सत्यमेव जयते

REPORT OF THE
COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF
INDI&

ON LOWER SUBANSIRI DISTRICT

For the year ended 31 March 2011

Government of Arunachal Pradesh


| TABLE OF CONTENT |

PARAGRAPH

Preface
Executive Summary
Profile of the District
Administrative Set-up
District Rural Development Agency
Scope of Audit
Audit Objectives
Audit Criteria
Audit Methodology
Acknowledgement

‘olicy and Planning
Perspective and Annual Plans

CHAPTER IV - FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND ACCOUNTING
FRAMEWORK

Fund flow and expenditure 4.1
Maintenance of PRIs accounts
Health

Education

Drinking Water Supply

Sanitation
Nutrition
CHAPTER VI-— ECONOMIC SECTOR
Road Connectivity
Irrigation
Employment Generation
Housing
Schemes for other Development Activities

Power



Audit Report on West Garo Hills District for the year ended 31 March 2011

PARAGRAPH PAGE NO.
Tourism
Fisheries
Horticulture

CHAPTER VII- GENERAL SECTOR

Panchayati Raj Institutions

Public Distribution System
Management of Wastes
E-Governance
Law & Order and Fire Services
Other Civil Amenities

CHAPTER VIII—MONITORING AND IMPACT EVALUATION
Inspection and Supervision
Grievance Redressal

CHAPTER IX - CONCLUSION

| APPENDICES |

Appendix No. Particulars Page No.

Conclusion

Appendix I Statement showing detail of primary schools posted with
single teacher in Lower Subansiri District

Appendix 11 Statement showing number of Schemes (year-wise)
taken up but not completed/slipback



This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
contains the results of district centric Audit of Lower
Subansiri district in Arunachal Pradesh. The Report has
been prepared for submission to the Governor under
Article 151(2) of the Constitution of India.

Audit conducted a review of the significant socio-economic
developmental activities implemented in Lower Subansiri
district during the period 2005 to 2011. Audit process
involved test check of records pertaining to the district
Lower Subansiri, in the State Planning Department, the
Office of the Deputy Commissioner, District Rural
Development Agency, selected Blocks, Gram Panchayats,
other departments and various District level implementing
agencies.

The Audit has been conducted in conformity with the
Auditing Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India.

iii


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Recognizing the importance accorded by the Planning Commission, Government of India
for a district centric approach to devolution of Finances for the integrated local area
development, a district centric audit of Lower Subansiri district was carried out to
assess the status and impact of implementation of various socio-economic
developmental activities in the district during 2005-11 and to evaluate whether quality
of life of the people has improved.

The review covered key sector programme relating to health, education and water
supply, economic sector programmes relating to creation of roads and other
infrastructure, employment generation, provision of basic civic amenities and use of
information technology (IT) to provide better public services etc.

While audit brought out many positives in the Social Sector programmes relating to
education; there were quite a few areas where the State/District Administration needs
to focus greater attention.

PLANNING

The District Level Vigilance and Monitoring Committee (DVMC) had not prepared any
Perspective Plan prior to 2007-08. Though the department claimed that the schemes
were selected and planned by gram sabha and later approved by the DVMC, but records
in its support were not available. The committee had met four times during 2005-11 to
review the progress of implementation of the developmental schemes.

Due to non-preparation of Perspective Plan and Annual Action Plan for the development
of the District and launching development effort without inputs from the blocks and the
gram panchayats, gaps in various developmental schemes/programmes remained
unidentified with the result that the felt needs of the weaker section of the society and
the disparities between various regions and communities within the District could not
be addressed.



|| AUDIT REPORT ON LOWER SUBANSIRI DISTRICT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2011

ACCOUNTING FRAMEWORK AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT

The total flow of funds in the District during 2005-11 and expenditure incurred was not
available either with the Addl. DC, who is the Chief Planning Officer or with the District
Planning Officer and other District Authority like DRDA. Funds were shown as fully
utilised in the books of the DRDA, societies and controlling officers the moment the
amounts were released to the implementing agencies rather than actual expenditure
incurred on execution of projects by the implementing agencies. Substantial amounts of
funds was parked in banks without utilizing them within the prescribed time frame due
to inadequate project management, skewed planning, lapses in execution, ineffective
monitoring and supervision. Accounts of zila parishads, anchal samitis and gram
panchayats were not being maintained in proper format in an on-line computerized
system as envisaged due to lack of infrastructure and non-appointment of secretaries

SOCIAL SERVICES

Health

Perspective Plan for the entire health mission period (2005-2012) has not been
prepared in the District. However, District Health Annual Plan was prepared by
involving lower functionaries and by doing house-wise survey to identify the gap in
health care facilities in the rural areas. Community participation was not ensured.
Though the number of healthcare centres in the District was more than prescribed
norms, most of these centres did not provide the basic healthcare services expected
from them due to non availability of skilled manpower and infrastructure.

The overall achievement in the district with regard to immunization of children between
zero to one-year age group covering BCG, DPT and OPV was low. However, the shortfall
in achievement of targets in secondary immunization ranges from 0 to 9 percent. During
2005-11, 230 cataract surgeries were carried out and 2055 schoolchildren were
screened for eye problems against the target of 330 and 8600 respectively. The rate of
prevalence of leprosy in the district was less than one percent.

Scrutiny revealed that District Health Society did not interact with or obtain inputs from
the concerned departmental functionaries relating to drinking water, sanitation and



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY |

hygiene, nutrition etc. leading to disjointed efforts of effects on various agencies
towards achieving the same goal.

In the absence of proper planning involving identification of gaps in the health care
infrastructure and non-availability of stipulated facilities and skilled manpower in the
health institutions, the aim of providing accessible and affordable healthcare to the
people remained to be fully achieved in the district.

Education

A review of the status of education in the district, especially in the context of
implementation of SSA, revealed that the number of Primary and Upper Primary Schools
(up to class VIII) as well as the enrolment of children in the targeted age group of 6 to 14
years in these schools increased during 2005-11. Drop out rate in schools has also
declined during the period.

Though overall Pupil Teacher Ratio (PTR) in the district was favourable compared to the
prescribed norms, there were excess teachers in certain schools (mostly in urban areas)
while there was shortage of teachers in schools located in rural/remote areas. Three
schools having 92 student had no teachers and 30 primary schools were having single
teacher against the norm of minimum two teachers. Lack of trained teacher was another
matter of concern.

During 2005-11 all the schools were having two rooms showing a significant
improvement. However, 16 primary schools and 9 upper primary schools required
major repairs. There was an all-round shortfall in basic amenities, such as drinking
water, separate toilets for girls and ramps for disabled children, both in primary and
upper primary schools.



|| AUDIT REPORT ON LOWER SUBANSIRI DISTRICT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2011

Pass percentage of students studying in government schools in Class X examination was
low in comparison with private schools even though books and other learning materials
were supplied to the student.

Further, mid-day meal was not served regularly at schools in the district.

Recommendation

Basic infrastructure amenities such as drinking water and toilets etc. should be
provided ona priority basis in all the schools.

Rational deployment of teachers in schools should be ensured and effective steps
should be taken to train all the untrained teachers at the earliest to improve the
quality of education imparted to the students.

Hygienic Mid-day Meals should be served to all eligible students on all schooldays
as envisaged under the programme.

Drinking Water

Out of 323 habitations, 108 habitations (33 percent) were fully covered, 180 habitations
(56 percent) were partially covered and 35 habitations (11 percent) remained
uncovered as on March 2011. During 2005-11, Despite 176 water supply schemes
having been implemented at a cost of % 44.64 crore covering a population of 21,514, the
number of fully covered habitations declined from 160 in March 2005 to 108 in March
2011. The Department had no Perspective Plan. Therefore, the water supply schemes
requiring augmentation, renovation and construction could not be prioritised and taken
up for execution in a phased manner for optimising results

53 water supply schemes taken up for execution during 2003-04 and 2004-05 at an
estimated cost of ¥ 6.57 crore remained incomplete even though these schemes were to
be completed within one year of their sanction. An expenditure of = 1.45 crore has been
incurred so far on these schemes. 114 water supply schemes completed at a cost of
%8.58 crore were not provided with slow sand filter component. As a result, a
population of 18,875 covered under the schemes were supplied with untreated water
During six year period 2005-11, 947 persons suffered from acute gastroenteritis and
there were 29 deaths.

Recommendation

The district administration needs to prepare a strategic action plan to provide
potable drinking water to all the habitations in the district, especially to the
uncovered habitations in a time bound manner.

Water treatment facility system should be improved/ upgraded to ensure supply of
safe drinking water to avoid any causality and reduce water borne diseases.

Gwin |


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY |

During 2005-11, the Division had constructed 4494 numbers of sanitation facilities
(APL -1164, BPL - 2963, Sanitary Complex - 13, Latrine for School - 232, Latrine for
Anganwadi - 119 and Rural Sanitary Mart - 03) against the total 7310 approved schemes
though the entire allotted funds were spent.

Sanitation

Further, the District has only one census town, namely Ziro also district headquarters,
where sanitation facilities were yet to be provided.

Recommendation

District authorities should initiate effective steps for achievement of the target
fixed for household latrines for all APL and BPL families.

Suitable plan should be framed to create proper sanitation facilities to urban area
of the district, especially Ziro town which is district headquarters also.

ECONOMIC SERVICES

Road Connectivity

There is no Railway connectivity and Airport in the district and only link with the rest of
the country is by road.

As of March 2011, there were 788 Km (Black Topped - 344 Km, WBM - 77 Km,
Unsurfaced - 367 Km) roads in the district, of which 276 Km road was constructed by
BRTF. There was no District Rural Road Plan indicating the core network required to
ensure that each eligible habitation is provided with a basic access (single and all-
weather road connectivity) to essential social and economic services. Public Works
Department and Rural Works Department were two main departments responsible for
construction and maintenance of roads in the district.

Public Works Department did not had any Perspective Plan. But Annual Operative Plan
was prepared without any survey or proper inputs. None of the six major works taken
up between 2001 and 2008 have been completed.

The internal road condition of the district was very poor even though % 26.48 crore was
spent for its maintenance during 2005-11.

Out of 22 villages in the district, as of March 2011 Rural Works Department had
provided road connectivity to 74 villages (State fund - 46 Nos. and PMGSY fund - 28).
Division did not maintain Asset Register for both roads constructed under State fund
and PMGSY fund.

18 Rural Link Road (RLR), taken up between 1993-94 and 1999-2000 at an estimated
cost of ¥ 3.85 crore, was partially completed by incurring an expenditure of € 1.39 crore
and no action had been taken to complete the remaining work, rendering the
expenditure incurred partially unproductive.



|| AUDIT REPORT ON LOWER SUBANSIRI DISTRICT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2011

Two PMGSY works (i) Construction of road from Pitapool to Sagalee road to Kebi (5.01
Km) approved at an estimated cost of रैं 2.44 crore and (ii) Construction of road from
Deed to Radhpu (5.25 Km) approved at an estimated cost of % 2.26 crore were not
completed till date. These works were awarded to a contractor on single tender basis,
but the work remained incomplete at different stages rendering the expenditure
incurred unfruitful.

Recommendation

Steps should be taken to prepare a perspective plan and identify the gap in the
road connectivity and a broad action plan to provide connectivity to all eligible
habitations in the district within specified period of time.

Annual operational plans should be framed in line with the perspective plan and
specific milestones be drawn to ensure timely completion of the projects planned
for execution during the year.

All incomplete work should be completed without further loss of time to avoid
already completed work becoming wasteful due to long delays.

Timely completion of work taken up should be ensured by adhering to codal and
other formalities required for the execution of the work.

Asset registers should be maintained properly and proper timely maintenance of
the road constructed should be ensured.

Irrigation

In the district there is no Major or Medium but only Minor Irrigation Projects (MIP) with
open trench weir type head work. The total agriculture land is fifteen thousand hectares.
Up to 2005, 127 MIPs were completed. But irrigation potential created in terms of
hectares was not on record. During 2005-11 out of 291 targeted MIPs 221 MIPs were
completed and irrigation potential created was 931 hectares against the target of
1171.66 hectares.

Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR) projected in the estimate was between 5 percent and 400
percent. But in terms of production there was decline in production of three major crops
of the district which could be attributable to poor co-ordination among farmers,
Agriculture Department and Irrigation Department.

Recommendation
A perspective plan be framed with detail of irrigational potential required to be

created in the district with identification of the source of water detailing the time
frame and funds required for implementation of the irrigation schemes so planned.



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY |

Employment Generation

The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Schemes (MGREGS) is
being implemented in the district from 2008-09. The basic objective of the scheme is to
ensure security of livelihood in rural areas by providing at least 100 days guarantee
wage employment.

While SGRY could generate 2.98 lakh mandays employment in three years (2005-08),
1.62 lakh mandays were generated under MGNREGS during the period 2008-11. Out of
18,800 Job Card holders in the district only 69 persons were provided 100 days
employment.

During 2005-11, 47 Self Help Groups and 678 individual Swarozgaries were assisted
under SGSY. But no mechanism was evolved to evaluate the impact of implementation of
the programme.

Power

Out of 226 inhabitated villages as per 2001 census report in the district, 196 villages (87
percent) were electrified and energized till date (March 2011).

During 2005-10, 11 KV line work to cover 134 villages was taken up in June 2008 at an
estimated cost of ¢ 34.67 crore and stipulated to be completed by December 2009. As of
March 2011, work in 110 villages was completed while in the remaining 24 villages was
yet to be completed. Of the 110 villages where the work was completed, 107 villages
were energized. A total amount of % 20.30 crore was spent till March 2011,

(—_


|| AUDIT REPORT ON LOWER SUBANSIRI DISTRICT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2011

About 40 per cent of the consumers in the district paid their electricity bills regularly,
but the rest paid them only when revenue realization drives were conducted or when
lines were disconnected due to defaults in payment. The outstanding electricity dues
stood at 8.25 crore.

Horticulture and Fisheries

The soil and climatic conditions of the District are favourable for growing of large
cardamom and kiwi fruit. However, the cultivation of these crops have not increased as
the farmers did not have access to proper marketing facilities and were not getting
support price for their produce.

Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRI)

Panchayat is a institution of Self Government constituted for the rural areas. According
to 733 Constitutional Amendment Act, the States were required to devolve adequate
powers and responsibilities on PRIs in order to make them effective institutions of local
self-government. The responsibility for preparation of plans for economic development
and social justice and its implementation in respect of 29 subjects listed in Eleventh
Schedule of the Constitution were to be assigned to Panchayats and to this effect, the
State Governments were expected to transfer the functions of department dealing with
these 29 subjects including the officials under the control of the Panchayats.

As of March 2011, neither functions nor functionaries, as envisaged in the Constitution,
have been transferred under the control of the Panchayats in the District as no progress
in this regard has been made in Arunachal Pradesh. Role of PRIs were very limited even
in the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice, No Gram

(=


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY |

Panchayat Secretaries were appointed as the Arunachal Pradesh Panchayati Raj Act,
1997, had no provision for appointment of Gram Panchayat Secretary. The post of Zillah Parishad
Secretary was not yet created. The Project Director, DRDA, is in charge of the Zillah Parishad.
Further, there was no Panchayat building and the Panchayat accounts were not
computerized,

Waste Management

The District has only one census town, namely Ziro, which is district
headquarters. As urban civic body is not yet formed, the function of municipality is

discharged by the District Urban Development Agency. No proper solid waste
management exists in the district. However, an estimate for solid waste management
submitted to the authority in July 2009 was awaiting approval. As a result, proper
disposal of garbage was not being done. Further, there was no proper facilities for the
disposal off bio-medical waste generated by the healthcare centres in the district. These
issues posed a serious threat to the public health and the environment.

Monitoring and supervision of the progress of implementation of various schemes at all
tiers of local administration in the district was perfunctory. Though the DC stated that
field visit and inspection were carried out by DC, Planning Officer and Block Officers
there was no documentary evidence of such inspection or the decision taken/follow up
action initiated consequent to such inspection.

No Grievance Redressal Cell has been set up in the district, DC claims that the complaints
are forwarded to the concerned department who in turn address the same with
intimation to DC. However, there was nothing available on record in support of this
claim.

xn |


|| AUDIT REPORT ON LOWER SUBANSIRI DISTRICT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2011

Local government at the district, block and gram panchayats levels were not involved in
the planning process, as envisaged in the Constitution, to ensure efficiency and
effectiveness in delivery of key services like rural development, health, employment, etc.

There are a multiplicity of programmes and schemes and an even larger number of
implementing agencies, presenting challenging situation to the district administration to
effectively monitor and supervise the developmental activities. While almost all
developmental programmes are targeted at the same set of beneficiaries, the existence
of a myriad programmes requires an integrated focus, rather than their implementation
ina standalone mode.

An adequate monitoring mechanism was not functioning as envisaged with regard to
execution of schemes. While plans have been formulated for providing integrated
development of a sector/service, these could not be executed due to delay in release of
funds and inadequate project management.

The State Government will have to address these issues in order to accelerate the
process of development of the district at the desired pace. Good governance, effective
and efficient delivery mechanism and sustainable development buttress high level of
performance and play a crucial role in the overall socio-economic development of the
district by providing essential and quality public infrastructure and services.

(is


11 Profile of the District

The Lower Subansiri District of Arunachal Pradesh is situated approximately between
92°40' and 94°21' East Longitude and 26°55' and 28°21' North Latitudes. The District
is bounded by Kurung Kumey District and some part of Upper Subansiri District to
the North, West Siang District and some part of Upper Subansiri District to the East,
Papumpare District and the State of Assam to the South and Kurung Kumey and
Papumpare District to the west respectively. The District covers an area of approx.
3460 square km with its Headquarters at Ziro. The District comprises of three Sub-
divisions and eight Circles. With a view to all round rural development, the District
has been divided into three Community Blocks covering 194 Gram Panchayats (GPs)
with 226 inhabited villages.

As per 2011 Census, the District has a population of 0.83 lakh (a growth of 48.65 per
cent from the last decade), which is about 6 per cent of the total population of the
State (13.85 lakh). The literacy rate is 76.33 per cent (an increase of 27.93 per cent
from the last decade) as against State average of 66.95 per cent and 74.04 per cent
(National average). The progress made in the literacy front is very impressive as the
literacy rate of the district, as per 2011 Census, is higher than the State as well as
National averages while it was far below the State and National averages as per earlier
census figures.

As per 2001 Census, out of 11,264 families in the District, 5,274 families (47 per
cent) are below poverty line (BPL) as compared to 66 per cent at the State level.
78 per cent of the population reside in rural areas.

1.2. Administrative Set-up

The District Level Vigilance and Monitoring Committee is the apex body at the
District level which approves developmental schemes for the District. The Deputy
Commissioner (DC) is in charge of the District and is the sanctioning authority for all
developmental programmes/schemes. He is also the Chief-Executive Officer (CEO)
of the District Rural Development Agency (DRDA), and ensures co-ordination
between DRDA, Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs), Field Offices and other
Departments of the State Government. In other cases (State and Central Plan Schemes
implemented by other Departments), he is the District Programme Coordinator
(DPC). Although DC is the overall in-charge of the District, including Law & Order,
the Superintendent of Police (SP) is responsible for maintenance of law and order.

The DC is assisted by an Additional Deputy Commissioner (ADC) (Development),
who is the Member Secretary for preparation and prioritization of schemes, their
monitoring and review.


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

DRDA is the main organ at the District level to oversee the implementation of Rural
Development Programmes. It is responsible for planning and co-ordinating with
various agencies — Governmental/non-Governmental, for successful programme
implementation. DRDA enables the community and the rural poor to participate in the
decision making process, oversees the implementation of programmes to ensure
adherence to guidelines, quality, economy, efficiency, ete;, and submits reports to the
concerned authorities at prescribed intervals. It is also responsible for carrying out
various surveys relating to BPL families, etc;. The Project Director (PD) is the
executive in charge of DRDA and is the Controlling Officer for all Block
Development Officers (BDOs). He is responsible for interaction with the
District/State Administration and Government of India, and ensures co-ordination
with Zila Parishads for implementation of Rural Development Programmes.

The administrative set-up of the District is depicted in Chart-1 below:

Chart -1



CH

ERI

21 Scope of Audit

Audit of Lower Subansiri District involved a review of the significant socio-economic
development programmes implemented in the District during 2005-11. The audit
encompassed an appraisal of Social Sector Programmes relating to health, education,
water supply and sanitation. In the Economic Sector, infrastructure development was
reviewed through an assessment of Projects and Schemes implemented for
improvement of road connectivity in the district (PMGSY and other Road Sector
Schemes). Provision for employment and houses to the poor and vulnerable sections
of the society under various schemes were also reviewed. This Audit covered
developmental initiatives and associated expenditure in the District, based on Funds
received from Central or State Government. Audit also focused on the role and
responsibilities of the District Administration in providing essential public services
and the extent of community participation in Programme implementation and
monitoring. The status of provision of basic civic amenities by the District Urban
Development Authority was also looked into.

Audit was based on scrutiny of records, physical verification in the offices of the DC,
DRDA, selected Blocks and Circle Officers/Addl. Dy. Commissioner and concerned
Departments.

2.2 Audit Objectives
The objectives of Audit were as follows:

** Assessing the adequacy of the planning process for different programmes.

“ Assessing the effectiveness of the developmental programmes in terms of

achievements of targeted outputs and their impact.

“* Assessing the effective and efficient execution of various developmental
programme

*» Assessing the effectiveness of the procedures for receipt, utilization and

accounting of funds.

“* Verification of reported expenditure on major development Programmes (Central

and State) with reference to detailed Statements of Expenditure and original
vouchers at the lower level in a hierarchical manner (State to District, District to
Block and Block to GP).

“* Assessing the effectiveness of the processes for monitoring, reporting and

evaluation.


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

2.3. Audit Criteria

Audit findings were benchmarked against the criteria contained in the following
sources and are quoted at relevant places in the performance audit report:

“+ District Plans and Annual Plans;

“+ Guidelines of the concerned Programmes/Schemes;
“Financial Rules and Regulations of the State Government; and
“Prescribed monitoring mechanisms.

2.4 Audit Methodology

District Audit was conducted in two spells spread over two years due to acute
shortage of staff. In first spell audit was commenced with an Entry Conference on
14 May 2010, with the District Authorities, where the Audit objectives, Criteria,
Scope and their inputs and perceptions relating to various developmental Programmes
were discussed.

Preliminary audit findings were discussed with departmental functionaries at various
levels during the course of audit and their views have been incorporated in the Report
in appropriate places. Major audit findings noticed during the first spell of audit were
also discussed in a conference held on 28 March 2011 with concerned District level
officers and their views were obtained

Second spell of audit was commenced with another conference on 30 May 2011;
where in the District Authorities were appraised of further course of audit. An exit-
conference after updating the district centric audit up to March 2011 was held on
19" October 2011. The department’s comment/replies have been incorporated in
the Report wherever found relevant.

[19] programmes (four in Social Sector, 10 under Economic Sector? and five in
General Sector*) were selected, keeping in view the socio-economic impact thereof.
All three Blocks were selected for audit. Other records to be scrutinized are those of
the DC, DRDA, Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), District Health Mission, District
Urban Development Authority and Circle Officers, being Member Secretaries dealing
with PRI.

2.5 Acknowledgement

The office of the Accountant General, Arunachal Pradesh acknowledges the
co-operation extended by the Deputy Commissioner, Lower Subansiri District and
heads of the concerned departments in carrying out this performance audit.

1 Health, Education, Water Supply and Nutrition

? Public Works, Rural Works, Irrigation, Employment Generation and Housing, MLALADS, Energy,
Tourism, Fisheries and Horticulture

3 Pachayati Raj Institutions, Public Distribution System, Waste Management, Law & Order
and E-Governance


CH

ER HI: PLANNING

3.1 Policy and Planning

Government of India envisages an inclusive and participative planning process for the
development of Districts. The 74" Amendment to the Constitution mandates the
establishment of a District Planning Committee (DPC) for consolidating plans
prepared by Panchayats and Municipalities of the District into an integrated District
Plan. All three tiers of the local administration, viz, DRDA, Blocks and GPs were to
prepare an Annual Action Plan (AAP) at the beginning of each financial year
equivalent to about 125 per cent of their share of funds allocated in the preceding year
and no work is to be taken up unless it forms part of the AAP.

A District Level Vigilance and Monitoring Committee (DVMC), formed in 10" May
2005, with a Cabinet ranked minister from the District as the Chairman of the
Committee, is the apex body in the District. The Committee was to meet as and when
felt necessary in a year, and should particularly meet in the month of August for
scrutiny/amendment of District level plans, preparation of Perspective Plan and
Integrated Plan for overall development of the District. Review and monitoring of
implementation of Schemes was also in the ambit of the DVMC.

3.2 Perspective and Annual Plans

Scrutiny revealed that the District Level Vigilance and Monitoring Committee
(DVMC) had not prepared any Perspective Plan prior to 2007-08. However, the
Department claimed that the Gram Sabha had selected and planned the Schemes and.
got them approved by DVMC. But no evidence in this regard was on record. The
DVMC met four times during 2005-11 to review the progress of implementation of
the development Schemes.

Plan under Urban Development involves planning for employment generation in
urban areas under the ““Swarna Jayanti Sahari Rojgar Yojana” (SJSRY) Scheme and
planning for Infrastructure Development under “Integrated Development of Small and
Medium Towns” (IDSMT).

SJSRY includes two sub-schemes, viz., “Urban Self Employment Programme”
(USEP) and “Urban Wage Employment Programme” (UWEP). The Scheme is to be
administered by the District Urban Development Authority (DUDA), with active
participation of the District units of Town and Country Planning (T&CP) and Urban
Local Bodies (ULBs). DUDA did not prepare any Action Plan for implementation of
SJSRY. Besides, preparation of a shelf of projects and identification of beneficiaries
survey were not done. The planning process for implementation of IDSMT was yet to
be initiated.


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

Thus, preparation of AAPs was made on an ad-hoc basis and most significantly,
survey and identification of beneficiaries was not carried out.

MGNREGS, SGRY and IAY were implemented by DRDA through BDOs during the
period covered by the Review. Separate accounts were maintained by the BDOs for
Anchal Samitys and Gram Panchayats, as there was no Panchayat building and there
was no provision in the State Act, 1997, for appointment of GP Secretaries.
Moreover, there were no Zila Parishad Secretaries. The PD, DRDA, is acting as the
Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the Zila Parishad. AAPs indicating location-wise
distribution of works for execution based on proposals made by village level
Committees/Gram Sabhas was absent. Under MGNREGS/SGRY, year-wise targets
for employment generation were not fixed. Hence, there was lack of transparency in
the planning process with reference to Guidelines.

In the absence of adequate planning in the District, schemes and programmes were
implemented without assessing the actual requirement of the area/people.

Due to non-preparation of Perspective Plans and integrated Annual Action Plans
for the development of the District with inputs from Blocks, GPs and ULBs, gaps in
various developmental schemes/programmes remained unidentified, with the result
that the felt needs of the weaker sections of society (both rural and urban) and the
disparities between various regions and communities within the District could not
be addressed.

Holistic perspective and integrated annual plans should be prepared for the
district, based on a structured process of obtaining inputs from blocks and GPs
and other stakeholders for a more realistic assessment of prime needs of the
district.

There should be regular meeting of DVMC to monitor and review the progress of
implementation of various developmental schemes being executed in the District.


CH

ER HI: PLANNING

3.1 Policy and Planning

Government of India envisages an inclusive and participative planning process for the
development of Districts. The 74" Amendment to the Constitution mandates the
establishment of a District Planning Committee (DPC) for consolidating plans
prepared by Panchayats and Municipalities of the District into an integrated District
Plan. All three tiers of the local administration, viz, DRDA, Blocks and GPs were to
prepare an Annual Action Plan (AAP) at the beginning of each financial year
equivalent to about 125 per cent of their share of funds allocated in the preceding year
and no work is to be taken up unless it forms part of the AAP.

A District Level Vigilance and Monitoring Committee (DVMC), formed in 10" May
2005, with a Cabinet ranked minister from the District as the Chairman of the
Committee, is the apex body in the District. The Committee was to meet as and when
felt necessary in a year, and should particularly meet in the month of August for
scrutiny/amendment of District level plans, preparation of Perspective Plan and
Integrated Plan for overall development of the District. Review and monitoring of
implementation of Schemes was also in the ambit of the DVMC.

3.2 Perspective and Annual Plans

Scrutiny revealed that the District Level Vigilance and Monitoring Committee
(DVMC) had not prepared any Perspective Plan prior to 2007-08. However, the
Department claimed that the Gram Sabha had selected and planned the Schemes and.
got them approved by DVMC. But no evidence in this regard was on record. The
DVMC met four times during 2005-11 to review the progress of implementation of
the development Schemes.

Plan under Urban Development involves planning for employment generation in
urban areas under the ““Swarna Jayanti Sahari Rojgar Yojana” (SJSRY) Scheme and
planning for Infrastructure Development under “Integrated Development of Small and
Medium Towns” (IDSMT).

SJSRY includes two sub-schemes, viz., “Urban Self Employment Programme”
(USEP) and “Urban Wage Employment Programme” (UWEP). The Scheme is to be
administered by the District Urban Development Authority (DUDA), with active
participation of the District units of Town and Country Planning (T&CP) and Urban
Local Bodies (ULBs). DUDA did not prepare any Action Plan for implementation of
SJSRY. Besides, preparation of a shelf of projects and identification of beneficiaries
survey were not done. The planning process for implementation of IDSMT was yet to
be initiated.


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

Thus, preparation of AAPs was made on an ad-hoc basis and most significantly,
survey and identification of beneficiaries was not carried out.

MGNREGS, SGRY and IAY were implemented by DRDA through BDOs during the
period covered by the Review. Separate accounts were maintained by the BDOs for
Anchal Samitys and Gram Panchayats, as there was no Panchayat building and there
was no provision in the State Act, 1997, for appointment of GP Secretaries.
Moreover, there were no Zila Parishad Secretaries. The PD, DRDA, is acting as the
Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the Zila Parishad. AAPs indicating location-wise
distribution of works for execution based on proposals made by village level
Committees/Gram Sabhas was absent. Under MGNREGS/SGRY, year-wise targets
for employment generation were not fixed. Hence, there was lack of transparency in
the planning process with reference to Guidelines.

In the absence of adequate planning in the District, schemes and programmes were
implemented without assessing the actual requirement of the area/people.

Due to non-preparation of Perspective Plans and integrated Annual Action Plans
for the development of the District with inputs from Blocks, GPs and ULBs, gaps in
various developmental schemes/programmes remained unidentified, with the result
that the felt needs of the weaker sections of society (both rural and urban) and the
disparities between various regions and communities within the District could not
be addressed.

Holistic perspective and integrated annual plans should be prepared for the
district, based on a structured process of obtaining inputs from blocks and GPs
and other stakeholders for a more realistic assessment of prime needs of the
district.

There should be regular meeting of DVMC to monitor and review the progress of
implementation of various developmental schemes being executed in the District.


CH

R

ER

CI

SE

Under Social services, areas of Education, Health, Water supply and sanitation and
Nutrition were covered.

A review of the implementation of Flagship Programmes in the Social Sector like
> National Rural Health Mission (NRHM)
> Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA)
> Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme (ARWSP)

revealed that there was a need to provide adequate and skilled manpower in these
sectors for full utilization of the infrastructure to achieve the intended objectives of
providing quality Health Care, Education, Water Supply and basic amenities to the
people of the District, as evident from the Audit findings as discussed below:-

5.1. HEALTH

The District Medical Officer, DMO-cum-Co-Chairman, District Health Society and
the District Family Welfare Officer, DFWO-cum-Chief Executive Officer, District
Health Society, are responsible for providing healthcare services to the people through
one District Hospital and other healthcare centres established under NRHM.

5.1.1 Planning

As a first step towards providing accessible, affordable and equitable healthcare under
NRHM, a household and facility survey was to be conducted to identify gaps in
healthcare facilities in rural areas.

Audit scrutiny revealed that the village level survey to assess the healthcare needs of
the rural population was conducted in 2006-07. Resource mapping was done to assess
the effects of other determinants such as drinking water, sanitary latrines, etc. and the
needs of different localities were collected through block level meetings. The District
Health Society (DHS) was required to prepare a Perspective Plan for the entire
Mission Period (2005-2012) and Annual Plans for the District with inputs from the
lower tiers of the Government. No Perspective Plan for the Mission Period was
prepared in the District. However, a District Health Annual Plan was prepared by
involving lower functionaries and house-wise surveys were made to identify the gap
in health care facilities in the rural areas.

Mission activities were to have converged with programmes of other departments and
the working of Non-Governmental Stakeholders, Village Health & Sanitation
Committees (VHSCs) and Rogi Kalyan Samities (RKSs). However, Audit scrutiny
revealed that the DHS did not interact with or obtain inputs relating to drinking water,
nutrition, sanitation and hygiene, etc. from the concerned departmental functionaries,
leading to disjointed efforts of various agencies towards the same goal. Further,


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

community participation was not ensured. Scrutiny of records revealed that only nine
RKS (in 8 PHCs and 1 CHC) were formed but the RKS in the CHC were not
functioning.

5.1.2 Infrastructure

As per Guidelines, for tribal area there should be one SC for a population of 3,000;
one PHC for a population of 20,000; and one CHC for every 80,000 people,. In terms
of these norms, the District required one CHC, three PHCs and 19 SCs, against which
there are one CHC, eight PHCs and 26 SCs, out of which one PHC and four SCs are
run by the Voluntary Health Association of India (VHAD.

Further, out of 26 SCs, seven SCs were non-functional and in 14 SCs, no ANM was
posted As a result, rural people located in the area of these SCs were deprived of the
intended healthcare.

However, many of these healthcare centres lacked the basic minimum infrastructure
facilities. This is evident from the details collected from the Health Centres physically
visited by audit team, as detailed in Table 2.

Table -2

No. of Health Centres visited
Waiting Room for Patients

Operation Theatre
Emergency/Casualty Room

Separate Utilities for Male & Female [oo |

*not sufficient

5.1.3. Basic Healthcare Services

The basic healthcare services required to be provided in the Health Centres were not
available at many centres visited by the audit team.

In only CHC of the district, healthcare services like newborn care, 24x7 deliveries,
X-rays, Obstetric Care, Intra-Natal Examination, Family Planning (Tubectomy and
Vasectomy), Blood Storage, Ultra Sound and ECG, which was supposed to be
provided at CHC as norms prescribed, were not available.

10


Chapter V : Social Sector

The position of availability of basic healthcare services in five physically verified
PHC were as following:

e Newborn care and Obstetric care not available in all the five PHCs,

¢ 24x7 deliveries and X-Ray not available in four PHCs

¢ In-patient services not available in three PHCs and.

e Emergency services (24 hours) and Paediatrics not available in two PHCs.
In two out of three SC visited by Audit, newborn care facility was not available.

Following are the photographs of some healthcare centres in poor condition

SC, Monopolyang
Constructed at a cost of 6 lakh during 2007- 08 - not Labour Room - not used
functional though one ANM was posted

PHC, Yazali

5.1.4. Upgrading of health infrastructure
The District Health Society (DHS) received & 85 lakh during 2005-2010 for upgrading
District Hospital (₹ 65 lakh) and one CHC to First Referral Units (FRUs) (% 20 lakh).
The DHS spent हैं 65 lakh for upgradation of the District Hospital. Out of 20 lakh
meant for the CHC, ₹ 8 lakh was spent on procurement of equipment, हैं 4.32 lakh on

procurement of medicines and % 8 lakh on repair/ renovation of kitchen and security
fencing with steel gate. However, it was noticed that none of the units were actually
upgraded to FRUs as of March 2011, as Specialists and other supporting staff were
not posted.

Thus, the Department failed to provide appropriate health infrastructure to ensure
availability of Referral Services in these institutions.

5.1.5 Community Health Centre, Ziro

CHC, Ziro is the lone CHC in Lower Subansiri District. The District Hospital is
located a mere four km. away. As a result, no patients were admitted in the CHC as
in-patients. Following are the photographs depicting sorry state of the CHC during
first visit in July 2010:

11



Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

Labour Room - used as Store Room Operational Theatre - not used and full of dirty water

In-patient Facility - Patients never admitted as In-patients

However, there were improvement in working of the CHC after the matter was
discussed with the concerned authorities at the end of the first spell of performance
audit and positive impact of audit can be seen from the following photographs.

Improvised Labour Room - CHC, ZIro Improvised Operation Theatre-CHC, Old Ziro

12


Chapter V: Social Sector

Indoor facility (functional) - CHC, Old Ziro

Due to such inequitable distribution of health care services, people in remote/far flung
areas are deprived of adequate health care facilities

5.1.6 Manpower Resources

NRHM aimed at providing adequate skilled manpower as per norms of the Indian
Public Health Standard (IPHS) at all Health Centres. Information furnished for one
CHC, eight PHCs and 12 SCs revealed that none of the Centres were staffed
adequately as per the IPHS norms, as detailed below:

S161 Community Health Centre, Ziro
Critical manpower position at CHC, Ziro as of March 2011 is given Table 3.
Table -3
sin Category of Post Repent: | ingefiin | EEC

Shortfall.

2. Staff Nurse 19 04 79%

Against the requirement of 15 Doctors there were only five Doctors at CHC, Ziro
(One Paediatric and One Orthopaedic (posted on a regular basis) and three other
doctors on temporary basis). There was no Gynaecologist, Eye Specialist or Dental
Surgeon posted. Against the sanctioned strength of 19 Staff Nurses, there were four
Staff Nurses and two ANMs.

5.1.6.2 Primary Health Centres

According to IPHS norms two medical officers (one may be from Ayush) are to be
posted in each PHC. The position of staff in eight PHCs in the district and five PHCs
those physically visited by the audit team is given in the Table 4.

13


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

Table - 4
Sl. Category of Post Pasition of Staff
No (Number required as PHC in district (Eight) In physically visited PHC (Five)
per IPHS norm) . .
Requirem In % of — Requirem In % of
ent position Shortfall ent position Shortfall

1. Doctors (TWO) 16 14 13% 10 10 2
2. Staff Nurse (THREE) 24 11 54% 15 7 47%
3. ANM Nil 16 Nil 12
4. Pharmacist (ONE) 8 2 75% 5 4 20%
5. Lab. Technician (ONE) 8 3 62% 5 3 20%

Scrutiny of records at five PHCs physically visited by audit team revealed that:
e Two Medical Officers were posted in Yazali PHC;
¢ One Allopathic and one Homeopathic doctors were posted at Yachuli PHC;
e Deed Neelam PHC was functioning with two Homeopathic doctors;

e Raga PHC was running with one Medical Officer and one Dental Surgeon;
and

e Boa Simla SC which was upgraded to PHC in October 2005, was posted with
two Medical Officers in July 2011.

This indicates that the PHCs in the districts are not posted with qualified staff as per
IPHS norm.

5.1.6.3 Sub-centres

Against a requirement of 52 ANMs for 26 SCs (two ANMs for each SC) in the
district, there were 12 ANMs, three health worker (female) and three health worker
(male). In three SCs that were physically visited by the audit team, against the
tequirement of six ANMs there were five ANMs, two health workers (female) and
three health workers (male) posted at these centre.

Performance Indicators quantifying the targets for reducing Infant Mortality Rate
(IMR), Maternal Mortality Rate (MMR), Total Fertility Rate (TFR), reducing
morbidity and mortality rate and increasing care rate of different endemic diseases are
generally prescribed by the State Government.

5.1.7 Reproductive and Child Health Care (RCH)

To achieve the NRHM goal of reducing the Infant Mortality Rate (IMR), Maternal
Mortality Rate (MMR) and Total Fertility Rate (TFR), the State Govt. prescribed
various health indicators to be achieved by 2011. As per details provided by the DHS,
all the prescribed targets were achieved.

14


Chapter V : Social Sector

Female Community Health Workers Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHAs).

One of the strategies envisaged by the Mission for achievement of the goal of
reduction in IMR, MMR and TFR was appointment of Trained Female Community
Health Workers called Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHAs). One ASHA is to
be appointed for every thousand population, and act as an interface between the
community and the health care system. However, the DHS appointed 255 ASHAs
against a requirement of 56 and ASHA Kits were issued to them. = 11.41 lakh was
spent on selection, training, etc. of 255 ASHAs.

5.1.8 | Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY)

One of the important components of the RCH Programme is the Janani Suraksha
Yojana (JSY), to encourage pregnant women to opt for institutional delivery rather
than domiciliary delivery, in order to reduce maternal and neo-natal mortality. Under
this Programme, all pregnant women above 19 years of age, belonging to the SC, ST
and BPL categories, are entitled to हैं 500/- to meet the cost of domiciliary delivery
and हैं 1000/- for institutional delivery (up to 2 live births).

S181 Institutional/Domiciliary Deliveries

Details relating to institutional and domiciliary deliveries and cash assistance
provided by the DHS is given Table 5: -

Table -5
ver | NeafPregnant | पी. Domictinry | ih Asistanes
Deliveries Deliveries
2006-07 489 442 52 1.20
2007-08 581 420 |. 9 | 3.63
2008-09 726 496 16 2.32
2009-10 623 485 46 1.26
| 200-ा | 726 481 29 4.823

Source: - Departmental Figures

Audit analysis revealed that the DHS was able to increase the number of institutional
deliveries. However, the amount of cash as:

stance stated to have given does not
match with the number of institutional deliveries and as a result all the deserving
recipients may not have been extended the benefit of the scheme or full entitlement
not being given to the intended.

However, a test check of one CHC in Old Ziro revealed that it did not conduct a
single institutional delivery, despite having adequate facilities.
5.1.8.2 Ante-natal Care

Scrutiny revealed that the percentage of pregnant women in the District who had
received three antenatal checkups during 2005-2011 ranged between 26.67 per cent
and 39.60 per cent as of March 2011.

15



Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

5.1.9 Immunization Programme

The overall achievement in the District with regard to immunization of children was
dismal. In the age group from birth to one-year children administered with Bacillus
Calmette-Guerin (BCG), DPT and oral polio vaccine (OPV), ranged between 38 and
45 percent during 2005-11. There was a shortfall in achievement of targets in the
secondary immunization programme - 9 per cent in 10 year age group (with
diphtheria toxoid/tetanus toxoid (DT/TT)) and 9 per cent in 16 year age group (with
tetanus toxoid (TT)) during 2005-2011.

Data showed that the prevalence of vaccine preventable diseases was negligible in the
District, as no case of infant and child diseases like neo-natal tetanus, diphtheria,
tetanus and whooping cough was detected during 2005-2011. No new cases of Polio
were detected during 2005-2011. However, the district health authorities needs to
increase their efforts to achieve universal coverage of all children as envisaged under
Universal Immunisation Programme.

5.1.10 National Programme for Control of Blindness (NPCB)

The NPCB aimed at reducing the prevalence of blindness to 0.8 per cent by 2007
through the increase of Cataract Surgery, Eye Screening of school children, collection
of donated eyes, creation of Donation Centres, Eye Banks, strengthening of
infrastructure, etc;.

During 2005-11, 230 cataract surgeries were conducted and 2055 school children
were screened against the target of 330 and 8600 respectively. No facility for eye
donation was created in the District.

5.1.11 National Leprosy Eradication Programme (NLEP)

The NLEP aimed at eliminating leprosy by the end of the XI"" Plan and to ensure that
the leprosy prevalence rate was less than 1 per 10,000. The total number of leprosy
patients undergoing treatment in the District was one per year during 2010-11. The
prevalent rate of leprosy in the District was less than one per cent.

5.1.12 National AIDS Control Programme (NACP)

The Programme was launched by the GOI in September 1992, with the assistance of
the World Bank and extended up to 2012. The main objectives of the Programme
are:-

e To reduce the spread of HIV infection in the country and
e To strengthen the capacity to respond to HIV/AIDS on a long-term basis.

To achieve the above objectives, funds were to be utilized on different
components/activities of the Programme, like priority intervention for the general
community, low cost AIDS Care, STI/HIV/AIDS surveillance, training, etc. As per

16


Chapter V : Social Sector

Guidelines of the National AIDS Control Programme (NACP), one Voluntary Blood
Testing Centre (VBTC) was to be established in each District.

During 2005-11, %9.62 lakh was allotted under the programme and the District
AIDS Programme Officer (DAPO) utilized = 9.02 lakh.

The State Government established one VBTC each in all the Districts of the State,
including Lower Subansiri. Test check revealed that the first HIV positive case in the
district was reported in July 2008. Out of 4899 people screened up to March 2011 in
the District, four HIV positive cases were detected, of which one was a fully blown
AIDS case.

उ.4.12.1 Family Health Awareness Camps

To increase awareness about HIV/AIDS and Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STD)
among the community/targeted population falling in the age group of 15-49 years, and
to provide facilities for diagnosis and treatment, the GOI decided (November, 1999)
to organize Family Health Awareness Camps in all States in a phased manner.

The position of the Family Health Awareness Camps held in District during 2005-11
is given Table 6:-

Table - 6

Period of Campaigns | Targeted Population | No. of people who % of Attendance
attended the Camp

2006 to 2011 5000 3780 76
Source:- Departmental Figures

District health authorities should make concerted efforts in mobilization of more
people at the grass-root level to increase the awareness about HIV/AIDS among the
public.

5.1,12.2 Blood Safety

Under the Blood Safety component, the existing Blood Banks were to be modernised
and new Blood Banks opened. Blood component separation facilities were to be made
available.

There is only one Blood Bank in the District Hospital operated with the help of one
Blood Bank Officer, one Nurse and one Laboratory Technician. However, blood
components separation facilities were not available.

5.1.13 National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme (NVBDCP)

The NVBDCP aims at control of vector borne diseases by reducing mortality and
morbidity due to Malaria, Filaria, Kala Azar, Dengue, Chicken Gunia and Japanese
encephalitis in endemic areas through close surveillance, mosquito control (by way of
indoor residual spray of larvicides and insecticides) and improved diagnostic and
treatment facilities at Health Centres. The Programme is aimed at achieving an
Annual Blood Examination Rate (ABER) of 10 per cent of the targeted population

17


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

under surveillance by 2007-08, and Annual Parasitic Incidents (API) of less than 0.5
per thousand throughout the country by that date.

Scrutiny of records revealed that annual blood examination was being done in all
circles of the district. The percentage of ABER in District has increased from 5.09 per
cent (2005-06) to 8.23 per cent (2010-11), which is still lower than the achievement
of 10 per cent aimed at by 2007-08.

The API rate increased from 2.64 (2009-10) to 15.10 (2010-11) indicates that
achieving API of less than 0.5 per thousand is remote. Further, four deaths due
to malaria has also been reported during the period 2005-11.

Distribution records indicated that 5000 insecticide-treated bed nets were distributed
to the intended beneficiaries through 47 Gaon Buras of Yazali Circle, but there was
no proof of distribution of these nets to the actual beneficiaries.

Further, a huge quantity of date expired anti-malaria drugs were held in stock of the
District Health Society Store Room as tabulated in Table 7.

Table -7
SI. No. Name of Medicine Expiry Date Quantity
|_1. | Quinine Sulphate April 2010 600 Tablets
2. Primaquine Tab (2.5 mg.) March 2010 9600 Tablets
3. Quinine Injection December 2009 49 Units
| 4. | Primaquine Tab.(2.5 mg) March 2009 4000 Tablets
5. Blister Combipack May 2010 196 Packs
| 6. | Primaquine Tab March 2011 8000 Tablets

Source:- Departmental Figures

The District Family Welfare Officer (DFWO) accepted (March 2011) all the audit
findings and assured that all possible effort will be made to comply with the audit
recommendations.

The District Health Society should commission a survey to identify the gaps in
health care infrastructure and facilities and draw up a specific time frame to
provide accessible and affordable health care to the rural poor and vulnerable
sections of society as per NRHM guidelines.

Community involvement should be ensured at every stage in planning,
implementation and monitoring of programmes.

Basic health infrastructure and amenities should be provided at all healthcare
centres by proper utilisation of the funds available to give confidence to achieve
the objective of the programme.

18


Chapter V : Social Sector

The district administration should implement various health programme viz., JSY,
NPCB, NVBDCP, Universal Immunisation Programme etc. in a more concerted
manner so that the benefit of the programme is extended to entire population of
the district.

The district administration needs to renew and strengthen its efforts to create
more awareness about HIV/AIDS and STD among the people.

5.2. EDUCATION

Education is one of the most important indicators of social progress of a nation. Both
the State and the Central Governments have been spending enormous amounts on
increasing the enrolment and retention of children in schools, especially in the
primary and elementary segments. Focus is also on inclusive progress, with special
attention to girls, SC/ST Communities, other vulnerable sections of the society and
remote and backward areas. The Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) is one of the flagship
programmes of the Government to make primary education universal.

5.2.1 Sarva Shiksha Abhijan (SSA)

With a view to make Elementary Education universal Sarva Shiksha Abhijan (SSA)
was launched in the District along with all other districts in 2001-02 with the
objective of providing quality education to children in the age group of 6-14 years.
SSA aimed to provide useful and relevant Elementary Education to all children in the
age group of 6-14 years by 2010. Another goal was to bridge social and gender gaps
by active community participation in the management of schools.

5.2.1.1 Administrative Set-up

The responsibility for implementing the programme rests with the District Project
Officer (DPO), headed by the Deputy Director of School Education (DDSE), assisted
by 3 (three) Asst. District Education Officers (ADEOs) in Headquarters. At the Block
level there is an Asst. District Education Officer and Asst. Project Officer (APO). The
Dy. Commissioner is the Chairman of the SSA. There are 3 Education blocks in the
District. As of March 2011, total number schools in the district was 311 schools (222
primary and 89 upper primary).

At the village level, there is a Village Education Committee (VEC), consisting of a
Panchayat member as Chairman, the Head Master of the school as Member Secretary
and three representatives from the parents side and village elders selected by Village
Committee as members. The ADEO/APO or any representative of the DDSE is the
District ex-officio member of the committee, The responsibilities of the VECs are: -

e To manage, direct, supervise and control the schools and to ensure
administrative, academic and financial discipline.

e To plan and execute school activities, including academic and co-curriculum
activities.

¢ To ensure availability of separate toilets for boys and girls.

19


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

e To ensure provision of clean drinking water and construction of ramps for
disabled students in the school.

e To provide good and sufficient land for the school and a playground.

5.2.1.2 Fund Management

Funds are allocated through the State Budget for carrying out various activities in the
field of elementary education, which are mainly towards salary of teachers. In
addition, funds were received directly by the implementing agencies for educational
developmental programmes sponsored by the GOI viz., Sarva Siksha Abhiyan (SSA)
along with the State Government’s matching share. The total receipt and expenditure
for the District under SSA are given in Table 8: -

Table -8
(₹ in crore)
Year Opening Receipts during the year Total Closing
Balance 6.01 Interest | Total णात | Expenditure | Balance
2005-06 0.40 3.49 0.01 3.90 3.85 0.05
2006-07 0.05 12.66 0.05 12.76 12.70 | 0.06 |
2007-08 0.06 9.34 0.01 | 4 | 9.33 0.08
2008-09 0.08 15.50 | 0.04 | 15.62 14.85 0.77
2009-10 0.77 7.30 NIL 8.07 7.99 0.08
2010-11 0.08 16.97 NIL 17.05 16.97 0.08
Source. - Extract from Audited Accounts and information furnished by DDSE
Accounts for the year 2007-08 showed that हैं 2.28 crore was spent towards execution
of Civil Works. It was evident from the Project Director’s letter of 30" September
2008, that the amount was initially released to M/s Syntex for Civil Works, but the
firm could not execute the works and refunded the entire amount within the year.
Subsequently, the fund was released to the VEC during 2008-09. The works were

executed during 2008-09 without effecting any rectification either in accounts of
2007-08 or 2008-09. This resulted in overstatement of expenditure during 2007-08
with corresponding understatement of expenditure हैं 2.28 crore in the accounts of
2008-09,

5.2.1.3 Planning

The success of any programme depends on good planning, beginning from the
grassroots’ level. Good planning also depends on effective training given to the
functionaries from Community to the District level. Planning in SSA is need-based,
context specific, decentralized and participatory. Therefore, the bottom up approach
of planning is adopted and the habitation is the unit of planning. Micro planning is
undertaken to ascertain the educational status and need.

5.2.1.4 Coverage of Habitations

SSA norms provided that Primary Schools should be set up subject to availability of
child population in the age-group of 6 to 14 with a minimum enrolment of 20 children

20



Chapter V : Social Sector

in those areas which do not have any school within one kilometre of habitation. The
Right to Education Act (RTE), 2009, envisaged that every child in the age group of 6
to 14 would be provided eight years of Elementary Education in an age appropriate
class in the vicinity of his/her neighbourhood.

There were 477 habitations in the District. As on 317 March 2011, 469 habitations (98
per cent) had Primary Schools/Education Guarantee Centre within one kilometre
radius. However, eight habitations of the District (Ziro I Block — two, Ziro Il Block —
three and Raga Block — three) were not having Primary schools within one kilometre
radius as per SSA norms.

Further, seven habitations of the district were not having Upper Primary schools
within three kilometre radius as per norms.

5.2.1.5 Enrolment and out of school children

The position of enrolment and out-of-school children during the last six years is given
in Table 9: -

Table - 9
Primary Schools Upper Primary Schools
Y PP’ Y Grand Out-of-
Year No. of No, of Tota | Schoo!
Schoais | Boys | Girls | Total | इक | Boys Girls | Total Children
2008-06 45 5952 | 4950 | 10902 35 1902 | 1512 | 3414 | 14316 4911
2006-07 61 7160 | 6986 | 14092 35 2846 | 2925 | 5771 | 19863 2530
2007-08 70 6786 | 6408 | 13194 37 2340 | 2298 | 4638 | 17832 | ॥५ | 194
2008-09 101 6850 | 6558 | 13408 69 2352 | 2262 | 4614 | 18022 1016
2009-10 135 8320 7848 16168 80 2508 2449 5029 21197 721
2010-11 222 हवग1 | 7935 | 16406 89 2657 | 2585 | 5242 | 21645 590
Source: SSA Records
Above table indicates that except during the year 2007-08 the enrolment had

increased steadily over the previous years. Out-of-school children had decreased from
4911 (in 2005-06) to 590 (2010-11), which is an encouraging fact. However, more
effort needs to be made to achieve 100 per cent enrolment of the children in classes
appropriate to the age group.

5.2.1.6 Drop Outs

Test check revealed that the dropout level of students has decreased from 18 per cent
in 2006-07 to seven per cent in 2010-11. Thus, there was improvement in checking
the dropout level in elementary schools. However, greater endeavour is required to
attain universal retention.

21



Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

5.2.1.7 Pupil Teacher Ratio

The Pupil Teacher Ratio (PTR) according to SSA norms is 40:1, which was modified
to 30:1. There should be at least two teachers for every primary school and a teacher
for each class in upper primary schools.

The overall PTR in the District at 15:1 was favourable than the permissible limit of
30:1 under SSA norms. PTR in three Blocks of the district is as shown in Table 10:

Table - 10
Block Total No. of Total No. of Pupil-Teacher Ratio
Students Teachers
Ziro-I 4227 350 12:1
Ziro-IT S947 400 15:1
Raga 5395 283 19:1
DISTRICT 15569 1033 15:1

Source: Departmental Figures

Audit analysis of the deployment of teachers in the district revealed that the
deployment of teachers in schools was not judicious. It was also noticed that there
was an excess of teachers in certain schools (mostly in urban area) and a shortage in
others (mostly in rural/remote areas).

Audit scrutiny revealed that following three schools in the district with 92 students
enrolled had no teachers as per details provided in Table 11.
Table - 11
SLN Number of
SL No. Block School Class Students
|. | Zito-t Govt. PS- Pai Gate LV 35
2. Ziro-IL Govt. PS- Harak LV fw
3 Ziro-I1 Govt. PS- Tayo LV 39

In addition, 30 Primary Schools (Appendix II) of the district with total enrolment of
1234 students (enrolment ranging from 32 to 70 children per school) had only one
teacher posted against the norm of at least two teachers for every primary school,
where as six schools in and around Ziro town (two upper primary school having
students enrolled in primary classes only, two residential schools having primary
classes and two primary schools) has more number of teachers than prescribed under
norms. The PTR in these schools varied between 1:4 and 1:10.

Similarly, there were some upper primary schools which had excess teachers over the
prescribed norms, while other few upper primary schools were not provided with the

minimum number of teachers as prescribed in the norms.

This is indicative of injudicious deployment of teachers. This is bound to adversely
impact on the quality of education imparted at deficit teacher schools

22



Chapter V : Social Sector

5.2.1.8 Teacher Training

As per SSA norms, untrained teachers should be given at least 60 days In-house
training to enhance their skills for imparting quality education. In the audit scrutiny it
was noticed that none of the untrained teachers were given the mandatory 60 days
training.

However, during 2009-10, ~ 13.46 lakh was sanctioned to impart 20 days training to
875 In-service teachers. The SSA conducted Teachers’ Training Camps/Courses
simultaneously in three Blocks for 10 days instead of 20 days (between 05 January
2010 and 15 January 2010) where in teachers were imparted some training (Ziro-I -
301 teachers, Ziro-Il - 352 teachers and Raga - 222 teachers). The usefulness of such
training is doubtful as the training was simultaneously conducted at three venues in
groups ranging between 222 and 352 teachers.

During 2010-11, though हैं 16.31 lakh was received for imparting 20 days training to
913 teachers, but no training was conducted during the year.

5.2.1.9 Quality of learning

Lack of trained teachers coupled with injudicious deployment of teachers had
impacted adversely on the quality of education imparted at theses schools as is
evident from results of the Class X Board Examination. It could be seen that the
results of students of Private schools was better than that of Government schools, as
shown in the following chart:

Chart: 2

% 100 96 200 98
= 75
eso!
5 50 |
a
2 25
a

0

2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11
बह Government School @ Private School
5.2.1.10 Physical Infrastructure

As of April 2006, there were 96 schools (61 primary schools and 35 upper primary
schools) in the district. Total number schools in the district, as of March 2011, had

23


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

more than tripled to 311 schools (222 primary schools and 89 upper primary schools).
All schools had more than two rooms, which is a significant achievement.

Out of the total number of 222 Primary and 89 Upper Primary Schools in the District as
of March 2011, number of schools requiring major and minor repairs are as depicted in
the Chart 3.

Chart: 3
25
20
15 B Number of class room
requiring major repairs
10 i Number of class room
requiring minor repairs
5
0
Upper Primary Primary

Source: -Departmental Figures

5.2.1.11 Basic Amenities

A majority of the schools at the elementary level did not have the basic minimum
amenities. Position regarding availability of basic amenities at elementary schools
during the period 2006-11 is as detailed in Table 12.

Table: -12

No. of Schools without

Total No. of Drinking water | Common toilet Girls toilet Ramps for
Year Schools facility facility facility disabled
children
| Pps | UPS: | ps | UPS | ps | UPS | ps | UPS. | ps | UPS
2006-07 | ७ | 35 51 27 42 | 19 | ot | 35 61 35
2007-08 | 70 37 35 | 6 | 51 21 70 37 70 37
2008-09 | 101 | ७ | 31 | ० | 63 24 62 | | 101 | ७ |

2009-10 155 153 107 | ० | | % | 39 112 44 132 78

2010-11 | 222 | » | 109 36 117 28 102 43 218 | |

(49) (40) (53) 1) (46) (48) (98) | (100)

Source: - Department Figures (Figures in parentheses indicate the percentage)

Above table indicates that there was an all-round shortfall of infrastructural facilities,
both in the primary and the upper primary schools. As of 31 March, 2011,

24


Chapter V : Social Sector

e Drinking water facility was not provided in about 49 per cent primary schools
and 40 per cent upper primary schools;

° 46 per cent of primary schools and 48 per cent of upper primary schools were
not having separate girls’ toilets; even common toilets were not available in 53
per cent primary and 31 per cent upper primary schools.

e Ramps for disabled children were not available in almost all the schools of the
District.

5.2.1.12 Construction activities

Records connected with the construction of new school building for Primary and
Upper Primary Schools were scrutinised in audit. The points noticed during the audit
scrutiny are brought out in the subsequent paragraphs.

As per Manual, funds for construction of school building is released to Village
Education Committee (VEC)/School Management Committee (SMC), were to be
released in three instalments — 50 per cent as 11 instalment, 35 per cent as 274
instalment and the remaining 15 per cent after the work was fully completed.

From the Chartered Accountant’s Report of SSA for DDSE, Lower Subansiri District
for the year 2008-09 it was seen that = 150 lakh, हैं 63 lakh and हें 49 lakh were booked
as expenditure incurred on Civil Works towards construction of Primary Schools,
Upper Primary Schools and Residential Hostels.

Construction of primary schools

Scrutiny of records of DDSE revealed that the entire amount of % 150 lakh! booked
on construction of Primary Schools was drawn on 28" March 2009 and & 4.29 lakh
each was paid to 25 VECs along with CGI Sheets and Ridging. Completion
certificates were obtained from the VECs concerned on the same day.

It was noticed that estimates for construction was prepared as per Arunachal Pradesh
Schedule of Rates (APSR) 2007. The cost of construction inter-alia included cost for
69.39 Sq m roofing. Rates applicable roofing as per APSR 2007 was for supply and
fixing of CGI sheet and ridging, which means that the rate included the cost of CGI
sheets and ridging. Since CGI sheets and ridging were supplied free of cost, the rates
allowed for roofing should have been reduced by that extent. Thus, CGI sheet and
ridging supplied to VECs/SMCs valuing हैं 42.75 lakh amounts to double payment for
material used in the roofing.

Audit team visited some of the schools constructed by VECs/SMCs and found that
standard of construction of schools was good in some cases and sub-standard in some
cases as evident from the photographs of some of the schools visited by Audit Team.

1/₹ 107.25 lakh towards ® 4.29 lakh each paid to 25 VECs/SMCs along with 99 CGI sheets and 14
ridging for construction of primary school building and हैं 42.75 lakh as cost of 2475 CGI sheets and
350 ridging centrally purchased and supplied by the State Project Director to respective VECs/SMCs).

25


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

Sub-standard school building

Good School building

ot

Good School building

CROCS aan
GOVT PRYSBO MEE हि320:

Good School building Sub-standard school building

Further physical verification revealed that new Primary School at Pai Gate was
abandoned and was in dilapidated condition since the year of construction in 2008-09.
A view is shown below:

26



Chapter V ; Social Sector

Photo showing Pai-Gate Primary School

Construction of upper primary schools

Similarly, out of = 63 lakh booked as expenditure incurred on Civil Works towards
construction of nine Upper Primary Schools constructed during 2008-09, (₹ 45 lakh
was paid to nine VECs/SMCs @ ® five lakh each along with 107 CGI sheets and 16
ridging for construction of upper primary school building and हैं 18 lakh as cost of 963
CGI sheets and 144 ridging centrally purchased and supplied to respective
VECs/SMCs). The amount of हैं 45.00 lakh was drawn on 28" March 2009 and
% five lakh each was paid to the VECs concerned along with CGI Sheets and ridging.
Again, the completion certificate was obtained on the same day.

It was also noticed in audit that in spite of the issue of roofing materials worth = two
lakh each to VECs/SMCs, they were paid for 79.75 sq. m. roofing area executed by
them at rate, which included the cost of supply and fixing as. per APSR 2007. Thus,
CGI sheet and ridging supplied to nine VECs/SMCs valuing ~ 18 lakh amounts to
double payment for material used in the roofing.

Photos of UP Schools are shown below: -

0813: 4 -

Good School building Sub-standard school building

27


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

Construction of hostel buildings

During 2008-09, an amount of % 68.40 lakh was booked towards construction of three
hostel buildings (50 boarders each) measuring 264 sq.mt. (% 49.35 lakh paid to the
three VECs/SMCs @ ₹ 16.45 lakh each and % 19.05 lakh as cost of 996 CGI Sheets
and 120 ridging issued for construction).

As in the case of primary and upper primary school building construction, in spite of
the issue of roofing materials worth हैं 6.35 lakh each to VECs/SMCs, they were paid
for roofing 138.70 Sq m at the rate which included the cost of supply and fixing as per
APSR 2007. Thus, CGI sheet and ridging supplied to nine VECs/SMCs valuing
% 19.05 lakh amounts to double payment for material used in the roofing.

Against the expenditure booked towards the construction of primary, upper primary
and hostel building, there were no other supporting documents, except completion
certificates obtained at the time of release of funds and issue of centrally purchased
materials, such as paid vouchers, measurement books, etc. available on record nor
were produced to audit on demand,. As such whether the actual construction was
made according to the specifications laid down without compromising the quality of
construction could not be assessed. This has to be viewed in the light of the fact that a
Junior Engineer-cum-Civil Co-ordinator was working under SSA. Further,
bill/voucher in support of centrally purchased items viz., CGI sheets and ridging was
not on the records nor was made available to audit

Photos of 50 Boarder Hostel Buildings are shown below

aw

RESIDENTIAL BLDG. FOR 50 BOARDERS AT GOVT. M.E. SCHOOL BOA SIMLA - RAGA Block

28



Chapter V : Social Sector

While furnishing the reason for non-maintenance of MB, the Project Officer stated
(November 2010) that the Mission was not empowered to maintain MB due to
uniform unit cost of all structures. The money was simply released to the VECs
concerned and construction was carried out by the VECs. Designated officials visited
the construction sites and conducted visual verifications only. However, the Chief
Consultant, EDCIL, New Delhi, had recently suggested the maintenance of MBs,
recording of measurements and release of payment to the VECs in three phases.

Construction during 2010-11

During 2010-11, the construction work of 30 new Primary School, upgraded from
EGS to Primary Schools was administratively approved at a total estimated cost of
र₹ 450 lakh (% 15 lakh per school). The schools were to be constructed with four rooms
(including one teacher room) of 40 student capacity in easy belt and 20 student
capacity in hard belt, boundary walls around the school building, separate toilets for
girls and boys, drinking water facilities, etc.

Test check revealed that a total of = 382.37 lakh was released to the School Managing
Committee (SMC) in two instalments (% 212.43 lakh (50 per cent) as 1“ instalment
and & 169.84 (40 per cent) as 2" instalment). The construction work was carried out
by the SMC and balance 10 per cent (the last instalment) was yet to be released.
Against this expenditure, except for Utilisation Certificates and APR’s, no other
supporting documents such as estimates, paid vouchers, MB’s, etc; were available on
record nor could be produced to audit. Further, neither were status reports of the
buildings submitted by the SMC to the District Project Director-cum-DDSE nor
insisted upon by the latter.

However, physical verification revealed that two schools were constructed with only
three rooms each. In one school at Dokum village, a common toilet was constructed,
but no boundary wall or drinking water facilities were provided, though stipulated in
the specifications. Views of the schools are shown below:-

Primary School at Reru-I Primary School at Dokum

29



Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

5.2.2 Mid-day Meal

Test check revealed that 190 kitchen sheds were to be constructed in the district with
the specifications, i.e., total built-up area (including wall) 24.76 sq m. These kitchen
sheds were to be built at a total cost of = 1.14 crore, out of which ₹ 0.51 crore (44.98
per cent) was retained by the Mission Directorate for central purchase of CGI sheets
and ridging (including VAT and transportation charges). Work Orders were issued
between September and December 2008 for construction of these kitchen sheds. The
contractors were issued with 23 CGI sheets and 5 ridging for construction of each
kitchen shed. The actual number of kitchen sheds constructed in the district was not
available on record and measurement book was maintained. Dates of commencement
and completion were not recorded on bills. Payment of ₹ 62.72 lakh was made to the
contractors between October 2009 and March 2010.

From the photographic evidence gathered by Audit, it could be seen that out of 190
kitchen sheds in Lower Subansiri district only 37 were as per specifications and the
rest are substandard. Some of the photographs are given below.

Condition of MDM Kitchen Sheds

Shed at EGS Centre, Toon

Kitchen Shed at Migo Joram Kitchen Shed at Dem-II

The Department stated (November 2010) that the construction of Kitchen sheds was
done as per availability of local materials and as per local conditions in different parts

30



Chapter V : Social Sector

of the District, and that in some cases, the sanctioned amount was not enough to meet
the specifications. Interaction with the Anchal Chairperson, ZPMs, GPMs and ASMs
confirmed the fact that almost all the Kitchen sheds were of the ‘kuccha’ type and but
they however, averred that mid-day meals were served regularly, barring 2008-09.

Test check revealed that 18,022, 21,197 and 21,648 students were enrolled during
2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11 respectively in the district. However, Mid-day Meal
rice for 12,539, 12,539 and 16,652 students was sanctioned during 2008-09, 2009-10
and 2010-11 respectively which was sufficient to feed 70 per cent, 59 per cent, 77 per
cent of the student enrolled during the respective years. The basis on which the
number of students entitled was determined was neither stated nor on record. With the
amount of rice sanctioned it is obvious that the mid-day meals were not served
regularly in the district. This fact is corroborated by the views expressed by public
representatives with whom Audit interacted.

Interaction with 12 public representatives revealed that mid-day meals were not
served regularly in any of the twelve schools located in the areas represented by those
public representatives. In one of the schools mid-day meals was never served
according to the public representative of the area where the school was located.

Nutritional status of students through regular weight measurement was stated to have
been done in schools, but no record of health improvement was on record. The quality
of education through better performance in class examinations was never assessed at
one level.

To sum up, many schools in the district lacked basic infrastructure/facilities.
Besides, deployment of teachers was not rational and adequate steps were not taken
to train teachers properly to ensure quality education. The target of bringing all
children within age group of 6-14 years to school by 2010 could not be achieved in
the District till date.

Basic infrastructure facilities should be provided on a priority basis in all the
schools.

Rational deployment of teachers in schools should be ensured and effective steps
taken to train all the untrained teachers at the earliest to improve the quality of
education imparted to the students.

District education authorities should ensure that the school buildings are
constructed as per specification with all basic amenities as envisaged and quality
should not be compromised. A proper overseeing mechanism should be put in
place for this purpose.

Hygienic Mid-day Meals should be served to all eligible students on all schooldays
as envisaged under the programme.

31


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

5.3. DRINKING WATER SUPPLY

Providing adequate and safe drinking water to all, especially those living in rural
areas, has been a priority for both the Central and State Government. In Lower
Subansiri District, the Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme (ARWSP) and
Rural Piped Water Supply (RPWS) Scheme were implemented.

The budget allotments for the Rural Water Supply Scheme during 2005-2011 were as

given in Table 13: -
Table - 13
(€in crore)
Centre State Government Total
Year Budget Expenditure Budget | Expendie | Budget | eens |
Allotment Allotment Allotment

2005-06 8.92 8.92 1.03 1.03 9.95 9.95

2006-07 TAT TAT 2.10 2.10 9.57 9.57

2007-08 5.90 5.90 2.16 2.16 8.06 8.06

2008-09 7.78 7.78 0.20 0.20 7.98 7.98

2009-10 11.20 11.20 11.20 11.20

2010-11 7.33 7.33 0.53 0.53 7.86 7.86

Total 48.60 48.60 | 6.02 | | 6.02 | | _ 54.62 | 54.62

Source:- Departmental Figures

Up to 2005, Out of 323 habitations 160 habitations were fully covered, nine partially
covered and 154 habitations were uncovered. During the last six years, 176 Water
Supply Schemes were constructed at a cost of % 44.64 crore covering a population of
21,514. Out of 323 habitations, 108 were fully covered, 180 partially covered and 35
yet to be covered, as shown in the chart.

Chart No.4

Fully Covered Partially Covered Not Covered

बा As of March 2005 हा As of March 2011

From the above graph it can be seen that number of not covered villages has
decreased from 154 habitations in March 2005 to 35 habitations in March 2011.
However, all these villages have not fully covered. The matter of concern is fully
covered habitations has declined from 160 in March 2005 to 108 in March 2011.

32



Chapter V : Social Sector

Reasons for slip back of fully covered habitations to partially covered
habitations/uncovered habitations was attributed to increase in population of the
habitations, completion of design period, rusting of GI pipes, damage to intake source
and supply network due to flood and landslide.

To have a reliable and sufficient water management system in the District, a detailed
plan was to be formulated so that the water supply schemes could be taken up for
execution in a phased manner and the schemes prioritised for optimising results. For
proper implementation of a programme, action plans incorporating all the rural
schemes requiring augmentation, renovation and construction are required to be
formulated by way of preparation of a perspective plan (PP). The annual action plans
which should pave way for taking up of the works in a particular year should flow
from the PP.

Records showed that the Department had not prepared any Perspective Plan to
provide Not Covered (NC) habitations with adequate potable drinking water and
upgrade Partially Covered (PC) habitations to Fully Covered (FC) habitations.
However, Annual Operating Plans (AOPs) were prepared for the District.

Under ARWSP Guidelines, no works were to be taken up for private individuals,
institutions owned by societies, private schools, etc. But between February 2002 and
March 2004, 28 Water Supply Schemes (unauthorized) belonging to the above
categories were taken up under ARWSP at a cost of हैं 327.80 crore. They were
completed between March 2003 and March 2005, at a cost of 353.77 crore.

53 Water Supply Schemes were again taken up during 2003-04 and 2004-05, at an
estimated cost of ~ 6.57 crore, and an expenditure of हैं 1.45 crore was incurred.
However, none of the schemes were completed as of March 2011. Only materials
were partially procured for 49 schemes (% 1.17 crore), for which neither were any
Material-at-Site Accounts maintained nor were the materials transferred to other
works. In 4 schemes, only CC works were done in 2003-04 at a cost of = 0.28 crore.
As per sanction orders, these 53 schemes should have been completed within one
year from the date of sanction, but all the schemes still remained incomplete even
after lapse of more than four years from the date of sanction, and details of these
schemes are given in Appendix — II.

5.3.1 Water Quality

Test check revealed that 114 Water Supply Schemes, covering a population of 18,875
were taken up between March 1996 and March 2008 at an estimated cost of % 8.58
crore. These were completed between March 1997 and March 2008 but without the
Slow Sand Filter component. As a result, the population was not provided with
safe/treated drinking water. In Lower Subansiri District, during the last 6 years, 947
people suffered from acute Gastroenteritis and were admitted to the District Hospital,
Ziro, of which there have been 29 casualties. Thus, the objective of supply of good
quality water to the people covered under these schemes was defeated despite huge
expenditure on their execution.

33


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

The Executive Engineer, Public Health Engineering Division, Ziro accepted
(March 2011) all the audit findings.

To sum up, unsafe/untreated water was being supplied to the public in general,
as water treatment plants were not installed in most of the schemes. Quite a
number of water borne diseases were noticed in the District. Further, many
schemes remained incomplete.

The district administration needs to prepare a strategic action plan to provide potable
drinking water to all the habitations in the district, especially to the uncovered
habitations in a time bound manner.

Water treatment facility should be improved/ upgraded to ensure supply of safe
drinking water to avoid any causality and reduce water borne diseases.

5.4 SANITATION

The District has only one census town, namely Ziro, where sanitation facilities were
yet to be provided. However, under Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) the following
sanitation facilities were approved for construction in the district at a cost of = 144.98
lakh.

Table - 14
House Hold Latrines Sanitary Latrines for Latrines of Rural Sanitary
"APL BPL Complex Schools Anganwadis Mart
| 1164 | 5766 26 232 | 19 [| 03

Against the approved facilities there was shortfall in achievement in respect of
Household Latrines - (BPL-2803), Sanitary Complex - 13, though the entire allotted
fund was expended. This was due to excess expenditure on components such as Start-
up Activities (¥ 7.56 lakh), Administrative Charges (€ 5.415 lakh) and IEC (₹ 18.92
lakh).

Further, test check revealed that out of 119 sanitary latrines shown to have been
constructed by the Public Health Engineering Division, Ziro at Aganwadi Centres, 17
centres where latrines were stated to have been constructed do not figure in the list of
286 Anganwadi Centres established in the district as furnished by the three Child
Development Project Officers, viz. Ziro-I, Ziro-Il and Tamen Raga.. As such, the
claim made by the department is questionable and the expenditure incurred on the
construction of these latrines are doubtful.

Thus, in the absence of adequate sanitation facilities, due to non-completion of
various schemes, the aims of Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) could not be achieved.

The Executive Engineer, Public Health Engineering Division, Ziro accepted
(March 2011) all the audit findings.

34


Chapter V : Social Sector

District authorities should initiate effective steps for achievement of the target fixed for
household latrines for all APL and BPL families.

Suitable plan should be framed to create proper sanitation facilities in the urban area of
the district, especially Ziro town which is district headquarters also.

5.5 NUTRITION

The Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) Programme is India’s primary
response to nutritional needs of children below six years and nursing mothers. The
scheme is in the forefront of the Central Government’s efforts to achieve the nutrition
related Millennium Development Goal (MDG) of halving underweight rates from 54
per cent to 27 per cent between 2009 and 2015.

The aim of Supplementary Nutrition Programme (SNP) is to supplement nutritional
intake for 300 days a year of children between six months to six years of age, nursing
mothers and severely malnourished children, as per norms given in Table 15.

Table - 15
Existing Norms Revised norm’s from 2009-10
Category
Calories Proteins Calories | Proteins |
Children up to 6
years 300 8-10 gm 500 12-15 gm

Out of 286 Anganwadi Centres in the District, 113 had their own Mud Insulated Basa
Type (MIBT) and the remaining Centres were run in the houses of Anganwadi
workers and helpers.

During 2005-11, 262.906 MTs of Kichiri, Biscuits, Posahar, Peas, Complan, Noodles,
ete;. was reported to have been distributed to 36,179 children in the age group of 0-6
years (84 per cent of 43,179) through the 286 Anganwadi Centres in the District. The
Project Officer could not furnish the calorific and protein content of the food
provided. Scrutiny of the relevant records revealed that the food was distributed for
about 180 days a year or on an average 15 days a month. Thus, the purpose of the
programme was frustrated.

However, interaction with 12 public leaders of different villages revealed that two
ICDS Centres were functioning from a private house and seven from a “Kutcha”
building. Food was provided occasionally in Neelam and Taya Simla, once in week in
Yazali, once in a year in Yarkum and was not at all provided AT Tamen Raga Centre.

Effective steps should be taken to supply nutritional supplement to all children in the
age group of 0-6 years for 300 days a year. It should be ensured that the calorific and
protein content of nutritional supplement is in accordance with the norms fixed.

35


Good infrastructure is the key for enhancing the growth potential of the District and
bridging the gap between the urban and rural areas. It will also bring remote and
backward areas closer to the District Headquarters and bring about growth of the
economy. Infrastructure includes provision of good all weather roads, adequate
electricity for households, industrial and irrigation needs, Railway connectivity, air
services and reliable communication facilities.

6.1. 17047 CONNECTIVITY

There is no flight or rail connectivity in the District. However, there is one Helipad in
Old Ziro, and the nearest airport (Lilabari) and Railway Station is in North
Lakhimpur, Assam, which is about 120 km. away. Ziro Town is connected by road to
the State Capital (Itanagar), about 167 km. away. The roads in Lower Subansiri
District from Kimin to Raga Block via Ziro-II Block were constructed and maintained
by the Border Roads Organisation (BRO). A review of road development in the
District revealed that 75 per cent villages were connected by road up to March 2011.
The total length of roads constructed by different construction agencies is as given in
Table 16.

Table - 16

APPWD 67.72 70.48

Source: Statistical Handbook.

Distance of various places from the District Headquarter is as under: -
Table - 17

Distance from HQs

Block Circle (Ziro)

Tamen Raga

37


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

Out of 226 villages in the district, up to March 2005, Only 104 villages were provided
road connectivity (APPWD = 55 and RWD = 49), which increased to 195 as of March
2011 (APPWD = 72 and RWD = 123).

The District Rural Road Plan (DRRP) indicating the entire existing road network in
the District and the core network identifying the roads required to assure each eligible
habitation with a basic access (single and weather road connectivity) to essential
social and economic services was required to be prepared. Records showed that
DRRP had not been prepared by the department as a result; the entire existing and the
required road network to be constructed in the District could not be ascertained.
Construction and maintenance of roads in the district is mostly done by Public Works
Department and Rural Works Department.

6.1.1 Public Works Department

The Division/Department had no Perspective Plan, however, Annual Operative Plans
were prepared. In the absence of a Perspective Plan, there is always possibilities of
haphazard execution of the schemes due to improper prioritisation of the project
causing delay in completion of the project or projects remaining incomplete for long
time leading to blocking of funds, wasteful expenditure, etc. Such instances noticed
during the audit scrutiny of the records of the division are discussed in the subsequent
paragraphs.

During 2005-11, the PWD has constructed only 27.5 km of road (25.5 km under CRF
and 2 km under NABARD) in the district.

(a) It was seen in audit that between 1987-88 and 1998-99, the Division had taken
up “Formation Cutting” at an estimated cost of = 1.04 crore in different locations and
between 40 and 100 per cent work was physically completed, with an expenditure of
र₹ 1.07 crore as of March 1999. Thereafter, no further work was taken up on those
roads. As a result, earthwork already done on incomplete roads may become waste
due to landslips, vagaries of weather, etc.

(b) Six major road works were taken up between 2001 and 2008 in the district, but
none were completed till date as detailed below: -

Table - 18
Year Name of the Road Funded from Estimated cost @ in Lakh) Expenditure
taken up in lakh)
2007 _| Pai to Pine Grove CRF 500.00 289,25
2008 Raga Township Road CRF 448.60 118.80
2007 | Yazali Mangio Road RIDF 4224.43 3715.13
NA _| Road from 20 Camp RIDF 713.80 629.81
Daporijo to Chambang
2001 | Pine Grove to Siro RIDF 1882.38 1882.90
2008 ‘| Yallap to Yom RIDF 400.00 139.25

Source: As per Progress Report

38



Chapter VI: Economic Sector

Further, scrutiny revealed that construction of RIDF funded road from Pine Grove to
Siro (3 to 44 km.), which was administratively approved in February 2001 at = 18.82
crore, was to be completed by March 2002. The work commenced in 2001 and only
74.53 per cent of work was executed after incurring an expenditure of = 18.81 crore.
Thereafter no progress in the work was made till August 2011. However, a revised
estimate for हैं 36.65 crore was prepared and submitted to the Chief Engineer for
approval. The same has not been approved yet.

Meanwhile, 6.05 km. formation cutting was damaged due to floods, but the actual
occurrence of damage was not on record. As a result, the expenditure became
unproductive, as shown in the photographs below:

Condition of Pine Grove - Siro Road

It was also seen that though the Division did not maintain any Asset Register, % 26.48
crore was incurred towards maintenance of internal roads during the last six years.
Neither was any survey conducted nor any estimate prepared for the repair work.
Physical verification revealed that there was no or very poor maintenance of internal
roads, as seen from the photographs below: -

39


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

Main Bazaar, behind Stadium, Hapoli Club Road, Hapoli

Right Side of Stadium, Hapoli

Creation of new PWD Divison

The Ziro PWD Division was bifurcated and Yazali PWD Division was created in
August 2009. The handing and taking over of assets of Yazali took place on 15"
October 2009, and records such as Measurement Books, Site Accounts and Estimates
were transferred to Yazali Division. But other records like APRs, Vouchers, Work
Orders, etc;. were still in the custody of PWD Division, Ziro. Though the Department
said it would transfer these records to Yazali Division, they were still with PWD
Division, Ziro as of August 2011. However, some shortcoming/lapses were noticed
during the test check of the records maintained by the PWD divisions in the District
which is indicative of deficient internal control mechanism in the department that
fraught with the risk of fraud, misappropriation and wasteful expenditure, etc.. For
example: -

“Works valued at = 2.50 crore was awarded to 18 contractors on the basis of
about 43 Work Orders, keeping each Work Order within the financial power
of the Executive Engineer. Payments were made to the contractors on Hand
Receipts (142 cases) for हैं 0.64 crore.

* Construction of a Foot Suspension Bridge over Dollungmukh river at a cost of
र₹ 0.26 crore was awarded to a single contractor by issuing 24 Work Orders.

40


Chapter VI; Economic Sector

हि
%

% 0.15 crore was paid to contractor for repair and maintenance of internal
roads in Ziro without measurement of the work done.

५९
%

Basic records like Work Registers, Deposit Registers and T&P Ledgers were
not maintained by the Division.

To sum up, in the absence of a Perspective Plan, works were taken up without
assessing their immediate requirement. Some works remained incomplete for long
time resulting in wasteful expenditure as such incomplete works became useless
due to long delays in completion of work. Internal control system prevalent in the
department was weak.

Steps should be taken to prepare a perspective plan and prioritise the work. All
incomplete work should be completed without further loss of time to avoid
already completed work becoming wasteful due to long delays.

Internal mechanism should be strengthened and it should strictly be ensured that
no codal provisions are violated. All prerequisite before the commencement of
work such as survey, soil testing, etc should be invariably carried out.

6.1.2. Rural Works Department

Under Rural Works Department, 49 villages were connected by road up to March
2005 (under State Fund - 38 and PMGSY - 11). 74 more villages were provided with
road connectivity by the department during 2005-11 (State Fund - 46 and PMGSY -
28) bringing the number of villages connected by roads to 123 (State Fund — 84 an
PMGSY - 39) as depicted in the following chart.

Chart 5

Status of Road Connectivity under
Rural Works Department

250

200.

150.

100

Number of villages
connected

50:

As of March 2005... As of March 2011

BTotal villages m State Fund m PMGSY

Al


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

It was noticed in audit that the Division neither prepared a Perspective Plan nor
Annual Operative Plans (AOPs). Further, the Division did not maintain Asset
Registers of the roads constructed under State or PMGSY funds.

As a result oversight, no action was taken/initiated to complete works in respect of 18
Rural Link Roads (RLRs) in different locations, which were taken up between 1993-
94 and 1999-2000 at an estimated cost of = 3.85 crore and were partially completed
after incurring an expenditure of हैं 1.39 crore (March 2001). Thus, the entire
expenditure of = 1.39 crore became unproductive.

Deficiencies noticed in the two works undertaken in the district are discussed in detail
in the subsequent paragraphs.

(a) The work “Construction of Road from Pitapool to Sagalee Road to Kebi (5.01
km)” was approved at an estimated cost of € 2.44 crore (€ 2.09 crore for construction
and हैं 0.35 crore for maintenance) to cover a population of 289 persons. In response to
Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) of July 2007, four tenders were received, out of which
three were rejected on technical grounds. The work was awarded to a contractor on
single tender basis at his tender value of = 2.32 crore by entering into an agreement in
November 2007. The work, due to be completed by November 2008, was extended up
to February 2009.

The work was commenced in November 2007 and payment of = 74.34 lakh was made
to the contractor in February 2009 for the items of works completed (Physical
Progress: Preparation Work — 100 per cent, Earth Work - 100 per cent, Drainage -
8 per cent, Base Course — 49 per cent and Base Wearing Coarse (Bituminous) — 0 per
cent). Thereafier neither was any further progress of work made nor was work
withdrawn and awarded to another contractor at the risk and cost of the original
contractor.

Further, it was revealed from the report of the National Quality Monitor (NQM)
dated 13-10-2010, that the thickness of each WBM was not adequate and the
aggregate did not conform to the grading, and that the same was oversized and the
thickness provided was inadequate, as can be seen from the photographs below: -

Starting Point

42



Chapter VI: Economic Sector

G-II at Ch 2950m Cross-drainage at Ch: 3.985 km
(1.5m span 00-50)

(b) — The work “Construction of Road from Deed to Radhpu - 5.25 kms.” was
approved at an estimated cost of % 2.26 crore (Construction Work - % 1.96 crore and
Maintenance Work - ₹ 0.30 crore) to cover a population of 302 persons. In response to
NIT (July 2007) three tenders were received, of which two tenders were rejected on
technical grounds. The work was awarded to a contractor on single tender basis at his
tender value of ~ 2.25 crore, by entering into an agreement in November 2007. The
work was stipulated to be completed by February 2009. The work commenced in
November 2007 and 66 per cent of the work was executed, for which = 1.30 crore was
paid to the contractor in September 2009 (Physical Progress: Preparation Work —
100 per cent; Earth Work — 100 per cent; Cross Drainage — 100 per cent; WBM 1 —
100 per cent; Shoulder - 25 per cent Base Course — 70 per cent; Wearing Course —
0 per cent and Marking & Road Side Furniture — 25 per cent), though the stipulated
date of completion was already over in February 2009. Thereafter, no progress of the
work was noticed. Further, it was revealed from the State Quality Monitoring (SQM)
Report dated 5" April 2009, that the aggregates in base course were oversized,
geometrics and side slope were not maintained, thickness of base course was not as
per specifications and highly plastic soil was used as filler material. The contractor
was recommended for blacklisting.

Further, NQM recommended (14-10-2010) that all mandatory tests were not
conducted. Super elevation was not as per specifications and the aggregate did not
conform to the grading. A few photographs of the road are shown below:

Entry Point Sieving at Channel 13401

43


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

Stop Culvert at Channel 350m. Pit Test for G-I & G-IIL

Again in two completed works, viz. construction of road from Bamin to Nanchalaya
(® 1.40 crore) and road from Tamen to Phokho Yokar (€ 2.35 crore) % 3.75 crore,
including 4 per cent VAT component of 0.15 crore, was paid to contractors. As such
an excess payment was made to the contractor due to non-deduction of statutory
dues of € 0.15 crore.

Steps need to be initiated to prepare a Perspective Plan identify the gap in the
road connectivity and a broad action plan to provide connectivity to all eligible
habitations in the district within specified period of time.

Annual operational plans should be framed in line with the perspective plan and
specific milestones be drawn to ensure timely completion of the projects planned
for execution during the year.

Timely completion of work taken up should be ensured by adhering to codal and
other formalities required for the execution of the work.

Asset registers should be maintained properly and timely maintenance of the
road constructed should be ensured.

6.2 IRRIGATION

The total agricultural land is 15,000 hectares. There were no Major or Medium
Irrigation Projects in the District. Only Minor Irrigation Projects with open trench
weir type headwork were established in the district.

The District did not prepare any Perspective Plan, but works were executed on the

basis of Annual Operative Plans (AOPs).

127 minor irrigation schemes were completed up to 2005, but the irrigation potential
created in terms of hectares was not on record. During 2005-11, total allotment of
% 55.05 crore made was spent in the respective year as indicated in Table19.

44



Chapter VI: Economic Sector

Table - 19
(€in crore)

Year Allotment Expenditure
2005-06 2.38 2.38
2006-07 6.00 6.00
2007-08 8.93 8.92
2008-09 7.66 7.59
2009-10 491 4.91
2010-11 25.16 25.16

Total 55.05 55.05

Source: Departmental Figures

During 2005-10, out of 291 targeted minor irrigation schemes, 155 schemes were
completed and the irrigation potential created was 931 hectares against a target of
1171.66 hectares. During 2010-11 no target was fixed, nor was there any construction.

Information in respect of creation of Irrigation Potential (hectare) was never reported
to the District Agriculture Officer (DAO) or the Director of Agriculture, Naharlagun.
As a result, the Agriculture Department had no information on the irrigational
potential created by the Irrigation Department.

Test check also revealed that the WRD Division projected Benefit Cost Ratio (BCR)
between 5 per cent and 400 per cent in respect of 31 completed schemes taken up in
2006-07 and completed during 2007-09. But WRD did not have any mechanism to
assess the achievement in respect of production as per projected BCR in the
Estimate/DPR. Information furnished by the District Agricultural Officer regarding
area coverage and production/yield in respect of paddy, maize and millet during the
period 2005-11 is given in the following table.

Table - 20
(Area covered in hectares, Production in MTs)
Paddy Maize Millet
Year Area Production Area Production Area Production
covered covered covered

2005-06 9500 11160 1672 2189 2504 3602
2006-07 9643 1174 1697 2222 2542 3656
2007-08 7685 9221 558.78 1117 1850.08 1341.31
2008-09 7838 9406 569.96 1122.82 1887.08 1358.70
2009-10 10193.18 12231.28 620.04 1221.48 1924.08 1443.06
2010-11 8154.54 15982.91 624.75 1230.75 1529.00 1441.31

Source: - Departmental Figures
From the above table it could be seen that total area covered under paddy, maize and
millet cultivation has declined from 13882 ha in 2006-07 to 10308.29 ha in 2010-11,
despite creation of additional irrigational facility for 931 ha land during the period.
Land under cultivation of paddy, maize and millet declined by 14.16 per cent, 62.63

45



Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

per cent and 38.94 per cent respectively. Barring production of paddy, there was a
shortfall of 44 per cent in production of maize and 60 per cent in production of millet
in comparison of 2005-06, even though certified and hybrid seeds were issued to the
farmers as per the agriculture calendar as claimed by DAO.

6.2.1 Execution of minor irrigation schemes

Test check revealed that five schemes covering five villages! were taken up in March
2009 at an estimated cost of हैं 40 lakh through contractors by issuing work orders
without calling for tenders. The works were shown to have been completed in July
2009, and a Utilization Certificate for = 40 lakh was submitted to the Chief Engineer.

Audit scrutiny, however, revealed that in four out of five schemes (at Habong, Bas
Camp, Pat Sepa Boa and Kemliko Villages) were completed without constructing
‘head works’, though provided in the estimates. As a result, expenditure on those
schemes, amounting to हैं 25 lakh became unfruitful.

6.2.2. Handing-over of completed irrigation schemes/realization of water
charges

Revised scheme guidelines (April 2004) provided for the following economic
reforms:

> Revision of the Water Rates to = 225/ha within a period of three years.

> Meeting the full operational and maintenance cost from the water charges
collected.

The Department stated that no water charges were collected from the users as no
Water User Association (WUA) was constituted (September 2010). But Audit
scrutiny revealed that the Division had paid ~ one lakh each to Yachuli WUA and
Raga WUA.

Test check revealed that during January to March 2009 the Division incurred हैं 0.70
crore towards repairs and maintenance of irrigation schemes, for which no funds were
provided. Maintenance work was carried out on work order basis without recording
the names of the schemes/works or their locations either in the work orders, bills or
measurement books.

6.2.3. Internal Control

The Division did not introduce the system of calling for tenders for awarding works.
Rather works were split and awarded to contractors. 616 Work Orders, valued at
र₹ 5.56 crore were issued to 74 contractors (average 8 WOs to each) during 2009-10.
Moreover, the completed works were not measured to assess whether the works were
completed as per specifications. Asset Register was not maintained by the Division.
As aresult, assets created could not be ascertained.

1 [MIP at Radum (#15 lakh); Habong (€ 10 lakh); Bas Camp (5 lakh); Pat Sepa Boa (@ 5 lakh)
and Kemliko (रैं 5 lakh)]

46


Chapter VI: Economic Sector

In Tamen Raga Block, six Minor Irrigation Channels (MIC), constructed under
Hariyali Scheme at a cost of = 18 lakh without prerequisite ‘head works’, became
unfruitful.

To sum up, no Perspective Plan was prepared. Completed schemes were not
handed over to the beneficiaries with intimation to the Agriculture Department.
There was no assessment of achievement in production as per BCR projected in
the DPR. There was lack of proper internal control, Asset Register were not
maintained and also monitoring of schemes was not carried out.

A perspective plan be framed with detail of irrigational potential required to be
created in the district with identification of the source of water detailing the time
frame and funds required for implementation of the irrigation schemes so
planned.

Completed irrigations schemes should be handed over to the beneficiaries, under
intimation to the agriculture department. An impact assessment of the completed
schemes should be carried out to assess whether BCR projected has been achieved
or not. Efforts should be made to collect water usage charges from the recipients.

Asset register should be maintained properly. Internal control mechanism should
be strengthened and the department should introduce the system of awarding
works by calling for tenders. The execution of projects/scheme should be
appropriately monitored.

6.3 Employment Generation

The GOI and the State Government initiated numerous measures to make a dent on
poverty, unemployment and the slow pace of progress in rural economy. In addition,
provision of food security, especially to the poor and vulnerable sections of the
society, was envisioned as one of the important components for intensive growth of
the economy. One of the most important schemes sponsored by the Central
Government for providing employment in the rural areas as a means of poverty
alleviation was Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yozana (SGRY). The Programme was to
be closed on 31 March 2008, with the introduction of another rural employment
guarantee oriented scheme, viz. MNREGP (Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Programme) under an Act of Parliament, which envisaged to
cover all Districts throughout the country in phases w.e.f- April 2008.

6.3.1 Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yozana (SGRY)

The Programme was done through participatory planning at the Gram Panchayat (GP)
level, Anchal Samitee (AS) level and District level. The works to be taken up were
finalized in the Gram Sabha at GP levels and reviewed at AS and District levels.
Important works not included in the list of works finalized in the Gram Sabhas are
included in the AS and District levels.

47


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

Fund allotted vis-a-vis expenditure under the programme in the district as per
information provided by during the years from 2005-06 to 2007-08 were as follows:
Table -21

Rin lakh)
Funds Received

Year ‘Bitance | Centre State Mise, Tot! tte Balance
Receipts
2005-06 11.41 61.28 11.32 0.65 84.66 66.46 18.20
2006-07 18.20 76.43 2.64 39.77 137.03 65.50 71.53
2007-08 71.53 52.76 12.00 3.62 139.91 137.41 2.50
6.3.11 Employment Generation under SGRY

Details of employment generation under this scheme as furnished by the blocks
during 2005-08 were as under: -

Table — 22
(Mandays in lakh)
Year Total ST Mandays Generated
Population
2005-06 0.94 = 0.37 | NL | 0.94
2007-08 1.32 0.63 | 0.69 | NIL 1.32

Source: figures furnished by the Blocks

During 2005-06 & 2007-08, 347 works were sanctioned, of which how many works
were executed were not on record nor stated to audit. Details of works sanctioned
were as shown in Table 23.

Table - 23

__ ee (Value of work - हैं के lakh)
Year Block-wise Number of Works Sanctioned Total

No. of Value of No. of Value of No. of Value of
Works Works Works Works Works Works

2005-06
2006-07

| - | | 46 | 13.03 | 18 | 11.37 | 64 | हज

Total
Sources: Departmental Figures

Test check revealed that the foodgrains component of 3 kg per manday was not given
to the Muster Roll labourers. They were paid in cash instead. It may be pointed out
here that during 2005-08 the three Blocks of Lower Subansiri District had not drawn
or issued any foodgrain component to the MR labourers, which amounted to non-
issue of 894 MTs of rice (2,98,000 mandays x 3 kg.). The concerned district
authorities stated that Government of India, Ministry of Rural Development has
exempted Arunachal Pradesh for lifting of food grains.

48


Chapter VI: Economic Sector

6.3.1.2 Shortcoming in works executed under SGRY

Under SGRY, 8 works such as CC footpaths, CC drains, etc. were sanctioned for
₹ 30.71 lakh. The works were started in November 2007 and completed in December
2007, at a cost of = 30.58 lakh.

Test check of the accounts of Ziro-I Block revealed that for execution of works, 4071
bags of cement, 568 cum of sand and 1076.74 cum shingles were required, against
which 3129 bags of cement were procured and utilized, resulting in short utilization of
942 bags of cement. Further, sand and shingles were not at all utilized in the work.
Moreover, the rice component valued at हैं 6.74 lakh, was also not issued to the
labourers. They were paid in cash instead, and the quantum of work done by unskilled
labourers was also not recorded in the MR Bills.

In view of the above, the expenditure of = 30.58 lakh seemed doubtful.

6.3.2 Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
(MGNREGS)

Following the decision of Government of India to extend National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act (NREGA) to all the rural areas of all the remaining district of the
country with effect from 01 April 2008, the SGRY programme in the districts was to
be discontinued on starting of NREGA programme (renamed as Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGREGS)). This programme was
implemented in Lower Subansiri District from 2008-09. The basic objective of the
scheme is to ensure security of livelihood in rural areas by providing at least 100 days
of guaranteed wage employment in a year to local rural household if it demands wage
employment and is willing to do unskilled manual work.

The cost of the scheme was to be shared between the Centre and the State in the ratio
of 90:10. The Central Government would bear the entire cost of wages for unskilled
manual workers, 75 per cent of the cost of material and wages for skilled and semi-
skilled workers and administrative expenses, which will include, inter alia, the salary
and allowances of Programme Officers and their support staff and work site facilities.
The State Government would bear 25 per cent of the cost of material and wages for
skilled and semi-skilled workers besides unemployment allowance payable in case the
State Government cannot provide wage employment within 15 days of application.

For effective implementation of scheme, time bound activities had to be discharged at
the Gram Panchayat, Block and District levels. For this purpose appointment of key
personnel was imperative. At district level, a District Programme Coordinator is
responsible for overall coordination and implementation of the scheme in the District.
Programme Officer (PO) is a key functionary in the scheme and coordinates the
NREGA works undertaken by Gram Panchayat and implementing agencies at the
block level. A full time dedicated PO was necessary. The success of the programme,
to a large extent, depend on him. Full time Programme Officers were not appointed in

49


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

the district till date. Officers of the DRDA and Blocks prepared the estimates and
measured the works.
6.3.2.1 Fund Management

The year-wise fund position and expenditure there against during 2007-08 to 2009-11
were as indicated in Table 24.

Table - 24
(Fin lakh)
Fund Received

Year Opening = तप fond | EXPEMA cy

entre State Receipts | available (%)
2007-08 - 54.50 - - 54.50 39.57 14.93 (27%)
2008-09 14.93 | 66.78 > 0.60 82.31 23.91 58.40 (71%)
2009-10. 58.40. | 125.00 2.93 1.39 187.72 81.05 106.67 (56%)
2010-11 106.67 | 59.37 - - 166.04 110.80 55.24 (33%)

Source: Departmental Figures
As per information furnished by three blocks of the district, there was a balance of
₹ 75.68 lakh with the Blocks. (Ziro-I : ₹ 16.61 lakh; Ziro-II : ₹ 36.54 lakh and Raga

Block : ₹ 22.53 lakh).
6.3.2.2 Employment Generation under MGNREGS

Details of employment generation under this scheme from 2008-09 to 2010-11 as
furnished by the DRDA are as under: -

Table - 25
Mann days in tay
Year Mandays Generated (ST)
Total Men Women

2008-09 0.14 0.09 0.05
2009-10 0.65 0.42 0.23
2010-11 0.83 0.55 0.28

Total 1.62 1.06 0.56

Sources: figures furnished by the DRDA

Out of 18800 Job-card holders, during 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11 only 460,
10155 and 9851 job cardholders were provided with the employment. Only 69 job
cardholders were provided with minimum guaranteed 100 days employment during
2009-10.

Details of employment generated from 2007-08 to 2010-11 as furnished by the Blocks
are as indicated in the following table.

50


Chapter VI; Economic Sector

Table - 26
a Marnndays in lakh)
Year Mandays Generated (ST)
Total Men Women

2008-09 0.53 0.27 0.26
2009-10 0.30 0.09 0.21
2010-11 0.73 0.43 0.30

Total 1.56 0.79 0.77

Sources: Figures furnished by the Blocks

It can be seen from the Table 25 and 26 that there is discrepancies in between the two
reports on quantum of generation of mandays. This indicates lack of credibility in the
information furnished.

6.3.2.2 Works executed under MGNREGS

During 2010-11, 68 works were completed. An analysis revealed that out of 68 works
completed during the year, six works related to water conservation/harvesting; 11
works belonged to the category of Micro Irrigation; seven works was in connection
with land development; 10 work was in connection with flood control and majority of
34 works (50 per cent of total completed work) belonged to the category of rural
connectivity. There were 16 incomplete work (Seven - rural connectivity, five — flood
control, one — land development and remaining three — Micro Irrigation). This
indicates that the greater emphasis was on rural connectivity, which is also main focus
of PMGSY. There is a need to have more balanced approach in this regard and durable
assets needs to be created for greater benefit of the rural population.

6.3.3 Swarnayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY)

The objective of the SGSY was to bring the assisted poor families above the poverty
line by ensuring an appreciable sustained level of income over a period of time by
organizing the rural poor into Self Help Groups (SHGs) through a process of social
mobilization, their training and capacity building and provision of income generating
assets through a mix of bank credit and subsidy.

Each District Rural Development Agency may incur expenditure on the following
items from funds available under the Scheme: (i) Infrastructure Development,
(ii) Training, (iii) providing Revolving Funds to SHGs (10 per cent of the total fund)
and (iv) providing subsidies through Bank Loans. Providing infrastructure support
under SGSY is primarily to bridge the gaps in available infrastructure (maximum
25 per cent of the total fund).

Further, the process/performance of the SHG/Individuals in management of assets for
generation of incremental income has to be continuously followed up, monitored and
evaluated. The follow-up of Projects taken up by the Swarozgaries should be done by
the DRDA/Block Officials and Bankers to assess the capacity to generate the
projected income.

Funds received and expenditure during 2005-11 are indicated in the following table.

51


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

Table - 27
(®in lakh)
Year Opening Funds Received Other Total Expenditure Closing
Balance Centre State Receipts Incurred Balance
2005-06 68.41 29.78 - 1.80 99.99 39.56 60.43
2006-07 60.43 8.55 - 1.64 70.62 9.75 60.87
2007-08 60.87 27.51 6.47 1.89 96.74 64,55 32.19
2008-09 32.19 65.03 11.24 1.72 110.18 21.27 88.91
2009-10 88.91 121.62 15.13 1.30 226.96 160.11 66.85
2010-11 66.85 31.3 28.65 1.94 128.74 37.86 90.88
Total 283.79 61.49 10.29 333.10
Sources: Figures furnished by the DRDA and audited accounts
During 2005-11, 47° Self Help Groups and 678° individual Swarozgaries were
assisted by the Blocks. But no mechanism was evolved to evaluate the impact o:

implementation of the programme. As such, whether the Swarozgaries assisted under
SGSY fund were uplifted to APL or not, could not be assessed.

To sum up, while SGRY could generate 2.98 lakh mandays employment in three
years (2005-08), 1.62 lakh mandays were generated under MGNREGS during
the period 2008-11. The district authority has failed to generate enough
employment which could provide assured minimum wage employment of 100
days per household having job-cards, there by defeating the objective of security
of livelihood of needy rural populace. The extent of poverty alleviation achieved
through implementation SGSY remains unassessed as no evaluation of the
impact of the programme has been carried out.

Ensure proper utilization of funds so that minimum guaranteed wage
employment is provided to each job-card holders who demand wage
employment.

The authorities should take up steps to monitor and evaluate projects
undertaken under SGSY schemes to assess the progress/performance of
swarozgaries.

6.4 | Housing Schemes (Indira Awas Yojana)

Indira Awas Yojana (IAY) is a flagship scheme to provide housing to the rural poor.
The objective of the scheme is primarily to help construction/up-gradation of dwelling
units of members of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes, freed bonded labourers and

? SHGs- 47( Ziro-I — 20, Ziro-II — 20 and Raga - 7)
> Individual Swarozgaries 678 (Ziro-I - 298, Ziro-II - 319 and Raga — 61)

52


Chapter VI: Economic Sector

other below-poverty-line non-SC/ST BPL rural households by providing them lump
sum financial assistance. Under the scheme, 60 per cent of the total allocation should
be spent for SC/ST BPL houscholds and a maximum 40 per cent should be spent for
non-SC/ST BPL households. In the District, the entire unit cost is utilized for
providing household materials, i.e. CGI Sheets only.

6.4.1 Identification of Beneficiaries

Beneficiaries were selected by Gram Panchayats, as per targets fixed by the DRDA
and the targets are fixed entirely for ST families.

6.4.2 Funding

The 109 is a centrally sponsored scheme, funded on cost sharing basis in the ratio of
75:25. Funds received and expenditure incurred during 2005-11 are shown below:

Table 28
(®in lakh)
Year Opening Fund Received Other Total Expenditure Closing
Balance Receipts | Funds Incurred Balance/%
2005-06 | 0.04 | 0.41 77.78 75.80 1.98 (2.55%)

2007-08

1,34 (1.12%)

4.66 (4.47%)

93.78

‘Source: Figures furnished by DRDA

As per the information furnished by the district authorities, 2995 units of houses (new
constructions - 2154 units; and up-gradations - 841 units) were constructed in three
Blocks during 2005-11. But monitoring reports on the implementation of the
programme were neither on record nor was produced to audit on request. As such,
whether the beneficiaries actually utilized the CGI Sheets for housing purposes, could
not be ascertained.

Further, test check revealed that in Ziro-I Block, CGI Sheets were issued to 385
families (234 new constructions and 151 up-gradations) at the rate of 0.53 MT per
head for new construction and 0.20 MT for up-gradation. 173 families of Ziro-I (new
constructions - 94 units; and up-gradations - 79 units) were non-BPL, so 173 bona
fide BPL families were deprived of benefits under IAY.

Selection of beneficiaries under IAY should be done from BPL list and it
should be ensured that non-BPL persons are extended the benefit of the
scheme.

53


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

A mechanism should be evolved to ascertain the actual utilization of CGI
sheets for housing by beneficiaries.

6.5 Schemes for other Development Activities

Other development activities like extension and construction of hostel of government
schools, construction of concrete cement (CC) footpaths, CC steps, rural link roads,
play grounds, etc;. were taken up in the District under Untied Fund and Member of
Legislative Assembly Local Area Development Fund (MLALADS) Scheme.

6.5.1. Untied Fund

As per guidelines, an Untied Fund was placed with the DC and the ADC (with
independent charges) for execution of works of very urgent nature directly benefiting
the community as a whole.

During 2005-11, ~ 4.86 crore was spent on works like CC footpaths (09),
compound/boundary/protection walls (14), suspension bridge (01), CC culverts (14),
approach roads (11), link road (04), land development (07), etc. These works were
executed through various agencies.

6.5.2 MLALADS

Lower Subansiri District has three Members of Legislative Assembly (Ziro-I, Ziro-II
and Raga). Under MLALADS, ₹ 50 lakh was released to each MLA during 2005-06
to 2008-09 and = 70 lakh to each MLA from 2008-09 onwards for execution of
developmental works in their respective constituencies, including housing assistance,
like roofing materials, cement, etc.

During 2005-11, the DC received ₹ 9.67 crore, of which रे 5.99 crore was spent on the
execution of works like minor irrigation channels, drainage, hanging bridges, land
development, CC footpaths, waiting sheds, etc. through various implementing
agencies like the Circle Officer, DRDA, Block, etc;. The remaining % 3.68 crore was
spent by the District Planning Officer for procurement and distribution of CGI Sheets
(650.51 MT) to 1,332 beneficiaries.

Audit scrutiny revealed that the work “Construction of Retaining Wall to protect
Quarters of the Power Department” was executed during March 2010 at a cost of
₹ 8.5 lakh. The work was not within the purview of the scheme, as such the
expenditure of = 8.5 lakh was unauthorized.

Test check of the records revealed that there were no storage facilities for the CGI
Sheets and they were distributed through an unidentified party. The same was
countersigned by the MLA, DC and the District Planning Officer. Out of the total
1,174 beneficiaries, APRs from 892 beneficiaries were not produced to audit for
verification. In view of this the distribution of CGI Sheets to these beneficiaries was
doubtful. Detail of CGI Sheets in respect of which receipts of beneficiaries were
wanting is tabulated below.

54


Chapter VI: Economic Sector

Table - 29

Constituency

Total

6.6 Power

There are 226 inhabited villages in the District, out of which 196 (87 per cent) were
electrified and energized as of March 2011. Out of a total of 7,553 BPL households,
4,756 were provided regular service connections, and the average energy consumption
per household per day was 0.9832 units (approx. one kwh per day).

6.6.1 Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY)

Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana RGGVY, which is a component of the
Bharat Nirman Programme, was launched by the GOI in April 2005, to provide
electricity to all rural households within a period of six years. The Executive
Engineer, Ziro Electrical Division, is the implementing agency in the District.

During 2005-10, 11 KV line work to cover 134 villages was taken up in June 2008 at
an estimated cost of ~ 34.67 crore and stipulated to be completed by December 2009.
As of March 2011, work in 110 villages was completed and work in remaining 24
villages was yet to be completed. Of the 110 villages where the work was completed,
107 villages were energized. A total amount of % 20.30 crore was spent till March
2011.

6.6.2 Realisation of Electricity charges

About 40 per cent of the consumers in the district paid their electricity bills regularly,
but the rest paid them only when revenue realization drives were conducted or when
lines were disconnected due to defaults in payment. Revenue realization during the
last six years was % 7.23 crore, whereas the outstanding electricity dues stood at
%8.25 crore. The Department had not taken/initiated any action to realize the
outstanding dues from defaulting consumers.

To sum up, as of March 2011, 27 villages (20 per cent) were yet to be covered
under RGGVY which should have been electrified by December 2009.

The department should take steps to complete the project without further delays
and electrified uncovered villages, so that benefits of programme is extended to
villagers living in those uncovered villages.

55


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

Revenue on electricity should be realised as and when due and also efforts should
be made to collect the revenue arrears on account of electricity charges.

6.7 Tourism

View on the way to Ziro

The topography of the District is mostly mountainous terrain, where the elevation
varies from approx. 1000 to 1600 metres above sea level. A greater part of it falls
within the Higher Mountain Zone, consisting of tangled peaks and valleys. The
heartland of the district, where the District Headquarters, Ziro, is situated, is in the
form of a magnificent plateau at about 1564 metres above sea level. It is famous for
its Paddy-cum-Fish Culture cultivation, which attracts tourists from different parts of

the country.

Other places of interest are Tale Valley, located about 30 km from Old Ziro, which is

almost an eco-system in itself,
and a repository of many unique
and endangered flora and fauna.

A Shiva Lingam, about 25 feet
high and 22 feet wide was
discovered in Kardo, in July
2004. Many devotees visit and
worship Lord Shiva in this area.

For the welfare of the devotees
the work, ‘Construction of Way-
side Amenities at Shiva Lingam
Site,’ was taken up under the
Secretariat Economic Scheme at a

56



Chapter VI: Economic Sector

cost of 15 lakh in January 2008. The work was shown completed by February 2008
and ₹ 15 lakh was paid to contractors in March 2008.

A joint physical verification (June 2010) revealed that the work, valued at ₹ 6.32 lakh
was not executed. Moreover the wayside building was not ready for use as it was

found closed till date (July.2011).

Outside view of Wayside Building

Inside view of Wayside Building.

For tourist accommodation, the construction of a Mini Resort and Cottage at Old Ziro
was taken up at an estimated cost of = 177.89 lakh through WRD. The work
commenced in March 2008 and was stipulated to be completed in March 2009. But
only 80 per cent of the work was completed till November 2010, though the entire
sanctioned cost of = 191.23 lakh was expended. The view of the Resort may be seen

from the photographs below: -

Mini Resort and Cottage, Old Ziro.

Similarly, to facilitate tourism, construction of Trekker Huts at Dosu Katu at Hari
Village Forest (with a view of the whole Ziro Valley) was taken up by the Tourism
Department at a cost of % 17 lakh in October 2010. The work was completed in
November 2010 and ₹ 16.93 lakh was paid to contractors in January 2011.

57


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

On physical verification (July 2011), it was revealed that just a wooden house with
CGI Sheet roofing was constructed, though the entire allotted fund was expended.
There were no CC footsteps for easy access and the house was closed till date (July
2011). Photographs of the hut are shown below:

Trekker Hut at Dosu Katu - 1 Trekker Hut at Dosu Katu- 2

To sum up, proper Tourist amenities could not be created in spite of a large amount
of expenditure.

The government should take effective steps to complete pending works
and create conducive environment to attract tourist and generate income
for the district.

Paddy-cum-Fish Cultivation

A famous innovative cultivation practice followed in the Apatani Plateau, where
fishes are reared along with paddy cultivation. In wet rice cultivation, after
transplantation of paddy from the Nursery to the main paddy field (W.R.C), fish
fingerlings are put in mulled (knee-deep channels in the paddy field for drainage) and
kept for 2/3 months before they could be harvested.

Paddy feld
cur Fish pond

TigdBova!
wigofen
पका

58


Chapter VI: Economic Sector

Fish being harvested from Paddy Field

. -
High altitude fish farm at Ziro

Year wise area covered, fingerlings distributed and production of fish are shown
below: -

Table - 30
Area Covered a Fingerlings Fish Production
Year . tributed to farmers .

(in hectares) (in lakh) (in MT)
2006-07 97.34 1.71 50.50
2008-09 140.00 1.20 36.00
2010-11 32.33 17.74 96.99

It can be seen from the above table that there is no particular trend and correlation

with area under cultivation, fingerling distributed to farmers and fish production. A
study should be conducted to analyse the huge variations and formulate a scientific
approach to increase the productivity so that farmers could benefit from it.

The causes of low production of fish may be investigated and remedial
action taken to increase production

59


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

6.9 Horticulture

The soil and climatic conditions of the District are favourable for growing of large
cardamom and kiwi fruit.

Large Cardamom

In Lower Subansiri District, land cultivated for large cardamom during the last five
years varied between 20 and 30 hectares. The yield was between 8 to 10 MTs. But
cultivation has not increased as the farmers did not have access to proper marketing
facilities and they were not getting support price for their produce.

Kiwi Fruit

Kiwi, an exotic fruit which contains starch, soluble sugar, ascorbic acid (Vitamin C),

soluble solids, tendering enzymes, etc. has been a large success in the district.

Details of area covered for plantation and production of Kiwi are as follows: -

Year

Table - 31

2005-06

2006-07 25 94

2007-08 40 150
2008-09 70 262
2009-10 50 187
2010-11 50 50

Source: Departmental Figures

The area covered and production declined during the years 2009-10 and 2010-11 as
there were no marketing facilities. However, a marketing board was constituted, in
July 2010, under the Chairmanship of the Commissioner and Secretary (Horticulture),
but the Board is yet to start functioning (July 2011).

Proper marketing infrastructure should be created so that kiwi fruit and
large cardamom growers get attractive prices for their produce to
safeguard economic interest of the growers. This would encourage other
farmers to take up cultivation of these cash crops and contribute towards
economy of the district as well as the State.

60


HAPTER VII GENERAL SE

7A Panchayati Raj Institution (PRI)

Panchayat is an institution of self-government constituted for rural areas. There
should be a Panchayat at the village level specified by the Governor by Public
Notification to be a village, and includes a group of villages so specified to execute
connectivity to interior areas, access to quality and timely health care in interior areas,
nutrition, particularly to the girl child, status of health of mothers and children,
availability of sources of water for irrigation, universal compulsory education and
quality achievement, opportunity for employment wages or self employment, etc;. In
brief, this should be a Millennium Development Goal as a starting point for achieving
at District Vision.

According to 73“ Constitutional Amendment Act, the States were required to devolve
adequate powers and responsibilities on PRIs in order to make them effective
institutions of local self-government. The responsibility for preparation of plans for
economic development and social justice and its implementation in respect of 29
subjects listed in Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution were to be assigned to
Panachayats and to this effect, the State Governments were expected to place the
functions of department dealing with these 29 subjects including the officials under
the control of the Panchayats.

However, as of March 2011, neither functions nor functionaries, as envisaged in the
Constitution, have been placed under the control of the Panchayats in the District as
no progress in this regard has been made in Arunachal Pradesh. Role of PRIs were
very limited even in the preparation of plans for economic development and social
justice.

The three Blocks of the District consist of 195 Panchayats (Ziro-I : 127; Ziro-II : 38;
and Raga : 30). There are 14 Anchal Samitis (Ziro-I : 07; Ziro-II : 03; and Raga : 04)
and one Zila Parishad. In respect of all Rural Development Programmes, the DRDA
executes the work through BDOs by maintaining separate accounts for Gram and
Anchal Samitis.

Eleventh and Twelfth Finance Commission grants received by the Panchayats for
Civil Amenities were as indicated in the following table:

Table: -32

(®in crore)

Grants Anchal Samiti Zila Parishad Total
- ते ने Finance

Commission

Twelfth Finance
Commission

2.46 1.47 0.78 4.71

Sources: - Departmental figures

61


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

No Gram Panchayat Secretaries were appointed as the Arunachal Pradesh Panchayati
Raj Act, 1997, had no provision for appointment of Gram Panchayat Secretary.
Moreover, the post of Zila Parishad Secretary was not yet created. The Project
Director, DRDA, is in charge of the Zila Parishad.

The Panchayat accounts were not computerized. The joint accounts of the Anchal
Samitis and Gram Panchayats are operated by the Chairperson. The Addl. Dy.
Commissioner (ADC)/Circle Officer (CO), being Member Secretary, holds monthly
meetings with the PRIs. Further, there was no Panchayat building.

The DRDA places funds at the disposal of the BDO’s of the District for
implementation of all Rural Development Programmes. The estimates of works were
prepared and measured by the Extension Officers (Rural Engineers) of the Blocks,
whereas the works were executed by the Panchayat or Anchal Samiti, as the case may
be. During 2008-10, works like drinking water supply (58), drainage (184), sanitary
latrines (74), CC platforms (15), CC footpaths (279), water tanks (62), CC culverts
(57), classrooms (19), panchayat ghars (18), approach roads (72), etc; were
constructed by the Panchayats.

The DRDA has to process sanction of works under all RD Programme besides
performing, monitoring or executing works. Each Scheme was to be monitored and
reviewed by the ADC by virtue of being the Member Secretary of the DVMC, but not
a single monitoring or review report could be made available to Audit.

To sum up, the Panchayat function in the District is not fully operational yet.

Steps should be taken in earnest to make PRIs fully functional at the
earliest so that the vision envisaged in the Constitution amendment of
having a decentralised approach in district planning is accomplished.

7.2 Public Distribution System (PDS)

Food security was to be ensured by regular supply of food grains to economically
vulnerable sections of society at affordable prices. The Targeted Public Distribution
System (TDPS) was launched in Arunachal Pradesh in June 1997, with the objective
of providing food grains at specially subsidized rates, below the Central Issue Price
(CIP) to Below Poverty Line (BPL) families as per norms prescribed by the
Government of India. BPL families were to be properly identified and issued with
special Ration Cards. Antadaya Anna Yojona (AAY), launched in December 2000,
was intended to ensure food availability to the poorest of the poor amongst BPL
families by providing rice at a specially subsidized rate. Distinctive ration cards were
to be issued to AAY beneficiaries afier identification of such families. The PDS
programme in Arunachal Pradesh covers rice, wheat, sugar and kerosene.

62


Chapter VII ; General Sector

Besides, there is the Annapurna Scheme (launched in April, 2000), under which
destitute senior citizens (65+ years) not in receipt of pension under the National Old
Age Pension Scheme or State Pension Scheme, are entitled to get 10 kg of rice per
month free of cost. Under PDS, the Above Poverty Line (APL) families would
continue to get food grains from Fair Price Shops (FPS) through ration cards at
normal rates.

The prescribed rates and scale for providing food grains to BPL and AAY families are
(a) BPL हैं 6.15/kg and 35 kg per ration card per month, (0) For AAY % 3/kg and 35 kg
per ration card per month. To control the movement of food grains from the FCI
Depot, the appointed District nominee-cum-carriage contractor was to draw/lift the
PDS food grains from the FCI Depot and maintain books of accounts for issue of
ration items to Fair Price Shops. There are two stockists and 127 fair price shops in
the District. The quantity of rice, sugar, kerosene lified by FPS and issued to
consumers are as follows:

Table - 33

Year Rice Sugar Kerosene
(in MT) (in MT) (in litres)

2006-07 4175.546 108.00 804000
2007-08 5630.287 159.45 804000
2008-09 3835.200 395.70 737000
2009-10 4332.205 224.40 737000
2010-11 4773172 619.70 835000
Total 22746.41 1507.25 3917000

Source: Departmental Figures

Interaction with 12 public leaders revealed that kerosene was not issued in nine
villages, and only occasionally issued in two villages. Sugar was not issued in five
villages, issued occasionally in four villages and issued only once in a year in one
village. Rice was not issued at all in Taya Simla Village.

The quantities of Wheat lifted by the Nominee, Atta Chaki Mills and FPS are shown
below: -

Table: -34
a Lifted by ane हा
vor | hts बा जा
(in MT) Gn Mt) (in MT) (in MT)

2006-07 388.500 388.500 369.075 19.425 | Report not
2007-08 306.490 306.470 291.200 15.299 | Submitted
2008-09 484.200 484,200 460.000 24.200
2009-10 211.000 211.000| | 211.00
2010-11 80.295 80.295 80.295 00

Total 1470.485 1470.465 120057 |_ 269.95 |

Source: Departmental Figures

63


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

The Department stated that the report of Atta lifted by consumers could not be
submitted as there was no provision made by the Department to record this detail.
Interaction with 12 public leaders revealed that no Atta was issued to the
beneficiaries.

This indicated that 1470.465 MTs of Atta had either not been distributed to FPSs or
diverted elsewhere. Mis-utilization cannot be ruled out.

Due to lack of monitoring and supervision, Fair Price Shop commodities did not
reach to the intended beneficiaries.

The district administration in charge of Public Distribution System should
ensure that fair price shop commodities reach all beneficiaries regularly
and as per prescribed norms.

7.3 Management of waste
7.3.1 Municipal Waste

The District has only one census town, namely Ziro, which is also district
headquarters. As the urban civic body was yet to be formed municipality functions
were discharged by District Urban Development Agency (DUDA). It received funds
from the Government but did not collect any revenue from the general public. In Ziro
Town, 4,15 MT of garbage was generated daily. It was collected by one Tipper truck
daily except Sundays and dumped in 25 dustbins three km away from Ziro/Hapoli
township.

The funds allocated during 2007-11 were as shown in Table

Table — 35
(Tin lakh)
Year Allotment Expenditure Excess(+)
Non-Plan | Plan | Total | Non-Plan Plan | Total Saving(-)
2007-08 1.85 161.67 163.52 1.14 152.28 153.42 (- 10.10

2008-09 20.54 286.49 307.03 20.31 217.01 237.32 (-) 69.71
2009-10 71.00 224.62 295.62 69.92 255.83 325.75 (+) 30.13

| 2010-11 | 4.50 369.71 374.21 4.50 423.36 427.86 (4) 53.65
Source: Departmental Figures

From 2007-08 to 2010-11, ₹ 10.48 crore was spent against an allocation of = 10.42
crore. No solid waste management has been taken up till date. However, an estimate
for solid waste management was submitted to the authorities in July 2009, which is
yet to be approved. During the first spell of performance audit during 2010 it was
noticed that garbage remained undisposed and could be seen strewn all round the
place, posing potential health hazards. Photographs taken during that time are
depicted.

64


Chapter VII ; General Sector

Garbage scattered out of overflowing dustbin
built near residential area, Ziro

Garbage scattered out of overflowing dustbin
built near residential area, Ziro

Garbage scattered out of overflowing dustbin
on Stadium Road, Ziro

Garbage scattered out of overflowing dustbin
build near residential area, Ziro

and are cleared regularly as shown below:

However, during the second spell of performance audit in 2011, a marked
improvement was noticed. Waste was being managed by the construction of dustbins

Renovated Dustbin at Stadium road, Ziro

Workers engaged in clearance of a dustbins
near Apex Bank, Ziro

65


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

7.3.2 Bio-medical Waste

Bio-medical waste is generated by hospitals and other health service providers and
consists of discharged drugs, waste shapes, micro-biological and bio-technological
waste, human anatomical waste, etc. The District had one District Hospital, one CHC,
eight PHCs and 26 SCs generating bio-medical waste.

Interaction with the Medical Superintendent, District Hospital, MO in-charge CHC
and five other PHCs revealed that except for the District Hospital, Ziro, no other
Health Centre had incinerators for disposing of bio-medical waste as per specified
norms laid down in the Bio-Medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1998
and amended from time to time.

Physical verification of the CHC and 5 PHCs revealed that waste was either dumped
or burnt at different places in the Health Centre premises.

Waste management needs to be improved to ensure proper disposal of
solid waste for preventing environmental pollution.

Awareness for cleanliness should be spread among common man.

Proper disposal of bio-medical waste should be ensured, which otherwise
poses a serious treat to public health and the environment.

7.4 Law & Order and Fire fighting services

Government of India introduced the Scheme “Modernization of Police Force”
(MOPF) to augment the operational efficiency of the State Police to face the emerging
challenges to internal security.

Information furnished by Superintendent of Police, Lower Subansiri, revealed that the
crime rate in the District increased by 7 per cent from 113 in 2006 to 121 in 2010.
There was a major increase in miscellaneous crimes (31 per cent) from 65 to 85 and
kidnapping by from two to three. Murder cases reduced from five to three, which was
due to regular patrolling, checking of hotels, setting up of NAKAS and the Beat
System. However the Superintended of Police pointed out that there was shortage of
manpower in every unit of the District.

The District had only one Fire Station against a requirement of three, as per the
Standard Fire Advisory Council norms. There were 64 fire incidents during 2005-11,
where 02 human lives and property worth % 7.44 crore were lost. Shortage of
infrastructure may be one of the causes responsible for loss of lives and property.

66


Chapter VII ; General Sector

Law enforcing authorities of the District should ensure that police force is
optimally manned and provided with requisite infrastructure in the area of
mobility, connectivity so that incidences of crime is minimised.

Fire Stations as per norms should be established to avoid loss of human life
and property.

7.5 E-Governance

National Informatics Centre (NIC) had set up a District Informatics Centre (DIC) in
Lower Subansiri District in 1998 to support the District Administration and spread the
awareness about the use of information technology (IT) in various departments. The
initiative envisaged procurement of hardware, development of software applications
and training staff of various offices in the District in the use of IT.

The State Government set up Integrated Community Service Centres (I-COSC),
known as “Jana Suvidha Centres” in March 2010.

The system developed was basically providing the following services electronically.

Table - 36

Certificates Only Scheduled Tribe Certificates

Jan-Suvidha centres should provide other facilities such as issue of
Temporary inner line permits, permanent residential certificates(PRC),
Temporary Residential certificates (TRC), issue and renewal of inner line
permits and issue and renewal of identity cards

7.6 Other Civic Amenities
7.6. Transportation

Audit came across poor condition of roads to reach the State Capital, Itanagar, North
Lakhimpur, and Block Headquarters. Moreover, there were only 11 State Transport
vehicles operating on six routes. As such, rural/poor people of the Lower Subansiri
District faced trouble communicating from one place to another.

67


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

7.6.2 Telephone connections

The District had 7876 Telephone (landline) connections, out of which 3876 (49 per
cent) were urban connections and 4000 (51 per cent) rural connections. There were
also 8841 Mobile phone connections, out of which 6196 (70 per cent) were urban
connections and 2645 (30 per cent) were rural connections. Tele-density of the
District was 45.50 per cent.

7.6.3 Banking facilities

Information obtained from Banks revealed that the District had 3 (three) semi-urban
and 5 (five) rural branches of different Commercial Banks. In the District, 22,425
saving bank accounts in different banks were in operation. There was a total credit of
₹ 68.48 crore as on March 2011. The number of villages with a population of over
2000 covered by banks are as per RBI guidelines could not be made available to
audit. Thus, coverage under banks could not be unascertained.

68


RING AND EVALUAT

8.1. Inspection and Supervision

The DC is responsible for monitoring and overall progress of implementation of
various developmental programmes in the District and ensuring that they are executed
within the specified time frame and approved budget. While most of the Central and
State Plans specify the monitoring requirements in general, most schemes required
The
District Level Vigilance and Monitoring Committee is also required to review the
progress of schemes every quarter. The State Government did not specify the extent
of supervision to be carried out at various levels with regard to Developmental
Works/Projects. The extent of supervision carried out at various levels is shown
below:-

that the DC should closely monitor the progress on a monthly/quarterly ba:

Table - 44
Designated Officers Percentage of Inspections to be carried out

Block Development Officer/Junior Engineer 100%

District Planning Officer NA

Addl. DC/Addl. DM NA

Sub-Divisional Officer NA

Deputy Commissioner approx. 75%

Officials from State Planning NA

Source: Departmental Figures

Apart from the stipulated personal inspection and supervision, a review of the
execution of schemes was also to be done through the periodical Review Reports and
Statements of Expenditure (SOE) sent from various levels - GPs to the Blocks, Blocks
to the DRDA/DC, DC to the State Government and to the Central Government with
respect to Central schemes.

Information obtained from the DC and DRDA revealed that monitoring and
supervision of the progress of implementation of various schemes in the District was
perfunctory. The District Level Vigilance and Monitoring Committee and Governing
Body met only four times during 2006-11. While the DC stated that field visits and
inspections were carried out both by the DC, Planning Officer and Block Officers,
there was no documentary evidence relating discussions held during such visits or
decisions taken/follow up action initiated consequent to such inspections.

Due to weakness in the internal control mechanism in various departments in the district

there were instances of misappropriation, wasteful expenditure, etc. which could have
been avoided if the laid down rules and regulations have been properly followed as
brought in the earlier paragraphs.

69


Audit Report on Lower Subansiri District for the year ended 31 March 2011

8.2 Grievance Redress Mechanism

The State Government had initiated a mechanism at District level for redress of
grievances. But in Lower Subansiri District, the Grievance Cell had not yet been set
up (August 2011). The DC stated that complaints are forwarded to the concerned
Departments, who in turn address the same under intimation to the DC. However,
there was nothing on record in support of this claim.

Supervision and inspection of the various schemes/projects undertaken by
different departments in the districts should be carried out regularly so that
corrective measures could be taken before too late.

Internal control mechanism of various departments involved in the
implementation of schemes/projects and discharge of public responsibilities
should be strengthened so that wasteful expenditure, misappropriation, etc could
be prevented.

The grievance redress cell should be set up and grievances should be properly
attended to

70


CHAPERI

CLUS

To ensure efficiency and effectiveness in delivery of key services like rural development,
health, employment, etc. the Government of India has increasingly been entrusting
responsibilities to the local government at the district, block and gram panchayats levels.
These agencies were to be empowered to discharge the functions that are constitutionally
assigned to them. Neither functions nor functionaries, as envisaged in the Constitution,
have been transferred under the control of the panchayats. However, the Department
claimed that the planning process was with participation at the gram panchayat level, but
records in support of this claim were absent.

There are a multiplicity of programmes and schemes and an even larger number of
implementing agencies, presenting challenging situation to the district administration to
effectively monitor and supervise the developmental activities. While almost all
developmental programmes are targeted at the same set of beneficiaries, the existence of
a myriad programmes requires integrated focus, rather than their implementation in a
standalone mode.

The monitoring mechanism is not functioning as envisaged with regard to execution of
schemes. While plans have been formulated for providing integrated development of a
sector/service, these could not be executed due to delay in release of funds and
inadequate project management. The State Government will have to address these issues
in order to accelerate the development of the district at the desired pace. Good
governance, effective and efficient delivery mechanism and sustainable development
buttress high level of performance and play a crucial role in the overall socio-economic
development of the district by providing essential and quality public infrastructure and.

services.
(S.A.Bathew)
Itanagar Accountant General
The Arunachal Pradesh
Countersigned
(Vinod Rai)
New Delhi Comptroller and Auditor General of India
The

71


Appendix - 1
Statement showing detail of primary schools posted with single teacher in Lower
Subansiri District

(Reference: Paragraph 5.2.1)

Sl. Student
No Name of School enrolled

Govt. PS-Hari-1 2. | Govt. P.S- Kuthkut
Govt. PS-Jama Putu 4. | Govt. P.S- Tajgi
Govt. PS-Dutta-II . | Govt.PS-Hoji

Govt. P.S- Lod Subu “4 Govt.PS-Luba

Govt. P.S-Diiko Piita . | Govt.PS-Sektap
Govt.PS-Deed-Bazaar . | Govt.PS-Serin Rakhe
Govt. PS-Mudo . | Govt.PS-Sela Rakhe

Govt. PS-Agri. Farm- 16 Govt.PS-Yom
Yazali

Name of School Student enrolled

Govt. PS-Dem-II . | Govt.PS-Tumporijo
Govt. PS-Amgi . | Govt.PS-Say Godak
Govt. PS-Raka . | Govt.PS-Tomchak
Govt. PS-Komp . | Govt.PS-Mengi Nyoko

Govt. P.S- Tado Silley . | Govt.PS-Delengi
Govt. P.S-Sikhe (Sito) . | Govt. P.S- Repari
Govt. P.S- Rakha . | Govt. P.S- Midpu

73


Za

| ss” | एगण्ण्व शराण्प्रा्व spear, $0-P007 Is'y “SO'E'L1 90 $0-P007/PE7/AVCAHd WezeX “AuojoD ULE] Lay [००प० NWI S/M | “LT
| ore payajduuoa 10a 3.2 $0-P007 6६५ “SOE LI W'SO-POOT/PET/AL/CHHd “Joodeyg ‘Jooysg “WUD W S/AX | “OT
| oeT Poxoog Aqenred अण्प्रगणुद्‌ $0-p00T 004६ “SOE LI3A'S0-P00T/PET/AL/CAHd WIS TOOYDS “WUIOD 48 S/M | “ST
| 080 payoog Ajenied अण्प्रथणुष््‌ $0-p007 Les “SOE LI 3A'S0-P00T/PET/AVGAHd ‘Pe Jooyss "wUIOD 1 8/0 | “PT
ole poxoog Aqrenred Bumyy 1D, 5$0#%00८ 166 290 ६8८1 I '$0-PO0T/PET/AVGAHd PT Joys wUIoD 3 S/M | “ET
IT payoog Aqjensed Sumy [9 S0-P007 00°07 SOE LIP ५0 -POOT/PET/AI/TAHA IEA 7) fooyss AT ALL 10 S/M | “TT
LOT pexoog Ayferred spetroyeyy $0#%00८ aes SOE LTP SO-PO0T/PET/AT/CAHd “POY TOOTPS OM Ie 8/७ | पा
| trp Peyoog Aqenred spear S0-P00T Orel SOE LI W S0-P007/PET/AL/GAHd “ngoed ‘Jooyss Apunurutoy ye 5//0 | “OL
081 एगण्ण्व धाणा/ण्व भुणपभणुष््‌ $0+%00८ 004६ 80६01 17 ५0+002#६5/21/0ाव THA Saoyey ye S/M | 6
काट एगण्ण्व शाणाएपव शुण्प्रभशुष््‌ 5$0+%002८ wo 50६01 % SO-PO0T/PET/AL/AHd पा-णीप “Jooysg धणाप्रप्रॉ०0 ye 5//0 | “8
| 9८01 फथगुवपा०० 410M 22 #0:६002 0051 10६6ट10 66//६11798/तत्वातव पष्ट९/ ००१०६ 'एण०31० $// | ५
| sel pexoog Ayensed spenore yw #0:६002 OL tl +0६6ट10 66/LEN9@S1999S/CAHd Jooyog wiwi0 BAIN 1० S/AK | 9
Lr9 “payyduos 10m 30 #0:६00८ LOT F0'€'673C 66/LE-99S/CAHd “node 1००प०5 AW Ie S/M | *S
| 810 payoog Ayenied spenoyeyy #0:६00८ 0081 POE 67IC 66/0 ए॥००8/तप्रप्तत (EH छणाश्त) ९ ०ण्प०४ AT एिप्रशूग्त ० S/M | के
Ire “paxjoog Aljenied speioyey #0:६00८ lias O'S 67 66/LE-H9S/AAHd “OUT JOOYSS OWE S/A | ६
|| seo “payoog Aqjetued sperayeyy #0:६00८ 00°07 y0'€ 671d 66/LE-9S/CTHHd {Joouss 'प्पप्राण) गण raddy 10 s/M | *T
Ee “poxoog Ayjetued Sumy [5 $0-P007 SOT “SOE LTP SO-PO0T/PET/AL/CAHd (Weg) TOY ‘Joouss "wD We S/AK | “T

“aanjipuadx

aanppuadxy Jo २०41,

Jo junowy

(रण ११2)

(ava) dn waxes,

1४०० एथष्यपफ़्त्न

गष्द ३ “ON 7१70 ण्गरजष्छ

(६६ :ydvadpang २२४०/7//प)

amayas

“yoeqdi[s/poyoyduuos 107 ynq dn usye} (ostM-1e94) souMoYydg Jo Joquinu SuLMoYs yUoUIDIeIS
TI - xipuoddy

106 yo.4DW Lg papua aad ayy sof 9914381

50409 1aMO7 ४० ३.1०49प yIpny



५८

“sanyipuodx

jo yunowy

aanyrpuadxg yo २१41,

(avaq) dn uaye

“809 एथष्ण्पफ़्न्त

गण्द ३ “ON AOPAG UoWIUE

awayas,

| LEG 1 | paxoog Ajjeried अण्ञथणर 90-S00z 0001 90६ धाउत 90-500८/817०8/तप्नातव Id 1००प०४ Areurtsg 1० 5/0 | “LE |
| 1r0 | एग००१ दाण्फष्व speroreyy 90-5002 000 90६ घापत 90-500द8110०8/तप्नातव “edeg [००१०६ “UNIOD Ie 5/0 | “OE |
I

| 8860 | एगण्ण्व श्वाण्प्राण्व sperayeyy 90-S007 00°01 90'€€1'Id 90-S002/81199S/CaHd “yssmy ‘JOOS OWI S/M | SE |
| भ्र्क्ट | “ssoroad ur yom 30 | 90-5002 0001 90६ ६ IC 90-S007/8}9°S/CAHA “pod ०णप०8 OWI 5/७ | “PE |
I

| slo | ए्जण्ण्व थराणफ्रणव जण्रभणुद््‌ 90-500८ 6L'6 90€'€1 IG 90-S007/81199S/CaHd vedeyquow] (००प०5 OW S/AA | “CE |
| 660 poxoog श्राणपाथव झण्प्रथणुक् 90-S00Z 000 "90६ ६ापद 90-S00z/8 1199S /CAHA dwoy “Jooyss OW 5/७ | “TE
ysl poyoog fied spenio yyy 90-5002 0001 90.६ धाउद 90-5006/81728/तप्रापव “UPL TOUS TIAL 8/0 | “TE

| cl payoog Ayyenzed बरष्प्रणणर्‌ 90-500८ 0001 90६ £114 90-5006/8110०8/त्वाव (LA Alo) Ajo] 10०प०४ Around 3 5/0 | “OE

1

| oc pexoog Ajerued sense 90-S00z 0001 90६ £11 90-5006/8117०8/तप्रावव प्रणु०0 eBepareg 1००प०४ OW 1 S/M | “67

|| payoog श्वाणु,ष्व शुण्एगण्॒‌ 90-500८ €L'6 90६ घाउत 90-S007/8T19°S/CIHd “BSSOg “JOOS 'पएएप्रण910 5/00 | '8८

|

|| paxoog शवाणुष्व जुण्ण्गणुष्‌ 90-S00z ६96 90६ 11 90-5006/81778/तप्राप्नव HPZEX ‘OOAHAN ००पएछ 'एए०105/0 | “LT

| 610 payoog Aqpenzed जुण्प्रगण्‌श् 90-S00z STIz “90'€ ETI 90-S00z/8T>9S/CAHE “eng ‘Joys “UNOS 18 5/0 | 97

||

| vot paxoog Ayjetued speiaeyy 90-500< 565 90°€ धापए 90-S007/8 1199S/CAHA 'णाणप्र (००प०४ "wUIOD 1 S/A\ | “SZ

| ez payoog Ayjenzed spersoreyy 90-5002 5862 90:६'ध 10 90-5005/8117०8/ठवातव "०60 Jooyos (एप्प 1० S/AA | फट

||

| 861 payoog Ayjetued अण्प्रभणुद् 90-S007 sor 90°€ LP 90-S00Z/8 1199S/CAH गाए PIO 1००ए०8 "UWI Ie S/A\ | “EZ

| evs paxyoog Ajrenzed speiore 90-S00Z 9८६६ 90६ घाउत 90-5006/81728/तप्रातव “IA wequy १००१० OWI 5/0 | "7

| 10L poyoog Aqjened Sumy 1D 50+%00८ ६66 50 ६८176 50+%00८#६८/01/त0प्वात॒व (IA HILL) त-1ण४) rey [००१०5 DYE 5//0 | पद

| 105 ssaudoad प्‌ 4104 30 50+%00८ 0091 “SOELI पद 50 +00८#घ्द्भ्र/तपापव “eAIW १००प०४ तग1०5//0 | “OZ

| 999 “paraydiuos MH ०० 50+%00८ 0071 “SO'E'LI IC “SO-POOT/PET/AT/CAHA “WOOT, [OHS OWE S/M\ | “6T

| ॥ | payjoog Aqyenzed speorepy S0-P00z LOCI 50६८1 I “SO-POOT/PET/AL'AATHA “reUNEPINY ‘JOOS OWI S/M | “ST

saoipuaddy


OL

| 88'bhT SOT'LS9 oy,

| es “paxjoog Aljenied speoyeyy 90-S007, 08% 90६ ET IC °90-S007/8 199S/CAHd एप 1००प०४ “WLIOD Ie S/M | “ES

|| SSE “pamsoad शणु॥एपं शुण्‌प्गणुष्‌ 90-S007 19TI 90६ घाउत 90-S007/8 1199S/CSHd 'श्प्पाइ BO “OOYDS WUD Je 5//0 | “ZS

| ‘painsoad Ayyented peusieyy

ers “para|dutos ye} aFe101g 90-S007 9671 90°€"€1'Id 90-5006/811728/तप्नावव “oyTTUINY| 10०प०६ “WEIOD Te S/TA\ | “TS

| ‘painooud Ayjensed yewayeyy

| Is ‘para|dutos जुप्ण aFes01g 90-007 ZOrEL 90°€"€14C 90 -sooz/s T1998 Hd Inf ‘Jooysg "WMIOD We 5//0 | “OS
“pomooad Ayjenied jeuoyey

| ory “paysjdutos जुपश atei01g 90-S007 OL TT 90 ETI 90-$007/8 199S/CHHd “TOIPIEY (००१०४ “UID 1 S/A\ | '6

| ore poyxoog Aqented speyoreyy 90-S007 0971 90° €1 3 90-S007/8 1499S/CTHd “TYouoUE | [००:०६ “WWHOD Ie S/A\ | “BF

||

| OFT poyoog Ayeried spew, 90-S007 IS tl 90६ ६70 90-S007/8 19S/CAHd ‘poops Krew eFey yw S/M | “LP

| Le payoog Ayenzed spers9ye yy, 90-007 168 900'€'€1'd 90-S00z/819°S/daHd OKBRY “[OOYDS “WLIOD I 5/0 | “OF

| Poxoog Aqenred jeLiaye Ay

| vere ‘para|duios yey aFe01g 90-007 कफ 90'€'€1'1 90-S00z/8 119°S/CaHd “Fuedejoy ००५०६ "UMIOD 1 S/M | “Sh

| re payoog Aqrenszed spear so-ro0z ह्दा “SO'E'LI IA 90-50द/8117०5/ठवाप्व Jooyps Areuttig eo] 1० 5/ | “bP

| use paxyoog Ajjenzed sjerareyy 50+#00८ हटा SOE LIC 50+#00८#६८/#1/दत्नाव Jooyss AreUILY EY I S/A\ | “EP

||

(60 payoog Ayenaed spear 90-500< ६6 90 ६ घाउत $0-POOT/8 1199S/CAHd श्जातणाा०31०5/0 | “Th

||

| os‘ paxjoog Ajensed spear 90-S00z 0001 90६ धाउत 90-5005/817०8/तप्नातव nfep [रष्द 'प्रणा०01९ 8//0 | “TF

||

| suo payoog Ajenzed अण्प्रथणुष 90-5006 0001 90६ धायत 90-5006/817728/दप्रनातत olury, ००१०5 DWI S/N | “OF

||

| 001 paxoog Ajjened sperayeyy 90-S00T orl 90 ६ €1C 90-S007/8 1199S/TAHd “duoseg duepny 'प्प्पण1० 5/0 | 6६

|

|| slo payoog Ayjensed speioye 90-S007 0001 90 ६घापत 90-500:/8117०8/तप्रत्नत 'कात्त JOOS VAL IE S/M | “BE

“aanyipuodxy

yo yunowy

aanypuadyg Jo ody,

(avax) dn waxy,

३४०० poyeUysy

यध्त ९ “ON JOpiQ Woy IES

amayas,

166 Yyo4DW Tg papua 0०4 ayy sof 4314381

ysuDgng 00107 uo ३०१० apny