 
 vii
  Preface 
1 This Report has been prepared for submission to the Governor 
under Article 151 of the Constitution. 
2 Chapter-I deals with the findings of  performance audit in the Food, 
Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection; Home and Public Health 
and Family Welfare Departments while Chapter-II deals with the 
findings of transaction audit in the Agriculture; Manpower and 
Planning; Public Works; Public Health and Family Welfare; Public 
Health and Engineering; Panchayat and Rural Development and 
Sports and Youth Welfare Depa rtments. Chapter-III includes 
comments based on internal control in the Water Resources 
Department. 
3 The observations arising out of audit of Government commercial 
and trading activities are included in Chapter-IV of this Report. 
4 The cases mentioned in the Report were observed during the course 
of test audit of accounts for the year 2008-09 as well as those which 
were observed in earlier years but could not be included in previous 
reports. Matters relating to the period subsequent to 2008-09 have 
also been included, wherever necessary. 

Overview 
 ix
OVERVIEW 
This Report comprises four Chapters which include four performance audits, a 
review of internal controls in th e Water Resources Department and 18 
paragraphs on audit of financial tr ansactions of various Government 
Departments, Government Companies and Statutory Corporations. 
The audit has been conducted in accor dance with the Auditing Standards 
prescribed for the Indian Audit and Ac counts Department. Audit samples have 
been drawn based on statistical sampli ng as well as risk based judgmental 
sampling. The audit conclusions have been drawn and recommendations have 
been made, taking into consideratio n the views of the Government. A 
summary of the key audit findings are presented in this overview. 
1. National Rural Health Mission  
The National Rural Health Mission was launched in April 2005 with the aim 
of providing accessible, affordable, accou ntable, effective and reliable health 
care facilities in rural areas. The State Government spent  
Rs 634.55 crore from the inception of the scheme till March 2009. There were 
savings of Rs 250.96 crore (28 per cent ). There were instances of irregular 
expenditure, stage-wise pl anning was not done and the availability of health 
care infrastructure, doctors and supporti ng staff remained inadequate. While 
there were significant achievements in  some interventions and the health 
indicators accordingly showed improv ements, there were shortfalls in 
administration of iron-folic acid tablets,  gender imbalance in sterilisation, low 
institutional deliveries, low detec tion of sputum positive cases and non-
achievement of the norms of annual para sitic incidence. Th e indicators of 
maternal and infant mortality remained short of interim targets.  
(Paragraph 1.1) 
2. Modernisation of Police Force 
The ‘Modernisation of Police Force’ sc heme was launched by Government of 
India to equip the State police forces  to face the emerging challenges to 
internal security. The Police Depart ment spent Rs 205.63 crore during 2003-
09 under the scheme. Performance audit of  the scheme showed that there were 
large savings, mainly under security and communication equipment heads. 
Despite availability of funds, large num bers of residential and non-residential 
buildings had not been completed and ther e were shortages of light vehicles in 
police stations. Besides, there were shortages in the availability of modern 
weapons. POLNET, a satellite based pol ice communication network used for 
communicating with the headquarters, districts and othe r States, was not 
installed in six districts and was func tioning partially in 14 districts. Police 
stations were not fully computerised . Equipment and buildings costing  
Rs 2.11 crore meant for conducting forensic examination were not utilized due 
to lack of technical staff. 
(Paragraph 1.2) 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 x
3. Computerisation of paddy procurement: ‘ Dhan Kharidi-
Online’ 
The State Government implemented the IT project ‘ Dhan Kharidi-Online’ for 
paddy procurement in order to ensure in stant cheque payments to farmers; 
improve inventory control; check leakag e and diversion of paddy and rice and 
improve management of milling. It was operationalised in a short period of six 
months and received the National e-Go vernance award in 2008. It has been 
used successfully for two paddy procurem ent cycles. A review of the project 
revealed that some areas were required to be streamlined. There were 
deficiencies in the registration of farmers with important details like 
landholdings not being recorded, controls  not being properly exercised at the 
data entry stage, paddy procurements not being validated against landholdings 
of farmers etc. Besides, there were shortcomings in the issue and 
reconciliation of cheques, the procedure for miller verification was not strictly 
followed, the validity of paddy delivery orders to millers was not adequately 
monitored and procedures for system security were not properly documented 
and implemented. Corrective action had, however, been initiated by the 
Government in most of the areas. 
(Paragraph 1.3) 
4. Internal Control in Water Resources Department 
A review of internal controls in the Wa ter Resources Department revealed that 
there were instances of excess expe nditure over allotments given by the 
Engineer-in-Chief, amounts remained pe nding under various suspense heads, 
works abstracts were not prepared a nd cheques and remittances were not 
reconciled in time. There were deficien cies in enforcing terms of agreements, 
resulting in undue benefits to contract ors. Deficiencies in maintenance of 
stock records resulted in differences  between stock records and accounts 
figures. Due to shortcomings in administrative controls, there were imbalances 
in the deployment of officials. There were also instances of works being 
executed without conducting quality control tests. 
(Paragraph 3) 
5. Audit of Transactions in Government Departments 
Audit of financial transactions in va rious departments of the Government 
revealed instances of excess payment,  wasteful expenditure, undue benefit, 
idle expenditure, blockage of funds an d irregular expenditure amounting to  
Rs 21.35 crore in the Agriculture De partment (Rs 90.16 lakh), the Manpower 
Planning Department (Rs 10.39 crore), the Panchayat and Rural Development 
Department (Rs 2.83 crore), the Public  Health and Engineering Department 
(Rs 95 lakh), the Public Health and Family Welfare Department (Rs 4.34 
crore), the Public Works Department (Rs 50.07 lakh) and the Sports and 
Youth Welfare Department (Rs 1.44 crore).  
 (Paragraphs 2.1 to 2.4) 

Overview 
 xi
6. Government Commercial and Trading Activities 
There were 10 Government Companies, four deemed Government Companies, 
two Statutory Corporations and the Electricity Regulatory Commission, all 
working under the control of the State Government, as on 31 March 2009. The 
total investment in 16 working PSUs  (14 Government Companies and two 
Statutory Corporations) was Rs 2,963. 05 crore. Out of 16 PSUs, 13 had not 
finalised their accounts for the year 2008- 09. According to the latest financial 
accounts, three working Government Companies had incurred an aggregate 
loss of Rs 7.20 crore and four Gove rnment Companies and two Statutory 
Corporations had earned an aggregate profit of Rs 184.36 crore. 
(Paragraphs 4.1.2, 4.1.7, 4.1.16 and  4.1.31) 
7. Review of Performance of Chhattisgarh Rajya Van Vikas  
Nigam Limited 
The Chhattisgarh Rajya Van Vikas Nigam  Limited is engaged in accelerating 
and increasing forest production by developing forest land, raising plantations, 
felling trees and their marketing. Th e performance audit of the Company was 
conducted to assess the ec onomy, efficiency and eff ectiveness of activities 
relating to acquisition and utilisation of land; planning and raising of 
plantations; financial management and adequacy of the internal control 
mechanism. It was observed that there was no laid down policy and detailed 
procedure specifying the criteria for sele ction of land and the time frame for 
transfer of land by the State Government. There was a shortfall of 0.26 lakh 
hectares against 1.49 lakh hectares of land targeted for treatment/ utilisation. 
The expenditure on the operational ac tivities of the Company had reduced 
from Rs 28.93 crore in 2004-05 to Rs  18.79 crore in 2007-08. It had not 
carried out replantation in 41.94 per cent  of failed plantation areas. The 
plantation activities at Hirri mines of Bhilai Steel Plant had survival rates of 
zero to 60 per cent  as against the agreed survival rate of 80 per cent . As a 
result, Bhilai Steel Plant had withheld  an amount of Rs 25.73 lakh towards 
excess casualty.  
(Paragraph 4.2) 
8. Audit of Transactions in  Government Companies and 
Statutory Corporation 
Audit of transactions in Government  Companies and Statutory Corporation 
included in this Report highlight the de ficiencies in the management of PSUs, 
which resulted in serious financial implications. These include the following : 
Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board had incurred extra expenditure of  
Rs 24.42 lakh due to non-compliance with  rules, directives, procedures and 
terms and conditions of contracts. 
(Paragraph 4.3.1) 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 xii
Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board procured economiser coils worth  
Rs 1.53 crore through extension orders and without inviting tenders. 
(Paragraph 4.3.2) 
Chhattisgarh State Industrial Devel opment Corporation Limited issued 
misleading instructions to MPSIDC whic h led to non-securitisation of loan 
documents of a private firm resulting in non-realisation of Rs 30.08 crore. 
(Paragraph 4.3.3) 

 
 
CHAPTER-I  
PERFORMANCE AUDIT 
 
PUBLIC HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
1.1 National Rural Health Mission 
Highlights 
The National Rural Health Mission was launched in April 2005 with the 
aim of providing accessible, affordable, accountable, effective and reliable 
health care facilities in rural ar eas. The State Government spent  
Rs 634.55 crore from the inception of the scheme till March 2009. There 
were substantial savings of Rs 250.96 crore. The availability of health 
care infrastructure, doctors and supporting staff was not adequate. While 
there were significant achievements in  some interventions, the indicators 
of maternal and infant mortality rema ined short of interim targets, even 
though the major expenditure unde r the scheme was for reproductive 
and child health. Some important audit findings are given below: 
An amount of Rs 21.30 crore, including Rs 9.27 crore meant for Mobile 
Medical Units and Rs 1.90 crore for a Health Management Information 
System, remained unutilised. 
(Paragraph 1.1.6.2) 
Funds amounting to Rs 3.46 crore, received for health care of urban 
poor, were diverted. 
(Paragraph 1.1.6.4) 
There was excess expenditure of Rs 25.54 lakh on purchase of blood 
lancets. 
(Paragraph 1.1.6.5) 
There were delays of upto 730 days in  the payment of cash incentives of 
Rs 59.64 lakh to 4,646 beneficiaries of the ‘Janani Suraksha Yojna’.  
(Paragraph 1.1.9.1[ii]) 
Payments totalling Rs 4.83 crore for folk dance programmes organised to 
spread health awareness, were not supported by prescribed certificates 
and photographs. 
(Paragraph 1.1.9.2) 
Only 52 per cent  of reports were being received in respect of the 
Integrated Disease Surveillance Project. 
(Paragraph 1.1.12.2) 
 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 2
1.1.1 Introduction 
The National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) was launched (April 2005) by 
the Government of India (GOI) with  the aim of providing accessible, 
affordable, accountable, effective and reliable health care facilities in the rural 
areas. Various existing National Disease Control Programmes viz. the 
Reproductive and Child Health-II (RCH -II) Programme, the National Vector 
Borne Disease Control Programme (NVBDCP), the Revised National 
Tuberculosis Programme (RNTCP), the National Leprosy Eradication 
Programme (NLEP), the National Blindness Control Programme (NBCP) and 
the Integrated Disease Surveillance Project (IDSP), were being implemented 
by separate health societies, which were merged under NRHM into a single 
State Health Society (SHS) to implement the scheme. The successful 
implementation of NRHM involved decentralised planning in the health sector 
and monitoring by health monitoring and planning committees formed at the 
Primary Health Centre (PHC), Block, District and State levels. 
1.1.2 Organisational Structure 
At the State level, the Chief Minister heads the State Health Mission (SHM), 
which provides the overall guidance to the scheme activities. The SHS, which 
is chaired by the Chief Secretary of the State, executes the scheme with the 
assistance of the State Programme Management Support Unit (SMPU). The 
Mission Director (MD), NRHM is the coordinator of the SHS and is 
responsible for overall implementation of the scheme. The MD is assisted by 
the Joint Director, NRHM and the Director, Health Services. 
At the district level, the District Health Societies (DHS) implement the 
project. They are headed by the District Collectors, who are assisted by the 
Chief Medical and Health  Officers (CMHO) who act as Chief Executive 
Officers (CEO) of the DHS. Hea lth care was extended to 2.08
1 crore people 
(including 1.66 crore rural people) of the State, through a network of 138 2 
Community Health Centres (CHC), 719 PHCs and 4,741 Sub Health Centres 
(SHC). The SHCs are manned by Female Health Workers/Auxiliary Nursing 
Midwives (ANM) and Multipurpose Health Workers (Male) (MPWM). The 
PHC is the first contact point between the patient and the doctor in rural areas, 
the CHC is treated as a secondary care institution and the district hospital 
(DH) is treated as a tertiary care institution. 
1.1.3 Audit Objectives 
The objectives of the performance audit were to assess whether: 
• stage-wise planning was done starting from surveys at the village 
level, 
• accounting and utilisation of funds was efficient and effective, 
                                                 
1  Population as per census 2001. 
2  As per data given by the Directorate of Health Services. 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 3
• the scheme achieved strengthening of physical and human 
infrastructure at different levels as per the Indian Public Health 
Standard norms, 
• the performance indicators and targets fixed in respect of reproductive 
and child health care as well as immunisation and disease control 
programmes were achieved and 
• the scheme was being monitored as provided in the guidelines. 
1.1.4 Audit criteria 
The audit was conducted based on criteria derived from the following: 
• Framework for implementation of NRHM issued by the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare, Government of India; 
• National Programme Implementation Plans for RCH and other disease 
control programmes; 
• State Programme Implementation Plans approved by GOI; 
• Memorandum of Understanding between the GOI and the State 
Government; 
• Indian Public Health Standards (IPHS) for upgradation of CHCs and 
PHCs; 
• Chhattisgarh Store Purchase Rules, 2002. 
1.1.5 Scope and coverage of Audit 
The performance audit of the scheme was conducted during April 2008 to 
May 2009 for the period from April 2005 to March 2009. The coverage of 
audit included the SHS and four
3 districts of the State selected by the Simple 
Random Sampling Without Replacement (SRSWOR) method. The four 
selected districts had 47 CHCs, 204 PHCs and 1,429 SHCs, out of which 
12 CHCs, 24 PHCs and 48 SHCs were selected, as shown in Appendix-1.1, by 
the SRSWOR method. 
The performance audit commenced with an entry conference with the 
Secretary, Public Health and Family Welfare Department on 4 April 2008. An 
exit conference was held on 10 September 2009 to discuss the audit findings. 
1.1.6 Financial Management 
As per the funding arrangement, GOI was to provide 100 per cent grants to 
the State upto 2006-07 and thereafter,  all the existing National Disease 
Control Programmes were to be merged under NRHM and the State was to 
contribute 15 per cent during the XI Plan period (2007-12) . The GOI grant 
was to be provided in two parts i.e. direct transfer to health societies and 
                                                
 
3  Bastar, Kanker, Raigarh and Raipur. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 4
transfer of funds to the State Government. The total expenditure incurred on 
the scheme during the period of audit was Rs 634.55 crore as against funds 
availability of Rs 885.51 crore as detailed in Appendix-1.2. Of the total 
expenditure of Rs 634.55 crore, the expenditure on Direction and 
Administration was Rs.256.06 crore (40 per cent ) while Rs 378.49 4 crore 
(60 per cent) was spent on programme activities, of which RCH was the main 
focus area, under which expenditure of Rs 341.96 crore was incurred. 
1.1.6.1   Persistent savings 
It was observed that except for the ye ar 2006-07, there were large savings 
during each financial year as depicted below: 
Table – 1.1: Funds received and expenditure incurred under NRHM 
(Rs in crore) 
Year Receipt Expenditure Savings Percentage of savings 
2005-06 165.58 112.19 53.39 32 
2006-07 202.16 195.34 6.82 3 
2007-08 260.88 177.52 83.36 32 
2008-09 256.89 149.50 107.39 42 
Total 885.51 634.55 250.96 28 
(Source: Information furnished by SHS and Directorate of Health Services) 
Note: The above table does not include receipt and expenditure figures relating to the State 
Malaria Control Society as the society could not produce the information/records to 
Audit. 
Of the total savings of Rs 25 0.96 crore, Rs 217.67 crore (87 per cent ) 
occurred under RCH-II. This included unspent balances of Rs 7.42 crore 
under RCH-Phase-I, Rs 24.19 crore under flexipool ( Janani Suraksha 
Yojana5, family planning, institutional strengthening and child health and 
training), Rs 127.28 crore under NRHM additionalities (untied funds, ASHA 6, 
mobile medical units, Health Management and Information System, 
procurement of drugs and equipment and public private partnerships) and Rs 
59 lakh under immunisation. The State contribution of Rs 47 crore and 
interest amount of Rs 5.68 crore remained unutilised. During the exit 
conference, the Government stated that there were savings under the salary 
head as personnel had not been appointed and the State contribution was not 
utilised as it was released at the end of March 2008 and March 2009. 
However, it was observed by Audit that the savings on salaries, booked 
primarily under Direction and Administration, was only a small part whereas 
the bulk of the savings was under various interventions under RCH. The 
                                                
 
4  RCH-Rs 341.96 crore (90 per cent), NLEP- Rs 4.77 crore (one per cent), RNTCP-
Rs 16.75 crore (five per cent), IDSP-Rs 2.97 crore (one per cent) and NVBDCP-
Rs 12.04 crore (three per cent). 
5  Janani Suraksha Yojana is a scheme to promote safe delivery at health centres by 
providing cash incentives to pregnant women, Auxiliary Nursing Midwives or ASHA 
6  ASHA (Accredited Social Health Activist): A trained community health worker to be 
provided in each village for assisting in neonatal care, prevention and cure of 
common childhood diseases, immunization and family planning activities and other 
activities for control of malaria, TB, leprosy etc. 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 5
Mobile 
Medical Units 
were not 
provided for 
remote areas  
Government also agreed that the State Malaria Control Society had not kept 
its records properly and informed that an inquiry was being conducted as there 
were many irregularities in its running. The results of the inquiry were 
awaited (August, 2009). 
1.1.6.2   Non-utilisation of funds of Rs 21.30 crore 
(i) As per the State programme implementation plans (PIP), GOI 
provided Rs 7.22 crore in 2006-07, for establishment of 16 Mobile Medical 
Units (MMUs) to provide necessary medical care in remote areas of the State. 
Subsequently, Rs 2.40 crore was released during 2007-08 as operational cost. 
It was observed that only four chassis of trucks for establishment of MMUs 
had been purchased (November 2008) for Rs 35 lakh against the requirement 
of 16 MMUs, while the balance of Rs 9.27 crore was lying unutilised. During 
the exit conference, the Government st ated that a prototype MMU had been 
provided by the supplier which was being changed as it was not as per the 
specifications. It was further stated that all the MMUs would be purchased by 
March 2010. It was evident that adequate efforts had not been made in the 
past and consequently, the aim of providing medical care in the remote areas 
was not achieved and the funds remained blocked. Similarly, an amount of  
Rs 1.90 crore was provided by GOI in 2007-08 for establishment of a Health 
Management and Information System (HMIS), to make public health care 
services more efficient by computerising all records and transactions, from the 
SHC level to the State level and to moni tor the functioning of health centres. 
However, the entire amount was lying unutilised. 
During the exit conference, the Government stated that hardware would be 
purchased and the software would be provided free of cost by the National 
Informatics Centre (NIC). This acti on should have been taken immediately 
after receiving the funds but due to delays, the regular monitoring envisaged 
in the scheme guidelines through HMIS had not been started. 
(ii) It was observed that funds received from GOI in 2004-05 for 
encouraging institutional deliveries through public private partnership  
(Rs 50 lakh) and formation of a cell to plan the stabilizing of population  
(Rs 20 lakh) and in 2007-08 for village and panchayat capacity building  
(Rs 98.20 lakh) and alternate human resources development (Rs 2.83 crore) 
remained unutilised. Consequently, these initiatives as envisaged in the annual 
PIPs were delayed for one to three years. 
During the exit conference, the Governme nt stated that the funds would now 
be utilised. 
(iii) Scrutiny of records of RCH societies in the test-checked districts 
revealed that funds of Rs 5.62 crore received during 2006-07 to 2007-08  
under various components were not utilised by the DHSs of Bastar 
(Rs 1.34 crore), Kanker (Rs 27 lakh), Raigarh (Rs 1.46 crore) and Raipur 
(Rs 2.55 crore) for more than one year, as detailed in Appendix-1.3. These 
funds were meant for purchase of drug kits, blood storage facilities, 
institutional strengthening, urban health programmes, formation of village 
health and sanitation committees etc. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 6
At the exit conference, the Government st ated that as drug kits were procured 
centrally by the Directorate of Health  Services, the unspent amounts were 
retained by DHS Raipur and would be utilised for other activities. The 
unspent amount for blood storage facility and institutional strengthening 
would be utilised in 2009-10. The Village Health Sanitation Committees had 
not been set up as bank accounts had not been opened and they would now be 
started. It was evident that adequate action had not been taken in the past to 
utilise the funds, which resulted in delaying the intended benefits by one to 
two years. 
1.1.6.3   Funds management and accounting 
The following shortcomings were observed in the handling of funds, 
accounting and reporting utilisation of the same: 
• It was observed that an unspent balance of Rs 7.42 crore of RCH-I was 
neither refunded to GOI nor spent upto 31 March 2009. At the exit 
conference, the Government stated (September 2009) that the unspent 
balance would be refunded to GOI immediately. Had this action been 
taken in 2005-06, blockage of funds of Rs 7.42 crore for over four 
years could have been avoided. 
• As per the MOU entered between GOI and the State Governments, the 
funds received under NRHM were to be kept in an interest-bearing 
account of a nationalised bank. Scrutiny of records revealed that funds 
received under RCH by DHS, Raigarh during April 2005 to June 2008 
were kept in a current account. At the exit conference, the Government 
stated (September 2009)  that a show cause notice would be issued to 
the concerned officials.  
• During scrutiny of records at the SHS, the State Malaria Control 
Society (SMCS) did not produce vouchers and other records like cash 
book and stock registers. Therefore, their receipts and expenditure 
could not be ascertained by Audit. The Government accepted that the 
records had not been maintained properly by the society and informed 
that the accounts were being recas t and an inquiry was also being 
carried out. 
1.1.6.4   Diversion of funds 
The SHS received Rupees four crore during 2005-06 to improve the health 
status of the urban poor community by providing quality primary health care 
with a focus on RCH services and to achieve population stabilisation. The 
programme was to be implemented by municipal bodies in coordination with 
the Health Department through social mapping of towns; identification of 
appropriate places for health care centres; appointment of two ANMs for 
urban slums to assist in deliveries  and providing immunisation services, 
antenatal care and other services simi lar to the rural SHCs. An amount of 
Rs 3.45 crore had to be disbursed to the municipal bodies for executing these 
activities. In addition, Rs 26.25 lakh had to be utilized for organising health 
camps for identifying patients with se rious illnesses and referring them to 
district hospitals. Another Rs 26.25 lakh had to be utilised for Information, 
Funds amounting to 
Rs 7.42 crore were 
neither refunded to 
GOI nor spent by 
implementing 
agencies 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 7
Education and Communication (IEC) 7 activities. It was observed that while 
expenditure was incurred on IEC activities as planned, the amount  of 
Rs 3.46 crore meant for municipal bodies was diverted for purchase of 
equipment, which was issued to Chief Medical and Health Officers in all 
districts. 
Due to the non-utilisation and diversion,  the objective of improving the health 
status of the urban poor community was not fulfilled. The Government 
assured that an inquiry would be ca rried out to ascertain whether the 
expenditure was appropriate. However, the diversion was inappropriate as it 
resulted in non-initiation of the activities for improving urban health care. 
1.1.6.5   Cases of irregular and extra expenditure 
Scrutiny of records of the SMCS revealed the following: 
(i) As per the guidelines of the Na tional Vector Borne Disease Control 
Programme (NVBDCP), 2004, procurement was to be done as per 
Government rules. The Chhattisgarh Purchase Rules, 2002 provided that 
purchases above Rs 50,000 should be made by inviting open tenders.  In 
contravention of these provisions, the SMCS invited (April 2005) quotations 
for laboratory and publicity material, finalized rates which were inclusive of 
all taxes and issued supply orders during September and October 2005. Based 
on these rates, blood lancets were purchased (March 2006) at the rate of 
Rs 1.45 each. During the same period,  the Director, Health Services invited 
(October 2005) separate tenders and finalised the rates for blood lancets at 
Rs 0.26 each and circulated (February 2006) the approved rates to all the 
societies. The rate of Rs 1.45 finalised by the SMCS, was in contravention of 
purchase rules and was five times higher, when compared to the rate of 
Rs 0.26 finalised by the Director, Health  Services. Therefore, by purchasing 
blood lancets at higher rates, the SM CS incurred excess expenditure of 
Rs 25.54 lakh as detailed in Appendix-1.4. It was also observed that though 
the approved rates were inclusive of all taxes, commercial tax of 4.6 per cent 
was paid on 17 invoices, which resulted in excess payment of Rs 4.40 lakh to 
a firm as detailed in Appendix-1.5. 
During the exit conference, the Government stated (September 2009) that the 
case has now been handed over to the Economic Offences Wing (EOW) for 
investigation. 
(ii) The SMCS issued (October 2005) a supply order for purchase of 
29,000 slide boxes for Rs 14.94 lakh. It was observed that the ordered quantity 
was supplied twice against the same supply order, vide invoices  
dated 14 February 2006 and 21 March 2006  and payment of Rs 31.24 lakh 
(including taxes) was made. It was found that the stock entry for the second 
lot of 29,000 slide boxes was made in the stock register on 1 March 2006 
though the material was supplied vide an  invoice dated 21 March 2006. There 
                                                
 
7  Information, Education and Communication is the activity by which health 
awareness is created in the general public through posters, banners, pamphlets, folk 
dances etc. 
Excess 
expenditure of 
Rs 25.54 lakh on 
purchase of blood 
lancets 
Irregular 
expenditure of 
Rs 15.62 lakh 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 8
was nothing available on record to explain the discrepancy, which raised 
doubts on the genuineness of the second supply. During the exit conference, 
the Government stated that case had been handed over to EOW for 
investigation. 
1.1.7 Planning 
Non-preparation of block action plans 
As per the  NRHM framework, the district action plans, the basis for 
interventions in the health sector, are to be prepared by consolidating the 
block action plans prepared on the basis of surveys at the village level by 
involving panchayat representatives. 
It was observed that a community needs assessment survey and a facility 
survey were carried out at the village level by the Health Department through 
ANMs and health workers but the bl ock action plans were not prepared. 
District plans were prepared using the survey data. Therefore, the stage-wise 
planning envisaged in the scheme was not carried out. During the exit 
conference, the Government agreed that  the bottom up approach of planning 
should be introduced and stated that block action plans would be prepared 
from 2010-11 onwards.  
1.1.8 Facilities at health centres 
Health care facilities in rural area s are provided through Community Health 
Centres (CHCs), Primary Health Cent res (PHCs) and Sub Health Centres 
(SHCs). 
1.1.8.1   Infrastructure  
(i) Community Health Centres 
The CHCs are located at the block level and constitute the secondary level of 
the health care design to provide referral as well as specialised health care to 
the rural population. 
As per the framework for implemen tation of NRHM, a CHC was to be 
established for every 1,20,000 persons (80,000 in tribal areas). The IPHS 
norms envisaged that the CHCs would provide assured medical services
8 and 
had prescribed the requisite infrastructure and facilities. Scrutiny of records of 
the 12 9 test-checked CHCs revealed the following shortcomings against the 
prescribed IPHS norms: 
                                                 
8  Routine and emergency surgeries, 24-hour normal and assisted delivery services, 
essential and emergency obstetric care including surgical interventions like 
caesarean sections and other medical interventions. 
9  Districts -  Bastar -(Bakawand, Lohandiguda and Tokapal)  Kanker-  (Amoda, 
Bhanupratappur and Charama), Raigarh -(Chaple, Pussore and Tamnar) and 
Raipur-( Abhanpur, Arang and Dharsinwa) 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 9
• As per the data provided by the Directorate of Health Services,  there 
were 138 CHCs in the State as on March 2009 against the requirement 
of 173 CHCs based on the 2001 census, which estimated the rural 
population of 1.68 crore. Thus, there was a shortage of 35 CHCs.  
• None of the 12 CHCs test-checked  had accommodation for patients’ 
attendants, 67 per cent  had no in-patient service, 50 per cent  were 
without accommodation facilities for ANM, 42 per cent  had no 
separate wards for male and female patients, 33 per cent  had no 
standby power supply and 25 per cent  had no accommodation 
facilities for general duty medical officers and staff nurses. The CHCs 
had adequate infrastructure for services such as ambulances, 
diagnostic facilities, labour rooms, water supply etc. The available 
infrastructure and facilities in CHCs are given in Appendix-1.6. 
Even though operation theatres were available in the 12 test-checked CHCs, 
out of the 14 items essential for operation theatres, eight items were not 
present in 8 to 12 CHCs as detailed in Appendix-1.7.  
Blood storage facilities were not availabl e at any of the 12 test-checked CHCs 
even though funds of Rs 65 lakh were released (2007-09) to the DHSs.  
(ii) Primary Health Centres 
The PHCs are located in the villages to provide 24-hour emergency services 
such as general medical care, family welfare and maternity and child health 
care services. They are re ferral centres for SHCs. The IPHS norms prescribed 
the equipment and facilities required in the PHCs such as standby power 
supply/generator, minor operation theatre, labour room etc.  
Scrutiny of records of the 24
10 test-checked PHCs revealed that there was non-
provision of standby power supply, 92 per cent  were without any operation 
theatre and accommodation for staff nurses, 79 per cent  had no separate 
utilities and wards for men and women, 71 per cent  could not provide 
inpatient services, 67 per cent  had no accommodation for medical officers,  
54 per cent had no diagnostic services, 46 per cent had no provision for water 
supply, 42 per cent  had no facilities for medical waste disposal and  
29 per cent  had no labour rooms. The PHCs were, however, adequately 
equipped with OPD rooms and 24x7 emergency and delivery services. The 
details of infrastructure and facilities available in PHCs are given in 
Appendix-1.8. 
(iii) Sub-Health Centres 
The SHCs located at the village level, are the first contact point of the health 
care system with the rural community. They are expected to provide 
promotional, preventive and a few curative primary health care services such 
                                                
 
10  Bastar-(Alnar, Belar, Jaibel, Malgaon, Maulibhata and Tahakapal),   
Kanker-(Basanvahi, Halba, Hatkarra, Korar, Kottara and Sarwandi),   
Raigarh-(BadeBhandar, Binjkot, Jobi, Kodatarai, Saraipali and Urba) and   
Raipur-(Champaran, Labhandi, Mandhar, Mandirhasaud, Rewa and Uparwara). 
Shortage of 
CHCs  
in the State 
Basic infra-
structure was 
inadequate in 
CHCs 
Essential 
OT equip-
ment not 
provided 
Blood 
storage 
facilities not 
available 
Inadequate 
infrastructure 
in PHCs 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 10
as antenatal and post-natal care, family planning and contraception. The SHCs 
should have facilities such as labour rooms, accommodation for staff, 
adequate water supply etc.  
Scrutiny of records of the 48 11 test-checked SHCs in four districts revealed 
that 71 per cent  were without separate utilities for men and women,  
67 per cent were without provision for water supply, 58 per cent did not have 
facilities for disposal of medical waste, 42 per cent were without labour rooms 
and accommodation for staff and 38 per cent had no Government building as 
detailed in Appendix-1.9 
In the absence of the minimum prescribed infrastructure and facilities, the 
health centres at various levels were not fully equipped to deliver assured 
services as envisaged in the IPHS norms. Since 38 per cent of the SHCs were 
running from rented premises, there was little scope for their upgradation and 
provision of the prescribed facilities such as waste disposal and labour rooms. 
During the exit conference, the Government stated that mapping of the 
population was being done to assess the total requirement and additional 
CHCs would be constructed as per the assessment. The Government also 
stated that action would be taken to construct buildings for SHCs, to equip the 
OTs adequately and to introduce a Chhattisgarh Equipment Management 
System to ensure minimum stock of medicines and equipment at all health 
centres. The State would also start a Medical Corporation for procurement of 
equipment and outsource the testing of equipment and medicine. These 
initiatives were required to be implemented expeditiously to improve the 
quality of health care in the State. 
1.1.8.2   Manpower 
(i) Community Health Centres 
The IPHS norms provided that every CHC should have a general physician, a 
gynaecologist, a paediatrician, an anaesthetist, a pharmacist, a laboratory 
technician, a radiographer and nine staff nurses to cater to a bed occupancy of 
60 per cent. 
                                                
 
11  Bastar-(Badanji, Burungpal, Chindgaon, Dharaur, Garenga, Irikpal, Karanji 
Napawand, Nainnar, Potanar, Targaon  and Ulnar),  Kanker - (Barvi, 
Bhainsakanhar, Bheja, Choria, Dudhava, Jepra, Kotela, Lilejhar, Musurputta, Puri, 
Samtara and Selegaon)  Raigarh - (Bhupdeopur, Chhatamuda, Gorpar, Gurda, 
Jaridih, Jibri, Khadgaon, Khamhariya, Khokhra, Nandeli, Samaruma and Supa) and 
Raipur-( Barbanda, Girod, Kachna, Kendri, Lakholi, Mowa, Nawagaon, Nimora, 
Palod, Paragaon Parsada, and Rakhi). 
Inadequate 
infrastructure in 
SHCs 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 11
Against the 1,104 sanctioned posts of qualified doctors in the State, there was 
a shortage of 514 (47 per cent) as detailed below: 
Table-1.2 : Status of manpower in CHCs in the State 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Post Sanctioned In position Shortage Percentage of 
shortage 
1. Medical Officer 414 376 38 9 
2. General Physician 138 51 87 63 
3. Gynaecologist 138 36 102 74 
4. Pediatrician 138 60 78 56 
5. Surgery specialist 138 28 110 80 
6. Anaesthetist 138 39 99 72 
Total 1104 590 514 47 
(Source: Information provided by the Directorate of Health Society) 
It was observed that none of the 12 test-checked CHCs had an anaesthetist and 
staff nurses, 92 per cent  were without general physicians, 83  per cent  were 
without gynaecologists, 67  per cent  were without paediatricians, 50  per cent 
were without general surgeons, 42 per cent  were without radiographers and  
33 per cent were without any general duty medical officer (MO). The shortage 
of staff is depicted in Appendix-1.10.  
(ii) Primary Health Centres 
As per the IPHS norms, a PHC should have an MO, a staff nurse, a pharmacist 
and a laboratory technician. Out of the 24 PHCs test-checked, 88  per cent  
were without any staff nurse, 75 per cent were without an ANM, 67  per cent 
were without laboratory technicians, 50 per cent  were without pharmacists 
and 29  per cent  were without any medical officers as detailed in 
Appendix-1.11.  
The shortage (29 per cent) of MOs in the test-checked PHCs was quite close 
to the overall shortage in the State. Against the requirement of 1,414 MOs for 
the whole State, only 1,092 were deployed , resulting in a shortage of 322  
(23 per cent). 
(iii) Sub Health Centres 
The IPHS norms prescribed that each SHC should have two ANMs and a 
male health worker to provide basic heal th care services. It was observed that 
two ANMs were posted only in two per cent of the SHCs, a single ANM was 
posted in 92 per cent of the SHCs, while in six per cent of the SHCs, no ANM 
was posted at all. Fifty eight per cent  of the SHCs were without any male 
health worker as detailed in Appendix-1.12. Since ANMs were required to 
make field visits and conduct weekly immunisation, it would not be possible  
to deliver the services at SHCs properly with just one ANM. The non-
availability of ANMs implied that the concerned SHCs were not equipped to 
deliver the level of health care as envisaged under NRHM.  
In the absence of the minimum prescribed numbers of doctors and 
paramedical staff at all levels, the health centres were not fully equipped to 
deliver the assured services as envisaged in the IPHS norms. 
Shortage of 
doctors in 
CHCs 
Shortage of 
manpower in 
PHCs 
Shortage of 
manpower in 
SHCs 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 12
During the exit conference, the Government stated that redistribution of posts 
and rationalisation of current deployment would be done for all the health 
centres and efforts would be made to increase the manpower. It also stated 
that some posts of doctors would be surrendered. Over 300 nurses had 
recently been appointed and more posts of nurses would be proposed. The 
redeployment was required to be done  and appointments made expeditiously 
to improve the quality of health care. 
1.1.9 Reproductive and Child Health 
Under NRHM, health care was targeted through two major areas: 
• Reproductive and Child Health (RCH) programme. 
• Other disease control programmes. 
The RCH programme aimed to reduce the maternal mortality rate (MMR), 
infant mortality rate (IMR) and total fertility rate (TFR) through improved 
antenatal care, family planning and immunization. The achievements against 
the targeted levels of MMR, IMR and TFR are indicated below: 
Table-1.3 : Status of MMR, IMR and TFR 
Item Status in year 2005 Target up to 
2012 
Target upto 
2008-09 
Achievement 
upto 2008-09 
MMR 379/1,00,000 live births  
(SRS-2001-03) 
100 300 335 
(SRS-2004-06) 
IMR 70/1000 live births 
(SRS-2003) 
30 Less than 55 59 
(SRS-2007) 
TFR 2.62 
(NFHS-2005-06) 
2.1 2.2 2.62 
(NFHS-2005-06) 
(Source: Data provided by SHS) 
SRS: Sample registration system, NFHS: National Family Health Survey 
While there were improvements in the indicators from the year 2005 onwards, 
they were lagging behind the interim targets envisaged under NRHM. 
1.1.9.1   Achievements and shortcomings under RCH- Phase II 
The scrutiny of records and information collected from the department and 
test-checked health centres revealed that there were significant achievements 
as well as shortcomings as described in the following paragraphs. 
(i) Antenatal care 
The maternal health strategies in RCH provide that pregnant women should be 
registered and given three antenatal checkups, iron-folic acid (IFA) tablets for 
100 days and two doses of tetanus toxide (TT). The information collected 
revealed that 82 per cent of pregnant women in the whole State were provided 
three antenatal check-ups while the percentage was 89 in the test-checked 
districts. Immunization of pregnant women against tetanus was  
95 per cent both in the whole State and in the test-checked districts. While the 
administration of IFA tablets to pregnant women in the State was 82 per cent, 
it was only 75 per cent in the test-checked districts. It was also observed that 
7.80 lakh pregnant women were registered in the test-checked districts but 
Improvement 
in MMR, 
IMR and 
TFR 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 13
IFA tablets were available for only 5.47 lakh (70 per cent) of women, leading 
to a shortage of 30 per cent  (Appendix-1.13). The shortage of IFA tablets 
implied that iron and vitamin supplements would not be available to all 
pregnant women. Thus, the administration of IFA tablets was to be stepped up 
to counter the incidence of anaemia and reduce the MMR. During the exit 
conference, the Government stated that sufficient IFA tablets would be 
obtained and administered. 
(ii) Institutional delivery 
Institutional deliveries in the State showed a gradual increase but remained at 
32 per cent in 2008-09 (Appendix-1.14).This could be attributed to various 
factors including shortcomings in facili ties and medical staff in health centres 
as detailed in paragraph 1.1.8 and also the shortcomings in the implementation 
of the  ‘Janani Suraksha Yojana’ (JSY)  which, as explained earlier, was an 
incentive scheme aimed to increase institutional deliveries by providing cash 
incentives to women who got the deliveries done at Government health 
centres.  
Government of India guidelines provided that all expectant mothers should get 
cash incentives under JSY in one go at the time of delivery. Further, GOI 
would not consider the payments under JSY legitimate if payments beyond  
25 per cent were made in advance or seven days after the delivery. Scrutiny of 
records in the four test-checked distri cts revealed that there were delays 
ranging from seven to 730 days in payment of cash incentives of 
Rs 59.64
12 lakh to 4,646 beneficiaries. During the exit conference, 
Government stated that JSY payments were now being made through bearer 
cheques and timely payments were being ensured. However, it could not 
explain the reasons for the delays pointed out by Audit and the action it 
proposed to take. 
Government of India had enhanced the rates of incentives in October 2006 
from Rs 700 to Rs 1,400 for rural areas and from Rs 600 to Rs 1,000 for urban 
areas but payments at the enhanced rates were made only from June 2007 
onwards, which led to less payment of Rs 15.77
13 lakh to 2,523 beneficiaries 
for the period November 2006 to May 2007 in the test-checked districts. In 
reply, the DHSs, Bastar, Kanker and Raipur stated that they had paid the 
enhanced rates as soon as they had received directions of the Directorate of 
Health Services. During the exit conf erence, the Government stated that 
timely issue of orders by the Directorate would be ensured in future.  
(iii) Family Planning 
Use of spacing methods e.g. Oral Pill Cycle, Inter Uterine Device (IUD) 
insertions and distribution of condoms was 90 per cent in the State. However, 
the overall sterilization in the State fell short by 22 per cent and the shortfall 
ranged from 11 to 31 per cent  in the test-checked districts during 2008-09. 
                                                
 
12  Bastar-Rs 14.81 lakh (1,702 women), Kanker-Rs 2.56 lakh (312 women),  
Raigarh-Rs 21.36 lakh (1,315 women) and Raipur-Rs 20.91 lakh (1,317 women). 
13  Bastar-Rs 6.44 lakh , Kanker- Rs 2.65 lakh and Raipur-Rs 6.68 lakh.  
Thirty per cent 
shortage of IFA 
tablets 
Enhanced 
payment of JSY 
not made to 
2,523 
beneficiaries 
Overall 
sterilization fell 
short by 22 per 
cent 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 14
During the exit conference, the Government stated that necessary measures 
would be taken to increase family planning activities. 
NRHM also lays thrust on promoting male sterilisation but it was observed 
that the percentage of male sterilisation in the State was only six during last 
four years. Moreover, information colle cted from the SHS revealed that most 
of the male sterilisations had occurred in Bastar (30 per cent ), Dantewada  
(66 per cent ) and Kanker (29 per cent ), which had increased the overall 
percentage of male sterilization which was otherwise very low in the other 
districts (0.25 to 6.76 per cent). During the exit conference, the Government 
agreed that efforts would be made to increase the number of male 
sterilisations. 
(iv) Immunization and Child Health 
The scheme had a very significant achievement of 96 per cent of the target in 
respect of routine immunizations fo r prevention of six diseases. The 
administration of vitamin A solution to children was also significant at  
90 per cent of the target. 
1.1.9.2   Information, Education and Communication activities 
As stated earlier, the Information, Education and Communication (IEC) 
strategy under NRHM aims to facilitate awareness and dissemination of 
information through print media, printed material, street plays etc., regarding 
the availability of and access to quality health care.  
The IEC Bureau
14 of the Director, Health Services approved three Samitis 15 
for executing IEC work, at the rate of Rs 1,940 per programme, through 
Kalajathas16, to create health awareness in all the villages of the State. 
Accordingly, the Joint Director, RCH issued (July 2005 to March 2006) work 
order to all the three Samitis with directions to submit the bills to the IEC 
Bureau along with photographs of the programmes and certificates from the 
Sarpanches of the villages and local workers, which would verify that the 
programmes had actually been held. While the RCH society made payment of 
Rs 4.16 crore to the three Samitis, the IEC Bureau was unable to produce any 
photographs or certificates from Sarpanches and local workers to Audit. 
The RCH society issued another work order to M/s Reliable Associates during 
March 2006 for executing 3,456 folk dance programmes in 16 districts 
without any specific instructions for submitting proof of execution and made a 
payment of Rs 67.04 lakh to them. 
On verification in the districts, the DHS, Bastar stated that the records of 
2005-06 were not available while the DHS, Kanker stated (November 2008) 
                                                
 
14 The agency for managing the work relating to IEC component under NRHM. 
15  Chhattisgarh Lok Kala Samiti; Dhamtari, Nav Jagriti Kala Samiti, Bilaspur and 
Suman Saurabh, Raipur. 
16 Plays and folk dance programmes in local language. 
Ninety six per cent 
achievement of 
immunization 
targets 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 15
that no such programmes had taken place. As the work orders included 850 
programmes for Kanker district, involving a total payment of Rs 16.49 lakh, 
the matter required investigation. The DHS, Raigarh stated (September 2008) 
that photographs and certificates relating to Kalajatha programmes during 
2005-06 had been sent to Raipur and were  kept at the State level. The DHS, 
Raipur stated (July 2008) that the programmes were held but did not produce 
to Audit, the photographs and certification by Sarpanches. 
Thus although payment of Rs 4.83 crore was made to Kalajatha Samitis and 
M/s Reliable Associates, photographs and certificates, which would have 
provided assurance that the programmes had indeed been held, were not 
traceable either at the State level or in the districts and there was no way to 
ascertain how the RCH society/ IEC Bureau had verified actual execution of 
the programmes before making the payments. 
During the exit conference, the Government stated (September 2009) that the 
work of the Kalajatha Samitis had now been handed over to EOW for 
investigation. 
1.1.10   Other disease control programmes 
Various existing disease control programmes were integrated under NRHM to 
eradicate and eliminate the prevalence of the diseases. Significant 
achievements and shortcomings were noticed in the following programmes as 
described below: 
1.1.10.1   National Vector Borne Disease Control programme 
The guidelines of the Malaria Action Plans, 1995 provided that the Annual 
Blood Examination Rate (ABER) 17 should be at least 10 per cent  and the 
Annual Parasitic Incidence (API 18) should be brought down to 0.5 per 
thousand. For areas where the API was more than two, indoor residual 
spraying of DDT and anti-larvae solution was to be carried out. While the 
programme achieved the targets for ABER of more than 10 per cent, API of 
less than 0.5 per thousand was not achieved although it showed a decreasing 
trend from 8.01 in 2005-06 to 4.99 in 2008-09. All the test-checked districts 
showed a decreasing trend in API but it  was very high in Bastar (20.72) and 
Kanker (16.28). One of the main contributing factors for the high API in these 
two districts was the high shortfall of upto 86 per cent  in the targets of 
spraying as detailed in Appendix-1.15. The DHS, Kanker and Bastar stated 
(July 2009) that the targets of spraying could not be achieved due to short 
supply of insecticides by GOI. During the exit conference, the Government 
stated (September 2009) that indoor residual spray was not the sole remedy 
for reducing API but agreed that the insecticides should have been purchased 
by the State despite short supply by the GOI.  
                                                
 
17  ABER-Total blood slides collected in a year/ total population * 100. 
18  API- Falciparum cases detected per thousand in a year. 
High API in 
Bastar and 
Kanker due to 
shortfall in 
insecticides 
Payment of  
Rs 4.83 crore 
for folk dance 
programmes 
was not 
authentic 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 16
While spraying was not the sole remedy, it was one of the prescribed methods 
of prevention and inadequate spraying was likely to have raised the API in 
these two districts. 
1.1.10.2   Revised National Tuberculosis Programme 
While achievement of the overall cure rate of tuberculosis under the Revised 
National Tuberculosis Programme was 83 to 84 per cent against the target of 
85 per cent,  the detection of new sputum positive cases was only 55 to  
62 per cent against the target of 70 per cent (Appendix-1.16). Deaths due to 
tuberculosis increased from 658 to 835 and defaulter cases increased from 
1,362 to 2,004 during the period of audit. It was observed that out of the 24 
test-checked PHCs, 13 PHCs did not have diagnostic facilities. This indicated 
that there was scope to improve the diagnostic facilities which could 
contribute to better detection rates. 
1.1.10.3   National Leprosy Eradication Programme 
Though the detection of new leprosy cases decreased from 9,040 to 7,984, the 
prevalence rate of leprosy increased from 1.99 to 2.34 per 10,000 population 
against the target of less than one by the year 2012. This was due to the 
reduction in the number of patients treated and cured from 12,519 in 2005-06 
to 5,000-8,000 during subsequent years (Appendix-1.17). In reply, the Deputy 
Director, Leprosy stated (July 2009) that the prevalence rate was higher due to 
the higher number of new cases detected and improved surveillance, including 
receipt of NGOs’ reports. This did not clarify the position as the detection of 
new cases had actually decreased. During the exit conference, the Government 
stated that the matter would be looked into and a detailed reply for increase in 
prevalence would be provided. The reply was awaited (September 2009). 
1.1.11 Role of ASHAs /Mitanins 
As explained earlier, an ASHA, called Mitanin in Chhattisgarh, is a trained 
community health worker to be provided in each village for assisting in 
neonatal care, prevention/cure of common childhood diseases, immunisation 
and family planning activities and other ac tivities for control of malaria, TB, 
leprosy etc. An ASHA is entitled for performance based incentives as per 
prescribed norms under programmes such as JSY, sterilisation and 
immunization.  
As per the framework of NRHM, one ASHA is to be provided in each village 
in the ratio of one per thousand popula tion. As per the information collected 
from SHS, 59,489 ASHAs were posted in the State against the norms of 
16,648 which was more than three times the prescribed number. Further, 
48,430 ASHAs had been imparted training. Therefore, the deployment of 
ASHAs in Chhattisgarh was much higher than the norms and strengthened the 
delivery of health services at the village level. 
Thirteen test-
checked PHCs 
did not have 
diagnostic 
facilities 
Prevalence of 
leprosy 
increased 
59,489 ASHAs 
were posted as 
against norms of 
16,648 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 17
1.1.12 Monitoring and Evaluation 
1.1.12.1   Community participation 
The NRHM framework states that community action is the only guarantee for 
exercising the right to health care and putting community pressure on the 
health care system. The framework provides for participation of NGOs in 
capacity building and monitoring; formation of village health and sanitation 
committees (VHSC) for village level monitoring and planning and monitoring 
committees at the State, district and block levels. 
• It was observed that during 2006-07, funds of Rs 2.32 crore were 
received in April 2006 for conducting base line survey and monitoring 
of RCH activities in unserved and under-served areas and  
Rs 2.25 crore was released to six Mother NGOs 19 at the end of March 
2008 but the entire amount remained unutilised (June 2009). During 
the exit conference, the Government stated that NGOs would not be 
engaged in future as their working was not satisfactory. 
• As per information provided by the SHS, out of 20,639 villages, 
VHSCs were formed in 18,452 villages. This was required to be 
extended to all the remaining villages. 
• As per the information collected from the SHS, community based 
monitoring committees had been started on a pilot basis at the district 
level in Bastar, Kawardha and Koriya districts in 2007-08 to monitor 
health services. Health planning and monitoring committees had not 
been formed at the State, district and block levels. 
Therefore, against the various kinds of community participation envisaged in 
the scheme for planning and monitoring, only village health and sanitation 
committees had been formed. 
1.1.12.2  Reporting under IDSP 
The Integrated Disease Surveillance Project (IDSP) is a weekly reporting 
system on symptoms of diseases such as high fever, vomiting, dysentery etc. 
The data is furnished by SHCs, PHCs and CHCs at the district level every 
Tuesday. The objective is to identify the outbreak of diseases and control 
them at early stages. Analysis of reporting under IDSP for 15 weeks in the 
year 2008 revealed that on an average, only 52 per cent  of the units were 
entering the required data ( Appendix-1.18). Consequently, the data was 
largely incomplete and the objective of surveillance of diseases was not being 
fulfilled as envisaged. 
                                                
 
19 Mother NGOs are appointed to undertake the activities of RCH at unserved and 
under-served areas. They are meant to get the activities executed through field 
NGOs. 
Active 
community 
participation 
was not 
ensured 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 18
1.1.13 Conclusion 
Implementation of the National Rural Health Mission in the State had various 
shortcomings. There were cases of under-u tilisation and diversion of funds as 
well as instances of irregular expendi ture. Stage-wise planning was not done. 
The health centres did not have adequate infrastructure, facilities, doctors and 
support staff. While there were significant achievements in some interventions 
and the health indicators accordingly showed improvements, there were 
shortfalls in administration of iron-folic acid tablets, gender imbalance in 
sterilisation, low institutional deliverie s, low detection of sputum positive 
cases and non-achievement of the norms of annual parasitic incidence. The 
indicators of maternal and infant mortality remained behind the interim 
targets. The level of community participation as envisaged in the scheme had 
not been achieved. 
1.1.14 Recommendations 
• The prescribed stage-wise planning process starting with block level 
health plans should be adopted. 
• Unspent amounts relating to various scheme initiatives may be utilised 
expeditiously. 
• Doctors, support staff, and facili ties should be ensured at health 
centres as per the Indian Public Health Standards norms. 
• Interventions under Reproductive and Child Health may be stepped up 
to achieve improvements in the maternal mortality rate, infant 
mortality rate and total fertility rate. Grant of cash incentives under the 
‘Janani Suraksha Yojna’ may be streamlined. 
• Interventions such as spraying may be stepped up to reduce the Annual 
Parasitic Incidence. 
• The monitoring system should be strengthened by implementing the 
Health Management Information System and ensuring timely reporting 
under the Integrated Disease Surveillance Project. 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 19
HOME DEPARTMENT 
 
1.2 Modernisation of Police Force 
Highlights 
The scheme of Modernisation of Po lice Force was launched to augment 
the efficiency of State police forces  to effectively face the emerging 
challenges to internal security. Perf ormance audit of implementation of 
the scheme showed that there were large savings; 41 per cent of the police 
stations were not provided light vehicl es; construction of non-residential 
and residential buildings were not completed; there were shortages in the 
number of modern weapons and sh ortcomings in the communication 
network; police stations were not fully computerised and buildings and 
equipment meant for forensic examination were lying idle. Some 
important audit findings are given below: 
 
The State Government could not utilise Rs 54.52 crore out of the total 
outlay of Rs 260.15 crore released during 2003-09 for the scheme. 
(Paragraph 1.2.7.1) 
Police stations continued to have lo w mobility because of shortage of 
vehicles. 
(Paragraph 1.2.8.1) 
Of the 849 housing units sanctioned during 2003-09, construction of 157 
units had not commenced and 332 units were incomplete. 
(Paragraph 1.2.9.1) 
Only 188 (52 per cent) out of 364 police stations and 27 (26 per cent) out of 
105 outposts had their own buildings. 
(Paragraph 1.2.9.2) 
There was a shortage of weapons as per the Bureau of Police Research 
and Development norms. 
(Paragraph 1.2.10) 
There was idling of expenditure of Rs 2.11 crore in forensic laboratories.  
(Paragraph 1.2.13.1) 
1.2.1 Introduction 
‘Police’ and ‘Law and Order’ are State subjects as per Schedule VII of the 
Constitution of India. It is the prime responsibility of the State Government to 
improve the functioning of their police force and equip them adequately with 
the latest technology. The ‘Modernisati on of Police Force’ (MOPF) scheme 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 20
was introduced by the Government of India (GOI) in 1969 to augment the 
operational efficiency of the State police forces so that they could effectively 
face the emerging challenges to internal security in the form of terrorism, 
Naxalism, insurgency, increase in crime etc. The scheme was revised during 
2000-01 and extended for a period of 10 years, to make good the deficiencies 
in basic police infrastructure as identified by the Bureau of Police Research 
and Development (BPR&D).  
1.2.2 Organisational Setup 
The Police force functions under the Home Department of the State 
Government headed by a Principal Secretary. The Director General of Police 
(DGP) is the Head of the Police Department. The scheme is implemented by 
the Police Headquarters (PHQ), Dist rict Police consisting of four Police 
Ranges divided into 21 Police districts (including one Government Rail Police 
unit), Chhattisgarh Armed Forces, the Telecom wing and the State Forensic 
Science Laboratory, which is under the direct control of the Home 
Department. The training facilities include the Police Academy at Chandkhuri 
and two Police Training Schools (PTS) at Rajnandgaon and Mana. A State 
Level Empowered Committee (SLEC) was formed (June 2001) under the 
chairmanship of the Chief Secretary to implement and monitor the scheme. 
1.2.3 Audit Objectives 
The audit objectives were to examine whether: 
• planning for implementation of the scheme was as per the 
methodology prescribed by the  Ministry of Home Affairs, 
• adequate funds were provided by the Central/State Governments and 
the same were utilized, 
• vehicles, buildings, modern weaponry, communication equipment and 
computers were provided as per BPR&D norms to augment 
operational efficiency at police stations,  
• Forensic science laboratories were modernized and 
• training facilities were adequate. 
1.2.4 Audit criteria 
Audit findings were benchmarked against criteria derived from the following: 
• Annual Action Plans of the department; 
• Norms prescribed by the BPR&D; 
• Guidelines issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
1.2.5 Audit coverage and methodology 
The records of PHQ, four Superintende nt of Police (SP) offices (Kanker, 
Raipur, Rajnandgaon and Sarguja) and eight police stations  (PS)   under    the 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 21
selected SP offices (five 1 Naxal-affected and three 2 others) were selected for 
audit by simple random sampling, for the period from 2003-09. The Assistant 
Inspector General (Telecommunicati ons) (AIG, Telecom), Bhilai; PTS, 
Rajnandgaon; and Director, State Forensic Science Laboratory (SFSL), Raipur 
were also audited. The audit was carried out from February to March 2009. An 
entry conference was conducted on 25 February 2009 with the DGP and the 
exit conference was held on 20 October 2009. 
Audit findings 
1.2.6 Planning 
As per instructions of GOI, the State Government was to submit to the 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), a five -year Perspective Plan (PP) starting 
from 2000-01, indicating the projects which were to be implemented each 
year. It was also supposed to submit Annual Action Plans (AAP) indicating 
the annual targets for implementation of sanctioned projects.  
It was observed that the department prepared a five year PP covering the 
period from 2000 to 2005. However, no PP was prepared thereafter. The 
AAPs were prepared but a separate s ub-Plan for Home Guards from 2003-04, 
as stipulated by MHA, was not included in the AAPs till 2005-06.  
1.2.7 Financial Management 
1.2.7.1  Funds not utilised 
During 2000-03, the scheme was financed by GOI and the State Government 
in the ratio of 50:50. The funding pattern was modified from 2003-04 and the 
ratio was changed to 75:25 between GOI and the State. The details of 
approved AAPs, funds made available vis-à-vis the expenditure incurred 
during the years 2003-04 to 2008-09 are given below: 
Table- 1.4 : Year-wise release of funds by GOI and State Government 
(Rupees in crore) 
Year Total 
Plan 
Outlay 
GOI 
share 
due 
Releases 
by GOI 
State’s 
share 
due 
Releases  
by State 
Total 
funds 
available 
(4+6) 
Total 
expendi-
ture 
Unspent 
amount 
Percent-
age of 
unspent 
amount 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) 
2003-04 22.22 16.66 16.66 5.56 5.56 22.22 22.07 0.15 1 
2004-05 43.63 32.72 32.72 10.90 10.90 43.62 43.60 0.02 0 
2005-06 52.11 39.08 39.08 13.03 13.03 52.11 51.20 0.91 2 
2006-07 75.98 56.99 56.99 19.00 19.00 75.99 39.97 36.02 47 
2007-08 53.76 40.33 40.33 13.43 13.43 53.76 43.05 10.71 20 
2008-09 12.45 9.91 9.91 2.54 2.54 12.45 5.74 6.71 54 
Total 260.15 195.69 195.69 64.46 64.46 260.15 205.63 54.52 21 
(Source: Expenditure statement provided by the department and compiled by Audit)  
                                                 
1  Ambagarh Chowki, Ambikapur, Charama, Kamleshwarpur and Kanker. 
2  Civil Lines-Raipur, Kotwali-Rajnandgaon and Simga. 
Separate 
sub-Plan for 
Home 
Guards was 
not prepared 
till 2005-06 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 22
It was observed that both GOI and the State Government met their respective 
commitments for funding the scheme. The expenditure incurred during the 
period 2003-09 was Rs 205.63 crore against the total outlay of  
Rs 260.15 crore, leaving an unspent amount of Rs 54.52 crore (21 per cent). 
The component-wise expenditure and savings were as follows: 
Table-1.5 : Component-wise funds received and expenditure incurred 
during 2003-09 
Component 
 
Funds received 
(Rs in crore) 
Expenditure 
(Rs in crore) 
 
Percentage of 
total expenditure 
(Column 3/Rs 
205.63 crore) 
on the 
component 
Savings 
(Rs in crore) 
Percentage 
of total 
savings 
(Column 
5/Rs 54.52 
crore) 
on the 
component 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) 
Building 51.46 51.44 25 0.02 0 
Weaponry 48.65 48.64 24 0.01 0 
Vehicles 42.8 35.82 17 6.98 13 
Communication 26.22 15.43 8 10.79 20 
Forensic Science 5.22 3.5 2 1.72 3 
Computerisation 5.99 5.57 3 0.42 1 
Security Equipment 69.9 36.79 18 33.11 61 
Training 5.64 4.67 2 0.97 2 
Traffic 1.43 0.98 0 0.45 1 
Anti-Corruption 
Bureau 
0.67 0.62 0 0.05 0 
Home Guard 2.17 2.17 1 0 0 
Total 260.15 205.63 100 54.52 100 
(Source: Expenditure statement and AAPs provided by the department and compiled by Audit) 
It was observed that there were significant savings under two components i.e. 
‘security equipment’ and ‘communication’. The bulk of the savings under 
‘security equipment’ i.e. Rs 27.75 crore pertained to 2006-07. It was intimated 
(October 2009) by the Government that items amounting to Rs 24.60 crore 
were already under different stages of procurement. This included 3065 bullet-
proof jackets for which work orders had been issued (August 2008) for  
Rs 17.21 crore but the jackets had not been supplied as clearance for Customs 
duty exemption for the same was pending with  MHA since September 2008. 
The department also stated during the entry conference that the procurement 
of security equipment was taking longer as it had introduced mandatory field 
testing for selection, to ensure qualit y. The bulk of savings of Rs 6.63 crore 
under ‘communication’ pertained to 2006-07, against which communication 
items costing Rs 6.36 crore were being procured. The department also 
attributed the savings to delayed re lease of funds in 2006-07 and 2007-08 and 
multiple calls for some tenders.  
1.2.7.2   Overstatement of expenditure  
The PHQ made advance payment of Rs 45.46 crore to the Chhattisgarh 
Housing Board for construction of police buildings. The actual expenditure on 
construction reported by the Board, as of March 2009 to PHQ was  
Rs 20.49 crore. GOI had issued instructions that the funds remaining unspent 
with the implementing agency should not be treated as expenditure. However, 
PHQ booked the entire advance of Rs 45.46 crore as expenditure and reported 
the same to the Home Department. This resulted in overstatement of 
Saving of  
61 per cent 
in security 
equipment 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 23
expenditure by Rs 24.97 crore and projection of an incorrect status of 
utilisation of funds. 
1.2.8 Mobility 
Mobility is vital to the efficient performance of the police force. Increased 
mobility reduces response time and enhances operational efficiency. BPR&D, 
in its study report, stated that in a well-equipped police force, the mobility 
deficiency should be ‘nil’, implying that the entire police force should have 
the ability to move at once. Based on this concept, BPR&D prescribed scales 
for various types of operational vehicles such as heavy/medium/light vehicles 
and motorcycles required for PS, Reserve Lines and Armed Battalions, which 
were to be the guiding factors in procurement of vehicles. 
1.2.8.1   Deficiency of Vehicles 
As per BPR&D norms, PHQ assessed (May 2009) a total requirement of  
6,011 vehicles, against which there were only 2,995 vehicles. Thus, there was 
a shortage of 3,016 vehicles as detailed below: 
Table- 1.6: Deficiency of vehicles 
 Light  Medium Heavy Motor cycle Total 
Requirement as per BPR&D 
norm 1,875 898 1,408 1,830 6,011 
Vehicles available 874 377 205 1,539 2,995 
Shortfall 1,001 521 1,203 291 3,016 
(Source: Information furnished by the department) 
Heavy vehicles, which can transport upto 35 persons, are required in reserve 
lines of district police headquarters and battalions of armed forces, for mass 
movement of police personnel. During test-check of four 3 districts, it was 
observed that as against the requirement of 224 heavy vehicles in the reserve 
lines, only 28 such vehicles were available as detailed below: 
Table- 1.7: Deficiency of heavy vehicles 
Name of Police 
District. 
Requirement of heavy vehicles as 
per BPR&D norms 
Availability of heavy vehicles 
Raipur 93 08 
Rajnandgaon 56 06 
Kanker 43 09 
Sarguja 32 05 
Total 224 28 
(Source: Information furnished by the department and compiled by Audit) 
Out of 28 heavy vehicles, six heavy vehicles (21 per cent ) were procured 
under the modernisation scheme (2003-09). Therefore, it was evident that 
there was a severe shortage of heavy vehicles in the district police 
headquarters/reserve lines. 
                                                 
3  Kanker, Raipur, Rajnandgaon and Sarguja. 
Shortage 
of heavy 
vehicles 
in district 
PHQs 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 24
Against the BPR&D norms of two light vehicles and three motorcycles for 
each PS, 149 PSs (41 per cent) out of the total of 365 PSs in the State were 
functioning without any light vehicles as of April 2009. In the four test-
checked districts, out of 94 PSs, 79 PSs had mobility deficiencies. The 
percentage of mobility deficiency with reference to the number of personnel in 
the 94 PSs was 51 (Appendix-1.19). This implied that on an average, only 49 
out of 100 policemen were mobile. In the test-checked PSs, it was observed 
that Kanker PS had more than the required number of vehicles, Rajnandgaon 
PS had one light and one medium vehicle and the other six PSs had 
deficiencies either in the number of light vehicles or motorcycles as detailed 
below: 
Table- 1.8: Status of light vehicles and motor cycles in test-checked PSs 
Naxal-affected PS Other PS 
Description Ambagarh 
Chowki 
Kanker Charama Ambikapur Kamlesh 
warpur 
Simga Civil lines, 
Raipur 
Kotwali, 
Rajnandgaon 
Light vehicle 
Requirement  2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 
Availability 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 1+1 (Medium) 
Shortage  1 - 1 1 1 1 1 - 
Motor cycle 
Requirement  3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 
Availability 5 5 2 3 4 0 0 0 
Shortage  - - 1 - - 3 3 3 
 (Source: Information furnished by PSs and compiled by Audit) 
It was observed that out of the 49 light  vehicles received by the test-checked 
districts under the scheme, only seven (14  per cent ) were issued to PSs while 
the remaining were issued to SPs, Additional SPs, reserve lines etc. for routine 
policing duty and operations in Naxal areas.  Therefore, very few of the light 
vehicles procured under the scheme, finally reached the PSs.  
The SPs of the test-checked districts st ated (March 2009) that deficiencies of 
vehicles were due to less availability of vehicles in the police district and 
because the vehicles received under the scheme had been distributed to 
various officers for polici ng and operational duties in Naxal-affected areas. 
The SPs of Rajnandgaon and Kanker further stated that Naxal-affected PSs 
were provided with motorcycles in place of light vehicles because during 
explosions by the Naxals, there was less damage to life and property.  
However, despite the issue of motor cy cles and procurement of vehicles under 
the scheme, the PSs continued to have low mobility. It was evident from the 
above facts that the light vehicles pr ocured under the scheme were being 
utilised at higher levels and additional vehicles were required to be procured to 
adequately address the cause of mobility deficiency of the PSs. 
1.2.8.2   Response time 
Increase in mobility for field policing sh ould result in reduction of response 
time
4. It was observed that the State Government had neither fixed any norms 
for response time nor given any instructions for recording the time of visits to 
crime sites in the crime diaries. Therefor e, this was not available in the daily 
                                                 
4  Total time taken from receiving a message/ First Information Report to the time when 
police personnel actually reach a crime scene. 
No norms 
were fixed 
for 
response 
time 
Shortage 
of light 
vehicles 
in PSs 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 25
diaries of the test-checked PSs. On this being pointed out, SPs 5 stated that 
there were no instructions to record this information. Thus there was no way to 
assess whether the response time had been reduced, consequent to the 
procurement of vehicles under the scheme. 
1.2.9 Buildings 
Construction of well-secured PS buildings and houses for police personnel 
closer to the PS was one of the thrust areas of the scheme. The personal 
security of off duty police personnel and their families would be enhanced if 
they were provided housing near the PS as the entire area covering the PS and 
contiguous houses could be kept secure . BPR&D had stated (March 2000) in 
its report, that the availability of family accommodation helped to humanize 
the police force and that States with higher levels of residential 
accommodation had higher efficiency levels. The largest share of the scheme 
funds was allotted for construction of residential accommodation for the police 
staff and non-reside ntial buildings including PS, outposts (OP), police lines, 
control rooms etc.  
Shortage of buildings and delays in construction 
1.2.9.1   Residential buildings 
The National Police Commission recommended 100 per cent  residential 
accommodation for police personnel. As per BPR&D norms, the minimum 
satisfactory levels for providing accom modation to upper subordinate level 
(USL)
6 and lower subordinate level (LSL) 7 police personnel were 80 and 70 
per cent respectively.  
Against the total requirement of 44,471 housing units (5,637 for USL and 
38,834 for LSL) for the entire police force, the availability of houses was only 
12,203 (1,223 for USL and 10,980 for LSL). The percentage availability of 
accommodation was only 22 and 28  respectively for upper and lower 
subordinate levels, which was far below the minimum satisfactory levels 
prescribed by BPR&D.  
During the period 2003-2009, the department allotted the construction of 
housing units to the Chhattisgarh Housing Board. Out of 849 units taken up 
under the scheme, 332 units were under progress while for 157 housing units, 
construction had not started as of March 2009, due to delays in tendering.  
Only 360 housing units (42 per cent) could be completed, out of which 163 
units were handed over to the Police Department and allotted to police 
personnel. The year-wise details are given in Appendix-1.20. 
The slow progress in construction of buildings indicated that despite the 
availability of funds, the shortage in police housing was not being adequately 
addressed. The Government stated (Oct ober 2009) that due to the provision of 
limited funds under the scheme, sufficient number of housing units could not 
be sanctioned. However, it was observed that even the sanctioned units were 
                                                
 
5  Kanker, Raipur, Rajnandgaon and Sarguja. 
6  Upper subordinate level – Assistant Sub-Inspectors, Sub-Inspectors and Inspectors. 
7  Lower subordinate level – Constables and Head Constables. 
Availability of 
accommo-
dation for 
upper and 
lower 
subordinate 
levels was 22 
per cent and 28 
per cent 
respectively 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 26
coming up very slowly, due to delays in execution, despite the availability of 
funds. 
1.2.9.2   Non-residential buildings 
BPR&D had stated that the PSs symbolised the presence of administration and 
buildings were the most important part of the infrastructure of the police. 
Therefore, every PS and OP was to have its own building for security of police 
personnel, records, equipment and arrested persons. It was found that against 
the total requirement of 364 PSs and 105 OP buildings, only 188 PSs  
(52 per cent) and 27 OPs (26 per cent) had their own buildings.  
Out of 115 non-residential buildings {23 PSs and 92 Other Administrative 
Buildings (OAB)} proposed to be constructed during 2003-09, only 26 
buildings (three PSs and 23 OAB) i.e. 23 per cent of the total target had been 
completed. Seventy three buildings were under progress and 16 had not been 
taken up due to delays in processing of tenders. During 2003-09, the 
construction of OPs was not sancti oned although the perspective plans 
provided for construction of 10 OPs each for 2003-04 and 2004-05. The year-
wise details of sanction are given in Appendix-1.21. It was also observed that 
the buildings were not completed on time even though the funds had been 
issued to CGHB and the department was regularly following up the issue. 
During test check of records of SP, Raipur, it was observed that no weapons 
could be issued to four
8 PSs operating from rented buildings in Raipur due to 
inadequate space to keep weapons. This clearly showed why it was important 
for PSs to have their own buildings.  
The Government replied (October 2009) that the progress of construction 
works entrusted to construction units was not satisfactory, especially in Naxal-
affected areas. Consequently, a police pioneer company had been created and 
one Public Works Division had been provided to PHQ for this purpose.  
It is evident that despite the availabili ty of funds, the progress of construction 
was slow and the objective of enhancin g security through better infrastructure 
was not being achieved. 
1.2.10 Weaponry 
To meet the challenges of Naxalites, terrorists and criminals, equipped with 
the latest weapons, upgradation of weaponry is of utmost importance for the 
police force. The MOPF scheme envisaged replacement of outdated weapons 
with sophisticated, modern weapons. 
Shortage of weapons 
BPR&D had prescribed separate norms for the requirement of weapons in PSs 
affected by Naxalism/terrori sm/dacoities and in PSs which were not affected 
by these problems. The Chhattisgarh Musketry Manual (CMM) also 
prescribed separate norms for police districts affected and not affected by 
Naxals/terrorism. The Police Department had a total of 49,143 units of 
weapons, of which 11,232 units (23 per cent ) were obsolete such as  
                                                
 
8  Deendayal Nagar, Devendra Nagar, Gol Bazaar and Rajendra Nagar. 
Only 188 out 
of  364 police 
stations and 
27 out of 105 
outposts had 
their own 
buildings 
Weapons 
were not 
issued in 
four PSs in 
Raipur due 
to lack of 
space in 
rented 
building. 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 27
.303 rifles, .410 muskets, .38 revolvers, .303 LMG and Grenade Fire (GF) 
rifles, which were still in use. The balance 37,911 units were modern weapons, 
of which 10,094 units (27 per cent ) were procured under the modernisation 
scheme during 2003-09. 
PHQ had assessed a total requirement of 47,265 units under various categories 
of modern weapons, against which, the availability was 37,911 units only. 
Therefore, there was an overall shortage of 9,354 units (20 per cent of the 
requirement) for the whole State. There were shortages in rifles, pistols/ 
revolvers, Light Machine Guns (LMG), AK 47 rifles, 51 mm mortars and GF 
rifles. It was further observed that during 2006-09, MHA had allotted 14,183 
units of modern weapons against the total demand of 19,334 units raised by 
the Chhattisgarh Police. 
Scrutiny of district-wise details furn ished by PHQ for deployment of the 
available arms showed that there were excesses and shortages in deployment 
of various arms and ammunitions as detailed below: 
Table-1.9: Deployment of arms 
 
(Source: Information furnished by PHQ and compiled by Audit) 
In the test-checked PSs, it was observed that five Naxal-affected PSs 9 were 
well-equipped with arms. In fact, the arms were in excess of the requirements. 
The three non-Naxal 10-affected PSs were equipped only with obsolete arms, 
which were grossly inadequate as per the norms fixed by BPR&D. 
It was clarified (October 2009) by the Government that the shortage of arms 
was being gradually reduced through purch ases and that due to less allocation 
of weapons from GOI, the total requirement could not be fulfilled. They stated 
that the obsolete arms would be replaced as and when modern arms were 
procured. They also stated that arms were provided in excess in some PSs/OPs 
in police districts which were partially Naxal-affected and also for security 
duties during VIP/VVIP visits.  
It was evident that more arms were required to be procured under the scheme 
to fully achieve the objective of equipping the police with modern weapons. 
PHQ could also review the deployment of arms to explore the possibility of 
shifting arms held in excess of requirement in non-Naxal-affected areas to the 
Naxal-affected areas.  
It was also observed that as per the Musk etry Manual, constables were eligible 
to fire with .303 rifles, .22 rifles and 7.62 SLRs.  During the period 2005-08, 
the constables were trained by PTS, Rajnandgaon to fire only these three 
                                                
 
9  Ambagarh  Chowki, Ambikapur, Charama, Kamleshwarpur andKanker. 
10 Civil Lines-Raipur, Kotwali-Rajnandgaon and Simga. 
 
Naxal-affected districts Non-Naxal-affected districts Battalions Police training institutions Description of 
arms Excess 
deployment 
Short  
deployment 
Excess 
deployment 
Short  
deployment 
Excess 
deployment 
Short 
deployment 
Excess 
deployment 
Short 
deployment 
Rifles 605 -- -- 515 -- 457 1130 -- 
LMGs 82 -- 12 -- -- 254 21 -- 
Carbines (9 mm) 134  -- 95  -- 191  -- 49  -- 
GF rifles 160 -- 03 -- -- 364 41 -- 
Pistols/ 
Revolvers 
-- 613 -- 109 -- 62 50 -- 
AK 47 rifles -- 1311 163 -- -- 2258 138 -- 
There was 
shortage of 
weapons as 
per 
BPR&D 
norms  

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 28
weapons. Of these weapons, .303 rifles  and .22 rifles had been declared 
obsolete by MHA. Therefore, the consta bles were not adequately trained in 
using modern weapons. SP, PTS, Rajnandgaon stated that the trainee 
constables were given instructions on the use of modern weapons and there 
was no provision in the Musketry Manual for practice of firing with AK 47s, 
Insas, LMGs, Carbines etc., for newly recruited police constables. 
It is recommended that the manual be revised suitably to enable the constables 
to be trained in appropriate modern weapons as per the operational 
requirements of the department. 
1.2.11 Communication 
The MOPF scheme envisaged the setting up of a cohesive police 
telecommunication network for the benefit of investigation of crime and 
transmission of related data. 
Functioning of POLNET 
POLNET is a satellite based National Police Communication network which 
uses Very Small Aperture Terminal (VSAT) at the State capital and district 
headquarters for communication with ot her States and New Delhi. The VSAT 
is operationalised at the district headquarters using a Base Subscriber Unit 
(BSU). The PSs are connected to the district headquarters through Multi-
Access Radio Telephony (MART) which is  also called Rural Subscriber Unit 
(RSU). The PSs located at distances in excess of 35 km from the district 
headquarters are connected using Single Channel VSAT (SC-VSAT) and a 
combination of repeater BSU and RSU.  
In the first phase 11 of POLNET, MHA provided equipment amounting to  
Rs 1.46 crore to 14 districts, including seven 12 Naxal-affected districts. The 
AIG (Telecom), Bhilai, had assessed (Ja nuary 2005) that in addition to the 14 
BSUs and 272 RSU/MART provided in first phase, another 31 BSUs,  
27 SC-VSATs and 270 MARTs were requi red to connect all PSs and other 
offices of the State. The requirement of additional BSUs and SC- VSATS 
worth Rs 55.10 lakh had been conveyed (October 2005) to the Director, Co-
ordination, Police Wireless, (DCPW) Ne w Delhi but had not been supplied as 
of July 2009 and the coverage under POLNET remained incomplete. 
There were instances of connectivity problems and non-utilisation of 
equipment as narrated below: 
• BSU- In Jashpur District, there was no connectivity as no BSU was 
provided at the district headquarters.  It was also observed during test-
check that in Rajnandgaon, the BSU was out of order from July 2008 
to March 2009 and in Kanker, it was malfunctioning from November 
2007 onwards. 
• RSU- At the time of test check (February 2009) by Audit, it was 
observed that out of 272 RSUs
13 provided for the first phase,  
                                                 
11  Implemented in undivided Madhya Pradesh State. 
12  Dantewada, Jagdalpur, Jashpur, Kanker, Koria, Rajnandgaon and Sarguja. 
13  RSUs supplied before formation of Chhattisgarh State (November 2000). 
Due to 
connectivity 
problems, 
POLNET 
was not 
utilized 
Constables 
did not 
practice 
firing with 
modern 
weapons 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 29
113 RSUs had been installed while the remaining 159 RSUs and 
accessories costing Rs 19.33 lakh were lying idle.  Not a single RSU 
had been installed in Sarguja and Jashpur Districts.  It was observed 
that only 67 PSs and 46 other offices such as SP Offices, control rooms 
etc. were connected to POLNET. After this issue was pointed out 
(February 2009) by Audit, the installation of RSUs increased to 166 
(155 PSs and 11 other offices such as SP Offices, control rooms etc.). 
Despite this, 106 RSUs of first phase were lying idle and as many PSs 
were still to be connected in 14 districts as of July 2009.  
The Government accepted the audit observations and stated (October 2009) 
that despite regular correspondence with DCPW, New Delhi and Bharat 
Electronic Limited, Ghaziabad, the BSU and RSU had not been provided in 
Jashpur and the BSUs at Rajnandgaon a nd Kanker had not been repaired till 
date (July 2009).   
It was evident that POLNET had achieved only partial connectivity due to 
non-procurement and non-installation of BSUs and RSUs. There were delays 
in repairs as they had to be carried out through DCPW, New  
Delhi. 
1.2.12 Computerisation 
Sharing and transmission of crime-related data amongst the police stations 
within the State and across the country is a core component of the MOPF 
scheme. This calls for creation of a robust IT infrastructure and supporting 
software for networking of computers.  
Computerisation of PSs 
One of the components of the scheme was the computeristion of the Police 
Department, which included PHQ, Battallions, PTSs, Police districts and PSs. 
In the four test-checked districts, it was observed (March 2009) that out of  
94 PSs, only 53 PSs had computers, while the remaining 41 PSs (44 per cent) 
did not have any computer. Out of the eight test-checked PSs, it was observed 
that three
14 had functional computers, one 15 had a computer that was non-
operational due to non-availability of trained staff, one 16 was non-operational 
due to technical fault while the remaining three 17 PSs did not have any 
computer. 
After the cases were pointed out (March 2009) by Audit, the computers of 
three more PSs were made functional by August 2009. However, one 18 PS still 
remained without a computer while another 19 continued to have a non-
functional computer.  
The Government stated (October 2009) that the procurement of computers 
sanctioned in the year 2007-08 was in process and in the year 2008-09, GOI 
                                                 
14  PS -Ambikapur, PS -Civil Lines Raipur and PS -Kanker. 
15  PS -Charama. 
16  PS - Simga. 
17  PS- Ambagarh Chowki, Kamleshwarpur and Kotwali, Rajnandgaon. 
18  PS-Kamleshwarpur. 
19  PS-Simga. 
Forty four per 
cent police 
stations in four 
test-checked 
districts  
were not  
computerised 
One hundred 
six rural 
subscriber 
units were 
lying idle 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 30
had not sanctioned any further purchase of computers. Thus, computers could 
not be provided to all PSs. It was further stated that the recruitment was going 
on in Police Districts and persons w ith knowledge of computers would be 
trained further to handle these computers. 
More computers were, therefore, required to be procured and installed for 
creating the robust IT infrastructure envisaged in the scheme guidelines. 
1.2.13 Forensic Science 
For improving the quality of crime investigation, development of 
infrastructure for forensic science was envisaged under the scheme. The State 
Forensic Science Laboratory (SFSL) provided assistance to the Police 
Department by analysing samples.  
1.2.13.1   Idling of equipment  and buildings-Rs 2.11 crore 
(i) Three items of equipment
20 costing Rs 95.20 lakh were purchased 
under the scheme and installed at SFSL during the period March to July 2007. 
They were not utilised for a year due to expiry of the batteries of their 
Uninterrupted Power Supply systems. The estimated cost of the batteries was 
Rs 1.10 lakh, for which proposals were sent to the PHQ in April, October and 
December 2008 but the sanction was still awaited (March 2009). Thus 
equipment costing Rs 95.20 lakh was idling for a year for want of batteries. 
On this being pointed out, the Government stated (October 2009) that the 
batteries had not been purchased beca use the PHQ had not provided requisite 
funds. The reply indicated that the equipment worth Rs 95.20 lakh remained 
idle for want of sanction for only Rs 1.10 lakh. 
(ii) SFSL procured three items of equipment
21 through MHA costing  
Rs 51.34 lakh for serological analysis in  August 2005, but they were not used 
till March 2009 as no scientific posts had been sanctioned for the Serology 
branch.  
On this being pointed out, the Government stated (October 2009) that 
serological equipment was purchased in anticipation of availability of required 
scientists for serology branch. The reply showed that the equipment was idling 
due to injudicious purchase without ensuring the requisite scientific posts. 
(iii) The construction of two Regional Forensic Science Laboratory (RFSL) 
buildings at Ambikapur and Jagdalpur were taken up under the scheme. These 
would cover the northern and southern regions of Chhattisgarh. The RFSL 
buildings at Ambikapur and Jagdalpu r were completed in March 2006 and 
June 2008 at costs of Rs 30.00 lakh and Rs 34.11 lakh respectively.  Both 
remained non-functional as staff was not  sanctioned by the State Government, 
leading to idle expenditure of Rs 64.11 lakh. Therefore, the objective of 
providing facilities for conducting forensic analysis in the northern and 
southern regions of the State could not be achieved. All samples from these 
regions continued to be brought to Raipur for examination which required 
                                                
 
20  Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrophotometer, Gas Chromatograph and Thermo 
Gravimetric-Differential Thermal analyzer. 
21  Vertical Gel Electrophoresis, Capillary Electrophoresis and Iso Electric Focusing. 
Equipment 
amounting 
to  
Rs 95.20 
lakh 
remained 
idle for want 
of batteries  
Non-
commencement  
of two Regional 
Forensic Science 
Laboratories 
resulted in idle 
expenditure of  
Rs 64.11 lakh 
Idle 
expenditure 
of Rs 51.34 
lakh on 
equipment 
procured 
without 
ascertaining 
availability 
of technical 
manpower 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 31
additional time and resulted in delays in obtaining results. On this being 
pointed out, the Government stated  (October 2009) that the laboratory 
buildings had been constructed and it had been planned to provide training to 
available scientific staff. This confirmed that the buildings had been 
constructed before making any plan for providing the requisite technical 
personnel. 
Thus there was idle expenditure of Rs  2.11 crore in the three cases cited 
above. 
1.2.13.2   Pendency of cases 
The State Government sanctioned (Mar ch 2004) 51 technical posts for SFSL, 
against which the actual working strength was 36. It was observed that 7,853 
cases received since 2003 for forensic analysis were pending under different 
divisions of SFSL at the end of year 2008.  On this being pointed out, the 
Government stated (October 2009) that as per BPR&D norms, the number of 
scientific officers was inadequate in proportion to the number of criminal 
cases referred for testing from all districts. The equipment was made available 
in anticipation of revision of staff setup. 
It was, therefore, evident that while additional infrastructure was created under 
the scheme, the requisite trained manpower was not provided to utilise the 
benefits of the equipment and facilities created. 
1.2.14 Training 
Training is an integral part of any police force and keeps the personnel fit and 
ready to meet the challenges posed by Naxalites, terrorists and criminals. 
BPR&D stated, in its report, that at the time the report was prepared i.e. 2000, 
it was possible to train personnel only once in 20 years. The report identified 
the shortage of infrastructure in the training institutions as the main problem. 
During test-check of records of PTS Rajnandgaon, it was observed that the 
construction of a police hospital, 12 housing units for ministerial staff and a 
motor transport garage were sanctioned in the PTS under the scheme during 
2004-06 with stipulated periods of construction of four months, nine months 
and two months respectively. The works we re completed after lapses of one to 
three years beyond the stipulated period of the contracts, during which the 
facilities remained unavailable. It was further observed that the vacancies were 
19 per cent  of the sanctioned strength of 185 posts. Thus, due to non-
completion of works and shortage of pe rsonnel, the facilities envisaged could 
not be made fully available at the PTS. 
On this being pointed out, SP, PTS stated (March 2009) that they were in 
regular correspondence with PHQ for filling up the vacancies. PHQ stated 
(July 2009) that attempts were made to fill up the vacancies in the PTS 
through deputations but officials from other departments had not volunteered 
to come on deputation. The process was on to fill the vacant posts through 
promotion and direct recruitment. 
The replies indicated that the filling up of vacant posts was required to be 
expedited to provide better quality of training. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 32
1.2.15   Monitoring and evaluation 
The State Level Empowered Committee (SLEC) was responsible for approval 
for the Annual Action Plans (AAPs) for onward submission to MHA. It was 
required to meet every month to monitor the preparation and implementation 
of the AAPs. However, it met only 10 times during the six-year period from 
2003-09. As per the guidelines of GOI issued during 2001, a mid-term review 
of the scheme was to be conducted after two years.  However, PHQ could not 
produce any records to show that any such formal review had been conducted.  
The Government replied (October 2009) that the scheme implementation was 
reviewed in PHQ every month and important issues were approved by the 
SLEC through circulation of files.  
1.2.16   Conclusion 
The performance audit of the implementation of the Modernisation of Police 
Forces scheme in the State showed that even after the construction of 
buildings and procurement of equipment under the scheme, there were 
significant gaps in respect of the levels envisaged under the Bureau of Police 
Research and Development norms. The Central and the State Government 
provided their share of funds which were not fully utilised, resulting in huge 
savings mainly under security and communication equipment heads. There 
was a significant shortage in the number of vehicles in police stations. Despite 
the availability of sufficient funds, a large number of residential and non-
residential buildings sanctioned under the scheme had not been completed.  
There were shortages in the number of modern weapons. The POLNET 
project was only partially operational with some equipment lying unused. The 
police stations were not fully comput erized. Equipment and buildings meant 
for forensic examination costing Rs 2.11 crore were idling. 
Recommendations 
• Five year Perspective Plans may be prepared from 2006 onwards. 
• The savings may be utilized in a time-bound manner to complete the 
activities included in the Annual Action Plans. 
• The mobility deficiency of the police stations should be addressed 
through procurement/ redeployment of vehicles. 
• The pace of construction should be accelerated to ensure completion of 
residential and non-residential buildings in a time-bound manner. 
• The shortages in weapons should be met and obsolete weapons should 
be replaced. The deployment of arms may also be reviewed. 
• The Musketry Manual may be suitably revised to enable firing practice 
with modern weapons. 
• Full connectivity may be ensured under the POLNET project. 
• More computers should be procured and installed to create a robust IT 
infrastructure. 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 33
• The State Government should set a definite time-frame for making the 
Regional Forensic Laboratories functional and the procured forensic 
equipment operational. 
• Vacancies of instructors in training schools should be minimized.  

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 
34
FOOD, CIVIL SUPPLIES AND CONSUMER PROTECTION 
DEPARTMENT 
 
1.3 Computerization of paddy procurement: ‘ Dhan Kharidi -
Online’ 
Highlights 
The State Government operationalised the computerisation project ‘Dhan 
Kharidi-Online’ within six months of it s inception. The system has been 
used successfully for two cycles of paddy procurement. A review of the 
various controls associated with the project revealed that some areas are 
required to be streamlined to furt her strengthen the system. Important 
audit findings are given below: 
There were deficiencies in registration of farmers.  
(Paragraphs 1.3.8.1, 1.3.8.2, 1.3.8.3) 
Controls were not properly exercised during the data entry of paddy 
received. 
(Paragraphs 1.3.8.4, 1.3.8.5) 
There was no provision in society software to check whether the receipt of 
procurement was in proportion to the landholdings. 
(Paragraph 1.3.8.6) 
There were shortcomings in the issue and reconciliation of cheques.  
(Paragraphs 1.3.8.7, 1.3.8.8, 1.3.8.9) 
Millers were registered in one dist rict without record of physical 
verification reports. 
(Paragraph 1.3.8.10) 
The validity of delivery orders was not adequately monitored by the 
system. 
(Paragraphs 1.3.8.11, 1.3.8.12) 
Documented security risk assessment and procedures were not available. 
(Paragraphs 1.3.10.1, 1.3.10.2) 
1.3.1 Introduction 
The Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection Department initiated the 
computerization project ‘ Dhan Kharidi -Online’ in June 2007. It became 
operational in November 2007. The objectives  of the project were to facilitate 
paddy procurement from farmers with instant cheque payment, checking 
leakage and diversion of paddy and rice, better inventory control and better 
management of milling and increase in transparency of operations. District-
wise details of paddy procurement givi ng details of the societies and farmers 
have been made online for viewing by the general public. 
After implementation, the project was used for two procurement cycles. 
During 2008-09, 37.59 lakh metric tonnes (MT) of paddy were purchased by 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 
 
35
1,333 societies through 1,577 procurement centres 1. The project received the 
National award for e-governance in 2008.  
1.3.2 Organizational Structure  
The Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Protection Department (Department) 
is headed by a Principal Secretary, assist ed by a Director at the State level, the 
District Collectors and Controller (Food)  /Food Officers (FO) at the district 
level and Sub Divisional Magistrates (SDM) and Assistant Food Officers 
(AFO) at the block level. Paddy procurement is managed by the Chhattisgarh 
State Marketing Federation (MARKFED) through District Marketing Officers 
(DMO) and through storage centres. MARKFED is assisted by the District 
Central Co-operative Bank (DCCB), Primary Agriculture Co-operative 
Societies (societies) and the procur ement centres. Rice procurement and 
distribution are managed by the Food and Civil Supplies Corporation, also 
known as the Nagrik Apurti Nigam (NAN). 
1.3.3 System design 
‘Dhan Kharidi -Online’ system has been designed and developed by the 
National Informatics Centre  (NIC). It has an online web-based application 
(online software) which is hosted on a central server available in the NIC 
office in the State Secretariat. This is connected through VSAT to MARKFED 
Headquarters, DMOs, Storage Centres,  NAN and block headquarters in the 
office of Janpad Panchayats for processing online. The online software has 
been developed using Microsoft SQ L Server and Microsoft Dot Net 
technology. The procurement centres have stand-alone computers with 
Windows operating system and software (society software) developed on MS 
Access. 
During the paddy procurement season, the incremental data from the society 
software is uploaded on the central serv er and data from the online software is 
downloaded to the society software daily by motorcycle riders (runners) at the 
nearest block headquarters and storage centres. The runners carry data on pen 
drives and act as a physical network ensuring data updation on the system on a 
daily basis. New versions of the society software are also downloaded from 
the server at the block level and carried to the procurement centres by runners. 
1.3.4 Flow of transactions 
The ‘ Dhan Kharidi -Online’ software has computerised various transactions 
which can be broadly classified into the stages of paddy procurement and 
milling. 
Paddy procurement 
Paddy procurement is done every year on Minimum Support Price (MSP) 
from farmers at procurement centres which are located at the village 
panchayat level. The farmers deposit pa ddy at procurement centres, which is 
weighed. The purchase details are entered in the society software and cheques 
are printed from the society software and disbursed to the farmers. The 
                                                 
1  Some societies purchase paddy through more than one procurement centre. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 
36
cheques issued to farmers are cleared by the DCCBs from the funds placed 
with it by MARKFED for paddy procurement. The paddy deposited at 
procurement centres is subsequently lifted by millers on the basis of delivery 
orders (DO) issued by DMO or sent to Food Corporation of India (FCI). The 
paddy left is transferred to MARKFED st orage centres as per the directions of 
DMO. The details of lifting/transfer of paddy are entered in the society 
software. 
Milling 
Rice millers get registered with the Collectors who give permission for custom 
milling. The DMOs conclude agreements with millers on the basis of the 
permissions and issues DOs for lifting of paddy against bank guarantees or 
against rice deposited in advance by the millers with the NAN.  
1.3.5 Audit Objective  
The audit was conducted with the primary objectives of evaluating whether 
• the necessary operational controls have been incorporated, 
• the business rules of the manual system have been incorporated, 
• IT security issues are being adequately addressed and followed and 
• adequate backup procedures are being followed. 
1.3.6 Audit Coverage, Sc ope and Methodology  
The flow of transactions for paddy purchase and milling was analysed to 
identify the key stages, risks and controls. After identifying the key controls 
and studying the organizational structure, the operation of the system was 
reviewed in the offices of the Managing Director (MD) MARKFED, NIC, and 
in three
2 selected districts covering three DMOs, three FOs, six 3 storage 
centres and 18 4 procurement centres. An entry conference was held with the 
Principal Secretary, Department of  Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer 
Protection on 23 March 2009. The exit conference was held with the Principal 
Secretary on 17 September 2009. 
The methodology of audit involved review of documents and computer 
operations in all the selected offices and procurement centres and included the 
analysis of the data dump of the system provided by NIC as on 19 March 2009 
as also the data dumps of 18 test-che cked procurement centres using IDEA 
and MS Access. The information generated from the data dumps, including 
exception reports prepared by Audit were compared with the manual records 
in various offices. Many transactions and processes were also carried out using 
dummy data to ascertain the results of processing. 
                                                
 
2  Dhamtari, Janjgir-Champa and Raipur. 
3  Akaltara, Bhatagaon, Chitod, Jonda, Manoharbhata and Tilda. 
4  Akaltara, Bathena, Bhatagaon, Billadi, Chatti, Chorbhatti, Demar, Gaud, Karmahu, 
Khokhara, Kurud, Kotmi, Loharsi, Manikchauri, Navapara, Posari, Rajim and 
Tarpongi. 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 
 
37
Audit Observations 
1.3.7 Inadequate docume ntation of the software 
The feasibility study of the project and the user requirements were not 
available on record and hence the extent to which the system met the user 
requirements could not be ascertained. The System Requirement Specification 
(SRS) was finalised in June 2008 although the system became operational in 
November 2007. Documentation relating to detailed testing was not on record. 
It was evident that the documentation for various stages of system design, 
application development and testing had either not been prepared or had been 
completed after implementing the system.  
It was also observed that none of the test-checked procurement centres had a 
user manual. The society software was being used on stand-alone computers 
located mainly in rural areas and were being run by data entry operators 
appointed temporarily. Therefore, a detailed user manual was absolutely 
necessary as it would enable the officials of the procurement centres to 
exercise the mandatory controls required in the post-computerization 
processing of transactions.  
The Government stated at the exit conference that a user manual in Hindi 
would be provided to the procurement centres before the commencement of 
paddy procurement season 2009-10. It also stated that some of the 
documentation was done after completion of the project as it was implemented 
in a very short time. 
1.3.8 Application Controls 
Application controls are applied on input, processes and outputs to ensure that 
only complete, accurate and valid data is entered and updated in a computer 
system. These controls also ensure that processing accomplishes the correct 
tasks, meet expectations, outputs are ge nerated and distributed with requisite 
controls. Application controls may consist of edit tests, totals, reconciliations 
and identification and reporting of incorrect, missing or exception data. 
Automated controls on the software should be coupled with manual 
procedures to ensure proper invest igation of exceptions. The control 
assessment at various important stages of the transaction flow are presented 
below:  
Registration of farmers  
Procedure and key controls: The agreement between the DMO and 
societies provides that the societies are responsible for ensuring that paddy is 
purchased at MSP only from genuine farmers. Therefore, the key control is 
that the procurement centres have to register all the farmers within its 
jurisdiction on the society software befo re starting of paddy procurement. The 
amount of paddy purchased should be commensurate with the landholding of 
farmers as recorded in the Credit Book (wrin pustika)
5.  
                                                 
5  Wrin Pustika : A record book available with farmers mentioning the details of his 
landholding, irrigated land, source of irrigation and loans obtained from different 
financial institutions. It is issued by the Tehsildar. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 
38
As per the directions (4 October 2007) of the Secretary, Food, Civil Supplies 
and Consumer Protection Department to District Collectors, the details of 
farmers were to be captured on the society software by 15 October 2007 by the 
procurement centres with the help of the Patwari6. During 2008-09 it was 
instructed that the information on farmers was to be compulsorily updated by 
10 October 2008. 
It was, however, observed that the farmers details had been entered from lists 
furnished by the Patwaris. The procurement centres also informed that details 
of the registration data of farmers were updated from their wrin pustikas as 
and when they came to sell paddy.  
1.3.8.1   Entry of landholding of farmers not mandatory on society software 
The provisions of the agreements and instructions of Government indicate that 
the sizes of landholdings must be mandatorily captured for registration of 
farmers on the system. However, in the data entry screen for farmer's 
registration, the entry of landholding was not mandatory. Therefore, it was 
possible to register a farmer without entering the landholding. There were 94, 
253 and 64 registered farmers from the procurement centres of Rajim 
(Raipur), Kotmi (Janjgir-Champa) a nd Loharsi (Dhamtari) showing ‘nil’ 
landholding on the system. Hence, the registrations by the department were 
not in consonance with the objective of purchasing paddy on the basis of 
landholdings. 
1.3.8.2   Single farmer registered more than once 
It was observed that a farmer who owned more than one piece of land was 
shown multiple times on the Patwari’s list and had also been entered more 
than once on the system and had multiple identities on the society software. 
Due to such duplication, the exact number  of registered farmers could not be 
ascertained. It was also observed that the farmer code generated by system 
was not being mentioned for cross reference either in the farmer’s wrin pustika 
or in the manual records of the procurem ent centres. In view of the multiple 
identities of a single farmer, the system was not equipped to identify the 
genuineness of all farmers.  
It is recommended that the entry of landholdings should be made mandatory in 
the society software while registering farmers. It should also have the 
provision to enter multiple landholdings of farmer under single name. The 
farmer code should be pasted in the wrin pustikas for cross-referencing. 
Printouts of farmer registration data should be taken in non-procurement 
season and circulated to Patwaris for verification of details/updating.  
The Government agreed with the recommendations and stated in the exit 
conference that the software had been modified and during the paddy 
procurement season 2009-2010, paddy receipts would not be generated if the 
mandatory fields of landholding and wrin pustika number were not available 
in the society software. Provision for feeding multiple landholdings for a 
single farmer already existed in the so ciety software, which would be strictly 
                                                
 
6  Official who maintains land records in a village. 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 
 
39
implemented. It was also stated that the farmer code would be printed on the 
paddy receipts for the purpose of cross -reference and the list of registered 
farmers and details would be verified by the Patwaris. 
Receipt of paddy from farmers  
Procedure and key controls: The farmers bring paddy to the procurement 
centres and transfer it into gunny bags of 40 kilograms capacity provided by 
the procurement centres. The bags are we ighed in the presence of the farmers 
and officials of the procurement centres. 
Details such as the variety and weight of paddy, number of bags, name of 
farmer, loan amount etc are noted in a proforma called the taulpatrak. It is 
verified and signed by the person responsible for weighing (Taul-Kanta 
Prabhari), the farmer and the procurement centre in-charge.  
As per the agreement between MARKFED and the societies and the orders 
issued by the Government from time to time, the key controls to be exercised 
by procurement centres at the time of receiving paddy from farmers are to 
verify the genuineness of the farmer and that the quantity of paddy received is 
commensurate with the landholding of the farmer.  
Scrutiny of manual records and data revealed the following control 
weaknesses. 
1.3.8.3   Verification of farmers 
It was ascertained that the verificati on of genuineness of farmers was done 
manually from the w rin pustika. After the manual verification, the w rin 
pustika numbers were entered in the so ciety software. The amounts of 
landholdings entered earlier from the Patwari's lists were to be 
verified/updated. This would effectivel y verify and comple te the registration 
of the farmers and make it possible to verify their identity from the software in 
future. Scrutiny of procurement centre databases showed some cases 7 where 
paddy had been received and purchased but w rin pustika  numbers had not 
been captured. There were also 130 cases where paddy was purchased from 
farmers whose landholdings were shown as ‘nil’ in the system. This indicated 
that in respect of these exceptions, th e registration data was not updated and 
verified from the wrin pustikas at the time of receipt of paddy.  
It is recommended that the society soft ware should have a provision to verify 
that the wrin pustika number and the landholding of the farmer concerned are 
available in the database before accepting paddy receipt data from the 
taulpatrak. 
The Government accepted the recommendations and stated in the exit 
conference that the software had been modified and during the paddy 
procurement season 2009-2010, paddy receipts would not be generated if the 
mandatory fields of landholding and wrin pustika number were not available 
in the society software. 
                                                
 
7  677 cases in Manikchauri (Raipur), 142 cases in Kurud (Dhamtari) and 16 cases in 
Chorbhati (Janjgir-Champa). 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 
40
Data entry of paddy received 
Procedure and key controls: The taulpatrak is the source document from 
which details of receipt of paddy are entered into the system which forms the 
basis for payment. The associated control is the authorisation inform of 
signatures of three persons including signature of data entry operator (DEO) to 
verify completion of data entry. Controls are necessary to ensure accuracy of 
entries from the taulpatrak, and to guard against the risk of fictitious entries. 
1.3.8.4   Taulpatraks not signed 
During random scrutiny, Audit found that in seven cases, taulpatraks were not 
signed by the Taul Kanta Prabhari, in five cases, they were not signed by the 
farmer, in 10 cases they were not signed by the procurement centre in-charges 
and in 49 cases, they were not signed by  the DEO. This indicates that further 
controls were required to ensure that taulpatraks which did not carry all three 
prescribed signatures were not entered into the society software and the DEOs 
invariably signed the taulpatrak after doing data entry.  
The Government agreed in the exit conference that taulpatrak entries and 
signatures were necessary and would be implemented strictly and instructions 
were being issued in this regard. 
1.3.8.5   Control against fictitious/double entries  
Once the data from the taulpatrak is entered and saved on the society 
software, a paddy receipt ID is genera ted which uniquely identifies that 
particular receipt of paddy. A paddy rece ipt is printed, given to the farmer and 
the copy is retained by the procurement centres. Subsequently, a cheque is 
printed through the society software against the paddy receipt ID and 
disbursed to the farmer. 
It was observed that in two
8 test-checked procurement centres, the taulpatraks 
and the paddy receipts were stapled and kept together which served as an 
automatic control against fictitious/double entries. This practice was required 
to be replicated in all procurement centres. The items on the paddy receipt 
should be verified with the data on the taulpatrak and a verification certificate 
recorded on the paddy receipt to ensure accuracy of data.  
It is recommended that a uniform format of the taulpatrak with space for three 
signatures for verification and signature of DEO should be circulated and 
used in all procurement centres. A provis ion may also be made in the society 
software to capture the serial number of the taulpatrak. 
The Government agreed with the recommendations and stated in the exit 
conference that the procedure of keeping the taulpatrak and paddy receipt 
stapled together as followed in Chorbhatti (Janjgir-Champa) and Tarpongi 
(Raipur) paddy procurement centres,  was a good practice and would be 
introduced throughout the State. It was also agreed that taulpatrak number 
would be captured in the society software along with duplication checks and a 
uniform format of taulpatrak would be introduced in all procurement centres. 
                                                 
8  Chorbhatti (Janjgir-Champa) and Tarpongi (Raipur). 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 
 
41
1.3.8.6 No provision in society software to ensure that receipt and 
procurement of paddy was in proportion to the landholding  
The department had directed the formation of a committee in every society 
consisting of a President, the Sarpanch of the area concerned, one member 
nominated by the Collector and two persons nominated by the Minister in-
charge of the area concerned, to estim ate the per hectare production of paddy 
in the area adjoining the society and recommended per hectare yield for the 
purpose of paddy procurement. This check was relevant in the year 2008-09 
procurement due to the payment of bonus in Chhattisgarh over and above the 
MSP. 
It was observed that there was no facility in the society software to capture the 
acceptable yield per hectare and check whether the paddy purchased was 
commensurate with the landholdings. Twelve procurement centres had the 
figure of the recommended production as decided by the committee. The 
remaining six were unable to provide information on the recommended 
production to Audit. Audit analysed the databases of these 18 procurement 
centres to identify the purchases where the paddy production was higher than 
the norms. In cases where the recommended production was not provided, a 
norm of maximum yield of 50 quintals per hectare declared by DCCB Raipur 
was used. It was ascertained that there were 2,783 cases where the purchases 
were above the recommended upper limit of yield and according to the data 
captured on the society software 7,287 MT of paddy was purchased in excess 
of norms (as detailed in Appendix-1.22).  
However, Audit was unable to ascertain the actual number of cases wherein 
paddy was purchased in excess over the norms of recommended yield. This 
was required to be investigated as th e shortcomings in registration data 
pointed out earlier would also generate such cases. This underlines the need 
for updating the farmer registration data pointed out earlier, in the absence of 
which it is difficult to use such exception reports as a monitoring tool. 
It is recommended that a provision should be made in the society software to 
capture the recommended yield. Further,  at the taulpatrak data entry stage, 
the society software should check the yield per hectare for every entry and 
highlight the cases where it exceeds the recommended yield. The department 
should also prescribe the action to be taken by the procurement centres when 
cases of excess yield are highlighted. Exception reports should be generated to 
identify/ investigate cases of abnormal yield. 
The Government accepted the recommendations and stated in the exit 
conference that provision as recommended would be incorporated in the 
current paddy procurement season (2009-2010) to check paddy receipts 
against a prescribed maximum production limit. 
Issue of cheques 
Procedure and key controls: One of the main objectives of introducing the 
computerised system was to expedite the payment of cheques. Since a very 
large number of cheques are disbursed within a short time during the 
procurement season, the printing and disb ursement of cheques is categorized 
as a very high risk item. Accordingly, c ontrols are required to ensure that (i) 
only one cheque is issued against one purchase entered in the society software 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 
42
(ii) cheques are printed and issued immediately after generating the paddy 
receipts (iii) cheques are issued to the registered farmers from whom paddy is 
purchased (iv) proper inventory of th e cheque forms is kept and cheques 
issued are reconciled with the bank. The following weaknesses were observed 
in these controls. 
1.3.8.7   Printing of cheques in the name of different persons  
Analysis of the purchase data showed that in 193 transactions in 11 
procurement centres, the cheques for purchase of paddy and the bonus payable 
were issued to different persons. It was observed that in some cases, this 
became necessary due to unavoidable circumstances like death of the farmer, 
unavailability of the registered farmers’, illness etc.  However, the system did 
not provide for printing of a cheque in another names. For the cases cited, this 
was done by temporarily changing the farmers’ names in the farmer 
registration table.  This is a risk area as unauthorized changes can be made in 
this manner and therefore there is no assurance on the integrity of the master 
data captured in the farmer registration table.  
It is recommended that this may be reviewed and a suitable module developed 
to enter such transactions on the society software with appropriate controls 
and authorisation. 
The Government accepted the recommendation and stated in the exit 
conference that additional checks, which were under testing, were being 
provided which would ensure that on ce paddy was received, the farmers’ 
names and their fathers’ names could not be changed in the society software. 
1.3.8.8   Printing of cheque is not flagged on the software 
It was observed that for printing a cheque, the DEO entered the date of 
purchase, selected the paddy receipt ID for which payment had to be made, 
gave a print command and a cheque was printed. The date of purchase was 
printed on the cheque regardless of the da te of printing. The cheque number of 
the printed cheque was not captured on the software, the date of printing/issue 
of cheque was not captured and there was no other provision such as flagging 
the paddy receipt ID in the system to indicate that a cheque had been printed 
for a particular transaction. Therefore, it was not possible to ascertain from the 
society software either the pending payments or the purchases for which 
payment had been made. It was also possible to print more than one cheque 
against a single paddy receipt.   
Moreover, the objective of expeditious payment could be monitored only if the 
society software captured the date of purchase and date of issue of cheque. In 
the absence of a provision to capture the da te of issue of cheque in the society 
software, the objective of ensuring instant cheque payment could not be 
monitored. 
1.3.8.9   Inventory of cheques 
In the computerised system, the traditional cheque book had been replaced by 
cheque forms on continuous stationery. However, all the provisions relating to 
the inventory and custody of cheques such as list of cancelled cheques, 
procedures for cancellation, reconcilia tion with bank etc. continued to be 
applicable. In view of the large number of transactions, there were bound to be 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 
 
43
some cancellations and some cheque forms would be damaged during 
printing.  
It was observed that the list of cheques cancelled/cheques forms damaged 
were neither captured on the society software nor were available in any 
manual register. Moreover, the society software did not have a provision for 
reconciliation of cheques with bank-scro lls since it did not capture the list of 
cheques printed/issued. While the test-checked procurement centres stated that 
the reconciliation was being done manually, the evidence in the form of bank 
reconciliation statements was not on record.  
The procurement centres monitored the issue of cheques using the manually 
kept Dhan-Kharidi register. However, in the absence of inventory of cheques 
and bank reconciliation and the possibility of printing any number of cheques 
using the software, there was a risk of misuse of cheques. 
It is recommended that the entire system may be reviewed considering the 
above observations and suitable access controls may be built by way of 
additional checks and provisions in the society software, supplemented by 
manual procedures, so that all the control requirements for custody, printing 
and inventory of cheques are fulfilled. 
The Government agreed with the recommendations and stated in the exit 
conference that the cheque numbers would be captured on the society software 
and a check would be provided to ensure that a second cheque could not be 
printed against a paddy receipt without cancelling first cheque. It was also 
stated that inventory of cheques would be maintained as the cheque numbers 
would be entered in the society software and numbers of cancelled/destroyed 
cheques would also be captured. The reconciliation of cheques would be 
ensured by the DCCBs and societies. 
Registration of millers and issue of permission for custom milling  
Procedure and key controls: A miller gets registered in the Collector’s 
office to lift paddy for custom milling. The information given in the 
applications for registration are physical ly verified and captured on the online 
software. Thereafter, a ve rification certificate is printed from the online 
software and issued to the miller. Registered millers apply for custom milling 
and permission is given by the Collector  indicating type of rice, quantity and 
period of milling and after data entry, the system prints an anumati 
(permission) for the miller which is issu ed by the Food Officer.  Thereafter, 
the DMO concludes an agreement with the miller. For a second anumati, a 
miller has to submit an application along with the latest electricity bill which 
is used to ascertain whether the miller has consumed appropriate amount of 
electricity for milling the paddy lifted against the first anumati. 
Therefore, the key control requirements are that only verified data from the 
applications of miller are entered correctly in the online software and the 
quality, quantity and time period approved by the Collector are entered 
correctly for generating anumati. Moreover, the electricity bills must be 
available in all cases of second anumati.  

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 
44
1.3.8.10   Physical verification of millers not carried out 
During the scrutiny of records of Food O ffices in test-checked districts, it was 
observed that in Raipur and Janjgir-Champ a, the verification reports of millers 
and electricity bills were on record but in Dhamtari district, it was observed 
that out of a total of 150 millers registered for the year 2008-09, verification 
reports were not on record in 130 cases. For the millers who were granted 
second anumati, the electricity bills were not on record. The online software 
did not have any provision for regist ering receipt of bills for second anumati. 
In the absence of verification, unauthorized data could be entered for miller's 
registration and second anumati. 
On this being pointed out by Audit, the Food Officer, Dhamtari replied that 
the procedure was not followed due to the workload and it would be followed 
in the next procurement season. 
The Government stated in the exit conference that the verification process of 
millers would be strictly implemented. 
Issue of delivery orders 
Procedure and key controls: On the basis of anumati and agreements the 
DMO issues DOs to procurement centres and storage centres, mentioning the 
quantity of paddy to be lifted by millers. As per the agreements with the 
millers, the DOs are valid for seven days from the date of issue. These DOs 
are entered on the online system and get updated in society software through 
the runners.  The society software contai ns a key control that paddy delivery 
memos for issue of paddy to millers are generated only after linking to a valid 
DO. 
1.3.8.11   Expiry of validity of DO not monitored by the system  
It was observed that the online software did not have a provision for capturing 
the extension of the validity periods of DOs. Although the DMOs extend the 
validity period in some cases, neither the online nor the society software has 
any provision of checking the validity period of the DO at the time of issue of 
paddy from the procurement and storage centres.  
Scrutiny of procurement centre data downloaded on the central server revealed 
that in 312 cases in Raipur and Dhamtari districts, paddy had been issued to 
millers after delays of up to 102 days from the DO expiry dates. All these 
cases had to be examined manually to ascertain whether lifting actually took 
place after expiry of validity period because in the absence of the 
aforementioned provisions in the software, this kind of exception data would 
also get generated in cases where the validity of DOs had been extended but 
not captured on the software. 
It is recommended that the system should have a provision for capturing 
extension of DO validity period and a check may be built in the system so that 
the paddy delivery memos are not generated in cases where validity of DO has 
expired. 
The Government agreed with the recommendation and stated in the exit 
conference that the DO validity check would be incorporated in the storage 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 
 
45
centres as they were web-based. It also explained that the same would not be 
possible in the society softwares as they were/are on stand-alone computers 
and therefore, extension of DOs was not immediately available on the society 
software. This constraint was accepted by Audit. 
1.3.8.12   Date of issue to miller not linked with date of DO 
It was observed that the society software did not run any check on the date of 
the DO and the date of issue of paddy to miller. During analysis of society 
software data uploaded on the central se rver, it was observed that in 397 cases 
(all districts of Chhattisgarh), dates of  issue of paddy were earlier than the 
dates of issue of DO, which implied that paddy was issued to millers before 
issue of the DOs. In another 18 DOs which were cancelled by DMOs, the 
paddy issue dates were after the cance llation dates of DOs which implied that 
paddy was lifted from procurement centres after the cancellation of DOs. This 
exception data was required to be scrutinized to ascertain the reasons for the 
ambiguity in data and how they occurred. 
It is recommended that the generation of paddy delivery memos should be 
permitted by the system in procurement centres after checking that the issue 
dates are later than the DO dates. 
The computerization of the milling pro cess has enabled better monitoring of 
conversion of paddy to rice as the procurement centres and storage centres can 
verify the DOs issued by the DMO. Therefore, if the deficiencies as pointed 
out above are also addressed, the management of milling will further improve. 
The Government accepted the recommendations and stated in the exit 
conference that the check had been incorporated in the society software to link 
the date of issue to miller with the date of the delivery order. 
1.3.9   Exception analysis 
Exception analysis is done to identify peculiar/unexpected data which has to 
be examined to identify possible processing errors or the presence of 
unauthorized or manipulated transactions. Audit carried out some exception 
analysis on the data in the central server and found the following discrepancies 
in the data uploaded on the server from the society software being used at the 
procurement centres. 
• The society software generated a unique paddy receipt number but in 
the procurement centre data on the server, there were 123 instances of 
duplicate paddy receipt numbers in Dhamtari and Janjgir-Champa 
districts. In 18 of these cases, the farmer code and farmer name against 
the duplicate receipt numbers were also different.  
• In respect of 516 (Dhamtari and Janjgir-Champa districts) cases of 
paddy purchase, the names and other details of farmers from whom 
paddy was purchased were not available as these details were missing 
from the farmer registration tables. 
• The total paddy lifted against 20 DOs was more than the quantity 
mentioned in the DOs. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 
46
It was observed that all these inconsistenc ies/exceptions had arisen in the data 
even though the society software had in-built controls to prevent such 
occurrences. It was required  to be ascertained whether the discrepancies were 
due to processing or updating errors or due to unauthorized/manipulated 
transactions. 
It is recommended that the above exception reports may be incorporated in the 
software and a mechanism established to generate periodic reports which are 
taken on record, examined and corrective measures taken. 
The Government accepted the recommendation and stated in the exit 
conference that exception analysis would be carried out. 
1.3.10   Security Management 
Security management of the system is designed primarily to minimise the risk 
of manipulation of the information stored on the system while in transit and to 
ensure continued availability of the system and data. The first step in an 
effective security management is to have a documented security policy or set 
of security practices/instructions which identify the risks to the system and 
prescribe the requisite procedures to mitigate the risk. It was observed that a 
documented security risk assessment and security procedures were not 
available.  On scrutiny of the procedures and practices, the following security 
concerns were identified. 
1.3.10.1   Disabled screens can be enabled by changing the system date 
The paddy procurement period for kharif year 2008-09 was 20 October to 31 
January.  Thereafter, paddy could be purchased upto 15 February only from 
those farmers whose loan amounts were outstanding in the procurement 
centres and such procurement was termed as ‘ Linking Dhan-Kharidi ’. The 
transactions of normal paddy purchase and Linking Dhan-Kharidi  were 
entered from the taulpatrak using two different screens in the society software. 
After the abovementioned cut-off dates, the software disabled both the screens 
so that no purchases could be entered thereafter.  
On scrutiny of society software, it was observed that it was possible to bypass 
the lock on these two screens by changing the system date of the computer to a 
date during the paddy procurement period.  This could be done easily while 
switching on the computer. Therefore, this system of disabling the purchase 
screens was required to be strengthened. 
The Government stated in the exit conference that checks had been built in to 
ensure that the system date could not be changed. 
1.3.10.2   Logical access control 
Logical access controls protect an IT system from unauthorized access and 
malicious codes such as viruses and worms. It was observed that : 
• The department did not have a documented password policy and no 
written instructions were issued regarding regular change of 
passwords.  Password control procedures like assigning alpha-numeric 
passwords, minimum number of characters for password, restriction on 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 
 
47
number of unsuccessful login attempts and forced periodic password 
changes were not incorporated. 
• There was no documented approval of access profiles from the 
department, authorising various levels of employees to access different 
modules and screens. At the six storage centres and three DMO offices 
test-checked, it was observed that more than one person were using the 
same user-ID and password for acces sing the application. Thus, the 
responsibility and accountability of all the operators was diluted and 
was required to be corrected throug h separate user-ID, access profiles 
and passwords. 
• It was observed that in three procurement centres, there was no anti-
virus and the remaining had anti-virus softwares of different 
companies which were not being updated in the absence of internet 
access. Therefore, in effect, none of the test-checked procurement 
centres were protected against virus or worm attacks and were prone to 
risk of intrusion and data corruption. 
It is recommended that the department should define and approve access 
profiles, strengthen password management and load a standard anti-virus 
software in all the computers in the procurement centres which should be 
updated through software patches downloaded from the net as per prescribed 
periodicity. The patches can be sent  to the procurement centres through 
runners. 
The Government stated in the exit conference that recommendations on 
passwords and anti-virus were being implem ented. It was also agreed that the 
task of regular updation of anti-virus software may be managed through the 
vendors providing the anti-virus software. 
1.3.10.3   Edit/delete screen not prov ided in society software and online 
      software 
The society software and the online applications did not have any screens for 
editing or deleting data except for changes in farmer registration data. If any 
wrong entries were made during data entry, the Central Processing Unit (CPU) 
of the procurement centre was taken to the concerned DMO or district NIC 
office with a written application for making corrections. The DMO office sent 
a complaint and the database of the proc urement centre electronically to NIC, 
Raipur. NIC made corrections in the data base and sent it back electronically. 
The corrected database was electronically downloaded to the procurement 
centres’ CPU at DMO or district NIC office which was then carried back 
physically to the concerned procurement centres. 
• In this procedure, the CPUs were exposed to the risk of physical 
damage and manipulation of data while in transit.   
• It was observed that all corrections of data for procurement centres and 
server data were made centrally by Assistant Programmers at NIC, 
Raipur centre using the backend facility of the database. This was a 
risk because backend corrections were devoid of any controls and all 
editing and deleting was being done without any data validation and 
without any log of the editing activity. There was a risk of bonafide 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 
48
mistakes as well as data manipulations which could remain undetected 
until appropriate exception analysis was done.  In the absence of 
activity log, it was impossible to fix responsibility for any 
errors/manipulation detected subsequently.  Some of the exceptions 
pointed out in this report could also be due to data editing from the 
backend without validation checks.  
• It was also observed that the procurement main data was in an MS 
Access database in a Windows based stand-alone computer and it was 
very easy to make copies of it. Th erefore, it was possible to make a 
copy of the database, insert some fictitious transactions, print cheques 
and then overwrite the database with the previously saved copy.  
Consequently, there would be no trace of the fictitious transactions 
anywhere on the society software.  This kind of risk was especially 
significant in view of the weak controls in keeping inventory of 
cheques as already pointed out in paragraph 1.3.8.9 of this report. 
It is recommended that the editing and deleting of data may be streamlined on 
the society software and online software so that it is done with requisite 
controls to mitigate the attendant risks. The processes 
copy/backup/restoration at procurement centres may be reviewed to make 
these operations procedure based i.e. menu driven from the application with 
appropriate controls. 
The Government agreed with the recommendations and stated in the exit 
conference that an administrative module was being prepared for carrying out 
the editing. However, it was stated that some backend corrections were 
necessary, which would be listed and the correction procedure would be 
documented. 
1.3.10.4   Back-up and continuity 
The data from procurement centres is backed up regularly on the central server 
through runners. The NIC maintains a primary central server and a secondary 
server which is a mirror image. This ensures continuity in case the primary 
server fails. Logical backups are taken daily on CDs and physical backups are 
taken on an external hard disk. 
It was observed that the secondary serv er and all backups were kept in the 
same room along with the primary server. In case of an unforeseen event like 
fire, the risk of total data loss was very high.  
It is recommended that the backup pro cedure be reviewed considering storage 
of backup media in a separate location as per prescribed periodicity. At the 
end of a procurement season, the data may be separately backed up and 
archived. The back up of system and application softwares may also be kept at 
a separate location. 
The Government agreed with the recommendations and stated in the exit 
conference that different locations such  as Jashpur and Hyderabad were being 
considered for the mirror server and backups would be kept at separate 
locations as suggested. 

Chapter-I Performance Audit 
 
 
49
1.3.11 Conclusion 
The State Government had implemented the computerization of the paddy 
procurement project in just four to five months. The project had significant 
achievements. It had integrated the farm ers and large number of functionaries 
from different departments who switched over from manual processing to the 
computerized environment and successfully used it for two procurement 
cycles. The procurement data was also available on the internet for public 
scrutiny. 
The IT review revealed that the achievements of the project could be further 
strengthened by reducing the risk in diffe rent areas of operation. This could be 
done by improving the controls relating to  registration of fa rmers, receipt of 
paddy from farmers and related data entry, issue of cheques, registration of 
millers and issue of permission for custom milling and monitoring of delivery 
orders. The documentation of the project needed to be streamlined and the 
security issues were also required to be addressed. 
1.3.12 Summary of recommendations 
Detailed recommendations have been made in the report. Some of the key 
items are summarized below: 
• Provision should be made to capture information such as multiple 
landholdings against single farmer code, wrin pustika numbers, serial 
number of taulpatraks etc.  
• Controls may be incorporated for mandatory entry of landholding of 
farmers, to prevent acceptance of paddy receipt data from taulpatrak, if  
wrin pustika number or landholding is not available, to check yield per 
hectare of paddy and to prevent generation of paddy delivery memo 
where DO date has expired. 
• The paddy receipt and the taulpatrak should be stapled together for 
cross-verification. 
• User manuals should be prepared and provided to the procurement 
centres. 
The Government accepted the recommendations and stated in the exit 
conference that it had already initiated action on many issues including 
modification of software. It also stated that a committee had been formed to 
examine various issues raised and its recommendations would be documented 
and implemented. 

 
 
CHAPTER-II  
AUDIT OF TRANSACTIONS 
 
 
2.1 Excess payment/ Wasteful expenditure 
 
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT 
2.1.1 Excess payment to contractor on earthwork 
Due to errors in calculation of quantity of earthwork, there was excess 
payment of Rs 28.08 lakh. 
The Executive Engineer (EE), Public Works Division, Ambikapur Division 
No. II, issued (August 2005) a work order for the construction of 19.40 km of 
the Fulidumar-Chera-Salvahi road including crossings at 22.80 per cent above 
the Schedule of Rates. The work was completed and final payment of Rs 2.92 
crore was made (December 2006). 
Scrutiny (September 2007) of the reco rds of the EE revealed that total 
earthwork of 63,817.29 cum was included in the final payment. It was 
observed from the measurement books (MBs) that the crust
1 and hard 
shoulder2 had not been deducted while working out the total volume of 
earthwork. In addition, there were other ca lculation errors as a result of which, 
the volume of earthwork was overstated. The actual volume of earthwork 
payable was recalculated by Audit as 44,134.72 cum, using the figures 
recorded in the MBs. 
Thus, the EE paid for 19,682.57 cum of excess earthwork without working out 
the actual quantity of earthwork to be paid, which resulted in excess payment 
of Rs 14.26 lakh to the contractor. 
In a similar case, the EE, Public Works Division, Koria awarded (February 
2003) the construction of road and culverts of the Manendragarh-Kelhari-
Janakpur road (59 km) at 3.10 per cent above the Schedule of Rates. The work 
was completed and final payment of Rs 6.41 crore was made (December 
2006). Scrutiny (January 2008) of the records of the EE revealed that while 
calculating the total volume of earthwork, the volume of hard shoulder of 
9,305.89 cum had not been deducted. This resulted in overstating of the 
earthwork and excess payment of Rs 13.82 lakh to the contractor. 
The Chief Engineer, Public Works Department, Zone-Bilaspur
3, agreed with 
the audit observations and ordered (August 2009) recovery of Rs 28.08 lakh 
from the contractors and initiation of departmental action for negligence and 
                                                 
1  Consists of Granular Sub Base (GSB), Water Bound Macadam (WBM) grade I and 
WBM grade II. 
2 It is constructed with moorum (hard soil) on either side of the crust. 
3  The Chief Engineer is the controlling officer for both the divisions. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 52 
 
overpayment. Further action on recovery and results of departmental action 
were awaited (September 2009). 
The matter was referred to the Government (May 2009). Reply had not been 
received (September 2009). 
 
PUBLIC HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
2.1.2 Excess payment on medical supplies 
Penalty of Rs 26.52 lakh was not impo sed on suppliers for delayed supply 
of material which resulted in excess payment. 
Rule 4.13 of the Chhattisgarh Stores Purchase Rules, 2002 stipulates that if a 
firm is unable to supply material within the agreed time period, the competent 
authority can grant an extension of the time period only once, with a penalty 
of two per cent per month. 
The Dean, Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru Memorial Medical College, Raipur 
issued 33 purchase orders between 15 March 2005 and 25 March 2006 
wherein the condition of imposing penalty of two  per cent  per month for 
delayed supply was included. In the tenders issued for these purchases, it had 
been reiterated that the maximum deduction of penalty would be 10 per cent. 
The supplies were made between 4 July 2005 and 21 April 2007, with delays 
ranging from 10 days to 11 months. It was observed that penalty totalling  
Rs 26.52 lakh as shown in Appendix-2.1 was not deducted for the delays in 
supply. This resulted in excess payment of Rs 26.52 lakh to the suppliers. 
In reply, the Dean, Medical College stated (August 2009) that penalty would 
be recovered as per the rules in these cases. He also stated that in the current 
financial year, they were enforcing the terms of the agreement by recovering 
penalty from those suppliers who delayed the supplies. Details of recoveries 
made at the instance of Audit were, however, not provided. 
The matter was referred to the Governme nt in April 2009. Reply had not been 
received (September 2009). 
AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT 
 
2.1.3 Wasteful expenditure on plantations 
Horticulture department  provided assistance for plantations in areas 
where irrigation facilities were gros sly inadequate, resulting in high 
mortality of plants and wasteful expenditure of Rs 46.64 lakh. 
The Agriculture Department adopted the cluster system of farming for 
horticulture crops. In order to ensure equitable development of horticulture, 
farmers were provided assistance under various Central and State sponsored 
schemes in the form of plants, fertilisers, pesticides etc. It was to be ensured 
that adequate provision for irrigati on was available in every cluster and 
sufficient water was available before providing such assistance. 

Chapter-II Audit of Transactions 
 53
Scrutiny of records of the Deputy Director (DD) Horticulture, Ambikapur 4 
revealed (May 2008), that the Department had provided assistance of  
Rs 54.55 lakh to farmers in four 5 clusters during the period from February 
2006 to April 2008. However, it was found that in these clusters, as against the 
total requirement of 92 borewells, only 28 had been drilled upto April 2008. 
Pumps had been installed on 26 of these borewells and only one of these 
pumps had been given an electrical conn ection for distribution of water. It 
was, therefore, clear that assistance had been provided in these clusters 
without ensuring adequate availability of water for irrigation. Consequently, 
there was high mortality of plants ranging from 70 to 90 per cent and the 
expenditure of Rs 46.64 lakh incurred on maintenance of the clusters became 
wasteful as detailed in Appendix-2.2. 
On this being pointed out (April 2009) by  Audit, the Director, Horticulture 
stated (June and August 2009) that the farmers were responsible for 
inadequate irrigation as they were supposed to ensure irrigation facilities and 
obtain electrical connections for pumps. He  also stated that there were other 
factors for the high mortality in the four clusters such as Naxal activities and 
damages to plants by grazing animals and wild elephants. Due to these 
constraints, no departmental activiti es were being conducted nor was any 
expenditure being incurred in these clusters at present. 
The reply indicates that although ther e were several serious constraints, 
including lack of irrigation facilities, th ese were not taken into consideration 
while providing assistance to these four clusters. 
The matter was brought to the notice of Government (April 2009), reply had 
not been received (September 2009). 
 
2.2 Undue favour to contractors 
 
PUBLIC HEALTH AND ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT 
2.2.1 Undue financial benefit to contractor on secured advance 
Due to incorrect valuation of material brought to site, there was excess 
disbursement of secured advance, resulting in undue financial benefit of 
Rs 95 lakh to a contractor. 
The Secretary, Urban Administration and Development Department accorded 
(March 2007) administrative approval of  Rs 15.24 crore for the Raigarh 
Augmentation Water Supply Scheme (RAWSS). Under this scheme, the 
Executive Engineer (EE), Public Health  Engineering Division, Raigarh issued 
a Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) for providing laying, jointing, testing and 
commissioning of raw material and clea r water pumping main of Ductile Iron 
(DI) pipes. The total amount of the contract was Rs 4.44 crore and the work 
order was issued (March 2008) at 58.95 per cent above the Schedule of Rates. 
                                                
 
4  Ambikapur is a tribal district. 
5  Ghatbarra, Kataroli, Salhi and Sanibarra. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 54 
 
Payment of Rs 4.95 crore was made (June 2009) to the contractor for work 
executed up to the seventh running bill. 
Clause 11(B) of the contract agreement provided that the Divisional Officer 
could sanction advances on the security of materials brought to the site upto an 
amount not exceeding 75 per cent of the value. However, based on assessment 
of the Divisional Officer, advance of 90 per cent could be sanctioned in case 
of steel items at site provided that the rate allowed in no case was more than 
the rate payable for the finished items as stipulated in the contract of such 
materials.  
Scrutiny (January 2009) of the records of the EE revealed that he paid (July 
2008 to December 2008) secured advance of Rs 3.90 crore to the contractor in 
four instalments, against pipes valuing Rs 3.93 crore brought to the site. The 
measurement books (MBs) showed that the EE calculated the price for each 
category of DI pipe based on the rates for finished items of work including 
tender percentage and not on the cost of the material brought to site as 
stipulated in Clause 11(B). The admissible secured advance should have been 
only Rs 2.95 crore as shown in Appendix-2.3, as per the proforma invoices 
produced by the contractor. The excess payment of secured advance of  
Rs 95 lakh resulted in undue financial benefi t to the contractor as he retained 
the additional interest-free
6 advance, upto the time of final recovery i.e. June 
2009.  
The Engineer-in-Chief replied (September 2009) that he had directed the EE 
to recover interest at bank loan rates on the excess payment of secured 
advance. He had also issued a circular to all divisions stating that the 
assessment of value of material brought to site should be based on 
CSIDC/DGS&D7 rate contracts if such rates were available. Otherwise, the 
assessments should be based on the invoices of the materials. The fact, 
however, remains that undue benefit of Rs 95 lakh was given to the contractor 
for almost a year. Recovery of interest as per orders of Engineer-in-Chief was 
awaited (September 2009). 
 
 
 
 
                                                
 
6  The contract terms did not provide for charging any interest on the secured 
advances. 
7  Director General Supplies and Disposal (DGS&D) prepares annual rate contracts 
for purchases by departments of Government of India which are also followed by 
State Government Departments. Chhattisgarh State Industrial Development 
Corporation (CSIDC) prepares similar annual rate contracts for purchases by 
departments of the Chhattisgarh State Government. 

Chapter-II Audit of Transactions 
 55
SPORTS AND YOUTH WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
2.2.2 Undue financial benefit to contractor on mobilisation advance 
An interest-free mobilisation advance of Rs 72.37 lakh was recovered 
from a contractor with a delay of 27 months, resulting in undue financial 
benefit. 
The Stadium Nirman Samiti (Samiti 8), Raipur concluded (25 February 2005) 
an agreement with a contractor for th e work, ‘Construction of State Sports 
Complex in Raipur’, at an estimated cost of Rs 14.48 crore. The work was to 
be completed within 12 months from the da te of the agreement. As per Clause 
30 of the agreement, the Samiti gave an interest-free mobilisation advance of 
Rs 72.37 lakh to the contractor on 25 February 2005. The agreement provided 
that the advance should be recovered by the time 75 per cent of the work was 
completed or 75 per cent  of the contract period was over, whichever was 
earlier. 
It was observed (January 2009) that the mobilisation advance was given from 
funds available with the Samiti for other projects, in anticipation of the budget 
allotment for the sports complex. However, the budget allotment was not 
received and the work could not be started. The entire mobilisation advance 
was recovered by the Samiti on 26 February 2008 after a period of 36 months. 
As per the terms of the agreement, the mobilisation advance should have been 
recovered from the contractor after nine months, by 25 November 2005 i.e. 
after expiry of 75 per cent of the stipulated period of 12 months. However, the 
recovery was delayed and the amount remained with the contractor for 27 
months after the due date of recovery. 
The matter was referred to the Governme nt, which stated (July 2009) that 
despite correspondence (August 2004, January 2006 and June 2006) by the 
Sports Department, no budget allocation had been received for the 
construction. The Government also stated that it was trying to recover interest 
on the advance. 
It is evident from the reply that the agreement was concluded in anticipation of 
budget allotment for the work. Thereafter, even though the allotment was not 
received during 2004-05 and 2005-06, the Samiti and the department failed to 
recover the advance in time, resulting in undue financial benefit to the 
contractor. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
8 A registered society which carries out the construction and maintenance of sports 
stadia in Chhattisgarh. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 56 
 
2.3 Idle expenditure/ blockage of funds 
 
MANPOWER PLANNING DEPARTMENT 
 
2.3.1 Idle expenditure on purchase of equipment 
Due to lack of coordination betwee n the Directorate and two Government 
Engineering Colleges on purchase and utilization of laboratory 
equipment, there was idle expenditure of Rs 10.39 crore. 
The Director, Technical Education (DTE) had issued (December 2004 to 
August 2008) 15 purchase orders for proc urement of laboratory equipment for 
the Government Engineering Colleges (GEC) at Bilaspur and Jagdalpur. After 
receipt of the equipment by the colleges, payment of Rs 10.39 crore was made 
by the DTE between February 2005 and September 2008 as detailed in 
Appendix-2.4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scrutiny (January 2009) of the records of GECs revealed that the laboratory 
equipment provided to them were not being used and were lying idle for one 
to four years, resulting in idle expenditure of Rs 10.39 crore on purchase of the 
same. 
On this being pointed out, the Principals of the GECs stated (January 2009) 
that they had not sent any requisitions for the equipment, which were not 
being used due to reasons such as non-availability of faculty, non-installation 
and lack of space as detailed in the Appendix-2.4. The DTE stated (September 
2009) that they had assessed that the laboratory equipment was required as per 
the syllabus and had received a requisition from the Raipur Engineering 
College for the equipment. They had procured the laboratory equipment for 
Raipur, Bilaspur and Jagdalpur to ensure similar facilities in all three 
VLSI design laboratory equipment supplied by DTE 
kept in sealed cartons at GEC, Bilaspur
DSP laboratory equipment   kept 
idle an almirah at GEC
, Jagdalpur

Chapter-II Audit of Transactions 
 57
institutions and instructors of all three colleges had been provided training in 
August/September 2006 and September/October 2008. It was also stated that 
the DTE had directed the Principals in May 2009 and the suppliers in 
August/September 2009 to get the equipment installed.  
The replies indicate that the DTE supplied the equipment without ensuring 
that the colleges had the necessary infrastructure and requisite faculty to 
utilize the equipment. Thus, the lack  of proper planning and coordination 
between the DTE and the colleges led to an idle expenditure of Rs 10.39 crore. 
The matter was referred to the Governme nt (May 2009). Reply had not been 
received (September 2009). 
SPORTS AND YOUTH WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
2.3.2 Idle expenditure on construction of sports stadium 
Despite incurring an expenditure of  Rs 71.28 lakh on construction, a 
sports stadium remained incomplete for want of additional funds of  
Rs 26.47 lakh resulting in idle expenditure. 
The Secretary, Sports and Youth Welfare Department (Secretary) accorded 
(October 2002) administrative approval (AA) of Rs 43.66 lakh for 
construction of a mini-stadium, including a boundary wall, at Dhamtari.  
Scrutiny (February 2006 and January 2009) of the records of the office of the 
Engineer-in-Chief (E-in-C), Public Works Department and the Executive 
Engineer (EE), Public Works Division, Dhamtari, revealed that the EE had 
issued the work order for construction of the stadium in March 2003. 
Subsequently, he submitted (September 2004) a revised estimate of  
Rs 90.13 lakh to the Government. Thereafter, the Secretary accorded AA for 
an additional amount of Rs 20 lakh in February 2005. The EE reminded 
(September 2005) the Government for a revised AA for the balance of 
Rs 26.47 lakh and thereafter, closed  (December 2005) the agreement through 
the sixth and incomplete final bill for Rs 66.93 lakh as the revised AA had not 
been issued by Government. 
The EE was in regular correspondence with the Government from September 
2006 to February 2009, intimating that a total expenditure of Rs 71.28 lakh 
had been incurred on the work and the remaining items of work could be 
completed only with an additional amount of Rs 26.47 lakh. However, the 
revised AA had not been accorded by the Government as of May 2009. 
During a site visit in May 2009 by Audit, it was observed that a major portion 
of the boundary wall and the spectators gallery had been constructed. 
However, due to neglect and non-maintenance, the sports ground was 
overgrown with weeds and shrubs ( Picture-1) and there were electric poles 
(Picture-2), within the ground, that had to be relocated. Work relating to 
flooring, main gate, distemper, painting etc. had not been done.
 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 58 
 
                    [Picture-1]     [Picture-2]  
Thus, the infrastructure created at a cost of Rs 71.28 lakh remained idle for a 
period of 45 months for want of additional funds of Rs 26.47 lakh as the 
revised AA had not been received from the Government. The matter was 
referred (May 2009) to the Government  which replied (July 2009) that a 
revised AA had been accorded (June 2009) for Rs 90.13 lakh. However, it did 
not intimate the reasons for delaying the approval for over four years, which 
resulted in sportsmen and the public being deprived of the benefits of utilizing 
the sports stadium at Dhamtari. 
AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT 
2.3.3 Idle expenditure on purchase of grading plants 
Fruit and vegetable grading plants remained non-operational as they 
were procured without ensuring availa bility of infrastructure and trained 
manpower, resulting in idle expenditure of Rs 43.52 lakh. 
Director, Horticulture purchased (September 2005 and January 2006) three 
fruit and vegetable grading plants9 for a total amount of Rs 43.52 lakh in order 
to facilitate marketing of horti culture products as detailed in Appendix-2.5. It 
was found that two of these plants located in Raipur and Jashpur had not been 
installed due to non-availability of land and civil works being in progress 
respectively. The third plant located in Durg had been installed (April 2007) 
but was not in operation as there was no operator for the same. It is, therefore, 
evident that the grading plants were purchased without adequate planning and 
ensuring the availability of infrastructure along with trained staff to 
operationalise the same. This resulted in idle expenditure of  
Rs 43.52 lakh10 for more than three years and non-achievement of the intended 
purpose of facilitating the marketing of horticulture products. 
The matter was brought to the notice of the Director, Horticulture and the 
Government in September 2008 and May 2009 respectively. The reply (June 
                                                 
9  Equipment used for sorting, grading, sizing and packing of fruit and vegetable 
products. Three such plants were purchased for Durg, Jashpur and Raipur districts. 
10  Details are given in the Appendix- 2.5. 

Chapter-II Audit of Transactions 
 59
2009) of the Director, Horticulture c onfirmed that two plants had not been 
installed and the third one had not  started operations. Reply of the 
Government had not been received (September 2009). 
PUBLIC HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE DEPARTMET 
2.3.4 Blockage of funds on establishment of cardiology unit 
Due to lack of planning and coordination, a cardiology unit could not be 
set up and there was a blockage of funds of Rs 4.08 crore. 
In order to provide better health services, the State Government decided to 
establish a cardiology unit in the Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Memorial Hospital 
(hospital), Raipur and provided for funds for the same in its budget for  
2006-07. Additional posts were also provided in the budget to set up the unit. 
After tendering and selection of the vendor, the Dean, Medical College issued 
(March 2007) a purchase order for a Cardiac Catheterization Laboratory 
(Cathlab) equipment for the cardiology unit and opened (April 2007) a Letter 
of Credit (LC)
11 for Rs 4.08 crore based on the approvals received from the 
Government and the Finance Department. The equipment was to be delivered 
by September 2007. It was observed that only after opening the LC, the 
hospital initiated (April 2007) a proposal for construction of a building for the 
cardiology unit which would house the Cathlab. The space requirements for 
the building were not assessed prope rly and were changed frequently. 
Although additional posts had been sanc tioned, the process of recruitment/ 
deployment had not been initiated to coincide with the completion of the 
building. While the construction of the building, purchase of equipment and 
arrangement of manpower were all necessary to start the cardiology unit, these 
were not planned, coordinated and executed in the proper sequence. 
Consequently, the Cathlab had not become operational as of September 2009 
and the amount of Rs 4.08 crore remained blocked in an LC outside the 
Government account for over two years. 
The matter was brought to the notice (May 2009) of the Government which 
stated (September 2009) that the completion certificate of the proposed 
building had been issued (June 2009) by PWD and the supplying firm had 
been directed (June 2009) to install the machine, the work for which was in 
progress. The Government accepted that initially there had been some delay in 
finalising the plan of the Cathlab building. 
The reply confirmed the delay in constr uction but did not clarify the reasons 
for the lack of coordination and planning which resulted in the blockage of 
funds and the Government’s objective of establishing a cardiology unit in the 
                                                
 
11  Letter of Credit: After deciding on a supplier and obtaining sanction for purchase, 
the amount payable is drawn from the Government account with the approval of the 
Finance Department and placed in a nationalized bank as a Letter of Credit in 
favour of the approved supplier. On confirmation of different stages of supply i.e. 
despatch, receipt and installation, the bank releases payments to the supplier as per 
the terms of the supply order. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 60 
 
hospital remaining unfulfilled, thus depriving the patients of improved cardiac 
care. 
PANCHAYAT AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
2.3.5 Blockage of funds on construction of rest house 
There was irregular expenditure and blockage of Rs 46.04 lakh on 
construction of a rest house on forest land. 
Paragraph 2.111 of the Works Department Manual provides that under the 
Forest Conservation Act 1980, diversion of forest land for any non-forest 
purpose requires prior approval of the Government of India (GOI).  
The Tribal Development Department allotted Rs 54.83 lakh to the Executive 
Engineer (EE), Rural Engineering Servic es Division, Raipur for construction 
of a rest house at Girodhpuri, in Raipur district. The EE issued (June 2006) the 
work order for Rs 38 lakh, with a stipulated completion period of eight 
months. A total amount of Rs 46.04 lakh was paid to the contractor upto the 
fourth running bill (February 2008). 
Scrutiny (June 2008) of records of the EE revealed that the Divisional Forest 
Office, Raipur (DFO) had raised (Septe mber 2006) an objection that the rest 
house was being constructed on forest  land and prior approval of GOI was 
essential. In spite of this, the work was not stopped. The Government of 
Chhattisgarh subsequently requested (March 2007) GOI for approval of 
diversion of forest land but GOI refused (August 2007) permission. 
Thereafter, the EE ordered (August 2007) the work to be stopped. 
The EE, RES division executed the work on forest land, in contravention of 
the Works Department Manual, disregarding the objection of the DFO. 
Consequently, there was an irregular expenditure of Rs 46.04 lakh as GOI 
refused permission for diversion of the forest land. The entire expenditure 
became blocked as the building was lying incomplete and unused from August 
2007 onwards. 
The matter was pointed out (December 2008) to the Government which 
intimated (June 2009) that a show cause notice had been issued to the EE 
concerned. Final action on the case was awaited (September 2009). 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter-II Audit of Transactions 
 61
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT  
2.3.6 Blockage of funds on construction of bridge 
Execution of work on forest land without GOI approval resulted in 
blockage of Rs 21.99 lakh on an incomplete bridge and non-achievement 
of the objective of upliftment of the tribal population. 
Paragraph 2.111 of the Works Department Manual provides that according to 
the Forest Conservation Act 1980, all proposals for diversion of forest land for 
any non-forest purpose require the prior approval of the Government of India. 
Government of Chhattisgarh approved  (March 2005) the construction of a 
high level bridge and an approach road across Ubhay river on Phulzar-
Kunwarpur road for Rs 61.75 lakh, on the Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh 
(MP) border, for the upliftment of the tribal population and to provide an all-
weather road to the inhabitants of the area. The construction of the high level 
bridge required water harvesting and approach road work on a small portion of 
forest land situated in MP. The Executive Engineer (EE), Public Works 
Department (PWD), Bridge Construction Division, Ambikapur issued 
(October 2005) the work order with a stipulated completion period of 10 
months, excluding the rainy season. 
Scrutiny (November-December 2007) of records of the EE revealed that a 
proposal for construction on the forest land was submitted to the Divisional 
Forest Officer, South-Shahdol, MP (DFO) in January 2006 i.e. after placing 
the work order. The DFO pointed out (June 2007) some defects in the proposal 
and stated that until they were corrected and a detailed report submitted, final 
sanction would not be given. The construction was stopped (June 2007) after 
executing work amounting to Rs 21.99 lakh. The forest clearance had not been 
obtained upto September 2009. 
As the EE had commenced the work without obtaining forest clearance, it had 
to be stopped mid-way, resulting in Rs 21.99 lakh remaining blocked for 
almost two years. The objective of upliftment of the tribal population and 
providing an all-weather road also remained unachieved. 
On this being pointed out, the Engineer-in-Chief stated (March and September 
2009) that the proposal for forest clearance had not been submitted before 
commencing the work because it had been anticipated that there would not be 
any damage to forest land or trees. The EE had submitted the corrected 
proposal to the Conservator of Forest s, Shahdol in January 2009 and approval 
was awaited (September 2009). 
The replies confirm that the department had not properly assessed the 
involvement of forest land at the initial stage, which resulted in the stoppage 
of work mid-way. Thereafter, the EE took one and a half years i.e. from June 
2007 to January 2009 to submit the revised proposal, which further delayed 
the completion of the bridge.  

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 62 
 
The matter was brought to the notice of the Government (May 2009). Reply 
had not been received (September 2009). 
2.4 Regularity issues and other points 
 
PANCHAYAT AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT  
 
 
2.4.1 Irregularities in tendering and execution of works 
Works valuing Rs 2.37 crore were executed in contravention of 
prescribed rules and procedures for tendering and tender acceptance. 
The Madhya Pradesh Works Manual (as adopted in Chhattisgarh) provides 
that the Executive Engineer (EE) is authorized to accept tenders upto  
Rs 20 lakh and the Chief Engineer (CE) upto Rupees one crore, while 
approval of the State Government is re quired for works exceeding Rupees one 
crore. 
Test check (May 2008) of records of the EE, Rural Engineering Services 
Division, Raipur revealed that th e Commissioner, Schedule Caste and 
Scheduled Tribes Development accorded (October and November 2004) 
Administrative Approvals (AAs) and Technical Sanctions (TS) for  
Rs 1.42 crore for four different cement concreting works at Girodpuri, costing 
from Rs 24.74 lakh to Rs 48.61 lakh as detailed in Appendix-2.6. A second set 
of AA and TS of Rs 1.02 crore were accorded in February and March 2005 for 
12 additional works which were to be carried out in the same area. It was 
observed that the EE issued notices inviting tenders (NIT) for the first set of 
four works by reducing their NIT values to below Rs 20 lakh in each case, so 
as to keep the tenders within his fina ncial powers and finalise them at his 
level. The EE awarded (November 2004) these four works to three contractors 
vide four different agreements, at a total cost of Rs 77.48 lakh as detailed in 
Appendix-2.6. It was found that in addition to these contracted works, the 
three contractors also executed the remaining portions of the first set of four 
works at a total cost of Rs 64.86 lakh as  well as the second set of 12 works, at 
a total cost of Rs 1.02 crore. Thereafter, a total payment of Rs 2.37 crore was 
made to them against the total contracted amount of Rs 77.48 lakh. The 
expenditure of Rs 1.59 crore over and above the contracted amount was made 
in violation of rules as neither any tendering was done for these works nor 
were any work orders issued. 
Thus there were irregularities amounting to Rs 2.37 crore in the execution of 
the abovementioned 16 works as the EE reduced the NIT values of four works 
to bypass the CE and thereafter got additional works executed without 
tendering and issuing of work orders. 
The matter was referred (March 2009) to the Government, which replied (June 
2009) that a show cause notice had been issued to the EE concerned. 

Chapter-II Audit of Transactions 
 63
2.4.2 Lack of responsiveness  of Government to Audit 
Due to inaction of Government departments, there were 3077 outstanding 
Inspection Reports and 21 pending Action Taken Notes on audit 
paragraphs included in the Audit Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India. 
(i) The Accountant General (Audit) conducts periodical inspections of 
State Government departments to check their transactions, maintenance of 
initial accounts as per the prescribed format, adherence to codal provisions and 
internal control procedures and maintenance of basic control registers. These 
inspections are followed by the preparation of Inspection Reports (IRs) which 
contain audit paragraphs prepared on the basis of various audit observations. 
These are issued to the concerned heads of offices, with copies to the next 
higher authorities, for examination of the audit paragraphs and reporting 
compliance to the Accountant General. Outstanding paras are settled by the 
Accountant General on intimation of requisite follow-up action taken by the 
Department.  
At the end of March 2009, there were 10,955 paragraphs related to 3,077 IRs, 
which were outstanding. The year-wise break-up of these outstanding IRs is 
given below: 
Table-2.1 : Details of outstanding inspection reports and paragraphs 
Year Number of outstanding 
Inspection Reports 
Number of 
Paragraphs 
Up to 2002-03 1,992 5,372 
2003-04 183 643 
2004-05 317 1,495 
2005-06 215 1,122 
2006-07 203 1,321 
2007-08 48 408 
2008-09 199 594 
Total 3,077 10,955 
The department-wise break-up of these out standing IRs and paragraphs is also 
indicated in Appendix-2.7. 
A review of the outstanding IRs pertaining to Horticulture, Panchayat and 
Rural Development, Public Health a nd Engineering, Tr ibal Welfare and 
Veterinary Departments revealed that a total of 1,013 paragraphs contained in 
190 IRs with a money value of Rs 596.25 crore, pertaining to the years from 
2003-04 to 2008-09 remained unsettled at the end of June 2009. The year-wise 
position of these outstanding IRs, paragraphs and money value involved are 
indicated in Appendix-2.8. 
Follow up action on Audit Reports 
(ii) Government has to take remedial  action on all audit paragraphs after 
the presentation of the Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India to the Legislature. The administrative departments concerned are 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 64 
 
required to furnish remedial Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on the audit 
paragraphs to the Public Accounts Co mmittee (PAC) as well as to the 
Accountant General. 
The position of pendency, as on August 2009, in furnishing ATNs on 
paragraphs included in the Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India (Civil) Government of Chhattisgarh, pertaining to the years 2002-03 to 
2007-08, is given below: 
Table-2.2: Details of paragraphs for which Action Taken Notes were not 
furnished 
CAG’s Audit 
Report  
No. of 
paragraphs 
included  
No. of paragraphs for which 
ATNs were furnished by the 
Government  
No. of paragraphs for 
which ATNs were due 
from the Government 
2002-03 20 18 2 
2003-04 14 9 5 
2004-05 18 16 2 
2005-06 22 18 4 
2006-07 21 18 3 
2007-08 11 6 5 
Total 106 85 21 
Department-wise details of the pending ATNs are given in Appendix-2.9. 
Therefore, a proper mechanism which would ensure speedy action on audit 
observations to recover losses/outstanding advances/ overpayments in a time-
bound manner, must be set up by the State Government. Such a system would 
not only be beneficial in fixing responsib ilities for the various lapses pointed 
out by Audit, but also make sure that the financial losses pointed out during 
audit do not continue over a long period. 

CHAPTER –III 
INTERNAL CONTROL IN A GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
WATER RESOURCES DEPARTMENT 
3 Internal Control in Wa ter Resources Department 
Highlights 
Internal control is an integral component of an organization’s 
management processes, which are established in order to provide 
reasonable assurance that its operati ons are carried out effectively and 
efficiently, financial reports and operational data are reliable and the 
applicable laws and regulations are complied with so as to achieve 
organizational objectives. The Government of India has prescribed 
comprehensive instructions for main tenance of internal control in 
Government departments through Rule 64 of the General Financial Rules 
2005. A review of internal controls in the Water Resources Department 
has revealed the following: 
Due to deficiencies in expenditure control, there was excess expenditure of 
Rs 7.78 crore over the allotments issued by the Engineer-in-Chief. 
(Paragraph 3.5.3) 
Due to non-compliance with State Treasury Rules, lapsed deposits worth 
Rs 24.90 lakh were not credited to Government account. 
(Paragraph 3.6) 
Due to deficiencies in assessing requirements while framing estimates, 
there was excess expenditure of Rs 1.91 crore. 
(Paragraph 3.7.7) 
Due to deficiencies in enforcing terms of agreement, additional security 
deposit and royalty were not deduc ted resulting in undue aid to 
contractors. 
(Paragraph 3.7.9 and 3.7.10) 
There was non-compliance with provisions relating to quality control tests 
in works amounting to Rs 1.43 crore. 
(Paragraph 3.8.2) 
3.1 Introduction 
Internal controls in an organisation are meant to give reasonable assurance that 
its operations are carried out according to the prescribed rules and regulations 
and in an economical, efficient and effective manner. 
The Water Resources Department (WRD ) is responsible for managing the 
water resources of the State, primar ily through the creation and maintenance 
of major, medium and minor irrigation projects. The department has six major 
projects, 32 medium projects and 2,242 minor projects in Chhattisgarh. Of 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
66 
these, five major, seven medium and 471 minor projects have been completed 
and the remaining are under progress. The department has also identified 
(June 2005) 595 locations for construction of anicuts 1 across various rivers for 
the purpose of ground water recharging a nd assistance in agriculture. As of 
March 2009, 61 anicuts worth Rs 74.89 crore have been constructed and the 
work of another 153 anicuts worth Rs 387 crore is under progress. 
The department maintains the headworks 2 and also undertakes major 
maintenance of canals. The minor and routine repairs of canals are done by 
Water Users Associations
3. 
3.2 Organisational Setup 
The department is headed by a Pr incipal Secretary/Secretary to the 
Government of Chhattisgarh. The Engine er-in-Chief (E-in-C) is the head of 
the department and is assisted by f our Chief Engineers (CEs). There are 11 
circles headed by Superintending Engi neers (SE) who supervise 62 divisions 
headed by Executive Engineers (EE). A chart of the organisational structure of 
the department is given in Appendix-3.1.  
3.3 Audit Objectives 
The review of internal controls has been conducted to test compliance with the 
Chhattisgarh Financial Rules, the Wo rks Department Manual (WD Manual), 
the State Treasury Code and the Central Public Works Accounts Code (CPWA 
Code) for accounting functions. The arrangements for monitoring, evaluation 
and internal audit have also been examined. 
3.4 Audit Coverage and Methodology 
The office of the E-in-C and two 4 out of four CEs were selected. Under each 
of the two selected CE’s offices, one SE’s office each 5 was selected. The 
office of the SE, (Electrical/Mechanical), Raipur was also selected. Under 
each of the two selected SE’s offices, 50 per cent  of the divisions i.e. three 
divisions each 6 were selected. The sample was discussed with the Secretary, 
WRD and other officers of the department during the entry conference on 13 
March 2009 and mutually agreed upon. On the Secretary’s suggestion, one 
ground water survey division
7 was also selected. The selection was made by 
Simple Random Sampling Without Replacement (SRSWOR). The selected 
units were reviewed for the period from 2006-07 to 2008-09. The 
methodology used was scrutiny of records and files of the selected divisions/ 
                                                 
1  Barriers across a river to enable  storage of water for dry season. 
2  Works undertaken at the site of storage of water such as reservoirs, dams, anicuts 
etc. 
3 Associations of farmers, responsible for equitable distribution of water and 
collection of water rates. 
4  CEs, Minimata Bango Project, Bilaspur and Mahanadi Reservoir Project, Raipur. 
5  SE’s, Indravati Project Circle, Jagdalpur and Minimata Dam Circle, Kharsia.  
6  Minimata Bango (MMB), Canal Division No 4, Dabhara, Tribal Development Pilot 
Project (TDPP), Jagdalpur, Water Resources Division, Kanker, Minimata Bango, 
Canal Division No. 5, Kharsia, Water Resources Division, Kondagaon and Minimata 
Bango, Canal Division No. 6, Sakti. 
7  Senior Geohydrologist, Ground Water Survey Division No. 9, Bilaspur. 

Chapter-III Internal Control  
67 
offices. The objectives and scope of the review were explained to the 
Secretary during the entry conference. Th e exit conference for the review was 
held on 26 August 2009 with the Secretar y, during which all the findings were 
discussed. 
Audit Findings 
3.5 Compliance with financia l rules and Works Department 
Manual relating to budgetary and expenditure control 
3.5.1 Persistent savings in expenditure 
The budget provisions of the department are available under six grants 8. The 
details of budget provisions, allotmen ts and expenditure during the period 
2006-07 to 2008-09 are given below: 
Table-3.1: Year-wise budget provision, expenditure and savings 
(Rupees in crore) 
Year Budget 
provision 
Expenditure Savings (percentage) 
2006-07 914.43 759.21 155.22 (16.97) 
2007-08 965.33 861.83 103.50 (10.72) 
2008-09 1090.34 1008.11 82.23 (7.54 ) 
Total 2970.10 2629.15 340.95 
(Source: Appropriation Accounts) 
It was observed that the savings were high at around 17 per cent in 2006-07 
but showed a decreasing trend subsequently. The E-in-C attributed (March and 
September 2009) the savings to delays in obtaining administrative approval for 
new projects/schemes, local problems/is sues that arose from time to time, 
incomplete construction work due to the rainy season and the imposition of the 
model code of conduct during the general elections of 2008.  
The Government stated during the exit conference that the general instructions 
in the budget manual may not be adequate at all times in view of the special 
nature and functions of the department and decided that some department 
specific guidelines would be drawn up regarding framing of the budget and 
supplementary estimates, taking into consideration the feasibility of the 
projects, realistic projection of works, time assigned for execution, status of 
ongoing works etc. 
3.5.2  Surrender of funds after the prescribed dates 
According to Clause 4.155 of the Manual, surrender of funds to the 
Government should ordinarily be made by 15 February and in any case upto 
15 March. For surrenders beyond the prescribed date, an explanation had to be 
given by the concerned offices as to why they could not foreseen earlier. 
The E-in-C surrendered unutilised funds worth Rs 118.54 crore after 15 March 
during the period 2006-07 to 2008-09 as shown in Appendix-3.2. The letters 
proposing surrenders sent by the E-in-C to the Government did not contain 
                                                 
8  23 (WRD), 41 (Tribal Area Sub-Plan i.e. TSP), 45 (Minor Irrigation Works), 57 
(Externally Aided Projects pertaining to WRD), 64 (Special Component Plan for 
Scheduled Castes) and 75 (NABARD Aided Project pertaining to WRD). 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
68 
any explanation as to why the surrenders were not foreseen prior to the 
prescribed date. Thus, timely surrenders were not made as envisaged in the 
Manual which limited the scope of the G overnment to provide the surrendered 
funds to other departments. During the exit conference, the Government 
agreed to issue directions for recording justifications for surrenders made after 
15 March for the concerned financial year. 
3.5.3  Excess expenditure over allotment  
After the budgetary provisions are approved through the Appropriation Bill, 
the E-in-C allots funds, head-wise, to the CEs, who in turn allot them to the 
divisions. The expenditure is to be monito red regularly to ensure that there is 
no excess over the allotments. 
It was observed that in respect of three grants, there was excess expenditure 
over allotments, amounting to Rs 7.78 crore, as shown in Appendix-3.3. The 
excesses indicated shortcomings in the monitoring and control of expenditure. 
During the exit conference, the Government took serious note of such cases 
and decided to review all the cases and to call for explanation from the 
concerned officials. 
3.5.4  Non-receipt of security deposit for custody of cash 
Rule 282 of the Chhattisgarh Financial Code provides that every cashier, 
storekeeper and other subordinate, who is entrusted with the custody of cash, 
stores or other valuables, is required to deposit security except in exceptional 
cases as specified by Government. 
Scrutiny of records in the test-checked units revealed that out of the 51 
officials handling cash/stores, none had made any security deposits except for 
two officials, one under SE, Electrical and Mechanical Circle, Raipur (SE, 
E/M Circle, Raipur) and one under SE, I ndravati Project Circle, Jagdalpur as 
detailed in Appendix-3.4. 
During the exit conference, the Government directed that security deposits 
should be recovered from all the cashiers as per the rule. 
3.6 Compliance with State Treasury Rules 
Lapsed deposits not credited to the Government Account  
According to Para 562 of the Chhattisgarh Treasury Code, deposits which 
remain unclaimed for more than three complete accounting years, should be 
credited to Government revenue under ‘Lapsed Deposits’. 
During scrutiny of records of seven divi sions, it was observed that in three 9 
divisions, a total amount of Rs 24.90 lakh was outstanding (between 
December 1954 to July 2002) under the deposit head for more than three 
years. It was, therefore, evident that the divisions were not taking requisite 
action for crediting the lapsed deposits to the Government account and the 
amounts were being retained in the public account at the cost of State revenue. 
In two
10 other divisions, the deposit registers were not produced to Audit 
although as per the monthly accounts of March 2009, Rs 1.15 crore and  
                                                 
9  WRD Kanker, MMB Dn. No. 5 Kharsia and TDPP, Division, Jagdalpur. 
10  WRD Kondagaon and MMB Dn. No.6 Sakti.  
Lapsed 
deposits not 
credited to 
the Govern-
ment 
account  
Lack of 
control 
resulted in 
excess 
expenditure 
of Rs 7.78 
crore over 
allotment 

Chapter-III Internal Control  
69 
Rs 13.57 lakh were shown under the deposit head. In the absence of the said 
registers, the exact amount of lapsed deposits could not be ascertained. MMB, 
Dn. No.4 Dabhara did not have any case of lapsed deposits while EE, WRD, 
Kondagaon stated (April 2009) that the register would be furnished after 
updating but could not furnish it to Audit. During the exit conference, the 
Government agreed to review all lapsed deposits in the divisions so that the 
amounts could be credited to revenue. 
3.7 Internal control activities 
Under the internal control activities, compliance to the Manual, CPWA Code 
and related instructions dealing with all operational activities of the 
department were scrutinized. The findings are discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
Accounting activities  
3.7.1 Amounts outstanding in suspense accounts 
As per para 13.2.1 and 22.4.10 of the CPWA Code, the divisions were 
required to maintain Cash Settlement Suspense Accounts (CSSA) and 
Material Purchase Settlement Suspense Accounts (MPSSA) with item-wise 
details. The operation of these suspense heads were dispensed w.e.f. 1983 and 
1984 respectively but old outstanding balances were required to be reconciled 
and cleared. 
The balances under MPSSA represented amounts which were payable for 
materials procured on credit from other divisions. The balances under CSSA 
represented amounts receivable from othe r divisions for materials supplied on 
credit. These heads were operated to ensure inter-divisional adjustments and 
served as a control against loss/pilferage of stock.  
Three11 of the test-checked divisions had old balances of Rs 52.85 lakh under 
MPSSA and Rs 25.70 lakh under CSSA. It was observed that the divisions did 
not have any item-wise break-up of thes e balances which were outstanding for 
periods from 1969-70 to 1999-2000. In the absence of the item-wise break-
ups, it would be difficult to clear these balances and the problem would get 
further compounded with the passage of time. During the exit conference, the 
Government agreed that such old outstanding balances which were pending in 
many divisions should be settled once and for all. 
3.7.2 Miscellaneous Public Works Advances  
According to Para 13.4.1 of the CPWA Code, (i) sale on credit (ii) expenditure 
incurred on deposit works in excess of deposits received (iii) losses, 
retrenchments, errors, etc. and (iv) other items are recorded under the head 
‘Miscellaneous Public Works Advance’ (MPWA). 
The items under this head are cleared either by cash recovery or by transfer to 
some other head of account. A sum of Rs 7.58 crore was outstanding under 
MPWA in the test-checked divisions from March 1954 as shown at  
                                                
 
11  MPSSA: WRD, Kanker and MMB Dn. No. 6 Sakti; CSSA: TDPP, Jagdalpur and 
WRD Kanker. Other four test-checked divisions did not have any outstanding 
balances. 
Long 
pending 
balances 
under 
suspense 
heads not 
cleared 
Huge 
outstanding 
balances 
under 
MPWA  

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
70 
Appendix-3.5(i). Detailed scrutiny of the pending amount of Rs 5.47 crore in 
three divisions showed that Rs 68.58  lakh was pending against departmental 
officials and Rs 4.79 crore was pending against contractors as detailed in 
Appendix-3.5 (ii). 
EE, MMB Canal Dn. No-6 Sakti replie d (May 2009) that action was being 
taken to adjust the amounts. EE, WRD, Kondagaon replied (April 2009) that 
the amount under MPWA would be adjusted after receiving explanations from 
the concerned officials and EE, WRD, Kanker replied (April 2009) that the 
amount would be adjusted after receipt of allotment. 
Adequate action had not been taken by the three divisions to clear the amounts 
either by cash recovery or by booking under the proper head. During the exit 
conference, the Government took a serious view of the items outstanding 
under MPWA and as a first corrective measure, decided that it would instruct 
every division to adjust the amounts under MPWA for the last three years. 
3.7.3 Works Abstract Registers not maintained 
As per Para 10.5.1 of the CPWA Code, an account of all the transactions 
relating to a work during a month should be prepared by the Divisional Officer 
in the Works Abstract Register. The register should record the final charges, 
advances to contractors and other entities and contingent charges to monitor 
the adjustment of all types of advances made for a particular work. 
Scrutiny (April and May 2009) of divisional records revealed that in four
12 
divisions, the register was not maintained and there was no assurance that all 
advances made for execution of works were adjusted. During the exit 
conference, the Government stated that du e to shortage of staff, these registers 
were not being maintained and agreed to explore the possibility of developing 
a software for divisional records which would reduce the requirement of 
maintaining multiple registers. 
3.7.4 Non-reconciliation of cheques and remittances 
Para 22.3.1 of the CPWA Code provides that each divisional officer should 
reconcile with the treasury, the encashment of cheques issued and remittances 
to the bank. A reconciliation statement s hould, thereafter, be prepared in Form 
51. Reconciliation is a critical control which ensures that all receipts have 
actually been remitted to the Government account and that there is no scope of 
encashment of cheques by manipulating the amounts after the cheques have 
been issued by the divisions. 
It was observed that out of seven divisions, only two viz. MMB Dn. No.4 
Dabhara and MMB, Dn.No.5 Kharsia, prepared the Statements in Form 51 
upto March 2009, while the remaining di visions were in arrears ranging 
between 3 to 51 months. Moreover, there were significant differences between 
the department’s and the Treasury’s figur es to the tune of Rs 2.37 crore in 
cheques and Rs 4.47 crore in remittances as detailed in Appendix-3.6. During 
the exit conference, the Government agreed that Form-51 should be kept up to 
date and stated that preparation of the form would also be included in the 
proposed computerisation project. 
                                                
 
12  MMB, Dn.No. 4 Dabhara, MMB, Dn.No.5, Kharsia, WRD Kondagaon and MMB Dn. 
No.6 Sakti.  
Non- 
reconciliation 
of cheques 
issued and 
amounts 
remitted into 
treasury 

Chapter-III Internal Control  
71 
3.7.5 Non-submission of accounts by Water Users Associations 
The Chhattisgarh Sinchai Prabhandhan me Krishakon ki Bhagidari Adhiniyam 
2006 (Act) was notified in May 2006 for adequate maintenance of the 
irrigation systems, efficient and economical utilisation and equitable 
distribution of water among users by Water Users Associations (WUAs). 
Test check of records of six
13 divisions revealed that WUAs were paid grants 
of Rs 94.93 lakh during 2006-09 as shown below: 
Table-3.2: Statement showing disbursement to WUAs 
(Rs in lakh) 
Year Sl. 
No. 
Name of division 
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 
Total 
1. WRD, Kanker 2.77 9.54 7.89 20.20 
2. MMB, Dn. No-4 Dabhara - 18.99 14.50 33.49 
3. MMB, Dn. No-6 Sakti - 6.37 5.50 11.87 
4. MMB, Dn. No-5 Kharsia 7.00 6.37 5.50 18.87 
5. TDPP, Jagdalpur 1.23 3.77 2.87 7.87 
6. WRD, Kondagaon - 2.63 - 2.63 
 Total 11.00 47.67 36.26 94.93 
(Source: Information supplied by department and compiled by Audit) 
Neither accounts for utilisation of the amounts nor details of maintenance 
works executed were submitted by the WUAs to the divisions. On this being 
pointed out, replies were received from five divisions. Two 14 of the divisions 
confirmed that no accounts or records had been presented by the WUAs. 
One15 division stated that the Government had not given any directions for 
receipt of accounts or records of the associations. The remaining 
two
16divisions stated that the accounts would get audited if the expenditure/ 
turnover was more than Rs 10 lakh and that they would take action to get the 
accounts from the WUAs. It was stated in the exit conference that while the 
Act said that the WUAs should get thei r accounts audited, it was silent about 
submitting the same to the EEs concerned. 
The replies and discussions indicate that there is lack of clarity on the records 
required to be maintained and submitted by the WUAs to the divisions.  
Execution of work without approval of competent authority 
The department prescribed the delegation of powers for various items of work. 
In three out of the seven test-checked divisions, it was observed that there 
were instances where the delegations were not being properly adhered to. 
3.7.6  Award of multiple piece works without approval from SE 
Departmental instructions provide that survey works can be executed through 
labour contractors on piece work basis. For each piece work, estimates are to 
be prepared and approved by the competent authority. However, approval of 
the SE is essential before issuing the work order. One work can be awarded to 
                                                
 
13  The Seventh test-checked division i.e. Ground Water Survey Division No. 9, Bilaspur 
did not have any WUAs. 
14 MMB, Dn. No. 4 Dabhara and WRD, Kondagaon. 
15  TDPP, Jagdalpur. 
16 WRD, Kanker and MMB, Dn. No.6 Sakti. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
72 
one contractor at a time and the concerned contractor is eligible for further 
piece work only after completion of the earlier piece work allotted to them. 
Three17 test-checked divisions entered into 16 piece work agreements 
amounting to Rs 43.14 lakh. Executive Engineer, WRD, Kondagaon awarded 
four piece works to the same contractor within the same month i.e. February 
2009. EE, WRD, Kanker awarded (February 2009) five piece works to a 
single contractor within a span of four days and awarded (January and March 
2009) another four works to another two contractors within a span of one and 
a half months. EE, TDPP, Jagdalpur awarded three piece works to a single 
contractor on the same day. Allotment of multiple orders to the same 
contractor without ensuring completion of  the earlier works allotted to them, 
was in contravention of the existing instructions. Details are given in 
Appendix-3.7. Moreover, in these cases, while the administrative approval and 
technical sanctions were obtained from the CE, the requisite prior approvals of 
the SE before issue of the work orders were not available on record. 
This matter was discussed during the exit conference and the department 
agreed with the audit observation and stated that instructions would be 
reiterated to all divisions for compliance.  
Shortcomings in assessment and tendering  
3.7.7 Incorrect assessment resulted in excess expenditure of Rs 1.91 crore 
Scrutiny of records of EE, MMB, Dn.No 6 Sakti revealed that the Government 
had accepted two item rate tenders for construction of 20 km of cement 
concrete lining of Sakti Branch Canal from RD 18 0 to 11000 m and 11000 to 
20000 m. Both the estimates involved 13 items including Cohesive Non-
Swelling Soil (CNS). Details of the two agreements are given below: 
Table-3.3: Details of agreements 
1. Agreement No. 9DL/05-06 10DL/05-06 
2. Reach   RD 0 to 11,000 metres RD 11,000 to 20,000 
metres 
3. Total estimated value of 
work 
Rs 1,024.50 lakh Rs 843.86 lakh 
4. Total estimated value of 
CNS 
Rs 178.28 lakh (17.40 per 
cent of estimated value) 
Rs 206.68 lakh (24.49 per 
cent of estimated value) 
5. Estimated quantity of 
CNS 
88,987 cum  1,15,455 cum 
6. Estimated rate of CNS Rs 200.35 per cum  Rs 179.02 per cum  
7. Lowest tender 
percentage 
13.67 per cent  below 
schedule of rates 
17.57 per cent  below 
schedule of rates 
8. Estimated rate of CNS 
reduced by overall 
tender per cent 
Rs 153.91  Rs 170.37 
9. Rate quoted by L1 
contractor for CNS 
Rs 80 Rs 21 
(Source: compiled from MMB canal Dn.No.6, Sakti) 
                                                 
17  TDPP, Jagdalpur ,WRD, Kanker and WRD, Kondagaon. 
18  RD : ‘Reduced distance’ which is a unit for measuring distance in canals. 
Piece 
works 
awarded 
without 
permission 
of SE 

Chapter-III Internal Control  
73 
It was observed that though CNS was projected in both the estimates as one of 
the main components, it was not executed at all in either of the contracts 
because the entire construction was through areas of non-expansive soil where 
CNS layers were not required. It was evident that the projection and 
assessment of the tenders and agreements on the basis of the price quoted for 
CNS was incorrect. It can be seen from item nine of the table above that the 
two contractors quoted very low rates for CNS work, which enabled them to 
become L1 i.e. the lowest tenderers. If the EE had assessed the requirements 
correctly and excluded CNS from the estimates, two other contractors who had 
quoted lesser rates for other components would have become L1 and the 
works would have been completed at a lower cost. Consequently, Government 
incurred excess expenditure of Rs 1.91 crore on the two works as detailed in 
Appendix-3.8. 
During the exit conference, the Government decided that the non-execution of 
CNS work against such a large estimated quantity was a serious issue and both 
the tenders would be re-examined to ascertain whether there was any 
manipulation in the estimates. 
Deficiencies in enforcing terms of agreement 
3.7.8 Inadequate provisions in agreements  to ensure that steel and cement 
had been procured from authorised companies 
The Government decided (May 2002) that instead of receiving supplies of 
cement and steel from them, contractors would have to procure cement 
directly from factories with daily production capacities of 450 metric tonnes of 
cement and steel from the Steel Authority of India Limited, its authorized 
primary retailers or the Tata Iron and Steel Company. The circular also 
directed that the tender documents should specify the type and grade of 
cement to be procured, with IS
19 numbers and dates.  
Scrutiny of records of nine agreements of the three 20 test-checked divisions 
under CE, MRP, Raipur showed that the provisions were included in the 
relevant clauses of the agreements. However, it was not mentioned in the 
agreement that the contractors were required to submit proof of procurement 
of cement and steel from the approved companies. Consequently, none of the 
contractors submitted any proof that the cement and steel used in their 
construction work was procured from the prescribed companies only. In 
another 12 agreements of three
21 divisions under CE, MMB, Bilaspur, there 
was a condition in the notes to the tenders that proof of despatch for 
procurement of steel had to be produced. Consequently, in 10 agreements, the 
proof of procurement from the prescribed companies was available in the form 
of purchase invoices submitted by the contractors, while the proof was not 
available in the remaining two agreements. 
Thus, the instructions of the Government were being interpreted differently by 
the two CEs. During the exit conference, the Government agreed to issue 
                                                
 
19  It is a certificate issued under Indian Standards Certification act regarding quality. 
20  TDPP Jagdalpur ,WRD Kanker and WRD Kondagaon.  
21  MMB Dn. No.4-Dabhara, MMB Dn. No.5 Kharsia and MMB Dn. No.6 Sakti. 
Inadequate 
provisions in 
agreements for 
procurement of 
steel and 
cement by 
contractors 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
74 
instructions to standardise the agreement clause which would prescribe the 
documents required to be provided by the contractors. 
3.7.9 Undue aid to contractors by not deducting additional security 
deposit  
In NITs issued for item rate tenders, ‘Schedule G’ is appended showing the 
quantities and rates for the various item s of work required to be executed. 
Departmental instructions provide that in cases where unbalanced rates 22 are 
quoted in item rate tenders, a revised ‘Schedule G’ has to be included in the 
agreement containing a list of all items, quantities, the rates quoted by the 
contractor and the estimated rate plus/minus the overall tender percentage. 
Wherever the rates quoted are higher than the estimated rate plus/minus tender 
percentage, payment has to be made at the latter rate and the difference has to 
be withheld as additional security deposit. The revised Schedule ‘G’ should 
also mention the manner in which the withheld amount has to be released. 
It was observed that in the cases of two item rate tenders, additional security 
deposit of Rs 30.97 lakh was not deducted by the EE, Tribal Development 
Pilot Project Division Jagdalpur (EE, TDPP Dn. Jagdalpur) and EE, WRD 
Kanker as per the revised ‘Schedule ‘G’ as detailed in Appendix-3.9. 
Similarly, in earthwork to remodel and provide a cement concrete lining for 
Mandhar Branch Canal from RD 16000 M to RD 32860 by EE, Water 
Management Division No.1, Raipur (Agmt. No.8DL/07-08) with a contract 
value of Rs 6.14 crore, the revised Sc hedule 'G' was not attached to the 
agreement and additional security deposit of Rs 30.97 lakh on unbalanced 
items was not deducted. 
These cases indicated that unbalanced te nders were not being regulated in the 
manner prescribed by the Government. During the exit conference, the 
Government stated that action would be taken against the defaulting divisions 
for the cases cited by Audit and instructi ons would be reissued to all divisions 
regarding deductions of additional security deposit. 
3.7.10   Non-deduction of royalty of Rs 26.32 lakh from contractors 
Departmental instructions provide that contractors are required to produce 
royalty payment certificates for use of minor minerals in works executed by 
them. In case the contractors fail to produce the certificates, the amount of 
royalty payable has to be deducted from the payments made to them. 
It was observed that in seven agreements , royalty paid certificates were not 
available on record but the divisions had not deducted any royalty charges as 
per the instructions of department. Rupees 26.32 lakh was due from the 
concerned contractors. Details are given in Appendix-3.10. 
On this being pointed out by Audit, EE, MMB, Dn. No. 4 Dabhara replied 
(May 2009) that the contractors would be  asked to submit royalty certificates 
or else the amount would be deducted from their final bills or security 
deposits. EE, WRD, Kanker replied (April 2009) that royalty would be 
adjusted from the security deposits. During the exit conference, the 
                                                
 
22  If the quoted rate of an item in an item rate tender is more than the estimated rate 
plus or minus the overall tender percentage, then the tender will be called an item 
rate tender with unbalanced rates. 
Additional 
security 
deposit not 
deducted 
Royalty of 
Rs 26.32 
lakh was 
not 
deducted 
from 
contractors 

Chapter-III Internal Control  
75 
Government stated that instructions would be issued to all divisions for 
ensuring deduction of royalty as per rules. 
Inventory Control 
3.7.11   Non-maintenance of stock records  
As per para 4.082 of the WD Manual, physi cal verification of stores is to be 
conducted once in a year. Para 4.073 of the manual also envisages that as soon 
as stores articles become unserviceable, a survey report should be prepared 
and the stores disposed of after sanc tion from the competent authority. Para 
4.083 of the Manual envisages that all articles of stock which are not likely to 
be required during the following 12 months should be reported by the Sub-
Divisional Officer to the EE who, if necessary, would take the SE’s orders for 
their disposal. 
It was observed that in three 23 out of seven test-checked divisions, the stock 
position as per the monthly accounts was ‘nil’. The position of stock in the 
remaining four divisions is given below: 
Table-3.4: Division-wise position of stock 
(Rupees in lakh) 
Sl.  
No. 
Name of division Value of stock as per monthly 
account 
1. EE, WRD Kanker  60.74 
2. EE, MMB Dn. No. 5 Kharsia 46.95 
3. EE, MMB Dn. No. 6 Sakti 125.81 
4. EE, TDPP Dn. Jagdalpur 3.92 
 Total 237.42  
(Source: Information supplied by department and compiled by Audit) 
The total outstanding balance in case of four divisions was Rs 2.37 crore. It 
was observed that EE, TDPP, Dn. Jagdalpur maintained full stock records, EE, 
MMB, Dn.No. 5 Kharsia had a list of stock items of only Rs 1.59 lakh and 
there was no explanation for the balance stock of Rs 2.32 crore carried 
forward in the monthly accounts. 
EE, WRD, Kanker and EE, MMB Dn. No. 6, Sakti did not maintain any stock 
register and there was no record regarding the large quantity of stock indicated 
in the monthly accounts. Consequently, there was no way to ascertain how 
much physical stock actually existed in these divisions against the amounts 
shown. 
On this being pointed out, EE, WRD, Kanker replied (April 2009) that the 
stock of Rs 60.74 lakh pertained to the period prior to 2000. The stock records 
had been seized by the Economic Offences Wing in 1996-97 and it was not 
possible to maintain any record thereafter. EE, MMB Dn. No. 5, Kharsia 
replied (May 2009) that as the transac tions were old, reconciliation would 
require minute examination which would require time. EE, MMB Dn. No. 6, 
Sakti replied (May 2009) that the verification of stock was being taken up with 
the SDOs concerned. 
                                                
 
23  Ground Water Survey Dn. No. 9 Bilaspur, MMB Dn. No.4 Dabhara and WRD, 
Kondagaon. 
Stock 
records not 
maintained 
for stores 
valued at  
Rs 2.32 
crore 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
76 
It is evident that a special drive is required to verify available physical stock, 
in order to segregate serviceable and unserviceable items and also to reconcile 
them with the account figures of stock. During the exit conference, the 
Government agreed to take corrective measures in the divisions and get the old 
stock reviewed to declare unserviceable items and utilise whatever stock 
remained usable. 
Administrative control 
3.7.12   Deficiencies in manpower deployment  
The deployment of EEs in the office of the E-in-C and CEs is detailed below:  
Table-3.5 : Staff position in the cadre of EEs as on March 2009 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Office Sanctioned 
strength of 
EE (Civil) 
Working 
strength 
Excess 
1. Engineer-in-Chief 5 10 5 
2. CE, Mahanadi Godavari Basin, 
Raipur 
5 7 2 
3. CE, Hasdeo Bango Basin, 
Bilaspur 
7 9 2 
4. CE, Mahanadi Reservoir Project, 
Raipur 
7 10 3 
5. CE, Minimata Bango Project, 
Bilaspur 
6 8 2 
 Total 30 44 14 
(Source: Information supplied by E-in-C and compiled by Audit) 
While the table indicates that 14 EEs were posted in excess of the sanctioned 
strength in the offices of the E-in-C and CEs, it was observed that 15 Assistant 
Engineers (AEs) were holding the higher charge of EEs in 15 24 divisions. The 
department should reconsider equitable deployment of manpower in order to 
ensure that posts of higher responsibilities such as those of EEs are not 
manned by AEs, especially when EEs are available and posted in excess in the 
offices of the E-in-C and CEs. 
Scrutiny of the sanctioned strength and deployment under CE, MRP, Raipur 
revealed that the distribution of staff wa s not uniform as detailed in the table 
below: 
                                                
 
24 (i)WRD Dn. Baikunthpur (ii) WRD Kharang Dn. Bilaspur (iii) MMB Dn. No. 4 
Dabhara (iv) Tandula Dn. Durg (v)WRD Dn. Janjgir  (vi) WRD Dn. Jashpur (vii) 
WRD Dn. Kanker (viii) WRD Dn. Kawardha (ix) WRD Dn. Kota (x) Maniyari WRD 
Dn. Mungeli (xi) WRD Dn. Pendra road (xii) WM Dn. 1 Raipur (xiii) WM Dn. Rudri 
(xiv) Dam Dn. No. 2 Rudri (xv) WRD, Dn. Surajpur. 
Fourteen 
EEs posted 
in excess of 
sanctioned 
strength in 
E-in-C and 
CE offices 

Chapter-III Internal Control  
77 
Table-3.6 : Deployment of AEs and Assistants’ Grade-II as on March 
2009 
In AE cadre In Assistant Grade-II cadre Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
office Sanctioned Working Excess Vacant Sanctioned Working  Excess Vacant 
1. CE, MRP, 
Raipur 
6 16 10 -- 08 16 08 -- 
2. SE, 
Indravati 
Project 
Circle, 
Jagdalpur 
43 31 -- 12 50 44 -- 6 
3. SE, MMB 
Dam Circle, 
Rudri 
20 23 03 -- 25 27 02 -- 
4. SE, 
Mahandi 
Circle, 
Raipur 
27 42 15 -- 34 44 10 -- 
 Total 96 112 28 12 117 131 20 06 
(Source: Information supplied by CE, MRP and compiled by Audit) 
The table indicates that 28 posts of AEs were in excess of sanctioned strength 
in the SE’s and CE’s offices. On the other hand, there were vacancies of 12 
posts of AEs in the office of the SE, Indravati Project Circle, Jagdalpur. 
Similarly, 20 posts in the cadre of Assi stant Grade-II were in excess of the 
sanctioned strength in the two 25 SE and one 26 CE offices but six posts were 
vacant in the office of the SE, Indravati Project Circle, Jagdalpur. The 
department should examine the deployment of manpower to remove the 
existing imbalances. 
Similarly, under the MMB project, Bilaspur, 80 AEs were working against the 
sanction of 84, whereas 132 Assistants , Grade-II were working against the 
sanction of 109 posts. During the exit conference, the Government agreed to 
review the deployment of personnel in various cadres. 
3.7.13   Payment of salaries to officials working in other offices 
During scrutiny of records, it was ob served that six officials in two 27 divisions 
were drawing salaries from the divisions but were working in offices of other 
departments for the last three to five years as detailed in Appendix-3.11. 
The EE, WRD, Kondagaon stated (April 2009) that correspondence was being 
initiated to recall the officials. This was required to be done expeditiously as 
the office of the EE, WRD was paying the salaries of these officials without 
getting the benefit of their services. Th e officials were required to either be 
reverted or alternatively, transferred or placed on deputation to the concerned 
offices/departments. During the exit conference, the Government stated that it 
would examine the cases. 
                                                
 
25  Mahanadi Circle, Raipur and MMB Dam Circle, Rudri. 
26  MRP, Raipur. 
27  Ground Water Survey Dn. 9 Bilaspur and WRD, Kondagaon.  
Six officials 
on divisional 
pay rolls 
were serving 
in other 
departments  

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
78 
3.8 Monitoring including internal audit  
3.8.1 Non-establishment of Internal Audit wing 
Internal audit is an important instrument to examine and evaluate compliance 
with the department’s rules and procedures. No Internal Audit wing had been 
established in the department since the formation of the State. During the exit 
conference, the Government stated that the feasibility of starting an Internal 
Audit wing would be examined.  
3.8.2 Quality control test reports not available for works costing  
Rs 1.43 crore  
According to Para 6.001 of the WD Manual, quality control is necessary for 
safety, reliability and durability of structures. It was observed that in three 28 
works executed for Rs 1.43 crore, the quality control test reports were not 
available on record. 
On this being pointed out, EE, TDPP Di vision, Jagdalpur stated (April 2009) 
that quality control tests were not done due to shortage of staff and machinery. 
The EE, WRD, Kanker stated (April 2009) that a suitable amount had been 
deducted from the contractor’s bill. However, regardless of the deduction 
made from contractor, in the absence of quality control tests, it was not 
possible to have an assurance that the works had been carried out with 
adherence to standards of safety, reliability and durability as envisaged by the 
Government. During, the exit conference, the Government stated that shortage 
of staff was not an acceptable reason fo r not carrying out quality control tests 
and show cause notices would be issued to the erring officials. 
3.8.3  Non-compliance of provisions of WD Manual on annual inspection  
Paras 5.006, 8.016 and 8.018 of the WD Manual prescribe the periodical 
inspections to be carried out by officers at various levels.  It further provides 
that a yearly and four-yearly programme for inspection of works should be 
framed by each inspecting officer and entered in a programme registers, which 
would also be used to note the dates of inspection. 
During scrutiny of the records of CE, SE and EE offices, it was observed that 
the prescribed programme register was not being maintained in any of these 
offices. On this being pointed out by Audit, the departmental officers replied 
that inspections were being carried out on a regular basis and furnished copies 
of inspection reports. While inspections were indeed being carried out, in the 
absence of the programme registers, it  was not possible to ascertain whether 
they were being done as per the prescribed frequencies. During the exit 
conference, the Government stated that the requisite registers would be 
maintained. 
3.8.4  Lack of response to Statutory Audit 
The Accountant General (Audit), Chhat tisgarh arranges to conduct periodical 
inspections of the department and divisional offices. The audit findings are 
communicated through Inspection Reports to the Heads of 
                                                 
28  (i) Construction of structures under Kosorteda Project by TDPP Dn. Jagdalpur. 
(ii) Construction of Dudhawa RBC and structures ch 270 to 390 by WRD, Kanker  
(iii) Construction of Dudhawa RBC and structures ch 390 to 530 by WRD, Kanker. 
Programme 
register for 
inspection 
not 
maintained  

Chapter-III Internal Control  
79 
Offices/Departments for compliance and necessary rectification of 
deficiencies pointed out. 
As on March 2009, 1,992 audit paragra phs relating to 517 Inspection Reports 
issued from 1994 to January 2009 were awaiting settlement. (The department 
should take proactive steps to settle pending audit paragraphs to strengthen the 
accountability mechanism). During the exit conference, the Government stated 
that regular Audit Committee meetings would be conducted to discuss and 
take requisite action on the paras. 
3.9 Conclusion  
The review of the internal contro l mechanism in the Water Resources 
Department revealed that there were persistent savings and instances of excess 
expenditure over the allotments given by the Engineer-in-Chief. Amounts 
were pending for settlement under suspense heads. There were instances of 
non-reconciliation of cheques and remittances, deficiencies in preparation of 
works abstract registers and execution of work without approval of the 
competent authorities. There were deficiencies in maintenance of stock 
records and deployment of manpower. The department did not have an 
Internal Audit wing, in the absence of which the extent of compliance with the 
existing rules, procedures and instructions could not be monitored on a regular 
basis.  
3.10 Recommendations  
It is recommended that the Department should 
• identify and review lapsed deposits and credit the same to revenue, 
• clear outstanding suspense balances through a special drive, 
• examine the feasibility of computerising the maintenance of divisional 
accounts and related registers, 
• issue guidelines to all divisions prescribing regular returns from Water 
User Associations, 
• introduce a standard clause in agreements to confirm that contractors 
have procured cement and steel from approved suppliers, 
• review the deployment of manpower, 
• consider setting up an Internal Audit wing in the department  
• maintain programme registers of inspections to ensure that inspections 
take place as per the prescribed frequencies and 
• take proactive steps to settle pending audit paragraphs to strengthen the 
accountability mechanism. 
Outstanding 
audit paras 
not settled 

 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
GOVERNMENT COMMERCIAL AND TRADING ACTIVITIES 
4.1 Overview of State Pub lic Sector Undertakings 
 
Introduction 
4.1.1 The State Public Sector Undert akings (PSUs) consist of State 
Government Companies and Statutor y Corporations. The State PSUs are 
established to carry out activities of commercial nature while keeping in view 
the welfare of people. In Chhattisgarh, the State PSUs occupy an important 
place in the state economy. The State PSUs registered a turnover of  
Rs 4,773.05 crore for 2008-09 as per th eir latest finalised accounts as of 
September 2009. This turnover was equal to 5.91 per cent  of State Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) for 2008-09. Major activities  of Chhattisgarh State 
PSUs are concentrated in the power sector. The State PSUs earned a profit of 
Rs 177.16 crore in the aggregate for 2008-09 as per their latest finalised 
accounts. They had employed 18,769
1 employees as of 31 March 2009. The 
State does not have any Departmental Undertakings (DUs).  
4.1.2 As on 31 March 2009, there were 16 PSUs as per the details given 
below. Of these, no company was listed on the stock exchange. 
Type of PSUs Working PSUs Non-working PSUs2 Total 
Government Companies 14 - 14 
Statutory Corporations 2 3 - 2 
Total 16 4 - 16 
4.1.3 During the year 2008-09, three PSUs 5 were established. The 
Chhattisgarh State Electricity Boar d (CSEB) was unbundled into five 
companies in compliance with the Electricity Act, 2003 vide Government 
order dated 30 December 2008. Of the five companies, the status of three 
companies viz. Chhattisgarh State Power Generation Company Limited 
(CSPGCL), Chhattisgarh State Powe r Transmission Company Limited 
(CSPTCL) and Chhattisgarh State Po wer Distribution Company Limited 
(CSPDCL), which were earlier func tioning as deemed companies under 
section 619-B of Companies Act, 1956, was changed as Government 
companies under section 619 of Companies Act, 1956 from 1 January 2009. 
Two other companies viz. Chhattisgarh State Power Holding Company 
Limited (CSPHCL) and Chhattisgarh State Power Trading Company Limited 
                                                
 
1 As per the details provided by 16 PSUs.  
2 Non-working PSUs are those which have ceased to carry on their operations. 
3 Chhattisgarh State Warehousing Corporation and Chhattisgarh State Electricity 
Board (From 1 January 2009, CSEB was unbundled into five companies under the 
Companies Act, 1956 as per the State Government Gazette Notification dated 19 
December 2008). 
4 The status of Chhattisgarh Sondiha Coal Company Limited, a newly formed 
Government Company, as on 31 March 2009 has not been received, hence not 
included in these PSUs.  
5 Chhattisgarh State Power Holding Company Limited, Chhattisgarh State Power 
Trading Company Limited and CMDC ICPL Coal Limited. 

 
Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
82 
(CSPTr.CL) were newly formed under section 619 of the Companies Act, 
1956 on 30 December 2008.  
Audit Mandate 
4.1.4 Audit of Government companies is governed by Section 619 of the 
Companies Act, 1956. According to Section 617, a Government company is 
one in which not less than 51 per cent of the paid up capital is held by 
Government(s). A Government company includes a subsidiary of a 
Government company. Further, a company in which 51 per cent of the paid up 
capital is held in any combination by Government(s), Government companies 
and Corporations controlled by Govern ment(s) is treated as if it were a 
Government company (deemed Government company) as per Section 619-B 
of the Companies Act. 
4.1.5 The accounts of the State Government companies (as defined in 
Section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956) are audited by Statutory Auditors, 
who are appointed by Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG) as per 
the provisions of Section 619(2) of the Companies Act, 1956. These accounts 
are also subject to supplementary audit conducted by CAG as per the 
provisions of Section 619 of the Companies Act, 1956. 
4.1.6 Audit of statutory corporations is governed by their respective 
legislations. Out of two statutory corporations, CAG was the sole auditor for 
Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board. In respect of Chhattisgarh State 
Warehousing Corporation, the audit is conducted by Chartered Accountants 
and supplementary audit by CAG. 
Investment in State PSUs 
4.1.7 As on 31 March 2009, the investment (capital and long-term loans) in 
16 PSUs was Rs 2,963.05 crore as per details given below. 
(Amount: Rupees in crore) 
Government Companies Statutory Corporations Type of 
PSUs Capital Long 
Term 
Loans 
Total Capital Long 
Term 
Loans 
Total 
Grand 
Total 
Working 
PSUs 77.25 373.67 450.92 24.12 2,488.01 2,512.13 2,963.05 6 
A summarised position of Government inve stment in State PSUs is detailed in 
Appendix-4.1.1. 
4.1.8 As on 31 March 2009, the total investment consisted of 3.42 per cent 
towards capital and 96.58 per cent  in long-term loans. The investment has 
grown by 170.40 per cent  from Rs 1,095.79 crore in 2003-04 to  
Rs 2,963.05 crore in 2008-09 as shown in the graph below: 
                                                 
6 State Government’s investment in working PSUs was Rs 826.69 crore (Share capital, 
Share application money and loans).  

 
Chapter-IV Commercial and Trading Activities 
 
83 
2963.05
1060.471095.79
997.72
2320.17
3152.28
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
2003-
04
2004-
05
2005-
06
2006-
07
2007-08 2008-09
Investment (Capital and long-term loans)   (Rs. in crore)
 
The decrease in investment in 2008-09 is due to repayment of loan of  
Rs 246.60 crore.  
4.1.9 The investment in various important sectors and percentage thereof at 
the end of 31 March 2004 and 31 March 2009 are indicated below in the bar 
chart.  
(Amount: Rupees in crore) 
2.05
28.75
18.01
1,043.93
2,511.38
351.77
31.80
71.15
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
2003-04 2008-09
Power Service Infrastructure Others
(84.76)
(11.87)(2.90)
(95.27)
(0.97)
(0.19) (1.64) (2.40)
(Figures in brackets show the percentage of total investment) 
As may be seen from the above chart the major investment of the State 
Government in PSUs was in power sector which increased from Rs 1,043.93 
crore during 2003-04 to Rs 2,511.38 crore during 2008-09. 

 
Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
84 
Budgetary outgo, grants/subsidies, guarantees and loans 
4.1.10   The details regarding budgetary outgo by the State Government 
towards equity, loans, grants/ subsidies, guarantees issued, loans written off, 
loans converted into equity and interest waived in respect of State PSUs are 
given in Appendix-4.1.3. The summarized details are given below for three 
years ended 2008-09. 
(Amount: Rupees in crore) 
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 Sl. 
No. 
Particulars 
No. of 
PSUs 
Amount No. of 
PSUs 
Amount No. of 
PSUs 
Amount 
1. Equity Capital 
outgo from budget 1 1.00 1 1.00 - - 
2. Loans given from 
budget 1 5.00 2 8.13 1 1.95 
3. Grants/Subsidy 
received 6 687.08 7 863.67 6 990.43 
4. Total Outgo 
(1+2+3) 67 693.08 7 7 872.80 7 7 992.38 
5. Loans converted 
into equity - - - - 1 20.11 
6. Loans written off - - - - - - 
7. Interest/Penal 
interest written off - - - - - - 
8. Total Waiver (6+7) - - - - - - 
9. Guarantees issued 2 326.48 2 252.53 2 108.11 
10. Guarantee 
Commitment 2 224.70 2 132.36 1 22.98 
4.1.11   The details regarding budgetary outgo towards equity, loans and 
grants/ subsidies for past five years are given in the graph below: 
(Amount: Rupees in crore) 
201.01
235.07 164.58
693.08
872.80
992.38
100
300
500
700
900
1100
2003-
04
2004-05
2005-06
2006-07
2007-08 2008-09
Budgetary outgo towards Equity, Loans and Grants/ Subsidies
 
The budgetary outgo towards Equity, Loans and Grants/Subsidies increased 
from Rs 235.07 crore (2003-04) to Rs 992.38 crore (2008-09). 
                                                 
7 These are the actual number of companies/ corporations which have received 
budgetary support in the form of equity, loans, grants and subsidy from the State 
Government during the year. 

 
Chapter-IV Commercial and Trading Activities 
 
85 
4.1.12   Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board was provided with guarantees by 
the State Government for which guarantee fee at the rate of 0.50 per cent was 
charged. The guarantees outstanding decreased from Rs 429.30 crore in 2003-
04 to Rs 22.98 crore in 2008-09. None of the PSU has paid any guarantee 
fee/commission to the State Government during 2008-09.  
Reconciliation with Finance Accounts 
4.1.13   The figures in respect of equity, loans and guarantees outstanding as 
per records of State PSUs should agree wi th that of the figures appearing in 
the Finance Accounts of the State. In case the figures do not agree, the 
concerned PSUs and the Finance Department should carry out reconciliation 
of differences. The position in this regard as at 31 March 2009 is stated below. 
(Amount: Rupees in crore) 
Outstanding in 
respect of 
Amount as per 
Finance Accounts 
Amount as per 
records of PSUs Difference 
Equity 49.64 62.95 13.31 
Loans 210.90 763.74 552.84 
Guarantees - 8 22.98 - 8 
4.1.14   Audit observed that the differences occurred in respect of three PSUs. 
The Government and the PSUs should take concrete steps to reconcile the 
differences in a time-bound manner. 
Performance of PSUs 
4.1.15   The financial results  of PSUs, financial position and working results 
of working Statutory corporations are detailed in Appendix-4.1.2, 4.1.5, 4.1.6  
respectively. A ratio of PSU turnover to State GDP shows the extent of PSU 
activities in the State economy. Table below provides the details of working 
PSUs turnover and State GDP for the period 2003-04 to 2008-09. 
(Amount : Rupees in crore) 
Particulars 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 
Turnover9 31.95 354.88 3,015.23 3,709.55 4,493.73 4,773.05 
State GDP10 38,610.00 45,999.00 51,921.00 57,782.00 67,455.00 80,698.41 
Percentage of 
Turnover to State 
GDP 
0.08 0.77 5.81 6.42 6.66 5.91 
There is steady increase in aggregate turnover of State PSUs primarily due to 
increase in business activities in power sector which is in line with the steady 
growth of State GDP.  
4.1.16   Profit earned and losses incurred by State working PSUs during  
2003-04 to 2008-09 are given below in a bar chart. 
 
                                                 
8 Finance Accounts do not have company/corporation-wise details for guarantees 
outstanding.  
9  Turnover as per the latest finalised accounts as of 30 September 2009. 
10  The State GDP in respect of 2007-08 and 2008-09 are Advanced estimates. 

 
Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
86 
(Amount: Rupees in crore) 
5.76
137.47
306.53
328.90
3.80
177.16
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09
Net Profit earned during the year by working PSUs
(16)
(8) (11)
(12)
(10)
(10)
 
(Figures in brackets show the number of working PSUs in respective years) 
During the year 2008-09, out of 16 working PSUs, six PSUs earned profit of 
Rs 184.36 crore and three PSUs incurred loss of Rs 7.20 crore. Six working 
PSUs prepared their accounts on a ‘no profit no loss’ basis as no commercial 
activity was started by these companies. One company namely Chhattisgarh 
Rajya Beej Evam Krishi Vikas  Nigam Limited has not prepared even first 
annual account since its inception in October 2004. The major contributors to 
profit were Chhattisgarh State El ectricity Board (Rs 136.94 crore), 
Chhattisgarh State Civil Supplies Corporation Limited (Rs 29.46 crore), 
Chhattisgarh Rajya Van Vikas Nigam  Limited (Rs 11.72 crore) and 
Chhattisgarh State Warehousing Corpor ation (Rs 5.60 crore). The losses were 
incurred by Chhattisgarh State Industrial Development Corporation Limited 
(Rs 6.11 crore), Chhattisgarh Mineral Development Corporation Limited  
(Rs 0.81 crore) and Chhattisgarh Infrastructure Development Corporation 
Limited (Rs 0.28 crore). 
4.1.17   The losses of PSUs are mainly attr ibutable to deficiencies in financial 
management, planning, implementation of project, running their operations 
and monitoring. A review of latest Audit Reports of CAG shows that the State 
PSUs incurred losses to the tune of Rs 284.59 crore and infructuous 
investments of Rs 0.14 crore which were controllable with better management. 
Year wise details from Audit Reports are stated below: 
(Amount : Rupees in crore) 
Particulars 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 Total 
Net Profit  (+)/ loss (-) of working PSUs 137.47 306.53 177.16 621.16 
Controllable losses as per CAG’s Audit Report 57.49 216.82 10.28 284.59 
Infructuous expenditure - - 0.14 0.14 
4.1.18   The above losses pointed out by Audit Reports of CAG are based on 
test check of records of PSUs. The actual controllable losses would be much 
more. The above table shows that with better management, the profits can be 
enhanced substantially. The PSUs can discharge their role efficiently only if 
they are financially self-reliant. The abov e situation points towards a need for 
professionalism and accountability in the functioning of PSUs. 

 
Chapter-IV Commercial and Trading Activities 
 
87 
4.1.19   Some other key parameters pertaining to State PSUs are given below: 
(Amount : Rupees in crore) 
Particulars 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 
Return on Capital 
Employed (Per cent) 7.49 5.03 20.56 14.35 22.76 14.38 
Debt 1,058.28 1,021.81 958.71 2,277.16 3,108.27 2,861.68 
Turnover11 31.95 12 354.88 3,015.24 3,709.55 4,493.73 4,773.05 
Debt/ Turnover Ratio 33.12:1 2.88:1 0.32:1 0.61:1 0.69:1 0.60:1 
Interest Payments - 11.94 119.09 193.93 216.20 180.99 
Accumulated Profits 
(losses) 4.48 10.77 319.28 451.76 728.52 836.89 
4.1.20   The Debt turnover Ratio decreased from 2.88:1 (2004-05) to 0.60:1 
(2008-09). Accumulated profit-Debt ratio increased from 0.42 per cent (2003-
04) to 29.24 per cent (2008-09). It shows that the performance of State PSUs 
is good enough to absorb the debt burden. 
4.1.21   The State Government had not formulated any dividend policy for 
payment of minimum return on the paid-up share capital contributed by the 
State Government. As per their latest finalised accounts, six PSUs earned an 
aggregate profit of Rs 184.36 crore of which only one PSU declared a 
dividend of Rs 0.12 crore as per the provisions of the relevant Act. 
Performance of major PSUs 
4.1.22  The investment in working PSUs and their turnover together 
aggregated to Rs 7,736.10 crore duri ng 2008-09. Out of 16 working PSUs, the 
following two PSUs accounted for individual investment plus turnover of 
more than five per cent  of aggregate investment plus turnover. These two 
PSUs together accounted for 94.67 per cent  of aggregate investment plus 
turnover. 
(Amount : Rupees in crore) 
PSU Name Investment Turnover Total 
(2) + (3) 
Percentage to 
Aggregate 
Investment 
plus Turnover 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1.Chhattisgarh State Civil Supplies 
Corporation Limited 
351.62 1,579.92 1,931.54 24.97 
2.Chhattisgarh State Electricity 
Board 
2,511.13 2,881.13 5,392.26 69.70 
Total 2,862.75 4,461.05 7,323.80 94.67 
Some of the major audit findings of past five years for above PSUs are stated 
in the succeeding paragraphs. 
Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board 
4.1.23   The profit has decreased from Rs 351.27 crore in 2002-03 to  
Rs 136.94 crore in 2004-05. The turnover has risen from Rs 2,041.03 crore in 
2002-03 to Rs 2,881.13 crore in 2004-05. The return on capital employed has, 
                                                
 
11  Turnover of working PSUs as per the latest finalised accounts as of 30 September 
except for 2008-09 for which turnover is as per latest finalised account as on 11 
September 2009. 
12  The turnover for 2003-04 does not include turnover of Chhattisgarh State Electricity 
Board as it had not finalised its account since bifurcation upto 30 September 2004. 

 
Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
88 
however, declined from 29.87 per cent  to 11.62 per cent during the period. 
The accounts of the Board were in arrears since 2005-06 as of September 
2009. 
4.1.24   Deficiencies in implementation 
• There was delay in construction of 108 sub stations of 33/11 KV 
capacity as the work was undertaken on semi turnkey basis. Moreover, 
there was a delay in processing tender for construction of another 76 
stations. The delay resulted in extra commitment of Rs 53.42 crore to 
the Board. (Para No. 6.2.19 of Audit Report 2006-07). 
• The Board had not taken timely actio n to file the cases against the 
defaulting consumers for recovery of arrears which rendered the claims 
of Rs 1.78 crore time barred. (Para No. 6.2.3 of Audit Report 2004-05). 
4.1.25   Deficiencies in planning 
• The Board incurred additional financial commitment of Rs 57.77 lakh 
on construction of staff quarters due to improper assessment of 
requirement followed by delay in finalisation of orders. (Para No. 6.3.2 
of Audit Report 2006-07).  
4.1.26   Deficiencies in Financial management 
• The Board kept huge surplus fund in term deposits with Banks on 
which the Board earned maximum interest at the rate of 8.34 per cent. 
On the contrary, the Board paid higher rate of interest on the borrowed 
fund which resulted in avoidable interest payment of Rs 2.23 crore. 
(Para No. 6.2.10 of Audit Report 2006-07).  
Chhattisgarh State Civil Supplies Corporation Limited 
4.1.27  The loss of Rs 40.29 crore during 2003-04 turned into profit of  
Rs 29.46 crore during 2005-06. The turnover has risen from Rs 1,148.16 crore 
in 2003-04 to Rs 1,579.92 crore in 2005-06. The accounts of the Company 
were in arrears since 2006-07 as of September 2009.  
4.1.28   Deficiencies in implementation 
• The revised sale price of sugar was not implemented by the 
corporation in Chhattisgarh State till 31 December 2002 resulting in 
loss of Rs 57.52 lakh. (Para No. 6.2.4 of Audit Report 2003-04).  
4.1.29   Deficiencies in planning 
• The corporation procured levy sugar in excess which resulted in 
locking up of funds and consequent loss of interest and avoidable 
storage charges of Rs 64.29 lakh. (Para No. 6.2.3 of Audit Report 
2003-04).  
Conclusion 
4.1.30   The above details indicate that there is scope for improvement in their 
overall performance. They need to imbibe greater degree of professionalism to 
ensure delivery of their products and services efficiently and profitably. The 
State Government should introduce a performance based system of 
accountability for PSUs.  

 
Chapter-IV Commercial and Trading Activities 
 
89 
Arrears in finalisation of accounts 
4.1.31   The accounts of the companies for every financial year are required to 
be finalised within six months from the end of the relevant financial year 
under Sections 166, 210, 230, 619 and 619-B of the Companies Act, 1956. 
Similarly, in case of Statutory corporations, their accounts are finalised, 
audited and presented to the Legislature as per the provisions of their 
respective Acts. The table below provide s the details of progress made by 
working PSUs in finalisation of accounts by September 2009. 
Sl. 
No. 
Particulars 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 
1. Number of Working PSUs 11 12 10 10 16 
2. Number of accounts finalised 
during the year 3 5 5 10 9 
3. Number of accounts in arrears 19 26 31 31 35 
4. Average arrears per PSU (3/1)  1.73 2.17 3.10 3.10 2.18 
5. Number of Working PSUs with 
arrears in accounts 8 12 10 10 13 
6. Extent of arrears 1 to 4 
years 
1 to 4 
years 
1 to 5 
years 
1 to 5 
years 
1 to 5 
years 
4.1.32   From the above table it would be seen that the companies have not 
been finalising even one account in a y ear. Thus there was increase in arrears 
of accounts. Concrete steps to clear the accounts need to be taken. The main 
reason as stated by the companies for delay in finalisation of accounts was the 
books of accounts not closed/reconciled. It was observed that many 
organisations were formed after bifurcating from the erstwhile organisations in 
Madhya Pradesh and importance for timely preparation and finalisation of 
annual accounts was not given by the management.  
4.1.33  The State Government had invested Rs 2,777.43 crore (Equity:  
Rs 1.50 crore, loans: Rs 22.95 cror e, grants: Rs 489.09 crore and others 
(subsidy): Rs 2,263.89 crore) in 7 PSUs during the years for which accounts 
have not been finalised as detailed in Appendix-4.1.4. In the absence of 
accounts and their subsequent audit, it can not be ensured whether the 
investments and expenditure incurred have been properly accounted for and 
the purpose for which the amount was invested has been achieved or not and 
thus Government’s investment in such PSUs remain outside the scrutiny of the 
State Legislature. Further, delay in fi nalisation of accounts may also result in 
risk of fraud and leakage of public money apart from violation of the 
provisions of the Companies Act, 1956. 
4.1.34   The administrative departments have the responsibility to oversee the 
activities of these entities and to ensu re that the accounts are finalised and 
adopted by these PSUs within the pres cribed period. Though the concerned 
administrative departments and official s of the Government were informed 
this year by the Audit, of the arrears in finalisation of accounts, no remedial 
measures were taken. As a result of this the net worth of these PSUs could not 
be assessed in audit. The matter of arrears in accounts was also taken up 
(December 2008) with the Principal Se cretary/Secretary to expedite the 
backlog of arrears in accounts in a time bound manner and also discussed in a 
meeting with Principal Secretary on 6 July 2009. 
 

 
Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
90 
4.1.35   In view of above state of arrears, it is recommended that: 
• The Government may set up a cell to oversee the clearance of arrears 
and set the targets for individual companies which would be monitored 
by the cell. 
• The Government may consider outsourcing the work relating to 
preparation of accounts wherever the staff is inadequate or lacks 
expertise. 
Accounts Comments and Internal Audit 
4.1.36   Five working companies forwarde d their audited (five) accounts to 
Accountant General during the year 2008-09. All the accounts of five 
companies were selected for supplemen tary audit. The audit reports of 
statutory auditors appointed by CAG and the supplementary audit of CAG 
indicate that the quality of maintenance of accounts can be improved. The 
details of aggregate money value of comments of statutory auditors and CAG 
are given below: 
(Amount: Rupees in crore) 
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 Sl. 
No. 
Particulars 
No. of 
accounts 
Amount No. of 
accounts 
Amount No. of 
accounts 
Amount 
1. Increase in 
profit 1 5.13 1 6.45 2 0.98 
2. Decrease in 
profit 1 0.04 - - 3 1.04 
3. Increase in loss - - 1 0.92 - - 
4. Decrease in loss - - - - - - 
5. Non-disclosure 
of material facts 1 0.20 1 7.57   
Total  5.37  14.94  2.02 
Number of accounts on which comments were made increased from three 
(2006-07) to five (2008-09). However, money value of the comments 
decreased from Rs 5.37 crore (2006-07) to Rs 2.02 crore (2008-09). 
4.1.37   During the year, the statutory auditors had given qualified certificates 
for four accounts. The compliance of companies with the Accounting 
Standards (AS) was satisfactory as there was only one instance of non-
compliance with AS–15 during the year. 
4.1.38   Some of the important comments in respect of accounts of companies 
are stated below: 
Chhattisgarh State Industrial Development Corporation Limited (2003-04) 
• The liability of Rs 15.98 lakh shown towards interest on bonds  
(Rs 10.37 lakh payable to LIC of India and Rs 5.61 lakh to SBI) should 
have been written off through proper procedure as there was no 
demand from LIC and SBI. 
• The interest does not include Rs 93.40 lakh towards interest accrued 
but not due on SLR Bonds and other borrowings. This resulted in 
understatement of Loss for the year and Current Liabilities to that 
extent.  

 
Chapter-IV Commercial and Trading Activities 
 
91 
Chhattisgarh State Beverages Corporation Limited (2006-07) 
• The purchases were overstated by Rs 15.26 lakh as the material 
received in previous year were recorded in current year, thereby 
understating profit of the Current year. 
• No provision of gratuity was made by the corporation in the financial 
statements of the year as per Accounting Standards (AS)-15, resulting 
in not compliance with the AS-15. 
Chhattisgarh Rajya Van Vikas Nigam Limited (2006-07) 
• The company has paid only Rs 26.66 lakh against a claim of Rs 8.70 
crore from LIC towards the Group Gratuity Policy liability upto 2006-
07 and of Rs 1.14 crore towards the annual premium of group gratuity 
for the year 2007-08. The company has neither provided for the 
balance amount in its accounts nor disclosed the same as “claims not 
acknowledged as debts” in the notes forming part of the accounts. 
4.1.39   Similarly, two working statutory corporations forwarded their four 
accounts to Accountant General during the year 2008-09. Of these four 
accounts, accounts of Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board (statutory 
corporation) pertained to sole audit by CAG which was completed. Of the 
remaining three accounts of Chhattisgarh State Warehousing Corporation, all 
the accounts were selected for supplemen tary audit. The details of aggregate 
money value of comments of statutory auditors and CAG are given below: 
(Amount: Rupees in crore) 
2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 Sl. 
No. 
Particulars 
No. of 
accounts 
Amount No. of 
accounts 
Amount No. of 
accounts 
Amount 
1 Decrease in 
profit - - 1 1.74 3 3.71 
4.1.40   During the year, out of four accounts, three accounts received 
qualified certificates. 
4.1.41 Some of the important comments in respect of accounts of Statutory 
corporations are stated below: 
Chhattisgarh State Warehousing Corporation (2004-05) 
• The corporation has not made provision for leave encashment on the 
basis of actuarial valuation as prescribed in the AS-15. 
Chhattisgarh State Warehousing Corporation (2006-07) 
• The corporation has not paid, provided by/ recovered service tax on 
handling and transportation (H&T) services rendered to Food 
Corporation of India.  The quantum of unpaid service tax for financial 
year 2005-06 and 2006-07 was Rs 99.35 lakh and interest liability up 
to 31 March 2007 was Rs 11.43 lakh. 
Recoveries at the instance of audit 
4.1.42   During the course of audit in 2008-09, recoveries of Rs 1.08 crore 
were pointed out to the Management of various PSUs, of which, recoveries of 

 
Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
92 
Rs 0.23 crore were admitted by PSUs. An amount of Rs 0.02 crore was 
recovered during the year 2008-09. 
Status of placement of Separate Audit Reports 
4.1.43   The following table shows the status  of placement of various Separate 
Audit Reports (SARs) issued by the CAG on the accounts of Statutory 
corporations, in the State Legislature. 
Year for which SARs not placed in Legislature Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Statutory 
corporation  
Year up to 
which SARs 
placed in 
Legislature 
Year of 
SAR 
Date of issue to 
the Government 
Reasons for 
delay in 
placement in 
Legislature 
- 2001-02 8.12.2006 - 
- 2002-03 25.4.2008 - 
1. Chhattisgarh State 
Electricity Board 
- 2003-04 1.4.2009 - 
2. Chhattisgarh State 
Warehousing 
Corporation 
2003-04 2004-05 29.6.2009 - 
The Board stated that Electricity Act, 2003 does not contain any provision for 
placing the SAR of the erstwhile Board in the Legislature. Non-placement of 
SARs weakens the legislative control over Statutory corporations and dilutes 
the latter’s financial accountability. The Government should ensure prompt 
placement of SARs in the Legislature. 
Disinvestment, Privatisation and Restructuring of PSUs 
4.1.44   The process of unbundling of Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board was 
completed as per the Electricity Act, 2003. The Board was unbundled on 30 
December 2008 into five companies (CSPDCL, CSPHCL, CSPGCL, 
CSPTr.CL, CSPTCL) with effect from 1 January 2009. Allocation of assets 
and liabilities is under process. 
Reforms in Power Sector 
4.1.45  The State has formed Chhattisgarh State Electricity Regulatory 
Commission (Commission) in October 2001 under Section 17 of the erstwhile 
Electricity Regulatory Commission Act, 1998 with the objective of 
rationalisation of electricity tariff, advi sing in matters relating to electricity 
generation, transmission and distribution in the State and issue of licences. 
During 2008-09, Commission issued 29 orders (None on annual revenue 
requirements and 29 on others). 
4.1.46   Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed in May 2000 
between the Union Ministry of Power and the State Government (MP) as a 
joint commitment for implementation of reforms programme in power sector 
with identified milestones. However, no MoU was signed between the Union 
Ministry of Power and State of Chhattisgarh after formation of Chhattisgarh 
State in November 2000 bifurcating erstwhile Madhya Pradesh under Madhya 
Pradesh reorganisation Act. Hence the implementation of reforms programme 
and achievement of identified milestones could not be assessed.  

 
Chapter-IV Commercial and Trading Activities 
 
93 
Discussion of Audit Reports by COPU 
4.1.47   The status as on 30 September 2009 of reviews and paragraphs that 
appeared in Audit Reports (Commercial) and discussed by the Committee on 
Public Undertakings (COPU) is as under: 
4.1.48   The matter relating to clearance of backlog of reviews/ paragraphs 
was taken up with the Secretary, Chhattisgarh Vidhan Sabha in March 2009 
and discussed with Chairman, COPU in July 2009.  
Number of reviews/ paragraphs 
Appeared in Audit Report Paras discussed Period of 
Audit Report Reviews Paragraphs Reviews Paragraphs 
2001-02 - 2 - 1 
2002-03 - 7 - 2 
2003-04 - 8  8 
2004-05 - 3 - 3 
2005-06 1 5 - 1 
2006-07 1 5 - - 
2007-08 1 5 - - 
Total 3 35 - 15 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 94
4.2 Performance review relatin g to Government Company  
 
Chhattisgarh Rajya Van Vikas Nigam Limited 
 
4.2.1 Introduction 
The Chhattisgarh Rajya Van Vikas Nigam  Limited (Company) was 
incorporated (May 2001) as a fully owned Government Company with paid up 
capital of Rs 6.54 crore 1 on bifurcation from Madhya Pradesh Rajya Van 
Vikas Nigam Limited. The main objectives of the Company are to accelerate 
and increase forestry production by developing land, raising plantations, 
felling of trees, marketing of forest pr oducts and to promote the participation 
of companies and firms in the development of forest based industries. 
The main activities of the company are acquisition of forest land; 
establishment of nurseries; raising of plantation and exploitation; protection 
and scientific management of forest areas transferred to it; intensive plantation 
of teak and bamboo for improving the quality and productivity of the forests; 
rehabilitation of mined areas by intensive plantation of miscellaneous species 
and grasses and marketing of forest produce obtained from forestry operation.   
Management of the company is vested in a Board of Directors (BOD) 
consisting of 11 Directors including a Managing Director who is the Chief 
Executive. He is assisted by one Executive Director in the corporate office, 
two Regional General Managers in two 2 regional offices and seven Divisional 
Managers. The company has six3 project divisions and an Industrial Plantation 
Division (IPD) at Korba, which undertakes plantation work of other 
organisations against advance deposited. 
4.2.2 Scope of Audit 
The present review conducted during April-June 2009 covers the overall 
performance of the company during 2004-09. Four 4 out of seven divisions, 
both the regional offices and the corpor ate office were selected for audit 
scrutiny, on the basis of volume of plantation and exploitation activities 
carried out. Out of 22,023 ha plantation done by the company during the 
period of review the selected divisions covered 9,917 ha (45.03 per cent).  
Similarly out of 1.33 lakh cubic metre (CMT) timber exploited by the 
company during the period of review, the selected divisions contributed 0.46 
lakh CMT (34.59 per cent). 
4.2.3 Audit objectives 
The performance review was conducted to assess whether: 
                                                 
1  Chhattisgarh Government Rs 5.62 crore and Central Government Rs 0.92 crore 
2   Raipur and Bilaspur. 
3  Barnawapara (Raipur), Panabaras (Rajnandgaon), Antagarh (Bhanupratappur), 
Kawardha (Kawardha), Kota (Bilaspur) and Sarguja (Ambikapur). 
4   Project division at Barnawapara, Panabaras, Sarguja and Industrial Plantation 
Division at Korba. 

Chapter-IV Commercial and Trading Activities 
 95
• the land was selected as per prescribed procedure and optimally 
utilised for plantation; 
• the activity of raising plantations of fast growing, higher economic 
value and diversified use was planned properly; 
• funds were available for plantation activities and utilised judiciously; 
• all the plantation activities i.e. raising of root-shoots in nursery, 
plantation, thinning and felling operations are carried out as prescribed 
in the working plan; and 
• the internal control mechanism was adequate. 
4.2.4 Audit criteria 
The audit criteria were derived from the: 
• Memorandum and Articles of Association of the company; 
• National/State Forest Policy, National Working Plan Code, 
decisions/directions/guidelines of the BOD and the State Government; 
• Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, Fo rest (Conservation) Rules, 1981 
and Forest (Conservation) Amendment Act, 1988; and  
• Targets/provisions made in working /annual plan of operations; 
4.2.5 Audit Methodology  
Audit followed the following methodologies: 
• analysis of working plans, targets, proposal of land acquisition and 
survey reports;  
• scrutiny of plantation Journal, Nursery Journal and technical 
guidelines; 
• analysis of agenda and minutes of board of Directors; 
• analysis of agreement for deposit work and document of sale of forest 
produces; and 
• Interaction/ discussion with the personnel of the company.  
4.2.6 Financial position  and working results 
The financial position and working results of the Company for last four years 
up to 31 March 2008 are given in Appendix-4.2.1. The summary position is 
stated below: 
(Rupees in crore) 
Particulars 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 
Capital plus Reserves & Surplus 17.44 19.82 28.57 40.37 
Liabilities 49.48 51.10 62.47 64.36 
Assets 66.92 70.92 91.04 104.73 
Income 27.45 24.31 28.67 22.15 
Expenditure 16.61 20.13 24.12 8.66 
Profit 10.84 4.18 4.55 13.49 
The revenue of the company was Rs 102.58 crore during 2004-08 against 
which it incurred expenditure of Rs 69.52 crore resulting in aggregate net 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 96
profit of Rs 33.06 crore. The majo r revenue was from Nationalised species 5 
(Rs 55.29 crore) and non-nationalised species (Rs 28.03 crore) whereas the 
major expenditure was on plantation, exploitation, conversion and 
transportation work (Rs 65.52 crore). 
Audit findings  
The Audit findings were reported to the Management/Government in August 
2009. The Management/Government have furnished their replies (September 
2009). The exit conference was held on 7 October 2009 with the Secretary 
(Forest Department), Government of Chhattisgarh and the Managing Director 
of the Company. The audit findings are discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
4.2.7  Acquisition and utilisation of land  
Chhattisgarh State has 59.77 lakh hectare (ha) of forest land. The company has 
total lease holding of 1.98 lakh ha consisting of 1.46 lakh ha that was available 
as on the date of formation and 0.64 lakh ha acquired during May 2001 to June 
2008. It had returned (June 2007) 0.12 lakh ha land to Forest Department. The 
details regarding acquisition and utilisation of land are given in Appendix-
4.2.2. 
4.2.7.1   Absence of clear policies and procedures for acquisition of land  
The company has not signed any Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with 
the State Government laying down clear policy and detailed procedure 
specifying the criteria for selection of la nd, time frame for transfer of land by 
the State Government, registration of lease deed, rate of lease rent payable and 
due date for lease rent payment. The Chhattisgarh State Forest Policy (2001) 
has not prescribed the percentage of the ar ea of forest land to be transferred to 
the company. 
It was observed that:  
• The land so far acquired by the company represents only 3.30 per cent 
of the total forest land of the State. 
• The company submitted (2004 and 2006) two proposals for transfer of 
17,300 ha land in Kendra Range of Bilaspur District (9,900 ha) and 
Balod and Dalli Rajhara of Durg District (7,400 ha). However, the 
proposals were not accepted by the Government on the grounds that 
the density of trees in some areas was more than the prescribed limit of 
40 per cent , some areas were included in the Amarkantak Sanctuary 
and in some areas the work was already being carried out by the Forest 
Department. Audit noticed that out of 17,300 ha land for which 
proposals were submitted 16,493 ha land did not fulfill the 
criteria/grounds mentioned by the Government. However, the 
remaining 807 ha of land was also not transferred.  
• Out of 11,643.35 ha of land transferred to the company in 2003-04 for 
Kawardha Project, 1,351.56 ha land was returned (August and October 
2008) on the request of Forest Department due to administrative 
                                                
 
5  This includes teak, bija, tinsa and sisem and the rest are non-nationalised species. 

Chapter-IV Commercial and Trading Activities 
 97
reasons. The company had incurred an expenditure of Rs 13.72 lakh 
towards plantation of teak on the land. The company has not taken up 
the matter with the Forest Department for recovery of Rs 13.72 lakh. 
The specific administrative grounds on which the said land was 
returned were also not on record. 
The Management stated that the land wa s returned to Forest Department for 
better protection of forest area. However, the expenditure of Rs 13.72 lakh is 
yet to be recovered. 
It is evident from the above that ther e was no clear framework/norms for the 
land transfers. Management stated (June 2009) that the proposals for transfer 
of land are decided by the State Government on certain criteria like degraded 
forest (less than 0.5 density), proximity to existing divisions, suitability for 
plantation activities etc. However, such criteria were not documented in any 
policy/agreement. Consequently the process of land acquisition was not 
governed by an agreed framework and the transactions were getting finalised 
based on subjective decisions taken in each individual case. 
Government replied (September 2009) that pursuant to the observation of 
audit, the company has submitted a request for framing clear guidelines and 
procedures for transfer of forest land, which would be issued by the 
Government in near future. 
4.2.7.2   Utilisation of land  
Out of 1.98 lakh ha of the forest land available with the company as of June 
2008, 1.49 lakh ha was due for treatment/utilisation as per working plan up to 
June 2008. The actual utilisation was 1.23 lakh ha (2007-08) giving a shortfall 
of 0.26 lakh ha (17.73 per cent ). Out of 0.26 lakh ha land pending for 
treatment, 0.05 lakh ha land in respect of Sarguja and Kawardha divisions was 
available for treatment since September 2003 and the remaining 0.21 lakh 
since the inception of the company.  
The Government transferred 20,191.44 ha land to Sarguja project division on 
its formation (12 September 2003). The working plan (2004-05 to 2013-14) 
provided that the division should have utilised/treated an area of 6849.02 ha 
up to 2007-08 whereas it had uti lised/treated 2235.97 ha (32.65 per cent ). 
Audit observed that the company has not formed Joint Forest Management 
Committees (JFM) involving local people in any of its divisions as envisaged 
in the State Forest Policy 2001.  
The Government replied (September 2009) that the low utilisation was due to 
non-cooperation and agitation of the local people and agreed that they need to 
be involved in the working of company through JFM and a proposal for 
introduction of JFM in forest areas under Nigam, by involving people and 
sharing of profit, is under active consideration of the State Government. 
It is evident from above that there was ample scope to streamline the 
operations and also involve the locals through JFM. 
Low 
utilisation of 
land to the 
extent of 
67.35 per 
cent 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 98
4.2.8 Planning  
4.2.8.1   Delay in preparation and submission of working plan  
As per Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, Forest (Conservation) Rules, 1981 
and Forest (Conservation) Amendment Act, 1988, prior approval of 
Government of India is mandatory for all proposals involving 
clearing/working in forest areas includi ng reforestation, for which working 
plan/managerial plans are to be submitted to Government of India, Ministry of 
Environment and Forests for permissi on to carry out the regeneration, 
plantation, demarcation and fire protection works.  
Audit scrutiny revealed that the working plan for the years 2008-09 to 2018-19 
was not prepared (June 2009) in Panabaras Project division. The Government 
replied (September 2009) that delay in the preparation of the plan was because 
of severe naxalite activities in the project  division area. In fu ture steps will be 
taken to prepare the Working Plan in time. The reply is not convincing as the 
land utilization in Panabaras division was 97 per cent which indicated that it 
should have been possible to prepare plans.  
4.2.8.2   Man power management  
The company, at the time of formation (May 2001), had 705 sanctioned posts 
which were subsequently revised (September 2008) to 723. The actual 
working strength of company as on 31 March 2009 was 605. 
Audit scrutiny revealed the following deficiencies in man power management:  
• Though the company, as a whole, was suffering from a shortage of 
staff, as on 31 March 2009 some di visions/offices were having excess 
staff in six out of 30 cadres, while some other divisions/offices were 
facing shortages in the same cadres as detailed below:  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of office Deputy 
Manager 
Assistant 
Manager 
(Accounts) 
Project 
Range 
Officer 
Accountant Driver Messenger 
  E(+)/S(-) E(+)/S(-) E(+)/S(-) E(+)/S(-) E(+)/S(-) E(+)/S(-) 
1. Head  office -2 1 0 0 -2 0 
2. Regional office 
Raipur  
1 0 -1 1 -1 0 
3. Regional office 
Bilaspur 
0 0 -1 0 0 0 
4. Barnawapara 0 -1 -3 0 2 2 
5. Panabaras -1 0 -4 0 1 3 
6. Kota -1 0 -2 -2 2 -2 
7. Antagarh 0 0 -4 1 0 0 
8. Kawardha -1 0 0 0 -1 -1 
9. Sarguja 0 -1 1 -2 0 -1 
10. Industrial 
Plantation 
Division, 
Korba 
-1 0 2 -1 -1 -1 

Chapter-IV Commercial and Trading Activities 
 99
Audit observed that one Deputy Manager was working in Regional office at 
Raipur without sanction. In Sarguja division one post of Assistant Manager 
Accounts (AM) was vacant since January 2008 whereas in HO one post of 
AM was in excess since January 2008. Similarly in IPD Korba five Project 
Range Officers (PRO) were working agai nst the sanctioned strength of three 
whereas in Antagarh and Panabaras four PRO posts each were vacant, in 
Barnawapara, three PRO posts were vacant and in Kota two PRO posts were 
vacant. The excess staff should have been deployed in deficit divisions. 
• Large number of employees i.e. 230 out of 605 employees (38 per 
cent) belong to the age group of 55 years and above of which 185 are 
having the experience in the field of plantation etc. and will be retiring 
in the next five years. Retirement of most of the experienced staff may 
have an impact on working of the company as successful plantation 
requires practical field experience.  
Management stated (October 2009) that a new Service Manual is being 
prepared which will have provisions for all administrative and technical 
matters. It was further stated that an y anomalies in posting will be removed 
during the transfer season and timely action will be taken to fill up the vacant 
posts through recruitment/promotion/deputation.  
4.2.9 Financial management 
4.2.9.1   Sources and utilisation of funds  
The activities of the company are managed from its own revenues which are 
generated primarily from sale of forest produce. It had profits during the 
period of audit and did not borrow any funds. The sources and utilisation of 
funds for the four years ending 31 March 2008 are given below: 
(Rupees in crore) 
Particulars 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 
Sources      
Income from Timber, logs  poles 
plants etc. 
25.53 19.84 23.03 16.32 
Other income  
Agency commission  
Interest  
Others income  
 
0.38 
1.13 
0.42 
 
0.32 
3.83 
0.32 
 
0.58 
4.56 
0.50 
 
0.20 
5.32 
0.31 
Increase/decrease in stock  5.18 1.86 (-) 4.97 1.63 
Total 32.64 26.17 23.70 23.78 
Utilisation      
Exploitation, conversion, and 
transportation etc.   
 
20.95 
 
21.25 
 
18.08 
 
8.93 
Employees remuneration  0.59 0.51 0.87 1.00 
Others  0.26 0.23 0.20 0.36 
Total 21.80 21.99 19.15 10.29 
Profit 10.84 4.18 4.55 13.49 
The expenditure on plantation, maintenance and nursery (Regeneration 
expenditure) incurred during 2004-05 –Rs 7.98 crore, 2005-06 –Rs 1.46 crore, 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 100
2006-07 –Rs 1.98 crore and 2007-08 –Rs 9. 86 crore had been capitalised as 
per the accounting policy of the company. The total expenditure on plantation, 
maintenance, nursery, exploitation, conversion and transportation had 
substantially reduced from Rs 28.93 crore in 2004-05 to Rs 18.79 crore in 
2007-08 whereas the income from interest on term deposits and savings 
accounts increased from Rs 1.13 crore in 2004-05 to Rs 5.32 crore in 2007-08. 
The term deposits held in bank as on 31 March 2008 were Rs 65.21 crore. It 
was also noticed that the reduction of income during the year 2007-08 was 
mainly on account of non-exploitation due to naxal activities in Antagarh 
division and due to fixation of low target of exploitation in Kota division, 
where substantial exploitation had been done in the previous year. 
Since the main objective of company was raising and upkeep of plantations, 
the reduction of expenditure on plantation, maintenance etc. indicated lower 
level of activity which was not in consonance with the objectives. Moreover, 
the retention of large amounts in term deposits fetching interest at 9 to 10 per 
cent per annum instead of utilising the same in plantation activities where the 
average rate of return (excluding interest income) was 15.85 per cent6 was not 
financially prudent. 
Government replied (September 2009) that the company has always strived to 
achieve the plantation targets and the same is subject to constraints like naxal 
problems and no plantation activity had been curtailed on the grounds of non-
availability of funds.  
4.2.9.2   Lack of budgetary control 
The company prepares annual budget deta iling therein sales and head wise 
expenditure in respect of operational, trading and other activities considering 
the estimates prepared by the divisions based on working plan/ annual plan 
and physical and financial targets. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that: 
• The budget is being revised every year based on actual performance 
from April to December and expected performance from January to 
March. However, the actual income and expenditure is not being 
assessed by the company and therefore not being compared against the 
budget. There was large variation between budgeted surplus and actual 
profit as depicted below:  
(Rupees in crore) 
Income Expenditure Surplus Year 
Budget Actual Excess/
shortfall 
Budget Actual Excess/
shortfall 
Budget Actual Excess/
shortfall 
2004-05 47.68 32.64 (-) 15.04 30.25 21.80 (-) 8.45 17.43 10.84 (-) 6.59 
2005-06 46.80 26.17 (-) 20.63 46.20 21.99 (-) 24.21 0.60 4.18 (+) 3.58 
2006-07 65.03 23.70 (-) 41.33 48.02 19.15 (-) 28.87 17.01 4.55 (+) 12.46 
2007-08 40.38 23.78 (-) 16.60 38.48 10.29 (-) 28.19 1.90 13.49 (+) 11.59 
                                                 
6  Source: Appendix-6.2 of Audit Report (Civil & Commercial) for the year 2007-08 of 
Government of Chhattisgarh. 
Parking of 
funds to the 
extent of  
Rs 65.21 
crore in 
banks 
instead of 
utilising in 
plantation 
activities 

Chapter-IV Commercial and Trading Activities 
 101
On being pointed out, the Government replied (September 2009) that the 
budgetary estimates prepared and submitt ed to the Board of the Directors of 
the Nigam have been indicated that the 'Surpl us' worked out in the estimates is 
subject to the Surplus of revenue over expenditure of Crop-I (referred to as 
lease rent) payable to the Forest Department of the State Government. Thus, 
the company should prepare budget in such a way that it can be compared with 
the actuals and used for preparation of subsequent budgets on realistic basis. 
• It was also observed that there was delay ranging from 42 to 83 days in 
conveying the approved annual budget to divisions. The Government 
replied (September 2009) that the targets for forestry operations are 
reviewed at various levels from time to time and are revised as per the 
conditions in the forests and the same are executed as per the approved 
job rates only and hence any delay in communication of budgets to the 
divisions does not hamper the progress of works of the divisions. Such 
delays tend to dilute budgetary discipline and control and should be 
avoided. 
4.2.9.3   Delay in remittance of dues to Forest Department  
As per existing arrangement, the company remits the sale proceeds of Crop- I
7 
after adjusting expenses to the Forest Department. It was observed that there 
was no agreed time schedule for remittance of these dues and company 
remitted Rs 10 crore in March 2009 against the dues of Rs 19.50 crore for the 
year 2006-07 although funds were available. 
On being pointed out by audit, the Management has remitted (August and 
September 2009) the dues to Forest Department amounting to Rs 9.50 crore 
pertaining to the year 2006-07. There is a need to establish a system for 
expeditious remittance of dues to the Government. 
4.2.10   Plantation activities  
The company undertakes the plantation of teak, bamboo and miscellaneous 
species. It also undertakes Jetropha plantation on behalf of State Government 
under National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS). 
Teak/bamboo plantation is done using root-shoots/ rhizomes which are grown 
in the nurseries maintained by each division. Root-shoots are categorised as 
standard, medium and under size. Standard  size is used for plantation as well 
as replacement of dead root-shoots planted in previous year, medium size are 
retained in bed till next year for grow th up to standard size and under size are 
destroyed or sold.  
4.2.10.1   Performance of Nurseries 
During 2004-08 the company has been operating seven nurseries wherein the 
company had produced 5.99 crore root-shoots using 0.95 lakh beds (excluding 
Manendragarh division). The average production was 631 root-shoots per bed. 
On the basis of targets fixed for plantation of teak each year, Company decides 
the quantity of root-shoots to be prepared in the nurseries of each division. 
Root-shoots are prepared out of teak plants germinated from seeds. For raising 
plants of good quality, seeds are purchased from Van Suraksha Samiti as well 
                                                
 
7   Standing natural forest which belongs to the Forest Department of State Government 
Huge 
variation 
between 
budgeted 
surplus 
and actual 
surplus.  

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 102
as from the open market and, after treatment, the seeds are sown for 
germination in April/May each year in beds of 10 x 1 meter size.  Plants grow 
in these beds by June/July of the next  year. The selected divisions of the 
company had four nurseries which had produced 3.42 crore root-shoots 
against the target of 4.49 crore root-shoots during the period from 2004-05 to 
2008-09.  
Audit scrutiny of performance of nurse ries under various divisions of the 
company revealed the following deficiencies.  
Less production of standard root- shoots  
As per the norms fixed by the company a minimum of 700 standard size root- 
shoots were to be produced from each bed. It was observed that during  
2004-08 the actual average production of standard size root-shoots  
was 381 per bed. The resultant shortfall in production was 2.93 crore  
root-shoots (details in Appendix-4.2.3). Analysis of the low production in 
Sarguja Project division revealed that as per soil test reports, enrichment was 
essential but the nursery went ahead with production of root-shoots without 
enrichment of soil in 2007 and 2008. This resulted in less production of 31.80 
lakh standard size root-shoots during the period. 
The Management stated (October 2009) that revised guidelines would be 
issued regarding production of root-shoots in the nursery. 
Non-accounting of root-shoots 
In the divisions where the required number of standard sized root-shoots are 
not available due to shortfall in production, they are transferred from other 
divisions having surplus. The company does not have any system of 
accounting and reconciling the inter divisional transfers. According to the 
information furnished to audit, during the period 2004-08, four divisions
8 had 
transferred 47.74 lakh root-shoots to ot her divisions. However, only two 
divisions9 had indicated the receipt of 15.62  lakh root-shoots. There was an 
unreconciled difference of 32.12 lakh root-shoots which would have to be 
reconciled with the records of all divisions. Since a substantial portion of root-
shoots are being transferred and keeping in view the large difference, it is 
essential to establish a system of prope r accounting and reconciliation of inter 
divisional transfers.  
On being pointed out by Audit, the company has prescribed a new format for 
accounting and reconciliation of root-sho ots. It also did the reconciliation of 
production and disposal of root-shoots by various project divisions for the 
period 2004 to 2008. 
Use of medium and undersized root-shoots  
The Company’s Technical Guidelines (2001)  prescribe that only standard size 
root-shoots should be used for plantation. Audit scrutiny revealed that Sarguja 
division had utilised 5.58 lakh medium and undersize root-shoots during  
2006-08 and the Barnawapara division had utilised 1.17 lakh and 1.37 lakh 
medium size root-shoots for plantation in the year 2004-05 and 2007-08 
                                                
 
8  Barnawapara , Kota, Antagarh and Panabaras    
9  Sarguja  and Panabaras   
Short 
production 
of 
standard 
size root-
shoots 
compared 
to the 
norm 
Inter 
division 
transfer of 
root-shoots 
were not 
reconciled  

Chapter-IV Commercial and Trading Activities 
 103
respectively in contravention of the norms of the company. It was also 
observed that the casualty rate was 34 per cent in Sarguja and 27 per cent in 
Barnawapara division in the year 2005-06 as against the prescribed norms of 
20 per cent. The use of medium and under sized root-shoots may have 
contributed to the high casualty.  
The Management stated (October 2009) that revised guidelines regarding use 
of root-shoots in the plantation would be issued separately. It was also stated 
that the Sarguja Project Division has utilized undersized root-shoots for raising 
pre-sprout plants in poly-bags for casua lty replacement in 2008, which is not 
direct plantation and is not prohibited. However, the details of utilisation of 
under size root-shoots for pre-sprout plants in poly-bags were not on record. 
4.2.10.2   Performance of plantations 
Inadequate re-plantation in the areas of failed bamboo and teak plantations 
Out of 13,429 ha of availabl e bamboo plantations in three
10 divisions, 10,710 
ha (79.75 per cent ) had been classified as unsuccessful by the respective 
division and out of 8,238 ha of available teak plantations in Kota division, 
2,646 ha (32.12 per cent) had been classified as unsuccessful as the existing 
forest cover had fallen below 40 per cent . It was observed that against the 
available failed area of 13,356 ha, teak replantation was done in 7,755 ha 
(58.06 per cent ) at a cost of Rs 6.38 crore. Therefore, replantation was not 
carried out in as much as 41.94 per cent  of the failed plantation areas. The 
reason for not carrying out the plantation in the remaining failed plantation 
areas was not on record.  Since the company had surplus funds and the 
expenditure on plantations and other operational activities had shown a steep 
decrease (para 4.2.9.1), it was evident that there was ample scope to increase 
the operations. 
The Government replied (September 2009) that the plantation targets depend 
only on availability of suitable area as per working plan prescriptions. The 
reply indicted that there was a need to review and include the areas of failed 
plantations in the working plans, so that the surplus funds with the company 
could be utilised for plantations. 
4.2.10.3   Jetropha plantation  
Jetropha has emerged as a major biofuel because of its high oil content. 
Looking at future trends towards incr eased use of biofuels instead of 
hydrocarbons, Chhattisgarh State had pla nned to go in for mass scale Jetropha 
plantations on barren/open common lands. The plantations are being done 
under the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (NREGS). The 
company is one of the implementing agencies for doing Jetropha plantation 
and receives funds from  Chhattisgarh Biofuel Development Authority, 
Chhattisgarh Government (CBDA) and Zilla Panchayats (NREGS funds). The 
CBDA, the Nodal Agency for implementation of Jetropha project, had fixed a 
target of five crore plantations for the company during 2005-07 against which 
the achievement was 4.55 crore plants.  
                                                
 
10  Baranawapara , Panabaras and Kota. 
Replantation 
was not 
carried out 
in 41.94 per 
cent of failed 
areas 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 104
The shortcomings relating to Jetropha plantations are discussed in succeeding 
paragraphs:  
Inordinate delay in preferring claim  
The CBDA had fixed a target of three crore Jetropha plantation for the year  
2007-08. The company had prepared 2.94 crore seedlings of Jetropha plants 
and utilised 2.80 crore seedlings and remaining 14 lakh were kept in stock. 
CBDA had asked (November and December 2007) the company to submit 
proposal for maintenance expenditure on unutilised seedlings. The company 
submitted the proposal for Rs 15.46 lakh in May 2008 and the same was 
rejected by CBDA due to delay. This resulted in non-recovery of  
Rs 15.46 lakh.  
The Government replied (September 2009) that as the expenditure on 
maintenance of the unutilised seedlings was done from the allotments received 
for preparation and plantation of these plants under various schemes, there is 
no question of recovery from CBDA. The reply is not convincing as the very 
fact that the company had submitted a proposal showed that it had expected to 
recover the amount from CBDA.  
Execution of work without approval 
The Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of Sarguja Zilla Panchayat (ZP), 
Ambikapur enhanced (June 2007) the Jetropha plantation target of Sarguja 
Project division for the year 2007-08 and instructed it to submit a proposal for 
administrative approval of the enhanced  portion. Accordingly, the division 
submitted (5 July 2007) a proposal for Rs 23.38 lakh and carried additional 
above work amounting to Rs 19.25 lakh in September 2007. The ZP has 
neither given the sanction nor made the payment (June 2009).  
The Government replied (September 2009) that the plantation has been carried 
out from the funds received under NREGS for other Jatropha plantations. 
However, the case is required to be pursued with the ZP to get the 
administrative approval and reimbursement. 
4.2.10.4   Deposit work 
IPD, Korba undertakes plantation activiti es of other organisations such as 
South Eastern Coalfields Limited (SECL) , NTPC Limited, Chhattisgarh State 
Electricity Board (CSEB), Bhilai Steel Plant (BSP) etc. as deposit work. It 
does not carry out its own plantations and deploys all its staff for executing 
deposit works. The Division collects supervision charges in addition to the 
actual expenditure incurred on plantations. Out of total deposits works of  
Rs 29.06 crore undertaken by the company during the period of review IPD, 
Korba contributed Rs 21.96 crore (75.57 per cent). Audit scrutiny revealed the 
following shortcomings in its operation. 
Excessive casualty of plants  
During the period from 2003 to 2006 the IPD, Korba had taken up plantation 
activities at Hirri mines of Bhilai Steel Plant (BSP) at a cost of Rs 65.66 lakh. 
Audit scrutiny revealed the survival of plants ranged between zero and 60 per 
cent as against the agreed survival rate of 80 per cent . As a result, BSP 
withheld an amount of Rs 25.73 lakh towards excess casualty. 

Chapter-IV Commercial and Trading Activities 
 105
The Government replied (September 2009) that action is being initiated 
against officers responsible. It was also stated that the expenditure on 
plantation is less than the receipt and the company has not incurred any 
expenditure from its funds. However, the company would have received 
additional payment of Rs 25.73 lakh if the survival had been over 80 per cent. 
Pending payments for plantation works  
It was ascertained that against the aggregate expenditure of Rs 7.31 crore on 
plantation work carried out during 2004 to 2007, the company had received an 
amount of Rs 6.33 crore leaving unpaid balance of Rs 98.15 lakh. While the 
division furnished a statement of such pending payments, the related files and 
records were not furnished. Consequently, audit could not examine whether 
the division had a suitable control mechanism to monitor the payments. It was 
observed that the Board of Directors had decided (September 2001) to levy 
interest at 18 per cent per annum for delays in receiving funds and incorporate 
a suitable clause in subsequent agreements. However, the requisite clause has 
not been included. 
Had such a clause been incorporated, as  directed by the Board of Directors, 
the pending payment of Rs 98.15 lakh would have earned an interest of  
Rs 24.09 lakh as on 31 March 2009. 
On being pointed out by audit, unpaid amount of Rs 72.34 lakh was recovered. 
However, the fact remains that the company has not incorporated suitable 
clause in agreements to levy interest @ 18 per cent per annum for delays in 
receiving funds. 
Uneconomic operation  
A review of the income and expenditure revealed that the IPD is running at a 
loss since 2004. During the period from 2004-05 to 2007-08, as against the 
expenditure of Rs 3.07 crore on salary and establishment, the income from 
supervision charges was Rs 2.43 crore resu lting in loss of Rs 64 lakh. Since, 
the execution of plantation works on behalf of other organisations is not one of 
the main objectives of the company and is generating persistent losses, the 
company is required to examine the alternatives to make the division 
economically viable or explore the possibilities of discontinuing deposit 
works. 
The Government replied (September 2009) that the company would examine 
alternatives to make the Industrial Plantation Division economically viable. 
4.2.11   Exploitation  
Exploitation denotes thinning and felling of teak and bamboo. Teak 
plantations are maintained every year up to three years, cleaning is done in the 
fifth year and thinning 11 is done in the 11, 21, 31, 41 and 45 and final 
harvesting (felling) in 60th year. In an area of one ha of land, 2,500 teak plants 
are planted. In the thinning process a fixed number of trees per ha are retained 
and the balance removed. The removal of trees ensures proper growth and 
development of retained trees till next thinning. In case of bamboo, felling is 
                                                 
11  Thinning involves cutting branches and trees to reduce the number of stems/plants 
per unit area, to ensure improved growth, better hygiene and higher production. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 106
done in the 8 th year and every 4 th year thereafter up to the 40 th year. The 
thinned/felled trees are graded as logs, poles and stacks and sold by auction. 
The total exploitation of teak done by the company was 1.33 lakh CMT of 
timber against the target of 1.18 lakh CMT. 
Postponement of thinning 
In Barnawapara division, thinning of 11 th year and 21 st year was to be carried 
out in 7,968 ha teak plantation but this was not done in 1,598 ha (20.06 per 
cent). This resulted in foregoing of revenue to the extent of Rs 1.5012 crore (net 
of expenditure) as projected in the working plan and the area was transferred 
to plantation improvement circle for plantation. 
The Government replied (September 2009) that in some plantations where 
growth of trees is less than the expected growth as per the yield tables, 
thinnings are not required. Of the 13 plantation journals for the compartments 
where thinning was not done, only four were furnished in incomplete form for 
scrutiny. Therefore, the reasons for cancelling the thinning could not be 
examined in totality by audit. 
Non-insurance of stock at depot on yearly basis  
The company followed the practice of taking insurance cover on forest 
produce, against fire, during January to July each year when there was risk of 
fire. However, after the naxalities had burnt (October 2005) fuel stacks 
valuing Rs 12.75 lakh kept in a depot of Panabaras division, the company 
decided to take insurance cover for all naxal affected areas for the whole year. 
It was observed that the period of cover of insurance had been extended in 
respect of the depots of the two
13 naxal affected divisions. However, the 
insurance coverage had gaps of one to eight months and was not continuous. 
This was required to be streamlined to  ensure continuous cover as envisaged 
by the company. The Government replied (September 2009) that at present 
continuous insurance cover for all de pots and coupes of naxal affected 
divisions is being ensured. 
4.2.12   Achievement of objectives  
Targets and achievements 
The company prepares the Annual Plans in compliance with the approved 
working plans of divisions and works are taken up for execution after approval 
of the same by Ministry of Environment and Forest (MOEF). The targets and 
achievements of activities proposed  in the Annual Plans for 2004-08 are 
summarised below and detailed in Appendix-4.2.4.  
                                                 
12  11 Year thinning: Poles (1250 ha X 500 pole per ha X Rs 12 per pole) Rs 75 lakh + 
Fuel stock (1250 ha X 2 Fuel stock X Rs 270 per fuel stock) Rs  6.75 lakh = Rs 81.75 
lakh and 21 year thinning: Logs (347.50 ha X 0.1 cum per ha X Rs 5300 per cum)  
Rs 1.84 lakh + poles (347.50 ha X 600 pole per ha X Rs 31 per pole) Rs  64.64 lakh + 
Fuel Stock (347.50 ha X 2 fuel stock per ha X Rs 270 per fuel stock) Rs 1.88 lakh = 
Rs 68.36 lakh. Therefore, total = Rs 81.75 lakh + Rs 68.36 lakh (1.50 crore). 
13  Antagarh and Panabaras  
Revenue 
foregone due 
to 
unsuitability 
of 
plantations 
for thinning  
Rs 1.50 crore  

Chapter-IV Commercial and Trading Activities 
 107
Sl. 
No. 
Work Target  Achievement  Shortfall 
in per cent  
1. Plantation Improvement Working circle (ha)  17686 7185 59 
2. Plantation Management Working circle (ha) 43022 30773 28 
3. Improvement Working circle (ha) 45366 19489 57 
4. Boundary pillars (Nos) 16479 8821 46 
5. Demarcation line (Km) 5123 2992 42 
6. Fire protection work (ha) 509497 538814 0 
The main activities in the Plantation Improvement Circle (PIC) and Plantation 
Management Circle (PMC ) are cleaning, thinning in growth areas, re-
plantation in failure areas and plantation in suitable areas. It was observed that 
the average shortfall in PIC and PMC was 59 per cent  and 28 per cent  
respectively during this period and ranged between 100 per cent and 13 per 
cent in different years. Inadequate replantations in the area of failed bamboo 
and teak plantations and the postponement of thinning discussed in paras 
4.2.10.2 and 4.2.11 of this report contributed to these shortfalls.  
In the improvement working circle, untreated land is treated to make it 
suitable for plantation. It was observed that in this circle, the average shortfall 
was 57 per cent and ranged between 74 per cent and 32 per cent. The shortfall 
in targets implied that plantation and land development was not being done at 
the level provided in the Annual Plans. This implied that the main objectives 
of raising and developing land were not being achieved to the extent envisaged 
in the Annual Plans. 
The targets were mostly achieved in fire protection work. In respect of 
boundary pillars and demarcation works average shortfall during 2004-08 was 
46 and 42 per cent respectively. The short fall was high in the years 2006-07 
and 2007-08 due to naxal activities. 
It was observed that the area to be pl anted was decided in periodical review 
meetings and targets for each division for plantation were fixed. The basis for 
fixing these targets was not available in the records produced to audit.  Since 
the company had significant cash surplus, it should review norms/basis to 
ascertain whether there is scope to use the surplus to increase the plantation. 
The Government replied (September 2009) that non-achievement of targets of 
treatment of forest area is primarily because of naxal activities in Panabaras 
and Antagarh project divisions and non-cooperation of local people in some 
areas. 
However, as pointed out earlier, there were instances of shortfall in utilisation 
of land in the Kota and Kawardha divisions also which were not affected by 
naxal activities and the JFM involving local people, as envisaged in the State 
Forest Policy 2001, had also not been formed.  

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 108
Development of forest based industries 
The main objective of the company, inter-alia, include ‘to promote and 
participate in companies, firms, establ ishments, concerns or undertaking for 
the purpose of development of forest based industries’. Audit scrutiny 
revealed that the company has not yet taken any initiatives towards setting up 
of forest based industries as envisaged in the Memorandum of Association of 
the company.  
The Government replied (September 2009)  that necessary action would be 
initiated in future. 
4.2.13   Internal Control  
Internal Control System is an essential part of the management activity and 
helps the management to achieve its objectives. The following deficiencies 
were noticed in the internal control of the company: 
Non-reconciliation of fixed assets and inventory  
• The reconciliation of balances of i nventory in the form of logs, poles 
and stacks lying, pending sales, at  depot/coupe with the figures in the 
accounts was not done. On being pointed out by Audit, the company 
has done the reconciliation of inventory of all divisions except 
Panabaras division. 
• The reconciliation of fixed assets as per Physical Verification Report 
with book records was not done. On being pointed by the Audit the 
company has done the requisite reconciliation. 
Conclusion 
A performance audit of the company showed that it has been a successful 
commercial entity which has made profits during the period of four years upto 
2007-08 covered by audit. However, the following areas of concern were 
identified: 
• there was no agreed and documented framework for transfer of land 
from the State Government.  
• there were some shortcomings in the production, accounting and use of 
root-shoots of teak plants. 
• the Industrial Plantation Division, Korba was doing the exclusive work 
of undertaking plantation on behalf of other organisations but running 
at a loss for four  years.  
• the company had surplus funds which remained in term deposits while 
the targets of operational activities were not achieved and the activities 
of the company were affected to a significant extent by naxal activities 
in two divisions. 

Chapter-IV Commercial and Trading Activities 
 109
Recommendations  
It is recommended that the company may: 
• develop an agreed framework with the State Government for transfer 
of land; 
• streamline the production, accounting and use of root-shoots; 
• examine the financial viability of the Industrial Plantation Division, 
Korba; and 
• examine the scope of application of the surplus funds to step-up the 
operational activities by acquiring more forest land. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
110 
 
4.3 Transaction audit observations 
 
CHHATTISGARH STATE ELECTRICITY BOARD 
 
4.3.1 Extra Expenditure 
 
Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board incurred extra expenditure of  
Rs 24.42 lakh due to not placing the extension order as per provisions of 
the tenders 
Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board (Board) invited (January 2006) tenders 
for purchase of Hi-Chrome Grinding Me dia Balls for Coal Mills of power 
plants in Korba Thermal Power Statio n (KTPS). In response, four firms 
submitted their offers and in view of the large quantity, the Board placed 
orders (April 2006) with the L1 and L2 firms for supply of 195 MT and 127 
MT in the ratio of 60:40 respectively at L1 rate of Rs 42,099.69 per MT. 
Clause 16 of the terms and conditions of the tender provided that the Board 
could place an extension order for any additional quantity within six months 
from the date of order. An indent for 492 MT of the same material was 
received on 7 July 2006 from KTPS. The Board invited (August 2006) fresh 
tender, opened Part I & II of the tender on 28 September 2006 and Part III 
(price bid) on 26 November 2006 and placed orders (December 2006) for 492 
MT at a higher rate of Rs 47,062.38 per MT, on the same two firms as they 
were again L1 and L2. Audit observed that on receiving the requisition in July 
2006, the Board could have placed extension orders for any additional quantity 
at the same terms and conditions of the original order up to October 2006. 
However, it did not utilise the extens ion order provisions and thus incurred 
extra expenditure of Rs 24.42 lakh.  
The Chief Engineer stated (November 2007) that the prevailing policy of the 
Board was to avoid extension orders except for urgent requirements. Since the 
requirement conveyed in July 2006 pertained to the year 2006-07, fresh 
tenders were called. It was further stated  that the responsibility of purchase of 
annual requirement on extension order would be explored in future. 
The reply indicated that instead of availing the valid provision of extension 
order, the management acted mechanically, resulting in avoidable extra 
expenditure. The Company may thus lay down clear cut policy for extension 
of purchase order. 
The matter was reported to the Government (May 2009). Their reply had not 
been received (August 2009). 
4.3.2 Purchase without tendering 
 
Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board purchased economiser elements 
worth Rs 1.53 crore without tendering 
Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board (Board) placed an order (March 2005) on 
a supplier for supply of 126 Economiser Elements /Coils (elements) for ABL 

Chapter-IV Commercial and Trading Activities 
 
111 
 
boilers of Hasdeo Thermal Power Station (HTPS) at cost of Rs 1.71 crore. The 
terms of the supply order provided for placing of extension order for six 
months from the date of letter of indent i.e. upto September 2005. 
During audit scrutiny, it was observed that requisition was again received 
(November 2005) from HTPS for procurement of additional 114 elements. 
CSEB did not invite tenders for procurement and after four months, obtained 
confirmation (March 2006) from the same supplier that additional requirement 
would be supplied on the same terms and conditions of the original order. 
Meanwhile the Member (Generation) instructed (22 March 2006) on the 
extension order proposal, to first utilise the 126 elements ordered earlier and to 
repair the elements taken out in the pr evious overhauling. The extension order 
proposal was resubmitted (September 2006) stating that it was not feasible to 
utilise the elements taken out and that the previously supplied elements had 
been utilised. The proposal was approved in December 2006 and extension 
order was placed in the same month on the supplier for supply of 114 elements 
at a cost of Rs 1.53 crore and they were supplied during July-September 2007. 
Since the requisition was received after the expiry of the contracted period of 
extension, the procurement should have been done through tendering. The 
procurement through extension order was irregular and the Board was 
deprived of competitive rates in the purchase of Rs 1.53 crore. 
The Management stated (November 2007) that in response to the instructions 
of Member (Generation), it was confirmed in September, 2006 that the old 
elements had been utilised and the re paired ones could not be used. If the 
tenders had been invited at that stage, there was a risk that the elements would 
not be received by the scheduled annual overhaul (AOH) in July-September 
2007. 
The reply did not indicate why the Board did not start the tendering process on 
receipt of requisition in November 2005 when there was enough time for 
tendering and instead preferred to approach the supplier, after four months, for 
purchase through extension order. This was also at variance with the stand 
taken by the Management in another purchase of Grinding Media Balls for 
power plants in Korba where it was intimated that the prevailing policy of the 
Board was to avoid extension orders except in cases of urgent requirement. In 
that purchase, the Management resorted to tendering while it could have 
placed an extension order whereas in this case, it did not do tendering and 
went for extension order although the period for extension had expired. This 
showed lack of uniformity of approach in purchase procedures. 
The Board needs to follow the correct practice consistently. It should resort to 
extension order within the validity peri od and after taking into account market 
rates at the time of extension. Whenever the validity has expired, it should go 
in for fresh tendering.  
The matter was reported to the Government (May 2009). Their reply had not 
been received (August 2009). 
 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
112 
 
Chhattisgarh State Industrial Development Corporation Limited 
 
 
4.3.3 Non-realisation of loan  
 
The company issued misleading inst ructions to MPSIDC which led to 
non-securitisation of loan documents from a private firm resulting in non-
realisation of Rs 30.08 crore 
Chhattisgarh State Industrial Development Corporation Limited (company) 
had an Inter-Corporate Deposit (ICD) with Madhya Pradesh State Industrial 
Development Corporation Limited (MPSIDC) at 13 per cent  interest per 
annum. As part of the bifurcation of assets and liabilities consequent to 
separation of state, MPSIDC proposed (July 2001) that the company could set 
off the above ICD, which was accumulating to Rs 7.76 crore as on 31 July 
2001, by taking over a loan given (March 2001) by them to Radius Water 
Limited (RWL) at 17 per cent interest per annum which had accumulated to 
Rs 7.76 crore as on 31 July 2001. The company agreed to this proposal and a 
tripartite agreement was drafted involving the company, MPSIDC and RWL. 
As per the draft agreement, RWL signed and furnished (March 2002) a set of 
financing documents to the company relating to the loan provided by 
MPSIDC. The company got the documents scrutinised by a chartered 
accountant who stated (April 2002) that a complete appraisal, as for a new 
loan, was necessary. Consequently, the company did not sign the draft 
tripartite agreement and there was a series of correspondence with RWL and 
MPSIDC. The matter was resolved in a meeting held on 9 November 2002 
where all parties were present. It was decided that the loan would be 
securitised by way of fresh documents and some amendments in the terms and 
conditions were agreed to. Consequently, the financing documents provided 
earlier by RWL were returned to them by the company (December 2002). The 
General Manager (Accounts and Finance), CSIDC, while forwarding the 
signed tripartite agreement to MPSIDC on 14 January 2003, stated in the 
forwarding letter that “Necessary acti on and accounting entries pursuant to its 
clauses A.2 and C.1 may be now carried at your end”. It was observed that 
clauses A.2 and C.1 prescribed the accounting adjustments to be carried out by 
the company and MPSIDC after the financing documents are executed with 
RWL. 
Subsequently, the manner of the securisation/ re-payment of the loan could not 
be agreed to despite protracted correspondence and RWL did not furnish a 
fresh set of financing documents. The company asked MPSIDC (April 2008) 
to repay the original ICD as RWL had not executed financing documents. 
MPSIDC informed that based on the letter of CSIDC of January 2003, it had 
carried out necessary action for adjustment of accounting entries, issued 
(January 2003) no dues certificate to RW L and returned the original security 
documents and no amount was payable to the company.  
Since the clauses of the tripartite agreement provided for all accounting 
adjustments AFTER executing the fina ncing documents, the instruction to 
carry out accounting entries in the letter of January 2003 was misleading and 
unnecessary as the financial documents had not been executed. Due to this 
instruction, the MPSIDC released the original documents to RWL. Thereafter, 

Chapter-IV Commercial and Trading Activities 
 
113 
 
the company has failed to execute the financing documents with RWL for 
more than seven years and the un-realised amount of the loan has become  
Rs 30.08 crore1 upto March 2009.  
Management stated (September 2009) that they have constantly corresponded 
with RWL for executing financing documents and have also sought legal 
advice on the issue in March 2009 and there is another dispute with RWL 
regarding viability which is under arbitration. It was also stated that it was 
incorrect on the part of MPSIDC to release the original documents to RWL. 
The reply does not explain why the company had issued the misleading 
instruction regarding accounting adjustments in January 2003 which led to the 
release of original security documents. It also does not explain why it sought 
legal advice on this matter as late as 2009 although it had failed to recover the 
amount for over seven years. In view of the on going disputes with RWL, it 
should have initiated legal action much earlier. The company should 
investigate and fix responsibility for is sue of misleading instructions to 
MPSIDC and take all measures to speed up the legal action which has been 
initiated very late. 
The matter was reported to the Government (July 2009). Reply had not been 
received (August 2009). 
General 
 
4.3.4 Opportunity to recover money ignored 
 
Four PSUs did not either seize the opportunity to recover their money or 
pursue the matters to their logical end. As a result, recovery of money 
amounting to Rs 508.93 crore remains doubtful 
A review of unsettled paras from In spection Reports (IRs) pertaining to 
periods upto 2003-04 showed that there were 68 paras in respect of four PSUs 
involving a recovery of Rs 508.93 crore. As per Para 197 of Chapter 14 of 
Regulations on Audit and Accounts, 2007, the PSUs are required to take 
remedial action on IRs and intimate the same to audit within four weeks of 
receipt of IRs However, no effective action has been taken to take the matters 
to their logical end, i.e. to recover money from the concerned parties. As a 
result, these PSUs have failed to utilise the opportunity to recover their money 
which could have augmented their finances. 
                                                
 
1 Including interest of Rs 22.32 crore. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
114 
 
PSU wise details of paras and recovery amount are given below. The list of 
individual paras is given in Appendix-4.3.1. 
Sl. 
No. 
PSU name No. of  
paras 
Amount for Recovery  
(Rupees in crore) 
1. Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board 56 479.23  
2. Chhattisgarh State Civil Supplies 
Corporation Ltd. 
10 27.52 
3. Chhattisgarh State Industrial Development 
Corporation 
1 2.13 
4. Chhattisgarh Mineral Development 
Corporation 
1 0.05 
 Total 68 508.93 
The paras mainly pertains to non-recovery on account of energy theft detected 
by Vigilance, short collection of additional security deposit, surcharges and 
short recovery of warehousing charges from customers.  
Above cases point out the failure of respective PSU authorities to safeguard 
their financial interests. Audit observations and their repeated follow up, 
including bringing the pendency to the notice of the Administrative/Finance 
Department and PSU Management periodically, have not yielded the desired 
results in these cases. 
The PSUs should initiate immediate steps to recover the money and complete 
the exercise in a time bound manner. 
4.3.5 Lack of remedial action on audit observations 
 
Five PSUs did not either take remedi al action or pursue the matters to 
their logical end in respect of 136 IR paras, thereby foregoing the 
opportunity to improve their functioning 
A review of unsettled paras from In spection Reports (IRs) pertaining to 
periods upto 2003-04 showed that there were 136 paras in respect of five 
PSUs, which pointed out deficiencies in the functioning of these PSUs. As per 
Para 197 of Chapter 14 of Regulations on Audit and Accounts, 2007, the PSUs 
are required to take remedial action on IRs and intimate the same to audit 
within four weeks of receipt of IRs. However, no effective action has been 
taken to take the matters to their logical end, i.e., to take remedial action to 
address these deficiencies. As a result, these PSUs have lost the opportunity to 
improve their functioning in this regard. 
PSU wise details of paras are given below. The list of individual paras is given 
in Appendix-4.3.2. 
Sl.No. PSU name No. of paras 
1. Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board 110 
2. Chhattisgarh State Civil Supplies Corporation Limited 23 
3. Chhattisgarh State Industrial Development Corporation 1 
4. Chhattisgarh Mineral Development Corporation 1 
5. Chhattisgarh State Beverage Corporation Limited 1 
 Total  136 
The paras mainly pertain to extra expenditure incurred/ loss due to non-
observance of contractual provisions, time over run and other irregularities. 

Chapter-IV Commercial and Trading Activities 
 
115 
 
Above cases point out the failure of re spective PSU authorities to address the 
specific deficiencies and ensure accountability of their staff. Audit 
observations and their repeated follow up,  including bringing the pendency to 
the notice of the Administrative/Finance Department and PSU management 
periodically, have not yielded the desired results in these cases. 
The PSUs should initiate immediate step s to take remedial action on these 
paras and complete the exercise in a time bound manner. 
 
Raipur (PRAVEEN KUMAR SINGH) 
The Accountant General (Audit), Chhattisgarh 
Countersigned 
New Delhi (VINOD RAI) 
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 

Appendices 
 
117 
Appendix-1.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.1.5; page 3) 
Units selected for test check 
District CHC/Block PHC SHC 
Chindgaon Jaibel Garenga 
Napawand Bakawand 
Malgaon Ulnar 
Burungpal Maulibhata Nainnar 
Potanar Lohandiguda 
Tahakapal Karanji 
Irikpal Alnar Taragaon 
Badanji 
Bastar 
Tokapal 
Belar Dharaur 
Dudhava Basanvahi Shamtara 
Choria Amoda 
Sarwandi Musurputta 
Barvi Hatkarra Bheja 
Bhainsakanhar Bhanupratappur 
Korar Selegaon 
Jepra Halba Kotela 
Lilejhar 
Kanker 
Charama 
Kottara Puri 
Bhupdeopuri Binjkot Gurda 
Gorpar Chaple(Kharsia) 
Jobi Khadgaon 
Nandeli Bade Bhandar Supa 
Chhatamuda Pussore 
Kodatarai Khokhra 
Jebri Saraipali Samaruma 
Jharidih 
Raigarh 
Tamnar 
Urba Khamhoriya 
Nawagaon Champaran Paragaon 
Kendri Abhanpur 
Uparwara Nimora 
Palod Mandir Hasod Rakhi 
Lakholi Arang 
Rewa Parsada 
Kachna Labhandi Mowa 
Girod 
Raipur 
Dharsiwa 
Mandhar Barbanda 
Total Districts: 04 Total CHCs: 12 Total PHCs: 24 Total SHCs: 48 
 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
118 
Appendix-1.2 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.1.6; page 4) 
Details of grant received and expenditure incurred on implementation of NRHM 
(Rupees in crore) 
Receipt of State Health Society Expenditure incurred 
during the year 
Closing balance Year 
Grant  
received  
from GOI  
State  
Share 
Other 
receipts
1 
Refund  
from  
districts 
Total  
receipt 
Grant  
received  
by State  
Govern- 
ment  
from GOI 
Total 
fund 
available By State 
Health 
Society 
By State 
Government 
Total 
expenditure 
With 
State 
Health 
Society 
With 
State 
Govern-
ment 
Total 
Percentage of 
balance to 
total amount 
available 
1 2 3 4 5 (2+3+4+5) =6 7 (6+7)=8 9 10 (9+10)=11 (6-9)=12 (7-10)=13 (12+13)=14 15 
2005-06 88.91 -- 1.46 2.30 114.382 51.20 165.58 70.36 41.83 112.19 44.02 9.37 53.39 32.24 
2006-07 125.41 -- 1.97 2.02 129.40 72.76 202.16 124.22 71.12 195.34 5.18 1.64 6.82 3.37 
2007-08 113.34 12.00 8.59 50.19 184.12 76.76 260.88 100.00 77.52 177.52 84.12 -0.76 83.36 31.96 
2008-09 138.88 35.00 3.41 0.57 177.86 79.03 256.89 83.91 65.59 149.50 93.95 13.44 107.39 41.80 
Total 466.54 47.00 15.43 55.08 605.76 279.75 885.51 378.49 256.06 634.55 227.27 23.69 250.96 28.34 
 
(Source: Information provided by State Health Society) 
                                                 
1  Other receipts include in terest received on fund 
2  Opening Balance of societies Rs 21.71 crore (RCH - 18.81, LEP - 0.99, TB - 0.87, IDSP- 0, and BLIND - 1.04.) is included in the total receipt of 2005-06. 
 

Appendices 
 
119 
Appendix-1.3 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.1.6.2(iii); page 5) 
Details of unutilised funds under NRHM in test-checked districts 
(Rupees in lakh) 
Name of 
district 
Component name Year of 
receipt 
Amount 
received 
Amount not 
used for more 
than one year 
Urban Health Programme 2007-08 10.00 10.00 
VHSC 2007-08 156.30 103.70 
Blood storage facility 2007-09 22.50 20.74 
Bastar 
Total – A  188.80 134.44 
IUCD Training 2007-08 1.04 1.04 
Training of paramedical on SBA   2007-08 10.36 5.04 
Blood storage facility 2007-09 22.50 20.74 
Kanker 
Total – B  33.90 26.82 
District Action Plan 2007-08 10.00 10.00 
Nursing Training centre 2007-08 15.00 15.00 
FRU Up gradation 2007-08 10.00 10.00 
ANM kit A &B 2007-08 47.99 47.99 
Strengthening Routing S.S.  2007-08 24.60 7.64 
Untied Fund for District Hospital 2007-08 40.00 40.00 
Urban Health Programme 2007-08 15.00 15.00 
Raigarh 
TOTAL –C  162.59 145.63 
Urban RCH 2006-07 25.00 23.64 
Institutional Strengthening 2006-07 43.17 41.18 
GNT Training 2006-07 15.00 15.00 
Procurement 2007-08 116.99 116.99 
Strengthening Mitanin programme 2007-08 65.90 47.91 
Blood storage 2007-08 10.00 10.00 
Raipur 
TOTAL-D  276.06 254.72 
Total (A+B+C+D)  661.35 561.61 
(Source : Information provided by District Health Societies) 
 
Appendix-1.4 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.1.6.5(i); page 7) 
Details of excess expenditure on purchase of blood lancets at higher rate  
(In Rupees) 
Sl. 
No 
Supply 
Order No./ 
Date 
Invoice 
No.  
and date 
Quantity Purchase 
Rate 
Available 
lowest rate 
Difference 
rate 
Excess 
expenditure  
1 188/ 
29.09.05 
6529/ 
31.03.06 
396000 1.45 0.26 1.19 471240 
2 188/ 
29.09.09 
6530/ 
21.03.06 
393800 1.45 0.26 1.19 468622 
3 188/ 
29.09.05 
6531/ 
21.03.06 
10200 1.45 0.26 1.19 12138 
4 219/ 
03.10.05 
6532/ 
21.03.06 
396000 1.45 0.26 1.19 471240 
5 238/ 
04.10.05 
6535/ 
21.03.06 
386191 1.45 0.26 1.19 459567 
6 238/ 
04.10.05 
6537/ 
21.03.06 
396000 1.45 0.26 1.19 471240 
7 238/ 
04.10.05 
6538/ 
21.03.06 
167801 1.45 0.26 1.19 199683 
TOTAL: 2145992     2553730 
(Source: Invoices provided by State Malaria Control Society) 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
120 
Appendix-1.5 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.1.6.5(i); page 7) 
Details of excess payment of commercial tax 
(In Rupees) 
Supply order 
no. date 
Invoice no. 
and date 
Item Quantity Rate Admissible 
Amount 
inclusive of 
all taxes 
Amount of 
tax paid 
extra 
Actual 
Payment 
made 
307/08.10.05 6542/21.03.06 
6543/21.03.06 
Slide box 29000 51.50 1493500 68701 1562201 
238/04.10.05 6538/21.03.06 
6535/21.03.06 
6537/21.03.06 
Lancet 950000 1.45 1377500 63365 1440865 
188/29.09.05 6529/21.03.06 
6530/21.03.06 
6531/21.03.06 
Lancet 800000 1.45 1160000 53359 1213359 
188/29.09.05 6532/21.03.06 Lancet 396000 1.45 574200 26413 600613 
280/07.10.05 6497/15.03.06 
6498/15.03.06 
JSB Stain 
Conical flask 
(F) 
4000 
5000 
250.0 
43.00 
1000000 
215000 
55890 1270890 
143/26.09.05 6491/15.01.06 
6492/15.01.06 
JSB Stain 4000 250.00 1000000 46000 1046000 
240/04.10.05 6494/15.01.06 JSB Stain 2000 250.00 500000 23000 523000 
307/08.10.05 6323/14.02.06 
6324/14.02.06 
Slide box 29000 51.50 1493500 68701 1562201 
172/28.09.05 6321/14.02.06 Slide box 14500 51.50 746750 34351 781101 
TOTAL   9560450 439780 10000230 
(Source: Invoices provided by State Malaria Control Society) 

Appendices 
 
121 
 
Appendix-1.6 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.1.8.1(i); page 9) 
Facilities at test-checked CHCs 
 
Facility available Facility not 
available 
Sl. 
No 
Description of facilities required at 
each CHC as per IPHS norms 
No. of 
CHCs 
test -
checked 
No. of 
CHCs 
Per cent No. of 
CHCs 
Per cent 
1  Accommodation facilities for attendants 
of admitted patients 
12 00 00 12 100 
2 Blood storage facility 12 00 00 12 100 
3 Inpatient services with 30 beds  12 04 33 8 67 
4 Accommodation for ANM 12 06 50 06 50 
5 Separate ward for male and female  12 07 58 05 42 
6 Accommodation for General Surgeon 12 07 58 05 42 
7 Working facility of standby power 
supply/generator 
12 08 67 04 33 
8 Accommodation for General duty 
Medical Officer 
12 09 75 03 25 
9 Accommodation for Staff Nurse 12 09 75 03 25 
10 Separate utilities for men and women  12 10 83 02 17 
11 Waiting rooms for patients not in good 
condition 
12 10 83 02 17 
12 Telephone connection 12 10 83 02 17 
13 Computer 12 10 83 02 17 
14 OPD rooms/ cubicles 12 11 92 01 08 
15 Diagnostic Services for routine urine, 
stool and blood tests, RTI/STI, sputum 
testing.  
12 11 92 01 08 
16 Operation theatre/ minor operation theatre 12 12 100 00 00 
17 Labour room 12 12 100 00 00 
18 Ambulance service 12 12 100 00 00 
19 Provision for water supply 12 12 100 00 00 
(Source: Information provided by test-checked CHCs) 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
122 
Appendix-1.7 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.1.8.1(i); page 9) 
Shortfall/ Non-availability of Operation Theatre equipment 
 
No of CHCs where equipment Sl. 
No. 
Equipment required at each CHC as 
per IPHS norms 
Total CHCs 
Available Not available 
1 Boyales apparatus 12 2 10 3 
2 EMO machine 12 1 11 4 
3 Cardiac Monitor for OT 12 2 10 5 
4 Defribillator for OT 12 0 12 6 
5 Ventilator for OT 12 3 09 7 
6 Horizontal High pressure sterilizer 12 4 08 8 
7 Vertical High Pressure Sterilizer 2/3 
drum capacity 
12 6 06 9 
8 Shadowless lamp ceiling trak mounted 12 3 09 10 
9 Shadowless lamp pedestal for minor 
OT 
12 9 03 11 
10 OT care/fumigation apparatus  12 6 06 12 
11 Gloves and dusting machines 12 8 04 13 
12 Oxygen cylinder 660 ltrs for Boyales 
apparatus 
12 7 05 14 
13 Nitrous oxide cylinder 1780 liters for 
one Boyales apparatus 
12 1 11 15 
14 Hydraulic operation table   12 11 01 16 
(Source: Information provided by test-checked CHCs) 
                                                 
3   Abhanpur, Amoda, Arang, Bakawand, Bhanupratappur, Chaple, Charama,   Dharsiva, 
Lohandiguda  and Tamnar 
4   Abhanpur, Amoda, Arang, Bakawand, Bhanupratappur, Chaple, Charama,   Dharsiva, 
Lohandiguda, Tamnar and Tokapal 
5  Abhanpur, Amoda, Bakawand, Bhanupratappur, Chaple, Charama, Lohandiguda, Pussore, 
Tamnar and Tokapal 
6   Abhanpur, Amoda, Arang, Bakawand, Bhanupratappur, Chaple, Charama, Lohandiguda, 
Pussore, Tamnar and Tokapal 
7   Abhanpur, Amoda, Arang, Bhanupratappur, Chaple, Dharsiva, Lohandiguda,  Tamnar and 
Tokapal 
8    Arang, Bhanupratappur, Chaple, Charama, Dharsiva, Pussore, Tamnar and   Tokapal 
9    Arang, Bhanupratappur, Chaple, Dharsiva, Lohandiguda and Tamnar 
10   Abhanpur, Amoda, Chaple, Charama, Dharsiva, Lohandiguda, Pussore, Tamnar and 
 Tokapal 
11  Arang, Charama and Dharsiva,  
12   Abhanpur,  Arang, Chaple, Charama, Dharsiva, Pussore and Tamnar 
13  Arang, Bhanupratappur and Dharsiva 
14   Arang, Bhanupratappur, Dha rsiva, Lohandiguda and  Pussore 
15   Abhanpur, Amoda, Arang, Bakawand, Bhanupratappur, Chaple, Dharsiva, Lohandiguda, 
Pussore, Tamnar and Tokapal 
16   Amoda 

Appendices 
 
123 
Appendix-1.8 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.1.8.1.(ii); page 9) 
Facilities at test-checked PHCs 
 
Facility 
available 
Facility not 
available 
Sl. 
No. 
Description of facilities required at each PHC No. of 
PHCs 
test -
checked 
No. of 
PHCs 
Per 
cent 
No. of 
PHCs 
Per 
cent 
1 Standby power supply/generator  24 00 00 24 100 
2 Minor operation theatre  24 02 08 22 92 
3 Accommodation for staff nurse 24 02 08 22 92 
4 Accommodation for other staff 24 04 17 20 83 
5 Separate utilities for men and women  24 05 21 19 79 
6 Separate ward for male and female 24 05 21 19 79 
7 Telephone connection 24 07 29 17 71 
8 Inpatient services with 6 beds  24 07 29 17 71 
9 Accommodation for Medical officers 24 08 33 16 67 
10 Diagnostic services for routine urine, stool and 
blood stets, RTI/STI, sputum testing etc.  
24 11 46 13 54 
11 Provision of water supply 24 13 54 11 46 
12 Facility of sewerage 24 14 58 10 42 
13 Facility of medical waste disposal 24 14 58 10 42 
14 Labour room 24 17 71 07 29 
15 Government building 24 18 75 06 25 
16 Electricity connection/power supply 24 21 88 03 12 
17  OPD rooms/cubicles  24 21 88 03 12 
18 24x7 Emergency services  24 21 88 03 12 
(Source: Information provided by test-checked PHCs) 
Appendix-1.9 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.1.8.1.(iii); page 10) 
Facilities at test-checked SHCs 
 
Facility available Facility not 
available 
Sl. 
No. 
Facilities required at each SHC as 
per IPHS norms 
No. of SHCs 
test -checked 
No of 
SHCs 
Per cent  No of 
SHCs 
Per cent 
1 Separate utilities for men and 
women  
48 14 29 34 71 
2 Provision of water supply 48 16 33 32 67 
3 Facility of medical waste disposal 48 20 42 28 58 
4 Citizen’s Charter displayed 
prominently in local language 
48 27 56 21 44 
5 Labour room 48 28 58 20 42 
6 Accommodation facilities for staff 
was partially present/occupied 
48 28 58 20 42 
7 Government building 48 30 62 18 38 
8  OPD rooms/cubicles 48 37 77 11 23 
9 Cleanliness was poor 48 38 79 10 21 
(Source: Information provided by test-checked SHCs) 
 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
124 
Appendix-1.10 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.1.8.2.(i); page 11) 
Manpower in test-checked CHCs 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Description of manpower 
required in each CHC as per 
IPHS norms 
No of 
test -
checked 
CHCs  
No. of 
CHCs 
where 
manpower 
available  
No of CHCs 
where 
manpower 
not available  
Shortfall 
in 
percentage 
1 Anaesthetist 12 00 12 100 
2 Nine Staff Nurses (two of them may 
be ANMs) 
12 00 12 100 
3 Eye Surgeon 12 00 12 100 
4 General Physician 12 01 11 92 
5 Five Staff Nurses 12 01 11 92 
6 Obstetrician & Gynaecologist 12 02 10 83 
7 Pediatrician 12 04 08 67 
8 General Surgeon 12 06 06 50 
9 General duty Medical officer 12 08 04 33 
10 Radiologist 12 07 05 42 
11 Pharmacist 12 08 04 33 
12 One Staff Nurse 12 10 02 17 
13 Lab Technician 12 11 01 08 
(Source: Information provided by test-checked CHCs) 
 
Appendix-1.11 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.1.8.2(ii); page 11) 
Manpower in test-checked PHCs 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Requirement of manpower 
in each PHC as per IPHS 
norms 
No. of test 
-checked 
PHCs 
No of PHCs 
where 
manpower 
available 
No of PHCs 
where 
manpower not 
available 
Shortfall 
in 
percentage 
1 Medical Officer (Allopathic) 24 17 07 29 
2 AYUSH Medical Officer 24 00 24 100 
3 Staff Nurse 24 03 21 88 
4 Health Worker Female 
(ANM) 
24 06 18 75 
5 Lab Technician 24 08 16 67 
6 Pharmacist 24 12 12 50 
7 Three Staff Nurses 24 01 23 96 
8 One  Staff Nurse 24 02 22 92 
(Source: Information provided by test-checked PHCs) 

Appendices 
 
125 
Appendix-1.12 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.1.8.2(iii); page 11) 
Manpower in test-checked SHCs 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Manpower required 
in each SHC as per 
IPHS norms 
No.of test -
checked 
SHCs 
No of SHCs 
with 
manpower 
available 
No of SHCs 
with manpower 
not available 
Shortfall in 
percentage 
1 One MPW 48 20 28 58 
2 Any ANM 48 45 3 06 
3 One ANM 48 44 04 08 
4 Two ANMs 48 01 47 98 
(Source: Information provided by test-checked SHCs) 
 
 
Appendix-1.13 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.1.9.1(i);  page 13.) 
(a) A dministration of Iron Folic Acid tablets at State level 
 Administration of IFA tablets 
Year Target in 
number of 
women  
Achievement Shortfall Percentage of 
achievement 
Percentage 
of shortfall 
2005-06 663356 674427 -- -- -- 
2006-07 670201 444045 226156 66 34 
2007-08 670786 557894 112892 83 17 
2008-09 708483 551150 157333 78 22 
Total 2712826 2227516 496381 82 18 
(Source - Information provided by test State Health Society) 
 
(b) Statement showing availability of Iron Folic Acid tablets in test-checked 
districts 
Year 2005-06 to 2008-09 Name of 
districts  Registered 
pregnant 
women 
Required 
IFA tablet 
@ 100 per 
person 
Available 
IFA tablet 
Shortage of 
IFA tablets 
Number of 
deprived 
women 
Percentage 
of shortage  
Percent-
age of 
achieve-
ment  
1 2 (2x100)=3 4 5 6 7 8 
Raipur 392280 39228000 31284760 7943240 79432 23 77 
Raigarh 143142 14314200 8130000 6184200 61842 43 57 
Kanker 71481 7148100 4001000 3147100 31471 44 56 
Bastar 173487 17348700 11298235 6050465 60505 35 65 
Total 780390 78039000 54713995 23325005 233250 30 70 
(Source:  Information provided by test-checked District Health Societies) 
 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
126 
Appendix-1.14 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.1.9.1 (ii); page 13) 
Statement of institutional deliveries at State level 
Year No. of pregnant 
women registered 
No. of 
institutional 
deliveries 
No. of  home 
deliveries 
Total 
deliveries 
Percentage of 
institutional 
deliveries 
2005-06 672823 102811 465970 568781 18 
2006-07 675802 131334 464913 596247 22 
2007-08 651226 149025 414599 563624 26 
2008-09 658429 179859 387276 567135 32 
Total 2658280 563029 1732758 2295787 25 
(Source:  Information provided by test State Health Society) 
 
Appendix-1.15 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.1.10.1; page 15) 
Details of areas covered under indoor residual spray in test-checked districts 
 
Name of 
the district  
Year ABER API No. of villages 
where spray was 
to be done 
Actual 
spraying 
done 
Percentage 
of spray 
Percentage 
of shortfall 
2005-06 25.77 31.13 1520 713 47 53 
2006-07 21.94 28.19 1520 211 14 86 
2007-08 21.04 25.43 1520 555 37 63 Bastar 
2008-09 19.80 20.72 1520 753 50 50 
2005-06 43.59 33.87 1032 591 57 43 
2006-07 32.17 23.53 964 154 16 84 
2007-08 32.49 18.88 703 651 93 07 Kanker 
2008-09 28.38 16.28 848 571 67 33 
2005-06 13.11 9.44 412 412 100 0 
2006-07 7.27 5.97 648 642 99 1 
2007-08 11.07 5.83 935 935 100 0 Raigarh 
2008-09 9.87 4.5 598 598 100 0 
2005-06 10.40 0.69 510 510 100 0 
2006-07 12.77 0.92 486 486 100 0 
2007-08 12.89 0.64 583 583 100 0 Raipur 
2008-09 11.57 0.45 672 672 100 0 
2005-06   3474 2226 64 36 
2006-07   3618 1493 41 59 
2007-08   3741 2724 73 27 Total 
2008-09   3638 2594 71 29 
(Source : Information provided by District Health Societies) 

Appendices 
 
127 
Appendix-1.16 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.1.10.2; page 16) 
(a)  Details of sputum examination and detection of new sputum positive  cases at 
State level 
 
Sputum examination Detection of new Sputum 
positives 
Achievement 
Year Total 
OPD 
Target  
(percentage of OPD) Number Per cent 
Target  
(in per cent) 
Achievement  
(in per cent) 
2005-06 4135826 2-3 90361 2 70 62 
2006-07 4301322 2-3 109289 3 70 55 
2007-08 4702938 2-3 110679 2 70 59 
2008-09 5173506 2-3 108439 2 70 57 
 
(b)  Outcome of treatment under Revised National Tuberculosis Control 
 Programme as on March 2009 at State level 
 
Year17 TB patients 
registered 
Total  
new 
sputum 
positive 
Treatment 
completed 
Cured Died
18  Failures 19 Defaulters 20 Transferred 
out 
Cure 
rate 
2005-06 23530 8046 161 6678 658 241 1362 81 83 
2006-07 28209 9704 243 8072 887 153 1733 66 83 
2007-08 27504 10737 322 9019 962 179 1796 283 84 
2008-09 27280 10598 424 8775 835 141 2004 63 83 
(Source: Information provided by State TB Society) 
 
Appendix-1.17 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.1.10.3; page 16) 
Details of prevalence of Leprosy at State level 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Particulars 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 
1 Population 22580282 22866957 22955117 23336169 
2 Cases at the beginning of the year 7994 4515 3322 5465 
3 New cases detected 9040 6056 7784 7984 
4 Treatment completed/cured 12519 7249 5641 7996 
5 Balance of cases at the end of the year 4515 3322 5465 5453 
6 Prevalence rate at the end of the year 2.03 1.45 2.38 2.34 
(Source: Information provided by the State Leprosy Society) 
                                                 
17  The data is maintained from January to December every year. 
18 Patients died of TB (positive, negative, extra pulmunory) 
19 Patients not successfully treated  
20 Patients who left the treatment in between 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
128 
Appendix-1.18 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.1.12.2; page 17) 
Details of reporting by all the districts for 15 weeks under IDSP during the period 
January to December 2008 
Particulars Week Total reporting 
units 
Number of units from 
which reports received  
Number of units from 
which reports not 
received 
31 4741 2083 2658 
32 4741 2237 2504 
33 4741 2083 2658 
34 4741 2456 2285 
35 4741 1972 2769 
36 4741 1796 2945 
37 4741 2023 2718 
38 4741 1993 2748 
39 4741 1995 2746 
40 4741 1677 3064 
46 4741 2340 2401 
47 4741 1755 2986 
48 4741 2080 2661 
49 4741 2556 2185 
DETAILS OF 
REPORTING 
DONE UNDER 
IDSP-S 
(Surveillance at 
SHCs)  
 
50 4741 2290 2451 
Total 15 weeks 71115 31336  
(44 Per cent) 
39779 
 (56 Per cent) 
31 734 255 479 
32 734 243 491 
33 734 213 521 
34 734 251 483 
35 734 235 499 
36 734 200 534 
37 734 221 513 
38 734 226 508 
39 734 222 512 
40 734 196 538 
46 734 238 496 
47 734 233 501 
48 734 240 494 
49 734 258 476 
DETAILS OF 
REPORTING 
DONE UNDER 
IDSP-P 
(Presumptive) 
 
50 734 230 504 
Total 15 weeks 11010 3461  
(31 Per cent) 
7549 
(69 Per cent) 

Appendices 
 
129 
 
Particulars Week Total 
reporting 
units 
Number of units from which 
reports received  
Number of units from 
which reporting not 
received 
31 146 96 50 
32 146 93 53 
33 146 106 40 
34 146 112 34 
35 146 105 41 
36 146 110 36 
37 146 118 28 
38 146 111 35 
39 146 129 17 
40 146 86 60 
46 146 139 07 
47 146 102 44 
48 146 117 29 
49 146 103 43 
DETAILS OF 
REPORTING 
DONE UNDER 
IDSP-L1 
(Laboratory at 
CHCs) 
 
50 146
 92 54 
Total 15 weeks 2190 1619 
(74 Per cent) 
571 
(26 Per cent) 
31 16 09 07 
32 16 09 07 
33 16 09 07 
34 16 08 08 
35 16 09 07 
36 16 06 10 
37 16 08 08 
38 16 08 08 
39 16 14 02 
40 16 07 09 
46 16 11 05 
47 16 10 06 
48 16 15 01 
49 16 13 03 
DETAILS OF 
REPORTING 
DONE UNDER 
IDSP-L2  
(Laboratory at 
District 
Hospital) 
 
50 16 09 07 
Total 15 
weeks 
240 145 
(60 Per cent) 
95 
(40 Per cent) 
Average  
Percentage 
  52 48 
(Source: Information provided by State IDP society) 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
130 
Appendix-1.19 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.2.8.1; page 24) 
Statement showing deficiency of mobility in PS 
 
Type of Vehicles Sl. 
No. 
Police 
District 
Total No. 
of PSs 
No.of personnel 
in PS Heavy Medium Light Motor cycles 
Mobility 1 Mobility 
deficiency
Percentage of 
deficiency 
No. of PS with 
deficiency 
1 Kanker 15 462 1 0 9 64 232 230 50 14 
2 Rajnandgaon 23 743 0 5 13 78 350 393 53 21 
3 Raipur 44 1,044 0 7 33 28 446 598 57 38 
4 Sarguja 12 245 0 0 11 48 184 61 25 6 
  TOTAL 94 2,494 1 12 66 218 1,212 1,282 51 79 
(Source: Data provided by SP Offices and compiled by audit) 
 
                                                 
1  Presuming that a Heavy vehicle, Medium vehicle, Light vehicle and a Motor cycle can carry 32, 18, 8 and 2 persons respectively as per BPR&D 
norms. 

Appendices 
 
 
131 
Appendix-1.20 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.2.9.1; page 25) 
Statement showing shortage of residential buildings for police personnel 
 
Upper subordinate level houses Lower subordinate level houses 
Year 
Sanctioned Completed Allotted Under 
progress 
Not 
commenced 
Percentage of 
completed 
units 
Sanctioned Completed Allotted Under 
progress 
Not 
commenced 
Percentage of 
completed units 
2003-04 66 28 6 33 5 42 100 56 12 36 8 56 
2004-05 45 32 4 13 0 71 450 244 141 182 24 54 
2005-06 0 0 0 0 0 0 38 0 0 18 20 0 
2006-07 20 0 0 20 0 0 30 0 0 30 0 0 
2007-08 20 0 0 0 20 0 80 0 0 0 80 0 
2008-09 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Total 151 60 10 66 25 40 698 300 153 266 132 43 
 
 
Total Residential buildings (Sum of USL and LSL)  
Year 
Sanctioned Completed Under Progress Not commenced Allotted Percentage of completed units 
2003-04 166 84 69 13 18 51 
2004-05 495 276 195 24 145 56 
2005-06 38 0 18 20 0 0 
2006-07 50 0 50 0 0 0 
2007-08 100 0 0 100 0 0 
2008-09 0 0 0 0 0 0 
TOTAL 849 360 332 157 163 42 
 (Source: Progress report furnished by PHQ and compiled by audit) 
 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
132 
Appendix-1.21 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.2.9.2; page 26) 
Statement showing shortage of non-residential buildings 
 
Police Stations Other Administrative Buildings 
Year 
Sanctioned Completed Under 
Progress 
Not 
commenced 
Percentage 
of 
completed 
units 
Sanctioned Completed Under 
Progress 
Not 
commenced 
Percentage 
of 
completed 
units 
2003-04 0 0 0 0 0 25 18 6 1 72 
2004-05 10 3 5 2 30 15 3 12 0 20 
2005-06 7 0 4 3 0 49 2 43 4 4 
2006-07 3 0 1 2 0 2 0 2 0 0 
2007-08 3 0 0 3 0 1 0 0 1 0 
2008-09 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Total 23 3 10 10 13 92 23 63 6 25 
 
 
Total of non-residential buildings (Police station + others) 
Year 
Sanctioned Completed Under Progress Not commenced Percentage of completed units 
2003-04 25 18 6 1 72 
2004-05 25 6 17 2 24 
2005-06 56 2 47 7 4 
2006-07 5 0 3 2 0 
2007-08 4 0 0 4 0 
2008-09 0 0 0 0 0 
TOTAL 115 26 73 16 23 
  (Source: Progress report furnished by PHQ and compiled by audit) 
 

Appendices 
 
 133
Appendix-1.22 
(Referred to in paragraph 1.3.8.6; page 41) 
Details of excess paddy purchased by procurement centres in 2008-09 
 
District Name of 
Procurement 
centres 
Recommended 
norms for 
production of 
paddy decided 
by societies 
(quintals/ 
hectares) 
Total  
paddy  
purchased  
(in quintals) 
in 
procurement 
centres 
No. of 
purchases 
where paddy 
was procured 
in excess of 
norms 
Amount of 
excess paddy 
procured (in 
quintals) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
Bathagaon 62 89696.40 200 5651.76 
Bathena 50 12597.20 93 893.50 
Chati 50 48464.80 151 2975.15 
Demar 55 47996.80 155 3196.25 
Kurud 50 62749.60 235 10518.65 
Dhamtari 
Loharsi 50 23121.20 65 1375.35 
Akaltara* -- 14867.20 45 1934.80 
Chorbhati 37 32944.80 174 4467.76 
Gaud* -- 23293.60 30 343.80 
Karmahu 50 24793.60 139 4113.75 
Kotmi* -- 23955.80 172 4487.75 
Janjgir-
Champa 
Khokhara* -- 36332.40 98 1094.80 
Billadi 50 28404.00 31 203.60 
Manikchuari 55 106251.40 267 6846.71 
Navapara* -- 45448.40 215 4823.50 
Ponsari 44 45528.40 297 5532.07 
Rajim* -- 43267.60 289 10125.45 
Raipur 
Tarpongi 50 24582.00 127 4285.30 
Total 734295.20 2783 72869.95 
   (Source: Society database and procurement centres) 
  * The societies that have not provided the average production per hectare to the Audit. 
 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
134 
 
Appendix-2.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.1.2; page 52) 
Details of cases where penalty at the rate of two per cent per month was not deducted from suppliers for delays in supply of medical equipment  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of firm Supply 
order 
No. 
Supply 
order  
date 
Item Due date of 
supply 
Actual 
date of 
supply 
Amount 
paid (in 
Rupees) 
Delay in 
supply 
(in days)   
Col. 7-6 
Delay 
in 
months 
col 
9/30  
Amount of 
penalty @ 
two per cent 
per month* 
not 
recovered(C
ol. 9x8/30x 
0.02) 
[1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] 
1 M/s. Nahar Medical, Dhamtari 1543 15-Mar-05 Colour Dopler 
machine 
15-Jun-05 15-Sep-05 2590000 92 3.07 158853.33 
2 M/s. Surgi Aid Pharmaa, Raipur 1561 15-Mar-05 Aneasthisia machine 15-Jun-05 18-Aug-05 81988 64 2.13 3498.15 
3 M/s. Surgi Aid Pharmaa, Raipur 1561 15-Mar-05 Defeb 15-Jun-05 31-Aug-05 294888 77 2.57 15137.58 
4 M/s. Surgi Aid Pharmaa, Raipur 1561 15-Mar-05 TP C Vaporizer 15-Jun-05 29-Au g-05 75888 75 2.50 3794.40 
5 M/s. India Medico, New Delhi 1567 15-Mar-05 EMG Biofeed 15-Jun-05 04-Jul-05 383900 19 0.63 4862.73 
6 M/s. India Medico, New Delhi 1567 15-Mar-05 Micro Diathermy 15-Jun-05 04-Jul-05 373360 19 0.63 4729.23 
7 M/s. Gayatri Medical, Bilaspur 1573 15-Mar-05 Aneasthisia 
Ventilator 
15-Jun-05 07-Dec-05 546000 175 5.83 54600.00 
8 M/s. Surgi Aid Pharmaa, Raipur 7503 29-Oct-05 De fibrillators 15-Dec-05 05-Jan-06 1179552 21 0.70 16513.73 
9 M/s. Surgi Aid Pharmaa, Raipur 7503 29-Oct-05 TPC Vaporizer 15-Dec-05 17-Jan-06 227664 33 1.10 5008.61 
10 M/s. Surgi Aid Pharmaa, Raipur 7503 29-Oct-05 TP C Vaporizer 15-Dec- 05 03-Feb-06 303552 50 1.67 10118.40 
11 M/s. Chhattisgarh Surgicals, 
Dhamtari 
1984 13-Mar-06 High Frequency 
Image Insfire 
24-Apr-06 01-Sep-06 919000 130 4.33 79646.67 
12 M/s. International Electro, New 
Delhi 
2344 23-Mar-06 Combination therapy 15-May-06 14-Jun-06 300850 30 1.00 6017.00 
13 M/s. Supreme Enterprises, 
Raipur 
2352 23-Mar-06 Mortury coolers 15-May-06 04-Jul-06 660000 50 1.67 22000.00 
14 M/s. Scientific Traders 2364 23-Mar-06 Double Channel 
Coagulometre 
15-May-06 05-Jun-06 127150 21 0.70 1780.10 
15 M/s. Metro Pharmaa, Bilaspur 2384 23-Mar-06 Blood warmers 15-May-06 25-May 06 160000 10 0.33 1066.67 
16 M/s. Metro Pharmaa, Bilaspur 2384 23-Mar-06 Office hysteroscope 15-May-06 17-Jan-07 71658 247 8.23 7165.80 
17 M/s. Medical Products, New 
Delhi 
2389 23-Mar-06 Gas Pipe Line 15-May-06 21-April-07 12801905 341 11.36 1280190.50 

Appendices 
 
 
135 
 
[1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] 
18 M/s. Alps International, New 
Delhi 
2348 23-Mar-06 Handheld Impedance 
Audiometre 
15-May-06 01-Jun-06 230000 17 0.57 2606.67 
19 M/s. Siemens Ltd., Mumbai 2372 23-Mar-06 60 MA High Fre. X-
Ray machine 
15-May-06 14-Jul-06 675000 60 2.00 27000.00 
20 M/s. Surgi Aid Pharmaa, Raipur 2509 25-Mar-06 Diode laser 15-May-06 27-Jun-06 2091776 43 1.43 59964.25 
21 M/s. Surgi Aid Pharmaa, Raipur 2509 25-Mar-06 A& B scan  15-May-06 18-Jun-06 978888 34 1.13 22188.13 
22 M/s. Surgi Aid Pharmaa, Raipur 2509 25-Mar-06 Operating 
microscope 
15-May-06 18-Jun-06 715722 34 1.13 16223.03 
23 M/s. Surgi Aid Pharmaa, Raipur 2509 25-Mar-06 Otoacaustic emission 15-May-06 30-May-06 318888 15 0.50 3188.88 
24 M/s. Bagree Enterprises, Raipur 2521 25-Mar-06 ECG Machine large 15-May-06 17-Jul-06 679500 63 2.10 28539.00 
25 M/s. Chhattisgarh Surgicals, 
Dhamtari 
2459 25-Mar-06 High Frequency 
Image Insfire 
15-May-06 01-Sep-06 1838000 109 3.63 133561.33 
26 M/s. Bagree Enterprises, Raipur 2521 25-Mar-06 Syringe pump 15-May-06 03-Jul-06 251136 49 1.63 8203.78 
27 M/s. Bagree Enterprises, Raipur 2521 25-Mar-06 Patient Monitoring 
System 
15-May-06 17-Jul-06 5128350 63 2.10 215390.70 
28 M/s. Bagree Enterprises, Raipur 2521 25-Mar-06 Defibrillators 15-May-06 23-Aug-06 649000 100 3.33 43266.67 
29 M/s. Bagree Enterprises, Raipur 2521 25-Mar-06 Shadow less OT 
light 
15-May-06 13-Jun-06 530000 29 0.97 10246.67 
30 M/s. HL Medical Sytems, 
Mumbai 
2516 25-Mar-06 Advance IC 
Ventilator 
15-May-06 21-Jul-06 4904592 67 2.23 219071.78 
31 M/s. HL Medico Mumbai 2516 25-Mar-06 Anesthesia work 
station 
15-May-06 21-Jul-06 891744 67 2.23 39831.23 
32 M/s. Lucky Engineering, New 
Delhi 
NA 23-Mar-06 Mobile table 15-May-06 21-Aug-06 146000 98 3.27 9538.67 
33 M/s. Feb Care, New Delhi 2393 23-Mar-06 Laundry system 15-May-06 09-Oct-06 1415000 147 4.90 138670.00 
  TOTAL                 2652473.67 
* Penalty limited to 10 per cent of the total cost of the equipment. 
 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 
 136
Appendix-2.2 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.1.3; page 53) 
Details of borewells, mortality of plants, assistance given and wasteful expenditure  
 
 Position of borewells (April 2008) Status of mortality of plants  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Cluster 
No. of 
bore-
wells 
requi-
red 
No. of 
bore-
wells 
drilled 
No. of bore-
wells with 
motor pump 
installed 
No. of 
bore-
wells 
electrified 
Main crop 
shown in crop 
survey report 
Week of 
reporting of 
crop survey 
Mortality 
rate 
Reasons  
for mortality as shown 
in weekly crop survey 
report 
Total 
assistance 
provided 
(In Rupees) 
Wasteful 
expenditure 
(In Rupees)  
col 11*col 9 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
1 Kantaroli 32 28 26 1 Lime 08-04-08 to 
16-04-08 
90 
 per cent 
Due to non availability 
Irrigation facility and 
water 
1612931 1451637.90 
2 Sanibarra 12 0 0 0 Citradora 26-02-08 to 
03-03-08 
70  
per cent 
Due to non availability 
of water 
999991 699993.70 
3 Ghatbarra 31 0 0 0 Citradora 18-03-08 to 
24-03-08 
90  
per cent 
Due to non availability 
of water 
2616195 2354575.50 
4 Salhi 17 0 0 0 Lime 27-02-08 to 
03-03-08 
70  
per cent 
Due to non availability 
of water 
225730 158011.00 
 TOTAL 92 28 26 1     5454847 4664218.10 
 ~Rs 54.55 lakh ~Rs.46.64 lakh 

Appendices 
 
 137
Appendix-2.3 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.2.1; page 54)  
Details of undue financial benefit to a contractor 
 
Rate Value of DI pipes 
delivered 
Admissible Secured 
Advance 
Sl.No. Diameter 
of DI 
pipes 
(mm) 
Quantity (in 
metre) as per 
Measurement 
Book 
(Rs per metre) (In Rupees) 
(Col.3 x 4) 
(75 per cent of col. 5) 
(In Rupees) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
1 700 847 8295.68 7026440.96 5269830.72 
2 600 291.50 6152.31 1793398.36 1345048.77 
3 350 3795 2778.97 10546191.15 7909643.36 
4 200 1950 1312.13 2558653.5 1918990.13 
5 250 79 1737.1 137230.9 102923.18 
6 300 4134.64 2215.93 9162072.81 6871554.61 
7 400 2420 3337.11 8075806.2 6056854.65 
Total amount (Rupees) 39299793.88 29474845.42 
 
 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 
 138
Appendix-2.4 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.3.1; page 56) 
Statement showing details of purchase and non-utilisation of equipment 
Sl 
No 
Name of equipment Amount as per 
purchase order (Rs) 
Date of purchase order Amount as per 
invoice (Rs) 
Date of payment Reply of Principal 
Items issued to GEC, Bilaspur 
1 Service over IP system 1, 67,77,000 13 January 2006 3,35,53,936 10 March 2006 Equipment were not used due to lack of space and regular 
faculty members and no research work was done with the 
equipment. 
 Digital Signal Processing (DSP) system lab equipments consisting of 
2 Digital Radio/Software defined radio 1,13,10,000 28 July 2005 1,13,10,000 6 October 2005 
3 DSP based Multiprocessing system 1,09,56,400 28 July 2005 1,09,56,400 6 October 2005 
4 DSP based Real time Image Processing system 26,05,200 28 July 2005 26,05,200 6 October 2005 
5 Speech library software 7,28,000 28 July 2005 7,28,000 6 October 2005 
6 Image library software 7,28,000 28 July 2005 7,28,000 6 October 2005 
7 DSP lab system 16,27,600 28 July 2005 16,27,600 18 January 2006 
Subtotal for DSP   (Sl No 2 to 7) 2,79,55,200    
The equipment were not put to use after installation due to 
lack of faculty members. No research work undertaken. 
8 VLSI design lab equipment  25 August 2008 77,31,000 18 September 2008 Not installed due to lack of space and no practicals he ld. 
TOTAL 6,92,40,136   
Items issued to GEC, Jagdalpur 
 Digital Signal Processing (DSP) system lab equipments consisting of 
9 Digital Radio/Software defined radio 1,07,75,000 29 December 2004 1,07,75,000 8 February 2005 
10 DSP based Multiprocessing system 1,09,56,400 28 July 2005 1,09,56,400 6 October 2005 
11 DSP based Real time Image Processing system 24,75,000 29 December 2004 24,75,000 8 February 2005 
12 Speech library software 6,50,000 29 December 2004 6,50,000 8 February 2005 
13 Image library software 6,30,000 29 December 2004 6,30,000 8 February 2005 
14 DSP lab system 14,75,000 29 December 2004 14,75,000 8 February 2005 
Subtotal for DSP   (Sl 9 to 14) 2,69,61,400    
15 VLSI design lab equipment 68,72,000+VAT 25 August 2008 77,31,000 18 September 2008 
 Service over IP system Purchase order and payment combined with Sl.No. 1 
Specialised faculty not available to conduct practical 
classes on the listed equipment.  Not a single 
experiment/practical conducted. No research work done 
using equipment. Equipment were not installed. 
TOTAL 3,46,92,400   
  Total payment for equipment = 6,92,40,136 + 3,46,92,400 = 10,39,32,536 
  
   
Sl. Nos. 2 to 7 and 9 to 14 are different components of Digital Signal Processing system laboratory equipment. 
 

Appendices 
 
 139
Appendix-2.5 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.3.3; page 58) 
Details of grading plants not in operation as on June 2009 
Sl 
No. 
Name of plant Date of 
receipt of 
plant 
Amount 
(Rs in 
lakh) 
Place 
where 
plant is 
lying 
Reasons for not 
starting operations  
Period for 
which idling 
upto June 
2009 (in 
months) 
1 Fruit and 
Vegetable 
Grading plant 
12.01.2006 13.86 Sokra nala 
Raipur 
Installation was not 
done due to non 
availability of land. 
Proposal for land 
allotment has been 
obtained from 
Panchayat and sent 
to Collector. 
41 
2 Tomato 
Grading Plant 
26.09.2005 15.80 Ludera,  
Pathalgaon 
Jashpur  
Land was allotted 
and civil work is in 
progress. After 
completion of civil 
work machine will 
be installed. 
45 
3 Fruit and 
Vegetable 
Grading plant 
25.10.2005 13.86 Aheri, 
Durg 
Machine did not 
have electrification 
which was done 
only on 5 May 2009. 
After posting of 
appropriate 
personnel the plant 
can become 
operational. 
44 
 Total  43.52    
 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 
 140
Appendix-2.6 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.4.1; page 62) 
Details of work executed without tendering 
(Rs in lakh) 
Details of additional works allotted under the same 
agreements without tendering 
Details of Payment Sl. 
No 
Agt.No Name of 
Contractor 
Name of 
work 
Amt. & 
date of 
AA 
Amt. 
of TS 
Amt. 
of NIT 
Rate of 
Contract 
Amt. of 
Contract 
Name of work Amt. & date of 
AA 
Amt. of 
TS 
Voucher 
no. & date 
Amount 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
1.  Construction of   CC 
road from main road to yatri 
shade 
2. Construction of CC 
road from main road to 
Helipad  
3. Construction of CC 
road from main road to 
Pump house  
4. Construction of CC 
road from exit gate to 
Helipad  
5. Construction of internal 
CC from mela parisar 
9.63 
(23.3.05) 
9.90 
(23.3.05) 
10.00 
(23.3.05) 
9.94 
(23.3.05) 
6.23 
(23.3.05) 
9.63 
 
9.90 
 
10.00 
 
9.94 
 
6.40 
1 150/ 
4.11.04 
Sh.Bhojram 
Ajgale 
Construction 
of CC road 
from main 
gate to 
temple, 
Girodpuri  
32.62 
(29.10.04) 
32.62 19.32 3 per cent 
above 
SOR 
(2.10.04) 
19.90 
Total 45.70 45.87 
30 & 
9.9.07 
76. 27 

Appendices 
 
 141
1. Construction of Cheka 
tiles & kota stone flooring on 
stepped CC road from temple 
to Charan kund 
2. 
Construction of side 
protection wall on both side 
of stepped road from temple 
to Charankund 
3.
 Construction of side 
protection wall on both side 
of CC road from Charankund 
to Amritkund 
9.97 
(22.3.05) 
 
 
8.44 
(22.3.05) 
 
9.72 
(22.3.05) 
 
9.97 
 
 
 
8.44 
 
 
9.72 
2 151/ 
4.11.04 
Sh.Deepak 
Kumar Agrawal 
Construction
.of steps & 
CC road, 
Girodpuri 
36.37 
(29.10.04) 
36.37 19.77 2  per cent 
below 
SOR 
(2.10.04) 
19.37 
Total 28.13 28.13 
24 & 
12.8.05 
62.68 
1. Construction of 
culverts in Gali concreting, 
Sonakhan. 
4.28 
(23.8.04) 
4.28 3 152/ 
4.11.04 
Sh.Deepak 
Kumar Agrawal 
Construction 
of Gali 
concreting, 
Sonakhan 
48.61 
(29.10.04) 
48.61 19.77 1 per cent 
below 
SOR 
(2.10.04) 
19.57 
Total 4.28 4.28 
59 & 
15.9.05 
51.55 
1. Construction of main 
gate & boundary wall at mela 
parisar 
2. Construction of steps & 
marble flooring at mandir 
parisar. 
3. Construction of 
boundary & marble flooring 
of Jaitkhambh 
10.00 
(22.03.05) 
9.77 
(22.3.05) 
4.30 
(16.2.05) 
 
10.00 
 
9.77 
 
4.30 
 
4 158/ 
23.11.04 
Sh. Budhram 
Agrawal 
Construction 
of Boundary 
wall & 
flooring 
work in 
temple 
parisar, 
Girodpuri 
24.74 
(4.11.04) 
24.74 15.71 18.66 
 per cent 
above 
SOR 
(2.10.04) 
18.64 
Total 24..07 24.07 
158 & 
25.3.08 
46.41 
Total 
(1+2+3+4) 
142.34 142.34 74.57  77.48 Grand Total 102.18 102.35  236.91 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 
 142
Appendix-2.7 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.4.2; page 63)  
Department-wise details of outstanding Inspection Reports (IRs) and paragraphs 
as on 31 March 2009 
 
Sl.No. Department IRs Paras 
1 Public Health and Engineering 163 755 
2 Public Works 395 1957 
3 PMGSY 41 205 
4 Agriculture/Land Conservation 116 218 
5 Cooperation 103 345 
6 Employment/Training & Manpower  72 182 
7 Fisheries 20 44 
8 Food and Civil Supplies 24 96 
9 General Administration 261 841 
10 Handicrafts 24 46 
11 Higher Education 72 187 
12 Horticulture 39 143 
13 Industries 19 72 
14 Information & Public Relations 25 47 
15 Jail 22 62 
16 Labour 12 21 
17 Law and Justice 35 67 
18 Panchayat and Rural Development 331 1581 
19 Police  91 252 
20 Public Health & Family Welfare 188 766 
21 Rural Engineering Services 88 355 
22 School Education 356 825 
23 Sericulture 21 61 
24 Town Country & Planning 44 201 
25 Tribal Welfare 182 568 
26 Veterinary 53 156 
27 Weights and Measures 6 9 
28 Women and Child Welfare 177 479 
29 Miscellaneous 97 414 
 TOTAL 3077 10955 
 

Appendices 
 
 143
Appendix-2.8 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.4.2; page 63) 
Statement showing the year-wise position of outstanding Inspection Reports in 
Horticulture, Panchayat and Rural Development, Public Health and 
Engineering, Tribal Welfare and Veterinary departments 
(Rupees in crore) 
Horticulture 
Period No. of IRs No. of paragraphs Money Value 
2003-04 5 22 1.62 
2004-05 8 45 8.63 
2005-06 0 0 0 
2006-07 0 0 0 
2007-08 1 5 1.12 
2008-09 4 32 16.02 
Total 18 104 27.39 
 
Panchayat and Rural Development 
Period No. of IRs No. of paragraphs Money Value 
2003-04 5 14 7.75 
2004-05 10 74 35.19 
2005-06 4 29 16.19 
2006-07 5 41 34.41 
2007-08 1 11 1.71 
2008-09 3 24 17.12 
Total 28 193 112.37 
 
Public Health and Engineering  
Period No. of IRs No. of paragraphs Money Value 
2003-04 5 25 37.15 
2004-05 19 85 90.42 
2005-06 19 94 35.64 
2006-07 12 71 26.57 
2007-08 3 32 12.50 
2008-09 4 29 12.18 
Total 62 336 214.46 
 
Tribal Welfare 
Period No. of IRs No. of paragraphs Money Value 
2003-04 15 40 16.59 
2004-05 13 58 24.03 
2005-06 11 37 58.61 
2006-07 12 82 31.42 
2007-08 0 0 0 
2008-09 8 49 74.64 
Total 59 266 205.29 
 
Veterinary 
Period No. of IRs No. of paragraphs Money Value 
2003-04 6 18 1.91 
2004-05 6 18 9.80 
2005-06 0 0 0.00 
2006-07 7 51 22.35 
2007-08 0 0 0.00 
2008-09 4 27 2.68 
Total 23 114 36.74 
 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 
 144
Appendix-2.9 
(Referred to in paragraph 2.4.2; page 64) 
List of audit paragraphs for which ATNs have not been furnished  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Department  Year of Audit 
Report 
Para No. Total 
number of 
paras 
2003-04 4.1.2, 4.3.2 2 
2005-06 4.4.1 1 
1 Public Health and Family 
Welfare Department 
2007-08 4.3.2 1 
2 Revenue Department 2002-03 4.4.1 1 
3 Tribal and Schedule Caste 
Development Department 
2002-03 5.1 1 
4 Tribal Welfare Department 2006-07 4.3.7 1 
5 Public Works Department 2003-04 4.1.4, 4.2.1, 
5.1 
3 
2004-05 4.2.6 1 
2005-06 4.2.1 1 
6 Panchayat and Rural 
Development Department  
2007-08 4.2.1, 3.1 2 
7 Water Resources Department 2004-05 4.2.9 1 
8 Forest Department 2005-06 4.1.2, 4.5.2 2 
9 Public Health and Engineering 
Department  
2006-07 4.3.5, 4.3.6 2 
10 Home Department  2007-08 4.1.1, 5.1 2 
 Total 21 
 
 

Appendices 
 
 145
Appendix-3.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.2; page 66) 
 
Organisational structure 
 
 
 
 
 
   Principal 
Secretary/Secretary 
(WRD) 
   
   ↓    
   Engineer-in-Chief     
   ↓    
↓   ↓  ↓  ↓ 
Chief Engineer, 
Mahanadi 
Reservoir 
Project, Raipur 
 Chief Engineer, 
Mahanadi 
Godavari 
Basin, Raipur 
 Chief Engineer, 
Minimata Bango 
Project, Bilaspur 
 Chief Engineer, 
Hasdeo Basin, 
Bilaspur 
↓  ↓  ↓  ↓ 
4 Circles 
(Superintending 
Engineers) 
 2 Circles 
(Superintending 
Engineers) 
 2 Circles 
(Superintending 
Engineers) 
 3 Circles 
(Superintending 
Engineers) 
↓  ↓  ↓  ↓ 
16 Divisions 
(Executive 
Engineers) 
 19 Divisions 
(Executive 
Engineers) 
 11 Divisions 
(Executive 
Engineers) 
 16 Divisions 
(Executive 
Engineers) 
 
(Source : Information supplied by E-in-C) 
 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 146
Appendix-3.2 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.5.2; page 67) 
Statement showing details of surrender of funds 
(Rupees in crore) 
Year Date of surrender Grant No. Amount Total 
23 17.91 
45 2.15 
57 14.85 
75 1.80 
2006-07 24.3.2007 
41 1.84 
38.55 
57 5.56 
41 2.47 
45 18.20 
75 4.20 
19.3.2008 
64 0.95 
45 0.50 
75 1.50 
41 13.92 
2007-08 
31.3.2008 
64 1.58 
48.88 
23 1.59 
41 14.15 
57 1.60 
64 13.52 
2008-09 31.3.2009 
45 0.25 
31.11 
 Grand total 118.54 
(Source: Information supplied by E-in-C) 
Appendix-3.3 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.5.3; page 68) 
Details of excess expenditure over allotment 
(Rupees in crore) 
Year  Grant no. and Major head Allotment Expenditure Excess 
2006-07 41/4702 (minor irrigation under TSP) 46.94 49.98 3.04 
2007-08 23/2701 (medium irrigation) 48.91 49.58 0.67 
23/4701 (capital outlay medium irrigation) 66.65 67.36 0.71 
57/4701 (capital outlay medium irrigation) 23.75 23.97 0.22 
41/4700 (capital outlay major irrigation) 25.05 26.28 1.23 
2008-09 
41/4702 (minor irrigation under TSP) 64.62 66.53 1.91 
 Total 7.78 
(Source: Information supplied by E-in-C) 

Appendices 
 
 147
Appendix-3.4 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.5.4; page 68) 
Statement showing employees dealing with cash/stores who had not deposited 
security deposit 
 
Sl 
No.  
Name of unit No. of 
employees 
dealing with 
cash/store 
Employees  who 
had not deposited 
security deposit 
1 Engineer-in-Chief, WRD, Raipur 1 1 
2 Ground Water Survey Unit-9, Bilaspur 1 1 
3 WR Division, Kanker 12 12 
4 WR Division, Kondagaon 4 4 
5 TDPP Division, Jagdalpur 8 8 
6 MMB Canal Dn. No 5, Kharsia 6 6 
7 MMB Canal Dn.No.6, Sakti 7 7 
8 MMB Canal Dn. No 4, Dabhara 6 6 
9 Chief Engineer Mahanadi project, Raipur 1 1 
10 Superintending Engineer Dam Circle, Kharsia 2 2 
11 Superintending Engineer E/M Circle, Raipur 2 1 
12 Superintending Engineer Indravati project circle, 
Jagdalpur 
1 0 
  Total 51 49 
(Source: Information supplied by department and compiled by Audit) 
 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 148
Appendix- 3.5 (i) 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.7.2; page 70) 
Statement showing amounts outstanding under Miscellaneous Public Works 
Advances as on March 2009 
(Rupees in lakh) 
 
(Source: Information supplied by department and compiled by audit) 
 
Appendix-3.5(ii) 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.7.2; page 70) 
Statement showing details of outstanding amounts under Miscellaneous Public 
Works Advances as on March 2009 
(Rupees in lakh) 
Sl.
No. 
Name of Division MPWA against 
officials 
MPWA 
against 
contractors 
Total 
1 Water Resources Division, 
Kondagaon 
65.01 - 65.01 
2 Mini Mata Bango, Division No 4, 
Dabhara 
0.43 4.84 5.27 
3 Mini Mata Bango, Canal 
Division, Kharsia 
3.14 473.97 477.11 
 Total  68.58 478.81 547.39 
(Source: Information supplied by department and compiled by audit) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Division 
Amount 
of sale 
on 
amount 
credit  
Expenditure 
incurred in 
excess of 
deposit 
received  
Loss 
retrenchment 
errors etc 
Other 
items 
Total Amount 
pending since 
1 TDPP Dn. 
Jagdalpur 
- 4.42 0.22 22.01 26.65 February 1981 
2 WRD Dn. 
Kanker 
- 0.01 0.02 82.99 83.02 March 1994 
3 WRD Dn. 
Kondagoan 
- 0.25 0 64.77 65.02 March 2001 
4 MMB Dn. 
No 4, 
Dabhara 
- 0 0 5.28 5.28 March 2002 
5 MMB Dn. 
No 5, 
Kharsia 
- 0 0 477.12 477.12 October 1995 
6 MMB Dn. 
No 6, Sakti 
- 0 0 101.04 101.04 April 1991 
  Total Nil 4.68 0.24 753.21 758.13   

Appendices 
 
 149
Appendix- 3.6 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.7.4; Page 70) 
Statement showing position of Form 51 as on March 2009 
(Rupees in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of division Period upto 
which recorded  
Difference 
between CTI 
and division 
record (Part II) 
Difference between CTR 
and division record (Part I) 
1. WRD, Kanker December 2006 0.53 1.39 
2. WRD, Kondagaon  December 2008 0.78 1.74 
3. TDPP Dn., Jagdalpur March 2008 0.33 0.33 
4. MMB Dn. 6, Sakti December 2008 0.72 1.00 
5. Ground Water Survey, 
Division, No.9, Bilaspur 
December 2004 0.01 0.01 
 Total  2.37 4.47 
 (Source: Information supplied by department and compiled by audit) 
 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 150
Appendix-3.7 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.7.6; page 72) 
Statement showing award of multiple piece works 
 
Work order 
No 
Date Contractor Completion 
period  
(In days) 
Amount  
(Rs in lakh) 
Bills not finalised upto 
EE, WRD,  Kondagaon 
453/SAC 06/2/2009 A 30 3.22 April 2009 
439/SAC 02/5/2009 A 30 3.19 April 2009 
618/SAC 26/2/2009 A 30 4.53 April 2009 
620/SAC 26/2/2009 A 30 4.53 April 2009 
EE, WRD, Kanker 
351/SAC 20/1/2009 B 30 4.49 March 2009 
353/SAC 20/1/2009 B 20 1.66 March 2009 
623/SAC 02/04/2009 A 30 2.97 March 2009 
625/SAC 02/04/2009 A 30 3.07 March 2009 
627/SAC 02/04/2009 A 30 2.63 March 2009 
695/SAC 02/07/2009 A 30 3.03 March 2009 
697/SAC 02/07/2009 A 30 3.64 March 2009 
1328/SAC 03/02/2009 B 20 3.88 March 2009 
1330/SAC 03/02/2009 B 20 1.21 March 2009 
EE, TDPP, Dn. Jagdalpur 
2258/ADR 05/12/2008 B 15 0.37 Final bill paid in the 
month of August 2008 
2260/ADR 
05/12/2008 B 
15 0.25 Final bill paid in the 
month of August 2008 
2262/ADR 
05/12/2008 B 
15 0.47 Final bill paid in the 
month of August 2008 
      Total 43.14   
(Source: Information supplied by department and compiled by audit) 
 

Appendices 
 
 151
Appendix-3.8 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.7.7; page 73) 
Statement showing incorrect assessment of CNS which led to excess expenditure 
Agreement No- 9DL/05-06 
Sl 
No. 
  Contractor 'A' Contractor 'B' Contractor 'C' Contractor 'D' 
1 Tendered amount 
including CNS 
Rs 919.49 lakh Rs 899.47 lakh Rs 884.44 lakh Rs 916.96 lakh 
2 Rate quoted by 
contractor for CNS 
Rs 182 per cum Rs 90 per cum Rs 80 cum per Rs 180 per cum 
3 Total cost of CNS as 
per contractor's rate  
(88987 cum) 
Rs 161.96 lakh Rs 80.08 lakh Rs 71.19 lakh Rs 160.18 lakh 
4 Tendered amount 
without CNS 
Rs 757.53 lakh Rs 819.39 lakh Rs 813.25 lakh Rs 756.78 lakh 
 
Agreement No-10DL/05-06 
Sl. 
No. 
 Contractor 
'A' 
Contractor 
'B' 
Contractor 'C' Contractor 'D' Contractor 
'E' 
1 Tendered amount 
including CNS 
Rs 727.95 lakh Rs 737.47 lakh Rs 708.46 lakh Rs 734.61 lakh Rs 695.59 lakh 
2 Rate quoted by 
contractor for 
CNS 
Rs 80 per cum Rs 90 per cum Rs 144 per cum Rs 171 per cum Rs 21per cum 
3 Total cost of 
CNS as per 
contractor's rate 
(1,15,455cum) 
Rs 92.36 lakh Rs 103.90 lakh Rs 166.26 lakh Rs 197.43 lakh Rs 24.25 lakh 
4 Tendered amount 
without CNS 
Rs 635.59 lakh Rs 633.57 lakh Rs 542.20 lakh Rs 537.18 lakh Rs 671.34 lakh 
(Source: Information supplied by department and compiled by audit) 
 
Calculation of excess expenditure 
Sl 
No 
  Agreement  No.- 
9DL/05-06 
Agreement  No.- 
10DL/05-06 
1 Amount payable to L1 
contractor executing work 
after excluding CNS 
884.44-71.19 = Rs 813.25 lakh 695.59-24.25 = Rs 671.34 lakh 
2 Amount payable to 
contractor who would have 
become L1 excluding CNS 
Rs 756.78 lakh Rs 537.18 lakh 
3 Excess expenditure due to 
inclusion of superfluous 
CNS 
Rs 56.47 lakh Rs 134.16 lakh 
  Total excess expenditure 56.47+134.16 =  Rs 190.63 lakh  
 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 152
Appendix-3.9 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.7.9; page 74) 
Statement showing undue aid to contractors due to  
non-deduction of additional security deposit 
 
 (A) EE, TDPP, Division Jagdalpur ; Agreement No 12DL /07-08 for Rs 4.51 crore 
Item no 
of 'G' 
schedule 
Item Quantity paid 
in last running 
bill 
Unbalanced 
rate quoted 
by 
contractor  
(Rs) 
Rate 
payable 
(Rs) 
Rate 
paid 
(Rs) 
Diffe-
rence in 
rate 
(Rs) 
Amount not 
recovered as 
additional SD 
(Rs) 
2 Excavation in 
different type of 
soil 
9878.61 m
3 45 42 45 3 29636 
3 Excavation in all 
type of rocks 
24460.45 m3 250 155 250 95 2323743 
8 Providing and 
placing in 
position cement 
concrete  
486.44 m
3 3000 2894 3000 106 51563 
10 P/Fixing non 
return flap value 
49 Nos 500 323 500 177 8673 
11 Providing and 
placing  in 
position cement 
concrete 
478.63 m3 3000 2860 3000 140 67008 
 Total  2480623 
(B) EE WRD Dn., Kanker ; Agreement No 72 DL/08-09 for Rs 2.61 crore 
4 Providing and 
laying cement 
concrete 
1818.75 m3 2300 2005.36 2300 294.64 535876 
6 Providing and 
filling 
foundation and 
around morum  
121.65 m3 70 51.87 70 18.13 2206 
8 Providing & 
filling 
imposition NP 3 
hyme pipe 
5704.14 m
3 70 56.29 70 13.71 78204 
  Total  616286 
(C) EE, Water Management Dn., No. 1 Raipur ; Agreement No.8 DL/07-08 for Rs 6.14 crore 
1 Excavation in 
different type of 
soil 
309737.68  m
3 39 29 39 10 3097377 
(Source: Information supplied by department and compiled by audit) 

Appendices 
 
 153
Appendix-3.10 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.7.10; page 74) 
Statement showing non-deduction of royalty 
(Rupees in lakh) 
Minor Mineral used by the contractor Sl. 
No. 
Agreement 
Number 
Name of 
Division Metal 
(cum) 
Sand 
(cum) 
Masonry 
stone 
(cum) 
Pitching 
stone 
(cum) 
Amount 
1. 4DL/05-06 EE, MMB, 
Dn. No.4 
Dabhara 
20110.00 18638.00 - - 11.85 
2. 1DL/05-06 EE, MMB, 
Dn. No.4 
Dabhara 
18466.11 18144.42 - - 11.03 
3. 10DL/04-05 EE, WRD, 
Kanker 
982.11 491.05 - - 0.21 
4. 9DL/04-05 -do- 295.83 147.92 522.17 55.80 0.21 
5. 1DL/07-08 -do- 234.48 117.24 - - 0.05 
6. 11DL/04-05 -do- 511.57 590.814 125.176 23.705 0.34 
7. 16DL/04-05 -do- 9432.46 - - - 2.63 
 Total      26.32 
(Source: Information supplied by department and compiled by Audit) 
 
Appendix-3.11 
(Referred to in paragraph 3.7.13; page 77) 
Details of staff working in other offices 
Sl. 
No. 
Drawing salary 
from 
Name of official Office in which 
working  
Period 
Shri R.K.Dhengre, 
Sub-Engineer 
Chief Executive 
Officer, Janpad 
Panchayat, 
Kondagoan 
November 2002  
to March 2009 
Shri P.K.Tripathi,  
Sub-Engineer 
Rural Engineering 
Service, Keshkal 
February 2004 to 
March 2009 
Shri P.P.Gondane, 
Assistant Draftsman 
Rural Engineering 
Service, Kondagoan 
Division 
September 2007 to 
March 2009 
Shri M.K.Dewangan, 
Assistant Grade-II 
Collectorate, 
Narayanpur 
December 2007 to 
March 2009 
1. EE, WRD, 
Kondagoan 
Shri Sukhram Baghel, 
Daftari 
-do- May 2007 to 
March 2009 
2. Senior 
Geohydrologist, 
Ground Water 
Survey Dn. 9 
Bilaspur  
Shri F.C.Tandon,  
Sub-Engineer 
Chief Executive 
Officer, Janpad 
Panchayat, Katghora 
August 2005 to 
March 2009 
(Source: Information supplied by department and compiled by audit) 

Appendices 
 
154 
Appendix-4.1.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.1.7; Page 82) 
Statement showing particulars of up to date paid-up capital, loans outstanding and Manpower as on 31 March 2009 in respect of 
Government Companies and Statutory Corporations) 
(Figures in column 5 (a) to 6 (d) are Rupees in crore) 
Paid-up Capital1 Loans2 outstanding at the close of 2008-09 Sl. 
No. 
Sector & Name of the Company Name of the 
Department 
Month 
and year 
of 
incorpo-
ration 
State 
Govern-
ment 
Central 
Govern-
ment 
Others Total State 
Govern-
ment 
Central 
Govern-
ment 
Others Total 
Debt equity 
ratio for 
2008-09 
(Previous 
year) 
Manpower 
(No. of 
employees)  
(1) (2) (3) (4) 5 (a) 5 (b) 5 (c) 5 (d) 6 (a) 6 (b) 6 (c) 6 (d) (7) (8) 
A. Working Government Companies             
AGRICULTURE & ALLIED 
1. Chhattisgarh Rajya Beej Evam Krishi Vikas 
Nigam Limited (CRBEKVNL) Agriculture 8.10.2004 0.50 - - 0.50 - - - - - - 
2. Chhattisgarh Rajya Van Vikas Nigam Limited 
(CRVVNL) Forest 22.5.2001 25.73 0.92 - 26.65 - - - - - 
(3.07:1) 604 
Sector wise total   26.23 0.92 - 27.15 - - - - - 
(3.07:1) 604 
FINANCE 
3. Chhattisgarh Nishakat Jan Vitt Avam Vikas 
Nigam Limited (CNJVAVNL) 
Social 
Welfare 19.7.2004 5.00 - - 5.00 - - - - - NA 
Sector wise total   5.00 - - 5.00 - - - - - - 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
4. Chhattisgarh Infrastructure Development 
Corporation Limited (CIDC) Finance 26.2.2001 4.20 - - 4.20 - - - - - 3 
5. Chhattisgarh State Industrial Development 
Corporation Limited (CSIDC) 
Commerce 
& Industries 16.11.1981 1.60 - - 1.60 22.95 - - 22.95 14.34:1 
(13.13:1) 205 
Sector wise total   5.80 - - 5.80 22.95 - - 22.95 3.96:1 
(3.62:1) 208 
MANUFACTURING 
6. Chhattisgarh Mineral Development Corporation 
Limited (CMDC)  
Geology & 
Mining 7.6.2001 1.00 - - 1.00 - - - - - 246 
7. CMDC ICPL Coal Limited (CICL) (Subsidiary 
of CMDC) 
Geology & 
Mining 11.4.2008 - - 37.00 37.00 - - - - - NA 
Sector wise total   1.00 - 37.00 38.00 - - - - - 246 
POWER 
8. Chhattisgarh State Power Distribution Company 
Limited (CSPDCL) (Subsidiary of CSPHCL ) Energy 19.5.2003 0.05 - - 0.05 - - - - - 0 
9. Chhattisgarh State Power Generation Company 
Limited (CSPGCL) (Subsidiary of CSPHCL ) Energy 19.5.2003 0.05 - - 0.05 - - - - - 0 
10. Chhattisgarh State Power Holding Company 
Limited (CSPHCL) Energy 30.12.2008 0.05 - - 0.05 - - - - - 0 
                                                 
1  Paid up capital includes share application money 
2  Loans outstanding at the close of 2008-09 represent long term loans only 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
155 
 
Paid-up Capital1 Loans2 outstanding at the close of 2008-09 Sl. 
No. 
Sector & Name of the Company Name of the 
Department 
Month 
and year 
of 
incorpo-
ration 
State 
Govern-
ment 
Central 
Govern-
ment 
Others Total State 
Govern-
ment 
Central 
Govern-
ment 
Others Total 
Debt equity 
ratio for 
2008-09 
(Previous 
year) 
Manpower 
(No. of 
employees) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 5 (a) 5 (b) 5 (c) 5 (d) 6 (a) 6 (b) 6 (c) 6 (d) (7) (8) 
11 Chhattisgarh State Power Trading Company 
Limited (CSPTr.CL) Energy 30.12.2008 0.05 - - 0.05 - - - - - 0 
12. Chhattisgarh State Power Transmission 
Company Limited (CSPTCL) (Subsidiary of 
CSPHCL ) 
Energy 19.5.2003 0.05 - - 0.05 - - - - - 0 
Sector wise total   0.25 - - 0.25 - - - - - 0 
SERVICES 
13. Chhattisgarh State Beverages Corporation 
Limited (CSBCL) 
Commercial 
Tax 7.11.2001 0.15 - - 0.15 - - - - - 39 
14. Chhattisgarh State Civil Supplies Corporation 
Limited (CSCSCL) 
Food, Civil 
Supplies & 
Consumer 
Protection 
13.3.2001 0.90 - 0.00 3 0.90 - - 350.72 350.72 389.69:1 
(554.67:1) 527 
Sector wise total   1.05 - 0.00 1.05 - - 350.72 350.72 334.02:1 
(477.57:1) 566 
Total A (All sector wise working Government 
companies)   39.33 0.92 37.00 77.25 22.95 - 350.72 373.67 4.84:1 
(27.18:1) 1,624 
B. Working Statutory corporations             
POWER 
1. Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board (CSEB) Energy 15.11.2000 23.12 - - 23.12 740.79 75.35 1,671.87 2,488.01 107.61:1 
(111.08:1) 17,145 
Sector wise total   23.12 - - 23.12 740.79 75.35 1,671.87 2,488.01 107.61:1 
(111.08:1) 17,145 
MISCELLANEOUS 
2. Chhattisgarh State Warehousing Corporation 
(CSWC) Food 2.5.2002 0.50 - 0.50 1.00 - - - - - NA 
Sector wise total   0.50 - 0.50 1.00 - - - - - - 
Total B (All sector wise working Statutory 
corporations)   23.62 - 0.50 24.12 740.79 75.35 1,671.87 2,488.01 103.15:1 
(106.47:1) 17,145 
Grand Total (A + B)   62.95 0.92 37.50 101.37 763.74 75.35 2,022.59 2,861.68 28.23:1 
(70.63:1) 18,769 
 
                                                 
3  Actual amount is Rs 7,000.00. 

Appendices 
 
156 
Appendix-4.1.2 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.1.15; Page 85) 
Summarised financial results of Government Companies and Statutory Corporations for the latest year for which accounts were 
finalised 
 
(Figures in column 5 (a) to (6) and (8) to (10) are Rupees in crore) 
Net Profit (+)/ Loss (-) Sl. 
No. 
Sector & Name 
of the Company 
Period of 
Accounts 
Year in 
which 
finalised 
Net Profit/ 
Loss before 
Interest & 
Depreciation 
Interest Depreci- 
ation 
Net 
Profit/ 
Loss 
Turnover Impact of 
Accounts 
Comments4 
Paid- up 
Capital 
Accumulate
d Profit (+)/ 
Loss (-) 
Capital 
employed5  
Return on 
capital 
employed6 
Percent
-age 
return 
on 
capital 
employ-
ed 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 5 (a) 5 (b) 5 (c) 5 (d) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) 
A. Working Government 
Companies 
             
AGRICULTURE & ALLIED 
1. CRBEKVNL First Account not finalised 
2. CRVVNL 2007-08 2008-09 11.88 - 0.16 11.72 22.15 (-) 11.61 6.54 33.83 60.41 11.72 19.40 
Sector wise total   11.88 - 0.16 11.72 22.15 (-) 11.61 6.54 33.83 60.41 11.72 19.40 
FINANCE 
3. CNJVAVNL 2006-07 2008-09 0.29 0.02 0.01 0.26 0.36 (+) 7.56 4.00 0.29 7.37 0.28 3.80 
Sector wise total   0.29 0.02 0.01 0.26 0.36 (+) 7.56 4.00 0.29 7.37 0.28 3.80 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
4. CIDC 2004-05 2007-08 (-) 0.19 0.07 0.02 (-) 0.28 0.13 - 4.20 (-) 0.86 2.99 (-) 0.21 - 
5. CSIDC 2003-04 2008-09 2.51 8.46 0.16 (- ) 6.11 69.75 - 1.60 (-) 40.87 47.79 2.52 5.27 
Sector wise total   2.32 8.53 0.18 (-) 6.39 69.88 - 5.80 (-) 41.73 50. 78 2.31 4.55 
MANUFACTURING 
6. CMDC 2003-04 2007-08 (-) 0.41 - 0.40 (-) 0.81 1.95 - 1.00 (-) 0.16 0.96 (-) 0.81 - 
7. CICL 2008-09 2009-10 0.00 7  - 0.00 7 - Nil Under 
finalisation 37.00 Nil 35.68 Nil Nil 
Sector wise total   (-) 0.41 - 0.40 (-) 0.81 1.95  38.00 (-) 0.16 36.64 (-) 0.81 - 
POWER 
8 CSPDCL 2007-08 2008-09 0.00 8  - - 0.00 8 0.00 9  Non review 0.05 0.00 8 0.05 0.00 8 0.00 
                                                 
4  Impact of accounts comments include the net impact of comments of statutory auditors and CAG and is denoted by (+) increase i n profit/ decrease in loss (-) 
decrease in profit/increase in losses. 
5  Capital employed represents net fixed assets (including capital work in progress) plus working capital except in case of fina nce companies/corporation where the 
capital employed is worked out as a mean of aggregate of the opening and closing balances of paid up capital, free reserves, bonds, deposit and borrowing 
(including refinance). 
6  Return on capital employed has been workout by adding profit and interest charged to profit and loss account. 
7  Actual amount is Rs 1,000. 
8  Actual amount is Rs 9,000. 
9  Actual amount is Rs 13,000. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
157 
 
Net Profit (+)/ Loss (-) Sl. 
No. 
Sector & Name 
of the Company 
Period of 
Accounts 
Year in 
which 
finalised 
Net Profit/ 
Loss before 
Interest & 
Depreciation 
Interest Depreci- 
ation 
Net 
Profit/ 
Loss 
Turnover Impact of 
Accounts 
Comments  
Paid- up 
Capital 
Accumulate
d Profit (+)/ 
Loss (-) 
Capital 
employed  
Return on 
capital 
employed  
Percent
-age 
return 
on 
capital 
employ
ed 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 5 (a) 5 (b) 5 (c) 5 (d) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) 
9. CSPGCL 2007-08 2008-09 0.00 8 - - 0.00 8 0.00 9 Non review 0.05 0.00 8 0.05 0.00 8 0.00 
10. CSPHCL First Account not finalised 
11 CSPTr.CL First account not finalised 
12. CSPTCL 2007-08 2008-09 0.00 8 - - 0.00 8 0.00 9 Non review 0.05 0.00 8 0.05 0.00 8 0.00 
Sector wise total   0.00 - - 0.00 0.00 - 0.15 0.00 0.15 0.00 0.00 
SERVICES 
13. CSBC 2006-07 2008-09 0.48 - 0.10 0.38 197.39 (-) 0.83 0.15 0.38 0.52 0.38 73.08 
14. CSCSCL 2005-06 2008-09 68. 74 39.15 0.13 29.46 1,579. 92 (-) 21.49 0.90 (-) 32.57 (-) 24.35 68.61 - 
Sector wise total   69.22 39.15 0.23 29.84 1,777.31 (-) 22.32 1.05 (-) 32.19 (-) 23.83 68.99 - 
Total A (All sector wise 
working Government 
companies) 
  83.30 47.70 0.98 34.62 1,871.65 (-) 26.37 55.54 (-) 39.96 131.52 82.49 62.72 
B. Working Statutory 
corporations 
             
POWER 
1. CSEB 2004-05 2009-10 317.24 133.13 47.17 136.94 2,881.13 Under 
finalisation 23.12 871.13 2,323.28 270.07 11.62 
Sector wise total   317.24 133.13 47.17 136.94 2,881.13 - 23.12 871.13 2,323.28 270.07 11.62 
MISELLANEOUS 
2. CSWC 2006-07 2009-10 7.25 0.16 1.49 5.60 20.27 (-) 1.48 1.00 5.72 57.59 8.66 15.04 
Sector wise total   7.25 0.16 1.49 5.60 20.27 (-) 1.48 1.00 5.72 57.59 8.66 15.04 
Total B (All sector wise 
working Statutory 
corporations) 
  324.49 133.29 48.66 142.54 2,901.40 - 24.12 876.85 2,380.87 278.73 11.71 
Grand Total (A + B)   407.79 180.99 49.64 177.16 4,773.05 (-) 27.85 79.66 836.89 2,512.39 361.22 14.38 
 
 
 

Appendices 
 
158 
Appendix-4.1.3 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.1.10; Page 84) 
Statement showing grants and subsidy received/receivable, guarantees received, waiver of dues, loans written off and  
loans converted into equity during the year and guarantee commitment at the end of March 2009 
(Figures in column 3 (a) to 6 (d) are Rupees in crore) 
Equity/ loans received 
out of budget during 
the year 
Grants and subsidy received during the year Guarantees received during 
the year and commitment at 
the end of the year10  
Waiver of dues during the year Sl. 
No. 
Sector & Name of 
the Company 
Equity Loans Central 
Government 
State 
Government 
Others  Total Received Commitment Loans 
repayment 
written off 
Loans 
converted 
into equity 
Interest/ 
penal interest 
waived 
Total 
(1) (2) 3 (a) 3 (b) 4 (a) 4 (b) 4 (c) 4 (d) 5 (a) 5 (b) 6 (a) 6 (b) 6 (c) 6 (d) 
A. Working Government 
Companies 
            
AGRICULTURE & ALLIED 
1. CRBEKVNL - - 16.40 0.35 - 16.75 - - - - - - 
2. CRVVNL - - - - - - - - - 20.11 - - 
Sector wise total - - 16.40 0.35 - 16.75 - - - 20.11 - - 
FINANCE 
3. CNJVAVNL - - - 0.55 - 0.55 2.31 - - - - - 
Sector wise total - - - 0.55 - 0.55 2.31 - - - - - 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
4. CIDC - - - 0.25 - 0.25 - - - - - - 
5. CSIDC - 1.95 - 17.47 - 17.47 - - - - - - 
Sector wise total  1.95 - 17.72 - 17.72 - - - - - - 
SERVICES 
6. CSCSCL - - 1,018.55 942.31 - 1,960.86 - - - - - - 
Sector wise total - - 1,018.55 942.31 - 1,960.86 - - - - - - 
Total A (All sector wise 
working Government 
companies) 
 1.95 1,034.95 960.93 - 1,995.88 2.31 - - 20.11 - - 
B. Working Statutory 
corporations 
            
POWER 
7. CSEB - - - 29.50 - 29.50 105.80 22.98 - - - - 
Sector wise total - - - 29.50 - 29.50 - 22.98 - - - - 
Total B (All sector wise 
working Statutory 
corporations) 
- - - 29.50 - 29.50 105.80 22.98 - - - - 
Grand Total (A + B) - 1.95 1,034.95 990.43 - 2,025.38 108.11 22.98 - 20.11 - - 
 
                                                 
10  Figures indicate total guarantees outstanding at the end of the year. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
159 
Appendix-4.1.4 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.1.33; Page 89) 
Statement showing investments made by State Government in PSUs whose accounts are in arrears 
 
(Figures in Column 4 and 6 to 9 are Rupees in crore) 
Investment made by State Government during the years for which accounts are in 
arrears  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the PSUs 
 
Year upto 
which 
Accounts 
finalised 
Paid up 
capital as per 
latest 
finalised 
accounts 
Year Equity Loans Grants 
Others to be 
specified  
(subsidy) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
 Working Companies/ Corporation        
2007-08 - - - - 1 
CSBC 2006-07 0.15 2008-09 - - - - 
2 CRVVNL 2007-08 26.65 2008-09 - - - - 
2004-05 - - - - 
2005-06 - - - 10.00 
2006-07 - - - 8.71 
2007-08 - - 41.17 - 
3 
CMDC 2003-04 1.00 
2008-09 - - - - 
2006-07 - - - 62.40 
2007-08 - - - 609.10 
4 
CSCSCL 2005-06 0.90 
2008-09 - - - 942.31 
2005-06 - - 0.40 - 
2006-07 - - - - 
2007-08 - - 0.25 - 
5 
CIDC 2004-05 4.20 
2008-09 - - 0.25 - 

Appendices 
 
160 
(Figures in Column 4 and 6 to 9 are Rupees in crore)  
Investment made by State Government during the years for which accounts are in 
arrears  Sl.  
No. 
Name of the PSUs 
 
Year upto 
which 
Accounts 
finalised 
Paid up 
capital as per 
latest 
finalised 
accounts 
Year Equity Loans Grants 
 Others to be 
specified  
(subsidy) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
2004-05 - - - 23.09 
2005-06 - 11.00 - 46.98 
2006-07 - 5.00 - 75.87 
2007-08 - 5.00 - 105.48 
6 
 
CSIDC 
 
2003-04 1.60 
2008-09 - 1.95 - 17.47 
2004-05 0.50 - - - 
2005-06 - - 2.00 - 
2006-07 - - 1.00 - 
2007-08 - - 1.00 0.20 
7 CRBEKVNL First accounts 
not finalised - 
2008-09 - - - 0.35 
2007-08 1.00 - 0.47 - 8 CNJVAVNL 2006-07 5.00 2008-09 - - 0.47 0.08 
2005-06 - - 37.07 92.72 
2006-07 - - 405.01 133.63 
2007-08 - - - 106.00 9 CSEB 2004-05 23.11 
2008-09 - - - 29.50 
2007-08 - - - - 10 CSWC 
 2006-07 1.00 
2008-09 - - - - 
11 CSPHCL First accounts 
not finalised - 2008-09 - - - - 
12 CSPGCL 2007-08 0.05 2008-09 - - - - 
13 CSPTCL 2007-08 0.05 2008-09 - - - - 
14 CSPDCL 2007-08 0.05 2008-09 - - - - 
15 CSPTr.CL First accounts 
not finalised - 2008-09 - - - - 
 Total  63.76 - 1.50 22.95 489.09 2,263.89 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
161 
Appendix-4.1.5 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.1.15; Page 85) 
Statement showing financial position of Statutory Corporations 
 
(Rupees in crore) 
Working Statutory Corporations 
1. Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board 
 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 
A. Liabilities    
Equity capital 23.12 23.12 23.12 
Reserves and surplus 594.32 863.79 1,004.43 
Capital liabilities 356.36 325.34 851.64 
Loans and Advances  1,075.28 1,420.48 1,030.48 
Subsidy 216.30 305.31 442.33 
Current liabilities and provisions 1,944.91 1,925.25 2,028.41 
Total A 4,210.29 4,863.29 5,380.41 
B. Assets    
Gross Block 1,681.50 1,768.85 1,915.68 
Depreciation 1,178.02 1,225.03 1,272.21 
Net Block 503.48 543.82 643.47 
Capital works-in-progress 757.84 947.39 1,199.81 
Investments 1,277.39 1,439.23 1,026.95 
Deferred cost liabilities 1.02 1.00 1.00 
Current Assets loans and Advances 1,669.39 1,931.05 2,508.41 
Intangible Assets 1.17 0.80 0.77 
Total B 4,210.29 4,863.29 5,380.41 
Capital employed 985.80 1,497.01 2,323.28 
2. Chhattisgarh State Warehousing Corporation 
A. Liabilities 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 
Paid up capital 1.00 1.00 1.00 
Advances against Capital - - - 
Reserves and Surplus 44.64 49.74 55.10 
Borrowings :    
Government - - - 
Others 2.32 1.60 2.47 
Trade dues and current liabilities 18.26 21.90 24.94 
Total A 66. 22 74.24 83.51 
B. Assets    
Gross Block 46.77 47.96 50.78 
Less: Depreciation 16.20 18.48 20.51 
Net fixed assets 30.57 29.48 30.27 
Capital work in progress 0.12 1.36 0.80 
Current assets, loan and advances 35.53 43.40 52.44 
Total B 66.22 74.24 83.51 
Capital employed 47.96 52.34 57.59 
 
 

Appendices 
 
162 
Appendix-4.1.6 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.1.15; Page 85) 
Statement showing working results of Statutory Corporations 
 
(Rupees in crore) 
A. Working Statutory Corporations 
1 Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board 
 Particulars 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 
 (a) Revenue receipts 2,403.13 2,675.30 2,881.13 
 (b) Subsidy/Subvention from Government 0.00 0.00 0.00 
 Total 2,403.13 2,675.30 2,881.13 
2 Revenue expenditure (net of expenses capitalized) including 
write-off of intangible assets but excluding depreciation and 
interest 
1,934.61 2,042.56 2,469.23 
3 Gross Surplus (+)/ Deficit (-) for the year (1-2) 468.52 632.74 411.90 
4 Adjustments relating to previous years 22.23 23.44 00.04 
5 Final Gross Surplus (+)/ Deficit (-) for the year (3+4) 490.75 656.18 411.94 
6 Appropriations:    
 (a) Depreciation (less capitalised) 55.09 47.01 47.17 
 (b) Interest on Government loans 66.26 66.47 66.50 
 © Interest on others, bonds, advance, etc. and finance charges 92.46 112.53 66.63 
 (d)Total interest on loans & finance charges (b+c) 158.72 179.00 133.13 
 (e) Less: Interest capitalized 0.00 0.00 0.00 
 (f) Net interest charged to revenue (d-e) 158.72 179.00 133.13 
 (g) Total appropriations (a+f) 213.81 226.01 180.30 
7 Surplus (+)/deficit(-) before accounting for subsidy from State 
Government {5-6(g)-1(b)} 276.94 430.17 231.64 
8 Net Surplus (+)/Deficit (-) {5-6(g)} 276.94 430.17 231.64 
9 Total return on capital employed 294.91 445.14 270.07 
10 Percentage of return on capital employed 29.87 29.73 11.62 
2. Chhattisgarh State Warehousing Corporation 
  2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 
 Income    
 (a) Warehousing charges 22.10 18.97 19.53 
 (b) Other Income 0.51 0.76 0.74 
 Total 22.61 19.73 20.27 
 Expenses    
 (a) Establishment charges 5.61 5.91 6.15 
 (b) Other expenses 6.19 5.62 5.62 
 Total 11.80 11.53 11.77 
 Profit (+)/Loss(-) before tax 10.81 8.20 8.50 
 Other appropriations 11  10.61 8.00 8.30 
 Amount available for dividend 0.20 0.20 0.20 
 Dividend for the year 0.20 0.20 0.20 
 Total return on capital employed 11.06 8.35 8.66 
 Percentage of return on capital employed 23.06 15.95 15.04 
 
                                                 
11  This does not include prior period adjustment 

Appendices 
 
 163
Appendix-4.2.1 
(Referred to in the paragraph 4.2.6; Page 95) 
Statement showing financial position and working result of Chhattisgarh 
Rajya Van Vikas Nigam Limited for the four years up to 2007-08 
 
Particulars 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 
A. Liabilities (Rupees in crore) 
Paid up capital 6.54 6.54 6.54 6.54 
Reserves & surplus 10.90 13.28 22.03 33.83 
Unsecured loan 20.12 20.12 20.12 20.12 
Current liabilities 29.36 30.98 42.35 44.24 
Total 66.92 70.92 91.04 104.73 
B. Assets     
Gross block 3.10 3.25 3.67 3.95 
Less: Depreciation 2.08 2.18 2.37 2.52 
Net fixed assets 1.02 1.07 1.30 1.43 
Capital work in progress - - - 0.03 
Deferred tax assets - - - 0.07 
Current assets 65.90 69.85 89.74 103.20 
Total 66.92 70.92 91.04 104.73 
Capital employed1 37.56 39.94 48.69 60.42 
 
Particulars 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 
A. Income (Rupees in crore) 
Nationalised species     
a. Timber logs & poles 13.00 12.00 15.26 10.20 
b. Bamboo 0.77 0.52 2.47 1.07 
Non-nationalised Species     
a. Timber logs & poles 8.45 4.69 3.06 2.52 
b. Fuel stacks 3.30 2.63 2.24 1.14 
Sales of plants - - - 1.39 
Other Income 1.93 4.47 5.64 5.83 
Total Income 27.45 24.31 28.67 22.15 
B. Expenditure     
Exploitation, Conversion and 
Transportation2  
15.78 19.39 23.05 7.30 
Other Expenditure 0.83 0.74 1.07 1.36 
Total expenditure 16.61 20.13 24.12 8.66 
Profit/loss (A-B) 10.84 4.18 4.55 13.49 
                                                 
1  Capital employed represents net fixed assets plus working capital. 
2  After adjusting the amount of increase/decrease in stock. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 164
 Appendix-4.2.2 
(Referred to in the paragraph 4.2.7; Page 96) 
 Statement showing details of acquisition and utilisation of land 
(Land in hectare) 
Sl. No.  Particular Barnawapara Panabaras Antagarh Kawardha Kota Sarguja Manendragarh Total 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
1 Land available with the company as on the 
date of formation of the company 
32822.84 41404.48 42744.23 0.00 29242.77 0.00 0.00 146214.32 
2 Land acquired by the company on lease since 
inception up to 2007-08 
2378.64 8888.15 0.00 16511.62 4617.03 20281.75 11093.96 63771.15 
3 Land transferred from Kota division 0.00 0.00 0.00 5797.14 0.00 0.00 0.00 5797.14 
4 Land returned to Forest department up to 
2007-08 
0.00 0.00 0.00 1351.56 0.00 0.00 11093.96 12445.52 
5 Land transferred to Kawardha division 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 5797.14 0.00 0.00 5797.14 
6 Total Land (1+2+3-4-5=6) 35201.48 50292.63 42744.23 20957.20 28062.66 20281.75 0.00 197539.95 
7 Land to be treated as per working plan of the 
company up to 2007-08 
32822.84 41404.48 39713.47 3834.88 23445.64 6849.02 1101.14 149171.47 
8 Land treated upto 2007-08 32822.84 40127.89 24816.36 3199.88 19276.34 2235.97 246.25 122725.53 
9 Shortfall in treatment of land 0.00 1276.59 14897.11 635.00 4169.30 4613.05 854.89 26445.94 
10 Percentage of shortfall in treatment of land 0.00 3.08 37.51 16.56 17.78 67.35 77.64 17.73 

Appendices 
 
 165
Appendix-4.2.3 
(Referred to in the Paragraph 4.2.10.1; Page 102) 
Statement showing less production of standard size root-shoots 
 
Actual production of standard size root-
shoots 
Name of 
division 
Plantation 
year 
No. of 
beds 
used Total 
(lakh) 
Per Bed 
(Nos)  
Col 4/col 
3 
Percentage  
(Col *100/700) 
(Col 5 x 100/700) 
Production 
as per 
norms 
700/bed 
(lakh)  
(Col 3 
*700) 
Less 
production 
of 
Standard 
size root-
shoots 
(lakh) (Col 
7-Col 4) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
2004 4237 7.81 184 26 29.66 21.85 
2005 4450 5.85 131 19 31.15 25.30 
2006 4250 11.48 270 39 29.75 18.27 
2007 2500 15.46 618 88 17.50 2.04 
Panabaras 
2008 5110 10.30 202 29 35.77 25.47 
2007 3000 7.25 242 35 21.00 13.75 Sarguja 
2008 2600 0.15 6 1 18.20 18.05 
2004 5000 33.07 661 94 35.00 1.93 
2005 5000 26.01 520 74 35.00 8.99 
2006 4000 11.07 277 40 28.00 16.93 
Barnawapara 
2007 4144 28.00 676 97 29.01 1.01 
2004 4403 16.57 376 54 30.82 14.25 
2005 5000 18.95 379 54 35.00 16.05 
2006 4000 20.54 514 73 28.00 7.46 
2007 4000 16.22 406 58 28.00 11.78 
Antagarh 
2008 4100 19.00 463 66 28.70 9.70 
2005 500 2.89 578 83 3.50 0.61 
2006 2540 13.53 533 76 17.78 4.25 Kawardha 
2007 4010 24.13 602 86 28.07 3.94 
2004 4000 6.78 170 24 28.00 21.22 
2005 3000 7.88 263 38 21.00 13.12 
2006 3200 13.34 417 60 22.40 9.06 
2007 4000 14.27 357 51 28.00 13.73 
Kota 
2008 3729 18.21 488 70 26.10 7.89 
Manendragarh 2006 1000 1.00 100 14 7.00 6.00 
Total 91773 349.76 381  54 642.41 292.65 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 166
Appendix-4.2.4 
(Referred to in the Paragraph 4.2.12; page 106) 
Statement showing targets and achievements 
 
2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 Total Sl. 
No. 
 Works 
Target  Actual 
Short 
fall in 
% 
Target  Actual 
Short 
fall in 
% 
Target  Actual Short 
fall in % Target  Actual 
Short 
fall in 
% 
Target Actual 
Short 
fall 
in % 
1 Plantation Imp. 
Working circle(ha) 
7708 4225 45 5348 2650 50 2470 310 87 2160 0 100 17686 7185 59 
2. Plantation 
Management 
Working circle(ha) 
12652 8355 34 12328 8278 33 8150 7072 13 9892 7068 29 43022 30773 28 
3 Improvement 
Working circle (ha) 
13290 4978 63 16210 4135 74 7354 4969 32 8512 5407 36 45366 19489 57 
4 Boundary pillars 
(Nos) 
4494 4165 7 3829 3243 15 3691 694 81 4465 719 84 16479 8821 46 
5 Demarcation line  
(Km) 
1231 905 26 1886 1425 24 1071 392 63 935 270 71 5123 2992 42 
6 Fire protection work 
(Ha) 
79111 78484 1 146688 101608 31 104337 179361 0 179361 179361 0 509497 538814 0 

Appendices 
 
 167
Appendix-4.3.1 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.3.4; Page 114) 
List of paras involving recovery of money 
 
A. Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board 
(Rupees in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
 
Name of Division 
Year of IR 
Amount 
involved 
Remarks 
 
1.  Non-recovery of Rs 1.11 lakh 
towards temporary connection 
given to LT consumers 
EE (O&M), Dhamtari 
2001-02 to 2002-03 
Part II B Para 1 
1.11 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
2.  Outstanding recovery of Rs 62.71 
lakh against RE/LIS 3 towards 
electrification work 
EE (O&M), Dhamtari 
2001-02 to 2002-03 
Part II B Para 4 
62.71 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
3.  Non-realisation of recoveries of 
Rs 15.54 lakh as pointed out by 
vigilance  
EE (O&M),  Kawardha 
(2001-2003)  
Part II B Para 1 
15.54 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
4.  Non-recovery of Rs 7.72 lakh for 
using MPEB4 poles by  TV cable 
operators  
EE(O&M), Korba East 
1999-2001  
Part II Para1 
7.72 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
5.  Defalcation of Rs  10,094 in 
Baradwar distribution center 
 
EE(O&M), Champa 
2000-2002 
Part II B Para 2 
0.10 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
6.  Non-recovery of Rs 92.50 lakh 
from Allied Steel  
Sr.AO/MPEB, Raipur  
1998-99  
Para 1 
92.50 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
7.  Recoveries of Rs  89.55 lakh 
outstanding against consumers 
identified by Vigilance Flying 
Squad  
SE(O&M), CSEB 
Raipur 
1999-2001 Para 2 
89.55 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
8.  Non recovery of lease rent of Rs 
3.49 lakh from the contractor of 
PCC
5 Pole factory 
EE(Civil S&I), 
Jagadalpur (1999-00 to 
2000-01)  Para 1 
3.49 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
9.  Non-recovery of Rs 1.88 lakh 
based on revised license fees of 
quarters 
EE(Civil S&I), 
Jagadalpur (1999-00 to 
2000-01) Para 2 
1.88 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
10.  Non-recovery of revenue of 
Rs 8.59 lakh 
EE(O&M), Bhatapara, 
CSEB  (1994-95 to 
1996-97) Para 1 
8.59 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
11.  Non-recovery of Rs 66,131 on 
account of intimated by Vigilance 
Department 
EE(O&M), Bhatapara, 
CSEB (1994-95 to 
1996-97) Para 2 
0.66 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
                                                 
3  Scheme code RE/LIS 036 relating to Majratola electrification. 
4  Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board 
5  Pre-stressed cement concrete pole 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 168
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
 
Name of Division 
Year of IR 
Amount 
involved 
Remarks 
 
12.  Non-recovery of dues worth 
Rs 28.12 lakh from different 
suppliers 
EE(Store) HTPS Korba 
West, CSEB 
1999-2001 
Part II B Para 3(b) 
14.60 Recovery of 
Rs 13.52 lakh was 
made.  Details of 
recovery of balance 
amount not given by 
the Management. 
13.  Non-recovery of advances 
amounting to Rs 7.52 lakh 
Sr. AO, HTPS, Korba 
West 1999 to 2000 
Part II B Para 3 
7.52 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
14.  Non-recovery of energy dues from 
consumers on accounts of energy 
theft detected by vigilance  
CE (Comml), Raipur  
2002-03 Part II B  
Para 5 
14.44 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
15.  Non-recovery of Sales Tax of 
Rs 0.42 lakh for hiring of vehicles 
EE(Civil Construction 
Division), Bhilai 
2001-03 Part II B 
Para 2 
0.42 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
16.  Non-recovery of dues from 
Railways amounting to 
Rs 7.93 crore on account of 
charges for parallel operation of 
railway traction 
EE(O&M), Raigarh  
1998-2000 
Part II A Para 1 
793.00 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
17.  Non-recovery of arrears detected 
by vigilance amounting to 
Rs 73.76 lakh on account of 
energy dues. 
EE (O&M) City 
Division, Bilaspur 
2001-03 
Part II B Para 2(b) 
73.76 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
18.  Non-recovery of outstanding rent 
of Rs 2.45 lakh from allotted 
shopkeepers 
SE(Civil Circle), Korba 
East  
2001-03 
Part II B Para 2 
2.45 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
19.  Illegal abstraction of electrical 
power violating the procedures. 
Non-recovery of dues of 
Rs 86.81 lakh 
CE (Comml), Raipur 
2003-04 
Part II B Para 1 
86.81 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
20.  Non-recovery of outstanding 
quarter rent of Rs 13.93 lakh 
SR AO, Korba (East) 
2001-02 
Part II B Para 2 
10.98 Recovery of 
2.95 lakh was made.  
Details of recovery 
of balance amount  
not given by the 
Management. 
21.  Non-recovery of thefts pointed out 
by the vigilance Rs 2.14 crore 
EE(O&M), Korba East 
1999-2001 
Part II B Para 3 
214.00 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
22.  Non-recovery of theft of energy 
cases Rs 31.98 lakh 
EE(O&M) Champa 
2000-2002 
Part II B Para 3 
31.98 Recovery details  
and latest position 
was not given by the 
Management. 
23.  Non-recovery of Rs 2.12 lakh -
energy theft detect ed by vigilance 
department 
EE (O&M) Champa 
1997-99 
Part II B Para 1 
2.12 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 

Appendices 
 
 169
 
24.  Non-recovery of additional 
charges earnest money of 
Rs 83,897 
EE(O&M) Dhamtari 
1992-94 
Part II B Para 6 
0.83 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
25.  Non-recovery for installation of 
new meter in lieu of burnt meter 
EE(O&M) Dhamtari 
1992-94 
Part II B Para 7 
0.44 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
26.  Non-recovery of penal rent from 
the retired/terminated officers of 
board Rs 1.69 lakh 
EE, CM. Division  
Bilaspur 
2000-01 to 2001-02 
Part II B Para 3 
1.69 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
27.  Non-recovery of cost of short 
supply of coal from SECL 6 
Rs 9.70 lakh 
Sr.AO, HTPS 7 Korba 
West 
1999 to 2000 
Para 2 
3.23 Recovery of Rs 6.47 
lakh has been made.  
Details of recovery 
of the balance 
amount not given by 
the Management. 
28.  Non-recovery of advances paid to 
Divisional Forest Officer Bilaspur 
Rs 33.23 lakh 
Sr.AO, HTPS Korba 
West 
1999-2000 
Para 4 
33.23 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
29.  Non-recovery of Rs 18.65 lakh 
from SECL 
EE, Coal Transfer 
(Internal) Korba West 
1993-95 
Para 2 
3.50 Recovery has been 
made upto Rs 15.15 
lakh. Details of 
recovery of balance 
amount not given by 
the Management. 
30.  Non-recovery of penalty due to 
delay in supply of materials-
Rs 0.82 lakh 
EE (Boiler and Maint) 
Dn. Korba (E) 
1995-97 
Para 4 
0.82 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
31.  Non-recovery of penalty from 
contractor due to delay in 
completion of work  in respect of 
annual overhauling of boilers 
Rs 5.01 lakh 
EE(Boiler 
Maintenance) Korba 
East 
1993-95 
Part II B Para 6 
5.01 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
32.  Pendency of railway claims 
Rs 14.91 lakh 
EE(Stores) HTPS 
Korba (W) 
1996-98 
Part II B Para 5 
14.91 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
33.  Non-receipt of Rs 9.12 lakh in 
respect of pump claim 
EE(O&M) CSEB 
Mahasamund 
1996-99 
Part II B Para 8 
9.12 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
34.  Misappropriation of Rs 3.60 lakh 
in the rural electrification scheme 
EE(O&M), Bilaspur 
1988-91 
Part II B Para 3 
3.60 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
35.  Non-recovery Rs 3,374 in deposit 
works. 
EE(O&M), Bilaspur 
1988-91 
Part II B Para 10 
0.03 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
                                                 
6   South Eastern Coal field Limited. 
7   Hasdeo Thermal Power Station. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 170
36.  Pending revenue recovery 
amounting to Rs 52.48 lakh 
EE(O&M) Bilaspur 
1998-2000 
Part II B Para 3 
52.48 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
37.  Delay in recovery of electricity 
theft cases caught by vigilance 
party amounting to Rs 5.83 lakh 
EE(O&M) Bilaspur 
1998-2000 
Part II B Para 4 
5.83 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
38.  Non-recovery of penalty due to 
non completion of seweage 
system renovation at CD type 
colony Korba East Rs 2.44 lakh 
SE(Civil) Korba (E) 
1994-2001 
Part II B Para 2  
2.44 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
39.  Non-recovery of advance paid to 
contractor Rs 51.95 lakh 
Sr. AO, HTPS,  
Korba West 
1999 -2000 Para 5 
51.95 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
40.  Non-recovery of rent 
Rs 21.28 lakh from Government 
quarters 
SE(Civil circle) Korba 
(E) 
2001-03 
Part II B Para 1  
21.28 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
41.  Non-recovery of outstanding rent 
from Government quarters 
Rs 16.40 lakh 
SE(Civil) Korba (E)  
1999 -2001 
Para 1 
16.40 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
42.  Under billing of energy charges -
Rs 29.54 lakh 
 
EE (O&M) Raigarh 
1998-2000 
Part II A Para 5  
29.54 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
43.  Recovered less service charges of 
Rs 0.72 lakh 
EE(O&M) Dhamtari 
1988-90 
Para 2 
0.72 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
44.  Short billing of energy charges of 
Rs 3.06 lakh from consumers 
EE(O&M) Dhamtari 
1994-97 
Part II B Para 1 
3.06 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
45.  Short billing of FCA 8 charges for 
the units sold to public street 
lighting - loss of revenue of 
Rs 1.48 lakh 
EE(O&M) Balod,  
2000-02 
Para 1 
1.48 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
46.  Short billing of FCA charges 
during 1995-96 Rs 16.39 lakh 
EE City division 
Bilaspur 
1999-2000 to 2000-01 
Part II A Para 1(a) 
16.39 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
47.  Short billing of FCA charges 
Rs 1.98 lakh on public street light 
and private consumption 
EE City division 
Bilaspur 
1999-2000 to 2000-01 
Part II A Para 1(b) 
1.98 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
48.  Short billing of FCA charges on 
assessed/minimum units where 
meter is defective Rs 89,865 
EE City division 
Bilaspur 
1999-2000 to 2000-01 
Part II A Para 1(c) 
0.90 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
49.  Outstanding of Rs 16.85 lakh on 
electrification of irrigation well 
EE(O&M) Dn II Durg 
1993-95 
Part II B Para 1 
16.85 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
                                                 
8  Fuel Cost Adjustment. 

Appendices 
 
 171
Management. 
50.  Non-recovery of excess payment 
of excise duty by pole factory 
Bilaspur 
EE(Civil) MPEB 
Bilaspur 
1986-89 
Part II B Para 4 
1.53 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
51.  Dues to be realised from South 
Eastern Railway Rs 430.99 crore 
CE (Comml) Raipur 
2002-03 
Part II B Para 4  
43099.00 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
52.  Non-recovery of interest of 
Rs 0.52 lakh/month from DCC 9 
Bank Bilaspur on account of 
belated remittances 
EE (City) Dn Bilaspur 
1997-99 
Part II B Para 5 
0.52 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
53.  Non-recovery of dues from LT 
consumers Rs 3.92 crore 
EE (O&M) Raigarh 
1998-2000 
Part II A Para 6(a)  
392.13 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
54.  Non-recovery of Rs 24.06 crore as 
penalty for delay from Alstom 
Power India Ltd. 
SE (R & M)  
Korba, East  
(2002-03) 
2406.00 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
55.  Non-recovery of Additional 
security deposit from HT 
consumers to the extent of 
Rs 1.89 crore 
Sr.AO, Bilaspur 
2002-03 
Part II B Para 2 
189.40 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
56.  Non-encashment of energy 
security deposit of Rs 0.57 lakh 
EE(O&M) Dn II Durg 
1993-95 
Part II B Para 3 
0.57 Recovery details and 
latest position was 
not given by the 
Management. 
 Total  47922.79  
 
                                                 
9   District Credit Co-operative Bank 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 172
B. Chhattisgarh State Civil Supplies Corporation Limited 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
 
Year of 
IR 
Amount 
Involved 
Remarks 
 
1.  Non-recovery of Rs 71.45 lakh 2001-02 
Para. 12 
71.45 Recovery details and 
latest position was not 
made available by the 
management. 
2.  Non-recovery of sales tax from the Sales tax 
department paid during October 2001 to 
March 2002 without availing exemption 
available. 
2001-02 
Para 14 
3.03 Recovery details and 
latest position was not 
made available by the 
management. 
 
3.  Misappropriation of funds to the extent of 
Rs 37.83 lakh by Sri F.R.Jayde, Assistant and 
incharge of Mandi in Kugumi during 
2000-2002 
2002-03 
Para 12 
37.83 The official suspended. 
The official was 
absconding since 
November 2002. Latest 
position was not made 
available by the 
management. 
4.  A sum of Rs 21.50 crore remained not 
recovered from various bodies like FCI 10, 
Railways, DRDA, Millers and others as on 
31.3.2001 
2003-04 
Para.9 
2,150.00 Recovery details and 
latest position was not 
made available by the 
management. 
 
5.  Non-recovery of Rs 13.28 lakh from the 
transporters and SWC11 for shortages in transit 
and in storages in SWC/CWC warehouses  
1996-97  
Part IIB 
Para 5 
13.28 Recovery details and 
latest position was not 
made available by the 
management. 
 
6.  Non-recovery of claim of Rs 81.46 lakh from 
SWC/CWC for shortage during storage in 
Bilaspur and Raigarh district warehouses. 
1999-2000 
Part II B 
Para13 
81.46 Recovery details and 
latest position was not 
made available by the 
management. 
 
7.  Delay in recovery of Rs 2.08 lakh from the 
transporter 
1996-97 
Part II B 
Para 7 
2.08 Recovery details and 
latest position was not 
made available by the 
management. 
 
8.  Non-recovery of shortage in SWC warehouse 
worth Rs 1.80 lakh  
1996-97 
Part II B 
Para 9 
1.80 Recovery details and 
latest position was not 
made available by the 
management. 
 
9.  Delay in recovery of Rs 3.85 crore from 
millers 
2000-01 
Part II B 
Para 6 
385.40 Recovery details and 
latest position was not 
made available by the 
management. 
 
10. Non-recovery of penalty (LD) of 
Rs 6.15 lakh for delay in supply 
2001-02 
Para 13 
6.15 Recovery details and 
latest position was not 
made available by the 
management. 
 
 Total  2,752.48  
 
                                                 
10  Food Corporation of India. 
11  State Warehousing Corporation. 

Appendices 
 
 173
 
C. Chhattisgarh State Industrial Development Corporation Limited 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
 
Year of IR Amount 
Involved 
Remarks 
 
1. Arrears of water charges- 
Rs  2.13 crore 
2003-04 
Part II B Para 4 
212.79 Recovery details and latest 
position had not been 
made available by the 
management. 
 
D- Chhattisgarh Mineral Development Corporation Limited. 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
 
Year of IR Amount 
Involved 
Remarks 
 
1. Non-recovery of advance of 
Rs 7.71 lakh 
2002-03 
Part II B 
Para 6 
4.75 Recovery was made upto 
Rs 2.96 lakh. Balance has to be 
done.  
 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 174
Appendix-4.3.2 
(Referred to in paragraph 4.3.5; Page 115) 
List of paras involving deficiencies 
 
A. Chhattisgarh State Electricity Board 
(Rupees in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
 
Name of Division 
Year of IR 
Amount 
involved 
Remarks 
 
1. Avoidable loss of revenue 
amounting to Rs 453.36 crore on 
account of theft of energy 
CE (O&M) Raipur  
2002-03 
Part II B Para 5 
45336.00 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
2. Abnormal delay in decision by 
the Board resulting in loss of 
dues of Rs 110.93 crore on 
account of parallel operation of 
Railway Traction substation 
EE(O&M) Korba 
East  
1999-2001 
Part II Para 2 
11093.00 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
3. Purchase of power from Jindal 
strips Ltd. Rebate for prompt 
payment Rs 3.01 crore 
EE(O&M) Korba 
East  
1999-2001 
Part II A Para 2  
301.00 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
4. Avoidable over payment 
Rs 37.71 crore to Jindal Strips 
due to defective clause on firm 
power 
EE(O&M) Korba 
East  
1999-2001 
Part II A Para 4 
3771.00 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
5. Loss of Rs 2.87 lakh to the board 
due to energy theft by Abhilasha 
Ispat Industries  
EE (MRT) Dn. I, 
Raipur 
2000-02 
Para 1 
2.87 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
6. Loss of Rs 23.39 lakh due to 
billing at minimum whereas 
actual quantity consumed exceed 
minimum quantity. 
EE(City) Dn. 
Bilaspur 
1997-99 
Part II B Para 2 
8.98 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
7. Loss of Rs 6.04 lakh as the 
transformer became defective  
EE(City Dn) East, 
Raipur 
1995-98 
Part II Para 3 
6.04 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
8. Loss of Rs 5.17 crore due to 
excess loss of energy over norm 
SE(O&M) Dn. 
Bilaspur 
1995-97 
Part II B Para 1 
517.20 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
9. Finalisation of contract resulting 
in an avoidable expenditure of 
Rs 25.71 lakh 
Concurrent of High 
Value Contract  
25.71 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
10. Undue benefit of Rs 36.52 lakh 
to three HT consumers 
EE(Sub 
transmission) and 
Rural 
Electrification, 
Bilaspur 
1996-99 
Part II A Para 1 
36.52 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
11. By not adhering to the 
provisions of Electricity Supply 
Act resulting in non recovery of 
dues Rs 1.87 crore 
EE (O&M) Raigah 
1998-2000 
Part II A Para 9 
187.13 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 

Appendices 
 
 175
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
 
Name of Division 
Year of IR 
Amount 
involved 
Remarks 
 
12. Excess payment of property tax 
of Rs 7.03 lakh and non-availing 
of rebate at the rate of 6.25 per 
cent (Rs  3.04 lakh) available for 
payment within the stipulated 
time of 15 days 
EE(Civil) 
Maintenance Dn. II 
Korba East 
1989-92 
Para 2 
10.28 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
13. Delay in remittance of Sale 
proceeds of scrap to board 
accounts Rs 1.30 crore 
CE (S&P) 
Generation, Raipur 
for the period 
ending March 2004 
Para 2 
129.56 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
14. Transformer failed within 
guarantee period-lying un-
repaired 
SE(Stores) Circle, 
Raipur 
2002-04 
Para 2 
0 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
15. Non-supply of 11 KV & 33 KV 
VCB and CT against extension 
order valuing Rs 2.12 crore 
High Value 
Contract audit of 
CE (S&P) Raipur 
for the period 
ending March 2004 
Para 4 
212.00 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
16. Non-supply of material against 
extension order resulted in extra 
expenditure of Rs 1.78 crore 
High Value 
Contract audit of 
CE (S&P) Raipur 
for the period 
ending March 2004 
Para 5 
178.00 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
17. Purchase of conveyor belt worth 
Rs 2.86 crore from disqualified 
suppliers 
HVC/CE (S&P) 
Generation Raipur 
2003-04 
Para 4 
285.51 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
18. Procurement of PCC 12 poles 
giving undue advantages to 
private manufacturers 
EE (S&P) Raipur 
2003-04 
Part II B 
Para 1 
0 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
19. Loss of Rs 2.12 lakh due to 
delay in replacement of 
defective 11 KV pre insulators  
EE (S&P) Raipur 
2003-04 
Para 2 
2.12 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
20. Delay in replacement of 
defective 11 KV fittings 
EE(S&P), Raipur 
2003-04 
Para 3 
0 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
21. Non supply of VCBs 13 within 
the delivery period by ABB 
Limited 
EE (S&P) Raipur 
2003-04 
Para 4 
0 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
22. Non execution of extension 
order by the contractor for 
supply of line material for 
Naragarh transmission line-Extra 
expenditure of  Rs 2.50 crore 
HVC of CSEB 
For the period 
ending June 2004  
Para 1 
250.00 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
                                                 
12  Pre stressed cement concrete pole 
13  Vacuum Circuit Breaker. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 176
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
 
Name of Division 
Year of IR 
Amount 
involved 
Remarks 
 
23. Non-deduction of Income Tax 
amounting to Rs 24.47 lakh on 
free supply of electricity to 
employees  
SR A.O Raipur 
2001-04 
Part II B Para 1 
24.47 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
24. Extra expenditure of 
Rs 12.63 lakh incurred on 
shifting of electrical support on 
behalf of Municipal Corporation, 
Raipur 
EE (City 
construction) 
Raipur 
2001-04 
Para 2 
12.63 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
25. Loss due to theft Rs 38.33 lakh CE (O&M) Raipur 
2003-04 
Para 2 
38.33 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
26. Payment of excise duty and 
Central Sales Tax to a firm 
without conforming 
documentary evidence  
Rs 39.44 lakh 
Concurrent (High 
Value Contract) 
-Part II A Para 2 
39.44 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
27. Wrong adoption of differential 
rates resulted in excess payment 
of Rs 0.62 lakh in purchase of 
power from Prakash Industries 
Limited 
Sr.AO, Bilaspur 
2002-03 
Part II B Para 3 
0.62 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
28. Non-disposal of unserviceable 
items of stores amounting to 
Rs 2.18 crore 
EE (Stores) Bhilai 
2001-03 
Part II B Para 2 
217.62 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
29. Dishonored cheque of 
Rs 23.00 lakh 
EE (O&M) City 
Division Bilaspur 
2001-03 
Part II B Para 2(B) 
23.00 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
30. Loss of Rs 3.61 lakh due to non 
billing of average consumption 
charges on defective/stopped 
meter. 
EE(O&M) Champa 
2000-02 
Part II B Para1 
3.61 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
31. Billed less due to damage of 
meter of Rs 0.42 lakh 
EE(O&M) 
Dhamtari 
1988-90 
Para 1 
0.42 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
32. Short billed for 3,885 units EE(O&M) 
Dhamtari 
1994-97 
Part II B Para 2 
0 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
33. Theft of assets of board valuing 
Rs 0.56 lakh 
EE(O&M) 
Dhamtari 
1992-94 
Part II B Para 5 
0.56 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
34. Loss of material by theft - 
Rs 0.98 lakh 
EE(O&M) 
Dhamtari 
1997-99 
Para 2 
0.98 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
35. Excess payment of Rs 6.43 lakh 
to the contractor due to material 
supplied above SOR 14 
percentage  
EE(Civil) 
Construction, 
Bhilai  
1994 -96 
6.43 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
                                                 
14  Schedule of Rate 

Appendices 
 
 177
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
 
Name of Division 
Year of IR 
Amount 
involved 
Remarks 
 
Para 1 
36. Loss of Rs 2.31 lakh due to theft 
of conductors 
EE(O&M)Dn 
Khairagarh, 
Rajnandgaon 
2000-01 to 
2001-02 
Part II A Para 2 
2.31 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
37. Transformer purchased at a 
value of Rs 1.96 crore but not 
used till 1999 
EE(Civil) Bhilai 
1996-99 
Para 1 
196.00 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
38. An amount of Rs 32.61 lakh 
incurred in construction of 
service station but the work was 
abandoned 
EE(Civil) Bhilai 
1996-99 
Para 2 
32.61 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
39. Locking up of funds in purchase 
of land Rs 22.65 lakh 
EE (EHT) Constn. 
Durg 
1993-96 
Para 2 
22.65 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
40. Loss of Rs 4.00 lakh due to 
placement of work order without 
acquisition of land. 
EE, Civil Division  
Bilaspur 
2000-01 to 
2001-02 
Part II B Para 1 
4.00 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
41. Avoidable payment of excise 
duty of Rs 5.94 lakh on the poles 
manufactured by universal 
enterprises Bishrampur  
EE, CM. Division  
Bilaspur 
2000-01 to 
2001-02 
Part II B Para 2 
5.94 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
42. Loss of material issued from 
stores worth Rs 2.73 lakh 
EE (Maintenance 
Division)PH-3 
Korba (E) 
1996-97 to 
1998-99 
Part II B Para 1 
2.73 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
43. Excess consumption of coal as 
per norm in electricity 
production resulting in extra 
expenditure Rs 7.41 crore 
SE(operation) PH 
II Korba (E) 
2000-02 
Part II B Para 1 
740.68 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
44. Irregular purchase order placed 
to God Enterprises, Calcutta 
EE(O&M) Dn. 
2X120 KW PH 
No.3 Korba (East 
Bank) 
April 1990 to April 
1993 
Part II B Para 3 
0 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
45. Equipment worth Rs 16.00 lakh 
lying unused 
EE(R&D) Korba 
(Bilaspur East) 
April 1996 to 
March 1998 
Part II B Para 2 
16.00 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
46. Irregular payment of 
Rs 4.73 lakh 
EE(R&D) Korba 
(Bilaspur East) 
April 1996 to 
March 1998 
Part II B Para 3 
4.73 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 178
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
 
Name of Division 
Year of IR 
Amount 
involved 
Remarks 
 
47. Loss of Rs 37.00 lakh due to 
sanction of Irregular Tender 
EE Civil/ 
Maintenance 
Division, Korba 
(E) 
April 1998 to 
March 2000 
Part II B Para 1 
37.00 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
48. Irregular payment of allowances 
of Rs 2.87 lakh due to posting of 
employees against abolish post 
of security guard 
EE (Training Dn) 
MPEB Raipur 
1995-98 
Para 1 
2.87 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
49. Theft of money worth Rs 20,000 
of the Board from SBI, Raipur 
EE (Training Dn) 
MPEB Raipur 
1995-98 
Para 2 
0.20 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
50. Non-receiving of expenditure 
incurred Rs 5.52 lakh claim from 
Government on el ectrification of 
agriculture pump 
CE(Raipur 
Region), CSEB 
Raipur 
2000-02 
Para 1 
5.52 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
51. Short billing of Rs 0.10 lakh on 
account of defective meter Sri 
Punjab Rice mill  
JE(Distribution 
center) Bhattapara 
1958-59 to 
1986-87 
Para 1 
0.10 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
52. Non-scaling of meters terminal 
seats and non recovery of 
rescaling charges of 
Rs 3,264 
JE(Distribution 
center) Bhattapara 
1958-59 to 
1986-87 
Para 2 
0.03 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
53. Short recovery of energy charges 
from Sri Chimam Bhai Rs 3,920 
JE(Distribution 
center) Bhattapara 
1958-59 to 
1986-87 
Para 4 
0.03 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
54. Non-deposit of sales tax of 
Rs 17,454 in treasury  
EE(O&M) Dn 
Bhatapara 
1994-95 to 
1996-97 
Para 3 
0.17 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
55. Loss of revenue amounting to 
Rs 85.65 lakh in supply of 
energy for irrigation pumps on 
flat rate  
Divisional (O&M) 
Raipur 
1997-98 to 1999-
2000 
Para 1 
85.65 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
56. Loss of revenue in supply of 
energy to single point of 
consumers- Rs 1.85 crore 
Divisional (O&M) 
Raipur 
1997-98 to 1999-
2000 
Para 2  
185.14 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
57. Idle investment on purchase of 
additional parallel housing 
feeder worth Rs 39.46 lakh and 
loss of interest Rs 71.03 lakh 
thereon 
EE(Store) HTPC, 
Korba (West)  
1999 to 2001 
Para 1 
71.03 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 

Appendices 
 
 179
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
 
Name of Division 
Year of IR 
Amount 
involved 
Remarks 
 
58. Excess payment of commercial 
tax amounting to Rs 7.95 lakh 
SE(Operation) 
Korba, west  
1997-99 
Para 4 
7.95 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
59. Poor maintenance of conveyor 
system resulting in short receipt 
of coal led to generation loss of 
power worth Rs 86.88 lakh and 
additional expenditure of 
Rs 35.10 lakh on transportation 
of coal by road 
SE(CHP) Internal, 
Korba West 
2000-02 
Para 1 
121.98 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
60. Purchase of on-off switch of 
Larsen and Turbo make valuing 
Rs 57.42 lakh without assessing 
responsibility of rates. 
SE(CHP) Internal, 
Korba West 
2000-02 
Para 2 
57.42 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
61. Irregular payment of 
Commercial Tax to contractor - 
Rs 1.04 lakh 
CE (Services), 
Korba West 
1997 to 2000 
Para 1 
1.04 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
62. Cost over run of Rs 0.80 crore 
due to abnormal time over run 
Sr.AO Korba West 
2000-01 
Para 4 
80.00 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
63. Avoidable extra payment of Rs 
17.95 lakh to Thejo Engg. 
Limited 
EE CHP (Internal) 
Korba West 
2000-02 
Para 1 
17.95 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
64. Non-feeding of 4.24 lakh MT 
coal valuing Rs 22 crore as per 
requirement of power houses 
EE CHP (Internal) 
Korba West 
2000 -02 
Para 2 
0 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
65. Irregular purchase of 
Rs 48.46 lakh 
EE(Maint) Circle II 
Korba West 
1994-95 to 
1995-96 
Para 1 
48.46 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
66. Theft of conveyor belt and other 
items Rs 20.23 lakh 
EE(Store) Korba 
West 
1994-96 
Para 1 
20.23 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
67. Undue advantages to contractors 
in construction of earthen bund 
and ancillary work for disposal 
pond- Rs 9.52 lakh 
SE(Civil) Circle-2 
Korba (E) 
1994 -96 
Para 1 
9.52 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
68. Estimate of capital works/oprn. 
Maint. Work valuing 
Rs 10.10 crore not sanctioned by 
competent authorities 
SE(Civil) Circle-2 
Korba (E) 
1994-96 
Para 2 
1,010.19 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
69. Amount of Rs 1.65 lakh 
sanctioned more than the ceiling 
limit 
SE(Civil) Circle-2 
Korba (E) 
1994-96 Para 3 
1.65 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
70. Estimates of 13 capital works 
costing Rs 6.67 crore not 
sanctioned by the competent 
authorities 
SE (Civil circle II) 
Korba East 
1981-94 
Part II B Para 1 
667.00 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 180
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
 
Name of Division 
Year of IR 
Amount 
involved 
Remarks 
 
71. Undue advantages to contractor 
due to non compliance of 
relevant rules for job work - 
Rs 2.92 lakh 
EE (Boiler and 
Maint) Dn. Korba 
(E) 
1995-97 
Para 1 
2.92 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
72. Avoidable expenditure of 
Rs 96.39 lakh on account of 
S&I15 under forest area without 
forest clearance from GOI 
EE(Civil) S&I 
Mini Dn. Bilaspur 
1999-2001 
Part II A Para 1 
96.39 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
73. Excess expenditure of Rs 1.23 
crore on different schemes 
without approval of revised 
sanctioned 
EE(Civil) S&I 
Mini Dn. Bilaspur 
1999-2001 
Para 2 
123.44 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
74. Unfruitful expenditure on S&I - 
Rs 2.30 crore 
EE(Civil) S&I 
Mini Dn. Bilaspur 
1999-2001 
Para 3 
230.00 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
75. Irregular payment on Earned 
leave encashment 
EE(O&M) Dn I 
Durg 
1992-94 
Part II Para 1 
0 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
76. Irregular payment of house rent 
allowance 
EE(O&M) Dn I 
Durg 
1992-94 
Para 2 
0 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
77. Loss of revenue due to short 
billing and unauthorized increase 
in weigh Rs 23,863 
EE(O&M) Dn.I 
Durg 
1990-92 
Para 1 
0.23 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
78. Loss of interest of Rs 8.98 lakh 
due to belated issue of bills to 
consumers 
EE (City) Dn 
Bilaspur 
1997-99 
Part II B Para 1 
8.98 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
79. Short recovery of rent 
Rs 0.74 lakh due to recovering 
rent at ordinary rate instead of at 
penal rate from unauthorized 
occupants 
EE(Civil) 
Maintenance Dn. II 
Korba East 
1989-92 
Para 3(a) 
0.74 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
80. Theft of material valuing 
Rs 0.31 lakh 
EE(STRE) 
Division Bilaspur 
1980-87 
Part II B Para 9 
0.31 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
81. Annual overhauling of 50 MW 
boiler through contracted labour-
non observation of statutory 
requirements 
EE(Boiler 
Maintenance) 
Korba East 
1993-95 
Part II B Para 2 
0 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
82. Loss of Rs 15.55 lakh due to 
procurement of materials from 
non-registered firms 
EE(Boiler 
Maintenance) 
Korba East 
1993-95 
Part II B Para 3 
15.55 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
                                                 
15 Survey and Investigation. 

Appendices 
 
 181
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
 
Name of Division 
Year of IR 
Amount 
involved 
Remarks 
 
83. Daily maintenance of slag 
conveyers through departmental 
labour-extra expenditure of 
Rs 2.03 lakh 
EE(Boiler 
Maintenance) 
Korba East 1993-
95 Part II B Para 4 
2.03 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
84. Blocking of funds of 
Rs 2.85 lakh due to defective 
distribution transformers 
EE(City) Constn. 
CSEB Raipur 
1996-99 
Part II B Para 1 
2.85 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
85. Charges incurred by board on 
shifting of electrical supports on 
behalf of municipal corporation 
Raipur -Rs 12.63 lakh 
EE/City Constn. 
Division Raipur 
2001-04 
Part II B Para 2 
12.63 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
86. Irregular payment of allowance 
of Rs 1.15 lakh to Junior 
Engineer 
EE(O&M) 
Nayapara Raipur 
1996-99 
Part II B Para 1 
1.15 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
87. Purchase of conveyor belt worth 
Rs 2.85 crore lakh from 
disqualified suppliers 
HVC, CSEB 
Raipur 
Upto December 
2002 
Para 4 
285.51 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
88. Excess expenditure over 
estimated cost on construction 
Rs 1.87 lakh 
EE(City Division), 
East Raipur 
1995-98 
Para 7 
1.87 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
89. Blocking up of funds of 
Rs 2.85 lakh due to defective 
distribution transformer 
EE(City Dn) 
CSEB, Raipur 
1996-99 
Para 1 
2.85 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
90. Undue benefit given to the 
contractor 
EE High Tension 
(Mant.) Dn Bhilai 
3 
1993-94     to 
1995-96 
Part II B Para 2 
0 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
91. Contract of unloading of coal 
wagon and feeding of coal into 
tipper extra payment of 
Rs 11.38 lakh to the contractors 
EE Coal Handling 
Plant, Korba(E) 
Thermal power 
station 
1994-96 
Part II B Para 1 
11.38 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
92. Loss due to hand picking of coal 
not in existence 
Coal Handling 
Plant Division, 
Korba (Thermal. 
PH Korba (E) 
1993-94 
Part II B Para 2 
0 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
93. Awarding of work for feeding of 
coal and cleaning of conveyor 
plant/belt at higher rate 
Coal Handling 
Plant Division, 
Korba (Thermal. 
PH Korba (E) 
1993-94 
Part II B Para 3 
0 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 182
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
 
Name of Division 
Year of IR 
Amount 
involved 
Remarks 
 
94. Irregular payment of 
Rs 0.55 lakh on account of 
Incentive Bonus 
CE, Electricity 
Generation 
Training Institute, 
Korba (E) 
1988-95 
Part II B Para 1 
0.55 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
95. Irregular payment of 
Rs 1.85 lakh 
CE, Electricity 
Generation 
Training Institute, 
Korba (E) 
1988-95 
Part II B Para 2 
1.85 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
96. Extra expenditure of 
Rs 5.91 lakh on one point 
connection 
EE(O&M), 
Bilaspur 
1988-91 
Part II B Para 2 
5.91 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
97. Extra expenditure of 
Rs 1.94 lakh in the ND scheme 
EE(O&M), 
Bilaspur 
1988 to 91 
Part II B Para 5 
1.94 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
98. Irregular payment of 
Rs 7.27 lakh due to be prepared 
electricity consumption bill of 
LT consumer from private firm 
EE(O&M) Korba 
1997-99 
Part II A Para 1 
7.27 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
99. Materials transferred on loan 
basis- Rs 3.41 lakh 
EE(Sub 
Transmission) and 
Rural 
Electrification 
division Bilaspur 
1996-99 
Part II B Para 1 
3.41 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
100. Avoidable expenditure of 
Rs 0.46 lakh 
EE(Sub 
transmission) and 
Rural 
Electrification 
division Bilaspur 
1996-99 
Part II B Para 3 
0.46 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
101. Loss of Rs 12.70 lakh to the 
board due to extraordinary 
increase of event of theft. 
SE(O&M) Division 
Bilaspur 
1995-97 
Part II B Para 4 
12.70 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
102. Non-verification of items issued 
from division level by indenting 
officers-amounting to 
Rs 1.99 lakh 
EE(O&M) Bilaspur 
1998-2000 
Part II B Para 1 
1.99 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
103. Non-receipt of subsidy by Board 
from different departments on 
extension of line for completion 
of pumps. 
EE(O&M) Bilaspur 
1998-2000 
Part II B Para 2 
0 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
104. Theft items of board amounting 
to Rs  2.52 lakh 
EE(O&M) Bilaspur 
1998-2000 
Part II B Para 6 
2.52 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 

Appendices 
 
 183
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
 
Name of Division 
Year of IR 
Amount 
involved 
Remarks 
 
105. Selection of BHEL Limited for 
EPC16 contract for 
implementation of Korba (East) 
2 X 250 MW Thermal Power 
Project 
Concurrent of High 
Value Contract 
Part II A Para 3  
- 
0 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
106. Extra/irregular expenditure of 
Rs  156.38 lakh in respect of 
works under the scheme 
improvements/communication 
and general development 
EE(O&M) CSEB 
Mahasamund 
1996-99 
Part II B Para 2 
156.38 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
107. Extra expenditure towards bank  
commission charges 
Rs 1.51 lakh due to not utilizing 
free services 
EE (O&M) 
Dhamtari  
2001-02 to 2002-
03 
Part II B Para 2 
1.51 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
108. Avoidable loss of Rs 4.25 lakh 
due to delay in recovery of short 
billing detected by internal audit 
Sr A.O Raipur 
2001-04 
Part II B Para 2 
4.25 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
109. Extra expenditure Rs 15.46 lakh 
due to non completion of work 
for execution of renovation of 
earthing system of 220/132 KV 
sub station to CSEB 
CE (ROC/TC) 
Raipur 
2001-04 
Para 1 
15.46 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
110. Outstanding Additional Security 
Deposit Rs 1.26 lakh 
EE(O&M) Dn II 
Durg 
1993-95 
Part II B Para 2 
1.26 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
 Total  67196.10  
B. Chhattisgarh State Civil Supplies Corporation Limited 
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
 
Year of IR Amount
Involved
Remarks 
 
1.  Huge shortage of paddy to the 
extent of 1,597.72 MT valuing 
Rs 86.97 lakh as on 31.3.2002 
2002-03 
Para 8 
86.97 Latest position not furnished by 
the management. 
2.  Rice of 193.70 MT (Rs 17.55 lakh) 
and 861.61 MT (Rs 77.98 lakh) 
procured under Above Poverty 
Line in Janjgir and in Rajnandgaon 
could not be sold. This resulted in 
loss of Rs 95.53 lakh. 
2002-03 
Para 9 
95.53 Latest position not furnished by 
the management. 
3.  Loss of Rs 18.45 lakh due to not 
returning 1,84,450 gunny bags 
(returnable) by Kanker district 
office under Gramin Yojana  in 
2002-03 
2003-04 
Para 10 
18.45 Latest position not furnished by 
the management. 
4.  Loss of Rs 1.21 lakh due to mis-
appropriation of 749.73 quintals 
paddy by Bhushan Enterprises, 
Jagdalpur Rice mill  
1999-2000  
Part II B 
Para 17 
1.21 Latest position not furnished by 
the management. 
                                                 
16  Engineering, Procurement and Commissioning. 

Audit Report (Civil and Commercial) for the year ended 31 March 2009 
 
 184
 
5.  Loss of Rs 28.85 lakh due to non 
settlement of theft and 
embezzlement cases 
1999-2000   
II B Para 18 
28.85 Latest position not furnished by 
the management. 
6.  Loss of Rs 10.52 lakh on sale of 
substandard paddy during the year 
99-2000 
1999-2000 
Part II B 
Para 7 
10.52 Latest position not furnished by 
the management. 
7.  Loss of Rs 15.33 lakh due to 
shortage of paddy of 3,232.81 
quintal in private and 2,777.70 
quintal in institutional shortage 
1999-2000 
Part II B 
Para 12 
15.33 Latest position not furnished by 
the management. 
8.  Blockage of Gingam funds Rs 3.00 
lakh with the Railway  
1996-97 
Part II B 
Para 6 
3.00 Latest position not furnished by 
the management. 
9.  Loss of Rs 1.50 lakh due to delay 
in disposal of wet wheat and rice  
1996-97 
Part II B 
Para 8 
1.50 Latest position not furnished by 
the management. 
10. Transportation of paddy from one 
district to another district during 
the year 1997-98 and 1998-99 
resulting unwarranted expenditure 
on transporter Rs 2.02 crore 
1997-99 
Part II B 
Para 5 
202.21 Latest position not furnished by 
the management. 
11. Transportation of paddy from one 
district to another district resulting 
avoidable expenditure on 
transporter Rs 17.09 lakh. 
1999-2000 
Part II A 
Para 3 
17.09 Latest position not furnished by 
the management. 
12. Review of Jawahar Rojgar Yojna 2000-01 
Part II B 
Para 2 
0 Latest position not furnished by 
the management. 
13. Excess payment of Rs 1.54 crore 
under food for work scheme 
2001-02  
Para 9 
154.00 Latest position not furnished by 
the management. 
14. Loss of Rs 79.75 lakh on disposal 
of paddy  of 3521.24 MT through 
auction sales at the rate of Rs 
450.20/quintal when GoI offered 
reimbursement at the rate of 
Rs 567.77/quintal against the 
purchase cost of Rs 782.91/quintal 
2002-03 
Para 5 
75.75 Latest position not furnished by 
the management. 
15. Stacking of paddy in open yards 
led to damage due to which the 
corporation suffered a loss of 
Rs 8.71 crore 
2002-03 
Para 6 
871.00 Latest position not furnished by 
the management. 
16. Abnormal loss on account of 
dryness in paddy stock-value 
Rs 4.99 crore 
2002-03 
Para 7 
499.00 Norms for dryness to be 
formed. 
17. Blocking of funds Rs 98.58 lakh 
due to delay in finalization of 
custom milling accounts 
2002-03 
Para 13 
98.58 Latest position not furnished by 
the management. 
18. Excess collection of Demand 
Drafts charges Rs 0.60 lakh by 
SBI, Vaikunthpur  
2002-03 
Para 14 
0.60 Latest position not furnished by 
the management. 
19. Proposals/activities implemented 
without financial concurrence 
2003-04 
Para 11 
0 Regularisation details may be 
furnished. 

Appendices 
 
 185
20. Loss of Rs 7.25 lakh due to 
shortage of food grains valuing 
Rs 3.50 lakh in Dhamtari District 
and Rs 3.75 lakh in Kawardha 
District 
2003-04 
Para 13 
7.25 Latest position not furnished by 
the management. 
21. Mandi charges paid on CMR 
during 2002-03 at the time of 
procurement and sale in 
Rajnandgaon district office in 
2002-03 was very high 
2003-04 
Para 15 
0 Latest position not furnished by 
the management. 
22. (a) Non-maintenance of important 
records by Dantewada district 
office 
(b) Non-furnishing of records. 
2003-04 
Para 17(a) & 
(b) 
0 Updation of records may be 
carried out. 
23. Loss of Rs 4.16 lakh as paddy 
valuing Rs 4.79 lakh was kept in 
SWC
17 godowns became unfit for 
use and disposed of for 
Rs 0.60 lakh 
2002-03 
Para 14 
4.16 Latest position not furnished by 
the management. 
 Total  2191.00  
 
C. Chhattisgarh State Industrial Development Corporation Limited 
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
 
Year of IR Amount
Involved
Remarks 
 
1. Unfruitful expenditure of 
Rs 15.95 lakh incurred on Project 
Report 
2003-04 
Part II Para 3 
15.95 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
 
D. Chhattisgarh Mineral Development Corporation Limited. 
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
 
Year of IR Amount 
Involved 
Remarks 
 
1. Non-disposal of immovable 
property lying at Bardwan, Janjgir 
2002-03 
Part II B Para 6 
10.90 Decided by the company 
to give to Govt. Details 
of disposal/utilization is 
required. 
 
E- Chhattisgarh State Beve rages Corporation Limited 
Sl. 
No. 
Para 
 
Year of IR Amount 
Involved 
Remarks 
 
1. Traveling expenses of the 
Chairman of th e Corporation-
Rs 2.89 lakh 
2001-03  
Part II B 
Para 10 
2.89 Latest position not 
furnished by the 
management. 
 
 
 
                                                 
17 State Warehousing Corporation. 