 iii  
 
1. This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor Gener al of India contains the results 
of audit of compliance of few departments on ‘Inter nal Controls and Risk 
Management’. The Report has been prepared for submi ssion to the Governor 
under Article 151 of the Constitution of India. 
2. The cases mentioned in this Report are among tho se which came to notice in the 
normal course of test-check of records of a few dep artments during the year 
2009-10 as well as those in earlier years. 
3. The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued 
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
Preface  

i 
Internal control system encompasses the policies an d procedures adopted by the 
management of an entity to assist in achieving mana gement’s objective of ensuring, 
as far as practicable, orderly and efficient conduc t of business, including adherence to 
management policies, safeguarding of assets, preven tion and detection of fraud and 
error, accuracy and completeness of the accounting records, executing orderly, 
ethical, economical, efficient and effective operations. 
The massive size and scale of Government operations  call for effective internal 
controls over its operations. Internal controls hel p strengthen public accountability of 
Government and help balance the competing demands o f delivering responsive and 
quality services to the community whilst recognizin g fiduciary responsibilities and 
maintaining standards of probity, prudence and ethics. Internal Controls are, therefore, 
closely aligned with good governance. The existence  of internal controls and risk 
management framework and its vibrant and honest ope rationalization can lead to 
better service delivery, more efficient use of resources, better project management and 
promote innovation. 
During the course of regular transaction audit thro ugh test check of 15 
1 departments 
(out of a total of 49 departments), number of cases  were noticed which raises question 
on the adequacy and effectiveness of the internal c ontrol systems existing in these 
departments. An audit analysis revealed serious ina dequacies impacting the financial 
discipline in the departments. These deficiencies n oticed were due to both overt and 
covert disregard for compliance of the internal con trol systems as prescribed in the 
Laws, Rules, Codes and Manuals guiding the operatio ns of the Government 
departments. Ineffective internal audit coupled wit h lack of effectual monitoring by 
the Controlling Officers and Drawing and Disbursing  Officers to oversee that the 
intended objectives of the controls in place were m et through diligent discharge of 
their duties and responsibilities, aggravated the risk of misappropriation. 
There were violations of the Government’s policies and its Acts, Rules, Statutes and 
Regulations which resulted in misappropriation, defalcation and waste of Government 
funds. Absence of proper documentations and evidenc ing of transactions involving 
large sums of money, controls relating to handling of cash were rendered ineffective, 
as the prescribed control measures were being overl ooked. Often, accountability was 
not being fixed. Execution of the works in total di sregard of the operational controls 
viz. an orderly, ethical, economical, efficient and  effective manner led to wasteful and 
excess expenditure including loss of Government fun ds. Public resources were not 
being conscientiously safeguarded against loss and misappropriations by the 
Controlling Officers and Heads of the Offices.  
Significant issues highlighting the failure of the departmental functionaries and Heads 
of Offices/departments to exercise effective controls are 
 summed up as under: 
                                                 
1  (1) Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Department, (2) Commer ce and Industries,  
(3) Dairy Development, (4) Education, (5) General Administr ation, (6) Health and Family Welfare,  
(7) Home, (8) Irrigation, (9) Panchayat and Rural Developme nt, (10) Power, (11) Public Health 
Engineering, (12) Public Works, (13) Revenue (General), (14) Re venue (Reforms) and Disaster 
Management, (15) Urban Development  
Executive Summary  

Audit Report on Internal Controls and Risk Management for the  year ended 31 March 2010 
 vi 
/head2right Despite elaborate and explicit provisions in the Ge neral Financial Rules (GFR); 
Assam Financial Rules (AFR); Assam Treasury Rules ( ATR) and Subsidiary 
Orders for effective cash management, violation of codal provisions resulted in 
misappropriation/suspected misappropriation/embezzl ement/ double payment/ 
doubtful payment . 
/head2right Failure to physically ensure the actual receipt of materials by the departmental 
authorities resulting in fraudulent payment against  fictitious certificates of 
receipt of materials.  
/head2right Weak system for ensuring statutory deductions from pay bills exercised by the 
Head of the Office/DDO.  
/head2right Weakening of internal controls for checking the nat ure of claim, amount 
claimed, correctness of claim, period of claim, expenditure sanction etc, over the 
proof of payment. 
/head2right Non-adherence to controls prescribed to safeguard t he resources by ensuring 
that no departmental receipts are kept out of gover nment accounts and used for 
meeting its own expenses without authorization, res ulting in incorrect reflection 
of Government revenue and expenditure. 
/head2right Issuing supply order without budget provision by De partmental authorities 
resulting in avoidable expenditure and showing fict itious utilization of material 
indicating failure of operational controls and rais ing doubts of business ethics of 
the executing authority. 
/head2right Payment without work to contractor; payment against  unauthorized and 
improper recordings in the measurement book; and pa yment for a work relating 
to non-existent part of the asset resulting in fictitious payments. 
/head2right Huge pendency in submission of Detailed Countersign ed Contingency bills in 
respect of Abstract Contingency (AC) bills in viola tion of Contingency Manual 
is fraught with the risk of misappropriation.  
/head2right Huge funds were drawn on last day of the financial year and kept in ‘Civil 
Deposit’ to avoid lapse of budget grant. Funds were  drawn in advance of 
requirements and retention for long periods in the form of DCR/Banker’s 
cheques/Bank drafts/Cash.  
/head2right Utilisation Certificates amounting to `5,769.83 crore in 16,760 cases pending 
for submission as on 31 March 2010. 
Recommendations 
/head2right In view of the weakened internal controls resulting  in instances of missing 
assets/inventory, pilfering, inflated claims, doubl e payments, false claims, 
payroll fraud in various State Departments; the Gov ernment should urgently 
asses the risk associated with these controls to en sure the efficacy of internal 
control system. 

Executive Summary 
 vii 
/head2right The Government needs to review the existing control mechanism prevalent in its 
departments to remove the flaws in design, errors o f judgment or interpretation, 
misunderstanding, carelessness, fatigue, distractio n, collusion, abuse or 
override. 
/head2right Organizational changes and management attitude can have a profound impact on 
the effectiveness of internal control and the perso nnel operating the system. 
Therefore the higher management (Chief Controlling Officers/Heads of 
Departments) needs to continually review and update  controls and communicate 
the changes to personnel. Monitoring mechanism and operational controls 
should be strengthened and accountability fixed pro mptly for failure to exercise 
controls leading to frauds, loss to exchequer and pilferage etc.  
/head2right A close and rigorous oversight mechanism should be put in place to adjust the 
Abstract Contingent Bills within the prescribed tim e schedule from the date of 
drawal of the amount.  No AC bills should be allowed to be drawn till settlement 
of earlier outstanding bills. 
/head2right Internal Audit wings should be established in all t he Government Departments 
so as to provide assurance for adequacy of control systems.  

 
 
 
 
1.1  Internal controls are “the whole system of control s, financial or otherwise 
established by the management in order to carry on the business of the organization in 
a orderly and efficient manner, ensure adherence to  management policies, safeguard 
assets and secure, as far as possible, the complete ness and accuracy of records”. 
Government Departments are responsible for a range of diverse services for citizens. 
The probability that Government plans, programmes o r projects may fail; services 
may not be delivered on time or to a satisfactory s tandard; benefits of a 
programme/scheme may not reach the targeted benefic iaries; financial loss, fraud or 
waste occurs, exists in all Government initiatives and endeavors. Therefore, 
establishing effective internal controls entails as sessment/identification of risks and 
their detection, mitigation and prevention. 
Internal Control is an integral process that is eff ected by an entity’s management and 
personnel and is designed to provide reasonable ass urance that the following general 
objectives are achieved: 
/head2right Accountability obligations and transparency; 
/head2right Compliance with applicable laws and regulations; 
/head2right Operational controls; and 
/head2right Safeguarding resources against loss and failure of control mechanism. 
Internal controls consist of five interrelated components, viz., 
/head2right Control environment; 
/head2right Risk assessment; 
/head2right Control activities; 
/head2right Information and communication; and  
/head2right Monitoring 
The massive size and scale of Government operations  call for effective internal 
controls over its operations. Internal controls hel p strengthen public accountability of 
Government and help balance the competing demands o f delivering responsive and 
quality services to the community whilst recognizin g fiduciary responsibilities and 
maintaining standards of probity, prudence and ethics. Internal Controls are, therefore, 
closely aligned with good governance. The existence  of internal controls and risk 
management framework and its vibrant and honest ope rationalization can lead to 
better service delivery, more efficient use of resources, better project management and 
promote innovation.  
1.2 Budgetary and Expenditure Controls 
The Budget Manual, the Contingency Manual, Financia l Rules and Treasury Rules of 
the Government of Assam prescribe internal controls  for drawal and utilization of 
Introduct ion  
Chapter -1 

Audit Report on Internal Controls and Risk Management for the  year ended 31 March 2010 
 2
funds from the Consolidated Fund of the State. Alth ough these provisions are 
mandatory on the part of the Executive, Audit obser ved that these were being 
bypassed persistently and with impunity by concerne d authorities in the State 
Departments, as evidenced from the following instances: 
/head2right Against the total amount of Abstract Contingent (AC ) bills of `1,452.00 crore 
drawn by DDOs in various Departments up to 31 March  2010, the total 
amount of Detailed Countersigned Contingent (DCC) b ills received during the 
period up to 31 March 2010 was only `79.59 crore; thus leading to an 
outstanding balance of DCC bills of `1,372.41 crore as on 31 March 2010. 
Non-adjustment of advances for long periods is frau ght with the risk of mis-
appropriation and therefore, requires close monitor ing by the respective 
DDOs.  
/head2right Although the Assam Treasury Rules prohibits drawal of money from the 
treasury unless it is required for immediate disbur sement, the State 
Government had drawn `127.30 crore at the fag end of the financial year a nd 
deposited into the head of account 8443 – Civil Dep osit to avoid lapse of 
budget grant. Besides, there were nine cases in sev en offices under four 
Departments wherein `27.21 crore was retained for periods ranging from o ne 
to seven years in Deposit at Call Receipt (DCR)/Ban kers cheque/Bank 
drafts/Cash (Appendix-I). Such financial transgressions  lead to blocking of 
funds and delay in implementation of schemes/progra mmes for which the 
funds were intended. 
/head2right Contrary to Assam Treasury Rules stipulation to avo id rush of expenditure in 
the closing month of the financial year, in respect  of 28 Major heads listed in 
Appendix II , expenditure exceeding `10 crore and also more than  
50 per cent  of the total expenditure for the year was incurred  in March 2010. 
Such lapses are fraught with the risk of weakening of controls over 
expenditure leading to financial mismanagement and instances of pilferage/ 
misappropriation going undetected. 
/head2right As per Article 205 of the Constitution of India, it  is mandatory for the State 
Government to get the excess over a Grant/Appropria tion regularized by the 
State Legislature. However, the excess expenditure amounting to  
`2,361.67 crore for the years 2002-03 to 2009-10 was  yet to be regularized. In 
violation of the provisions of the Assam Budget Man ual, the excess drawal of 
`2,361.67 crore was made during 2002-10 leading to e rosion of the authority 
of the legislature over the finances of the State Government.  
/head2right General Financial Rules (GFR) and Assam Financial R ules provide that for 
the grants provided for specific purposes, Utilisation Certificates (UCs) should 
be obtained by the departmental officers from the g rantees and after 
verification these should be forwarded to the Accou ntant General (A&E) 
within 12 months from the date of their sanction un less specified otherwise. 
However, 16,760 UCs due in respect of grants aggreg ating `5,769.83 crore 
paid up to 2008-09 were outstanding as of March 201 0. In the absence of the 
UCs it could not be ascertained whether the recipie nts had utilized the grants 
for the purposes for which these were given. 

Introduction 
 3
/head2right As per the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) stipulat ions, the administrative 
departments are required to submit Action Taken Not es (ATNs) on paragraphs 
and reviews featured in the Audit Reports, within t hree months of presentation 
of the Audit Reports to the Legislature. Audit howe ver, noticed that the PAC 
discussed (March 2010) 965 out of 1,521 paragraphs and reviews pertaining to 
the years 1983-2009 and ATNs pertaining to none of the paragraphs/reviews 
were received either from the Departments or throug h the PAC. Consequently, 
none of these paras/reviews were settled by PAC as of March 2010. Therefore, 
the lacklustre approach of the Executive in respond ing Audit findings for 
taking remedial action and resting accountability o n the defaulting officers 
dilutes the exercise of audit. 
In view of the persistent nature of above transgres sions of stipulated financial and 
budgetary provisions indicating weakening of the in ternal control mechanism in 
various State Departments, Audit has made an attemp t to analyse and highlight the 
systemic control failures through test-check of fin ancial transactions of 15 1 
Departments of the State Government. 
Audit findings relating to these departments of the  State Government revealed weak 
financial discipline, owing not only to the absence of internal controls mechanism, but 
also due to inability of the management to effectiv ely implement the controls already 
in place as prescribed in Laws, Rules, Regulations,  Codes, Manuals etc. Absence of 
effective internal audit coupled with lack of super vision and monitoring to oversee 
that the obligations of internal controls were bein g discharged effectively by the 
executing officers aggravated the risk of failure of the systems. As is evidenced by the 
audit analysis; bypassing the internal control obli gations resulted in misappropriation, 
defalcation, loss of Government funds, fictitious/w asteful expenditure; and extra, 
avoidable and unproductive expenditure. These are b rought out under Chapters 3 to 6 
of this Report. Chapter 7 deals with non-existence/ non-functioning of internal audit 
wings in the departments which led to recurring and serious financial irregularities. 
 
 
 
                                                
 
1  (1) Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Department, (2) Commer ce and Industries,  
(3) Dairy Development, (4) Education, (5) General Administr ation, (6) Health and Family Welfare,  
(7) Home, (8) Irrigation, (9) Panchayat and Rural Developme nt, (10) Power, (11) Public Health 
Engineering, (12) Public Works, (13) Revenue (General), (14) R evenue (Reforms) and Disaster 
Management, (15) Urban Development. 

 
 
2.1 Scope of Coverage 
In course of test-checks during compliance audit fr om April 2008 to 31 March 2010 
of 31 offices of 15 out of 49 Departments of the Go vernment of Assam, 
transgressions of internal controls were noticed in  audit. The various transgressions 
threw patterns, which are grouped in five succeedin g chapters. Each chapter captures 
a particular pattern of transgressions which have b een exhibited in the form of case 
studies depicting instances of misappropriation, de falcation, infructuous/ 
wasteful/fictitious expenditures. This Report, high lighting the transgressions noticed 
during the course of compliance audit, brings out t he extent of adherence to and 
effectiveness of internal controls in those offices. 
2.2   Audit Objectives 
The objectives of the audit were to assess and seek reasonable assurance for achieving 
the following: 
/head2right Risk to avoid recurrence of misappropriations, frauds, pilferages etc;  
/head2right Assessing the accountability obligations; 
/head2right Complying with applicable laws and regulations; 
/head2right Executing orderly, economical, effective, efficient and ethical operations; 
/head2right Safeguarding resources against loss and failure of control mechanism; 
/head2right Monitoring and Supervisory controls ; and 
/head2right Internal Audit. 
2.3  Audit Criteria 
Audit findings were benchmarked against the following criteria: 
/head2right Laws, Rules, Codes, Manuals of Assam Treasury rules , General financial 
rules, etc.; 
/head2right Government Sanctions, Circulars, Instructions; and 
/head2right Controls prescribed in the Guidelines of programmes/ schemes/projects. 
2.4 Audit Methodology 
Test check of the records of 15 Departments of the State Government for the period 
2008-10 for compliance audit was carried out and au dit conclusions were drawn and 
incorporated in the Report. The audit findings were  intimated to the Heads of the 
concerned Departments and their replies, wherever r eceived, have been appropriately 
incorporated in the Report. 
2.5 Acknowledgements 
The office of the Principal Accountant General (Aud it), Assam acknowledges the co-
operation rendered by the State Government Departments during the course of audit. 
Chapter -2 
Audit Framework  

 
  
 
 
Accountability is the process whereby public servic e bodies and the individuals 
working therein are to account for their decisions and actions including their 
stewardship of public funds, fairness and all aspec ts of performance. This would be 
realized by developing and maintaining reliable and  relevant financial and  
non-financial information and by means of a fair di sclosure of that information in 
timely reports to internal as well as external stak eholders. That the accountability 
obligations were not being always fulfilled is brou ght out in the succeeding four case 
studies and 23 instances featured in the Inspection Reports for the period from 1 April 
2008 to 31 March 2010. 
General Administration Department 
3.1 `20 lakh remained unaccounted for due to non-adheren ce to internal 
controls 
Rules 78 and 79 of Assam Financial Rules (AFR) prov ide that every payment should 
be supported by a voucher and Actual Payee’s Receip t 
(APR). Further, according to Rule 95 of AFR , every 
receipt and disbursement should be recorded in the cash 
book. Test-check (November 2009) of the records of DC, 
North Cachar Hills (N C Hills), Haflong revealed th at 
`45.62 lakh was drawn (July 2008) to meet expenditur e 
for counter-insurgency operation. The amount, thus 
drawn, was credited to DDO’s bank account bearing 
number 6B-11315096998. Subsequently, the amount was  
withdrawn (8 July 2008) from the bank account and t ransferred to Nazarat Branch of 
the office. 
According to payment register (subsidiary cash book ) of Nazarat branch, out of 
`45.62 lakh, an amount of `25.62 lakh was drawn in cash and spent for the purp ose 
for which it was drawn and `20 lakh was converted (8 July 2008) to deposit at c all 
receipt in State Bank of India, Haflong branch. Tho ugh the amount was converted to 
deposit at call receipt but the same was not taken into account in the closing balance 
of the main cash book. Audit scrutiny further discl osed that the aforesaid deposit at 
call receipt was encashed by DC on the very next day, i.e. 9 July 2008, but the amount 
was neither recorded in the cash book nor any vouch er, APR etc ., in support of 
expenditure, were produced to audit, though called for. In reply, DC did not clarify 
the whereabouts of `20 lakh. 
Thus, due to non-adherence to the financial provisi ons for proper maintenance of cash 
book in the Department, as provided in Rules 78, 79  and 95 of AFR, an amount of 
`20 lakh remained unaccounted for which tantamounted  to misappropriation of 
Government money.  
Chapter-3 
Accountability and Transparency  
DC, N.C. Hills, Haflong 
drew 
`20 lakh by 
reconverting deposit at 
call receipt but did not 
take it into Government 
account, resulting in 
misappropriation of 
 
`20 lakh.  

Audit Report on Internal Controls and Risk Management for the  year ended 31 March 2010 
 8
The matter was reported to the Government in Februa ry 2010; their reply had not 
been received (August  2010). 
3.2 Failure of Deputy Commissioner, N.C.Hills, Hafl ong to conduct necessary 
checks as per the Financial Rules as drawing and disbursing officer  
According to Rule 95 of Assam Financial Rules (AFR) , a Drawing and Disbursing 
Officer (DDO) is personally responsible for account ing 
of all moneys received and disbursed and for the sa fe 
custody of cash. The DDO should satisfy himself, by  
periodical examination, that the actual cash balanc e 
corresponds to the balance as per cash book. Furthe r, 
DDO is required to verify day-to-day transactions, attest 
each entry appearing in the cash book and authentic ate 
the analysis of daily/monthly closing balances. As per 
Rule 7 of Assam Treasury Rules (ATR), all money 
received or tendered to Government on account of 
revenue of the State Government should be credited to Government account 
immediately. 
Test-check (November 2009) of the records of the De puty Commissioner (DC), North 
Cachar Hills (N C Hills), Haflong revealed that: 
i)  DC, who also happened to be the DDO, took over char ge on 27 February 2009 
with a closing cash balance of `1,32,28,345. DDO did not record a certificate in th e 
cash book to the effect that the cash balance was p hysically verified on the day of 
assuming charge. Further, he neither attested the d ay-to-day transactions appearing in 
the cash book since taking over charge nor conducte d any physical verification of 
cash with the required analysis of closing balances , and hence exercised no control 
over financial transaction that took place during the period. 
ii)  Further, audit analysis revealed that, on 27 May 20 09, new cashier resumed 
charge and a new cash book was opened with ‘nil’ op ening balance as the previous 
cashier had not handed over any cash though there w as actual closing cash balance of 
`1,26,39,961 on the previous day i.e., 26 May 2009, as revealed from the entries in 
the earlier cash book. The above fact was in the kn owledge of the DC, however, there 
was nothing on record to show that the matter of misappropriation was reported by the 
DC to the Government or intimated to the Accountant  General (A&E) and whether 
any action was taken against the defaulting official. 
iii)  The closing cash balance comprised of Government re venues ( `124.43 lakh) 
and un-disbursed balance ( `1.97 lakh) without detailed analysis. 
Thus, failure of the DC to exercise prescribed checks for safeguarding resources led to 
misappropriation of `1.26 crore. This reflected poor control environment  relating to 
handling of cash in the Department. 
The reply of the DC, N C Hills, Haflong forwarded b y the Government (May 2010) 
revealed that the DC accepted the observation and i nitiated an investigation  
(March 2010) at the instance of audit. Final report is awaited (August 2010). 
Failure of Deputy 
Commissioner, N.C.Hills, 
Haflong 
 to conduct 
necessary checks as per 
the Financial Rules as 
drawing and disbursing 
officer led to 
misappropriation of  
 
`1.26 crore. 

Accountability and Transparency 
 9
Revenue (General) Department 
3.3 Lack of proper verification before releasing pa yment to the contractor, 
led to double payment for the same work 
The Government of India’s decision (ii) below Rule 6 of General Financial Rules 
(GFR) provides that the expenditure should not be p rima facie more than the occasion 
demands. The Government of Assam, Revenue (General)  Department accorded 
(October 2005) sanction for `1.50 crore from Calamity 
Relief Fund for the work “Flood Damage Repair to 
Guwahati Garbhanga Road for 2004-05” with the 
condition to execute the work through Public Works 
Department (PWD). The work was divided chainage-wis e 
in seven groups. Chief Engineer, Public Works 
Department (Roads) awarded (January 2006) the work of 
chainage 6200m to 6500m to a contractor at the tend ered value of `20.16 lakh with 
the stipulation to complete the work within 60 days  from the date of issue of work 
order. The work was completed in August 2006. 
Test-check (August-September 2009) of the records o f DC, Kamrup (Metro), 
Guwahati revealed that the passed bills for `20.16 lakh for execution of the said 
chainage (6200m to 6500m) were forwarded by the  executing division 2 twice  
(18 July 2007 and 11 June 2008) to the DC for payme nt. DC, without proper 
verification, made payment to the contractor agains t the bills, dated 30.10.06 and 
19.07.07. On this being pointed out in audit, the e xecuting division admitted 
(September 2009) the double payment and stated that  the excess payment  
(`20.16 lakh) was recovered from the contractor’s bil l. However, further scrutiny 
revealed that the recovery was yet to be effected a s the bill from which the said 
recovery was proposed to be made was unpaid (August 2010). 
Thus, disregard of the mandatory checks of consulti ng previous records by the 
Executive Engineer as well as by the DC led to doub le payment for the same work 
resulting in defalcation of `20.16 lakh. 
Panchayat and Rural Development Department 
3.4  Payment for materials against fictitious certi ficates of receipt of materials 
and in violation of guidelines on DRDA Administrati on and NREGS,  the Project 
Director incurred unauthorised expenditure  
Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana was 
discontinued in the district of Karbi Anglong 
w.e.f  31 March 2007 and the unutilized fund, 
if any, were to be amalgamated with the fund 
of National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme. According to the Guidelines on 
District Rural Development Agency (DRDA), 
the latter is a supporting and a facilitating 
organization and not the implementing agency 
for rural development programmes. 
                                                 
2 PWD Roads City Division No.1, Guwahati.  
Project Director, District Rural 
Development Agency, Karbi 
Anglong, made payment for 
materials against fictitious 
certificates of receipt of materials, 
which resulted in fraudulent 
payment of 
`26.29 lakh. Further, 
the Project Director incurred 
unauthorised expenditure of 
 
`93.43 lakh.  
Failure to exercise 
required verification by 
the Department resulted 
in double payment of 
`20.16 lakh. 

Audit Report on Internal Controls and Risk Management for the  year ended 31 March 2010 
 10 
Test-check (September-October 2009) of the records of the Project Director, DRDA, 
Karbi Anglong, Diphu revealed that during 2005-06, the PD placed supply orders on 
three local firms for supply of RCC Hume pipes, Col lars and RCC rings valued at  
`93.43 lakh (Hume pipes and Collars for `23.37 lakh and RCC rings for  
`70.06 lakh) for implementation of Sampoorna Grameen  Rozgar Yojana in five 3 
development blocks with the condition to deliver th e material at site and submit bills 
supported by delivery challans with certificates of  receipt of materials from the 
concerned block officials for payment. The materials were shown as supplied between 
June 2006 and September 2007 and on the strength of  certification of receipts  
(August 2006 to May 2007) of materials on the body of the bills, duly signed by the 
concerned Block Development Officers, payments were  made between November 
2007 and March 2008 from the fund received under Na tional Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme for 2007-08. 
Of the five Development Blocks, materials were rece ived only in three blocks (Nilip, 
Rongkhong and Rongmongwee). In reply to audit query, Block Development Officers 
(BDOs) of two Development Blocks (Samelangso and Ho wraghat) stated  
(September 2009) that they had not received any mat erials, valued at `26.29 lakh, 
under Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana from the supplier. 
Thus, failure of the Project Director to physically  ensure the actual receipt of 
materials led to fraudulent payment of `26.29 lakh against fictitious certificates 
of receipt of materials.  
Further, the Project Director incurred unauthorised  expenditure of `93.43 lakh under 
Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana in violation of gui delines on DRDA 
Administration and National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme. 
In case of entities where goods are received at fie ld level and payments are made 
centrally, there should be a built in internal cont rol mechanism for parallel checks 
which can be exercised through cross-verification and monitoring. 
3.5 Misappropriation/Fraud/Embezzlement cases detec ted in 19 offices under 
seven Departments 
Every Government servant is personally responsible for any loss sustained through 
fraud or negligence on his part. To reduce the risk  of wrongful acts, frauds, 
embezzlement cases and the risk of not detecting su ch problems, effective checks and 
balances should exist in the system which should be  enforced by the Head of 
Office/Controlling Officer through frequent checks to see that all financial rules are 
followed by his subordinates. Weak controls over th ese aspects and inadequate 
monitoring led to cases of misappropriation/fraud / embezzlement as brought out 
below: 
 
                                                
 
3  Nilip, Howraghat, Rongkhong, Rongmongwee and Samelangso.  

Accountability and Transparency 
 11 
Twenty-three cases of misappropriation/fraud/embezz lement involving `4.53 crore 
were detected in 19 offices under 7 Departments (de tailed in Appendix-III ) and 
reported to the State Government during the period from September 2008 to  
April 2010 through Inspection Reports with a reques t to furnish reply within four 
weeks from the date of receipt of Inspection Report s. However, no reply had been 
received from the Government in respect of the aforesaid cases as of August 2010. 
The modus operandi  of misappropriation etc., were not entering the re ceipts in 
cashbook, not carrying out physical verification, f orged drawal of funds from bank, 
disbursement of funds without vouchers and APRs etc.  
Rules 78 and 79 of AFR provide that every payment s hould be supported by a 
voucher and Actual Payee’s Receipt. Further, according to Rule 95 of AFR every 
receipt and disbursement should be recorded in the cashbook. Failure to observe 
these internal controls led to the misappropriation/fraud etc. 
 
 

 
 
Government organizations are required to comply wit h applicable laws and 
regulations which include the Constitution, Finance  Act, International treaties, laws 
and regulations on administration, accounting laws,  environmental protection and 
civil rights laws, tax laws etc. Non compliance wit h applicable laws and regulations 
makes these vulnerable to fraud, misappropriation, fictitious payment, defalcation of 
Government Funds. Audit scrutiny revealed that the Government operations were not 
always in compliance with the extant laws, rules an d regulations etc. as brought out in 
the succeeding six case studies and two other instances. 
Education Department 
4.1 Diversion of university fund due to non-deposit  of income-tax by the 
university authority  
According to Section 192 of the Income Tax Act, 196 1, any person responsible for 
paying any income chargeable under the head 
‘salaries’ shall, at the time of payment, deduct 
income-tax on the amount payable at the average 
rate of income tax computed on the basis of the 
rates in force in that financial year in which the 
payment is made. The duty of making proper 
deduction from pay bill on account of statutory 
deductions like Income Tax devolves on the drawer 
of the bill without any discretion. 
Test-check (April-May 2009) of the records of Regis trar, Dibrugarh University 
revealed that in course of physical verification of  tax deduction at source conducted 
(September 2005) by I.T.O. TDS, Dibrugarh, 
and the result of Chartered Accountant’s 
examination furnished to audit, Income Tax 
amounting to `31.85 lakh ( `24.41 lakh for 
2003-04 and `7.44 lakh for 2004-05) was 
deducted short, from the salaries of different 
employees of the University. Further, as per 
resolution (July 2005) of the Executive 
Council, an amount of `31.85 lakh, deducted 
short, was deposited (July 2005 and 
September 2005) to the Income Tax head 
from general fund of the university with the 
condition to recoup the amount from the salaries of  the respective employees in 
maximum twelve installments. However, it was notice d that, in violation of even the 
resolution of the Executive Council, the university  had recovered only `19.85 lakh 
from the concerned employees and an amount of `12 lakh remained unrecovered 
(December 2009). 
Deposit of income-tax of 
`31.85 lakh by the university 
on behalf of the employees 
without recovering the same 
from their salaries resulted in 
undue financial benefit to 
these employees for over four 
years. 
Chapter -4 
Compliance  
 Administrative Building of Dibrugarh University  

Audit Report on Internal Controls and Risk Management for the  year ended 31 March 2010 
 14 
Thus, in violation of the Income Tax Act, deposit o f income tax by the university 
authority on behalf of the employees, and failure t o recover the same from the salaries 
of the respective employees, the university authori ty not only extended undue 
financial aid to the employees but also diverted th e university fund to the tune of 
`31.85 lakh. 
The reply of the University forwarded by the Govern ment stated (June 2010) that 
entire recovery would be completed by June 2010. Re covery status is, however, 
awaited (August 2010).The fact, however, remains th at the Provision of Section 192 
of the Income Tax Act had been violated in addition to diversion of University fund. 
Short deduction of Income tax and subsequent non-recovery from the pay bills of 
the employees is indicative of weak controls over s tatutory deductions from pay 
bills being exercised by the Head of the Office/DDO  and therefore, there is an 
urgent need to strengthen the same to avoid recurrence. 
Irrigation Department 
4.2 Payment of contractors’ bills in excess of legi timate dues  
The Executive Engineer (EE), Itakhola Irrigation Di vision, 
Bordikorai had issued (March 2005 and February 2007 ) 
cheques aggregating `63.71 lakh to 11 contractors against 
11 bills valued `39.29 lakh and passed bills for only  
`36.09 lakh ( Appendix-IV ). The contractors subsequently 
encashed the cheques. 
Thus, drawal of money in excess of passed bill valu e for payment was in violation of 
Rule 78 of AFR. This led to misappropriation of Gov ernment money amounting to 
`27.62 lakh ( `63.71 lakh - `36.09 lakh). Had the required Rule 78 of AFR been 
followed, the misappropriation could have been avoided.  
This clearly shows weakening of internal controls l ike, nature of claim, amount 
claimed, correctness of claim, period of claim, exp enditure sanction etc . over the 
proof of payment i.e. voucher prescribed 
for the Drawing Officer under the 
Financial rules and therefore, there is an 
urgent need to strengthen these controls. 
The Government accepted (November 2009) 
the audit contention and stated that steps 
would be taken to recover the excess 
payment from the bills of the contractor. 
Recovery status of the excess payment made 
is, however, awaited (August 2010). 
4.3 Non-adherence to codal provisions 
Rule 131 of Assam Public Works Department Manual 
provides that every payment must be supported by a 
voucher setting forth full and clear particulars of  the 
claim. This is reiterated in Rule 78 of AFR. Test-c heck 
Payment of 
contractors’ bills in 
excess of legitimate 
dues led to 
misappropriation of 
`27.62 lakh. 
Non-adherence to codal 
provisions resulted in 
fictitious payment 
 
of  `2.27 crore. 
Bordikorai Irrigation Scheme 

Compliance 
 15 
however, revealed that 92 vouchers relating to exec ution of different components of 
the Bordikorai Irrigation Scheme involving payment of `2.27 crore to the contractors 
for the months of March 2005 and February 2007 were not on record. 
Though the payments were reflected in the cash book  and monthly accounts but the 
vouchers were neither attached to the monthly 
accounts nor produced to Audit (Appendix-V). 
In the absence of vouchers in support of 
payment, though reflected in cash book, 
fictitious payment to the tune of  
`2.27 crore could not be ruled out. Failure to 
exercise the required checks as provided for in 
the Manual indicates a serious lapse and thus, is 
fraught with the risk of misappropriation of 
Government money. 
The matter was reported to the Government in Octobe r 2009 and the Government 
accepted (November 2009) the audit observation. Fur ther reply stating remedial 
action taken is awaited (August 2010). 
Public Health Engineering Department 
4.4 Defalcation in Public Health Engineering Divisi on, Howraghat  
According to Rule 268 of Assam Financial Rules (AFR ), 
no work shall commence without sanctioned detailed 
design and estimate, allotment of funds and orders for its 
commencement issued by the competent authority. 
Further, Rules 78 and 79 of AFR provide that every 
payment should be supported by Vouchers and APRs. 
Test-check of the records (November-December 2008) of Public Health Engineering 
(PHE) Division, Howraghat and further information collected (January 2010) revealed 
that an amount of `53.20 lakh was drawn by the division from Diphu tre asury 
(through eleven cheques) during September 2004 with out any authorization in the 
form of sanction and Fixation of ceiling (FOC) 
4. The fund was shown received in the 
cash book No.15 and subsequently shown disbursed on  the payment side of the cash 
book to two contractors charging the amount under d eposit 5 during the period  
9-12 September 2004. No records, however, relating to name of works/schemes, work 
orders and payment vouchers/actual payee receipts t owards execution of any work 
against the payment was available in the division. The withdrawal of fund from 
deposit head of account was not verified in audit d ue to non-maintenance of ‘deposit 
register’. 
                                                
 
4 Fixation of ceiling for assignment is issued by the  Finance Department in favour of a drawing and disb ursing 
officer. Such fixation of ceiling for assignment sp ecifies the maximum amount up to which the officer credited 
shall have authority to draw on the particular trea sury on which the fixation of ceiling or the assign ment has been 
issued.  
5 Deposit transactions under Public Works Deposits inter-alia  provided for disbursement of sums due to contractors on closed 
accounts. 
An amount of `53.20 
lakh was defalcated in 
Public Health 
Engineering Division, 
Howraghat towards 
contractor’s payment. 
 
Bordikorai Irrigation Scheme 

Audit Report on Internal Controls and Risk Management for the  year ended 31 March 2010 
 16 
In the absence of records in support of utilization , the likelihood of defalcation of the 
entire amount of `53.20 lakh could not be ruled out.  
On being pointed out in audit (November-December 20 08), the matter was 
investigated by the Government in March 2010. The G overnment in their reply after 
investigation of the matter stated (July 2010) that  the Government fund of  
`53.20 lakh appears to be defalcated but needs furth er inquiry/investigation taking 
evidences from all concerned, for arriving at a final decision. 
Failure to exercise the prescribed checks indicates  serious lapse on the part of the 
Department. Thus, non-observation of codal provisio ns resulted in suspected 
defalcation of Government money amounting to `53.20 lakh. 
Dairy Development Department 
4.5 Non-compliance to constitutional and codal prov isions led to 
unauthorised expenditure besides loss of interest  
Rule 7(1) of Assam Treasury Rules envisages that al l 
moneys received by or tendered by Government 
servants on account of the revenue of the province 
shall not be appropriated to meet departmental 
expenditure nor otherwise kept apart from the 
Consolidated Fund or the Public Account of the Stat e. 
Article 266 of the Constitution of India also lays 
down that all revenues received by the Government of 
a State shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of the State and that no moneys out 
of the said Fund shall be appropriated except in ac cordance with law and in the 
manner provided under the constitution. 
Test-check (July 2009) of the records of Assistant Dairy Development Officer 
(ADDO), Jorhat, Assam, revealed that during 2001-02  to 2008-09 the Assistant Dairy 
Development Officer, Jorhat, received total revenue of `2.31 crore from sale proceeds 
of packaged milk and milk products. Of this, ADDO d eposited only `14.74 lakh 
(`7.66 lakh directly through challan and `7.08 lakh by transfer against the receipt of 
FOC) in the treasury. In violation of the Constitut ional and codal provisions, ADDO 
spent `2.16 crore for meeting the departmental expenditure  towards payment of milk 
bills, though there were persistent savings in the Department, which ranged from 
`1.17 crore to `8.46 crore during these years against the budget pr ovision for 
procurement and processing of milk under the Major head of accounts ‘2404-Dairy 
Development, II-State Plan and Non-Plan Schemes’. A gainst the budget provision of 
`1.07 crore the ADDO, who was also the DDO received ‘Fixation of Ceiling’ of 
`59.61 lakh during the period from 2001-02 to 2008-0 9 drew only `9.12 lakh but did 
not use the amount for the purpose of making payment of milk bills. 
Thus, the failure of ADDO, Jorhat to comply with th e Constitutional and codal 
provisions led to unauthorised expenditure of `2.16 crore besides non-deposit of 
departmental receipts into the revenue head of Gove rnment account. Further, the 
Government sustained a loss of `17.20 lakh at the average rate of interest of 
Government borrowing during the years 2001-09. In r eply (May 2010), it was stated 
Non-compliance to 
constitutional and codal 
provisions led to 
unauthorised expenditure 
of 
`2.16 crore besides loss 
of interest for  
`17.20 lakh. 

Compliance 
 17 
that due to non-receipt of adequate fund, the department had to pay the milk bills from 
the sale proceeds. Reply of the department is not a cceptable as there was persistent 
savings ranging from `1.17 crore to `8.46 crore during these years. 
In essence, non-adherence to controls prescribed to  safeguard the resources by 
ensuring that no departmental receipts are kept out  of Government accounts; 
kept out of consolidated funds or public account; n ot kept out for long and used 
for spending except under authorization, led to una uthorized expenditure by the 
Department resulting in incorrect reflection of Gov ernment revenue and 
expenditure. 
General Administration Department 
4.6 Non-compliance to constitutional and codal prov isions led to Blockade of 
fund and Loss of interest 
According to Assam Treasury Rules, 1937 and 
Subsidiary Orders (Rule 16, SO 50) read with Rules 
62 and 63 of Assam Financial Rules (AFR), 1939, 
no money shall be drawn from the treasury unless it  
is required for immediate disbursement.  
In violation of the above provisions, Deputy 
Commissioner (DC), Kokrajhar kept unutilized 
fund, received from time to time for different work s under various schemes, in the 
form of DCR 6 since 1993. As of March 2010, DC had accumulated u nspent balance 
of `1.24 crore in 96 DCRs for periods ranging from 13 t o 211 months. (Appendix-
VI ). DC, Kokrajhar made drawals of `22.82 lakh in respect of 52 out of 96 DCRs 
(Appendix-VII ) during 1993 to 2007, but no particulars relating t o these drawals were 
produced to audit.  However, during discussion, the  DC stated that the unspent 
amount of `22.82 lakh would be refunded to the proper head of account after 
obtaining necessary instructions from the Government. 
Thus, retention of unspent scheme funds in DCRs for  years together has resulted in 
loss of interest of `31.14 lakh at the average rate of Government borrow ing during 
1992-93 to 2009-10 (Appendix-VIII ). 
In reply, the DC stated (July 2010) that a further amount of `18.96 lakh had since 
been utilized, but documents in support of utilizat ion were not furnished. Balance of 
`1.05 crore was however, still retained in DCRs. Thu s, blockade of Government 
funds persists. 
Miscellaneous Departments 
4.7 Observations in Inspection Reports 
(a) Assam Treasury Rules, 1937 envisages that all m oneys received by or 
tendered by Government servants on account of the r evenue of the province shall not 
be appropriated to meet departmental expenditure no r otherwise kept apart from the 
Consolidated Fund or the Public Account of the State. 
                                                
 
6 Deposit at Call Receipt.  
The Deputy Commissioner, 
Kokrajhar retained 
`1.24 
crore in the form of DCRs for 
the period ranging from 13 to 
211 months resulting in 
blockade of Government 
fund. 

Audit Report on Internal Controls and Risk Management for the  year ended 31 March 2010 
 18 
In violation of above provision, Manager, Governmen t Livestock Farm Barhampur , 
Nagaon spent `7.32 lakh from sale proceeds of fodder and milk col lected since prior 
to 2005-06 to 2009-10 for departmental expenditure. 
This was reported to Government in December 2009; t heir replies had not been 
received (August 2010). 
(b) Traveling Allowance/Leave Travel Concession Rul es provide that when LTC 
advance is taken, the final bill should be submitte d within one month of return 
journey, failing which the advance should be recove red in lump sum. Test-check 
(June 2009) of the records of District Elementary E ducation Officer (DEEO), 
Dhemaji revealed that LTC advance of `3.18 lakh disbursed to 18 school teachers 
during January 2001 to November 2005 were neither a djusted nor recovered and most 
of the teachers had either expired or retired rendering the advances unrecoverable. 
This was reported to Government in September 2009; their replies had not been 
received (August 2010). 
The details of the Inspection Reports issued (durin g the period from July-December 
2009) to the Government are shown in (Appendix-IX). In none of these cases replies 
were furnished. 
 
 
 

 
 
The operational controls of the entity’s operations  should be orderly, ethical, 
economical, efficient and effective. General expect ations are that public servants 
should serve the public interest with fairness and manage public resource ethically. 
Four case studies discussed in the succeeding parag raphs bring out the failure of the 
Government to observe the operational controls, in the test-checked offices of  
15 departments during 2008-09 and 2009-10, relating  to its policies and guidelines of 
schemes being implemented in the State. 
Health and Family Welfare Department  
5.1 Procurement of bed nets of shorter shelf-life w hen bed nets of longer 
shelf-life were available and their delayed distribution  
GOI decision (i) below Rule 6 of GFR provides 
that, “Every officer is expected to exercise the 
same vigilance in respect of expenditure incurred 
from public moneys as a person of ordinary 
prudence would exercise in respect of expenditure 
of his own money”.  
Health and Family Welfare (A) Department 
sanctioned (February 2008) `3.88 crore for procurement of long-lasting insectic ide 
treated bed nets @ `397 each against award of Twelfth Finance Commissio n. The 
Director of Health Services (DHS), Assam placed (Fe bruary 2008) supply order on 
M/S Health Circle Private Limited, Guwahati for sup ply of 97,853 long lasting 
insecticide treated bed nets at the aforesaid rate within February 2008. The supplier 
was asked to supply bed nets having shelf-life of o ne year, although bed nets with 
shelf life of four years were available at same pri ce. The firm supplied 68,000 and 
29,853 bed nets in March and May 2008 respectively. 
Test-check (July 2009) of the records of DHS, Assam  revealed that the 68,000 bed 
nets supplied in March 2008 had shelf-life of only 10 months (date of expiry:  
January 2009). Of these 68,000, 47,000 bed nets wer e issued to different Civil 
hospitals of Assam between May and August 2008 and remaining 21,000 bed nets 
were issued in February 2009, when their shelf-life had already expired. 
Thus, due to acceptance of bed nets having shorter shelf-life and inability on the part 
of the Department to issue the bed nets promptly on  their receipt frustrated the 
objective of procuring the insecticide treated bed nets. This was not only failure of 
operational controls but also led to unfruitful exp enditure of `83.37 lakh 
7. Besides, 
47,000 bed nets, worth `1.87 crore, issued to different civil hospitals, ha d shelf-life of 
only 10 months, which obviously limited the effecti veness of the bed nets in terms of 
                                                 
7 `397 X 21000 = `83.37 lakh.  
Procurement of insecticide 
treated bed nets of shorter shelf-
life when bed nets of longer 
shelf-life were available at same 
rates and their delayed 
distribution resulted in wasteful 
expenditure of `83.37 lakh.  
Chapter -5 
Operational Controls  

Audit Report on Internal Controls and Risk Management for the  year ended 31 March 2010 
 20 
time . Significantly, as a part of the same consignment, 2 9,853 bed nets were received 
in May 2008 with shelf-life of almost four years, a t the same price. Thus, ordering 
supply of bed nets with shorter shelf-lives (10 and  12 months) when bed nets with 
longer shelf-life were obtained at the same price w as injudicious and infraction of 
Rule 6 of GFR. 
In reply Government stated (March 2010 & July 2010) that the period of effectiveness 
is calculated from the date of its use and not the date of manufacture. Reply of the 
Government is contradictory as the stock register i tself shows that date of expiry of 
the shelf life of the bed nets was one year (upto January 2009). 
Home Department 
5.2 In violation of the provision of Assam Jail Man ual, the Government 
handed over the work of ‘construction of new Centra l Jail’,  to APHC Ltd., 
withdrawing the same from PWD  
According to Assam Jail Manual, all works of 
original nature (including addition/alteration to 
existing structures) as well as all repairs to the jail 
buildings, borne on the books of PWD are to be 
technically sanctioned and executed by PWD after 
obtaining the relevant administrative approval 
from the competent authority. 
Test-check (May 2009) of the records of the 
Inspector General of Prisons, Assam revealed that 
under the scheme “Modernization of Prison 
Administration” the Government of Assam had 
taken up the work, ‘construction of new Central 
Jail at Sarusajai, Guwahati’ and an estimate of `15.26 crore was prepared (December 
2004) by the Executive Engineer, PWD (Building), Gu wahati. Though the 
Government of Assam, Home Department accorded (January 2005) the administrative 
approval for `14.31 crore, but necessary technical sanction was n ot obtained from 
PWD. The Inspector General (Prison) entrusted the w ork to the Chief Engineer, PWD 
(Building), Assam (January 2005) with a request to complete the work expeditiously. 
The work was started in May 2005 after a delay of nearly four months. 
Further scrutiny revealed that a meeting was held ( 9 November 2006) in the official 
residence of Hon’ble Minister, Jails and Social Wel fare, wherein it was decided that 
in order to expedite the progress of the works, the  portion of works which were 
already started by PWD would be continued and compl eted by them and the 
remaining portion of works, which had not yet been started by PWD, would be 
entrusted to Assam Police Housing Corporation (APHC ) Ltd. This was stated to be 
done for expeditious execution with a condition tha t the works would be done by 
APHC Ltd through the same contractors to whom these  works had been allotted by 
PWD without any alteration in the tendered values a nd terms and conditions. 
Accordingly, Home Department entrusted (December 20 06) all the works, which had 
not been started by PWD, to APHC Ltd. with an instr uction to complete the work by 
March 2007. PWD handed over the relevant portion of  works to APHC Ltd in 
December 2006. 
The injudicious decision of the 
Government to handover the 
work, ‘construction of new 
Central Jail’, to APHC Ltd., 
withdrawing the same from 
PWD in violation of the 
provision of Assam Jail 
Manual , resulted in extra 
expenditure of 
`64.48 lakh 
besides non-completion within 
the schedule resulted in cost 
overrun of 
`5.24 crore.  

Operational Controls 
 21 
Further information revealed that APHC Ltd., instea d of completing the work by 
March 2007, submitted in August 2008 i.e., 17 month s after the schedule of 
completion, a revised estimate for `22.51 crore, incorporating 10 per cent  agency 
charge, three per cent  contingency charge and two per cent  work charge to Home 
Department for Phase –I of the work, though for the  same item of works the estimate 
of PWD was `13.53 crore. The Administrative Approval of the rev ised estimate for 
`19.55 crore was accorded (November 2008) by Home De partment after allowing 
five per cent agency charge of `88.85 lakh and one per cent  contingency charge of 
`17.77 lakh. From the physical progress report submi tted by APHC Ltd. till  
March 2009, it was noticed that the agency failed t o complete the work (progress  
20 to 100 per cent  under different components) within the stipulated date  
(March 2007). An amount of `13.54 crore had already been paid to APHC Ltd. till  
May 2009 besides payment of R.77.94 lakh to PWD upt o February 2008 against their 
respective completed items of works. 
Thus, the intended objective of expeditious executi on of the work through APHC had 
not been achieved. Further, the injudicious decisio n of the Government to handover 
the work to APHC Ltd., in violation of the provisio n of Assam Jail Manual, resulted 
in an extra expenditure of `64.48 lakh towards payment of five per cent  agency 
charge to APHC Ltd. There was already (March 2010) cost overrun of `5.24 crore 
and time over run of three years.  
In reply, Government stated (July 2010) that entrus tment of Government works to 
Public Sector Work Agencies such as APHC Ltd. was n ot incorporated in the Jail 
Manual, which was last revised in 1934. Besides, AP HC Ltd. is officially entitled to 5 
per cent agency charge. But the fact remains that Government  had to bear an extra 
burden of `64.48 lakh towards agency charge due to handing ove r of the work to 
APHC Ltd from PWD. Further, non-completion of the w ork on scheduled date 
resulted in cost overrun of `5.24 crore. 
The injudicious action of the Government to change the implementing agency  
mid-way without taking into consideration the costs , benefits and risks involved was 
indicative of lax controls vis-à-vis its operations  in safeguarding the resources of 
the State and also to deliver services/goods on time. 
Revenue (Reforms) and Disaster Management Department 
5.3 Injudicious procurement, without budget provisi on and delay in 
payment of supplier’s outstanding claim 
According to the Assam Budget Manual, 
expenditure should not be incurred on 
schemes/services without provision of funds. The 
Director of Land Records and Surveys (DLR), 
Assam placed (September 1998) a supply order on 
the Assam Small Industries Development 
Corporation Ltd. (ASIDC), Guwahati, a State 
Government undertaking, for supply of tent and 
tarpaulin valued at `7.86 lakh (cost of materials: `7.51  lakh and ASIDC’s  
commission: `0.35 lakh). DLR placed the supply order without any  provision in the 
Injudicious procurement, 
without budget provision and 
avoidable delay in payment of 
supplier’s outstanding claim, 
resulted in avoidable 
expenditure of 
`25.11 lakh 
towards payment of interest. 

Audit Report on Internal Controls and Risk Management for the  year ended 31 March 2010 
 22 
budget and without any sanction from the Government . ASIDC entrusted  
M/s Assam Tent and Tarpaulin Industries, to supply the materials. The materials were 
supplied (March 1999) and a bill for `7.86 lakh was submitted by the ASIDC for 
payment in March 1999 to DLR. 
Test-check (August 2009) of the records of DLR reve aled that after eight months 
(November 1999) of receipt of the materials the Dir ector requested the Government 
for providing fund for payment to supplier. The Gov ernment asked (December 1999) 
the Directorate to explain the reasons for purchase  of materials when there was no 
budget provision for the purpose. The reply furnish ed (August 2000 and March 2001) 
by the Director was not found satisfactory and the sanction and provision for fund 
were not accorded. 
Meanwhile, the supplier approached the Civil Courts  for getting his payment released 
from ASIDC. The Court directed (August 2003) for pa yment of bill valued at 
`7,50,854 with compound interest at the rate of 18 per cent  per annum from the date 
of the bill till the date of full and final payment . As the payment was not received by 
the supplier, he again appealed in High Court for r ealization of his dues and once 
again, the Hon’ble High Court ruled in his favour (November 2006). 
As a compliance of the Court orders, Revenue (Refor ms) & Disaster Management 
Department accorded sanction for `32.62 lakh for payment of the cost  
(`7.51 lakh) of materials to ASIDC with 18 per cent  compound interest from  
7 July 1999 to 16  January 2008 ( `25.11 lakh) to M/s Assam Tent and Tarpaulin 
Industries, Guwahati. The payments were made betwee n January 2008  
(`29.95 lakh) and February 2009 ( `2.67 lakh). 
Thus, the injudicious supply order placed without r equired budget provision and 
avoidable delay in payment of supplier’s outstandin g claim and failure of internal 
control resulted in avoidable expenditure of `25.11 lakh towards payment of 
interest. 
The Government accepted (April 2010) the observatio n and stated that action had 
been initiated against officers responsible for iss ue of supply orders without budget 
provision. 
Power Department 
5.4 Delay in payment of outstanding dues  
Power Department assumed liabilities (November 
2003) of outstanding dues (as on 31 October 2003) 
of purchased power by Assam State Electricity 
Board (ASEB) to GRID Corporation of Orissa 
Limited, Bhubaneswar (GRIDCO), under the 
Financial Restructuring Plan (FRP). The 
outstanding dues were `127.11 crore (Principal: `47.27 crore and Surcharge: `79.84 
crore). A meeting was held (April 2004) between ASE B and GRIDCO to determine 
the payment modalities, wherein GRIDCO agreed to wa ive  
60 per cent surcharge on the request of ASEB. 
Delay in payment of 
outstanding dues resulted in 
payment of additional/penal 
interest to the tune of 
 
`4.44 crore. 

Operational Controls 
 23 
According to the modalities, the Government of Assa m was to pay `100.65 crore 
(Principal: `79.20 crore and interest: `21.45 crore) over a period of five years from 
November 2003 to July 2008 in 20 quarterly installm ents. The payment modalities 
were accepted by the Government of Assam and the sa me was conveyed (May 2005) 
to GRIDCO. 
Test-check (May-June 2009) of the records of Deputy  Secretary, Secretariat 
Administration (Accounts) Department revealed that the Government of Assam 
released and paid (between October 2005 and June 20 08) `105.09 crore to GRIDCO. 
An excess payment of `4.44 crore ( `105.09 crore – `100.65 crore) had to be made 
due to delays (ranging from 9 to 466 days) in payme nts of principal and interest 
thereon. The delay was unwarranted, especially in v iew of the fact that there were 
unsurrendered savings, in each year during 2004-09 in the Department, which ranged 
from `137 crore to `4,290 crore under the relevant head of account. Fur ther, 
GRIDCO claimed (October 2008) another amount of `54.37 lakh, being the interest 
and penal interest on the principal loan of `79.21 crore, due to delays in payment of 
installment on scheduled dates. The Government of A ssam requested (February 2009) 
to waive the same; the response of GRIDCO was awaited (August 2010). 
Thus, despite availability of budgetary provision, the timely payment was not made to 
GRIDCO though the Department was signatory to the p ayment schedule. Due to 
delay in payment of outstanding dues, as per agreem ent, the Government had to incur 
a loss of `4.44 crore towards payment of additional and penal interest. The loss of 
`4.44 crore could have been avoided if the due payme nts were made to the GRIDCO 
on time. The Government accepted the audit observat ion and stated  
(June 2010) that the delay occurred in observing th e formalities of sanction and 
release of funds. 
This was indicative of poor monitoring and weak int ernal controls in the 
Department and raises a question mark on the workin g efficiency of the 
Department. 
 
 
 

 
 
Safeguarding resources against loss in any sector i s imperative for economical, 
efficient and effective operations for delivery of goods and services. Given the 
fiduciary responsibility of the Government it assum es greater significance in public 
sector. Internal controls to safeguard resources ar e to be put in place and these are to 
be doggedly adhered to both in letter and spirit. T he internal controls to safeguard 
resources would entail disciplined structure, robus t and transparent procedures and 
committed personnel operating in a conducive climate to provide good governance.  
Issues and instances relating to blatant disregard by the State departmental authorities 
to safeguard resources of the State against loss no ticed during the course of audit are 
brought out in the succeeding paragraphs. 
Irrigation Department 
6.1 Payment without work  
Rule 479(1) of Assam Financial Rules stipulates tha t the Divisional Officer as the 
primary disbursing officer of the division is respo nsible not only for the financial 
regularity of the transactions of the whole divisio n but also for the maintenance of the 
transaction correctly and in accordance with the rules in force.  
The work, ‘Development of Inspection Path on the em bankments from Chainage 0 m 
to 6506 m (Left Bank) and Chainage 6506 m to 8508 m  (Right Bank)’, was 
technically sanctioned (November 2006) by the 
Additional Chief Engineer, Irrigation department fo r 
`30.39 lakh and was awarded (date not available) to a 
contractor 
8 for `17.47 lakh. Test-check of the records 
revealed that although a bill for the said work 
amounting to `21.39 lakh remained unpassed and unpaid as of July 2009 but cash 
book of the division depicted (8 February 2007) a p ayment of `10.50 lakh to another 
contractor 9 (not related to aforesaid work) against the unpass ed bill resulting in 
misappropriation of `10.50 lakh. Thus, failure of the Department to carr y out the 
required checks as provided for in rules and codes led to misappropriation of 
Government money amounting to `10.50 lakh. Therefore, an effective accountability 
mechanism was lacking in the Department and needs strengthening. 
The matter was reported to the Government in Octobe r 2009 and March 2010. In 
reply, Government accepted (November 2009) the obse rvation and stated that action 
would be taken to recover the said amount from the concerned contractor. Further 
reply was awaited (August 2010). 
                                                
 
8 Shri Monohar Ansari.  
9 Shri Gouri Sankar Deka. 
Payment without work led 
to misappropriation of 
Government money 
amounting to `10.50 lakh. 
Chapter -6 
Safeguarding Resources 

Audit Report on Internal Controls and Risk Management for the  year ended 31 March 2010 
 26 
6.2 Fictitious payment to a contractor, not associa ted with the work 
Paragraph 309 of APWD Code read with Rule 275 of AF R provides that an advance 
payment on work actually executed but not measured may be made on the basis of 
certificate of Sub-divisional officer to the effect that not less than the quantity of work 
paid for has actually been done. 
The work, ‘Construction of approach road of colony 
at Seijusa’, was technically sanctioned (TS) 
(November 2005) by Additional Chief Engineer, 
Zone-II, Irrigation Department, Tezpur, for  
`36.68 lakh. The work was, however, awarded 
(February 2005) prior to according TS in two groups  
(A-32: Shri M. Bhagwati and A-33: M/s Swagata Const ruction). EE, Irrigation 
Division, Itakhola paid (March 2005) `35 lakh ( `17.50 lakh each), as part payment 
against two advance bills of Shri M. Bhagawati and M/s Swagata Construction of `18 
lakh each, to M. Bhagwati according to cash book wh ereas payment was made to M/s 
Swagat Construction vide Voucher No.171 dated 19 Ma rch 2005 and Hand Receipt 
No.18 dated Nil against the work ‘Removal of silt a t Main Canal’ and not for the 
work construction of approach road of colony at Sei jusa. The work of silt clearance 
was however not awarded to M/s Swagata Construction. 
Detailed audit check further disclosed that: 
/head2right supporting bills did not bear the signature of the contractor in support of their 
claim and also not routed through Seijusa Sub-Division; 
/head2right measurement books were not available in support of payment to contractors; 
/head2right mandatory certificate in support of advance payment  by the SDO/AEE was not 
authenticated with official seal; 
/head2right contrary to the provisions, advance payment was mad e on hand receipt and the 
hand receipt did not bear the official seal of the contractor; 
/head2right final adjustment bills were not available even afte r more than four years of 
advance payment. 
Thus, non-observation of prescribed checks raises d oubts about the effectiveness 
of the internal control system in place to ensure t hat no fictitious payment was 
made by the Department. Weak controls resulted in p ayment of `35 lakh to a 
contractor for the work, which was not executed by him. 
The matter was reported to Government in October 20 09 and March 2010. The 
Government stated (November 2009) that the payment of `35 lakh to one contractor 
against two bills was due to some mistake. The repl y was not tenable as none of the 
checks prescribed was observed. 
 
 
Payment to a contractor, 
not associated with the work 
for which the payment was 
made, resulted in fictitious 
expenditure of `35 lakh. 

Safeguarding Resources 
 27 
6.3 Payment of contractor’s bills against unauthori zed recordings in 
measurement books 
According to Assam PWD Manual, payments for 
work done should be made on the basis of 
measurements recorded in the measurement book 
and entries therein should be made in ink. 
Test-check of cash book and vouchers pertaining to 
seven different works 
10  of Bordikorai Irrigation Project revealed that seven bills worth 
`21.27 lakh were paid (8 February 2007) by EE, Irrig ation Division, Itakhola prior to 
receipt of the bills (10 February 2007) in the Divi sion (Appendix-X).  These works 
were neither put to tender nor were any comparative  statements prepared. The 
measurements were recorded in the measurement book in pencil and not signed by the 
concerned Site Engineer. By recording the prime dat a with pencil; the department 
made the system vulnerable to manipulations and has  raised serious question mark on 
the operational control system prevailing in the Department. 
The fact that such a case of fictitious payment rem ained undetected for about 
three years reflects that internal control system w as not effective and the 
oversight mechanism was weak as no checks were exer cised by the superiors as 
part of monitoring mechanism.  
The matter was reported to the Government in Octobe r 2009 and March 2010. The 
Government stated (November 2009) that due to droug ht like situation in 2006 the 
work was taken up as an emergency measure and that the measurement book 
remained unsigned due to oversight of the concerned  Junior Engineer and pencil 
entries in the measurement book were due to his ign orance. The replies were not 
tenable as it not only violated the codal provisions but also led to fictitious payment of 
`21.27 lakh to contractors. Further reply was awaited (August 2010). 
6.4 Fictitious expenditure towards non-existent par t of canal 
For the work, ‘Renovation of head regulator at 
chainage 8,508 metre of main canal’ an amount of 
`2.50 lakh was paid to one contractor in February 
2007. Test-check of the records in respect of work 
of renovation of head regulator of main canal of 
Bordikorai Irrigation Scheme revealed that the 
actual length of the main canal was only up to 8,45 9 metre and not 8,508 metre. 
Therefore, renovation of head regulator at chainage  8,508 metre was a physical 
impossibility. 
 
 
                                                 
10  (i)River Diversion to feed water to Main Canal Ch. 9 0-180, (ii) River Diversion to feed water to 
Main Canal Ch. 0-90, (iii) Removal of Silt & debris fro m the Bed of Main Canal Ch 8180-8345,  
(iv) Removal of Silt and debris from the bed of Main Can al Ch.6130M- 6740M and Ch.8345M-
8508M, (v) Removal of deposited silt from the bed of Main C anal Ch.4980 to 5010 M, (vi) Removal of 
Silt deposited with debris from the bed of Main Canal Ch. 614 5M-6280M and (vii) Removal of Silt 
and debris from bed of Main Canal Ch. 6280M-6460. 
Payment of contractor’s bills 
against unauthorized 
recordings in measurement 
books led to fictitious payment 
of `21.27 lakh.  
EE, Irrigation division, 
Itakhola incurred fictitious 
expenditure of `2.50 lakh 
towards  non-existent part of 
canal.  

Audit Report on Internal Controls and Risk Management for the  year ended 31 March 2010 
 28 
Awarding of fictitious work and payment thereagains t was reflective of failure of 
internal controls at each level, starting from sanc tion; notice inviting tender; 
appraisal of bids; award of work; 
execution of work and its supervision 
and required evidencing in documents 
like bills, measurement books; and 
finally, payment. Such failures 
indicate a nexus of authorities at 
various levels and do not bode well for 
good governance. 
 
The matter was reported to the 
Government in October 2009 and March 
2010. The Government stated (November 2009) that th e length of the main canal was  
8,508 metre. The reply was not tenable as not only the revised project report showed 
the total length of the main canal as 8,459 metre, even the approved index map of 
Bordikorai Irrigation Scheme showed the total lengt h of the main canal  
as 8,459 metre. 
 
 
Bordikorai Irrigation Scheme 

 
 
 
7.1 Main objectives 
 
Internal audit assists an organization in ensuring adherence to internal controls by 
evaluating their effectiveness and efficiency and b y promoting continuous 
improvement. Based on the result of risk assessment , the internal audit activity should 
evaluate the adequacy and effectiveness of controls  encompassing the organization’s 
governance, operations and information systems. This should include: 
/head2right Reliability and integrity of financial and operational information; 
/head2right Effectiveness and efficiency of operations; 
/head2right Safeguarding of assets; and 
/head2right Compliance with laws, regulations and contracts. 
7.2 Internal Audit in Government Departments 
 
Internal audit wings have been set up only in 19 De partments 11  under the control of 
the Directorate of the Departments, which prevents it from functioning independently 
and objectively. Their functioning is confined main ly to accounting work. The wing, 
where it existed (19 Departments) did not have a manual or stated mandate. 
 
Information from five Departments out of five test checked departments revealed that 
in Public Health Engineering and Co-operation Depar tment there was no internal 
audit wing. The Accounts Officers posted in the Chi ef Engineer’s office and divisions 
under PHE by Finance Department were engaged mainly  in accounting work like pre-
check of bills and advising the Chief Engineer and Executive Engineers on financial 
matters. In other three Departments viz, Agricultur e, Industries & Commerce and 
Animal Husbandry & Veterinary (AH & Vety), although  there were audit wings, their 
activities were very limited. The two internal audi tors posted in AH & Vety 
Department. Directorate had not conducted audit of any unit. Under Agriculture 
Department one officer from Assam Finance Service a nd seven to eight departmental 
assistants of the audit wing covered only six per cent of the auditable units during 
2001-06. Again under Industries and Commerce Depart ment, two officers from 
Assam Audit service and three extension officers (I ndustries) conducted audit of only 
one unit out of 27 auditable units in 2007-08. 
 
                                                 
11  1. Agriculture, 2. Animal Husbandry and Veterinary, 3. Commer ce and Industries,  
4. Dairy Development, 5. Economics and Statistics, 6. Edu cation (Elementary and Secondary),  
7. Education (Higher), 8. Financial Inspection, 9. Fisheri es, 10. Forest, 11. Handloom and Textile,  
12. Health and Family Welfare, 13. Home, 14. Legal Metr ology, 15. Planning and Development,  
16. Printing and Stationery, 17. Sericulture, 18. Social Welfare and 19. Sports and Youth Welfare.  
Chapter -7 
Internal Audit  

Audit Report on Internal Controls and Risk Management for the year ended 31 March 2010 
 30 
In sum, non-existence/non-functioning of internal a udit wings in the Departments 
of the State Government deprived the latter of dete cting instances of non-
observance, inadequacies (if any) and effectiveness  of internal controls. 
Consequently, a lessons-learnt mechanism, to respond to error signals, could not be 
put in place by the State Government which led to r ecurring and serious financial 
irregularities, often of similar/identical nature, over last several years. 
7.3   Response to audit observations in Inspection Repor ts 
The Principal Accountant General (Audit) (AG) arran ges to conduct periodical 
inspection of Government offices to test-check the transactions and verify the due 
maintenance of significant accounting and other rec ords according to prescribed rules 
and procedures. Inspection Reports (IRs) are issued  to the Heads of the concerned 
offices with a copy to the Government. Orders of th e State Government (March 1986) 
provide for prompt response by the Executive to the  IRs issued by the AG to ensure 
rectificatory action in compliance to the prescribe d rules and procedures. A half-
yearly report of pending IRs is sent to the concern ed Commissioner and Secretary of 
the Departments by the Principal Accountant General  (Audit) Assam, Guwahati to 
facilitate monitoring of the audit observations in the pending IRs. 
Audit observations by the Accountant General are re quired to be attended to by the 
Department within one month from the receipt of the  Inspection Reports (IRs). It was 
however, noticed that 4905 IRs and 25880 Paragraphs  were pending for settlement as 
of May 2010 as detailed below: 
Year Opening 
Balance 
Addition Settlement Balance (as on 
May 2010) 
Money 
Value 
(Rupees in 
crore) IRs Paras IRs Paras IRs Paras IRs Paras 
2005-06 5,801 29,278 450 3,279 923 7,400 5,328 25,157 1,466.39 
2006 -07  5,328  25,157  503  3,726  336  3,578  5,495  25,305  2,870.04  
2007 -08  5,495  25,305  680  4,489  332  2,073  5,843  27,721  2,632.3 0 
2008-09 5,843 27,721 598 3,844 160 1,916 6,281 29,649 4,591.08 
2009-10 6,281 29,649 514 3,759 1,890 7,528 4,905 25,880 5,371.39 
 
IRs and Paragraphs therein are error signals to whi ch a State Government should be 
sensitive to ensure that errors are comprehensively  dealt with, those responsible for 
these are held accountable and these don’t recur. M ore the sensitivity and more the 
alacrity to act firmer is the Government’s resolve to deliver good governance to its 
people. However, the State Government’s sensitivity  to IRs and Paragraphs did not 
infuse the desired confidence in its people/legislature. 
 

 
 
 
Review of internal controls in the Departments and its directorates through test-check 
of field offices revealed absence of control enviro nment as officials at various levels 
were either unaware of the controls in place or had  a tendency to ignore/bypass the 
same. 
Bypassing the regulatory framework is the most common anatomy of any fraud. Audit 
scrutiny of the records revealed violations of the Government’s policies and its Acts, 
Rules, Statutes and Regulations resulting in misapp ropriation, defalcation, waste etc. 
of Government Funds. Absence of proper documentatio n and evidencing of 
transactions involving large sums of money were not iced. Cash controls were 
ineffective, as mandatory internal control measures  were not being observed. Often, 
accountability was not being fixed. Non-execution o f the works in an orderly, ethical, 
economical, efficient and effective manner resulted  in wasteful, extra and 
avoidable/unproductive expenditure including loss o f Government funds. Public 
resources were not being safeguarded against loss a nd operational controls were often 
not being observed. 
Near-absence of effective internal audit and weak s upervision and monitoring to 
oversee that the obligation of internal controls we re being discharged properly by the 
executing officers aggravated the risks. Persistent  violation of the provisions of the 
Budget Manual and Contingency Manual led to huge pendency of submission of DCC 
bills, UCs, unnecessary drawals and retention of fu nds, increasing the risk of misuse, 
misutilisation and even misappropriation of public money. 
 
 
Chapter -8 
Conclusion  

 
 
/head2right In view of the weakened internal controls resulting  in instances of missing 
assets/inventory, pilfering, inflated claims, doubl e payments, false claims, 
payroll fraud in various departments, the Government should urgently assess 
the risk associated with these controls to ensure t he efficacy of internal 
control.  
/head2right The Government needs to review the existing control  mechanism prevalent in 
its departments to remove the flaws in design, erro rs of judgment or 
interpretation, misunderstanding, carelessness, fat igue, distraction, collusion, 
abuse or override. 
/head2right Organizational changes and management attitude can have a profound 
impact on the effectiveness of internal control and  the personnel operating 
the system. Therefore, the higher management (Chief  Controlling 
Officers/Heads of Departments) needs to continually  review and update 
controls and communicate changes to personnel. Moni toring mechanism and 
operational controls should be strengthened and acc ountability fixed 
promptly for failure to exercise controls leading t o frauds, loss to exchequer 
and pilferage etc.  
/head2right A close and rigorous oversight mechanism should be put in place to adjust 
the Abstract Contingent Bills within the prescribed  time schedule from the 
date of drawal of the amount.  No AC bills should b e allowed to be drawn till 
settlement of earlier outstanding bills. 
/head2right Internal Audit wings should be established in all t he Government 
Departments so as to provide assurance for adequacy of control systems.  
 
 
Guwahati  (Mukesh P. Singh) 
The       Principal Accountant General 
 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi  (Vinod Rai) 
The     Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Chapter -9 
Recommendations  

Appendices 
 35 
Appendix –I 
(Reference to paragraph – 1.2; Page-2) 
Irregular retention of Government fund 
Sl. 
No. 
IR No/Para Period of 
audit 
Name of unit  Period of 
Inspection 
Brief particulars Money value  
(` In crore) 
Reply 
Health and Family Welfare Department  
1. IC-I/10-3/09-10/Pt-
IIA/Para 3 
1/08 to 4/09 Director Medical 
Education, Assam, 
Guwahati 
5.5.09 to 
16.5.09 
DCR & Bankers cheque for ` 46.09 lakh drawn between May 2004 to 
September 2007 were lying in hand without utilisati on. It was stated (July 
2009) that steps will be taken to refund the unutil ized fund into Government 
Account. No steps however had been taken till  
April 2010.  
0.46 Reply 
furnished 
(Aug 2010) 
Education Department 
2. IC-II/33-01/09-10/  
Pt-IIB/Para 3 
3/07 to 3/09 Director of 
Secondary Education, 
Assam 
4.5.09 to 
15.5.09 
Retention of heavy Closing Balance of `13.49 crore in DCR/Bank 
drafts/Bankers cheques drawn between 2004 and 2009. 
13.49 Reply not 
furnished 
(Aug 2010) 
Home Department 
3. IC-II/39-03/09-10 
Pt-IIB/Para 4 
7/07 to 4/09 I.G. Prison 16.5.09 to 
26.5.09 
Retention of heavy closing balance of `2.66 crore in DCR/Bank drafts/cash etc 
drawn between May 2005 and April 2009. 
2.66 Reply not 
furnished 
(Aug 2010) 
4. IC-II/39-32/08-
09/Pt-IIA/Para-5 
7/07 to 11/08 Director General of 
Police (Hq) Guwahati 
16.12.08 to 
1.1.09 
Blocking of fund worth `1.93 crore in DCR drawn between March 2003 and 
March 2007. 
1.93 Reply not 
furnished 
(Aug 2010) 
General Administration Department 
5. IC-II/40-12/08-
09/Pt-IIA/Para 1 
11/06 to 
11/08 
D.C. Nagaon 14.11.08 to 
8.12.08 
Unauthorized retention of Government fund to the tu ne of `1.05 crore in DCR 
drawn between March 1994 to March 2007. 
1.05 Reply not 
furnished 
(Aug 2010) 
6. IC-II/40-14/08-
09/Pt-IIA/Para 3 
8/07 to 1/09 D.C. Golaghat 7.2.09 to 
3.3.09 
Retention of cash balance of `5.36 crore at the end of March 2009. Of `5.36 
crore, `1.15 crore was retained in hand since prior to  
July 2004. 
5.36 Reply not 
furnished 
(Aug 2010) 
7. IC-II/40-09/09-
10/Pt-IIA/Para 3 
11/07 to 7/09 D.C., Kamrup 
(Metro), Guwahati 
20.08.09 to 
14.9.09 
Balance funds released since 2003 to 2008 mainly un der flood relief/FDR and 
water supply schemes amounting to `1.38 crore accumulated in hand. 
1.38 Reply not 
furnished 
(Aug 2010) 
8. -do- -do- -do- -do- Funds released to three BDOs during February 2008 t o May 2008 for 
implementation of Kalpataru scheme irregularly retained in hand. 
0.44 Reply not 
furnished 
(Aug 2010) 
9. -do- Pt-IIB/Para 8 -do- -do- -do- Blockade of Kalpataru scheme fund of `43.57 lakh since 2006-07. 0.44 Reply not 
furnished 
(Aug 2010) 
Total 27.21  
 

Audit Report on internal Controls and Risk Management for  the year ended 31 March 2010 
 
 36 
 
Appendix-II 
(Reference to Paragraph-1.2; Page 2) 
Rush of Expenditure 
 
(` in crore) 
Sl 
No.  
Grant No. and Name Head of 
Account 
Scheme/ 
Service 
Expenditure 
incurred in 
March 2009  
Total 
expenditure  
Percentage 
of total 
expenditure 
incurred 
during 
March 2009 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
1 9- Transport Services 5055 21.00 28.00 75 
2 11- Secretariat and Attached 
 Offices  
 
2052  
 
787.07  
 
1026.95  
 
77  
3 17- Administrative and 
 Functional Buildings 
 
4059 
 
41.34 
 
59.59 
 
69 
4 27- Art and Culture 2205 56.39 99.00 57 
5 31- Urban Development 
 (Town & Country 
 Planning) 
 
 
2217 
 
 
64.15 
 
 
100.92 
 
 
64 
6 34- Urban Development 
 (Municipal Area 
 Development) 
 
 
2217 
 
 
32.98 
 
 
46.06 
 
 
72 
7 36- Labour and Employment  
 
2230  
 
 
52.39  
 
 
87.45  
 
 
60  
8 37- Food Storage, 
 Warehousing and Civil 
 Supplies 
 
 
2408 
 
 
12.72 
 
 
23.97 
 
 
53 
9 38- Welfare of Scheduled 
 Castes/Scheduled Tribes & 
 OBCs etc. 
 
 
2225 
 
 
273.43 
 
 
368.33 
 
 
74 
10 39- Social Security, Welfare 
 and Nutrition 
 
2236 
 
254.07 
 
314.94 
 
81 
11 41- Natural Calamities 2245 517.07 622.39 83 
12 42- Social Services 2070 17.88 20.23 88 
13  48 - Agriculture  2401  296.44  398.57  74  
14 53- Dairy Development 2404 12.48 20.78 60 
15 54- Fisheries 2405 28.98 46.27 63 
16 56- Rural Development 
 (Panchayat) 
 
2515 
 
243.67 
 
396.24 
 
62 
17 58- Industries 2852 
4885 
10.52 
12.50 
17.04 
16.03 
62 
78 
18 62- Power (Electricity) 2801 
6801 
10.79 
27.34 
11.78 
40.34 
92 
68 
19 64- Roads and Bridges 5054 378.97 603.87 63 
20 65- Tourism 5452 12.45 16.45 76 
21 66- Compensation and 
 Assignment to Local 
 Bodies and Panchayati Raj 
 Institutions 
 
 
 
3604 
 
 
 
378.91 
 
 
 
549.89 
 
 
 
69 

Appendices 
 37 
 
22 69-Scientific Services and 
     Research  
3425 12.54 18.30 69 
23 Public Debt and Servicing of 
Debt 
6004 162.76 220.11 74 
24 25-Miscellaneour General 
     Services 
2075 1412.11 1412.11 100 
25  72 -Relief and Rehabilitation  2235  68.13  96.81  70  
26 73-Urban Development 
     (GDD) 
2217 59.87 89.78 67 
27 75-Information Technology 4859 22.23 24.09 92 
28 76-Hill Areas Department 
     (KAAC) 
2515 
4702 
32.83 
43.63 
37.09 
62.09 
89 
70 
 
 

Audit Report on Internal Controls and Risk Management for the  year ended 31 March 2010 
 38 
 
 
Appendix –III 
(Reference to paragraph – 3.5: Page-10) 
Misappropriation/Fraud/Embezzlement as reported in the Inspection Reports 
Sl. 
No 
IR No/Para Period of 
audit 
Name of unit  Period of 
Inspection 
Brief particulars Money 
value  
(` In crore)  
Reply 
Education Department 
1. IC-II/33-8/09-10/ 
Pt-IIA/Para 1 
2/06 to 5/09 District 
Elementary 
Education Officer 
(DEEO) Dhemaji 
3.6.09 to 15.6.09 
Misappropriation of `5.15 lakh 
In violation of rule 95 of AFR the cash book was no t closed on 
31.1.06 by the erstwhile deceased cashier. The cash  book was 
started by the new cashier from 15.2.06 with closin g bank 
balance. Audit found a discrepancy of `5,15,402 in the closing 
balance. The DEEO during discussion (June 2009) ass ured to 
investigate the matter. No reply was however, recei ved as of 
March 2010. 
0.05  
Reply not 
furnished 
(Aug 2010) 
2. 
IC-II/33-8/09-10/ 
Pt-IIA/Para 2 
2/06 to 5/09 
 District Elementary 
Education Officer 
(DEEO) Dhemaji 
3.6.09 to 15.6.09 Suspected misappropriation of `4.40 lakh 
In violation of Rule 95 of AFR `9.60 lakh being scholarship 
money drawn in March 2007 was not entered in the ca sh book 
of DEEO. Subsequently, `2.70 lakh was disbursed and `2.50 
lakh was deposited into DDO’s account. Rest `4.40 lakh was 
neither refunded nor disbursed resulting in misappropriation. 
0.04 Reply not 
furnished  
(Aug 2010)  
3. IAB/SSA/1-6/08-09/ 
Para 2/Pt-IIB 
2001-02 to 
2006-07 
DMC, SSA, 
Golaghat 
9.6.08 to 20.6.08 Suspected misappropriation of `1.33 lakh 
In violation of Rule 95 of AFR money en-cashed (May -June 
2002) from bank thorough four self-cheques amountin g to 
`1,33,260 were not entered in the cash book. Voucher s and 
APRs were also not available resulting in misappropriation. 
0.01 Reply not 
furnished  
(Aug 2010)  

Appendices 
 39 
4. IAB/SSA/1-12/08-09/ 
Para 7/Pt-IIB 
2002-03 to 
2006-07 
DMC, SSA, 
Goalpara 
11.8.08 to 26.8.08 Misappropriation of `1.24 lakh 
The LDA cum Accountant of the office of the Block M ission 
Co-ordinator Lakhipur drew (November 2004 to Januar y 2005) 
excess amount of `1.24 lakh by manipulating the amounts of 
five cheques and cash in hand of `14,000. Subsequently `0.45 
lakh was recovered leaving a balance of `0.79 lakh yet to be 
recovered. 
0.01  
Reply not 
furnished  
(Aug 2010)  
Panchayat and Rural Development Department 
5. IAB/DRDA/2-4/2009-10/ 
Para 3/Pt-IIB 
2006-07  to 
2007-08 
PD, DRDA, 
Morigaon 
29.5.09 to 30.6.09 Reported misappropriation of Govt. money `51.51 lakh  
Secretary Dhupguri Gaon Panchyat under BDO Lahorigh at 
went on leave from July 2008 without handing over r ecords to 
the President. Subsequently, the officials of Lahor ighat 
Anchalik Panchayat detected misappropriation of `10.20 lakh 
(2007-08) and lodged FIR. Audit found that apart fr om `10.20 
lakh, `61.27 lakh was also received by the Gaon Panchyat under 
different schemes of which `19.96 lakh was lying in Bank 
Account.  However, no records in support of utiliza tion of 
`41.31 lakh was shown to audit resulting in misappro priation of 
total amount of `51.51 lakh ( `41.31 lakh + `10.20 lakh). 
0.52  
 
 
 
 
Reply not 
furnished  
(Aug 2010)  
6. IAB/DRDA/2-8/07-08/ 
Para 1/Pt IIA 
2005-06 to 
2006-07 
PD DRDA, 
Golaghat 
29.5.09 to 30.6.09  
Embezzlement of SGRY fund of `2.01 crore 
Orders for supply of 3.10 lakh M.R. forms and 0.50 lakh M.B.s 
were given to a non-existent supplier and payment o f `25 lakh 
was also made in October 2006. However supply was n ot 
received and amount was suspected to be embezzled.  
0.25 Reply not 
furnished  
(Aug 2010)  
7. LBAA/1-8/09-10  
Para 5 (B) 
 
4/04 to 3/09 Dhemaji ZP  22.2.10 to 8.3.10 In violation of Rule 78 & 79 of Assam Fiinancial Ru le, `3.33 
lakh out of `12.33 lakh received from BDO, Morkengstek 
Tribal Development Block on 16.01.09 was shown as s pent 
without any voucher or APRs in the cash book. The C EO stated 
(March 2010) that voucher would be produced but no reply had 
been received. 
0.03 Reply not 
furnished  
(A ug 2010) 

Audit Report on Internal Controls and Risk Management for the  year ended 31 March 2010 
 40 
8. LBAA/1-8/09-10  
Para 5 (B)  
4/04 to 3/09 Dhemaji ZP 22.2.10 to 8.3.10  Rupees four lakh was paid to the President and CEO of the ZP 
in July 2004 without any recorded reason. Another p ayment of 
`2.50 lakh was reflected in the cash book in July 20 04 without 
recording the purpose of expenditure and particular s of payee. 
Vouchers and APRs were not available for the total amount of 
`6.50 lakh. According to the record the amounts ( `6.50 lakh) 
were drawn by the accountant of the Zilla Parishad with the 
intention to deposit it in a particular account. Ho wever, till date 
of audit (February – March 2010) the amounts were n ot 
returned. 
0.07 Reply not 
furnished  
(Aug 2010)  
9. LBAA/1-8/09-10  
Para 5 (B) 
 
4/04 to 3/09 Dhemaji ZP 22.2.10 to 8.3.10  Expenditure of ` 38.38 lakh, during the period from February 
2007 to February 2009 (under NREGS), was incurred o n 
procurement and installation of Hand Tube wells (HT W). But 
the report regarding installation of HTW was not pr oduced to 
audit. Neither any completion certificate nor relat ed 
measurement books were shown to audit. Bills, vouch ers and 
APRs also were not shown to audit. 
 
0.38 
Reply not 
furnished  
(Aug 2010)  
10. LBAA/1-4/9-10/2073-78  
Para 1 
4/06 to 3/09 Kamrup ZP 4.9.09 to 18.9.09 The amount of `74 lakh was shown as advances paid to four ZP 
officials on 30.3.07 under SGRY. As per auditors (C A) report 
(12.07.07) the amount was not adjusted till that da te and treated 
by the auditor as advance. Subsequently, the amount  was 
recorded in the cash book as adjusted by mentioning  the date of 
adjustment as 31.03.2007. But neither voucher refer ence nor 
dates of voucher were recorded against the adjustme nt entries. 
Even the names of works against which adjustments w ere made 
were not recorded. In course of audit in September 2009 (i.e. 
after two and half years of adjustment) related records like MBs, 
MR vouchers, in support of the adjustment were not produced 
to audit. No advance register was maintained to wat ch recovery/ 
adjustments of advances. The CEO stated (September 2009) that 
advance register will be maintained and records wil l be 
produced to next audit. The CEO in an interim reply  (October 
2009) stated that pursuant to audit observation adv ance register 
and adjustment register have been maintained.  
Reply to the inspection report issued in December 2 009 
however, had not been received.  
0.74 Reply not 
furnished  
(Aug 2010)  
 

Appendices 
 41 
 
 
11. LBAA/1-4/9-10/2073-78  
Para 2 
4/06 to 3/09 Kamrup ZP 4.9.09 to 18.9.09  `5.70 lakh was released by the CEO, Kamrup ZP to the  BDO, 
Boko Development Block on 31.01.2008 under SGRY 200 7-
08. The cheque was debited to the BDO on 29.03.2008. But as 
per auditors report the amount was not taken to BDO ’s 
account (12.10.2008). The CEO, Kamrup ZP did not ta ke 
action/carry out any investigation and stated (Sept ember 
2009) that the matter would be verified and intimat ed. The 
CEO in an interim reply (October 2009) stated that the 
concerned BDO was asked to clarify the matter. 
Reply to the inspection report, issued in December 2009, 
however, had not been received (May 2010). An audit  party 
was deputed in January 2010 to conduct audit of the  accounts 
of BDO, Boko, but no record was produced to audit. The 
matter of non-production of records was intimated t o the 
Government in March 2010. 
0.06 Reply not furnished 
(Aug 2010) 
12. LBAA/IR/MZP/08-09 
Para 8 
4/02 to 3/07 Morigaon ZP  26.12.08 to 8.1.09 Doubtful procurement of Hand Tube Well for Rupees o ne 
lakh in August 2007. Materials were neither entered  in the 
stock book nor stock certificate recorded in the bo dy of the 
bill. List of beneficiary, records showing place of  installing 
the HTW were not made available to audit. 
0.01 Reply not furnished 
(Aug 2010) 
13. LBAA/IR/1-5/09-
10/3113-18 Para 12 
4/02 to 3/09  Hailakandi ZP 26.12.08 to 8.1.09  Director, P&RD, Assam released `5.65 lakh vide letter No. 
DRD-12P/22/2007-08/134 dt. 30.5.08 (Bank draft No. 569364 
dt. 26.5.08) and the amount was paid to ZP members for 
distribution to 565 selected SHGs @ `100 per SHG under 
Assam Vikash Yojana. APRs in support of receipt of the 
amount by the SHGs were not available. Utilisation 
Certificates had also not been sent to Director, P&RD Assam. 
0.06 Reply not furnished 
(Aug 2010) 
14. 
 
 
APLBAA/2-8/09-10  
Para 3 
4/06 to 3/09 Chamaria Dev. 
Block 
5.9.09  To 
16.09.09 
 
 
`24.29 lakh was spent in March 2008 for purchase of 1,699 
sprayers. But delivery challans/bills cash memos et c. and 
stock register in support of receipt of materials w ere not 
produced to audit. 
0.24 Reply not furnished 
(Aug 2010) 
 

Audit Report on Internal Controls and Risk Management for the  year ended 31 March 2010 
 42 
15. AP LBAA/2-13/09-
10/3139-44 Para 5 
4/02 to 3/09 
Kaliapani Dev. 
Block 
12.11.09 to 
20.11.09 
Doubtful payment of wages for `85,119 was made based on 
muster roll. Scrutiny of muster rolls revealed that  during 
March – April 2009 expenditure of `85,119 was made 
without obtaining signatures of the labourers in su pport of 
disbursement of wages. 
0.01 Reply not 
furnished 
(Aug 
2010) 
16. LBAA/2-6/09-10/2743-
48  
Para 1 
4/07 to 3/09 Katlichera Dev. 
Block/AP 
5.8.09 to 12.08.09 
 
An amount of `16 lakh was drawn by the BDO on 27.2.2009 
through self-cheque and paid to a Junior Engineer o n 
28.02.2009 for construction of 64 IAY houses. Howev er, no 
supporting vouchers/APRs were shown to audit regard ing 
construction of above houses. During discussion the  BDO 
stated that reply would be submitted in due course.  However, 
no reply was received. 
0.16 Reply not 
furnished 
(Aug 
2010) 
Health and Family Welfare Department  
17. IC-I/10-28/09-10/ 
Para 1/Pt-IIB 
5/2000 to 
10/2009 
Addl. CM&HO 
(FW) Morigaon 
4.12.09 to 
15.12.09 
Suspected misappropriation of `3.50 lakh 
`1,81,524 withdrawn from bank through five cheques d uring 
January 2007 to March 2007 for routine immunization , were 
not entered in the cash book. Further, out `70,000 drawn from 
bank in March 2008, only `11,000 was entered in the cash 
book leaving  `59,000 out of account. Thus, total amount of 
`2.41 lakh drawn from bank remained unaccounted for 
leading to misappropriation. Besides, `1.09 lakh, being the 
closing balance on 27.6.2003, was not taken as open ing 
balance of the next day resulting in further misapp ropriation 
of `1.09 lakh. 
0.03 
 
Reply not 
furnished 
(Aug 
2010) 
18. IC-I/10-34/09-10/ 
Para 5/Pt-IIB 
10/07 to 
12/09 
Joint DHS 
(including DMO) 
Kamrup 
20.1.10 to 1.2.10 Misappropriation of `1.03 lakh 
While carrying forward the closing cash balance of 
`3,94,934.86 as on 31.10.2009 to the next day’s (1.1 1.2009) 
opening balance, it was erroneously recorded as `2,91,787.86 
(less by `1,03,147). The error was not detected as physical 
verification of cash was not done and subsequently the 
amount was misappropriated. 
0.01 Reply not 
furnished 
(Aug 
2010) 
 

Appendices 
 43 
Commerce and Industries Department 
19. IC-II/23-4/09-10/ 
Para 4/Pt IIB 
8/05 to 6/09 
G.M. District 
Industries & 
Commerce, 
Kokrajhar 
8.7.09 to 16.7.09 Suspected misappropriation of `60.38 lakh 
`60.38 lakh, received from Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC), 
Kokrajhar between March 2008 to August 2008, was no t 
entered in the cash book even after more than one y ear from the 
dates of receipt. 
0.60 Reply 
not 
furnished 
(Aug 
2010) 
Public Health and Engineering Department 
20. WA-II/PHE-16/08-09  
Para 1 
08/04 to 
08/08 
E.E Howraghat 
PHE Division 
21.11.08 to 
03.12.08 
Fraudulent drawal of `1.20 crore 
In violation of Rule 95, Rule 78 and Rule 79 of AFR , 
`1,20,39,000 were drawn from Diphu Treasury in Janua ry and 
February 2005 in 26 cheques by forging the signatur e of the 
Executive Engineer, Howraghat. There were no vouchers, APRs 
or entry in Cash Book. Cheque books were in the cus tody of the 
Accounts officer who was placed under suspension. 
In reply the matter was stated to be under investigation. 
1.20 Reply 
not 
furnished 
(Aug 
2010) 
Public Works Department  
21 WA-II/PWD (R)-4/08-09 
Para-10 
12/06  to 
01/08 
E.E. Sarupathar 
Rural Road 
Division 
21.04.08 to  
03.05.08 
Double drawal of  `0.56 lakh 
In violation of Rule 95, Rule 78 and Rule 79 of AFR  pay and 
allowances amounting to `56,000 for the month of August 2007 
were drawn (09/2007 and 10/2007) twice by the AEE a nd AE 
by making two separate salary bills. 
0.01 Reply 
not 
furnished 
(Aug 
2010) 
22 WA-II/Bldg-2/09-10  
Para 5 
07/07 to 
05/09 
E.E. North 
Lakhimpur PWD 
Building Division 
09-07-09 to  
21-07-09 
Fraudulent drawal of `3.27 lakh 
In violation of Rule 95, Rule 78 and Rule 79 of AFR  temporary 
GPF advances of `3.27 lakh were drawn from Dhemaji 
Treasury during 2004 and 2005 by a Sectional Assist ant in 
respect of 20 employees of the office by using dupl icate office 
seal and forging the signature of office staff and DDO. An FIR 
was lodged by the Treasury Officer, Dhemaji against  him and 
subsequently he was placed under suspension. 
0.03 Reply 
not 
furnished 
(Aug 
2010) 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report on Internal Controls and Risk Management for the  year ended 31 March 2010 
 44 
 
Urban Development Department  
23. LBAA/5-8/09-10/ 
3145-49 Para 9 (b) 
9/02 to 3/09 Morigaon MB, 3.11.09 to 
20.11.09 
Suspected misappropriation of `1.20 lakh 
Town & Country Planning released `1.20 lakh under Integrated 
Development of Small and Medium Towns to Morigaon 
Municipal Board, but the amount was neither recorde d in the 
cash book nor reflected in bank pass book/bank stat ement. The 
Chairman of the Morigaon MB during discussion state d that the 
matter would be verified and intimated to audit. No  intimation 
received so far. 
0.01 Reply 
not 
furnished 
(Aug 
2010) 
Total 4.53  
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
 45 
Appendix – IV 
(Reference to Paragraph 4.2; Page-14) 
Statement showing the amount paid in excess of bill value passed for payment 
 (In `) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the 
contractor 
Bill 
value 
Passed 
for 
payment 
Amount 
paid 
including 
deductions  
Excess 
payment 
Vr. No. 
and date 
Cheque No. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 (Col.5-4)  7 8 
1 Miukul Kalita 1,97,761 19,7000 4,50,000 2,53,000 296 
dt.7/2/07 383895/7678 
2 Ikram Hussain 1,97,000 1,96,000 3,00,000 1,04,000 286  
dt.7/2/07 383886/7678 
3 Md.Imdad 2,67,776 2,67,000 9,98,900 7,31,900 292  
dt.7/2/07 383892/7678 
4 Dil Ahmed 1,99,904 1,99,000 2,00,000 1,000 304  
dt.7/2/07 383952/7680 
5 Lakhi Saikia 28,055 25,000 31,460 6,460 463  
dt.8/2/07 383900/7658 
6 Mehboob 
Hussain 1,28,003 1,27,000 5,00,000 3,73,000 408 & 409 
dt.7/2/07 382860/7658 
7 Pradip Ghose 46,916 25,000 50,000 25,000 436  
dt.8/2/07 382873/7658 
8 Har Gobinda 
Mahanta 33,800 30,000 1,00,000 70,000 287  
dt.7/2/07 383887/7678 
9 Mrigen 
Bhagawati 27,72,661 25,00,000 36,95,814 11,95,814 474  
dt.8/2/07 382961/7660 
10 Dipti Pd. Borah 30,383 19,600 19,627 27 105  
dt.7/2/07 383711/7675 
11 Suren Borah 27,000 23,000 25,000 2,000 426  
dt.19/3/05 332006/6641 
Total 39,29,259 36,08,600 63,70,801 27,62,201   
 

Appendices 
 46 
 
Appendix-V 
(Reference to Paragraph - 4.3; Page-15) 
Statement showing the details of wanting vouchers 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Contractor 
Name of work Chainage Net 
Payment 
(`) 
Gross 
Payment 
(`) 
Vr 
No 
Date 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
1 Pranab Ranjan 
Bhattacharjee 
O/E   8,000  8,000  7 11-Mar-05  
2 Arun Borah S/C D3 3486-3516M 7,296  8,000  176  19-Mar-05  
3 Mohendra Nath S/C D3 326-350M 5,472  6,000  257  19-Mar-05  
4 Durlov Hazarika  S/C D1  152 -166M  4,560  5,000  329  19 -Mar -05  
5 Ankur Biswakarma  S/C D2M2  81 -108M  6,384  7,000  392  19 -Mar -05  
6 Mahendra Nath  S/C D3  8095 -8116m  3,648  4,000  399  19 -Mar -05  
7 Lalit Kalita  S/C D3M1  1710 -1740M  9,120  10,000  584  21 -Mar -05  
8 Rajesh Daimari Aqueduct D3 1950M 22,500  25,250  592  21-Mar-05  
9 Jayanta Sarmah B/C D1M2   44,500  50,000  708  21-Mar-05  
10 Neebul Enterprise Reequip. M/C 1002-1030M 2,22,500  2,50,000  776  21-Mar-05  
Sub-total   3,33,980  3,73,250      
11  Bhabani Saikia  C/D at D3M3    39,761  44,675  51  6-Feb -07  
12  Bhabani Saikia  S/C at D3    18,152  19,903  52  6-Feb -07  
13  Kulendra Kalita  S/C at D1    59,630  67,000  60  6-Feb -07  
14 Bhabani Saikia S/C at D1   22,250  25,000  80  6-Feb-07  
15 Dip Newar S/C at Main Canal   2,670  2,927  120  7-Feb-07  
16 Prabin Ozah S/C at Main Canal   22,250  25,000  136  7-Feb-07  
17 Binoy Basumatary S/C at Main Canal   81,702  91,800  141  7-Feb-07  
18 Pronoy Basumatary B/C at Main Canal   54,418  61,144  150  7-Feb-07 
19  Gurin Phukan  River Diversion    4,00,500  4,50,000  151  7-Feb -07  
20 Lakhi Balu S/C at Main Canal   600  600  202  7-Feb-07  
21 Suresh Ghatraj B/C at Main Canal   1,95,800  2,20,000  214  7-Feb-07  
22 Pranab Ranjan Bhatta  C.C.L. at Main 
Canal 
  38,30,920  44,00,000  218  7-Feb-07  
23 Rajen Saikia S/C at Main Canal   44,567  50,075  220  7-Feb-07  
24 Sunil Dawka RGB   4,107  4,503  241  7-Feb-07  
25 Sunil Dawka RGB   3,860  4,015  247  7-Feb-07  
26 Sunil Dawka RGB   2,274  2,365  248  7-Feb-07  
27 Sunil Dawka RGB   3,995  4,162 249  7-Feb-07  
28 Sunil Dawka RGB   8,081  8,418  250  7-Feb-07  
29 Gurin Phukan Log Clearance & 
Levelling 
  9,79,000  11,00,000  251  7-Feb-07  
30 Gurin Phukan S/C at Main Canal   6,23,498  7,00,560  252  7-Feb-07  
31 Anwar Zmam S/C at D1 2160-2306M 4,08,376  4,58,850  257  7-Feb-07  
32 Jewel Chakravarty S/C at Main Canal 7872-7884M 7,477  8,400  275  7-Feb-07  
33 Jewel Chakravarty S/C at Main Canal   11,542  12,968  276  7-Feb-07  
34  Rainbow Enterprise  B/C at Main Canal    2,67,000  3,00,000  279  7-Feb -07  
 
 

Appendices 
 47 
 
1 2 3 4  5 6 7 8 
35  Largus Guria  Improv. at D1    13,449  14,747  280  7-Feb -07  
36  Dharmananda Borah  B/C at Main Canal    1,33,500  1,50,000  293  7-Feb -07  
37  Ugam Chand  Improv. at D1    62,300  70,000  297  7-Feb -07  
38  Ratul Hazarika  S/C at Main Canal    1,92,631  2,16,439  303  8-Feb -07  
39  Kamala Baishya  C.C.L. at Main 
Canal 
  12,65,000  15,00,000  305  8-Feb -07  
40  Neebul Enterprise  Log Clearance    24,18,881  26,93,125  306  8-Feb -07  
41 Neebul Enterprise Bld. (Rest House)   6,09,700  6,50,000  308  8-Feb-07  
42 Gaurisankar Deka S/C at Main Canal   20,025  22,500  311  8-Feb-07  
43 Gaurisankar Deka Inspection Path   9,34,500  10,50,000  313  8-Feb-07  
44 Gaurisankar Deka ???   1,78,587  1,98,232  314  8-Feb-07  
45 Khirod Das RGB   7,71,824  8,67,220  316  8-Feb-07  
46 Ashik Xerox Centre S/C at D1   7,850  7,850  331  8-Feb-07  
47 Ashik Xerox Centre S/C at D1   4,900  4,900  332  8-Feb-07  
48 Ashik Xerox Centre RGB   1,430  1,430  333  8-Feb-07  
49 Ashik Xerox Centre RGB   9,420  9,420  334  8-Feb-07  
50  Ashik Xerox Centre  RGB    7,155  7,155  335  8-Feb -07  
51  Dutta X erox  S/C at D1    2,840  2,840  340  8-Feb -07  
52  Dutta Xerox  RGB    2,468  2,468  341  8-Feb -07  
53  Dutta Xerox  S/C at D1    4,742  4,742  342  8-Feb -07  
54  Dutta Xerox  RGB    2,700  2,700  343  8-Feb -07  
55 Dutta Xerox RGB   3,069  3,069  344  8-Feb-07  
56 Tezpur Conting RGB   2,365  2,365  345  8-Feb-07  
57 Tarun Kalita B/C at Main Canal   5,19,109  5,92,167  358  8-Feb-07  
58 Dipen Baruah C.C. at D3   23,875  26,825  369  8-Feb-07  
59  Tapan Das  Improv. at D1    6,384  7,000  370  8-Feb -07  
60  Bhanu Saikia  S/C at D1M2    10,944  12,000  373  8-Feb -07  
61  Horen Borah  B/C at Main Canal    1,05,352  1,18,373  382  8-Feb -07  
62  Bhabani Saikia  C/D at D3    50,000  56,180  383  8-Feb -07  
63 Fariuddin Ahmed Improv. at D3 Canal    1,02,400  1,15,000  395  8-Feb-07  
64  Samsul Hoque  S/C at D1    4,560  5,000  397  8-Feb -07  
65 Phunu Hazarika B/C at Main Canal   3,41,693  3,79,279  407  8-Feb-07  
66 Kaji Abdul Hai C.C.L. at D1M2   6,67,300  7,70,000  413  8-Feb-07  
67 Rimpuraj Sutradhar B/C at Main Canal   2,84,800  3,20,000  414  8-Feb-07  
68 Rimpuraj Sutradhar B/C at Main Canal   71,200  80,000  415  8-Feb-07  
69 Rajen Basumatary B/C at Main Canal   16,964  19,060  419  8-Feb-07  
70 Ghana Kt. Borah B/C at Main Canal   2,00,000  2,24,720  420  8-Feb-07  
71 Prasanta Das Improv. of D1   13,600  15,280  438  8-Feb-07  
72 Nilamoni Borah Improv. of D3M2   10,12,000  11,37,070  440  8-Feb-07  
73 Bipul Borah C/D at D2   44,500  50,000  441  8-Feb-07  
74 Rupjyoti Saikia S/C at Main Canal   13,680  15,000  442  8-Feb-07  
75  Nipak Bharali  S/C at Main Canal    9,120  10,000  443  8-Feb -07  
76  Kedar Singh  ???    44 ,500  50,000  444  8-Feb -07  
77  Niranjan Saikia  S/C at Main Canal    26,700  30,000  445  8-Feb -07  
78  Khanjan Saikia  S/C at Main Canal    17,800  20,000  446  8-Feb -07  
79  Jaan Sarmah  S/C at Main Canal    17,800  20,000  451  8-Feb -07  

Appendices 
 48 
 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
80  Digen Das  S/C at D2    11,856  13,000  452  8-Feb -07  
81  Bibek Deka  S/C at D1   35,600  40,000  455  8-Feb -07  
82  Piyush Kanti Das  S/C at Main Canal   44,500  50,000  457  8-Feb -07  
83  Chandan Hazarika  S/C at Main Canal   32,040  36,000  460  8-Feb -07  
84 Nasar Ali S/C at Main Canal  9,120  10,000 462 8-Feb-07 
85 Samir Kakoti B/C at Main Canal  1,33,000  1,49,438 464 8-Feb-07 
86 Pranjal Saikia S/C at Main Canal  3,73,800  4,20,000 466 8-Feb-07 
87 Diganta Borah S/C at Main Canal  44,500  50,000 473 8-Feb-07 
88 Nilamoni Borah S/C at Main Canal  3,56,000  4,00,000 475 8-Feb-07 
89 Pradip Ghose River Diversion  2,67,000  3,00,000 476 8-Feb-07 
90 Khirod Das S/C at Main Canal  4,45,000  5,00,000 477 8-Feb-07 
91 Ashraf Ali Ansari Escape Channel  3,56,000  4,00,000 482 8-Feb-07 
92 Ashraf Ali Ansari Escape Channel  3,56,000  3,90,857 483 8-Feb-07 
Sub-total  1,98,10,463 2,23,75,816   
Total  2,01,44,443  2,27,49,066    
 
 
 

 49 
Appendix VI 
(Reference to paragraph 4.6 Page-17) 
 
Statement showing the details of DCR in which particulars of drawal were not produced  
Year Sl.  
No 
DCR No Date Amount Name 
of 
bank 
Branch Particulars 
of drawal 
Total 
(In `) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
1992-93 
1 DL773345 31/3/93 70000 SBI DO Not available  
78223 
2 DL804196 3/3/1993 3223 SBI DO Not available 
3 DL773241 
7th 
Jan,1993 5000 SBI DO 
No t available  
1993-94 
4 DL804100 24-6-93 200 SBI DO Not available 
88021 
5 DL804006 8/4/1993 5000 SBI DO Not available  
6 DL804252 5/11/1993 7821 SBI DO Not available 
7 DL804356 28/2/94 75000 SBI DO Not available 
1994-95 
8 DL804536 27/4/94 5917 SBI DO Not available 
30891 
9 DL804929 31/12/94 739 SBI DO Not available 
10 DL80737 1/8/1994 3095 SBI DO Not available 
11 DL804839 21/10/94 10140 SBI DO Not available 
12 J0801182 18/4/95 11000 SBI DO Not available 
1995-96 
13 J801569 18/01/96 2280 SBI DO Not available 
206282 
14 J801305 29/6/95 5292 SBI DO Not available  
15 J801337 25/7/95 7669 SBI DO Not available 
16 J801429 18/9/95 761 SBI DO Not available  
17   2/8/1995 71201 SBI DO Not available 
18 J801513 
12th 
Dec,95 119079 SBI DO 
No t available  
1996-97 
19 DL802185 4/5/1996 16871 SBI DO Not available 
333553 
20 J801926 6/4/1996 4844 SBI DO Not available  
21 J801917 2/4/1996 449 SBI DO Not available 
22 J802184 4/5/1996 270000 SBI DO Not available  
23 J802489 5/11/1996 23444 SBI DO Not available 
24 J802617 4/2/1997 7828     Not available  
25 J802784 11/4/1997 117 SBI DO Not available 
26 J802615 3/2/1997 10000 SBI DO Not available 
1997-98 
27 J803678 18-9-98 3000 SBI DO Not available 
53000 28 J803515 9/6/1998 50000 SBI DO Not available 
1999-
2000 
29 J804080 15-6-99 26800 SBI DO Not available 
27020 30 J804425 25-2-2000 220 SBI DO Not available 
2000-01 
31 J804782 29-9-2000 78979 SBI DO Relief  
96595 32 938 30/1/01 17616 
Prag-
jyotish 
Gaonlia 
Bank 
(PGB ) 
Kokra-
jhar Not available 

 50 
 
 
2001-02 
33 J805148 18-8-01 154623 SBI DO 
BAC 
ELECTION 
176129 
34 J805209 29-10-01 6000 SBI DO Not availab le  
35 J805357 4/3/2002 15506 SBI DO Not available 
2002-03 
36 J805704 5/12/2002 13000 SBI DO Not available  
221871 
37 J805688 18-11-02 5000 SBI DO Not available 
38 J805440 3/5/2002 144 SBI DO Not available 
39 J805868 25-3-03 193727 SBI DO Relief 
40 J805790 14-2-03 10000 SBI DO Not available 
2003-04 
41 DM768087 7/10/2003 60000 SBI DO Relief 
145000 
42 DM768059 16-9-03 10000 SBI DO Not available 
43 DM768111 7/11/2003 25000 SBI DO Not available 
44 J805995 11/7/2003 5000 SBI DO Not available 
45 J805916 12/5/2003 10000 SBI DO Not available  
46 DM768242 11/3/2004 5000 SBI DO Not available 
47 DM768162 8/1/2004 30000 SBI DO Not available  
2004-05 
48 DM768372 30-7-04 30126 SBI DO Relief 
1299084 
49 DM768479 14-10-04 15000 SBI DO Not a vailable  
50 DM768352 13-7-04 25000 SBI DO Not available 
51 DM768776 28-3-05 69000 SBI DO Ex -gratia  
52 DM768699 4/3/2005 30000 SBI DO Not available 
53 DM768655 15-2-05 6000 SBI DO Not available 
54 DM768629 5/2/2005 38958 SBI DO 
Computerisati 
on of land 
records 
55 DM768607 15-1-05 85000 SBI DO Relief 
56 DM769741 23-3-05 1000000 SBI DO Not available 
2005-06 
57 DM769000 12/7/2005 15000 SBI DO Relief 
120114 
58 DM769421 9/12/2005 20000 SBI   Ex-gratia 
59 DM769229 15-9-05 10000 SBI   Ex -gratia  
60 DM769134 16-8-05 25000 SBI DO Relief 
61 DM769103 8/8/2005 10000 SBI DO Relief  
62 DM768999 12/7/2005 34 SBI DO Not available 
63 DM769498 17-1-06 80 SBI DO Not available  
64 DM769495 13-1-06 10000 SBI DO 
Relief 
(exgratia) 
65  DM7696 53  13 -3-06  10000  SBI  DO  Ex -gratia  
66 DM769699 23-3-06 5000 SBI DO  (exgratia) 
67 DM769570 16-2-06 15000 SBI DO Not available 
2006-07 
68 DM770352 7/12/2006 279826 SBI DO Not available 
3088821 
69 DM770366 15-12-06 30000 SBI DO Ex-gratia 
70 DM770132 18-8-06 45000 SBI DO Ex-gratia 
71 DM770194 11/9/2006 5000 SBI DO Ex-gratia 
72  DM770221  20 -9-06  5900  SBI  DO  Relief  
73  DM770146  29 -8-06  197000  SBI  DO  CRF  
74 DM770293 2/11/2006 976074 SBI DO 2245 (Nc) 

 51 
 
 
 
 
75 DM769516 25-1-06 10000 SBI DO 
Relief 
(exgratia) 
 
76 DM769936 23-6-06 750600 SBI DO CRF 
77  DM770124  10/8/2006  10000  SBI  DO  Not available  
78 DM770307 8/11/2006 421 SBI DO Not available 
79  DM770556  14 -3-07  5000  SBI  DO  Ex -gratia  
80 DM770423 1/2/2007 750000 SBI DO RKG 
81 DM770448 12/2/2007 15000 SBI DO Ex-gratia 
82 DM770452 14-2-07 9000 SBI DO Relief 
2007-08 
83 DM770972 12/6/2007 430000 SBI DO CRF 
1007481 
84 DM771053 19-7-07 20000 SBI DO Ex-gratia 
85  DM771114  28 -8-07  5000  SBI  DO  Ex -gratia  
86 DM771115 28-8-07 5000 SBI DO Ex -gratia  
87 DM771132 12/9/2007 458470 SBI DO CRF 
88  DM771263  5/11/2007  84000  SBI  DO  Mid -day -Meal  
89 DM770656 29-3-07 5000 SBI DO Not available 
90 DM770918 4/6/2007 11 SBI DO Not available ) 
2008-09 
91 DM771930 19-8-08 4314511 SBI DO CRF 
5418943 
92 DM771984 10th Oct,08 25432 SBI DO 
2235-Central 
relief 
93 DM771749 25-4-08 100000 SBI DO 2245-Ex-gratia 
94 DM514991 14-11-08 105000 SBI DO Ex-gratia 
95 32119 17-2-09 874000 SBI DO 
Computerisati 
on of land 
records 
2009-10 96 32577 7/7/2009 13613 SBI DO 
undisbursed 
pay 13613 
Total 12404641 Total 12404641 

 52 
Appendix VII 
(Reference to paragraph 4.6 Page- 17) 
Statement showing the details of DCR in which particulars of drawal were not produced 
 
 
Sl NO. DCR No. and date Amount 
1 DL 804252 dated 5.11.1993 7,821 
2 DL 773241 dated 7.1.1993 5,000 
3 DL 804196 dated 3.3.1993 3,223 
4 DL 773345 dated 31.3.1993 70,000 
5 DL 804006 dated 8.4.1993 5,000 
6 DL 804356 dated 28.2.1994 75,000 
7 DL 804356 dated 27.4.1994 5,917 
8 DL 804737 dated 1.8.1994 3,095 
9 DL 804839 dated 21.10.1994 10,140 
10 J 801182 dated 18.4.1995 11,000 
11 J 801305 dated 29.6.95 5,292 
12 J 801337 dated 25.7.1995 7,669 
13 J 801356 dated 2.8.1995 71,201 
14 J 801573 dated 12.12.1995 1,19,079 
15 J 801569 dated 18.1.1996 2,280 
16 J 801926 dated 6.4.1996 4,844 
17 J 802185 dated 4.5.1996 16,871 
18  J 802184 dated 4.5.1996  2,70,000  
19 J 802489 dated 5.11.1996 23,444 
20 J 802615 dated 3.2.1997 10,000 
21 J 802617 dated 4.2.1997 7,828 
22 J 803515 dated 9.6.1998 50,000 
23 J 803679 dated 18.9.1998 3,000 
24 J 804080 dated 15.6.1999 26,800 
25  J 804782 dated 29.9.2000  78,979  
26 J 805148 dated 18.8.2001 1,54,623 
27 J 805209 dated 29.10.2001 6,000 
28 J 805357 dated 4.3.2002 15,506 
29 J 805688 dated 18.11.2002 5,000 
30 J 805704 dated 5.12.2002 13,000 
31 J 805868 dated 25.3.2003 1,93,727 
32 J 805790 dated 14.2.2003 10,000 
33 J 805916 dated 12.5.2003 10,000 
34 J 805995 dated 11.7.2003 5,000 
35 DM 768059 dated 16.9.2003 10,000 
36 DM 768057 dated 7.10.2003 60,000 
37 DM 768372 dated 30.7.2004 30,126 
38 DM 768162 dated 8.1.2004 30,000 
39 DM 768242 dated 11.3.2004 5,000 
40 DM 768352 dated 13.7.2004 25,000 
41 DM 768479 dated 14.10.2004 15,000 
42 DM 769570 dated 16.2.2006 15,000 
43 DM 769653 dated 13.3.2006 10,000 
44 DM 770124 dated 10.8.2006 10,000 
45 DM 770132 dated 16.8.2006 45,000 
46 DM 770146 dated 29.8.2006 1,97,000 
47  DM 770366 dated 15.12.2006  30,000  
48 DM 770556 dated 14.3.2007 5,000 
49 DM 771132 dated 12.9.2007 4,58,470 
50 DM 771115 dated 28.8.2007 5,000 
51 DM 771114 dated 28.8.2007 5,000 
52 DM 771053 dated 19.7.2007 20,000 
Total: 22,81,935 
 

 53 
 
Appendix VIII 
(Reference to paragraph 4.6 Page-17) 
Statement showing the loss of interest for retention of  unutilized fund in the form of DCR  
Sl. 
No 
Number 
of DCR 
Amount 
(In rupees) 
Year from 
which the 
amount 
retained 
Total Number of 
Years as on 
31/03/2010 
Minimum 
rate of 
interest on 
investment 
Total loss of 
interest on 
investment 
(In rupees) 
1 3 78223 1992-93 17 7.50% 1 99734 
2 4 88021 1993-94 16 7.50% 105625 
3 5 30891 1994-95 15 7.50% 34752 
4 6 206282 1995-96 14 7.50% 216596 
5 7 333436 1996-97 13 7.50% 325100 
6 1 117 1997-98 12 7.50% 105 
7 2 53000 1998-99 11 7.50% 43725 
8 2 27020 1999-2000 10 7.50% 20265 
9 2 96595 2000-01 9 9.34% 81198 
10 3 176129 2001-02 8 9.70% 136676 
11 5 221871 2002-03 7 9.82% 152514 
12 7 145000 2003-04 6 9.97% 86739 
13 9 1299084 2004-05 5 8.47% 550162 
14 12 130114 2005-06 4 8.18% 42573 
15 15 3083821 2006-07 3 7.66% 708662 
16 7 1002481 2007-08 2 7.14% 143154 
17 5 5418943 2008-09 1 6.76% 366320 
18 1 13613 2009-10 - 6.76% 0 
Total  96 12404641      31,13,900 
 
 
 
                                                
 
1 Minimum rate of interest on Government Borrowing is take n for 1992-93 to 1999-2000. 

 54 
Appendix –IX 
(Reference to paragraph -4.7 ; Page-18) 
Miscellaneous observations 
Sl. 
No. 
IR No/Para Period of 
audit 
Name of unit  Period of 
Inspection 
Brief particulars Money value 
(` in crore)  
Reply 
Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Department 
1. IC-II/31-08/09-10/Para 
1/Pt-IIB 
7/97 to 9/09 Manager, Govt. 
live stock farm, 
Barhampur, 
Nagaon 
21.10.09 to 
26.10.09 
Departmental receipts amounting to `7.32 lakh 
collected from sale proceeds of fodder and milk since 
prior to 2005-06 to 2009-10 spent for departmental 
expenditure in violation of Rule 7 of Assam Treasur y 
Rule. 
0.07 Reply not 
furnished 
(August 2010) 
Education Department 
2. IC-II/33-8/09-10/Pt-
IIB/Para 3 
2/06 to 5/09 District 
Elementary 
Education 
Officer (DEEO) 
Dhemaji 
3.6.09 to 
15.6.09 
As per TA Rules, LTC advance was required to be 
recovered in one installment if final bill is not 
submitted within one month of completing inward 
journey. LTC advance of `3.18 lakh disbursed to 18 
school teachers during January 2001 to November 
2005 were neither adjusted nor recovered and most 
of the teachers had either expired or retired. 
0.03 Reply not 
furnished 
(August 2010) 

 55 
Appendix- X 
(Reference to paragraph-6.3; Page-27) 
Statement showing payment details against unauthorized recordings in measurement book 
Sl. 
No.  
Voucher 
No. & dt. 
Voucher 
Amount ( `) 
Divisional Bill No. 
& date 
Name of Contractor Name of work Pay/ order  
 
(`) 
MB No. / Page No. 
1 479  
dt. 8/2/07 
12,47,190 896 dt. 10/2/07 Khirod Das River Diversio n to feed water 
to Main Canal Ch. 90 -180  
4,00,000  28 / Page 70-71 
899 dt. 10/2/07 Khirod Das River Diversion to feed water 
to Main Canal Ch. 0-90 
4,47,190  28 / Page 67-69 
900  dt. 10/2/07 Khirod Das Removal of Silt & debri s 
from the Bed of Main Canal 
Ch 8180 -8345  
4,00,000  544 / Page 180-182 
2 478  
dt. 8/2/07 
5,00,000 891 dt. 10/2/07 Khirod Das Removal of Silt and debris 
from the bed of Main Canal 
Ch.6130M- 6740M and 
Ch.8345M -8508M  
4,60,000  Not Mentioned in Voucher 
892 dt. 10/2/07 Khirod Das Removal of deposited silt 
from the bed of Main Canl 
Ch.4980 to 5010 M 
40,000  Not Mentioned in Voucher 
3 432  
dt. 8/2/07 
3,80,000 893 dt. 10/2/07 Abdul Kadir Khan  Removal of Silt deposited 
with debris from the bed of 
Main Canal Ch. 6145M-
6280M 
1,80,000 
 544 / Page 154-155 
895 dt. 10/2/07 Abdul Kadir Khan  Removal of Silt a nd debris 
from bed of Main Canal Ch. 
6280M-6460 
2,00,000 
 Not Mentioned in Voucher 
TOTAL 21,27,190   
 
  
 
 
 