 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General 
of India 
 
on 
 
 
 
 
 
Maintenance of track on heavy traffic sections  
over Indian Railways 
 
 
 
for the year ended March 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Laid in LokSabha/RajyaSabha on ___________ 
 
 
 
 
Union Government (Railways) 
No.45 of 2017 

Preface 
 
This Report has been prepared for submission to the President of India 
under Article 151 of the Constitution of India.   
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India contains the 
results of audit of ‘Maintenance of tracks on heavy traffic sections over 
Indian Railways’.  The instances mentioned in this Report are those which 
came to the notice in the course of test audit for the pe riod April 2016 to 
March 2017 as well as those which came to the notice in earlier years, but 
could not be reported in the previous Audit Reports.  
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 

 
Contents 
 
Particulars Para no. Page 
Abbreviations  i 
Executive Summary  ii 
Chapter 1: Introduction   
Track and its components 1.1 1 
Track maintenance  1.2 3 
Organizational Structure 1.3 6 
Audit Objectives 1.4 6 
Audit Criteria 1.5 6 
Audit scope, methodology and sample 1.6 7 
Acknowledgement  1.7 9 
Chapter 2: Planning and execution of track maintenance  
Planning track maintenance 2.1 10 
Undertaking track maintenance 2.2 14 
Impact due to deficiencies in track maintenance 2.3 47 
Chapter 3: Utilisation of resources and infrastructure for track maintenance 
Development of infrastructure for track maintenance as 
envisaged in Vision 2020 
3.1 53 
Budget Allotment and expenditure on track maintenance 3.2 56 
Availability of manpower for track maintenance and their 
training 
3.3 57 
Utilization of track machines including small track 
machines 
3.4 63 
Allotment of blocks for track maintenance 3.5 66 
Chapter 4: Conclusion and Recommendations  
Conclusion 4.1 70 
Recommendations 4.2 72 
Appendix I and II  76-97 
Annexure 1 to 7  98-115 
 

i 
 
Abbreviations 
Abbreviation Full form 
ADEN  Assistant Divisional Engineer 
AT Weld Alumino Thermite Weld 
BCM Ballast Cleaning Machine 
CRS Commissioner for Railway Safety 
CTE Chief Track Engineer 
CTR Complete Track Renewal 
CWR Continuous Welded Rail 
DEN Divisional Engineers 
ECR East Central Railway 
FB Weld Flash Butt Weld 
GPS Geo Positioning System 
HDN High Density Network 
LWR Long Welded Rail 
NCR North Central Railway 
OHE Overhead Equipment 
PCE Principal Chief Engineer 
PDA Personal Digital Assistant 
POH Periodical Overhaul 
PSR Permanent Speed Restriction 
PWI Permanent Way Inspector 
RDSO Research, Designs and Standard Organization 
ROH Routine Overhaul 
SER South Eastern Railway 
SR Southern Railway 
SWR South Western Railway 
SEJ Switch Expansion Joints 
SSE Senior Section Engineer 
STM Small Track Machine 
TKM Track Kilometer 
TM Track Machine 
TMO Track Machine Organisation  
TMS Track Management System 
TRC Track Recording Car 
TSR Through Sleeper Renewal 
USFD Ultrasonic Flaw Detection 
UTS Ultimate Tensile Strength  
WILD Wheel Impact Load Detector 
 
i

Report No.45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
ii 
 
Executive Summary 
Indian Railway has 92,084 running track kilometers (as on 1 April 2016). Track 
or Permanent Way (P -way) is the rail- road on which the trains run. Track 
structure includes two parallel rails at a specified distance, fastened to sleepers 
which are embedded in a layer of ballast of defined thickness spread over the 
formation. 
The railway track should be maintained properly in order to enable trains to 
run safely at th e highest permissible speeds and to provide passengers a 
reasonable level of comfort during the ride.  Due to the constant movement of 
trains, the packing under the sleepers and track geometry gets disturbed,  the 
fittings of the track get undone , there is h eavy wear and tear of the track and 
its components and t he gauge and alignment of the track gets affected 
adversely. The track and its components also get worn out as a result of the 
weathering effect of rain, sun, and sand. Therefore, if the track is not 
maintained properly, it will cause discomfort to the passengers and in extreme 
cases may even give rise to hazardous conditions that can lead to derailments 
and a consequential loss of life and property.  
Track maintenance involve preventive maintenance (p eriodic maintenance 
activities), condition monitoring (through inspections and use of technology)  
and repair of defects  noticed. Maintenance activities are carried out using 
machines as well as manually through a group of railway personnel called track 
maintainers (trackmen, keyman, gangmen). 
The Audit was conducted with a view to assess whether the maintenance of 
tracks was planned and undertaken following the laid down norms  and 
instructions. Audit also assessed w hether the resources/infrastructure 
required for maintenance of tracks was available and used efficiently  and 
effectively. For this purpose, Audit reviewed 37 selected sections (29 high 
density routes (HDN) and eight non -HDN routes) of the five Zonal Railways 
(NCR, ECR, SER, SR and SWR) . These section were running with line capacity of 
100 per cent  to 168 per cent  in 2015 -16, except four sections where line 
capacity was between 90 per cent and 99 per cent. 
Audit observed that track maintenance activities need ed to be strengthened 
and undertaken following the laid down instructions and guidelines. Shortfalls 
in i nspections of tracks by railway officials as per laid down frequency were 
noticed in the selected sections. Prescribed methods for preventive 
maintenance of tracks were not being follow ed effectively/not done 
adequately. This included  ultrasonic flaw detection testing to detect flaws in 
the track, monitoring of track using track recording cars, installation of wheel 
impact load detectors to monitor impact of wheels on track in sections w here 
enhanced loading has been permitted, use of GPS based foot plate inspection 
device etc. There were arrears in periodical maintenance activities such as 
deep screening of ballast and more efficient methods of welding were not 
used in all selected secti ons. Audit noticed that track maintenance activities  
ii

iii
Report No.45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
iii 
 
were not completely mechanized in all the selected sections. No 
communication equipment was provided to track maintainers to report any 
failure, fracture or damage immediately. The formula for  assessment of 
requirement of manpower for track maintenance was frame long back in 2000 
and needed revision. Though there were shortages of track maintenance staff 
in the selected Zonal Railways , many of them were diverted for works other 
than track maintenance. The block demanded by Engineering Department for 
maintenance works were not fully made available , and where made available, 
these were not optimally utilized by the Engineering department. 
Important Audit findings 
 In NCR and ECR, perspective maintenance plans were not prepared . 
Though maintenance schedule prescribes planning maintenance works as a 
preventive measure, SER was doing rectification of deficiencies on 
inspection.  In NCR, ECR and SER, c oncerned P-way Inspectors who are 
primarily responsible for maintenance of tracks in the sections were not 
communicated the Annual Plan in advance for actual deployment of track 
machines in their sections. Pre-monsoon and post -monsoon inspection 
activities were not mentioned in the Annual Plan and only need based 
inspection was carried out in monsoon season in NCR, ECR and SER.  
Para 2.1.1, 2.1.2 and 2.1.3 
 In NCR, SER and SWR, the beat of the patrol men was not restricted to one 
km length of UP and DN line on double line section and it was more than 
one kilometre on both sides in some of the sections checked  in audit. 
Patrol men were not equipped with any communication equipment to 
report any failure, fracture or damage immediately from the section where 
shortcomings an d defects in track were observed. Indian  Railways has a 
laid down mechanism through which t he track is inspected either visually 
or using equipment/machines in order to detect flaw s in various 
component of track. Audit noticed shortfalls and deficiencies in inspections 
carried out at different level s. GPS based foot plate inspection device was 
not procured by any of the selected five Zonal Railways and inspection of 
track was carried out through traditional means. 
Para 2.2.1.1, 2.2.1.2 and 2.2.1.3 
 Testing of rails using Ultrasonic Flaw Detection (USFD) machines was no t 
being carried out as per the prescribed norms. Test check of five per cent of 
the USFD testing done by the contractor was to be done  by railway staff, 
which was not found to be done in selected sections of NCR and SWR. Also, 
while provision for capturing scanned images/peak patterns exist s in the 
USFD machine , same were not saved and utilized  for scrutiny/analysis 
during successive USFD tests.  
Para 2.2.1.4 
 The Track Machines and Monitoring D irectorate of Research, Designs and 
Standard Organisation ( RDSO) is required to monitor the track using Track 

iv
Report No.45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
iv 
 
Recording Cars (TRC) for assessment of the condition of track, identification 
of locations needing maintenance and providing data to Railway Board and 
Zonal Railways. During 2016-17, out of the availble four TRCs, none of the 
TRCs were run whole  of the year in the planned section  due to remaining 
under repair for long period . Further, TRC  did not have an uninterrupted 
run at uniform speed  in the planned section s due to h eavy traffic, due to 
which it was not possible to obtain comparable results between successive 
recordings.  
Para 2.2.1.5 
 In Indian Railways dual detection system comprising of track circuiting as 
well as axle counters simultaneously are used on the same track length of 
the automatic block section.  The use of dual detection system ensures that 
signal remains in a clear posit ion, even if there is an electrical discontinuity 
in the circuit due to power failure/rail fracture. As long as either of the two 
i.e. track circuiting or axle counter gives a clear signal, the signal to the 
locomotive driver would be clear. From the contr ol panel located at the 
station, the Station Master would know if there is a failure of track 
circuiting without knowing the reason for the same. In such circumstance, 
he can switch over the system to axle counter mode only and allow the 
train movement on the basis of signal based on axle counter mode. The 
existing operation instructions do not require the Station Master to look 
into the reasons for failure of track circuiting and take any action like 
imposing speed restriction on the movement of the trains  or issue any 
alert. Audit noticed that an accident of Train no. 12987, Sealdah -Ajmer 
Express occurred at Rura on 28.12.2016 at 5:30 hrs in which over 50 
persons were injured . Though DC track circuit failure incident occurred at 
2:16:47 on 28 December 2016 , no follow up action was taken by Station 
Master on the incident of failure of track circuiting. A number of trains 
travelled on the track between 2:16 to 5:30, before the Train no. 12987 
derailed. A s  p e r  the records of joint observation note of superviso rs on 
accident, the probable reason was rail fracture. 
Para 2.2.1.6 
 Deep screening of ballast is required to restore the resiliency and elasticity 
of the ballast bed  and for improving running quality of track. Audit noticed 
significant arrears in deep screening work and found that deep screening 
was overdue for one to 22 years in the section s of five Zonal Railways test 
checked.  
Para 2.2.2.1 
 The safety of track is vitally affected by locked up thermal stresses, which 
can result in rail buckling or fractures. De-stressing is a technique to avert 
rail track problems  in long welded rails/continuous welded rails . Audit 
noticed deficiencies in de-stressing in the selected sections, which may lead 
to stress getting locked up in the rail s and may result in rail b uckling or 
fractures.  
Para 2.2.2.2 

v
Report No.45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
v 
 
 In respect of maintenance by departmental staff, there is a requirement of 
the concerned staff being trained and skilled , however, s imilar, 
requirement is not there in respect of maintenance being do ne through 
contractors.  
Para 2.2.2.3 
 Audit noticed 274 cases of rail fractures and 465 cases of weld failures 
during 2015-16 and 2016-17 in the selected section of five Zonal Railways. 
During this period , seven accidents occurred due to rail fractures/ weld 
failures in these five Zonal Railways.  
Para 2.2.3.1 
 Operation of wagons with load in excess of carrying capacity of 8 tonnes 
with tolerance of 2 tonnes (CC+8+2t)  was permitted in certain sections 
from August 2006 with  a set of strict conditions and instructions issued in 
this regard. Though instructions were issued eleven years ago, Wheel 
Impact Load Detectors (WILD) system were yet to be  installed at all 
identified locations. Where installed, corrective action was not  being taken 
on the basis of the information/data generated from WILD as Railway 
Administration ignored most of the critical alarms generated through WILD 
in Mughalsarai.  
Para 2.2.3.2 
 Track Management System (TMS) provides benefits in the form of 
prioritization of works, need based deployment of Gang and Machine, 
overall economy in Track Maintenance, monitoring of overdue inspections, 
listing of features needing attention, optimization of maintenance inputs 
by virtue of centralized database.  In NCR , asset, store, caution orders, 
traffic block, ballast supply and insertion and accident reporting modules 
were not working in TMS . In SER, updation of data in TMS was not regular 
as internet connection was poor. ECR was not uploading the reports of 
inspection done at Senior Section Engineer  / Permanent W ay level and 
compliance thereof at all the levels in the system was  being done 
selectively. 
Para 2.2.3.3 
 Audit noticed 294 permanent speed restrictions imposed o n the selected 
sections of five selected Zonal Railways because of track vulnerability.  
Para 2.3.1 
 During 2014 -15 to 2016 -17, 16 accidents/derailments took place due to 
deficient track maintenance  in the selected five Zonal Railways . The 
reasons were rail fracture, weld fracture , t rack defects, defects in point, 
track buckling, etc.  
Para 2.3.2 
 As per Indian Railway Vision 2020, Railways has to develop infrastructure in 
maintenance of tracks. The upgrdation of infrastructure and using of 
modern mechanized techniques in maintenance activities was assessed by 
Audit.  

vi
Report No.45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
vi 
 
o In ECR and  SER, Rails were not being procured in long panels of 120 
meters, which increases the number of welds. AT welds were used 
more than the flash butt welding , though  weld failure percentage is 
significantly high for AT welds.  
o In NCR, ECR, SER, track maintenance activities in selected sections were 
not completely mechanised. 
o Human dependence in the form of push trolley inspection, foot -plating, 
patrolling, etc. for detection of flaws and deficiencies in track 
parameters were not eliminated/reduced. 
Para 3.1 
 A formula for assess ment of requirement of manpower for track 
maintenance was derived by the railways in 2000. The formula was not 
being used by the five Zonal Railways checked in Audit, to assess the 
manpower requirement and fill the gap for tack maintenance activities 
during the past three years. This criteria may not be relevant after 17 years 
due to significant changes in methods of track maintenance and 
introduction of mechanised means in a larger number of activities. A 
maintenance gang consist of 10 -15 track maintainer s who are responsible 
for protecting the line during regular maintenance work and in emergency. 
Audit observed shortages of staff in different safety categories responsible 
for track maintenance in selected Zonal Railways  ranging from nine to 22 
per cent . The situation was made worse by diverting available track 
maintainers to works other than track maintenance. Further, the 
jurisdiction of SSEs varied from 16.65 kms to 149 kms in various selected 
sections. The sanctioned strength of track maintainers  per km  also had 
wide variations and the  criteria on the basis of which the sanctioned 
strength had been assessed was not objective and scientific. More track 
maintainers have been posted to bigger cities than remote locations 
though the requirement for the whole section may be uniform. 
Para 3.3.1 
 Check of competency certificate in selected sections of NCR, SER, ECR and 
SWR revealed that no system existed to  ensure that only trained staff  was 
posted in the section responsible for maintenance work. 37 per cent, 15.7 
per cent  and 4.6 per cent  of the total staff of NCR, SER and SWR 
respectively, deployed in LWR/CWR section had not been imparted 
training. Similarly, 60 per cent of staff deployed for operation of small track 
machines were not trained. 
Para 3.3.2 and 3.3.3 
 There was sub-optimal utilisation of track machines due to reasons such as 
non-availability of block, under repair/breakdown/ maintenance, no fuel, 
machine under shifting, etc. Further, the small machines were not available 
in the selected sections  as per requirements. Where available, these could 
not be used optimally due to various constraints such as frequent 
breakdowns, non -availability of blocks, non -availability of utility vehicles 

vii
Report No.45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
vii 
 
for transportation of these machines at work sites, non -availability of 
spares, non -availability of imprest to handle repair and maintenance of 
these machines etc. 
Para 3.4 
 Audit noticed shortage of about 50 per cent  blocks against the block 
demanded by engineering department for track maintenance work. The 
time allotted was also less than the prescribed norms. In all these selected 
sections, line capacity utilisation of 2013-14 to 2015-16 ranged between 90 
per cent and 168 per cent. As such, these sections required adequate 
blocks for proper track maintenance. However, blocks provided were much 
less than blocks demanded which impacted track maintenance. 
Para 3.5 
Recommendations 
Planning and monitoring 
1. All Zonal Railways should prepare integrated track maintenance plans for 
day to day as well as periodical maintenance and condition monitoring 
using machines/ equipment such as USFD machine, Track Recording Cars, 
etc., duly incorporating timelines and reso urce requirement/ availability. 
The plan should include mechanised and non -mechanised components of 
track maintenance. It should also incorporate addressing arrears of deep 
screening of ballast, de -stressing and prescribed requirements for 
operations of CC+8+2 / 25t. 
2. The integrated annual maintenance plan for track maintenance of a Zonal 
Railway should be promptly communicated to the divisional and field 
formations for its effective implementation. 
3. Patrolling and inspections should be done as per norms and the teams 
should be equipped with GPS enabled devices. Output of patrolling, 
inspections should be incorporated into Track Maintenance System 
through GPS based devices, which can be used for monitoring of 
patrolling, inspections, etc. 
4. Monitoring of preparation and implementation of integrated annual 
maintenance plan for track maintenance over Zonal Railways should be 
treated as a key results area for Principal Chief Engineer and key 
performance area for the Chief Track Engineer for Zonal Railways. Co-
ordination issues between departments related to monitoring of 
preparation and implementation of integrated track maintenance plan 

viii
Report No.45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
viii 
 
should be a key performance area for Divisional Railway Managers and 
key results area for the General Managers. 
Strengthening the process of track maintenance  
5. RDSO prescribed guidelines regarding storage of USFD output and 
subsequent review / test check / post check should be implemented. 
Output of USFD should be uploaded to a centralised data base in real time 
and analysed for monitoring the conditions of the rails. 
6. Availability, maintenance and operations of Track Recording Cars should 
be ensured for checking track parameters at prescribed frequency. 
7. Dual detection has been provided to improve the reliability of signals and 
decrease the failure of signals. As a side effect, it allows the signals to 
remain green even when there is a rail fracture and the track circuit has 
dropped. In such a case when the signal would be green and the train 
would be moving at maximum permissible speed,  there is a risk of 
accident. Track circuiting system has the potential for detecting rail 
fractures. Safety Committee had recommended that the signal should be 
put to yellow aspect as soon as track circuit drops in the dual detection 
territory so that the train speed is controlled to lower speed while passing 
the affected zone, which may have rail fracture. Railways may consider 
using this feature of track circuiting effectively to avert accidents. When a 
track circuit fails due to any reason, the signal c ould be put to yellow and 
the train could be passed only at cautious speed, till the track is certified 
fit by the P-Way Inspector and there is no rail fracture.   
8. Application system like the TMS should be used efficiently to its full 
potentiality. Need ba sed access to TMS should be provided to all related 
functional departments and units namely Operating, Safety, Accounts 
and Signal & Telecommunication, instead of restricting to the Engineering 
department only. This will enable effective planning by these 
departments and enable them to align their operations and maintenance 
activities to the integrated maintenance plans for the track maintenance. 
This will also enhance efficiency and effectiveness of block utilisation. 
Adequate provision and effective utilisation of resources  
9. Railways may consider revising/re -working the formula for calculation of 
manpower requirement for track maintenance and re -assess the 
manpower requirement in view of the changed scenario, wherein, more 

ix
Report No.45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
ix 
 
and more mechanised means are goi ng to be used for track maintenance. 
Diversion of man power provided for maintenance of track for other work 
should not be permitted. Selection criteria for track maintainers may be 
aligned with the requirement of their job which includes physical work as 
well and persons with defective attitude should be adequately sensitized. 
Deployment of man power should be monitored to ensure proper  
maintenance of the entire route length. 
10. To ensure effective co -ordination between various departments involved, 
it may be considered to entrust Divisional Railway Managers with the 
responsibility of monitoring block availability and utilization for regula r 
and periodical maintenance activities. 
11. The routes, where enhanced loading over and above the carrying capacity 
has been permitted, should be equipped with necessary infrastructure. 
This would include installation of Wheel Impact Load detectors (WILD) to 
assess impact of enhanced loading on the track structure, installation and 
utilisation of weighbridges to detect and prevent overloading, up -
gradation of track infrastructure, addressing concern of rail grinding, 
weld protection through joggled fish plates  and USFD testing of rails at 
shorter intervals.  
12. Officials of the field formations engaged in track maintenance should be 
equipped with mechanised and digital equipment including Personnel 
Digital Assistants, GPS enabled communication devices and small track 
machines. Necessary skills and training should be imparted to the 
personnel engaged in track maintenance. Appropriate funds in the form 
of imprest should be provided to enable expeditious maintenance of these 
machines and equipment. Availability of spares for these machines should 
also be ensured. 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 1
1
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
1 
 
Chapter 1 - Introduction  
 
1.1 Track and its components  
Indian Rail way (IR) has 
92,084 running track 
kilometers1 (as on 1 April 
2016). Track or Permanent 
Way (P-way) is the rail -road 
on which the trains run. 
Track structure includes t wo 
parallel rails at a specified 
distance, fastened to 
sleepers, which are embedded in a layer of ballast of defined thickness spread 
over the formation.  
The track on a rail way also known as the P-way is the structure consisting of the 
rails, fasteners, sleepers 
and ballast plus the 
underlying sub- grade
2.  
Track enables trains to 
move by providing a 
dependable surface for 
their wheels to roll upon.  
Rail: Modern track 
typically uses hot rolled 
steel with a profile of an asymmetrical rounded ‘I’ shaped cross-sectional beam. 
Unlike some other uses of iron and steel, rail way rails are subject to very high 
stresses and are made of very high quality steel alloy. The stronger the rails and 
the rest of the track, the heavier and faster train s it can carry. Rail is graded by 
weight over a standard length. Heavier rails can support greater axle loads3 and 
higher train speeds without sustaining damage than lighter rails. 
Rails are produced in fixed lengths and need to be joined end to end to make a 
continuous surface on which trains run. The traditional method of joining the rails 
is to bolt them together using metal fishplates4, producing jointed track. Because 
of the small gaps left between the rails, when trains pass over jointed tracks they 
                                                           
1 The length of all running tracks excluding tracks in sidings, yards and crossings. 
2 Sub – grade is layer of small crushed stones, which gives a solid support for the top ballast, and reduces the seepage of 
water from the underlying ground. 
 3The axle load of a wheeled vehicle is the total weight felt by the Permanent way for all wheels connected to a given axle. 
4 Metal fishplates is a metal bar attached by means of bolts to the rails on either side of the joint 
Figure 1: Railway Track 
Figure 2: Components of track 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 1
2
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
2 
 
make a clack sound. Unless it is well-maintained, jointed track does not have the 
ride quality of welded rails and is less desirable for high speed trains. However, 
jointed track is still used in rail ways on lower speed lines and sidings 5 due to the 
lower cost for its installation and maintenance.  
Where higher speeds are required, the lengths of rail are welded together to form 
Long Welded Rail 6 (LWR) or a C ontinuous Welded Rail7 (CWR) that may be 250 
meter to several kilometers long. Because there are few joints, this form of track 
is strong, gives a smooth ride and needs less maintenance; trains can travel on it 
at higher speeds and with less friction. Welded rails (presently used methodology 
of laying of rails)  are more expensive to lay than jointed tracks, but have much 
lower maintenance costs.  
Alumino Thermite (AT)8 welding is used to repair or splice9 together existing CWR 
segments. Thi s is a manual process which uses molten iron  to weld the gap 
between rails. AT bonded joints are less reliable and more prone to fracture. The 
preferred process of Flash Butt (FB) welding involves an automated track laying 
machine running a strong electrical current through the touching ends of two un-
joined pieces of rail. The ends become white hot due to electrical resistance and 
are then pressed together to form a strong weld.  
Sleepers: Sleepers are the transverse ties that are laid to fix and support the rails. 
The sleeper has two main roles , viz. to transfer the loads from the rails to the 
track, ballast and the ground underneath and to hold the rails to the correct width 
apart.  
Several types of sleeper s are in use on Indian Rail ways which includes wooden 
sleepers, cast iron sleepers, steel channel sleepers and concrete sleepers. Sleeper 
density is the number of sleepers per rail length and is determined based on 
various factors such as axle load and speed, type and section of rails, type and 
strength of the sleepers, type of ballast and ballast cushion and nature of 
formation. The spacing of sleepers is fixed depending upon the sleeper density. 
Spacing is not kept uniform throughout the rail length. It is closer near the joints  
because of the weakness of the joints and impact of moving loads on them. 
                                                           
5 Siding is a low speed track section distinct from a running line or through route such as a main line or branch line 
6 Long Welded Rail (LWR) is a welded rail, the central part of which does not undergo any longitudinal movement due to 
temperature variations. A length of greater than 250 meter on Broad Gauge (BG) will normally function as LWR. The 
maximum length of LWR under Indian conditions shall normally be restricted to one block section. 
7 Continuous Welded Rail (CWR) is a LWR which would continue through station yards including points and crossings. 
8 Alumino Thermite (AT) welding is a process involving exothermic reaction between aluminium and iron oxides which 
results in the production of molten steel which is poured into a mould around the gap to be welded. The superheated 
molten metal causes the rails to melt at the edges of the gap to be welded, and it is also the filler metal, so that the material 
from the rails coalesces with and joins the added molten steel as it solidifies to form a weld. 
9 Join or connect by interweaving the strands at the end 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 1
3
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
3 
 
Bed and foundation : Ballast forms major component of track sub -structure and 
plays a dominant role in the track performance and its maintainability. Track 
ballast forms the track bed upon which rail way sleepers are laid. It is packed 
between, below and around the sleepers. It also keeps down vegetation that 
might interfere with the track structure. It is typically made of crushed stone. The 
thickness of a layer of track ballast depends on the size and spacing of the 
sleepers, the amount of traffic expected on the line, speed of the trains to be run 
on the track, etc. It is essential for ballast to be piled as high as the s leepers, and 
for a substantial ‘shoulder’ to be placed at their ends, the latter being important, 
since this ballast shoulder is, for the most part, the only thing  restraining lateral 
movement of the track. Ballast acts as a shock absorber and provides lateral 
resistance against longitudinal move ment of sleepers. While providing lateral 
stability to track it facilitates distribution of weight of rolling stock10, it also serves 
as a drainage system for the formation. Better riding comfort and safe passage of 
trains are achieved through provision of adequate quantity of quality ballast. 
1.2 Track maintenance  
The railway track should be maintained properly in order to enable trains to run  
safely at the highest permissible speeds and to provide passengers a reasonable  
level of comfort during the ride. Due to the constant movement of trains, the 
packing under the sleepers and track geometry11 gets disturbed, the fittings of the 
track get undone, there is heavy wear and tear of the track and its  components 
and the gauge12 and alignment of the track gets affected adversely. The track and 
its components also get worn out as a result of the weathering effect of rain, sun, 
and san d. Thus, track undergoes vertical stresses (due to locomotive, wagons, 
coaches being run on the track) and longitudinal stresses (due to environmental 
factors such as temperature, floods, rain, sun, sand , etc.). If the track is not 
maintained properly, it will cause discomfort to the passengers and  in extreme 
cases may even give rise to hazardous conditions that can lead to derailments and 
a consequential loss of life and property. Inadequate maintenance may also lead 
to ‘speed restrictions’. Proper track maintenance ensures that such situations are 
avoided. It also ensures that the life of the track as well as that of the rolling stock 
gets enhanced and leads to reduction in operating costs and fuel  consumption. 
High speed and heavy axle load operation s on IR has also necessitated up -
                                                           
10 Locomotives, carriages, wagons, or other vehicle used on a railway are called rolling stock 
11Track geometry  is three -dimensional geometry of track layouts and associated measurements used in design, 
construction and maintenance of rail road tracks 
12 The Gauge of a railway track is defined as the clear minimum perpendicular distance between the inner faces of the two 
rails 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 1
4
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
4 
 
gradation of the track structure and increased requirement for maintenance and 
monitoring. 
Track maintenance ensures availability of track of desired standard for smooth 
running of trains. It was at one time , hard manual labour, requiring teams of 
labourers or trackmen, who used lining bars to correct irregularities in horizontal 
alignment of the track and tamping 13 and jacks14 to correct vertical irregularities 
(surface). The track structure has become sturdier and less amenable for manual 
maintenance due to continuous developments in various track components 
namely ra ils, sleepers, fastenings 15, points 16, crossings17, etc. This has led to 
gradual proliferation of use of track machines for mechanized maintenance of 
track. Over the years, mechanized maintenance has gained importance for 
reliable track maintenance with high degree of precision and quality with lesser 
dependence on manual labour . Inspections are also carried out by officers of 
various levels to detect flaws requiring preventive maintenance in track, either 
through manual inspection or using specialized machines. 
Track maintenance involve s preventive maintenance (p eriodic maintenance 
activities) through deep screening of ballast, de -stressing of rail joints, condition 
monitoring of track structure through regular inspection/patrolling  and repair of 
defects, tracking parameters to assess quality of track structure through use of 
Track Recording Cars, using Ultrasonic Flaw Detection  (USFD) machines for 
assessing condition of rail (for detecting/identifying rails likely to be affected by 
buckling
18and welds li kely to fail), Wheel Impact Load Detector (WILD) for 
identifying wagons/coaches exerting higher vertical stresses on the rail (for 
detachment and repair of such wagon/coaches) and  monitoring track 
maintenance activities using Track Management System (TMS).  
Preventive maintenance also includes periodical changing of sleepers, lubricating 
and adjusting switches 19, tightening loose track components, and surfacing and 
lining20 track to keep straight sections straight and curves within prescribed limits. 
Sleepers and rails are replaced where they have passed their life or on condition 
basis. Over time, ballast is crushed or moved by the weight of trains passing over 
                                                           
13 Tamping means packing of (or tamp) the track ballast under the railway tracks to make the tracks more durable 
14 The hydraulic track jack (non–infringing type) is used for lifting of track in track maintenance/construction work 
15 Various types of nuts / bolts used to fasten rails to sleepers 
16 Point comprises of one pair of tongue rails and stock rails with necessary fittings to guide the train for change in direction. 
This works along with crossing element. 
17 Crossings is a device introduced at the junction where two rails cross each other to permit the wheel flange of a railway 
vehicle to pass from one track to another. 
18 Buckling is formation of large lateral misalignments in continuous welded rail (CWR) track. Buckles are typically caused 
by a combination of three major factors: high compressive forces, weakened track conditions, and vehicle loads. 
19 Switch or turnout is a mechanical installation which enables railway trains to be guided from one track to another. 
20 Surfacing (tamping) and Lining are track maintenance activities which restore the desired  track geometry  and 
smoothness of vehicle running.  

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 1
5
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
5 
 
it, periodically requiring re-leveling (tamping) and eventually to be cleaned (deep 
screening). If this is not done, the tracks may become uneven causing s waying, 
rough riding and possibly cause derailments. In the alternative , ballast  can be 
reinserted beneath the rails and sleepers  after lifting them . Maintenance 
activities are carried out using machines as well as manual ly through a group of 
railway personnel called 'gangs'. 
Track maintenance activities (preventive and others) along with the responsibility 
centres are given below: 
Table 1 – List of maintenance activities and their responsibility centres 
S. 
no 
Maintenance 
related 
activity 
Detailed  activities Responsibility Centre   
1 Inspection of 
Track  
Patrolling by Track maintainers (Gang man, 
Track man, Key Man) 
Inspection by Junior Engineer 
Inspection by Senior Section Engineer(SSE) 
Inspection by Assistant Divisional 
Engineer(ADEN) 
Inspection by Divisional Engineer(DEN) 
As per jurisdiction of sectional, 
sub-divisional and Divisional 
offices of Railways 
Daily inspection Keyman, Senior Section Engineer 
2 USFD testing USFD testing of welds Senior Section Engineer/ USFD 
team, Assistant Divisional 
Engineer and Divisional Engineer, 
Track 
USFD testing of  Rails 
3 Track 
monitoring 
Rail Profile Measurement by Track Recording 
Cars (TRC) 
Track Machines and Monitoring 
Directorate of Research Design & 
Standards Organization for 
deployment of TRC. Assistant 
Divisional Engineer should 
accompany the TRC in his 
jurisdiction and take down notes 
regarding the spots needing 
attention 
4 Wheel 
Impact Load 
Detector 
Monitoring of impact of load  on track by 
‘wayside detection system’ through Wheel 
Impact Load Detector (WILD) system 
Zonal Railway 
5. Preventive 
and Periodic 
maintenance 
activities 
 
Deep Screening  Divisional and Sub – divisional 
offices 
De-stressing  Divisional and Sub – divisional 
offices 
Others  Senior Section Engineer (overall 
charge) 
Training Principal Chief Engineer and 
Senior Divisional Engineer 
Co-ordination  with other Departments Assistant Divisional Engineer 
Track on Bridges Assistant Divisional Engineer 
Ballast Assistant Divisional Engineer 
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
5 
 
it, periodically requiring re-leveling (tamping) and eventually to be cleaned (deep 
screening). If this is not done, the tracks may become uneven causing s waying, 
rough riding and possibly cause derailments. In the alternative , ballast  can be 
reinserted beneath the rails and sleepers  after lifting them . Maintenance 
activities are carried out using machines as well as manual ly through a group of 
railway personnel called 'gangs'. 
Track maintenance activities (preventive and others) along with the responsibility 
centres are given below: 
Table 1 – List of maintenance activities and their responsibility centres 
S. 
no 
Maintenance 
related 
activity 
Detailed  activities Responsibility Centre   
1 Inspection of 
Track  
Patrolling by Track maintainers (Gang man, 
Track man, Key Man) 
Inspection by Junior Engineer 
Inspection by Senior Section Engineer(SSE) 
Inspection by Assistant Divisional 
Engineer(ADEN) 
Inspection by Divisional Engineer(DEN) 
As per jurisdiction of sectional, 
sub-divisional and Divisional 
offices of Railways 
Daily inspection Keyman, Senior Section Engineer 
2 USFD testing USFD testing of welds Senior Section Engineer/ USFD 
team, Assistant Divisional 
Engineer and Divisional Engineer, 
Track 
USFD testing of  Rails 
3 Track 
monitoring 
Rail Profile Measurement by Track Recording 
Cars (TRC) 
Track Machines and Monitoring 
Directorate of Research Design & 
Standards Organization for 
deployment of TRC. Assistant 
Divisional Engineer should 
accompany the TRC in his 
jurisdiction and take down notes 
regarding the spots needing 
attention 
4 Wheel 
Impact Load 
Detector 
Monitoring of impact of load  on track by 
‘wayside detection system’ through Wheel 
Impact Load Detector (WILD) system 
Zonal Railway 
5. Preventive 
and Periodic 
maintenance 
activities 
 
Deep Screening  Divisional and Sub – divisional 
offices 
De-stressing  Divisional and Sub – divisional 
offices 
Others  Senior Section Engineer (overall 
charge) 
Training Principal Chief Engineer and 
Senior Divisional Engineer 
Co-ordination  with other Departments Assistant Divisional Engineer 
Track on Bridges Assistant Divisional Engineer 
Ballast Assistant Divisional Engineer 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 1
6
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
6 
 
Detailed information regarding maintenance activities along with the prescribed 
periodicity are given in Appendix I. 
1.3 Organisational Structure 
At Rail way Board, Member Engineering (ME), assisted by Additional Members 
(Works & Civil Engineering), Executive Directors (Works, Civil Engineering, Track 
Machines, General and Planning), Directors (Works, Civil Engineering Bridges & 
Structures and Planning) and Jo int Directors (Works , Track Machines ) are 
responsible for formulating policy relating to track and P-way. 
At the Zonal level, the Chief Track Engineer (CTE), working under the control of 
Principal Chief Engineer (PCE), is responsible for implementing the p olicy 
guidelines / orders of the Railway Board. The Track Machine Organisation (TMO) 
is headed by the Principal Chief Engineer (PCE) and assisted by the Chief Engineer 
(Track Machines), Deputy Chief Engineer (Machines) and Executive Engineer 
(Machines). At the divisional level, the Senior Divisional Engineers / Divisional 
Engineers (Sr. DEN / DEN), aided by Assistant Divisional Enginee r / Assistant 
Engineers (ADEN/AEN) / Senior Section Engineers (SSE)/Section Engineers (SE) (P-
way) take care of day to day operations, repair and maintenance of the track. 
Track Machines and Monitoring Directorate of RDSO is responsible for Track 
Monitoring by Track Recording Cars and Rail Profile Measurement System
21, 
Testing of track components like Sleepers, Fastening, welds, etc. Entire length of 
track of Indian Railways is monitored by Track Recording Cars of RDSO.  
1.4 Audit Objectives 
The review was carried out with a view to assess: 
1. Whether the maintenance of tracks was planned and undertaken following 
the laid down norms and keeping in view the instructions of Railway Board? 
2. Whether the  resources/infrastructure required for maintenance of tracks 
were available and used efficiently and effectively?  
1.5 Audit Criteria 
The provisions laid down in the following manuals/documents were adopted as 
Audit Criteria: 
• Indian Railway Permanent Way Manual (IRPWM) 
• Indian Railway Small Track Machine Manual (IRSTM) 
• Indian Railway Track Machine Manual (IRTMM) 
                                                           
21Rail profile measurement is a system of inspection and monitori ng of track by mechanical means in which laser based 
contactless track recording cars, portable accelerometers and optical rail profile measurement etc. are used. 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 1
7
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
7 
 
• Indian Railway Code for the Engineering Department 
• Vision 2020 Document of IR 
• Manual of instructions on long welded rails (Long Welded Rails/ Continuous 
Welded Rails) 
• Ultrasonic Flaw Detection (USFD) Manual  
• Guidelines/ instructions issued by Railway Board / Zonal Railway relating to 
track maintenance  
1.6 Audit scope, methodology and sample 
The review covered the period from 01  April 2016 to 31  March 2017. Audit 
assignment was aimed at  studying maintenance of track vis -à-vis provisions of 
different codes/ manuals , safety measures prescribed and other related orders  
and instructions issued by the Railway Board from time to time. The focus of the 
study was primarily on maintenance of tracks on selected 29 sections of High 
Density Network (HDN) Routes. Eight sections non-HDN routes were also selected 
for study and comparison. 
Audit methodology consisted of examination of records at the Zonal / Divisional 
Headquarters and field offices relating to action for compliance to plan/ policies 
framed by the IR and their implementation at the field level , e xamination of 
records maintained in A ssistant Divisional Engineer /Senior Section Engineer ( P-
way) offices of selected sections , Zonal and Divisional Engineering Department , 
Safety Department and at Research Designs & Standards Organisation (RDSO), 
Lucknow. 
In Indian Rail ways, a common rail track is used for both passenger and freight 
traffic. With increase in passenger and freight traffic over the recent years, the 
rail network has experienced severe capacity constraints. The major hub of 
activity, namely the Golden Quadrilateral and its diagonals connecting the major 
metros – Mumbai, Delhi, Chennai and Kolkata constitute merely 25 per cent of 
the total network; but carry around 70 per ce nt of t otal freight resulting in 
consequent over -saturation in levels of capacity utilisation in a number of 
stretches. There are seven High Density Networks over Indian Railway: 
1. Delhi-Howrah along with the alternative ‘B’ route on Northern Railway and its 
extension towards Shakurbasti-Bhatinda-Suratgarh and Andal Sainthia for the 
coal routes 
2. Mumbai-Howrah along with the link route of Bilaspur -Anuppur-Katni-Bina-
Kota and Jalgaon-Surat 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 1
8
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
8 
 
3. Delhi-Mumbai via Kota -Ratlam inclu ding alternative route of Delhi -Rewari-
Phulera-Ajmer-Chittorgarh and Gandhidham -Palanpur-Bhildi-Samdari-
Jodhpur Bhatinda and Panvel JNPT 
4. Delhi-Guwahati via Moradabad –Sitapur-Burhwal-Gonda Gorakhpur-Chhapra 
Barauni-Katihar 
5. Delhi-Chennai via Jhansi-Bhopal-Itarsi-Nagpur-Ballarshah 
6. Howrah-Chennai along with alternative route via Jharsuguda -Sambalpur-
Titlagarh-Vizianagram including 3rd line between Vizianagram and Kotavalasa 
and 4th line between Kotavalasa and Simhachalam North 
7. Mumbai-Chennai along with link route Guntakal – Hospet Hubli-Vasco (iron 
ore circuit) 
In respect of three HDN routes viz. HDN 1, 2 and 7, 100 per cent sections with 
more than 150 per cent capacity utilisation and 50 per cent of the sections with 
100 to 150 per cent  capacity utilisation were selected for a deta iled review in 
audit. Besides, a few sections with utilization in excess of 90 per cent line capacity 
were also included. Eight non -HDN sections with more than 100 per cent  line 
capacity utilisation were also selected. The following 37 sections were select ed 
over five Zonal Railways: 
Table 2– Details of sample selection 
S.no Zonal 
Railway 
Name of the section Route KM Line Capacity 
in 2015-16 
HDN-1 Delhi-Howrah 
1. NCR Dadri-Dankaur 17.6 140 
2. NCR Tundla-Shikohabad 36.4 156 
3. NCR Shikohabad-Panki 183.4 154 
4. NCR Panki-Juhi 7.4 154 
5. NCR Juhi-Kanpur 1.4 158 
6. NCR Juhi-Chandari 2 99 
7. NCR Allahabad-Naini 7.48 125 
8. NCR Naini-Cheoki 1.4 120 
9. NCR Jeonathpur-Mughalsarai 7.8 128 
10. ECR Mughalsarai-Dehri-on-Sone 117.1 106 
11. ECR Dehri-on-Sone-Sonenagar 5.7 120 
12. ECR Sonenagar-Gaya 79.4 93 
13. ECR Gaya-Gomoh 169.1 103 
HDN-2 MUMBAI-HOWRAH 
14. SER Jharsuguda-Rourkela 101 106 
15. SER Rourkela-Bondamunda 8.5 102 
16. SER Tata-Kharagpur 134 96 
17. SER Santragachi-Tikaipara 5.6 104 
18. SER Tikiapara-Howrah 2 113 
HDN-7 MUMBAI-CHENNAI 
19. SR Arakkonam-Tiruvallur 26.83 111 
20. SR Pattabiram-Avadi 3.91 103 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 1
9
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
9 
 
Table 2– Details of sample selection 
S.no Zonal 
Railway 
Name of the section Route KM Line Capacity 
in 2015-16 
21. SR Avadi-Villivakkam 11.61 119 
22. SR Villivakkam-Vyasarpadi 5.8 123 
23. SR Basin Bridge- Chennai Central 2.22 128 
24. SWR Vellary-Hospet 64.84 126 
25. SWR Hospet-Gadag 85.14 114 
26. SWR Gadag-Hubli 58.08 139 
27. SWR Hubli-Dharwar 20.09 119 
28. SWR Dharwar-Londa 70.36 141 
29. SWR Londa-Castle Rock 24.48 99 
NON-HDN ROUTES 
30. ECR Patna-Danapur 9.00 120 
31. ECR Danapur-Ara 39 127 
32. ECR Ara-Buxar 69 125 
33. ECR Buxar-Mughalsarai 94 128 
34. SER Nimpura – Gokulpur 6 137 
35. SER Panskura – Haldia 70 148 
36. SER Burnpur – Asansol 5.6 139 
37. SER Muri – Barkakana 58 165 
In addition, on these five Zonal Rail ways, sections where accidents/derailments, 
etc. have taken place for reasons attributable to track or where final investigation 
report and reason for accident was yet to be known, during the past three years 
(2014-15 to 2 016-17) were also  checked in detail. Da ta regarding reasons for 
accident, rail weld failure , etc. for one year i.e.  2016-17 was also collected and 
analysed. Audit findings and recommendations were discussed with the Ministry 
of Railways during an Exit Conference on 30 Augu st 2017. Their responses have 
been duly incorporated in the Audit Report.  
The audit was conducted in selected heavy traffic routes over five Zonal Railways 
(NCR, ECR, SER, SR and SWR), on which traffic much more their line capacity was 
being handled. Similar deficiencies and issues may be prevalent in other Zonal 
Railways as well. The basic purpose of this audit was to identify the weakness in 
track maintenance work and highlight systemic weakness, which are required to 
be addressed by Indian Railways.  
1.7 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the co -operation extended by the Railway Board and the 
Zonal Railway Administrations during the field audit. 
  

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
10
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
10 
 
Chapter 2 - Planning and execution of track maintenance 
Audit Objective 1: Whether the maintenance of tracks was planned and 
undertaken following the laid down norms and keeping in view the instructions 
of Railway Board? 
 
2.1 Planning track maintenance  
Maintenance planning include planning for manual as well as mechanised 
maintenance of track sections. These include activities to be undertaken on a 
regular basis within a year (regular maintenance) and activities which are 
undertaken after a year (periodical). The compliance of the prescribed procedures 
relating to planning for manual as well as mechanised maintenance of tracks was 
examined in the selected 37 sections of five Zonal Rail ways (NCR, SWR, SR, ECR 
and SER). The audit findings are discussed below: 
2.1.1 Perspective Plan for manual track maintenance by sectional officials 
As per laid down provisions22, every P-way Inspector must prepare a perspective 
maintenance plan of his section one month in advance . The plan should include, 
apart from normal inspection, inspection of point and crossings, curves and level 
crossings, realignment of curves, deep screening, casual renewal, renewal of 
points and crossings, welding of joints, de -stressing of long welded rails , etc. so 
that optimum utilization of tim e and labour resources becomes possible . It was 
observed that 
 In selected sections of SWR and SR, perspective maintenance plan and annual 
inspection plan were being prepared by the P-way Inspectors. 
 In NCR advance perspective maintenance plan were not prepared. Advance 
monthly planning for realignment of curves, adjustment of creep, deep 
screening, casual renewal of points on crossing, welding, distressing, etc. was 
not carried out. 
 In ECR, perspective main tenance plans were not prepared. Maintenance 
Schedule prescribes planning maintenance works as a preventive measure, 
whereas, SER was doing rectification of deficiencies on inspection.  
2.1.2 Annual Plan for mechanised maintenance through Track Machines 
For sections nominated for mechanized maintenance, annual plan for 
deployment of various track machines is to be finalized by C hief Track Engineer 
(Machine)/ Chief Track Engineer of the Zonal Railway who are required to arrange 
deployment of  machines accordingly . Concrete sleeper track is required to  be 
                                                           
22Para 205 of Indian Railway P-way Manual 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
11
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
11 
 
maintained by heavy on -duty track tampers 23. An annual machine deployment 
programme is to be drawn by Zonal Railway and circulated to the divisions before 
the beginning of the year. Compliance of these laid down provisions was checked 
in the selected sections and it was observed that 
 In NCR, Annual P lan 2016-17, for deployment of various track machines was 
delayed and circulated to Divisional offices on 29  April 2016. Further, 
deployment plan of various track machines was not intimated in advance to 
concerned ADEN and SSE by the Divisional offices. 
 In ECR, Annual Plan 2016-17, for deployment of various track machine s was 
prepared and finalized division wise instead of section wise as per the norms.  
 In SER, Annual Plan 2016-17, for deployment of Track Machines was prepared 
and finalized by Chief Engineer at headquarters level and communicated to 
the Divisional Engineers, but not to the concerned Sectional P-way Inspectors.  
As a result, P -way Inspectors of selected sections who are primarily responsible 
for maintenance of tracks in the sections assigned to them were not aware of the 
Annual Plan in advance for actual deployment of track machines in their sections. 
In SWR and SR, annual plan for deployment of track machines were being 
prepared in advance and as per the norms. 
It was further seen that in selected sections of NCR, maintenance activities were 
not fully mechanized. Maintenance activities like de-stressing of LWR, laying and 
welding of  rails and deep screening of ballast were carried out both with the 
machines and manually. 
The Expert Group for Modernisation of Indian Railways in its report 
recommended (February 2012) 100 per cent mechanised track maintenance on 
routes
24 A and B for superior quality of track laying and maintenance . However, 
all the selected sections covered in Audit are of route A or B, but track 
maintenance of these sections was yet to be fully mechanised.  
2.1.3 Annual Programme for track maintenance  
As per laid down rules25, the annual programme of regular track maintenance and 
works incidental thereto includes the following: 
 
                                                           
23 Track tamper is a machine used to pack the track b allast under railway tracks to make the tracks more durable ( Para 
1408 (3) of Indian Railway P-way Manual) 
24 Para 202 of IRPWM classifies broad gauge line of IR into six groups A to E on the basis of future maximum permissible 
speed (RB letter no. 2003/CE-II/TS/2 Part I dated 15 Feb 2008) 
25Para 203, 204 of Indian Railway P-way Manual 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
12
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
12 
 
Table 3– Annual Programme for track maintenance 
S. no Period Work 
1. Post 
monsoon 
attention: 
For about six 
months after 
end of 
monsoon 
a. Attention to run down lengths in the entire gang beat to restore the 
section to good shape. 
b. One cycle of conventi onal systematic through packing/ systematic 
directed track maintenance from, one end of the gang length to the 
others including overhauling of nominated sections.  
c. Normally four to five days per week should be allotted for works 
under item b and the remaining days for picking up of slacks, attention 
to bridge approaches, level crossings and points and crossings over the 
entire g ang beat . Works such as lubrication of rail joints, joint gap 
adjustments as required and realignment of curves should be done 
during this period. 
2. Pre monsoon 
attention: 
For about 2 
months prior 
to break of 
monsoon. 
Normally two to four days in a week should be devoted to clearing of 
side and catch water drains, earthwork repairs to cess, clearing water 
ways and picking up slacks . In the rest of the days normal systematic 
maintenance will be carried out. 
  
3. Attention 
during 
monsoon: 
For about 
four months 
Attention to track as required. This will consist primarily of picking up 
slacks and attention to side and catch water drains and water ways. 
During abnormally heavy rains, patrolling of the line by gangs should 
be carried out in addition to regular monsoon patrolling. 
Further, scattered renewals and earth work repairs is to be done as necessary . 
For maintenance schedule on Long Welded Rails (LWR)/Continuous Welded Rails 
(CWR)26, special instructions in the LWR/CWR Manual27are to be followed. 
During the review of records related to selected sections of five Zonal Rail ways, 
audit noticed that  
 In NCR, all schedules and frequency of inspection and maintenance were fixed 
in Track Management System ( TMS). Pre -monsoon and post -monsoon 
activities were not mentioned in the A nnual Plan and only need based 
inspection was carried out in monsoon season. However, no cases of delay in 
lubrication of rail joints, joint gap adjustments and realignment of curves were 
noticed in selected sections of NCR. 
 In ECR, specific inspection programme for pre -monsoon, post-monsoon and 
during monsoon were not prepared.  However , work like lubrication of rail 
joints, joint gap adjustment and realignment of curve , etc. were included in 
                                                           
26Long Welded Rails (LWR) of length 260 meters are joined together through welding to make Continuous Welded Rails 
(CWR) of longer lengths 
27LWR / CWR sections require closure monitoring, inspection and maintenance due to variation and impact of temperature. 
Thus, Special instructions for Track Maintenance in LWR /CWR Section given in Manual of instructions on Long Welded 
Rails - 1996. 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
13
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
13 
 
the gang chart and additional patrolling of tracks by gangs during abnormally 
heavy rains were conducted. 
 In selected sections of SWR, regular track maintenance activities were 
conducted as per prescribed provisions. However, in Gadag -Hospet section 
and Kanginhal station the lubrication of rail joints was due during August and 
October 2016, but not done up to April 2017.  
 In selected sections of SR, Annual Track Machines programme was prepared 
and circulated as per norms. Pre -monsoon and post -monsoon 
patrolling/maintenance activities were carried out. Lubrication of rail joints, 
adjustment of rail joint gaps , etc. were done. Track Tampers were used 
wherever necessary in the maintenance of track. 
 In SER, it was noticed that there was no annual programme of track 
maintenance.  
During Exit Conference (30 August 2017), Railway Board stated that in the present 
scenario, where track maintenance has become more and more mechanized, 
perspective planning for track maintenance entails machine deployment, 
identification of areas for dee p screening, casual attention of track , etc. This is 
required to be done at Zonal Headquarter level (by CTE and CE (TM)) and then 
disseminated at the level of division and further communicated to sectional level 
viz., AEN/SSE. It was further stated that preparation of perspective plan by P-way 
inspector is not relevant for such activities. P -way inspector is required to plan 
locally for manual maintenance works such as oiling, greasing, etc. Audit is of the 
view that perspective planning in advance is requi red for both non -mechanized 
maintenance (to be conducted by the sectional officials) as well as for mechanized 
maintenance (to be conducted by the Z onal Headquarters).  The mechanized 
maintenance requires the assistance of official in-charge of section. Further, as all 
items for mechanized maintenance have not been completely implemented over 
the high density network as seen during audit of selected sections  and a mix of 
mechanized and non-mechanized maintenance is undertaken , a comprehensive 
advance p erspective maintenance plan is required.  This is  required to be 
communicated timely to the official in-charge of sections who shall then prepare 
the comprehensive advance  perspective plan incorporating  the information 
received from Zonal Headquarters.  This advance perspective plan is a functional 
requirement for planning , implementation as well as monitoring of track 
maintenance activities. 
Thus, planning for track maintenance needed to be done comprehensively . 
Efforts to expeditiously cover maximum sections and maximum activities under 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
14
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
14 
 
mechanized maintenance should be made both at planning and implementation 
stage. 
2.2 Undertaking track maintenance 
Besides, preventive and periodical maintenance, condition monitoring of track is 
undertaken by IR using a variety of means (both manual and mechanized).  
Officials and equipment with RDSO, Zonal Headquarters, Divisional Headquarters, 
Sectional formations are used for the purpose. This includes condition monitoring 
of track, detection of flaws in track conducted both through inspections as well as 
through use of machines/equipment. M onitoring of various track parameters 
such as rail fractures and weld failures also enables  undertaking measures to 
address the deficiencies and defects noticed/detected by replacing rails, sleepers, 
ballast, etc. or imposing speed restrictions till the flaws are rectified.  
2.2.1      Periodical maintenance activities - condition monitoring 
Indian Railways has a laid down mechanism through which the track is inspected 
either visually or using equipment/machines in order to detect flaws in various 
component of tracks. This includes patrolling by patrolmen. Periodic inspections 
are required to be done by ADEN and SSE to check track conditions. They also use 
equipment such as Ultrasonic Flaw Detection machine, Track Recording Car, etc. 
to detect flaws in the track. Corrective actions are initiated to rectify the flaws 
detected during inspection and through use of these machines/equipment. 
2.2.1.1      Patrolling of track  
Railway tracks are patrolled to ensure the safety of the track and of the traffic 
moving over it. Patrolling basically involves to and fro movement of the 
patrolman/ watchman along the track as per the specified programme in order to 
look out for any unusual occurrence that may threaten the safety of the track.  
Various types of patrolling include daily patrolling, patrolling during abnormal 
rainfall or storm, night patrolling dur ing monsoon, hot weather patrolling, cold 
weather patrolling etc. The patrolling is done by track maintainers (keyman, 
gangman, trackman) also called patrolman, as per the beat allotted to them.  
Beat is the portion of the track that a patrolman patrols. Beat of two kms in single 
line and one km in double line has been fixed for cold and hot patrolling as per 
Indian Railway P-way Manual. The patrolman walks over his beat slowly along one 
rail in one direction and on the other rail in the return direction. On double lines, 
he repeats this procedure alternately on the Up and Down tracks. He watches out 
for rail and weld fractures. He also keeps an eye on  the gaps at the switch 
expansion joints at the ends of the LWR. The walking speed of a patrolman may 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
15
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
15 
 
be taken as 3 km s per hour and the maximum distance covered by a patrolman 
should not normally exceed 20 km in a day. 
Audit reviewed patrol books maintain ed in the SSE offices over the selected 
sections of five Zonal Railways  to analyse the extent of beat allotted to track 
maintainers for patrolling. Audit noticed that   
(i) In NCR, patrolling chart maintained in the office of SSE /Firozabad revealed 
that beat of the patrol men was not restricted to one km length of UP and DN 
line on double line section. The beat of patrolman was up to 2.75 km (UP and 
Down line - 5.5 km). However, in other SSE offices, beat were restricted as per 
the norms.  
(ii) In SER, the beat of patrol men was not restricted to one km  in the office of 
SSE/Santragachi and SSE/Kolaghat and ranged between two kms and five kms 
in Up, Mid and Down line. 
(iii) In SWR, in all the sections reviewed in audit, beat of patrol men was not 
restricted to one km length of Up and Down line section and it was up to five 
kms per person with two rounds per day. 
(iv) In SR and ECR, no deficiency was noticed in the allotment of beat to the 
patrolmen.  
(v) Audit further noticed that patrol men were not equipped with any 
communication equipment to report any failure, fracture or damage 
immediately from the section where shortcomings and defects in track were 
observed. 
During Exit Conference (30 August 2017), Railway Board stated that the beat of 
patrol men could not be restricted to one km due to shortage of patrol men in all 
Zonal Railways.  
Audit is of the view that t he shortfall of patrolmen is within the control of 
Railways and being a safety related aspect needs to be seriously addressed. 
2.2.1.2     Inspection by Section Engineer (also called P-way Inspectors) 
Rules28 prescribe routine inspection of track of the entire section by SSEs by push 
trolley at least once in a month or more often as necessary. Inspection of the SSE 
include 
1. Inspection of Gangs covering 
a. Check of the work done by gang, their recording and to ensure prompt 
action on items requiring attention 
                                                           
28 Para 124 of Indian Railways P-Way Manual 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
16
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
16 
 
b. Examination of small machines (fortnightly) and examination of gang tool 
(monthly) including arrangement for their repair and replacement.  
2. Inspection of level crossings  to examine the condition of rails, sleepers and 
fastenings and ensuring the defects are rectified; check the equipment with 
the Gateman and their knowledge of safety rules; and 
3. Inspection of Points and Crossing and Curves 
The SSE is required to maintain an inspection diagram of all the inspections 
carried out during the month as per the schedule  and to submit the same to the 
Divisional Engineer through Assistant Engineer every month  bringing out the 
reasons for shortfall in adhering to schedule of inspections, if any. 
As per laid down rules
29, SSE is directly responsible for the safety of the track. He 
shall be vigilant to locate faults in the P-Way and promptly rectify them. He should 
bring to the Assistant Engin eer's notice, track defects which are beyond his 
powers to rectify. Rules30 also provide that  SSE should arrange for patrolling of 
track as laid down through suitable  gangmen and to arrange for necessary  
equipment. SSE should check the night patrolman once a month by train and by 
trolley during monsoon as per the prescribed schedules.  
During the review of the compliance of schedule of above inspections  in the 
selected sections of five Zonal Railways, the following was observed: 
(i) In NCR, routine inspection of SSE was carried out and inspection notes were 
submitted to ADEN . However, surprise test check of patrolling was not 
conducted at all.  
(ii) In SER and ECR, Inspection Note of SSEs were not prepared. In ECR, action 
taken a nd compliance of Inspection Reports was not entered in the TMS  
whereas in SER action taken and compliance of Inspection Reports was not 
found on record. Thus, compliance of inspection could not be monitored by 
Assistant Engineer.  
(iii) In SWR, all SSEs carried out routine inspections of Track as per the Indian 
Railway Permanent Way Manual ( IRPWM) and irregularities noticed, if any, 
were recorded and reported to ADEN, during the review period. All SSEs 
deputed suitable men from gangs and required Patrol Books and necessary 
equipment such as Simplex Jacks, tools, flags, detonators, torches, etc. - were 
provided to the gangs.    
                                                           
29Para 125 of Indian Railway P-Way Manual 
30 Para 126 of Indian Railway P-Way Manual 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
17
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
17 
 
(iv) In SR, routine inspection of track, reporting of deficiencies to higher level 
officials, conduct of patrols, check  of patrolmen by SSE, pre -monsoon and  
post-monsoon patrol, etc. were carried out as per schedule.  
During Exit Conference (30 August 2017), Railway Board stated that inspection 
shortfall are mainly due to shortage of SSEs.  
Audit is of the view that the shortfall of SSEs being a safety related aspect needs 
to be properly addressed.  
2.2.1.3       Inspection by Assistant Divisional Engineer (ADEN) 
Rules31 provide that the ADEN shall conduct inspection in his jurisdiction as per 
the schedules laid down by the  Zonal Railway Administration from time to time . 
He should maintain the records of the results of his inspection and 
ensure compliance of the instructions within a reasonable time. He should submit 
copies of the  inspection diagram at the end of every month to the Divisional 
Engineer indicating the inspection carried out during the month . He should also 
scrutinise the registers maintained by P -way Inspector  and see whether t he 
schedules of inspection are being a dhered to by the Inspectors and whether the 
necessary follow up action is being  taken.The following inspections are 
prescribed32 to be carried out by the ADENs: 
Table 4 – Inspections schedule for ADENs 
Type of Inspection Details of inspection 
Trolley Inspection Entire sub-division once in two months. Work of 
minimum one gang in each SSE’s jurisdiction every 
quarter 
Fast Train Inspection Entire sub-division once in a month. 
Checking of curves, points and crossings One curve in each SSE’s jurisdiction every quarter 
and all points and crossings once a year on 
passenger lines  
Monsoon Patrolling Work of Patrolman at night once in a month 
Inspections of LWR/CWR Track Switch Expansion Joints (SEJs)/Buffer rails provided 
in the LWR/CWR track once in every six months.This 
implies that every SEJs/Buffer Rail 33 within the 
jurisdiction of ADEN should be inspected after every 
six months.  This gets converted to number of LWR 
to be inspected every month. 
(a) Shortfall in inspections 
During the review of records in connection with the adherence to the inspection 
schedule as mentioned above, the following was noticed: 
                                                           
31 Para 106 of Indian Railways P-Way Manual 
32Para 107 of Indian Railways P-Way Manual 
33 SEJs/Buffer rails are used at the end of LWRs for thermal expansion.  Butter rails are  ordinary rails of a much higher 
standard.  SEJs involve use of switch for the purpose. 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
18
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
18 
 
 Check of records of monthly inspection charts of ADEN revealed that there 
were shortfalls in inspections conducted by ADENs in NCR as given below: 
Table 5 – Deficiencies noticed in conducting inspections by ADENs during 2016 -1734 in NCR 
Name of the 
Selected 
Section 
Related 
ADEN 
Types of 
inspection 
Details of inspections not done along with 
section  
Jeonathpur – 
Mughalsarai /  
ADEN, 
Chunar 
Push Trolley 
inspection  
UP line of Jeonathpur – Kailahat  section in  
January to April 2016  
 Curve 
inspection 
Entire jurisdiction of ADEN during January to 
March 2016. 
Naini - Cheoki ADEN, 
Mirzapur 
Push Trolley 
inspection  
 UP main line section of Meja Road - Naini 
during January and February 2016 and DN 
line of Vindhyachal – Unchdhi section during 
January to April 2016.  
 Foot plate 
inspection 
DN line of Jhingura – Naini during January 
and February 2016 by ADEN, Mirzapur. 
Allahabad - 
Kanpur 
ADEN, 
Line, 
Allahabad 
Push Trolley 
inspection  
UP line of Bharwari – Shujaatpur and DN line 
of Bamhrauli      – Manoharganj during 
January – February 2016  
UP line section of Bharwari – Sath Naraini in 
the month of March and April 2016 
 Foot plate 
inspection 
Allahabad- Sath Naraini in DN line in the 
month of January 2016 to April 2016  
Juhi – Kanpur, 
Panki – Jhuhi, 
Jhuhi – Kanpur 
and Panki - 
Shikohabad 
ADEN, 
Line, 
Kanpur 
Push Trolley 
inspection  
Goods Marshalling Yard Kanpur (GMC) – Rura 
section during January – February 2016 and 
in DN line during March – April 2016. 
 Foot plate 
inspection 
GMC – Rura section in January – February 
2016 
 Inspections of 
LWR 
 For the Year 2016 out of 110 inspections of 
LWR 40 inspections were carried out in same 
month of planning.  Remaining 70 
inspections were not done in planned month 
and conducted in later months. 
 Inspections of 
Curve 
Out of 48 curve inspection planned in 2016 
only one inspection of curve was not 
delayed. Remaining were delayed by a 
month. 
Shikohabad - 
Panki 
ADEN, 
Etawah 
Push trolley 
inspection 
Phaphund – Ghasa during March – April 
2016. 
Tundla - 
Shikohabad 
ADEN, 
Firozabad 
Push trolley 
inspection 
UP main line section between Bhadan – 
Shikohabad during January –February 2016 
Foot plate 
inspection 
UP main line section of Jaswantnagar – 
Shikohabad during January – February 2016 
As seen in Audit, inspections were not carried out as per scheduled plan in the 
above sections of NCR . All the above sections are heavy traffic route and 
required frequent and regular inspections  to detect flaws in track. Audit 
further noticed that in the selected sections, though inspections of SSE offices, 
                                                           
34 Inspection programmes of ADEN are prepared and updated in TMS on the basis of calendar year i.e. January – December.  
Therefore, shortfall in inspection noticed in Audit during January 2016 to March 2016 were included in Audit findings. The 
results of inspection of last quarter of 2015-16 consequently fall in 2016-17 and that of 2016-17 (last quarter) in 2017-18. 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
19
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
19 
 
stores and small machines were conducted by the ADEN as per the plan, the 
inspection notes were not updated in TMS. 
 In ECR, in respect of non-HDN route, 415 inspections were done out of 1834 
inspections due, leaving a shortfall of 1425 inspections (78 per cent), which 
were mainly in inspection of LWR, points and crossings.  In res pect of HDN 
routes, out of total 793 inspections due to be done (LWR, Points & Crossings, 
Curves, etc.) 767 inspections were done. However, there was a shortfall of 11 
per cent in inspection of LWR. 
 No shortfalls in inspection of ADENs were  noticed in the selected sections of 
SER, SWR and SR during 2016-17. 
During Exit Co nference (30 August 2017), Railway Board stated that though 
ADENs are responsible for maintenance of track, they are also given the 
responsibilities relating to punctuality, cleanliness, protocol duties, special drives, 
etc. This results in arrears in their scheduled activities of inspection. Audit is of 
the view that  Railways need to address this issue so that A DENs are able to 
provide due attention on their primary responsibility of track maintenance. 
Shortfall in conductin g inspections as per prescribed nor ms, deficiencies in 
conducting inspections and not preparing notes of inspections in the HDN routes 
test checked in Audit are areas of concern, which Railways need to  address 
expeditiously. 
(b) Use of GPS based device for safety inspections 
It was further seen during foot plate/ brake van/ inspection car/ Push  trolley/ 
motor trolley inspections, a GPS based device can be used for marking and storing 
the location of track defects. The GPS based foot plate inspection device35 consists 
of a GPS receiver and a recording unit. The device stores the location ID of defects 
which can be retrieved on graphic LCD display in terms of latitude and longitude. 
Defects of un-evenness of track, ballast deficiency, bad weld, weeds on cess, loose 
packing, etc., are some of the defects which can be marked through the device. 
These devices are thus useful for effective monitoring of safety inspections. It was 
observed that GPS based Foot plate inspection device was not procured by any of 
the selected five Zonal Railways and inspection of track was carried out through 
traditional means. 
During Exit Conference (30 August 2017), Railway Board stated that assets of 
Indian Railways are not on GPS platform.  
                                                           
35 RDSO has finalized the specifications for this device vide specification no. TM/SM/326 dated 03.07.2012 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
20
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
20 
 
Audit is of the view that Railways need to use GPS based inspection device for 
inspection purpose.  This would also facilitate effective monitoring  of safety 
inspections. 
2.2.1.4      Testing using Ultrasonic Flaw Detection (USFD) machine 
The USFD manual prescribes a need -based concept of USFD testing 36 of rails, 
under which the rails already laid in track will be tested after the passage of eight 
gross million tonne (GMT) of traffic. In this method, by sending an ultrasonic signal 
directly into the rail and measuring the time it takes for the signal to bounce back, 
cracks can be located. Since a crack prevents the signal from reaching the base of 
the rail, it will bounce back more quickly, alerting the inspector to its presence.  
Departmental USFD testin g of rail is carried out under control  of Sr. Divisional 
Engineer, Co -ordination. He is assisted by Divisional Engineer Track and SSE, 
USFD. At the field level USFD team headed by Senior Section Engineers take care 
of day to day operations of USFD testing. Further, quality check of USFD testing is 
carried out by the concerned ADEN by 5 per cent test check of the section. Rules
37 
provide that  the Inspectors carrying out the ultrasonic testing of rails shall be 
trained by RDSO, in the techniques of USFD testin g. Each Zonal Rail way shall 
create adequate number of ex-cadre post of Inspectors to ensure that entire track 
length in their jurisdiction is ultrasonically tested as per  laid down periodicity . 
Railway Board (May 2015) also instructed to train all DENs/ADENs handling USFD 
Machines independently. In April 2015, Rail way Board expressed38 concern over 
increasing arrears in  the USFD testing due to non -finalization of agency for 
outsourcing. Railway  Board also expressed serious concern on outsourcing of 
safety critical USFD work  and felt that outsourcing by Zonal Railways may be 
resorted to only as an interim measure to clear the increased workload due to 
increase in frequency on account of increased traffic density , etc. and not as a 
regular measure.  
(i) Audit reviewed the utilisation of USFD machines over 37 selected sections of 
five Zonal Railways. It was observed that 
 Over selected sections of NCR, US FD testing was carried out by ten 
departmental teams under the control of DEN/Track Allahabad. Workshop 
for training and working of USFD testing was organised and all Sr . 
DEN/DEN /ADENs were trained to handle USFD machines . In SWR, only 
DENs/ADENs of Hubli Division were trained in the Workshop organized in 
February 2017. 
                                                           
36 Analog and digital 
37 Para 3 of Revised USFD manual 
38 Railway Board letter No.Trackl21/200410902/7/Vol. Il dated 22 April 2015 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
21
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
21 
 
 As per rules39, no rail untested by USFD is to be laid in the track whether 
for new lines or layouts or renewals or for repair works. For repairs and 
casual renewals a location wise creation of stock of tested rails of various 
lengths has been prescribed for each SSE. These USFD tested rails should 
be kept segregated in a lot and each such rail should be paint marked on 
the flange from each end as ' USFD tested '. In NCR, instructions for 
preparation of location wise stock of USFD tested rail was issued from time 
to time by divisional and Zonal offices. However, check of records of SSE 
and ADEN offices of selected section revealed that location-wise stock of 
USFD tested rails was not made and no system existed to ensure that only 
USFD tested rails were used for repair and casual renewal work. 
 As per provisions 40, railway staff should test check five  per cent  of the 
testing done by the contractor , within 25 per cent  time period of 
frequency of USFD testing done in that section or one month whichever is 
earlier. Further, if any new flaw is detected which was left out by the 
contractor during testing; the whole length of track (Track length of 50 
kms) should be tested again by the contractor without getting any extra 
payment for the same . In all selected section of NCR (ADEN – Allahabad, 
Firozabad, Kanpur, Mirzapur, Aligarh, Etawah, Chunar ) and SWR where 
the USFD testing was carried out by the contractor, five per cent test check 
was not conducted by the concerned ADEN . Consequently, this impacted 
the assurance of the quality of USFD testing carried out through 
outsourcing. This check was carried out in SER and not required in SR and 
ECR, as USFD testing was done departmentally. 
 As per RDSO’s guidelines, provisio n for capturing scanned images/ peak 
patterns should exist in the USFD machine to save the scanned data for 
use as and when required by the operators .  However, over selected 
section of NCR and ECR, scanned images /peak patterns was not saved by 
the USFD teams. Thus, scrutiny/analysis by concerned supervisory officers 
was also not possible during successive USFD tests. As such, the system of 
5 per cent test check by ADEN has been rendered redundant, as post check 
comparison of output of the USFD test by the outsourcing agency between 
the two tests was not possible . In SR, the USFD was being done 
departmentally and in regard to capturing of scanned images/peak 
patterns, no failure was noticed.  In SER and SWR, scanned images/peak 
patterns of USFD Testing were saved for the test conducted by 
contractors. In respect of Departm ental USFD Team, Scanned images/  
                                                           
39Para 252(4) of Indian Railways P-way Manual 
40Para 16 of Special Condition of the Contract 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
22
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
22 
 
peak patterns were saved only in cases of welds and rails requiring 
immediate replacement.  The non-saving of other images/peak patterns 
were attributed to shortage of staff. This is not convincing as no additional 
manpower is required to save images/patterns. 
(ii) Further, a s per codal provision s, new weld should be tested as soon as 
possible through USFD and after 1 st testing it should be entered in USFD 
schedule for next testing. It was seen that 
 In Kharagpur Division of SER, 3299 new welds were done contractually 
during April 2016 to Dec 2016. Of these, only 763 welds were USFD tested 
and balance 2536 welds were not tested till March 2017. 
 In SWR  and NCR , in selected s ections, cases were noticed where new 
welds were not tested by USFD within 30 days of welding. In SWR, testing 
of 40 welds out of 350 welds (during the period covered in Audit) was done 
beyond 30 days with delays ranging between four to eight months. In NCR 
information regarding date of testing of new weld was not recorded in the 
jurisdiction of ADEN/Kanpur in all cases and by ADEN/Chunar in 23 cases. 
Information was also not maintained over NCR by ADEN/Mirzapur and 
ADEN/Etawah. In jurisdiction of ADEN/Mirzapur and ADEN/Etawah, three 
and two welds respectively were seen from weld failure report where 
delays were up to 19 days. In ECR the new welds were be ing tested by 
USFD machine within 30 days. 
 In SR, USFD testing was done as per schedule and the same was monitored 
by SSE/USFD nominated for the purpose. 
(iii) A number of cases of f ailure of rail facture/weld failure during 2016-17 were 
detected within 30 days of these having undergone USFD testing. The details 
of these are given below: 
Table 6– Number of rail fracture/weld failure within one month of USFD testing during 2016-17 over 
selected sections 
Zonal 
Railway   
Numbers Remarks 
NCR 50 -- 
SER 21 In 19 cases, the result of USFD testing was found satisfactory during the 
course of USFD testing 
SWR 10 The USFD test preceding the event indicated the result of such a test as good. 
ECR 6 -- 
SR 1 -- 
Incidence of failure was  seen within three to 30 days of USFD testing , which 
showed deficiency in quality of USFD testing. In one particular case of ECR, where 
a train accident occurred on  Buxar – Ara section on 25 July 2016, Audit noticed 
that USFD testing of the section was carried out at a twelve month interval, 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
23
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
23 
 
whereas USFD testing of the section should have been carried out every three 
months as per provisions41 as the GMT of Buxar – Ara section (non – HDN route) 
was 39.274. It was further seen that enquiry report of the accident mentioned the 
final cause as ‘Multiple rail fracture and slackness in supervision’. 
During Exit Conference (30 August 2017), Railway Bo ard stated that at present, 
the USFD testing plan are uploaded in the TMS and results/ report of testing are 
also put into the system. The alert for the arrears is also displayed in the 
dashboard for monitoring purposes. It was also stated that there is an  option to 
save scanned images/ peak patterns of the USFD test undertaken. The response 
does not address the audit findings specifically. A s observed in audit, despite 
existence of the facility for saving the images, the same was not be ing utilized in 
the selected sections of NCR and ECR.  
Thus, there were shortcomings in USFD testing being done. Timely USFD testing 
could help detect the vulnerable points and accidents can be avoided.  
2.2.1.5      Recording of track using Track Recording Cars 
The Track Machines and Monitoring Directorate of RDSO monitors the track using 
Track Recording Cars
42 (TRC). The main purpose of these special carriages is 
assessment of the condition of track, identification of locations needing 
maintenance and providing data to Railway Board and Zonal Railways. While track 
geometry monitoring of Metre Gauge routes 43 is not to be done by TRCs, the 
Broad Gauge routes should be monitored by TRC as per the following frequencies 
(except for the routes where track recording has been dispensed with): 
Table 7 – Frequency of track recording prescribed 
i) Routes with existing speeds above 130 kmph Once in 2 months 
ii) Routes with existing speeds above 110 kmph and up to 130 
kmph 
Once in 3 months 
iii) Other Group 'A' and 'B' routes Once in 4 months 
iv) Group 'C', 'D' and 'D Special' Routes Once in 6 months 
v) Group 'E' and 'E Special' Routes Once in 12 months 
On receipt of track recording car programme from the R DSO, the Zonal Railways 
should arrange for suitable power and path along with telecommunication 
arrangement between the track recording car and the locomotive 44. The 
Headquarters should advise the Divisions concerned for making necessary 
arrangements to ensure that the Track Recording Car has an uninterrupted run.  
                                                           
41 Para 3 of Revised USFD Manual- where GMT is between 30 and 40, the USFD testing should be done quarterly 
42 These include five Microprocessor Based Track Recording Cars, one LASER based contact less sensors TRC and one Rail 
Profile Inspection & Analysis System 
 43Para 606 ofIndian Railway P-way Manual 
44Para 609 of Indian Railway P-way Manual 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
24
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
24 
 
The Divisiona l Engineer, Assistant Engineer and P -way Inspector of the section 
and nominated officer/staff of Headquarters office should accompany the Track 
Recording run45. The recording speed range of a Broad Gauge car is 70-80 kmph. 
The recording done below these spe eds are taken as 'non-recorded'. For 
obtaining comparable results between successive recordings, it is necessary to 
run the TRC at a uniform speed. The TRC must run on through lines of all stations. 
Recording should be done during day light hours. Spots (kms) requiring immediate 
attention, indicated by large peaks should be noted down by the Assistant 
Engineer/P-way Inspector accompanying the car and immediate attention should 
be given to these spots without loss of time
46. 
(i) Check of records of annual deployment plan of TRC at Track Machine & 
Monitoring Directorate, 
RDSO, Lucknow for the 
year 2016 -17 revealed 
that track recording was 
not conducted as per 
plan due to non -
availability of adequate 
number of TRCs. There 
were only four
47 TRCs in 
the RDSO for recording of 
entire track of Indian Rail ways. The details of functioning of these four TRCs 
during the year 2016-17 are mentioned below: 
Table 8 - Deployment of Track recording Cars over BG sections of Indian Railway during 2016-17 
Month Track recording in Km 
 TRC 7965 TRC 7967 TRC 7968 TRC 7969 
April 2016 3604 3185 3658 Under repair 
May 2016 2784 3332 Under repair Under repair 
June 2016 1292 915 Under repair 4626 
July 2016 3149 3582 Under repair 3171 
Aug 2016 1993 Under repair Under repair Under repair 
Sep 2016 2619 Under repair Under repair 3631 
Oct2016 3441 Under repair Under repair 2650 
Nov 2016 Under repair Under repair Under repair Under repair 
Dec 2016 4575 3080 Under repair Under repair 
Jan 2017 5037 Under repair Under repair 4934 
Feb 2017 4115 3835 Under repair 871 
Mar 2017 2895 6309 Under repair Under repair 
Recording plan 
cumulative (kms) 
36581 24621 3645 20265 
                                                           
45Para 610 of Indian Railway P-way Manual 
46Para 611 of Indian Railway P-way Manual 
47TRC 7965, TRC 7967, TRC 7968 and TRC 7969 
Figure 3: Track Recording Car 


Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
25
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
25 
 
Table 8 - Deployment of Track recording Cars over BG sections of Indian Railway during 2016-17 
Month Track recording in Km 
 TRC 7965 TRC 7967 TRC 7968 TRC 7969 
Actual run 
cumulative (kms) 
35504 24238 3658 19883 
Short/excess 
cumulative (kms) 
-1077 -383 13 -382 
From the above table, it can be seen that three of the four TRCs available with 
RDSO were under repair for substantive part of the year and one TRC was run only 
during one month in 2016-17 and remained under repair for the entire year. Out 
of the total recording plan  of 85112 km, the four TR Cs covered 83283 kms with 
only a shortfall of 1829 km s, because n o track recording was planned in the 
months when TRCs were under repair. As per the report for the year 2016 -17 of 
the Track Monitoring Directorate of RDSO, total liability of track recording on IR 
was around 1,95,000 track kms.  
(ii) Audit further observed that 
 In NCR track recording was conducted once against required four runs in 
2016-17. TRC did not have an uninterrupted run over selected sections of 
NCR and the speed of TRC was also not uniform . Thus, comparable results 
between successive recordings were not produced by TRC.  
 In SER, TRC was run once in selected sections against four scheduled runs to 
be conducted in a year in HDN route (A route). No TRC run was done during 
the last three years in Santragachi-Tikiapara and Tikiapara – Howrah section 
as the TRC starts its journe y from Santragachi onwards. TRC run was not 
done in the selected non-HDN routes during the year 2016-17. 
 In ECR, track recording were not conducted as per frequency prescribed. In 
both HDN sections (A route) and non-HDN sections (B route), TRC was run 
two times during the year 2016 -17 against the provision of once in four 
month for both A and B  routes. 
 In SWR, no TRC run was done during the year 2016-17 in ‘D Special’ route. 
 In SR, against three track recordings to be done in a year, only two track 
recordings were conducted during the year 2016-17. 
During Exit Conference (30 August 2017), Railway Board stated that the results of 
track recording data are handed over to division for uploading in TMS and the 
same is used as one of the inputs for planning track maintenance activities in the 
section. They however, agreed with audit observation regarding TRCs not having 
an uninterrupted run in Zonal Railways and stated that it is desirable to have an 
uninterrupted run, but it may not be possible due to heav y traffic density in the 
sections. It was also stated that all four TRCs are at present working , but are not 
adequate for the entire Indian Railways. It was mentioned that RDSO has placed 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
26
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
26 
 
an order for one more TRC and preparation of specification for  three more TRCs 
was in process for procurement. 
Thus, TRCs could not be used optimally due to frequent breakdowns and repairs. 
Non-deployment of TRCs over the planned sections led to non-checking of track 
parameters viz., position, curvature, alignment of track, smoothness, rail 
profile, etc. as per laid down frequency. 
2.2.1.6 Track circuiting for detection of rail fractures 
a) Track Circuits 
Track circuits are electrical circuits, that are set up in such a way that when a train 
is on the tracks that are part of the track circuit, the circuit is altered in some way 
(usually, by current that normally flows in the track circuit being shunted through 
the conductive body of the train), thereby activating a detector which may then 
be used, e.g., to set signals at danger for the section. 
In substance, Track Circuit is a low powered electrical circuit in which running rails 
are used as a part of the circuit.  With the help of track circuit,  one can identify 
whether the particular section is clear or occupied by a train / vehicles or track 
circuit is in failed condition. It is highly reliable for effective and safe running of 
trains. A Direct Current (DC) track circuit  has mainly two ends i.e . feed end and 
relay end. A track circuit gives two indications: 
Table 9 – Indications in track circuiting 
1. Yellow / White / No light 
indication 
When track circuit portion is clear i.e. when line is 
unoccupied. 
2. Red indication When track circuit portion is occupied by a vehicle or track 
circuit is in fail ed condition. Reason of failure of track 
circuit could be fracture in rail or failure in power supply. 
Track circuits work by running a circuit using the rails to connect a power source 
at one en d of the block with a  relay at the far end. The relay and power source 
are connected to each rail by cables. As long as the circuit is complete the relay 
will be energized, which keeps signals in the “clear” position. When the circuit is 
broken due to occupation by a vehicle the track circuit system gives reports with 
red indication. The track circuit system also reports a red indication when the 
circuit gets interrupted for other reasons which primarily could be weld failure / 
rail failure due to fracture or non-availability of power supply.  
b) Axle Counters 
Axle counters are devices that can count the number of axles of vehicles passing 
through them on the track. Axle counters are installed at either end of the section 
of track of interest; when the number of axles counted at entrance to the section 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
27
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
27 
 
is the same as the number of axles counted exiting the section, it means the train 
has passed thr ough the section intact. Axle counters are used in some cases 
where track circuits are hard or impossible to operate (e.g., where metal sleepers 
are provided or where conditions are such that there is too much electrical noise 
and conductivity problems that make track circuits unworkable). 
c) Provision of Dual Detection - Digital Axle Counter in parallel with AFTC /DC 
track circuits 
The availability of track vacancy detection equipment in station section (DC track 
circuits) and in Automatic B lock Sections (Audio Frequency Track circuit) is 
increased by providing Axle counter to work in parallel with DC track circuits / 
AFTCs. This arrangement is called as ‘dual track vacancy detection’ (AFTC or DC 
track circuits + Axle Counter) which in turn ensures less disruption of train traffic. 
During failure of DC track circuit / AFTC, the axle counters  will be available and 
signal will continue to display , red/yellow/green depending upon whether the 
section is occupied by a train/vehicle. Similarly, during axle counter failure, DC 
track circuits / AFTC is available in order to avoid traffic disruption. 
Thus, it is essential to provide continuous track circuiting or axle counters  in the 
Automatic Block System 48. The Automatic Block System controls the movement 
of trains between the blocks using automatic signals. In this system , signals are 
designed to allow trains operating in the same direction to follow each other in a 
safe manner without risk or rear -end collision.  Continuous track circuiting not 
only helps in improving the capacity with automatic block signaling where more 
than one train can be sent in a block section , but also improves safety. If double 
rail track circuit (audio frequency track circuit) is adopted, it can detect electrical 
discontinuity in ra ils due to rail/weld failures or acts of sabotage, etc. and thus 
can be used for detection of rail fracture/weld failure.  
In Indian Railways dual detection system comprising of track circuiting as well as 
axle counters simultaneously is used on the same t rack length of the automatic 
block section.  The use of dual detection system ensures that signal remains in a 
clear position , even if there is an electrical discontinuity in the circuit due to 
power failure/rail fracture. So a red indication in the signal  requiring restricting 
the movement , would arise , when both axle counter and track circuiting 
simultaneously satisfy the condition that the concerned track length is occupied 
by the train. In other words as long as either of the two i.e. track circuiting or axle 
counter gives a clear signal, the signal to the locomotive driver would be clear.  
From the control panel located at the station, the Station Master would know if 
                                                           
48 Both the axle counters as well as track circuiting can work simultaneously in an Automatic Block System 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
28
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
28 
 
there is a failure of  track circuiting without knowing the reason for the same . In 
such circumstance, he can switch over the system to axle counter mode only and 
allow the train movement on the basis of signal based on axle counter mode.  
Thus, as long as Railway Administration assures itself that error signal by the track 
circuiting system is not related to track occupancy and hence the collision of the 
trains is not an area of concern, the error signal of the track circuiting is bypassed 
by switching over to axle counter mode. As the error signal in the track circuit 
could also be an indication of a rail fracture among other reasons, there is a need 
to explore the possibility of using the same for detection of potential rail fracture 
and putting in place a control mechanism like speed restrictions, for ensuring 
safety for rail operations. Audit observed that the operation instructions did not 
require the Station Master to look into the reasons for failure of track circuiting 
and take any action like imposing speed restriction on the movement of the trains 
or issue any alert. 
In NCR, Allahaba d-Ghaziabad section has Automatic Block Signaling System. An 
accident of Train no. 12987, Sealdah -Ajmer Express  occurred at Rura on 
28.12.2016 at 5:30 hrs in which over 50 persons were injured and a loss of ` 5.16 
crore was estimated on account of  damages to assets. The enquiry by 
Commissioner for Railway Safety (CRS) was still going on. The preliminary report 
which is required to be given after one month and Final report which is due from 
CRS within six months of the date of accident, were yet to be given. (June 2017) 
Audit reviewed the records of joint observation note of supervisors on accident 
and found that though DC track circuit failure incident occurred at 2:16:47 on 28 
December 2016, no follow up action was taken by Station Master on the incident 
of failure of track circuiting. A number of trains travelled on the track between 
2:16 to 5:30, before the Train no. 12987 derailed. As per the Supervisors Joint 
note of Rura accident, the probable finding was rail fracture. The current 
approach in Indian Railways is not to use the output of track circuiting for 
detecting rail fracture and bypass such indication, till the time it is not related to 
track occupancy and hence could result in collision.  Had the Railway 
Administration used this failure in dication of track circuiting for examination of 
potential rail fracture, this rail accident could have been prevented.  Since track 
circuiting failure have the potential of identifying rail fractures on real time basis, 
directives to use it for identificat ion or ruling out of rail fractures should be 
considered. 
During Exit Conference (30 August 2017), Railway Board stated that track 
circuiting is a reliable method of detecting defects in track. In the dual detection 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
29
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
29 
 
system, axle counters are used as an alt ernative in case of failure in track 
circuiting. In the particular accident case pointed out by Audit, when the track 
circuiting failed, mode of train operation was shifted to axle counter without 
ascertaining the cause of failure of track circuiting. It was further stated that world 
over Railways only use one methodology viz., track circuiting for train operation 
and do not use dual detection system. However, due to traffic density, Indian 
Railways use dual detection system.  
It was also stated that while using dual detection system, utmost caution is 
required. In case of failure of track circuiting while switching over to axle counters, 
speed restriction with caution order need to be imposed. Safety Review 
Committee (Para 20.5.7) had also recommended that the signal should be put to 
single yellow/double yellow aspect as soon as track circuit drops in dual detection 
territory, so that train speed is controlled to lower speed while passing the 
affected zone, which may have rail fracture.  
Audit is of the view that Railways need to put a mechanism in place to examine 
the reasons for the failure of track circuiting and only after being satisfied that 
the reason is not rail fracture, should the train be allowed to move further. In 
such circumstances, the error signal of track circuit should be examined for rail/ 
weld fracture and till such time, a speed restriction should be prescribed for the 
identified track length. 
2.2.2 Periodical maintenance activities -  Preventive measures  
In order to maintain the track in good condition, Rail ways undertake various 
preventive measures. These include Deep Screening of ballast and De-stressing of 
Long Welded Rails (LWR)/ Continuous Welded Rails (CWR) following the 
prescribed procedures.  
2.2.2.1 Deep Screening of ballast 
It is essential that track is well drained for which screening of ballast should be 
carried out periodically 49. Due to presence of bad formation, ballast attrition, 
excessive rain fall and dropping of ashes and ore, ballast getting chok ed up, the 
track drainage is impaired. In such situations, it becomes necessary to screen the 
entire ballast right up to the formation level /sub-ballast level. Further, thorough 
screening restores the resiliency and elasticity of the ballast bed, resultin g in 
improved running quality of track . Such screening is called ‘d eep screening’, as 
distinguished from the shallow screening, which is done, during overhauling. The 
work of deep screening should be carried out continuously from one end of the 
                                                           
49Para 238 of Indian Railways P-Way Manual 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
30
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
30 
 
section to the other. Deep screening should be carried out by providing full ballast 
cushion prior to Complete Track Renewal (CTR) and T hrough Sleeper Renewal 
(TSR), w here the caking of ballast has resulted in unsatisfactory riding , before 
converting existing track, fish plated or Short welded Rail (SWR) into LWR or CWR; 
or before introduction of machine maintenance, unless the ballast was screened 
in recent past. The entire track must be deep screened at least once in ten years. 
The activities of deep screening of ba llast over selected sections of five Zonal 
Railways were reviewed and it was observed that 
 Over selected sections of NCR deep screening of ballast was carried out 
manually on contractual basis and mechanically with the help of Track  
machines. Over the selected sections (total length 228.28 kms) of NCR, deep 
screening was not done in 214 locations covering 65 kms (28.47 per cent ) 
though it was due since the 1995 to 2016. The range of delay in deep screening 
was one year to 22 years  over these 21 4 locations. Further, in 18 locations 
covering 4.98 kms, the deep screening was overdue for more than 10 years; 
in four locations (between Shikohabad -Tundla, Panki -Etawah, Govindpuri -
Panki and Kanpur-Govindpuri sections) covering 1.35 km, deep screening was 
overdue for more than 20 years. The main reasons for delay in deep screening 
was attributed to non -availability of block, delay in approval of proposal, 
shortage of contractual labour and use of manual method of deep screening, 
etc.  
 In SWR, over the sel ected section (total length 242.07 kms), deep screening 
was not done in 86 locations covering 51.51 kms (21.28 per cent) though it 
was overdue for a period ranging from three to 66 mo nths. The reasons for 
not carrying out deep screening was stated as not included in the annual plan, 
delay in execution of works, sanction of Through Fitting Renewals (TFR) works 
in the subsequent immediate period, etc. In Heavy Traffic Sections, Deep 
Screening was done by machines. 
 In SR out of three selected section (124.59 kms), in two sections
50 covering 
100.43 kms, deep screening of ballast was not done in 5.18 kms, which were 
due during 2010-11 and 2011-12 respectively and carried out during 2016-17 
after a delay of five years.  
 All the deep screening work in selected HDN and Non -HDN routes was done 
mechanically during 2016-17. In selected non-HDN route of ECR (total length 
211 kms), the deep screening was done only in 0.924 kms as against the 
62.218 kms due in 2016-17 leaving shortfall of 98.5 per cent. The reasons for 
shortfall were non-availability of Ballast Cleaning Machine due to shifting of 
                                                           
50SSE/P Way/AVD -Down Slow EMU Line and SSE/P Way/TRL – Down slow EMU line 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
31
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
31 
 
base of machines to other locations; machine remained under maintenance, 
non-availability of blocks, etc. In selected HDN routes, deep scre ening of 
228.57 kms was due but only 37.14 kms was planned and done during 2016 -
17. The reason for non -inclusion of all the due portion of deep screening of 
track in annual programme of 2016 -17 was not found on record. For HDN 
sections in ECR , a s on 31  March 2017, deep screening was overdue at 63 
locations ranging from one to nine years.  The main reasons for delay in deep 
screening were non-availability of block, delay in approval of proposal, etc.  
 In SER, in all the selected sections  (total length 396.20 kms) , deep screening 
of ballast was not carried out  regularly. In 16 locations covering 78.87 kms 
deep screening was overdue. I n some sub -sections of seven sections 
(Kharagpur-Tata, Mecheda -Panskura, Jharsuguda- Rourkela, Rourkla -
Bondamunda, Panskura-Haldia, Santragachi-Tikiapara and Tikiapara-Howrah), 
last deep screening was done more than 10 to 16 years back. However, the 
deep screening work in these sub -sections was not  done in 2016 -17. The 
reasons for the same were non -sanctioning o f work, non -finalization of 
tender, non -availability of block, shifting of machine, non -availability of 
sleepers, etc. 
Annexure I 
During Exit Conference (30 August 2017) Railway Board agreed with the audit 
observations and stated that non -availability of b locks is the main reasons for 
overdue deep screening of ballast. Audit is of the view that availability of blocks 
is within the control of Indian Railways and the same should be provided for track 
maintenance works. 
Thus, there were significant arrears in deep screening work, which impacts the 
resiliency and elasticity of the ballast bed with consequent impact on running 
quality of tracks. 
2.2.2.2 De-stressing of LWR/CWR 
The safety of LWR track is vitally affected by locked up thermal stresses, which 
can result in rail buckling or rail fractures. De-stressing is a technique to avert rail 
track problems in LWR or CWR. When installing a new rail, or before the onset of 
hot weather, the rail is pulled or stretched by hydraulic tensors
51 or heated along 
its entire length to an equivalent length to that the rail would be at the stress free 
temperature. As per rules52 de-stressing is undertaken with or without rail tensors 
to secure stress free conditions in the LWR /CWR at the desired /specified rail 
                                                           
51 A rail tensor is a hydraulic or mechanical device use for stretching the rail physically to keep rail free from thermal stress 
52Para 1.9 of Manual of Instructions on LWR 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
32
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
32 
 
temperature. Railway Board  further instructed ( 21 February 2012 ) that  track 
works should not be undertaken manually on A B C & D special routes without the 
approval of Additional Member/Civil Engineering.   
As per rules 53, de -stressing shall be undertaken whenever the abnormal  
behaviour of LWR /CWR gets manifested in the form of gap between Switch 
Expansion Joint (SEJ) beyond limits, after Through Fittings Renewal  (TFR), deep 
screening /mechanized cleaning of ballast, l owering/lifting of track , major 
realignment of curves, sleeper renewal other than casual renewals, rehabilitation 
of bridges and formation causing disturbance to track , after restoration of track 
following an unusual occurrence and i f number of locations where temporary 
repairs have been done exceed three per km. 
The activity of de-stressing of LWR/CWR was examined in the selected sections of 
five Zonal Railways. It was observed that 
 In NCR, need based de -stressing was carried out without using rail tensors. 
Further, in Tundla – Shikohabad section, the work of de-stressing was overdue 
in two locations of main line section between S arai Bhopat and Shikohabad  
which became due after use of Ballast Cleaning Machine (BCM) in one location 
and in other location, de-stressing was done on high temperature early due 
to which extra stresses were developed in LWR. Proposal for de–stressing was 
sent (July 2016) to Divisional offices by the ADEN / Firozabad but the same 
was yet to be approved by the Di visional office till the date of audit (June 
2017). 
 During the check of records maintained in SSE offices of selected sections of  
SER, it was noticed that  
o In four sections (Kharagpur -Tata, Mecheda -Panskura, Jharsuguda -
Rourkela, Muri-Barkakana), though special track maintenance was done 
during 2004 to 2015, the de-stressing work was not done in these sections 
after maintenance work of Deep Screening and Complete Track Renewal 
works.  
o In Kharagpur-Tata, under SSE, Jhargram, de -stressing was d one in 2009, 
but due to absence of any record, it could not be ascertained whether 
further de-stressing was done.  
o In Santragachi -Tikiapara and Jharsuguda -Rourkela sections under SSE, 
Santragachi and Rajganpur, de -stressing was done during 2003 and 2004 
respectively, no further de -stressing was done. Even in Santragachi -
Tikiapara, de-stressing was done in one LWR in 2007 and four LWR in 2010. 
No further de-stressing was done in this section till date.  
                                                           
53Para 6.4.1 of Manual of Instructions on LWR 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
33
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
33 
 
 In SR, SWR and ECR, the de -stressing of rails was carri ed out in the sections 
checked.  
During Exit Conference (30 August 2017), Railway Board stated that main 
constraint is non-availability of required block. It was mentioned that Rail tensors 
are used while de-stressing of rails only when the required temperature is below 
the prescribed threshold. As the time required for de -stressing using rail tensors 
is more and usually longer maintenance blocks are not available, manual de -
stressing is resorted to. They further stated that arrear on account of de-stressing 
gets accumulated, if the blocks are not provided when the de -stressing 
temperature is available. 
Thus, delay in de-stressing in selected sections after special maintenance work, 
may have a bearing on the safety as thermal stress gets locked up in the LWR 
which may result in buckling or fractures.  Railways need to provide required 
time of block for de-stressing work to avoid cases of rail fractures/buckling. 
2.2.2.3     Contractual works for track maintenance  
Proposal for contractual works in connection with the repair and maintenance of 
permanent way is initiated by the PWI (Permanent Way Inspector) office and sent 
to division for approval . This could involve multiple activities of regular and 
periodical maintenance in the section to be undertaken through outsourcing. 
During the review of records related to contractual works such as change of 
damaged track due to derailment, deep screening of ballast, turnout renewal, de-
stressing of track on main line , etc. for track maintenance over selected sections 
of five Zonal Railways, the following was observed 
 Review of tender document and contract agreements in NCR and SER showed 
that in all the selected sections, the clause for employment of skilled staff by 
contractor was not incorporated in the agreement. However, in ECR, the same 
was incorporated and certificate for the purpose was collected from the 
contractors.  
 In SER, as per the special conditions of contracts, the contractor is suppos ed 
to engage Supervisors and send them for training to a railway training centre 
and bear the cost of training payable to the railways. It was observed that the 
contractors were not sending their supervisors for training for acquiring 
required skill set. There was no penalty clause in the contract for not adhering 
to this specific condition of contract. 
During Exit Conference (30 August 2017), Railway Board stated that normally 
there is a clause in the contract for skilled supervision. Audit stated that in respect 
of maintenance by departmental staff, there is a requirement of the concerned 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
34
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
34 
 
staff bei ng trained and skilled. Similar  requirement, however, is not there in 
respect of maintenance being done through contractors.  
Thus, Railways need to ensure incorporation of a clause for deployment of 
skilled labours under the supervision of trained personnel and provision for 
penalty in case of non -compliance, for ensuring quality of work done by the 
contractors. 
2.2.3 Corrective actions based on condition monitoring 
Using the detective and preventive methodolog ies discussed above, Rail ways 
monitor various track parameters and take necessary corrective actions. These 
parameters include rail fracture, weld failure and other defects in rails, crossings, 
sleepers, etc.  
2.2.3.1 Rail fractures and weld failures 
The life of rails, sleepers, and 
fastenings gets adversely affected 
due to the extra  stresses created 
by the impact of moving loads on 
the rail joint. The rail end s 
particularly get battered and 
hogged and chances of rail 
fracture at joints are  considerably 
high due to fatigue stresses in the 
rail ends. Rail fractures occur when a small crack turns into a larger one and they 
occur in the season when there is a significant difference between the maximum 
and minimum temperatures in the day, since those cause the tracks to expand 
and contrac t. P oor maintenance and fitting could also be the cause of a small 
crack that over time could lead to a separation of rails. This results in a break in 
the tracks, which causes the bogie to  go off the rails, aff ecting all the coaches 
behind it. The Ultrasonic Flaw Detection Manual54 identifies the m ost common 
cause of rail failure as the fatigue fracture, which is due to imperfections present 
in the material or due to crack formation during service.  
(a) Process of welding of rail joints  
Rails are produced in fixed lengths and need to be joined end to end to make a 
continuous surface on which trains may run. For joining of the rails welding of 
ends of two rails is carried out. A weld failure could be a result of poor quality of 
welding. As envisaged in the Corporate Safety Plan  (2003-13) and Vision 2020 of 
                                                           
54Chapter 1 of Revised USFD Manual  
Figure 4: Rail fracture 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
35
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
35 
 
Indian Railways , to improve t he quality of welds and enhance  safety, the 
population of Alumino Thermite Welds was to be gradually reduced and replaced 
by Flash Butt (FB) welds with the help of mobile flash butt welding plants.  The 
advantages of FB welds over an Alumino Thermite weld are as follows: 
 
Table 10 – FB welds versus Alumino Thermite welds 
 FB weld AT weld 
Principles of welding Welding is done by 
passing a 35,000A 
electric current between 
two rails ends. 
Welding is done by initiating an 
exothermic chemical reaction 
between iron oxide and 
aluminium  
Quality of welding Excellent Good 
Strength of welding Good in fatigue Weak in fatigue 
Time required for 
welding  
About 3-6 minutes 10-12 minutes for SKV55 and 30-45 
minutes for conventional  
Place of welding Welding normally done 
in workshop, but can be 
done on-site using 
mobile plant 
Welding done onsite 
Cost of welding ` 400-600 per weld ` 700-1200 per weld 
Tolerance Very high Normal 
Control on the quality 
of welding 
Quality can be controlled 
with the help of a 
welding recorder 
Quality control is possible only by 
working diligently and no 
monitoring is possible.  
Slow progress in induction of mobile flash butt welding was attributed to mobile 
flash butt welding plants being bulky requiring more space and long spells of 
traffic blocks. 
In April 2014, Rail way Board 
instructed56 that all the tenders of 
Alumino Thermite Welding were to 
be only with single shot crucible 57 
after 1 April 2015 . The use of multi -
shot in Alumino Thermite welding 
after 1 April 2015 was to be 
discontinued and permitted only as 
an exception. Railway Board further 
instructed58 (March 2015) that  one 
weld in every division will be got executed by Chief Track Engineers (CTEs) in their 
                                                           
55 SKV is the short form of the German phrase Schweiss-Verfahranmit Kurzvorwarmung meaning the short preheat welding 
method. The technique is therefore also termed SPW (short preheat welding).  
56 Railway Board’s letter no .Track/21/2007/0110/AT Welding dated 2 April 2014 
57 Single shot crucible is an improved AT welding technology in which a portion of welding material is directly set on top of 
the mould without any hardware.  
58 Railway Board letter no .Track/21/2002/090S/7IVoI.II dated 18 March 2015 
Figure 5: Weld failure 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
36
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
36 
 
presence, observing all instr uctions of checklist of Alumino Thermite Welding. 
Similarly, initial testing of one new weld per division was to be got executed by 
CTEs in their presence observing all instructions of checklist of Ultrasonic Flaw 
Detection testing and report sent to Railway Board. In case of the work being done 
by a contractor, provisions exist for re-welding of failed welds free of cost by the 
contractor within the guarantee period. For failure beyond a prescribed criteria, 
a penalty is to be paid by the contractor. 
Audit examined relevant records pertaining to the rail fracture/ weld failure over 
the selected sections of five Zonal Railways. The details are given below: 
Table11 – Rail fractures and weld failures in selected sections during 2015-16 and 2016-17 
Zonal 
Railway 
Accidents  
due to rail 
fractures/ 
weld 
failures  
Number of rail 
fractures 
Number of 
Alumino 
Thermite 
weld 
failures  
Number of Flash 
Butt weld 
failures  
Reasons 
2015-16 2016-17 2015-16 2016-17 2015-16 2016-17 
SWR 01 30 95 89 220 05 12 One accident 
occurred in 2015-
16 due to rail 
fracture. No 
casualties were 
reported. 
SR Nil 11 12 4 4 4 1 Liner seat 
corrosion and 
corrosion at weld 
area 
ECR 5 39 34 9 11 6 5 Sudden rail 
fracture 
SER 0 10 9 2 3 1 2 -- 
NCR 01 15 19 31 35 10 11 Final report of 
investigation still 
awaited. 
Total 07 105 169 135 273 26 31  
From the above table, it can be seen that  
 Seven accidents occurred in the selected 37 sections over five Zonal Railways 
due to rail fracture/ weld failure during the past two years.  
 In SWR and SR, number of rail fractures increased as compared to the previous 
year. Further, number of Flash Butt weld failures was much less than that of 
Alumino Thermite weld failures. 
 In SWR, the reasons of sudden increase i n rail/weld failures in 2016 -17 were 
attributed to change in the method of reporting 59 since October 2016. 
                                                           
59From October 2016 onwards all incidents of weld/rail fractures are being reported to Railway Board. Earlier, rail/weld 
fractures only of a serious nature were reported to Railway Board. 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
37
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
37 
 
Further, Flash Butt Welding was yet to be taken up in a big way and hence, no 
comparative study could be made between Flash Butt Welding and Alumino 
Thermite Welding works/failures. 
(b) Flash Butt welding versus Alumino Thermite welding 
A comparison of defects in the Alumino Thermite weld population and Flash Butt 
weld population was done in selected sections of five Zonal Railways. It was 
observed that percentage defects in Alumino Thermite weld were much higher 
than FB weld as can be seen from the table below: 
Table 12 – Weld failures in selected sections of NCR during 2016-17 
ADEN / SSE AT weld 
population 
Defective 
weld in 
USFD 
testing 
Percentage FB Weld 
population 
Defective 
weld in 
USFD 
testing 
Percentage 
NCR 
ADEN – Etawah 4953 1323 26.71 15747 67 0.43 
ADEN - Kanpur 6999 1844 26.35 12746 132 1.01 
ADEN - Chunar 6785 957 14.10 5393 26 0.41 
ADEN - Firozabad 21490 1105 5.14 18261 71 0.39 
SSE - Naini 543 99 18.23 1524 15 0.98 
SSE - Allahabad 514 153 30.93 175 7 4 
SSE - Dadri 1965 121 6.16 4183 3 0.07 
Total 43,249 5,602 12.95 58,029 321 0.55 
SER 
ADEN/PKU 5437 58 1.07 12176 38 0.31 
ADEN/JGM 12931 111 0.86 12978 44 0.34 
ADEN/Satragachi 11724 142 1.21 2329 06 0.26 
ADEN/BLS 18327 246 1.34 14343 22 0.15 
ADEN/TMZ 16929 62 0.37 10894 36 0.33 
ADEN/Kharagpur 10723 52 0.48 10083 57 0.57 
TOTAL 76,071 671 0.88 62,803 203 0.32 
SWR 
AEN - Bellary 7590 1679 22.12 222 02 0.90 
AEN - Gadag 6619 1302 19.67 - - 0.00 
AEN - Central 6398 1586 24.79 - - 0.00 
AEN - Belagavi 9133 1801 19.72 523 04 0.76 
AEN - Castlerock 4949 780 15.76 1441 14 0.97 
TOTAL 34,689 7,148 20.61 2,186 20 0.91 
 In NCR, Alumino Thermite welding was not initiated with single shot crucible. 
However, in some cases use of single shot crucible was noticed only after 
January 2017. 
 In SER, Alumino Thermite welding with single shot crucible was started after 
April 2017 instead of April 2015 i.e. after a lapse of two years by SSE/Rourkela 
and SSE/Kolaghat under Jharsuguda – Rourkela and Mecheda – Panskura 
sections respectively. 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
38
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
38 
 
 In SWR, Alumino Thermite welding was done with single shot crucible with 
effect from 1 April 2015.  
 In ECR, Alumino Thermite welding with single shot crucible was started in non-
HDN route with effect from October 2016 after delay of 18 month and in HDN 
route with effect from June 2016 after delay of 14 month. The reason was 
attributed to delay in supply of material. 
 In SR, Alumino Thermite welding was not being done with single shot crucible 
and instead done by auto thimble (pre-fabricated piece). During March 2017, 
a contract has been awarded for Alumino Thermite welding with single shot 
crucible in the Chennai Central-Arrakonam section. 
 In NCR and ECR, initial testing of one new weld exec uted in presence of CTEs 
was not done. 
 In NCR, welding work was carried out departmentally and by the staff  of 
contractor. No case of contractors’ failure and imposition of penalty as per 
contract ibid were noticed in NCR, ECR and SWR. 
During Exit Conference (30 August 2017), Railway Board stated that they use 
Alumino Thermite welds only for repair work. It was also stated that while flash 
butt welding is better methodology for welding of rails, it is techno-economically 
not feasible for welding in all cases. As such, flash butt welding is being used in 
joining rails in depots and Alumino Thermite weld judiciously used for repair work 
only. At present there are seven flash butt welding plants in Indian Railways, 
renewal of which has been planned. However, Audit observed that railways have 
taken a policy view for gradually reducin g the population of Alumino Thermite 
Welds and replace them by Flash Butt (FB) welds with the help of mobile flash 
butt welding plants.  Railway Board has also issued various instructions over the 
years for reducing the number of AT welds and using mobile f lash butt welding 
plants instead to enhance the quality of welds and safety of tracks.  However, 
progress made in this regard was not satisfactory. 
Railway Board further stated that 70 per cent of rails procured from SAIL are 13/26 
m and 30 per cent rails are 130 m which are joined to make LWR. It was added 
that it is planned to have 70 per cent rails of 130 m which will need lesser number 
of field welds.  
Railway Board  also stated that availability of block of minimum 75 minutes is 
essential for goo d quality Alumino Thermite welding, which is usually not made 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
39
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
39 
 
available. Audit is of the view that Railways need to ensure availability of required 
block time for ensuring quality of Alumino Thermite welds. 
To improve the quality of welds and enhancing  safety, the population of 
Alumino Thermite Welds was to be gradually reduced and replaced by Flash Butt 
welds with the help of mobile flash butt welding plants . Railways need to take 
action and enhance the use of mobile flash butt welding plants. 
2.2.3.2   Monitoring of track where enhanced loading (CC+8+2t /25 t axle load) 
is permitted 
(a)  Conditions to be followed where operation of wagons with enhanced 
loading was permitted 
Anticipating that enhanced axle load will have more adverse effect on track, the 
operation of CC +8+2t wagons with load in e xcess of carrying capacity by eight 
tonnes with tolerance of two tonnes was permitted with a set of strict conditions. 
Instructions were issued from the apex level on 10 August 2006. The salient points 
are given below: 
 Wheel impact load detector s (WILD) were to be installed at all selected 
locations within one year 
 Weighbridges were to be installed and it was to be ensured that all 
weighbridges were maintained and functional . No overloading was to  be 
permitted. Drastic penal action was to be taken against defaulters. 
 Wagons were to  be well maintained and  additional springs were to be  
provided during Routine Overhauling/Periodical Overhauling. 
RDSO further prescribed requirements for operation of CC +8+2t /25 t axle load 
that inter alia included: 
1. The track was to be of a minimum standard of 60 kg rail (90UTS), with 1660 
sleeper density and minimum depth of ballast cushion of 300 mm below 
sleeper. Maximum permissible speed was to  be restricted to 70 kmph in 
loaded condition and 100 kmph in empty condition . For track with a 
minimum standard of 52 kg rail (90UTS), sleeper with M +7 density and 
minimum depth of ballast cushion of 250mm below sleeper, t he maximum 
permissible speed was to be restricted to 50 km ph in loaded condition and 
100 kmph in empty condition.  
2. The welds were to  be protected by joggled fish plates as per laid down 
provisions60and maintenance of Rails and Rail joints was to be ensured61. In 
                                                           
60 Para 6 .4 and Para 8 .14 of Ultrasonic Flaw Detection Manual and Para 6 .3 o f AT welding manual and other policy 
instruction of Railway Board. 
61 Para 250 and 251 of Indian Railway P-way Manual 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
40
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
40 
 
addition, wherever condition warranted  on account of corrosion on 
rail/weld collar, wear on rail, cupping of welds , etc., necessary precautions 
were to be taken for fish plating/joggled fish plating. 
3. USFD testing was to be carried out at a frequency, one grade higher than 
the specified frequen cy in the USFD manual . On section with GMT more 
than 60, the existing stipulated frequency of once in one and a half month 
as per USFD Manual was to be continued. 
4. Only weighed raked were to  be moved on the section after unloading / 
correction of over loaded  wagons. In case unloading /correction is not 
possible then speed of rakes was to be restricted as applicable for CC +8+2 
tonne loaded rakes as mentioned in unified JPO issued by Railway Board62. 
5. Zonal Rail way were to set up a regular rail grinding regime which is 
considered necessary, to check development of rolling contact fatigue 
defects in rail due to 25T axle load operations. 
(b) Adherence to Railway Board guidelines regarding checks and controls 
before running heavier loads on sections 
In NCR, operation of 22.9t BOXNHL wagon was introduced through Railway Board 
sanction in December 2009 . In the selected sections of NCR, no assurance could 
be derived about compliance to these conditions with regards to weighment and 
availability of minimum depth of ballast cushion for running of  25t axle load . In 
ECR CC+8+2 loading was introduced in Patna -Mughalsarai-Gomoh sections in 
2008 and in SER, out of six selected HDN sections, four sections were identified 
for CC+8+2/25 ton Axle load. No assurance could be derived in ECR and SER about 
availability of minimum depth of cushion for running of 25t axle load due to non-
maintenance of records in the selected sections. In SWR ballast cushion of 300 
mm was seen maintained over the selected sections. In SR sleeper density of M+8 
and ballast cushion of 300 mm was maintained in the selected sections. 
Railway Board/RDSO issued a number of control and monitoring measures to be 
strictly followed in the sections where enhanced loading was  permitted. This 
included rehabilitation of distressed bridges and installation of Bridge Load 
Monitoring System, installation of weighbridges and ensuring weighment, use of 
USFD testing for monitoring track,  replacement of rails  by 90R rail in the whole 
section, monitoring rail and weld defects, etc. The compliance of these 
instructions was checked in the selected sections, where enhanced loading of 
CC+8+2/CC+6+2/CC+4+2 was permitted. 
                                                           
62 Railway Board letter no. 2007/CE/II/TS/8 dated 2.4.2009 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
41
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
41 
 
(i)    In NCR, it was observed that all the nine sections (Allahabad div ision) were 
notified for running of CC+8+2 rakes. However,  
 Damages were reported in 14 bridges in Ghaziabad-Mughalsarai section , but 
yet to be rectified (March 2017), 
 Location-wise stock of USFD tested rails was not made in selected sections 
for use, 
 New welds were not tested by USFD within 30 days of welding, 
 52 kg rails still existed on few portions of these sections (67.754 kms) where 
enhanced loading was permitted , due to which speed restriction s had been 
imposed; and 
 Only one weighbridge at GMC was available in Allahabad Division, which was 
installed in December 2011. 
(ii)   In ECR, Patna-Mugalsarai and Mugalsarai-Gomoh sections were notified for 
running CC+8+2 rakes. However, Bridge load monitoring system was not installed 
and USFD testing was not b eing done as per prescribed frequency. In  Patna-
Mughalsarai section, no weighbridge was installed to check overloading of rakes.  
(iii)   In SER, out of six selected HDN sections, four sections (Jharsuguda – Rourkela, 
Rourkela – Bondamunda, Tata -Kharagpur and Mecheda - Panskura) were 
identified for CC+8+2/25t Axle load. Bridge Load Monitoring System had not been 
installed in these sections. 
(iv) In SR, three sections have been notified for running of CC+8+2 rakes.  New 
welds were tested by USFD within 60 days instead of 30 days due to busy schedule 
of deployment of USFD machine over the division.  
(v)     In SWR, there is one section notified for running of CC+8+2 rakes.  New welds 
were USFD tested after delay of one to six months. Though scanned images/peak 
pattern were saved for the test conducted by the private agencies, for 
departmental USFD team, these were saved only  for welds and rails which 
required immediate removal/replacement. 
Annexure 2 
In this regard, review of report of RDSO regarding ‘Effect on track due to operation 
of CC +8+2t/ 25t axle load ’ revealed an increasing trend of rail/weld defects in 
Mughalsarai-Ghaziabad section on quarter-to-quarter basis as detailed below: 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
42
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
42 
 
Table 13- Rail / Weld failure and USFD testing details of Mughalsarai – Ghaziabad section  
(60 kg rail, PSC – 1660/kms) 
Quarter Track 
length 
(Km) 
Rail 
Defects 
(OBS + 
IMR) 
Weld 
Defects 
(OBS+IMR) 
Rail 
Failure 
Weld 
Failure 
No of 
welds 
tested 
DFW DFW per 
100 
weld 
Oct 2015 to Dec 2015 1502.4 92 345 5 18 11682 889 7.6 
Oct 2016 to Dec 2016 1502.4 141 304 5 19 9806 757 7.7 
Jan 2016 to Mar 2016 1502.4 96 322 4 11 14570 706 4.8 
Jan 2017 to Mar 2017 1502.4 189 341 10 19 7425 977 13.2 
April 2016 to June 
2016 
1502.4 56 206 0 2 10910 849 7.8 
July 2016 to Sep 2016 1502.4 74 168 3 5 8177 815 10 
(OBS – observation of weld, DFW – Defective weld, IMR – Immediate rail removal) 
A comparison of number of defective welds per 100 weld tested of various 
quarters during October to March, with the figures of the previous year’s 
respective quarters, showed an increasing trend in Mughalsarai – Ghaziabad 
section. The actual rail and weld failures were also  showing an increasing trend. 
The report of RDSO highlighted that 
 Increased axle load wagons have adverse effect on rail and old Alumino 
Thermite weld. 
 Defect generation in rail and welds is increasing due to heavy l oad on the 
track. 
 Actual failures in rails and welds are also increasing. 
 Rate of breakage of PSC sleepers, glued joints and fish plates and wear of 
switches & crossing were increasing. 
 The implementation of Rail way Board instructions regarding monitoring and 
detachment of defective wagons as per WILD alarms was severely lacking. 
 Weighment of each rake and control on overloading is also not being 
monitored by NCR. 
 At present in sections where 22.9 t /25t axle loads are running there is no rail 
grinding regime in operation to take the advantage of the technology.  
(c) Non installation of Wheel Impact Load Detector (WILD) System   
WILD (Wheel Impact Load Detector ), is an unmanned intelligent trackside data 
acquisition system that measures the dynamic impact load of wheels on the track. 
It is a useful ‘ wayside detection system’ for safety and asset reliability in train 
operations. 
WILD system helps reduce the rail way maintenance cost significantly by 
identifying the damage causing wheels fo r quick removal . Out of round wheels 
produce very high impact loads which result in normally imperceptible damage . 
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
42 
 
Table 13- Rail / Weld failure and USFD testing details of Mughalsarai – Ghaziabad section  
(60 kg rail, PSC – 1660/kms) 
Quarter Track 
length 
(Km) 
Rail 
Defects 
(OBS + 
IMR) 
Weld 
Defects 
(OBS+IMR) 
Rail 
Failure 
Weld 
Failure 
No of 
welds 
tested 
DFW DFW per 
100 
weld 
Oct 2015 to Dec 2015 1502.4 92 345 5 18 11682 889 7.6 
Oct 2016 to Dec 2016 1502.4 141 304 5 19 9806 757 7.7 
Jan 2016 to Mar 2016 1502.4 96 322 4 11 14570 706 4.8 
Jan 2017 to Mar 2017 1502.4 189 341 10 19 7425 977 13.2 
April 2016 to June 
2016 
1502.4 56 206 0 2 10910 849 7.8 
July 2016 to Sep 2016 1502.4 74 168 3 5 8177 815 10 
(OBS – observation of weld, DFW – Defective weld, IMR – Immediate rail removal) 
A comparison of number of defective welds per 100 weld tested of various 
quarters during October to March, with the figures of the previous year’s 
respective quarters, showed an increasing trend in Mughalsarai – Ghaziabad 
section. The actual rail and weld failures were also  showing an increasing trend. 
The report of RDSO highlighted that 
 Increased axle load wagons have adverse effect on rail and old Alumino 
Thermite weld. 
 Defect generation in rail and welds is increasing due to heavy l oad on the 
track. 
 Actual failures in rails and welds are also increasing. 
 Rate of breakage of PSC sleepers, glued joints and fish plates and wear of 
switches & crossing were increasing. 
 The implementation of Rail way Board instructions regarding monitoring and 
detachment of defective wagons as per WILD alarms was severely lacking. 
 Weighment of each rake and control on overloading is also not being 
monitored by NCR. 
 At present in sections where 22.9 t /25t axle loads are running there is no rail 
grinding regime in operation to take the advantage of the technology.  
(c) Non installation of Wheel Impact Load Detector (WILD) System   
WILD (Wheel Impact Load Detector ), is an unmanned intelligent trackside data 
acquisition system that measures the dynamic impact load of wheels on the track. 
It is a useful ‘ wayside detection system’ for safety and asset reliability in train 
operations. 
WILD system helps reduce the rail way maintenance cost significantly by 
identifying the damage causing wheels fo r quick removal . Out of round wheels 
produce very high impact loads which result in normally imperceptible damage . 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
43
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
43 
 
Such impact loads sustained over long term leads to premature failure of rail s, 
wheels, bearings, etc. With rising axle -loads the severity of  this type of damage 
increases. 
Thus, WILD helps in reducing service failures and unplanned maintenance cost of 
rolling stock and tracks and catching the defects at an early stage and thereby  
instrumental in protecting rail infrastructure, avoid derailment and accidents . It 
replaces subjective human judgment, increases reliability of identification of 
defective wheel, has in -
built automatic 
communication for prompt 
corrective action, detects 
overloaded wagons and 
helps in improvement in 
safety of vehicle and track. 
Minister of Rail ways in 
August 2006 pointed out 
that WILD must be installed 
at all the selected location s 
(270 locations were 
identified over all Zonal Railways) within one year. Further, Railway Board in 2008-
09 decided for procurement of WILD through development cell at Railway Board. 
In December 2015, RDSO advised all Zonal Railway s to ensure installation and 
maintenance of adequate num ber of WILD instruments to record the impact of 
loading spectrum actually passing over the track . As against 270 locations 
identified, WILD ha d been installed at Mughalsarai (ECR), Bina and Itarsi (WCR) 
and Dongargarh (SECR). Audit observed that no WILD system had been installed 
in NCR, SER and SR. In SWR, W ILD was installed in Hitnal station in August 2010, 
but not working since February 2017 due to ongoing doubling work in the section. 
It was further seen that the global tender for installation of WILD was yet to be 
finalised (March 2017). 
RDSO in its report (11 May 2017)  on ‘Effect on track due to operation of 
CC+8+2t/25t axle load’ stated  that implementation status of Railway Board’s 
instruction regarding weighment of each rake and control on overloading is not 
being monitored by Zonal Rail ways. The Report highlighted the following 
deficiencies: 
1. In NCR, not even one per cent of the rakes running on the system were being 
passed through weighbridge installed at Jhansi and Kanpur Goods Marshalling 
Figure 6: Wheel Impact Load Detector 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
44
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
44 
 
Yard (GMC). Between January 2016 and March 2017, of 7207 rakes of 22.9t 
axle load which passed through Allahabad - Kanpur Goods Marsha lling Yard, 
only 20 rakes were weighed of which five were found overloaded and 
corrected.    
2. Operation of 22 .9t BOXNHL wagon was introduced in NCR through Rail way 
Board sanction in 2009 . Ghaziabad-Mughalsarai route (Track length 1502 .4 
Km) was under CC+8+2 routes and line capacity utilisation was more than 100 
per cent . However, WILD instrument has still not been installed over NCR . 
Hence, impact of heavy loading, flat wheel and overloading on track could not 
be ascertained for quick remedial action. 
3. Analysis of the RDSO report for the WILD at Mugalsarai  showed that during 
January 2016 to March 2017, of the 7857516 wheel passed through WILD, 
27183 maintenance alarm s were generated, of which 221 were critical. 
However, only seven wagons were detached. Even t he wagons producing 
alarm up to 51t were allowed to run.  
4. The Report also showed an increasing trend of rail and weld defects in most 
of the sections operating 22.9t/25t axle load.  
During Exit Conference (30 August 2017), Railway Board stated that at present 
out of 270 locations identified, WILD has been installed in 15 locations, of which, 
two are no longer functional. It was stated that a JPO has been issued at Railway 
Board level to follow laid down procedures for monitoring through WILD , which 
needs to be followed properly.  It was also stated that the impact load and 
sometimes due to overloading on already stressed rails also cause sudden rail 
failures. 
Railway Board further stated that all critical alarms generated are crucial and 
action need to be  taken on each and every critical alarm. Not taking action and 
detaching wagons where critical alarms are generated leads to severe damage to 
tracks/rails and entail high risk of accident/derailment. 
Thus, necessary measures such as installing weighbridges to ensure weighment 
and control  overloading, laying of higher strength rails, were also not 
implemented. Running goods trains with enhanced load without ensuring the 
check and control mechanism in place could lead to poor track condition, which 
could impa ct the safety of running trains. Eleven years after the issue of 
instructions, WILD system was not installed at most of the identified locations. 
In a few locations like Mughalsarai where WILD was installed, corrective action 
was not being taken on the basis of the information/data generated from WILD 
as Railway Administration ignored most of the critical alarms. 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
45
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
45 
 
2.2.3.3 Monitoring through Track Management System (TMS) 
With a view to maximize the benefits of material, equipment and manpower 
inputs made to track and to optimize the life and utilisation of assets, Track 
Management System (TMS) application software  has been developed. 
TMS provides benefits in the form of p rioritization of works, n eed based 
deployment of Gang and Machine, overall economy in Track Maintenance, 
monitoring of overdue inspections, listing of f eatures needing attention, 
optimization of maintenance inputs, easy management of  entire infrastructure 
with centralized option, r educed IT maintenance and personnel costs and 
seamless transfer of data for users moving from one location to other by virtue of 
centralized database. TMS has various modules, viz. Asset, Inspection, Planning, 
Work, Stores, Report, Innovations, Miscellaneous, Rail and weld fracture, Track 
monitoring by machines,  Monitoring by machines & USFD testing, Engineering 
control-caution orders and traffic blocks, Track renewal and deep scree ning, 
Ballast supply and insertion, Patrolling and accidents reporting. 
Audit examined the implementation of TMS over the selected Zonal Railways. In 
this regard, read only access of TMS was not provided by Railway authorities to 
Audit at Divisional and Zonal level. Thus, details of functioning of TMS application 
and its optimum utilization in decision making by divisional and Zonal offices 
could not be ascertained in Audit. Limited access to the TMS reports was given to 
audit at sectional level. Audit observations on the basis of analysis of these reports 
are detailed below: 
 TMS was working over Allahabad Division  since 2014- 15. 115 TMS  
connections were provided to ADEN and SSE (P-Way) over Allahabad Division. 
Check of reports generated through TMS revealed that  
o Asset, store, caution orders, traffic block, ballast supply and insertion and 
accident reporting modules were not working in TMS. 
o Monitoring of TMS at ADEN & SSE level is a regular activity and must be 
done on day to day bas is . However, compliance of inspections was not 
entered in TMS. Consequently backlog of compliance was being reflected 
on TMS . 
o Data of bridge inspection, training of staff, periodical medical examination 
and refresher courses was not updated in TMS. 
o Check of reports of Track Machine module of TMS revealed that details of 
track machine deployed in different sections were updated in TMS 
regularly. 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
46
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
46 
 
 In SER, updation of data in TMS was not regular as internet connection was 
poor. However, manual records viz. Gap register, Points & Crossings Register, 
Curve Register, etc. were being maintained side by side along with TMS.  
 In ECR, information/data in respect of track maintenance viz. inspection 
programme of SSE/ P. Way, AEN of the concerned section, Inspection de tails 
asset register of LWR, detail of machine maintenance were fed in the TMS 
from the year 2015 -16 onwards.  It was further noticed that ECR was not 
uploading the reports of inspection done at SSE/P -way level and compliance 
thereof at all the levels in t he system in all the cases rather uploading was 
done selectively. 
Scrutiny of inspection reports of SSE/P. Way, AEN & DEN generated from TMS 
of both selected HDN and Non -HDN routes revealed that action taken and 
compliance of general remarks/findings of inspection conducted by 
concerned officers/officials were not incorporated in the TMS.  In absence of 
action taken and compliance of Inspection Reports , it could not be assessed 
whether timely action was taken. 
 In SWR, implementation of TMS in eight select ed SSE (P -way) and five AEN 
Offices was checked.  
o There were delays in feeding data in TMS by P-way officials. 
o Alerts issued by TMS were not attended to/taken care of. 
o In SSE (P-way), Hubli (East), though inspections - LWR, points & crossings, 
curves, Level Crossings, etc., were conducted, details of the same were not 
fed in TMS from April to September 2016. 
 In SR, in regard to track maintenance part of TMS, except Stores Module, all 
other Modules relating to track maintenance have been implemented.  Track 
Machines programme is uploaded in the TMS for monitoring by officials, of 
adhering to the planned maintenance schedule using track machines, TMS is 
used by the concerned officials. 
 Store module viz. receipt, issue and balance of material and excess/sho rtage 
of material, etc. were not maintained in the TMS of both selected HDN and 
non- HDN routes in all Zonal Railways - NCR, SER, ECR, SWR and SR. 
During Exit Conference (30 August 2017), Railway Board stated that at present 
module for bridge inspection is  not inbuilt in the TMS and is being prepared 
separately. Only master dat a of bridges has been upload ed in TMS. During 
discussions Audit suggested providing access of TMS to all departments for better 
coordination of maintenance activities , to which Railwa y Board responded  that 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
47
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
47 
 
access to TMS was on a ‘need to know’ and ‘need to use’ basis. However, reports 
could be made available as and when required to officials of other departments. 
Thus, TMS was not being used effectively in monitoring track maintenance  
activities. There is a need for complete development of bridge inspection module 
in TMS, implementation of all modules of TMS in all Z onal Railway formations, 
completeness of data entry, real time updation of data into TMS and utilization 
of information i n TMS for monitoring, decision making and undertaking track  
maintenance activities. 
2.3 Impact due to deficiencies in track maintenance 
Deficiencies in maintenance of track result in imposition of speed restriction on 
various sections, and can also lead to derailments/ accidents. 
2.3.1 Speed restrictions 
The impact of running trains causes heavy wear and tear of the track. It becomes 
necessary to rehabilitate or renew the track periodically to ensure that it 
continues to be safe and efficient. Retaining the over aged tracks in operation not 
only leads to an increased cost of maintenance but also affects the safety and 
fluidity of the movement of traffic. Due to delays in track maintenance, incidents 
of rail fractures may increase.  
Zonal Railways impose speed restrictions on various sections due to poor track 
structure. Each speed restriction has a cost attached to it and prolonged 
imposition would also have a  financial impact in add ition to the operational 
impact. It is therefore necessary to ensure completion of works within a set time 
frame so that speed restrictions are removed at the earliest. 
Audit revealed that 
 In NCR,  34 PSRs which had been continuing since 2007 in the selected 
sections. The reasons for imposing PSRs included defects in track structure, 
less transition curve in the track, inadequate transition length between points 
& crossings, weak bridge structure, bad drainage system, poor visibility, large 
number points and crossings in track, unusual vibration  sound during 
oscillation trail, etc. 
 In SER, a total of 159 PSRs were imposed (Kharagpur - 102 and Chakradharpur 
- 57), out of which 28 PSR s (Kharagpur - 18 and Chakradharpur-10) were 
removed during the last three years in HDN routes.  

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
48
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
48 
 
 In ECR, scrutiny of working time table of Mughalsarai Division (for HDN Route) 
and Danapur Division (for Non- HDN routes) revealed that, there was no PSR 
on account of poor track structure. 
 In SWR, a total of 119 PSRs were imposed from November 1993 to December 
2008 on accoun t of bad sub -soil and  bunching of ballast, kinking welds on 
track, non -interlocked point, less lateral distance on bridges, points & 
crossings taking off on curves, insufficient super elevation of curve, yielding 
formation, vulnerable bridges, poor visibility of level crossings  and steep 
degree of curve, etc.  
 In SR, 15 PSRs were in place due to poor track structure like diamond crossing 
on wooden layouts and existence of Girder Bridge with wooden sleepers. Five 
PSRs were relaxed during 2016-17. 
Thus, 294 speed restriction s had to be imp osed in these five Zonal Railways 
because of track vulnerability. 
2.3.2 Train Accidents  
Audit reviewed the records of train accidents over the last three years over the 
selected five zones. The details of accidents occurred during the last three years 
(2014-15 to 2016-17) are mentioned below: 
Table 14– Trains accidents during 2014-15 to 2016-17 in selected Zonal Railways 
S. no Date of 
accident 
Train no. and Location Brief 
description 
Cause Impact of the accidents  
NCR   
1 25.05.2015 18101 Tata-Jammu 
Tawi Express (km-
887/21 of Sirathu-
Athsarai section 
11 coaches 
derailed 
Buckling of track Damage assessment at `1.64 
crore, causalities of three 
passengers, one passenger 
sustained grievous injury and six 
passenger suffered minor 
injuries.  
2 07.12.2015 AMG special (Loop line 
point No.202B) 
Three wagons 
derailed  
Non-negotiation of 
curve of the point 
and center pivot 
defects in wagon 
Damage assessment at `11 lakh, 
no casualties / no injury. 
3 31.03.2016 ICDD special (km 
1496/16 of Ootward-
Ramgarh section) 
Four wagons 
derailed 
Track buckled in ‘S’ 
form with onset of 
temperature  
Damage assessment at `10.10 
lakh, no casualties / no injury. 
4 30.09.2016 Goods KN-25 (Between 
DN Home and DN 
Starter of Barhan 
station) 
Five wagons 
and 1 break 
van derailed 
Track reading and 
wagon reading on 
higher side 
Damage assessment at `23.10 
lakh, no casualties / no injury. 
SER 
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
48 
 
 In ECR, scrutiny of working time table of Mughalsarai Division (for HDN Route) 
and Danapur Division (for Non- HDN routes) revealed that, there was no PSR 
on account of poor track structure. 
 In SWR, a total of 119 PSRs were imposed from November 1993 to December 
2008 on accoun t of bad sub -soil and  bunching of ballast, kinking welds on 
track, non -interlocked point, less lateral distance on bridges, points & 
crossings taking off on curves, insufficient super elevation of curve, yielding 
formation, vulnerable bridges, poor visibility of level crossings  and steep 
degree of curve, etc.  
 In SR, 15 PSRs were in place due to poor track structure like diamond crossing 
on wooden layouts and existence of Girder Bridge with wooden sleepers. Five 
PSRs were relaxed during 2016-17. 
Thus, 294 speed restriction s had to be imp osed in these five Zonal Railways 
because of track vulnerability. 
2.3.2 Train Accidents  
Audit reviewed the records of train accidents over the last three years over the 
selected five zones. The details of accidents occurred during the last three years 
(2014-15 to 2016-17) are mentioned below: 
Table 14– Trains accidents during 2014-15 to 2016-17 in selected Zonal Railways 
S. no Date of 
accident 
Train no. and Location Brief 
description 
Cause Impact of the accidents  
NCR   
1 25.05.2015 18101 Tata-Jammu 
Tawi Express (km-
887/21 of Sirathu-
Athsarai section 
11 coaches 
derailed 
Buckling of track Damage assessment at `1.64 
crore, causalities of three 
passengers, one passenger 
sustained grievous injury and six 
passenger suffered minor 
injuries.  
2 07.12.2015 AMG special (Loop line 
point No.202B) 
Three wagons 
derailed  
Non-negotiation of 
curve of the point 
and center pivot 
defects in wagon 
Damage assessment at `11 lakh, 
no casualties / no injury. 
3 31.03.2016 ICDD special (km 
1496/16 of Ootward-
Ramgarh section) 
Four wagons 
derailed 
Track buckled in ‘S’ 
form with onset of 
temperature  
Damage assessment at `10.10 
lakh, no casualties / no injury. 
4 30.09.2016 Goods KN-25 (Between 
DN Home and DN 
Starter of Barhan 
station) 
Five wagons 
and 1 break 
van derailed 
Track reading and 
wagon reading on 
higher side 
Damage assessment at `23.10 
lakh, no casualties / no injury. 
SER 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
49
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
49 
 
Table 14– Trains accidents during 2014-15 to 2016-17 in selected Zonal Railways 
S. no Date of 
accident 
Train no. and Location Brief 
description 
Cause Impact of the accidents  
5 22.06.2014 53342 DN Muri-
Dhanbad Passenger 
(Muri-Bokaro Steel City 
Section) 
Train engine 
and five 
coaches 
derailed 
Rail fracture of RHS 
tongue rail (5.09 m 
from toe) 
There were no casualties. 
Though Engineering 
Department was held 
responsible, no individual 
Railway staff was held 
responsible. 
6 03.12.2014 UP NBox E Spl (Ranchi-
Muri section) 
21  Nbox 
derailed 
Rail facture under 
load 
There was no casualty. 
Responsibility was fixed on one 
SSE/P-Way and one JE/P-Way 
and censure issued. 
ECR 
7 20.12.2015 At Pasarha station of 
Kathiar – Barauni 
section, seven coaches 
of Train number 15707 
Katihar – Amritsar 
Express derailed 
7 coaches 
derailed 
Breakage of RH 
tongue rail of RH 
switch of point 
No impact quantified either in 
terms of loss due to accident or 
for casualties / injuries. 
8 07.06.2015 UP Dadri Goods (coal) 
(Barkakana-Barwadih 
section) between 
Richughutu and Demu 
stations 
Train engine 
and 19 
wagons 
derailed 
Rail Broken Both up and down main line 
blocked 
9 14.02.2017 53349 UP Barwadih Jn. 
to Dehri On Son 
Passenger (Dehri-on-
son station in Garwa 
Road Jn.-Dehri-on-son 
section) 
Train engine 
derailed 
Defects in point  No impact quantified either in 
terms of loss due to accident or 
for casualties / injuries. 
10 17.11.2016 53371 Koderma to 
Barka Kana Passenger 
(Mid-section/Koderma-
Hazaribagh and 
Kurhagada) 
Train engine 
derailed 
Weld fracture No impact quantified either in 
terms of loss due to accident or 
for casualties / injuries. 
11 11.10.2016 18698 Patna Jn.-
Saharsa Jn. Koshi Exp  
(Bakhtiyarpur – 
Danapur section) 
Derailed at PF 
No. 10 at 
Patna Jn. 
Rail Fracture No impact quantified either in 
terms of loss due to accident or 
for casualties / injuries. 
12 25.07.2016 13006, Amritsar Jn - 
Howrah Mail (Mid-
section/DNR-BXR & 
BXR-BUE) 
Train derailed Defects in point No impact quantified either in 
terms of loss due to accident or 
for casualties / injuries. 
SWR 
13 13.02.2015 12677 UP Bengaluru-
Ernakulam Jn. Express 
(Anekal Road-Hosur 
section) 
Train engine 
and coaches 
(except 2nd 
coach and 
trailing loco) 
derailed. 
Rail Fracture, 
under category 
Failure of 
Equipment- Rail 
Failure 
No casualties/no injuries to 
Passengers reported. Damaged 
track material was replaced. 
Cost of damages was assessed 
at ` 1.11 crore. 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
50
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
50 
 
Table 14– Trains accidents during 2014-15 to 2016-17 in selected Zonal Railways 
S. no Date of 
accident 
Train no. and Location Brief 
description 
Cause Impact of the accidents  
14 28.08.2015 18463 Bhubaneswar-
Bengaluru Prashanti 
Express (OHE mast No 
SBC 1043 & 1048) 
Train engine 
and two 
coaches 
derailed. 
Track defect No casualties/no injuries to 
passengers reported. 
15 21.12.2015 11006 Puduchery to 
Dadar Express (Unakal 
station) 
Train engine 
and two 
coaches 
derailed. 
Failure of 
Equipment(P-way) 
No casualties reported, 11 
passengers injured. Cost of 
damages to track material was 
assessed at ` 35.62 lakh. 
SR 
16 17.06.2015 12658 Bengaluru to 
Chennai, Chennai Mail 
(Basin Bridge Chennai-
Arakkonam section) 
While the 
train was 
passing 
through Basin 
Bridge station 
wheels of two 
coaches 
derailed 
Deep flange in R-1 
wheel of coach and 
track instability at 
diamond crossing 
on wooden layout. 
No impact quantified either in 
terms of loss due to accident or 
for casualties / injuries. 
 
In the selected five Zonal Railways, during 
2014-15 to 2016 -17, sixteen 
accidents/derailments took place due to 
deficient track maintenance.  The reasons 
were rail fracture, weld fracture, track 
defects, defects in points, track buckling, etc. 
This included  the following three train accidents that occurred during 2016 -17 
over NCR for which causes of accidents were under investigation. 
 Table 15 – Accidents where final investigation report is awaited 
S. 
no 
Date of 
accident 
Location Train no. Brief description 
1 20.11.2016 Pokhrayan – 
Malasa(PHN-MLS) 
section in Kanpur 
19321 Indore -
Rajendra Nagar 
Patna Express 
14 coaches derailed. 150 
passengers died and more 
than 200 injured 
2 28.12.2016 Kanpur Central  – 
Rura Section 
12987 Sealdah – 
Ajmer Express 
15 coach derailed and 50 
passengers were injured 
3 30.03.2017 Kulpahar- Mahoba 12189 Jabalpur – 
H. Nizamuddin-
Mahakaushal 
Express 
Eight coaches derailed 
Audit carried out detailed analysis of position of track maintenance in the 
sections, where the major accidents took place . Some important findings in 
respect of four accidents are tabulated below: 
Figure 7: Train no. 12987, Ajmer-Sealdah Express 
derailed in Kanpur on 28.12.16 
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
50 
 
Table 14– Trains accidents during 2014-15 to 2016-17 in selected Zonal Railways 
S. no Date of 
accident 
Train no. and Location Brief 
description 
Cause Impact of the accidents  
14 28.08.2015 18463 Bhubaneswar-
Bengaluru Prashanti 
Express (OHE mast No 
SBC 1043 & 1048) 
Train engine 
and two 
coaches 
derailed. 
Track defect No casualties/no injuries to 
passengers reported. 
15 21.12.2015 11006 Puduchery to 
Dadar Express (Unakal 
station) 
Train engine 
and two 
coaches 
derailed. 
Failure of 
Equipment(P-way) 
No casualties reported, 11 
passengers injured. Cost of 
damages to track material was 
assessed at ` 35.62 lakh. 
SR 
16 17.06.2015 12658 Bengaluru to 
Chennai, Chennai Mail 
(Basin Bridge Chennai-
Arakkonam section) 
While the 
train was 
passing 
through Basin 
Bridge station 
wheels of two 
coaches 
derailed 
Deep flange in R-1 
wheel of coach and 
track instability at 
diamond crossing 
on wooden layout. 
No impact quantified either in 
terms of loss due to accident or 
for casualties / injuries. 
 
In the selected five Zonal Railways, during 
2014-15 to 2016 -17, sixteen 
accidents/derailments took place due to 
deficient track maintenance.  The reasons 
were rail fracture, weld fracture, track 
defects, defects in points, track buckling, etc. 
This included  the following three train accidents that occurred during 2016 -17 
over NCR for which causes of accidents were under investigation. 
 Table 15 – Accidents where final investigation report is awaited 
S. 
no 
Date of 
accident 
Location Train no. Brief description 
1 20.11.2016 Pokhrayan – 
Malasa(PHN-MLS) 
section in Kanpur 
19321 Indore -
Rajendra Nagar 
Patna Express 
14 coaches derailed. 150 
passengers died and more 
than 200 injured 
2 28.12.2016 Kanpur Central  – 
Rura Section 
12987 Sealdah – 
Ajmer Express 
15 coach derailed and 50 
passengers were injured 
3 30.03.2017 Kulpahar- Mahoba 12189 Jabalpur – 
H. Nizamuddin-
Mahakaushal 
Express 
Eight coaches derailed 
Audit carried out detailed analysis of position of track maintenance in the 
sections, where the major accidents took place . Some important findings in 
respect of four accidents are tabulated below: 
Figure 7: Train no. 12987, Ajmer-Sealdah Express 
derailed in Kanpur on 28.12.16 


Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
51
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
51 
 
Table 16 – Important findings of four major accidents  
1. Accident of Train no. 19321, Indore - Rajendra Nagar Patna Express on 20 November 2016 
Spot of Accident Between Pokhrayan - Malasa station section, Pole no. 1290/2 – 
1290/16, SSE/Juhi, Jhansi Division, NCR, Section Ait – Bhimsen 
Loss of life/ railway 
property  
Death of 150 passengers 
Estimated loss of C&W – ` 6 crore 
Cause of accident as per 
supervisor’s joint note 
Rail failure due to old flaw in rail 
 
Report of the 
Commissioner of 
Railway Safety (CRS) 
Preliminary Report of CRS which should be given within one 
month of the accident and Final report of CRS enquiry which is due 
within six months of the accident is awaited. 
Audit findings regarding track maintenance activities of the section  
 USFD was done on 18 October 2016 i.e. about one month before the accident. At that time, 
no major deficiencies were reported. 
 13 rail/weld failures took place between May 2016 and March 2017. Spot of failures  were 
not inspected by ADEN, Kanpur. 
 Track recording by TRC was to be done in six month. Last TRC  was done on 5 March 2016. 
No TRC carried out in 2016-17. 
 Deep screening was overdue in main line section at 10 locations for length of 16264 meter 
from one to 19 years. 
 Out of 196 staff on roll, 32 staff were absent from the duty without any intimation to office 
establishment between 01 April 2016 to 31 March 2017 for more than 15 days.  15 Track 
maintainers were posted in the section of SSE, Juhi without imparting initial training of track 
maintenance. 
2.  Accident of Train no. 12987, Ajmer Sealdah Express on 28 December 2016 
Spot of Accident Near KM-1061/26 UP Line of Maitha-Rura under jurisdiction of SSE 
– II, Kanpur, Allahabad Division, NCR 
Loss of life/ railway 
property  
16 coaches derailed, 50 persons were injured and estimated loss of 
` 4.67 crore occurred due to damages to assets 
Cause of accident as per 
supervisor’s joint note 
Rail fracture 
Report of the 
Commissioner of 
Railway Safety (CRS) 
Preliminary Report of CRS which should be given within one 
month of the accident and Final report of CRS enquiry which is due 
within six months of the accident is awaited. 
Audit findings regarding track maintenance activities of the section  
 Four rail/weld failure took place during 2016 -17. Spot of failures were not inspected by 
ADEN, Kanpur. 
 TRC was to be done in six month. During 2016-17, only TRC was done in December 2016 
 Deep screening was overdue in main line section at 41 locations for length of 34.46 km due 
from three to four years.  
 As of April 2017, against the sanctioned strength of 488 track maintainers only 288 were on 
roll of which, 14 were deployed in other than track maintenance work. 
3.  Accident of Train no. 12189,Jablapur – Nizamuddin Mahakaushal Express on 30 March 
2017 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 2
52
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
52 
 
Table 16 – Important findings of four major accidents  
Spot of Accident Between Mahoba and Kulpahar Stations under Manikpur- Jhansi 
Section, jurisdiction of SSE/Mahoba 
Loss of life/ railway 
property  
Estimated loss of ` 25.6 lakh on account of damaged track. Eight 
rearmost Coaches of the Train derailed and 10 passengers injured. 
Cause of accident as per 
supervisors joint note 
Fracture near rail joints. 
Report of the 
Commissioner of 
Railway Safety (CRS) 
Not made available to Audit.  
Audit findings regarding track maintenance activities of the section  
 As per USFD test, 276  defective welds and 76 defective rails existed at different locations . 
Welding of most of defective welds was done in 2002 and 2003 i.e. welds are old and prone 
to frequent weld failures.  
 TRC was not done as per frequency pr escribed. During 2016-17, only TRC was done in July 
2016. 
 Out of 127 track maintainers on roll, 20 track maintainers were deployed in other than track 
maintenance work. 
4.  Derailment of Train no. 18101, Tata-Jammu Tawi Express on 25 March 2015 
Spot of Accident Near KM-887/21 in Sirathu- Athsarai Section (Main Section 
Allahabad-Kanpur) under jurisdiction of SSE, Khaga 
Loss of life/ railway 
property  
11 coaches derailed, cost of damage `1.64 crore 
Death of 10 passengers  
Cause of accident  Buckling of Track 
Report of the 
Commissioner of 
Railway Safety (CRS) 
Report of CRS finalised on 26.05.2015 and as per enquiry report of 
CRS derailment of Train caused by buckling of track. Responsibility 
fixed against three railway staffs. 
Audit findings regarding track maintenance activities of the section  
 Under-utilisation of track maintenance machines in Allahabad Division  was 23.40 to 81.61 
per cent. 
 TRC was to be done once in three months. During 2016-17, only two TRC done in July 2016 
and December 2016. 
 Deep screening was overdue at seven location for length of 25 km between two to five years. 
De-stressing was required to be done on seven locations. However, due to non-maintenance 
of record and not providing the access to TMS report to Audit, could not be ascertained 
whether de-stressing was done or not.  
 Out of 242 track maintainers on roll, 41 track maintainers were absent between May 2014 
to May 2015. 
Detailed observations in respect of five major accidents are given in Appendix II. 
  

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
53
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
53 
 
Chapter 3 - Utilisation of resources and infrastructure for track 
maintenance 
Audit Objective 2: Whether the resources/infrastructure required for 
maintenance of tracks were available and used efficiently and effectively?  
For effective and efficient day to day maintenance of tracks , resources and 
infrastructure in the form of necessary machines /equipment, blocks, budget, 
trained manpower and a mechanism to monitor and control various track 
parameters is the basic requirement. The availability and adequacy of such 
infrastructure was reviewed in audit of the selected sections. Audit findings are 
discussed in the paragraphs that follow:  
3.1 Development of infrastructure for track maintenance as envisaged in 
Vision 2020  
As per Indian Rail way Vision 2020 Document of Ministry of Rail ways tabled in 
Parliament (December 2009), the following actions were proposed to be taken 
with regard to track maintenance: 
(i) Para 8 (a) of the Vision 2020 document stated that ‘Track structure will be 
standardized with 60 kg, 90 Ultimate Tensile Strength (UTS) rails and concrete 
sleepers with elastic fastenings. Improvements in specifications of materials, new 
types of elastic fastenings, economical designs of concrete sleepers and modern 
mechanized methods of track -laying and maintenance will be progressively 
adopted.’ 
The issue was examined in the selected five Zonal Railways (NCR, ECR, SER, SR and 
SWR) and it was observed that in all the selected zones, concrete sleepers with 
elastic fastenings were being used. Track structure was yet to be standardized. 
Over NCR rails were changed manually and track  laying activities were still not 
mechanized. Track maintenance activities such as deep screening and de-
stressing were carried out both manually and with machines. However, modern 
mechanized methods for track maintenance are being used in heavy traffic 
sections of all the other selected zones. 
(ii) Para 8 (b) of Vision 2020 document states that ‘Tracks on identified, 
segregated routes would be made fit for running passenger trains at speeds up to 
160- 200 kmph and freight trains at speeds up to 100 kmph.’  
During examination of the records of the selected five Zonal Rail ways (NCR, ECR, 
SER, SR and SWR), it was noticed that 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
54
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
54 
 
 Tracks were identified and segregated route -wise over Allahabad Division . 
However, maximum speed of passenger trains was up to 130 kmph and goods 
trains with load at speeds up to 80 kmph and empty up to 100 kmph only. 
 In selected sections of ECR, SWR, SR and SER, no tracks were identified and 
route-wise segregation  was not made  for running of passenger trains and  
freight trains speed wise. However, in SER, planning for increase in speed to 
130/ 160 kmph on A and B routes was under process. 
(iii) Para 8 (c) of Vision 2020 Document envisages that ‘Rails will be procured 
in long panels of 120 metres and would be welded in flash-butt plants and laid 
with lengths ranging from 250 meters to 500 meters. Such continuously welded 
rails would eliminate a large number of rail joints and, in turn, would improve rail 
metallurgy i.e. minimal residual stress, higher wear resistance, higher elongation 
and better fracture toughness and maintenance and riding comfort. Joints will be 
welded in situ  by portable flash butt welding plants and in exceptional 
circumstances by Alumino-Thermite (AT) welding. Rail life will be extended by rail 
grinding and rail lubrication . Improved types of switch expansion joints (SEJ) 
would be used in place of the conventional switch expansion joints.’ 
Further, Corporate Safety Plan (2003-13) stipulates that as the Alumino Thermite 
weld are weak links in trac k, its population need to be gradually reduced and 
replaced by Flash Butt welds to be executed with the help of Mobile flash butt 
welding plants. Railway also stated (December 2015) that Tender for Mobile Flash 
Butt Welding Plant should be called for improvement of quality of welding.  
Rails are procured from Steel Authority of India Ltd., Bhilai (SAIL) on the basis of 
requisitions placed by the Zonal Railways on Railway Board. Railwa ys send their 
yearly requirement in metric tonne to Railway Board. The length of rails to be 
supplied to respective Railways is decided by Railway Board on the basis of Rolling 
Stock Programme of the SAIL.  During the examination of records of the selected 
sections of five Zonal Railways, it was noticed that 
 Over NCR, Rails of 13m long panels were procured. Long welded rails panel up 
to 260 meter length (20 rails x 13 meter) were used in LWR section.  Mobile 
Flash Butt Welding Plant was not introduced in open line and in general 
maintenance welding was carried out using AT welding technology. 
 In ECR, SER and SWR, rails were not being procured in long panels of 120 
metres. In ECR and SER, rails were being procured in 13/26 metre length and 
welded by Flash Butt to make the rail panels and supplied to the fields for 
laying. However, in ECR, rails were not being welded in Flash Butt welding 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
55
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
55 
 
plants for being laid with lengths ranging from 250 metres to 500 m etres. In 
SWR, 260 m long rail panels are being used. 
 In SR, rails were being laid as per the prescribed procedure. 
 Though use of improved types of switch expansion joints was initiated over  
selected sections of NCR, proper monitoring /supervision of assembling 
activities was not carried out and concerned supervisors were not conversant 
with improved SEJ assembling and its maintenance. In ECR, improved types of 
switch expansion joints were not used. However, in SR , SER and SWR, 
improved types of switch expansion joints were being used.  
(iv) Para 8(d) of Vision 2020 Document envisaged that ‘Cost effective options 
for mechanized track maintenance, including through remote satellite control, 
shall be explored . There will be complete mec hanization of track maintenance 
activities. A decision support system such as TMS  will be in place to optimize 
material, machine and equipment and manpower inputs for track recording-cum- 
monitoring on the entire IR network (including USFD cars capable of recording 
precisely the location of track irregularities ). P-way engineers shall also be 
provided with personal digital assistance (PDAs) for recording inspection inputs . 
All the maintenance and construction activities related to track shall be 
mechanized. Trackmen will be equipped with small track machines also . Human 
dependence in the form of push trolley inspection, foot -plating, patrolling, etc . 
for detection of flaws and deficiencies in track parameters will be eliminated. It is 
envisaged that by 2020,  the health monitoring of assets should be completely 
mechanized. Vehicle mounted USFD would be stabilized by 2020 to achieve a 
sharp reduction in the number of rail fractures and increased reliability of assets.’ 
During examination of records of selected sections of five Zonal Railways, it was 
seen that  
 In NCR, ECR, SER, track maintenance activities in selected sections were not 
completely mechanised. Deep screening of ballast, rail change, and de-
stressing of track was carried out manually . However, in S WR, track 
maintenance activities were completely mechanised. In SR, track 
maintenance activities were mechanised in selected sections except that deep 
screening in platform stretches of track and de -stressing of rails were being 
done manually. 
 In ECR, SER and SR, Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs) were provided to 
Permanent Way Engineer’s for recording inspection inputs . However, during 
examination it was found that none of the PDAs were in proper working 
condition. In NCR and SWR, PDAs were not provided but computer note book/ 
laptops were provided to Permanent Way Engineer’s.  

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
56
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
56 
 
 Track maintainers were equipped with small track machines available in the 
gang, but no communication equipment was provided to trackmen to report 
any failure, fracture o r damage immediately from the section where short 
comings/defects in track were observed. In ECR, Trackmen were not equipped 
with small track machines. However, in SWR and SR, small track machines 
were available with all SSEs (P-way). 
 Human dependence in the form of push trolley inspection, foot -plating, 
patrolling, etc . for detection of flaws and deficiencies in track parameters 
were not eliminated/reduced in NCR, ECR, SWR , SER and SR due to absence 
of mechanisation of maintenance activities and absence o f utilisation of 
advance monitoring tools viz ., Wheel Impact Load Detector (WILD), Geo 
Positioning System (GPS) – based Foot plate inspection device. 
 One of the objectives of installation of TMS was to maximise the benefit of 
material, equipment and utilisation of assets without impairing the safety. 
However, Asset module of TMS was not functioning over selected sections of 
NCR and ECR , and hence health monitoring of assets  remained to be 
mechanised. In SWR, efforts/steps/initiatives were taken for progressive and 
complete mechanized health monitoring of assets. Track parameters were 
measured and corrective action was taken.  In SR and SER, the assets module 
over TMS was functional over the selected sections. 
Thus, infrastructure and other arrangements, as envisioned in 2020 document 
with respect to track maintenance, are yet to be put in place. Further, manual 
dependence in the form of push trolley inspection, foot platin g, patrolling etc. 
continued for detection of flaws and deficiencies in the tracks. 
3.2 Budget Allotment and Expenditure on Path way maintenance  
Details of Budget Grant (BG), Final Grant (FG) and Actual Expenditure (AE) for the 
year 2015 -16 and 2016 -17 under Demand No 4 Abstract ‘B’: Repairs & 
Maintenance of Permanent Way & works and Minor Head 200 - Maintenance of 
Permanent way are as under: 
Table 17– Budget Allotment and Expenditure ( ` in crore) 
Zonal Railway BG FG AE Savings  
(BG- AE) 
2015-16 
NCR 489.4 483.33 474.87 -14.53 
SER 411.43 454.39 454.56 43.13 
ECR 203.58 225.01 220.66 17.08 
SWR 268.99 260.73 251.69 -17.3 
SR 461.54 478.7 484.13 22.59 
2016-17     
NCR 633.99 578.44 527.34 -106.65 
SER 552.91 559.09 570.38 17.47 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
57
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
57 
 
Table 17– Budget Allotment and Expenditure ( ` in crore) 
Zonal Railway BG FG AE Savings  
(BG- AE) 
ECR 570.55 559.02 563.32 -7.23 
SWR 328.53 319.48 307.68 -20.85 
SR 581.51 592.23 584.5 2.99 
It is seen that from 2015-16 to 2016-17 the Budget grant had increased from 
22.13 per cent  to 180.26 per cent for the selected Zona l Railways with mean 
increase of 45.37 per cent. The actual expenditure has also increased during the 
period by 11 per cent to 155.32 per cent with mean increase of 35.38 per cent in 
these selected Zonal Railways. The savings were significant  at 16.82 per cent in 
2016-17 for NCR and  6.43 per cent in 2015-16 and 6.35 per cent in 2016-17 for 
SWR. The maintenance activities need to be accelerated to ensure utilisation of 
budgetary allocations. 
3.3 Availability of manpower for track maintenance and their training  
 
3.3.1 Sanctioned Strength and Men on Roll of track maintainers 
A maintenance gang consist of 10-15 track maintainers63who are responsible for 
protecting the line in an emergency and during work affecting the track. Patrolling 
of track is also carried out by the track maintainers. As per Rules64, the strength 
of each maintenance gang shall be decided by the Chief Engineer.  A register 
should be maintained by each SSE and in office of ADEN with details of sanctioned 
strengths of gangs, Gatemen, Watchmen, Lookout men, Trolley men and other 
staff. No deviation from the sanctioned strength of gangs and other staff shall be 
permitted without the approval of the Chief Engineer.  
In this regard, Audit reviewed the  data regarding the length of jurisdiction of 
various SSEs, sanctioned strength of track maintainers and the track maintainers 
available in the selected se ctions of five Zonal Railways. Audit also reviewed the 
data on total manpower available for track maintenance in the selected five Zonal 
Railways. The audit observations are discussed below: 
(i) The line capacity utilisation of the selected sections is more than 100 per 
cent (except four sections, where it is between 90 per cent and 100 per cent). As 
such, there should not be wide variations in length of the jurisdiction of SSEs in 
these sections, mainly because the line capacity utilisation in a section would be 
same for all the SSEs under the section. It was however seen that the jurisdiction 
of SSEs varied from 16.65 kms (Santragachi) to 149 kms (Tamluk) in various 
selected sections . It was furth er seen that the sanctioned strength of track 
                                                           
63including Gangmate (Head of the group), Keymen, Gangmen and Blacksmith. 
64Para 213 of Indian Railway p-way manual 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
58
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
58 
 
maintainers per km also had wide variations. The same ranged from 2.01 per km 
(Tamluk) to 18.56 kms (Gaya). This indicated that that the criteria on the basis of 
which the sanctioned strength had been assessed was not objective and scientific. 
As mechanised means of track maintenance are being used gradually and 
increasingly, there is an urgent need to re -assess the requirement of manpower 
in respect of track maintainers.  
Review of men-in-position under the jur isdiction of various SSEs in the selected 
sections further showed that the men-in-position per km was significantly high as 
compared to the other parts of the sections in places like Allahabad, 
Washermanpet (very close to Chennai), Santragachi (very close to Howrah) and 
Gaya among others. Thus, more track maintainers have been posted to bigger 
cities than remote location s though the requirement for t he whole section may 
be uniform.  
Annexure 3 
In 2006, Railway Board approved a report of the Committee on ‘Manpower and 
Cost Norms for Track Maintenance ’ (MCNTM), which laid down a formula for 
calculation of strength of track maintainers/ gang strength on the basis of manual 
and mechanised track maintenance activities being undertaken by the railways in 
200065. 
In December 2013, Railway Board directed ZRs to undertake regular exercise for 
working out the required strength of trackmen as per MCNTM formula for 
maintenance of all running section of the railway. The exercise was to be carried 
out jointly by PCE, FA&C AO and CPO every year on 1 April to work out 
surrender/creation/ re-distribution of post of trackmen every year.  This was to 
ensure zero based review, as per actual traffic and other related conditions every 
year. The resultant status with w.r.t total requ irement of Trackman on Zonal 
Railways as a whole (for surrender or creation or re -distribution) was to be 
worked out every year in a systematic manner. This exercise was to serve 
following purposes. 
 Possible redistribution on Zonal Railways. 
 Managing gap b etween actual Trackman on Roll and requirement of total 
trackman by a rational deployment of contractual agencies till requisite posts 
as needed were created and vacancies filled up. 
 Identify and account for loss of actual man -days beyond what is provided 
(accounted) for. 
                                                           
65 The Committee Report was finalized in May 2000 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
59
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
59 
 
 The identified resources for deployment of contractual agencies was to be 
utilised to provide sufficient funds for the purpose. 
The matter was reviewed in five selected Zo nal Railways and the following wa s 
observed: 
 In NCR, the exercise was undertaken only in two years, (April 2014 and 2015) 
but no action was taken on the re -assessed requirements. No re-assessment 
was done thereafter.  
 In SER and SR, the assessment of sanctioned strength of trackmen was 
undertaken every year in April (2014, 2015 and 2016) as per MCNTM formula 
and forwarded to Railway Board. However, the gaps between actual trackmen 
on rill and requirement of total trackmen were not being filled by outsourcing. 
 In ECR and SWR, no such annual assessment was done. However, in ECR 
recently (in September 2017), sanctioned strength was assessed as per 
MCNTM formula and information sent to Railway Board. 
It was also seen that the criteria on the basis of which the formula was prepared 
included mix of activities (manual and mechanised) as of 2000. The same may not 
be relevant after 17 years due to significant changes in methods of track 
maintenance and introduction of mechanised means in a larger number of 
activities. 
Thus, there was an urgent need to re-work th e formula and re-assess the 
requirement of manpower for undertaking the work of track maintenance in 
view of the changed scenario, wherein, more and more mechanised means are 
going to be used for track maintenance. In addition, equitable distribution of 
manpower in accordance with workload was also needed to be carried out. 
(ii) Review of total manpower available for track maintenance works in 
selected five Zonal Railways showed that there were shortages of staff in different 
safety categories in selected  Zonal Rail ways viz. NCR, SER, ECR, SWR and SR  
ranging from nine to 22 per cent as given below: 
Table 18 – Manpower availability for track maintenance 
Zonal 
Railway 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Men on 
Roll 
Vacancy Percentage 
of Vacancy 
No. of staff deputed in other 
works (viz. other official Est., 
officers residence, etc.) 
NCR 2972 2325 645 22 90 
SER 3390 2884 506 16 381 
ECR 3449 2762 687 20 0 
SWR 1698 1553 145 9 70 
SR 782 659 123 16 0 
Total 12291 10183 2106 17 541 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
60
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
60 
 
Though no deviation from the sanctioned strength of gangs and other staff is 
permitted without the approval of the Chief Engineer, 541 (five per cent) staff was 
deputed for other duties.   
During Exit Conference  (30 August 2017), Railway Board stated that there were 
acute shortages in the safety category staff relating to track maintenance. It was 
also stated that staff recruited as track maintainers are over-qualified and do not 
want to do physical work on tracks. It was further stated that due to very lenient 
eligibility criteria for Physical Efficiency Test for women, a large number of women 
with inadequate physical ability are also recruited, many of whom do not want to 
work as track maintainers in the field. Railway Board however, did not provide 
any reasons for wide variations in the sanctioned strength of track maintainers 
under the jurisdiction of various SSEs.  
Annexure 4 
Thus, despite a shortage in manpower position vis-à-vis sanctioned strength, the 
situation was made worse by diverting available track maintainers to works 
other than track maintenance. Due to shortage of track maintainers, the length 
covered by them had increased which can impact the quality of  maintenance. 
Recruitment of overqualified staff who are not willing to  undertake physical 
work at tracks indicated that the selection criteria for track maintainers is not 
aligned with their job requirement. This issue needs to be resolved. 
(iii) The minimum educational qualification  prescribed for recruitment of 
Track Maintainers is 10th pass or ITI or equivalent
66. Check of records of 
attendance of Track Maintainers in selected sections of NCR , SER, SWR and ECR 
revealed that Track Maintainers and other safety category staff of the Gang, were 
not signing the Attendance R egister in token of their presence at the work 
location. Only P’’ for presen t and A ’’ for absent were being marked by the 
supervisors .The attendance of staff deputed to other locations was also marked 
as ‘P’ and ‘A’  in the Gang Attendance Register. Non-signing in the Attendance 
Register by the Track Maintainers facilitated such incorrect marking of 
attendance.  
An effective system of marking attendance is needed to be put in place in order 
to ensure optimum utilisation of available manpower.  Railways need to 
streamline the system of attendance marking of track maintainers on priority. 
 
                                                           
66 As per Railway Board Railway Board letter no. E(NG)-II/2009/RR-1/10 pt. dated 09 December 2010 minimum educational 
qualification prescribed for recruitment in Pay Band – 1 of Rs.5200 -20,200 grade pay of `1800/-  was 10th pass or ITI or 
equivalent 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
61
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
61 
 
3.3.2 Training for permanent way staff 
Rules67 require that P -way staff should be impar ted training at regular interval. 
The following four types of training courses should be organized in the Training 
Institutes run by the Railway Administration : 
 Initial/Induction Courses 
 Promotional Courses 
 Refresher Courses  
 Special Courses 
Arrangements for training of all Permanent Way staff working on LWR  / CWR 
sections shall be made by Chief Engineer by holding special  /regular courses in 
Zonal Training centres and by Sr.DEN/DEN in Divisional Training Center68. Further, 
only staff trained in laying and maintenance of LWR  /CWR shall be posted on LWR 
 /CWR sections69.  In case of Keyman, Gangmate & PWM, only such staff , who 
possess valid competency certificate issued by Zonal  /Divisional training centre 
shall be posted on LWR  /CWR section. The competency certificates shall be valid 
for five years from the date of issue70. Check of competency certificate in selected 
sections of NCR, SER, ECR and SWR revealed that no system existed to ensure that 
only trained staffs were posted in LWR / CWR section. The position of trained staff 
posted in these sections is mentioned below: 
Table 19 - Number of Staff working in LWR/CWR sections without training  
Zonal Railway Number of staff posted in 
LWR/CWR section 
Number of staff not trained 
(percentage) 
NCR 1728 638 (37) 
SER 2865 450 (15.7) 
ECR 1993 0 
SWR 1452 67 (4.6) 
SR 659 0 
TOTAL 8697 1155 
It was seen that 37 per cent, 15.7 per cent and 4.6 per cent of the total staff of 
NCR, SER and SWR  respectively, deployed in LWR/CWR section had not been 
imparted training. Deployment of staff for laying and maintenance of LWR 
without training/ competency certificate has a bearing on the safety. It was, 
however seen that in ECR and SR, 100 per cent of staff deployed in LWR/CWR 
sections had been trained.  Competency certificate for working on LWR / CWR 
section was also not obtained for Keyman, Gangmate .TMS report of training of 
staff was also not updated and consequently monitoring of training programm e 
at higher level was not carried out.         Annexure 5 
                                                           
67 Para 1501 to 1505 of IRWPM  
68 Para 9.2.1 of  Manual of instructions on Long Welded Rails 
69 Para 9.2.2 of Manual of instructions on Long Welded Rails 
70 Para 9.2.3 of Manual of instructions on Long Welded Rails 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
62
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
62 
 
Thus, untrained staff handling track maintenance could compromise the quality 
of track maintenance. There was no mechanism to ensure that trained staff was 
posted to LWR/CWR sections. 
3.3.3 Training for Operating and Maintenance of Small Track Machine 
Rules71 provide that Sr. Divisional Engineer (Co-ord) shall organize training of staff 
for operation and maintenance of Small Track Machines  / tools through the 
machines / tools manufacture s. It shall als o be ensured that adequate training 
facilities are made available in Divisional Training School at Divisional Level and 
Zonal Training Schools at Zonal Level. 
Further, centralized training for operation, maintenance and repair of small track 
machines  /tools shall be organized at Zonal Rail way Training Centre   / Divisional 
Training Centre72. 
Review of records of training for staff deployed on working of small track 
machines over the selected zones revealed that about 60 per cent staff were not 
trained. The position is given as under: 
Table 20 - Number of staff deployed in operation of Small Track Machines  during 2016-17 
Zonal 
Railway 
Number of staff 
deployed in STMs 
Number of staff 
trained 
Number of staff not 
trained 
NCR 294 139 155 
SER 57 38 19 
ECR Need Based Trained/certified track maintainers are utilized for 
operation of small track machine. 
SWR 164 0 164 
SR 28 22 6 
TOTAL 543 215 328 
In SWR, no separate Training Centre was established for imparting training to staff 
attending to Small Track Machines/Tools. The Training Schedule of Civil 
Engineering Training Centre, Hubli Division, was analyzed for the three years from 
2014-15 to 2016-17. No separate training slots were provided for operation and 
maintenance of Small Track Machines. Thus, Track Maintainers were not trained 
in operation and maintenance of small Track Machines.  
Thus, 60 per cent of the staff deployed in working of STMs was not trained. 
Deployment of untrained staff for operation of STMs undermines the quality of 
maintenance. 
Annexure 6 
 
                                                           
71 Para 1.6 of Indian Railway Small Track Machine Manual 
72 Para 1.6.1 of Indian Railway Small Track Machine Manual 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
63
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
63 
 
3.4 Utilisation of track machines including small track machines 
SSE in-charge of a section is responsible to undertake and assist in maintenance 
activities which include Alumino Thermite welding of rails, spot attention in yards, 
distressing and fracture repair.  This is carried out by the section in -charge 
through use of small track machines such as abrasive disc cutter, rail drilling 
machine, rail profile grinder, weld trimmer, hydraulic jack s, etc.   Besides, the 
officer section in-charge is required to assist in work of mechanized maintenance 
carried out through track machines.  These activities are required to be carried 
out in a well-planned and scientific manner. 
(a) Utilisation of track machines 
The utilisation of track machines over the selected sections of these five Zonal 
Railways was reviewed and noticed that 
 Out of 6878 machine days, 2341 machine days were not utilised by 
Allahabad Division. The major reasons were non -availability of block, 
machines under repair/breakdown/shifting, staff rest, site not ready , etc. 
The target fixed in the annual plan for various track machines for the year 
2016-17 was not achieved and maintenance of track was hampered. 
During the year, as against the target of 11717 km, only 5041 km (43 per 
cent) was achieved. Comparison of block time made available for track 
maintenance and networking time of track machines revealed that the 
track machines could not be utilized effective ly due to time loss in 
travelling, setting, windings of machines, OHE failure, non -availability of 
P-way staff at site, failure of assets, etc. The detailed review of availability 
of block time and its utilisation by 25 track machines during 2016 -17 
revealed that on an average 33 per cent time of block could not utilised by 
these track machines. Audit also noticed that 46 per cent loss of block time 
of the track machine was attributable to travelling time i.e. shifting of track 
machines.   
 In selected non-HDN sections of Danapur Division of ECR, during the year 
2016-17 as against the target of 6856.25 kms, only 2824.86 kms was 
achieved resulting in shortfall o f 58.79 per cent. In selected HDN section  
of Mughalsarai Division, the achievement was 29826 kms against the 
target of 43886 kms, leaving short fall of 32 per cent . The reasons for 
shortfall was attributed to short fall in granting of block by operating 
department, base shifting of machine and idling of machines on account 
of maintenance .   

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
64
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
64 
 
 In SER, Track Management System (TMS) data revealed that against 19276 
machine days of the availability of track machines, the machines worked 
for 10031 days in 2016-17 and remaining idle for 9245 machine days. The 
reason for non -utilization was stated as non-availability of block, under 
repair/breakdown/ maintenance, no fuel, machine under shifting, etc.  
 In SWR, no instances  were noticed in short achievement of targets of 
available track machines in the selected sections. 
(b) Utilisation of small track machines 
As per the Integrated Railway Modernization Plan 2005-2010, issued in November 
2004, Indian Rail ways had planned to achieve complete mechanization of track 
maintenance and relaying  by 2012. Due to growing traffic and introduction of 
heavier track structure, faster and more efficient methods of maintenance are 
needed to be evolved73. Thus, the role of small track machines has increased for 
quality maintenance of track. Different types of small machines such as Abrasive 
Rail cutter, Rail Drilling machine, Rail Creep Adjuster, Hydraulic Track Jack, Rail 
Profile Weld Grinder , etc. have been developed for various activities on track.  
These small track machines are to be used for day-to-day maintenance, laying and 
casual repair of track.  
During the check of records of SSEs of selected sections over the five Zon al 
Railways it was seen that  
 Adequate numbers of essential small track machines were not available with 
each SSE offices in all the selected sections of NCR, SER, ECR, SWR and SR. 33 
per cent of the available small track machines were found out of order during 
Audit.  
                                                           
73Para 1.1 of Indian Railway Small Track Machine Manual 
Figure 8: Abrasive Rail cutter       Figure 9: Hydraulic Track Jack               Figure 10: Rail Creep Adjuster 
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
64 
 
 In SER, Track Management System (TMS) data revealed that against 19276 
machine days of the availability of track machines, the machines worked 
for 10031 days in 2016-17 and remaining idle for 9245 machine days. The 
reason for non -utilization was stated as non-availability of block, under 
repair/breakdown/ maintenance, no fuel, machine under shifting, etc.  
 In SWR, no instances  were noticed in short achievement of targets of 
available track machines in the selected sections. 
(b) Utilisation of small track machines 
As per the Integrated Railway Modernization Plan 2005-2010, issued in November 
2004, Indian Rail ways had planned to achieve complete mechanization of track 
maintenance and relaying  by 2012. Due to growing traffic and introduction of 
heavier track structure, faster and more efficient methods of maintenance are 
needed to be evolved73. Thus, the role of small track machines has increased for 
quality maintenance of track. Different types of small machines such as Abrasive 
Rail cutter, Rail Drilling machine, Rail Creep Adjuster, Hydraulic Track Jack, Rail 
Profile Weld Grinder , etc. have been developed for various activities on track.  
These small track machines are to be used for day-to-day maintenance, laying and 
casual repair of track.  
During the check of records of SSEs of selected sections over the five Zon al 
Railways it was seen that  
 Adequate numbers of essential small track machines were not available with 
each SSE offices in all the selected sections of NCR, SER, ECR, SWR and SR. 33 
per cent of the available small track machines were found out of order during 
Audit.  
                                                           
73Para 1.1 of Indian Railway Small Track Machine Manual 
Figure 8: Abrasive Rail cutter       Figure 9: Hydraulic Track Jack               Figure 10: Rail Creep Adjuster 
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
64 
 
 In SER, Track Management System (TMS) data revealed that against 19276 
machine days of the availability of track machines, the machines worked 
for 10031 days in 2016-17 and remaining idle for 9245 machine days. The 
reason for non -utilization was stated as non-availability of block, under 
repair/breakdown/ maintenance, no fuel, machine under shifting, etc.  
 In SWR, no instances  were noticed in short achievement of targets of 
available track machines in the selected sections. 
(b) Utilisation of small track machines 
As per the Integrated Railway Modernization Plan 2005-2010, issued in November 
2004, Indian Rail ways had planned to achieve complete mechanization of track 
maintenance and relaying  by 2012. Due to growing traffic and introduction of 
heavier track structure, faster and more efficient methods of maintenance are 
needed to be evolved73. Thus, the role of small track machines has increased for 
quality maintenance of track. Different types of small machines such as Abrasive 
Rail cutter, Rail Drilling machine, Rail Creep Adjuster, Hydraulic Track Jack, Rail 
Profile Weld Grinder , etc. have been developed for various activities on track.  
These small track machines are to be used for day-to-day maintenance, laying and 
casual repair of track.  
During the check of records of SSEs of selected sections over the five Zon al 
Railways it was seen that  
 Adequate numbers of essential small track machines were not available with 
each SSE offices in all the selected sections of NCR, SER, ECR, SWR and SR. 33 
per cent of the available small track machines were found out of order during 
Audit.  
                                                           
73Para 1.1 of Indian Railway Small Track Machine Manual 
Figure 8: Abrasive Rail cutter       Figure 9: Hydraulic Track Jack               Figure 10: Rail Creep Adjuster 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
65
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
65 
 
 In NCR, i t was see n that various track repairing activities such as  drilling of 
rails, chamfering of holes 74, cutting of rails, maintaining proper gap for 
welding (using tensors), welding, chipping of extra metal after de -molding, 
grinding of weld, painting of weld, etc. are being d one both manually as well 
as using  small track machines . The small track machines  were not used 
optimally due to sub-optimal maintenance practices. There were operational 
constraints in movement of these machines to work site as these machines 
weighed 20 to 375 kgs and could not be carried without the help of a utility 
vehicles. In selected sections, 62 out of 110 Abrasive rail cutters and 10 out of 
52 rail drilling machines were out of order. Besides, there was shortfall of 186 
hydraulic track jacks  against prescribed norms . This hampered maintenance 
work in these sections . Non-availability of spares locally, absence of 
workshops at decentralized locations  (only one centralized workshop over 
Allahabad Division at Allahabad is present for repair and maintenance of Small 
Track Machines) and absence of imprest for repair and maintenance were the 
main reasons for such a large number of machines remaining out of order. 
 In SER, one PWI/STM was posted in non -HDN route dealing with an average 
12 Express trains per day where an imprest of ` 3500/- pm was sanctioned to 
meet the emergency repair of faulty STMs. In contrast to this, neither any 
PWI/STM nor imprest was sanctioned in HDN route handling an average of 
150 Express trains per day indicating mis placed priority. Non-availability of 
imprest and shortfall of machines impacted various aspects of track 
maintenance like de-stressing, squaring, reconditioning, toe load measuring, 
lifting & packing, trolling work, packing and screening work. 
 All small track machines and tools shall be purchased under at least two years 
manufacturer’s warranty and negotiations for AMCs after warranty period 
shall be held & finalised at the time of initial purchase
75. AEN shall carry out 
inspection of all the small track machines once in six months, while the SSE 
shall inspect all his machines/tools once in a fortnight.  This was not being 
done in SR.  
Annexure 7 
Track maintenance work were also hampered due to non-availability of material. 
Audit notice d the following  cases over selected  section of five Zonal Railways 
during 2016-17. 
                                                           
74 Chamfering means cut way (right-angled edge or corner) to make a symmetrical sloping edge.  Chamfering of rail holes 
gives substantial increase in fatigue life of rail at the hole (an increase of three to four times). Chamfering of bolt holes also 
delays the formation of cracks. 
75Para 1.4(h) and 1.5 of IRSTMM 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
66
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
66 
 
• In SER, track maintenance works was hampered in all selected sections due to 
non-availability of materials like SEJ Bolt, crossing Bolt, Point Crossing Rubber 
Pad, Plate screw, SEJ sole pad, SEJ sleeper, Cast Manganese Steel ( CMS) 
crossing, Grooved Rubber (GR) Pad, SEJ GR Pad, Glass Filled Nylon (GFN) Liner, 
Turn out GR pads, check rail bolt, GFN liner 3706, etc. in all PWI offices in the 
selected HDN and Non-HDN sections. 
• In SWR, non -availability of Hacksaw Blades, Simplex Jacks, Insulated Gauge -
cum-Level, Banner Flag Red, etc., impacted track maintenance works. 
• Due to shortage of material the PWI offices had to manage the maintenance 
work by taking recourse to material from other PWIs or use second hand 
material which had been retrieved during track renewal works.  
• In other three Zonal Railways (NCR, ECR and SR) no inst ance of hampering of 
maintenance work due to non-availability of materials was noticed. 
There was sub-optimal utilisation of track machines due to reasons such as non-
availability of block, under repair/breakdown/ maintenance, no fuel, machine 
under shifting, etc . Further, t he small machines were not available in the 
selected sections as per requirements. Where available, these could not be used 
optimally due to various constraints such as frequent breakdowns, non -
availability of blocks, non -availability of utility vehicles for transportation of 
these machines at work sites , non -availability of spares, non -availability of 
imprest to handle repair and maintenance of these machines etc.  
3.5 Allotment of blocks for track maintenance 
Track maintenance by machines requires line occupation and availability of blocks 
for their working76. It is desirable for these machines to be given a single block of 
at least four hours per day or two separate blocks of 2½ hours each, for better 
working. It is necessary to ha ve longer blocks, so that the net available time for 
working on the line is as high as possible . On the double line section, temporary 
single line working may be introduced whenever possible . Diversion of some 
trains along alternative routes may also be re sorted to, wherever possible . An 
ideal situation would be to provide for time allowance for working the machines 
in the Working time table . The block time should be interpolated in the master 
chart for passenger and goods trains that is prepared with every  change in time 
table. It is as much the responsibility of the Operating Department as that of the 
Engineering Department to ensure provision of adequate time for economical 
                                                           
76Para 226 of Indian Railway P-way Manual 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
67
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
67 
 
working of machines . For this purpose it is desirable to frame a programme of 
working the machines in consultation with the Operating Department.  
Maintenance of track is done after availability of blocks as demanded by the 
Engineering department since it is a safety item . Passenger train and target for 
loading of goods for the last three years shows an increasing trend. But the scope 
of maintenance work is less due to non -availability of required block (as 
demanded by Engineering department ), though increase in operation of traffic 
requires more maintenance. 
The availability of block against demand for the selected five Zonal Railways was 
as follows: 
Table 21– Availability of blocks against demand for track maintenance 
Zonal 
Railways 
Division Block 
demanded  
(in hours) 
Block made 
available  
(in hours) 
Shortage (%) 
NCR Allahabad 27648.00 10921.00 60.50 
ECR Danapur 4538.65 1767.80 61.05 
Mughalsarai 5553.60 3689.78 33.56 
SWR Hubli 13591.00 9942.00 26.85 
SR Chennai 1326.15 1102.19 16.89 
SER Kharagpur 1042.75 566.50 45.67 
Chakradharpur 4147.50 1176.00 71.65 
Ranchi 487.33 238.00 51.16 
TOTAL  58342.00 29411.00 49.60 
Zonal Railways wise audit findings are discussed below: 
In NCR, line capacity utilisation of the selected sections was more than 100 per 
cent. It was observed that there was huge gap between the blocks demanded and 
blocks made available by the railway administration. Audit further noticed that 
 Only 40 per cent  block of the block demanded were given by operating 
department for maintenance of track. Less availability of block in heavy traffic 
section may lead to poor maintenance of track.  
 Review of corridor block provision made in working time table of Allahabad 
division for the selected sections revealed that corridor block was provided in 
the range of 90 minutes to 120 minutes for maintenance work, which was less 
than 2.5 hours as per the norms.  
 Check of block register maintained in engineering control offices revealed that 
block was not provided as per provision made in Working Time Table. The 
prime reasons of deviati on from corr idor block was late  running of train, 
introduction of new/special train and running of all goods trains without any 
scheduled timing.  

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
68
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
68 
 
 During the time of provision of corridor block for maintenance (which was less 
than the required time), some scheduled trains time falls under the corridor 
block. This further hampered the maintenance work, as corridor block could 
not be utilised due to running of these trains during the time of availability of 
corridor block.  
In SWR, Working Time Table of Hubli Division provided for blocks to facilitate 
maintenance works. It was further observed that 
 During 2016- 17, in Hubli Division as against 13591 hours  of line blocks 
demanded by the Engineering Department, only 9942 hours were provided by 
the Operating Department (73 per cent).  
 Due to non -availability of blocks, SSEs (P -way) reduced the target of 
inspections of tracks.  
 In respect of 14 Track Machines,  out of the available net block hours of 8021 
hrs and 15 min, only 5359 hrs  and 40 min were utilized (66.82  per cent) for 
maintenance works. 
In SR, it was seen that though the Working Time Table had tentative provision for 
maintenance blocks, actual provision of line block i could only be decided by the 
Operations department on a day to day basis based on the prevailing position of 
movement of traffic. It was seen that 
 In the three selected sections in Chennai Division, as against the total 1326.15 
hours of line block sought for maintenance during 2016-17, 1102.19 hours of 
line block was provided.  
 In the sections checked, there was no instance of non-utilisation of line block 
provided.  
In ECR, it was observed that 
 Maintenance block was provided by the operating department (provision in 
Working Time Table was 7331 hrs in Mughalsarai Division and 7400 hrs in 
Danapur Division) during the review period. The main reason for not providing 
corridor block was late running of t rains, lack in co -ordination between 
operation and engineering departments , etc. Therefore , all the track 
maintenance work was conducted during maintenance block granted by the 
operating department.  
 In Mughalsarai Division (selected HDN Route), there was a shortfall of 33.56 
per cent  in grant of block for maintenance of track (3689.78 hour granted 
against demand of 5553.60 Hrs).  In Danapur Division (selected non -HDN 
section), there was a shortfall of 61.05 per cent in grant of block for 
maintenance work.  

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 3
69
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
69 
 
In SER, it was seen that despite a provision in the Working Time Table to provide 
minimum hours of block per day, the same was not being followed. Adequate 
number of blocks was not provided to ensure economical and gainful working of 
machines. It was further seen that 
 In Kharagpur Division (Rajgangpur -Tatanagar, Mecheda -Panskura, Howrah -
Tikiapara-Santraganchi sections), the block made available was about 54 per 
cent by operating department.  
 In the selected sections of Chakradharpur and Ranchi Division, the shortage 
of block made available by the operating department against the block 
demanded during 2016-17 was 72 per cent and 51 per cent respectively. 
During Exit Conference (30 August 2017), Railway Board stated that availability of 
assured maintenance block need to be ensured by operating department for 
undertaking timely track maintenance works. It was further stated that as per the 
practice being followed in foreign railways, adequately lo ng hours of blocks are 
dedicated for track maintenance. Audit is of the view that Railways need to ensure 
provision for corridor block in the Working Time Tables and to ensure its 
availability and proper utilisation. 
As line capacity utilisation of these sections on an average of 2013 -14 to 2015-
16 was more than 100 per cent, less availability of block in heavy traffic section 
may lead to poor maintenance of track. Hence, these sections needs more block 
hours along with mechanised maintenance for proper maintenance of track. The 
assessment of requirement of blocks may be arrived at in consultation with all 
the concerned departments, so that a realistic assessment of requirement is 
done and blocks are provided and utilised o ptimally. Divisional Railway 
Managers who head the Divisions, could play an important role in coordinating 
efforts regarding block availability and utilisation.  

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 4
70
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
70 
 
Chapter 4 - Conclusion and Recommendations  
 
4.1 Conclusion 
Audit of 37 selected sections (29 high density routes (HDN) and eight non -HDN 
routes) of the Indian Railways showed that track maintenance activities needed 
to be strengthened and undertaken following the laid down instructions and 
guidelines. Planning for track maintenance needed to be done comprehensively 
with a view to completely shift towards mechanised maintenance.  Inspections 
were not being done as per laid down frequency by railway officials at various 
levels including Sr. Section Engineer and Assist ant Divisional Engineer in the 
selected sections.  There were  deficiencies in conducting Inspections and all 
prescribed activities of inspection were not being undertaken. In many cases, 
notes of inspections were not being prepared for further follow up.  Timely 
supervision through (USFD) testing could help detect the vulnerable points and 
accidents can be avoided. It was seen that USFD testing was not being done as 
per laid down provisions and thus not used effectively for monitoring track 
parameters. Though four Track Recording Cars (TRCs) were available, these were 
not used optimally due to frequent breakdowns and repairs. Non-deployment of 
TRCs as per laid down frequency over the planned sections also led to non -
assessment of track parameters viz., p osition, curvature, alignment of track, 
smoothness, rail profile , etc. There were significant arrears in deep screening 
work, which could impact the resiliency and elasticity of the ballast bed with 
consequent impact on running quality of tracks. Further, there were delays in de-
stressing in selected sections after special maintenance work. This may have a 
bearing on the safety as thermal stress gets locked up in the LWR /CWR, which 
may result in buckling or fractures in rails. In respect of track maintenance works 
undertaken through contractors, there was no clause in the contract for ensuring 
deployment of only skilled labours under the supervision of trained personnel. 
Various activities of track maintenance were guided, driven and undertaken by 
different formations. While utilisation and allotment of track machines was 
managed by Chief Track Engineer in Zonal Headquarters, Sr. Divisional Engineer 
(Coordination) was monitoring allotment and use of USFD machines and Track 
Recording Cars were under the contro l of Research, Design and Standard 
Organisation ( RDSO). Thus, there was lack of comprehensive integrated track 
maintenance plan which could address and take care of all aspects of track 
maintenance.  

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 4
71
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
71 
 
To improve the quality of welds and enhancing safety, the population of Alumino 
Thermite Welds was to be gradually reduced and replaced by Flash Butt welds 
with the help of mobile flash butt welding plants. Railways however, need to take 
action and enhance the use of mobile flash butt welding plants. 
Railway Bo ard permitted enhanced loading at CC+8+2/CC+8+6/CC+4+2t on 
various selected sections on various Zonal Railways in 2006. While permitting 
higher loading, instructions were issued to put in place a mechanism to monitor 
track for adverse impact of enhanced lo ading on track and rolling stock and 
ensure timely corrective action. Zonal Railways were to install necessary 
machines/equipment /systems for the same. E leven years after the issue of 
instructions, as against 270 locations identified, Wheel Impact Load Detector 
(WILD) system was yet to be installed at all identified locations.  Where installed, 
corrective action was not being taken on the basis of the information/data 
generated from WILD as Railway Administration ignored most of the critical 
alarms generat ed through WILD in Mughalsarai (which feeds the traffic on 
Mughalsarai-Ghaziabad Section). Other necessary measures such as installing  
weighbridges to ensure weighment and control overloading, laying of higher 
strength rails, were also not implemented in all sections where it was required to 
be done. Running goods trains with enhanced load without ensuring the check 
and control mechanism in place could lead to poor track condition s and impact 
the safety of running trains. As such, all the sections notified for CC+8+2/25t axle 
load require d continuous monitoring for track defects and suitable remedial 
actions. Speed restrictions were imposed due to poor track conditions at many 
locations. 
Infrastructure and other arrangements for track maintenance, as envisaged in 
Vision 2020 document, were yet to be put in place. Further, manual dependence 
in the form of push trolley inspection, foot plating, patrolling , etc. continued for 
detection of flaws and deficiencies of the tracks. The philosophy of track 
maintenance was yet to shift from ‘find and fix’ to ‘measure and predict’.  
Railways had prescribed a formula for calculation of strength of track 
maintainers/ gang strength on the basis of manual and mechanised track 
maintenance activities being undertaken by them in 2000. This criteria on the 
basis of which this formula was derived may not be relevant after 17 years due to 
significant changes in methods of track maintenance and introduction of 
mechanised means in a larger number of activities. This formula was also not used 
by the five selected Zonal Railways to assess the manpower requirement and fill 
the gap for track maintenance activities during the past three years.  There was a 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 4
72
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
72 
 
shortage in manpower vis-à-vis sanctioned strength and the situation was made 
worse by diverting available track maintainers to works other than track 
maintenance. Due to shortage of gangmen, the length covered by them was 
increased which can impact the quality of maintenance.  Also, e quitable 
distribution of manpower in accordance with workload was not carried out in 
selected sections of all five Zonal Railways . Adequate training was not provided 
to the track maintenance staff. 37 per cent, 15.7 per cent and 4.6 per cent of the 
total staff of NCR, SER and SWR respectively, deployed in LWR/CWR section had 
not been imparted training.  60 per cent of the staff deployed in working of Small 
Track Machines (STMs) were not trained. Deployment of untrained staff for 
operation of STMs and track maintenance could compromise the quality of track 
maintenance. There was no mechanism to  ensure that trained staff was posted 
to Long Welded Rails/ Continuous Welded Rails ( LWR/CWR) sections. The small 
machines were not available in the selected sections as per requirements. Where 
available, these could not be used optimally due to various constraints such as 
frequent breakdowns, non-availability of blocks, non-availability of utility vehicles 
for transportation of these machines at work sites, non-availability of spares, non-
availability of imprest to handle repair and maintenance of these machines etc. In 
all these selected sections, line capacity utilisation of 2013-14 to 2015-16 ranged 
between 90 per cent and 168 per cent. As such, these sections required adequate 
blocks for proper track maintenance. However, bl ocks provided were much less 
than blocks demanded which impacted track maintenance. 
4.2 Recommendations  
Planning and monitoring 
1. All Zonal Railways should prepare integrated track maintenance plans for 
day to day as well as periodical maintenance and condition monitoring using 
machines/ equipment such as USFD machine, Track Recording Cars , etc., 
duly incorporating timelines and resource requirement/ availability. The 
plan should inc lude mechanised and non -mechanised components of track 
maintenance. It should also incorporate addressing arrears of deep 
screening of ballast, de -stressing and prescribed requirements for 
operations of CC+8+2 / 25t. 
 
 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 4
73
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
73 
 
2. The integrated annual maintenance plan for track maintenance of a Zonal 
Railway should be promptly communicated to the divisional and field 
formations for its effective implementation. 
3. Patrolling and  inspections should be done as per norms and the teams 
should be equipped with GPS enabled devices. Output of patrolling, 
inspections should be incorporated into Track Maintenance System through 
GPS based devices, which can be used for monitoring of patrolling, 
inspections, etc. 
4. Monitoring of preparation and implementation of integrated annual 
maintenance plan for track maintenance over Zonal Railways should be 
treated as a key results area for Principal Chief Engineer and key 
performance area for the Chief Track Engineer for Zonal Railways. Co-
ordination issues between departments related to mon itoring of 
preparation and implementation of integrated track maintenance plan 
should be a key performance area for Divisional Railway Managers and key 
results area for the General Managers. 
Strengthening the process of track maintenance  
5. RDSO prescribed g uidelines regarding storage of USFD output and 
subsequent review / test check / post check should be implemented. Output 
of USFD should be uploaded to a centralised data base in real time and 
analysed for monitoring the conditions of the rails. 
6. Availability, maintenance and operations of Track Recording Cars should be 
ensured for checking track parameters at prescribed frequency. 
7. Dual detection has been provided to improve the reliability of signals and 
decrease the failure of signals. As a side effect, it allows the signals to remain 
green even when there is a rail fracture and the track circuit has dropped. In 
such a case when the signal would be green and the train would be moving 
at maximum permissible speed, there is a risk of accident. Track circuiting 
system has the potential for detecting rail fractures . Safety Committee had 
recommended that the signal should be put to yellow aspect as soon as track 
circuit drops in the dual detection territory so that the train speed is 
controlled to lower speed while passing the affected zone, which may have 
rail fracture. Railways may consider using this feature of track circuiting 
effectively to avert accidents. W hen a track circuit fails due to any reason, 
the signal could be put to yellow and the train could be passed only at 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 4
74
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
74 
 
cautious speed, till the track is certified fit by the P-Way Inspector and there 
is no rail fracture.   
8. Application system like the TMS should be used efficiently to its full 
potentiality. Need based access to TMS should be provided to al l related 
functional departments and units namely Operating, Safety, Accounts and 
Signal & Telecommunication, instead of restricting to the Engineering 
department only. This will enable effective planning by these departments 
and enable them to align their operations and maintenance activities to the 
integrated maintenance plans for the track maintenance. This will also 
enhance efficiency and effectiveness of block utilisation. 
Adequate provision and effective utilisation of resources  
9. Railways may consider  revising/re-working the formula for calculation of 
manpower requirement for track maintenance and re-assess the manpower 
requirement in view of the changed scenario, wherein, more and more 
mechanised means are going to be used for track maintenance. Diversion of 
man power provided for maintenance of track for other work should not be 
permitted. Selection criteria for track maintainers may be aligned with the 
requirement of their job which includes physical work as well and persons 
with defective attitude should be adequately sensitized. Deployment of man 
power should be monitored to ensure proper maintenance of the entire 
route length. 
10. To ensure effective co-ordination between various departments involved, it 
may be considered to entrust Divisional Rai lway Managers  with the 
responsibility of monitoring block availability and utilization for regular and 
periodical maintenance activities. 
11. The routes, where enhanced loading over and above the carrying capacity 
has been permitted, should be equipped with ne cessary infrastructure. This 
would include installation of Wheel Impact Load detectors (WILD) to assess 
impact of enhanced loading on the track structure, installation and 
utilisation of weighbridges to detect and prevent overloading, up-gradation 
of track infrastructure, addressing concern of rail grinding, weld protection 
through joggled fish plates and USFD testing of rails at shorter intervals.  
 
 

9L
elpullo Jallortdruof,
7TOZ fuenue1 ge:pa1eq
lqlao rnaNlerauag Jollpnv pue
(rHsrusrn Arrvu)
NLL q)-- I
pautgsraluno3
lerauag rollpnv pue rallolldtuo3 AtndaO
(ruoust>toruvn)
BTOZ Arenuel €0:pereo
lqlao rnaN
'patnsua
eq osp pryotts saulqrout asatfi nl sands Io tAUqolo^V 'waudlnba puo
saulq)Dut asaqt to acuoualulDut snolUpadxa alqoua ol pap!^od aq pqotts
patdutl to ruto! aW u! spunl awudotddv 'eruoualulottt \Jt tt u1 padobua
puuostad aqt q paltodutl aq pryot1s 6u1u1o4 pup slt4ls rUossacap'sau!.pDttt
)pDtt lp.as puD sal!^ap uopwrynutut@ palqPua Sdg 'stuotslssv latl6lg
puuosrad 6u1pnpu1 Tuawdlnba pildlp pup paquDqtau qllm paddlnba
aq ppotls iluouatulou )pott u1 padobua suol1outtot pP{ aW to s1o1t[lg'77
(stompoy) 77OZ lo St'oy yoday

76
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
76 
Appendix I (Para no. 1.2) 
Track maintenance activities (preventive and others) along with the periodicity and responsibility centre 
S.no. Groups Activities Items Periodicity / Frequency Responsibility 
Centre   Sectional JE/P. 
Way 
SSE/P. Way 
In-charge 
Sectional 
ADEN/DEN 
Sr. DEN 
1 Inspection of 
Track 
Patrolling by Track 
maintainers (Gang 
man, Track man, Key 
Man),  
Inspection by Junior 
Engineer, 
Inspection by 
Sectional Engineer,  
Inspection by 
Assistant Divisional 
Engineer,  
Inspection by 
Divisional Engineer 
 
Gang 
Inspection 
Once in a month 
(all gangs) 
Once in a 
month one 
gang per JE/ 
P. way 
Work of 
minimum one 
gang in each 
SSE’s 
jurisdiction 
every quarter 
Minimum one 
gang per SSE / 
P.Way Incharge 
three month 
Divisional  
and Field 
formations of 
Zonal 
Railways 
Push Trolley 
Inspection 
Once in a 
fortnight 
Once in a 
month 
Entire sub 
division once 
in two  month 
Once in three 
month 
Footplate 
Inspection 
Once in a month  Once in a 
month 
Once in a 
month  
Once in three 
month 
Night 
Inspection 
Once in a 
fortnight  
Once in a 
month 
Once in a 
month 
Once in a 
month 
On Foot 
Inspection 
Once in Six 
months on pro-
rata basis so as 
to cover entire 
section 
Once a year 
on pro-rata 
basis so as to 
cover entire 
section 
- - 
Curve Once in Six 
months by 
rotation with SSE 
/ Permanent 
Way  In-charge 
 
Once in Six 
month by 
rotation with 
sectional JE/P. 
Way 
One curve 
every quarter 
under each 
SSE/ P. Way 
In-charge 
Minimum one 
curve in each 
ADEN section in 
every three 
months. 
 

77
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
77 
S.no. Groups Activities Items Periodicity / Frequency Responsibility 
Centre   Sectional JE/P. 
Way 
SSE/P. Way In -
charge 
Sectional 
ADEN/DEN 
Sr. DEN 
 Inspection of 
Track 
 Points and 
crossings of 
Pass. & running 
lines 
Once in three 
months by 
rotation with 
SSE/P. Way  
Incharge 
Once in three 
months by 
rotation with 
sectional JE/P. 
Way  
Once in a 
year 
As often as 
possible during 
trolley inspection 
at least one 
important points 
and crossing on 
Pass and running 
lines. 
Divisional  
and Field 
formations of 
Zonal 
Railways 
Points and 
crossings of 
other lines & 
Yards  
Once in 6 
months by 
rotation with 
SSE/P. Way 
Incharge 
Once in 6 months 
by rotation with 
JE/P. Way 
I/10th of 
total T/outs 
every year 
on 
Programme 
basis 
- 
LWR/CWR & SE Once in 
fortnight during 
two coldest and  
two hottest 
months min 
and max 
temperature, 
otherwise once 
in two months 
by rotation with 
SSE/P. Way 
Incharge 
Once in fortnight 
during two 
coldest and two 
hottest months at 
min and max 
temperature, 
otherwise once in 
two months by 
rotation with 
sectional 
JE/P.Way 
Once in 
every six 
months 
preferably 
hottest & 
coldest 
months 
- 
 

78
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
78 
S.no. Groups Activities Items Periodicity / Frequency Responsibility 
Centre   Sectional 
JE/P. Way 
SSE/P. Way 
In-charge 
Sectional 
ADEN/DEN 
Sr. DEN 
 Inspection of 
Track 
 Level Crossing Once in a 
month 
Once in a 
month 
Once in Six 
months 
Minimum One 
LC per SSE/ P. 
Way In -charge 
in three months 
Divisional  
and Field 
formations of 
Zonal 
Railways 
Small Track 
machines 
- Once a 
fortnight 
Once in Six 
months 
-  
Patrolling (hot 
weather / cold 
weather / 
Monsoon) 
Check the 
night 
patrolling 
once a 
fortnight 
Arrange for 
patrolling of 
track by 
deputing 
suitably 
selected 
men, check 
the night 
patrolman 
once a 
month  
Check the 
work of 
patrolman at 
night once in a 
month 
-  
Daily inspection The key man shall inspect by foot his entire beat once a day, both the tracks and 
bridges, and return along the opposite rail to that taken on his outward journey 
in case of single line. On double line, key man will carry out one round of 
inspection in morning hours by going along, UP line and then returning along DN 
line or vice – versa. Key man looks for defects, broken rail, fittings, greasing, 
lubrication, buckling, unauthorized structures etc. in his beat. 
Key man, SSE 
of Divisional 
and field 
formations of 
Zonal 
Railways 
 
 

79
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
79 
2 USFD testing USFD testing of 
weld 
Type of welds Type of testing Testing Schedule Responsibilit
y Centre   
 USFD testing of 
welds 
 
Type of Welds Type of Testing Testing Schedule  SSE / USFD 
team, ADEN 
and DEN, 
Track 
Conventional AT 
weld 
Periodic Tests Every 40 GMT or 5 year, 
whichever is earlier 
 
SKV weld Acceptance Test Immediately after welding  
 First Periodic Test 1 year   
Further tests based on route GMT Routes having GMT Frequency 
>45 2 years 
>30    ≤45 3 years 
>15≤30 4 years 
0-15 5 years 
USFD testing of  
Rails (Rail head 
center and 
gauge face 
corner / non – 
gauge face 
corner / non – 
gauge face 
corner testing) 
Routes having GMT Testing frequency Once in 
≤5 2 years  
>5≤8 12 months 
>8≤12 9 months 
>12≤16 6 months 
>16≤24 4 months 
>24≤40 3 months 
>40≤60 2 months 
>60≤80 1 and 1/2 months 
>80 1month 
3 Track 
monitoring  
Rail Profile 
Measurement by Track 
Recording Cars (TRC) 
Types of Routes Frequency Responsibility Centre 
Track Recording Cars 
(TRC) 
Routes with existing speeds above 120 
kmph 
Once in 2 months Track Machines and 
Monitoring Directorate of 
RDSO for deployment of 
TRC and AEN should 
accompany the TRC in his 
Routes with existing speeds above 110 
Kmph and up to 130 kmph 
Once in 3 months 
Other Group ‘A’ and ‘B’ routes Once in 4 months 

80
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
80 
Group ‘C’, D’D’ and ‘D Special’ Routes Once in 6 months jurisdiction and take down 
notes regarding the spots 
needing attention 
 
Group ‘E’ and ‘E Special’ Routes Once in 12 months 
4 WILD Monitoring of impact load  on track by ‘Wayside detection system’ through Wheel Im pact 
Load Detector (WILD) system 
Zonal Railway 
5 Preventive and 
periodic 
maintenance 
activities 
Deep 
Screening  
Deep screening should be carried out in the following situations by 
providing full ballast cushion: 
1. Prior to complete track renewal 
2. Prior to through sleeper renewal 
3. Where the caking of ballast has resulted in unsatisfactory riding 
4. Before converting existing track into L.W.R. or C.W.R; or before 
introduction of machine maintenance, unless the ballast was screened in 
recent past. 
5. The entire track must be deep screened at least once in ten years.  
Divisional and Sub – 
divisional formations of 
Zonal Railways 
De-stressing  Abnormal behavior of LWR/CWR whenever gets manifested in one or more 
of the Following, de-stressing shall be undertaken  
i) When the gap observed at SEJ 
(a) differs beyond limits specified; 
(b) exceeds the maximum designed gag of SEJ; 
(c) When stock/tongue rail crosses the mean position. 
ii) After special maintenance operations  
iii) After restoration of track following an unusual occurrence  
iv) If number of locations where temporary repairs have been done exceed 
three per km. 
Divisional and Sub – 
divisional formations of 
Zonal Railways 
  Others 1. Overhauling of points and Crossing 
2. Renewal of crossings 
3. Changing of sleepers 
4. Lubricating and adjusting switches 
5. Tamping 
6. Welding 
SSE (in overall charge) 

81
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
81 
6 Training Arrangements for training of all Permanent Way Staff working on LWR/CWR sections shall 
be made/by Chief Engineer by holding special/regular Courses in Zonal Training centers and 
Sr. DEN / DEN in Divisional Training Centers. 
PCE and Sr. DEN 
7 Co-ordination 
with other 
Departments 
The Assistant Engineer should co-operate effectively with officers and staff of other 
departments in matters that warrant co-ordination 
AEN 
8 Track on Bridges The track on Bridges should be inspected as a part of the annual Bridge inspection, besides 
normal track inspections. 
AEN 
9 Ballast Measure and record the measurements of ballast or carry out 100 per cent check on quality 
and quantity of the ballast, if the measurements are recorded by SSE 
AEN 
 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
82
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
82 
 
Appendix II (Para no. 2.3.2) 
On account of reasons attributed to track condition or deficient track maintenance such as rail 
fracture, weld fracture, track defects, defects in points, track buckling etc., 14 accidents occurred in 
the five selected Zonal Railways NCR, ECR, SER, SR and SWR, during the review period 2014-15 to 
2016-17. Of these ten accidents were of trains carrying passengers and four accidents were that of 
goods trains. In addition, three accidents of passenger carrying trains occurred in NCR during 2016-
17, for which causes of accidents were still under investigation. 
In respect of the following five selected passenge r train accidents out of the 17 accidents mentioned 
above, Audit checked the track maintenance practices and track conditions in the sections where 
these accidents took place: 
1. Train no. 19321, Indore - Rajendra Nagar Patna Express on 20 November 2016 
2. Train no. 12987, Ajmer Sealdah Express on 28 December 2016 
3. Train no. 12189,Jablapur- NizamuddinMahakaushal Express on 30 March 2017 
4. Train no. 18101, Tata-Jammu Tawi Express on 25 March 2015 
5. Train no. 53342 DN, Muri-Dhanbad Passenger on 22 June 2014 
The track maintenance practices in these sections were reviewed andAudit noticed deficiencies in 
inspections and maintenance of tracks against the norms/schedules. These are tabulated below: 
Review of major passenger train accidents 
1. Accident of Train no. 19321, Indore - Rajendra Nagar Patna Express on 20 November 2016 
Train no. and 
name 
Train no. 19321 - Indore - Rajendra Nagar Patna Express 
Date of Accident  20 November 2016 at 3:03 hrs 
Spot of Accident Between Pokhrayan – Malasastation section, Pole no. 1290/2 – 1290/16 
Zonal Railway North Central Railway 
Division Jhansi 
Name of the 
Section 
Ait – Bhimsen 
Jurisdiction of SSE Sr. Section Engineer (SSE) /Juhi 
Jurisdiction of 
ADEN 
Assistant Divisional Engineer (ADEN), Kanpur, Jhansi Division 
Loss of life/ 
railway property  
Death of 150 passengers 
Estimated loss of C&W – ` 6 crore 
Cause of accident 
as per 
supervisor’s joint 
note 
Rail failure due to old flaw in rail 
 
Report of the 
Commissioner of 
Railway Safety 
(CRS) 
Preliminary Report of CRS which should be given within one month of the accident and 
Final report of CRS enquiry which is due within six months of the accident are still 
awaited. 
Audit findings regarding track maintenance activities of the section where an accident of passenger train took 
place on 20 November 2016 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
83
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
83 
 
Perspective Plan 
for manual track 
maintenance by 
the sectional 
officials  
x Advance perspective maintenance plans were not prepared.  
x Advance planning for realignment of curves, deep screening, casual renewal of points 
and crossing, welding, de-stressing etc. were not planned. 
Plan for 
mechanised 
maintenance 
through Track 
Machines (Zonal 
Headquarters) 
x Annual plan for deployment of various track machines was intimated to Sr. Divisional 
Engineer (Coordination), Allahabad on 29 Apri l 2016, i.e. after 29 days from the start of 
the year.  
x Deployment plan of various track machines was not intimated to concerned ADEN and 
SSE of Juhi. 
TMS reports of 
Jhansi Division 
during 2016-17 
x Advance planning for smooth shifting and functioning of machines was not made. 
x 3246 machine days out of 7641 machine were not utilised / wasted over Jhansi Division 
on account of non-availability of block, deport work, repairs, shifting, staff rest, site not 
ready etc. 
Utilisation of 
track machines in 
Jhansi Division 
x Average shortfall in achievement of ta rget over Jhansi Division was 57 per cent  with 
minimum value of 14 per cent and maximum value of 87.5 per cent. 
x Shortfall in targets of ballast cleaning machine (87  per cent ) , ballast regulation 
machine (57  per cent) ,  Tamping, lifting, slewing and deep screening of track (59 per 
cent),Tamping, aligning and labelling of track  (56 per cent ) and Lining, labelling and 
tamping   of track (68 per cent). 
Welding of rail 
joints  
x Use of AT welds, due to which tracks are prone to frequent weld failures, still 
widespread. Comparison of defect reported in AT welt and Mobile flash butt weld 
revealed that defects in AT weld was 9.2 per cent and FB weld is 0.58per cent i.e. failure 
in FB weld was negligible. 
Name of the 
Section 
AT weld 
population 
Defects 
noticed 
in USFD 
testing 
Percentage Flash butt 
weld 
population 
Defects 
noticed 
in USFD 
testing 
Percentage
Ait-Bhimsen (up) 141 0 0 0 0 0
Ait-Bhimsen (Dn.) 114 03 2.63 61 0 0
Ait-Bhimsen (SL) 4130 413 10 6633 45 0.68
Bhimsen -
Govindpuri (up) 
146 05 3.42 1088 04 0.37
Bhimsen -
Govindpuri (Dn.) 
152 10 6.58 777 01 0.13
Total 4683 431 9.2 8559 50 0.58
x In SSE / Juhi, single shot crucible was not initiated in AT welding after 01 April 2015 due 
to non-supply of single shot crucible welding portion. In some cases single shot crucible 
was sued only after January 2017. 
USFD testing   x USFD was done by the Departmental Team 7 of Kanpur on 18 October 2016. No major 
deficiencies were reported in USFD testing. 
x Training and Workshop for training of ADEN and SSE to handle USFD machines 
independently was not conducted in Jhansi Division of North Central Railway. SSE, Juhi 
was not trained in USFD testing. 
x Test check of 5 per cent  was not conducted by ADEN in the section where the USFD 
testing was actually carried out by the Contractor. 
x Scanned images / peak patterns was not saved by the USFD team. Thus in successive 
USFD test scrutiny / analysis by concerned supervisors / officers were not possible. 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
84
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
84 
 
x Due to irregularities in test check new flaw  left out by the contractor / USFD team 
could not be detected. In reply to audit obse rvation ADEN, Kanpur remarked that test 
check details were recorded by him on Measurement book. No record could be 
provided by ADEN, Kanpur, Jhansi Division to Audit in support of test check. 
Preparation of 
location wise 
stock of USFD 
tested rails 
x Instructions for preparation of location wise stock was issued by NCR. However, 
location wise stock of USFD tested rails was not made and certification from USFD 
operator before use in replacement / change of rail work was not ensured.  No system 
existed to ensure that the only USFD te sted rails was used for repair and casual 
renewal work. 
x Check of rail / weld failure during 2016-17 in the jurisdiction of SSE / Juhi revealed that 
13 number of failure took place but, in order to establish whether the fracture was 
detectable and missed by USFD machine spot  of fracture/ was not inspected by ADEN, 
Kanpur, Jhansi Division. Details are as under: 
S.no. Location Date of 
Failure 
Type of 
failure 
Date of 
USFD testing 
Result of 
USFD 
test 
Responsibility
1 1284/14-
16 
17.05.2016 Weld 
failure 
20.01.2016 Good M/s Khemchand
2 1299/30 to 
1300/2 
15.10.2016 Weld 
failure 
18.03.2015 Good Sudden failure 
responsibility not 
fixed. 
3 1320/8-10 24.10.2016 Mid rail 
fracture 
23.07.2016 Good  M/s Khemchand
4 1289/4-6 10.11.2016 Rail 
fracture 
18.10.2016 OBS Rail Sudden failure 
responsibility not 
fixed. 
5 1310/14-
16 
18.12.2016 Rail 
fracture 
15.12.2016 Good  Sudden failure 
responsibility not 
fixed. 
6 1291/4-6 27.12.2016 Rail 
fracture 
15.12.2016 No flaw Avoidable, detected 
by patrolmen on 
duty. 
7 1289/4-6 10.01.2017 Rail
fracture 
13.12.2016 Nil  Sudden failure 
responsibility not 
fixed. 
8 1297/26-
28 
11.01.2017 Weld 
failure 
12.02.2014 No flaw Last USFD testing 
about 03 years ago. 
9 1326/30-
32 
14.01.2017 Sudden 
failure 
13.12.2016 Good  Nil 
10 1305/18-
20 
12.02.2017 Weld 
failure 
29.11.2016 DFWO Nil 
11 1314/12-
14 
25.02.2017 Rail 
failure 
14.12.2016 OBS NIL 
12 1285/14-
16 
25.02.2017 Weld 
Failure 
23.01.2016 Good Nil 
13 1310/12-
14 
12.03.2017 Weld 
failure 
06.04.2015 Nil  Last USFD testing 
about 02 years ago. 
x In two out of 13 cases last USFD test of weld was carried out 2 to 3 years ago. 
Track recording Check of register of TRC results of track in the office of SSE, Juhi revealed that: 
x Jhansi – Kanpur route of Indian Railway comes under ‘D’ routes i.e. monitoring 
frequency of TRC was once in six months. 
x Track recording was not conducted during 20 16-17. Last track recording was carried in 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
85
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
85 
 
2015-16 on 05 March 2016. 
x Track recording car did not have an uninterrupted run over Jhansi – Kanpursections of 
NCR and speed of TRC was also not uniform. Thus, comparable results between 
successive recordings were not produced by TRC unit.  
x The prescribed recording speed range of a BroadGauge car is 70 - 80 kmph and the 
recording done below these speeds are taken as ‘Non-recorded’. Check of TGI of 
accident location showed that from km 1289-1291 TGI of the track was not recorded by 
TRC unit on 05 March 2016 due to running of  TRC below the prescribed speed range of 
70-80 kmph. Speed of TRC was also not recorded by the officer accompanying the 
Track Recording run. 
Inspection x GPS based foot plate inspection device was not procured by NCR and inspection of 
track was carried out traditionally. 
x Track maintainers were not equipped with  communication equipment to report any 
failure, fracture or damage immediately from the section where short comings / 
defects in track was observed. 
Deep screening of 
ballast 
In the jurisdiction of SSE, Juhi, Deep screening was overdue in main line section at 10 
locations for length of 16264 meter between one to 19 years, as detailed below: 
S.no. Section Line Deep Screening 
month & year 
Location from km/m to 
Km/m 
Length 
1 Ait-Bhimsen Single Line March 1999 1272/0 to 1274/300 2264 m 
2 Ait -
Bhimsen 
Single Line Jan. 1999 1275/275 to 1275/655 380 m 
3 Ait -
Bhimsen 
Single Line March 1998 1276/472 to 1280/285 3839 m 
4 Ait -
Bhimsen 
Single Line March 1998 1281/330 to 1281/375 45 m 
5 Ait -
Bhimsen 
Single Line April 2007 1315/0 to 1317/580 2582 m 
6 Ait -
Bhimsen 
Single Line March 2007 1318/775 to 1319/0 266 m 
7 Ait -
Bhimsen 
Single Line March 2007 1319/0 to 1324/0 4991 m 
8 Ait -
Bhimsen 
Single Line March 2007 1324/0 to 1325/0 997 m 
9 Bhimsen-
Govindpuri 
Up Line Jan. 2002 1332/850 to 1333/580 730 m 
10 Bhimsen- 
Govindpuri 
Up Line Jan. 2002 1333/580 to 1333/750 170 m 
 16264 m 
 
De-stressing of 
LWR/CWR 
In the sections of SSE, Juhi,during 2016-17, 
1. De-stressing was done without rail tensors and done manually by contractual labours 
in 
x 8175 meter out in LWR number 33 (1289 km 696m to 1297 km to 970 m) 
x 800 meter in LWR number 34 (1298 km 115 m to 1298 km to 915 m)  
x 796 meter was carried out in LWR number 32 (1288 km 776 m to 1289 km to 570 m)  
2. De-stressing was done without rail tensors and done manually by departmental 
labours in 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
86
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
86 
 
x 834 meter in LWR number 30 (1280 km 375 m to 1281 km to 193 m)  
x 7285 meter in LWR number 43 (1325 km 328 m to 1332 km to 613 m)  
Standardisation 
of Track structure 
Track structure was not standardised with 60 Kg, 90 UTS rails. As per rail change report 
during 2016-17, both 52 Kg and 60 Kg rails were still in use. During 2016-17 in 367 
instances rail were replaced due to defects. Of these, 
x 45 instances were caused by defects in welds at joints viz. defective weld, IMR weld 
(where immediate rail removal is required), weld failure.  
x In 16 cases, premature renewal of rail was carried out due to SEJ failure. 
x In 143 cases rails was changed due to pitted rail. 
Use of Small 
Track Machines 
for mechanized 
track 
maintenance 
In Jhansi – Kanpur section all maintenance activities are being done through manually as 
well as through machines. Track maintenance work such as de-stressing, reconditioning, 
toe load measuring, lifting, trolling and screening of ballast was impacted due to the 
following constraints: 
x Number of small track machines was not adequate 
x Arrangement for transport of these machines was not proper 
x Spares for small track machines were not available in local market 
x For emergency repairs of small track machines imprest was not sanctioned. 
x Staff deputed on deployment / operation of small track machines were not trained. 
Check of records of SSE, Juhi and ADEN, Kanpur revealed that there was huge shortage of 
small track machines. During January 2017,  
- 17 out of 44 Abrasive rail cutters were out of order 
- 12 out of 52 Rail drilling machines were out of order 
- One out of four rail tensors were out of order  
- Both the Rail profile weld grinders were out of order 
- One out of 8 Double action trimmer for AT welding were not working 
- Generator for running these machines was also not working 
Manpower for 
track 
maintenance 
As on 1 April 2016, the staff position in under the SSE/Juhi was as follows: 
Category Sanction Actual Men on roll Shortage 
Blacksmith 02 01 -01
H/Man 0 01 +1
Welder 02 01 -01
MSN 2 0 -02
ART/Khalasi 02 01 -01
Non ART / Khalasi 01 0 -01
T.M - I 14 5 -9
T.M. II 27 8 -19
T.M. III 51 71 +20
T.M. IV 148 108 -40
Total 249 196 -53
Out of 196 staff on roll, 32 staff were abse nt from the duty without any intimation to 
office establishment between 01 April 2016 to 31 March 2017 for more than 15 
days.Though shortages of staff was communicated by SSE in the monthly reports, no 
action was taken so far for filling of vacancies. 
As such, actual man power of SSE’s after rest, leave, sick, absent and training was being 
used in maintenance activities. Thus work of regular maintenance in jurisdiction of SSE, 
Juhi was hampered. 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
87
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
87 
 
Training for 
permanent way 
staff 
In NCR, Check of competency certificate in selected sections showed that no system 
existed to ensure that only trained staffs we re posted in LWR / CWR section. It was seen 
that 
x 15 Track maintainers were posted in the section of SSE, Juhi without imparting initial 
training of track maintenance.  
x Records of refresher courses were not maintained and Competency certificate for 
working on LWR section was also not obtained for Keyman, Gangmate.  
x TMS report of training of staff was also not updated as a result monitoring of training 
programme at higher level was not carried out. 
2. Accident of Train no. 12987, Ajmer Sealdah Express on 28 December 2016 
Train no. and 
name 
12987 (Sealdah Ajmer express) 
Date of Accident  28 December 2016at 05:11  
Spot of Accident Near KM-1061/26 UP Line 
Zonal Railway North Central Railway 
Division Allahabad 
Name of the 
Section 
Maitha-Rura 
Jurisdiction of SSE SSE – II, Kanpur, Allahabad Division 
Jurisdiction of 
ADEN 
ADEN, Line Kanpur 
Loss of life/ 
railway property  
16 coaches derailed, 50 persons were injured and estimated loss of Rs. 4.67 crore 
occurred to Railways for damages to assets 
Cause of accident 
as per supervisor’s 
joint note 
Rail fracture 
Report of the 
Commissioner of 
Railway Safety 
(CRS) 
Preliminary Report of CRS which should be given within one month of the accident and 
Final report of CRS enquiry which is due within six months of the accident are still 
awaited. 
Audit findings regarding track maintenance activities of the section where an accident of passenger train 
took place on 28 December 2016 
Preparation of 
Perspective Plan 
for manual track 
maintenance by 
the sectional 
officials  
x Advance perspective monthly planning for realignment of curves, deep screening, 
casual renewal of points and crossing, welding, de-stressing etc. were not made. 
x Activities of maintenance were not executed as per Annual plan of TMS. 
Plan for 
mechanised 
maintenance 
through Track 
Machines (Zonal 
Headquarters) 
x Annual plan for deployment of various track machines was intimated to Sr . 
Divisional Engineer (Coordination), Allahabad on 29 April 2016, i .e. after 29 days 
from the start of the year.  
x Deployment plan of various track machines was not intimated to concerned ADEN 
and SSE of Kanpur - II. 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
88
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
88 
 
TMS reports of 
Allahabad Division 
during 2016-17 
x Advance planning for smooth shifting and functioning of machines was not made. 
x Check of reports of TMS regarding working of Track machines over Allahabad 
Division revealed that during 2016-17 advance planning for smooth shifting and 
functioning of machines was not made and 2341 machine days out of 6878 
machine days i.e. 34 per cent were not utilised / wasted over Allahabad Division on 
account of non-availability of block, deport work, repairs, shifting, staff rest, site not 
ready, bad weather, non-availability of fuel etc. 
Utilisation of track 
machines in 
Allahabad Division 
x Average shortfall in achievement of target  over Allahabad Division was 55 per cent 
with minimum value of 14 per cent and maximum value of 87.5 per cent. 
x Shortfall in targets of ballast cleaning machine (87 per cent ), ballast regulation 
machine (57 per cent), Tamping, lifting, slewing and deep screening of track  (59per 
cent),Tamping, aligning and labelling of track  (56 per cent) and Lining, labelling and 
tamping   of track (68 per cent). 
Welding of rail 
joints  
x Use of AT welds, due to which tracks are prone to frequent weld failures, still 
widespread. Comparison of defect reported in AT welt and Mobile flash butt weld 
revealed that defects in AT weld was 33.6 per cent and FB weld is 0 .92 per centi.e. 
failure in FB weld was negligible. 
Name of 
the Section 
AT weld 
population 
Defects 
noticed 
in USFD 
testing 
Percentage Flash butt 
weld 
population 
Defects 
noticed 
in USFD 
testing 
Percentage
Govindpuri - 
Panki 1242 435 35.02 2622 15 0.57 
Panki - 
Etawah 2653 874 32.94 8217 85 1.03 
Total 3895 1309 33.60 10839 100 0.92
x In SSE /Kanpur, single shot crucible was not initiated in AT welding. 
USFD testing   x USFD testing results of rail joints was not recorded in welding register. 
x USFD was done by the Departmental and Contractual Team. As per USFD test result 
in jurisdiction of SSE/ II, Kanpur 14734 defective welds and 61 defective rails existed 
at different locations. 
x SSE, Kanpur II was not trained in USFD testing. 
x Scanned images/peak pattern was not saved by the USFD team. Thus, in successive 
USFD test scrutiny/analysis by concerned supervisors/officers were not possible. 
Test check of 5 per cent was not conducted by ADEN in the section where the USFD 
testing was actually carried out by the Contractor. 
x Due to irregularities in test check new flaw left out by the contractor /USFD team 
could not be detected.  
Preparation of 
location wise stock 
of USFD tested 
rails 
x Instructions for preparation of location wi se stock were issued by NCR. However, 
location wise stock of USFD tested rails was not made and certification from USFD 
operator before use in replacement / change of rail work was not ensured.  No 
system existed to ensure that the only USFD tested rails was used for repair and 
casual renewal work. 
x Check of rail / weld failure during 2016-17 in the jurisdiction of SSE /Kanpur II 
revealed that four weld failure took place but, in order to establish whether the 
fracture was detectable and missed by USFD machine spot of fracture/ was not 
inspected by ADEN, Kanpur, Allahabad Division.  
Date of previous 
TRC Run and TGI 
Check of register of TRC results of track in the office of SSE, Kanpur II revealed that: 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
89
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
89 
 
x Monitoring frequency of TRC was once in six months. 
x Track recording was not conducted as per prescribed frequency as during 2016-17 
track recording was carried in only one times in December’2016  
x TGI of spot of the accident was 107 and no major irregularities were reported by 
TRC unit. 
Inspection x GPS based foot plate inspection device was not procured by NCR and inspection of 
track was carried out traditionally. 
x Track maintainers were not equipped with communication equipment to report any 
failure, fracture or damage immediately from the section where short comings / 
defects in track was observed. 
Deep screening of 
ballast 
In the jurisdiction of SSE, /I I/Kanpur, Deep screening is overdue in main line section at 
41 locations for length of 34.46 km, due from  three to four years. Section and location 
wise details are as under: 
S.no Section Line Deep Screening 
month & year 
Location from 
km/m to km/m 
Length
1 Govindpuri-
Panki 
UP & DN Dec2002 1022 to 1026 4.33 TKM
2 Panki-Etawah UP & DN July 2003 1027 to 1047 30.13 TKM 
TOTAL  34.46 TKM
De-stressing of 
LWR/CWR 
De-stressing of LWR /CWR under SSE/II/Kanpur was not entered in TMS. No records 
were produced to audit regarding due de-stressing and its method. 
Use of Small Track 
Machines for 
mechanized track 
maintenance 
Check of records of SSE/II/Kanpur revealed that: 
x Over Govindpuri - Etawah section all these maintenance activities are being done 
through dual maintenance. It not only takes longer time but also affects quality of 
work resulting in lesser life of the work done. 
x For emergency repairs of Small track machines imprest was not sanctioned. 
x Staff deputed on deployment / operation of small track machines was not trained. 
x Non-availability of imprest and shortfall of machines impacted various aspects of 
track maintenance like de – stressing, reconditioning, toe load measuring, lifting, 
trolling and screening of ballast. 
x During March 2017, out of 13Hydraulic track Jack 10were out of order, out of 
13Abrasive rail cutters, 10 were out of order and three out of fiveRail drilling 
machineswere out of order. 
Manpower for 
track maintenance 
x As on April 2017, against the sanction strength of 488 Track maintainers only 288 
track maintainers were on roll. 
x Out of 288 track maintainers 14 track maintainers were deployed in other then 
track maintenance work. 
Training for 
permanent way 
staff 
In NCR, checks of competency certificate in  selected sections showed that no system 
existed to ensure that only trained staffs were posted in LWR /CWR section . It was 
seen that 
x 44 Track maintainers were posted in the section of SSE /Kanpur-II without imparting 
initial training of track maintenance.  
x Records of refresher courses were not ma intained and Competency certificate for 
working on LWR section was also not obtained for Key man, Gang mate.  
x TMS report of training of staff was also  not updated as a result monitoring of 
training programme at higher level was not carried out. 
 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
90
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
90 
 
3. Accident of Train no. 12189,Jablapur - NizamuddinMahakaushal Express on 30 March 2017 
Train no. and 
name 
Train no. 12189 - Jablapur –NizamuddinMahakaushal Express 
Date of Accident  30 March 2017 at 2:30 hrs 
Spot of Accident Between Mahoba and Kulpahar Stations  
Zonal Railway North Central Railway 
Division Jhansi 
Name of the 
Section 
Manikpur – Jhansi Section 
Jurisdiction of SSE SSE/Mahoba 
Jurisdiction of 
ADEN 
ADEN, Mahoba, Jhansi Division 
Loss of life/ 
railway property  
Estimated loss of ` 25.6 lakh on account of damaged track. Eight rearmost Coaches of 
the Train derailed 10 passengers injured. 
Cause of accident 
as per supervisors 
joint note 
Fracture near rail joints. 
Report of the 
Commissioner of 
Railway Safety 
(CRS) 
NAV 
Audit findings regarding track maintenance activities of the section where an accident of passenger train 
took place on 30 March 2017 
Preparation of 
Perspective Plan 
for manual track 
maintenance by 
the sectional 
officials  
x Advance perspective monthlyplanning for realignment of curves, deep screening, 
casual renewal of points and crossing, welding, de-stressing etc. were not made. 
x Activities of maintenance were not executed as per Annual plan of TMS. 
 
Plan for 
mechanised 
maintenance 
through Track 
Machines (Zonal 
Headquarters) 
x Annual plan for deployment of various track machines was intimated to Sr. 
Divisional Engineer (Coordination), Jhansi on 29 April 2016, i.e. after 29 days from 
the start of the year.  
x Deployment plan of various track machines was not intimated to concerned ADEN 
and SSE of Mahoba. 
TMS reports of 
Jhansi Division 
during 2016-17 
x Advance planning for smooth shifting and functioning of machines was not made. 
x 3246 machine days out of 7641 were not utilised / wasted over Jhansi Division on 
account of non-availability of block, deport work, repairs, shifting, staff rest, site not 
ready etc. 
Utilisation of track 
machines in Jhansi 
Division 
x Average shortfall in achievement of target over Jhansi Division was 57 per cent with 
minimum value of 14 per cent and maximum value of 87.5 per cent. 
x Shortfall in targets of ballast cleaning machine (87 per cent), ballast regulation 
machine (57 per cent), Tamping, lifting, slewing and deep screening of track (59per 


Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
91
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
91 
 
cent),Tamping, aligning and labelling of track (56 per cent) and Lining, labelling and 
tamping   of track (68 per cent). 
Welding of rail 
joints  
x Use of AT welds, due to which tracks ar e prone to frequent weld failures, still 
widespread. Comparison of defect reported  in AT welt and Mobile flash butt weld 
revealed that defects in AT weld was 3.36 per cent and FB weld is 0.1 per cent i.e. 
failure in FB weld was negligible. 
Name of 
the 
Section 
AT weld 
population 
Defects 
noticed 
in USFD 
testing 
Percentage Flash butt 
weld 
population 
Defects 
noticed 
in USFD 
testing 
Percentage
JHS-MBA 6956 270 3.88 2048 6 0.29 
MBA KID 329 23 6.99 2412 8 0.33 
MBA KURJ 1446 0 0 9022 0 0
Total 8731 293 3.36 13482 14 0.1 
x In SSE / Mahoba, single shot crucible was not initiated in AT welding after 01 April 
2015 due to non-supply of single shot crucible welding portion.  
USFD testing   x USFD testing results of rail joints was not recorded in welding register. 
x USFD was done by the Departmental and Contractual Team. As per USFD test result 
in Jhansi – Mahoba section 276 defective welds and 75 defective rails were exist at 
different locations. Year of welding in most of the defective welds was 2002 and 
2003 i.e. these welds are old and prone to frequent weld failures.  
x Training and Workshop for training of ADEN and SSE to handle USFD machines 
independently was not conducted in Jhansi Division of North Central Railway . SSE, 
Mahobawas not trained in USFD testing. 
x Scanned images / peak patterns were not saved by the USFD team . Thus, in 
successive USFD test scrutiny / analysis by concerned supervisors / officers were not 
possible.Test check of 5 per cent was not conducted by ADEN in the section where 
the USFD testing was actually carried out by the Contractor. 
x Due to irregularities in test check new flaw left out by the contractor / USFD team 
could not be detected.  
Preparation of 
location wise stock 
of USFD tested 
rails 
x Instructions for preparation of loca tion wise stock was issued by NCR . However, 
location wise stock of USFD tested rails was not made and certification from USFD 
operator before use in replacement / change of rail work was not ensured .  No 
system existed to ensure that the only USFD tested rails was used for repair and 
casual renewal work. 
x Check of rail / weld failure during 2016-17 in the jurisdiction of SSE / Mahoba 
x Oneweld failure took place but, in order to establish whether the fracture was 
detectable and missed by USFD machine spot of fracture / was not inspected by 
ADEN, Mahoba, Jhansi Division. 
Date of previous 
TRC Run and TGI 
Check of register of TRC results of track in the office of SSE, Mahoba revealed that: 
x In Jhansi – Mahoba sectionmonitoring frequency of TRC was once in six months. 
x Track recording was not conducted as per prescribed frequency as during 2016 -17 
track recording was carried in only one time s on 24 July 2016. As per TRC register 
TGI of spot of the accident (Km 1291) was 110 . i.e. no deficiencies were detected by 
TRC unit in track parameters. 
Inspection x GPS based foot plate inspection device was not procured by NCR and inspection of 
track was carried out traditionally. 
x Track maintainers were not equipped with communication equipment to report any 
failure, fracture or damage immediatel y from the section where short comings / 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
92
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
92 
 
defects in track was observed. 
Deep screening of 
ballast 
Records of deep screening in the Jhansi – Mahoba section was not available in office of 
SSE / Mahoba and SSE states that Deep screening is overdue in a large porting of 
Jhansi – Mahoba section. 
De-stressing of 
LWR/CWR 
Details of De – stressing of LWR / CWR was not made available to Audit.  
Standardisation of 
Track structure 
x Track structure was not standardised with 60 Kg, 90 UTS rails . As per rail change 
report during 2016-17, both 52 Kg rails were still in use.  
During 2016-17 in 84 instances rail were replaced due to defects. Out of these, 
x 41 instances were caused by defects in welds at joints viz. defective weld, IMR weld, 
weld failure.  
x In 23 cases rails was changed due to defects in rail viz pitted rail, scabbed rail, OBS 
rail. 
Use of Small Track 
Machines for 
mechanized track 
maintenance 
x In Jhansi – Mahoba section all maintenance activities are being done through 
manually as well as through machines . Track maintenance work such as de -
stressing, reconditioning, toe load measuring, lifting, trolling and screening of 
ballast was impacted due to the following constraints: 
x Number of small track machines was not adequate 
x Arrangement for transport of these machines was not proper 
x Spares for small track machines were not available in local market 
x For emergency repairs of Small track machines imprest was not sanctioned. 
x Staff deputed on deployment / operation of small track machines were not trained. 
This impacted  
x Check of records of SSE, Mahoba revealed  that there was huge shortage of small 
track machines. During June 2017,  
- 7 out of 11 Abrasive rail cutters were out of order 
- 13 out of 20 Rail drilling machines were out of order 
- 2 out of 3  Rail profile weld grinders were out of order 
Manpower for 
track maintenance 
Out of 127 track maintainers on roll 20 track maintainers were deployed in other then 
track maintenance work.  
Training for 
permanent way 
staff 
In NCR, checks of competency certificate in  selected sections showed that no system 
existed to ensure that only trained staffs were posted in LWR / CWR section. It was 
seen that 
x 61 Track maintainers were posted in the section of SSE / Mahoba without imparting 
initial training of track maintenance.  
x Records of refresher courses were not ma intained and Competency certificate for 
working on LWR section was also not obtained for Key man, Gang mate.  
x TMS report of training of staff was also not updated as a result monitoring of 
training programme at higher level was not carried out. 
4. Derailment of Train no. 18101, Tata-Jammu Tawi Express on 25 March 2015 
Train no. and 
name 
Train no. 18101 Tata Jammu Tawi Express 
Date of Accident  25.05.2015, 13:45 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
93
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
93 
 
Spot of Accident Near KM-887/21 in Sirathu- Athsarai Section 
Zonal Railway North Central Railway 
Division Allahabad 
Name of the 
Section 
Allahabad - Kanpur 
Jurisdiction of SSE SSE/Khaga 
Jurisdiction of 
ADEN 
ADEN, Line, Allahabad Division 
Loss of life/ 
railway property  
11 coaches derailed, cost of damage Rs.1.64 crore 
Death of 10 passengers  
Cause of accident  Buckling of Track 
Report of the 
Commissioner of 
Railway Safety 
(CRS) 
Report of CRS finalised on 26.05.2015 and as per enquiry report of CRS derailment of 
Train caused by buckling of track. Responsibility fixed against three railway staffs. 
Audit findings regarding track maintenance activities of the section where an accident of passenger train took 
place on 25May 2015 
Preparation of 
Perspective Plan 
for manual track 
maintenance by 
the sectional 
officials  
x Advance perspective maintenance plans for maintenance were not prepared by SSE, 
Khaga.  
x Advance planning for realignment of curves, deep screening, casual renewal of points 
and crossing, welding, de-stressing etc. were not made. 
 
Plan for 
mechanised 
maintenance 
through Track 
Machines (Zonal 
Headquarters) 
x Annual plan for deployment of various track machines was intimated to Sr. Divisional 
Engineer (Coordination), Allahabad on 29 April 2016, i.e. after 29 days from the start of 
the year.  
x Deployment plan of various track machines was not intimated to concerned ADEN and 
SSE. 
TMS reports of 
Allahabad 
Division during 
2016-17 
x Advance planning for smooth shifting and functioning of machines was not made. 
x Advance planning for smooth shifting and functioning of machines was not made and 
2341 machine daysout of 6878 machine daysi.e. 34 per centwere not utilised / wasted 
over Allahabad Division on account of non-availability of block, depot work, repair, 
shifting, Staff rest, site not ready, bad weather, non-availability of fuel etc. 
Utilisation of 
track machines in 
Allahabad 
Division 
x Average shortfall in achievement of target for 17 machines over Allahabad Division of 
NCR was 57 per cent with minimum value of 23.34 and maximum value of 81.61 
percent.  
x Shortfall in targets of ballast cleaning machine (70.5  per cent ), ballast regulation 
machine (68.5 per cent),  Tamping, lifting, slewing an d deep screening of track (39  per 
cent), Tamping, aligning and labelling of track  (76.8 per cent) and Lining, labelling and 
tamping   of track (62.8per cent). 
Welding of rail 
joints  
x Use of AT welds, due to which tracks are prone to frequent weld failures, still 
widespread.  
x In jurisdiction of SSE / Khaga, single shot crucible was not initiated in AT welding after 
01 April 2015 due to non-supply of single shot crucible welding portion. In some cases 
single shot crucible was sued only after January 2017. 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
94
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
94 
 
USFD testing   x USFD was testing of the section was carried out by the Departmental Team and by the 
contractor M/s Khemchandra.  
x SSE, Khaga was not trained in USFD testing. 
x Test check of 5 per cent was not conducted by ADEN in the section where the USFD 
testing was actually carried out by the Contractor. 
x Scanned images / peak patterns were not saved by the USFD team. Thus, in successive 
USFD test scrutiny / analysis by concerned supervisors / officers were not possible. 
x Due to irregularities in test check new flaw  left out by the contractor / USFD team 
could not be detected.  
Preparation of 
location wise 
stock of USFD 
tested rails 
x Instructions for preparation of location wi se stock were issued by NCR. However, 
location wise stock of USFD tested rails was not made and certification from USFD 
operator before use in replacement / change of rail work was not ensured.  No system 
existed to ensure that the only USFD tes ted rails was used for repair and casual 
renewal work. 
x Check of rail / weld failure during 2016-17 in the jurisdiction of SSE / Khaga revealed 
that one number of weld failure took place but, in order to establish whether the 
fracture was detectable and missed by US FD machine spot of fracture/ was not 
inspected by ADEN, Line, Allahabad.  
Date of previous 
TRC Run and TGI 
Check of register of TRC results of track in the office of SSE, Khaga revealed that: 
x Allahabad – Kanpur route of Indian Railway comes under ‘A’ routes i.e. monitoring 
frequency of TRC was once in three months. 
x During 2016-17Track recording by TRC wa s conducted on 22.07.2016 and 26.12.2016 
i.e. recording of track was not conducted as per prescribed frequency. 
x Track recording car did not have an uninterrupted run over Allahabad – Kanpursection 
of NCR and speed of TRC was also not uniform. Thus, comparable results between 
successive recordings were not produced by TRC unit.  
Inspection x GPS based foot plate inspection device was not procured by NCR and inspection of 
track was carried out traditionally. 
x Track maintainers were not equipped with  communication equipment to report any 
failure, fracture or damage immediately from the section where short comings / 
defects in track was observed. 
Deep screening of 
ballast 
In the jurisdiction of SSE, Khaga, Deep screening was overdue at 07 locations for length of 
25 Kilo meter between twoto five years, as detailed below: 
S.no. Section Line Deep Screening 
month & year 
Location from km/m 
to Km/m 
Length
1 SRO - Yard UP 2003 881.83 to 882.63 0.80  TKM
2 ASCE YARD UP 2002 888.88 to 889.46 0.60 TKM
3 KUW YARD UP 2002 894.00 to 895.24 1.24 TKM
4 KTCE YARD UP 2002 899.85 to 901.14 1.29 TKM
5 SNIE YARD UP 2005 914.22 to 915.40 1.18 TKM
6 SRO YARD DN 2005 881.82 to 882.84 1.02 TKM
7 KUW - SNIE DN 2003 895.27 to 914.22 18.95 TKM
Total 25.08 TKM
 
De-stressing of 
LWR/CWR 
In the sections of SSE, Khaga,during 2016-17, de-stressing is required at 07 locations of 
main line. Details are as under: 
 
 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
95
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
95 
 
Location from Location To Required de-
stressing in kilo 
meter 
895.34 899.85 4.51
894.33 895.24 0.91
900.16 900.92 0.76
900.14 900.92 0.78
901.13 906.80 5.67
914.42 915.10 0.68
915.30 921.0 5.70
Total 19.01
Records of de-stressing were not maintained and access to TMS reports were not 
provided to Audit. Thus could not be ascertained that the due de-stressing was carried 
out. 
Use of Small Track 
Machines for 
mechanized track 
maintenance 
In Allahabad – Kanpur section all maintenance activities are being done through manually 
as well as through machines. Track maintenance work such as de-stressing, 
reconditioning, toe load measuring, lifting, trolling and screening of ballast was impacted 
due to the following constraints: 
x Number of small track machines was not adequate 
x Arrangement for transport of these machines was not proper 
x Spares for small track machines were not available in local market 
x For emergency repairs of Small track machines imprest was not sanctioned. 
x Staff deputed on deployment/ operation of small track machines was not trained. 
Manpower for 
track 
maintenance 
As on 1 March 2015, the staff position in under the SSE/Khaga was as follows: 
Category Sanction Actual Men on roll Shortage 
Blacksmith 08 06 -02 
Welder 05 02 -03 
Fitter  02 02 00 
Car penter 01 01 00 
Penter 01 01 00 
Mate 08 07 -01 
Key Man 13 8 -05 
Track Maintainer 222 176 -46 
Head Trolly Man 04 03 -01 
Trolly Man  12 07 -05 
Gate Man 28 28 00 
Stock issuer  01 01 00 
Total 305 242 -63 
Out of 242 staff on roll, 41 staff were absent from the duty without any intimation to 
office establishment between 012.05.2014 to 30.05.2015. Though shortages of staff were 
communicated by SSE in the monthly reports, no action was taken so far for filling of 
vacancies. 
As such, actual man power of SSE’s after rest, leave, sick, absent and training was being 
used in maintenance activities. Thus, work of regular maintenance in jurisdiction of SSE, 
Khaga was hampered. 
Training for 
permanent way 
staff 
In NCR, Check of competency certificate in selected sections showed that no system 
existed to ensure that only trained staffs were posted in LWR / CWR section. It was seen 
that 
 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
96
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
96 
 
x 30 Track maintainer were posted in the sect ion of SSE / Khaga without imparting initial 
training of track maintenance.  
x Records of refresher courses were not maintained and Competency certificate for 
working on LWR section was also not obtained for Keyman, Gangmate.  
x TMS report of training of staff was also not updated as a result monitoring of training 
programme at higher level was not carried out. 
5. Accident of Train no. 53342 DN–Muri-Dhanbad Passenger on 22 June 2014 
Train no. and 
name 
Train no. 53342 DN–Muri-Dhanbad Passenger 
Date of Accident  22nd June 2014 at about 05.35 hours 
Spot of Accident In Muri – Bokaro Section at Bokaro ‘A’ cabin Km 402/06. 
Zonal Railway South Eastern Railway 
Division ADRA 
Name of the 
Section 
Muri – Bokaro 
Jurisdiction of SSE Sr. Section Engineer (SSE) /Bokaro 
Jurisdiction of 
ADEN 
Assistant Divisional Engineer (ADEN), Bokaro, AdraDivision 
Loss of life/ 
railway property  
No Casualty  
 
Cause of accident 
as per supervisors 
joint note 
Rail facture of RHS tongue Rail (5.09 mtrs. From toe) 
 
Report of Chief 
Safety Officer(SER) 
Enquiry Report has been submitted by CTE, CSE, CETE and CSO on 08.07.2014. 
Audit findings regarding track maintenance activities of the section where an accident of passenger train took 
place on 22nd June 2014. 
Preparation of 
Perspective Plan 
for manual track 
maintenance by 
the sectional 
officials  
x Advance perspective maintenance plans were not prepared.  
x Advance planning for realignment of curves, deep screening, casual renewal of points 
and crossing, welding, de-stressing etc. were not planned. 
Plan for 
mechanised 
maintenance 
through Track 
Machines (Zonal 
Headquarters) 
Deployment plan of various track machines was not intimated to concerned SSE of 
Bokaro. 
TMS reports of 
Adra Division 
during 2014-15 
Not applicable in respect of Tongue Rail 
Utilisation of track 
machines in Adra 
Division 
Not applicable in respect of Tongue Rail 
Welding of rail 
joints  
Welding of joints does not arise in Tongue Rail 
USFD testing   x USFD of the Section in between Km400/500 Km to 402/500 kmswas done on 24 May 
2014 by the PWI/USFD. No deficiencies were reported in USFD testing. 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Appendix
97
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways) 
 
97 
 
x It was revealed during inquiry that testing of this fractured location of Tongue rail is 
beyond the capacity of normal USFD rail testing process and there is no special 
technique of testing of Tongue rails as mentioned in USFD Manual 2012. 
x It was noted that this important aspect has not been taken care of till date as Railways 
have been spending lot of resources on USFD testing of track to detect flaws in the 
rails as well as welds. 
x Therefore, some system should be adopted for USFD checking as well as monitoring of 
health of Tongue Rail on regular basis. 
Preparation of 
location wise stock 
of USFD tested 
rails 
Not applicable 
Track recording As per TMS record, TRC run prior to the date of accident in the section was done during 
July 2011 and thereafter in September 2014. 
Inspection Scheduled monthly inspections were being done by the Sectional PWI and there was no 
shortfall. 
Deep screening of 
ballast 
As per TMS record, In the jurisdiction of SSE, Bokaro, Deep screening in the section was 
last done during the year 2004-05 and then during February 2014. Therefore, Deep 
Screening was not overdue in the Section.  
De-stressing of 
LWR/CWR 
De-stressing of Tongue Railis not applicable. 
Standardisation of 
Track structure 
Tongue Rail of Bokaro – A Cabin is of 60 Kg rail 
Use of Small Track 
Machines for 
mechanized track 
maintenance 
InMuri - Bokaro section all maintenance activities were done manually as well as through 
machines. Track maintenance work such as de-stressing, reconditioning, toe load 
measuring, lifting, trolling and screening of  ballast was impacted due to the following 
constraints: 
x Number of small track machines was not adequate 
x For emergency repairs of small track machines imprest was not sanctioned. 
Manpower for 
track maintenance 
As on 1 April 2017, the Sanctioned Strength,actual men-in roll (Track Maintainers)  under 
the SSE/Bokaro is as follows: 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Men on Roll Vacancy Staff working in various Office 
Establishments 
426 328 98 22 
Though shortage of staff was communicated by SSE in the monthly reports, no action 
was taken so far for filling of vacancies. Fu rther, 22 number of staff were engaged in 
various office establishments for which work of regular maintenance in jurisdiction of 
SSE, Bokaro was hampered. 
Training for 
permanent way 
staff 
Check of competency certificate in selected sections showed that no system existed to 
ensure that only trained staffs were posted in LWR/ CWR section. However, It was seen 
that85 Track maintainers were posted in the section of SSE, Bokaro without imparting 
initial training of track maintenance.  
 

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Annexure
98
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Dadri- Dankaur Feb/98 2008 1405.68 1405.82 135 108
Dadri- Dankaur Feb/98 2008 1405.1 1406.45 1350 108
Dadri- Dankaur Feb/98 2008 1411.06 1411.7 645 108
Dadri- Dankaur Jan/00 2010 1411.06 1411.6 545 106
Dadri- Dankaur Feb/98 2008 1414.65 1414.85 200 108
Dadri- Dankaur Mar/98 2008 1415.05 1415.2 150 108
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Jan-2004 2014 1213 917 1213 1032 115 36
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Jun-2005 2015 1213 825 1213 849 24 24
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Oct-2004 2014 1214 868 1214 873 5 36
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Oct-2004 2014 1218 115 1218 118 3 36
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Oct-2004 2014 1221 137 1221 138 1 36
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Oct-2004 2014 1221 338 1221 340 2 36
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Jul-2004 2014 1221 349 1221 477 128 36
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Jul-2004 2014 1221 477 1222 224 749 36
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Jul-2004 2014 1222 224 1222 634 410 36
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Dec-2005 2015 1225 245 1225 247 2 24
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Dec-2005 2015 1226 84 1226 270 186 24
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Dec-2005 2015 1227 169 1227 170 1 24
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Dec-2005 2015 1230 905 1230 916 11 24
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Dec-2005 2015 1230 916 1231 512 600 24
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Dec-2005 2015 1230 916 1231 512 600 24
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Dec-2005 2015 1231 512 1231 515 3 24
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Jan-2006 2016 1231 512 1232 317 818 12
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Feb-2006 2016 1232 317 1232 715 398 12
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Sep-2004 2014 1233 162 1233 164 2 36
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Sep-2004 2014 1234 964 1234 965 1 36
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Sep-2004 2014 1235 864 1235 877 13 36
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Sep-2004 2014 1237 648 1237 802 154 36
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Sep-2004 2014 1239 125 1239 160 35 36
 Shikohabad-Tundla  May-2005 2015 1239 167 1239 316 149 24
 Shikohabad-Tundla  May-2005 2015 1239 316 1240 42 726 24
 Shikohabad-Tundla  May-2005 2015 1240 42 1240 364 322 24
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Sep-2004 2014 1241 5 1241 85 80 36
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Sep-2004 2014 1242 140 1242 145 5 36
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Sep-2004 2014 1242 605 1242 635 30 36
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Sep-2004 2014 1244 190 1244 195 5 36
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Dec-2005 2015 1218 22 1218 25 3 24
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Dec-2005 2015 1218 675 1218 906 231 24
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Dec-2005 2015 1221 104 1221 105 1 24
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Nov-2004 2014 1221 302 1221 488 186 36
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Nov-2004 2014 1221 488 1222 222 736 36
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Nov-2004 2014 1222 222 1222 571 349 36
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Jan-2006 2016 1224 950 1225 180 232 12
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Jan-2006 2016 1226 54 1226 60 6 12
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Jan-2006 2016 1227 39 1227 40 1 12
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Jan-2006 2016 1230 823 1230 860 37 12
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Apr-2001 2011 1230 867 1230 925 58 72
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Apr-2001 2011 1230 925 1231 241 320 72
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Jan-2001 2011 1231 241 1231 547 306 72
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Jul-2001 2011 1231 547 1232 325 791 72
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Jan-1985 1995 1232 325 1232 711 386 264
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Feb-2006 2016 1234 906 1234 907 1 12
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Feb-2006 2016 1235 791 1235 796 5 12
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Feb-2006 2016 1237 109 1237 111 2 12
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Feb-2006 2016 1238 881 1238 908 27 12
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Feb-2005 2015 1239 83 1239 266 183 24
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Feb-2005 2015 1239 266 1240 5 739 24
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Feb-2005 2015 1240 5 1240 400 395 24
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Mar-2006 2016 1242 145 1242 150 5 12
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Mar-2006 2016 1243 29 1243 30 1 12
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Mar-2006 2016 1244 175 1244 180 5 12
 Shikohabad-Tundla  Mar-2006 2016 1246 69 1246 70 1 12
 Etawah-Shikohabad  Sep-2004 2014 1167 890 1167 892 2 36
 Etawah-Shikohabad  Sep-2004 2014 1168 890 1168 913 23 36
 Etawah-Shikohabad  Sep-2004 2014 1169 940 1169 990 50 36
 Etawah-Shikohabad  Jan-2004 2014 1197 926 1197 930 4 36
 Etawah-Shikohabad  Jan-2004 2014 1199 716 1199 724 8 36
 Etawah-Shikohabad  Jan-2004 2014 1204 899 1204 965 66 36
 Etawah-Shikohabad  Jan-2004 2014 1207 34 1207 99 65 36
 Etawah-Shikohabad  Jan-2004 2014 1210 140 1210 150 10 36
 Etawah-Shikohabad  Jan-2005 2015 1197 935 1197 939 4 24
 Etawah-Shikohabad  Jan-2005 2015 1200 157 1200 165 8 24
 Etawah-Shikohabad  Jan-2005 2015 1200 705 1200 782 77 24
 Etawah-Shikohabad  Jan-2005 2015 1200 847 1200 920 73 24
 Etawah-Shikohabad  Jan-2005 2015 1200 970 1201 11 42 24
 Etawah-Shikohabad  Jan-2005 2015 1201 99 1201 186 87 24
 Etawah-Shikohabad  Jan-2005 2015 1204 1040 1205 0 17 24
 Etawah-Shikohabad  Jan-2005 2015 1206 90 1206 130 40 24
 Etawah-Shikohabad  Jan-2005 2015 1207 145 1207 200 55 24
 Etawah-Shikohabad  Jan-2005 2015 1209 40 1209 50 10 24
 Etawah-Shikohabad  Jan-2005 2015 1210 210 1210 220 10 24
 Etawah-Shikohabad  Jun-1996 2006 1211 315 1211 365 50 132
 Etawah-Shikohabad  Jun-1996 2006 1211 365 1211 802 437 132
 Panki-Etawah  Jan-1987 1997 1028 550 1029 30 471 240
 Panki-Etawah  Jun-2004 2014 1031 40 1031 230 190 36
 Panki-Etawah  Jun-2004 2014 1033 1000 1034 0 11 36
Next Deep 
Screening due 
Annexure 1 (Para 2.2.2.1)
Statement showing sections where deep screening was overdue 
ZR Section Total length of 
section in Km
Last Deep 
Screening 
RemarksLocation Length 
(m)
Dealy in  
MonthFrom To
183.4
NCR 17.4

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Annexure
99
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Next Deep 
Screening due 
Annexure 1 (Para 2.2.2.1)
Statement showing sections where deep screening was overdue 
ZR Section Total length of 
section in Km
Last Deep 
Screening 
RemarksLocation Length 
(m)
Dealy in  
MonthFrom To
 Panki-Etawah  Jun-2004 2014 1034 900 1034 904 4 36
 Panki-Etawah  Jun-2004 2014 1036 99 1036 100 1 36
 Panki-Etawah  Jun-2004 2014 1037 805 1037 815 10 36
 Panki-Etawah  Jun-2004 2014 1038 490 1038 520 30 36
 Panki-Etawah  Jun-2004 2014 1039 158 1039 160 2 36
 Panki-Etawah  Nov-2003 2013 1045 60 1045 70 10 48
 Panki-Etawah  Nov-2003 2013 1048 173 1048 195 22 48
 Panki-Etawah  Apr-2006 2016 1049 570 1049 910 340 12
 Panki-Etawah  Jan-1997 2007 1049 570 1049 920 350 120
 Panki-Etawah  Sep-2003 2013 1054 835 1054 864 29 48
 Panki-Etawah  Sep-2003 2013 1057 275 1057 475 200 48
 Panki-Etawah  Sep-2003 2013 1058 408 1058 505 97 48
 Panki-Etawah  Sep-2003 2013 1059 630 1059 853 223 48
 Panki-Etawah  Sep-2003 2013 1060 710 1060 980 270 48
 Panki-Etawah  Jul-2003 2013 1064 935 1064 944 9 48
 Panki-Etawah  Jul-2003 2013 1065 770 1065 785 15 48
 Panki-Etawah  Jul-2003 2013 1065 920 1065 934 14 48
 Panki-Etawah  Jan-2004 2014 1030 42 1030 48 6 36
 Panki-Etawah  Jan-2004 2014 1033 818 1033 829 11 36
 Panki-Etawah  Jan-2004 2014 1034 538 1034 638 100 36
 Panki-Etawah  Jan-2004 2014 1034 908 1034 912 4 36
 Panki-Etawah  Jan-2004 2014 1036 347 1036 348 1 36
 Panki-Etawah  Jan-2004 2014 1037 733 1037 963 230 36
 Panki-Etawah  Jan-2004 2014 1038 183 1038 208 25 36
 Panki-Etawah  Sep-2003 2013 1040 785 1040 796 11 48
 Panki-Etawah  Sep-2003 2013 1047 875 1047 897 22 48
 Panki-Etawah  Dec-2002 2012 1127 470 1127 490 20 60
 Panki-Etawah  Dec-2002 2012 1127 700 1127 770 70 60
 Panki-Etawah  Dec-2002 2012 1128 440 1128 470 30 60
 Panki-Etawah  Dec-2002 2012 1130 601 1130 880 279 60
 Panki-Etawah  Dec-2002 2012 1132 0 1132 192 192 60
 Panki-Etawah  Dec-2002 2012 1133 130 1133 252 122 60
 Panki-Etawah  Dec-2002 2012 1133 362 1133 502 140 60
 Panki-Etawah  Dec-2002 2012 1134 150 1134 250 100 60
 Panki-Etawah  Dec-2002 2012 1135 67 1135 167 100 60
 Panki-Etawah  Dec-2002 2012 1135 575 1135 642 67 60
 Panki-Etawah  Jan-2001 2011 1140 869 1140 876 7 72
 Panki-Etawah  Jan-2001 2011 1143 366 1143 438 72 72
 Panki-Etawah  Jan-2001 2011 1144 108 1144 128 20 72
 Panki-Etawah  Jan-2001 2011 1144 718 1144 818 100 72
 Panki-Etawah  Jan-2001 2011 1146 38 1146 70 32 72
 Panki-Etawah  Feb-2002 2012 1149 160 1149 363 203 60
 Panki-Etawah  Feb-2002 2012 1149 573 1149 593 20 60
 Panki-Etawah  Mar-2002 2012 1154 660 1154 668 8 60
 Panki-Etawah  Mar-2002 2012 1155 88 1155 298 210 60
 Panki-Etawah  Aug-2005 2015 1136 412 1137 520 1103 24
 Panki-Etawah  Jul-2001 2011 1144 470 1144 534 64 72
 Panki-Etawah  Jul-2001 2011 1146 70 1146 80 10 72
 Panki-Etawah  Jun-2004 2014 1146 80 1147 200 1125 36
 Panki-Etawah  Mar-2002 2012 1087 336 1087 380 44 60
 Panki-Etawah  Mar-2002 2012 1087 805 1088 25 195 60
 Panki-Etawah  Mar-2002 2012 1088 865 1088 880 15 60
 Panki-Etawah  Mar-2002 2012 1089 155 1089 180 25 60
 Panki-Etawah  Mar-2002 2012 1089 580 1089 590 10 60
 Panki-Etawah  Mar-2002 2012 1091 305 1092 225 911 60
 Panki-Etawah  Mar-2002 2012 1093 270 1093 370 100 60
 Panki-Etawah  Mar-2002 2012 1095 470 1095 548 78 60
 Panki-Etawah  Mar-2002 2012 1096 685 1096 710 25 60
 Panki-Etawah  Mar-2002 2012 1097 140 1097 180 40 60
 Panki-Etawah  Mar-2002 2012 1097 630 1097 670 40 60
 Panki-Etawah  Nov-2006 2016 1099 950 1100 953 964 12
 Panki-Etawah  Mar-2002 2012 1102 832 1102 886 54 60
 Panki-Etawah  Mar-2002 2012 1107 118 1107 122 4 60
 Panki-Etawah  Mar-2002 2012 1108 174 1108 200 26 60
 Panki-Etawah  Aug-1998 2008 1109 380 1109 600 220 108
 Panki-Etawah  Aug-1998 2008 1109 600 1109 690 90 108
 Panki-Etawah  Aug-1998 2008 1110 81 1110 145 64 108
 Panki-Etawah  Aug-1998 2008 1110 998 1110 1000 2 108
 Panki-Etawah  Aug-1998 2008 1111 239 1111 240 1 108
 Panki-Etawah  Aug-1998 2008 1113 7 1113 40 33 108
 Panki-Etawah  Aug-1998 2008 1115 107 1115 300 193 108
 Panki-Etawah  Aug-1998 2008 1116 390 1116 477 87 108
 Panki-Etawah  Apr-1994 2004 1099 580 1100 910 1291 36
 Panki-Etawah  Aug-1998 2008 1109 847 1109 911 64 108
 Panki-Etawah  Aug-1998 2008 1111 31 1111 66 35 108
 Panki-Etawah  Aug-1998 2008 1111 919 1111 950 31 108
 Panki-Etawah  Aug-1998 2008 1111 950 1116 800 4789 108
 Govindpuri-Panki  Jun-2004 2014 1021 850 1021 855 5 36
 Govindpuri-Panki  Jun-2004 2014 1022 785 1022 793 8 36
 Govindpuri-Panki  Jun-2004 2014 1022 785 1023 55 133 36
 Govindpuri-Panki  Jul-2004 2014 1023 785 1023 811 26 36
 Govindpuri-Panki  Jan-1996 2006 1027 840 1028 450 612 132
 Govindpuri-Panki  Jan-1987 1997 1028 450 1028 550 100 240
 Govindpuri-Panki  Dec-2002 2012 1021 791 1021 836 45 60
 Govindpuri-Panki  Dec-2002 2012 1022 251 1022 261 10 60
 Govindpuri-Panki  Dec-2002 2012 1022 901 1023 90 52 60
183.4
7.4
NCR

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Annexure
100
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Next Deep 
Screening due 
Annexure 1 (Para 2.2.2.1)
Statement showing sections where deep screening was overdue 
ZR Section Total length of 
section in Km
Last Deep 
Screening 
RemarksLocation Length 
(m)
Dealy in  
MonthFrom To
 Govindpuri-Panki  May-2004 2014 1025 650 1025 660 10 36
 Govindpuri-Panki  May-2004 2014 1026 830 1026 839 9 36
 Govindpuri-Panki  May-2004 2014 1027 0 1027 100 100 36
 Kanpur-Govindpuri  Sep-2006 2016 1021 280 1021 646 366 12
 Kanpur-Govindpuri  Jan-1987 1997 1021 150 1021 540 390 240
 Kanpur-Govindpuri  May-2006 2016 0 960 2 0 1111 12
 Kanpur-Govindpuri  Jan-1998 2008 1019 144 1021 150 3544 108
 Kanpur-Govindpuri  Jan-1995 2005 1017 969 1018 46 77 144
 Kanpur-Govindpuri  Jan-1991 2001 1017 969 1018 60 103 192
Kanpur Central- 
Chandari
2  Feb-2006 2016 1019 0 1019 480 480 12
Allahabad-Naini 2005 2015 820 821 1000 24
Allahabad-Naini 2005 2015 821 825 4000 24
Allahabad-Naini 2005 2015 821 823 2000 24
Allahabad-Naini 2005 2015 823 824 1000 24
Naini-Cheoki 2005 2015 824 825 1000 24
Naini-Cheoki 1996 2006 815.55 815.984 434 132
Naini-Cheoki 1996 2006 816.604 816.672 68 132
Naini-Cheoki 1996 2006 816.672 816.72 48 132
Naini-Cheoki 1996 2006 816.72 816.806 86 132
Naini-Cheoki 1993 2003 816.806 817.484 678 168
Naini-Cheoki 1997 2007 817.484 817.86 376 120
Naini-Cheoki 2006 2016 817.86 818.243 383 12
Naini-Cheoki 1995 2005 818.243 818.5 257 144
Naini-Cheoki 1995 2005 819.452 819.51 58 144
Naini-Cheoki 2006 2016 809 809.572 572 12
Naini-Cheoki 2006 2016 809.572 814.672 5100 12
Naini-Cheoki 2006 2016 814.762 816.36 1598 12
Naini-Cheoki 2006 2016 815.514 815.88 366 12
Naini-Cheoki 2005 2016 815.88 816.358 478 12
Naini-Cheoki 2005 2016 816.358 816.51 152 12
Naini-Cheoki 2005 2016 816.51 816.756 246 12
Naini-Cheoki 2005 2016 818.314 820 1686 12
Mughalsarai-Chunar Jan/06 2016 677 280 677 429 149 12
Mughalsarai-Chunar Jan/06 2016 677 719 678 0 1 12
Mughalsarai-Chunar Jan/06 2016 678 0 678 208 208 12
Mughalsarai-Chunar Jan/06 2016 678 668 678 735 67 12
Mughalsarai-Chunar Jan/02 2012 679 850 681 0 1227 60
Mughalsarai-Chunar Jan/06 2016 677 280 678 0 440 12
Mughalsarai-Chunar Jan/06 2016 678 0 679 0 927 12
Mughalsarai-Chunar Jan/06 2016 679 0 680 0 1077 12
Mughalsarai-Chunar Jan/06 2016 679 915 680 0 162 12
Mughalsarai-Chunar Jan/02 2012 680 0 681 0 1000 60
Mughalsarai-Manpur 473.00 - 476.62 - 3620 72
Mughalsarai-Manpur 476.87 - 477.65 - 780 72
Mughalsarai-Manpur 639.78 - 640.65 - 870 72
Mughalsarai-Manpur 668.00 - 673.00 - 5000 72
Mughalsarai-Manpur 676.00 - 677.24 - 1240 72
Mughalsarai-Manpur 632.65 - 634.30 - 1650 72
Mughalsarai-Manpur 463.95 - 465.20 - 1250 60
Mughalsarai-Manpur 479.56 - 480.00 - 440 60
Mughalsarai-Manpur 628.91 - 634.40 - 5490 60
Mughalsarai-Manpur 644.02 - 645.00 - 980 60
Mughalsarai-Manpur 479.00 - 480.00 - 1000 60
Mughalsarai-Manpur 641.52 - 642.39 - 870 60
Mughalsarai-Manpur 642.46 - 643.31 - 850 60
Mughalsarai-Manpur 643.66 - 643.75 - 90 60
Mughalsarai-Manpur 599.75 - 601.00 - 1250 48
Mughalsarai-Manpur 605.00 - 606.30 - 1300 48
Mughalsarai-Manpur 611.50 - 619.00 - 7500 48
Mughalsarai-Manpur 635.00 - 638.00 - 3000 48
Mughalsarai-Manpur 643.75 - 647.92 - 4170 48
Mughalsarai-Manpur 656.00 - 658.00 - 2000 48
Mughalsarai-Manpur 480.00 - 484.47 - 4470 48
Mughalsarai-Manpur 579.20 - 580.00 - 800 48
Mughalsarai-Manpur 608.00 - 614.00 - 6000 48
Mughalsarai-Manpur 620.75 - 628.81 - 8060 48
Mughalsarai-Manpur 634.40 - 635.00 - 600 24
Mughalsarai-Manpur 748.00 - 753.00 - 5000 24
Mughalsarai-Manpur 753.00 - 756.00 - 3000 24
Mughalsarai-Manpur 756.00 - 757.60 - 1600 24
Mughalsarai-Manpur 548.55 - 549.00 - 450 24
Mughalsarai-Manpur 554.00 - 555.00 - 1000 24
Mughalsarai-Manpur 556.00 - 564.00 - 8000 24
Mughalsarai-Manpur 568.00 - 569.80 - 1800 24
Mughalsarai-Manpur 574.00 - 585.00 - 11000 24
Mughalsarai-Manpur 585.00 - 587.00 - 2000 24
Mughalsarai-Manpur 594.00 - 597.00 - 3000 24
Mughalsarai-Manpur 621.00 - 629.00 - 8000 24
Mughalsarai-Manpur 748.00 - 750.00 - 2000 24
Mughalsarai-Manpur 756.00 - 757.60 - 1600 24
Mughalsarai-Manpur 493.00 - 506.00 - 13000 12
Mughalsarai-Manpur 635.00 - 641.00 - 6000 12
2005-06
2006-07
7.8
7.4
1.4
7.48
1.4
210
NCR
ECR 2011-12
2012-13
2013-14
2015-16
2016-17
2001-2002
2002-03
2003-04

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Annexure
101
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Next Deep 
Screening due 
Annexure 1 (Para 2.2.2.1)
Statement showing sections where deep screening was overdue 
ZR Section Total length of 
section in Km
Last Deep 
Screening 
RemarksLocation Length 
(m)
Dealy in  
MonthFrom To
Mughalsarai-Manpur 649.00 - 654.00 - 5000 12
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2004 2014 506 - 516 - 10000.00 36
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2004 2014 498 - 516 - 18000 36
Mughalsarai-Manpur 1998 2008 517.1 - 517.9 - 800 108
Mughalsarai-Manpur 1998 2008 517.2 - 517.8 - 600 108
Mughalsarai-Manpur 1998 2008 518 - 518.5 - 500 108
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2000 2010 519.1 - 519.9 - 800 84
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2000 2010 524 - 525.8 - 1800 84
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2000 2010 528 - 529.1 - 1100 84
Mughalsarai-Manpur 1999 2009 528.2 - 529.1 - 900 96
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2002 2012 537.5 - 538.9 - 1400 60
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2000 2010 537.1 - 538.9 - 1800 84
Mughalsarai-Manpur 1998 2008 543 - 543.9 - 900 108
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2000 2010 543.2 - 543.9 - 700 84
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2002 2012 546 - 548.5 - 2500 60
Mughalsarai-Manpur 1994 2004 548.5 - 550 - 1500 156
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2002 2012 555 - 556 - 1000 60
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2002 2012 564 - 566 - 2000 60
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2004 2014 564 - 566.9 - 2900 36
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2004 2014 570.8 - 572.8 - 2000 36
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2004 2014 573.8 - 587 - 13200 36
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2001 2011 574 - 579.5 - 5500 72
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2002 2012 582 - 585.9 - 3900 60
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2002 2012 588 - 594 - 6000 60
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2002 2012 597 - 599.75 - 2750 60
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2000 2010 597 - 598.5 - 1500 84
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2000 2010 606.8 - 607.8 - 1000 84
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2003 2013 606.5 - 607.5 - 1000 48
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2003 2013 619 - 621 - 2000 48
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2002 2012 619 - 628 - 9000 60
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2003 2013 645.5 - 648.5 - 3000 48
Mughalsarai-Manpur 2004 2014 654 - 656.9 - 2900 36
Patna-Mughalsarai 543.85 - 545 - 1150
Patna-Mughalsarai 543.55 - 544.5 - 950
Patna-Mughalsarai 564 - 572 - 8000
Patna-Mughalsarai 575 - 576.9 - 1900
Patna-Mughalsarai 689.3 - 689.7 - 400
Patna-Mughalsarai 633 - 633.5 - 500
Patna-Mughalsarai 677 - 677.3 - 300
Patna-Mughalsarai 569.86 - 571 - 1140
Patna-Mughalsarai 575.75 - 576.75 - 1000
Patna-Mughalsarai 577.75 - 579.1 - 1350
Patna-Mughalsarai 660.3 - 662.5 - 2200
Patna-Mughalsarai 591.7 - 593 - 1300
Patna-Mughalsarai 576.9 - 582.1 - 5200
Patna-Mughalsarai 615.13 - 627 - 11870
Patna-Mughalsarai 2006-07 2016-17 583.1 - 591.7 - 8600
SWR Hospet-Bellary 0.2 Jul-06 Jul-16 0.200 8 Not Included in Annual Plan
Hospet-Bellary 0.1 Jul-06 Jul-16 0.100 8 Not Included in Annual Plan
Hospet-Bellary 0.28 Jul-06 Jul-16 0.280 8 Not Included in Annual Plan
Hospet-Bellary 14.055 Jul-06 Jul-16 14.055 8 Not Included in Annual Plan
Hospet-Bellary 0.2 Jul-06 Jul-16 3.500 7 Not Included in Annual Plan
Hospet-Bellary 0.1 Jul-06 Jul-16 22.000 21 Not Included in Annual Plan
Hospet-Bellary 0.28 Jul-06 Jul-16 3.000 13 Not Included in Annual Plan
Hospet-Bellary 14.055 Jul-06 Jul-16 70 14 Deep screening completed with delay 
Hospet-Bellary 3.5 Aug-06 Aug-16 202.5 206 10 14 Deep screening completed with delay 
Hospet-Bellary 22 Jun-05 Jun-15 187 209 10 14 Not Included in Annual Plan
Hospet-Bellary 3 Feb-06 Feb-16 209 212 30 14 Not Included in Annual Plan
Hospet-Bellary 0.21 Jan-06 Jan-16 167.79 168 210 14 Not Included in Annual Plan
Hospet-Bellary 0.01 Jan-06 Jan-16 176.9 176.91 10 14 Not Included in Annual Plan
Hospet-Bellary 11.58 Dec-06 Dec-16 161.5 173.08 11580 3 Not Included in Annual Plan
Hospet-Bellary 0.1 Dec-06 Dec-16 173.3 173.4 100 3 Not Included in Annual Plan
Hospet-Bellary 1.47 Dec-06 Dec-16 173.6 175.07 1470 3 Deep screening completed with delay 
Hospet-Bellary 9.115 Jun-04 Jun-14 177.885 187 9115 31 Not done due to TFR work sanctioned
Gadag-Hospet 4 Dec-01 Dec-11 79 83 4.000 63 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 2 Nov-01 Nov-11 83 85 2.000 64 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 2 Oct-01 Oct-11 85 87 2.000 65 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 1 Sep-01 Sep-11 87 88 1.000 66 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 2 Nov-03 Nov-13 88 90 2.000 40 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 1 Nov-03 Nov-13 94 95 1.000 40 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 6 Dec-03 Dec-13 95 101 6.000 39 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 1 Jan-04 Jan-14 101 102 1.000 38 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 0.6 Jan-02 Jan-12 102 102.6 0.600 62 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 0.5 Jan-02 Jan-12 102.7 103.2 0.500 62 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 0.1 Jan-02 Jan-12 103.4 103.5 0.100 62 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 0.1 Jan-02 Jan-12 103.6 103.7 0.100 62 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 0.41 Sep-03 Sep-13 63.35 63.76 0.410 42 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 0.22 Sep-03 Sep-13 63.3 65.52 0.220 42 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 0.34 Sep-03 Sep-13 65.82 66.16 0.340 42 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 0.17 Oct-03 Oct-13 66.83 67 0.170 41 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 3 Feb-02 Feb-12 67 70 3.000 61 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 33 Feb-02 Feb-12 70 103 33.000 61 Not done due to TFR work sanctioned
Gadag-Hospet 0.2 Jan-02 Jan-12 104.53 104.73 0.200 62 Not Included in Annual Plan
Not readily available Not readily available
2006-07
1999-2000
2002-03
2003-04
210ECR
2005-06
211 2009-10
2012-13
2013-14
2015-16
2016-17

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Annexure
102
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Next Deep 
Screening due 
Annexure 1 (Para 2.2.2.1)
Statement showing sections where deep screening was overdue 
ZR Section Total length of 
section in Km
Last Deep 
Screening 
RemarksLocation Length 
(m)
Dealy in  
MonthFrom To
Gadag-Hospet 0.325 Sep-01 Sep-11 114 114.325 0.325 66 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 0.23 Sep-01 Sep-11 114.84 115.07 0.230 66 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 0.15 Sep-01 Sep-11 115.22 118.37 0.150 66 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 0.41 Sep-01 Sep-11 115.49 115.9 0.410 66 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 0.1 Aug-03 Aug-13 115.9 116 0.100 43 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 0.56 Jul-03 Jul-13 125.765 126.335 0.560 44 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 0.7 Jun-03 Jun-13 130.95 131.65 0.700 45 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 0.1 May-03 May-13 135.07 135.17 0.100 46 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 0 Jun-02 Jun-12 136.53 137.075 0.545 57 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 545 Mar-02 Mar-12 138.505 139.385 0.880 60 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 0.095 Feb-02 Feb-12 141.425 141.52 0.095 61 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 3.513 Mar-02 Mar-12 75.487 79 3.513 60 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 2.085 Nov-03 Nov-13 90 92.085 2.085 40 Not Included in Annual Plan
Gadag-Hospet 1.5 Nov-03 Nov-13 92.5 94 1.500 40 Not Included in Annual Plan
Hubballi-Gadag 0.8 Jan-03 Jan-13 2.2 3 800 50 Not Included in Annual Plan
Hubballi-Gadag 5.92 Aug-02 Aug-12 3.26 9.18 5920 55 Not Due
Hubballi-Gadag 1.46 May-02 May-12 9.18 10.64 1460 58 Not Due
Hubballi-Gadag 3.166 May-02 May-12 16.7 19.866 3166 58 Deep screening completed with delay 
Hubballi-Gadag 0.5 Mar-03 Mar-13 20 20.5 500 48 Not Included in Annual Plan
Hubballi-Gadag 0.5 Feb-03 Feb-13 34 34.5 500 49 Not Due
Hubballi-Gadag 1.06 Feb-04 Feb-14 35 36.06 1060 37 Not Included in Annual Plan
Hubballi-Gadag 0.14 Feb-04 Feb-14 40.32 40.46 140 37 Not Included in Annual Plan
Hubballi-Gadag 0.195 Feb-04 Feb-14 40.815 41.01 195 37 Not Included in Annual Plan
Hubballi-Gadag 11.99 Mar-04 Mar-14 41.01 53 11990 36 Not Included in Annual Plan
Hubballi-Gadag 3 Mar-03 Mar-13 53 56 3000 48 Not Included in Annual Plan
Hubballi-Dharawad 0.28 Jan-01 Jan-11 480.72 481 0.280 74 Not Included in Annual Plan
Hubballi-Dharawad 3.7 Oct-01 Oct-11 481 484.7 3.700 65 Not Included in Annual Plan
Dharawad-Alnavar 12.9 Sep-01 Sep-11 488.5 501.4 12.900 66 Not Included in Annual Plan
Dharawad-Alnavar 1.02 Mar-03 Mar-13 516.19 517.21 1.020 48 Not done due to TFR work sanctioned
Dharawad-Alnavar 0.84 Jun-00 Jun-10 5243.16 525 0.840 81 Not done due to TFR work sanctioned
Dharawad-Alnavar 1.6 Jun-01 Jun-11 525 526.6 1.600 69 Not done due to TFR work sanctioned
Alnavar-Londa 0.35 Sep-94 Sep-04 526.65 527 0.350 150 Obstruction to Bridge No 148
Alnavar-Londa 3 May-94 May-04 527 530 3.000 154 Not Included in Annual Plan
Alnavar-Londa 4 Apr-94 Apr-04 531 535 4.000 155 Not Included in Annual Plan
Alnavar-Londa 1 Sep-94 Sep-04 535 536 1.000 150 Not Included in Annual Plan
Alnavar-Londa 2 May-94 May-04 536 538 2.000 154 Not Included in Annual Plan
Alnavar-Londa 3 May-00 May-10 538 541 3.000 82 Not Included in Annual Plan
Londa-Castle Rock 3.4 Feb-03 Feb-13 12.5 15.9 3.400 47 Not Included in Annual Plan
Londa-Castle Rock 1.4 Apr-04 Apr-14 20.5 21.9 1.400 35 Not Included in Annual Plan
Londa-Castle Rock 1.6 Jun-04 Jun-14 21.9 23.5 1.600 33 Not Included in Annual Plan
Londa-Castle Rock 3.5 May-05 May-15 25.5 29 3.500 22 Not Included in Annual Plan
Londa-Castle Rock 3 Nov-05 Nov-15 29 32 3.000 16 Not Included in Annual Plan
Londa-Castle Rock 4 Dec-05 Dec-15 32 36 4.000 15 Not Included in Annual Plan
Londa-Castle Rock 5 Jan-06 Jan-16 36 41 5.000 14 Not Included in Annual Plan
Londa-Castle Rock 1 Dec-05 Dec-15 41 42 1.000 15 Not Included in Annual Plan
Londa-Castle Rock 1 Jan-06 Jan-16 42 43 1.000 14 Not Included in Annual Plan
Londa-Castle Rock 3 Apr-05 Apr-15 43 46 1.000 23 Not Included in Annual Plan
Londa-Castle Rock 3 Feb-05 Feb-15 46 49 3.000 25 Not Included in Annual Plan
Londa-Castle Rock 0.5 Dec-04 Dec-14 49 49.5 0.500 27 Not Included in Annual Plan
Londa-Castle Rock 0.635 Apr-02 Apr-12 49.5 50.135 0.635 59 Not Included in Annual Plan
Avadi-Villivakkam  53.48 2000-01 2010-11 4100 72 Site condition
Arakkonam-Tiruvallur 46.947 2001-02 2011-12 1082  60 Site condition
Vyasarpadi-
Villivakkam
 24.16 Sep.2010 Sep.2020 0 0 Not due
May-06 May-16 750 10
May-01 May-11 750 70
May-02 May-12 450 58
Jun-06 Jun-16 701 9
Apr-01 Apr-11 3660 71
Apr-02 Apr-12 520 59
Mar-02 Mar-12 452 60
Jul-07 Jul-17 11460 0
2017 2027 11500 0 Prior to 2017 deep screening was last 
done in 2005
2003-04 2013-14 12500 36 As stated by the SSE, the major problem 
for DSR by BCM was that the cess could 
not be thrown off as it would block both 
the Up & Dn line.
2011 2021 10000 0
2001 2011 8000 72 Non availibility of BCM
2008-09 2018-19 36250 0
2011 2021 60750 0
2015 2025 192000 0
6.5 Kms in 
2015       2.5 
Kms in 2004-
05
6.5 km in 2025      
2.5 km in 2014-
15
9000 24 Out of 9 Kms in Up line, 6.5 kms of Deep 
Screening has been done in the year 
2015. Deep Screeing for the remaining 
2.5 kms was last done in 2004-05. Delay 
of 24 months was in respect of 2.5 Km. 
only.
Not readily available Not readily available
Not readily available
SR
SER
SER
Not readily available
Tikiapara-Howrah
Santragachi-Tikiapara 5.6
Not readily available
Panskura-Mechada 14
Not readily available
Kharagpur-TATA 134
Not readily available
Rourkela-Jharsuguda 101
TSR work along with deep screening  was 
sanctioned in 2015-16, the same could 
not be taken up due to non-availability of 
sleepers. It is proposed to be taken up in 
2017-18
2

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Annexure
103
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Next Deep 
Screening due 
Annexure 1 (Para 2.2.2.1)
Statement showing sections where deep screening was overdue 
ZR Section Total length of 
section in Km
Last Deep 
Screening 
RemarksLocation Length 
(m)
Dealy in  
MonthFrom To
May - 16 0.5 Km in 2026,     
8.5 Km in 2014-
15
9000 24 Out of 9 Kms in Dn line, 0.5 kms of Deep 
Screening has been done in the year May 
2016. Deep Screeing for the remaining 
8.5 kms was last done in 2004-05
Burnpur-Asansol 5.6 Nov-2012  &           
Apr-2016
Nov-2022 &          
Apr-2026
5600 0
2001 2011 2800 72
2006 2016 2240 12
2006-07    &        
2008-09
2016-17   &           
2018-19
17700 0
2003 2013 4650 48 Not done before. CTR done in 2000 then 
also deep screening not done. The section 
includs yard, loop line and sidings.
Muri-Barkakhana 58 2012-13    &        
2014-15
2022-23   &        
2024-25
58000 0
Apr-04 Apr-14 15700 46
Aug-05 Aug-15 7700 31
Mar-12 Mar-22 117000 0
Work sanctioned in 2013-14 but tender 
not yet called.
Not readily available
Panskura-Haldia 70
Not readily available
Not readily available
Not readily available
Nimpura-Gokulpur 6
Not readily available
SER
SER
Rourkela-Jharsuguda 101

104
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Annexure
Zonal 
Railway
Name of the 
selected section
Whether 
selected 
section is 
notified for 
running of 
CC+8+2 
/CC+6+2 
/CC+4+2
Whether WILD 
installed, if 
yes, location of 
WILD
Whether any 
distressed 
bridges on 
the route. If 
yes,  
whether 
rehabilitatio
n done and 
Bridge load 
monitoring 
system 
installed
Number of major bridges in 
which damages reported by 
Sr.DEN. Co. In his monthly 
report of 'impact of CC+8+2 on 
bridges' in the month of March 
2017
Whether 
location 
wise stock 
of USFD 
tested rail 
was made in 
selected 
sections 
Whether 
new 
welds 
were 
tested by 
USFD 
within 30 
days of 
welding
Whether 
USFD 
testing 
done as per 
prescribed 
frequency
Whether scanned 
images / peak 
pattern of USFD 
testing was saved 
for comparision in  
successive check.
Number of rail 
failure / weld 
failure during 
2016-17 
within 01 
month of 
USFD testing 
(Master 
register of Rail 
failure / weld 
failure)
Whether rails were replaced 
by 90R rail in the whole 
section
Whether 
rail 
replaced 
prematurel
y
No of weighbridges and 
location in the selected 
section
Whether 
track 
recording 
done as 
per 
prescribed 
frequency 
by Track 
recording 
cars
No of 
rail 
fractur
es 
dures 
2016-
17
Numbe
r of 
weld 
ailures 
during 
2016-
17
Number of 
rail and 
Weld 
failures 
within 
month in 
which 
USFD test 
results 
were good
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Dadri - Dankaur CC+8+2 No No No No No No Yes No No
Tundla- ShikohabadCC+8+2 No No No No No No Yes No No
Shikohabad - Panki CC+8+2 No No No No No No Yes No No
Panki - Juhi CC+8+2 No No No No No No Yes No No
Juhi - Kanpur CC+8+2 No No No No No No Yes Goods marshalling yard 
(GMC) Kanpur 
No
Juhi - Chandari CC+8+2 No No No No No No Yes No No
Allahabad - Naini CC+8+2 No No No No No No Yes No No
Naini - Cheoki CC+8+2 No No No No No No Yes No No
Jeonathpur - MGS CC+8+2 No No No No No No Yes No No
Vyasarpadi - 
Villivakkam
CC+8+2 No** No 0 Yes No * Yes Yes 0 No No No No 3 0 0
Villivakkam- Avadi CC+8+2 No** No 0 Yes No * Yes Yes 0 No No Ambattur No 3 0 0
Tiruvallur - 
Arakkonam
CC+8+2 No** No 0 Yes No * Yes Yes 1 No No Thiruvalangadu No 6 5 0
SWR Bellari - Castlerock CC+8+2 Yes WILD 
installed at 
Hitnal station 
in August 2010. 
However, due 
to doubling 
work by RVNL 
which is in 
progress, WILD 
was not 
working since 
Feb 2017. 
No 0 No Yes# Yes Yes## NIL Yes No Weigh Bridges provided by 
SWR: Bannihatti-01, Daroji-
01, Dharwad-01 & 
Sanvordem-01
Weigh Bridges Provided by 
Private Parties: Jindal Steel 
Works (South Yard) Siding-
02, Jindal Steel Works 
(North Yard) Siding-04, 
BMM Ispat Siding-01, Adani 
Siding-02 & SWPL at MPT 
Siding-01 
No 90 232 10
Tikiapara-Howrah CC+6+2 No No Nil Yes No Yes Yes Nil Nil No Nil No 0 0 Nil
Santragachi-
Tikiapara
CC+6+2 No No Nil Yes No Yes Yes Nil Nil No Nil No 0 0 Nil
Panskura-
Mechada
CC+8+2 No No Nil Yes 39 Nos 
were not 
tested.
Yes Yes Nil Nil No Nil 4 against 
12
0 1 Nil
SR
Annexure 2 (Para 2.2.3.2 (b))
NCR 46 21Damages reported in 14 Bridges 
in GZB - MGS Section of 
Allahabad Division (Allahabad - 
Mugalsari SectionBridge No. 
494, 498, 503, Kanpur Tundla 
Section - Bridge No. 285, 286, 
11, 13, 48, 55 Tundla - Gaziabad 
section - Bridge No. 123, 126, 
127 Allahabad - Kanpur section 
Bridge No. 205-206 ), 
50 No. Because
as per Working time table of 
Allahabad Division reason of  
Speed restriction at 08 
location was existance of 52 
Kg rails. Further rail change 
report of 2016-17 for the 
selected section shows that 
52Kg UTS rails still exist on 
the track. 
19
SER
  Statement showing implementation of measures for monitoring of CC+8+2 selected sections in five Zonal Railways 

105
Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Annexure
Zonal 
Railway
Name of the 
selected section
Whether 
selected 
section is 
notified for 
running of 
CC+8+2 
/CC+6+2 
/CC+4+2
Whether WILD 
installed, if 
yes, location of 
WILD
Whether any 
distressed 
bridges on 
the route. If 
yes,  
whether 
rehabilitatio
n done and 
Bridge load 
monitoring 
system 
installed
Number of major bridges in 
which damages reported by 
Sr.DEN. Co. In his monthly 
report of 'impact of CC+8+2 on 
bridges' in the month of March 
2017
Whether 
location 
wise stock 
of USFD 
tested rail 
was made in 
selected 
sections 
Whether 
new 
welds 
were 
tested by 
USFD 
within 30 
days of 
welding
Whether 
USFD 
testing 
done as per 
prescribed 
frequency
Whether scanned 
images / peak 
pattern of USFD 
testing was saved 
for comparision in  
successive check.
Number of rail 
failure / weld 
failure during 
2016-17 
within 01 
month of 
USFD testing 
(Master 
register of Rail 
failure / weld 
failure)
Whether rails were replaced 
by 90R rail in the whole 
section
Whether 
rail 
replaced 
prematurel
y
No of weighbridges and 
location in the selected 
section
Whether 
track 
recording 
done as 
per 
prescribed 
frequency 
by Track 
recording 
cars
No of 
rail 
fractur
es 
dures 
2016-
17
Numbe
r of 
weld 
ailures 
during 
2016-
17
Number of 
rail and 
Weld 
failures 
within 
month in 
which 
USFD test 
results 
were good
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Annexure 2 (Para 2.2.3.2 (b))
  Statement showing implementation of measures for monitoring of CC+8+2 selected sections in five Zonal Railways 
Kharagpur-Tata CC+8+2 No No Nil Yes 455Nos 
were not 
tested.
Yes Yes 3 Nil No 1 No at Dhalbhumgarh 1 against 8 3 1 Nil
Rourkela-
Jharsuguda
CC+8+2 No No Nil Yes Yes Last testing 
was done in 
the month 
Yes Nil No 90R rails in this section No Nil 2 against 8 6 0 Nil
Barnpur-Asansol Nil against 
1
0 0
Nimpura-Gokulpur CC+6+2 No No Nil Yes 12 Nos 
were not 
tested.
Yes Yes Nil Nil No Nil 1 against 1 0 1 Nil
Muri-Barkakhana Nil against 
1
0 0
Panskura-Haldia CC+8+2 No No Nil Yes 20 Nos 
were not 
tested.
Yes Yes Nil Nil No 1 No at Durgachalk Nil against 
4
0 0 Nil
*** In this regard it is stated that as per RB's directives,   52 Kg or 60 Kg rails are to be laid in CC+8+2 route and not 90R rails.  This column requires revision and comments to be modified accordingly. 
#  In some cases new welds  were not tested by USFD within 30 days of welding. Delay ranged from 1 month to 6 months.
## Scanned images/peak pattern of USFD testing was saved for the test conducted by Agencies. In respect of Departmental USFD team, scaneed images/peak pattern saved only in IMR/Weld & IMR/Rail cases
*  Due to busy schedule of deployment of USFD over the division, this test is stated to be carried out within 60 days instead of 30 days. 
** WILD installed in between Arakkonam and Renigunta section near Tirutani which falls under HDN 7.  However, this is not in the selected section.
SER
Record under collection
Record under collection

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Annexure
106
Zonal 
Railway
Name of   Division Name of PWI/SSE 
Office
Track lengh covered by 
PWI/SSE (in kms)
Sanction 
strength
Men in 
position
Vacancy Sanctioned 
strengh per 
kilometer
Men in position 
per kilometer
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Kanpur II 102 397 295 102 3.89 2.89
Kanpur (West) 80 284 205 79 3.55 2.56
Kanpur (East) 62 242 242 242 3.90 3.90
Etawah 103 240 190 50 2.33 1.84
Phaphund 116 248 177 71 2.14 1.53
Sikhohabad 102 271 204 67 2.66 2.00
Dadri 104 232 189 41 2.23 1.82
Allahabad 55.16 349 321 28 6.33 5.82
Naini 25 164 151 13 6.56 6.04
Firozabad 71 212 159 53 2.99 2.24
Chunar 98 333 253 80 3.40 2.58
820.16 2639 2133 746 3.22 2.60
Bellary 50 277 234 43 5.54 4.68
Hospet/ML 87.44 331 274 57 3.79 3.13
Gadag/ML 109.75 196 180 16 1.79 1.64
Hubballi (East) 66.39 292 269 23 4.40 4.05
Dharwar 57.56 236 222 14 4.10 3.86
Londa 28.8 183 190 -7 6.35 6.60
Castle Rock 49.53 183 184 3 3.69 3.71
449.47 1698 1553 149 3.78 3.46
Avadi 53.48 230 218 12 4.30 4.08
Tiruvallur 46.95 228 225 3 4.86 4.79
Washermanpet 24.16 324 216 108 13.41 8.94
124.59 782 659 123 6.28 5.29
Santraganchi 16.65 281 243 38 16.88 14.59
Kolaghat 49.5 171 164 7 3.45 3.31
Panskura 79.5 209 201 8 2.63 2.53
Jhargarm 80 226 188 38 2.83 2.35
Gidhni 77.4 183 169 14 2.36 2.18
Kharida 57 252 227 25 4.42 3.98
Tamluk 149.4 300 214 86 2.01 1.43
Galudih 54.28 151 131 20 2.78 2.41
Rourkela 37.04 303 228 75 8.18 6.16
Rajganpur 110.8 338 261 77 3.05 2.36
Jharsuguda 88.09 345 279 66 3.92 3.17
Adra Damodar Jn. 77 268 266 2 3.48 3.45
Ranchi Muri-II 50 363 313 50 7.26 6.26
926.66 3390 2884 506 3.66 3.11
Danapur 45 389 319 70 8.64 7.09
Ara 53 328 269 59 6.19 5.08
Buxar 52 347 267 80 6.67 5.13
Dildarnagar 53 381 284 97 7.19 5.36
Chandauli Majhwar 39.9 353 311 42 8.85 7.79
Bhabua Road 40.1 332 248 84 8.28 6.18
Dehri-on-sone 38 368 273 95 9.68 7.18
Aurangabad 34 324 250 74 9.53 7.35
Rafiganj 36 293 251 42 8.14 6.97
Gaya 18 334 290 44 18.56 16.11
409 3449 2762 687 8.43 6.75
NCR Allahabad
Statement showing the staff position (Track maintenaners) over selected sections
ECR Mughalsarai
Annexure 3 (Para 3.3.1)
ECR Danapur
Chakradharpur
KharagpurSER
NCR Allahabad
SR Chennai
SWR Hubballi

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Annexure
107
Name of 
Zonal 
Railway
Name of   
Division
Name of PWI 
Office
Category of staff Grade 
Pay (Rs.)
Sanction 
strength
Men in 
position
No. of 
vacancy
Whether 
action taken 
to fill up the 
vacancy (Y/N)
Whether 
maintenance 
work was 
hampered due to 
shortage of staff 
(Y/N)
No. of staff deputed in 
other works viz. other 
official establishments, 
Officers residence, 
offices of different 
departments etc. 
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 1 1 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 19 19 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 73 71 2
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 304 204 100
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 17 1 16
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 34 19 15
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 63 42 21
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 170 143 27
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 8 5 3
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 7 7 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 49 47 2
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 178 122 56
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 4 2 2
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 9 5 4
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 12 8 4
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 215 175 40
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 8 2 6
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 15 7 8
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 35 12 23
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 190 156 34
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 16 4 12
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 32 22 10
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 60 60 NIL
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 163 118 45
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 14 0 14
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 28 6 22
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 51 20 31
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 139 163 -26
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 21 9 12
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 42 30 12
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 77 109 -32
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 209 173 36
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 0 0 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 9 9 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 57 57 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 98 85 13
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 0 0 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 2 2 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 22 22 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 188 135 53
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 4 0 4
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 16 8 8
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 38 27 11
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 275 218 57
TOTAL 2972 2325 645 90
Chunar
NCR Allahabad
Annexure 4 (Para 3.3.1)
Kanpur East
Kanpur West
Kanpur II Y Y
Y Y
Y Y
14
6
8
NCR Allahabad
Sikhohabad
Etawa
Dadri
Y Y
Y YPhaphund
Y Y
Y Y
Y Y
Y Y
Staff Position
6
Naini 10
4
11
10
Allahabad
5
11
5
Y Y
Y YFirozabad

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Annexure
108
Name of 
Zonal 
Railway
Name of   
Division
Name of PWI 
Office
Category of staff Grade 
Pay (Rs.)
Sanction 
strength
Men in 
position
No. of 
vacancy
Whether 
action taken 
to fill up the 
vacancy (Y/N)
Whether 
maintenance 
work was 
hampered due to 
shortage of staff 
(Y/N)
No. of staff deputed in 
other works viz. other 
official establishments, 
Officers residence, 
offices of different 
departments etc. 
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Annexure 4 (Para 3.3.1)
Staff Position
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 23 4 19 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 47 45 2 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 86 84 2 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 233 186 47 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 20 2 18 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 39 33 6 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 72 68 4 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 197 166 31 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 21 3 18 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 42 26 16 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 76 76 0 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 208 162 46 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 23 4 19 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 46 22 24 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 84 92 -8 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 228 166 62 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 18 5 13 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 44 61 -17 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 77 65 12 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 214 180 34 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 19 6 13 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 42 34 8 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 72 68 4 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 199 140 59 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 21 7 14 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 46 51 -5 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 80 73 7 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 221 142 79 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 19 9 10 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 39 32 7 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 72 61 11 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 194 148 46 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 18 7 11 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 32 73 -41 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 66 59 7 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 177 112 65 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 21 5 16 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 34 50 -16 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 75 66 9 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 204 169 35 0
TOTAL 3449 2762 687 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 17 8 9 Y Y 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 34 40 -6 --- --- 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 63 59 4 Y Y 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 163 127 36 Y Y 0 1 long absent
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 21 1 20 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 41 26 15 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 79 73 6 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 190 174 16 1 5 Medical decateorised
SWR Hubballi
Bellary
Hospet/ML
ECR Danapur
ECR Mughalsarai
Danapur
Ara
Chandauli  
Mjhwar
Bhabhua Road
Dehri-on-son
Anugrah N 
Road
Rafiganj
Gaya
Buxar
Dildarnagar
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y Y
Y Y
Y Y
Y Y
Y Y
Y Y
Y Y
Y Y
Y Y

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Annexure
109
Name of 
Zonal 
Railway
Name of   
Division
Name of PWI 
Office
Category of staff Grade 
Pay (Rs.)
Sanction 
strength
Men in 
position
No. of 
vacancy
Whether 
action taken 
to fill up the 
vacancy (Y/N)
Whether 
maintenance 
work was 
hampered due to 
shortage of staff 
(Y/N)
No. of staff deputed in 
other works viz. other 
official establishments, 
Officers residence, 
offices of different 
departments etc. 
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Annexure 4 (Para 3.3.1)
Staff Position
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 12 1 11 Y Y 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 24 25 -1 --- --- ---
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 43 39 4 Y Y 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 117 115 2 Y Y 4 4 long sick/absent
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 17 2 15 Y Y 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 34 26 8 Y Y 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 64 4 60 Y Y 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 177 237 -60 --- --- 42
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 0 0 0 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 0 0 0 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 0 0 0 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 0 0 0 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 14 4 10 Y Y 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 28 12 16 Y Y 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 52 33 19 Y Y 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 142 173 -31 --- --- 14 7 sick/absent
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 11 0 11 Y Y 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 22 24 -2 --- --- 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 40 31 9 Y Y 2
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 110 135 -25 --- --- 9 2 long sick/absent
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 11 5 6 Y Y 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 22 14 8 Y Y 0 1 long sick
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 40 38 2 Y Y 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 110 127 -13 --- --- 0 1 long sick
TOTAL 1698 1553 145 72
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 14 13 1 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 29 28 1 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 54 51 3 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 133 126 7 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 14 1 13 N 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 28 24 4 N 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 52 45 7 N 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 134 155 -21 - 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 21 8 13 N 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 41 36 5 N 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 76 77 -1 - 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 186 95 91 N 0
TOTAL 782 659 123 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 17 17 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 34 32 2
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 63 56 7
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 167 138 29
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 10 11 -1 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 20 18 2 1
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 39 34 5 2
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 102 101 1 14
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 13 9 4 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 25 23 2 3
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 47 42 5 9
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 124 127 -3 18
SER
SSE/P.Way/ 
Panskura
 Kolaghat
Kharagpur
Y
Y
Sanctioned strength and 
Actuals of SSE/UBL/East & 
SSE/UBL/West is combined
 Santragachi
32 Position of shortage regularly 
shown in the PCDO
Avadi Work will be managed with 
adjacent gangs
Tiruvallur
Washerman-
pet
Dharwar
Londa
Castle Rock
Hubali/ East
Hubali/West
SR Chennai
SWR Hubballi
Gadag/ML
Y Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y Y
Y
Y

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Annexure
110
Name of 
Zonal 
Railway
Name of   
Division
Name of PWI 
Office
Category of staff Grade 
Pay (Rs.)
Sanction 
strength
Men in 
position
No. of 
vacancy
Whether 
action taken 
to fill up the 
vacancy (Y/N)
Whether 
maintenance 
work was 
hampered due to 
shortage of staff 
(Y/N)
No. of staff deputed in 
other works viz. other 
official establishments, 
Officers residence, 
offices of different 
departments etc. 
Remarks
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Annexure 4 (Para 3.3.1)
Staff Position
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 12 12 0 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 25 14 11 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 46 45 1 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 143 117 26 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 11 5 6 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 22 22 0 2
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 41 36 5 3
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 109 106 3 5
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 11 9 2 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 24 20 4 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 41 34 7 10
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 75 68 7 43
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 15 10 5 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 30 30 0 5 USFD- 2, ADEN - 2, PWI/ KAF - 1
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 55 51 4 16 CETC - 1, USFD - 1, DEN - 5, 
PWI/ KAF - 3, LC gate - 6
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 152 136 16
45
CETC - 2, ADEN - 2, DEN - 3, 
IOW - 1, PWI/ KAF - 12, LC gate - 
25
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 17 14 3 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 35 24 11 7
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 64 27 37 8
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 184 149 35 29
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 18 16 2 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 38 37 1 1
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 69 59 10 8
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 178 116 62 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 20 7 13 1
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 38 39 -1 2
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 73 71 2 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 207 144 63 2
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 10 10 0 Not Applicable 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 42 53 -11 Under Process 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 77 77 0 Not Applicable 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 216 139 77 Under Process 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 16 7 9
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 31 18 13
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 57 70 -13
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 164 171 -7
Track Maintainer, Gr.-I 2800 23 8 15 0
Track Maintainer, Gr.-II 2400 45 19 26 1
Track Maintainer, Gr.-III 1900 84 28 56 17
Track Maintainer, Gr.-IV 1800 211 258 -47 16
TOTAL 3390 2884 506 308
GT 12291 10183 2106 470
Chakradharpu
r
8
The figures incoporated in Col. 
6 & 7 are the total of both the 
Sections, i.e MURI-BRKA and 
MURI-KSX Section.
SER
SER
Total 2 post vacant since 
30/06/2016 due to expired of 
one staff and other normal 
retirement.
Ranchi
 Muri-II
ADRA
 Damodar 
Jharsuguda
Rourkela
Rajgangpur
Tamluk
 Kharida
Galudih
Gidhni
 Jhargarm
Kharagpur
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
No
YY
Y Y

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Annexure
111
Zonal 
Railway
Division ADEN/AEN  SSE/P Ways 
responsible for laying 
and maintenance of 
LWR/CWR 
No. of  P. 
Ways 
Staff 
working 
on LWR/ 
CWR
No. of Staff  
trained by 
Holding 
special/regular 
courses/or Posses 
valid Competancy 
Certificate
No. of Staff 
working on 
LWR/CWR 
without  
training 
/Competecy 
Certificate
No of staff  
not attended 
refresher 
course since 
last three 
years
Remarks if any
Kanpur 256 256 0 0
West Kanpur 122 122 0 0
East Kanpur 194 197 0 0
Etawah 209 25 184 5
Phaphund 126 0 126 0
Shikohabad 86 86 0 0
Firozabad 195 163 32 0
Allahabad Allahabad 321 51 270 0
Mirzapur Naini 38 38 0 0
Chunar Chunar 24 24 0 0
Aligarh Jn. Dadri 157 131 26 0
TOTAL 1728 1093 638
Danapur 319 319 NIL NIL
Ara 262 262 NIL NIL
Buxar 267 267 NIL NIL
Dildarnagar Jn. 284 284 NIL NIL
Gaya 175 175 NIL NIL
Rafigunj 200 200 NIL NIL
Anugrah Narayan 
Road 226 226 NIL NIL
Dehri-on-soneDehri-on-sone 260 260 NIL NIL
Total 1993 1993
Bellary Bellary 190 190 0 57
Bellary Hospet 217 198 19 25
Gadag Gadag 180 180 0 0
Hubli/East 269 261 8 48 Sanctioned strength and Actuals of 
SSE/UBL/East & SSE/UBL/West is 
combined
Hubli/West
Dharawad 222 215 7 32
Belagavi Londa 190 185 5 3
Castle Rock Castle Rock 184 156 28 39 This section is having only SWR. No LWR 
exists
TOTAL 1452 1385 67 204
Avadi Avadi 535 535 0 68
Tiruvallur Tiruvallur 197 197 0 57
WashermanpetWashermanpet 112 112 0 0
TOTAL 844 844 0 125
Shalimar Santragachi-Tikiapara 
and Tikiapara -
Howrah
243 241 2 14
2 No TM-IV initial course to be attended 
on dated 03/07/17 to 31/07/17
Bagnan-Bhogpur
107 106 1 96
96 nos. of staff have attended their 
refresher course training last during the 
year 2012.
Bhogpur-Duan 128 128 0 15
Nimpura-TATA
Gidhani 130 5 125 126
Ghatsila-Rakhamines
78 0 78
Keyman and Gangmate are working on 
LWR/CWR without competency 
certificate, however, they have been 
imparted training such as RC, IC and 
crash courses
Kharagpur Nimpura- Gokulpur 
and Kharagpur - TATA 136 136 0
Staff are trained in regular courses.
Tamluk Tamluk 135 0 135 24 (last done in 2013-14)
SWR
ECR
Gaya
Hubli/Central
Jhargram
Panskura
SR
Kharagpur
Hubli
Annexure 5 (Para 3.3.3)
 (PARA-9.2 of Manual of Instruction on Long Welded Rail and Para 1504 of IRPWM Correction slip no. 104).
Deployment of Trained  Permanent Way Staff (As on 31.03.2017) in LWR Section
Mughalsarai
NCR Allahabad Kanpur
Etawah
Firozabad
Danapur Danapur
Buxar
SER
Chennai 
Central

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Annexure
112
Zonal 
Railway
Division ADEN/AEN  SSE/P Ways 
responsible for laying 
and maintenance of 
LWR/CWR 
No. of  P. 
Ways 
Staff 
working 
on LWR/ 
CWR
No. of Staff  
trained by 
Holding 
special/regular 
courses/or Posses 
valid Competancy 
Certificate
No. of Staff 
working on 
LWR/CWR 
without  
training 
/Competecy 
Certificate
No of staff  
not attended 
refresher 
course since 
last three 
years
Remarks if any
Annexure 5 (Para 3.3.3)
 (PARA-9.2 of Manual of Instruction on Long Welded Rail and Para 1504 of IRPWM Correction slip no. 104).
Deployment of Trained  Permanent Way Staff (As on 31.03.2017) in LWR Section
A Cabin - Panposh 135 135
0 0
Keyman and Gangmate are working on 
LWR/CWR without competency 
certificate, however, they have been 
imparted training such as RC, IC and 
crash courses
Rourkela - Bamra 280 271 9 0 -
Bamra-Jharsuguda 329 314 21 21 Out of 21 staff Long absentee 15
Panposh-Bamra 296 276 20 36 Out of 36 Long Absentee 20
Panposh-Jharsuguda 625 590 41 57
Adra Adra/East Damodar 
122 106 16 16
All 106 staff done by regular course 
training organised by DETC/ADA but no 
competency certificate issued.
Ranchi Muri Muri-Barakakana
121 119 2 12
Out of 12 staffs who have not attended 
RC training for the last three years, 2 
staffs are long absent.
TOTAL 2865 2427 450 417
Chakradhar
pur
Jharsuguda
Rourkela
SER

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Annexure
113
Zonal 
Railway
Division AEN/Line(P.WAY) Location of SSE/P. 
Ways
No. of Staff in 
deployed in 
operation of Small 
Track Machine
No. of Staff 
Trained in 
operation and 
maintenance 
of small track 
machine 
No. of Staff 
deployed in 
Operation of Small 
Track Machine 
without training
Remarks if any
SSE/II/Kanpur 62 18 44
SSE/West/Kanpur 78 40 38
 SSE/East/Kanpur 51 51 0
SSE/Etawah 11 5 6
SSE/Phaphund 18 0 18
SSE/Shikohabad 14 14 0
SSE/Firozabad 15 10 5
Allahabad SSE/Allahbad 13 0 13
Mirzapur SSE/Naini 10 0 10
Chunar SSE/Chunar 5 0 5
Aligarh SSE/Dadri 17 1 16
Total 294 139 155
Danapar
Ara
Buxar
Dildarnagar
Chandauli Mjhwar
Bhabhua Road
Dehri-on-son
Anugrah N Road
Rafiganj
GAYA
Bellary Bellary 50 0 50
Bellary Hospet/ML 60 0 60
Gadag Gadag/ML 10 0 10
Hubli/Central Hubli/East 6 0 6 Sanctioned strength & Actuals of 
SSE/Hubli/East & SSE/Hubli/West 
is combined
Hubli Central Hubli/West NAV NAV NAV
Hubli Central Dharawad 17 0 17
Belgaum Londa Jn. 15 0 15
Castle Rock Castle Rock 6 0 6
Total 164 0 164
NWL Avadi 12 12 0
NWL Tiruvallur 12 6 6
Washermanpet Washermanpet 4 4 0
Total 28 22 6
Santragachi Tikiapara-Howarah 
& Santragachi-
Tikiapara
4 0 4 Staff working on STM based on 
working experience.
Kolaghat Bagnan-Bhogpur 4 2 2
Panskura Panskura 3 3 0
Jhargram Nimpura-Tata 6 6 0
Jhargram Gidhni 4 0 4
Jhargram Galudih 3 1 2
Rourkela Rourkela 5 5 0
Rajgangpur Rourkela - Bamra 6 6 0
Jharsuguda Jhasugura 8 8 0 Special traning required from 
Private workshop 
Adra Adra Damodar 8 4 4
Kharagpur Kharida Nimpura - Gokulpur 
and Kharagpur - 
Tata
No separate staff is 
deployed for 
operation of Small 
Track Machine. One  
EBS (Engineering 
Blacksmith) does the 
work in addition to 
other maintenance 
staff.
0 All the staff 
deployed in working 
of Small Track 
Machine are 
working without 
training in Operating 
and Maintenance of 
these machines.
Ranchi Muri-II Muri-Barkakana 3 3 0
Kharagpur Tamluk Tamluk 3 0 3
Total 57 38 19
Grand Total 543 199 344
Annexure 6 (Para 3.3.4)
Training of Staff for Operating & Maintenance of Small Track Machine  (As on 31.03.2017)
NAV NAV Trained track maintainers were 
deployed on small track machines 
operation. No post of machine 
operator exists.
Kanpur
Etwah
Firozabad
NCR Allahabad
SWR Hubballi
NAVDanapar
Buxar
Mughal Sarai
Dehri on sone
GAYA
Danapur
Mughal Sarai
ECR
SWR Hubballi
SR Chennai 
SER Kharagpur
Chakradhar
pur

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Annexure
114
Name of  
Zonal 
Railway
Name of 
Division
Name of SSE / P. 
Way Office
Type of Machine Quantity 
available
No of 
defective / 
unservicable 
machine
1 2 3 4 5 6
Concrete Sleeper Drilling Machine 0 0
Self propelled light weight Trolly 0 0
Hydraulic Rail joint Straightener 2 0
Abrasive Rail Cutter 110 62
Rail Cutting Machine (Saw Type) 19 9
Rail Drilling Machine 52 18
Chamfering Kit 46 0
Hydraulic Rail Tensor (non-infringing type), 70t capacity 16 4
Hydraulic Rail Bender (Jim Crow), Heavy duty 12 0
Rail Creep Adjuster 1 0
Hydraulic Sleeper Spacer 17 3
Portable DC Welding Generator 22 7
Heavy Duty Hydraulic Extractor for Jammed ERCs 7 1
Toe Load Measuring Device (Mechanical) 8 7
Electronic Toe Load Measuring Device 9 8
Mechanical Track Jack 21 20
Hydraulic Track Jack 136 58
Portable track lifting & slewing device (TRALIS) 16 2
Powered Material Trolley 0 0
Attachment for Rail Dolly for PRC sleeper 10 0
Hand Held Off Track Tamper 4 0
Portable Shoulder Ballast Compactor 0 0
Light Weight Rail (Mono) cum Road Trolley 0 0
Portable Ballast Cleaner (Semi-Mechanised) 2 0
Total 510 199
Concrete Sleeper Drilling Machine 0 0
 Self propelled light weight Trolly 2 1
 Hydraulic Rail joint Straightener 0 0
Abrasive Rail Cutter 7 3
Rail Cutting Machine (Saw Type) 14 0
Rail Drilling Machine 17 5
Chamfering Kit 7 0
Hydraulic Rail Tensor (non-infringing type), 70t capacity 3 2
Hydraulic Rail Bender (Jim Crow), Heavy duty 9 4
Rail Creep Adjuster 0 0
Hydraulic Sleeper Spacer 3 3
Portable DC Welding Generator 9 4
Heavy Duty Hydraulic Extractor for Jammed ERCs 8 2
Toe Load Measuring Device (Mechanical) 9 7
Electronic Toe Load Measuring Device 6 5
Mechanical Track Jack 26 8
Hydraulic Track Jack 143 23
Portable track lifting & slewing device (TRALIS) 0 0
Powered Material Trolley 5 0
Attachment for Rail Dolly for PRC sleeper 13 0
Hand Held Off Track Tamper 6 2
Portable Shoulder Ballast Compactor 0 0
Light Weight Rail (Mono) cum Road Trolley 51 6
Portable Ballast Cleaner (Semi-Mechanised) 2 0
Total 340 75
Concrete Sleeper Drilling Machine 1 0
 Self propelled light weight Trolly 5 0
 Hydraulic Rail joint Straightener 0 1
Abrasive Rail Cutter 20 7
Rail Cutting Machine (Saw Type) 16 6
Rail Drilling Machine 31 9
Chamfering Kit 31 7
Hydraulic Rail Tensor (non-infringing type), 70t capacity 7 3
Hydraulic Rail Bender (Jim Crow), Heavy duty 13 1
Rail Creep Adjuster 3 1
Hydraulic Sleeper Spacer 22 1
Portable DC Welding Generator 9 5
Heavy Duty Hydraulic Extractor for Jammed ERCs 19 8
Toe Load Measuring Device (Mechanical) 19 3
Electronic Toe Load Measuring Device 10 3
Mechanical Track Jack 179 52
ECR Danapur, 
Mughalsarai
Danapur, Buxar, 
Arah, 
Dildarnagar, 
Gaya, 
Mughalsarai
SER Kharagpur, 
Chakradharp
ur, Adra, 
Ranchi 
Santragachi, 
Kolaghat, 
Panskura, 
Jhargram, 
Gidhni, Galudih, 
Rourkela, 
Rajganpur, 
Jharsugada, 
Damodar Jn., 
Kharida, MURI-
II, 
Annexure 7 (Para 3.4)
Availability of small track machines
NCR Allahabad Chunar, Nainy, 
Allahabad, 
Kanpur-II, 
Kanpur-East, 
Kanpur-West, 
Phaphund, 
Etawa, 
Shikohabad, 
Firozabad, Dadri

Report No. 45 of 2017 (Railways)Annexure
115
Name of  
Zonal 
Railway
Name of 
Division
Name of SSE / P. 
Way Office
Type of Machine Quantity 
available
No of 
defective / 
unservicable 
machine
1 2 3 4 5 6
Annexure 7 (Para 3.4)
Availability of small track machines
Hydraulic Track Jack 272 125
Portable track lifting & slewing device (TRALIS) 9 3
Powered Material Trolley 7 0
Attachment for Rail Dolly for PRC sleeper 47 0
Hand Held Off Track Tamper 0 0
Portable Shoulder Ballast Compactor 0 0
Light Weight Rail (Mono) cum Road Trolley 59 0
Portable Ballast Cleaner (Semi-Mechanised) 0 0
Total 777 291
Concrete Sleeper Drilling Machine 0 0
 Self propelled light weight Trolly 0 0
 Hydraulic Rail joint Straightener 0 0
Abrasive Rail Cutter 14 0
Rail Cutting Machine (Saw Type) 2 2
Rail Drilling Machine 5 0
Chamfering Kit 1 1
Hydraulic Rail Tensor (non-infringing type), 70t capacity 4 1
Hydraulic Rail Bender (Jim Crow), Heavy duty 1 0
Rail Creep Adjuster 0 0
Hydraulic Sleeper Spacer 2 0
Portable DC Welding Generator 3 0
Heavy Duty Hydraulic Extractor for Jammed ERCs 0 0
Toe Load Measuring Device (Mechanical) 1 1
Electronic Toe Load Measuring Device 3 1
Mechanical Track Jack 17 0
Hydraulic Track Jack 18 0
Portable track lifting & slewing device (TRALIS) 0 0
Powered Material Trolley 0 0
Attachment for Rail Dolly for PRC sleeper 9 0
Hand Held Off Track Tamper 0 0
Portable Shoulder Ballast Compactor 0 0
Light Weight Rail (Mono) cum Road Trolley 22 0
Portable Ballast Cleaner (Semi-Mechanised) 0 0
Total 102 6
Concrete Sleeper Drilling Machine 2 1
 Self propelled light weight Trolly 4 0
 Hydraulic Rail joint Straightener 0 0
Abrasive Rail Cutter 16 5
Rail Cutting Machine (Saw Type) 54 28
Rail Drilling Machine 43 23
Chamfering Kit 8 2
Hydraulic Rail Tensor (non-infringing type), 70t capacity 5 0
Hydraulic Rail Bender (Jim Crow), Heavy duty 2 0
Rail Creep Adjuster 0 0
Hydraulic Sleeper Spacer 6 3
Portable DC Welding Generator 11 5
Heavy Duty Hydraulic Extractor for Jammed ERCs 5 3
Toe Load Measuring Device (Mechanical) 21 9
Electronic Toe Load Measuring Device 3 1
Mechanical Track Jack 85 20
Hydraulic Track Jack 10 0
Portable track lifting & slewing device (TRALIS) 7 3
Powered Material Trolley 1 0
Attachment for Rail Dolly for PRC sleeper 9 3
Hand Held Off Track Tamper 8 2
Portable Shoulder Ballast Compactor 0 0
Light Weight Rail (Mono) cum Road Trolley 0 0
Portable Ballast Cleaner (Semi-Mechanised) 0 0
Total 300 108
Grand Total 2029 679
SWR Hubli Bellary, Hospet, 
Gadag, Hubli-
East, Hubli-
West, 
Dharawad, 
Londa, Castle 
Rock 
SR Chennai Avadi, 
Tiruvallur, 
Washermanpet
SER Kharagpur, 
Chakradharp
ur, Adra, 
Ranchi 
Santragachi, 
Kolaghat, 
Panskura, 
Jhargram, 
Gidhni, Galudih, 
Rourkela, 
Rajganpur, 
Jharsugada, 
Damodar Jn., 
Kharida, MURI-
II, 