Report  of  the
Comptroller and Auditor General
of India
for the year ended March 2017
Union Government (Civil)
Union Territories without Legislatures
Compliance Audit Observations
Report No. 3 of 2018

 
 
i 
 
Description Paragraph Page 
Preface  iii 
Overview v - ix 
CHAPTER – I : INTRODUCTION 
About this report 1.1 1 
Union Territories in India 1.2 1 
Administrative arrangements 1.3 1 
Financial arrangements 1.4 2 
Planning and conduct of audit 1.5 4 
Responsiveness of the Government to audit 1.6 4 
Follow-up on Audit Reports 1.7 5 
Response of the Union Territories to draft paragraphs 1.8 5 
CHAPTER – II : UNION TERRITORIES (EXPENDITURE SECTOR) 
Andaman and Nicobar Administration 
Implementation of Coastal Security Scheme and Crime  and 
Criminal Tracking Network and Systems (CCTNS) project 
2.1 6 
Andaman Public Works Department  
Unfruitful Expenditure 2.2 15 
Directorate of Shipping Services 
Avoidable payment towards customs duty 2.3 17 
Andaman & Nicobar Island Building and other Constru ction Workers’ Welfare 
Board 
Avoidable payment towards income tax  2.4 18 
Resident Commissioner, Andaman and Nicobar Bhawan   
Irregular expenditure on camp office in Delhi 2.5 19 
Chandigarh Administration  
Idling of Sub-Station due to improper planning of work 2.6 21 
Construction of market without establishing viability 2.7 23 
Union Territory of Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli Administration 
Deposit works entrusted to Omnibus Industrial Devel opment 2.8 24 
Contents 

 
 
ii  
Corporation (OIDC) of Daman & Diu (D&D) and Dadra &  
Nagar Haveli (DNH) Ltd 
Irregular grant to District Panchayat for tourism 2.9 33 
Inadmissible and unjustified payment to a contractor 2.10 34 
Avoidable expenditure due to demolition and reconst ruction of  
a divider 
2.11 35 
Union Territory of Lakshadweep Administration (UTLA)  
Procurement and Distribution of essential commoditi es under 
Public Distribution System in Union Territory of Lakshadweep  
2.12 37 
Delay in construction of dedicated berthing facilities and parking 
of funds with a Public Sector Undertaking 
2.13 46 
Avoidable expenditure due to delay in disposal of a  
decommissioned vessel 
2.14 49 
Short deduction of Income Tax 2.15 51 
CHAPTER – III : UNION TERRITORIES (REVENUE SECTOR) 
Union Territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli  
Short-levy of stamp duty on Development Agreements 3.1 53 
CHAPTER – IV : UNION TERRITORIES (COMMERCIAL SECTOR) 
Union Territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli  
DNH Power Distribution Corporation Limited 
Purchase and Sale of Power by DNH Power Distributio n 
Corporation Limited 
4.1 55 
Annexes 65 - 69 
Appendix 71 - 73 
   

Report No. 3 of 2018 
 
 
iii  
This report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended 
March 2017 has been prepared for submission to the President under Article 
151 of the Constitution of India. The report contai ns the results of compliance 
audit of financial transactions of five Union Territories without legislatures. 
Reports in relation to accounts of a Government Com pany or Corporation are 
submitted to the Government by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
under Section 19-A of the Comptroller and Auditor G eneral’s (Duties, Powers 
and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971. This Audit Re port contains a audit 
observation relating to a Central Public Sector Enterprise.  
The instances mentioned in this report are those wh ich came to notice in the 
course of test audit for the period 2016-17 as well  as those which came to 
notice in earlier years but could not be reported i n the previous Audit Reports. 
Matters relating to the period subsequent to 2016-1 7 have also been included, 
wherever necessary. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the  Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
PREFACE  

Report No. 3 of 2018 
v 
There are seven Union Territories (UTs) specified u nder Part II of the First 
Schedule to the Constitution of India, viz . Andaman and Nicobar Islands, 
Chandigarh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu, Lakshadweep, 
National Capital Territory of Delhi and Puducherry.  Except for the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi and Puducherry, UTs do n ot have Legislatures. This 
report includes audit observations arising from the  audit of the five UTs 
without Legislatures. 
The Report contains four chapters. Chapter I gives a brief outline of the 
administrative and financial arrangements in the Un ion Territories as well as 
the budgetary allocation and expenditure incurred a s well as the position of  
response to audit in terms of replies to draft para graphs and Action Taken 
Notes of earlier years. Chapter II contains paragra phs pertaining to the 
expenditure sector of UTs while Chapter III pertain s to the revenue sector. 
Chapter-IV contains one paragraph relating to a Pub lic Sector Undertaking 
(PSU) under UT Administration of Dadra and Nagar Ha veli. The financial 
implication of the audit observations included in this report is 
` 609.01 crore. 
Some of the important findings included in this Report are summarised below: 
Expenditure Sector 
Andaman and Nicobar Administration 
Police Department, Port Blair 
Implementation of Coastal Security Scheme and Crime  and Criminal 
Tracking Network and Systems (CCTNS) project 
All scheme components of the Coastal Security Schem e Phase II which was 
to augment infrastructure for coastal surveillance and security were lagging 
behind original scheme targets. Only one out of the  ten planned Marine 
Operational Centers had been established even thoug h seven years had 
elapsed since commencement of the scheme. Further, sites for ten planned 
jetties were yet to be finalized and work on upgrad ation of 20 Coastal Police 
Stations was yet to commence. The Crime and Crimina l Tracking Network 
and Systems (CCTNS) which was envisaged to re-engin eer processes and 
integrate various levels of the Police Department w ith other stakeholders in a 
single network had missed most of the envisaged milestones.  
(Paragraph No. 2.1) 
OVERVIEW  

Report No. 3 of 2018 
vi 
Andaman Public Works Department 
Unfruitful Expenditure 
Andaman Public Works Department awarded work for au gmenting water 
supply at Aerial Bay at a cost of 
` 1.42 crore without obtaining mandatory 
forest clearance leading to the work getting forecl osed. Foreclosure of the 
work rendered unfruitful expenditure of ` 92.94 lakh incurred on material 
procured for the work. 
(Paragraph No. 2.2) 
Directorate of Shipping Services 
Avoidable payment of customs duties 
Failure of Directorate of Shipping Services, Andama n and Nicobar 
Administration, to  avail of exemption from payment  of customs duties in 
terms of Custom Notifications issued under the Cust oms Act, 1962, led to 
avoidable payment of 
` 57.99 lakh towards customs duty on procurement of 
imported spares for routine repair and maintenance of an ocean-going vessel. 
(Paragraph No.2.3)  
Chandigarh Administration  
Idling of Sub-Station due to improper planning of work 
Electricity Department Union Territory of Chandigar h entered into an 
agreement with the Power Grid Corporation of India Limited for erection of a 
Grid Sub-Station at Sarangpur Chandigarh at an esti mated cost of 
` 9.87 crore. The erection of the sub-station which should have been 
completed by November 2011 was delayed by over four  years due to 
allotment of land with encumbrances. The newly erec ted sub-station is yet to 
be commissioned due to non-availability of 66 KV tr ansmission lines 
rendering idle assets created at an expenditure of ` 10.19 crore.  
(Paragraph No. 2.6) 
Construction of market without establishing viability 
Chandigarh Administration constructed an Air Condit ioned Fish & Meat 
Market at a total cost ` 1.53 crore even though viability of the market was  in 
doubt. The entire integrated market has been lying vacant for past eight years 
due to lack of response for shop booths from vendors. 
(Paragraph No. 2.7) 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
vii 
Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli Administration 
Deposit works entrusted to Omnibus Industrial Development Corporation 
(OIDC) of Daman & Diu (D&D) and Dadra & Nagar Haveli (DNH) Ltd 
During 2011-17, seventeen Departments/Autonomous Bo dies of the UTs of 
D&D and DNH entrusted 44 deposit works and deposited ` 528.87 crore with 
OIDC. The Departments failed to ensure adherence to  the codal provisions 
governing release of funds to OIDC for execution of  projects as deposit 
works. Funds were released far in excess of actual requirement which resulted 
in idling of ` 56.57 crore that seemed to serve only to sustain t he Corporation 
without achieving their primary objective of creati on of the envisaged 
infrastructural assets. Funds amounting to ` 57.70 crore were released 
without prior administrative approval and expenditu re sanction thereby 
undermining budgetary control and discipline. Proje cts were delayed for 
prolonged periods as codal requirement of ensuring availability of 
encumbrance free sites before award of work was not  adhered to. Finally, 31 
deposit works valued at ` 454.74 crore were entrusted to it without entering  
into a MOU as a result of which scope of work, paym ent schedule and 
milestones for completion were left undefined.  
(Paragraph No. 2.8) 
Irregular grant to District Panchayat for tourism 
UT Administration of Daman & Diu irregularly sancti oned Grant in Aid of 
` 1.35 crore for tourism to District Panchayat Daman  even though tourism 
was not a subject entrusted to panchayats. As the p roject for which the funds 
were released was not even finalized, the grant rem ained unutilized. Instead 
of promptly returning the funds to the Government, it was parked outside 
government accounts for more than four years depriv ing the Government of 
the opportunity of utilising the funds for other development activities. 
(Paragraph No. 2.9) 
Inadmissible and unjustified payment to a contractor 
Failure of Daman Municipal Corporation   to recover the cost of its regular 
workers deployed with the contractor led to inadmis sible payments of 
` 33.22 lakh to a contractor.  It also allowed addit ional payment for items of 
work that were already committed in the original ag reement leading to 
unjustified payment of ` 47.88 lakh to the contractor. 
(Paragraph No. 2.10) 
Avoidable expenditure due to demolition and reconstruction of a divider 
Change in technical specifications of a road divide r during execution of work 
without due technical approval and its subsequent d emolition and 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
viii 
reconstruction with a design similar to the origina l design resulted in 
avoidable expenditure of ` 58.72 lakh. 
(Paragraph No. 2.11) 
Union Territory of Lakshadweep Administration (UTLA) 
Procurement and Distribution of essential commodities under Public 
Distribution System in Union Territory of Lakshadweep 
The Public Distribution System (PDS) in the Union T erritory of 
Lakshadweep (UTL) involved allocation, transportati on, storage and 
distribution of Superior Kerosene Oil (SKO), sugar and rice. Audit of PDS 
revealed that quantum of SKO and sugar allocated, l ifted and distributed was 
not commensurate with requirements computed based o n the population of 
the UT. The estimated value of the excess expenditu re on this account was 
` 3.47 crore. Further, a large quantity of damaged r ice valued at ` 75.24 lakh 
was held in godowns without any enquiry about the c auses of damage and 
without any action for its disposal. There was also  lack of internal controls 
and meaningful monitoring as accounts for PDS items  were not prepared 
since 2014-15 and accounts up to 2013-14 showed out standing remittance of 
sale proceeds from Island Co-operative Supply and M arketing Societies. 
There was also short and delayed remittance of sales proceeds by the societies 
into the Government account and Vigilance Committee s and inspection 
mechanisms were either non-functional or non-existent. 
(Paragraph No. 2.12) 
Delay in construction of dedicated berthing facilities and parking of funds 
with a Public Sector Undertaking 
Union Territory of Lakshadweep Administration relea sed funds amounting to 
` 40.34 crore meant for construction of  a dedicated  berth without prior 
project approval by the competent authority and req uisite clearances. This 
amounted to parking of funds with Lakshadweep Devel opment Corporation 
Limited with no prospect of its immediate utilisati on for the intended 
purpose. This was not only in violation of the Rece ipts and Payments Rules 
and the GFRs but also denied UTLA of the opportunit y to utilise these funds 
for other developmental activities. Further, the pr oject is yet to commence 
even six years after it was conceived for want of clearances and approvals. 
 (Paragraph No. 2.13) 
Avoidable expenditure due to delay in disposal of a decommissioned vessel 
Lack of established procedures for disposal of deco mmissioned vessels 
coupled with delay in initiating timely action incl uding fixing of appropriate 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
ix 
reserve price of an outlived vessel resulted in avo idable expenditure of 
` 7.67 crore. 
(Paragraph No. 2.14) 
Short deduction of Income Tax 
Union Territory of Lakshadweep Administration (UTLA ) did not include the 
Island Special Duty Allowance (ISDA) for determinin g income tax liability 
which resulted in short deduction of income tax of 
` 51.92 lakh in case of 19 
DDOs out of 118 DDOs under the PAO of UT Lakshadweep. 
(Paragraph No. 2.15) 
Revenue Sector 
Union Territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
Short-levy of stamp duty on Development Agreements 
Failure of the Sub-Registrar Silvassa to levy stamp  duty on the basis of 
consideration amount with respect to Development Ag reements led to short 
levy of stamp duty. An amount of 
` 29 lakh was subsequently recovered in 
12 cases at the instance of audit. 
(Paragraph No. 3.1) 
Commercial Sector 
Union Territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
DNH Power Distribution Corporation Limited 
Purchase and Sale of Power by DNH Power Distributio n Corporation 
Limited 
Inadequate assessment of power requirements led to the Company purchasing 
power despite having adequate allocation of power f rom central generating 
stations. Further, poor management of Power Purchas e Agreements (PPAs) 
resulted in avoidable or irregular expenditure tota ling 
` 371.30 crore as well 
as in non-recovery of penalty of ` 8.63 crore. Non-compliance of Joint 
Electricity Regulatory Commission Regulations were noted in respect of 
security deposits, limit prescribed for power facto r and frequency of field 
inspection. 
(Paragraph No. 4.1) 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
1 
 
1.1 About this Report 
This Report contains compliance audit observations relating to the five Union 
Territories without legislatures. Compliance audit refers to the examination of 
transactions relating to expenditure, receipts as w ell as the assets and liabilities 
of audited entities to ascertain compliance to prov isions of the Constitution of 
India and applicable laws, rules, regulations and various orders and instructions 
issued by competent authorities from time to time.  
The Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) performs  audits in terms of the 
Auditing Standards approved by him. These standards  prescribe the norms 
which the auditors are expected to follow in conduc t of audit and require 
reporting on individual cases of non-compliance and  abuse as well as on 
weaknesses that exist in systems of financial manag ement and internal control. 
The findings of audit are expected to enable the Ex ecutive to take corrective 
action and to frame policies and issue directives t hat will lead to improved 
financial management of the organizations thereby c ontributing to better 
governance. 
This Report includes audit findings based on the co mpliance audit of the 
Government Departments/Offices/Institutions under t he administrative control 
of the UTs without legislatures.  
1.2 Union Territories in India 
There are seven Union Territories (UTs) specified u nder Part-II of the First 
Schedule to the Constitution of India viz . the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, 
Chandigarh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu, La kshadweep, the 
National Capital Territory of Delhi and Puducherry.  Except the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi and Puducherry, the rema ining five UTs do not have 
their own legislatures, councils of ministers or consolidated funds. Instead, they 
function under the authority of Parliament and the Government of India. 
1.3 Administrative arrangements 
Under the Government of India (Allocation of Busine ss) Rules, 1961, the 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) is the nodal ministr y for legislative matters, 
finance and budget and services for the UTs. Each U T functions under an 
Administrator appointed by the President under Arti cle 239 of the Constitution 
of India. In the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the L t. Governor is designated 
as the Administrator while the Governor of Punjab i s the administrator of 
CHAPTER I: INTRODUCTION 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
2 
Chandigarh. Administrators are also separately appo inted for Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli, Daman and Diu and Lakshadweep. The Administ rator’s Advisory 
Councils in these UTs advise the administrators. Th e Home Minister’s 
‘Advisory Committees’ in these UTs address general issues relating to the 
social and economic development of the UTs. The Isl and Development 
Authority (IDA) under the Prime Minister facilitate s the integration of high 
level decisions concerning the island UTs of the An daman and Nicobar Islands 
and Lakshadweep. 
1.4 Financial arrangements 
The budget provisions in respect of UTs are under t he administrative control of 
the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA). The MHA prepare s the Demands for 
Grants and Detailed Demand for Grants (DDGs) relati ng to these UTs for 
approval of Parliament. While the general administr ation of the UTs is the 
responsibility of the MHA, other ministries/departm ents of the Union 
Government administer funds on the subjects mention ed in Lists I and II of the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India insof ar as they exist in regard to 
these territories. Thus, the DDGs also contain prop osals of other ministries and 
departments relating to the expenditure on these UT s on activities concerning 
these ministries and departments. Administrators of  the UTs have been 
delegated financial powers upto a certain limit 1 by MHA for sanction of plan 
schemes. 
1.4.1 Provision and Expenditure 
Details of budgetary allocation and expenditure in the five UTs in 2016-17 are 
given in Table No. 1 below. 
Table No. 1 Budgetary allocation and expenditure  
(`` `` in crore)  
Name of Union 
Territory  
Total 
Grant/Appropriation  
Actual 
Expenditure Savings (Per cent ) 
Revenue Capital Revenue Capital Revenue Capital 
Amount  Per cent Amount  Per cent  
Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands 
4080.87  683.68  4077.26  478.73  3.61  0.09  204.95  29.98  
Chandigarh 3624.04  644.77  3524.41  644.69  99.63  2.75  0.08  0.01  
Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli 
745.37  384.49  744.33  358.57  1.04  0.14  25.92  6.74  
Daman and Diu 1387.54  280.84  1154.97  280.80  232.57  16.76  0.04  0.01  
Lakshadweep 1089.38  182.62  888.39  126.45  200.99  18.45  56.17  30.76  
Total  10927.20  2176.40  10389.36  1889.24  537.84  4.92  287.16  13.19  
Source: Union Government-Appropriation Accounts (Civil) 
                                                 
1 `  50 crore where Governor or Lt Governor is the Admin istrator and ` 25 crore in the 
remaining UTs. 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
3 
Significant savings occurred under the capital sect ion in Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands (ANI).  This was due to delay in finalisati on of ship building contracts, 
non-finalisation of agreement with Central Railway Information System for 
upgradation of Ship Ticketing Advance Reservation S ystem, handing over of a 
work pertaining to National Highways to National Hi ghways & Infrastructure 
Development Corporation Ltd., declaration of a stre tch of State Highway as 
National Highway and slow progress of work. In addi tion, savings also 
occurred due to non-finalisation of tenders for pur chase of High Frequency 
Radio Telephony equipment and delay in delivery of tugs by the construction 
yard. 
In Chandigarh, savings occurred due to non-implemen tation of the 
recommendations of the Punjab Pay Commission, fewer  foreign tours by High 
Court Judges , late finalisation of tenders for purchase of transp ort buses and 
non-filling of vacant posts in Arts and Science colleges.  
In Daman and Diu, savings under revenue section wer e mainly due to shifting 
of major high tension consumers to open Access Powe r Purchase Scheme, 
reduced cost of power and cuts imposed at revised e stimate stage by the 
Ministry of Finance. 
In Dadra and Nagar Haveli, savings in the capital s ection was mainly due to 
non-clearance of a scheme for inter-connecting tran smission line by Central 
Electricity Authority. 
In Lakshadweep, savings under revenue section occur red mainly due to less 
requirement of funds for running and maintenance of  ships, non-filling of 
vacant posts and reduction in provisions at revised  estimate stage by the 
Ministry of Finance. In the Capital section, saving s were due to delay in 
acquisition of ships and ferry vessels and reductio n of provision at revised 
estimate stage by the Ministry of Finance. 
1.4.2 Revenue 
Details of tax and non-tax revenues raised by the a dministrations of the UTs 
without legislatures, in 2016-17 are given in Table No. 2 below. 
 Table No. 2 Details of tax and non-tax revenues  
(`` `` in crore)  
Name of Union Territory  Tax Non Tax Total 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands 88.26 278.58 366.84 
Chandigarh 2192.35 1283.71 3476.06 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli 974.80 31.10 1005.90 
Daman and Diu 1028.74 112.06 1140.80 
Lakshadweep 1.02 51.78 52.80 
Total  4285.17 1757.23 6042.40 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
4 
In the Andaman and Nicobar Islands (ANI), State Exc ise contributed 85.98 per 
cent  of the total tax revenue of the UT. In the case of  non-tax revenue, the 
largest contributor was 'Power' which contributed 4 8.49 per cent  of total non-
tax revenue. In Chandigarh, Sales Tax and Power con tributed 70.69 per cent  
and 72.04 per cent  of the tax revenue and non-tax revenue respectivel y.  In 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Sales Tax contributed 88.18  per cent  of tax revenue 
and power contributed 71.61 per cent  of the non-tax revenue. In Daman and 
Diu, Sales Tax and Power accounted for 66.88 per cent  and 89.91 per cent  of 
the tax revenue and non-tax revenue respectively. T ax revenue in UT 
Lakshadweep (UTL) was meagre with stamp duty being the largest component.  
In the case of non-tax revenue of UTL, Power and Sh ipping were the largest 
source contributing 36.50 per cent  and 35.53 per cent respectively. 
1.5 Planning and conduct of audit 
The audit process commences with a risk based asses sment of expenditure 
incurred, the criticality/complexity of activities,  delegated financial powers, 
overall position of internal controls, concerns of the stakeholders and previous 
audit findings. The frequency and extent of audit a re decided on the basis of 
this risk assessment. On completion of audit, Inspe ction Reports (IRs) 
containing audit findings are issued to the Heads o f the Departments of the 
audited entity. Important audit observations arisin g out of these Inspection 
Reports are processed for inclusion in the Audit Reports of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India submitted to the President  of India under Article 151 
of the Constitution of India. 
During 2016-17, Audit covered 307 units under the c ontrol of the five UTs 
without legislatures as detailed in Appendix-I. 
1.6 Responsiveness of the Government to audit 
Prompt and vigorous pursuance of objections and tim ely reporting of important 
irregularities to Government are essential for ensu ring that the Audit Reports 
serve their intended purpose and Government derives  their full value. The 
responsibility for the settlement of objections dev olves primarily upon the 
disbursing officers, heads of offices and controlli ng authorities who are 
required to comply with the observations contained in the IRs, rectify the 
defects and omissions promptly and report their compliance to audit within four 
weeks of receipt of the IRs. Periodical reminders a re issued to the Heads of 
Departments requesting them to furnish the replies expeditiously. 
As of 31 March 2017, a total of 2,133 IRs containin g 8,140 audit paragraphs 
were outstanding for settlement in respect of vario us departments/institutions 
under the five UTs without legislatures as given in Appendix-II. 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
5 
1.7 Follow-up on Audit Reports 
In its 105 th  Report (10 th Lok Sabha-1995-96) presented to the Parliament on 1 7 
August 1995, the Public Accounts Committee had reco mmended that Action 
Taken Notes (ATNs) on all paragraphs of the Reports  of the C&AG should be 
furnished to the Committee through the Ministry of Finance (Department of 
Expenditure) within a period of four months from th e date of laying of the 
Audit Reports on the Table of the House starting from 31 March 1996 onwards. 
Subsequently, a Monitoring Cell was created under t he Department of 
Expenditure which is entrusted with the task of coo rdination and collection of 
the ATNs on the various Audit Paragraphs from all t he Ministries/Departments 
concerned duly vetted by Audit and sending them to the Public Accounts 
Committee within the stipulated period of four mont hs from the date of 
presentation of the Audit Report to the Parliament. 
Audit observed that 11 ATNs pertaining to the Audit  Report of the C&AG for 
the period upto 31 December 2017 were pending as given in Appendix-III. 
1.8 Response of the Union Territories to draft para graphs 
On the recommendation of the PAC, Ministry of Finan ce issued directions to 
all Ministries in June 1960 to send their responses  to the draft paragraphs 
proposed for inclusion in the Report of the Comptro ller and Auditor General of 
India within six weeks of receipt of the paragraphs. 
Replies from the auditee departments had been recei ved in 14 2 out of the 17 
paragraphs included in this Report of the Comptroll er and Auditor General of 
India for the year ended March 2017. However, the M inistry did not reply to 
any of the paragraphs. 
                                                 
2    Replies to the Paragraphs No. 2.1, 2.8 and 2.9 were not received. 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
6 
Andaman and Nicobar Administration 
Police Department, Port Blair 
2.1 Implementation of the Coastal Security Scheme a nd Crime and 
Criminal Track Network and Systems (CCTNS) project 
All scheme components of the Coastal Security Schem e Phase II were 
lagging behind the original scheme targets. Only one out of the ten planned 
Marine Operational Centers had been established eve n after seven years 
since commencement of the scheme. Further, sites fo r ten planned jetties 
were yet to be finalized and work on upgradation of  20 Coastal Police 
Stations yet to commence. There was also deviation from procurement 
rules and guidelines in procurement of boats costin g `` `` 54.32 lakh. The 
Crime and Criminal Track Network and Systems had al so missed most of 
the envisaged milestones. As a result, most of the functionalities and 
benefits envisaged from the system remained undelivered.  
2.1.1 Introduction 
The Police Department (Department), Andaman and Nic obar Islands (ANI), is 
responsible for internal and coastal security of th e islands apart from 
maintenance of law and order including prohibition of poaching activities. The 
Department is headed by the Director General of Pol ice who is assisted by an 
Inspector General, Superintendents and Deputy Superintendents. 
Audit examined the records relating to implementati on of two schemes for 
strengthening the Police Administration of ANI viz . the Coastal Security 
Scheme Phase II and the Crime and Criminal Track Ne twork and Systems. 
Audit also examined implementation of the UT Plan C oastal Security 
Surveillance Scheme (CSSS) which was conceived as a  supplementary 
scheme of CSS-II. The period covered by audit was 2011-17. 
The budget allotment and expenditure under the sche mes during the period 
2011-17 is given in the Table No. 1 below: 
Table No. 1: Budget Allotment and Expenditure  
(`` `` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Name of Schemes/Project 2011-17 
Allotment Expenditure 
1. Coastal Security Scheme Phase II (CSS-II) 1 27.02 9.40 
2. Crime and Criminal Track Network and Systems 
(CCTNS) 2 5.11 4.92 
                                                           
1 Funds under the scheme CSS-II of ` 27.02 crore were received during 2011-12 and 2012-13. 
2 GOI provided a sum of ` 6.71 crore from November 2009 to August 2014 for the  CCTNS 
project which was a 100 per cent  centrally funded scheme with a total cost of ` 7.27 crore. 
Expenditure on the project was ` 5.01 crore till March 2017. 
CHAPTER – II : UNION TERRITORIES 
(EXPENDITURE SECTOR) 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
7 
2.1.2 Audit Findings 
2.1.2.1 Coastal Security Scheme Phase II (CSS II) 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) sanctioned the Coast al Security Scheme II 
in November 2010 for augmentation of infrastructure  in nine coastal States 
and four coastal UTs including ANI to supplement ot her coastal security 
initiatives undertaken by the Navy and the Coast Gu ard. The duration of the 
scheme was originally for five years i.e. up to Mar ch 2016 but has since been 
extended upto March 2020 at the request of the Department. 
The components of the scheme along with approved co st and originally 
stipulated period of completion is given in Table No. 2 below: 
Table No. 2: Components of CSS-II  
Sl. 
No. Components of the scheme Quantity 
Approved  
Approved cost  
(`` `` in crore) 
Originally 
Stipulated period  
of completion 
1. Construction of Marine Operational 
Centers (MOC) 
10 13.50 2012-15 
2. Construction of Jetties 10 5.00 2011-16 
3. Procurement of Four Wheelers 20 1.40 2011-16 
4. Procurement of Motor Cycles 20 0.12 2011-16 
5. Upgradation of existing police stations 
to Coastal Police Stations 
20 4.00 2012-15 
6. Procurement of equipment and 
furniture for 20 Coastal Police Stations 
- 3.00 2011-16 
2.1.2.2  Poor utilization of funds 
Funds amounting to ` 27.02 crore were sanctioned by MHA for the scheme i n 
three stages during 2011-12 and 2012-13. All the th ree sanctions were issued 
under Major Head 4055-Capital Outlay on Police with  instructions to 
release/remit the funds to DGP ANI by demand draft (DD). MHA accordingly 
remitted these funds to the Police Department of AN I which in turn deposited 
these funds under Major Head (MH)-8443.00.104.00.00 -Civil Court Deposits 
in the Public Accounts. Of the above amount kept as  civil deposits by the 
Department, only ` 9.40 crore had been withdrawn till March 2017. Aud it 
noted that even out of this amount of ` 9.40 crore, a major part i.e. ` 7.33 
crore (77.98 per cent ) was only a transfer 3to the Andaman Public Works 
Department (APWD) for construction of five Marine O perational Centers 
which were yet (November 2017) to be constructed. T hus, only ` 2.07 crore 
(7.66 per cent ) of the fund received was actually spent on the sc heme even 
though five years had elapsed from its commencement.  
                                                           
3 Between February 2016 and December 2016. 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
8 
2.1.2.3 Inordinate delay in establishment of Marine  Operational 
Centers 
Under the scheme, ten Marine Operational Centers (MOCs) were to be set up 
as nerve centers to undertake patrolling, raids and  surveillance in 
remote/scattered islands. MHA suggested (November 2 010) completion of all 
preparatory works 4  for the MOCs by 31 March 2011. However, the 
Department constituted joint survey teams only in M ay 2011 after being 
prompted by MHA to initiate processing of statutory  clearances for 
identification of sites and preparation of DPRs. Au dit noted that only one out 
of the ten planned MOCs could be set up and operati onalized in Kadamtala. 
The present status of implementation of the balance  nine MOCs is given in 
Annexe-I. Four cases that were currently at the tendering s tage had suffered 
delays due to change in site, inadequate preparator y work and non-intimation 
of availability of funds. In three cases, clearance s and allotment of land were 
awaited and administrative approval and expenditure  sanction and revised 
estimates were awaited in one case each. 
The Department attributed (November 2017) the delay s to involvement of 
various stakeholders in the process of obtaining clearances.  
The reply is not tenable as there was no evidence o f concerted action on the 
part of the Department to take advance action and a ctively pursue the requisite 
clearances. The Empowered Committee with members dr awn from all key 
departments such as Finance, Revenue, PWD and Fores ts that could have 
facilitated early clearances had also never met sin ce its constitution though it 
was required to meet at least once every quarter. A s a result, funds allotted by 
the Ministry have remained un-utilized and assets c ritical for coastal security 
are yet to materialize.  
2.1.2.4  Delay in finalizing requirement and locati on of jetties 
The scheme included construction of ten new jetties  for berthing and 
maintenance of boats/interceptor boats at strategic  locations. Though 
preparatory works for jetties was required to be co mpleted by 31 March 2011, 
the Department constituted joint survey teams only in May 2011.  Surveys 
undertaken by these teams recommended (May 2012 and  November 2014) 
dropping construction of jetties and using the exis ting jetties at nine locations. 
At one location, construction was found to be not f easible due to high costs 
and unfavourable weather conditions. 
                                                           
4 Identification and acquisition of land, planning e stimation and tendering. 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
9 
As funds allotted for the purpose were lying unspen t, the Department revived 
the proposal for construction of jetties in Novembe r 2016 and proposals for 
construction of eight jetties were obtained from th e Districts. Audit noted that 
these fresh recommendations for eight jetties inclu ded four jetties at the same 
locations envisaged earlier. Hence, it was apparent  that the assessment of 
requirement of jetties by survey teams had not been  accurate. Thus, 
considerable time was lost in implementing a critic al component of the CSS-II 
while ` five crore allotted for the purpose remained unutilized. 
2.1.2.5 Non-commencement of works of upgradation of  Coastal 
Police Stations 
Funds for addition/alteration/upgradation of 20 Coa stal Police Stations (CPSs) 
was sanctioned under the scheme. Audit noted that e stimates for only 12 
CPSs 5  had been received between May 2016 and September 2 016 and 
estimates for the remaining eight CPSs were under p reparation by Andaman 
Public Works Department  as of November 2017. 
The Department stated (April 2017) that though up-g radation of CPSs was 
delayed, the CPSs were fully functional with availa ble infrastructure and 
resources and priority was being given to other time consuming works.  
The reply is not tenable as other works had also no t progressed and up-
gradation of 20 CPSs was an independent component o f the scheme for which 
funds had been made available much in advance. 
2.1.2.6  Failure to procure critical equipment 
Funds were allotted in October 2012 for providing a ssistance of ` 15 lakh per 
police station for procuring various types of equip ment for surveillance, 
navigation, communication, detection and night oper ation capabilities of boats 
as also card readers, computer systems and furnitur e. Audit noted that the 
Department had only procured computer furniture wor th ` 32.18 lakh and 20 
Distress Alert Transmitter (DAT) costing ` 3.78 lakh till March 2017 . Critical 
eq uipment for surveillance, navigation/communication,  and computer systems 
were yet to be procured (November 2017).  
The Department stated (March 2017) that a tender was floated for procurement 
of night vision devices and hand held devices but c ould not be finalized due to 
exorbitant rates quoted and variations in the equipment offered.  
                                                           
5 Kamorta/Nancowry, Teressa, Car Nicobar, Campbell B ay, Katchal, Havelock, Chatham, 
Bamboo Flat, Diglipur, Kalighat, Billyground, Baratang. 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
10 
Audit observed that it was in any event incumbent u pon the Department to 
review the tender process and bring it to a success ful conclusion while 
adhering to the GFRs. Thus, lack of substantive pro gress in procurement of 
equipment defeated the objective of ensuring reliab le communication between 
MOC, CPSs and Boats. Besides, ` 2.64 crore remained unutilized for more 
than five years. 
2.1.2.7 Non-procurement of Large Vessels and Rigid Inflatable 
Boats  
Ministry sanctioned (November 2010) 10 large vessels and 23 Rigid Inflatable 
Boats 6 (RIB) to be centrally procured at a cost of ` 302.30 crore. These vessels 
were required to exercise watch and vigilance at is lands and along the coast 
line and were to be stationed at 10 strategic locations where MOCs were being 
set up. 
Ministry floated limited tender enquiries in June 2 016 for procurement of the 
large vessels and RIBs more than five years after a pproval of the scheme and 
finalized tenders for these vessels in December 201 7. Thus, a critical 
component of CSS-II has been delayed for more than six years after approval 
and the objective of strengthening vigilance at str ategic locations through 
regular patrolling has  yet to be achieved. 
2.1.3  Coastal Security Surveillance Scheme  
2.1.3.1  Non-implementation of key components of Sc heme  
This scheme was proposed as a UT Plan Scheme to inter alia  achieve self-
sufficiency in patrolling and striking capability w ithin our territorial waters. 
The scheme was proposed to cover items that could n ot be funded by the 
Ministry due to limited funds available under the CSS-II. 
Audit noted that only three out of the 22 items env isaged under the scheme 
(boats 7, diving equipment and setting up a Marine Police C ontrol Room) had 
materialized. Audit also observed that most of the expenditure incurred was 
under establishment 8 (63.38 per cent ) and POL (25.65 per cent ) heads. Thus, 
funds intended to augment assets in support of CSS- II was primarily used for 
funding establishment and POL expenses.  
                                                           
6 A Rigid Hull Inflatable Boat is a light weight but  high performance and high-capacity 
boat constructed with a solid, shaped hull.  
7 FRP Boats were procured from CSS-II funds but achi evement was shown under CSSS 
8 Salary, Domestic Travel and office expenses. 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
11 
2.1.3.2  Irregular procurements of boats under the scheme 
Rule 137 of GFRs, 2005, stipulate that every author ity delegated with 
financial powers of procuring goods shall bear the responsibility and 
accountability to ensure efficiency, economy and tr ansparency in matter 
relating to public procurement and fair and equitab le treatment of suppliers 
and promotion of competition in public procurement.  This includes 
determining specification of goods proposed to be p rocured, inviting offers in 
a fair and transparent manner and evaluating the of fer with reference to those 
pre-determined specifications. Further, Rule 160 st ates inter alia  that bids 
should be evaluated in terms of conditions already incorporated in the bidding 
documents and the contract should be awarded to the  lowest evaluated bidder 
who is found to be responsive  in terms of the specifications and conditions 
stipulated in the bid documents. Where a two bid sy stem is adopted, the 
technical bid is evaluated first and the financial bid of only those that are 
technically qualified are opened (Rule 152 GFR). In  such a system, there 
should not be any variation between the goods offer ed in the technical offer 
and that actually contracted for and procured. Any such deviation vitiates the 
entire process. 
Audit observed deviations from the above-mentioned fundamental principles 
of public procurement in two cases of procurement o f boats as discussed 
below: 
Case A: A Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) was issued in June 2 012 in a 
two-bid system for procurement of four Fibre Reinfo rced Polymer (FRP) 
Boats 
9 under the CSSS. The bid document specified the len gth and breadth of 
the boats proposed to be acquired. The technical sp ecification of the boats as 
stipulated in NIT and those offered by the lowest b idder (vendor) is given in 
the Table No. 3 below. 
Table No. 3: Technical specification of NIT and that offered by bidder  
Sl. 
No  Particulars  Technical 
specification  
Technical 
specification offered 
by the lowest bidder  
Technical 
specification of 
procured FRP  
Deviation 
from 
offer  
1. Length 
overall 
6.0 meter (m) 
( + ) 10% 
6 m (+10%) i.e. 6.60 
m 
5.48 m 1.12 m 
2. Breadth 
(Moulded) 
1.90 m 
( + ) 5% 
1.90m(+5%)i.e.1.995 
m 
1.78 m 0.215 m 
Audit noted variations in the specifications of the boats between that stipulated 
in the NIT and that offered by the vendor and that mentioned in the work order 
and that actually procured. The lowest bidder offer ed boats of a larger size in 
                                                           
9 Used for fast approach and fast response in costal  security. 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
12 
comparison with the NIT specifications. The work or der issued by the 
Department included specifications as per the NIT. The invoice submitted by 
the vendor gave the specifications of the boat as p er its bid. However, the 
boats actually delivered by the vendor were of a sm aller size than that offered 
in its bid. 
The Department justified (October 2017) the procure ment stating that the 
specifications of the boat delivered were as per NIT.  
The reply is not acceptable as there should be no d eviation in the specification 
of boats included in the technical bid and that act ually procured. Further, 
supply of smaller boats should have entailed price reduction as the prices 
accepted by the Department were for larger boats. T hus, acceptance of smaller 
boats at total cost of 
` 33.82 lakh was irregular.  
CASE B: The Department published (July 2012) a NIT for proc urement 
of 10 RIBs 10  with aluminum floors following a two-bid system. T he NIT inter 
alia  specified that the RIBs should have aluminum floor s. Of the three firms 
that responded to the NIT, two firms offered RIBs w ith aluminum floors while 
the third firm offered RIBs with marine grade plywood floor having aluminum 
stringers. Audit observed that the Department accepted the technical bids of all 
the firms including the firm whose technical bid di d not match the 
specifications given in the NIT and went on to evaluate the financial bids of all 
the three bidders. As the bid of the vendor whose technical offer did not match 
the NIT specifications was the lowest, orders were placed on it (March 2013) 
at a cost of ` 20.50 lakh ignoring the fact that it was not technically compliant. 
The Department justified (November 2017) the procur ement of the boats with 
marine grade plywood floor on the grounds of saving in costs.  
However, the reply was unacceptable as the financial bid of this vendor should 
not have been considered as its technical bid was n ot compliant with NIT 
specifications.  
2.1.4  Crime and Criminal Track Network and Systems  (CCTNS)  
The CCTNS project was conceptualized by MHA in 2009  as a mission mode 
project to modernize the police force. It envisaged  creation of a 
comprehensive and integrated system by adoption of principles of 
e-governance and establishment of a nation-wide net worked infrastructure for 
                                                           
10  Rubberized Inflatable Boats (RIBs) are used for pr oviding beaching/landing facilities 
where the dinghy or speed boats cannot provide the same owing to rocky or cliffy terrain  

Report No. 3 of 2018 
13 
an IT-enabled state-of-the-art tracking system . Implementation guidelines for 
the system were issued in July 2009.  
The National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) was appoin ted by MHA as the 
central nodal agency with responsibility for develo ping the Core Application 
Software of CCTNS (CAS) and providing the same to a ll states/UTs including 
ANI for customization. ANA set up the Andaman and N icobar 
Computerization of Police Society (ANCoPS) for implementing the project.  
The Department appointed a State Project Management  Consultant (SPMC) in 
July 2010 at a fee of ` 16.65 lakh for preparation of a Detailed Project R eport 
(DPR) and  a Systems Integrator (SI) in May 2012 at  a fee  of ` 3.74 crore for 
implementation and performance 11  of CCTNS. A firm nominated by the 
Ministry was appointed in May 2012 as the State Pro gramme Management 
Unit (SPMU) at a cost of ` 2.20 crore for providing consultancy services for 
overall project management and to monitor the techn ical, operational and 
maintenance aspects of the SI. The Department of In formation Technology 
(DIT) of ANA was to provide network connectivity for the system. Milestones 
for various activities are given in Annexe-II . 
The DPR identified 32 processes and detected a tota l of 153 gaps in these 
processes. To address the identified gaps, the DPR proposed various IT 
solutions aimed at meeting functional requirements and achieving specific 
outcomes. These solutions were in the form of 31 “S pecific Modules” based 
on functions of the Department and nine "other modu les" which covered 
aspects such as access requirements, monitoring and  reporting, information 
and navigation. After deliberations, the Department  removed ten out of the 31 
“Specific Modules” mentioned in the DPR while float ing the Request for 
Proposal (RFP) for selection of SI. In the case of the nine other modules, one 12  
module did not require customization and two 13  other modules were not made 
part of RFP. 
In terms of the agreement with the SI, all modules and functionalities were to 
be provided within seven months of signing of the agreement i.e. by December 
2012. Audit noted that of the 21 “Specific Modules” , eleven were either not 
provided or not functional, nine were partially fun ctional to the extent ranging 
from 16.66 per cent  to 85.71 per cent  and functionality of one module could 
not be ascertained. Of the six remaining 'Other mod ules,' five were partially 
functional to the extent of 78.57 per cent  and functionality of one module 
could not be ascertained.  
                                                           
11  Operational and maintenance phase for three years.  
12  Search module. 
13  Navigation module and Configuration module. 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
14 
Since the modules were mapped to 17 services of the  Core Application 
Software (CAS) of CCTNS, incomplete customization o f CAS led to non/ 
partial availability of the services as given in the Table No. 4 below: 
Table No. 4: Status of Services of CCTNS 
Number 
of Service  Name of Service  Status of 
Service  
1 User Access and Authorization Management Service Available 
8 Citizen Portal Service ,  Petition Management Services, 
Unclaimed/ Abandoned Property Register Service, Com plaint 
and FIR Management Service, Investigation Managemen t 
Service, Crime and Criminal Records and Query Manag ement 
Service ,  Periodic Crime and Law & Order Reports and 
Review Dashboard Service ,  Notification of Alerts Important 
Events Reminders and Activity Calendar or Tasks Service 
Partly 
available 
5 Police e-mail & Messaging Service, User Feedback Tr acking 
and resolution service, User help and assistance Se rvice, PCR 
Call Interface and Management Service, Court and Ja il 
Interface and Prosecution management Service 
Unavailable/ 
Non-
Functional  
3 State-SCRB-NCRB Data Transfer and Management Servic e, 
State CAS Administration and Configuration manageme nt 
Service, Activity Log Tracking and Audit Service 
Proper 
functioning 
could not be 
ascertained 
17  Total 
The overall status of availability of envisaged fun ctionalities on account of 
non/part implementation of specific modules is that  only 80 out of a total of 
442 envisaged functionalities i.e. 18.10 per cent  are fully available to the 
Department and the stakeholders. 
The Department stated (November 2017) that work on some modules was in 
progress and the SI had targeted completion by Janu ary 2018. It accepted that 
several benefits from the system were not being provided to stakeholders.  
Thus, non/partial availability of envisaged service s severely limited the 
benefits expected from the system.   
2.1.5 Conclusion  
All scheme components of the Coastal Security Schem e Phase II were lagging 
behind original scheme targets though funds were no t a constraint. Only one 
out of the ten planned Marine Operational Centers h ad been established even 
after seven years of commencement of the scheme and  sites for ten planned 
jetties were yet to be finalized. Further, work on up-gradation of 20 Coastal 
Police Stations were yet to take off. The Crime and  Criminal Track Network 
and Systems had also missed most of the envisaged m ilestones.  As a result 
most of the functionalities and benefits envisaged from the system remained 
undelivered. 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
15 
The matter was referred to the Ministry/Department in August 2017; their 
reply was awaited as of December 2017.  
Andaman Public Works Department 
2.2 Unfruitful Expenditure 
Andaman Public Works Department awarded work for au gmenting 
water supply at Aerial Bay at a cost of `` `` 1.42 crore without obtaining 
mandatory forest clearance leading to the work gett ing foreclosed. 
Foreclosure of the work rendered unfruitful expendi ture of `` `` 92.94 
lakh incurred on procurement of material procured for the work. 
The CPWD Manual stipulates that preparation of deta iled estimates, designs 
and drawings for a work should be taken up only aft er obtaining an assurance 
that the site would be available without any encumb rance for the work.  
Towards this end, it is incumbent upon the Departme nt to seek and ensure any 
statutory clearances that may be required for the w ork to commence on the 
proposed site. The manual also stipulates that prep aration of the detailed 
estimates, designs and drawings should precede tendering of the work. 
In August 2013, APWD proposed to take up a work for  augmenting water 
supply at Aerial Bay as the yield of water from the  existing water source at 
Lamiya Bay was insufficient to meet the demand of t he local population. 
Further, the existing water supply was frequently d isrupted during the rainy 
season due to landslides and restoration of supply was difficult and time 
consuming. 
The work proposed by APWD involved construction of an alternate pipeline 
from another source at Lamiya Bay which would avoid  vulnerable stretches of 
land. The work consisted of construction of a check  weir, RCC supporting 
pillar for pipeline and laying of 300 mm dia and 200 mm dia pipe including all 
necessary fittings. Administrative Approval and Exp enditure Sanction for the 
work was accorded in October 2013 for 
` 1.42 crore. The tender for the work 
was issued in December 2014 and the work was awarde d at a cost of ` 1.43 
crore in June 2015. 
As the work was to be executed in a forest area, AP WD was required to apply 
for diversion of land under Sections 2 and 6 of the  Forest (Conservation) Act, 
1980. Audit noted that APWD did not initiate any ac tion for obtaining forest 
clearance either prior to preparation of estimates,  designs and drawings or the 
tendering of the work. APWD requested the Forest De partment for permission 
to execute the work only on 15 December 2015 viz . after a lapse of around six 
months from the date of award of work.  APWD could not secure the forest 
clearance even after a lapse of 16 months after the award of work 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
16 
In the meantime, APWD released (December 2015) a se cured advance of 
` 83.09 lakh to the contractor against total cost of  material purchased and 
brought on site by the contractor of ` 92.94 lakh though forest clearance was 
yet to be received.  In October 2016, the contracto r requested for foreclosure 
of the work due to non-availability of forest clear ance. Subsequently, in 
November 2016, APWD agreed to foreclose the work stating that there was no 
scope of the work starting in the near future. The balance amount of  
` 9.85 lakh towards cost of material was also releas ed (November 2016) to the 
contractor. 
Thus, failure of APWD to ensure timely action to ob tain the mandatory forest 
clearance and provide encumbrance free land to the contractor before award of 
work led to unfruitful expenditure of 
` 92.94 lakh on material procured for the 
work. 
APWD stated (July 2017) that the aspect of forest c learance had not been 
considered during the estimation stage since the pr oposed work was only an 
augmentation of the water supply scheme which was a lready operational and 
which had been commissioned with the co-operation o f the Forest 
Department.  However, the laying of the pipe lines was subsequently objected 
to by the Forest Department as the site fell within  the jurisdiction of a Wildlife 
sanctuary. APWD added that the material procured i. e. pipes and gaskets were 
under the safe custody of the Department and would be utilized in future water 
supply projects. 
The reply reflects the lack of due diligence on the  part of the APWD to 
ascertain the status of the proposed site and ensur e obtaining of requisite 
statutory clearances before award of work as envisa ged in the codal 
provisions. Further, procurement of material and pa yment of advance against 
the same when there was no forest clearance for the  work has led to funds of 
` 92.94 lakh getting blocked in stores that have rem ained idle since the 
foreclosure of the contract. In addition, the objec tive of augmenting the water 
supply to the targeted population remains unfulfilled. 
The matter has been referred to the Ministry in Jul y 2017; their reply was 
awaited (December 2017). 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
17 
Directorate of Shipping Services 
2.3 Avoidable payment towards customs duty 
In terms of Customs Notification No.12/2012 dated 1 7 March 2012 issued 
under Section 25(1) of the Customs Act, 1962, Ship Repair Units (SRUs) 
registered with the Directorate General of Shipping  were exempted from 
payment of customs duty on import of capital goods and spares thereof, raw 
materials, parts, material handling equipment and c onsumables when such 
procurement was required for repairs of ocean-going vessels. Subsequently, by 
Customs Notification No.43/2015 dated 4 August 2015 , the Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue) removed the require ment for registration of 
SRUs with Directorate General of Shipping for avail ing of the aforesaid 
exemption. 
On 12 December 2012, the Directorate of Shipping Se rvices, Andaman and 
Nicobar Administration, Port Blair (DSS), entered i nto an agreement with a 
private company for engine and thruster maintenance and supply of spare parts 
and price guarantees in respect of spares and avail ability of spares for the 
vessel M.V. Campbell Bay 
14 .  In terms of Article 12 of the agreement, any 
exemptions from payment of direct and indirect taxe s availed of due to 
applicable laws of the time were to accrue to the A ndaman & Nicobar 
Administration. 
Audit observed that DSS paid 
` 2.80 crore to the company between November 
2015 and June 2016 towards supply of engine spare p arts for M.V. Campbell 
Bay which included the component of customs duty am ounting to ` 57.99 
lakh. Although DSS functioned as an SRU, it failed to avail exemption under 
the provisions of the Customs Act cited above which  resulted in avoidable 
payment of ` 57.99 lakh towards customs duty on procurement of imported 
spares for routine repair and maintenance of MV Campbell Bay. 
DSS stated (May 2017) that though Article 12 of the  agreement empowered 
the Administration to avail exemption of customs du ty on spares, availing of 
such exemption was practically not possible since i t was a time consuming 
process and delay in supply of spares could have ad versely affected the 
                                                           
14  A ship owned by the DSS equipped  with main engine s, auxiliary engines and other 
equipment manufactured/supplied by Yanmar Co. Ltd, Japan and  thrusters by Kawasaki 
Heavy Industries Limited, Japan.  
Failure of Directorate of Shipping Services, Andama n and Nicobar 
Administration, to avail of exemption in terms of C ustom Notifications 
issued under the Customs Act, 1962, led to avoidabl e payment of 
`` `` 57.99 lakh towards customs duty on procurement of imported spares 
for routine repair and maintenance of an ocean-going vessel. 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
18 
operational availability of the vessel.  However, t he matter has been taken up 
with the appropriate authority for availing such exemption. Subsequently, DSS 
added (July 2017) that the Marine Dockyard (under t he DSS) was responsible 
for repairs and maintenance of the fleet of ship/bo ats and there would not be 
any savings to the Government exchequer since the p ricing of the spares were 
as per the price list of original equipment manufacturers.  
The reply is not tenable since customs duty on spar es for ocean going vessels 
was exempted by the Government of India that should have been availed of by 
the company and the benefit passed on to DSS. 
The matter was referred to the Ministry of Home Aff airs in May 2017; their 
reply was awaited as of December 2017. 
Andaman & Nicobar Island Building and other Constru ction Workers’ 
Welfare Board 
2.4 Avoidable payment towards income tax 
Section 10 (46) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, provid es for exemption from 
income tax on specified income of any entity set up  under a central or state 
Act mainly for the benefit of public. Such entities  are required to apply to the 
Income Tax Department for exemption which is then n otified in the official 
Gazette. 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands Building and Other Cons truction Workers’ 
Welfare Board (BOCWWB) was constituted in January 2 009 by the Andaman 
and Nicobar Administration in accordance with Section 18 of the Building and 
other Construction Workers’ (Regulation of Employme nt and Conditions of 
Service) Act, 1996. The BOCWWB was established for the welfare of 
building and other construction workers and hence s atisfied the necessary 
conditions for income tax exemption under Section 1 0 (46) of the Income Tax 
Act, 1961. 
Audit noticed that BOCWWB failed to apply for exemp tion to the income tax 
authorities and hence no notification for exemption  had been issued by the 
Central Government. In the absence of a notificatio n for exemption, TDS 15 of 
                                                           
15  Tax deducted at Source. 
Failure of Building and Other Construction Workers’  Welfare Board, 
Port Blair, to apply for exemption in compliance with the Income Tax Act 
resulted in avoidable payment of `` `` 34.68 lakh towards income tax which 
would otherwise have been available for utilization  on social welfare 
measures of the workers and their families. 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
19 
` 46.79 lakh was deducted by banks on interest earne d on deposits kept with 
them by BOCWWB between November 2013 and December 2016. 
BOCWWB filed an Income Tax Return (ITR) for the Assessment Year 2015-16 
showing nil income and was given a refund by the In come Tax Department of 
the TDS collected by banks of ` 12.11lakh for that year. BOCWWB thus 
made an avoidable payment of ` 34.68 lakh 16  towards Income Tax. 
The Department stated (February 2017) that an appli cation for exemption has 
been submitted to the Government of India in view of the audit observation. 
Thus, failure of BOCWWB to apply for exemption in c ompliance with the 
provisions of the Income Tax Act resulted in avoida ble payment of ` 34.68 
lakh towards income tax. Had the exemption been obt ained, this amount 
would have become available for utilization on soci al welfare measures of the 
workers and their families . 
The matter was referred to the Ministry in May 2017 ; their reply was awaited 
(December 2017). 
Resident Commissioner, Andaman and Nicobar Bhawan  
2.5 Irregular expenditure on camp office in Delhi 
Andaman and Nicobar Administration declared the pri vate residence 
of incumbent Lieutenant General’s (LG’s) as camp of fice for their use 
during their official visits to Delhi though establ ishment of such camp 
office was not covered under any rule and despite a vailability of 
earmarked accommodation for LG at Andaman Bhawan, N ew Delhi.  
This resulted in irregular expenditure of `` `` 29.45 lakh from the 
government exchequer. 
The terms of appointment of Lieutenant Governors (L Gs) of Union 
Territories 17  prescribes the pay and allowances and other facili ties viz . 
residence, medical facilities, travelling allowance s, etc. admissible to the 
appointed LGs. It provides inter alia for a furnished residential 
accommodation without payment of any rent. However,  there is no provision 
for setting up any camp office in addition to the furnished house. 
Audit scrutiny brought out that the private residen ce 18  of the then incumbent 
LG in Gurugram, Haryana, was declared (September 20 13) as a camp office 
                                                           
16  Tax deducted ` 46.79 lakh minus tax refunded ` 12.11 lakh. 
17  Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs lett er no. U-14016/31/85-UTS dated 
20 April 1987. 
18  House No. 964, Sector 17-B, Gurugram, Haryana. 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
20 
on the ground that the Hon’ble LG had to discharge official duties during his 
official visits to Delhi. The declaration was subse quently (October 2013) ante-
dated retrospectively from the date of assumption o f office by the LG viz . July 
2013. The camp office was attached to the office of  the Resident 
Commissioner (RC), Andaman and Nicobar Bhawan, New Delhi, for 
manpower and material requirements and the entire e xpenditure towards the 
camp office of approximately ` 23.18 lakh including telephone bills, repair of 
goods, water and electricity charges, vehicles and salary of outsourced staff, 
was met out of the budget of the RC. 
Similarly, the private residence of the next incumb ent LG at Janakpuri 
19 , New 
Delhi, was also declared as camp office from August  2016 i.e. the date of 
assumption of office till October 2017 i.e. on reli nquishment of charge and 
expenditure amounting to ` 6.27 lakh was incurred for the camp office from 
the budget allocated for Andaman Bhawan, New Delhi, as of March 2017. 
Audit observed that the Andaman Bhawan in New Delhi  was a 54 bedded 
Guest House and included a designated suite for the  LG while in Delhi.  
Therefore, separate camp offices in Delhi was unwar ranted. Moreover, there 
was no provision or rule for setting up such camp o ffice separately and that 
too in private residences of the respective LGs. Th erefore, the expenditure of 
` 29.45 lakh from Government exchequer was both injudicious and irregular.  
The Andaman and Nicobar Administration cited (June 2017) the precedence 
of declaration of residence of Chief Minister of Hi machal Pradesh at Delhi as 
Camp Office by the Governor of Himachal Pradesh and  added that Camp 
Office facilities with manpower, water charges, ele ctricity charges, telephone 
charges and technology devices were provided to IAS  and DANICS officers 
by the Delhi Government.  
The reply was not tenable as there was no rule prov ision under which private 
residence of concerned LGs could be declared as cam p office and its expenses 
met out from the Government exchequer. Moreover, th e fact that designated 
LG accommodation was available at the station rende red the expenditure even 
more injudicious and violative of the canons of financial propriety. 
The matter was referred to the Ministry in Septembe r 2017; their reply was 
awaited as of December 2017. 
 
 
                                                           
19  PremKutir, A-2/70 JanakPuri, New Delhi – 110058. 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
21 
Chandigarh Administration  
2.6 Idling of Sub-Station due to improper planning of work  
Electricity Department, Union Territory of Chandiga rh, entered into an 
agreement with the Power Grid Corporation of India Limited for 
erection of a Grid Sub-Station at Sarangpur, Chandi garh at an 
estimated cost of `` `` 9.87 crore. The erection of the sub-station which 
should have been completed by November 2011 was delayed by over four 
years due to allotment of land with encumbrances. T he erected sub-
station is yet to be commissioned due to non-availa bility of transmission 
lines rendering idle assets created at a cost of `` `` 10.19 crore.  
In February 2009, Chandigarh Administration accorde d administrative 
approval for construction of a 66/11KVMVA Grid Sub- Station (sub-station) 
at Sarangpur, Chandigarh at an estimated cost of ` 9.89 crore. Subsequently, 
in November 2009, Electricity Department, Union Ter ritory, Chandigarh 
(EDUTC) entered into an agreement with Power Grid C orporation of India 
Limited (PGCIL) for the work at an estimated cost of ` 9.87 crore. 
As per the agreement, construction of the sub-stati on was to be completed 
within 18 months from the date of release of first instalment or signing of the 
agreement whichever was later. As the first instalm ent was released in June 
2010, the project should have been completed by Nov ember 2011. This date 
would be extended if EDUTC did not fulfil its oblig ations such as obtaining 
Right of Way and forest/environmental clearances. 
EDUTC released 
` 9.48 crore for the project to PGCIL during the per iod from 
June 2010 to February 2013. Of this amount, ` 7.48 crore had been released 
by the time land had been handed over to PGCIL in J anuary 2012. The sub-
station was completed and handed over by PGCIL to E DUTC in September 
2016. The total completion cost of the sub-station was ` 10.19 crore. In 
addition, ` 45.85 lakh was spent on construction of a boundary  wall around 
the sub-station.  
Audit scrutiny of records revealed the following:  
(i)  Land for the sub-station was earmarked by the Chand igarh 
Administration in April 2010. However, possession o f the land was handed 
over to EDUTC/PGCIL only in January 2012 i.e. after  two and half years of 
signing of the agreement with PGCIL and 20 months a fter earmarking of the 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
22 
land. This was despite issue of several reminders 20  by PGCIL to EDUTC for 
handing over the site for the sub-station.  
(ii)  A dispute was raised by the Wakf Board (Board) in S eptember 2012 
on the title of a part of the land handed over by the Chandigarh Administration 
for the sub-station. Though this part of the land b elonging to the Board had 
been exempted from land acquisition, the Architect Department of the 
Chandigarh Administration failed to depict this in the layout plan for the site.  
As a result, critical work relating to the sub-stat ion was planned on the 
disputed portion of the land. These works could be taken up only after the 
dispute with the Board was resolved in February 201 5. Failure of the 
Administration to taken into account the dispute wi th the Wakf Board 
contributed to the delay in erection of the sub-station by over four years. 
(iii)  Installation of 66 KV transmission lines and associ ated works was a 
critical requirement for operationalizing the sub-s tation. The Chandigarh 
Administration gave administrative approval and exp enditure sanction for 
works relating to construction of 66 KV line bays a nd overhead transmission 
lines in December 2012 and January 2013 and issued Letters of Intent (March 
2013) to PGCIL. It also released 
` 17.67 lakh and ` 46.76 lakh for these 
works as advance to the company without any formal agreement/work order.  
Later, due to the alignment of the transmission lin es crossing the proposed 
Metro line, these works were not taken forward. EDU TC had not catered for 
this aspect despite advice of the Chandigarh Admini stration to do so while 
issuing the administrative approval and expenditure sanction. 
(iv)  Tendering for installation of the 66 KV transmissio n line was re-
initiated in September 2015 and the work was allott ed in November 2016 to 
M/s REC Power Distribution Company Ltd. at an estim ated cost of ` 88 lakh. 
The work was to be completed within 18 months from the date of release of 
first instalment/or signing of agreement whichever was earlier. Though 
several reminders had been issued to the company, w ork was yet to 
commence as of December 2017. In the absence of the  66 KV transmission 
lines, the sub-station though erected in September 2016 could not be tested 
and commissioned.  
(v)  An inspection undertaken by the Electrical Inspecto r in September 
2016 disclosed deterioration in the condition of th e installed equipment and in 
site conditions. Besides, EDUTC had shifted (Septem ber 2016) one 
transformer of 20-MVA from this site to another sub -station. These had the 
potential of further impeding commissioning of the sub-station. 
                                                           
20  Letters dated 26 February 2010, 05 August 2010, 04  January 2011, 25 July 2011, 
17 August 2011 and 15 September 2011. 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
23 
EDUTC stated (June 2017) that the land allotted for  the sub-station could not 
be utilised due to land dispute with Wakf Board. Th e delay in taking up the 
work for the 66 KVA transmission line was attribute d to change in scope of 
work due to alignment of the Metro route crossing t he proposed transmission 
line. 
The reply is not tenable as the Chandigarh Administ ration should have taken 
due cognizance of the matter raised by the Wakf Boa rd and ensured 
encumbrance free site for the sub-station either at  the same location or 
alternate location so as to take forward the projec t for which funds were 
released.  Moreover, the fact that the metro line w as coming in the way of the 
transmission lines was known to the Administration while giving 
administrative approval and expenditure sanction for the work. 
The matter was reported to the Ministry of Home Aff airs, Government of 
India in May 2017; its reply was awaited (December 2017).
 
2.7 Construction of market without establishing via bility 
Chandigarh Administration constructed an air condit ioned Fish and 
Meat Market at a cost `` `` 1.53 crore even though viability of the market 
was in doubt. The entire integrated market has been  lying vacant for 
the past eight years due to lack of response from vendors. 
Chandigarh Administration undertook a project to es tablish a modern air 
conditioned Fish and Meat Market at an estimated co st of ` 98.75 lakh. The 
construction of the Integrated Fish and Meat Market  was completed at a total 
cost of ` 1.53 crore. The wholesale and retail booths along with a chilled room 
in the complex was handed over to the Municipal Cor poration of Chandigarh 
(MCC) in two stages in May 2007 and December 2009 respectively. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that during studies and con sultation undertaken by the 
Chandigarh Administration and the MCC to establish the feasibility of 
establishing a fish market, the Agriculture Ministr y had expressed the view 
that the project would not be economically viable a s the cost of fish would be 
more than that of other fish outlets in the city. T he concept of the project was 
thereafter broadened to include a meat market also.  However, no reference 
was made to the Municipal Corporation for its viability after inclusion of meat 
markets.  Fish dealers in Chandigarh had also opine d that they would not be 
able to take up shops in such a market. The Fish an d Meat Market has been 
lying vacant since its construction due to lack of response from vendors 
during auctions. 
MCC stated (May 2017) that auctions to rent out the  Fish and Meat Market 
was conducted five times between April 2010 and Jul y 2015 but were not 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
24 
successful. MCC added (May 2017) that it was now pr oposed to convert the 
market from a fish and meat market into a general t rade market and a decision 
was awaited (November 2017). 
Thus, failure of Chandigarh Administration to prope rly assess the viability of 
the Fish and Meat Market before undertaking its con struction resulted in the 
market constructed at a cost of 
` 1.53 crore remaining vacant for the past eight 
years. 
The matter was referred to the Ministry in July 201 7; its reply was awaited as 
of December 2017. 
Union Territory of Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Ha veli 
Administration  
2.8 Deposit works entrusted to Omnibus Industrial D evelopment 
Corporation (OIDC) of Daman & Diu (D&D) and Dadra &  Nagar 
Haveli (DNH) Ltd 
During 2011-17, 17 Departments/Autonomous Bodies of  the UTs of  
D&D and DNH entrusted 44 deposit works and deposite d `` `` 528.87 crore 
with OIDC. Funds were released in many cases to OID C in advance of 
requirements in contravention of the Receipt and Payment Rules and the 
CPWD Manual leading to idling of funds. OIDC awarde d works without 
adequate planning and ensuring availability of clea rances and 
encumbrance free land which led to inordinate delay s and wasteful 
expenditure. Though OIDC followed the CPWD Manual f or its works, 
31 deposit works costing `` `` 454.74 crore were entrusted to it without 
entering into a MOU as result of which scope of wor k, payment schedule 
and milestones for completion were left undefined.   
2.8.1 Introduction 
Daman and Diu (D&D) and Dadra and Nagar Haveli (DNH ) are Union 
Territories (UTs) without legislature and are administered by an Administrator 
under the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), Governmen t of India (GOI). 
Funds for developmental works are provided to the U Ts through the Union 
Government budget. 
The Omnibus Industrial Development Corporation (OID C) of Daman & Diu 
and Dadra & Nagar Haveli Ltd. was incorporated on 27 March 1992 under the 
Companies Act, 1956, to carry out the business of p roviding financial 
assistance to industrial enterprises and act as the  Infrastructure Development 
Corporation in the UTs of D&D and DNH. OIDC also ex ecutes deposit works 
entrusted by various departments of both the UTs in  accordance with the 
provisions of the Central Public Works Department ( CPWD) Manual and 
Codes. The Administrator of UT of D&D is the Chairm an of OIDC and the 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
25 
Development Commissioner is its Managing Director. During 2011-17, 44 
deposit works 21  were entrusted to OIDC by 17 Departments/Autonomou s 
Bodies of UTs of D&D and DNH and ` 528.87 crore was deposited with 
OIDC for these works. 
An audit was conducted to ascertain whether the fun ds deposited against the 
works entrusted were in accordance with rules, regu lations and other 
instructions issued by the Government of India (GOI ) and the Administration 
of UTs of D&D and DNH from time to time and whether  OIDC ensured 
timely completion of works.  The audit covered the period from 2011-12 to 
2016-17. Records of 39 out of 41 deposit works 
22  entrusted to OIDC during 
2011-16 were examined. No expenditure was incurred on three works 
entrusted during 2016-17 as these were still in the tender/RFP stage. Out of 39 
works examined, 23 works were completed, nine works  were in progress, six 
works were dropped by the UT Administration and one  work was decided to 
be executed through PWD-Daman. 
2.8.2  Audit findings 
2.8.2.1  Idling of funds 
The CPWD Manual stipulates that works of government  departments are to be 
carried out by CPWD through issue of authorizations . In the case of deposit 
works funded entirely from government grants and where receipt of deposits is 
assured, 33.33 per cent of the estimated cost of the work may be deposited  in 
advance. The Receipt and Payment (R&P) Rules, 1983,  provides that no 
money shall be drawn from government accounts unles s it is required for 
immediate disbursement. It is not permissible to draw money in anticipation of 
demands or to prevent lapse of budget grant. 
Audit noted that six departments of D&D and DNH dep osited 
` 56.57 crore in 
advance for 10 works with OIDC before placing work orders between April 
                                                           
21  UT of D & D : (i) PWD Daman: 12 works, (ii) PWD-Diu: 03 works, (iii) Forest 
Daman:02 works, (iv) Forest Diu: 01 work, (v) Touri sm Daman: 01 work (vi) District 
Panchayat, Daman:01 work (vii) Rashtriya Madhyamik Siksha Abhiyan (RMSA), 
Daman: 01 work (viii) District Industries Centre, D aman: 01 work and (ix) Director of 
Health, D & D: 01 work. 
 UT of D&NH  : (i) PWD Road: 06 works (ii) PWD Building : 03 wo rks, (iii) PWD 
Electricals: 03 works (iv) Silvassa Municipal Counc il (SMC) : 03 works, (v) Tourism 
Department, Silvassa:01 work (vi) Institute of Hote l Management, Silvassa: 02 works, 
(vii) Dr. A P J Abdul Kalam Govt. College: 02 works and (viii) DRDA Silvassa: 01 work. 
22  One work pertaining to maintenance of UT Bhavan at  Delhi was transferred to PWD-
Daman and hence not examined. Work of protection wa ll of Tourism Department, Daman 
had been examined separately and an audit para on t he case was included (para no. 2.5) in 
the CAG Report No.32 of 2015. 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
26 
2011 and February 2016. The funds deposited in adva nce in each case ranged 
from 118 per cent  to 831 per cent of the tendered cost as against the provision 
of 33.33 per cent provided for in the CPWD manual. The advances paid 
exceeded even the tendered cost by ` 23.23 crore with the excess paid over 
tendered cost ranging from 18 to 731 per cent. The funds deposited into OIDC 
remained idle in nine out of 10 cases as detailed in the Table No. 5 below: 
Table No. 5 Idling of Funds  
Sl. 
No.  
Name of work/UT 
department Audit finding 
1. Consultancy work 
of six bridges 
 
 
PWD-Daman 
PWD Daman entrusted the work to OIDC at a cost of ` 6 crore and 
transferred (July 2011) 100 per cent  of the estimated cost to OIDC. OIDC 
incurred an expenditure of ` 3.23 crore till August 2016. The balance deposit 
of ` 2.77 crore has been lying idle with OIDC (October 2017) for almost six 
years.  
2. Construction of 
RCC storm water 
drain with utility 
trench and 
providing paver 
block on both side 
of road from 
Bamanpuja check 
post to Dholar 
Junction and from 
Bamnipuja check 
post to Bamnipuja 
gate 
PWD-Daman 
PWD-Daman transferred ` 13.01 crore in March 2012 and October 2012 as an 
advance equal to the estimated cost of the work. Th e work was awarded in 
November 2012 by OIDC to a contractor at a tendered  cost of ` 10.13 crore 
with stipulated date of completion of September 201 3. Thus, PWD-Daman 
transferred an excess amount of 
` 2.88 crore ( ` 13.01 crore - ` 10.13 crore) 
before placement of work order. During execution of  the work, certain site 
related constraints emerged and the scope of the wo rk was curtailed (March 
2014) and tendered cost was revised to ` 7.95 crore.  The work was finally 
completed at a cost of ` 6.65 crore in March 2014. The excess deposit of 
` 6.36 crore was refunded 23 only in May 2015. This resulted in idling of 
Government funds for 14 months. 
3. Construction of 
Prefabricated 
portable cabins at 
sea beaches of 
Daman 
PWD-Daman 
On the basis of estimate prepared by OIDC, PWD-Dama n transferred 
(February 2016) the total estimated cost of the wor k of ` 0.90 crore in 
advance. Due to non-availability of land, the work was finally dropped and 
` 0.89 crore was returned in November 2016 to PWD-Da man after keeping 
these funds out of Government account for nine months. 
4. Implementation of 
water supply 
scheme, Dunetha, 
Nani Daman 
 
PWD-Daman 
 
PWD-Daman deposited (April 2013) the entire estimat ed cost of the work of 
` 19.92 crore in advance. The total expenditure incu rred on the work was 
` 10.57 crore as on July 2017 and the work was 90 per cent  complete. Thus, 
Government funds amounting to ` 9.35 crore was kept blocked for a period of 
52 months (July 2017). 
5. Construction of 
protection wall for 
anti-sea erosion 
from Jetty to Light 
House 
 
PWD-Daman  
 
PWD-Daman transferred ` 1.89 crore as 100 per cent  advance in December 
2011. OIDC incurred an expenditure of ` 0.47 crore on consultancy and 
establishment charges against the advance paid up t o July 2017. UT 
Administration decided (December 2016) not to execu te the work with OIDC 
and decided to get it done through PWD. As PWD-Dama n did not foreclose 
the work even after repeated requests by OIDC betwe en March and October 
2017, remaining funds amounting to ` 1.42 crore was lying idle with the 
OIDC (November 2017) for almost six years. 
                                                           
23  `  5.26 crore was transferred to construction of brid ge with permission of UT 
Administration and remaining ` 1.10 crore was refunded to PWD-Daman.  

Report No. 3 of 2018 
27 
6. Construction of 
bridge connecting 
Vanakbara in DIU 
and Kotda in 
Gujarat 
 
PWD-Diu  
PWD-DIU transferred (October 2012) ` 10 crore without assessing the 
immediate requirement for the work and more than th ree years before OIDC 
issued work order for consultancy for the work for ` 1.50 crore. The work was 
foreclosed in November 2016 after incurring expendi ture of 
` 0.32 crore as 
the land in Kotada (Gujarat) could not be acquired.  The remaining amount of 
` 9.68 crore has remained idle in the accounts of OI DC from September 2012 
till date (November 2017). 
7 
& 
8. 
Construction of two 
Inspection Huts at 
Daman and three 
Inspection Huts at 
Diu 
Forest 
Department D&D 
The works were entrusted (December 2015/February 20 16) to OIDC and 
` 1.43 crore (Daman ` 0.57 crore and Diu ` 0.86 crore) which was 100 per 
cent  of the estimated cost was transferred to the Corpo ration. OIDC later 
prepared revised estimates for these works of ` 0.74 crore and ` 1.16 crore 
respectively in April/May 2016. These works were later dropped on directions 
of the Administrator in June 2017.  OIDC continued to hold the advance 
received by it awaiting consent for returning the s ame from the Forest 
Department, Daman & Diu leading to idling of funds of ` 1.43 crore for 
almost 21 months. 
9. Construction of 
Protection wall at 
Kadaya Village 
(Phase-II & III) 
 
District Panchayat 
(DP), Daman 
Phase I of the work was completed (November 2012) b y the DP Daman at a 
cost of ` 0.96 crore. Phase II & III of the work were entrusted (February 2013) 
to OIDC by DP Daman for which a deposit of ` 2.09 crore was made. OIDC 
issued (November 2015) work order for consultancy f or marine and 
meteorological information, conceptual layouts for alternative site and 
preparation of detailed estimate, etc. at a cost of  ` 0.25 crore. The work was 
not taken forward (December 2016) by OIDC after inc urring expenditure of 
` 0.12 crore on consultancy without adducing any rea son and remaining funds 
of ` 1.96 crore was returned (January 2017) to the DP-D aman. Thus, release 
of fund without immediate requirement led to idling  of ` 1.96 crore for 47 
months.  
Thus, failure of UT Administration to comply with t he provisions of the 
CPWD Manual and Receipt and Payment Rules led to re lease of funds in 
advance of requirements and idling of government fu nds amounting to  
` 56.57 crore for prolonged periods which only benef itted OIDC and did not 
serve the stated objective for which the funds were released. 
2.8.2.2 Non-compliance with codal provisions 
(a) Release of funds without Administrative Approva l and 
Expenditure Sanction 
As per paras 2.1 and 2.4 of the CPWD Manual 2012, no work should normally 
be commenced or any liability incurred thereon unti l an administrative 
approval has been obtained, a properly prepared det ailed estimate has been 
technically sanctioned and necessary expenditure sa nction has been accorded 
and allotment of funds made. Expenditure sanction i s to be accorded by the 
administrative Ministry/Department to indicate that  funds for the project/work 
have been provided and liability can be incurred . 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
28 
Audit noted that the UT Administration released fun ds amounting to  
` 57.70 crore to OIDC eight to 33 months prior to gr ant of administrative 
approval as detailed in the Table No. 6 below. 
Table No. 6 Release of funds without Administrative Approval  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the work/UT 
department Audit finding 
1. Bridge from Village 
Magarwada to 
Kachigam on 
Damanganga river 
(PWD-Daman)  
PWD Daman entrusted (June 2011) the work to OIDC 
and transferred ` 15 crore in December 2012 and ` 20 
crore in September 2013. The Administration accorde d 
AA&ES for ` 47.89 crore only in February 2015.  
2. Construction of Parallel 
bridge at Ghoghla, Diu 
(PWD-Diu) 
PWD Diu entrusted the work to OIDC in January 2012 
and transferred `
 7.70 crore in February 2012. The 
Administration accorded AA&ES only in August 2013.  
3. 03 High level bridges at 
Athal, Rakholi and 
Piparia at DNH (PWD-
Road, Silvassa) 
PWD (Road) Silvassa entrusted the deposit work to O IDC 
in July 2011 and transferred ` 15 crore 24  in March 2012 
for construction of the three bridges. The Administ ration 
however accorded AA&ES only in December 2012. 
In four out of the five cases, funds were released in the months of February 
and March indicating that the purpose of releasing the funds ahead of grant of 
administrative approval and financial sanction was to prevent the budget 
allocation from lapsing. However, release of funds without prior 
administrative approval and expenditure sanction re sulted in bypassing an 
important element of budgetary control and financial discipline.  
(b) Award of work of Fishery Harbour and Minor Port  at Daman and Diu 
without obtaining revised AA & ES  
As per para 2.3.5 of CPWD Works Manual, excess of u p to 10 per cent  of the 
amount of the administrative approval may be author ized by officers of the 
CPWD up to their respective powers of technical sanction.  In case this limit is 
exceeded, a revised administrative approval must be  obtained from the 
authority competent to approve the cost so enhanced.   
PWD Daman proposed (February 2012) construction of a fishery harbor at 
Daman District and made a provision of ` 81 crore 25  during the 12 th Five Year 
Plan (2012-17). An amount ` one crore was provided during 2012-13 for 
preparation of feasibility report, detailed plan, e stimates and drawings of the 
work. PWD Daman deposited (December 2012) ` five crore with OIDC 
against estimate of consultancy work of ` 3.47 crore and the remaining 
amount of ` 1.53 crore was earmarked for construction activity . OIDC 
                                                           
24  Athal bridge: ` six crore; Rakholi bridge: ` five crore; and Piparia bridge: ` four crore. 
25  2012-13: ` one crore, 2013-14: ` 20.00 crore, 2014-15: ` 20.00 crore, 2015-16: ` 20.00 
crore, 2016-17: ` 20.00 crore. 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
29 
thereafter (May 2012) uploaded a Request for Propos al (RFP) for consultancy 
relating to “Construction of Fisheries Harbour and Minor port”. On the basis 
of the technical bid 26 , it issued a work order for consultancy (January 2 013) to 
a Firm at a cost of ` 14.22 crore against the estimated cost of ` 3.47 crore.  
Audit observed that the contract was concluded with out obtaining revised 
administrative approval and expenditure sanction fr om the UT Administration 
in terms of the CPWD Manual though the cost of the work had increased by 
410 per cent . 
2.8.2.3 Entrustment of work without ensuring encumb rance free 
site 
As per para 3.3 of the CPWD Manual, no deposit of f unds should be accepted 
by the works agency until an estimate has been sent  to the client after fully 
ascertaining all necessary site details, technical feasibility, topographical 
details, ownership of land, etc. Further, as per pa ra 4.2 of the CPWD Manual 
2012, preparation of detailed estimates, drawings a nd designs should not be 
taken up until an assurance is obtained from the De partment/Ministry about 
availability of encumbrance free site. 
Audit noticed delays ranging from three months to o ver three years’  in 
execution of works entrusted to OIDC in 23 (15 comp leted and eight work in 
progress) out of a total of 39 cases. These delays were attributable to non-
provision of encumbrance free sites, changes in des ign at later stage, shortage 
of labour, change in working conditions, shortage of funds, etc. Six illustrative 
instances are discussed in Table No. 7 below: 
Table No. 7 Delay in execution of works  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
work/UT 
department 
Audit finding 
1. Construction of 
bridge across river 
Kalai from village 
Bamanipuja to 
village Pali”  
 
(PWD-Daman) 
 
PWD Daman entrusted (June 2011) the work to OIDC an d 
deposited (October 2012) ` 8.63 crore. The work was awarded 
(January 2013) to a contractor at a cost of ` 6.72 crore with 
stipulated date of completion of May 2014. Land for  the work was 
not acquired and written consent of the land holder s were also not 
obtained before entrustment of the work. The design  and span of 
the bridge was changed during execution of the work  due to re-
allotment of land and revised estimate was prepared  and 
sanctioned (July 2015) for ` 10.08 crore and PWD-Daman 
deposited (December 2015) additional amount of ` 1.45 crore. 
Clearance for removal of trees and electrical poles  were taken 
during execution of the work (November 2015). The w ork was 
completed in December 2015 at the cost of ` 9.14 crore. Thus, 
non-acquisition of  land before start of work  led to need for 
change in designs and span of the bridge resulting in both delay of 
18 months and cost increase of ` 2.42 crore. 
                                                           
26  Two bids were received. 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
30 
2. Water supply pipe 
line from 
Madhuban Dam to 
different tank at 
Magarwada 
 
 
PWD-Daman 
Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation accorded (N ovember 
2011) AA & ES for the work at an estimated cost of 
` 45.27 
crore. PWD Daman entrusted (November 2011) the work  to 
OIDC before taking necessary permission from Irriga tion 
Department (Government of Gujarat), Railways, Natio nal 
Highway Authority of India (NHAI), GAIL, Gujarat Ga s Ltd, 
Forest Department, etc. and deposited ` 19 crore with OIDC in 
December 2011. The work was awarded (May 2012) to a  
contractor at a cost of ` 49.32 crore with stipulated date of 
completion of May 2014. The work was only 93 per cent 
complete after incurring expenditure of ` 45.97 crore as of July 
2017. As necessary permissions were not obtained pr ior to award 
of work, the work was delayed by 37 months.  
3. “Underground 
Sewerage Scheme 
for Silvassa, 
DNH” 
 
Silvassa 
Municipal 
Council. 
SMC entrusted (September 2011) the work to OIDC wit hout 
making provision for land for the Sewerage Treatmen t Plant 
(STP) and pumping stations and deposited (November 2011) 
` 12.94 crore. The work was awarded (July 2013) to a contractor 
at a cost of ` 26.89 crore with stipulated date of completion of 
January 2015. Land for the STP was allotted after a ward of the 
work which became subject to litigation which was f inalized only 
in June 2014. Further, the design of the STP was up graded 
(December 2014) at an extra estimated cost of ` 7.41 crore. The 
location of the pumping stations were also changed during 
execution of work and SMC failed to provide encumbr ance free 
site to OIDC till May 2017.  Thus, only 92 per cent of the work 
had been completed after incurring an expenditure o f ` 30.66 
crore as of July 2017.  
4. Construction of 
office of the 
Conservator of 
Forest 
Department, 
Daman 
(Forest 
Department 
Daman) 
Forest Department, Daman entrusted the work in Octo ber 2015 
without a clear site and made a deposit of `
 1.34 crore in 
November 2015. OIDC awarded the work in May 2016 at  a cost 
of ` 0.97 crore with stipulated date of completion of Ma y 2017. 
Demolition of old structure and cutting of trees we re done in 
November 2016 and soil investigation report and str uctural proof 
design were taken from Forest department after awar ding the 
work (September 2016). Hence, the work was not star ted till 
November 2016. The value of work completed was only  ` 0.30 
crore (31 per cent ) in July 2017 even after the stipulated date of 
completion. 
5. Consultancy work 
for six bridges 
PWD Daman 
OIDC awarded consultancy work for four bridges 27  entrusted 
(October 2011) to OIDC to a company for preparation  of DPR 
and estimates at a cost of ` 1.76 crore (October 2011) considering 
consultancy fee of each bridge to be 1/4 th  ( ` 0.44 crore) of the 
tendered cost. Audit observed that out of the four bridges, work of 
two bridges 28  was dropped in September 2013 after preparation of  
DPR and estimates due to non-acquisition of land fo r these two 
bridges. OIDC had made payment of ` 143.41 lakh to the 
consultant for preparation of DPR of these four bri dges (January 
                                                           
27  (i) Construction of bridge from Jampore, Moti Daman to Kalai Village in Gujarat across 
Kalai River, (ii) Construction of bridge from Magar wada, Moti Daman to Kachigam, 
Nani Daman across Damanganga river, (iii) Construct ion of bridge across Kalai river 
connecting Pali Village in Gujarat State and Bamnip uja in Daman and (iv) Construction 
of bridge across Kolak river connecting Udwada vill age in Gujarat State and Patalia in 
Daman. 
28  Construction of bridge from Jampore, Moti Daman to  Kalai Village in Gujarat across 
Kalai River and Construction of bridge from Kadaiya , Nani Daman to Kolak Village in 
Gujarat state across Kolak River. 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
31 
2012 to August 2016). Thus, entrustment of work to OIDC and 
further award of consultancy work without land bein g available 
for 2 bridges led to expenditure of ` 71.70 lakh (being 50 per cent 
of the cost of ` 143.41 lakh) on consultancy being rendered 
wasteful. 
6. Scheme for 
upgradation of 
industrial 
infrastructure 
under UT Plan, 
Daman and Diu, 
 
District 
Industrial 
Centre, Daman 
District Industry Centre (DIC) Daman initiated a sc heme for 
"Upgradation of industrial infrastructure" at a cos t of ` 10 crore 
for the 12
th Five Year Plan @ ` two crore per year.  DIC entrusted 
(July 2012) the scheme to OIDC and deposited ` two crore for the 
plan year 2012-13 without ascertaining the site det ails of the 
existing  industrial area and without entering into  MOU with 
industries as envisage in the scheme guidelines. Un til July 2017, 
OIDC could only complete three works at a cost of ` 0.81 crore. 
One work which was awarded in September 2016 was he ld up 
after incurring expenditure of ` 6.05 lakh (July 2017) due to land 
related problems. Thus, only ` 0.9629 crore could be utilized (July 
2017) out of provision of ` 10 crore for FYP 2012-17 due to site 
related problems. 
2.8.2.4  Lack of monitoring by Departments of depos it works 
(a)  Absence of MOU with OIDC 
The CPWD made (June 2006) signing of a Memorandum o f Understanding 
(MOU) with client departments compulsory for all de posit works having 
estimated cost of more than ` two crore as a control framework to monitor 
various aspects of the work. The MOU introduced by CPWD provided inter 
alia for a schedule of activities, scope of work, fund flow details, project 
completion milestones and departmental charges leviable. 
Audit observed that though OIDC was required to fol low provisions of the 
CPWD manual, it did not sign any MOU with the conce rned departments for 
31 works each costing more than ` two crore and totaling ` 454.74 crore. 
Thus, milestones crucial to ensuring that works wer e executed within agreed 
time lines and within approved costs were not fixed  while entrusting the work 
to OIDC. In absence of a MOU, the departments could  neither monitor fund 
utilization nor the physical progress of works entrusted to OIDC. 
Absence of MOUs and consequent lack of a suitable m onitoring mechanism, 
contributed to the lack of synchronization of relea se of advance with actual 
commencement of work and inordinate delays in compl etion of works and 
settlements of accounts.  
PWD Daman Diu and Silvassa stated (November 2017) that progress of works 
was monitored through periodical meetings and site inspections by the Chief 
Engineer/Executive Engineer (November 2017).  
                                                           
29 ` Nine lakh incurred on tender, advertisement, ` 81 lakh completed work, ` six lakh  
incomplete work .
 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
32 
The reply is not acceptable as there was no binding  mechanism available for 
monitoring funds flow, scope of work and progress of works. 
(b) Failure to seek quarterly report on deposits an d expenditure 
As per para 3.6 of CPWD Works Manual, 2012, Executi ve Engineers (EE) are 
required to send a quarterly report to the clients showing the amounts 
deposited and the expenditure incurred against each  work for settlement of 
accounts. Audit observed that quarterly reports of expenditure were not sent 
by OIDC to the concerned departments with respect t o any of the deposit 
works.  Further, the Departments had also not asked  for progress reports as 
envisaged under the CPWD manual. 
(c) Retention of savings on works by OIDC 
The Silvassa Municipal Corporation (SMC) entrusted (September 2011) the 
work of “Water Supply Scheme for Silvassa & Amli To wnship in UT of 
DNH” to OIDC and deposited ` 29.22 crore (November 2011 and December 
2012) with a stipulation that interest earned on th e advance deposit would be 
credited to the Government. OIDC credited interest of ` 6.02 crore on advance 
deposit till completion of work. The work was compl eted in May 2016 at a 
cost of ` 32.68 crore but OIDC failed to settle the account and refund the 
savings of ` 2.56 crore to the SMC as of November 2017. 
(d) Non regularization of excess expenditure  
As per para no. 51.2 of the CPWD Manual, sanction o f Government is 
required to regularize excess expenditure. Audit ob served that OIDC incurred 
excess expenditure of ` 3.49 crore in seven out of the 39 works completed 
between July 2014 to March 2017 which remained to b e regularized 
(November 2017) due to non-submission of settlement  accounts for periods 
ranging from eight months to over three years after completion of work. 
2.8.3  Conclusion  
The Departments failed to ensure adherence to the c odal provisions governing 
release of funds to OIDC for execution of projects as deposit works. Funds 
were released far in excess of actual requirement w hich resulted in idling of 
` 56.57 crore that seemed to serve only to sustain t he Corporation without 
achieving their primary objective of creation of th e envisaged infrastructural 
assets. Funds amounting to ` 57.70 crore were released without prior 
administrative approval and expenditure sanction th ereby undermining 
budgetary control and discipline. Projects were del ayed for prolonged periods 
as codal requirement of ensuring availability of en cumbrance free sites before 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
33 
award of work was not adhered to. Finally, institut ional and procedural 
mechanism for monitoring purpose were absent. 
The matter was referred to the Ministry in Septembe r 2017; its reply was 
awaited (December 2017). 
2.9 Irregular grant to District Panchayat for touri sm  
UT Administration of Daman & Diu irregularly sancti oned grant in aid 
of `` `` 1.35 crore for tourism to District Panchayat Daman even though 
tourism was not a subject entrusted to PRIs. As the  project for which 
the funds were released was not even finalized, the  grants remained 
unutilized. Instead of promptly returning the funds  to the Government, 
it was parked outside government accounts for more than four years 
depriving the Government of the opportunity of util izing the funds for 
other development activities. 
Tourism is not included in the 29 subjects entruste d to Panchayati Raj 
Institutions (PRI) under 11th Schedule of the Const itution. It is also not a 
subject allotted to the District Panchayat (DP) of Daman in terms of the 
second schedule of the Daman and Diu Panchayat Regu lation, 2012, 
promulgated by the Ministry of Law and Justice in July 2012. Thus, PRIs were 
not eligible to get grants-in-aid for the purpose of tourism. 
Audit noted that the UT Administration had sanction ed and released Grants in 
Aid (GIA) of ` one crore in October 2012 for development of water  sports at 
Jampore Beach, Daman and Nagoa Beach, Diu and ` 35 lakh in September 
2013 for development of various recreational infras tructure to District 
Panchayat, Daman. In terms of the sanction orders, the entire amount was to 
be utilized within one year from the date of sancti on and any portion of the 
grant not required was to be returned. However, the se funds were kept idle in 
the accounts of the DP Daman (July 2017) without incurring any expenditure.  
DP, Daman stated (July, 2017) that the GIA remained  unutilized as the project 
could not be finalized. It added that the DP Daman is now proposing to return 
the unutilized grant to the Tourism Department. 
Thus, the UT Administration of Daman & Diu irregula rly sanctioned GIA of 
` 1.35 crore for tourism to DP Daman even though tou rism was not a subject 
entrusted to PRIs. Further, the funds remained unut ilized as the projects were 
not even finalized.  Instead of promptly returning the funds to the 
Government, they remained parked outside government  accounts for more 
than four years depriving the Government of the opp ortunity of utilizing the 
funds for other development activities. 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
34 
The matter was referred to the Ministry in July 201 7; its reply was awaited 
(December 2017). 
2.10 Inadmissible and unjustified payment to a cont ractor 
Failure of DMC to recover the cost of its regular workers deployed with 
a contractor led to inadmissible payments of `` `` 33.22 lakh to the 
contractor. Besides it allowed additional payment f or items of work 
that were already committed in the original agreeme nt leading to 
unjustified payment of `` `` 47.88 lakh to the contractor. 
The Daman Municipal Corporation (DMC) entered into an agreement 
(February 2013) for outsourcing the work of managem ent of Municipal solid 
waste to a contractor at a cost of ` 2.30 crore for the period from February 
2013 to January 2014. The validity of the agreement  was later extended by the 
DMC upto 15 December 2015.  
As per the conditions of the agreement, the contrac tor was required to engage 
regular and casual workers of the DMC for sanitatio n work and the pay and 
wages of these workers would be recovered in accord ance with the Minimum 
Wages Act from the payments due to the contractor.  Further, the contractor in 
its action plan submitted along with the tender, committed to conduct a special 
cleaning drive every week on a single road includin g removal of 
advertisements, paint jobs, unwanted grass and trees, etc. 
Audit noticed that in October 2013, the DMC decided  to discontinue 
deduction of the wages of regular workers from the contractor’s bill. Though it 
had also been decided that the services of regular workers would be withdrawn 
later, DMC continued to attach 15 to 16 of their re gular workers with the 
contractor during the validity of the contract. On account of this it incurred 
additional expenditure of 
` 33.22 lakh which in terms of the tender was 
recoverable from the contractor. 
Further, while renewing the contract from February 2014 till January 2015, 
DMC entrusted work consisting of cutting grass, bus hes from the footpaths 
and cleaning of DMC’s open ground spaces to the con tractor at an additional 
cost of 
` 3,99,050 per month and paid ` 47.88 lakh between February 2014 
and January 2015 for the same. The entrustment of t his work as additional 
scope was not justified as the contractor had alrea dy committed to conduct 
special cleaning drive every week on single road in cluding removal of 
advertisements, paint jobs, unwanted grass and tree s, etc. without extra 
consideration in terms of the action plan submitted  by him along with his 
tender in 2013.  Moreover, the charges approved for  the additional work were 
apparently not based on an assessment of extra area  to be covered and of 
resources to be deployed as no records relating to measurement of additional 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
35 
area covered and mobilization of additional resourc es in support of payment 
could be made available to audit. Subsequently, dur ing the second extension 
of the contract from February 2015 neither was this  additional work 
incorporated in the contract nor was any separate order given to the contractor. 
The D&D Administration stated (September 2017) that  if the DMC had 
insisted on recovering the salary and wages of its permanent and casual labour 
from the contractor’s bill there were likelihood that the contractor would either 
degrade the quality of his services or abandon the contract. Hence, DMC 
decided not to deduct the salary and wages of its p ermanent workers from the 
contractor’s bills.  DMC also held that award of ad ditional scope of work was 
in accordance with the Memorandum of Agreement (MoA ) signed (February 
2013) with the contractor. 
The reply is not tenable as the contractor’s bid wa s based on tender conditions 
which stipulated that recovery of pay and wages of DMC employees attached 
with the contractor would be made from the payments  due to the contractor. 
Stopping deduction on account of pay and wages of r egular workers of DMC 
attached to the contractor thus amounts to a post tender revision of the contract 
that benefitted the contractor. Further, even thoug h it had been decided to 
remove the regular workers, DMC continued to deploy  them with the 
contractor without being compensated for the same. The stand of DMC that 
entrustment of additional work to the contractor wa s in accordance with the 
MoA is also not correct as in terms of the action p lan submitted by the 
contractor such services were to be performed as a special drive each week 
without any remuneration.  
Thus, failure of DMC to recover the cost of its per manent workers deployed 
with the contractor as well as allowing additional payments for items of works 
already committed under the terms of the original a greement led to unjustified 
payment of 
` 81.10 lakh to the contractor. 
The matter was communicated to the Ministry in June  2017; its reply was 
awaited as of December 2017. 
2.11 Avoidable expenditure due to demolition and re construction of a 
divider 
Change in technical specification of a road divider  during execution of 
work without due technical approval and its subsequ ent demolition and 
reconstruction in adopting a design similar to the original design 
resulted in avoidable expenditure of `` `` 58.72 lakh. 
As per paragraph 2.5.2 of the CPWD Manual, if mater ial structural alterations 
are contemplated subsequent to accord of technical sanction, orders of the 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
36 
authority which gave technical sanction of the esti mate should be obtained 
even if the alterations do not entail any additiona l expenditure. Further, 
minimum economic life of semi-permanent structures constructed by the 
CPWD has been estimated as 30 years. 
In December 2010, the Superintending Engineer, Publ ic Works Division, 
Daman, accorded Technical Sanction for construction  of a road divider for 
Major District Road (MDR) from Kalaria Junction to Dabhel Check Post at 
Dabhel, Nani Daman.  The divider was 61 cms in heig ht and had two concrete 
sides each of 20/15 cm width with earth filling at the center covering 60 cms. 
In January 2011, the Development Commissioner/ Fina nce Secretary of UT of 
Daman and Diu (D&D) accorded administrative approva l and expenditure 
sanction for 
` 50.80 lakh for the work. 
The work was awarded in March 2011 to a contractor at a cost of ` 40.80 lakh 
with completion time of four months. During execution of the work, the height 
of the divider was enhanced to 90 cms against the a pproved height of 61cms 
whereas the width of the divider was reduced from 1 00/90 cms to 50/30 cms 
on the oral directions of Chief Engineer (CE) PWD d uring a site visit.  The 
work was completed in November 2011 at a cost of ` 44.82 lakh.  
In January 2015, within five years of construction of the divider, a proposal 
was submitted by the Executive Engineer PWD Daman f or removal of the 
divider and reconstruction of a new divider of abou t 60 cms height on the 
same road. This was done following a direction give n by the Development 
Commissioner/Secretary (PWD) during his visit to va rious MDRs in Daman 
district. The proposal included filling of the divi der with soil and provision of 
PVC pipes for weep holes. Technical sanction for de molition and 
reconstruction was accorded in the same month and a dministrative approval 
and expenditure sanction was accorded in March 2015  by the Collector, 
Daman, for ` 89.73 lakh. The work was awarded to another contra ctor in May 
2015 at a cost of ` 58.72 lakh. The work was completed in July 2016 an d an 
amount of ` 57.10 lakh had been paid upto July 2016. 
Audit observed that in contravention of provisions of CPWD manual, PWD 
failed to obtain approval of the competent authorit y for the change in 
specifications which were effected during the cours e of execution of the work.  
Hence, the changes in specifications escaped a prop er assessment of its 
technical implications. Audit examination also reve aled that while submitting 
and approving the proposal, no reasons were cited for demolishing the existing 
divider and reconstructing a new one except that th is was being done on the 
instructions of the Development Commissioner/Secret ary PWD. Further, the 
reconstructed divider was broadly of the same speci fications as the original 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
37 
specifications approved in 2010 in terms of height and width. Hence, the 
decision to change the original design and specifications of the divider in 2011 
was evidently not justified. 
PWD Daman explained (May and August 2017) that the divider had to be 
demolished due to water logging, damage to divider and ribbon development. 
It added that rain water accumulated on the road du e to height of the divider 
and that the divider was broken at many places to p revent water logging. It 
was therefore decided to reconstruct the divider wi th a lower height and with 
provision for proper median gaps for pedestrian movement and for drainage of 
rain water. 
This reply is not acceptable as the issues relating  to water logging and 
measures necessary to overcome it would have been known even at the time of 
the initial technical specification and should have  been taken into account 
while finalizing the design and specifications.  Fu rther, had the height of the 
divider not been increased from 61 cms to 90 cms wi thout proper technical 
assessment and had effective drainage and proper me dian gaps been provided 
initially, demolition of the divider within five ye ars of its construction and re-
construction of a new divider at a cost of 
` 58.72 lakh could have been 
avoided. 
The para was issued to the Ministry in May 2017; its reply was awaited as of 
December 2017. 
 
Union Territory of Lakshadweep Administration (UTLA) 
2.12 Procurement and Distribution of essential comm odities under 
Public Distribution System in Union Territory of Lakshadweep 
Public Distribution System (PDS) in the Union Terri tory of 
Lakshadweep (UTL) involved allocation, transportati on, storage and 
distribution of Superior Kerosene Oil (SKO), sugar and rice. Audit of 
PDS revealed that quantum of SKO and sugar allocate d, lifted and 
distributed was not commensurate with the requireme nts computed 
based on the population of the UT.  The estimated v alue of the excess 
expenditure was `` `` 3.47 crore. Further, a large quantity of damaged ri ce 
valued at `` `` 75.24 lakh was held in godowns without any enquiry about 
the causes of damage and without any action for its  disposal. There was 
also lack of internal controls and meaningful monit oring as accounts 
for PDS items were not prepared since 2014-15, acco unts up to 2013-14 
showed outstanding remittance of sale proceeds from  Island Co-
operative Supply and Marketing Societies and short and delayed 
remittance of sales proceeds by the societies into the government 
account. Further, Vigilance Committees and inspecti on mechanisms 
were either non-functional or non-existent. 
 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
38 
2.12.1 Introduction 
The Public Distribution System (PDS) in Union Terri tory of Lakshadweep 
(UTL) covers procurement, storage and distribution of rice, sugar and Superior 
Kerosene Oil (SKO) to ration card holders through F air Price Shops (FPS). 
PDS is regulated under the Public Distribution (Con trol) Order 2001, the 
Targeted Public Distribution System (Control) Order , 2015, and the National 
Food Security Act (NFSA) 2013. The quantity of rice , sugar and SKO 
required for the islanders is assessed by the Civil  Supplies Department based 
on the number of beneficiaries under different categories and their entitlement. 
The categories of beneficiaries and entitlement for  each PDS item is given in 
Annexe-III . 
2.12.2 Organizational Setup 
The Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer  Affairs (Department), 
UTL, is headed by a Secretary. The Director Food Ci vil Supplies and 
Consumer Affairs is the administrative Head of the Department and has been 
declared as the Chief Civil Supplies Authority in U TL overseeing all 
arrangements relating to allotment, lifting and dis tribution of PDS items in the 
10 islands 30 .  The Deputy Collector/Sub Divisional Officers positioned in each 
island have been declared as the Civil Supplies Aut hority of the island and are 
responsible for implementation of PDS in that island. 
2.12.3 Functioning of PDS in UTL 
PDS in UTL is implemented through Island Co-operati ve Supply and 
Marketing Societies (ICSMS). The Lakshadweep Co-ope rative Marketing 
Federation (LCMF), the apex body of these societies , is entrusted with 
procurement, storage, transportation and distributi on of PDS items. Sugar and 
SKO are procured by LCMF from the Kerala State Civi l Supplies Corporation 
(SUPPLYCO) and Indian Oil Corporation respectively and transported to 
different islands in cargo barges. The Androth Isla nd Co-operative Supply and 
Marketing Society is entrusted with lifting and transportation of PDS rice from 
Food Corporation of India godowns at Androth to dif ferent islands through 
cargo barges.  The ICSMSs distribute these items th rough 39 Fair Price Shops 
(FPS).  The sales proceeds of PDS items for a month  are required to be 
deposited in the government account by the ICSMSs i n the first week of the 
succeeding month. The Food and Civil Supplies Depar tment has a unit at 
Kochi which keeps accounts of PDS items, issues rel ease orders to FCI and 
IOC for rice and SKO, prepares statements of liftin g of PDS items and 
monitors movement of the items to various islands.  
                                                           
30  Agatti, Amini, Andrott, Bitra, Chetlet, Kadmat, Kalpeni, Kavaratti, Kiltan and Minicoy. 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
39 
The budget allocation for the Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs 
Department of UTLA ranged between ` 4.33 crore and ` 6.85 crore and 
expenditure ranged from ` 3.89 crore and ` 6.53 crore during the period  
2012-13 to 2016-17. 
2.12.4 An audit was undertaken of the functioning of the Public Distribution 
System during the period 2013-14 to 2016-17 with th e objective of assessing 
the effectiveness of systems for storage, distribut ion and delivery of essential 
commodities and of the system for ensuring timely r eceipt of dues from 
various societies and marketing federations. 
2.12.5  Audit findings 
2.12.5.1 Distribution, storage and delivery of esse ntial commodities 
2.12.5.2 Distribution of Superior Kerosene Oil to i neligible purposes  
Government of India (GoI) allocates SKO for distrib ution under PDS to UTL 
on an annual basis. This is distributed to card hol ders through FPS at the rate 
of one litre per person per month at a selling pric e fixed by the 
Administration 31 .  In accordance with instructions of Ministry of P etroleum 
and Natural Gas (March 2013), UTLA was directed to ensure availability of 
subsidized SKO meant for distribution under PDS to the targeted beneficiaries 
only for the purpose of cooking and illumination. 
Audit noted that Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) at s ubsidized rate was being 
supplied to residents of Kavaratti and Minicoy Isla nds for cooking purposes. 
These LPG consumers were however also being supplie d SKO in the same 
quantity as was being supplied to residents of othe r islands who were not 
supplied LPG. As all the houses in the two islands were electrified and 
residents were being supplied with LPG, supply of S KO which was meant 
only for cooking and illumination was irregular. Au dit further noted that 
approximately 80 per cent  of PDS card holders in Karavatti and Minicoy had 
been issued LPG connections. The total cost of SKO supplied to card holders 
in these two islands during the period 2013-14 to 2 016-17 was 
` 2.05 crore. 
As such, UTLA incurred an avoidable expenditure of ` 1.64 crore on supply 
of SKO to residents with LPG connections during this period.  
Further, as LPG consumers would not require SKO in the same quantity as 
non-LPG consumers, the possibility of diversion of subsidized SKO for other 
purposes cannot be ruled out. 
The Department stated (September 2017) that UTLA ha d allowed supply of 
SKO as LPG provided was not sufficient for joint fa milies in these islands, 
                                                           
31  April 2013- ` 18 per litre, May 2013 to January 2017 ` 20 per litre, February 2017- ` 22 
per litre onwards, however, we considered ` 20 per litre throughout the period. 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
40 
reduce use of electricity for cooking purpose and t o meet LPG shortage during 
off seasons.  
Audit observed that the UTLA should have made a rea listic assessment of the 
requirement of SKO of residents provided with LPG c onnections taking into 
account all factors instead of just continuing supp ly at the rate of one litre per 
person per month. 
2.12.5.3 Allocation and lifting of SKO in excess of  actual entitlement 
Audit scrutiny revealed that the quantum of SKO all ocated and lifted was not 
commensurate with the number of beneficiaries and t he entitled quantity. The 
total population of UTL was 64,500 as per the 2011 Census and 71,900 as on 
April 2017. Assuming an average population of UTL o f 70,000 during the 
period 2013-14 to 2016-17, the maximum quantity req uired for distribution 
under PDS was approximately 840 kilo litres (KL) per annum . However, 
based on the maximum quantity of SKO required per annum , the Department 
had lifted an excess quantity of 436.45 KL kerosene worth ` 87.29 lakh during 
2013-14 to 2016-17 as detailed in Table No. 8  below: 
Table No. 8 : Allocation, lifting and sale of Kerosene 
Year 
Allocation Lifting Total sales  Excess 
Cost per litre 
(`` ``) 
Value of excess 
lifting 
(`` `` in lakh) quantity in kilo litres 
2013-14  1008 1008 867.93 140.07 20 28.01 
2014-15  1008 1008 894.78 113.22 20 22.64 
2015-16  984 984 860.83  123.17 20 24.64 
2016-17  936 936 876.01  59.99 20 12.00 
Total  3936 3499.55 436.45  87.29 
Source: Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas allocat ion details, despatch details from LCMF and 
sales details from each Co-operative Society collected through the Directorate of FCS&CA. 
Audit noted that the UTLA had itself acknowledged ( December 2014) that 
monthly sales of SKO in the islands was exceeding t he total population of 
islands and had directed the Cooperative Supply & M arketing Societies to 
limit sales of PDS SKO to the population as per rat ion cards in that islands.  
However, allocation and lifting of SKO continued to  be higher than what was 
justified based on population. 
UTLA stated (September 2017) that the higher alloca tion and lifting of SKO 
was to ensure availability of sufficient quantity o f SKO in the islands during 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
41 
the difficult seasons and attributed the difference s in actual quantity allocated, 
lifted and sold to the possible transportation and storage losses.  
The reply is not tenable as there is no justificati on for not basing requirement 
of SKO on the actual population of the islands and the differences between 
quantity lifted and sold can be attributed to losse s in transit and storage only if 
norms for the same have been fixed. It was evident that SKO was being 
allocated and lifted without any realistic assessment of requirement. 
2.12.5.4 Excess supply of PDS sugar 
Consequent on abolition of levy sugar by GOI with e ffect from January 2013, 
sugar required for distribution under PDS in UTL wa s procured by the LCMF 
through Kerala State Civil Supplies Corporation Lim ited (SUPPLYCO).  As 
per guidelines issued by GOI, sugar supplied under PDS would continue to be 
subsidized as per existing allocation and per capit a norms. States/UTs 
distributing sugar under PDS at the Retail Issue Price of not more than ` 13.50 
per kg were to be provided subsidy at the rate of ` 18.50 per kg limited to the 
existing allocation of the State/UTs.  
UTLA was distributing PDS sugar at the rate of one kg per person per month.  
GOI fixed a quota of 115 MT per month of PDS sugar for UTL along with an 
annual festival quota of 22 MT totaling 1,402 MT to  UTL for a year. The 
position of allotment, procurement and sale of suga r during period from 
2013-14 to 2016-17 is brought out in Table No. 9 below. 
Table No. 9: Details of Sale of Sugar 
Year 
Quantity 
allotted 
(MT) 
Opening 
stock * 
Quantity 
Procured (MT) 
Quantity 
sold(MT) 
Closing 
stock * 
2013-14 1402 918.54 627.40  1044.18  186.11 
2014-15 1402 186.11 1094 977.76 287.77 
2015-16 1402 287.77 750 994.88 45.31 
2016-17 1402 45.31 1100 949.49 118.42 
* The opening stock and the closing stock indicate only the stock at the godown of the 
societies and do not include the stock held at the 39 FPS in the 10 islands. 
Source: Details collected from Dept. of FCS&CA  
Audit scrutiny revealed that the allocation and sal e of sugar did not tally with 
the total number of beneficiaries. Assuming an aver age population of 70,000 
during the years 2013-14 to 2016-17, the maximum qu antity required for 
distribution works out to approximately 862 MT per annum  i.e. 840 MT sugar 
per annum @ 70 MT per month plus 22 MT annual festi val quota. However, 
the average sale of PDS sugar for the above period was 991 MT per annum .  
Sale of PDS sugar was thus not in conformity with t he total number of 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
42 
beneficiaries with the excess sale of sugar being a pproximately 516 MT 
involving a subsidy of ` 95.46 lakh 32 . 
The Department informed (September 2017) that additional sugar at the rate of 
one kg per head was distributed under the festival quota for two festivals in a 
year with the approval of the Administrator. Hence,  the total requirement of 
sugar worked out by the Administration was 980 MT per annum . 
Audit noted that GOI had fixed a festival quota of sugar of 22 MT per annum  
and distribution of 140 MT of sugar per annum towar ds festival quota requires 
ratification from GOI. Moreover, the quantity of PD S sugar allotted needs to 
be revised based on the actual requirement. 
2.12.5.5 Non disposal of damaged Rice 
As per guidelines for the disposal of damaged food grains communicated to 
State Government/Union Territories by the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Food and Public Distribution, Government of India i n May 2013, damaged 
food grains shall be disposed after fixing reserve price within a maximum 
period of sixty days from the date of declaration o f stock as damaged. Further, 
reasons for the damage are required to be determine d through an inquiry.  
Audit of the records of the Food, Civil Supplies an d Consumer Affairs 
Department disclosed that 650.35 MT of rice valuing ` 75.24 lakh received for 
distribution under PDS were damaged and kept by the eight Island Societies in 
their godowns as shown in Table No. 10 below: 
Table No. 10 : Details of damaged rice 
Sl. 
No.  Name of Island  Year of 
receipt  
Quantity 
damaged  
(in Kg)  
Rate  
(`` ``) 
Value of 
damaged  rice 
(`` ``) 
1. Kavaratti 2002-03 34736 10.40 361254 
5164 8.80 45443 
2. Andrott 2000-01 223900 12.50 2798750 
3. Minicoy 2000-01 81396 9.55 777332 
110378 12.30 1357649 
2001-02 163600 11.80 1930480 
4. Agathi 2011-12 400 10.40 4160 
                                                           
32  The total sale for four years is 3966.31MT and the  average sale for one year is 991 MT.  
The excess sale worked out as : (Average sale 991MT  – Max required 862 MT) x four 
years x GOI subsidy of ` 18.50 = ` 95.46 lakh. 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
43 
2012-13 2596 10.40 26998 
2014-15 11600 12.5 145000 
5. Kadmat 1991-92 1000 3.45 3450 
2010-11 750 10.40 7800 
1239 6.15 7620 
6. Kiltan 2002-03 1350 8.80 11880 
7. Chetlat 2003-04 848 8.80 7462 
8. Bitra 2011-12 3750 10.40 39000 
Total  650348  752427  
Source: Details collected from Island Co-operative Societies through the Directorate, 
FCS&CA. 
Despite the stock of damaged rice being held for lo ng periods, the Department 
had not taken any action to dispose the damaged sto ck kept in the godowns. 
The damaged stock posed a threat to the existing st ock of food grains through 
fungal infection. Further, no system existed for ta king prompt action for 
ascertaining the reasons for damage, disposal of da maged stocks, issue of 
orders for write off and for recovering losses from  the persons responsible for 
the damage. Audit observed that though stocks of da maged rice were held 
from 2002-03 onwards, action for analysing the caus e of damage had been 
initiated only after December 2014 and it was only in May 2016 that UTLA 
directed the Food Supply Officers of all the island s to collect samples of old 
stock of rice and send the same to a laboratory for  analysing and categorising 
the stock. 
2.12.5.6 Maintenance of godowns 
The Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public D istribution, Department 
of Food and Public Distribution issued (June 2015) a Code of Practices for the 
maintenance of godowns as well as FPS. As per this Code, the floor and walls 
of the godowns are to be treated with chemicals to check insect infestation and 
prophylactic (spray of insecticide) and curative tr eatment (fumigation) are to 
be carried out for the control of insects/pests and for effective rodent control.   
Audit observed that though rice and sugar issued un der PDS were kept in 
government godowns in the islands, none of the meas ures envisaged by the 
Code of Practices were being followed in the three elected islands.  
8

Report No. 3 of 2018  
44 
The Department replied (September 2017) that this would be taken up with the 
Food Supply Officers and the Island Co-operative Su pplies and Marketing 
Societies for necessary action. 
2.12.5.7 Delay in receipt of dues from various Soci eties/Marketing 
federations 
UTLA issued directions (June 2014) that the Co-oper ative Supply and 
Marketing Societies in the islands should remit sales proceeds of PDS items of 
month to the government account before the 7th of e very succeeding month. 
The societies should forward a challan (in original ) to the Administrative 
Officer, Kochi, with a copy to the Directorate/Admi nistration for the amount 
remitted towards rice, sugar and kerosene oil credi t account before the 15th of 
every month. The Assistant Registrar of Co-operativ e Societies (ARCS)/ 
co-Inspectors in the islands should check the recor ds of the societies by 7 th  of 
every month to ensure timely remittance of sales proceeds into the government 
accounts.   
Audit scrutiny disclosed the following;  
(i) The Department had finalized Credit Accounts on ly up to March 2014.  As 
per these accounts, an amount of 
` 2.95 crore was outstanding from seven 
Island Co-operative Supply and Marketing Societies (ICSMS) as on 31 March 
2014.  Scrutiny of remittance challans up to June 2 017 revealed that only 
` 1.91 crore out of the outstanding amount had been remitted to government 
account leaving a balance of ` 1.03 crore due for remittance from the Societies 
of the four Islands.  
(ii)  Though UTLA had issued directions for remitti ng entire sale proceeds 
of PDS items into government account before 7th of the succeeding month, 
the Department did not have a system for verifying remittances made by the 
Societies. Scrutiny of records of the three test ch ecked Island Societies 
revealed that the Societies had not remitted sales proceeds amounting to  
` 2.33 crore for the period 2014-15 to 2016-17 into the government account. 
(iii)  There was also delay with respect to due dat es in making remittances 
into the government account. During the period 2014 -15 to 2016-17, the 
Agatti ICSMS remitted dues in to government account by the due date only on 
three occasions (September 2015, October 2015 and January 2017).  The delay 
for the remaining months varied from three to 48 da ys.  Androth ICSMS had 
remitted the dues in time only on two occasions (Ju ly and August 2015).  The 
delay in other months ranged from one to 46 days.  Kavaratti ICSMS has 
remitted the dues in time only on two occasions (Fe bruary 2015 and June 
2015) and the delay in other months ranged from two to 38 days. 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
45 
The Department stated (September 2017) that the Adm inistrative Officer 
Kochi has been asked to reconcile/update accounts/records with the remittance 
figures and that details will be submitted after re conciliation and if non 
remittance is proved, action will be taken against the responsible officer. It 
added that reconciliation of remittance details was  pending and on completion 
of reconciliation action would be taken against off icers responsible for non-
remittances.  
2.12.5.8 Lack of Monitoring 
Audit observed that there was no mechanism for monitoring of the functioning 
of the PDS that could ensure effective delivery of the PDS items for the 
intended beneficiaries and obviate the possibility of leakages as brought out 
below: 
(i)  The sale proceeds of rice, sugar and kerosene oil under PDS are 
remitted by the ICSMSs into the government account.   It was seen that the 
Annual Credit Accounts were prepared only up to 201 3-14. No effective 
action appeared to have been taken by the Departmen t for preparation of 
Annual Credit Accounts from 2014-15 to 2016-17.  Mo reover, reconciliation 
of remittances made to government account by the IC SMSs was not being 
conducted and the Department was relying on figures booked by the PAO. 
(ii)  The PDS (Control) Order 2001 and TPDS (Contro l) Order 2015 
envisaged that Vigilance Committees should be forme d at State and Taluk 
levels and they should meet at least once in a quar ter. Audit scrutiny disclosed 
that no meeting of the Vigilance Committee at UTL ( District) level was held 
during the period 2014-15 to 2016-17. In the three tests checked islands, 
Island Level Vigilance Committee met only once in 2 016-17 in Agatti Island 
and no meeting of Vigilance Committees were held in  Androth and Kavaratti 
Islands, during the period 2014-15 to 2016-17. 
(iii)  PDS (Control) Order 2001 State/UT Government  envisages inspection 
of FPSs once in six months and TPDS (Control) Order  2015 provides for 
quarterly inspections of FPSs. During the period 20 14-15 to 2016-17, among 
the three test checked islands only one inspection was conducted in Agatti in 
2016-17. 
(iv) As per the TPDS (Control) Order 2015, the Stat e Government was 
required to regularly review the list of eligible h ouseholds for the purpose of 
deletion of ineligible households and organise an a nnual special drive before 
the end of every financial year for the elimination  of bogus or ineligible ration 
cards. No such special drive had been undertaken by the UTLA.  

Report No. 3 of 2018  
46 
(v)  While implementing the NFSA 2013, UTLA had sti pulated that 
beneficiaries falling under 10 specified categories 33  were not eligible to be 
included in the Priority House Hold (PHH) category.   However, no periodical 
review for verifying whether beneficiaries came und er one of the ten 
categories was conducted in the three test checked Islands.  
2.12.6 Conclusion 
Audit of the PDS in UTL revealed that quantum of SK O and sugar allocated, 
lifted and distributed was higher and not commensur ate with requirements 
computed based on the population of the UT. Further , a large quantity of 
damaged rice was held in godowns without any enquir y about the causes of 
damage and without any action for its disposal. Acc ounts for PDS items were 
not prepared since 2014-15 and accounts upto 2013-1 4 showed outstanding 
remittance of sale proceeds from Island Co-operativ e Supply and Marketing 
Societies. Further, check of remittance of sale pro ceeds by the island societies 
in three test checked islands showed short and dela yed remittance of sales 
proceeds by the societies into government account. Audit also disclosed 
inadequate monitoring as envisaged Vigilance Commit tees either did not meet 
or met infrequently and mandated inspections of Fai r Price Shops were 
infrequent. 
The matter was referred to the Administration/Minis try in August 
2017/December 2017. While the reply from Department  was received in 
September 2017, the reply of the Ministry was awaited as of December 2017. 
2.13 Delay in construction of dedicated berthing fa cilities and parking 
of funds with a Public Sector Undertaking  
Union Territory of Lakshadweep Administration relea sed `` `` 40.34 crore 
meant for construction of a dedicated berth without  prior project 
approval by the competent authority and requisite c learances. This 
amounted to parking of funds with Lakshadweep Devel opment 
Corporation Ltd. with no prospect of its immediate utilization for the 
intended purpose. This was not only in violation of  the Receipts and 
Payments Rules and the GFRs but also denied the UTL A of the 
opportunity to utilize these funds for other develo pmental activities. 
Further, the project is yet to commence even six ye ars after it was 
conceived for want of clearances and approvals.  
Union Territory of Lakshadweep Administration (UTLA ) submitted a 
proposal in February 2010 to the Government of Kera la (GoK) for 
                                                           
33  Government employees/retired, income tax payer, hom e with A/c or double stories, possession of 
more than one two wheeler, possession of motorized four wheeler, fishing boats greater than 10 HP, 
all professionals, registered contractors, employees of undertaking like companies, corporations and 
persons receiving rent from residential or non-residential properties . 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
47 
construction of a 200 metres dedicated berth at Bey pore 34  in Kerala due to 
limited and delayed availability of berthing facili ties for its passenger/cargo 
ships at the existing Cargo Terminal and Wharf faci lity at Beypore Port. The 
GoK accorded approval for construction of the berth  in October 2010 and 
agreed to lease land for the purpose for 30 years. Accordingly, a Memorandum 
of Understanding (MoU) was signed in November 2010 between the GoK and 
UTLA. 
In the meantime, UTLA placed 
` 22.28 crore at the disposal of the 
Lakshadweep Development Corporation Limited (LDCL) for making payment 
for construction of the dedicated berth at Beypore.  In March 2011, an MOU 
was signed by UTLA with CPWD for construction of th e dedicated berth at 
Beypore as a deposit work. An amount of ` 8.19 lakh was released to CPWD 
in April 2011 from funds placed with LDCL for condu cting soil 
investigations. CPWD thereafter prepared a prelimin ary estimate for the work 
of ` 49.23 crore and provided a period of six months for  planning and 18 
months for execution after depositing of the funds.  A detailed agreement for 
lease of land for the berth was signed with GoK in January 2012 and a sum of 
` 57.20 lakh was deposited with GoK towards annual le ase rent and Earnest 
Money Deposit. The agreement also stipulated that c onstruction of the berth 
should comply with Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) and Environment Rules. 
Based on the preliminary estimates submitted by CPW D, UTLA circulated a 
proposal on 14 February 2012 for consideration of t he Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) in the Union Ministry of Finance.  On 29 March 2012, the 
Ministry of Shipping asked UTLA to clarify certain observations and submit 
an amended EFC proposal. UTLA asked CPWD in August 2012 to attend to 
the observations and also advised it to undertake n ecessary technical and 
feasibility studies and obtain requisite CRZ and en vironmental clearances. A 
sum of ` 1.90 crore was sanctioned on 23 November 2012 to CP WD for 
undertaking Environmental Impact Assessment and Hyd raulic Model Studies. 
In the meantime, relying on an in-principle approval conveyed by the Planning 
Commission on 19 March 2012, a further amount of ` 18.14 crore was 
released by UTLA to LDCL on 31 March 2012 for const ruction of the 
dedicated berth. 
UTLA's proposal incorporating results of various st udies was examined by the 
Union Ministry of Shipping and Ministry of Home Aff airs and the latter 
sought a fresh proposal incorporating revised costs  based on cost index as on 
01 April 2014. CPWD informed UTLA that while it has  prepared the revised 
estimates, it would submit the same after getting n ecessary environmental 
                                                           
34  In the space available between the existing berth and fishing harbour wharf. 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
48 
clearances. Though the environmental clearances wer e received by CPWD in 
May 2017, submission of the fresh EFC proposal with  updated costs for 
obtaining project approval was awaited (October 2017). 
Audit examination of project records revealed the following: 
 Rule 100 of the Receipts and Payments (R&P) Rules, 1983, stipulates 
that no money shall be drawn from Government Accoun t unless it is 
required for immediate disbursement and that it is not permissible to 
draw money from government account in anticipation of demands. 
However, UTLA placed ` 40.42 crore with LDCL prior to EFC 
approval for the project. Except for a payment of ` 8.19 lakh made to 
CPWD, the funds have remained idle for over five ye ars. Further, 
LDCL also held back interest earned on the funds pa rked with it 
amounting to ` 9.38 crore. 
 In addition to Rule 100 of R&P Rules 1983 cited abo ve, Rule 56 (2) of 
the General Financial Rules stipulates that budget provisions that 
cannot be profitably utilized should be surrendered  to Government as 
soon as these are foreseen. However, budget grants were made for 
construction of dedicated berths in the budgets of 2010-11 and 2011-12 
though there was no sanction/approval for spending these grants. 
Instead of surrendering the grants, funds were draw n and transferred to 
LDCL without any actual requirement. 
 As per instructions of Department of Expenditure, M inistry of Finance 
(April 2010), approval of the Secretary of the Admi nistrative Ministry 
is required for pre-investment activities. However,  UTLA released 
` 2.56 crore towards pre-investment activities viz.  leasing of land, soil 
investigation and conducting EIA and Hydraulic Stud ies without the 
approval of the Secretary of the Department. 
 While submitting the Preliminary Estimates for the work, CPWD 
estimated a completion period of 24 months. However , UTLA 
submitted its initial EFC proposal without conducti ng technical and 
feasibility studies for the project and initiating action for 
environmental and CRZ clearances. It belatedly gave  clearance in 
August 2012 for undertaking necessary studies and p rovided funds for 
the same. Final submission of EFC proposal is still  awaited even 
though Environmental Clearance had been received in  May 2017. As a 
result, construction of the berth is yet to commenc e even though it is 
more than six years since GoK gave approval for the same.  

Report No. 3 of 2018 
49 
UTLA stated (March/October 2016) that LDCL was appo inted as the nodal 
agency due to non-availability of technically quali fied personnel in the Port 
and the Shipping and Aviation Department was author ised to release funds to 
CPWD. However, no explanation was given for parking  of funds with LDCL 
without there being any immediate requirement.  
Thus, release of ` 40.34 crore meant for construction of dedicated ber th 
without firm approvals nor even requisite clearance s amounted to parking of 
funds with LDCL with no prospect of its immediate utilisation for the intended 
purpose.  This was not only violative of the Receip ts and Payments Rules as 
well as the GFRs but also denied the UTLA of the op portunity to utilise these 
funds for other developmental activities. Further, even as these funds continue 
to remain parked, the project is yet to commence ev en six years after it was 
conceived for want of clearances and approvals. 
The matter was communicated to the Ministry in June  2017; its reply was 
awaited as of December 2017. 
2.14 Avoidable expenditure due to delay in disposal  of a 
decommissioned vessel 
Lack of established procedures for disposal of deco mmissioned vessels 
coupled with delay in initiating timely action incl uding fixing of 
appropriate reserve price resulted in avoidable exp enditure of  
`` `` 7.67 crore. 
A vessel, MV DweepSethu, owned by the Union Territo ry of Lakshadweep 
Administration (UTLA), was entrusted to the Lakshad weep Development 
Corporation Limited (LDCL) for operation and mainte nance with effect from 
July 2010. In March 2012, it was decided to place t he vessel for 
condemnation.  Since then, the vessel remained non- operational and it was 
finally decided in May 2013 to scrap the same.  
UTLA initiated (October 2013-January 2014) action t o dispose the vessel 
within three months through the Shipping Corporatio n of India (SCI).  In 
February 2014, UTLA requested LDCL to place the iss ue of finalizing the 
modalities for decommissioning of vessel in its next board meeting.  However, 
these efforts yielded no results and no follow up a ction was taken either by 
UTLA or LDCL to finalise modalities for disposal of the vessel. 
Subsequently, UTLA decided to conduct an auction an d floated an Expression 
of Interest (EOI) in March 2014 for engagement of a pproved valuers to fix a 
reserve price. Subsequently, based on the recommend ation of the valuers, 
UTLA approved (July 2015) a reserve price of ` one crore. Meanwhile , 
procedures for e-auction were taken up with MSTC (S eptember 2014) and the 
vessel was put up for auction in July 2015. Two offers received were cancelled 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
50 
as the purchase price received of ` 0.36 crore was only one third of the reserve 
price. Subsequently, three attempts were made by UL TA for the disposal of 
the vessel. In the first two attempts, the highest offer price obtained was 
` 44.73 lakh for the vessel and spares which was muc h lower than the reserve 
price. In the third tender, a minimum quote price of ` 44 lakh was fixed but no 
bidder participated. Meanwhile, the statutory certification and H&M insurance 
of the vessel expired in November 2015. 
In May 2016, it was decided to again entrust the task of de-commissioning and 
auction of the vessel to LDCL. An agreement was exe cuted with MSTC in 
October 2016 by LDCL for disposal of all scrap mate rial, obsolete items, 
plants and machinery. 
Subsequently, the reserve price for e-auction was f ixed at 
` 51 lakh (October 
2016) and e- auction was conducted. The highest off er received of ` 35.02 
lakh was accepted by UTLA after considering the app roximate monthly 
expenditure towards monthly manning fee, crew wages /month, steamer 
agency fee, fuel charges, proportionate monthly exp enditure towards H&M 
and P&I insurance being incurred to keep the vessel  afloat (approximately 
` 12.34 lakh). In January 2017, it was decided to dis pose of the vessel.  
Though an agreement was executed in June 2017 with the buyer for taking 
over the vessel from LDCL, it has not been shifted even after the lapse of 
extended date for lifting the vessel for want of va rious documents such as 
fitness certificate and insurance. 
As the vessel had to be safely manned till it was f inally disposed of/scrapped 
in accordance with statutory requirements, the Admi nistration had to incur an 
expenditure of 
` 10.94 crore 35  towards establishment costs of the vessel 
between April 2012 and March 2017. 
UTLA stated (July 2017) that the expenditure could not be avoided as the 
vessel was to be safely manned till such time it wa s finally disposed of. It had 
given top priority for disposal of the vessel and t he delay in disposal was due 
to codal formalities and procedures that were to be  complied with.  It added 
that the buyer had been asked to settle crew wages,  manning fees and ground 
rent for delay in lifting the vessel.  Further, as the buyer has taken over legal 
possession of the vessel (June 2017), the Registrar , Mercantile Marine 
Department has been requested to de-register the vessel.  
Audit observed that over three years had lapsed sin ce the decision for disposal 
of the vessel. Neither UTLA nor LDCL had framed any  procedures or 
                                                           
35  Expenditure incurred towards establishment cost of  the vessel after allowing a reasonable 
period of one year i.e. 2012-13 within which the UTLA could have disposed of the vessel, 
has been taken as avoidable. Total expenditure incu rred during the period 2012-13 to 
2016-17 (` 10.94 crore) 2012-13 - ` 3.27 crore, 2013-14 – ` 3.22 crore, 2014-15 – ` 1.84 
crore& 2015-16 – ` 1.32 crore, 2016-17 –` 1.29 crore. 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
51 
modalities for disposal of vessels though they operate and manage a number of 
vessels.  Consequently, their efforts were largely ad-hoc and sporadic. Timely 
and prompt action for the safe disposal of the vess el and its effective 
follow-up could have saved at least ` 7.67 36  crore incurred during 2013-14 to 
2016-17. The vessel is still lying with LDCL even a fter a lapse of more than 
four years  and UTLA is incurring a continuing expe nditure towards crew 
wages, fuel charges, etc. Moreover, as UTLA is yet to ensure availability of 
documents such as insurance, fitness certificate et c. the buyer has not been 
able to shift the vessel from the port. 
The matter was referred to the Ministry (July 2017) ; its reply is awaited 
(December 2017). 
2.15 Short deduction of Income Tax 
Union Territory of Lakshadweep Administration (UTLA ) did not 
include the Island Special Duty Allowance (ISDA) fo r determining 
income tax liability which resulted in short deduct ion of income tax of 
`` `` 51.92 lakh in case of 19 DDOs out of 118 DDOs unde r the PAO of UT 
Lakshadweep. 
Ministry of Finance vide Office Memorandum dated 29  August 2008 
sanctioned Island Special Duty Allowance (ISDA) to Central Government 
civilian employees on their posting to the Andaman & Nicobar Islands and 
Lakshadweep.  ISDA is to be calculated at 12.5 per cent  of the total of Band 
Pay, Grade Pay and Non Practising Allowance in resp ect of Kavaratti and 
Agatti and at 25 per cent  in Minicoy. In respect of all the other islands, t he 
applicable rate is 20 per cent . 
According to Rule 2BB (1) of the Income Tax Rules, only allowances 
prescribed under Section 10(14) of the Act will qua lify for exemption. ISDA 
is not a prescribed item of allowance which qualifi es for exemption under 
section 10(14).  
A test check of pay bill registers and Income Tax s tatements of various 
offices/ departments of UTL for the financial year 2010-11 onwards revealed 
that income tax was calculated by excluding the ent ire ISDA drawn by them 
from the salary income of the officials.  This resu lted in short-deduction of IT 
and Education cess. 
On this being pointed out during audit, UTLA (Augus t 2013) included ISDA 
in salary income while calculating income tax durin g the financial year 
                                                           
36  Total expenditure incurred during the period 2012- 13 to 2016-17 ( ` 10.94 crore) less 
expenditure incurred during 2012-13 ( ` 3.27 crore) = avoidable expenditure of  
` 7.67 crore. 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
52 
2013-14.  It also directed (February 2015) all Depa rtment heads to effect 
recovery of income tax short-deducted after re-calc ulating the income tax for 
the year by including ISDA in salary.  Audit sought  details of Income Tax 
calculation from the Pay and Account Officer (UTL) in September 2016.  In 
response, the Finance Department of UTL (September 2016) forwarded a 
format to all Distributing and Drawing Officers 37  to furnish details of income 
tax calculations taking into account ISDA. Based on  replies furnished up to 
October 2017 by the DDOs, short deduction of income  tax amounting to 
` 53.30 lakh on account of non-inclusion of ISDA in salary income have been 
worked out of which an amount of ` 1.38 lakh has been subsequently 
recovered by four DDOs. Thus, an amount of ` 51.92 lakh remained to be 
deducted from the officials of UTLA as of November 2017.  In addition, 99 
DDOs are still to provide information in the requir ed format with regard to 
recovery of income tax on ISDA. 
UTLA stated (November 2017) that the omission of no n-inclusion of ISDA 
for determining income at the initial stage of intr oduction of ISDA was due to 
misinterpretation of Rules by the concerned DDOs. I t added that remedial 
action had been taken immediately on receipt of the  audit objection but 
recovery could not be completed due to shortage of staff in some Departments. 
Thus, non-inclusion of ISDA in salary income for ca lculation of income tax 
liability by the UTLA had resulted in short-deducti on of income tax 
aggregating to 
` 51.92 lakh in respect of 19 DDOs during the period  from 
2010-11 to 2013-14. Further, as per section 201 of the Income Tax Act, if  any 
deductor fails to deduct tax at source, it would be deemed to be an assessee-in-
default and be liable to pay simple interest at one  per cent  for every month or 
part of a month on the amount of such tax from the date on which such tax 
was deductible to the date on which such tax is deducted. 
The matter was referred to the Ministry in Septembe r 2017; its reply was 
awaited (December 2017). 
 
 
                                                           
37  Total 118 DDOs available in UTL. 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
53 
Union Territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
3.1 Short-levy of stamp duty on Development Agreeme nts 
 
Failure of the Sub-Registrar, Silvassa, to levy sta mp duty on the basis of 
consideration amount with respect to Development Ag reements led to 
short levy of stamp duty. An amount of `` `` 29.03 lakh was subsequently 
recovered in 12 cases at the instance of Audit. 
In terms of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, stamp duty is payable on conveyance 
agreements relating to sale and transfer of propert ies based on the sale 
consideration. The stamp duty payable on sale consi deration of properties as 
fixed by the UT Administration in April 2011 was on e per cent  for tribal to 
tribal sale and two per cent  in the case of all other sales. For safeguarding 
government revenue, the UT Administration also fixe s circle rates for the 
purpose of charging stamp duty on transfer of properties.  
Test check of 500 documents out of a total of 22,12 3 documents registered 
during the period from 2011-12 to 2015-16 in the Of fice of the Sub-Registrar 
(SR) Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Silvassa, revealed tha t nine Development 
Agreements were registered between land owners and developers for 
transferring development rights on stamp paper of only ` 100.  In four of these 
cases, the developers had agreed to pay ` 6.88 crore as consideration to the 
land owners. In the remaining five cases, the consi deration amount was not 
clearly 1 mentioned. Since ownership of land had been transf erred through 
Development Agreements, these were to be treated as  conveyance agreements 
attracting stamp duty at the rate of two per cent  on the consideration value. 
Consequent to the audit observation, the SR Silvass a issued notices to the 
Developers (June 2017) in all the nine cases and re covered an amount of 
` 19.90 lakh (August 2017). In five cases, stamp dut y was collected as per 
circle rates and in the other four cases it was col lected based on declared 
value. The SR Silvassa assured that this position w ould be reviewed once 
construction permission is accorded and differentia l stamp duty, if any, would 
be collected based on the area for which developmental rights is transferred. 
                                                           
1 In such cases, stamp duty may be collected on the value of property fixed based on Circle 
 Rate fixed by the UT Administration.  
CHAPTER – III: UNION TERRITORIES 
(REVENUE SECTOR) 

Report No. 3 of 2018  
54 
Audit noted that though a computerised system for r ecording all registration 
documents was in place since August 2011, the same did not provide for 
Development Agreements as a distinct category of do cuments. Hence, the 
system could not segregate Development Agreements f rom amongst the 
22,123 documents registered during the period from 2011-12 to 2015-16 for 
the purpose of estimating and collecting short levi ed stamp duty. The SR 
Silvassa had to therefore manually identify all Dev elopment Agreements 
registered during 2011-12 to 2015-16 and calculate short-levy of stamp duty 
and collect the same.  
SR Silvassa stated (August 2017) that there was no possibility of creating a 
separate category of Development Agreements in the existing software. 
Further, it was difficult to demand stamp duty at t he time of registration of 
Development Agreements and that stamp duty can only  be estimated and 
demanded when developers register the constructed b uildings. It added that an 
additional amount of stamp duty of 
` 9.13 lakh has been recovered in the case 
of three more Development Agreements.  
Audit observed that the Department of Revenue shoul d have interacted with 
NIC to ensure that changes are made in the software  which captures all the 
different types of instruments. This is necessary t o ensure that stamp duty is 
correctly estimated and collected and not evaded on  account of ambiguous 
classification of instruments. It should also have undertaken a manual check of 
documents registered to identify all cases of Devel opment Agreements where 
stamp duty had been short collected. 
Thus, failure of the Sub-Registrar, Silvassa to lev y stamp duty on the basis of 
consideration amount with respect to Development Ag reements led to short 
levy of stamp duty. Further, as the cases of short levy of stamp duty were 
identified only from amongst a small sample of regi stered documents, the 
chances of more cases being in existence cannot be ruled out as the 
computerised system in use was not able to segregat e the Development 
Agreements registered.  
The paragraph was issued to the Ministry in June 20 17; its reply was awaited 
(December 2017).  

Report No. 3 of 2018 
55  
Union Territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
DNH Power Distribution Corporation Limited 
4.1 Purchase and Sale of Power by DNH Power Distrib ution 
Corporation Limited 
Inadequate assessment of power requirements led to the Company 
purchasing power despite having adequate allocation  of power from 
central generating stations. Further, poor manageme nt of PPAs resulted 
in avoidable or irregular expenditure of `` `` 371.30 crore as well as non-
recovery of penalty of `` `` 8.63 crore. Non-compliance of Joint Electricity 
Regulatory Commission Regulations were noted in res pect of security 
deposits, limit prescribed for power factor and fre quency of field 
inspection. 
4.1.1 Introduction 
DNH Power Distribution Corporation Limited (the Company) was incorporated 
in July 2012 on unbundling of the erstwhile Electri city Department of the 
Union Territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli (ED-DNH).  The UT 
Administration notified (March 2013) the “Dadra & N agar Haveli Electricity 
Reforms Transfer Scheme 2013” and transferred the e lectricity business 
including assets and liabilities of ED-DNH to the C ompany with effect from 
1 April 2013. Accordingly, the Company is the distr ibution licensee for the 
Union Territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli (UT) and is vested with 
responsibility for distribution and supply of elect ricity in the Union Territory. 
The Company commenced commercial operations from 1 April 2013 with 
60,744 consumers with a total contracted demand of 1,051 MW 1. As on 31 
March 2017, there were 70,300 consumers with contra cted demand of 1228.20 
MW. 
An audit was undertaken to ascertain whether demand  of power was properly 
assessed and whether purchase of power as well as i ts transmission and 
distribution was planned and carried out efficientl y, effectively and 
economically. The audit covers scrutiny of long ter m Power Purchase 
Agreements (PPAs), short term power purchases and e xamination of 
operational efficiency in billing, collection and m onitoring during the period 
2013-14 to 2016-17. 
                                                           
1 MW-Mega Watt. 
CHAPTER – IV: UNION TERRITORIES 
(COMMERCIAL SECTOR) 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
56 
4.1.2 Audit findings 
4.1.2.1 Planning for procurement of power 
The Company does not have its own captive generatio n plants and procures 
power from Central Generating Stations (CGS) such a s NTPC Limited 
(NTPC), Nuclear Power Corporation India Limited (NP CIL), Ratnagiri Gas 
and Power Private Limited (RGPPL) and NTPC-SAIL Pow er Company 
Limited (NSPCL) and from private parties such as M/ s EMCO Energy Limited 
(EMCO).  Long Term PPAs were executed during May 2003 to May 2011 with 
eight CGS (six generating stations of NTPC, NSPCL a nd RGPPL) and with 
EMCO (March 2013). 
(a) Purchase of power from EMCO despite having adeq uate allocation 
of power 
The number of consumers, total demand (connected lo ad and contract demand) 
and availability of power during the last four year s ended 31 March 2017 is 
given in the Table No. 1 below: 
Table No. 1: Power Allocation and Demand for Power 
S. No. Particulars As on 31 March 
2014 2015 2016 2017 
1. Allocation from CGS and other regions 
(MW) 
930.45  899.00  871.00  911.00  
2. PPA with EMCO Energy limited (MW) 200.00  200.00  200.00  200.00  
3. Total power allocation (MW) 1130.45  1099.00  1071.00  1111.00  
4. Contracted demand from consumers (MW)  1051.52  1098.85  1122.54  1228.20  
5. Average Peak demand/running load (MW)  643.00  678.00  722.00  624.00  
6. Maximum peak demand (MW)  775.00  743.00  781.00  784.00 
7. Percentage of power allocation over and 
above average peak demand ( per cent ) 
{(S. No. 1 – S. No. 5) x100/S. No. 5}  
45  33  21  46  
The Company had secured firm allocation of power in  excess of the maximum 
peak demand in the all the four years from CGS. The  allocation from CGS and 
other regions was 21 to 46 per cent  more than the average peak demand during 
the same period and any short fall in this allocati on/availability of power could 
be met from unscheduled interchange (UI) upto 12 per cent  of the total 
scheduled power. Audit observed that despite having  sufficient allocation, the 
ED-DNH executed (21 March 2013) a Power Purchase Ag reement (PPA) with 
EMCO for the purchase of 200 MW power for a period of seven years and 
three months with effect from 1 April 2013 and paid  ` 1,564.03 crore during 
2013-14 to 2016-17 towards fixed charges besides ` 1,190.42 crore as energy 
charges for procurement of electricity. 
Management stated (June 2017) that the allocation o f power was higher than 
the running load looking to the demand of the terri tory as all the plants are not 
compulsorily available in the system and generate p ower regularly. The 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
57  
Company was unable to get full quantum of allocated  power and continuous 
over drawl was not permissible. Due to open access,  there was surplus power 
which was sold through NTPC on 50-50 sharing basis.  It added that the 
Administration of UT of DNH has taken up with Minis try of Power for 
surrender of surplus power. 
The reply is not tenable as there was no justificat ion for entering into the PPA 
with EMCO in view of the firm allocation of power f rom CGS and it was 
evident that it had been entered into without condu cting any scientific study for 
assessing the requirement of power. 
(b) Non-levy of penalty for shortage in availabilit y of capacity 
Clause no. 4.2.5 of schedule 4 of PPA entered into with EMCO (March 2013) 
provide for penalty to be levied if the availabilit y of power for a contract year 
falls below 80 per cent and  Clause 4.2.4 provides incentive in case of 
availability exceeding 85 per cent. Review of records revealed that during the 
contract year (April 2013 to March 2014), the Compa ny had incorrectly treated 
the actual capacity made available by EMCO as contr acted capacity and the 
availability factor was worked out as 99.16 per cent  to 100 per cent  against the 
actual availability factor of 67.26 per cent  in July 2013 and 45.90 to 55.04 per 
cent  during November 2013 to March 2014. Details of con tracted capacity and 
contracted capacity adopted by the company during t he contract year April 
2013 to March 2014 is given in the Table No. 2 below: 
Table No. 2: Details of contracted capacity and capacity adopted by the company 
Sl. 
No.  Period  Contracted capacity as 
per PPA (MW)  
Contracted Capacity adopted 
by the Company (MW)  
1. April 2013 100 100 
2. May 2013 100 100 
3. June 2013 100 100 
4. July 2013 150 101.75 
5. August 2013 150 150.00 
6. September 2013 150 150.00 
7. October 2013 200 200.00 
8. November 2013 200 101.94 
9. December 2013 200 91.66 
10. January 2014 200 91.10 
11. February 2014 200 110.09 
12. March 2014 200 109.93 
The available capacity remained less than the presc ribed limit in July 2013 and 
from November 2013 to March 2014. Thus, instead of levying penalty of 
` 8.63 crore, the Company paid an incentive of ` 3.13 crore due to incorrect 
adoption of contracted capacity. This resulted in n on-levying penalty of ` 8.63 
crore as well as irregular expenditure of ` 3.13 crore. 
Management stated (May 2017) that EMCO was not able  to obtain the open 
access to supply full quantum of power due to const raints of the transmission 
system of Power Grid Corporation of India Limited ( PGCIL) and the Company 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
58 
has not paid the capacity charges for the quantum f or which Open Access was 
not granted by PGCIL. 
The reply of the Management did not address the iss ue of incorrect adoption of 
contracted capacity. Further as per the PPA, penalt y was to be paid by EMCO 
in addition to capacity charges that were payable on proportionate basis. 
(c) Avoidable payment of capacity charges to NSPCL 
The Company had a long term PPA (October 2007) with  NTPC-SAIL Power 
Company Limited (NSPCL) for purchase of 100 MW powe r. In December 
2012, the Company entered into a Supplementary Agre ement (SA) for 
additional 65.5 MW for the period from April 2013 t o March 2014. Though the 
Company had Medium Term Open Access (MTOA) from Pow er Grid 
Corporation Ltd (PGCIL) for additional 40.5 MW, the  Company entered into 
SA for 65.5 MW without ensuring the arrangements fo r evacuation of the 
balance 25 MW. The request made (December 2012) by the Company for 
MTOA for 25 MW was rejected (April 2013) by PGCIL. This resulted in non-
drawing of power of 25 MW from April 2013 to Februa ry 2014 and avoidable 
payment of ` 29.13 crore towards capacity charges. 
Management stated (May 2017) that the matter of rej ection of MTOA by 
PGCIL was intimated to NSPCL and was also discussed  the issue in the 
64 th  Meeting (May 2013) of the Western Regional Power C ommittee (WRPC). 
The Standing Committee of WRPC stated that the char ges have to be paid. The 
CERC had also dismissed (October 2013) the petition  of the Company. The 
appeal (December 2014) of the Company before the Ap pellate Tribunal for 
Electricity (APTEL) was pending (May 2017). 
The fact remains that the Company incurred avoidabl e payment of 
` 29.13 
crore due to lack of proper assessment of the avail ability of MTOA before 
entering into supplementary agreement for additional 65.5 MW. 
(d) Short-scheduling 2 due to unjustified sanction of STOA 
As per the Joint Electricity Regulatory Commission for the State of Goa and 
Union Territories (Open Access in Transmission and Distribution) Regulations, 
2009, Short-Term Open Access (STOA) shall be allowed if open access 3 can be 
accommodated by utilizing (i) inherent design margi ns, (ii) margins available 
due to variation in power flows, and (iii) margins available due to in-built spare 
transmission capacity created to cater to future load growth. 
As per clause 2.1.8 of the procedures notified for according STOA by the UT 
Administration, consent from the distribution licen see is mandatory for 
according sanction for open access. Audit noticed t hat the Company accorded 
                                                           
2 Scheduling of power – is the availability of power fi xed by WRLDC for drawl in each time 
block. 
3 Open access user means a person permitted to use in tra-State transmission system or receive 
supply of electricity from a person other than the distribution licensee of his area of supply. 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
59  
short term open access for purchase upto 323 MW cap acity power to 22 HT 
consumers during the period May 2016 to March 2017.  The sanction of STOA 
resulted in reduction of demand from the consumers who had been sanctioned 
STOA as they purchased power from other sources and  the Company had to 
reduce the scheduling of power from the firm source s. The Company 
approached NTPC, NSPCL and the Ministry of Power fo r surrender of 
allocated power/electricity. NSPCL and NTPC refused  to accept the 
Company’s request for surrender of allocated power/electricity.  
As per the PPAs entered with the parties and the Na tional Tariff Policy 
Resolution (NTPR) issued by the Union Ministry of P ower, the excess 
available power with a licensee (power procurer) can be permitted to be sold by 
the seller and the generator and power procurer wou ld share the gains realized 
from sale, if any, of such Un-Requisitioned Surplus 4 (URS) power in the ratio 
of 50:50 in the absence of any related provision in PPA.  
During the period April 2016 to March 2017, the Com pany incurred ` 805.40 
crore towards fixed charges for procurement of 3933 .7 million kwh but 
scheduled only 2,014.36 million kwh which resulted in under recovery of fixed 
charges. Thus, due to allowing STOA and resultant s hort scheduling, the 
Company could not recover fixed charges amounted to  ` 384.32 crore. This 
resulted in avoidable payment of ` 326.86 crore after adjusting the URS 
revenue of ` 17.35 crore and STOA charges of ` 40.11 crore. 
Management stated (June 2017) that the STOA was san ctioned within the 
contract demand of the respective consumers. Due to  the implication of open 
access, the power remained surplus and hence consen t was given to sell the 
URS power. 
The reply is not tenable as the Company has to cons ider the effects of granting 
STOA and take appropriate action to avoid possible losses. 
(e) Non-availing of full rebate on billing for powe r purchase 
As per clause 8.3.6 of the PPA (March 2013) with EM CO, the seller would 
raise a provisional invoice on the last business da y of the month and if the 
Company makes the payment on the first day of the n ext month, a rebate of 
2.25 per cent  of the amount will be admissible to the company. F urther rebate 
amount would reduce at the rate 0.05 per cent for each day up to the fifth day 
of the month. The rebate of two per cent  would be provided if the payment to 
EMCO is made within one day of presentation of final monthly bill. 
Audit noted that during 2013-14 to 2016-17, the Com pany did not obtain 
provisional invoice and the monthly bills raised by  the seller in the first week 
of the next month were settled within due dates and  a rebate of only two per 
                                                           
4 URS - Un-Requisitioned Surplus power is the power avai lable for the licensee as per the PPA 
but not scheduled due to less demand. 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
60 
cent  was availed as per PPA. In the absence of obtainin g provisional invoice 
from EMCO, the Company had to forgo additional savi ng of ` 5.91 crore on 
account of additional rebate of 0.25 per cent . 
Management replied (May 2017) that the seller has n ot issued provisional bills 
on the last day of the month. However, Company avai led 100 per cent  rebate 
mechanism for all the payments made towards power p rocurement and hence 
the additional rebate could not be availed. 
The reply of the Management is not tenable as no ac tion was taken by the 
Company for ensuring provisional bills on the last business day of the month to 
avail of the maximum rebate. 
(f) Avoidable payment of Reactive Energy Charges 5 
As per Regulation 6.6 (1) of Central Electricity Re gulatory Commission 
(Indian Electricity Grid Code) Regulations, 2010 (G rid Code), reactive power 
compensation should ideally be provided locally by generating reactive power 
as close to the reactive power consumption as possi ble. In case licensees draw 
reactive energy when the grid voltage is not betwee n 97 and 103 per cent , 
penalty will be levied by WRLDC at specified rates.  As such, the licensee 
should install capacitor banks at appropriate locat ions to maintain proper 
voltage and reduce the drawal of reactive energy fr om the grid. However, the 
Company had not installed capacitor banks to compen sate the reactive energy 
in the low voltage lines and incurred avoidable rea ctive energy charges of 
` 6.27 crore during the period 2013-14 to 2016-17. 
Management stated (May 2017) that a study of transm ission and distribution 
network was being carried out by engaging (Septembe r 2014) PGCIL and the 
company would plan for capacitors and reactors after getting their report. 
The reply of the Management is not acceptable as th e clause for installation of 
capacitor banks was already envisaged in the CERC r egulations in the year 
2010 itself and the Management should have taken ex peditious action in the 
wake of levy of reactive energy charges by the West ern Regional Power 
Committee (WRPC). 
4.1.2.2 Monitoring and Control 
The Company has to ensure that there is no unauthor ized use/theft of power by 
instituting suitable mechanisms for regular inspection of consumer premises for 
checking of metering equipment and electrical installations. 
 
 
                                                           
5 REC is the penal charges payable by the licensee f or drawl of VAr compensation 
when the voltage is not in the specified limits. 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
61  
(a) Shortfall in field inspection 
As per Regulation 7.4 of Joint Electricity Regulato ry Commission (Electricity 
Supply Code) Regulations 2010, inspection/testing o f the consumer meters 
(LT, HT, EHT) should be conducted as per prescribed  periodicity and records 
of these test results should be maintained in accordance with Central Electricity 
Authority (Installation and operation of Meters) Regulations 2006. 
As against 61,008 inspections (LT 57,333 and HT/EHT  3,675) to be conducted 
during the years 2013-14 to 2016-17 the Company had  conducted only 190 
inspections. Further, of the 190 inspections, 186 i nspections were in the 
premises of LT three phase and HT/EHT consumers and  the inspection 
conducted in the premises of single phase consumers  were negligible.  The 
shortfall in field inspections ranged between 92 and 100 per cent . 
Management stated (June 2017) that the field inspec tions could not be carried 
out by its Lab & Vigilance Section due to man power shortage. 
(b) Non replacement of defective meters of LT consu mers 
As per Regulation 7.3(1) of Joint Electricity Regul atory Commission 
(Electricity Supply Code) Regulations 2010, if the Company fails to keep the 
meter or metering equipment in proper working condi tion, the consumer shall 
not be liable to pay the meter rent for the period the meter remains defective. 
As per the amended Regulations (August 2013), in ca se of faulty meter, 
average consumption is to be billed based on the co nsumption of the 
corresponding month of the previous year. In case t he consumption of the 
corresponding month is not available, average of the previous 12 months was to 
be considered. It was noticed that due to defective  meters, 3,865 consumers 
were billed on average consumption during March 201 7. During the period 
2013-14 to 2016-17, 1,15,323 bills were issued on a verage consumption basis, 
of which 55,532 bills were issued to 2,805 consumer s for periods ranging from 
13 to 48 months.  
As per Regulation 8.1(15), the defective meter should be replaced immediately. 
Since the billing system does not provide any data relating to replacement of 
meters, audit could not ascertain whether the repor ted faulty meters were 
replaced within a reasonable time. 
  Further, contrary to the provisions of the 
Regulations, the Company levied ` 16 lakh towards meter rent in 1,12,640 bills 
which had defective meters. 
Management stated (August 2017) that the Company is  in the process of 
purchasing the meters and will complete the replace ment by the end of this 
financial year. Further necessary conditions will b e included in the software for 
non-recovery of meter rent during defect in meter. 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
62 
Though the Management has indicated that it is in t he process of initiating 
rectificatory steps, the fact remains that 2,805 co nsumers were billed on 
average consumption for more than 12 months during the period 2013-14 to 
2016-17. 
(c) Non-monitoring of adherence to the limits presc ribed in respect of 
Power Factor 6 
As per the Joint Electricity Regulatory Commission (Electricity Supply Code) 
Regulations 2010, the HT/EHT consumers should maint ain a Power Factor 
(PF) of 90 per cent  and above. PF incentive in 2015-16 and 2016-17 was  to be 
paid to HT/EHT consumers at the rate of one per cent  (0.50 per cent  for the 
year 2013-14 and 2014-15) for every one per cent  addition to the PF in excess 
of 95 per cent  and a penalty is levied at the same rate if the PF  falls below 90 
per cent .  If the average power factor falls below 70 per cent  (lagging) 
consecutively for three months, the Company may dis connect the HT 
consumer's service connection. Scrutiny of records/ data of HT/EHT and LT 
consumer billing revealed the following: 
(i) 194 HT/EHT consumers registered a power factor of less than 70 per cent  
(lagging) consecutively for three months during the  period 2013-14 to 
2016-17. In case of nine consumers, power factor re corded constantly 
below 70 per cent  between April 2013 and March 2017. The Company 
did not initiate any action to disconnect these con nections. Further, the 
Company could not recover any penal charges from th ese consumers for 
the drop in PF below 70 per cent . Non-disconnection has resulted in 
continued non-compliance of the Regulation and undu e benefit to the 
consumers besides non-recovery of penalty. 
Management stated (August 2017) that due to paucity  of field staff and 
overload, no disconnections were made in respect of  HT consumers 
whose PF was less than 70 per cent . 
(ii) As per Regulation 4.6 (2) (a), supply to LT in stallation with induction 
motor(s) of capacity of 3 Horse Power and above was  not be provided 
unless Low Tension Shunt Capacitor was installed to  ensure power factor 
not less than 90 per cent . Analysis of data revealed that shunt capacitor 
was not installed for 123 LT consumers with connected load of more than 
three HP. Further, though the licensee (the Company ) has the right to 
install the capacitor and to recover the cost, the Company has not initiated 
any action to install the capacitors. 
                                                           
6 Power Factor means the average monthly power facto r and shall be the ratio expressed as a 
percentage of the total kilowatt hours to the total  kilovolt ampere hours (KVAH) supplied 
during the month; the ratio being rounded off to two decimal figures. 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
63  
Management replied (August 2017) that in case of LT consumers installation of 
capacitors is mandatory and installation of capacitors were being effected at the 
time of release of connection. 
The fact remains that 123 LT consumers did not have  the shunt capacitors 
installed.  
(d) Non-compliance of JERC Regulation in respect of  Security Deposit 
As per Clause 6.10 of the Joint Electricity Regulat ory Commission (Electricity 
Supply Code) Regulations 2010, the Company collects  security deposit from 
consumers for energy charges equivalent to the esti mated consumption for 
three months from agricultural consumers and two mo nths from seasonal and 
other consumers.  This is reviewed half yearly and annually on the basis of 
consumption during the previous six months and twel ve months for HT/EHT 
and Low Tension consumers respectively and addition al security deposit is to 
be collected/refunded for deviations of more than 2 0 per cent  of the amount of 
security deposit held by the licensee. Scrutiny of data made available by the 
Company revealed that: 
(i) No SD was available in consumer data base for 9 1 HT/EHT consumers 
amounting to ` 7.61 crore calculated based on bills from April 20 16 to 
September 2016. Further, as per the consumption for  this period, there 
was a short fall in SD in respect of 73 HT/EHT cons umers which worked 
out to ` 10.29 crore. 
(ii) Data was not captured in the data base for 42, 762 LT consumers by the 
Company. Hence, Audit could not verify the collection of prescribed SD. 
(iii) Consumer-wise details for meter number and co nsumer number was not 
reconciled with security deposit of ` 16.58 crore that was collected from 
the UT Administration. In the absence of this data,  the Company could 
not transfer the interest on SD to the concerned consumers. 
(iv) Security deposit for ` 40.21 crore was accepted as Fixed Deposit Receipts 
from 720 HT consumers instead of in the prescribed form such as cash, 
cheque/draft and bank guarantee.  
Management stated (August 2017) that the Company ob tained security deposit 
from consumers at the time of release of connection  as well as at the time of 
release of additional load and review is done regul arly for HT consumers and 
additional security deposit is being collected. In case of LT consumers, review 
was not possible as the data base was not available. 
The Management reply that LT consumer review was no t possible points to a 
lacunae in the data collection and collation. Furth er, Management has not 
addressed the other deficiencies viz. non-capturing  of data, security deposit 
taken in the form of fixed deposit receipts and non -accountal and non-
reconciliation of security deposit received from the UT Administration.  

Report No. 3 of 2018 
64 
4.1.3 Conclusions 
The Company failed to ensure proper assessment of it s power requirements 
which resulted in entering into PPAs for power that was not required. This 
involved payment of fixed charges as well as procurement of power of 
` 2,754.45 crore between 2013-14 and 2016-17. Further , poor implementation 
of PPAs resulted in avoidable or irregular expenditure totalling ` 371.30 crore 
d
ue to incorrect adoption of contracted capacity, unjustified sanction of short 
term access, avoidable payment of capacity charges, reactive energy charges 
and non-availing of rebate. In addition it failed to levy penalty of ` 8.63 crore. 
I
n the light of the audit findings, the Management as well as the Administrator 
of the Union Territory should review the process of entering into PPAs and of 
their implementation so as to ensure that possibilities of such avoidable 
expenditure are obviated and responsibility fixed where necessary. 
The audit observations were reported to the Administrator of Union Territory 
of Dadra & Nagar Haveli in October 2017; their reply was awaited 
(December 2017). 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexes 
  

Report No. 3 of 2018 
65  
Annexe-I 
(Referred to in paragraph no. 2.1.2.3) 
Inordinate delay in establishment of Marine Operational Centers  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
MOC 
Date of 
selection 
of site 
Estimated 
cost 
(`` `` in lakh) 
 
Present status 
1 Havelock Land not 
allotted 
-- Site for MOC though initially finalized in Septembe r 
2011 was not allotted to the Department. The reason  for 
non-allotment was not available on records.   
Department made no correspondence till February 201 5 
and finally applied for allotment of land only in A pril 
2017. The matter is pending with land authorities. 
2 Campbell Bay February 
2012 
- Department took more than a year (May 2013 to 
August 2014) to apply for CRZ clearance after being  
informed by APWD of the requirement. It also took 
nine months (May 2015 to March 2016) for taking 
administrative approval for conducting Rapid 
Environmental Impact Assessment (REIA) study.  The 
CRZ clearance has not yet been obtained. 
3 Pongi Balu January 
2013 
58.78  Department decided (March 2012) to utilise two 
abandoned buildings of Port Management Board 
(PMB) for which PMB gave in principle approval. 
However, the department took 33 months to seek 
permission for demolishing the buildings, which was  
given only in February 2017. The department was yet  
to apply for required forest clearance (November 20 17) 
and demolition of existing structures awaited. 
4 Diglipur January 
2016 
189.28  The initial site which was identified in November 2 011 
was later changed in October 2012. However, in 
January 2016 it was decided to revert to the initia l site 
as the second site was located at a distant locatio n in a 
dense forest. The work of MOC is at tendering stage  at 
present. Final site selection in January 2016. The work 
is under tendering. 
5 Interview Island November 
2011 
49.97  Construction of MOC has been delayed as the site 
selected in November 2011 was located in a reserve 
forest. Further, site inspection and preparation of  
estimates by APWD has been delayed due to 
remoteness of the site.  Audit noticed that prepara tory 
work at site was not pursued adequately by APWD 
after identification of site. The work of MOC is at  
tendering stage at present. 
6 Haddo, Port 
Blair 
September 
2011 
350.00  Department requested APWD (June 2013) to provide 
estimate without specifying availability of funds i n 
terms of approval of Ministry for the MOCs. Hence, 
Department had to obtain approval of additional 
amount which took 22 months (October 2013 to 
October 2015) to obtain. No reasons for the time ta ken 
were found on record. The MOC at Haddo is at 
tendering stage. 
7 East island November 
2011 
47.03  In the case of MOC’s at East Island and Hutbay, Pol ice 
Department requested (September 2012, December 
2012) APWD to provide estimate without specifying 
the amount approved by the Ministry for the work. 
APWD thus, provided estimates which exceeded the  
 
8 Hutbay December 
2012 
115.44 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
66  
expenditure limit approved by the Ministry. This 
necessitated further revision in the estimates for the two 
MOCs (March 2017 and April 2016) leading to delay i n 
construction of the MOCs. In case of MOC at East 
Island a/a & e/s is still awaited and MOC at Hutbay  is 
at tendering stage. 
9 Nancowry February 
2012 
28.29 Site was in an area prone to water logging. Estimat es 
prepared were revised two times i.e. in September 2 013 
and  January 2016 and  fresh  estimates are still u nder 
preparation. 
  

Report No. 3 of 2018 
67  
Annexe-II 
(Referred to in paragraph no. 2.1.4) 
Milestones for various activities in the scheme  
Date of 
signing of 
Agreement 
-06.07.2010 
Milestone/Deliverables Timelines 
Preparation and submission of draft DPR and Project  Implementation and 
Monitoring Plan (PIM) & on acceptance of the same b y the competent 
authority. 
10Weeks 
(13.09.10) 
Submission of Final DPR and RFP & on acceptance of the same by the 
competent authority. 
14 Weeks 
(11.10.10) 
Assist in floating RFP after approval from MHA/SCRB. 16Weeks  
(25.10.10) 
Submission of technical evaluation report & on acce ptance of the same by 
the competent authority. 
22 Weeks 
(06.12.10) 
Submission of Draft contract & on acceptance of the  same by the 
competent authority. 
24 Weeks 
(20.12.10) 
    
SI    
Date of 
signing of 
Agreement-
17.05.12  
Milestone Deliverables Timelines 
  Deployment of resources   
Go-Live in Pilot 
Location 
Customization of CAS State, development of new 
modules and integration with CAS (State) 
provided by NCRB 
Month-6 
(16.11.12) 
Data digitisation 
Installation and commissioning of Network 
Infrastructure at Pilot Location 
Go-Live in Pilot Location 
Go-Live Readiness in 
Phase-I Location 
Improvement in CAS State if required based on 
feedback from Pilot Locations 
Month-7 
(16.12.12) 
Data digitisation at other Phase-I locations 
Installation and commissioning of Hardware at 
other Phase-I Locations 
Go-Live  in Phase-I 
Location 
Site Go-Live at other Phase-I locations Month-8 
(16.01.12) 
Go-Live Readiness in 
Phase-II Location 
Data digitisation in Phase-II locations Month-11 
(16.01.12) Installation and commissioning of hardware at 
other Phase-II Locations 
Capacity building Activities at Phase-II Locations 
Go-Live  in Phase-II 
Location 
Site Go-Live at other Phase-II locations Month-12 
(16.05.13) 
  

Report No. 3 of 2018 
68  
SPMU    
Date of 
signing of 
Agreement-
09.10.2012  
Payment Milestones Deliverables Timelines 
Commissioning of 
hardware for Police 
Stations and Higher 
Offices 
 The timelines/ deliverables of SPMU were to be rec koned with 
reference to deliverables of SI 
Networking Solution 
Data digitisation 
completion 
Quarterly payments 
for 3 years 
 
 
  

Report No. 3 of 2018 
69  
Annexe-III 
(Referred to in paragraph no. 2.12.1) 
The allocation and category wise distribution of Ri ce and other commodities under 
TPDS and under NFSA with effect from 01 August 2015 is given in below: 
 
Commodities  Entitlement under Targeted Public 
Distribution System 
Entitlement after introduction 
of  National Food Security Act 
Rice AP 1 - 10 Kgs per person per month at free of 
cost  
AP - 10 Kgs per person per month 
at free of cost * 
AAY 2 - 35 Kgs per month per household @ 
` three per Kg  
AAY - 35 Kgs per month per 
household @ ` three per Kg 
 
 
BPL 3 - 35 kgs per month per household @ 
` 6.15 per Kg 
 
PHH 4 - five kgs of rice per person 
per household for a month @ 
` three per Kg  
APL 5 - eight kgs of rice for each adult and 4 
kgs of rice for each child in a House Hold for 
a month @ ` 12.50 per kg  
T.O.
6 - 6 kilograms of rice for 
each adult and two kgs of rice for 
each child in a House Hold for a 
month @ ` 9.5 per kg  
Total 
allocation  of 
Rice by GOI 
AAY - 43 MT/month  
BPL - 62 MT/month 
APL - 280 MT/month 
AAY - 36.785 MT/month  
PHH - 90.065 MT/month 
T.O.- 258.15 MT/month AAY  
Kerosene @ one litre per person per month 
 
Sugar @ one Kg per person per month 
* Only 10 beneficiaries 
 
                                                      
1 Annapoorna, 
2 Antyodaya Anna Yojana 
3 Below Poverty Line 
4 Priority House Holds 
5 Above Poverty Line  
6 Tide Over 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 

Report No. 3 of 2018 
71 
Appendix-I 
(Referred to in Paragraph 1.5) 
Details of Audit units covered during 2016-17 
 
Sl.  No.  Name of the UT  Audit covered during 
2016-17  
1.   And aman and  
Nico bar I sland s  
126 
2.   Ch andig arh  106 
3.   Dadra a nd N aga r Have li 
and D aman and Diu  
39 
4.   La kshadweep  36 
Total  307 
 
  

Report No. 3 of 2018 
72 
 
Appendix-II 
(Referred to in Paragraph 1.6)  
UT wise position of outstanding Paras and IRs upto 31 March 2017 
Sl.  No.  Name of the UT  IRs  Paras  
1.   And aman and  
Nico bar I sland s  
564 2426 
2.   Ch andig arh  1028 3215 
3.   Dadra a nd N aga r 
Have l and 
Daman and Diu  
354 1534 
4.   La kshadweep  187 965 
Total  2133 8140 
 
  

Report No. 3 of 2018 
73 
Appendix-III  
(Referred to in Paragraph 1.7) 
Year wise pendency of ATNs 
 
Sl. 
No  Name of the UT  
Report 
for the 
year 
ended 
March  
Union Territories without 
Legislatures  
ATNs 
vetted and 
submitted 
to PAC Due 
Not 
received 
at all 
Under 
correspondence 
1. Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands 
2014 - - - 4 
2015 1 - 1 3 
2016 6 - 6 2 
2. Chandigarh 2014 - - - 2 
2015 1 - 1 4 
2016 - - - 3 
3. Dadra and Nagar Haveli 2014 - - - 2 
2015 - - - 1 
2016 - - - 2 
4. Daman and Diu 
2014 - - - 4 
2015 - - - 2 
2016 - - - 2 
5. Lakshadweep 
2014 1 - 1 3 
2015 - - - 3 
2016 2 - 2 1 
 Total  11  11  