 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on 
Economic Sector 
for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Rajasthan 
Report No. 5 of the year 2017 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Presented to the Legislature on 27 FEB 2018. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
on  
 
Economic Sector 
for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Rajasthan 
Report No. 5 of the year 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
http://www.cag.gov.in 

(i) 
 
Table of Contents 
 Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
Preface - (v) 
Chapter I  
Introduction 
About this Report 1.1 1 
Profile of Audited Entities 1.2 1 
Authority for Audit 1.3 2 
Organisational Structure of the Office of the Accountant 
General ( Economic and Revenue Sector Audit ), 
Rajasthan 
 
1.4 
 
2 
Planning and conduct of audit 1.5 3 
Significant audit observations 1.6 3 
Response of the Departments to Performance 
Audit/Compliance Audit Paragraphs 
 
1.7 
 
9 
Follow-up on Audit Reports 1.8 9 
Chapter II 
Performance Audit 
Environment Department 
Role of Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board in 
controlling air pollution in the State 2.1 11 
Chapter III  
Compliance Audit 
Mines, Geology and Petroleum Department 
Adherence to Environmental Issues on Mining 
Activities in Rajasthan 3.1 49 
Forest Department 
Development of water catchment through greening of 
Rajasthan 3.2 73 
Public Works Department 
Implementation of Rajasthan Road Sector 
Modernization Project 3.3 80 
Non-completion of road led to non -connectivity of 
habitations 3.4 
 
88 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 (ii) 
 Reference to 
Paragraph Page 
Public Works Department   
Irregular payment to contractors for curing compound 3.5 89 
Awarding of work without ensuring availability of land 3.6 91 
Excess payment of price escalation 3.7 92 
Avoidable expenditure on construction of Cement 
Concrete roads 
3.8 93 
Irregular expenditure on construction of roads 3.9 95 
Water Resources Department   
Blocking of funds and non- recovery of compensation 3.10 96 
Blocking of funds on construction of Canal 3.11 98 
 

Table of contents 
 (iii) 
 
Appendices 
Appendix 2.1 Position of Income and Expenditure 101 
Appendix 2.2 Actions were to be taken up as a measures for 
prevention, control or abatement of air pollution  in 
NCR 
101 
Appendix 2.3 List of Air Quality Monitoring Stations 104 
Appendix 2.4 Details of air quality monitoring instruments 
installed at unsuitable locations 
105 
Appendix 2.5 Details of samplers installed at sites other than 
approved locations 
106 
Appendix 3.1 Details of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India 
orders in context of mining in Aravalli Mountain 
Hills 
106 
Appendix 3.2 Provisions relating to environmental issues laid 
down under various regulations to be met by the 
lease holders 
107 
Appendix 3.3 Cross verification of the joint physical inspection 
findings with 38 RSPCB inspection reports 
109 
Appendix 3.4 Activity-wise position of physical targets and 
achievements 
112 
Appendix 3.5 Statement showing status of distribution of 
uncertified/below standard seeds 
113 
Appendix 3.6 Details of cases in which plantation done p rior to 
issuance of technical sanction 
113 
Appendix 3.7 Details of works that deviated from micro plan 115 
Appendix 3.8 Statement showing division -wise status of 
construction of Soil & Moisture Conservation 
Structures without obtaining prior permission f rom 
state level committee 
116 
Appendix 3.9 De-sanction of works due to lack of proper survey of 
roads 
117 
Appendix 3.10 Tenders invited prior to issuing of technical sanction 118 
Appendix 3.11 Excess payment to contractor on Price Adjustment 119 
Appendix 3.12 Non-submission of Operating and Maintenance 
Manual 
120 
Appendix 3.13 Undue benefit to contractor for non -submission of 
revised work programme 
123 
Appendix 3.14 Details of insurance cover to roads not provided 124 
Appendix 3.15 No action taken ag ainst contractor for non -delivery 
of performance security 
126 
Appendix 3.16 Details of works in which certificates of test results 
not produced 
127 
Appendix 3.17 Statement showing excess price escalation paid to 
contractors 
128 
Appendix 3.18 Statement s howing the expenditure incurred on 
excavation for road way in soil, construction of 
GSB, WBM and WMM 
129 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 (iv) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 (v) 
PREFACE 
 
This Report for the year ended 31 March 2017  has been prepared for 
submission to the Governor of the State of Rajasthan under Article 151 of the 
Constitution of India. 
The Report contains significant results of the performance audit and 
compliance audit of the  departments of the  Government of Rajasthan under 
the Economic Services carried out under the provisions of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India (DPC) Act, 1971 and the Regulations on Audit and 
Accounts, 2007 issued there under by the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India.  
The instances men tioned in this Report are those  which came to notice in the 
course of test audit during the period 2016-17 as well as those  which came to 
notice in earlier years but could not be reported in the p revious Audit Reports; 
instances relating to the period subsequent to 2016-17 have also been 
included, wherever necessary. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter I 
Introduction 
 

 
 
1 
Chapter I 
Introduction 
 1.1 About this Report 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) relates 
to matters arising from performance audit of selected programmes and 
activities and compliance audit of economic sector departments. 
Compliance audi t refers to examination of the transactions relating to 
expenditure of the audited entities. This is to ascertain whether the provisions 
of the Constit ution of India, applicable laws, rules and regulations,  various 
orders and instructions issued by the competent authorities are being complied 
with. Performance audit examines whether the objectives of the programme or 
activity are achieved economically, efficiently and effectively. 
The primary purpose of the Report is to bring important results of audit to the 
notice to the State Legislature. Auditing Standards require that the materiality 
level for reporting should  be commensurate with the nature , volu me and 
magnitude of transactions. T he fin dings of au dit are ex pected to enable  the 
Executive to take corrective measures . This would provide them inputs to 
frame policies and directives to i mprove financial management of the 
organisations for better governance. 
This chapter, in addition to explaining the planning and extent of audit, 
provides a synopsis of the significant  deficiencies noticed in Performance and 
Compliance Audit. Chapter II of this Report contains findings arising out of 
performance audit o n Role of Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board 
(RSPCB) in controlling air pollution in the St ate. Chapter III contains 
observations arising out of compliance audit of the Government Departments.  
 1.2 Profile of Audited Entities 
The Accountant General (Economic and Revenue Sector Audit), Rajasthan, 
Jaipur conducts Audit of the expenditure of nine economic sector 
departments. These Departments are  headed by Additional Chief 
Secretaries / Principal Secretar ies / Secretaries, who are assisted by 
Commissioners /Deputy Secretaries and subordinate officers.  
The comparative position of expenditure incurr ed by the Government of 
Rajasthan during 2014-15 to 2016-17 is given in Table 1 as follows: 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
 
2 
Table 1: Comparative position of expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
Particulars 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 
Revenue expenditure 
General services 27,868 31,016 39,203 
Social services 37,754 43,349 49,372 
Economic services 28,920 31,874 38,565 
Grants-in-aid and Contribution -* -** -*** 
Total  94,542 1,06,239 1,27,140 
Capital and other expenditure 
Capital Outlay 16,103 21,985 16,980 
Loans and Advances disbursed 701 36,602 12,965 
Payment of Public Debt 4,960 4,959 5,015 
Contingency Fund 300 - - 
Public Accounts disbursement 1,22,061 1,40,432 1,48,886 
Total 1,44,125 2,03,978 1,83,846 
Grand Total 2,38,667 3,10,217 3,10,986 
Source: Audit Reports on State Finances of the respective years  
* ₹ 9 lakh only, ** ₹ 10 lakh only, *** ₹ 6 lakh only 
 
 1.3  Authority for Audit 
The authority for audit by the CAG is derived from Articles 149 and 151 of 
the Constitution of India and the CAG’s Duties, Powers and Conditions  of 
Service (DPC) Act, 1971. 
The Accountant Gener al (Eco nomic and Revenue Sector Audit), Rajasthan, 
Jaipur conducts audit of expenditure of Economic Sector Departments, 
including Public Sector Undertakings  and Autonomous Bodies  of the 
Government of Rajasthan under the provisions of the CAG's DPC Act, 1971 
and the C&AG’s Regulations on Audit and Accounts, 2007 issued there under. 
The principles and methodology for the performance and compliance audit are 
prescribed in the guidelines and manual issued by the CAG. 
1.4 Organisational Structure of the Office of the Accountant 
General (Economic and Revenue Sector Audit), Rajasthan 
Under the directions of 
the CAG, the office of the 
Accountant General 
(Economic and Revenue 
Sector Audit), Rajasthan,  
Jaipur conducts audit of 
Revenue and Economic 
Sector Depart ments, 
including Public Sector  


Chapter I: Introduction 
 
 
3 
Undertakings and Autonomous Bodies of the Government of Rajasthan 
through three groups.  
 1.5  Planning and conduct of audit 
Audit process starts with the assessment of risk exposure of various 
Government departments /organisations / autonomous bodies and sche mes / 
projects, etc. Risk assessment s are based on expenditure, criticality of 
activities, assessment of overall  internal controls and the conc erns of 
stakeholders. Previous audit findings are also considered in this exercise. 
After completion of audit of each unit, an Inspection Report containing audit 
findings is issued to the head of the unit. The units are requested to furnish 
replies to the audit findings within one month of receipt  of the  Inspection 
Report. Whenever replies are received, audit  findings are either settled or 
further compliance is advis ed. The important audit observations ari sing out of 
these Inspection Reports are processed for inclusion in the Audit Reports. 
 1.6  Significant audit observations 
During the last few years, Audit has reported several significant deficiencies 
relating to  implementation of various program mes/activities as  well as the 
quality of inter nal controls through performance audits . The deficiencies 
noticed during compliance audit of the Government departments/organisations 
were also reported. 
The present report contains one Performance Audit on Role of RSPCB in 
controlling air pollution in the State , three Compliance Audits covering 
themes on Adherence to E nvironmental Issues on Mining Activities in 
Rajasthan, Development of Water Catchment through Greening of Rajasthan  
and Implementation of Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization Project  and 
eight individual paragraphs. The highlights are given in the following  
paragraphs. 
 1.6.1 Performance Audit of programmes/activities 
Chapter II of this Report contains the Performance Audit on Role of Rajasthan 
State Pollution Control Board in controlling air pollution in the State . The 
salient features of the performance audit are discussed below: 
Role of Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board in controlling air 
pollution in the State  
RSPCB was entrusted with the responsibility of prevention, control and 
abatement of air pollution under the provisions of Air (Prevention an d Control 
of Pollution) Act, 1981.  
The five cities of Rajasthan i.e. Alwar, Jaipur, Jodhpur, Kota and Udaipur are 
in the list of top 100 polluted cities in the world  declared by World Health 
Organisation. These are also considered as ‘non-attainment’ cities by Central 
Pollution Control Board (CPCB). These cities have not met the National 
Ambient Air Quality Standards consecutively over three years’ period.  Audit 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
 
4 
observed that t he source apportionment studies were not carried out in these 
cities to identify  and quantify the sources of pollution. In absence of which  
RSPCB was not in a position to prepare comprehensive programmes for 
prevention, control or abatement of air pollution.  
In the case of National Capital Region (NCR) area or non-attainment cities of 
the State, no action plans for abatement and control of pollution were 
submitted by the concerned department/ authority to RSPCB . As a result 
directions issued by CPCB could not be monitored by RSPCB, hence, most 
of the actions given in the direction could not be initiated. 
As of March 2017, only 32 Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Stations and two 
Continuous Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Stations were operating in six 
districts while 27 districts having 47.03 million population and 74.50 lakh 
vehicles were  still out of the purview of air quality monitoring. It was also 
seen that RSPCB and Environment Department did not have meaningful data 
of the sources of pollution in rural areas also in absence of which planning to 
mitigate pol lution could not be underta ken. The samplers were installed at 
unapproved locations. The instruments for measuring air quality at monitoring 
stations were installed in violation of the guidelines.  This has the risk of 
generating inaccurate and non-representative results. 
The annual mean value of Respirable Suspended Particulate Matter  (PM10) 
was very high and ranged between 87μg/m 3 and 295μg/m 3 against the 
prescribed limit (60.00μg/m 3) in test checked  21 Ambient Air Quality 
Monitoring Stations. There was no follow up action to reduce the pollution 
levels. Periodic survey to identify the sources of air pollution  and the adverse 
impact on eco -system as well as human health was neither done by RSPCB 
nor were any action plan prepared with clear timelines to reduce the air 
pollution. 
Information on type and number of vehicles and meteorological data with 
respect to t emperature, relative humidity, wind speed and its directions was 
neither collected by the RSPCB nor maintained at the 27 Ambient Air Quality 
Monitoring Stations test checked as required under National Air Quality 
Monitoring Programme guidelines.  
RSPCB does not have consolidated data of category wise number of industrial 
units covered under consent mechanism in the State. It had neither conducted 
any survey nor coordinated with other departments to effectively discharge its 
regulatory functions to cover all industrial units under its consent mechanism. 
The RSPCB did not evolve any mechanism to watch the renewal of consent to 
operate after expiry of the validity period of consent issued earlier. There was 
inordinate delay in issuing consents and consents were  also issued with 
retrospective effect in some cases.  Test check of 573 cases of the selected 
Regional Offices revealed that 74 industries had run without consent to 
operate for periods ranging from 14 to 3038 days. During joint inspection,  
12 units were found operating though their Consent to Operates had expired. 
Number of detection and death cases  due to silicosis  showed continuous 
increase. Detection and death cases were 304 and one respectively in 2012 -13, 
which increased to 4931 and 449 respectively in 2016-17.  
 

Chapter I: Introduction 
 
 
5 
In compliance with the  recommendation of the Rajasthan Human Right s 
commission, RSPCB had committed to carry out Ambient Air Quality 
Monitoring periodically near clusters of mines/quarries. However,  audit 
observed that the details of clusters  of mines were not provided by the 
Director Mines and Geology to the RSPCB. In absence of this, the RSPCB 
had neither prepared any plan for frequency of inspection nor had started 
ambient air monitoring nearby mining clusters.  
All units of Kota Super Thermal Power station (KSTPS) and Chhabra Thermal 
Power Plant (CTPP) were operating without obtaining consent to 
operate/renewal of consent to operate which was the violation of provision of 
the Air Act. 
It was also seen that i n Jaipur though 33 brick kilns ha d not even applied for 
Consent to Establish/Consent to Operates , no concrete steps were taken by 
RSPCB against these units. Further, three brick kilns were found operat ing 
without consent to operate  during inspections carried out by the respective 
ROs despite the fact that closure notices were issued to them about six years 
ago. 
The Transport Department also failed to prepare an action plan to phase out 
15-year-old vehicles. No action was taken to ensure that the Pollution Under 
Control Certificate centres were functioning as per prescribed norms.  The 
Transport Department neither conducted any survey to identify the places with 
heavy traffic nor was pollution load assessed in major cities of the State. There 
were only 22 Pollution Flying Squad s (PFS) covering 10 out of 12 regions for 
monitoring of polluting vehicles. Two region comprising six districts had no 
PFS. Further, Transport Department did not have data of number of vehicles 
which were found emitting excess pollutants during inspections by the flying 
squads.     
During joint inspection of Pollution Under Control (PUC) centres, it was 
observed that Transport Department had issued licences without verifying the 
site and equipment of PUC centres as 20 licensees had not installed equipment 
but they had the  requisite licenses from the Transport Department. In 10 
instances, PUC certificates were issued by the operator of PUC centres 
without testing of vehicles. In Udaipur, one centre was generating 
computerised certificates on plain paper from computer while these should 
have been issued on stationery allotted from Rajasthan Petroleum Dealers 
Association.    
There was shortfall in conducting inspection of highly polluting industrial 
units during 2012-17 to the extent of 48 to 60 per cent. 
Number of stack sampl es analysed by Central Laboratory reduced by 50 per 
cent in 2016 -17 when compared to the year 2012 -13 indicating decreased 
testing. 
(Paragraph 2.1) 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
 
6 
1.6.2 Significant audit observations arising out of Compliance Audit 
Adherence to Environmental Issues on Mining Activities in Rajasthan 
Mineral extraction activities in the State are regulated under the provisions of 
the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 and 
rules/policies made thereunder. Mining leases/quarry licences are granted b y 
the Mines and Geology Department, Government of Rajasthan. The applicant 
has to obtain approvals before the grant of mining lease/quarry licence for 
diversion of forest land for non -forest purposes and Environmental Clearance  
(EC) from Ministry of Enviro nment and Forest, Government of India or State 
Level Environment Impact Assessment Authority as the case may be along 
with Consent to Establish and Consent to Operate from Rajasthan State 
Pollution Control Board ( RSPCB). After the grant of Mining Licence, the 
lessee is required to furnish reports on production of minerals and the 
measures for environmental protection to the Mines Department and RSPCB. 
We observed that Mines were operated without renewing the Consent to 
Operate. Mineral production was enhanc ed without obtaining the 
Environmental Clearance and there was excess excavation of minerals by the 
lease holders in violation of conditions attached with Consent to Operate.  
Illegal mining activit y was prevalent in the State. There were inadequacies in 
preventive measures as well as in follow up of the illegal mining cases 
detected. There was slackness in implementation of the policy measures 
enunciated in 2011 for curbing illegal mining. Also, there was lack of 
deterrence due to delay in issue of notices  for raising demand and recovery of 
the penal amount from illegal miners. 
We also noticed violations of the orders of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of 
India as mining leases falling in Aravalli mountain  range were granted , 
renewed and extended.  Besides, the M inistry of Environment and Forest also 
granted Environmental Clearance  for mining lease despite the area falling 
under the Aravalli hill range. 
We also observed that e nvironmental issues related to mining activities were 
not accorded due attention by the De partment and RSPCB. The Department 
had not prescribed any periodical return requiring the lease holders to furnish 
information regarding the observance of conditions related with environmental 
protection as prescribed in M ining Plan, Environment Clearance and Consent 
to Operate. The inspection reports of the Department also did not focus on the 
environmental issue s. Out of 136 leases under selected Mining 
Engineers/Assistant Mining Engineers offices, the RSPCB had conducted 
inspections in 38 leases only dur ing 2010-17. Further, 106 lease holders had 
not submitted any reports and 118 lease holders had not submitted the Annual 
Environment Statement during the operative period of the Consent to Operate. 
Further, the inspection reports were incomplete, incorrect  and unreliable as 
was confirmed through comparison of the findings of joint physical inspection 
conducted by us vis-a-vis the RSPCB inspection reports.  The site inspections 
pointed out serious deficiencies and neglect towards fulfilment of 
environmental conditions relating to top soil, overburden dumps, plantation, 
construction of garland drain, air pollution control measures, noise pollution 

Chapter I: Introduction 
 
 
7 
control measures, reclamation and rehabilitation measures and mining in 
benches.  
The State Government levied Envi ronment and Health Cess in 2008 on 
selected major minerals . The  proceeds of which were to be utilised for 
protection of environment  and health and maintenance of ecolog ical balance 
especially in the mining areas of the State, but the  funds were sanctioned for 
activities which did not meet the objectives for which the cess was collected . 
The Department also collected (₹ 295.03 crore ) under the ‘Environment 
Management Fund’ for environment protection works which was not utilised 
in absence of any guidelines.  
(Paragraph 3.1) 
Development of Water Catchment through Greening of Rajasthan 
A project ‘Development of Water Catc hment through Greening of Rajasthan’ 
for rehabilitation of degraded forest was planned by the State Government. It 
was planned to treat about 52,750 hectares of degraded land during the period 
2012-13 to 2016 -17. The project was carried out in selected 17 districts1 out 
of total 33 districts. 
It was noticed that at the time of preparation of micro plans due importance 
was not given to the base line work which resulted in various shortcomings 
and discrepancies besides non -review of micro plans even after  lapse of 
prescribed two years’ period. The categorization of degraded forest land was 
not done during the planning stage in absence of  which correctness and 
authenticity of categorization of the same could not be ascertained. 
 Instances of non -adherence to technical parameters such as distribution of 
sub-standard/un-certified seeds, execution of plantation works without 
obtaining technical sanctions, plantation of immature plants were noticed.  In 
case of construction of soil and water conservation structures , there were 
cases of deviation from micro plans and required permission from state level 
committee was not obtained before construction of the same.  
In case of execution of Joint Forest Management Activities , there were 
blockage of funds a t Village forest protection/management committee 
(VFPMC) level, lack of sufficient representation of women and lack of 
adherence of instructions regarding prescribed number of general meetings  
and inspection of VFPMCs. It was also noticed that an entire package of the 
project viz. Convergence through Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme  were not implemented.  The norms for 
monitoring and evaluation by internal as well as external agencies were not 
fulfilled.  
(Paragraph 3.2) 
Implementation of Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization Project 
The State Government decided (2012 -13) to connect all the villages having 
population between 250 and 499 (Census 2001) with all -weather bituminous 
                                                 
1  Ajmer, Alwar, Baran, Bundi, Bharatpur, Chittorgarh, Dausa, Dholpur, Jhalawar, Karauli, 
Kota, Pratapgarh, Rajasamand, Sawai Madhopur, Sirohi,  Tonk and Udaipur. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
 
8 
roads in a phased manner in the areas of the state not covered by Pradhan 
Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana . To achieve this, the Rajasthan Road Sector 
Modernization Project was launched by Government of Rajasthan in 2013 -14. 
The project envisaged improvement in rural connectivity , strengthening of 
road sector management and enhancement in road safety. 
The department did not provide the information whether all villages having 
population between 250-499 were taken into account in the plan for providing 
connectivity with all -weather bituminous roads. A few civil works are yet to 
be completed pending resolution of disputes on land availability.  Norms 
related to quality control as maintenance of Part -II of quality control register 
were not fulfilled by some of the selected divisions and required number of 
inspection at different stages of civil work were also not conducted by State 
Quality Monitor officers. Works in key areas related to second component i.e. 
road sector modernization and performance enhancement for rural road sector 
modernization plan were delayed. Similarly, work related to safe  corridor 
demonstration programme related to third component was also delayed. 
(Paragraph 3.3) 
Non-compliance with provisions of Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana  
guidelines and awarding of work without making proper arrangement of funds 
resulted in non -completion of roads after incurring an  expenditure of ₹  2.61 
crore and the objective of provid ing all-weather road connectivity to the 
targeted habitations was defeated.  
(Paragraph 3.4) 
As curing compound was not used by the contractors and curing was done by 
using water, the payment of ₹ 83.55 lakh by Public Works Department,  was 
irregular and resulted in undue benefit to the contractors. 
(Paragraph 3.5) 
Work order for construction of bypass road on National Hi ghway-112 (Bar -
Bilara-Jodhpur Section) was awarded without ensuring the availabilit y of land 
and non -shifting of high tension lines in time . Therefore , road connectivity 
could not be provided to the habitations even after incurring an expenditure of 
₹ 9.50 crore. 
(Paragraph 3.6) 
While making payment to contractors on account of price escalation for 
labour, steel, cement, bitumen, POL, plant and machinery and other material 
components, the date of opening of technical bid was considered for 
calculating the payment of price escalation  by Public Works Department  
instead of the date of opening of financial bid. This resulted in an excess 
payment of price escalation of ₹ 1.02 crore. 
(Paragraph 3.7) 
Avoidable expenditure of ₹ 4.19 crore was incurred due to w rong inclusion of 
items of excavation of earth, construction of granular sub -base and laying of 
compacted graded stone aggregate in the estimates of construction of cement 
concrete roads under Gramin Gaurav Path Scheme. 
 (Paragraph 3.8) 

Chapter I: Introduction 
 
 
9 
Against the rule of  financial propriety, irregular expenditure of ₹  80.28 lakh 
was incurred on two roads under  Gramin Gaurav Path  Scheme which were 
already constructed under other scheme. 
 (Paragraph 3.9) 
Due to non -awarding of work of Canal and Dam simultaneously, there was 
blocking of expenditure of ₹  9.21 crore on construction of Dam and the 
farmers were deprived of the irrigation facilities for more than six years. 
Besides, ₹ 93.24 lakh under clause 3 o f the agreement was not recovered from 
contractor by Water Resources Department. 
(Paragraph 3.10) 
Failure to obtain of clearance of forest land before start of the work resulted in 
blocking of funds of ₹  39.87 crore on construction of canal in parts  by Water 
Resources Department. It also resulted in deferment of benefits of irrigation 
facilities to be provided to the farmers. 
(Paragraph 3.11) 
1.7 Response of the Departments to Performance Audit/Compliance 
Audit Paragraphs 
The draft paragraphs are forwarded to the Additional Chief Secretary/Principal 
Secretary/Secretary of the departments concerned, drawing their attention to 
the audit findings and seeking their response on these findings. It is brought to 
their personal attention that in view of likely inclu sion of such paragraphs in 
the Audit Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, which are 
placed before State Legislature, it would be desirable to include their 
comments. They are also advised to have meetings with the Accountant 
General to discuss the performance audit/draft paragraphs proposed for 
inclusion in the Audit Report. Accordingly, the performance audit/draft 
paragraphs proposed for inclusion in this Report are forwarded to the 
Additional Chief Secretary/Principal Secretary/Secretary concerned.  
All the replies to draft paragraphs and perfor mance audit furnished by the 
State Government have been appropriately incorporated in the Report. 
 1.8 Follow-up on Audit Reports 
The Finance Depart ment of the Sta te Government deci ded (December1996) 
that Action Taken Notes on all p aragraphs/performance audits that have 
appeared in Audit Reports be su bmitted to the Public Accounts Com mittee, 
duly vetted by Audit, within three months from the date of laying of the 
Reports in the State Legislature. A review of the outstanding Action Taken 
Notes on paragraphs/perfor mance audits included in the Reports of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India pertaining to  various Economic 
Sector Departments as of  December 2017 revealed that three Action Taken 
Notes were pending from the concerned Departments. 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
 
10 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter II 
 
Performance Audit 

 
11 
 
Chapter II 
Performance Audit 
This chapter  includes the performance audit  on Role of Rajasthan State 
Pollution Control Board in controlling air pollution in the State. 
Environment Department 
 
2.1 Role of Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board in 
controlling air pollution in the State 
Executive Summary 
The responsibility of prevention, control and abatement of air pollution under 
the provisions of Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 is 
entrusted to the Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board (RSPCB). 
 
The five cities of Rajasthan i.e. Alwar, Jaipur, Jodhpur, Kota and Udaipur  
are in the list of top 100 polluted cities in the world  and are considered as 
‘non-attainment’ cities by Centra l Pollution Control Board (CPCB ). These 
cities have not met the National Ambient Air Quality Standards consecutively 
over three years’ period. The source apportionment studies were not carried 
out in these cities to identify and quantify the sources of pollution. In absence 
of which  RSPCB could not prepare comprehe nsive programmes for 
prevention, control or abatement of air pollution.  
                                                             (Paragraph 2.1.6.1 and 2.1.6.2) 
 
In case of National Capital Region (NCR) area or non -attainment cities of 
the State, no a ction plans were submitted by the concerned department/ 
authority. Resultantly directions issued by CPCB could not be monitored by 
RSPCB, hence, most of the actions given in the direction could not be 
initiated. 
              (Paragraph 2.1.6.3) 
 
As of Mar ch 2017, only 32 Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Stations and two 
Continuous Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Stations were operating in six 
districts while 27 districts having 47.03 million population and 74.50 lakh 
vehicles were still out of the purview of air quality monitoring.  It was also 
seen that RSPCB and Environment Department did not have meaningful data 
of the sources of pollution in rural areas  in absence of which planning to 
mitigate pollution could not be undertaken. 
                                                                                              (Paragraph 2.1.7.1) 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
12 
 
The annual mean value of Respirable Suspended Particulate Matter ( RSPM) 
(PM10) ranged between 87μg/m 3 and 295μg/m3 which exceeds the prescribed 
limit (60.00μg/m3) in all 21 Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Stations. Periodic 
survey to identify the sources of air pollution and the adverse impact on eco -
system as well as human health was neither done by RSPCB nor were any 
action plan prepared with clear timelines to reduce the air pollution. 
In Jodhpur, the first measurement of PM 2.5 was taken after 42 months of 
installation of sampler and only 19 measurements were taken up to June 2015 
against 120 measurements required to be taken. In absence of proper 
monitoring of PM 2.5, the purpose of procuring the costly equipment was 
defeated. 
                                                                                              (Paragraph 2.1.7.2) 
 
The samplers were installed at unapproved locations . The instruments for 
measuring air quality at monitoring stations were installed in violation of the 
guidelines. This has the risk of generating inaccurate and non -representative 
result. 
Information on type and number of vehicles and meteorological data with 
respect to temperature, re lative humidit y, wind speed and its direction  was 
neither collected by the RSPCB nor maintained at the 27 Ambient Air Quality 
Monitoring Stations test checked as required under National Air Quality 
Monitoring Programme guidelines.  
                                                                                              (Paragraph 2.1.7.3) 
 
RSPCB does not have consolidated data of category wise number of industrial 
units covered under consent mechanism in the State. It had neither conducted 
any survey nor coordinated with other departments to effectively discharge its 
regulatory functions to cover all industrial units under its consent mechanism. 
In joint inspections of 148 industrial units by audit team along with 
representatives of Regional Offices  (ROs), RSPCB, it was found that 15 
industrial units were operating without even consent to establish.  
                                                                                             (Paragraph 2.1.8.1) 
 
The RSPCB did not evolve any mechanism to watch the renewal of consent to 
operate after expiry of the validity period of consent issued earlier. There was 
inordinate delay in issuing consents and consents were issued with 
retrospective effect in some cases. Test check of 573 cases of the selected ROs 
revealed that 74 industries had run without consent to operate for periods 
ranging from 14 to 3038 days. During joint inspection, 12 units were found 
operating though their CTOs had expired. 
                                                                                              (Paragraph 2.1.8.2) 
 
Number of detection and death cases of silicosis were continuously increasing. 
Detection and death cases were 304 and one respectively  in 2012-13, which 
increased to 4931 and 449 respectively in 2016-17.  
                                                                                             (Paragraph 2.1.8.3) 
 
 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
 
13 
 
In compliance with recommendation of Rajasthan Human Right s commission, 
RSPCB had committed to carry out Ambient Air Quality Monitoring 
periodically near clusters of mines/quarries. However, the details of clusters 
of mines were not provided by the Director, Mines and Geology to the RSPCB. 
In absence of this, the RSPCB had neither prepared any plan for frequency of 
inspection nor had started ambient air monitoring near mining clusters. 
(Paragraph 2.1.8.4) 
                                                                                           
All units of Kota Super Thermal Power station (KSTPS) and Chhabra Thermal 
Power Plant (CTPP) were o perating without obtaining consent to 
operate/renewal of consent to operate  which was the violation of provision of 
the Air Act. 
                                                                                              (Paragraph 2.1.8.5) 
 
 
In KSTPS, prescribed standards of Particulate Matter (150 mg/Nm 3) and 
RSPM (100μg/m 3) could not be achieved as  Particulate Matter remained 
between 174 and 952mg/Nm3 and RSPM remained between 110 and 202μg/m 3 
for the period 2012-13 to 2016-17. 
 (Paragraph 2.1.8.6) 
                                                                                               
 
In Jaipur, 33 brick kilns had not even applied for Consent To 
Establish/Consent To  Operate (CTE/CTO). N o concrete steps were taken by 
RSPCB against these units. Further, three brick kilns were found operating 
without consen t to operate regularly during inspections carried out by the 
respective ROs despite the fact that closure notices were issued to them about 
six years ago. 
                                                                                  (Paragraph 2.1.8.9) 
 
In seven stone crusher units in Udaipur, Suspended Particulate Matter (SPM) 
level had exceeded the prescribed limits (600 μg/m 3) and ranged between 
2286 and 4685μg/m 3. However, the Regional Officer renewed CTO without 
ensuring adherence to the norms as n o further sample analysis report was 
found on record. 
                                                                                (Paragraph 2.1.8.10) 
                           
The Transport Department also failed to prepare an action plan to phase ou t 
the 15 -year-old vehicles. No action was taken to ensure that the Pollution 
Under Control Certificate centres were functioning as per prescribed norms. 
                                                                                           (Paragraph 2.1.10.1) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
The Transport Department neither conducted any survey to identify the places 
with heavy traffic nor was pollution load assessed in major cities of the State.  
                                                                                           (Paragraph 2.1.10.2) 
 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
14 
 
Only 22 Pollution Flying Squads (PFS) were covering 10 out of 12 regions for 
monitoring of polluting vehicles. Two region s comprising six districts had no 
PFS. Further, Transport Department did not have data of number of vehicles 
which were found emitting excess poll utants during inspections by the flying 
squads.  
                                                                                          (Paragraph 2.1.10.4) 
    
During joint inspection of Pollution Under Control (PUC) centres, it was  
observed that Transport Department had issued licences without verifying the 
site and equipment of PUC centres as 20 licensees had not installed equipment 
but they had the requisite licenses from the Transport Department. In 10 
instances, PUC certificates were issued by the operator of PUC centres 
without testing of vehicles. In Udaipur, one centre was generating 
computerised certificates on plain paper from computer while these should 
have been issued on stationery allotted from Rajasthan Petroleum Dealers 
Association.  
(Paragraph 2.1.10.6) 
                                                                                                                                                                
Manpower management in RSPCB was poor. The vacancies were steadily 
increasing thus impacting the effective functioning of the Board. 
                                                                                            (Paragraph 2.1.11.3) 
 
There was shortfall in conducting inspection of highly polluting industrial 
units during 2012-17 which ranged between 48 and 60 per cent.         
                                                                                            (Paragraph 2.1.12.1)                                                                                                                                     
 
Number of stack samples analysed by Central Laboratory reduced by 50 per 
cent in 2016 -17 when compared to the year 2012 -13 indicating decreased 
testing. 
                                                                                            (Paragraph 2.1.12.2)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
 2.1.1 Introduction 
Air pollution has become a growing concern in the past few years, with an 
increasing number of acute air pollution episodes in many cities worldwide. 
Ambient (outdoor) air pollution alone kills around three million people each 
year, mainly from non -communicable diseases. Air pollution continues to rise 
at an alarming rate, and affects economies and quality of life in all regions. Air 
pollution has also been identified as a global health priority in the sust ainable 
development agenda.  
Sources of Air Pollution 
The commonly identified sources of air pollution are: 
Natural: Forest Fire, Windblown dust such as road dust, soot, physical 
processes of crushing, grinding and abrasion of surface, Volcano es, Lightning, 
etc. 
Manmade - Burning of fossil fuels, smelting of metals, Road traffic emissions 
from vehicles, Non -combustion processes (e.g. quarrying), Agricultural 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
 
15 
 
activities, Burning of crop residues, Tobacco smoke, Wood smoke, Industrial 
emissions, fly ash, etc. 
Substances that are generally recognized as air pollutants include SPM1, 
RSPM2, Sulphur Dioxide (SO 2), Nitrogen Oxide (NO 2), Carbon Monoxide 
(CO), Carbon Dioxide (CO 2), Methane and Ozone depleting substances such 
as Chlorofluorocarbon (CFC).  These polluta nts adversely affect man and 
material, flora and fauna equally.  
As per the World Health Organisation’s (WHO) report on ‘Ambient Air  
Pollution 2016, India has the highest number of polluted cities in the world. 
Out of the 100 most polluted cities in the wo rld, India has 33, while 22 cities 
among the top 50 most polluted cities are in India. 
There are five cities of Rajasthan in this list of top 100 polluted cities in the 
world: Jodhpur, Jaipur, Kota, Udaipur and Alwar.  
According to the Indian Council of Me dical Research’s ( ICMR’s) Health of 
the Nation’s States Report 2017, the contribution of air pollution to disease 
burden remains high in India, with levels of exposure among the highest in the 
world. It causes burden through a mix of non -communicable and i nfectious 
diseases, mainly cardiovascular diseases,  chronic respiratory diseases  and 
respiratory tract infections. The burden of outdoor air pollution has increased 
due to a variety of pollutants from power production, industry, vehicles, 
construction and waste burning. The burden due to outdoor air pollution is 
highest in a mix of northern states, including  Rajasthan, Haryana, Uttar 
Pradesh and Punjab. 
The Report also highlights that Rajasthan has the dubious distinction of faring 
significantly higher than the national mean in ter ms of death rates caused due 
to pulmonary diseases, lower respiratory  tract infections and Asthma. 
Similarly, Rajasthan has the highest ratio of the Disability Adjusted Life Years 
(DALY) rate attributable to air pollution in the co untry and it is the second 
biggest reason for loss of life in the State, after malnutrition. 
Air Quality Index (AQI) is a tool for effective communication of air quality 
status to people in terms which are easy to understand. It transforms complex 
air qual ity data of various pollutants into a single number (index value), 
nomenclature and colour. There are six AQI categories, namely Good, 
Satisfactory, Moderately polluted, Poor, Very Poor, and Severe. Each of these 
categories is decided based on ambient conc entration values of air pollutants 
and their likely health impacts (known as health breakpoints). As per Central 
Pollution Control Board’s (CPCB) bulletin of Ambient Air Quality ( January 
2016), the analysis of AQI values in Rajasthan during September 2015 
indicates that only six per cent AQI values are in good category, 49 per cent in 
satisfactory, 41 per cent in moderate category, two per cent are poor and two 
per cent are in severe category. This indicates the adverse impact of pollution 
on the health of the people of the state. 
                                                 
1  Suspended Particulate Matter are microscopic solid or liquid matter suspended in earth’s 
atmosphere. 
2  Particulate matters with aerodynamic diameter less than or equal to 10 micrometers thus 
also name as PM10.  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
16 
 
Organizational Structure 
Environment Department 
The Department of Environment in Rajasthan  was established in September 
1983. The Department is headed by Additional Chief Secretary (ACS) assisted 
by Secretary, Director and Joint Secretary. The Department has been entrusted 
with the responsibility of prevention and control of atmospheric pollution 
including all matters connected with the RSPCB. The ACS is responsible for 
formulation of policy regarding environment protection and over all 
monitoring of authorities like RSPCB. 
Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board 
The RSPCB was constituted under Section 4 of the Water (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 (February 1975) with the objective of 
prevention and control of water p ollution. Later, it was entrusted with the 
responsibility of prevention, control and abatement of air pollution under the 
provisions of Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 (The Act). 
The RSPCB has a two -tier structure with headquarters at J aipur and Regional 
Offices at 15 locations3. The RSPCB has established one Central Laboratory at 
Jaipur and four regional laboratories at Alwar, Jodhpur, Kota and Udaipur. In 
addition to this, eight regional laboratories are partially operative. The RSPCB 
is headed by the Chairperson.  
Monitoring of air pollution is the responsibility of the Board under the Air Act 
while the control of vehicular pollution is the responsibility of the Transport 
Department under Central Motor Vehicle s Act, 1988 and Rules, 198 9. The 
Board was to lay down the standards for automobile emission under Section 
17(1) (g) of the Air Act and the State Government in consultation with the 
Board was to instruct the Transport Department under Section 20 of the Air 
Act to ensure the compliance with the standards laid down. 
2.1.2 Audit Objective 
A Performance Audit of ‘ Role of Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board in 
controlling air pollution in the State ’ was conducted with the objective to 
assess whether the planning, implementation and m onitoring for prevention, 
control and abatement of air pollution were proper, adequate and effective.  
2.1.3 Audit Criteria 
 
The Audit criteria were derived from: 
 Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and rules framed 
there under; 
 The Central  Motor Vehicle s Rules, 1989 notified under the Motor 
Vehicle Act, 1988 and Rajasthan Motor Vehicle Rules, 1990; 
 Rajasthan State Environment Policy, 2010; and 
                                                 
3 Alwar, Balotra, Bharatpur, Bhilwara, Bhiwadi, Bikaner, Chittorgarh, Jaipur (North), Jaipur 
(South), Jodhpur, Kishangarh, Kota, Pali, Sikar and Udaipur. 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
 
17 
 
 Notifications, circulars and orders issued by Government of India, State 
Government, Central Pollution Control Board and RSPCB. 
2.1.4 Audit Coverage and Methodology 
 
A Performance Audit of Role of Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board in 
controlling air pollution in the State was conducted covering the period from 
2012-13 to 2016 -17 in the office of the RSPCB at Jaipur along with Central 
Laboratory, six  Regional Offices 4 (ROs) out of 15 and four  Regional 
Laboratories5. Relevant records in the Departments of Env ironment and 
Forest, Transport and respective Implementing Agencies 6 were also 
scrutinized. Five ROs were selected on the basis of  the World Health 
Organisation’s Report (2016) on hundred most polluted cities of the world . 
These were the only ROs where ambient air quality monitoring was done by 
RSPCB (during the period of audit). Further one Regional office, Bhiwadi was 
selected as it has critically polluted industrial cluster and is ranked sixth 
among 88 clusters in the Comprehensive Environmental Pollution Index 
prepared by CPCB (2009). Besides it is part of the NCR. 
The audit team with the repr esentatives of concerned Regional Offices, 
RSPCB jointly visited 148 industrial units 7 and 33 air monitoring stations 8 
under the jurisdiction of six selected ROs. Besides, 120 PUC centres were also 
jointly visited along with the flying squad of concerned f ive Regional 
Transport Offices. 
The reply of the State Government has not been received.   However, a udit 
findings were discussed in the exit conference (11 October 2017)  and on the 
basis of discussion,  the State Government response has suitably been 
incorporated in the paragraph.  
Audit Findings 
The audit findings are discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
2.1.5 Financial Arrangement 
 
Financial resources of RSPCB comprised water cess, consent fees and other 
receipts. Position of income and expenditure of the R SPCB for the period 
from 2012-13 to 2016-17 is given in Appendix-2.1. 
 
The CPCB co-ordinates with the RSPCB to ensure uniformity and consistency 
of air quality data and it provides technical and financial support to RSPCB 
for operating the Monitoring Stati ons in the State. The total receipts and 
                                                 
4 Alwar, Bhiwadi, Jaipur (North), Jodhpur, Kota and Udaipur. 
5 Alwar, Jodhpur, Kota and Udaipur. 
6 Pollution Under Control centres (PUC centres) 
7 Thermal power plants, cements, stone crusher, brick kiln etc. 
8 27 Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Stations and six Continuous Ambient Air Quality 
Monitoring Stations 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
18 
 
expenditure under National Air Quality  Monitoring Programme9 (NAMP) 
during 2012-13 to 2016-17 were ₹ 0.90 crore and ` 0.85 crore respectively. 
It was noticed that:  
 the percentage of surplus funds ranged between 62 and 74 per cent of 
total funds available during the respective years.  
 out of the total expenditure of ₹ 108.41 crore (2012-16), only 12 per cent  
(₹ 13.52 crore) was spent on project activities under various Acts10 and the rest 
on establishment and other expenses.  
 huge surplus funds11 were parked in the fixed deposits and PD account s. 
As a result, ₹ 12.46 crore was paid as income tax during the last four years. 
It is clear from above that there was a meagre expenditure on projects to 
control pollution in the State. 
Audit also observed that activities and programmes were affected due to laxity 
in planning, implem entation, lack of enforcement of  rules and poor 
management information system as discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
 
2.1.6 Planning 
 
Planning forms one of the most important aspect of project 
implementation. It includes sequence of activities, pro grammes, action 
plans, etc. to achieve specific goals. The planning for implementation of 
project activities were marred by lack of comprehensive programme t o 
prevent pollution, not taking up of apportionment studies and  non-
preparation of action plans besides other activities as discussed below: 
2.1.6.1 Lack of comprehensive programmes to prevent and control air 
pollution 
 
According to Section 17 of the Act, RSPCB was required to prepare 
comprehensive programmes for prevention, control or abatement of air 
pollution. The programmes should have included steps for Control of 
Vehicular Emissions such as action against visibly polluting v ehicles, action 
plan to che ck fuel adulteration and random monitoring of fuel quality data, 
Control of Road Dust/Re -suspension of dust and other fugitive 12 emission. 
This was to be done through formulation of action plans for creation of green 
buffers along the traffic corridors,  Control of Industrial Air Pollution  such as 
action against unauthorized brick kilns and industrial units not complying with 
standards, etc.  
It was seen that RSPCB had not initiated effective programmes for prevention 
and control of air pollution in the State . Audit observed  that the RSPCB 
                                                 
9  The CPCB had started National Ambient Air Quality network during 1984 -85 which was 
later renamed as National Air Quality Monitoring Programme (NAMP) 
10  The Water (Prevention and  Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, The Environment Protection 
Act, 1986, The Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991 etc. 
11 As on 31.03.2012 FDR was ₹ 189.57 crore, as on 31.03.2013 ₹ 244.77 crore, as on  
31.03.2014 ₹ 293.44 crore, as on 31.03.2015 ₹ 332.41 crore and as on 31.03.2016  total 
FDR was ₹ 386.24 crore. Balance in  PD A/c was ₹ 12.73 crore as of 31 March 2016. 
12  Fugitive emissions are emission of gases or vapours from pressurised equipment due to 
leaks and other unintended or irregular release of gases, mostly from industrial activities.  

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
 
19 
 
merely forwarded the instructions issued by the CPCB to the executive 
departments but did not follow up on them. There was lack of coordination 
between the RSPCB and other relevant departments  which led to non -
identification of sources of air pollution along with their quantification 
through source apportionment studies as discussed in succeeding paragraphs.  
2.1.6.2 Source Apportionment studies not undertaken 
Apportionment studies include preparation of emission inventories,  
monitoring of ambient air quality for various pollutants, chemical speciation13 
of ambient PM 1014 and PM 2.515 of source emission to assess the contribution 
from various sources, future projections and evaluation of various control 
options to develop cost-effective action plans or intervention for mitigating air 
pollution.  
The constituent of Sulphur Dioxide, Nitrogen Oxide and particulate matter in 
the environment should be within standards fixed by CPCB . The cities whic h 
do not fulfill the standards we re con sidered as non -attainment cities. It was 
seen that in Rajasthan, five cities 16 are considered as ‘non -attainment’ 
consecutively over three years ’ period17. Consequently, Central Pollution 
Control Board  suggested (August 2014) to the RSPCB to evolve effective  
action plans and undertake source apportionment studies. CPCB also urged 
(January 2015) RSPCB to submit action plans and carry out source 
apportionment studies in the ‘non -attainment cities’ with population o f more 
than a million. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that no action for source apportionment studies was 
undertaken by RSPCB. However , the RSPCB in its meeting (July 2016) 
approved a proposal of ` 1.12 crore for conducting air quality assessment, and 
source apportionment study only in Jaipur city. As per the  Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) with Indian Institute of Technology ( IIT), Kanpur 
(January 2017), the study would be completed by July 2018. The RSPCB, 
therefore, took 23 months to initiate the source apportionment study for one 
out of three cities having a population of more than one million. 
In absence of source apportionment studies in ‘non -attainment’ cities, the 
RSPCB failed to get fundamental inputs for policy making and could not  
formulate an effective strategy and action plan to combat air pollut ion in these 
cities.  
Secretary, Environment Department  stated in the exit conference that source 
apportionment studies must be carried out as per directions of the CPCB and 
expertise from IITs must be sought by RSPCB.  Chief Environment Engineer 
stated that the study involves large data analysis. It was also stated that trained 
technical staff are required to accomplish the task but resources are limited. 
                                                 
13  Quantity mass concentration an d significant PM10 or PM2.5 constitutes which include tra ce 
elements sulfate, nitrate, sodium, potassium, ammonium and carbon. 
14  Particles with a diameter between 2.5 and 10 micrometers, a health hazard. 
15  Fine particles with a diameter of 2.5 micrometers or less, a health hazard. 
16 Alwar, Ja ipur, Jodhpur, Kota and Udaipur (three of these i.e. Jaipur, Jodhpur and Kota 
having population of more than one million) 
17  During 2011 to 2013. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
20 
 
However, RSPCB would make concerted efforts to take up such studies on 
priority once the first study was completed. 
2.1.6.3 Non-preparation of action plans 
Under Section 18 (1) (b) of the Act, the CPCB issued (December 2015) 
directions to the RSPCB for prevention, control or abatement of air pollution 
and improvement of National Ambient Air Quality in Delh i and NCR which 
included 42 action points (Appendix-2.2) within specified18 timelines.  
CPCB further issued (July 2016) directions to the RSPCB to improve the air 
quality, particularly in the  areas of non-attainment cities. These steps required 
a multipronged, sustained and integrated approach including close monitoring 
of implementation. The direction included 31 actions points19 to be undertaken 
within a clear specified timeframe. Most of the activity was to be completed 
within 180 days.  Action plan on these points was to be submitted to the CPCB 
within 45 days. Accordingly, RSPCB issued (January and July 2016)  
directions under Section 31 -A of the Act to the various 
authorities/departments20 for implementing the directions of CPCB. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that in case of non -attainment cities, no action plans 
were submitted by any department/authority (April 2017). Thus directions 
issues by CPCB could not be monitored by RSPCB.  Further in case of NCR, 
action plans were not submitted by five departments21 to th e RSPCB even 
after lapse of more than one year. As a result, planning for implementation of 
measures as prescribed could not be made. 
This was indicative of the fact that RSPCB failed to take  concrete steps for 
expediting preparation of action plans in abs ence of which most of the actions 
to be undertaken for improving the air quality had not been initiated in both 
NCR and non-attainment cities. (April 2017). 
The Secretary, Environment Department informed  during exit conference that 
Central Government had issued (January 2017)  the notification of Graded 
Action Plan at the direction of S upreme Court but its execution wa s quite 
difficult because of resource constraints. The  Chief Env ironment Engineer, 
RSPCB stated  that response to the directions issued b y RSPC B about the 
action plans wa s being received from concerned departments and latest 
progress in this regard would be made available to audit. 
2.1.7 Implementation 
The Rajasthan State Environment Policy 2010 considered the air quality 
monitoring network of th e State to be inadequate and envisaged its 
enhancement. Possibilities of implementing PPP models for effective air 
quality monitoring across the State by involving the private sector as well as 
                                                 
18 Actions on 39 points were to be completed within 90 days and remaining actions within a 
year. 
19  Among these, 25 points were also covered in 42 points related to NCR. 
20  Department of Transport, Mines and Petroleum, Local Self Government, Food and Supply,  
Urban Development and Housing, Agriculture etc. 
21 Food and Supply, Mines and Petroleum, Transport, Local Self Government, Urban 
Development and Housing. 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
 
21 
 
research and academic institutes were also to be explored. The implementation 
included installation of  Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Station  (AAQMS) 
and Continuous Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Station ( CAAQMS)22 and 
monitoring the sources of pollution. 
2.1.7.1 Functioning of AAQMS 
Environment Department, Government  of Rajasthan after consultation with 
the RSPCB had declared 23 the whole of the State of Rajasthan as air pollution 
control area for the purpose of the Act . Thus, the RSPCB was required to 
operate air quality monitoring stations covering all the cities of the State. 
 There were only 21 AAQMS in five cities 24 till the year 2010. It was 
seen that no AAQMS was established in the State during 2010 -15. Audit 
scrutiny revealed that 11 AAQMS were established in four  cities25 during 
2015-17 (out of 15 AAQMS sanctioned between March 2006 and December 
2015) with delays ranging from two to nine years. The reasons for delay s in 
establishment of AAQMS were not intimated to audit. Besides, two  
CAAQMS26 were also in operation since July 2012. It was also seen that the 
RSPCB confined the air quality monitoring network to only six districts 27 out 
of total 33 districts in the State. 
This is indicative of the fact that RSPCB failed to enhance adequate ly the air 
quality monitoring network in the State. It is to be noted that there are  other  
27 districts having 47.03 million population with 74.50 lakh vehicles which 
were still out of the purview of air quality monitoring.  
 During test check of records of Regional Office Jodhpur it was also seen 
that no air quality monitoring was done a t any of the six stations in Jodhpur 
during March to October 2014 due to stoppage of work by its Field Assistant. 
No alternative arrangements were made by the RSPCB for regular monitoring. 
In absence of regular monitoring, the purpose of setting up of AAQM S was 
defeated.  
 For the Rural areas , the CPCB had sought (June 2015) a detailed 
proposal for establishment of 10 manual ambient air quality stations for the 
State to capture the air quality data and build database on crop residue 
burning. However, no prop osal was submitted  by the RSPCB (September 
2017). As a result, the RSPCB and Environment department did not have 
meaningful data of the sources of pollution in rural areas. 
Thus in the absence of data relating to air pollution in rural areas and lack of 
air quality stations in urban areas to capture the air quality data, the planning 
to mitigate pollution could not be undertaken. 
The RSPCB replied (June 2017) that due to lack of infrastructural  facilities 
and human resources  it was not possible to monitor a mbient air quality in 
                                                 
22  CAAQMS is an automatic real time monitoring station. 
23  Notification issued (February 1988) by the Secretary, Department of Environment, GoR. 
24  Alwar, Jaipur, Jodhpur, Kota and Udaipur. 
25  three in Bhiwadi (two in 2015 and one in 2016), three in Bharatpur (one in 2015 and two in 
2016), three in Kota (in 2016) and two in Jaipur (in 2017). 
26  One each in Jaipur and Jodhpur. 
27  Alwar, Bharatpur, Jaipur, Jodhpur, Kota and Udaipur 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
22 
 
other areas. The Chief Environment Engineer, RSPCB stated during exit 
conference that at present 10 Real Time/Continuous Ambient Air Quality 
Monitoring Stations and 36 manual air quality monitoring systems we re in 
operation. It was al so stated that RSPCB wa s planning to establish five more 
Real Time/Continuous Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Stations in the State. 
However, the fact remains that only 32 AAQMS and two CAAQMS were in 
operation during the review period  and that to o in only six districts of the 
State. Further, as brought out earlier there was no constraint of funds. 
2.1.7.2 Monitoring of air pollutants 
The CPCB had notified National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) in 
November 2009 with 12 identified pollutants. It inclu ded five gaseous 
pollutants such as Sulphur Dioxide (SO 2), Nitrogen Oxide (NO2), Ozone (O3), 
Carbon Monoxide (CO) and Ammonia (NH 3), two dust related parameters 
(PM10 and PM 2.5), three metals (Lead, Nickel and Arsenic) and two organic 
pollutants (Benzene and BaP-particulate). 
Audit scrutiny revealed that the RSPCB was monitoring only three air 
pollutants i.e. SO2, NO2 and RSPM/PM 10 regularly at all the 32 AAQMS.  
PM2.5 was being monitored only at two AAQMS 28. The reasons for not 
analyzing all 12 pollutants in  all AAQMS were called for. The RSPCB stated 
that (June 2017) lack of infrastructural facilities was the main reason for not 
analyzing all the pollutants. Secretary, Environment Department stated in exit 
conference that all over Ind ia only three major poll utants we re being 
monitored at all air monitoring stations and the remaining were studied only in 
specific situations. The reply should be seen in the light of the fact that in a 
review meeting held (July 2014) on NAMP , it was suggested by Chairperson, 
CPCB that the other notified parameters should also be included in the 
monitoring mechanism. CPCB had communicated (December 2014) to the 
RSPCB the need to upgrade the AAQMS  to measure  five more parameters.  
This was indicative of the fact that despite availab ility of funds RSPCB failed 
to strengthen the infrastructure facilities in monitoring of air pollution.  
Measurement of SO2, NO2 and PM10 
Scrutiny of the results of analysis reports in respect of the 21 stations 29 located 
in the five cities for the years 2012 to 2016 revealed that: 
 The annual mean value of SO2 ranged between 5.10 μg/m3 and 13.50 μg/ 
m3 which was within the prescribed limit (50.00 μg/m3). 
 The annual mean value of NO 2 ranged between 19.40μg/m 3 and 
54.32μg/m3 which slightly exceeded the prescribed limit (40.00μg/m3).  
 The annual mean value of RSPM (PM 10) ranged between 87μg/m 3 and 
295μg/m3. This pollutant always exceeded the prescribed limit (60.00μg/m 3) 
in all 21 AAQMS for the five -year period from 2012 to 2016. Audit analysis 
revealed that annual mean value was ranging in two cases between 60μg/m 3 
and 100μg/m 3; in 48 cases between 101μg/m 3 and 150μg/m 3; in 27 cases 
                                                 
28   Jaipur and Jodhpur. 
29  Scrutiny of monitoring data of 21 AAQMS which were established prior to 2012 was 
undertaken. 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
 
23 
 
between 151μg/m3 and 200μg/m3; and in 28 cases, it was more than 200μg/m3. 
It is evident from analysis that PM 10 always exceeded the prescribed limit but 
periodic survey to identify the sources of air pollution and  the adverse impact 
on eco-system as well as human health was neither done by RSPCB nor were 
any action plans prepared with clear timelines and commitment to reduce the 
air pollution. 
Measurement of PM2.5  
Measurement of PM2.5 was not monitored adequately in the State.  
  As per National Ambient Air Quality Standards, the a nnual arithmetic 
mean of  104 measurements of PM2.5 in a year at a particular site should be 
taken by measuring the level twice a week 24 hourly at uniform intervals. 
It was observed that during May to December 2012 (except July 2012) no 
measurement of PM 2.5 was made in Jaipur while only one sample was 
analysed in the month of April 2012. Samples were not anal ysed twice a week 
as required during August to December 2011 and only 20 samples were 
analysed against the required 40 during the period. Scrutiny of analysis reports 
for the station for the period from July 2011 to March 2017 revealed that the 
test results were almost within the permissible limits except on 29 occasions 
wherein the concentration values exceeded slightly and ranged between 60.57 
μg/m3 and 104.76μg/m3 against National Ambient Air Quality Standards of 60 
μg/m3. 
Audit scrutiny also revealed th at two out of three PM 2.5 samplers purchased 
for Jaipur and Jodhpur were not working adequately as discussed below: 
 The RSPCB placed supply order (February 2010) for three 30 PM2.5 
sampler31 at a cost of ` 15.92 lakh for monitoring PM2.5 in Jaipur and Jodhpur. 
Out of these three samplers, (November -December 2010) one each was 
installed in Jaipur and Jodhpur and one was kept on standby at Jaipur. 
Monitoring of PM 2.5 commenced from July 2011 and May 2014 in Jaipur and 
Jodhpur respectively. As the s ampler at Jaip ur was not working properly it 
was replaced by another one. During scrutiny of records of RO, Jodhpur it has 
been observed that PM2.5 sampler was out of order since June 2015. As of May 
2017 only one sampler in Jaipur was in working condition and two  samplers32 
were out of order. However, the RSPCB could not resolve this problem within 
the warranty period33.  
 In Jodhpur, the first measurement of PM 2.5 was taken after 42 months of 
installation of sampler and only 19 measurements were taken up to June 2015 
against 120 measurements required to be taken. Thereafter, it was mentioned 
on record that the instrument was not working. In absence of monitoring of 
PM2.5, the purpose of procuring the costly equipment was defeated.  
Monitoring of Benzene level not initiated 
Benzene is one of the hydrocarbons present in the atmosphere at trace level. It 
is an atmospheric pollutant that may have effect on human health. Escape of 
                                                 
30  two for Jaipur and one for Jodhpur 
31  Thermo Fisher Make Model Partisol 2000 FRM 
32  One each in Jaipur (March 2015) and Jodhpur (June 2015) 
33  Effective from the date of satisfactory installation. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
24 
 
Benzene is controlled at petrol pumps by a d evice called a Vapour Recovery 
System. Further as per the NAAQS set by the CPCB, the permissible level of 
Benzene is 5μg/m3. 
During review of records of RSPCB, it was noticed that: 
 No plan to monitor and control the benzene level was made;  
 The RSPCB did not carry out any testing of benzene level near the reta il 
petrol/diesel stations in any city of the State. 
 The RSPCB did not ensure installation of Vapour Recovery System at 
the retail petrol/diesel stations. 
 Out of 3592  Automobile Fuel Outlet 34 (Dispensing) in the State, t he 
RSPCB issued only 26 Consent to Est ablish (CTEs) and Consent to Operate 
(CTOs) to Automobile Fuel Outlet (Dispensing) so far in three districts35.  
In absence of above, the RSPCB could not assess the health hazard and adopt 
measures to control and regulate the pollutants from various sources  and their 
harmful effects. 
Secretary, Environment Department agreed and stated in exit conference that 
monitoring of air pollutants should be on daily basis so that improvement can 
be made in the system. 
2.1.7.3 Joint Inspections of Air Quality Monitoring Stations 
Audit along with team s from regional offices of the Board conducted joint 
inspection of 33 monitoring stations (27 AAQMS and  6 CAAQMS) out of 
total 42 Monitoring stations 36 (Appendix-2.3). Following irregularities were 
noticed: 
Installation of Respirable Dust Samplers at unsuitable site /un 
approved locations  
According to NAMP guidelines, a site is representative if the data generated 
from the site reflects the concentrations of various pollutants and their 
variations in the area. The station shoul d be located at a place where 
interferences are not present or anticipated. In general, the instrument must be 
located in such a place where free flow of air is available. The instrument 
should not be located in a confined place, corner or a balcony. If lo cation of 
monitoring station is not representative of the area, the data may not be useful 
for drawing any interpretation. 
During joint inspection it was noticed that 12 instruments for measuring air 
quality at AAQMS/CAAQMS were installed contrary to the g uidelines. These 
instruments were located close to a wall and/or surrounded by buildings, trees, 
water overhead tank, etc. which restricted free flow of air. Details are given in 
Appendix-2.4. 
Further test check of records revealed that  in Jaipur, monitori ng of PM 2.5 is 
being carried out at the campus of RSPCB, Jhalana Dungri which is an 
                                                 
34 Number of PSUs retail outlets as informed by State Level coordinator - Indian Oil 
Corporation Limited- Jaipur. 
35  Churu (1), Dholpur (2) and Chittorgarh (23). 
36  32 AAQMS and 10 CAAQMS (eight Analyzers were on trial)  

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
 
25 
 
institutional area. This area is far from dense population, free from vehicular 
pollution and there are no commercial and industrial activities. Also, the 
station was surrounded by trees. Similarly, in Jodhpur, the PM 2.5 sampler was 
placed in an area surrounded with trees. 
Installation of the air -monitoring instruments at a non -polluting and non -
representative location has the risk of generating inaccurate and non -
representative result. 
Unsuitable site and un approved location of Monitoring Station 
 
Sampler was installed at corner of roof at M/s Jain Irrigation Limited, Alwar in place of 
approved location and surrounded by trees which was in contravention of NAMP guidelines  
The NAMP guidelines state that the objective of monitoring is to measure 
trends in air quality and measurements are t o be conducted over a long time. 
The site should be selected in such a manner that it remains a representative 
site for a long time and no land use changes, rebuildings, etc. are foreseen in 
near future.  
It was noticed that in seven cases, the samplers were installed at locations 
other than the approved locations as detailed in Appendix-2.5 
No approval for change of sites was found on record. The respective ROs were 
continuously sending monitoring results against the names of  originally 
approved locations. Secretary, Environment Department stated during exit 
conference that it wa s a technical issue and the guidelines of CPCB m ust be 
followed in this regard. 
Other important findings during Joint Inspections  
As per NAMP guidelines, information on type and number of vehicles, 
meteorological data with respect to temperature, relative humidity, wind speed 
and wind direction should be collected by RSPCB. 
During the joint inspections audit observed: 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
26 
 
 Information regarding type and number of vehicles was not maintained 
by any monitoring station. No assessment was made by the RSPCB in this 
regard even at the time of setting up of these monitoring stations. 
 In all AAQMS, no  measurement of meteorological data with respect to 
temperature, relative humidity, wind speed and direction was carried out as 
there was no such measuring instrument/equipment.  
 Site sheltering facilities like shade for protection from  rains, sunlight, 
etc. were not available in all AAQMS. 
 Instruments were not calibrated by 18 AAQMS out of 27 during  
2012-17. In Jodhpur, calibration was being done regularly in all six centres 
while in three AAQMS, Udaipur it was done only in November 2015. 
 As per the NAMP guidelines, field assistants should hold masters degree 
in Environmental Chemistry for measurement of pollutants at AAQMS. Audit 
scrutiny, however, revealed that only one field assistant was a science 
graduate. Some had passed class 10 or class 12 only. 
 There was lack of facility fo r power back up in all AAQMS.  In 
AAQMS, Sojatigate, Jodhpur, at the time of joint inspection, there was power 
cut and due to lack of standby arrangement, the sampler was not operational. 
 
2.1.8 Industrial Pollution 
 
Industrial pollution occurs when factories (o r other industrial plants) emit  
harmful by-products and waste into the environment. In order to contain the 
pollution, RSPCB provides consent to establish/ o perate for each industrial 
unit. The main sourc es of industrial pollution in Rajasthan were Mining, 
Thermal Power Plants, Brick Kilns, Stone Crushing Industries , Cement plants 
etc. Scrutiny of records of RSPCB as well as joint inspections of industrial 
units revealed the following:  
2.1.8.1 Industries functioning without consent 
According to Section 21 of the Act, no person shall, without the previous 
consent of the State Board, establish or operate any industrial plant in an air 
pollution control area. Further, Section 17 of the Act requires the State Board 
to inspect air pollution control areas, assess the quality of air therein and take 
steps for the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution in such areas. 
This implied that RSPCB was required to conduct periodical survey s and 
coordinate with o ther State Government Departments like the Department of 
Industries to identify polluting industries.  
 Industries are  categorised37 as red, orange, green and white category 
based on their pollution load.  There were 4,29,339 units38 registered with the 
Industries Department  and Department of Inspection of Factory and Boilers 39 
                                                 
37  Ministry of Environment and Forest releases new categorisation of industries on dated  
5 March 2016. 
38   Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises -415709, Large-366 and Factory and Boilers-13264 
39   Data based on calendar year 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
 
27 
 
in the State as of March 2015 40. However, the RSPCB did not have 
consolidated data of category wise number of industrial units.   
The RSPCB is required to issue consent to establish for e ach industr y other 
than the white category41. 
 It was noticed that d uring review of records in selected ROs except 
Jodhpur42, 2168 ‘Consent to Establish’ (CTE) were issued during 2012 -15 by 
these ROs for establishment of industrial units in the cities in their jurisdiction. 
During the same period, 27,678 new industries, factories  and boilers 43 were 
registered in the cities under the jurisdiction of the selected ROs as ascertained 
from the data of Department of Industries and Department of Inspection of 
Factory and Boilers. Only eight per cent  industrial units registered were, 
therefore, given the consent to establish . Thus, it is evident that the industries 
were allowed to operate without the required ‘consent to establish’. 
 In joint inspections of 148 units44 by audit team with representatives of 
Regional Offices, RSPCB, it was found that in  15 instances45, industrial units 
were operating without even consent to establish.  
Secretary, Environment Department stated during exit conference that total 
number of indust ries may not be taken into consideration as many of them 
may not be polluting units. However, the Government and the RSPCB 
accepted that the complete list of polluting i ndustries was not available with 
RSPCB. Audit’s view is that the RSPCB neither coordina ted with the 
Department of Industries and Department of Inspection of Factory and Boilers 
nor made any other effort to identify actual number of polluting industries so 
that all could be brought under the consent regime.  
One of the most important prerequi sites to determine the action that was 
required to be taken to control air pollution, therefore, was not fulfilled. 
2.1.8.2 Shortcoming in issuing of consent 
Industrial units have to apply for renewal of c onsent granted to industries 
under Section 21 of the Act within a reasonable period46 of its validity. As per 
sub-section (4), the RSPCB was required to issue consent within a period of 
four months after the receipt of the consent application referred to in sub 
section (i).  Action was supposed to be taken under Section 31 -A of the Act 
against the defaulter units if these were operating even after expiry/refusal of 
consent. According to Rule 15 of Rajasthan (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Rules, 1983, RSPCB was to maintain consent register in Form VIII 
as required under section 51 of the Act. 
                                                 
40 As per GoI’s notification dated 18.9.15, every MSME shall file Udyog Aadhaar 
Memorandum through online  including existing enterprises due to which old registered 
industrial units also allowed for reregistration. 
41  According to RSPCB order dated 31 May 2016, white category units are not required to 
obtain CTE/CTO. 
42   Information not furnished by RO, Jodhpur 
43   Data based on calendar year. 
44   Brick kilns-32, stone crusher-61 and other industrial units-55 
45   Brick kilns-10, stone crusher-2, industries-3 
46   120 days in advance prior to expiry of previous consent. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
28 
 
During scrutiny of records of RSPCB Headquarter and six selected ROs, it 
was seen that the RSPCB did not evolve any mechanism to watch the renewal 
of consent after expiry of the validity period of consent issued earlier.  RSPCB 
was unable to produce the exact number of consent s expiring during the audit 
period. The number of industrial units in operation without consent of RSPCB 
could not be ascertained in absence of maintenance of data by the RSPCB. 
Further shortcomings were observed as follows: 
 Consolidated data regarding validity period of the consent issued to 
industrial units was no t maintained by any selected RO  except RO, Bhiwadi 
where 83 applications for renewal were obtained against the required 192 
applications for renewal of consent during 2016 -2017. No further action was 
found on record against those units which had not applied for renewal. Test 
check of 573 cases 47 of the selected ROs revealed that 74 industries 48 had run 
without consent to operate for periods ranging from 14 to 3038 days. Out of 
these, 23 units were still in operation. During joint inspection, 12 units were 
found operating though their CTOs had expired.  
 On scrutiny of information provided by selected ROs 49, it was observed 
that 19 CTEs 50 and 514 CTOs51 had either expired or were denied during the 
period 2012-17. The Board, however, did not evolve any mechanism to ensure 
that such industrial units did not operate after rejection of consent applications 
or expiry of validity of consent. 
 In test checked 4070 consents out of 6159 CTOs issued during 2012 -17 
by six ROs, it was noticed that 568 ‘consents’ were not issued within the 
prescribed time and the delay ranged between three and 1977 days. Further, 
the consents were issued with retrospective eff ect52. Delayed issuance of 
consents and making these effective retrospectively implied that the industrial 
units did not need to ensure compliance with the required conditions. 
 It was also observed that consents were issued to 83 industrial units for 
the pe riod before the date of filing applications. This implied that industrial 
units were operating without consent before the date of filing application and 
the RSPCB had regularized such period without ascertaining the emission 
norms and observance of required conditions during the period. 
  Consent register was not maintained  by RSPCB Headquarter s and 
selected ROs. The purpose of consent register was to monitor information on 
type of operation or process, consent classification, date of installation of air 
pollution control equipment, emission standards and consent conditions as 
required under the Rules. Due to non -maintenance of consent registers, 
various important parameters could not be effectively monitored. 
Deficiency mentioned ibid was indicative of failure to utilise the existing 
mechanism to monitor all the industrial units regularly. 
                                                 
47 In Alwar-100, Bhiwadi-85, Jaipur (North)-95, Jodhpur- 92, Kota-114 and Udaipur-87 
48 In Alwar-8, Bhiwadi-10, Jaipur (North)-10, Jodhpur- 23, Kota-18 and Udaipur-5 
49 Except Jaipur (North) which did not furnish information. 
50 In Kota-9, Udaipur-4 and Jaipur (North)-6, 
51 In Kota-80, Udaipur-35, Jodhpur-183, Alwar-182 and Bhiwadi-34 
52 In 675 consents out of 4070 test-checked (retrospective effects ranging from four to 1983 
days). 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
 
29 
 
2.1.8.3 Silicosis: A threat to the life of mine workers 
Silicosis is a fibrotic lung disorder caused by inhalation, retention and 
pulmonary reaction to crystalline silica. It is an incurable disease that results 
in slow and painful death. The workers of stone quarries and crushers, sand 
blasting, foundries, ceramic industries, gem cutting and polishing, slate/pencil, 
construction, glass manufacture and all mining industries are particularly 
prone to it due to inhalation of silica dust during their working. In order to 
prevent such disease wet drilling53 measures are to be adopted in mining units. 
There were about 2,548 silicosis prone mining units in the State54 such as sand 
stone, quartz and silica sand. 
It was seen that 7,959 silicosis cases were detected 55 out of which 32.78 per 
cent cases pertained to Jodhpur district during January 2015 to February 2017. 
In Five districts 56 the number of silicosis patients detected and the nu mber of 
deaths during 2013-17 were as under: 
Table: 1 Number of detection and death cases of silicosis 
Year Number of silicosis cases 
detected 
Number of affected 
persons who have died 
2013-14 304 01 
2014-15 905 60 
2015-16 2,186 153 
2016-17 1,536 235 
Total 4,931 449 
Source: Office of State/District T.B. Officer, Medical and Health Department.  
The data given in above table raises serious concern regarding management of 
silicosis. 
2.1.8.4 Lack of robust enforcement in mining units to contain 
silicosis 
The Rajasthan State Human Rights Commission (RSHRC) prepared a special 
report (December 2014) on the matter of prevalence of silicosis amongst 
workers employed in mines in Rajasthan and sent it to the Ministry of Labour 
and Employment (MoLE), Government of India with a direction to take action 
on the recommendations contained therein.  
The MoLE forwarded (September 2015) the recommendations of RSHRC to 
the Director, Department of Mines and Geology (DMG), Rajasthan and 
Member Secretary (MS), RSPCB for further  action on the recommendations 
related with them. The MS, RSPCB sent (November 2015) a reply to the 
Deputy Registrar, RSHRC, according to which the RSPCB had committed to 
                                                 
53  Wet drilling means use of drills either operated with dust extractors or equipped with water 
injection system. 
54  Source: data uploaded on website of Department of Mines and Geology, Udaipur  
55 According to information provided by the Director (Public Health), Medical and Health 
Service, Rajasthan. 
56  Alwar, Jaipur, Jodhpur, Kota and Udaipur. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
30 
 
carry out Ambient Air Quality Monitoring periodically near clusters of 
mines/quarries. The RSPCB sought (May 2016 and September 2016) the 
details of mining clusters located in the State from DMG but the details were 
not provided by the DMG to the RSPCB (April 2017).  In absence of this, the 
RSPCB had neither prepared any plan for frequency  of inspection nor had 
started ambient air monitoring nearby mining clusters. 
The Director, Mines and Geology, Udaipur had also submitted (December 
2014) Action Taken Report on the recommendations. According to a 
recommendation of RSHRC, flying squads cons isting of officers of Mining 
Department and RSPCB were to be constituted. The DMG wrote (January 
2015) to the Principal Secretary, Mines and Petroleum, GoR for constituting 
joint teams consisting of respective Mining/Assistant Officers and Regional 
Officers, RSPCB. However, no joint flying squad was constituted even after 
lapse of two years (May 2017). 
Significant findings relating to mining activities in Rajasthan are discussed 
separately in chapter 3.1. 
Emissions by Thermal Power Plants 
Thermal Power Plan ts (TPPs) are highly polluting and are classified under 
‘Red’ category. The power plants cause air pollution due to excess emission of 
Particulate Matter and other gases. Two 57 out of seven58 coal based TPPs were 
selected for joint inspection.  
 
Kota Thermal Power Plant is Rajasthan's first major  coal-fired power plant. It 
is located on the east bank of the  Chambal River near Kota. There were seven 
units in Kota Super Thermal Power Station (KSTPS) havin g capacity of 1240 
Megawatt (MW). Chhabra Thermal Power Plant (CTPP) is located at Chowki 
Motipura in Baran district. There were four units in CTPP with 1000 Mega 
Watt capacity. During review of records relating to these Power Projects, the 
following issues were observed: 
2.1.8.5 All units were operating without obtaining CTO/renewal of 
CTO 
Prior consent of the RSPCB is mandatory for establishing or operating 
industrial plant in an air pollution control area. 
Review of records of CTPP indicated that the Units I and II were granted CTO 
up to 31 August 2015, Unit III was granted CTO up to 30 November 2014 and 
Unit IV had started production with effect from 30 December 2014 but it did 
not have the required CTO from the RSPCB (April 2017). Thereafter, CTOs 
of these units were not renewed. As a result, all the four units were operating 
without CTOs. Reply from the RSPCB is still awaited. 
Further, it was observed that the KSTPS was granted CTO for the period from 
1 July 2013 to 30 June 2015 for all seven units. The consent applicatio ns for 
renewal submitted (27 Febru ary 2015) by the KSTPS were  still (April 2017) 
                                                 
57 Kota Thermal Power Plant (Kota) and Chhabra Thermal Power Plant (Baran) 
58 Suratgarh (Sriganganagar ), Kota (Kot a), Barmer (Barmer) , Motipura (Baran), Barsingsar 
(Bikaner), Gurha (Bikaner) and Thumbli (Barmer) 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
 
31 
 
pending with the RSPCB due to non -compliance with the conditions such as 
non-operation of Air Pollution Control Machines (APCMs) installed at coal 
yard and coal crusher, non -interlocking of all units of Electrostatic 
Precipitators (ESPs) and lack of details about detection range, calibration, 
frequency, signals, linear factors, etc. The RSPCB in exercise of the powers 
conferred upon it under the provisions of Section 31 -A of th e Act issued  
(5 November 2015 and 12 January 2017) show cause notices 59. The reply of 
the last show cause notice was still awaited (April 2017). However, the plants 
were being continuously operated. Thus RSPCB failed to take action under 
Section 37 of the Act against KSTPS for not complying with the directions 
issued under Section 31 -A. As a result , excess emission continued from 
KSTPS as detailed in the succeeding paragraph. 
2.1.8.6 Excess emission 
Scrutiny of the stack and ambient monitoring reports revea led that the 
emission level of Particulate Matter and RSPM exceeded the prescribed level.  
All the seven units of KSTPS had pollution control arrangements and ESP to 
arrest the fly ash, yet the prescribed standards of Particulate Matter (150 
mg/Nm3) and RS PM ( 100μg/m3) could not be achieved by the units as 
Particulate Matter remained between 174 and 952mg/Nm 3 and RSPM 
remained between 110 and 202μg/m 3 for the period 2012 -13 to 2016 -17. It 
was observed from the records of KSTPS that the ESPs were not working 
efficiently60.  
Though RSPCB had issued show cause notices to KSTPS , no effective steps 
to improve efficiency of ESPs were taken by the KSTPS. 
2.1.8.7 Disposal of fly ash 
Coal ash is the waste that is left after coal is combusted. It includes fly ash 61 as 
well as coarser materials that fall to the bottom of the furnace. Coal ash mainly 
comes from coal-fired electric power plants. 
Ministry of Environment and Forest ( MoEF) issued (November 2009) 
notification for 100 per cent utilization of Fly Ash by all Coal/Lign ite based 
Thermal Power Stations in the country in a progressive manner. The Thermal 
Power Stations which were in operation before the date of notification were 
required to achieve the target of Fly Ash utilization in five years from the date 
of issue of n otification. The new Thermal Power Stations coming into 
operation after the MoEF’s notification were to achieve the target of Fly Ash 
utilization in fourth year from their date of commissioning. This condition was 
incorporated in the CTO and RSPCB had to ensure compliance. 
Scrutiny revealed that in KSTPS, 330000 MT fly ash was lying as of April 
2013 which was reduced by 48.37 per cent and 170371 MT fly ash remained 
                                                 
59 Due to intense fugitive emissions of coal dust, non -providing acoustic enclosures with 
Diesel Generating sets, unavailability of infrastructural monitoring facility with the boiler, 
non-maintenance of log books of operation of APCMs etc. 
60  Many fields of ESP were out of charge on regular basis. 
61  fine powdery particles that are carried up the smoke stack and captured by pollution control 
devices. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
32 
 
in balance as of March 2017. Thus, the MoEF notification was not complied 
with. During review of records in CTPP, it was observed that t he fly ash and 
bottom ash disposal in CTPP during 2010 -11 to 2016 -17 (up to September 
2016) was 42.12 lakh MT against the generation of 48.76 lakh MT during the 
same period. About 6.64 lakh MT of ash, therefore, remained in the ash ponds.  
2.1.8.8  Joint Inspection Findings 
During joint inspection by audit team along with the Regional Officer, 
RSPCB, Kota, the following shortcomings in KSTPS and CTPP were noticed 
which were against the CTO conditions: 
    Intense fugitive emissions of coal dust were observed in KSTPS while in 
CTPP, intense fugitive emission of coal dust was observed in and around 
factory premises. Coal was stored at open places. At some places, coal was 
burning due to which smoke emission was observed. 
    Diesel Generating sets were not provided with acoustic enclosures for 
containing noise in KSTPS. 
    Infrastructural monitoring facility was not provided with the Boiler in 
KSTPS. 
    Log books of operation of APCMs were not being maintained in KSTPS. 
    Infrastructural facility for monitoring of stack emission was not available 
at Unit VI of KSTPS and, therefore, no stack sample of this unit was collected 
and analysed by the RSPCB. 
    There was no ambient air monitoring station at the periphery of the 
factory premises of CTPP. Only one mobile van was available for this 
purpose. 
    Plantation was not carried out as per norms in CTPP. 
Inspection reports of the Regional Officer, Kota also confirmed these 
observations.   
The RSPCB thus failed to take concre te steps under Section 31 -A. against the 
high polluting units which continued violating the consent conditions. 
During exit conference RSPCB stated that although the Power Plants were not 
complying with all the norms, keeping in view their criticality it w as not 
feasible to shut them down. Audit is of the view that RSPCB must continue to 
make concerted efforts to improve compliance with environmental norms in 
the plants. 
Brick Kilns 
2.1.8.9 Pollution from brick kilns 
Clay bricks are produced in Rajasthan in  small or cottage scale brick kilns. 
The raw materials in the brick kilns include topsoil, coal, paddy husk, fly ash, 
wood & locally available agro wastes to some extent. Brick manufacturing 
process generates emissions which consist of mainly coal fines an d dust 
particles. Coal fines and du st particles are health hazards  and these pollutants 
weaken the immune system of human beings.  Brick kilns are orange category 
units. 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
 
33 
 
The RSPCB prepared a draft guideline for abatement of pollution in brick 
kilns industry and uploaded it on its website in 2012. However, the RSPCB 
had not approved this guideline so far.  
The RSPCB did not have any consolidated data about number of brick kilns 
that were covered under consent mechanism. The RSPCB was also unable to 
ascertain the actual number of brick kilns operating in the State in absence of 
any survey/study conducted to identify these units. 
Scrutiny of information provided by RO, Jaipur (North), disclosed that 33 
brick kilns had not even applied for CTEs and CTOs. No concr ete steps were 
taken against these units.  In 32 cases, though CTOs had expired during 
September 2002 to December 2015, no application for renewal of consent was 
submitted. In course of joint inspection, four of  these 32 units were found 
operational. There  were 16 brick kilns which had taken CTEs but had not 
applied for CTOs. The RO (North) Jaipur replied that due to shortage of 
manpower, no survey was done and, therefore, operating status of brick kilns 
was not available. Thus, there was no mechanism to ch eck the operating status 
of brick kilns.  
Further, scrutiny of inspection reports revealed that closure notices were 
issued to three brick kilns by two ROs 62 as these kilns were operating 
unauthorizedly after expiry of validity of CTOs. However, all three u nits were 
found operating regularly during inspections by the ROs despite the fact that 
closure notices were issued to them about six years ago. 
Member Secretary, RSPCB stated during exit conference that brick kilns are 
located even in villages and it is n ot possible for the RSPCB to carry out air 
monitoring of the same as per prescribed monitoring frequency. However, the 
RSPCB may look into the option of getting the air quality monitoring 
conducted through third party. 
Stone crushing industry 
2.1.8.10 Control of air pollution from stone crushing industry 
Stone crushing industry is classified under Red category and the main 
pollutants arising from this industry ar e SPM and RSPM . MoEF prescribed 
standard of SPM to be not more than 600 μg/m3 at a distance betwe en three 
and 10 meters from any process equipment.  There were 644 stone crushers in 
selected ROs. However, the ROs were not aware of the functional status of the 
stone crusher units. Besides, ROs had not maintained data regarding number 
of inspections done of stone crusher units and ambient samples analysed. 
Scrutiny of files in RO Udaipur revealed that a special joint inspection carried 
out by the team of District Collector with the officials of RSPCB had observed 
that in seven cases, the SPM level had ex ceeded the prescribed limits (600 
μg/m3) and ranged between 2286 and 4685μg/m 3. The RO served show cause 
notices to all seven units and issued closure directions to two units. In 
response to the show cause notices, the units replied that compliance with the 
observations had been made. However, the RO renewed CTO  without 
                                                 
62 Alwar and Bhiwadi 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
34 
 
ensuring adherence to  the norms as no further sample analysis report was 
found on record. 
Member Secretary, RSPCB accepted the facts and stated during exit 
conference that stone crushers are  located at industrial areas and on converted 
revenue land also. Therefore, the concerned authorities like Industries 
Department, Revenue Department or Rajasthan State Industrial Development 
and Investment Corporation Limited (RIICO) may inform the RSPCB w hile 
granting the permission for establishment of stone crusher so that RSPCB may 
take necessary action.  
2.1.8.11 Joint Inspection Findings of Cement, Brick Kilns and Stone 
Crushing Industries 
In test checked ROs, six out of 30 cement plants, 32 out of 332 brick kilns, 61 
out of 644 stone crushing units and 49 other industrial units were jointly 
visited by audit team along with the representative of respective ROs. Out of 
these 148 units, findings related to cement, brick kilns and stone crushing units 
are discussed below while  findings related to Thermal Power  Plants were 
discussed earlier. No significant issues were observed in other industrial units 
except three units 63 where industrial plants were operating without obtaining 
consent to establish.  
The fi ndings noticed were against the provisions of the Act and CTO 
conditions as mentioned below: 
 
 Plantation was inadequate in 77 industrial units64. 
 In one cement plant, raw materials were lying in open area while in two  
other cement plants, raw materials were partially lying in open areas. 
 In one cement plant, internal road was rough due to which intense fugitive 
emission was observed while in another cement plant road was partially 
rough. 
 Water sprinkling was not done in two cement plants. In one cement plant  
water sprinkling was partially done. In 46 stone crushing industries, water 
sprinkling systems were not in operation. 
 No air pollution measuring device was installed in one cement plant.  
 10 units of brick kilns and two stone crushers were operating witho ut 
obtaining CTE while eight brick kilns and four stone crushers were in 
operation despite the fact that validity of the CTO issued to these units 
had expired or were refused.  
 Infrastructure facilities for stack monitoring were inadequate in 22 brick 
kilns of Jaipur district. 
 In 28 brick kilns, inspections were not carried out and stack samples were 
not taken and analysed by respective ROs. 
 Dust containment cum suppression systems did not exist in 53 stone 
crushing units. 
                                                 
63   M/s Marwar Chemical. Jodhpur, M/s Om Chemical and Mineral, Jodhpur and M/s Raj Art      
and Handicraft, Jodhpur. 
64   One cement industry, 30 brick kilns and 46 stone crushing industries. 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
 
35 
 
 In 45 stone crushing units, the approach roads were without hard surfaces. 
 Wind breaking walls were not constructed in 41 stone crushing units. 
 In 16 stone crushing units, water storage capacity with minimum 3000 
litre was not available. 
 In 45 stone crushing units, ambient air monitoring was not done. 
 
If the conditions, subject to which CTO has been granted were not fulfilled, 
the consent should have been cancelled before the expiry of the period for 
which it was granted or further consent should have been refused after such 
expiry under Section 21 (4) of the Act. However, the RSPCB did not take any 
concrete action except issuing notices.  
Member Secretary, RSPCB accepted the audit observation in exit conference.  
During test check of records it was however also seen that Ultra Tech Cement 
plant in Jaipur was operating efficiently and was complying with the emission 
norms. 
Besides above, scrutiny of records of Regional Office, Alwar, revealed that 
not even a single report of health check -up of workers related to three metal 
industries was fo und on record. According to conditions mentioned in CTOs, 
the industrial units were required to periodically examine the industrial 
workers at least once in a year for lead level in blood as well as urine. Persons 
found having higher lead level were required to be shifted immediately to non-
lead activity areas and given special treatment till the lead levels returned to an 
acceptable level (10μg/m3). 
This indicated that the industrial units as well as Regional Officer, RSPCB 
were not sensitised adequately about the adverse impact of lead on health of 
workers of metal industries. 
2.1.9 Crop residue burning 
Crop residue burning is one among the many sources of air pollution. It results 
in the emission of smoke which if added to the gases present in the air like 
methane, nitrogen oxide and ammonia, can cause severe atmosph eric 
pollution. These gaseous emissions can result in health risk, aggravating 
asthma, chronic bronchitis and decreasing lung function. 
Government of Rajasthan after consultation with the RSPCB issued (August 
2015) a notification regarding prohibition of b urning of left over straw in 
whole of Rajasthan State. 
During review of records of the RSPCB, it was found that the National Green 
Tribunal (NGT) in its decision regarding application number 118/2013 h ad 
ordered (December 2015) that all the State Governmen ts and the Pollution 
Control Boards should ensure that small land ho lding farmers are provided 
with machines for extracting agricultural crop res idue in their respective 
fields, the State Governments should, in coordination with Indian Space 
Research Organ ization, National Remote Sensing Agency and State Remote 
Sensing Agency, develop real time monitoring mechanism.  
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
36 
 
The RSPCB issued (January 2016) directions to the Principal Secretary, 
Department of Agriculture, GoR under Section 31A of the Act to curb ai r 
pollution due to biomass burning and sought an action plan and compliance 
report so that same could be submitted to the CPCB. However, no action plan 
as required by the RSPCB was submitted (April 2017) by the Agriculture 
Department. 
Besides, the RSPCB had no data of burning of crop residue during 2012 -16 in 
the State. It could not be ascertained whether the RSPCB was monitoring the 
pollution from burning of agricultural residue properly. 
During exit conference RSPCB stated that this was a very small issue  for 
Rajasthan as this practice was not widely prevalent in the State. Reply may be 
viewed in the light of the fact that the Commissioner and Special Secretary, 
Agriculture raised (February 2016) a demand of ` 6.50 lakh on the RSPCB for 
conducting study of  crop burning area through Satellite Remote Sensing 
Technology on the proposal of State Remote Sensing Application Centre, 
Jodhpur. However, the RSPCB had not released any funds for this purpose 
(April 2017) for which reasons were not found on record.  As a result, neither 
the RSPCB nor the Agriculture department was  in a position to identify the 
actual locations and number of cases of crop burning. 
2.1.10 Vehicular pollution 
Under Section 20 of the Act, the Transport Department was authorized to 
control ve hicular pollution. The major vehicular pollutants are carbon 
monoxide, nitrogen oxides, photochemical oxidants, air toxics namely 
benzene, aldehydes, 1 -3 butadiene, lead, particulate matter, hydrocarbon, 
oxides of sulphur and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbo ns. While the 
predominant pollutants in petrol/gasoline driven vehicles are hydrocarbons 
and carbon monoxide, the predominant pollutants from the diesel based 
vehicles are oxides of nitrogen and particulates. 
2.1.10.1  Lack of strategic planning for re -registration/renewal of  
15 years old vehicles 
As a result of amendments (March 2002) in the Motor Vehicle s Act, 1988, the 
registration of all transport vehicles in Rajasthan was made valid for 15 years. 
Further, under Rule 4.2A (inserted in March 2003) of Ra jasthan Motor 
Vehicles Rules, 1990, a transport vehicle shall not be deemed to be validly 
registered after the expiry of 15 years from the date of its first registration until 
the vehicle is re -registered. The Transport Department in its order (September 
2016) had initiate d action in two phases. In first phase 65, action was  to be 
initiated against all category of vehicles which were registered up to March 
2001 and in second phase, action was  to be taken on regular basis against all 
category of vehicles which  were registered after March 2001. The Transport 
Department, therefore, did not take adequate measures for more than 14 years 
towards implementation of the provision as regards re -registration or renewal 
of 15-year-old vehicles. It set (December 2016) the target for re-registration or 
                                                 
65 Action of first phase was to be completed by 15 May 2017. 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
 
37 
 
renewal of 1.47 lakh vehicles only against the 29.40 lakh vehicles registered 
up to 31 March 2001. 
Thus, Transport Department failed to phase out the 15-year-old vehicles.  
District Transport Officer stated in exit conference  that re-registration process 
was under consideration and it would be implemented soon.  
2.1.10.2  Vehicular pollution load was not assessed 
Estimation of emission loads is an essential step in order to estimate the share 
of various sources in the total emi ssion load in a region. It also helps in 
understanding the potential of various strategies in reducing the emission loads 
in a region. 
Review of records of Transport Department revealed the following: 
 The Transport Department neither conducted any study/su rvey to 
identify the places of heavy traffic nor pollution load was assessed in major 
cities of the State.  
 The Transport Department failed to prepare a comprehensive plan or 
strategy to reduce pollution load in the major cities in absence of reliable and 
relevant data. 
The Additional Transport Commissioner (ATC) Pollution Control (PC) 
admitted (April 2017) that no comprehensive plan was prepared during 2012 -
17 to minimize the vehicular pollution load but efforts were being made to 
control vehicular polluti on such as grant of full tax rebate to all battery 
operated vehicles and 50 per cent  rebate on special road tax to LPG/CNG 
operated vehicles. Besides, in order to bring transparency and uniformity, all 
PUC centres were being connected with networking. 
2.1.10.3  Fleet modernization programme not initiated 
According to Rajasthan State Environment Policy, 2010, fleet modernization 
program was to be initiated in which subsidies/direct cost benefits were to be 
provided to the old commercial vehicles owners to sw itch from old to new 
vehicles. Scrutiny revealed that: 
 no such programme was initiated by the Transport Department in which 
subsidies/direct cost benefits were offered to the old commercial vehicle 
owner for switching to new vehicle.  
 the policy to introdu ce fleet modernization programme, therefore, did 
not take off.  
Thus, the Departme nt failed to phase out 15 years  old vehicles in absence of 
adequate planning for re-registration/renewal of old vehicles. 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
38 
 
2.1.10.4 Pollution testing apparatus not provided to flying squad 
Scrutiny of records revealed that: 
 in Rajasthan, there were 22 Pollution Flying Squads (PFS) covering 10 
out of 12 regions for monitoring of polluting vehicles. Two regions 66 
comprising six districts had no PFS. 
  the flying squads except o ne in Udaipur were not provided any 
apparatus to check the emission level of visibly polluting vehicles. The data 
about the numbers of vehicles checked an d found emitting excess pollutants  
was not available with the flying squad in Udaipur though it had th e required 
apparatus.  
 the Transport Department agreed that there was no data of number of 
vehicles which were found emitting excess pollutants during inspections by 
the flying squads. 
District Transport Officer stated in exit conference that decision has been 
taken to provide PUC mobile vans to flying squ ad to check the visibly 
polluting vehicles. 
2.1.10.5  Pollution Under Control Certificates 
It is important to check and thereby control emissions during the entire useful 
life of a vehicle. Every motor veh icle is required to carry a valid "Pollution 
Under Control Certificate" issued by the Transport Department or by any 
Pollution Checking Center authorized by the Transport Department. 
A motoryaan pradushan janch kendra scheme was introduced in the year 
2005. Under this scheme, the PUC certificate was  being issued for six months 
to petrol and diesel vehicles after achieving the prescribed compliance 
standards.  
Review of records revealed that: 
 there was no provision for setting up of PUC centres based on the 
number of registered vehicles. There were 1.36 crore registered vehicles of 
different categories as of March 2016 in the State. The Transport Department 
had authorized only 1159 Pollution Check Centres (PCC) as of March 2017.  
 data regarding actual number of vehicles plying on the road was not 
available with State Transport Department. 
However, PUC certificates issued during 2012 -13 to 201 6-17 as against total 
number of vehicles registered in the State were as under: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
66  Dausa and Sikar 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
 
39 
 
Table 2: Number of PUC certificates issued in the State during 2012-17 
(In lakh) 
Year Vehicles 
registered 
(upto 1 st April 
of each year) 
Number of PUC 
Certificates to 
be issued as per 
norms 
PUC 
Certificates 
issued during 
the year 
Number of PUC 
Certificates  not 
issued as per 
norms 
(Percentage)(3-4) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
2012-13 89.86 179.72 4.26 175.46 
(97.63) 
2013-14 100.72 201.44 3.85 197.59 
(98.09) 
2014-15 111.84 223.68 3.78 219.90 
(98.31) 
2015-16 123.79 247.58 9.66 237.92 
(96.10) 
2016-17 136.32 272.64 -NA- -NA- 
Source: Transport Department, Rajasthan 
No mechanism was evolved by the Transport Department to watch the expiry 
of PUC issued to vehicles. It did not have the database for monitoring the 
issuance of PUCs and ensuring that all the vehicles come for the emission 
testing, whenever due. Further, data regarding number of vehicles which failed 
the pollution testing at PUC centres due to excess emission w as not produced 
by test checked RTOs except at Jaipur and Udaipur. In Jaipur, 12141 and in 
Udaipur, 14820 vehicles were found pollu ting the air beyond prescribed limit 
and these were not issued PUC certificates by the PUC centres However, the 
Transport Department did not evolve any mechanism to watch whether these 
vehicles had obtained PUCs after taking corrective measures. 
The Transp ort Department stated that there was no penal provision for 
defaulters. It added that all PUC centres were being connected through 
networking to generate data and an agreement had been signed with the 
Rajasthan Electronics and Instruments Limited (October 2016) for networking 
of all PUC centres. It is also stated that old vehicles plying on roads are not 
more than five per cent. Reply is not convincing as there was no mechanism to 
assess the actual number of vehicles are plying on roads. 
2.1.10.6  Anomalies found during Joint Inspection of PUC centres 
A joint team (consisting of officials of the Transport Department and Audit) 
visited 120 out of 427 Vehicle Pollution Emission Testing Centres in five test 
checked districts. Against the provisions of CMVR,  1989 and Motoryaan 
Pradushan Janch Kendra Scheme, 2005, the following deficiencies were 
noticed: 
 Probe was not inserted properly during testing of vehicles in  
12 centres. Besides in nine centres, reading was not taken five times while 
checking diesel vehicles. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
40 
 
 No Type Approval certificates67 were available in 71 centres. 
 Information about complaint/suggestion book was not displayed and 
these were not maintained in 65 centres. 
 In case of pollutants found above the prescribed limit, there was no 
facility of tuning or fuel mixture adjustment in 73 centres. 
 In eight centres, PUC certificates were being issued by an unauthorized 
signatory. 
 Data regarding number of vehicles issued PUC certificates was not 
maintained by 11 centres and quarterly reports were not submit ted by  
19 centres to the Transport Department. 
 Annual Maintenance Contract and regular calibration was not being 
done in 13 cases. 
 In 79 centres, the complaint post cards were not available and the 
information was also not displayed. 
 No training was imparted to 41operators of PUC centres. 
 In 10 instances 68, PUC certificates were issued by the operator of PUC 
centres without testing of vehicles. In Udaipur, one centre was generating 
computerised certificates on plain paper from computer while these should 
have been issued on stationery allotted from Rajasthan Petroleum Dealers 
Association. 
 The Transport Department had issued licences without verifying the site 
and equipment of PUC centres. It was found that 20 licensees had not installed 
equipment but they had the requisite licenses from the Transport Department. 
2.1.10.7  Inspections of PUC centres not carried out regularly 
According to Motoryaan Pradushan Janch Kendra Scheme 2005 , every PUC 
centre is required to be inspected twice in a year by the transport officials not 
below the rank of sub -inspector and inspection report has to be submitted to 
the respective RTOs. 
The Transport Department had not maintained compiled data of number of 
inspections of PUC centres made by the departmental officials. In test checked 
RTOs/DTOs, the data relating to inspections conducted during last five years 
was not made available to audit. The position of inspections of PUC centres 
during 2016-17 was as under: 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
67  According to rule 116 (3) of CMVR,  1989, the pollution testing meter should be typed 
approved by any agency referred in rule 126 or National Environmental Engineering 
Research Institute. 
68  Alwar-02, Kota-04, Jodhpur-02 and Udaipur-02. 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
 
41 
 
Table: 3 Position of inspections of PUC centres conducted during 2016-17 
Name of 
RTO/DTO 
Number of Shortfall Percentage 
of shortfall PUC 
centres 
Inspections 
required 
Inspections 
carried out 
Alwar 47 94 Nil 94 100 
Jaipur 179 358 NA NA NA 
Jodhpur 141 282 15 267 95 
Kota 22 44 22 22 50 
Udaipur 38 76 05 71 93 
Source: Regional/District Transport Offices 
Owing to inadequate inspections of PUC centres, the functioning of PUC 
centres was not satisfactory as discussed in the paragraph above. The 
Board/Transport Authority had also not been conducting quality control tes ts 
of service stations authorised to issue PUC certificates. 
2.1.11 Management Information System 
During the scrutiny of records, it was seen that the M anagement Information 
System of the RSPCB was poor as discussed below: 
2.1.11.1 Delay in preparation of Annual Report 
Section 35 (2) of the Act envisaged that every State B oard during each 
financial year  would prepare an annual report giving full account of its 
activities during the previous financial year and copies thereof were also to be 
forwarded to the State Government within four months from the last date of 
previous financial year and such report was required to be laid before the State 
Legislature within a period of nine months from the last date of the previous 
financial year. 
It was observed that pr eparation of annual report and its submission to the 
State Government was delayed as evident from the details mentioned below: 
Table: 4   Submission of Annual Report to the State Government 
Financial 
year 
Date of submission of annual 
report to the State Government 
Delay in submission 
of annual report 
Date of laying in 
Assembly 
2012-13 07-01-2016 2 years 5 months -NA- 
2013-14 01-03-2016 1 year 7 months -NA- 
2014-15 16-03-2017 1 year 7 months 21-03-2017 
2015-16 23-03-2017 7 months 24-03-2017 
Source: RSPCB Jaipur. 
It was also interesting to note that the annual report for the period 2010 -11 
gave full account of the Board’s activities under various Acts but from 2011 -
12 onwards, the annual reports were sketchy and important information 
regarding number of c ategory wise applications of consents  received and 
disposed during the year,  RO wise number of stack and ambient samples 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
42 
 
analyzed, trend of annual average of ambient air quality monitoring through 
bar charts, action taken against polluting units, etc. we re missing from the 
report. 
2.1.11.2 Statutory Audit not conducted 
  The RSPCB is required to prepare Annual Accounts at the close of each 
financial year and get the same audited by a qualified Auditor appointed by 
the State Government on the advice of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India. Further, such auditor shall send a copy of his report along with an 
audited copy of the accounts to the State Government for laying before the 
state legislature. 
It was observed that the annual accounts were not au dited by qualified auditor 
since 2002. In this regard, a resolution was passed in Board meeting (October 
2015) that statutory audit be carried out within a period of six months. 
However, no action was taken till the date of next meeting (July 2016) when it  
was again resolved that statutory audit be carried out within a period of six 
months. However, the statutory audit of the Annual Accounts was not carried 
out so far (April 2017). The RSPCB, therefore, failed to perform its mandatory 
function in a timely manner. 
2.1.11.3 Manpower Management  
It was mentioned in the State Environment Policy 2010 that the RSPCB had 
reviewed its staffing and found that the per district scientific and technical 
staff ratio was the lowest in RSPCB among the S tate Pollution Control Boards 
compared; the per lakh population ratio was the lowest in RSPCB; the per 
1000 square kilometer technical and scientific staff ratio was the lowest in 
RSPCB; and the number of industries handled by the technical and scientific 
staff was the highest in RSPCB. Recognizing these issues, a rigorous program 
of strengthening of the Board was underway, including sanctioning of new 
posts.  
The position of sanctioned, person -in-position (PIP) and vacant posts in the 
RSPCB during 2011-12 to 2016-17 was as under: 
Table : 5 Person in position against sanctioned posts in the RSPCB during 
2011-17 
Year Number of 
sanctioned posts 
Person in 
position 
Number of 
vacant posts 
Percentage of 
vacancy  
2011-12 363 284 79 21.76 
2012-13 363 280 83 22.87 
2013-14 371 274 97 26.14 
2014-15 370 275 95 25.68 
2015-16 387 262 125 32.29 
2016-17 394 260 134 34.01 
Source: RSPCB, Jaipur. 
 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
 
43 
 
It could be seen that the percentage of vacant posts increased steadily from 
21.76 in 2011 -12 to 34.01 in 2016 -17.  As of March 2017, PIP of tech nical 
and scientific posts was 152 against sanctioned post of 205 and the vacancy 
was 53 (25.85 per cent ). The PIP position in the RSPCB, had affected the 
inspection and monitoring of air polluting units as discussed in previous 
paragraphs. Secretary, Envi ronment Department in exit conference directed 
Member Secretary, RSPCB to put forth the man power restructuring proposal 
on priority. 
It is not evident from the records produced to audit whether the requirement of 
its manpower was assessed on the basis of number of districts, population and 
area covered and number of indu stries under consent management.  No reply 
was also furnished to audit. 
2.1.11.4 Enforcement 
As per section 31-A of the Act, the State  board may, in the exercise of its 
powers and performance of its functions under this Act, issue any directions in 
writing to any person, officer or authority , who shall be bound to comply with 
such directions regarding: 
(a) the closure, prohibition or regulation of any  industry, operation or process, 
and 
(b) t he stoppage or regulation of supply of electricity, water or any other 
service. 
Information regarding det ails of defaulter units and the re against closure 
orders issued by the RSPCB during 2012 -13 to 2016-17 in compliance of 
section 31 -A of the Act were ca lled for but no consolidated data of closure 
orders issued by the RSPCB were furnished to audit. However, as per Annual 
Reports of RSPCB, closure directions during 2012 -13 to 2015-16 were issued 
as under: 
Year                                      2012-13   2013-14   2014-15    2015-16 
No. of closure directions          158          115          414            171 
Besides above, RSPCB had issued 302 closure direction jointly under section 
31-A of Air Act and 33-A of Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution ) Act, 
1974, during 2012-13 to 2015-16.  
However, no concrete follow -up action on these directions were found on 
record as discussed earlier. 
2.1.12 Monitoring 
2.1.12.1 Huge shortfall in conducting inspection of air polluting 
industries 
According to Sectio n 17 of the Act, the RSPCB has been empowered to 
inspect, at all reasonable times, any control equipment, industrial plant or 
manufacturing process and to give, by order, such directions to such persons 
as it may consider necessary to take steps for the pr evention, control or 
abatement of air pollution. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
44 
 
RSPCB prepared (April 2015) an operating manual for scientific and technical 
group and instructed all scientific and technical officers to execute the work 
according to this manual. As per the operating manu al, 17 Category units, Red 
Category (Large and Medium) units were to be inspected once in six months 
with 50 per cent  inspections by Regional Officer; Red Category (Small), 
Orange Category (Large and Medium) units were to be inspected once in a 
year with 1 0 per cent inspections by Regional Officer; and Orange Category 
(Small) units were to be inspected once in two years. Prior to this  operating 
manual, inspection no rms for inspections were fixed in August 2001  by the 
RSPCB. The Regional Offices, however, ma intained the data only according 
to the nature of category like red, orange and green and not according to size 
viz. large, medium and small. Further, no year wise targets for inspections 
were allotted to any RO by RSPCB (Headquarter). 
In absence of availa bility of data according to the norms fixed for inspection, 
analysis of 17 category highly polluting units was conducted in four test -
checked ROs 69. Two ROs 70 did not furnish the required information to audit. 
The details are as follows: 
Table: 6 Number of inspections of highly polluting industries carried out 
in test checked four Regional Offices 
Year Total number 
of 17 category 
units 
Number of 
inspections 
required 
Number of 
inspections 
carried out 
Shortfall in 
inspection 
(percentage) 
2012-13 60 120 48 72 (60) 
2013-14 65 130 63 67 (52) 
2014-15 66 132 68 64 (48) 
2015-16 66 132 56 76 (58) 
2016-17 66 132 60 72 (55) 
Total 323 646 295  
Source: Regional Offices, RSPCB 
Shortfall in conducting inspection of highly polluting industrial units during 
2012-17 ranged between 48 and 60 per cent. It was observed from records in 
respect of other category units that inspections were carried out as and when 
the units applied for consent or on the basis of complaint received against the 
units. RO, Alwar attributed (April 2017) the reasons for shortfall to non -
availability of staff and basic facilities. The reply was not tenable as RSPCB 
was responsible to strengthen manpower and basic facilities and it failed to do 
so. 
The mechanism for regular inspections which were neces sary for taking 
adequate steps for prevention and control of air pollution was, therefore, 
deficient.   
Member Secretary, RSPCB agreed about shortfall of inspection and stated that 
risk based module has now been developed and inspection targets are 
available in software. 
                                                 
69 Alwar, Bhiwadi, Kota and Udaipur. 
70 Jaipur (North) and Jodhpur. 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
 
45 
 
2.1.12.2  Inadequate sampling 
According to the provisions of Section 22 of the Act, no industrial or 
processing unit or person can discharge into air, emissions containing 
environmental pollutants in excess of prescribed standards.  RSPCB w as to 
ensure compliance with this provision by drawing the samples of emissions 
and analyzing the same. The details regarding number of samples to be drawn 
and analyzed on the basis of number of industries in operation in the State 
were not maintained by t he RSPCB. However, it was observed in selected 
ROs that the number of stack samples drawn and analysed were less than the 
numbers of consent to operate issued during 2012 -13 to 2016-17. Information 
provided by five ROs 71disclosed that 1846 stack samples wer e collected and 
analysed during 2012 -17 whereas 6159 CTOs were issued during the same 
period by these ROs. Further, it was observed that no targets were fixed for 
laboratories to achieve the norms. It was observed that the number of stack 
samples analysed by Central Laboratory decreased by 50 per cent in 2016-1772 
compared to 2012-1373. RO, Alwar stated (April 2017) that due to shortage of 
staff, sample analyses could not be done as per norms. Reply was not tenable 
as RSPCB was required to strengthen manpower. 
Inadequate sampling and analysis resulted in diluting the enforcement 
mechanism to prevent and control discharge of emissions beyond the 
prescribed level.  
2.1.12.3  Inadequate number of meetings of the Board    
According to Section 10 (1) of the Act, th e RSPCB was required to meet at 
least once in every three months and was to observe such rules of procedure in 
regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed.  
During review of the Board’s record, it was noticed that during the period 
from 2012-13 to 2016-2017, only eight meetings were held as against required 
20 meetings by the RSPCB. The attendance of members in these meetings 
ranged between 35 and 59 per cent  only.  Except for the Chairman and 
Member Secretary of the RSPCB, at tendance of other members in the 
meetings was irregular. The Mayor, Municipal Corporation, Jodhpur, who was 
nominated for the period from 19 April 2011 for three years, was  not present 
in five consecutive meetings74. The Commissioner, Transport Department who 
has a major responsibility to control vehicular pollution attended only two 
meetings of the Board while his representative attended another two meetings. 
The State Government did not t ake action against the absentee  members in 
accordance with Section 7 (4) of the Act, 1981 by terminating their 
membership from the Board.  
The RSPCB replied (May 2017) that nomination of the members of non -
government and local bodies was not done by the Environment Department, 
GoR between 19 April 2014 and 27 July 2016 whic h led to less attendance in 
the Board’s meeting. 
                                                 
71 Information not furnished by RO Jodhpur. 
72 114 samples analysed 
73 232 samples analysed 
74  Held during May 2012 to September 2013. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
46 
 
Member Secretary, RSPCB agreed about shortfall of board’s meeting and 
stated that Government has appointed the nominated members and in future 
the number of meetings will be increased. 
2.1.13 Conclusion 
 RSPCB did not prepare comprehensive programmes for prevention, 
control or abatement of air pollution. The source apportionment studies were 
not carried out in the State to identify the sources of pollution along with their 
quantification.  
 As of March 2017, 32  AAQMS and two CAAQMS were operating 
in six districts while 27 districts having 47.03 million population and 74.50 
lakh vehicles were still out of the purview of air quality monitoring. 
 The RSPCB and the Environment Department do not have any 
meaningful data of the sources of pollution in rural areas.   
 RSPCB does not have consolidated data of category wise number of 
industrial units covered under consent mechanism in the State. The samplers 
were installed at locations other than approved locations and inst ruments for 
measuring air quality at AAQMS/CAAQMS were installed in violation of the 
guidelines. As per NAMP guidelines, information on type and number of 
vehicles, meteorological data with respect to temperature, relative humidity, 
wind speed and its dire ctions should have been collected by RSPCB. 
However, this Information neither was collected by RSPCB nor was 
maintained at all 27 AAQMS test checked. 
  RSPCB had neither conducted any survey nor coordinated with 
other departments to effectively discharge it s regulatory functions to cover all 
industrial units under its consent mechanism.  
 During joint inspections of 148 units by audit team along with 
representatives of Regional Offices, RSPCB, it was found that many industrial 
units were operating without even consent to establish.  
 The RSPCB did not evolve any mechanism to watch the renewal of 
consent to operate after expiry of the validity period of consent issued earlier.  
 The RSPCB had not taken any proactive steps to prevent silicosis 
amongst the workers. 
 Transport Department also failed to prepare an action plan to phase 
out the 15 years’ old vehicles. The Monitoring of PUC centres was weak and 
no follow up action was taken to ensure that these centres were functioning as 
per prescribed norms.  
 The Transp ort Department neither conducted any study/survey to 
identify the places with heavy traffic nor pollution load was assesse d in major 
cities of the State.  
 Manpower management in RSPCB was poor. The vacancies were 
steadily increasing thus impacting the effective functioning of the Board.  
 Shortfall in conducting inspection of highly polluting industrial units 
during 2012-17 ranged between 48 and 60 per cent and the number of stack 

Chapter II: Performance Audit 
 
47 
 
samples analysed by Central Laboratory reduced by 50 per cent  in 2016 -17 
when compared to the year 2012-13.  
 During the period from 2012 -13 to 2016 -2017, only eight meetings 
of the Board were held as against required 20 meetings. 
2.1.14 Recommendations 
 
 
 RSPCB should conduct source apportionment studies in all major cities 
to identi fy the quantum of pollution from various sources. Accordingly, 
comprehensive programmes for prevention, control or abatement of air 
pollution should be prepared and submitted to the State Government. 
 RSPCB should coordinate with other departments like Indu stries, 
Factory and Boilers, etc. to obtain data of newly established industrial units to 
bring them under consent mechanism. 
  RSPCB should enhance coverage for Ambient Air Quality Monitoring 
Systems in the towns and villages located near the major polluting industries. 
 RSPCB should ensure that the samplers are installed at approved 
locations and the site should be suitable as per guidelines of National Ambient 
Air Monitoring Programme so that representative data is generated. 
 The State Government and RSPCB  should strengthen the AAQMS by 
providing all necessary instruments and facilities so that type and number of 
vehicles, meteorological data with respect to temperature, relative humidity, 
wind speed and direction could be recorded. 
 RSPCB should ensure that  no industrial unit operates without obtaining 
consent to establish and it should evolve a mechanism to watch the validity 
period of consent issued. The consent to operate must be issued in time and 
not retrospectively so that compliance with environmental  conditions can be 
enforced. 
 The Transport Department should conduct studies/surveys to assess 
pollution load in major cities so that measures for control and abatement of 
vehicular pollution could be planned. The Transport Department should make 
a strategic plan to phase out 15 -year-old vehicles in a time bound manner. It 
should take measures like offering subsidies/direct cost benefits for fleet 
modernisation as envisaged under Environment Policy. Inspections of PUC 
centres must be carried out for strengthening the functioning of these centres 
 The RSPCB should fill up all vacant technical and scientific posts so that 
it is fully equipped to exercise its mandate effectively. 
 The RSPCB should ensure that the meetings of the Board are held in 
time and as per required norms. The prescribed monitoring mechanism should 
be strictly enforced. 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter III 
 
Compliance Audit 

 
49 
Chapter III 
Compliance Audit 
Mines, Geology and Petroleum Department 
 3.1 Adherence to Environmental Issues on Mining Activities in 
Rajasthan 
3.1.1 Introduction 
Rajasthan has vast reserves of minerals like copper, lead, zinc, rock 
phosphate, soapstone, silica sand, limestone, marble and gypsum. Most of the 
mineral wealth of the State is found in the Aravalli mountain range. 
Mining exerts pressure on environment at many stages i.e., exploration, 
extraction, processing and post closure of mines. The key environmental 
issues related to mining are land degradation including aridification, spread of 
wind-blown sand on agricultural fields, gully erosion, soil contamination and 
pollution of surface and ground water. 
Rajasthan is also facing the problem of rampant illegal mining in and around 
the Aravalli hills range which is threatening its biodiversity and ecosystem. 
Regulatory framework 
Mineral extraction activities in the State are regula ted under the provisions of 
the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 and 
rules/policies made thereunder. Mining leases/quarry licences are granted by 
the Mines and Geology Department (MGD), Government of Rajasthan (GoR). 
The applicant has to obtain approvals before the grant of mining lease/quarry 
licence for diversion of forest land for non -forest purposes and Environmental 
Clearance (EC) from Ministry of Environment and Forest (MoEF), 
Government of India (GoI) or State Level Environme nt Impact Assessment 
Authority (SEIAA) as the case may be along with Consent to Establish (CTE) 
and Consent to Operate (CTO) from Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board 
(RSPCB).  
After the grant of Mining Licence, the lessee is required to furnish reports  on 
production of minerals and the measures for environmental protection to the 
Mines Department and RSPCB. 
Organisational structure 
At the Government level, the Principal Secretary, Mines and Petroleum, 
Jaipur and at the Departmental level, the Director, Mines and Geology 
(DMG), Udaipur are responsible for administration and implementation of the 
related Acts and Rules in the Department. The DMG is assisted by seven 
Additional Directors, Mines (ADM) in administrative matters and by a 
Financial Advisor in f inancial matters. The ADMs exercise control through 
nine circles headed by Superintending Mining Engineer (SME). 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
50 
 
There are 49 Mining Engineers (ME) and Assistant Mining Engineers (AME), 
who are responsible for regulation, assessment and collection of reven ue 
receipt on account of minerals. The Department has a separate Vigilance 
Wing headed by ADM (Vigilance), Jaipur for prevention of illegal excavation 
and despatch of minerals which was shifted (August 2016) to Udaipur. 
As on 31 March 2016 1, there were 167  mining leases for major minerals and 
15,318 mining leases for minor minerals besides, 18,103 quarry licences.  
Why we chose the topic 
There were frequent reports in the print and electronic media regarding 
rampant illegal mining and environmental degradat ion especially in the 
Aravalli hills due to unscientific mining or mining operations without 
conforming to norms prescribed by various regulatory authorities. Previous 
audits conducted by this office had also highlighted individual cases of illegal 
mining or mining operations allowed by the Mines Department without 
regulatory approvals. 
3.1.2 Audit scope and methodology 
Audit selected nine AME/ME offices 2 of five districts 3 along with concerned 
five Regional Offices 4 (RO) of RSPCB through probability proportional to 
size with replacement method to examine the compliance with existing 
environmental provisions by the lessees and monitoring by the concerned 
authorities. The records pertaining to the period from April 201 0 to March 
2017 were scrutinised. 
Audit scrutiny was carried out from November 2015 to May 2016 and May 
2017 to June 2017. There were 4,150 leases in the selected AME/ME offices. 
Records of 288 operating mining leases selected at random were examined by 
Audit including 35 cancelled/surrendered mining leases. In addition, records 
maintained by the Principal Secretary, Mines and Petroleum, Jaipur and 
DMG, Udaipur were also examined. 
Joint physical inspection of selected leases  
A joint physical inspection of 1365 mining leases out of the selected 288 
mining leases was conducted along with representatives of the Mines 
Department to assess the extent of compliance with environmental provisions 
during operation of leases and after closure of mines. A representati ve of the 
lessee, wherever available, was also included in the joint physical inspection.  
                                                 
1 Compilation of figures as on 31 March 2017 relating to mining leases and quarry licences  
was in progress (June 2017) at DMG level. 
2 ME Alwar, ME Jaipur, AME Kotputli, AME Neem Ka Thana, ME Rajsamand -I, ME 
Rajsamand-II, AME Rishabhdeo,.ME Sikar and ME Udaipur. 
3  There are 33 districts in the State of Rajasthan, out of which 15 districts are falling in the 
Aravalli mountain range. Five districts were selected on the basis of working mines i.e. 
Alwar, Jaipur, Rajsamand, Sikar and Udaipur. 
4  Alwar, Bhilwara, Jaipur, Sikar and Udaipur. 
5 43 major mineral leases and 93 minor mineral leases including 21 c ancelled and  
 2 surrendered leases. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
51 
 
Cross verification of data 
Out of 136 leases for which joint physical inspection was conducted, the 
Mines Department had conducted 19 inspections in 17 leases whereas RSPCB 
had carried out 50 inspections in 38 leases during 2010-156. 
Joint physical inspection findings were cross verified with inspection reports 
of RSPCB (based on which the CTO was granted), the inspections carried out 
by AME/ME and the Mining Pl an submitted by the lessees and approved by 
the Mines Department to ascertain whether the facts reported by the RSPCB 
or Mines Department were adequate, reliable and complete.  
This has been discussed in para 3.1.6.3 of this report. 
Acknowledgement 
The Indian Audit and Accounts Department acknowledges the co-operation of 
the MGD and the RSPCB in providing the necessary information and records 
for audit. An Entry Conference was held on 7 January 2016 , with the DMG, 
Udaipur, wherein objectives and methodology  of audit were explained. The 
factual statement was issued to the Department/Government on 27 May 2016. 
The reply of the factual statement was received from the Government on 22 
July 2016 and from the RSPCB on 7 October 2016. 
An exit conference was held on  7 November 2016 with the Secretary, Mines 
and Petroleum, GOR, Jaipur and Chairperson, RSPCB, Jaipur in which results 
of audit and recommendations were discussed. The replies of the 
Government/Department/Board received during the exit conference and in 
response to the factual statement have been included in the respective 
paragraphs. 
The major issues which were covered during the audit were (i) Mining 
without environmental clearance and consent to operate (ii) cases of illegal 
mining (iii) Non–compliance with directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of 
India (iv) Non -compliance with environmental condi tions mentioned in 
mining plan and (v) Management of funds relating to environment protection. 
Audit Findings 
 
3.1.3  Mining without Environmental Clearance and  Consent to 
Operate 
As per the notification dated 27 January 1994 issued by the MoEF, prior EC 
was to be obtained from MoEF for new mining projects or expansion or 
modernisation of existing mining projects relating to major minerals if the 
lease area was m ore than five hectares. This notification was superseded by 
notification dated 14 September 2006 which states that all mining projects 
irrespective of being major mineral or minor mineral in area of five hectares 
                                                 
6  After conducting joint physical inspections of 136 leases, Mines Department had conducted 
25 inspections in 25 leases and RSPCB had conducted three inspections in two leases during 
2015-17. As such inspection reports of the RSPCB were not compared due to gap in period.  

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
52 
 
to less than 50 hectares were required to h ave prior EC from the SEIAA and 
projects in area of 50 hectares and above were required to have prior EC from 
the MoEF. The leases of minor minerals in an area of less than five hectares 
also came into the ambit of prior EC after the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India 
(SCI) vide its order dated 27 February 2012 made it mandatory. Further, the 
leases of major minerals having area less than five hectares requires EC vide 
amendment dated 07 October 2014 in EIA notification 2006 . During test 
check of the records, it was noticed that there were instances of enhancement  
of mineral production without EC, mining operations were done without 
renewing the lapsed CTO and excavations of minerals were done violating 
CTO conditions as described below: 
3.1.3.1 Enhancement of mineral production without EC 
The MoEF vide its office memorandum dated 18 May 2012 directed that the 
EIA notification issued on 14 September 2006 would be applicable on all 
mining projects of minor minerals irrespective of the size of the lease. As per 
the conditions of EIA notification, enhancement of production would require 
prior EC from the SEIAA. Further, as per Section 15 of the EP Act, 1986, 
whoever fails to comply with or contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, 
or the rules made or orders or  directions issued there under, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years with 
fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both. 
On scrutiny of records of selected offices, it was noticed in four AME/ME 
offices that four lessees had enhanced their production of mineral withou t EC. 
The details are as under: 
S.no. Name of 
Lessee 
Mineral 
and area  
(in hectare) 
Period of 
previous 
CTO and 
permitted 
mining 
capacity  
Application 
date for CTO 
for 
enhancement of 
production 
CTO issuance 
date for 
enhancement of 
production 
Period of 
CTO and 
permitted 
mining 
capacity 
1 
Gannayak 
Mining Pvt 
Ltd. (ML 
No. 
46/2011) 
Marble 
 (4) 
21.12.2011 
to 
30.11.2014 
(40,575 MT/ 
Annum) 
22.1.2013 30.1.2013 
22.1.2013 to 
31.12.2015 
(5,01,288 
MT/Annum) 
2 
Vineet 
Udhyog 
(ML No. 
41/93 old 
No. 202/82) 
Serpentine 
(1) 
1.11.2011 to 
31.10.2014 
(11,847 MT/ 
Annum) 
10.10.2012 18.10.2012 
10.10.2012 to 
30.9.2015 
(1,00,000 
MT/Annum) 
3 
M/s Arora’s 
J.K. Natural 
Marbles 
Limited 
(ML No 
11/03) 
Marble  
(4) 
1.11.2011 to 
31.10.2014 
(50,000 MT/ 
Annum) 12.6.2014 9.7.2014 
1.5.2014 to 
30.4.2017 
(1,07,165 
MT/Annum) 
4 
M/s Singhal 
Stones  
(ML No. 
260/95) 
Masonry 
Stone  
(1) 
1.1.2011 to 
31.12.2013  
(100 MT/ 
Day) 
1.11.2012 26.11.2012 
1.11.2012 to 
31.10.2015  
(500 MT/ Day) 
No action to stop mining operation was taken against the lessees by the 
concerned AME/MEs and the lease holders were allowed to continue their 
operations. Further, the ROs of RSPCB (Bhilwara, Jaipur and Udaipur) issued 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
53 
 
CTOs in clear violation of EIA notification and no action was initiated against 
these lessees for imposing penalty. There was lack of co -ordination between 
Mines Department and the RSPCB. 
The matter was brought to the notice of the Government (May 2016). The 
Government replied (July 201 6) that directions had been issued (8 June 2016 
and 15 July 2016) to the concerned ME/AME offices for issuing notices for 
enhancement of production without EC. 
3.1.3.2 Mining operations without renewing the lapsed CTO 
The RSPCB grants CTO to the mining units prior to the start of mining 
operation for excavating the quantity of mineral in a specified period. The 
lease holders irrespective of the size and nature of the lease have to obtain 
CTO from the RSPCB for undertaking mining operations under Section 21(4) 
of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and Section 25 and 
26 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974. Further, 
Rule 37T(1) of the RMMC Rules, 1986 also provides that each lessee/quarry 
licensee has to obtain C TO from the RSPCB prior to start of mining 
operations and implement the conditions of CTO strictly. Further, the mining 
unit shall submit a fresh application for consent to operate at least 120 days in 
advance of expiry of the consent period for its renewal. 
On scrutiny of records of selected five AME/ME offices 7 for the period from 
April 2010 to March 2017, it was noticed that nine  lease holders having  
563.11 hectares lease area excavated 1.72 lakh MT mineral masonry stone, 
marble, soapstone and quartz  without obtaining CTO or renewing the lapsed 
CTO. It was noticed that no action to stop mining operations was taken by the 
concerned AME/ME against the lease holders. 
The matter was brought to the notice of the Government (May 2016). The 
Government replied (July 2016) that directions had been issued (8 June 2016 
and 15 July 2016) to the concerned AME/ME offices for closing of mining 
operations immediately if mines were working without CTO and to issue 
notices to concerned lessees after verification of fact s. Further, DMG stated in 
exit conference (November 2016) that the Department now has an online 
system in place and rawannas8 are generated only after entry of CTO details. 
3.1.3.3 Excavation of mineral violating CTO conditions 
The EC of each lease specifies the mineral production quantity per year during 
the lease period. The CTO also prescribes the quantity of mineral which can 
be excavated during a specified period. If any lease holder wants to enhance 
production of mineral then he has to apply for a revised CTO. 
Scrutiny of the records of the selected leases disclosed that: 
 In seven AME/ME office s9, 32 lease holders having an area of  
96.75 hectares had excavated 7.29 lakh MT minerals marble, dolomite, 
                                                 
7  Jaipur, Rajsamand-I, Rajsamand-II, Sikar and Udaipur. 
8 “Rawanna” means delivery challan for removal or despatch of mineral from mines.  
9  Jaipur, Kotputli, Rajsamand-I, Rajsamand-II, Rishabhdeo, Sikar and Udaipur. 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
54 
 
masonry stone, quartz, feldspar, serpentine and soap stone in excess of 
quantity authorised in the CTO. 
It was noticed that the concerned AME/ME did not initiate any action against 
this unlawful excavation even though contravention of CTO condition can 
lead to withdrawal of CTO. The ROs of RSPCB also did not  take any action 
against these violators and renewed CTOs for future period. The matter was 
brought to the notice of the Government and the RSPCB. The Government 
replied that action in this regard was required to be taken by  the RSPCB, 
SEIAA and MoEF. 
The reply is not acceptable as the Department issued rawannas to the lessees 
for despatch of minerals from mining area. The rawannas should have been 
issued as per the quantity permitted in CTO. 
Member Secretary, RSPCB stated in exit conference (November 2016)  that 
wherever excess excavation of mineral was found, the lessee would be 
prosecuted and orders had already been issued for prosecution in respect of all 
those mines where production exceeded the quantity authorised in the CTO by 
20 per cent. 
 Stringent ac tion must be taken against the violators car rying out 
unlawful excavation in  contravention of the conditions stipulated in EC and 
CTO. 
3.1.4 Illegal Mining 
Mining without a licence, mining outside lease area, raising of minerals 
without paying royalty, etc. constitute illegal mining. Illegal mining activities 
put immense pressure on environment because these do not comply with any 
regulations or environmental conditions. Illegal mining operations have 
serious consequences on natural resources such as for ests, rivers, flora and 
fauna, and public health. It was noticed that there was inadequate follow up of 
cases on illegal mining, lack of deterrence due to delay in issue of notices and 
non-implementation of policy measures as narrated below: 
3.1.4.1 Inadeq uate follow up on illegal mining cases registered in 
selected ME offices 
On detection of illegal mining, transportation and storage of minerals, 
Panchnamas10 were to be prepared and recorded in the register to monitor the 
recovery of cost. The cases of ille gal excavation, despatch and storage of 
minerals are either compounded by recovering cost of mineral or lodged in the 
court through police. These cases are monitored through MIS sent to DMG 
through SMEs of the circle. 
Scrutiny of the records of nine AME/ME  offices revealed the following 
position of illegal mining, transportation and storage of minerals during  
2011-12 to 2016-17.  
 
                                                 
10 Verification note made by the inspecting officer on the spot regarding illegal excavation. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
55 
 
Name of 
office 
No. of cases registered Total 
quantity of 
minerals 
(in lakh 
MT) 
Amount 
Recovered    
(`in Crore) 
Outstanding 
amount  
(` in Crore) Illegal 
mining 
Illegal 
transportation 
Illegal 
storage 
ME Alwar 115 786 78 3.03 4.71 2.30 
ME Jaipur 166 457 1 4.01 5.33 2.16 
AME 
Kotputli 
108 648 0 20.94 6.46 26.89 
AME Neem 
Ka Thana 
5 82 1 0.02 0.63 0 
ME 
Rajsamand-I 
8 37 0 0.005 0.18 0 
ME 
Rajsamand-II 
76 344 5 0.20 1.32 0.02 
ME Sikar 206 379 1 67.22 4.94 147.15 
ME Udaipur 106 433 14 3.45 1.93 0.41 
AME 
Rishabhdeo 
1 14 1 0.002 0.07 0 
Total 791 3,180 101 98.87 25.57 178.93 
As seen from the above table, selected nine AME/ME offices had registered 
4,072 cases of illegal mining, transportation and storage of mineral during 
2011-12 to 2016-17. Around 98.87 lakh MT minerals were found to have been 
illegally excavated. The Departm ent, however, could recover only ` 25.57 
crore against recoverable amount of ` 204.50 crore.  
Examination of the documents related to illegal mining and transportation 
disclosed that name of villages from where the vehicle owners had loaded the 
illegally excavated minerals were mentioned in the panchnamas. However, 
specific site or location  was not mentioned in the panchnamas. The ME did 
not investigate further regarding the source or  location of illeg al excavations 
and the cases were closed whe never the recoveries were made. However, the 
recoveries were made from the vehicle owners while the illegal miners went 
undetected and continued illegal mining. 
The matter was brought to the notice of the Government (May 2016). The 
Government replied (July  2016) that directions would be issued to the 
subordinate offices for filling complete details in panchnamas and for 
recovery of the outstanding amount in cases of illegal mining. 
3.1.4.2 Lack of deterrenc e due to delay in issue of notices and 
recovery of the penal amount from illegal miners 
As per Rule 48 (5) of  the RMMC Rules 1986, if the mineral wa s found to 
have been despatched or consumed by the illegal miner, the authorities may 
recover the cost of mineral along with rent, royalty or the tax chargeable on 
the land occupied or mineral excavated. The cost of mineral shall be 
computed at 10 times the royalty payable at the prevalent rates.  
It was noticed that no time frame was prescribed for issue of notices, raising 
of demand and recovery of cost of mineral and royalty from the illegal miners. 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
56 
 
As a result, there were delays in issue of notices and realisation of a mount 
from the illegal miners. Some cases are discussed below: - 
 A joint team of ME Sikar on inspection (11 August 2014) found that six 
lease holders had excavated 1.09 lakh MT masonry stone, granite and murram 
from outside their lease area . ME Sikar issued show cause notices 
(September/October 2014) to these lease holders for illegal excavation of 
minerals. Five lease holders out of six had obtained stay order s (8 January 
2016) against recovery from the court of AD (Mines) Jaipur and the st ay 
against recovery could not be vacated till June 2017. In remaining case, SME 
Jaipur constituted (12 August 2016) a committee for verification of illegal 
mining in the area and verification report was awaited (June 2017). 
 Mining operations in a lease (ML  65/2000) were stopped (5 March 
2010) by the ME Sikar as the mine was falling in Aravalli mountain range. 
The mine Foreman during inspection (16 October 2014) of the lease area 
found that the lessee had excavated 1,295 MT masonry stone from the lease 
area after the mine had been closed on the directions of ME. First Information 
Report was lodged (17 October 2014) in Dantaramgarh police station. 
However, no further action was taken against the lessee either by the ME or 
by the Police.  
 During scrutiny of rec ords of selected leases of ME Alwar, it was 
noticed that in two cases (450/09 and 554/09) a committee 11 had reported (18 
July 2015) that the lease holders had despatched (upto February 2015) 89,795 
MT masonry stone from their lease area as against excavatio n of 6,091 MT 
masonry stone as per pit measurement on 4 March 2015. This had resulted in 
excess despatch of 83,704 MT masonry stone excavated from somewhere else 
by misusing rawannas. The ME raised (September 2015) demand against 
these lessees.  The position relating to recovery of demand was not intimated 
(June 2017). 
The matter was brought to the notice of the Government (May 2016). The 
Government replied (July 2016) that explanation from concerned MEs would 
be called for and directions had been iss ued for taking action to recover the 
amount. 
3.1.4.3 Non -implementation of policy measures for curbing illegal 
mining 
The Rajasthan Mineral Policy (Policy), 2011(effective from 28 January 2011) 
stipulated certain measures for curbing illegal mining in the State. Perusal of 
records of DMG and selected offices disclosed that no concrete measures viz. 
regulatory supervisions, proper vigilance, non -initiation of incentives 
schemes, modernisation of check posts and restoration and reclamation of 
mined out pits were taken as detailed below: 
                                                 
11 The DMG constituted (22 February 2015) a committee under chairmanship of ADM 
(Vigilance) for joint inspection of leases in District Alwar. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
57 
 
Regulatory supervision  
As per the policy, the State Government need to take steps to improve the 
regulatory supervision for checking illegal mining and to incentivise the 
Village Panchayats to keep vigil on illegal mining. 
Further, the DMG had increased the norms for inspection of subordinate 
offices, mining leases and check posts each year. As a result, the AME/ME 
had to conduct 120 inspections of mining leases per year. No specific norm 
was prescribed for the Foreman but o nly field duties were assigned to him. 
During audit of the selected AME/ME offices, it was noticed that no register 
had been prescribed to record details of inspections carried out by the ME and 
Foreman. As a result , fulfilment of prescribed inspection nor ms could not be 
ascertained.  Further, n o provisions for incentivising the village Panchayats 
were incorporated in the RMMC Rules, 1986 (February 2017). As a result, the 
objective of the policy could not be achieved. 
The matter was brought to the notice of  the Government (May 2016). The 
Government replied (July 2016) that provisions regarding improving the 
regulatory supervision were in process for inclusion in Rajasthan Minor 
Mineral Concession Rules, 2017 but still it could not be incorporated. 
Vigilance 
As per the policy, vigilance wing of the Department was to be strengthened 
for a close watch on mining activities. Accordingly, offices were to be located 
at appropriate places in the State. 
It was seen that the State Government restructured (July 2011) an d 
strengthened the vigilance wing by creating additional posts. Specific 
inspection targets were fixed for ADM (Vigilance), SME (Vigilance) and ME 
(Vigilance) to inspect subordinate offices, check posts and mining leases. 
However, the vigilance offices lacked necessary resources and vital posts such 
as ME (Vigilance), AME (Vigilance), remained largely vacant. For example, 
the Government created (August 2013) ME (Vigilance) offices at Alwar and 
Sikar and AME (Vigilance) offices at Kotputli and Rajsamand. No 
independent ME (Vigilance) Alwar (August 2013 to March 2017), ME 
(Vigilance) Sikar (October 2014 to March 2017), AME (Vigilance) Kotputli 
(August 2013 to March 2017) and AME (Vigilance) Rajsamand (August 2013 
to November 2014) were posted in newly created offices.  
The matter was brought to the notice of the Government (May 2016). The 
Government replied (July 2016) that the vigilance wing would be further 
strengthened. 
Incentive scheme 
As per the policy, an incentive scheme to award officers of the Department 
making best efforts for checking unauthorised mineral movement and illegal 
mining shall be introduced. A scheme for rewarding the informers on the basis 
of quality of information was also envisaged. 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
58 
 
It was noticed that no incentive scheme was in troduced by the State 
Government/Department to award officers making exceptional efforts for 
checking unauthorised mineral movement and illegal mining. Further, no 
scheme was introduced to reward the informers for providing information on 
illegal mining.  
The matter was brought to the notice of the Government (May 2016). The 
Government replied (July 2016) that proposals for incentive scheme shall be 
forwarded to the competent authority. 
Modernisation of check posts 
As per the policy, mineral check posts wou ld be  modernised with 
sophisticated equipment to track illegal transportation of mineral.  However, 
no check post was modernised. 
The matter was brought to the notice of the Government (May 2016). The 
Government replied (July 2016) that proposals for modern isation of check 
posts were pending for approval at the State Government level. 
Restoration and reclamation of mined out pits of illegal mining 
As per the policy, suitable provisions would be made to enable Mines 
Department to restore the mined out pits cr eated by illegal miners and to 
realise the expenditure from illegal miners as arrears of land revenue.  
It was noticed that though more than seven years had passed since the 
promulgation of the policy , no provisions were made for recovery of 
compensatory a mount from the illegal miners to restore the illegally mined 
out pits. 
The matter was brought to the notice of the Government  (May 2016) . The 
Government replied (July 2016) that rules for reclamation and restoration of 
mined out pits were under process. 
In the exit conference  (November 2016) , the Department agreed that 
provisions contained in the policy for curbing illegal mining were not 
implemented completely.  
 The Department must upgrade its oversight, vigilance and preventive 
mechanism to curb illegal mining. It may co -ordinate with other departments 
to curb the menace of illegal mining activities and their adverse impact on 
environment. 
 The Department must consider using satellite mapping and remote 
sensing techniques to track illegal mining activities in the State. 
 The Department must show its commitment towards environment 
protection by fully implementing the policy measures enunciated in 2011 for 
curbing illegal mining.  It may immediately include a provision for levying 
compensatory amount on illega l miners for reclamation and rehabilitation of 
land.  
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
59 
 
3.1.5 Compliance with orders of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of 
India 
During test check of the records of the selected AME/ME offices, it was seen 
that directions in respect of the Aravalli hills issued by the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India were not adhered to by the Department as discussed below: 
3.1.5.1 Orders issued by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India on 
mining activities in Aravalli hills 
In the Aravalli hills, mining activities on a large scale for many years ignoring 
environmental concerns have caused  severe environmental degradation. The 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the matters of mining in Aravalli hills 
issued directives 12 from time to time as per details given in Appendix-3.1 
Further, the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India ordered (9 May 2002) the setting 
up of the Central Empowered Committee (CEC) to monitor the 
implementation of the court's order and to look into cases of non-compliance. 
The Department adopted (16 January 2003) Richard Murphy’s Landforms 
Classification for demarcation of Aravalli hills. According to this 
classification, if the peak/parts of hill are 100 metres above ground level then 
it would come under ‘Aravalli hills’ and the slopes/peaks that are below that 
point (100 metres from ground level) were not to be treated as ‘Aravalli hills’.  
The following deficiencies in compliance were noticed: 
3.1.5.2  Grant of fresh mining leases in Aravalli hills 
The Hon’ble Supreme Court of India on 8 April 2005 stated, “pending further 
directions, we restrain any kind of mining in forest areas. Further, we restrain 
mining in any area in Aravalli hills falling in the State of Rajasthan, where 
permission may have been accorded after 16 December, 200 2”. In pursuance 
of the H on’ble Supreme Court of India directions, the DMG belatedly issued 
(January 2006) directions to stop allotment of fresh mining leases in Aravalli 
hills. 
During scrutiny of the records of the selected AME/ME offices, it was noticed 
that: 
 Two leases (ML 20/0 5 and ML 8/03) were sanctioned by the office of  
ME Rajsamand -I and Rajsamand -II in the Aravalli hill range in 2005 for 
excavation of quartz and feldspar minerals. The DMG directed (August 2006) 
the ME to stop the mining activities immediately and declare these mines null 
and void. However, no action was taken by the ME to cancel the leases. On 
the contrary, the lease period of ML 20/05 was enhanced (28 February 2015) 
by the ME Rajsamand -II upto 1 March 2056 (Original lease period 2 March 
2006 to 1 March 2036).  
 Four fresh mining leases (ML 61/2009, ML 3/02, ML 05/97 and  
ML 47/11) spread over 15.52 hectares in jurisdiction of three AME/ME 
                                                 
12 In the case of T.N. Godavarman Thirumalpad v/s Union of India (Writ Petition (Civil) No. 
202 of 1995) 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
60 
 
offices13 were sanctioned between March 2005 and January 2012 even though 
these leases were in Aravalli hills . The lessees excavated 65,147.64 MT 
minerals (feldspar, serpentine and marble) between 2010 and 2017. 
 Two gap areas spread over 0.6762 hectares were granted by ME 
Rajsamand-II (March 2007) and AME Rishabhdeo (March 2009) even though 
these were falling under Aravalli hills. 
The DMG stated in the exit conference (November, 2016) that the matter 
would be looked into and reply would be furnished within two weeks. The 
reply was, however, awaited (October 2017). 
3.1.5.3 Renewal and extension of mining leases fall ing under Aravalli 
hills 
 The Hon’ble Supreme Court of India  in the order dated 19 February 
2010 stated “There were about 261 mining leases in the Aravalli range in the 
State of Rajasthan. Some of the mining leases have been renewed after 
16.12.2002, though it was not strictly permissible as per order passed on that 
date. A large number of renewal applications are also pending with the 
authorities. Taking advantage of the deeming provision of Rule 24A Renewal 
of mining lease of the Mines and Mineral (Develop ment and Regulation) 
Rules, 1960 almost all the lease -holders are carrying on mining operations 
uninterruptedly. The renewal applications are pending for a long time and in 
many cases for several years. Rule 24A apparently does not envisage this kind 
of si tuation. We, accordingly, restrain all those lease -holders whose 
applications for renewal of their respective leases are pending from doing any 
mining operation till further orders.” 
It was noticed that the State Government directed (20 October 2010) the 
Department to dispose cases pending for renewal of ML in Aravalli hills apart 
from 261 mining leases 14 whose details were submitted to the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of India. 
On scrutiny of records of ME Rajsamand -I, Rajsamand -II and AME 
Rishabhdeo, it was foun d that the Department had renewed 18 mining leases 
after 19 February 2010 though they were falling under the “Aravalli hills” as 
per the Department’s adopted definition. The lessees had excavated 16.22 lakh 
MT minerals between April 2010 and March 2017 from the lease areas. 
The matter was brought to the notice of the Government (May 2 016). The 
Government agreed ( July 2016) that they had directed the Department to 
dispose pending applications for renewal of mining leases in Aravalli hills as 
according to the m the ban had been imposed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
of India on renewal of 261 leases only. 
This may be viewed in the context of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India 
order of 19 February 2010 which stated that some mining leases in the State 
                                                 
13   Rajsamand-I, Rishabhdeo and Udaipur. 
14  As per the status contained in the order (September 2008) of the SCI, 261 MLs includes 
157 MLs where renewals became due after 16 December 2002 but renewals were not 
granted, 53 MLs where renewals were granted after 16 December 2002 and 51 MLs which 
were granted after16 December 2002. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
61 
 
were renewed though this was not strictly permissible as per order passed on 
that date. 
 The State Government extended (28 January 2011) the original lease 
period of existing minor mineral leases granted before 28 January 2011 from 
20 years to 30 years. 
During test che ck of the records of seven AME/ME offices 15, it was also 
noticed that 50 leases spread over an area of 5,028.52 hectares in the Aravalli 
mountain range were due to expire between October 1996 16 and March 
203617. However, the original lease period of these lea ses were extended and 
the lease period would now expire between March 2019 and March 2056. The 
State Government extended lease periods of all the mining leases without 
taking into consideration that the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India had 
imposed ban on mining operations in leases falling in the Aravalli hills.  
During test check of mining leases it was seen that i n eight operating leases in 
the jurisdiction of three ME 18 offices, the lease holders excavated 38.23 lakh 
MT minerals during April 2010 to March 2017 causing degradation of 
environment in the Aravalli hills. 
Thus, t he State Government by extension of the lease period  had to gone 
against the orders of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India. 
The matter was brought to the notice of the Government (May 2016). The 
Government replied (July 2016) that no ban was imposed on extension of 
original lease period by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in its orders 
dated 16 December 2002 and 19 February 2010. 
The reply has to be seen in light of the fact that mining was restrained in the 
Aravalli hills after 16 December 2002 . By virtue of the extension period 
granted by the State Government, there would be continuance of mining 
operations in Aravalli hills even beyond the original lease period.  
3.1.5.4 Irregular sanction of Environmental Clearance by the MoEF 
The Hon’ble Supreme Court of India’s order of October 2002, prohibiting and 
banning the mining activity in Aravalli hills fr om Haryana to Rajasthan was 
modified (16 December 2002) insofar as the State of Rajasthan was concerned 
to the following effect: 
‘Wherever requisite approvals/sanctions in the said State have been obtained 
under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 and the Environment (Protection) 
Act, 1986 and the mining is not prohibited under the applicable Acts or 
                                                 
15  Alwar, Jaipur, Kotaputli, Neem Ka Thana, Rajsamand-I, Rajsamand-II and Udaipur. 
16  In one case (ML 4/95), the lease was effective from 5 October 1976 to 4 October 1996 for 
20 years. The lessee applied (22 September 1995) for renewal. However, renewal was not 
granted since the area of ML was falling in Aravalli hills. Thereafter, the lease period was 
extended by the AME Kotputli up to 4 October 2026 for fifty years as per the MM(DR) 
Amendment Act, 2015. 
17  This includes two leases with original lease period of 30 years which w as further extended 
to 50 years. 
18   Rajsamand-I, Rajsamand-II and Udaipur. 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
62 
 
notifications or orders of the Court, mining can continue and to such mining 
the aforesaid order will not apply’. 
On scrutiny of the records of AME Kotputli, it was noticed that a mining lease 
(7/1992) near village Buchara, tehsil Kotputli, district Jaipur, spread over 
37.64 hectares was effective for the period from 25 June 1996 to 24 June 2016 
in favour of M/s Shri Modi Levigated Kaolin Private Limited, Neem K a 
Thana. It was observed that the lessee had not obtained EC before 16 
December 2002 from MoEF as required under EIA Notification dated 27 
January 1994. The MoEF had directly enquired (November 2005) from the 
lease holder to confirm whether the lease area fell in the ambit of the order of 
the SCI dated 8 April 2005. The lease holder intimated (2 December 2005) the 
MoEF that the lease area did not fall in the Aravalli hills to the best of his 
knowledge. In response to the application (14 October 2005) of the  lessee, the 
MoEF, thereafter, granted EC on 31 July 2006. 
Examination of the files disclosed that the AME in response to a ‘Right to 
Information’ application had confirmed (8 October 2009) that the lease area 
was in the Aravalli hills. Further, on examina tion of the Geological 
Topographic Sheet, it was noticed that the difference in the contour of the 
lease area was more than 100 metres. The lessee had not obtained the EC 
before 16 December 2002 and the lease area fell in Aravalli hills. Thus, issue 
of EC by MoEF was irregular and the Department was required to stop the 
mining operations carried out by the lessee. 
The lease holder excavated 4.67 lakh MT china clay and 0.05 lakh MT silica 
sand during 25 June 2010 to 31 March 2017 by misrepresenting facts to 
MoEF for which the EC granted was required to be cancelled as per paragraph 
4 of the EIA notification (27 January 1994) which stipulates that concealing 
factual data or submission of false data or misleading information would lead 
to the project being reje cted and approval, if granted earlier, on the basis of 
false data would also be revoked.  
The matter was brought to the notice of the Government (May 2016). The 
Government replied (July 2016) that no ban was imposed by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of India in its orders dated 16 December 2002, 08 April 2005 
and 19 February 2010 on grant of EC by the MoEF. The reply is not 
acceptable as the lessee obtained EC from the MoEF on false representation of 
facts that the lease area did not fall in Aravalli hills. Furt her, the EC was 
granted after 16 December 2002.  
The DMG stated in the exit conference  (November 2016) that the matter 
would be examined.  
 The Department must strengthen its oversight and control over mining 
activities in and around areas banned for mining activities by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of India . Action must be taken against officers permitting 
mining in violation of court orders in the Aravalli hills.   
 The leases granted and renewed in the banned areas need to be 
cancelled.  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
63 
 
3.1.6 Compliance with environmental conditions mentioned in 
Mining Plan, Environmental Clearance and Consent to Operate 
 
The environmental impact of mining includes soil erosion, formation of 
sinkholes, loss of biodiversity and contamination of soil, ground water and 
surface water. In forested areas, mining may cause destruction and disturbance 
of ecosystems and in agricultural areas, it may disturb or destroy productive 
grazing and croplands. In urbanised environments, mining may produce noise 
pollution and air pollution. The Central and State Governments have 
prescribed strict environmental and rehabilitation conditions while approving 
Mining Plan (MP) and granting EC and CTO to ensure that the area mined is 
returned close to its original state by each lease holder. 
Scrutiny of MP, EC and CTO of mining leases disclosed that there were 
certain provisions laid down under various regulations as depicted in 
Appendix 3.2  which were to be met with reference to  the following 
environmental issues; 
Top Soil, Overburden dumps, Plantation, Air pollution control measures, 
Garland drains in the lease area, Noise pollution control measures, 
Reclamation and rehabilitation works and Mining in benches.  
The following issues were noticed during audit: 
3.1.6.1 Lack of focus on environmental issues related to mining 
activities 
The Mines Department along with the RSPCB had to ensure that the lessee 
carried out mining as per the MP and the conditions specified in the EC and 
CTO. The scrutiny of records of s elected AME/ME offices, disclosed that the 
Department had not prescribed any periodical return requiring the lease holder 
to furnish information regarding the observance of conditions related to 
environmental protection as prescribed in MP, EC and CTO exce pt in the 
proforma of the monthly report which includes only the number of plantation 
done in the lease area. The concession and assessment files of selected 136 
lease holders had records mainly pertaining to monthly returns of excavated 
mineral and assess ments thereof . As a result, records of compliance with 
environmental provisions or lack of it were not available with the Mines 
Department. 
The RSPCB also monitors compliance with all the conditions mentioned in 
the CTO through inspection reports for the l ease holders. On scrutiny of 
records of selected 136 leases where 228 inspections were required to be 
conducted as per norms 19  during 2011-15, it was found that the RSPCB had 
                                                 
19  As per the norms of inspections fixed (July 2011) for mining units by the RSPCB, the 
inspection was mandatory once in five years in case of manual mining units, once in two 
years for Semi -Mechanised mining units and once in a year for Mechanised mining units. 
Further, the operating manual of the RSPCB refixed (2015 -16) the frequency of 
inspection. The RSPCB officials had to conduct inspection of mining units at least once in 
a year of mines having area more than 50 hectares; at least once in two years of mines 
having area between 5 and 50 hectares and need based inspection of mines having area less 
than 5 hectares.  

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
64 
 
conducted 50 inspections in 38 leases only during 2010 -15. It was seen that 
only three inspections were conducted between 2015 -17. Further, only three 
lease holders had submitted prescribed report and Annual Environmental 
Statement20 on time. It was noticed that 106 lease holders had not submitted 
any return and 118 lease holders had no t submitted the statement during the 
operative period of the CTO.  
We, therefore, conducted a joint physical inspection of 136 mining leases in 
selected AME/ME offices to assess the compliance of provisions relating to 
protection of environment by the leas e holders. The joint physical inspection 
covered the environmental issues stated above. The findings of joint physical 
inspection were also correlated with the inspection reports of the RSPCB. 
3.1.6.2 Findings of joint physical inspection of mining leases  
Top Soil 
Top soil  is the uppermost layer and is an essential component for land 
reclamation in mining areas. During the planning stage, the lessee has to 
submit an estimated quantity of the top soil, its storage area, location and 
details of subsequent utilisation.  
During joint physical inspection of 136 leases, it was found that top soil was 
not stacked separately in 44 leases (32 per cent ). Further, it could not be 
ascertained whether the top soil had been used as required or was mixed with 
the overburden. Hence, its retrieval in these leases was not possible for future 
use. 
Overburden dumps 
Overburden is the natural rock and soil that exists above and around the ore 
body. It is not subject to any chemical processes at the mine but needs to be 
removed to allow access to the ore. Overburden is often used at mine sites for 
landscape contouring and re-vegetation during mine closure.  
On joint physical inspection of 136 mining leases, it was found that: 
 In 53 leases (39 per cent ), the  overburden was f ound dumped in 
scattered manner within and outside lease area instead of dumping at 
earmarked site.  
 The dump was found stacked without any retaining wall in 81 leases   
(60 per cent).  
                                                 
20  As per Rule 14 of the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986, ev ery person carrying on an 
industry, operation or process requiring consent under Section 25 of the Water (Prevention 
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 or under Section 21 of the Air (Prevention and Control 
of Pollution) Act, 1981 or both shall submit an environmental statement for the financial 
year ending 31 March in Form V to the RSPCB on or before 30 September every year . 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
65 
 
Plantation 
Each lessee has to plant trees based on his area of lease with each progressive 
year of mining so that phase wise restoration, reclamation and rehabilitation of 
land take place.  
On joint physical inspection, it was found that: 
 80 lease holders who had to plant 13,800 saplings during 2010 -11 to 
2014-15 as per the circular, did not raise any plantation in their lease areas.  
 32 lease holders had planted approximately 1,38,100 plants as against 
1,83,850 plants required.  
 Remaining 24 lease holders claimed that plantation was done in areas 
other than the lease area like nearby boundaries of school, area available near 
temple, along roadside, crushers, etc. However, such plantations could not be 
ascertained in absence of any documentary proof.  
Thus, there was lack of maintenance of ambient air quality around these leases 
and provisions laid down in the above rules were not complied with. 
Construction of garland drain 
Garland drain is constructed around mining pit and overburden dump to arrest 
flow of silt and sediments from soil, overburden and mineral dump.  
During joint physical inspection of selected 136 mining leases, it was found 
that: 
 123 lease holders (90 per cent ) had not constructed any garland drain 
around the mining pit in their lease areas contrary to the conditions laid down 
in the EC/CTO.  
Air pollution control measures 
During joint physical inspections of 136 leases, it was found that: 
 No record  regarding periodic monitoring of ambient air quality was 
maintained by operating 105 lease holders (77 per cent) at mining site.  
 No water sprinkling had been carried out on haul roads as well as on 
loading points in 74 leases (54 per cent) on the day of inspection.  
 No water sprinkling system was installed in any lease area except in one 
mining lease which was owned by a State Public Sector Undertaking.  In the 
remaining leases, the water sprinkling was claimed to be done through water 
tankers. However, th e lessees had no records in the lease area to show 
periodicity of water sprinkling.  
 No record pertaining to air pollution control measures was available at  
21 cancelled and two surrendered lease site during inspection. 
 112 lease holders did not have any equipment for checking ambient air 
quality at mining lease site on the day of inspection except lease no. 03/89 of 
the office of ME, Udaipur. 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
66 
 
As such in absence of checking ambient air quality at mining lease site and 
non-availability of reports regarding air quality, the quantum of air pollutant s 
in lease areas could not be ascertained.    
Noise pollution control measures 
Audit was unable to check the noise level in the selected 113  operating 
leases21 as the AME/ME offices did not have any equipment to test  the noise 
level.  It was noticed in audit that only seven lessees had noise monitoring 
reports. In absence of periodic noise monitoring reports, breaching of the 
permissible noise level in lease areas could not be ascertained.  
Rehabilitation and reclamation of mined out pits 
The objective of reclamation of mined out pits by the lessee is to initiate 
restoration, reclamation and rehabilitation of areas mined out in a phased 
manner so that the land is returned to an acceptable standard of productive 
use.  
During joint physical inspection of 136 leases, it was found that: 
 23 lease holders out of the 24 operating leases checked and which had 
area of five or more hectares had not carried out phased reclamation or 
rehabilitation work of mined out pits in the lease area stating that it would be 
carried out after closure of mines. The remaining lease was of an underground 
mine (3/89). As such, these lease holders violated the rules as well as 
conditions laid down in EC/CTO. 
 89 lease holders having lease area les s than five hectares had also not 
carried out reclamation work stating that rehabilitation and reclamation work 
would be carried out after closure of mines. 
Mining in benches 
Formation of benches is required for safety of workers as well as for free 
movement of vehicles and mineral to be dug out from pit. Mining in benches 
minimises the danger of material fall and accidents.  
During joint physical inspection of 136 mining leases, it was noticed that: 
 In 90 leases  (66 per cent), mining operations were carried out without 
formation of benches. It was a clear violation of the mine regulations and no 
action was initiated against these lease holders by the concerned AME/ME.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
21 23 Cancelled/surrendered leases had been excluded as no record was available at mining 
site due to closure of mining operations.  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
67 
 
Case study: Mining in benches 
 
Mining Plan 
 Mining was proposed through formation of benches of average height 
(three to six metres) and width (7 to 65 metres). 
Rajasthan Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 1986 
 System of working in mining lease shall be performed by formation of 
benches; 
 Such benches in miner al and overburden including weathered mineral 
shall be formed separately; 
  The lessee shall maintain the bench height and slope as per the 
Metalliferous Mines Regulations, 1961 and maintain the overall slope of mine 
below 45 degrees. 
Joint physical inspection conducted by audit 
A joint physical inspection was conducted on 05 Jan uary 2016 and it was 
found that: 
 Mining operations were carried out without formation of benches; 
 Overall slope of mine was much more than prescribed slope. 
A good example of properly formed benches 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ML No.  : 304/92 
Mineral : Masonry Stone 
Area : 1 hectare 
Lease Period:   14 October 1993 to         
13 October 2023 
Location: Jaipur 
 ML No.  06/89 
M/s Hindustan Zinc Ltd., 
Maton Mines, Udaipur 
Mineral : Rock Phosphate 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
68 
 
3.1.6.3 Cross verification of the findings with 38 RSPCB inspection 
reports 
The scrutiny of inspection reports of RSPCB regarding 38 leases  disclosed 
variance in eight components of environmental issues i.e. Top Soil, 
Overburden dumps, Plantation, Garland drains in the lease area, Air pollution 
control measures, Noise pollution control measures, Reclamation and 
rehabilitation works and Mining in benches. 
There was a variation in reporting of the RSPCB in resp ect of f ollowing 
environmental issues: 
 Availability of top soil in lease area and storage thereof. 
 Dumping of overburden dumps at earmarked site in lease area and 
stabilisation of overburden dumps through vegetation.  
 Plantation was not done by lease holde rs in their leased area as per 
prescribed norms and misreporting thereof. 
 Excavation of mineral was being carried out without development of 
benches in lease area etc. 
These are discussed in Appendix 3.3 
3.1.6.4 Action taken 
The matter was brought to the notice of the Government (May 2016) and the 
RSPCB (May 2016). The Government replied (July 2016) that directions had 
been issued to the concerned ME/AME offices for issuing notices to lease 
holders who had not stacked top soil separately and overburden at earmarked 
place, where plantation was not done as per norms, garland drains were not 
constructed, reclamation and rehabilitation of mined out pits was not done and 
where benches were not formed even after joint inspection. The Government 
replied that reports may be obtained from the RSPCB regarding air and noise 
pollution control measures. The RSPCB replied (October 2016) that show -
cause notices had been issued to the non -compliant mining lessees by the 
concerned ROs. 
The Secretary, Mines and Petroleum and Chairperson of the RSPCB stated in 
the exit conference (November 2016) that there had been violation of Rules 
and added that it was not feasible for the Board to monitor each and every 
mine due to shortage of manpower. Member Secretary, RSPCB stated that t he 
Board was going to monitor the mines through Global Positioning System. It 
was also stated by the Secretary that adequate plantation was not being done 
by the lessees. Further, DMG stated that it was not feasible for the lessees to 
plant trees in and ne arby lease area due to rocky terrain and, therefore, 
saplings were planted in nearby road, school, etc. in clusters. The reply is not 
acceptable as plantation had to be done as per the conditions mentioned in 
EC/CTO/Mining Plan and it must be clearly verifiable.  
The Department and RSPCB may strengthen its monitoring mechanism 
related to fulfillment of environmental conditions prescribed in MP, EC and 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
69 
 
CTO through periodical returns/frequent inspections for the lease holders 
seeking status on the observance of the prescribed conditions. 
3.1.7 Management of Funds relating to Environment Protection 
The State Government received financial assurance amount as surety for site 
rehabilitation, post closure monitoring and maintenance of mining project;  
levied Environment and Health cess which was to be utilised for protection of 
environment and health in mining areas and collected contribution to 
Environment Management F und for carrying out environment protection 
works. The following irregularities were noticed: -  
3.1.7.1 Financial assurance 
The amount of surety to be deposited is computed based on the area put to use 
for mining and allied activities. The amount of financial assurance for mines 
is as under: 
Major minerals 
As per rule 23(F) of the Mineral Conservation and 
Development Rules, 1988 
Minor minerals 
As per Rule 37(J) of the 
RMMC Rules 1986 
(inserted on 19 June 2012) 
A22 category mines per 
hectare (in `) 
B category mines per 
hectare(in `) 
Per hectare and part 
thereof(in `) 
25,000 15,000 15,000 
The minimum amount of Financial Assurance to be furnished in the form of letter of credit 
from any scheduled bank should be ` two lakh for ‘A’ category mines and ` one lakh for ‘B’ 
category mines. Maximum amount of Financial Assurance for minor minerals is  ` 30 lakh 
On scrutiny of records of selected 288 mining leases of AME/ME offices, it 
was found that four lease holders having an area of 17.82 hectares had not 
deposited ` 0.60 lakh towards financial assurance.  
Further, on scrutiny of selected 35 cancelled/surrendered leases, it was noticed 
that: 
 20 lessees having an area of 29.69 hectares whose mining leases had 
been cancelled/ surrendered had not deposited the financial assurance amount 
of  ` 3.00 lakh. The burden of restoration of these leases, therefore, would 
have to be borne from the State exchequer.  
 No restoration works were carried out by the concerned AME/MEs in 
six cancelled leases wherein the financial assurance amount of ` 3.45 lakh had 
been deposited by the lessees. This was not utilised in absence of clear 
directions for utilisation of funds.  
The DMG stated in the exit conference (November 2016) that the amount 
would be utilised for restoration of mined out pits in leased area. 
                                                 
22‘A’ category mines means fully mechanised mines where the work is being carried out by 
deployment of heavy mining machinery for deep hole drilling, excavation, loading and 
transport or such mines where the number of average employment exceeds 150 in all. 
Category ‘B’ mines means mines other than category ‘A’ mines. 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
70 
 
3.1.7.2 Environment and Health Cess 
The State Government levied ‘Environment and Health Cess’ in 2008 on 
selected major minerals. The proceeds of the cess were to be utilised for 
protection of environment and health and maintenance of ecological balance 
especially in mining areas of the State. The rates of environment and health 
cess for collection of proceeds were prescribed and effective since 1 April 
2008 and the rates were revised from time to time. 
The State Government collected cess of ` 544.48 crore from the lease holders 
of selected major minerals during 2008 -09 to 2016 -17. Thereafter, the State 
Government rescinded the collection of cess vide notification dated 6 January 
2017.  
The State Government constituted (24 December 2010) Rajasthan 
Environment and Health Administrative Board (REHAB) for effective 
management of funds. It was noticed that the Cess became effective from  
1 April 2008 but the REHAB was not constituted till 23 December 2010. As a 
result, no fund was used during 2008 -09 to 2010 -11. Fu rther, only  
` 140.53 crore (25.81 per cent ) of the fund was utilised during 2011 -12 to 
2016-17.  
On scrutiny of the minutes of the twelve REHAB meetings which took place 
between January 2011 and January 2017, it was noticed that: 
 The Board sanctioned fund s for activities which were not related to the 
objectives prescribed under the Environment and Health Cess as stipulated in 
the Rajasthan Finance Act, 2008 and Rules made thereunder. The Board also 
admitted in its seventh and ninth meetings held on 7 April  2014 and 23 
December 2014 respectively that some sanctions issued for incurring 
expenditure from cess amount were not in consonance with the objectives of 
the Act. Objectives of the Act such as the shifting of Makrana -Parbatsar 
railway line and payment of cost of land thereof and computerisation at DMG 
office. 
The matter was brought to the notice of the Government (May 2016). The 
Government replied (July 2016) that all the expenditure was incurred after 
scrutiny of the proposals by the Board members and decision taken in the 
Board meetings. The reply is not acceptable as the expenditure incurred on the 
items discussed above was contrary to the objectives of the Environment and 
Health Cess. The Board had also admitted in its meetings that some sanctions 
issued were not in consonance with the objectives of the Act.  The Joint 
Secretary, Mines stated in the exit conference (November 2016) that unspent 
balance of fund would be utilised on the objectives for which the fund was 
collected. 
3.1.7.3 Environment Management Fund 
A separate Environment Management F und (EMF) was created by the State 
Government under Rule 37 T (5) of the RMMC Rules, 1986 inserted vide 
notification dated 19 June 2012 to meet the financial requirement for carrying 
out environment protection works as per environment management plan. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
71 
 
 EMF was to be al lotted by District Level Environment Committee for 
environment development work, to the concerned association of cluster or to 
the agency to which such work was assigned. The Hon’ble Rajasthan High 
Court in the D.B. Civil Writ Petition No. 11584/2013 decla red (9 April 2015) 
collection of EMF illegal until the final decision of the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India . In compliance with the direction of the Hon’ble Rajasthan 
High Court, DMG postponed the collection of EMF with immediate effect on 
05 May 2015.It w as noticed that a sum of ` 295.03 crore was collected on 
account of EMF by the Department. However, no amount was utilised for 
carrying out environment protection works as the DMG did not prepare any 
guidelines for incurring expenditure. 
The matter was bro ught to the notice of the Government  (May 2016).  The 
Government replied  (July 2016)  that DMG had requested the State 
Government for allocation of funds of `  14 crore under EMF to the 
subordinate offices for plantation. 
DMG stated in the exit conference (November 2016) that the amount would 
be utilised after preparation of guidelines. 
 The Department may ensure collection of the financial assurance 
amount from the lease holders and wherever lease holder fails to undertake 
reclamation and rehabilitation mea sures, the financial assurance amount 
collected must be judiciously utilised in the mined out area. 
 The Cess amount must be spent only on those purposes which meet the 
objectives for which the Cess had been imposed by the Government. 
3.1.8 Conclusion 
We observed that mineral production was enhanced without obtaining the EC 
and mines were operated without renewing the lapsed CTO. There was excess 
excavation of minerals by the lease holders in violation of conditions attached 
with CTO.  
We observed that illegal mining activities were rampant in the State. There 
were inadequacies in preventive measures as well as in follow up of the illegal 
mining cases detected. There was lack of deterrence due to delay in issue of 
notices raising demand and recovery of t he penal amount from illegal miners. 
Also, there was slackness in implementation of the policy measures 
enunciated in 2011 for curbing illegal mining. 
We noticed serious violations of the orders of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of 
India as mining leases fallin g in Aravalli mountain range were granted , 
renewed and extended. Besides, the MoEF also granted EC for mining lease 
despite the area falling in Aravalli hills.  
We observed that environmental issues related to mining activities were not 
accorded proper attention by the Department and RSPCB. The Department 
had not prescribed any periodical return requiring the lease holders to furnish 
information regarding the observance of conditions related with 
environmental protection as prescribed in MP, EC and CTO. The inspection 
reports of the Department also did not focus on any environmental issue s. Out 
of 136 leases of selected AME/ME offices, we observed that the RSPCB had 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
72 
 
conducted inspections in 38 leases only during 2010 -17. Further, 106 lease 
holders had not submitted any reports and 118 lease holders had not submitted 
the Annual Environment Statement during the operative period of the CTO. 
Further, the inspection reports were incomplete, incorrect and unreliable as 
was ascertained through comparison of the f indings of joint physical 
inspection an d the RSPCB inspection reports. The physical inspections 
revealed serious deficiencies and apathy towards fulfilment of environmental 
conditions relating to top soil, overburden dumps, plantation, construction of 
garland drain, air pollution control measures, noise pollution control 
measures, reclamation and rehabilitation measures and mining in benches.  
We noticed that the mandatory financial assurance amount was not recovered 
from four lease holders and 20 lease hol ders whose leases were 
cancelled/surrendered. The deposited amount of financial assurance from six 
lease holders could not be spent in absence of clear directions. Further, only 
25.81 per cent of the ‘Environment and Health Cess’ was spent during 2011 -
17. Funds were sanctioned for works that did not meet the objectives for 
which the Cess was collected. The Department also collected ‘Environment 
Management Fund ` 295.03 crore but the same could not be utilised in 
absence of any guidelines.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
73 
 
Forest Department 
 
3.2 Development of water catchment through greening of Rajasthan 
 
3.2.1 Introduction 
A project ‘Development of Water Catchment through Greening of Rajasthan’ 
for rehabilitation of degraded forest was planned by the State Government. 
The National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) 
sanctioned loan for the project. It was planned to treat about 1,59,000 hectares 
of degraded forest land at a project cost of ₹ 988.56 crore. The Phase -I of the 
project having a total cost of  ₹ 336.66 crore envisaged treatment of 52,750 
hectares of degraded land during the period 2012-13 to 2016-17. According to 
project guidelines , implementation of the project was to be done through a  
memorandum of understanding (MoU) between forest departmen t and village 
forest protection/management committee (VFPMC). The project was carried 
out in selected 17 districts23 out of total 33 districts. 
During the implementation and execution of phase -I of the project 2012 -13 to 
2016-17, budget allotment of ₹ 311.3 8 crore was made and ₹ 289.61 crore 
spent on different activities of the project. The activity -wise physical targets 
and achievements during 2012-13 to 2016-17 are given in Appendix-3.4. 
3.2.2 Audit Coverage and Methodology 
The audit of records was conducted in the offices of the Principal Chief 
Conservator of Forest (PCCF); Head of Forest Force (HoFF); Deputy 
Conservator of Forest (DCF) NABARD; Finance Department (Expenditure 
Division) of GoR, Additional PCCF (Development/ Monitoring/Project 
Formulation/NABARD) and seven divisions 24 headed by DCFs, selected out 
of 29 divisions by adopting stratified random sampling method, covering the 
period from 2012-13 to 2016-17. Apart from this, joint physical inspection of 
selected sites was also conducted with t he Departmental officers to verify the 
works executed. The audit was conducted to assess whether the various 
activities were executed effective ly and the required monitoring and 
evaluation were done. 
Audit Findings 
 
 
3.2.3 Preparation of micro-plans  
The project guidelines provided that right from the beginning, need based and 
area speciﬁc mi cro plans taking a village as a  unit of development would be 
prepared through Participatory Rural Appraisal. The micro plans prepared 
would be discussed in Village For est Protection/Management Committee 
                                                 
23  Ajmer, Alwar, Baran, Bundi, Bharatpur, Chittorgarh, Dausa, Dholpur, Jhalawar,  Karauli, 
Kota, Pratapgarh, Rajsamand, Sawai Madhopur, Sirohi,  Tonk and Udaipur. 
24  Ajmer, Bharatpur, Bundi, Kota, (WL) MNP Kota, Pratapgarh and Rajsamand. 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
74 
 
(VFPMC)25 meetings and would be approved by the concerned DFOs. The 
micro plan once prepared would be valid for a period of five years. However, 
the micro plan would be reviewed after two years. During scrutiny of records  
of selected divisions following points noticed by the audit: 
 172 micro plans were prepared in selected divisions out of which the  
dates of approval of 12 micro plans 26 were not submitted to audit by the 
concerned DFOs. The expenditure on the concerned pro jects was ` 3.37 
crore27. 
 In 145 cases micro plans were not reviewed after two years.  
 In five cases in DCF (WL) MNP, Kota the works were executed before 
approval (March 2016) of the micro plans. 
 In case of DCFs Ajmer and Bundi it was revealed that in 19 cases28 the 
dates of approval of micro plans were preceded the date of the registration of 
relevant VFPMCs. 
Targets were set for construction of different types of soil and water 
conservation structures. However, survey reports in support of site suitabilit y 
and selection of type of structures were not available.  
3.2.4   Afforestation  
3.2.4.1 Lack of categorization of land for afforestation  
Phase-I of the project envisaged treatment of 52,750 hectares of degraded 
land. As per project guidelines, degraded land was to be categorized under 
Rehabilitation of Degraded Forest -I (RDF -I), II (RDF -II), Assisted Natural 
Regeneration (ANR) and Panchayat land plantation (PLP) on the basis of 
availability of tree cover in the specific areas.  
At the time of scrutiny of records of selected divisions, it was seen that 
categorization of land into aforesaid categories (viz. RDF-I, RDF-II and ANR) 
for afforesta tion was not done at the planning stage . T he details of such 
categorization were neither available in the project report nor submitted to 
audit in absence of which correctness and authenticity of categorization of 
degraded forest land could not be ascertained.   
3.2.4.2  Non adherence to technical parameters  
 Assisted Natural Regeneration works were executed at 19 sites 
pertaining to five divisions 29 at an expenditure of ` 2.47 crore30. An essential 
item required to ensure proper growth of plantation i.e. ‘singling and 
                                                 
25 According to provisions made in forest manual (Government of Rajasthan) , Deputy 
Conservator of Forests or equivalent officer will register these committees.  
26  DCF Bharatpur : 4 and Rajsamand : 8 
27  DCF Rajsamand : ` 2.88 crore and DCF Bharatpur : ` 0.49 crore 
28  DCF Ajmer : 2,  Bundi : 17 
29  DCF Bharatpur,  Bundi, (WL) MNP, Kota, Pratapgarh, Rajsamand 
30 DCFs Bharatpur : ` 25.93 lakh; Bundi : ` 78.35 lakh; (WL) MNP, Kota: ` 12.52 lakh;  
Pratapgarh ` 101.19 lakh; Rajsamand : ` 29.42 lakh. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
75 
 
tending’31 included as  item number 4 in model estimates was neither 
undertaken nor any technical reason for not undertaking the activity was 
provided. It was also noticed that the required sanction from the next higher 
authority was not obta ined for deviation from the model estimate. The 
availability of necessary root stock on ANR sites could not be ensured and the 
purpose of singling and tending was defeated.  
 Seed testing is essential to ensure increase in forestry yield and 
protection from the threats of diseases and pests. As per orders of the PCCF 
the samples of seed should be sent for testing necessarily before purchase. The 
seed germination test of collected seed was necessary and the payment in 
respect of seed purchase was to be m ade only after quality testing of the 
purchased/collected seed. Scrutiny of records revealed that in seven divisions, 
sub-standard seed amounting to ₹ 6.74 lakh and un -certified seed (without 
laboratory test) worth ₹ 17.08 lakh were distributed to the Rang e offices from 
the Divisional Offices (Appendix-3.5). In response to audit query , DCF, 
Ajmer stated (March 2017) that range officers have been directed to ensure 
compliance of the aforesaid orders of the Van Vardhan Adhikari. The DCF, 
Pratapgarh stated tha t in view of limited time frame for completion of 
plantation work, seed germination tests could not be done. Replies of DCFs 
Kota, Rajsamand, Bundi, Bharatpur and (WL) MNP, Kota were awaited. 
 The PCCF issued orders (October 2002) specifying that no work should 
be initiated without sanction of technical estimates. The proposals for 
development work relating  to plantation should invariably consist of detailed 
technical note, map and estimates.  Scrutiny of records revealed that in three 
divisions32, in case of 29 sites 33 relating to RDF -I, RDF -II and ANR the 
plantation work commenced and payment was made prior to issuance of 
technical sanctions (Appendix-3.6). The commencement of plantation work 
prior to issuance of technical sanctions in aforesai d cases was irregular and 
contrary to the instructions issued by the PCCF.  
 As per Department of Forest, GoR, plants of size of 1 metre to 1.5 metre 
and age of one and half years are treated as matured for plantation. Scrutiny of 
records and information pr ovided by the Department revealed that in DCF, 
Bundi at site Soran -A under RDF -I, immature plants only five months old 
were planted. Similarly, in DCF, Pratapgarh, plants between 4 and 7 months 
of age were planted at site Panighatta under RDF -II, Nayan Bad likhera-III 
under RDF -I and Khankudi and Chitrimata under Assisted Natural 
Regeneration. In case of DCF, Bharatpur, at eight sites34, plants between 5 and 
7 months old were planted. The department incurred an expenditure of ` 2.26 
crore (DCFs Bundi  : ` 26.94 lakh; Pratapgarh : ` 75.65 lakh; Bharatpur :  
` 123.53 lakh) on the plantation of immature plants. Immature plants have 
high chance of mortality and are vulnerable to grazing. In response to audit 
                                                 
31 Singling means removal of multiple stems and tending means removal of unnecessary 
saplings. These operations are required to reduce root competition and transpiration water 
loss and improve light conditions. 
32   DCF (WL) MNP, Kota, Pratapgarh,  Rajsamand  
33   DCF (WL) MNP, Kota : 2,  DCFs Rajsamand : 19, Pratapgarh : 8 
34   RDF-I: Bilond, RDF-II: Kankachal, Gogera-I, Bolkhera, Kankachal-II, ANR: Mansapurar,   
Matiya pahar, PLP: Rajpura-II 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
76 
 
query the department intimated mortality rates of th ese plants viz. DCF,  
Bundi : (1 site) 15 per cent ; Pratapgarh : (4 sites) 30 to 48 per cent  and 
Bharatpur : (8 sites) 40 to 50 per cent . No evaluation was conducted to 
determine the cause of such high mortality rates.  
3.2.5 Soil and Water Conservation Structures 
3.2.5.1  Work of construction of soil and water conservation structures 
deviated from micro plans  
During scrutiny of records of selected divisions 35, we found cases of deviation 
from micro plans. It was seen that instead of the initially proposed 33 works 
amounting to ₹ 2.14 crore at specified locations, divisions executed 28 works 
amounting to ₹ 1.21 crore at locations other than the originally propo sed 
areas. The implementation of the project works, therefore, was not done in 
accordance with the relevant micro plans. The details of such works have been 
depicted in the Appendix-3.7. 
3.2.5.2  Construction of soil and water conservation structures witho ut 
obtaining sanction from the committee constituted  
For proper planning of schemes based on micro watershed , Administrative 
Reforms Department (GoR) constituted a State level coordination committee 
(August 2011). The committee consisted of representatives of various 
departments including Forest Department. No project would be considered for 
sanction without the clearance from the committee. Water Resources 
Department also clarified that before construction of anicuts/water harvesting 
structures/check dam, consent of the committee would be necessary to decide 
height and capacity of the structures (June 2012).  
Scrutiny of records of selected divisions revealed that 419 check dams,  
56 anicuts of type-II, 29 anicuts of type-III and 76 water harvesting structures 
involving expenditure of ₹ 8.87 crore were constructed in seven divisions 
without obtaining consent from the Committee (Appendix-3.8). 
In response to audit query DCF, Kota stated (February 2017) that height of 
constructed structures was less than 2 -meter and these were constructed for 
‘conservation of soil’ in place of ‘water conservation’; DCF (WL) MNP, Kota  
also stated (May 2017) that constructed structures were less than 2 -meter high 
and were not lying within catchment area of any reservoir. Thus the 
permission of the committee was not required. 
The Department’s plea regarding the two meters height of const ructed 
structures was not relevant because the Forest Department in its own orders 
had already clarified that regardless of height of structures permission from 
aforesaid committee was to be obtained.  Further, department also replied that 
construction was  in view of conservation of soil in place of water 
conservation. This is also not tenable because construction of check dam, 
                                                 
35   DCF Bharatpur, Bundi, Kota, DCF (WL) MNP Kota, Pratapgarh,  Rajsamand   
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
77 
 
anicut II, anicut III and Water Harvesting Structure  were part of package 
number three and related to soil and moisture conservation.  
3.2.6  Joint Forest Management Activities 
For ‘Joint Forest Management’ village -wise VFPMCs were to be constituted. 
The DCF or equivalent officer would register this committee and the VFPMC 
would maintain an updated membership register. At least 33 per cent 
members of the VFPMC would be women. In addition to this, women sub -
committee would be constituted and at least one key official in the executive 
committee would be a woman. The tenure of the executive committee would 
be two years and fresh election would be held after expiry of this period. The 
VFPMC would hold at least two general meetings every year and the Range 
Officer of the area and other senior officers of the Forest Department may 
inspect the records related to the revenue of VFPMC. 
Out of 183 VFPMCs constituted in selected divisions, it was observed that: 
 During 2012-13 to 2016-17, ₹ 30.99 lakh was allocated to 41 VFPMCs 
under Joint Forest Management Activities in order to conduct income 
generating activities through Self Help Groups ( SHGs). It was observed that 
the funds allocated to VFPMCs were not disbursed to SHGs due to which 
income generating activities were not carried out. It was also observed that the 
department did not take proper action to recover the blocked funds.  
 In 28 36 out of 5 3 cases (DCFs Bundi : 37  and Kota : 16)  the total 
number of women members was less than the prescribed number of women to 
be included in the VFPMC. In 16 cases 37, the women’s sub -committees were 
not constituted or there were no woman representative in the committees. As a 
result, the involvement of women in JFM activities could not be ensured. 
 In all 183 cases, dates of elections held after completion of tenure of 
executives committees were not made available. 
 Further, two general meetings required to be conducted in each year as 
provided in guidelines were not held.  
 Inspection of records of all 183 VFPMCs was not done by the 
departmental authorities and audit of the same was not conducted due to 
which irregularities and shortcomings could not be detected. 
3.2.7  Convergence through MGNREGS 
Package number eight i.e. ‘Convergence through Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme  (MGNREGS)’ had a provision of  
₹ 37.36 crore for coverage of 1000 hectares land by construction of pucca 
stone wall fencing of vulnerable forest and wild life area. Scrutiny of records 
of the selected divisions 38 revealed that the area susceptible to encroachment 
was neither identified nor were the targets for construction of pucca stone wall 
                                                 
36   DCF Bundi : 15,  Kota : 10, MNP Kota 03 
37   DCF Ajmer : 4, Bharatpur : 6,  Pratapgarh : 2, Rajsamand : 4 
38   DCF Ajmer, Bharatpur, Bundi, Kota, (WL) MNP  Kota, Pratapgarh, Rajsamand 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
78 
 
fencing achieved. Scrutiny of information provided by the department 
disclosed that the targets for construction of pucca wall fencing increased to 
4900 hectares (390 per cent ) with a decrease in financial t argets to ₹ 19.63 
crore (52.54 per cent).  However, no expenditure was incurred on the package.  
The department replied (June 2017) that pucca wall fencing was not 
permissible in MGNREGS. Thus, despite non -admissibility of the 
construction of pucca wall in the scheme this component was included in the 
project as a separate package.  
3.2.8  Monitoring and Evaluation 
As per the project guidelines, the DCF, Planning and Monitoring would 
evaluate randomly selected works in randomly selected divisions every year 
as per norms. One work would be completely evaluated and the remaining 
works would be partially (equivalent to 10 per cent of the area) evaluated. In 
case, major deviations were found then those works would also be evaluated.   
Scrutiny of Monitoring and Evaluation Reports of DCF, Planning and 
Monitoring, revealed that in five divisions 39, only the afforestation package 
was evaluated. The evaluation reports indicated shortcomings in 
implementation of project works like lack of cut -back work of natural plants, 
ineffective fencing, digging of undersized pits, grazing by domesticated as 
well as wild animals, unsatisfactory condition of natural grass in the area and 
lack of medicinal seed sowing on V-ditches.  
Action taken reports on the shortcomings were neither found on record nor 
submitted to audit by three divisions 40. Besides, monitoring an d evaluation 
work of DCF (WL) MNP, Kota was not conducted due to which 
implementation of project works remained un -monitored and un-evaluated. In 
case of DCF, Bharatpur monitoring and evaluation reports not submitted to 
audit thus the same remained un-reviewed by the audit. 
As per the guidelines, external agencies appointed by PCCF will carry out 
evaluation of 10 per cent project divisions after three years.  
It was noticed that in absence of appointment of external agencies by PCCF, 
the evaluation work in 10 per cent  of project divisions which was to be 
conducted after three years could not be done.  
The matter was referred (July 2017) to State Government, the reply was 
awaited. 
3.2.9  Conclusion 
The basis for categorization of degraded forest land and identification of 
location and types of soil and water conservation structures at the planning 
stage of the project could not be verified in absence of records and survey 
reports. There were shortcomings in prepar ation of the micro plans besides 
deviations in respect of construction of soil and water conservation structures. 
                                                 
39  Ajmer, Bundi,  Kota, Pratapgarh, Rajsamand.  
40  Bundi,  Kota,  Rajsamand. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
79 
 
Similarly, there were instances of purchase/collection and ut ilization of un -
certified seeds and  non-adherence to project guidelines in respec t of agro -
forestry and joint forest management activity packages. 
The norms prescribed for monitoring and evaluation by internal agencies were 
not adhered to and external agencies were not appointed for project 
evaluation. 
  

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
80 
 
Public Works Department 
 
3.3 Implementation of Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization 
Project 
 
3.3.1 Introduction 
The State Government decided (2012 -13) to connect all villages having 
population between 250 and 499 (Census 2001) with all -weather bituminous 
roads in a phased manner in the areas of the state not covered by Pradhan 
Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana  (PMGSY). To ac hieve this, the Rajasthan Road 
Sector Modernization Project (RRSMP) was launched by GoR in 2013 -14. 
The project had three main components i.e. improvement in rural 
connectivity, strengthening of road sector management and enhancement in 
road safety. 
The project is financed by the World Bank and the State Government in the 
ratio of 70:30. The total project cost is ` 1362 crore. The objective of the first 
component ‘Rural Connectivity Improvement’ was to support construction of 
about 2500 kilometer rural road s for providing connectivity to about 1300 
revenue villages with population of 250 -499. The second component included 
‘Road sector modernization and performance enhancement’ for rural road 
sector modernization plan . The third component, ‘Road safety manage ment’ 
has the objective of reducing the number of fatalities and serious injuries from 
traffic accidents.  
3.3.2 Status of project 
The starting and closing dates of the project were 10 March 2014 and  
31 December 2018 respectively. An expenditure of ` 951.76 crore was  
incurred on the project between 2013 and 2017 against an allocation of         
` 1156.86 crore. Under component A - Rural connectivity improvement, road 
connectivity was to be provided to 1056 villages through construction of 2521 
kilometers of roads. It was seen that 2225 km roads were constructed  upto 
March 2017 and 990 villages were connected.  
The second component included three key areas viz. sustainable asset 
management; improved policy framework; modernization of engineering 
practices and business procedures . It was seen that sustainable Road Assets 
Management System (RAMS) was to be implemented by 30 January 2017 in 
two phases. However, first p hase of designing the system of  RAMS was 
incomplete (March 2017 ) as a result , second phase could not be taken up. 
Similarly, in case of works related to safe c orridor demonstration programme 
of third component ‘Road safety management’ only final report on proposed 
demo corridor and safer road investment plans was completed and other 
works were in progress. 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
81 
 
3.3.3 Scope and Methodology 
The audit of RRSMP for the period 2013 -14 to 2016 -17 was conducted 
through scrutiny of records available in the offices of the Chief Engineer (CE) 
(PMGSY), Public Works  Department (PWD), Rajasthan, Jaipur and  
18 divisions41 selected out of 74 divisions by adopting stratified random 
sampling method 42. The test checked divisions executed 4 17 road works 
covered in 137 packages. 
Audit findings 
 
Component A- Rural Connectivity Improvement 
 
3.3.4 Planning 
 
3.3.4.1 Lack of data for planning 
 One of the objectives of the programme was to provide all weather road 
connectivity to all villages not covered under PMGSY having population 
between 250 and 499. PAD43 had taken into account 7357 such villages which 
had population below 500 as of October 2013. As a result of reconciliation 
done (November 2015) by State Government, the number of unconnected 
habitations44 having population between 250 and 499 shown on OMMA S45 
increased by 1571. The Department, however, did not supply the details of 
villages to be provided connectivity vis-a-vis those already covered/to be 
covered under other schemes to audit as of March 2017. It was seen that 1056 
villages were selected for connectivity under RRSMP and 1500 villages were 
proposed for coverage under National Bank for Agriculture and Rural 
Development (NABARD). The information regarding remaining 4801  
villages 46 was not intimated. Besides this , the department did not provide the 
information regarding road connectivity of villages increased due to increase 
of habitations by 1571. 
In absence of reliable data it could not be ascertained whether all villages 
having population between 250 and 499 were taken into account during 
planning for providing connectivity with all-weather bituminous roads. 
 As per PAD, the Project Management Consultant (PMC) was required 
to help PWD in preparation of Operation Manual which would detail the 
                                                 
41  Executive Engineer, PWD Division, Abu Road, Alwar -II, Beawar, Bhilwara, Bundi (World 
Bank), Chaumahla, Chhabra, Chittorgarh (WB), Dausa, City Division Jaipur, 
Distt.Dn.Jaipur, Malpura, Nimbahera, Rajsamand (WB), Sawai Madhopur (WB), Sikandra, 
Sriganganagar, Suratgarh. 
42 The stratified random sampling method is a technique which attempts to restrict the possible 
samples to those which are ‘less extreme’ by ensuring that all parts of the population are 
represented in the sample in order to increase the efficiency of the methodology. 
43   Project Appraisal Document prepared by world bank basis on which loan was sanctioned.  
44  A habitation is cluster of population, living in an area, the location of which does not  
change over time. Several habitations make a village. 
45   Online Monitoring, Management and Accounting System. 
46   7357-(1056+1500) 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
82 
 
implementation arrangement for various project compon ents, including 
project monitoring, fund flow and management of social and environmental 
aspects.  
During scrutiny of records of CE (PMGSY), it was observed that the 
Operation Manual was not prepared for the project by PWD.    
The CE, PWD, Rajasthan, Jaipu r stated that PAD was not a legal document 
and it was not binding upon the borrower to prepare the Operation Manual. 
However, the State Government replied (September 2017) that PMC has been 
directed to prepare the Operation Manual within one month. 
3.3.4.2 Non-availability of clear site  
As per rule 351 of Public Works Financial and Accounts Rules (PWF&AR), 
no work should be commenced on land which has not been duly made over by 
the responsible civil officer. 
Test check of the selected divisions revealed following issues: 
 In Abu Road division, one road from Vasa to Kedar Padar 47 (km 0/0 to 
3/400) was sanctioned but the road work was not constructed from chainage 
km 0/383 to 0/833 and 3/010 to 3/400 due to land dispute. In absence of this, 
the purpose of all  weather road connectivity was not fulfilled even afte r 
incurring an expenditure of ₹ 1.54 crore.  
 In  Sawai Madhopur (WB) Division, one road from Khandar -Baler to 
Parsipura48 (4.13 km) was sanctioned for ₹ 1.86 crore but due to lack of 
clearance of forest land (690 meters) from the Forest Department, the road 
remained incomplete and objective of road connectivity was not fulfilled even 
after incurring an  expenditure of ₹ 60.44 lakh. 
On this being pointed out (May 2017) by audit the State Government state d 
(September 2017) that to save time works were started and the process for 
obtaining forest clearance was taken up simultaneously. During preparation of 
Detailed Project Report , transect walk was carried out by PWD Officers, 
Sarpanch and others in which the status of land, forest, etc. were looked into. 
The response indicates that the transect walk was not conducted properly. 
The issue of inadequate survey was noticed in 11 road works of eight districts 
with a total length of 20.08 km  (Appendix-3.9). These works were proposed 
for de-sanction later due to factors like location in submergence area of dam, 
double connectivity, land dispute or existence of roads constructed under 
other schemes.  
The State Government accepted (September  2017) the fact s and stated that 
show cause notices have been issued to the concerned Project Implementation 
Units (PIUs) to explain reasons for negligence and avoid such mistakes in 
future. 
 
                                                 
47    Package No. RJ-29-WB-RRSMP-01 
48    Package No. RJ-27-WB-RRSMP-09 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
83 
 
3.3.5 Implementation 
 
 
3.3.5.1  Expenditure incurred without revised  administrative sanction 
and tenders invited before issuance of technical sanction 
The PWF&AR states that when expenditure on a work exceeds or is likely to 
exceed the amount administratively approved by more than 10 per cent , or 
where there are material d eviations from the original proposals, revised 
administrative approval must be obtained from the authority competent to 
approve the cost. 
During scrutiny of records of Beawar and Nimbahera divisions, it was found 
that in three packages (seven road works) t he expenditure incurred was ` 5.66 
crores. This exceeded the administrative sanction by 23.3  per cent. However, 
no such revised sanction was obtained. 
The State Government replied (September  2017) that all the P IU’s had been 
directed to send the proposals for revised administrative and financial 
sanctions and not to execute further works without permission. 
In six packages (13 road works) of four divisions 49, tenders were invited 
before issuance of technical sanctions (Appendix-3.10). This was contrary to 
the rule mentioned in PWF&AR. 
The State Government replied (September 2017) that the tenders were called 
at Chief Engineer Level for minimizing NIT expenditure as well as saving of 
time due to urgency of work. The reply i s not acceptable as it was against the 
provisions of PWF&AR. 
3.3.5.2 Undue benefit to contractors 
The General Conditions of Contract (GCC) specify that: 
 the contract price shall be adjusted for increase or decrease in rates of 
labour, material, fuel and lubricants and other inputs in accordance with the 
formula given in the contract data. In case of use of cement, rate of grey 
cement and in case of use of steel, rate of steel rebar would be applied. In case 
of bitumen, selling price of bitumen discharged from refinery would be taken 
for calculating the price adjustment. On scrutiny of  records of selected 
divisions, w e found a number of deviations from the terms of the GCC as 
brought out below: 
  In Nimbahera division, in one package (three road works), the 
contractor was paid excess price adjustment because of adoption of base index 
of March 2013 instead of August 2013, the month in which bids were opened. 
Further, the price adjustment on steel rods was claimed instead of steel rebar.  
 In Dausa division, in one package (five road works), the rates of cement, 
slate and graphite products were taken in place of grey cement.  
 In four packages (16 road works) of Chhabra division, price adjustment 
bills were paid taking selling price of bitumen including entry tax.  
                                                 
49   Abu Road, Alwar-II, Chaumahla and Sawai Madhopur (WB). 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
84 
 
 In five packages (19 road works) of Suratgarh division, weightage  for 
each of the factors of cost stated in table(s) of adjustment data were changed 
by corrigendum issued by Executive Engineer, which was against the 
provisions of clause 47.1(g).  
 In Sikandra division, in one package (five road works) rates of bitumen 
were taken on 16 th day of the month instead of on the 1 st day of the month, 
base date for bitumen was taken as June 2013 instead of August 2013 and 
rates of steel rod were taken instead of rebars. This resulted in excess payment 
of price adjustment of ₹ 67.45 lakh (Appendix-3.11).  
The State Government replied (September 2017) that the Executive Engineer 
in-charge of the divisions have been directed to recover the excess payments 
from the contractors on account of price adjustment. 
 the contractor has to supply Operating and Maintenance Manual within 
28 days of the issue of certificate of completion of whole or section of the 
work. Otherwise one per cent of the contract value not exceeding ₹ three lakh 
would be withheld. During scrutiny of records of selected divisions, in nine 
divisions50, it was found that Operation and Maintenance Manual was not 
submitted by the contractors after completion of works and  no record related 
to maintenance of roads was provided to audit. In absence of submission of 
manual and record s relating to maintenance, it could not be ensured whether 
the activities like restoration of rain cuts, maintenance of culverts and 
causeways, m aking up of shoulders, etc. were executed. Besides the 
department did not withhold ₹ 2.02 crore on this account resulting in undue 
benefit to the contractors (Appendix-3.12). 
The State Government replied (September  2017) that all the PIUs have been 
directed to ensure submission of Operating and Maintenance Manual by the 
contractors. 
 within 14 days of delivery of the letter of acceptance, the contractor 
shall submit to the Project Manager a revised work programme incl uding 
environmental management plan. He would update the work programme at 
intervals of 30 days. Otherwise an amount of ₹ 5 lakh could be withheld. In 
136 packages 51 (416 roads)  of selected divisions, the contractors neither 
submitted the revised work progr amme within 14 days after the date of letter 
of acceptance nor submitted the updated work programme before completion 
of the work. The department did not withhold the amount of ₹  6.80 crore from 
the bills which resulted in undue benefit to the contractors (Appendix-3.13). 
The State Government replied (September 2017) that the concerned PIUs have 
been directed to withhold amount of ₹ 5.00 lakh wherever the updated work 
programme was not submitted. 
 the contractor has to provide insurance cover to the road from the date 
of start of the works to the end of defect liability period of five years. If the 
                                                 
50  Alwar-II, Chaumahla, Chittorgarh (WB), Chhabra, Bundi (WB), Dausa, Nimbahera, Sawai 
Madhopur (WB) and Suratgarh. 
51  Abu Road- 1, Alwar-II-4, Beawar-1, Bhilwara-9, Bundi (WB)-7, Chaumahla-2, Chittorgarh 
(WB)-18, Chhabra-19, Dausa-10, Malpura-10, Nimbahera-18, Rajsamand (WB)-11, Sawai 
Madhopur (WB)-13, Sikandra-2, Sriganganagar-5 and Suratgarh-6 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
85 
 
contractor does not provide any of the policies and certificates required, the 
employer may effect the insurance and rec over the premium which the 
employer had paid from payments due to the contractor. It was observed that 
in eight divisions52, out of 58 packages (176 roads) the insurance cover was 
provided in 27 packages ( 76 roads) for the period of construction of work 
whereas it was to be provided up to the defect liability period  of five years. In 
31 packages (100 roads), no insurance cover was provided by the contractors 
(Appendix-3.14). Contractors were thus allowed undue benefit of ₹  1.43 crore 
due to non-payment of premium. 
The State Government accepted the facts and replied (September  2017) that 
action as instructed in the contract agreement shall be taken.  
 The Instruction to Bidder states that within 21 days after issuance of 
letter of acceptance, the successful b idder shall sign the contract agreement 
and deliver to the employer a performance security which should be valid up 
to 45 days after the expiry of defect liability period i.e. period of routine 
maintenance of five years.  Failure to comply with the requirements of 
Instruction to Bidder shall constitute sufficient grounds for cancellation of 
award. 
During scrutiny of records of selected divisions, it was observed that in  
27 packages of five divisions 53, performance security was not furnished to the 
employer for the required period i.e. up to 45 days after the expiry of defect 
liability period. The Department did not take any action against the successful 
bidders (Appendix-3.15). 
The State Government rep lied (September 2017) that concern ed PIUs have 
been asked to clarify reasons for not taking any action against the defaulter 
contractors and to get the Bank Guarantee (BG) extended for the required 
period. 
3.3.5.3 Inadequate plantation 
In order to address environmental, concerns and to facilitate greening of rural 
roads it was decided to have road side plantations under the project for 
conservation of the environment and reduce pollution. 
 
The work of plantation and its mainte nance for five years was to be carried 
out under MGNREGS funds and the implementing agency would be Gram 
Panchayat/Forest Department.  The PWD had to provide the action plan for 
road side plantation s on RRSMP roads and detailed information about name 
of roads, sanctioned length for plantation, species of trees and number of trees 
to be planted. 
The QPR of March 2017 showed a target of 92,476 trees to be planted in ten 
districts. In the remaining districts targets were not set. No trees however were 
planted in any of the districts.  
                                                 
52   Beawar, Bhilwara, Chaumahla, Chhabra, Chittorgarh (WB), Dausa, Nimbahera and Sawai 
Madhopur (WB).  
53   Beawar, Chittorgarh (WB), Rajsamand-WB, Malpura and Nimbahera 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
86 
 
The State Government replied that i ssuance of Administrative and Financial 
sanction for plantation works to be done under MGNREGS is being pursued 
regularly by PWD officers with District Collectors. 
3.3.6 Quality Control and Monitoring 
 The bidding data sheet states that the contractor should procure 
bitumen/emulsion required for the execution of work from authorized refinery 
and furnish the bitumen testing certificate from Government Agency/Regional 
Laboratory/Engineering College before u se. During scrutiny of records of 
Chittorgarh (WB) division, it was noticed that in seven packages for 22 road 
works (Appendix-3.16) bitumen/emulsion testing certificates were not 
produced by the contractors. In absence of this, the quality of bitumen and 
emulsion could not be ensured. This was also not checked by the concerned 
Executive Engineer. In four packages (12 road works), bitumen/emulsion was 
used for the roads on the basis of Consignee Receipt Certificate 54 (CRC) 
issued 5 to 34 months before the work orders were issued.  
The State Government replied (September 2017) that explanation s regarding 
testing certificates of bitumen/emulsion have been sought from the PIU office. 
 The quality control register had to be maint ained in two parts: the first 
part for recording the quality control tests and second part for recording the 
abstract of tests and action taken to remedy the deficiencies. During scrutiny 
of records of selected  divisions, it was found that only first part of quality 
control register was maintained by seven divisions 55 while s econd part was 
not maintained. It could not be ascertained whether the deficiencies recorded 
in first part were addressed.  
The State Government replied (September 2017) that instruction s have been 
issued to all the divisions to ensure the maintenance of Quality Control 
register. 
 The State Quality Monitor (SQM) 56 has to inspect the quality of every 
work at least three times. The first two inspections of every work will be 
carried out durin g the execution of work at three month  intervals and the last 
inspection would be carried out within one month of completion of work. Test 
check revealed that against the 977 completed (March 2017) road works 2931 
inspections were required to be carried ou t by SQM. However, it was seen 
that only 15 (1.54 per cent ) inspections at first stage, 61 (6.24 per cent ) 
inspections at second stage and 722 (73.90 per cent) inspections at third stage 
were carried out. In absence of required number of inspections, it is not clear 
how the Department could be assured of the quality of roads. 
On this being pointed out (May 2017) by audit the State Government accepted 
(September 2017) that till January 2017 the number of SQM inspections were 
                                                 
54  It is a certificate regarding details of Bitumen/Emulsion and issued by the supplier to the 
Contractor. 
55  Bhilwara, Chittorgarh (WB), Chhabra, Malpura, Nimbahera, Rajsamand -WB and Sawai 
Madhopur-WB 
56  Quality control units, setup/engaged by the St ate Government, independent of the 
Executive Engineers/PIU. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
87 
 
not up to the mark and the quality control tests have been carried out by PWD 
technical field staff as per norms to assure the quality before release of 
payment and these test result were linked to the payment. Tests have also been 
carried out by PMC during site visit. Therefore, quality was assured. The 
reply is not acceptable as the measures taken at departmental level are only 
stop gap arrangements and can not be taken as a valid substitute  for the SQM 
inspections. 
3.3.7  Conclusion 
Upto March 2017, Rural road connectivity was provided to 990 villages (93 
per cent) out of 1056 villages to be connected. Works in key areas related to 
second component were delayed . Similarly, work related to safe corridor 
demonstration programme related to third component was also delayed. 
 The department did not provide the information whether all villages 
having population between 250 -499 were taken into account in the plan for 
providing connectivity with all-weather bituminous roads. 
 Undue benefits were given to contractors in violation of the conditions 
of the contract. 
 Norms related to quality control such as maintenance of Part -II of 
quality control register we re not fulfilled by some of the selected divis ions. 
Required number of inspections at different stages of civil work were also not 
conducted by State Quality Monitor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
88 
 
Public Works Department 
 
3.4 Non-completion of road led to non-connectivity of habitations 
 
Improper fund management resulted in non -completion of work 
after incurring an expenditure of ₹ 2.61 crore and non -fulfilment of 
the objective of providing road connectivity to the habitations 
The primary objective of the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana  (PMGSY) 
was to provide con nectivity by way of an all -weather road, which is usable 
throughout the year, to the eligible unconnected habitations in the rural areas 
with a population of 500 persons and above. Paragraph 4.1 of the PMGSY 
guidelines  provide that proper planning is imperative to achieve the objective 
of the programme in a systematic and cost effective manner. Further, 
paragraph 11.5 of the guideline provides that in case the value of tenders 
received is above the estimate that has been cleared by the Ministry of Rural 
Development, the difference (tender premium) pooled for the entire 
District/State for works cleared in a phase/batch will be borne by the State 
Government. 
The State Government issued (September 2013) administrative and financial 
sanction of ₹ 3.17 crore for  construction of three 57 roads under PMGSY 
(package no. RJ -08-WB-17) in Bikaner district. The tender was awarded 
(February 2014) by the Chief Engineer, PWD, Rajasthan, Jaipur at a cost of  
₹ 4.11 crore and work order was issued (March 2014) by Executive Eng ineer, 
PWD Division, Nokha with stipulated date of completion as  
3 January 2015. As per note below the work order, the work was to be 
restricted up to the amount of administrative sanction of ₹ 3.17 crore without 
change in physical target.  The contractor was paid ₹ 3.27 crore for the works 
completed up to March 2016. 
Test check (May 2016) of records of the SE, PWD Circle, Bikaner revealed 
that out of the three roads included in the package, one road was fully 
completed and two roads 58 remained incomplete du e to lack of budget. 
Expenditure incurred on these two roads was ₹ 2.61 crore. As the amount of 
work order was more than the administrative sanction issued, it needed an 
additional fund of ₹ 94.66 lakh to complete the work. No request was made by 
the field  officers for obtaining the additional fund either before issuing the 
work order or subsequently and works were treated as finalised by EE at 
incomplete stage. 
Thus, n on-compliance with aforesaid provisions and awarding of work 
without making proper arrang ement of funds resulted in non -completion of 
roads after incurring an expenditure of ₹ 2.61 crore and the objective of the 
PMGSY to provide all -weather road connectivity to the targeted habitations 
was defeated. 
                                                 
57   (i) Seelwa to Naykon/Bhatiyon -ki-Dhani ₹ 60.10 lakh (km 0/0 to km 3/0) (ii) Hansasar to 
Godaron-ki-Dhani ₹ 1.02 crore (km 0/0 to km 5/0) (iii) Kakko to Jogaji -ki-Dhani ₹ 1.54 
crore (km 0/0 to km 8/0) 
58  Hansasar to Godaron -ki-Dhani completed in 4.275 km length (₹1.05 crore), Kakko to 
Jogaji-ki-Dhani completed in 6.500 km length (₹ 1.56 crore) 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
89 
 
The State Government stated (February 2017) that maximum population of 
Godaron-ki-Dhani and Jogaji -ki-Dhani were residing in scattered Dhanis and 
roads constructed up to the central places i.e. water reservoir in case of 
Godaron-ki-Dhani and school in case of Jogaji -ki-Dhani were being used by 
the people. It further stated (March 2017) that as the Dhanis were located at 
scattered places, they were not shown in the strip plan enclosed with Detailed 
Project Report.  
The reply is not acceptable on the following grounds: 
 In case of Godaron -ki-Dhani, in the strip plan enclosed with the project 
report, neither the location of the central place i.e. water reservoir nor the 
habitation at 4.275 km (last point of the road constructed) were shown. All 
along the road, agriculture land was shown. In case of Jogaji -ki-Dhani, the 
central place i.e. school was located near 8.000 km whereas the road was 
constructed up to the distance of 6.500 km and there was no habitation at the 
end point of the road. The objective of PMGSY to provide all weather road, 
operable throughout year, was not achieved due to non - construction of roads 
in full length. 
 As per paragraph 3.4 of PMGSY guidelines, for determining the 
population of a cluster, population of all habitations within a radius of 500 
metres are clubbed. In the instant case, road was not constructe d in 0.725 km 
length in case of  Godaron-ki-Dhani and 1.500 km in case of Jogaji -ki-Dhani. 
The distance of both the Dhanis from the last point of the roads constructed 
was more than 500 metres. This was contrary to the rule mentioned ibid. Also, 
as the habitations remained at a distance of more than 500 metres from an all 
weather road even after construction, these came under the definition of 
unconnected habitations as per paragraph 3.3 of PMGSY guidelines. 
3.5 Irregular payment to contractors for curing compound 
 
Irregular payment of ₹ 83.55 lakh made to contractors for curing 
compound under Gramin Gaurav Path Scheme 
As per clause 10.8 of Indian Road Congress ( IRC) 15-2011 regarding 
Standard Spec ifications and Code of Practice for Construction of Concrete 
Roads, the curing 59 of concrete can be done by one of the following two 
methods: 
 By application of curing compound 60 followed by spreading of wet 
hessian and moistening it regularly. In case of arid areas where water is 
extremely scarce, two applications of curing compound with moist curing by 
wet hessian may be allowed at the discretion of the Engineer.  
 For small work s, curing can be done by manual methods using wet 
hessian which is kept moist during curing period. Curing shall be done for a 
                                                 
59  Curing is a process of preventing loss of moisture from the concrete. It enhances strength 
and durability of concrete besides serviceability. 
60  It is a chemical compound which is applied to a concrete surface to prevent the loss of 
moisture during early stages of cement hydration. 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
90 
 
minimum period of 14 days. In case of blended cement, curing shall be done 
for 16 days. 
The State Government accorded (December 2 014) administrative and 
financial sanction for construction of Cement Concrete (CC) roads under 
Gramin Gaurav Path  Scheme (GGPS) for ₹ 1112.95 crore  on 2119.16 kms. 
The work orders for construction of CC roads in following three Divisions 
were issued as under: 
1. The Executive Engineer (EE), PWD Division, Vallabhnagar issued 
(December 2014) work order s for 27 roads 61  for ₹ 8.96 crore with stipulated 
date of completion a s 28 August 2015. The contractor was paid a sum of  
₹ 7.89 crore upto March 2016. 
2. The EE, PWD Division, Dhariawad issued (February 2015) work order s 
for construction of seven roads 62 for ₹ 2.53 crore with stipulated date of 
completion as 24 July 2015. The c ontractor was paid a sum of ₹ 2.38 crore up 
to April 2016. 
3. The EE, PWD Division, Jhalawar issued (December 2014) work order s 
for construction of 30 roads 63 for ₹ 16.76 crore with stipulated date of 
completion as 28 August 2015. The contractor was paid a sum  of ₹ 15.43 
crore up to January 2016. 
During scrutiny of records (September 2016) of the Divisions, it was observed 
that Basic Schedule of Rate (BSR) of item CC pavement work included the 
element of curing compound whereas curing of CC roads was done by th e 
contractors using water. The CC pavement work was executed in 37986.68 
cum area for which an expenditure of ₹ 83.55 lakh was incurred on curing 
compound as per table given below: 
Name of Division CC pavement work 
executed (in cum) 
Expenditure incurred 
(₹ in lakh) 
Vallabhnagar 14598.13 42.11 
Dhariawad 3956.92 15.17 
Jhalawar 19431.63 26.27 
Total 37986.68 83.55 
As the curing compound was not used by the contractors and curing was done 
using water, the payment of ₹ 83.55 lakh made in respect of curing compound 
was irregular and resulted in undue benefit to the contractors. 
In case of Vallabhnagar, the State Government replied (February and May 
2017) that as per provision of IRC 15 -2011, curing of GGP roads was carried 
out using curing compound as well a s water. The reply is not acceptable as no 
evidence in support of using curing compound was submitted.  
In case of Jhalawar, the State Government replied (May 2017) that curing was 
done using water to obtain required strength. The item of curing compound 
                                                 
61  Package No. RJ-33-05/5054/GGP Road/Plan/2014-15 
62  Package No. RJ-26-04/5054/GGP Road/Plan/2014-15 
63  Package No. RJ-19-01/5054/GGP Road/Plan/2014-15 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
91 
 
was removed from ‘G’ schedule as the contractor was not bound to use the 
curing compound. The reply is not acceptable as the payment for curing 
compound was made to contractor as per rate analysis.  
In case of Dhariawad, the State Government replied (May 2 017) that curing 
compound is used for curing specific places where continuous traffic ply on 
the roads and it is not possible to divert the traffic till the hardening of cement 
concrete. As the constructed roads were rural roads, the traffic was diverted 
and water curing was done till the end of curing period for 14 days and 
opening of traffic. On these roads, curing compound was not used because it 
was not needed. There was no provision for deduction of ra te from BSR if 
curing compound was not used and payment of work was made on the basis of 
rates given in BSR instead of rate analysis. The reply itself confirms that 
curing compound was not used and curing was done by using water.  
Action of the Department to add curing compound in rate analysis as an extra  
item was, therefore, irregular and resulted in undue benefit to the contractors. 
3.6 Awarding of work without ensuring availability of land 
 
Awarding of work without ensuring availability of land led to non -
completion of road even after incurring an expenditure of ₹ 9.50 
crore and deprival of road connectivity to the habitations 
Rule 351 of PWF&AR provided that no work should be commenced on land 
which has not been duly made over by the responsible civil officer. 
The Ministry of Road, Transport and Hi ghways (MoRTH), Government of 
India issued (March 2010) administrative and financial sanction of ₹ 27.38 
crore for construction of bypass road in 6.750 km length (between km 40/000 
to 51/000 reach) on NH -112 (Bar -Bilara-Jodhpur Section). The Chief 
Engineer (CE), National Highway (NH), Rajasthan accepted (July 2010) the 
tender for ₹ 17.61 crore and work order was issued (October 2010) by 
Executive Engineer (EE), PWD NH Division, Pali with stipulated date of 
completion as 31 January 2012. The work was finalis ed at incomplete stage 
after incurring an expenditure of  ₹ 9.50 crore (January 2015). 
Scrutiny of records of EE, PWD NH Division, Pali revealed (August 2016) 
that the road work was executed in 4.250 km length (km 2/000 to 6/750) 
excluding the stretch from  0/0 km to 2/000 km and 5/200 km to 5/700 km. In 
the stretch 0/0 km to 2/000 km, the road could not be constructed due to non -
acquisition of land. There was a dispute on land and a case was pending in 
Hon’ble Rajasthan High Court (August 2016). In the rema ining stretch from 
5/200 km to 5/700 km, the road could not be constructed due to not shifting of 
electric high tension lines falling in the alignment of road. The electric high 
tension lines were shifted in March 2013. Due to delay in shifting of electric  
high tension line, the work could not be completed within  the scheduled time 
and the contractor demanded revision in contract price. The contractor 
stopped (May 2012) the work on the plea that the revision sought was not 
sanctioned by the Department. On the recommendation (May 2014) of the CE, 
NH, PWD Rajasthan, MoRTH accorded (August 2014) approval to foreclose 
the present agreement. The contract agreement was terminated (November 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
92 
 
2014) by CE, NH, PWD Rajasthan. Scrutiny further revealed that in the 
technical report, it was certified by the Superintending Engineer (SE), PWD 
Circle, Jodhpur that there was no land dispute in this reach and there was no  
need of shifting public utilities . Awarding of work without ensuring the 
availability of land and non -shifting of high tension lines in time, therefore, 
led to non -completion of road even after incurring an expenditure of ₹ 9.50 
crore. 
The State Government replied (March 2017) that during execution of work, it 
was noticed that private land of some khasras falling in the alignment of reach 
from km 0/0 to km 2/0 was not acquired earlier. For acquisition of the land, 
process was started but some of the cultivators did not accept the amount of 
land compensation. It was also stated that nearby habitants had encroached the 
land and a court case was filed in the Rajasthan High Court. The reply is not 
acceptable as the legal title of land and timely shifting of high tension lines 
were not ensured before awarding the road work. In addition to this, the 
certificate given by the SE, PWD in technical report that there was no dispute 
of land was incorrect.   
3.7 Excess payment of price escalation 
 
Excess payment of price escalation of  ₹ 1.02 crore  
Clause 47 of  the contract agreement executed  with the contractor stipulates 
that the contract price shall be adjusted for increase or decrease in rates of 
labour, material, fuel and lubricants in accordance with the principles and 
formula given in the contract data. The price adjustment shall apply for the 
work done from the date of start given in the contract up to the end of the 
initial intended completion date or extension granted by the engineer in -
charge and the price adjustment shall be determined during each month. 
Further, the contract data s tipulates that the base i ndex shall be taken of the 
date 28 days preceding the date of opening of bid. 
The MoRTH, Government of India (GoI) accorded (March 2013) 
administrative, technical and financial sanction of ₹ 70.85 crore for 
strengthening of road wi th paved shoulders (34.100 km from km 259/000 to 
286/600, km 290/600 to 297/100) and widening of existing two lane road to 
four lane (4 km from km 286/600 to 290/600) on NH -15 (Jaisalmer-Barmer-
Sanchore Road). The tender for the work was accepted (August 2 013) by 
Chief Engineer (NH), PWD, Jaipur for  ₹ 59.16 crore and the work order was 
issued (August 2013) by Executive Engineer (EE), PWD NH Division, 
Barmer with stipulated date of completion as 28 February 2015. The 
contractor was paid a sum of ₹ 3.85 crore as price escalation up to March 
2015.  
In an another case, MoRTH, GoI accorded (December 2012) administrative, 
technical and financial sanction of ₹ 57.70 crore for widening of two lane road 
with geometric improvement in re -aligned portion (31.300 km from km 
223/500 to 254/800) of Pachpadra -Bagundi Section of old SH 28 -B including 
construction of minor bridge on NH -112 (Bar -Bilara-Jodhpur-Barmer). 
Tender for the work was accepted (August 2013) by Chief Engineer (NH), 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
93 
 
PWD, Jaipur for ₹ 43.00 crore and the work order was issued (August 2013) 
by EE, PWD  NH Division, Barmer with stipulated date of completion as  
8 March 2015. The contractor was paid a sum of ₹ 2.28 crore as price 
escalation up to August 2014. 
Test check of records of EE, PWD NH Division, Barmer revealed (August 
2016) that while making payment to contractors on account of price escalation 
for labour, steel, cement, bitumen, POL, plant and machinery and other 
material components, the date of opening of technical bid was considered for 
calculating the payment of price escalation instead of th e date of opening of 
financial bid. Also, the base index for calculation of price escalation was to be 
taken of the date prior to 28 days from the date of opening of financial bid. In 
case of Jaisalmer-Barmer-Sanchore Road, the financial bid was opened on 14 
June 2013 and, therefore, the base index rate of 17 May 2013 was to be taken 
but the Division took base index rate of 4 April 2013. In case of Pachpadra -
Bagundi section, old SH 28-B including construction of minor bridge work on 
NH-112, the financial bid was opened on 3 May 2013 and, therefore, the base 
index rate of 6 April 2013 was to be taken but the Division took base index 
rate of 8 January 2013. This resulted in excess payment of price escalation of 
₹ 1.02 crore to the contractors (Appendix-3.17).  
The State Government replied (May 2017) that combined bid (includin g 
technical and financial bid) was submitted by the contractor on the last date of 
bid submission and the base index were considered with respect to the date of 
opening of technical bid an d not financial bid. The reply is not acceptable as 
clause 26.1 of part -E of contract agreement stipulates that technical bid only 
determines the eligibility criteria whereas financial bid determines the 
remaining conditions with respect to the priced bill  of quantities, technical 
specifications and drawings.  Also base price  for calculating price escalation 
was to be taken prior to 28 days from date of opening of financial bid. Further, 
a letter issued (April and June 2017) to Finance Department regarding 
clarification about the date of opening of bid for payment of price escalation, 
has remained unanswered (August 2017). 
3.8 Avoidable expenditure on construction of Cement Concrete 
roads 
 
Avoidable expenditure of ₹ 4.19 crore due to wrong inclusion of 
items of excavation of earth, construction of granular sub -base and 
laying of compacted graded stone aggregate in the estimates of 
construction of Cement Concrete roads under Gramin Gaurav Pat h 
Scheme 
As per circular issued (December 2014) by Principal Secretary, Public Works 
Department (PWD), Rajasthan, Jaipur, the construction of Cement Concrete 
(CC) roads under Gramin Gaurav Path Scheme (GGPS) would be undertaken 
on already existing CC/bitum en roads and, therefore, a new sub -base or 
preparation of ground for fresh CC roads would not be required. It was also 
stipulated in the circular that while giving the work orders under GGPS, 
Department would ensure that items like excavation of earth, con struction of 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
94 
 
granular sub-base and laying of compacted graded stone aggregate were not 
included, as far as possible, because it would exhaust the entire budget given 
for the purpose without having quality construction. According to the circular, 
avoidable expenditure on items as mentioned above was to be taken care of at 
all stages to reduce the cost and use the money to connect more areas with CC 
roads. 
The State Government accorded (December 2014) administrative and 
financial sanction for construction of CC roads under GGPS. The work orders 
for 95  roads64 were issued (December 2014) by concerned Executive 
Engineers (EEs) for ₹ 43.86  crore65 and stipulated date of completion was 
fixed between May and September 2015. A sum of ₹ 34.55  crore66 was paid 
(August 2015 to August 2016) to various contractors. 
Scrutiny of records (January- October 2016) of the Divisions revealed that the 
Department had included excavation of earth, construction of granular sub -
base and laying of compacted graded stone aggregate as indiv idual items in 
the estimates of works. It is to mention that these works were not to be 
included according to GGPS guidelines as mentioned above. However, the  
works were awarded/executed  in contravention to GGPS guidelines.  The 
Department could have avoide d an expenditure of ₹ 4.19 crore (Appendix-
3.18) by not including these items in the estimates and constructing the CC 
roads on already existing CC/bitumen roads as per the existing instructions. 
This would have helped the Department to use the savings to connect more 
areas with CC roads. 
In case of Balotra, Shahpura and Barmer -I Divisions, the State Government 
stated (January, June and July 2017) that to resolve the issue of water storage 
and mud problem on the road, excavation of earth, gravel and WBM wor ks 
were included in the estimate and works were executed. In case of Chittorgarh 
Division, it was stated (August 2017) that  most of the roads were badly 
damaged due to accumulation of water on roads and to resolve this issue, 
these items were taken in the estimates and th e works executed. In case of 
Nawalgarh Division, it was stated (June 2017) that there was a lot of traffic on 
these roads due to mining operations in the area, so Granular Sub -base and 
Water Bound Macadam works were executed as per design o f crust approved 
by State Technical Agency (STA). The reply is not acceptable as inclusion of 
these items was in violation of the directions of the Government. Further, no 
survey reports in support of the roads claimed to have been badly damaged 
were furni shed by the Divisions and in case of Naw algarh division, STA 
report in respect of only one out of 17 roads was submitted. In case of 
Barmer-I division, surface history of roads, signed by concerned Assistant 
Engineer’s (not survey report) was submitted by the department, but it is not 
clear as to whom and when this document was submitted and what action was 
taken by the higher authorities. 
                                                 
64  Balotra (15 roads), Chittorgarh (26 roads), Barmer -I (14 roads), Shahpura (23 roads) and 
Nawalgarh (17 roads) 
65  Balotra ( ₹ 9.73 crore), Chittorgarh ( ₹ 12.52crore), Barmer -I ( ₹ 7.02 crore), Shahpura  
(₹ 8.41 crore) and Nawalgarh (₹ 6.18 crore) 
66  Balotra (₹ 6.54 crore), Chittorgarh (₹ 9.58 crore), Barmer-I (₹ 5.84 crore), Shahpura (₹ 6.63 
crore) and Nawalgarh (₹ 5.96 crore) 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
95 
 
3.9 Irregular expenditure on construction of roads 
 
Irregular expenditure of ₹ 80.28 lakh incurred against the rule of 
financial propriety 
Rule 10 of General Financial and Accounts Rules provides that every 
Government servant incurring or authorising expenditure from public funds 
should be guided by high standards of financial propriety. Every Government 
servant should als o enforce financial order and strict economy at every step. 
He is expected to exercise the same vigilance in respect of expenditure 
incurred from public money as a person of ordinary prudence would exercise 
in respect of expenditure of his own money.  
The State Government issued (December 2014) administrative and financial 
sanction for construction of Cement Concrete (CC) roads under Gramin 
Gaurav Path Scheme (GGPS). Technical sanction for 31  roads67 was issued 
by Executive Engineer (EE), Public Works Depart ment (PWD) Division, 
Chittorgarh for ₹ 15.50 crore. After tendering process, the work order was 
issued (December 2014) by EE, PWD Division, Chittorgarh for ₹ 12.52 crore 
with stipulated date of completion as 6 September 2015. The work remained 
incomplete and the contractor was paid ₹ 9.58 crore up to March 2016. 
Test check of records (May 2016) of EE, PWD, Division Chittorgarh revealed 
that out of 31 roads, two roads were constructed 1 to 12 months earlier68 under 
other schemes and were under guarantee perio d. In spite of knowing this fact, 
these roads were again sanctioned under GGPS  and works were under 
progress after incurring an expenditure of ₹ 80.28 lakh. The road -wise details 
of expenditure incurred are as below: 
As the reach of the above roads had already been constructed under other 
schemes 1 to 12 months earlier and were under guarantee period, sanctioning 
of these roads again under GGPS and incurring an expenditure of ₹ 80.28 lakh 
on construction was avoidable and against the rule of financial propriety.  
                                                 
67 Package No. RJ-10-01/GGP Road/Plan/2014-15 
68 from the date of sanction under GGPS 
69 Rural Infrastructure Development Fund 
S.No. Name of 
Road 
Reach Expenditure 
incurred 
under  GGPS 
(₹ in lakh) 
Month in which the work 
was earlier executed under 
other scheme 
1 Approach 
Road to Pal 
2/500 km to 
3/500 km 
40.67 November 2013 (12 months 
before) under the scheme 
RIDF69 
2 Chittorgarh- 
Soniyana 
Surpur Road 
13/500 km to 
14/500 km 
39.61 November 2014 (one month 
before) Reach from km 
13/000 to 14/000 was 
executed under the scheme 
i.e. Non-patchable works. 
Total 80.28  

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
96 
 
The State Government replied (May 2017) that the roads located in the 
populated areas of Gram Panchyat headquarters were old and badly damaged. 
On the recommendation of local Member of Legislative Assembly, CC roads 
were constructed in these areas. The reply is not acceptable as the old and 
badly damaged roads were not part of the above sanctioned roads an d there 
was no administrative and financial sanction for the construction of these 
roads under GGPS. As such, payment made for these roads against the amount 
booked for the roads sanctioned under GGPS was irregular as in disguise of 
construction of sanctioned CC roads under GGPS, CC roads were constructed 
elsewhere for which no sanction existed. 
Water Resources Department 
 
3.10 Blocking of funds and non- recovery of compensation 
 
Blocking of funds of ₹ 9.21 crore due to non -execution of work of 
Dam and Canal simultaneously and non -recovery of compensation 
₹ 93.24 lakh from the contractor 
As per instructions of Chief Engineer, Water Resources Department (WRD), 
construction of dam and canal should be taken up simultaneously so as to 
utilise the water stored in dam for irrigation purpose immediately. Further, the 
Planning commission has also emphasised that to secure the maximum use of 
irrigation facilities created and to prevent unnecessary locking up of capital, 
the construction of dam, canal and field cha nnels should be appropriately 
coordinated from the time a project is first approved. 
The State Government issued (May 2007) administrative and financial 
sanction of ₹ 15.44 crore for construction of Ghora Khoj Minor Irrigation 
Project which was revised to ₹ 19.24 crore in July 2011. The sanction 
included the work of construction of Dam and Canal. The work of 
construction of Dam was completed in May 2010 after incurring an 
expenditure of ₹ 9.21 crore. Technical sanction for construction of Right Main 
Canal70 having Culturable Command Area (CCA) of 425.21 hectares was 
issued (December 2009) by Additional Chief Engineer, Water Resources 
(WR) Zone, Udaipur for ₹ 3.81 crore which was revised to ₹ 4.18 crore  in 
September 2014.The tender for construction of canal w as accepted (May 
2010) by Chief Engineer (CE), WR Department, Rajasthan, Jaipur for ₹ 3.50 
crore and work order was issued by Executive Engineer (EE), WR Division, 
Salumber in May 2010 with stipulated date of completion as 4 December 
2011. The work was fin alised at incomplete stage (5 September 2013 ) and 
payment of ₹ 2.42 crore was made to the contractor for the completed portion 
of the work (March 2015).  
Test check of records of EE, WR Division, Salumber revealed (April 2016) 
that work of canal was not completed by the contractor even after grant of 
time extension up to 28 February 2013. The CE, WR accorded (September 
2013) sanction to initiate action unde r clause 2 and 3 (c) of the agreement. In 
                                                 
70 There is no left main canal 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
97 
 
compliance of this, EE, WR Division, Salumber recovered (September 2013) 
a sum of ₹ 14.10 lakh from the contractor as compensation under clause 2 of 
the agreement out of the bank guarantee of ₹ 35.03 lakh furnished  by the 
contractor and the balance amount of ₹ 20.93 lakh was lying with the Division 
in Deposit -V71. The Department initiated action to get the remaining work 
completed by another contractor at the risk and cost of the original contractor 
under clause 3 (c) of the agreement. T enders were invited six times (February 
2014 to June 2015) for completing the balance work of  
₹ 1.31 crore but no contractor participated in the bidding process. The tender 
was accepted and work order was issued in June 2016 to anothe r contractor 
for ₹ 3.07 crore (including cost of extra items). The original contractor was 
therefore liable to pay compensation of ₹ 93.24  lakh under clause 3 of the 
agreement, which was not recovered. 
Due to non -awarding of work of Canal and Dam simultane ously, there was 
blocking of expenditure of ₹ 9.21 crore on construction of Dam and the 
farmers were deprived of the irrigation facilities for more than six years. 
The State Government replied (May 2017) that construction of dam had been 
completed in May 2 010 and work of Canal was expected to be completed by 
June 2017. It further stated that out of total envisaged CCA of 425 hectares, 
irrigation facilities had been provided in 150 hectares up to 2011 -12 and on 
completion of the project, irrigation facilitie s in remaining area of 275 
hectares would be provided. The reply is not acceptable as due to non -
allotment of work of dam and canal simultaneously, the envisaged CCA of 
canal could not be created timely and farmers were deprived of the irrigation 
facilities for more than six years. Further, the Department had not recovered 
the amount of compensation under clause 3 of the agreement. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
71   Security Deposit Account 

Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
98 
 
3.11 Blocking of funds on construction of Canal 
 
Lack of clearance in respect of forest land caused blocking of funds 
of ₹ 39.87crore on construction of Bhikha Bhai Sagwara Canal  
Rule 351 of Public Works Financial and Accounts Rules provides that no 
work should be commenced on land which has not been du ly made over by 
the responsible civil officer. 
The Bhikha Bhai Sagwara Canal is a scheme run by the State Government in 
the predominantly tribally populated area of Dungarpur. This canal brings 
irrigation water from Mahi Bajaj Sagar Dam with the objective to cater  to 
27500 hectares of Culturable Command Area (CCA). The canal works up to 
RD72 78.88 km were completed (May 2012) and are being utilised. The  State 
Government issued (April 2013) administrative and financial sanctions for 
construction of remaining  reaches beyond RD 78.88 km i.e. from RD 78.88 
km to 92.01 km (MIS 73-VII) for ₹ 41.80 crore, from RD 92.01 km to 105.00 
km (MIS-VIII) for ₹ 44.27 crore and from RD 105.00 km to 115.00 km (MIS -
IX) for ₹ 42.50 crore. The sanctions issued were subject to the c learance of 
land from the Forest Department before start of the work. The work orders 74 
for construction of canal were issued (between September 2013 and October 
2014) by Executive Engineer (EE), Bhikha Bhai Sagwara Canal Division, 
Mahi Project, Sagwara with stipulated date of completion between September 
2015 and October 2016. The  work of construction of canal from RD 81.09 
km to RD 87.51 km was completed (September 2015) after incurring an 
expenditure of ₹ 12.73 crore and work from RD 97.08 km to 110.37 k m was 
in progress (August 2016) after incurring an expenditure of  
₹ 27.14 crore 75. The work from RD 87.51 km to 92.01 km was pending for 
non- finalisation of tenders. The linear chart of the canal is depicted as below: 
Completed 
portion 
Forest 
land  
(3.58 ha.) 
Completed 
portion 
Tender not 
finalised 
Forest 
land 
(0.29 ha.) 
Work in 
progress 
Km 0.0 to 
78.88 
Km 78.88 
to 81.09 
Km 81.09 to 
87.51 
Km 87.51 
to 92.01 
Km 92.01 
to 97.08 
Km 97.08 
to 110.37 
 Test check of records of Bhikha Bhai Sagwara Canal Division, Mahi Project, 
Sagwara revealed (September 2016) that the work from RD 78.88 km to 81.09 
km and from RD 92.01 km to 97.08 km could not be executed due to 
involvement of 3.87 hectares forest land. The matter for clearance of forest 
land was referred to Forest Department in April 2013 and permission for the 
same is awaited (April 2017). Non -obtaining of clearance of forest land from 
the Forest Department before start of the work resulted in blocking of funds of 
₹ 39.87 crore on construction of canal in parts without construction of 
intervening portions. It also resulted in deferment of benefits of irrigation 
                                                 
72   Running Distance 
73   Minor Irrigation Scheme 
74  From RD 81.09 to 87.51 for ₹ 12.91 crore, RD 97.08 to 102.00 for ₹ 13.05 crore, RD 
102.00 to 105.00 for ₹ 9.06 crore and from RD 105.00 to 110.37 for ₹ 11.58 crore  
75   From RD 97.08 to 102.00 for ₹ 9.95 crore, RD 102.00 to 105.00 for ₹ 7.69 crore and fro m 
RD 105.00 to 110.37 for ₹ 9.50 crore 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
 
99 
 
facilities to be provided to the farmers, out of the intended CCA to be created 
on completion of canal from RD 78.88 km to RD 110.37 km.  
The State Government replied (May 2017) that the District Collector, 
Dungarpur had issued (May 2015 and November 2016) certificates under the 
Scheduled Tribes and Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Fores t 
Rights) Act, 2006 for the forest land to be diverted for non -forest purposes. It 
was also stated that an equivalent non-forest land in lieu of forest land falling 
between RD 78.88 km and 81.09 km and RD 92.01 km and 97.08 km was 
being diverted and the process of seeking permission from Forest Department 
was progressing. The reply is not acceptable as acquisition of land was the 
pre-requisite and the administrative and financial sanctions were accorded 
subject to the condition that forest clearance be obta ined before start of the 
work. As such, construction of canal from RD 81.09 km to RD 87.51 km and 
from RD 97.08 km to 110.37 km without construction of canal from RD 78.88 
km to 81.09 km and RD 87.51 km to 97.08 km due to non- availability of land 
for want of forest clearance resulted in blocking of funds of ₹ 39.87 crore and 
deferment of benefits of irrigation facilities to be availed by the farmers after 
completion of the project.  
 
 
 
(ANADI MISRA) 
Accountant General 
JAIPUR,                            (Economic & Revenue Sector Audit), Rajasthan 
The 02 FEB 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(RAJIV MEHRISHI) 
NEW DELHI,                           Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
The 06 FEB 2018 
 
 
 
 
 


Chapter III: Compliance Audit 
 
100 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Appendices 

101 
 
Appendix  2.1 
(Refer paragraph 2.1.5; page 17) 
Position of Income and Expenditure 
(₹ in crore) 
Year Income Expenditure Net Surplus 
(percentage) Consent 
Fees 
Water 
Cess 
Interest 
Income 
Other 
Income1 
Total 
Income 
Project 
Expenses 
Establishment 
and other 
Expenses 
Income 
Tax 
Total 
Expenses 
2012-13 43.03 20.52 19.33 0.90 83.78 10.79 17.62 1.22 29.63 54.15 (65) 
2013-14 45.75 0.00 25.65 1.39 72.79 1.22 18.43 1.46 21.11 51.68 (71) 
2014-15 38.05 0.00 29.81 1.26 69.12 0.80 22.25 3.38 26.43 42.69 (62) 
2015-16 75.76 8.14 31.65 4.78 120.33 0.71 24.13 6.40 31.24 89.09 (74) 
2016-17 -NA- 
Total 202.59 28.66 106.44 8.33 346.02 13.52 82.432 12.46 108.41 
 
Source : RSPCB, Jaipur 
Appendix  2.2 
(Refer paragraph 2.1.6.3; page 20) 
Actions were to be taken up as a measures for prevention, control or abatement of air pollution in NCR 
S.No. Action Points Time frame for 
implementation 
Concerned 
Authority 
A Control of Vehicular Emissions:   
1 Launch extensive awareness drive against polluting vehicles;  Immediate Transport 
Department 
2 Ensure Strict action against visibly polluting vehicles; Immediate -do- 
3 Install weigh in motion bridges at Delhi borders to prevent 
overloading; 
Immediate -do- 
4 Take steps to prevent parking of vehicles in the non -
designated areas; 
Immediate -do- 
5 Introduce early alarm system for benefit of commuters 
related to traffic congestion on major routes for   route 
diversion ;  
Immediate -do- 
6 Consider introducing plan for Flexi/staggered timings to 
minimize peak movement of vehicles on the road;  
Immediate  -do- 
7 Take steps for retrofitting of diesel vehicles with Particulate 
Filters;  
Immediate -do- 
8 De-congest pathways; Immediate -do- 
9 Synchronize traffic movements / Introduce intelligent traffic 
systems for lane-driving; 
30 days Department of 
Food & Supply, 
Transport  
10 Install vapor recovery system in fueling stations 30 days -do- 
                                                 
1 Laboratory sample test fee, BMW, Monitoring fee etc. 
2 Includes ₹ 1.00 crore on laboratory expenses. 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
102 
 
11 Take steps for installation of remote sensor based PUC 
system etc.; 
90 days  Transport 
Department 
12 Formulate action plan for controlling decongestion of fuel 
stations including increasing number of dispensing 
machines;   
90 days Department of 
Food & Supply, 
Transport 
13 Prepare action plan to check fuel adulteration and random 
monitoring of fuel quality data; 
90 days -do- 
14 Prepare action plan for public transport on CNG mode; 90 days Transport 
Department 
15 Undertake road widening and improvement of infrastructure 
for decongestion of road; 
90 days -do- 
16 Promote battery operated vehicles; 90 days -do- 
17 Take steps to expedite early completion of  Western and 
Eastern Peripheral expressway and submit completion 
schedule 
60 days -do- 
B Control of Road Dust/Re -suspension of dust and other 
fugitive emission: 
  
18 Formulate action plan for creation of green buffers along the 
traffic corridors; 
Immediate  
19 Introduce wet/ mechanized vacuum sweeping of roads; 30 days -do- 
20 Maintain pot holes free roads for free -flow of traffic to 
reduce emissions and dust; 
60 days -do- 
21 Introduce water fountains at major traffic intersection, 
wherever feasible; 
90 days -do- 
22 Undertake greening of open areas, gardens, community 
places, schools and housing societies. 
90 days -do- 
23 Take steps for blacktopping / pavement of road shoulders to 
avoid road dust;  
180 days LSG/UDH 
C Control of Air Pollution from Bio-Mass Burning:   
24 Take stringent action against open burning of bio -
mass/leaves/tyres etc to control such activities and submit 
periodic status reports; 
Immediate Agriculture 
Department 
25 Ensure proper collection of horticulture waste (bio -mass) and 
composting–cum-gardening approach; 
Immediate -do- 
26 Ensure strict enforcement of ban on burning of agriculture 
waste and crop residues  
Immediate -do- 
27 Prohibit use of coal in hotels and restaurants and eliminate 
use of kerosene for cooking  in Delhi;   
60 days LSG/UDH 
D Control of Industrial Air Pollution;   
28 Ensure strict action against unauthorized brick kilns  30 days RSPCB 
29 Ensure strict action against industrial units not complying 
with standards ; 
60 days -do- 
30 Enforce strict compliance  of conversion of Natural draft 
brick kilns to induced-draft; 
90 days -do- 
31 Launch action plan for switching over to natural gas by 
industries, wherever feasible. 
120 days -do- 

Appendices 
103 
E Control of Air Pollution from Construction and 
Demolition Activities: 
  
32 Control dust pollution at construction sites through 
appropriate cover 
Immediate LSG/UDH 
33 Undertake control measures for fugitive emissions from 
material handling, conveying and screening operations 
through water sprinkling, curtains, barriers and du st 
suppression units;  
30 days -do- 
34 Ensure carriage of construction material in closed/covered 
vessels; 
30 days -do- 
F Other Steps to control Air Pollution   
35 Set-up helpline in States/UT for taking action against 
reported non-compliance; 
Immediate LSG/UDH 
36 Evolve a system of reporting of garbage /municipal solid 
waste burning through mobile based applications and other 
social media platform linked with Central and State level 
Control Rooms ; 
30 days -do- 
37 Establish Standard Operating Procedur e to provide quick and 
effective response to complaints 
30 days -do- 
38 Take steps for maximizing coverage of LPG / PNG   for 
domestic cooking purposes with intention of achieving 
100%; 
90 days -do- 
39 Ensure DG sets meeting the standards only be allowed to 
operate 
30 days -do- 
40 Promote use of LPG instead of coal in restaurants/ dhabas/ 
road side eateries; 
90 days -do- 
41 Undertake Satellite based monitoring for tracking and 
enforcing agriculture waste burning; 
90 days -do- 
42 Take steps for setting up of bio-mass based power generation 
units to avoid bio-mass burning. 
One year -do- 
Source : RSPCB, Jaipur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
104 
 
Appendix  2.3 
(Refer paragraph 2.1.7.3; page 24) 
List of Air Quality Monitoring Stations 
S.No. City 
Name 
Installation 
Year 
Location of AAQMS/CAAQMS Remarks (Approved 
location name) 
Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Station (AAQMS) 
1 Bhiwadi 2015 RO, RSPCB Building   - 
2 Bhiwadi 2015 UIT Guest House  ESI Hospital 
3 Bhiwadi 2016 M/S Uttam Strips  - 
4 Alwar 1994 RO RSPCB Building  - 
5 Alwar 1994 M/S  Jain Irrigation LTD.  Gaurav Solvex 
6 Alwar 1991 M/S  Vintage Distillers Ltd.  RIICO Pump House 
7 Jodhpur 1994 Shastri Nagar Police Station  - 
8 Jodhpur 2003 Chopasni Housing Board  - 
9 Jodhpur 1994 Mahamandir Police Station - 
10 Jodhpur 1994 Sojti Gate Police Station - 
11 Jodhpur 2003 DIC Office  - 
12 Jodhpur 2003 RO RSPCB Building   RIICO Office Basni II 
13 Kota 1985 Krishi  Vigyan Kendra Borkhera  Samcore Glass Ltd. 
14 Kota 2000 Municipal Corporation  Rampura   
15 Kota 2016 Fire Station   
16 Kota 2016 M/S Giriraj ITI   Sewrage Treatement 
Plant Balita 
17 Kota 2016 Rajasthan  Technical University  - 
18 Kota 1998 RO RSPCB Building   - 
19 Udaipur 1994 RO RSPCB Building  - 
20 Udaipur 1994 Town Hall - 
21 Udaipur 1994 Amba Mata  - 
22 Jaipur 1996 RSPCB Head Office Building, Jhalana dungri - 
23 Jaipur 1996 RO RSPCB Building, Sikar Road - 
24 Jaipur 1996 RSEB Building, Chandpole  - 
25 Jaipur 1996 VKI, Recreation Club  - 
26 Jaipur 1996 RIICO Office MIA  - 
27 Jaipur 1996 PHED Building Ajmeri Gate  - 
28 Jaipur 2017 RIICO Office Baees Godam Industrial Area - 
29 Jaipur 2017 RIICO Office, Sitapura Idustrial Area - 
30 Bharatpur 2015 RO Building Bharatpur - 
31 Bharatpur 2016 RIICO Office - 
32 Bharatpur 2016 Khadi Gramodyog  - 
 
 

Appendices 
105 
Continuous Ambient Air Quality Monitoring  Station (CAAQMS) 
1 Jaipur 2012 Police Commissioner, M I Road - 
2 Jodhpur 2012 District Collectorate, Jodhpur - 
3 Jaipur 2017 Psychiatric  Centre , Sethi Colony - 
4 Jaipur 2017 Regional Science Centre ,Shastri Nagar - 
5 Ajmer 2017 Sainik Vishram Grah,Civil Line - 
6 Pali 2017 Bangur Govt.  PG College, Pali - 
7 Bhiwadi 2017 Water Supply Scheme Phase-4  RIICO Industrial Area - 
8 Kota 2017 Shrinath  Puram  Stadium - 
9 Alwar 2017 Rajasthan Madhymic Shiksha Parishad Office, in front of 
SDM School, Alwar 
- 
10 Udaipur 2017 DMG  Office, Court Circle - 
Source : RSPCB, Jaipur; Jointly visited units have been highlighted in bold 
 
Appendix  2.4 
 (Refer paragraph 2.1.7.3; page 24) 
  Details of air quality monitoring instruments installed at unsuitable locations 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
City 
Name and Location of 
monitoring station 
Audit Findings 
1 Alwar CAAQMS, Rajasthan 
Madhymic Shiksha Parishad 
Located at corner of back side of build ing and 
surrounded by buildings. 
2 Alwar AAQMS, M/ s Vintage 
Distillers Limited, 117 MIA, 
Alwar 
Located at corner of roof of small size building and 
surrounded by buildings and trees. 
3 Alwar AAQMS, M/s Jain Irrigation 
Limited 
Located at corner of roof of small size building and 
surrounded by trees. 
4 Bhiwadi CAAQMS, water supply 
complex, RIICO  Industrial 
Area 
Close to a wall, surrounded by buildings, trees and 
water overhead tank. 
5 Jodhpur AAQMS, Regional Office, 
Jodhpur 
Located at corner of roof of building and surrounded by 
trees. 
6 Jodhpur AAQMS, Mahamandir, police 
station 
Surrounded by trees. 
7 Jodhpur AAQMS, Sojatigate, police 
station 
Surrounded by trees. 
8 Jodhpur AAQMS, Chopasani Housing 
Board 
Sampler was installed near walls and trees. 
9 Kota AAQMS, Fire station Sampler was installed near walls and trees. 
10 Kota AAQMS, KVK, Borkhera Station was surrounded by farm land and there was no  
nearby sources, concentration gradients of pollutants, 
etc. 
11 Udaipur AAQMS, Town hall Close to a wall, surrounded by buildings and trees. 
12 Udaipur AAQMS, RO building Placed at ground of roof and close to boundary wall.  
Source: Regional Offices, RSPCB and Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Stations  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
106 
 
Appendix  2.5 
(Refer paragraph 2.1.7.3; page 25) 
Details of samplers installed at sites other than approved locations 
 
S.No. Name of city Type of monitoring 
station 
Approved location of 
monitoring stations 
Location where sampler was 
installed  
1 Alwar AAQMS M/s Gaurav Solvex Ltd M/s Jain Irrigation Ltd 
2 Alwar AAQMS RIICO Pump House Roof of Guard Room, Industrial 
Area, attached with M/s Vintage 
Distilleries Ltd 
3 Bhiwadi CAAQMS UIT Guest House Water Supply Complex, RIICO 
Industrial Area 
4 Bhiwadi AAQMS E.S.I. Hospital UIT Guest House 
5 Jaipur CAAQMS RO building, Sikar Road Police Commissionerate 
6 Kota AAQMS Samkor Glass Ltd KrishiVigyan Kendra, Borkheda 
7 Kota AAQMS Sewarage Treatment 
Plant, Balita 
Giriraj I.T.I 
Source: Regional Offices, RSPCB and Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Stations  
 
Appendix  3.1 
(Refer paragraph 3.1.5.1; page 59) 
Excerpts of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India orders in context of mining in Aravalli 
Mountain Hills (Writ Petition(Civil)no. 202/1995) 
 
Date Particulars 
29 October 2002  The Hon’ble Supreme Court of India prohibit and ban all mining activity in the 
entire Aravalli hills . This ban is not limited only to the hills encircling Kote and 
Alampur villages but extends to the entire hill range of Aravalli from Dholpur to 
Rajasthan. The Chief Secretary, State of Haryana and Chief Secretary, State of 
Rajasthan are directed to ensure t hat no mining activity  in the Aravalli hills  is 
carried out,  especially, in that part which has  been regarded as forest area or 
protected under the Environment (Protection) Act. 
16 December 2002  The order dated 29/30 October 2002 prohibiting and banning the mining activity in 
Aravalli hills from Haryana to Rajasthan is modified inso far as the State of 
Rajasthan is concerned to following effect:   
Wherever requisite approval/sanctions in the said State have been obtained under 
the Forest (Conservation) Act , 1980 and the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 
and the mining is not prohibited under the applicable Acts or notifications or 
orders of the court , mining can continue and to such mining the order aforesaid 
will not apply. 
08 April 2005  Pending further  directions, we restrained any kind of mining in forest area. 
Further, we restrained mining in any area in Aravalli hills falling in the State of 
Rajasthan, where permission may have been accorded after 16 December 2002. 
19 February 2010 There were about 261 mining leases in the Aravalli range in the State of Rajasthan. 
Some of the mining leases have been renewed after 16.12.2002, though it was not 
strictly permissible as per order passed on tha t date. A large number of renewal 
applications are also pendin g with the authorities. Taking advantage of the 
deeming provision of Rule 24A Renewal of mining lease of the Mines and Mineral 
(Development and Regulation) Rules, 1960 almost all the lease -holders are 
carrying on mining operations uninterruptedly. The rene wal applications are 
pending for a long time and in many cases for several year s. Rule 24A apparently 
does not envisage this kind of situation. We, accordingly, restrain all those lease -
holders whose applications for renewal of their respective leases are pending from 
doing any mining operation till further orders. 

Appendices 
107 
Appendix  3.2 
(Refer paragraph 3.1.6; page 63) 
Provisions relating to environmental issues laid down under various regulations to be 
met by the lease holders 
1 Top Soil 
MCD Rules, 1988 Mining Plan EC conditions CTO conditions 
Rule 32 - every holder of a major mineral 
mining lease shall, wherever top soil exists and 
is to be excavated for mining operations, 
remove it separately and shall utilise it for 
restoration/rehabilitation of the land. 
Similar provisions exist in Rule 37U (1) of the 
RMMC Rules, 1986 for minor mineral leases. 
The top soil will 
be stacked on the 
non-mineralised 
area. Top soil 
will be spread 
over dumps for 
plantation 
purposes. 
The top soil, if any, shall 
be stacked at earmarked 
sites only and it should 
not be kept unutilised for 
long. The top soil shall 
be used for land 
reclamation and 
plantation.  
The project 
proponent will stack 
the top soil 
separately and will 
use it for plantation 
and reclamation of 
overburden dumps. 
2 Overburden dumps 
Mining Plan EC conditions CTO conditions 
Each lessee depending on the 
type of mineral extracted, 
proposes specific treatment/ 
reclamation of overburden in 
Mining Plan. 
Stabilisation of overburden by 
retaining wall. (Each lessee 
proposes stabil isation as per 
overburden status). 
A separate space should be earmarked for 
dumping of the overburden material and it 
should not be kept active for long period. 
The overburden dumps should be 
scientifically vegetated with suitable native 
species to prevent erosion and surface run off. 
Monitoring and management of rehabilitated 
areas should continue until the vegetation 
becomes self-sustaining. 
The overburden generated shall be 
stacked at earmarked dump sites only 
and after dumping is over, it should be 
stabilised by suitable plantation. 
Monitoring and management of 
rehabilitated areas should continue until 
the vegetation becomes self-sustaining.  
A retaining wall should be at the toe of 
the overburden dumps. 
3 Plantation 
GOR’s circular dated 29 September 2003 Mining Plan EC condition CTO condition 
The norms for plantation for each lease holder/ quarry 
license holder would be as under: 
Category Norms 
Major Mineral lessee 5 plants/hectare or part/ 
year 
Marble, Serpentine and 
granite leases and Quarry 
Licenses. 
20 plants/hectare or 
part/ year 
Other minor mineral 
leases and Quarry 
Licenses.  
10 plants/hectare or 
part/ year 
Quarry License of 
minerals other than 
Marble and Granite 
having area less than 1 
hectare.  
5 plants/ Quarry 
Licenses/year 
The mining pla n contains 
the name of species 
which would be planted, 
number of plants, place/ 
site for year wise 
plantation. The lessee has 
to ensure post plantation 
care such as hedging, 
watering during dry spell, 
manuring, pest treatment 
and replenishment of 
plant cas ualties so that 
survival rate is not less 
than 80 per cent. 
Plantation of 
trees has to be 
developed all 
along the mine 
lease area in a 
phased manner.  
The plantation 
area varies 
depending on the 
size of the lease. 
The lessee shall 
develop 
plantation in at 
least 33 per cent 
of the total lease 
area to maintain 
ambient air 
quality around 
the mine and the 
action plan for 
plantation has to 
be adhered. 
4 Construction of garland drain 
EC conditions CTO conditions 
Garland drain should be constructed around the mi ning pit and 
overburden dump to arrest the silt and sediments from the runoff 
water in low lying areas during rains. 
Garland drain should be constructed around the 
mineral and overburden dump to prevent runoff 
water and flow of sediments. 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
108 
 
5 Air pollution control measures  
MCD Rules, 1988 Mining Plan EC conditions CTO conditions 
Rule 37 stipulates that air 
pollution due to fines, dust, 
smoke or gaseous emissions 
during mining, beneficiation3 and 
related activities shall be 
controlled and kept within 
permissible limits specified under 
various environmental laws of 
the country including the Air 
(Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1981 and the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 
1986 by the holder of the major 
mineral mining lease. 
Similar provisions exist in Rule 
37U(4) of the RMMC Rules, 
1986 for minor mineral leases. 
Details of possible 
causes of air 
pollution are 
discussed in detail 
with remedial 
measures. 
The haul road, loading and 
unloading point should be 
sprinkled with water to 
prevent the dust parti cles 
becoming airborne. 
The environmental 
monitoring of the air quality, 
level of Suspended 
Particulate Matters (SPM), 
Respirable Particulate 
Matters (RPM), Sulphur 
dioxide (SO 2), Nitrogen 
dioxide (NO 2) and Carbon 
monoxide (CO) should be 
tested and the res ults should 
be submitted to RSPCB once 
in six months. 
The water spray and sprinkling 
system installed should always 
be maintained in order to utilise 
the same for dust suppression.  
As per the general condition of 
the CTO, the lessee is required to 
conduct ambient air quality 
monitoring for SPM in the 
mining area once in six months 
and submit the results to RSPCB. 
The lessee shall provide 
necessary infrastructure facilities 
including equipment for the 
monitoring of ambient air 
quality. 
6 Noise pollution control measures 
MCD Rules 1988 Mining Plan EC conditions CTO conditions 
Rule 39 stipulates that noise arising out of 
mining, beneficiation etc. shall be abated or 
controlled by the major mineral mining lease 
holder at the source so as to keep it within 
the permissible limit. 
Similar provisions exist in Rule 37U (6) of 
the RMMC Rules, 1986 for minor mineral 
leases. Further, results of periodical 
examination of noise pollution shall be 
intimated to the concerned ME/AME as well 
as RO of the RSPCB. 
Proper maint enance 
for machine 
deployed at mining 
site is proposed for 
minimising the 
noise. 
Measures should 
be taken for 
control of noise 
levels within 
prescribed 
standards. 
The noise level under no 
circumstances should exceed 
the prescribed limits (day time -
75 dBA a nd night time -65 
dBA). 
Monitoring  of noise level shall 
be conducted once in six 
months and results thereof shall 
be submitted to the RSPCB 
regularly. 
7 Rehabilitation and reclamation of mined out pits 
MCD Rules 1988 EC conditions CTO conditions 
Rule 34 stipulates that every holder of major mineral 
mining lease shall undertake the phased restoration, 
reclamation and rehabilitation of lands affected by 
mining operations and shall complete this work before 
the conclusion of such operations and the abandonme nt 
of mine. 
Similar provisions exist in Rule 37U (3) of the RMMC 
Rules, 1986 for minor mineral leases.  
A final mine closure plan 
along with details of 
corpus fund should be 
submitted to the MoEF five 
years in advance of final 
mine closure for approval. 
The mining unit shall undertake the phased 
restoration, reclamation and rehabilitation of 
lands as per established practices and procedures 
affected by mining operations and shall complete 
this work before the conclusion of such 
operations and the abandonmen t of prospects or 
mines. 
8 Mining in benches 
Metalliferous Mines Regulations, 1961 Mining Plan EC conditions 
Regulation 106(2) (a) provides that where excavation of deposit is 
worked out by manual means on a sloping face, the face shall be 
benched and th e sides shall be sloped at an angle of not more than 60 
degrees from the horizontal. The height of any bench shall not exceed 
six meters and the breadth thereof shall not be less than the height. 
However, where the ore -body consists of comparatively hard a nd 
compact rock, the Regional Inspector may, by an order in writing and 
subject to such conditions as he may specify therein, permit the height 
of the bench to be increased up to 7.5 meters. 
Year wise 
development of 
mine wherein for 
each year, the pit 
wise bench height, 
width and length to 
be developed are 
provided. 
Benches height, width and 
slope shall be maintained 
as per the Metalliferous 
Mines Regulations, 1961 
or as per the approval of 
the Director General of 
Mines Safety.  
                                                 
3   "Beneficiation" means processing of minerals or ores for the purpose of (i) regulating the size of a desired 
produce; (ii) removing unwanted constituents; and (iii) improving quality, purity or assay grade of desired 
product. 

Appendices 
109 
Appendix  3.3 
(Refer paragraph 3.1.6.3; page 68) 
Cross verification of the joint physical inspection findings with 38 RSPCB inspection 
reports 
 
S.no. Component of 
environmental issues  
Comparisons between reports of RSPCB 
and Joint physical inspections  
Audit comments 
1 Top soil: As per the 
proforma of the 
inspection reports of 
RSPCB, the availability 
of the top soil had to be 
commented on and in 
case it was available 
then its storage, 
location and quantity 
had to be specified. 
As per RSPCB inspection reports, no top soil 
were available in 15 MLs, no mention about 
top soil in 14 MLs or minimal top soil were 
available in six MLs and top soil present in 3 
MLs where as in Joint physical inspection 
findings, it was noticed that no top soil were 
available in 16 MLs and the top soil were 
present in 22 MLs. 
 
 
It revealed that the RSPCB had 
reported availability of top soil 
in three cases only whereas it 
was available in 22 MLs as per 
joint physical inspection 
findings. Thus, the inspection 
reports of the RSPCB were 
incomplete, incorrect and 
unreliable regarding top soil in 
19 MLs. 
2 Overburden dumps:  
In the proforma of the 
inspection report of the 
RSPCB, the inspecting 
officer is required to 
report the number of 
overburden dumps with 
dimension and location 
of these dumps, 
construction of 
retaining wall around 
the overburden dumps, 
the number of plants 
around the dump and 
the type of plantation 
As per RSPCB inspection reports, no 
overburden were present in 7 MLs, 
overburden not present or insignificant dump 
found in 29 MLs and no comments on 
overburden was made in 2 MLs where as in 
Joint physical inspection findings, it was 
noticed that overburden were present in 36 
MLs and overburden not present or 
insignificant dump were found in 2 MLs. 
 
 
In none of the reports of the 
RSPCB, all the details r egarding 
the number of dumps with 
dimension and location were 
mentioned. In seven 4  MLs, the 
number of dumps and 
dimensions were mentioned but 
their location was not specified 
except in one ML (07/01 -
Rishabhdeo). In two MLs, no 
comment had been made 
regarding overburden dumps . In 
the remaining 29 MLs it was 
stated that no overburden dump 
or insignificant dump was found 
in the lease area and so no 
reclamation was required. In 
nine MLs, retaining wall was 
reported to have been 
constructed by the RSPCB in 
their inspection reports but it 
was noticed that retaining wall 
was found constructed in one 
ML only and retaining wall was 
in progress in two MLs. 
3 Plantation: The 
inspection format 
required the inspecting 
officer to comment on 
number of plantations, 
type o f plantation and 
its location.  
As per RSPCB inspection reports, 12 to 
1,500 plants were reported in 25 MLs, 1,000 
and 40,000 plants were reported in 2 MLs, 
plantation reported (300 -3,400) in and 
outside the lease area in 3 MLs and no details 
of plantation s outside the lease area was 
given and no comments on plantation were 
made in one ML where as in Joint physical 
inspection findings, it was noticed that no 
plantation in 27 MLs were found, 20 to 100 
plants were found in 3 MLs   as against 
reported 300 -3,400 plants and 1,750 plants 
were found in one ML wherein RSPCB had 
made no comments about plantation. 
The inspection reports of the 
RSPCB regarding plantation 
were imprecise. In case of 25 
MLs, the inspection reports of 
RSPCB had reported plantation 
of 12 t o 1,500 plants. However, 
no plantation was found during 
joint physical inspection. 
Further, in case of two MLs (ML 
415/02 and 414/02) out of 25 
MLs, it was noticed that the 
                                                 
4  Seven leases (11/05 and 54/93 –Rajsamand-I, 02/92, 15/03 –Rajsamand-II, 06/89 –Udaipur, 7/01 and 08/92 –
Rishabhdeo). 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
110 
 
 RSPCB had carried out 
inspection in the year 2011 and 
2012 respectively. As per the  
reports, in ML 415/02, 35 plants 
and in ML 414/02, about 30 
plants were reported. In the 
second inspection carried out in 
March 2015, 50 plants in each 
mining lease area were reported. 
However, no plantation was 
found inside the mining lease 
area during j oint physical 
inspection. The inspecting 
officers did not comment on the 
specific location of the 
plantations done. 
In two MLs (ML 1/93and 
54/93), as per the RSPCB 
inspection report, around 1,000 
and 40,000 plantations 
respectively were reported inside 
the lease area. However, during 
joint physical inspection, not a 
single plant was found.  
The RSPCB in their inspection 
report of three MLs had reported 
plantation of 2,000 (ML 07/01), 
3,400 (ML 02/92) and 300 (ML 
48/11) plants in and outside 
mining lease are a. It was seen 
that no details regarding location 
of plantation done outside the 
lease area were given in their 
report. On joint physical 
inspection, it was found that only 
20 plants were present inside the 
mining lease area in ML 07/01, 
100 plants in  
ML 2/92 and 100 plants in ML 
48/11. 
In one ML (15/03), RSPCB had 
not mentioned anything against 
plantation but during joint 
physical inspection, 1,750 plants 
were found. 
4 Construction of 
garland drain 
As per RSPCB inspection reports, no 
comments about garland drains were reported 
in 20 MLs, garland drain were provided in 15 
MLs, garland drains were not provided in two 
MLs and garland drains was not applicable in 
one ML where as in Joint physical inspection 
findings, it was noticed that garland drains 
were pr ovided in two MLs, garland drains 
were not provided in 30 MLs and garland 
It revealed that in 20 MLs, status 
of garland drains had not been 
commented upon by the RSPCB. 
Further, it was found in joint 
physical inspect ion that there 
was no garland drain in 30 MLs. 
Garland drains were found 
constructed in only two MLs as 

Appendices 
111 
drains were not applicable in six MLs.  against 15 MLs reported in the 
RSPCB reports. 
5 Air pollution control 
measures: The lease 
holder is required to 
submit six monthly 
report regarding 
ambient air quality to 
the RSPCB. 
The proforma of the 
inspection report of 
RSPCB has a column 
in which as part of Air 
Pollution control 
measures, the 
inspecting officer has 
to report on water 
sprinkling arrangement 
and its functioning, 
periodicity of water 
sprinkling and details 
of location where water 
sprinkling was done. 
Cross verification of joint physical 
inspection findings regarding the air 
quality was not possible with inspection 
reports of RSPCB as the air quality 
could not be checked during joint 
physical inspection in absence of 
equipment for checking the air quality at 
the mining site. 
The column relating to the water 
sprinkling arrangement provided 
in the inspection reports of the 
RSPCB were not adequately 
filled up by the Inspecting 
Officer and con cerned RO, 
RSPCB did not initiate any 
action for non -submission of six 
monthly reports regarding 
ambient air quality.  
6 Noise pollution 
control measures: 
Scrutiny of the inspection reports of 
RSPCB of 38 leases revealed that there 
was no mention about the noise level. 
The RSPCB could not monitor 
noise pollution level in the lease 
areas as there was no column 
provided in the proforma of 
inspections report for monitoring 
of noise level. 
7 Rehabilitation and 
reclamation of mined 
out pits  
 
As per RSPCB insp ection reports, only 
in three inspections out of 38 checked 
MLs were advised to undertake phased 
restoration, reclamation and 
rehabilitation of lands affected by 
mining operations while it was noticed in 
joint physical inspection findings,  there 
was no ph ased restoration, reclamation 
and rehabilitation were found in MLs. 
The RSPCB could not monitor 
phase wise restoration, 
reclamation and rehabilitation of 
land in lease areas as the 
inspection proforma did not 
cover the aspect. 
 
8 Mining in benches:  
The fo rmat of the 
inspection report of the 
RSPCB includes a 
column on 
development of 
benches with pit wise 
bench height, width and 
length. 
As per RSPCB inspection reports, no 
comments about development of benches 
were made in 23 MLs, benches were 
developed in 10  MLs, benches were not 
developed in one ML, benches not applicable 
in one ML and nil reporting was done in 3 
MLs where as in Joint physical inspection 
findings, it was noticed that benches were 
developed in 3 MLs as against 10 MLs 
reported by the RSPCB, be nches were not 
developed in 27 MLs, benches not applicable 
in one ML and improper benches were found 
in 7 MLs. 
It was noticed that for 23 MLs, 
‘no comments’ were given in the 
column by the RSPCB. For 10 
leases, it was reported that 
benches had been develop ed.  
However, the details regarding 
pit wise bench height, width and 
length were not given in five 
cases. For one lease, it was 
reported that benches were not 
applicable. For three leases, it 
was reported as ‘nil’ and only for 
one lease it was reported tha t 
benches had not been formed. 
No notice was found to have 
been issued to the lessee for 
ensuring proper development of 
the benches by the RSPCB 
 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
112 
 
Appendix  3.4 
(Refer paragraph 3.2.1; page 73) 
Activity-wise position of physical targets and achievements 
 
S.N Name of activity Unit  Targets as per 
Project Report 
Achievements 
1 Afforestation (in hectares) Ha. 52,750 52,750 
2 Agro Forestry Activities  
(i) Seedling distribution (in numbers) 
Nos. 50,00,000 46,97,000 
 
(ii) Creation of new nurseries (in numbers) Nos. 10 10 
(iii) Development of existing nurseries          (in 
numbers) 
Nos. 10 10 
3 Soil and Moisture Conservation Structures (in 
numbers) 
Nos. 38,060 38,077 
4 Joint Forest Management Activities 
(i) Creation of SHGs/VFPMCs (in numbers) 
(ii) Preparation of Micro plans (in numbers) 
(iii) VFPMC meetings (in numbers) 
(iv) Honorarium to NGOs 
(v)  Awareness camps (in numbers) 
Nos.  
250 
250 
250 
17 
250 
 
249 
229 
249 
12 
250 
5 Capacity Building 
Training to VFPMC 
members/NGOs/ROs/ACFs/DFOs 
LS.  
256 
 
253 
6 Communication and Extension 
(i) Exchange visits/study tours (in numbers) 
(ii) Workshops/seminars (in numbers) 
Nos.  
34 
7 
 
34 
5 
7 Monitoring and Evaluation LS. - - 
8 Convergence through MGNREGA  
Construction of pucca wall  fencing  (in hectares) 
Ha.  
1,000 
 
- 
Source: Information provided by PCCF. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
113 
Appendix  3.5 
 (Refer paragraph 3.2.4.2; page 75) 
Statement showing status of distribution of uncertified/below standard seeds 
 (in `) 
S. 
No. 
Name of division Purchase of 
seed from 
market which 
was not  tested 
from Lab. 
Seed 
collected 
through 
VFPMCs 
but not  
tested from 
Lab. 
Total seed not  
tested from 
Lab. 
Purchase of 
seed from 
market 
which was 
below 
standard 
 Grand 
Total 
(3+4+6) 
1 DCF Kota 0 39,835 39,835 3,58,162 3,97,997 
2 DCF (WL) MNP, 
Kota 
2,39,499 32,750 2,72,249 0 2,72,249 
3 DCF Rajsamand 0 4,680 4,680 91,353 96,033 
4 DCF  Ajmer 1,14,767 0 1,14,767 0 1,14,767 
5 DCF Bundi 2,19,481 2,882 2,22,363 2,24,500 4,46,863 
6 DCF Pratapgarh 6,35,515 1,71,394 8,06,909 0 8,06,909 
7 DCF Bhartapur 2,47,080 0 2,47,080 0 2,47,080 
 Total 14,56,342 2,51,541 17,07,883 6,74,015 23,81,898 
Source: Information provided by concerned DCFs. 
 
Appendix  3.6 
(Refer paragraph 3.2.4.2; page 75) 
Details of cases in which plantation done prior to issuance of technical sanction 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Division 
Name of site/model and 
Range 
Technical sanction 
No. and date 
Voucher No. 
and date 
Amount 
paid 
Actual 
period of 
execution of 
work 
1 DCF (WL) 
MNP, Kota 
Kalyakui (RDF-I), 
Range-Dara 
5968/30.10.2014 
amount ` 5.88 lakh 
22/30.1.2014 3,80,246 1.4.2014 to 
31.8.2014 
2 -do- -do- -do- 44/28.11.2014 1,52,132 1.9.2014 to 
31.10.2014 
3 DCF, 
Rajsamand 
Ajitgarh (ANR), Range-
Bhim 
47-60/ 27.7.2015 
amount ` 1,53,700/- 
53/28.7.2015 17,278 1.4.2015 to 
30.6.2015 
4 -do- -do- -do- 53/17.10.2015 16,572 1.7.2015 to 
31.7.2015 
5 -do- Jetakhera (ANR) Range-
Bhim 
-do- 41/17.10.2015 28,936 1.4.2015 to 
30.6.2015 
6 -do- Bansa (RDF-II) Range-
Kumbhalgarh 
01-06/22.7.2013 
amount ` 4.94 lakh 
49/29-8-2013 12,471 23.3.2013 to 
30.4.2013 
7 -do- -do- -do- 50/29-8-2013 9,607 1.5.2013 to 
31.5.2013 
8 -do- -do- -do- 51/29-8-2013 31,321 1.6.2013 to 
30.6.2013 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
114 
 
9 -do- -do- -do- 52/29-8-2013 1,39,816 3.7.2013 to 
31.7.2013 
10 -do- -do- -do- 33/29-8-2013 2,000 8.7.2013 
11 -do- Bhagawad Range (RDF-
II)-Bhim 
24-29/19-8-2013 
amount ` 4.43 lakh 
71/30-8-2013 20,438 1-4-2013 to 
31-5-2013 
12 -do- -do- -do- 70/30-8-2013 2,00,353 1-6-2013 to 
31-7-2013 
13 -do- -do- -do- 75/30-8-2013 6,000 1-4-2013 to 
31-7-2013 
14 -do- -do- -do- 28/29-8-2013 1,501 24-6-2013 
15 -do- -do- -do- 29/29-8-2013 1,501 21-7-2013 
16 -do- Ratnawaton ki bhagal 
(RDF-II) range-
Nathdwara 
12-18/ 8-8-2013 
amount ` 4.94 lakh 
13/22-8-2013 7,081 25-3-2013 to  
30-4-2013 
17 -do- -do- -do- 14/22-8-2013 10,121 1-5-2013 to 
31-5-2013 
18 -do- -do- -do- 15/22-8-2013 30,497 1-6-2013 to 
30-6-2013 
19 -do- -do- -do- 16/22-8-2013 1,21,981 2-7-2013 to 
27-7-2013 
20 -do- -do- -do- 36/29-8-2013 1,500 10-7-2013 
21 -do- -do- -do- 38/29-8-2013 1,000 1-8-2013 
22 DCF, 
Pratapgarh 
Huda Bavji-B range-
Pipalkhunt (ANR) 
3525-26/30.5.14 147/19.6.14 8,600 1.4.14 to 
31.5.14 
23 -do- Siya khedi mahadev 
Range-Choti sadri 
(ANR) 
3525-26/30.5.14 178/19.6.14 8,600 1.4.14 to 
31.5.14 
24 -do- Ruwamagara Range-
choti sadri (ANR) 
3525-26/30.5.14 186/25.6.14 8,600 1.4.14 to 
31.5.14 
25 -do- Dhar Range-Bansi 
(ANR) 
3525-26/30.5.14 02/25.7.14 8,600 1.4.14 to 
31.5.14 
26 -do- Kanna mata Range-
Bansi (ANR) 
3525-26/30.5.14 211/15.9.14 8,600 1.4.14 to 
31.5.14 
27 -do- Khanpuri Range-
Dhariyawad (ANR) 
3525-26/30.5.14 138/25.7.14 8,600 1.4.14 to 
31.5.14 
28 -do- Aadavela Range 
Dhariyawad (ANR) 
3525-26/30.5.14 121/25.7.14 8,600 1.4.14 to 
31.5.14 
29 -do- Mewa Range-
Dhariyawad (ANR) 
3525-26/30.5.14 294/16.10.14 8,600 1.4.14 to 
31.5.14 
Total 12,61,153  
Source: Information provided by concerned DCFs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
115 
Appendix  3.7 
(Refer paragraph 3.2.5.1; page 76) 
Details of works that deviated from micro plan 
(₹ in Lakh) 
S. 
No. 
Name of  
Division 
Proposed works (Not executed) Works executed (Not proposed 
initially) 
Types  of works  No. Amount  Types  of 
works  
No. Amount  
1 DCF 
Rajsmand 
Anicut  
Contour  
Gabion  
4 
3 
1 
82.00 WHS 1 3.04 
2 DCF Kota Anicut  
Farm pond  
1 
1 
13.50 Contour  
Anicut  
Check dam  
PCT  
LBG 
WHs 
Farm pond 
6 
2 
1 
4 
1 
2 
2 
73.36 
3 DCF Bundi Anicut  
WHs  
Gabion 
Check dam  
PCT  
Contour  
Farm pond  
2 
1 
2 
3 
1 
2 
1 
67.00 Gabion 
PCT 
Contour 
1 
1 
1 
19.18 
4 MNP Kota Checkdam 
Farmpond 
Anicut 
PCT 
2 
2 
1 
1 
5.00 WHs 
Anicut 
2 
2 
18.38 
5 DCF 
Partapgarh 
Anicut 1 6.50 WHs 
Contour 
1 
1 
7.05 
6 DCF 
Bharatpur 
Anicuts 
Pond 
2 
2 
40.00 - - - 
  Total 33 214.00 Total 28 121.01 
Source: Information provided by concerned DCFs. 
WHS-Water Harvesting Structure 
PCT-Percolation Tank 
LBG- Loose Boulder Gabion 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
116 
 
Appendix  3.8 
 (Refer paragraph 3.2.5.2; page 76) 
Statement showing division-wise status of construction of Soil & Moisture Conservation 
Structures without obtaining prior permission from state level committee  
(Amount in `) 
 
Source: Information provided by concerned DCFs. 
 
S No. Name of 
Division 
Year Construction of soil and moisture conservation structure 
Check 
dam No 
Amount Anicut 
II 
Amount Anicut 
III 
Amount WHS 
No 
Amount 
1 Rajsmand 12-13 - _ 03 1949576 02 1585407 - - 
13-14 51 928444 06 3890210 02 1699822 13 3924909 
14-15 _ _ 02 1299476 01 850000 02 604000 
  Total 51 928444 11 7139262 5 4135229 15 4528909 
2 MNP 
Kota 
12-13 03 55000 - - - - - - 
13-14 - - 05 3144404 02 1533765 05 1487933 
14-15 - - - - - - - - 
  Total 03 55000 05 3144404 02 1533765 05 1487933 
3 Kota 12-13 10 185000 - - 02 1691000 - - 
13-14 45 832000 - - 01 850000 12 3921000 
14-15 - - 03 1937000 02 1700000 02 603000 
  Total 55 1017000 03 1937000 05 4241000 14 4524000 
4 Bundi 12-13 - - 05 3028000 02 1700000 - - 
13-14 121 1101000 - - - - 16 3625000 
14-15 02 42000 - - - - - - 
  Total 123 1143000 05 3028000 02 1700000 16  3625000 
5 Ajmer 12-13 10 184943 - - - - - - 
13-14 17 315000 - - - - - - 
14-15 - - 1 649000 03 1949000 3 906000 
  Total 27 499943 1 649000 03 1949000 3 906000 
6 Partapgarh 12-13 20 369700 05 3245503 02 1699543 05 1537123 
13-14 61 1125033 12 7787480 04 3396543 12 3619481 
14-15 - - 07 4549374 03 2548700 04 1206233 
15-16 - - 02 1300000 01 850000 - - 
  Total 81 1494733 26 16882357 10 8494786 21 6362837 
7 Bharatpur 12-13 - - 5 3285499 2 1684068 - - 
13-14 76 1612574 - - - - - - 
14-15 03 62992 - - - - 2 598773 
  Total 79 1675566 5 3285499 2 1684068 2 598773 
  Grand 
Total 
419 6813686 56 36065522 29 23737848 76 22033452 
         88650508 

Appendices 
117 
Appendix  3.9 
 (Refer paragraph 3.3.4.2; page  82) 
De-sanction of works due to lack of proper survey of roads 
Awarded works not started (Proposed for de-sanction) 
S.No. District Packages Name of work Length 
(in 
km) 
Remarks 
1 Alwar RJ-02-WB-
RRSMP-II-
10 
Alwar Bhiwadi 
road SH-25 to 
Naugaon 
1.18 Proposed for de-sanction due to 
submergence 
2 Gadpur to Amlaki 1.60 
3 Baran RJ-04-WB-
RRSMP-03 
Richari Jagir road 
to Kakarwa 
1.75 To be de-sanctioned, double 
connectivity 
4 Bharatpur RJ-06-WB-
RRSMP-II-
10 
Sunari road to 
Nagla Shikham 
0.50 Proposed for de-sanction. Connected 
in other scheme. Sanctioned in 
missing link 
5 Sriganganagar RJ-30-WB-
RRSMP-10 
Construction of BT 
road from 20 KND 
to 18 KND 
3.00 Proposed for de-sanction. Connected 
in other scheme. 
6 Dholpur RJ-13-WB-
RRSMP-04-
II/2013-14 
Baseri Sirmathura 
road to Kallapura 
0.75 Already connected 
7 Jaipur RJ-16-WB-
RRSMP-04 
Tholai Birasana 
road to Gopalyawas 
1.30 No revenue track available. Land 
dispute (700 meter length) 
8 Bundi RJ-09-WB-
RRSMP-07 
Dora Suthra road to 
Bhawanipura 
1.50 Revised proposal and DPR submitted 
for issue of revised A&F, decision is 
awaited 
Total 11.58  
To be awarded works (Proposed for de-sanction) 
S.No. District Name of work Length 
(in km) 
Remarks 
1 Kota  Simliya to Kalyanpura 3.30 Connected in other scheme 
2 Kota Bhonra to Balabhpura 4.00 
3 Bharatpur SH-14 Chak Gharwari to Madhuvana 1.20 
Total 8.50 
Grand Total 20.08  
Source: As per Quarterly Progress Report of RRSMP. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
118 
 
Appendix  3.10 
(Refer paragraph 3.3.5.1; page 83) 
Tenders invited prior to issuing of technical sanction 
Abu Road Division 
S.No. Name of package No. of 
roads 
Date of Technical Sanction Date of NIT 
1 RJ-29-WB-RRSMP-01 1 08.02.2013 28.01.2013 
Alwar-II Division 
S.No. Name of package No. of 
roads 
Date of Technical 
Sanction 
Date of NIT 
1 RJ-02-WB-RRSMP-02 2 23.07.2013 20.06.2013 
1 23.08.2013 
Chaumehla Division 
S.No. Name of package No. of 
roads 
Date of Technical 
Sanction 
Date of NIT 
1 RJ-19-WB-RRSMP-13 1 03.08.2013 02.07.2013 
Sawai Madhopur-WB Division 
S.No. Name of package No. of 
roads 
Date of Technical 
Sanction 
Date of NIT 
1 RJ-27-WB-RRSMP-01 1 18.02.2013 28.01.2013 
2 RJ-27-WB-RRSMP-10 3 26.08.2013 and 
13.09.2013 
02.07.2013 
3 RJ-27-WB-RRSMP-11 4 24.07.2013 and 
16.07.2013 
02.07.2013 
Grand total 13   
Source: Information obtained from scrutiny of records of test checked units.  
 

Appendices 
119 
Appendix  3.11 
(Refer paragraph 3.3.5.2; page 84) 
Excess payment to contractor on Price Adjustment 
Name of Division Package No. Number of 
Road Works 
Agreement No. Voucher No. & 
Date 
Paid amount Actual amount Excess  amount 
Executive Engineer, PWD Dn., 
Nimbhahera 
RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-35 3 32/2013-14 52/26.02.16 1567927 663583 904344 
Executive Engineer, PWD Dn., Dausa RJ-12-WB-RRSMP-07 5 12/2013-14 41/25.08.14 1120601 680793 439808 
Executive Engineer, PWD Dn., Chhabra RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-01 3 07/2014-15 52/27.11.15 997643 318492 679151 
RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-02 5 02/2014-15 01/13.08.15 1171123 -537780 1708903 
RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-03 4 06/2014-15 02/13.08.15 560155 26611 533544 
RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-04 4 05/2014-15 03/13.08.15 434064 -183673 617737 
Executive Engineer, PWD Dn., Suratgarh 
 
 
 
RJ-30-WB-RRSMP-03 4 07/2013-14 135/25.08.14 1021289 723712 297577 
RJ-30-WB-RRSMP-05 4 04/2013-14 27/21.10.14 2696732 2269526 427206 
RJ-30-WB-RRSMP-06 3 09/2013-14 24/21.10.14 1336794 1304785 32009 
RJ-30-WB-RRSMP-08 4 05/2013-14 26/21.10.14 1829913 1471648 358265 
RJ-30-WB-RRSMP-09 4 06/2013-14 25/21.10.14 2878642 2392448 486194 
Executive Engineer, PWD Dn., Sikandra RJ-12-WB-RRSMP-14 5 18/2013-14 05/18.12.14 887114 626710 260404 
Total 16501997 9756855  6745142 
Source: Information obtained from scrutiny of records of test checked units. 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
120 
 
Appendix  3.12 
(Refer paragraph 3.3.5.2; page 84) 
Non- submission of Operating and Maintenance Manual 
Alwar-II 
S.No. Name of package No.of roads Contract Value 
  (₹ in lakh) 
Amount to be 
withheld        @1% of 
contract value not 
exceeding ₹ 3 lakh     
(₹ in lakh)  
1 RJ-02-WB-RRSMP-02 4 143.48 1.43 
2 RJ-02-WB-RRSMP-07 1 102.04 1.02 
3 RJ-02-WB-RRSMP-08 2 133.87 1.33 
4 RJ-02-WB-RRSMP-09 3 98.98 0.99 
5 RJ-02-WB-RRSMP-10 3 162.48 1.62 
Total 6.39 
 
Bundi-WB 
1 RJ-09-WB-RRSMP-01 3 310.67 3.00 
2 RJ-09-WB-RRSMP-02 3 291.35 2.91 
3 RJ-09-WB-RRSMP-05 3 442.85 3.00 
4 RJ-09-WB-RRSMP-06 2 409.46 3.00 
5 RJ-09-WB-RRSMP-07 3 232.15 2.32 
6 RJ-09-WB-RRSMP-08 3 438.72 3.00 
7 RJ-09-WB-RRSMP-10 1 299.27 2.99 
Total 20.22 
Chaumehla 
1 RJ-19-WB-RRSMP-13 2 219.07 2.19 
Total 2.19 
 
Chittorgarh-WB   
1 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-08 4 272.88 2.72 
2 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-09 3 273.17 2.73 
3 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-18 5 429.07 3.00 
4 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-19 2 312.97 3.00 
5 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-24 2 351.07 3.00 
6 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-25 2 425.59 3.00 
7 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-26 5 321.99 3.00 
8 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-27 2 317.05 3.00 
9 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-28 3 267.19 2.67 
10 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-29 3 252.07 2.52 
11 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-30 3 301.88 3.00 

Appendices 
121 
12 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-31 3 290.19 2.90 
13 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-32 2 139.68 1.39 
Total 35.93 
Chhabra 
1 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-02 5 667.90 3.00 
2 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-04 4 340.87 3.00 
3 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-08 2 229.59 2.29 
4 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-09 2 241.44 2.41 
5 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-10 2 271.98 2.71 
6 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-11 2 194.34 1.94 
7 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-12 2 330.99 3.00 
8 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-13 2 211.00 2.11 
9 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-14 3 288.20 2.88 
10 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-15 2 270.02 2.70 
11 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-16 2 287.02 2.87 
12 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-17 2 235.19 2.35 
13 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-18 2 223.04 2.23 
14 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-19 2 204.75 2.04 
15 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-20 1 208.91 2.08 
16 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-21 2 233.95 2.33 
Total 39.94 
Dausa  
1 RJ-12-WB-RRSMP-01 2 106.06 1.06 
2 RJ-12-WB-RRSMP-04 3 189.22 1.89 
3 RJ-12-WB-RRSMP-06 2 158.57 1.58 
4 RJ-12-WB-RRSMP-07 5 450.12 3.00 
5 RJ-12-WB-RRSMP-08 4 339.28 3.00 
6 RJ-12-WB-RRSMP-09 3 353.50 3.00 
7 RJ-12-WB-RRSMP-10 3 408.44 3.00 
8 RJ-12-WB-RRSMP-11 4 485.27 3.00 
9 RJ-12-WB-RRSMP-12 4 318.27 3.00 
10 RJ-12-WB-RRSMP-13 5 493.86 3.00 
Total 25.53 
Nimbahera Dn. 
1 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-21 2 141.13 1.41 
2 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-33 3 242.79 2.43 
3 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-34 3 274.07 2.74 
4 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-35 3 246.38 2.46 
5 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-36 3 254.84 2.54 
6 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-37 3 309.78 3.00 
7 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-38 3 266.70 2.66 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
122 
 
8 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-39 3 245.67 2.45 
9 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-40 3 305.08 3.00 
10 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-41 3 320.80 3.00 
11 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-42 2 280.01 2.80 
12 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-46 2 208.97 2.08 
13 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-48 2 128.48 1.28 
14 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-49 3 269.57 2.69 
15 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-51 2 331.71 3.00 
16 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-52 4 272.52 2.72 
Total 40.26 
Sawai Madhopur-WB 
1 RJ-27-WB-RRSMP-02 3 241.52 2.42 
2 RJ-27-WB-RRSMP-03 2 276.82 2.77 
3 RJ-27-WB-RRSMP-04 1 267.79 2.68 
4 RJ-27-WB-RRSMP-12 2 403.35 3.00 
5 RJ-27-WB-RRSMP-16 2 282.38 2.82 
Total 13.69 
Suratgarh Division 
1 RJ-30-WB-RRSMP-03 4 272.01 2.72 
2 RJ-30-WB-RRSMP-05 4 477.76 3.00 
3 RJ-30-WB-RRSMP-06 3 677.24 3.00 
4 RJ-30-WB-RRSMP-07 4 530.66 3.00 
5 RJ-30-WB-RRSMP-08 4 338.24 3.00 
6 RJ-30-WB-RRSMP-09 4 484.26 3.00 
Total 17.72 
Grand Total 221 Roads  201.87 
Source: Information obtained from scrutiny of records of test checked units. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
123 
Appendix  3.13 
(Refer paragraph 3.3.5.2; page 84) 
 Undue benefit to contractor for non submission of revised work programme 
 
S.No. Name of divisions No. of packages No. of roads Amount to be 
withheld         
(₹ in lakh) 
1 Abu Road 01 01 05.00 
2 Alwar-II 04 10 20.00 
3 Beawar 01 08 05.00 
4 Bhilwara 09 39 45.00 
5 Bundi-WB 07 18 35.00 
6 Chaumehla 02 03 10.00 
7 Chhabra 19 47 95.00 
8 Chittorgarh-WB 18 60 90.00 
9 Dausa 10 35 50.00 
10 Malpura 10 39 50.00 
11 Nimbhahera 18 49 90.00 
12 Rajsamand-WB 11 33 55.00 
13 Sawai Madhopur-WB 13 34 65.00 
14 Shri Ganganagar 05 11 25.00 
15 Sikandra 02 06 10.00 
16 Suratgarh 06 23 30.00 
Total 136 416 680 
Source: Information obtained from scrutiny of records of test checked units 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
124 
 
Appendix  3.14 
(Refer paragraph 3.3.5.2; page 85) 
Details of insurance cover to roads not provided 
Beawar Division 
S.NO. Package No. No. of 
roads. 
Insurance policy not 
submitted. 
Insurance policy 
submitted for the 
construction period. 
Work order 
amount 
Premium 
amount 
@1.20% of 
work order 
Work 
order 
amount 
Premium 
amount 
@0.40% of 
work order 
1 RJ-01-WB-RRSMP-01 8 36824907 441899 - - 
Bhilwara Division 
1 RJ-07-WB-RRSMP-08 5 - - 32294621 129178 
2 RJ-07-WB-RRSMP-09 5 43844846 526138 - - 
3 RJ-07-WB-RRSMP-18 4 43274135 519290 - - 
4 RJ-07-WB-RRSMP-19 4 36060576 432727 - - 
5 RJ-07-WB-RRSMP-20 4 35885686 430628 - - 
6 RJ-07-WB-RRSMP-21 4 37417044 449004 - - 
7 RJ-07-WB-RRSMP-22 3 - - 42698605 170794 
8 RJ-07-WB-RRSMP-23 5 - - 43376011 173504 
9 RJ-07-WB-RRSMP-24 5 - - 43094024 172377 
Chaumehla 
1 RJ-19-WB-RRSMP-11 1 35012774 420153 - - 
2 RJ-19-WB-RRSMP-13 2 - - 21907012 87628 
Chittorgarh (WB) Division 
1 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-08 4 27287734 327453 - - 
2 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-09 3 27317321 327808 - - 
3 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-25 2 - - 42559213 170237 
4 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-32 2 - - 13968104 55872 
Chhabra Division 
1 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-02 5 - - 66790417 267162 
2 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-03 3 47498952 569987 - - 
3 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-10 2 27197780 326373 - - 
4 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-11 2 19434385 233213 - - 
5 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-12 2 - - 33099181 132397 
6 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-13 2 - - 21099909 84400 
7 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-14 3 - - 28819657 115279 
8 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-16 2 - - 28701574 114806 
9 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-17 2 - - 23519441 94078 

Appendices 
125 
10 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-19 2 - - 20474947 81900 
11 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-20 1 - - 20891292 83565 
12 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-21 2 - - 23395133 93581 
13 RJ-04-WB-RRSMP-22 3 - - 15519352 62077 
Dausa Division 
1 RJ-12-WB-RRSMP-01 2 - - 10605661 42423 
2 RJ-12-WB-RRSMP-04 3 18921953 227063 - - 
3 RJ-12-WB-RRSMP-06 2 - - 15856953 63428 
4 RJ-12-WB-RRSMP-07 5 45012304 540148 - - 
5 RJ-12-WB-RRSMP-08 4 - - 33928273 135713 
6 RJ-12-WB-RRSMP-09 3 35349910 424199 - - 
7 RJ-12-WB-RRSMP-11 4 - - 48527373 194109 
8 RJ-12-WB-RRSMP-13 5 49385565 592627 - - 
Nimbhahera Division 
1 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-21 2 14113224 169359 - - 
2 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-33 3 24278792 291345 - - 
3 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-34 3 27407033 328884 - - 
4 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-35 3 24637607 295651 - - 
5 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-37 3 30977570 371731 - - 
6 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-39 3 24566819 294802 - - 
7 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-40 3 - - 30508065 122032 
8 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-41 3 - - 32079902 128320 
9 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-42 2 28001484 336018 - - 
10 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-44 3 - - 24421078 97684 
11 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-46 2 20896555 250759 - - 
12 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-48 2 12848407 154181 - - 
13 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-49 3 - - 26956551 107826 
14 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-51 2 - - 33171166 132685 
15 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-52 4 27251866 327022 - - 
Sawai Madhopur-WB Division 
1 RJ-27-WB-RRSMP-01 2 20913746 250965 - - 
2 RJ-27-WB-RRSMP-02 3 24151992 289824 - - 
3 RJ-27-WB-RRSMP-11 4 24742912 296915 - - 
4 RJ-27-WB-RRSMP-12 2 - - 40335060 161340 
5 RJ-27-WB-RRSMP-13 2 20706291 248475 - - 
6 RJ-27-WB-RRSMP-16 2 28237655 338852 - - 
Total 58 packages 176 - 1,10,33,493 - 32,74,395 
  31 packages & 100 roads 27 packages &77 roads 
   1,10,33,493+32,74,395=1,43,07,888 
Source: Information obtained from scrutiny of records of test checked units 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
126 
 
Appendix  3.15 
(Refer paragraph 3.3.5.2; page 85) 
No action taken against contractor for non-delivery of performance security 
Beawar Division 
S.No. Package No. Validity  of performance 
security upto (as per 
clause 35.1) 
Validity  of performance 
security upto 
1 RJ-01-WB-RRSMP-01 31.08.2020 26.06.2019 
Chittorgarh(WB) Division 
1 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-08 25.07.2019 01.07.2017 
2 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-09 19.07.2019 01.07.2017 
3 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-29 30.11.2019 22.12.2015 
4 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-30 30.11.2019 22.12.2015 
5 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-31 30.11.2019 27.12.2018 
 
Malpura Division 
1 RJ-31-WB-RRSMP-05 31.08.2019 Not available 
2 RJ-31-WB-RRSMP-12 31.08.2020 Not available 
3 RJ-31-WB-RRSMP-18 31.12.2019 Not available 
4 RJ-31-WB-RRSMP-19 31.03.2020 Not available 
5 RJ-31-WB-RRSMP-23 31.03.2020 Not available 
6 RJ-31-WB-RRSMP-24 31.03.2020 Not available 
7 RJ-31-WB-RRSMP-26 14.12.2020 Not available 
8 RJ-31-WB-RRSMP-27 31.12.2019 Not available 
Nimbhahera Division 
1 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-33 12.11.2019 19.01.2015 
2 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-35 30.11.2019 22.10.2018 
3 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-37 30.11.2019 19.01.2015 
4 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-39 12.11.2019 26.09.2016 
5 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-44 12.11.2019 27.02.2015 
6 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-46 22.11.2019 02.01.2018 
7 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-48 12.11.2019 26.09.2016 
8 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-49 30.11.2019 19.01.2015 
9 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-51 16.12.2019 19.01.2015 
10 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-52 30.11.2019 21.11.2016 
Rajsamand(WB) Division 
1 RJ-26-WB-RRSMP-08 28.11.2019 23.09.2014 
2 RJ-26-WB-RRSMP-09 28.11.2019 23.09.2014 
3 RJ-26-WB-RRSMP-22 28.11.2019 23.09.2014 
Total 
Packages  
27   
Source: Information obtained from scrutiny of records of test checked units. 

Appendices 
127 
Appendix  3.16 
(Refer paragraph 3.3.6; page 86) 
Details of works in which certificates of test results not produced 
 
S.N. Package No. No. of 
roads 
Work order amount Period of work 
1 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-08 4 27287737 13.07.2013 to 12.07.2014 
2 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-09 3 27317321 13.07.2013 to 12.07.2014 
3 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-10 3 40135436 24.12.2013 to 23.12.2014 
4 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-18 5 42906660 01.07.2013 to 30.06.2014 
5 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-19 2 31296570 04.07.2013 to 03.07.2014 
6 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-24 2 35107274 19.07.2013 to 18.07.2014 
7 RJ-10-WB-RRSMP-28 3 26719035 10.01.2014 to 09.01.2015 
Total  22  
Details of cases in which Consignee Receipt Certificates issued prior to work order  
S. 
No. 
 
Name of 
package 
Work order 
No. and  date 
No. 
of 
roads 
Work 
order 
amount 
in ₹ 
Period of 
work 
Name of 
material  
 CRC No. and date 
 
Quantity 
of 
material 
(MT) 
1 RJ-10-
WB-
RRSMP-
08 
1293/04.07.2013 4 27287737 13.07.13 
to 
12.07.14 
Emulsion 
Bitumen 
RS-1 
140/15.09.2010 14.240 
2 RJ-10-
WB-
RRSMP-
09 
1294/04.07.2013 3 27317321 13.07.13 
to 
12.07.14 
 
 
Emulsion 
Bitumen 
RS-1 
94/08.06.2012 6.790 
241/02.12.2012 6.520 
Bitumen  
VG-10 
655029564/12.06.2012 20.050 
3 RJ-10-
WB-
RRSMP-
10 
3181/27.12.2013 
3 40135436 24.12.13 
to 
23.12.14 
Emulsion 
Bitumen 
RS-1 
2102012178/10.04.2013 15.00 
17035/15.07.2013 24.910 
4 RJ-10-
WB-
RRSMP-
27 3774/03.03.2014 
2 31705122 14.03.14 
to 
13.03.15 
Emulsion 
Bitumen 
RS-1 
42527/05.06.2013 24.244 
42644/07.06.2013 24.310 
Bitumen     
VG-10 
661129241/15.03.2013 10.64 
663105479/11.06.2013 14.586 
663213980/15.06.2013 14.494 
Total Road 12  
Source: Information obtained from scrutiny of records of test checked units 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
128 
 
Appendix  3.17 
(Refer paragraph 3.7; page 93) 
Statement showing excess price escalation paid to contractors 
 (₹ in crore) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S.No. Name of 
Office  
Name of Work Name of 
Contractor 
Price Variation Avoidable/ 
Excess 
Payment 
Reasons for excess 
payment Amount paid Amount to be 
paid 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7=5-6 8 
1 Executive 
Engineer, 
PWD NH 
Division, 
Barmer 
Strengthening with paved sh oulders from km 
259/000 to 286/600, km 290/600 to 297/100 
(34.10 km) and widening of existing two lane 
road to four lane in km 286/600 to 290/600 
(4.00 km) on NH -15 (Jaisalmer -Barmer-
Sanchore Road) 
M/s Bhimji Veljji 
Soratiya, Adipur, 
Gujrat 
 
3.85 
 
3.24 
 
0.61 
Date of opening of 
technical bid was 
considered for 
calculating the payment 
of price escalation in 
place of date of opening 
of financial bid. 
2 Executive 
Engineer, 
PWD NH 
Division, 
Barmer 
Widening of two lane road with geometric 
improvement in re -aligned portion from km 
223/500 to 254/800 (Pachpadra -Bagundi 
Section of old SH 28 -B) including 
construction of minor bridge on NH -112 (Bar-
Bilara-Jodhpur-Barmer). 
M/s Tan Singh 
Chouhan, Barmer 
 
2.28 
 
1.87 
 
0.41 
 
-do- 
     Total 1.02  

Appendices 
129 
Appendix  3.18 
(Refer paragraph 3.8; page 94) 
Statement showing the expenditure incurred on excavation for road way in soil, construction of GSB, WBM and WMM  
 
S.No Name of Division Excavation for 
roadway in soil  GSB WBM Grading-2 WBM Grading-3 WMM Total 
1 Executive Engineer, PWD 
Division, Balotra 184508.24 2519109.65 306504.95 2478226.28 0.00 5488349.12 
2 Executive Engineer, PWD 
Division, Chittorgarh 0.00 2842198.72 0.00 0.00 13296505.17 16138703.89 
3 Executive Engineer, PWD 
Division-I, Barmer 521822.65 3297235.43 0.00 3691448.83 0.00 7510806.91 
4 Executive Engineer, PWD 
Division, Shahpura (Jaipur) 0.00 2891013.25 0.00 3607595.84 0.00 6498609.09 
5 Executive Engineer, PWD 
Division, Nawalgarh 24091.64 3327802.72 2946645.66 0.00 0.00 6298540.02 
Total 41935009.03 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
130 
 
 

131 
 
  
Glossary of Abbreviations 
 
Abbreviation Expanded form 
A 
A&F Administrative & Financial 
AAQMS  Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Station 
ACS  Additional Chief Secretary 
ADM Additional Director, Mines 
AME Assistant Mining Engineer 
ANR Assisted Natural Regeneration 
APCM Air Pollution Control Machine 
AQI  Air Quality Index 
ATC   Additional Transport Commissioner 
B 
BG Bank Guarantee 
BRS Bank Reconciliation Statement 
BSR Basic Schedule of Rates 
  
C 
CAAQMS    Continuous Ambient  Air Quality Monitori ng 
Station 
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
CAMPA Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management 
and Planning Authority 
CBC Consortium Bank Credit 
CC Cement Concrete 
CCA Culturable Command Area 
CE Chief Engineer 
CEC Central Empowered Committee 
CET Cost Effective Technology 
CF Commission Fund 
CFC  Chlorofluorocarbon 
CO    Carbon Monoxide 
CO2   Carbon Dioxide 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
132 
 
CPCB Central Pollution Control Board 
CRC Consignee Receipt Certificate 
CTE Consent to Establish  
CTO Consent to Operate 
CTPP  Chhabra Thermal Power Project 
D 
DB Double Bench 
DALY Disability Adjusted Life Year 
DCF Deputy Conservator of Forest 
DIC District Industries Centre 
DMG Director, Mines and Geology 
E 
EC Environmental Clearance 
EE Executive Engineer 
EDP Entrepreneurship Development Programme 
EIA Environment Impact Assessment  
EMF Environment Management fund  
EP Act Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 
EP Rules Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986 
ESP Electro Static Precipitator 
F 
FFD Flexi Fixed Deposit 
G 
GCC General Conditions of Contract 
GGPS Gramin Gaurav Path Scheme 
GF & AR General Financial and Accounts Rules 
GoI Government of India 
GoR Government of Rajasthan 
H 
HoFF  Head of Forest Force  
I 
ICMR Indian Council of Medical Research 
IRC Indian Road Congress 
 

Glossary 
133 
J 
JFM Joint Forest Management  
K 
KSTPS  Kota Super Thermal Power Station 
L 
LBG Loose Boulder Gabion 
Metals  Lead, Nickel and Arsenic 
M 
MCD Rules Mineral Conservation and Development Rules, 
1988 
ME Mining Engineer 
MGD Mines and Geology Department  
MGNREGS Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme  
MIS Management Information system 
ML Mining Lease 
MLA Member of Legislative Assembly 
MMDR Act Mines and Minerals (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1957 
MoDIS  Management of Data Information System 
MoEF  Ministry of Environment and Forest 
MoEF and CC  Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate 
Change 
MoLE Ministry of Labour and Employment 
MoRTH Ministry of Road , Transport and Highway 
MoU  Memorandum of Understanding 
MP Mining Plan 
MP Member of Parliament  
MS Member Secretary 
MT Metric Ton 
MW  Magawatt 
N 
NAAQS  National Ambient Air Quality Standard 
NABARD National Bank for Agriculture and Rural 
Development  

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
134 
 
NAMP  National Air Quality Monitoring Programme 
NCR  National Capital Region 
NGT  National Green Tribunal 
NH National Highway 
NH3 Ammonia 
NIT Notice Inviting Tender 
NO2   Nitrogen Oxide 
O 
OMMAS Online Monitoring Management & Accounting 
System 
O3 Ozone 
Organic pollutants Benzene and BaP-particulate 
P 
PAD Project Appraisal Document 
PC  Pollution Control 
PCC  Pollution Check Centre 
PCCF Principal Chief Conservator of Forest 
PCT Percolation Tank 
PD  Personal Deposit 
PDO Project Development Objective 
PFS  Pollution Flying Squad 
PIP  person-in-position 
PIU Project Implementation Unit 
PLP Panchayat Land Plantation 
PMC Project Management Consultant 
PMGSY Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojna 
PMU Project Monitoring Unit 
PUC  Pollution Under Control Certificate 
PWD Public Works Department 
PWF&AR Public Works Financial and Accounts Rules 
Q 
QL Quarry Licence 
R 
RAMS Road Asset Management System 

Glossary 
135 
RDF-I Rehabilitation of Degraded Forest-I 
RDF-II Rehabilitation of Degraded Forest –II 
REHAB Rajasthan Environment and Health 
Administrative Board 
RHC Hon’ble Rajasthan High Court 
RIICO Rajasthan State Industrial and Investment 
Corporation 
RTGS Real Time Gross Settlement 
RMMCR Rajasthan Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 
1986 
RMMS Road Maintenance Management System 
RMP Rajasthan Mineral policy, 2011 
RO Regional Offices 
RRSMP Rajasthan Road Sector Modernization Project 
RS Rapid Setting 
RSHRC Rajasthan State Human Rights Commission 
RSPCB  Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board 
RSPM    Respirable Suspended Particulate Matter 
RTI Right to Information 
S 
SCI Hon’ble Supreme Court of India 
SDC System Defining Consultant 
SE Superintending Engineer 
SEIAA State Level Environment Impact Assessment 
Authority 
SFC  State Facility Center 
SH State Highway 
SHG Self Help Group 
SMCS  Soil and Moisture Conservation Structures 
SME Superintending Mining Engineer  
SO2   Sulphur Dioxide 
SPC System Provider Consultant 
SPM    Suspended Particulate Matter 
SQM State Quality Monitor 
STA State Technical Agency 

Audit Report (Economic Sector) for the year ended 31 March 2017 
136 
 
T 
TB Tuberculosis  
The Act Air  Prevention and Con trol of Pollution  Act, 
1981 
ToR Terms of Reference 
TPPs  Thermal Power Plants 
V 
VFPMC Village forest protection/management committee  
VG Viscosity Grades 
W 
WB World Bank 
WHO World Health Organisation 
WHS Water Harvesting Structure 
WIP Work in Progress 
(WL) MNP (Wild Life) Mukundara National Park 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Government of Rajasthan           Report No. 5 of the year 2017 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://agraj.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 