Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India  
on Performance Audit of Flood Management  
and Response in Chennai and its 
Suburban Areas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the year ended  March 2016 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Tamil Nadu 
Report No. 4 of 2017 

 
 i 
  
 
 Paragraph Page 
Preface  v 
Executive Summary  vii 
CHAPTER I  - INTRODUCTION 
Floods of 2015 1.1 1 
Incidence of rainfall 1.2 2 
Statutory and Institutional framework for flood 
management  
1.3 3 
Departments and agencies audited 1.4 4 
Audit Objectives 1.5 5 
Audit Criteria 1.6 5 
Scope and Coverage of Audit 1.7 6 
Previous Audits 1.8 6 
Audit Methodology 1.9 7 
Sampling 1.10 7 
CHAPTER II – PLANNING 
Planning for regulation of land use 2.1 9 
Policies and Plans focusing on flood prevention 
and moderation 
2.2 19 
Construction activities along water bodies 2.3 22 
Non-adherence to land use planning  2.4 28 
Analysis  2.5 35 
  
TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response  in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 ii 
 Paragraph Page 
CHAPTER III - MANAGEMENT OF WATER BODIES 
Deficiencies in increase in storage capacity of 
water bodies 
3.1 37 
Non-implementation of project for restoration and 
protection of lakes 
3.2 44 
Incomplete river restoration works 3.3 44 
Analysis 3.4 47 
CHAPTER IV - ENCROACHMENTS 
Encroachments contributing to the floods 4.1 49 
Encroachment in tanks 4.2 50 
Encroachment of rivers 4.3 51 
Encroachments of water bodies by local bodies 4.4 55 
Structural hindrances in Adyar River course 4.5 58 
Analysis 4.6 61 
CHAPTER V- DRAINAGE SYSTEM IN CHENNAI METROPOLITAN AREA 
Flood protection works 5.1 63 
Micro drainage system 5.2 73 
Storm Water Drain network of Greater Chennai 
Corporation 
5.3 77 
Storm Water Drain network in suburban areas 5.4 81 
Clogging of storm water drains due to 
unauthorised entry of sewage 
5.5 84 
Pre-monsoon preparedness work 5.6 85 
Non-adherence to instructions on supervising 
desilting of water bodies 
5.7 87 

Table of Contents 
 
 iii 
 Paragraph Page 
Flood mitigation measures in Adyar River 5.8 88 
Inundations in suburban areas of Chennai 5.9 98 
Analysis 5.10 100 
CHAPTER VI - DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
Deficiencies in the institutional framework 6.1 103 
Shortfalls in capacity building for disaster 
management 
6.2 105 
Deficiencies in  functioning of Emergency 
Operation Centre 
6.3 106 
Rescue operations 6.4 108 
Relief work  6.5 109 
Inadmissible expenditure from SDRF on 
restoration works in flood affected areas 
6.6 116 
Non-receipt of Utilisation Certificate 6.7 116 
Analysis 6.8 117 
CHAPTER VII - MONITORING 
Monitoring the implementation of Second Master 
Plan 
7.1 119 
Absence of monitoring in leasing of land  7.2 122 
Analysis 7.3 122 
CHAPTER VIII - CONCLUSION 
Lessons learnt 8.1 123 
Lessons not learnt 8.2 124 
Conclusion 8.3 125 
 

 Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response  in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 iv 
 
 
 
Appendix 
No. Details Page 
2.1 Satellite images of CMA 129 
2.2 
Joint Field Inspection Report of layout approvals along water 
body in Kundrathur Panchayat Union  (PU), Kundrathur Town 
Panchayat (TP) and Poonamallee PU 
131 
2.3 Reclassification of Open Space and Recreation (O&R)  zone to 
others 134 
5.1 Details of missing links 136 
5.2 Physical and Financial Progress of works under TNSUDP as on 31 
August 2016 138 
5.3 Areas in selected suburban areas affected by flood 140 
5.4 Details of SWD constructed partially in Pallavapuram Municipality 141 
5.5 Maintenance of water bodies in selected Zones/Municipalities and 
Town Panchayats 142 
5.6 Details of  inflow and surplus discharge  from Chembarambakkam 
tank  143 
7.1 Achievement against service level bench mark 144 
 Glossary of Abbreviations 145 
 
APPENDICES 

 
v 
 
PREFACE 
 
This Report for the year ended March 2016 has been prepared for 
submission to the Governor of Tamil Nadu under Article 151 of 
the Constitution of India , for being laid before the State 
Legislature. 
The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor Gener al of India 
contains the results of Performance Audit o f ‘Flood management 
and response in Chennai and its suburb an areas’ covering the 
period from 2011-12 to 2015-16.  
The instances mentioned in the Report are those, which came to 
notice in the course of the performance audit conducted during 
June 2016 to November 2016 .  Matters relating to the periods 
outside the audit period have also been reported in places where 
they were found necessary.  
The Audit has been  conducted in conformity with the Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India. 
Audit wishes to acknowledge the cooperation received from 
Revenue and Disaster Management Department, Housing and 
Urban Development Department, Municipal Administration and 
Water Supply Department and Public Works Department.   
 

 
EXECUTIVE
SUMMARY
Inundation in suburban Perungalathur area
 

 vii 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Chennai city has a long history of facing the vagaries  of nature in the form of  
cyclones and high intensity rain fall.  Chennai had experienced catastrophic 
flooding in 1943, 1976, 1985, 1998, 2002, 2005  and 2015 due to heavy rains 
associated with cyclonic activity .  The December 2015 floods in t he city and 
its suburban areas claimed 289 lives, inundated 23.25 lakh houses, disrupted 
power and telecommunication services, halted air, rail and road transport , 
caused extensive damage to public and private property and brought the city to 
a standstill for several days.   
The agonising impact of the floods brought to public domain the failure in the 
roles, which ought to have been played by various Government bo dies in 
effectively managing the disaster.  With a view to ascertain the preparedness 
of Government of Tamil Nadu  (GoTN) in minimising the magnitude of loss 
due to floods and to assess whether the disaster was avoidable , a Performance 
Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’, 
was conducted from June to November 2016 , covering the period from April 
2011 to March 2016.   
The objectives of the Audit w ere to assess the (i) effectiveness in  
implementing the Master Plans for orde rly development of the city with due 
regard to preservation of water bodies and structures, (ii)  effectiveness in 
addressing  the issue of encroachments, which hinder free flow of rain water , 
(iii) economy and effectiveness in carrying out flood management  
programmes, (iv) efficiency and effectiveness in disaster management , and  
(v) the effectiveness of internal control mechanism, including performance 
evaluation and monitoring.   
 
 
The Purpose 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 viii 
 
Results of Audit scrutiny indicated that the l axities in urban planning and 
ineffective enforcement of statutes and Master Plan s had impacted natural 
water bodies and thereby, paved the way for flooding.  Several plans to restore 
and augment capacities of tanks and reservoirs, to reduce surface runoff and to 
meet the ever incr easing drin king water demands of the water -starved city 
failed due to poor project management, ineffective handling of  land 
acquisition process and lack of co-ordination among different departments and 
agencies of Go TN.  Unrestrained encroachments blocked  free flow of flood 
water and had inundated several parts of the city.  Flood mitigation projects to 
revive the waterways suffered delays due to poor project management  and 
unresolved encroachment issues .   Even routine desilting and cleaning of 
macro and micro drains w ere not carried out as envisag ed.  The city and its 
suburban areas  were way behind the target on putting in place storm water 
drainage networks  due t o lack of importance attached to  this crucial 
infrastructure.  Underground Sewage Schemes did not cover several areas  
and sewage entering and clogging storm water drainage network was not a 
rare sight.   
Flood relief activities were hampered by absence of dedicated institutional 
mechanism to spearhead rescue and relief activities .  Absence of a D isaster 
Management Plan impeded the efforts of  extending rescue and relief in an 
organised manner.   
 
 
PLANNING 
 The State lacked a law on Flood Plain Zone (FPZ) and an updated 
Water Policy to protect  natural waterways.  Frequency - based flood 
inundation maps, Emergency Action P lan for dams and Basin-wise 
comprehensive master plans were not prepared to respond to 
challenges posed by heavy rains. 
(Paragraph 2.2) 
  Though the Tamil Nadu District Municipalities Building Rules, 1972  
had envisaged for maintainin g a buffer zone of 15 metres from the 
margin of the waterways, the Second Master Plan, 2008 of Chennai 
Metropolitan Development Authority (C MDA) did not attempt to 
demarcate flood plain zones to regulate constructions along waterways, 
resulting in large bu ildings coming  up on the banks of river s, 
obstructing free flow of flood water.   
(Paragraph 2.3) 
Results in brief 
Principal Findings  

Executive Summary 
 
 ix 
  CMDA liberally allowed constructions through conversion of land use 
from Agriculture, Non-urban and  Open Space & Recreation zones to 
other zones, resulting in steep increase in built up areas and consequent 
reduction of soil recharge of rain water .  Such u nauthorised 
constructions shrank the water bodies  and had led to massive 
inundation during December 2015 floods. 
(Paragraph 2.4) 
 
MANAGEMENT OF WATER BODIES 
  Failure of Water Resources Department ( WRD) to create two new 
reservoirs in the upstream of Chembarambakkam Tank  though 
recommended by Nucleus Cell for flood mitigation and improper 
planning/non-completion of augmentation work across Kosa stahalayar 
River resulted in non -achievement of envisaged water storage and 
flood control. 
(Paragraph 3.1) 
 Tardy implementation of project for restoration and protection of water 
bodies resulted in abandoning of lakes and consequent reduction in the 
water storage capacity of the water bodies. 
 (Paragraph 3.2) 
 
ENCROACHMENTS  
  Encroachment of tanks, lakes and river beds played a major role in 
causing the massive floods in Chennai .  Despite enactment of a law in 
2007 to protect tanks from encroachment, the percentage of tanks  
encroached, kept increasing year after year.   
(Paragraph 4.2) 
 
DRAINAGE SYSTEM IN CHENNAI METROPOLITAN  
AREA  
  Eight projects taken up  under Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban 
Renewal Mission, to provide new channels and strengthen existing 
channels in Chennai Metropolitan Area (CMA) could not be completed 
due to encroachments and lack of co -ordination between different 
departments, contributing to flooding in many areas. 
(Paragraphs 5.1.1 to 5.1.8) 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 x 
  Inadequate coverage of storm water drains (SWD) due to poo r outlay, 
coupled with improper design and missing links in the SWD networks, 
contributed to flooding .  Furthermore, rainfall intensity adopted by 
Greater Chennai Corporation for designing SWDs was incorrect 
leading to construction of lower capacity SWDs which also contributed 
to the floods of 2015. 
(Paragraph 5.2) 
  In 2014 and 2015 , the a nnual desilting work s of waterways in CMA 
had not commenced before the onset of monsoon .  GoTN had not 
attached due importance to the desiltation work and had not bothered  
to release funds well before the monsoon and as a result, none of the 
sanctioned works could be completed before the onset of the monsoon .  
The non-execution of works before monsoon hindered the free flow of 
flood water, thus contributing to floods in 2015. 
(Paragraph 5.6.1) 
 Chembarambakkam Tank, despite being a major tank, did not have any 
scientific inflow forecast system and lacked a mechanism for real time 
flood forecast , which was not in accordance with the Central Water 
Commission (CWC) norms for Dam  Safety Procedures and Reservoir 
Regulation Schedules. 
(Paragraph 5.8.5) 
  In the absence of Emergency A ction Plan for Chembarambakkam 
Tank, the outflow of water was much more than the inflow leading to 
unsustained release of water in to Adyar River.  The water at the tank 
was never maintained at the full tank l evel.  On 01 December 2015, 
water was stored upto 3. 481 TMC against the total capacity of  
3.645 TMC, as WRD wanted to protect the private  land, which were 
illegally allowed to remain in the foreshore area, from being 
submerged.   
(Paragraph 5.8.5) 
 Considering the opportunity to store  an additional  0.268 TMC in 
Chembarambakkam Tank, 12,000 cusec of discharge could have been 
maintained for six hours  during which period, water was actually 
released at 20,960 to 29,000 cusec.  Hence, an additional quantity of 
0.266 TMC could have been stored in the Chembarambakkam Tank  
and yet the storage level would not have reached the brim. 
(Paragraph 5.8.5) 
  Paragraph 8.1.2 of the Report on Dam Safety Procedures issued by 
CWC, GoI (July 1986) concludes that flood  disaster can be logically 
classified as  man-made if the quantum of outflow from the dam 
exceeds the inflow .  The indiscriminate discharge of water at  
29,000 cusec for 21 hours on 1 and 2 December 2015 had led to a man-
made catastrophe. 

Executive Summary 
 
 xi 
(Paragraph 5.8.5) 
DISASTER MANAGEMENT  
  The Governing Body of T amil Nadu  State Disaster Management 
Authority (Authority) did not meet even once since its constitution in 
November 2013.  The Tamil Nadu State Disaster Management Agency 
(TNSDMA) did not have the financial autonomy contemplated by GoI. 
 (Paragraph 6.1) 
 
 
  Action should be taken to enact a law on Flood Plain Zoning , on the 
lines suggested by Go I, to minimi se the impact of construction on 
water bodies. 
  Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority should not allow 
development along water bodies  without  ensuring ameliorating 
measures taken by developers to prevent the impact of  such 
developments.  The system of conditional approvals  should be 
stopped forthwith.   
  Government should ensure co -ordination with all line departments/ 
agencies in evicting encroachments along water ways and inside 
water bodies.   
  Thrust should be laid on expansion of Storm Water Drain networks 
with due importance to design of water carrying capac ity of the 
drains and annual maintenance.   
  Preparation of Emergency Action Plan for dams should be 
completed on priority.   
 Government should put in place an operational institutional 
framework for disaster management  with financial autonomy as 
contemplated by GoI.   
Principal Recommendations  

 
  
CHAPTER I
Adyar river overflowing 
INTRODUCTION

 
 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.1 Floods of 2015 
In* November - December 2015, Chennai and its suburban areas received 
multiple torrential rain spells. In the worst affected districts of Chennai, 
Kancheepuram and Tiruvallur, the floods associated with the rains claimed 
289 lives due to drowning, electrocut ion, wall collapse etc. The floods 
inundated 23.25 lakh houses and put life out of gear for several days. Floods 
are not new to the city; Chennai had experienced catastrophic flooding in 
1943, 1976, 1985, 1998, 2002, and 2005 due to heavy rains associated with 
cyclonic activity.  
Chennai receives sixty percentage of its annual average rainfall of 1,324 mm 
during North East Monsoon, between October and December, every year.  The 
contours of Chennai and its suburb an areas have an average elevation of  
6.7 metre above Mean Sea Level (MSL) , with few isolated hillocks in the 
south west with maximum height of 60 metre above MSL.  Adyar, Cooum and 
Kosasthalaiyar are the three main rivers in  Chennai Metropolitan Area1 
(CMA).  Buckingham Canal, constructed as a na vigational canal in 1806 , 
along the coast , flows through CMA, connect s the three rivers. Besides the 
three rivers and the Buckingham Canal, a host of smaller nullahs also play 
their role in draining rain water.  
The three major tanks in CMA are C holavaram (capacity 1 .005 TMC2), 
Redhills (3.300 TMC) an d Chembarambakkam (3 .645 TMC). Ch olavaram 
Tank is the secondary storage tank , receiving water from the Poondi 
Reservoir, which lies outside CMA.  Redhills Tank is the main source of water 
supply to Chennai City  and during storm events, water is released into 
Redhills surplus channel, w hich enters the Kosasthalaiyar River and 
discharges into the sea. Chembarambakkam Tank, in the southern part of 
CMA, releases its surplus into Adyar River.  These tanks play a major role in 
moderating flow of flood water in the rivers and consequently, impact the 
flooding in CMA.  Map 1.1 depicts the water bodies in CMA. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                             
*
  Abbreviations used in this report are listed in the Glossary at Page 145 
1 Metropolitan area comprises Greater Chennai Corporation, eight Municipalities,  
11 Town Panchayats  and 179 Village Panchayats  in Chennai, Kancheepuram and 
Tiruvallur districts 
2 Thousand Million Cubic Feet 
CHAPTER I  
INTRODUCTION  

 Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 2 
 
Map 1.1: Rivers and tanks in Chennai Metropolitan Area 
 
(Source: Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority) 
1.2  Incidence of rainfall 
During North East Monsoon, 2015, heavy rains lashed Chennai between  
15 and 17 November 2015 and the second spell of heavy rains was on  
23 November 2015. The third spell on 1 December 2015 marooned large parts 
of the metropolis. Worst affected ar eas were Adyar, Alandur, Ambattur, 
Kodambakkam and Perungudi zones of Greater Chennai Corporation (GCC) 
Corporation 
Municipalities 
Town Panchayats 
Village Panchayats 
Cantonment 
 
Kosasthalaiyar 
River  Cholavaram Tank 
Redhills 
Tank 
Cooum River 
Buckingham Canal 
Chembarambakkam Tank 
Adyar River 

Chapter I - Introduction 
 
 3 
and adjoining suburban areas of Pallavapuram, Peerkankaranai, Perungalathur, 
Sembakkam and Tambaram, due to overflowing of rivers, chocking of storm 
water drains, etc. 
The details of normal rainfall 3 and the actual rain fall in millimetre during 
North East Monsoon, 2015 are given in Table 1.1. 
Table 1.1: Normal and actual rainfall (in millimetre) 
District 12 to 18 November 
2015 
19 to 25 November 
2015 
26 November to  
2 December 2015 
Normal 
rainfall 
Actual 
rainfall 
Normal 
rainfall 
Actual 
rainfall 
Normal 
rainfall 
Actual 
rainfall 
Chennai 104.9 449.9 82.0 217.5 53.4 347.3 
Kancheepuram 59.8 452.3 66.6 238.6 46.0 459.0 
Tiruvallur 67.3 414.0 54.5 180.1 41.1 342.6 
(Source: Data from India Meteorological Department) 
The floods during November  - December 2015, brought to fore the  
indiscriminate developm ent in the watershed areas, encroachment of water 
bodies and  deficiencies in  development and maintenance of infrastructur al 
facilities for flood prevention and control and lack of preparedness, 
inadequacies in flood management and response,  as commented in the 
succeeding chapters of this Report.  
1.3 Statutory and Institutional framework for flood management 
According to National Institute of Disaster Management, flooding occurs due 
to uneven distribution of rainfall, coupled with  unplanned urbanisation, and 
encroachment of natural drainage channels and urban lakes.   
The TN Town and Country Planning Act, 1971 and the First and Second 
Master Plans framed under the Act provide the backbone for orderly 
urbanisation to mitigate the impact of floods.  The National Water Policy 
(NWP) promotes planning, development and management of wate r resources, 
to avert natural disasters like floods, through structural and non -structural 
measures, with emphasis on preparedness for flood along with coping 
mechanisms. Central Water Commission (CWC) is involved in framing 
guidelines to prevent flooding and has also instituted a flood forecasting 
system.  The Dam Safety Organisation of CWC has issued Dam Safety 
Procedures for efficient operation of dams.  
Following the enactment of the Disaster Man agement Act, 2005, (DM Act ), 
GoI constituted the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) as the 
apex body for disaster management in India. TN State Disaster Management 
Agency (TNSDMA) is the State level body for disaster management.  
The National Disaster Management Guidelines for Management of Floods, 
2008, elaborates the mechanism for (i) preparedness for prevention of flood,  
(ii) flood forecasting and warning, (iii) maintenance of wat er storage 
structures like dams and  reservoirs, (iv) regulation and enforcement of 
                                                             
3 Long term average of 30 years rainfall 

 Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 4 
systemic measures like flood plain zon ing, constructions in flood prone areas,  
(v) capacity development and (vi) institutional framework and financial 
arrangement for disaster response.   
1.4 Departments and agencies audited 
Audit teams from the office of the Accountant General (G eneral and Social 
Sector Audit (G&SSA) ) audited Revenue and Disaster Management 
Department, Municipal Administration and Water Supply Department and 
Housing and Urban Development Department. Audit teams from the Office of 
the Accountant General ( Economic and Revenue Sector Audit (E&RSA) ) 
audited Public Works Department.  The various agencies audited are depicted 
in the Chart below: 
 
 Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority  (CMDA) is involved in 
planning and overseeing the effective implementation of the Master 
Plans in min imising the impact of urbanisation on water bodies and 
waterways.  
 Water Resources Department (WRD) is the principal stakeholder for 
managing large water bodies and the macro drainage4 system. 
 Revenue and Disaster Management Department is an important 
stakeholder as custodian of Government land.  
                                                             
4 Rivers and canals constitute macro drainage networks 
Government of Tamil Nadu  
PWD (WRD)  
(Augmentation and 
maintenance of waterways 
and water bodies) 
Revenue and Disaster 
Management Department 
(Land ownership, issue of 
patta, Disaster relief) 
Collector  
(Land admin, Pre-
monsoon work 
and coordination) 
TNSDMA 
(Disaster 
preparedness 
and mitigation) 
Housing and Urban  
Development Department  
(Urban planning and slum clearance)  
CMDA  
(Urban 
planning) 
Municipal Administration and  
Water Supply Department  
(Urban Local Bodies) 
GCC and other Local 
Bodies  
(storm water drains and 
minor water bodies) 
Chennai Rivers  
Restoration Trust  
(Eco-restoration of 
rivers) 
Chennai Water Supply 
& Sewerage Board  
(sewer lines) 
TNSCB 
(Rehabilitation 
of slum dwellers) 
 

Chapter I - Introduction 
 
 5 
 GCC, Municipalities and other local bodies are responsible for the 
micro drainage - storm water drainage system. 
 Chennai River s Restoration Trust (CRRT), a body constituted by 
GoTN in January 2010, works in coordination with other agen cies for 
restoration of the rivers, tanks and its catchment areas. 
 Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance Board (TNSCB) works to evict slums and 
rehabilitate and resettle the slum families. 
 TNSDMA, established under DM Act, 2005, is responsi ble for 
preparation of plans for disaster preparedness and managing disasters.   
1.5 Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit was conducted with a view to assess whether: 
 The Master Plans of CMDA were effectively implemented to ensure 
sustainable development  of the metropolis with due regard to 
preservation of water bodies and land use plans;   
 The Government effectively addressed the issue of encroachments in 
and around water bodies and elsewhere in CMA, which hinder free 
flow of rain water; 
 Implementation o f flood management programmes, including 
coordination among the related agencies, was effective and economic; 
 Response and efforts to mitigate loss during the flood was timely, 
adequate and effective and 
 Internal control mechanism, including performance ev aluation and 
monitoring, was effective. 
1.6 Audit Criteria 
The Performance Audit was benchmarked against the criteria derived from the 
following documents: 
 National Water Policy 2012 and State Water Policy, 1994 
 The TN Land Encroachment Act, 1905  
 The TN Protection of Tanks and Eviction of Encroachment Act, 2007 
 The National Disaster Management Act, 2005 and National Disaster 
Management Guidelines for Management of Floods, 2008 
 CWC guidelines and Dam Safety Procedures 
 The Chennai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1919 and its Rules  
 The TN District Municipalities’ Act, 1920 
 The TN Town and Country Planning Act, 1971 and its Rules 
 The Registration Act, 1908 
 First and Second Master Plan s of CMDA and GCC ’s City 
Development Plan  
 XII Five Year Plan 

 Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 6 
 Guidelines of Indian Roads Congress 
 Manuals of various Government Departments/Boards/Agencies 
1.7 Scope and Coverage of Audit  
The Performance Audit was conducted from June to November 2016, 
covering the period from 2011 -12 to 2015 -16. In respect of relief measures , 
the Audit covered the period 2015 -16. References to earlier periods were 
made, wherever necessary for trend analysis.  
We focused on: 
 Adherence to the Master Plans prepared by CMDA and regulation of 
developmental activities by way of layout approvals in flood plains, 
extent of reclassification of zones and monitoring the execution of 
recommendations 
 Eviction of families encroaching the river margins by TNSCB and 
status of projects executed by WRD under Jawaharlal Nehru National 
Urban Renewal Mission (JNNU RM) scheme and for augmentation of 
water storage facilities 
 Construction and maintenance of Storm Water Drains (SWD) and 
canals in Chennai City by GCC and in the suburb an areas  by the 
respective local bodies 
 Pre-monsoon works carried out in rivers and cana ls, nullahs, SWDs, 
and other water bodies 
 Flood management, preparedness, mitigation and response by 
TNSDMA, in coordination with other related agencies 
Action taken on previous audit observations/recommendations on the subject 
and also Public Accounts Com mittee (PAC) recommendations, as detailed in 
Paragraph 1.8, were also the focus of study.  
1.8 Previous Audits 
(i) A Performance Audit on “Alleviation of flood and abatement of water 
pollution in Chennai City through Chennai Waterways Project” was included  
in the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) 
(Civil), GoTN for the year ended 31 March 2006 with recommendations for 
flood alleviation in Chennai City. The Report was discussed by PAC in 
November 2009. PAC recommended for (a) promp t action for increasing the 
storage capacity of tanks by removing encroachment, (b) completion of flood 
prevention works undertaken in Buckingham Canal and (c) taking steps on 
sustainable basis, to keep the Adyar mouth open by removal of sand bars and 
by construction of groynes5. 
(ii) A Performance Audit was conducted on the implementation of 
JNNURM and findings included in the Report of C&AG (Local Bodies), 
GoTN for the year ended 31 March 2011. The findings included  
non-completion/delay in completion of several works to prevent flooding. 
Another Performance Audit on Irrigation activities in Chennai Region was 
                                                             
5 Barrier to protect from erosion 

Chapter I - Introduction 
 
 7 
conducted and included in the Report of C&AG (Economic Sector), GoTN for 
the year ended March 2013. This Report included finding on mismanagement  
of projects aimed at improving water bodies.  These Reports were not taken up 
for discussion by PAC (March 2017). 
1.9 Audit Methodology 
Records were checked at the Secretariat and field offices of various 
departments, GCC, Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply a nd Sewerage Board 
(CMWSSB), CMDA, TNSCB  and CRRT, and three Municipalities and three 
Town Panchayats in Chennai suburban areas. 
Besides scrutiny of records and collection of information through Audit 
enquiries and analytical procedures, the methodology included, (i) analysis 
using Google Hybrid- Land use information system – the GIS tool available in 
the website of CMDA to identify  the extent of developments in water bodies, 
open space, non-urban zones and catchment areas which are to be preserved as 
per Second Master Plan (SMP), (ii) joint inspections conducted by the 
Accountants General (G&SSA) and (E&RSA) and Audit teams along with the 
officials from WRD, Revenue Department, GCC and sampled local bodies, 
(iii) Digital analysis of satellite imageries of CMA, and (iv) Consultations with 
Experts engaged by Audit for technical issues on town planning and water 
resources, brought out in the Report.  
1.10 Sampling 
Sample selection was based on judgmental basis, largely dependent on areas 
affected due to floods in 2015. Urban planning, f lood management/ 
augmentation of storage facilities, macro and micro drainages and 
encroachment on water bodies were studied in the departments and related 
agencies.  Sampling was not applied for audit of preparedness, rescue and 
relief measures. 
Field units sampled for audit were as given in Table 1.2 below: 
Table 1.2: Field units audited 
Auditee Units Total Samples 
Zones of GCC 15 56 
Municipalities 8 37 
Town Panchayats 11 48 
WRD Divisions 3 39 
 
                                                             
6 Adyar, Alandur, Ambattur, Kodambakkam and Perungudi 
7 Pallavapuram, Sembakkam and Tambaram 
8 Kundrathur, Peerkankaranai, Perungalathur and Thiruneermalai 
9 Three jurisdictional divisions - Araniyar Basin Division, Lower Palar Basin Division 
and Kosasthalaiyar Basin Division 

 
  


 
 9 
 
 
 
 
 
Holistic planning holds the key to manage flooding and simultaneously 
addresses the need to harness water resources in the context of increasing 
urbanisation and depleting ground water tables.  
Section 9 -C of the TN Town and Country Planning Act, 1971 p rovides for 
preparation of a Master Plan for the Chennai Metropolitan Area (CMA) by 
Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority (CMDA). Master Plans 
prescribe policies and strategies for the overall development of CMA, taking a 
long term view of requirement s like efficient functioning of traffic and 
transportation sector, plan for reclassification of land and development of 
basic amenities. As part of the strategy, land use and construction of building s 
were required to be regulated by CMDA under Master Plan s for orderly 
development of the city.  
2.1 Planning for regulation of land use 
The First Master Plan (FMP) for CMA came into effect in 1976 for a period 
covering 20 years till 1995.  FMP dealt with land use planning through 
earmarking of land for residential, commercial, institutional, agr icultural and 
recreational use.  Under the Development Control Rules (DCR), 1976, framed 
under FMP, CMDA was responsible to regulate land use in CMA in terms of 
the FMP.  
Further, FMP proposed to develop three satellite towns and six urban nodes to 
absorb future urban population and to construct ring roads, express ways, 
Mass Rapid Transit System (MRTS), etc.  The proposals for satellite towns 
and urban n odes to decongest the city were not achieved as planned. 
Moreover, the CMDA failed to maintain the land use conversions, as the 
agricultural land and open space decreased more than what was projected.  
The agricultural land, which was projected to decrease  by 36,510 hectare, had 
decreased by 61,120 hectare and the open space which was projected to 
increase by 2,556 hectare had actually decreased by 5,176 hectare.  The area 
under agricultur e and open space got reduced due to their conversion for 
various othe r purposes like, residential, commercial, institutional and 
industrial use.  Thus, the violation of FMP resulted in haphazard growth of the 
city, leading to adverse consequences such as congestion, impact on 
environment and flooding in the city.  
After FMP, the Second Master Plan (SMP) ought to have come into place with 
effect from 1996.  But, the SMP, originally prepared by CMDA in 1995, was 
finally approved by GoTN only in 2008 as it was not properly prepared by 
CMDA after taking into account the urban de velopment, having taken place 
by doing necessary survey. SMP, which came into effect with effect from 
2008, was to guide the development of CMA till 2026.  Under the 
CHAPTER II  
PLANNING  

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 10 
Development Regulations (DR), 2008, framed under SMP, CMDA was 
responsible to regulate lan d use in CMA in terms of the broad parameters of 
the SMP. 
We observed that GoTN did not accord adequate importance to urban 
planning as evidenced by the delay of five years to approve the FMP after the 
TN Town and Country Planning Act, 1971 came into force , and an abnormal 
delay of 13 years in notifying (2008) the SMP after the end of plan period of 
FMP (1995). 
The strategies of SMP were, inter alia, (i) to address the present constraints in 
disposal of flood water as an opportunity to manage and use the ex cess water 
for augmenting urban water supply through creation of additional storage 
capacity, (ii) developing a network of open spaces to provide green 
environment to be used as flood moderators during critical months of the year, 
(iii) to maintain existin g water bodies by preventing encroachments, and  
(iv) improvement of macro drainage systems and integration of micro drainage 
with the macro system.  The observations relating to non -adherence to the 
strategies of SMP are discussed in this Report. 
2.1.1 Unauthorised land use conversion 
(a)  The TN Town and Country Planning Act, 1971 envisages approval of 
Master Plan, which includes the land use plan, by GoTN.  Further, the Act 
envisages review of the approved Master Plan every five years for effecting 
necessary changes in the plan if considered appropriate based upon survey.  
With a view to cater to the growing population, the Master Plans projected 
additional requirement of land for housing, industrial and institutional 
purposes and for other infrastructural facilities by converting agricultural land. 
The land use in CMA (a) a s projected in FMP and SMP, (b) the actual area 
available in 1973 and 2006 as per survey done by CMDA and (c) the position 
in 2016 as arrived at based on approved land use changes, are shown in  
Table 2.1 below:  
Table 2.1: Land use changes in CMA 
(Land in hectare) 
Land use Area available 
as of 1973 
(Before FMP) 
Area 
projected in 
FMP for 1995 
Area available 
in 2006 
(After FMP and 
before SMP) 
Area 
projected in 
SMP for 2026 
 
Area available 
in 2016 
(during SMP) 
(Figures in bracket represent percentage to total land area) 
Agriculture 73,689  (60) 37,179  (31) 12,569  (10) 7,296  (6) 12,322  (10) 
Open 
space 
5,742  (5) 8,298  (7) 566  (0.5) 1,393  (1) 553  (0.5) 
Residential 16,932  (14) 41,667  (35) 32,400  (27) 52,937  (43) 32,628  (27) 
Others 26,611  (21) 31,772  (27) 76,602 (62.5) 60,511  (50) 76,634 (62.5) 
Total 1,22,974  1,18,916  1,22,137  1,22,137  1,22,137  
(Source: Details furnished by CMDA) 

Chapter II - Planning 
 
 11 
As could be seen from the above, during the period between 1973 and 2006, 
the area under agriculture came down from 73,689 to 12,569 hectare, i.e., from 
60 per cent to 10 per cent of the total area.  During the same period, open 
space came down from 5,742 to 566 hectare, i.e., from 5 per cent to  
0.5 per cent of the total area.  We observed that the area under agriculture an d 
open space, which are flood moderators, came down by beyond what was 
projected in master plans.  
We noticed that during the interim period between FMP and SMP, without 
any plan being in force, CMDA allowed 439 land use conversions from 
agriculture zone ( 1,229 hectare), Open Space and Recreation  (O&R) zone  
(345 hectare) and sensitive areas such as water bodies (14 hectare).  We 
observed that, in the absence of a Government approved Master Plan during 
1996 to 2008, approval of the above land use conversions was in violation of 
the Town and Country Planning Act, 1971.  
Instances of irregular approvals for land use conversion aft er approval of SMP 
have been discussed in detail in succeeding paragraphs ( Paragraphs 2.3  
and 2.4).  Further, despite rapid demographic changes taking place in CMA, 
CMDA did not review SMP after five years as envisaged in the TN Town and 
Country Planning Act.  Moreover, GoTN also did not direct CMDA to carry 
out such a review.  
Thus, land use changes were carried out not only in excess of the projection 
made in Master Plan, but also in violation of the Town and Country Planning 
Act, 1971 and without the en visaged review of Master Plan.  The 
indiscriminate development of land increased soil runoff and consequent 
depletion of ground water table, contributing to flooding.  
Highlighting the importance of planning, the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs, which presented (August 2016) its Report on 
Chennai flood to the Parliament, had also concluded, inter alia, that unplanned 
urbanisation was a contributing factor for floods in and around Chennai. 
Recommendation No.  1: We recommend that GoTN should initiate timely 
action for review of SMP as contemplated and to decide a time frame to start 
action on the next Master Plan to avoid gap between Master Plan periods.  
(b)  Changes in land use, either authorised by CMDA or taking place 
through illegal cons tructions as discussed in Paragraph 2.1.2 below, 
contributed to changes in the overall land cover of CMA.  
In order to analyse the change in land cover over a period of time, we sourced 
satellite imageries of CMA as of January 1979 and February 2016 through 
National Remote Sensing Agency, Hyderabad, a body under the Indian Space 
Research Organi sation (ISRO), and got the imageries digitally analysed  
(April 2017) by the In stitute of Remote Sensing, Anna University, Chennai. 
The analysis disclosed that the built -up area in CMA increased from  
90.88 sq.km in 1979 to 541.14 sq.km in 2016.   Correspondingly, the area 
under water bodies and vegetation came down from 100.98 to 91.31 sq.km 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 12 
and 548.53 to 442.43 sq.km respectively as shown in the Map 2.1 ( detailed 
map at Appendix 2.1). 
Map 2.1- Digitally analysed satellite images of CMA 
 
(Source: Analysis by Institute of Remote Sensing, Anna University, Chennai) 
While the FMP and SMP, together projected a total increase in built -up area 
by 330.58 sq.km (33,058 hectare) over the 50 years period between 1976 and 
2026, the actual increase in built -up area, as worked out using satellite 
imageries, over 37 years period between 1979 and 2016 was 450.26 sq.km. 
Thus, the satellite data, which depicts the actual ground reality,  indicated that 
much higher building activity had taken place than what had been approved by 
CMDA, pointing to large scale illegal constructions as has been pointed out in 
Paragraph 2.1.2 below.  Simultaneously, the area un der water bodies 
declined 9.67 sq.km between 1979 and 2016. 
The disappearance/shrinkage of some of the urban lakes between 1979 and 
2016, as noticed from the satellite maps are depicted in Exhibits 2.1 to 2.5. 


Chapter II - Planning 
 
 13 
Exhibit 2.1: Velachery Lake 
Velachery Lake, located in the thickly populated southern part of the city, 
shrank over the years, leading to reduction in storage capacity of the lake.  
 
Map not to scale  
(Source: National Remote Sensing Agency, Hyderabad and Google Digital Globe) 
 


Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 14 
Exhibit 2.2: Pallikaranai Marsh 
The Pallikarani  Marsh, a unique fresh water swamp in CMA, which was 
measuring 5,000 hectare in 1975 shrank to 695 hectare in 2016 mainly due to 
the decision of GoTN to allow construction on a stretch of 500 metres on 
either side of Rajiv Gandhi Salai (IT corridor) to facilitate development of IT 
industry. 
 
Map not to scale  
(Source : National Remote Sensing Agency, Hyderabad and Google Digital Globe) 


Chapter II - Planning 
 
 15 
Exhibit 2.3 : Adyar Estuary 
Adyar Estuary, a unique eco -system at the mouth of Adyar River, is 
surrounded by thickly populated areas of Adyar, Raja  Annamalaipuram and 
Mandaveli.  Large scale constructions in the Estuary shr ank the area over the 
years as depicted below.  
Map not to scale  
(Source : National Remote Sensing Agency, Hyderabad and Google Digital Globe) 
Exhibit 2.4: Ambattur Tank 


Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 16 
Ambattur, located at the  north western side of the city, is a thickly populated 
residential area with scattered small industries.  The Ambattur Tank, adjoining 
Ambattur, which influences flow in Kosasthalaiyar River shrank in size over 
the years due to constructions inside the tank bed.  The overflowing  Ambattur 
Tank caused inundation in the adjoining areas.   
 
Map not to scale  
(Source : National Remote Sensing Agency, Hyderabad and Google Digital Globe) 
Exhibit 2.5 : Mogappair Lake  


Chapter II - Planning 
 
 17 
Constructions on the lake bed consumed the entire Mogappair L ake located in 
the north western part of the city.    
 
Map not to scale  
(Source : National Remote Sensing Agency, Hyderabad and Google Digital Globe) 


Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 18 
We observed that drastic increase in the built -up area including those 
unauthorisedly allowed, which contributed to decrease in the area of water 
bodies and increase in soil runoff of rain water, exposed the city to the risk of 
flooding.  
2.1.2 Illegal residential colonies 
Development Regulations (DR), 2008, framed under Master Plans prohibited 
development of sites without CMDA’s approval.  The Honourable Madras 
High Court, Chennai, hearing a petition on illegal colonies, directed  
(March 2016) the GoTN to furnish information on illegal colonies which had 
come up after 1989 1.  CMDA, however, did not have any mechanism to 
monitor illegal colonies cropping up within its jurisdictional area. Therefore, 
CMDA called for this information from local bodies.  We noticed that only  
19 out of 45 local bodies (including zones of GCC) furnished the required 
information.  The information, as furnished by the local bodies, was furnished 
to GoTN for placing before the Court.  The matter was under judicial scrutiny 
(March 2017).  
As per the data obtained by CMDA, the details of illegal colonies in CMA, as 
of March 2016, was as under: 
Table 2.2: Illegal colonies in CMA 
Category of 
local body 
Total 
number 
of local 
bodies in 
CMA 
No. of local 
bodies for 
which data 
was 
available 
No. of illegal 
colonies 
identified 
No. of 
houses/ 
house sites 
involved 
Area in 
hectare 
Zones of GCC 15 05 54 NA NA 
Municipalities 08 08 113 7,320 155.87 
Town 
Panchayats 
11 05 30 1,259 19.43 
Panchayat 
Unions 
10 01 NA NA NA  
Cantonment 
bodies 
01 NA NA NA NA 
Total* 45 19 197 8,579 175.30 
* Total has been worked out with available information.  NA- Not Available 
(Source: Data furnished by local bodies) 
Considering the fact that data was not available in respect of all the local 
bodies, the number of illegal colonies and the land area of these illegal 
colonies could be much higher than the above figure of 197 colonies and  
175 hectare.  During the same pe riod of 1989 to 2016, the actual number of 
layouts approved by CMDA for residential colonies was 3,084, which meant 
that illegal colonies were substantial in number.  
                                                             
1  All unapproved layouts before 1989 were regularised by GoTN 

Chapter II - Planning 
 
 19 
We found that GoTN was aware of the issue of illegal colonies and amended 
(2009) the Regi stration Act, 1908, to prohibit registration of unapproved 
layouts. The amendment was to come into force on such date as the GoTN 
may issue by notification.  As GoTN delayed notification of the Act, 
registration of unapproved layouts continued unabatedly.   In 2015, based on a 
writ petition filed by an individual, the Honourable Madras High Court, noted 
that large scale unapproved layouts contributed to the floods of 2015 and 
imposed a ban ( September 2016) on registration of plots/buildings in 
unauthorised layouts.  GoTN also issued (October 2016) an order notifying the 
2009 amendment to Registration Act 1908.  We observed that the GoTN, by 
delaying enforcement of the amendment to the Act, contributed to the growth 
of illegal colonies.  
Thus, the abnormal delay of GoTN in notifying the amendment to the 
Registration Act, 1908 and lack of control on the part of CMDA and failure of 
local bodies in controlling unauthorised developments had rendered the 
mechanism for urban planning ineffective , as even with the limited data,  
197 illegal layouts had come up in CMA after 1988. 
Recommendation No. 2: We recommend strict enforcement of the amended 
Registration Act to curb mushrooming of illegal colonies. CMDA should 
strengthen its monitoring activities and play a proactive role in identifying 
and stopping illegal constructions.  
2.2 Policies and plans focusing on flood prevention and 
moderation 
2.2.1 Non-revision of State Water Policy  
Tamil Nadu State Water Policy (S WP), 1994 was formulated based on the 
National Water Policy (NWP), 1987.   NWP was updated in 2002 and 2012. 
NWP 2012 envisaged planning and management of water resources by 
incorporating coping strategies for possible climate changes.  As per NWP 
2012, the  acceptability criteria for new water resources projects were to be  
re-worked in view of the climate changes.  However, SWP was not revised in 
line with NWP.   A comment was also included in the C&AG’s Audit Report 
(Economic Sector), GoTN for the year ende d 31 March 2013, regarding non -
revision of SWP.  GoTN constituted (August 2013) a Committee for revising 
the SWP and the Committee presented its draft policy in August 2014.  The 
draft policy, however, was not approved and notified by GoTN even as of 
November 2016.  Non-revision of SWP had impacted various systemic 
measures like preparation of flood inundation maps, emergency action plan for 
dams, basin -wise master plans etc. , as was required under Central Water 
Commission (CWC) norms and NWP.  We further observed that non-creation 
of new reservoirs taking into account the climate changes as emphasi sed in 
NWP 2012 was one of the reasons for inundation during Floods 2015. 
Such lackadaisical approach of Government indicated that no lessons were 
learnt from th e catastrophic floods of 2015 causing huge loss to human lives 
and properties.  

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 20 
2.2.2 Non-preparation of frequency based flood inundation maps  
Flood forecasting is an important and cost effective non -structural method to 
mitigate the impact of floods.   The CWC is involved in flood forecasting in a 
scientific manner. With a view to facilitate CWC in forecasting floods, the 
National Flood Commission recommended (1982) to assess the areas prone to 
floods, flooded areas, damages to properties and lives and fur nish the same 
along with connected maps to CWC.  The NWP 2012 also envisaged that 
every State should prepare flood inundation maps based on frequency of 
floods to evolve coping strategies besides conducting morphological 2 studies 
for planning and taking me asures to prevent permanent loss of land eroded by 
the river causing damages to their revetments, spurs, embankments, etc.   The 
Water Resources Department (WRD), as the custodian of major waterways, 
was responsible for preparation of flood inundation maps.  
We observed that WRD did not assess the area prone to floods, flooded area, 
damages to property and lives during the period from 2012-16.  As a result, no 
data as required under National Flood Commission recommendations were 
furnished to CWC.  The connec ted maps as well as river basin maps were 
neither prepared by WRD nor furnished to CWC.   Further, morphological 
studies, to evolve flood coping strategies and protecting water bodies were 
also not conducted as was required under NWP 2012.  
GoTN, while a dmitting non-preparation of flood inundation maps, stated   
(May 2017)  that flood prone areas had been assessed.  The reply was not 
tenable as assessment of flood prone areas would not serve the purpose unless 
frequency based flood inundation maps are prepared  and furnished to CWC 
for flood forecasting and evolving appropriate coping strategies.  As a result, 
WRD did not have a comprehensive plan for flood prevention measures such 
as construction of revetments, spurs and embankments and CWC was not 
facilitated to scientifically issue flood forecasts.  
Recommendations No.  3: We recommend that SWP may be immediately 
revised by GoTN making it mandatory for WRD to prepare frequency based 
flood inundation maps. 
2.2.3 Non-preparation of Emergency Action Plan for Dams 
NWP 2002 stressed the need for preparation of Emergency Action Plan 3 
(EAP) for all large dams.   Dam Safety Organisation of CWC had also issued 
(May 2006) guidelines for development and implementation of EAP  for dams 
with due emphasis on procedure to be followed to minimi se damage to 
property and loss of life.  The NWP 2012 also reiterated on increased 
preparedness for sudden and unexpected floods by preparing and updating of 
EAP.  
                                                             
2 Study of the configuration and evolution of land forms 
3 Emergency Action Plan is a formal document that identifies potential emergency 
conditions at a dam and specifies pre -planned actions to be followed to minimi se 
property damage and loss of life 

Chapter II - Planning 
 
 21 
In Tamil Nadu, there are 12 7 large dams/reservoirs, and in Chennai and 
suburban areas, there are four large reservoirs (Poondi, Cholavaram, Redhills 
and Chembarambakkam) which required EAP.  However, WRD did not attach 
due importance to the guidelines of NWP and CWC to prepare EAP for the 
reservoirs in Chennai and its suburban areas (December 2016).  Engineer-in-
Chief, WRD stated (March 2017) that action was being initiated to prepare 
EAP for the dams under World Bank funded Dam Rehabilitation and 
Improvement Project in a phased mann er.  He further stated that approval of 
EAP proposal for two dams (Sothuparai and Servalar dams) was awaited from 
CWC.  Based on the approval of CWC, EAP for other dams would be 
prepared. 
We observed that EAP was a cost effective non -structural measure and it was 
not appropriate on the part of WRD to link it with the larger and cost intensive 
Dam Rehabilitation programme.  EAP for the reservoirs in CMA could have 
helped better management of flood discharge from all reservoirs, including 
Chembarambakkam Tank (Paragraph 5.8.5).  
Recommendation No. 4: We recommend early action on preparation of EAP 
for taking care of safety of dams. 
2.2.4 Non-availability of basin-wise Master Plan 
In 1990, CWC  had issued detailed guidelines for preparation of Master Plan 
for river basins.  The guidelines were revised in 2007.  The Master Plan was to 
take into account the catchment area, water potential, storage availability, 
consumption pattern etc.  The SWP, 1994 had also emphasi sed preparation of 
a basin-wise master plan for every flood prone basin, as a measure for flood 
control and water management.  
We observed that Master Plan for Chennai and its suburban areas, for its three 
rivers viz., Adyar, Cooum and Kosasthalaiyar was not prepared (August 2016) 
to manage the flood situation and for augmentation of water resources.  
GoTN stated (March 2017) that the Master Plan would be prepared by 
engaging a Consultant.  We observed that preparation of Master Plan involved 
coordination between WRD and local bodies as major waterways are under 
the control of WRD and minor ones are under local bodies.  We noticed that 
no action was taken by WRD to coordinate with local bodies for preparing 
basin-wise master plan.  
Non-preparation of basin -wise Master Plan for CMA, led to unplanned 
execution of macro and micro drainage networks, as commented in 
Paragraphs 5.1, 5.2, 5.3 and 5.4. 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 22 
2.2.5 Non-enactment of legislation on Flood Plain Zoning  
Flood Plains are low -lying land areas adjacent to a river.   Flood Plain Zoning 
(FPZ) is a concept to regulate land use in the flood plains to restrict the 
damage caused by floods and aims at determining the locations and the extent 
of areas for developmental activities in such a fashion that it does not impact 
the environment. 
In 1975, CWC circulated a model Bill on FPZ, envisaging provisions for flood 
zoning authorities, surveys and delineation of flood plain area, notification of 
limits of flood plains, prohibition or restriction of the use of the flood plains, 
compensation, and power to remove obstruction after prohibition etc., for 
enactment.  As per National Disaster Management (NDM) guidelines, the 
areas vulnerable to frequent floods and areas on either side of the existing and 
proposed drains including rural drains were to be decla red as green belts, 
where no building or other activity, except parks and playgrounds, were to be 
allowed.  The SWP, 1994 mandated that watershed management and flood 
forecasting for reservoir operations, FPZ and prevention of flood plain 
encroachment by h uman settlement and obstruction to flow would be 
considered along with structural measures, such as embankments and flood 
channels.  The same was reiterated in NWP 2012. 
We, however, observed that the suggested legislation on FPZ was yet to be 
enacted and the SMP, approved by GoTN in 2008, did not provide for FPZ, 
specifying the distance from the water body i.e. off -set space, upto which 
development/construction activities were to be restricted.  CMDA also did not 
stipulate any FPZ in its Development Regulations.  
To an audit query on enactment of FPZ Act, CE, WRD replied (August 2016) 
that a proposal (June 2014) to form a Committee to give recommendations for 
enacting the legislation was under consideration of GoTN (August 2016). 
Thus, the lack of legislati on for flood plain zoning, resulted in developments 
abutting waterways, as discussed in Paragraph 2.3 below.  
Recommendation No. 5: We recommend that the FPZ bill may be enacted at 
the earliest to prevent constructions along the three rivers of CMA. 
2.3 Construction activities along water bodies  
Despite clear policies, as discussed in Paragraph 2.2 above, on preservation 
of water bodies which are flood accommodators, construction activities along 
water bodies reduced the area of water bodies and contribute d to the floods of 
2015.  Specific lapses of GoTN and CMDA in this regard are discussed in this 
paragraph.  

Chapter II - Planning 
 
 23 
2.3.1  Granting unauthori sed building permission along waterways by 
CMDA 
In the absence of demarcated FPZ  and specification of off -set space 
requirements in the Development Regulations of SMP, Tamil Nadu District 
Municipalities Building Rules, 1972, regulate the approvals for construction of 
buildings in urban areas of the State.  As per the Rule 7, if a cons truction site 
was within 15 m of a water body, water course or well, such measure as may 
be necessary or as the executive authority may direct, should be carried out to 
protect the water body.  
In June 2012, a committee headed by the Vice -Chairman, CMDA, 
recommended a buffer zone of at least 15 m between the river and the 
proposed building, and to issue an office order to that effect.  
We noticed that in violation to the extant rules and the recommendation of the 
Committee, CMDA continued to issue planning permission for buildings 
within 15 m of water bodies without ensuring any ameliorating measures to 
prevent damage to the water body.  CMDA adopted a procedure of obtaining 
No Objection Certificate ( NOC) from WRD for issuing conditional approvals 
for constructions adjacent to water bodies.  We observed that neither the TN 
Town and Country Planning Act nor the Development Regulations framed 
under SMP allowed CMDA to issue conditional approvals subject to 
adherence to NOC conditions of WRD. 
During joint site i nspections (August 2016) along with officials of the test 
checked Municipalities, Town Panchayats and Zones of GCC along Adyar and 
Cooum Rivers, we observed that special and multi -storeyed buildings listed in 
Table 2.3 were approved by CMDA which were fall ing within 15 m of the 
waterways. These buildings were inundated and contributed to inundation of 
neighbourhoods, during the floods of 2015.  
Table 2.3: List of buildings approved on river banks 
Sl.
No. 
Name of the builders Year of 
construction 
Name of the 
water body 
Distance from 
water body 
1 Residential building by Pace builders 2012 to 2015 Pappan channel 10 ft 
2 Residential building by Shakul 
Hamid and Bros 
2012 Periya Eri 14.06 m 
3 Residential building by Mantri 
Hamlet Private Ltd 
2014 Periya Eri 11.72 m 
4 Residential building by Jain Housing 2014 Nattukkalvai Less than three 
metres 
5 Residential building Orchid Springs 
by Alliance 
2012 Korattur Lake 10 m 
6 MIOT hospital NA Ramapuram 
Nullah 
On the bank 
7 Jayanth tech park NA Adyar River On the bank 
8 Residential building by Arihant 
builders 
NA Adyar River On the bank 
9 Residential building by Casa Grande Ongoing Adyar River On the bank 
NA: Not available 
(Source: Information collected from CMDA and WRD) 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 24 
Scrutiny of records revealed that in violation to the TN Town and Country 
Planning Act and the D R framed under SMP, CMDA issued approvals for 
these buildings on the basis of NOCs.  Though CMDA by violating the 
prescribed rules, issued conditional approvals, the conditions of NOC, so 
irregularly set, were not even satisfied by the builders/realtors and nor ensured 
by the CMDA as to whether such conditions were complied with.  This is 
indicative of the fact that CMDA did not bother about the protection of water 
bodies while issuing the approvals for residential buildings  though it was 
responsible for ensuring implementation of the provisions of the TN Town and 
Country Planning Act.  
The wrong practice of allowing conditional planning permissions on the basis 
of NOC, had not helped preservation of  waterways as adherence to NOC 
conditions were not enforceable, leading to unplanned developments, 
contributing to floods.  
To an audit enquiry, CMDA stated (October 2016) that in the flood plains of 
Adyar River and in the areas adjoining the Cooum River, the land had been 
reserved for agriculture use zone/non -urban use zone to safeguard these areas 
from flood hazards.  The reply was not tenable as CMDA itself had approved 
special and multi -storeyed buildings, as detailed in Table 2 .3 above and  
51 layouts (Table 2.4) in selected local bodies along the flood plains of river/ 
channel during the years from 2009 to 2016.  
2.3.2 Approval of layouts without preservation of water bodies  
Regulation 2 (25) of DR defines layout as division of plots exceeding eight i n 
number and provides for approval of layouts of more than 10 acres by CMDA 
in CMA.  
Regulation 7 (2) of DR prohibited development of sites without CMDA’s 
approval.  Approval was not to be accorded without ameliorative measures if 
CMDA considered the site (i) to be near a water body/course (ii) likely to be 
inundated with no possibility of proper drainage arrangement, (iii) was a filled 
up tank or low lying and (iv) was likely to be affected by dampness owing to 
the sub-soil water.  Ameliorative measures that were to be satisfied by CMDA 
were not defined in the DR.  
In the absence of demarcated FPZ, CMDA, without any authority, obtained 
NOC from WRD which is the custodian of the water bodies, and issued 
conditional approval for development of sites as layout s which were located 
within 15 m of the waterways. 
NOC issued by the CE, WRD stipulated conditions that were to be fulfilled by 
the promoter, such as (i) culverts 4 to be constructed across the water way,  
(ii) provision of storm water drain in the layout, (iii) leaving off-set space from 
the waterway and (iv) raising the level of the site above maximum flood level 
of the waterway.  CMDA issued layout approvals along with the NOCs issued 
by WRD , to the local bodies, with instructions to local bodies to ensure 
                                                             
4 A small structure to allow water to pass under a road 

Chapter II - Planning 
 
 25 
compliance of all conditions stipulated by the WRD by the promoters of the 
layout and obtain a letter from WRD confirming compliance before release of 
layout approval.  
Once local bodies re ceived application for layout approvals from an 
individual, which was beyond their delegated powers, they forwarded the 
application to CMDA for approval. CMDA accorded approval after verifying 
the conditions like classification of land use, road width, pro vision of storm 
water drains and ownership of the site, but had not ensured the distance of  
15 m between the water bodies and the sites, which was required under the TN 
District Municipalities Building Rules, 1972.  
We observed that prima facie, CMDA issued incorrect approvals to layouts in 
flood plains along waterways without satisfying ameliorative measures as 
required under Regulation 7 (2) of DR 2008.  In the absence of ameliorative 
measures that were to be undertaken, CMDA was not competent to give 
conditional approvals for sites which were located in flood plains.   Further, 
CMDA failed in its responsibility and passed it on to local bodies to ensure 
that NOC stipulations were complied with.  These failures of CMDA are 
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
During 2009-15, CMDA approved 291 layouts in CMA, of which 127 were 
within 15 m of waterways.  The year -wise details of total layout approvals 
given by CMDA and approvals for layouts which were located in the flood 
plains of waterways are as shown in Chart 2.1. 
Chart 2.1: Year-wise layout approvals - 2009-15 
(Source: Data from CMDA) 
Out of the above, we examined the approval process in respect of 51 layouts 
approved during the period 2009 -15, located in three local bodies given in  
Table 2.4.  
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
57
38
28
46 46
31
45
25
15 13 16
21 18 19
Total layouts 
approved
Layouts approved 
along waterways

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 26 
Table 2.4: Details of layouts approved in CMA in selected local bodies 
Sl. 
No. 
Area No. of 
layouts 
approved 
No. of layouts 
within 15 
metres of 
waterways 
Area in acres 
along water 
course converted 
as layouts 
Original 
land before 
conversion 
into layout 
1 Kundrathur 63 23 125.07 Ayacut5 
2 Thiruneermalai 1 1  5.59  Agriculture 
3 Poonamallee 50 27 153.00 Not available 
(Source: CMDA) 
We observed that 23 layouts were approved by CMDA in Kundrathur 
Panchayat Union and Kundrathur Town Panchayat, one in T hiruneermalai and 
27 in Poonamallee Panchayat Union .  Joint inspection (October 2016) of  
23 sites (Appendix 2.2) by Audit along with officials of local bodies, revealed 
the following factors contributing to flood: 
(i)  In one layout, abutting the Kolapakka m Channel in Manappakkam 
and Kolapakkam Villages, buildings were constructed very close to the 
channel without any off-set space.  Untreated waste water from these buildings 
was directly let into the channel through outlet PVC pipes, contrib uting to 
choking of the channel .  CMDA stated that the water course was not affected 
by the site. The reply of CMDA was found incorrect through field visit.  
(ii) In one layout in Kulathuvancherry and Srinivasapuram Villages, 
CMDA had even failed to ensure that NOC condi tions imposed by WRD in 
constructing culverts on the roads across a channel passing along the layout 
were complied with.  Further, land filling suggested by WRD, in view of 
possible inundation, was also not carried out.  Though the channel and its 
branch w ere duly demarcated in Revenue records, the channel, which runs 
along the layout, was silted with no traverse.  This showed that CMDA was 
desperate in approving the layouts even when such layouts did not satisfy the 
NOC conditions to facilitate realtors.   
(iii) In one layout in Varadarajapuram Village, an apartment constructed 
on the bund of the Adyar Odai 6, narrowing its width and in another layout the 
natural drain (vaikal), was encroached by a temple and houses.  On this being 
pointed out by Audit, CMDA  stated that the Commissioner of Kundrathur 
Panchayat Union was requested to ensure the compliance of NOC conditions 
of WRD.  The reply, being futuristic in nature, had not addressed the 
deficiency pointed out.  It appears from the reply that CMDA is still  resorting 
to the inappropriate NOC conditions of WRD and is in a mode of complete 
denial from their act of violation of the extant rules.  CMDA, without taking 
any measures to evict the encroachers and demolish the buildings occupying 
the water body, appr oved the layout, causing further damage to the water 
body.  
                                                             
5 Agricultural area irrigated by a tank 
6 Rivulet 

Chapter II - Planning 
 
 27 
(iv) In three out of six layouts in Kundrathur Village, there were 
unapproved buildings and encroachment on the channel .  The channel was not 
continuous and no demarcations were available.  It was filled with debris.  The 
road culvert provided across the channel was only for a length of three meters 
as against 10 m stipulated by WRD  (Exhibit 2.6).  In three other layouts, the 
channel was occupied by unapproved buildings. 
Exhibit: 2.6: Smaller than stipulated culvert at Kundrathur Village 
(Source: Photo taken by Audit team during Joint Inspection) 
(v)  In three layout s in Mannancherry Village, culverts as stipulated by 
WRD across a field channel were not constructed.  The channel was occupied 
by buildings .  No action was taken by the Executive Officer of Kundrathur 
Town Panchayat to ensure provision of culvert as stipulated in the NOC.   In 
another case of two layouts in Naduveerapattu, the WRD  conditions to 
earmark channel boundary were not fulfilled.  
CMDA replied that removal of encroachments and removal of debris was the 
responsibility of local body.  The reply did not address the issue that approvals 
were given without ensuring ameliorating  measures.  It further indicated the 
fact that despite knowledge about encroachments, CMDA did not pay due 
attention to preservation of the water body, leading to inundation and still 
CMDA was passing the blame on local bodies.  
CMDA further stated (Novemb er 2016) that the proposals for layouts were 
approved with the permission of the WRD.   The reply revealed that the 
CMDA was incorrectly putting the onus of preserving the water bodies on 
WRD.  The NOC issued by WRD had prescribed the condition that the 
promoter should maintain the channel to its width, protect the channel from 
encroachment and also desilt the channel in some cases.   It was seen that the 
promoter had no role, once he had sold all the plots in the layout.  Thus, 
CMDA in connivance with WRD, p romoters and local bodies allowed  
 


Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 28 
development/construction activities along flood plains without ensuring the 
fulfillment of the conditions of NOCs. 
Recommendation No . 6: We recommend that CMDA should stop issuing 
conditional approvals for layouts and bu ildings along water bodies . 
Approval should be issued only after ensuring that ameliorating measures 
were completed.  
2.4 Non-adherence to land use planning 
Section 9 -C of the TN Town and Country Planning Act, 1971, empowered 
CMDA to prepare an existing la nd use map and such other maps as may be 
necessary for preparing any development plan.  Zoning provides spatial 
segregation of conflicting uses besides preservation of open space, prime 
agriculture land and ecologically sensitive areas.  The DCR and DR fra med 
under FMP, 1976 and SMP, 2008 respectively for CMA contained detailed 
regulations on land use zoning and reservation of open space for recreation 
and public use.  
Land use is divided into various zones and all developments in an area are to 
be regulate d with reference to the Land Use classification 7 indicated in the 
SMP and the DRs specify the permissible usage in each zone.   
Section 32 of the TN Town and Country Planning Act empowers GoTN to 
approve variations of land use. CMDA, however, was not autho rised to 
reclassify water bodies, O &R zone, Non -urban zone and Redhills catchment 
areas for other purposes as per FMP and SMP.  
In order to curtail indiscriminate conversion of agricultural wet lands, t he TN 
Town and Country Planning Act, 1971 was amended in March 2012 which 
stated that “while preparing the Master Plans, most of the agriculture wet 
lands are earmarked under agricultural use zone and any conversion to other 
uses will be entertained only after obtaining a Government order after 
following due procedures with full justification as per the Act provisions”. 
Results of the scrutiny of zone conversions approved by CMDA are discussed 
in the sub-paragraphs below: 
2.4.1 Non-preservation of agricultural land 
In the XII Five Year Plan (2012 -17), one of t he thrust areas was to develop a 
mechanism to control diversion of fertile agricultural land and wet land for 
non-agricultural purposes and protection of wet land and water bodies was one 
of the strategies while preparing the Master Plans.  We noticed that  
historically, the area of agriculture land in CMA kept shrinking.  The area 
which stood at 73,689 hectare in 1973, had shr unk by 83 per cent in 2006 to 
12,569 hectare. 
                                                             
7 Land uses are categori sed as Primary Residential, Mixed Residential , Commercial, 
Industrial, Institutional, Agricultural, Urbanisabl e, Open Space and Recreation , Non -
urban and Water bodies 

Chapter II - Planning 
 
 29 
During preparation of SMP , the Director of Agriculture had recommended 
(August 2007) the implementation of SMP without affecting the area of 
agricultural land.  A Group of Ministers had also decided (July 2008) that the 
land use allocation should not push down the agricultural act ivity and 
substantial allocation of land for agricultural activities should be ensured. 
Contrary to these recommendations, SMP, 2008 projected that there would be 
no agricultural land in Chennai City by 2026 and only 7,296 hectare would 
remain as agricultu re land in CMA.  This further indicated a projected 
reduction of 42 per cent in the agriculture area from what was existing in 
2006.  
On analysing the issue concerning conversion of agricultural land for other 
uses, we noticed that in 1991, GoTN had impose d a ban on conversion of 
agricultural wet lands except with the concurrence of the Government in 
Agriculture Department.  Subsequently, in 1992, Government, while reversing 
their own order, exempted agricultural wet lands which were already approved 
for conversion in Master Plans prepared by planning authority, from obtaining 
concurrence of Government.  As such, CMDA got the freedom to convert 
agricultural wet lands which were already approved in the Master Plan for 
other uses.  We observed that between 199 6 and 2008, CMDA approved 
conversion of 1,229 hectare of agricultural land without Government 
concurrence, even though the FMP period had ended in 1995 and this period 
was not covered by any Government approved Master plan.  
We noticed that, in the SMP, wh ile planning to earmark 5,273 of the available 
12,569 hectare of agricultural land for other uses, CMDA had not identified 
the parcels of land earmarked for conversion.  Whenever, a promoter 
approached CMDA for planning permission on an agricultural land, CMDA 
accorded approval without seeking the concurrence of Government in 
Agriculture Department, as conversion of 5,273 hectare had already been 
approved in the SMP.  
We observed that, CMDA violated the Government order of 1991 in 
approving conversion of 1,740 hectare of agricultural land during the period 
from 1992 to 2016.  Over a 40 years period, between the commencement of 
FMP in 1976 and 2016, agricultural land in the suburban areas of Chennai in 
the districts of Kancheepuram (part) and Thiruvallur (par t) declined by  
47.5 per cent, from 1,22,162 hectare to 64,117 hectare. 
As conversion of agricultural land for residential or other building purposes 
affect the water holding capacity of soil, the action of CMDA in approving 
conversion of agricultural land contributed to the ill effects of floods of 2015.  
Recommendation No. 7 : We recommend strict im plementation of the 
Government o rder stipulating Government approval for zone conversion 
from agricultural land.  

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 30 
2.4.2 Conversion of water bodies as residential areas 
SMP stipulated that water body land should not be converted for any other 
use. Further, as per GoTN’s order (January 1987), “It is important to protect 
and maintain water streams, wells and tanks.  The encroachment in water 
bodies are to be evicted and monitoring arrangement has to be made to avoid 
future encroachments.  As such, Government imposed ban on regularisation of 
any encroachment in water bodies”.  
Despite the above stipulation, CMDA approved during 2009 -16 conversion of 
9.32 hectare of water bodies as residential zone at seven locations.  Audit 
scrutiny of five cases involving five acres, revealed that in three cases  
(0.60 hectare ), survey numbers 8, which related to water bodies/river courses 
were subdivided by the Revenue au thorities and Pattas granted to private 
individuals.  CMDA approved reclassification of these water bodies land as 
Primary Residential 9 and Mixed Residential 10 zones on the strength of the 
ownership established through Patta issued by Revenue authorities th ough 
these lands were lying well within Adyar River.  GIS maps of water bodies 
super-imposing survey numbers showing developments inside water bodies 
are shown in Exhibits 2.7 to 2.11 below:  
Exhibit 2.7: Reclassification of water body in St.Thomas Mount - Pozhichalur Village 
 
Map not to scale 
(Source: Google Hybrid Land use Information System available in CMDA website) 
                                                             
8 Survey Nos. 170/2 and 170/3C of Nandambakkam Village in Nandambakkam Town 
Panchayats 6/2 of Pozhichalur Village and Survey No. 1/3B3 of Manapakkam Village in 
Kundrathur Panchayat Union 
9 Zone earmarked for residential buildings, professional consulting offices, petty shops, 
schools, parks and play fields 
10 Zone earmarked for all uses permitted in PR and hotels, community halls, recreation 
clubs, dispensaries, Government and Municipal offices, banks, educational institutions 
and restaurants 


Chapter II - Planning 
 
 31 
Exhibit 2.8: Reclassification of water body in Nandambakkam Village 
 
Map not to scale 
(Source: Google Hybrid Land use Information System available in CMDA website) 
 
Exhibit 2.9: Reclassification of water body in Manapakkam Village 
 
Map not to scale 
(Source: Google Hybrid Land use Information System available in CMDA website) 
 


Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 32 
Exhibit 2.10: Reclassification of water body in Rajakilpakkam Village in Sembakkam  
Town Panchayat 
 
Map not to scale 
(Source: Google Hybrid Land use Information System available in CMDA website) 
Exhibit 2.11: Reclassification of water body in Varadharajapuram in  
Kundrathur Panchayat Union 
Map not to scale 
(Source: Google Hybrid Land use Information system available in CMDA website) 
We noticed that as per the earliest available Revenue records pertaining to 
1912 (Revision Survey and Resettlement Register), all the above lands were 
parts of water bodie s.  Revenue authorities sub -divided the Survey number 
pertaining to water bodies and issued Pattas to private individuals over the 
years, despite a Government order as early as in 1954 banning assignment of 
water body lands.  As such, issue of Patta to private persons by sub -dividing 
water bodies by Tahsildar was in violation of Government orders.  CMDA, 
violating SMP and the stipulated rules and orders, approved conversion of 
water bodies for residential purposes, treating these pattas as ownership title.   


Chapter II - Planning 
 
 33 
Thus, the wrong and inappropriate actions by CMDA in allowing conversion 
of water bodies and issuing patta by Revenue authorities, which was in 
violation of Government orders, had resulted in loss of natural water bodies 
and blocking of natural flow of water leading to inundation in all these areas.  
Recommendation No.  8: We recommend the GoTN to impose ban on 
conversion of water body land and to evacuate and demolish all illegal 
constructions in water bodies.   
2.4.3 Non-preservation of Open Space and Recreational zone 
According to SMP, construction in areas declared as ‘open spaces’ is not 
allowed. The DR specifies the permissible usage of the O&R zone as below: 
“All public and semi -public recreational uses and open spaces, parks and 
playgrounds, zoologi cal and botanical gardens, nurseries, waterfront 
developments, museums, necessary installations for the above uses are 
normally permissible.  With the special sanction of the CMDA, theme parks 
and amusement parks, open air theatres, exhibitions, circuses, fairs and festival 
grounds, public utilities, burial and burning grounds or crematoria, incidental 
residential/commercial uses for essential staff required to be maintained in the 
premises, hotels and restaurants not exceeding 300 sq.m., beach cottages eac h 
not exceeding 100 sq.m in floor area and 7.5 metres in height, Sports stadia 
and recreational complexes can also be allowed.  All other uses shall be 
prohibited”. 
Agricultural land and areas along a water course were classified as O&R zone 
to maintain ecological balance and to preserve water bodies.  
As per land use policy of 2006, there was 566 hectare O&R land.  SMP had 
prohibited conversion of O&R land for other uses.   It was noticed that during 
the SMP period from 2009 -16, 11 hectare of O&R land were reclassified for 
residential, commercial and industrial purposes in violation of SMP. We 
examined all eight cases ( 11 hectare) of reclassification of O&R zone during 
2009-16, for residential/industrial purposes, as detailed in Appendix 2.3. 
CMDA approved reclassification by obtaining a certificate from local bod ies 
that there was no proposal for developing any park and play fields in the site 
reclassified.  We observed that there was no Rule or Government order 
facilitating this action of CMDA in  allowing conversion of O&R land by 
relying on the certificate from local body. CMDA had unilaterally put this 
system in place to work in tandem with the local bod ies in a manner 
detrimental to the overall interest of preventing O&R land being allowed to b e 
developed. Thus, the action of CMDA and local bodies in these cases was in 
violation of the stipulations of SMP. 
Since the local bodies failed to develop park and playfields in Government 
lands classified as O&R zone and also could not acquire private la nds 
classified as O&R zone for park and playfields as per DR, the purpose of 
earmarking O&R zone was, thus, defeated , affecting the smooth flow of flood 
water to the sea.  

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 34 
Recommendation No. 9: We recommend that responsibility should be fixed 
for the lapse s in allowing development of O&R zone. We also recommend 
that the practice of obtaining certificate from local bodies should be stopped 
and O&R land should not be allowed to be converted.   
2.4.4 Non-preservation of Non-Urban zone 
SMP had classified low ly ing areas as non-urban zone wherein, all agriculture 
uses, burning, burial grounds, crematoria and cemeteries, salt pans, brick 
works, etc., were permissible with usage of electric motors not exceeding  
50 HP.  Incidental residential uses were permissible with special sanction of 
CMDA. All other uses were to be prohibited.  SMP also stipulated that 
conversion of non -urban zone for other purposes may be considered after 
reviewing the SMP after five years depending on the demand.  As per the 
provisions of the TN Town and Country Planning Act, 1971, the Master Plans 
are required to be reviewed after every five years, but SMP was not reviewed 
even after eight years.  
We observed that CMDA had approved reclassification of 132 hectare  
(six cases) from non -urban u se zone to residential zone during 2009 -16, 
without reviewing SMP, which was required to be done to assess the quantum 
of conversion from non-urban zone to other purposes.  Scrutiny of three cases 
revealed that nine hectare of land were reclassified by CMDA, subject to 
conditions laid down by WRD, stating that there was no bar on DR of SMP to 
reclassify non -urban land for residential purpose.  This presumption of the 
CMDA was against the stipulations of SMP as brought out above.  
Thus, CMDA, without any authority, reclassified 132 hectare of non -urban 
zone for residential/ commercial/industrial purposes in an arbitrary manner 
against the provisions of SMP.  The purpose of zoning an area as non-urban in 
SMP had become redundant.  Allowing development in non-urban zone, being 
predominantly located in low lying areas along river banks, also contributed to 
the floods which calls for fixing of responsibility.  
2.4.5 Non-preservation of catchment areas 
In view of GoTN’s decision (1990) to restrict d evelopments to  preserve the 
Redhills catchment area, CMDA resolved (December 1990) (i) to keep all the 
land classified as Agricultural use zone as it was and not to entertain any 
request for reclassification in this area (ii) that the Government land in this 
area to be zoned for O&R use for developing social forestry and (iii) to keep 
the land classified as Primary Residence and Mixed Residential zone as per 
the FMP, as they were.  
Consequent to the above resolution, CMDA had reclassified land from 
Institutional, Residential etc., to either agriculture or O&R zones.  The SMP 
had rejected (October 2007) petitions for reclassification of land use in the 
catchment areas into Residential/Institutional/Industry/Other uses, thus 
protecting 27 villages in Redhills catchment area. 

Chapter II - Planning 
 
 35 
Despite a decision not to allow development in Red hills catchment area, the 
land use map showed agricultural land11 and a water body12 at Pakkam Village 
as Primary Residential zone and further developments inside the water body 
were visible in the GIS land use information map.  
To an audit enquiry about developments in catchment area, CMDA stated 
(November 2016) that the lands at Pakkam Village were zoned as Industrial 
use in SMP and reclassification of land in Morai Village was approved by 
GoTN as a specia l case (November 1998) for construction of quarters for 
Police personnel.  The reply of CMDA was not correct as the reclassification 
of lands in Pakkam Village as industrial zone in SMP was not legal as per the 
Government policy.  This area was erroneously  exhibited in SMP. 
Government has no authority or justification to relax the policy decision of not 
allowing any development in Red hills catchment area as a special case which 
would become precedence for future reclassifications. 
The purpose of restricted developments in the Redhills and Puzhal Lake 
catchments area s, which serves as the major source for city water supply to 
maintain the area free from possible contamination, was defeated. 
Thus, non -adherence to land use planning envisaged in SMP  and 
reclassification of land arbitrarily by the CMDA led to loss of water bodies 
and land with high water holding capacity, thus contributing to flooding in 
2015.  As such, there is a need to ensure strict adherence to the policy of not 
allowing developments in catchment area. 
2.5 Analysis 
The monsoon rains during 2015 were compounded with multiple failures in 
adopting policies and putting in place suitable plans to mitigate the impact of 
floods.  The State lacked an updated Water Policy to guide plans to minimise 
the impact of urbanisation on natural waterways.  Frequency based flood 
inundation maps, E AP for dams and basin -wise comprehensive master plans 
were not in place to respond to challenges posed by heavy rains in an 
organised and scientific manner.  Urban planning lacked legal backing, as the 
State did not enact the envisaged statute on regulating developments/  
construction activity in flood plain zone.  CMDA, not only  repeatedly failed 
to check large scale constructions along waterways, but also al lowed 
constructions in an unauthorised manner, which choked waterways and altered 
land uses in the metropolitan area.  CMDA’s action in allowing conversion of 
agricultural land without Government’s approval, the unauthori sed conversion 
of water body land a nd non -urban land and the way in which it converted 
O&R land for various other purposes in connivance with local bodies, 
indicated the lack of seriousness on the part of CMDA in ensuring planned 
urbanisation.  
 
                                                             
11 Survey Nos. 236, 352/4, 5, 429/1 to 13, 14B,15B, 24A, 25A, 26A, 28 of Morai village 
12 Survey No.851 which is within the water body (Survey No. 850) 

 
  
CHAPTER  III 
Porur  Lake
MANAGEMENT OF 
WATER BODIES

 
 37 
 
 
 
 
Management of water bodies is vital for providing quality water for human 
consumption, along with their important role as flood accommodators by 
restricting rainwater discharge into sea.  Such management includes creation 
of water storage facilit ies, maintenance of the length and width of water 
bodies and keeping water courses free from encroachment and disuse.  Neglect 
of tanks, canals and illegal encroachments played havoc in the management of 
water bodies, leading to vast amounts of rain water draining into the sea . 
National Water Policy, 2002 envisaged that w ater is a scarce and precious 
national resource to be planned, developed, conserved and managed in an 
integrated and environmentally sound basis, keeping in view the socio -
economic aspects.  
3.1 Deficiencies in increase in storage capacity of water bodies 
State Water Policy, 1994 envisaged creation of additional storage facilities, 
restoration of rivers, preservation of existing water bodies and eviction of 
encroachments as crucial component s for flood control.  Standard on 
Operation of Reservoirs (IS 7323:1994), issued by Bureau of Indian 
Standards, envisaged construction and/or augmentation of water storage 
facilities of Reservoirs as one of the measures to control floods.  
A study conducte d (2008-12), with the approval of GoTN, by the Institute of 
Remote Sensing, Anna University, Chennai, on ‘Flood Risk Mapping of 
Chennai and its suburbs’, also recommended for creation of additional storage 
facilities to moderate floods. 
Deficiencies notice d in augmenting storage capacity of reservoirs and 
preservation of existing water bodies are discussed in succeeding paragraphs: 
3.1.1 Failure to create storage capacity of reservoir 
Considering the catastrophic floods, in 1976, GoTN constituted (1979) 
Nucleus Cell in CMDA to suggest flood mitigation measures.   The Nucleus 
Cell recommended (1980) creation of two new reservoirs in the upstream of 
Chembarambakkam Tank, influencing Adyar River, to capture  
1.57 Thousand Million Cubic feet (TMC) of water.   We noticed that after a 
delay of eight years, WRD proposed (198 7) for creation of a reservoir at 
Thiruneermalai across Adyar River by which time, the said site had become 
populated due to which the requisite land was not available.  Thus, the WRD 
failed to construct the reservoir which could have accommodated the surplus 
water in Adyar River in 2015.  The WRD had not made any efforts for 
construction of a second reservoir.   
Instead of creating new reservoirs in the upstream of Chembarambakkam  
Tank, GoTN envisa ged (2011 -12) creation of three new tanks in the 
CHAPTER III  
MANAGEMENT OF WATER BODIES 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 38 
upstream/downstream of Poondi reservoir, across Kosasthalayar River to 
augment storage capacity by 4.2 TMC as given in Table 3.1.  
Table 3.1: Projects proposed for increase of storage capacity 
Projects approved Additional storage capacity  
in TMC 
Expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Remarks 
Targeted 
as per 
Policy 
Note 
Targeted 
as per 
GO 
Created 
upto 
Decem-
ber 2016 
New reservoir at 
Thervaikandigai 
1.0 1.0  Nil 186.47 Work not completed. 
Reasons discussed in  
Paragraph 3.1.2 below 
New reservoir at 
Thirukandalam  
1.0 0.26  Nil 28.65 Work completed, but 
structure breached as 
detailed in Para graph 3.1.3 
below. 
New reservoir at 
Ramanjeri 
1.0 Nil Nil Nil Project was dropped by 
GoTN. 
Deepening of 
Cholavaram Tank 
0.3 0.2 Nil 
74.51 
Work completed. But full 
capacity not utilised as 
detailed in Para graph 
3.1.4(A). 
Restoration of six 
existing tanks* 
0.9 0.368 0.17 Failures are brought out in 
Paragraph 3.1.4(B). 
Total 4.20 1.828 0.17 289.63  
* Nemam, Porur, Ayanambakkam, Ambattur, Korattur and Madhavaram  
(Source: Policy Note of GoTN for the year 2011-12) 
We observed that, against an outlay of ` 500.36 crore to increase the storage 
capacity by 1.83 TMC, an expenditure of ` 289.63 crore was incurred upto the 
end of March 2016 t o achieve an increase of only 0.17 TMC.  These projects 
initiated during 2011 -12 and scheduled to be completed in 2014 -15, with the 
objective of augmenting drinking water supply and flood control had not been 
achieved due to various reasons, as discussed i n Paragraphs 3.1.2 to 3.1.4 
below. 
Recommendation No. 1 0: We recommend Government to create new 
reservoir in the upstream of Chembarambakkam Tank as recommended by 
Nucleus Cell and ensure early execution of the sanctioned works on 
augmentation of reservoir capacity. 
3.1.2 Commencement of work before acquisition of land leading  to non-
completion of reservoir 
Para 180 of Tamil Nadu Public Works Department Code stipulates that no 
work should be started unless the required land has been duly handed over by 
the responsible civil officer.  
Engineer-in-Chief, WRD, submitted (December 2011) proposals based on 
WRD’s tentative design for formation of new reservoir at Thervaikandigai 
village (including Kannankottai village) at Tiruvallur District.  GoTN 
accorded (January 2012) Administrative Sanction for ` 330 crore (including   
` 160 crore for land acquisition).  The reservoir was intended to store one 
TMC of surplus water per year from Krishna Water Supply Project, besides 
harnessing water from its own catchment area.  The CE, WRD, Chennai 

Chapter III – Management of Water Bodies 
 39 
Region, accorded Technical Sanction in August 2012.  The work of formation 
of reservoir involved connecting the two 1 tanks besides acquisition of land. 
The land requirement was assessed (May and June 2013) after field 
investigation as  601.28 hectare 2 which was approved by GoTN in  
January 2014.  
Pending acquisition of land, CE, WRD finalised (July 2013) the tender for   
` 149.11 crore and awarded (September 2013) the work to the lowest bidder 
for completion within 24 months from the dat e of handing over the site.  The 
work was commenced in September 2013. 
The department completed (October 2016) acquisition of private lands to an 
extent of 324.15 hectare out of 601.28 hectare.   However, 130.72 hectare of 
the acquired private land could no t be physically taken over due to pendency 
in determination of quantum of compensation.   As of December 2016, the 
department had spent an amount of ` 90.67 crore towards land acquisition  
(` 54.35 crore paid as interim compensation and ` 36.32 crore kept i n civil 
deposits).  Therefore, though the poramboke lands and forest lands were taken 
over, the work could not be completed by WRD despite spending an amount 
of ` 95.80 crore on civil works due to not getting possession of private lands.  
The total expenditure incurred till March 2016 was ` 186.47 crore. 
Thus, the failure on the part of the GoTN to acquire unencumbered land and 
the hasty action on the part of the CE to commence the work without ensuring 
possession of the entire extent of land required for t he work, resulted in non -
achievement of the objective of increasing the storage capacity of reservoir for 
which the responsibility may be fixed. 
3.1.3 Imprudent decision and faulty design leading to breach of a check 
dam 
GoTN envisaged (2011 -12) constructi on of a storage reservoir at 
Thirukandalam in Tiruvallur District, across Kosasthalayar River to store one 
TMC of water.  The proposed reservoir was to be located at the downstream of 
Poondi reservoir and Thamaraipakkam anicut 3.  As the proposal required 
acquisition of private land of 1,376.52 hectare in 15 villages, GoTN instructed 
WRD to revise the project with minimum land acquisition.  Accordingly, 
WRD downsized the project to construct a check dam to store 0.26 TMC 
instead of the original proposal of c onstructing a reservoir with a storage 
capacity of one TMC.  We observed that WRD had resorted to construct ion of 
check dam instead of a reservoir, in order to avoid land acquisition.  GoTN 
accorded (October 2012) Administrative Approval for c onstruction o f check 
dam for a length of 470 metres at a cost of ` 35 crore. CE, Chennai Region, 
WRD conducted detailed investigation (December 2012) of the site and 
considering the width of the river at Thirukandalam reduced the length of the 
check dam (March 2013) to  175 metres, with further reduction in storage 
                                                             
1 Kannankottai Hissa Rajaneri and Thervaikandigai 
2 Patta land 324.15 hectare; poramboke land 255.03  hectare and Reserve forest land 
22.10 hectare 
3 A small concrete structure in the stream to store water 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 40 
capacity to 0.16 TMC.  Accordingly, Technical Sanction was accorded (March 
2013) by the CE, restricting the cost to ` 32.90 crore.  The Technical Sanction 
envisaged designing the check dam considering the maxi mum flood discharge 
of the two upstream reservoirs, viz., Poondi reservoir and Thamaraipakkam 
anicut.  
We further noticed that the structure was designed to withstand a maximum 
flood discharge of 65,000 cusec 4, considering 59,725 cusec registered during 
1966 floods at Thamaraipakkam check dam.  We, however, observed that the 
WRD had failed to take into account the discharge of 92,260 cusec registered 
at Poondi reservoir in 1966.  
The work was awarded (July 2013) to a contractor for ` 28.19 crore for 
completion in 18 months. The work, commenced in July 2013, was completed 
in September 2014 at a cost of ` 28.65 crore. 
Scrutiny of the records revealed that during the floods in 2015, the left side 
retaining wall of the check dam breached due to inflow of 79,564 cusec; left 
side of main structure distorted and body wall for a length of 38 metres of the 
check dam had sunk.  WRD proposed (March 2017) to reconstruct the 
damaged check dam with revised design to accommodate maximum discharge 
capacity of 90,000 cusec at an estimated cost of ` nine crore. 
Thus, we observed as under: 
 Though WRD had submitted a proposal for construction of one TMC 
reservoir keeping in view the water potential, to prevent flooding, 
harness excess flood water and cater to drinking water needs , yet the 
GoTN advised the WRD to construct check dam by reducing the 
storage capacity to 0.16 TMC with minimum land acquisition to avoid 
acquisition of private land of 1 ,376.52 hectare in 15 villages for 
construction of reservoir. 
 The imprudent decision o f the GoTN to reduce the storage capacity to 
0.16 TMC  just to avoid land acquisition , which was indicative of 
abdication of its responsibility,  which resulted in failure to harness 
excess flood water  to cater to the future requirements as envisaged by 
WRD.   
 Incorrect adoption of flood discharge capacity for construction of the 
check dam resulted in its breach during 2015  floods thereby causing 
inundation of nearby areas.  
Recommendation No. 1 1: We recommend the G oTN to institute 
investigation into the faul ty design of check dam for fixing responsibility 
and ensure completion of reconstruction work without delays. 
                                                             
4  Cubic feet per second 

Chapter III – Management of Water Bodies 
 41 
3.1.4 Increase in capacity of existing tanks 
(A) Cholavaram Tank 
GoTN accorded (September 2010) Administrative Sanction for strengthening 
of Chol avaram Tank and Chief Engineer, WRD Chennai Region, accorded 
(June 2012) Technical Sanction for ` 7.96 crore.   The work was awarded 
(April 2013) to a contractor and completed (July 2015) at a cost of  
` 7.58 crore. 
We noticed that despite execution of work s of strengthening the tank and 
increasing the capacity to store 1.08 TMC, WRD failed to maintain water to 
the increased capacity of the tank.  Reasons for not maintaining water to its 
increased capacity were not available on record.  The highest storage r eached 
was only 0.91 TMC for 12 hours on 3 December 2015 and the average storage 
was only 0.73 TMC during December 2015 as against the available increased 
capacity to store 1.08 TMC of water. 
We further observed that well before the tank could reach its fu ll capacity, 
WRD released 400 cusec of water during December 2015 to the already 
overflowing Redhills Tank which resulted in inundation of residential areas in 
the downstream, viz., Balaji Nagar, Thiruneelakanda Nagar, Baba Nagar, 
Burma Nagar and Manali. 
Thus, failure of the CE, WRD to ensure full utilisation of the increased storage 
capacity of the tank and consequent discharge of flood water prematurely had 
contributed to inundation of residential areas in the December 2015 floods.  
We observed that the e xpenditure of ` 8.01 crore incurred on increasing the 
storage capacity of Cholavaram Tank remained largely unfruitful. 
On being asked, Government replied (March 2017) that the objective was 
achieved as the capacity of the tank was increased to 1.08 TMC.  The reply 
was not relevant as the increased capacity to store water upto 1.08 TMC was 
not fully utilised.  Moreover, 400 cusec of water was released without utilising 
the available increased capacity to store water upto 1.08 TMC.  We observed 
that increasing the capacity was of no use as the increased storage capacity 
was not utilised despite specifically spending an amount of ` 8.01 crore. 
(B)  Nemam, Porur and Ayanambakkam Tanks 
Nemam Tank (capacity of 0.257 TMC) in the upstream of Chembarambakkam 
Tank and Porur Tank (capacity 0.046 TMC) in its downstream influence the 
flow in the Adyar River.  Ayanambakkam Tank (capacity 0.290 TMC) 
influence the flow in Cooum River. 
WRD proposed (August and October 2011) to renovate these three tanks by 
desilting, deepening through excavation of earth, and by rehabilitation of the 
bund.  It was also proposed to construct a new surplus water regulatory 
arrangement for Nemam Tank and for restoration of flood carrying capacity of 
the surplus course. 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 42 
GoTN accorded (December 201 1) Administrative Sanction for renovation of 
these three tanks at a cost of ` 129.50 crore.  GoTN also directed WRD to 
identify the selling option for the earth excavated by following the prescribed 
procedure for realisation of revenue to Government. CE, C hennai Region, 
WRD accorded (December 2011) Technical Sanction for these three works at 
a cost of ` 129.50 crore.  The work was awarded (December 2012) to three 
contractors for execution within 18 months from the date of handing over of 
the site.  The sites for the work were handed over in January 2013. 
As stipulated by the Tender Approval Committee, the contractors and the 
Superintending Engineer concerned furnished joint declaration to the effect 
that they had inspected the site and ensured the accuracy o f the quantity of the 
earth available for excavation.  The agreements also stipulated for payment of 
the departmental rate of ` 102.98 crore5 for the disposal of the excavated earth 
by the contractors and no payments need to be made for the earth utili sed for 
strengthening the bunds of the tanks.  
The details of the additional capacity envisaged, work proposed and executed 
have been shown in Table 3.2. 
Table 3.2: Details of augmentation works in three tanks 
Particulars Nemam Porur Ayanam-
bakkam 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
Existing capacity of the tank (TMC) 0.257 0.046 0.290 
Additional capacity envisaged (TMC) 0.3206 0.024 0.024 
Civil Works 
Percentage of civil works completed till 
March 2016 
34 90 96 
Value of work done (` in crore) 18.52 13.91 24.27 
Earth excavation work 
Proposed quantity of earth excavation 
(in lakh M³) for bund strengthening and 
for disposal through sale 
 
3.48 + 114.37 
=117.85 
 
2.75 + 12.48 
=15.23 
 
2.19 + 1.89 
=4.08 
Quantity of earth actually excavated (in 
lakh M3) 
3.31+9.61=12.92 2.73 +1.06 
=3.79 
2.15+1.0  
=3.15 
Percentage of excavation of earth 
completed and utilised for formation of 
bund 
95 99 98 
Percentage of excavation completed for 
sale of earth by contractors 
8 8 53 
Over all percentage of excavation of 
earth 
11 25 77 
Increased capaci ty achieved with 
reference to the overall percentage of 
excavation of earth (in TMC) 
0.0216 
 
0.006 0.0185 
(Source : WRD) 
                                                             
5 Departmental rate reali sable as per agreement for Nemam Tank - ` 91.49 crore;  
Porur - ` 9.98 crore and Ayanambakkam - ` 1.51 crore 
6 Adding 0.196 TMC by deepening t he tank and  0.124 TMC by construction of new 
regulatory arrangement, which was achieved in full. 

Chapter III – Management of Water Bodies 
 43 
As may be seen from the above table, 
 Though 128.74 lakh M3 of earth was required to be excavated for sale 
in the three tanks, only 11 .67 lakh M3 (nine per cent ) was excavated 
and a revenue of ` 11.48 crore7 was realised. Thus, the non-excavation 
of the agreed quantity of earth from the tanks resulted in  
non-achievement of objective of enhancement of capacity of tanks for 
harnessing flo od water to an extent of 23 to 89 per cent . Short 
achievement of the envisaged objective resulted in discharge of flood 
waters to the nearby areas causing inundation. 
 The works were proposed to augment the storage capacity of the three 
tanks by 0.368 TMC. But, the actual achievement was only  
0.170 TMC (46 per cent ) despite incurring an expenditure of  
` 74.04 crore against the estimate of ` 129.50 crore for the work. 
 In respect of the Nemam Tank with the lowest achievement, only  
34 per cent of civil works , such as flood wall, regulator , etc., which 
formed part of the surplus course was completed at a cost of  
` 6.71 crore due to non -completion of land acquisition.  This led to 
overflow of water over the surplus course and inundation in the nearby 
areas during December 2015 floods. 
Thus, the works proposed to augment the storage capacity of the three tanks in 
Chennai and its suburb an areas  by harnessing the rain waters were  
ill-conceived due to wrong feasibility study for earth excavation , leading to 
non-achievement of the envisaged objective of increase of storage capacity of 
water and to take care of flooding in the area despite spending an amount of   
` 74.04 crore.  
Government stated (March 2017) in reply that the civil works in Nemam Tank 
would be completed after acquisition of land.  In respect of non-excavation of 
earth by contractors for sale, Government replied that the estimation of the 
quantity of earth in the estimates were arrived on the basis of arithmetical 
calculations due to presence of water in the tanks and hence the entire quantity 
could not be excavated.  
The reply was misleading as the quantity of earth to be excavated was 
calculated and certified by both the Contractors and the Superintending  
Engineer after doing joint survey and confirmed by both of them while signing 
the agreement of the work.  Moreover, no action had been taken against the 
contractor for leaving the work incomplete in violation of the terms and 
conditions of the agreement. 
 
 
                                                             
7 Departmental rate realised for Nemam Tank - ` 8.28 crore; Porur Tank -  ` 2.40 crore 
and Ayanambakkam Tank - ` 0.80 crore 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 44 
3.2   Non-implementation of project for resto ration and protection 
of lakes 
As per Tamil Nadu Protection of Tanks and Eviction of Encroachment Act, 
2007, Pallavaram Lake and Kilkattalai Lake in the suburban area of Chennai 
having a total storage capacity of 0.310 TMC were under the control of WRD, 
who was responsible for maintenance of these lakes. The Pallavapuram 
Municipality initiated (June 2014) a proposal to restore and protect the two 
lakes and GoTN accorded (January 2015) administrative sanction for  
` 22.02 crore for the said work. 
Since the c reation and maintenance of lakes falls under the jurisdiction of 
WRD, the municipality was not competent to take up the work owing to which 
the EE, WRD objected to the proposal of the municipality and insisted 
(January 2016) on implementation of the projec t through WRD as Deposit 
Work.  Due to the dispute between WRD and the local body, the project could 
not be commenced. Subsequently, the local public took the neglected 
condition of the lakes to the National Green Tribunal, which intervened and 
ordered (September 2016) WRD to take up the work. The work was yet to be 
started (January 2017). 
We observed that, the WRD had failed to undertake routine maintenance of 
these two lakes which had led to abandoning of the lakes, besides  
non-utilisation of water storage of 0.310 TMC for flood mitigation and cater to 
drinking water needs.  Further scrutiny of records revealed that during the 
floods in December 2015, the two lakes had breached and flooded the 
neighbourhood. 
The laxity on the part of WRD to execute the wo rk in time calls for fixing of 
responsibility. 
3.3 Incomplete river restoration works 
The three east flowing rivers in the CMA viz., Adyar, Cooum and 
Kosasthalayar are the natural waterways draining into Bay of Bengal.  Free 
flow of flood waters in these r ivers is crucial for flood control.   Failure to 
desilt these rivers and encroachment on river banks, which contributed to the 
floods of 2015 are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.  The lapses on the 
part of various agencies concerned are discussed below:  
3.3.1 Deficiencies in eco-restoration of Adyar River 
GoTN established (2006) Adyar Poonga, a special purpose vehicle, for 
development of eco-park in 23.48 hectare in Adyar River.  Adyar Poonga was 
renamed as Chennai Rivers Restoration Trust (CRRT) in 2010, with an 
extended mandate to develop, maintain and conserve eco -parks in Chennai 
and any other places of Tamil Nadu to preserve ecological and natural 
resources such as waterways and water bodies. 

Chapter III – Management of Water Bodies 
 45 
CRRT prepared (2010) a DPR for restoration of 121.46 h ectare of Adyar 
River in Adyar estuary and creek8 (Exhibit 3.1).  
Exhibit 3.1: Project area of eco-restoration of Adyar Creek 
 
(Source: Website of Chennai Rivers Restoration Trust) 
GoTN accorded (December 2010) administrative approval for the project at a n 
estimated cost of ` 18.93 crore and subsequently, revised (March 2013) it to  
` 24.93 crore due to change in the scope of work.  The restoration works 
included capital dredging 9 at the river creek and mouth to manage flood 
discharge.  It was also envisaged that dredging at mouth of river at 400 metres 
wide and 1.5 metres deep below Mean Sea Level would keep the river mouth 
open. 
Coastal Regulatory Authority, Ministry of Environment and Forests, G oI, 
while approving the above project, restrained CRRT from dredging the river 
mouth till all the sewage outfalls identified by Chennai Water Supply and 
Sewerage Board (CMWSSB) were plugged.   CMWSSB proposed (July 2012 
and December 2014) to plug all the 49 outfalls in a phased manner with State 
funds.  The works we re started in phases in January 2014 and  
September 2015. As of November 2016, though civil works relating to  
31 outfalls were executed by laying sewer lines, the outfalls were not plugged 
as the sewage source was not yet connected to the newly laid sewer  lines.  
Remaining 18 works were still under progress; 14 of them had overshot the 
original target date by 10 months.  The expenditure incurred on the project till 
September 2016 was ` 16.06 crore. 
Thus, the failure of CMWSSB to connect sewage source to se wer lines, as 
planned, had resulted in delay in plugging the outfalls. Ultimately, the  
 
                                                             
8  A narrow area of water that flows into the land from the sea, a lake etc. 
9 Deepening the bed of river by removing accumulated sand 


Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
 46 
dredging works in the mouth of Adyar River were not started even as of 
November 2016, defeating the objective of smooth discharge of flood water. 
Non-opening of Adyar River mouth prevented free flow of water to the sea 
and the resultant flood in Adyar basin during 2015.  
3.3.2 Deficiencies in eco-restoration of Cooum River 
During 2000-01, GoI formulated the Chennai City River Conservation Project 
(CCRCP) with an objecti ve to prevent sewage entering into waterways, 
augment the treatment capacity of sewage treatment plants (STP) and to keep 
the city waterways clean on sustainable basis.  Under the project, CMWSSB 
carried out the works relating to laying of interceptor sew erage lines along 
Cooum River to intercept and divert all untreated sewage entering the river. 
The scope of the works involved laying of sewage pumping mains and 
construction of four STPs at a cost of ` 382.24 crore during 2001-06. C&AG’s 
Audit Report on Go TN (Civil), 2006, pointed out non -removal of sand bars 
and failure to carryout measures to keep the river mouth open on sustainable 
manner.  WRD, however, had not taken any measures in that direction.  
After a delay of five years, GoTN directed (2011) CRRT  to prepare a DPR for 
restoration of Cooum River.  The consultant engaged (2012) by CRRT 
submitted the DPR in November 2014 and GoTN accorded (January 2015) 
administrative sanction for implementation of Integrated Cooum River  
Eco-restoration Project at a cost of ` 604.77 crore by various agencies.  The 
objective of the project was to improve and maintain flood carrying capacity 
by dredging the river mouth and to abate pollution by intercepting sewage 
outfalls. The project is scheduled to be completed in 2018. 
(A) One major component of the project was to improve the river channel 
through dredging from its mouth to Chetpet bridge.  As the work site was in 
coastal zone, it was mandatory to obtain clearance from Coastal Regulatory 
Authority.  Though the project was approved in January 2015, we noticed that 
Chennai Rivers Restoration Trust ( CRRT) applied for clearance from C oastal 
Regulatory Authority only in February 2016, after a delay of 13 months, 
mainly due to administrative delays. CRRT’s application (Febr uary 2016) for 
clearance was pending with Coastal Regulatory Authority (December 2016).  
As per CRRT’s DPR, there were 118 sewage outfalls into the river.  The study 
report of Public Affairs Committee, Bengaluru, highlighted that Cooum River 
was spoilt by filth and pollution and the water quality was considered to be 
highly toxic.  In order to improve the water quality, CMWSSB planned (June 
2016) for laying interceptor lines to divert sewage.  The work was planned by 
CMWSSB in l0 packages covering a length of 10.51 km.  We noticed 
abnormal delay in executing these works as discussed hereunder: 
 four works were not taken up for want of Coastal Regulation Zone  
clearance and the issue was under correspondence with Coastal 
Regulatory Authority,  
 two works were n ot taken up  due to lack of response for repeated 
tender calls,  

Chapter III – Management of Water Bodies 
 47 
 two works were not taken up as CRRT declined to release funds as 
there was no progress in works and CMWSSB required funds to pay 
mobilisation advance to contractor to commence the work, and 
 two other works were not taken up due to delay in eviction of 
encroachments by Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance Board (TNSCB).  
(B) Under the project, TNSCB was responsible for resettlement of  
14,257 slum families and 458 vendors enumerated along the banks of Coou m 
River.  GoTN approved (January 2015) an outlay of ` 181.85 crore to CRRT 
for resettling the slum families.  CRRT was to release funds to TNSCB based 
on progress in work.  The expenditure included shifting allowance, subsistence 
allowance, EB service conn ection charges, community development 
programme, land cost, etc.  TNSCB sought (October 2016) ` 181.85 crore 
from CRRT for eviction of slum dwellers.  CRRT, however, did not release 
any funds to TNSCB till November 2016, citing lack of progress in the 
preliminary works for resettlement of slum dwellers.  This indicated lack of 
coordination between CRRT and TNSCB on how to go about with eviction. 
Thus, due to lack of planning, the project was taken up after delay of five 
years. Further, the slackness in execu tion of works on plugging of sewage 
outfalls and resettlement of slum families, had resulted in slow progress of the 
project to restore Cooum River.  We observed that completion of the project 
by 2018, as per schedule, would not be possible.  
3.4  Analysis 
Three rivers and several nullahs criss-crossed the city’s length and breadth.  
But, siltation and unplanned construction and encroachments impacted their 
flood carrying capacities. Projects to restore and increase the storage 
capacities of the tanks and r eservoirs suffered setbacks due to faulty planning 
and lack of co-ordination between various Government agencies.  

 
CHAPTER IV
Houses in the foreshore of Perungalathur Lake
ENCROACHMENTS

 
49 
 
 
 
 
The Tamil Nadu Land Encroachment Act, 1905, envisaged continuous 
monitoring of occupation of Government lands to identify encroachments .  As 
per the Act, encroachment of rivers, streams, nullah, lakes, tanks, canals, 
roads, parks, and all other Government lands including land held by Central 
and State Government Departments and Local Bodies is totally prohibited .  
Besides this Act, the Tamil Nadu Protection of Tanks and Eviction of 
Encroachment Act, 2007 was enacted to protect the tanks under the control of 
WRD, and to evict the encroachers occupying such land illegally.   
Issues such as lack of timely action in preventing encroachment , failures on 
the part of public authorities to clear illegal encroachments and local bodies 
which contribute to blocking of waterways are discussed in this chapter.   
4.1 Encroachments contributing to the floods  
SWP, 1994 emphasi sed the need to maximi se the benefits from the available 
water resources by removal and  prevention of encroachment in water courses 
and water bodies .  GoTN instructed (August 2011) the Regional Chief 
Engineers of the WRD to take stringent action to evict encroachment of WRD 
land with the help of police authorities. 
An audit comment was made in the Report of C&AG (Civil Audit), GoTN for 
the year 2005 -06, on non -restoration of storage capacity of 525 irrigation 
tanks.  We had pointed out that 40 per cent  of the test checked tanks were 
encroached, leading to floods in Cooum and Adyar River during November 
2005.  The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) of Tamil Nadu Legislature had 
instructed (June 2014) the GoTN to undertake effective action on restoration 
of storage capacity of the tanks.  Again, in the Audit Report for the year ended 
March 2013, we had pointed out that 43 per cent of the sampled tanks were 
encroached, indicating ineffective enforcement of the Act for eviction of 
encroachment.   
We noticed that despite highlighting the spate of encroachments in successive 
Audit Reports, the enc roachments were still continuing to pose a grave threat 
due to inaction of GoTN in removing encroachments.  As of October 2016, the 
percentage of tanks encroached went up to 6 9, as discussed in  
Paragraph 4.2 below.   
At a macro level, we noticed that as o f 31 March 2016, there were  
7,83,767 documented encroachments illegally occupying Government land of 
79,649 hectare in the State .  The Ministry of Water Resources, G oI, in its 
submission to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, stated 
(August 2016) that encroachment of lakes and river beds played a major role 
in causing the massive floods in Chennai. 
CHAPTER IV  
ENCROACHMENTS  

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
50 
Despite these provisions of the Act and comments in the earlier Audit Reports, 
efforts made by GoTN and PWD in prevention, identification and eviction of 
encroachments in the water bodies were not effective as detailed in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
4.2 Encroachment in tanks 
(A) The Tamil Nadu Protection of Tanks and Eviction of Encroachment 
Act, 2007 was enacted to protect the tanks under the control of WRD and for 
checking the encroachments besides early eviction of the same .  The Act also 
provided for conduct of survey of the tanks in the State by the Officer 
nominated by the Revenue Department to determine their limits, demarcate 
boundaries and initiate action for eviction of encroachment in co -ordination 
with Revenue Department and police authorities. 
The details of the total tanks, tanks surveyed, encroachments identified and 
evicted in the three districts of Chennai and its suburbs are as detailed in 
Table 4.1. 
Table 4.1: Survey of encroachment in tanks 
Period Total 
tanks 
under 
WRD 
No.  of 
tanks 
surveyed 
No.  of 
tanks for 
which 
boundaries 
fixed 
No.  of 
encroach-
ments 
identified 
No.  of 
encroach-
ments 
evicted 
No.  of 
tanks 
restored 
Up to 
31.03.2013 1,540 296 215 16,546 10,083 170 
2013-2014 1,540 0 0 0 0 0 
2014-2015 1,554 214 222 200 100 0 
2015-2016 1,554 41 90 19,168 576 0 
Total 1,554 551 527 36,814 10,764 170 
(Source: Details furnished by the WRD) 
As could be seen from the table,  
 Department could complete survey of only 551 out of 1,554 tanks  
(35 per cent ) after the enactment of the Tamil Nadu Protection of 
Tanks and Eviction of Encroachment Act, 2007 .  The fixing of 
boundaries of all these surveyed 551 tanks could not be completed. 
 Though, 36,814 encroachments were identified till March 2016, only 
10,764 of the identified encroachment (30 per cent) were evicted and 
only 170 tanks were restored to their original capaci ty, leaving the 
remaining 381 tanks (69 per cent) yet to be restored .  No tanks were 
restored during the period 2013-14 to 2015-16. 

Chapter IV – Encroachments 
 
51 
 Department failed to conduct any survey to identify encroachments 
and take action to evict encroachments during the year 2013 -14 
indicating lack of action for removal of encroachments. 
(B) Field visit to Perungalathur Big Tank ( Exhibit 4.1) in Kancheepuram  
District and scrutiny of relevant records revealed that 279 encroachers had 
encroached 4.36 h ectare of water spread area .  WRD replied ( October 2016) 
that efforts were being made for identification and removal of encroachment 
in coordination with line dep artments and agencies like Revenue Department, 
Police Department, Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance Board, etc. 
Exhibit 4.1: Encroachment in Perungalathur Big Tank  
 
(Source: Photo taken by Audit team during Joint Inspection) 
Thus, despite availability of strong statutory backing and the matter being  
pointed out in the earlier Audit Reports, majority of encroachments in water 
bodies continued to thrive without eviction, even after lapse of nine years from 
the enactment of the A ct resulting in non -achievement of objective of 
preservation of water bodies besides contributing to flooding in Chennai and 
its suburban areas during December 2015. 
Recommendation No . 12: We recommend framing stringent laws to fix 
responsibility on the of ficials responsible for non -enforcement of the 
provisions of the TN Tank Protection and Eviction of Encroachment  Act in 
identifying and eviction of encroachments of any nature. 
4.3 Encroachment of rivers 
Though it is a bounden duty of the Revenue Authorities to protect Government 
land from encroachments, every year, before monsoon, the Commissioner of  
 


Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
52 
Revenue Administration issues a circular with a checklist to all District 
Collectors, inter alia, directing them to remove all encroachments along water 
bodies.  Despite having statutory powers and clear knowledge and directions 
on the issue, the Revenue Authorities and WRD had continued to tacitly allow 
encroachments and failed to remove encroachments.   
The details of encroachments in the Adyar, Cooum Rivers and Buckingham 
Canal available in Chennai and suburb an areas, number of encroachment and 
slum families living on encroached land as of December 2015 are given 
below: 
Chart 4.1: Encroachment along rivers 
(Source: Data furnished by Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance Board) 
As may be seen from the above, either side of Adyar River bank was 
encroached to an extent of 30.2 out of 85 km (36 per cent) by 9,539 families .  
Absence of effective action in eviction of these  encroachments resulted in 
obstruction of the flow of flood water in the Adyar River which caused 
inundation in the adjoining areas .  During Joint Inspection (October 2016) of 
Accountant General’s (E&RSA) Team along with officials of WRD, CE, 
WRD admitted that at the time of December 2015 floods, 9 out of 12 vents 1 
under Maraimalai Adigalar Bridge across the Adyar River at Saidapet were 
encroached leading to overflowing of the river at Saidapet .  We observed 
during the Joint Inspection that 5 out of these 1 2 vents were continued to be 
encroached (Exhibit 4.2) by slum dwellers indicating absence of effective 
steps in removal of encroachments despite huge loss to life and property in the 
catastrophic floods. 
                                                             
1 Openings under the bridges which permit flow of water in the river 
0
10
20
30
40
Length of river bank 
encroached (In KM)
Number of 
encroachments (in 
thousands)
Number of families (in 
thousands)
30.2
12.37 9.54
22.7
16.82 14.316.5
26.3 26.3
Adyar Cooum Buckingham Canal

Chapter IV – Encroachments 
 
53 
Exhibit 4.2: Encroachments  in Maraimalai Adigalar bridge (with blocked vents) 
 (Source: Photo taken by Audit team during Joint Inspection) 
 Along Cooum River, out of the total length of 80 km of the banks ,  
22.7 km (28 per cent ) was encroached by 14,257 slum families and 
others.  We conducted a  joint inspection of river bank along with 
officials of the line departments and found that the slum encroachment 
along the bund of the river (Exhibit 4.3) had reduced the width of its 
carrying capacity.   
Exhibit 4.3: Encroachment along Cooum River 
Blocked vent and sewage outfall (Langs Garden) 
(Source: Photo taken by Audit team during Joint Inspection) 


Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
54 
Encroachment and sewage outfall (Pallavan Nagar) 
(Source: Photo taken by Audit team during Joint Inspection) 
 Seventeen per cent  of the banks of Buckingham Canal (16.5 out of  
96 km) was encroached by 26,300 families .  Joint site inspection of 
central Buckingham Canal by the Audit team with the departmental 
officials revealed that encroachers were provided w ith electricity 
connection, proper roads, common water supply and ration cards  
indicating tacit support of the G oTN in helping encroachments.  It was 
also noticed that the sanctioned flood protection works in Buckingham 
Canal could not be carried out due t o existence of encroachments 
(Exhibit 4.4) to an extent of about three km. 
 
(Source: Photo taken by Audit team during Joint Inspection) 
Thus, the encroachment in the rivers and canals had contributed to flooding in 
slums and also the adjoining areas of the test checked zones of Adyar, 
Alandur, Ambattur, Kodambakkam and Perungudi .  The District Collector,  
 
Exhibit 4.4: Encroachment in Buckingham Canal 


Chapter IV – Encroachments 
 
55 
Chennai (July 2016) stated that encroachment to an extent of 58.58 hectare in 
Adyar River at various reaches, which contributed to the floods of 2015,  were 
identified subsequent to the floods and boundaries were fixed for  
39.28 hectare, leaving boundaries to be defined for 19.30 hectare.   
WRD stated (August 2016) that 4,134 families encroaching the banks of 
Adyar River were evicted through a special drive after the floods of December 
2015.  The number of families evicted was 43 per cent of the encroachments 
along Adyar River.  But, only 397 families encroaching Cooum River were 
evicted through special drive after the floods, which was negligible in 
comparison with the total of 14, 257 families encroaching the margins of 
Cooum River. 
Chief Engineer, WRD, in the exit conference, expressed that the Department 
did not possess independent powers for eviction of encroachments in rivers as 
the Tamil Nadu Protec tion of Tanks and Eviction of Encroachment Act 2007 
did not include rivers.  The reply was not acceptable as the Department failed 
to comply with the instructions of the Government and efforts for demarcation 
of boundaries and eviction of encroachments cou ld have been made in co -
ordination with the Revenue Department. 
Recommendation No .  13: We recommend strict enforcement of the TN 
Land Encroachment Act, 1905 to prevent encroachment and to evict 
encroachments already taken place. 
4.4 Encroachment of water bodies by local bodies 
Scrutiny of records in the test checked Municipalities and Town Panchayats 
revealed that the local bodies had encroached the water bodies, for 
construction of permanent structures and also as dumping yard, as discussed 
hereunder: 
(i)  Peerkankaranai Town Panchayat requested (2004) the District 
Collector for assigning land for Solid Waste Management (SWM) facility .  
Without waiting for assignment of land by the District Collector, the Town 
Panchayat established (July 2005) the SWM faci lity in a 0.20 hectare plot 
inside Peerkankaranai Lake ( Exhibit 4.5).  Despite objection on 
environmental concern by the TN Pollution Control Board, the Town 
Panchayat constructed (July 2013) a compound wall at a cost of ` 20.84 lakh.  
In reply, GoTN state d (May 2017) that the District Collector had allotted 
(August 2016) an alternative land for construction of SWM facility and the 
unit will be shifted soon .  We observed that WRD, which is responsible for 
maintenance of this tank failed in its mandated duti es to prevent the Town 
Panchayat from the callous action of encroaching the water body for solid 
waste disposal.  The failure of District Collector, who took 12 years to identify 
and assign a suitable land for the SWM facility, also contributed to the 
degradation of the lake.   
 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
56 
Exhibit 4.5: SWM facility inside Peerkankaranai Lake 
(Source: Photo taken by Audit team during Joint Inspection) 
(ii)  Sembakkam Municipality constructed (2006) a compost yard in 
Sembakkam Lake encroaching an area of 300 square metre.  Though SWM 
activities were discontinued in September 2015, the site still remained 
encroached (November 2016) .  Government stated (April 2017) that clearing 
the dumped garbage from the banks of lake would be taken up under Swachh 
Bharat Mission com ponent for which administrative approval had been 
accorded for ` 163 lakh.   
(iii)  Pallavapuram Municipality utilised 40.49 hectare in Pallavaram Big 
Lake as a dumping yard till June 2015 .  Even though the SWM activities were 
discontinued, the damage caused to the lake had not been restored (November 
2016).  Government stated (April 2017) that the dumped garbage would be 
disposed by scientific closure method. 
We observed that these encroachments of water bodies had reduced the 
capacity of Peerkankaranai, Sembakkam and Pallavaram Lakes to store water, 
thereby contributing to inundation in the adjacent areas. 
4.4.1 Illegal constructions in water bodies in suburban areas 
WRD and local bodies are the custodians of water bodies .  Revenue 
Department is the custodian of Government land and has the power and 
responsibility to check encroachment of Government land.   
Scrutiny of records of Peerkankaranai and Thiruneermalai Town Panchayats 
and joint inspections revealed that there were encroachments in the water  
bodies as discussed below:  
(a) A colony was developed by Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance Board 
(TNSCB) to accommodate the slum dwellers from other parts of the 
city in the Peerkankaranai Chitheri .  The Revenue authorities had 
alienated water body to TNSCB to const ruct tenements.  As per the 
provisions of the Revenue Standing Orders, in areas where agriculture 
had ceased to be practiced and the irrigation tanks serving them were 
under disuse, Revenue Authorities were empowered to hand over the 
tank bed land for cons truction activities .  We observed that this 


Chapter IV – Encroachments 
 
57 
provision, granting legitimacy to urbanise tank beds contributed to the 
shrinkage of water bodies in CMA and contributed to the floods of 
2015.  We found the above provision was against the stipulations of 
SMP, according to which construction activities have been prohibited 
in water bodies.   
(b) Two illegal colonies had encroached upon the tanks viz., 
Veeraraghavan Eri, Periya Eri and Chitheri in Thiruneermalai Town 
Panchayat.  The local bod y had provided infrastruct ure facilities such 
as roads, lighting and water supply in all the above illegal colonies 
indicating that the Government agencies were also involved in 
encouraging illegal colonies and they were working against the 
declared policy, statutes and instruction s according to which illegal 
colonies and encroachments should not be allowed to exist in the State.   
(c) Four illegal colonies had encroached upon a stream in Perungalathur 
village for 1.40 hectare.   
(d) Illegal houses had encroached upon an area of a lake in 
Varadarajapuram village to the extent of 2.40 hectare.   
(e) Five illegal colonies had encroached upon water bodies (Adyar River, 
Odai and bund) in Anakaputhur village to the extent of 6.03 hectare. 
To an audit enquiry, the Executive Officer, Peerkankaranai Tow n Panchayat 
replied that as occupants of all illegal colonies inside water bodies in the Town 
Panchayat were issued with Patta by Revenue Authorities, taxes were 
collected and basic amenities like roads, street lights and water supply were 
provided.  The Executive Officer, Thiruneermalai Town Panchayat replied 
(July 2016) that, since these developments were not covered by Patta from the 
Revenue Department, property tax was not collected for these buildings .  He 
further stated that other amenities such as r oads, street lights and water supply 
were provided in all the areas including areas covered under water body. 
Thus, we observed that in these cases of illegal colonies in water bodies, 
WRD, local bodies and Revenue authorities had failed to prevent the 
encroachments.  Further, the Revenue Authorities and GoTN, applied the 
provisions of Revenue Standing Orders, with impunity, on disposal of tank 
bed land of unused irrigation tanks .  The RSO being in violation of the 
provisions of the TN Tank Protection and E viction of Encroachment Act, 
2007, allowed constructions in water bodies thereby endangering the life and 
property of the people during floods which are being faced frequently in the 
city, the ill effects of which have been witnessed in the recent floods i n 2015 
by the State. 
Recommendation No.  14: We recommend that the Revenue Standing Order  
(RSO) should be amended to make it illegal to dispose of the tank bed land.   
 
 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
58 
4.5 Structural hindrances in Adyar River course 
(i)  The main campus of the Officers Training Academy (OTA) of 
Ministry of Defence is located on the northern side of Adyar River at Saint 
Thomas Mount in Chennai .  The training area of OTA is located on the 
southern side of the river .  An existing causeway 2 across Adyar River served 
for accessing the training area of OTA from its main campus .  The permission 
sought by OTA for construction of a bailey bridge across Adyar River was 
rejected (June 2012) by GoTN as it would obstruct the free flow of water in 
the river and hence not feasible to allow permission.  Based on the subsequent 
request from OTA (June 2012), GoTN accorded permission for construction 
of bailey bridge for a length of 45 meters (150 feet) on temporary basis .  OTA 
constructed the Bailey bridge for a length of 45 meters with e arthen ramps on 
either side across the Adyar River thereby intruding the water course to 
obstruct free flow of water.   
We observed that while granting permission for construction of Bailey bridge 
to cover a width of 45 meters, GoTN failed to consider the 90 meters width of 
Adyar River at that point.  As the bridge covered only 50 per cent of the river 
width, earthen ramps were constructed on either side of the bridge for the 
balance 50 per cent of the river width, blocking the free flow of the river  
(Exhibit 4.6). 
 
(Source: Water Resources Department) 
The bridge permitted on temporary basis during June 2012 continued to be 
operational till December 2015, without any proposal for construction  of 
permanent bridge at the site .  The obstructions created by the causeway and 
the Bailey bridge with earthen ramps, caused overflow of flood water at that 
point during heavy flow of water in the Adyar River during floods in 2015, 
thereby inundating Nandambakkam and Manapakkam areas .  We noticed that 
                                                             
2 A raised road or path to cross a water body which allows water to flow over the 
structure 
Exhibit 4.6: Ramp of Bailey bridge protruding into Adyar River 


Chapter IV – Encroachments 
 
59 
the floods had washed away the Bailey bridge and that during joint inspection 
(October 2016) of the site, it was observed that the damaged ramps of the 
Bailey bridge were continuing to hinder free flow of water in the river. 
Thus, failure of the Government to consider the width of the river while 
allowing construction of Bailey bridge with ramps across the Adyar River, 
resulted in inundation of residential areas during the December 2015 floods.   
On being asked , Government did not furnish any specific reason for granting 
permission but stated (March 2017) that efforts would be made to remove 
damaged portions of the ramp from the river.   
(ii)  A causeway bridge at Jafferkhanpet, blocking the free flow of water i n 
Adyar River, was not removed though an over -bridge in lieu of the causeway 
bridge was already constructed by Highways Department and put into use .  At 
the same location, Chennai Metro Rail Limited (CMRL) had constructed a 
bridge across the river with its  three pile caps protruding above the river bed 
(Exhibit 4.7) without obtaining NOC from WRD .  We observed that WRD 
had turned a blind eye to these violations by CMRL, which is also a 
Government Agency.  The existing causeway and the pile caps by CMRL in 
violation of Government instructions hindered free flow of water in Adyar 
River resulting in inundation of flood waters in Ekkaduthangal, MGR Nagar, 
Jafferkhanpet and K.K.  Nagar areas. 
The Divisional Engineer, Highways Department stated (December 2016) tha t 
line Departments had been requested for removal of utilities to enable 
dismantling of the causeway bridge .  Government agreed (March 2017) to 
initiate action in this regard. 
Exhibit 4.7: Metro Rail pile caps and old causeway  
(Source: Photo taken by Audit team during Joint Inspection) 
(iii)  Scrutiny of records of GCC revealed that a 420 met res long high level 
bridge constructed (December 2009) under JNNURM had encroached upon 
the river at Guindy Industrial Area to an extent of 15 metres from the 
boundary of the river, reducing the carrying capacity of the river .  GoTN 
stated (April 2017) that the bridge was constructed according to the site 
conditions and river boundary available at that time .  The reply was 
unacceptable as the ramp of the bridge was  clearly protruding into the river 


Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
60 
obstructing its flow as was pointed out by the Chief Engineer, WRD and 
observed during joint inspection of the site.   
(iv) Across Adyar River at Kotturpuram, a high level bridge was 
constructed in lieu of an old bridge .  The old bridge, though not utili sed for 
vehicular traffic, was not demolished .  It was being utili sed for carrying 
pipelines of CMWSSB ( Exhibit 4.8), which acted as barricade to the flow of 
water and caused afflux of flood waters causing huge inundation i n the 
upstream areas of Kotturpuram.   
Exhibit 4.8: Old bridge blocking the free flow of water 
(Source: Photo taken by Audit team during Joint Inspection) 
We are constrained to record the callous attitude of the WRD in allowing these 
obstructions in the water bodies which contributed to the 2015 floods.   
(v)  Airports Authority of India approached WRD (May 2009) and sought 
NOC for expansion of Chennai International A irport by construction of 
secondary runway across Adyar River, which also necessitated dismantling 
recently constructed check dam.  The proposal was agreed to by the GoTN and 
NOC was issued with conditions, inter alia, that (i) the construction cost of the 
check dam i.e.  ` 3.52 crore be remitted to GoTN account,  (ii) Airport s 
Authority shou ld deploy flood safety arrangements on either side of the 
bridge, and (iii) Airport s authority should carry out periodical maintenance 
including desilting works .  The Airport s authority constructed (2011 -12) the 
secondary runway.  A study (2012) by Anna University indicated that the piles 
under the runway reduced the width of the Adyar River, thereby increasing the 
possibility of floods in the nearby areas .  The findings of Anna University 
were proved right as the Airport and the adjoining areas were severely 
inundated during 2015 flood (Exhibit 4.9).  During joint inspection conducted 
by the Audit team along with CE, WRD, it was noticed that the individual 
pillars supporting the runway, without any wall connecting them, acted as filth 
accumulators thereby obstructing the free flow of river. 


Chapter IV – Encroachments 
 
61 
Exhibit 4.9: Flooding of Chennai International Airport 
(Source: Airports Authority of India) 
We observed that WRD failed to ensure compliance to the NOC conditions 
relating to flood protection works and periodical  maintenance by the Airport 
authority.  GoTN stated (March 2017) that detailed survey would be done to 
tackle this issue.  The reply did not address the audit findings as compliance to 
NOC conditions should have been monitored continuously by WRD. 
4.6  Analysis 
Encroachments, a menace, in the path of flood mitigation works, had not been 
effectively handled by the Government.  Though the city is well endowed with 
several natural lakes and manmade tanks and reservoirs, encroachment s 
reduced their water storing capacity.  Local bodies had themselves encroached 
upon tank beds for dumping of garbage and contributed to pollution and 
choking of water bodies.  Even Government agencies encroached water bodies 
for developing public infrastru cture, unmindful of the damage they caused to 
flood carrying capacity of water bodies.  Encroachment on tank beds and river 
margins remained unchecked despite  TN Land Encroachment Act, 1905 and 
TN Protection of Tanks and Eviction of Encroachment Act, 2007 are in place 
to tackle this menace.   


 
CHAPTER V
DRAINAGE SYSTEM IN
CHENNAI METROPOLITAN
AREA
Pappan channel, Tambaram

 
63 
 
 
 
 
5.1 Flood protection works 
The National Water Policy recommends that water resource development and 
management has to be done for a hydrological unit such as a drainage basin as 
a whole, or for a sub-basin.  The approach needs to address not only irrigation 
but other requirements such as, domestic, industrial, energy, recreational and 
other uses as well .  The importance of planning any project within broad 
framework of river basin master plan has been, therefo re, amply emphasised.  
Improvements to macro and micro drainages 1 are, therefore, vital to address 
the challenges of flooding. 
The macro drainage works are executed by Water Resources Department 
(WRD) and the micro drainage works are executed by Greater Ch ennai 
Corporation (GCC) and respective local bodies. 
With a view to mitigate flooding in Chennai city due to frequent heavy rains, 
after the floods of 2005, WRD proposed to carryout flood protection works 
under the centrally sponsored scheme of JNNURM.  As JNNURM works were 
related to urban areas, the preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) was 
entrusted to GCC to provide solution for the inundation problems of Chennai 
city.  The DPRs were prepared in 2008-09.   
GoTN accorded (October 2009) administrat ive sanction for improvement to 
macro drainages maintained by WRD in the four basins 2 of Chennai at a cost 
of ` 633.03 crore using JNNURM funds (35 per cent ) and State funds   
(65 per cent).  The works were to be executed in 10 packages .  The works in 
seven packages were awarded between June 2010 and April 2011 to various 
contractors.  The C&AG’s Audit Report on GoTN (Economic Sector) for the 
year ended 2012-13 had pointed out that these works were not completed due 
to improper planning, non-acquisition of land, lack of co-ordination with other 
departments, and non -eviction of encroachments .  We observed that these 
issues continued to persist and consequently, the works were getting delayed 
as discussed in the following paragraphs.  Works in three other packages were 
not commenced due to non-removal of encroachments in waterways by WRD, 
where such works were required to be carried out. 
                                                             
1 Rivers and canals, under the control of WRD, constitute macro drainages and storm 
water drains under the control of GCC, constitute micro drainages 
2 Northern Basin (Ambattur, Kathirvedu, Korattur and Otteri); Central Basin 
(Arumbakkam, Koyambedu, Maduravoil and Virugambakkam); Eastern Basin 
(Adyar, Ice House, Mandaveli, Muttukadu, Mylapore, Triplicane and Wall Tax 
Road) and Southern Basin (Manapakkam, Pallikaranai, Porur, Ram Nagar, Taramani 
and Velachery) 
CHAPTER V  
DRAINAGE SYSTEM IN  
CHENNAI METROPOLITAN AREA  

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
64 
While implementing the seven packages awarded in 2010 -11, WRD faced 
constraints in the DPR prepared in 2008 -09 such as low soi l bearing capacity 
of the work site, need for changing the construction methodology,  
non-availability of land due to encroachments,  non-feasibility of the proposed 
alignment, etc .  Therefore, WRD prepared (September 2012) a revised DPR 
for executing the work in all the ten packages including in the seven packages 
which were awarded, but faced various constraints in implementation .  The 
revised DPR was approved by  GoI, Ministry of Urban Development in 
December 2012.   
After approval of the DPR by Go I in December 2012, and subsequent 
approval by Technical Advisory Committee and Tender Award Committee, 
GoTN accorded (September 2014) Revised Administrative Sanction for the 
ten packages at a total cost of ` 699.86 crore.   
We observed from the fact that the works could not be carried out based on the 
DPR of 2008 -09, which indicated that the DPR was defective, warranting a 
revised DPR and the consequent delay in implementation of the works.   
As of March 2016, three out of the ten packages were successfull y completed.  
Deficiencies in the execution of the remaining packages, contributing to  
non-achievement of objectives of these works despite incurring an expenditure 
of ` 274.05 crore, are discussed in Paragraphs 5.1.1 to 5.1.8. 
Northern Basin  
5.1.1 Work not completed due to non -completion of land acquisition 
despite directive by the Hon’ble Supreme Court to acquire 
remaining land 
GoTN sanctioned (October 2009) construction of a diversion channel for 
carrying 300 cusec of surplus water from Kolathur Tank to Madhavaram Tank 
to reduce inundation in adjoining areas due to overflowing of Ko lathur Tank’s 
surplus course .  The work of creation of the channel for 1,830  m out of  
3,150 m was completed by incurring an expenditure of ` 13.92 crore .  The 
balance work of creation of channel for 1,320  m was not executed due to legal 
proceedings in the acquisition of land and the partly executed work was closed 
by WRD (July 2015).   
We observed that the legal appeal filed by the land owners was disposed of 
(September 2014) by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India with direction to 
GoTN to start land acquisition process afresh .  But, WRD without taking any 
initiative to acquire the land, closed the work in July 2015, ten months after 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court’s direction.  This lackadaisical approach of WRD 
had resulted in non -achievement of the objective of constructing diversion  
channel from Kol athur Tank to Madhavaram Tank and thus, the expenditure 
of ` 13.92 crore incurred on the partial work proved unfruitful .  Non-
completion of the channel resulted in inundation of nearby areas of 
Thanikachalam Nagar of Kolathur  during the December 2015 floods. 

Chapter V – Drainage System in Chennai Metropolitan Area 
 
65 
GoTN replied (February 2017) that efforts would be made to complete the 
land acquisition.  The reply was not tenable as GoT N had not initiated any 
action even after a lapse of three years since the judgement of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court allowing fresh land acquisition.  Thus, there is need for GoTN 
to complete the work after ensuring acquisition of remaining land as per 
directives of the Hon’ble Supreme Court for achieving the intended objective 
of the work. 
5.1.2 Failure to create additional vent resulted in afflux of water  
GoTN sanctioned (Oc tober 2009) the work of improvements to Ambattur 
Tank surplus drainage channel to mitigate inundation in Ambattur industrial 
area of North Chennai by discharging 1,830 cusec of surplus water from 
Ambattur Tank to Korattur Tank.  The works included construction of weirs at 
left and right flank, flood protection walls, bridge etc. 
We had observed 3 that the work could not be fully completed even after 
incurring an expenditure of ` 18.68 crore due to non -receipt of permission for 
provision of additional vent for transferring 570 cusec under the Railway track 
considering the safety of the tracks.   
We also observed from the scrutiny of records that no efforts were made by 
WRD for redesigning the vents in accordance with the safety requirements of 
the Railways but pre -closed the execution of work  
(March 2015) .  This resulted in non -achievement of the objective of 
transferring 570 cusec  of water and continued inundation and flo oding in 
Ambattur and SIDCO industrial areas. 
Thus, failure of WRD to commence the work after obtaining necessary 
permissions or to initiate efforts for redesigning the vents in accordance with 
the requirement of railways resulted in non -achievement of des ired objective, 
besides unfruitful expenditure of  ` 18.68 crore. 
5.1.3  Unfruitful expenditure on partially executed surplus channel work 
Para 100 of P ublic Works Department (P WD) Code envisaged that no 
estimates should be prepared for any work except on the basis of a detailed 
investigation on the site .  Para 180 also stipulated that no work should be 
started on land which was not duly handed over. 
(A) Korattur Tank having capacity of 0.236 TMC is situated in Ambattur 
taluk, Tiruvallur District .  The tank  had a defined surplus course only for a 
length of 1,750 m.  Thereafter, it spreads over and takes a natural course for a 
length of 1 ,290 m., passing through patta lands before falling into 
Madhavaram Tank.  In 2010 , the National Highways Authority of Indi a 
(NHAI) proposed construction of Chennai bypass road, with its alignment 
cutting across the surplus course of Korattur Tank.  During commencement of 
the work on the bypass road , NHAI had proposed (February 2010) for 
                                                             
3 Paragraph 2.13.4 of C&AG’s Audit Report (Economic Sector), GoTN for the year  
2012-13 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
66 
construction of a drain along the service road for taking the Korattur Tank’s 
surplus water  to Madhavaram Tank (Exhibit 5.1).  The proposal was 
discussed by NHAI and WRD authorities, and it was suggested by WRD for 
construction of box culverts at two locat ions to carry surplus water across the 
road to its natural drains .  WRD had not agreed to the NHAI proposal of 
construction of a drain along service road .  NHAI had completed (2011) 
Chennai Bypass road and service road with box culverts at two locations as  
suggested by WRD.   
Exhibit 5.1: Illustrative sketch showing existing and proposed alignment of Korattur 
Tank’s surplus course 
 
 
Not to scale 
The bypass road work was completed with box culvert underneath the road to 
carry the surplus water of Korattur Tank, instead of constructing a drain along 
the service road as was suggested by NHAI .  After crossing the bypass road 
through box culverts, the surplus water took natural course over the patta 
lands, thereby contributing to inundation in adjoining areas .  The failure of 
WRD to agree to the proposal of NHAI resulted in continued flow of the 
surplus water through thickly populated areas contributing to the inundation in 
the adjoining areas. 
(B) Subsequent to the construction of Chennai Bypass, the work of 
improvements to diversion channel to Korattur Tank surplus course to carry 
600 cusec water was approved (December 2012) in the Revised DPR .  The 
work involved creation of regulatory arrangement to the existing weirs, 
construction of cut and cover type surplus channel for 850 m along the service 
road of NHAI and construction of flood protection wall to the surplus channel. 
Based on the approval (July 2013) of the Technical Advisory Committee of 
GoTN, Technical Sanction was accorded (December 2013) by CE, WRD f or 
execution of the work at a cost of ` 27.76 crore .  The work was awarded 
(February 2014) for ` 27.67 crore to the lowest bidder for completion in nine 
months.   
WRD requested (June 2014) permission from NHAI for construction of cut 
and cover type surplus  channel along the service road .  NHAI refused 
(October 2014) permission citing non -availability of sufficient land for 


Chapter V – Drainage System in Chennai Metropolitan Area 
 
67 
execution of work in the service road and such construction would also disturb 
the embankment of the existing NHAI bridge.  WRD engaged the services of a 
consultant from IIT, Madras to assess the possibility of undertaking cut and 
cover type surplus channel and the consultant opined that excavation of the 
service road for box type surplus channel would weaken the embankment of 
the bridge.  The contractor completed the other items of the work at a cost of  
` 17.94 crore and requested for foreclosure of the work citing non -availability 
of work front and the work was foreclosed (May 2015).   
We observed that despite non -initiation of proceedin gs seeking permission 
from NHAI and without ensuring work front for execution of work, WRD had 
prematurely finalised the contract and commenced other components of the 
work.  This resulted in pre -closure of the work after incurring an expenditure 
of ` 17.94 crore.  Thus, absence of proper planning in management of macro 
drains in diversion of surplus waters, finalisation of alignment without proper 
feasibility study, commencement of work without ensuring the availability of 
work front and in contravention o f the codal provisions resulted in unfruitful 
expenditure of  ` 17.94 crore on the partially executed work besides  
non-achievement of the envisaged objective .  Partial execution of the work 
was of no use as the surplus course of 600 cusec from Korattur Tank could not 
be linked to the downstream Madhavaram Tank, thus, defeating the very 
objective of the project.   
Thus, (a) the injudicious decision of WRD in 2010 to construct box culvert 
instead of drain along the service road and (b) the resultant failure in executing 
the drain work sanctioned in 2013 due to refusal of permission by NHAI as it 
would damage the existing bridge, had contributed to huge inundation and loss 
of property in the residential areas of INTUC Nagar, Collector Nagar and 
Ambedkar Nagar of Kathirvedu village during 2015. 
Government replied (March 2017) that efforts were being made to commence 
the work in the service road without damaging the embankment of highway .  
The reply was not tenable as WRD should have done a proper feasibility study 
as the alignment of the channel along the service road was not at all feasible 
with the present design. 
Southern basin  
5.1.4 Incorrect assessment of field conditions in the DPR resulted in 
non-achievement of objective and unfruitful expenditure  
During the f loods in 2005, Velachery and its adjoining areas were one of the 
worst affected areas which faced massive inundation, the reasons for which 
may be primarily attributed to poor drainage system and non -existence of 
diversion channel from Velachery Tank to South Buckingham Canal.  As 
such, GoTN sanctioned (October 2009) the work of providing a short cut 
diversion drainage channel for a length of 4,100 m to carry surplus water from 
Velachery Tank to Sou th Buckingham Canal near T IDEL Park at a cost of  
` 58.15 crore, which was subsequently revised to ` 88.34 crore.  The work 
was subsequently awarded (June 2010) to a contractor for completion in  

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
68 
18 months.  WRD handed over the site to the contractor in May 2011 after a 
delay of 12 months due to defects in the DPR, which are as follows:  
 As no field study was conducted during the preparation of DPR, WRD 
could not ascertain that Grade separator piers of Highways Department 
were lying, which were overlapping the alignment of the proposed 
channel work in one stretch (LS 0 -220 m), resulting in  delayed 
execution of work. 
 The DPR failed to assess that routine traffic was required to be 
diverted for execution of the work in a stretch of 60  m (4,040 –  
4,100 m), for which prior permission from Police Department was 
required to be obtained .  No such field study was conducted, which 
again contributed to delayed execution of the work. 
We further observed that the DPR had even failed to  assess that the 
conventional construction method would not be feasible for a length of  
2,690 m out of the total length of 4,100  m as there were 23 road crossings 
including a major crossing near Velachery Bus Stand .  As a result, the entire 
stretch of work , which should have been completed by the stipulated period 
i.e.  November 2012, was not completed till date (May 2017).   
Thus, incorrect preparation of DPR without assessing the field conditions, 
delayed handing over of work front and absence of co -ordination for 
finalisation of alignment resulted in unfruitful expenditure of ` 72.42 crore 
besides non -achievement of flood mitigation in the areas .  This led to 
inundation in the Velachery area during the December 2015 floods. 
Government stated (March 2017) that presence of heavy traffic in the stretch 
and necessity of required permission from various agencies delayed the 
completion of work.  The fact however remains that WRD failed to ensure the 
correctness of methodology suggested in the DPR while according  Technical 
Sanction for the work which resulted in non-achievement of the objective even 
after five years despite being pointed out in the earlier Audit Report. 
5.1.5  Non-commencement of diversion channel work resulting in 
inundation 
GoTN sanctioned (Janu ary 2010) two works, viz., (i) improvements to South 
Buckingham Canal from Okkiyum Maduvu to Muttukadu backwater to carry 
9,000 cusec of flood waters and provide relief from inundation of Velachery 
and (ii) a short cut diversion channel from Buckingham Canal (near 
confluence of Okkiyum Maduvu) to the Bay of Bengal to carry 3,500 cusec of 
flood waters for effective draining of flood waters from the Pallikarnai 
marshland at a total cost of ` 131.90 crore.   
WRD completed (December 2014) the first component  of the work of 
improvements to south Buckingham Canal to carry 9,000 cusec of flood water 
from Okkiyum  Maduvu to Muttukadu backwater .  But, while preparing the 
revised DPR in 2012, WRD proposed to drop the second component of the 
work of constructing shor t cut diversion channel from Buckingham Canal to 

Chapter V – Drainage System in Chennai Metropolitan Area 
 
69 
the Bay of Bengal as the proposed alignment was to pass through ‘VGP 
Golden Beach’, a popular sea shore resort cum amusement park, citing land 
acquisition cost of ` 100 crore .  The Central Public Health Envi ronmental 
Engineering Organi sation (CPHEEO) of G oI, Ministry of Urban 
Development, while appraising the revised DPR did not agree to the proposal 
of WRD to drop the diversion channel work and instructed that the decision 
was required to be reviewed by GoTN  keeping in view the importance of the 
component.  Despite strong recommendation of CPHEEO,  GoTN dropped the 
work after incurring an expenditure of ` 90.34 crore.  We had observed4 that 
the work of short cut diversion channel from Buckingham Canal to Bay o f 
Bengal, was not commenced due to the involvement of acquisition of private 
lands costing about  ` 100 crore.  GoTN finally dropped (October 2014) the 
project citing land acquisition problems. 
We observed that absence of short cut diversion channel led to increased 
discharge of 12,500 cusec of flood waters into the Buckingham Canal, 
designed to carry 9,000 cusec, resulting in inundation of Velachery and 
adjacent areas. 
Thus, the action of the Governm ent in not considering alternative  options and 
deciding to  drop the project citing land acquisition cost,  indicated lack of 
seriousness in fulfilling the objective of providing a permanent solution to the 
inundation problems of the thickly populated Velachery area.   
5.1.6 Unfruitful expenditure on partially completed surplus course 
Porur Tank situated in the city limits of Chennai was catering to the drinking 
water needs of the residents of the city .  The tank did not possess a defined 
surplus course or regulatory arrangement .  The tank discharged 600 cusec of 
surplus water through weirs which passed through patta lands causing 
inundation during monsoon.   
WRD proposed (August 2009) for providing a defined surplus course to 
connect the Porur Tank to the existing Manapakkam drain for final discharge 
into Adyar Rive r.  Accordingly, GoTN sanctioned (October 2009)  
` 26.96 crore for improvements to Porur Tank surplus drainage by weir 
reconstruction, widening and deepening canal and widening of existing 
bridges.   
We had observed5 that the work could not be commenced due to inability of 
WRD to acquire the required land for the project. 
WRD revised the alignment of the surplus course for length of 1,165 m and 
for provision of cut and cover canal with pre -cast concrete in the service  road 
of NHAI to an extent of 745 m, at a cost of ` 49.92 crore and CE accorded 
(January 2014)  revised T echnical Sanction.  The work was awarded to the 
                                                             
4 Paragraph 2.13.1 of C&AG’s Audit Report (Economic Sector), GoTN for the year 
2012-13 
5 Paragraph 2.13.4 of C&AG’s Audit Report (Economic Sector), GoTN for the year  
2012-13 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
70 
lowest bidder for ` 45.53 crore for completion in 15 months from February 
2014.  WRD forwarded (June 201 4) a proposal seeking permission from 
NHAI to undertake the work in the service road for a length of 745 m .  NHAI 
returned (December 2014) the proposal stating that the drawing indicated the 
total width of canal as 5.9 m and considering the width of service road (5.5 m), 
execution of the work would damage drain along the main carriage way.   
Despite notice from NHAI (February 2015) directing not to commence the 
work without approval, WRD commenced construction work and partially 
executed 495 m of the canal work.  The work was stopped after the matter was 
taken up by NHAI with GoTN indicating that the continuance of work by 
WRD without permission amounted to trespassing and illegal activity under 
the provisions of National Highways Act, 1956.   The work was st opped 
(March 2016) after incurring an expenditure of ` 45.03 crore. 
We observed as under from the scrutiny of records: 
 WRD failed to undertake proper field investigation and to determine 
the adequate width of the canal in consonance with the width of  the 
service road resulting in non -receipt of required permission from 
NHAI.   
 Commencement of work on the service road without permission 
resulted in illegal activity by WRD contravening the provisions of 
National Highways Act which calls for fixing of respon sibility on the 
officials concerned. 
 The work was pre -closed without completing 250 m, which was in the 
initial stretches of the surplus canal, which resulted in unfruitful 
expenditure of ` 45.03 crore incurred on the canal in subsequent 
stretches due to i ts non -utilisation besides inundation in the nearby 
areas. 
Thus, the failure of WRD to undertake proper field investigation and to 
determine the adequate width of the canal resulted in unfruitful expenditure on 
the partially completed work besides non -achievement of the envisaged 
objective despite being pointed out in the earlier Audit Report. 
In the Exit conference (February 2017) wi th the S ecretary to Government, 
PWD, WRD officers informed that the work would be completed after 
obtaining necessary permiss ion from NHAI .  The reply did not address the 
Audit observation that the work was commenced without following the due 
process leading to stoppage of work and non-achievement of the objective.   
Central basin 
5.1.7 Abandoning of work due to absence of feasibility study  
GoTN accorded (October 2009) administrative sanction for ` 17.52 crore for 
improvements and construction of diversion channel from Maduravoyal Tank 
to Cooum River for discharging 962 cusec of surplus flood water. 

Chapter V – Drainage System in Chennai Metropolitan Area 
 
71 
We had observed6 that the work awarded (June 2010) to the contractor was not 
commenced due to existence of multi-storeyed tenements of Tamil Nadu Slum 
Clearance Board and heavy encroachments at work site.  In order to overcome 
the issues posed  by encroachments, WRD, without initiating any measure to 
evict the encroachers, proposed an alternative alignment.   
The proposed alternative  alignment required obtaining of permission from 
other agencies like Highways, TNEB, BSNL, CMWSSB and NHAI for 
execution of the project .  The Tender Award Committee decided (September 
2013) to execute the work by calling for fresh tenders after obtaining 
clearances from these agencies .  GoTN accorded (September 2014) revised 
administrative sanction for ` 32.59 crore f or construction of straight cut 
diversion channel in the alternate alignment for discharge of surplus flood 
water.  We observed that WRD failed to obtain necessary permission from the 
agencies concerned, resulting in non -commencement of the work even as of 
January 2017.   
Government replied (March 2017) that delay in obtaining necessary 
permissions from the agencies concerned delayed the c ommencement of the 
project.  The reply was not tenable as other than writing letters to the agencies 
concerned, WRD did not make any serious efforts to obtain permission from 
them.   
Thus, the failure of WRD to evict encroachments at the site of the original 
alignment and the absence of effective co -ordination to obtain necessary 
permission from various agencies for execution of work in the alternative 
alignment, resulted in non -commencement of diversion channel to discharge 
962 cusec of surplus flood water s into Cooum  River.  This had also led to 
inundation in Maduravoyal area and its adjacent areas during 2015 floods. 
Eastern Basin 
5.1.8 Non-completion of improvement works to Central Buckingham 
Canal due to encroachment 
Non-commencement of the work of impr ovements to Central Buckingham 
Canal sanctioned in October 2009 for ` 68.62 crore was pointed out in 
C&AG’s Report on GoTN (Economic Sector), 2013. 
National Disaster Management Guidelines, 2008 envisaged provision of 
embankment in the existing course of rivers for preventing overflowing of 
water over the banks .  It was also envisaged that concrete or masonry flood 
walls may be constructed where adequate space was not available in 
developed areas for provision of embankments. 
GoTN accorded (October 2009) a dministrative sanction for improvement to 
Central Buckingham Canal for ` 68.62 crore to mitigate the inundation in the 
residential areas of Triplicane, Ice House, etc., due to overflowing of the canal 
                                                             
6 Paragraph 2.13.3 (a) of C&AG’s Audit Report (Economic Sector), GoTN for the year  
2012-13 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
72 
during monsoon seasons .  Technical Sanction was accorde d by CE, Chennai 
Region for the work including construction of flood protection wall on both 
banks of the canal, having total length of 14,200 m (7,100 m on either side) 
besides widening of two bridges viz., Ice House road bridge and Kutchery 
Road bridge which had vents with width of 5  to 6 m as against the required  
15 to 17 m.   
We had observed7 that the work could not be commence d due to incorrect 
adoption of soil conditions in the DPR (December 2008) and encroachment of 
the canal area by slum dwellers. 
WRD revised (January 2014) the scope of the work for adoption of  pile 
foundation instead of open foundation and reduced constru ction of flood 
protection wall to  a length of 1,115 m due to the failure of the WRD to evict 
the encroachments by slum  dwellers w ho demanded alternative  residential 
accommodation in nearby areas .  The work was awarded (February 2014) to 
the lowest bidder for ` 16.18 crore for completion in 12 months .  The work 
commenced in March 2014 was completed in March 2015 incurring an 
expenditure of ` 15.72 crore except for important sub component , viz., 
construction of additional vent facilities to two bridges for the reason that the 
additional work would weaken the existing structure. 
We observed from the scrutiny of records as under: 
 WRD failed to ensure the correctness of the soil condition at the time 
of according Technical Sanction, resulting in revision of scope of work 
of construction of flood protection wall from open foundation to pile 
foundation. 
 Failure of WRD to evict the slum dw ellers from the banks of the canal 
forced the department to reduce the scope of the work of  flood 
protection wall to 1,115  m.  as against 14,200  m.  We also observed 
that the encroachers were provided with electricity connection, voter 
identification cards, ration cards and well laid roa ds in violation of 
GoTN’s own statutes, orders etc .  All th ese indicated lack of 
seriousness on the part of GoTN to mitigate the hardships due to 
inundation and loss of property in the nearby areas. 
 Non-commencement of important sub components of providing 
additional vent facilities under two bridges indicated inadequate field 
investigation by the departmental officials while sanctioning Technical 
Sanction. 
 Without exploring alternat ive ways for creation of additional ve nt 
facilities, WRD pre-closed the work resulting i n flow of water in a 
width of 5 to 6 m as against the required 15 to 17 m, which contributed 
to flooding in the adjoining areas during December 2015. 
Government replied (March 2017) that the encroachments could not be evicted 
due to stiff resistance from the encroachers and efforts were being made to 
                                                             
7 Paragraph 2.13.4 of C&AG’s Report on Economic Sector, GoTN for 2012-13 

Chapter V – Drainage System in Chennai Metropolitan Area 
 
73 
evict them in stages.  The reply was not acceptable as it was G oTN’s duty not 
to allow any encroachments as per its own law and orders.   
Thus, failure of the WRD to ensure the correctness of soil conditions and 
stability of the existing structure and  to take  stern action for removal of 
encroachments resulted in reduction in scope of work and  non-achievement of 
the objective of mitigating the inundation of residential areas despite incurring 
an expenditure of ` 15.72 crore .  The failure of the G oTN to remove 
encroachments clearly demonstrated its lack of seriousness to handle serious 
issues affecting the life and property of the people of Chennai city. 
Recommendation No.  15: We recommend that GoTN should take effective 
steps to complete all the above eight flood prevention works, approved way  
back in 2009 under JNNURM, by evicting encroachments, facilitating  
acquisition of land,  finding alternative alignments  and instructing WRD to 
redesign the construction methodology, wherever required, so that the threat 
of inundation is reduced. 
5.2 Micro drainage system 
Storm water drains (SWD ) are intended to collect surface rain water from the 
streets and discharge into water courses .  An efficient, well designed and well 
maintained storm water drainage system would minimise the level of water 
logging and damage and therefore play an important role in flood 
management. 
Indian Roads Congress (IRC) Guidelines of 1999 and 2013 provide that urban 
drainage system has to be designed in such a way that it captures the rainwater 
runoff from the road surface and infiltrate and  takes it into the ground closest 
to the source.  In case of lack of space, it should be conveyed along the road to 
the receiving body, in addition to infiltrate it into below ground at designated 
locations only. 
SWD networks comprise of lateral drains, sub-mains and trunk or main drains.  
Rain water gets collected in the lateral drains along road margins .  The lateral 
drains join to make sub-main drain and finally joins trunk or main drain.   
As per the existing system and as envisaged in the SMP, the local bodies are 
responsible for management of micro drainage system within their 
jurisdiction.  In GCC areas, as against the road length of 7,303 km, SWDs 
were provided only for a length of 1,894 km which formed only 26 per cent of 
the total road length.  Scrutiny of records of sampled zones revealed that SWD 
network was not adequate, as discussed in succeeding paragraph .  A sketch 
depicting, macro drain, sub -mains, lateral drains and missing links in SWD 
network in Ward 127 of Kodambakkam Zone is shown in Exhibit 5.2. 
  

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
74 
Exhibit 5.2: Illustrative sketch depicting SWD network  
 
Not to scale 
(Source : Storm water network in GCC) 
5.2.1 Non-preparation of master plan for Storm Water Drains 
The guidelines issued (1999/2013) by IRC envisaged preparation of 
comprehensive master plan to manage storm water.  The master plan was to be 
based on watershed 8-based planning, focusing on retaining and recharging the 
rain water locally.  It also envisaged Geographical Information System (GIS) -
based analysis of drainage patterns, hydrological m apping, topography and 
open spaces of the city. 
We noticed that GCC did not prepare any master plan for SWDs .  Though a 
Department headed by a Superintending Engineer had been functioning to deal 
with construction of  SWDs, no attempt was ever made by GCC t o prepare a 
master plan for SWDs to approach the issue in a systematic manner.  Lack of a 
master plan with a timeline had resulted in poor coverage of SWDs and 
unidentified missing links 9 in the network .  During monsoon 2014, GCC 
identified (November 2014)  52 missing links of SWDs in road margins and 
sub-mains which were not connected to SWD network, which ultimately 
                                                             
8 The area that drains into a single river is the watershed for that river 
9 SWDs not connected with the network.  These SWDs empty the rain water in 
undesignated areas 


Chapter V – Drainage System in Chennai Metropolitan Area 
 
75 
caused inundation during floods of 2015 .  The details of missing links are 
given in Appendix 5.1.  Subsequent to the floods, remedial measures  for 
connecting the missing links were carried out in 42 links and works were in 
progress in 10 links (November 2016).  Out of 52 missing links, 24 links were 
in the test checked zones, which reported inundation during December 2015 .  
Government stated tha t (April 2017) a Master Plan was prepared (2009) by a 
Consultant appointed in 2008.   The reply was incorrect as the  DPR for 
JNNURM work, prepared in 2009 could not be equated to a Master Plan as it 
dealt with only the works proposed to be carried out and i t did not have any 
plan for covering the whole area of the city. 
We observed that non -preparation of comprehensive master plan for SWD as 
envisaged in IRC guidelines had resulted in poor coverage of SWDs in CMA 
and non-completion of the work of correcting the missing links in the network 
prior to floods of 2015. 
Recommendation No.  16: We recommend preparation of a Master Plan on 
watershed basis to guide a time -bound strategy for construction of SWDs on 
all required roads for ensuring flow of storm water to  the sea/destination/at 
its disposal point.   
5.2.2 Wrong designing of storm water drains due to incorrect adoption 
of rainfall intensity 
(i) IRC guidelines (1999) envisaged that rainfall intensity 10  was to be 
considered for designing SWDs .  Other parameters to be considered for 
designing SWDs are the catchment area, land pattern and location of disposal 
point.  CMDA appointed (1993) a Consultant to recommend a programme of 
works for the alleviation of flooding in the city and CMA .  The Consultant 
viz., Matt MacDonald arrived (1994) at a rainfall intensity of 48.63 mm per 
hour using Gumbel’s extreme value distribution method 11 to be adopted for 
designing SWDs.  National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee, which evaluated 
the World Bank - aided Hydrology Project II12 (Project 2006) also arrived at a 
rain fall intensity of 48.89 mm per hour using the same method.  We observed 
that both Matt MacDonald and National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee had 
adopted the same method to calculate rain fall intensi ty.  The negligible 
variation in the rainfall intensity  calculated by the Consultants was due to 
adoption of different base years for calculation.   
In June 2008, GCC engaged a Consultant for preparation of DPR for 
improvement of SWDs under JNNURM Project .  While preparing (2009) the 
DPR for SWDs, the Consultant had considered two methods for arriving at the 
rainfall intensity based on which the size of SWDs were to be designed .  The 
                                                             
10 Rainfall intensity is defined as the ratio of the total amount of  rain falling during a 
given period to the duration of the period.  It is expressed in mm per hour (mm/h) 
11 In probability theory and statistics, the  Gumbel distribution is used to model the 
distribution of the maximum or the minimum.  This theory is used by CMDA as well 
and the workings were vetted by the Consultant appointed by Audit 
12 Project executed by PWD during 2006 to 2014 for storm water management in 
Cooum River 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
76 
Consultant arrived at a rainfall intensity of 31.39 mm per hour under one 
method (hourly rainfall data obtained by interpolation of data of rain fall for 
periods less than 60 minutes) and 49 mm per hour under another method 
(recurrence interval method).  GCC adopted the rainfall intensity of 31.39 mm 
per hour and constructed SWD s for a length of 345 km at a cost of   
` 610.55 crore under JNNURM project during 2011 -14 with design based on 
lesser rainfall intensity.  We observed that adoption of lesser rainfall intensity 
had resulted in construction of SWDs of lower rain water carry ing capacity 
which was one of the findings of Anna University in respect of SWDs 
available in 2009.   
On being pointed out during audit, GCC justified adoption of  lesser rainfall 
intensity citing approval given by Central Public Health and Environmental 
Engineering Organisation (CPHEEO), a body under GoI, Ministry of Urban 
Development.  We observed that GCC could not source the required data from 
India Meteorological Department (IMD) as required under CPHEEO 
guidelines and went in for interpolation of avail able data to arrive at the 
rainfall intensity of 31.39 mm per hour .  Rather than interp olating the data, 
GCC could have adopted the method as suggested in SMP. 
We noticed that the second value of rainfall intensity as worked out by GCC’s  
own Consultant for the JNNURM project and the values worked out by 
CMDA’s Consultant Matt MacDonald and the National Institute of 
Hydrology, Roorkee,  ranged between 48.63 mm  and 49  mm.  This clearly 
established that the rainfall intensity adopted by GCC f or designing SWDs 
was incorrect leading to construction of lower capacity SWDs which 
contributed to the floods of 2015.   
To substantiate the argument for adoption of the recurrence interval method, 
the Report on Functional Plan on Drainage for National Capital Region, under 
the Ministry of Urban Development, G oI, had also emphasised that the design 
of SWD should be on the basis of recurrence interval method .  This Report 
further stated that CPHEEO Manual was not applicable to cities like Chennai, 
where rai nfall intensity is more than 20 mm per hour and executing SWD 
works based on the method suggested by CPHEEO may cause severe floods. 
Recommendation No .  17: We recommend adoption of the correct rainfall 
intensity for designing SWDs in future.   
(ii)  In the aftermath of 2005 Floods, the GoTN had entrusted the work of 
flood risk mapping for CMA to Anna University, Chennai using Airborne 
Laser Terrain Mapping (ALTM) and Geo Information System at a cost of  
` 2.17 crore with partial financial support from GoI (Department of Science 
and Technology). 
The University submitted its report in 2012 containing recommendations by 
experts group proposing flood mitigation works with site plans and also 
conducted workshops for dissemination of knowledge in which officials from 
GCC, Revenue Department, WRD and other Departments participated .  The 
Report attributed the flooding in Chennai and its suburbs to red uction in 

Chapter V – Drainage System in Chennai Metropolitan Area 
 
77 
capacity of the water ways due to encroachment, construction of roads and 
bridges across water bodies, inade quate size of drains, obstructions in the 
drains, obstructions in rivers’ mouth due to sand bars, etc. 
The recommendations of Anna University, inter alia, included inter-linking of 
SWDs with temple tanks 13 which were not taken up seriously by GCC as 
discussed below: 
Based on lithological studies on recharge capabilities, the Report classified 
areas of Chennai city and its suburbs into seven zones based on their geo 
locations which were intended to recharge  coastal and river sands (aquifer 
zone), parks, open spaces, play grounds, temple tanks and institutions .  The 
Report recommended intensive artificial recharge by redesigning SWDs , by 
providing recharging bore holes at potential recharge locations and by 
connecting SWDs to temple tanks to divert the flood wa ter and  to minimise 
surface run off. 
As per GCC’s norms,  rain water harvesting structures were to be provided in 
SWDs at 30 m  intervals along the roads .  However, GCC did not construct 
rain water harvesting structures in SWDs as required .  In respect of te mple 
tanks, GCC identified 17 tanks for rejuvenation and inter -linking of them with 
SWDs.  Out of this, GCC took up (2016) two tanks on pilot basis and 
completed at a cost of ` 0.40 crore.   
GoTN stated (April 2017) that a total of 9,113 rain water harvest ing structures 
were constructed in the SWD network of GCC .  We observed that as per 
GCC’s own plan, rain water harvesting structures were to be provided at  
30 metre intervals along the roads .  Considering the SWD length of 1,894 km, 
63,133 rain water harvesting structures were required .  While appreciating the 
efforts of GCC to start providing rain water harvesting structures in SWDs, we 
observed that the achievement was only 14.43  per cent, indicating a need for 
greater thrust.   
We observed that non-adoption of the rec ommendations of Anna University 
and improper design in construction of drains with incorrect capacity also 
contributed to the floods during 2015. 
5.3 Storm Water Drain network of Greater Chennai Corporation 
GCC had taken up improvement of SWD network under Centrally Sponsored 
JNNURM and World Bank -aided TN Sustainable Urban Development 
Programme (TNSUDP).   
(i) Under JNNURM, SWD works for Chennai City were approved  
(April 2009) for a length of 533.32 kms at a c ost of ` 814.88 crore .  The 
project comprising of 1 ,203 works was to be carried out in four basins viz., 
North, Central, East and South. 
                                                             
13 Tanks located in temple complex which are used for temple ceremonies, poojas, etc.   

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
78 
A Performance Audit on the implementation of JNNURM was conducted and 
audit findings were included in C&AG’s Report (Lo cal bodies) – GoTN for 
the year ended March 2011.   The Report highlighted delays in execution of 
SWD works.  The present position of execution of SWD works under 
JNNURM by GCC as of December 2016 has been given in Table 5.1 below. 
Table 5.1: Projects under JNNURM in respect of SWD by GCC 
Name of 
the basin 
Revised Plan Completed  Number of 
works 
dropped Number of 
works 
Length of 
SWD (km) 
Number of 
works 
Length of 
SWD (km) 
North 329 118.91 329 117.73 0 
Central 328 144.32 245*    82.92 83 
East 244 91.48 195 86.38 49 
South 131 65.19 116 57.97 15 
Total 1,032 419.90 885 345.00 147 
*   includes a canal work partially completed 
(Source: Details furnished by GCC) 
As against revised p lan to execute 1,032 works for a length of 419.90 km, 
GCC executed 885 works for a length of 345 km during June 2012 to  
June 2015 and dropped the remaining 147 works due to reasons such as 
commencement of works for Metro Rail project, narrow roads, service l ines, 
heavy traffic, good condition of SWD and public objection .  Audit scrutiny in 
sample Zones revealed that areas in Adyar and Kodambakkam zone s, where 
works under JNNURM were dropped, were affected during floods, since no 
alternative measures were proposed to mitigate the flood in these areas. 
(ii) Under TNSUDP, GoTN accorded (January 2015) administrative approval 
for provision of SWDs in newly added areas 14  of GCC at a cost of  
` 2,212.89 crore.  As per the conditions of World Bank relating to such works, 
tenders were to be finalised only after resettlement of families living along the 
canals.  GCC invited (April 2015) tenders for providing SWDs in the basins of 
Adyar and Cooum Rivers under 39 packages.   
Audit scrutiny of the records of GCC disclosed th at work orders were issued 
(January-February 2016) for 35 packages.  There were delays in issue of work 
orders by GCC, ranging from two to five months .  Further, the milestones, as 
provided in the agreement (20 per cent of work in six months period), were 
not achieved in 25 packages and achievement was less than 10 per cent in ten 
packages, as of August 2016 (Appendix 5.2). 
The remaining four packages, which were to be executed in Nandambakkam, 
Padikuppam, Ambattur SIDCO and Nolambur  Canals, were not taken up due 
to non -clearance of encroachments .  Subsequent to 2015 floods, GCC 
                                                             
14 Alandur, Ambattur, Perungudi and Valasaravakkam zones, which were added (2011) 
to Chennai Corporation as part of additional eight zones 

Chapter V – Drainage System in Chennai Metropolitan Area 
 
79 
prepared (July and August 2016) Resettlement Action Plan to motivate 
voluntary resettlement of encroachers.  Based on the action plans prepared for 
three of the four canals, TNSCB re habilitated the encroachers of 
Nandambakkam Canal area and action was being taken to rehabilitate the 
encroachers dwelling in Ambattur SIDCO, Nolambur and Padi kuppam 
Canals. 
Despite eviction of encroachers from one canal and progress made in respect 
of other canals, GCC had not initiated action for commencing work in these 
four packages.  However, the works for construction of SWDs in the streets, 
which had disposal points in these canals, were awarded  
(January 2016) and were being executed. 
The delays in  execution of SWD works delayed accrual of the benefits .  We 
observed that construction of SWDs without  execution of works in canals 
would not mitigate the floods.   
5.3.1 Construction and maintenance of Storm Water Drains 
Expenditure on construction and maintenance of SWDs, as a percentage of 
total expenditure of GCC, during 2011-12 to 2015-16 is given in Table 5.2.   
Table 5.2: SWD in GCC 
(` in crore) 
Year Total expenditure Expenditure on SWD Percentage 
of SWD 
expenditure 
to total 
expenditure 
Revenue Capital Total Revenue Capital Total 
2011-12 924.66 269.55 1,194.21 0.41 77.90 78.31 7 
2012-13 1,413.78 732.72 2,146.50 1.13 162.76 163.89 8 
2013-14 1,973.15 1,392.63 3,365.78 1.02 236.01 237.03 7 
2014-15 2,222.67 1,923.91 4,146.58 7.90 198.31 206.21 5 
2015-16 2,536.01 1,742.79 4,278.80 11.81 158.55 170.36 4 
Total 9,070.27 6,061.60 15,131.87 22.27 833.53 855.80 6 
(Source: Details furnished by GCC) 
The percentage of expenditure on SWD  to the total expenditure of GCC 
during 2011-16 ranged from four to eight per cent.  The financial outlay for 
SWD was found to be inadequate in the face of the huge shortfall in the 
coverage of SWDs in GCC  area, leading to inundation of areas, as discussed 
in the succeeding paragraphs. 
5.3.2 Non-achievement of targets due to poor outlay 
Achievement of targets, as of August 2016, against the targets set (April 2006) 
under City Development Plan for provision of SWD in City and other urban 
areas by 2011/2016 is given in Table 5.3. 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
80 
Table 5.3: SWD - Targets and achievements 
Zone Length of 
road  
(in kms.) 
Target for SWD 
achievement as per City 
Development Plan  
(in per cent) 
Length of 
SWD 
provided 
(in kms.) 
Actual 
achievement 
Percentage  
(as of August 
2016) 
2011 2016 
Adyar 411.52 100 100 136.33 33 
Alandur 231.84 40 60 86.17 37 
Ambattur 496.51 40 60 29.97 6 
Kodambakkam 456.36 100 100 189.60 42 
Perungudi 455.47 40 60 55.94 12 
(Source: Details furnished by zonal offices) 
We observed that even the targets fixed for 2011 were not achieved as of 
August 2016 in any of the sampled Zones and the GCC had a long way to go 
to achieve 2016 target.  From the above, it could be observed that the length of 
SWD in the selected zones was 6 to 42 per cent of the total length of the roads.  
In terms of number of streets, scrutiny of records revealed that SWDs were not 
provided in 4,854 15 out of 9 ,225 streets in four 16 of the five sampled Zones  
(53 per cent).   
While conceding to the low coverage of SWDs, GoTN stated (April 2017) that 
in respect of Ambattur Zone, works were in progress to provide SWDs under 
the World bank aided TNSUDP .  Further, GoTN stated that the natural 
topography of Adyar zone was sloping towards water body, requiring les ser 
coverage of SWD network.  The reply was untenable as Adyar was one of the 
worst affected areas during floods of 2015.  The fact of vulnerability of Adyar 
area to inundation was indicated by the fact that according to a micro level 
study conducted by GCC in 2014, the Adyar Zone had 21 out of 52 water 
stagnant ‘hot spots’ in the city, requiring attention .  This proved that the 
contention of GoTN that Adyar required lesser coverage of SWD in view of 
its topography was incorrect.   
5.3.3 Poor maintenance of Storm Water Drains 
As per the Disaster Management Plan prepared (2014) by GCC, zonal offices 
should complete the pre -monsoon activities, which inter-alia included 
cleaning of SWDs, before the onset of monsoons. 
Scrutiny of records in the test checked zo nes revealed that cleaning of SWDs 
was not done in 163 out of 614 streets with drains in Kodambakkam zone 
during 2013 -16 and in all 898  streets with drains in Perungudi zone during 
2015-16.  Further, work orders for cleaning of SWDs in four Divisions of 
Kodambakkam zone were issued in October 2015 after the onset of the 
                                                             
15 Alandur: 397, Ambattur: 780, Kodambakkam: 1,776 and Perungudi: 1,901  
16 Except Adyar zone for which details were not furnished 

Chapter V – Drainage System in Chennai Metropolitan Area 
 
81 
monsoons and  the works were  completed in December 2015 and January 
2016.  Non-cleaning of SWDs contributed to inundation of these areas. 
GoTN, in their reply (April 2017) reasoned that the b an on manual scavenging 
imposed by the Hon’ble Madras High Court caused difficulties in cleaning 
SWDs.  We noticed that  only because of the 233 illegal sewer lines linked to 
SWDs (October 2016), cleaning of SWDs became an issue.  We observed that 
GCC faile d to effectively prevent sewage entering SWDs, leading to  
non-cleaning and consequent flooding due to overload and clogging of these 
SWDs.   
5.4 Storm Water Drain network in suburban areas 
Scrutiny of records of Tambaram, Sembakkam and Pallavapuram 
Municipalities and Perungalathur, Peerkankaranai and Thiruneermalai Town 
Panchayats and joint inspection of sites alongwith the local bodies’ officials 
revealed the following regarding maintenance of SWDs: 
5.4.1 Inadequate funds for Storm Water Drain 
The details of total expenditure of the selected local bodies  and the 
expenditure incurred by them on SWDs during 2011 -16 were as under  
(Table 5.4). 
Table 5.4: Expenditure on SWD 
Name of 
Municipality/ 
Town 
Panchayat 
Total expenditure (` in crore) Expenditure on SWD (` in crore) 
Percentage 
2011-12 
2012-13 
2013-14 
2014-15 
2015-16 
Total 
2011-12 
2012-13 
2013-14 
2014-15 
2015-16 
Total 
Pallavapuram 25.13 33.41 37.18 40.25 49.80 185.77 0.49 1.37 2.11 1.44 2.93 8.34 4 
Peerkankaranai 2.50 2.78 3.10 3.91 5.51 17.80 0.22 0.73 0.99 0.96 1.18 4.08 23 
Perungalathur 4.95 5.09 6.89 5.82 11.10 33.85 0.08 0.10 1.07 0.21 0.76 2.22 7 
Sembakkam 4.76 5.30 8.30 8.67 11.67 38.70 0.15 0.72 1.51 2.81 2.81 8.00 21 
Tambaram 24.56 30.45 41.28 47.85 58.80 202.94 3.66 8.03 8.27 8.33 12.86 41.15 20 
Thiruneermalai 4.06 4.24 6.19 5.04 5.00 24.53 0.15 0.55 0.86 0.33 0.37 2.26 9 
 (Source: Details furnished by the respective local bodies)  
As seen from the above, the percentage of expenditure incurred for provision 
and maintenance of SWDs, with reference to total expenditure, ranged from   
4 to 23  per cent  during 2011 -16.  The poor outlay had resulted in  
non-provision of SWDs leading to inundation of areas in the selected local 
bodies during floods, the details of which are given in Appendix 5.3. 
Government stated (April 2017) that lesser percentage of expenditure for 
SWD was due to paucity of funds and the need to incur expenditure on 
unavoidable and more essential works .  The reply was incorrect as these local 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
82 
bodies had accumulated surplus 17 as of March 2016  and hence there was no 
paucity for funds.  We observed that the local bodies were not making serious 
efforts to provide SWDs which had contributed to flooding causing huge loss 
to life and property.   
5.4.2 Inadequate/non-provision of Storm Water Drains by local bodies 
According to the service level benchmark for SWDs, stipulated by GoI, 
Ministry of Urban Development, only ‘covered pucca drains’ are to be 
considered for the purpose of calculation of achievement of SWD coverage .  
Kutcha drains are unreliable as they are constructed without scientific design 
and get clogged by filth entering them as they are not covered .  The length of 
SWDs provided by selected local bodies, as of March 2016, was as under  
(Table 5.5). 
Table 5.5: SWD in suburban local bodies 
Municipality/ 
Town Panchayat 
Length of 
road 
(in kms.) 
Length of SWD 
provided (in km.) 
Percentage 
Kutcha Pucca Kutcha Pucca 
Pallavapuram 242.00 172.00 3.00 71 1 
Peerkankaranai 41.65 26.60 0 64 0 
Perungalathur 83.56 40.18 0 48 0 
Sembakkam 100.42 0 85.35 0 85 
Tambaram 164.75 0 142.75 0 87 
Thiruneermalai 39.36 32.86 0 83 0 
(Source: Details furnished by the local bodies) 
It is evident from the table above that without constructing pucca drains as per 
service level benchmark for SWDs, four out of six local bodies had mostly 
constructed kutcha drains.  Therefore, kutcha drains constructed without 
proper scientific design with cover were not considered as proper SWDs.   
We observed that in four out of six local bodies test checked, construction of 
pucca SWDs with reference to total length of the roads was almost nil while in 
two local bodies, it ranged from 85 to 87 per cent.  Pallavapuram Municipality 
and Peerkankaranai, Perungalathur, and Thiruneermalai Town Panchayats did 
not achieve coverage of SWD in 321 18  streets as against the target of  
50 per cent set out in the City Development Plan to be achieved by 2016.   
We, therefore, observed that lack of a Master Plan as envisaged in IRC and 
non-attachment of adequate importance for SWD works resulted in poor 
coverage of SWDs in suburban areas leading to inundation.   
                                                             
17 Pallavaram Municipality - ` 43.16 crore; Sembakkam Municipality - ` 20.45 crore; 
Tambaram Municipality - ` 48.41 crore; Peerkankaranai TP - ` 9.55 crore; 
Perungalathur TP - ` 32.93 crore and Thiruneermalai TP - ` 12.51 crore 
18 Pallavapuram: 206, Peerkankaranai: 5, Perungalathur: 103 and Thiruneermalai: 7 

Chapter V – Drainage System in Chennai Metropolitan Area 
 
83 
Government stated (April 2017) that adequate funds would be pr ovided to 
construct SWD in left out streets .  The reply was not tenable as even with the 
available funds the local bodies had spent on kutcha drains instead of pucca 
drains as per the service level benchmark for SWDs, thereby defeating the 
very objective of constructing SWDs. 
5.4.3 Non-implementation of consultant’s recommendations on 
improving Storm Water Drains in Tambaram 
In 2011, GoTN appointed a consultant for preparation of a DPR for 
construction of SWDs in six Municipalities, including Tambaram in CMA.  In 
Zone 5 and Zone 9 of Tambaram Municipality, 14 Wards 19were identified as 
priority areas for SWDs at a cost of ` 17.24 crore, which were to be taken up 
in the first phase of four months. 
We observed that  despite a lapse of three years the Municipality did not take 
up any of the proposed works in the priority areas as suggested in the DPR  as 
GoTN had not yet issued Administrative Sanction for taking up SWD works in 
the six Municipalities based on the DPR o f March 2014.  Major flooding had 
occurred during 2015 in the areas identified in the DPR as flood prone and 
priority areas, leading to damages including  to roads, which were estimated to 
cost ` 25 crore for repairing.   
GoTN replied (April 2017) that SWDs  were constructed in 2 of the 14 
prioritised wards .  We noticed that even in the two wards mentioned by 
GoTN, SWDs were constructed only in few streets, and no work was approved 
in the remaining 12 wards .  Thus, the DPR proposal to construct SWDs on 
priority basis in 12 out of the 14 wards, which required urgent action, did not 
materialise even after a lapse of three years, contributing to flooding in these 
areas during 2015. 
5.4.4 Inadequate provision of Storm Water Drain on State Highways  
Inside Tambaram Municipal area, 9.7 km of roads were owned and maintained 
by State Highways Department.  Scrutiny of records of Highways Department 
revealed that SWDs were provided in a scattered manner for a length of  
3.47 km on left side and 3.26 kms on right side without linkage and continuity.  
To an Audit query on non -construction of SWDs for the full length of the 
roads, t he Assistant Divisional Engineer (C onstruction and Maintenance ), 
Highways Sub Division, Tambaram and Government stated (June 2016/April 
2017) that due to non -availability of land, SWDs were provided only in the 
locations, wherever the land was available .  We observed that construction of 
SWDs in a sporadic manner, citing non -availability of land, indicated that the 
Highways Department had worked in  an unprofessional manner without 
draining the rain water from the roads .  On scrutiny of records pertaining to 
flood affected areas of Tambaram Municipality, w e noticed that rain water 
stagnated in the areas abutting the highways during 2015. 
                                                             
19 Ward numbers 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 20, 22, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32 and 38 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
84 
Thus, failure of the Highways Department in not constructing the SWDs for 
full length of the roads resulted in wasteful expenditure on sporadic 
construction of SWDs without linkage, and consequent inundation of the areas 
abutting Highways in Tambaram Municipality.   
5.4.5 Partial execution of Storm Water Drain works 
SWDs in internal streets (small lanes and by lanes) were to be designed in 
such a way that they collected rain water, seamlessly connected with sub -main 
and discharged the water into the main drain .  However, scrutiny of records of 
Pallavapuram Municipality revealed that SWDs were constructed in bits and 
pieces, without seamless connectivity in the streets ( Appendix 5.4), as against 
the provisions made in the respective estimates .  When pointed out by Audit 
(June 2016), the Municipal Commissioner stated that the works were stopped 
due to public objection.   
We observed that non -provision of SWDs to the full length in the streets, 
despite sanction of funds, defeated the objective of c reating comprehensive 
drainage facilities, which contributed to inundation of these areas during 
floods of 2015.  Government stated (April 2017) that the work of connectivity 
would be taken up during 2017 -18 as the public had come forward for 
construction of SWD. 
We observed that executing SWD works in bits and pieces was indicative of 
an unprofessional style of functioning of Pall avapuram Municipality .  
Stoppage of the SWD works, which were to benefit the public citing  public 
objection, indicated that the Municipality failed to authoritatively negotiate 
with public to overcome the objection. 
5.5 Clogging of storm water drains due to unauthorised entry of 
sewage  
Underground sewerage system (UGSS) scheme was intended to carry sewage 
from households, commerci al establishments and industries to treatment 
plants.  UGSS is helpful to mitigate health issues arising due to open sewers .  
The untreated sewage carried by UGSS are treated by sewage treatment plants 
before being led into major drains .  In places where the UGSS were either not 
available or not functioning, sewage got discharged into SWDs,  which were 
constructed to carry rain water .  The illegal action of allowing untreated 
sewage to enter SWDs caused clogging of the drains thereby blocking the flow 
of rain water through the existing SWD system.   
The position in sample local bodies is discussed below: 
  

Chapter V – Drainage System in Chennai Metropolitan Area 
 
85 
5.5.1 Non-completion of underground Sewage Scheme in Tambaram 
Municipality 
GoTN accorded (May 2009) administrative approval for implementing UGSS  
at a cost of ` 160.97 crore in Tambaram Municipal area through CMWSSB .  
The project was to be completed by August 2014 .  Out of four packages of 
works included in the project, one package entrusted (September 2009) by the 
CMWSSB to a contractor was termin ated (June 2014) due to slow progress .  
The execution of  the package was taken over by the Municipality in June 
2014, but entrusted to a contractor only in March 2016 due to poor response to 
first three tender calls.  The three other packages executed by C MWSSB were 
also not completed due to slow progress of work. 
The project scheduled to be completed by August 2014 was not completed 
even as of March 2017 and the sullage from houses in many parts of the town 
continued to flow into SWDs and clogged them lead ing to inundation in 
Tambaram Municipal area. 
5.5.2 Non-implementation of Project in other selected local bodies 
GoTN accorded (December 2009) administrative sanction for implementing 
UGSS in the areas of Perungalathur, Peerkankaranai and Sembakkam local 
bodies at a cost of ` 130.72 crore, funded equally by JNNURM  
(50 per cent) and loan (50 per cent). 
While the preliminary works were underway, the GoTN cancelled (September 
2010) the implementation on the ground that these local bodies were not 
financially sound to repay the loan proposed to be taken for implementation of 
this scheme. 
After six years, Sembakkam Municipal Council (January 2016) decided to 
implement UGSS in its area and sought approval of Commissioner of 
Municipal Administration for preparatio n of D etailed Project Report, which 
was awaited (March 2017). 
We observed that rather than finding source of funds, GoTN took a wrong 
decision to drop an approved project to provide UGSS to three suburban areas 
of CMA.  This clearly indicated bad governance, contributing to sullage being 
let out into SWDs.  We observed that clogging of SWDs also contributed to 
the inundation in the suburban areas of Pallavapuram, Peerkankaranai, 
Perungalathur, Sembakkam, Tambaram and Thiruneermalai. 
5.6 Pre-monsoon preparedness work  
The rivers and drains in CMA are seasonal in nature with water flow only 
during monsoon .  The rivers and drains get dried up in the non -monsoon 
period, except for the sewage unauthorisedly entering them .  Misuse of dried 
rivers/drains for dumping solid waste and debris and growth of vegetation 
hinders free flow of water in the monsoon months.  Therefore, every year, CE, 
WRD initiates action before the onset of N orth East monsoon for removal of 
silt, floating materials, vegetation and other obstructions to ensure free flow of 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
86 
water.  These pre -monsoon works also include continuous cleaning of 
vulnerable points during monsoon also.   
5.6.1 Delay in release of funds for pre-monsoon works 
Paragraph 4.12.2 of the National Disaster Management guidelines for urban 
flooding envisaged that desilting of drains is a major activity in flood 
management.  Unauthorised disposal of untreated sewage, garbage,  
bio-degraded solid waste and growth of vegetation causes siltation of major 
and micro drains. 
Commissioner of Revenue Administration  (CRA) in their circular for disaster 
preparedness for the North East Monsoon also instructed (August 2015) that 
all water courses had to be desilted well before the onset of North East 
Monsoon. 
The pre -monsoon work involving removal of silt, slush, debris, weeds, 
desilting and reforming the bund of the drains maintained by WRD was 
proposed for execution every year .  North East Monsoon in the State is from 
October to December and hence the pre -monsoon works were required to be 
executed prior to onset of monsoon for effective clearance of debris from the 
water bodies. 
The details of the pre -monsoon works proposed, sanctioned, executed in 
Kosasthalaiyar Basin, Lower Palar Basin and Araniyar Basin Divisions along 
with the  expenditure and the dates of onset of monsoon are given in the  
Table 5.6. 
Table 5.6: Details of execution of pre-monsoon works 
Year Date of 
Adminis-
trative 
Sanction 
No.  of 
works 
proposed 
No.  of 
works 
sanctioned 
and 
executed 
Expendi-
ture  
(` in 
crore) 
Date of 
onset of 
monsoon 
Date of 
commencement 
of pre-monsoon 
works 
Date of 
completion of 
pre-monsoon 
work 
2011 30/08/2011 58 58 3.59 24/10/2011 02/09/2011 to 
27/09/2011 
21/09/2011 to 
15/12/2011 
2012 18/09/2012 71 63 3.59 19/10/2012 25/09/2012 to 
01/10/2012 
17/10/2012 to 
31/12/2012 
2013 06/09/2013 68 58 3.57 21/10/2013 27/09/2013 to 
03/10/2013 
23/10/2013 to 
30/12/2013 
2014 13/10/2014 54 43 3.60 18/10/2014 16/10/2014 to 
02/12/2014 
31/10/2014 to 
31/12/2014 
2015 29/10/2015 52 41 3.59 28/10/2015 06/11/2015 to 
01/12/2015 
15/11/2015 to 
31/12/2015 
(Source: Details furnished by WRD) 
From the details illustrated in the table, we observed as follows: 
 GoTN did not sanction all the proposals received for undertaking  
pre-monsoon works, except during 2011. 
 As sanction of funds during the five year period of 2011 to 2015 was 
almost the same, the number of pre -monsoon works sanctioned was in 
the decreasing trend during 2012 to 2015. 

Chapter V – Drainage System in Chennai Metropolitan Area 
 
87 
 GoTN belatedly released funds for pre -monsoon works during 2014 
and 2015, leading to commencement and execution of 84 works after 
the onset of the monsoon .  The execution of work after the 
commencement of monsoon hindered the free flow of flood water 
 Though pre -monsoon works for the year 2013 were sanctioned by 
GoTN prior to monsoon, the works were not completed before the 
onset of monsoon.   
Thus, the GoTN did not provide adequate funds on the basis of the proposals 
received from WRD, and failed to release funds prior to the onset of the 
monsoon in the year 2014 and 2015, lea ding to ineffective execution of  
pre-monsoon works, contributing to floodings.   
Government replied (March 2017) that the pre -monsoon works were 
commenced prior to monsoon and continued during the monsoon period for 
clearance of debris, etc .  The reply was not acceptable as the works which 
were required to be carried prior to the onset of monsoon were not completed 
before onset of monsoon in 2013, 2014 and 2015. 
5.6.2 Non-desilting of canals by GCC 
As per extant Rules, water bodies catering to 40 hectare or more of 
agricultural land were to be maintained by WRD and other than those were to 
be maintained by the respective local bodies .  The details of water bodies 
maintained by GCC and WRD in the selected zones, Municipalities and Town 
Panchayats are given in Appendix 5.5. 
During joint inspection (August to October 2016) of water bodies in GCC area 
by Audit and GCC officials, it was noticed that GCC failed to undertake any 
desilting works in the three out of four canals in Kodambakkam  Zone and six 
out of eight canals in Ambattur Zone during 2011 -16, which contributed to 
inundation in respective areas during floods of 2015 .  Further, Veerangal Odai 
(Alandur Zone) intended for draining excess water from the Adambakkam 
Lake, which finally drains out i n Pallikaranai marsh, was also not maintained 
by WRD to facilitate free flow of flood water, leading to flooding in 
Adambakkam area. 
5.7 Non-adherence to instructions on supervising desilting of 
water bodies 
The CRA issued circulars prior to North East Monsoon 2014 and 2015 to all 
the Collectors to oversee the cleaning/desilting of natural water courses, 
clearance of encroachment etc.   
We noticed that the District Collector, Chennai had not done any supervision 
of pre -monsoon works .  To an audit query, t he District Collector, Chennai 
replied (June 2016) that the pre -monsoon works were being carried out by the 
GCC and WRD .  The reply was not tenable as the District Collector was 
responsible for overseeing the work by WRD .  The District Collector, 
Tiruvallur inspected the pre -monsoon works only after the monsoon .  The 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
88 
District Collector, Kancheepuram inspected the works carried out only in 4 out 
of 12 Taluks. 
Thus, the instructions of the CRA were not followed by the respective 
Collectors in overseeing pre -monsoon works which also contributed to 
flooding. 
5.8 Flood mitigation measures in Adyar River  
Adyar River course starts from Adanur Tank in Kancheepuram District and 
flows through Chennai city before draining into Bay of Bengal .  The width of 
the river was not uniform in the entire stre tch and it ranged between 30 m and 
200 m.  As per WRD records, 222 tanks  with storage capacity of 7.41 TMC, 
influence the flow of water in Adyar River.  The surplus course of a major 
tank Chembarambakkam with storage capac ity of 3 .645 TMC flows into the 
Adyar River near Thiruneermalai.  The maximum flood carrying capacity of 
Adyar River in Chennai city as of October 2013, determined based on  
100-year discharge ranged between 30,229 cusec and 49,652 cusec. 
Historically, flooding in Chennai city was caused by overflow of flood water 
in Adyar River.  Floods in Adyar River had caused inundation in Chennai and 
suburban areas in 1976, 1985, 1996 and 2005.   The river with a carrying 
capacity ranging from 30,2 29 to 49,652 cusec, recorded a flow of 1.34 lakh 
cusec20 on 1 December 2015 due to incessant rains and discharge of surplus 
water from Chembarambakkam Tank and several other unregulated tanks. 
The recommendations made for mitigation of flood in Chennai city and its 
suburbs by various a gencies nominated by GoTN and Go I were as detailed 
below:  
 Nucleus Cell formed in CMDA to suggest measures for flood problems 
recommended (1980) creation of two new tanks above 
Chembarambakkam Tank and diversion channel from Per ungalathur/ 
Tambaram to transfer 10,000 -15,000 cusec of surplus water from 
Adyar River to Covelong backwaters of Bay of Bengal. 
 Report on Dam Safety Procedures issued by Central Water 
Commission, G oI (July 1986) envisaged preparation of Inundation 
map as t he first input for planning an effective emergency 
preparedness.  It was also envisaged to analyse the inundation history 
of the past 25 years and 50 years to assess safe carrying capacity of the 
downstream channel and the vulnerability of different areas through 
which the surplus water from  the dam pass ed through.  These 
inundation maps were to facilitate in prioritising structural measures to 
prevent floods. 
 Report on Dam Safety Procedures issued by Central Wate r 
Commission, G oI (July 1986) envisaged that  the flood carrying 
                                                             
20 Estimated by Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru adopting simulated h ydrologic 
model 

Chapter V – Drainage System in Chennai Metropolitan Area 
 
89 
capacity of the river channels downstream of the dam shall be 
reviewed at intervals of five years. 
 National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) in their Guidelines 
(January 2008)  recommended the State Governments to identify the 
locations and to take up channel improvement works like 
embankments, flood protection walls, etc., to increase the velocity or 
area of flow and reduce flood level in the river depending upon  
site-specific conditions and techno-economic considerations. 
 Anna University, Chennai, engaged21 (2010) to prepare flood mapping 
of Chennai city and its suburbs by using Air-borne Laser Terrain 
Mapper (ALTM)  technology, recommended (March 2012) for 
establishment of Automatic Weather Stations for development of an 
Early Warning and  Decision Support System for Urban Flood 
Management in addition to IMD predictions. 
 The National Water Policy 2012  envisaged installation of real time 
data acquisition system for flood forecasting and flood preparedness.   
 An Expert Committee constituted by GoTN to suggest measures to 
minimise flood hazard and to optimi se utilisa tion of monsoon rains 
recommended ( October 2012) for construction of two check dams at 
Varadharajapuram and Anakaputhur village s to harness the surplus 
flow of flood waters through Adyar River. 
We observed that these recommendations were not given due importance by 
GoTN to mitigate the floods a rising due to North East Monsoon which 
resulted in unprecedented floods in Chennai and its suburbs during December 
2015, as detailed below: 
5.8.1 Creation of new reservoirs 
Non-construction of two tanks in the upstream of Chembarambakkam  Tank, 
as per Nucleus Cell’s recommendations, and dropping of the proposal to 
construct a reservoir across Adyar River at Thiruneermalai have already been 
commented in Paragraph 3.1.1.  Failures of WRD in execution of other 
structural measures suggested by the Nucleus Cell and the Expert Committee 
(2012) are discussed hereunder: 
 GoTN did not consider the recommendation of the Nucleus Cell for 
construction of diversion channel from Perungalathur/Tambaram to 
transfer 10,000 -15,000 cusec  of surplus water from Adyar River to 
Covelong backwaters .  We observed that the diversion channel 
proposed by the Nucleus Cell could have diverted a substantial flood 
load from Adyar River so that the flow in the river gets reduced .  We 
also observed that  GoTN neither made any attempt for acquiring land 
to construct the diversion channel nor made any provision in the SMP 
to earmark land for the channel by restricting development in the area. 
                                                             
21 By GoI, Ministry of Science & Technology and GoTN at a cost of ` 2.47 crore 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
90 
 GoTN did not consider construction of two check dams at 
Varadharajapuram and Anakaputhur village s to minimise flood hazard 
and to harness the surplus flow of flood waters through Adyar River 
despite it being recommended by the Expert Committee on North East 
Monsoon rains.  On the contrary, it allowed the Airport s Authority of 
India to demolish a check dam constructed across Adyar River as 
discussed in Paragraph 4.5(v).  We observed that construction of the 
suggested check dams could have accommodated flood and to that 
extent the flow in Adyar River would have been reduced.   
Thus, GoTN failed not only to create new reservoirs and check dams to 
mitigate the flood hazard due to monsoon rains, but also did not take any 
action to divert flood water from Adyar River despite recommendation by 
Nucleus Cell and Expert Committee resulting in inundations due to floods 
during December 2015 rains.   
GoTN stated ( May 2017) that the proposed and sanctioned reservoirs could 
not be taken up due to non -acquisition of land and urbanis ation of the city .  
The issues like non-acquisition of land and urbani sation cited as reasons for 
not creating new reservoir by the GoTN were well in its capability and 
authority as brought out in this Report in the light of the benchmarks 
mentioned in the FMP and SMP.   
5.8.2 Non-creation of flood protection wall 
The NDM  guidelines, 2008 recommended to carry out river channel 
improvement works as a measure to reduce the flood level in the river.  Taking 
into the account the flood vulnerability near Nandambakkam bridge on Adyar 
River, GoTN se nt (July 2008) to GoI, a detailed proposal for flood protection 
works on left bank of Adyar River for execution under centrally sponsored 
Flood Management Programme (2007 -12).  The proposal was withdrawn 
(March 2012) by the WRD on the plea that an amount o f ` 1.06 crore would 
be required for acquisition of 0.69 ha of agricultural and residential land, 
which in fact was a very meagre amount.  Thus, the injudicious decision of the 
WRD for deletion of the proposal resulted in non -execution of flood 
protection work as envisaged in the NDM guidelines which led to huge 
inundation in adjoining areas.   
Thus, the failure of WRD in acquiring the meagr e area of land by way of 
paying compensation had led to non -creation of important component of river 
improvement work by constructing flood protection wall.  This was one of the 
failures, which contributed to inundation in the adjoining areas .  The issue of 
failure of WRD in acquiring meager area of land requires to be investigated by 
GoTN, which entailed serious consequences.   
Furthermore, this failure of WRD had also contributed to the inundation at 
MIOT Hospital, where critical patients were admitted and no help could be 
extended during the time of flooding.   

Chapter V – Drainage System in Chennai Metropolitan Area 
 
91 
5.8.3 Non-desilting of Adyar River 
Report on Dam Safety Procedures issued by Central Water Commission, G oI 
(July 1986) envisaged that the flood carrying capacity of the river channels 
downstream of the dam shall be reviewed after every fiv e years.  Watershed 
Management Division of WRD, Pollachi, was responsible to conduct 
sedimentation survey to identify the extent of siltation in the tanks and rivers. 
We observed that in ter ms of CWC guidelines, the Waters hed Management 
Division of WRD did not conduct any survey to assess the extent of siltation 
in the Adyar River during the years 2011 -12 to 2015 -16 enabling WRD to 
carryout desiltation works to enhance the flood carrying capacity in violation 
of CWC guidelines .  It was pertinent to note  that the flood mapping of 
Chennai city and its suburbs by using ALTM technology conducted by Anna 
University had also recommended desilting the river courses as an immediate 
flood mitigation measure in CMA .  Non-desilting of Adyar River resulted in 
overflowing of surplus water over the banks of the river at many points and 
resultant inundation in the residential areas of Chennai and its suburban areas. 
WRD replied (October 2016) that no periodicity for conducting sedimentation 
studies had been fixed in the  Departmental M anuals and survey would be 
conducted on priority basis .  The reply was not acceptable as the CWC 
guidelines are quite clear about reviewing the carrying capacity of river 
channels after every five years. 
The reply is also indicative of the fact that Manuals are outdated and need to 
be updated soon .  Furthermore, needless to mention that desiltation is a very 
significant work of flood mitigation, WRD had not even bothered to carry out 
the work despite knowing the fact that CMA had witnessed s everal 
catastrophic floods even in the past .  Instead of according seriousness to the 
desiltation work in the river, WRD cited non -provision of periodicity in 
Manual, which indicated lack of interest shown by the WRD towards flood 
mitigation measures. 
5.8.4 Absence of Early Warning System for flood management 
The Adyar River carried the surplus water from four major unregulated tanks22 
besides surplus discharge of Chembarambakkam Tank joining in the 
midcourse before passing through Chennai and its suburbs fo r discharging 
water into Bay of Bengal .  Despite recommendations for installation of 
Automatic Weather Stations for development of an Early Warning  and 
Decision Support System for Urban Flood Management in addition to IMD  
predictions by Anna University and National Water Policy , WRD did not 
initiate efforts for installation of Early Warning System .  This resulted in  
non-regulation of the flow of surplus water in the river after obtaining inputs 
from the controlling office rs of various Tanks and overflowing of water over 
its banks causing inundation. 
                                                             
22 Adanur, Mannivakkam, Nandhivaram and Urappakkam 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
92 
WRD in the Exit Conference stated that efforts were being made to complete 
installation of Early Warning System.   
5.8.5 Flood Management of Chembarambakkam Tank influencing 
Adyar River 
Report on Dam Safety Procedures issued (July 1986) by CWC, GoI envisaged 
that the aim of reservoir operation is to reduce the risk of man -made floods to 
the area on the downstream through carefully prepared reservoir regulation 
schedules, relea se procedure and gate operation schedules aided by an 
accurate and reliable flood forecasting and warning system. 
Paragraph 8.1.2 of the guidelines also stipulated that floods disaster would be 
considered natural if the quantum of outflow from the dam is e qual to the 
inflow flood.  If, however, due to very existence of a dam, the outflow exceeds 
the inflow, the disaster can be logically classified as man -made.  Paragraph 
8.2.1, further stipulated that outflow in excess of inflow can be taken care of 
by developing operation rules with built -in factor of safety and adequate and 
efficient warning system. 
Paragraph 8.8.1 of the guidelines envisaged that an efficient communication 
system with wireless communication facility should be in place for the success 
of e mergency preparedness plan .  Emergency Action Plan (EAP) for Dams, 
2006 formulated  by CWC, Go I recommended the requirement of inflow 
forecasting arrangements for better flood management. 
Chembarambakkam Tank is one of the largest t anks with a capacity to s tore 
3.645 TMC of water.  The original surplus arrangement with three weirs 23 was 
converted into regulated arrangement by constructing five vented regulators 
with discharge capacity of 20,410 cusec and subsequently enhanced to 33,060 
cusec by constructing (July 1993) 19 vented regulators.   
The Rules for Flood Regulations of Chembarambakkam Tank, forming part of 
Compendium of Rules of Regulations (COR) issued by PWD in October 1984, 
provided for release of surplus water  through three weirs without regulating 
arrangements.  The Rules also provided for estimating the inflows into the 
tank and promptly intimating the flood discharges to the Chief Engineer, 
District Collector, Commissioner of Police and Commissioner of Chennai 
Corporation. 
We observed from the scrutiny of records as follows: 
Despite stipulations in the CWC guidelines for  preparation of reservoir 
regulation schedules, the COR for Chembarambakkam Tank was not revised 
by WRD  taking into account the regulated discharge of surplus water and 
enhancement of the height of the tank to 24 feet. 
                                                             
23 Weirs are structures provided in tanks for surplus water to pass through 

Chapter V – Drainage System in Chennai Metropolitan Area 
 
93 
A comparison between COR for Poondi r eservoir and the unrevised COR for 
Chembarambakkam Tank revealed the following: 
Subject As per COR for 
Poondi 
reservoir 
As per COR for 
Chembarambakkam 
Tank 
Applying the regulated COR of Poondi 
Reservoir to Chembarambakkam Tank 
Required Actuals 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
Declaration of 
state of Extra -
ordinary 
Emergency 
As soon as the 
reservoir level 
reaches three feet 
below Full 
Reservoir Level. 
No such emergency 
declared.  
Information to other 
Departments when 
the weirs are likely to 
surplus and water 
level crosses 25 m. 
Extra-ordinary 
Emergency should 
have been 
declared when the 
depth of water 
reached 21 feet (It 
reached 21 feet on 
16/11/2015 (12 
noon) and the 
water was 
maintained above 
that level till 
02/12/2015). 
Extra-ordinary Emergency 
was not declared.  District 
Collector and Police 
officials were informed on 
01/12/2015 when depth of 
water in the tank was  
22.5 feet and flood 
warnings were issued. 
Rainfall and 
discharge 
details of 
upstream tank 
During 
emergency, the 
details of 
rainfall, duration, 
intensity, 
discharge 
particulars of 
upstream tanks 
were to be 
obtained. 
No reference to 
emergency.  The 
details of rainfall, 
inflow and outflow of 
upstream tanks were 
required to be 
collected. 
Duration and 
intensity of the 
rainfall in the 
upstream tank 
were to be 
collected. 
We observed that surplus 
from Sriperumpudur and 
Nemam Tanks discharged 
to Chembarambakkam 
Tank and there were only 
two rain gauges to 
measure the rainfall in its 
catchment and upstream 
tanks measuring  
357 sq.km.   
We also observed that the 
duration and intensity of 
discharge of upstream 
tanks was not recorded. 
Opening of 
regulator 
shutters 
The gates should 
not be opened 
suddenly.  They 
should be lifted 
giving time to 
allow the water 
level to rise 
gradually. 
No provision as the 
COR was based on 
unregulated 
arrangement. 
Gradual opening 
of gates and 
release of water. 
We observed that the 
release of water was not 
gradual as detailed in the 
succeeding paragraph. 
The surplus course of Chembarambakkam Tank joined Adyar River at 
Thiruneermalai.  In the absence of gauges, the inflow into the tank from 
catchment areas was to be measured based on the increase in the height of 
water in the tank.   
The details of inflow, outflow and water levels of Chembarambakkam Tank 
for the period fro m 16/11/2015 to 17 /11/2015 and 01 /12/2015 to 02 /12/2015 
are indicated in Appendix 5.6.  The inflow, outflow and water levels 
pertaining to the crucial days of 1 and 2 December 2015 are shown in  
Chart 5.1. 
 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
94 
 
(Source: Chart prepared based on data provided by WRD) 
We analysed the discharge with reference to the extant rules and observed as 
under:  
Imprudent and injudicious release of water causing massive flood 
As per the C OR for Regulated Tanks, WRD  should store water at the Full 
Reservoir Level in the month of December, as the monsoon starts receding .  
The COR also does not allow presence of private patta land inside water 
spread area.  As such, the patta land was required to be acquired for ensurin g 
storage of water till the full capacity of the reservoir.  We observed that the 
full tank capacity of Chembarambakkam was 3.645 TMC at a storage depth of 
24 ft .  However, the same was not achieved on any of the days during the 
receding monsoon of 2015 .  Even on the days of maximum inflow 
(01/12/2015 and 02/12/2015), water was s tored only up to a maximum of 
3.481 TMC, leaving 0.164 TMC of remaining capacity unutilised .  We 
observed that t he WRD did not maintain Full Reservoir Level to avoid 
possible submer gence of the patta land on foreshore area, which was in 
absolute violation to the compendium of rules of regulations. 
The Department had, therefore, failed to acquire patta land to operate the tank 
to its full capacity .  GoTN stated ( May 2017) that considering the cost of 
acquisition of patta land, a proposal to enhance the bunds in the foreshore of 
the tank was in pipeline, the documentary evidence for which was not made 
available to Audit .  Had WRD acquired the patta land, the storage ca pacity 
could have been maintained to its fullest and magnitude of flooding could 
have been reduced as more water could have been stored in the reservoir. 
The following observation substantiate that maintaining the storage capacity to 
the maximum, could have reduced the magnitude of the disaster: 
 On 01 December 2015, at 2 pm, when the storage stood at 3.377 TMC, 
which was 0.268 TMC  less than the total capacity of the tank, the 
discharge of water was abruptly increased from 12,000 cusec to  
20,960 cusec .  Again at 5 pm, the discharge was increased to  
960
7500
14000
24932
29000
31000
29000
26000
26000
23000
900
3000
12000
20960
29000
29000
29000
29000
29000
2900022.08
22.30
22.70
23.06 23.20
23.40 23.40 23.30
23.07
22.64
21
21.5
22
22.5
23
23.5
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
Water level in feet
Inflow / Outflow in cusec
Date and time
Chart 5.1: Inflow, outflow and water level on 1st and 2nd Dec. 2015 
Inflow Outflow Water level

Chapter V – Drainage System in Chennai Metropolitan Area 
 
95 
25,000 cusec and from 6 pm  to 29,000 cusec .  Considering the 
opportunity to store another 0.268 TMC, we firmly hold the view that 
the discharge could have been maintained at 12,000 cusec for another 
six hours24, by which an additional quantity of 0.266 TMC could have 
been stored and yet the storage level would not have reached to the 
brim.  We further observed that this indiscriminate water discharge 
was made to happen also because of the fact that patta land, which was 
allowed in the foreshore area, was to be saved from submergence .  The 
tank-in-charge, therefore, had not maintained the tank capacity upto 
the maximum level and consequently, abrupt and un -sustained release 
of water was  done.  This was a serious f ailure in operation of the 
reservoir, thus, contributing to the massive disaster .  Such imprudent 
and injudicious action by the Tank-in-charge as well as WRD warrants 
detailed enquiry. 
 The discharge of water at 29,000 cusec continuously for 2 1 hours from 
01/12/2015 - 18.00 hrs to 02/12/2015 - 15.00 hrs into the Adyar River 
coupled with surplus water from the upstream tanks and catchment 
area, caused huge flow of flood waters into Adyar River.  Non-taking 
up of the desiltation work in Adyar River for increasing the flood water 
storage capacity along with other flood protection works in Adyar 
River and the injudicious decision to indiscriminately increas e the 
discharge of water from 12,000 cusec to 29 ,000 cusec had proved that 
the disaster that had happened in  November-December 2015 was not a 
natural disaster but was indeed a man -made catastrophe as per CWC 
norms, for which GoTN was responsible. 
 According to CWC norms on Dam Safety, the surplus water released 
from the tank should be based on the actual inflow o nly.  In the 
absence of Emergency Action Plan and due to GoTN’s failure to 
update its system/manuals as per CWC guidelines, the water was 
released in an un-sustained manner.  We also observed that the outflow 
of surplus water was more than inflow into the tank for 13 hours on 
02/12/2015 (2.00 hrs to 15.00 hrs; Inflow 23,000 to 26,000 cusec – 
outflow 29,000 cusec) during the period of rain and despite non-storing 
of water to its full capacity, in contravention of the Guidelines of CWC 
prescribing the procedure for Dam safety, resulting in increased flow 
of water to the already swelling Adyar River. 
 We observed that a total quantity of 8.7 TMC of water, which was 
more than 75 per cent of the total capacity of four reservoirs in CMA 
put together, was discharged from Chembarambakkam into the sea 
during 17 November to 10 December 2015 .  As Chembarambakkam 
Tank plays a very significant role in catering to the water supply needs 
                                                             
24  Additional discharge of 8,960 cusec for three hours, over and above 2 pm discharge 
of 12,000 cusec between 2 pm to 5 pm would have increased storage by 96.768 mcft 
(8,960 x 60 x 60 x 3/10,00,000) + Additional discharge of 13,000 cusec for one hour, 
over and above 12,000 cusec between 5 pm to 6 pm would have increased storage by 
46.80 mcft (13,000 x 60 x 60 x 1 / 10,00,000) + Additional discharge of 17,000 cusec 
for two hours, over and above 12,000 cusec between 6 pm and 8 pm would have 
increased the storage by 122.40 mcft (17,000 x 60 x 60 x 2 / 10,00,000) 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
96 
of Chennai city, the upstream reservoirs, if constructed, as was  
proposed by the Nucleus Cell, would have helped in storing at least 
1.57 TMC and the issue o f catering to the drinking water needs could 
have been addressed to that extent, besides reducing the load on 
Chembarambakkam. 
Absence of scientific real-time flood forecasting and communication facility 
 No real -time flood forecast and scientific assessment of inflow, as 
envisaged in the guidelines of CWC and Anna University (2012) was 
carried out.  As regards inflow, WRD  did not have any scientifically 
proven inflow forecast system and depended only on IMD for weather 
forecast and reverse mechanism method 25 based on the actual increase 
in the water level of the water spread area .  As a result, the actual 
assessment of infl ow could not be ensured and the total outflow 
exceeded the actual inflow for 13 hours during 02/12/2015 from  
2.00 am to 3.00 pm, leading to the massive flooding. 
 A scrutiny of periodical Inspection Report on safety of 
Chembarambakkam dam conducted and submitted to Dam Safety 
Directorate of the State revealed that the wireless communication 
facility was not functioning for more than six months before December 
2015 floods, indicating that WRD did not possess adequate emergency 
preparedness plan as envisaged in the Dam Safety Procedure .  As a 
result, on 01 December 2015, when the inflow was more, necessary 
communications could not be made using the wireless communication 
devices as was also evident from the fact that no records were made 
available to audit for ascertaining the fact that communication from the 
tank-in-charge was actually made with the Government/Departmental 
authorities on the incoming flood. 
Absence of monitoring in release of water from Chembarambakkam Tank 
 CWC guidelines on Release Procedure states that the aim of reservoir 
operation is to reduce the risk of man -made floods through careful 
preparation of reservoir regulation schedule, releas e procedure and 
gate operation schedules with accurate and reliable flood forecasting 
and warning system .  The discharge of water from the 
Chembarambakkam Tank was monitored and executed by a Section 
Officer (SO) who was the in-charge of the tank.  In absence of any gate 
opening schedule as prescribed under CWC norms, the decision to 
release water from the tank vests with the SO in-charge of the tank.  As 
no record was made available to Audit on any communication made by 
the SO with the Departmental/Governm ent authorities, we observed 
from the data that on 01 December 2015, when there was a huge 
discharge of 29,000 cusec of water, the imprudent decision was made 
by the in-charge of the tank.  The Department had stated that there was 
telephonic communication made by the in -charge of the tank and the 
Chief Engineer, PWD was personally monitoring the entire activity; 
                                                             
25 Assessment of inflow is made with reference to the rise in the water level of the tank 

Chapter V – Drainage System in Chennai Metropolitan Area 
 
97 
documentation of the telephonic conversation was though not found on 
record to ascertain the veracity of the claim made by WRD.  The fact, 
however, remains that even if it was accepted on basis of the reply that 
supervision and monitoring at Chief Engineer level was in place, the 
actual inflow and outflow was, nevertheless, not regulated as per CWC 
norms.  Consequently, indiscriminate discharge of water in excess of 
inflow took place which had further reduced the water level in the 
tank, as a result of which, burden on Adyar River was more, leading to 
massive flood in Chennai and in its suburban areas .  Thus, though a 
watchful supervision was in place, as was claimed by WRD, it could 
not be even ensured that total outflow from Chembarambakkam Tank 
did not exceed the inflow for 13 hours, as no schedule for gate opening 
was available.  This implies that due to  non-ensuring of discharge of 
water in sustained manner, the catastrophe that had happened during 
North East Monsoon 2015 may be categori sed as a man -made disaster 
as per CWC Guidelines. 
Thus, Department failed to consider the Report on procedures for Dam s afety 
issued by CWC by updating the COR of Chembarambakkam Tank taking into 
account the regulated surplus arrangement, non -maintenance of full capacity 
of the tank, non -release of surplus water in a sustained manner, release of 
surplus water in excess of i nflow of water into the tank and to formulate EAP 
for determination of the actual inflow and management of the tank resulting in 
un-planned release of water in excess of the carrying capacity of the Adyar 
River causing huge floods in the residential areas of Chennai and its suburbs 
during December 2015 rains. 
Government replied (March 2017) that the release of water was based on the 
existing Compendium of Rules of Regulations and revision of Compendium 
and formulation of EAP were under progress .  The reply was not tenable as 
WRD failed to revise the Compendium even after a lapse of 23 years from the 
date of installation of regulated arrangement to the tank and no lessons were 
learnt from the damages caused to life and property in the floods of 2005. 
Recommendation No . 18: We recommend immediate updation of the 
Compendium of Rules of Regulations of Chembarambakkam Tank and 
fixing responsibility on officials for their failure to follow CWC’s guidelines 
on Dam safety. 
  

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
98 
5.8.6 Inundation at Thiruneermalai confluence point due to afflux of 
water and encroachment by local body 
The surplus course of Chembarambakkam  was constructed in such a way that 
it joins the Adyar River at Thiruneermalai confluence point on a perpendicular 
line.  Owing to th e existence of perpendicular line of meeting design, water 
flowing from Chembarambakkam surplus course collided with water flowing 
from Adanur and other Tanks causing afflux action and consequent inundation 
in the upstream areas during 2015 .  Besides, the river portion of the 
confluence point had been encroached by the compound wall of solid waste 
management unit operated by Thiruneermalai Town Panchayat increasing the 
afflux action.   
Thus, due to heavy discharge of 29,000 cusec of water for continuous 21 hours 
on 01/12/2015 and 02/12/2015 from Chembarambakkam Tank, the discharged 
water could not smoothly pass through the confluence point causing immense 
inundation in the nearby areas .  GoTN replied (March 2017) that under the 
project ‘Rehabilitation and Restoration of Floods -damaged Adyar’, 
Administrative Sanction had already been issued (October 2016)  for various 
works including construction of a meeting point curve at Thiruneermalai 
confluence point where Chembarambakkam surplus water meets the surplus 
water from Adanur and other tanks .  The belated action of GoTN in planning 
for corrective measures at the confluence point also contributed to flooding.   
5.9 Inundations in suburban areas of Chennai  
The inundations in various locations of Chennai and its suburbs due to 
overflowing of flood waters in Adyar River and the major factors contributing 
to the inundations are discussed in the subsequent paragraphs. 
5.9.1  Inundation due to non-desilting of tanks 
Report on Dam Safety Procedures issued by Central Water Commission, G oI 
(July 1986) envisaged that reservoir silt survey should be undertaken at 
regular intervals and the area capacity of the curve need to be revised 
accordingly.  Watershed Management Division of WRD, Pollachi, was 
responsible to conduct sedimentation survey to identify the extent of siltation 
in the tanks.   
We observed that no sedimentation survey was conducted in any of the tanks 
in Chennai, Kancheepuram and Tiruvallur districts exce pt Poondi reservoir 
(2010).  Check of five tanks 26 influencing Adyar River by Anna University 
also revealed that the storage capacity had reduced by 30 per cent, i.e. from 
0.780 TMC to 0.576 TMC, due to siltation.  Shrinkage of original capacity of 
222 tanks led to overflow of water triggering the flooding in Adyar River and 
non-harnessing of rain waters to an extent of 2.2 TMC 27.  We also noticed that 
four tanks viz., Mannivakkam, Nandhivaram, Urappakkam and Adanur, which 
                                                             
26 Manimangalam, Nemam, Pillaipakkam, Porur and Sriperumpudur 
27 Capacity of 222 tanks was 7.412 TMC; siltation of 30 per cent  worked out to  
2.2 TMC 

Chapter V – Drainage System in Chennai Metropolitan Area 
 
99 
influence Adyar River, breached during the rains .  We also observed that due 
to non-desilting of these tanks, flood waters could not be accommodated to the 
full tank capacity resulting into heavy inflow of flood waters in Adyar River. 
WRD replied (October 2016) that no periodicity for conducting sedimentation 
studies had been fixed in the Departmental manuals and survey would be 
conducted on priority basis .  The reply was not acceptable because such 
studies were required to be conducted as  per CWC guidelines and their 
departmental manuals required updation in tune with CWC guidelines. 
Recommendation No .  19: We recommend for conduct of sedimentation 
survey of the tanks in Chennai and its suburbs for taking effective action in 
removal of the silt and maintaining the original capacity of the tanks. 
5.9.2  Inundation due to abrupt ending of channel 
Pappan Channel in the southern part of the city, carried surplus water from 
nearby uncontrolled tanks to Adyar River.  The channel passed through a 
defined course 28 on Government land and along road sides, before spreading 
over private patta land and emptying into Adyar River.   
We noticed that developments including construction of culverts and foot 
paths by local bodies and a small bridge and retaining wall constructed by 
Highways Department, without obtaining NOC from WRD reduced the width 
of the Channel .  Downstream, the chann el ended abruptly as residential 
buildings had come up on the patta land near confluence with Adyar  River, 
thus causing inundation in Tambaram, Mudichur, Mannivakam and 
Perungalathur areas.  Joint inspection also showed that a major residential 
colony was developed on the end point of the Pappan Channel .  CMDA stated 
that the residential area was developed on a patta land.  The reply was not 
tenable as the role of CMDA was also to ensure protection of waterways 
through proper planning .  Due to the abrupt en ding of the channel, WRD 
provided a diversion channel after the floods. 
 
During floods of 2015, surplus water from Peerkankaranai and Irumbuliyur 
Lakes caused heavy floods in the Pappan Channel.  Due to its limited carrying 
capacity, the channel could not drain the surplus water received from the lakes 
quickly into Adyar River and could not negotiate with the Adyar River, which 
was already in floods, thereby causing heavy inundation in th ese areas, shown 
in Exhibit 5.3. 
  
                                                             
28  Defined course is a channel with earthen or concrete bund, as against an undefined or 
natural course of channel which does not have any structure like a bund to carry the 
flood through a definite path 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
100 
Exhibit 5.3: Heavy inundation in the areas of Ward 32 of Tambaram Municipality 
 
    (Source: Tambaram Municipality) 
Thus, the failure of CMDA in allowing constructions of residential buildings 
without preserving water course and WRD’s failure in protecting the channel 
under its jurisdiction resulted in inundation of adjoining areas. 
Recommendation No. 20: We recommend the GoTN to conduct investigation 
in the matter of establishment of colonies and constructions in the water 
bodies in violation of the SMP and CWC guidelines and allowing facilities 
like power, water connections, roads and other community works.   
5.10 Analysis  
Though Chennai and its suburban areas witness high intensity rainfall during a 
short span of two to three months every year, Government and its agencies 
failed to keep the mitigation machinery in full preparedness .  Even the 
stipulated annual desilting of micro and macro drains was largely not carried 
out or started after the onset of monsoon. 
Allowing patta lands in the foreshore area of the tanks and inability to acquire 
lands for flood protection walls indicate the  helplessness of GoTN in ensuring 
safety to its people against disaster.   
Improvements to macro drains did not fructify due to encroachment and 
pending clearance from other agencies .  No system existed for real -time flood 
forecast for releasing of surplus  water with due regard to the water carrying 
capacity of waterways .  SWDs were not scientifically designed and lacked 
seamless connectivity to trunk mains/rivers .  Lapses in implementing 
Underground Sewage Schemes by local bodies led to continued outflow o f 
sewage into SWD and consequent clogging of drains. 
  


Chapter V – Drainage System in Chennai Metropolitan Area 
 
101 
We observed failure of GoTN in carrying out the recommendations of various 
experts/committees on creation of additional storage capacity in the upstream 
of Chembarambakkam Tank, construction of diversion channel to Adyar River 
and construction of two check dams across the river.  Moreover, the GoTN did 
not ensure desilting of the channels and tanks feeding Adyar River besides 
non-execution of flood protection works, non -adherence to CWC’s guidelines 
on dam safety and release procedures and non -clearance of structural 
hindrances in the river.  Due to all these factors, we conclude that the flooding 
was man-made in terms of the CWC guidelines. 

 
CHAPTER VI
Rescu e operation by Armed Forces
DISASTER MANAGEMENT

 
103 
 
 
 
 
According to Disaster Management Act, 2005 (DM Act), disaster management 
involves continuous and integrated process of p lanning, organising, 
coordinating and implementing measures which are necessary for  
(i) prevention of threat of any disaster, (ii) mitigation of ris k of disaster,  
(iii) capacity building, (iv) preparedness to deal with disaster, (v) rescue, relief 
and rehabilitation and reconstr uction, etc .  After the floods of 2015,  GoTN 
launched rescue and relief operation s with the help of various agencies .  
Deficiencies noticed in long term planning  and institutional mechanism and 
issues in handling the rescue and relief activities are discussed in this chapter. 
We have already discussed in previous chapters about various factors which 
severely handicapped th e Government to face the 2015 disaster such as  
(i) f ailures in prevention of disaster due to non-adherence to Master Plans,  
(ii) failures in taking timely action to effect removal of encroachments at 
various places in the Chennai City including in water bodies, (iii) faulty design 
and insufficient coverage of SWDs , (iv) failures in mitigation of risk of 
disaster such as non -construction of several planned channels to divert flood 
water and  (v) non-removal of  identified and planned to be removed  
obstructions, blocking free flow of flood water in river, etc.  This chapter deals 
with deficiencies in capacity building, preparedness  to deal with disaster and 
rescue, relief and reconstruction activities.   
6.1 Deficiencies in the institutional framework 
6.1.1 Deficiencies in the functioning of State Disaster Management 
Authority 
The Tamil Nadu State Disaster  Management Authority (Authority) formed 
under Section 14(1) of DM Act, 2005, is responsible for disaster preparedness 
and coordinating rescue and relief measures in the event of a disaster .  The 
following deficiencies on the part of the Authority added to  the vulnerability 
of Chennai city and its suburban areas during the floods in 2015. 
The State at its own level, had constituted a Disaster Management Authority  
under the chairmanship  of the Chief Secretary in 2003 .  However, u nder 
Section 14 (2) of DM Act, 2005, the Authority was to be constituted with the 
Chief Minister (CM) as the Chairperson.  Though the Act came into force in 
2005, the  Authority, which was functioning under the Chief Secretary,  was  
re-constituted in  November 2013, with the CM as the chairperson , after a 
delay of eight years  indicating lack of seriousness on the part of the State 
Government to take care of disasters .  The Authorit y’s responsibilities 
included laying down the State Disaster Management Policy and approving 
Disaster Management Plan  (DMP).  We observed that t he Authority did not 
hold its meeting even once after its constitution in November 2013 , again 
CHAPTER VI  
DISASTER MANAGEMENT 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
104 
showing lack of seriousness on the part of the State Government at  the highest 
level. 
We further noticed that three years after reconstitution of the Authority and 
after the floods of December 2015, t he Executive Council (EC)  of the 
Authority passed (August 2016) a resolution for seeking convenient date from 
the CM for holding its first meeting, but no such meeting was held till date 
(April 2017) .  The delay in constit ution of the Authority under the 
chairmanship of the CM and non -convening of meetings indicated lack of 
seriousness attached to disaster preparedness  on the part of the State 
Government.  GoTN stated (M ay 2017) that non -convening the meeting of 
Authority did not dilute the functions, and the response to the natural disaster 
was carried out effectively  under the direction of the CM .  The reply was 
misleading and did not address the issue that GoTN lacked a n organi sed 
structure and approach for disaster pre paredness as mandated under DM Act, 
2005 even after facing disastrous floods of 2015. 
TN State Disaster Management Agency (TNSDMA), constituted in November 
2013, functioning under the Authority was to provide institutional framework 
for disaster management .  As per its bye-laws, it is mandatory for TNSDMA 
to hold its Annual General Body Meeting (AGM) once a year to discuss the  
(i) report of the EC, (ii) assets and liabilities, (iii) income and expenditure 
statement (iv)  report of the Auditor and (v) other issues connected with 
disaster preparedness etc .  We, however, observed that the TNSDMA did not 
hold its AGM since its constitution in November 2013  indicating lack of 
seriousness for adequate preparedness for facing disaster  during 2015  as 
discussed in subsequent paragraphs. 
TNSDMA had been envisaged as a body with financial and administrative 
resources, to manage disasters .  As per existing NDM guidelines, the Central 
and State funds were to be released to the bank account of TNSDMA.  But, we 
noticed that the bank account was not opened to ensure the envisaged financial 
autonomy.  On the contrary, we noticed that GoTN provided funds through 
budget which w ere to be drawn through separate financial sanction,  thereby 
making TNSDMA an entity without the required financial autonomy to swiftly 
respond to disasters.  As a result, the TNSDMA remained dependent on orders 
from GoTN for release of funds  for meeting expenditure for relief measures, 
such as payment of cash doles, procurement of sarees and dhotis a nd rice for 
free distribution to beneficiaries .  Thus, the dependence on GoTN  had taken 
avoidable time, which could have been avoided had there been financial 
autonomy with TNSDMA.   
As per Section 17 of the DM Act, 2005, an Advisory Committee had to be 
constituted co nsisting of experts in Disaster Management and those having 
practical experience on Disaster Managem ent.  Detailed proposals submitted 
(September 2014) by TNSDMA on constitution of the Advisory Committee 
was approved by Government only in October 2016.  As a result, the State was 
deprived of expert advice on disaster preparedness .  It was, therefore, evident 
that GoTN was not serious in adhering to NDM guidelines to protect the lives 
and properties of the people. 

Chapter VI - Disaster Management  
 
 
105 
Sections 48(1) (b) and (d) of th e DM Act, 2005, envisaged constitution of 
District Disaster Response Fund and District Disaster Mitigation Fund .  
Further, GoI advised (September 2010) the State to constitute the above funds.  
These funds, which were essential to ensure swift response to disasters, were 
not constituted in all the three audited districts, viz., Chennai, Kancheepuram 
and Tiruvallur.   
Thus, from (i) the delay in constitution of the Authority, ( ii) non-convening of 
Authority’s meetings and the AGM of TNSDMA, ( iii) the lack of the 
envisaged financial autonomy to TNSDMA, ( iv) the delay in constitution of 
Advisory Committee and ( v) non -establishment of Disaster Response Fund 
and Disaster Mitigation Fund at District level, we observed that the State 
lacked an organised system for disaster preparedness and response. 
Recommendation No . 21: We recommend that Government should put in 
place the institutional framework envisaged in the Act and the guidelines 
issued by GoI .  Regular convening of meetings and grant of financial 
autonomy to TNSDMA should be ensured.   
6.1.2 Abnormal delay in preparation of Disaster Management Plan  
Section 23(1) of the DM Act, 2005, envisaged preparation of a State DMP .  
The DMP was to inter alia include the roles and responsibilities of the 
different departments of the Government in responding to the disaster .  The 
DMP was to assess hazard vulnerability and plan preventive measure and 
disaster response.  The DMP was to be updated annually and  approved by the 
Authority.   
We observed that i n the absence of DMP  at the time of floods, preventive 
measures and disaster response were not organi sed in a planned manner .  We 
further observed that Anna Institute of Management, Chennai, was engaged 
(November 2013) to update the draft DMP prepared in 2010 .  The draft 
submitted (August 2014) by Anna Institute of Management was not approved 
(March 2015) by TNSDMA as the plan was not drafted as per the template 
suggested by National Disaster Management Author ity.  Though the plan 
revised in 2016 by the TNSDMA was agreed to by GoTN (October 2016) but 
it was not approved by the Authority due to non -convening of its meetings 
(April 2017). 
6.2 Shortfalls in capacity building for disaster management 
The 13 th Finance Commission  emphasised the need to train manpower and 
equip District Emergency Operation Centre (DEOC) to handle complex 
disaster situations.   
The 13th Finance Commission’s capacity building grant entitled to GoTN and 
actually received are given in Table 6.1 below: 
  

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
106 
Table 6.1: 13th Finance Commission’s capacity building grant 
(` in crore) 
Year Grant entitled Grant actually 
received 
Remarks 
2010-11 5.00 0.00 Grant for the first year was 
received in 2011 -12.  Grants 
for 2011-12  and 2012-13 were 
received only in 201 3-14 due 
to delayed submission of 
utilisation certificates (UCs).  
Grant for 2013-14 and 2014-15 
were not received due to 
delayed submission of UCs. 
2011-12 5.00 5.00 
2012-13 5.00 0.00 
2013-14 5.00 10.00 
2014-15 5.00 0.00 
Total 25.00 15.00  
(Source: TNSDMA) 
The capacity building grant was to be utili sed for training manpower, 
strengthening of DEOC, preparation of educational  materials for creating 
awareness, etc.  District authorities procured  inventories such as TV, desktop  
computers, laser printer, fax,  furniture, scanner and digital camera  etc., using 
13th Finance Commission grant for strengthening of DEOCs .  We observed 
that the funds released to districts w ere inadequate as the sampled  
Kancheepuram DEOC lacked even basic inventories such as TV, fax machine, 
scanner and CCTV, which were essential to keep the communication channel 
open during floods .  None of the DEOCs had satellite phones suggested by 
GoI, which were crucial in situations where the communication network broke 
down.  Further, the DEOCs had not put in place the online  Decision Support 
System envisaged by NDMA to ensure effective communication and swift 
decision making .  The Director, Disaster Management stated (March 2017) 
that Government wa s c onsidering procure ment of advanced communication 
equipment.  But, the fact remain s that due to  non-availing of 13th Finance 
Commission grant in full due to administrative delays on the part of 
Commissioner of Revenue Administration ( CRA), the State could not 
strengthen its DEOCs to effectively  handle the disaster in 2015.  Thus, GoTN 
may review the infrastructural requirements of DEOCs to equip them 
adequately.   
6.3 Deficiencies in functioning of Emergency Operation Centre 
As per NDM guidelines of 2 008, EOCs  were to be established as an offsite 
facility, functioning from the State/District headquarters .  EOC was to be an 
augmented control room having communication facilities .  It coordinates all 
line departments in rescue and relief work after disasters.  Shortage of 
manpower in the EOC at TNSDMA’s office at Chennai was pointed out in  
C&AG’s Audit Report on GoTN ( G&SSA) for the year ended March 2012 .  
As per NDM guidelines, one Senior Administrative Officer with required 
number of Assistants and  representatives of various line Departments were to 
be posted in the EOC .  Despite this being pointed out by Audit in 2012, no 
dedicated staff were posted .  Twelve desk personnel (contract staff) 
outsourced from Electronic s Corporation of TN (ELCOT) were manning the 
EOC.  As the period from January to June was considered non -calamitous 
season, every year, the number of desk staff stood reduced to six .  Scrutiny of 

Chapter VI - Disaster Management  
 
 
107 
TNSDMA’s records revealed that even during the monsoon months of 2015, 
there were only six desk personnel who were not adequate to handle the EOC. 
In Chennai and Tiruvallur DEOCs, desk personnel were not engaged from 
ELCOT during November and December 2015 .  In Kancheepuram DEOC, 
only one out of two Desk personnel were available during  
01 November 2015 to 31 January 2016.  It was replied that in the absence of 
regular desk personnel, officials of Revenue Department were placed in 
charge of the DEOCs.  The reply was not acceptable as the officials deputed to 
work in the DEOC did not report there fo r work  as per the record verified 
during audit. 
We further observed that the n on-posting of desk personnel in EOCs 
hampered their efficiency as discussed below: 
 In order to facilitate easy accessibility during disasters, EOCs have 
been equipped with toll f ree contact numbers (1070 and 1077) .  These 
numbers are accessible from all landline and mobile networks .  EOCs 
were to coordinate with line departments to take action on the 
complaints received through these toll free numbers.  EOCs maintained 
the contact details of field level functionaries of line departments to 
coordinate rescue, relief and restoration works .  We observed that 
during November and December 2015 i.e., during the months when 
flood took place,  the Chennai District  EOC received 1 ,586 calls from 
flood affected people.  All the calls were recorded in registers and the 
messages were forwarded to GCC (1,371 messages), TN Electricity 
Board (TNEB)(78) and Taluk offices (18).   
 We further observed that apart from forwarding the messages , no 
further action was taken to coordinate with the line departments to find 
solution for the complaints received .  On this being pointed out by 
Audit, District Collector, Chennai replied that there was no response 
from the Call Centres run by the GCC and  TNEB.  The reply was  
untenable as the EOC itself could have approached the field officers of 
line departments rather than just passing on the message to the call 
centres of GCC and TNEB.   
 The DEOCs of Tiruvallur and Kancheepuram districts received 970 
calls and 1,330 calls respectively, during November  and December 
2015.  These DEOCs were also not in a position to monitor  action 
taken reports from line departments .  Thus, DEOCs did not follow up 
on the complaints received over phone, but functioned with a limited 
scope of just forwarding the complaints to other agencies. 
On being asked, CRA stated (May 2017) that shortage of Desk Personnel did 
not impact the functioning of DEOCs as regular staff were deployed .  CRA 
further stated that in addition to EOCs, control rooms of Police, GCC, etc., 
also functioned in a decentrali sed manner .  The reply was not acceptable as 
posting of staff in an adhoc manner rather than through regular engagement in 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
108 
deviation from the NDM  guideline for centrali sed coordination of disaster 
response through EOCs indicated lack of planned and structured approach.   
6.4  Rescue operations 
In terms of the DM Act, 2005, GoI  had created National Disaster Response 
Force (NDRF) to respond to natural disasters .  One of the battalions of NDRF 
is stationed at Arakkonam, located close to Chennai .  NDRF battalions have 
teams with high skill training and latest equipment for water rescue .  Further, 
in case of emergencies, civil authorities can request the army for help .  
Scrutiny of records relating to response to floods disclosed the followings: 
6.4.1 Deployment of National Disaster Response Force for rescue 
As per the information furnished to the Parliamentary Committee, 1,200 Army 
men, 600 personnel from Navy, Coast Guard and Air Force and 1,920 NDRF 
personnel were involved in the rescue and relief operations .  However, we 
could not ascertain the date and time from which the NDRF were d eployed in 
rescue operations.   
According to NDRF Guidelines, three days before the approaching calamity, 
alert to nearest NDRF battalion and armed forces had to be made for relief and 
rescue operations.  We observed that instead of approaching the NDRF at least 
three days in advance as per NDRF guidelines, the GoTN actually contacted 
the Director General ( DG), NDRF only on 01 December 2015 , after the 
flooding had taken place .  Due to delayed intimation made to NDRF  by 
GoTN, the NDRF could deploy its for ces between 01 December and  
04 December 2015 only, which resulted in delay in rescue operations.  Had the 
timely action been taken in this regard, the extent of loss of human lives could 
have been reduced. 
6.4.2 Lack of communication equipment for rescue operations 
Keeping communication channels working is crucial for rescue and relief 
operations during disasters .  As power supply and telecommunication 
networks broke down due to floods, mobile and telephone services got 
disturbed in Chennai and suburban areas during floods.  Very High Frequency 
(VHF) sets were the only reliable communication system for rescue and relief 
works.  The details of availability of VHF sets in Collectors’ offices, Revenue 
Divisional offices and Taluk offices in Chennai, Kancheepuram and Tiruvallur 
districts as of June 2016 are given in Table 6.2. 
  

Chapter VI - Disaster Management  
 
 
109 
Table 6.2: Availability of VHF sets 
Chennai Kancheepuram Tiruvallur 
No.  
of 
offices 
No.  of VHF sets 
available 
No.  of 
offices 
No.  of VHFsets 
available 
No.  of 
offices 
No.  of VHF sets 
available 
Base 
Station 
Mobile 
Station 
Base 
Station 
Mobile 
Station  
Base 
Station 
Mobile 
Station 
15 8 7 20 16*  
 
16 ** 22 18 17 
* Three of them were not installed and five of them were not in working condition 
** Eight of them were not in working condition 
(Source: Revenue and Disaster Management Department) 
Guindy, one of the affected taluks in Chennai District where 1,472 huts were 
fully damaged and 1,4 15 huts were partly damaged did not have any VHF 
sets.  The Revenue Divisional Officers in Egmore, and  Tondiarpet and four 
other taluk offices did not have VHF sets .  In Tiruvallur District, the worst 
affected Taluks of Maduravoyal, Thiruvottiyur and Avadi did not have any 
VHF sets.  We observed that non-availability of these critical communication 
equipment revealed inadequacies in disaster preparedness.   
6.5 Relief work  
6.5.1 Relief extended by Government 
Besides food and shelter provided as immediate relief, GoTN approved the 
following relief to the affected population: 
 A cash dole of ` 5,000 for each of the families of inundated house/hut 
 A cash dole of  ` 5,000 and ` 5,200 for each of the families of  partly 
damaged huts and tiled houses respectively 
 A cash dole of ` 10,000 for fully damaged huts 
 One set of saree and dhoti to each of the affected households 
 10 kg of rice to each of the affected households 
 Special drive to issue certificates, ration cards and other officials 
documents to families who lost them in floods  
Deficiencies noticed in relief and rehabilitati on acti vities are discussed in 
Paragraphs 6.5.2 to 6.5.6. 
6.5.2 Deficiencies in beneficiary identification 
We noticed discrepancy in the estimation of number of families affected by 
floods.  While the number of families affected by floods for the purpose of 
cash doles was 25.13 lakh, the number of families affected for the purpose of 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
110 
issue of rice and sarees and dhotis was depicted as 24.71 lakh, as shown in  
Table 6.3. 
Table 6.3: Beneficiary data 
District 
Number of families affected according to 
Cash dole list Rice allotment list Sarees and dhotis 
distribution list 
Chennai 13,15,000 12,36,253 12,36,253 
Tiruvallur 5,97,826 6,34,000 6,34,000 
Kancheepuram 5,99,843 6,00,713 6,00,675 
Total 25,12,669 24,70,966 24,70,928 
(Source: Data furnished by CRA) 
Adoption of different number of families affected for each category shows the 
inaccuracy of the data presented by CRA .  While the estimation of number of 
affected households for the purpose of cash dole was done by door to door 
enumeration conducted by officials drawn from other districts, estimation for 
supply of rice and sarees and dhotis were not based on the same.   
We observed the following: 
 In Chennai District, there was a short payment of ` 50.45 crore 
towards payment of cash dole to beneficiaries,  which was remitted 
back to Government account .  Similarly, in Tiruvallur  district, ` 4.76 
crore was surrendered and in Kancheepuram district, ` 15.20 crore was 
surrendered/remitted back .  The relief amount were surrendered/  
remitted back to Government account, due to defective  preparation of 
enumeration i.e., incorrect account number/names of beneficiaries etc .  
We observed that the defective enume ration had resulted in short 
payment of relief totaling ` 70.41 crore  to eligible beneficiaries 
enumerated after floods.   
 In Chennai, the District Collector issued 16,70,000 serially numbered 
enumeration forms to enumerators and 12,87,735 beneficiaries we re 
given relief .  However, Audit scrutiny of the data revealed that 
Tahsildars paid ` 33.65 lakh to 662 persons enumerated through forms 
which were not issued by the Collector’s office.  The District Collector 
attributed (December 2016) typographical error s in respect of 424 of 
the 662 applications, but did not produce copies of the said 
applications.  By analysing the electronic data furnished by the District 
Collector, we noticed that 146 of the 662 persons who were paid 
assistance based on unnumbered enu meration forms had received 
assistance based on enumeration forms supplied by the Collectorate as 
well.  CRA stated (May 2017) that 424 of the 662 cases of payments 
based on unnumbered enumeration forms were identified as genuine 
cases, and the remaining 238 constituted a very small percentage of the 
total of 13.17 lakh cash dole applications .  We could not verify the 
genuineness of the 424 cases cited in the reply and observed that even 

Chapter VI - Disaster Management  
 
 
111 
a small percentage of cases of irregular payments pointed towards 
deficiencies in the system of enumeration, supervision and authori sing 
payments. 
 In Thenneri Village of Wallajabad Taluk (Kancheepuram District), the  
Tahsildar paid ` 4,100 each to 155 families as compensation for partly 
damaged hu ts based on certificate in Form-201 by the Revenue 
Inspector.  However, Form-20 for obtaining details of the family and 
copy of ration card was not available on record in respect of  
128 families .  Neither the Tahsildar, Wallajabad nor the District 
Collector, Kancheepuram furnished the Form 20 in respect of the  
128 families.  We could not confirm the genuineness of the payment of  
` 5.25 lakh to them.  We observed that the payment was made in these 
cases in violation of the prescribed procedure as per Government order  
for giving ben efit for flood affected persons for which door to door 
enumeration was required. 
 Cash dole was to be paid based on enumeration  by teams of officials 
constituted by District Collectors .  Enumeration involved certification 
to the effect that the house hold w as affected by flooding .  The 
Tahsildar of Sholinganallur Taluk, Kancheepuram  District, however, 
paid (February 2016) ` 4.17 crore as cash dole to 8,354 persons 
without any enumeration .  On this being pointed out by Audit, the 
District Collector, Kancheepuram admitted (August 2016) making 
payments without enumeration, but stated that these people were left 
out during the enumeration.  CRA was not sure about the 
circumstances under which the payments were made when he replied 
(May 2017) to Audit  that “some of the beneficiaries who  did not 
receive the cash dole in the first phase might have submitted their 
applications to Collector’s office and Chief Minister’s Special Cell” .  
The reply was not a cceptable, being presumptive and not based on 
records, as payment was to be made on the basis of enumeration only.  
We observed that the Tahsildar, Sholinganallur  and Collector, 
Kancheepuram had failed to exercise due diligence in making cash 
dole payment of ` 4.17 crore to 8,354 persons.   
6.5.3 Multiple payment of relief to same beneficiaries 
Government decided (December 2015) to provide cash assistance to all 
families living in houses/huts inundated, with water stagnation for more than 
two days .  Cash dole payments were made based on enumeration done by 
Government officials drawn from various districts .  Enumeration forms 
included the name of the head of family, address, Ration card number (identity 
proof) and carried the signature of the head of family .  All eligible 
beneficiaries enumerated were paid (January and February 2016) the entitled 
cash dole through ECS by the Tahsildars concerned.   
We analysed the electronic data on cash dole payment, which were maintained 
by the three District Collectors,  and noticed instances of payments of cash 
doles more  than once to the same household/beneficiaries .  Details of 
                                                             
1 A existing certificate prescribed for assistance to victims of natural disaster 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
112 
households/beneficiaries who received multiple payments, based on single 
identification document (Ration card, Adhaar card etc.) are given in Table 6.4. 
Table 6.4: Multiple payments of relief to same beneficiary/household 
District Nature of 
payment 
Details of multiple payments Excess 
payment 
(` in lakh) 
Chennai Cash dole 
(` 5,000 for 
partly damaged 
huts/inundation) 
 
28,934 beneficiaries received 
multiple payments (two to eight 
times to same 
beneficiary/household)  
1,514.60 
Kancheepuram 38,712 beneficiaries received 
multiple payments (2 to 35 times 
to same beneficiary/household) 
2,149.60 
Tiruvallur 26,507 beneficiaries received 
assistance twice 
574.36 
Total excess payment (94,153 cases) 4,238.56 
(Source: Electronic data furnished by District Collectors) 
In addition to the scrutiny of electronic data on payment of relief, as 
mentioned in Table 6.4 above, we conducted manual scrutiny of all the  
1,856 applications, which the electronic data had indicated multiple payments 
in Guindy Tal uk of Chennai District .  The results of the manual scrutiny are 
given in Table 6.5. 
Table 6.5: Analysis of multiple payments of relief to same beneficiary/household 
i Number of cases of multiple payment detected 
through scrutiny of electronic data at Guindy Taluk 
1,856 
ii Number of cases manually scrutinised 1,856 
iii Number of cases wrongly seen as multiple 
payment due to data entry error at Collectorate 
601 
iv Different persons getting payment at different 
addresses based on one Ration card 
453 
v Actual number of cases of multiple payment (ii- 
iii-iv) 
802 
vi Cases of same person/household getting more than 
one payment based on one Ration card at the same 
address 
187 cases 
 
vii Cases of same person/household getting more than 
one payment at different address, based on one 
Ration card 
183 cases 
 
viii Cases of different persons/households getting 
payment at the same address based on one Ration 
card 
432 cases 
 
(Source: Analysis of data and enumeration forms of Guindy Taluk) 
In respe ct of multiple payments pointed  out, CRA stated (Ma y 2017) that 
multiple payment on the strength of one ration card number happened in the 
case of married son/daughter of the head of the family, who were living 

Chapter VI - Disaster Management  
 
 
113 
separately without separate ration card  and tenants who migrated recently 
giving the ration card number of house owner for claiming cash dole.   
The reply was incorrect as manual checking of all the 1,856 cases of multiple 
payment for single ration card or identity document at Guindy Taluk had 
indicated same person receiving more than one payment in 187 cases based on 
one ration card at the same address , which worked out to 10 per cent of the 
number of cases of multiple payment as observed through analysis of 
electronic data.   
Further, we provided a list of 321 cases of multiple payment on the strength of 
single ration card or other identity document to the Collectors of Chennai, 
Kancheepuram and Thiruvallur, to verify the genuineness of the payments .  
Based on verifications, the Collectors found that double payments were made 
to 23 of the 321 cases , which worked out to seven per cent  of the cases of 
multiple payment as observed through analysis of electronic data.   
The detailed manual scrutiny of records in addition to analysis of electronic 
data and verifications done by District Collectors clearly established m ultiple 
payment of cash dole to same beneficiary , which indicated serious lapses in 
payment of cash dole, despite putting in place an elaborate  system which 
included direct payment of cash dole to the bank account of the beneficiaries. 
6.5.4 Inequitable distribution of relief to beneficiaries 
According to GoTN Order (January 2016), the relief amount payable was  
` 10,000 for fully damaged huts and  ` 5,000 for partly damaged huts .  The 
following short payments were noticed: 
We noticed that only ` 5,000 was paid to the 3,447 fully damaged huts against 
` 10,000 allowed in Tiruvallur District and 9,290 out of 28,097 fully damaged 
huts in Kancheepuram district .  The total short payment of relief to 12,737 
families whose houses were enumerated as ‘fu lly damaged’ was ` 6.37 crore.  
We observed that this serious lapse  on the part of Revenue officials had led to 
deprival of eligible assistance to 12,737 families amounting to ` 6.37 crore.   
In Kancheepuram District,  families of 10,649 of the 17,755 partly damaged 
huts were paid only ` 4,100, leading to short payment of ` 95.84 lakh (` 900 
to 10,649 huts) .  Similarly, families of 884 out of 986 partly damaged h uts in 
Tambaram Taluk in the same district were paid only  ` 3,800.  The total 
amount of short payment in the two districts to 11,533 families whose houses 
were enumerated as be ‘partly damaged’ was ` 1.06 crore2. 
We observed that in both the above cases, the Revenue Officials wrongly 
adopted the pre -revised rates of assistan ce without giving effect to the 
Government order (December 2015) raising the rates of assistance to ` 5,000 
per family  for house inundation and another ` 5,000 for part ly damaged 
houses and ` 10,000 for fully damaged houses. 
  
                                                             
2 (10,649 x ` 900) + (884 x  ` 1,200) 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
114 
6.5.5 Excess procurement of sarees and dhotis  
CRA estimated (February 2016) a requirement of 24.71 lakh sets of sarees and 
dhotis for supply  to the people  affected by floods in Chennai, Tiruvallur and 
Kancheepuram districts.  Government decided (February 2016) to source the 
sarees and dhotis from Weavers Cooperative Societies and released  
(February 2016) ` 64.78 crore at ` 262.15 per set, to the Director of 
Handloom and Textiles (DHT).   
DHT organised supply of sarees and dhotis from Weavers Cooperative 
Societies to Taluk offices in the three districts, for distribution to beneficiaries 
through ration shops.  Sarees and dhotis were received by Tahsildars between 
December 2015 and March 2016 and the same were distributed to ration shops 
for issue to beneficiaries .  The details of sarees and dhotis supplied to 
Tahsildars and distributed to ration shops are given in Table 6.6. 
Table 6.6: Issue of sarees and dhotis 
(Number in lakh) 
District Item Received by 
Taluk Offices 
supplied to 
ration shops 
Balance available 
at Taluk offices 
Chennai 
  
Sarees 11.29 6.86 4.43 
Dhotis 11.32 6.86 4.46 
Kancheepuram 
  
Sarees 4.43 1.35 3.08 
Dhotis 4.45 1.44 3.01 
Tiruvallur 
  
Sarees 2.51 2.38 0.13 
Dhotis 2.54 2.41 0.13 
Total  
  
Sarees 18.23 10.59 7.64 
Dhotis 18.31 10.71 7.60 
(Source: Data furnished by respective District Collectors) 
Thus, against the receipt of 18.23 lakh sarees and 18.31 lakh dhotis by Taluk 
officers, only 10.59 lakh sarees and 10.71 lakh dhotis were distributed to 
ration shops for issue to affected people.  The Tahsildars did not obtain details 
of actual distribution by ration shops.   
Based on excess stock lying in taluk offices, we noticed that 7.64  lakh sarees 
and 7.60 lakh dhotis valued at ` 19.99 crore (7.64 lakh x ` 169.45 (+) 7.60 
lakh x ` 92.70) were procured in excess .  The CRA replied to Audit ( May 
2017) that the quantity procured in excess were distributed for Pongal festival 
2017.  The reply confirmed inadmissible use of sanction under State Disaster 
Response Fund ( SDRF) for supply of sarees and dh otis for Pongal 2017, 
which was in violation of SDRF norms as SDRF funds was not allowed to be 
utilised for supply of free sarees and dhotis for Pongal festival.   
We further observed that the very idea of providing immediate relief to 
affected people was not fulfilled as the sarees and dhotis reached taluk offices 
between December 2015 and March 2016 .  The District Collectors did not 

Chapter VI - Disaster Management  
 
 
115 
have any data on the actual distribution of sarees and dhotis by ration shops to 
beneficiaries.   
GoTN stated (May 2017) tha t the sarees and dhoties procured for supply to 
flood affected people could not be distributed due to lack of interest shown by 
many of them.  Thus, incorrect estimation of requirement without any survey 
or basis, resulted in excess procurement and the delayed procurement rendered 
the relief not reaching the beneficiaries on time.   
Recommendation No.  22: We recommend that the cost of sarees and dhotis, 
procured under SDRF, but distributed for Pongal 2017, may be worked out 
and adjusted, as SDRF assistance cannot be utilised for free supply of sarees 
and dhotis for Pongal. 
6.5.6 Procurement of rice in excess of requirement 
CRA estimated (February 2016) a requirement of  24,709.66 Metric Tonnes 
(MT) of rice for supply to 24.71 lakh families at 10 k g per family and paid  
` 52.69 crore to Tamil Nadu Civil Supplies Corporation (TNCSC) .  The 
details of rice procured by TNCSC from  Food Corporation of India  (FCI), 
supplied by TNCSC to ration shops and balance held by TNCSC are given in  
Table 6.7. 
Table 6.7: Issue of rice to affected families 
Name of 
District 
Requirement 
assessed by 
CRA 
Procurement 
made by 
TNCSC 
Issued 
by 
TNCSC
to 
ration 
shops 
Balance 
stock with 
TNCSC 
Value of 
Balance 
stock 
In MT (` in crore) 
Chennai 12,362.53 12,362.53 4,748.12 7,614.41 16.24 
Kancheepuram 6,007.13 6,007.13 433.30 5,573.83 11.88 
Tiruvallur 6,340.00 6,340.00 810.85 5,529.15 11.79 
Total 24,709.66 24,709.66 5,992.27 18,717.39 39.91 
(Source: Data furnished by respective District Collectors) 
Out of 24,709.66 MT of rice procured by TNCSC for free distribution to 
affected families in the three districts, only 5,992.2 7 MT (24.25 per cent) was 
actually issued to ration shops for distribution.  The cost of the quantity of rice 
procured in excess was  ` 39.91 crore .  On being pointed out (June 2016) , 
TNCSC refunded (November 2016)  the cost of rice procured in excess after 
deducting administrative charges.  The rice procured in excess was utilised for 
regular civil supplies by TNCSC.   
The wrong estimation of beneficiaries without any survey and release of funds 
by CRA on the basis of estimation  had resulted in blocking of Government 
funds in the form of idle stock/funds to the tune of  ` 39.91 crore with TNCSC 
for about nine months, which could have been spent elsewhere. 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
116 
6.6 Inadmissible expenditure from SDRF on r estoration works in 
flood affected areas 
Instances of ineligible expenditure from SDRF, were as discussed below: 
 As per the norms for assistance under SDRF, GCC was entitled for an 
assistance of ` 1 lakh per km of roads damaged by floods to carry out 
immediate restoration work .  GCC repaired 41  km stretch of affected 
roads at a cost of ` 75.44 crore3.  As per the norms, GCC  was entitled 
to an assistance of ` 0.41 crore only .  Non-adherence to SDRF 
guidelines resulted in an unauthorised expenditure of ` 75.03 crore.  
As the funds were sanctioned under SDRF, it was to be utilised based 
on the scale prescribed.   
 As per guidelines, SDRF funds could be utilised only to restore traffic 
on public roads .  However, road work within the campus of GCC’s 
headquarters (Ripon Buildings) was executed under SDRF at a cost of 
` 65.50 lakh.  Utilisation of SDRF funds for relaying of roads wit hin 
the office complex of GCC was in violation of SDRF norms.   
 District Collector, Kancheepruam utili sed SDRF assistance for 
procuring a 40 KVA generator and petty repair works in his office at a 
cost of ` 10.27 lakh.  This expenditure was in violation SD RF norms, 
which did not allow SDRF funds for equipping Government offices.   
 As per SDRF guidelines, capital expenditure was not permissible .  
Two Zonal Officers4 of GCC created assets by purchase of motors, at a 
cost of ` 15.97 lakh using SDRF, which was not permissible.  GCC 
replied that due to high cost involved in renting motors for pumping 
water, procurement was made rather than renting the motors .  
However, no details substantiating this decision were made available to 
us. 
CRA justified the above expenditure under SDRF citing the role of the 
agencies/offices in disaster management .  The reply was not acceptable as the 
norms were very specific and did not allow these expenditure. 
Recommendation No . 23: We recommend that exces s/ineligible assistance 
extended to GCC and District collector, Kancheepuram be recouped  to 
SDRF. 
6.7 Non-receipt of Utilisation Certificate 
In the aftermath of 2015 floods, GoTN sanctioned a sum of ` 3,039.24 crore, 
including GoI funds, for relief and re storation works in all Districts of the 
State, as tabulated in Table 6.8. 
 
                                                             
3 Cost of work as per agreement.  Actual expenditure is awaited as bills are still to be 
settled (March 2017). 
4 Zone 6 and Zone 7 

Chapter VI - Disaster Management  
 
 
117 
Table 6.8: Funds sanctioned for 2015 floods 
Date of sanction of funds Amount (` in crore) 
17/11/2015 500.00 
15/12/2015 300.00 
15/12/2015 1,000.00 
07/01/2016 500.00 
11/01/2016 340.79 
15/02/2016 398.45 
Total 3,039.24 
(Source: Government orders) 
Out of the sum of ` 3,039.24 crore sanctioned for relief and restoration works 
of 2015 floods,  ` 1,587.66 crore was released to the District Collectors of 
Chennai, Kancheepuram and  Thiruvallur and GCC towards cash doles and 
relief and restoration works .  The Collectors  in turn released the funds to 
various agencies executing the rescue, relief and restoration works. 
We noticed that UCs were received (February 2016) only for ` 1,477.33 crore 
from District Collectors and GCC.  Despite specific direction by the Chairman 
of the EC of TNSDMA in August 2016 in this regard, UC for the balance  
` 110.33 crore was still awaited from GCC (March 2017). 
6.8 Analysis 
The State of Tamil Nadu , being prone to frequent cyclonic effects, failed to 
put in place a functional institutional mechanism to face disaster situations .  
The TN State Disaster Management Authority did not play its envisaged role, 
as it neither had the contemplated financial autonomy nor had dedicated staff .  
The apex body for disaster management under the chairmanship of the Chief 
Minister never met to evolve policies .  Disaster Management Plan was not 
prepared to institutionalise and coordinate rescue and relief operations during 
the floods of 2015 .  Relief activities were marred by delayed extension of 
relief, excess/short payment of cash doles and blocking up of funds due to 
wrong estimation of requirement of relief materials.  SDRF funds were utilised 
on ineligible works and spending excess over the norms.   

 
CHAPTER VII
Tamil Nadu Government Secretariat
MONITORING
 

 
119 
 
 
 
 
Monitoring is essential to evaluate on a regular basis the progress made so as 
to achieve the milestones envisaged, by intervention and corrective action.   
7.1  Monitoring the implementation of Second Master Plan 
7.1.1 Insufficient monitoring of implementation of recommendations by 
line agencies 
In order to monitor implementation of SMP, CMDA formed five s ector-wise 
committees in 2009 .  Two of these committees viz., (i) Land Use and 
Environment Committee, and (ii) Investment and Infrastructure Planning 
Committee1 were to deal with implementation of recommendations relating to 
flood control measures. 
As these committees  were non -functional during 2009 to 2012 , CMDA 
reconstituted these committees  in October 2013 .  The reconstituted 
committees were to meet at least once in three months and their main 
functions were as under: 
 Advise about the action  to be taken to achieve the objectives of SMP  
relating to land use planning  
 Prioritise the policies, programmes and action p lans recommended in  
SMP and advise the departments/agencies  
 Recommend detailed studies to draw up programmes for effective 
implementation of the Master Plan 
 To frame detailed policies for Government’s approval and adoption 
 Review the progress of implemen tation and recommend timely 
corrections, if any, for effective implementation 
 To identify measurable indicators to evaluate and monitor the progress 
made in achieving the objectives of  SMP 
Audit scrutiny of functioning of these committees revealed the following:  
The two Monitoring Committees , comprising of  heads of line departments , 
never held any meetings during 2009 and 2012 .  After reconstitution in 
October 2013 , till December 2016, they should have held ten  meetings2; 
against which , they held only two  meetings.  We noticed that t he members 
who attended the first meeting did not attend the second meeting .  The 
meetings were attended by lower level officers of the agencies .    Line 
departments were to furnish action taken report on the decisions reached.  We 
noticed that out of eight line department s, only TN Pollution Control Board 
                                                             
1 Original name was Investment and Planning and Governance Committee .  Renamed 
in 2013 
2 At one meeting every quarter 
CHAPTER VII  
MONITORING 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
120 
furnished an action taken report for the first meeting of Land Use and 
Environment Committee .   Similarly, only Chennai Metropolitan Water 
Supply and Sewerage Board and TN Pollution Control Board furnished action 
taken report for the second meeting of the Committee.   
We observed that infrequent meetings, non -participation of senior officers of 
line departments and l ack of response from line departments/agencies , 
hampered monitoring of land use planning and infrastructure planning 
functions of CMDA as discussed below.   
(a)  One of the recommendations of SMP was to preserve water bodies and 
to prohibit developments in O&R zone including  Redhills catchment area .  
Reclassifications of water bodies, O&R zone and catchment area w ere 
approved by CMDA during the period 2009 -16 against the SMP 
recommendations.  These reclassifications were  not discussed by CMDA in 
the Land Use and Environment Committee  to evolve an alternate action plan 
to achieve the objectives of SMP.   
(b) One of the objectives of SMP was to protect w ater bodies from 
encroachments.  CMDA did not bring the subject of encroachments in water 
bodies and about the periodical check exercis ed by local bodies in preventing 
encroachments for discussion by the Committee .  The Committee did not 
prioritise the action plans recommended in SMP which was one of its main 
functions.   
(c)  One of the important policies in SMP was to use excess flood water for 
augmenting urban water supply through creation of additional storage 
capacity.  We observed that against the target of creating three new reservoirs 
with a capacity of one TMC each, the achievement was nil as construction of 
one reservoir was drop ped, capacity of one was reduced  and another one was 
yet to be completed (Paragraph 3.1.1).  WRD did not bring the constraints in 
implementation to the notice of the Investment and Infrastructure Planning 
Committee for evolving a solution.   
(d)  SMP stated that the role of CMDA was to evaluate on a regular basis 
the progress made towards achieving the objectives for which CMDA was to 
identify measurable indicators in several sectors to monitor the progress made 
by the stakeholders.   
(e)  The committees did not identify and employ measurable indicators to 
monitor the progress made by various stakeholders , which was one of their 
main function. 
Thus, we observed that the above deficiencies in monitoring had impacted the 
implementation of SMP as discussed in Chapter II.   
7.1.2 Lack of monitoring of local bodies by CMDA review team 
In order to review and advise the local bodies on planning permissions, 
CMDA’s Review Team  inspects local bodies.  We noticed that during such 
inspection, the Review Team did not ensure that the local bodies abided by the 
provisions of DR on preservation of water bodies .  Scrutiny of files relating to 

Chapter VII  - Monitoring 
 
121 
seven inspections conducted during  2013-15 in Kundrathur  Panchayat Union 
and Kundrathur, Thiruneermalai and Perungalathur Town Panchayats revealed 
that the Inspection Reports did not cover examination of files relating to layout 
approvals along water bodies .   On being asked , CMDA replied (November 
2016) that the Review Team verified  Planning Permission/Building permits 
issued by local bodies and not that issued by CMDA .  The reply was not 
tenable since it was the responsibility of CMDA to ensure that local b odies 
took actions on the conditions stipulated by CMDA. 
7.1.3 Lack of action by Technical Advisory Committee  
Based on CWC i nstructions, GoTN revived (January 1985) the Technical 
Advisory Committee (TAC) with functions inter-alia included: 
 identification of flood prone areas and formulation of schemes to 
contain the flood and recommending to Government, 
 devising measures to evict encroachment in vulnerable areas and safe 
guarding the flow ways and flood places, 
 evolving a methodology for the flood warning system in the State.   
The TAC was reconstituted (October 2010) und er the chairmanship of 
Engineer-in-Chief, WRD and again reconstituted (December 2011) under the 
nomenclature ‘State TAC ’, by including one member from the Regional 
Central Water Commission .  The committee was to  meet as and when 
necessary, but not less than once in six months.   
However, the Committee met only twice3 during 2011-16 against the required 
minimum 10 times, contrary to the GoTN instructions.  Despite availability of  
` 400 crore under XII Five year plan (2012 -17), the Committee had neither 
identified flood prone areas nor formulated any schemes to contain the flood .  
TAC failed to devise any measures to  prevent encroachments and to  evict 
encroachment in vulnerable areas and  safeguarding the flow ways and flood 
places and for the flood warning system in the State .  Further, l ack of 
monitoring by TAC denied an opportunity to WRD to regulate issue of NOCs 
for constructions and to ensure adherence to NOC condition.   
7.1.4 Monitoring achievement against Service Level Benchmark  
GoI, Ministry of Urban Development determined (2008) Service Level 
Benchmarks for Urban local bodies  for water supply, sewage, solid waste 
management and storm water drainage .  Details of achievement again st the 
benchmarks in provision of SWDs by the selected zonal offices of GCC and 
suburban local bodies are given in Appendix 7.1, which revealed that there 
was shortfall in achievement in providing SWD ranging from 13 to 100  
per cent and shortfall of 100 per cent in prevention of water logging .  GoTN/ 
Commissioner of Municipal Administration failed to monitor the achievement 
by GCC/local bodies in providing SWD and preventing water logging.   
  
                                                             
3 8 March 2013 and 30 January 2015 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
122 
7.2 Absence of monitoring in leasing of land 
Para 172 of WRD ‘D’ Code envisaged the granting lease of land including the 
land in river margins (river berms) of water ways and water bodies for  
non-agricultural purpose viz., construction of bridges/culverts and laying of 
pipe lines, etc., upon collection of lease rent charges.  The manual also 
envisaged maintenance of Miscellaneous Property Register by the Sub -
Divisional Officers, to record the details of the period of grant of lease, lease 
rent to be recovered, actually recovered , etc.  As per GoTN instructions 
(December 2012), WRD was to issue NOC for granting right of way .  The 
NOC was to stipulate essential conditions for maintenance of existing status 
quo of the drains without any hindrance to free flow of water.   
We observed that WRD did not possess consolidated details of adjoining areas 
of water bodies leased to private individuals or other organisations .  We 
further noticed that in one of the three WRD Divisions (Lower Palar Basin 
Division) audited, lease register was not maintained .  In the two other 
Divisions (Araniyar Basin and Kosasthalaiyar Basin Divisions) , lease 
registers, though maintained were not monitored for periodical renewal of 
lease agreements and collection of lease rent .  In the three Divisions , out of  
44 cases of leasing of land by WRD, only 15  were periodically renewed, 
leaving the balance 29 not renewed or revoked. 
Thus, non-availability of consolidated details of the lease agreements resulted 
in non-ensuring the adherence to NOC conditions.  GoTN accepted the audit 
findings and stated (February 2017) that remedial steps would be taken.   
7.3 Analysis 
CMDA, after preparing the detailed Master P lan for regulated urbanis ation, 
failed to monitor implementation of the plans despite specific provision in the 
SMP to monitor through various committees.  The Technical Advisory 
Committee of WRD failed to monitor identification of flood prone areas and 
formulate schemes to contain floods. 

 
APPENDICES

 
131 
Appendix 2.2 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.3.2; Page 26) 
Joint Field Inspection Report of layout approvals along water body in Kundrathur Panchayat 
Union (PU), Kundrathur Town Panchayat (TP) and Poonamallee PU 
 
Sl.No Layout and WRD’s conditions Audit Observations during field visit 
(1) (2) (3) 
1 Site in  Survey No (S.No): 490/1, 492 of  
Manapakkam and 1/1pt of Kolapakkam  
village : 
 
 To provide a channel. 
A SWD was under construction to link to the 
channel.  The channel was not maintained as it 
was stagnant with plastic waste and aqua plants .  
It was also seen that the waste water from these 
building were let out through outlet PVC pipes 
into the channel. 
2 Site in S.No: 55/1A1, 58 of Kulathuvancheri 
and 178/1,2, 179, 180, 181, 182/1, 184/2, 185, 
186/1,2,3,4,5,7,8,9, 187 of Srinivasapuram:   
 Site to  be filled up and two culverts 
provided. 
Site was not filled up /raised.  Culverts were not 
provided.  The water channel as seen in the 
layout map was not visible in the site. 
3 Site in S.No:15/2A, 3B, 16/2 in  
Naduveerapattu village Kundrathur PU:  
 No structure should be developed within 
three metre from the channel.    
Channel’s boundaries were not earmarked. 
4 Site in S.No: 343/3A, 3B, 4D, 4E, 5E to 5G, 
6C2, 7A, 7C, 7E  of Naduveerapattu village:  
 Layout roads should be provided with SWD 
of size 0.45x0.45m on both sides.   
Layout did not have Storm Water Drain 
5 Site in S.  No: 72, 73/1A1, 1B, 2, 74/1, 2, 3/75, 
76, 77/1,2,3, 81/1,2, 82, 83/1B, 1C, 3A to 3H, 
84, 85/2 of Varadarajapuram village  in 
Kundrathur PU: 
 No development allowed in the area upto 
1.5 m along the channel. 
A residential apartment was built on the bund of 
the channel .  The work of widening of the 
channel was stopped with this building 
encroaching into the channel and the width of the 
channel was narrowed. 
6 Site in S.  No : 163/2B2, 3, 164/1, 2, 3A, 3B of 
Varadarajapuram village  in Kundrathur PU: 
 Storm Water Drain network of size 
0.60x0.90m to be constructed all -round the 
site and the channel linked with existing 
Adayar Odai.  – 
 A compound wall to be constructed around 
site on west and east side. 
The channel/natural drain passing in front of the 
layout was encroached by a temple and houses .  
No roads were formed on the layout and storm 
water drain all around the site connecting to the 
existing Adayar Odai was not constructed. 
7 Site in S.  No : 215 and 216 of Kundrathur  
village  in Kundrathur  TP:  
 Minimum offset of one metre should be 
maintained from the boundary of the 
channel.   
 A road culvert of 10 metre to be provided 
across the channel. 
One RCC box type culvert for a length of 
approximately three meters was provided .  The 
channel was not continuous and found 
encroached on both sides by buildings. 
  

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
132 
(1) (2) (3) 
8 Site in S.  No : 410/1, 2A, 411/1B, 2, 412/1of 
Kundrathur  village  in Kundrathur  TP: 
 The site should be raised to a minimum 
level of +18.150 m uniformly.    
 RCC box type culvert with a vent of size 
3.00x1.00m should be constructed.   
 Width of the channel to be maintained, 
setback space of  six metres to be 
provided adjacent to the channel. 
No culvert constructed .  Channel not maintained  
along the road.  Ground level not raised.  Setback 
space of six was not provided, but a compound 
wall constructed. 
9 Site in S .  No : 1179/1, 2 of Kundrathur  
village  in Kundrathur  TP: 
 No structure within 2m from the channel 
boundary stone.   
 Box type culvert should be constructed at 
S.No.  1181. 
Boundary stones were not laid .  Channel was not 
maintained, filled with aqua plants .  Unapproved 
buildings were seen constructed abutting the 
channel adjacent to this approved layout. 
10 Site in S.  No : 36, 37, 38/1, 2A, 2B, 42/1,2of 
Kundrathur  village  in Kundrathur  TP: 
 Demarcation stone should be laid for the 
waterway.   
 Ground level to be raised to  17.09 m 
above MSL. 
No demarcation stone laid .  The channel abutting  
the site was filled with debris to form  an 
unapproved layout (in eastern side) .  Thereby, the 
channel was narrowed down into a small drain. 
11 Site in S.  No : 11/2A1, 2A2, 2A3, 1379/1A to 
1C, 2, 3A, 3B, 4A3, 4A4, 4B2, 5, 6A3, 6B  of 
Kundrathur  village  in Kundrathur  TP: 
 To raise ground level by 2.18 m to reach  
18.06  m above MSL. 
Ground level was not raised .  Clear channel was 
not maintained including the width required .  
Channel was covered with shrubs and aqua plants. 
12 Site in S .  No : 320, 321/2, 322/1 of 
Kundrathur  village  in Kundrathur  TP: 
 Width of the channel is to be maintained. 
Layout was not clear .  The channel was not 
maintained and  was encroached. 
13 Site in S .  No : 97 and 123 of Manancherry  
village  in Kundrathur  TP 
 Two road culverts to be provided across 
field channel with a vent opening of four 
metres.   
No channel was seen .  In survey number 96, the 
channel was occupied by a building .  No culvert 
was seen. 
14 Site in S.  No: 98, 99/2, 121/2 of Manancherry  
village  in Kundrathur  TP: 
 Culvert should be constructed. 
The channel was occupied by a building .  No 
culvert was seen.   
15 Site in S.No : 93/2, 99/1 of Manancherry  
village  in Kundrathur  TP: 
 Culvert should be constructed. 
 Joint field inspection report of layout approvals in Poonamallee Panchayat 
Union 
16 Site in  S .No: 26/2A,2B, 31/1C,1D, 32/1A of 
Kannapalayam village:  
 Site should be raised in layers by earth by 
more than 0.30 metre.   
 RCC box type culvert to be provided with 
a vent of size 7.20 metre x 6.00 metre x 
1.2 metre  should be constructed and 
promoter should do periodical desilting 
work. 
Site was not raised .  A smaller culvert was 
provided and the channel was not desilted.   

Appendices 
 
 
133 
(1) (2) (3) 
17 Site in  S.No: 60, 61/1,2 of Meppur village: 
 Site level to be raised to the level of  
channel. 
 Permanent fencing should be done along 
the boundary between the site and the 
channel and the layout to be formed three 
metres  away from the fencing. 
No permanent fencing was constructed along the 
boundary between the site and the channel .  
Layout was formed three meters away from the 
temporary fencing. 
18 Site in  S.No: 79 to  81, 83/1,2, 84/1,2, 85/1, 
86/1, 98/2, 111/2A2, 112, 113/2, 114 of 
Meppur village: 
 Minimum offset of 1.50 metre from the 
channel.   
Channel was encroached by plantations. 
19 Site in  S.No 83/8B, 9  to 11, 13,  14, 15B, 
16B, 84/2B, 3A2, 3B, 4 to 7, 85/3, 86/2, 3, 7, 
87/2A, 2B, 3pt, 6, 88/1, 2, 3, 4, 5A, 5B, 11, 
12, 13A, 13B, 94/2B of Sorancherry village: 
 Ground level to be raised with an 
average filling varying  from 0.435 to 
1.35m.  Should provide adequate SWD. 
 Demarcation should be done at both 
sides of the channel. 
Ground level was not raised .  SWD was not 
provided.  The channel was not demarcated, it was 
encroached. 
20 Site in  S.No 108/5B of Sorancherry village:  
 The site should be raised to the level of 
24.13 m by filling the earth to the height 
of 0.75 m. 
Channel flowing adjacent to the layout leading to 
Cooum River  not being visible. 
21 Site in  S.No 107/5 of Sorancherry  village: 
Site should be raised to a height of 1.50 metre 
 RCC box type culvert with vent size 7.2 x 
2.4 m to be constructed  
 RCC culvert was not provided .  Channel was not 
visible. 
22 Site in S.No .  240/2A,2B2 of Voyalanallur 
village 
This site is in continuation of the site in S.No .  
107/5 of Soranjeri village .  The channel which 
passes through the layouts ibid in Soranjeri village 
pass through this layout to join Cooum River .  
This channel in Voyalanallur village is 
encroached by a Compound wall and a garden. 
23 Site in S.No .  604/2,3, 605/2 to 5, 606/3, 
607/2 of Annambedu village 
 Site should be raised by 1.50 m.   
 RCC box type culvert 3 x 9 m in between 
S.No.  606/3 and 607/2 
 Channel running inside the site should  
not be encroached and boundaries of the 
channel to be earmarked. 
No channel is visible in the layout and no culvert 
constructed. 
  

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
134 
Appendix 2.3 
(Reference:  Paragraph 2.4.3; Page 33) 
Reclassification of Open Space and Recreation (O&R) zone to others  
Sl.No Survey No.  / village Field verification  and decision by CMDA 
1 Old Survey No 209 part, Present Town 
Survey (TS) No.  4 Block No 58 Ward 
–D of Thirumullaivoyal village  
The Commandant, Tamil Nadu Special 
Police  Battalion -V, Avadi requested 
for reclassification of O&R zone for 
construction of Administrative 
Buildings.   
The extent of site is 6.92 ha. 
CMDA inspected the site and found that the site 
abuts the 91 feet wide public road .  Four to five 
buildings were existing  and used as 
Administrative office, Barracks (Guest houses for 
training people) and store rooms etc. 
The Technical Committee on 6.5.2015 
recommended the reclassification of O&R use 
zone to Institutional use zone and the Authority 
resolved to reclassify in the meeting held on 
4.8.2015. 
2 S.No 158/2A1B & 2B of Koladi 
village, Ambattur Taluk, Thiruvallur 
District, Thiruverkadu Municipality.   
 
The applicant had applied for 
reclassification of O&R use zone to 
Mixed Residential use zone to 
construct a commercial complex .  The 
total extent of the site is 0.36 ha. 
CMDA inspected the site on 30.1.2014 and found 
that the site was vacant .  The site abuts 33 feet  
wide road.  The site slopes down from road to its 
rear side and l ow lying by about 3.0 m .  The 
Cooum River runs on the southern side after a 
small parcel of land from the site under reference .  
The surrounding developments were 
predominantly with mixed activity. 
CMDA addressed PWD on 27/1/2014 for NOC on 
inundation point of view and it was awaited. 
The Technical Committee in its meeting 
(7.2.2014) discussed the subject and observed that 
the site abuts a public road, lying low and adjacent 
to the Cooum River.  The representative from 
PWD clarified that the ownership of the applicant 
on the site under reference would be confirmed 
before issue of NOC for the site as it is close to 
the Cooum River in which case the ownership of 
the river part is vested with the PWD .  
Considering these, the Technical Committee 
recommended the reclassification and the 
Authority resolved on 10.9.2014 to reclassify the 
land. 
3 S.No.  59/7A1A (old survey No 14/18, 
15/14) of Numbal Village, Ambattur 
Taluk 
The applicant requested for  
reclassification of Green Belt use zone.  
to Industrial zone. Extent is 0.07 ha.   
As per CMDA inspection report, the site abuts  
45 m  wide Poonamall ee High Road and was 
surrounded on the north by vacant land, south by 
PH Road, east by vacant land and  west by IT 
company & College.   
The Technical committee recommended  
(27.02.2012) to reclassify the site under reference 
from Green Belt Use zone to Industrial use zone 
subject to the condition that the applicant had to 
demolish the existing small struct ure before 
applying for planning permission for 
new/additional building and the Authority 
resolved on 13.03.2014 to reclassify the site. 
  

Appendices 
 
 
135 
Sl.No Survey No.  /Village/File No. Field verification  and decision by CMDA 
4 Survey No 2/3,3C and 2/3B of 
Veeraraghavapuram and 25/1A, 
Sundarasholavaram village 
The applicant requested reclassification 
from O&R use zone to Institutional 
zone for construction of College 
building 
 Extent 1.21 ha 
 
CMDA in their inspection report stated that the 
land was vacant with abutting road width of 22.6 
metre with surrounding developments as 
residences and Cooum River on the eastern side. 
The Technical Committee stated that the site 
under reference abuts 22.60  metre Avadi -
Poonamallee High Road .  The local body had 
recommended for reclassification of land use from 
partly Agricultural use zone and partly O&R use 
zone into Institutional use zone subject to the 
condition that the applicant should get NOC from 
PWD before making any development in the site 
under reference .  The Authority resolved  on 
7.5.2012 for reclassification of land use. 
5 TS No 5 Block No 16 Velachery 
Village  
The applicant requested for 
reclassification from O&R use zone to 
commercial use zone-  
Extent 1.96  ha 
CMDA in its inspection report stated that the 
present use of the land was old horse stable and 
old Quarters for horse trainers with abutting road 
width of 23.5 metre with surrounding 
developments as residences and commer cial 
buildings. 
The Technical Committee viewed that the site was 
a patta land and did not form part of 10 per cent 
OSR land .  Considering the adjacent 
developments, the Committee recommended for 
reclassification of the site and the Authority also 
resolved to reclassify the site on 7.5.2012. 
6 TS No 7/2,3&4 Block No 17 
Velachery–  
The applicant requested for 
reclassification from O&R use zone to 
commercial use zone-  
Extent 0.15 ha 
 
CMDA in its inspection report stated that the 
classification of land as ‘wet’ land abutting 55 feet 
wide Tar Road with surrounding developments as 
residences and commercial buildings. 
The Technical committee noted that a ground 
Floor and first floor (part) building was in 
existence in the site and it was being used as 
Hospital and also the applicant had furnished 
approved demolition plan for the building .  
Therefore, the compliance of existing building to 
Development Regulations did not arise.  Also, the 
committee noted that the site was surrounded by 
residences, commercial and institutional activities 
and recommended to reclassify the site under 
reference from O&R use zone to commercial use 
zone and the Authority resolved on 14.2.2011 to 
reclassify the site. 
7 Survey No.  159/1A2, 5, 6 of Koladi 
village, Tiruverkadu Municipality  
The applicant requested for 
reclassification from O&R use zone to 
Mixed Residential zone 
Extent: 0.30.90 ha 
The site was abutting 11.40 m wide Permalagaram 
Road on the North and vacant lands on other 
sides.   
The Technical Committee recommended the site 
under reference for reclassification of site subject 
to the condition that the applicant obtain NOC 
from PWD and Authority resolved to reclassify 
the site on 16-02-2016. 
 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
136 
Appendix 5.1  
(Reference:  Paragraph 5.2.1; Page 75) 
Details of missing links 
Sl.No Zone 
No. 
Division 
No. 
Name of the Street Length in 
Metres 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1 1 5 TH Road junction of MRF Road 8 
2 1 6 Kalaignar Nagar 275 
3 2 15 Manalai New Town 60 Feet Road 11.2 
4 2 16 Rajiv Gandhi Nagar from TPP salai to 
Andarkuppam Main Road 
100 
5 2 16 From Kanniammanpet pond to 
Kadapakkam Lake 
80 
6 3 22 Mahalakshmi Nagar 6 
7 3 23 Punitha Anthoniyar Street 15 
8 3 23 Othai Vadai Street 10 
9 4 45 Ganesapuram Main Road 12 
10 4 47 KH Road 16 
11 5 58 EVK Sampath Salai 17 
12 5 61 Egmore High Road  720 
13 5 62 Arunachalam Road 70 
14 5 63 Chella Pillayar Kovil Street  50 
15 5 63 G.P.Road  45 
16 6 68 Maduraiswamy Madam Street 100 
17 6 70 Bharathi Main Road 560 
18 8 100 & 101 5th Main Road Surroundings 100 
19 8 100 & 101 4th Main Road Surroundings 40 
20 9 118 Mayor Sundra (Rao) Road 120 
21 9 121 Thiru-Vi-Ka 3rd Street 9 
22 10 136 North Usman Street 22 
23 10 127 100 Feet Road (Junction of Kaliamman 
Koil Street) 
25 
24 10 127 Kaliamman Koil Street (in front of Police 
Station) 
20 
25 11 154 Bharathi Salai 20 

Appendices 
 
 
137 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
26 12 167 Nanganallur 44th Street 12.3 
27 13 173 MRC Nagar 370 
28 13 173 Vasantha Avenue 270 
29 13 173 Kasthuri Avenue 164 
30 13 175 L.B.  Road 8 
31 13 175 Kasthuribai Nagar 20 
32 13 175 Indra Nagar 6 
33 13 175 Anna Avenue 5 
34 13 176 Sastri Nagar II, IX & XV Cross Street 18 
35 13 178 A.G.S Colony 20 
36 13 179 V.G.P.Selva Nagar Extension I to V streets 856 
37 13 179 V.G.P.Selva Nagar I Cross Street & I Main 
Road 
440 
38 13 179 Bhuvaneswari Nagar I & III Cross Street 
& III Main Road 
299 
39 13 179 Veenus Colony II Street 200 
40 13 181 Dr.Radhakrishnan Nagar 50 
41 13 181 Valmigi Street 100 
42 13 180 CSIR Road  10 
43 13 174 Nehru Nagar – Veerapandiya 
Kattabomman Street 
270 
44 13 174 Nehru Nagar – Periyar Street 330 
45 13 174 Nehru Nagar – Anbil Dharmalingam Street 270 
46 13 174 Velacherry Main Road 900 
47 13 182 Journalist Colony 200 
48 14 169 Ram Nagar (North) 30 
49 15 192 Ellaiamman Koil Street 160 
50 15 193 MCN Nagar 100 
51 15 194 OMR – Mettukuppam (VGP Avenue 
Junction) 
180 
52 15 197 Wipro Salai 2,500 
 
  

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
138 
Appendix 5.2 
(Reference:  Paragraph 5.3(ii); Page78) 
Physical and Financial Progress of works under TNSUDP as on 31 August 2016 
 
Sl.  No. 
Package No. 
Name of the Contractor 
Total length  
(in 'm') as per BoQ 
Length (in ‘m’) completed 
Value of work done ` in crore 
Percentage  of  
 financial progress 
Delay in issue of work orders 
(in months) 
Earthwork 
PCC 
RCC Raft 
RCC Side Walls 
RCC Top Slab 
percentage of physical 
progress 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) 
1 1 M/s RPP Infraproject (P) Ltd 13,299 1,454 1431 1,431 1211 1041 7.83 2.13 5.38 5 
2 2 M/s RPP Infraproject (P) Ltd 8,825 1,227 1,192 1,164 1,057 1,033 11.71 2.03 6.10 5 
3 3 M/s Saravana Engineering 
Bhavani (P) Ltd 
2,801 1,115 1,115 1,115 1,085 1,065 38.02 4.90 12.57 2 
4 4 M/s Sri Sivaram & Co. 7,791 2,952 2,932 2,902 2,802 2,782 35.71 6.29 21.82 - 
5 5 M/s RPP Infraproject (P) Ltd 7,608 1,395 1,350 1,315 1,315 1,240 16.30 3.47 7.60 5 
6 6 M/s P&C Project (P) Ltd 2,848 428 413 338.4 308.1 299 10.50 2.35 9.12 2 
7 7 M/s P&C Project (P) Ltd 8,071 1,007 978 976 956 946 11.72 1.97 5.93 2 
8 8 M/s Kumar Builders 2,244 60 0 0 0 0 2.67 0.01 0.04 2 
9 9 M/s Gurumurthy Engineering 
Enterprises 
6,901 2,781 2,781 2,756 2,581 2,581 37.40 5.88 16.31 2 
10 10 M/s Annai Infra Developers 
(P) Ltd 
12,893 2,661  2,641  2,601  2,601  2,506  19.44 6.06 14.15 2 
11 11 M/s Saravana Engineering 
Bhavani (P) Ltd 
7,049 3,002 2,965 2,940 2,894 2,864 40.63 7.85 28.76 2 
12 12 M/s P&C Project (P) Ltd 11,557 1,490 1,486 1,458 1,432.6 1,372 11.87 2.42 6.92 2 
13 13 M/s Sri Sivaram & Co. 10,644 2,405 2,385 2,380 2,360 2,360 22.17 4.49 19.62 5 
14 14 M/s P&C Project (P) Ltd 5,278 246 215 200 182 182 3.45 0.11 0.31 2 
15 15 M/s Annai Infra Developers 
(P) Ltd 
4,743 196 172 150 150 104 2.19 0.12 0.30 5 
16 16 M/s Annai Infra Developers 
(P) Ltd 
9,792 1,106 1,066 1,011 935 853 8.71 2.74 6.63 5 
17 17 M/s Annai Infra Developers 
(P) Ltd 
15,294 2,177  2,170  2,098  2,078  2,014  13.17 6.14 10.37 5 
18 18 M/s Sree Venkateswara Road 
Constructions 
4,966 872 852 784 746 658.2 13.25 1.43 9.58 2 
19 20 M/s Thirumala Traders 1,927 590 340 80 0 0 1.30 0.61 3.44 5 
20 21 M/s Landmark Corporation  8,462 3,069 2,984 2,854 2,806 2,759 32.60 5.27 18.99 5 
21 22 M/s Gurumurthy Engineering 
Enterprises 
10,124 4,190 4,155 4,095 4,012 3,880 38.32 10.87 35.17 2 

Appendices 
 
 
139 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) 
22 23 M/s R.Krishnamurthy & Co. 12,249 1,190 1,123 1,081 1,072 814 6.65 1.78 3.95 2 
23 26 M/s Selliamman 
Constructions (P) Ltd 
1,326 787 787 787 787 782 58.97 2.19 11.50 - 
24 27 M/s Sakthi Constructions 9,798 1,693 1,693 1,687 1,622 1,579 16.12 1.30 3.64 2 
25 28 M/s Rock & Arch 
Construction India (P) Ltd 
14,845 1,860 1,776 1,771 1,771 1,759 11.85 3.52 8.95 2 
26 29 M/s Rock & Arch 
Construction India (P) Ltd 
7,289 429 429 419 419 395 5.42 0.89 3.32 5 
27 30 M/s Landmark Corporation  8,921 1,722 1,680 1,555 1,464 1,400 15.69 1.90 8.13 - 
28 31 M/s R.Krishnamurthy & Co. 9,129 1,246 1,246 1,155 1,111 997 10.92 1.76 4.93 2 
29 32 M/s R.Krishnamurthy & Co. 9,996 2,143 2,108 2,100 2,100 1,953 19.54 4.56 13.41 2 
30 33 M/s Selliamman 
Constructions (P) Ltd 
11,028 4,239 3,969 3,747 3,637 3,557 32.25 4.27 12.20 2 
31 34 M/s Sree Venkateswara Road 
Constructions 
4,047 2,126 1,996 1,926 1,926 1,906 47.10 2.99 12.88 2 
32 35 M/s P&C Project (P) Ltd 8,684 550 505 490 465 425 4.89 0.82 2.77 2 
33 36 M/s P&C Project (P) Ltd 9,060 467 467 419 344 300 3.31 0.54 1.62 2 
34 37 M/s Annai Infra Developers 
(P) Ltd 
10,982 1,408 1,348 1303 1,283 1,238 11.27 1.13 2.89 2 
35 38 M/s Annai Infra Developers 
(P) Ltd 
11,414 1,412 1,389 1,337 1,297 1,267 11.10 1.88 4.14 2 
  Total 2,91,885 55,696 54,140  52,426  50,811 48,912 16.76 106.66 9.16  
Total length = 2,91,885 metres;    
Physical progress percentage = 16.76;   
Financial progress percentage = 9.16;  
PCC- Plain Cement Concrete;  
RCC- Reinforced Cement Concrete   

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
140 
Appendix 5.3 
(Reference:  Paragraph 5.4.1; Page 81) 
Areas in selected suburban areas affected by flood 
 
Name of the local body Areas affected 
Tambaram Municipality CTO Colony, Mullai Nagar, Mangalapuram, Arputham Nagar, 
Nehru Nagar, Motilal Nagar, Tiruvallur Nagar, Adhi Nagar, 
Ananthapuram, Ambedkar Nagar and Bharat Nagar 
Sembakkam Municipality Raja Rajeswari Nagar, Tellus Avenue, VallalUsuf Nagar, Gokul 
Nagar, Sivakami Nagar and Shanthi Nagar 
Pallavapuram Municipality Sakthi Nagar, Medavakkam Main Road, Bhavani Nagar, Ambaal 
Nagar, Mummoorthy Nagar and Nethaji Nagar 
Perungalathur Town 
Panchayat 
Bharathi Nagar, Moovendar Nagar Extn., Samathuva Periyar Nagar, 
AnnaiAnjugam Nagar, Indira Nagar, Kannan Avenue, Meenatchi 
Avenue, Goodwill Nagar, Kurunji Nagar, Balaji Nagar, 
Sasivaradhan Nagar, Kumaran Nagar, Gandhi Nagar, Thangaraj 
Nagar, EB Colony, Sri Ram Nagar, Parvathi Nagar and Mudichur 
Road 
Peerkankaranai Town 
Panchayat 
Sri Ram Nagar, Devanesan Nagar, KK Nagar, Imanuel Street and 
Cross Street, Velu Nagar and Cross Street, Ambedkar Street,  
Kalaimagal Street, Rajiv Gandhi Street, Gandhi Road, Uma Nagar, 
Archana Nagar, Shakthi Nagar, Mullai Nagar, Bhavani Street, 
Church Road, Karthik Avenue, AS Rajan Nagar and Extension, 
Swami Vivekandar Street Extension, Balaji Avenue, Annai Indira 
Nagar, Bh arathidasan Nagar, TTK Nagar and Cross Streets and 
Thanga Raj Nagar 
Thiruneermalai Town 
Panchayat 
Subbaraya Nagar, Saraswathipuram, Parvathipuram, Ranga Nagar, 
Anna Street, MallimaVeethi, Arignar Anna Street, Selva  Vinayagar 
Koil Street, V.G.N.  Nagar and Bajanai Koil Street 
 
 

Appendices 
 
 
141 
Appendix 5.4 
(Reference:  Paragraph 5.4.5; Page  84) 
Details of SWD constructed partially in Pallavapuram Municipality 
Sl.  
No. 
M.Book 
No. 
Nature of the work Estimate 
amount  
(in `). 
Expenditure 
incurred  
(in `) 
Length in metres Difference 
in metres As per 
estimate 
As per 
execution 
1  197/14-15 Construction of SWD at 
Ramaswamy street in 
ward No.30 
8,00,000 3,62,290 210 188.95    21.05 
2 37/14-15 Construction of SWD at 
Joy Nagar Ist street and 
Padmavathy street in 
ward No.24 
7,00,000 2,07,400   140 130.30      9.70 
3 112/13-14 Construction of SWD 
with RCC culvert at 
Dharga Road in ward 
No.11 
11,70,000 3,93,485   371   79.00  292.00 
4 63/13-14 Construction of  SWD at 
Janakiraman street and 
Hasthinapuram Main 
Road in Ward No.22 
 4,50,000 2,80,435   220 121.60   98.40 
 
 
  

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
142 
Appendix 5.5 
(Reference:  Paragraph 5.6.2; Page 87) 
Maintenance of water bodies in selected Zones/Municipalities and Town Panchayats 
Sl.
No. 
Name of the 
local body 
Details of water bodies Position obtained Department 
responsible for 
maintenance 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
 
1 
Adyar  Zone of  
GCC 
Guindy industrial estate canal, Raj 
Bhavan Canal, Mambalam Canal  
Width of Canal 
 reduced due to encroachment 
GCC 
2 Alandur Zone of 
GCC 
Adambakkam Lake and Veerangal 
odai 
Width of Veerangal Odai 
reduced due to encroachment 
WRD 
3 Ambattur Zone 
of GCC 
Korattur Canal, Ambattur Canal, 
Canal near VAO Office,, 
Padikuppam Canal and Coovam 
Canal 
Width of Canals reduced due to 
encroachment 
GCC 
Korattur and Ambattur Lakes Water bodies were poorly 
maintained and encroachment 
was noticed 
WRD 
4 Kodambakkam 
Zone of GCC 
Virugambakkam Canal, MGR 
nagar Canal, Jaferkhanpet Canal 
and Mambalam Canal 
Width of canals reduced due to 
encroachment 
GCC 
5 Pallavapuram 
Municipality 
Pallavapuram Periya Eri, 
Kilkattalai Eri, Sembakkam Eri 
and Moovarasampattu Eri 
Water bodies were poorly 
maintained and encroachment 
was noticed 
PWD 
6 Sembakkam 
Municipality 
Rajakilpakkam and Sembakkam 
Lakes 
Water bodies were poorly 
maintained and encroachment 
was noticed 
PWD 
Gowrivakkam Lake Water body poorly maintained St.Thomas Mount 
Panchayat Union 
7 Tambaram 
Municipality 
Peerkankaranai Lake, Irumbuliyur 
Lake and Thiruvancheri Lake 
Water bodies were poorly 
maintained and encroachment 
was noticed 
WRD 
Pappan Channel Channel abruptly ended and 
WRD was diverting the channel 
to join with Adyar River.  
Width of Channel reduced due 
to encroachment and 
developments 
PWD 
Adyar River (Kishkinta Road 
point) 
River was poorly maintained 
and encroachment noticed 
 
PWD 
8 Perungalathur 
Town Panchayat 
Periya Eri and Sitheri Water bodies were poorly 
maintained and encroachment 
was noticed 
PWD 
9 Peerkankaranai 
Town Panchayat 
Periya Eri and Sitheri Periya Eri was poorly 
maintained and encroachments 
noticed.  Sitheri was 
encroached and converted into 
residential areas 
PWD 
10 Thiruneermalai 
Town Panchayat 
Periya Eri, Sitheri and 
Veeraraghavan Lake 
Water bodies were poorly 
maintained and encroachments 
were noticed 
PWD 
Channel connecting Periya Eri and 
Adyar River 
Width of channel reduced due 
to encroachments 
PWD 

Appendices 
 
 
143 
 
Appendix 5.6 
(Reference:  Paragraph 5.8.5; Page 93) 
Details of inflow and surplus discharge from Chembarambakkam Tank  
Date Time Water availability       
(in TMC) 
Inflow 
(cusec) 
Discharge 
through 
Surplus 
course 
(cusec) 
Depth 
(feet) 
Maximum 
capacity 
available 
16.11.2015 21.00 3.645 3.388 17,685 5,000 22.85 
17.11.2015 
21.00 3.645 3.388 17,685 5,000 22.85 
2.00 3.645 3.293 12,722 18,000 22.67 
4.00 3.645 3.256 12,762 18,000 22.53 
6.00 3.645 3.197 12,031 18,000 22.30 
10.00 3.645 3.141 12,000 15,000 22.08 
12.00 3.645 3.113 11,000 10,000 21.97 
14.00 3.645 3.113 10,000 10,000 21.97 
16.00 3.645 3.108 9,653 10,000 21.95 
18.00 3.645 3.094 7,362 10,000 21.90 
20.00 3.645 3.080 7,362 7,500 21.85 
22.00 3.645 3.080 7,500 7,500 21.85 
24.00 3.645 3.067 6,350 6,000 21.80 
1.12.2015 
6.00 3.645 3.141 960 900 22.08 
9.00 3.645 3.197 7,500 3,000 22.30 
10.00 3.645 3.248 10,000 10,000 22.50 
12.00 3.645 3.299 14,000 12,000 22.70 
14.00 3.645 3.377 23,629 20,960 23.02 
16.00 3.645 3.390 24,932 20,960 23.06 
17.00 3.645 3.429 25,000 28,000 23.20 
18.00 3.645 3.429 29,000 29,000 23.20 
19.00 3.645 3.460 30,000 29,000 23.35 
20.00 3.645 3.481 31,000 29,000 23.40 
22.00 3.645 3.481 29,000 29,000 23.40 
24.00 3.645 3.481 29,000 29,000 23.40 
2.12.2015 
2.00 3.645 3.455 26,000 29,000 23.30 
3.00 3.645 3.442 26,000 29,000 23.25 
6.00 3.645 3.396 26,000 29,000 23.07 
9.00 3.645 3.332 23,000 29,000 22.83 
12.00 3.645 3.284 23,000 29,000 22.64 
15.00 3.645 3.225 23,000 20,000 22.41 
18.00 3.645 3.200 15,000 15,000 22.31 
21.00 3.645 3.161 12,000 14,000 22.16 
24.00 3.645 3.132 11,500 13,000 22.05 
3.12.2015 6.00 3.645 3.094 10,200 11,000 21.90 
9.00 3.645 3.067 5,000 3,500 21.80 
 

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
144 
Appendix 7.1 
(Reference:  Paragraph 7.1.4; Page 121) 
Achievement against service level bench mark 
(i) Provision of SWD 
Name of the local 
body 
Total length 
of road 
network 
(more than 
3.5 metres 
carriage way) 
(Kms.) 
Total length of 
primary, 
secondary and 
tertiary drains 
(only pucca 
construction and 
covered drains) 
(Kms.) 
Percentage 
of coverage 
As per GoI 
norms 
(in 
percentage) 
Shortfall 
(Percentage) 
Adyar Zone 411.52 136.33 33.13 100 66.87 
Alandur Zone 231.84 86.17 37.17 100 62.83 
Ambattur Zone 496.51 29.97 6.03 100 93.97 
Kodambakkam Zone 456.37 189.60 41.55 100 58.45 
Pallavapuram 242.00 3.00 1.04 100 98.96 
Peerkankaranai 41.65 Nil 0.00 100 100.00 
Perungalathur 83.50 Nil 0.00 100 100.00 
Perungudi zone 455.47 55.94 12.28 100 87.72 
Sembakkam 100.42 85.35 85.00 100 15.00 
Tambaram 164.75 142.75 86.65 100 13.35 
Thiruneermalai 39.36 Nil 0.00 100 100.00 
(ii) Report of water logging 
Name of the local 
body/GCC Zone 
Number of flood prone 
areas identified* 
 
 
 
 
 
(A) 
Number 
of 
occasions 
of 
flooding/
water 
logging in 
a year  
(B) 
Aggregate 
number of 
incidents of water 
logging (stagnant 
water for more 
than four hours of 
a depth more than 
six inches)  
(A x B) 
As per 
GoI 
norms 
(Number 
of water 
loggings) 
Shortfall 
(in 
percentage) 
Adyar Zone 75 1 75 0 100 
Alandur Zone 60 1 60 0 100 
Ambattur Zone 74 1 74 0 100 
Pallavapuram 6 2 12 0 100 
Peerkankaranai 27 1 27 0 100 
Perungalathur 18 1/2 9 0 100 
Sembakkam 6 2 12 0 100 
Tambaram 11 1 11 0 100 
Thiruneermalai 12 1 12 0 100 
Perungudi Zone 31 3 93 0 100 
Kodambakkam 
Zone 
6 3 18 0 100 
*  Water logging at key road intersections, or along a road length of 50 m or more, or in a locality affecting 50 
households or more 

Appendices 
 
 
145 
Glossary of Abbreviations 
Abbreviation Full form 
AGM Annual General Body Meeting  
ALTM Airborne Laser Terrain Mapping 
C&AG Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
CE Chief Engineer 
CMA Chennai Metropolitan Area 
CMDA Chennai Metropolitan Development Authority 
CMRL Chennai Metro Rail Limited 
CMWSSB Chennai Water Supply and Sewerage Board 
COR Compendium of Rules of Regulations  
CPHEEO Central Public Health Environmental Engineering Organisation  
CRA Commissioner of Revenue Administration 
CRRT Chennai Rivers Restoration Trust 
CWC Central Water Commission 
DCR Development Control Rules 
DEOC District Emergency Operation Centre 
DHT Director of Handlooms and Textiles 
DM Act, 2005 Disaster Management Act, 2005 
DMP Disaster Management Plan 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DR Development Regulations 
E&RSA Economic & Revenue Sector Audit 
EAP Emergency Action Plan 
EC Executive Council 
EE Executive Engineer 
ELCOT Electronics Corporation of Tamil Nadu 
EOC Emergency Operation Centre 
ETRP Emergency Tsunami Reconstruction Project 
FMP First Master Plan 
FPZ Flood Plain Zoning 
G&SSA General & Social Sector Audit 
GCC Greater Chennai Corporation 
GoI Government of India 
GoTN Government of Tamil Nadu 
IRC Indian Roads Congress 
ISRO Indian Space Research Organisation 
JNNURM Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission 
Mcft Million Cubic Feet 
MRTS Mass Rapid Transit System 
MSL Mean Sea Level 
NCDS National Committee on Dam Safety 
NDM National Disaster Management  

Performance Audit of ‘Flood management and response in Chennai and its suburban areas’ 
 
146 
NDMA National Disaster Management Authority 
NDRF National Disaster Response Force 
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
NOC No Objection certificate 
NWP National Water Policy 
O&R Zone Open Space and Recreation Zone 
OTA Officers Training Academy  
PAC Public Accounts Committee 
PWD Public Works Department 
SDRF State Disaster Response Fund 
TNSDMA Tamil Nadu State Disaster Management Agency 
SMP Second Master Plan 
SO Section Officer 
STP Sewage Treatment Plant 
SWD Storm Water Drain 
SWM Solid Waste Management 
SWP State Water Policy 
TAC Technical Advisory Committee 
TMC Thousand Million Cubic Feet 
TNCSC Tamil Nadu Civil Supplies Corporation  
TNEB Tamil Nadu Electricity Board 
TNSCB Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance Board 
TNSUDP Tamil Nadu Sustainable Urban Development Programme 
UC Utilisation Certificate 
UGSS Underground Sewage System 
VHF Very High Frequency 
WRD Water Resources Department 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
http://www.agtn.cag.gov.in 