 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General 
of India 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   for the year ended March 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Laid in Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha on ___________ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government (Railways) 
No.5 of 2018 
 

Preface 
The Report for the year ended March 201 7 has been prepared for submission 
to the President under Article 151 of the Constitution of India. Chapter 8 of the 
Report which pertains to Public Sector  Undertakings under the Ministry of 
Railways has been prepared for submission to President under Section 19(A) of 
the Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers  and Conditions of 
Service (DPC)) Act, 1971 as amended in 1984. 
The Report contains significant result s of the compliance audit of th e Ministry 
of Railways of the Union Government , including Railway Public Sector 
Undertakings and Autonomous Bodies. 
The instances mentioned in this Report are those, which came to notice in the 
course of test audit for the period 201 6-17 as well as those w hich came to 
notice in earlier years, but could not be reported in the previous Audit Reports; 
instances relating to the period subsequent to 201 6-17 have also been 
included, wherever necessary. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued 
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.  
 
 

i
i 
 
 
Contents 
 
Particulars Paragraph  Page 
Abbreviations  iv-vi 
Overview  vii to xix 
Chapter 1–Introduction 
Audited Entity Profile 1.1 1 
Authority for audit 1.2 3 
Audit Planning  1.3 3 
Reporting 1.4 3 
Structure of the Report  1.5 4 
Response of the Ministry/Department to Provisional 
Paragraphs 
1.6 4 
Recoveries at the instance of Audit 1.7 5 
Remedial action on Audit Paragraphs streamlining internal 
process 
1.8 5 
Paragraphs on which Action Taken Note received/pending 1.9 9 
Chapter 2 – Traffic 
Flexi fare system in Rajdhani, Shatabdi and Duronto trains 2.1 13 
Management of commercial plots and parking spaces near 
stations by Commercial department in Indian Railways 
2.2 36 
Loss of revenue of ` 13.24 crore due to carrying of freight 
traffic through weaker sections 
2.3 58 
Incorrect entry of train timing of terminating trains in 
Integrated Coaching Management System (ICMS) led to 
compromise in data integrity 
2.4 63 
Under-utilisation of 3rd line between Mathura and Palwal 
section of Agra Division 
2.5 65 
Loss due to Non/short-realization of Way Leave Charges (WLC) 
from parties/firms 
2.6 69 
Unfruitful expenditure of ` 62.15 crore due to procurement of 
microprocessor based LED destination boards 
2.7 73 
Failure to appoint halt contractor at newly opened halt 
stations led to inconvenience to passengers and leakage of 
revenue 
2.8 76 
Pre-departure detention of goods trains due to delay in arrival 
of crew and guard and consequent loss of opportunity of 
earnings of ` 58.30 crore 
2.9 78 
Inadmissible allowance of concession of ` 11.08 crore on 
restricted commodity under ‘Freight Incentive Scheme’ 
2.10 80 
Improper planning and short closure of traffic facility works 
resulted in loss of earning capacity 
2.11 81 
Incorporation of ambiguous clause in the agreement  2.12 84 

ii
ii 
 
Particulars Paragraph  Page 
leading to refusal of payment of wagon hire charges by 
Mormugao Port Trust 
Loss due to non-realization of engine hire charges from 
the siding owner 
2.13 85 
Non-weighment of loaded rakes of Food Corporation of 
India (FCI) 
2.14 87 
Undue advantage taken by Jansadharan Ticket Booking 
Sewaks (JTBSs) by depositing de-monetised specified bank 
notes with the Railways post-demonetization 
2.15 89 
Loss due to short realization of demurrage charges 2.16 92 
Deficiencies in remittance of cash by the Ticket booking 
staff and Ticket Examiners 
2.17 93 
Chapter 3 – Engineering 
Undue favour to firm in awarding contracts by violating 
Railway Board’s instructions on financial capacity and 
capability  
3.1 100 
Blocking-up capital in execution of Gauge Conversion work  3.2 104 
Deficient planning and execution of contracts related to 
New Line project  
3.3 107 
Blocking up of capital due to construction of a Road Over 
Bridge without ensuring encumbrance free land  
3.4 109 
Non-recovery and short recovery of capitalized 
maintenance charges in respect of ROB works executed on 
‘Deposit Terms’  
3.5 110 
Short recovery of land license fee from CONCOR  3.6 112 
Chapter 4 – Traction 
Setting up of diesel locomotive manufacturing unit at 
Marhowra, Bihar  
4.1 115 
Utilisation of Diesel Locomotive in completely electrified 
section 
4.2 122 
Avoidable expenditure of ` 4.35 crore due to incorrect 
fixation of Contract Demand and erroneous payment of 
electricity duty at DMU Factory, Haldia 
4.3 124 
Chapter 5 – Signalling and Telecommunications 
Implementation of Mobile Train Radio Communication 
(MTRC) system over Indian Railways  
5.1 128 
Unwarranted procurement of Operational Purpose 
Handsets and General Purpose Handsets led to blockage 
of capital of ` 17.77 crore  
5.2 139 
Avoidable liability on account of Spectrum Charges due to 
failure to review the use of Walkie Talkie sets 
5.3 145 

iii
iii 
 
Particulars Paragraph  Page 
Chapter 6 – Rolling Stock 
Receipt of wagons not due for POH in Dahod Workshop 
led to detention and consequent loss of earning capacity 
of these wagons  
6.1 149 
Chapter 7 –Autonomous Bodies 
Development of railway land for commercial use by Rail 
Land Development Authority  
7.1 152 
Delay in Implementation of Indian Railways Disaster 
Recovery Data Centre for IT Applications 
7.2 162 
Delay in Implementation of Geographical Information 
System (GIS) Mapping & Geospatial Database for Indian 
Railway Assets 
7.3 165 
Delay in Implementation of Land Management System 
over Indian Railways 
7.4 168 
Chapter 8 –Railway Public Sector Undertakings 
Injudicious payment of Mobilization Advance to 
contractors  
8.1 173 
Deficient planning in procurement of high speed bogie 
assemblies  
8.2 175 
Annexure  178-202 
 
 

iv
iv 
 
Abbreviations 
 
Abbreviation Full form 
AMC Annual Maintenance Contract 
ARP Advance Reservation Period 
ATN Action Taken Note 
CC Carrying Capacity 
CCM Chief Commercial Manager 
CE Chief Engineer 
CEE Chief Electric Engineer 
CLW Chittaranjan Locomotive works 
CME Chief Mechanical Engineer 
COM Chief Operations Manager 
CONCOR Container Corporation of India Limited 
COS Controller of Stores 
CR Central Railway 
CRB Chairman Railway Board 
CRIS Centre for Railway Information Systems 
CRS Commissioner of Railway Safety 
CWE Chief Workshop Engineer 
DFC Dedicated Freight Corridor 
DLW Diesel Locomotive Works 
DMU Diesel Multiple Unit 
DR Disaster Recovery 
DRM Divisional Railway Manager 
EBR Extra Budgetary Resources 
ECOR East Coast Railway 
ECR East Central Railway 
EFT Excess Fare Ticket 
EMU Electric Multiple Unit 
EMU Electric Multiple Unit 
EOL Engine On Load 
ER Eastern Railway 
FA&CAO Financial Advisor and Chief Accounts Officer 
FC Financial Commissioner 
FOIS Freight Operation Information System 
GAD General Arrangement Drawings 
GC Gauge Conversion 

vv
v 
 
Abbreviation Full form 
GC Gauge Conversion 
GIS Geographical Information System 
GM General Manager  
GPH General Purpose Handset 
GPS Global Positioning System 
GSM-R Global System for Mobile Communication-Railway  
ICF Integral Coach Factory  
ICMS Integrated Coaching Management System 
IOH Intermediate Overhaul 
IR Indian Railways 
IRCON Indian Railway Construction International Limited 
IRPMU Indian Railway Project Management Unit 
JPO Joint Procedure Order 
L&A Land and Amenities 
LAR Last Accepted Rate 
LED Light Emitting Diode 
LOA Letter of Acceptance 
MFC Multi-Functional Complex 
MIS Management Information System 
MoR Ministry of Railways 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding  
MR Metro Railway 
MRVC Mumbai Rail Vikas Corporation 
MTRC Mobile Train Radio Communication 
NCR North Central Railway 
NEFR  Northeast Frontier Railway 
NER North Eastern Railway 
NOC No Objection Certification 
NR Northern Railway 
NTES National Train Enquiry System 
NTKM Net Tonne Kilometer 
NWR North Western Railway 
OEM Original Equipment Manufacturer 
OHE Over Head Electrical Equipment 
OPH Operation Purpose Handset 
PAC Public Accounts Committee 
PCE Principal Chief Engineer  

vivivi 
 
Abbreviation Full form 
POH Periodical Overhaul 
PRS Passenger Reservation System 
PSU Public Sector Undertaking 
RDSO Research, Design and Standards Organisation 
RE Railway Electrification 
RFP Request For Proposal 
RITES Rail India Technical and Economic Services Limited 
RKM Route Kilometers 
RLDA Rail Land Development Authority 
ROB Road Over Bridge 
RUB Road Under Bridge 
S&T Signalling and Telecommunication 
SCR South Central Railway 
SM Station Master 
SR Southern Railway 
Sr. DCM Senior Divisional Commercial Manager 
Sr. DOM Senior Divisional Operations Manager 
SWR South Western Railway 
TC Tender Committee  
TDC Target Date of Completion 
TEU Twenty Feet Equivalent Unit 
TIA Traffic Inspector of Accounts 
TIELS Terminal Incentive cum Engine on Load Scheme 
TKM Track Kilometre  
TMS Track Management System 
TTE Travelling Ticket Examiner  
UTS Unreserved Ticketing System 
WCR West Central Railway 
WLC Way Leave Charges 
WR Western Railway 
 

vii
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Overview
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Overview 
 
vii 
 
Overview 
The Audit Report consists of audit findings relating to compliance issues in respect 
of the Ministry of Railways and its various field units including Railway Public 
Sector Undertakings and Autonomous Bodies. The Audit R eport includes two 
thematic audits,  two long paragraphs and 32 individual Paragraphs. A brief 
overview of the important audit findings and conclusions is given below: 
Para 2.1: Flexi fare system in Rajdhani, Shatabdi and Duronto trains 
Ministry of Railways implemented the flexi-fare scheme in all Rajdhani, Duronto 
and Shatabdi trains in September 2016, irrespective of the demand and 
occupancy. The scheme resulted in decrease in occupancy in all classes except 
Sleeper class in Duronto trains. The occupancy increased only in  a few Premier 
trains. Though the Railways had introduced enhanced/dynamic fare in various 
formats (Enhanced Tatkal fare in Premier trains, Suvidha trains and Special trains 
with Tatkal fare) before introducing the flexi fare scheme, they did not take into  
consideration the fact that the occupancy in all classes (except sleeper class in 
Suvidha Trains) where enhanced/dynamic fare were implemented was very low 
and AC 2 and AC 3 in these trains were not finding adequate patronage. In AC 3 
class also, which was one of the most profitable classes, the occupancy dropped 
significantly after introduction of flexi fare and the vacant berths increased from 
0.66 per cent  in pre -flexi period to 4.46 per cent  in post -flexi period. Thus, 
introduction of flexi fare in AC 3 Tier class was not fair.  
In terms of absolute numbers, the Premier trains carried 2,40,79,899 passengers 
during post flexi period as compared to 2,47,36,469 passengers during pre -flexi 
period. There was de-growth of 2.65 per cent despite availability of higher number 
of berths/seats , which resulting in sub -optimal utilisation of national assets.  
Railway, however, earned ` 552 crore from passenger earnings from the Premier 
trains post flexi fare system during 9 September 2016 to 31 July 2017.
 Thus, there 
is a need for review and fine tuning in the scope of the scheme so that not only 
more revenue is earned but number of passengers also increase, thus, further 
enhancing revenue. 
The occupancy of Mail/Express Trains in the routes where Premier trains run, was 
found to be much more than the Premier trains during the months test checked 
by Audit (October 2016 and February 2017). This indicated that instead of paying 
higher fare, passengers preferred to travel by Mail/Express trains over the 
Rajdhani/ Duronto/ Shatabdi trains despite a higher travel time for Mail/Express 
trains. 
A comparison with air fare for different Advance Reservation Periods in 13 sectors 
also showed that air fares were cheaper than the respective train fares for a large 
number of routes/sectors. When compared to the cost and time taken for travel 
by Premier trains, air fare became a cheaper and preferable mode of travel. While 
in air fares the prices of tickets increase with increase in demand, in flexi fare, 
there is a fixed increase in far es after every 10 per cent  of the tickets booked 

viii
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Overview
Overview Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
irrespective of the demand. By paying a higher price for an air ticket, a passenger 
is ensured a confirmed seat, but a passenger who purchases a waitlisted train 
ticket by paying a higher amount does not have an assurance of confirmed ticket. 
Thus, charging a higher fare without providing confirmed seat/berth has forced 
passengers to explore other available alternatives.  
Railway Board introduced a few measures such as reducing the Tatkal quota from 
30 per cent to 10 per cent, discounted fare in AC Chair Car of two Shatabdi trains 
and 10 per cent  rebate in the last fare on the vacant berths/seats after 
preparation of first chart during December 2016. These measures improved the 
occupancy of the Premier trains to some extent. This shows that rail passengers 
did not perceive value for their money in flexi fare system in Premier trains. 
Passenger Survey by Audit showed that passengers expect better quality services 
commensurate with enhanced fare. At present, many of them feel that they have 
not derived value for money and time spent in the Premier trains and that they 
would prefer to switch over to other modes of transport.  
It is recommended that 
 Railways may review and fine tune the scope of the scheme so that not only 
more revenue is earned but number of passengers also increase, thus, 
further enhancing revenue. Instead of enhancing fare across all classes and 
routes, Indian Railways may consider  reviewing the fare structure on the 
basis of demand and occupancy in different routes.  
  Railway Board may explore the possibility of rationalising the fare structure 
across all types of trains instead of targeting Premier trains which was 
already having a separate increased fare structure.  
 Instead of allotting 90 per cent seats/berths under flexi fare scheme and 
leaving only 10 per cent seats/berths for normal fare, at least 50 per cent 
seats/berths should be allotted for normal fare.   
 While paying a higher air fare, a passenger is assured a confirmed seat, 
whereas under flexi fare scheme, when a passenger books a waitlisted ticket 
at 40 to 50 per cent higher fare, he is not assured of a confirmed seat. It is 
recommended that for the uncertainty a waitlisted passenger undergoes, he 
should be compensated by way of a lower fare. 
Para 2.2: Management of commercial plots and parking spaces near stations by 
Commercial department in Indian Railways 
While a large area of land in the railways falls under the ju risdiction of the 
Engineering Department, Commercial Department is responsible for managing 
the commercial plots and parking spaces near stations. Audit observed that there 
was no land management cell for commercial plots managed by Commercial 
Department a t any level. The existing land management cell under the 
Engineering Department was not dealing with or having records of commercial 
plots. Land records were poorly maintained and not digitized. There was no 

ix
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Overview
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Overview 
 
ix 
 
database for land under the control of Commercial Department. The mechanism 
of Standing Committee to examine fresh cases of licensing of commercial plots 
and monitoring them was not being used effectively in the selected seven Zonal 
Railways. The records related to licensing of land, fixation of license fee, renewal 
of license agreement and recovery of license fee etc. were not available with the 
Railways in respect of a significant number of stations to monitor timely collection 
of license fee from the licensees. The Station Managers did not ensure prop er 
maintenance of records, timely realisation of rent and timely reporting of events 
to the divisional office in the stations test checked by Audit. License agreements 
were not executed and renewed timely and information about the land available 
under the jurisdiction of Commercial Department available with the railways was 
incomplete. License fee had not been revised based on market value of land. 
Railway plots were being used for purposes other than the purpose for which it 
was allotted initially to the plot holders. Railways had not undertaken any survey 
to assess the present use of the plots and take action to cancel the land allotment. 
The plot holders were also not paying license fee in a number of cases and huge 
amount was outstanding in the selected Zonal Railways. 
Significant number (33 per cent) of plots were occupied by persons other than the 
original allottee. Large numbers of plots were occupied unauthorisedly by 
persons/firms. Commercial plots were illegally transferred by original allottees to 
others by way of sale, donation deed, power of attorney etc. During joint 
inspection, permanent structures were found built on commercial plots by the 
allottess/unauthorized persons.  These plots were being used for commercial/  
private purposes. Zonal Railways neither took action to give one time opportunity 
for change of name of allottees nor auction the same.  
As regards parking lots, railways did not execute agreements promptly in many 
cases and also did not enter into agreement in some places. The contractors were 
managing the parking lots in an un -professional manner and the railways were 
not able to ensure that they provide service as per the agreements and recover 
dues from contractors. In a number of stations, though the State police was 
running t he pre -paid auto/taxi booths, Railway Admi nistrations did not take 
suitable action/pursue the matter with the authorities concerned for 
collection/sharing of parking charges for running of pre-paid booths. Due to non-
settlement of the court cases, the plot  holders were earning revenues/enjoying 
benefits from the plots without paying any license fee to the Railways.  
It is recommended that 
 Railways may consider putting in place a mechanism for management of 
commercial plots, wherein comprehensive survey and demarcation of 
commercial plots, maintenance of records and data base of land records and 
their digitization, examination of cases of li censing and their monitoring is 
ensured. This may be done either by forming an exclusive Land Cell for 
management of commercial plots or the Land Cells which manage the plots 

x
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Overview
Overview Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
under the jurisdiction of Engineering Department may be entrusted with the 
responsibility of managing them. 
 Railways may strengthen the monitoring mechanism for licensing of land, 
fixation of license fee, renewal of license agreement and recovery of license 
fee, settlement of the court cases, maintenance of records etc. at Divisional 
and Zonal levels.  
 Zonal Railways may take action to get vacated and occupy the commercial 
plots which are 
not occupied by the original allottees  and execute fresh 
agreements for recovery of license fee at rates prescribed by the Railway 
Board, within a fixed time frame as land is precious resource which Railway 
can ill-afford to use sub-optimally.  
 Railway may strengthen the monitoring mechanism and ensure that parking 
lots are managed professionally following the terms and conditions of the 
agreements by the contractors.  Railways may also take suitable action to 
take up matter with the authorities concerned for collection/sharing of 
parking charges for pre-paid booths being managed by State police or GRP. 
Para 2.3: Loss of revenue of ` 13.24 crore due to carrying of freight traffic 
through weaker sections 
When traffic is booked via routes which involve two or more of different types of 
routes viz. CC+4, CC+6 and CC+8, the chargeable weight will be the permissible 
carrying capacity of the route for which permissible carrying capacity is the most 
restrictive i.e. rates applicable for normal, CC+4 or CC+6 route, as the case may 
be. Audit observed that from Karaikal Port Private Limited siding (KIKP) to four 
destinations in SR, major portion of the route was upgraded  and a small portion 
was yet to be upgraded. While lengths of these sections ranged from 133 kms to 
340 kms, the portion yet to be upgraded ranged was only 15 kms to 89 kms. As a 
result, the freight was being charged with rate applicable to the lower load. Audit 
observed that SR Administration sent incomplete proposals to Railway Board by 
omitting part of sections, which were already fit for carrying higher loads. This led 
to charging of coal traffic carried on these routes at rates applicable for lower 
loads and led to loss of ` 7.81 crore during 2016-17. The loss would continue till 
such time the above sections are upgraded and notified for CC+8 loading. Further, 
food grain traffic was booked from other Zonal Railways to SR  on nine sections, 
wherein small portion (15 kms to 188 kms) of the routes were yet to be upgraded 
to CC+6. By failing to take timely action to strengthen the weaker sections to CC+6 
route, railways incurred a loss of ` 5.43 crore during 2013-14 to 2016-17.
  
It is recommended that these weaker sections may be upgraded so that not only 
higher revenue is generated, the movement of goods also becomes faster. 
Para 2.4: Incorrect entry of train timing of terminating trains in Integrated 
Coaching Management System (ICMS) led to compromise in data integrity 
Railways entered the arrival timing of terminating trains at Allahabad station 
incorrectly in the ICMS. This led to compromise in data integrity. As the 

xi
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Overview
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Overview 
 
xi 
 
information fed into ICMS is reflected in National Train Enquiry System (NTES), 
the incorrect entries caused inconvenience to the passengers by showing wrong 
timings of arrival of trains in Allahabad station. Similar position i.e. incorrect data 
entry of arrival/ departure time of trains may also prevail at other stations.  
It is recommended that Railways Board may issue strict instructions to all the 
Zonal Railways to ensure correct entry of the arrival/departure timings in NTES, 
(either through direct entry in NTES or through entry in Control Office 
Application or through data loggers) so that the passe ngers get accurate 
information on arrival/departure of trains. There is a need for evolving a 
mechanism of systemic and supervisory check of data entered in NTES with 
reference to the data in the Train Signalling Register/ Control Office 
Application/data loggers or through other means. 
Para 2.5: Under-utilisation of 3 rd line between Mathura and Palwal section of 
Agra Division 
Agra Division of NCR has constructed a 3rd line between Mathura- Palwal (84 kms) 
for smooth operation of traffic over the section due to saturation of UP and Down 
Line. The line was opened for traffic two years back, a fter incurring an 
expenditure of ` 412.65 crore . However , the newly created 3 rd line could be 
utilised only to the extent of 52 per cent despite line capacity utilisation being in 
excess of 100 per cent on both UP and Down directions, of the other two lines . 
Smooth operation through 3rd line required yard remodelling work at Kosi Kalan 
station, which was not included in the detailed estimate of the work . The non -
optimal utilisation of 3 rd line adversely impacted train punctuality and causes 
inconvenience to passengers. Though the proposal for yard remodeling work has 
been included in the work of 4 th line sanctioned in 2015-16, the same is in very 
early stages and the detentions would continue till the work of yard remodelling 
at Kosi Kalan station is completed. Till such time, Railways will continue to lose 
potential revenue of ` 16.38 crore annually.  
It is  recommended that  Railway may take up the work of Kosi Kalan yard 
remodeling on priority basis for smooth movement of traffic in this section and 
optimal utilisation of newly created 3
rd line between Mathura-Palwal.  
Para 2.6: Loss due to Non/short -realization of Way Leave Charges (WLC) from 
parties/firms 
Way leave facilities/easement rights on Railway land involve occasional or limited 
use of land by a party for specified purpose like passage etc. without conferring 
upon the party any right of possession or occupation of the land and without any 
way affecting the Railway’s title, possession, control and use of land. Permission 
for way leave should be granted in genuine and un -avoidable cases after 
execution of proper agreements. Thirteen railway divisions under six Zonal 
Railway Administrations did not comp ly with the guidelines laid down by the 
Railway Board with regard to granting of way leave facilities /easement rights. 
This resulted in loss due to non/short realization of way leave charges of ` 65.20 

xii
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Overview
Overview Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
crore from 954 parties/firms for the period from year 1998 to March 2017. These 
Railway Divisions also failed to execute/ renew agreements in a number of cases 
with the parties/firms for allowing them to avail the way leave facilities/easement 
rights. 
Para 2.7: Unfruitful expenditure of ` 62.15 crore due to procurement of 
microprocessor based LED destination boards 
Ministry of Railways announced installation of microprocessor controlled LED 
destination display boards in the Budget speech 2008 -09. Thereafter, Railway 
Board made frequent revisions in specifications for LED based destination boards. 
These necessitated reversal of instructions to Zonal Railways to initiate bulk 
purchase. However, LED destination boards which had been procured by the 
Zonal Railways at a cost of ` 98.26 crore could not be used fully due to failure of 
Zonal Railways to update the train  data base in the Coach Control Unit and to 
ensure provision of remote control unit at the time of their procurement. As a 
result, LED destination boards worth ` 62.15 crore remained unutilised. 
Para 2.15: Undue advantage taken by Jansadharan Ticket Booking Sewaks 
(JTBSs) by depositing de -monetised specified bank notes with the Railways 
post-demonetization 
Government of India vide their  Gazette Notification dated 08 November 2016, 
demonetized currency notes of denomination of five hundred rupees and one 
thousand rupees and these notes ceased to be legal tender on and from 09 
November 2016. Railway Board, on 09 November 2016, clarified that the specified 
bank notes would not cease to be legal tender with  effect from 09 November 
2016 until 11 November 2016 to the extent of transactions  at railway ticketing 
counters for purchase of tickets, for which complete records were required to be 
maintained. Audit observed that no specific directives/instructions wer e issued 
by the Railway Board in respect of cash deposited by the Jansadharan Ticket 
Booking Sewaks (JTBSs) in Railway’s Deposit Accounts essential for issue/sale of 
unreserved tickets through computerised Unreserved Ticketing System.  132 
Jansadharan Ticket Booking Sewaks in six Zonal Railways took undue advantage 
of the facility provided by the Government of India to allow transactions at railway 
ticketing counters and deposited specified bank notes with the Railways post 
demonetisation instead of depositing the cash in the banks. 
Para 2.17: Deficiencies in remittance of cash by the Ticket booking staff and 
Ticket Examiners 
There was accumulation of admitted debits in various divisions of Central Railway, 
as codal provisions for clearance of admitted debits were not implemented by 
Railway Administration. Staff misappropriated cash and did not remit cash in full. 
System of recovery of outstanding amount, in convenient monthly installments, 
also encouraged continuance of the practice of short remittance of cash by the 
staff. Non-deposit of cash collection amounts to temporary embezzlement. 

xiii
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Overview
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Overview 
 
xiii 
 
Railway Administration failed to take disciplinary action against the employees 
who were habitual defaulters.  
It is recommended that a ll Zonal Railway Administrations may issue J oint 
Procedure Order expeditiously to put in place a mechanism for streamlining the 
system of remittance of cash by staff and minimizing the cases of 
misappropriation of station earnings.  Railways also need to take stringent 
action against defaulters which will act as a deterrence against such practices. 
Considering the number of ticket booking and ticket checking staff across Indian 
Railways, the risk of mis -appropriation and continued pra ctice of short 
remittance of cash would be manifold.       
Para 3.1: Undue favour to firm in awarding contracts by violating Railway 
Board’s instructions on financial capacity and capability 
For exercising better quality control and proper monitoring/supervision, 
Northern Railway Construction Organisation divided the work of d oubling 
between Meerut and Muzaffarnagar into two Zones. However, they awarded 
both the works to the same firm by allowing the same set of documents in respect 
of Plant and Machinery/resources available and credentials for proof of receiving 
of payments in both the tenders  simultaneously. Railways,  thus, awarded the 
contracts to a firm without examining its financial capac ity and capability . 
Railways also favoured the firm by granting extensions without penalty. The 
performance of the contractor was mentioned as ‘satisfactory’ in both the works 
and he was not made responsible for the delays whi le granting extensions. This 
adversely affected the progress of Doubling work between Meerut and 
Muzaffarnagar and resulted in non-achievement of intended benefit of increasing 
the line capacity for movement of freight and passenger traffic in the section. 
Para 3.2:  Blocking-up capital in execution of Gauge Conversion work 
Railway Board undertook an exercise  to study the reasons for inordinately long 
mega block time for Gauge Conversion Works and find means and ways to carry 
out the works of Gauge Conversion in abou t a months’ block time. Based on the 
study Railway Board issued instructions that the works in connection with Gauge 
Conversion projects such as earthwork, minor bridges and certain major bridges 
on diversions should be started two to three years in advanc e and completed 
before the block.  Railway Board viewed that it will be desirable to complete all 
the works in a mega block of not more than 60 days although 30 days would be 
ideal. 
In respect of t he Gauge Conversion work of Sakri -Nirmali and Jhanjharpur -
Laukaha bazar section  (94 km) over Samastipur Division of ECR  Railway, Audit 
observed that out of these 28 contracts, only four were completed, 12 contracts 
were in progress after extensions and the remaining 12 contracts were 
terminated/fore-closed. An expenditure of ` 32.69 crore was incurred on seven 
of these contracts. Further, pre-mega block works in respect of Gauge Conversion 
project, which should be completed as per a pre -determined plan two to three 

xiv
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Overview
Overview Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
years in advance of mega block, could not be completed even after lapse of nine 
years from the date of sanction of detailed estimate.  Contracts were fore -
closed/terminated on the ground of non -availability of mega block. The firms 
failed to start the work even after the scheduled date of completio n and action 
was taken by the railways to terminate/ foreclose the contract after significant 
delays. Poor execution and inefficient contract management on part of Railway 
Administration led to delay in completion of the project and blockage of capital 
of ` 47.98 crore. The overall cost of civil works in the project also increased by ` 
551.68 crore due to price escalation. 
Para 3.3:  East Central Railway (ECR): Deficient planning and execution of 
contracts related to New Line project 
In the New Line project from Hajipur to Sagauli (148.3 kms), ECR Administration 
took a decision to first complete the work up to Vaishali for better use of 
resources and decided to foreclose all the existing contracts beyond Vaishali. 
However, deviating from this decision, terminated contracts were re-awarded at 
a cost of ` 86.14 crore, thereby committing investment without completing the 
work up to Vaishali.  The action defeated  the purpose of decision taken to first 
complete the new line up to Vaishlai, optimizing use of resources. 
Para 3.4: Northeast Frontier Railway: Blocking up of capital due to construction 
of a Road Over Bridge without ensuring encumbrance free land 
Between Mathabhanga and New Coochbehar Station on State Highway No. 12A 
of West Benga l, a Road Over Bridge (ROB) was constructed by NEFR 
Administration without ensuring encumbrance free land for the approach road. 
Due to incomplete approach road the ROB could not be commissioned even after 
four years of its construction resulting in blocking up of capital of ` 20.03 crore. 
Para 4.1: Setting up of diesel locomotive manufacturing unit at Marhowra, Bihar 
Ministry of Railways proposed setting up of diesel locomotive manufacturing unit 
at Marhowra, Bihar in September 2006. The contract was awarde d to M/s GE 
Global Sourcing India Pvt. Ltd in November 2015 for setting up of diesel 
locomotive manufacturing unit along with maintenance depot at Roza and 
Gandhidham. As a long time has elapsed, there was a need to reassess the 
necessity of setting up of new diesel locomotive manufacturing unit, before 
awarding the contract. Audit analysis showed that the diesel locomotives 
available with the Railways are sufficient in numbers to take care of the present 
needs.  Indian Railways is planning to shift to comp lete electrification of its BG 
routes by 2021 and would also run the freight trains in dedicated freight corridors 
(DFCs) on electrified routes. Even if, Railways do not go for 100 per cent  
electrification, it is expected that most of the high traffic routes would definitely 
be electrified and the need for diesel traction would remain only for low traffic 
routes, for which high horse power diesel locos are not likely to be used optimally. 
Consequently, need for high power diesel traction in Indian Railways is going to 
diminish in the years to come. Indian Railways has realised this eventuality and 

xv
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Overview
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Overview 
 
xv 
 
decided to significantly reduce the production of diesel locomotives at Diesel 
Locomotive Works (DLW), Varanasi from 2018-19 onwards. Also, the production 
plan of Diesel Loco Modernisation Works (DMW), Patiala, does not include any 
plan for production of diesel locomotive in 2018 -19. As such, the diesel 
locomotives procured under this agreement would have no scope for productive 
utilisation in the Indian Railway network in future. Railways themselves have 
decided to significantly reduce in-house production of diesel locomotives at DLW, 
Varanasi from 2019 -20 onwards. Thus, setting up of a new infrastru cture for 
production of diesel locomotives and incurring a huge liability of ` 17126.08 crore 
is not in sync with the overall strategic vision of Railways.  
It is recommended that Railways may revisit the issue and examine whether it 
will be prudent to create assets and infrastructure for which Railways may have 
no useful requirement in future, as they have planned for large scale 
electrification and dedicated freight corridor is also going to be completely 
electrified; Railways have already considerably scaled down their own in-house 
production programme of diesel locomotives. 
Para 4.2: Utilisation of Diesel Locomotive in completely electrified section 
North Central Railway administration allowed utilization of diesel locomotives in 
completely electrified electric sections of Allahabad-Ghaziabad (606.88 kms) and 
Palwal-Bina (505.31 kms). On these two electrified sections, during 2013 -14 to 
2016-17, a total 350 freight trains  were run using diesel locomotives under 
electric wire. This led to extra operational cost of ` 5.74 crore besides negative 
impact on environment and increased dependency on petroleum based energy. 
Para 5.1: Implementation of Mobile Train Radio Communication (MTRC) system 
over Indian Railways 
The MTRC system has been introduced to replace the existing (Very High 
Frequency) VHF based communication system over IR. It aims at better traffic 
management over Indian Railways through data transfer (regarding location and 
movement of trains) and secured communication amongst drivers, guards, 
maintenance staff, etc. MTRC to be effective required implementation on 
complete routes, dedicated locomotives with cab radios for the routes, provision 
and maintenan ce of MTRC infrastructure, stakeholder identification and role 
assignment, skill identification and upgradation, revision of recruitment rules and 
change management. However, no road map for implementation of the system 
has been prepared by the railways. D ue to absence of a comprehensive time 
bound road map, implementation of MTRC system could not take place. As on 31 
March 2017, only on 1470 RKMs out of 19,512 RKMs planned, the MTRC project 
has been implemented. Wherever implemented, the system is not bein g utilised 
as complete routes have not been covered for implementation and dedicated 
locomotives with cab radios for the routes have not been provided. Besides, due 
to deficient support system in terms of maintenance contracts and faulty Mobile 
Service Swi tching Centre at Agra, the system remains unutilised. Thus, 

xvi
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Overview
Overview Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
expenditure of ` 181.73 crore incurred on MTRC system so far has remained 
unfruitful.   
It is recommends that a full scale review of the MTRC projects may be taken up 
by the Railway Board and completed within a reasonable time frame. Till such 
time all fresh procurements and agreements related to MTRC may be put on 
hold. This may exclude agreements /tenders which are necessary to maintain 
the health of existing assets. A road map indicating activities, time lines, stake 
holder identification with role assignment may be prepared, addressing issues 
of change in technology, support system and skill requ irement etc. India has 
undergone a telecom revolution in the last decade and Railway administration 
should consider if the requirement of secured communication envisaged 
through MTRC could be met through specialized telecom providers (existing in 
India) in  place of creating an independent telecom infrastructure for MTRC 
within IR. 
Para 5.2: Unwarranted procurement of Operational Purpose Handsets and 
General Purpose Handsets led to blockage of capital of ` 17.77 crore 
North Central Railway Administration procured costly Operational Purpose 
Handsets (OPH) and General Purpose Handsets (GPH) equipment worth ` 17.77 
crore without proper and realistic need analysis and hence these could not be 
utilised. Q uotes were called from the firm wi thout any basis and rational. The 
Tender Committee went out of its way to obtain documentation pertaining to the 
earlier tender from RDSO, to prove the eligibility of the firm for the current 
tender. As these handsets are not being used, the amount of ` 17.77 crore spent 
for procuring these handsets remains blocked. 
Para 5.3: Avoidable liability on account of Spectrum Charges due to failure to 
review the use of Walkie Talkie sets 
Walkie Talkie sets are used in Railways as an emergency communication tool for 
which Railways have to pay spectrum charges to Department of 
Telecommunication. Consequent to proliferation of CUG mobile phone, Railway 
Board directed Zonal Railways to review the us e of Walkie Talkie sets. Audit 
observed that SER Administration did not review the use of Walkie Talkie sets to 
declare the unusable and non -repairable sets as condemned for avoiding 
payment of spectrum charges. This has led to avoidable liability of ` 30.36 crore 
towards payment of Spectrum charges. As SER Administration has not paid the 
spectrum charges due as yet, they would also be liable to pay ` 20.29 crore 
towards surcharge on delayed payment of spectrum charges. 
Para 6.1: Receipt of wagons not due f or POH in Dahod Workshop led to 
detention and consequent loss of earning capacity of these wagons 
Only wagons due for POH should be sent to the workshops. These should be 
accepted, after due inspection and approval by the workshop staff. However, 
from June 2013 to March 2017, 434 wagons not due for POH were received in 

xvii
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Overview
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Overview 
 
xvii 
 
Dahod workshop. Inspection and approval was not being carried out by workshop 
staff before accepting the wagons for POH. These wagons hindered operational 
activities as they occupied track in side the workshop and were returned back to 
the Zonal Railways without carrying any work on them after being detained at the 
workshop for long periods. This led to avoidable loss of potential earning capacity 
of ` 16.46 crore due to detention.  
It is recommended that Railways may strictly follow the laid down instructions 
and ensure that wagons which are not due for POH are not accepted by the 
workshop authorities. By exercising the check of inspection and approval, the 
detention to wagons could be reduced and efficiency in operations can be 
achieved.  
Para 7.1: Development of railway land for commercial use by Rail Land  
Development Authority 
The main objective of setting up of RLDA was to generate revenue by non -tariff 
measures through commercial development of surplus railway land. Audit 
reviewed development of 17 sites, which were entrusted to RLDA in 2007 when 
it was constituted and observed that none of these sites have been developed so 
far. It was noticed that there were delays in engagement of consultants, delay in 
submission of reports by the consultants, delay in taking permission from State 
Government for change of land use, deficienc ies in entrustment of land to RLDA 
by the concerned Zonal Railways by providing encumbered land, identifying 
wrong site or site with incomplete papers etc. which resulted in non-development 
of 17 sites of 166.996 acres, reviewed in Audit. Out of 17 cases r eviewed, in only 
three cases developers were appointed, but commercial development did not 
take place. In two cases, the Development Agreements could not be entered into 
and Letter of Acceptance had to be cancelled as the first instalment of lease 
premium was not deposited by the  parties and in one case t he Development 
Agreement was terminated as the Developer refused to take the land offered by 
RLDA in exchange of land originally identified by the Railway and railways had to 
pay back the lease premium of ` 43.12 crore along with interest. Out of 17 plots, 
13 plots  were planned for commercial development with a lease potential of  
` 282.69 crore. Since being set up, RLDA has been able to earn ` 67.97 crore from 
development of Multi-Functional Complexes (MFCs) at railway stations, which is 
other than the earnings from commercial development of entrusted lands. As 
against this, expenditure of ` 102.29 crore has been incurred towards 
establishment, consultancy charges, advertisement etc. during 2006 -07 to  
2016-17. 
It is recommended that  
 Railways may take timely action to seek clearance from the respective State 
Governments for change in land use and open space reservation  and also 
examine the legal implications of change of land use in consultation with the 
State Governments.  

xviii
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Overview
Overview Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 Following the norms of local authorities, Zonal Railways may identify and 
entrust only unencumbered sites to RLDA and ensure complete 
documents/records for the same. 
 RLDA may ensure timely appointment of consultants. RLDA may also enforce 
the terms and conditions of the agreements so that they complete their work 
on time and take action on their reports expeditiously. RLDA needs to put in 
place a mechanism to ensure early finalization of development contracts by 
setting up reasonable time lines for each activity.  
 Before attempting to commercially exploit vacant land, railways may 
consider offering the land to the State Government/Local Bodies/other 
departments for public purposes, lest they become an impediment for 
development of land. 
Para 7.2, 7.3 and 7.4: Delay in implementation of IT projects by CRIS 
Indian Railways Disaster Recovery Data Centre for IT Applications 
Railway mooted the proposal for setting up of a Disaster Recovery Data Centre in 
June 2007. Ten years have passed, but the railways were yet to finalize the same. 
There were delays at every stage and the decision for entrustment of work of 
construction was yet to be taken. Though the interim disaster recovery (DR) site 
for Passenger Reservation System (PRS) and Unreserved Ticketing System (UTS) 
has been made functional, it is located in the same building as the Railway 
Reservation Complex.  
It is recommended that Railways may set up the DRDC at a remote location  on 
priority, so that it can mitigate the risk arising out of incidents such as serious 
fire, earthquake or terror attack etc.  
Geographical Information System (GIS) Mapping & Geospati al Database for 
Indian Railway Assets 
The project on ‘Development of a comprehensive web based databank for land 
and asset management for optimum utilization of resources’ was put forward in 
June 2012, it remains at initial stages of implementation till date. The main 
reasons for slow progress  were delay in finalization of estimates, delay in 
execution of MoU, failure to adhere to MoU targets and delay in conducting GPS 
survey by the Zonal Railways.  
It is recommended that railways may expeditiously implement the project, so as 
to derive the in tended benefits of simplified asset management, easy 
visualization and management of day -to-day operations, assessing location of 
rolling stock  on the GIS map, effective planning for traffic and easy visualization 
of the affected area during  the time of a disaster. 
Land Management System over Indian Railways 
The proposal for introducing a web based Land Management System on Indian 
Railways was initiated in January 2011. In view of the large area of land under the 

xix
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Overview
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Overview 
 
xix 
 
jurisdiction of the railways, the proposal was important as it envisaged conversion 
of land related matters i.e. land records, land boundary verification, land 
leasing/licensing, process of prevention and removal  of encroachment, 
commercial exploitation of land etc. into a web based application. However, due 
to delay in finalization of estimates, delay in execution of MoU, failure to adhere 
to MoU targets and delay in conducting GPS survey by the Zonal Railways, 
implementation of the same was yet to be started.  
It is recommended that railways may expeditiously implement the project, so 
that as envisaged the manual register/records can be dispensed with and the 
railway land plans, State Government Revenue Plan, geographical features of 
the railway land and adjoining areas are captured on GIS platform. 
Para 8.1: Injudicious payment of Mobilization Advance to contractors 
MRVC granted mobilization advance of ` 6.17 crore to contractors in nine 
contracts which had an estimated cost of less than ` 25 crore, which was the 
amount prescribed by the Railway Board for grant of mobilization advance. The 
rate of interest charged by MRVC was also much lower than that prescribed rates. 
None of the nine works could be completed within the scheduled date of 
completion. Besides, MRVC was unable to ensure full recovery of Mobilization 
Advances granted as ` 0.09 crore is yet to be recovered. Even the amount 
recovered involved significant delays. 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)
Chapter 1
1
Report No.5 of 2017 (Railways)  Chapter 1   
 
 1 
Chapter 1 
Introduction 
1.1  Audited Entity profile 
Indian Railways is a multi -gauge, multi-traction system with a total route length of 
67,368 kms (as on 31 March 201 7). Some important statistics 1 regarding 
route/track length in Indian Railways is given below: 
Table 1.1 
 Broad Gauge 
(1,676 mm) 
Meter Gauge 
(1,000 mm) 
Narrow Gauge 
(762/610 mm) 
Total 
Route Kilometers 61,680 3,479 2,209  67,368 
Running Track Kilometers 87,962 3,731 2,209 93,902 
Total Track kms (TKM) 1,14,912 4,099 2,396 1,21,407 
Electrified Route kms (RKM)    25,367 
IR runs 13,329 passenger trains and 9,2 21 goods trains every day. During 201 6-17, 
it carried 22.2 4 million passengers and 3.0 4 million tonnes freight each day. As on 
31 March 201 7, Indian Railways had 1.31 million work force an d maintained the 
following infrastructural assets and rolling stock: 
Table 1.2 
Rolling stock Numbers 
Locomotives 11,461  
Coaching Vehicles 70,937 
Freight Wagons 2,77,987 
Stations 7,349 
The Ministry of Railways , is headed by a Union Minister of Railw ays (a Cabinet 
Minister) and has two Ministers of State for Railways.  
                                                           
1 Source – Indian Railways Year Book 2016-17 and Indian Railways' Website 
Report No.5 of 2017 (Railways)  Chapter 1   
 
 1 
Chapter 1 
Introduction 
1.1  Audited Entity profile 
Indian Railways is a multi -gauge, multi-traction system with a total route length of 
67,368 kms (as on 31 March 201 7). Some important statistics 1 regarding 
route/track length in Indian Railways is given below: 
Table 1.1 
 Broad Gauge 
(1,676 mm) 
Meter Gauge 
(1,000 mm) 
Narrow Gauge 
(762/610 mm) 
Total 
Route Kilometers 61,680 3,479 2,209  67,368 
Running Track Kilometers 87,962 3,731 2,209 93,902 
Total Track kms (TKM) 1,14,912 4,099 2,396 1,21,407 
Electrified Route kms (RKM)    25,367 
IR runs 13,329 passenger trains and 9,2 21 goods trains every day. During 201 6-17, 
it carried 22.2 4 million passengers and 3.0 4 million tonnes freight each day. As on 
31 March 201 7, Indian Railways had 1.31 million work force an d maintained the 
following infrastructural assets and rolling stock: 
Table 1.2 
Rolling stock Numbers 
Locomotives 11,461  
Coaching Vehicles 70,937 
Freight Wagons 2,77,987 
Stations 7,349 
The Ministry of Railways , is headed by a Union Minister of Railw ays (a Cabinet 
Minister) and has two Ministers of State for Railways.  
                                                           
1 Source – Indian Railways Year Book 2016-17 and Indian Railways' Website 
Report No.5 of 2017 (Railways)  Chapter 1   
 
 1 
Chapter 1 
Introduction 
1.1  Audited Entity profile 
Indian Railways is a multi -gauge, multi-traction system with a total route length of 
67,368 kms (as on 31 March 201 7). Some important statistics 1 regarding 
route/track length in Indian Railways is given below: 
Table 1.1 
 Broad Gauge 
(1,676 mm) 
Meter Gauge 
(1,000 mm) 
Narrow Gauge 
(762/610 mm) 
Total 
Route Kilometers 61,680 3,479 2,209  67,368 
Running Track Kilometers 87,962 3,731 2,209 93,902 
Total Track kms (TKM) 1,14,912 4,099 2,396 1,21,407 
Electrified Route kms (RKM)    25,367 
IR runs 13,329 passenger trains and 9,2 21 goods trains every day. During 201 6-17, 
it carried 22.2 4 million passengers and 3.0 4 million tonnes freight each day. As on 
31 March 201 7, Indian Railways had 1.31 million work force an d maintained the 
following infrastructural assets and rolling stock: 
Table 1.2 
Rolling stock Numbers 
Locomotives 11,461  
Coaching Vehicles 70,937 
Freight Wagons 2,77,987 
Stations 7,349 
The Ministry of Railways , is headed by a Union Minister of Railw ays (a Cabinet 
Minister) and has two Ministers of State for Railways.  
                                                           
1 Source – Indian Railways Year Book 2016-17 and Indian Railways' Website 

2
Report No. 14 of 2017 (Railways)Chapter 1
Chapter 1  Report No.5 of 2017 (Railways)  
 
 2 
The Railway Board which is the apex body of Indian Railways, reports to the 
Minister for Railways. Railway Board is headed by Chairman Railway Board (CRB) 
and has six members viz. Member (Traffic), Member ( Engineering), Member 
(Traction), Member (Rolling Stock), Member ( Staff) and Financial Commissioner  
(Railways). The Board  is responsible for laying down policies on all matters of 
operation and maintenance of train services , acquisition , construction and 
maintenance of assets and monitoring implementation of policies and instructions 
across Zonal Railways . Railway Board is also responsible for regulating pricing of 
both passenger fares and freight tariffs. The Functional Directorates und er each 
Member assist and aid in decision-making and monitoring of railway operations. 
At the field level, there are 17 Zon al Railways. In addition, there are specialized 
organisation viz. Research, Design and Standards Organization (RDSO) Lucknow  for 
research and standardization specific ; a Central Organization for Modernization of 
Workshops (COFMOW) for procurement of specialized machinery; two Locomotive 
manufacturing units {Diesel Locomotive Works (DLW) and Chittaranjan Locomotive 
Works (CLW)} at Varan asi and Chittaranjan respectively; three Coach factories at 
Kapurthala, Rae Bareli and Perambur; two Wheel and Axle Plants at Yelahanka and 
Bela; and Diesel Modernization Works at Patiala.  
The details of Zonal Railways  with their Headquarters and total route kilometers 
(RKMs) as on 31 March 2017 are given below: 
Table 1.3 
Zonal Railways Headquarters RKMs 
Central Mumbai 4101.63 
Eastern Kolkata 2711.61 
East Central Hajipur 3986.06 
East Coast Bhubaneshwar 2745.45 
Northern New Delhi 7301.30 
North Central Allahabad 3523.30 
North Eastern Gorakhpur 3881.44 
Northeast Frontier Maligaon (Guwahati) 4097.91 
North Western Jaipur 5550.64 
Southern Chennai 5079.51 
South Central Secunderabad 6168.35 
South Eastern Kolkata 2712.45 
South East Central Bilaspur 2512.14 
South Western Hubli 3522.23 
Western Mumbai 6448.64 
West Central Jabalpur 2997.88 
Metro Railway Kolkata 27.28 
Total 67,367.82 
Each Zon al Railway  is headed by a General Manager who is assisted by Principal 
Heads of Departments, of Operating, Comm ercial, Engineering, Electrical, 
Mechanical, Stores, Accounts, Signal & Telecommunication, Personnel, Safety, 
Medical etc. departments. 

3
Report No. 14 of 2017 (Railways)
Chapter 1
Report No.5 of 2017 (Railways)  Chapter 1   
 
 3 
Besides the above, there are 37 PSUs and two Autonomous Bodies (RLDA and CRIS) 
under control of Ministry of Railways. Th ese PSUs/ABs  have been  set up by the 
Ministry with varied and specific objectives of raising finance for its rolling stock, 
manufacture of wagons, executing infrastructure projects, managing 
containerization of rail traffic, catering and tourism, station d evelopment, utilise 
railway telecommunication network etc. 
A fully integrated financial advice and control system exists both at Railway Board 
headed by the Financial Commissioner  (Railways) and the Financial Advisers and 
Chief Accounts Officers  (FA&CAOs) at the Zonal level. The Financial Heads are 
responsible for rendering advice and scrutinizing all proposals involving 
expenditure from the pubic exchequer.  
1.2 Authority for audit 
The authority for our audit is derived from Articles 149 and 151 of the Con stitution 
of India and the Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions 
of Service) (DPC) Act, 1971. Audit of expenditure and receipts of Ministry of 
Railways, its Public Sector Undertakings and Autonomous Bodies is conducted 
under Section 13, Section 16, Section 19 (1)  and Section 20 (1) of the CAG’s (DPC) 
Act respectively. Principles and methodology of compliance audit are prescribed in 
the ‘Regulations of Audit and Accounts, 2007’. 
1.3 Audit Planning  
Broadly, the selection of the uni ts for audit of the Railways is planned on the basis 
of a risk assessment with regard to the level of budgets planned, resources 
allocated and deployed, extent of compliance with internal controls, scope of 
delegation of powers, sensitivity and criticality  of function/activity, external 
environment factors, etc. Previous audit findings, Public Accounts Committee 
(PAC)’s recommendations, media reports, where relevant, are also considered.  
Based on such risk assessment, test audit of 4, 543 entities/units of t he Railways 
was conducted during 2016-17. 
The Audit Plan focused on selected issues of significant nature in terms of policy 
and its implementation inter-alia covering freight traffic, earnings, infrastructure 
development, passenger amenities, asset management, material management and 
safety works. Each study brings out important audit findings and conclusions 
followed by audit recommendations, which could help improve systems and 
strengthen internal control mechanism in railways.  
1.4 Reporting 
Audits of selected topics were conducted across the Zonal Railways reviewing 
relevant records and documents of the field units as well as that of  Railway Board. 
Appropriate samples from the population were selected so as to adequately cover 
the issues under study. The audit findings were issued to the respective Zonal 
Managements for their response. Similarly, Audit Notes/Inspection Reports 
(IRs)/Special Letters arising out of regular audit of vouchers and tenders were 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 1
4
Chapter 1  Report No.5 of 2017 (Railways)  
 
 4 
issued to the Associated Finance and Head of the unit for obtaining their replies. 
Audit findings were either settled or further action for compliance was advised 
depending upon action taken. Important audit observations, not having been 
complied with, were followed up through Draft Paragraphs addressed to the 
General Managers of Zonal Railway s with copies endorsed to the FA&CAOs and 
Heads of the Departments for reply within the prescribed period. Selected issues 
raised in these Draft Paragraphs were taken up as Provisional Paragraphs with the 
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) for furnishing their reply within a period of six 
weeks (as prescribed by the PAC) before their inclusion in the Audit Report.  
1.5 Structure of the Report  
The Audit Report for the year ending March 201 7 comprises results of scru tiny of 
transactions relating to expenditure, receipts, assets and liabilities of the audited 
entities under the control of Ministry of Railways (Railway Board in cluding Zonal 
Railways, Railway Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) and Autonomous Bodies under 
the Ministry of Railways all over India). This includes an examination of the 
adequacy, legality, transparency, etc. of the relevant rules to maintain and operate 
effective control mechanism over public expenditure and safeguard against misuse, 
waste and loss.  
The Report contains eight Chapters. Chapter 1 is introductory in nature and covers 
issues of cross -cutting nature. The other seven Chapters contain audit findings 
related to important areas of functioning and operations of Indian Railways viz., 
Traffic, Engineering, Traction, Signalling & Telecommunication, Rolling Stock , 
Autonomous Bodies  and Railway Public Sector Units . The Report presents audit 
findings of significant materiality which are intended to aid the executive in taking 
corrective actions to bring about improved performance and better financial 
management. Detailed findings on the following four issues, over Indian Railways, 
are presented in this Report:  
1. Flexi Fare system in Rajdhani, Shatabdi and Duronto trains 
2. Management of commercial pl ots and parking spaces near stations by 
Commercial department in Indian Railways 
3. Implementation of Mobile Train Radio Communication system in Indian 
Railways 
4. Development of railway land for commercial use by Rail Land Development 
Authority  
In addition, 33 individual par agraphs covering audit findings of respective Zonal 
Railways/ Public Sector Units/ Autonomous Bodies are presented in Chapters 2 to 8 
of this Report. 
1.6 Response of the Ministry/Department to Provisional Paragraphs 
A total of 112 Draft Para graphs were issued to the General Managers of the  
concerned Zonal Railways up to September 2017. 42 Provisional paragraphs were 
forwarded to the Chairman Railway Board, Members concerned and the Financial 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)
Chapter 1
5
Report No.5 of 2017 (Railways)  Chapter 1   
 
 5 
Commissioner, Railway Board between 28 August 2017 and 2 February 2018. As on 
28 February 201 8, Railway Board's replies have been received in respect of ten 
Provisional Paragraphs . After considering the replies  of Railway Administrations 
wherever received, 36 Paragraphs (which include two thematic audits and two long 
paragraphs) have been included in the Audit Report.  
1.7 Recoveries at the instance of Audit 
Audit has pointed out the cases of undercharges in realization of freight and other 
earnings, over payments to staff and other agencies, non -recovery of dues of the 
Railways etc. amounting to  ` 229.27 crore in the various Zonal Railways during the 
year 2016-17. During the past six years, ` 688.79 crore has been recovered by the 
Railways at the instance of Audit, as detailed below: 
Table 1.4 – Amount recovered at the instance of Audit during 2011-12 to 2016-17 
Year Amount Recovered (` in crore) 
2011-12 138.51 
2012-13 98.14 
2013-14 107.70 
2014-15 101.26 
2015-16 80.27 
2016-17 162.91 
Total 688.79 
During 2016-17, an amount of ` 186.47 crore was accepted for recovery by various 
Zonal Railways and other field units. Of this,  ` 162.91 crore was recovered and ` 
23.25 crore was agreed to be recovered  by the railways . Seven Zonal Railways 
accounted for recoveries exceeding ` 10 crore each viz. North Central Railway (` 
46.78 crore), Western (` 18.78 crore), Northeast Frontier Railway ( ` 16.64 crore), 
West Central Railway ( ` 12.24 crore), Northern Railway ( ` 12.24 crore), South 
Central Railway (` 12.07 crore) and South East Central Railway (` 11.97 crore).  Out 
of the total amount of ` 186.47 crore recovery accepted, an amount of ` 74.31 
crore pertained to transactions that were already checked by Accounts Department 
of concern ed Railways and ` 106.19 crore were other than those c hecked by 
Accounts Department. As a result , of further review carried out by Account s 
Department, another ` 5.97 crore were recovered/agreed to be recovered  by the 
Railways. 
1.8 Remedial action on Audit Paragraphs streamlining internal process 
Railway Board initiated remedial action in response to audit observations issued in 
previous years by making appropriate changes and issue of instructions during 
2016-17 for streamlining their internal process . Some of the important cases are 
illustrated below:  
 
 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 1
6
Chapter 1  Report No.5 of 2017 (Railways)  
 
 6 
Table 1.5 
Para No./  
Report No. 
Audit observations/ 
Recommendations 
Action Taken by Railways 
2.3 of Report 
no. 24 of 2015 
 
The procedure adopted by station 
authorities for dealing with the Fake 
Indian Currency Notes was not as per 
the prescribed rules/instr uctions. 
Debits were realized by cash officers 
over Zonal Railways for remitting FICNs. 
Further, FICNs were being returned to 
the concerned booking staff rather 
than to impounding them, which led to 
possibility of recirculation of FICNs in 
open market.   
Railway Board instructed (September 2017) 
Zonal Railways to install note counting cum 
fake currency detecting machines at 
booking/PRS offices. They stated that 
instructions will be reiterated for strictly 
following the guidelines as regards handling 
of fake  currency. Training will also be 
imparted for the booking staff on detection 
and handling of fake currency. 
5.2.4 of 
Report no.8 
of 2005 
ECR Administration failed to execute 
agreement from collieries in the 
standard format and recover railway 
dues on acco unt of cost of damaged 
wagons. 
Cost of damaged wagons has been 
recovered and action has been taken 
(March 2017) to execute agreement in the 
standard format for smooth recovery of 
cost of damaged wagons.   
Ch-1 of 
Report no.11 
of 2013 
For generating revenu e from 
commercial publicity, Railways failed to 
conduct assessment on revenue 
potential, to exploit various media . 
Deficiencies in contract management 
was observed in terms of deficient 
record maintenance led to non -
execution of agreement in respect of 
contracts awarded with high risk of 
recoverability of outstanding licence 
fee and unauthorized displays beyond 
expiry of the contract period.   
In order to facilitate effective monitoring of 
contractual receipt and ensure timely 
payment and prompt renewal of contracts, 
a Sundry Earnings Management System is 
being developed. Instructions have been 
issued for maintaining the register with full 
particulars of conducting regular 
inspections at stations, trains in car 
shed/wagons depots etc. The Non Fare 
Revenue di rectorate has been formed 
(2016-17) in the Railway Board to realize 
full potential of advertising revenue.  
Report no. 22 
of 2017 
In the this Audit Report (Electrification 
Projects in Indian Railways), Audit 
recommended that  
 
(a) Para No. 4.10  - Irregular creation of 
Gazetted posts for Zonal Railways and 
Railway  Board in RE Estimates    
General Manager/CORE vide letter No. 
CORE/G/1 dated 1 December 2017 has 
issued instructions that RE work charged 
posts will not be operated in the Zonal 
Railways. Zonal Railways may make suitable 
alternative arrangement so that they are 
not dependent of RE posts.         
(b) Recommendation no.2  - All new line 
projects should be assessed 
simultaneously with and without 
electrified routes instead of current 
practice where new lines are assessed 
without electrification and 
electrification is added as a 
Railway Board vide its letter No.2017/W -
1/General/Policy dated 05  July 2017 has 
issued instructions that all the Doubling 
Works  and New Line/Gauge Conversion 
sections connected to adjoining electrified 
sections  shall be assessed with 
electrification. Such works shall invariably 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)
Chapter 1
7
Report No.5 of 2017 (Railways)  Chapter 1   
 
 7 
Table 1.5 
Para No./  
Report No. 
Audit observations/ 
Recommendations 
Action Taken by Railways 
supplementary and subsequent 
activity. This way if viable, the line 
project can be taken up with 
electrification from the beginning. 
be executed toget her with electrification 
through a single agency.      
(c) Recommendation no.6  - The projects 
should be prioritized on the basis of 
expected financial and operational 
benefits and project execution 
methodology such as engineering 
procurement and commissio ning (EPC) 
or turnkey may be used as far as 
feasible as this would enhance 
accountability of the contractor, 
minimize coordination issues and make 
monitoring of the projects easier.      
Railway Board vide letter No. 
2016/RE/711/44 dated 30 October 2017 
has directed General Manager/CORE to 
preferably adopt EPC (turnkey) based 
contacting system or large composite item 
rate contract in big package size for timely 
completion of project.  In exceptional and 
unavoidable circumstances CORE may go 
for smaller item  rate contract for smaller 
sections with personal approval of 
GM/CORE and prior consultation of Railway 
Board.      
(d) Recommendation no.8  - E-tendering 
should be implemented and various 
activities of tender evaluation should 
be done in parallel. 
E-tendering has been started in CORE since 
March 2017. For works contract s, Railway 
Board vide Para Nos. 3.1 and 3.2 of letter 
No. 2017/Trans/01/Policy dated 8 February 
2018, has decided to adopt the affidavit 
system of credential verification. The 
practice of ve rification of tenderers 
documents by the Railways will be 
dispensed with, making the process simpler 
and faster.  
(e) Recommendation no.9 - Large number 
of tenders require closer monitoring 
and handling of coordination issues on 
account of multiplicity of  tenders. 
Therefore, a project should be 
executed in a way that the number of 
tenders are minimized. 
Railway Board vide letter no. 
2017/RE/161/20 Part I dated 9 October 
2017, has issued directions to CORE, to 
form packages of 300/500/1000/1500 
RKMs dependi ng upon availability of 
contractors and ease of execution to get 
economy of scale while ensuring faster 
execution of projects.   
(f) Recommendation no.10 - Timelines for 
various activities in tender processing 
may be prescribed so as to complete 
tender ev aluation process within a 
reasonable time. Last Accepted Rates 
(LAR) should be up dated by 
maintaining appropriate database. 
Railway Board vide letter No. 
2017/Trans/01/Policy dated 8 February 
2018 has issued directions to CORE and 
GMs of all ZRs, fixing t he validating periods 
of tenders as 30 days (in cases where short 
notice period is 21 days) and 20 days (in 
cases where short notice period is 14 days). 
Also in cases of urgency, instructions have 
been given to call for open tenders before 
sanction of Deta iled Estimate with the 
approval of DRM/PHOD/CHOD. This will 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 1
8
Chapter 1  Report No.5 of 2017 (Railways)  
 
 8 
Table 1.5 
Para No./  
Report No. 
Audit observations/ 
Recommendations 
Action Taken by Railways 
expedite decision making and execution of 
works. Further, CORE vide letter No.G -6/14 
dated 17 November 2017 has prescribed 
timeliness of 30 days and 25 days from the 
Tender Opening Date for finali zation of 
Works and Stores Tenders respectively and 
issue of Letter of  Acceptance (LOA). 
(g) Recommendation no.12  - General 
Conditions of Contract/Special 
Conditions of Contract terms should be 
practical and balanced and their strict 
implementation shoul d be ensured. 
Conflicting Provisions in GCC for 
execution of binding agreement should 
be reconciled. Delays in execution of 
agreement with the contractors should 
be minimized and agreements should 
be executed within the prescribed 
period. 
Railway Board  vi de Para 8.0 of letter No. 
2017/Trans/01/Policy dated 8 February 
2018 has decided to remove the PVC clause 
in all the Works Contract Tenders value less 
than ` 5 crore.  
(h) Recommendation no.15  - The 
execution of the project requires 
significant involvemen t of the 
contractor, the implementing agency 
for Railway Electrification and the 
concerned Zonal Railways. Thus, a 
tripartite agreement should be 
considered between the three to 
delineate responsibilities and 
streamline coordination issues 
between the three parties. 
Railway Board vide Para No. 9.0 of letter 
No. 2017/Trans/01/Policy dated 8 February 
2018 has extended the Project 
Management Consultancy (PMC) services 
for all Works Contracts costing more than ` 
10 crore in Open Line, Construction and RE 
organization subject to certain conditions 
laid down. Further, tripartite system is 
already part of EPC mode of contacting 
system, which will be implemented in 
future tenders by the railways after gaining 
experience. 
(i) Recommendation no.16  - Delays in 
execution of works may be controlled 
through better project monitoring. To 
eliminate delays, project teams should 
be adequately empowered for various 
activities during project 
implementation like approval of 
variations, approval of layout, drawing, 
etc. Reasonabl e time limits may be 
prescribed for higher hierarchical 
formations for taking decisions. 
Railway Board vide Para No. 1.0 of letter 
No. 2017/Trans/01/Policy dated 8 February 
2018, in order to expedite decision making 
and execution of works, has modified the  
instructions on ‘vitiation’. A contract shall 
be considered ‘vitiated’ only  when the 
percentage variation in contract value 
between tenderers are noticed to have 
been exceeded by 10 per cent for Tender 
value less than ` 50 lakh  and  5 per cent  
for Tender value  equal to or more than ` 
50 lakh. Tender Accepting Authority will be 
empowered to decide the quantity 
variations. 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)
Chapter 1
9
Report No.5 of 2017 (Railways)  Chapter 1   
 
 9 
Table 1.5 
Para No./  
Report No. 
Audit observations/ 
Recommendations 
Action Taken by Railways 
(j) Recommendation no.19  - Making 
available a block for any project 
involves foregoing of potential earning 
from block utilization. Therefore, 
Railway Board should prescribe suitable 
benchmark for block utilization and use 
it for incentivizing/penalizing the 
contractors. 
GM/CORE vide letter 
no.LR/T/OHE/EPC/GR/182,184 and 185 
dated 13 February 2017  has been  issued 
prescribing format for Request For Proposal 
(RFP) for Engineering, Procurement and 
Construction (EPC) agreement. In the 
Schedule-O of the RFP for EPC contract, the 
maximum aggregate duration of Blocks for 
the Railway Projects is required to given. 
The contractor is entitled to execute the 
work within the specified period and if the 
total duration exceeds 20 per cent of the 
period specified in the schedule, the 
contractor shall pay damages at the rate of 
`10,000 per hour or part thereof for 
exceeded block periods.  On the other 
hand, if the block required is not provided 
in accordance with the confirmed 
programme, the contractor shall be 
compensated by the providing an 
additional block of equal time 
subsequently. In the event of any default in 
providing such additional blocks for 
compensating contractor, he shall be paid 
damages at the rate of `1,000 per day for 
each hour. 
(k) Recommendation no.21 - Missing links 
should be identified and accorded 
highest priority as missing links 
adversely impact the utilization of 
electric traction on electrified routes. 
The issue of missing links between two 
electrified territories has been taken in 
account while preparing Action Plan for 100 
per cent electrification prepared by the 
railways in October 2017.  
(l) Recommendation no.24  - The 
utilization of the electrified section for 
using electric traction is the real 
objective of RE projects and should be 
monitored by the Railway Board to 
ensure that diesel traction on the 
electrified sections is not used except 
for unavoidable reasons. 
A Committ ee has been constituted by 
Railway Board vide letter No.ERB -
1/2016/23/25 dated 19 May 2017 with 
respect to deployment of diesel/electric 
locomotives in electrified territories, in 
order to cut down the running of diesel 
locomotives under wire.  
1.9        Status of Action Taken Notes 
To ensure accountability of the Executive on all issues dealt with in the Report of 
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, the PAC had decided (1982) that the 
concerned Ministries/Departments of the Government of India should furnish 
corrective/remedial Action Taken Note (ATNs) on all Paragraphs contained therein 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 1
10
Chapter 1  Report No.5 of 2017 (Railways)  
 
 10 
and had further desired in their Ninth Report (Eleventh Lok Sabha) presented to the 
Parliament on 22 April 1997 that henceforth corrective/remedial ATNs, duly v etted 
by Audit, on all Paragraphs included in the Reports be furnished within four months 
after the Report  is laid on the Table of the Parliament. 
The position of ATNs furnished by the Railway Board ( as on 28 February 2018) on 
the Paragraphs included in t he Reports of the Comptroll er and Auditor General of 
India-Union Government (Railways) up to the year ended 31 March 20 17 is given 
below:  
Table 1.5 – Status of Action Taken Notes of Ministry of Railways 
Year Total 
Paragraphs 
included in 
the 
Reports 
No. of 
Paragraphs 
on which 
ATNs 
finalized 
No. of Paragraphs on which ATNs are pending 
ATNs 
not 
received 
ATNs on 
which 
comments 
sent to 
Railway 
Board 
ATNs 
finally 
vetted but 
yet to be 
loaded in 
the portal 
ATNs under 
verification 
by Audit 
Total 
2010-11 34 33 0 1 0 0 1 
2011-12 29 27 0 0 2 0 2 
2012-13 30 27 0 2 1 0 3 
2013-14 47 36 0 7 3 1 11 
2014-15 44 32 0 11 1 0 12 
2015-16 45 11   8 19 4 3 34 
Total 229 166 8 40 11 4 63 
ATNs in respect of eight Paragraphs relating to the Reports for the year  
2015-16 were not received within the prescribed period of four months .  40 ATNs 
received for vetting by Audit were returned with observations for further action. 11 
ATNs, vetted by Audit, are yet to be finalized by Ministry of Railways.  In four cases, 
the action stated to have been taken by the railways is under verification by Audit. 
Chapter 1  Report No.5 of 2017 (Railways)  
 
 10 
and had further desired in their Ninth Report (Eleventh Lok Sabha) presented to the 
Parliament on 22 April 1997 that henceforth corrective/remedial ATNs, duly v etted 
by Audit, on all Paragraphs included in the Reports be furnished within four months 
after the Report  is laid on the Table of the Parliament. 
The position of ATNs furnished by the Railway Board ( as on 28 February 2018) on 
the Paragraphs included in t he Reports of the Comptroll er and Auditor General of 
India-Union Government (Railways) up to the year ended 31 March 20 17 is given 
below:  
Table 1.5 – Status of Action Taken Notes of Ministry of Railways 
Year Total 
Paragraphs 
included in 
the 
Reports 
No. of 
Paragraphs 
on which 
ATNs 
finalized 
No. of Paragraphs on which ATNs are pending 
ATNs 
not 
received 
ATNs on 
which 
comments 
sent to 
Railway 
Board 
ATNs 
finally 
vetted but 
yet to be 
loaded in 
the portal 
ATNs under 
verification 
by Audit 
Total 
2010-11 34 33 0 1 0 0 1 
2011-12 29 27 0 0 2 0 2 
2012-13 30 27 0 2 1 0 3 
2013-14 47 36 0 7 3 1 11 
2014-15 44 32 0 11 1 0 12 
2015-16 45 11   8 19 4 3 34 
Total 229 166 8 40 11 4 63 
ATNs in respect of eight Paragraphs relating to the Reports for the year  
2015-16 were not received within the prescribed period of four months .  40 ATNs 
received for vetting by Audit were returned with observations for further action. 11 
ATNs, vetted by Audit, are yet to be finalized by Ministry of Railways.  In four cases, 
the action stated to have been taken by the railways is under verification by Audit. 
Chapter 1  Report No.5 of 2017 (Railways)  
 
 10 
and had further desired in their Ninth Report (Eleventh Lok Sabha) presented to the 
Parliament on 22 April 1997 that henceforth corrective/remedial ATNs, duly v etted 
by Audit, on all Paragraphs included in the Reports be furnished within four months 
after the Report  is laid on the Table of the Parliament. 
The position of ATNs furnished by the Railway Board ( as on 28 February 2018) on 
the Paragraphs included in t he Reports of the Comptroll er and Auditor General of 
India-Union Government (Railways) up to the year ended 31 March 20 17 is given 
below:  
Table 1.5 – Status of Action Taken Notes of Ministry of Railways 
Year Total 
Paragraphs 
included in 
the 
Reports 
No. of 
Paragraphs 
on which 
ATNs 
finalized 
No. of Paragraphs on which ATNs are pending 
ATNs 
not 
received 
ATNs on 
which 
comments 
sent to 
Railway 
Board 
ATNs 
finally 
vetted but 
yet to be 
loaded in 
the portal 
ATNs under 
verification 
by Audit 
Total 
2010-11 34 33 0 1 0 0 1 
2011-12 29 27 0 0 2 0 2 
2012-13 30 27 0 2 1 0 3 
2013-14 47 36 0 7 3 1 11 
2014-15 44 32 0 11 1 0 12 
2015-16 45 11   8 19 4 3 34 
Total 229 166 8 40 11 4 63 
ATNs in respect of eight Paragraphs relating to the Reports for the year  
2015-16 were not received within the prescribed period of four months .  40 ATNs 
received for vetting by Audit were returned with observations for further action. 11 
ATNs, vetted by Audit, are yet to be finalized by Ministry of Railways.  In four cases, 
the action stated to have been taken by the railways is under verification by Audit. 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
11
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 11 
Chapter 2 
 Traffic  
The Traffic Department comprises four streams viz., Commercial, Traffic, 
Coaching and Catering & Tourism. The activities related to these streams are 
performed by the respective directorates headed by Additional Members/ 
Executive Director. At the Railway Board level, the Traffic Department is headed 
by Member Traffic.  
The activities such as marketing, traffic development, improvements in quality 
of railway service s provided to customers, regulation of passenger/ coaching/ 
freight tarif fs, monitoring of collection, accountal and remittance of revenues 
from passenger/ freight traffic are managed by Commercial Directorate. The 
activities such as long-term and short -term planning of transportation services , 
management of day to day running of trains including their time tabl e, ensuring 
availability of rolling stock to meet the expected demand and conditions for safe 
running of trains is managed by Traffic Directorate. The management of 
passenger and parcel services is done by Coaching Direct orate and activities 
related to catering and tourism is managed by Catering & Tourism Directorate. 
At the zonal level, the Traffic Department consists of two department s, viz., 
Operating and Commercial. These are headed by Chief Operations Manager 
(COM) an d Chief Commercial Manager (CCM) respectively, who are under 
charge of General Manager of the concerned Zonal Railway. At the divisional 
level, the Operating and Commercial Departments are headed by Senior 
Divisional Operations Manager (S r.DOM) and Senior Divisional Commercial 
Manager ( Sr.DCM) respectively, who report to  Divisional Railway Manager 
(DRM) of the concerned Division.  
The total traffic operating expenses during the year 2016-17 was ` 24007.42 
crore
2. Total gross traffic receipt during the year was ` 1,65,292.20 crore3. 
During 2016 -17, the annual growth rate of passenger originating improved by 
0.11 per cent4 over the previous year . Passenger earnings in 2016 -17 increased 
by 4.5 per cent5. In 2016-17, freight loading increased by only 0.42 per cent6. The 
freight earnings however, decreased by 5.24 per cent  as compared to the 
previous year.  
During the year, apart from regular audit of vouchers and tenders etc., 1168 
offices of the department were inspected by audit . This chapter  include two 
reviews on Railway Board’s policy on ‘Flexi Fare System in Rajdhani, Shatabdi 
and Duronto Trains in Indian Railways’ and ‘ Management of commercial plots 
and parking spaces near stations by Commercial department in Indian Railways ’. 
                                                           
2 Grant no.09 – Operating Expenses – Traffic for 2016-17 
3 Includes Passenger E arnings ` 46,280.46 crore, Freight Earnings ` 1,04,338.54 crore, Other C oaching Earnings  
` 4,312.00 crore and Sundry Earnings ` 10,368.04 crore 
4 As against the projected passenger originating of 8,182 million, Indian Railways carried 8,116.10 million passengers 
5 ` 44,283.26 crore in 2015-16 and ` 46,280.46 crore in 2016-17 
6 1101.51 million tonne in 2015-16 to 1106.15 million tonne in 2016-17 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
12
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 12 
Fifteen Audit Paragraphs highl ighting irregularities such as, loss of revenue due 
to carrying freight traffic through weaker sections , unfruitful expenditure  on 
procurement of microprocessor based LED destination boards, incorrect entry of 
train timings in Integrated Coaching Managemen t System  (ICMS), under -
utilisation of third line  between Mathura and Palwal , non/short -realisation of 
way leave charges/engine hire charges/demurrage charges, inadmissible 
allowance of concession on restricted commodity etc. are also included . 
 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
13
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 13 
 
2.1 Flexi fare system in Rajdhani, Shatabdi and Duronto trains  
2.1.1 Introduction 
Indian Railways (IR) is one of the most availed means of transportation and 
connectivity among the people. It consists of an extensive network covering 
7,349 stations. On an averag e, 13,329 passenger trains per day are operated in 
Indian Railways. However , over the past four years, there is a declining trend in 
passengers carried by IR is shown in Graph 2.1.  
In 2015-16, the earnings from passenger traffic were ` 44,283.26 crore. Wi th a 
view to augment passenger earnings, apart from the fare structure adopted in 
regular trains, Indian Railways introduced (September 2016) dynamic pricing in 
various trains, Special trains with Tatkal fare and flexi fare system in Premier 
trains.  
Various schemes Introduced by Indian Railways for passenger fares 
The fare for travel in regular Mail/Express and passenger trains is charged 
according to the tariff notified in the Indian Railway Confere nce Association 
Coaching Tariff (Part II), Passenger Fare Table. The fare for all classes were last 
revised in June 2014.  To augment the revenue in passenger traffic, Indian 
Railways has adopted the following strategies during the past two and a half 
years: 
i. October 2014: A policy of charging fare on dynamic pric ing was introduced 
with effect from October 2014, on selected trains which have high demand. 
As per this policy, 50 per cent of the existing Tatkal Quota was earmarked as 
Premium Tatkal Quota. This is a distance -slab based fare scheme where the 
fare increases by 20 per cent after each slab of 10 per cent berths are sold.  
ii. April 2015: Zonal Railways were given powers to run Special Trains with 
special fare (Tatkal fare) structure to meet the high demand during holidays 
and festival seasons in popular sectors. The fare structure of these trains was 
on the pattern of Mail/Express trains. In addition to fare, a special charge 
Graph 2.1: Passengers carried by Indian Railways (in millions), Source: Indian Railway Year Books 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
14
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 14 
was levied at the rate of 10 per cent of basic fare for second class and 30 per 
cent of basic fare for all other classes subject to a minimum and maximum as 
prescribed by Railway Board (May 2015). 
iii. July 2015: Suvidha special trains were introduced by Railway Board with 
effect from July 2015 based on demand during peak seasons and on other 
occasions as decided by Zonal Railways. The minimum fa re for this train shall 
be Tatkal fare and the fare would increase dynamically after booking of 
every 20 per cent of the berths/seats subject to a maximum of three times of 
base fare plus Tatkal charges.  
iv. September 2016: Flexi fare system has been introduced in Premier trains like 
Rajdhani, Shatabdi and Duronto with effect from 9  September 2016. The 
fare under this system increases by 10 per cent  with every 10 per cent  of 
berths/seats sold subject to a maximum of 140 per cent for AC 3 tier class 
and 150 per cent for all classes except AC First and Executive Chair Car. 
v. December 2016 : Railway Board introduced a discounted fare in certain 
sections for travel by Shatabdi Express duly exempting them from charging 
under flexi fare system due to very low occupancy.   During the same month, 
Railway Board, further introduced  a rebate of 10 per cent  on last booked 
fare on vacant berths/seats after preparation of first chart on an 
experimental basis for six months in Rajdhani/Shatabdi/ Duronto trains. 
vi. December 2016: Humsafar trains with AC three tier coaches was introduced. 
The base fare for this class is 1.15 times of the base fare of AC 3 tier 
superfast Mail/Express trains, for the first passenger block of 50 per cent .  
Thereafter, there is an increase of 10 per cent for every 10 per cent increase 
in the passenger block for the remaining 50 per cent berths. 
vii. February 2017 : Antyodaya Express trains, a long distance superfast service 
with fully second class unreserved coaches were introduced. The base fare 
of unreserved sec ond class is 15 per cent higher than the base fare of same 
class in Mail/Express trains.   
Comments of Parliamentary Standing Committee about passenger fare 
The Standing Committee on Railways in their Third Report 2014 -15 (December 
2014) observed that the Railways have implemented a flat 10 per cent increase 
in Passenger fares in all classes from 25 June 2014. Inclusive of 4.2 per cent Fuel 
Adjustment Component (FAC), the increase in Passenger fares was around 14.2 
per cent for different classes of travel. Ministry of Railway s stated that in order 
to increase passenger earnings, efforts were being made to meet the additional 
demand and augment revenue through various measures like introduction of 
new trains, enhancement of the composition of more popular tra ins, 
attachment of extra coaches in the existing trains, etc. The Committee was 
informed that special trains are run for clearance of extra passenger traffic 
during the peak seasons, festivals and special events. Further, the premium 
special trains are als o operated on certain high -demand sectors with dynamic 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
15
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 15 
pricing which is resulting in higher passenger revenues. The Committee 
observed that all the measures taken by the Ministry of Railways would yield 
desired results and passenger earnings would show an upward trend so as to 
ensure higher revenue generation. The Committee, however, desired that with 
increase in train fares, attention be also paid in augmenting/improving 
passenger amenities and facilities in trains and at Railway stations. 
Observations of NITI Aayog regarding ‘Social service obligations’ by IR 
The NITI Aayog (National Institution for Transforming India) released a report on 
reviewing the impact of social service obligations by Indian Railways in 
September 2016. The report highlighted the op erating losses in various classes 
of rail travel as follows: 
Table 2.1 - Category-wise contribution to Passenger Business losses ( ` in crore)  
(-ve loss and +ve profit) 
S. no Particulars  2011-12  2012-13  2013-14  2014-15  
A. Operating Loss: Mail/Express Classes (Non-Suburban Services)  
A1  AC 1  (-) 39 (-)41 (-)47 (-)127 
A2  First  (-) 39 (-)61 (-)92 (-)70 
A3  AC 2  (-) 439 (-)348 (-)497 (-)496 
A4  AC 3  499 495 411 882 
A5  ACC  (-)13 (-)38 (-)148 (-)142 
A6  Sleeper Class  (-)6532 (-)6853 (-)8408 (-)8510 
A7  Second Class  (-)4238 (-)5168 (-)7134 (-)7642 
A8  Sub-total (sum of all above)  (-)10800 (-)12014 (-)15917 (-)16106 
B.   Operating Loss: Ordinary Classes 
B1  First  (-)48 (-)60 (-)70 (-)50 
B2  Sleeper Class (-)369 (-)403 (-)451 (-)530 
B3  Second Class  (-)8476 (-)9321 (-)10584 (-)11094 
B4  Sub-total (sum of all above)  (-)8893 (-)9784 (-)11105 (-)11674 
C  Total Operating Loss (A8+B4)  (-)19693 (-)21797 (-)27022 (-)27779 
D  Parcel, Luggage and Postal Services  (-)1867 (-)1863 (-)2394 (-)2453 
E  Catering Services  (-)940 (-)1030 (-)952 (-)1016 
F  Operating Loss - Suburban passenger 
services and Metro Kolkata  
(-)2814 (-)3365 (-)4027 (-)4679 
G  Total Loss (for Passenger Business) 
(C+D+E+F)  
(-)25314 (-)28056 (-)34395 (-)35928 
 Source: NITI Aayog Report on ‘Reviewing the impact of ‘Social service obligations’ by IR  
Some of the key observations and recommendations of the report are as under: 
 While lower tariffs and concessions substantially contribute to losses in 
passenger business and hence a ccount for social service costs, they are not 
the only factors. In a competitive market where demand for transport is 
elastic, IR will have a limitation on increasing the fares (i.e. revenue side) 
which would be driven by competition. Hence, computation of  under-

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
16
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 16 
recoveries should have reference to IR’s ability to charge fares in a 
competitive market rather than its cost structure. 
 While tariff levels of SL and 2 nd Class service is substantially lower than the 
competing services (equivalent bus fare rates), AC services are reasonably 
higher than the bus fares.  
 Accordingly, losses in AC class could potentially be attributable to higher 
base cost structure of IR than to its fare structure. Similarly, for sleeper and 
second class services, IR over -estimates the quantum of losses that could be 
attributable to lower tariff levels. Analysis indicates that about 80 per cent of 
losses in these classes could be attributable to lower tariff levels while the 
balance 20 per cent are more likely attributable to IR’s cost structure.  
Therefore, inefficiency in IR’s cost structure also significantly contributes to the 
losses in passenger service business and hence tariff increase cannot be the only 
mechanism to recover costs. 
In this background, t he present study was undertaken to review the flexi fare 
scheme with reference to passenger demand, impact on the occupancy of these 
trains and earnings of Indian Railways , along with a comparison with the air 
sector. 
Audit Objective 
The study was undertaken with a view to assess the  change in patronage and 
earnings of Rajdhani/Duronto/Shatabdi trains after the introduction of flexi -fare 
scheme and its impact on railway passenger revenues.  
Audit scope, methodology and sample  
The study covered data analysis in respect of train occupa ncy and earnings of 
142 Premier trains (44 Rajdhani, 46 Shatabdi and 52 Duronto trains) where flexi 
fare scheme was introduced with effect from 9 September 2016. Data in respect 
of berth potential, actual occupancy and earnings for the period 9 September 
2015 to 31 July 2016 (referred to as pre -flexi period in the Report) and 9 
September 2016 to 31 July 2017 (referred to as post -flexi period in the Report) 
was collected from Centre for Railway Information Systems ( CRIS), New Delhi 
and analysed.  
The change in occupancy after introduction of the scheme (9 September 2016 to 
31 July 2017) has been compared with occupancy and earnings pertaining to the 
corresponding months of the previous year i.e. 9 September 2015 to 31 July 
2016 in respect of all the Premier t rains. Occupancy of Mail/Express trains 
running in the same route as the Premier trains was also  compared for two 
months (October 2016 and February 2017) to assess the diversion of passenger 
from Premier trains to Mail/Express trains. A comparison has been  made 
between the costs of tickets by air vis -à-vis flexi fare of AC II Tier of Premier 
trains for 30 to 120 day Advance Reservation period (ARP) as on 31 March 2017. 
Change in number of passengers travelling by air in selected 13 sectors where 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
17
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 17 
Premier tra ins are run, was collected from the website of Director General of 
Civil Aviation (DGCA).  
The punctuality of the Premier trains for the month of February 2017 has been 
checked to assess the quality of service being provided to the passengers. A 
passenger survey questionnaire was also administered on 806 passengers of 16 
Shatabdi and 11 Rajdhani Trains during April 2017 and May 2017 to capture 
their views on flexi -fare and quality of services, cleanliness, food quality etc. 
being provided in these trains, while charging higher fares. 
Annexure 2.1 
Response of railway administration  
Initially, the audit was undertaken analyzing data of five months period from 
September 2016 to February 2017 and the corresponding periods of the 
previous year. The Audit finding s and recommendations were discussed with 
Railway Board during Exit Conference. Railway Board during the Exit Conference 
and in their reply (July 2017) stated that the audit assessment have been made 
for the period in which flexi fare system was not fully operational, the 
observation made by audit may not be acceptable , as the data have been 
assessed only up to February 2017. Subsequently, Audit enhanced the scope of 
their study and covered a period up to July 2017 for review. The revised report 
with enhanced scope covering the post -flexi fare period of up to July 2017  was 
again issued to the Railway Board on 23 November 2017. The audit findings on 
the revised scope have been included in the report. 
Audit findings 
2.1.2    Judiciousness of decision for introduction of flexi-fare scheme 
The proposal to introduce flexi fare structure in Rajdhani, Duronto and Shatabdi 
trains was mooted (August 2016) by Railway Board in order to achieve the 
additional revenue generation of ` 5800 crore in the passenger earnings, when 
there was an estimated increase of one per cent in the originating passengers 
when compared to 2015 -16. Rajdhani, Duronto and Shatabdi trains running in 
most sectors were highly popular with high average occupancy and contribute 
about 12 per cent of t otal Passenger Reservation System ( PRS) earnings. The 
following proposals were considered for revenue augmentation: 
 Enhanced fare structure during the peak demand period of April -June and 
October – December for Rajdhani, Duronto and Shatabdi trains and the  
existing fare structure for the remaining period. 
 Enhanced fare structure in selected Rajdhani, Duronto and Shatabdi trains 
which have average occupancy exceeding 100 per cent consistently in all 
months. 
 Enhanced fare structure in all Rajdhani, Duronto an d Shatabdi trains 
irrespective of the demand and occupancy. 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
18
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 18 
The third alternative was approved and flexi -fare system was introduced in all 
Rajdhani, Duronto and Shatabdi trains with effect from 9 September 2016. 
Before introducing the flexi -fare system, Ra ilways had already tried the 
dynamic/ enhanced fare in different formats. These are discussed below: 
2.1.2.1     Enhanced fare introduced in Premier Trains 
Under Tatkal scheme 30 per cent  of the total seats/berths were allotted at 
enhanced fare of 30 per c ent more than the normal fare. Class wise position 
under ‘Tatkal Scheme’ in Premier trains during the eleven months period of 
September 2015 to July 2016 was as follows: 
Table 2.2 - Class wise vacancy position under Tatkal scheme in Premier trains before 
introduction of flexi-fare 
Train type Class Tatkal Potential7 Vacancy Percentage 
Shatabdi CC 18,95,493 5,13,283 27.08 
Duronto 2A 1,53,718    35,817 23.30 
Duronto 3A 7,36,807 1,50,461 20.42 
Rajdhani 2A 4,08,002    57,539 14.10 
Rajdhani 3A 13,24,494    69,295   5.23 
Total 45,18,514 8,26,395  
 Source: PRS data obtained from CRIS/New Delhi 
Thus, when 30 per cent of the seats/berths were allocated to Tatkal under the 
increased fare of 30 per cent over the normal fare, the berths/seats remained 
vacant to the extent of five to 23 per cent in AC 2, AC 3 and CC classes of all the 
Rajdhani, Duronto and Shatabdi trains. Only in SL class of Duronto, the Tatkal 
tickets were filled up. The demand of berths/seats in all AC classes was less due 
to enhanced Tatkal fare.  
When Railways were not able to fully utilise the 30 per cent of seats/berths 
under Tatkal scheme with enhanced fare of 30 per cent over the normal fare, 
the decision to allot 90 per cent of seats under flexi fare with enhanced fare up 
to 40 or 50 per cent was not judicious. 
2.1.2.2      Enhanced fare introduced in other trains  
Railway Board introduced (May 2015) Special trains on Tatkal fare keeping in 
view the demand pattern and with the approval of CCM of Zonal Railways. The 
fare structure of these t rains was on the pattern of mail/express trains. In 
addition to fare, a special charge was levied at the rate of 10 per cent of basic 
fare for second class and 30 per cent of basic fare for all other classes subject to 
a minimum and maximum as prescribed b y Railway Board in the ibid order. 
Railway Board further introduced Suvidha Trains from 1 July 2015 on dynamic 
pricing system during peak season like holiday rush and festivals as jointly 
decided by CCM and COM of Zonal Railway. The fare in these trains in creased 
after every 20 per cent of berths/seats booked and ranged up to three times of 
base fare plus Tatkal fare. 
 
                                                           
7 Tatkal potential implies the number of seats/berths available for booking under Tatkal Scheme 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
19
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 19 
The occupancy in these two types of trains during the period April 2016 to 
August 2016 was as follows: 
Table 2.3 - Occupancy trends in other trains with enhanced/dynamic fare 
Class Berth/seat 
Potential 
Actual 
occupancy  
Vacancy Vacancy (%) 
Class-wise occupancy in Suvidha Trains (114 trains and 1085 runs) during April 2016 to 
August 2016 
2A 98416 34487 63929 64.96 
3A 400083 182825 217258 54.30 
SL 602000 423064 178936 29.72 
2S 910 872 38 4.18 
Class-wise occupancy in Special Trains with Tatkal fares (121 trains and 1259 runs) during 
April 2016 to August 2016 
AC 1 5196 2013 3183 61.26 
AC 2 69401 31504 37897 54.61 
AC 3 229033 145769 83264 36.35 
CC 51642 33992 17650 34.18 
SL 325854 258599 67255 20.64 
2S 488673 136363 352310 72.10 
Source: PRS data obtained from CRIS/New Delhi 
It can be seen that in all the classes in Special Trains with Tatkal fare, the 
percentage vacancy was very high an d ranged between 21 per cent and 72 per 
cent. Even in the sleeper class where the occupancy normally does not reduce 
with increased fare, in the sleeper class in Special trains with Tatkal fare, the 
vacancy was 21 p er cent. Further, in all classes of Suvid ha Trains, there was 
vacancy ranging between four per cent and 65 per cent. 
Thus, wherever dynamic/enhanced fare was introduced, the occupancy was 
very low. However, this aspect was not taken into consideration while 
introducing the flexi fare system in al l Rajdhani, Duronto and Shatabdi trains 
irrespective of demand and occupancy.  
2.1.3 Patronage and earnings of Rajdhani/Duronto/Shatabdi trains after 
introduction of flexi-fare 
2.1.3.1    Decreasing trend in the occupancy of Premier trains after 
introduction of flexi fare 
In the flexi-fare system, the base fares would increase by 10 per cent with sale of 
every 10 per cent of berths/seats subject to a maximum of 140 per cent for AC 3 
tier class and 150 per cent for all classes except AC First class and Executive Chair 
Car. Audit examined the trend of occupancy in Rajdhani/Shatabdi/Duronto 
trains before and after introduction of Flexi fare system. For this purpose, a 
comparison of occupancy in various classes was made for the period from 9 
September 2016 to 31  July 2017 (Post-flexi fare period) (i.e. eleven months post 
introduction of flexi fare system) with the corresponding eleven months period 
in the earlier year (before introduction of flexi fare system) i.e. from 9 
September 2015 to 31 July 2016 (Pre-flexi fare period). The comparison of data 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
20
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 20 
for 44 Rajdhani trains, 52 Duronto and 46 Shatabdi trains (total 142 trains) was 
as follows: 
 
Table 2.4 - Comparison of occupancy of Premier trains pre and post flexi-fare scheme 
Class 9.9.15 to 31.7.16 (Pre-flexi period) 9.9.16 to 31.7.17 (Post-flexi period) 
Berth/ 
seat 
potential8 
Actual 
occupancy9 
Vacant 
berths/ 
seats 
Vacancy 
(in per 
cent) 
Berth/ 
seat 
potential 
Actual 
occupancy 
Vacant 
berths/ 
seats 
Vacancy 
(in per 
cent) 
2A 3062608 2850824 211784 6.92 3099523 2570333 529190 17.07 
3A 9987609 9922008 65601 0.66 10409950 9945700 464250 4.46 
SL 1920256 2042632 (-)122376 (-)6.37 2008593 2132914 (-) 124321 (-) 6.19 
CC 12411532 9921005 2490527 20.07 12696680 9430952 3265728 25.72 
Total 27382005 24736469 2767912 10.11 28214746 24079899 4259168 15.10 
Source: PRS data obtained from CRIS/New Delhi 
As can be seen that after introduction of flexi fare, the vacant berths/seats 
which were 10.11 per cent  of the total berth/seat potential during September 
2015 to July 2016 incre ased to 15.10 per cent during September 2016 to July 
2017. Even in terms of absolute numbers, the Premier trains carried 2,40,79,899  
passengers during post -flexi period as compared to 2,47,36,469 passengers 
during pre -flexi period and thus registered a de -growth of 2.65 per cent  
passengers despite availability of higher number of berths/seats.  This indicates 
that more number of passengers chose not to travel by train at significantly 
higher fare. Train wise analysis of the trend of occupancy pre and post 
implementation of flexi fare, showed that 
 Out of 44 Rajdhani trains,  
o In respect of AC 2 tier, in 42 trains the overall occupancy decreased by 
four to 27 per cent .  In only two trains
10, the occupancy increased by 
three and 14 per cent.   
o In respect of AC 3 tier, in 20 trains the overall occupancy decreased by 
five to 20 per cent. In 16 trains, the occupancy decrease was up to five 
per cent. In five trains, the occupancy almost remained constant. In only 
three trains11, the occupancy increased by 12 to 19 per cent. 
 Out of 52 Duronto trains,  
o In respect of AC 2 tier, in 28 trains the overall occupancy decreased by 
five to 25 per cent.  In 16 trains, the decrease was up to five per cent. In 
one train, the occupancy almost remained constant. In 7 trains, the 
occupancy increased by up to 16 per cent.   
o In respect of AC 3 tier, in 15 trains the occupancy decreased by five per 
cent to 22 per cent.  In 21 trains, the decrease was up to five  per cent. In 
                                                           
8Berth Potential means end to end potential berths available for bookings. 
9Actual occupancy means number of passengers travelled end to end vis-à-vis different legs of journey 
10 22207 (Chennai Central – Thiruvananthapuram), 22208 (Thiruvananthapuram - Chennai Central) – These trains shown 
as Rajdhani trains in CRIS data, but these are AC Super Express. 
11 12436 (New Delhi-Dibrugarh), 22207 (Chennai Central – Thiruvananthapuram), 22208 (Thiruvananthapuram - Chennai 
Central) – The last two trains shown as Rajdhani trains in CRIS data, but these are AC Super Express. 
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 20 
for 44 Rajdhani trains, 52 Duronto and 46 Shatabdi trains (total 142 trains) was 
as follows: 
 
Table 2.4 - Comparison of occupancy of Premier trains pre and post flexi-fare scheme 
Class 9.9.15 to 31.7.16 (Pre-flexi period) 9.9.16 to 31.7.17 (Post-flexi period) 
Berth/ 
seat 
potential8 
Actual 
occupancy9 
Vacant 
berths/ 
seats 
Vacancy 
(in per 
cent) 
Berth/ 
seat 
potential 
Actual 
occupancy 
Vacant 
berths/ 
seats 
Vacancy 
(in per 
cent) 
2A 3062608 2850824 211784 6.92 3099523 2570333 529190 17.07 
3A 9987609 9922008 65601 0.66 10409950 9945700 464250 4.46 
SL 1920256 2042632 (-)122376 (-)6.37 2008593 2132914 (-) 124321 (-) 6.19 
CC 12411532 9921005 2490527 20.07 12696680 9430952 3265728 25.72 
Total 27382005 24736469 2767912 10.11 28214746 24079899 4259168 15.10 
Source: PRS data obtained from CRIS/New Delhi 
As can be seen that after introduction of flexi fare, the vacant berths/seats 
which were 10.11 per cent  of the total berth/seat potential during September 
2015 to July 2016 incre ased to 15.10 per cent during September 2016 to July 
2017. Even in terms of absolute numbers, the Premier trains carried 2,40,79,899  
passengers during post -flexi period as compared to 2,47,36,469 passengers 
during pre -flexi period and thus registered a de -growth of 2.65 per cent  
passengers despite availability of higher number of berths/seats.  This indicates 
that more number of passengers chose not to travel by train at significantly 
higher fare. Train wise analysis of the trend of occupancy pre and post 
implementation of flexi fare, showed that 
 Out of 44 Rajdhani trains,  
o In respect of AC 2 tier, in 42 trains the overall occupancy decreased by 
four to 27 per cent .  In only two trains
10, the occupancy increased by 
three and 14 per cent.   
o In respect of AC 3 tier, in 20 trains the overall occupancy decreased by 
five to 20 per cent. In 16 trains, the occupancy decrease was up to five 
per cent. In five trains, the occupancy almost remained constant. In only 
three trains11, the occupancy increased by 12 to 19 per cent. 
 Out of 52 Duronto trains,  
o In respect of AC 2 tier, in 28 trains the overall occupancy decreased by 
five to 25 per cent.  In 16 trains, the decrease was up to five per cent. In 
one train, the occupancy almost remained constant. In 7 trains, the 
occupancy increased by up to 16 per cent.   
o In respect of AC 3 tier, in 15 trains the occupancy decreased by five per 
cent to 22 per cent.  In 21 trains, the decrease was up to five  per cent. In 
                                                           
8Berth Potential means end to end potential berths available for bookings. 
9Actual occupancy means number of passengers travelled end to end vis-à-vis different legs of journey 
10 22207 (Chennai Central – Thiruvananthapuram), 22208 (Thiruvananthapuram - Chennai Central) – These trains shown 
as Rajdhani trains in CRIS data, but these are AC Super Express. 
11 12436 (New Delhi-Dibrugarh), 22207 (Chennai Central – Thiruvananthapuram), 22208 (Thiruvananthapuram - Chennai 
Central) – The last two trains shown as Rajdhani trains in CRIS data, but these are AC Super Express. 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
21
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 21 
two trains, the occupancy almost remained constant. In 14 trains, the 
occupancy was in increased by one to 23 per cent. 
Annexure 2.2 a 
 Out of 46 Shatabdi trains,  
o In CC, in 44 trains the occupancy decreased by one to 14 per cent.  In the 
remaining two trains the occupancy almost remained constant. 
Annexure 2.2 b 
Thus, the occupancy in all the classes of Rajdhani, Duronto and Shatabdi trains 
except Sleeper class of Duronto trains showed a decreasing trend except in a 
few trains.  
White Paper of I ndian Railways (February 2015) observed that “Running of AC3 
tier class is mos t suitable for railways and passengers  and it breaks even at 
approximately 75 per cent occupancy. As it is the only coach which gives profits, 
trains should be augmented to run with as many AC3 tier coaches as possible ”. 
‘Summary of End Results Coaching Services Profitability/Unit Costs’ published by 
IR also indicates that all classes of Indian Railways are operated under losses 
except AC 3 Tier class. 
As seen from the data on occupancy of Premier trains, the occupancy in AC 3 
tier has significantly dropped  after introduction of flexi fare. The vacant berths 
increased from 0.66 per cent  in pre -flexi period to 4.46 per cent  in post -flexi 
period.  
Thus, the introduction of flexi fare in AC 3 tier class which was already a profit 
making class was not fair. 
2.1.3.2   Impact on earnings  
A review of data regarding  earnings of Premier trains before and after 
introduction of flexi fare scheme was done. It was seen that while the occupancy 
in all classes of travel reduced post flexi fare scheme except in Sleeper clas s, 
there was an increase in total earnings from 142 Premier trains, where flexi fare 
scheme was introduced.   
The table below compares increase in earnings vis -a-vis berth potential and the 
earnings per berth in different classes of Rajdhani, Duronto and Shatabdi trains: 
Table 2.5  - Berth potential and earnings of Premier trains 
Class Pre-flexi period  Post-flexi period Increase in 
earnings 
Percentage 
increase in 
earnings 
Decrease 
in number 
of 
passengers 
Percentage 
decrease in 
passengers 
carried 
Earnings Number of 
passengers 
carried 
Earnings Number of 
passengers 
carried (` in crore) (` in crore) (` in crore) 
Rajdhani 
AC 2 540.04 2137294 572.18 1877026 32.14 5.95 -260268 -12.18 
AC 3 1306.39 6740208 1573.19 6823371 266.8 20.42 83163 1.23 
Duronto 
AC 2 157.25 713530 183.29 693307 26 16.54 -20223 -2.83 
AC 3 522.7 3181800 603.43 3122329 80.73 15.45 -59471 -1.87 
SL 148.18 2042632 185.73 2132914 37.55 25.34 90282 4.42 
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 21 
two trains, the occupancy almost remained constant. In 14 trains, the 
occupancy was in increased by one to 23 per cent. 
Annexure 2.2 a 
 Out of 46 Shatabdi trains,  
o In CC, in 44 trains the occupancy decreased by one to 14 per cent.  In the 
remaining two trains the occupancy almost remained constant. 
Annexure 2.2 b 
Thus, the occupancy in all the classes of Rajdhani, Duronto and Shatabdi trains 
except Sleeper class of Duronto trains showed a decreasing trend except in a 
few trains.  
White Paper of I ndian Railways (February 2015) observed that “Running of AC3 
tier class is mos t suitable for railways and passengers  and it breaks even at 
approximately 75 per cent occupancy. As it is the only coach which gives profits, 
trains should be augmented to run with as many AC3 tier coaches as possible ”. 
‘Summary of End Results Coaching Services Profitability/Unit Costs’ published by 
IR also indicates that all classes of Indian Railways are operated under losses 
except AC 3 Tier class. 
As seen from the data on occupancy of Premier trains, the occupancy in AC 3 
tier has significantly dropped  after introduction of flexi fare. The vacant berths 
increased from 0.66 per cent  in pre -flexi period to 4.46 per cent  in post -flexi 
period.  
Thus, the introduction of flexi fare in AC 3 tier class which was already a profit 
making class was not fair. 
2.1.3.2   Impact on earnings  
A review of data regarding  earnings of Premier trains before and after 
introduction of flexi fare scheme was done. It was seen that while the occupancy 
in all classes of travel reduced post flexi fare scheme except in Sleeper clas s, 
there was an increase in total earnings from 142 Premier trains, where flexi fare 
scheme was introduced.   
The table below compares increase in earnings vis -a-vis berth potential and the 
earnings per berth in different classes of Rajdhani, Duronto and Shatabdi trains: 
Table 2.5  - Berth potential and earnings of Premier trains 
Class Pre-flexi period  Post-flexi period Increase in 
earnings 
Percentage 
increase in 
earnings 
Decrease 
in number 
of 
passengers 
Percentage 
decrease in 
passengers 
carried 
Earnings Number of 
passengers 
carried 
Earnings Number of 
passengers 
carried (` in crore) (` in crore) (` in crore) 
Rajdhani 
AC 2 540.04 2137294 572.18 1877026 32.14 5.95 -260268 -12.18 
AC 3 1306.39 6740208 1573.19 6823371 266.8 20.42 83163 1.23 
Duronto 
AC 2 157.25 713530 183.29 693307 26 16.54 -20223 -2.83 
AC 3 522.7 3181800 603.43 3122329 80.73 15.45 -59471 -1.87 
SL 148.18 2042632 185.73 2132914 37.55 25.34 90282 4.42 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
22
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 22 
Table 2.5  - Berth potential and earnings of Premier trains 
Class Pre-flexi period  Post-flexi period Increase in 
earnings 
Percentage 
increase in 
earnings 
Decrease 
in number 
of 
passengers 
Percentage 
decrease in 
passengers 
carried 
Earnings Number of 
passengers 
carried 
Earnings Number of 
passengers 
carried (` in crore) (` in crore) (` in crore) 
Shatabdi 
CC 718.87 9921005 828.06 9430952 109.19 15.19 -490053 -4.94 
Total 3393.43 24736469 3945.85 24079899 552.42 16.28 -656570 -2.65 
Source: PRS data obtained from CRIS/NDLS 
Thus, there was an increase in the total earnings from the Premier trains post 
flexi fare period by ` 552 crore. However, the actual number of passengers  
carried by the Premier trains post flexi -fare, decreased significantly by 6.57 lakh 
passengers during the period September 2016 to July 2017 (2.65 per cent). 
Railway Board in its reply ( February 2018 ) stated that the actual earnings are 
increasing in comparison to the same period of previous years.  
Audit agrees that the passenger earnings have increased, however, the 
railways carried 6.75 lakh less passengers in Premier trains during 9 September 
2016 to 31 July 2017 despite a three per cent increase in be rth potential as 
compared to the previous year period of 9 September 2015 to 31 July 2016. 
2.1.3.3 Impact of flexi fare on occupancy in Mail/Express trains running on the 
same route of Premier Trains 
Apart from Premier trains being run on various routes, M ail/Express trains are 
also running on the same routes. Audit examined  the occupancy in the 
Mail/Express trains on the routes where Premier trains were being run. Data in 
respect of two months viz., October 2016 12 and February 2017 13 was collected 
and a comparison was made between occupancy of Rajdhani/Duronto/Shatabdi 
trains (with less than 75 per cent occupancy) with that of Mail/Express trains 
running on the same routes. The data is given below: 
Table 2.6 - Comparison of occupancy of Premier trains with Mail/Express trains 
Month Train No./Name Class Occupancy 
(per cent) 
Train type 
(Mail/ Express/ 
Superfast) 
Train No./Name Occupancy 
(per cent) 
Premier Trains Mail/Expres Trains 
Premier Train - Rajdhani 
Oct-16 22694 
Nizamuddin- Bengaluru 
2A 64 SF 12650 
Nizamuddin- Yesvantpur 
108 
Oct-16 12235 
Dibrugarh- 
New Delhi 
2A 45 EXP 14055 
Dibrugarh - Delhi 
99 
Oct-16 12437 
Secunderabad – 
Nizamuddin 
2A 65 SF 12721 
Hyderabad – Nizamuddin 
145 
Oct-16 12441 
Bilaspur –  New Delhi 
2A 48 SF 12409 
Raigarh – Nizamuddin 
128 
Oct-16 12453 
Ranchi –    New Delhi 
2A 53 SF 12825 
Ranchi – New Delhi 
89 
                                                           
12 One of the months of peak season 
13 One of the months of lean season 
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 22 
Table 2.5  - Berth potential and earnings of Premier trains 
Class Pre-flexi period  Post-flexi period Increase in 
earnings 
Percentage 
increase in 
earnings 
Decrease 
in number 
of 
passengers 
Percentage 
decrease in 
passengers 
carried 
Earnings Number of 
passengers 
carried 
Earnings Number of 
passengers 
carried (` in crore) (` in crore) (` in crore) 
Shatabdi 
CC 718.87 9921005 828.06 9430952 109.19 15.19 -490053 -4.94 
Total 3393.43 24736469 3945.85 24079899 552.42 16.28 -656570 -2.65 
Source: PRS data obtained from CRIS/NDLS 
Thus, there was an increase in the total earnings from the Premier trains post 
flexi fare period by ` 552 crore. However, the actual number of passengers  
carried by the Premier trains post flexi -fare, decreased significantly by 6.57 lakh 
passengers during the period September 2016 to July 2017 (2.65 per cent). 
Railway Board in its reply ( February 2018 ) stated that the actual earnings are 
increasing in comparison to the same period of previous years.  
Audit agrees that the passenger earnings have increased, however, the 
railways carried 6.75 lakh less passengers in Premier trains during 9 September 
2016 to 31 July 2017 despite a three per cent increase in be rth potential as 
compared to the previous year period of 9 September 2015 to 31 July 2016. 
2.1.3.3 Impact of flexi fare on occupancy in Mail/Express trains running on the 
same route of Premier Trains 
Apart from Premier trains being run on various routes, M ail/Express trains are 
also running on the same routes. Audit examined  the occupancy in the 
Mail/Express trains on the routes where Premier trains were being run. Data in 
respect of two months viz., October 2016 12 and February 2017 13 was collected 
and a comparison was made between occupancy of Rajdhani/Duronto/Shatabdi 
trains (with less than 75 per cent occupancy) with that of Mail/Express trains 
running on the same routes. The data is given below: 
Table 2.6 - Comparison of occupancy of Premier trains with Mail/Express trains 
Month Train No./Name Class Occupancy 
(per cent) 
Train type 
(Mail/ Express/ 
Superfast) 
Train No./Name Occupancy 
(per cent) 
Premier Trains Mail/Expres Trains 
Premier Train - Rajdhani 
Oct-16 22694 
Nizamuddin- Bengaluru 
2A 64 SF 12650 
Nizamuddin- Yesvantpur 
108 
Oct-16 12235 
Dibrugarh- 
New Delhi 
2A 45 EXP 14055 
Dibrugarh - Delhi 
99 
Oct-16 12437 
Secunderabad – 
Nizamuddin 
2A 65 SF 12721 
Hyderabad – Nizamuddin 
145 
Oct-16 12441 
Bilaspur –  New Delhi 
2A 48 SF 12409 
Raigarh – Nizamuddin 
128 
Oct-16 12453 
Ranchi –    New Delhi 
2A 53 SF 12825 
Ranchi – New Delhi 
89 
                                                           
12 One of the months of peak season 
13 One of the months of lean season 
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 22 
Table 2.5  - Berth potential and earnings of Premier trains 
Class Pre-flexi period  Post-flexi period Increase in 
earnings 
Percentage 
increase in 
earnings 
Decrease 
in number 
of 
passengers 
Percentage 
decrease in 
passengers 
carried 
Earnings Number of 
passengers 
carried 
Earnings Number of 
passengers 
carried (` in crore) (` in crore) (` in crore) 
Shatabdi 
CC 718.87 9921005 828.06 9430952 109.19 15.19 -490053 -4.94 
Total 3393.43 24736469 3945.85 24079899 552.42 16.28 -656570 -2.65 
Source: PRS data obtained from CRIS/NDLS 
Thus, there was an increase in the total earnings from the Premier trains post 
flexi fare period by ` 552 crore. However, the actual number of passengers  
carried by the Premier trains post flexi -fare, decreased significantly by 6.57 lakh 
passengers during the period September 2016 to July 2017 (2.65 per cent). 
Railway Board in its reply ( February 2018 ) stated that the actual earnings are 
increasing in comparison to the same period of previous years.  
Audit agrees that the passenger earnings have increased, however, the 
railways carried 6.75 lakh less passengers in Premier trains during 9 September 
2016 to 31 July 2017 despite a three per cent increase in be rth potential as 
compared to the previous year period of 9 September 2015 to 31 July 2016. 
2.1.3.3 Impact of flexi fare on occupancy in Mail/Express trains running on the 
same route of Premier Trains 
Apart from Premier trains being run on various routes, M ail/Express trains are 
also running on the same routes. Audit examined  the occupancy in the 
Mail/Express trains on the routes where Premier trains were being run. Data in 
respect of two months viz., October 2016 12 and February 2017 13 was collected 
and a comparison was made between occupancy of Rajdhani/Duronto/Shatabdi 
trains (with less than 75 per cent occupancy) with that of Mail/Express trains 
running on the same routes. The data is given below: 
Table 2.6 - Comparison of occupancy of Premier trains with Mail/Express trains 
Month Train No./Name Class Occupancy 
(per cent) 
Train type 
(Mail/ Express/ 
Superfast) 
Train No./Name Occupancy 
(per cent) 
Premier Trains Mail/Expres Trains 
Premier Train - Rajdhani 
Oct-16 22694 
Nizamuddin- Bengaluru 
2A 64 SF 12650 
Nizamuddin- Yesvantpur 
108 
Oct-16 12235 
Dibrugarh- 
New Delhi 
2A 45 EXP 14055 
Dibrugarh - Delhi 
99 
Oct-16 12437 
Secunderabad – 
Nizamuddin 
2A 65 SF 12721 
Hyderabad – Nizamuddin 
145 
Oct-16 12441 
Bilaspur –  New Delhi 
2A 48 SF 12409 
Raigarh – Nizamuddin 
128 
Oct-16 12453 
Ranchi –    New Delhi 
2A 53 SF 12825 
Ranchi – New Delhi 
89 
                                                           
12 One of the months of peak season 
13 One of the months of lean season 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
23
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 23 
Table 2.6 - Comparison of occupancy of Premier trains with Mail/Express trains 
Month Train No./Name Class Occupancy 
(per cent) 
Train type 
(Mail/ Express/ 
Superfast) 
Train No./Name Occupancy 
(per cent) 
Premier Trains Mail/Expres Trains 
Oct-16 12433 
Chennai – Nizamuddin 
2A 73 SF 12621 
Chennai –      New Delhi 
103 
Feb-17 22694 
Nizamuddin- Bengaluru 
2A 64 SF 12650 
Nizamuddin- Yesvantpur 
125 
Feb-17 12235 
Dibrugarh- 
New Delhi 
2A 22 EXP 14055 
Dibrugarh - Delhi 
77 
Feb-17 12437 
Secunderabad – 
Nizamuddin 
2A 43 SF 12721 
Hyderabad – Nizamuddin 
155 
Feb-17 12441 
Bilaspur –  New Delhi 
2A 49 SF 12409 
Raigarh – Nizamuddin 
112 
Feb-17 12453 
Ranchi –    New Delhi 
2A 36 SF 12825 
Ranchi – New Delhi 
77 
Feb-17 12433 
Chennai – Nizamuddin 
2A 55 SF 12621 
Chennai –      New Delhi 
114 
Feb-17 12235 
Dibrugarh- 
New Delhi 
3A 70 EXP 14055 
Dibrugarh - Delhi 
97 
Feb-17 12437 
Secunderabad – 
Nizamuddin 
3A 70 SF 12721 
Hyderabad – Nizamuddin 
185 
Feb-17 12453 
Ranchi –  New Delhi 
3A 74 SF 12825 
Ranchi – New Delhi 
132 
Premier Trains - Duronto  
Oct-16 22201 
Sealdah – Puri 
2A 64 SF 12837 
Howrah - Puri 
98 
Oct-16 22210 
New Delhi – Mumbai 
central 
2A 52 SF 12908 
Nizamuddin – Bandra 
Terminus 
85 
Oct-16 12294 
Allahabad – Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus 
2A 52 SF 22130 
Allahabad – Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus 
70 
Oct-16 12240 
Jaipur – Mumbai central 
2A 28 SF 12956 
Jaipur – Mumbai central 
90 
Oct-16 22204 
Secunderabad – 
Vishakapatnam 
2A 74 SF 12728 
Hyderabad – 
Vishakapatnam 
106 
Oct-16 12213 
Yesvantpur –  
Delhi Sarai Rohilla 
2A 72 SF 12649 
Yesvantpur -Nizamuddin 
124 
Oct-16 12228 
Indore – Mumbai central 
2A 53 SF 12962 
Indore – Mumbai central 
87 
Feb-17 22210 
New Delhi – Mumbai 
central 
2A 63 SF 12908 
Nizamuddin – Bandra 
Terminus 
74 
Feb-17 12294 
Allahabad – Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus 
2A 72 SF 22130 
Allahabad – Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus 
98 
Feb-17 12240 
Jaipur – Mumbai central 
2A 47 SF 12956 
Jaipur – Mumbai central 
122 
Feb-17 22204 
Secunderabad – 
Vishakapatnam 
2A 62 SF 12728 
Hyderabad – 
Vishakapatnam 
109 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
24
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 24 
Table 2.6 - Comparison of occupancy of Premier trains with Mail/Express trains 
Month Train No./Name Class Occupancy 
(per cent) 
Train type 
(Mail/ Express/ 
Superfast) 
Train No./Name Occupancy 
(per cent) 
Premier Trains Mail/Expres Trains 
Feb-17 12269 
Chennai – Nizamuddin 
2A 62 SF 12615 
Chennai - Delhi Sarai Rohilla 
121 
Feb-17 12213 
Yesvantpur –  
Delhi Sarai Rohilla 
2A 44 SF 12649 
Yesvantpur -Nizamuddin 
149 
Feb-17 22201 
Sealdah – Puri 
2A 51 SF 12837 
Howrah - Puri 
101 
Oct-16 12294 
Allahabad – Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus 
3A 68 SF 22130 
Allahabad – Lokmanya Tilak 
Terminus 
72 
Oct-16 12240 
Jaipur – Mumbai central 
3A 37 SF 12956 
Jaipur – Mumbai central 
91 
Oct-16 12228 
Indore – Mumbai central 
3A 36 SF 12962 
Indore – Mumbai central 
83 
Feb-17 12240 
Jaipur – Mumbai central 
3A 65 SF 12956 
Jaipur – Mumbai central 
113 
Feb-17 22204 
Secunderabad – 
Vishakapatnam 
3A 69 SF 12728 
Hyderabad – 
Vishakapatnam 
111 
Feb-17 12213 
Yesvantpur –  
Delhi Sarai Rohilla 
3A 59 SF 12649 
Yesvantpur -Nizamuddin 
141 
Feb-17 12228 
Indore – Mumbai central 
3A 69 SF 12962 
Indore – Mumbai central 
107 
Premier Trains - Shatabdi  
Oct-16 12035 
Jaipur –      Agra Fort 
CC 56 SF 12196 
Ajmer – Agra Fort 
96 
Oct-16 12026 
Secunderabad – Pune 
CC 63 EXP 17014 
Hyderabad - Pune 
103 
Oct-16 12277 
Howrah – Puri 
CC 66 SF 12821 
Howrah – Puri 
108 
Oct-16 12243 
Chennai – Coimbatore 
CC 67 SF 12679 
Chennai - Coimbatore 
104 
Feb-17 12005 
New Delhi – Kalka 
CC 72 EXP 14095 
Delhi Sarai Rohilla - Kalka 
79 
Feb-17 12035 
Jaipur –      Agra Fort 
CC 54 SF 12196 
Ajmer – Agra Fort 
87 
Feb-17 12026 
Secunderabad – Pune 
CC 68 EXP 17014 
Hyderabad - Pune 
122 
Feb-17 12277 
Howrah – Puri 
CC 30 SF 12821 
Howrah – Puri 
107 
Feb-17 12243 
Chennai – Coimbatore 
CC 61 SF 12679 
Chennai - Coimbatore 
105 
Feb-17 12278 
Puri – Howrah 
CC 44 SF 12822 
Puri - Howrah 
111 
Feb-17 12039 
Kathgodam – New Delhi 
CC 69 EXP 15014 
Kathgodam – Delhi 
99 
Source: Data warehouse of Indian Railways 
For the months test checked, it was observed that 
 The occupancy of AC 2 and AC 3 tier class of Mail/Express trains on the same 
routes as Rajdhani trains was significantly higher than the occupancy of 
corresponding classes of Rajdhani trains and was more than 100 per cent in 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
25
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 25 
10 trains.  In five Mail/Express trains, where the occupancy w as 77 per cent 
to 99 per cent, the corresponding occupancy of Rajdhani trains was 22 per 
cent to 70per cent. 
 The occupancy of AC 2 and AC 3 tier class of Mail/Express trains on the same 
routes as Duronto trains was significantly higher than the occupancy o f 
corresponding classes of Duronto trains and was more than 100 per cent in 
11 trains.  In 10 Mail/Express trains, where the occupancy was 72 per cent to 
98 per cent, the corresponding occupancy of Duronto trains was 28 per cent 
to 72 per cent. 
 The occupan cy of CC class of Mail/Express trains on the same routes as 
Shatabdi trains was significantly higher than the occupancy of corresponding 
classes of Shatabdi trains and ranged from 79 per cent to 122 per cent, 
whereas the occupancy in Shatabdi train ranged b etween 30 per cent and 69 
per cent. Only on New Delhi – Kalka route, the occupancy of both types of 
trains were in the similar range (72 per cent and 79 per cent for Mail/Express 
and Shatabdi trains respectively). 
The above indicates that after the introdu ction of the flexi fare system, 
passengers preferred to travel by Mail/Express trains over the Rajdhani/  
Duronto/ Shatabdi trains despite a higher travel time for Mail/Express trains. 
Railway Board in their reply stated (July 2017) stated that the occupanc y of 
Premier trains depends upon the peak and lean seasons. The occupancy of 
Premier trains in lean season always remained low in comparison to the 
Mail/Express trains. 
However, Audit analysis of occupancy of Premier trains vis -à-vis Mail/Express 
trains in cluded both peak season (October 2016) and lean season (February 
2017). The trend indicated that the vacant berths were increasing. 
2.1.3.4 Impact on passengers’ patronage of Premier trains post flexi fare 
scheme 
The system of flexi fare adopted by airline s is aimed to take care of yield 
management14.  The pricing is linked to the occupancies and the time at which 
the ticket is being booked.  As the occupancies shrink, fares go up so that 
maximum yield per seat can be obtained.   
Audit examined the flexi far e scheme in Rajdhani/Duronto/Shatabdi trains in 
light of the concept of yield management. Audit selected the following 13 
sectors of Premier trains, on which there are regular flights. 
Table 2.7 - Sectors adopted for comparison of air-fare with train fare 
S. no Sector 
1 Chennai – New Delhi – Chennai  
2 Trivandrum – New Delhi – Trivandrum 
3 Hyderabad – New Delhi – Hyderabad  
                                                           
14 Yield mana gement is a variable pricing strategy, based on understanding, anticipating and influencing consumer 
behavior in order to maximize revenue or profits from a fixed, time -limited resource (such as airline seats or hotel room 
reservations or advertising inventory). 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
26
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 26 
Table 2.7 - Sectors adopted for comparison of air-fare with train fare 
S. no Sector 
4 Kolkata – New Delhi – Kolkata  
5 Guwahati – New Delhi – Guwahati  
6 Bengaluru – New Delhi – Bengaluru 
7 Mumbai – New Delhi – Mumbai  
8 Ranchi – New Delhi – Ranchi  
9 Ahmedabad – New Delhi – Ahmedabad  
10 Bhubaneswar – New Delhi – Bhubaneswar  
11 Goa – New Delhi – Goa  
12 Mumbai – Kolkata – Mumbai  
13 Bengaluru – Kolkata – Bengaluru 
All inclusive fare of AC 2 tier of Rajd hani and Duronto trains in the identified 13 
sectors were compared with all inclusive air fare (economy class of Air India as 
well as one private airlines) as on 31 March 2017 for journey on 30 April 2017 
(30 day of ARP 15), 30 May 2017 (60 day of ARP), 29 J une 2017 (90 day of ARP) 
and 29 July 2017 (120th day of ARP). Audit findings are given below: 
Table 2.8 - Statement showing the cheapest mode of transport 
S. no Name of the Sector Cheapest mode (Air/Rail) 
120 days ARP 90 days 
ARP 
60 days 
ARP 
30 days 
ARP 
1 Chennai – New Delhi  Rail Air Air Air 
New Delhi – Chennai Air Air Air Air 
2 Trivandrum – New Delhi  Rail Air Air Air 
New Delhi – Trivandrum Rail Air Air Air 
3 Hyderabad – New Delhi  Air Air Air Air 
New Delhi – Hyderabad Air Air Air Air 
4 Kolkata – New Delhi  Air Air Rail Rail 
New Delhi – Kolkata Rail Air Rail Air 
5 Guwahati – New Delhi  Rail Air Air Rail 
New Delhi – Guwahati Rail Air Air Air 
6 Bengaluru – New Delhi  Air Air Air Air 
New Delhi – Bengaluru Air Air Air Air 
7 Mumbai – New Delhi  Air Air Air Rail 
New Delhi – Mumbai Air Air Rail Air 
8 Ranchi – New Delhi  Air Rail Air Rail 
New Delhi – Ranchi Air Rail Air Air 
9 Ahmedabad – New Delhi  Rail Rail Rail Rail 
New Delhi – Ahmedabad Air Rail Rail Air 
10 Bhubaneswar – New Delhi  Air Air Air Air 
New Delhi – Bhubaneswar Air Air Air Air 
11 Goa – New Delhi  Air Rail Rail Rail 
New Delhi – Goa Air Rail Rail Rail 
12 Mumbai – Kolkata  Rail Rail Air Rail 
Kolkata – Mumbai Rail Rail Air Air 
13 Bengaluru – Kolkata  Air Air Air Air 
Kolkata – Bengaluru Air Air Air Rail 
Source: Web site of Airlines and IRCTC 
                                                           
15 Advance Reservation Period 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
27
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 27 
It was observed that, of the 26 directions (up/down of the 13 sectors), 
 for 120 days ARP, travel by air was found to be the cheapest mode in 17 
directions of travel.In the remai ning 9 directions, though the air fare was 
higher, the difference in fare was only up to ` 600. 
 for 90 days ARP, travel by air was found to be the cheapest mode in 18 
directions of travel. 
 for 60 days ARP, travel by air was found to be the cheapest mode in  19 
directions of travel. 
 for 30 days ARP, travel by air was found to be the cheapest mode in 17 
directions of travel. 
 In Hyderabad-New Delhi, New Delhi- Hyderabad, Bengaluru -New Delhi, New 
Delhi- Bengaluru, Bhubaneshwar -New Delhi, New Delhi-  Bhubaneshwar, 
New Delhi-Chennai and Bengaluru -Kolkata sectors, the air fare was cheaper 
when tickets were booked 30 days to 120 days in advance.  
 In Chennai -New Delhi, Trivandrum -New Delhi, New Delhi -Trivandrum, New 
Delhi-Guwahati sectors, the air fare was cheaper whe n tickets were booked 
30 days to 90 days in advance. 
 In Mumbai -New Delhi and Kolkata -Bengaluru sectors, the air fare was 
cheaper when tickets were booked 60 days to 120 days in advance. 
 In New Delhi -Mumbai sector, the air fare was cheaper when tickets were  
booked 90 days to 120 days in advance.  
Thus, in a large number of sectors and for most of the ARPs, air fare was found 
to be cheaper.  
The trend of occupancy in airlines and AC 2 and AC 3 tier of premium trains 
during pre-flexi period and post flexi period was as follows: 
Table  2.9 - Comparison of increase/decrease in number of passengers in selected sectors – Rail and Air 
Sector  Total for 
AC 2 and 
AC 3 (Sep 
15 to Jul 
16) 
Total for 
AC 2 and 
AC 3 (Sep 
16 to Jul 
17) 
Increase 
(+) / 
Decrease 
(-) (Nos.) 
Increase 
(+) / 
Decrease 
(-) (in per 
cent) 
No. of 
passengers 
by air (Sep 
15 to Jul 16) 
No. of 
passengers 
by air (Sep 
16 to Jul 17) 
Increase 
(+) / 
Decrease 
(-) (Nos.) 
Increase 
(+) / 
Decrease 
(-) (in per 
cent) 
A B C D E F G H I 
New Delhi - Chennai   115259 112738 -2521 -2 980416 1061148 80732 8 
Chennai - New Delhi  106928 108932 2004 2 980429 1063482 83053 8 
New Delhi – 
Thiruvananthapuram 
150344 129279 -21065 -14 115705 168415 52710 46 
Thiruvananthapuram 
- New Delhi  
164910 147964 -16946 -10 108411 185678 77267 71 
New Delhi – 
Hyderabad   
74205 72140 -2065 -3 985054 1088112 103058 10 
Hyderabad - New 
Delhi  
73554 71947 -1607 -2 985249 1067219 81970 8 
New Delhi – Kolkata 942382 910978 -31404 -3 1072148 1400462 328314 31 
Kolkata - New Delhi  945083 924067 -21016 -2 993328 1319021 325693 33 
New Delhi – 
Guwahati   
737549 728833 -8716 -1 442398 603508 161110 36 
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 27 
It was observed that, of the 26 directions (up/down of the 13 sectors), 
 for 120 days ARP, travel by air was found to be the cheapest mode in 17 
directions of travel.In the remai ning 9 directions, though the air fare was 
higher, the difference in fare was only up to ` 600. 
 for 90 days ARP, travel by air was found to be the cheapest mode in 18 
directions of travel. 
 for 60 days ARP, travel by air was found to be the cheapest mode in  19 
directions of travel. 
 for 30 days ARP, travel by air was found to be the cheapest mode in 17 
directions of travel. 
 In Hyderabad-New Delhi, New Delhi- Hyderabad, Bengaluru -New Delhi, New 
Delhi- Bengaluru, Bhubaneshwar -New Delhi, New Delhi-  Bhubaneshwar, 
New Delhi-Chennai and Bengaluru -Kolkata sectors, the air fare was cheaper 
when tickets were booked 30 days to 120 days in advance.  
 In Chennai -New Delhi, Trivandrum -New Delhi, New Delhi -Trivandrum, New 
Delhi-Guwahati sectors, the air fare was cheaper whe n tickets were booked 
30 days to 90 days in advance. 
 In Mumbai -New Delhi and Kolkata -Bengaluru sectors, the air fare was 
cheaper when tickets were booked 60 days to 120 days in advance. 
 In New Delhi -Mumbai sector, the air fare was cheaper when tickets were  
booked 90 days to 120 days in advance.  
Thus, in a large number of sectors and for most of the ARPs, air fare was found 
to be cheaper.  
The trend of occupancy in airlines and AC 2 and AC 3 tier of premium trains 
during pre-flexi period and post flexi period was as follows: 
Table  2.9 - Comparison of increase/decrease in number of passengers in selected sectors – Rail and Air 
Sector  Total for 
AC 2 and 
AC 3 (Sep 
15 to Jul 
16) 
Total for 
AC 2 and 
AC 3 (Sep 
16 to Jul 
17) 
Increase 
(+) / 
Decrease 
(-) (Nos.) 
Increase 
(+) / 
Decrease 
(-) (in per 
cent) 
No. of 
passengers 
by air (Sep 
15 to Jul 16) 
No. of 
passengers 
by air (Sep 
16 to Jul 17) 
Increase 
(+) / 
Decrease 
(-) (Nos.) 
Increase 
(+) / 
Decrease 
(-) (in per 
cent) 
A B C D E F G H I 
New Delhi - Chennai   115259 112738 -2521 -2 980416 1061148 80732 8 
Chennai - New Delhi  106928 108932 2004 2 980429 1063482 83053 8 
New Delhi – 
Thiruvananthapuram 
150344 129279 -21065 -14 115705 168415 52710 46 
Thiruvananthapuram 
- New Delhi  
164910 147964 -16946 -10 108411 185678 77267 71 
New Delhi – 
Hyderabad   
74205 72140 -2065 -3 985054 1088112 103058 10 
Hyderabad - New 
Delhi  
73554 71947 -1607 -2 985249 1067219 81970 8 
New Delhi – Kolkata 942382 910978 -31404 -3 1072148 1400462 328314 31 
Kolkata - New Delhi  945083 924067 -21016 -2 993328 1319021 325693 33 
New Delhi – 
Guwahati   
737549 728833 -8716 -1 442398 603508 161110 36 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
28
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 28 
Table  2.9 - Comparison of increase/decrease in number of passengers in selected sectors – Rail and Air 
Sector  Total for 
AC 2 and 
AC 3 (Sep 
15 to Jul 
16) 
Total for 
AC 2 and 
AC 3 (Sep 
16 to Jul 
17) 
Increase 
(+) / 
Decrease 
(-) (Nos.) 
Increase 
(+) / 
Decrease 
(-) (in per 
cent) 
No. of 
passengers 
by air (Sep 
15 to Jul 16) 
No. of 
passengers 
by air (Sep 
16 to Jul 17) 
Increase 
(+) / 
Decrease 
(-) (Nos.) 
Increase 
(+) / 
Decrease 
(-) (in per 
cent) 
A B C D E F G H I 
Guwahati - New Delhi  707105 701483 -5622 -1 424356 613601 189245 45 
New Delhi – 
Bengaluru 
357893 373458 15565 4 1680897 1846712 165815 10 
Bengaluru- New Delhi  429965 409285 -20680 -5 1680454 1861949 181495 11 
New Delhi – Mumbai  787629 787787 158 0 2905364 3174442 269078 9 
Mumbai - New Delhi  856495 838966 -17529 -2 2880430 3140280 259850 9 
New Delhi – Ranchi  169808 161986 -7822 -5 205662 375389 169727 83 
Ranchi - New Delhi  168931 154174 -14757 -9 188793 341308 152515 81 
New Delhi – 
Ahmedabad  
342727 342971 244 0 724335 878513 154178 21 
Ahmedabad - New 
Delhi 
333572 326539 -7033 -2 727164 866251 139087 19 
New Delhi – 
Bhubaneswar 
314140 282744 -31396 -10 331881 433720 101839 31 
Bhubaneswar - New 
Delhi   
309694 272739 -36955 -12 320542 419269 98727 31 
New Delhi – Goa*   48219 43241 -4978 -10 468738 606639 137901 29 
Goa - New Delhi*   67158 67028 -130 0 489545 609543 119998 25 
Mumbai – Kolkata 171371 160694 -10677 -6 757088 811876 54788 7 
Kolkata – Mumbai  164970 163883 -1087 -1 718891 789635 70744 10 
Bengaluru– Kolkata 79178 87618 8440 11 542487 721322 178835 33 
Kolkata – Bengaluru 78365 85187 6822 9 515163 699241 184078 36 
Source: PRS data obtained from CRIS 
*Since the Train No. 22413/22414 (New Delhi – Madgaon Rajdhani) was introduced from November 
2015, the comparison of passengers carried by rail/air was adopted from December to July only 
It can be seen that 
 The number of passengers carr ied by the airlines has increased in all the 26 
directions (up/down of the 13 sectors), whereas occupancy in 
Rajdhani/Duronto trains, it increased only in four directions viz. Chennai – 
New Delhi, New Delhi – Bengaluru, Bengaluru – Kolkata, Kolkata – Bengaluru 
where the increase was 2, 4, 11, 9 per cent respectively. 
 In three directions viz. New Delhi – Mumbai, New Delhi – Ahmedabad, Goa – 
New Delhi the passengers carried was almost constant. 
 In 19 directions, the decrease in passengers was in the range of one to 14 
per cent.   
Annexure 2.3 
This indicates that when compared to the cost and time taken for travel by AC 2 
and AC 3 tier, air travel by economy class worked out to be cheaper and 
preferable mode of travel. This is corroborated by decreasing trend o f 
occupancy in Premier trains post flexi fare scheme, while the number of the 
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 28 
Table  2.9 - Comparison of increase/decrease in number of passengers in selected sectors – Rail and Air 
Sector  Total for 
AC 2 and 
AC 3 (Sep 
15 to Jul 
16) 
Total for 
AC 2 and 
AC 3 (Sep 
16 to Jul 
17) 
Increase 
(+) / 
Decrease 
(-) (Nos.) 
Increase 
(+) / 
Decrease 
(-) (in per 
cent) 
No. of 
passengers 
by air (Sep 
15 to Jul 16) 
No. of 
passengers 
by air (Sep 
16 to Jul 17) 
Increase 
(+) / 
Decrease 
(-) (Nos.) 
Increase 
(+) / 
Decrease 
(-) (in per 
cent) 
A B C D E F G H I 
Guwahati - New Delhi  707105 701483 -5622 -1 424356 613601 189245 45 
New Delhi – 
Bengaluru 
357893 373458 15565 4 1680897 1846712 165815 10 
Bengaluru- New Delhi  429965 409285 -20680 -5 1680454 1861949 181495 11 
New Delhi – Mumbai  787629 787787 158 0 2905364 3174442 269078 9 
Mumbai - New Delhi  856495 838966 -17529 -2 2880430 3140280 259850 9 
New Delhi – Ranchi  169808 161986 -7822 -5 205662 375389 169727 83 
Ranchi - New Delhi  168931 154174 -14757 -9 188793 341308 152515 81 
New Delhi – 
Ahmedabad  
342727 342971 244 0 724335 878513 154178 21 
Ahmedabad - New 
Delhi 
333572 326539 -7033 -2 727164 866251 139087 19 
New Delhi – 
Bhubaneswar 
314140 282744 -31396 -10 331881 433720 101839 31 
Bhubaneswar - New 
Delhi   
309694 272739 -36955 -12 320542 419269 98727 31 
New Delhi – Goa*   48219 43241 -4978 -10 468738 606639 137901 29 
Goa - New Delhi*   67158 67028 -130 0 489545 609543 119998 25 
Mumbai – Kolkata 171371 160694 -10677 -6 757088 811876 54788 7 
Kolkata – Mumbai  164970 163883 -1087 -1 718891 789635 70744 10 
Bengaluru– Kolkata 79178 87618 8440 11 542487 721322 178835 33 
Kolkata – Bengaluru 78365 85187 6822 9 515163 699241 184078 36 
Source: PRS data obtained from CRIS 
*Since the Train No. 22413/22414 (New Delhi – Madgaon Rajdhani) was introduced from November 
2015, the comparison of passengers carried by rail/air was adopted from December to July only 
It can be seen that 
 The number of passengers carr ied by the airlines has increased in all the 26 
directions (up/down of the 13 sectors), whereas occupancy in 
Rajdhani/Duronto trains, it increased only in four directions viz. Chennai – 
New Delhi, New Delhi – Bengaluru, Bengaluru – Kolkata, Kolkata – Bengaluru 
where the increase was 2, 4, 11, 9 per cent respectively. 
 In three directions viz. New Delhi – Mumbai, New Delhi – Ahmedabad, Goa – 
New Delhi the passengers carried was almost constant. 
 In 19 directions, the decrease in passengers was in the range of one to 14 
per cent.   
Annexure 2.3 
This indicates that when compared to the cost and time taken for travel by AC 2 
and AC 3 tier, air travel by economy class worked out to be cheaper and 
preferable mode of travel. This is corroborated by decreasing trend o f 
occupancy in Premier trains post flexi fare scheme, while the number of the 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
29
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 29 
passenger carried by airlines increased during the same period of post -flexi as 
compared to pre-flexi.  
Audit compared the number of passengers travelled by air with the number o f 
passengers travelled by premier trains (AC 2 and AC3 tier) during the pre and 
post flexi period in the 13 selected sectors. The result can be seen in Graph 2.2: 
 
Graph 2.2: Comparison of passanegsr travelled by air and rail during Pre-flexi period (October 
2015 to July 2016) and Post-flexi period (October 2016 to July 2017)  
From the above graph, it can be seen that on one hand number of train 
passengers of AC 2 and AC 3 tier class of premier trains showed decreasing 
trend in p ost flexi period in comparison to pre flexi period, on the other hand 
air passengers have shown increasing trend over the same period. This 
indicates that the decrease in occupancy in Premier trains did lead to 
passengers shifting to air for travel in these sectors. 
Railway Board in their reply stated (July 2017) stated that for shorter ARP, flights 
charged much more fare than that of Premier trains. However, audit study 
compared the fare in 26 directions for four ARP periods –30 days, 60 days, 90 
days and 1 20 days and noticed that, travel by air was cheaper in 17, 19, 18 and 
17 directions respectively.  Railway Board further stated (February 2018) that 
while air fares are dynamic with surge pricing, in flexi -fare variation is fixed 
throughout the year and the re is no surge pricing.
 Overall there is an increase in 
occupancy of reserved passengers (all trains including Rajdhani, Shatabdi and 
Duronto trains) and passengers have not shifted to other modes of transport. 
Audit review has shown that passengers of Raj dhani, Shatabdi and Duronto 
trains have shifted to either the Mail/Express trains on the same routes or 
shifted to air.  
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 29 
passenger carried by airlines increased during the same period of post -flexi as 
compared to pre-flexi.  
Audit compared the number of passengers travelled by air with the number o f 
passengers travelled by premier trains (AC 2 and AC3 tier) during the pre and 
post flexi period in the 13 selected sectors. The result can be seen in Graph 2.2: 
 
Graph 2.2: Comparison of passanegsr travelled by air and rail during Pre-flexi period (October 
2015 to July 2016) and Post-flexi period (October 2016 to July 2017)  
From the above graph, it can be seen that on one hand number of train 
passengers of AC 2 and AC 3 tier class of premier trains showed decreasing 
trend in p ost flexi period in comparison to pre flexi period, on the other hand 
air passengers have shown increasing trend over the same period. This 
indicates that the decrease in occupancy in Premier trains did lead to 
passengers shifting to air for travel in these sectors. 
Railway Board in their reply stated (July 2017) stated that for shorter ARP, flights 
charged much more fare than that of Premier trains. However, audit study 
compared the fare in 26 directions for four ARP periods –30 days, 60 days, 90 
days and 1 20 days and noticed that, travel by air was cheaper in 17, 19, 18 and 
17 directions respectively.  Railway Board further stated (February 2018) that 
while air fares are dynamic with surge pricing, in flexi -fare variation is fixed 
throughout the year and the re is no surge pricing.
 Overall there is an increase in 
occupancy of reserved passengers (all trains including Rajdhani, Shatabdi and 
Duronto trains) and passengers have not shifted to other modes of transport. 
Audit review has shown that passengers of Raj dhani, Shatabdi and Duronto 
trains have shifted to either the Mail/Express trains on the same routes or 
shifted to air.  
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 29 
passenger carried by airlines increased during the same period of post -flexi as 
compared to pre-flexi.  
Audit compared the number of passengers travelled by air with the number o f 
passengers travelled by premier trains (AC 2 and AC3 tier) during the pre and 
post flexi period in the 13 selected sectors. The result can be seen in Graph 2.2: 
 
Graph 2.2: Comparison of passanegsr travelled by air and rail during Pre-flexi period (October 
2015 to July 2016) and Post-flexi period (October 2016 to July 2017)  
From the above graph, it can be seen that on one hand number of train 
passengers of AC 2 and AC 3 tier class of premier trains showed decreasing 
trend in p ost flexi period in comparison to pre flexi period, on the other hand 
air passengers have shown increasing trend over the same period. This 
indicates that the decrease in occupancy in Premier trains did lead to 
passengers shifting to air for travel in these sectors. 
Railway Board in their reply stated (July 2017) stated that for shorter ARP, flights 
charged much more fare than that of Premier trains. However, audit study 
compared the fare in 26 directions for four ARP periods –30 days, 60 days, 90 
days and 1 20 days and noticed that, travel by air was cheaper in 17, 19, 18 and 
17 directions respectively.  Railway Board further stated (February 2018) that 
while air fares are dynamic with surge pricing, in flexi -fare variation is fixed 
throughout the year and the re is no surge pricing.
 Overall there is an increase in 
occupancy of reserved passengers (all trains including Rajdhani, Shatabdi and 
Duronto trains) and passengers have not shifted to other modes of transport. 
Audit review has shown that passengers of Raj dhani, Shatabdi and Duronto 
trains have shifted to either the Mail/Express trains on the same routes or 
shifted to air.  


Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
30
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 30 
2.1.4 Impact of measures taken by railways to utilise the vacant seats  
The Tatkal quota in the Premier trains continued to be operated  as per existing 
guidelines after the flexi fare scheme was introduced and the berths assigned 
under the Tatkal quota were to be booked at the rate of 1.5 times of the base 
fare for all classes viz. SL, 2A, 3A and CC except AC 1 and EC. Subsequently, 
Railway Board revised (December 2016) the instructions and with effect from 20 
December 2016, reduced the Tatkal quota from 30 per cent  to 10 per cent  of 
total class wise accommodation.   
As the occupancy during lean seasons reduced significantly, Railway Board  
further decided (14 December 2016) to allow discounted fare in some section of 
Shatabdi trains and a rebate of 10 per cent after preparation of first chart in all 
Premier trains. The impact of these measures is discussed below: 
2.1.4.1      Decision of reducing Tatkal quota in flexi fare trains 
Audit analysed the tickets earmarked under Tatkal quota in all 142 Premier 
trains and its utilisation during 20 October 2016 to 19 December 2016 and 
compared with the Tatkal utilisation during 20 December 2016 to 19  February 
2017 i.e. during the period of two months before and after the decision of 
reducing the Tatkal quota.  Audit analysis is given below: 
Table 2.10  -Train type wise Tatkal summary of all Rajdhani/Duronto/Shatabdi trains  
Train 
type 
Class 20-10-2016 to 19-12-2016 20-12-2016 to 19-02-2017 
Berth 
potential 
Actual 
passengers 
Vacant 
berths 
Vacancy 
(in per 
cent) 
Berth 
potential 
Actual 
passengers 
Vacant 
berths 
Vacancy 
(in per 
cent) 
Rajdhani 2A 92489 51995 40494 43.78 43723 31457 12266 28.05 
3A 299985 216838 83147 27.72 139128 119576 19552 14.05 
Duronto 2A 33231 21837 11394 34.29 18875 13285 5590 29.62 
3A 153992 109560 44432 28.85 84083 64211 19872 23.63 
SL 98392 95580 2812 2.86 57808 61917 -4109 -7.11 
Shatabdi CC 412842 242150 170692 41.35 223419 130168 93251 41.74 
 Total   1090931 737960 352971 32.36 567036 420614 150531* 29.56* 
* Except sleeper class  
It can be seen that after the decision to reduce the Tatkal quot a in Premier 
trains was taken with effect from 20 December 2016, the percentage of vacant 
berths/seats improved significantly in all the classes.  
Thus, the decision to reduce the Tatkal quota from 30 per cent to 10 per cent in 
Premier trains led to better utilization of Tatkal berths/seats. 
2.1.4.2     Discount in some sections of Shatabdi trains 
In order to improve the patronage, Railway Board introduced discounted fare in 
AC Chair Car of Shatabdi trains running over Mysuru – Bengaluru and Ajmer -
Jaipur sections from 20 December 2016 on trial basis for six months. For these 
sections, the flexi fare system was not applicable and Tatkal charges were not 
levied on the discounted fare. 
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 30 
2.1.4 Impact of measures taken by railways to utilise the vacant seats  
The Tatkal quota in the Premier trains continued to be operated  as per existing 
guidelines after the flexi fare scheme was introduced and the berths assigned 
under the Tatkal quota were to be booked at the rate of 1.5 times of the base 
fare for all classes viz. SL, 2A, 3A and CC except AC 1 and EC. Subsequently, 
Railway Board revised (December 2016) the instructions and with effect from 20 
December 2016, reduced the Tatkal quota from 30 per cent  to 10 per cent  of 
total class wise accommodation.   
As the occupancy during lean seasons reduced significantly, Railway Board  
further decided (14 December 2016) to allow discounted fare in some section of 
Shatabdi trains and a rebate of 10 per cent after preparation of first chart in all 
Premier trains. The impact of these measures is discussed below: 
2.1.4.1      Decision of reducing Tatkal quota in flexi fare trains 
Audit analysed the tickets earmarked under Tatkal quota in all 142 Premier 
trains and its utilisation during 20 October 2016 to 19 December 2016 and 
compared with the Tatkal utilisation during 20 December 2016 to 19  February 
2017 i.e. during the period of two months before and after the decision of 
reducing the Tatkal quota.  Audit analysis is given below: 
Table 2.10  -Train type wise Tatkal summary of all Rajdhani/Duronto/Shatabdi trains  
Train 
type 
Class 20-10-2016 to 19-12-2016 20-12-2016 to 19-02-2017 
Berth 
potential 
Actual 
passengers 
Vacant 
berths 
Vacancy 
(in per 
cent) 
Berth 
potential 
Actual 
passengers 
Vacant 
berths 
Vacancy 
(in per 
cent) 
Rajdhani 2A 92489 51995 40494 43.78 43723 31457 12266 28.05 
3A 299985 216838 83147 27.72 139128 119576 19552 14.05 
Duronto 2A 33231 21837 11394 34.29 18875 13285 5590 29.62 
3A 153992 109560 44432 28.85 84083 64211 19872 23.63 
SL 98392 95580 2812 2.86 57808 61917 -4109 -7.11 
Shatabdi CC 412842 242150 170692 41.35 223419 130168 93251 41.74 
 Total   1090931 737960 352971 32.36 567036 420614 150531* 29.56* 
* Except sleeper class  
It can be seen that after the decision to reduce the Tatkal quot a in Premier 
trains was taken with effect from 20 December 2016, the percentage of vacant 
berths/seats improved significantly in all the classes.  
Thus, the decision to reduce the Tatkal quota from 30 per cent to 10 per cent in 
Premier trains led to better utilization of Tatkal berths/seats. 
2.1.4.2     Discount in some sections of Shatabdi trains 
In order to improve the patronage, Railway Board introduced discounted fare in 
AC Chair Car of Shatabdi trains running over Mysuru – Bengaluru and Ajmer -
Jaipur sections from 20 December 2016 on trial basis for six months. For these 
sections, the flexi fare system was not applicable and Tatkal charges were not 
levied on the discounted fare. 
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 30 
2.1.4 Impact of measures taken by railways to utilise the vacant seats  
The Tatkal quota in the Premier trains continued to be operated  as per existing 
guidelines after the flexi fare scheme was introduced and the berths assigned 
under the Tatkal quota were to be booked at the rate of 1.5 times of the base 
fare for all classes viz. SL, 2A, 3A and CC except AC 1 and EC. Subsequently, 
Railway Board revised (December 2016) the instructions and with effect from 20 
December 2016, reduced the Tatkal quota from 30 per cent  to 10 per cent  of 
total class wise accommodation.   
As the occupancy during lean seasons reduced significantly, Railway Board  
further decided (14 December 2016) to allow discounted fare in some section of 
Shatabdi trains and a rebate of 10 per cent after preparation of first chart in all 
Premier trains. The impact of these measures is discussed below: 
2.1.4.1      Decision of reducing Tatkal quota in flexi fare trains 
Audit analysed the tickets earmarked under Tatkal quota in all 142 Premier 
trains and its utilisation during 20 October 2016 to 19 December 2016 and 
compared with the Tatkal utilisation during 20 December 2016 to 19  February 
2017 i.e. during the period of two months before and after the decision of 
reducing the Tatkal quota.  Audit analysis is given below: 
Table 2.10  -Train type wise Tatkal summary of all Rajdhani/Duronto/Shatabdi trains  
Train 
type 
Class 20-10-2016 to 19-12-2016 20-12-2016 to 19-02-2017 
Berth 
potential 
Actual 
passengers 
Vacant 
berths 
Vacancy 
(in per 
cent) 
Berth 
potential 
Actual 
passengers 
Vacant 
berths 
Vacancy 
(in per 
cent) 
Rajdhani 2A 92489 51995 40494 43.78 43723 31457 12266 28.05 
3A 299985 216838 83147 27.72 139128 119576 19552 14.05 
Duronto 2A 33231 21837 11394 34.29 18875 13285 5590 29.62 
3A 153992 109560 44432 28.85 84083 64211 19872 23.63 
SL 98392 95580 2812 2.86 57808 61917 -4109 -7.11 
Shatabdi CC 412842 242150 170692 41.35 223419 130168 93251 41.74 
 Total   1090931 737960 352971 32.36 567036 420614 150531* 29.56* 
* Except sleeper class  
It can be seen that after the decision to reduce the Tatkal quot a in Premier 
trains was taken with effect from 20 December 2016, the percentage of vacant 
berths/seats improved significantly in all the classes.  
Thus, the decision to reduce the Tatkal quota from 30 per cent to 10 per cent in 
Premier trains led to better utilization of Tatkal berths/seats. 
2.1.4.2     Discount in some sections of Shatabdi trains 
In order to improve the patronage, Railway Board introduced discounted fare in 
AC Chair Car of Shatabdi trains running over Mysuru – Bengaluru and Ajmer -
Jaipur sections from 20 December 2016 on trial basis for six months. For these 
sections, the flexi fare system was not applicable and Tatkal charges were not 
levied on the discounted fare. 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
31
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 31 
 In New Delhi – Ajmer Shatabdi Express (Train No.12015/12016), the 
discounted fare was proposed between Jaipur and Ajmer and between 
Jaipur and Kishangarh in both up and down directions.  The discounted fare 
was subsequently withdrawn with effect from December 2017. 
 In Chennai Central – Mysuru Shatabdi Express (Train No.12007/12008)  the 
discounted fare was proposed between Bengaluru City and Mysuru in both 
up and down directions. 
A comparison of the occupancy and earnings during January 2017 and February 
2017 with that of October 2016 and November 2016 i.e. two months before and 
after the month in which the discounted fare was implemented can be seen in 
the table below: 
Table 2.11 - Impact on occupancy and earnings  
Period Passengers (Nos.) Earnings (in `) Passengers 
(Nos.) 
Earnings (in `) 
 Between Bengaluru City and Mysore Between Mysore and Bengaluru 
City 
Oct-Nov 2016 9,129 40,18,435 11,809 48,24,945 
Jan-Feb 2017 10,361 30,38,468 13,504 38,14,879 
Increase/Decrease 1,232 (-) 9,79,967 1,695 (-) 10,10,066 
(in per cent) 13 (-) 24 14 (-) 21 
Source: PRS Data obtained from CRIS/NDLS 
The above analysis revealed that in Bengaluru City –Mysuru direction, there was 
an increase of 13 per cent in occupancy and in Mysuru– Bengaluru City direction, 
there was an increase of 14 per cent  in occupancy after implementation of 
discounted fare. 
2.1.4.3     Rebate after preparation of first chart 
Railway Board introduced 10 per cent  rebate in the last booked fare on the 
vacant berths/seats after preparation of first chart on an experimental basis for 
six months in Rajdhani/Shatabdi/Duronto trains from 20 December 2016.  The 
scheme was also applicable for allotment of vacant berths due to 'no show' 
passengers in train by TTEs.   
Audit examined the trend of occupancy and earnings after implementation of 10 
per cent  rebate on vacant berths/seats booked aft er preparation of first chart 
during January and February 2017 and compared it with the period of October 
and November 2016 i.e. two months prior to and two months after the month 
of implementation of the scheme and the results of our analysis are given 
below: 
Table 2.12 - Trend of occupancy and earnings after introduction of rebate  
Period No. of services (Shatabdi) Occupancy (CC) Earnings (`) 
Oct-Nov 2016 2,481 75,321 6,23,25,386 
Jan-Feb 2017 2,404 91,511 7,05,33,776 
Increase (-) 77 16,190 82,08,390 
Increase (%) (-) 3 21 13 
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 31 
 In New Delhi – Ajmer Shatabdi Express (Train No.12015/12016), the 
discounted fare was proposed between Jaipur and Ajmer and between 
Jaipur and Kishangarh in both up and down directions.  The discounted fare 
was subsequently withdrawn with effect from December 2017. 
 In Chennai Central – Mysuru Shatabdi Express (Train No.12007/12008)  the 
discounted fare was proposed between Bengaluru City and Mysuru in both 
up and down directions. 
A comparison of the occupancy and earnings during January 2017 and February 
2017 with that of October 2016 and November 2016 i.e. two months before and 
after the month in which the discounted fare was implemented can be seen in 
the table below: 
Table 2.11 - Impact on occupancy and earnings  
Period Passengers (Nos.) Earnings (in `) Passengers 
(Nos.) 
Earnings (in `) 
 Between Bengaluru City and Mysore Between Mysore and Bengaluru 
City 
Oct-Nov 2016 9,129 40,18,435 11,809 48,24,945 
Jan-Feb 2017 10,361 30,38,468 13,504 38,14,879 
Increase/Decrease 1,232 (-) 9,79,967 1,695 (-) 10,10,066 
(in per cent) 13 (-) 24 14 (-) 21 
Source: PRS Data obtained from CRIS/NDLS 
The above analysis revealed that in Bengaluru City –Mysuru direction, there was 
an increase of 13 per cent in occupancy and in Mysuru– Bengaluru City direction, 
there was an increase of 14 per cent  in occupancy after implementation of 
discounted fare. 
2.1.4.3     Rebate after preparation of first chart 
Railway Board introduced 10 per cent  rebate in the last booked fare on the 
vacant berths/seats after preparation of first chart on an experimental basis for 
six months in Rajdhani/Shatabdi/Duronto trains from 20 December 2016.  The 
scheme was also applicable for allotment of vacant berths due to 'no show' 
passengers in train by TTEs.   
Audit examined the trend of occupancy and earnings after implementation of 10 
per cent  rebate on vacant berths/seats booked aft er preparation of first chart 
during January and February 2017 and compared it with the period of October 
and November 2016 i.e. two months prior to and two months after the month 
of implementation of the scheme and the results of our analysis are given 
below: 
Table 2.12 - Trend of occupancy and earnings after introduction of rebate  
Period No. of services (Shatabdi) Occupancy (CC) Earnings (`) 
Oct-Nov 2016 2,481 75,321 6,23,25,386 
Jan-Feb 2017 2,404 91,511 7,05,33,776 
Increase (-) 77 16,190 82,08,390 
Increase (%) (-) 3 21 13 
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 31 
 In New Delhi – Ajmer Shatabdi Express (Train No.12015/12016), the 
discounted fare was proposed between Jaipur and Ajmer and between 
Jaipur and Kishangarh in both up and down directions.  The discounted fare 
was subsequently withdrawn with effect from December 2017. 
 In Chennai Central – Mysuru Shatabdi Express (Train No.12007/12008)  the 
discounted fare was proposed between Bengaluru City and Mysuru in both 
up and down directions. 
A comparison of the occupancy and earnings during January 2017 and February 
2017 with that of October 2016 and November 2016 i.e. two months before and 
after the month in which the discounted fare was implemented can be seen in 
the table below: 
Table 2.11 - Impact on occupancy and earnings  
Period Passengers (Nos.) Earnings (in `) Passengers 
(Nos.) 
Earnings (in `) 
 Between Bengaluru City and Mysore Between Mysore and Bengaluru 
City 
Oct-Nov 2016 9,129 40,18,435 11,809 48,24,945 
Jan-Feb 2017 10,361 30,38,468 13,504 38,14,879 
Increase/Decrease 1,232 (-) 9,79,967 1,695 (-) 10,10,066 
(in per cent) 13 (-) 24 14 (-) 21 
Source: PRS Data obtained from CRIS/NDLS 
The above analysis revealed that in Bengaluru City –Mysuru direction, there was 
an increase of 13 per cent in occupancy and in Mysuru– Bengaluru City direction, 
there was an increase of 14 per cent  in occupancy after implementation of 
discounted fare. 
2.1.4.3     Rebate after preparation of first chart 
Railway Board introduced 10 per cent  rebate in the last booked fare on the 
vacant berths/seats after preparation of first chart on an experimental basis for 
six months in Rajdhani/Shatabdi/Duronto trains from 20 December 2016.  The 
scheme was also applicable for allotment of vacant berths due to 'no show' 
passengers in train by TTEs.   
Audit examined the trend of occupancy and earnings after implementation of 10 
per cent  rebate on vacant berths/seats booked aft er preparation of first chart 
during January and February 2017 and compared it with the period of October 
and November 2016 i.e. two months prior to and two months after the month 
of implementation of the scheme and the results of our analysis are given 
below: 
Table 2.12 - Trend of occupancy and earnings after introduction of rebate  
Period No. of services (Shatabdi) Occupancy (CC) Earnings (`) 
Oct-Nov 2016 2,481 75,321 6,23,25,386 
Jan-Feb 2017 2,404 91,511 7,05,33,776 
Increase (-) 77 16,190 82,08,390 
Increase (%) (-) 3 21 13 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
32
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 32 
Table 2.12 - Trend of occupancy and earnings after introduction of rebate  
Period No. of services 
(Rajdhani) 
Occupancy Earnings (`) 
AC 2 AC 3 AC 2 AC 3 
Oct-Nov 2016 1,529 9,742 32,064 2,27,60,091 5,03,51,000 
Jan-Feb 2017 1,476 15,580 47,726 4,24,02,483 8,30,423,67 
Increase (-) 53 5,838 15,662 1,96,42,392 3,26,913,67 
Increase (%) (-) 3 60 49 86 65 
Period No. of services 
(Duronto) 
Occupancy Earnings (`) 
AC 2 AC 3 SL AC 2 AC 3 SL 
Oct-Nov 2016 1200 2180 10827 4343 4840268 17328293 2768689 
Jan-Feb 2017 1155 3157 14795 5466 7734340 26855341 3667260 
Increase (-) 45 977 3968 1123 2894072 9527048 898571 
Increase (%) (-) 4 45 37 26 60 55 32 
Source: PRS Data obtained from CRIS/NDLS 
It was seen that 
 Though the services of Shatabdi trains were less by 77, there was an increase 
in occupancy to the extent of  21 per cent  in CC class. Also, there was an 
increase in earnings of around 13 per cent  after implementation of the 10 
per cent rebate scheme. 
 Similarly, though services of Rajdhani trains were less by 53, the occupancy 
in AC 2 tier and AC 3 tier increased  by 60 and 49 per cent respectively.  The 
earnings also increased by 86 and 65 per cent in respect of AC 2 tier and AC 3 
tier respectively after implementation of the scheme. 
 Also, while theservices of Duronto trains were less by  45, the occupancy in 
AC 2 tier, AC 3 tier and Sleeper class increased by 45, 37 and 26 per cent  
respectively.  The earnings also increased by 80, 55 and 32 per cent  in 
respect of AC 2 tier, AC 3 tier and Sleeper class respectively after 
implementation of the scheme. 
Thus, after implementation of the rebate scheme there has been an increase in 
occupancy and earnings in all the Premier trains.   
Railway Board in their reply stated (July 2017 and February 2018 ) stated  that 
during interim review after introduction of flexi fare various discount schemes 
were introduced in premier trains.  Audit review has also made a point that after 
introduction of discount/rebate schemes, there was increase in occupancy 
which indicates that rail passengers did not perceive value for their money in 
flexi fare system in Premier trains. 
2.1.5      Quality parameters for Premier trains with enhanced fare structure 
The White Paper of IR (February 2015) observed that the major issues regarding 
passenger satisfaction are availability of train accommodation, tra nsit time, 
punctuality, cleanliness at stations and in trains, catering services, reservation 
facilities etc.  

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
33
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 33 
Parliamentary Committee about passenger fare desired that with increase in 
train fares, attention be also paid in augmenting/improving passenge r amenities 
and facilities in trains and at Railway stations. 
Audit examined the punctuality of Rajdhani/Duronto/Shatabdi trains and 
obtained feedback from passengers on services provided by Railways. These are 
discussed in the following paragraphs. 
2.1.5.1 Punctuality 
Punctuality is one of the most important parameter of the quality of service 
being provided to the passengers. The punctuality of Rajdhani/  Shatabdi/ 
Duronto trains terminated in each Zonal Railway during February 2017 (subject 
to a maximum o f two trains in each category) was reviewed in audit. It was 
observed that 
 In 19 Rajdhani trains, out of 311 services, 243 services (78 per cent ) were 
delayed and only 68 services maintained their punctuality.  
 In 22 Duronto trains, out of 252 services, 16 7 services (66 per cent ) were 
delayed and only 85 services maintained their punctuality.  
 In 22 Shatabdi trains taken up for the study, out of 544 services, 347 services 
(64 per cent ) were delayed and only 197 services maintained their 
punctuality.  
 In fou r Rajdhani Trains
16, all the 76 services during the month of February 
2017 did not maintain punctuality. Similarly , all six Duronto 17 and six 
Shatabdi18 trains with 48 and 149 services respectively did not maintain their 
punctuality during February 2017.   
Annexure 2.4 
Thus, even after introduction of flexi fare, punctuality of trains has not been 
maintained.  
2.1.5.2 Passenger feedback on quality of services 
To ascertain the opinion of travelling passengers on flexi fare system, Audit 
administered a survey qu estionnaire to 806 passengers travelling in 16 Shatabdi 
and 11 Rajdhani during the month of April 2017 and May 2017. 
(i) To a question on ‘ Whether Indian Railways have provided any improvement 
in the services rendered commensurate with enhanced fare’ , 495 passengers 
(61 per cent) replied in negative.   
(ii) To a question on ‘ Do you feel that you derive the value for the money and 
time you have spent by travelling in Premium train with flexi fare? ’ 445 
                                                           
16(12302 – New Delhi – Howrah, 12314 – New Delhi – Sealdah, 12433 – Chennai – New Delhi, 22692 – New Delhi – KSR 
Bengaluru) 
17(12260 – New Delhi – Sealdah, 12274 – New Delhi – Howrah, 12281 – Bhubaneswar – New Delhi, 12273  – Howrah – 
New Delhi, 12286 – New Delhi – Secunderabad, 12214 – New Delhi – Yesvantpur) 
18(12033 – Kanpur-New Delhi, 12003 – Lucknow - New Delhi, 12041 – Howrah – New Jalpaiguri,  12027 – Chennai – KSR 
Bengaluru, 12007 – Chennai – Mysuru, 12002 – New Delhi – Habibganj) 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
34
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 34 
passengers (55 per cent) replied in the negative and 361 passenge rs (45 per 
cent) replied in affirmative. 
(iii) To a question on ‘ Given the travel time, flexi fare without value addition, 
would you prefer to travel by flight/bus’, 497 passengers (62 per cent) replied 
in affirmative. 
(iv) These passengers were further asked to indi cate areas which required 
improvement.   
 324 passengers (65 per cent ) stated that food served in trains requires 
improvement 
 97 passengers travelling in  AC 2 and AC 3 class of expressed that bed -
rolls required improvement 
 176 passengers (36 per cent ) state d that punctuality needed to be 
improved 
 181 passengers (37 per cent ) stated that cleanliness inside the coach 
required improvement. 
 280 passengers (57 per cent) indicated that cleanliness of toilets required 
improvement. 
 Other significant issues identifie d by passengers for improvement 
included prevention of unauthorised vendors, cleanliness at station and 
waiting area, more options/variety in food served, behaviour of pantry 
car staff, provision of television, mobile/laptop charging points, cleaning 
of windows and curtains. 
Thus, passengers expect better quality services commensurate with enhanced 
fare. At present many of them feel that they have not derived value for money 
and time spent in the Premier trains and that they would prefer to switch over 
to other modes of transport.  
2.1.6 Conclusion 
The decision to implement flexi -fare scheme in all Rajdhani, Duronto and 
Shatabdi trains irrespective of the demand and occupancy resulted in decrease 
in occupancy in all classes except Sleeper class in Duronto tr ains. There were 
instances of minor increases in occupancy in a few premier trains. T he 
occupancy increased only in a few Premier trains. Though the Railways had 
introduced enhanced/dynamic fare in various formats (Enhanced Tatkal fare in 
Premier trains, S uvidha trains and Special trains with Tatkal fare) before 
introducing the flexi fare scheme, they did not take into consideration the fact 
that the occupancy in all classes (except sleeper class in Suvidha Trains) where 
enhanced/dynamic fare were implement ed was very low and AC 2 and AC 3 in 
these trains were not finding adequate patronage. In AC 3 class also, which is 
one of the most profitable classes, the occupancy dropped significantly after 
introduction of flexi fare and the vacant berths increased fro m 0.66 per cent in 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
35
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 35 
pre-flexi period to 4.46 per cent in post-flexi period. As such, introduction of flexi 
fare in AC 3 Tier class in the present form was not judicious. Even in terms of 
absolute numbers, the Premier trains carried 2,40,79,899 passengers du ring 
post flexi period as compared to 2,47,36,469 passengers during pre -flexi period 
and thus registered a de -growth of 2.65 per cent passengers despite availability 
of higher number of berths/seats. Though Railways earned ` 552 crore from 
passenger earnin gs from the Premier trains post flexi fare system during 9 
September 2016 to 31 July 2017 , they carried 6.75 lakh less passengers in 
Premier trains during 9 September 2016 to 31 July 2017 despite a three per cent 
increase in berth potential as compared to the previous year period from 9 
September 2015 to 31 July 2016. Thus, there is a need for review and fine tuning 
in the scope of the scheme so that not only more revenue is earned but number 
of passengers also increase, thus, further enhancing revenue . Railway Board in 
their reply (February 2018) stated that a Committee has been constituted to 
review the flexi fare/ variable fare system over Indian Railways. The Committee 
has submitted report on 16 January 2018 and their recommendations are under 
consideration of the Board. 
The occupancy of Mail/Express Trains in the routes where Premier trains run,  
was found to be much more than the Premier trains during the months test 
checked (October 2016 and February 2017). As such, passengers preferred to 
travel by Mail/Express trains over the Rajdhani/Duronto/Shatabdi trains despite 
a higher travel time for Mail/Express trains. 
A comparison with air fare for different Advance Reservation Periods in 13 
sectors also showed that air fares were cheaper than the respective train fares 
for a large number of routes. As such , when compared to the cost and time 
taken for travel by Premier trains, air fare became a cheaper and preferable 
mode of travel. While in air fares the prices of tickets increase with increase in 
demand, in flexi fare, there is a fixed increase in fares after every 10 per cent of 
the tickets booked irrespective of the demand. By paying a higher price for an 
air ticket, a passenger is ensured a confirmed seat, but a passenger who 
purchases a waitlisted train ticket by paying a higher amount does not have an 
assurance of confirmed ticket. Thus, charging a higher fare without providing 
confirmed seat/berth would force passengers to explore other available 
alternatives.  Railways have recently introduced a new Ra jdhani Train between 
Hazrat Nizamuddin and Mumbai, which would travel the distance in two hours 
less time than the regular Rajdhani for which Railway propose to charge higher 
fare for reduction in travel time. Linking of increased fare with a value additio n 
in the quality of service is a welcome step in this direction.  
Railway Board introduced a few measures such as  reducing the Tatkal quota 
from 30 per cent to 10 per cent, discounted fare in AC Chair Car of two Shatabdi 
trains and 10 per cent  rebate in th e last fare on the vacant berths/seats after 
preparation of first chart during December 2016. These measures improved the 
occupancy of the Premier trains to some extent.  

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
36
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 36 
Passenger Survey showed that passengers expect better quality services 
commensurate w ith enhanced fare. At present, many of them feel that they 
have not derived value for money and time spent in the Premier trains and that 
they would prefer to switch over to other modes of transport.  
2.1.7      Recommendations 
1. Railways may  review and fine  tune the scope of the scheme so that not 
only more revenue is earned but number of passengers also increase, thus, 
further enhancing revenue. Instead of enhancing fare across all classes and 
routes, Indian Railways may consider reviewing the fare structur e on the 
basis of demand and occupancy in different routes.  
2. Railway Board may explore the possibility of rationalising the fare 
structure across all types of trains instead of targeting Premier trains which 
was already having a separate increased fare structure.  
3. Instead of a llotting 90 per cent seats/berths under flexi fare scheme and 
leaving only 10 per cent seats/berths for normal fare , i t is recommended 
that at least 50 per cent seats/berths should be allotted for normal fare.   
4. While paying a higher a ir fare, a passenger is assured a confirmed seat, 
whereas under flexi fare scheme, when a passenger books a waitlisted 
ticket at 40 to 50 per cent higher fare, he is not assured of a confirmed 
seat. It is recommended that for the uncertainty a waitlisted p assenger 
undergoes, he should be compensated by way of a lower fare. 
2.2 Management of commercial plots and parking spaces near 
stations by Commercial department in Indian Railways 
2.2.1 Introduction 
Indian Railways (IR) owned 
4,76,001 hectares (ha) of 
land19 as on 31 March 2017. 
Land area measuring 
3,70,158 ha (77.76 per cent 
of total land) is used for 
operational and service 
infrastructure. Railway land 
is also licensed for various 
purposes such as 
afforestation, grow more 
food scheme, pisciculture 
and commercial licensing . 
Besides above, 51,648 ha land is vacant and 862 ha land under encroachment. 
The breakup of the usage of Railway Land as on 31 March 2017 is given in Graph 
2.3.  
                                                           
19 As per records of Land and Amenities Directorate of Railway Board 
Graph 2.3: Usage of railway land as on 31 March 2017  
(in hectares) 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
37
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 37 
Para 1008 of Indian Railways Engineering Code enjoins upon railway 
administration to develop the resources and put to profitable use any areas of 
land in its occupation and lying idle. As per provisions under Para 1010 of Indian 
Railways Engineering Code, the Engineering or any other Department of the 
Railway as decided by the G eneral Manager at his discretion is responsible for 
management of land in the occupation of the IR. Zonal Railway Administrations 
are permitted to grant land under license for purposes, whether or not 
connected with Railway working
20. Land (other than stati on areas) including 
sidings is under the control and management of the Engineering Department of 
Railways. Land within the station area and near siding for advance stacking of 
goods is under the control and management of Commercial Department of 
Railways. Commercial Department gives land licenses to outsiders for stacking 
rail-borne goods or for any other specified purpose such as operating 
cycle/scooter stand, car parking etc.  
Background 
Minister of Railway in the budget speech for the year 2016 -1721expressed 
concern over low generation (less than five per cent) of revenues through non -
traffic sources and expressedthe aim of reaching world average (10 to 20 per 
cent) by monetizing assets and undertaking other revenue yielding activities. A 
Non-fare Revenue Directorate was constituted at Railway Board 22 in April 2016  
for commercial exploitation of vacant land, parking of vehicles in railway land 
other than stations besides enhancing revenues through advertisements and 
other sources. Surplus land of Railways is  one such non-traffic source where the 
Railway Administration should endeavour to maximise revenue by profitable use 
of such areas in its occupation. 
In previous studies23 conducted in audit, the issues related to m anagement and 
utilisation of railway land under the control of Engineering Department of 
Railways were covered. The present study is focused on review of management 
of plots and parking spaces near stations under the control of Commercial 
Department of IR. The land plots adjacent to Railway statio ns and at prime 
locations are much sought after and have huge potential for revenue 
generation. The plots of land near railway stations were allotted to parties and 
were traditionally being used for stacking of goods for transportation by the 
railways. However, after abolition of 'small and piecemeal booking of wagons'
24 
in 1980s, these plots were not taken back from plot holders and generally used 
for the purpose not connected with the working of the railways. Though the 
Railway Board  had issued various cir culars on commercial licensing of railway 
land from time to time, the management of such commercial plots after 
                                                           
20Para 1013 of  Indian Railway Code for Engineering Department 
21presented in the Parliament on 25 February 2016 
22Railway Board’s letter No. 2016//O&M/6/2 dated 28.04.2016 (Office Order No. 20 of 2016) 
23Performance Audit on “Land Management in Indian Railways” (Report No. PA 8 of 2008), Theme Based Audit on 
“Commercial Utilization of Surplus Railway Land”(Report No. 32 of 2011 -12), Theme Based Audit on “Management of 
vacant land in Indian Railways” (Report No.24 of 2015, Volume II, Chapter 4) 
24 In case of booking of goods by more than  one party in a wagon 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
38
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 38 
abolition of 'small and piecemeal booking of wagons' has not been addressed. 
Despite taking up the issue with the Railway Board by Audit in Januar y 2016, no 
suitable guidelines have been framed by Ministry of Railways to address the 
issue.     
Though share of earnings from commercial plots is smaller in magnitude, there 
is significant revenue earning potential which has largely remained untapped as 
adequate attention has not been given by the Zonal Railway administrations. 
Audit, in the present study, assessed the steps taken by the railways to 
maximise earnings from exploitation of commercial plots adjacent to railway 
stations and at other prime loc ations having huge potential for revenue 
generation. 
Organizational structure 
The responsibility of laying down the policy and framing the rules and 
regulations with regard to licensing of Railway land for commercial purpose, 
rests with the ‘Land Managemen t and Amenities Directorate’ of the Railway 
Board functioning under the overall supervision of the Member Engineering. At 
the Zonal Railway level, the Chief Commercial Manager is the implementing and 
co-ordinating authority for various policies/orders issu ed by the Railway Board 
from time to time for the land under the control of Commercial Department. 
The implementation of instructions/directives at divisional level rests with the 
Senior Divisional Commercial Manager for the land within station areas and near 
sidings for advance stacking of goods.  At the field level, management of land 
plots rests with the Commercial Inspectors/Station Managers. 
Audit Objectives 
The Thematic Audit was undertaken with a view to assess 
1. The extent to which the Zonal Railway Ad ministrations were complying with 
the laid down rules and provisions for management of commercial plots. 
2. The adequacy and efficiency of the system of allotment of land/plots, 
documentation of commercial plots, execution of agreements, utilization of 
available commercial plots and realization of license fee. and 
3. The effectiveness of the measures undertaken to prevent un -authorized 
occupation of commercial plots and settlement of cases under litigation. 
Audit Criteria  
The provisions made in the Railways Code s and Manuals, viz. Indian Railway 
Commercial Manual, Indian Railway Code for Accounts Department (Volume I), 
Indian Railway Code for Engineering Department and Indian Railway Works 
Manual and Railway Board’ instructions issued from time to time were taken  as 
the criteria for conducting this study.   
Audit Scope, Methodology and Sample 
A period of three years from 2014 -15 to 2016- 17 was covered under the study, 
including cases of previous periods contemporaneous in nature wherever 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
39
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 39 
needed. The study covered examination of r ecords at Zonal Railway 
Headquarters, Divisional offices and field offices of the seven Zonal Railways viz. 
SER, ECoR, NER, NFR, NR, SCR and CR 25, where 1,5 54 plots26 covering area of 
148.88 ha of land is under the control of the Commercial Department. Of th is, 
984 plots covering an area of 115 ha had been licensed to various licensees. 
Audit selected, 491 plots for detailed review across these seven Zonal Railways. 
Two other Zonal Railways viz. ER and SR were also selected to study the licences 
of car parkin g. In all, 55 stations were selected to study the licences of 
commercial plots and car parking  and 108 parking lots in nine Zonal Railways 
were reviewed in Audit. In the selected stations all licenses of plots, agreements, 
contracts for licensing of plots,  cycle/motor cycle/scooter/car parking were 
reviewed. Joint Inspections by Audit along with Railway officials were also 
carried out to ascertain the actual land use in the field.  
Annexure 2.5 a and 2.5 b 
Audit findings 
2.2.2 Standing Committees for licens ing of railway land at Zonal and 
Divisional level 
Railway Board reviewed the policy on commercial licensing of railway lands and 
issued detailed guidelines (August 1995). Railway Board further issued a Master 
Circular 
27 (February 2005) on commercial licens ing of land incorporating all the 
earlier policy instructions. The salient features of the policy were as follows: 
 Temporary licensing of railway land not connected with railway working was 
banned; however, existing licensees could be renewed from time to time so 
long the land was not required by railway for its own purposes. 
 Licensing of ordinary commercial plots connected with railway working 
would be done with the personal approval of General Manager in 
consultation with Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts Officer (FA&CAO). 
 License would be renewed by Divisional Railway Manager (DRM) on the 
recommendation of Committee of Divisional Heads of Engineering, 
Commercial and Finance Departments.   
In case of fresh licensing, at Zonal level, a Standing Committee 28 consisting of 
Chief Engineer, Chief Commercial Manager and FA&CAO examines cases 
connected with railway working as indicated above except Shops/Retail Depots 
etc. The Committee submits recommendations to General Manager for 
approval.At Divisional level, the Committee consisting of Senior Divisional 
Engineer, Senior Divisional Commercial Manager and Senior Divisional Finance 
Manager reviews annually whether the traffic commitments by the licensees of 
                                                           
25 After selection, it was seen that CR did not have any commercial plot in the selected stations. Thus, only parking lots 
were reviewed in CR. 
26 Includes 294 plots in BSB Division of NER, where area of land was not on record. 
27 Railway Board’s letter No. 2005/LML/18/8 dated 10.02.2005 
28Para 4 of Railway Board's Circular of 2005 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
40
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 40 
the commercial plots have actually materialised and in c ase of any deviation, 
initiate suitable corrective action including de -licensing and vacation as 
necessary. 
Audit observed that 
 Standing Committee of three Head of Departments hadnot beenset up in 
two Zonal Railways (NER and NFR). In SER, though the Commit tee was 
formed, the Committee was entrusted the work of only signing of pending 
agreements and not for reviewing the volume of traffic offered by plot 
holders. As such, the Committee’s scope of work was limited. 
 At Divisional level, the Standing Committee consisting of Divisional Heads of 
Engineering, Commercial and Finance was not set up in NER and ECoR. In 
NR, the Committee was set up in Ferozpur and Umbala Divisions only. 
 Out of seven selected Zonal Railways, fresh licenses were given only intwo 
Zonal Ra ilways (NFRand SCR) during the review period.In all the selected 
Zonal Railways, commercial plots were given on short period license basis. 
However, these were notrenewed in four selected Zonal Railways (SER, 
ECoR, NER and NEFR). 
Thus, the mechanism of Sta nding Committee to examine fresh cases of 
licensing of commercial plots and monitoring them was not being used 
effectively in the selected Zonal Railways. 
2.2.3 Maintenance of records at Divisional Commercial Office and Stations 
Chapter VIII of the Indian Railway Works Manual  includes detailed 
instructions/guidelines about the acquisition, management and disposal of land. 
For the land under the Commercial Department viz. station areas and sidings, 
the responsibility of allotment of land and realisation of l icense fee rests with 
the Commercial Department.  
(a) Audit observed that 
 At Zonal Headquarters as well as in the Divisional Commercial offices, the 
Railway Administration had no data base of the commercial plots in all the 
selected seven Zonal Railways.  
 While the digitization of land records had been done to large extent in the 
plots managed by the Engineering Department, the same was yet to start in 
respect of plots managed by Commercial Departments  in the selected Zonal 
Railways. 
 There was no separate l and management cell in Commercial Department 
both at Zonal Headquarter and Divisional Level in any of the selected Zonal 
Railways. The Land Management Cell at the Zonal and Divisional level which 
manages the plots of Engineering Department, did not monitor  the plots of 
Commercial Departments and they also do not have any database/details of 
Commercial Plots in all selected seven Zonal Railways. 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
41
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 41 
(b) Audit examined the maintenance of records of plots allotted by their 
Commercial Departments in the selected se ven Zonal Railways. It was observed 
that: 
 In ECoR, 144 plots covering 42,523 sqm in Cuttack under Khurda Road 
Division were allotted as commercial plots before independence. Records in 
respect of these plots were,  however, not available with Commercial 
Department. 
 In SER, details of initial allotment of plots in four 29 stations under Kharagpur 
Division were not available. In Kolaghat, there were 170 commercial plots, 
but the vital details such as area of plot, date of allotment, renewal of 
license agreement and license fee recovered were not available in respect of 
32 plots.  
 In NER, copies of license agreements were not available at five selected 
stations30. Records of outstanding license fees were also not available in two 
selected stations 31. In Lucknow Divi sion, there were 102 commercial plots, 
but details of 32 plots such as the area of plot, date of allotment, renewal of 
license and license fee recovered were not available. 
Thus, records related to licensing of land, fixation of license fee, renewal of 
license agreement and recovery of license fee  etc. were not available with the 
Railways in respect of a significant number of stations to monitor timely 
collection of license fee from the licensees. 
During Exit Conference (October 2017) SER Administration opi ned that a 
separate land cell needs to be set up by the Commercial Department for 
managemet of commercial plots and land records digitized for proper 
management. Whereas, NER and SCR Administrations contended that as 
Engineering Department is the custodian  of land, records should be maintained 
by Engineering Department. 
2.2.3.1  License Register  
As per provisions
32, a License Register should be maintainedat all the stations. A 
separate page should be allotted for each plot and the index should be kept 
posted up -to-date to facilitate easy reference. Station Manager is personally 
responsible to ensure that the required particulars are correctly posted in the 
License Register in accordance with the information furnished by the Divisional 
Office. Station Manager s (SMs) are responsible for realizing the licence fee and 
other charges due from licensees at their stations as stipulated in the agreement 
and for accounting the same. Any case of encroachment or subletting of the 
licensed land or violation of other stipu lations of the agreement by the licensee 
should be reported to the Senior Divisional Commercial Manager (Sr.DCM).  In 
addition, a monthly statement showing the particulars of recovery of licence fee 
                                                           
29Andul, Kolaghat, Panskura and Balasore 
30Lucknow City, Basti, Colonelganj, Naugarh, Shahmatganj 
31Lucknow City, Basti 
32Para 3014 of Indian Railway Commercial Manual (Volume II) 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
42
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 42 
during the month should be submitted to the Sr.DCM and to the Traffic 
Accounts Office, along with the relevant balance sheet. In Railways, where the 
work is decentralized, this statement should be sent to Divisional Accounts 
Office instead of Traffic Accounts Office. 
Audit observed that 
 License Registers were not maintained in the Station Manager (SM) offices in 
NR and SCR. These were, however, maintained in all the selected stations in 
SER, one station each
33in NER, NFR and ECoR.  
 In SER, separate page for each plot was not allotted in the register of four 
stations34. In ECoR and NER, detailed entries as per prescribed format were 
not made in the Register. 
 In all selected Zonal Railways, monthly statement showing position of 
recovery of license fee and outstanding recovery was not regularly sent by 
SMs to divisional offices. 
 In SER 35, license fee bills/demand notices were not issued to plot holders. 
License fee was collected by SM  (Kolaghat and Panskura) as and when plot 
holders made payments. In respect of other stations of SER, the following 
were noticed: 
 In Balasor e station, license fee was fixed at enhanced rate in the year 
2006 in terms of Railway Board’s order of 2005. The plot holders had 
made payment up to March 2011 at revised rate and thereafter no 
license fee had been paid due to litigation. At the end of Ma rch 2017, 
license fee amounting to ` 6 lakh remained unrealized from two plot 
holders. 
 In Andul station, all the plot holders (21 nos.) had stopped payment of 
license fee since December 1997. Reasons for the same were not 
available on record. License fee, at the end of March 2017, amounting to 
` 3.24 crore remained unrealized from plot holders. 
 In Kuldiha station, one plot holder holding 55 plots had made payment 
up to 2003 and thereafter filed court case against eviction order issued 
by Railway Administration for not fulfilling the target of traffic. Thus, the 
license fee in respect of 55 plots was outstanding for recovery for the 
last 14 years. 
 In Manoharpur station, a bill was raised for license fee of  ` 9.09 crore 
pertaining to period 2007 -08 to 2014 -15on SAIL.However, no records in 
support of receipt of payment from SAIL, was available with the Railway.  
It was also noticed that license fee at normal rate for the year 1981, 
1985 and 1991 from SAIL was also outstanding for recovery.  
 In Kolaghat station, one plot holder (Plot No.45) approached (December 
2016) the railway administration to surrender the plot but railway did 
not take over the possession of the plot as the plot had a structure on it. 
                                                           
33Colonelganj in NER, Jogighopa in NFR, Brahmapur in ECoR 
34Panskura, Balasore, Manoharpur and Kuldiha 
35Kharagpur division 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
43
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 43 
Due to delay in takeover by the railway, this piece of land  was 
susceptible to encroachment. 
 In NER, in the records of Divisional office, Lucknow there were 21 
commercial plots at Colonelganj station, whereas in the records of the 
concerned station, details of only 19 plots were available. Thus, there 
was lack of coordination between Divisional office and the concerned 
station. 
Thus, the Station Managers did not ensure proper maintenance of records, 
timely realisation of rent and timely reporting of events to the divisional office 
in the stations test checked by Audit.  
During Exi t Conference ( September/December 2017 ), NER and SCR 
Administration stated that as Engineering Departemnt is the custodian of land 
and the plots are maintained by them, license regisers should be maintained by 
the Engineering Department.  ECoR Administration assured to take remedial 
action in this regard.  
2.2.3.2 Licensing Agreements 
Railway Board instructed
36 that in each case of licensing, proper agreement 
must be executed between the Zonal Railway Administration and the licensees 
before the  licensee is given possession of the land/plot. This must be strictly 
followed and for any violation of these instructions, the official handing over 
land before the execution of agreement shall be held personally responsible by 
the Railway Administration. A copy of agreement will be provided to the Station 
Manager by the Divisional office to ensure that the conditions attached to 
license are correctly met by the licensee.At Divisional level, Sr. DCM, Sr. 
Divisional Engineer and Sr. Divisional Finance Mange r shall be responsible for 
execution of various agreements for commercial licensing. In this regard, Audit 
observed that 
 Agreements with none of the plot holders were executed in ECoR (177 plots) 
and NER (65 plots). 
 Copies of agreements were not available in 212 plots of selected four
37 
stations of Kharagpur  Division of  SER and three plots of two 38 stations in  
NFR. 
 Although agreements were executed, these were not renewed in eight 39 
plots in NR, two 40 plots in SER (Chakradharpur  Division), nine41 plots in NFR  
and three42plots inSCR. 
                                                           
36Railway Board’s letter No. 83/W2/LM/18/87 dated 29.08.1995 and 2005/LML/18/8 dated 10.02.2005 
37Andul, Kolaghat,Panskura and Balasore 
38Jogoghopa(JPZ) -1plot, Jorhat Town (JTTN)-2 plots   
39Ambala-2 plots,Ferozpur- 6 plots 
40Manoharpur and Kuldiah 
41Jogighopa(2 plots), Shibsagar Town (3 plots), Jorhat Town (3 plots),New Bongaigaon (1 plot)  
42Ravikampadu, Rechni Road and Mandamarri 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
44
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 44 
 In SER, copies of license agreements for commercial plots were available in 
ChakradharpurDivisional office, but the same were not available in two SM  
offices of Kuldiha and Manoharpur. In SER, the following was observed 
further: 
 From t he register maintained at Manoharpur station (Chakradharpur  
Division), it was seen that between the years 1991 to 2017, the number 
of plot holders have reduced from 17 to 01 and the number of plots from 
79 to 03.  From the record, it was seen that only four  plot holders had 
surrendered 21 plots in the year 1991. Thereafter, no records were 
maintained to show the number of plots surrendered/cancelled in 
subsequent years. In the absence of relevant information/records, 
possibility of unauthorized occupation of  these plots cannot be ruled 
out. A cross check of records at the Sr.DCM’s office at Chakradharpur, 
showed that there were 13 plots under four plot holders atManoharpur 
station at the end of 2016 -17. As such, the position at divisional office 
and concerned  station was not reconciling. This  indicated lack of co -
ordination between Divisional office and concerned station. 
During joint inspection,  SM/Manoharpur could not explain the  location 
of all the plots as appearing in the Divisional office records (13 plo ts 
under 4 plot holders). SM is the custodian and responsible for managing 
the Commercial plots and his unawareness about the details of the plots 
were indicative of possible unauthorised occupation of plots. In absence 
of complete details of plots andstat us of plots licensed, the possibility of 
non-recovery of licensing fee cannot be ruled out. Also, the railway 
administration is not aware whether there is any encroachment of 
railway land. 
 As per records of  Chakradharpur Division, there were 73 plots (13,0 49 
sqm) in Kuldiha station, out of which 55 plots (9,197 sqm) were allotted 
to a single licensee. The details of remaining 18 plots (3,852 sqm) were 
not made available. 
 In NFR, two
43 commercial plots were allotted on the basis of temporary 
stacking order issued by Divisional office, but no agreement was executed. 
 In SCR, in case of three plots 44 agreements were not renewed after 01 April 
2017. A plot (26,610.10 sqm) at Ravikampadu station was licensed to M/s 
Maheswari Minerals. Though the period of contract e xpired on 30 June 
2016; no renewal of agreement was done. Although there was demand of 
this plot for stacking of laterite ore, the plot was not allotted to anyone. 
Reasons for not licensing  the plot (from 01 July 2016) were not on record. 
Railways lost an opportunity to earn  a license fee of  ` 5.84 lakh for the 
period 01 July 2016 to 31 March 2017. 
                                                           
43Fakiragram (area-350 sqm) and  Jogighopa (area-5,320.84 sqm) 
44Ravikampadu, Rechni Road and Mandamarri 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
45
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 45 
Thus, railways needed to strengthen the land management by ensuring timely 
execution of agreements and their renewal when due and maintain a 
comprehensive database of land available under the jurisdiction of the 
Commercial Department. 
2.2.4 Utilisation of land/plot by the licensees/plot holders 
Under the provisions 45, railway land/plots/buildings and other structures within 
railway premises are lice nsed to outsiders for stacking rail -borne goods or for 
any other specified purpose such as operating a cycle stand etc. Copy of the 
license agreement, indicating the purpose for which the license granted, should 
be provided to the Station Manager by the Di visional Office to ensure that the 
conditions attached to license are correctly fulfilled by the licensee. The Station 
Manager and inspecting officials should ensure that plots have been properly 
demarcated and that there are no unauthorized infringements.  On review of 
status of utilisation of railway plot/land in the Zonal Railways , Audit observed 
the following:  
 Information about the present utilization of all the plots was not available 
with SM in a number of the cases. No survey was done by the railways  to 
assess the present use of these plots allotted long time ago. In SER, where a 
survey of 18 plots was done by the railways, it was found that these were 
being used for residence, shops including wine shops, satta corner, electric 
goods, auto stand, etc.  Joint inspections by Audit teams along with railway 
officials also revealed that presently the plots were being used for shops, 
offices, godowns, factory etc.  
 Plots were illegally transferred from original allottee to sub -allottee and 
even by sub -allottees to other occupants through transferring on sale deed 
between the parties on low value non -judicial stamp paper in presence of 
witness and deed of donation and registered in the state government sub -
registry office. 
 Railway plots were given on temporary license basis. No plot holder was 
permitted to erect any permanent structure except with specific approval of 
the Railway Administration. It was, however, noticed that the plot holders 
had occupied the plots unauthorized and erected permanent structures. 
 Instances were noticed wherein, commercial plots allotted to various 
government companies /corporations, were not vacated, though not being 
used by them. 
Annexure 2.6 
Thus, railway plots were being used for purposes other than the purpose for 
which it was allotted initially to the plot holders. Railways had not undertaken 
any survey to assess the present use of the plots and take action to cancel the 
land allotment. 
 
                                                           
45Para 3013 of Indian Railway Commercial Manual (Volume II) 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
46
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 46 
2.2.5 Sub-letting of plots by the original licensees 
Commercial plots near the stations were given on temporary license for stacking 
and loading of goods. After introduction of block rake 46 booking, goods as 
‘Small’ and ‘Piecemeal Wagons’ by railways was phased out by the end of 1980s 
and as such  the purpose for which the plots were originally license d were not  
relevant thereafter.  However, no efforts were made by the Railway 
Administration to de -license and to get the land vacated by small traders 
occupying commercial plots. These plots still remained either in the hands of 
original licence holders in very few cases or handed over by them to others un -
authorizedly in most of the cases.  In June 1998, Railway Board 47 gave 
opportunity to the existing plot holders who were running their business on 
power of attorney on behalf of original licensees to get license of t he plots in 
their name. Considering the problem and huge revenue loss to Railways, Railway 
Board in July 2004, further decided to permit as one time opportunity for 
change of name of allottee, regardless of whether they were legal heirs or not 
the original  allottee. However, such permission of licensing would be for five 
years. After five years, all plots were to be auctioned afresh and allotted to 
highest bidder duly giving first right of refusal to the present occupant. 
(a) In four selected Zonal Railways  (SER, NER , ECoR  and SCR), out of 467 
commercial plots, Audit observed that 
(i) only 129 plots (27.62 per cent) were occupied by the original allottees,  
(ii) only one plot (0. 21 per cent ) was formally transferredto licensee, but no 
agreement was executed, 
(iii) 31 plots  (6.64 per cent ) were occupied either by legal heir or others on 
power of attorney, 
(iv) 121 plots ( 25.91 per cent ) were unauthorized occupied either by family 
members/relatives of the original allottees or outsiders, 
(v) Zonal Railway Administration did not have a ny information about the 
remaining 185 plots (39.61 per cent). 
Annexure 2.7 
(b) In SER, it was observed that though the Railway Administration claimed 
that in some cases plots were formally transferred ‘on power of attorney’ and 
recorded in the register of  stations, the power of attorney was not made 
available to audit for verification. It could not be established whether the power 
of attorney was legally acceptable to the railways. Railway was accepting license 
fee in the names of the original allottees wi thout verifying whether they were 
actually alive or from the present occupants without verifying the occupation of 
the commercial plot. In NER, four plots were unauthorized occupied by original 
allotees/heirs of original allottees/outsiders since 2000 in Naugarh station under 
Lucknow Division. Records were not available to ascertain whether any of the 
Zonal Railway Administrations had taken action to permit as one time 
                                                           
46Booking of entire rake for carrying bulk goods/consignment such as coal, cement etc. 
47Railway Board’s letter No. 97/LML/18/67 dated 25.6.1998 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
47
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 47 
opportunity for change of name of allottees as per Railway Board’s instruction 
of July 200 4, regardless of whether they were legal heir or not of the original 
allottees. Besides, no action was also taken to auction afresh after five years and 
allotted to highest bidder duly giving first right of refusal to the present 
occupant. 
Thus, information available with the Zonal Railway Administrations regarding 
the commercial plots licensed by them was incomplete. A significant number 
(33 per cent) of plots were occupied by persons other than the original allottee. 
Despite instructions of Railway Board,  Zonal Railways neither  took action to 
give one time opportunity for change of name of allottees nor auction the 
same. 
2.2.6 Fixation and realisation of license fee 
In August 1995 and February 200548, Railway Board formulated policy guidelines 
for licensing of railway land. As per these guidelines, licence fee was to be fixed 
at the prescribed percentage of land value for the specific purposes; the land 
was to be used. Market value of land of the surrounding areas as on 1 January 
1985 was to be taken to serv e as base value for fixing the licence fee. The land 
value was to be increased every year on the 1
st of April, starting from 1 April 
1986 at the rate of 10 per cent over the previous year’s land value to arrive at 
the land value for the following year. Fro m 1 April 2004 onwards, the land value 
was to be increased at the rate of seven per cent every year over the previous 
year’s value. However, for fresh cases of licensing of plots, licence fee was to be 
fixed after obtaining the current value of land. The m inimum licence fee of plots 
should be ` 1,000 per annum. Para 1025 of Indian Railway Code for Engineering 
Department stipulates that recovery of licence fee should be done in advance. In 
addition, payment of security deposit should also be made. In case of  non-
payment of advance occupation fee, liquidated damages at the rate of one per 
cent per month or part thereof to be charged. 
2.2.6.1 Outstanding license fee 
Audit observed that license fee of commercial plots were not fixed based on 
market value ofland as instructed by the Railway Board
49. In five selected 
stations50 in SER, two stations 51 at NFR and one station 52each in ECoR  and NER. 
The other irregularities noticed in fixing and realisation of license fee in the 
Zonal Railways were as under: 
(i) In Andul and B alasorestations of SER, plot holders were not paying license 
fee since 1997 and 2014 respectively. However, no effective action was 
taken by the Railway Administration. Even old license fee payable prior to 
implementation of 2005 order of Railway Board, am ounting to ` 1.57 crore 
                                                           
48Railway Board’s letter No. 83/W2/LM/18/87 dated 29.08.1995 and 2005/LML/18/8 dated 10.02.2005 
49Railway Board’s letter No. 2005/LML/18/8 dated 10.02.2005 
50Andul, Kolaghat, Panskura, Kuldiha and Manoharpur (3 plot holders out of 4) 
51Sibsagar Town –One plot, Jorhat Town- four plots 
52Daitari in ECoR, Lucknow City in NER 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
48
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 48 
in KharagpurDivision 53 and ` 0.03 crore in Chakradharpur  Division54 was 
outstanding from the plot holders in selected stations as on March 2017.  
Based on market value of land, audit assessed that license fee recoverable in 
five55selected stations was ` 43.04 crore in Kharagpur  Division (SER) and   
` 0.20 crore in Chakradharpur Division (SER). The plot holders were utilizing 
the plots for different purposes by paying very meagre license fee to the 
railways due to non -revision of the licen se fee.  Instances of usage of the 
commercial plots and loss of revenue are given in Annexure 2.8 a and 2.8 b. 
(ii) At JammuTawi station in NR,  the outstanding amount of license fee against 
three plot holders at the end of March 2017 was ` 5.31 crore. 
(iii) In NER, Li cense fee of  ` 8.17 crore,  pertaining to the period April 1995 to 
March 2017, was pending for recovery as on 31 March 2017.  Reason for 
non-payment of license fee was attributed to refusal of allottees to pay 
license fee at the revised rates and with retros pective date. Further, in 
Lucknow Division, the Railway Administration had circulated revised rate of 
license fee w.e.f. 1st April 1985 to 156 stations, but no recovery particulars 
of the license fee at the revised rates was made available by the Railway 
Administration to audit for necessary examination. 
(iv) At Sibsagar Town and Jorhat Town stations in NFR, license fee amounting to 
` 29.33 lakh
56 was outstanding at the end of March 2017. 
Thus, plot holders were not paying license fee in a number of cases and hug e 
amount was outstanding in the selected Zonal Railways. 
2.2.6.2 Procedure of billing of license fee 
Para 1139 to 1141 of Indian Railway Code for Accounts Department (VolumeI)  
include provisions for the maintenance of ‘Register of Bills Recoverable’ in the  
Accounts Office and duties of the Accounts Department in this regard. It 
stipulates that all dues recoverable from the parties for any purpose should be 
entered in the 'Register of Bills Recoverable’, register should be reviewed 
monthly with a view to see that the bills have been correctly issued to all parties 
in time and necessary action is taken towards the realisation of the outstanding 
bills.The realisation of the bills should be vigorously pursued with the parties 
and cases of delay in payment should  be promptly brought to the notice of the 
Executive Officer concerned for expeditious action to recover the outstanding 
dues or to discontinue the service etc. The Accounts Officer should report the 
position every quarter to the FA&CAO. 
Audit observed that  in all selected Zonal Railways except CR
57, license fee bills 
were prepared by CommercialDepartment. In SER, bills for license fee were not 
                                                           
53Kolaghat,Andul,Panskura and Balasore 
54 In ChakradharpurDivision two stations was selected. Due to non -availability of land value of Manoharpur station, only 
Kuldiah station was taken both in railway’s assessment and in audit assessment. 
55Four stations in Kharagpur Division Kolaghat, A ndul, Panskura and Balasore and one station in Chakradharpur Division -
Kuldiha, due to non-availability of market value of land, Manoharpur could not be assessed. 
56 Based on the Railway Board’s instructions, the outstanding license fee worked out in audit at ` 30.58 lakh. 
57 No commercial plots in CR 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
49
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 49 
prepared by Accounts/Commercial Department. Station Managers (SMs) were 
collecting license fee from plot holders with  seven per cent increase in license 
fee over previous year, as and when plot holders approach SMs for making 
payment. It was further observed that 
 In SER, there was mismatch of figures of outstanding license fee between 
Accounts and Commercial Department i n Kharagpur division. At the end of 
March 2017, in the Bills Recoverable Register of Accounts, the outstanding 
amount from all the plot holders of Kharagpur  Division was ` 1.84 crore 
whereas the outstanding amount was ` 2.19 crore as per records of 
Commercial Department. Further, in Chakradharpur  Division, amount of bills 
was not entered in the Bills Recoverable Register maintained by the Accounts 
Department. The amount of outstanding license fee from all the plot holders 
inChakradharpurDivision at the end of March 2017 was ` 26.49 crore. 
 In ECoR  (Visakhapatnam Division) and NR (Delhi Division), amount of bills 
were not entered in the Bills Recoverable Register. 
 In NER (Lucknow Division) licence fee bills of commercial plots were not 
prepared due to litigati on. No proper data base of license fee accrued, 
recovered and outstanding was maintained at the stations, Divisional 
Commercial office and Accounts Department. 
 In NER, SCR and NFR,  license fee bill amounts were not entered in the Bills 
Recoverable Register in Accounts office.  
Bills recoverable registers were not being maintained properly which impacted 
the monitoring and recovery of license fee from the plot holders. 
2.2.6.3 Fixation of licence fee for Iron Ore stacking and its realisation 
In view of unprecedented demand for construction of private sidings for loading 
of iron ore, the Railway Board issued policy guidelines vide Freight Marketing 
Circular No. 12 of 2008  (August 2008)
58. Licence fee of railway land for 
construction of siding and advance stacki ng of iron ore was fixed at six times of 
the normal licence fee. Further, Freight Marketing Circular No. 12 of 2008 was 
withdrawn by the Railway Board in November 2014 59 mentioning that there 
would be no separate policy for ‘Iron Ore’ sidings. All sidings w ould be covered 
under the purview of ‘Liberalization of Siding Rules’ circular. 
Out of seven selected Zonal Railway, SER and ECoR were dealing with iron ore. It 
was observed that 
 In SER, in two stations (Kuldiah  and Manoharpur) over  Chakradharpur 
Division, plots were allotted for the purpose of iron ore stacking. At Kuldiha 
station, all plots (55 nos.) were allotted to a single party. Fixation of license 
fee as per extant rule was not done due to litigation.  At Manoharpurstation, 
out of 12 plots, three plot s were allotted to SAIL.  BillS for license fee of ` 
                                                           
58Railway Board’s letter No. 155(G)/2008 dated 28.08.2008 
59  Railway Board’s letter No. 99/TC(FM)/26/1 (Iron Ore)/Pt.-I dated 17.11.2014 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
50
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 50 
9.09 crore for the period  2007-08 to 2014 -15 preferred on  SAIL remained 
outstanding. Divisional office Chakradharpur (May 2015) sought clarification 
from Zonal Headquarter  regarding license fee to be  fi xed for the period 
starting from issue of circular (2008) on increase of license fee to six times 
till the date of withdrawal of the same (2014), but clarification was still 
awaited. 
 In ECoR, one plot of area 18,000 sqm at Daitari station was allotted to O rissa 
Mining Corporation for Iron Ore stacking since 1981 -82. The license fee was 
not enhanced/revised in terms of the Railway Board’s order of 2008. License 
fee due at the revised rate for the period 2008 -09 to 2014-15 worked out in 
audit was ` 1.08 crore, whereasonly ` 0.17 crore was recovered by Railway 
Administration. 
2.2.7 Licensing of land for Cycle/Motor Cycle/Scooter/Car parking  
Facility of parking of private and public vehicle
60 in railway station premises is 
provided by the railways. The Railway B oard issued policy guidelines at different 
times61. The primary objective of this policy is to extend parking facility to the 
passengers as an important amenity at all categories62 of stations i.e. A-I, A, B, C, 
D, E and F stations where such facilities are required. All endeavours should be 
made to realise maximum potential of earnings from this source. A team of 
nominated Engineering and Commercial officials shall finalize a plan for each 
station after conducting a survey of the proposed parking area with l ocations 
and dimensions clearly marked on the plan.  Contracts are to be awarded on 
open tender basis for a period of three years. In case of lack of response, 
contracts can be awarded on quotation basis for a limited period of three 
months. Railway Board m odified the policy in May 2015
63, and delinked the 
reserve price with the value of land and directed to assess the same on the basis 
of number of users, type of vehicles, parking charges prevailing at other 
locations in the area, last accepted rate etc. In each case of licensing, proper 
agreement was required to be executed
64 between the Railway Administration 
and the licensees before the licensee was given possession of the land/plot.  
(a) Scrutiny of contracts and relevant records of c ycle/motor cycle/scooter/ 
car parking at selected stations showed that in a number of stations, there were 
disputes with contractors managing the parking lots and licensee fee was yet to 
be recovered.  At Bhubaneswar Station, parking area of 2000 sqm was not under 
any contract for parking. At Howrah station, the period of licensing expired in 
July 2017 and the licensee has deposited fee beyond the period of contract and 
the tender process was  going on as the time of audit. At Vishakhapatnam 
station, the license fee was not revised on 1 April 2016 @ 10 per cent, in respect 
of three parking lots of 5673 sqm, 1844 sqm and 1640 sqm respectively, which 
                                                           
60Cycle, motorcycle, scooter, car, call taxi, radio taxi, passenger carrying commercial vehicles (PCCVs), a utos, tempos, minibus, 
bus etc. 
61Railway Board’s letter No. 2004/TGIV/8/P dated 29.10.2004, 12.02.2014 and 14.05.2015 
62 Categorised on the basis of earnings from passengers   
63Railway Board’s letter No. 2004/TG-IV/8/P dated 14.05.2015 
64Para 2.4 of  Railway Board’s letter No. 83/W2/LM/18/87 dated 29.8.1995 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
51
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 51 
led to short -recovery of the amount of `  7.27 lakh. At Gorakhpur station, an 
amount of ` 17.33 lakh for September 2015 to June 2016 w as outstanding from 
the contractor, who left the work without payment. At Katihar station, the 
contractor was allowed to manage the parking on quotation basis for one year 
and ` 1.67 lakh was outstanding against him. Two parking lots of area 1318.50 
sqm and 2200 sqm were not licensed for collection of parking fee.  
Annexure 2.9 
(b) As per Railway Board’ instructions
65, agreement should be executed 
within 30 days of issue of letter of Acceptance after deposition of Security 
Deposit and Performance Guarantee. It was noticed that out of 365 cases, in 71 
cases, agreements  were not executed before awarding of contracts. Advance 
payment was also not taken resulting in outstanding licence fee. The Railway 
Administration in some cases either could not finalise the co ntract agreement in 
time resulting in running the stand departmentally involving additional cost of 
staff or plot was lying vacant without earning any revenue. 
(c) As per Railway Board’s instructions of May 2015, the licensee should (i) 
have insurance for vehicles against loss, theft or damages etc. and submit 
receipt of such insurance to the Railway Administration for verification, (ii) pay 
the fair wages to the workers engaged by him, (iii) keep a proper record of such 
payments etc. and submit a certifica te every month to the Railway 
Administration and (iv) display rate board at conspicuous place, staff should 
wear uniform and having identity card, issue computerized coupon for A1 and A 
category station. 
During joint inspection, it was observed that insura nce of vehicle was not made 
in any of the selected station of the selected Zonal Railways or submitted 
receipt to the Railway Administration for verification.  Minimum wages were not 
paid in any of the selected station or submitted monthly return to the Rai lway 
Administration. The  staff were not wearing uniform in SER (except Tatanagar), 
ECoR, NR and SCR. The staff were not having identity card in SER, ECoR  (except 
Vishakhapatnam), and NR.  Computerized coupons were not issued by the 
licensee at A1 and A cate gory stations viz. Kharagpur, Tatanagar, Rourkela, 
Jharsuguda (SER), Cuttack, Bhubaneswar, Sambalpur,  Vishakhapatnam (ECoR) 
and all the selected stations of SCR.  During Exit Conference, SER Administration 
stated (October 2017) that presently, there was no mechanism to ensure 
enforcement of statutory obligations. ECoR Administration stated (December 
2017) that they will pursue the matter with the contractor.  
(d) During joint inspection in SER and ECoR, audit observed that 
In SER,  
(i) the station circulating ar ea (Kharagpur-South) land measuring 500 sqm was 
found occupied by Taxi Association without any agreement with the Railway 
administration. No parking charges were collected from the occupants. 
                                                           
65Railway Board’s  letter No.2004/TG-IV/8/P dated 14.5.2015 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
52
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 52 
(ii) Two plots of land 100 sqm each adjacent to cycle stand at Midnap ore were 
being utilized unauthorized by the licensee of cycle stand. 
(iii) 500 sqm of land was lying vacant at Midnaporewhere several vehicles were 
parked. 
(iv) Auto-rickshaws were found parked in group in front of both Entry and Exit 
Points of Tatanagarstation. 
(v) Unclaimed cycle and scooters at Rourkela were kept in cycle stand/parking 
plot occupying huge space. Though the report in this regard was sent to GRP 
(August 2016), no action wastaken by GRP as yet. 
(vi) In front of Jharsuguda  station (area about 1,500 sqm) number of 
Cycle/Motor cycle/Scooter/Auto rickshaw and cars were found parked. No 
parking charges, however, were collected for parking the vehicles by the 
Railway Administration. 
In ECoR, 
(i) At Cuttack (cycle stand No. 02) against the allotment of 400 sqm,  the 
licensee utilized an area of 534.61 sqm thereby encroaching extra plot of 
134.61 sqm revenue loss assed as ` 1.49 lakh per annum. 
(ii) At Bhubaneswar the licensee had been using an area of 4,628.35 sqm 
instead of 3,913 sqm allotted to him i.e. extra 715.35 sqm was un authorized 
used. The potential revenue which railways could earn from this extra land 
was assessed as  ` 5.90 lakh per annum. Date since when the present 
licensee occupied the above area unauthorizedwas not recorded. 
(iii) At Brahmapur (parking stand no. 03) an a rea of 476 sqmwas licensed. The 
licensee occupied total area of 510 sqm.  The licensee did not pay the license 
fee for the extra plot. The loss of license fee for the period from 09 Jan 2017 
to 10 July 2017 as assessed in audit worked out to ` 6.12 lakh. 
Thus, railways did not execute agreements for parking lots promptly in many 
cases and also did not enter into agreement in some places. The contractors 
were managing the parking lots in an un-professional manner and the railways 
were not able to ensure that  they provide service as per the agreements and 
recover dues from contractors. 
2.2.8 Prepaid Auto/Taxi Booth on Railway Land  
Prepaid Auto/Taxi booths are generally managed by local police/Government 
Railway Police (GRP) in the space earmarked for Auto/Tax i stand. The charges 
are collected from the taxi operators by the State Authorities like local 
police/GRP etc. and the parking charges as applicable are collected by the 
Railways either directly or through parking contractor
66 at the rates decided by 
the Divisional authorities  in consultation with Associated Finance and with the 
approval of DRM/ADRM67. Audit observed that: 
 In SER, Police Department, Government of West Bengal requested (January 
2012) the Divisional Railway Manager (DRM)/ Kharagpur for permitting them 
                                                           
66Commercial Circular No.4 of 2014 dated 12.2.2014 
67 Para 11 of  Railway Board’s letter No. 2004/TG-IV/8/P dated   12.02.2014 and 14.05.2015 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
53
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 53 
to run a pre -paid taxi booth at Santragachi station in the interest of public 
service. Proposed area for the pre -paid taxi booth was developed in 
September 2016 by the Engineering Department at a cost of ` 13 lakh 
(approx).Howrah City Police started (January 2017) operation of the pre-paid 
taxi booth without taking permission of the Railway Administration and 
without finalizing the modalities of collection/sharing of parking charges.No 
parking charges were being recovered by the Railway Administration. 
 In ECoR,  one pre-paid Taxi stands 1,225 sqm are being operated at Cuttack 
station by Police Commissioner/Cuttack since the plot was handed over  
October 2011  by the Railway Administration. Railway Administration fixed 
the reserved price at ` 9.28 lakh per annum in March 2015 and intimated the 
Commissioner of Police to float a tender. However, the tender was not 
floated and methodology of revenue sharing was also not formulated. Police 
authorities were collecting  charges from the taxi owners without sharing  it 
with the Railway. Railway sustained a loss of ` 46.44 lakh towards parking 
charges from 2012 -13 to 2016 -17. State Police Commissioner  operating one 
pre-paid auto booth at Bhubaneswar station and one pre-paid auto booth at 
Visakhapatnam station. No rele vant records or agreements of these 
operations were available with the Divisional Commercial offices. No revenue 
was shared with the Railway Administration.  During Exit Conference, ECoR 
Administration stated (December 2017) that as a measure of passenger 
amenities, the land has been handed over free to the State Police to operate 
pre-paid taxi booth and that they will look into the matter of revenue 
sharing.  
 In NR, prepaid taxi booths are being operated at New Delhi and Ghaziabad 
stations.  At Ghaziabad, p osition of recovery of parking charges could not be 
verified due to non-maintenance of records by the Railway Administration. In 
respect of New Delhi station, no parking charges were being recovered either 
directly or through Delhi traffic police. 
 In CR, prepaid Taxi booth was operated  at CSMT and LTT stations of Mumbai 
Division by entering into agreement in September and November 2011 
respectively with the Regional Transport Office (RTO), Central Zone, Mumbai 
Central. In February 2015, the Railway Administ ration proposed to collect the 
parking charges from the passenger carrying vehicles by the agency 
appointed by the RTO at a rate of ` 10 per vehicle as per the revised policy 
issued
68.  However, RTO did not agree and stated that taxi stands at railway 
stations were run by taxi drivers through their association/union for the 
benefit of taxi drivers and general public. In the year 2013 -14, 49,560 pre -
paid taxis were booked from these two stations. Taking into account, the 
parking charges @ ` 10 per vehicle, Ra ilway Administration could have 
earned ` 4.96 lakh per annum. 
                                                           
68Commercial Circular No.4 of 2014 dated 12.2.2014 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
54
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 54 
  NER, one pre -paid Auto/Taxi Booth is being operated at Gorakhpur station 
by GRP. However, Railway Administration could not furnish any record/  
agreementand detailsof license fee collected. In a bsence of records, it could 
not be ascertained whether any license fee collected by GRP was being 
shared with the Railway Administration. 
 In NFR, one pre -paid taxi booth at New Jalpaiguri was being operated and 
managed by GRP authorities. No charges or rev enue sharing was, however, 
being received by the Railway Administration for operation of pre -paid taxi 
both on the railway land. 
All the pre-paid auto/taxi booths were being operated on railway land. As per 
Commercial Circular (February 2014), the State po lice or GRP may manage 
thepre-paid auto/taxi booth, but the parking charges to be collected by the 
Railways either directly or through parking contractor. In all the above cases, 
though the State police was running the pre -paid auto/taxi booths, Railway 
Admirationsdid not take suitable action/pursue the matter with the 
authorities concerned for  collection/sharing of parking charges for running of 
pre-paid booths. 
2.2.9 Un-authorised occupation of Commercial Plots  
Railway Board from time to time has issued instructions to the Zonal Railway 
Administrations for taking steps to prevent encroachments and remove existing 
encroachments on railway land. Joint Procedure Orders (JPOs) signed between 
Chief Security Commissioner, Chief Commercial Manager and Chief Engi neerof 
the Zonal Railways entailed strict action against encroachers on the Railway land 
under Section 4 of the Railway Act, 1989. After phasing out of the ‘small’ and 
‘piecemeal wagon’ booking of traffic, the purpose for which the plots were 
allotted was no longer valid and the Railway Administration should have taken 
back possession of the plots for fresh re -allotment. There were cases of 
encroachments (Annexure 2.10) of railway land, of which some of the 
significant cases are discussed below: 
 In SER, aud it had pointed out (September 2015) the unauthorized retention 
of plots by the  unauthorized persons. Subsequently,  Kharagpur Division 
issued (December 2015) a notification in local newspapers to vacate the 
plots (except the plots where the court has issued an interim order for not to 
vacate). West Bengal Police Authorities, after publication of the vacation 
notification, took up (December 2015) the matter with General 
Manager/SER as any suomoto action for forcible eviction may lead to serious 
Law and Order problems and other adverse consequences. It was also 
requested to sensitize the field authorities of Railways along with the 
Railway Protection Force (RPF) to abstain from any such action which may 
jeopardize the peace and law and order of the area and cre ate embarrassing 
situation for the State.  No records were made available by the Railway 
Administration to Audit in support of any action taken by them to take up 
the issue at a higher level with State Government or bringing the issue to the 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
55
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 55 
notice of Railway Board.  Senior Divisional Commercial Manager further 
advised (February 2017) the SMs to collect provisional  occupation fee as per 
existing rate with instruction to include clause that ‘any revised payment as 
per revision of Railway Board, should be paid by the licensees’. However, 
revised license fee bills were not raised and collected by the Railway 
Administration. 
 In ECoR, a four wheeler parking stand at Cuttack Station (area 1106.70 sqm) 
was under encroachment of Taxi Owners Association for more than t hree 
decades. ECoR Administration allotted the said plot to Sri Mayadhar  Biswal 
in March 2012 @ ` 63,600 for three months. Taxi Owners Association filed a 
case before the Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police -cum-Executive 
Magistrate/Cuttack under secti on 144(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure 
and the contractor could not occupy the plot and run the parking business. 
The section was in force for two months, but no action was taken by Railway 
for licensing the plot after expiry of two months period. Rai lway’s lost an 
opportunity to earn revenue of ` 15.52 lakh during 2012-13 to 2016-17.  
 In ECoR, at Brahmapur station, one oil Installation of BPCL (covering an area 
of 6,253 sqm) was licensed before independence. The plot was used in 
connection with railwa y working i.e. supply of petroleum products through 
tank wagons and unloading it in the Depot. After stopping of POL traffic 
(from October 2014), the Railway served notice to BPCL authorities 
(February 2015) to stop operation, dismantle the assets and surr ender the 
land due to safety reasons i.e. electrification of crossovers to Line No.5 at 
Visakhapatnam end of Brahmapur  station. Also,  the land allotted to BPCL 
was no longer used in connection with railway’s working.  BPCL remitted 
(April 2016) license fee of ` 6.91 lakh to Railway for 2016 -17 but Zonal 
Headquarter instructed Divisional office not to receive cheque and evict 
BPCL from Brahmapur station under Public Premises (Eviction of 
Unauthorized Occupants), Act 1971. Though the Railway Administration 
terminated the license of BPCL in July 2016  and served seven days’ notice in 
August 2016, said the plot was not vacated by BPCL as yet.  
 In NR, the parking contractor at Ghaziabad station of Delhi Division had 
occupied the space in excess of allotment. Howeve r, the Station Manager 
did not convey the position of excess occupation of space by the parking 
contractor to Delhi Division. 
 In NFR, one plot measuring 2.68 acres was licensed  (in year1960) to Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation (ONGC) at Sibsagar Town of Tin sukia Division. From 
year 2001, ONGC authority refused to pay license fee (for 2.68 acres land) on 
the ground that they were possessing land measuring only 1.32 acres instead 
of 2.68 acres. They had also contended that Railway was occupying an area 
of 0.54  acre and 0.82 acre remained under unauthorized occupation. Even 
after 16 years, the issue has not been resolvedas yet and ONGC was paying 
the license fee for 1.32 acres land. At New Jalpaiguri  station, circulating area 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
56
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 56 
and car parking area, total 264 nos.  of cases of unauthorized encroachment  
measuring 1.0753 ha area came into notice against which notice has already 
been served in April 2017 by the Railway Administration. However, the 
encroachment has not been removed as yet. 
Encroachments renders large a reas of railway land unusable for any 
commercial exploitation/use by the railways and encourages misuse of railway 
land by encroachers.  
2.2.10 Commercial plots under litigation 
There were cases of litigations arising due to retrospective application of 
ordersand fixation of licence fee at higher rate etc. Inselected five  Zonal 
Railways viz. SER, ECoR, NER, NR and SCR, there were 51 court cases involving 
commercial plots, cycle stand and parking space at the beginning of 2014 -15. 
During review period (2014 -15 to 2016- 17), 14 more court cases (SER -12, NR-1, 
SR-1) were added. Out of two court cases (in SER) settled, one case was decided 
against the Railway (April 2016) in District Court, Howrah but the Railway 
Administration had not filed review petition at higher Court (till March 2017). 63 
court cases  were pending at the end of March 2017; the oldest being of 1986 
pertaining to ECoR.                 Annexure 2.11  
Review of the records revealed that the Zonal Railway Admin istrations were not 
active in pursuig  the Court cases, filing the cases at higher court against the 
decision of the lower court or early settlement of the court cases.  
Due to non -settlement of the court cases, the plot holders were earning 
revenues/enjoying benefits from the plots without pa ying any license fee to 
the Railways. 
2.2.11 Conclusion  
While a large area of land in the railways falls under the jurisdiction of the 
Engineering Department, Commercial Department is responsible for managing 
the commercial plots and parking spaces near s tations. Audit observed that 
there was no land management cell for commercial plots managed by 
Commercial Department at any level. The existing land management cell under 
the Engineering Department was not dealing with or having records of 
commercial plots. Land records were poorly maintained and not digitized. There 
was no database for land under the control of Commercial Department. Audit 
further observed that there were difference s in opinion in management of data 
of commercial plots. While SER Administration opined that a separate land cell 
needs to be set up by the Commercial Department for management of 
commercial plots and land records digitized for proper management , NER and 
SCR Administratyions contended that the plosts are maintained by the 
Engineering Department, hence the data of land, land records, license registeres 
etc. should be maintained by the Engineering Department. The mechanism of 
Standing Committee to examine fresh cases of licensing of commercial plots and  
monitoring them was not being  used effectively in the selected Zonal Railways. 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
57
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 57 
The records related to licensing of land, fixation of license fee, renewal of 
license agreement and recovery of license fee etc. were not available with the 
Railways in respect of a significant number of sta tions to monitor timely 
collection of license fee from the licensees. The Station Managers did not ensure 
proper maintenance of records, timely realisation of rent and timely reporting of 
events to the divisional office in the stations test checked by Audi t. License 
agreements were not executed and renewed timely and information about the 
land available under the jurisdiction of the Commercial Department available 
with the railways was incomplete. License fee had not been revised based on 
market value of land. 
Significant number ( 33 per cent) of plots were occupied by persons other than 
the original allottee. Large numbers of plots were unauthorised occupied by 
persons/firms. Commercial plots were illegally transferred by original allottees 
to others by way of sale, donation deed, power of attorney etc. During joint 
inspection, permanent structures were found built on commercial plots by the 
allottess/unauthorized persons.The unauthorized occupants were using plots for 
commercial/private purposes and also not  paying license fee to the Railway 
Administration.Despite instructions of Railway Board, Zonal Railways neither 
took action to give one time opportunity for change of name of allottees nor 
auction the same. Railway plots were being used for purposes other than the 
purpose for which it was allotted initially to the plot holders. Railways had not 
undertaken any survey to assess the present use of the plots and take action to 
cancel the land allotment. The plot holders were also not paying license fee in a 
number of cases and huge amount was outstanding in the selected Zonal 
Railways. 
As regards parking lots, railways did not execute agreements promptly in many 
cases and also did not enter into agreement in some places. The contractors 
were managing the parking  lots in an un -professional manner and the railways 
were not able to ensure that they provide service as per the agreements and 
recover dues from contractors. In a number of stations, though the State police 
was running the pre -paid auto/taxi booths, Railw ay Admirations did not take 
suitable action/pursue the matter with the authorities concerned for 
collection/sharing of parking charges for running of pre -paid booths.  Due to 
non-settlement of the court cases, the plot holders were earning 
revenues/enjoying benefits from the plots without paying any license fee to the 
Railways.  
2.2.12 Recommendations 
1. Railways may consider putting in place a mechanism for management of 
commercial plots, wherein comprehensive survey and demarcation of 
commercial plots, mainte nance of records and data base of land records 
and their digitization, examination of cases of licensing and their 
monitoring is ensured. This may be done either by forming an exclusive 
Land Cell for management of commercial plots or the Land Cells which 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
58
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 58 
manage the plots under the jurisdiction of Engineering Department may be 
entrusted with the responsibility of managing them. 
2. Railways may strengthen the monitoring mechanism for licensing of land, 
fixation of license fee, renewal of license agreement and recovery of license 
fee, settlement of the court cases, maintenance of records etc. at Divisional 
and Zonal levels.  
3. Zonal Railways may take action to get vacated and occupy the commercial 
plots which are not occupied by the original allottees and execute fr esh 
agreements for recovery of license fee at rates prescribed by the Railway 
Board, within a fixed time frame as land is precious resource which Railway 
can ill-afford to use sub-optimally.  
4. Railway may strengthen the monitoring mechanism and ensure that 
parking lots are managed professionally following the terms and 
conditions of the agreements by the contractors.Railways may also take 
suitable action to take up matter with the authorities concerned for 
collection/sharing of parking charges for pre -paid b ooths being managed 
by State police or GRP. 
2.3 Southern, Northern, South Central, North Central and South Western  
Railways: Loss of revenue of ` 13.24 crore due to carrying of freight traffic 
through weaker sections 
When traffic is booked via routes which  involve two or more of different types of 
routes viz. CC+4, CC+6 and CC+8, the chargeable weight will be the permissible 
carrying capacity of the route for which permissible carrying capacity is the most 
restrictive i.e. rates applicable for normal, CC+4 or CC+6 route, as the case may 
be. Audit observed that on a number of routes, major portion of the route was 
upgraded, and a small portion was yet to be upgraded, as a result of which, the 
freight was being charged with rate applicable to the lower load.  In this regard, 
SR Administration sent incomplete proposals to Railway Board by omitting part 
of sections, which were already fit for carrying higher  loads. This led to charging 
of coal traffic carried on these routes at rates applicable for lower loads and  led 
to loss of ` 7.81 crore during 2016 -17. The loss would continue till such time the 
above sections are notified for CC+8 loading. Further, food grain traffic was 
booked from other Zonal Railways to SR, wherein small portion of the routes 
were yet to be  upgraded to CC+6. By failing to take timely action to strengthen 
the weaker sections to CC+6 route, railways incurred a loss of ` 5.43 crore during 
2013-14 to 2016 -17. There is an urgent need to upgrade these weaker sections 
so that not only higher revenu e is generated, the movement of goods also 
becomes faster.  
Consequent to a pilot project (2006) to allow running of freight trains on CC+8 
and CC+6 routes, Railway Board extended the validity of the project and notified 
(June 2007) certain routes of India n Railways to transport commodities in goods 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
59
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 59 
trains having wagons loaded up to four/six/eight tonnes 69 in excess of their 
marked carrying capacity (CC). Further, Railway Board instructed (June 2008) 
that in cases when traffic is booked via routes which invo lve two or more of 
different types of routes viz. CC+4, CC+6 and CC+8, the chargeable weight will be 
the permissible carrying capacity of the route for which permissible carrying 
capacity is the most restrictive i.e. rates applicable for normal, CC+4 or CC +6 
route, as the case may be. In March 2015, Engineering Directorate of Railway 
Board forwarded a list of routes identified for CC+6 to CC+8 by the Traffic 
Directorate and instructed Zonal Railways to check the suitability of track of left 
over route for higher axle load and to forward the action plan for upgradation of 
routes suitable for higher axle load by 31 March 2015.   
Audit reviewed the compliance of above instructions in SR and observed that in 
a number of routes, major portion of the route was upg raded, and a small 
portion was yet to be upgraded, as a result of which, the freight was being 
charged with rate applicable to the lower load. Audit analysis is detailed in the 
subsequent paragraphs.   
A. Traffic booked and moved within Southern Railway (SR) 
Large scale Coal traffic in BOBRN/BOXN wagons is booked from Karaikal Port 
Private Limited siding (KIKP) to four destinations
70 within SR, for a distance of 
132.5 kms (Puduchatiram) and 339.56 kms (Mettur Dam). The route is 
predominantly CC+8 route, (70.67 per cent to 93.44 per cent) except for a short 
distance of 15 to 89 kms (comprising of 6.55 per cent to 29.32 per cent of total 
length of the route). As a result, despite most of the route being CC+8, due to a 
small distance being CC+6, the rate charged is  being restricted to rate applicable 
to the CC+6. The details are given below: 
Table 2.13 – Traffic booked and moved within SR  
Section Length of section 
on which traffic is 
booked (in kms) 
Route 
Karaikal Port Pvt Ltd siding  – Tamilnadu Power Ltd 
siding, Puduchatiram  
Total length 133    
Karaikal Port Pvt Ltd siding – Thiruvarur  34 CC+8 
Thiruvarur – Mayiladuturai  39 CC+6 
Mayiladuturai - Tamilnadu Power Ltd siding, 
Puduchatiram 
60 CC+8 
Karaikal Port Pvt Ltd siding  – Tamilnadu Newsprint 
and Papers Ltd siding, Pugalur  
Total length 229   
Karaikal Port Pvt Ltd siding – Karur  214 CC+8 
Karur – Tamilnadu Newsprint and Papers Ltd siding, 
Pugalur 
15 CC+6 
Karaikal Port Pvt Ltd siding  – Chemplast Sanmar 
siding, Metturdam 
Total length 340   
Karaikal Port Pvt Ltd siding – Karur 214 CC+8 
                                                           
69 CC+4/CC+6/CC+8 
70 Tamilnadu Power Company Limited Siding, Puduchatiram (PUCS), JSW Steel Limited siding, Mechery Road (MCSI), 
Tamilnadu News Print Siding, Pugalur (PGRS) and Chemplast Sanmar Limited siding, Mettur Dam (MTDC) 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
60
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 60 
Table 2.13 – Traffic booked and moved within SR  
Section Length of section 
on which traffic is 
booked (in kms) 
Route 
Karur – Magnesite junction  89 CC+6 
Magnesite junction – Chemplast Sanmar siding, 
Metturdam 
37 CC+8 
Karaikal Port Pvt Ltd siding (KIKP) – JSW Steel siding, 
Mecheri Road (MCSI) 
Total length 328   
Karaikal Port Pvt Ltd siding – Karur 214 CC+8 
Karur – Magnesite junction 89 CC+6 
Magnesite junction – JSW Steel siding, Mecheri Road 25 CC+8 
During examination of records, Audit noticed that the above sections notified as 
CC+6 were already fit to carry CC+8 load. It was seen that 
(i) While sending the proposals to Railway Board (August 2015) SR had 
recommended only Tiruchchirappalli - Karur section (69.62 kms)  instead of 
Tiruchchirappalli-Karur-Tamilnadu Newsprint and Papers Ltd siding, Pugalur - 
Erode section (143.94 kms) for runn ing of CC+8 loads, despite the fact that 
whole Tiruchchirappalli - Erode section was fit for CC+8 load (as proposed by 
SR in February 2015 in response to the Railway Board’s letter of January 
2015). Because of the omission of Karur - Tamilnadu Newsprint an d Papers 
Ltd siding, Pugalur section (15 kms) by SR, Railway Board notified (March 
2016) only Tiruchchirappalli - Karur section for running CC+8 load.  
(ii) Karur - Magnesite junction section (88.53 kms), which forms part of 
Nagercoil - Magnesite section (458.2 5 km) was also already fit for running 
CC+8 load at the time, when SR forwarded the proposal to Railway Board 
(August 2015). A small porti on of five kms between Dindigul -Madurai 
forming part of Nagercoil - Magnesite section did not meet the criteria for 
higher axle load and hence Railway Board did not notify the entire section 
for running CC+8 load. Instead of proposing the entire Nagercoil - Magnesite 
section which did not meet the condition for higher axle load for a smaller 
section of five kms between Di ndigul-Madurai, SR should have proposed 
Karur - Magnesite junction (89 kms) section which was already fit for CC+8 
load.  
(iii) Coal traffic from Karaikal Port Private Limited siding is carried via Thiruvarur 
- Mayiladuturai branch line to Tamilnadu Power Ltd si ding, Puduchatiram 
which was also fit for running CC+8 load (March 2015). While sending the 
proposals to Railway Board  (August 2015) SR failed to include Thiruvarur - 
Mayiladuturai (39 km) section. 
Audit reviewed the traffic in the above sections for 12 mon ths from April 2016 
to March 2017 from Karaikal Port Private Limited siding to the four destinations 
on SR and found that traffic was charged with rates applicable for CC+6 load, 
despite the fact the traffic was carried through CC+8 load for major part of 
routes. As a result, SR lost the opportunity to earn revenue of `6.51 crore during 
the year 2016-17. 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
61
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 61 
Another section, Vadalur -Uttangalmangalam (13 kms), dealing with coal traffic, 
was also fit for running CC+8 load . While sending proposals to Railway Board  
(August 2015), SR did not include this section for running CC+8 load , which 
resulted in the section being categorized as CC+6 route  and SR lost the 
opportunity to earn revenue of `1.30 crore during the year 2016-17.  
From the above, it can be seen that SR  Administration sent incomplete 
proposals to Railway Board by omitting part of sections, which were already fit 
for carrying higher loads. This led to charging of freight carried on these routes 
at rates applicable for lower loads. As a result, SR incurred  a loss of ` 7.81 crore 
(` 6.51 crore + ` 1.30 crore) during 2016 -17 and loss would continue till such 
time the above sections are notified for CC+8 loading.  
B. Traffic booked and received by SR from and to other Zonal Railways 
Regularly food grain is transp orted from stations in Northern part of India to 
stations in Kerala and Tamil Nadu area and fertilizer traffic is moved from SR to 
stations on SWR. The inward traffic to SR was moved via CC+6 routes for major 
part of the distance except for a short distance in ten sections over NR, NCR, SCR 
and SWR where they are moved via CC+4 route ranging between 14.02 kms and 
188.29 kms. 
Table 2.14 – Traffic booked and received by SR from and to other Zonal Railways  
Section Railway Length of section on 
which traffic is booked 
(in kms) 
Route 
Bodhan - Angamali for Kaladi SCR Total length 1391  
Bodhan -Jankampet 21 CC+4 
Jankampet - Angamali for Kaladi 1370 CC+6/CC+8 
Guru Harsahai – Angamali for Kaladi NR Total length 3216  
Guru Harsahai – Firozepur City 36 CC+4 
Firozepur City - Angamali for Kaladi 3180 CC+6/CC+8 
Mainpuri  – Coimbatore North NCR Total length 2533  
Mainpuri – Shikohabad 48 CC+4 
Shikohabad - Coimbatore North 2485 CC+6/CC+8 
Kota – Angamali for Kaladi SWR Total length 2526  
Kota – Miraj 1370 CC+6/CC+8 
Miraj -Londa 188 CC+4 
Londa - Angamali for Kaladi 968 CC+6/CC+8 
Ladhuka – Mulagunnathukavu NR Total length 3173  
Ladhuka -Fazilka 15 CC+4 
Fazilka - Mulagunnathukavu 3158 CC+6/CC+8 
Faizabad – Palghat NR Total length 2644  
Faizabad – Chilbila 95 CC+4 
Chilbila – Partapgarh 98 CC+8 
Partapgarh – Allahabad 59 CC+4 
Allahabad - Palghat 2392 CC+6/CC+8 
Jalalabad – Palghat NR Total length 3111  
Jalalabad – Firozepur City 53 CC+4 
Firozepur City – Palghat 3058 CC+6/CC+8 
MCF Siding, Panamburu-Solapur SWR Total length 968  
MCF Siding, Panamburu – Vijayapura 858 CC+6/CC+8 
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 61 
Another section, Vadalur -Uttangalmangalam (13 kms), dealing with coal traffic, 
was also fit for running CC+8 load . While sending proposals to Railway Board  
(August 2015), SR did not include this section for running CC+8 load , which 
resulted in the section being categorized as CC+6 route  and SR lost the 
opportunity to earn revenue of `1.30 crore during the year 2016-17.  
From the above, it can be seen that SR  Administration sent incomplete 
proposals to Railway Board by omitting part of sections, which were already fit 
for carrying higher loads. This led to charging of freight carried on these routes 
at rates applicable for lower loads. As a result, SR incurred  a loss of ` 7.81 crore 
(` 6.51 crore + ` 1.30 crore) during 2016 -17 and loss would continue till such 
time the above sections are notified for CC+8 loading.  
B. Traffic booked and received by SR from and to other Zonal Railways 
Regularly food grain is transp orted from stations in Northern part of India to 
stations in Kerala and Tamil Nadu area and fertilizer traffic is moved from SR to 
stations on SWR. The inward traffic to SR was moved via CC+6 routes for major 
part of the distance except for a short distance in ten sections over NR, NCR, SCR 
and SWR where they are moved via CC+4 route ranging between 14.02 kms and 
188.29 kms. 
Table 2.14 – Traffic booked and received by SR from and to other Zonal Railways  
Section Railway Length of section on 
which traffic is booked 
(in kms) 
Route 
Bodhan - Angamali for Kaladi SCR Total length 1391  
Bodhan -Jankampet 21 CC+4 
Jankampet - Angamali for Kaladi 1370 CC+6/CC+8 
Guru Harsahai – Angamali for Kaladi NR Total length 3216  
Guru Harsahai – Firozepur City 36 CC+4 
Firozepur City - Angamali for Kaladi 3180 CC+6/CC+8 
Mainpuri  – Coimbatore North NCR Total length 2533  
Mainpuri – Shikohabad 48 CC+4 
Shikohabad - Coimbatore North 2485 CC+6/CC+8 
Kota – Angamali for Kaladi SWR Total length 2526  
Kota – Miraj 1370 CC+6/CC+8 
Miraj -Londa 188 CC+4 
Londa - Angamali for Kaladi 968 CC+6/CC+8 
Ladhuka – Mulagunnathukavu NR Total length 3173  
Ladhuka -Fazilka 15 CC+4 
Fazilka - Mulagunnathukavu 3158 CC+6/CC+8 
Faizabad – Palghat NR Total length 2644  
Faizabad – Chilbila 95 CC+4 
Chilbila – Partapgarh 98 CC+8 
Partapgarh – Allahabad 59 CC+4 
Allahabad - Palghat 2392 CC+6/CC+8 
Jalalabad – Palghat NR Total length 3111  
Jalalabad – Firozepur City 53 CC+4 
Firozepur City – Palghat 3058 CC+6/CC+8 
MCF Siding, Panamburu-Solapur SWR Total length 968  
MCF Siding, Panamburu – Vijayapura 858 CC+6/CC+8 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
62
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 62 
Table 2.14 – Traffic booked and received by SR from and to other Zonal Railways  
Section Railway Length of section on 
which traffic is booked 
(in kms) 
Route 
Vijayapura – Hotgi 94 CC+4 
Hotgi - Solapur 16 CC+8 
MCF Siding, Panamburu – Shivamogga Town SWR Total length 414  
MCF Siding, Panamburu – Birur 351 CC+6/CC+8 
Birur – Shivamogga Town 63 CC+4 
From the above table, it can be seen that these routes are predominantly 
CC+6/CC+8 route, (85 per cent to 99.5 per cent) except for a short distance of 15 
to 188 kms (comprising of 0.47 per cent to 15.22 per cent of total length of the 
route). As a result, despite most of the route being CC+6/CC+8, due to a small 
distance being CC+4, the rate charged is being restricted to rate applicable to 
the CC+4. As a result the entire traffic consisting of BCN wagons was carried and 
charged less by two tonnes per wagon resulting in loss of revenue to the tune of 
` 5.43 crore to Railways for the years 2013-14 to 2016-17. 
Action taken by the Railway Administration to upgrade these ten sections to 
CC+6 route was reviewed over three (NR, SCR & SWR) Railways and it was 
noticed that 
 Three sections of NR viz., Guru Harsahai -Firozepur City, Ladhuka -Fazilka and 
Jalalabad-Firozepur City had already been upgraded during 2010 -12 and 
made fit for running CC+6 loads, but were not included in CC+6 route fo r 
charging traffic. 
 In two sections of NR viz., Faizabad -Chilbila and Partapgarh -Allahabad, no 
proposals for upgradation of the section to CC+6 route were mooted and 
friehgt trains were still being run carrying CC+4 loads. Further, constraints 
for not upgrading were not on record. 
 In two sections of SWR, Miraj -Londa, Birur -Shimoga Town works for 
upgradation has been sanctioned, but not yet started and in case of 
Vijayapura-Hotgi section, proposal for upgradation is at divisional level only. 
 In one section o f SCR viz., Bodhan -Jankampet the upgradation works were 
sanctioned in 2015-16 and work is in progress.  
From the above, it can be concluded that till such time the above sections are 
upgraded to CC+6 routes, the traffic will continue to be charged with low er 
loads and the loss of revenue would continue. By taking timely action to 
strengthen the weaker sections to CC+6 route, the loss of ` 5.43 crore could 
have been avoided.  In reply, SR stated  (February 2016) that as the weaker 
sections fall under their ju risdiction of SWR, action was required to be taken by 
SWR Administration only.   
Thus, there is an urgent need to upgrade these weaker sections so that not 
only higher revenue is generated, the movement of goods also becomes faster. 
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 62 
Table 2.14 – Traffic booked and received by SR from and to other Zonal Railways  
Section Railway Length of section on 
which traffic is booked 
(in kms) 
Route 
Vijayapura – Hotgi 94 CC+4 
Hotgi - Solapur 16 CC+8 
MCF Siding, Panamburu – Shivamogga Town SWR Total length 414  
MCF Siding, Panamburu – Birur 351 CC+6/CC+8 
Birur – Shivamogga Town 63 CC+4 
From the above table, it can be seen that these routes are predominantly 
CC+6/CC+8 route, (85 per cent to 99.5 per cent) except for a short distance of 15 
to 188 kms (comprising of 0.47 per cent to 15.22 per cent of total length of the 
route). As a result, despite most of the route being CC+6/CC+8, due to a small 
distance being CC+4, the rate charged is being restricted to rate applicable to 
the CC+4. As a result the entire traffic consisting of BCN wagons was carried and 
charged less by two tonnes per wagon resulting in loss of revenue to the tune of 
` 5.43 crore to Railways for the years 2013-14 to 2016-17. 
Action taken by the Railway Administration to upgrade these ten sections to 
CC+6 route was reviewed over three (NR, SCR & SWR) Railways and it was 
noticed that 
 Three sections of NR viz., Guru Harsahai -Firozepur City, Ladhuka -Fazilka and 
Jalalabad-Firozepur City had already been upgraded during 2010 -12 and 
made fit for running CC+6 loads, but were not included in CC+6 route fo r 
charging traffic. 
 In two sections of NR viz., Faizabad -Chilbila and Partapgarh -Allahabad, no 
proposals for upgradation of the section to CC+6 route were mooted and 
friehgt trains were still being run carrying CC+4 loads. Further, constraints 
for not upgrading were not on record. 
 In two sections of SWR, Miraj -Londa, Birur -Shimoga Town works for 
upgradation has been sanctioned, but not yet started and in case of 
Vijayapura-Hotgi section, proposal for upgradation is at divisional level only. 
 In one section o f SCR viz., Bodhan -Jankampet the upgradation works were 
sanctioned in 2015-16 and work is in progress.  
From the above, it can be concluded that till such time the above sections are 
upgraded to CC+6 routes, the traffic will continue to be charged with low er 
loads and the loss of revenue would continue. By taking timely action to 
strengthen the weaker sections to CC+6 route, the loss of ` 5.43 crore could 
have been avoided.  In reply, SR stated  (February 2016) that as the weaker 
sections fall under their ju risdiction of SWR, action was required to be taken by 
SWR Administration only.   
Thus, there is an urgent need to upgrade these weaker sections so that not 
only higher revenue is generated, the movement of goods also becomes faster. 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
63
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 63 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board (18 September 2017); 
their reply was awaited (28 February 2018). 
2.4 North Central Railway (NCR): Incorrect entry of train timing of 
terminating trains in Integrated Coaching Management System (ICMS) led to 
compromise in data integrity 
Railways entered the  arrival timing of terminating trains at Allahabad station 
incorrectly in the ICMS. This led to compromise in data integrity. As the 
information fed into ICMS is reflected in National Train Enquiry System (NTES), 
the incorrect entries caused inconvenience to the passengers by showing wrong 
timings of arrival of trains in Allahabad station. Similar position i.e. incorrect 
data entry of arrival/ departure time of trains may also prevail at other stations. 
Railways Board may issu e strict instructions to all the Zonal Railways to ensure 
correct entry of the arrival/departure timings in NTES, (either through direct 
entry in NTES or through entry in Control Office Application or through data 
loggers) so that the pass engers get accurate information on arrival/departure of 
trains. There is a need for evolving a mechanism of supervisory checking of 
certain percentage of data entered in NTES with reference to the data in the 
Train Signalling Register/ Control Office Application/data logge rs or through 
other means. 
Data related to train/coach movement, their arrival/departure, etc. is captured 
in ICMS manually. ICMS also utilized data captured/updated from other 
applications (like Control Office Application, Coaching Operation Information 
System etc.) through manual processes/means. This data is finally reflected in 
National Train Enquiry System (NTES) where passengers can see arrival and 
departure timings of the trains in real time.  
Audit analysed the data of arrival/departure of three tra ins (Allahabad Duronto 
Express-12276, Prayag Raj Express - 12418, J aipur Allahabad Express - 12404) 
captured in ICMS and noticed incorrect data entry for arrival of these trains at 
Allahabad station. Audit examined the d ata from two tables
71 of Punctuality 
Analysis Module (PAM) of ICMS in respect of the above three terminating trains 
at Allahabad Station and the last but one station (Fatehpur station) for the year 
2016-17 for analysis.  
During the year 2016 -17, Train no. 12418, 12404, and 12276 ran 354,  343 and 
144 days respectively. It was seen that during 2016 -17, train No. 12418,  12404 
and 12276 was late at last but the terminating station (Fatehpur) in excess of 15 
minutes on 342,  325 and 128 days. Out of these, the trains were late by more 
than 15 minute s at terminating station (Allahabad) on 166,  281 and 75 times 
and on 176, 44 and 53 days respectively these trains reached at terminating 
station where delay was less than 15 minutes.  
The distance between last but terminating station (Fatehpur) and termin ating 
station (Allahabad Junction) is 116 kms and maximum permissible speed of the 
                                                           
71Table no. 1(Train Monitoring), 2 (Punctuality Performance) 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
64
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 64 
train as per Working Time Table -2016 is 130 kmph. A minimum 53 minutes is 
required to cover this distance.  
Analysis of data in case of 354,  343 and 164 days during 2016 -17 were carried 
out by Audit for assessing the data integrity for correctness of entry of arrival 
time at the terminating station (Allahabad junction). The assessment was made 
against the criteria of minimum period of travel of 53 minutes between 
Fatehpur and Allahabad. It was noticed that  
 The time taken to travel from Fatehpur (last but on terminating station) to 
Allahabad Junction (terminating station) was less than 53 minutes on 25, 29 
and 31 days for train no. 12418, 12404 and  12276 respectively with 
minimum time being reflected at ( -) 25 minutes on 10/4/2016 for 12404, 17 
minutes on 15/03/2017 for train no.12418 and 17 minutes on 9/7/2016 for 
Train no. 12276. These  trains  took  less than  thirty minutes on 3,  3 and 7  
days out of these 25,  29 and 31 day s respectively. The potential reasons for 
covering the distance of 116 kms in less than the possible 53 minutes was 
erroneous data entry or over speeding.  
 During cross check from data of running train in ICMS, it was  found that 
o Train no.12418 (Prayag Raj  Express) on 7/3/2017 reached Fate hpur at 
06:12 hours, Subedarganj  at 07:45 hours and Allahabad at 06 :50 hours. 
On that day  Punctuality Performance Table showed as RT (right time 
arrival at Allahabad). 
o Train no.12404 (Jaipur Allahabad Express) on 10/4/2017  reached 
Fatehpur at 05:56 hours and Allahabad at 05:31 hours. On that day,  in 
Punctuality Perforamnce Table, it was shown as 36 minutes delay in 
arrival at Allahabad. 
o Train No. 12276 (Allahabad Duronto Express) on 09/7/2016 reached 
Fatehpur at 05:53 hours  and Allahabad at 06:10 hours. On that day in 
Punctuality Performance Table, it was shown as RT  (right time arrival at 
Allahabad).  For a train to travel 116 kms in 17 minutes, the resultant 
speed would be 409 Kms/per hour.  
The above analysis is an indica tion of incorrect data entry in ICMS. As the 
information fed in ICMS is also reflected in NTES, it leads to communication of 
wrong information to the passengers through NTES  and inconvenience to 
railway passengers . In response to the audit observation, All ahabad division 
took action and issued directions for feeding of arrival/departure information 
into NTES at terminating stations . Audit test checked the correctness of arrival 
and departure timings at Kanpur and Allahabad stations in February 2018 . In 
Allahabad station the data is correctly being entered in NTES and almost 
identical to data in  Train Signalling Register at Allahabad station.  Also, the 
timings of Kanpur Central station of Allahabad division were being entered into 
application system through d ata loggers  and almost identical to data in Train 
Signalling Register at Kanpur Central station.  

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
65
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 65 
Similar position i.e. incorrect data entry of arrival/ departure time of trains 
may also prevail at other stations. Railways Board may issue strict instructions 
to all the Zonal Railways to ensure correct entry of  the arrival/departure 
timings in NTES,  (either through direct entry in NTES or through entry in 
Control Office Application or through data loggers) so that the passe ngers get 
accurate information on a rrival/departure of trains.  There is a need for 
evolving a mechanism of systemic and supervisory check of data entered in 
NTES with reference to the data in the Train Signalling Register / Control Office 
Application/data loggers or through other means.  
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board (22 November 2017); 
their reply was awaited (28 February 2018). 
2.5 North Central Railway (NCR): Under-utilisation of 3 rd line between 
Mathura and Palwal section of Agra Division 
Agra Division of NCR has c onstructed a 3 rd line between Mathura - Palwal for 
smooth operation of traffic over the section due to saturation of UP and Down 
Line. After incurring the expenditure of ` 412.65 crore (till June 2017), the newly 
created 3 rd line could be utilised only to t he extent of 52 per cent despite line 
capacity utilisation being in excess of 100 per cent on both UP and Down lines. 
Smooth operation through 3rd line required yard remodelling work which was not 
included in detailed estimate. Operational constraints such as connectivity with 
platforms of 3rd line at Mathura junction, Yard remodelling at Kosi  Kalan station 
also remained to be addressed. Under-utilisation has led to loss of  revenue 
potential of  ` 32.76 crore between August 2015 and August 2017 with 
continuing loss of ` 16.38 crore per annum. The non-optimal utilisation of 3rd line 
adversely impacted train punctuality and has caused inconvenience  to 
passengers. 
Mathura - Palwal section is known as busiest trunk A  route connecting the 
Chatrapati Shivaji Termin us Mumbai (CSTM) and New Delhi main route. This 
section deals with the freight traffic consisting of major commodities including 
Iron & Steel, food grains, fertilizer, cement, general goods etc. Due to existence 
of 3 rd and 4th lines in section up to Palwal , trains going from New Delhi to 
Mathura and onward, suffer detention in beyond Palwal72. 
Work of Mathura -Palwal 3 rd line (84 kms) was completed in two part viz ., 
Mathura-Bhuteshwal (3.48 kms) and Palwal – Bhuteshwar (81 kms).  
Mathura-Bhuteshwar 3 rd line w ork was sanctioned in October 1999 at a total 
cost of ` 4.24 crore which was completed in November 2001 and was opened 
for traffic in December 2001 . The executing agency of Palwal –Bhuteshwar 3 rd 
line was Rail Vikas Nigam Limited (RVNL). This work was sanc tioned by Railway 
                                                           
72 Only third line is existing beyond Palwal to Mathura 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
66
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 66 
Board during 2005-0673. Audit noticed that original sanctioned (abstract) cost of 
project was ` 242.7974 crore at the time of preliminary survey (July 2003).  
But, during Final Location survey conducted by RVNL after more than two years 
of preliminary survey, the estimated cost increased to ` 347.90 crore. The target 
date for completion of this project was  five years from the date of sanction of 
the project. This project was completed in November  2012. The section was 
opened for operation in parts between March 2011 and August 2015 . T otal 
expenditure incurred on this project (up to June 2017)  was ` 412.65 crore. The 
cost of project increased by 25 .31 per cent  in comparison to sanctioned cost 
(July 2003) and by 18 .61 per cent  in 
comparison t o estimated cost during 
final location survey.  
Audit assessed the reasons for delay in 
opening of section for traffic and 
noticed that major deficiencies such as 
non-provision of relays, non -
submission of drawings/documents, 
inconsistencies in the microl ock system 
wiring at site and corresponding 
drawings etc. in signalling work in 
Palwal-Hodal and Bhuteshwar -Chhata 
were reported (April to Nov 2012) by 
Senior Divisional Signal and 
Telecommunication Engineer/Agra. 
Accordingly, the 3
rd line could not be 
opened for passenger traffic. 
Audit further noticed that the 3 rd line 
could not be utilised optimally, even after two years of opening the section for 
traffic. Audit reviewed the records of running of trains through different lines in 
Mathura - Palwal section of Agra division and noticed that during the year  
2016-17, 19,821 trains were run, out of which, only 3,119 trains (15.73 per cent) 
were run through the 3
rd line. Line wise details of running of trains during 2016 -
17 were as follows: 
Table 2.15 
Total number of train runs in Palwal - Mathura Section - 19,821 
UP line: Palwal - Mathura DN line: Mathura - Palwal 3rd line Mathura - Palwal 
10,319 6,383 3,119 
52.06 per cent 32.20 per cent 15.73 per cent 
The line capacity utilisation of all the three lines fo r Mathura – Palwal section 
was 108 per cent during the period 2015 -16 to 2016 -17. Individual line wise 
                                                           
73 Railway Works Programme 2005-06 (item no.13) 
74Cost of project shown in Pr eliminary Engineering cum traffic survey  (PET) for 3rd line between Palwal and Bhuteshwar 
(July 2003) 
Figure 2.1:  Map of Mathura-Palwal 3rd line 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
67
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 67 
utilisation of line capacity was not made available to Audit . Based on the above 
data, audit assessed the utilisation of the three lines at 168 .48 per cent for UP 
line (Palwal-Mathura), 103.68 per cent  for Down line (Mathura -Palwal) and 
51.84 per cent  for the third line. The operation of 3,119 trains on the 3 rd line 
included 1,096 trains in the UP direction and 2023 trains in DN direction . Thus, 
3rd line be tween Mathura -Palwal was not optimally utilised for running of 
trains. The load of movement of traffic was not evenly distributed amongst UP, 
DN and 3rd line and ranged from 51 .84 per cent to 168.48 per cent with a mean 
value of 108 per cent.  
 
Audit ana lysed the reasons including constraints for under -utilisation of the 
Mathur-Palwal 3rd line. Audit observed that  that these were within the control 
of railway administration and included the following: 
 There is only one platform available at Kosi Kalan station75 for handling down 
trains coming from Chata station from Down main line and UP & Down trains 
from 3rd line.   
 Loop line is not available for crossing / precedence of train on 3 rd line in Kosi 
Kalan Yard. 
 Goods yard of Kosi Kalan  Yard is also connected  from the down loop line, 
being utilized as 3 rd line. This results in detention of train (both UP & Down) 
at outside station of Kosi Kalan due to deficient laying and connectivity of 
line at Kosi Kalan. 
 After commissioning of 3 rd line between Chata -Kosi Ka lan and Kosi Kalan -
Hodal, Up and Down trains are being  detained outside Kosi Kalan because of 
non- availability of 3rd line yard at Kosi Kalan station. 
                                                           
75 Kosi Kalan station is located in Bhuteshwar-Palwal section between Chata and Hodal stations 
Figure 2.2:  Map of Kosi Kalan station 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
68
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 68 
 Besides, Line Road Learning 76 of crew of 3 rd line is also incomplete . At 
present, crew from Jhansi Divisi on and crew from Northern Railway and 
West Central Railway have not completed LRD. 
 In December 2012, General Manager /NCR raised the matter of 
commissioning of yard remodelling including 3 rd line at Kosi Kalan . In 
response, RVNL clarified that this yard rem odelling work involved 
construction of new station building, new panel etc ., along with additional 
track and civil works. RVNL also stated that a dditional work of yard 
remodelling of Kosi Kalan yard was not covered under sanctioned scope of 
work of 3 rd line and could not be executed through this estimate . 
Consequently, it was decided to execute the yard remodelling work with the 
fourth line work, as and when sanctioned. 
 The work of 4 th line between Mathura -Palwal section was sanctioned in 
2015-1677 under Extra Budgetary Resource (EBR). However, this work is at a 
very early 78 stage. Till completion of the 4 th line, the problem of the 
detention of trains at Kosikalan and Hodal stations would continue.  
 The 3rd line is connected to Mathura yard and not to  any of the platforms. 
The 3rd line is adjacent to the down line, which is in the middle . Review of 
data of movement of 3119 trains on 3 rd line where 1096 trains are in Up line 
direction 2023 trains are in Down line direction revealed that cross over of 
trains from Up line to 3rd line and vice-versa requires crossing over the down 
line, which coupled with absence of link of 3 rd line to platform at Mathura 
restricts use of 3 rd line for trains in upward direction as well as operation of 
passenger trains with halt at Mathura station.  
As such, due to non -provision of additional cross over in existing loop line and 
non-availability of 3rd line yard at Kosi Kalan station, the placement and removal 
of rakes at Kosi Kalan and Hodal station takes almost one and half hour . This 
hampers smooth movement of trains through this section . Further, despite 
identification of defects in planning relating to Kosi Kalan yard remodelling as 
early as December 2012, impacting utilisation of the 3 rd line, no action for 
addressing the defici ency has been taken . These identified constraints should 
have been taken up as a Material Modification under Para 1110 of the Indian 
Railway code for the Engineering Department . On the contrary, Railway is going 
ahead for construction of 4
th line in the section. 
Audit assessed the financial impact on under -utilisation of newly created 3rd line 
in Mathura-Palwal section. Assuming the optimal utilisation of 80 per cent and 
considering the expected earnings for first year as ` 58.50 crore  (as per 
sanctioned de tailed estimate, April 2006 ), Audit assessed that during the two 
years period between August 2015 and August 2017, Railways sustained loss of 
                                                           
76 The Crew who has not worked in the section are required to undertake Line Road Learning to acquaint themselves 
about the section 
77 Work Programme 2015-16 (item no.14) 
78 The contracts for execution of 4th  line of Mathura-Palwal section was awarded during April 2016 to April 2017 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
69
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 69 
revenue potential of ` 32.76 crore79. Further till, optimum utilisation, Railways 
will continue to lose potential revenue of ` 16.38 crore annually. 
Railways need to take up the work of Kosi Kalan yard remodeling on priority 
basis for smooth movement of traffic in this section and optimal utilisation of 
newly created 3rd line between Mathura-Palwal. 
The matter was brou ght to the notice of Railway Board (20 December 2017); 
their reply was awaited (28 February 2018). 
2.6 Central, North Central, Eastern, South East Central, Northern and North 
Eastern Railway s: Loss due to Non/short -realization of Way Leave Charges 
(WLC) from parties/firms 
Way leave facilities/easement rights on Railway land involve occasional or 
limited use of land by a party for specified purpose like passage etc. without 
conferring upon the party any right of possession or occupation of the land and 
without any way affecting the Railway’s title, possession, control and use of 
land. Permission for way leave should be granted in genuine and un -avoidable 
cases after execution of proper agreements.  Thirteen railway divisions under six 
Zonal Railway Administrat ions did not comply with the guidelines laid down by 
the Railway Board with regard to g ranting of way leave facilities /easement 
rights. This resulted in loss due to non/short realization of way leave charges of  
` 65.20 crore from 954 parties/firms for the  period from year 1998 to March 
2017. These Railway Divisions also failed to execute/ renew agreements in a 
number of cases with the parties/firms for allowing them to avail the way leave 
facilities/easement rights. 
As per rules 80 way leave facilities/easem ent rights on Railway land involve 
occasional or limited use of land by a party for specified purpose like passage 
etc. without conferring upon the party any right of possession or occupation of 
the land and without any way affecting the Railway’s title, p ossession, control 
and use of land. Permission for way leave should be granted in genuine and un -
avoidable cases after execution of proper agreements.  
Railway Board issued (November 2001) comprehensive instructions
81 on way 
leave facilities/easement rights on railway land. According to these instructions, 
Way Leave Charges (WLC), in majority of cases like, pipe line crossings, cable 
crossings passage/roads for vehicles etc., are to be recovered in advance for a 
block of ten years after which the next instal ment of these charges becomes 
due. While calculating the advance equivalent to 10 years annual charges, 
annual increase of 10 per cent in land value would be assumed. At the time of 
calculation of WLC for the next ten years, prevailing land rates have to b e 
obtained from the Revenue authorities and suitable adjustments made. 
Therefore, it is imperative that the renewal of way leave agreements is taken up 
                                                           
79 (80 per cent -52 per cent) x `58.5 crore X 2 years (between August 2015 to August 2017) 
80 Para 1033 of Indian Railway Code for Engineering Department 
81 Railway Board’s letter No. 97/LML/24/3 dated 27/11/2001 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
70
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 70 
well in advance. WLC was to be revised after ten years at the time of renewal of 
agreement as per the revised rates of license fee, if any.  
Audit review of records of thirteen railway divisions under six Railway Zones 
conducted during the period April 2015 to May 2017 revealed that an amount of 
` 65.20 crore  was outstanding as on 31 March 2017 against 954  parties/firms 
towards WLC who were granted way leave facilities during the period from the 
year 1998 onwards (Annexure 2.12). Scrutiny further revealed that in a number  
of cases, the Railway Administrations failed either to get the agreements 
executed or renewed with the parties/firms in time as was required in the policy 
guidelines of Railway Board issued in November 2001. Zonal Railway wise audit 
observations are given below. 
Central Railway (CR)  - During the review (May 2017) of records relating to 
realization of way leave charges in Central Railway, Audit observed that  
 In Mumbai and Bhusawal Divisions, an amount of  `  95.58 lakh 82 was 
outstanding as on 31 March 2017 towards way leave charges against 408 
parties/firms which was yet to be realized.  
 In Nagpur Division, an amount of ` 2.53 crore was outstanding against 26 
parties/firms.  
 In Pune Division, though way leave charges were recovered from all 63 
parties for the facilities provided to them for first 10 years period i.e. from 
2001 onwards, for the  next 10 years i.e. from 2011 onwards, bills for way 
leave charges were not preferred by the railway division, resulting in non -
recovery of way leave charges to the tune of ` 3.06 crore from 63 
parties/firms.   
 Agreements which were required to be renewed before the expiry of the 
initial agreement period were also not renewed as of date.  
In reply, CR Administration stated (May 2017) that the proposals for revisions of 
way leave charges in respect of 17 cases under Nagpur division were received 
from Enginee ring Department and were under scrutiny. However, the Railway 
Administration was yet to renew the agreements and recover the outstanding 
amount of way leave charges to the tune of ` 2.53 crore from the parties as of 
date. Thus, CR Administration failed to realize way leave charges of ` 6.55 crore 
from 497 parties/firms in four divisions.  
North Central Railway (NCR)  - Review of records of three Divisions viz. 
Allahabad, Jhansi and Agra Divisions  under NCR revealed that 119 parties/firms 
were granted way lea ve facilities and the agreements executed with them from 
time to time. Out of 119 parties/firms, initial agreements in respect of three 
firms in Jhansi Division were not executed and in one case at Allahabad Division, 
the party had renewed the agreement. F urther, the copy of renewal 
agreements, in 116 cases were not found in the records and in remaining two 
                                                           
82 ` 44.18 lakh and ` 51.40 lakh for Mumbai and Bhusawal Divisions respectively 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
71
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 71 
cases, the information about renewal of agreements could not be ascertained as 
the relevant records were not provided to audit. 
Audit further noticed th at all the three divisions under NCR issued revised WLC 
bills of ` 15.91 crore (` 12.00 crore, ` 1.78 crore and ` 2.13 crore for Allahabad, 
Jhansi and Agra Divisions respectively) against 119 parties/firms and realized an 
amount of ` 2.25 crore from 15 par ties/firms. Recovery of an amount of  ` 0.67 
crore was not feasible from five parties/firms as these firms under Agra Division 
were not found at their registered address during spot verification conducted by 
the concerned Railway Administration. Thus an am ount of ` 12.91 crore  
(` 10.05 crore, ` 1.77 crore and ` 1.09 crore for Allahabad, Jhansi and Agra 
Divisions respectively) was outstanding from 97 parties/firms as of March 2017. 
Audit also noticed that Railway Administration did not take action for 
termination/discontinuation of the way leave facilities provided to these 
parties/firms. 
Eastern Railway (ER) - Review of records in ER showed that the Howrah division 
failed to realize outstanding amount of ` 1.03 crore
83 from two firms till date.  In 
respect of Asansol Division, an amount of ` 87 lakh towards way leave charges 
was outstanding against 41 parties/firms who continued to avail the way leave 
facilities. Audit further noticed that in two cases of Asansol Division, the 
agreement was not executed with the parties/firms.  
In reply, ER stated (August 2017) that in case of Howrah Division, demand notice 
had been served to M/s WBSEDCL in September 2011 and December 2016.  A 
demand notice had also been served to M/s Durgapur Project Ltd. in May 2008 
followed by a legal notice in April 2009. However, the outstanding amount of  
` 1.03 crore was yet to be recovered by March 2017. As regard s Asansol 
Division, Railway Administration stated that an amount of ` 81 lakh out of ` 87 
lakh have been recovered and effort s were being made for recovery of 
remaining outstanding way leave charges of ` 6 lakh. 
South East Central Railway (SECR) - Review of records in SECR showed that that 
Nagpur division failed to realize the way leave charges amounting to ` 1.04 
crore from 16 parties/firms which became due from 2002 -03 onwards. Non-
realization of WLC was due to non -revision of agreements and also non -raising 
of revised bills after the expiry of 10 years of initial agreement period. Audit also 
observed that the Railway Administr ation preferred incorrect bills of WLC in 71 
cases in Nagpur division which resulted into short realization of ` 6.99 lakh that 
became due from 2013-14 onwards.  
Northern Railway (NR)  - Review of records  in Varanasi in NR  showed that that 
Cantonment Board (CB) Varanasi was utilizing railway land for various purposes 
at five different locations for the past many years. The exact date of occupation 
of land by the CB, Varanasi was not found available in the record of the railways. 
The Railway Administration ne ither entered into an agreement with the CB, 
                                                           
83 ` 96 lakh from M/s Durgapur Project Ltd and ` 7 lakh from M/s WBSEDCL 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
72
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 72 
Varanasi nor realized way leave charges as required under instructions issued by 
Railway Board  in November 2001 for the facilities provided to the CB. Audit 
noticed that the bills were raised for the period from 2013-14 to 2022 -23 in 
October 2013 and a copy of the agreement was also sent for signature. 
However, the CB Varanasi did not  pay the way leave charges or returned the 
agreement duly signed to the railway administration. The total amount of way 
leave charges of ` 9.70 crore was due against CB, Varanasi for the period 1998 -
99 onward for availing way leave facilities at five locations which was 
unrecovered till March 2017. 
Audit further noticed that apart from CB Varanasi, an amount of ` 14.11 crore 
was also outstanding against 174 parties/firms in Lucknow division towards way 
leave charges for the period from 1998 -99 to 2008 -09. Further, out of 174 
parties/firms, agreements in the case of 55 parties/firms were yet to be 
executed by the NR Administration and in 119 cases, the renewal of agreements 
was not done.  
In Delhi Division, audit observed that 28 parties/firms were utilizing railway land 
without paying the requisite charges to the Railway Administration. These 
parties/firms were served the notices for pay ment of way leave charges. 
However, way leave charges of ` 14.22 crore was outstanding against 28 
parties/firms till March 2017. Only six agreements were renewed out of total 28 
parties/firms who were utilizing the railway land for various purposes. 
Thus, NR not only failed to realize the total outstanding amount of way leave 
charges of ` 38.03 crore from 207 parties/firms in Lucknow and Delhi divisions, 
but also failed to execute/renew the agreements with the parties/firms. 
North Eastern Railway (NER)  - Audit examination (February 2016) of records of 
Lucknow division disclosed that M/s Indian Potash Limited (Sugar Division) 
Bahraich was utilizing land for road and open drains/sewage purposes since July 
2010. However,  no agreement was executed by the North E astern Railway 
administration with the company for charging way leave facilities. Despite the 
request of the company, Railway Administration did not execute the agreement 
with them for charging the way leave facilities provided. This led to  non-
recovery of  way leave charges amounting to ` 5.51 crore for the period from 
2010-11 to 2016-17. 
In reply, NER stated (August 2017) that though M/s Indian Potash Ltd had 
requested to railway administration in December 2010, year 2012 and year 2013 
for way leave facili ties, the process could not be completed due to non -receipt 
of the area of land and survey report from the firm and the bill could not be 
raised. They stated that  the action was being taken by the division as per the  
Railway Board  instructions of November 2001 and way leave charges of ` 60 
lakh duly updated on the basis of circle rate of revenue department had been 
worked out and a proposal was sent for recovery.  

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
73
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 73 
However, NER Administration has not been able to execute the agreement with 
M/s Indian Potash Ltd even after a lapse of more than seven years and has failed 
to recover way leave charges of ` 5.51 crore from the company.  
Thus, thirteen Railway Divisions under six Zonal Railways failed to realize ` 65.20 
crore towards way leave charges from 954 part ies/firms for the period from the 
year 1998 till March 201 7. These parties/ firms were granted way leave 
facilities/easement rights for various purposes without recovering the requisite 
charges as required under Railway Board instructions issued in November  2001. 
In a number of cases, these divisions also did not comply  with the 
rules/instructions issued by the Railway Board for execution/renewal of 
agreements with the parties/firms , thereby resulting in non -realization of way 
leave charges in advance for a block of ten years. 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board (12 December 2017); 
their reply was awaited (28 February 2018). 
2.7 All Railways: Unfruitful expenditure of ` 62.15 crore due to 
procurement of microprocessor based LED destination boards 
Minister of Railways announced installation of microprocessor controlled LED 
destination display boards in the Budget speech 2008 -09. Thereafter, Railway 
Board made  frequent revision s in specifications for LED based destination 
boards. These necessit ated instructions to Zonal Railways not to initiate bulk 
purchase. LED destination boards procured in the meantime by the Zonal 
Railways at a cost of ` 98.26 crore could not be used fully due to failure of Zonal 
Railways to update the train  data base in th e Coach Control Unit and to ensure 
provision of remote control unit at the time of their procurement. As a result, 
LED destination boards worth ` 62.15 crore remained unutilised. 
For optimizing the utilization of coaches many trains have been integrated in  
rake links. This necessitates frequent changes in the train description depicted 
on the destination boards of the trains and consequent change of destination 
boards at platforms and stabling lines. For this,  a need for programmable LED 
based destination boards on coaches arose. These boards show the name of the 
originating and terminating stations with train number and name and are fitted 
on both sides of coaches for easy identification by passengers. 
Minister of Railways announced installation of  microprocessor controlled LED 
destination display boards  in the Budget speech 2008 -09. The pilot project on 
installation of LED based destination boards with local specifications without 
Global Positioning System (GPS) in about 750 coaches at a cost of ` 40,000 each 
was conducted by South Central Railway  (SCR). Based on the trial s in SCR, RDSO 
finalized (April 2008) the specifications
84 of the same.  Subsequently, Railway 
Board accorded sanction (September 2008) for the provision of microprocessor 
controlled LED based destination boards on 500 coaches in five 85 Zonal Railways. 
                                                           
84 Specification no. RDSO/2008/CG-02 
85 ER, NFR, NWR, SCR and SR 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
74
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 74 
In August 2009 and April 2010, Railway Board further sanctioned provision of 
these destination boards in  5000 and 10000 coaches  respectively in all Zonal 
Railways at a cost of  ` 1.25 lakh each. T his cost was not a firm cost as it was 
based on abstract cost and was stated to be only indicative cost for the guidance 
of the Railways as expressed (September 2011) by Director Mechanical 
Engineering (Coaching) Railway Board. 
As per the Railway Board’s d irectives of December 2008, all the main line 
coaches to be manufactured in the Production Units from 2009 -10 were to be 
fitted with remote controlled programmable LED destination boards
86. Railway 
Board also instructed (October 2009) all Zonal Railways to procure LED boards, 
strictly as per the RDSO specification, as these boards were aimed towards 
uniform application over entire Indian Railways and to ensure interchangeability 
of coaches over various Coaching Depots/Railways. 
With a view to upgrade the fun ctionality of this microprocessor controlled 
system and use the same for monitoring the coach related parameters in 
addition to operating LED destination boards, Railway Board  reversed (October 
2009) its stand and instructed all Zonal Railways to defer bul k procurement till 
the existing  specification was refined. Subsequently, RDSO revised (February 
2010) the specification
87and issued amendment in May 2010. Railway Board 
instructed (April 2010)  all Zonal Railways to procure LED destination boards 
Based as per the revised specification. Accordingly, Zonal Railways invited offers 
from the RDSO approved sources and contracts were entered into for ‘Supply, 
installation, commissioning and maintenance of microprocessor based 
destination board display system’. Railway Board again decided to go in for new 
specification and instructed (September 2011) Zonal Railways and Production 
Units to stop the procurement of LED boards immediately.  However, by that 
time orders had been placed by Zonal Railways as per the revised s pecifications 
and LED destination boards were delivered till 2013-14. 
Audit further observed that in 2012, RDSO attempted product development in 
this regard, which did not materialize. In April 2015, RDSO again issued a new 
specification and approached Rai lway Board for approval. Audit noticed that in 
July 2016, WR raised issue of duplication of electronic modules used in LED 
Board and Passenger Information System (PIS) issued by two different 
directorates of RDSO (PS & EMU and Carriage directorates). Conse quently, in 
November 2016, Railway Board decided to prepare a common specification for 
PIS and LED based indications, which was still under preparation (March 2017). 
Audit reviewed the records pertaining to the decisions taken and fitment of LED 
based destination boards in passenger coaches during the period during 2008 -
09 to 2013-14. It was observed that 
 As against the planned procurement of LED destination boards for 15500 
coaches, various Zonal Railways had procured and fitted LED based 
                                                           
86 as per the RDSO’s specification of April 2008 
87 Specification no. RDSO/2009/CG-1(Revision no.1) 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
75
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 75 
destination boards in 6399 coaches at a total value of ` 98.26 crore till 2013-
14. Further, frequent alteration of specifications by Railway Board for the 
stated objective of upgrading the functionality of the system and reversal of 
instructions to initiate bulk purchase r esulted in haphazard execution of this  
important passenger amenity work. Even after conducting pilot study three 
years back, Railway Board failed to standardize the specifications and 
revision in the specification was made a number of times, which resulted  in 
procurement of LED boards for 6399  coaches with the earlier approved 
specifications.                 Annexure 2.13 
 The status of usage of procured LED destination boards over Zonal Railways 
was also reviewed in audit. It was observed that 
o Out of the total procurement of LED destination boards for 6399 coaches 
procured by 15 Zonal Railways, 5132 coaches
88 fitted with LED boards 
worth ` 62.15  crore were not functional. 
o South Central Railway reported (December 2013) Railway Board that 
after completion of maintenance period by OEM, LED destination Boards 
were going out of order very frequently and sought clarification whether 
Railway can enter into contract for repair and maintenance of LED 
boards procured with old specifications. 
o Western Railway reported  (January 2014) Railway Board that coaches 
received from ICF were without LED boards. They informed that though 
RCF and BEML coaches were received with LED boards, these were 
without remote control units which was essential for operating them. 
BEML coaches with LED boards were also received by ECR (21) SECR ( 11) 
and WCR (39) without remote units. As such the procured LED 
destination boards, received without remote control units were lying 
unutilized and were not functional. 
o Further, Zonal Railways had not uplo aded the database of train routes in 
the coach control unit and remote control unit. Whenever the coaches 
fitted with LED destination boards underwent the mandatory periodic 
overhauling, Railways could neither change the train number on coach 
control unit nor edit the data using remote unit, either by wireless or 
wired mode. As the coaches after POH were not received at the 
designated base depot, the train number and the name and the relevant 
details could not be changed resulting in non -functioning of the LED 
boards defeating the purpose of introduction of programmable LED 
destination boards. 
In reply, SER Administration accepted the audit observations and stated (January 
2017) that rake integrity of LED fitted coaches could not be maintained and 
coaches we re sent to other Divisions/ Depots. As a result, the LED destination 
boards became non-functional. In reply, SR Administration also stated (February 
and March 2014) that return of coaches back to base depot was not possible,  as 
                                                           
88(CR-42, ER-311, ECR-21, NCR-150, NER-400, NFR-750, NR-389, NWR-942, SCR-866, SER-322, SECR-230, SR-175, SWR-
128, WR-367 and WCR-39) 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
76
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 76 
it may result in unproductive cross movement of coaches. As it is not practical to 
send back coaches to base depot, remote control unit was essential to change 
the destination in the LED boards for its optimum functioning. However, without 
remote control units, these boards could not be used. 
Thus, frequent alteration of specifications by Railway Board and reversal of 
instructions to Zonal railways to initiate bulk purchase resulted in haphazard 
execution of this important passenger amenity work. LED destination boards 
procured by the Zonal Railways at a cost of ` 98.26 crore could not be used fully 
due to failure of Zonal Railways to update the train data base in the Coach 
Control Unit and to ensure provision of remote control unit at the time of their 
procurement and LED destination boards worth ` 62.15 crore remained 
unutilised. The specifications for LED destination board was yet to be finalised 
by the Ministry (March 2017). 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board (18 September 2017); 
their reply was awaited (28 February 2018). 
2.8 East Central Railway (ECR): Failure to appoint halt contractor at newly 
opened halt stations led to inconvenience to passenger s and leakage of 
revenue 
Railways have failed to appoint a halt contractor authorizing him for sale of 
tickets from four halt stations viz. Nekpur, Sarsoo, Mohammadpur and Hisua . 
This has resulted in leakage of revenue on account of ticket less travel from these 
halts. Railways have also incurred a cost of ` 21.03 crore on operating these halt 
stations up to March 2017. 
As per the codal provision 89, while opening new halts, Railway Administration 
must be satisfied that the provision of halt will not involve the Railway in 
leakage of revenue on account of ticket less travel. The working of halts should 
ordinarily be entrusted to reliable contractors permanently living in the locality. 
An agreement in the prescribed form should be executed by the contractor with 
the Railway Administration.  
In regard to opening of halt stations, Railway Board issued
90 (May 1999) 
comprehensive guidelines, which inter-alia, include: 
 A halt stations can be opened under General Manager’s power without 
referring such a case to Railway Board for approval when: 
i)  There is a financial justification for opening a halt-station. 
ii)  In the non -suburban area, the site of the proposed halt is at least 5 km 
from the stations/halts on either side. 
iii)  When the proposal is feasible both from Operating and Engineering 
points of view. 
                                                           
89 Para 1905 and 1906 of Indian Railway Code for Traffic (Commercial) Department 
90 RB’s letter No. 99/TG IV/Halts/Policy dated 17.05.1999 [Circular No. 12 (Commercial Department)] 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
77
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 77 
 If the conditions under which the General Manager can open halt stations 
are non-fulfilled, a halt may be opened as a passenger amenity , if the Zonal 
Railway is satisfied that there is justification for opening the halts on the 
grounds of volume of passenger traffic after getting approval of the Railway 
Board. 
 While determining  the feasibility of opening of a halt station, the Zonal 
Railways inter-alia should take into account the financial implication i.e. 
cost of stoppages of trains at the proposed halt for providing this facility. 
These guidelines continues to remain operational till date.  
During the review of records of Danapur Division of ECR, Audit observed that 
newly constructed Rajgir – Tilaiya New line, covering a distance of 46.08 km s, 
was opened for traffic on 29 June 2010. This single branch line section has three 
stations (Natesar, Jethian and Oro) and four halt stations (Nekpur, Sarsoo, 
Mohammadpur and Hisua). ECR Administration issued (June 2010) notification 
for commercial extension of a pair of passenger train
91 from Danapur to Rajgir 
up to Tilaiya with effect fro m 30 June 2010 with stoppage at all stations and 
halts over Rajgir – Tilaiya section. Subsequently with effect from 20 December 
2010 a notification was also issued by ECR Administration for operation of new 
pair of DEMU Passenger train 92 between Bakhtiyarpu r and Gaya via Rajgir – 
Tilaiya section with stoppage of all stations and halts over the section. The 
above notifications were endorsed to all concerned including Danapur Division, 
where the Rajgir – Tilaiya section falls.  
Audit scrutiny of records reveal ed that these two pairs of passenger trains were 
regularly having stoppage  at all the halt stations of Rajgir – Tilaiya section for 
more than six years . However, it was seen that no arrangements were made by 
Danapur Division for sale of ticket on these four halt stations and halt contractor 
was not appointed.  
Audit further revealed (February 2017) that Divisional Authority, Danapur was 
even not aware of opening of these halts over this section despite the fact that  
 Notification issued in June 2010 and Dec ember 2010 were also endorsed to 
Danapur Division.  
 In the working Time Tables of Danapur Division of each year effective from 
July 2010  to October 2016 , stoppages of these trains at halts had been 
notified.  
 Tickets were also being sold for traveling to these four halt  stations as 
noticed by Audit during test check of records of Rajgir station in May 2017. 
Audit noticed that Railways have incurred a cost of ` 21.03 crore on operating 
these halt stations for stoppage of two pair of passengers trains from the date of 
opening of halt station to March 2017. The cost has been assessed on the basis 
                                                           
91 Train No. 544/545 later re- numbered as 53232/53231 
92 Train No. 555/556 later re- numbered as 53225/53226 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
78
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 78 
of minimum cost of stoppage of train, notified by Railway Board in June 2005 
and December 2015. 
Failure to appoint a halt contractor authorizing him for sale of  tickets from four 
halt stations viz. Nekpur, Sarsoo, Mohammadpur and Hisua has resulted in 
leakage of revenue on account of ticket less travel from these halts . This also 
creates inconvenience to the passengers and compel them to travel ticketless 
from these halt stations.  
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board (18 September 2017); 
their reply was awaited (28 February 2018). 
2.9 South Eastern Railway (SER): Pre -departure detention of goods trains 
due to delay in arrival of crew and guard and consequent loss of opportunity of 
earnings of ` 58.30 crore 
Two crew booking lobbies are run at Kharagpur, one adjacent to Kharagpur 
railway station and other at Nimpura Through Yard, which is located 11 km 
away. The crew from other divisions sign in and sign o ff at Nimpura Crew 
Booking Lobby, whereas the crew and guards of Kharagpur division sign in 
and sign off at the Combined Crew Booking Lobby at Kharagpur and then 
report to the Chief Controller/ Nimpura Through Yard for taking over charge 
of the goods train . Transportation of crew and guards is managed by 
providing hired vehicles. Due to late arrival of crew and guards at Nimpura 
Through Yard there have been regular pre -departure detentions of goods 
trains. The pre-departure detentions during the period 2014-15 to 2016-17 led 
to consequent loss of opportunity to earn ` 58.30 crore.  
The Lobby System is aimed towards arranging train crew and guards for 
movement of Goods train s93.  A Lobby is like Control Office in the field. It is 
established with the twin aim  of reducing engine detention and crew detention 
in a Yard or a Crew or engine changing station by realistic ordering of trains and 
Crew/ Guard Booking. It is advantageous to have a combined crew and guard 
booking lobby so that both are available simultane ously. Pre -departure 
detention to the crew, crew ho urs balancing, rescheduling of locos and y ard 
detentions to locos can be thoroughly monitored by the Lobby. Therefore, any 
pre-departure detention i.e. time gap between issue of Train Order and delay in 
actual departure of train indicates mis -management in the arrangement of train 
crew and guards  for movement of trains.  
There are two Crew Booking Lobbies at Kharagpur, one adjacent to Kharagpur 
Railway station and other at Nimpura Through Yard 11 km away. The crew from 
other divisions sign in and sign off at Nimpura Crew Booking Lobby, whereas the 
crew of Kharagpur division sign in and sign off at the Combined Crew Booking 
Lobby at Kharagpur and then report to the Chief Controller/ Nimpura Through 
Yard for taking over charge of the goods train. Transportation of Crew and 
                                                           
93 Para IV (f) of Chapter Freight Operation of Indian Railways Operating Manual 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
79
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 79 
Guards from Combined Crew Booking Lobby/ Kharagpur to Nimpura Through 
Yard and back is managed by providing hired vehicles.  
As per the existing system, goods trains are ordered from Nimpura Through Yard 
for different directions where crew is booked and Train Order served at 
Kharagpur Combined Crew Booking Lobby. There have been regular pre -
departure detentions of goods trains at Nimpura Through Yard due to late 
arrival of crew and guards at Nimpura Through Yard. Audit observed that the 
main reason for pre -departure detentions was non -availability of crew and 
guard vehicles on time according to Train Order and less carrying capacity of 
vehicles. It was seen that on an average 45 minutes were l ost due to travel time 
from Kharagpur to Nimpura Through Yard resulting in reduction of effective 
crew hours by 90 minutes.  
Further analysis revealed that to minimise the pre -departure detention of goods 
trains at Nimpura Through Yard and loss of railway revenue thereof, a proposal 
for commissioning of a new Combined Crew and Guard lobby with full 
infrastructure such as approach road, street light, extra office space for opening 
crew controller office, quarters for Loco pilots/Assistant loco pilots etc.,  and 
signing in and signing off facility at Nimpura Through Yard was initiated by the 
Senior Divisional Operating Manager, Kharagpur in September 2015. Though the 
proposal for commissioning of crew base at Nimpura Through Yard was agreed 
by Sr. Divisional M echanical Engineer and Divisional Electrical Engineer 
(Operation) of Kharagpur division, no action was taken to open the combined 
crew base at Nimpura Through Yard. 
Subsequently, the Divisional Railway Manager/Kharagpur made an exercise of 
re-pinpointing o f guards and 29 goods guards were transferred to Nimpura 
Through Yard (November 2015 and March 2016). Though transfer orders were 
issued in November 2015 and March 2016 respectively, the concerned guards 
continued to sign in and sign off at the Combined Cr ew Booking Lobby/ 
Kharagpur due to non-opening of combined crew base at Nimpura Through Yard 
(August 2017).  
Review of records of the Senio r Divisional Operations Manager/ Kharagpur, 
showed that 13911, 13770 and 14121 goods train were ordered from Nimpura 
Through Yard during 2014 -15, 2015 -16 and 2016 -17 respectively (i.e. average 
daily 38 trains). Out of these trains ordered 2350 trains (17 per cent) in 2014-15, 
2866 trains (21 per cent) in 2015 -16 and 2509 trains (18 per cent ) in 2016 -17 
departed late due to late arrival of loco pilots (crew) and Guards at Nimpura 
Through Yard. The average pre -departure detention of rolling stock and 
locomotives was 41, 37 and 39 minutes per train in 2014 -15, 2015-16 and 2016-
17 respectively. Due to these detentions, SER lo st an opportunity to earn 
revenue of ` 58.30 crore
94 during the past three years. 
                                                           
94 ` 17.55 crore in 2014 -15 ,  ` 21.26 crore in 2015 -16 and  ` 19.50 crore in 2016 -17, on the basis of loss of earning 
capacity of rolling stock calculated by multiplying total hours lost due to detention and goods train earning per km 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
80
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 80 
Thus, delay in opening of combined crew and guard lobby at Nimpura Through 
Yard by SER Administration and failure in addressing the issue of pre -departure 
detention of trains by providing a suitable accommodation for crew and guards 
at Nimpura, resulted in loss of opportunity to earn ` 58.30 crore during the 
period 2014-15 to 2016-17. 
In reply, SER Administration  stated (August  2017) that that the work for new 
combined Crew and  Guards base at Nimpura Through Yard is in progress. They 
further stated that representations from crew and guards posted to Nimpura 
are being received, as staff quarters for them are not available for them in 
Nimpura. Earlier in June 2015,  they had stated  that the crew was temporarily 
utilised at Kharagpur, till final posting order issued and with the opening of new 
base at Nimpura Through Yard they should be posted at Nimpura. But, t ill date 
they are working from c ombined crew lobby at Kharagpur. SER Admi nistration 
need to take measures to provide necessary infrastructure to the crew and 
guards at Nimpura so as to avoid pre-departure detention. 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board (24 October 2017); their 
reply was awaited (28 February 2018). 
2.10 Northeast Frontier Railway (NFR): Inadmissible allowance of concession 
of ` 11.08 crore on restricted commodity under ‘Freight Incentive Scheme’  
As per the ‘Incentive scheme for Traditio nal Empty Flow Direction (TEFD), 
concession on freight was available to a consignor from the next consignment 
on which they achieve a ‘benchmark’ Net Ton Kilometers  (NTKM).  There was 
a stipulation that all ‘Ores and Minerals’ would be a restricted commodity if 
carried in open wagon and thus would not qualify for c oncession under the 
scheme. However, c oncession under ‘Freight Incentive Scheme’ was allowed 
on carriage of Dolomite in open wagons , which did not qualify for incentive.  
This led to i nadmissible allowance of concession of ` 11.08 crore  to the 
consignor. 
Railway Board introduced four different freight incentive schemes in November 
2009 which were implemented with effect from January 2010. The main 
objective of the scheme were to achieve improved utilisation of rolling stock and 
generate additional traffic f rom sidings and goods sheds, across which traffic 
movement traditionally predominantly comprised of empty wagons. 
Out of the said four schemes, one was ‘Incentive scheme for Traditional Empty 
Flow Direction (TEFD)’. As per guidelines of this scheme, conces sion on freight 
was available to a consignor from the next consignment on which they achieve a 
‘benchmark’ Net Ton Kilometers  (NTKM) fixed on the basis of average month 
wise NTKM performance for the two previous years for the same commodity 
from the same t erminal. There was, however, a stipulation that all ‘Ores and 
Minerals’ would be a restricted commodity if carried in open wagon and thus 
would not qualify for concession under the scheme. 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
81
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 81 
In Alipurduar Division, Dolomite was being carried in both Open and  Covered 
Wagons to different parts of the country and for the purpose of calculation of 
'benchmark', NTKM earned from both Covered and Open Wagons were being 
considered by the Railway Administration. Dolomite, being categorised as ‘Ores 
and Minerals’ in IR CA Goods Tariff, is a restricted commodity for availing the 
concession under Incentive Scheme when carried in Open Wagons. Thus, the 
NTKM earned on carrying it on rakes comprising of Open Wagons does not 
qualify for consideration for concession under the scheme. 
A consignor, M/s Bhiringhee Commercial Private Ltd. (BCPL) Durgapur, sent 
Dolomite in Open as well as covered wagons regularly. For, achieving the 
month-wise ‘benchmark’ NTKM, they were allowed weightage on NTKM earned 
by them on the consignments se nt in Open Wagons too, which was 
inadmissible. 
The matter was taken up with Railway Board on 11 October 2017. In reply, 
Railway Board stated (7 December 2017) that for determining Benchmark the 
examples of customer having loaded commodities in BCN and BOXN  rakes 
(covered wagons) was taken for working out NTKMs. Hence, Alipurduar Division 
having taken previous loading in open wagon and covered wagon for the 
purpose of determining NTKM Benchmark, the NTKM in the case of particular 
consignee was determined as per extant guidelines. Further, the types of 
wagons indicated in the Special Letter are covered type wagon which was used 
for loading. 
However, as per the illustrative calculation given in  the Rate Circular No. 62 of 
2009, calculation of NTKM was made for transportation of ‘cement’, which does 
not fall under the category of ‘Ores and Minerals’ and hence not a restricted 
commodity. As such , both BCN and BOXN rakes were cited. Further, NFR 
Administration allowed concession on rakes of covered wagons after all owing 
the consignor to achieve Benchmark NTKM inclusive of NTKMs earned on Open 
wagons without considering the ‘restricted commodity’ clause specifically 
mentioned against the instant policy. 
Railway Administration continued to allow the inadmissible advan tage to the 
consignor till the validity of the scheme (August 2015), thereby allowing an 
undue privilege worth ` 11.08 crore. 
2.11 East Coast Railway (ECoR): Improper planning and short closure of 
traffic facility works resulted in loss of earning capacity  
The Nayagarh railway siding caters to  87 customers for loading of iron ore. On 
an average 340 wagons are loaded every day and railway earns a freight 
revenue of ` 676 crore per year from this siding. Construction Organisation of 
ECoR awarded a contract f or traffic facility work in the siding for enhancing the 
efficiency in loading/unloading operations of iron ore traffic.  Though clear site 
was an essential pre -requisite to ensure timely execution of the work, Railway 
Administration allowed iron ore heaps to accumulate in the work site and did not 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
82
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 82 
remove the same to handover a clear site to the contractor. Thus, the benefits of 
the sanctioned traffic facility works worth ` 4.23 crore, viz., development of 
circulating area and concrete pavement between R/3  and R/4 did not 
materialize. Railways also had to make an avoidable payment of ` 1.15 crore to 
the contractors towards price variation.   
A contract was awarded by the Construction Organization of EC oR for the work 
comprising ‘(i) Development of circulat ing area and loading/unloading surface 
between Route -3 (R/3) and Route -4 (R/4) with concreting surface for smooth 
handling of iron ore traffic and (ii) construction of additional loop line adjacent 
to R/4 with loading/unloading surface at Nayagarh Station over Jakhharpura -
Bansapani section of ECoR’ in February 2010.  The agreement value of the work 
was
 ` 12.83 crore and it was targeted for completion within eight months, i.e. 
by October 2010.  
Audit noticed  that the work was commenced in March 2010, but the  physical 
progress achieved by the target date of completion (TDC) was only 7.7 per cent.  
The contractor informed the Construction wing on 23 March 2011 that the site 
between R/3 and R/4 was not handed over to him. The site was covered with 
huge deposit o f iron ore and it hampered taking up the work of concreting of 
the surface between R/3 and R/4. Construction wing took up the matter with 
the Operating Department in May 2011 for clearance of the iron ore deposit and 
handing over the site for execution of the traffic facility work. However, till 
November 2013, the iron ore deposits could not be cleared. Extensions of TDC 
without penalty were granted mainly on this account. 
Initially Nayagarh was a four lined
95 station.  An additional loop line (R/5) with a 
loading/unloading platform was proposed on account of heavy demand for 
loading/ unloading of iron ore/ coal and accumulation of more than 150 pending 
indents at Nayagarh. While the work of additional loop line (R/5)  was in 
progress, one more loop line was i ncluded in the ongoing contract through 1 st 
variation on 10 February 2011 with enhancement of overall agreement value to  
` 13.45 crore. The R/5 line was renamed as R/6 and the loop line proposed later 
was named as R/5. 
Meanwhile, the Operating Department i ntimated the Construction Organisation 
(6 December 2013) that the  execution of sanctioned work for development of 
circulating area, loading/unloading surface between R/3 and R/4 was not 
required considering various activities to be undertaken at Nayagarh station in 
future. They however, did not specifi y any details of the future activities. 
Consequently, the contract was foreclosed by Construction organisation on 11 
December 2013. By that time, 70 per cent  of work worth  ` 9.74 crore (viz., 
provision of two  additional loop lines R/5 and R/6 with a new loading platform) 
had been executed leaving the works for development of circulating area and 
concrete pavement between R/3 and R/4. 
                                                           
95 R/1 - loop line having RL platform, R/2 - Main line, R/3 &  R/4 - loop lines having a common platform for unloading/ 
loading 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
83
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 83 
Audit observed that the contract was awarded without ensuring availability of 
site. The work which was planned to be completed within eight months i.e. by 
October 2010, lingered for more than four years with eight extensions and 
eventually foreclosed on Railway’s account in December 2013. This led to 
avoidable payment of ` 1.15 cror e to the contractors towards price variation 
besides the benefits of the sanctioned traffic facility works worth ` 4.23 crore, 
viz., development of circulating area and concrete pavement between R/3 and 
R/4 did not materialize. The loading/unloading surfac e provided for the line R/6 
served only one line and was not developed as a common loading platform to 
enhance loading/unloading facilities. 
When the matter was taken up with the Railway Administration through Special 
letter in November 2016, Railway Administration replied (January 2017) that 
(i) At the time of tendering process, all plans and site were available. However, 
after the award of contract, heaps of iron ore got deposited in the loading 
area between R/3 and R/4 and the site could not be handed over f or work 
execution. The Operating Department decided (December 2013) that various 
activities for enhancing loading and unloading facilities at Nayagarh station 
were under active consideration and finalisation; in view of that the work of 
development of circulating area, loading/unloading surface between R/3 and 
R/4 was not required to be executed and accordingly informed the 
Construction wing. 
(ii) R-6 along with loading platform was in completion stage when R -5 was 
sanctioned. Hence, R -5 had to be constructed in  between R-4 and R- 6.  This 
additional loop line (R-5) was required as an engine reversal line. 
The reasons given by the Railway Administration for foreclosing the work cannot 
be justified due to the following: 
(i) The concreting work between R/3 and R/4 was p roposed citing several 
ditches in the platform causing discontentment among customers in plying 
trucks. But, the sanctioned work could not be executed due to presence of 
iron ore deposits on the site. The Railway Administration was aware that a 
contract for traffic facility work was already awarded and clear site was an 
essential pre -requisite to ensure timely execution of the work. Railway 
Administration allowed iron ore heaps to accumulate in the work site and 
did not remove the same to handover a clear s ite to the contractor. This led 
to abnormal delay in execution and ultimate foreclosure of the contract with 
a payment of ` 1.15 crore. Though it was stated that the Operating 
Department proposed that the works were not required considering various 
activities to be undertaken at Nayagarh station in future, no such activities 
were undertaken at Nayagarh subsequently. 
(ii) Though Railway Administration stated that R/5 was required as an engine 
reversal line, it was seen that there was no such mention in the justif ication 
of the estimate.  Creation of lines (R/5 and R/6) on both the sides of the 
newly laid platform would have enhanced its utility in traffic handling. 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
84
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 84 
Nayagarh railway siding caters to 87 customers for loading of iron ore. On an 
average 340 wagons are loaded every day and railway earns a freight revenue of 
` 676 crore per year (during 2016-17) from this siding. Though provision of two 
additional loop lines R/5 and R/6 with a new loading platform was executed, the 
works for development of circulating a rea and concrete pavement between R/3 
and R/4 were not executed. The concreting work between R/3 and R/4 was 
proposed citing several ditches in the platform causing discontentment among 
customers in plying trucks. This work continued for more than four yea rs with 
eight extensions due to lack of coordination between, Construction and 
Operating Departments and non -availability of site on account of accumulation 
of iron ore and eventually foreclosed on Railway’s account in December 2013 
with avoidable payment of ` 1.15 crore to the contractors towards price 
variation.  Thus, the benefits of the sanctioned traffic facility works worth ` 4.23 
crore, for development of circulating area and concrete pavement between R/3 
and R/4 did not materialize.    
In reply, ECo R Administration stated (September 2017) that although the work 
was awarded and the agency was availabl e for execution, the Operating 
department might not have agreed to stop loading/ unloading activities in peak 
period anticipating huge revenue loss. However, the work was justified as 
necessary and included in the contract  and t he site should have been made 
available to execute the work. 
Audit is of the view that a closer look is required to be taken at the works for 
development of circulating area and con crete pavement between R/3 and R/4 
and view should taken on its need. 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board (30 October 2017); their 
reply was awaited (28 February 2018). 
2.12 South Western Railway  (SWR): Incorporation of ambiguous clause i n 
the agreement leading to refusal of payment of wagon hire charges by 
Mormugao Port Trust 
Due to incorporation of an ambiguous clause in the agreement for a suitable 
incentive in the waiver of Wagon Hire Charges for any reduction in free time, 
Mormugao Po rt Trust (MPT) did not reckon accumulated credit hours and 
refused to pay bills of ` 15.05 crore raised by SWR. 
Mormugao Port Trust (MPT), Goa is one of the major Ports serving SWR. Major 
commodities being handled at the Port are Coal, Iron Ore and general  cargo 
items. Due to the proximity of the Port with various mining regions in Goa, the 
Port became a premier Iron Ore exporting port of the country. Coal requirement 
from various steel industries and power generating units has made it an 
attractive and cost effective destination for coal imports and steel exports.  
As per Clause 5.1 (a) of the Working Agreement, executed in August 2004 
(effective from October 2004), between MPT and SWR, a free time of 15 hours 
was fixed with suitable incentive in the waiver  of Wagon Hire Charges for any 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
85
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 85 
reduction in free time,  which would be calculated and adjusted once in six 
months.  
The clause was found to be ambiguous and in the absence of clarity in granting 
incentive for early release of rakes under this Clause, neither MPT nor SWR 
could a rrive at a common understanding for the past 15 years. While SWR 
continued to raise bills on MPT on a monthly basis towards detention to Railway 
rakes beyond the allotted free time,  MPT consistently refused to pay bills so 
raised, insisting on resolving th e issue of suitable incentive as per Clause 5.1(a). 
Though SWR raised a total bill for ` 16.43 crore  (from February 2012 to 
December 2016), MPT agreed to pay ` 1.38 crore only , duly considering the 
waiver of up to 50 per cent of Wagon Hire Charges till Ja nuary 2012 and for the 
remaining period, by straightaway deducting the total credit hours from the 
total debit hours. 
Thus, an ambiguous clause for adjusting credit hours accumulated resulted in a 
deadlock of over 15 years in recovery of legitimate dues fr om MPT towards 
Wagon Hire Charges. 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board (18 September 2017); 
their reply was awaited (28 February 2018). 
2.13 South East Central Railway (SECR): Loss due to non realization of 
engine hire charges from the siding owner 
Despite detention of Railway’s Engine in the siding beyond permissible period 
under Terminal Incentive cum Engine on Load Scheme (TIELS) and clear 
instructions of Railway Board on realization of engine hire charges on this 
account, Railway Admin istration did not realize the Engine Hire Charges of   
` 28.23 crore from the siding owner. 
In order to improve the utilization of the rolling stock, and help customers in 
prompt clearance of freight trains from their terminals, the Engine -on-Load 
(EOL) Scheme96 was introduced by the Railway Board in July 2004.  Under the 
said scheme the train engine would remain available during loading/unloading 
operation in the siding and wait on Railway’s account so as to work the train 
immediately after loading/unloadin g operation is completed. The EOL scheme 
was superseded (March 2006) by a new ‘Terminal Incentive cum Engine on Load 
Scheme (TIELS)’ effective from 1st April 2006 97. It was stipulated in the said 
order that implementation of the scheme should be through mec hanism of EOL 
Benefit/ Terminal incentive benefit.  Some of the important features of TIELS 
Scheme are: 
 For the purpose of reduction of detention of Rolling stock in the terminals, 
loading / unloading free time
98 of block rake, under the scheme, was reduced. 
                                                           
96  Rates Circular No. 21 of 2004 dated 12.7.2004 
97 Railway Board’s Freight Marketing Circular No. 9 of 2006 issued under No. 2005/TC/(FM)/1/8 dated 6.3.2006 
98 Prescribed time schedule for loading / unloading of rakes in a siding beyond which demurrage charges are leviable   

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
86
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 86 
For example, unloading time of Open rake (BOXN etc.) was reduced to five 
hours against nine hours applicable to normal sidings.  
 A financial incentive in the form of freight rebate of specified percentage for a 
period of ten years was allowed to customer  who helps to reduce the 
terminal detention by taking certain measure like, increase in number of pay 
loaders /tippler, introduce round the clock working etc. (for old existing 
customers only). 
 The scheme was applicable to existing sidings only, which have  been notified 
for charging of freight on through distance basis.  
 All future sidings were to come up with EOL concept and reduced loading/ 
unloading time for TIELS would be applicable without any financial benefit 
(freight rebate).  
 As a direct benefit un der the scheme, freight customers were allowed for 
utilization of Railway’s Locomotives during free time of loading/unloading, 
without paying engine hire charges. 
During audit (February 2014) of records of M/s Sanjay Gandhi Thermal Power 
Station Siding (SG TPS) served by Birshinghpur Station of South East Central 
Railway (SECR) it was noticed that a new unloading point (Track  Hopper No. 2) 
was opened in the siding under SECR’s Rate Circular
99 of April 2008 in addition 
to their two existing unloading points (T ippler Siding and CHP Siding).  It was 
stipulated in the SECR’s Rate Circular that the coal rakes would be placed for 
unloading in any of the three unloading points including the new one and the 
freight would be charged for the farthest distance of 10.83 k ms for all three 
unloading points. It was further indicated that TIELS would be applicable to the 
new unloading point without financial benefit 100 and free time for unloading 
would be the free time notified for TIELS101. The existing two unloading points 
would be treated as normal siding (without TIELS) and normal free time102 would 
be applicable and demurrage would be calculated beyond free time for 
detention of wagons. For detention of Engines beyond free time in these two 
old unloading points, shunting charges on the basis of All India Engine Hour Cost 
would be charged from the time of placement of rakes to till completion of 
unloading, as the Rail Engine would remain attached to the rakes till completion 
of unloading as a result of applicability of TIELS in 3
rd unloading point. 
Audit noticed that in Track Hopper No.2 (the new unloading point) of SGTPS 
siding, though SECR authority was levying and realizing the demurrage charges 
for detention of wagons beyond free time of five hours, Engine hire charges for 
detention of Railway’s Engine beyond free time of five hours as prescribed in 
Rule of TIELS
 103 were not levied and realised from the siding owner. This led to 
                                                           
99 Rates Circular No. 51(G)/2008 dated 21.4.2008 of Chief Commercial Manager, SECR, Bilaspur 
100 Freight rebate of specified percentage in TIELS vide Freight Marketing Circular No. 9 of 2006 dated 6.3.2006 (Para 10).  
101 Five hours unloading time in this case vide Para 6 of Freight Marketing Circular No. 9 of 2006 dated 6.3.2006 
102 Nine hours in this case 
103 vide Para 5 of FM circular No. 9 dated 6.3.2006 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
87
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 87 
non-levy and non -realisation of ` 28.23  crore104 towards Engine Hire Charges 
from the Siding owner duri ng the period from January 2009 to March 2017 
towards detention of 6968 Engines for 12582 hours. The loss would continue till 
remedial action is taken.                  Annexure 2.14 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Administration in July 20 17, 
while replying (September 2017) Railway Administration accepted the Audit 
contention and stated that they have now decided to impose engine hire 
charges beyond free time for use of railway engine in Track Hopper No. 2. 
However, no details on date of bi lling, amount billed and realization thereof etc. 
were furnished to Audit. In addition, formal bills for realization of Engine Hire 
Charges were yet to be raised by SECR. Moreover, As per Para 21(iii) of Railway 
Board’s Freight Marketing Circular No. 9 of 2006, Division will sign an agreement 
with the terminal owners stipulating the streams of traffic that will be covered 
under TIELS working, as also the date from which it will come into force.  
However, neither any reply in this regard nor the copy of the agreement was 
furnished by Railway Administration to Audit so far.  
Thus, detention of Railway’s Engine in the siding beyond permissible period 
under TIELS resulted in non -realisation of Engine Hire Charges of  ` 28.23 crore 
from the siding owner during the period January 2009 to March 2017. 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board (13 October 2017); their 
reply was awaited (28 February 2018). 
2.14 East Coast Railway (ECoR): Non -weighment of loaded rakes of Food 
Corporation of India (FCI) 
FCI has eight sidings for loading of consignments in Sambalpur division. A s per 
the instructions laid down by the  Railway Board , for rakes loaded with bagged 
consignments, weighment of at least 5 per cent rakes is required to be done 
before loading, to keep a ch eck on overloading.  Audit observed that in four out 
of eight loading points  viz. Hirakud, Bargarh Road, Khariar Road and 
Mahasamund, ECoR Administration did not ensure weighment of at least 5 per 
cent rakes before loading, though there were instances of overloading in the past 
at these loading points. The weighbridges at these four locations have become 
non-functional during 2015 to 2017 . The rakes are not being weighed any more. 
Non-weighment of rakes encourages overloading malpractices which lead to loss  
of revenue and damage to rolling stock and tracks  and detection of overloading 
and levy of punitive charges thereon is also not possible. 
Section 73, of The Railways Act, 1989 prescribes levy of punitive charges for 
overloading of goods in a wagon beyond  its permissible carrying capacity at the 
prescribed rate circulated by Railway Board from time to time. As per Ministry of 
Railways instructions
105 (June 2007), in cases of dispute regarding punitive 
                                                           
104 ` 27.34 towards non -realisation of Engine Hi re Charges from the Siding owner  and n on payment of service tax 
amounting to ` 0.89 crore accrued on Engine Hire Charges. 
105 Rates Circular No.61 of 2007 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
88
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 88 
charges for overloading in respect of consignments loaded  in standard sized 
bags, the number of bags in the wagons detected to be overloaded may be 
counted and the average weight of a bag determined by weighing a few bags in 
random basis at the destination point in the presences of the representatives of 
the con signor/ consignee and two gazetted Railway officers.  Further, Ministry 
of Railways (September 2011) further issued instructions
106, decided that in case 
of consignment loaded in standard uniform bags; at least 5 per cent  of rakes 
should be subjected to weig hment. Where the commodities are over -loaded in 
Railway wagons, the Railway Administration shall recover punitive charges 107 
from the consignor, the consignee or the endorsee as the case may be. 
Audit scrutiny (January 2015 and August 2016) of records on Sta tion 
Outstanding in the Office of the Senior Divisional Commercial Manager/  
Sambalpur revealed accumulation of outstanding punitive charges of  ` 4.59 
crore levied against the Food Corporation of India (FCI) for overloading detected 
in their  bagged consignm ents of food grains loaded at eight Goods 
Siding/Stations viz. Hirakud, Bargarh Road, Kantabanji, Khariar Road, 
Mahasamund, Bagbahra, Balangir and Kesinga of Sambalpur Division from 
November 2012 to August 2016. 
FCI authorities disputed the levy of punitiv e charges since 2012 -13 and stated 
that no overloading was done as all the consignments were being loaded by FCI 
on 100 per cent weighment basis on the computerised weigh bridge after taking 
both gross weight and tare weight of the trucks. They stated that  there might be 
some error in the in -motion weigh bridge for which it was showing excess 
weight after loading. They further contested that their rakes were loaded with 
standard bags of uniform size and only 5 per cent  of it should have been 
subjected to we ighment at in -motion weighbridges. Railway Board directed 
(April 2016) ECoR Administration to settle the issue locally by mutual discussions 
and did not gave a firm decision to settle the long outstanding dispute and to 
realize outstanding punitive charges.   
Audit reviewed the position of weighment of FCI rakes after August 2016, and 
noticed that there was no case of weighment/ overloading of FCI consignments 
in respect of all the loading stations except only one case in Mahasamund 
loading station. Further  review showed that out of the eight loading points 
(Hirakud, Bargarh Road, Kantabanji, Khariar Road, Mahasamund, Bagbahra, 
Balangir and Kesinga) of FCI consignments in Sambalpur division, in four loading 
points viz. Kantabanji, Bagbahra, Balangir and Kesi nga, no rake was loaded 
during 2016 -17 and 2017 -18 (up to September 2017).  In respect of the 
remaining four loading points viz. Hirakud, Bargarh Road, Khariar Road and 
Mahasamund, FCI’s consignments were loaded but the weighment of at least 5 
per cent rakes as per the provision of Railway Board’s orders was not followed . 
Further, these weighbridges were out of order since 2015.  This clearly indicates 
                                                           
106 Rates Circular No.32 of 2011 
107 Punitive charges on overloading are calculated by Railway authorities as per Ministry of Railways Rates circular 
No.19/2012 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
89
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 89 
that the consignments are being allowed to move without any weighment  since 
2016-17. As rakes are not being weighed any more, possible detection of 
overloading and levy of punitive charges thereon is not possible.  
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board in November 2017. 
Railway Board stated (December 2017) t hat rakes of FCI have been weighed in 
the railway in-motion weighbridges duly certified by legal metrology department 
and the punitive charges have been levied as per rule. The in motion 
weighbridge at Hirakud turned defective and become non -functional sin ce 8 
May 2015 due to system software failure and it was condemned on 30 March 
2016.  The in motion weighbridge at Titlagarh was condemned on 8 May 2016 
and weighment discontinued from 11 February 2017. Hence, the rake of FCI 
could not be weighed in at Hira kud and enroute weighbridge at Titlagarh for 
FCI’s rakes originating from Sambalpur Division. New electronic in motion 
weighbridge have been planned in place of Hirakund and Titlagarh at Latanga 
and Kandel Road station respectively to ensure weighment of r akes originating 
from Sambalpur Division.  The new weighbridge will be commissioned shortly. 
The reply of Railway Board substantiates the audit observation that weighment 
of FCI rakes could not be done until the new weighbridges are commissioned. 
Non-weighment of rakes encourages overloading malpractices which lead to 
loss of revenue and damage to rolling stock and tracks.  Railway Board must 
ensure that their instructions of weighment of consignments are followed 
scrupulously and recovery of penalty , if ne eded is done from the defaulting 
consignor/ consignee. 
2.15    Central, Eastern, Northeast Frontier, North Eastern, North Western and 
Western Railway (CR, ER, NFR, NER, NWR and WR): Undue advantage taken by 
Jansadharan Ticket Booking Sewaks (JTBSs) by depo siting de -monetised 
specified bank notes with the Railways post-demonetization 
132 Jansadharan Ticket Booking Sewaks in six Zonal Railways took undue 
advantage of the facility provided by the Government of India to allow 
transactions at railway ticketing c ounters and deposited specified bank notes 
with the Railways post demonetisation instead of depositing the cash in the 
banks. 
Ministry of Railways, with a view to improve dispensation of unreserved tickets 
in city areas, conceptualized a scheme of Jan Sad haran Ticket Booking Sewak 
(JTBS) in June 2006.  The scheme was initially introduced in Northern Railway as 
a pilot project and implemented in the other Zonal Railways in January 2008.  
The procedure for implementing the scheme was laid down
108 by Railway Board 
in June 2006. Vide Para 11 (iii) of the letter, Railway Board clarified that the JTBS 
would have to make advance deposit and tickets could be issued till the amount 
                                                           
108 No. 2006/TG-I/20/JTBS dated 28 June 2006 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
90
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 90 
against the deposit was available. In November 2009, Railway Board further 
clarified that lower financial limit of ` 10,000 up to which JTBS can issue tickets 
have to be provided in system universally for all JTBS so that tickets by JTBS 
cannot be issued if the am ount deposited by them is less than ` 10,000109. No 
upper financial cash limit for issue of tickets by the JTBS was fixed by the Railway 
Board. 
As per Gazette Notification 110 dated 08 November 2016, currency notes of 
denomination of five hundred rupees and one  thousand rupees (i.e. specified 
bank notes) were demonetised and these notes ceased to be legal tender on 
and from 09 November 2016. Railway Board, vide its letter 111 dated 09 
November 2016, clarified that the specified bank notes would not cease to be 
legal tender with effect from 09 November 2016 until 11 November 2016 to the 
extent of transactions at railway ticketing counters, ticket counters of 
Government or Public Sector Undertakings buses and airline ticketing counters 
at airports for purchase of tick ets and communicated the same to all Zonal 
Railways. It was also stated that a complete account of record should be 
maintained for transactions which were made with the specified bank notes 
during the above period. Instructions were given to the officials involved in the 
Railway ticketing operations and eventual deposit of the cash received in the 
Railway’s Deposit Account. It was observed that no specific directives/  
instructions were issued by the Railway Board in respect of cash deposited by 
the JTBSs in  Railway’s Deposit Accounts essential for issue/sale of unreserved 
tickets through computerised Unreserved Ticketing System. 
Audit test checked the transactions carried out by 132 JTBSs during 07 
November 2016 to 11 November 2016 on 5 9 stations
112 of six Zonal Railways113.  
A comparison of deposits made by the JTBSs for five days of pre and post 
demonetisation revealed that post demonetization, total cash deposited by 
these 132 JTBSs exceeded their normal pre -demonetization cash deposit by 
significant amounts as tabulated below: 
Table 2.15 – Details of amounts deposited by JTBS pre and post demonentisation  
Zonal 
Railway 
Total 
number 
of JTBS in 
the Zonal 
Railways 
Number of 
JTBS where 
significant 
variation in 
cash deposit 
was noticed 
Amount deposited by JTBS (` in lakh) 
Pre-demonetisation Post demonetisation 
07.11.2016 08.11.2016 09.11.2016 10.11.2016 11.11.2016 
CR 210 33 14.51 12.24 61.39 32.95 18.24 
NEFR 16 08 0.10 0.82 3.89 2.02 1.29 
                                                           
109Made effective from 1 January 2010 
110 S.O. 3407(E) and S.O. 3408(E) dated 08 Nov 2016 
111 Letter No.RBA 2016/ACII/9/3 dated 9 Nov 2016 
112CR-08 stations (Kurla, Gh atkopar, Thane, Kalyan, Panvel, Pune, Parasia, Bhusawal), NFR -05 stations ( Sumsi, Ladha, 
Jogbani, Katihar, Barsoi), NWR -14 stations (Alwar,  BandiKui, Nimkathana, Sikar, Jaipur, Phulera, Bhilwara, Ajmer, 
Bhiwani, Laharu, Churu, Hisar, Degana, Makrana), NER -08 stations (Farrukhabad, Gorakhpur, Mau, Siwan, Kashipur, 
Lucknow,Chhapra,Kashipur, Ajamgarh), WR -09 stations (Ahmedabad, Viramgam, PTN, Kandivili, Virar, BhauruchJn, 
Kosamba Jn, Indore, Ujjain), ER -15 stations (Barddhaman, Howrah, Katwa Jn.,  Tarkeshwar, Ashoknagar Road, 
Behrampore Court, Chakdaha, Canninig, Dattakupur, Kanchrapara, Krishnapur, Sealdah, Sodpur, Sonarpur, Taldi) 
113 Central, Northeast Frontier, North Western, North Eastern, Eastern ,Western Railways 
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 90 
against the deposit was available. In November 2009, Railway Board further 
clarified that lower financial limit of ` 10,000 up to which JTBS can issue tickets 
have to be provided in system universally for all JTBS so that tickets by JTBS 
cannot be issued if the am ount deposited by them is less than ` 10,000109. No 
upper financial cash limit for issue of tickets by the JTBS was fixed by the Railway 
Board. 
As per Gazette Notification 110 dated 08 November 2016, currency notes of 
denomination of five hundred rupees and one  thousand rupees (i.e. specified 
bank notes) were demonetised and these notes ceased to be legal tender on 
and from 09 November 2016. Railway Board, vide its letter 111 dated 09 
November 2016, clarified that the specified bank notes would not cease to be 
legal tender with effect from 09 November 2016 until 11 November 2016 to the 
extent of transactions at railway ticketing counters, ticket counters of 
Government or Public Sector Undertakings buses and airline ticketing counters 
at airports for purchase of tick ets and communicated the same to all Zonal 
Railways. It was also stated that a complete account of record should be 
maintained for transactions which were made with the specified bank notes 
during the above period. Instructions were given to the officials involved in the 
Railway ticketing operations and eventual deposit of the cash received in the 
Railway’s Deposit Account. It was observed that no specific directives/  
instructions were issued by the Railway Board in respect of cash deposited by 
the JTBSs in  Railway’s Deposit Accounts essential for issue/sale of unreserved 
tickets through computerised Unreserved Ticketing System. 
Audit test checked the transactions carried out by 132 JTBSs during 07 
November 2016 to 11 November 2016 on 5 9 stations
112 of six Zonal Railways113.  
A comparison of deposits made by the JTBSs for five days of pre and post 
demonetisation revealed that post demonetization, total cash deposited by 
these 132 JTBSs exceeded their normal pre -demonetization cash deposit by 
significant amounts as tabulated below: 
Table 2.15 – Details of amounts deposited by JTBS pre and post demonentisation  
Zonal 
Railway 
Total 
number 
of JTBS in 
the Zonal 
Railways 
Number of 
JTBS where 
significant 
variation in 
cash deposit 
was noticed 
Amount deposited by JTBS (` in lakh) 
Pre-demonetisation Post demonetisation 
07.11.2016 08.11.2016 09.11.2016 10.11.2016 11.11.2016 
CR 210 33 14.51 12.24 61.39 32.95 18.24 
NEFR 16 08 0.10 0.82 3.89 2.02 1.29 
                                                           
109Made effective from 1 January 2010 
110 S.O. 3407(E) and S.O. 3408(E) dated 08 Nov 2016 
111 Letter No.RBA 2016/ACII/9/3 dated 9 Nov 2016 
112CR-08 stations (Kurla, Gh atkopar, Thane, Kalyan, Panvel, Pune, Parasia, Bhusawal), NFR -05 stations ( Sumsi, Ladha, 
Jogbani, Katihar, Barsoi), NWR -14 stations (Alwar,  BandiKui, Nimkathana, Sikar, Jaipur, Phulera, Bhilwara, Ajmer, 
Bhiwani, Laharu, Churu, Hisar, Degana, Makrana), NER -08 stations (Farrukhabad, Gorakhpur, Mau, Siwan, Kashipur, 
Lucknow,Chhapra,Kashipur, Ajamgarh), WR -09 stations (Ahmedabad, Viramgam, PTN, Kandivili, Virar, BhauruchJn, 
Kosamba Jn, Indore, Ujjain), ER -15 stations (Barddhaman, Howrah, Katwa Jn.,  Tarkeshwar, Ashoknagar Road, 
Behrampore Court, Chakdaha, Canninig, Dattakupur, Kanchrapara, Krishnapur, Sealdah, Sodpur, Sonarpur, Taldi) 
113 Central, Northeast Frontier, North Western, North Eastern, Eastern ,Western Railways 
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 90 
against the deposit was available. In November 2009, Railway Board further 
clarified that lower financial limit of ` 10,000 up to which JTBS can issue tickets 
have to be provided in system universally for all JTBS so that tickets by JTBS 
cannot be issued if the am ount deposited by them is less than ` 10,000109. No 
upper financial cash limit for issue of tickets by the JTBS was fixed by the Railway 
Board. 
As per Gazette Notification 110 dated 08 November 2016, currency notes of 
denomination of five hundred rupees and one  thousand rupees (i.e. specified 
bank notes) were demonetised and these notes ceased to be legal tender on 
and from 09 November 2016. Railway Board, vide its letter 111 dated 09 
November 2016, clarified that the specified bank notes would not cease to be 
legal tender with effect from 09 November 2016 until 11 November 2016 to the 
extent of transactions at railway ticketing counters, ticket counters of 
Government or Public Sector Undertakings buses and airline ticketing counters 
at airports for purchase of tick ets and communicated the same to all Zonal 
Railways. It was also stated that a complete account of record should be 
maintained for transactions which were made with the specified bank notes 
during the above period. Instructions were given to the officials involved in the 
Railway ticketing operations and eventual deposit of the cash received in the 
Railway’s Deposit Account. It was observed that no specific directives/  
instructions were issued by the Railway Board in respect of cash deposited by 
the JTBSs in  Railway’s Deposit Accounts essential for issue/sale of unreserved 
tickets through computerised Unreserved Ticketing System. 
Audit test checked the transactions carried out by 132 JTBSs during 07 
November 2016 to 11 November 2016 on 5 9 stations
112 of six Zonal Railways113.  
A comparison of deposits made by the JTBSs for five days of pre and post 
demonetisation revealed that post demonetization, total cash deposited by 
these 132 JTBSs exceeded their normal pre -demonetization cash deposit by 
significant amounts as tabulated below: 
Table 2.15 – Details of amounts deposited by JTBS pre and post demonentisation  
Zonal 
Railway 
Total 
number 
of JTBS in 
the Zonal 
Railways 
Number of 
JTBS where 
significant 
variation in 
cash deposit 
was noticed 
Amount deposited by JTBS (` in lakh) 
Pre-demonetisation Post demonetisation 
07.11.2016 08.11.2016 09.11.2016 10.11.2016 11.11.2016 
CR 210 33 14.51 12.24 61.39 32.95 18.24 
NEFR 16 08 0.10 0.82 3.89 2.02 1.29 
                                                           
109Made effective from 1 January 2010 
110 S.O. 3407(E) and S.O. 3408(E) dated 08 Nov 2016 
111 Letter No.RBA 2016/ACII/9/3 dated 9 Nov 2016 
112CR-08 stations (Kurla, Gh atkopar, Thane, Kalyan, Panvel, Pune, Parasia, Bhusawal), NFR -05 stations ( Sumsi, Ladha, 
Jogbani, Katihar, Barsoi), NWR -14 stations (Alwar,  BandiKui, Nimkathana, Sikar, Jaipur, Phulera, Bhilwara, Ajmer, 
Bhiwani, Laharu, Churu, Hisar, Degana, Makrana), NER -08 stations (Farrukhabad, Gorakhpur, Mau, Siwan, Kashipur, 
Lucknow,Chhapra,Kashipur, Ajamgarh), WR -09 stations (Ahmedabad, Viramgam, PTN, Kandivili, Virar, BhauruchJn, 
Kosamba Jn, Indore, Ujjain), ER -15 stations (Barddhaman, Howrah, Katwa Jn.,  Tarkeshwar, Ashoknagar Road, 
Behrampore Court, Chakdaha, Canninig, Dattakupur, Kanchrapara, Krishnapur, Sealdah, Sodpur, Sonarpur, Taldi) 
113 Central, Northeast Frontier, North Western, North Eastern, Eastern ,Western Railways 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
91
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 91 
Table 2.15 – Details of amounts deposited by JTBS pre and post demonentisation  
Zonal 
Railway 
Total 
number 
of JTBS in 
the Zonal 
Railways 
Number of 
JTBS where 
significant 
variation in 
cash deposit 
was noticed 
Amount deposited by JTBS (` in lakh) 
Pre-demonetisation Post demonetisation 
07.11.2016 08.11.2016 09.11.2016 10.11.2016 11.11.2016 
NWR 91 18 3.11 12.12 12.39 4.53 5.10 
WR 49 12 3.88 11.44 15.35 6.32 4.43 
ER 131 32 7.35 9.57 34.50 19.86 13.33 
NER 148 29 6.63 21.65 31.55 16.29 14.49 
In seven out of 13 cases at Kurla station, where the JTBSs had deposited the 
demonetized notes disproportionate to their ticket sales, the Central Railway 
Administration had issued show cause notices (28 and 30 November 2016) 
endorsing copies to Income Tax Department. The JTBSs, in their explanations to 
show cause notice, stated that these cash were for their personal use, 
emergency needs, loan payment, to avoid rush in the banks etc. Reasons for not 
taking action against the remaining six JTBSs at Kurla Station by the Central 
Railway Administration were not on record. On the matter taken up by Audit, 
the Central Railway Administration referred the matter to Income Tax 
Authorities on 23 August 2017, 07 September and 11 September 2017 in 
Mumbai, Pune, Nagpur and Bhusawal Divisions respectively.  
It was further observed that the percentage of tickets sold by these JTBSs were 
significantly low in comparison to cash deposited by them during post 
demonetization period as shown in the Table below:   
Table 2.16 - Percentage of sale of tickets to cash deposited by the JTBS 
Zonal 
Railway 
Pre-demonetisation Post demonetisation 
07.11.2016 08.11.2016 09.11.2016 10.11.2016 11.11.2016 
CR 93 89 15 24 42 
NEFR 157 79 14 19 29 
NWR 90 22 12 31 28 
WR 91 25 13 32 44 
ER 105 85 20 26 45 
NER 120 45 28 38 42 
Thus, in the absence of specific directives/instructions from Railway Board to fix 
an upper limit for cash deposits by JTBSs, the JTB Ss took undue advantage and 
deposited large amounts of cash with the railways in de -notified denominations, 
instead of depositing the same in the banks. The Gazette Notification issued by 
the Central Government on 0 8 November 201 6 allowed the old denominat ion 
notes to be used for the purpose of buying railway tickets at railway ticket 
counters and sale of tickets by JTBS was not included in the same. 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board (5 January 2018); their 
reply was awaited (28 February 2018). 
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 91 
Table 2.15 – Details of amounts deposited by JTBS pre and post demonentisation  
Zonal 
Railway 
Total 
number 
of JTBS in 
the Zonal 
Railways 
Number of 
JTBS where 
significant 
variation in 
cash deposit 
was noticed 
Amount deposited by JTBS (` in lakh) 
Pre-demonetisation Post demonetisation 
07.11.2016 08.11.2016 09.11.2016 10.11.2016 11.11.2016 
NWR 91 18 3.11 12.12 12.39 4.53 5.10 
WR 49 12 3.88 11.44 15.35 6.32 4.43 
ER 131 32 7.35 9.57 34.50 19.86 13.33 
NER 148 29 6.63 21.65 31.55 16.29 14.49 
In seven out of 13 cases at Kurla station, where the JTBSs had deposited the 
demonetized notes disproportionate to their ticket sales, the Central Railway 
Administration had issued show cause notices (28 and 30 November 2016) 
endorsing copies to Income Tax Department. The JTBSs, in their explanations to 
show cause notice, stated that these cash were for their personal use, 
emergency needs, loan payment, to avoid rush in the banks etc. Reasons for not 
taking action against the remaining six JTBSs at Kurla Station by the Central 
Railway Administration were not on record. On the matter taken up by Audit, 
the Central Railway Administration referred the matter to Income Tax 
Authorities on 23 August 2017, 07 September and 11 September 2017 in 
Mumbai, Pune, Nagpur and Bhusawal Divisions respectively.  
It was further observed that the percentage of tickets sold by these JTBSs were 
significantly low in comparison to cash deposited by them during post 
demonetization period as shown in the Table below:   
Table 2.16 - Percentage of sale of tickets to cash deposited by the JTBS 
Zonal 
Railway 
Pre-demonetisation Post demonetisation 
07.11.2016 08.11.2016 09.11.2016 10.11.2016 11.11.2016 
CR 93 89 15 24 42 
NEFR 157 79 14 19 29 
NWR 90 22 12 31 28 
WR 91 25 13 32 44 
ER 105 85 20 26 45 
NER 120 45 28 38 42 
Thus, in the absence of specific directives/instructions from Railway Board to fix 
an upper limit for cash deposits by JTBSs, the JTB Ss took undue advantage and 
deposited large amounts of cash with the railways in de -notified denominations, 
instead of depositing the same in the banks. The Gazette Notification issued by 
the Central Government on 0 8 November 201 6 allowed the old denominat ion 
notes to be used for the purpose of buying railway tickets at railway ticket 
counters and sale of tickets by JTBS was not included in the same. 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board (5 January 2018); their 
reply was awaited (28 February 2018). 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
92
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 92 
2.16 South East Central railway (SECR): Loss due to short realization  of 
demurrage charges 
As per Railway Board directives permissible free time for loading/unloading of 
rakes has been prescribed for various types of wagons in private steel sidings . 
The agreement with Jindal Steel and Power Limited  clearly stipulated that the 
instruction regarding Terminal Incentive cum Engine on Load Scheme contained 
in Railway Board directives shall be followed for the siding.  SECR however, 
allowed excess free time to this siding which resulted in short-levy of demurrage 
charges of ` 10.56 crore. 
Railway Board vide its Rate Circular No.74 of 2005 dated 19 December 2005 has 
clearly bifurcated free time for loading and unloading of different types of 
wagons and allowances (if any) at goods sheds and sidings.  
In order to improve the utilization of the rolling stock and help customers in 
prompt clearance of freight trains from their terminals, Railway Board 
introduced (March 2006) ‘Terminal Incentive cum Engine on Loa d Scheme 
(TIELS)’ effective from 1st April 2006
114. The scheme stipulates that all future 
sidings are to come up with (Engine on Load) EOL concept and 
loading/unloading time for TIELS would be applicable for all such future 
terminals without any financial be nefits being admissible. Permissible free time 
for loading/ unloading of various types of block rakes with TIELS working is 
prescribed as: 
Table 2.17 – Loading and unloading time allowed for various types of wagons 
Type of wagon Loading (hrs) Unloading (hrs) 
Open Rake (BOXN etc.) 3:00 5:00 
Hopper Rake (BOBR etc.) 3:00 2:00 
Covered Rake (BCN etc.) 6:00 6:00 
Tank Rake (BTPN etc.) 5:00 5:00 
In SECR, there are two sidings of Jindal Steel and Power Limited  (JSPL), 
Kirodimalnagar viz. JSLK siding and Rail &  Universal Beam Mill (R&UBM) siding.  
JSLK siding is the old siding with normal free time applicable for steel plants as 
per Para 2.4 of the Rate Circular No.74 of 2005. R&UBM siding is a new siding 
notified115 as independent booking point for handling full rake by SECR 
Administration in November 2007 with TIELS free time, wherein it was also 
mentioned that for calculation of demurrage charges, the free time prescribed 
in TILES shall be applicable. D uring test check of records of grant of free time 
and realiz ation of Demurrage Charges in these sidings, the following 
irregularities were noticed: 
(i) In contravention to the permissible free time for loading under TIELS/EOL 
concept, Railway Administration allowed normal free time applicable for steel 
plants as per Pa ra 2.4 of RC -74/2005. As a result, 17 hours (12 hours + 5 hours) 
free time (including block rake allowance of five hours) was allowed instead of 
                                                           
114 Railway Board’s Freight Marketing  (FM)Circular No. 9 of 2006 dated   06.03.2006 
115 CCM/SECR/BSP’s Circular No. 183 (G)/2007 dated 26.11.2007 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
93
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 93 
three hours for loading of open wagons rakes and demurrage charges were 
levied and realized accordingly. This l ed to short levy of demurrage charges to 
the tune of  ` 6.38 crore for the period during April 2012 to March 2017 in 
respect of 1018 rakes in R&UBM Siding as assessed in Audit. 
(ii) Railway Board further clarified 116 (May 2015) that permissible EOL free 
time for loading of Flat Rake (BRN/BFN, CONCORD) shall be six hours. However, 
the said instruction was also not adhered to and 17 hours (including Block Rake 
Allowance of five hours) free time was allowed instead of six hours for loading of 
Flat and CONCORD rakes. C onsequently, demurrage charges in respect of 
Flat/CONCORD (BRN+BFN+BOST) rakes was also short collected to the tune of  
` 4.18 crore for the period from  May 2015 to March 2017 in respect of 809 
rakes in R&UBM Siding as assessed in Audit. 
In reply, SECR  Administration in March 2016, they stated (May 2016) that 
R&UBM siding was constructed in the existing plant area under expansion 
programme and notified in November 2007. It was further stated that only new 
siding can be brought under EOL and for the existin g sidings TIELS will be 
applicable, only when, the siding opts to come under TIELS/EOL. No separate 
agreement was executed for R&UBM to work under TIELS.   
However, the fact remains that the agreement was executed (November 2007) 
between JSPL & Railway Adm inistration for newly constructed R&UBM siding 
and Clause 13(c) of the agreement clearly stipulated that instruction regarding 
TIELS contained in FM-09/2006 shall be followed for the siding. 
Thus, non -adherence to Railway Board’s orders and allowing excess  free time 
for loading of rakes in R&UBM siding resulted in short -levy of demurrage 
charges of ` 10.56 crore
117 by SECR. Further, the very purpose of improving the 
utilization of rolling stock and prompt clearance of freight trains from siding for 
which the TIELS/EOL free time scheme was introduced was also defeated. 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board (21 September 2017); 
their reply was awaited (28 February 2018). 
2.17 Central Railway  (CR): Deficiencies in remittance of cash by the Ticket 
Booking Staff and Ticket Examiners 
There was accumulation of admitted debits in various divisions of CR, as codal 
provisions for clearance of admitted debits were not implemented by Railway 
Administration. Staff misappropriated cash and did not remit cash in full. 
System of recovery of outstanding amount, in convenient monthly installments, 
also encouraged continuance of the practice of short remittance of cash by the 
staff. Railway Administration failed to take disciplinary action against the 
employees who  were habitual defaulters. All Zonal Railway Administrations 
need to issue JPO expeditiously so as to put in place a mechanism for 
streamlining the system of remittance of cash by staff and minimizing the 
cases of misappropriation of station earnings. Rail ways also need to take 
                                                           
116 Railway Board’s Rate Circular No. 18 of 2015 dated 14.05.2015 
117 ` 6.38 crore for the period April 2012 to March 2017 and ` 4.18 crore for the period May 2015 to March 2017 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
94
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 94 
stringent action against defaulters which will act as a deterrence against such 
practices. Considering the number of ticket booking and ticket checking staff 
across Indian Railways, the risk of mis -appropriation and continued practic e of 
short remittance of cash would be manifold.    
As per Para 2430 of Indian Railway Commercial Manual (Volume II), any railway 
servant who receives money on account of Railway and with intent to defraud, 
omits to enter it in the cash book or other pres cribed record or who collects 
unauthorized charges from the public, is liable to be prosecuted. Severe action 
would be taken against the staff at fault, if it is found that the money realized 
has not been remitted. 
Admitted Debits represent the debits rais ed against the station and accepted by 
the staff as due from them. Every debit or disallowance against the station by 
the Traffic Accounts Office or Cash Office arising from errors in charging fare or 
freight, short remittance of cash, base coins or other causes, is payable by the 
concerned staff. Rules
118provide that admitted debits should be made good 
immediately by the staff concerned in cash. In case of heavy debits, Divisional 
Commercial Manager (DCM) may permit the recoveries from salary bills in 
monthly installments. Rules 119 also provide that if the admitted debits are not 
made good in cash by the staff concerned before the date of preparation of 
salary bill, the Station Master should prepare a statement of recoveries to be 
made from the staff on account  of debits and send the same to the Divisional 
Accounts Office along with relevant pay bill.  
As per existing instructions
120 issued to Travelling Inspector of Station Accounts 
(TIA) and Traffic Inspection Section, the TIA should pursue the pending admitted 
debits and see that they are cleared quickly by advising DCM for recovery 
through pay sheet. Details of the persons who are frequently in the habit of 
making short remittances should be brought to the notice of DCM and Chief 
Commercial Manager (CCM) for fu rther action. Commercial staff against whom 
debits are raised repeatedly and where the debits are heavy should not 
ordinarily be allowed
121 to continue in posts involving cash handling in order to 
prevent recurrence of such cash embezzlement. 
Review of the p osition of clearance of admitted debits by the Ticket booking 
staff and Ticket checking staff in Central Railway revealed the following 
irregularities:  
Admitted Debits of Ticket booking staff  
In various Divisions of Central railway, outstanding balance u nder Admitted 
Debits was ` 56.27 lakh122 at the end of March 2017. Though h alf yearly reviews 
                                                           
118Paras 2720 and 2723 of Indian Railway Commercial Manual (Volume II) 
119Para 2721 of Indian Railway Commercial Manual (Volume II) 
120Paras 266 (3) and 924 (2) of Central Railway’s Manual of Instructions issued by Financial Adviser and Chief A ccounts 
Officer (FA&CAO) 
121Para 1002 (iii and vi) of Indian Railway Code for Traffic (Commercial) Department 
122Mumbai Division (` 20.59 lakh), Pune Division (` 6.63 lakh), Bhusawal Division (` 25.09 lakh), Nagpur  Division (` 3.50 
lakh), Solapur Division (` 0.47 lakh) 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
95
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 95 
were conducted by CR Administration and results reported to Railway Board, no 
concrete efforts were made either by the Commercial or the Traffic Accounts 
Department to initiate necessary action to recover the old outstanding amounts 
as per codal provisions. In Mumbai Division, it was observed that  
 During April 2014 to December 2016, eight Booking Clerks were regularly 
making short remittances of cash, but the Railwa y Administration failed to 
take disciplinary action against them. The provisions of disallowing the staff 
to continue in the posts involving cash handling  were also not being 
followed.  
 Admitted debits amounting to ` 3.05 lakh were not recovered from 14 
Booking clerks for reasons such as long absence, transfer and TIA credit 
awaited etc.  
In six other cases (Mumbai, Pune and Bhusawal Divisions), the Admitted Debits 
were outstanding for a considerable period 09 months to 33 months.  
Admitted Debits of Ticket checking staff 
 In Bhusawal, cash amounting to ` 24.72 lakh collected by one TTE (Sri.S.S. 
Wanale) through issue of Excess Fare Tickets (EFTs) to the passengers during 
29 December 2013 to 01 October 2014 was not remitted. TTE’s returns in 
respect of these EFT books were also not submitted by him. The said TTE had 
quoted fake Money Receipt numbers in proof of depositing cash with 
railways and also affixed stamp of Bhusawal booking office on reverse side  
of the last EFT used.  Debit of `24.72 lakh was raised  (November 2014) 
against Shri S.S. Wanale/TTE and recovery was being made @ `10,000 per 
month with effect from February 2016. A sum of ` 21.92 lakh was 
outstanding for recovery at the end of December 2017. Audit observed that 
the irregularity of misappropr iation/non-remittance of cash by the said TTE 
(Shri Wanale) was not pointed out in any of the nine TIA Reports for the 
period 2012 -13 to 2014 -15, which indicated a weak internal check by the 
Traffic Branch of the Accounts Department. 
 In Mumbai Division, re view of records of DCTI/Mumbai revealed (March 
2017) that the ticket checking staff were habitual in making short remittance 
of railway cash . Debits aggregating `11.32 lakh were raised against the 
erring staff. Thus, railway’s revenue/cash was retained by the erring staff 
and used by them for personal use, which tantamount to misappropriation 
of Railway revenue. On the pointed out by Audit, the Railway Administration 
stated (June 2016) that the ` 10.80 lakh had been recovered from 14 
employees and only ` 0.52 lakh was outstanding from two staff.  
Outstandings from retired/expired/transferred/long absent staff 
Audit observed that, in respect of 31 Ticket booking staff of Mumbai Division 
who had either retired, expired or removed from service, Railway 
Administration did not recover the outstanding dues amounting to ` 7.16 lakh as 
on December 2016. An amount of ` 2.51 lakh was outstanding for recovery from 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
96
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 96 
the ticket checking staff of DCTI/CSTM who had either retired, transferred, 
expired or were long absent. 
Issuing of EFT books and returning by TTEs    
Detailed procedure for maintaining the stock book of money value books (Blank 
Paper Ticket Books)/EFT books are laid down 123 in railway manuals. Railway 
Board’s Commercial Circular No.53 of 2012, describe the proce dure for 
depositing earnings of Ticket Collectors (TCs) and TTEs in the booking office, 
issue of Money Receipt by the station staff receiving the cash and preparation of 
excess fare returns by the TTEs for its submission to the Traffic Accounts Office 
by t he Chief Ticket Inspector (CTI) concerned. Checks to be carried out by the 
TIAs on the initial records of accounts (viz. excess fare receipts etc.) maintained 
at stations and periodicity of inspections,  procedure to be adopted in utilization 
and preparation of various returns of EFT by station staff viz. TTEs and TCs and in 
case of loss of an EFT book are laid down
124.  
During audit, instances of delay in returning/non -returning of EFT books, delay 
in submission of EFT returns, loss of EFT books by the TCs/TEs/TTEs were also 
noticed which have been summarized below: 
i. Delay in returning/non-return of used EFT books 
As per existing instructions, used EFT books are to be returned by the 
TCs/TEs/TTEs immediately after exhausting all the foils of the book before 
requisitioning a new book.  It was observed that 
 In Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus (CSTM), in 32 cases, there were 
delays of two and 182 days in returning the EFT books issued to 
TCs/TEs/TTEs during the period January 2016 to January 2017.  
 In Bhusawal,  out of 150 used EFT books (pertaining to the period January 
2016 to March 2017); there were delays in 97 cases in returning the used 
EFT books. The delays ranged between seven and 144 days.  
 In two cases, two EFT books issued (on 13 -7-2012 and 2-4-2013) to the staff 
(one TTE and one Head TTE) were not returned by them. Cash amounting to 
` 0.50 lakh collected by them was outstanding. The TTE was absent since 
October 2012.  
ii. Delay in submission of EFT returns  
During April 2016 to March 2017, 11 staff of DCTI /Bhusawal did not submit the 
EFT returns in time. The delay ranged between 17 and 31 days. 
iii. Loss of EFT books 
In seven cases, EFT books issued to TTEs were not returned by them till March 
2017 and reported as lost resulting in non -remittance of railway cash  of ` 2.02 
lakh. 
 
                                                           
123Para 228 (b), Para 554 and Para 728 of Indian Railway Commercial Manual (Volume I) 
124Paras 3301, 3302 and 3307 of Indian Railway Code for Accounts Department (Volume II), Chapters 2, 5, 7, 13 and Paras 
228 (b), 554 and 728 of Indian Railway Commercial Manual (Volume I),Railway Board’s Commercial Circular No.53 of 
2012 and Commercial Circular No.8/2007 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2
97
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 2 
 
 97 
iv. Issue of Joint Procedural Order 
Railway Board vide Commercial Circular No. 53 of 2012 dated 11.9.2012 issued 
detailed guidelines for the remittances of Travelling Ticket Examiner (TTE)’s 
cash. As per Railway Board’s instructions (Septembe r 2012), the TTE shall 
deposit the amount realized through EFTs issued immediately at the station 
where duty schedule terminates. The Booking clerk, on receipt of the cash from 
TTE, shall generate Unreserved Ticket System (UTS) Money receipt duly feeding 
break-up of remittances and hand over the same to the TTE. TTE shall mention 
the UTS Money receipt number and date under clear signature/stamp on the 
back side of last record foil of EFT used.  
Railway Board directed Centre for Railway Information System (C RIS) 
(August/September 2012) to make necessary provisions in Unreserved Ticketing 
System (UTS) by including a mandatory field of Provident Fund (PF) Number so 
that, money receipts are issued from the UTS with PF number. A Report (on 
daily/periodical/monthly basis) was to be designed by CRIS showing the TTE 
wise remittances made at various stations either within the same zone or other 
Zonal Railways. This was to be done to facilitate easy reconciliation of TTE 
returns submitted by them. The zone wise and TTE ’s Headquarter wise report 
was to be generated for all the Zonal Railways. This report was crucial for 
reconciliation, checks and subsequent transfer of earnings due to other railways. 
The date of effect of the above software change was to be informed to Z onal 
Railways under intimation to Railway Board for implementing the above revised 
scheme. Railway Board had directed the Chief Commercial Managers (CCMs) 
and FA&CAOs of all the Zonal Railways to issue a detailed JPO covering all the 
aspects mentioned abov e and to ensure smooth implementation of the revised 
procedure. 
Audit observed that JPO on the above lines was not issued by the Central 
Railway Administration (23 January 2018). Review of status of issue of JPO in the 
other Zonal Railways showed that no J PO was issued in nine Zonal Railways 
(NCR, NER, NEFR, NR, SWR, SER, SECR, WCR and WR). Only NWR and ECR had 
issued the JPO in compliance of Railway Board’s instructions dated 11 
September 2012. In three Zonal Railways (SR, SCR and ECoR), necessary 
instructions based on Railway Board’s Commercial Circular No. 53 of 2012 were 
issued, no JPO as required in the Commercial Circular ibid was issued by the 
Zonal Railway Administration. Status of issue of JPO was not made available to 
audit by ER Administration . Audit noticed that in SR, instructions issued based 
on commercial circular ibid are being followed. However, there is no provision in 
UTS for generating report on TTE-wise/location-wise/zone-wise remittances and 
there is no automatic system generated reconciliation.   
Thus, there was accumulation of admitted debits in various divisions of CR, as 
codal provisions for clearance of admitted debits were not implemented by 
Railway Administration. Staff misappropriated cash and did not remit cash in 
full. System of  recovery of outstanding amount, in convenient monthly 
installments, also encouraged continuance of the practice of short remittance of 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 2
98
Chapter 2 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 98 
cash by the staff. Non-deposit of cash collection amounts to temporary 
embezzlement. Railway Administration failed to ta ke disciplinary action against 
the employees who were habitual defaulters. The audit observations are a result 
of test check in one Zonal Railway (Central Railway). Considering the number of 
ticket booking and ticket checking staff across Indian Railways, the risk of mis-
appropriation and continued practice of short remittance of cash would be 
manifold. All the Zonal Railway Administrations need to issue JPO 
expeditiously so as to put in place a mechanism for streamlining the system of 
remittance of cash by  staff and minimizing the cases of misappropriation of 
station earnings. Railways also need to take stringent action against 
defaulters which will act as a deterrence against such practices.  
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board (02 February 2017); their 
reply was awaited (28 February 2018). 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 3
99
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 3 
 
 99 
Chapter 3 
 Engineering  
Member Engineering at Railway Board is responsible for maintenance of all fixed 
assets of Indian Railways such as Tracks, Bridges, Buildings, Roads, water supply, 
in addition to construction of new assets such as new lines, gauge co nversion, 
doubling and other expansion and developmental works. He is assisted by 
Additional Member (Civil Engineering), Additional Member (Works) and Advisor 
(Land & Amenities). 
At Zonal level, the Engineering Department is headed by Principal Chief Engineer 
(PCE). The PCE is assisted by various chief engineers for track, bridge, planning, 
track machines, general matters etc. In addition, each Zonal Railway has a 
construction organization headed by a Chief Administrative Officer, Construction 
who is respon sible for major construction works including survey works within 
the Zonal Railway and is assisted by various Chief Engineers (Construction).  
The total expenditure on repair and maintenance of assets (Permanent way and 
works, bridges, tunnels, roads, sani tation and water supply etc.  including plant 
and equipment ) by Indian Railways during the year 2016 -17 was ` 13016.62 
crore
125.  Indian Railway also incurred an expenditure of ` 41679.07 crore126 on 
creation of new assests such as new line, doubling, gauge con version, traffic 
facility works, track renewal works , bridge works, level crossing and passenger 
amenities works . During the year, apart from regular audit of vouchers and 
tenders, 1280 offices of Engineering department including Construction 
Organization of the Railways were inspected by Audit.  
This Chapter includes six individual paragraphs relating to undue favour to 
contractors, blocking up of capital in new line, gauge conversion and ROB works, 
short recovery of license fee, etc.  
                                                           
125 Grant no.04 – Repair and maintenance of Permanent Way and works for 2016-17 and Minor Head 200 of Grant no.07 
– repair and maintenance of plant and equipment 
126 Respective Plan Head of Grant no.16 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 3
100
Chapter 3 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 100 
 
3.1 Northern Railway: Undue favour to firm in awarding contracts by violating 
Railway Board’s instructions on financial capacity and capability 
A firm was awarded by contracts by Northern Railway Construction Organisation 
without examining its financial capacity and capabil ity despite Railway Board’s 
instructions and codal provisions. Railways favoured the firm by granting the 
extensions without penalty . T he performance of the contractor was mentioned 
as ‘satisfactory’ in both the works and he was not made responsible for th e 
delays while granting extensions. This adversely affected the progress of 
Doubling work between Meerut and Muzaffarnagar and resulted in non -
achievement of intended benefit of increasing the line capacity for movement of 
freight and passenger traffic in the section. 
As per rules127, no work or supply should ordinarily be entrusted for execution to 
a contractor whose capability and financial status has  not been investigated and 
found satisfactory. Railway Board, keeping in view several instances of failure o f 
the earthwork contractors of important projects of New Lines, Doubling and 
Yard Remodelling etc., and  to avoid the risk of such failures on the part of the 
contractors and consequent delay in completing the work, directed (December 
1968128) the General Man agers of all Indian Railways to pay special attention 
while deciding the tenders for earthwork contracts.  
Railway Board during the Works  Review Meetings  (November 2003) with the 
Zonal Railways observed that the Tender Committees (TCs)  were not examining 
the financial capacity and capability once the tenderer fulfils the Minimum 
Eligibility Criteria prescribed129 by the Railway Board in October 2002, viz.  
(i) submission of Revenue/Banker’s Solvency Certificate (40 per cent  of the 
Advertised Tender Value of Work) 
(ii) completion of at least one similar single work for a minimum value of 35 per 
cent of the Advertised Tender Value of Work in the last three financial years 
(current year and three previous financial years), and 
(iii) receiving of the contract amount of 150 per cent of the Advertised Tender 
Value of Work during the last three years 
Railway Board, therefore, again issued directives (November 2003)clarifying that 
one of the important roles of the TC is to examine the financial capacity and 
capability of intending tenderer vis-à-vis the workload in hand in order to ensure 
that the tenderer can undertake and execute the new work successfully, if 
assigned to him.  
Railway Board, in November 2013, amended the Clause 10 of the General 
Conditions of Contract. As per this C lause, ‘the tenderer (s) shall be eligible, only 
if he/they fulfil Minimum EligibleCriteria of having received total contract  
                                                           
127 Para 1215 of Indian Railway Code for Engineering Department 
128 Railway Board letter No.67/W5/RP2/5 dated 4-12-1968  
129 Railway Board letter No.94/CEI /CT/ 4 dated17-10-2002  

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 3
101
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 3 
 
 101 
amount during the last  three financial years and in the current financial year 
with a minimum of 150 per cent  of the advertised t ender value’. 
Authentic/Attested Certificates from employer/client, audited Balance Sheet 
duly certified by the Chartered Accountant shall also be produced by the 
tenderer (s).  
Work of doubling of 55 kms between Meerut and Muzaffarnagar was sanctioned 
by the Railway Board in August 2013. For exercising better quality control and 
proper monitoring/supervision, the doubling work was divided into two Zones 
viz. Zone  I and Zone  II by the executive agency i.e. Northern Railway 
Construction Organisation. Tenders  for ‘Earthwork in cutting, filling in 
embankment and other allied works’were invited (September 2013) under two 
packet system for both the Zones  separately. M/s Dynasty Promoters Pvt. Ltd., 
Faridabad was found to be the lowest tenderer for both the works.  As 
recommended by the TC, the contracts for  Zone I and Zone  II were awarded to  
this firm at cost of ` 23.42 crore and ` 26.21 crore in June 2014 and May 2014 
respectively. Letters of Acceptance (Lo A) were issued in June 2014 and May 
2014 respectively with date of completion of work being 18 months in both the 
cases.  
Review of the finalisation of tenders and contracts awarded in the above works 
revealed the following: 
1. The firm M/s Dynasty Promoters Pvt. Ltd had submitted the same set of 
documents in respec t of Plant and Machinery/ resources available and 
credentials for proof of receiving of payments in both the tenders.   
2. The advertised cost of the tender for Zone I and Zone II was ` 25.39 crore 
and ` 29.06 crore respectively.  Hence, as per the Minimum Eli gibility 
Criteria, the firm should have received ` 38.09 crore and ` 43.60 crore 
respectively during the last three financial years and current financial year. 
3. In the tender documents for Zone  I, the firm had mentioned that they had 
received payments of ` 38.66 crore. Whereas, in the tender documents for 
Zone II, the firm had mentioned that ` 51.49 crore were received by them 
during the same period. Scrutiny of details of payments of ` 51.49 crore 
claimed to have been received in ZoneII showed that it inclu ded the 
payments of ` 38.66 crore shown for ZoneI by the contractor. As such, the 
firm had received total payments of ` 51.49 crore during the last three 
financial years and current financial year, of which ` 38.66 crore was shown 
by the firm as amount received against both the tenders. 
4. Tender Committee  recommended acceptance of offer of M/s Dynasty 
Promoters Pvt. Ltd  which was accepted by the competent authority (Chief 
Administrate Officer/Construction). As a result, two contracts having total 
value of ` 49.63 crore were awarded to a single firm which had received 
total payment of ` 51.49 crore during the prescribed qualifying period of last 
three financial years and current year (2010 -11 to 2012-13 and current year 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 3
102
Chapter 3 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 102 
2013-14) against the financial criteria o f receipt of payments of a value not 
less than 150  per centof the advertised cost (150 per cent of ` 54.46 crore 
i.e. ` 81.68 crore) by an individual bidder during the same period.  
5. The violation occurred despite the fact that  
 TC members and Tender Accept ing Authority were same in both the 
tenders, 
 Opening date of both tenders was same i.e. 29 October 2013, and  
 TC meetings were held during the same period. 
6. The firm had received a payment of ` 1.18 crore in financial year 2009-10. As 
per the Form 16A, this  payment pertained to 2009 -10. The firm, however, 
accounted for this amount as received in 2010-11, based on the date of issue 
of the certificate (21 September 2010). The TC also took into account this 
amount for the period 2010 -11. Had this amount not con sidered by TC, the 
firm M/s Dynasty Promoters Pvt. Ltd would stand disqualified for ZoneI as 
the payment received would have been reduced to ` 37.48 crore ( ` 38.66 
crore-` 1.18 crore) against the threshold prescribed criteria of ` 38.09 crore 
(based on Min imum Eligibility Criteriaof receiving payments of 150 per cent 
of the Advertised Tender  Value of ` 25.39 crore in the last three financial 
years). 
7. After dividing the work in two parts for better quality control and proper 
monitoring/supervision, both the w orks were awarded to the same 
contractor, which defeated the purpose of the decision. 
From the above, it is evident that TC favoured the firm on three counts viz. 
(i) Allowed same proof of receipt of payments in both the tenders 
simultaneously,  
(ii) Consi dered the payment of ` 1.18 crore received by the firm beyond the 
qualifying period prescribed in the tender documents, and  
(iii) Awarded both the works to a firm beyond its financial capacity and 
capability disregarding the Railway Board’s directives. 
In reply, NR  Administration stated (November 2015) that (a) the date of 
payment of ` 1.18 crore (i.e. 21 -09-2010) falls in the eligibility period (2010 -11); 
(b) there was neither provision nor any formula for assessing the available bid 
capacity of the bidde r, and (c) a new Bid Capacity Clause has now been 
introduced.  
Audit, however, noticed that the date 21 September 2010 as shown in Form 16A 
was the date of issue of the same, for the financial year 2009 -10. Also, the 
Certificate issued by Executive Enginee r, Ministry of Transport and Highway, 
Chandigarh was issued on the basis of Form 16A. Railway Board has time and 
again stressed the need for examination of the financial capacity and capability 
of the tenderer by the TC. Therefore, non -inclusion of Bid Cap acity Clause  in 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 3
103
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 3 
 
 103 
tender condition to ascertain the workload in hand of the firm was a lapse and 
violation of Railway Board’ instructions. 
Audit further observed that the progress of work was poor. Financial progress of 
Zone I and Zone  II was only 49.12 per cent and 17.18 per cent respectively till 
February 2016 and October 2015, whereas the date of completion was 19 
December 2015 and 25 November 2015 respect ively. NR Administration  also 
favoured the firm by granting the extensions without penalty. The perfor mance 
of the contractor was mentioned as ‘satisfactory’ in both the works and the 
contractor was not made responsible for the delays  while granting extensions.  
Both the contracts were foreclosed and final payment of ` 14.87 crore for ZoneI 
and ` 13.33 crore for Zone II was made to the firm in March 2017 and April 2017 
respectively. No fresh contract was awarded to undertake balance work (July 
2017). 
Thus, the decision of TC to award the contracts to a firm without examining its 
financial capacity and capabi lities indicated undue favour to the firm. Not only, 
Railway Board's instructions for tender processing were disregarded in this case, 
but it also adversely affected the progress of the works. The intended benefits of 
increasing the line capacity for movem ent of freight and passenger traffic was 
also not achieved. 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board on 3 October 2017 . In 
their reply, Ministry of Railways, stated (23 February 2018) that there was no 
provision in tender notice/conditions to assess the financial capacity and 
capability of the lowest tenderer based on the combined value of two tenders, 
in which the same tenderer was the lowest. Also, there was no formula provided 
in the tender document for assessing bid capacity of lowest tende rer based on 
the work executed in the past and works in hand. However, with effect from 
October 2015, a new Bid Capacity Clause along with formula has been 
introduced to assess the residual capacity of tenderer. As per this clause, if the 
available bid cap acity is equal to or more than estimated cost of present work, 
the tenderer has to furnish the details of existing commitment and ongoing 
works. The Ministry further stated that the contractor had received a payment 
of ` 1.18 crore on 21 September 2010 i.e . financial year 2010 -11 which falls in 
the eligibility period i.e. 1 April 2010 to 29 October 2013.  
Audit observed that though the Northern Railway Construction organisation has 
introduced a new Bid Capacity Clause and formula for assessing bid capacity of 
lowest tenderer, the issue of assessment of the financial capacity and capability 
of the lowest tenderer, if the same tenderer found to be the lowest in more 
than one tenders opened during same time, was yet to be resolved. As per 
tender conditions, the  payments received for works completed during the last 
three years and up to the date of opening of tender was required to be not less 
than 150 per cent  of the advertised cost of work. In this case, though the 
payment of ` 1.18 crore was received on 21 Sep tember 2010, the same was in 
respect of work done in the year 2009 -10 and, thus, was not eligible for arriving 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 3
104
Chapter 3 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 104 
at the financial eligibility criteria. For maintaining transparency in tendering and 
awarding the contracts, the Ministry needs to clarify whether the payments 
received for the work pertaining to the period prior to qualifying period would 
be considered for arriving at the financial eligibility criteria. 
3.2 East Central Railway (ECR):  Blocking -up capital in execution of Gauge 
Conversion work 
Railway Administration failed to complete pre -mega block works in connection 
with Gauge Conversion projects which was to be completed in advance as per 
Railway Board’s guidelines. Besides, poor execution and inefficient contract 
management on part of Railway Adm inistration was noticed in other civil 
works which led to delay in completion of Gauge Conversion project and 
blockage of capital of `  47.98 crore. The overall cost of civil works in the GC 
project also increased by ` 551.68 crore due to price escalation. 
Railway Board formed (August 2004) a Committee to study the reasons for 
inordinately long mega block time for Gauge Conversion Works and means and 
ways to carry out the works of Gauge Conversion in about a months’ block 
time
130. Based on the study Railway Board issued instructions (May 2005) that 
the works in connection with Gauge Conversion (GC) projects such as earthwork, 
minor bridges and certain major bridges on diversions should be started two to 
three years in advance and completed before the block. F urther, Railway Board 
viewed that it will be desirable to complete all the works in a mega block of not 
more than 60 days, although 30 days would be ideal. 
The GC work of Sakri -Nirmali and Jhanjharpur -Laukaha bazar section  (94 km) 
over Samastipur Division of ECR was included in the budget for 2004 -05. The 
detailed estimate of the work (including GC work of Saharsa - Forbesganj section) 
was sanctioned by Railway Board at a cost of ` 372.14 crore in February 2008. Of 
this, a cost ` 325.44 crore was for civil w orks, the scope of which included 
earthwork, blanketing, construction of major and minor bridges, ballast 
formation, track linking etc. 
Audit of records of the above GC project revealed that up to January 2017, ECR 
awarded 28 contracts for the civil works of this project. These included separate 
contracts for rebuilding of major bridges (super -structure), rebuilding of pile 
foundation of bridges (sub -structure), construction including rebuilding and 
widening of minor bridges, soil exploration and earthwork in formation and 
construction of bridges, supply and fabrication of girders for bridges, 
construction of station building, approach road, yard etc. and construction of 
siding. The status of these projects along with requirement of block is  given 
below: 
 
 
                                                           
130 Block is a time given by operating department to the project/contract executing department to carry out works at the 
railway tracks, during which the traffic in the selected section is suspended. 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 3
105
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 3 
 
 105 
Table 3.1 – Status of 28 works 
Requirement of block Completed works Ongoing works Foreclosed/ 
terminated 
works 
No block required 4 3 2 
Block required partially - 6 5 
Block required - 3 5 
Total 4 12 12 
Out of these 28 contracts 
 Only four were completed between December 2010 and July 2014 at a total 
expenditure of ` 15.29 crore. 
 Twelve contracts, awarded between April 2009 and January 2017 with date 
of completion/extended date of completion between June 2017 and 
February 2018, were under -execution stage. Out of these 12 contracts, six 
contracts required mega block partially and three contracts did not require 
mega block. The works not requiring mega -block were required to be 
completed in advance as per Railway Board’s directives of May 2005. 
However, the same was not ensured.  
 The remaining 12 contracts were terminated/fore -closed between August 
2013 and February 2017. A total expenditure of ` 32.69 crore were incurred 
on seven contracts up to February 2017, whereas in five terminated/fore -
closed contracts, the financial progress were nil.  
Audit examined fore -closure/termination of the above 12 contracts and 
observed that  
 Five contracts related to earthwork formation, rebuilding/construction/ 
jacketing of minor bridges, rebuilding of major bridges etc., w ere fore -
closed/terminated due to non -availability of mega block. These contracts 
were awarded between July 2009 and January 2013 and to be completed by 
September 2013, which were terminated/ fore-closed up to February 2017. 
Out of these five contracts, fou r contracts were fore- closed after three to 
four years from the date of award of contract after incurring expenditure of 
` 23.14 crore. The physical progress on these contracts ranged between 35 
and 88 per cent . In the remaining one terminated contract, ph ysical and 
financial progress was nil . It was also noticed that though the works were 
awarded between July 2009 and January 2013, demand for mega block was 
not raised by the Construction department up to August 2014, which was 
allotted in April 2016 and Se ptember 2016 for part sections. Further, mega 
block for the entire section was given in May 2017 after closure of all the 
five contracts. As such, due to lack of coordination between the 
construction and operating departments, the contracts were terminated / 
fore-closed after incurring an expenditure of ` 23.14 crore. 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 3
106
Chapter 3 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 106 
 Three contracts related to rebuilding of major bridges and provision of 
siding, were fore -closed due to change in plan and scope of work and 
designs of bridges after award of contract. Of these  contracts an 
expenditure of ` 0.46 crore was incurred till the date of fore-closure. 
 The remaining four contracts were terminated due to failure of contractors 
to complete the work and also due to failure on part of the contractors to 
apply for extension of date of completion. Three contracts, where financial 
progress remained nil till date of fore -closure, were terminated after more 
than three years of award of contracts. All the three contracts were 
awarded to the same firm M/s Ma Kali Construction. This  indicate deficient 
monitoring in execution of contracts.  
From the above, it can be concluded that the pre-mega block works in respect of 
Gauge Conversion project, which should be completed as per a pre -determined 
plan two to three years in advance of meg a block, could not be completed even 
after lapse of nine years from the date of sanction of detailed estimate. Further, 
contracts were fore -closed/terminated on the ground of non -availability of 
mega block. The firms failed to start the work even after the  scheduled date of 
completion and action was taken by the railways to terminate/ foreclose the 
contract after significant delays. 
Audit also observed that due to delay in completion of project, the revised 
estimate also increased (July 2013) to ` 1250.86 crore (including cost ` 1109.16 
crore of civil works) mainly due to price escalation and enhancement in 
quantities as per latest planning of P-way works, embankment and elimination of 
Level Crossing gates. As such, the proposed revised estimate of the proje ct the 
cost of Civil Engineering Department increased (September 2013) by ` 783.72
131 
crore against the sanctioned (February 2008) detailed estimate cost of ` 325.44 
crore in which ` 551.68 crore (71 per cent of increased cost) was on account of 
price escalation. Besides, work done in the four completed contracts at a cost of 
` 15.29 crore and the works executed at the cost of ` 23.14 crore in the five 
foreclosed/terminated works also remained unfruitful.  
Thus, poor execution and inefficient contract managem ent of civil works led to 
delay in completion of the GC Project and resulted in blockade of capital of 
` 47.98 crore132 besides increase in cost of civil works by 71 per cent.  
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board on 11 October 2017; 
their reply is awaited (28 February 2018). 
 
 
 
                                                           
131 ` 1109.16 crore (proposed revised estimate of Civil Works) – ` 325.44 crore (sanctioned detailed estimate of Civil 
Works) 
132 ` 15.29 crore on four completed works + ` 32.69 crore on seven terminated/fore-closed contracts 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 3
107
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 3 
 
 107 
3.3 East Central Railway (ECR): Deficient planning and execution of contracts 
related to New Line project 
In the New Line project from Hajipur to Sagauli (148.3 kms), parts of the 
project got delayed and four out of f ive contracts had to be 
terminated/foreclosed. Subsequently, ECR Administration took a decision to 
first complete the work up to Vaishali for better use of resources and decided 
to foreclose all the existing contracts beyond Vaishali. However, deviating fr om 
this decision, terminated contracts were re -awarded at a cost of ` 86.14 crore, 
thereby committing investment without completing the work up to Vaishali.   
The construction of new BG Line from Hajipur to Sagauli stations (148.3 kms) was 
announced in Bu dget 2003-04. Railway Board sanctioned detailed estimate of  
` 528.65 crore for the project in October 2007. 
During the review of records of contracts awarded by ECR Administration for the 
new BG line Hajipur-Sagauli project, Audit observed that contracts were awarded 
without ensuring completion of pre -contract works such as soil test, site 
investigation, approval of all plans, drawings and estimates by competent 
authority, handing over the site etc. as per the instructions  of Railway Board  of 
February 1989 .  Even after more than nine years from the year of sanction 
(October 2007) of detailed estimate of the project, the project remained to be 
completed.  
For execution of the New Line project, five contracts were awarded between 
October 2008 and May 2010 at a total cost of ` 82.63 crore for earthwork and 
construction of major/minor bridges up to 81.963 kms of new line. Out of these 
five contracts, only one contract could be completed (February 2016) with the 
delay of about 70 months. The remaining four contra cts were t erminated/ fore-
closed. The reasons for termination/ fore-closure were as follows: 
i. Two contracts from 0 km to 15.00 kms (before Vaishali) were awarded 
(December 2008 and January 2009) at a total cost of ` 10.73 crore
133 with a 
completion period of 18 months from the date of issue of LoA. These 
contracts were terminated (June 2015 and August 2015) due to slow 
progress of work by the contractor after incurring expenditure of ` 3.27 
crore134 on incomplete works. The physical progress of works in these 
contracts was 28 and 38 per cent respectively. Audit also noticed that 10 to 
11 extensions were given for these contracts mainly due to non -availability 
of full work site, delay in fixation of final alignment, non -availability of bridge 
drawing as per latest  decision and naxalite problem. The left over works 
were awarded (December 2015) at additional cost at ` 9.13 crore. The 
contractor had been paid ` 6.75 crore for increased cost of the work. 
ii. The other two contracts from 41.963 kms to 81.963 kms (beyond Vai shali) 
were awarded (February 2010 and May 2010) at a total cost of ` 49.73 
                                                           
133 ` 4.53 crore for 1st contract + ` 6.20 crore for 2nd contract 
134 ` 1.37 crore for 1st contract + ` 1.90 crore for 2nd contract 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 3
108
Chapter 3 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 108 
crore135 with date of completion for 18 months from the date of issue of 
LoA. These were foreclosed in March 2015 and July 2016 after giving 5 to 6 
extensions in completion period due to reasons such as revision of drawings, 
non-availability of hindrance free site, naxalite problem etc. The physical 
progress of work in these contracts was 17 to 27 per cent respectively.  
Audit observed that while the works of the above new line proj ect were going 
on, ECR decided (January 2015) to commission the new line section up to 
Vaishali (up to 39 kms length) first by utilizing available resources and putting to 
use the  invested money in the first phase. They decided to foreclose all the 
existing contracts beyond Vaishali. They further  stated that after the train 
becomes operational or on the verge of completion of work up to Vaishali, works 
for stretches beyond Vaishali would be executed. They decided that  no contract 
should be awarded to work b eyond Vaishali ( in lieu  of closure of contract) till 
such time the track linking works etc. up to Vaishali were almost completed. As 
such, the contracts beyond Vaisha li were foreclosed (March 2015/ July 2016) 
after incurring an expenditure of ` 10.06 crore on the work executed till that 
date. 
Audit further observed that, disregarding the above decision, ECR floated 
tenders (July 2016 and November 2016) and awarded (October 2016 and 
February 2017) contracts for the left over works of the foreclosed contracts to 
two separate agencies at a cost of ` 86.14 crore. Audit noticed that as of 
November 2016, the physical progress of the work up to Vaishali (from Ghoswar 
to Vaishali, 5.5 kms to 36.2 kms) was not up to the mark (overall physical 
progress of 58 per cent on new line project) , acquisition of 24.08 acres of land 
was yet to be done; 2.5 lakh  cum earthwork and 0.6945 la kh cum of blanketing 
work, work of 10 out of 44 minor bridges and work of seven out of the 13 R oad 
Under Bridges was yet to be done; no ballast work was done; 21 kms out of 30.4 
kms of formation work and 34.87 kms out of 38.45 kms of track linking work was 
not done.  
As such, the action taken by ECR Administration to re -award the foreclosed 
contracts beyond Vaishali (39 kms length) was not justifiable keeping in view the 
fact that the work up to Vaishali had still not reached an adva nced stage. The 
action defeated the purpose of decision taken to first complete the new line up 
to Vaishlai, optimizing use of resources. It could not be ascertained as  to 
whether issues related to hindrance free site and naxalite problems etc. had 
adequately been taken care of before awarding the works.  
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board on 17 October 2017; 
their reply is awaited (28 February 2018). 
 
 
                                                           
135 ` 22.54 crore for 1st contract + ` 27.19 crore for 2nd contract 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 3
109
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 3 
 
 109 
3.4 Northeast Frontier Railway  (NFR): Blocking up of capital due to 
construction of a Road Over Bridge without ensuring encumbrance free land 
Between Mathabhanga and New Coochbehar Station on State Highway No. 
12A of West Benga l, a  Road Over Bridge (ROB) was constructed without 
ensuring encumbrance free land for the approach road. Due to incomplete 
approach road the ROB could not be commissioned even after four years of its 
construction resulting in blocking up of capital of ` 20.03 crore. 
Railway Board issued directives in August 1980 to award contracts for works 
only after site investigation have been completed, all plans, drawings and 
estimates were duly approved and there is no hitch in handing over the site to 
the contractor. This was further reiterated in February 1985 that for bridge work 
and accommodation works such as level crossings, road over bridge etc. a close 
liaison should be maintained with the concerned local authorities, so that there 
is no cause for subsequent changes which may enhance t he cost of the project 
substantially. It was also stated that Railway Administration should decide 
calling of tenders only when they are fully prepared to hand over the site and 
supply the plans etc. to the contractor. 
In execution of New Maynaguri -Jogighopa Broad Gauge New Line project, 
Construction Organisation of NFR awarded the work (May 2010) at a cost of ` 
6.93 crore for construction of Major ROB and Minor RUB
136 along with other 
ancillary works between Mathabhanga and New Coochbehar Station on State 
Highway No. 12A of West Bengal. The work was scheduled to be completed 
within nine months from signing of the contract ( May 2010 to February 2011). 
Audit observed  that though the work was awarded in May 2010, the General 
Arrangement Drawing (GAD) was changed  twice before finally obtaining final 
approval from the State Government of West Bengal five years later (May 2015). 
The construction of bridge proper was completed in June 2013, much before 
obtaining approval from the State Government. It was also seen th at there were 
encroachments on a stretch of land belonging the State Public Works 
Department on which the proposed approach road to the ROB was to be 
constructed. Despite being aware of the fact, Construction Organisation went 
ahead and not only awarded the work for construction of ROB and RUBs in May 
2010, but also awarded contracts for two more works. These works were  
‘Development of diversion road for ROB’ valuing ` 1.96 crore and another for 
‘Retaining wall on approach road’ valuing ` 6.47 crore in Marc h 2012 and 
November 2012
137 respectively. These works were to be completed by April 
2012 and March 2013 respectively.   
Audit observed that in respect of the first work, an amount of ` 9.58 crore was 
paid as final settlement. In respect of the remaining two works, up to May 2017, 
an expenditure of ` 2.17 crore and ` 8.28 crore respectively was incurred, yet 
                                                           
136 Major ROB no.1/39 (1 x 12.20 PSC slab) on pile foundation at km 87.520 and RCC minor RUBs in lieu of level crossings, 
contract agreement executed in September 2010  
137 Contract Agreements were executed in June 2012 and February 2013 respectively 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 3
110
Chapter 3 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 110 
significant amount of work was still to be done. There was no progress in the 
status of work thereafter. Thus, against a total contractual amount of ` 15.36 
crore, till now an expenditure of ` 20.03 crore has already been incurred for 
construction of ROB. However, due to encroachments, the work of approach 
road to the ROB was yet to be completed and an amount of ` 20.03 crore 
incurred on these works remained bl ocked. Meanwhile, being unable to put the 
ROB in use and under pressure for commissioning the New Changrabandha -New 
Coochbehar section of the project by the targeted period of March 2016, the 
Construction Organisation of NFR had to provide a manned level c rossing gate 
adjacent to the incomplete ROB.  
In reply, NEFR Administration stated (February 2016) that while planning a long 
work it is presumed that the small stretch of land can be acquired during the 
process of work. They further stated that the ROB wi ll be useful after execution 
of the balance work and that a temporary Level Crossing Gate has been 
provided to reap the benefit of investment made by the Railway and after the 
completion of work of ROB, the gate will be closed permanently. 
However, NFR Adm inistation did not follow Railway Board’s directives and due 
to encroachment, the work of construction of ROB could not  be completed 
seven years after taking up the work of ROB. This resulted in blocking up of 
capital to the tune of ` 20.03 crore.  
The mat ter was brought to the notice of Railway Board on 24 October 2017; 
their reply is awaited (28 February 2018). 
3.5 Western Railway  (WR): Non -recovery and short recovery of capitalized 
maintenance charges in respect of ROB works executed on ‘Deposit Terms’ 
As per  the codal provision and Railway Board’s directives Zonal Railways are 
required to recover  capitalised maintenance charges of ROBs executed on 
deposit terms. These instructions were not followed by WR Administration, bills 
for ` 25.65 crore against si x parties were not raised and recovered by 
Construction Organisation, Ahmedabad and ` 5.11 crore were short-recovered 
from four parties in Ratlam Division.  
As per codal provision 138 all Deposit works in Railway premises should be 
maintained by the Railway A dministration concerned at the cost of the parties 
who applied for them. Charges for maintaining (keeping in good repair) Deposit 
works should be recovered on the basis of either 
1. A fixed percentage of the cost of the works, the rate being fixed by the 
General Manager (GM); or 
2. Actual expenditure (including departmental charges). 
The provision further states that in every case, before commencement of the 
Deposit works, capitalized value of maintenance charges and cost of extra 
establishment, if any, should be recovered in full.  
                                                           
138 Para 1851 of Indian Railway Code for Engineering  Department 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 3
111
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 3 
 
 111 
Railway Board directed (February 2002) that in case of Road over Bridges (ROBs) 
constructed in lieu of level crossings, maintenance charges at the rate of three 
per cent  per annum, capitalized to 30 per cent  shall be levied. In July 20 12, 
Railway Board revised the earlier directives and advised that in case of ROB/RUB 
sanctioned on deposit terms, instead of levy of maintenance charges at the rate 
of three per cent  capitalized to 30 per cent , Railways should follow the 
instructions conta ined in the above codal provision. It also stated that 
capitalized maintenance charges should be calculated on cost of bridge proper 
(excluding Road ways) and reasonable cost of maintenance should be derived on 
the basis of actual maintenance cost. 
Audit observed that Ahmedabad Division of WR did not include the capitalized 
maintenance charges at the prescribed rate of three per cent in the estimates of 
five ROB works costing ` 28.06 crore sanctioned prior to July 2012. Audit further 
noticed that capitalize d maintenance charges to be worked out on actual cost 
basis, was also not included in the estimates of three works costing ` 68.91 
crore sanctioned after July 2012. Due to this failure, WR could not recover the 
capitalized maintenance charges of ` 25.65 crore in respect of ROBs sanctioned 
during June 2008 to January 2014 from six parties
139. 
In reply, Construction Organisation of WR stated (March 2016) that there was 
no practice in Construction Organization to recover maintenance charges in 
deposit works and open line authorities have been requested to recover these 
charges from the party. On the other hand, open line authorities stated (January 
2017) that bill could not be raised for want of documents required for raising of 
maintenance bills by Engineering D epartment and completion report/drawings 
from construction organization. Thus, there was lack of coordination between 
the two departments, as a result of which,  bills for maintenance charges were 
not raised and ` 25.65 crore could not be recovered in respe ct of eight ROBs 
work on deposit terms in Ahmedabad Division.  
Audit also reviewed the records of Ratlam Division, where five ROB works 
costing ` 38.19 crore were sanctioned (during July 2008 to June 2014). It was 
seen that maintenance charges were calcula ted taking into account only 
‘supervision charges’, ‘civil engineering cost’, instead of total cost of bridge 
portion of ROBs. This led to incorrect computation of maintenance charges and 
consequent short-recovery of ` 5.11 crore from the four parties
140. 
Thus, WR Administration failed to ensure compliance with the codal provisions 
and Railway Board’s directives in regard to recovery of maintenance charges in 
respect of ROB works on deposit terms. This resulted in non -recovery of ` 25.65 
crore and short recov ery of ` 5.11 crore towards capitalized maintenance 
charges of ROBs executed on deposit terms.  
                                                           
139 Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation; Vadodara Municipal Corporation; Himmatnagar Nagar Palika,; Managing Director 
GSRDS, Gandhinagar; Executive Engineer (Roads & Bridges), Surat; Executive Engineer (Roads & Bridges), Mehsana 
140 Public Works Department, Bhopal; Madhya Pradesh Road Development Authority, Bhopal; Indore Development 
Authority, Indore; Public Works Department (Branch) construction, Madhya Pradesh 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 3
112
Chapter 3 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 112 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board on 18 September 2017. 
In reply, Railway Board stated (16 November 2017) that bills up to 2017 -18 have 
been raised by Ahemdabad and Vadodara Divisions in five cases, in three cases 
the amount would be recovered from the State Government and in Ratlam 
Division, the amount would be recovered from the respective parties. 
3.6 Central Railway (CR): Short recovery of land license fee from CONCOR  
Central Railway accepted the license fee paid by the CONCOR without reconciling 
the actual number of TEUs handled by the m at six depots.  This led to short 
recovery of license fee of ` 9.16 crore from CONCOR.   
Indian Railways  licenses railway land to Container Corporation of India 
(CONCOR) for setting up the Inland Container Depots. In Central Railway, 
CONCOR has six container depots located at Mulund, Chinchwad, Turbhe, 
Bhusawal, Miraj and Nagpur. As per the Lease Agreements executed (in the year 
2002) between Central Railway and CONCOR, the latter had to pay land license 
fee on the basis of actual number of containers dealt with by CONCOR at the 
prescribed rates subject to renewal of agreement every five years. In January 
2008, Railway Board  while revising the rate of license fee for the railway land 
licensed to CONCOR, fixed the rate of license fee
141 at ` 500 per TEU142. The rate 
of licence fee was revised to ` 920 per TEU with effect from 1 April 2016. 
An audit observation on n on-maintenance of the records by the Central Railway 
Administration relating to number of containers handled in the container depots 
and acceptance of the lease charges as paid by CONCOR was printed in Para 
2.1.8.11 of Report No. 34 of 2010 -11 (Railways).  Subsequently, in order to 
streamline the billing and collection of land license fee from CONCOR, CR 
Administration issued a Joint Procedural Order (JPO) in July 2012.  In the JPO, 
the role of Commercial and Engineering Departments of CR and CONCOR, 
periodical submission of the details of TEUs handled by CONCOR etc. were 
stipulated.  
While examining the records relating to the land license fee paid by CONCOR to 
Central Railway, during 2010-11 to 2015-16, Audit observed the following: 
1. As per the JPO (of July  2012), the Commercial Department would prepare a 
list of Outward/ Inward TEUs handled during the month on the basis of 
Railway Receipts (for outward traffic) and Invoices/Inward Release Memos 
(for inward traffic). Further, CONCOR would send the details of  all the TEUs 
handled in the month by 5
th of the following month to Engineering 
Department (Divisional Engineer/Land Management’s Office). On receipt of 
information, the Engineering Department would prepare a bill for the month 
and send the same to Accounts Department (Senior Divisional Finance 
Manager’s Office) for raising the bill against the CONCOR. On receipt of bill 
for, CONCOR would make payment of half yearly basis. 
                                                           
141 Effective from 01-10-2007 
142 Twenty feet Equivalent Unit 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 3
113
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 3 
 
 113 
It was observed that the procedure laid down in the JPO for billing and 
collecting li cense fee was not being followed by the Commercial and 
Engineering Departments of Central Railway. Also, the details of TEUs 
handled in its depots were not being provided to the Engineering 
Department by CONCOR.        
2. As per their website, CONCOR handles 10,20,369 TEUs at its six depots in 
Central Railway during 2010 -11 to 2015- 16. Against this, CONCOR paid 
license fee was to Central Railway in respect of 8,37,209 TEUs only. Thus, 
there was short recovery of license fee amounting to ` 9.16 crore in respect 
of 1,83,160 TEUs.  
After audit raised the issue in January 2017 , CR  Administration directed 
(February 2017 ) the Engineering Department to reconcile the actual TEUs 
handled by CONCOR and to recover balance license fee. However, no further 
progress in the m atter was made by the CR Administration. Thus, acceptance of 
license fee paid by the CONCOR without reconciling the actual number of TEUs 
handled by the CONCOR in its depots resulted in short recovery of license fee of 
` 9.16 crore during 2010-11 to 2015-16.  
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board on 12 December 2017; 
their reply is awaited (28 February 2018). 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 4
114
Chapter 4 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 
114 
Chapter 4 
Traction  
Member Traction at Railway Board is overall in charge of t he Electrical 
department of Indian Railway. He is also responsible for Railway Electrification 
Workshops (exclusively for locomotives) and Energy/Fuel Management. 
At Zonal level,  Chief Electrical Engineer  (CEE) is responsible for operation and 
maintenance of Electric Locos, Electric Multiple Unit train ( EMU), Mainline 
Electric Multiple Unit train ( MEMU), maintenance and operation of Overhead 
Electrical Equipment (OHE), electrical coaching stock etc. Maintenance of Diesel 
locomotives is supervised by Chief Motive Power (Diesel).  Production Units  
Chittaranjan Locomotive Works (CLW) and Diesel Locomotive Works (DLW) are 
managed independently by General Managers reporting to Member Traction at 
Railway Board. 
The total expenditure of Indian Railways on repair and maintenance of Motive 
Power (including plant and equipment) and expenditure on fuel (diesel and 
electricity) during the year 2016 -17 was ` 8338.88 crore143 and ` 26427.26 
crore144 respectively.  An expenditure of ` 263.79 crore145 was incurred in 
production units of locomotives during the year 201 6-17. During the year, apart 
from regular audit of vouchers and tenders , 407 offices of Electrical department 
including CLW and DLW were inspected by Audit. 
This chapter includes one long paragraph  on ‘setting up of diesel locomotive 
manufacturing unit at Marhowra, Bih ar’. In addition, this chapter also include s 
two individual paragraphs highlighting issues of utilization of diesel locos in 
completely electrified routes and incorrect fixation of contract demand. 
                                                           
143 Grant no.05 – Repair and maintenance of Motive Power for 2016-17 and Minor Head 400 of Grant no.07 – repair and 
maintenance of plant and equipment 
144 Grant no.10 – Operating Expenses – Fuel for 2016-17 
145 DLW, Varanasi, DMW, Patiala and CLW, Chittaranjan 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 4
115
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 4 
 
 
115 
 
4.1 Railway Board: Setting up of diesel locomotive manufacturing un it at 
Marhowra, Bihar 
Ministry of Railways proposed setting up of diesel locomotive manufacturing unit 
at Marhowra, Bihar in September 2006. The contract was awarded to M/s GE 
Global Sourcing India Pvt. Ltd in November 2015 for setting up of diesel 
locomotive manufacturing unit along with maintenance depot at Roza and 
Gandhidham. As a long time has elapsed, there was a need to reassess the 
necessity of setting up of new diesel locomotive manufacturing unit, before 
awarding the contract. Audit analysis showed that the diesel locomotives 
available with the Railways are sufficient in numbers to take care of the present 
needs.  Indian Railways is pl anning to shift to complete electrification of its BG 
routes by 2021 and would also run the freight trains in dedicated freight 
corridors (DFCs) on electrified routes. Even if, Railways do not go for 100 per cent 
electrification, it is expected that most o f the high traffic routes would definitely 
be electrified and the need for diesel traction would remain only for low traffic 
routes, for which high horse power diesel locos are not likely to be used 
optimally. Consequently, need for high power diesel traction in Indian Railways is 
going to diminish in the years to come. Indian Railways has realised this 
eventuality and decided to significantly reduce the production of diesel 
locomotives at Diesel Locomotive Works (DLW), Varanasi from 2018 -19 
onwards. Also, the production plan of Diesel Loco Modernisation Works (DMW), 
Patiala, does not include any plan for production of diesel locomotive in 2018 -19. 
As such, the diesel locomotives procured under this agreement would have no 
scope for productive utilisation in the Indian Railway network in future.  Railways 
themselves have decided to significantly reduce in -house production of diesel 
locomotives at DLW, Varanasi from 2019 -20 onwards. Thus, setting up of a new 
infrastructure for production of diesel locomotives a nd incurring a huge liability 
of ` 17126.08 crore is not in sync with the overall strategic vision of Railways.  
Railways need to revisit the decision of setting up of the new factory for 
production of diesel locomotives and examine whether it will be prude nt to 
create assets and infrastructure for which Railways has no  useful requirement in 
future, when they have planned for large scale electrification and have also 
reduced considerably their own in-house production of diesel locomotives. 
Minister of Railwa y in his Budget Speech for 2006 -07146, announced setting up 
of a new Diesel Locomotives Factory at Marhowra, Bihar, for meeting the 
requirements of Indian Railways including the requirement of locomotives for 
Dedicated Freight Corridor . Railways proposed (Se ptember 2006) setting up of 
this unit in order to meet the additional requirement of locomotives in view of 
various line capacity works being undertaken including the Dedicated Freight 
Corridor. At that time, Diesel Locomotive Works (DLW), Varanasi was the  sole 
diesel locomotive building plant in the country with a capacity to build 150 
                                                           
146 during monsoon session 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 4
116
Chapter 4 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 
116 
diesel locomotives per year with an expandable capacity of 200 locomotives per 
year. A requirement of 350 diesel locomotives per year was assessed by Indian 
Railways till the end of 2017 . Keeping in view the assessed capacity of 200 
locomotives at DLW, Varanasi, a new diesel l ocomotive manufacturing facility 
with a capacity of 150 HHP locomotives per year was proposed (September 
2006) at Marhowra, Bihar.  The capital cost of the project was ` 2106.66 crore.  
The project was notified as Special Railway Project on 19 February 2008 .The 
project was targeted for completion by 2011-12. 
The main objectives for setting up of this unit were as follows: 
 To bridge the demand supply gap and to create facilities for manufacture of 
150 diesel locomotives per year, 
 Creation of facilities for ma nufacture of state of the art high horsepower 
diesel locomotives to meeting traffic requirements, and 
 To derive benefits of the latest technological developments to reduce unit 
cost with better fuel efficiency, maintainability and higher reliability.  
Indian Railways finalised a joint venture partnership project  through 
international competitive bidding for manufacture and supply of modern diesel 
electric locomotives of 4500 HP and 6000 HP .  The Request for Proposal (RFP)  
was issued to two short listed bidd ers at Request for Qualification (RFQ)  stage 
on 11 March 2015 .  The bid was opened on 1 September 2015 and the project 
was awarded to M/s GE Global Sourcing India Pvt. Ltd (hereinafter referred to as 
the Company) for setting up of Diesel Locomotive Factory  (DLF) at Marhowra, 
Saran District, Bihar and production and maintenance of mainline diesel electric 
locomotives on 6 November 2015. The project involved setting up of a diesel 
locomotive factory at Marhowra and maintenance depot at Roza and 
Gandhidham. The company was to work on an assured off -take model of 100 
locomotives per annum for 10 years, starting from third year from appointing 
date (November 2015)
147 i.e. from November 2018 .  The basic cost of these 
1000 freight locos would be around ` 14,656 crore.  The company would also 
maintain a few of these locomotives up to 13 th year. Thereafter, Indian Railways 
would take over maintenance of these locomotives . As on 31 March 2017, the 
physical progress of 30 per cent and financial progress of five and a half per cent 
was achieved. 
Requirement of diesel locomotives in current scenario 
The proposal for setting up of the Diesel Locomotive Factory was mooted in 
September 2006 and initially the expected date of completion of the project was 
2011-12. The agreement for setting up of Diesel Locomotive factory, Marhowra, 
Bihar was finalized in November 2015 i.e. after more than eight years.  During 
2007-08 to 2015 -16, 2117 new diesel locomotives were added to the fleet of 
Indian Railways (1325 of these were 4000 HHP to 5000 HHP), which were not 
                                                           
147Para 14.5.1 of the Agreement  

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 4
117
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 4 
 
 
117 
taken into consideration while awarding the contract to the Company in 
November 2015. Meanwhile, during the past few years, im portant policy 
decisions have been taken by the Ministry of Railways, regarding the pace of 
electrification in the railways, which have a significant impact on the 
requirement of diesel locomotives in Indian Railways in the coming future and 
number of diesel locomotives required would come down drastically.  
Audit observed that the assessment of requirement of diesel locomotives 
projected in the Budget speech of 2006 -07 was not reviewed at the time of 
finalization of agreement in November 2015 . Detailed aud it observations are 
discussed below: 
a. Electrified Dedicated Freight Corridors 
The projected requirement of locomotives in the estimate of setting up of new 
Diesel locomotive factory, Marhowra, Bihar included projected utilization of 
diesel locomotive on the Dedicated Freight Corridor (DFC)  routes. Under the 
Eleventh Five Year plan of India (2007 -12), Ministry of Railway started 
constructing a new Dedicated Freight Corridor in two routes viz., the Eastern 
and Western Freight Corridors. The two routes cover ed a total length of 3360 
kms, with the Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor stretching from Ludhiana in 
Punjab to Dankuni in West Bengal and the Western Dedicated Freight Corridor 
from Jawaharlal Nehru Port in Mumbai (Maharashtra)  to Dadri in Uttar Pradesh. 
Upgradation of transportation technology, increase in productivity and 
reduction in unit transportation cost are the focus areas for the project . The 
mandate of the company implementing this project,  Dedicated Freight Corridor 
Corporation of India Ltd . (DFCCIL), is heavy haul train operation with electric 
traction with 13 minute head way;4500/6500 tonne and 9000/13000 tonne 
trains in the ratio of 2 :1, Speed of 100 kmph, deployment of high horse power 
locomotive (9000/12000 HP) .  Both the corridors, Western  Corridor
148 of 1504 
kms and Eastern Corridor 149 of 1856 kms  are being set up for operation on 
electrified routes.   
In view of completely electrified DFCs, the projected assessment of 
requirement of diesel locomotives should have been done afresh, as there is  no 
requirement of the diesel locomotive on completely electrified DFC routes. 
b. Electrification of existing and new broad gauge routes 
A blue print for Railway electrification in the Vision 2020 Document was issued 
by Ministry of Railway in December 2009 , wherein it was stated that 33000 kms 
of railway routes would be electrified by March 2020 . The blue print contained 
the list of routes that were to be taken up for electrification in future . By 31 
March 2016, 27,999 RKMs out of 58,825 RKMs had been elect rified, 12,710 
                                                           
148Rewari-Vadodara (963 kms), Vadodara-JNPT (430 kms), Rewari-Dadri (127 kms) – Fully electrified double line section 
149Khurja-Bhaupur(343 kms), Bhaupur -Mughalsarai (402 km), Khurja -Ludhiana (4 01 kms), Khurja -Dadri (46 kms), 
Mughalsarai-Sonnagar (126 kms) and Sonnagar -Dankuni (538 kms) - 447 kms of  Ludhiana- Dhari - Khurja section with 
single electrified track and remaining line will be double track electrified up to Dankuni in West Bengal 
 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 4
118
Chapter 4 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 
118 
RKMs had been included in the Works Programme and the remaining 18,116 
RKMs were yet to b e sanctioned. In August 2016  (nine months after signing of 
the agreement for assured off  take of the 1000 diesel locomotives and setting 
up of the Diesel Locomotive Factory at Marhowra) the target of electrification 
was revised by Railway Board to cover 24 ,427 RKMs under electrified route by 
31 March 2021. This included 12,710 RKMs in progress and 11717 RKMs (out of 
18116 RKMs)  of missing links between already electrified sections . Ministry of 
Railway decided to engage public sector undertakings viz ., Indian Railway 
Construction Organisation Co . ( IRCON), Rail India Technical and Economic 
Services Limited (RITES)(Railway’s PSUs)and Power Grid Corporation of India 
Limited (PGCIL)(PSU under the Ministry of Power)having expertise in  laying the 
transmission lines in India and abroad .The status of electrification of BG routes 
and availability of diesel and electric locomotives in Indian Railways during the 
past ten years was as follows: 
Table 4.1 – Year-wise total route kilometers and electrified route kilometers i n Indian Railways  
Year 2007-
08 
2008-
09 
2009-
10 
2010-
11 
2011-
12 
2012-
13 
2013-
14 
2014-
15 
2015-
16 
2016-
17 
Electrified 
(RKM) 
18145 18942 20059 21034 22224 23541 24891 26266 27999 30012 
Total (RKM) 63273 64015 63974 64460 64600 65436 65808 66030 66687 67368 
The pace of electrification in Indian Railways has  increased and as on 31 March 
2017, 45  per cent  of BG routes have been electrified in Indian Railways. 
Subsequently, in September 2017, Ministry of Railways have decided to have 
100 per cent electrified routes over Indian Railways . The action plan for Railway 
electrification against this target of 100 per cent electrification includes 
preparation of detailed project reports by October 2017, preparation of designs 
and drawings by the Zonal Railways by Dec 2018, finalisation of bid document by 
May 2018 and award of contract by June 2018. Capacity assessment should be 
done by RDSO and CORE and the vendor base should be expended so that 33000 
RKMs electrification can be achieved in next three years . Public Sect or 
Undertaking have been advised to ramp up their progress of Railway 
Electrification works for achieving the objectives of mission 100 per cent Railway 
electrification of Indian Railway network within next three years . General 
Managers of various Zonal Ra ilways have sent 107 proposal for 100 per cent  
electrification of all BG routes of Indian Railway to Railway Board for approval .  
In order to expedite the electrification work, Railway Board has issued directions 
for keeping ready, all the prerequisites li ke detailed survey, drawing/ plans and 
other related documentation pertaining to these routes, for making a part of 
tender document, so as to immediately take up the work. 
In addition Railway Board has also decided (July 2017) that all New lines, 
Doubling and Gauge Conversion projects should be inclusive of electrification. 
Audit observed that at the time of finalization of agreement for this project 
(November 2015), the issues mentioned in Blue print 2009 and future planning 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 4
119
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 4 
 
 
119 
of consideration for electrification of Railway routes, were not taken into 
consideration for assessment of requirement of diesel locomotives required in 
Indian Railways. The decision o f the Ministry of Railways to go for 100 per cent 
electrification of all BG routes and directions issued to all stakeholders to 
putting concerted efforts to achieve the same, indicate that Indian Railways 
plans to run its passenger and goods trains only on  electrified routes after 2021. 
Even if, Railways do not go for 100 per cent electrification, it is expected that 
most of the high traffic routes would definitely be electrified and the need for 
diesel traction would remain only for low traffic routes, for  which high horse 
power diesel locos are not likely to be used optimally.    
The requirement of high horse power diesel locomotives in such a scenario 
thus, would not be there and the decision of setting up of the new factory for 
production of diesel locomotives needs to be reconsidered.  
c. Present availability and utilisation of diesel locomotives in Indian 
Railways 
The numbers of diesel and electric locomotives in Indian Railways for the past 
ten years are as follows: 
As on 31 March 2017, there are 6023 diesel locomotives in Indian Railways, of 
which 2101 are high horse power.  Review of Annual Statistical S tatement no.22 
regarding availability and utilization of diesel locomotives over Indian Railway, 
revealed that the percentage of unutilized diesel locomotive in 2015 -16 was 
26.63 per cent of available 5869 locomotives.  
Table 4.3 – Share of unutilized diesel locomotives in Indian Railway 
Year Total 
number of 
diesel 
locomotives 
Diesel Locomotives 
used in different type of 
services in Indian 
Railway 
Unutilized Diesel 
locomotives available 
in Indian Railway 
Percentage of 
unutilized 
locomotives 
2007-08 4843 3587 1256 25.93 
2008-09 4963 3682 1281 25.81 
2009-10 5022 3789 1233 24.55 
2010-11 5137 3872 1265 24.63 
2011-12 5197 3899 1298 24.98 
2012-13 5345 3964 1381 25.84 
2013-14 5633 4106 1527 27.11 
2014-15 5714 4244 1470 25.73 
2015-16 5869 4306 1563 26.63 
Average Diesel locomotives unutilized = 1364 
Percentage of unutilized locomotive = 25.69 
Unutilized locomotives lying spare range between 1233 and 1563 
Table 4.2 - Numbers of diesel and electric locomotives in Indian Railway 
Year/ 
Locomotives 
2007-
08 
2008-
09 
2009-
10 
2010-
11 
2011-
12 
2012-
13 
2013-
14 
2014-
15 
2015-
16 
2016-
17 
Diesel  4843 4963 5022 5137 5197 5345 5633 5714 5869 6023 
Electric 3443 3586 3825 4033 4309 4568 4823 5016 5214 5399 
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 4 
 
 
119 
of consideration for electrification of Railway routes, were not taken into 
consideration for assessment of requirement of diesel locomotives required in 
Indian Railways. The decision o f the Ministry of Railways to go for 100 per cent 
electrification of all BG routes and directions issued to all stakeholders to 
putting concerted efforts to achieve the same, indicate that Indian Railways 
plans to run its passenger and goods trains only on  electrified routes after 2021. 
Even if, Railways do not go for 100 per cent electrification, it is expected that 
most of the high traffic routes would definitely be electrified and the need for 
diesel traction would remain only for low traffic routes, for  which high horse 
power diesel locos are not likely to be used optimally.    
The requirement of high horse power diesel locomotives in such a scenario 
thus, would not be there and the decision of setting up of the new factory for 
production of diesel locomotives needs to be reconsidered.  
c. Present availability and utilisation of diesel locomotives in Indian 
Railways 
The numbers of diesel and electric locomotives in Indian Railways for the past 
ten years are as follows: 
As on 31 March 2017, there are 6023 diesel locomotives in Indian Railways, of 
which 2101 are high horse power.  Review of Annual Statistical S tatement no.22 
regarding availability and utilization of diesel locomotives over Indian Railway, 
revealed that the percentage of unutilized diesel locomotive in 2015 -16 was 
26.63 per cent of available 5869 locomotives.  
Table 4.3 – Share of unutilized diesel locomotives in Indian Railway 
Year Total 
number of 
diesel 
locomotives 
Diesel Locomotives 
used in different type of 
services in Indian 
Railway 
Unutilized Diesel 
locomotives available 
in Indian Railway 
Percentage of 
unutilized 
locomotives 
2007-08 4843 3587 1256 25.93 
2008-09 4963 3682 1281 25.81 
2009-10 5022 3789 1233 24.55 
2010-11 5137 3872 1265 24.63 
2011-12 5197 3899 1298 24.98 
2012-13 5345 3964 1381 25.84 
2013-14 5633 4106 1527 27.11 
2014-15 5714 4244 1470 25.73 
2015-16 5869 4306 1563 26.63 
Average Diesel locomotives unutilized = 1364 
Percentage of unutilized locomotive = 25.69 
Unutilized locomotives lying spare range between 1233 and 1563 
Table 4.2 - Numbers of diesel and electric locomotives in Indian Railway 
Year/ 
Locomotives 
2007-
08 
2008-
09 
2009-
10 
2010-
11 
2011-
12 
2012-
13 
2013-
14 
2014-
15 
2015-
16 
2016-
17 
Diesel  4843 4963 5022 5137 5197 5345 5633 5714 5869 6023 
Electric 3443 3586 3825 4033 4309 4568 4823 5016 5214 5399 
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 4 
 
 
119 
of consideration for electrification of Railway routes, were not taken into 
consideration for assessment of requirement of diesel locomotives required in 
Indian Railways. The decision o f the Ministry of Railways to go for 100 per cent 
electrification of all BG routes and directions issued to all stakeholders to 
putting concerted efforts to achieve the same, indicate that Indian Railways 
plans to run its passenger and goods trains only on  electrified routes after 2021. 
Even if, Railways do not go for 100 per cent electrification, it is expected that 
most of the high traffic routes would definitely be electrified and the need for 
diesel traction would remain only for low traffic routes, for  which high horse 
power diesel locos are not likely to be used optimally.    
The requirement of high horse power diesel locomotives in such a scenario 
thus, would not be there and the decision of setting up of the new factory for 
production of diesel locomotives needs to be reconsidered.  
c. Present availability and utilisation of diesel locomotives in Indian 
Railways 
The numbers of diesel and electric locomotives in Indian Railways for the past 
ten years are as follows: 
As on 31 March 2017, there are 6023 diesel locomotives in Indian Railways, of 
which 2101 are high horse power.  Review of Annual Statistical S tatement no.22 
regarding availability and utilization of diesel locomotives over Indian Railway, 
revealed that the percentage of unutilized diesel locomotive in 2015 -16 was 
26.63 per cent of available 5869 locomotives.  
Table 4.3 – Share of unutilized diesel locomotives in Indian Railway 
Year Total 
number of 
diesel 
locomotives 
Diesel Locomotives 
used in different type of 
services in Indian 
Railway 
Unutilized Diesel 
locomotives available 
in Indian Railway 
Percentage of 
unutilized 
locomotives 
2007-08 4843 3587 1256 25.93 
2008-09 4963 3682 1281 25.81 
2009-10 5022 3789 1233 24.55 
2010-11 5137 3872 1265 24.63 
2011-12 5197 3899 1298 24.98 
2012-13 5345 3964 1381 25.84 
2013-14 5633 4106 1527 27.11 
2014-15 5714 4244 1470 25.73 
2015-16 5869 4306 1563 26.63 
Average Diesel locomotives unutilized = 1364 
Percentage of unutilized locomotive = 25.69 
Unutilized locomotives lying spare range between 1233 and 1563 
Table 4.2 - Numbers of diesel and electric locomotives in Indian Railway 
Year/ 
Locomotives 
2007-
08 
2008-
09 
2009-
10 
2010-
11 
2011-
12 
2012-
13 
2013-
14 
2014-
15 
2015-
16 
2016-
17 
Diesel  4843 4963 5022 5137 5197 5345 5633 5714 5869 6023 
Electric 3443 3586 3825 4033 4309 4568 4823 5016 5214 5399 
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 4 
 
 
119 
of consideration for electrification of Railway routes, were not taken into 
consideration for assessment of requirement of diesel locomotives required in 
Indian Railways. The decision o f the Ministry of Railways to go for 100 per cent 
electrification of all BG routes and directions issued to all stakeholders to 
putting concerted efforts to achieve the same, indicate that Indian Railways 
plans to run its passenger and goods trains only on  electrified routes after 2021. 
Even if, Railways do not go for 100 per cent electrification, it is expected that 
most of the high traffic routes would definitely be electrified and the need for 
diesel traction would remain only for low traffic routes, for  which high horse 
power diesel locos are not likely to be used optimally.    
The requirement of high horse power diesel locomotives in such a scenario 
thus, would not be there and the decision of setting up of the new factory for 
production of diesel locomotives needs to be reconsidered.  
c. Present availability and utilisation of diesel locomotives in Indian 
Railways 
The numbers of diesel and electric locomotives in Indian Railways for the past 
ten years are as follows: 
As on 31 March 2017, there are 6023 diesel locomotives in Indian Railways, of 
which 2101 are high horse power.  Review of Annual Statistical S tatement no.22 
regarding availability and utilization of diesel locomotives over Indian Railway, 
revealed that the percentage of unutilized diesel locomotive in 2015 -16 was 
26.63 per cent of available 5869 locomotives.  
Table 4.3 – Share of unutilized diesel locomotives in Indian Railway 
Year Total 
number of 
diesel 
locomotives 
Diesel Locomotives 
used in different type of 
services in Indian 
Railway 
Unutilized Diesel 
locomotives available 
in Indian Railway 
Percentage of 
unutilized 
locomotives 
2007-08 4843 3587 1256 25.93 
2008-09 4963 3682 1281 25.81 
2009-10 5022 3789 1233 24.55 
2010-11 5137 3872 1265 24.63 
2011-12 5197 3899 1298 24.98 
2012-13 5345 3964 1381 25.84 
2013-14 5633 4106 1527 27.11 
2014-15 5714 4244 1470 25.73 
2015-16 5869 4306 1563 26.63 
Average Diesel locomotives unutilized = 1364 
Percentage of unutilized locomotive = 25.69 
Unutilized locomotives lying spare range between 1233 and 1563 
Table 4.2 - Numbers of diesel and electric locomotives in Indian Railway 
Year/ 
Locomotives 
2007-
08 
2008-
09 
2009-
10 
2010-
11 
2011-
12 
2012-
13 
2013-
14 
2014-
15 
2015-
16 
2016-
17 
Diesel  4843 4963 5022 5137 5197 5345 5633 5714 5869 6023 
Electric 3443 3586 3825 4033 4309 4568 4823 5016 5214 5399 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 4
120
Chapter 4 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 
120 
Though 1026 new diesel locomotives have been added during the last nine 
years, almost 26 per cent have remained unutilised.  
Statistics of Engine Kilometre per day in use and on line are as under: 
Table 4.4 - Engine kilometre per day (Diesel locomotive) 
Year Per passenger 
engine in use 
Per mixed 
engine in use 
Per goods 
engine in use 
Per engine 
in use 
Per engine on 
line 
2007-08 587 793 403 436 350 
2008-09 584 791 398 433 342 
2009-10 586 802 382 435 355 
2010-11 594 794 384 439 357 
2011-12 612 0 407 460 369 
2012-13 641 0 423 465 370 
2013-14 615 0 429 461 359 
2014-15 614 0 383 418 349 
2015-16 607 0 367 442 352 
The above data shows that Indian Railways is not able to use the existing diesel 
engines on line to its  optimal capacity .  The use of diesel engine in terms of 
engine kilometre per day per engine on line is 352 , which means that these 
diesel engines are being run at speed of 14 .67 km/hour (on 24 hour utilisation 
basis) and 18.53 km/hour (on 19 hour utilisat ion basis at 80 percent utilisation 
of engine on line)  only. This reflects that the existing locomotives are 
underutilized and the requirement of additional locomotives, if any, can be 
made good by better utilisation of the existing fleet.  The diesel engin es were 
being run for 350 kms per day per engine in 2007 -08, which is almost the same 
as 352 kms per day per engine in 2015 -16. As such, despite adding more than 
1000 diesel engines since 2007 -08, their utilisation has shown no improvement. 
Hence, projected requirement for additional diesel locomotives on g rounds of 
infrastructure optimization is not justifiable. 
d. In-house production of diesel locomotives by Indian Railways 
Indian Railways has realised this eventuality and decided (October 2017)  to 
significantly reduce the production of diesel locomotives at Diesel Locomotive 
Works (DLW), Varanasi from 2018 -19 onwards. Initially, the production plan for 
locomotives at DLW, Varanasi comprised of 254 diesel and 25 electric 
locomotives in 2017- 18 and 200 dies el and 75 electric locomotives for 2018 -19.  
For 2018 -19, this has been revised to 107 diesel locomotives and 173 electric 
locomotives in September 2017 by the Railway Board . The reason for retaining 
the production target of 107 diesel locomotives for 2018 -19 was attributed to 
the likely availability of buffer of material equivalent to 107 locomotives in April 
2018 and to ensure utilisation of the existing infrastructure at the DLW . 
However, rebuilding
150 of diesel locomotives is to be completely stopped from  
2019-20. 
                                                           
150 Locomotive Rebuilding includes dismantling, repairs and reassembly of the complete Locomotive including under 
frame. During rebuilding, locomotive sub-assemblies are brought to as good as new condition.  

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 4
121
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 4 
 
 
121 
Further, in Diesel Loco Modernisation Works (DMW), Patiala, which also 
undertakes rebuilding of diesel locomotives and started production of diesel 
locomotives from 20 10-11 onwards, there has been a significant change in the 
production plan. While in 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17, 89, 11 and 43 diesel 
locomotives were manufactured, the number came down to just nine diesel 
locomotives in 2017-18 (up to January 2018) and in 2018-19, there is no plan for 
production of diesel locomotives. 
Thus, there i s hardly any real requirement of additional 1000 diesel 
locomotives which are to be manufactured at Diesel Locomotives Factory, 
Marhowra. Whatever little requirement for diesel locomotives remains, can be 
comfortably met with in-house production at DLW, Varanasi.  
e. Present status of implementation of the project 
The scope of the project included setting up of a diesel locomotive factory at 
Marhowra and maintenance depot at Roza and Gandhidham. The work of 
setting up of the factory is planned for completion by November 2018
151. As of 
September 2017, land acquisition has been done and the works of power, rail 
and road connectivity are in progress. The work of Government maintenance 
depot at Gandhidham remains to be initiated . The earmarked site is yet to be 
handed over to the Company as of November 2017 . As regards Company 
maintenance depot at Roza, Railways have handed over the land to the 
company on 9 November 2016 and executed  a land lease agreement at a token 
license fee of Rupee one annually. As on 31 March 2017, the physical progress of 
30 per cent and financial progress of five and a half per cent was achieved. 
By going ahead with the setting up of this factory, Railways would be inducting 
another 1000 diesel locomotives in its fleet, which it does not require, and there 
by commit to a liability of `17126.08 crore on account of manufacture  and 
maintenance of locomotives, land cost of factory and depots, equity share, 
power, rail and road connectivity  and investment made in Joint Venture with 
M/s GE Global Sourcing India Pvt. Ltd. The details of the liabilities are as under: 
Table 4.5 – Liability of Indian Railways 
Particulars of liability Amount of Liability (` in crore) 
Cost of locos to be supplied by company152 14,656 
Maintenance cost to be paid by Railway 2228 (Annexure 4.1) 
Expenditure as on September 2017 at 
Marhowra (Land acquisition cost, Equity 
share153, Power connectivity, Rail connectivity, 
Road connectivity and Miscellaneous such as 
establishment, vehicle, imprest etc.) 
242.08 
Total liability 17126.08 
                                                           
151Para 12.4.1 of the Agreement stipulates the scheduled date of completion as 1095 days from the date of appointment 
of the company (6 November 2015). 
152The effective weighted average cost of 1000 locomotives (700 4500 HHP and 300 6000 HHP)  
153As per the Para 1.1.8 of the Agreement, Government shall have the right to subscribe to equity share capital of the 
Company up to maximum of 26 per cent of its issued and paid up share capital, but subject to maximum ` 100 crore. 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 4
122
Chapter 4 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 
122 
The above indicates that diesel locomotives available with the Railways are 
sufficient in numbers to take care of the present needs. In the changed scenario, 
wherein Indian Railways is planning to shift to complete electrification of its BG 
routes a nd also to run the freight trains in Dedicated Freight Corridors  on 
electrified routes, the diesel locomotives procured under this agreement have 
hardly any scope for gainful utilisation on the Indian Railway network . Railways 
themselves have decided to si gnificantly reduce in -house production of diesel 
locomotives at DLW , Varanasi from 2019 -20 onwards and have not planned 
production of any diesel locomotive in DMW, Patiala in 2018 -19. Thus, setting 
up of a new infrastructure for production of diesel locomo tives and incurring a 
huge liability of ` 17126.08 crore is not in sync with the overall strategic vision of 
Railways. Better utilisation of the current fleet of diesel locomotives can help 
address the requirement of Indian Railways, if any.  
It is recommended that Railways may revisit the issue and examine whether it 
will be prudent to create assets and infrastructure for which Railways may 
have no useful requirement in future, as they have planned for large scale 
electrification and dedicated freight corr idor is also going to be completely 
electrified; Railways have already considerably scaled down their own in -
house production programme of diesel locomotives. 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board on 18 January 2018; 
their reply is yet to be received (28 February 2018). 
4.2 North Central Railway (NCR): Utilisation of Diesel Locomotive in completely 
electrified section 
NCR administration allowed utilization of diesel locomotives in completely 
electrified electric sections of Allahabad -Ghaziabad (606.88 kms) and Palwal -
Bina (505.31 kms). This led to extra operational cost of ` 5.74 crore besides 
negative impact on environment and increase the dependency on petroleum 
based energy. 
Electric traction is a more environment friendly option to haul t rains in Indian 
Railway (IR). By using electric traction, which is also a cheaper source of energy,  
import and use of fossil fuel is reduced resulting in reduction of carbon 
footprints of IR. The electric rolling stock also has the capacity to regenerate 
electricity. Thus, overall electric traction is as economically  viable option for the 
railways for haulage of trains. 
Audit reviewed the movement of trains in two sections of NCR viz., Mughalsarai -
Ghaziabad and Palwal -Bina, which are fully electrified. Audi t noticed that diesel 
locomotives are still running under these sections.  
Audit analysed the data of Freight Operation Information System (FOIS) 
pertaining to freight movement in the above two sections for the year 2013 -14 
to 2016-17 and noticed that on the long running length viz. Allahabad-Ghaziabad 
section (606.88 RKM) and Palwal -Bina section (505.31 RKM), which are fully 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 4
123
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 4 
 
 
123 
electrified sections, a number of freight trains were running  with diesel 
locomotives.  
Audit noticed that on these two electrified s ections, during the period of 2013 -
14 to 2016-17, a total 350 freight trains were run using diesel locomotives under 
electric wire. This resulted in extra operational cost of `5.74 crore154 on account 
of freight movement using diesel locomotives as detailed below: 
Table 4.6 – Extra operation cost due to running of diesel locomotives in electrified sections 
Year Section No. of  freight 
trains 
Extra operation cost due to 
running diesel locomotives  (in `) 
2013-14 Allahabad-Ghaziabad 35 5227637.61 
Palwal-Bina 33 4207719.40 
2014-15 Allahabad-Ghaziabad 52 10511436.22 
Palwal-Bina 43 7245805.35 
2015-16 Allahabad-Ghaziabad 36 4719803.16 
Palwal-Bina 39 5550318.06 
2016-17 Allahabad-Ghaziabad 38 7035622.60 
Palwal-Bina 74 12980769.77 
 Total 350 57479112.17 
Utilisation of diesel locomotives in electric traction not only causes extra 
operation cost, but also defeats the purpose of electrification.  
When the matter was taken up with the NCR Administration in May 2017, they 
stated (July 2017) th at though Allahabad -Ghaziabad section is completely 
electrified, all adjoining territories are yet to be electrified. Allahabad division 
receives trains with diesel traction and changes traction in its own system. They 
further stated that trains on diesel traction on electrified route are operated due 
to operational constraints like absence of matching of diesel and electric 
traction at interchange point, crew availability, training of crew, non -acceptance 
by other division etc. 
The reply may be viewed in l ight of the fact that even if the goods train enters 
NCR jurisdiction from a section which is not electrified, NCR administration 
could change traction under their jurisdiction, so that electric locomotives can 
haul the trains in electrified section under NCR, especially when the length of 
electrified section is as long as 500 to 600 kms. For optimal utilisation of long 
electrified stretches, Railways need to identify constraints and address them to 
enable effective use of railway electrifications assets cr eated, save resources in 
terms of expenditure on energy costs and reduce need for diesel tractions in 
Indian Railways. 
Thus, use of diesel locomotives in completely electrified Allahabad -Ghaziabad 
and Palwal-Bina sections thus, resulted in extra operationa l cost of ` 5.74 crore. 
Besides, it also has a negative impact on environment and increases carbon foot 
print of the railways. 
                                                           
154Calculation of extra operation cost is based on the line haul cost per thousand GTKMs for frei ght (BG) issued by 
Railway Board 
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 4 
 
 
123 
electrified sections, a number of freight trains were running  with diesel 
locomotives.  
Audit noticed that on these two electrified s ections, during the period of 2013 -
14 to 2016-17, a total 350 freight trains were run using diesel locomotives under 
electric wire. This resulted in extra operational cost of `5.74 crore154 on account 
of freight movement using diesel locomotives as detailed below: 
Table 4.6 – Extra operation cost due to running of diesel locomotives in electrified sections 
Year Section No. of  freight 
trains 
Extra operation cost due to 
running diesel locomotives  (in `) 
2013-14 Allahabad-Ghaziabad 35 5227637.61 
Palwal-Bina 33 4207719.40 
2014-15 Allahabad-Ghaziabad 52 10511436.22 
Palwal-Bina 43 7245805.35 
2015-16 Allahabad-Ghaziabad 36 4719803.16 
Palwal-Bina 39 5550318.06 
2016-17 Allahabad-Ghaziabad 38 7035622.60 
Palwal-Bina 74 12980769.77 
 Total 350 57479112.17 
Utilisation of diesel locomotives in electric traction not only causes extra 
operation cost, but also defeats the purpose of electrification.  
When the matter was taken up with the NCR Administration in May 2017, they 
stated (July 2017) th at though Allahabad -Ghaziabad section is completely 
electrified, all adjoining territories are yet to be electrified. Allahabad division 
receives trains with diesel traction and changes traction in its own system. They 
further stated that trains on diesel traction on electrified route are operated due 
to operational constraints like absence of matching of diesel and electric 
traction at interchange point, crew availability, training of crew, non -acceptance 
by other division etc. 
The reply may be viewed in l ight of the fact that even if the goods train enters 
NCR jurisdiction from a section which is not electrified, NCR administration 
could change traction under their jurisdiction, so that electric locomotives can 
haul the trains in electrified section under NCR, especially when the length of 
electrified section is as long as 500 to 600 kms. For optimal utilisation of long 
electrified stretches, Railways need to identify constraints and address them to 
enable effective use of railway electrifications assets cr eated, save resources in 
terms of expenditure on energy costs and reduce need for diesel tractions in 
Indian Railways. 
Thus, use of diesel locomotives in completely electrified Allahabad -Ghaziabad 
and Palwal-Bina sections thus, resulted in extra operationa l cost of ` 5.74 crore. 
Besides, it also has a negative impact on environment and increases carbon foot 
print of the railways. 
                                                           
154Calculation of extra operation cost is based on the line haul cost per thousand GTKMs for frei ght (BG) issued by 
Railway Board 
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 4 
 
 
123 
electrified sections, a number of freight trains were running  with diesel 
locomotives.  
Audit noticed that on these two electrified s ections, during the period of 2013 -
14 to 2016-17, a total 350 freight trains were run using diesel locomotives under 
electric wire. This resulted in extra operational cost of `5.74 crore154 on account 
of freight movement using diesel locomotives as detailed below: 
Table 4.6 – Extra operation cost due to running of diesel locomotives in electrified sections 
Year Section No. of  freight 
trains 
Extra operation cost due to 
running diesel locomotives  (in `) 
2013-14 Allahabad-Ghaziabad 35 5227637.61 
Palwal-Bina 33 4207719.40 
2014-15 Allahabad-Ghaziabad 52 10511436.22 
Palwal-Bina 43 7245805.35 
2015-16 Allahabad-Ghaziabad 36 4719803.16 
Palwal-Bina 39 5550318.06 
2016-17 Allahabad-Ghaziabad 38 7035622.60 
Palwal-Bina 74 12980769.77 
 Total 350 57479112.17 
Utilisation of diesel locomotives in electric traction not only causes extra 
operation cost, but also defeats the purpose of electrification.  
When the matter was taken up with the NCR Administration in May 2017, they 
stated (July 2017) th at though Allahabad -Ghaziabad section is completely 
electrified, all adjoining territories are yet to be electrified. Allahabad division 
receives trains with diesel traction and changes traction in its own system. They 
further stated that trains on diesel traction on electrified route are operated due 
to operational constraints like absence of matching of diesel and electric 
traction at interchange point, crew availability, training of crew, non -acceptance 
by other division etc. 
The reply may be viewed in l ight of the fact that even if the goods train enters 
NCR jurisdiction from a section which is not electrified, NCR administration 
could change traction under their jurisdiction, so that electric locomotives can 
haul the trains in electrified section under NCR, especially when the length of 
electrified section is as long as 500 to 600 kms. For optimal utilisation of long 
electrified stretches, Railways need to identify constraints and address them to 
enable effective use of railway electrifications assets cr eated, save resources in 
terms of expenditure on energy costs and reduce need for diesel tractions in 
Indian Railways. 
Thus, use of diesel locomotives in completely electrified Allahabad -Ghaziabad 
and Palwal-Bina sections thus, resulted in extra operationa l cost of ` 5.74 crore. 
Besides, it also has a negative impact on environment and increases carbon foot 
print of the railways. 
                                                           
154Calculation of extra operation cost is based on the line haul cost per thousand GTKMs for frei ght (BG) issued by 
Railway Board 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 4
124
Chapter 4 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 
124 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board on 6 October 2017; their 
reply is yet to be received (28 February 2018). 
4.3 South Eastern Railway (SER):  Avoidable expenditure of ` 4.35 crore due to 
incorrect fixation of Contract Demand and erroneous payment of electricity 
duty at DMU Factory, Haldia  
SER Administration did not realistically assess the energy requirements of  the 
DMU factory at Haldia, keeping in view the pace and scope of its activities and 
continued to incur expenditure on Contract Demand charges and load factor 
surcharge for increasing contract demand from 1500 KVA to 5500 KVA. This led 
to avoidable expenditure of ` 3.22 crore in addition to the load factor surcharge 
of ` 0.52 crore. The scope of higher consumption is remote in near future as 
Phase I of the factory has been set up with very limited activity and there is no 
proposal to set up Phase II in near future. Till the time the activities of the factory 
are geared up, SER Administration would continue to pay for 1500 KVA supply, 
though actual consumption is below 100 KVA (7 per cent of contract demand 
approximately). 
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board)  vide their circulars of February 2000 and 
January 2011 directed all Zonal Railways to monitor the maximum demand at  
each supply point on regular basis and revise the same to the desired level 
based upon the agreements and tariffs of Electric Supply Author ities in force 
once in two years or earlier to avoid payment of penalty on account of contract 
demand.  
South Eastern Railway (SER) decided (2011) to set up a Diesel Multiple Unit 
(DMU) Factory at Haldia 155 in two phases to manufacture 400 coaches of DMU 
and 30 coaches of Self Propelled Accident Relief Train (SPART) per annum. Phase 
I of the project was planned as Departmental unit for manufacture of 8 to 12 
coaches per month. The Phase I unit, constructed by Rail Vikas Nigam Limited 
(RVNL), was taken over by  the Railway Administration in April 2013. However, 
very limited activity of assembly, painting, furnishing of the fabricated shell 
received from Integral coach Factory (ICF) was started. In Phase II, full scale 
production of DMUs and SPARTs through Joint Venture (JV)/ Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) mode was planned, which could not materialize till March 
2017. 
Audit observed that SER Administration had applied (May 2011) for 33 KV bulk 
power supply at Haldia factory premises from the West Bengal State El ectricity 
Distribution Company Limited (WBSEDCL). Electrical Department
156 of SER 
executed agreement with WBSEDCL in April 2012. On the basis of projected 
progressive requirement of 1500/2000/2500/5500/7000 KVA  for the first five 
years of operation , the Contract Demand (CD) was fixed as per the forecast for 
the first five years and the sub -station was energized on 15 March 2013.  SER 
                                                           
155 Previously the factory was planned at Sankrail but in February 2011 it was relocated to Haldia 
156 Senior Divisional Electrical Engineer, General, Kharagpur 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 4
125
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 4 
 
 
125 
Administration incurred an expenditure of ` 3.07 crore for new connection, 
security deposit and shifting of the existing 11 KV to 33 KV line. 
Audit noticed that because of very low level of workshop activities, actual 
consumption of electricity was very low in comparison to CD (below 100 KVA 
during the period April 2013 to March 2017). Meanwhile, the Contract Demand 
continued to in crease as per the progressive projected requirement of 
1500/2000/2500/5500/7000 KVA  for the first five years of operation . A s per 
agreement, railway had to pay for Maximum Demand (MD) at 85 per cent of the 
CD, irrespective of the actual usage 157. This resulted in an avoidable expenditure 
of ` 3.22 crore 158 towards demand charges 159. Besides, due to extremely low 
load factor, railways also paid load factor surcharge of ` 0.52 crore for the 
period from April 2013 to March 2017. 
In February 2012, Senior Divisional E ngineer, Kharagpur assessed the load 
demand160 of 1500 KVA as sufficient for the DMU, Factory, Haldia. Audit raised 
the issue in February 2014 and observed that construction of Phase  II of the 
factory has not yet planned and all infrastructure of Phase I has not yet ready for 
full production, estimation of contract demand progressively 1500/  2000/ 2500/ 
5500/ 7000 KVA for the first five years was injudicious. However, SER 
Administration approached WBSEDCL for downward revision of CD to 500 KVA 
only in August 2016.  In response, WBSEDCL intimated (August 2016) that CD for 
33 KV system of supply should not be below 1500 KVA and revised (October 
2016) the CD to 1500 KVA from the consumption month of November 2016.  
Thus, though the CD increased from 1500 KVA to 5500 KVA during 2013 to 2017, 
the option for downward revision of CD was availed by railways only in 
November 2016, though it was available to them in April 2014 itself.   
Audit further observed that SER Administration erroneously paid an amount of  
` 0.61 c rore pertaining to the period from October 2013 to March 2017 to 
WBSEDCL towards Electricity Duty (ED). This was in violation of Constitutional 
provisions of Article 287 which stipulates that ‘no law of a State shall impose, or 
authorize the imposition of a tax on the consumption or sale of electricity 
(whether produced by a Government or other persons) which is consumed in 
the construction, maintenance or operation of any railway by the Government 
of India etc.’ In this connection, it is pertinent to menti on that railway is not 
paying ED to the electricity authority for purchase of electricity at other 
locations (Haldia Railway Station and Kharagpur). 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board on 9 October 2017 . 
Ministry of Railways in their repl y (February 2018) stated that as soon as the 
actual load was found to be less than the initial projected demand, the user 
                                                           
157 As per Clause 22 and 23 of the Agreement dated 13.04.2012 
158 Considering 100 KVA as maximum demand as during the entire period from April 2013 to March 2017, MD was below 
100 KVA  
159 Demand Charge is the element of electricity charge computed on the maximum contract demand per KVA/ month. 
160 Load demand is the maximum requirement of electricity for which agreement is entered into with the West Bengal 
State Electricity Distribution Company Limited 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 4
126
Chapter 4 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 
126 
department was consulted and matter taken up with WBSEDCL for revision of 
contract demand. They further stated that the assessment of power 
requirement was done as per factory utilisation envisaged  and they have further 
sent a reference to CMD, WBSEDCL for examining the possibility of further 
reduction of demand.  
Regarding payment of electricity duty, the Ministry stated that they had t aken 
up the matter with WBSEDCL in February 2017, who stated that the exemption 
could be considered provided the Director of Electricity Duty, Government of 
West Bengal agrees to it. They stated that they have taken up the matter with 
the State Government and their reply was awaited.  
Thus, SER Administration did not realistically assess the energy requirements of  
the DMU factory  keeping in view the pace and scope of its activities and 
continued to incur expenditure on Contract Demand charges and load fact or 
surcharge for increasing contract demand from 1500 KVA to 5500 KVA. This  led 
to avoidable expenditure of ` 3.74 crore. The scope of higher consumption is 
remote in near future as Phase I of the factory has been set up with very limited 
activity and ther e is no proposal to set up Phase II in near future.  Till the time 
the activities of the factory are geared up, SER Administration would continue to 
pay for 1500 KVA supply, though actual consumption is below 100 KVA (7 per 
cent of contract demand approximately). 
 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 5
127
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 5 
 
 
127 
Chapter 5 
Signalling & Telecommunication  
At Railway Board level, Director General is overall in-charge of Signalling & 
Telecommunication (S&T), a Department of Indian Railways who directly reports 
Chairman Railway Board . At Zonal level,  the Chief Signalling and Telecom  
Engineer ( CSTE) is responsible for overall supervision and maintenance of S&T 
assets.   
For enhancing efficiency and safety in train operation, modern signaling plays a 
very vital role. The Signalling Department handles induction and maintenance of 
signalling systems such as Multi Aspect Colour Light signaling (MACLS), Panel 
Interlocking (PI), Route Relay Interlocking (RRI), Electronic Interlocking (EI), 
Automatic Block Signaling, Block proving by Axle Counter, enhancement of 
safety at level crossing by Interlocking of level crossings and provision of 
telephones at manned level crossings etc. The Telecom D epartment oversees 
the complete working of Telecom in Railways  and takes care of all the 
telecommunication requirements of Railways. 
The exp enditure on repair and maintenance of plant and equipment of S&T 
department during the year 20 16-17 was ` 2856.49 crore161. A capital 
expenditure of ` 966.58 crore was incurred on creation of S&T assets. During 
the year, apart from regula r audit of vouchers and tenders, 180 offices of the 
Department were inspected.   
This chapter includes a long paragraph  on ‘Implementation of Mobile Train 
Radio Communication (MTRC) system ov er Indian Railways ’. In this paragraph, 
Audit reviewed the status of implementation o f the MTRC system on Indian 
Railways and analysed reasons of sub -optimal/non-utilisation of the system.  In 
addition there are two  individual paragraph s highlighting non -utilisation of 
handsets procured for MTRC system and a voidable liability  on account of 
Spectrum Charges due to failure to review the use of Walkie Talkie sets.  
                                                           
161 Minor Head 500, 600 and 700 of Grant no.07 – Repair and maintenance of plant and equipment 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 5
128
Chapter 5 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 
128 
 
5.1 Implementation of Mobile Train Radio Communication ( MTRC) 
system over Indian Railways 
5.1.1 Executive Summary 
The MTRC system has been intr oduced to replace the existing Very High 
Frequency (VHF) based communication system over IR. It aims at better traffic 
management over Indian Railways through data transfer (regarding location and 
movement of trains) and secured communication amongst drivers, guards, 
maintenance staff, etc. MTRC to  be effective required implementation on 
complete routes, dedicated locomotives with cab radios for the routes, provision 
and maintenance of MTRC infrastructure, stakeholder identification and role 
assignment, skill identification and upgradation, revision  of recruitment rules 
and change management. However, no road map for implementation of the 
system has been prepared by the railways. Due to absence of a comprehensive 
time bound road map, implementation of MTRC system could not take place. As 
on 31 March 2017, only on 1470 RKMs out of 19,512 RKMs planned, the MTRC 
project has been implemented. Wherever implemented, the system is not being 
utilised as complete routes have not been covered for implementation and 
dedicated locomotives with cab radios for the routes have not been provided. 
Besides, due to deficient support system in terms of maintenance contracts and 
faulty Mobile Service Switching Centre at Agra, the system remains unutilised.  
Thus, expenditure of ` 181.73 crore incurred on MTRC system so far has 
remained unfruitful.  There is a need to review the requirement and architecture 
of the MTRC system as an independent telecom system within Indian Railways, 
particularly in view of the advancements made in the telecom field in the country 
during the last decade. 
5.1.2 Introduction 
Indian Railway is presently using ‘Driver -Guard-Station-Controller System’, 
generally known as ‘Control Communication System’ for communication to run 
trains. In this system, communication between Driver -Guard and Driver -Guard-
Station Master is based on Wireless Fidelity (Wi -Fi) Technology through VHF 162 
(Very High Frequency) handsets; that uses radio waves to provide network 
connectivity. Communication between Station Master and Control offices is 
based upon land line phones. Under this system the communication through Wi-
Fi is not retrievable, whereas communication through land line is retrievable. 
Indian Railways decided to introduce Mobile Train Radio Communication based 
on GSM -R technology. The ‘Gaisal Train Disaster’, which occurred on 2 August 
1999 due to the collision between the Avadh Assam Express from Dibrugarh and 
the Bramhaputra Mail from New Delhi, leading to more than 280 deaths and 
leaving over 320 people injured prompted the Indian Railways to expedite the 
changeover to MTRC system.  
                                                           
162A system of communication through walkie talkies 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 5
129
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 5 
 
 
129 
Mobile Train Radio Communication (MTRC) system is being implemented as a 
dynamic and technologically avant-garde system of highly advanced system 
based on the ‘Global System for Mobile Communications -Railway (GSM -R)’ 
technology and is e xpected to play an intrinsic role in minimizing train accidents 
by aiding effective communication. It ensures safety of passengers by providing 
effective communication and instant and constant interaction of the train crew 
with the Control Centre and Stati on Master through the use of GSM -R 
technology. 
In 2005, the MTRC project was sanctioned and Nokia Siemens Network was 
given the work of implementing MTRC based on GSM -R technology in India. The 
Nokia Siemens Network implemented the country’s first GSM -R ba sed MTRC 
system in May 2008 for Palwal -Mathura-Jhansi route of North Central Railways.  
As per the Action Plan for Vision 2020 and recommendation of the High Level 
Safety Review Committee, all ‘A’, ‘B’ & ‘C’ routes of Indian Railway s consisting of 
19,152 Route Kilometres (RKMs)out of 66,687 RKMs of Indian Railway s network 
were to be provided with MTRC System . Accordingly, 19 MTRC projects  
(including one Kolkata Metro Project, three projects of ‘D’ and ‘E’ category 
routes) were taken up (31 March 2017). The MTRC project is being implemented 
by the Indian Railways Project Management Unit (IRPMU) over North Central 
Railway (NCR) as well as Kanpur-Lucknow section of Northern Railway. 
Mobile Train Radio Communication (MTRC) system 
MTRC system ensures switch over f rom analog communication to digital 
technology. It needs a specific frequency band pertaining to railway 
applications. For Indian Railways, the Telecom Directorate of IR has 
recommended 900 MHz frequency band for downlink and uplink signals 
respectively. They are essentially 935-960 MHz and 890-915 MHz, respectively. 
 
The present day MTRC system has many advanced features, which enhance the 
safety of the overall system of railways operations and ensure that the optimum 
passenger safety conditions are met. The important components and equipment 
of MTRC based on GSM -R include Base Station Subsystem (BSS), Mobile Station 
(MS), Operating Subsystem (OSS), Network and Switching Subsystem (NSS), Cab 
Figure 5.1: Departure Ready Message 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 5
130
Chapter 5 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 
130 
Radio163, Dispatcher and Power Supply Arrangement . A pictorial rep resentation 
of GSM-R systems is shown in Figure 5.1. 
The system aims to provide complete detail about the train and its running 
status to the railway officials like information about the train’s speed, its current 
direction of movement based on ‘Global Pos itioning System (GPS)’, time of 
train’s arrival and departure, the current passenger strength on the train, the 
track details on which the train is running, amongst other advantages. It can be 
used to warn the drivers beforehand of the running trains as  well as provide 
effective assistance to the railway officials involved in train related operations.  
In case of a safety concern, the concerned staff can immediately intimate the 
concerned officials of the railway establishment.  If any accident takes place, i t 
will ensure effective facilitation of the management of the post event activities.  
The salient features of MTRC system include the following: 
1. The modern trains having MTRC system simultaneously calculate and 
communicate their running status through radio  communication to the 
drivers and the control rooms .The communicated status includes important 
details about the running trains like the accurate position of trains, their 
speed, braking distance and the direction in which they travel in terms of 
their position coordinates.  
2. The system allows the wayside equipment’s
164 to highlight such points on 
the railway track which may be called as nodes, which should not be crossed 
by other trains moving on the same path.  
3. The system calculates the ambient ‘Safety Braki ng Distance’ and greatly 
reduces this distance between two trains by providing continuous and 
accurate train location and speed details.  
4. The system provides for easy switchover and up -gradation to driverless 
trains as it is based on a highly advanced communication technology. 
5. The system, by calculating the most efficient train speed for minimum 
energy loss incorporates train costing (due to which the train runs down the 
track because of its own gravity, without making use of other energy forms 
like electric power). This helps save energy.  
Even though the MTRC system has many advanced features to ensure maximum 
efficiency in railways operations and passenger safety, like any other 
                                                           
163 As per Chapter XVIII of Indian Railway Telecom Manual, cab radio is on -board equipment suitable for voice and data 
communication. It  can be used with European Train Control System (ETCS) for train control. It consists of three units 
Radio, Operating units on Man Machine Interface  (MMI) and antenna. The cab radio is a part of the locomotive. It 
ensures seamless GSM -R communication and registration/de-registration at crew changing points is not required. The 
alternatives to cab radio are mobile handsets and Operational Purpose Handset (OPH). These require registration and 
de-registration at every crew changing point. Further, during a single journey of a locomotive the relationship of a 
locomotive to crew is one to many i.e. a number of crew will be required for completing a single trip of locomotive. Thus, 
alternative to a single cab radio will require multiple units of mobile equipm ent. Mobile Equipment (ME) used in MTRC 
system includes Operational Purpose Handsets (OPH) and General Purpose Handsets (GPH). OPH  is useful for Guards, 
Train Superintendents, Station Masters, Shunting Teams, Controllers other than the Section Control and Drivers also 
when Cab Radios are not provided/functioning in loc. General Purpose Handset (GPH) is useful for trackside maintenance 
staff (Engineering, Signal & Telecom and Electrical for Railway Electrification areas, and Security patrols). 
164As per the Ma nual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, 2009 given by the 'US Department of Transportation, Federal 
Highway Administration',  wayside equipment includes the switches, signal systems, control devices, etc.  for railway 
transit operations housed within one or more than one enclosures located on the railway tracks. 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 5
131
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 5 
 
 
131 
technology, it also has some drawbacks which need to be taken into 
consideration when designing or using the system for railways communication . 
The major risk is that if the communication between any of the trains fails or is 
hampered, then the MTRC system might fail, wholly or partially, endangering 
the safety of passengers. As the MTRC system uses Radio Communication for all 
applications, there can be communication failures due to weak signal strengths, 
attenuation, electromagnetic (EM)  interference or glitch in the functioning of 
the hardware . As the system makes use of wireless communication, it can be 
subjected to unethical hacking, putting the passenger safety into question . Due 
to malfunctioning of equipment, there can be unexpected and unwanted 
application of emergency brakes, which can cause train accidents.  
A pictorial representation of Automatic Train Supervision
165 is shown below:  
Operational requirements for MTRC 
The MTRC system has been introduced to replace the existing VHF based 
communication system over IR. It would lead to better traffic management over 
Indian Rail ways through data transfer (regarding location and movement of 
trains) and secured communication amongst drivers, guards, maintenance staff, 
etc. The following necessary minimum ingredients are necessary for obtaining 
benefits of implementation of MTRC over Indian Railways: 
i. Complete route should be MTRC enabled : MTRC system seeks to replace 
VHF based communication system over Indian Railways have trains travelling 
on long distance routes e.g. Delhi -Howrah, Delhi -Nagpur, Delhi -Kanpur, 
Delhi-Jammu etc. It requires availability of MTRC system on complete routes. 
If made available over small sections and sub -sections, the benefits of the 
system cannot be derived.  
                                                           
165Automatic Train Supervision  has two sub -systems: Automatic Train Protection  is responsible for the safety -critical 
functions including train protection and Automatic Train Operation  is responsible f or the automatic operation of 
throttle and brake commands to move trains between stations and other stopping locations. 
Figure 5.2:  Automatic Train Supervision 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 5
132
Chapter 5 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 
132 
ii. Availability of dedicated locomotives for the MTRC enable routes : The 
complete benefits of MTRC are  available through a dedicated cab radio for 
each locomotive for data recording, transfer and communication. Thus, it is 
desirable that MTRC enabled locomotives with cab radios run on the routes 
with MTRC system. 
iii. Seamless uninterrupted network on MTRC rout e requires sufficient number 
of Base Transceiver System
166 (BTS), Mobile Service Switching C entre167 
(MSC), absence of blind spot 168, maintenance facilities for hardware 
components and software applications. 
iv. Replacement of VHF based system by MTRC system require s revision of 
operational instruction for operation of train, training, skill up gradation 
and change in working practices including changes in recruitment rules.      
Audit reviewed planning and execution of selected  completed and ongoing 
projects for imp lementation of MTRC systems in Indian Railways. Audit findings 
are discussed below: 
Audit findings 
5.1.3 Status of various MTRC Projects undertaken by Indian Railways 
Though planned since 1980, Indian Railways initiated the work of 
implementation of MTRC S ystem in 1999 -00 through different projects in 
different segments .Based on the recommendation of Railway Safety Review 
Committee’s report (August 1999 and February 2001), Railway Board approved 
in-principle implementation of MTRC project  covering 19,152 RK M of ‘A’, ‘B’, 
and ‘C’ routes. Vision 2020, envisaged covering 12000 RKM under MTRC by 31 
March 2017. 19 MTRC Projects (15 projects of ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ routes, two 
projects of ‘D’ routes, one of E route and one project of Kolkata Metro Railway)  
were planned for implementation. Audit noticed that  as on 31 March 2017, only 
3,900 RKM have been covered under MTRC (Annexure 5.1), i.e. 20.367 per 
cent
169 of the total RKMs planned. Audit observed that  
 Only on 1470 RKM ( 12.25 per cent170) the MTRC work has been comple ted 
by railways as on 31 March 2017: 
Table 5.1 – Sections where MTRC work has been completed as on 31 March 2017  
S. no Name of the section where MTRC Project implemented RKM  
1 New Delhi -Jhansi (excluding New Delhi -Palwal (57 RKM) and Palwal -Mathura  
(83 RKM)) 
270 
2 Palwal-Mathura  83 
3 Lucknow-Kanpur  75 
4 New Delhi-Ambala-Ludhiana (Including New Delhi-Palwal section and Delhi area) 372 
5 Mughalsarai – Dhanbad 400 
6 Dhanbad – Howrah 270 
Total 1470 
                                                           
166It performs channel coding/decryption and contains transmitter and receivers, antennas 
167It is centre responsible for call processing, switching & routing traffic and supplementary services.  
168A blind spot is location where GSM network not working 
1693900 RKM /19152RKM *100 
1701470 RKM/12000RKM*100 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 5
133
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 5 
 
 
133 
 Out of 19 MTRC Projects planned, t he following five projects have not been 
started as yet, even after a lapse of three to four years from the date of their 
sanction. The detailed estimate of these projects were yet to be sanctioned: 
 Though benefits of MTRC system could be derived only when it is 
implemented on the complete route and not in parts, the same was not 
ensured while taking up various projects. e.g. The MTRC project of New 
Delhi-Jhansi (270 kms) was taken up in the year of 2001 -02. But, the middle 
section of Palwal -Mathura (83  kms) was taken up after more than three 
years in 2004-05. No reasons were found on record for the same. 
 A cab radio for each locomotive for data recording, transfer and 
communication and dedicated locomotives for the MTRC enable routes were 
not provided, and OPH/GPH handsets were being issued, where MTRC was 
implemented. 
Thus, railways have not planned for implementation of the MTRC system in a 
comprehensive manner . MTRC to be effective required implementation on 
complete routes, dedicated locomotives with cab radios for the routes, 
provision and maintenance of MTRC infrastructure, sta keholder identification 
and role assignment, skill identification and upgradation, revision of 
recruitment rules and change management. However, no road map for 
implementation of the system has been prepared by the railways.  As on 31 
March 2017, only on 14 70 RKMs out of 19,512 RKMs planned, the MTRC 
project have been implemented. 
5.1.4 Analysis of completed MTRC Projects  
Audit undertook detailed analysis of MTRC projects completed/partly completed 
by Indian Railways. Detailed audit findings are discussed below: 
5.1.4.1 Mathura –Jhansi and Palwal-Mathura sections 
The MTRC projects were planned for Mathura -Jhansi section (270 RKM) and 
Palwal-Mathura section (83 RKM) by IRPMU in 2001 -02 and 2004 -05 
respectively. The contract for these projects including  survey, design, 
manufacture, supply, installation, testing and commissioning of MTRC system 
was awarded (April 2005) to M /s Siemens Public Communication Networks 
Table 5.2 – Sections where MTRC work is yet to be taken up 
S. no Zonal 
Railway 
Name of the section where MTRC projects were yet to be taken 
up 
1 NFR Kamakhya-Goalpara-New Bongaigaon section 
2 NFR Guwahati-Lumding section 
3 WR Churchgate-Virar-Replacement section (and integration with 
MTRC of Central Railway) 
4 CR Itarsi-Nagpur MTRC (without master switching centre)  
5 NR New Delhi-Ghaziabad including Delhi-Sahibabad section 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 5
134
Chapter 5 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 
134 
(Pvt.) Ltd., Gurgaon, at ` 19.92 crore 171. The project was to be completed 
within12 months from the date of issue of letter of acceptance (April 2005). 
These projects were  finally completed in 2008 with a delay of nearly two years 
and at a cost of ` 37.62 crore till March 2017.The actual date of completion and 
reasons of cost overrun was not found on recor d. The project was taken over in 
June 2014 (after more than five years) by NCR, after issue of the directives  by 
Railway Board in July 2013, with certain deficiencies as listed below:  
 Isolation Transformer were not available at Datia, Antri, Sithouli and 
different other places. 
 Faulty Isolation Transformer, defective Specific Transmission Module 
FIBCOM make and unavailable Duamco card at the Level crossing gate. 
 Unavailable Base Transceiver Station (BTS) at tunnel (Antri-Sandalpur). 
 Unavailable coverage du e to dark zone between  Antri-Sandalpur, Sithouli -
Gwalior and Dholpur-Mania. 
 Faulty communication devices (handsets)  including 101 Operational Purpose 
Handsets (OPH), 31 General Purpose Handsets (GPH) and six mobile sets of 
Magicon make. 
The reason and just ification for not taking over of the above MTRC system in 
this section up to a period of five years were also not found on record. 
Audit observed that 
1.     The comprehensive warranty and annual maintenance contract (AMC) of 
the MTRC system in this sectio n expired on 31 March 2012. The two year 
warranty and three year AMC expired without any operation or utilisation of the 
MTRC system. Thereafter, the AMC could not be renewed. The system does not 
have any AMC coverage for the last five years. 
Agra Division of NCR floated tender (April 2014, June 2014 and again in August 
2014) for Comprehensive AMC of MTRC system in the section at an estimated 
cost of ` 4.90 crore. Against tender of August 2014, only one bidder viz.  Original 
Equipment Manufacturer (OEM),M /s Nokia India, Gurgaon responded with 
offered price of ` 8.43 crore. This price included cost of repair charges for faulty 
items identified. Tender Committee discharged this tender on the ground of 
non-fulfilling of minimum qualifying/eligibility criteria an d recommended to 
invite fresh tender after revision of the estimate .Thereafter, tenders  with 
revised estimated ( ` 9.36 crore including cost of repair and maintenance of 
faulty spares)were invited four times (September 2015,January 2016, June 2016 
and April 2017) without change/relaxation in eligibility criteria. Against the fifth, 
sixth and seventh tender, the offer received was discharged on the ground of 
non-fulfilling of minimum qualifying /eligibility criteria . Further, in November 
2017 and December 2017, tenders were invited with change in eligibility criteria. 
The offer received against tender of December 2017 was under process and yet 
to be finalised.  
                                                           
171 ` 18.82 crore for Mathura-Jhansi and ` 1.10 crore for Palwal-Mathura section 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 5
135
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 5 
 
 
135 
As such, though response received against every tender was poor, Railways 
repeatedly invited tenders for AMC of this section without exploring any 
relaxation/change in the minimum qualifying/eligibility criteria. Also, a better 
response for AMC would have been received, if the same was not linked with 
repair work of faulty items.  
2. The Mobile Service Sw itching Centre (MSC) at Agra is the prescribed 
Home Location Register (HLR)
172 for NCR. All MTRC users of NCR  are required to 
register at this MSC. Due to fault in the MSC at Agra, new subscribers cannot be 
added. Further, the communication taking place in M TRC system is also not 
retrievable over this section. The fault in MSC at Agra have not been rectified as 
AMC of MTRC system in Palwal-Mathura-Jhansi route is not in place since April 
2014. Defects pointed out at the time of taking over the system in June 2014 
continue to exist. No cab radio is installed or in use over locomotives running on 
the section for purpose of use of MTRC system. As an alternative OPH, GPH, 
mobile handsets to limited number of subscribers, who were registered before 
MSC at Agra, are being used in the MTRC system. 
3. The operation of trains over Indian Railways are executed through 
directives contained in General and Subsidiary Rules (G&SR). Respective Zonal 
Railways issue amendments to G&SR to cater to local variations. The provision  
for MTRC over NCR was incorporated in G&SR through Amendment issued (4 
December 2013), which provided that GSM MTRC, Tetra based mobile 
communication; trunking radio and CTCSS VHF are prescribed as a secured 
means of communication in regard to communicati on between station Master 
and Loco Pilot. The amendment further provides that wherever secured means 
of communication are not available, the loco pilot shall be advised through a 
written memo. Provision of MTRC through this amendment  showed that MTRC 
system is prescribed as a standby system for communication between loco pilot 
and station master, whereas controllers, guards, maintainer and others are not 
included in the amendment to G&SR for communication through MTRC. 
Thus, MTRC system is not being used wi th its full potentialities and objectives. 
G&SR prescribes its use as a supplementary communication to Wi -Fi Based 
communication. This is based on feature of MTRC where communication is 
recorded and is retrievable.  However, since this aspect of MTRC is not  working 
at present, the MTRC system in the section cannot be used for the purpose. 
4. The basic features of GSM -R
173 allows various users to make point to 
point calls, groups of users to receive common information and make calls 
within/among the groups, all ows a user or an application to be reached by 
means of a number, which identifies the relevant function and not the physical 
terminal, provides the routing of mobile originated calls to the correct controller 
e.g. relative to the geographic area  and allows resource pre-emption for priority 
calls. 
                                                           
172HLR contains pertinent user information including address, account status and preferences. It interacts with the MSC 
which is a switch used for call control and processing.  
173 As defined in Chapter 18 of Indian Railway Telecom Manual  

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 5
136
Chapter 5 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 
136 
To ascertain the extent of utilization and benefit of MTRC system on the above 
two sections, Audit collected feedback from 19 users/maintainers (consisting 10 
of running staff (Loco Pilot), 03 maintainers (Technici an and Engineers)  and six 
others (control staff and Station Masters ) by way of their opinion/experience.  
Audit observed that 
 More than 90 per cent users were having ordinary mobile set or other type 
of simple equipment. 
 All the MTRC system users are using only normal calling facility just like CUG 
calling system and were not acquainted with features of MTRC system in 
operation. 
 90 per cent of running staff and 11 per cent of other staff users expressed 
constraints over availability of signal strength and la ck of connectivity as the 
main problem of MTRC system.  
 All running staff have problem in registration /deregistration. The use of 
handsets in place of cab radios leads to requirement of registration / 
deregistration. 
 No user or maintainer had been provided any training regarding use / 
maintenance of MTRC system.  
As such, none of the users are in a position to use MTRC system for any purpose 
except as a standby to Wi-Fi system (Communication System in existence for the 
purpose at present ). The crew on Indian Railways also have another stand by 
system for communication in form of Closed User Group (Communication 
facility) provided through a private telecom service provider. 
Thus, defects and deficiencies in the MTRC system at the time of taking over, 
subsequent defects of MSC/Agra, failure in communication retrieval, absence 
of cab radios in the locomotives, absence of repair facilities and non -
availability of an AMC have led to the sub -optimal utilization of MTRC system. 
The expenditure of  
` 37.62 crore on impl ementation of MTRC project in 
Palwal-Mathura-Jhansi route remained unfruitful . Moreover, chances of 
technological obsolescence of MTRC equipment and accessories installed 10 
years back cannot be ruled out, particularly due to non -finalization of AMC as 
on date. 
5.1.4.2 Lucknow-Kanpur section 
Audit reviewed the records relating to the MTRC work of Lucknow -Kanpur 
section and noticed that 
 The above project consisting 75 RKM was planned by IRPMU in the year 
2007-08 and is an extension of Ghaziabad -Kanpur route (which is a part of 
the Ghaziabad-Mughalsarai route over NCR). 
 It was finally completed after 16 extensions granted and after a delay of 
more than six years at a cost of `4.57 crore as on 31 March 2017 . Actual 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 5
137
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 5 
 
 
137 
date of completion of this project was not fou nd on records made available 
to audit. 
 The system was offered to Northern Railway (NR) with handsets on October 
2015 by IRPMU, but the same did not materialise. The system remains 
unutilised as on date. 
 CPM/IRPMU also recorded (October 2015) in the Minutes of the Meeting to 
review the operational and maintenance issue and progress  of MTRC works 
that the system of Lucknow-Kanpur route has been commissioned, but is not 
in use . It will be come into use when the work in whole section from 
Ghaziabad-Kanpur will be completed. 
Thus, the completed portion of 75 RKM of Lucknow -Kanpur route remained 
unutilised even after incurring an expenditure of 
` 4.57 crore and after 
passage of more than eight years. 
5.1.4.3 New Delhi -Ambala-Ludhiana (Including New Delhi -Palwal se ction and 
Delhi area) 
The work was taken up in  2001-02. Though the work was completed, financial 
closing was pending. The project was commissioned in August 2013 and handed 
over Network Management organisation in November 2016 after three years. 
AMC for 29  locations of Palwal -Ludhiana section lapsed in February 2015, but 
contract for AMC for the period thereafter was finalised only in March 2017. 
However, none of the train being run in the section are using this system.  The 
system on New Delhi – Palwal section was commissioned in August 2013. 
5.1.4.4 Mughalsarai - Dhanbad (400 RKM) 
The system has been commissioned in 2006 -07 by M/s Nortel. However, the 
same is not being utilized due to the following reasons: 
 MTRC system is very sophisticated and requires hig hly expert manpower for 
its maintenance and cannot be maintained departmentally. However, as the 
company, which commissioned the system in this section, closed down in 
the year 2010, the system could not be maintained.  Due to lack of 
maintenance and want of spares etc., the system stopped working since the 
year 2013. AMC was awarded (October 2017) to M/s Nokia solution network 
Pvt. Ltd. 
 ECR Administration confirmed that a blind spot between Koderma -Gujhandi 
section (0.5 km) was reported through drive test. The concerned division has 
approached (October 2017) the AMC contractor for rectification of the 
same.  
 Out of 1150 handsets required, there w as a shortage of 1113 equipment. 
Though requisitions for the same were made by the concerned division, the 
same were yet to be received.  
Audit further observed that there was failure of connectivity on nine occasions 
during 2016 -17 for 33.62 hours between Base Station Controller and Mobile 
Services Switching Centre,  as provided by Railtel Communication India Limited  

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 5
138
Chapter 5 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 
138 
(RCIL). During 2017 -18 (up to January 2018) link failure was noticed on four 
occasions for 21.25 hours. Thus, though commissioned ten years back, the 
system was not being utilised. 
5.1.4.5 Dhanbad - Howrah (270 RKM) 
The system was commissioned in (22 Janu ary 2007), but not operational as the 
company (M/s Nortel -OEM), which commissioned the system in this section, 
closed down in the year 2010, the system could not be maintained. MSC at 
Kolkata is not working and MSC (proposed) at Tundla is required to be r elocated 
to Kolkata. The system is, thus, not being utilised. 
5.1.4.6 Status of completed part project  
Audit reviewed the records relating to the MTRC work of Ghaziabad -Kanpur 
section and noticed that 
 The above project consisting 410 RKM was planned by IR PMU to be 
completed in the year 2002-03.   
 Etawah-Aligarh consisting of 170 RKM was completed by M /s Ansaldo Signal 
Consortium in November 2013 without taking up any work from Ghaziabad 
to Aligarh and from Tundla to Kanpur . This middle section remained 
switched off upto March 2016 . Later on, it was offered to Allahabad Division 
with handsets and SIM for use in October 2016 . But due to defect in working 
of MSC at Agra, the system remains unutilised as on date . MSC at Agra is the 
home location register for al l subscribers of NCR and no MTRC system over 
NCR cannot be put to use without the removal of defect in the MSC at Agra .  
The alternate is to procure, install and commission another MSC. 
 The expenditure on the above project was incurred to the extent of  ` 47.90 
crore as of March 2017 without any utilisation so far. 
 NCR also incurred an expenditure of ` 12.00 crore on procurement of items 
including OPH handsets for cab radio, cab radio hardware and software, etc. 
lying unutilized since 2011 at Tundla Depot. 
Thus, the completed portion of 170  RKM on Ghaziabad -Kanpur section also 
remained unutilised, despite incurring an expenditure of 
` 47.90 crore. 
Thus, despite the fact that the MTRC system can be best utilised when it is 
implemented seamlessly on the complet e intended routes, the MTRC system 
has not been implemented in full stretches. Wherever implemented, the same is 
not being utilised due to deficient support system in terms of maintenance 
contracts and faulty Mobile Service Switching Centre at Agra  and Kol kata and 
non-availability of cab radios in the locomotives. The expenditure of ` 181.73 
crore incurred on MTRC system so far has become unfruitful. In this regard, 
Audit noticed that Executive Director of Signal Directorate /Railway Board in 
2002-03, proposed to the Chairman Railway Board and all the works 
sanctioned/processed for sanction may be dropped as the experience in this 
regard on sections where this was provided has been extremely discouraging . 
Member Electrical/Railway Board opined that arrangemen t of VHF sets and 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 5
139
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 5 
 
 
139 
walkie-talkie sets to driver and guard may serve as an interim arrangement, 
which at best can provide simple and limited communication in stationary and 
low speed mode. The view of Member Electrical was agreed to by the Chairman 
Railway B oard. Thus, there is a need to review the policy in terms of its 
requirement and its relevance in the present scenario. 
Audit recommends that a full scale review of the MTRC projects may be taken 
up by the Railway Board and completed within a reasonable ti me frame. Till 
such time all fresh procurements and agreements related to MTRC may be put 
on hold . This may exclude agreements /tenders which are necessary to 
maintain the health of existing assets . A road map indicating activities, time 
lines, stake holder  identification with role assignment may be prepared, 
addressing issues of change in technology, support system and skill 
requirement etc. India has undergone a telecom revolution in the last decade 
and Railway administration should consider if the require ment of secured 
communication envisaged through MTRC could be met through specialized 
telecom providers (existing in India) in place of creating an independent 
telecom infrastructure for MTRC within IR. 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board  on 2 February 2018; 
their reply is yet to be received (28 February 2018). 
5.2 North Central Railway (NCR): Unwarranted procurement of Operational 
Purpose Handsets and General Purpose Handsets  led to blockage of capital of 
` 17.77 crore 
Railway Administration procured costly Operational Purpose Handsets (OPH) and 
General Purpose Handsets (GPH) equipment worth ` 17.77 crore without proper 
and realistic need analysis and hence these could not be utilised. Q uotes were 
called from the firm without any basis and  rational. The Tender Committee went 
out of its way to obtain documentation pertaining to the earlier tender from 
RDSO, to prove the eligibility of the firm for the current tender.  
Mobile Train Radio Communication (MTRC) is a dynamic and technologically 
avant-garde highly advanced system based on the Global System for Mobile 
Communications-Railway (GSM-R) technology. The system is expected to play an 
intrinsic role in minimizing train accidents by aiding effective communication.  
Operational Purpose Handset s (OPH) and General Purpose Handsets (GPH) are 
mobile equipment used for communication by drivers and for general  use by 
railway personnel involved in  train operations, such  as guards, shunting and 
track side maintenance staff (Engineering, Signal & Teleco m and Electrical for 
Railway Electrification  and Security patrols ) respectively, under MTRC system. 
This equipment function after registration/ de -registration in the specific Mobile 
Switching Centre (MSC)  which is a telephone exchange that makes the 
connection between mobile users within the network, from  mobile users to the 
public switched telephone network and from mobile users to  other mobile 
networks. 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 5
140
Chapter 5 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 
140 
Indian Railways procures these handsets either through a composite package of 
the MTRC project  including design, manufacture, supply, installation and 
commissioning of the whole project or through procurement as a non -stock 
item based on cross acceptance approval 174 of Research Designs and Standards 
Organisation (RDSO) . OPH equipment has  two SIM cards for ea sy switch 
between Global System for Mobile Communication for Railways (GSM -R) and 
public subscription in order to achieve effective and efficient communication 
under MTRC system. GPH equipment has single SIM card system. 
Audit reviewed the records of procurement of these OPH and GPH equipment in 
NCR. It was  seen that on the basis of indents  received (October 2014 and 
February 2015) from Jhansi Division for requirement of 507 OPH and 1000 GPH 
handsets for their usage in MTRC system over New Delhi - Jhansi sec tion, NCR 
Administration (Controller of Stores, Allahabad), through open tender mode 
placed (July 2016) Purchase Order (PO) on M/s Vista Information System (VISPL). 
The contractual price for supply of 507 OPH and 1000 GPH was  ` 17.77 crore175 
@ ` 1,36,100 and ` 74,599 for OPH and GPH respectively. The stipulated 
delivery schedule of start within two months and to be completed within four 
months thereafter. Audit observed that deficiencies in the process of 
assessment and procurement of these handsets. Detailed observations are given 
below:  
A. Assessment of requirements of handsets 
Jhansi division placed indents (October 2014 and February 2015) for 
requirement of 507 OPH and 1000 GPH handsets for their usage in MTRC system 
over New Delhi - Jhansi section. It was also seen that during the review of work 
of MTRC project of Jhansi -Bina section, Railway Board decided (October 2015)  
not to procure costly GPH /OPH and stated only to use ordinary GSM handsets 
with single SIM architecture in view of the current status of  implementation of 
MTRC and acceptability of MTRC by users . They further suggested that 
introduction of special purpose OPHs can be considered as a step for value 
addition after the system gets wide acceptance and the staff become familiar. 
The status of requirement of OPH/GPH against their actual utilisation as on June 
2017 was a follows: 
Table 5.3 - Status of requirement of OPH/GPH against their actual utilisation as on June 2017  
Name of Division of 
NCR 
Modified 
Requirement 
Remarks 
OPH GPH 
Jhansi   125 944 Jhansi Division projected its requirement based on 25 
per cent additional quantity towards spares. 
Agra  382 415 Agra Division projected its requirement based on 25 
percent additional quantity towards spares but 
without essentiality certificate and finance vetting. 
                                                           
174 Cross-acceptance approval of a product is status when it has been accepted by one Authority and is acceptable to 
other Authorities without the necessity for further assessment. 
175 ` 14.38 crore for supply and` 3.39 crore towards two year maintenance charges after three year warranty period 
Chapter 5 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 
140 
Indian Railways procures these handsets either through a composite package of 
the MTRC project  including design, manufacture, supply, installation and 
commissioning of the whole project or through procurement as a non -stock 
item based on cross acceptance approval 174 of Research Designs and Standards 
Organisation (RDSO) . OPH equipment has  two SIM cards for ea sy switch 
between Global System for Mobile Communication for Railways (GSM -R) and 
public subscription in order to achieve effective and efficient communication 
under MTRC system. GPH equipment has single SIM card system. 
Audit reviewed the records of procurement of these OPH and GPH equipment in 
NCR. It was  seen that on the basis of indents  received (October 2014 and 
February 2015) from Jhansi Division for requirement of 507 OPH and 1000 GPH 
handsets for their usage in MTRC system over New Delhi - Jhansi sec tion, NCR 
Administration (Controller of Stores, Allahabad), through open tender mode 
placed (July 2016) Purchase Order (PO) on M/s Vista Information System (VISPL). 
The contractual price for supply of 507 OPH and 1000 GPH was  ` 17.77 crore175 
@ ` 1,36,100 and ` 74,599 for OPH and GPH respectively. The stipulated 
delivery schedule of start within two months and to be completed within four 
months thereafter. Audit observed that deficiencies in the process of 
assessment and procurement of these handsets. Detailed observations are given 
below:  
A. Assessment of requirements of handsets 
Jhansi division placed indents (October 2014 and February 2015) for 
requirement of 507 OPH and 1000 GPH handsets for their usage in MTRC system 
over New Delhi - Jhansi section. It was also seen that during the review of work 
of MTRC project of Jhansi -Bina section, Railway Board decided (October 2015)  
not to procure costly GPH /OPH and stated only to use ordinary GSM handsets 
with single SIM architecture in view of the current status of  implementation of 
MTRC and acceptability of MTRC by users . They further suggested that 
introduction of special purpose OPHs can be considered as a step for value 
addition after the system gets wide acceptance and the staff become familiar. 
The status of requirement of OPH/GPH against their actual utilisation as on June 
2017 was a follows: 
Table 5.3 - Status of requirement of OPH/GPH against their actual utilisation as on June 2017  
Name of Division of 
NCR 
Modified 
Requirement 
Remarks 
OPH GPH 
Jhansi   125 944 Jhansi Division projected its requirement based on 25 
per cent additional quantity towards spares. 
Agra  382 415 Agra Division projected its requirement based on 25 
percent additional quantity towards spares but 
without essentiality certificate and finance vetting. 
                                                           
174 Cross-acceptance approval of a product is status when it has been accepted by one Authority and is acceptable to 
other Authorities without the necessity for further assessment. 
175 ` 14.38 crore for supply and` 3.39 crore towards two year maintenance charges after three year warranty period 
Chapter 5 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 
140 
Indian Railways procures these handsets either through a composite package of 
the MTRC project  including design, manufacture, supply, installation and 
commissioning of the whole project or through procurement as a non -stock 
item based on cross acceptance approval 174 of Research Designs and Standards 
Organisation (RDSO) . OPH equipment has  two SIM cards for ea sy switch 
between Global System for Mobile Communication for Railways (GSM -R) and 
public subscription in order to achieve effective and efficient communication 
under MTRC system. GPH equipment has single SIM card system. 
Audit reviewed the records of procurement of these OPH and GPH equipment in 
NCR. It was  seen that on the basis of indents  received (October 2014 and 
February 2015) from Jhansi Division for requirement of 507 OPH and 1000 GPH 
handsets for their usage in MTRC system over New Delhi - Jhansi sec tion, NCR 
Administration (Controller of Stores, Allahabad), through open tender mode 
placed (July 2016) Purchase Order (PO) on M/s Vista Information System (VISPL). 
The contractual price for supply of 507 OPH and 1000 GPH was  ` 17.77 crore175 
@ ` 1,36,100 and ` 74,599 for OPH and GPH respectively. The stipulated 
delivery schedule of start within two months and to be completed within four 
months thereafter. Audit observed that deficiencies in the process of 
assessment and procurement of these handsets. Detailed observations are given 
below:  
A. Assessment of requirements of handsets 
Jhansi division placed indents (October 2014 and February 2015) for 
requirement of 507 OPH and 1000 GPH handsets for their usage in MTRC system 
over New Delhi - Jhansi section. It was also seen that during the review of work 
of MTRC project of Jhansi -Bina section, Railway Board decided (October 2015)  
not to procure costly GPH /OPH and stated only to use ordinary GSM handsets 
with single SIM architecture in view of the current status of  implementation of 
MTRC and acceptability of MTRC by users . They further suggested that 
introduction of special purpose OPHs can be considered as a step for value 
addition after the system gets wide acceptance and the staff become familiar. 
The status of requirement of OPH/GPH against their actual utilisation as on June 
2017 was a follows: 
Table 5.3 - Status of requirement of OPH/GPH against their actual utilisation as on June 2017  
Name of Division of 
NCR 
Modified 
Requirement 
Remarks 
OPH GPH 
Jhansi   125 944 Jhansi Division projected its requirement based on 25 
per cent additional quantity towards spares. 
Agra  382 415 Agra Division projected its requirement based on 25 
percent additional quantity towards spares but 
without essentiality certificate and finance vetting. 
                                                           
174 Cross-acceptance approval of a product is status when it has been accepted by one Authority and is acceptable to 
other Authorities without the necessity for further assessment. 
175 ` 14.38 crore for supply and` 3.39 crore towards two year maintenance charges after three year warranty period 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 5
141
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 5 
 
 
141 
Table 5.3 - Status of requirement of OPH/GPH against their actual utilisation as on June 2017  
Name of Division of 
NCR 
Modified 
Requirement 
Remarks 
OPH GPH 
Others (Returned to NR 
against taken on loan) 
--- --- No projection for return to Northern Railway was 
reflected in the demand. 
Total quantity procured 507 1000 The indent for GPH was adjusted to 1000 against 
demand for 1359 handsets 
Audit observed that 
 As of March 2017, 301 OPH and 321 GPH valuing ` 4.03 crore were lying idle 
at Tundla Depot since 2011. Audit noticed that Jhansi Division had not taken 
into account the availability of these items, while sending the indents for 
procurement of OPH/GPH in October 2014 and February 2015. While vetting 
the proposal, Finance division of Jhansi division suggested (July/August 
2015) a reassessment of requirement afresh. No action was taken on this 
suggestion of Finance by the Signal and Telecommunication Department.  
 The requirement and issue/ distribution was not consistent at Jhansi and 
Agra Division. 
 The additional 25 per cent spare requirement was made without any basis by 
Jhansi Division. 
 The requirement towards return of handsets taken on l oan from NR was not 
projected earlier. Moreover, the model of 100 OPH and 285 GPH returned to 
NR has been found to be different from that received from NR. 
Thus, procurement of OPH/GPH was done without any realistic assessment of 
requirement. NCR Administr ation in their reply stated (June 2017) that t he 
requirement of OPH/GPH was justified as all indents of Jhansi Division were 
approved by competent authority and vetted by finance. The stock from Tundla 
Depot was not available for diversion to Palwal -Jhansi section as it is for 
Ghaziabad-Mughalsarai section being a separate work and is under 
commissioning. However, the Signal and Telecommunication Department did 
not undertake any reassessment of requirement as suggested by the Finance. 
Subsequently, it was s een that all these procured handsets could not be utilised 
and were lying idle. 
B. Assessment of reasonability of rates  
In response to this tender of March 2016, only one of offer was received. Review 
of the process of assessment of reasonability of rates  received by the Tender 
Committee (TC) was done in audit. It was seen that 
 Jhansi Division estimated the price of OPH at ` 1,36,211 and GPH at ` 74,724 
based on the accepted rate (April 2012) of works contract of Kolkata Metro,  
where M/s VISPL supplied 12 OPH and 22 GPH  in October 2014. The TC did 
not correlate the quantity of meager supply in Metro Railway case involved in 
the total contract including system design, planning, supply, installation, 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 5
142
Chapter 5 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 
142 
testing and commissioning of GSM-R based MTRC. Besides, rates of individual 
items in a works contract should not be taken as last accepted rates where 
consolidated rate for the entire work was accepted and individual items have 
be potential of being compensated by other items through lower rates for 
those items. To that extent, the decision of TC to use the rates quoted in a 
contract in Metro Railway, Kolkata was not judicious. 
 The corresponding rates of handsets were also available with IRPMU for 
2012-13 ( ` 66,915 and ` 29,194 for OPH and GPH respectively) of a 
discharged tender for Palwal -Mathura-Jhansi section. The tender was 
discharged on the grounds of non -compliance with the updated EIRENE
176 
specification by the bidder and the OPH/GPH procured were lying idle in open 
condition/ unutilized supplied by the same firm for the past one year.  
 NCR Administration issued open t enders for the purchase of OPH/ GPH 
instead of global tender without recording any reason and proper justification 
for non-issue of global tenders. As the item was not available in India and was 
to be imported, the reason for floating an open tender was not justified. 
Thus, estimates were not arrived at realistically and reasonability of the rates 
offered was not assessed. NCR Administration in their reply stated (June 2017) 
that the cost est imates were based on the Last Accepted Rates  (LAR) of 2012 of 
Metro Railway and were appropriate as the rates of individual items are also 
assessed in works contract as per Railway Board letter (November 1972 ). The 
rates of discharged tender of 2012 -13 wer e not reasonable to be compared 
(being a part of discharged tender). 
However, the rates of April 2012 (Metro Railway’s works contract) were only for 
12 OPH and 22 GPH  and were for the entire schedule of work
177 and it did not 
include acceptance of rates of i ndividual items. Further, in case of this tender 
(June 2016), for assessment of reasonability of the price offered, the railways 
had the option to use RBI indices, with 2011 -12 rates along with the change in 
exchange rate between Euro and Rupee. However, t he same was not done. This 
was crucial as only a single response had been received. As regards, not 
considering the rates of a discharged tender, it is stated that the reason for 
discharging of the tender was not the reasonability of rates but change in 
specifications and as such, these rates could have been used as a reference. 
C. Undue benefit to the supplier 
On 25 November 2011, RDSO gave a certificate for Prototype Approval on Cross 
Acceptance basis for OPH (Model TiGR 350R ) and GPH (Model TiGR 155R ) of 
Sagemcom make issued to M /s NSN for IRPMU contract
178  dated February 
2006. The Certificate of RDSO was with reference to the products meeting 
specification (EIRENE) as prevalent at that time . The prototype clearance was 
                                                           
176 European Integrated Railway Radio Enhanced Network 
177 Total 23 items including supply of Trans Rate Adaptor, Supply of base station controller, supply of base station 
transceivers units etc.  
178Against contract no.IRPMU/W/01/KfW/03-04/CA dated 01.02.2006 of IRPMU  

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 5
143
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 5 
 
 
143 
valid in terms of this certificate till su ch time as there was no change in 
specification, design, process, raw material, components and source of raw 
material/components or in software whichever is earlier . Subsequently, RDSO 
issued its own specifications179, which were applicable at the time of issue of the 
tender for the procurement of OPH /GPH of March 2016 . These RDSO 
specifications were stated to have been issued based on EIRENE specifications, 
which had also undergone revisions between 2011 and 2016. 
In December 2015, M/s VISPL sought clarifica tion180 from RDSO as exclusive 
distributor of M /s Sierra Wireless (earlier known as Sagemcom)  in India that 
both the models and make i.e. OPH TiGR 350R and GPH TiGR 155R have Cross 
Acceptance from RDSO . In response RDSO issued a letter 181 to M/s VISPL, 
informing VISPL about Prototype Approval (on the basis of Cross Approval ) of 
OPH and GPH granted to M/s NSN. 
Audit observed that 
 Jhansi Division took a budgetary quotation from M/s VISPL on 20 October 
2014, which was just one day before sending the indent to NCR.  The rational 
for taking the quote from the firm was not on record. As M/s VISPL was 
neither an OEM nor VISPL had any cross acceptance approval for this item 
from RDSO, the basis of taking a budgetary quotation from M/s VISPL was 
not justified. 
 The TC acce pted the letter of RDSO dated 04  January 2016 to M /s VISPL as 
meeting the requirement of Cross Acceptance. Though this letter was not 
submitted by the bidder (M/s VISPL ), it was given cognizance by a Tender 
Committee Member after obtaining the same from RDSO. The letter of RDSO 
clearly stated that Prototype Approval for the product was specific to the 
IRPMU contract and further Prototype Approval for other railways require d 
dispensation and the same could be issued only if make, model and version 
were not c hanged. This was thus, not a Cross Acceptance Certificate, which 
could meet the eligibility of tender terms in this tender. 
 Further the information sought by M/s VISPL was relating to an earlier 
discharged tender and not the current tender. The Prototype A pproval on 
Cross Acceptance basis (November 2011) was given to M/s NSN and was not 
applicable to M/s Sierra Wireless (the OEM) or M/s VISPL.  
 TC however, interpreted the Prototype Approval given to M/s NSN on the 
basis of the following documents:  
o Certificate of Prototype Approval on Cross Acceptance basis issued to 
M/s NSN was for the model & make quoted by M/s VISPL. 
                                                           
179latest being RDSO/SPN/TC/88/2015 Rev .1.0 
180Letter no. VISTA/RDSO/Handset/01 dated 28.12.2015 of M/s VISPL 
181Letter no .STT/WL/MTRC/503/Misc/.Vol.IV dated 04.01.2016 of RDSO 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 5
144
Chapter 5 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 
144 
o Photo copy of M/s Sierra Wireless (OEM) certificate (dated 11 September 
2015) stating that related business of Sagemcom has been acqui red by 
Sierra Wireless in August 2012. 
o Photocopy of letter (dated 18 March 2016) by Sales Director of Sierra 
Wireless to Controller of Stores (CoS), NCR stating that M/s VSPL would 
represent Sierra Wireless in the said tender182. 
Through this process, a cert ificate issued to M/s NSN specific to an earlier 
IRPMU contract, was linked and taken as valid for a different contract for M/s 
VISPL and its OEM . Also, Cross Acceptance over Ghaziabad -Mughalsarai MTRC 
project of IRPMU never evolved to a position, where it s performance evaluation 
could have led to any satisfactory assessment made about M /s NSN or the 
equipment or its use over other railways in other contracts. 
Audit further noticed that 
 In the first tender 183 (December 2015), no tenderer responded and 
subsequently fresh tender 184 was issued in March 2016 with certain 
modifications, without seeking RDSO approval. 
 The terms and conditions of the subsequent tender were modified in favour 
of supplier M/s VSPL. The condition of ‘office establishment of OEM in India 
with maintenance spare part support’ was changed to ‘office establishment 
of OEM in India without maintenance/spare part support’. 
 A letter of authorization by M /s Sierra Wireless (OEM) for Annual 
Maintenance Support in favour of M /s VISPL was submitted by M/s VISPL in 
its bid . The same was accepted by the TC as meeting the prescribed 
requirement in the tender .However, issuance of a letter of authorization by 
OEM in favour of M /s VISPL did not establish availability of appropriate 
Authorized Maintenance Support System in India. No details of maintenance 
documents in support being provided by M /s VISPL or OEM in India were 
sought by the TC.  
The above indicates undue favour granted to M/s VISPL by the NCR 
Administration. Not only quotes were called from the firm without any basis and 
rational, the TC went out of its way to obtain documentation pertaining to the 
earlier tender from RDSO, to prove its eligibility for the current tender. 
Also, in view of EIRENE specifications having undergone several revisions, th e 
Cross Acceptance of the OPH/GPH was no longer valid as changes in EIRENE and 
RDSO specification implies changes in specification for the OPH/GPH . Thus, 
there was no assurance about the consistency of OPH /GPH with the 
specifications of both EIRENE as well as cross acceptance. 
 
                                                           
182  Tender no. 50155116-A 
183 Tender no. 50.15.5116 dated 10.12.2015 
184Tender no. 50.15.5116A issued on 11.03.2016 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 5
145
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 5 
 
 
145 
D. Utilisation of OPH/GPH supplied  
During the analysis of the status of utilisation of procured OPH and GPH, Audit 
observed that 457 OPH and 955 GPH remained unutilised till July 2017 as given 
below: 
Audit analyzed the reasons of non -utilization of OPH/GPH.  The OPH/GPH 
equipment procured for Jhansi and Agra Divisions are  required to be registered 
in the MSC placed at Agra for functioning under MTRC system.  It was, however, 
observed that no new subscriber of OPH/GPH is possible at MSC/ Agra due to its 
defective and non -functional condition. Further, there is no AMC in place since 
July 2014 to address the same.  
Thus, it can be seen that 457 pieces of OPH and 955 pieces of GPH remained 
unutilized as of July 2017.The objective of purchasing the handsets at the cost of 
` 17.77 crore also remains to be achieved. 
The matter was brought t o the notice of Railway Board on 16 October 2017, 
their reply has yet to be received (28 February 2018).  
5.3 South Eastern Railway (SER): Avoidable liability on account of Spectrum 
Charges due to failure to review the use of Walkie Talkie sets 
Walkie Talkie sets are used in Railways as an emergency communication tool 
for which Railways have to pay spectrum charges to Department of 
Telecommunication. Consequent to proliferation of CUG mobile phone, Railway 
Board directed Zonal Railways to review the use of Walkie Talkie sets. Audit 
observed that SER Administration did not review the use of Walkie Talkie sets to 
declare the unusable and non -repairable sets as condemned. This has led to 
avoidable liability of  ` 30.36 crore ( ` 21.60 crore on working sets and ` 8.76 
crore on non -working sets) towards payment of Spectrum charges. As SER 
Administration has not paid the spectrum charges due as yet, there would also 
be liable to pay ` 20.29 crore towards surcharge on delay payment of spectrum 
charges. 
Railways are using Walkie Talkie sets as an emergency communication tool since 
long. Ministry of Communication, Government of India decided (April 2004) to 
Table 5.4 - status of utilisation of procured OPH and GPH 
S.no  Agra Jhansi NR Total 
1. OPH issued 207 200 100 507 
2. OPH distributed 205 50 0 255 
3. OPH undistributed 02 150 100 252 
4. OPH utilized 0 50 0 50 
5. OPH unutilized 207 150 100 457 
6. GPH issued 415 300 285 1000 
7. GPH distributed 45 0 0 45 
8. GPH undistributed 370 300 285 955 
9. GPH utilized 45 0 0 45 
10. GPH unutilized 255 300 300 955 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 5
146
Chapter 5 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 
146 
levy spectrum charges (License fee and Royalty) from all wireless users including 
Central Government Ministries/ Departmen ts from 1 st June 2004. On the basis 
of reference made from the Railway Board, Ministry of Communication and IT 
and Law and Justice, Government of India had made (December 2006) a 
reference to the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance on levy of 
spectrum charges. Ministry of Finance in their response stated that spectrum 
being scarce economic resources should be appropriately priced so that they are 
optimally utilized and the users should pay spectrum charges. Railway Board 
communicated (Octobe r 2007) that since levy of spectrum charges is a 
government decision, all Ministries of Government of India including Railways 
should follow it until decided otherwise. 
As per the revised spectrum tariffs issued by DOT in March 2012,  ` 12500 as 
Royalty an d ` 250 as Licence fees per annum is being levied for every VHF 
Walkie Talkie set being used/procured on Indian Railways. In September 2014, 
Railway Board instructed for critical review of the number of VHF Walkie Talkie 
sets in use and bring it down to re alistic levels. Accordingly, Chief Signal and 
Telecom Engineer, South Eastern Railway requested (September 2014) the 
departmental heads to review use of the Walkie -talkie sets consequent on 
proliferation of CUG mobile phones. Subsequently, Member Electrica l, Railway 
Board intimated (February 2016) to the General Manager, South Eastern Railway 
that the issue to re -visit the requirement to pay spectrum charges by Indian 
Railways for VHF Walkie Talkie sets which are used purely to meet its 
operational requirement was taken up at appropriate level by the Railway Board 
with the Ministry of Communication and Information Technology (MoCIT), but 
the possibility of reduction in charges was remote as other Ministries including 
para military forces had paid similar cha rges. It was instructed to review the 
requirement of VHF Walkie Talkie sets and condemn unusable and non -
repairable sets to avoid payment of spectrum charges on those sets. 
Accordingly, the General Manager, South Eastern Railway instructed (February 
2016) the Divisional Railway Managers (DRMs) of four divisions of South Eastern 
Railway to act on the above lines. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that South Eastern Railway Administration had 
never thoroughly reviewed the actual number of Walkie Talkie sets requir ed for 
emergency communication or to declare the unusable and non -repairable 
Walkie Talkie sets as condemned for avoiding payment of spectrum charges on 
those sets. Except in two occasions (
` 2.02 crore in July 2015 for 1581 numbers 
of 5 watt Walkie Talkie sets and ` 1.21 crore  in February 2017 for 946 numbers 
of 5 watt Walkie Talkie sets), South Eastern Railway Administration never paid 
the spectrum charges at the time of new procurement as required.   
Scrutiny in Audit further revealed that as on Decembe r 2015, South Eastern 
Railway was holding about thirteen thousand Walkie Talkie sets and spectrum 
charges were leviable on all those sets as none were declared condemned. As 
proper records were not maintained, Audit could collect information from 11 
out of 33 user units. It was noticed that in 11 units during 2012 -13 to 2016 -17, 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 5
147
 Report No.5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 5 
 
 
147 
4241 to 7915  5 watt Walkie Talkie sets were available in which 764 to 3064 (18 
to 39 per cent ) sets were not in working condition. Excluding the payment of  
` 3.23 crore m ade at the time of procurement of new sets, the liability of 
spectrum charges from 2012 -13 to 2016 -17 stood at  ` 30.36 crore  (` 21.60 
crore on working sets and  ` 8.76 crore on non working condition sets). In case 
of delayed payment of spectrum charges, the re is also provision by MoCIT for 
levy of surcharge at the rate of 2 per cent per month or part thereof for delayed 
renewal of licence.  As SER Administration  is not paying the spectrum charges, 
surcharge has also accrued on the outstanding amount.   
Thus, failure of SER Administration to review the use of Walkie Talkie sets 
resulted in avoidable liability of  ` 30.36 crore towards payment of Spectrum 
charges (` 21.60 crore on working sets and ` 8.76 crore was on account of sets 
not in working condition). As the spectrum charges have not been paid by them, 
they would be liable to pay surcharge of ` 20.29 crore as well. 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board on 20 December 2017, 
their reply has yet to be received (28 February 2018).  
 
 
 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 6
148
Chapter 6 Report No.6 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 
148 
Chapter 6 
Rolling Stock  
At Railway Board level, Member Rolling Stock is overall in-charge of Mechanical 
Department, including Workshops and Production U nits (other than 
locomotives). The works related to EMU/MEMU, and electrical maintenance of 
all coaching stock is also the responsibility of the Member Rolling Stock. 
At Zonal level,  the Chief Mechanical Engineer (CME) is responsible for overall 
supervision and maintenance of all coaches, freight sto ck etc. Chief Workshop 
Engineer (CWE) is overall in-charge of the functioning of workshops dealing with 
maintenance of rolling stock and related items. Production Units  are managed 
independently by General Managers reporting to Member Rolling Stock at 
Railway Board.   
The total revenue expenditure on repair and maintenance of rolling stock 
(carriage and wagons  and plant and equipment ) in workshop  and operating 
expenses on rolling stock an d equipment  were ` 14515.51 crore185 and  
` 11681.82 crore186 respectively during the year 201 6-17. Further, capital 
expenditure in production units of coaches during the year 201 6-17 was  
` 295.08 crore187. During the year, apart from regula r audit of vouchers and 
tenders, 664 offices of the Mechanical Department were inspected.   
This chapter includes  one individual paragraph highlighting receipt of wagons 
‘not due for POH’ in Dahod Workshop. 
                                                           
185 Grant no.06 – Repair and maintenance of carriages and wagons for 2016-17 and Minor Head 300 of Grant no.07 – 
Repair and maintenance of Plant and Equipment 
186 Grant no.08 – Operating expenses – Rolling stock and equipment for 2016-17 
187 ICF, Chennai, RCF, Kapurthala and MCF, Rae Bareli 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 6
149
 Report No.6 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 6 
 
 
149 
 
6.1 Western Railway (WR): Receipt of wagons not due for POH in Dahod 
Workshop led to detention and consequent loss of earning capacity of these 
wagons 
Only wagons due for POH should be sent to the workshops. These should be 
accepted, after due inspection and approval by the workshop staff. However, 
from June 2013 to March 2 017, 434 wagons not due for POH were received in 
Dahod workshop. Inspection and approval was not being carried out by 
workshop staff before accepting the wagons for POH. These wagons hindered 
operational activities as they occupied track inside the worksho p and were 
returned back to the Zonal Railways without carrying any work on them  after 
being detained at the workshop for long periods . This led to avoidable loss of 
potential earning capacity of ` 16.46 crore due to detention. 
Periodical Overhaul (POH) of  wagons received from own and other Railways is 
undertaken in Dahod Workshop of Western Railway. Following instructions have 
been issued from time to time, regarding procedure to be followed before 
sending wagons for POH in workshops: 
(i) As per Railway Board’ s directives (October 1994), unloadable wagons in age 
group of 18 to 25 years with sound under frames requiring heavy repairs on 
body/floor were to be marked as ‘C’ category by Train Examiner/ Chief 
Workshop Supervisors of open line and sent for rebuilding  to Dahod, 
Jamalpur or Charbagh Workshops. 
(ii) In July 2013, Railway Board directed Chief Mechanical Engineer, Western 
Railway that POH workshops should not carry out Routine Overhaul (ROH) of 
wagons, as wagons for POH were waiting in yard. In case, such wagon s are 
sent along with POH load, the workshop should not carry ROH and turn 
them out as ‘Not Due POH’ without attention. It was also reiterated that ‘C’ 
category unloadable wagons should not be sent to workshop except when 
these are due for POH within next one year, which was revised to three 
months in May 2016. 
(iii) Chief Rolling Stock Engineer/ Freight and Operations/ Churchgate 
(CRSE/F&O/CCG) directed (January 2014) all concerned officials to follow the 
practice of accepting only such loads for rehabilitation which were inspected 
and approved by staff of Dahod Workshop. 
During scrutiny of records of Dahod Workshop, Audit noticed that unloadable 
wagons not due for POH were received regularly in the workshop in violation of 
Railway Board’s instructions of July 20 13. Audit further observed that despite 
the instructions issued by CRSE/F&O/CCG, inspection and approval was not 
being carried out by workshop staff before accepting the wagons for POH. This 
led to receipt of wagons ‘not due for POH’ and resulted in accumu lation of such 
wagons in the workshop. Such wagons were further detained due to delayed 
removal by the Traffic Department. These wagons also hindered operational 
activities as they occupied track inside the workshop. 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 6
150
Chapter 6 Report No.6 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 
150 
Audit observed that during the period f rom June 2013 to March 2017 total 434 
wagons not due for POH were received in the workshop as detailed below: 
Table 5.1 – Year wise number of wagons received not due for POH 
Year Number of wagons received not due for POH 
June 2013 to Mar 2014 30 
2014-15 0 
2015-16 278 
2016-17 126 
Total 434 
Audit noticed that  
 81 wagons were removed from the workshops after detention for more than 
30 days. 
 35 wagons were removed after delays ranging between 15 days and 30 days.  
 318 wagons not due for POH were detained up to 14 days.  
 These wagons were detained up to 1126 days in the workshops leading to 
loss of potential earnings of ` 16.46 crore. 
 Further, seven wagons which were sent back as these were ‘not due for 
POH’ were received back in the Workshop again during July 2013 to 
June2014.  
On the matter being taken up (December 2015) with Railway Administration, 
they stated (December 2015) that these wagons were offered for transfer to 
Open Line sick depots but were not taken by Traffic Department. However, the 
issue persisted as 173 wagons which were ‘not due for POH’ were detained up 
to 38 days in the Workshop during January 2016 to March 2017.  
Thus, non -compliance of the prescribed procedures/instructions, lack of 
coordination and absence of effective monitoring by the Dahod Workshop led to 
avoidable detention of wagons and consequential loss of potential earnings.  
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board on 1 September 2017. In 
reply Railway Board stated (13 November 2017) that to avoid booking of wagons 
not due for POH/ROH to Dahod workshop, instructions have been issued to all 
workshops and Open Line. They further stated that to avoid detention of 
wagons in the workshop, which have been correctly booked for POH, constraints 
such as availability of ma terial and capacity enhancement are being addressed. 
They also stated that as the ineffective percentages well within the prescribed 
limit of four per cent no loss of revenue is caused to the Railway. 
Audit is of the view that there is a need to strictly f ollow the laid down 
instructions and ensure that wagons which are not due for POH are not 
accepted by the workshop authorities. By exercising the check of inspection 
and approval, the detention to wagons could be reduced and efficiency in 
operations can be achieved.  

151
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7
 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7 
 
 
 151 
Chapter 7  
Autonomous Bodies 
There are two autonomous bodies viz., Rail Land Development Authority and 
Centre for Railway Information Systems under the control of Ministry of 
Railways. During 2016 -17, expenditure incurred by RLDA and CRIS was ` 15.58 
crore and ` 266.30 crore respectively. 
This Chapter includes one long paragraph on ‘Development of railway land for 
commercial use by Rail Land Development Authority ’. In addition , there are 
three individual paragraphs on delay in implementation of three IT pro jects by 
CRIS. 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 7
152
Chapter 7 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 152 
 
7.1 Development of railway land for commercial use by Rail Land 
Development Authority 
7.1.1 Executive Summary 
The main objective of setting up of RLDA was to generate revenue by non -tariff 
measures through commercial development of surplus  railway land. Audit 
reviewed development of 17 sites, which were entrusted to RLDA in 2007 when it 
was constituted and observed that none of these sites have been developed so 
far. Audit noticed that there were delays in engagement of consultants, delay i n 
submission of reports by the consultants, delay in taking permission from State 
Government for change of land use, deficiencies in entrustment of land to RLDA 
by the concerned Zonal Railways by providing encumbered land, identifying 
wrong site or site wi th incomplete papers etc. which resulted in non -
development of 17 sites of 166.996 acres, reviewed in Audit. Out of 17 cases 
reviewed, in only three cases developers were appointed, but commercial 
development did not take place. In two cases, the Developme nt Agreements 
could not be entered into and Letter of Acceptance had to be cancelled as the 
first instalment of lease premium was not deposited by the parties and in one 
case the Development Agreement was terminated as the Developer refused to 
take the lan d offered by RLDA in exchange of land originally identified by the 
Railway and railways had to pay back the lease premium of ` 43.12 crore along 
with interest. Thirteen of these 17 plots were planned for commercial 
development with a lease potential of ` 282.69 crore. Since being set up, RLDA 
has been able to earn ` 67.97 crore from development of Multi -Functional 
Complexes (MFCs) at railway stations, which is other than the earnings from 
commercial development of entrusted lands. As against this, expenditu re of ` 
102.29 crore has been incurred towards establishment, consultancy charges, 
advertisement etc. during 2006-07 to 2016-17. 
7.1.2 Introduction 
Rail Land Development A uthority (RLDA) is a statutory a uthority under the 
Ministry of Railways . It was set-up188 by an amendment to the Railways Act , 
1989, for the development of Railway land , as entrusted by the Central 
Government for commercial use and for the purpose of generating revenue by 
non-tariff measures. The main functions of RLDA are  
(i) to prepare scheme(s) for use of railway land in conformity with the provisions 
of this Act, 
(ii) t o develop railway land for commercial use as may be entrusted by the 
Central Government for the purpose of generating revenue by non -traffic 
measures, 
                                                           
188RLDA was constituted in terms of Extraordinary Gaz ette Notification dated 31.10.2006, as amended on 05.01.2007. 
Rules for functioning of RLDA were published in the Extraordinary Gazette dated 04.01.2007. 

153
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7
 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7 
 
 
 153 
(iii) t o develop and provide consultancy, construction or management service 
and to undertake operation in India in relation to the d evelopment of land and 
property; and  
(iv) t o carry out any other work or function as may be entrusted to it by the 
Central Government, by order in writing.  
Commercial development of vacant railway land by RLDA involves the following: 
 Inspection of the sites entrusted by Railway to ensure that these are free 
from any encumbrances or encroachments and suitable for commercial 
development. 
 Appointment of real estate Consultant to get the survey of each plot of land 
for its valuation and to identify the potential use of the land to provide 
maximum revenue. 
 Calling for an expression of interest/request for proposals from developers 
for commercial development through Public Private Partnership (PPP), and 
 Selecting a suitable developer based on specific technical and financial 
parameters, after seeking financial bids from shortlisted developers. 
Executive Board of RLDA consists of Member Engineering at Railway Board as 
ex-officio Chairman, one Vice -Chairman and four Members i.e.  Member/ 
Finance, Member/  Planning, Rail Traffic Co -ordination, Member/  Planning, 
Infrastructure Development and Member/Real Estate and Urban Planning. Each 
member is assisted by a General Manager, Joint General Manager and other 
subordinates. Ministry of Railways provides grant to meet the administrative 
and establishment expenses
189of RLDA. The entire earnings generated from 
development of railway land are transferred to the Ministry. Audit conducted 
this study to assess the extent to which RLDA was able to achieve  its main 
objective of development of railway land for commercial use to generate 
revenue by non -tariff measures. Audit reviewed the records of R LDA in respect 
of 20 commercial sites entrusted by the Railways since year 2007. 
Audit Findings 
7.1.3 Non-development of sites handed over to RLDA 
Indian Railways had entrusted 49 commerc ial sites190 to RLDA during the period 
from 2007 to 2017. Out of 49 sites, 
 Eight sites were  found encumbered i.e. proper land papers were not 
available for some of them, there were encroachments on some of the sites, 
in respect of some sites there were litig ation going on or State Government 
clearance were pending in some cases. 
                                                           
189Annual expenditure of RLDA was ` 12.75 crore and ` 15.58 crore in 2015-16 and 2016-17 respectively. Annual Income 
of RLDA was `13.14 lakh and `15.37 lakh in 2015-16 and 2016-17 respectively 
190Commercial sites are such Railways lands which are not near Railway station and are required to be developed by 
developer for commercial use i.e. Shopping Malls, Multiplex- Cinemas and other commercial purpose etc. 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 7
154
Chapter 7 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 154 
 One site  at Jaipur in NWR was proposed for de -entrustment to Railway 
Board, as NWR had proposed the construction of Holiday Home on the 
subject land. 
 The remaining 40 sites (covering total area of 498 hectares) were found 
commercially viable as on 31 March 2017. Out of these 40 sites, developers 
were short listed/fixed in six sites located at Gaya, Bangalore Platform Road, 
Daba Gardens Visakhapatnam (Ambedkar circle), Vijaywada, Golaka Mandir, 
Gwalior and Old Steam Loco Shed, Sarai Rohilla, Delhi. However,  
o Development Agreements could not be entered into and Letter of 
Acceptance had to be cancelled in respect of two sites viz. Daba Gardens 
(Ambedkar circle)/Visakhapatnam (April 2017) an d Vijaywada (August 
2017) as the first instalment of lease premium was not deposited by 
them.  
o In respect of one site at Gola  ka Mandir/Gwalior, the Development 
Agreement was terminated (11 April 2012) as the Developer refused to 
take the land offered by R LDA in exchange of land originally identified by 
the Railway and railways had to pay back the lease premium of ` 43.12 
crore along with interest.  
o Three sites at Old Steam Loco Shed, Sarai Rohilla/Delhi, Gaya and 
Bangalore Platform Road were under litigation since 19 September 2013, 
11 May 2015 and 15 January 2016 respectively. At the end of 2016 -17, 
an amount of ` 1,189.89 crore was collected as lease premium from 
these three sites. In respect of site at Gaya, the developer failed to 
complete the work in e xtended period of completion and RLDA issued 
notice for intention to terminate the agreement. The developer moved 
to Court seeking relief. In respect of sites at Sarai Rohilla and Bangalore, 
the developer s failed to pay the third /fourth instalment of the l ease 
premium and obtained stay against encashment of bank guarantee by 
RLDA. RLDA terminated the agreement as the project was not completed 
within the targeted date of completion.  
o Consultancy/valuation/commercial bids etc. were in -progress in respect 
of 37 sites, excluding three cases under litigation.     
Thus, none of the commercial sites entrusted to RLDA has been fully developed 
so far, even after 10 years.  Audit reviewed the position of development of 17  
selected sites (plots of land). These were entr usted to RLDA in year 2007 by 
Railways for development. Three sites
191 were kept out of the purview of the 
study as the same were under litigation  since September 2013, May 2 015 and 
January 2016 respectively.  Details of these sites and the current status of 
development of lands are enclosed in Annexure 7.1. Audit analyzed the reasons 
for non-development of 17 sites over eight Zonal Railways. These are discussed 
below: 
                                                           
191Gautam Buddh Institute, Gaya (Mug halsarai) under litigation since 11 May 2015, Old steam loco shed, Sarai Rohilla 
(Delhi) under litigation since  19 September 2013, near platform (Bangalore) under litigation since 15 January 2016 

155
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7
 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7 
 
 
 155 
7.1.4 Delay in appointment of Consultants 
RLDA appoints Consultants to get the survey of each plot of land for its valuation 
and to identify the potential use of the land to provide maximum revenue.  
Under the consultancy contracts, the Consultants are required to study and 
survey the site, collect and verify the records, prepare feasibility report, Mas ter 
Plan including land use, urban design and associated parameters; preliminary 
design and architectural concept plans for commercial development of the 
project site, architectural concept plans for the redevelopment works, 
developing/ suggesting the fina ncial model, customize bid documents, 
marketing the projects, assisting RLDA in managing the bid process for 
commercial development of the projects and selection of developer/bidder  etc. 
As per rules
192, RLDA has to carry out the necessary market survey to a ssess the 
potential use of the land to work out the best mode of commercial development 
from the angle of revenue returns and accordingly proceed with the bidding 
process.   
Thus, before undertaking the financial valuation of the site, it is necessary to 
undertake feasibility study and market survey to ascertain the land title, 
verification of boundaries, possible uses of land, suggesting best model for 
development, period of lease and valuation of returns etc.  RLDA engages 
consultants where the value of la nd is estimated to be more than ` 10 crore 
during the inspection conducted by RLDA’s officials. Audit observed that: 
 For engagement of consultant, RLDA invites offers through open tenders. 
Audit noticed that RLDA had no panel of Government approved consult ants 
till September 2015. In October 2015, RLDA prepared a list of Financial and 
Marketing Consultants empanelled for financial consultancy service for 
commercial development of vacant land of Indian Railways.  
 RLDA does not have a specific or prescribed m ethodology for valuation of 
land. Though RLDA has prepared a broad check list and parameters for 
various methods, Consultants are free to choose the methodology for 
valuation of land and give their recommendation based on adequate 
justification. 
 RLDA has n ot fixed any time frame for appointment of consultant after 
entrustment of land. Audit noticed that in three cases
193, Consultants were 
appointed after a lapse of about three years from  the entrustment of land, 
reasons for which were not available on record.  In two cases194, Consultants 
were appointed after eight years of entrustment, as land details were not 
available with the concerned Zonal Railway and there were delays in 
conducting inspection of land.  In one case  (Katra, F erozepur Division, land 
area 42775.72 sqm ), the plot was entrusted to RLDA in 2007, no suitable 
                                                           
192Clause 5 (b) of RLDA (Constitution) Rules, 2007 
193Kampoo Kothi, Gwalior (Jhansi), Plots at Salem market station (Salem), Plot at Nagaptinam station 
194 Plots at Pattukoti station (Tiruchirapalli),Plots at Villipuram station (Tiruchirapalli) 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 7
156
Chapter 7 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 156 
offer for appointment of consultant was received (August 2011). RLDA took 
another five years to appoint (in January 2015) the consultant.  
7.1.5 Delay in submission of reports by the Consultants 
As per Clause 7 of Request for Proposal (RFP) for engagement of consultant, the 
Consultants have to submit their reports in 36 weeks. As per conditions of 
agreements being entered into by RLDA with the Consultants, any delay by the 
Consultants in commencement or delay in performing its contractual obligations 
shall render the Consultant liable to any or both of the following: 
(i) Imposition of liquidated damages @ 0.5 per cent of contract value per week 
subject to maximum of five per cent of contract value. This ma y include 
forfeiture of performance guarantee. 
(ii) Termination of contract. 
Audit observed that in seven cases 195 the Consultants took more than one year 
in submission of report. RLDA  however, took no action against them for such 
delay in submission  and did not recover liquidated damages as per the 
provisions of the contract with the consultants.  Audit assessed an amount of  
` 3.67 lakh as liquidated damages which should have been realized from these 
Consultants in seven consultancy contracts. 
As per the  timeline prescribed in the RFP,  RLDA has to accept the report of the 
Consultant in one week after its submission by the Consultant. Audit, however, 
observed that in five cases (Vijaywada, Kampoo  Kothi (Gwalior), Aurangabad, 
Salem and Siliguri), RLDA took four months to three years to accept the report of 
the Consultant due to certain deficiencies and rectification exercise. 
7.1.6 Non-preparation of plan for development  
RLDA (Constitution) Rule196 provides that the Authority may prepare a Five Year 
Plan of the Commercial Development Projects proposed to be taken up for 
execution. The Authority may also prepare a Five Year Plan for consultancy, 
construction or management services and operation proposed to be executed 
by it in relation to development of land and property.  
Audit observed that Five Year Plan for development of commercial land was not 
prepared by RLDA till 2015-16. However, during 2015 -16 targets for 
development of 12 commercial sites was fixed by RLDA  which included five  
sites197 selected for review in Audit . Of these, letters of acceptance (LOA) were 
issued for leasing and commercial development of sites at Vijayawada and 
Vishakhapatnam. However, as the concerned developers did not deposit the 1 st 
installment of lease premium , the LOAs were terminated. Similarly , during the 
                                                           
195Katra (Firozepur),Kampoo  Kothi, Gwalior (Jhansi), Part of old ITDC Hotel, Aurangabad,  Near Moula Ali flyover, 
Telangana, Kakkapalam, Padi (Chennai), On Station approach road, Raxaul (Samastipur), Old Station area Jamnagar 
(Rajkot) 
196Rule 6 of the RLDA (Constitution), 2007  
197Vijaywada, Vishakapatnam, Katra, Aurangabad, Kampoo Kothi/Gwalior 

157
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7
 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7 
 
 
 157 
year 2016 -17, five sites (including four selected sites198) were targeted for 
commercial development but none of these sites could be developed as yet.  
The reasons for non -development of the sites were delay in providing land and 
land record by  railways, litigation, rejection of highest offer and taking much 
time to re -appoint the consultant. Some of the important cases are discussed 
below: 
7.1.6.1 Termination of development agreement and payment of interest in 
respect of land at Gola ka Mandir, Gwalior 
After appointment of Developer (January 2009) and receiving lease premium of  
` 26.57 crore, a Development Agreement (DA) was entered into in August 2009 
for the site at Gola  ka Mandir at Gwalior  (land are a 13 ,216.64 sqm). The 
procedure199 laid down for handing over of land to RLDA clearly require that a 
joint demarcation of the site land will be carried out by RLDA and Zonal 
Railways, if necessary along with the local revenue authorities and a proper 
‘Land Plan with schedule’ will be prepared and si gned jointly showing exact 
boundaries and important structures/land marks in each direction along with 
area and other details. A joint ‘Handing Over Note’ shall be prepared by the 
Zonal Railways and RLDA duly annexing the ‘Land Plan with Schedule’. Audit 
observed that, this important procedure was not followed by RLDA for 
preparation of ‘Land Plan with Schedule’. As a result, not only the land was 
found less than the originally allotted area at the time of actual handing over, 
the khasra details were also not incorporated correctly in the DA, while handing 
over the land to the Developer. 
Further, though, the Developer was to submit development proposal with plans 
within three months, it informed in March 2011 that the market was not 
conducive enough to const ruct a Mall in Gwalior. Audit observed that RLDA did 
not initiate any action against the Developer to terminate the agreement,  
though the Developer did not comply with the conditions laid down in the DA 
and did not submit development scheme/plans etc. to R LDA for more than two 
years against the prescribed period of three months.  Meanwhile, Madhya 
Pradesh State Government  took over part of the land for construction of road 
and RLDA agreed to handover part of land to the State Government . The 
Developer went to the High Court, where the court decided the case in favour of 
the Developer.  NCR Administration had to refund ` 43.12 crore to Developer 
(October 2015) including 12 per cent interest on the lease premium paid by the 
Developer. Had the ‘land plan with sch edule’ been prepared properly, the 
developer may have been penalized for not complying with the conditions of the 
DA and the liability of the interest could have been avoided.  
Thus, due diligence was not ensured in preparation of ‘Land Plan with Schedule’  
by NCR and RLDA. RLDA also did not ensure submission of development 
                                                           
198Raxaul, Sarai Rohilla, Aurangabad, Katra 
199Para 8(a) of Railway Board’s letter No. 2008/LML/2/17 dated 28 April 2009 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 7
158
Chapter 7 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 158 
plans/scheme by developer. As a result,  Railway had to bear additional liability 
of ` 17.65 crore and return the money to the Developer. 
7.1.6.2 Rejection of highest offer received for de velopment of land/plot at Old 
ITDC Hotel at Aurangabad 
On the basis of report of c onsultant (May 2009),  a tender was invited for 
development of site  (land area 38,971.23 sqm) by RLDA . Against the reserve 
price of ` 43.45 crore, highest offer of ` 52.52 crore was received (June 2011). 
The RLDA, however, rejected the highest bid and awarded the fresh consultancy 
contract to the same consultant. The authorities failed to furnish any reasons for 
rejection of highest bid  to Audit . Tender was re- invited in Januar y 2017 after 
revaluation but no offer was received.  Thus, the land/plot could not be 
developed as yet. 
7.1.7 Delay in providing land, land records by Zonal Railways 
As per Railway Board’s instructions 200, Zonal Rail ways are  responsible to keep 
the land free from encroachments and all encumbrances. They are required to 
provide the land to RLDA, after joint demarcation of boundaries of the land 
jointly with RLDA and preparing and handing over a proper ‘Land Plan with 
schedule’ with all relevant details of the land.  
Audit observed that 
 In two cases 201 in NFR and WR, the land handed over to RLDA by the Zonal 
Railways, was encumbered. After entrustment of two plots by N FR and WR 
(in April 2007), RLDA engaged consultants and incurred ` 0.21 crore on 
consultancy. However, development work could not be started as the land 
was not unencumbered. 
 Three plots at station Pattukoti (Tiruchirapalli Division , land area 8,012.776 
sqm) were entrusted to RLDA in September 2007. RLDA, in February 2009, 
requested SR to provide details of land which were provided in April 2009. 
RLDA, however, took almost six years for examination of land papers and 
requested SR to verify land plans and to provide ownership documents. 
Reasons for such delay were not available on record. Consultant appointed 
in March 2016 gave  its report in February 2017 suggesting not to develop 
the proposed site. 
 One Plot on station approach road, Raxaul (Samastipur  Division, land area 
22,581.46 sqm)  was entrusted to RLDA in August 2007. The Consultant 
submitted report in September 2009. After two years, in October 2011, RLDA 
started process for obtaining land records which were received in May 2013 . 
These were found to be incomplete by the Consultant. On the advice of the 
Consultant (May 2014), District Magistrate was approa ched (October 2014) 
to provide land records. The same were received in October 2014. RLDA, in 
                                                           
200Para 3(c) of Annexure I of Railway Board’s letter No. 2008/LML/2/17 dated 27 April 2009   
201Burdwan Road Siliguri(  Katihar)/NEFR (land area 11,994.88 sqm), Old station area Jam Nagar (Rajkot)/WR (land area 
11,088.39 sqm)  

159
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7
 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7 
 
 
 159 
September 2014, submitted commercial development plan to Executive 
Officer (EO)/  Raxaul for obtaining No Objection Certificate (NOC). The EO 
informed that NOC coul d not be granted as three very busy roads were 
crossing the proposed site. RLDA approached ECR (December 2014) to close 
the roads. A revised plan was also submitted in April 2015. ECR, in June 
2016, showed its inability to close the roads. In view of this,  the Consultant 
was re-engaged for valuation in October 2016 who has submitted its report 
in March 2017 which was  accepted in June 2017. Tenders were invited in 
July 2017 and are yet to be opened . Thus, the decision to entrust land for 
commercial development was injudicious to start with.  
 Two plots at Salem market station (Salem , land area 3,318.422 sqm ) were 
entrusted to RLDA in September 2007.  The Consultant submitted report in 
October 2011. In May 2012, SR requested to limit the development work in 
respect of only one plot. Due to this, the Consultant submitted revised 
report in April 2014. RLDA, however, took another three years for inviting 
the tender for lease and development, tender  was opened in March 2017 
and was yet to be finalized. 
 One Plot at As hok Vihar, New Delhi (Delhi Division, land area 1,32,494.08 
sqm) was entrusted to RLDA in September 2007.  Based on the Consultant’s 
report of 2008, RLDA  obtained specific approval of MoR  to undertake 
residential development
202 on this land in January 2014 i .e. after six years. 
Due to delay, Consultant was again appointed in August 2016 who submitted 
report in October 2016. Consultant was asked to submit financial model for 
45 years lease period. Valuation was yet to be been done by the consultant. 
Thus, there were deficiencies in entrustment of land to RLDA, in two cases, the 
land was encumbered, in two cases land papers were not in order and it took a 
long time to get verification from the land authorities and in one case the 
selection of the site was not judicious.   
7.1.8 Change in land use and non -observance of by -laws of State 
Government  
Indian Railways acquired land for its operation purposes i.e. development of 
Traffic facilities and also reserved surplus land for its future 
expansion/operational purposes. H owever, with the passage of time Indian 
Railways decided to utilize this surplus land for commercial purposes through 
non-tariff measures. Since the railway land being demarcated in revenue 
records as ‘Public and Semi Public Zone’ the same was required to be converted 
to a ‘Commercial Zone’ by obtaining permission from concerned State 
Government through the Change of Land Use (CLU). 
As per by-laws, some  Open Space to create community facilities as per norms of 
Government (10 per cent of developed land) is required to be kept open and 
handed over to the local body through a registered deed before commercial 
                                                           
202As per Railway Board’s letter No.2008/LML/2/17 dated 27 -4-2009, RLDA may explore various options includin g 
residential for commercial development of land.  

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 7
160
Chapter 7 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 160 
utilization of land. This provision is called Open Space Reservation (OSR). Land 
given under OSR does not revert back to the owner, only permission to de velop 
and maintain the 10  per cent  land is however accorded from the State 
Government. 
Audit observed that in the following cases, there were delays due to un-resolved 
CLU and OSR issues, in addition to delays by RLDA in processing the cases: 
 In respect of  one Plot near Moula Ali flyover, Hyderabad  (Telangana, land 
area 88,962.04 sqm)  which was entrusted to RLDA in April 2007, t he 
Consultant submitted its report in June 2008. However, development of the 
site was put on hold due to decision of SCR to use the  land for opening 
Medical College. The decision for opening of Medical College was reverted in 
May 2011. In July 2011, RLDA again contacted the Consultant and extended 
period of consultancy. The matter was further delayed due to non -
finalization of CLU and OSR issues till date. 
 One plot at Kakkapalam Padi (Chennai Division, land area 21,003.18 sqm)  
was entrusted to RLDA in April 2007. The Consultant submitted its report in 
June 2009. However, the site could not be developed, as due to an 
unresolved OSR issue, no offer was received. 
 One Plot near Nagaptinam station (Tiruchirapalli Division, land area 1,294.99 
sqm) was entrusted to RLDA in  September 2007. RLDA took three years in 
appointment of Consultant (December 2010). The Consultant  submitted its 
report in September 2011 and suggested to increase the size of plot to make 
it commercially more viable. Consultant submitted final report in February 
2015 and suggested to split the size of plot into two to avoid OSR clause.  
Meanwhile, RLDA did not take up the iss ue of CLU with the appropriate 
authorities and the same was still in process. 
 Three p lots at station Villipuram (Tiruchirapalli Division , land area 7,081.99 
sqm) were entrusted to RLDA in September 2007. A fter 18 months of 
entrustment of land, RLDA request ed (February 2009) SR to provide details 
of land which were provided in April 2009. After five years RLDA inspected 
the site (July 2014) and took another 23 months to appoint Consultant (May 
2016) who submitted its report in July 2016. Thereafter, RLDA sta rted the 
process for change of land use which was still pending. 
Thus, these cases were delayed due to unresolved issues of CLU and OSR.  
7.1.9 Delay in taking decision for development of land at Nirala Nagar, 
Kanpur for residential purposes  
One p lot at Nirala Nagar, Kanpur (Allahabad Division, land area 2,64,886.98 
sqm) was entrusted to RLDA in February 2007. RLDA requested Railway Board 
(January 2009) to accord approval for taking up residential project on this site. 
Railway Board, however, permitted residenti al development on this site in 
January 2014. RLDA further requested Railway Board (July 2015) for increasing 
the lease period of 90 years for residential development. Railway Board 

161
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7
 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7 
 
 
 161 
permitted (August 2015) RLDA for development of land for residential purposes 
only for a period of 45 years . Process for appointment of Consultant was 
initiated by RLDA in September 2017. 
7.1.10 Conclusion 
The main objective of setting up of RLDA was to generate revenue by non -tariff 
measures through commercial development of sur plus railway land. Audit 
reviewed development of 17 sites, which were entrusted to RLDA in 2007 when 
it was constituted and observed that none of these sites have been developed 
so far. Audit noticed that there were delays in engagement of consultants, del ay 
in submission of reports by the consultants, delay in taking permission from 
State Government for change of land use, deficiencies in entrustment of land to 
RLDA by the concerned Zonal Railways by providing encumbered land, 
identifying wrong site or sit e with incomplete papers etc. which resulted in non -
development of 17 sites of 166.996 acres, reviewed in Audit. Out of 17 cases 
reviewed, in only three cases developers were appointed, but commercial 
development did not take place. In two
203 cases, the Deve lopment Agreements 
could not be entered into and Letter of Acceptance had to be cancelled as the 
first instalment of lease premium was not deposited by the parties and in one204, 
case the Development Agreement was terminated as the Developer refused to 
take the land offered by RLDA in exchange of land originally identified by the 
Railway and railways had to pay back the lease premium of ` 43.12 crore along 
with interest. Thirteen of these 17 plots were planned for commercial 
development with a lease potential  of ` 282.69 crore. Since being set up, RLDA 
has been able to earn ` 67.97 crore from development of Multi -Functional 
Complexes (MFCs) at railway stations 205, which is other than the earnings from 
commercial development of entrusted lands. As against this, e xpenditure of  
` 102.29 crore has been incurred towards establishment, consultancy charges, 
advertisement etc. during 2006-07 to 2016-17. 
7.1.11 Recommendations 
1. Railways may take timely action to seek clearance from the respective 
State Governments for cha nge in land use and open space reservation  and 
also examine the legal implications of change of land use in consultation 
with the State Governments.  
2. Following the norms of local authorities, Zonal Railways may identify and 
entrust only unencumbered sites to RLDA and ensure complete 
documents/records for the same. 
3. RLDA may ensure timely appointment of consultants. RLDA may also 
enforce the terms and conditions of the agreements so that they complete 
their work on time and take action on their reports expedi tiously. RLDA 
                                                           
203Old Steam Loco Shed, Sarai Rohilla/Delhi, Gaya and Bangalore Platform Road 
204Gola ka Mandir at Gwalior 
205 besides earning of ` 7.55 crore received from IRCON towards development of MFCs and ` 4.82 crore towards amount 
forfeited on account of cancelled agreements for development of MFCs 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 7
162
Chapter 7 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 162 
needs to put in place a mechanism to ensure early finalization of 
development contracts by setting up reasonable time lines for each 
activity.  
4. Before attempting to commercially exploit vacant land, railways may 
consider offering the land t o the State Government/Local Bodies/ other 
departments for public purposes, lest they become an impediment for 
development of land. 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board (02 February 2017); their 
reply was awaited (28 February 2018). 
7.2 Centre for Railway Information System (CRIS): Delay in Implementation 
of Indian Railways Disaster Recovery Data Centre for IT Applications 
Railway mooted the proposal for setting up of a Disaster Recovery Data Centre in 
June 2007. Ten years have passed, but the railways were yet to finalize the same. 
There were delays at every stage and the decision for entrustment of work of 
construction was yet to be taken. Though the interim disaster recovery (DR) site 
for Passenger Reservation System (PRS) and Unreserved T icketing System (UTS) 
has been made functional, it is located in the same building as the Railway 
Reservation Complex. There is an urgent need to set up the DRDC at a remote 
location, on priority, so that it can mitigate the risk arising out of incidents s uch 
as serious fire, earthquake or terror attack etc. 
Centre for Railway Information Systems (CRIS), an autonomous body, functions 
as an IT arm of the Indian Railways.  Indian Railways has developed and 
implemented a large number of IT applications 206 that h ave been deployed in 
data centers across the country and which are critical for the operations of 
Indian Railways. Such critical IT applications require high availability with 
permissible target service uptime of 99.9 per cent.  To achieve such high uptime, 
a comprehensive business continuity strategy in the form of a full -fledged 
Disaster Recovery (DR) system is required at a remote location which could take 
care of any eventuality which might arise from regional level incidents such as 
serious fire, earthquake or terror attack etc.   
In June 2007, Railway Board sanctioned Disaster Management System for PRS at 
five locations at an estimated cost of ` 37.34 crore.  In May 2008, Railway Board 
sanctioned ` 50 crore for Disaster Recover System for Freight Opera tions 
Information System  (FOIS) project, which also included funds for 
implementation of Disaster Recovery Data Centre
207, to be set up by CRIS. In 
February 2012, CRIS earmarked a sum of ` 17.71 crore208 for Disaster Recovery 
Data Centre (DRDC) to cater to the following requirements: 
                                                           
206Like Passenger Reservation System, Unreserved Ticketing System, Control office Application, Freight Operations 
Information system, e-Procurement System etc. 
207It consisted of Disaster Recovery Centre at Secunderabad and Data Centre at CRIS, Chanakyapuri, New Delhi ( � 10.88 
crore for Data Warehouse, � 18.72 crore for Disaster Recovery and � 19.86 crore for Data Centre). 
208� 5.61 crore was earmarked out of  � 37.34 crore sanctioned for PRS project and � 12.1 crore was earmarked out of � 
50 crore sanctioned for FOIS project. 

163
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7
 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7 
 
 
 163 
 DR setup for Passenger Reservation system (PRS), Unreserved Ticketing 
System (UTS), Freight Operations Information System (FOIS) and other 
existing applications
209. 
 DR System for all the applications to be centrally managed by CRIS ( e.g. 
Human Resources Management System, Track Management System etc.) 
An area of 15000 sqm was identified (March 2010) at Maula Ali, Secunderabad 
for setting up/creation of DRDC by Railway Board in October 2010. For carrying 
out a requirement study, preparing a request for proposals (RFP) and associating 
with award of work for setting up a DRDC at Secunderabad, a tender was floated 
by CRIS in  May 2010.  The Work Order was placed on M/s 3i InfoTech Limited, 
Noida in July 2010 at a cost of ` 12.50 lakh.  As per the terms of reference of the 
Work Order following time lines were fixed for various activities: 
Table 7.1 – Timeline for activities in the DRDC projects 
Activity Timeline 
Preparation and submission of essential 
reports such as Inception Report, Data 
Centre Sizing Report, and Preliminary 
Design Report by the consultant 
Within 8 weeks of placing work order 
(by 17 September 2010) 
Preparation of Bid documents/technical 
specifications and bill of material 
Within 11 weeks of placing work order  
(by 08 October 2010) 
Award of tender for DRDC was to be 
issued by the Consultant/Contractor 
Within 20 weeks from the date of issue of 
Work Order of 23 July 2010  
(by 11 December 2010) 
First draft Request for Proposal (RFP) was presented by the consultancy firm in 
December 2010 and final RFP was submitted on 16 April 2012.  The delay was 
attributed to change requests made by CRIS after submission of RFP viz. revised 
versions submitted by the firm on 22 April 2011, 31 May 2011, 20 July 2011 and 
16 February 2012 respec tively. An expenditure of ` 9.95 lakh was incurred for 
hiring the consultancy firm for preparation of various reports
210. 
During November 2011 and June 2013, CRIS incurred an expenditure of ` 41.92 
lakh (approx.) on shifting of 33 KVA high tension wire from site and allied 
activities (diversion of PIJF UG cables 211, co nstruction of fencing etc.) in 
connection with setting up DRDC.   
As per the terms of reference of the consultancy contract, tender for DRDC was 
to be awarded by 11 December 2010. Due to delay in finalization of RFP (tender) 
and other documents submitted by the consultancy firm, the tender could not 
be issued within the target date.  The tender  was floated on 5 July 2012 by CRIS 
and opened on 22 March 2013. Delay in opening of tender was attributed  to 
                                                           
209Indian Railways has computerised its various processes pertaining to Establishment, Accounting, Engineering, 
Production, Workshops, Ope rations (Train operations), Inventory Management including Inventory Procurement, 
Manpower Management, Hospital Management etc. 
210Inception Report, Data Centre sizing Report, Preliminary design report, Preparation of Bid documents & Technical 
specification and bill of material report 
211 Polyethylene Insulated Jelly Filled Under Ground (PIJF UG) communication cables 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 7
164
Chapter 7 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 164 
queries and subsequent  modification in the tender conditions. The offer 
submitted by the eligible firm at ` 39.98 crore against the estimated tender cost 
of ` 17.64 crore was bey ond the power of nominated tender accepting 
authority. The rates offered in the bid indicated requir ement of higher funds. 
The tender was not finalised within the validity of the offer (30 May 2014).  
Extension of the validity of the offers sought for in March 2016 was not agreed 
to by the vendor.  MD/CRIS, thus, discharged the tender in April 2016 due t o 
high cost/expiry of the validity period of the offer. 
In May 2016, Railway Board sanctioned another work for setting up disaster 
recovery site for five projects (i.e. IPAS, e -RECON, ARPAN, TAMS and WAMS
212) 
at a cost of ` 26.38 crore. In October 2016, a nu mber of options for setting up 
DRDC at Maula Ali (Secunderabad) (including entrustment of the work to 
Construction organization of SCR) were under consideration of CRIS. No final 
decision was available on record (August/September 2017).  
In order to have an interim disaster recovery (DR) site for Passenger Reservation 
System (PRS) and Unreserved Ticketing System (UTS), an interim DR site for PRS 
and UTS was made functional since 11 March 2012 from the 1
st floor of Railway 
Reservation Complex, Secunderabad.  However, in June 2015, there was 
incessant rain in Hyderabad which resulted in water seepage from the roof of 
the DR room and water also leaked into server racks. Though, remedial 
measures were taken to avoid such instances, SCR emphasized for expediting 
the process of setting up DR site as this was the only DRDC for the entire Indian 
Railways. However, no significant/tangible progress was made in the matter till 
September 2017.  
Thus, ten years after the proposal for setting up of a Disaster Recovery Data  
Centre was mooted, railways were yet to finalize the same. There were delays at 
every stage and the decision to entrustment of work of construction was yet to 
be taken. Though the interim disaster recovery (DR) site for Passenger 
Reservation System (PRS) and Unreserved Ticketing System (UTS) has been 
made functional, it is located in the same building as the Railway Reservation 
Complex. The loss of data in case of disaster can have serious legal implications 
as well. It is recommended that Railways may set  up the DRDC at a remote 
location on priority, so that it can mitigate the risk arising out of incidents such 
as serious fire, earthquake or terror attack etc. 
CRIS, in its reply (February 2017) clarified that the nature of work was complex 
and CRIS had no  previous experience and also stated that the expenditure 
incurred on shifting of the 33 KVA h igh tension wire was inevitable. Thus, DRDC 
project was yet to take off and the Railway IT applications remains vulnerable to 
the risk of interruption due to any disaster. 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board (02 February 2017); their 
reply was awaited (28 February 2018). 
                                                           
212 IPAS – Integrated Payroll and Accounting System; eRecon is web based portal for reconciling transfer transactions 
across Railways; ARPAN – Advanced Railway Pension Access Network; TAMS – Traffic Accounts Management system; 
WAMS – Workshop Accounts Management System  

165
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7
 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7 
 
 
 165 
7.3 Centre for Railway Information System (CRIS) : Delay in Implementation 
of Geographical Information System ( GIS) Mapping & Geo spatial Database for 
Indian Railway Assets 
The project on ‘Development of a comprehensive web based databank for land 
and asset management for optimum utilization of resources’ was put forward in 
June 2012, it remains at initial stages of implementation ti ll date. The main 
reasons for slow progress  were delay in finalization of estimates, delay in 
execution of MoU, failure to adhere to MoU targets and delay in conducting GPS 
survey by the Zonal Railways. There is a need to expeditiously implement the 
project, so as to derive the intended benefits of simplified asset management, 
easy visualization and management of day -to-day operations, assessing location 
of rolling stock on the GIS map, effective planning for traffic and easy 
visualization of the affected area during the time of a disaster. 
Minister for Railway’s in his budget speech of 2011 -12, announced 
‘Development of a comprehensive web based databank for land and asset 
management for optimum utilization of resources’. Accordingly, a proposal for a 
project titled ‘GIS Map and Geospatial Database of Indian Railways Assets’, was 
mooted in December 2011. The project envisaged development of a computer 
based system, for mapping of information relating to various civil engineering 
assets
213, land & amenities (L& A) assets 214, mechanical engineering assets 215, 
signal and telecommunication (S&T) assets 216 and safety assets 217. The project 
was sanctioned by Railway Board in June 20 12 at an abstract cost of � 36.24 
crore. The roadmap of the project included the following: 
 To prepare a GIS map of an appropriate resolution of entire IR, 
 To include spatial (thematic) artifacts, relevant to IR, in the map, 
 To associate basic attributes to each artifacts, relevant to each department, 
 To prepare interfaces to key applications of IR, 
 To provide decision support system with spatial details, 
 To design and integrate disaster management to provide better response at 
the time of disaster; and 
 Better monitoring, condition assessment, performance and alternative 
evaluation of physical assets of IR. 
As per the initial plan, the project was proposed for execution under two phases 
and area of interest was divided in the following two categories: 
 Focus areas –This included railway assets in cities, stations, yards, major 
bridges and other areas, where high resolution mapping was required.  
                                                           
213Track-line (electrified-non electrified), bridges, tunnels, level crossings, yards, sidings etc. 
214Railway buildings, colonies, stations, station facilities/passenger amenities, workshops, sheds, maintenance depot etc. 
215Sick lines, production units etc. 
216Signal and interlocking system at stations/sections, OFC network, power supply equipment’s, cables, control phones 
etc. 
217Like location, address, telephone numb ers of civil administration, civil/railway hospitals, fire brigade, school, helipad, 
Accident Relief Train etc. 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 7
166
Chapter 7 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 166 
 Non-focus areas – This included permanent way, its surrounding land in the 
hinterland where high resolution mapping was not important.  
The project was intended to provide benefits in t erms of simplified asset 
management, easy visualization and management of day -to-day operations, 
assessing location of rolling stock   on the GIS map, effective planning for traffic 
and easy visualization of the affected area during  the time of a disaster. 
Chief Administrative Officer/FOIS 218 (CAO/FOIS) was nominated (November 
2012), as project executing agency for implementation of the project and the 
project (application) was assigned to Center for Railway Information Systems 219 
(CRIS). Since NR was undertaking a project on ‘Management Information System 
for Indian Railways (Phase I Land), they approached (November 2014) Railway 
Board for assignment of the GIS project to it. Being the custodian of all land 
assets of IR and also being responsible for maintenan ce of most of the railway 
assets, Engineering Department of NR was entrusted with the responsibility of 
project execution. Chief Engineer (TMS)/NR was nominated nodal officer for 
implementation of the project. 
In March 2015, Railway Board approved a propos al of NR for forming a 
committee of six officials representing Railway Board, Survey of India (SOI), CRIS, 
National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI) and National Remote Sensing Centre 
(NRSC) to deliberate and guide in establishing of Indian Railway’s GIS  portal and 
mapping of Indian Railway’s land and other assets along with background map 
and to synergise and facilitate inputs required from NRSC, SOI and NSDI. The 
Committee recommended (23 November 2015) software platform for database 
layer, GIS developm ent layer, GIS portal layer and stated that the relevant 
software packages were immediately required.  
MoU for the project was executed between CRIS and NR on 18 October 2016 . It 
included detailed estimates, scope of the work, terms and conditions, payment  
details, milestone and targets, deliverables, warranty supports, roles/  
responsibilities of parties to MoU etc.  The milestones envisaged in the MoU and 
their status was as follows: 
Table 7.2 - Status of various milestones as envisaged in the MoU as on 15 September 2017 
S.no Milestone Target for 
completion 
Status of actual work executed by CRIS 
1 Preparation of SRS 
(concept) document for GIS 
2 weeks Not prepared 
2 Tender for hand held GPS 
devices, GIS platform 
hardware and software and 
land plan digitization 
6 weeks Tender should have been finalized by the end of 
November 2016 , but tender for procurement of 
hardware infrastructure and its associated 
software was floated and the tender was 
scheduled for opening on 20 September 2017. 
3 Placement of PO for 
hardware and software 
20 weeks Yet to be done 
                                                           
218 Freight Operations Information System 
219 An autonomous body functioning as an IT arm of Indian Railways, for setting u p database and developing the IT 
application 
Chapter 7 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 166 
 Non-focus areas – This included permanent way, its surrounding land in the 
hinterland where high resolution mapping was not important.  
The project was intended to provide benefits in t erms of simplified asset 
management, easy visualization and management of day -to-day operations, 
assessing location of rolling stock   on the GIS map, effective planning for traffic 
and easy visualization of the affected area during  the time of a disaster. 
Chief Administrative Officer/FOIS 218 (CAO/FOIS) was nominated (November 
2012), as project executing agency for implementation of the project and the 
project (application) was assigned to Center for Railway Information Systems 219 
(CRIS). Since NR was undertaking a project on ‘Management Information System 
for Indian Railways (Phase I Land), they approached (November 2014) Railway 
Board for assignment of the GIS project to it. Being the custodian of all land 
assets of IR and also being responsible for maintenan ce of most of the railway 
assets, Engineering Department of NR was entrusted with the responsibility of 
project execution. Chief Engineer (TMS)/NR was nominated nodal officer for 
implementation of the project. 
In March 2015, Railway Board approved a propos al of NR for forming a 
committee of six officials representing Railway Board, Survey of India (SOI), CRIS, 
National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI) and National Remote Sensing Centre 
(NRSC) to deliberate and guide in establishing of Indian Railway’s GIS  portal and 
mapping of Indian Railway’s land and other assets along with background map 
and to synergise and facilitate inputs required from NRSC, SOI and NSDI. The 
Committee recommended (23 November 2015) software platform for database 
layer, GIS developm ent layer, GIS portal layer and stated that the relevant 
software packages were immediately required.  
MoU for the project was executed between CRIS and NR on 18 October 2016 . It 
included detailed estimates, scope of the work, terms and conditions, payment  
details, milestone and targets, deliverables, warranty supports, roles/  
responsibilities of parties to MoU etc.  The milestones envisaged in the MoU and 
their status was as follows: 
Table 7.2 - Status of various milestones as envisaged in the MoU as on 15 September 2017 
S.no Milestone Target for 
completion 
Status of actual work executed by CRIS 
1 Preparation of SRS 
(concept) document for GIS 
2 weeks Not prepared 
2 Tender for hand held GPS 
devices, GIS platform 
hardware and software and 
land plan digitization 
6 weeks Tender should have been finalized by the end of 
November 2016 , but tender for procurement of 
hardware infrastructure and its associated 
software was floated and the tender was 
scheduled for opening on 20 September 2017. 
3 Placement of PO for 
hardware and software 
20 weeks Yet to be done 
                                                           
218 Freight Operations Information System 
219 An autonomous body functioning as an IT arm of Indian Railways, for setting u p database and developing the IT 
application 

167
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7
 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7 
 
 
 167 
Table 7.2 - Status of various milestones as envisaged in the MoU as on 15 September 2017 
S.no Milestone Target for 
completion 
Status of actual work executed by CRIS 
4 Installation, commissioning 
and testing of hardware 
and software 
24 weeks Yet to be done 
5 Application development 
and hosting in stages 
34 weeks Yet to be done 
6 Uploading and processing 
of filed data on GIS 
platform 
42 weeks Yet to be done 
7 Publishing of GIS map (First 
Version) 
52 weeks Yet to be done 
As per the milestones mentioned above, the work was to be completed within 
52 weeks from the date of signing of the MoU i.e. by October 2017.  Further, a s 
per the Budget pronouncement of Minister for Railways in 2014 -15 and 2015 -
16, GIS/GPS mapping of various assets of Indian Railways was to be completed 
during the current year.   All assets were to be mapped and made possible to 
view on Satellite.  A GPS survey for domain data was to be done by Zonal 
Railways. 
In September 2015, CRIS submitted detailed estimates of the pilot phase of the 
project to NR for examination and approval. Detailed estimates were approved 
(27 May 2016) by NR at a cost of ` 32.74 crore220.  CE/TMS, NR requested CRIS in 
July 2016, August 2016, November 2016 and March 2017 to expedite the action 
for processing the procurement of hardware/software items.  Further, Railway 
Board also requested (November 2016) NR to put the project work on fast track 
mode and implementation plan for the same should include all divisions of IR 
with immediate effect. During August 2017, CRIS processed a tender for 
procurement of hardware and associated software of the project which was 
scheduled for opening on 20 September 2017.  
In this regard, the following was observed 
 The project was sanctioned in June 2012. However, no significant progress 
in the project was made by CRIS for a period of almost 30 months since 
sanction of the project, as a result of which, it was re -allotted to NR 
(January 2015). CRIS prepared detailed estimates in September 2015, which 
were approved by NR in May 2016 after nine months. 
 The MoU was executed in between NR and CRIS after another 21 months in 
October 2016. A review of the posit ion of work vis -à-vis target/milestones 
of work specified in the MoU revealed that work did not progress as per the 
milestones laid down in the MoU. The milestone of two weeks for 
Preparation of SRS (concept) document for GIS was not realistic and was 
                                                           
220 � 32,73,61,330 (CRIS Portion : � 26.58 crore) 
 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7 
 
 
 167 
Table 7.2 - Status of various milestones as envisaged in the MoU as on 15 September 2017 
S.no Milestone Target for 
completion 
Status of actual work executed by CRIS 
4 Installation, commissioning 
and testing of hardware 
and software 
24 weeks Yet to be done 
5 Application development 
and hosting in stages 
34 weeks Yet to be done 
6 Uploading and processing 
of filed data on GIS 
platform 
42 weeks Yet to be done 
7 Publishing of GIS map (First 
Version) 
52 weeks Yet to be done 
As per the milestones mentioned above, the work was to be completed within 
52 weeks from the date of signing of the MoU i.e. by October 2017.  Further, a s 
per the Budget pronouncement of Minister for Railways in 2014 -15 and 2015 -
16, GIS/GPS mapping of various assets of Indian Railways was to be completed 
during the current year.   All assets were to be mapped and made possible to 
view on Satellite.  A GPS survey for domain data was to be done by Zonal 
Railways. 
In September 2015, CRIS submitted detailed estimates of the pilot phase of the 
project to NR for examination and approval. Detailed estimates were approved 
(27 May 2016) by NR at a cost of ` 32.74 crore
220.  CE/TMS, NR requested CRIS in 
July 2016, August 2016, November 2016 and March 2017 to expedite the action 
for processing the procurement of hardware/software items.  Further, Railway 
Board also requested (November 2016) NR to put the project work on fast track 
mode and implementation plan for the same should include all divisions of IR 
with immediate effect. During August 2017, CRIS processed a tender for 
procurement of hardware and associated software of the project which was 
scheduled for opening on 20 September 2017.  
In this regard, the following was observed 
 The project was sanctioned in June 2012. However, no significant progress 
in the project was made by CRIS for a period of almost 30 months since 
sanction of the project, as a result of which, it was re -allotted to NR 
(January 2015). CRIS prepared detailed estimates in September 2015, which 
were approved by NR in May 2016 after nine months. 
 The MoU was executed in between NR and CRIS after another 21 months in 
October 2016. A review of the posit ion of work vis -à-vis target/milestones 
of work specified in the MoU revealed that work did not progress as per the 
milestones laid down in the MoU. The milestone of two weeks for 
Preparation of SRS (concept) document for GIS was not realistic and was 
                                                           
220 � 32,73,61,330 (CRIS Portion : � 26.58 crore) 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 7
168
Chapter 7 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 168 
completely disregarded. The same was yet to be prepared. The tender 
process was also running a year behind schedule. 
 GPS survey for domain data was to be done by Zonal Railways. Railway 
Board had given a target for completion of the work by 31 December 2015. 
However, the work was still in progress as on September 2017. 
Thus, even after a period of more than five years since the sanction in June 
2012, the project was at the initial stage of execution due to delay in finalization 
of estimates, delay in execution of MoU, failure to adhere to MoU targets and 
delay in conducting GPS survey by the Zonal Railways.  
NR (Nodal office for the project) in their reply stated (December 2017) that day 
to day activities of railways are in no way affected by the delay in execut ion of 
the project as the project is a step towards system improvement and 
digitalization of railway assets is for better management and optimization of 
resources. Audit agrees that it is a way forward and recommends that railways 
may expeditiously implement the project, so as to derive the intended benefits 
of simplified asset management, easy visualization and management of day -
to-day operations, assessing location of rolling stock on the GIS map, effective 
planning for traffic and easy visualization of t he affected area during the time 
of a disaster. 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board (02 February 2017); their 
reply was awaited (28 February 2018). 
7.4 Centre for Railway Information System (CRIS): Delay in Implementation 
of Land Management System over Indian Railways 
The proposal for introducing a web based Land Management System on Indian 
Railways was initiated in January 2011. In view of the large area of land under 
the jurisdiction of the railways, the proposal was important as it envi saged 
incorporation of land related matters i.e. land records, land boundary 
verification, land leasing/licensing, process of prevention and removal of 
encroachment, commercial exploitation of land etc. into a web based 
application. However, due to delay in finalization of estimates, delay in execution 
of MoU, failure to adhere to MoU targets and delay in conducting GPS survey by 
the Zonal Railways, implementation of the same was yet to be started.  There is a 
need to expeditiously implement the project, so that, as envisaged the manual 
register/records can be dispensed with and the railway land plans, State 
Government Revenue Plan, geographical features of the railway land and 
adjoining areas are captured on GIS platform. 
Railway Board (January 2011) proposed to introduce web based Land 
Management System on Indian Railways and directed Centre for Railway 
Information Systems (CRIS), an IT arm of Indian Railways, to prepare abstract 
estimates for sanction of work under the plan head of ‘Computerization’.  In 
February 2011, CRIS submitted an abstract estimate at a cost of ` 8.60 crore to 
Railway Board. The project envisaged conversion of land related matters i.e. 

169
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7
 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7 
 
 
 169 
land records, land boundary verification, land leasing/licensing, process of 
prevention and removal o f encroachment, commercial exploitation of land etc. 
into a web based application. The objective was to dispense with the manual 
register/records and to put the railway land plans, State Government Revenue 
Plan covering railway land and small stretch on ei ther side, geographical 
features of the railway land and adjoining areas on GIS
221 platform. 
The first phase of the project ‘Management Information System on Indian 
Railways Land (Phase I)’ was included (January 2012) in the Works Programme 
2011-12 at an abs tract cost of ` 4.0 crore. The project was entrusted to CRIS in 
January 2012.  Principal Chief Engineer, Northern Railway was nominated as 
nodal officer for execution of the work.  In February 2012, CRIS was authorized 
to execute Land Management System (Ph ase I) (LandMS) as a pilot project on 
Ambala (NR) and Secunderabad (SCR) division s of Indian Railways.  During the 
meeting, it was envisaged to complete the work within 10 months. The scope 
was changed to Ahmedabad division only, in February 2013.  
The execution of the project starts after approval of abstract estimates, detailed 
estimates (DEs) and execution of MoU between CRIS and Railways. CRIS 
submitted (July 2012) detailed estimates for ` 4.69 crore to Railway Board for 
the pilot project of GIS based L and Management System (Phase 1) for Ambala 
division. Audit observed that, as the proposal was not routed through Northern 
Railway (the nominated railway for the work) and detailed estimates were not 
vetted by finance and approved by GM/NR, Railway Board di d not approve 
(August 2012) the same. They also cited other reasons like not quoting the basis 
of the rates in the estimates, not attaching the variation statement etc. for not 
approving the estimates. Thereafter, Railway Board reduced the Abstract 
Estimates of ` 8.6 crore prepared by CRIS, to ` 4 crore without intimating CRIS 
about the bifurcation of reduction in the cost in various subheads. 
For implementing the pilot project in Ahmedabad Division, CRIS requested WR 
to make available land plan and other r ecords in digitized form and nominate 
officials for coordination and related activities pertaining to the project. Since 
CRIS did not have experience/knowhow for GIS part of the software 
development, they consulted various market leaders and submitted (Mar ch 
2013) detailed estimate (DE) of ` 5.69 crore to Railway Board. CRIS added that 
the area of application was new for CRIS, hence, it was not possible to list out all 
the activities in the DEs and price them correctly.  In the DE, CRIS set a period of 
12 m onths for completion of the work. The work in respect of Ahmedabad 
Division only was initiated. 
In May 2013, Railway Board directed CRIS to execute MoU with NR (the nodal 
office for execution of the project).  Audit observed that though the process for 
execution of MoU was started in May 2013, MoU was yet to be executed 
                                                           
221A Geographic Information System (GIS) is a system designed to capture, store, manipulate, analyze, manage, and 
present all types of geographical data and enables visualize, question, analyze and interpret data  to understand 
relationships, patterns, and trends. 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 7
170
Chapter 7 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 170 
(November 2017). Reasons for non -execution of the MoU were not available on 
record.  
Audit noticed that CRIS stated inadequacy of manpower as a constraint and 
requested (March 2013) Railway Board to make available staff for the project.  
Audit further noticed that, NR was not satisfied (August 2013) with the project 
plan prepared by CRIS and attributed the same to inadequate and incomplete 
domain knowledge. Despite directives from the project  implementing authority 
(NR), CRIS did not take any action in the matter till July 2014. NR also highlighted 
(April 2014) that the progress of the project was held up due to lack of action on 
the part of CRIS. In July 2014, CRIS informed Railway Board that it was not aware 
about the scope and role required to be played by CRIS.  
In June 2016, Railway Board again directed to undertake pilot implementation of 
LandMS project at Ambala, Ahmedabad and Secunderabad divisions.  In October 
2016, after a period of more than three years, CRIS re-processed the DEs and NR 
approved DEs at a cost of ` 4.05 crore (August 2017) for three divisions. Audit 
observed that, without implementing the pilot phase of the Land MS project, 
CRIS proposed (September 2016) all India roll out of LandMS project at an 
abstract cost of ` 16.98 crore for inclusion in the budget of 2018-19. 
In the budget estimates for the financial year 2017 -18, a provision of ` 70 lakh 
was made for LandMS. In November 2017, Railway Board constituted a core 
group of four members
222 for coordination to provide input and decide various 
issues related to development of the application and set a target date of 31 
March 2018 for development of the IT application. However, as of November 
2017, only detailed estimates of the project were sanctioned  and MoU with 
Railway Administration for project development and implementation was yet to 
be executed. 
In this regard, the following was observed 
1. After a period of two and a half years of entrustment of project, CRIS 
enquired about the scope and their role in the project. This clearly indicated 
lack of synchrony between NR and CRIS. 
2. CRIS did not follow due procedure in preparing detailed estimates. It did not 
route the proposal through NR, did not get the estimates vetted by the 
associate finance of NR and did not give the basis of rates adopted in the 
estimate and the details of cost escalation. As a result, Railway Board did not 
approve the estimates, which added to the delay. 
3. Though the project was entrusted to CRIS in January 2012, the process of 
execution of MoU started in May 2013 only.  However, the same was yet to 
be executed (November 2017). 
4. CRIS submitted proposal for all India rollout of LandMS project at an abstract 
cost of ` 16.98 crore for inclusion in the budget of 2 018-19, while the pilot 
phase implementation was yet to take off.  
                                                           
222 Chief Engineer (TMS)/NR, Executive Director (Track/P)/RB, Executive Director (L&A -1)/RB and Chief Engineer 
(MRTS)/NR were members of the Core Group 

171
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7
 Report No.7 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 7 
 
 
 171 
Thus, the project was being executed  without any synchronization of efforts, 
without providing requisite manpower and without following due procedure, 
which led to delay of six years (from January 2012). Without completing pilot 
project, proposing all India roll out is also not prudent and this needs to be 
reviewed. 
In December 2017, in response to an audit query about the impact of delay in 
the execution of the project, NR (Nodal office for  the project) communicated 
that day to day activities of railways are in no way affected by the delay in 
execution of the project as the project is a step towards system improvement 
and digitalization of railway assets is for better management and optimization of 
resources. 
Thus, delay in implementation of the project, the benefits in terms of system 
improvement and better management and optimization of resources are yet to 
be derived. Besides all India roll out without completing pilot project may be 
fraught with the glitches and needs to be reviewed. It is recommended that 
railways may expeditiously implement the project, so that , as envisaged the 
manual register/records can be dispensed with and the railway land plans, 
State Government Revenue Plan, geogr aphical features of the railway land 
and adjoining areas are captured on GIS platform. 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board (02 February 2017); their 
reply was awaited (28 February 2018). 

172
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 8Chapter 8 Report No.8 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 172 
Chapter 8  
Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) 
 
There are 37 Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) as on 31 March 201 7 under 
control of Ministry of Railways. These PSUs were set up by the Ministry with 
varied and specific objectives of raising finance for its ro lling stock, manufacture 
of wagons, executing infrastructure projects, managing containerization of rail 
traffic, catering and tourism, station development, utilise railway 
telecommunication network etc.  During 2016- 17, Indian Railways invested  
` 7184.13 crore in various Railway PSUs.  
This Chapter includes two individual  paragraphs on grant of mobilization 
advance to contractors and d eficient planning in procurement of high speed 
bogie assemblies by MRVC. 

173
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 8 Report No.8 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 8 
 
 
 173 
 
8.1 Mumbai Railway Vikas Corporation ltd. (MRVC) : Injudicious payment of 
Mobilization Advance to contractors 
In contravention of codal provisions and Railway Board’s guidelines, MRVC 
granted mobilization advance of ` 6.17 crore to contractors in nine contracts. 
The value of these contracts was below ` 25 crore prescribed by Railway Board. 
The rate of interest charged by MRVC was also much lower than that prescribed 
by the Railway Board. None of the nine works could be completed within the 
scheduled date of completion. Besides, MRVC was unable to ensure f ull recovery 
of Mobilization Advances granted as ` 0.09 crore is yet to be recovered. Even the 
amount recovered involved significant delays. 
Codal provisions 229 stipulate that Executive should, as far as possible, abstain 
from giving advances. However, in ca se of works which are capital intensive and 
of specialized nature and estimated value of tender exceeds ` 25 crore, suitable 
provisions may be included in the special conditions of the tender for grant of 
mobilization advance and advance against machinery and equipment, if the 
work warrants grant of such advances. It further stipulates that the advance 
shall be limited to a maximum of 10 per cent  of the contract value. As per 
Railway Board’s orders of April 2012, the rate of interest on mobilization 
advance was revised from 12 per cent  per annum to 4.5 per cent  per annum 
above the Base Rate of State Bank of India, as effective on the date of approval 
of payment of Mobilization Advance. It was also stated that mobilization 
advance clause shall be restricted o nly for high value tenders of ` 25 crore and 
above. This order
230 was applicable to all concerned including MRVC.  
Central Vigilance Commission (CVC)’s expressed (8 October 1997) its concern 
about payment of mobilization advances by PSUs and desired that ade quate 
steps may be taken to ensure stipulation of mobilization advance only for 
selected works and advance should be interest bearing so that contractor does 
not draw undue benefit. It was stated that timely execution/completion of all 
projects is an essen tial requirement of mobilization advance and the contractor 
would like to draw interest bearing mobilization advance only when he needs to 
maintain his cash flow. Further, CVC in its guidelines (10 April 2007) expressed 
that provision of mobilization advan ce should essentially be need based and 
decision to provide such advance should rest at the level of Board (with 
concurrence of Finance) in the organization. It was also mentioned that 
mobilization advance should be clearly stipulated in the tender documen t and 
its recovery should be time-based and not linked with progress of work.  
Mumbai Railway Vikas Corporation ltd. (MRVC) is a Public Sector Undertaking 
(PSU) under Ministry of Railways. As per norms set by MRVC for discharge of its 
functions, the projec ts handled by MRVC shall be dealt with as per guidelines 
issued by World Bank/Railway Board/RDSO/Quality Manual. The technical 
specifications are followed as issued by RDSO/Railway Board /various Codes and 
Manuals. Audit reviewed the records pertaining to execution of works by MRVC 
                                                           
229 Para 1264 of Indian Railway Code for Engineering Department 
230 This order has been added to the Engineering Code vide Correction Slip no.46 

174
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 8Chapter 8 Report No.8 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 174 
related to projects under Mumbai Urban Transport Project (MUTP -2B). It was 
noticed that 
 MRVC sanctioned (December 2009 to November 2013) mobilization advance 
amounting to ` 6.17 crore to contractors in nine contracts which were w ell 
below the threshold levels of ` 25 crore prescribed for grant of such 
advances as per Railway Board’s order of April 2012 and codal provision. 
 None of the above works could be completed within the scheduled date of 
completion. While two works were comp leted after a delay of around three 
years each, two were terminated after completing 21 per cent to 26 per cent 
of the work. Remaining five works were running behind schedule by two to 
three years up to May 2017. As such, purpose of granting mobilization 
advance for timely execution/completion of projects was defeated.  
 The mobilization advance was granted to contractors at the interest rate of 
six per cent and eight per cent , which was well below rate prescribed by 
Railway Board 231. Audit assessed the loss o f interest as ` 0.63 crore on 
account of recovery of interest at lower rate. 
 Out of the mobilization advance of ` 6.17 crore granted, ` 6.07crore have 
been recovered after delays ranging between three months to 52 months 
from the scheduled date of completi on. As on May 2017, an amount of  
` 0.09 crore was yet to be recovered from one contractor.  
Thus, in contravention of the Railway Board’s instructions and CVC guidelines, 
MRVC sanctioned mobilization advance in contracts below the stipulated 
contract value at lower interest rate than prescribed by Railway Board. Besides, 
MRVC was unable to recover the mobilization advance granted to the contractor 
fully and even recovered after significant delays.   
In reply, MRVC stated (July 2017) that they have their own Schedule of Powers, 
manuals, bidding documents and guidelines for contract management and they 
do not necessarily follow all the codal provisions and directives issued by 
Railway Board in management of works contracts. They stated that the orders 
mentioned by Audit were not applicable to them. They also stated that since a 
number of major activities being carried out by MRVC are funded by World 
Bank, the guidelines issued by World Bank are followed by MRVC for 
preparation of Bid documents. To maintain uni formity the same guidelines are 
adopted in all contracts irrespective of the source of funding.  They stated that, 
there is no direct link between the mobilization advance and the completion of 
work. 
Audit, however, noticed that Finance department of MRVC d uring vetting had 
raised the issue about non -uniformity in granting mobilization advance in 
contracts and stated that for the same project Chief Engineer’s office had not 
given the mobilization advance  and suggested deletion of the clause . However, 
his views were not considered stating that ‘no internal order had been issued in 
                                                           
231 12 per cent per annum before April 2012 and with effect from April 2012, it was revised to 4.5 per cent above the 
Base Rate of State Bank of India 

175
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 8 Report No.8 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 8 
 
 
 175 
MRVC to follow Railway Board’s orders of May 2015 regarding Mobilization 
Advance in Works Contracts’.  
Grant of mobilization advances to contractors should be governed by the 
directives of Ministry of Railways (Railway Board). The orders of Railways Board 
mentioned by Audit were duly addressed to all Railway PSUs including MRVC. 
Besides, the said project (MUTP-2B) is not funded by World Bank, but funded by 
Government of Maharashtra and Ministry of Railways on 50:50 basis. Therefore, 
MRVC needs to follow guidelines issued by the Railway Board while granting 
Mobilization Advance in Works Contracts. As regards, linkage of mobilization 
advance with completion of projects, CVC guidelines of  October 1997 clarifies 
that timely completion/execution of all projects is an essential requirement, for 
which mobilization advance may be granted. 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board on 18 October 2017; 
their reply is yet to be received (28 February 2018). 
8.2 Mumbai Rail way Vikas Corporation Ltd.: Deficient planning in 
procurement of high speed bogie assemblies 
Mumbai Rail Vikas Corporation Ltd. (MRVC) awarded contracts for procurement 
of high speed bogie assemblies from M/s Siemens -Austria without assessing 
availability of the required infrastructure for conducting oscillation trials. There 
were delays at various stages of execution and consequently the contract was 
terminated. This resulted in blocking up of capital of ` 42.57 crore.   
Mumbai Urban Transportation Project (MUTP) was conceived in 1993 with an 
objective to improve public transport system in Mumbai, with participation of 
Indian Railways (IR) and Government of Maharashtra (GOM) and financial 
assistance of World Bank.  Phase I of MUTP included procurement, manufacture 
and retrofitment of Electrical Multiple Units (EMUs), which were to be executed 
on Mumbai suburban Railways by Mumbai Rail Vikas Corporation Ltd.
232(MRVC). 
Railway Board (July 2000) decided that MRVC shall invite te nders for 
procurement of EMUs adhering to the specifications and conditions approved 
by IR, under technical scrutiny of Research, Design and Standards Organization 
(RDSO). These EMUs could achieve higher speed up to 130 kmph, as compared 
to 110 kmph of ICF conventional EMU cars. 
Accordingly, MRVC invited global tenders with the approval of Railway Board 
(July 2003) and awarded a contract (December 2008) to M/s Siemens 
Transportation System, Austria for supply of 108 high speed bogie assemblies
233 
at a cost of EURO 9461491 plus ` 1.3 crore. The cost was finally revised to EURO 
9552383 plus ` 1.30 crore (totaling to ` 63.72 crore).  The delivery time initially 
fixed as 6 June 2010, was extended from time to time up to 15 August 2014. 
Some of the reasons for gran ting extensions included want of approval of coach 
lay out and allotment of transportation codes by Railway Board, issue of Speed 
Certificate and clearance of Railway Safety Commissioner (CRS) for main line 
                                                           
232A PSU under Ministry of Railways 
233 108 high speed bogies were to be used for manufacture of 54 cars of EMU; per car two bogies are required 

176
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways)Chapter 8Chapter 8 Report No.8 of 2018 (Railways) 
 
 176 
trials etc. RDSO made a request (May 2013) for is suing of transportation Code 
for the purpose of oscillation trails, which was finally issued by Railway Board in 
April 2014. This Transportation Code was also required for speed certificate 
from CCRS and as such clearance of CR S was also delayed. The first  18 bogie 
assemblies were required to undergo oscillation trials for prototype approval 
within 26 weeks from the date of receipt of rake at purchaser’s end, while 
remaining 90 bogies were to be supplied thereafter in series. Integral Coach 
Factory (ICF), Chennai was required to manufacture the EMU coaches (shells) to 
be mounted on these bogies in Prototype two 9 -car rakes and three 12 -car 
rakes. 
The contract conditions specified maximum speed of 110 kmph on main line 
and 130 kmph on Rajdhani route with 2 de gree curve track for these bogie 
assemblies supplied by M/s. Siemens. The oscillation trails with prototype rakes 
were required to be conducted on both types of tracks i.e. Main line and 
Rajdhani track. A prototype 9 -car rake was manufactured by ICF at a c ost of  
` 20.68 crore (cost borne by Indian Railways) and received in June 2011 at 
Mumbai Central Car shed for oscillation trials. The amount of ` 21.89 crore was 
paid (July 2010) by MRVC (March 2012) to M/s Siemens from the amount 
allocated from World Bank funds towards advance payment (Stage II) as per the 
contract.  
During the review of records, Audit observed that trials could not be conducted 
within specified period of 26 weeks, due to non -availability of 2 degree curve 
track in Mumbai sub -urban area. In order to address this issue, RDSO (April 
2012) revised the specification of curve on track for oscillation trials from 2 
degree to 0.5 -1.0 degree, which was accepted by M/s Siemens. But, results of 
further trials were not in conformity with the laid down standards.  
Subsequently, M/s Siemens proposed to modify the design by way of increase in 
pressure setting of air spring in the prototype bogie assemblies with the 
approval of RDSO. However, modified rake too did not achieve speed beyond 80 
kmph in the trial held on 23 August 2014, due to speed restriction imposed on 
account of ongoing track renewal work in the section. In the meantime, Railway 
Board (April 2014), while according post facto approval to the layout of coaches 
and transportation codes requi red for Oscillation trials directed ICF not to 
manufacture more such coaches till further decision. MRVC was also advised to 
defer any further delivery of bogies from M/S Siemens till the Railway Board’s 
decision was obtained.  
Audit observed that delibera tions related to plans for trials, speed certificates, 
extension of delivery schedule etc. were continued among MRVC, RDSO and 
M/s Siemens till January 2016 when sanction to conduct Detailed Oscillation 
Trials was accorded by CRS. MRVC advised (January 201 6) M/s Siemens that it 
should make necessary arrangement and keep the rake with prototype bogies 
ready for oscillation trial under advice to RDSO. However, despite regular 
pursuance (February, March and April 2016), followed by notice (October 2016), 

177
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 8 Report No.8 of 2018 (Railways) Chapter 8 
 
 
 177 
M/s S iemens did not revert back about readiness of bogies for trials as per 
specifications in the contract.  
Finally, MRVC terminated the contract (14 December 2016) with M/s Siemens 
on account of failure to discharge its obligations under the contract and en -
cashed (December 2016) the Bank Guarantee (BG) amounting to ` 17.09 crore.  
However, balance amount of ` 4.80 crore out of ` 21.89 crore paid to M/s 
Siemens for bogie assemblies up to March 2012 was yet to be recovered (July 
2017). In addition to this, retu rn of 40 bull gears and MSU assemblies worth  
` 3.88 crore handed over by ICF to M/s Siemens was also awaited.  
Thus, procurement of expensive bogies, without ensuring the availability of 2 
degree curve track and ensuring feasibility of running such high s peed bogies on 
Mumbai Suburban section for oscillation trials, was not judicious. Deficient 
planning on part of MRVC led to inordinate delays at various stages of execution 
and consequent termination of contract. This also resulted in blocking up of 
capital of ` 42.57 crore for more than four and half years on account of cost of 
shells manufactured by ICF ( ` 20.68 crore) and payments made to M/s Siemens 
(` 21.89 crore). Further, shells worth ` 20.68 crore were lying idle at Mumbai 
Central car shed, recovery  of ` 4.80 crore and return of bull gear/MSU 
assemblies worth ` 3.88 crore from M/s Siemens were still awaited. Failure of 
the contract for procurement of high speed bogies for EMUs from M/s Siemens 
has also resulted in non - achievement of intended objecti ves related to 
reliability, safety and maintenance in suburban network under the MUTP. 
The matter was brought to the notice of Railway Board on 18 October 2017; 
their reply is yet to be received (28 February 2018). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi        (Nand Kishore) 
Dated:     Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
 
 
  
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
New Delhi       (Rajiv Mehrishi) 
Dated:     Comptroller and Auditor General of India 











    
` LQFURUH












    
3HUFHQWDJH
Report No. 37 of 2016        Page 69 
 
 
 
 
  (NAND KISHORE) 
 
 
 
 (SHASHI KANT SHARMA)  
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)37
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
       
 
7. Integration between ICMS and Passenger Reservation System (PRS), ICMS 
and Control Office Application (COA) and ICMS and Coach Display System 
(CDS) may be strengthened to have timely data updation and to avoid manual 
intervention. 
Application controls provide assurance to the Administration that transactions are 
properly authorised, complete and accurate, and validity of transactions, their 
maintenance and other types of data input controls are in place. As seen from the 
data and live operations checked during field audit ICMS lacked adequate input 
controls during data entry into the syst em which led to incorrect/invalid data 
being entered and also had deficient manual supervisory controls. Due to 
deficiencies in such controls data accuracy, consistency and completeness could 
not be ensured. 
8. Adequate validation and manual supervisory controls over data entry may 
be introduced in ICMS to ensure accuracy, completeness and validity of 
various types of data input and output.   
The IT Security was deficient and physical and logical access controls needed 
strengthening. Change Management was not documented and no system/ 
procedure for getting appropriate approvals before releasing the changes made in 
the ICMS was found in place. Business Continuity Plan was yet to be fully 
implemented. 
9. Physical and logical access controls may be strengthened. 
10. Change Management procedures for updation and approval of changes 
may be laid down and changes documented.  
11. Business Continuity Plan/Disaster Recovery Plan may be fully implemented 
so as to ensure that business critical  information and assets are protected 
from loss, damage and abuse. 
 
 
 
         (Nand Kishore) 
New Delhi         Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
Date: 28 November 2016 
 
    Countersigned 
      
 
 
     (Shashi Kant Sharma) 
New Delhi            Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Date: 28 November 2016
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System
Report No.32 of 2016 (Railways)37
Report on Integrated Coaching Management System 
       
 
7. Integration between ICMS and Passenger Reservation System (PRS), ICMS 
and Control Office Application (COA) and ICMS and Coach Display System 
(CDS) may be strengthened to have timely data updation and to avoid manual 
intervention. 
Application controls provide assurance to the Administration that transactions are 
properly authorised, complete and accurate, and validity of transactions, their 
maintenance and other types of data input controls are in place. As seen from the 
data and live operations checked during field audit ICMS lacked adequate input 
controls during data entry into the syst em which led to incorrect/invalid data 
being entered and also had deficient manual supervisory controls. Due to 
deficiencies in such controls data accuracy, consistency and completeness could 
not be ensured. 
8. Adequate validation and manual supervisory controls over data entry may 
be introduced in ICMS to ensure accuracy, completeness and validity of 
various types of data input and output.   
The IT Security was deficient and physical and logical access controls needed 
strengthening. Change Management was not documented and no system/ 
procedure for getting appropriate approvals before releasing the changes made in 
the ICMS was found in place. Business Continuity Plan was yet to be fully 
implemented. 
9. Physical and logical access controls may be strengthened. 
10. Change Management procedures for updation and approval of changes 
may be laid down and changes documented.  
11. Business Continuity Plan/Disaster Recovery Plan may be fully implemented 
so as to ensure that business critical  information and assets are protected 
from loss, damage and abuse. 
 
 
 
         (Nand Kishore) 
New Delhi         Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
Date: 28 November 2016 
 
    Countersigned 
      
 
 
     (Shashi Kant Sharma) 
New Delhi            Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Date: 28 November 2016
15 March 2018
16 March 2018


178
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
S.no Train No. From To S.no Train No. From To S.no Train No. From To
1 12235 Dibrugarh New Delhi 1 12213 Yeshwantpur Delhi Sarairohilla 1 12001 Habibganj New Delhi
2 12236 New Delhi Dibrugarh 2 12214 Delhi Sarairohilla Yeshwantpur 2 12002 New Delhi Habibganj
3 12301 Howrah New Delhi 3 12219 Lokmanya Tilak Terminus Secunderabad 3 12003 Lucknow NE New Delhi
4 12302 New Delhi Howrah 4 12220 Secunderabad Lokmanya Tilak Terminus 4 12004 New Delhi Lucknow NE
5 12305 Howrah New Delhi 5 12221 Pune Howrah 5 12005 New Delhi Kalka
6 12306 New Delhi Howrah 6 12222 Howrah Pune 6 12006 Kalka New Delhi
7 12309 Rajendranagar T New Delhi 7 12223 Lokmanya Tilak Terminus Ernakulam 7 12007 Chennai Central Mysore
8 12310 New Delhi Rajendranagar T 8 12224 Ernakulam Lokmanya Tilak Terminus 8 12008 Mysore Chennai Central
9 12313 Sealdah New Delhi 9 12227 Mumbai Central Indore 9 12009 Mumabi Central Ahmedabad
10 12314 New Delhi Sealdah 10 12228 Indore Mumbai Central 10 12010 Ahmedaba Mumbai Central
11 12423 Dibrugarh New Delhi 11 12239 Mumbai Central Jaipur 11 12011 New Delhi Kalka
12 12424 New Delhi Dibrugarh 12 12240 Jaipur Mumbai Central 12 12012 Kalka New Delhi
13 12425 New Delhi Jammu Tawi 13 12245 Howrah Yeshwantpur 13 12013 New Delhi Amritsar
14 12426 Jammu Tawi New Delhi 14 12246 Yeshwantpur Howrah 14 12014 Amritsar New Delhi
15 12431 Thiruvananthapuram 
Central
H Nizamuddin 15 12259 Sealdah New Delhi 15 12015 New Delhi Ajmer
16 12432 Nizamuddin Thiruvananthapu
ram Central
16 12260 New Delhi Sealdah 16 12016 Ajmer New Delhi
17 12433 Chennai Central Nizamuddin 17 12261 Chhatrapati Shiviji Terminal 
Mumbai
Howrah 17 12017 New Delhi Dehradun
18 12434 Nizamuddin MAS 18 12262 Howrah Chhatrapati Shiviji Terminal 
Mumbai
18 12018 Dehradun New Delhi
19 12435 Dibrugarh New Delhi 19 12263 Pune Nizamuddin 19 12019 Howrah Ranchi
20 12436 New Delhi Dibrugarh 20 12264 Nizamuddin Pune 20 12020 Ranchi Howrah
21 12437 Secunderabad Nizamuddin 21 12265 Delhi Sarairohilla Jammu Tawi 21 12025 Pune Secunderabad
22 12438 Nizamuddin Secunderabad 22 12266 Jammu Tawi Delhi Sarairohilla 22 12026 Secunderabad Pune
23 12439 Ranchi New Delhi 23 12267 Mumbai Central Ahmedabad 23 12027 Chennai Central Bangaluru
24 12440 New Delhi Ranchi 24 12268 Ahmedabad Mumbai Central 24 12028 Bagaluru Chennai Central
25 12441 Bilaspur New Delhi 25 12269 Chennai Central Nizamuddin 25 12029 New Delhi Amritsar
26 12442 New Delhi Bilaspur 26 12270 Nizamuddin Chennai Central 26 12030 Amritsar New Delhi
27 12453 Ranchi New Delhi 27 12273 Howrah New Delhi 27 12031 New Delhi Amritsar
28 12454 New Delhi Ranchi 28 12274 New Delhi Howrah 28 12032 Amritsar New Delhi
29 12951 Mumbai Central New Delhi 29 12275 Allahabad New Delhi 29 12033 Kanpur Central New Delhi
30 12952 New Delhi Mumbai Central 30 12276 New Delhi Allahabad 30 12034 New Delhi Kanpur Central
31 12953 Mumbai Central Nizamuddin 31 12281 Bhubaneswar New Delhi 31 12035 Jaipur Agra Fort
32 12954 Nizamuddin Mumbai Central 32 12282 New Delhi Bhubaneswar 32 12036 Agra Fort Jaipur
33 12957 Ahmedabad New Delhi 33 12283 Ernakulam Nizamuddin 33 12037 New Delhi Ludhiana
34 12958 New Delhi Ahmedabad 34 12284 Nizamuddin Ernakulam 34 12038 Ludhiana New Delhi
35 22207 Chennai Central Thiruvananthapu
ram Central
35 12285 Secunderabad Nizamuddin 35 12041 Howrah New Jalpaiguri
36 22208 Thiruvananthapuram 
Central
Chennai Central 36 12286 Nizamuddin Secunderabad 36 12042 New Jalpaiguri Howrah
37 22691 Bangaluru Nizamuddin 37 12289 Mumbai Central Nagpur 37 12043 New Delhi Moga
38 22692 Nizamuddin Bangaluru 38 12290 Nagpur Mumbai Central 38 12044 Moga New Delhi
39 22693 Bangaluru Nizamuddin 39 12293 Lokmanya Tilak Terminus Allahabad 39 12045 New Delhi Chandigarh
40 22694 Nizamuddin Bangaluru 40 12294 Allahabad Lokmanya Tilak Terminus 40 12046 Chandigarh New Delhi
41 22811 Bhubaneswar New Delhi 41 12297 Ahmedabad Pune 41 12243 Chennai Central Coimbatore
42 22812 New Delhi Bhubaneswar 42 12298 Pune Ahmedabad 42 12244 Coimbatore Chennai Central
43 22823 Bhubaneswar New Delhi 43 22201 Sealdah Puri 43 12277 Howrah puri
44 22824 New Delhi Bhubaneswar 44 22202 Puri Sealdah 44 12278 Puri Howrah
45 22203 Visakhapatnam Secunderabad 45 12847 Howrah Digha
46 22204 Secunderabad Visakhapatnam 46 12848 Digha Howrah
47 22205 Chennai Central Madurai
48 22206 Madurai Chennai Central
49 22209 Mumbai Central New Delhi
50 22210 New Delhi Mumbai Central
51 22213 Shalimar Patna
52 22214 Patna Shalimar
Annexure 2.1 (Para 2.1.1)
List of premier trains
RAJDHANI DURONTO SHATABDI

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
179
Berth 
potential
Actual 
passengers
Occupancy 
(%)
Berth 
potential
Actual 
passengers
Occupancy 
(%)
Berth 
potential
Actual 
passengers
Occupancy 
(%)
Berth 
potential
Actual 
passengers
Occupancy 
(%)
12235 RAJ DBRG NDLS RAJEX Dibrugarh New Delhi 13740 11250 81.88 13800 8650 62.68 -19.20 57622 48421 84.03 61274 48103 78.50 -5.53
12236 RAJ NDLS DBRG RJDHN New Delhi Dibrugarh 11408 11451 100.38 11408 8893 77.95 -22.42 46930 49178 104.79 48944 48134 98.35 -6.45
12301 RAJ KOLKATA RAJDHNI Howrah Jn New Delhi 85894 82276 95.79 86570 73626 85.05 -10.74 217836 224712 103.16 227196 229364 100.95 -2.20
12302 RAJ KOLKATA RJDHNI New Delhi Howrah Jn 77212 76626 99.24 76264 67551 88.58 -10.67 203616 218736 107.43 210528 217925 103.51 -3.91
12305 RAJ KOLKATA RJDHNI Howrah Jn New Delhi 15238 15440 101.33 15394 13898 90.28 -11.04 36925 39163 106.06 39013 39578 101.45 -4.61
12306 RAJ KOLKATA  RJDHNI New Delhi Howrah Jn 13447 13681 101.74 13057 12269 93.96 -7.78 34616 37524 108.40 35704 38181 106.94 -1.46
12309 RAJ RJPB RAJDHANI Rajendranagar T New Delhi 120672 116748 96.75 119510 111058 92.93 -3.82 203932 207458 101.73 208066 211875 101.83 0.10
12310 RAJ RJPB RAJDHANI New Delhi Rajendranagar T 120620 123817 102.65 119510 111939 93.66 -8.99 195500 212782 108.84 201734 211915 105.05 -3.79
12313 RAJ SDAH RAJDHANIEX Sealdah New Delhi 69160 59542 86.09 69160 53570 77.46 -8.64 337588 325955 96.55 349608 329576 94.27 -2.28
12314 RAJ SEALDAH RJDHANI New Delhi Sealdah 59252 60090 101.41 58728 53563 91.21 -10.21 317620 329481 103.73 327300 328534 100.38 -3.36
12423 RAJ DBRT RAJDHANI E Dibrugarh Town New Delhi 120406 119695 99.41 117367 101539 86.51 -12.90 400140 401026 100.22 412686 414102 100.34 0.12
12424 RAJ DBRT RAJDHANI New Delhi Dibrugarh Town 106290 131646 123.86 105442 115056 109.12 -14.74 312186 403811 129.35 338380 420276 124.20 -5.15
12425 RAJ JAMMU RAJDHANI New Delhi Jammu Tawi 84832 80457 94.84 86368 76807 88.93 -5.91 250677 252416 100.69 275396 266892 96.91 -3.78
12426 RAJ JAMMU RAJDHANI Jammu Tawi New Delhi 86385 81325 94.14 87262 78927 90.45 -3.69 253140 260551 102.93 276960 277936 100.35 -2.58
12431 RAJ RAJDHANI EXP Trivandrum Central H Nizamuddin 39008 42019 107.72 39615 35505 89.63 -18.09 97756 122891 125.71 99385 112459 113.15 -12.56
12432 RAJ TRIVNDRM RJDHNI H Nizamuddin Trivandrum Central 43218 38182 88.35 41418 31503 76.06 -12.29 106530 112162 105.29 102514 97776 95.38 -9.91
12433 RAJ RAJDHANI EXP Chennai central H Nizamuddin 25576 20709 80.97 26144 18052 69.05 -11.92 61824 59010 95.45 63204 56505 89.40 -6.05
12434 RAJ CHENNAI RAJDHNI H Nizamuddin Chennai Central 26220 19706 75.16 26040 17571 67.48 -7.68 64108 60571 94.48 63426 58342 91.98 -2.50
12435 RAJ DBRT RAJDHANI E Dibrugarh Town New Delhi 28458 24068 84.57 28764 19588 68.10 -16.47 126005 102645 81.46 134910 109501 81.17 -0.30
12436 RAJ NDLS DBRT RJDHN New Delhi Dibrugarh Town 25004 28001 111.99 23994 23214 96.75 -15.24 115070 113462 98.60 99696 113260 113.61 15.00
12437 RAJ RAJDHANI EXP Secunderabad Jn H Nizamuddin 11596 8144 70.23 12788 7248 56.68 -13.55 32908 27950 84.93 31096 25763 82.85 -2.08
12438 RAJ NZM SC RJDHNI H Nizamuddin Secunderabad Jn 11602 9525 82.10 13066 8684 66.46 -15.64 34255 32084 93.66 33229 28625 86.14 -7.52
12439 RAJ RNC NDLS RAJ EX Ranchi New Delhi 30092 27554 91.57 30132 22597 74.99 -16.57 60820 60817 100.00 62526 61056 97.65 -2.35
12440 RAJ NDLS RNC RAJ EX New Delhi Ranchi 29620 25098 84.73 30318 20288 66.92 -17.82 57867 59833 103.40 61971 60331 97.35 -6.04
12441 RAJ BSP NDLS RAJ EX Bilaspur Jn New Delhi 31651 22570 71.31 36084 17995 49.87 -21.44 61951 52665 85.01 83849 58544 69.82 -15.19
12442 RAJ BILASPUR RJDHNI New Delhi Bilaspur Jn 28793 21998 76.40 31620 18180 57.50 -18.91 56050 53118 94.77 71138 57937 81.44 -13.33
12453 RAJ RNC NDLS RAJ EX Ranchi New Delhi 33348 24507 73.49 30318 14769 48.71 -24.78 58876 56053 95.21 67854 55752 82.16 -13.04
12454 RAJ NDLS RNC RJDHNI New Delhi Ranchi 32998 26795 81.20 30039 19599 65.25 -15.96 58066 58082 100.03 67235 61768 91.87 -8.16
12951 RAJ MUMBAI RAJDHANI Mumbai Central New Delhi 96806 95365 98.51 94538 88677 93.80 -4.71 268990 282872 105.16 281290 297121 105.63 0.47
12952 RAJ MUMBAI RAJDHANI New Delhi Mumbai Central 90194 84670 93.88 89920 79661 88.59 -5.28 254881 260318 102.13 267688 275148 102.79 0.65
12953 RAJ AUG KR RAJ EXP Mumbai Central H Nizamuddin 105437 102050 96.79 101716 86266 84.81 -11.98 284912 301141 105.70 291462 299687 102.82 -2.87
12954 RAJ AG KRANTI RJDHN H Nizamuddin Mumbai Central 96667 90608 93.73 93013 80609 86.66 -7.07 266978 277316 103.87 270660 278271 102.81 -1.06
12957 RAJ SWARNA J RAJ EX Ahmedabad Jn New Delhi 91086 81334 89.29 90318 70376 77.92 -11.37 254842 252238 98.98 267518 256163 95.76 -3.22
12958 RAJ ADI SJ RAJDHANI New Delhi Ahmedabad Jn 91086 83404 91.57 91650 75932 82.85 -8.72 251970 259323 102.92 267942 267039 99.66 -3.26
22207 RAJ SUPER AC EXP Chennai central Trivandrum Central 12420 8273 66.61 12555 10147 80.82 14.21 47104 33700 71.54 47616 43057 90.43 18.88
22208 RAJ SUPER AC EXP Trivandrum Central Chennai Central 12420 6479 52.17 12555 6897 54.93 2.77 46912 28529 60.81 47616 34540 72.54 11.72
22691 RAJ RAJDHANI EXP KSR Bengaluru H Nizamuddin 54760 51651 94.32 58904 41117 69.80 -24.52 143088 157911 110.36 181488 163231 89.94 -20.42
22692 RAJ BANGLORE RJDHNI H Nizamuddin KSR Bengaluru 53253 51133 96.02 58200 44005 75.61 -20.41 133905 148152 110.64 174200 167750 96.30 -14.34
22693 RAJ RAJDHANI EXP KSR Bengaluru H Nizamuddin 41720 51386 123.17 41720 39921 95.69 -27.48 108835 133672 122.82 128380 132865 103.49 -19.33
22694 RAJ BANGLORE RAJDHN H Nizamuddin KSR Bengaluru 39198 31567 80.53 36696 26073 71.05 -9.48 105198 104381 99.22 117024 104721 89.49 -9.74
22811 RAJ BBS RAJDHANI EX Bhubaneswar New Delhi 17308 15473 89.40 16712 12698 75.98 -13.42 119022 112252 94.31 113056 98698 87.30 -7.01
22812 RAJ BUBNESWR RJDHNI New Delhi Bhubaneswar 16500 15704 95.18 16240 13651 84.06 -11.12 105168 110758 105.32 104160 99845 95.86 -9.46
22823 RAJ BBS RAJDHANI EX Bhubaneswar New Delhi 24340 21568 88.61 23476 18471 78.68 -9.93 160859 146870 91.30 152949 130203 85.13 -6.18
22824 RAJ BUBNESWR RJDHNI New Delhi Bhubaneswar 23346 23709 101.55 22509 20386 90.57 -10.99 142884 148218 103.73 139518 135022 96.78 -6.96
12213 DRNT DURONTO EXPRESS Yesvantpur Jn Delhi S Rohilla 7384 5695 77.13 7520 4334 57.63 -19.49 30808 29650 96.24 37544 27817 74.09 -22.15
12214 DRNT YPR DURONTO EXP Delhi S Rohilla Yesvantpur Jn 7416 3297 44.46 7708 4636 60.15 15.69 30312 19363 63.88 37356 26273 70.33 6.45
12219 DRNT SC DURONTO EXP Lokmanyatilak T Secunderabad Jn 14508 10557 72.77 14508 8454 58.27 -14.50 60264 50052 83.05 67464 46578 69.04 -14.01
12220 DRNT DURONTO AC EXP Secunderabad Jn Lokamanyatilak T 14508 12302 84.79 14508 12745 87.85 3.05 60264 55617 92.29 67680 63669 94.07 1.78
12221 DRNT HOWRAH DURONTO Pune Howrah Jn 14508 14529 100.14 14664 13605 92.78 -7.37 70632 68766 97.36 67824 64072 94.47 -2.89
12222 DRNT HWH PUNE DURONT Howrah Jn Pune 15360 14299 93.09 15712 14468 92.08 -1.01 73496 66222 90.10 70480 66986 95.04 4.94
12223 DRNT LTT ERS DURONTO Lokmanyatilak T Ernakulam Jn 9672 7472 77.25 9672 7458 77.11 -0.14 53568 40313 75.26 53496 38896 72.71 -2.55
12224 DRNT ERS LTT DURONTO Ernakulam Jn Lokamanyatilak T 9776 6569 67.20 9672 6445 66.64 -0.56 54144 33891 62.59 53496 34792 65.04 2.44
12227 DRNT INDORE DURONTO Mumbai Central Indore Jn BG 10148 6925 68.24 10230 7100 69.40 1.16 55268 40573 73.41 54570 39998 73.30 -0.11
12228 DRNT MUMBAI DURONTO Indore Jn BG Mumbai Central 10148 6761 66.62 10340 7132 68.97 2.35 55124 37648 68.30 55156 36504 66.18 -2.11
12239 DRNT JAIPUR DURONTO Mumbai Central Jaipur 10526 7264 69.01 10974 6768 61.67 -7.34 54982 43539 79.19 55614 37781 67.93 -11.25
12240 DRNT JP BCT DURONTO Jaipur Mumbai Central 10392 6570 63.22 10672 4984 46.70 -16.52 56280 38568 68.53 57040 36349 63.73 -4.80
12245 DRNT HWH YPR DURONTO Howraj Jn Yesvantpur Jn 12700 13132 103.40 13048 12219 93.65 -9.76 62656 65233 104.11 70654 72968 103.28 -0.84
12246 DRNT DURONTO EXPRESS Yesvantpur Jn Howrah Jn 12624 12738 100.90 13980 12450 89.06 -11.85 63440 66440 104.73 74488 75168 100.91 -3.82
12259 DRNT NDLS  DURONTO Sealdah New Delhi 32204 27140 84.28 41674 24652 59.15 -25.12 144032 138926 96.45 150754 128232 85.06 -11.39
12260 DRNT SDAH DURONTO EX New Delhi Sealdah 31944 29440 92.16 40792 28617 70.15 -22.01 143024 144157 100.79 149200 132785 89.00 -11.79
12261 DRNT HOWRAH DURONTO C Shivaji Mah T Howrah Jn 29172 29442 100.93 28860 26736 92.64 -8.29 137304 141929 103.37 133200 133958 100.57 -2.80
12262 DRNT HWH CSTM DURONT Howraj Jn C Shivaji Mah T 30408 27334 89.89 31422 27267 86.78 -3.11 141016 137636 97.60 140380 136616 97.32 -0.28
12263 DRNT NZM DURONTO EXP Pune H Nizamuddin 13416 13205 98.43 14508 14044 96.80 -1.63 59199 62528 105.62 60264 64305 106.71 1.08
12264 DRNT PUNE DURONTO EX H Nizamuddin Pune 14039 12545 89.36 15252 14145 92.74 3.38 60508 61093 100.97 61938 64035 103.39 2.42
Increase (+)/ 
Decrease (-) 
(in per cent)
Annexure 2.2 a (Para 2.1.3.1)
Statement showing the comparison of occupancy in Rajdhani and Duronto trains
AC 2 tier AC 3 tier
9.9.15-31.7.16 9.9.16-31.7.17 Increase (+)/ 
Decrease (-) 
(in per cent)
9.9.15-31.7.16 9.9.16-31.7.17
Train No Train 
Type
Train Name Originating Station of train Destination Station of train

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
180
Berth 
potential
Actual 
passengers
Occupancy 
(%)
Berth 
potential
Actual 
passengers
Occupancy 
(%)
Berth 
potential
Actual 
passengers
Occupancy 
(%)
Berth 
potential
Actual 
passengers
Occupancy 
(%)
Increase (+)/ 
Decrease (-) 
(in per cent)
Annexure 2.2 a (Para 2.1.3.1)
Statement showing the comparison of occupancy in Rajdhani and Duronto trains
AC 2 tier AC 3 tier
9.9.15-31.7.16 9.9.16-31.7.17 Increase (+)/ 
Decrease (-) 
(in per cent)
9.9.15-31.7.16 9.9.16-31.7.17
Train No Train 
Type
Train Name Originating Station of train Destination Station of train
12265 DRNT DEE JAT DURONTO Delhi S Rohilla Jammu Tawi 8600 7514 87.37 7560 5887 77.87 -9.50 62488 61104 97.79 64496 59298 91.94 -5.84
12266 DRNT DURONTO EXPRESS Jammu Tawi Delhi S Rohilla 8652 7140 82.52 7560 5518 72.99 -9.53 62736 61099 97.39 64776 56063 86.55 -10.84
12267 DRNT ADI DURONTO EXP Mumbai Central Ahmedabad Jn 44988 42517 94.51 44988 42255 93.93 -0.58 257702 245539 95.28 257734 240717 93.40 -1.88
12268 DRNT BCT DURONTO EXP Ahmedabad Jn Mumbai Central 45094 41845 92.80 44946 41668 92.71 -0.09 259032 241672 93.30 258105 236779 91.74 -1.56
12269 DRNT DURONTO EXPRESS Chennai central H Nizamuddin 7884 6067 76.95 11562 7639 66.07 -10.88 24680 21142 85.66 30106 26736 88.81 3.14
12270 DRNT MAS DURONTO EXP H Nizamuddin Chennai Central 9530 7597 79.72 10416 8237 79.08 -0.64 27512 27385 99.54 28272 28588 101.12 1.58
12273 DRNT NDLS   DURONTO Howrah Jn New Delhi 5076 4303 84.77 5390 4090 75.88 -8.89 27264 27626 101.33 27950 27481 98.32 -3.01
12274 DRNT HWH DURONTO EXP New Delhi Howrah Jn 5076 4310 84.91 5208 3848 73.89 -11.02 27264 28337 103.94 27528 27705 100.64 -3.29
12275 DRNT NDLS DURONTO EX Allahabad Jn New Delhi 16172 16242 100.43 21528 20661 95.97 -4.46 50400 50707 100.61 49680 49364 99.36 -1.25
12276 DRNT ALD DURONTO EXP New Delhi Allahabad Jn 16172 15544 96.12 21840 19124 87.56 -8.55 50400 48554 96.34 50400 46446 92.15 -4.18
12281 DRNT BBS DURONTO EXP Bhubaneswar New Delhi 2466 1569 63.63 2350 1448 61.62 -2.01 14688 11962 81.44 12960 11221 86.58 5.14
12282 DRNT BBS DURONTO EXP New Delhi Bhubaneswar 2564 1769 68.99 2520 1662 65.95 -3.04 14712 13982 95.04 13320 12178 91.43 -3.61
12283 DRNT ERS NZM DURONTO Ernakulam Jn H Nizamuddin 3016 2366 78.45 3748 3318 88.53 10.08 11304 8346 73.83 14608 14180 97.07 23.24
12284 DRNT NZM ERS DURONTO H Nizamuddin Ernakulam Jn 3592 2867 79.82 4038 3125 77.39 -2.43 12624 12629 100.04 15184 16246 106.99 6.95
12285 DRNT NZM DURONTO  EX Secunderabad Jn H Nizamuddin 9746 8868 90.99 9672 9244 95.57 4.58 26784 28592 106.75 26784 29692 110.86 4.11
12286 DRNT NZM SC DURONTO H Nizamuddin Secunderabad Jn 9928 7668 77.24 10340 8079 78.13 0.90 27216 24928 91.59 28200 26752 94.87 3.27
12289 DRNT NAGPUR DURONTO C Shivaji Mah T Nagpur 51488 52532 102.03 52968 49653 93.74 -8.29 96120 99175 103.18 94496 95738 101.31 -1.86
12290 DRNT NGP CSTM DURONT Nagpur C Shivaji Mah T 51596 51484 99.78 52996 50008 94.36 -5.42 96040 100356 104.49 94528 97758 103.42 -1.08
12293 DRNT ALD DURONTO EXP Lokmanyatilak T Allahabad Jn 12510 11609 92.80 12711 10810 85.04 -7.75 47552 47945 100.83 50832 47233 92.92 -7.91
12294 DRNT ALD LTT DURONTO Allahabad Jn Lokamanyatilak T 12921 11069 85.67 13113 10220 77.94 -7.73 48348 47267 97.76 51228 47075 91.89 -5.87
12297 DRNT PUNE DURONTO Ahmedabad Jn Pune 21840 20952 95.93 21840 20889 95.65 -0.29 90720 91434 100.79 90720 92019 101.43 0.64
12298 DRNT ADI DURONTO EXP Pune Ahmedabad Jn 21840 19620 89.84 21840 18976 86.89 -2.95 90720 89376 98.52 90720 89198 98.32 -0.20
22201 DRNT DURONTO EXPRESS Sealdah Puri 6900 4240 61.45 7000 4187 59.81 -1.63 36444 28731 78.84 36808 29717 80.74 1.90
22202 DRNT DURONTO EXPRESS Puri Sealdah 6720 4582 68.18 6672 3891 58.32 -9.87 35904 29647 82.57 35776 29114 81.38 -1.19
22203 DRNT SC DURONTO EXP Visakhapatnam Secunderabad Jn 25502 19943 78.20 25573 17197 67.25 -10.96 97792 82707 84.57 97856 74602 76.24 -8.34
22204 DRNT VSKP DURONTO EXP Secunderabad Jn Visakhapatnam 25769 20611 79.98 25767 18290 70.98 -9.00 98496 82057 83.31 98560 74807 75.90 -7.41
22205 DRNT MDU DURONTO EXP Chennai central Madurai Jn 12420 7786 62.69 12420 5445 43.84 -18.85 47104 29564 62.76 47104 23239 49.34 -13.43
22206 DRNT MAS DURONTO EXP Madurai jn Chennai Central 12420 5403 43.50 12285 3700 30.12 -13.38 47172 22623 47.96 46592 17625 37.83 -10.13
22209 DRNT NDLS DURONTO EX Mumbai Central New Delhi 15328 13253 86.46 15762 12388 78.59 -7.87 61634 61814 100.29 63062 54827 86.94 -13.35
22210 DRNT BCT DURONTO New Delhi Mumbai Central 14718 12917 87.76 15170 11836 78.02 -9.74 60714 61800 101.79 62010 62262 100.41 -1.38
22213 DRNT SHM PNBE DURONT Shalimar Patna Jn 6440 6089 94.55 6440 5710 88.66 -5.89 26880 25296 94.11 26880 23789 88.50 -5.61
22214 DRNT DURONTO EXPRESS Patna Jn Shalimar 6506 6038 92.81 6682 6045 90.47 -2.34 26880 26260 97.69 26688 26098 97.79 0.10

181
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
Berth 
potential
Actual 
passengers
Occupancy 
(%)
Berth 
potential
Actual 
passengers
Occupancy 
(%)
12001 SHT Habibganj New Delhi 463644 441722 95.27 465075 391036 84.08 -11.19
12002 SHT New Delhi Habibganj 374980 482098 128.57 376223 435761 115.83 -12.74
12003 SHT Lucknow NE New Delhi 455897 427627 93.80 454650 411991 90.62 -3.18
12004 SHT New Delhi Lucknow NE 405600 423758 104.48 404430 423006 104.59 0.12
12005 SHT New Delhi Kalka 322462 273002 84.66 346864 254166 73.28 -11.39
12006 SHT Kalka New Delhi 546780 269931 49.37 584844 241374 41.27 -8.10
12007 SHT Chennai Central Mysuru Jn 326525 249283 76.34 350280 260273 74.30 -2.04
12008 SHT Mysuru Jn Chennai Central 329664 238740 72.42 349192 254503 72.88 0.46
12009 SHT Mumbai Central Ahmedabad Jn 364179 376251 103.31 358289 357545 99.79 -3.52
12010 SHT Ahmedabad Jn BCT 386946 389806 100.74 376288 376504 100.06 -0.68
12011 SHT New Delhi Kalka 323466 316623 97.88 329550 301418 91.46 -6.42
12012 SHT Kalka New Delhi 557454 297493 53.37 557811 272962 48.93 -4.43
12013 SHT New Delhi Amritsar Jn 412850 350265 84.84 419900 345026 82.17 -2.67
12014 SHT Amritsar Jn New Delhi 507480 341882 67.37 513825 327832 63.80 -3.57
12015 SHT New Delhi Ajmer Jn 348270 339428 97.46 339237 318265 93.82 -3.64
12016 SHT Ajmer Jn NDLS 418876 303908 72.55 449464 286268 63.69 -8.86
12017 SHT New Delhi Dehradun 298688 297751 99.69 311656 303784 97.47 -2.21
12018 SHT Dehradun New Delhi 361342 285941 79.13 361860 260758 72.06 -7.07
12019 SHT Howraj Jn Ranchi 186200 175478 94.24 185026 171639 92.76 -1.48
12020 SHT Ranchi Howrah Jn 231840 165242 71.27 230184 162083 70.41 -0.86
12025 SHT Pune Secunderabad Jn 215527 159829 74.16 214760 141458 65.87 -8.29
12026 SHT Secunderabad Jn Pune 210482 158601 75.35 210560 146013 69.35 -6.01
12027 SHT Chennai Central KSR Bengaluru 250380 228729 91.35 262080 232252 88.62 -2.73
12028 SHT KSR Bengaluru Chennai Central 250458 216377 86.39 262080 212183 80.96 -5.43
12029 SHT New Delhi Amritsar Jn 318665 302723 95.00 304224 284146 93.40 -1.60
12030 SHT Amritsar Jn New Delhi 396341 290689 73.34 383945 268615 69.96 -3.38
12031 SHT New Delhi Amritsar Jn 59919 45502 75.94 59428 44631 75.10 -0.84
12032 SHT Amritsar Jn New Delhi 60783 41976 69.06 60486 39839 65.86 -3.19
12033 SHT Kanpur Central New Delhi 246792 230006 93.20 259428 219001 84.42 -8.78
12034 SHT New Delhi Kanpur Central 246714 210674 85.39 259428 185140 71.36 -14.03
12035 SHT Jaipur Agra Fort 84991 47090 55.41 87048 44426 51.04 -4.37
12036 SHT Agra Fort Jaipur 79594 44373 55.75 81458 40583 49.82 -5.93
12037 SHT New Delhi Ludhiana Jn 150120 69256 46.13 161039 58740 36.48 -9.66
12038 SHT Ludhiana Jn New Delhi 153144 68802 44.93 164287 63407 38.60 -6.33
12041 SHT Howraj Jn New Jalpaiguri 167146 150078 89.79 178509 146976 82.34 -7.45
12042 SHT New Jalpaiguru Howrah Jn 186804 147290 78.85 199914 150548 75.31 -3.54
12043 SHT New Delhi Moga 56950 32410 56.91 62980 30943 49.13 -7.78
12044 SHT Moga New Delhi 88145 26064 29.57 97478 24841 25.48 -4.09
12045 SHT New Delhi Chandigarh 209976 130108 61.96 197386 107890 54.66 -7.30
12046 SHT Chandigarh New Delhi 210756 171290 81.27 210291 150863 71.74 -9.53
12243 SHT Chennai Central Coimbatore Jn 151242 116085 76.75 152100 105105 69.10 -7.65
12244 SHT Coimbatore Jn Chennai Central 151242 117109 77.43 152100 109831 72.21 -5.22
12277 SHT Howraj Jn Puri 290182 138560 47.75 328168 136753 41.67 -6.08
12278 SHT Puri Howrah Jn 245310 171045 69.73 277134 177107 63.91 -5.82
12847 SHT Howraj Jn Digha 153363 78364 51.10 152827 76372 49.97 -1.12
12848 SHT Digha Howrah Jn 153363 81746 53.30 152894 77095 50.42 -2.88
Annexure 2.2 b (Para 2.1.3.1)
Statement showing the comparison of occupancy in Shatabdi trains
Train No Train 
Type
Originating Station of train Destination Station of train 9.9.15-31.7.16 9.9.16-31.7.17 Increase 
(+)/Decrease (-
) (in per cent)

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
182
S. no Sector Train No. Total for AC 2 
and AC 3(Sep. 15 
to July 16)
Total for AC 2 
and AC 3(Sep. 16 
to July 17)
Increase (+) / 
Decrease (-) 
(Nos.)
Increase (+) / 
Decrease (-) 
(in per cent)
No. of 
passengers 
(Sep. 15 to 
July 16)
No. of 
passengers 
(Sep. 16 to July 
17)
Increase (+) 
/ Decrease (-
) (Nos.)
Increase (+) / 
Decrease (-) 
(in per cent)
2A 3A 2A 3A
12434 19706 60571 17571 58342 80277 75913 -4364 -5
12270 7597 27385 8237 28588 34982 36825 1843 5
27303 87956 25808 86930 115259 112738 -2521 -2 980416 1061148 80732 8
12433 20709 59010 18052 56505 79719 74557 -5162 -6
12269 6067 21142 7639 26736 27209 34375 7166 26
26776 80152 25691 83241 106928 108932 2004 2 980429 1063482 83053 8
12432 38182 112162 31503 97776 150344 129279 -21065 -14
38182 112162 31503 97776 150344 129279 -21065 -14 115705 168415 52710 46
12431 42019 122891 35505 112459 164910 147964 -16946 -10
42019 122891 35505 112459 164910 147964 -16946 -10 108411 185678 77267 71
12438 9525 32084 8684 28625 41609 37309 -4300 -10
12286 7668 24928 8079 26752 32596 34831 2235 7
17193 57012 16763 55377 74205 72140 -2065 -3 985054 1088112 103058 10
12437 8144 27950 7248 25763 36094 33011 -3083 -9
12285 8868 28592 9244 29692 37460 38936 1476 4
17012 56542 16492 55455 73554 71947 -1607 -2 985249 1067219 81970 8
12302 76626 218736 67551 217925 295362 285476 -9886 -3
12306 13681 37524 12269 38181 51205 50450 -755 -1
12314 60090 329481 53563 328534 389571 382097 -7474 -2
12260 29440 144157 28617 132785 173597 161402 -12195 -7
12274 4310 28337 3848 27705 32647 31553 -1094 -3
184147 758235 165848 745130 942382 910978 -31404 -3 1072148 1400462 328314 31
12301 82276 224712 73626 229364 306988 302990 -3998 -1
12305 15440 39163 13898 39578 54603 53476 -1127 -2
12313 59542 325955 53570 329576 385497 383146 -2351 -1
12259 27140 138926 24652 128232 166066 152884 -13182 -8
12273 4303 27626 4090 27481 31929 31571 -358 -1
188701 756382 169836 754231 945083 924067 -21016 -2 993328 1319021 325693 33
12236 11451 49178 8893 48134 60629 57027 -3602 -6
12424 131646 403811 115056 420276 535457 535332 -125 0
12436 28001 113462 23214 113260 141463 136474 -4989 -4
171098 566451 147163 581670 737549 728833 -8716 -1 442398 603508 161110 36
12235 11250 48421 8650 48103 59671 56753 -2918 -5
12423 119695 401026 101539 414102 520721 515641 -5080 -1
12435 24068 102645 19588 109501 126713 129089 2376 2
155013 552092 129777 571706 707105 701483 -5622 -1 424356 613601 189245 45
22692 51133 148152 44005 167750 199285 211755 12470 6
22694 31567 104381 26073 104721 135948 130794 -5154 -4
12214 3297 19363 4636 26273 22660 30909 8249 36
85997 271896 74714 298744 357893 373458 15565 4 1680897 1846712 165815 10
22691 51651 157911 41117 163231 209562 204348 -5214 -2
22693 51386 133672 39921 132865 185058 172786 -12272 -7
12213 5695 29650 4334 27817 35345 32151 -3194 -9
108732 321233 85372 323913 429965 409285 -20680 -5 1680454 1861949 181495 11
12952 84670 260318 79661 275148 344988 354809 9821 3
12954 90608 277316 80609 278271 367924 358880 -9044 -2
22210 12917 61800 11836 62262 74717 74098 -619 -1
188195 599434 172106 615681 787629 787787 158 0 2905364 3174442 269078 9
1 New Delhi - Chennai  
Annexure 2.3 (Para 2.1.3.4)- Comparison of passengers - Rail and Air in selected 13 sectors
Rail passengers Air passengers
No. of passengers (Sep. 
15 to July 16)
No. of passengers 
(Sep. 16 to July 17)
2 Chennai - New Delhi 
3 New Delhi – Thiruvananthapuram
4 Thiruvananthapuram - New Delhi 
5 New Delhi – Hyderabad  
6 Hyderabad - New Delhi 
7 New Delhi – Kolkata 
8 Kolkata - New Delhi 
9 New Delhi – Guwahati  
10 Guwahati - New Delhi 
11 New Delhi – Bangalore  
12 Bangalore - New Delhi 
13 New Delhi – Mumbai 

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
183
S. no Sector Train No. Total for AC 2 
and AC 3(Sep. 15 
to July 16)
Total for AC 2 
and AC 3(Sep. 16 
to July 17)
Increase (+) / 
Decrease (-) 
(Nos.)
Increase (+) / 
Decrease (-) 
(in per cent)
No. of 
passengers 
(Sep. 15 to 
July 16)
No. of 
passengers 
(Sep. 16 to July 
17)
Increase (+) 
/ Decrease (-
) (Nos.)
Increase (+) / 
Decrease (-) 
(in per cent)
2A 3A 2A 3A
Annexure 2.3 (Para 2.1.3.4)- Comparison of passengers - Rail and Air in selected 13 sectors
Rail passengers Air passengers
No. of passengers (Sep. 
15 to July 16)
No. of passengers 
(Sep. 16 to July 17)
12951 95365 282872 88677 297121 378237 385798 7561 2
12953 102050 301141 86266 299687 403191 385953 -17238 -4
22209 13253 61814 12388 54827 75067 67215 -7852 -10
210668 645827 187331 651635 856495 838966 -17529 -2 2880430 3140280 259850 9
12440 25098 59833 20288 60331 84931 80619 -4312 -5
12454 26795 58082 19599 61768 84877 81367 -3510 -4
51893 117915 39887 122099 169808 161986 -7822 -5 205662 375389 169727 83
12439 27554 60817 22597 61056 88371 83653 -4718 -5
12453 24507 56053 14769 55752 80560 70521 -10039 -12
52061 116870 37366 116808 168931 154174 -14757 -9 188793 341308 152515 81
12958 83404 259323 75932 267039 342727 342971 244 0
83404 259323 75932 267039 342727 342971 244 0 724335 878513 154178 21
12957 81334 252238 70376 256163 333572 326539 -7033 -2
81334 252238 70376 256163 333572 326539 -7033 -2 727164 866251 139087 19
22812 15704 110758 13651 99845 126462 113496 -12966 -10
22824 23709 148218 20386 135022 171927 155408 -16519 -10
12282 1769 13982 1662 12178 15751 13840 -1911 -12
41182 272958 35699 247045 314140 282744 -31396 -10 331881 433720 101839 31
22811 15473 112252 12698 98698 127725 111396 -16329 -13
22823 21568 146870 18471 130203 168438 148674 -19764 -12
12281 1569 11962 1448 11221 13531 12669 -862 -6
38610 271084 32617 240122 309694 272739 -36955 -12 320542 419269 98727 31
22414 10618 37601 9074 34167 48219 43241 -4978 -10
10618 37601 9074 34167 48219 43241 -4978 -10 468738 606639 137901 29
22413 14978 52180 13287 53741 67158 67028 -130 0
14978 52180 13287 53741 67158 67028 -130 0 489545 609543 119998 25
12261 29442 141929 26736 133958 171371 160694 -10677 -6
29442 141929 26736 133958 171371 160694 -10677 -6 757088 811876 54788 7
12262 27334 137636 27267 136616 164970 163883 -1087 -1
27334 137636 27267 136616 164970 163883 -1087 -1 718891 789635 70744 10
12246 12738 66440 12450 75168 79178 87618 8440 11
12738 66440 12450 75168 79178 87618 8440 11 542487 721322 178835 33
12245 13132 65233 12219 72968 78365 85187 6822 9
13132 65233 12219 72968 78365 85187 6822 9 515163 699241 184078 36
14 Mumbai - New Delhi 
15 New Delhi – Ranchi 
16 Ranchi - New Delhi 
17 New Delhi – Ahmedabad 
18 Ahmedabad - New Delhi
19 New Delhi – Bhubaneshwar 
20 Bhubaneshwar - New Delhi  
21 New Delhi – Goa  
22 Goa - New Delhi  
26 Kolkata – Bangalore
23 Mumbai – Kolkata  
24 Kolkata – Mumbai 
25 Bangalore – Kolkata 

184
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
Category Train No. From To No. of 
services 
during Feb. 
2017
Delay days Punctuality Percentage
Rajdhani 22812 New Delhi Bhubaneswar 12 3 75%
Rajdhani 22824 New Delhi Bhubaneswar 16 11 31%
Rajdhani 12302 New Delhi Howrah 24 24 0%
Rajdhani 12314 New Delhi Sealdah 28 28 0%
Rajdhani 12433 Chennai Central Nizamuddin 8 8 0%
Rajdhani 12951 Mumbai Central New Delhi 28 26 7%
Rajdhani 12424 New Delhi Dibrugarh Town 28 26 7%
Rajdhani 12436 New Delhi Dibrugarh Town 8 7 13%
Rajdhani 12432 Nizamuddin Trivandrum Central 12 5 58%
Rajdhani 12434 Nizamuddin Chennai Central 8 4 50%
Rajdhani 12438 Nizamuddin Secunderabad Jn 4 0 100%
Rajdhani 12454 New Delhi Ranchi 8 3 63%
Rajdhani 12440 New Delhi Ranchi 8 5 38%
Rajdhani 12442 New Delhi Bilaspur Jn 8 6 25%
Rajdhani 22692 Nizamuddin KSR Bengaluru 16 16 0%
Rajdhani 22694 Nizamuddin KSR Bengaluru 12 11 8%
Rajdhani 12958 New Delhi Ahmedabad Jn 28 24 14%
Rajdhani 12952 New Delhi Mumbai Central 28 17 39%
Rajdhani 12310 New Delhi Rajendranagar T 27 19 30%
Duronto 12220 Secunderabad Jn Lokmanyatilak T 8 4 50%
Duronto 12224 Ernakulam Jn Lokmanyatilak T 8 3 63%
Duronto 12282 New Delhi Bhubaneswar 4 3 25%
Duronto 22201 Sealdah Puri 12 3 75%
Duronto 12260 New Delhi Sealdah 16 16 0%
Duronto 12274 New Delhi Howrah 8 8 0%
Duronto 12281 Bhubaneswar New Delhi 4 4 0%
Duronto 12273 Howrah New Delhi 8 8 0%
Duronto 12276 New Delhi Allahabad Jn 12 10 17%
Duronto 12293 Lokmanyatilak T Allahabad Jn 8 0 100%
Duronto 12239 Mumbai Central Jaipur 8 5 38%
Duronto 12270 Nizamuddin Chennai Central 8 7 13%
Duronto 12284 Nizamuddin Ernakulam Jn 4 3 25%
Duronto 12219 Lokmanyatilak T Secunderabad Jn 8 7 13%
Duronto 12286 Nizamuddin Secunderabad Jn 8 8 0%
Duronto 12246 Yesvantpur Jn Howrah 20 18 10%
Duronto 12261 C Shivaji Mah T Howrah 16 15 6%
Duronto 12214 Delhi S Rohilla Yesvantpur Jn 4 4 0%
Duronto 12245 Howrah Yesvantpur Jn 20 19 5%
Duronto 12269 Mumbai Central Ahmedabad Jn 28 2 93%
Duronto 12268 Ahmedabad Jn Mumbai Central 28 12 57%
Duronto 22213 Shalimar Patna Jn 12 8 33%
Shatabdi 12026 Secunderabad Jn Pune 24 19 21%
Shatabdi 12277 Howrah Puri 28 4 86%
Shatabdi 12042 New Jalpaiguri Howrah 24 23 4%
Shatabdi 12020 Ranchi Howrah 24 20 17%
Shatabdi 12033 Kanpur Central New Delhi 22 22 0%
Shatabdi 12003 Lucknow NE New Delhi 28 28 0%
Shatabdi 12034 New Delhi Kanpur Central 22 3 86%
Shatabdi 12035 Jaipur Agra Fort 22 3 86%
Shatabdi 12041 New Jalpaiguri Howrah 24 24 0%
Shatabdi 12015 New Delhi Ajmer Jn 28 14 50%
Shatabdi 12036 Agra Fort Jaipur 24 11 54%
Annexure 2.4 (Para 2.1.5.1) - Statement showing the punctuality of selected premier trains (Para  2.4.1)

185
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
Category Train No. From To No. of 
services 
during Feb. 
2017
Delay days Punctuality Percentage
Annexure 2.4 (Para 2.1.5.1) - Statement showing the punctuality of selected premier trains (Para  2.4.1)
Shatabdi 12008 Mysuru Jn Chennai Central 24 17 29%
Shatabdi 12244 Coimbatore Jn Chennai Central 24 19 21%
Shatabdi 12025 Pune Secunderabad Jn 24 12 50%
Shatabdi 12019 Howrah Ranchi 24 6 75%
Shatabdi 12278 Puri Howrah 28 20 29%
Shatabdi 12027 Chennai Central KSR Bengaluru 23 23 0%
Shatabdi 12007 Chennai Central Mysuru Jn 24 24 0%
Shatabdi 12002 New Delhi Bhopal Jn 28 28 0%
Shatabdi 12009 Mumbai Central Ahmedabad Jn 24 5 79%
Shatabdi 12010 Ahmedabad Jn Bhubaneswar 24 2 92%
Shatabdi 12004 New Delhi Lucknow NE 27 20 26%

186
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
S. no Zonal 
Railway
Division Name of the stations 
selected 
Number of 
Commercial 
plots
1 SER Kharagpur Kolaghat 170
2 SER Kharagpur Andul 21
3 SER Kharagpur Panskura 19
4 SER Kharagpur Balasore 2
5 SER Chakradharpur Manoharpur 4
6 SER Chakradharpur Kuldia 1
7 ECoR Khurda Road Cuttack 153
8 ECoR Khurda Road Brahmapur 13
9 ECoR Khurda Road Daitari 1
10 ECoR Khurda Road Bhubaneswar 2
11 ECoR Visakhapatnam Visakhapatnam 5
12 ECoR Sambalpur Sambalpur 3
13 NER Lucknow Lucknow City 13
14 NER Lucknow Colonelganj 20
15 NER Lucknow Naugarh 11
16 NER Lucknow Basti 3
17 NER Izzatnagar Shahamatganj 18
18 NFR Alipurduar Fakiragram 1
19 NFR Rangiya New Bongaigaon 1
20 NFR Rangiya Jogighopa 4
21 NFR Tinsukia Sibsagar Town 3
22 NFR Tinsukia Jorhat Town 5
23 NR Firozpur Jammu 7
24 NR Firozpur Moga 1
25 NR Delhi Ghaziabad 1
26 NR Ambala Saharanpur 1
27 NR Ambala Chandigarh 1
28 SCR Secunderabad Mandamari 2
29 SCR Secunderabad Rechni Road 2
30 SCR Vijayawada Ravikampadu 1
31 SCR Guntakal Panyam 1
32 SCR Guntakal Betamcheria 1
Total 491
Annexure 2.5 a (Para 2.2.1) Sample Selection (Plots)

187
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
S. no Zonal 
Railway
Division Name of the stations Number of contracts for 
parking etc.
1 SER Kharagpur Kharagpur 1 Car Parking and 2 
Cycle stand
2 SER Kharagpur Santragachi 1 Car parking
3 SER Kharagpur Midnapore 3 Cycle stand
4 SER Chakradharpur Tatanagar 2 Car Parking, Motor 
Cycle, Cycle Stand
5 SER Chakradharpur Rourkela 2 Car Parking, Motor 
Cycle, Cycle Stand
6 SER Chakradharpur Jharsuguda 1 Car Parking, Motor 
Cycle, Cycle Stand
7 NER Lucknow Gorakhpur 5
8 NER Lucknow Lucknow City 1
9 NER Lucknow Naugarh 1
10 NER Lucknow Basti 2
11 NFR Katihar Katihar 2
12 NFR Katihar New Jalpaiguri 1
13 NFR Alipurduar New Cooch Behar 1
14 NFR Rangiya New Bongaigaon 1
15 NFR Rangiya Jogighopa 1
16 SCR Secunderabad Secunderabad 4
17 SCR Vijayawada Vijayawada 10
18 SCR Vijayawada Eluru 5
19 SCR Vijayawada Nellore 5
20 SCR Guntur Guntur 5
21 CR Mumbai Kalyan 5
22 CR Mumbai Lokmanya Tilak Terminus 1
23 CR Pune Pune 4
24 CR Solapur Solapur 2
25 CR Nagpur Nagpur 6
26 ER Howrah Howrah 2
27 SR Chennai Chennai Central 3
28 NR Firozpur Jammu 1
29 NR Firozpur Moga 1
30 NR Delhi Ghaziabad 3
31 NR Delhi New Delhi 2
32 NR Ambala Saharanpur 3
33 NR Ambala Chandigarh 4
34 ECoR Khurda Road Cuttack 4
35 ECoR Khurda Road Brahmapur 3
36 ECoR Khurda Road Bhubaneswar 2
37 ECoR Visakhapatnam Visakhapatnam 5
38 ECoR Sambalpur Sambalpur 1
 Total 108
Annexure-2.5 b (Para 2.2.1) Sample Selection (Parking contracts) 

188
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
Railway Audit observations
SER Station-Kolaghat
(i)       Plot No. 32 (area 197 sqm) allotted to Shri Madan Mohan Bera was being utilized by TusharKanti Jana as Chanachur
factory and had permanent structure.
(ii)     Plot No.9 (area 372 sqm) which was originally allotted to Smt. Indar Devi Chopra had been rented to Jute Corporation of
India and had permanent structure.
(iii)   Plot No.31 was originally allotted to Sri Haripada Maity and Kalipada Maity. Subsequently the plot was occupied by Sri
Jitendranath Maity and sold to Shri Pravat Mondal at ` 1.95 Lakh on ` 50 non-judicial stamp paper in presence of witness. How
the plot was transferred to Sri Jitendranath Maity was not available on record. The plot was being used as ceramic tiles and
marble shop, stationery goods shop etc. by erecting permanent structure.
(iv)    Plot No. 67 was originally allotted to Sri BalaiDey. The plot was transferred to Sri Pravat Mondal by Power of Attorney on
` 50 non-judicial stamp paper through Notary executed by RiktaDey, PrabirDey, SubirDey and Baishakhi Chakraborty wife, sons 
and married daughter of Late Balai Dey.
(v)      Plot nos.1, 1A originally allotted to Shri Shridhar Chandra Dolui was transferred to his son-in-law Shri Ananta Kumar
Nayak by deed of donation on ` 2200 non judicial stamp paper through registration in the state sub-registry office. The plot
was presently being occupied by his grandson, Kaushik Nayak. The plots 1 & 1A is being utilized as Hardware shop, Hosiery
factory and Wood stacking. In both the plots permanent structures has been erected.
(vi)    Plot no. 89 (area 849 sqm.) originally allotted to Shri Kishori Mohan Khan was being utilized by Ratan Lal Bothra and R.
Bothra as Oil Mill and had permanent structure.
(vii)  None of the plots jointly inspected (at Kolaghat station) were properly demarcated and was being utilized unauthorized
by persons other than original allottee.
SER Station-Panskura
(i)       Plot No. 10B (S) (area 167 sqm.) originally allotted to Central Trading Co. was being used by Ram Krishna Ghorai. In
compliance of the orders of Hon’ble High Court, Kolkata he was evicted in January 2017. Engineering department was asked to
take over the plot but they refused to take over the same due to existence of pucca masonry structures on it leaving chances of 
unauthorized occupation. The plot was not fully vacated and was partly occupied unauthorized by one NimaiBhowmik who
was running a flower shop. The plot had permanent structure.
(ii)     Plot no. 10 B (S) (area 948 sqm.) originally allotted to Smt. Sandhya Rani Dey was being utilized as Bakery (Raja Food
Products) by Syed Imdad Ali and Kalpana Rani Jana. The plot had permanent structure.
(iii)   Plot number 3 B (S) (area 167 sqm.) originally allotted to D.A.Khan was being utilized as hotel, mobile shop, studio etc. by
D.A.Khan, M.A.Khan and E.A.Khan. Plot had double storied building on it.  
(iv)    Plot no. NIL(S) (area 255 sqm) originally allotted to W.A.Khan was being utilized by his son and had two storied building
for residence and shops on the ground floor.
(v)      Plot no. 5B (S) (area 167 sqm) originally allotted to Basudev Mahapatra was being utilized by an outsider as residence and
seed shop having permanent structure.
(vi)   None of the plots were properly demarcated. All plots were being utilized unauthorized by persons other than original
allottee except in case of plot no. 3B (S) where the original allottee was running business with partners.
SER Station-Andul
(i)       Plot No. 25 (S) measuring 636.50 sqm was allotted to National Tar Products. The company had unauthorized encroached
an additional area of 1,105.54 sqm and requested (2008) the Railway Administration for regularization of the same. The
Railway Administration had not taken any action to vacate the encroached land.
(ii)     Plot no. 1(S) (area 167 sqm) originally allotted to Samar Ghosh, Amar Ghosh and others was unauthorized occupied and
utilized by others as Stationery, Sweet, Snacks, Tea , Gas Oven repairing shop and saloon.
(iii)   Plot nos. 2 and 3 (area 334 sqm.) originally allotted to Dulal Chandra Ghosh & Sons were occupied by Mrityunjoy Ghosh
and eight others. The plots were used as Cycle/ Motor cycle stand and had permanent structure. 
(iv)    Plot no. 4(S) (area 167 sqm) originally allotted to Mrityunjoy Ghosh was merged with plot nos. 2 and 3 without permission
of the railway and was being used as cycle stand by Mrityunjoy Ghosh and eight others.
(v)      Plot no. 1(C) (area 465 sqm) allotted to Abdul Hakim was used as saw mill, storing of fire wood & timber, manufacturing
of furniture. The plot had permanent structure.
(vi)    All the five plots jointly inspected were not properly demarcated. Out of five, three were unauthorized occupied. 
SER Station-Balasore
(i)       Plot No. NIL (area 929 sqm) and 6/1 (area 168 sqm) was allotted to N.K.Das and M/s M.G.P.Company. Both the plots were
occupied by Ashok Kumar Agarwal and were being used as salt godown and had permanent structure. 
(ii)     Other commercial plots, lying in between plots NIL and 6/1, which were handed over to Engineering Department earlier
after vacation by plot holders were under unauthorized occupation and being utilized for residential purpose, club etc.
Annexure 2.6 (Para 2.2.4)
Utilization of plots by licensee/plot holders

189
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
Railway Audit observations
Annexure 2.6 (Para 2.2.4)
Utilization of plots by licensee/plot holders
SER Station-Manoharpur
(i)       Plot Nos. 1A, 2A & 3A (area 20,955 sqm) were allotted to SAIL (formerly known as IISCO) for stacking of iron ore but
loading was stopped from 2016.
(ii)      Plots were not demarcated and had no structure on it.
SER Station-Kuldiha
Fifty five plots (measuring 13,049 sqm) were allotted to Sri B.C. Dogra for stacking and dispatch of iron ore by trains. An
additional area of 80 sqm was occupied by plot holder.
SER General observations
(i)    Plots were allotted for stacking/storing of rail borne goods like jute, fire wood, paddy and other goods. After phasing out of
the ‘piece meal’ and ‘small’ booking of goods in wagons, there was no scope to use the plots for the purposes these plots were
originally allotted. Also, information about the present utilization of all the plots was not available with SMR.
(ii)  Railway had never made any survey about the uses of the plots except for 18 Plots out of 170 Plots under Kolaghat station in 2014. In
respect of these 18 plots, railways found that these were being used for residence, shops including wine shops, satta corner, electric
goods, auto standetc., occupied by outsiders and divided the plots in pieces among them etc. Audit conducted joint inspection[1]along
with railway officials of Commercial Department and observed that
(a)  Presently the plots were being used for various other purposes like Hardware shop, Hosiery factory, Grill factory, Ceramic
tiles and Marble shop, godown, Chanachur factory, Oil mill, salt godown, rented to Jute Corporation of India, Burning Ghat,
Political Party office and miscellaneous other purposes.
(b)  Railway plots were given on temporary license basis. No plot holder was permitted to erect any permanent structure
except with specific approval of the Railway Administration. It was, however, noticed that the plot holders had occupied the
plots unauthorized and erected permanent structures. On plot number 3B(S), Nil (S) residential double storied buildings with
shops have been constructed and at Kolaghat station double storied buildings have been constructed on plot number 18 and
25 made of RCC (reinforced cement concrete) column, brick and cement wall etc. Ceiling and top ceiling (in case of double
story) were covered with tiles and asbestos etc. to give resemblance of a temporary structure.
(c)   Plots were illegally transferred from original allottee to sub-allottee and even by sub-allottees to other occupants through
transferring on sale deed between the parties on low value non-judicial stamp paper in presence of witness and deed of
donation and registered in the state government sub-registry office. 
ECoR Station-Cuttack
(i)       A plot of land measuring 10,876 sqm licensed to HPCL for the purpose of oil installations was not vacated though the
depot was closed since February 2016. The structures were not dismantled so far.
(ii)     FCI siding adjacent to the Malgodown area closed long back was lying idle. The details of area occupied by the siding, date
from which it is not in use and the proposal for commercial utilization of the vacant area by the Railway, if any, were not
available on records.
(iii)   All the plots at Malgodown area were unauthorized occupied. Records on utilization, assessment and realization of license
fee were not available.
ECoR Station-Brahmapur
One Oil Installation of BPCL with an area of 6253 sqm was in operation since pre-independence on license fee at the rate fixed
by Railway. The plot was used in connection with Railway working, i.e., supply of petroleum products through tank wagons and 
unloading in the depot. Since POL traffic was stopped from October 2014, the Railway served notice to BPCL authorities on
February 2015 to stop operation, dismantle the assets and surrender the land due to safety reasons. However, BPCL remitted
license fee for 2016-17 for ` 6.91 lakh to Railway but Zonal Headquarters instructed the Divisional office not to receive cheque
and evict BPCL from Brahmapur with application of Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act 1971. The
Railway terminated the license of BPCL (July 2016) and served seven day’s notice (August 2016). The land under BPCL was not
vacated. The Railway lost an occupation fee of ` 14.52 lakh during 2016-17 and 2017-18. 
(i)        One plot (350 sqm) was utilized by two parties at Fakiragram. 
(ii)     Another Plot (area 5,320.84 sqm) at Jogighopa was being utilized by 14 parties for conducting business of transporting
bamboo chips and coal by virtue of temporary stacking on orders issued from time to time by respective Divisional offices. No
agreement was executed with any of them. 
(iii)   Plot holders at two selected stations (SibsagarTownandJorhat Town) were not offering traffic to railways and using the
plots for other business. They have stopped payment of license fee since 2014.
 SCR One plot of area 7,305 sqm at Rechni Road was licensed to M/s Naresh Kumar Company Pvt. Ltd. but the plot was being used
by M/s SCCL with permanent construction of Lorry Weigh Bridge and office structure. No action has been taken by Railway
Administration against the plot holder.
 NFR

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
190
Name of 
Station
No. of Plot 
Holders
Occupied by 
Original 
allottee
Transferred in 
the name of 
present 
occupant 
Occupied by 
legal heir on 
power of 
attorney                 
Occupied by Other 
than legal heir on 
power of attorney                                
Un-authorised 
occupied by 
heir of original 
allottee
Un-authorised 
occupied by 
outsiders                                          
Others (viz no 
record available 
or not allotted)
SER 217 65 1 2 22 30 65 32
NER 66 28 0 7 0 4 22 5
ECoR 177 33 0 0 0 0 0 144
SCR 7 3 0 0 0 0 0 4
Total 467 129 1 9 22 34 87 185
27.62 0.21 1.93 4.71 7.28 18.63 39.61
Annexure 2.7 (Para 2.2.7)
Sub-letting of plots by the original licensees
Percentage to total

191
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
Annual Licence 
fee fixed by 
Railway
(as on April,2016) 
(in `)
(i) 637 Coal tar (i)109356    (i)234334 114
(ii)1106 
unauthorisedly  
occupied
(ii) Nil (ii) 407016
Janab Abdul Hakim 464 Timber 78114 No 171010 119
Sk. Rejjak and 
ChittaranjanGoswami
372 Residence and  
Godown of Steel 
10299 No 249231 2320
BhabhaniRanjanChakrab
orty
372 Iron rod and 
corrugated sheet
10299 No 249231 2320
NischalKankaria 191 Garment 
manufacturing
5310 No 128475 2319
Nirmalendu Bhunia 162 Saw mill 4506 No 109032 2320
Pravat Mondal 254 Marble Godown 7029 Yes 170098 2320
BarindraNathSamanta 492 Marble shop 13647 No 392536 2776
SubodhPramanik 167 Fruit whole sale 
business
5182 Yes 249596 4717
Four sons of W.A.Khan 255 Two storied 
building
7769 Yes 381381 4809
The Central Trading Co. 929 Petrol pump 25900 Yes 1386811 5254
The Central Trading Co. 899 Petrol pump 23312 Yes 1341878 5656
Syed Emdad Ali and 
Kalpana Rani Jana
948 Raja Food product 
(Bakery)
25900 Yes 1414577 5362
SRTN ONGC 10845.57 Petroleum product 631646 Yes 618838 14
IOCL 1546.37 Petroleum product Nil No 48649 100
IOCL 1081.29 Petroleum product Nil No 144463 100
RAI BAHADUR CHUNI 
LAL
2082.63 Petroleum product 79777 Yes 79777 0
B.L.PODDAR 1393.54 Ballast Quarry 80562 Yes 80562 0
Annexure 2.8  (2.2.6.1) 
Fixation and realization of license fee
Railway Name of the 
station
Present occupant of  
commercial plots
Area of the plot 
(In sqm.)
Purpose for which 
plot was being 
utilised  
License fee 
paid (Yes/ 
No)
Annual licence fee as 
assessed by Audit as 
per Railway Board’s  
instructions/guidelines 
of 2005 (in `)
Short 
realisation (in 
percentage)
132399 2320
NFR
JTTN
SER Andul (ADL) National Tar Product
Panskura 
(PKU)
No
Kolaghat 
(KIG)
TusharKanti Jana 197 Food product 
(Chanachur)
5472 No

192
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
Zonal 
Railway
Audit observations/findings
At Kharagpur (North side) the licensee Magan Pandey had stopped payment for cycle stand (1,402 sqm) since August 1983 and filed court case (in 1983)
against eviction notice issued by the Railway Administration. Though the plot was evicted in August 2013 after the Court’s order Railway Administration
failed to recover outstanding license fee amounting to `0.84 crore pertaining to August 1983 to August 2013. 
After expiry of contractual period for cycle stand at Midnapore-I (456.25 sqm) in May 2009, licensee was served termination notice in July 2013. The
licensee filed Court case in September 2013 against the termination notice. Thereafter, the licensee was served termination notices on expiry of two
remaining contracts of Midnapore-II (225 sqm) and Midnapore-III (610 sqm) against which the licensee once again filed Court case. However, the licensee
paid the license fee which was accepted by the Railway Administration. SMR was unaware of the area of the plot of Midnapore cycle stand handed over
to the licensee for running the cycle stands. It was noticed that the licensee unauthorized occupied additional two plots of area 100 sqm (approx.) each
case.
At Tatanagar M/s Sahakar Global Ltd. was awarded the contract for cycle stand and car parking (9,848.96 sqm) from October 2015 to January 2018. The
firm stopped the working from July 2016. Thereafter, the Railway Administration run it departmentally till July 2017. Railway Administration awarded a
new contract (July 2017) to M/s Dream Homes Infrastructure without executing the agreement till joint inspection conducted in August 2017. Also, no
record on deployment of number of staff and revenue collected were made available to audit. 
At Rourkela out of 4,930 sqm of parking area, man power was not deployed for collection of parking charges in respect of 2,500 sqm. Six Group ‘C’ and six
Group ‘D’ staff besides one Supervisor were engaged in manning only cycle and scooter stand while the car parking stand remained unmanned. It was
observed that the earnings from stand/parking was only ` 1.66 lakh per month whereas the expenditure on staff deployed was ` 5 lakh per month as
assessed in audit. 
Parking area (2,000 sqm) was lying vacant at Bhubaneswar station. Public and private vehicles were parked without any revenue to the Railway
Administration. Railway Administration had no plan for garner revenue from the parking plot.
At Brahmapur capacity of the parking plot (1,324 sqm) was 114 cycle and 239 motor cycle/scooter at any time of the day (24 hours). The parking fee is
charged on 12 hours parking time basis. The Railway Administration fixed the reserved price based on 57 cycle and 120 motor cycle/scooter (i.e half of the
capacity) in 12 hours instead of 114 and 239. As such reserve price was calculated less as should have been. License fee ` 25.16 lakh was fixed and
collected for the period from 2013-14 to 2016-17 instead of`31.76 lakh as assessed by audit resulting in short realization of `6.60 lakh.
At Visakhapatnam for Cycle and Car parking (5,673.5 sqm) annual increase of ten percent over the previous year’s license fee of ` 50.01 lakh on1.4.2016
was not done at the time of realization of license fee resulted in short realization of ` 5 lakh.
In another parking plot (1844 sqm) annual increase of ten percent over the previous year’s license fee of `16.61 lakh on 1.4.2015 at the time of realization
of license fee was not done resulted in short realization of `1.66 lakh. Similar increase was not done from 1.4.2016 resulting in short realization of ` 1.8
lakh.
Similarly in other parking plot (1,640 sqm) annual increase of ten percent was not done over the previous year’s license fee of ` 4.79 lakh on 1.4.2016
resulting short realization of ` 0.47 lakh.
NER At Gorakhpur contracts were awarded for two cycle stands. Contractor did not deposit license fee from September 2015 to June 2016. He left the work in
June 2016 with the total outstanding license fee of `69.33 lakh. Railway Administration adjusted `51.99 lakh from security deposit and performance
guarantee. A sum of `17.33 lakh was still recoverable from the contractor.
At Katihar, after expiry of agreement, the contractor was allowed to run the business on quotation basis for a period of one year after a gap of three
months. A sum of Rs. 1.67 lakh was outstanding against him. Further, for two parking plots having area of 1,318.5 sqm and 2,200 sqm, there was no
agreement in force for collection of parking charges for two and three months respectively in 2015.Railway sustained a loss of ` 1.81 Lakh during that
period.
At New Cooch Behar, after expiry of three years agreement in May 2016, the contractor was allowed to run business for nine months on quotation basis.
Fresh agreement was executed with him in February 2017. An amount of `4.36 lakh was, however, outstanding against him for the earlier period of
contracts.
At Jogighopa, no agreement was in force in different spells for a total of 27 months during the period from September 2015 to November 2017 for a plot
of 7,500 Sqm involving loss of earning to the tune of `14.13 lakh.
At Chatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus (CSMT), Engineering Department of Mumbai Division had completed the work of development of parking area
beside Platform No. 18 at CSMT station on P D’mello Road side entry in March 2012 by incurring expenditure of ` 56.30 lakh. The area was not allotted
on Pay and Park basis by Railway Administration. It was noticed that huge available parking area was used by passengers and private taxis for parking their 
vehicles without making any payment. As the CSMT is a A1 class station and has potential for getting high rates for Pay and Park plots, the Railway
Administration lost revenue of `2.44 crore due to non-allotment of parking contract during April 2012 to June 2017.
At Kurla, contract for provision of Pay and Park facility was awarded in July 2013 to Sushila Trading Corporation at `19 lakh per annum for a period of
three years. The contractor made advance payment of three months’ license fee of `4.75 lakh. As the Railway Administration could not provide the
leveled parking space to the contractor, the pay and park facility could not be commenced on this land. The Pay and Park plot at Kurla is still lying vacant.
Railway Administration lost revenue of `74.42 lakh from August 2013 to June 2017 due to not providing the land properly leveled for parking of vehicles.
At Ghatkopar, contract for provision of Pay and Park facility was awarded to Sani Consultancy Pvt. Ltd. at Ghatkopar stations at ``21.67 lakh per annum
for a period of three years. The contractor made advance payment of three months’ license fee amounting to `5.41 lakh. However, the Railway
Administration failed to provide proper entry and exit gates at Ghatkopar station to the contractor. As a result, the pay and park facility could not be
commenced in these plots.Railway Administration sustained a loss of revenue of ` 48.75 lakh from August 2013 to October 2015 as assessed in audit.
CR
Annexure 2.9 (Para 2.2.7)
Licensing of land for Cycle/Motor Cycle/Scooter/Car parking
 SER
ECoR
ER At Howrah Station, the period of licensing of Car parking Stand I and Stand II expired on 7-10-2017 and 17-7-2017 respectively, the licensee has deposited
the license fee beyond the period of contract. Documents regarding extension of contract were not found on record. A tender has been floated for both
the taxi stands with date of opening on 23.08.2017.
NFR

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
193
Area under 
encroachment 
(in sqm)
SER ADL,KIG,PK
U,BLS
KGP 212 55,603 119 31,173 56 Factories, shops, Godowns 
etc.
ECoR CTC KUR 144 42,523 144 42,523 100 Not available
NER NUH, CLJ LJN 32 19,337 28 17,479 90 Not available
NFR SRTN TSK 1* 10,845.58 NA 3,318.42 30.59 Petroleum product
SCR RECH SC 2 14,305 1 7305 51 Lorry weigh bridge
NR
CR
No unauthorised occupation of commercial plot in NR
No commercial plot in CR
* A part of licensed Plot No. L/SRTN/2160 was unathorisedly occupied by outsider.
Annexure 2.10 (Para 2.2.9)
Un-authorised occupation of Commercial Plots
Zonal 
Railway 
Station Division Total number 
of plots
Area of the 
plots (in sqm)
Number of plots under 
encroachment 
Percentage of land under 
unauthorised occupation/ 
encroachment
Purpose for which plots 
were unauthorized used

194
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
Zonal 
Railway
Division Station Number of 
plots 
involved
Audit observations/findings  
Railway Administration was permanently restrained from enhancement of license fee for the commercial plots by court
(1969). 
 Since 1997 the plot holders of Andul station did not pay licence fee.
After enhancement of licence fee (February 2006) the plot holders again filed case against the railway in court and Civil
Judge (Jr. Division), Howrah observed that Railway appeared and filed their written statement without contesting the
suit. As such the suit proceeded ex parte against Railway
Court ordered (April 2016) that the railway is permanently restrained by a decree of permanent injunction from giving
any effects to the notices dated 28.02.2006 issued in the names of different plaintiffs.
Railway Administration never filed any petition at higher court against the lower court’s order of permanent injunction. 
Outstanding licence fee at the end of March 2017, at old rate, was ` 1.27 crore.
Plot No. NIL and 6/1 were allotted to N.K.Das and M/s M.G.P.Company. Both the plots were occupied by Ashok Kumar
Agarwal unauthorisedly and were being used as salt godown by erecting permanent structure and paying license fee. 
Railway Administration issued demand notice (November, 2013) for payment of license fee at enhanced rate from April
2011 to March 2014. 
The plot holders refused to pay the enhanced licence fee on the plea that the Railway Administration fixed the licence
fee at higher rate of land value compared to the value of land in the area. 
The parties filed writ petition (2014) in High Court, Cuttack. Hon’ble Court instructed to allow the petitioner to operate
the premises. The case has not yet been finalised.
After expiry of the contract period for three cycle stands, the licensee was served notice (July 2013) to vacate the plots.
The party filed case (September 2013) in the High Court, Calcutta. 
The court instructed (September 2016) railways to take possession of the plots but before that a surveyor shall take the
measurement of the plots in presence of both the parties and prepare a sketch. 
Survey was awaited.
Commercial plots measuring 13049.16 sqm were allotted to Shri B.C. Dogra, for the purpose of stacking of iron ore for
despatch by Railways. 
In May 2004 Divisional Office CKP issued termination notice to the plot holder due to offering insufficient traffic to the
Railways. The plot holder had paid licence fee upto 2003.
The plot holder filed Writ petition (in 2004) before the High Court, Cuttack and obtained stay order against Railway’s
vacation notice. 
The counter Affidavit to the writ petition and misc. case was filed in March 2005 but the case has not yet been listed in
the Hon’ble court. 
The case was still pending and the plot holder is utilizing the plot without paying any license fee.
M/s Biri Trading Company was allotted four commercial plots in 1962 and 1975 for stacking timbers for despatching the
same by Railways. 
In July 2009 Divisional office, CKP issued termination notice to the plot holder due to non-offering of traffic to the
Railways. 
The Company filed Title Suit (in 2010) in the Court of the Munsif at Chaibasa and the case was still pending as on
31.3.2017.
144 plots on Railway land was licensed to the traders in Malgodown area in Cuttack since 1925 to1985.
Railways issued notice to the licensees in January,2002 for payment of license fees with arrear for the period
01.04.1986 to 31.03.2002 in terms of Railway Board’s order dated 29.8.1995.
Eviction notice was issued to the licensees due to failure to make payment of licence fees with arrears. 
Estate officer/KUR also directed the licensees to pay license fee along with interest thereon for period 01.04.1986 to
31.03.2002.
Challenging the order of Estate officer, the licensees preferred a writ petition before Hon’ble Court.
High Court, Cuttack issued an interim stay on the Railway’s eviction notices and directed to maintain status quo until
further orders.
Commercial plots had been allotted to different allottees prior to 1985 who did not pay outstanding license fees and
renew the contract agreements in 2005.
Again in 2011 and 2012, NER administration issued notices to all allottees to deposit the outstanding license fees and to
renew the contract agreement.
In December, 2013 notice was issued to allottees to clear their outstanding dues and vacate the land. 
Railways filed cases against the defaulting plot holders in the Court of the Estate officer.
Eight hearings had taken place during the period December 2013 to November 2015.
There was dispute in the area of land made available towards parking space to the contractor.
Based on the representation of the contractor, the area was re-measured and correct area arrived at.
The applicant claimed for refixation of licence fee from the date of allotment, which was not agreed to by the Railways.
The contractor sought arbitration and then filed case in the Hon’ble High court of Andhra Pradesh on account of delay
in arbitration proceedings.
The case is under listing.
Annexure 2.11 (Para 2.2.10)
Commercial plots under litigations
SER Kharagpur Andul 21
Balasore 2
Midnapore 3
Chakradharpur Kuldiha
SCR Secunderabad Secunderabad 1
1
Manoharpur 4
NER Izzatnagar Shahmatganj 18
ECoR Khurda Road Cuttack 144

195
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
Total outstanding amount 
as on 31 March 2017
(` in lakh)
Mumbai 34 44.18
Bhusawal 374 51.4
Nagpur 26 253.36
Pune 63 306.04
Allahabad 41 1005
Jhansi 68 177
Agra 10 109
Howrah 2 103.52
Asansol 41 5.77
4 SECR Nagpur 87 110.99
Lucknow 179 2380.6
Delhi 28 1422.18
6 NER Gorakhpur 1 550.82
Total 6 13 954 6519.86
Say ` 65.20 crore
Annexure 2.12 (Para 2.6)
Statement showing non-realization of Way Leave (WL) charges from parties/firms 
2 NCR
3 ER
Total number of parties/ firms 
who were granted way leave 
facility
5 NR
Sl. No. Zonal 
Railway 
Name of the 
Divisions
1 CR

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
196
Zonal 
Railway
Railway 
Board's 
sanction for 
500 coaches 
(sanction 
accorded in 
September 
2008)
Railway 
Board's 
sanction 
for 5,000 
coaches 
(sanction 
accorded 
in August 
2009)
Railway 
Board's 
sanction 
for 10,000 
coaches 
(sanction 
accorded 
in April 
2010)
Total No. 
of coaches 
to be fitted 
with LED 
boards as 
per RB's 
sanction/al
lotment              
(col. 2+col. 
3+col. 4)
No. of 
coaches 
fitted with 
LED 
destination 
boards in 
Zonal 
Railways 
No. of 
coaches  
received 
from 
Coach 
Producti
on Units 
from 
2009-10   
No. of 
coaches 
fitted with 
LED 
destination 
boards 
received 
from Coach 
Production 
Units  
Total no. of 
coaches in 
Zonal 
Railways 
fitted with 
LED 
destination 
boards                                                                                                             
(col. 6 + 
col.7)
Rate at 
which the 
LED boards 
procured 
and fitted 
in Zonal 
Railways
Rate at 
which the 
LED boards 
procured 
and fitted 
in 
Production 
Units 
Expenditure 
incurred on LED 
boards fitted in 
the Zonal 
Railways ( 
col.8*col.9)
Exp incurred 
on LED boards 
in fitted in the 
Production 
Units 
(col.7*col.10)
No. of  LED 
destination 
boards fitted 
in coaches 
not 
functional in 
Zonal 
Railways
Expenditure 
incurred on non 
functional LED 
Boards
Reasons for non-functioning of LED destinaion boards
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 7 A 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
201 201 125000 25125000 0 0 0
146 146 104800 15300800 0 42 4401600
347 347 40425800 0 42 4401600
1600 223 223 123583 27559009 0 152 18784616
0 100 100 109340 10934000 0 0 0
0 159 159 126113 20051967 0 159 20051967
482 482 58544976 0 311 38836583
ECR 0 150 700 850 0 1213 21 21 125000 2625000 0 21 2625000 Coaches were received from BEML fitted with LED destination boards without remote unit
ECoR 0 250 400 650 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
NCR 0 150 200 350 150 150 109784 16467600 0 150 16467600 Master unit defective, display not working and  power supply unit defective 
NER 0 250 400 650 400 400 106240 42496192 0 400 42496192 Coaches fitted with LED boards have not been attached to nominated rakes. No AMC and
technical support available
NFR 100 250 400 750 750 750 127581 95685750 0 750 95685750 Non-maintenance by the Authorities
NR 0 500 1200 1700 437 437 125000 54625000 0 389 48625000 Defective/No technical expertise available
130 108200 14066000 0 328 35489600
75 107625 8071875 0 10 1076250
74 77723 5751502 0 0 0
150 109469 16420350 0 48 5254512
245 107364 26304180 0 556 59694384
100 200 400 700 674 876 674 70613907 0 942 101514746
SCR 100 400 850 1350 943 1599 0 943 125000 117875000 0 866 108250000 No AMC/spares  available
0 500 800 1300 322 1158 0 92 125000 11500000 0 92 11500000
230 123000 28290000 0 230 28290000
322 39790000 0 322 39790000
SECR 0 200 250 450 200 0 30 230 125000 28750000 0 230 28750000 Non execttion of AMC after expiry of initial contract and unsatisfactory performance of
AMC contractor during initial contract period. Out of 30 BEML coaches, 11 coaches were
received without remote control units. All LED destination boards fitted in 30 coaches were
non functional.
SR 100 400 1000 1500 175 2217 0 175 125000 21875000 5460972 175 27335972 No execution of AMC after expiry of intial contract and non updation of data base
SWR 0 200 550 750 544 544 125000 68000000 0 128 16000000 Non-functional due to failure of power supply ,display related problems,defective master
card,Radio modem design faults, non-confirmity with RDSO specifications.
WR 0 400 850 1250 885 0 0 885 125000 110625000 0 367 45875000 Faulty power supply box, wiring problems and defects in Master Display Boards, problems
in PCB and moisture in display boards
WCR 0 150 200 350 0 39 39 125000 4875000 0 39 4875000 Non-updation of data base
Total 500 5000 10000 15500 6309 90 6399 982648908 5460972 5132 621528443
SER Became non-functional after POH and consequent disintegartion of rakes. Fuses and MCBs
were dislocated bt electric department during POH. Remote control units were kept at the
base coaching depot.
ER 100 500 1000 Warranty period for maintenance of LED destination boards had expired and the Original
Equipment Manufacturer with whom the maintenance work was entrusted did not respond 
to the work. Also 16 LED boards were not functional due to mechanical defect.
NWR Electrical faults encountered during service
Annexure 2.13 (Para 2.7)
Statement showing Zonal Railway wise position of number of coaches fitted with LED destination boards
CR 0 500 800 1300 The LED boards were functional within warranty but no AMC was provided. The depot did
not have expertise in its maintenance. Sr. DME (Cog), Mumbai stated that remote control
units were not received from PUs and therefore the LED destination Boards were not in
working conditions. 

197
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
Year No of rakes 
unloaded during 
the year in the 
unloading point
No of rakes involved 
where detention 
exceeded 
permissible free 
time (5 hours)
Percentage of 
rakes where 
detention 
exceeded 
permissible free 
time
Total hours 
of detention 
beyond 
permissible 
free time
Total No 
of engines 
involved
Amount of 
Engine Hire 
Charges 
recoverable 
(**)
Amount of 
Service tax 
accrued
Remarks 
2009 558 167 29.93 450 334 6957000 -
2010 622 275 44.21 635 550 9890720 -
2011 653 307 47.01 906 614 14846880 -
2012 698 408 58.45 1339 816 23977800 226209
2013 707 571 80.76 2101 1142 39953080 1481459
2014 670 636 94.93 2637 1272 58825840 2181262
2015 590 506 85.76 2247 1012 55354120 2164421
2016 620 494 79.68 1948 988 54434660 2409312
2017(*) 164 120 73.17 319 240 9244620 416008
Total 5282 3484 65.96 12582 6968 273484720 8878671
Grand total
28.23 Crore
(*) For the year 2017 data is upto March 17
Annexure 2.14 (Para 2.13)
Statement showing loss of revenue due to non imposition of Engine Hire Charges beyond permissible free time in SGTPS Siding/Birsinghpur
282363391
(**) Engine Hire charges in Col 7 above  have been calculated on the basis of detail date wise detention of rakes from the time "Placement" to  "Release" in the siding minus 
unloading time of  five hour for BOXN wagons / two hours for BOBRN (Hopper) wagons as prescribed in Rule (K-2 Para 6). Detention in Engine Hours so arrived at  have been 
multiplied by No of engines used (2 engines in most of cases) and then multiplied by  "All India Engine Hour Cost (AIEHC) for recovery of  siding and shunting charges" as ciculated 
from time to time  by the Railway Board in  their  Rates Circulars. 
Service tax introduced from October 
2012 which also includes Education cess 
2% and higher edu cess 1% vide Railway 
Board's RC No. 29 of 2012 dated 28-9-
2012 AND  revised from time to time 

198
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
Cost of one 
locomotive
(` in crore)
Nine years For first 250 14.65 47.25 [1] 1730.53
Four years Next 250 14.65 13.6[2] 498.1
Beyond 500
2228.63
[1] Total percentage of maintenance cost of 1 to 250 locomotives for nine years = (3.25%*3 years)+ (6.25%*1 years) + (3.25%*3 years) + (18.25%*1 
years) + (3.25%*1 years) = 47.25 %
[2] Total percentage of maintenance cost of 251 to 500 locomotives for four years = {(3.25%*3 years) + (6.25%*1 years)}*85%= 16*85% = -13.6%
Annexure 4.1 (Para 4.1)
As per para 26.2.1 of the Agreement with the Company, an amount of ` 2228.63 crore is to be paid by Railways to the company towards 
maintenance, on completion of supply of diesel locomotives at prescribed rate of maintenance fee as follows:
Number of locomotives to be 
maintained for
Total Percentage of 
maintenance cost for 
Total maintenance cost to be paid by Railway to company (` in crore)
There is no specific clause for maintenance of remaining 500 out of 1000 locomotives to be supplied by the Company. The supply
of 501st locomotives onwards would start from the seventh year onwards while the first maintenance depot for maintenance of
these locomotives would be transferred in the tenth year. Similarly, a number of locomotives which would be received under the
lot of 251 to 500 would be without maintenance cover even before transfer of first maintenance depot to Indian Railways. The
maintenance of these locomotives by the Indian Railways would have to be obtained through the company as per agreement, the
cost implications for which are likely to be significant, but not quantified in the contract agreement.
Total

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
199
S. no Group Zonal 
Railway
Name of the section where MTRC Project 
implemented 
Route 
KM
Year of 
inclusion in 
Works 
Programme
Status as on 31-03-
2017
Status of the project Audit findings
1 NR New Delhi-Ambala-Ludhiana (including New
Delhi-Palwal section and Delhi area)
372 2000-01 Completed Completed The work is physically completed, financial closing pending. The project/work was commissioned in August 2013 and
handed over to open line in November 2016. The system was not seen to be working over Palwal-Ludhiana as seen in
Audit in July 2017
2 NR Ludhiana-Pathankot-JammuTawi-Amritsar 456 1999-00 Work in Progress Not in operation The estimate was sanctioned in 1999-2000. The work is yet to be completed. As of January 2017, physically progress 
was 80 per cent financial progress was 74 per cent. Out of 63 nos, 49 nos. BTS commissioned. For balance 14 new sites, 
towers at 08 locations erected & is in progress at 06 locations. 
3 NCR New Delhi-Jhansi (excluding Palwal-Mathura) 270 2001-02 Completed Completed Entire work completed material reconciliation done. The system on New Delhi-Palwal has been commissioned on
29.08.2013 and stated to be working. However, the system is not effectively utilized as the communication amongst
Driver, Guard, Control office and station is not working due to weak signal between New Delhi-Palwal. As per the
railway administration records, the MTRC system is functional over New Delhi – Jhansi section. However, review of
records over NCR showed that there is no utilization of the MTRC system on this as the maintenance system (AMC) is
not in place and MSC at Agra is defective.
4 NCR Palwal-Mathura 83 2004-05 Completed Completed Entire work completed, material reconciliation is prepared. Final variation to be prepared.As per the railway
administration, the section is functioning satisfactorily. However, Audit observed that MTRC system is not being utilised
over this section as the maintenance system (AMC) is not in place and MSC at Agra is defective.
5 NCR Jhansi-Bina 150 2013-14 Work in Progress Not in operation The project consisting 150 RKM was planned by IRPMU in the year 2013-14. This is a part of the New Delhi-Nagpur
route which is divided in to five sanctioned works viz. New Delhi-Jhansi (excluding Palwal-Mathura), Jhansi-Bina, Bina-
Itarsi and Itarsi-Nagpur for the purpose of MTRC system. Tender of the said project floated in January 2016 was
discharged (January 2017) with recommendation for re-inviting the same with wide publicity. The tender was again
invited (20.01.2017) with date of opening of bid 06.03.2017, which was yet to be finalized. Estimate has been prepared
and sanctioned. 
The work of Jhansi-Bina MTRC (without MSC) 150 kms has since been transferred from Jhansi Division to IRPMU in
September 2016 to be executed by IRPMU on grounds of similar work for Ghaziabad-Mughalsarai being under
execution at IRPMU.
6 Bina-Itarsi WCR Bina-Itarsi 230 2013-14 Work in Progress Not in operation Tender open on January 2016 brief note for technical bid vetted by Accounts and tender case with TC.
7 Itarsi-Nagpur CR Itarsi-Nagpur (without master switching centre) 290 2013-14 Work in Progress Not in operation Estimate has been prepared and sanctioned (September 2016). The contract for the work is yet to be awarded.
8 NR New Delhi-Ghaziabad including Delhi-Sahibabad 38 2016-17 Work in Progress Not in operation Detailed Estimate is under vetting.
Work in Progress Part of work Etawa-Aligarh completed in No. 2013. Due to power supply issue from electrical deptt., the system was 
switched OFF & restored on march 2016.
Work in Progress System offered to Allahabad division with hand set & SIM for use in Oct-16. But due to problem in Agra MSC (in which 
the SIMs are to programmed), system could not be put into use.
10 NCR Aligarh: Indoor equipment, recording system &
CNL equipment in connection with CNL center
(Kanpur-Mughalsarai), KFW Work
350 2002-03 Work in Progress Not in operation In the part section Aligarh–Etawah (170 RKM), major works related to MTRC were completed (November 2013). The 
completion report is yet to be drawn and MTRC could not be put under use due to non-completion of whole work. In 
respect of works of other sections i.e. Ghaziabad-Aligarh and Etawah-Kanpur-Mughalsarai, estimates have been 
prepared and sanctioned (March 2005 to July 2007), but the works are yet to be completed. 
Annexure 5.1 (Para 5.1) - Status of MTRC projects
New Delhi-Ambala-
Ludhiana-Jammu 
TawiNew Delhi-Palwal-
Mathura-Jhansi-Bina
New Delhi-
Ghaziabad-Aligarh 
Junction-Etawah-
Mughalsarai-
Dhanbad-Howrah
9 NCR Etawah: Indoor equipment, recording system &
CNL equipment in connection with CNL center,
Ghaziabad -Kanpur
410 2002-03 Not in operation

Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
200
S. no Group Zonal 
Railway
Name of the section where MTRC Project 
implemented 
Route 
KM
Year of 
inclusion in 
Works 
Programme
Status as on 31-03-
2017
Status of the project Audit findings
Annexure 5.1 (Para 5.1) - Status of MTRC projects
11 ECR Mughalsarai - Dhanbad 400 2000-01 Completed Not in operation The system has been commissioned. However, the same is not being utilized due to the following reasons:
• MTRC system is not available from Dhanbad to Howrah and Mughalsarai to Delhi.
• There exist a blind spot between Koderma – Gaya section of 0.5 RKM
• There is a failure of connectivity between Base Station Controller and Mobile Services Switching Center provided by 
Railtel Communication India Limited (RCIL).  
• There is shortage of mobile equipment.
• Annual maintenance support for the system is not in place.
12 ER Dhanbad - Howrah 270 Not available Completed Not in operation The system was commissioned in (22 January 2017), but not operational due to the following reasons: 
• M/s Nortel (OEM) had commissioned the system, but as OEM has since been closed, the system is not working. To be 
operational, the system is required to be upgraded.
• MSC of Nortel at Kolkata is not working and MSC (proposed) at Tundla is required to be relocated to Kolkata.
13 Kanpur-Lucknow NCR Lucknow-Kanpur 75 2007-08 Completed Completed The section has been commissioned (February 2015) but not functional till the completion of MTRC project in New Delhi 
– Kanpur section. Lucknow Division has not taken over due to continued deficiencies in the work of MTRC executive
over this section. The system was offered to NR with hand sets in October 2015 to Sr. DSTE/LKO but not taken over.
Now the same is under process with Dy. CSTE/MW/NR for handing over the system.
14 Bally-Shaktigarh ER Bally-Shaktigarh 90 2008-09 Work in Progress Not in operation Tender terminated. Estt. Vetted on 15.04.2016 & sanctioned on 03.05.2016
15 NFR Kamakhya-Goalpara-New Bongaigaon 175 2012-13 Work in Progress Not in operation Estimate revised due to inclusion of spectrum charges of MTRC for one year instead of three years. Revised estimate 
sent to HQ finance on 08.01.2016 for vetting. After finance observation case return on 08.03.2016 and resubmitted on 
17.03.2016. Return on 22.06.2016 with finance observation. Submitted to HQ on 27.07.2016.
16 NFR Guwahati-Lumding 181 2012-13 Work in Progress Not in operation Estimate revised due to inclusion of spectrum charges of MTRC for one year instead of three years. Revised estimate 
vetted by Divisional finance on 11.12.2015 and sent to HQ on 01.03.2016. Case returned by HQ finance on 08.03.2016 
with finance observation. Resubmitted on 08.09.2016, finance return unvetted on 26.09.2016. The system has been 
commissioned. However, only 200 OPH sets out of 968 OPH sets with NFR are working as against the total projected 
requirement of 1800 OPH. Thus, there is no utilization of MTRC over NFR.
17 Churchgate-Virar- WR Churchgate-Virar-Repl. suburban section &
integration with MTRC of Central Railway
60 2012-13 Work in Progress Not in operation Survey & designing of system completed. Site survey for indoor equipment installation at existing locations completed.
Land location for erecting new tower approved. CMRTS license received from DOT on 17.12.2015. WPC license for
spectrum frequency is received on 22.08.2016. Tower design, soil testing report of JOS is received & BA is awaited.
Space for pole mast at CCG station building is under process.
New Bongaigaon -
Kamakhya-Guwahati-
Lumding 
New Delhi-
Ghaziabad-Aligarh 
Junction-Etawah-
Mughalsarai-
Dhanbad-Howrah

201
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
Area Whether 
Consultant 
appointed
(in sqm) (Month)
(i)11.09.09 but cancelled Yes
(ii)2010 (December 2010, 
March 2017)
(i)                                  
(iii)June 2014
(ii)                                 
(Cancelled)
(iii)                               (iv) 
November 2016
14.06.2008 Yes 
11.09.2009 (April 2014, 
November 2017)
27.08.2013
01.08.2016
Kampoo 27.10.2015
 (No bid received)
Aug-16
(i) 12.02.2010
No bid received
(ii) 01.02.2011 
Highest bid for
` 55.52 crore was received 
but rejected.
(iii) 31.01.2017
No bid received.
Yes 
(August 2009)
7 SCR 
(Secunderaba
d)
Near Moula Ali 
flyover,  
Telangana
88962.005 Yes 
(November 
2007)
-- No Change in decision of Railway for use 
of land and non-finalization of open 
space reservation (OSR) clause 
delayed the project.
8 SR (Chennai) Kakkapalam,  
Padi(Chennai)
21003.18 Yes (January 
2008)
-- No No offer was received during tender 
in view of OSR issue which could not 
be resolved till date.
9 SR (Salem) Plots at Salem 
market station 
Salem (Salem)
3318.422 Yes 
(December 
2010)
15.03.2017 No Decision of Railway to develop only 
one plot instead of two led the 
Consultant to revise its report. RLDA 
also delayed tender process for 
development of land.
10 SR 
(Tiruchirrapal
li)
Plot at station 
Nagaptinam 
(Tiruchirapalli)
1294.994 Yes 
(December 
2010)
-- No Matter of change in land use was not 
taken to appropriate authorities due 
to which the same could not be 
finalized so far.
Annexure No. 7.1 (Para No. 7.1)
 Statement showing the sites identified for commercial development by RLDA and their current status
S. 
No.
Zonal 
Railway 
(Division)
Name of Site Status of Tender for 
development of land
Whether 
Developer 
appointed
Current status 
In both the cases, RLDA had to cancel 
the LOA as both the parties did not 
deposit 1st instalment of lease 
premium.
2 ECoR(Waltair
)
DabaGardens 
(Ambedkar 
Circle, 
Visakhpatnam)
1999.1471
1 SCR 
(Vijaywada)
Near Railway 
Hospital 
(Poornandam 
Pet) Vijaywada
1497.337 Yes 
(November 
2007)
Yes (May 
2007)
After non receipt of bid in December 
2010, RLDA took about five years in 
re-appointment of Consultant. 
4 NCR (Jhansi) 5989.348 Yes (August 
2010)
No RLDA took much time in 
appointment of Consultant. No 
suitable offer was received for 
development in October 2015 and 
August 2016.
3 NR 
(Ferozpur)
Katra 
(Ferozpur)
42775.272 Dec-10 NoYes (March 
2008, January 
2015)
Kothi, Gwalior 
(Jhansi)
RLDA rejected highest offer received 
for development of land. 
Subsequently, no offer was received.
6 NCR (Jhansi) Gola ka Mandir, 
Gwalior
13216.64 Jul-08 The land could not be developed so 
far due to injudicious exchange of 
railway land by RLDA which led to 
litigation and avoidable payment of 
5 SCR (Nanded) Part of  old ITDC 
Hotel, 
Aurangabad
38971.23 Yes 
(November 
2007, 
September 
2013)
No
Yes (August 
2016)
Delay in providing land details and 
further verification of land delayed 
appointment of Consultant.
11 SR 
(Tiruchirrapal
li)
Plots at station 
Pattukoti 
(Tiruchirapalli)
8012.776 -- NoYes (March 
2016)

202
Report No. 5 of 2018 (Railways) Annexure
Area Whether 
Consultant 
appointed
(in sqm) (Month)
Annexure No. 7.1 (Para No. 7.1)
 Statement showing the sites identified for commercial development by RLDA and their current status
S. 
No.
Zonal 
Railway 
(Division)
Name of Site Status of Tender for 
development of land
Whether 
Developer 
appointed
Current status 
13 ECR 
(Samastipur)
On station 
approach road, 
Raxaul(Samasti
pur)
22581.46 Yes 
(November 
2007)
07.07.2017 No Delay in obtaining complete land 
records from Railways and State 
Govt. and further delay in obtaining 
NOC from Executive Officer led to re-
engagement of Consultant and 
further delay in development of land.
16 NR (Delhi) Ashok Vihar 
New Delhi 
(Delhi)
132494.08 Yes 
(November 
2007 and 
August 2016)
-- No Railway delayed approval for 
residential development due to 
which Consultant was again 
appointed.
17 WR (Rajkot) Old station area 
Jamnagar 
(Rajlkot)
11088.39 Yes 
(November 
2007)
-- No Consultant submitted report in 
August 2010 but action could not be 
taken as non-encumbered land was 
not provided by Railways.
12 SR 
(Tiruchirrapal
li)
Plots at station  
Villipuram 
(Tiruchirapalli)
7081.999 -- No Delay in providing land details, delay 
in inspection of land and further 
delay in appointment of Consultant 
led to delay in development of land.
Yes (May 
2016)
Railway Board delayed approval for 
residential development of land 
which delayed the appointment of 
Consultant.
15 NEFR 
(Katihar)
11994.882 Yes (January 
2008)
-- No Consultant submitted report in 
January 2009 but action could not be 
taken as non-encumbered land was 
not provided by Railways.
14 NCR 
(Allahabad)
Nirala Nagar, 
Kanpur
264886.99 -- NoYes (May 
2007)
Burdwan Road 
Siliguri (Katihar)