 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on  
Performance Audit of 
National Rural Drinking Water Programme 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the year ended March 2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government (Civil) 
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation 
Report No. 15 of 2018 
(Performance Audit) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 15 of 2018 
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme 
 
i 
 
Contents 
 
 Description Page 
 Preface iii 
 Executive Summary v-ix 
Chapter-I Programme Overview and Audit Approach 1-6 
1.1 Introduction 1 
1.2 Programme Objectives 1 
1.3 Programme implementation strategy 2 
1.4 United Nations Development Goals  3 
1.5 Audit approach 4 
1.6 Acknowledgement 6 
Chapter-II Planning and Delivery Mechanism  7-19 
2.1 Introduction 7 
2.2 Planning 7 
2.3 National Drinking Water and Sanitation Council 10 
2.4 Delivery Mechanism 11 
2.5 Audit Summation 18 
Chapter-III Fund Management 20-38 
3.1 Introduction 20 
3.2 Financial Performance 21 
3.3 Utilisation of funds under focused schemes 29 
3.4 Short-utilisation of Water Quality Funds 32 
3.5 Funds lying unspent under Jalmani 33 
3.6 Other financial irregularities 33 
3.7 Unspent balance/blocking of fund 36 
3.8 Audit summation 38 
Chapter-IV Programme Implementation 39-82 
4.1 Introduction 39 
4.2 Coverage 39 
4.3 Quality 62 
4.4 Sustainability 69 
4.5 Operation & Maintenance 73 
4.6 Persistence of slip-back habitations 75 
4.7 Support Activities 77 

Report No. 15 of 2018 
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme 
 
ii 
 Description Page 
4.8 Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance 78 
4.9 Audit summation 82 
Chapter-V Monitoring and Evaluation 83-92 
5.1 Introduction 83 
5.2 Integrated Management Information System 84 
5.3 Analysis of IMIS Database 84 
5.4 Evaluation studies 87 
5.5 National Level Monitors 88 
5.6 Grievance Redressal System 89 
5.7 Non-constitution of Team of Experts for Field Inspe ctions at 
district level 
90 
5.8 Failure to undertake required reviews of Programme by 
SWSM 
90 
5.9 Non-setting up of Vigilance and Monitoring Committee 91 
5.10 Absence of Social Audit 91 
5.11 Non-setting up of Monitoring and Investigation Unit 92 
5.12 Audit summation 92 
Chapter-VI Conclusion and Recommendations 93-95 
 Annexes 97-153 
 Glossary of Terms and Abbreviations 155-156 
 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
 
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme  
 
iii 
 
The Government of India launched the National Rural  Drinking Water 
Programme (NRDWP) in April 2009 by modifying the Accelerated Rural Water 
Supply Programme (ARWSP) and subsuming earlier sub- missions/schemes.  
The NRDWP guidelines were further updated in 2013 with focus on piped water 
supply, increasing household tap connections and ra ising drinking water supply 
norms.  The objectives of the Programme is to provi de safe and adequate water 
for drinking, cooking and other domestic needs to e very rural person on a 
sustainable basis. 
A performance audit of the NRDWP was conducted to a ssess how far the 
objectives of the Programme were achieved.  The per formance audit covers the 
period from 2012 to 2017 and examines various aspects of the Programme such 
as planning, delivery mechanism, fund management, i mplementation including 
coverage of partially covered and quality affected habitations, water quality 
monitoring and surveillance.   
This report has been prepared for submission to the  President of India under 
Article 151 of the Constitution of India. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the  Auditing Standards issued 
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
Preface  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
 
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme  
 
v 
 
Key Facts 
About the 
Programme 
• The National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) was 
launched in April 2009 by modifying the Accelerated  Rural 
Water Supply Programme (ARWSP) and subsuming earlie r 
sub-missions/schemes. The objective of the Programm e is to 
provide safe and adequate water for drinking, cooking and other 
domestic needs to every rural person on a sustainable basis.  
Deliverables By 2017 
• All rural habitations, government schools and anganwadis  to 
have access to safe drinking water. 
• 50 per cent of rural population to be provided potable drinking  
water (55 lpcd 1) by piped water supply.  
• 35 per cent of rural households to be provided household 
connections. 
Programme 
Funds  
[2012-17] 
• ` 89,956 crore (Central share ` 43,691 crore and State share 
` 46,265 crore) provided for the Programme. 
• Expenditure incurred was ` 81,168 crore. 
Achievement 
against 
Deliverables 
set for 2017 
• Coverage of rural habitations increased by only 8 per cent at 40 
lpcd and 5.5 per cent on the basis of 55 lpcd during 2012-17 
despite the expenditure of ` 81,168 crore. 
• Only 44 per cent  of rural habitations and 85 per cent  of 
government schools and anganwadis  provided access to safe 
drinking water. 
• Only 18 per cent of rural population provided potable drinking 
water (55 lpcd) by piped water supply. 
• Only 17 per cent  of rural households provided household 
connections. 
                                                           
1 Litre per capita per day 
 
Executive Summary  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme  
 
vi  
Key audit 
findings  
Planning and Fund Management 
• Annual Action Plans of States lacked bottom-up approach. 
• ` 8,788 crore out of available funds of ` 89,956 crore  
(10 per cent ) remained unutilized. 
• ` 359 crore of scheme funds diverted for ineligible purposes.  
• ` 304 crore blocked with State Water and Sanitation Mission 
and executing agencies.  
Program Implementation 
• Poor execution of works and weak contract managemen t 
resulted in works remaining incomplete, abandoned o r non-
operational as well as unproductive expenditure on equipment 
with a financial implication of ` 2,212.44 crore. 
Monitoring 
• There was no mechanism for ensuring authentication and 
validation of data entered in Integrated Management  
Information System in several States leading to dat a 
inconsistency.  
• Overall monitoring and oversight framework of the Programme 
lacked effectiveness and there was inadequate commu nity 
involvement. 
 
Key findings in the Report 
The National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP/ Programme) was launched 
with the objective of providing adequate safe water  for drinking, cooking and other 
domestic needs to every rural person on a sustainab le basis.  The 12 th  Plan aimed at 
providing all rural habitations, schools and anganwadis  with safe drinking water by 
December 2017.  It also envisaged that at least 50 per cent  of the rural population will 
be provided piped water supply at 55 lpcd within the household premises or at a distance 
of not more than 100 meters from their households.  NRDWP is being implemented in 
the States through its six components and through o ther focused schemes.  During the 
12 th  FYP period (2012-17), a total of ` 89,956 crore (Central share of ` 43,691 crore 
and State share of ` 46,265 crore) was provided for the Programme of wh ich  
` 81,168 crore was spent during this period.  
The Programme failed to achieve the targets that were set for achievement by 2017 viz.  
(i) all rural habitations, Government schools and anganwadis to have access to safe 
drinking water, (ii) 50 per cent  of rural population to be provided potable drinking water 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
 
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme  
 
vii 
(55 lpcd) by piped water supply and (iii) 35 per cent  of rural households to be provided 
household connections.  As of December 2017, only 4 4 per cent  of rural habitations 
and 85 per cent  of Government schools and anganwadis could be prov ided access to 
safe drinking water, only 18 per cent  of rural population provided potable drinking 
water by piped water supply and only 17 per cent  of rural households were provided 
household connections.  The overall coverage of rur al habitations increased only by 
eight per cent  at 40 lpcd and 5.5 per cent  at 55 lpcd after incurring expenditure of 
` 81,168 crore during the period 2012-17. 
Implementation of the Scheme was marked by lack of proper planning and funds 
management and delivery as well as ineffective exec ution of works that resulted in 
undue delays and expenditure that failed to yield t he expected results or benefits.  The 
total financial implication of the audit findings w orks out to ` 2,875 crore, which was 
a very significant 15 per cent  of the expenditure of ` 19,151 crore, covered during our 
test check of various aspects of scheme management and implementation.  
The NRDWP was an important element in Government of  India’s commitment to 
achieve the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal Number 6 which relates to 
ensuring availability and sustainable management of  water and sanitation for all.  The 
Ministry had informed (September 2017) that while i ts objective was to provide 
drinking water to every Indian household, it would require approximately ` 23,000 
crore annually till 2030 (at present cost) to achieve this goal and given the present level 
of outlays, the SDG cannot be realized solely through NRDWP efforts. 
Audit noted that while NRDWP may not be the sole effort required to achieve the SDG, 
it was nevertheless an important measure towards th at end and shortfalls and 
deficiencies in its implementation including unfrui tful expenditure would further 
impede and make difficult the achievement of the Goal.   
(A)  Planning and Delivery Mechanism  
The planning and delivery framework established at the Centre and States deviated 
from the Programme guidelines.  Twenty one States did not frame Water Security Plans 
and deficiencies were found in preparation and scru tiny of Annual Action Plans such 
as lack of stake holder and community participation, non-inclusion of minimum service 
level of water in schemes and absence of approval o f State Level Scheme Sanctioning 
Committee for schemes included in the plans.  The apex level National Drinking Water 
and Sanitation Council set up to co-ordinate and ensure convergence remained largely 
dormant.  Agencies vital for planning and execution  of the Programme such as State 
Water and Sanitation Mission, State Technical Agency, Source Finding Committee and 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme  
 
viii  
Block Resource Centres were either not set up or we re not performing their assigned 
functions.  These constraints both in terms of planning and delivery ultimately affected 
achievement of Programme goals and targets.  
(B)  Fund Management 
NRDWP is implemented as a Centrally Sponsored Schem e with cost being shared 
between the Central and State Governments.  Ministr y’s expectations that the States 
would be able to compensate for reduced Central all ocation by increasing their own 
financial commitment to the scheme taking into account the increased devolution based 
on the recommendations of the 14 th  Finance Commission was belied.  Thus, the overall 
availability of funds for the Programme declined during the period 2013-14 to 2016-17.  
However, even the reduced allocations of funds rema ined unutilised. There were  
delays of over 15 months in release of Central shar e to nodal/implementing agencies.  
There was also diversion of funds towards inadmissi ble items of expenditure and 
blocking of funds amounting to ` 662.61 crore with State Water and Sanitation 
Missions and work executing agencies.  
(C)  Programme Implementation 
The Programme failed to achieve the targets that we re to be achieved by end of 2017 
as brought out above.  This was attributable partly  to deficiencies in implementation 
such as incomplete, abandoned and non-operational w orks, unproductive expenditure 
on equipment, non-functional sustainability structu res and gaps in contract 
management that had a total financial implication of ` 2,212.44 crore. 
Further, only five per cent  of quality affected habitations had been provided with 
Community Water Purification Plants and there was s low progress in setting up such 
plants out of funds provided by NITI Aayog . Sustainability plans were either not 
prepared/implemented or not included in the Annual Action Plans. There was 
inadequate focus on surface water based schemes and  a large number of schemes  
(98 per cent ) including piped water schemes continued to be bas ed on ground water 
resources.  Operation and Maintenance plans were ei ther not prepared in most of the 
States or had deficiencies leading to schemes becom ing non-functional.  As a result, 
incidence of slip-back habitations has persisted.  
Lastly, lack of required number of labs at States/d istrict/sub-divisional level resulted 
shortfall in prescribed quality tests of water sources and supply thereby compromising 
the objective of providing safe drinking water to the rural population.  
 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
 
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme  
 
ix 
(D)  Monitoring and Evaluation 
Data in the Integrated Management Information Syste m (IMIS) of the Programme 
lacked consistency and accuracy due to insufficient  authentication and validation 
controls.  Expert teams for inspection, Vigilance a nd Monitoring Committees to 
monitor and review implementation of Programme were either not established or were 
not functioning in the planned manner.  Social audi t of the Programme to measure 
beneficiary level satisfaction was not conducted. H ence the overall monitoring and 
oversight framework lacked effectiveness and there was inadequate community 
involvement in this exercise. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
1 
 
1.1  Introduction  
Ever since independence, Government of India has undertaken various programmes to 
provide safe drinking water to the rural population .  In 2009, Government of India 
launched the National Rural Drinking Water Programm e (NRDWP/Programme) by 
modifying the earlier Accelerated Rural Water Suppl y Programme and subsuming 
various sub-missions, miscellaneous schemes and mai nstreaming Swajaldhara  
principles. 
The investments made by the Central and State Gover nments up to the 12 
th  Five Year 
Plan on providing drinking water to the rural population is given in Graph-1.1 : 
Graph-1.1: Investment made during plan period 
 
Source: Records of the Ministry 
1.2  Programme Objectives 
NRDWP was framed with the vision of providing safe and adequate drinking water in 
rural areas for all on a sustainable basis.  The Pr ogramme had the following primary 
objectives:  
Ist 
(1951- 
56) 
IInd 
(1956- 
61) 
IIIrd 
(1961- 
66) 
IVth 
(1969- 
74) 
Vth 
(1974- 
79) 
VIth 
(1980- 
85) 
VIIth 
(1985- 
90) 
VIIIth 
(1992- 
97) 
IXth 
(1997- 
02) 
Xth 
(2002- 
07) 
XIth 
(2007- 
12) 
XIIth 
(2012- 
17) 
Centre 0 0 0 34 157 895 1906 4140 8455 16254 39191 39501 
States 3 30 48 208 348 1530 2472 5084 10773 15102 49000 46265 
Total 3 30 48 242 505 2426 4377 9224 19228 31357 88191 85766 
0
10000 
20000 
30000 
40000 
50000 
60000 
70000 
80000 
90000 
100000 
```` in crore 
Chapter-I  Programme Overview and Audit Approach  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
2 
a.  enable all households to have access to and use safe and adequate drinking water 
within reasonable distance; 
b.  enable communities to monitor their drinking water sources; 
c.  ensure that potability, reliability, sustainability , convenience, equity and 
consumers preference are the guiding principles while planning for a community 
based water supply system; 
d.  provide drinking water facility, especially piped w ater supply, to G ram 
Panchayats  that have achieved open defecation free status on priority basis; 
e.  ensure all Government schools and anganwadis  have access to safe drinking 
water; 
f.  provide enabling support and environment for Panchayati Raj Institutions and 
local communities to manage their own drinking wate r sources and systems in 
their villages; and 
g.  provide access to information through online report ing mechanism with 
information placed in public domain to ensure trans parency and informed 
decision making. 
1.3  Programme implementation strategy 
In the 11 th  Five Year Plan (FYP), the basis for coverage under  the rural water supply 
programme was shifted from habitations to household s so as to ensure drinking water 
supply to all households in the community.  In the 12 th  Plan, the emphasis was on piped 
water supply.  The Working Group on Domestic Water and Sanitation in the Planning 
Commission had recommended the need to increase drinking water supply service level 
in rural areas from 40 lpcd 1 to 55 2 lpcd and  to focus on piped water supply. 
The Strategic Plan 3 (2011-2022)  envisaged providing every rural person in the coun try 
access to 70 lpcd of safe drinking water within the ir household premises or at a 
horizontal or vertical distance of not more than 50 meters from their household without 
barriers of social or financial discrimination by 2 022.  It recognized that States would 
adopt their own strategies and phased timeframes to  achieve this goal.  The Strategic 
Plan sets out the following timelines for achieving the set goals: 
 
                                                           
1  litres per capita per day 
2  Drinking-3 lpcd, Cooking-5 lpcd, Bathing-15 lpcd,  washing utensils and house-10 lpcd, 
Ablution/Toilets-10 lpcd, Washing of cloths and other uses-12 lpcd 
3  Strategic Plan (2011-2022), Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation- Rural Drinking Water 
“Ensuring Drinking Water Security in Rural India” 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
3 
by year 2017 
• at least 50 per cent  of rural households are provided with piped water supply;  
• at least 35 per cent  of rural households have piped water supply with a  household 
connection; less than 20 per cent  use public taps and less than 45 per cent  use hand 
pumps or other safe and adequate private water sources; 
• all services meet set standards in terms of quality  and number of hours of supply 
every day; 
• ensure that all households, schools and anganwadis  in rural India have access to and 
use adequate quantity of safe drinking water; 
•  provide enabling support and environment for Panchayati Raj Institutions and local 
communities to manage at least 60 per cent  of rural drinking water sources and 
systems.  
by year 2022  
• ensure that at least 90 per cent  of rural households are provided with piped water 
supply;  
• at least 80 per cent  of rural households have piped water supply with a  household 
connection; less than 10 per cent  use public taps and less than 10 per cent  use hand 
pumps or other safe and adequate water sources; 
• provide enabling support and environment for all Panchayati Raj  Institutions and 
local communities to manage 100 per cent  of rural drinking water sources and 
systems.  
1.4  United Nations Development Goals 
The theme of providing safe drinking water was incl uded by the United Nations in its 
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and subsequentl y the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs). 
Under the MDGs, nations committed to halving the pr oportion of households without 
access to safe drinking water sources from its 1990  level by 2015.  The India Country 
Report 
4  on achievements made under MDGs showed that these targets had been 
achieved during 2012 in the rural areas.   
The SDGs Agenda for 2030 came into effect in Januar y 2016.  Under the SDGs, 
universal and equitable access to safe and affordab le drinking water for all is to be 
achieved by 2030.  The Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation in its Strategic Plan 
(2011-2022) envisaged providing drinking water to all rural households by 2017 and to 
enhance accessibility to piped water supply to households to 90 per cent  by 2022. 
                                                           
4  Issued by Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (2015)  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
4 
On the issue of integrating national goals with the  relevant SDG goals, the Ministry 
informed (September 2017) that its overarching goal is “Har Ghar Jal ”- i.e. to achieve 
saturation with household water connections in rural India.  The Ministry added that it 
would require ` 23,000 crore annually till 2030 (at present cost) to achieve this goal 
and given the present financial outlays, SDGs canno t be realised solely through 
NRDWP efforts.  
1.5  Audit approach 
1.5.1  Audit objectives 
The performance audit was taken up with the objective of ascertaining whether: 
  necessary planning and institutional mechanisms exi sted for effective 
implementation of the Programme; 
  fund management for the Programme was economical and effective; 
  implementation of Programme was effective and efficient; and 
  adequate and effective mechanisms existed for monitoring and evaluation of the 
Programme. 
1.5.2  Audit methodology and coverage of performance audit 
The performance audit commenced with an entry confe rence with the Ministry on 16 
March 2017 wherein the audit methodology, scope, ob jectives and criteria were 
discussed. Simultaneously, entry conferences were held in each State by the respective 
Principal Accountants General/Accountants General w ith the nodal departments 
involved in the implementation of the Programme.  T hereafter, records relating to the 
Programme were examined in the Ministry and in Stat es between April 2017 and 
August 2017.   
The performance audit covered implementation of the Programme over a period of five 
years i.e. from 2012-13 to 2016-17 in 27 States 
5.  An audit survey was also carried out 
using a structured questionnaire designed to assess  the involvement of Gram 
Sabha /village/habitations and its representatives in the  Programme.  After conclusion 
of the audit, an exit conference was held with the Ministry on 16 February 2018 in 
which the draft audit findings were discussed.  Exi t conferences were also held at the 
State level.  This Report has taken into account re plies furnished by the Ministry and 
Programme implementing agencies at different levels. 
                                                           
5  Two States viz. Haryana  and West Bengal  were excluded from the selection due to coverage of audit 
of NRDWP in State Audit Reports of the previous year. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
5 
1.5.3  Source of audit criteria 
The audit criteria were derived from the following: 
  NRDWP Guidelines; Strategic Plan, notifications, orders and circulars issued 
by the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation; 
  Studies conducted by the erstwhile Planning Commission (NITI Aayog) and 
other monitoring agencies in Centre and State; and 
  State Government orders relating to implementation of NRDWP; 
1.5.4  Audit sampling 
Each State was divided into geographically contiguous regions and samples were taken 
from each region to make them representative of the  entire State.  The process and 
mechanism for sampling and selection of districts, blocks, Gram Panchayats  and 
beneficiaries are detailed in Annexe-1.1 (A).  
An audit survey was carried out to review the insti tutional arrangements at the Gram 
Sabha /Village levels and their involvement in planning a nd implementation and 
awareness about the Programme.  In addition, the im pact of the Programme on 
beneficiaries was studied with reference to key issues viz . availability, access, regularity 
and reliability of drinking water.  The details of habitations surveyed and profile of 
beneficiaries are given in Annexe-1.1 (B) and (C).  
The sample size covered during the performance audit is depicted in Chart-1.1 : 
Chart-1.1: Sample size 
 
Details of the sampled districts, divisions, blocks , Gram Panchayats , habitations and 
beneficiaries selected are given in Annexe-1.2 .  Name of selected districts are given in 
Annexe-1.3 . 
 
27 States 
 168 
Districts 
 380 Blocks 
 773 Gram 
Panchayats 
2,322 
Habitations 
28,586 
Beneficiaries 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
6 
1.5.5  Previous audit findings 
The Programme was previously reviewed and included in the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India’s Report No. 12 of 2008 (Accelerat ed Rural Water Supply 
Programme). The significant observations included i n the Report pertained to 
deficiencies in the Annual Action Plans, delayed su bmission of proposals, slip-back 
habitations 6 , non-functional schemes, inadequate attention to w ater quality and 
infrastructure for testing and monitoring water quality. 
The Public Accounts Committee (15 th Lok Sabha), in their 35 th Report (2011- 12) on 
the above-mentioned Report No. 12 of 2008 had made their recommendations. The 
Committee further reviewed the Action Taken Notes f urnished by the Ministry 
(February 2012) in their 69 th  Report (2012-13).  
The present performance audit of NRDWP for the period 2012-13 to 2016-17 revealed 
that the deficiencies pointed out in the earlier CAG’s Report continued to persist.  The 
details of deficiencies, corresponding recommendation and position as per current audit 
are given in Annexe-1.4 . 
1.6  Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the co-operation and assistance extended by the Ministry, State 
Governments and implementing departments and their officials at various stages during 
conduct of this performance audit. 
                                                           
6  Habitations shifted from category of fully covere d to partially covered due to drying up of sources or 
contamination of water sources, etc. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
7 
2.1  Introduction  
Proper planning and a well-established delivery mec hanism is essential for achieving 
the goals set out for any programme. The Programme guidelines envisage participation 
of relevant agencies at National, State, District, Block and Village levels for effective 
planning and implementation of rural drinking water schemes.  
2.2  Planning 
2.2.1  Non-preparation of State Specific Sector Policy Framework 
India is a geographically diverse country with vari ed sources of available drinking 
water and hence preparation of a State Specific Sec tor Policy Framework is essential 
for each State. Programme guidelines accordingly ma ndated preparation of a State 
Specific Sector Policy Framework based on the ‘Nati onal Policy Framework’ by each 
State. Subsequently, based on the State Policy Fram ework, each State would take up 
State level planning for preparing water supply schemes for the Twelfth FYP. 
However, 17 States viz . Andhra Pradesh,  Arunachal Pradesh , Goa, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra,  Manipur, Meghalaya 1, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Odisha, Punjab, Sikkim, Tripura and Uttarakhand 2 did not 
prepare State Specific Sector Policy Framework . In Rajasthan, though the Framework 
was stated to have been prepared, it was not made a vailable to Audit. In Tamil Nadu, 
no  information was provided to audit on this aspect.  
2.2.2  Non-preparation of Water Security Plan 
Water security planning is required to optimise the  use of water resources within the 
constraints of financial and human resources in order to meet basic needs and also take 
decisions with regard to water resources management  including investments. Water 
security planning is to be undertaken at the village, district and State levels. 
Village Water Security Plan (VWSP) includes the dem ographic, physical features, 
water sources and other details of the village, ava ilable drinking water infrastructure 
and water sources, funding by dovetailing various funds available at village levels and 
                                                           
1  The Department stated (October 2017) that framing o f Meghalaya State Water Policy had been 
initiated. 
2  State of Uttarakhand  has adopted National Rural Drinking Water Programm e (NRDWP) guideline 
2013 as policy of State to provide drinking water supply to its rural population. 
Chapter-II Planning and Delivery Mechanism  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
8 
requirement of funds from Rural Water Supply Progra mme. Based on the VWSP, 
District Water Security Plan (DWSP) are to be prepared. Further, under the broad goal 
set by each State, a five-year Comprehensive Water Security Action Plan was to be 
prepared. 
However, Water Security Plans were not prepared at any of the three levels in 21 States 
viz . Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Prad esh, 
Maharashtra 
3 , Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Odisha, Pu njab 4 , 
Rajasthan 5, Uttar Pradesh 6 and Uttarakhand . 
In Gujarat, Tamil Nadu and  Tripura , Water Security Plans were not prepared at 
Village and District level whereas in Chhattisgarh and  Telangana , Water Security 
Plans were not prepared at Village and State level.  
In two States of Chhattisgarh and Telangana , DWSP was not prepared in eight out of 
the 11 selected districts. In the remaining three 7 districts, though the plan was stated to 
have been prepared, no documentary evidence was provided to audit. In Sikkim , Water 
Security Plan at State level was not prepared. 
In Tamil Nadu , though State level plan had been prepared for the  Eleventh FYP, no 
plan was prepared for the Twelfth FYP. In Tripura , the plan was only prepared in 2017 
for the period 2016-17 to 2021-22.  
                                                           
3  Except district Sangli in respect of DWSP 
4  DWSP was prepared in the shape of work programme.  
5  Department stated that CWSAP was prepared. Howeve r, supporting documents were not produced. 
6  52 (out of 54) GPs test checked in respect VWSP 
7  Nalgonda ( Telangana ) and Raipur and Kawardha ( Chhattisgarh ) 
Rajasthan  
Work for preparation of VWSPs for 5,455 villages was awarded in August 2010 at a cost of 
` 10.51 crore to be completed within three months of issue of work order. Payments for the 
work was linked to five milestones viz. (i) submission of Inspection Report (five per cent ), 
(ii) submission of VWSP including DPRs (75 per cent ), (iii) submission of final report with 
GIS application (10 per cent ), (iv) approval of STA (five per cent ) and (v) clearance by 
SLSSC (five per cent ). Audit noted that 4,917 DPRs were submitted by th e firms of which 
4,003 were verified and ` 3.73 crore had been paid to firms up to January 20 15. However, 
milestones III, IV and V were not executed. In the absence of final reports on VWSPs and 
approval of STAs and SLSSCs, the entire expenditure of ` 3.73 crore was rendered wasteful .  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
9 
Thus, a majority of the States had failed to ensure  preparation of the Water Security 
Plans at the required levels which was indicative of schemes being formulated without 
any assessment of actual requirements and available resources.  
2.2.3  Annual Action Plan (AAP) 
Programme guidelines 8 require States to prepare their AAPs in a particip atory manner 
detailing activities in the rural drinking water sector proposed to be taken up during the 
year and the financial costs of such proposals. In the AAP, higher priority was to be 
given to habitations where access to drinking water was limited up to 25 per cent  of the 
population and to quality affected habitations. AAP s of the ensuing year were to be 
submitted to the Ministry by January of each year through online IMIS. These plans are 
thereafter discussed with the Ministry in February/March for the purpose of allocating 
funds to the States.  
Discrepancies noted in the process of preparation a nd scrutiny of AAPs are discussed 
in the succeeding paragraphs. 
2.2.3.1  Shortcomings in Processing of AAP by the Ministry 
Audit examined records relating to processing of 31  AAPs of nine States ( Gujarat, 
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Mizoram, Od isha, Rajasthan, 
Tripura and  Uttar Pradesh ) pertaining to different financial years (2012-13 to 
2016-17) and observed the following: 
 Compliance with instructions issued for a specific financial year such as 
coverage of more quality affected habitations, incr easing individual tap connections, 
testing of drinking water sources, strengthening of  infrastructure facilities in 
laboratories, recruitment of professionals in WSSO,  DWSM, BRC, addressing public 
grievances, etc., was not being reviewed by the Ministry in processing subsequent year 
AAPs.  
 Targets projected for a specific financial year wer e changed by the State(s) in 
subsequent year while depicting achievement for that year. The reasons for the changes 
were however not being ascertained by the Ministry.  Adherence to Programme target 
for provision of 55 lpcd of drinking water was not being ensured while approving AAPs 
and States were being permitted to fix a lower targ et of 40 lpcd of drinking water. 
Further, the format of the AAP was not such that al lowed the Ministry to ensure that 
schemes proposed by the States were in line with the strategic goals. 
                                                           
8  Para 14 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
10 
Ministry explained (September 2017) that it was not  possible to monitor the AAPs 
minutely due to limited manpower. 
2.2.3.2  Discrepancies in preparation of AAPs  
In 10 States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Goa, Jharkhand, Kerala, Nagaland, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram and Uttar Pradesh,  Annual Action plans (AAPs) were prepared 
at State levels without District level AAPs being prepared. In 23 States , audit observed 
shortcomings in preparation of AAPs such as delayed  submission/approval of AAP, 
lack of local stakeholder and community involvement  in preparation of AAP, absence 
of approval from SLSSC and non-inclusion of minimum service level of water (55 lpcd) 
in schemes/plan as detailed in Annexe-2.1 . 
2.3  National Drinking Water and Sanitation Council 
The National Drinking Water and Sanitation Council (NDWSC) 9 was created in July 
2010 to bring greater co-ordination and convergence  among different Ministries/ 
Departments of the Central Government and between C entre and States on issues 
relating to drinking water and sanitation. As per t he Strategic Plan (2011-22), the 
Ministry, through the National Water Mission (under Ministry of Water Resources) and 
NDWSC, was to take a convergent approach along with the other concerned Ministries.  
Audit observed that NDWSC had remained dormant duri ng the period 2012-17. As a 
result, a co-ordinated and convergent approach with other stakeholders was missing in 
the planning and implementation of the Programme.  
The Ministry accepted (September 2017) that no meet ing had been held after the first 
two meetings (prior to 2012) and stated that co-ord ination and convergence was being 
achieved through alternate means. However, the fact  remains that the Ministry was 
deprived of the benefits of a high level forum for addressing issues requiring 
coordination and convergence.  
                                                           
9  Consisting of representatives of different Depart ments, five State secretaries and ten members drawn  
from expert organisations/Civil society organisatio ns/Educational & scientific institutions/Zila 
Panchayats/Apex Industry associations.  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
11 
2.4  Delivery Mechanism  
Programme guidelines envisage creation of an instit utional framework spanning 
various levels and bodies entrusted with specific r esponsibilities to ensure smooth 
delivery of various components of the Programme. Th is framework is detailed in 
Chart-2.1 :  
Chart-2.1: Delivery mechanism at Central and State level  
 
 


Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
12 
2.4.1  State Water and Sanitation Mission 
According to NRDWP guidelines, a “State Water and S anitation Mission (SWSM)” 
was to be set up as a registered society at the Sta te level under the aegis of the 
Department/Agency implementing the rural water supp ly programme in the State. 
SWSM was to be headed by the Chief Secretary/Additi onal Chief Secretary/ 
Development Commissioner with Secretaries in-charge of PHED, Rural Development, 
Panchayati Raj , Finance, Health, Education, Women and Child Devel opment, Water 
Resources, Agriculture, Information and Public Rela tions as members. The Mission 
was to be the apex level institution in the State e ntrusted with key functions related to 
policy, coordination, management and monitoring of the water supply and sanitation 
project in the State. The Mission was expected to meet at least twice a year.  
Audit observed that SWSMs were not formed as mandat ed by the guidelines in Goa, 
Karnataka and Mizoram  and its functions were being performed by other 
Departments/agencies. This defeated the purpose of setting up of a Mission with 
representation from all Departments to ensure better convergence and coordination. In 
nine States viz . Andhra Pradesh 10 , Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and  Tripura , SWSMs remained 
non-functional as no meetings were held. 
In nine other States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Kerala, Manipur, Punjab, Sikkim and  Uttar Pradesh , the SWSMs met 
infrequently i.e. one to six 
11  times during 2012-17. Records relating to meeting of the 
Mission were not provided to audit in Jharkhand 12 , Nagaland and  Telangana.  
Thus, not only were Programme guidelines violated in several States, there was also no 
assurance that the programme received the support i n terms of policy guidance, co-
ordination, monitoring and evaluation at the apex level which is critical for ensuring its 
successful delivery. 
2.4.2  State Level Scheme Sanctioning Committee 
States were to constitute a State Level Scheme Sanctioning Committee (SLSSC) to be 
chaired by Secretary, PHED/Rural Water Supply Depar tment. The SLSSC was to 
approve the Annual Action Plan (AAP) on habitations  to be targeted under the 
Programme and schemes to be taken up in consultatio n with the Ministry. This 
                                                           
10   SWSM was headed by Principal Secretary, PR & RD Department. 
11   Arunachal Pradesh  (6), Assam  (5 ), Chhattisgarh (5), Jammu & Kashmir (1), Kerala  (1), 
Manipur  (4), Punjab  (3), Sikkim (1) and Uttar Pradesh  (3)  
12   In Jharkhand , Programme Management Unit (PMU) was functioning f or NRDWP whereas 
Jharkhand State Water and Sanitation Mission (JSWSM) was functioning for World Bank projects. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
13 
Committee was to meet at least twice a year wherein , apart from sanctioning new 
schemes, progress, completion and commissioning of the schemes approved earlier 
were to be reviewed.  
Audit scrutiny brought that against the required 10 meetings for each State, there were 
shortfalls ranging between 30 and 80 per cent  during 2012-17 in 20 States as given in 
Annexe-2.2 . In Bihar and Himachal Pradesh , the shortfall in number of meetings 
during 2015-17 was 50 per cent 
13 .  
In Goa , the committee was not functional and decisions we re actually taken by the 
Public Works Department in place of the SLSSC. In Meghalaya, Mizoram and 
Nagaland , the role of the Committee was confined to only sa nctioning of projects. In 
Odisha , the Committee approved works only in terms of num bers without specifying 
the name of the works. Therefore, evaluation of eac h approved work by SLSSC was 
not possible in subsequent meetings. In Rajasthan , the Committee accorded ex-post 
facto approval to 7,276 schemes costing ` 5,867.65 crore which defeated the purpose 
of formation of SLSSC as feasibility of the schemes and other aspects were required to 
be scrutinized by SLSSC before according approval. 
Thus, non-performance of the assigned role and shor tfall in the number of meetings 
undermined the objective of setting up of the SLSSC s of providing apex level policy 
guidance, review and coordination.  
2.4.3  State Technical Agency 
The SWSM was required to identify reputed technical institutions in consultation with 
the Ministry for appointment as State Technical Age ncy (STA). The STAs were to 
provide technical support to the Department in plan ning and design of rural water 
supply schemes with emphasis on sustainability of t he source and assist in evaluation 
of major and complicated water supply schemes. The STA was also responsible for 
providing feedback to the SWSM/SLSSC/department on various aspects relating to 
planning and implementation of the scheme at the field level. 
Audit observed that seven States i.e. Andhra Pradesh 14 , Gujarat 15 , Jammu & 
Kashmir 16 , Meghalaya, Nagaland, Punjab and  Telangana 17  had not identified STAs. 
In six States of Assam, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Manipur, Rajasthan and  Uttar 
                                                           
13   One meeting each year during 2015-17 in both States. 
14   STA was constituted in March 2012, however, after  bifurcation (June 2014) of state, the agency 
remained non-functional. 
15   State has Internal Technical Committees only.  
16   Preparation, scrutiny and vetting of the DPRs were done by the Chief Engineers, PHED. 
17   Both scrutiny and clearance of various items of works planned under NRDWP was done by SLSSC. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
14 
Pradesh ) a Committee/Body/Agency of serving/retired office rs or even the work 
executing agency itself was functioning as STA inst ead of a reputed technical 
institution. Other State specific findings are as below: 
Arunachal Pradesh:  North Eastern Regional Institute of Science & Techn ology 
(NERIST), Nirjuli, was appointed as STA in June 201 4. However, none of the 
schemes 18  were referred to STA for pre-evaluation nor was po st evaluations of 
completed schemes carried out by the STA during 2012-17. 
Chhattisgarh:  Functions like assistance in planning and designing  projects, 
preparation of action plan for hardware and softwar e activities, evaluation and 
monitoring, feedback, etc., were not performed by the STA. 
Himachal Pradesh:  STA was identified in October 2015 for a period of one year. 
However, status of extension to STA beyond one year was not found on records of the 
Department. 
Jharkhand:  Though STA was identified in November 2011, their services were taken 
after November 2014. Till November 2014, DPRs were presented in SLSSC meetings 
without vetting by STA.  
Kerala:  Instead of engaging a reputed technical institution , State Government 
constituted an agency headed by the Managing Direct or, Kerala Water Authority  
(July 2010) to function as STA. However, even this agency was not functional. 
Mizoram: STA was constituted in November 2009 with the Joint Secretary, PHED, as 
Officer-in-Charge and six other members including a  public health institute 19  which 
was responsible for engaging technical experts for scrutinising projects. However, no 
technical experts were engaged and the Detailed Pro ject Reports (DPRs) were 
scrutinised without deliberating on technical parameters. 
Odisha:  DPRs/estimates of Rural Piped Water Supply works were not sent to STA for 
scrutiny. 
Sikkim:  Instead of identifying reputed technical institutio ns, the Water Security and 
Public Health Engineering Department was identified  as the STA. Further, except for 
two 20  mega RWSS projects, DPRs and estimates relating to  RWSS works were not 
vetted by the STA. 
                                                           
18   828 schemes for the period 2014-17.   
19   All India Institute of Hygiene & Public Health, Kolkata 
20   Namphing and Yangang.  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
15 
Uttarakhand:  The SLSSC discontinued the services of STA 21  in December 2016 on 
the grounds that there were already two filter leve ls existing in the State i.e. 
Departmental Sanctioning Committee and Empowered Sanction Committee. 
Thus, failure to identify and designate STAs and to  ensure their proper utilisation for 
the prescribed tasks increased the risk of schemes being taken up which were not 
technically sound or feasible.  
2.4.4  Source Finding Committee 
The Source Finding Committee (SFC) was required to invariably review the feasibility 
and functioning of existing water supply schemes in  terms of adequacy of availability 
of potable drinking water. The schemes put up for approval in the SLSSC were required 
to have prior clearance of the SFC.  
Audit scrutiny showed that SFC was not constituted in 19 States i.e. Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam 
22 , Bihar,  Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Man ipur, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Telangana, Ut tar Pradesh and 
Uttarakhand . In Gujarat , the SFC did not assess ground water schemes as a result of 
which 2,052 ground water based schemes were non-functional (July 2017) mainly due 
to inadequate quantity of water in the concerned water sources of the schemes.  
In the absence of SFC, the nodal agencies did not o btain the required assurance with 
regard to availability of adequate potable water wh ile approving and reviewing water 
supply schemes. 
2.4.5  Water and Sanitation Support Organisation 
All States were to set up a Water and Sanitation Su pport Organisation (WSSO) under 
SWSM and existing Communication and Capacity Develo pment Unit (CCDU 23 ) for 
water and sanitation was to be merged with this org anisation which was to become a 
Rural Water and Sanitation Management Organisation at the State level in the form of 
a Society 24  with members from reputed civil society organisati ons, academic 
institutions, technical institutes and representati ves of VWSCs. The Organisation was 
to be mainly responsible for assisting the Panchaya t Raj Institutions (PRIs) in 
preparation of water security plan, human resource development and IEC activities, 
                                                           
21   IIT Roorkee 
22   SFC was constituted in May 2017  
23   Unit to take up IEC and HRD activities 
24   Under Society Registration Act. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
16 
impact assessment and evaluation studies research a nd development activities and use 
of modern IT tools for monitoring.  
Audit scrutiny showed that four States viz . Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Mizoram and  
Sikkim  did not set up WSSO and CCDUs continued to work for the Programme. There 
were various shortcomings in functioning of WSSO in  13 States  such as shortage of 
staff, non-conduct of evaluation studies and non-in volvement in preparation of water 
security plans as tabulated in Annexe-2.3 . 
2.4.6  District Water and Sanitation Mission 
A District Water and Sanitation Mission (DWSM) was to be constituted at the district 
level and was to function under the supervision, co ntrol and guidance of the Zila 
Panchayat/Parishad. The Mission would be headed by the Chairperson of the Zila 
Panchayat/Parishad  and would include elected representatives, Chairper son of the 
Standing Committee of the Zila Parishad and distric t level government functionaries. 
The Mission was to meet at least quarterly and be r esponsible for formulation and 
management of projects and monitoring its progress. 
Audit scrutiny of records showed that DWSM was not formed in any of the selected 
districts in Bihar, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and  Tamil Nadu . In two 
States i.e. Karnataka and Maharashtra , DWSM was not formed in five 25  out of the 
20 selected districts. In Nagaland , the Department did not furnish records regarding 
formation of DWSM and the activities carried out by them in the selected districts.  
Audit noticed shortcomings in functioning of DWSM such as non-conduct of meetings, 
shortfall in number of meetings, non-functional DWS Ms, Mission not chaired by 
chairperson of Zila Parishad, non-inclusion of publ ic representative (MP/MLA/PRI), 
shortage of staff and limitation of role to Swachh Bharat  Mission  in 19 States  as given 
in Annexe-2.4. 
2.4.7  Block Resource Centre 
Block Resource Centre (BRC) was envisaged as the no dal point at the block level to 
provide continuous support in terms of awareness generation, motivation, mobilisation, 
training and handholding of village communities, GPs and GPSC 26 /VWSCs. The BRC 
was to be under the administrative control and supe rvision of Block Panchayats  and 
serve as an extended delivery arm of DWSM.  
                                                           
25   Bidar and Yadgir of Karnataka  (2), Beed, Buldhana and Raigad of Maharashtra  (3) 
26   Gram Panchayat  Sanitation Committee 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
17 
Audit scrutiny showed that BRCs were not establishe d in the selected blocks in  
17 States i.e. Bihar, Goa, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Ke rala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Punjab, Rajasthan, 
Sikkim, Tamil Nadu 27 , Telangana and Uttarakhand .  In five other States of Andhra 
Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha and  Uttar Pradesh , there was 
shortfall in formation of BRC upto 52 per cent in  selected blocks. Other State specific 
comments on the functioning of BRC are as below:  
Andhra Pradesh:  In two districts (Guntur and West Godavari), though  BRCs were 
constituted they remained non-functional. 
Arunachal Pradesh:  44 Sub-Divisional Offices of PHED were notified in January 
2012 by the State Government to act as BRCs for 99 Blocks in the State. These BRCs 
were under the control of Executive Engineers, PHED  and not the Block Panchayats . 
There was no evidence to show that BRCs conducted a ny awareness programmes, 
training activities and site visits on the matter of safe water and testing of drinking water 
sources using kits, etc. 
Assam:  Functions of BRCs were limited to only sanitation. 
Chhattisgarh:  BRCs were stated to be formed in eight 28  out of 16 selected blocks but 
no records were produced.  No information was furnished  by the remaining blocks. 
Jharkhand:  BRCs started functioning only from April 2013 and f unctioned upto 
March-November 2016 in the blocks of six selected districts. However, BRCs failed to 
perform their function as per guidelines in selected districts.  
Odisha:  In 24 selected Blocks, BRCs were functioning with 3 9 personnel against the 
requirement of 61 personnel. Due to shortage of staff, awareness campaign, motivation, 
mobilisation and training to the village communities, GPs and VWSCs was not done. 
Uttar Pradesh:  Only Block Co-ordinator 29  was posted in the BRCs. Cluster 
co-ordinators were not posted in any of the BRCs in the State. 
The fact that BRCs were either absent or were functioning inadequately across all States 
indicated that the Programme was being planned and implemented without ensuring 
proper stake-holder involvement and support. 
                                                           
27  Infrastructure at Block level functioning under the State Rural Development Department was co-opted 
to function as BRCs.  
28   Abhanpur, Dharsiwan, Kawardha, Bodla, Dongargarh, Khairagarh, Surajpur and Ramanujnagar 
29   One of the 24 functionaries of BRC  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
18 
2.4.8  Village Water and Sanitation Committee  
A Village Water and Sanitation Committee (GPWSC/VWSC) was to be set up in each 
village for implementation of water supply schemes to ensure the active participation 
of villagers. The Committee was to be assigned resp onsibility for tasks such as 
planning, designing and implementing in-village dri nking water and sanitation 
activities and providing data and information to th e Gram Panchayat  for reviewing 
water and sanitation issues. 
VWSCs were not formed in Bihar, Kerala, Rajasthan and  Tamil Nadu 
30 . In the 
selected GPs of 10 States ( Assam, Goa, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Odisha and Uttarakhand ), the shortfall in 
formation of VWSC ranged between 29 and 96 per cent . 
Audit observed shortcomings in functioning of VWSC in 12 States  such as non-
involvement of VWSC in planning and management of t he scheme, limitation of role 
to sanitation sector, non-ensuring the representation of SCs, STs and poorer sections of 
the villages, etc., as brought out in Annexe-2.5 . 
Thus, non-setting up of VWSCs indicated lack of bot tom up approach in planning, 
designing and implementation of the Programme. 
2.5  Audit Summation  
The institutional mechanisms and structures intende d for effective implementation of 
the scheme ensuring stakeholder participation were not established in most of the States 
and where established failed to function on a regul ar basis. At the Central level, the 
apex level Committee i.e. NDW&S Council intended fo r achieving coordination and 
convergence remained largely non-operational. At the State level, Water Security Plans 
were not being prepared in most States at any of th e three tiers i.e. village, district and 
State as envisaged in the Programme guidelines sign ifying absence of bottom up 
approach and community participation in the plannin g of schemes. Further, structural 
support for delivery of the Programme was weak in S tates as the apex level body i.e. 
SWSM for policy guidance, convergence and coordination was either not functional in 
12  States  or functioned with limitations. The SLSSC which is tasked with approval and 
monitoring progress and completion of schemes did n ot meet at prescribed intervals. 
Technical support for schemes was not ensured as State Technical Agency and Source 
Finding Committees were non-identified/not formed i n seven  States  and 19 States  
respectively. At the District level, the functionin g of DWSMs though formed in 
                                                           
30   Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage (TWAD) Board was doing the work of VWSC 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
19 
19 States , suffered from a variety of shortcomings which und ermined their utility and 
effectiveness. The block level delivery body i.e. Block Resource Centre was not formed 
in selected blocks of 17  States . Village Water and Sanitation Committees was not 
formed in several GPs across States and inadequacies were noticed in their functioning.  
Consequently, the Programme faced constraints both in terms of planning and delivery 
which ultimately affected achievement of programme’s goals and targets.  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
20  
 
3.1  Introduction 
NRDWP was implemented as a centrally sponsored sche me with cost being shared 
between the Central and State Governments. Within t he planned budget allocation, 
funds are earmarked for specific categories such as World Bank Projects, Water Quality 
Sub-Mission, projects in the North East States and projects in Desert Development 
Programme States. The Ministry also retains funds for R&D and support activities and 
for natural calamities. The balance funds are there after allocated to States under six 
NRDWP components 1on the basis of rural population based weightage cr iteria. The 
main categories under which allocation was earmarked are given in Chart-3.1 : 
Chart-3.1: Distribution of Budget Allocation  
 
Source: Programme guidelines 
                                                           
1  Coverage, Sustainability, Water Quality, Operation & Maintenance, Water Quality Monitoring & 
Surveillance, Support (Para 9.2 and 9.3 of the Programme guidelines). 
 
•From the planned budget allocation, funds are kept 
aside for World Bank aided projects and for Water 
Quality Sub-mission (for distribution amongst 
identified States) 
Funds for special 
projects 
•Part of funds are kept by the Ministry for 
expenditure e.g. Reserarch and Development, 
Support Activities at its level 
•2 per cent of allocation for Natural Calamities 
Funds retained at 
Ministry level 
•10 per cent of Programme funds are for Desert 
Development Programme Areas 
•5 per cent of Programme funds are for Water 
Quality affected earmarked areas 
Funds for 
earmarked 
activities 
•10 per cent of remaining Programme funds are for 
North-East States including Sikkim 
•73 per cent of remaining Programme funds are for 
non-North-East States 
Funds allocated to 
States/UTs 
Chapter-III  Fund Management  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
21  
3.2  Financial Performance  
Programme guidelines laid down the pattern of compo nent wise funding specifying 
Central and State share for each component. Following the 14 th  Finance Commission’s 
recommendation for increasing devolution of funds t o the States and based on the 
recommendations of the sub-group of Chief Ministers  on Rationalisation of Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes, the Ministry changed the funding pattern for various components 
of the Programme with effect from 1 April 2015. The  original and revised funding 
pattern is given in Table-3.1  below: 
Table-3.1: Centre-State fund sharing pattern  
Component 
Original pattern Revised pattern 
Other 
States 
NE/Himalayan 
States 
Other 
States 
NE/Himalayan 
States 
Coverage, Water Quality, 
Operation and Maintenance 50:50 90:10 50:50 90:10 
Sustainability, Support, Water 
Quality Monitoring and 
Surveillance (WQM&S) 
100:0 100:0 60:40 90:10 
Desert Development 
Programme, Natural Calamity 100:0 100:0 60:40 90:10 
Earmarked Water Quality 50:50 90:10 50:50 90:10 
Source: Programme guidelines 
3.2.1  Funds allocation for NRDWP by Centre 
During 2012-17, the total budget allocation made to  the Ministry was ` 40,111 crore. 
Against this, the Ministry incurred an expenditure of ` 39,779 crore during this period 
of which releases to States was ` 39,501 crore. The year-wise details are given in 
Table-3.2 below: 
Table-3.2: Allocation of funds by the Central Government: 2012-17  
(`` ``     in crore) 
Source: Records of the Ministry 
# Release to States + Ministry level expenditure  
The Ministry expected that the decrease in budgetar y allocation in the years 2015-16 
and 2016-17 would be compensated by the enhancement  in devolution of funds to the 
States based on the recommendations of the 14 th  Finance Commission and the increase 
Year  Budget 
Estimates  
Revised 
Estimates  
Actual 
Expenditure # 
 
Funds released 
by the Ministry 
to States*  
2012-13 10,500 10,500 10,490 10,473 
2013-14 11,000 9,700 9,697 9,640 
2014-15 11,000 9,250 9, 243 9,191 
2015-16 2,611 4,373 4,370 4,265 
2016-17 5,000 6,000 5,979 5,932 
Total  40,111 39,823 39,779 39,501 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
22  
in the States’ share of the components of the Programme as effective from 1 April 2015. 
In addition, States were advised to explore alterna tive sources of funding from both 
domestic and external lending agencies to meet their resource requirements. 
3.2.2  Deduction/cut in Central share to States 
As part of measures to improve financial discipline 2 in transfer of funds to States, 
opening balance in excess of 10 per cent of the release in the previous year is required 
to be subsumed in the release of the first instalment during a year. Further, Central share 
of funds was also liable to cuts on account of reas ons such as late receipt of proposals 
from State governments, less release of State’s sha re and excess expenditure on 
operation and maintenance. 
Audit observed that Ministry imposed cuts and reduced Central share by a total amount 
of 
` 829.39 crore in the case of 13 States  due to reasons given above during the period 
covered by audit. These cuts were the highest in the case of Rajasthan (` 398.53 crore) 
and ranged between ` 50 crore and ` 80 crore in the case of Assam , Bihar, Jharkhand, 
Karnataka and  Maharashtra  and between ` 25 crore and ` 50 crore in Andhra 
Pradesh  and Himachal Pradesh. The cut was ` 10 crore or less in the case of 
Manipur , Odisha , Punjab and Telangana. 
3.2.3  Short/Non-release of State share  
In 12 States, matching States share amounting to ` 1,178.76 crore was either not 
released or short released during 2012-17. Short or non-release of State share was more 
than ` 100 crore in the case of Andhra Pradesh , Maharashtra  and Uttarakhand  with 
the amount with respect to Maharashtra  being the highest at ` 547.93 crore. In the 
case of Assam , Bihar , Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan and  Telangana , short/non 
release ranged between ` 40 crore and ` 100 crore. Short/ non-release was less than 
` 10 crore in case of Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Nagaland  and Sikkim.  
Analysis in audit showed that after change in the sharing pattern between Centre-State 
with respect to certain components, States did not release their matching share against 
Central share during 2015-17 under these components. Details are given in Annexe-3.1. 
Ministry stated (February 2018) that due to late in timation about changed funding 
pattern (January 2016) to the States, some of the S tates could not make provision for 
the same in the financial year 2015-16. This reply is not tenable as many States did not 
release their share against Central share even in the next financial year. 
 
 
 
                                                           
2  Ministry of Finance O.M. dated 13 May 2012  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
23  
3.2.4  Release and utilisation of Central and State funds 
The release and utilisation of Central and States s hare of funds for implementation of 
NRDWP during 2012-17 is detailed in Table-3.3 below: 
Table-3.3: Release and utilisation of Central and State funds: 2012-17 
(`` ``     in crore)  
Year Opening 
Balance 
Fund 
Released 
to State 
Interest/  
Recoveries 
Available 
Fund Expenditure 
Closing Balance 
Amount 
Percentage of 
available 
fund 
Central Release and Expenditure  
2012-13 3705 10473 207 14385 10081 4303 29.92 
2013-14 4304 9640 105 14049 10937 3112 22.15 
2014-15 3054 9191 57 12302 9788 2515 20.44 
2015-16 2511 4265 86 6862 5325 1537 22.40 
2016-17 1537 5932 30 7499 5393 2105 28.08 
Total  39501 485 43691 # 41524   
State Release and Expenditure  
2012-13 -- 9151 -- 9151 7325 1826 19.95 
2013-14 -- 9528 -- 9528 8275 1253 13.15 
2014-15 -- 10188 -- 10188 9090 1098 10.78 
2015-16 -- 7966 -- 7966 6795 1171 14.70 
2016-17 -- 9432 -- 9432 8159 1273 13.50 
Total -- 46265 --  46265 39644   
Total Centre and State Release and Expenditure 
2012-13 3705 19624 207 23536 17406 6130 26.05 
2013-14 4304 19168 105 23577 19212 4365 18.51 
2014-15 3054 19379 57 22490 18878 3612 16.06 
2015-16 2511 12231 86 14828 12120 2708 18.26 
2016-17 1537 15364 30 16931 13552 3379 19.96 
Total  85766 485 89956 81168 8788 9.77 
Source: IMIS data of the Ministry 
Note: 
#Available balance  is equal to opening balance of 2012-13 plus total r elease during 2012-17 and interest 
received. 
In respect of Central funds, there were variations in closing and opening balances during 2012-13 to 2015-
16 in IMIS data. 
IMIS data does not disclose availability of unspent balance under State share. 
 
Thus, there were savings with respect to available funds in each year though the 
percentage of savings declined from 26.05 per cent  in 2012-13 to 19.96 per cent  in 
2016-17. Overall, funds amounting to ` 8,788 crore, including ` 2,105 crore from 
Central share, remained unutilised at the end of March 2017. 
Further, the overall availability of funds for the Programme decreased from ` 23,577 
crore in 2013-14 to ` 16,931 crore in 2016-17 belying the expectations t hat States 
would be able to adequately compensate for the lowe r central allocation. Moreover, 
even the reduced allocations were not fully utilise d. The decrease in availability of 
funds coupled with inability of the State Governmen ts to utilise the reduced funds 
impacted the implementation of Programme both in terms of number of schemes taken 
up and completed from 2014-15 onwards as discussed in paragraph 4.2.4. State-wise 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
24  
position of releases, utilisation and outstanding b alance of Central and State share of 
funds during 2012-17 is at Annexe-3.2. 
The Ministry in its replies to the Standing Committ ee(s) of Parliament on Rural 
Development on Demand for Grants 3 stated that late submission of proposals for 
release of second instalments, late submission of u tilisation certificates and excessive 
time taken in implementing the scheme at ground lev el were the main reasons for 
unspent balances. The Ministry added (August 2016) that reasons for unspent balance 
in States were administrative in nature and were issues of financial management. 
3.2.5  Fund flow mechanism 
Programme guidelines stipulate release of NRDWP fun ds directly to State 
implementing agencies. Accordingly, Government of I ndia (GoI) released funds 
directly to the State Water and Sanitation Missions  (SWSM) till 2013-14. However, 
from 2014-15 onwards, funds were being routed through the Consolidated Fund of the 
State with a stipulation that the State Governments would transfer these funds including 
State’s share to SWSM within 15 working days of rec eipt of funds from the Centre. 
The flow of NRDWP funds to the States is depicted in Chart-3.2 : 
Chart-3.2: Fund flow mechanism  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Programme guidelines  
Programme guidelines provide that SWSM shall mainta in separate bank accounts for 
programme funds and support funds and the Ministry was to release programme funds 4 
and support funds 5 into these accounts. Further, State Governments were to release their 
matching share to the SWSMs. 
                                                           
3 2013-14 to 2016-17 and Reports on Action Taken on the recommendations thereon. 
4 For components such as coverage, water quality, O&M and sustainability. 
5 For bodies like WSSO, DWSM, BRCs, IEC, HRD, MIS and computerisation, R&D, etc., and WQM&S 
Fund flow during 2012-13 to 2013-14 
 
Implementing Agencies 
State Water and Sanitation Mission 
Programme Fund 
Account 
Support Fund 
Account 
Government of India and state government 
Programme Fund 
 Support Fund 
Fund flow during 2014-15 to 2016-17 
 
Implementing Agencies 
State Water and Sanitation Mission 
Programme Fund 
 Support Fund 
State Government Consolidated Fund 
(along with state share) 
Government of India 
Programme Fund 
 Support Fund 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
25  
In 16 States i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat 6, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Meghalaya, O disha, Sikkim, Tamil 
Nadu, Telangana, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and  Uttarakhand 7, Central share was 
directly released to dedicated programme fund accou nts and support fund accounts 
maintained by SWSM and the State share was also transferred to these accounts through 
State Budget till March 2014. From April 2014 onwards, the Central share was routed 
through the State Consolidated Fund to the dedicate d accounts of SWSMs as part of 
restructuring of CSS. 
In Assam, Central share was released to SWSM through the Stat e Budget in 2014-15 
whereas in the period 2015-17 it was released direc tly to work executing department 
without routing through SWSM. The State shares were  directly released to work 
executing departments throughout the period 2012-17  which was a violation of 
Programme guidelines. 
In Goa , while both Central and State shares were being di rectly credited to SWSM 
accounts up to 2013-14, from 2014-15 onwards both t hese shares were being released 
to work executing department without routing through SWSM. 
In nine States of Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Punjab and  Rajasthan,  while the Ministry was 
releasing the Central share directly to SWSM the State share was being released by the 
State to work executing departments without routing  it through SWSM upto March 
2014. From April 2014, the Central share was releas ed to State Consolidated Fund 
which was thereafter along with the States’ share b eing released to work executing 
divisions/implementing agencies without routing through SWSM.  
Non-routing of funds through SWSMs especially after  March 2014, was in 
contravention of the guidelines. It also undermined the SWSMs as an apex body in the 
State for guiding, coordinating and monitoring the project by reducing its control over 
programme finances.  
 
 
 
 
                                                           
6 Gujarat , since 2014-15 provides fund to Gujarat Water Supply and Sewerage Board (GWSSB), Water 
and Sanitation Management Organisation (WASMO) and GJTI. 
7 Except state shares for 2012-14. 
 
Manipur and  Rajasthan  
State Governments transferred Central share directly to work executing department without 
routing them through SWSM since April 2014. As a re sult, dedicated accounts for 
programme fund and support funds of SWSM became non -operational and ` 66.03 crore 
(Manipur ` 1.01 crore and Rajasthan ` 65.02 crore) remained unutilised in these accounts 
(March 2017 ).  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
26  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2.6  Short-utilisation of funds available for NRDWP components 
Funds of NRDWP are allocated for its six components  and for specific areas, 
habitations and purposes as depicted in Chart-3.3 .  
Karnataka 
Against the stipulation of operating two accounts f or the Programme and support 
accounts, the State Government of Karnataka  was operating 108 savings accounts 
in four different banks. Only two savings banks accounts viz . an account in Syndicate 
Bank, BWSSB Branch, Bengaluru (Programme Fund) and an account in Corporation 
Bank, Malleswaram Branch, Bengaluru (Support Activi ties Fund) were 
communicated to the Ministry for transfer of funds.  
Of the remaining 106 accounts, seven accounts were opened (six in August 2010 
and one January 2011) in Syndicate Bank, BWSSB Branch. Of these seven accounts, 
while three accounts were never operated the remain ing four accounts received 
funds from the Programme fund account for payment to contractors. 
In addition to the above, 98 accounts (97 in Syndic ate Bank, BWSSB Branch and 
one in Andhra Bank) were opened in March 2011. In one of the 97 Accounts opened 
in the Syndicate Bank, ` 73 crore was transferred in the month of March in 2011, 
2012 and 2013 from the four accounts opened in Augu st 2010 referred to above. 
This amount was re-credited to the four accounts by  June 2013. These transactions 
were not supported by any documentary authorization s which indicate that these 
transactions were carried out to inflate the expenditure and for parking of funds. 
In other 96 accounts opened in 31 March 2011 in the  name of district officers for 
various component of the Programme, ` 525 crore was transferred from four 
accounts opened in August 2010. However, after laps e of 11 days (11 April 2011), 
the entire amount along with along with interest was credited back to the respective 
four accounts.  
In the account opened in Andhra Bank in March 2011, ` 90.42 crore was deposited 
(26 March 2011) after being withdrawn from the trea sury by debiting Capital 
Expenditure-Rural Water Supply for release to vario us Zila Parishad for utilisation 
under the respective components. During November 20 11 to April 2014, ` 5 crore 
was transferred (30 March 2013) to another bank acc ount in Dena Bank and 
 
` 0.73 crore was released to Zila Parishad  for payment to contractor.  
These transactions indicate that besides two main a uthorized accounts, funds were 
parked by the State Government in various unauthorized accounts. 
Opening of multiple bank accounts and complicated i nter-bank transactions 
indicated lapses in control over funds allocated fo r the Programme. A committee 
constituted (October 2015) by the State Government recommended (June 2016) a 
detailed reconciliation of these transactions which  was still in progress (August 
2017). Meanwhile, the balances of ` 612 crore in these accounts (except two main 
accounts) as of May 2016 were remitted back to the government.  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
27  
Chart-3.3: Component-wise distribution of Programme Funds  
 
Due to the wide variation between States in terms o f the number of habitations with 
water quality problems and the number of partially covered habitations, guidelines 
provide flexibility in allocation of funds under th e Coverage and Water Quality 
components up to 67 per cent  of funds available for allocation to a State can b e used 
under the Coverage and Water Quality components tak en together. Similarly, ‘water 
surplus’ States have the flexibility to use a lower  percentage of funds under the 
Sustainability component with proper justification. 
The position of funds available and expenditure inc urred under different NRDWP 
components during 2012-17 is detailed in Table-3.4: 
Coverage - 47 per cent of state allocation is for providing safe and adequate 
drinking water supply to uncovered, partially covered and slipped back 
habitations 
Water Quality Monitoring & 
Surveillance – three per cent of state 
allocation is for monitoring and 
surveillance of water quality in 
habitations at field level and for setting 
up, upgrading laboratories at State, 
district and sub-district levels 
Water Quality -
20 per cent of state 
allocation is for 
providing safe 
drinking water to 
water quality 
affected habitations 
Sustainability - 10 
per cent of State 
allocation is for 
encouraging states to 
achieve drinking water 
security at the local 
level through 
sustainability of 
sources and systems 
Operation & Maintenance -
15 per cent of state allocation is 
for expenditure on running, 
repair and replacement costs of 
drinking water supply projects 
Support - five per 
cent of state 
allocation is for 
support activities like 
WSSO, DWSM, 
BRCs, IEC, HRD, 
MIS and 
computerisation, 
R&D, etc .

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
28  
Table-3.4: Expenditure incurred on NRDWP components: 2012-17 
(`` ``     in crore)  
  2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 Total 
Coverage + Water Quality + Sustainability + Operation & Maintenance 
Funds available 20,641.83  20,762.96  19,414.34  12,685.35  13,596.42  79,192.75  
Central  
Opening balance 2,751.58  3,346.31  2,227.56  1,541.16  793.12   
Release 8,653.08  7,926.60  7,191.58  3,235.39  3,912.95  30,919.60  
Interest, Other deposits/ 
recoveries, etc. 164.35  100.08  43.89  99.90  23.40  431.62  
State (Release)  9,072.82  9,389.97  9,951.31  7,808.90  8,866.95  45,089.95  
 Expenditure 15,566.25  17,476.33  16,832.66  10,603.69  11,122.25  71,601.18  
From available Central fund  8,250.80  9,226.28  7,927.99  3,983.38  3,656.46  33,044.91  
From available State fund  7,315.45  8,250.05  8,904.67  6,620.31  7,465.79  38,556.27  
Percentage utilisation of 
available funds 75.4 84.2 86.7 83.6 81.8 90.4 
Component wise expenditure from Central fund 
Coverage 5,590.24  6,442.95  5,603.26  2,645.74  2,559.47  22,841.66  
Water Quality 1,053.42  816.82  752.66  447.79  461.78  3,532.47  
Sustainability 628.04  703.77  537.16  356.04  174.79  2,399.80  
Operation & Maintenance 979.09  1,262.75  1,034.83  533.87  460.39  4,270.93  
 Support Activities 
Funds available 403.70 444.71 496.34 402.66 390.53 1,520.08 
Central  
Opening Balance 244.82 182.58 179.78 188.17 107.22  
Release 159.80 272.57 314.82 182.86 181.55 1,111.60 
Interest, etc. 7.11 4.49 3.71 3.27 2.43 21.01 
State (Release)  0.00 2.18 1.41 31.86 107.20 142.65 
Expenditure 229.14 268.5 311.35 273.84 251.77 1,334.60 
From available Central fund  229.14 267.03 310.53 267.38 184.75 1,258.83 
From available State fund  0.00 1.47 0.82 6.46 67.02 75.77 
Percentage utilisation of 
available funds 56.8 60.4 62.7 68.0 64.5 87.8 
Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance (WQM&S) 
Funds available 209.27  229.84  262.69 206.11  170.38  804.19  
Central  
Opening Balance 92.07  102.69  74.19 94.84  67.38   
Release 117.20  127.15  188.30 110.87  101.99  645.51  
Interest, etc. 0.00  0.00  0.20 0.40  1.01  1.61  
State (release during the year)  0.00  0.00  0.00 8.82  56.18  65.00  
Expenditure 106.66  155.67  167.84 142.78  166.75  739.70  
From available Central fund  106.66  155.67  167.84 138.79  122.84  691.80  
From available State fund  0.00  0.00  0.00 3.99  43.91  47.90  
Percentage utilisation of 
available funds 51.0 67.7 63.9 69.3 97.9 92.0 
Source :  IMIS data of the Ministry  
Note: 1. Component wise State expenditure in respect of Cove rage, Water Quality, Sustainability, 
Operation & Maintenance were not available in IMIS data. 
2. In respect of Coverage and Support activity, variation in opening balance/closing balance  were 
noted in all the financial years 
It is evident that funds under the main components viz.  Coverage, Water Quality, 
Sustainability and O & M  remained unutilised to the extent of 13.3 to 24.6 per cent . 
Under Support activities, short utilisation of fund s was between 32 and 43.2 per cent. 
Under-utilisation in WQM&S related activities was up to 49 per cent .  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
29  
State-wise yearly position of expenditure under com ponents of Coverage, Support 
Activities and WQM&S related activities is at Annexes 3.3 , 3.4 and 3.5. It was 
observed that more than 85 per cent of the available funds were utilised by the States 
under Coverage, Water Quality, Sustainability and O peration & Maintenance  in all 
States except Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Punjab and Ra jasthan . 
Utilisation of funds under Support Activities was above 85 per cent in all States except 
Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Telanga na and  Uttar Pradesh  
and under WQM&S in all States except Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, 
Rajasthan  and Uttarakhand .  
The Ministry stated (February 2018) that the re-str uctured NRDWP guidelines would 
give States more flexibility as it merges support, water quality monitoring and 
surveillance activities and the water quality earma rked component in the coverage 
component. 
3.3    Utilisation of funds under focused schemes  
The NRDWP provides for taking up focused Drinking Water Supply Schemes in DDP 
areas and areas affected by natural calamities. 
3.3.1  Short-utilisation of funds under the Desert Development Programme 
The Desert Development Programme (DDP) of the Depar tment of Land Resources, 
Ministry of Rural Development, is under implementat ion in 235 blocks of 40 districts 
in seven States 8. Under NRDWP, 10  per cent of funds are allocated for Rural Water 
Supply schemes in DDP areas to address extreme cond itions of low rainfall and poor 
water availability in these areas. Table-3.5 presents the position of funds released and 
expenditure incurred by the States under DDP during 2012-17. 
Table-3.5: Release and Expenditure under Desert Development Programme  
(`` ``     in crore)  
Year  Opening  
balance  
Release  Available 
funds  
Expenditure  Percentage 
expenditure of 
available funds  
Closing 
balance  
1 2 3=1+2 4 5=4/3 6=3-4 
2012-13 451.21 1,050.00 1,501.21 1,170.70 78.0 330.51 
2013-14 330.51 956.63 1,287.14 1,038.87 80.7 248.27 
2014-15 122.83 925.00 1,047.83 991.12 94.6 56.72 
2015-16 56.72 420.96 477.68 415.45 87.0 62.25 
2016-17 62.35 496.28 558.63 383.21 68.6 175.43 
Source: Format D1 of IMIS data 
Note: Variation in the closing and opening balances  in IMIS data was not clarified.  
                                                           
8 DDP covers an area of 4.58 lakh Sq. km involving population of 404.22 lakh. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
30  
As seen from above, funds allocated for utilisation  for implementing schemes in the 
DDP areas remained unutilised at the end of each ye ar. Substantial unutilised  
funds were lying with States such as Andhra Pradesh  ( ` 37.52 crore), Haryana  
(` 16.40 crore) and Rajasthan  (` 105.17 crore) as on March 2017. 
Further, after change in funding pattern from April  2015, States 9 had not released  
their share of funds under DDP during 2015-17. This  has also been discussed in  
para 3.2.3 of this Report. Under-utilisation of available fund by the States defeated the 
purpose of earmarking and allocation of funds for a priority area identified for focussed 
attention. 
3.3.2  Other State specific observations  
Audit noted shortcomings in the management of funds  for schemes under DDP due to 
stoppage of work mid-way, idling of funds and diver sion of funds in the States of 
Andhra Pradesh  and Himachal Pradesh  as summarised below. 
Andhra Pradesh: In DDP district Anantapuram, Gorantala Mandal was s elected in 
July 2012 for implementing a pilot project with an estimated cost of ` 32.06 lakh and 
an agreement was executed with an agency to provide technical assistance to 16 GPs to 
prepare and implement village/GP water security plan. Subsequently in February 2014, 
a revised approval for the work was accorded for ` 54.25 lakh. However, due to changes 
sought in the DPR for the pilot project, the agency  stopped (June 2014) the work after 
incurring an expenditure of ` 14.10 lakh which was rendered unfruitful. 
Himachal Pradesh: Despite availability of unutilised funds of ` 3.28 crore since 
2012-13, the Ministry released additional funds of ` 1.90 crore to the State during 
2015-17. The entire amount of ` 5.18 crore thereafter remained unutilised at the end of 
financial year 2016-17. The Ministry stated (Septem ber 2017) that the State had been 
asked to refund the unspent amount. Similarly, in district Kinnaur, out of an amount of 
` 0.55 crore for DDP works received in January 2012, ` 0.30 crore was lying un-utilised 
under a deposit head (August 2017) for non-DDP bloc ks. In Pooh Block, ` 0.73 crore 
pertaining to DDP funds were diverted for construction of flow irrigation schemes and 
maintenance of water supply schemes during 2012-13 to 2015-16. 
3.3.3  Non-utilisation of funds under Natural Calamity 
Ministry retains two  per cent of the NRDWP funds for providing assistance to Sate s 
for mitigating drinking water problems in rural areas for natural calamities. Funds under 
this head are allocated on the basis of recommendat ions of Central teams that visit the 
                                                           
9 Except Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Rajasthan which released their share during 2016-17  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
31  
States in the wake of natural calamities. However, it was observed that States did not 
utilise funds provided to them for this purpose dur ing 2012-17. Details are given in 
Table-3.6: 
Table-3.6: Release and Expenditure under Natural Calamity  
 (`` ``  in crore)  
Year  
Opening  
balance  Release  Available 
funds  Expenditure  
Percentage 
expenditure of 
available 
funds  
Closing 
balance  
1 2 3=1+2 4 5=4/3 6=3-4 
2012-13 164.88  83.85 10  248.73  134.33  54.0 114.40  
2013-14 115.41  95.63  211.04  97.36  46.1 113.68  
2014-15 113.68  138.00  251.68  110.32  43.8 141.37  
2015-16 141.13  57.60  198.73  126.85  63.8 71.89  
2016-17 71.89  56.73  128.62  66.34  51.9 62.28  
Source:  Format D1 of IMIS data 
Note: Variation in the closing and opening balances  in IMIS data was noticed.  
Thus, utilisation of funds allocated on account of natural calamities was only up to 64 
per cent. Substantial unspent balances were noticed in the case of Assam  (` 3.55 crore 
since 2015-16), Karnataka  (` 3.85 crore since 2014-15), Kerala  (` 15.00 crore prior 
to 2012-13), Rajasthan  (` 5.22 crore since 2012-13), Tamil Nadu  (` 7.96 crore since 
2015-16) and Uttarakhand  (` 19.74 crore since 2016-17 11 ) as on March 2017. Since 
funds under the component were being provided in the wake of natural calamities, their 
under-utilisation raises doubts about the efficacy and promptness of efforts for restoring 
and maintaining water supply in the aftermath of natural calamities. 
The Ministry stated (February 2018) that States have been requested to send utilisation 
certificate, if already utilised, or refund the unspent funds lying with them. 
                                                           
10  Including ` 7.01 crore of other recoveries. 
11  Included ` 3.42 crore pertained to 2013-14  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
32  
 
3.4  Short-utilisation of Water Quality Funds  
As per the Programme guidelines, five per cent of programme funds are earmarked for 
allocation to States with chemical contaminated qua lity affected habitations and 
bacteriological affected JE/AES 12  districts. The year wise position of utilisation o f the 
funds  earmarked for water quality affected habitations is given in Table-3.7. 
Table-3.7: Utilisation of funds allocated under earmarked Water Quality   
 (`` ``  in crore)  
Particulars Available funds (2012-17) Expenditure (2012-17) 
Earmarked for Central State Total Central State Total 
Chemical 840.94 219.39 1,060.33 768.48 189.16 957.64 
Bacteriological 310.72 520.53 831.25 318.47 290.99 609.46 
Total 1,151.66 739.92 1,891.58 1,086.95 480.15 1,567.10 
Source: IMIS data of the Ministry 
                                                           
12  Japanese Encephalitis/Acute Encephalitis Syndrome (JE/AES) 
 
Bihar, Manipur, Nagaland and Sikkim  
` 27 crore was provided to Bihar  during 2008-09 under natural calamity component. 
Against this, the State utilised only ` 17.89 crore. However, information with regard to the 
remaining amount of ` 9.11 crore was not reported to the Ministry. The M inistry stated 
(September 2017) that State Government has been req uested (April 2017) to furnish 
Utilisation Certificate and audit certificate for c onsidering further release under this 
component. 
In Manipur , Ministry released (September 2016) ` 1.23 crore for restoration of damaged 
rural drinking water supply system due to earthquak e in January 2016. However, these 
funds were not released by the State Government (March 2017) for execution of works. 
In Nagaland , PHED provided ` 24.18 lakh to Khonama village of district Kohima u nder 
Natural Calamity Fund during 2013-14. However, duri ng joint physical verification, the 
departmental officials and the Water and Sanitation Committee members could not locate 
and identify the work executed. 
Sikkim,  which was hit by a major earthquake on 18 Septembe r 2011, was sanctioned 
` 41.64 crore towards restoration of damaged rural w ater supply. Department stated that 
the entire funds received during 2011-12 was utilised by 2014-15. However, it was noticed 
that the Department had diverted ` 5.80 crore for other works that were not within the ambit 
of the Natural Calamity Fund. Further, 84 electro-c hlorinators were procured at a cost of 
` 1.18 crore for distribution to Gram Panchayats  of South and West districts. Joint physical 
verification of eight Gram Panchayats  showed (May 2017) that these were not put to use 
and were lying idle in dilapidated condition (May 2017 ).  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
33  
During 2012-17, both Central and State funds earmar ked for chemically and 
bacteriological affected habitations were utilised only to the extent of 82.8 per cent . 
State-wise position of release and expenditure of t hese funds is given in Annexe-3.6. 
Audit noted that more than 25 per cent  of the available funds remained unutilised in six 
States { Andhra Pradesh  (48.7 per cent ),  Maharashtra  (38.7 per cent ), Odisha  (79.5 
per cent ), Rajasthan  (32.4 per cent ), Tamil Nadu  (26.9 per cent ) and Uttar Pradesh  
(26.9 per cent )} during this period. 
3.5  Funds lying unspent under  Jalmani 
With the objective of providing children studying in water quality affected rural schools 
with safe and clean drinking water, ` 200 crore was provided to 29 States during 
2008-10 under the programme Jalmani .   
Audit observed that expenditure of ` 121.73 crore had been incurred on installation of 
1.08 lakh standalone water purification systems by 2013-14. Thereafter, no expenditure 
on account of Jalmani  was incurred and balances of ` 78.27 crore was outstanding with 
20 States as of July 2017.  
Ministry stated (February 2018) that the amount lyi ng with States was reduced to 
` 49.73 crore and efforts were being made to recover the unspent amount with interest 
and also obtain reasons for non-utilisation of funds.  
3.6  Other financial irregularities 
3.6.1  Delayed release of funds by the State Government  
Programme guidelines 13  stipulate that States shall release the entire Cen tral share 
received along with the matching State’s share to the implementing agency i.e. SWSM 
without any delay and in any case not later than 15 days after receipt of funds. Further, 
as per the conditions attached to the release of Ce ntral allocation, in case of any delay 
beyond stipulated period, a penal interest of 12 per cent  per annum for the period of 
delay shall be transferred by the State Government to the implementing agency along 
with the principal amount. 
Audit observed that transfer of Central share along -with State’s matching share of 
` 9,388.89 crore to the implementing agency was delayed by periods up to 478 days in 
19 States. However, in none of these cases was pena l interest transferred to the 
implementing agencies. State-wise details are given in Annexe-3.7.  
In Andhra Pradesh, Central share of ` 26.62 crore received in March 2017 was not 
transferred along with State’s matching share to SW SM as of May 2017. Assam 
                                                           
13  Para 17(s) 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
34  
(` 120.16 crore) and Goa (` 0.25 crore) did not transfer Central share amounti ng to 
` 120.41 crore to their implementing agency as of March 2017. 
3.6.2  Non-accountal/loss of interest of `` `` 448.84 crore 
Programme guidelines 14  require that money accruing as interest in the programme and 
support accounts shall be credited to the same account and reflected as available funds 
in the Utilisation Certificate for the year. 
Audit observed that 
` 117.15 crore earned as interest in four States {Andhra Pradesh 
(` 4.31 crore 15 ), Assam (` 0.20 crore), Gujarat (` 1.63 crore), Karnataka (` 111.01 
crore)}, was neither accounted for in the respectiv e accounts nor shown in utilisation 
certificates. 
Audit also observed that the Programme suffered a l oss of interest amounting to 
` 331.69 crore in four States as discussed below: 
In Jammu & Kashmir, ` 0.41 crore earned as interest on NRWDP funds was remitted 
into the treasury in August 2016 instead of account ing the same in NRDWP fund. In 
Karnataka, though the agreement with the implementing agency a nd the bank 
provided for investment of surplus funds in fixed deposits, this was not done leading to 
a loss of interest of ` 260.49 crore. In Maharashtra , funds transferred to Zila Parishad 
for operation and maintenance were not kept in a se parate bank account as a result of 
which interest earned was not worked out and credit ed into the programme account. 
Further, interest of ` 0.08 crore earned by the works executing divisions  was remitted 
to the State Government instead of crediting it int o the programme account. In Uttar 
Pradesh , UP Jal Nigam kept programme funds and support funds in 11 bank accounts 
and earned interest of ` 70.71 crore during 2012-17. The interest earned was transferred 
to its revenue account and subsequently spent on es tablishment expenditure instead of 
being credited to the programme account for utilisation on the Programme.  
3.6.3  Inadmissible expenditure and diversion of funds 
As per Programme guidelines 16 , expenses such as cost escalation, tender premium, and 
items for which the State Government was responsibl e were not eligible for funding 
under NRDWP and were to be met by the State Government.  
In 21 States , programme funds amounting to ` 358.59 crore was diverted and utilised 
for ineligible purposes such as purchase of land, t ender premium, office expenses, 
                                                           
14   Para 16.10 
15   Includes ` 0.50 crore earned as interest by DWSMs and loss interest of ` 0.16 crore due to deposition 
of ` 2.70 crore in non-interest bearing account by RWS&S division, Kovvuru of West Godawari. 
16   Para 16.5 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
35  
creation of inadmissible assets, purchase of vehicl es, renovation works and centage 
charges as detailed in Annexe-3.8 . 
As per the guidelines, Odisha which had average rainfall of less than 1,500 mm an d 
was thus a water stressed State was not entitled to  divert funds under Sustainability 
Component to coverage and water quality component. However, audit observed that 
` 14.19 crore of Sustainability Component funds was diverted for coverage, water 
quality works and O & M during the period covered by audit. 
In five States ( Arunachal Pradesh , Assam , Bihar, Gujarat and  Telangana), 
exemption from payment of excise duty amounting to ` 22.37 crore 17  on purchase of 
pipes of more than 100 mm dia, was not availed leading to avoidable expenditure. 
In Odisha , ` 1.50 crore was deducted by the bank towards TDS on  the interest earned 
during 2013-14 as the State Authority did not obtai n exemption from payment of 
income tax.  
The diversion of funds indicated weak internal cont rols on the part of State 
Governments.  
3.6.4  Audit of SWSM accounts 
Programme guidelines 18  stipulated that SWSM had to ensure that accounts w ere 
audited by a chartered accountant selected from a p anel approved by the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India within six months of the close of the financial year. This 
account would be supported by a statement of reconc iliation with the work executing 
departments’ accounts and a certificate of the char tered accountant as to its accuracy. 
Further, Utilisation Certificate should be submitte d by the competent authority of the 
concerned Department.  
 Audit observed that discrepancies in SWSM Accounts such as non-matching figure of 
expenditure IMIS figures, non-maintenance of cash b ook, variation in opening and 
closing balances, inflated expenditure, non-segrega tion of expenditure from 
Programme Funds as detailed below: 
Andhra Pradesh:  Financial figures reported in the audit reports of the chartered 
accountant did not match with the IMIS figures. Fur ther, the implementing agency 
(Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Department) did not maintain cash book for funds 
under the Programme. As such, the correctness of re leases and expenditure and inter 
component transfer of programme funds were not verifiable. 
                                                           
17   Arunachal Pradesh  (` 1.68 crore), Assam  (` 12.71 crore), Bihar  (` 6.04 crore) , Gujarat  (` 1.02 
crore) and Telangana  (` 0.92 crore) 
18   Para 18 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
36  
Bihar: Auditor’s report was not as per the prescribed guidelines. There were variations 
in opening balance, receipt, expenditure and closin g balance of the Central share as 
compared with the cash book and IMIS data.  
Himachal Pradesh:  Chartered Accountants in their Audit Reports for 20 12-13 to 
2015-16 pointed out that divisions were maintaining  a common cash book and other 
records for all the transactions of the divisions without segregating transactions related 
to the Programme funds. Further, the Divisions were  booking the entire expenditure 
under one component i.e. Normal Coverage and was not classifying expenditure under 
different components of the Programme. 
Jharkhand:  Accounts were not being prepared and audited by cha rtered accountants 
and bank reconciliation statements were also not being prepared.  
Karnataka: Multiple bank accounts had been opened as discussed in case study under 
para 3.2.2 above, chartered accountants stated that the State Government did not submit 
details of these accounts and component wise fund f low statements during any of the 
years. Hence, the accounts were certified based on utilisation certificates and balance 
confirmation slips issued by the banks. Further, th e format specified for utilisation 
certificates was not adhered in the State and did n ot have component wise details of 
achievements against targets. 
Rajasthan:  Only funds lying in the SWSM accounts was covered u nder audit by the 
chartered accountant. Hence, funds transferred to d epartmental executing agencies 
from April 2014 onwards without routing through SWS M accounts remained 
unaudited. Further, utilisation certificates furnis hed by the State Government did not 
show expenditure from the State’s share of funds. 
3.7  Unspent balance/blocking of funds 
Test check of records of State Governments revealed that ` 304.02 crore was lying with 
SWSM and work executing agencies despite subsuming of earlier schemes 
(Swajaldhara)  or completion of works as discussed below: 
Gujarat: 
Case 1: 
 Water and Sanitation Management Organisation (WASM O) released ` 57.10 
crore to GWSSB for undertaking water supply project s in seven villages of Rajkot 
Urban Development Authority area in March 2011 stat ing that it had never executed 
such a large scale project earlier. GWSSB, which wa s also executing project for State 
plan scheme, did not execute the work and refunded ` 46.53 crore till April 2017 and 
` 10.92 crore (including interest) of NRDWP fund remained blocked with GWSSB. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
37  
Case 2:  In three selected districts (Junagarh, Narmada and  Panchmahal), 22 VWSCs 
did not refund the unspent amount of ` 0.15 crore after completion of assigned works. 
Case 3:  In two selected districts (Bhavnagar and Narmada),  VWSCs withdrew  
` 0.23 crore 19  from the bank but they neither executed the work n or refunded the 
amount. 
Himachal Pradesh: 
Case 1: 
 NRDWP funds of ` 44.77 crore was transferred (2010-11) to Himachal Pradesh 
Civil Supplies Corporation (HPCSC) for purchase of pipes and ` 41.66 crore was 
transferred to various divisions without specifying  the works to be undertaken. The 
amount released for purchase of pipes was lying unadjusted as status of receipt of pipes 
and adjustment account from HPCSC was awaited (August 2017). 
Case 2:  In districts Shimla and Kinnaur, ` 0.16 crore lying in saving bank account of 
Executive Engineers since 2014-15 was not accounted  for in closing balance of 
NRDWP. 
Case 3:  ` 0.98 crore pertaining to Swajaldhara  programme which was mainstreamed 
in the NRDWP in 2009 was lying unutilised with DWSM Kangra district.  
Jammu & Kashmir:  In four Divisions, 20  ` 4.07 crore was lying unutilised with the 
bank since April 2014. The concerned Executive Engi neers stated that the fact will be 
brought to the notice of Chief Engineer for utilising the funds.  
Karnataka: 
Case 1: 
 Programme fund of ` 36.53 crore released to 19 Zila Panchayats  for 
implementation of water supply scheme was lying in their respective bank accounts 
despite State Government instructions of March 2011 and May 2011 to remit back the 
unutilised amounts to Programme fund. 
Case 2:  In district Chamarajanagar, balance amount of ` 1.05 crore after completion of 
two water supply works in March/August 2013 was still to be recovered from Karnataka 
Rural Infrastructure Development Limited. 
Uttar Pradesh:  Swajaldhara  scheme fund of ` 163.50 crore lying unutilised in two 
bank accounts of SWSM despite the scheme subsumed with NRDWP in 2009. 
                                                           
19  During 2005-06 ` 0.08 crore, 2008-09 ` 0.13 crore and 2010-11 ` 0.46 crore. 
20  Executive Engineers, GWD, Jammu; PHE division Leh; PHE division Kupwara and PHE division 
Kargil 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
38  
3.8  Audit summation 
The Central budget allocation for the Programme during 2012-2017 was ` 40,111 crore 
of which ` 39,501 crore was released to the States. The allocations for the Programme 
and releases to the States declined in the last two years of the period covered by audit. 
The expectation that States would be able to compen sate for this reduction either 
through their own resources and the increased devol ution of funds or by accessing 
internal or external funding agencies were not met.  As a result, the overall availability 
of funds for the Programme decreased from ` 23,577 crore in 2013-14 to ` 16,931 crore 
in 2016-17. Moreover, even the reduced allocations were not fully utilised and the 
percentage of available fund that remained unutilis ed each year during the period 
2012-17 ranged from 16 to 26 per cent .  
Further, the stipulated fund flow mechanism was not followed in 11 States  where funds 
released by the Centre and the State were not route d through SWSM. In four States , 
the Programme suffered interest loss of ` 331.69 crore. There was diversion of funds 
amounting to ` 358.59 crore towards inadmissible items of expendi ture in 21 States  
while ` 304.02 crore was lying unspent/blocked at various levels in five States  despite 
closure of schemes and completion of works.  
Hence, the management of Programme funds suffered f rom under-utilisation, short 
release, diversion and blocking of funds. Further, the laid down fund flow mechanism 
was not adhered to as SWSMs were bypassed which und ermined their role as an apex 
body for guiding and monitoring the Programme. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
39  
 
4.1  Introduction  
NRDWP is being implemented in the States through it s six components comprising 
Coverage; Water Quality; Operation & Maintenance; Sustainability; Support and Water 
Quality Monitoring & Surveillance. In addition, funds are also being provided for water 
quality affected habitations, Desert Development Programme Areas, Natural Calamity 
and other sub-missions under the Programme. The com ponent-wise fund availability 
and expenditure therefrom has been discussed in Chapter-3. This chapter contains 
audit findings relating to implementation of the various components of NRDWP during 
the period covered by this audit exercise.  
4.2  Coverage 
Under NRDWP schemes, piped water supply schemes 1 , handpumps, tube wells,  
borewells, etc., were taken up to provide safe drinking water to rural habitations. Upto 
the 11 th Plan period, habitations provided with a minimum of  40 lpcd of safe drinking 
water were considered as fully covered. In the 12 th Plan, a minimum norm of provision 
of 55 lpcd has been adopted as an interim measure.  
4.2.1  Status of coverage of habitations 
Audit observed that despite the increase in norms of 55 lpcd for treating habitations as 
fully covered, the old norm of 40 lpcd was adopted for treating habitations as fully 
covered. Taking into account both the 40 and 55 lpc d norms, the overall status of 
coverage of habitations in terms of fully covered is detailed in Table-4.1 below: 
Table-4.1: Status of coverage of habitations  
As on 
April Total habitations 
Fully covered habitations Percentage of fully covered 
40 lpcd  55 lpcd * 40 lpcd  55 lpcd * 
2009 16,58,205 11,48,920 -- 69.29 -- 
2010 16,60,940 11,66,448 -- 70.23 -- 
2011 16,64,068 11,66,816 -- 70.12 -- 
2012 16,65,957 12,31,393 6,57,693 73.92 -- 
2013 16,92,133 11,61,018 7,26,395 68.61 38.87 
2014 16,96,546 12,49,695 7,42,121 73.66 42.82 
2015 17,13,185 12,70,199 7,68,958 74.14 43.32 
                                                           
1  single village piped water supply scheme (SVPWSS) an d multi-village piped water supply scheme  
(MVPWSS) 
Chapter-IV  Programme Implementation  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
40 
As on 
April Total habitations 
Fully covered habitations Percentage of fully covered 
40 lpcd  55 lpcd * 40 lpcd  55 lpcd * 
2016 17,14,438 12,97,431 7,65,833 75.68 44.85 
2017 17,26,031 13,25,302 6,57,693 76.78 44.37 
Source: IMIS data of the Ministry 
* IMIS data on 55 lpcd available from April 2013 
While the percentage of fully covered rural habitat ions to the total habitations with 40 
lpcd increased from 69 (2013) to 77 per cent (2017), the coverage was increased from 
39 per cent  in April 2013 2 to 44 per cent in April 2017 based on the norms of 55 lpcd. 
Either way, the target of coverage of 100 per cent  of rural habitations by 2017 remained 
unachieved. The percentage of coverage of rural habitations increased by only eight per 
cent  at 40 lpcd and 5.5 per cent  at 55 lpcd after incurring expenditure of ` 81,168 crore 
on the programme.  
The State-wise percentage of fully covered habitations as on April 2017 in comparison 
to April 2013 based both on the norms of 40 lpcd and 55 lpcd is depicted in Chart-4.1 
and 4.2 respectively: 
Chart-4.1: Fully covered habitations at 40 lpcd (in percentage)  
 
                                                           
2 Data for 55 lpcd was captured in IMIS from 2013-14 onwards. 
 
Source: IMIS data of the Ministry  
0
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
53 
12 
44 
68 
64 
99 
98 
94 
70 
61 
65 
42 
30 
91 
86 
57 
20 
61 
26 
66 
69 
57 
24 
78 
30 
100 
6
39 
64 
38 
60 
61 
94 
99 
100 
96 
79 
56 
97 
33 
22 
100 
87 
59 
17 
63 
44 
88 
64 
44 
35 
92 
52 
99 
56 
47 
%age of fully covered habitations as on April 2013 %age of fully covered habitations as on April 2017 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
41  
Chart-4.2: Fully covered habitations at 55 lpcd (in percentage)  
Based on the norm of 40 lpcd, the percentage of fully covered habitations decreased in 
April 2017 in eight States ( Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Meghalaya, Punjab, Rajasthan and  Uttar Pradesh)  as compared to April 2013. 
Based on the norm of 55 lpcd, the percentage of fully covered habitations decreased in 
four States ( Rajasthan, Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal) in April 2017 when 
compared to status as of April 2013.  
4.2.2  Non-prioritisation of habitations based on water av ailability and 
failure to meet targets 
As per the Programme guidelines, priority was to be given to the habitations where less 
than 25 per cent and 25 to 50 per cent  population have access to adequate safe drinking 
water. 
Audit observed that in all the years except 2014-15 , coverage of habitations falling in 
the category with less than 25  per cent population having access to adequate safe 
drinking water was lower as compared to coverage of  habitations falling in categories 
with higher percentage of population having access to safe drinking water as shown in 
Chart-4.3 : 
 
Source: IMIS data of the Ministry  
 
0
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
26 
3
2
26 
24 
80 
93 
76 
56 
1
56 
9
7
66 
1
0
0
5
6
29 
45 
32 
7
0
1
100 
2
14 
43 
25 
17 
30 
45 
80 
99 
78 
64 
1
95 
11 
10 
78 
3
4
0
20 
12 
39 
45 
13 
4
9
23 
90 
16 
10 
%age of fully covered habitations as on April 2013 %age of fully covered habitations as on April 2017 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
42 
Chart-4.3: Priority in coverage of partially covered habitations  
Test check of records in States also brought out that priority in coverage was not given 
to habitations in 16 States i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh 3, 
Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Manipur, M izoram, Nagaland, 
Rajasthan, Sikkim, Telangana, Tripura, Uttar Prades h and Uttarakhand where 
less than 50 per cent  of the population had access to adequate quantity of safe drinking 
water. 
Further, there was also a shortfall in achievement vis a vis  targets for covering 
habitations in three categories of habitations i.e. up to 25 per cent , 25 to 50 per cent  and 
75 to 100 per cent . The percentage shortfall was higher in the habitations which should 
have been prioritised for coverage as detailed in Table-4.2  
Table-4.2: Target and achievement of coverage of habitations 
                                                           
3 In three districts – Kawardha, Bastar and Surajpur 
2012-17  > 0 and < 
25%  
> 25% and < 
50%  
>50% and < 
75%  
> 75 and < 100 
% 
Target habitations  51,918 79,653 73,352 72,176 
Achievement 42,709 68,990 75,049 69,774 
Shortfall 9,209 
(17.7%) 
10,663 
(13.4%) 
--- 2,402 
(3.3%) 
(as percentage of total habitations under the respective category)  
 
Source: IMIS data of Ministry 
Note: coverage targets was with respect to 40 lpcd of drinking water  
 
26.8 
8.7 
23.3 
7.7 
4.6 
29.5 
15.6 
22.9 
13.2 
11.1 
21.5 
14.5 
17.0 
8.1 
9.4 
34.7 
10.6 
12.7 
9.6 
6.4 
0
5
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
40 
2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 
>0 and <25% >25% and <50% >50% and <75% >75% and <100% 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
43  
It was evident that the implementation plans were n ot being prepared as per the 
guidelines and resources were not being focussed on  segments of the rural population 
where availability of safe drinking water was the lowest. 
4.2.3  Shortfall in prioritisation and non-achievement of targets for 
quality affected habitations 
The Programme guidelines stipulates that priority s hould be given to quality affected 
habitations while finalising the annual action plans. It was however noted that less than 
30 per cent of quality affected habitations were targeted under  the Programme during 
the period 2012-15. The targets with respect to this category of habitations were further 
reduced to less than 20 per cent  during the last two financial years. There were al so 
shortfalls in achievement ranging between 23 and 34  per cent  against the targets for 
covering quality affected habitations as given in Chart-4.4 below : 
Chart-4.4: Target and achievement of water quality affected habitations  
 
Source: IMIS data of Ministry  
Lack of prioritisation, reduction in targets and shortfall in achievement were indicative 
of inadequate focus both in planning and implementa tion of schemes to address water 
quality issues.  
Ministry stated (February 2018) that chemical contamination in drinking water sources 
was geo-genic in nature but did not explain the reduced/low coverage of quality affected 
habitations under the Programme and shortfalls with respect to targets. 
2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 
WQ affected 104,160 82,794 78,506 66,761 67,290 
Target 28,642 21,771 22,562 11,705 7,789 
Achievement 19,402 16,649 15,579 8,125 5,127 
 - 
 20,000 
 40,000 
 60,000 
 80,000 
 100,000 
 120,000 
Number of Habitations 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
44 
4.2.4  Implementation of water supply schemes 
Analysis of data in IMIS 4 shows that 12,38,642 schemes 5 including 3,89,295 piped 
water schemes were taken up for execution during 20 12-17. Including 1,39,525 on-
going schemes as on 1 April 2012, there were a total of 13,78,167 schemes which were 
being executed during the period. Against this, a total of 12,43,723 schemes comprising 
4,13,430 piped water schemes and 8,30,293 schemes b ased on handpumps/borewells/ 
tube wells, were completed during 2012-17 as given in Table-4.3 : 
Table-4.3: Number of water supply schemes  
Year 
PWS and Hand Pumps/Borewells 
Schemes PWS Percentage of 
PWS 
On-
going Taken up Completed Pending/ 
on-going 
On-
going 
Taken 
up Completed Pending/ 
on-going 
Taken 
up Completed 
2012-13 139525  342908  329051  153382  81826  119000  104226  96600  34.70  31.67 
2013-14 153382  341046  340975  153453  96600  120744  108271  109073  35.40  31.75 
2014-15 153453  310618  309879  154192  109073  88732  97285  100520  28.57  31.39 
2015-16 154192  157480  208256  103416  100520  43892  76553  67859  27.87  36.76 
2016-17 103416  86590  55562  134444  67859  16927  27095  57691  19.55  48.77 
Total  1238642  1243723    389295  413430   31.43  33.24 
Source: IMIS Data of Ministry 
Ministry, while communicating 6  (January 2016) the revised funds sharing pattern 
between Centre and States, placed restrictions on t aking up new projects except in 
fluoride and arsenic affected habitations and habitations under the Sansad Adarsh Gram 
Yojana in view of the outstanding liabilities relating to ongoing projects . This led to a 
sharp decline in the number of new schemes taken up during 2015-16 and 2016-17. The 
percentage of schemes completed as a percentage of schemes on hand 7 reduced from 
67-68 per cent during 2012-13 to 2015-16 to 29 per cent  in 2016-17.  
In the 12 th Plan (2012-17), emphasis was placed on Piped Water Supply (PWS) 
Schemes. The percentage of PWS to the total schemes8 taken up during 2012-17 ranged 
between 19 and 35 per cent and had been declining year on year during the peri od. 
There was also a decline in the absolute numbers of  PWS being taken up. It can 
therefore be concluded that the focus on PWS envisa ged in the 12 th  Plan was not 
reflected in actual planning and implementation.  
                                                           
4 Format B-22 as on 26 February2018 
5 Piped water and Hand Pumps/Bore well schemes only 
6 MoDWS’s letter number W-11011/36/2015-water dated 1 January 2016. 
7 Ongoing + taken up schemes 
8 Piped water and hand pump/tube well schemes based on 40 lpcd 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
45  
Another important target set out in the Strategic P lan and Programme guidelines was 
that at least 50 per cent  of rural population 9will be provided with at least 55 lpcd of 
piped drinking water within their household premise s 10  by 2017. Audit observed that 
only 18.4 per cent  of the rural population had been covered under PWS  schemes with 
provision of 55 lpcd of drinking water as of December 2017 which was well below the 
projected target. The position with regard to perce ntage of population covered under 
PWS and population without PWS as on 31 December 2017 is given in Table-4.4 : 
Table-4.4: Population covered with PWS schemes (December 2017)  
Total population  
Covered with PWS   
Without 
PWS  
Fully 
covered 
Partially  
covered 
Quality 
affected 
Population( in lakh ) 9,199.0 1,688.7 3,167.9 322.0 4,020.4  
Population ( in percentage ) -- 18.4 34.4 3.5 43.7  
Source: IMIS data of Ministry 
The Strategic Plan and Programme guidelines also en visaged that at least 35 per cent 
of rural households would have individual household  drinking water connection by 
2017. In terms of rural households, out of a total of 17.91 crore rural households, only 
3.02 crore i.e. 16.85 per cent were covered by piped water connections as of December 
2017. The position of coverage of rural households by piped water supply connections 
varied widely among different States as shown in Table-4.5 : 
Table-4.5: Status of households with piped water connections  
Five top States with largest 
coverage of rural 
households by piped water 
connections.  
Coverage  
(in per cent ) 
Five States with least 
coverage of rural 
households by piped 
water connections.  
Coverage  
(in per cent ) 
Sikkim 99.32 Uttar Pradesh 0.53 
Gujarat 72.82 West Bengal 0.67 
Himachal Pradesh 56.62 Meghalaya 1.15 
Haryana 47.68 Bihar 1.22 
Punjab 47.56 Assam 2.05 
Source: IMIS data of the Ministry 
Further, the coverage of rural households by piped water connections was below the 
national average of 16.85 per cent in 17 States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Ma nipur, Meghalaya, 
                                                           
9 As per Strategic Plan, 55  per cent of rural households were to be covered with PWS. 
10  or at a horizontal or vertical distance of not more than 100 meters from their household without 
barriers of social or financial discrimination.  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
46 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Odisha, Rajasthan, Tripura, Utta r Pradesh, Uttarakhand 
and West Bengal . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.2.5  Delay in completion of water supply schemes 
As per IMIS 11 , there had been no delay in case of 10,937 schemes out of 22,617 ongoing 
schemes whose status was updated on IMIS while the balance 11,680 schemes were 
delayed for reasons shown in Chart-4.5: 
                                                           
11  As on 14 December 2017 
Gujarat 
945 villages in seven districts were covered under various schemes executed 
and completed between 2012 and 2017. Audit observed  that 142 villages were 
not getting water due to technical problems such as  low water pressure at tail 
end villages, non-availability of necessary infrast ructure and lack of internal 
pipeline network in the village. 
In three out of the ten selected districts, 17,47,075 thousand litres of water was 
supplied through tankers to four to 193 villages during 2012-13 to 2016 17 due 
to non-availability/insufficient availability of po table water. However, as per 
State records all the habitations were fully covered 
.  
Findings of Audit Survey 
 139 habitations out of a sample of 2,322 were categ orised as fully covered 
though water supply availability was less than 40 lpcd.  
 3,422 out of 28,586 beneficiaries (12 per cent ) reported that water supply 
schemes were non-functional. This included 572 bene ficiaries drawing 
drinking water through household connections and 2, 850 through 
community connection.  
 In district Kaimur (Bhabua) of Bihar , the piped water supply scheme 
(Bhangwanpur PSW in Tori Panchayat ) was closed in the summer season 
due to drying of river. Further, beneficiaries of t he PWS stated that water 
pressure was very low and water supply was irregular.  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
47  
Chart-4.5: Delay in completion of schemes 
 
Reasons for delay 12  No. of 
schemes  
Lack of funds 4,947 
Schemes not taken up 1,747 
Statutory clearance awaited 1,273 
Source related problems 932 
Non-availability of land 648 
Material not-available 426 
Dispute over laying pipeline 389 
Contractual/arbitration and 
other problem 
364 
Tender related problems 409 
Transport/inaccessibility 
problem 
321 
Electricity/Power problem 224 
Thus, 57.31 per cent schemes were delayed due to administrative reasons,  19.78 per 
cent due to site related reasons, 11.63 per cent due to construction related issues, 6.62 
per cent due to contract related issues and 4.67 per cent schemes were delayed due to 
infrastructure issues. 
4.2.6  Incomplete works 
Test check of records in selected divisions revealed that 437 works with estimated cost 
of ` 4,293.49 crore remained incomplete in 16 States after incurring an expenditure of 
` 1,667.46 crore 13  (March 2017). These works remained incomplete due to pending 
tunnelling work, lack of permissions/clearances fro m concerned authorities, land 
disputes, non-execution of works by contractors, paucity of funds, change in source of 
water supply and non-availability of material as detailed in Annexe-4.1 . This reflected 
non-adherence to codal provisions relating to execu tion of works such as requirement 
of ensuring encumbrance free site and timely obtaining of required statutory clearances 
before award of works, proper site surveys and inve stigations to ensure preparation of 
realistic designs and estimates to facilitate unhin dered execution of works as well as 
administrative laxity and lack of concern for their timely completion. Some illustrative 
cases are discussed below: 
Andhra Pradesh:  J C Nagi Reddy Drinking Water Supply Project plann ed with 
Gandikota reservoir as source for water drawal was administratively approved in May 
2006 at a cost of ` 508 crore. The scheme was taken up for execution in June 2007 with 
                                                           
12   As per IMIS (A-8) 13 December 2017 
13   In respect of 417 works  
 ( >= 1 to < 3 
years old ) 
 (>=3 to < 5 
Years old ) 
 ( >= 5 To < 
10 Years Old 
)
 ( >= 10 
Years Old ) 
all 20,655 17,916 8,127 1,803 
PWS 7,267 11,949 5,727 951 
 - 
 5,000 
 10,000 
 15,000 
 20,000 
 25,000 No. of schemes 
Postion of ongoing schemes 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
48 
target date of completion as October 2009. However, the scheme remained incomplete 
due to non-completion of tunnelling work from Owk r eservoir to Gandikota reservoir. 
State Government directed in November 2013 to have two water sources (Gandikota 
and Mid Pennar dam) for commissioning of the scheme . However, this did not 
materialise. Thus, the scheme taken up in June 2007 to provide water to 561 habitations 
was yet to be completed even after ten years and in curring expenditure of ` 365.88 
crore. 
Assam:  Ten works in Hailkandi (four schemes) and Jorhat ( six schemes) divisions 
taken up for execution between March 2013 and June 2014 at an estimated cost of 
` 136.24 crore with scheduled date of completion bet ween November 2015 and 
February 2017 remained incomplete due to non-execut ion/slow progress of works by 
the contractors. Non-completion of schemes rendered  unfruitful the expenditure of 
` 70.33 crore incurred so far besides depriving 1,37 ,088 population of the intended 
benefit of safe and adequate drinking water.  
Bihar:  In Patna District, work for construction of 8.95 Mi llion Litre per day (MLD) 
capacity surface water supply scheme for 45 arsenic affected habitations at Maner was 
taken up in June 2009 at a cost of ` 62 crore and was to be completed by June 2011. 
After laying of 75.28 kilometres of pipes upto Marc h 2011, the source of water was 
changed to ground water due to non-availability of land required for construction of 
different structures. As per the revised agreement for the scheme executed in December 
2016, the work was to be completed by August 2017 b ut due to slow progress, the 
agreement was rescinded in July 2017. An expenditur e of ` 45.35 crore had been 
incurred on the work. Incomplete work deprived 1.70  lakh population in 45 arsenic 
affected habitations from getting potable water eve n after lapse of more than eight 
years. 
Himachal Pradesh:  Source level augmentation of 41 schemes to partiall y covered 
habitations in Sadar, Gumarwin and Jhanduta Blocks in district Bilaspur with water 
source from Kol Dam reservoir was technically sanct ioned in July 2009 for ` 47.08 
crore. The work was awarded to a contractor in June 2010 at a cost of ` 49.62 crore to 
be completed by July 2012. The work however remaine d incomplete after incurring 
expenditure of ` 38.99 crore for want of installation of pumping machinery as erection 
of electric transformer by State Electricity Board was held up due to site dispute with 
private land owner. 
Jharkhand:  In district Sahibganj, a mega water supply scheme for 58 villages in four 
blocks under quality affected component was taken up in July 2012 at a cost of ` 133.68 
crore for completion by July 2014. The scheme remai ned incomplete after incurring 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
49  
expenditure of ` 117.67 crore (June 2017) due to non-availability of required land and 
“No Objection Certificates” from other State Government departments. The cost of the 
scheme was increased to ` 147.93 crore with extended target date of completi on as 
March 2017.  
In district West Singhbhum, 253 PWS schemes (Chaibasa-181 and Chakradharpur-72) 
were taken for execution during 2012-14 to be completed within three months from the 
date of agreement. However, these schemes too remained incomplete (May 2017) after 
incurring expenditure of 
` 27.40 crore. No final measurement and completion 
certificate was recorded in the Measurement Books. A district level committee 
consisting of Assistant Collector and Sub Divisiona l Officer examined 98 schemes 
(Chaibasa-64 and Chakradharpur-34) and Superintende nt Engineer examined 
32 schemes (Chaibasa) and reported damaged pipelines, electrical problems, damaged 
tank, sub-standard work, defective construction and using PVC rising pipes in place of 
GI rising pipes (March 2017). 
Karnataka:  In four districts (Bagalkot, Gadag, Yadgir and Chitradurga), six works to 
provide safe drinking water to 86 villages were tak en up for execution at an estimated 
cost of ` 53.20 crore between 2007-08 and 2012-13 for completion between September 
2009 and December 2016. These works remained incomplete for want of required land, 
necessary permission from railway authorities, National Highway Authority and Forest 
Department after incurring expenditure of ` 42.59 crore. Further, in three districts 
(Bagalkot, Gadag and Tumakuru), five 14  water supply schemes to provide safe drinking 
water to 86 villages were taken up during 2007-08, 2011-12 and 2012-13 for execution 
at an agreed cost of ` 42.95 crore. These works also remained incomplete due to failure 
of the department to ensure definite and perennial source of water even after incurring 
expenditure of ` 39.56 crore. 
Rajasthan:  Work to provide safe drinking water to 1,698 villages of district Bhilwara 
under Chambal-Bhilwara Project Phase-II was sanctioned in March 2013 at ` 1,495.68 
crore. The work was awarded in four packages at a cost ` 1,263.63 crore for completion 
by October 2016. All the four packages were stopped by the contractor between January 
2015 and May 2016 and remained incomplete despite i ncurring an expenditure of 
` 204.30 crore. In district Phulera, water supply sc heme for 173 villages was awarded 
in July 2013 to a firm at a cost of ` 226.95 crore to be completed by January 2016. 
However, the work was lying incomplete since Decemb er 2016 after incurring 
                                                           
14   Metagud and seven other villages, Asuti and six other villages, Gulur and 16 other villages, CS Pura 
and 34 other villages and Ariyur and 26 other villages 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
50 
expenditure of ` 115.68 crore as supply of material for work was he ld up due to non-
payment to supplier by the firm. 
Telangana:  Nine works in districts Mahabubnagar, Nalgonda and Khammam were 
taken up between April 2012 and April 2016 at a cost of ` 251.92 crore for completion 
between October 2013 and July 2016. These works remained incomplete (March 2017) 
after incurring expenditure of ` 152.51 crore due to reasons such as non-obtaining of 
clearances from Forest Department, defective design ing, electric power connection, 
revision of estimates, handing over site to the con tractor, delay in approval of design 
and drawing, non-obtaining permission for road cutt ing from Panchayat Raj 
Department and non-obtaining approval for blasting of rock portion in pipeline 
alignment.  
In Nalgonda district, a CPWS scheme in Suryapet Con stituency in Suryapet awarded 
(May 2014) at a cost of ` 71 crore was to be completed by May 2016. Though the work 
was stated to be completed, physical verification showed (June 2017) that construction 
of Rapid Sand Filters at head work was incomplete. The scheme was under trial run 
during which untreated water was being supplied to the habitations. Thus, the target of 
providing treated water to 231 habitations was not achieved even after 14 months from 
stipulated date of completion and after incurring expenditure of ` 60.17 crore. 
4.2.7  Works completed but remained non-operational 
Test check of executed works in different States br ought out that 34 works completed 
at a cost of ` 61.91 crore were not operational for reasons such as lack of power 
connection, damaged pipelines due to road widening,  leakages in pipelines and non-
execution of work as per approved specifications. T hese were reflective of lack of 
coordination between different agencies to operatio nalise projects already completed. 
A few illustrative cases are discussed below: 
Arunachal Pradesh:  In Papumpare district, scheme for providing water s upply 
through deep bore well at Taying Tarang completed i n March 2015 at a cost of  
` 0.24 crore was non-functional for want of electricity connection. 
Assam:  23 PWSSs under Greater Titabor Water Supply Scheme completed in May 
2013 at a cost of ` 7.04 crore were not operational due to inadequate and irregular 
power supply, shortage of boosting station, absence of alternate pump sets and leakage 
of water. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
51  
Jharkhand: Pratappur Rural Water Supply scheme was sanctioned in 2006 at a cost of 
` 1.94 crore to provide safe water to fluoride affected habitations. Even after incurring 
an expenditure of ` 1.88 crore till March 2012, water supply from the scheme was 
partial due to choked rising mains and low power voltage. Water supply was not being 
made from the scheme to the targeted villages since  July 2016 as pipelines supplying 
water from the river had been damaged. 
  
 
Photograph showing idle generator and rusting pressure filters in non-functional MPWS Scheme 
in fluoride affected GP of Jharkhand  


Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
52 
Meghalaya:  Two works (Sakhain Moolimen Water Supply Scheme and  Cham Cham 
Water Supply Scheme) sanctioned in 2008 had not bee n made functional (July 2017) 
even after incurring an expenditure of ` 1.30 crore due to lack of power connection.  
4.2.8  Works completed without coverage of targeted habita tions and 
overlapping of habitations covered 
Test check of records in selected divisions reveale d that habitations in three States 
targeted to be covered under the scheme planned wer e either not covered despite 
completion of the scheme or same habitations were covered under two or more schemes 
as discussed in succeeding paragraphs: 
Telangana  
Three works (CPWS scheme to Nagar Kurnool Constitue ncy; balance habitation 
Thimajipet scheme–Achampet Project in district Maha bubnagar and CPWS scheme 
Manuguru and Pinapaka scheme in district Khammam-Ph ase-I &II) were completed at a 
cost of ` 24.44 crore for supplying water to 76 habitations.  These works were not 
commissioned (March 2017) due to removal of a stret ch of ductile iron pipes and non-
rectification of defects relating to Phase-I.  
CPWS scheme to Bukkapur and other habitations was completed at a cost of ` 2.93 crore 
for water supply to six habitations. However, it wa s noticed that the scheme was not 
commissioned as water at the intake well had recede d by more than 500 metres and the 
intake well was higher than the water level.  
Karnataka  
In district Bagalkot, two works (Water supply schem es for Katageri and other 13 villages 
and for Anawal and other 10 villages) awarded at a cost of ` 12.93 crore in August 2008 
were to be completed by August 2009. As the contractor failed to adhere to the approved 
specifications, water could not be provided to inte nded villages during the trial run of the 
project. The schemes were not made functional even af ter incurring an expenditure of 
` 14.38 crore. Though the SLSSC approved augmentatio n works for ` 1.50 crore to rectify 
the defect in September 2013, no progress (August 2 017) could be made to address the 
problem.  
Further, a multi village water supply sch 
eme for Nagaral and other five villages in Taluk 
Mudhol was administratively and technically approved (October 2006 and December 2007) 
at a cost of ` 7.90 crore but work was not awarded till January 2008 due to lack of response 
from bidders. Subsequently, estimates for the scheme was revised to ` 8.82 crore and work 
was awarded to a contractor for execution (March 2008) at a cost of ` 10 crore with stipulated 
completion by February 2009. The scheme was complet ed at a cost of ` 9.70 crore. Audit 
observed tha t water was not reaching the reservoir due to leaka ges which was evidence of 
sub-standard work executed by the contractor. Further, physical verification also showed that 
the source (Ghataprabha canal) identified for water supply had also dried up. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
53  
Andhra Pradesh:  Eight Comprehensive Protected Water Supply (CPWS) 15  schemes 
commissioned at a cost of ` 79.93 crore covered only 344 habitations as agains t the 
target of 694 habitations. The shortfall in coverag e was attributed inter-alia to 
insufficient funds and non-receipt of certain clearances. 
Arunachal Pradesh:  In the four selected districts (six divisions), 26 targeted 
habitations were not covered due to non-execution o f work relating to laying of 
pipelines in 23 schemes completed during 2012-17 at a cost of ` 20 crore. 
Assam:  PHE division Hailakandi had taken up water supply w orks under three multi-
village schemes 16  between January 2013 and March 2013. As of May 201 7, physical 
progress of 65 to 95  per cent was achieved with an expenditure of ` 31.57 crore. Five 
habitations which were covered under these multi-village schemes were again included 
for being coverage under five individual water supp ly schemes at an estimated cost of 
` 5.80 crore by the same division during the period June 2013 and December 2013. 
Thus, sanction of five individual water supply sche mes covering the same habitations 
as covered under the multi-village schemes was not justified and expenditure of  
` 3.03 crore incurred on these individual schemes was irregular. 
4.2.9  Abandoned works 
Test check of records in selected divisions revealed that 1,367 works in 12 States were 
abandoned after incurring an expenditure of ` 40.07 crore. These works were 
abandoned on account of reasons such as abandonment  of works by contractors  
(16 works), land disputes (17 works), damaged pipe lines (5 works), contamination of 
water source (13 works), unsuccessful boring of tube wells (1,312 works) and schemes 
becoming non-functional (4 works) as given in Annexe-4.2. A few illustrative cases 
are discussed below: 
Andhra Pradesh:  Five 17  water supply works with estimated cost of ` 10.94 crore were 
awarded to contractors between November 2011 and May 2015 for completion between 
May 2012 and October 2015. The contractors abandoned these works midway between 
April 2012 and December 2016. However, the departme nt did not take any action to 
                                                           
15   Veldurthy Mandal; KV Palli, Kalikiri and Kalakana da Mandals in district Chittor; Tallapudi (M), 
Lankalakoderu and others habitations, Unguturu, Vee ravasaran and other habitations, Saripalli and 
other habitations, Madavaram and other habitations of district Godavari. 
16   Rupacherra MV PWSS under State Plan and Greater Sheralipur MV PWSS & Lala MV PWSS under 
NRDWP 
17  CPWS to Chintalapudi and strengthening of bund and  protection works in Prathikollalanka in district 
West Godavai; Single Village Water Scheme to Krishn ayapalem (V) of Mangalagiri (M) and 
Kuragallu (v) of Mangalariri (M); scheme of Neerukonda (v) of Mangalagiri (M) of district Guntur  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
54 
complete the balance works and expenditure of ` 6.17 crore incurred on these works 
was rendered unfruitful.  
Jharkhand:  In district Palamu, two scheme 18  with estimated cost of ` 12.19 crore were 
taken for execution in March 2008 and January 2010.  These works were abandoned 
since October 2010 and April 2013 respectively due to non-availability of land, 
unwillingness of contractor to execute work at old rates and delay in supply of pipes 
thereby rendering the expenditure of ` 5.52 crore unfruitful. 
Karnataka:  In district Chitradurga, work of water supply schem e to Revalakunte and 
26 other villages was awarded to a contractor at a cost of ` 10.25 crore for completion 
by May 2009. Audit observed that the work was not c ompleted/commissioned due to 
heavy leakages in the pipelines during trial run an d drying up of source. The project 
remained abandoned since January 2013 and the expen diture of ` 9.45 crore incurred 
was rendered unfruitful. In district Yadgir, work t o supply drinking water to Gogi and 
10 other villages was awarded in March 2002 at a co st of ` 2.58 crore. The source of 
water was identified as a tank in Gogi village. The  work was completed at a cost of 
` 2.96 crore and handed over to Gram Panchayat  in April 2009. During physical 
verification, it was noticed that the identified wa ter sources of scheme was getting 
contaminated from the outflow from a uranium plant that existed within the catchment 
area of the tank. Proposal to shift the source to another tank was not worked out as the 
canal supplying water to the tank was tailing off. Thus, failure of the department in 
identifying a proper water source rendered wasteful expenditure of ` 2.96 crore. 
Odisha:  Geo-hydrological test was not conducted and service s of Source Finding 
Committee as well as Directorate of Ground Water Su rvey and Investigation was not 
obtained in the eight selected districts before sin king of tube wells. As a result, 1,310 
tube wells became unsuccessful and expenditure of ` 3.76 crore incurred on these tube 
wells was rendered wasteful. 
Rajasthan:  In district Jaisalmer, water supply scheme (Sagarma l Gopa branch 
Ramgarh-Sonu-Mokan-Khuniyala) was taken up for execution in March 2013 at a cost 
of ` 2.30 crore for completion by December 2013. The contractor, after executing work 
valuing ` 1.79 crore (September 2014), did not execute the r emaining work due to 
encountering of hard strata and the work was lying incomplete (June 2017). As of 
March 2017, the total cost incurred on the work was ` 1.87 crore. 
                                                           
18  Singra Rural Piped Water Supply scheme and Bishrampur Rural Piped Water Supply Scheme. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
55  
Uttar Pradesh: In Raebareli, Construction-I division executed Bard ar Water Supply 
Scheme at a cost of ` 1.84 crore and handed over the work to the Gram Panchayat  in 
August 2015. The scheme was designed to meet 30 yea rs’ requirement of water of 
Bardar and Bankat village covering 11 habitations. It was noticed that just after one 
month of handing over, the boring pump of the scheme failed (September 2015) due to 
excess discharge of sand and soil. The scheme was lying abandoned as of July 2017. 
4.2.10  Payment without execution of work 
Test check of records in selected divisions reveale d that ` 1.45 crore was paid to 
contractors in 12 works in three States without the  works being executed as detailed 
below: 
Chhattisgarh:  In Kanker division, ` 60 lakh was paid during 2012-15 in nine works 
comprising of percolation tanks, stop dams, RCC cis tern, pump house and laying of 
pipelines without actual execution of work. The Department stated that an enquiry was 
being held and ` 26 lakh had been recovered from two contractors.  
Manipur: PHE division Kangpokpi incurred ` 43 lakh for purchase of construction 
material for laying of pipelines for supply of drin king water to 227 schools and 108 
anganwadi  centres. The work was executed through Non-Governm ent Organisations 
(NGOs) and contractors and claims for work done wer e not supported by vouchers. 
Thus, the genuineness of the payments made for the work was doubtful. Audit also 
observed that Houbal PHE division executed a work of providing drinking water to 100 
anganwadi  centres at a cost of ` 20 lakh in 2013. However, neither the work order nor 
the agreement mentioned the location of anganwadi  centres. There were 72 anganwadi  
centres in the district and physical verification carried out in the 13 selected habitations 
revealed that none of the anganwadi  centres at these habitations had been provided with 
drinking water facility.  
Sikkim:  In South Sikkim district, one of the items in the e stimate of work for RWSS 
at Yangang and adjoining villages awarded in July 2 013 was laying of 64,050 metres 
of pipeline by excavating soil at a cost of ` 22 lakh. During physical verification, Audit 
found that pipes were laid without excavating soil leading to irregular payment for this 
item of work besides exposing the pipes to risk of damage. 
4.2.11  Discrepancies in tendering process and contract management 
General Financial Rules provide that every authorit y delegated with the financial 
powers shall have the responsibility and accountability to ensure efficiency, economy, 
and transparency in matters relating to public procurement. Towards this end, the Rules 
as well as the Works Manuals along with instruction s and guidelines issued by the 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
56 
Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) from time to tim e contain specific provisions 
relating to the tendering process and management of contracts that are to be adhered to 
by the concerned departments. Test check of records relating to water supply schemes 
revealed several instances of deviation from the codal provisions which had a financial 
implication of ` 14.67 crore as discussed below: 
Mizoram:  As per guidelines of the Finance Department of the Government of 
Mizoram, prices approved by the State Purchase Advi sory Board (SPAB) were valid 
for one year extendable by another six months. The SPAB approved purchase of GI 
Pipes from a firm in March 2010. However, PHED proc ured pipes for 302 rural water 
supply schemes costing ` 19.40 crore from the same firm at the same rates w ithout 
inviting fresh tenders during 2012-13 to 2016-17 th ough the validity of the approval 
given by SPAB had expired. This deprived the depart ment of the opportunity of 
ascertaining current market prices and assuring its elf of the competitiveness and 
reasonableness of the expenditure incurred on the procurement. 
Sikkim: In South Sikkim district, tenders were invited in February 2013 for civil work 
of a RWSS at an estimated cost of ` 3.28 crore. In response, five bids were received 
and the lowest bid of ` 2.26 crore which was 31.3 per cent below the estimated cost 
was recommended for acceptance. The bidder however subsequently withdrew its offer 
on “personal grounds.” Of the four remaining bidder s, three of the bidders agreed to 
carry out the work at ` 2.79 crore which was 15 per cent  below the estimated cost. The 
work was however awarded (July 2013) to the fourth bidders at the estimated tender 
cost of ` 3.28 crore. Audit observed that the CVC guidelines stipulate that in the event 
of the lowest bidder backing out the work, the work  should be re-tendered in a 
transparent manner. In the instant case, not only w as the CVC guidelines not adhered 
to, the work was awarded to the highest bidder whic h resulted in an avoidable 
expenditure of ` 0.49 crore. 
Assam:  In Jorhat PHE Division, work for Greater Titabor wa ter supply scheme was 
divided in two zones viz. Zone-I and Zone-II. Audit observed that estimated c ost of 
ductile iron special and fittings in Zone-I was taken at 25 per cent  of the cost of ductile 
iron pipes whereas it was taken at 15 per cent  in Zone-II. Adoption of higher rate of 25 
per cent  in Zone I for the same item of work lacked justifi cation as the rate of 15 per 
cent  had been adopted in Zone II as well as in other PH E divisions. Adoption of the 
higher rate in Zone I inflated the cost of scheme b y ` 1.78 crore. Further, rates of 
un-plasticised polyvinyl chloride (UPVC) pipes take n in the approved estimates 
(October 2011) for the two zones were higher than t he available approved rates for 
these pipes (July 2010). This further inflated the estimates by ` 0.86 crore. This resulted 
in excess expenditure of ` 2.64 crore on the works.  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
57  
Kerala:  Four works (CARWSS to Moorkanad and adjoining villa ges; WSS to East 
Eleri Panchayat Package 1; WSS to East Eleri Panchayat  package 3 and ARWSS- 
augmentation and improvement Nilambur WSS) were ter minated between February 
2012 and December 2015 at the risk and cost of the contractors. However, liability of 
` 3.75 crore on account of the risk and cost clause was yet to be recovered from the 
defaulting contractors. In another WSS covering Manimala and adjoining villages, the 
contract was terminated in July 2013 at the risk an d cost of the contractor but the 
balance work was awarded to the same contractor in December 2013. The work was 
yet to be completed (July 2017). 
Maharashtra:  Since insurance charges are included in the schedul e of rates for 
preparation of estimates, tender conditions require d contractors to submit insurance 
policies prior to start of work failing which one per cent  of tendered cost was 
recoverable from the contractors. In Buldhana and R aigad districts, contractors 
executing 379 schemes did not purchase insurance po licies. However, no recoveries 
were made as per the tender conditions leading to n on-recovery of ` 1.74 crore from 
the contractors. Audit also noted that the Building  and Other Construction Workers 
Cess Act 1996 obligated the department to deduct cess from the bills of the contractors 
for deposit with the Building and Other Constructio n Workers Cess Board. However, 
the department failed to deduct labour cess amounting to ` 1.76 crore from the bills of 
these contractors which was not only violation of a statutory obligation but also exposed 
the department to the liability of paying the cess to the Board under the Act ibid.  
Odisha: Five PWS works (Kesapali, Barab, Kholbilong, B Garp osh and Amodi) in 
districts Sambalpur and Nuapada were awarded at a cost of ` 10.26 crore between April 
2012 and March 2015. The contractors after executin g work valuing ` 4.03 crore 
abandoned the works. However, the department failed to impose liquidated damages of 
` 1.24 crore upon the defaulting contractors as per the terms of the contract.  
The Government of Odisha issued orders for involvin g Non-Governmental 
Organisations in execution of drinking water supply  projects. These orders stipulated 
that money for the works would be released on reimb ursement basis on completion of 
the works. Further, the Odisha PWD Code prohibited payment of advances to 
contractors except in exigencies in which event 18 per cent  interest would be levied. In 
violation of the above, the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Department awarded 
piped water supply works at Bhanjanagar and Berhamp ur to an NGO and paid an 
advance of ` 2.77 crore 19  during 2012-17 without any recorded reasons for th e same. 
Out of this, ` 2.66 crore had been adjusted as of July 2017 leavi ng ` 0.11 crore 
                                                           
19   ` 2.10 crore by Bhanjanagar and ` 0.67 crore by Berhampur 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
58 
unadjusted. Further, no interest was levied on the advance which led to a loss of  
` 0.10 crore to the exchequer.  
Rajasthan:  In terms of Clause 2 of General Conditions of Contr act/Agreement 
prescribed in the Public Works Financial and Accoun ts Rules of Rajasthan, 
compensation is to be recovered if the contractor does not complete the work within the 
period specified in the work order and the delay is  attributable to the contractor. In 
contravention of the above codal provision, the dep artment failed to recover 
compensation of ` 0.28 crore in district Ganganagar despite delays i n execution of 
works that were attributable to the contractors. 
4.2.12  World Bank Project for Low Income States 
A project for rural water supply in four low income  States viz. Assam, Bihar, 
Jharkhand  and Uttar Pradesh  was started by the Ministry in December 2013 in 
collaboration with the World Bank. Under the projec t, a rural population of 78 lakh in 
33 districts of four States 20  was to be covered with 2,012 piped water supply sc hemes 
by 2020 at an estimated cost of ` 6,147 crore (equivalent to USD 1 billion 21 ). As per 
the agreement between Government of India and the W orld Bank, the latter would 
provide 50 per cent of the project cost (USD 500 million) over a period of seven years 
(2013-14 to 2019-20). The remaining 50 per cent  of the project cost was to be financed 
through contributions from Government of India, State Governments and beneficiaries.  
As per the agreement, 726 out of the 2,012 schemes were to be completed by March 
2017. The actual status of completion of these schemes is given in Table 4.6 : 
Table 4.6: Status of Schemes under World Bank Project as on March 2017  
Schemes Assam Bihar Jharkhand Uttar 
Pradesh 
Total 
Planned 7 330 751 924 2,012 
To be completed 3 156 335 232 726 
Started  7 137 201 233 578 
Completed 0 0 103 26 129 
Ongoing 3 129 78 204 414 
Yet to be started 4 8 20 3 35 
Source: Records of the Ministry 
The schemes under the World Bank Project were laggi ng behind and only 129 out of 
the 726 schemes planned for completion by March 201 7 i.e. 17.8 per cent had been 
completed. As per the agreement, World Bank funds of ` 1,506.02 crore was available 
for disbursement up to March 2017. However, due to slow progress in commencement 
                                                           
20   Assam -seven districts, Bihar -10 districts, Jharkhand -six districts and Uttar Pradesh -10 districts 
with estimated population coverage of 14 lakh, 24 lakh, 12 lakh and 28 lakh receptively. 
21  1 US $ = ` 61.47  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
59  
and execution of the schemes by the States the Ministry disbursed only ` 584.90 crore 
by March 2017 against which expenditure incurred wa s only ` 380.04 crore (25.2 per 
cent ). 
The Ministry attributed (September 2017) the slow p rogress of works to inadequate 
financial capability of vendors, lack of knowledge/ skill of vendors, inexperience in 
implementing turnkey projects and lack of capacity available with the State 
Government machinery. 
The slow physical and financial progress recorded against the World Bank project that 
was especially focussed on implementing piped drink ing water supply schemes in 
33 districts of four low income States deprived the  target population in these States 
from the benefits from the project.  
4.2.13  Slow progress of Solar Energy Based Water Supply Schemes 
Two separate projects for setting up of Solar Energ y Based Dual Pump Piped Water 
Supply scheme were initiated by the Ministry with t he financial assistance of the 
National Clean Energy Fund (NCEF), Ministry of Finance (March 2013) and Ministry 
of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) (October 2014). The objective of the project 
was to cover remote areas in all States where electricity supply was not available. Audit 
observed the following:  
a)  Installation of Dual-Pumps in 11,068 rural habitati ons of 10 States was taken 
up with 40 per cent financial assistance from NCEF while the balance 60 per cent was 
to be equally shared between the Centre and States. NCEF contributions amounting to 
` 110.65 crore (March 2013) and ` 110.64 crore (March 2015) were released for 
installation of dual-pumps in 11,068 habitations. I n the case of 5,424 habitations, the 
project was scheduled to be completed in 18 months i.e. by September 2014 and by 
August 2015 in the case of remaining 5,644 habitati ons. It was noted that a total of 
8,802 22  habitations (79.5 per cent ) had been covered under the project as of September 
2017. Analysis of State-wise performance showed tha t achievement ranged between 
55 per cent and 94 per cent in Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, 
Telangana and  Uttar Pradesh.  
                                                           
22  Achievement of Andhra Pradesh , Bihar, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh  were not available with 
the Ministry.  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
60 
b)  Installation of 15,400 dual-pumps in 17 States at a n estimated cost of ` 1.80 
lakh each was taken up in July 2016 with the financ ial assistance of ` 0.40 lakh per 
pump from Ministry of MNRE leaving a balance cost o f ` 1.40 lakh per pump. This 
balance cost along with storage, distribution and i nstallation cost amounting to ` 4.50 
lakh was to be shared between the Centre and States. The work was to be completed by 
March 2017. Audit observed that against the target of 15,400 pumps, only 7,100 dual-
pumps (46.1 per cent ) had been installed by September 2017. State-wise performance 
showed that Assam, Haryana, Punjab and  West Bengal had not installed any dual 
pump against their target of 1,000. Further, in Bihar, Gujarat, Rajasthan and  Tamil 
Nadu , only 14 dual pumps had been installed against the targeted installation of 3,000 
dual pump as on September 2017. In Chhattisgarh , Karnataka, Telangana and  Uttar 
Pradesh , the percentage achievement ranged between 18 and 57 per cent.  
The Ministry stated (September 2017) that implementation of the scheme was lagging 
behind as the States were not able to focus on the schemes due to pre-occupation with 
other mainstream programmes. It intimated that the progress was being closely watched 
and the schemes would be completed soon. The fact r emained that the delay in 
completing the scheme would affect the objective of  extending coverage of water 
supply schemes to remote areas in all States where electricity supply was not available. 
4.2.14  Coverage of Schools and Anganwadis  
Programme guidelines envisage that all States should compile data of rural government 
schools and anganwadis in existence and the number of them having drinking  water 
facilities. Further, as per the Strategic Plan (201 1-22), all schools and anganwadis  in 
rural India are to be provided with access to adequ ate quantity of safe drinking water 
by 2017.  
Odisha  
Solar energy based dual pump piped water supply sch eme for IAP district was 
launched in 2013-14 through Odisha Renewable Energy  Development Agency 
(OREDA) for which seven per cent  service charge was paid to the agency. All works 
were covered with five years Comprehensive Maintenance Contract (CMC) from the 
date of installation. During 2013-14 to 2016-17, 6, 291 solar dual pumps were 
installed in the State incurring an expenditure of  ` 161.02 crore. As of August 2017, 
428 solar dual pumps installed incurring an expendi ture of  ` 19.41 crore were non-
functional for a period ranging between three and 25 months. OREDA had intimated 
the vendors to rectify the defects within 15 days. Due to non-restoration of these 
pumps, targeted populations of 428 habitations were not getting the desired benefit. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
61  
Audit observed that out of 10.45 lakh schools (gove rnment, aided, local body and 
private) and anganwadis , 1.50 lakh schools and anganwadis  i.e. 14.35 per cent  were 
without drinking water facilities as of November 20 17. The shortfall in provision of 
drinking water facilities to schools and anganwadis was higher in the North-Eastern 
States of Arunachal Pradesh  (56 per cent ), Assam  (29 per cent ), Meghalaya  (48 per 
cent ), Nagaland (54 per cent ) and Sikkim  (36 per cent ) as compared to States in the 
other regions. State specific observations on the s tatus of provision of drinking water 
facilities to schools and anganwadis  are given below. 
Arunachal Pradesh: In West Kameng district, 21 out of 40 test checked water supply 
schemes to schools (53 per cent ) remained incomplete for more than four years (August 
2017) due to non-construction of items like sedimen tation tanks, non-provision of 
storage tanks and Public Stand Posts (PSPs). In Low er Subansiri district, 15 schemes 
were non-functional since April 2006 due to quantity and quality problems. Out of eight 
test checked schools, in one school the water suppl y scheme which was completed 
(March 2014) at a cost of ` Six lakh remained non-functional as a storage tank and PSPs 
had not been constructed as of March 2017. 
Madhya Pradesh: In 44 selected GPs, drinking water facility was not  available in 33 
out of 226 schools. Similarly, drinking water facility was not available in 27 out of 125 
anganwadis . 
Rajasthan: In 10 selected districts, drinking water facility was available in only 1,049 
out of 2,903 schools as on April 2012 leaving 1,854  schools uncovered as of March 
2017. It was also observed that no school was covered during 2015-17 in four districts 23  
despite 866 schools 24  not having drinking water facilities as of April 2015.  
Tripura:  The department informed audit that only three schoo ls remained without 
access to adequate drinking water facilities. However, scrutiny of records at the district 
level in the test checked districts revealed that i n Dhalai district alone, 34 schools and 
51 anganwadis  were yet to be covered at the end of 2016-17. Moreover, cross check of 
updated (June 2017) records of United District Info rmation System for Education 
revealed that 991 schools were without potable drin king water facilities in contrast to 
the State’s claim that only three schools remained without access to adequate drinking 
water facilities. 
It is evident that the Ministry had fallen short of achieving the Programme objective of 
providing safe drinking water to all schools and anganwadis  in rural areas by March 
2017 with the shortfall being sharpest in the North Eastern States.  
                                                           
23  Bhiwara, Dungarpur, Jaipur, and Jhalwar  
24  Bhiwara-290, Dungarpur-61, Jaipur-333, and Jhalwar-182 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
62 
4.3  Quality 
Chemical contamination of drinking water especially due to arsenic, fluoride, iron and 
heavy metals along with bacteriological contamination are major concerns in supply of 
safe drinking water in rural areas. A large number of rural habitations are quality 
affected and ensuring availability of safe drinking water by addressing quality concerns 
remains a challenge. Consequently, NRDWP emphasises  coverage of water quality 
affected habitations by earmarking funds for scheme s in such areas as detailed in para 
3.1 of this report. In addition, special schemes were also launched to mitigate the water 
quality in habitations, schools and anganwadis . 
4.3.1  Status of quality affected habitations  
Audit observed that 1,04,160 rural habitations (1 A pril 2012) were affected with 
chemical contamination which reduced to 67,290 habi tations as of April 2016 but 
increased to 74,724 habitations (11 per cent ) as of April 2017. The position with regard 
to major sources of chemical contamination of drink ing water, availability of 
community water purification plants (CWPPs) and related issues are given in Box-4.1 : 
Box-4.1: Habitations affected with chemical contamination  
 
 
CWPP habitations 
and shortfall w.r.t. 
position of 01 April 
2017 
 
 
No. 
 
 
per cent 
 
2,290 83.3 
994 94.6 
44 99.8 
156 98.9 
Fluoride: According to IMIS data, 13,492 habitations having 1 .08 crore of rural population in 
17 States were at risk due to fluoride in drinking water sources as on 1 April 2017. However, 
83.3 per cent of such habitations were not provided with CWPPs . 
Arsenic: Arsenic affected habitations were significant in Assam  and West Bengal . According 
to IMIS data, 18,258 habitations with a rural population of 1.70 crore were affected with arsenic 
contaminated drinking water as on 1 April 2017. CWP Ps were however for provided only in 
994 habitations (5.4 per cent ). CWPPs were not provided in any of the affected h abitations of 
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka and  Uttar Pradesh.  
01.04.12 01.04.13 01.04.14 01.04.15 01.04.16 01.04.17 
Fluoride 17,986 15,565 14,132 12,727 14,055 13,492 
Arsenic 4,314 1,917 1,991 1,800 14,143 18,258 
Iron 56,144 43,662 42,093 34,096 20,806 24,168 
Salinity 22,958 18,589 17,472 15,617 14,085 14,317 
 - 
 10,000 
 20,000 
 30,000 
 40,000 
 50,000 
 60,000 
Habitations 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
63  
Iron:  Despite a declining trend (2012-16), drinking water in 24,168 habitations covering a rural 
population of 1.48 crore in 22 States were still co ntaminated with iron as of 1 April 2017. 
Against this, only 44 habitations (0.2 per cent) in five States including 35 in Karnataka  and 
five in West Bengal  were provided with CWPPs. 
Salinity:  Salinity is predominant in Rajasthan.  According to IMIS data, out of 14,317 
habitations covering 44 lakh rural population where water was affected by salinity as on 1 April 
2017, 12,800 habitations covering 30 lakh rural pop ulation were in Rajasthan . CWPPs had 
been however provided only in 156 habitations (one per cent ) including 131 habitations in 
Rajasthan . 
Source : IMIS data of the Ministry 
Thus, out of 74,724 quality affected rural habitati ons as on April 2017, 70,235 rural 
habitations i.e. 94 per cent  were affected with major chemical contamination of arsenic, 
fluoride, iron and salinity. Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Odisha and  West 
Bengal  are the prominent States affected with the water contamination. The position of 
States largely affected with arsenic, fluoride, iro n and salinity as of April 2017 is 
detailed in Chart-4.6 : 
Chart-4.6: Contamination-wise status of habitations in States as on April 2017  
 
As on April 2017, only five per cent of the quality affected rural habitations had been 
provided with CWPPs leaving the problem of contamin ated water unaddressed in the 
remaining habitations. In 12 States viz . Arunachal Pradesh, Haryana, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Kerala, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Odisha, Tamil  Nadu, Telangana, 
Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and  Uttarakhand , CWPPs were not installed in any of the 
quality affected habitations to provide safe drinki ng water. In nine other States i.e. 
Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab, 
Rajasthan and  West Bengal , the percentage of habitations provided with CWPPs  
0
2000 
4000 
6000 
8000 
10000 
12000 
14000 
16000 
18000 
20000 
ASSAM BIHAR CHATTI 
SGARH 
JHARK 
HAND 
KARNA 
TAKA 
ODISHA PUNJAB RAJAST 
HAN 
TELAN 
GANA 
TRIPUR 
A
UTTAR 
PRADES 
H
WEST 
BENGA 
L
Salinity 0 0 2 0 45 384 16 12800 183 0 80 506 
Iron 6227 2462 743 2372 92 2587 292 5 36 2583 362 5875 
Arsenic 4523 877 20 102 4 0 752 0 0 0 748 11232 
Fluoride 291 901 406 610 745 106 310 6695 1028 0 179 1421 
No. of habitations 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
64 
ranged from one to seven per cent. In Andhra Pradesh and  Karnataka , the percentage 
of habitations provided with CWPPs was 35 and 49 per cent  respectively. 
Ministry stated (February 2018) that 10,689 CWPPs h ad been installed in quality 
affected habitations to provide safe drinking water . However, the fact remains that 
95 per cent quality affected habitations were still without access to safe drinking water. 
State specific comments based on test check of reco rds with regard to quality affected 
habitations and provision of mitigating measures are given below: 
Assam: In Golaghat PHE division, water from eight PWS Schemes completed between 
May 2011 and March 2013 at an expenditure of ` 4.75 crore was tested by a DLL (June 
2017) and found to be contaminated with arsenic. Similarly, in Hojai and Nagaon PHE 
divisions, quality testing of water from 11 PWS Sch emes completed between 
November 2010 and December 2014 at an expenditure o f ` 4.98 crore revealed that 
water from all the schemes were contaminated with f luoride beyond the permissible 
limit. The concerned Divisional Officers stated tha t steps would be taken to provide 
safe drinking water to the beneficiaries covered by these schemes from alternate source. 
Thus, safe drinking water could not be made available to the habitants in these districts 
despite incurring an expenditure of ` 9.73 crore on 19 PWS schemes. 
Odisha: Sixteen out of 40 tube wells in seven villages of t wo blocks in district 
Nabarangpur were contaminated by fluoride during 20 15-17 but neither was any 
alternate source for safe drinking water provided to the villagers nor remedial measures 
such as installation of fluoride removal devices taken by the Department to mitigate the 
problem. As a result, the population of seven villages continued to use unsafe water. 
Rajasthan:  As per data made available by the State level labor atory, Jaipur, the State 
had not shown any habitation as being contaminated with heavy metals. However, as 
per the Central Ground Water Board, heavy metal con tamination (lead, cadmium, 
chromium, nickle and copper) was present in Jhunnjh unu, Alwar, Jaipur and Jodhpur 
districts. 
Tripura:  As of 1 April 2017, 741 deep tube wells were not at tached to Iron Removal 
Plants to tackle iron contamination. Consequently, all the habitations supplied with 
drinking water from these deep tube wells remained quality affected. 
It was also observed that 15,493 habitations in 20 States were affected with heavy 
metals such as manganese, aluminium, uranium, lead,  cadmium and selenium as of 
March 2017. The prominent States so affected were Assam  (1,582 habitations), Punjab  
(2,038 habitations) and West Bengal  (11,486 habitations). 
 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
65  
4.3.2  Unproductive expenditure on removal of chemical contamination 
Test check of records in six States brought out that Reverse Osmosis (RO) Plants, Iron 
Removal Plants, Ultra-Filtration Pot Filters, Mobil e Water Treatment Plants and de-
fluoridation units procured during 2012-17 valuing ` 87.15 crore were either lying idle 
or non-functional as discussed below: 
Assam 
(a) PHED procured 33,600 arsenic filters valued at ` 83.84 crore to provide fluoride 
and arsenic free water to schools and anganwadis during 2013-17. Of these, 33,580 
filters were issued to the PHE divisions during 201 3-14 to 2016-17 leaving 20 filters 
costing ` 0.05 crore in stock. Out of the issued filters, 18 ,575 were received by 13 
selected divisions of which 7,214 (39 per cent ) were issued to the schools and 
anganwadis  leaving 11,361 filters costing ` 28.35 crore in selected divisional stores 
since 2013. Audit observed that Silchar-I Division issued 1,350 filters costing ` 3.37 
crore to schools and anganwadis  without any requisition as water was not chemicall y 
contaminated. 
Thus, incorrect planning and procurement of filters without assessment of requirement 
resulted in 12,731 filters costing 
` 31.77 crore remaining unused or issued to schools 
and anganwadis without any requirement (March 2017).  
(b)  Audit also noted that out of 68 25  Solar Operated Reverse Osmosis (RO) Plants worth 
` 22.61 crore procured during 2014-16, 22 plants were issued to six 26  divisions leaving 
46 plants in stock as of July 2017. However, 10 out  of these 22 plants issued in three 
selected divisions 27  were yet to be installed. 
                                                           
25  NRDWP (40 Plants) and State Plan Fund (28 Plants) 
26  (i) Guwahati PHE Division No.1 (5 Plants) (ii) Hojai PHE Division (7 plants) (iii) Jorhat PHE 
Division (2 Plants) (iv) Dhubri PHE Division (4 plants) (v) Barpeta PHE Division (2 Plants) and (vi) 
Nalbari PHE Division (2 plants) 
27  Hojai Division: 7 plants; Jorhat Division: 1 plant and Dhubri Division: 2 plants. 
Arsenic filters lying idle at stores of different PHE divisions  
 
Store of Hailakandi PHE 
Division (17.05.2017) 
Store of Dhubri PHE 
Division  
(06.07.2017) 
Store of Howraghat PHE 
Division (31-5-2017) 


Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
66 
Solar Operated Reverse Osmosis Plants lying uninstalled ( 27.07.2017) 
Department stated that 46 plants were not issued du e to non-receipt of division-wise 
locations for installation from the higher authorit ies as well as non-receipt of 
information regarding completion of PWSS works where the plants were to be installed. 
Thus, 56 Solar Operated Reverse Osmosis plants procured during 2014-16 at a cost of 
worth ` 18.62 crore were lying idle. 
(c) PHED procured 10,485 “Iron Removal Plants (IRPs)” c osting ` 73.19 crore to 
provide iron free water during 2012-17. Out of 11,174 IRPs (including 689 IRPs lying 
in stock since April 2012), 10,882 IRPs were issued  to the PHE Divisions for 
installation leaving 292 IRPs valued at ` 2.04 crore in stock. Out of the 10,882 IRPs 
issued, 2,733 IRPs were received by 13 selected divisions. Of these, 1,924 IRPs (70 per 
cent ) were utilised/installed by the divisions leaving 809 IRPs in stock. Thus, 1,101 
IRPs valued at ` 7.68 crore were yet to be utilised as of March 2017. 
Further, out of the 937 IRPs installed in PHE divis ions Silchar-II, Dhubri and Hojai, 
during 2012-17 only 47 IRPs were functional as of M ay 2017 and the remaining 790 
IRPs 28  valuing ` 5.51 crore were non-functional due to lack of maintenance. 
 
                                                           
28  Pin point location of 100 IRPs were not furnished to audit.  
Non-functional Iron Removal Plants  
 
Adabari Id-gah under Dhubri PHE 
Division Photograph taken on 9-7-2017  
 
Adabari LPS under Dhubri PHE 
Division Photograph taken on 9-7-2017  


Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
67  
(d) PHED procured 22,715 “Senco make ultra-filtration p ot filters” costing ` 25.95 
crore for installation in schools during 2012-17. O ut of this, 4,150 filters valued at 
` 4.74 crore and 2,321 filters (including 325 filter  lying since April 2012) valuing 
` 2.65 crore were lying in stock with Sanitation and Water Division, Guwahati and with 
13 selected divisions as of March 2017. 
Chhattisgarh:  Out of 647 installed (2012-16) IRPs in the various  iron affected 
habitations of Bastar, Rajnandgaon, and Jashpur, 77 were non-functional (March 2017) 
resulting in unfruitful expenditure of ` 0.42 crore. 
Gujarat:  In the selected districts, audit collected water sample test results (2012-17) of 
73 habitations from 20 Talukas from water testing District and Taluka  laboratories and 
found that 146 out of 700 samples taken were contam inated due to presence of excess 
fluoride and nitrates. However, neither were GPs in formed about these test results nor 
was any remedial action taken. 
Jharkhand:  In Sahibganj and Palamu, Mobile Water Treatment Pla nts procured 
(August 2012) at a cost of ` 0.53 crore, were lying idle since April-May 2013. 
 
Madhya Pradesh and  Rajasthan   
In Madhya Pradesh , in sub-divisions Chhindwara, Parasia and Jamai, 9 6 de-fluoridation units 
were installed at a cost of  ` 1.64 crore in 2014-15. Terms of conditions of agre ement with the 
executive agency included regular maintenance of th e installed plants for five years. It was 
observed that 92 units were maintained by the agenc y for only four months from the date of 
installation. As the agency did not maintain these units, the contract was rescinded in February 
2016. All 96 units were not functional (March 2017)  and fluoride contaminated water was being 
supplied to the habitants. 
In Rajasthan , in five selected districts (Bhilwara, Jaisalmer, Jhalawar, Kota and Tonk), work 
orders for installation of 669 de-fluoridation unit s at a cost of  ` 5.80 crore were issued to an 
agency in January/May 2011. The agency was paid  ` 0.79 crore for 374 de-fluoridation units 
installed in 2011-12. These units became non-functional for want of maintenance despite the fact 
the terms of contract included their operation and maintenance for five years.  
Further, 57 Reverse Osmosis plants installed in dis trict Jaisalmer and Barmer at a cost of  
 
` 7 crore became non-functional for want of maintena nce though the terms of contract included 
maintenance for seven years.  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
68 
 
4.3.3  Status of special schemes 
Ministry launched special schemes to provide safe d rinking water in schools and 
anganwadis  in water quality affected areas and to provide financial support to affected 
States to mitigate water quality problem as a short term measure. 
4.3.3.1  Unproductive expenditure under Jalmani  Scheme 
The Jalmani Scheme was started in November 2008 wit h the objective of providing 
children studying in water quality affected rural s chools with safe and clean drinking 
water by installation of one lakh standalone water purification systems in schools. 
Test check of records showed that out of the 3,302 water purification systems in schools 
of six States, 2,439 systems valued at ` 4.24 crore 29  were either not installed or not 
functional. The State-wise position with regard to installation of water purification 
systems is given in Table-4.7: 
Table-4.7 : Status regarding installation of water purification systems  
                                                           
29  In respect of 2,403 stand-alone Water Purification System 
State 
Number of water purification systems  Value of Not 
installed/Non-
functional WPS 
(`` `` in crore ) 
Installed Not installed Non- 
functional 
1 2 3 4 6 
Andhra Pradesh 782 66 91 0.31 
Assam 174 203 - 0.41 
Chhattisgarh 362 - 262 0.34 
Madhya Pradesh 770 - 733 1.28 
Mizoram 983 - 949 1.90 
Telangana 231 - 135 NA 
Total 3,302 269 2170 4.24 
Findings of Audit Survey in Bihar  
• As per IMIS data, Nagel habitation in district Banka was shown as covered with PWSS. 
But no PWSS was found to exist in the habitation during survey. 
• As per IMIS data, three selected habitations (Seoka  gola, Khasia and Houda tola) of 
Teliya Kumri Panchayat  were shown as having fluoride removal attachment units. But 
no attachment units were found in two habitations a nd the unit in the remaining 
habitation was not functional. 
• As per IMIS data, all four selected habitations of West Katskra Panchayat  in district 
Banka were shown as being provided with attachment units. But these were not found 
during the audit survey.  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
69  
Thus, the expenditure of ` 4.24 crore, incurred on their procurement was rend ered 
unfruitful. 
4.3.3.2  Short utilisation of Central assistance provided by NITI Aayog 
Due to the long gestation period 30  for water supply schemes and to avoid consumption 
of unsafe drinking water, NITI Aayog  recommended in February 2016 release of one-
time assistance for installation of CWPPs. Accordin gly, ` 1,000 crore was released to 
19 States 31  with the objective of providing at least 8-10 lpcd of drinking water in 1,327 
arsenic affected and 12,013 fluoride affected habitations during 2015-16.  
As of September 2017, 359 (27 per cent ) arsenic affected and 2,596 (22 per cent) 
fluoride affected habitations were covered at a cost of ` 574.68 crore (57.46 per cent of 
total fund). NITI Aayog, while reviewing the progress (September 2017), instructed the 
States to complete installation of CWPP before 31 December 2017. 
Audit observed that ` 319.89 crore released as one-time financial assist ance remained 
unutilised in four States { Andhra Pradesh (` 8.19 crore), Kerala  ( ` 19.73 crore), 
Rajasthan  (` 197.39 crore) and Telangana  (` 94.58 crore)}. 
In Karnataka , the Ministry released (March 2016) ` 59.90 crore on the 
recommendations of NITI Aayog. In turn, the State G overnment released  
(August 2016) this amount to 18 districts (includin g seven selected districts). Though 
three of the selected districts (Bagalkot, Chitradurga and Mandya) furnished details of 
financial progress, details of works executed were not provided.  
In Maharashtra , in 54 selected GPs, seven out of 177 habitations had no CWPPs. 
Further, in five village Panchayats  having six schools and 16 anganwadis , two CWPPs 
were installed. However, ` 24.08 crore released during 2015-16 under “NITI Aa yog” 
initiative remained unutilised. 
Thus, non-utilisation of funds and slow progress of  work defeated the very purpose of 
this short term measure to provide drinking water facility in quality affected habitations. 
4.4  Sustainability 
Sustainability of drinking water sources and schemes ensures safe drinking water even 
during distress periods through conjunctive use of groundwater, surface water and roof-
water harvesting. The main aim of schemes for susta inability of drinking water is to 
ensure that water supply schemes do not slip back throughout their design period. This 
is achieved through construction of sustainability structures such as water harvesting 
                                                           
30   It takes four to five years to complete piped water supply schemes 
31   In respect of installation of community water pur ification plants ( ` 800 crore) and to take up surface 
water projects where funds were required for last mile connectivity ( ` 200 crore).  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
70 
systems, water recharging systems and surface water  impounding systems aimed at 
improving rural drinking water supply. 
4.4.1  Non-preparation/implementation of sustainability plan 
The Strategic Plan (2011-22) envisaged preparation of Sustainability plans to ensure 
that recharge and water harvesting structures are t aken up in a scientific manner. The 
Programme guidelines also stipulated that Annual Ac tion Plans should indicate 
sustainability structures being taken up during the year. 
However, sustainability plans were either not prepa red or were not being included in 
AAP in 14 States ( Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Himachal 
Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur , Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Rajasthan, Sikkim and  Telangana ). In the absence of sustainability plans, 
there was no assurance that sustainability structures were being taken up in a scientific 
manner so as to avoid expenditure incurred becoming infructuous.  
4.4.2  Low expenditure on sustainability component 
To ensure that water supply schemes do not slip bac k from fully covered to partially 
covered during the designed lifetime of the schemes , the Programme guidelines 
stipulate allocation of 10 per cent of the programme fund for sustainability 32 to be used 
exclusively to achieve drinking water security. Analysis of data on utilisation 33  of funds 
for sustainability component showed that only five States viz . Chhattisgarh, Himachal 
Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Odisha , achieved this level of expenditure and 
the expenditure in 16 States34  ranged between five and ten per cent and it was less than 
five per cent  in eight States of Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Goa, 
Kerala, Telangana, Tripura and West Bengal.   
Expenditure on the sustainability component by 24 States at lower than envisaged levels 
indicated low prioritisation for construction of su stainability structures. Audit noted 
that States which spent less than ten per cent  of funds on sustainability component were 
among those that had a high number of slipped back habitations. 
                                                           
32   Till 2014-15 it was 100 per cent Centre share, thereafter from 2014-15 sharing pattern changed to 
60:40 as Centre:State share. 
33   In respect of Central allocation only 
34   Assam,Gujarat, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Madhya 
Pradesh, Manipur, Nagaland, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and  
Uttarakhand 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
71  
4.4.3  Construction of sustainability structures 
Test check of records in States relating to provision of sustainability structures revealed 
the following: 
Arunachal Pradesh:  Only 245 out of the targeted 1,729 sustainability structures were 
completed after incurring ` 24.86 crore. This left a shortfall of 1,484 struct ures which 
was attributed to short allocation of funds. 
Assam:  Out of 2,220 Rain Water Harvesting Systems construc ted during 2010-17 in 
primary schools and institutional buildings, 1,839 systems costing ` 37.81 crore were 
not functional (March 2017) due to lack of maintena nce. In some of the cases, the 
bibcock of the reservoirs tank was broken and gutte r pipes were either blocked or 
broken. 
Bihar:  State Government sanctioned four schemes for constr uction of 70,095 hand 
pumps as point source recharging systems during 201 2-17. Out of this, 58,183 hand 
pumps were constructed at a cost of ` 288.57 crore without making provision of point 
source re-charging system. Evidently, hand pumps we re constructed mainly for 
coverage of habitations and the objective of sustainability remained unachieved.  
Karnataka:  Nine check dams constructed between December 2012 a nd March 2016 
at a cost of ` 0.50 crore did not serve its purpose as they were constructed on sites where 
water was not flowing in the stream for many years.  Another three check dams 
constructed during the same period at a cost of ` 0.15 crore were either not used due to 
improper planning or abandoned. This evidenced the lack of planning in taking up 
sustainability works. Further, 11 check dams comple ted between January 2013 and 
March 2016 at a cost of ` 1.32 crore were found damaged or encroached and wa ter 
could not be stored in these dams.  
Rajasthan:  Codal provisions stipulate ensuring encumbrance-free site before award of 
works. PHED circle Bhilwara awarded (February 2015)  water security work at  gram 
panchaya  Khemana consisting of one overhead service reservo ir, one open well, 
recharge shafts and recharge pits to a contractor at cost of ` 0.77 crore to be completed 
by August 2015. However, the work remained incomple te for over two years as of 
August 2017 due to existence of a land dispute thou gh an expenditure of ` 0.64 crore 
had been incurred. 
4.4.4  Non-convergence with other programmes 
The Strategic Plan (2011-22) envisaged that works r elated to sustainability structures 
included in the sustainability plans should be take n up and financed in convergence 
with other related programmes such as Mahatma Gandh i National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) and Watershed Development Programmes. This was 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
72 
intended to ensure that labour cost recharging and surface water impounding systems 
is met from the other programmes.  
Audit found that construction of sustainability str uctures was not being undertaken in 
convergence with other related programmes in 23 States  (Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, 
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &  Kashmir, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Megha laya, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Tripura 
and Uttar Pradesh).  Non-convergence of works relating to sustainabilit y with other 
programmes led to avoidable demand on funds allocated for the component. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.4.5  Dependence on Ground Water 
NRDWP guidelines identified reduction in dependence  on ground water and shift to 
surface water sources and conjunctive use of water from different sources as a critical 
issue to be addressed during the 12 th  plan period. The aim was to reduce pressure on 
ground water extraction and ensure sustained availa bility of safe drinking water even 
during distress periods. However, 88 per cent of piped water schemes continued to be 
based on ground water sources at the end of the 12 th  Plan period. The share of piped 
rural water supply schemes based on surface and gro und water resources is shown in 
the Chart-4.7 :  
Chhattisgarh and Uttar Pradesh 
As per guidelines for implementation of Sustainability Component labour cost 
of any recharging system/surface water impounding s tructures was to be met 
from MGNREGS/IWMP funds. However, in Chhattisgarh , test check of 
records of PHE Electrical & Mechanical Division, Ba star & Raipur revealed 
that labour component amounting to ` 0.43 crore of 3,365 hydro-fracturing 
works executed during 2012-17 was paid from Sustain ability Component 
rather than from MGNREGS/IWMP.  
In Uttar Pradesh , in the Minor Irrigation Division of Raebareli, la bour 
component of 
` 0.89 crore for constructing 17 ponds during 2014 was not met 
from MGNREGS. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
73  
Chart-4.7: Piped water schemes covered under different water sources  
Source : IMIS data of the Ministry 
The percentage of piped water schemes on ground water sources was above the national 
average of 88 per cent in the States of Andhra Pradesh , Bihar, Chhattisgarh, 
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Punja b, Tamil Nadu, 
Telangana, Tripura and Uttar Pradesh.  
The high level of dependence on ground water advers ely affected the objective of 
ensuring availability of safe drinking water in the long term and also contributed to the 
incidence of slipping back of habitations.  
4.5  Operation & Maintenance 
Operation & Maintenance (O&M) is crucial for provis ion of drinking water supply in 
required quantity on a continued basis and also for ensuring that completed schemes do 
not slip back and valuable investment is protected. The Programme guidelines therefore 
provide for preparation of O&M Plans, provision of adequate and sustainable sources 
of funding for O&M activities; management of scheme s in GPs by PRIs and 
devolution/transfer of funds to the PRIs for O & M of schemes managed by them.  
4.5.1  Non-preparation of Operation and Maintenance Plan 
NRDWP guidelines provide 35  for use of the Ministry’s O&M Manual by the States  or 
preparation of a State specific O&M Manual. The Min istry’s Manual of O&M 
envisages preparation of a O&M plan containing proc edures for routine tasks, checks 
and inspection at set intervals for every major uni t and for each scheme as a whole. 
Audit observed that scheme-wise O&M Plans for routine tasks, checks and inspections 
were not prepared in 20 States  (Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, 
                                                           
35  Paragraph 9.7 
 
Ground Water based Surface Water based 
Piped Water scheme 848,484 116,204 
 - 
 100,000 
 200,000 
 300,000 
 400,000 
 500,000 
 600,000 
 700,000 
 800,000 
 900,000 
No. of schemes 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
74 
Bihar 36 , Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &Kashmir, K arnataka, 
Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagala nd, Punjab, 
Rajasthan 37 , Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand). In 
the absence of O&M plans, there was no assurance th at the required checks and 
inspections of schemes were being conducted to identify maintenance requirements and 
operational problems.  
4.5.2  Allocation and utilisation of funds under O&M Component 
As per the Programme guidelines, up to 15 per cent of NRDWP fund can be utilised by 
States for O&M and States will make matching contri bution which along with funds 
provided under the Finance Commission’s recommendations as grants to PRIs will be 
used to meet the O&M expenditure on drinking water supply schemes.  States should 
devolve the required O & M fund to the PRIs for O & M of schemes managed by them. 
Analysis of expenditure on O&M component 38  brought out that expenditure on O&M 
was less than 10 per cent of the programme fund in seven States viz . Bihar, Goa, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Sikkim and  Telangana . In another 
seven States viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Odish a, 
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and  Uttarakhand , it ranged between 10 and 15 per cent .  
This lack of emphasis on running and maintenance of  schemes contributed to non-
functioning of schemes as discussed in paragraph 4.5.4. 
4.5.3   Lack of involvement of PRIs in O&M 
Audit observed that completed water supply schemes were only partly handed over to 
PRIs in nine States viz . Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Mizoram and  Nagaland . In four other 
States of Assam, Bihar, Meghalaya and  Tripura , water supply schemes were not 
handed over to PRIs for effective O&M as stipulated  in the Programme guidelines. In 
two States of Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland, thoug h O&M activities were 
transferred to PRIs, funds were not devolved to the m. In Nagaland , the State claimed 
that O&M Funds shown transferred to the selected villages had been received by them 
but physical verification disclosed that funds had not been made available. 
Thus, contrary to the Programme objectives and guidelines, the overall involvement of 
PRIs and local communities in management and maintenance of drinking water supply 
schemes was found to be low and uneven across States.  
                                                           
36  Operation and Maintenance Plan was prepared for Major Schemes  only. 
37  Department claimed to have such plan. However, supporting documents were not produced. 
38  Statement number D13 of IMIS. 
 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
75  
4.5.4  Non-functioning of schemes  
Adequate and efficient O&M is essential for ensuring that water supply schemes remain 
functional. Test check of records in 17 States ( Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, 
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil 
Nadu, Tripura and  Uttar Pradesh) revealed  that 1,03,486 water supply schemes had 
become non-functional due to reasons which included inadequate maintenance.  
Though O&M is essential for ensuring uninterrupted water supply to habitations, non-
utilisation of allotted funds and deficiencies in u ndertaking O&M activities coupled 
with inadequate involvement of PRIs in management o f water supply schemes 
compromised its effectiveness and adequacy. 
Ministry stated (February 2018) that the re-structu ring of the Programme approved in 
November 2017 will address the problem of non-funct ional schemes as it links 
allocation of 25 per cent  of funds with the percentage of completed piped wa ter 
schemes found to be functional through third party surveys. 
4.6  Persistence of slip-back habitations 
C&AG’s Performance Audit Report (No.12 of 2008) on the Accelerated Rural Water 
Supply Programme had highlighted the problem of sli p-back of habitations from fully 
covered to partially covered. The Ministry, while stating that slippage was unavoidable, 
had intimated that it had revised its strategy by f ocussing on sustainability so that the 
phenomenon of slippage is reduced. The PAC, in its Report No. 35 of 2011-12 had 
recommended that the Ministry should impress upon t he States to ensure that 
habitations do not slip-back further. However, 4.76  lakh habitations had slipped back 
during the period 2012-2017. The State-wise slip-ba ck habitation during this period is 
given in Chart-4.8: 
Assam  
Store and Workshop division, Guwahati, procured 37,471 sets of Slow Moving Spare Parts 
for Direct Action Hand Pump (DAHP) valued at  ` 83.02 crore. Each set consisting of 25 
items were supplied in two boxes (Box-I and II) dur ing 2011-15. Out of 37,471 sets, 
18,706 sets (Box-I) were issued to the executing PH E divisions for repairing of DAHPs 
leaving 18,765 sets in stock (July 2017). Out of 18,706 sets issued to divisions, 5,220 sets 
(Box-I) were received by the selected 13 divisions.  Of these, 1,802 sets were utilised by 
the selected divisions leaving 3,418 sets in stock.  
Divisional Officers stated that spare part sets wer e received without these being 
requisitioned. After installation, the DAHPs were h anded over to the public/community 
and these were maintained by the community itself. Thus, the procurement of Slow 
Moving Spare Parts for DAHP was injudicious.  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
76 
It is evident that the phenomenon of slip-back habitations had continued to persist. The 
number of slip-back habitations was markedly high in States such as Andhra Pradesh , 
Bihar, Karnataka, Jharkhand, Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand and  West Bengal. 
The reasons for habitations slipping back from the category of fully covered to partially 
covered are excessive extraction of ground water, i nadequacy of efforts to address 
Chart-4.8 
 
 
Source : IMIS data of the Ministry  
0
20000 
40000 
60000 
A N D H R A  P R A D E S H 
A R U N A C H A L  …
A S S A M 
B IH A R 
C H H A T T IS G A R H 
G U J A R A T 
H A R Y A N A 
H IM A C H A L  …
J A M M U  &  K A S H M IR 
J H A R K H A N D 
K A R N A T A K A 
K E R A L A 
M A D H Y A  P R A D E S H 
M A H A R A S H T R A 
M A N IP U R 
M E G H A L A Y A 
M IZ O R A M 
N A G A L A N D 
O D IS H A 
P U N J A B 
R A J A S T H A N 
S IK K I M 
T A M IL  N A D U 
T E L A N G A N A 
T R IP U R A 
U T T A R  P R A D E S H 
U T T A R A K H A N D 
W E S T  B E N G A L 
24438 
2271 
19759 
53009 
1969 
1767 
361 
9098 
2139 
41920 
52837 
8972 
182 
15607 
194 
4731 
458 
911 
36638 
5170 
28207 
1448 
17924 
2821 
1289 
3726 
29495 
56338 
Number of  habitations slipped back f rom f ully cover ed to 
partially covered 
0
6000 
12000 
18000 
24000 
A N D H R A  P R A D E S H 
A R U N A C H A L  …
A S S A M 
B IH A R 
C H H A T T IS G A R H 
G U J A R A T 
H A R Y A N A 
H IM A C H A L  …
J A M M U  &  K A S H M IR 
J H A R K H A N D 
K A R N A T A K A 
K E R A L A 
M A D H Y A  P R A D E S H 
M A H A R A S H T R A 
M A N IP U R 
M E G H A L A Y A 
M IZ O R A M 
N A G A L A N D 
O D IS H A 
P U N J A B 
R A J A S T H A N 
S IK K I M 
T A M IL  N A D U 
T E L A N G A N A 
T R IP U R A 
U T T A R  P R A D E S H 
U T T A R A K H A N D 
W E S T  B E N G A L 
3344 
11 
3357 
3218 
479 
422 
252 
0
27 
3329 
3223 
0
907 
227 
0
27 
0
67 
1271 
4120 
1927 
0
152 
1854 
1378 
1566 
29 
21036 
Number of  habitations slipped back f rom f ully cover ed to 
quality af f ected 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
77  
quality related aspects, lack of sustainability of water sources, and inadequate/non-
maintenance of water supply schemes.  
4.7  Support Activities 
Support activities include (i) engagement of consul tants by WSSO and DWSM, 
(ii) setting up and running of BRCs, (iii) supporti ng awareness creation and training 
activities, (iv) giving hardware and software support at district and sub-divisional level, 
(v) research and development activities relevant to  the State and (vi) engagement of 
STA. The percentage expenditure under different heads under Support Activities during 
2012-17 is given in Chart-4.9  below: 
Chart-4.9: Financial performance under Support Activities: 2012-17  
Source : IMIS data of the Ministry 
Thus, the expenditure on Support Activities was pre dominantly (41 per cent) on  
administration and establishment and functional asp ects such as IEC, Training and 
R&D accounted for much smaller share of expenditure. 
4.7.1  Non-preparation/implementation of Support Activity Plan  
Action plan for Support Activities consisting of ar eas such as Information, Education 
and Communication (IEC), training and capacity buil ding are to be need-based and 
should be approved by the SLSSC before or at the co mmencement of each financial 
year. 
Audit observed that action plans for support activi ties were either not prepared or not 
included in AAP in Andhra Pradesh, Sikkim and  Telangana. Audit also noted non-
utilisation of funds meant for support activities, shortfalls in achievement of targets and 
failure to organise training programmes and absence  of R & D Activities in 19 States  
(Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, G oa, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtr a, Manipur, 
Admn.Exp 
41% 
Training 
8% 
IEC 
26% MIS 
12% 
R&D 
1% 
Others 
12% Other 
13% 
Admn.Exp Training IEC MIS R&D Others 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
78 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Punjab, Rajasthan, Si kkim, Telangana and  
Tripura) as given in Annexe-4.3. 
NRDWP is a demand driven and community based progra mme where effective and 
creative communication plays a crucial role in its success. As a result of lack of IEC, 
training and capacity building activities, awarenes s and motivation in the rural 
community remained low which affected planning, implementation and monitoring of 
the schemes. 
 
4.8  Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance 
The National Rural Drinking Water Quality Monitorin g and Surveillance Programme 
(WQM&SP) was launched in February 2006 and thereaft er subsumed in the NRDWP 
with effect from April 2009. A Uniform Drinking Wat er Quality Monitoring Protocol 
(UDWQMP) was issued by the Ministry in February 201 3. This protocol lays down 
specific requirements for monitoring drinking water  quality by establishing water 
quality testing labs in States. The parameters for these labs are also specified in terms 
of infrastructure, manpower and water quality testing facilities. 
Three  per cent  of programme funds is to be allocated for the WQM& S component of 
NRDWP. These funds are to be used for monitoring an d surveillance of water quality 
in habitations at field level and for setting up an d upgrading water quality testing 
laboratories at State, district and sub-district levels. Availability and utilisation of funds 
are given in Table-3.3 in Chapter-III .  
Findings of Audit survey 
 Results of water quality testing along with specifi ed parameters were not 
displayed in 666 out of 773 GPs (86 per cent ) and alerts/results of 
contamination of water was not communicated to 564 (73 per cent ) GPs.  
 Information, education and communication, human res ource development 
and other awareness activities were not carried out in 497 GPs. 
 21,112 (75 per cent ) beneficiaries stated that no training or awarenes s 
generating IEC activities was ever provided to them. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
79  
4.8.1  Shortages of labs, infrastructure and equipment for  water quality 
testing 
The State level laboratory had not been established  in seven States  (Chhattisgarh, 
Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Meghalaya,  Sikkim and  
Uttarakhand) . In 20 States  where State level laboratories (SLLs) had been established, 
15 had NABL accreditation. Further, out of the esta blished 20 SLLs, only the SLL at 
Odisha had the capability of examining all 78 parameters a s specified under 
UDWQMP. In nine 39  SLLs, the required technical manpower was not in p lace. Ten 40  
SLLs were not adequately equipped in terms of infra structure and testing facilities 
prescribed in the protocol referred above. 
In addition to the above, shortfalls were observed in all the selected States with respect 
to availability of infrastructure for water quality  testing such as laboratories at district 
and sub-divisional levels, accreditation of labs, c ompliance by labs with envisaged 
parameters and availability of manpower and equipment as detailed in Annexe-4.4 . 
Audit also observed the following:  
In Assam, two mobile lab testing vans valuing 
` 69.96 lakh were lying in a dilapidated 
condition with a PHE division since August 2015. In  Vadodara and Junagadh districts 
of Gujarat , two mobile water testing laboratories procured (A ugust 2014) at a cost of 
` 0.52 crore were not put to use except for a short period of three months for want of 
drivers and chemists. In Uttar Pradesh, SLSSC approved (January 2015) 10 mobile 
water testing laboratories to ensure regular monito ring of the water sources. Funds 
amounting to ` 5 crore was released in July 2015 for the purpose but the mobile labs 
were still to be procured (July 2017).  
In Karnataka, 100 block level water testing laboratories were set up at a cost of 
` 92.10 
crore during March 2014 and March 2015. However, du e to the improper functioning 
of these laboratories, the concerned Department rescinded the contract with the agency 
that were running the Labs in April 2017. The block level laboratories in the State have 
remained completely non-functional since May 2017, in the absence of any alternative 
arrangement for water testing.  
In Rajasthan, contract for 165 block level laboratories expired i n March 2016. The 
tendering process for a new contract for running th ese was yet to be finalized (March 
2017). Thus, the facility of water testing at the block levels has not been available since 
March 2016.  
                                                           
39   Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Goa, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Odisha, Rajasthan and Uttar 
Pradesh 
40   Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Punjab, Tamil 
Nadu and Uttar Pradesh.  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
80 
Such gaps in provision of labs, infrastructure and equipment for water quality testing 
contributed to extensive shortfalls in conduct of p rescribed water quality testing as 
discussed in para 4.8.2 below.  
4.8.2  Shortfall in water quality testing 
According to the Programme guidelines, 100 per cent sources were to be tested at sub-
divisional laboratories level both for bacteriologi cal and chemical contamination. 
Testing for chemical and physical parameters was re quired to be carried out once in a 
year and twice a year during pre and post monsoon m onths for bacteriological 
parameters. District level labs were required to check 10 per cent of samples including 
positively tested samples from sub-divisional labor atories. The State lab was to carry 
out routine cross-verification of water samples. Pr ogramme guidelines also laid down 
that all Gram Panchayats and water quality testing laboratories would use Field Testing 
Kits (FTKs) for primary investigation. 
Test check disclosed shortfalls in all the selected States with respect to conduct of three 
prescribed tests 
41  on all the water sources during a year. In additio n, there were 
shortfalls with respect to performance of envisaged  tests against parameters and on 
samples. The shortfalls were attributed by States t o factors such as non-functioning of 
labs, and lack of  equipment, manpower and funds. Details are given in Annexe-4.5.  
Further, FTKs were neither procured in the required  numbers nor were those acquired 
fully utilised to carry out the prescribed tests. In five States ( Andhra Pradesh, Assam, 
Jharkhand, Odisha  and Uttar Pradesh), 13.25 lakh FTKs/refills valued at ` 6.50 
crore had not been used and their shelf life had ex pired making the expenditure on 
kits/refills infructuous. 
Test check in the selected States brought out the following:  
Andhra Pradesh:  During physical verification of water sample test r eports of 
habitations of selected districts, audit observed t hat concerned laboratories reported 
safe/potable water even though the acceptable permi ssible limits as per Bureau of 
Indian Standards (BIS) were exceeded and department  continued to provide unsafe 
water to the population. 
Further, State Government identified the presence o f uranium contamination in 
Nagarjuna Sagar and Kadapa areas of Andhra Pradesh  and informed the same to the 
Ministry (March 2014). Ministry suggested (March 2014) that help of Bhabha Atomic 
Research Centre (BARC) may be taken for testing ura nium. However, no action was 
                                                           
41   Two bacteriological (Pre and Post Monsoon) and one chemical test 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
81  
initiated for creating facilities for testing Urani um contamination in drinking water 
(July 2017). 
Odisha: As per Central Ground Water Board data, ground water in 28 out of 30 districts 
was contaminated with nitrates. But laboratories we re not testing the mandatory 
parameters such as nitrate, arsenic, alkalinity (January 2017).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shortfalls in prescribed testing of water sources i ncreased the risks of supply of 
contaminated water to habitations and households an d undermined the Programme 
objective of ensuring supply of safe drinking water. 
4.8.3  Non-review of water quality testing 
As per the Uniform Drinking Water Quality Monitoring Protocol, State level labs were 
required to be headed by a Chief Chemist reporting directly to the Engineer in Chief of 
the implementing Department. The Chief Chemists were to undertake an annual review 
of the water quality test reports to enable framing  of a policy for water quality 
monitoring. However, no such annual review of water quality test reports of the 
different level laboratories was carried out by the Chief Chemists in 20 States ( Andhra 
Karnataka  
During physical verification, it was observed that 15 block level laboratories in 
the selected districts were either not adequately s taffed or staff were not 
adequately trained. As a result, the labs did not c onduct envisaged tests and 
equipment were either not being used or not functional. It was observed that test 
results were being uploaded on IMIS without authent ication by the concerned 
Departmental authorities and without conducting tests on water samples for all 
the parameters. None of the samples reported to be contaminated by these 
laboratories were forwarded to District laboratorie s for cross-verification. The 
Departmental authorities also did not insist on cro ss-verification before 
considering a habitation as contaminated and taking  up works in such 
habitations. As a result, the entire process of wat er quality testing and 
consequent declaration of habitations as quality affected was flawed. 
Department rescinded the contract with the agency ( April 2017) on 
abovementioned irregularities. Consequently, block level laboratories in the 
State remained completely non-functional since May 2017 without any alternate 
arrangement for water testing. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
82 
Pradesh , Arunachal Pradesh , Assam, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Maha rashtra, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Punjab, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Tripura and  Uttar 
Pradesh ). 
4.9  Audit summation  
Lack of necessary focus and prioritisation keeping in view the deliverables that were to 
be achieved by 2017 resulted in their non-achieveme nt. Only 44 per cent  of rural 
habitations and 85 per cent  of government schools and anganwadis  could be provided 
safe drinking water against the target of covering all rural habitations, government 
school and anganwadis  by December 2017. Further, against the Programme 
deliverables of providing 50 per cent of rural households/population with potable 
drinking water (55 lpcd) by piped water supply and at least 35 per cent of rural 
households with household connections by April 2017 , the actual achievement as of 
December 2017 was only 18.4 per cent  and 16.8 per cent respectively. Non-adherence 
to codal provisions relating to implementation of w orks, especially those mandating 
proper site investigations to ensure unimpeded exec ution of works once awarded 
resulted in different works remaining incomplete, a bandoned or non-operational. The 
financial implication of such deficiencies together  with unproductive expenditure on 
equipment and gaps in contract management worked out to ` 2,212.44 crore.  
The implementing authorities also failed to pay adequate attention to the need to ensure 
water quality and there were significant shortfalls  in provision of mitigating measures 
such as Community Water Purification Plants. In the  case of the sustainability 
component, plans were not prepared and adequate fun ds were not allocated for the 
purpose in several States. O&M which is important f or ensuring uninterrupted water 
supply to habitations was inadequate and not being managed by the PRIs. As a result 
of inadequate efforts with regard to quality, susta inability and maintenance of water 
supply schemes, the incidence of slip-back of habitations continued to be high.  
Thus, despite large outlays and an elaborate delivery mechanism, gaps remained in the 
implementation of the Programme which affected attainment of Programme objectives 
and goals in terms of provision of adequate and saf e drinking water on a sustainable 
basis.  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
83  
 
5.1  Introduction  
Monitoring and evaluation are essential for ensuring efficient utilisation of programme 
resources so that the envisaged outputs and outcome s are achieved within the planned 
timeframes.  As government programmes are executed over long time periods and at 
different levels, it is imperative to have a robust  and effective programme monitoring 
and evaluation system.  
The Programme guidelines provide for an elaborate s et up for monitoring and 
evaluation spanning all levels i.e. the National, State and Community levels as given in 
Chart-5.1 . 
Chapter-V Monitoring and Evaluation  
Chart-5.1: Structure of Monitoring and Evaluation  
 
Source: Programme guidelines 
 
Centre 
•Integrated Management Information System 
•National Level Monitors 
•Centralised public grievance redressal and monitoring system 
State 
•Monitoring and evaluation of physical and financial performance of 
water supply  projects by SWSM 
•State Vigilance and Monitoring Committee 
•Monitoring and evaluation studies 
District 
•Monitoring of projects by DWSM 
•District Vigilance and Monitoring Committees to monitor the progress 
and exercise vigilance 
Block 
•Coordination by BRC with grassroots level workers in water quality 
monitoring 
•Helping in conducting social audits 
GP 
•Community monitoring of water supply schemes by VWSC under the 
jurisdiction of Gram Panchayats 
•Village Vigilance and Monitoring Committees 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
 
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
84  
5.2  Integrated Management Information System 
The Ministry deployed an “Integrated Management Inf ormation System (IMIS)” as a 
web based information system designed to enable aut horities at all levels across India 
to monitor progress of the various components under  the Programme including 
coverage of rural habitations, schools and anganwadis.  IMIS also aimed at ensuring 
proper reporting and make implementation transparent as well as facilitate programme 
planning and monitoring.  
The National Informatics Centre (NIC) is the Chief Technical Consultant to the 
Ministry with respect to functioning of the IMIS. At the Central level, NIC is in-charge 
of management of the Central database and is responsible for all software development 
and training.  The State level units of NIC assist the SLSSCs in implementing the IMIS 
project.  The State governments were to provide necessary infrastructure support at all 
levels i.e. sub-division, district and State level.   Further, a State IT Nodal Officer was 
to be identified with responsibility for oversight in respect to regularity and accuracy 
of the data being furnished by the districts.   
The IMIS database was reviewed during audit and the  main findings are discussed in 
subsequent paragraphs.  
5.2.1  Lack of support by States 
Audit observed that 11 States of Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Gujarat, Himachal 
Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Nagaland, Odisha, Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh 
and  Uttarakhand did not appoint a State  IT Nodal Officer. Further, 12 States viz. Goa, 
Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharas htra, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Punjab, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh  and  Uttarakhand had  no 
mechanism for authentication and validation of data entered in the IMIS. In the absence 
of nodal officers and systems for data authenticati on and validation, several instances 
of discrepancies and inaccuracy in data entered in the system was noticed during audit. 
Ministry stated (February 2018) that States would b e asked to rectify the data 
inconsistencies. 
5.3  Analysis of IMIS Database 
The IMIS system is primarily based on data entered across the country at different 
levels of the implementation hierarchy by users in the States and districts.  IMIS data 
was analysed at the Central level by using data analytics tools1  on data dump of IMIS 2 
furnished by the Ministry to identify inconsistencies and inaccuracies in data along with 
data trends and outliers. In addition, IMIS data wa s compared with manual records 
maintained by authorities at different levels.  Audit analysis brought out the following:  
                                                           
1  SQL Server and Computer Assisted Audit Tools viz . TABLEAU, Excel, etc. 
2  In August 2017, database dump was restored in SQL  Server 2012 and relevant tables of the IMIS 
database were analysed  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
85  
5.3.1  Data inconsistencies and lack of validation controls  
 Invalid sanction-years i.e. years prior to the commencement of the scheme and 
beyond current year 2017-18 were entered under ‘San ction Year’ in the case of 6,494 
schemes.  Further, “not known” was recorded against sanction years in case of 1,80,347 
schemes. Thus, data against fields critical for mon itoring the schemes were either not 
provided or were inaccurate in a large number of cases reducing the value of IMIS as a 
monitoring tool.   
 Out of a total of 71,58,386 schemes, date of completion in the case for 3,27,086 
schemes was recorded as dates prior to independence.  Out of these 3,27,086 schemes, 
in 1,02,753 schemes the recorded sanction year was before 2001-02 and in 79,003 
schemes it was 2001-02 or later.  As such IMIS was permitting entry of completion 
dates which were prior to the sanction year.  In th e remaining 1,45,330 schemes, 
sanction year was recorded as “Not Known”.  In the case of 244 Schemes, the 
completion year entered was beyond 31 March 2030. 
 In the case of 1,055 schemes, though data furnished  was as of 31 March 2017, 
completion dates of schemes recorded was on or after 01 January 2018.  Of these, date 
of commencement was shown between 01 April 2019 and  31 March 2020 in 27 
schemes and in 94 schemes date of commencement was shown as beyond 01 April 
2025. In the case of 13,16,258 schemes, the date of  commencement and the date of 
completion was shown as being the same which shows absence of proper validation 
checks in the system.  Ministry stated that for spo t sources, the system allows the date 
of commencement and completion to be same as these schemes can be completed 
within a day. The reply is not acceptable as the ca ses cited also contained other than 
‘Spot’ Schemes. 
 For 9,039 schemes, the date of completion was entered as being before the date 
of commencement which shows incorrect data entries in the system. Ministry stated 
that the data has to be corrected by the respective State Governments and NIC has now 
implemented server side validations for data that is being imported through back-end. 
 Status of water quality in habitation profile data has been shown as safe whereas 
in source/delivery point report it is shown as not fit for drinking and vice-versa  (Bihar 
and  Karnataka).  
 Instances of inconsistency in IMIS data such as var iation in number of water 
supply sources (Format B-6 and B-28), against expen diture of supply of tankers, 
physical status was ‘nil’ (Format C-31), variation in earmarked expenditure on 
chemical and bacteriological affected habitation du ring 2015-17 (Format D-1 and 
D-8A) were noticed and have been detailed in Annexe-5.1 . 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
 
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
86  
The above-mentioned data inconsistencies indicated a lack of validation controls that 
allowed incorrect entries to be accepted for fields  critical for monitoring progress of 
schemes and led to generation of incorrect MIS reports. 
5.3.2  Discrepancies in data of IMIS with field record 
Audit observed that data obtained from field record s did not match with the data 
available in IMIS. These discrepancies were found t o exist for important aspects such 
as number of schemes; number of non-functional schemes; quality affected habitations; 
availability of community water purifying plants an d water testing laboratories. 
Examples of inconsistent data for different States are given in Annexe-5.2.  
Bihar 
• In district Bhabua, out of two schemes covering 17 Fluoride affected habitations sanctioned during 
2012-17, only one scheme covering two habitations w as completed but IMIS data showed 34 
habitations as being covered. Further, as per IMIS data, there was no habitation/population under 
Iron contamination in the district but data obtained in the field showed that 239 water sources were 
affected with Iron contamination.  
• In district Saran , 85 sources were affected with contamination during 2012-17 .  During 2013-14, 
bacteriological contamination was found in six sour ces. However, as per IMIS data, there was no 
habitation/population under any contamination in the district.  
• In district Muzaffarpur , 201 water sources were affected during 2012-17 fro m iron contamination . 
However, as per IMIS data, there was no habitation/ population under Iron or any other 
contamination in the district. 
•  In district Nawada, three schemes for covering 113  fluoride affected habitations were sanctioned 
during 2012-17 of which one scheme covering two habitations had been completed . However as per 
IMIS data, 32 habitations were shown as having been covered .  Further, as per data made available 
by the concerned Division, 272 habitations were aff ected from Fluoride contamination during 
2012-17 .  However, as per IMIS data, only 96 habitations were  reported to have Fluoride 
contamination. 
• In district Samastipur, as per IMIS data, five habitations were affected from Fluoride contamination 
as on 1 April 2012 and no habitation shown as fluoride contaminated as on 31 May 2017 despite the 
fact that no scheme was sanctioned and executed to remove Fluoride contamination in ground water .  
As per data made available by the division, out of 15,549 sources, 2,825 sources were iron affected, 
four sources were nitrate affected and 812 sources were Arsenic affected during 2012-17 . However,  
IMIS data showed 186 habitations with arsenic contamination. 
Gujarat  
In 10 selected districts, 10,913 samples (14 per cent ), out of 77,064 samples tested in water testing 
laboratories during 2015-17 were found unfit for dr inking due to presence of fluoride, nitrate, 
alkalinity, hardness, etc.  However, these reports were not entered in IMIS.  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
87  
5.4  Evaluation studies 
Evaluation of impact of implementation of any progr amme is necessary for making 
mid-course corrections and for drawing lessons for reformulating guidelines and 
implementation strategies. Programme guidelines for  NRDWP envisaged periodic 
evaluation studies by the Ministry .  The State Governments were also required to take 
up similar monitoring and evaluation studies for which 100 per cent  financial assistance 
would be provided by the Ministry .  
Audit noted that the Ministry had got five evaluati on studies conducted viz.   
(i) Assessment of Functionality of RDWS Scheme in Bihar  (September–October 2014), 
(ii) Evaluation of Implementation of WQM&S Programm e (August 2014),  
(iii) Evaluation of Impact of Sustainability Struct ures Constructed under NRDWP,  
(iv) Evaluation of Usage and Impact of Using Hydro Geo Morphological (HGM) maps 
on the Quality of Implementation of RWSS (September 2013), and (v) Status of Rural 
Water Supply in Maharashtra  (2015) during 2012-17.    
Major findings emerging from these studies included  non-formation of Village Water 
and Sanitation Committees, lack of coverage of scho ols and anganwadis , non-
functioning of schemes, low coverage of population with piped water schemes,  
presence of contaminated ground water, inadequate u se of Field Test Kits for water 
quality testing, lack of sustainability structures,  non-use of Hydro Geo Morphological 
maps for locating suitable site for source sustainable structures  and in planning process 
and  low penetration of IEC activities.  Each evalu ation study incorporated 
recommendations for addressing shortcomings/deficie ncies noticed . With regard to 
follow up on the evaluations studies the Ministry stated that as these reports were state 
specific the concerned State Governments were asked  to send the action taken reports 
to this Ministry. However, outcome of action taken on these studies was not monitored. 
Audit also noted that the above studies were either  issue specific or state specific and 
no comprehensive evaluation of the Programme had be en undertaken by the Ministry 
covering all the States to assess the impact of NRD WP.  Further, none of the selected 
States except Odisha  and Tamil Nadu had conducted evaluation studies during the 
period of performance audit. 
 
 
 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
 
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
88  
 
5.5  National Level Monitors 
National level monitoring is a comprehensive system  of independent monitoring of 
Programmes evolved by the Ministry of Rural Development. National Level Monitors 
(NLMs) visit districts to ascertain implementation of Programme and verify the assets 
created and interact with officials and villagers .  As per extant norms, there are to be 
quarterly round of visits and approximately 150 districts are to be covered in each round 
so as to cover all the districts in the country in a year. Based on their findings, a report 
is submitted within a given time frame to the Ministry for follow-up action. 
During the period 2012-17, NLMs visited 24,420 vill ages in 6,995 3 blocks to review 
the implementation of NRDWP.  The reports submitted by the NLMs highlighted issues 
such as non-availability of safe water sources/insu fficient water availability, water 
sources affected by seasonal variations, poor opera tion and maintenance of water 
supply schemes, non-functionality of water sources,  poor quality of water supplied in 
the villages, issues relating to water quality test ing and sustainability, water supply 
                                                           
3  No. of blocks for the first half of 2012-13 were not available 
Report of Quality Council of India 
During the period 5 December 2016 to 5 January 2017 , Quality Council of 
India evaluated and assessed the functionality, sus tainability, public 
perception and visual observation of quality water supplied. The survey 
covered piped water supply schemes completed during  2009 to 2016.  The 
survey included assessment of 4,332 schemes (both single and multi-village) 
in 5,610 villages of 580 districts in 29 States.  
Major findings were: 
• 455 schemes (10.5 per cent ) in 696 villages were not in existence. 
• 348 schemes (eight per cent ) in 526 villages were non-functional. 
• In 526 villages where schemes were found non-functi onal the same was 
due to failure of infrastructure, pumping system an d pipe lines (38 per 
cent ) and drying of sources (19 per cent ). 
• 57 per cent  of surveyed villages did not have sufficient water  supply of 
50 lpcd or more. 
• Out of 4,387 villages where scheme was functional, 782 villages (18 per 
cent ) experienced breakdowns of more than 20 days in a year. 
• 22 per cent  of the surveyed villages with functional schemes had less than 
2 hours of water supply. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
89  
management and non-availability of drinking water in schools and anganwadis.  It was 
found that the Ministry did not initiate any action  on these reports except seeking 
compliance of the States based on inter-active work shops of NLMs held during 
October-November 2014 on which replies of States were awaited.  
Ministry stated (February 2018) that earlier NLMs e ngaged by the Ministry of Rural 
Development were covering both rural development sc hemes and schemes being 
implemented by Ministry/Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation . However, the 
Ministry was now separately engaging NLMs for over- seeing the implementation of 
NRDWP and for giving feed back to the Ministry .  Specific engagement of NLMs for 
NRDWP has commenced only from September 2017.  
Thus, while visits by NLMs were taking place, the Ministry did not have an established 
system for examining the reports of NLMs and taking  follow up action thereby 
undermining the purpose and utility of the visits. It has only recently begun specific 
assignment of inspection of NRDWP to NLMs.  
5.6  Grievance Redressal System 
A web-based public grievance redressal portal was launched by the Ministry to enable 
citizens to lodge their grievances on rural water s upply. Action taken against each 
grievance is recorded by the system and displayed. As on 1 September 2017, out of 855 
grievances received by the Ministry related to avai lability and quality of water, 402 
grievances were closed after taking action.   
Out of 52 grievance cases taken up for examination,  it was seen that more than five 
months were taken in 23 cases (44 per cent ) to initiate action for resolution of the 
complaint.  Further, no time frame had been fixed for disposal of complaints and as of 
25 October 2017, 409 grievances were pending for more than 30 days.   
Programme guidelines provided for establishment of Computerised Grievance 
Redressal System by State governments with financia l support from the Ministry .  It 
was found that no such Grievance Redressal Mechanis m had been set up in 15 States 
of Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Goa, Guja rat, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Maharasht ra, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and  Tamil Nadu .  
Ministry stated (February 2018) that it forwards gr ievances received to the concerned 
authority in the States for redressal as the ultimate responsibility for doing so rests with 
them. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
 
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
90  
 
5.7  Non-constitution of Team of Experts for Field Inspe ctions at 
district level 
Programme guidelines 4 stipulate that DWSMs shall constitute a team of ex perts in the 
district who shall review the implementation in dif ferent blocks frequently .  Such 
review shall be held at least once in a quarter.  I nspections shall be done to check and 
ensure that the water quality monitoring and survei llance programme is being 
implemented in accordance with norms and also that the community has been involved 
in the analysis of water samples using field test kits. 
DWSMs in 23 States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Goa, 
Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya  Pradesh, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Odisha, Punjab, Rajas than, Sikkim, Tamil 
Nadu, Telangana, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and  Uttarakhand, did not constitute any 
team of experts to check and ensure that the water quality monitoring and surveillance 
programme was implemented as envisaged in guideline s .  In Chhattisgarh , though a  
team of experts was stated to have been constituted  in two districts, no record was 
produced to substantiate the same. 
5.8  Failure to undertake required reviews of Programme by SWSM 
Programme guidelines stipulate that SWSMs shall conduct a review of the Programme 
in the districts once in six months. SWSM did not conduct any review of the Programme 
in 17 States of Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Hima chal 
Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh , Maharashtra, 
Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh and  
Uttarakhand.  
                                                           
4 Para 8 of Annexure-III Framework for Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance (WQM&S)  
Assam  
A grievance redressal system was established at a c ost of ` 3.11 crore which 
included cost of operations for a year.  The firm after establishing and operating 
the system for one year, requested (November 2014) WSSO to take over the 
system.  During joint physical verification (16 Aug ust 2017) audit found that 
grievance redressal system was not operational. Director, WSSO stated (August 
2017) that system had been non-operational since De cember 2016 due to lack 
of staff and discontinuation of internet connectivity by the service provider i.e., 
BSNL.  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
91  
In Andhra Pradesh, Odisha and  Telangana , though it was stated that review meetings 
were held once in six months, minutes of meetings w ere not prepared . In Assam , the 
periodical review meetings were conducted at State Headquarters with the divisional 
representatives instead of in districts.  In Tripura, the SWSM met once instead of twice 
every year to review the Programme. 
5.9  Non-setting up of Vigilance and Monitoring Committee 
As per Programme guidelines, Vigilance and Monitoring Committees (VMC) are to be 
constituted at State, district 5 and village levels to fulfil the objective of ensuring quality 
of expenditure particularly in the context of large  public funds being spent under the 
Programmes.  Members of Parliament and elected public representa tives in State 
Legislatures and Panchayati Raj  Institutions were expected to play a critical role in the 
functioning of the committees with respect to implementation of all rural development 
programmes including NRDWP.  
Audit observed that VMCs were neither set up at the State level nor at the  village level 
in 13 States i.e. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra 
6 , Manipur 7 , Nagaland, 
Rajasthan, Sikkim and  Telangana .  In nine States { Andhra Pradesh (3) , Arunachal 
Pradesh (3) , Assam (3) , Himachal Pradesh (2) , Karnataka (1) , Maharashtra (3) , 
Meghalaya (2) , Nagaland (3)  and  Sikkim (1)} , district level VMCs were not set up in 
21 (out of 53) selected districts.  
5.10  Absence of Social Audit 
Social audit helps narrow the gap between the perce ption of the line department’s 
definition of services provided and the beneficiaries’ level of satisfaction .  Programme 
guidelines provide for a social audit every six mon ths on a fixed date by community 
organisations such as GPSWC, VWSC and User Groups t o ensure that the works 
undertaken are as per the specification and funds utilised are in accordance with works 
undertaken.  
Audit observed that social audit of the programme was not being conducted in 23 States 
of Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Ch hattisgarh, Goa, 
Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnata ka, Madhya Pradesh, 
Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Odisha, Punj ab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, 
Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Tripura and  Uttar Pradesh.  
 
                                                           
5  As per the Ministry of Rural Development letter d ated 26 July 2016, District Development 
Coordination and Monitoring Committee (DISHA) has superseded District Vigilance and Monitoring 
Committee. 
6   Village level VMC not constituted in 33 out of 54 selected GPs. 
7  Department stated that SLVMC is in existence.  Ho wever, supporting documents were not produced.  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
 
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
92  
5.11  Non-setting up of Monitoring and Investigation Unit 
Programme guidelines provide that a special Monitoring Cell and Investigation Unit at 
the State headquarters be set up with necessary sup porting staff.  The Monitoring unit 
shall be responsible for collecting information fro m the executing agencies, 
maintenance of the data and timely submission of th e prescribed data online to the 
Central Government by due dates.  The unit shall al so be responsible for monitoring 
aspects of quality of water, adequacy of service and other related qualitative aspects of 
the Programme at the field level.   
Audit observed that Monitoring Cell and Investigation Units were not set up in 12 States 
of Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, 
Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Punjab, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu
8 , Telangana and 
Uttarakhand .  In Uttar Pradesh, the unit was working with one official against the 
sanctioned post of four. 
The absence or inadequate functioning of monitoring  committees was indicative of 
deficient monitoring of the Programme.   
5.12  Audit summation 
The Integrated Management Information System was the principal tool devised by the 
Ministry for effective monitoring the Programme .  However, the IMIS data was 
inconsistent and erroneous with mismatch between IM IS data and corresponding 
manual data. This undermined its utility as a meaningful management tool for realistic 
monitoring.  
Further, institutional mechanisms for effective monitoring and grievance redressal were 
weak and inadequate at the State, District and vill age levels. Grievance Redressal 
Mechanisms were not in place and team of experts were not constituted in several States. 
Neither the Ministry nor the States had undertaken a comprehensive evaluation of the 
Programme during the period covered by Audit.  As a result, the impact and outcomes 
from the Programme remained unassessed. 
                                                           
8   EDP wing under the control of EDP Manager in TWA D Board was collecting and uploading various 
data in IMIS.  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
93 
The Programme was launched with the primary objecti ve of providing safe and 
adequate drinking water to the rural population on a sustainable basis.  The 12 th  Plan 
aimed at providing all rural habitations, schools a nd anganwadis  with safe drinking 
water by 2017 against which actual achievement of c overing habitations was only  
44 per cent  and 85 per cent for schools and  anganwadis. The Plan also placed emphasis 
on piped water supply with a goal of providing 50 per cent of rural households/ 
population with potable drinking water (55 lpcd) by  piped water supply and at least  
35 per cent of rural households with household connections by A pril 2017. The  
actual achievement (December 2017) against these de liverables was however only  
18.4 per cent  and 16.8 per cent respectively. 
The planning and delivery framework was deficient with most States not framing Water 
Security Plans or comprehensive Annual Action Plans . The apex level National 
Drinking Water and Sanitation Council that was set up to co-ordinate and ensure 
convergence remained dormant during the period cove red in the performance audit 
exercise. Other bodies critical for planning and ex ecution of the Programme such as 
State Water and Sanitation Mission, State Technical  Agency, Source Finding 
Committee, Block Resource Centres were also either not set up or were not performing 
their assigned functions.  Thus, the Programme face d constraints both in terms of 
planning and delivery which subsequently affected a chievement of programme goals 
and targets.  
NRDWP is implemented as a Centrally Sponsored Schem e with cost being shared 
between the Central and State Governments. It was however noticed that availability of 
funds for the Programme decreased from 2013-14 to 2 016-17. Moreover, even the 
funds allocated could not be fully utilised. The co nstraints of funds were accentuated 
by diversion of funds amounting to ` 358.59 crore towards inadmissible items of 
expenditure and blocking of funds of ` 304.02 crore with State Water and Sanitation 
Missions and work executing agencies.  
Lack of proper site investigations and timely obtaining of requisite statutory and other 
mandatory clearances as stipulated in the codal pro visions coupled with poor contract 
management and enforcement of contractual terms in cases of default by contractors 
resulted in works remaining incomplete, abandoned o r non-operational as well as 
unproductive expenditure on equipment with an overa ll financial implication of 
` 2,212.44 crore. 
Ensuring water quality and sustainability was a pri ncipal element of the scheme. 
However, Community Water Purification Plants could be provided to only five per cent  
of quality affected habitations and sustainability plans were either not prepared/ 
Chapter-VI   Conclusion and Recommendations 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
94 
implemented or not included in Annual Action Plans.   There was inadequate focus on 
surface water based schemes and a large number of s chemes (98 per cent ) including 
piped water schemes continued to be based on ground  water resources. Further, 
Operation and Maintenance plans were either not prepared in most of the States or had 
deficiencies leading to schemes becoming non-functi onal.  As a result, incidence of 
slip-back habitations continued to persist. Further , lack of requisite number of 
States/district/sub-divisional level laboratories r esulted in shortfalls in prescribed 
quality tests of water sources and supply thereby d iluting the objective of providing 
safe drinking water to the rural population.  
Lastly, institutional mechanisms for inspection, vi gilance and monitoring were either 
not established or were not functioning in the mann er envisaged and the overall 
monitoring and oversight framework lacked effectiveness. 
Thus, the overall coverage of rural habitations inc reased by only eight per cent  at 40 
lpcd and 5.5 per cent  at 55 lpcd even after incurring of expenditure of ` 81,168 crore 
during the period 2012-17.  
Recommendations:   
Based on the audit findings, we recommend as follows: 
 In view of the fact that the  institutional framework for planning and delivery as 
contemplated in the programme guidelines were eithe r non-existent or non-
functional in a large number of States, Ministry sh ould review the feasibility 
and practicality of these mechanisms to ensure that  they serve the intended 
purposes.  
 Water security plans and annual action plans must be prepared with community 
participation to ensure that schemes are aligned to community requirements and 
ensure optimum and sustainable utilisation of water resources. 
 Ministry must strengthen capacity building/IEC at b lock and village levels so 
that they are equipped and empowered to meaningfull y participate in the 
planning, management and monitoring of scheme and programme. 
 Planning should take into account state specific as pects and requirements and 
towards this end, Ministry should stipulate a realistic timeframe for preparation 
of State Specific Policy Framework and Annual Actio n Plans that may also be 
monitored by the Ministry.  
 Allocation of resources for the Programme should be  dynamic and based on a 
clear assessment of requirements and achievements under each component.  
 Plans and schemes should be granted approval only a fter technical and 
sustainability aspects have been duly vetted and it  should be ensured that all 
clearances are in place so as to ensure unimpeded e xecution of the 
works/schemes. 

Report No. 15 of 2018 
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme  
 
95 
 Focus should be placed on effective works and contr act management so as to 
ensure that works are completed in time as per the contractual terms. Any 
default on the part of contractors should be viewed  strictly in accordance with 
the contract stipulations so as to penalise delays attributable to the contractors 
and enforce accountability. 
 Focussed attention should be accorded to mitigating  measures in all quality 
affected habitations to ensure availability of safe  drinking water and 
infrastructure for testing water quality should be made effective so as to meet 
the objective of providing safe drinking water.  
 Ministry should improve the effectiveness of all en visaged monitoring tools 
including Integrated Management Information System so that both Programme 
planning and implementation are strengthened.  
 
New Delhi 
Dated: 
 
 
 
(MAMTA KUNDRA) 
Director General of Audit, 
Central Expenditure 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
New Delhi 
Dated: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(RAJIV MEHRISHI) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
97 
Annexe-1.1 (A) 
Process and Mechanism for Sampling 
(Refer to para 1.5.4) 
 
 
 
 
  
                                                           
1  Maximum of 10 districts was to be selected. 
2  Andhra Pradesh (1), Gujarat (6), Haryana (7), Himachal Pradesh (2), Jammu & Kashmir (2), Karnataka (6) 
and Rajasthan (16). 
Ist  Stage 
(Districts 1) 
25 per cent  of the districts excluding DDP districts from each  region 
(subject to a minimum of two) were selected by Prob ability 
Proportional to Size Without Replacement (PPSWOR) m ethod with 
size measure as total NRDWP expenditure during 2012-17.   
Out of 40 DDP districts in seven states 2, 25 per cent  of districts (subject 
to a minimum of two) were selected by PPSWOR method  with size 
measure as entire expenditure in these DDP districts during 2012-17.  
In each selected district, two divisions selected f or detailed 
examination by PPSWOR method with size measure as total NRDWP 
expenditure during 2012-17.  
II nd  Stage 
(Blocks) 
Within each selected district in the 1 st  stage, 20 per cent  rural blocks 
(subject to minimum two and maximum four) were sele cted by 
PPSWOR method with size measure as number of drinki ng water 
supply schemes completed during 2012-17. 
III rd  Stage 
(Gram 
Panchayats ) 
After having selected the sample blocks in the 2 nd  stage, two Gram 
Panchayats  from each block were selected on Simple Random 
Sampling Without Replacement (SRSWOR). 
IV th  Stage 
(Beneficiary 
survey) 
From each selected Gram Panchayat , based on SRSWOR, four 
habitations were selected.  For the purpose of impa ct assessment, 10 
households were selected from each of the four sele cted habitations 
using SRSWOR.  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
98 
Annexe-1.1 (B) 
Details of habitations surveyed 
(Refer to para 1.5.4) 
 
 
Annexe-1.1 (C) 
Profile of beneficiaries surveyed 
(Refer to para 1.5.4) 
 
  
Habitations 
coverage status  
Fully 
covered 
Partially 
covered 
Quality 
Affected 
Not covered by any 
water supply scheme 
1,279 976 39 28 
Habitations 
covered 
through 
Piped water 
supply 
Hand-pump/ 
Tube-Well Others Not covered by any 
water supply scheme 
1,312 894 88 28 
Source of 
supply 
Ground 
water Surface water Others Not covered by any 
water supply scheme 
1,738 535 21 28 
Household/ 
Beneficiaries 
General Schedule 
Caste 
Schedule 
Tribes 
Others Total 
Male  4,506 2,815 3,032 4,742 15,095 
Female  3,871 2,786 3,365 3,469 13,491 
Total 8,377 5,601 6,397 8,211 28,586 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
99 
Annexe-1.2 
Details of Sample Selected 
(Refer to para 1.5.4) 
Name of 
State 
District Division Block Gram Panchayat Habitation Beneficiary 
Total Selected Total Selected Total Selected Total Selected Total Selected Surveyed 
Andhra 
Pradesh 13 5 13 9 284 10 182 20 61 44 800 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 16 4 7 6 25 8 299 16 149 64 640 
Assam 27 9 17 13 107 23 296 46 1,394 184 1,840 
Bihar 38 10 12 12 160 20 213 40 187 111 1,600 
Chhattisgarh  27 8 13 11 51 16 1,347 32 251 113 1,280 
Goa 3 2 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Gujarat 33 10 19 17 81 20 1,197 40 87 73 1,600 
Himachal 
Pradesh 12 6 12 12 38 13 446 26 387 104 1,021 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 22 7 17 10 55 14 326 29 63 66 698 
Jharkhand 24 6 8 8 90 19 340 38 848 152 1,520 
Karnataka 30 10 10 10 60 20 748 40 293 160 1,600 
Kerala 14 4 15 8 46 8 58 16 295 64 640 
Madhya 
Pradesh 51 10 10 10 72 22 1,650 44 294 176 1,623 
Maharashtra 34 10 0 0 126 27 976 54 109 85 2,160 
Manipur 9 4 5 5 20 8 387 19 44 38 640 
Meghalaya 11 4 7 7 16 8 1,653 16 39 35 640 
Mizoram 8 2 6 4 8 4 94 8 9 9 90 
Nagaland 11 3 6 6 22 6 142 22 142 22 220 
Odisha 30 8 13 13 109 24 540 48 1,113 192 1,920 
Punjab 22 7 17 11 48 14 318 28 30 28 1,080 
Rajasthan 33 10 36 18 71 20 654 39 93 87 866 
Sikkim 4 2 0 0 5 4 85 8 156 32 319 
Tamil Nadu 31 8 0 0 102 21 583 42 552 168 1,680 
Telangana 9 3 7 6 50 10 187 20 59 37 814 
Tripura 8 2 3 3 18 4 102 8 68 31 321 
Uttar 
Pradesh 75 10 47 20 118 27 1,834 54 397 178 2,160 
Uttarakhand 13 4 16 8 43 10 913 20 133 69 814 
Total 607 168 316 227 1,825 380 15,570 773 7,253 2,322 28,586 
 
 
 
                                                           
3 Goa was exempted from Beneficiary survey so no further selection after District was made. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
100 
Annexe-1.3 
Name of Selected Districts 
(Refer to para 1.5.4) 
Sl. 
No. Name of State Selected 
Districts Name of Selected Districts 
1. Andhra Pradesh 5 Anantpuram, Chittoor, Kadapa, Guntur, West Godavari 
2. Arunachal Pradesh 4 Papum Pare, lower Subansiri, West Siang, West Kameng 
3. Assam 9 Golaghat, Dhubri, Nagaon, Cachar, Kamrup Rural, Karbi Anglong, 
Udalgiri, Hailakandi, Jorhat 
4. Bihar 10 Nawada, Samastipur, Banka, Kaimur (Bhabhua), Muzaffarpur, 
Nalanda, Patna, Saharsa, Saran, Sitamarhi 
5. Chhattisgarh 8 Raipur, Kawardha, Bastar, Kanker, Rajnadgaon, Surajpur, Jashpur, 
Baloda Bazar-Bhatapara 
6. Goa 2 North Goa, South Goa 
7. Gujarat 10 Banaskantha, Bhavnagar, Junagadh, Mehsana, Narmada, Navsari, 
Panchmahal, Surat, Surendranagar, Vadodara 
8. Himachal Pradesh 6 Kangra, Solan, Bilaspur, Shimla, Kinnaur, Lahaul & Spiti 
9. Jammu & Kashmir 7 Jammu, Reasi, Rajouri, Kupwara, Pulwama, Kargil, Leh 
10. Jharkhand 6 Dhanbad, Garhwa, Hazaribag, Palamu, Sahibganj, West Singhbhum 
11. Karnataka 10 Belagavi, Bidar, Chamarajanagar, Chitradurga, Gadag, Mandya, 
Tumakuru, Yadgir, Bagalkot, Koppal 
12. Kerala 4 Thiruvananthapuram, Kottaym, Kannur, Malappuram 
13. Madhya Pradesh 10 Gwalior, Singrouli, Narsinghpur, Chhindwara, Dhar, Khargone, 
Vidisha, Tikamgarh, Raisen, Ujjain 
14. Maharashtra 10 Pune, Sangli, Ahmednagar, Nashik, Nagpur, Aurangabad, Beed, 
Raigad, Thane, Buldana 
15. Manipur 4 Bishnupur,  Churachandpur, Senapatai, Thoubal 
16. Meghalaya 4 Jaintia Hills 4 , Ri Bhoi, West Garo Hills, South West Garo Hills 
17. Mizoram 2 Aizawl, Champhai 
18. Nagaland 3 Kohima, Dimapur, Tuensang 
19. Odisha 8 Ganjam, Nabarangpur, Nuapada, Jajpur, Mayurbhanj, Cuttak, 
Keonjhar, Sambalpur 
20. Punjab 7 Amritsar, SAS Nagar, Bathinda, Hoshiarpur, Fatehgarh Sahib, 
Moga, Patiala 
21. Rajasthan 10 Barmer, Bhilwara, Jaipur, Jaisalmer, Jhalawad, Kota, Jodhapur, 
Sriganganagar, Dungarpur, Tonk 
22. Sikkim 2 East Sikkim, South Sikkim 
23. Tamil Nadu 8 Coimbatore, Cuddalore, Dindigul, Karur, Nagapattinam, 
Pudukkottai, Vellore, Virudhunagar 
24. Telangana 3 Khammam, Mahbubnagar, Nalgonda 
25. Tripura 2 Dhalai, West Tripura 
26. Uttar Pradesh 10 Agra, Jhansi, Aligarh, Chitrakoot, Etawa, G B Nagar, Gorakhpur, 
Jaunpur, Rae Bareily, Sonbhadhra 
27. Uttarakhand 4 Almora, Nainital, Pauri, Tehri 
Total  168  
 
 
 
                                                           
4  District Jaintia Hills was bifurcated in two districts (East Jaintia Hills and West Jaintia Hills) on July 2012.  Both these two 
district were taken as one district for the purpose  of sampling due to non-availability of separate da ta of fund of these two 
districts with the department. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
101 
Annexe-1.4 
Details of deficiencies, corresponding recommendation of  PAC and status as per current audit   
(Refer to para 1.5.5) 
Sl.  
No. 
Main Recommendations of the 
Public Accounts Committee 
Response of the Ministry Status as per current 
audit report 
1. The Ministry should issue instructions 
to the States to prepare and submit the 
Annual Action Plan (AAP) habitation-
wise and such instructions should not 
be merely on paper but bring tangible 
results.   
(Recommendation No. 7)  
AAPs are prepared at the district 
level and district level AAPs are 
combined at the State level to give 
State level AAP. AAPs prepared by 
the States every year are discussed 
with the Ministry. Habitations 
targeted under the AAPs are marked 
on the IMIS.  
In 10 states, AAPs were 
prepared at state level 
without district level 
AAPs being prepared.   
(Para 2.2.3.2 )  
2. The Committee, expressing concern 
over the delay in receiving proposals 
from the States, recommended that the 
Ministry should devise a strong 
Monitoring Mechanism in 
consultation with the Chief Secretaries 
of the States so that proposals are 
invariably received in time.  
(Recommendation No. 8)  
Letters have been addressed to states 
to send proposals in time. 
Instances of delayed 
submission of proposals 
were observed.  
(Para 2.2.3.2 and  Para 
3.2.2) 
 
3. The Ministry should evolve a 
mechanism within a time-frame 
whereby precise data with regard to 
the ‘slip-back’ habitations could be 
obtained. States should be impressed 
upon to ensure that habitation does not 
slip-back further and a quarterly report 
of the progress in this regard should be 
sent to the Ministry. 
Further, expressing serious concern 
towards a number of schemes lying as 
non-functional, the Committee desired 
the Ministry to look into this vital area 
and take necessary corrective steps for 
completion of all the schemes in time 
in every State. The Ministry may also 
consider withholding of financial 
assistance to the defaulter States. 
 (Recommendation No. 9)  
The Ministry had referred various 
reasons ( viz.  over extraction of 
ground water, irregular/deficient 
rainfall, contamination of water due 
to unchecked disposal of industrial/ 
municipal effluents and extensive 
use of pesticides) due to which slip-
back could not be eliminated.  It can 
be certainly minimized/reduced by 
taking the corrective and preventive 
measures (such as sustainability of 
sources, construction of 
sustainability structures) for which 
states have been advised in various 
meetings/through letters.   
In respect of non-functional 
schemes, states had been asked to 
take all corrective/preventive 
actions to avoid the schemes to 
become non-functional.   
Instances of slip-back 
habitations and non-
functional schemes 
noticed. 
(Para 4.5.4 and  Para  
4.6 ) 
4. All States should assess the technical 
staff requirements and the Ministry 
should impress upon the States to fulfil 
the vacancies so that the Scheme could 
be implemented in an effective 
manner and quality water is available 
to the users. The Ministry should also 
periodically monitor the augmentation 
During various meetings, the State 
Government officials have been 
requested to recruit/hire trained 
manpower urgently in the 
laboratories so that water quality 
testing is done regularly.  
Shortage of labs, 
infrastructure and 
equipment for water 
quality testing were 
observed in several 
States.  
(Para 4.8.1)  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
102 
Sl.  
No. 
Main Recommendations of the 
Public Accounts Committee 
Response of the Ministry Status as per current 
audit report 
of water testing in States through field 
visits or otherwise and ensure that 
these laboratories are functional at all 
times. 
(Recommendation No. 10)  
5. The Ministry should pay more 
emphasis on water testing aspect and 
should increase the frequency of 
monitoring the quality of water. The 
Ministry should instruct the States to 
test all drinking water sources at least 
twice a year and for chemical 
contamination at least four times in a 
year i.e.  every quarterly. The 
information so obtained should be put 
on the public domain.  
(Recommendation No. 11)  
The Ministry will continue to focus 
on drinking water quality 
monitoring and coverage of water 
quality affected habitations during 
XII Five Year Plan and thereafter.  
 
In all selected States, 
shortfall in carrying out 
prescribed tests were 
noticed. In addition, 
shortfall with respect to 
performance of 
envisaged tests against 
parameters were also 
noticed. 
 (Para 4.8.2 ) 
6. A future targets for procurement and 
distribution of Field Test Kits (FTKs) 
should also be fixed. Further, workers 
at the grass root level at GPs should be 
adequately trained to achieve the sole 
objective of providing safe potable 
water in each rural habitat. 
(Recommendation No. 12)  
In the Annual Action Plans (AAP), 
targets are fixed for supply of field 
test kits and number of persons to be 
imparted training and refresher 
training on use of these kits. 
Instances of non-
procurement of required 
FTKs, non-utilisation of 
FTKs and expiry of 
shelf-life of FTKs were 
noticed.   
(Para 4.8.2 ) 
7. Being a funding agency it was 
incumbent upon the Ministry of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation to 
monitor completion of projects 
without any time overrun. 
(Recommendation No. 15)  
Ministry is using the IMIS to closely 
monitor the schemes being 
implemented by the States. During 
the AAP discussions, completion of 
incomplete schemes is given 
priority. States are urged to ensure 
completion of incomplete schemes 
before taking up new schemes. 
Several cases of 
incomplete schemes, 
schemes that remained 
non-operational after 
completion and 
abandoned works were 
noticed.  
 (Para 4.2.6, 4.2.7 and 
4.2.9 ) 
 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
103 
Annexe-2.1 
Shortcomings in preparation of Annual Action Plan  
(Refer to para 2.2.3.2)  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State Shortcomings 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
• Annual Action Plans (AAP) were prepared without loc al participation. Further, 
the plan was not discussed in the SLSSC meetings for approval.  
• Preference to minority concentrated habitations and other backward communities, 
sustainability structures, coverage of schools and anganwadis  with water supply 
were not included in the AAPs.   
2. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
• AAP was prepared with base as 40 lpcd upto 2012-13.  The department has not 
planned for any augmentation/improvement for covera ge of water deficient 
habitations (habitations with 40 lpcd water supply)  despite the existing water 
supply schemes were being below the prescribed norms of 55 lpcd. 
• Priority was not given to habitations with lower availability of drinking water. 
3. Assam • AAPs were prepared without having any input from the village/GP.  
• AAPs were submitted to the Ministry with a delay of four months during 2012-17.  
4. Bihar 
• AAPs were submitted to the Ministry with a delay ra nging between 24 days and 
78 days during 2014-17.  
• Water Quality Affected Habitations and low coverage habitations were not given 
priority. 
5. Chhattisgarh 
• 217 Piped Water Supply Schemes (PWSS) sanctioned with cost of ` 93.01 crore 
in 2014-17 were designed for 40 lpcd service levels.  
• AAPs were submitted to the Ministry with a delay ranging between three and eight 
months during 2012-17. 
6. Goa 
• AAPs were not approved by the SLSSC due to non-conduct of SLSSC meetings. 
• No planning for provision of drinking water in the schools and anganwadis  was 
noticed in the AAPs even though 52 anganwadis  and five out of 1568 schools did 
not have access to adequate drinking water. 
7. Himachal 
Pradesh 
• AAP was submitted to the Ministry with a delay rang ing between two and five 
months.  
• Proposals of elected public representatives were no t obtained for inclusion in 
AAP. 
8. Jharkhand 
• AAPs were prepared with minimum service level of 40 lpcd during 2012-17.  
• AAP did not prioritise habitations with partially covered population (0-25 per cent  
population) and quality affected habitations over h abitations with fully covered 
population (100 per cent  population). 
9. Karnataka 
• AAPs were approved with a delay ranging between fiv e and ten months during 
2012-17. 
• Basic information on which AAPs were prepared was not documented. 
• Plans for coverage of schools and anganwadis  with water supply schemes were 
not included in AAP. 
10. Kerala • The state AAP was prepared on the basis of details received from the divisions 
without having grass root level planning. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
104 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State Shortcomings 
11. Madhya 
Pradesh 
• The plan did not contain the required aspect i.e., target, coverage of habitation, 
schemes, water quality monitoring, etc. 
12. Maharashtra 
• AAPs were submitted to the Ministry with a delay ranging between three and six 
months during 2012-17. 
• None of the schemes taken up during 2012-17 were designed for water supply at 
55 lpcd.  
13. Manipur 
• AAP was prepared based on 40 lpcd during 2012-16.  
• Priority was not given to 0-25 per cent  and 25-50 per cent  population coverage 
habitations. 
14. Meghalaya 
• AAPs were prepared without having any inputs from the districts and villages as 
well as any suggestions/proposals from the elected public representatives.  
• All the schemes were designed to provide 40 lpcd  till 2016-17 
15. Mizoram 
• AAPs were prepared on the basis of data available at the department regarding the 
coverage of water supply in the habitations without receiving any inputs from the 
village/district levels.  
• AAP was prepared with base as 40 lpcd till 2015-16. 
16. Nagaland 
• AAPs were prepared with base as 40 lpcd of drinking  water supply during 
2012-17 instead of 55 lpcd.  
• Provision for water supply to the anganwadis  was not included in the AAP. 
17. Rajasthan 
• AAPs were prepared without having community partici pation as well as 
suggestions/proposals of elected public representatives. 
• Schemes/projects were prepared on the basis of 40 lpcd instead of 55 lpcd. 
18. Sikkim 
• Target was not fixed for coverage in AAP regarding priority to be given for 
coverage of 0 per cent, 0-25 per cent  and 25-50 per cent  population covered in 
planning.  
• The department targeted 40 lpcd in AAPs. 
• AAPs were submitted to the Ministry with delay up to two months. 
19. Tamil Nadu • AAPs were prepared by taking service level of 40 lpcd and less. 
20. Telangana 
• There was no indication of prioritising habitations  with 0 - 25 per cent  of 
population covered, quality affected habitations, SC, ST and minority community 
dominated habitation. 
21. Tripura • There was no evidence of bottom-up approach i.e., i nvolvement of PRIs in the 
preparation of AAP.  
22. Uttar 
Pradesh 
• In selected districts, AAPs were not prepared in bottom up approach.  
• AAPs were not submitted for approval of SLSSC during 2015-17.  
23. Uttarakhand • AAP was prepared with base as 40 lpcd. 
 
  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
105 
Annexe-2.2 
SLSSC Meetings held during 2012-17 
(Refer to para 2.4.2) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State 
No. of 
Meetings 
required to be 
held during 
2012-17 
No. of meeting held during Percentage 
shortfall 
during 
2012-17 
2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 Total 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 10 2 2 1 1 1 07 30 
2. Arunachal 
Pradesh 10 2 1 1 1 0 05 50 
3. Assam 10 2 2 2 1 0 07 30 
4. Chhattisgarh 10 1 1 2 1 1 06 40 
5. Gujarat 10 2 1 1 0 1 05 50 
6. Jammu & 
Kashmir 10 0 2 1 1 2 06 40 
7. Kerala 10 2 1 1 1 0 05 50 
8. Madhya 
Pradesh 10 1 2 1 1 2 07 30 
9. Maharashtra 10 1 1 1 1 1 05 50 
10. Manipur 10 1 1 1 1 1 05 50 
11. Meghalaya 10 1 0 1 0 2 04 60 
12. Mizoram 10 1 1 1 1 1 05 50 
13. Nagaland 10 1 1 1 1 0 04 60 
14. Odisha 10 1 2 2 1 1 07 30 
15. Punjab 10 0 1 1 0 0 02 80 
16. Sikkim 10 0 2 0 0 0 02 80 
17. Tamil Nadu 10 2 2 1 1 1 07 30 
18. Telangana 06 - - 1 1 1 05 50 
19. Tripura 10 1 1 1 1 1 05 50 
20. Uttarakhand 10 1 2 2 1 1 07 30 
 Total 196 22 26 23 16 17 106 46 
  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
106 
Annexe-2.3 
Shortcomings in functioning of WSSO 
(Refer to para 2.4.5) 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of 
State Shortcomings 
1. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
• Consultants for Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and Hydro-geologist 
had not been appointed since its inception. 
• WSSO did not carry out evaluation and impact assess ment study and 
Research and Development (R&D) activities during 2012-17. 
2. Assam 
• WSSO did not prepare plan for capacity building. St ate specific 
information, education and communication strategy for reform initiatives 
in water was not developed. 
• Evaluation and impact assessment study was not carried out. 
3. Bihar 
• Staffs viz. Director, Consultants (Hydro geologist), Accountant and Data 
Entry Operator were not appointed in WSSO. 
• WSSO did not carry out Research and Development (R&D) activities. 
4. Chhattisgarh  
• Function of Evaluation and Impact assessment studie s, software aspects 
of RWS sector, assistance to GPs in preparation of Water Security Plan 
was not done. 
5. Goa • WSSO did not undertake any evaluation studies and i mpact assessment 
studies as well as activity relating to R&D. 
6. Himachal 
Pradesh 
• The organisation faced shortage of staff during the period of performance 
audit. 
7. Karnataka 
• The organisation did not involve in the preparation  of water security 
plans and did not take up evaluation studies, impac t assessment, 
development of IEC and HRD modules, research and de velopment, 
Geographical Information System (GIS) mapping, etc. 
8. Manipur • The Organisation did not take up evaluation studies  and impact 
assessment of the programme.   
9. Meghalaya 
• Consultant (HRD), Consultant (IEC), Consultant (M&E ), Consultant 
(Hydrogeologist), Consultant (WQM&S) and Consultant (Sanitation and 
Hygiene) were not appointed. 
10. Nagaland 
• The organisation neither carried out the responsibi lity of preparation of 
water security plan in the state nor conducted eval uation studies, impact 
assessment and R&D activities. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
107 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of 
State Shortcomings 
11. Rajasthan 
• The organisation couldn’t achieve the autonomy as the organisation was 
functioning under the CE (Rural). Members from repu ted CSOs 1 , 
academic institutions, representative of GPWSC/VWSC  were not 
nominated in WSSO.  
• Meeting of General Body of WSSO was not held during 2012-17 against 
the norms of at least two meetings in a year. 
• Director for WSSO was not appointed since October 2016 but additional 
charge was given to the Superintending Engineers (S E) working in the 
PHED. 
12. Telangana 
• WSSO’s involvement in preparation of water security  plan including 
state specific information on education and communi cation strategy for 
reform initiatives in water and sanitation and new technologies and 
research on various aspects of sanitation, IEC stra tegies, etc., was not 
forthcoming from the records. 
13. Uttar 
Pradesh 
• Members from Civil Society Organisation, academic I nstitutions, and 
technical institutes working in the sector, represe ntatives of GPWSC/ 
VWSCs etc., were not included in the organization. 
 
  
                                                           
1Civil Society Orgnisations 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
108 
Annexe-2.4 
Shortcomings in functioning of DWSM 
(Refer to para 2.4.6)  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State Shortcomings 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
• In all test checked districts, meetings were not conducted during 2012-17. 
2. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
• Instead of DWSM, DWSC headed by Deputy Commissioner s of respective 
districts was constituted which didn’t have PRIs an d community 
representation in formulation, implementation and m onitoring of water 
supply schemes. 
3. Assam 
• DWSM remained non-functional during 2012-17. All th e functions of 
DWSM were performed division-wise by the respective  Executive 
Engineers. 
4. Chhattisgarh 
• In all selected districts, Collector chaired the DW SM. The MPs, MLAs, 
Chairperson of Standing Committees of ZP, District Officers of Social 
Welfare, WRD and Agriculture were not members of the Mission/Committee 
in two districts 2. Remaining five districts did not produce records relating to 
DWSM. 
5. Goa 
• Meetings were not held during 2012-17. 
• DWSMs were chaired by District Collector. The Missi on did not have 
representation of the MPs / MLAs as well as NGOs. 
6. Gujarat 
• Instead of DWSM, District Water and Sanitation Comm ittees (DWSCs) 
headed by District Collators of respective district s were constituted. 
However, elected public representatives were not as sociated in the 
committee.  
7. Himachal 
Pradesh 
• The Mission did not have sufficient staff during 20 12-17 as against the 
requirement of six consultants for each DWSM, one c onsultant was 
appointed. 
• Follow up action on the decision taken in the meeti ngs was not taken up in 
the subsequent meetings. 
8. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
• DWSMs were defunct due to non-existence of PRI structure. 
9. Jharkhand 
• Against the required 40 meetings, four meetings wer e held in two districts 
during 2012-17. Meetings were not held in rest of four selected districts 3. 
• NGO was not co-opted as member by DWSM. 
10. Karnataka 
• Meetings were not held in four 4 selected districts during 2012-17. In other 
four districts the number of meetings held ranged from one to four. 
• None of the selected districts except Chitradurga a nd Tumakuru, co-opted 
the NGOs as members of DWSM.  DWSMs wherever constituted were also 
                                                           
2 Raipur and Surajpur 
3 Garhwa, Hazaribag, Palamu, and Sahibganj. 
4 Bagalkot,Chitradurga, Koppal and Mandya 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
109 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State Shortcomings 
not involved in formulation and approval of the act ivities under the 
programme.  
• In district Chitradurga, the CEO of ZP was made the  President of DWSM 
instead of the Chairman of ZP. 
11. Maharashtra 
• In five 5 districts, DWSM was not headed by Chairman of Zilla Parishad.  
• In none of the selected districts Members of Parlia ment, Members of 
Legislative Assembly/Council were included in the DWSM.  
• In none of the districts, members of NGOs were co-o pted as members of 
DWSM. 
12. Manipur 
• There was no record of meetings of the Mission duri ng the period of 
performance audit.  
• It has no technical and professional persons(Consultant HRD, IEC, M&E and 
Hydrogeologist). 
13. Meghalaya • Role of DWSM was limited to Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM). 
14. Mizoram • Instead of DWSM, DWSCs were formed in selected dist ricts and their role 
was confined to Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM). 
15. Odisha 
• In seven out of eight selected districts, meetings were not held during 
2012-17. 
• Against requirement of eight staff members, DWSMs were functioning with 
two to seven staff members in six out of eight sele cted districts. In five 6 out 
of eight selected districts, technical and professi onal personnel were not 
engaged. 
16. Punjab • Meetings were not held during 2012-17. 
17. Telangana • Records were not available regarding meetings held by DWSMs in any of 
the selected districts. 
18. Tripura • In district West, only one meeting was held during 2012-17.  
19. Uttar 
Pradesh 
• DWSMs had three consultants against the prescribed six consultants of 
different specialised areas. 
• The General body of the Mission met only six times during 2012-17. 
  
                                                           
5Ahmednagar, Nagpur, Sangli, Thane and Nashik 
6Cuttack, Ganjam, Jajpur, Mayurbhanj, Nabarangpur 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
110 
Annexe-2.5 
Shortcomings in functioning of VWSC 
(Refer to para 2.4.8)  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State Shortcomings 
1.  Arunachal 
Pradesh 
• Though the VWSCs were formed in all selected GPs, t he schemes/projects 
were being formulated at District Water and Sanitation Committee (DWSC) 
level without involving VWSC. This indicated that p articipation of GPs/ 
village communities in planning and management of rural water supply was 
not ensured. 
2.  Assam • VWSCs were only involved in sanitation activities. 
3.  Chhattisgarh • 12 7out of 32 selected GPs, did not have records pertaining to constitution of 
VWSC. 
4.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
• Though VWSCs were constituted in December 2013 they  were not 
functional due to dissolution of PRIs. 
5.  Jharkhand • VWSCs were not involved in planning, designing, app roval and 
implementation of schemes in selected districts. 
6.  Karnataka • VWSCs were not involved in the process of formulati on of activities under 
the programme. 
7.  Madhya 
Pradesh 
• In 36 out of 44 GPs, VWSCs did not ensure community  participation and 
decision making in all phases of village activities. 
8.  Maharashtra • In three GPs (Beed: one GP; Nashik: 2 GPs), the VWS Cs were not formed 
on the ground that they were not aware about the formation of VWSC. 
9.  Mizoram 
• VWSCs were mainly engaged with the operation and ma intenance of the 
schemes but were not involved in the planning, desi gning and 
implementation process of the schemes. 
10.  Telangana 
• In districts Khammam and Mahbubnagar, representatio n of persons from 
SCs, STs and poorer sections of the village was not ensured in any of selected 
GPs. 
11.  Tripura • Though the Committee was constituted by the state g overnment, joint 
physical verification in eight GPs showed their non-existence. 
12.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
• VWSCs members were not involved in planning of water supply schemes. 
 
                                                           
7 Datrenga, Boriakala, Paragaon, Khiloura, Manikchou ri, Piplawand, Bhanpuri, Borigaon, Koliyapuri, Luik ona, 
Charaidand and Malda. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
111 
Annexe-3.1 
Non-release of State share of funds (2015-17) 
(Refer to para 3.2.3) 
Component  
Central-
State 
fund 
share 
2015-16 2016-17 
States which had not released their 
share 
States which had not 
released their share 
Desert Development 
Programme 
60:40 
(90:10) 
Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Karnataka and Rajasthan 
Gujarat, Haryana, 
Himachal Pradesh and 
Jammu & Kashmir 
Natural Calamity 60:40 
(90:10) 
Assam, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh 
and Tamil Nadu 
Arunachal Pradesh, 
Manipur and West 
Bengal 
Earmarked Water 
Quality 
50:50 
(90:10) 
Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand, Punjab and 
Rajasthan 
Karnataka, 
Maharashtra 
Support Activities 60:40 
(90:10) 
Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Assam, Bihar, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Nagaland Odisha, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu and 
Telangana  
Arunachal Pradesh, 
Bihar, Goa, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Kerala, 
Maharashtra, Manipur, 
Odisha, Punjab  and 
Sikkim 
Water Quality 
Monitoring and 
Surveillance 
60:40 
(90:10) 
Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Assam, Bihar, Goa, Haryana, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Maharashtra, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland 
Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, 
Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Tripura, 
Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand 
Arunachal Pradesh, 
Assam, Bihar, Goa, 
Jammu & Kashmir, 
Kerala, Maharashtra, 
Manipur, Odisha, 
Punjab, Sikkim and 
Uttarakhand  
Source: IMIS data of the Ministry 
Note: Figures in brackets indicate Central-State fund sharing pattern in respect of North-Eastern and Himalayan 
States. 
 
  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
112 
Annexe-3.2 
State-wise position of releases, utilisation and outstanding balance of Central and State Share (2012-17) 
(Refer to para 3.2.4) 
(`` ``     in crore) 
Sl.  
No. 
Name of  
State 
Central Share  State Share  Total (Central + State) 
Opening 
balance  
Central 
Release 
Misc. 
receipt 
(Intt. 
etc.) 
Total Expenditure  Closing 
balance Release Expenditure  
Remaining 
balance 
(Grants – 
Expendi-
ture) 
Available 
Fund Expenditure  Closing 
Balance 
Percen-
tage of un-
utilised 
fund 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 (5+8) 12 (6+9) 13 (7+10) 14 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 301.30 1,868.49 0.00 2,169.79 2,110.28 59.51 2,763.29 2,671.07 92.22 4,933.08 4,781.35 151.73 3 
2. Arunachal 
Pradesh 9.46 746.61 7.38 763.45 751.06 12.40 67.51 67.46 0.05 830.96 818.52 12.45 1 
3. Assam 127.51 2,401.67 19.29 2,548.47 2,238.89 309.59 773.51 703.56 69.95 3,321.98 2,942.45 379.54 11 
4. Bihar 285.65 1,548.89 1.52 1,836.06 1,751.09 84.97 1,631.78 1,314.83 316.95 3,467.84 3,065.92 401.92 12 
5. Chhattisgarh 80.82 579.69 4.96 665.47 638.61 26.86 642.34 607.49 34.85 1,307.81 1,246.10 61.71 5 
6. Goa 5.91 2.88 0.00 8.79 5.57 3.23 12.27 12.27 0.00 21.06 17.84 3.23 15 
7. Gujarat 327.59 2,155.53 0.00 2,483.12 2,457.26 25.84 3,406.55 2,652.94 753.61 5,889.67 5,110.20 779.45 13 
8. Haryana 43.98 1,055.09 3.91 1,102.98 1,072.67 30.30 2,229.80 1,919.06 310.74 3,332.78 2,991.73 341.04 10 
9. Himachal 
Pradesh 61.94 529.29 -27.66 563.57 533.49 30.09 581.76 264.83 316.93 1,145.33 798.32 347.02 30 
10. Jammu & 
Kashmir 147.04 1,780.99 17.86 1,945.89 1,888.01 57.87 266.88 259.92 6.96 2,212.77 2,147.93 64.83 3 
11. Jharkhand 74.31 935.72 51.90 1,061.93 981.30 80.62 1,458.90 1,185.41 273.49 2,520.83 2,166.71 354.11 14 
12. Karnataka 213.14 2,952.24 61.69 3,227.07 3,133.97 93.10 7,265.07 6,335.52 929.55 10,492.14 9,469.49 1,022.65 10 
13. Kerala 16.08 708.45 22.43 746.96 729.24 17.72 1,411.13 1,300.19 110.94 2,158.09 2,029.43 128.66 6 
14. Madhya 
Pradesh 32.54 1,880.68 30.59 1,943.81 1,907.82 35.92 1,984.46 1,779.93 204.53 3,928.27 3,687.75 240.45 6 
15. Maharashtra 320.10 3,020.31 0.76 3,341.17 3,168.35 172.82 3,102.15 2,711.80 390.35 6,443.32 5,880.15 563.17 9 
16. Manipur 17.72 278.58 0.00 296.30 267.27 29.61 147.52 132.45 15.07 443.82 399.72 44.68 10 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
113 
Sl.  
No. 
Name of  
State 
Central Share  State Share  Total (Central + State) 
Opening 
balance  
Central 
Release 
Misc. 
receipt 
(Intt. 
etc.) 
Total Expenditure  Closing 
balance Release Expenditure  
Remaining 
balance 
(Grants – 
Expendi-
ture) 
Available 
Fund Expenditure  Closing 
Balance 
Percen-
tage of un-
utilised 
fund 
17. Meghalaya 36.83 342.17 1.88 380.88 377.48 3.39 513.57 445.87 67.70 894.45 823.35 71.09 8 
18. Mizoram 6.80 169.12 0.55 176.47 177.19 0.14 42.59 34.78 7.81 219.06 211.97 7.95 4 
19. Nagaland 1.10 348.08 1.21 350.39 349.49 0.89 28.42 28.54 -0.12 378.81 378.03 0.77 0 
20. Odisha 84.34 996.47 48.76 1,129.57 1,076.14 53.47 1,079.93 992.93 87.00 2,209.50 2,069.07 140.47 6 
21. Punjab 30 484.28 0.00 487.28 460.63 26.64 974.57 743.32 231.25 1,461.85 1,203.95 257.89 18 
22. Rajasthan 397.00 5,648.16 96.79 6,141.95 5,527.04 555.31 3,700.81 2,553.76 1,147.05 9,842.76 8,080.80 1,702.36 17 
23. Sikkim 49.88 122.09 4.82 176.79 169.53 4.75 9.11 9.10 0.01 185.90 178.63 4.76 3 
24. Tamil Nadu 240.27 1,696.77 16.11 1,953.15 1,938.79 14.35 2,590.35 2,345.94 244.41 4,543.50 4,284.73 258.76 6 
25. Telangana 0.00 443.04 0.24 443.28 407.56 35.71 1,213.52 1,185.92 27.60 1,656.80 1,593.48 63.31 4 
26. Tripura 4.03 334.24 5.32 343.59 337.06 6.54 95.66 96.42 -0.76 439.25 433.48 5.78 1 
27. Uttar Pradesh 159.90 3,970.46 62.91 4,193.27 3,935.45 257.82 4,222.09 3,508.22 713.87 8,415.36 7,443.67 971.69 12 
28. Uttarakhand 239.27 421.62 16.16 677.05 624.37 52.66 386.45 452.07 -65.62 1,063.50 1,076.44 -12.96 -1 
29. West Bengal 417.10 2,076.28 35.28 2,528.66 2,507.87 20.78 3,659.76 3,326.20 333.56 6,188.42 5,834.07 354.34 6 
30. Andaman & 
Nicobar Island 0.00 2.06 0.05 2.11 1.07 1.05 3.40 2.30 1.10 5.51 3.37 2.15 39 
31. Puducherry 0.00 1.23 0.08 1.31 0.00 1.27 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.31 0 1.27 97 
 Total 3,704.61 39,501.18 484.79 43,690.58 41,524.55 2,105.22 46,265.15 39,644.10 6,621.05 89,955.73 81,168.65 8,726.27 10 
 
  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
114 
Annexe-3.3 
(State-wise financial position under Coverage/WQ/Sustainability/O&M) 
(Refer to para 3.2.6) 
(`` ``  in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Name of state 
Available Fund (2012 – 2017) Expenditure (2012-2017) Percentage 
Utilization 
of 
available 
funds 
Central 
(Opening 
+ Release 
+ Intt.)  
State  
Release  Total  
Central  
State  Total  
Coverage  Water 
quality  
Sustaina-
bility  
Operation & 
maintenance  Total  
1 2 3 4 5 (3+4) 6 7 8 9 10 (6 to 9) 11 12 (10+11) 13 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 1,858.88  2,762.38  4,621.26  1,485.30  151.90  16.56  186.18  1,839.94  2,662.73  4,502.67  97.43  
2.  Arunachal 
Pradesh 
642.48  67.51  709.99  497.82  13.41  24.22  95.04  630.49  67.46  697.95  98.30  
3.  Assam 2,127.49  773.51  2901  804.42  651.03  188.6  277.79  1,921.84  696.97  2,618.81  90.27  
4.  Bihar 1,493.66  1,574.87  3,068.53  903.51  392.10  49.76  68.73  1,414.10  1,215.99  2,630.09  85.71  
5.  Chhattisgarh 638.27  642.34  1,280.61  436.55  34.79  71.86  69.02  612.22  604.59  1,216.81  95.02  
6.  Goa 7.03  12.27  19.30  5.57  0.00  0.00  0.00  5.57  12.27  17.84  92.44  
7.  Gujarat 1,682.50  3,406.55  5,089.05  1,254.72  100.56  88.98  225.66  1,669.92  2,642.02  4,311.94  84.73  
8.  Haryana 572.06  2,229.80  2,801.86  471.99  1.84  44.82  45.14  563.79  1,917.20  2,480.99  88.55  
9.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
509.05  581.76  1,090.81  297.38  44.05  49.55  65.74  456.72  264.52  721.24  66.12  
10.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
1,761.61  266.88  2,028.49  1,371.64  36.18  103.99  225.74  1,737.55  259.92  1,997.47  98.47  
11.  Jharkhand 911.37  1,458.90  2,370.27  589.93  86.28  78.51  91.84  846.56  1,157.90  2,004.46  84.57  
12.  Karnataka 2,199.29  7,265.07  9,464.36  1,320.03  330.45  215.06  288.31  2,153.85  6,328.15  8,482.00  89.62  
13.  Kerala 685.85  1,408.74  2,094.59  539.56  32.63  23.54  102.52  698.25  1,297.78  1,996.03  95.29  
14.  Madhya Pradesh 1,815.34  1,956.22  3,771.56  1,269.68  80.87  150.20  292.98  1,793.73  1,742.86  3,536.59  93.77  
15.  Maharashtra 3,018.01  3,102.15  6,120.16  2,054.41  342.13  218.28  277.70  2,892.52  2,711.80  5,604.32  91.57  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
115 
Sl. 
No. Name of state 
Available Fund (2012 – 2017) Expenditure (2012-2017) Percentage 
Utilization 
of 
available 
funds 
Central 
(Opening 
+ Release 
+ Intt.)  
State  
Release  Total  
Central  
State  Total  
Coverage  Water 
quality  
Sustaina-
bility  
Operation & 
maintenance  Total  
16.  Manipur 284.24  147.52  431.76  186.58  2.89  22.44  44.78  256.69  132.45  389.14  90.13  
17.  Meghalaya 351.86  513.57  865.43  257.50  5.12  38.13  49.35  350.10  445.67  795.77  91.95  
18.  Mizoram 165.23  42.59  207.82  123.93  0.00  19.10  22.81  165.84  34.62  200.46  96.46  
19.  Nagaland 320.25  28.42  348.67  197.49  49.21  23.99  48.69  319.38  28.42  347.80  99.75  
20.  Odisha 1,040.66  1,079.93  2,120.59  694.90  84.24  122.00  105.67  1,006.81  992.93  1,999.74  94.30  
21.  Punjab 456.18  974.57  1,430.75  305.73  21.49  42.67  61.17  431.06  743.32  1,174.38  82.08  
22.  Rajasthan 3,222.90  3,463.34  6,686.24  2,115.07  405.85  285.19  402.45  3,208.56  2,367.10  5,575.66  83.39  
23.  Sikkim 128.00  9.11  137.11  107.33  1.49  9.99  5.04  123.85  9.10  132.95  96.97  
24.  Tamil Nadu 1,750.89  2,581.42  4,332.31  1,289.21  40.19  161.29  259.65  1,750.34  2,332.98  4,083.32  94.25  
25.  Telangana 393.96  1,208.26  1,602.22  320.50  28.12  5.28  15.59  369.49  1,173.73  1,543.22  96.32  
26.  Tripura 321.64  95.58  417.22  221.81  43.64  3.46  46.90  315.81  96.14  411.95  98.74  
27.  Uttar Pradesh 3,393.01  3,694.66  7,087.67  2,084.87  328.01  249.59  534.07  3,196.54  3,144.98  6,341.52  89.47  
28.  Uttarakhand 576.82  386.45  963.27  409.31  10.99  37.57  88.31  546.18  451.97  998.15  103.62  
29.  West Bengal 1,771.27  3,352.18  5,123.45  1,224.68  212.48  55.06  274.06  1,766.28  3,018.54  4,784.82  93.39  
30.  Andaman & 
Nicobar Island 
1.84  3.40  5.24  0.24  0.53  0.11  0.00  0.88  2.16  3.04  58.02  
31.  Puducherry 1.16  0.00  1.16  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  0.00  
 Total 34,102.80  45,089.95  79,192.75  22,841.66  3,532.47  2,399.8  4,270.93  33,044.86  38,556.27  71,601.13  90.41  
 
  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
116 
Annexe-3.4 
(State-wise Financial Position under Support Fund) 
(Refer to para 3.2.6) 
(`` ``  in crore) 
Sl. 
No.  Name of state 
Available Fund (2012 – 2017) Expenditure (2012-2017  Percentage 
Utilization of 
available 
funds 
Central 
(Opening + 
Release + 
Intt.) 
State 
Release Total Central State Total 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 60.11 5.08 65.19 58.92 2.34 61.26 93.97 
2.  Arunachal Pradesh 33.12 0.00 33.12 32.69 0.00 32.69 98.70 
3.  Assam 96.65 0.00 96.65 95.12 0.00 95.12 98.42 
4.  Bihar 49.08 0.00 49.08 46.56 0.00 46.56 94.87 
5.  Chhattisgarh 17.37 3.30 20.67 17.14 1.71 18.85 91.19 
6.  Goa 1.55 0.00 1.55 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
7.  Gujarat 95.52 8.21 103.73 90.21 6.71 96.92 93.43 
8.  Haryana 17.77 2.39 20.16 16.66 1.32 17.98 89.19 
9.  Himachal Pradesh 22.91 0.23 23.14 22.71 0.19 22.90 98.96 
10.  Jammu &Kashmir 48.04 0.00 48.04 21.47 0.00 21.47 44.69 
11.  Jharkhand 32.45 7.11 39.56 31.66 4.65 36.31 91.78 
12.  Karnataka 76.00 14.80 90.80 70.24 7.37 77.61 85.47 
13.  Kerala 19.45 0.00 19.45 19.33 0.00 19.33 99.38 
14.  Madhya Pradesh 65.01 14.67 79.68 57.22 6.83 64.05 80.38 
15.  Maharashtra 165.07 0.00 165.07 149.20 0.00 149.20 90.39 
16.  Manipur 8.65 0.00 8.65 8.64 0.00 8.64 99.88 
17.  Meghalaya 9.38 0.11 9.49 9.32 0.11 9.43 99.37 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
117 
Sl. 
No.  Name of state 
Available Fund (2012 – 2017) Expenditure (2012-2017  Percentage 
Utilization of 
available 
funds 
Central 
(Opening + 
Release + 
Intt.) 
State 
Release Total Central State Total 
18.  Mizoram 7.17 0.10 7.27 7.32 0.10 7.42 102.06 
19.  Nagaland 11.12 0.07 11.19 11.37 0.07 11.44 102.23 
20.  Odisha 37.31 0.00 37.31 33.04 0.00 33.04 88.56 
21.  Punjab 15.26 0.00 15.26 14.92 0.00 14.92 97.77 
22.  Rajasthan 118.39 5.00 123.39 84.38 0.00 84.38 68.38 
23.  Sikkim 2.67 0.00 2.67 2.64 0.00 2.64 98.88 
24.  Tamil Nadu 75.73 5.82 81.55 73.52 5.57 79.09 96.98 
25.  Telangana 22.22 3.25 25.47 17.11 3.23 20.34 79.86 
26.  Tripura 14.94 0.36 15.30 14.70 0.14 14.84 96.99 
27.  Uttar Pradesh 148.56 58.16 206.72 148.15 22.57 170.72 82.59 
28.  Uttarakhand 17.52 0.10 17.62 16.34 0.10 16.44 93.30 
29.  West Bengal 88.11 13.12 101.23 88.10 12.62 100.72 99.50 
30.  Andaman & Nicobar 
Island 
0.21 0.77 0.98 0.15 0.14 0.29 29.59 
31.  Puducherry 0.09 0.00 0.09 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
 Total 1,377.43 142.65 1,520.08 1,258.83 75.77 1,334.6 87.80 
  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
118 
Annexe-3.5 
(State-wise financial position under Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance) 
(Refer to para 3.2.6) 
(`` ``  in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Name of state 
Available Fund (2012 – 2017) Expenditure (2012-2017 Percentage 
Utilization of 
available 
funds 
Central 
(Opening + 
Release + Intt.)  
State  
Release  Total  Central  State  Total  
1.  Andhra Pradesh 52.30 5.25 57.55 51.92 5.21 57.13 99.27 
2.  Arunachal Pradesh 17.23 0.00 17.23 17.21 0.00 17.21 99.88 
3.  Assam 62.73 0.00 62.73 60.99 0.00 60.99 97.23 
4.  Bihar 25.94 0.00 25.94 25.01 0.00 25.01 96.41 
5.  Chhattisgarh 9.79 1.55 11.34 9.26 1.19 10.45 92.15 
6.  Goa 0.22 0.00 0.22 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
7.  Gujarat 31.17 4.65 35.82 29.86 4.22 34.08 95.14 
8.  Haryana 9.96 1.67 11.63 9.38 0.54 9.92 85.30 
9.  Himachal Pradesh 11.18 0.14 11.32 10.55 0.12 10.67 94.26 
10.  Jammu &Kashmir 35.30 0.00 35.3 31.63 0.00 31.63 89.60 
11.  Jharkhand 18.96 1.33 20.29 17.85 0.90 18.75 92.41 
12.  Karnataka 45.47 5.34 50.81 37.20 0.00 37.20 73.21 
13.  Kerala 9.26 0.00 9.26 9.26 0.00 9.26 100.00 
14.  Madhya Pradesh 37.76 10.84 48.60 34.32 5.25 39.57 81.42 
15.  Maharashtra 86.76 0.00 86.76 85.02 0.00 85.02 97.99 
16.  Manipur 2.18 0.00 2.18 1.93 0.00 1.93 88.53 
17.  Meghalaya 4.62 0.09 4.71 3.06 0.09 3.15 66.88 
18.  Mizoram 4.04 0.06 4.10 4.03 0.06 4.09 99.76 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
119 
Sl. 
No. Name of state 
Available Fund (2012 – 2017) Expenditure (2012-2017 Percentage 
Utilization of 
available 
funds 
Central 
(Opening + 
Release + Intt.)  
State  
Release  Total  Central  State  Total  
19.  Nagaland 5.06 0.04 5.10 5.06 0.04 5.10 100.00 
20.  Odisha 18.55 0.00 18.55 16.97 0.00 16.97 91.48 
21.  Punjab 15.51 0.00 15.51 14.38 0.00 14.38 92.71 
22.  Rajasthan 32.08 0.95 33.03 25.65 0.34 25.99 78.69 
23.  Sikkim 1.73 0.00 1.73 1.63 0.00 1.63 94.22 
24.  Tamil Nadu 42.33 2.40 44.73 39.30 2.09 41.39 92.53 
25.  Telangana 14.47 3.71 18.18 14.47 3.71 18.18 100.00 
26.  Tripura 5.46 0.07 5.53 5.16 0.07 5.23 94.58 
27.  Uttar Pradesh 78.29 19.04 97.33 72.05 16.20 88.25 90.67 
28.  Uttarakhand 11.25 0.00 11.25 9.16 0.00 9.16 81.42 
29.  West Bengal 49.44 7.87 57.31 49.44 7.87 57.31 100.00 
30.  Andaman & 
Nicobar Island 
0.09 0.00 0.09 0.05 0.00 0.05 55.56 
31.  Puducherry 0.06 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
32.  Total 739.19 65.00 804.19 691.80 47.90 739.70 91.98 
 
  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
120 
Annexe-3.6 
State-wise Release and Expenditure under earmarked water quality (2012-2017) 
(Refer to para 3.4) 
(`` ``     in crore) 
Sl. 
No.  Name of State 
Central State Total (Central and State)  
Earmarked 
Funding (Chemical) 
Earmarked 
Funding (Bacterial) 
Earmarked 
Funding (Chemical) 
Earmarked 
Funding (Bacterial) 
Earmarked Funding (Chemical + 
Bacterial)  
Release Expenditure Release Expenditure Release Expenditure Release Expenditure Release Expenditure 
% of 
Expr. of 
Release 
1. Andhra Pradesh 2.13 0.78 0.00 0.00 0.91 0.78 0.00 0.00 3.04 1.56 51.32 
2. Arunachal Pradesh 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
3. Assam 46.08 40.50 2.56 2.49 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 48.64 42.99 88.38 
4. Bihar 80.95 78.46 13.82 13.37 33.00 31.92 4.32 4.18 132.09 127.93 96.85 
5. Chhattisgarh 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
6. Goa 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
7. Gujarat 1.52 1.14 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.52 1.14 75.00 
8. Haryana 0.42 0.42 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.42 0.42 100.00 
9. Himachal Pradesh 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
10. Jammu &Kashmir 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
11. Jharkhand 0.17 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.17 0.00 0.00 
12. Karnataka 135.93 117.31 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 135.93 117.31 86.30 
13. Kerala 2.39 2.40 0.00 0.00 2.41 2.41 0.00 0.00 4.80 4.81 100.21 
14. Madhya Pradesh 22.53 22.53 0.00 0.00 28.23 24.99 0.00 0.00 50.76 47.52 93.62 
15. Maharashtra 38.42 23.55 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 38.42 23.55 61.30 
16. Manipur 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
17. Meghalaya 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
18. Mizoram 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
19. Nagaland 0.05 0.05 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.05 0.05 100.00 
20. Odisha 2.78 0.57 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.78 0.57 20.50 
21. Punjab 0.30 0.25 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.30 0.25 83.33 
22. Rajasthan 104.78 78.07 0.00 0.00 20.58 6.62 0.00 0.00 125.36 84.69 67.56 
23. Sikkim 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
121 
Sl. 
No.  Name of State 
Central State Total (Central and State)  
Earmarked 
Funding (Chemical) 
Earmarked 
Funding (Bacterial) 
Earmarked 
Funding (Chemical) 
Earmarked 
Funding (Bacterial) 
Earmarked Funding (Chemical + 
Bacterial)  
Release Expenditure Release Expenditure Release Expenditure Release Expenditure Release Expenditure 
% of 
Expr. of 
Release 
24. Tamil Nadu 0.24 0.23 6.69 6.06 0.36 0.22 8.57 5.08 15.86 11.59 73.08 
25. Telangana 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
26. Tripura 1.38 1.38 0.00 0.00 0.08 0.08 0.00 0.00 1.46 1.46 100.00 
27. Uttar Pradesh 14.57 14.56 282.41 291.58 0.00 0.00 503.88 279.16 800.86 585.30 73.08 
28. Uttarakhand 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
29. West Bengal 386.30 386.28 5.24 4.97 133.82 122.14 3.76 2.57 529.12 515.96 97.51 
30. Andaman & Nicobar 
Island 
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
31. Puducherry 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
 Total 840.94 768.48 310.72 318.47 219.39 189.16 520.53 290.99 1,891.58 1,567.10 82.85 
  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
122 
Annexe-3.7 
Delay in release of fund by state government during 2012-17 
(Refer to para 3.6.1) 
Sl. 
No.  Name of State  
Delay released  
Amount 
(`` `` in crore) Period 
1. Andhra Pradesh 655.27 12 to 249 days 
2. Arunachal Pradesh 73.52 30  to 150 days 
3. Assam 545.87 2  to 59 days 
4. Bihar 6.28 81  days 
5. Jharkhand 1,194.25 1 to 180 days 
6. Karnataka 695.44 1 to 127 days 
7. Kerala 247.37 6 to 98 days 
8. Maharashtra 1,151.01 up to 365 days 
9. Meghalaya 84.86 7  to 92 days 
10. Mizoram 59.56 More than 15 day up  to 365 days 
11. Nagaland 176.81 More than 15 day up  to 365 days 
12. Odisha 173.67 6 to 35 days 
13. Rajasthan 1,560.17 More than 15 days up to 365 days 
14. Sikkim 61.38 15  and up to 180 days  
15. Tamil Nadu 497.71 7  to 66 days 
16. Telangana 227.21 26 to 104 days 
17. Tripura 62.10 4 to 262 days 
18. Uttar Pradesh 1,766.26 5 to 478 days 
19. Uttarakhand 150.15 8 to 267 days 
 Total 9,388.89  
  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
123 
Annexe-3.8 
Cases of inadmissible expenditure and diversion of funds 
(Refer to para 3.6.3) 
Sl. 
No.  Name of State Fund diverted to Amount 
(`` `` in crore) 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
Purchase of land for augmentation of pipe water scheme to 
Akumarru and 19 other habitations in district Krishna  
2.20 
2. Assam Renovation/repair of residential buildings, purchas e of 
squatting plates to be used as sanitary latrine dur ing 
calamities, construction of guest house and other s tate 
schemes, incorrect payment of excise duty. 
30.13 
3. Bihar Social awareness through organisation of ‘ Jalchaupal ’ 
under Mukhyamantri Gram Swakcha Pey Jal Nischaya 
Abhiyan , World Water day celebration, purchase of trolley 
bag for presentation of budget speech in the legisl ative 
assembly, tender premium and diversion of funds due  to 
execution of agreement higher than administrative 
approval. 
28.05 
4. Chhattisgarh In 792 cases accepted, during 2012-17, rates were h igher 
than the estimated cost and payment towards tender 
premium. 
14.77 
5. Goa Centage charges paid to Public Works Departments 0.71 
6. Himachal 
Pradesh 
` 19.39 crore were diverted to other habitations (six  
divisions), ` 0.26 crore paid as price escalation (one 
division),  ` 0.41 crore for land acquisition (two divisions) 
and excess expenditure over approved cost of ` 15.82 crore 
(seven divisions). 
35.88 
7. Jammu and 
Kashmir 
In three division, NRDWP funds were diverted to oth er 
state schemes 
1.47 
8. Jharkhand Price escalation  3.55 
9. Karnataka Payment of rent, hiring of vehicles, outsourcing of  
employees, telephone charges, etc. 
5.64 
10. Kerala For construction of compound wall, approach road, repair, 
electricity charges , etc. 
4.50 
11. Madhya 
Pradesh 
In five selected districts 1, expenditure was incurred on fuel, 
typing and photocopy works  of the divisions, tende r 
premium 
4.67 
                                                           
1 Chhindwara, Gwalior, Narsinghpur, Raisen and Vidisha  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
124 
Sl. 
No.  Name of State Fund diverted to Amount 
(`` `` in crore) 
12. Maharashtra In selected divisions and Zila Paridshad , funds were 
diverted towards tender premium, centage charges and cost 
escalation 
172.53 
13. Manipur Centage charges, extension of office building, construction 
of conference hall, construction of laboratory 
7.22 
14. Meghalaya Purchase of vehicles 0.31 
15. Mizoram Other scheme (Maintenance of Urban Water Supply 
Scheme), purchase of stationery , furniture, vehicles, etc. 
2.32 
16. Nagaland Purchase of vehicles 0.15 
17. Odisha Payment to watch and ward, photocopy expenses, purchase 
of fuel, etc. 
0.44 
18. Punjab Inadmissible works and items of expenditure (maintenance 
of office building, purchase of genset, etc.) 
2.36 
19. Rajasthan Payment towards Tender premium, Construction of Sta ff 
Quarters 
6.13 
20 Uttar Pradesh Payment of salary to permanent staff of Jal Sansthan of 
districts Jhansi, Lalitpur and Orai 
34.62 
21. Uttarakhand Construction of Swajal Pathshala and Toilet Museum in 
Dehradun 
0.94 
Total 358.59 
 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
125 
Annexe-4.1 
Incomplete Works 
(Refer to para 4.2.6)  
(`` ``  in crore) 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of 
State 
Brief of work No. of 
works  
Estimated 
Cost 
Expr. 
incurred  
1.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
• Comprehensive Protected Water Supply (CPWS) scheme to cover 51 habitations in district Anantapur was 
taken up in November 2012 with scheduled completion  date of November 2013. This was completed and 
handed over to Zila Parishad in March 2017 without constructing the intake well due to denial of permission 
by Irrigation Department. Department replied that water supply was provided to 39 habitations by November 
2016 on temporary basis by drawing water from another project.  
1 56 .00  46.77  
• Three CPWS (167 habitations in district Chittoor; augmentation of water supply to some mandals in district 
Guntur for 12 villages and 130 habitations in Achan ta constituency) taken up between September 2010 an d 
November 2015 with scheduled dates of  completion b etween September 2011 and June 2017, remained 
incomplete due to land dispute and non-release of water from source. 
3 51.00  34.60  
• Two CPWS  schemes (one for 12 habitations in Tanuku and the other for 14 habitations in Attili (M) of district 
West Godavari), taken up between April 2011 and May  2014 with scheduled date of completion  between 
April 2012 and June 2015, remained incomplete for want of permission from Railways Authorities. 
2 29.00  19.10  
• CPWS scheme to Kamavarapukota (M) of district West Godavari to serve 11 habitations, taken up in March 
2014 with schedule date of completion as February 2 015, was not commissioned for want of power 
connection. 
1 6.30  5.22  
• J C Nagi Reddy Drinking Water Supply Project planne d with Gandikota reservoir remained incomplete as 
detailed in Paragraph 4.2.6. 
1 508.00  365.88  
2.  Arunachal 
Pradesh 
• In Yuipa division, a water supply scheme based on d eep bore well was reported to have been completed i n 
March 2016.  However, during physical verification it was found that only 50 per cent  of the work had been 
completed at a cost of ` 0.35 crore.   
1 0.51  0.35  
3.  Assam 
 
• Three works for sustainability and quality affected habitations in Silchar-I and Hojai Divisions, taken up for 
execution between January 2013 and October 2014 wit h scheduled date of completion between December 
2015 and December 2016, remained incomplete for want of road cutting permission  
3 36.28  19.06  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
126 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of 
State 
Brief of work No. of 
works  
Estimated 
Cost 
Expr. 
incurred  
• Nine works for sustainability and quality affected habitations in Silchar-I, Silchar-II and Hojai Divi sions, 
taken up for execution between May 2013 and May 2015 with schedule date of completion between December 
2015 and February 2017,  remained incomplete for want of material (DI pipes). 
9 73.00  38.10  
• 19 works for sustainability and quality affected habitations in Slchar-I, Silchar-II, Bokakhat, Golaghat, Hojai 
and Nagaon divisions, taken up for execution betwee n February 2011 and March 2015 scheduled to be 
completed between April 2014 and February 2017, remained incomplete due to paucity of funds. 
19 187.92  107.04  
• In Howraghat division, work of Jar-op Langso water supply scheme for quality affected habitation, taken up 
in 2013 at a cost of ` 6.00 crore and scheduled to be completed by February 2014, remained incomplete due 
to remoteness of area. 
1 6.00  1.63  
• In Bakakhat division, work of the Greater Dergaon R ural Water Supply Scheme was administratively 
approved in February 2014 at a cost of ` 10.92 crore.  Department stated that work had not been started due 
to non-availability of land. However, verification of records disclosed that possession of the required land had 
already been taken in October 2015 by the concerned Sub-Division. 
1 10.92   
• 10 works in Hailkandi and Jorhat divisions, taken u p for execution between March 2013 and June 2014 
remained incomplete as discussed in paragraph  4.2.6. 
10 136.24  70.34  
4.  Bihar • Work for re-organising rural piped water supply scheme was taken up in May 2013 for completion within a 
year.  However, the work was rescinded in July 2017  due to slow progress after incurring expenditure o f 
` 0.41 crore.  
1 0.75  0.41  
• In Patna District, work for construction of 8.95 Mi llion Litre per day (MLD) capacity surface water su pply 
scheme for 45 arsenic affected habitations at Maner  was taken up in June 2009 but remained incomplete as 
discussed in paragraph 4.2.6. 
1 62.00  45.35  
5.  Gujarat • In district Narmada, work of Narmada No-Source Regional Water Supply Scheme Part-II, to provide potable 
water (surface water) to habitants of 12 fluoride a ffected villages, was awarded (Mach 2012) at a cost  of 
` 4.70 crore and was to be completed by February 201 3.  Work of supply and laying of pipelines was 
completed in August 2014 after incurring expenditur e of ` 3.73 crore. However, the pipe line failed 
(November 2013 to August 2014) in hydro testing due  to leakages at various locations.  The contract wa s 
terminated in June 2016 due to slow progress of wor k and non-replacement of defective pipes. As the 
contractor has gone for arbitration the work remained incomplete after incurring expenditure of ` 3.73 crore.  
1 4.70  3.73  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
127 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of 
State 
Brief of work No. of 
works  
Estimated 
Cost 
Expr. 
incurred  
6.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
 
• In Ghumarwin, Kaza and Pooh divisions, execution of  six schemes, sanctioned during June 2009 and July 
2016 to cover 97 habitations, remained incomplete s ince March 2012 and March 2017 on account of land 
dispute and non-execution of work by the contractors. 
6 7.92  5.46  
• Scheme to provide potable water to habitations in T ehsil Arki of Solan division, was administratively 
approved in June 2011 for ` 21.69 crore.   The scheme was however technically sanctioned for ` 21.59 crore 
in February 2015 i.e., after four years of obtainin g administrative approval, due to change in water s ource. 
The scheme has remained unexecuted as only 81 per cent  of the expenditure (June 2017) was incurred as 
advance to the contractor. 
1 21.59  3.60  
• 41 schemes in Sadar, Gumarwin and Jhanduta Blocks i n district Bilaspur awarded in June 2010 remained 
incomplete as discussed in paragraph 4.2.6.  
41 47.08  38.99  
7.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
• In division Awantipur, four schemes were lying incomplete since March 2013 to March 2016 due to paucity 
of funds. 
4 12.01  6.33  
8.  Jharkhand 
 
• In district Palamau, Baratola Water Supply Scheme for fluoride affected habitations, was taken up in October 
2009 at a cost to ` 16.38 crore to be completed by January 2011.The scheme remained incomplete due to non-
acquisition of land and lack of clearances from aut horities. The contractor, after executing work for ` 12.29 
crore (up to March 2013), refused to complete the w ork on account of increased rates and contract was 
rescinded in April 2013. Tender for balance work was invited in February 2014 and the work was awarded to 
a contractor at a cost of ` 10.26 crore. The contractor was paid ` 8.85 crore (May 2016) and the work still 
remained incomplete (July 2017). 
1 24.75  21.14  
• In district Palamau, Purabdiha Rural Water Supply Scheme for fluoride affected habitations, was taken up in 
March 2008 at a cost of ` 1.33 crore for completion by March 2009. The schem e remained incomplete for 
want of Ductile iron pipes (to be supplied departmentally) and non-availability of required land. The contract 
was rescinded (October 2010). The estimate was revi sed to ` 2.53 crore and remaining work was awarded 
(July 2017) at a cost of ` 1.58 crore. 
1 2.53  1.44  
• Hulhulla Khurd Rural Water Supply Scheme to provide potable water to fluoride affected habitations in Gram 
Panchayat  Julhulla under Block Nagaruntari, sanctioned in De cember 2007 at a cost of ` 0.86 crore, was 
taken up for execution in September 2008 to be comp leted by March 2010. However, the work was not 
completed and terminated for want of pipes (to be supplied departmentally). The work was again taken up at 
a cost of ` 0.74 crore in July 2010 which included supply and laying of pipelines. The work remained 
1 0.86  0.85  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
128 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of 
State 
Brief of work No. of 
works  
Estimated 
Cost 
Expr. 
incurred  
incomplete for want of laying of 290 metres of pipe lines passing under railway track for which permiss ion 
from railways authorities still awaited (July 2017). 
• In district West Singhbhum, 253 PWS schemes (Chaiba sa-181 and Chakradharpur-72) were taken for 
execution during 2012-14 remained incomplete as discussed in paragraph 4.2.6 
253 32.83  27.40  
• In district Sahibganj, a Mega Water Supply Scheme f or 58 villages in 4 blocks under quality affected 
component,  taken up in July 2012 remained incomplete as discussed in paragraph 4.2.6 
1 147.93  117.67  
9.  Karnataka 
 
• Two works for supply of potable water to 297 villages of Chamrajanagar and Gundhupet taluks, taken up for 
execution in March 2014 at cost of ` 497.80 crore for completion by September 2015, remained incomplete 
(March 2017). Besides this, Project Monitoring Cons ultant appointed for supervision of work after eigh t 
months of entrustment of work for a lump sum remunerations of ` 7.78 crore, was also granted extended till 
completion of work at a cost of ` 0.38 crore per month which led to extra payment of ` 2.29 crore. 
2  497.80   
• In four districts (Baglkot, Gadag, Yadgir and Chitradurga), six works taken up for execution between 2007-
08 and 2012-13, remained incomplete as discussed in paragraph 4.2.6.  
6 53.20  42.59  
• In  three districts (Bagalkot, Gadag and Tumakuru),  five water supply schemes taken up during 2007-08,  
2011-12 and 2012-13 remained incomplete as discussed in paragraph 4.2.6. 
5 42.95  39.56  
10.  Kerala • Six works (WSS to Kottiyur, Kelakam and Kanichar; improvement of rural water supply scheme to Manjaloor 
Panchayat;  CARWSS to Thiruvali and adjoining villages; WSS Mu nniyoor Gram Panchayat  ARWSS 
Karoor Panchayat  and WSS to Meenachil, Thalappalam and Barananganam  Panchayat ), taken up between 
January 2002 and May 2015 with estimated cost of ` 61. 94 crore, remained incomplete due to non-acquisition 
of required land. 
6 61.94   
• Six works (WSS to Madayl Panchayat ; CWSS to Irikkur and adjoining villages; WSS to Va lavannur–
Kalpakanchan Panchayats ; CARWSS to Thirunavaya and adjoining villages; WSS  to Cheekode and 
adjoining villages and Source sustainability –RWSS to Kakkakuzi in Vettoor Panchayat ), awarded at cost of 
` 32.78 crore between March 2014 to October 2016 for completion between September 2014 and April 2017, 
remained incomplete for want of road cutting permissions. 
6 32.78   
11.  Manipur • Two schemes (PHE Bishanupur division-construction of settling tank, slow sand filter, service reservoir filter 
media and pump house and PHE Thoubal division–water supply scheme of Bitra), taken up for execution in 
June 2013 and September 2010 to be completed by June 2015 and September 2013, were incomplete. 
2 0.53  0.46  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
129 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of 
State 
Brief of work No. of 
works  
Estimated 
Cost 
Expr. 
incurred  
• The work of RWS at Nongmaikhong at estimated cost of ` 0.20 crore was taken up for execution during 2012-
13. As of March 2015, expenditure of ` 0.11 crore was incurred on settling tank and procu rement of pipes. 
On spot verification it was found that scheme was n ot yet completed (July 2017) even after more than f ive 
years.  
1 0.20  0.11  
• In  Thoubal division , execution of an ARWS scheme was stated to have been completed in November 2013 at 
a cost of ` 0.66 crore.  During physical verification (August 2017), Audit found that the scheme had not been 
commissioned and the created assets were in a dilap idated state.  Further, several assets such as pipe lines, 
filter media, power installations were not found at the work site. 
1 0.45  0.66  
12.  Punjab • Work of construction of providing potable water for village Jagga Ram Tirth and Jumber Basti was sanctioned 
in October 2014 at a cost of ` 2.77 crore. The work of Package-I was awarded (Oct ober 2014) at a cost of 
` 1.72 crore to be completed by July 2015. However, the work was lying incomplete due to absence of forest 
clearance for laying of pipe line. Expenditure of  ` 1.57 crore incurred on the scheme rendered ungainful. 
1 2.77  1.57  
13.  Sikkim • 14 rural water supply works, taken up between Decem ber 2012 and January 2015 for completion between 
November 2013 and January 2016, remained incomplete  due to non-availability of material (pipes), chang e 
of water source, land dispute, shortage of funds  etc.  
14 5.14  1.33  
• Three 1 works, sanctioned during February 2014 and February 2015 (sanctioned/awarded cost of ` 0.63 crore), 
though completed (March 2016) or achieved physical progress of 90 per cent (March 2017), did not serve its 
intended purpose as sustainability of water source throughout the year was not ensured. 
3 0.63   
• In district South Sikkim, two 2 works with  sanctioned cost of ` 0.56 crore, were awarded to Co-operative 
Society for completion by February 2014 and May 201 5.  During physical verification (May/June 2017), i t 
was found that both the works were held up due to m issing material (G I Pipes) and damage of tank duri ng 
construction of road.   
2 0.56   
14.  Rajasthan • To provide water to villages where water was being transported through tanks, work of Borabas-Mandana 
Water Supply project with technical sanction at ` 98.10 crore was taken up for execution in September 2012 
to be completed by December 2014. The work remained  incomplete as forest and wildlife clearances were 
not obtained. 
1 98.10  49.57  
                                                           
1 RWSS from Hitti dhara to Namphok, Sarki Jhora to Chawangaon and Bhalukhop source to Sangtong 
2 RWSS at Kochey from Tirikhola source and augmentation of RWSS from Tur Khola source to Shyamdas Upper Dwarey Ward 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
130 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of 
State 
Brief of work No. of 
works  
Estimated 
Cost 
Expr. 
incurred  
• In district Bhilwara, the work to provide safe drin king water to 1,698 villages under Chambal- Bhilwar a 
Project to be completed by October 2016 , remained incomplete as discussed in Paragraph 4.2.6. 
1 1495.68  204.30  
• In district Phulera, water supply scheme for 173 vi llages, taken up for execution in July 2013 remaine d 
incomplete as discussed in paragraph 4.2.6. 
1 226.95  115.68  
15.  Telangana • Nine works,  taken up between April 2012 and April 2016 remained incomplete as discussed in paragraph 
4.2.6 
9 248.18  149.81  
• In Nalgonda district, a CPWS scheme awarded  in May 2014 remained incomplete as discussed in paragraph 
4.2.6 
1 71.00  60.17  
16.  Tripura • Work of setting up 11 Surface Water Treatment Plant s  taken up between 2007-08 to 2013-14, remained 
incomplete. 
11 44.51  21.19  
 Total 437 4,293.49  1,667.46  
 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
131 
Annexe-4.2 
Abandoned Works   
(Refer to para 4.2.9) 
(`` ``     in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State Brief of work  No. of 
works 
Expr. 
incurred  
1.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
• Contractors abandoned five 3 works (estimated cost of ` 10.94 crore) midway between April 2012 and Decembe r 2016.  
Expenditure of ` 6.17 crore was incurred on these works as discussed in paragraph 4.2.9. 
5 6.17  
2.  Assam • In Diphu (R) Water Supply Division, a ground water based scheme (Balijan No.1) was completed with an e xpenditure of 
` 1.13 crore.  However, the work related to installation of deep tube well was unsuccessful after two attempts and the scheme 
became non-functional. This rendered entire expenditure of ` 1.13 crore on the scheme infructuous.  
1 1.13  
3.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
 
• In division Kargil, five works (estimated cost of ` 1.59 crore) were abandoned after incurring ` 0.40 crore due to land dispute. 5 0.40  
• Two 4 works, completed at a cost of ` 0.53 crore in February 2009 and March 2012, remained non-functional. 2 0.53  
4.  Jharkhand 
 
• In Medininagar, expenditure of ` 0.52 crore on 4.50 km of ductile iron pipes laid i n 2012-13 under Baralota Rural Water 
Supply Scheme was rendered wasteful as the work was  rescinded in March 2013.  Further, the newly laid pipeline was 
covered by a road while widening and strengthening of an existing road.  Besides, work done at a cost of ` 0.20 crore on 
Water Treatment Plant and GLSR, was also damaged. 
1 0.72  
• In district Hazaribag, eight mini rural piped water  supply schemes, taken up at a cost of ` 1.34 crore for completion by 
December 2014, remained incomplete after incurring an expenditure of ` 0.36 crore due to various factors including non–
availability of land.  Efforts were not made to complete these schemes even after a lapse of two and half years.  
8 0.36  
• In district Palamu, two works (Singra and Bishrampur), taken up at a cost of ` 12.19 crore in March 2008 and January 2010, 
were abandoned as discussed in paragraph 4.2.9. 
2 5.52  
5.  Karnataka 
 
• In taluk Yelandur, work of construction of overhead tank for piped water supply to B R Hills was awarded at a cost of ` 0.22 
crore in April 2016 for completion in six months.  After incurring expenditure of ` 0.04 crore, the work was abandoned due 
to land disputes.  
1 0.04  
                                                           
3 CPWS to Chintalapudi and strengthening of band and protection works in Prathikollalanka in district West Godavai; Single Village Water Scheme to Krishnayapalem (V) 
of Mangalagiri (M) and Kuragallu (v) of Mangalariri (M); scheme of Neerukonda (v) of Mangalagiri (M) of district Guntur  
4 WSS Gatoo Goshan and Choka Tacha 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
132 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State Brief of work  No. of 
works 
Expr. 
incurred  
• In taluk Chamarajanagar, a piped water supply work was awarded for execution in June 2013 at a cost of ` 0.12 crore.  The 
work was, however, not progressed after July 2013 a fter the contractor had completed a portion of the pipeline and 
construction of pump house at a cost of ` 0.05 crore incurred . 
1 0.05  
• In district Yadgir, work for water supply to 11 vil lages was abandoned due to contamination of source after incurring 
expenditure of ` 2.96 crore as discussed in paragraph 4.2.9. 
1 2.96  
• In district Chitradurga, water supply work for 27 villages was abandoned due to heavy leakage in pipelines and drying up of 
source rendering expenditure of ` 9.45 crore as wasteful as discussed in paragraph 4.2.9. 
1 9.45  
6.  Maharashtra 
 
• In district Pune, department did not draw water in village Hinjavadi from identified source (Kasarsai Medium Irrigation 
project) due to protest by the villagers against dr awing of water from the source.  This led to expend iture of ` 0.37 crore 
incurred (October 2015) on excavation work of Jack well and approach bridge to the jack well,  infructuous. 
1 0.37  
7.  Nagaland • A scheme for providing water supply sanctioned duri ng 2014-15 at a cost of ` 0.17 crore which was stated to be complete 
was found (July 2017) to be non-functional due to non-construction of one IRP unit and a public fountain.  
1 0.17  
• In district Kohima, project for providing water supply to Sanoru-Peraciezie was taken up in 2014-15 at a cost of ` 0.14 crore 
and stated to have been completed in November 2014.   During physical verification (July 2017), the wor k was found to be 
incomplete due to land dispute. 
1 0.14  
• Scheme to augment water supply to Menguzuma by pumping ground water was taken up in 2014-15 at a cost of ` 0.22 crore 
and was stated to have been completed in November 2014.  During physical verification (July 2017), the scheme was found 
to be non-operational  due to non-availability of water at the source. 
1 0.22  
8.  Odisha • In division Keonjhar, two works for supply of safe drinking water to 11 habitations were sanctioned du ring 2012-13 for 
` 1.16 crore with provision of source, head works, distribution system, rising line, treatment unit, elevated storage reservoir, 
delivery point, etc. However, the works were abandoned after incurring expenditure of ` 0.17 crore as five solar dual pumps 
were installed in existing tube wells at a cost of ` 0.25 crore in these habitations in 2015-16. 
2 0.17  
• In division Nuapada, three works sanctioned during 2009-12 for ` 1.68 crore were abandoned after incurring expenditure of 
` 0.25 crore on procurement of pipes. 
3 0.25  
• In division Khariar, as per IMIS, physical progress of two works 5 sanctioned during 2010-11 for supply of potable water to 
a population size of 11,225 was 100 per cent . However, physical verification showed that work was abandoned after achieving 
physical progress of 20 per cent  and incurring expenditure of ` 0.93 crore on source creation and procurement of pipes. 
2 0.93  
                                                           
5 PWS to Thelkodungari and Kuligaon 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
133 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State Brief of work  No. of 
works 
Expr. 
incurred  
• 1,310 tube-wells executed at a cost of ` 3.76 crore become unsuccessful as discussed in paragraph 4.2.9. 1,310 3.76  
9.  Punjab • In divisions Patiala and Rajpura, two water supply schemes 6, constructed at a cost of ` 0.62 crore, became non-functional 
due to leakages in distribution system and non-payment of electricity bills.  
2 0.62  
• In district Fatehgarh Sahib, one water supply schem e and 10 hand pumps, installed at a cost of ` 0.61 crore, became non-
functional due to disputes and water quality problems. 
11 0.61  
10.  Rajasthan • In Tehsil Uniyara, work of water supply scheme Bentha Roopwara, taken up at a cost of ` 1.73 crore for completion by May 
2013 was abandoned by the contractor (March 2013) after incurring expenditure of ` 1.02 crore. 
1 1.02  
• In district Jaisalmer, water supply scheme (Sagarmal Gopa branch Ramgarh-Sonu-Mokan-Khuniyala) abandoned due to hard 
strata as discussed in paragraph 4.2.9. 
1 1.87  
11.  Sikkim • In district South Sikkim, a water supply scheme was  completed in March 2014 at a cost of ` 0.47 crore.  During physical 
verification audit found that the  entire work had been damaged due to widening of road. 
1 0.47  
• In Maniram Bhanjyang, a water supply scheme taken u p at a cost of ` 1.08 crore was to be completed by November 2014.  
Physical verification (June 2017) showed that 50 per cent of the work was completed at a cost of ` 0.30 crore and the pipeline 
along a six kilometre road was damaged during road widening work.   
1 0.30  
12.  Uttar Pradesh • In Raebarely, the Bardar Water Supply Scheme was abandoned due to excess discharge of sand and soil as discussed below 
paragraph 4.2.9. 
1 1.84  
 Total 1,367 40.07  
                                                           
6 Dharamgarh (Rajpura-November 2014) and Rakhra (Patiala-April 2015) 
 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
134 
Annexe-4.3 
Non-preparation/implementation of Support Activity plan (IEC, HRD MIS, R&D) 
(Refer to para 4.7.1)  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State Audit Observation 
1.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
• Annual plan for IEC, HRD, MIS, R& D was not included in AAP. 
•  Capacity building plan was not prepared at District and State level. 
• Training module based on Training Needs Assessment Workshop for different 
stakeholders was not prepared annually.  
• In Guntur district, ` 97.77 lakh was not utilized for support activities  as the District 
did not prepare plan for IEC activities (March 2017). 
2.  Arunachal 
Pradesh 
• Department did not prepare a comprehensive plan for  implementing IEC/HRD 
activities.   
• 13,091 out of 24,463 IEC and 11,858 out of 15,966 H RD activities were reported to 
be conducted during the five-year period.  
• There were no records of the exact nature of activities conducted to assess their impact 
and adequacy.  
3.  Assam • Yearly achievements under various activities were not commensurate with the yearly 
targets during the entire period of 2012-17. 
•  Achievement against the targets for IEC Activities  was three per cent  during 
2012-14 and 19 per cent  during 2014-17. 
4.  Bihar • Targets were not fulfilled in respect of MIS, IEC and Training during 2013-17.  
• As per IMIS data, no target was fixed for Support Activities in 2012-13  
• During 2012-17, expenditure was not incurred on R&D activities. 
5.  Goa • No expenditure was incurred on IEC activities before 2015-16.   
6.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
• Shortfall in achievement of targets during 2012-17 under IEC, HRD and computer 
program was ranged 18, 5 and 35 per cent  respectively. 
•  Department did not set up R&D Cell of the Program.  
7.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
• Against targets for IEC activities, there was a sho rtfall ranging between 34 and  
94 per cent .  
• For trainees under HRD, there was a shortfall again st targets ranging between 9 and  
58 per cent  during 2012-15 and of 100 per cent  during 2015-17.  
• Out of targeted 2.51 lakh persons for training of GPs only 220 were imparted training 
during 2013-17. 
8.  Kerala • Despite availability of funds, CCDU did not take up  programmes under support 
activities.  This was attributed to shortage of manpower. 
• No activities under R & D were undertaken.  
•  Achievement against target for IEC activities was 45 per cent during 2012-17 and it 
was 12 per cent  under HRD activities.  
• Against target of 1.35 lakh trainees, only 16,915 trainees were trained. 
9.  Madhya 
Pradesh 
• Three activities were undertaken under R&D.  
• 8,066 training programs out of 10,078 were conducted under HRD.  
• Out of selected 44 GPs, IEC, HRD and other awareness activities was not carried out 
in 42 GPs. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
135 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State Audit Observation 
10.  Maharashtra • WSSO did not prepare AAP for R&D activities for the approval of SLSSC.   
• Out of 86,441 activities under IEC, 21,332 (25 per cent ) were conducted. 
11.  Manipur • Against target of 76,338 IEC activities and 218 training programmes the shortfall was 
27 per cent and 50 per cent  respectively.  
• No R&D activity and computer training was taken. 
12.  Meghalaya • 20 to 30 per cent  of the targeted IEC activities were undertaken during 2012-16. 
• In 2016-17 achievement was 88 per cent as targets were drastically reduced.  
13.  Mizoram • No training need assessment was made to develop tra ining module on different 
subjects. 
• During 2012-17, out of 6,525 persons targeted for t raining, only 3,887 were trained 
during 2012-13 to 2014-15 and no training was done during 2015-17.  
• No R & D activities were undertaken. 
14.  Nagaland • Against target of 303 training programmes, 209 were  conducted during 2012-14. In 
2014-15, no training programme was conducted agains t the target of 900 and no 
training programme was planned during 2015-17.  
• No R&D activities were undertaken. 
15.  Punjab • Shortfall in IEC activities was ranged between 14 and 74 per cent during 2012-13 and 
2014-17.  
16.  Rajasthan • Major part of expenditure for IEC was incurred on S tate level activities and a very 
small portion ranging from 0 to 39 per cent was incurred on village level activities.  
• During 2015-17, no district and village level IEC activities were taken up.  
• No R&D, software development and computer trainings  activities undertaken by 
WSSO.  
17.  Sikkim • No Support Activity Plan was prepared for support a ctivities during the period 
2012-17.  
• Against target of training 880 personnel annually d uring 2012-17 only 378 and 
33 trainees were trained during 2015-16 and 2016-17 respectively. 
•  No R & D activity was carried out. 
18.  Telangana • Support activity plan was not incorporated in AAP f ixing targets for training, IEC 
and HRD activities, etc .  
•  No expenditure was incurred towards R & D activities. 
19.  Tripura • AAP for the support activities was prepared except for R&D activities.  
• Against the 483 targeted training programmes to be conducted during 2012-17, 389 
(80 per cent ) were conducted.  
 
  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
136 
Annexe-4.4 
Shortage of labs, infrastructure and equipment for water quality testing 
(Refer to para 4.8.1)  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State Audit observation 
1.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
• Out of 107 laboratories only one lab i.e., the Gunt ur district laboratory was, 
accredited.  
2.  Arunachal 
Pradesh 
• SLL had only eight staff against the required number of 14.  
• DLLs of four selected districts had capacity to exa mine only 10 out of the 34 
prescribed parameters. 
• DLLs had  only six staff  against requirement of 32. 
3.  Assam • SLL was capable of examining 19 parameters against requirement of 78 
parameters.  
• DLLs were capable of examining 13 to 25 parameters against requirement of 
34 parameters.   
• DLLs had shortage of manpower. 
4.  Bihar • SLL was capable of examining only 17 parameters out  of requirement of 78 
parameters.   
• DLLs (selected districts) examined only 14 to 15 pa rameters out of 34 
parameters.  
•  Patna district was arsenic affected, but DLL did not test arsenic contamination 
due to non-functioning of Spectrophotometer during 2012-17.  
• Labs at Block/Sub-Division levels were not in existence.   
5.  Chhattisgarh • DLLs (eight selected districts) were capable of exa mining only 8 to 18 
parameters out of 34 parameters.  
• DLLs except in district Raipur, did not have required infrastructure facilities. 
•  Five DLLs were inadequately staffed while three (K awardha, Surajpur and 
Jashpur) had no staff.  
• SDLLs were functional in only 24 out of 76 PHE Sub-divisions.  
6.  Goa • No labs had NABL accreditation.   
7.  Gujarat • Out of 32 DLLs, only four had NABL accreditation that too only for testing 13 
out of 34 parameters.  
• In SLL only 16 out of 78  prescribed parameters  an d in DLLs only 14 out of 
34 parameters were tested due to non-availability of required instruments. 
8.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
• Only 25 labs were set up during 2012-17against targ et of establishment of 42 
laboratories at State/district/block level.  
•  Only 56 labs were strengthened during 2012-17 against target of 106.   
• In the absence of the required man power such as ch emists/bacteriologists, 
required tests were not conducted in selected districts. 
• Equipment procured for bacteriological tests were not put to use in absence of 
trained staff.  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
137 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State Audit observation 
9.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
• None of the 22 DLLs and 78 SDLLs in existence were accredited with NABL.   
• Staff such as chemist/water analyst were not appoin ted on regular basis in test 
checked divisions.  
• In DLLs only 11 to 13 out of 34 parameters were examined.  
10.  Jharkhand • SLL had NABL accreditation for testing only 10 out of the 78 required 
parameters.  
• No DLLS (in selected districts) were accredited with NABL.   
• DLLs were examining only 5 to15 out of prescribed 34 parameters.  
• DLLs had shortage of instruments and manpower and M icrobiologist/ 
bacteriologist were not appointed in any of the selected DLLs.  
• No block level laboratories were established in selected blocks.   
11.  Karnataka • DLLs were not equipped for conducting all prescribed 34 tests.  
• DLLs were not adequately staffed. 
• DLLs (in selected districts) did not have essential  equipment in working 
condition and did not maintain required inventory of chemicals.  
12.  Kerala • At block level, labs were functioning in only 33 out of 148 Rural Blocks.  
13.  Madhya 
Pradesh 
• SLL was accredited to test only 26 out of 78 parameters.   
• In selected districts, DLLs had a shortage of 31 staff against a total requirement 
of 72 persons.   
• 15 selected blocks had no lab facilities. 
14.  Maharashtra • DLLs in 28 districts did not have NABL Accreditation.  
• DLLs and 138 SDLLs had no facility for testing arsenic.   
• Out of a total of 818 post required for the labs at  various levels 224 posts 
remained vacant.  
15.  Manipur • SLL had capability of examining only 14 out of 78 parameters 
• DLLs had capability of examining only 12 out of 34 parameters. No 
Microbiologist/ Bacteriologist was posted in the labs. 
16.  Meghalaya • DLLs were in existence in only 7 out of 11 districts.  
• Out of 41 sub-divisions, laboratories were set up only in 20 sub-divisions.  
17.  Mizoram • State Laboratory and DLLs were not accredited to NABL.  
• 50 per cent manpower  shortages were noticed in SLL, DLLs and SDLLs. 
18.  Nagaland • SLL and three selected DLLs did not conduct tests a gainst prescribed 
parameters due to non-availability of required equipment and chemicals.   
• DLL in Dimapur was non-functional since its inception. 
•  SDLLs were not set up.  
19.  Odisha • DLLs were not accredited with NABL.   
• Against a requirement of eight staff per lab there was only one staff in 13 labs, 
two staff in ten labs and three staff in three labs.   
• Shortfall in equipment, glassware and chemicals in the labs ranged between 28 
and 95 per cent.  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
138 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State Audit observation 
20.  Punjab • Labs were inadequately equipped with manpower. 
21.  Rajasthan • SLL did not have facility and equipment for testing  heavy metals, 
pesticides/toxic elements and radioactive elements in drinking water.  
• DLLs were not strengthened to examine all required parameters.   
22.  Sikkim • Against requirement of four DLLs and nine SDLLs onl y two DLLs were 
established.   
• DLLs at North and West Districts were not establish ed though approval of 
` 69.92 lakh had been given.  
• Essential staff such as microbiologist/bacteriologi st and sampling assistants 
were not available in the DLLs. 
23.  Tamil Nadu • In SLL, eight out of 34 parameters were tested.   
• SLL faced shortage of personnel such as Senior Chem ist, Water Analyst, lab 
Assistant and Sampling Assistant. 
•  Post of Microbiologist/Bacteriologist were not sanctioned and operated in SLL 
as well as in sampled DLLs. 
24.  Telangana • Only two out of 76 laboratories established during 2010-12 were accredited to 
NABL. 
25.  Tripura • No action was taken to establish SDLLs though appro val was given (August 
2009) for 23 new SDLLs at a cost of ` 2.82 crore. 
•  None of the labs had the adequate sanctioned strength of manpower.  
• Equipment supplied to labs were lying unused/in defunct condition. 
26.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
• Shortage of 38 staff  was noticed in eight 7 out of 10 test checked districts. 
27.  Uttarakhand • In DLLs only 19 out of 34 parameters were examined. 
• None of the Labs were accredited with NABL. 
 
  
                                                           
7Agra, Aligarh, Gautam Budha Nagar, Etawah, Jaunpur, Jhansi, Chitrakoot and Sonebhadra. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
139 
Annexe-4.5 
Shortfall in Water Quality Testing 
(Refer to para 4.8.2) 
Sl. 
No. Name of State Audit observation 
1.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
• Achievement of targets in respect of Bacteriological and Chemical parameters 
was 39  per cent  and 52  per cent  respectively.  
• In selected districts, out of 4.15 lakh water sourc es, 50 per cent   
bacteriological and 52 per cent chemical tests were conducted.   
• Required tests were not conducted due to non-availability of sufficient funds 
and non-procurement of required quantities of refills of chemical reagents and 
H2S vials. 
2.  Arunachal 
Pradesh 
• In selected districts, against the required 92,613 bacteriological/ chemical 
tests, 40 per cent  bacteriological/ chemical tests were conducted.  
• 56 per cent  both pre and post monsoon testing were conducted as against the 
required 61,742 tests to be conducted during 2012-17 for 6,839 water sources. 
3.  Assam • In selected eight districts, against the required 2 8,952 samples tests, SRL 
conducted 2,564 tests.   
• DLLs carried out 0.68 lakh tests against 1.03 lakh targeted sources/delivery 
points.  
4.  Bihar • In selected districts, divisions carried out two to  20 per cent  test of total 
sources.  
• Pre and post-monsoon check of water quality from so urces was not done in 
selected districts.  
5.  Chhattisgarh • In selected eight districts, shortfall in conducting of tests ranged between two 
to 95 per cent.  
• Testing of all the water samples twice for bacterio logical contamination and 
once for chemical contamination in a year was not done. 
6.  Goa • State laboratory did not conduct the test of fluoride and arsenic contamination.   
7.  Gujarat • None of the districts laboratories re-examined wate r samples tested in the 
Taluka laboratories as per guidelines.  
•  Out of 4.40 lakh sources, 33.39 per cent  were tested in the laboratories during 
2016-17.   
8.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
• Shortfall to the tests required to be carried out was 88 per cent .   
9.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
• IMIS data showed that year-wise tests were carried out during the pre-
monsoon and post monsoon. 
• However, no records/details of the pre-monsoon or p ost-monsoon tests were 
available either with the Department or in selected executing divisions 
10.  Jharkhand • In selected districts, shortfall in testing was ranged between 16 and 70 per cent  
for chemical contamination.   
11.  Karnataka • Shortfall in testing was ranged between 90 and 99 per cent . 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
140 
Sl. 
No. Name of State Audit observation 
12.  Kerala • Out of 22.09 lakh 5.80 lakh samples were tested.   
• Testing of all sources was not carried out due to the shortage of sufficient labs, 
staffs and other infrastructure.   
13.  Madhya 
Pradesh 
• In nine selected districts, against targeted 1.55 l akh samples, 1.38 lakh tests 
were conducted.  
• Against the target of conducting biological testing  of Pre and post-monsoon 
samples of 13.20 lakh, 0.58 lakh tests were conducted.   
14.  Maharashtra • Shortfall in testing ranged between seven  to  42 per cent.  
15.  Manipur • Out of targeted 1,800 water sample, 61 per cent  were tested by State Lab.   
• Testing of heavy metals was started by State Lab in September 2016 and tested 
60 per cent  against the target of 20 samples.  
•  The State Lab did not take up testing for presence of pesticides/toxic elements 
and radioactive elements in drinking water.  
•  In four selected districts, against the target of 8,015 tests for DLLs, 73 per 
cent  tests were carried out. 
16.  Meghalaya • In selected districts, tests conducted ranged between nil to nine per cent .   
• As per IMIS, tests conducted by RiBhoi DLL were sho wn as 117, 40 and 87 
during 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15 respectively, b ut laboratory was not 
functional during these years.  
• Department stated (September 2017) that tests reported in the IMIS were tests 
which were conducted through FTKs at the village level. 
17.  Mizoram • In selected Aizawl and Champhai districts, water quality test for 28 to 46 per 
cent and 12 to 17 per cent  of sources were not conducted in pre and post 
monsoon respectively.  
18.  Nagaland • No pre and post monsoon tests were carried out for 2,195 sources in Dimapur 
district.  
19.  Odisha • Laboratories were not testing the mandatory paramet ers such as nitrate, 
arsenic, alkalinity (January 2017).  
20.  Punjab • Shortfall in Chemical testing was ranged between 34  and 84 per cent  during 
2013-14 to 2016-17.  
•  No information was available on bacteriological te sting as FTKs were 
distributed in fields to Health and Education department. 
21.  Rajasthan • Out of 20.43 lakh sources to be tested, 8,094 sources were tested both pre and 
post monsoon.  
22.  Sikkim • In district labs, against the required 36,798 tests  each year, actual testing 
ranged between one and five per cent  due to acute shortage of manpower.   
• Treatment of water and fencing of 80 water sources to prevent biological 
contamination was not done. 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
141 
Sl. 
No. Name of State Audit observation 
23.  Tamil Nadu • Out of 2.46 lakh samples to be tested each year, 35 per cent  and one per cent  
tests were carried out during 2015-16 and 2016-17 respectively.  
• No laboratory tests were conducted by DLLs and SDLL s due to inadequate-
receipt of funds from Ministry in 2016-17. 
24.  Telangana • Shortfall in water quality testing ranged between 6 1 and 65 per cent  during 
2014-15 to 2016-17.   
25.  Tripura • Percentage of tests performed against 63,000 target ed tests was ranged from 
20 to 35 per cent  during 2012-17 .  
26.  Uttar Pradesh • In nine selected districts, out of targeted 1.50 lakh sources, tests were carried 
out for 0.78 lakh sources. 
27.  Uttarakhand • In selected districts, 91 to 95 per cent  of sources were not tested and number 
of sources tested twice a year was less than two per cent .   
• Shortfalls attributed to shortage of staff. 
 

Report No. 15 of 2018 
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
142 
Annexe-5.1 
Inconsistency in IMIS data 
(Refer to para 5.3.1) 
Sl. 
No. Format  Information given Remarks 
1. B6 73,87,069 number of water supply scheme sources shown Different 
information on the 
number of sources 
furnished 
B28 74,42,389 number of water supply sources (72,68,567 ground 
water and 1,73,822 surface water) 
2. B28 Incorrect information on latitude/longitude (mentioned as 0,0 
in Gujarat), aquifer names (mentioned as fgegefg, a bc  in 
Gujarat and Rajasthan) 
Information were 
futile for monitoring 
purpose 
3. C31 Against expenditure for supply of tankers physical status was 
shown nil in all the years. 
4. B15 Piped water and Hand pump schemes for the years 189 9-
1900, 1900-1901 and 1907-1908 have been shown in respect 
of States of Haryana and Tamil Nadu. 
 
5. 
D1 During 2016-17, earmarked expenditure (Central) in respect 
of chemical affected habitations was ` 114.52 crore, while in 
respect of bacteriological affected habitations it was ` 35.46 
crore. 
During 2015-16, earmarked expenditure (Central), in respect 
of chemical affected habitations was ` 223.52 crore. 
Different 
information in the 
amount of 
expenditure incurred 
under the earmarked 
water quality 
component provided D8A During 2016-17, earmarked expenditure (Central) in respect 
of chemical affected habitations was ` 104.47 crore, while in 
respect of bacteriological affected habitations it was ` 27.89 
crore. 
During 2015-16, earmarked expenditure (Central), in respect 
of chemical affected habitations was ` 220.79 crore. 
6. C29 For 2016-17, in respect of support fund total avail able fund 
was ` 409.61 crore. 
Variation was due to 
data of Meghalaya, 
Nagaland, Tamil 
Nadu, Tripura and 
Uttar Pradesh. 
D1 For 2016-17, in respect of support fund total avail able fund 
was ` 395.97 crore. 
 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
143 
Annexe-5.2(a) 
Number of surface water bodies 
(Refer to para 5.3.2) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of State No. of 
Districts 
Data as per 
IMIS (B-8) 
Data as per 
records of the 
Department 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 4 0 371 
2.  Arunachal Pradesh 4 2,602 6,839 
3.  Bihar 10 0 37 
4.  Chhattisgarh 2 2 0 
5.  Gujarat 10 284 317 
6.  Jammu & Kashmir 3 190 62 
7.  Kerala 4 2 1,288 
8.  Madhya Pradesh 10 2 0 
9.  Maharashtra 10 10 971 
10.  Manipur 4 1,182 1,174 
11.  Meghalaya 2 67 300 
12.  Mizoram 1 1 7 
13.  Odisha 8 2 33 
14.  Rajasthan 10 1,039 8 
15.  Tripura 2 0 5 
16.  Uttarakhand 4 3,565 8,558 
 
  

Report No. 15 of 2018 
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
144 
Annexe-5.2(b) 
Status of Drinking Water Facility at School in selected districts 
(Refer to para 5.3.2) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of State No. of 
GPs 
Number of Schools No. of School with 
drinking water facility  
As per 
IMIS  
(B-10) 
As per site 
or records 
As per 
IMIS  
(B-10) 
As per site 
or records 
1.  Arunachal 
Pradesh 
16 62 33 47 22 
2.  Assam 46 635 747 533 634 
3.  Bihar 40 187 334 185 258 
4.  Chhattisgarh 32 122 141 115 122 
5.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
29 114 98 109 70 
6.  Jharkhand 38 166 284 150 227 
7.  Karnataka 40 358 315 287 303 
8.  Kerala 16 0 179 0 179 
9.  Madhya Pradesh  44 205 226 174 197 
10.  Maharashtra 54 160 139 154 122 
11.  MANIPUR 19 58 58 53 25 
12.  Meghalaya 16 44 44 24 28 
13.  Mizoram 08 31 20 31 20 
14.  Nagaland 22 36 34 28 20 
15.  Odisha 48 316 434 266 422 
16.  Rajasthan 39 143 309 118 209 
17.  Sikkim 8 44 38 28 23 
18.  Tripura 8 20 28 15 19 
19.  Uttar Pradesh 54 89 185 71 171 
20.  Uttarakhand 20 35 40 22 36 
 
  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
145 
Annexe-5.2(c) 
Status of Drinking Water Facility at Anganwadis in selected districts 
(Refer to para 5.3.2)  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of State No. of 
GPs 
Number of Anganwadis No. of Anganwadis with 
drinking water facility  
As per 
IMIS  
(B-10) 
As per site 
or records 
As per 
IMIS  
(B-10) 
As per site 
or records 
1.  Arunachal Pradesh 16  71 57 16 15 
2.  Assam 46  319 745 140 264 
3.  Bihar 40  55 323 47 98 
4.  Jharkhand 38  70 304 46 168 
5.  Karnataka 40  311 362 215 302 
6.  Kerala 16  0 502 0 271 
7.  Madhya Pradesh 44  56 125 40 98 
8.  Maharashtra 54  133 183 125 151 
9.  Manipur 19  15 113 14 10 
10.  Meghalaya 16  7 14 5 9 
11.  Mizoram 08  15 20 14 16 
12.  Odisha 48  203 469 137 392 
13.  Rajasthan 39  23 210 15 123 
14.  Sikkim 8 6 56 3 27 
15.  Tripura 8 39 55 27 42 
16.  Uttar Pradesh 54  0 220 0 140 
 
  

Report No. 15 of 2018 
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
146 
Annexe-5.2(d) 
Status of Drinking Water Facility at Schools in whole state as 
compared to data of education department (As on 31.3.2017) 
(Refer to para 5.3.2)  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State 
Number of Schools  No. of Rural Schools with drinking 
water facility 
As 
per 
IMIS 
As per Data 
of Education 
Department 
(HRD) 
Difference As per 
IMIS 
As per Data 
of Education 
Department 
(HRD) 
Difference 
1.   Arunachal 
Pradesh 
3,480  3,513 33 2,898 2,877 21 
2.   Assam 29,841  45,827 15,986 23,390 42,357 18,967 
3.   Goa 224  1,551 1,327 163 1,200 1,037 
4.   Karnataka 47,397  43,895 3,502 38,384 43,785 5,401 
5.   Kerala 1,504  11,904 10,400 1,484 11,904 10,420 
6.   Madhya 
Pradesh 
91,550  1,07,391 15,841 77,653 1,02,444 24,791 
7.   Manipur 2,074  2,973 899 1,700 2,863 1,163 
8.   Mizoram 1,940  2,047 107 1,608 1,883 275 
9.   Nagaland 2,362  1,874 488 1,786 1,476 310 
10.   Punjab 15,176  19,458 4,282 15,175 19,374 4,199 
11.   Uttarakhand 6,545  16,994 10,449 5,306 686 4,620 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
147 
Annexe-5.2(e) 
Status of Drinking Water Facility at Schools in selected districts as 
compared to data of education department (As on 31.3.2017) 
(Refer to para 5.3.2)  
Sl.  
No. 
Name of 
State 
No. of 
District 
 
Number of Schools No. of Rural Schools with drinking 
water facility 
As per 
IMIS 
As per Data 
of 
Education 
Department 
(HRD) 
Difference No. of 
District 
As per 
IMIS 
As per Data 
of 
Education 
Department 
(HRD) 
Difference 
1.  Arunachal 
Pradesh 
3 874 779 95 3 783 644 139 
1 245 292 47 1 169 182 13 
2.  Assam 9 12,242 19,922 7,680 9 9,850 17,960 8,110 
3.  Karnataka 9 17,663 14,728 2,935 8 12,364 13,563 1,199 
1 775 931 156 2 2,244 2,051 193 
4.  Kerala 4 479 4,367 3,888 4 469 4,367 3,898 
5.  Manipur 4 1,058 1,438 380 4 843 1,431 588 
6.  Mizoram 2 706 557 149 2 638 550 88 
7.  Nagaland 3 770 587 183 3 611 442 169 
8.  Goa 2 224 1,551 1,327 2 163 1,200 1,037 
9.  Madhya 
Pradesh 
10 22,349 25,205 2,856 10 18,898 24,016 5,118 
10 Maharashtra 4 9,085 8,608 477 4 9,085 8,608 477 
6 14,772 16,414 1,642 6 14,771 16,365 1,594 
11 Punjab 7 5,924 7,007 1,083 7 5,924 6,918 994 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 15 of 2018 
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
148 
Annexe-5.2(f) 
Water Testing Labs 
(Refer to para 5.3.2) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of  
State 
No. of 
District 
Selected 
Districts 
Selected Blocks 
(Sub-Divisional 
Level)  
Total Mobile 
Labs 
As 
per 
IMIS 
As per 
Physical 
records 
As 
per 
IMIS  
As per 
Physical 
records 
As per 
IMIS 
As per 
Physical 
records 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 5 14 20 23 18 0 0 
2.  Arunachal Pradesh 4 4 4 5 4 0 0 
3.  Assam 9 19 27 4 8 7 7 
4.  Chhattisgarh 8 8 8 1 1 7 18 
5.  Jammu & Kashmir 7 7 7 27 24 4 0 
6.  Jharkhand 6 6 6 0 1 1 0 
7.  Karnataka 10 14 10 24 18 1 0 
8.  Kerala 4 14 14 0 1 0 0 
9.  Madhya Pradesh 10 10 9 2 7 0 1 
10.  Maharashtra 10 12 13 36 46 0 0 
11.  Meghalaya 1 4 4 3 3 1 0 0 
12.  Nagaland 3 3 3 0 0 1 0 
13.  Rajasthan 10 10 10 17 2 0 1 
14.  Telangana 3 7 7 17 20 0 0 
15.  Tripura 2 2 2 5 4 0 0 
16.  Uttarakhand 4 0 4 0 4 0 0 
 
  
                                                           
1In respect of difference in number of labs in Meghalaya , the Department agreed that there 
were errors in IMIS due to the fact that the figures in IMIS could not be corrected.  

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
149 
Annexe-5.2(g) 
Non-functional Schemes (as on 31.3.2017) 
(Refer to para 5.3.2) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of  
State 
No. of 
Districts 
Total No. of Schemes Total No. of Non-
functional schemes  
As per 
IMIS  
(B-17) 
As per 
Physical 
records 
As per 
IMIS  
(B-17) 
As per 
Physical 
records 
1.  Assam 9 44,407 3,108 4,651 357 
2.  Bihar 10  36,552 2,76,414 787 50,200 
3.  Chhattisgarh 8 44,508 1,00,392 7,564 2,855 
4.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
6 18,218 14,217 22 470 
5.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
7 4,675 3,210 7 4 
6.  Jharkhand 6 1,10,126 1,18,926 8,031 23,467 
7.  Madhya 
Pradesh 
10  1,46,291 51,120 14,416 4,736 
8.  Maharashtra 10  58,856 61,260 1,218 7,143 
9.  Meghalaya 4 6,368 1,896 277 65 
10.  Mizoram 2 255 309 0 0 
11.  Nagaland 3 1,280 1,280 3 24 
12.  Odisha 8 1,49,224 1,30,741 6,699 1,476 
13.  Punjab 7 5,227 5,227 166 38 
14.  Rajasthan 10  33,543 17,853 2,111 133 
15.  Sikkim 2 2,879 935 0 1 
16.  Tripura 2 7,054 8,795 2,267 632 
17.  Uttar Pradesh 10  3,09,256 4,11,627 2,413 21,094 
18.  Uttarakhand 4 11,435 11,381 9 0 
 
 

Report No. 15 of 2018 
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
150 
Annexe-5.2(h) 
Category of schemes in selected Gram Panchayats 
(Refer to para 5.3.2)  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of  
State 
No. 
of 
GPs 
Total PWS Hand pumps Others 
As 
per 
IMIS  
As per 
Records  
Diffe-
rence 
No. of 
Selected 
GPs 
As 
per 
IMIS  
As per 
Records  
Diffe-
rence 
No. of 
Selected 
GPs 
As per 
IMIS 
As per 
Records  
Diffe-
rence 
No. of 
Selected 
GPs 
As per 
IMIS 
As per 
Records  
Diffe-
rence 
1.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
2 50 58 8 10 51 21 30 1 22 23 1 2 0 14 14 
10  135 99 36 2 26 30 4 11 86 69 17 - - - - 
2.  Arunachal 
Pradesh 16  137 107 30 16 133 103 30 16 4 4 0 16 0 0 0 
3.  Assam 22  624 1,063 439 6 20 29 9 19 422 635 213 19 14 10 4 
24  1,416 541 875 40 222 159 63 27 1,313 406 907 27 49 365 316 
4.  Bihar 40  897 884 13 40 59 50 9 40 839 839 0 40 0 0 0 
5.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
6 80 123 43 3 5 9 4 9 41 103 62 1 1 0 1 
20  351 268 83 23 231 173 58 17 154 106 48 - - - - 
6.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
29  354 287 67 27 110 93 17 2 4 9 5 1 1 0 1 
- - - - 2 1 3 2 27 238 201 37 - - - - 
7.  Kerala 16  0 542 542 16 0 210 210 16 0 179 179 16 0 153 153 
8.  Madhya 
Pradesh 
6 169 226 57 44 40 24 16 6 165 216 51 4 0 11 11 
38  1,241 816 425 - - - - 38 1,205 791 414 - - - - 
9.  Maharashtra 11  86 44 42 5 9 15 6 42 98 399 301 35 1 0 1 
43  234 535 301 49 164 74 90 12 48 18 30 19 0 73 73 
10.  Mizoram 8 9 46 37 8 9 17 8 8 0 24 24 2 0 5 5 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
151 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of  
State 
No. 
of 
GPs 
Total PWS Hand pumps Others 
As 
per 
IMIS  
As per 
Records  
Diffe-
rence 
No. of 
Selected 
GPs 
As 
per 
IMIS  
As per 
Records  
Diffe-
rence 
No. of 
Selected 
GPs 
As per 
IMIS 
As per 
Records  
Diffe-
rence 
No. of 
Selected 
GPs 
As per 
IMIS 
As per 
Records  
Diffe-
rence 
- - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1 0 1 
11.  Nagaland 23  60 52 8 23 60 52 8 23 0 0 0 23 0 0 0 
12.  Odisha 4 183 225 42 1 2 3 1 4 170 213 43 - - - - 
44  3,146 3,099 47 47 109 103 6 44 3,026 2,983 43 4 22 22 0 
13.  Rajasthan 17  62 226 164 4 4 18 14 10 29 162 133 5 0 17 17 
22  801 265 536 35 75 47 28 29 738 237 501 32 16 10 6 
14.  Sikkim 1 34 37 3 2 41 51 10 - - - - 8 37 0 37 
7 212 119 93 6 168 105 63 - - - - - - - - 
15.  Tamil Nadu 42  2,011 1,961 50 42 976 976 0 42 857 807 50 42 178 178 0 
16.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
32  2,879 4,138 1,259 4 0 4 4 31 2,765 3,944 1179 - - - - 
22  1,216 1,204 12 50 42 42 0 23 1,364 1,352 12 - - - - 
17.  Uttarakhand 13  70 43 27 14 72 39 33 - - - - 2 2 0 2 
7 15 26 11 6 11 22 11 - - - - 5 0 8 8 
 
 
  

Report No. 18 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
152 
Annexe-5.2(i) 
Number of Habitations with CWPP 
(Refer to para 5.3.2) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of  
State 
No. of 
Districts 
Number of Habitations with CWPP 
As per IMIS  
(C-17A) 
As per site or 
records 
1.  Assam 9 1 0 
2.  Jharkhand 6 20 0 
3.  Karnataka 10 37 82 
4.  Kerala 4 2 0 
5.  Maharashtra 10 0 2 
6.  Rajasthan 10 50 53 
7.  Uttar Pradesh 10 0 4 
 
  

Report No. 18 of 2018  
 
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
153 
Annexe-5.2(j) 
Status of Water quality of habitation 
(Refer to para 5.3.2) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of  
State 
No. of 
Habitations 
Status of water quality of the selected 
Habitation (Chemically affected, 
Bacteriological affected or Potable)  
Potable Non Potable 
(Chemically affected, 
Bacteriological 
affected)  
As per 
IMIS 
As per site 
or records 
As per 
IMIS 
As per 
site or 
records 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 32 32 19 0 13 
2.  Assam 184 164 68 20 108 2 
3.  Chhattisgarh 113 106 106 7 4 
4.  Karnataka 160 90 90 70 0 
5.  Kerala 16 14 14 2 0 
6.  Madhya Pradesh 176 176 166 0 10 
7.  Maharashtra 54 53 45 1 0 
8.  Rajasthan 87 68 62 19 25 
9.  Telangana 14 6 6 8 0 
10.  Uttar Pradesh 178 175 165 0 9 
 
  
                                                           
2 Information not available in 3 habitations and water quality not tested in 5 habitations 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
155 
Glossary of Terms and Abbreviations 
Term Details  
AAP Annual Action Plan 
ARWSP Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme 
BRC Block Resource Centre 
CCDU Communication and Capacity Development Unit 
CPWS Comprehensive Protected Water Supply 
CWPP Community Water Purification Plant 
CWSAP Comprehensive Water Security Action Plan 
DDP Desert Development Programme 
DLL District Level Laboratory 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DWSM District Water and Sanitation Mission 
DWSP District Water Security Plan 
FTK Field Test Kit 
GIS Geographical Information System 
GPUs  Gram Panchayat Units       
GPWSC Gram Panchayat Water and Sanitation Committee 
HRD Human Resource Development 
IEC Information, Education and Communication 
IMIS Integrated Management Information System 
IRPs Iron Removal Plants 
IT Information Technology 
LPCD Litres per capita per day 
MDGs Millennium Development Goals 
MDI Management Devolution Index 
MIS Management Information System 
MVPWSS Multi Village Piped Water Supply Scheme 
MVS Multi Village Scheme 
NABL National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration 
Laboratories 
NDWM National Drinking Water Mission 
NIC National Informatics Centre 
NLM National Level Monitor 
NRDWP National Rural Drinking Water Programme 

Report No. 15 of 2018  
Performance Audit of National Rural Drinking Water Programme   
 
156 
NWQSM National Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance    
O&M Operation and Maintenance 
PAC Public Accounts Committee 
PHE Public Health Engineering 
PHED Public Health Engineering Department 
PPSWOR Probability Proportional to Size Without Replacement 
PWSS Piped Water Supply Scheme 
RCC Reinforced Cement Concrete 
RWSS Rural Water Supply Scheme 
SDGs Sustainable Development Goals 
SDLL Sub-Divisional Level Laboratory   
SLL State Level Laboratory 
SLSSC State Level Scheme Sanctioning Committee 
SRSWOR Simple Random Sampling Without Replacement 
STA State Technical Agency 
SVS Single Village Scheme 
SWSM State Water and Sanitation Mission 
UDWQMP Uniform Drinking Water Quality Monitoring Protocol  
UNICEF United Nation International Children’s Emergency Fund 
VMC Vigilance and Monitoring Committee 
VWSC Village Water and Sanitation Committee 
VWSP Village Water Security Plans 
WASMO Water and Sanitation Management Organization 
WHO World Health Organization 
WQM&S Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance 
WSSO Water and Sanitation Support Organization 
 
 