 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
 
Performance audit  
of  
Solid Waste Management in Urban Local 
Bodies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Karnataka 
Report No. 4 of the year 2018 
 

Table of contents 
i 
Table of contents 
 
Paragraph Contents Page 
Number 
 Preface v 
 Executive summary vii 
Chapter I Introduction  
1.1 Definition and classification of waste 1 
1.2 Process of waste management 1 
1.3 Regulatory framework governing management of waste 1 
1.4 Status of devolution in urban governance 2 
1.5 Role of urban local bodies in solid waste management 4 
Chapter II Audit framework   
2.1 Audit objectives 5 
2.2 Audit criteria 5 
2.3 Audit scope 5 
2.4 Audit methodology 6 
2.5 Acknowledgement 6 
Section I Effectiveness of pla nning, institutional mechanism and utilisation 
of funds for efficient solid waste management 
Chapter III Planning and institutional mechanism  
3.1 Entities involved in so lid waste management 7 
3.2 Generation and assessment of waste 7 
3.3 State Policy and strategy on solid waste management 8 
3.4 Municipal solid waste management plan  9 
3.5 Detailed project reports for solid waste management 9 
3.6 Non-preparation of contingency plans 12 
3.7 Strategy for implementation of 3R approach 12 
3.8 Non-involvement of all st akeholders in planning 13 
3.9 Non-integration of informal waste collectors in waste 
management  14 
3.10 Institutional mechanism  14 
3.11 Outsourcing of solid waste management activities 15 
3.12 Service level benchmarks 17 
3.13 Allocation of responsibility and accountability  18 
3.14 Capacity building  19 
Chapter IV Financial management  
4.1 Assessment of requirement of funds 21 
4.2 Sources of funds for solid waste management 21 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
ii 
Paragraph Contents Page 
Number 
4.3 Receipts and expenditure  22 
4.4 Resource-expenditure gap 24 
4.5 Levy and collection of solid w aste management cess 25 
4.6 Diversion of funds 27 
4.7 Collection of user charges from railway authorities/other 
establishments 28 
Section II Effectiveness of implementation of solid waste management 
process 
Chapter V Information, Education & Communication activities  
5.1 Introduction 29 
5.2 Deficiencies in Information, Education & 
Communication activities 29 
Chapter VI Segregation, Collection and Transportation of waste  
6.1 Segregation 33 
6.2 Collection 36 
6.3 Transportation 41 
Chapter VII Processing, Treatment and Disposal of Waste  
7.1 Processing 45 
7.2 Waste processing technology adopted by test-checked 
urban local bodies 45 
7.3 Disposal of waste 47 
7.4 Works proposed without ensu ring post-closure care 54 
Section III Management of Special  waste and Construction and Demolition 
waste 
Chapter VIII Special waste and Construction and Demolition 
waste  
8.1 Plastic waste 55 
8.2 Bio-medical waste 58 
8.3 E-waste 62 
8.4 Slaughterhouse waste 64 
8.5 Construction and Demolition Waste 66 
   
Chapter IX Conclusion 69 
 Appendices 73 
 Glossary 95 
  

Table of contents 
iii 
List of Appendices 
 
Appendix 
Number Details Page 
Number 
1.1 Regulatory framework governing the management 
of different types of waste 73 
1.2 Organisational structure with respect to functioning 
of ULBs in the State 74 
2.1 List of selected ULBs 75 
2.2 Brief profile of Mrs. Almitra Patel 76 
3.1 Roles and responsibilities of different institutions in 
SWM 77 
3.2 Variations in per capita estimates indicated by ULBs 
and as worked out by audit 78 
3.3 Status of committees prescribed to oversee the 
implementation of MSWM 79 
3.4 SLB performance indicators and benchmarks 
pertaining to SWM 80 
3.5 Status of achievements (2016-17) of 30 test-checked 
ULBs vis-à-vis targets fixed and benchmarks 81 
3.6 Course-wise details of training relating to SWM 
activities conducted during 2012-13 to 2016-17 83 
4.1 Details of utilisation of funds in test-checked ULBs 
during the period from 2012-13 to 2016-17 84 
4.2 Increase/decrease in resource-expenditure gap in 
test-checked ULBs 85 
4.3 
ULB-wise details of SWM cess collected and 
foregone, and revenue expenditure incurred during 
the period 2012-13 to 2016-17 
86 
4.4 Statement showing the details of diversion of funds 
allocated for SWM 87 
4.5 Statement showing the diversion of funds in CMC, 
Sira 88 
5.1 Statement showing details of modes of 
communication used for IEC activities 89 
8.1 
Statement showing the actual periodicity of 
collection of BMW in Government hospitals 
compared with that prescribed in the agreements 
90 
11 Compilation of Good practices 91 
 

v 
Preface 
 
1. This Report of the Comptroller an d Auditor General of India has  been 
prepared for submission to the Governor of Karnataka under CAG’ s DPC 
Act, 1971. 
2. The Report covering the period 2012-17 contains the results of performance 
audit of ‘Solid Waste Management in Urban Local Bodies’.   
3. Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued 
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 

vii 
Executive summary 
Municipal Solid Waste Management in urban areas has emerged as one of the 
biggest challenges that our country faces today.  The situation is aggravated by 
rapid urbanisation.  Inadequate management of waste has significant negative 
externalities in terms of public health and environmental outco mes.  Besides, 
it has an adverse impact on the aesthetic appearance of the surroundings. 
We conducted a performance audit on ‘Solid Waste Management in Urban 
Local Bodies’ for the period 2012-13 to 2016-17 to assess whether 
management of municipal solid waste (MSW) and special waste (in cluding 
construction and demolition waste) was effective, efficient, an d carried out 
economically and scientifically.  It involved examination of th e records 
relating to Solid Waste Management (SWM) in the Directorate of Municipal 
Administration, District Urban Development Cells in the selecte d districts, the 
Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) and its Regiona l Offices 
and 35 Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). 
The status of devolution of funds for urban governance disclose d that ULBs 
are dependent on Central/State Governments.  In addition, the ULBs do not 
have powers to appoint personnel – officers/officials.  The lac k of capacity, 
both in terms of funds and functionaries, tends to affect the i mplementation of 
SWM activities. 
The performance audit showed that the test-checked ULBs had not  conducted 
any survey during the period 2010-16 but had adopted per capita estimates that 
had low level of reliability.  The per capita estimates adopted  were also not 
realistic.   Action plans and st rategy documents envisaged in the State policy 
formulated in 2004 was not prepare d and State policy and strategy in 
accordance with the SWM Rules, 2016 was yet to be formulated.  ULBs 
neither prepared short term nor long-term plans.  Detailed Project Reports 
(DPRs) prepared during 2016 were deficient. The State Government did not 
operationalise any waste minimisation strategy during the revie w period and 
ULBs did not take up initiatives to promote waste minimisation activity 
exclusively other than Town Municipal Council, Kumta. 
Though requisite committees were formed at the State level, the  District and 
ULB level Committees were not formed in any of the test-checked  districts 
leading to poor support for effective implementation of SWM plans.  
Dedicated SWM Cell was absent at ULB level.  There was shortage  o f  
manpower in all cadres viz. Environment Engineer (32 per cent ); Health 
Inspectors (70 per cent) and Pourakarmikas (65 per cent). 
It appears that the Karnataka M unicipalities Act, 1964 and the Karnataka 
Municipal Corporations Act, 1976 are not in consonance with the  Constitution 
provisions, as contained in the Constitution (74
th Amendment) Act, 1992, as 
the Constitution provisions are  silent about the approval of th e budget while 
both the Acts specifically mention the role of the State Govern ment in 
sanctioning/modifying the budget. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
viii 
None of the test-checked ULBs assessed the requirement of capit al and 
revenue funds for SWM activities until the preparation of DPRs and hence, 
they were unaware of the resource deficit.  Though DPRs prepare d during 
2016-17 assessed the resource defi cit, these failed to address measures for 
bridging this deficit.  But audit did not come across any insta nce of ULB 
asking for funds from the State Government. 
ULBs did not utilise the funds provided for creation of capital  assets by the 
Central and State Finance Commissions.   In comparis on, the funds allocated 
for revenue expenditure were utilised in full by the ULBs.  The expenditure on 
SWM was not commensurate with the funds available, resulting in  
accumulation of balances to the tune of `93.19 crore at the end of March 2017. 
There was an appreciable increase in the number of test-checked  U L B s  
collecting SWM cess and the quantum of cess increased significa ntly during 
the period 2012-13 to 2016-17.  The test-checked ULBs were not collecting 
cess from places of public worship, occupiers of buildings/shop s owned by 
ULBs and Government buildings as these properties were either e xempt from 
payment of property tax or service charges.  ULBs also did not levy cess on 
vacant lands despite the enabling provisions.  Consequently, th e ULBs lost 
revenue of `3.07 crore during the period 2012-13 to 2016-17.  There was short 
accounting of cess of `5.41 crore in six ULBs and Hubballi-Dharwad 
Municipal Corporation alone short accounted to the extent of `5.11 crore. 
Ten ULBs diverted funds of `3.81 crore for works and purchase of 
equipment/machinery/vehicles related to underground drainage pu rposes and 
other activities not connected w ith SWM.  City Municipal Counci l, Sira 
diverted `15.80 lakh resulting in non-achievement of intended objective o f 
constructing bio-methanation plant, purchasing secondary storag e containers, 
etc. 
The Information, Education and Communication (IEC) activities d id not 
specifically focus on segregation of special waste and did not emphasise ‘not 
to bury’ and ‘not to burn’ waste.   
Segregation of waste at different levels was either absent or p artial in all the 
test-checked ULBs.  The State/District/ULBs did not notify the classification 
of items as domestic hazardous waste and therefore, the need to  segregate 
them separately was not publicis ed.  Consequently, segregation of domestic 
hazardous waste was not done.  Similarly, sanitary waste was no t collected 
separately.  Hence, mixed waste was transported to landfills. 
Ward-wise collection of waste was absent in six of the test-checked ULBs and 
it was partial in nine ULBs.  The test-checked ULBs did not car ry out street 
sweeping of 6,935 (83 per cent ) out of 8,324 km of roads on daily basis. 
Occupational waste (cut beedi leaves and ash) was mixed with regular MSW 
during collection.  Shortage of primary collection vehicles was  to the extent of 
57 per cent. 
 

Executive summary 
ix 
Open vehicles and vehicles without necessary partition were use d for 
transportation of waste.  Absence of functional global position ing system 
(GPS) and tracking systems resulted in unauthorised dumping of waste near 
the bank of River Kabini in City Municipal Council, Nanjangud.   
The test-checked ULBs were able to process only 26 per cent  o f  w a s t e  
collected during the review period.  This was because of non-creation of 
required infrastructure and under-u tilisation of infrastructure  created.  Eleven 
ULBs processed waste through composting and only three ULBs ado pted bio-
methanation technology. 
The ULBs were operating disposal facilities without valid autho risation from 
KSPCB and necessary environmental clearance.  The required buff er zone 
round the landfill sites were not maintained.  Activities that do not conform to 
the provisions of MSW/SWM Rules were taken up in the landfill s ites.  Many 
of the landfills test-checked lacked basic infrastructure such as waste 
inspection facilities, weighbridge , fire-fighting equipment, to ilet, etc.  There 
was evidence of unscientific dum ping and burning of mixed waste i n  t h e  
landfills. 
The above lapses indicate lack of basic monitoring by ULBs and district /State 
level authorities to ensure compliance to statutory requirements and posed a 
serious threat to the environment besides leading to health hazards. 
The absence of proper segregation of waste led to mixing of MSW with plastic 
waste, bio-medical waste, e-wast e and slaughterhouse waste.  Th e ULBs did 
not comply with the directions/in structions stipulated under th e various acts 
and rules governing management of special waste.   
Plastic waste, though found feasible for use in laying of roads , was not used 
for the purpose. This not only resulted in mismanagement of plastic waste but 
also in environmental degradation and death of cattle.  Health care institutions 
were functioning without authoris ation and resorting to unautho rised disposal 
of bio-medical waste. 
Test-checked ULBs did not colle ct and channelise e-waste to aut horised 
dismantlers/recyclers and e-waste was found mixed with MSW.  
Slaughterhouses in the test checked ULBs were functioning witho ut 
authorisation and slaughterhouse waste was not managed properly.  Thirty-two 
of the 35 test-checked ULBs were  yet to identify sites for disp osal of 
construction and demolition wast e. Consequently, construction d ebris was 
dumped on roadsides, near water bodies and low-lying areas.  In efficient 
management of special waste would lead to environment degradati on, 
pollution and health hazards besides affecting the aesthetics o f the 
cities/towns. 
 
 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
x 
List of recommendations 
1. The State Government may expedite preparation of State policy 
incorporating strategies for waste minimisation and management.  
2. The State Government needs to devise better information systems  t o  
assist ULBs in preparation of action plans for effective implem entation of 
waste management. 
3. The State Government may ensure pro-active and continuous engag ement 
of non-government sector in waste management. 
4. The State Government may revise the model agreement for each SW M 
service/activity considering the deficiencies pointed out.  It should be 
ensured that the terms and conditions of the agreement are clea r, free 
from ambiguity and protect the interests of ULB/Government. 
5. The State Government may draw a time-bound plan for ULBs to ach ieve 
the highest/preferred level of reliability of Service Level Benchmark 
(SLB) data. 
6. The State Government may ensure that the required District/ULB level 
Committees are constituted for effective institutional mechanis m and 
implementation of SWM plans. 
7. The State Government may devise mandatory modules for training all 
personnel involved in SWM and ensure coverage of all personnel within a 
specified period. 
8. The Central and State Governments may devise a system for need- based 
allocation of funds and accord greater flexibility to ULBs in t heir 
utilisation to bridge the resource-expenditure gap. 
9. While the number of ULBs collecting SWM cess as well as the amo unt 
being collected by these ULBs s howed a rising trend, it is necessary that 
ULBs conduct a realistic assessment of the Operation & Maintenance cost 
involved in SWM and levy and collect SWM cess accordingly with a 
view to achieving SLBs.  The State Government may make suitable  
amendments to Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964 for levy and 
collection of SWM cess as was done in case of Karnataka Municip al 
Corporations Act, 1976. 
ULBs may ensure maximisation of  own resources through efficient 
collection and widening of SWM cess base through measures such as 
collection of cess from (i) individual units instead of on plin th area; (ii) 
functions/activities conducted in open spaces; (iii) unorganised sector and 
levy of interest for belated payment of cess, (iv) railway authorities, etc. 
10. The State Government should accord required priority to IEC and ensure 
that IEC activities are appropriate and create awareness about the harmful 
effects of ineffective SWM manage ment on health and environment .  It 
may explore usage of more effec tive means of communication for 
increasing the impact and efficacy of IEC activities. 
The IEC 
activities should be unde rtaken, keeping in view the particular 
wastes in particular areas and particular seasons.  This may be  taken up 
consequent to assessments and pilots. 

Executive summary 
xi 
11. Segregation should be given greater emphasis by means of public ity and 
awareness campaigns and holding regular meetings with housing 
associations and non-government o rganisations.  The State Government 
should encourage segregation of waste at source by devising a s ystem for 
incentivising waste generators and collectors for segregation o f waste, 
and should prevent mixing of seg regated waste during various st ages of 
SWM. 
12. ULBs should ensure that the informal system co-exists and suppl ements 
the formal system of waste collection, treatment and disposal a nd larger 
percentage of MSW generated is collected.  ULBs should also ensure that 
workers involved in handling waste follow occupational health a nd safety 
protocols by wearing safety gear and other protective equipment. 
13. The State Government may issue suitable instructions to enable ULBs to 
manage occupational waste such as beedi leaves, wood ash, etc., 
effectively and efficiently. 
14. The ULBs, in addition to increasing the number of vehicles, sho uld also 
ensure that the vehicles already procured comply with the statu tory 
requirements of registration, obt aining authorisation, insurance, fitness 
certificate, etc. The vehicles procured shoul d be suitably designed to 
collect and transport segregated waste efficiently. 
15. The State Government/ULBs shoul d maximise processing of waste 
through complete utilisation of the infrastructure created and encourage 
adoption of bio-methanation technology by ULBs. 
16. The State Government should ensure that all landfill sites are operating 
with valid authorisation and e nvironmental clearances.  It shou ld also 
enforce and monitor scientific and proper disposal of the unprocessed 
waste through periodic checks. 
17. The State Government may promote use of plastic waste in laying  of both 
urban and rural roads as this enables reduction of considerable  amount of 
waste reaching the landfill and lessens the expenditure on maintenance of 
roads.  It may also explore other areas where plastic can be used. 
18. The State Pollution Control Board needs to ensure that all heal th care 
institutions, slaughterhouses, recyclers, etc., obtain necessary 
authorisation for their functioni ng and enforce adherence to pr escribed 
standards. 
19. KSPCB/ULBs may maintain a compre hensive database of health care  
institutions, slaughte rhouses, recyclers, etc., and strictly enforce their 
adherence to bio-medical waste, plastic, e-waste, slaughterhouse an
 d 
construction and demolition rules. 
20. The State Government and ULBs may put in place suitable systems t o  
enforce Extended Producer Responsibility for specific waste categories as 
per the relevant rules. 

1 
Chapter I 
Introduction 
1.1 Definition and classification of waste 
Wastes are materials that are not prime products (that is produ cts produced for 
the market) for which the generator has no further use in terms  of his/her own 
purposes of production, transformation or consumption, and of w hich he/she 
wants to dispose 1. Wastes are generally classified into municipal solid waste 
(MSW), bio-medical waste (BMW), construction and demolition (C&D) waste, 
e-waste, plastic waste, slaught erhouse waste, industrial waste and hazardous 
waste by virtue of their nature.  They are also classified as biodegradable, non-
biodegradable, combustible, dry and inert based on their charac teristics. 
Municipal Solid Waste Management (MSWM) in urban areas has emerged as 
one of the biggest challenges that our country faces today.  Th e situation is 
aggravated by rapid urbanisation. Inadequate management of wast e has 
significant negative externalities  in terms of public health an d environmental 
outcomes.  Besides, it has an adverse impact on the aesthetic appearance of the 
surroundings. 
1.2 Process of waste management 
The process of waste management is depicted below: 
 
 
1.3 Regulatory framework governing management of waste 
The Central Government, has the power to take measures necessar y for 
protecting and improving the quality of the environment, subject to the 
provisions of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.  Judicial  interventions
2 
have had a significant impact on Solid Waste Management (SWM). 
                                                             
1  According to United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD). 
2 (a) Municipal Council, Ratlam vs. Shri Vardichand and others ( 1980) – Supreme Court 
opined that lack of finances cannot be the reasons for not discharging statutory duties. 
 (b) B.L. Wadhera vs. Union of India (1994) – Supreme Court iss ued directives to Delhi 
Municipal Corporation regarding the collection, transportation and disposal of garbage and 
hospital waste.  
 (c) Ms. Almitra Patel vs. Union of India (1996) - Supreme Cour t constituted a committee 
to look into SWM in Class I cities i.e. cities with a population of over one lakh. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
2 
The Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (MoEFCC) notified 
(September 2000) the Municipal Solid Waste (Management and Hand ling) 
Rules, 2000 (MSW Rules, 2000).  Subsequently, MoEFCC amended the MSW 
Rules, 2000 and introduced rules for management of biomedical, plastic, 
hazardous, C&D and e-waste.  The regulatory framework governing  t h e  
management of different types of waste is indicated in Appendix 1.1. 
The Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 superseded (April 2016) MSW 
Rules, 2000.  Chart 1.1 depicts the role of various authorities at all levels in 
planning, execution and monitoring of MSW management. 
Chart 1.1: Role of various authorities in MSW management  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: SWM Rules and Manuals 
The organisational structure with respect to functioning of Urban Local Bodies 
(ULBs) in the State is given in Appendix 1.2. 
1.4 Status of devolution in urban governance 
The 74 th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 made provisions for the 
establishment of ULBs as the third tier of governance in urban areas.  The 
amendment sought to empower the ULBs to perform functions and i mplement 
schemes in relation to 18 subjects specified in the 12 th Schedule, which inter 
alia included urban planning, regulation of land use, public health , sanitation, 
conservancy and solid waste management.  It also made provisions for enabling 
ULBs by according them power to impose taxes, duties, tolls and  fees and 
prescribing assignment of resources by the State Government to the ULBs. It 
prescribed that all Municipaliti es would be empowered with such powers and 
responsibilities as may be necessary to enable them to function  as effective 
institutions of self-government. Each state was expected to ena ct a legislation 
to implement the amendment.  
The State Government amended (i) Karnataka Town and Country Pla nning 
Act, 1961, (ii) Karnataka Munici palities Act, 1964 (KM Act, 196 4) and  
  
 
Policy 
framing,  
Monitoring  
& Evaluation 
Urban 
Development 
Department 
State Pollution 
Control Board 
 
Approval of 
plans/DPRs, 
and 
monitoring  
 
Review and 
Advisory
State High 
Powered 
Committee for 
SBM 
State Level 
Advisory Body 
for SWM 
District 
Urban Local Bodies 
City Corporations  
City Municipal Councils 
Town Municipal Councils 
Town Panchayats 
Project Director, District Urban 
Development Cell 
Deputy Commissioner
Council and Municipal 
Commissioner 
Planning 
and 
monitoring 
Implementation 
 
 
State 

Chapter-I 
3 
(iii) Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976 (KMC Act, 1976), in order to 
give effect to the above amendment. 
Out of the 18 functions, all except Fire Services have been transferred to ULBs.  
Further, of the 17 functions tra nsferred, six functions which included Urban 
poverty alleviation, slum improvement and upgradation were assigned to ULBs 
as discretionary functions and not as obligatory functions. 
The ULBs are empowered to levy and collect various taxes and no n-tax 
revenues such as property tax, a dvertisement tax, trade license , town planning 
and building fee, various cess, etc.  In addition to generating their own revenue, 
ULBs receive grants from the Central and State Governments. As per the 
recommendations of the Third State Finance Commission (SFC), th e ULBs 
were to receive 10 per cent of Non-Loan Net Own Revenue Receipts (including 
salary expenditure) and the Panchayat Raj Institutions (PRIs) w ere to receive 
23 per cent .  However, the State Government in partial modification of thi s 
recommendation took a decision to devolve 32 per cent of Non-Loan Net Own 
Revenue Receipts to PRIs and 8.5 per cent to 10 per cent to ULBs as given in 
Table 1.1. 
Table 1.1: Status of devolution of funds to ULBs and PRIs 
Year Percentage to be devolved Percentage actually devolved 
ULBs PRIs ULBs PRIs 
2011-12 8.5 32 8.59 30 
2012-13 9.0 32 6.96 32 
2013-14 9.5 32 7.53 31 
2014-15 10 32 8.02 33 
2015-16 10 32 7.51 33 
2016-17 10 32 6.41 33 
                Source: Finance Accounts 
It is evident from the table above that the actual amount devolved to ULBs was 
less than that prescribed in all the years except 2011-12.  Wit h effect from the 
10th Central Finance Commission (CFC) period, the Central Government made 
recommendations for fiscal transfers to urban and rural local b odies.  
Subsequent FCs have enhanced the quantum of fiscal transfers. 
Further, as per the Acts governing ULBs, the State Government has the powers 
to regulate classification, method of recruitment, conditions of service, pay and 
allowances, discipline and conduc t of the staff and officers of  U L B s .   T h e  
Karnataka Municipalities (Recruitment of Officers and Employees) Rules, 2010 
and the Karnataka Municipal Corporations (Common Recruitment of  Officers 
and Employees) Rules, 2010, list out the Appointing Authorities  for various 
categories of posts as indicated below: 
Group A –  State Government 
Group B and C –  Director of Muni cipal Administration (DMA) or Officer 
empowered by Government 
Group D –   Deputy Commissioner (DC) for City Municipal Council s 
(CMCs), Town Municipal Councils (TMCs) and Town 
Panchayats (TPs) and Municipal Commissioner for City 
Corporations (CCs). 
Thus, the authority to appoint/depute personnel to ULBs vests m ainly with the 
State Government. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
4 
1.5 Role of urban local bodies in solid waste management 
SWM was one of the eighteen subjects devolved to the ULBs under Article 243 
(12th Schedule) of the Constitution of the India.  Section 87 of the KM Act, 1964 
and Section 58 of the KMC Act, 1976 mandate management of solid  waste as 
an obligatory function of the ULBs.  The 13 th and 14th FCs identified SWM as 
one of the core sectors besides water supply, sewerage and stor m water 
drainage. 

 
5 
Chapter II 
Audit framework 
2.1 Audit objectives 
The objectives of the Performance audit were to ascertain whether: 
 the strategy and planning envisioned for SWM by the ULBs were i n 
accordance with the extant provisions and supported by an adequ ate 
institutional mechanism; 
 management of Municipal solid waste and Special waste 3 (segregation, 
collection, transportation, processing and disposal) was effective, efficient, 
and carried out economically and scientifically; and 
 the risks to environment posed by waste were identified and minimised. 
2.2 Audit criteria 
The criteria for evaluating the performance of SWM were derived mainly from: 
 The Municipal Solid Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000  and 
Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 and respective Manuals (Mini stry 
of Urban Development); 
 The Bio-medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1998 and Bio-
medical Waste Management Rules, 2016; 
 The Plastic Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2011 and Pla stic 
Waste Management Rules, 2016; 
 The E-Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2011 and E-waste 
Management Rules, 2016; 
 The Construction and Demolition Waste Management Rules, 2016; 
 The State Policy on Integrated Solid Waste Management, 2004; and 
 Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)/Karnataka State Pollution Control 
Board (KSPCB) guidelines issued from time to time and National Green 
Tribunal (NGT) orders and other Court orders. 
2.3 Audit scope 
The performance audit on ‘Solid Waste Management in Urban Local  Bodies’ 
was carried out during April to November 2017.  The period of audit coverage 
was from April 2012 to March 2017.  It involved examination of the records 
relating to SWM in the Directorate of Municipal Administration, District Urban 
Development Cells (DUDC), KSPCB and its Regional Offices and 35  ULBs
4 
                                                 
3 Special waste includes e-waste , BMW, slaughterhouse waste and plastic waste, etc. 
4 This office conducted a performance audit on SWM in BBMP which  featured in the Audit 
Report on Local Bodies for the year ended March 2013 (Paragraph 4.1 of Report No. 5 of 
the year 2014).  Hence, BBMP was kept outside the scope of this  performance audit.  The 
report was discussed by the Committee on Local Bodies and Panch ayat Raj Institutions 
during April-May 2016 and the Report (19
th Report) containing the recommendations 
thereof was placed in the Legislature on 18.7.2016.  There were  no recommendations with 
reference to the process of SWM. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
6 
(Exhibit 2.1) across all the four strata in 19 districts as shown in Table 2.1.  The 
list of selected ULBs is given in Appendix 2.1. 
Table 2.1: Number of ULBs selected for test-check 
Sl. 
No. Category of ULBs Total number of ULBs in the 
State 
Number of ULBs 
selected for test-check 
1 City Corporations 10 excluding Bruhat Bengaluru 
Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) 4 (40%)
2 City Municipal Councils 57 11 (19%)
3 Town Municipal 
Councils  114 12 (11%)
4 Town Panchayats 89 8 (9%)
We adopted simple random sampling method on each tier of ULBs u nder each 
Revenue division to select the sample.  The selected ULBs accounted for 
approximately 28 per cent of waste generated in the State during the review 
period. 
2.4 Audit methodology 
An entry conference was held on 17 May 2017 with the Secretary,  U r b a n  
Development Department (UDD), in which the audit methodology, s cope, 
objectives and criteria were explained.  The audit methodology involved 
document analysis, responses to audit queries, joint physical verifications (JPV) 
with municipal staff and collection of photographic evidence.  While framing 
the conclusions and recommendations, good practices regarding w aste 
management in Karnataka and in other states have also been quoted to illustrate 
the fact that these practices are possible in the field of waste management and 
can serve as examples to policy makers while framing policies.  The results of 
the performance audit were dis cussed with the Secretary, UDD in an exit 
conference on 23 April 2018.  Replies of the State Government w ere received 
on 16 May 2018 and have been suitably incorporated.   
Audit also consulted Mrs. Almitra Patel, Member of the Supreme Court 
Committee on Solid Waste Management, and engaged Centre for 
Environmental Education, Research and Advocacy (CEERA), Nationa l Law 
School of India University, Bengaluru, for their domain knowled ge and inputs 
on issues pertaining to SWM (Brief profile of Mrs. Almitra Pate l is given in  
Appendix 2.2). 
2.5 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the cooperati on and assistance extended by t he State 
Government, all the ULBs, KSPCB and Regional Pollution Control Boards 
(RPCBs) in conducting the performance audit. 
Audit findings 
Audit findings are organised into three sections and are discus sed in the 
following chapters. 

EXHIBIT 2.1 - Sample selection for SWM
belagavi City Corporation
City Municipal Council
Town Municipal Council
Town Panchayat
division Units selected for sample
kalaburagi
bengaluru
Mysuru
bidar
humnabad
Ainapura
Ugar khurd
Chinchali
Bagalkote
raibag
Mugalkhod
Kakkera
Manvi
Hubballi-Dharwad
Dandeli
Karwar
Kumta
Honnavara
Bhatkal
Hosapete
Kudligi
Ballari
Sagar
Hiriyur
Sira
Tumakuru
Gudibande
Shidlaghatta
Chintamani
Malur
Magadi
Maddur
Koppa
Sringeri
Udupi
Mangaluru
T. Narasipura
Nanjangud

7 
Chapter III 
Planning and institutional mechanism 
3.1 Entities involved in  solid waste management 
The framework for administration and management of SWM in India is broadly 
divided into three tiers - Central, State and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs).  Other 
stakeholders that play a cruci al role are households, businesse s, industries, 
informal sector, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), communi ty-based 
organizations (CBOs), self-help groups (SHGs), etc.  Involvement of all these 
stakeholders is necessary at several stages of SWM.  Appendix 3.1 lists out the 
roles and major responsibilities of stakeholders involved in the process of 
SWM. 
3.2 Generation and assessment of waste 
A reliable assessment of different kinds of waste generated in the city limit is 
essential for planning and effective implementation of SWM.  Se ction 3.3.6 of 
MSWM Manual, 2000, stipulated that data on waste generation, we ight and 
volume should be collected by each authority for application in its own area of 
operation. 
The details of MSW generated by all ULBs (except BBMP) in the State for the 
period from 2013-14 to 2016-17 are given in Table 3.1: 
Table 3.1: Details of MSW generated by all ULBs (except BBMP) 
Years 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 
Ton per day (TPD) 5,284 5,197 5,342 5,506 
Note: Data for 2012-13 not furnished. 
Source: Annual Reports of KSPCB 
The details of generation, collection and processing of MSW during the years 
2012-13 to 2016-17 as per the information furnished by 35 test- checked ULBs 
are depicted in Chart 3.1: 
Chart 3.1: Generation, collection and processing of MSW in 35 test-
checked ULBs 
 
Source:  Information furnished by test-checked ULBs 
As evident from above, 92 per cent of the waste was collected and only 26 per 
cent was processed each year and a major portion of the remaining MSW was 
dumped at landfills, which would have a harmful impact on health and 
environment. 
1,343 1,370 1,428 1,529 1,555
1,221 1,248 1,309 1,407 1,438
122 121 118 122 117
277 288 323 405 441
944 960 986 1,002 998
0
400
800
1,200
1,600
2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17
TPD
MSW generated MSW collected Uncollected MSW MSW processed Unprocessed MSW

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
8 
The information furnished by 35 test-checked ULBs was not verified as survey 
was not conducted to assess the quantum of waste generated during the period 
from 2012-13 to 2015-16.  Most of the data on quantity of MSW were per capita 
based estimates.  However, as per Handbook on Service Level Ben chmarks 
(SLBs), per capita based assessments have low reliability 5. The quantum of 
special waste and C&D waste generated by ULBs, were not available with either 
KSPCB or DMA/ULBs. 
DMA stated (June 2017) that assessment of waste generation was conducted in 
the year 2005 for a period of five years and later in 2016 unde r Swachh Bharat 
Mission (SBM) scheme for similar period.  The fact, however, remains that after 
2010, no survey/assessment was done for the period 2010-16.  Au dit also 
attempted to estimate the per capita waste quantity by adopting  the municipal 
refuse generation rates suggested in MSWM Manual, 2000 (Section 3.3.6.2) and 
found that the per capita estimates indicated by ULBs were in variance with the 
audit estimation, as detailed in Appendix 3.2.  Hence, the assessment of waste 
by ULBs was not realistic. 
While accepting audit’s observation regarding MSW, the State Go vernment 
stated (May 2018) that assessment of plastic waste and C&D waste was being 
carried out in the SWM DPRs prepared under SBM.  The assessment of e-waste 
and bio-medical waste generated by households was not done as t he quantity 
generated was very little in comparison with MSW.  The reply is not convincing 
as these wastes require special h andling and disposal due to their physical and 
chemical characteristics. 
3.3 State Policy and strategy on solid waste management 
MSWM Manual 2000 (Section 25.2) stipulated that the State Gover nment 
should prepare a State Policy an d strategy on SWM.  The Secreta ry, UDD 
notified a State Policy for inte grated SWM in August 2004.  The  Policy 
highlighted that a long-term management strategy and action pla n would be 
developed.  We observed that str ategy documents and action plan s addressing 
the following crucial aspects were not prepared.  As a result, the State Policy 
was not fully operationalised.  
a. Assessment of MSW generation in v arious ULBs and identification  of the 
best possible means for managing it; 
b. Setting operational targets for each of the waste management activities and 
indicating the means of achieving them for various ULBs; 
c. Setting out roles and responsibilities of stakeholders under various contract 
arrangements; and 
d. Developing resource (human and financial) utilisation guideline s for 
different categories of ULBs. 
                                                             
5 Highest/preferred level of reliability - Waste generation esti mates based on quarterly 
survey/sample of statistically significant and representative n umber of households and 
establishments. Seasonal variation in waste quantity generation  is captured in these 
estimates. Waste collection is based on actual weighment of was te on a weighbridge at the 
disposal site (which is aggregate of waste measured at composti ng yard, sanitary landfill 
site, and waste taken out for recycling / reuse after it has been collected). 

Chapter-III 
9 
Subsequently, the MSWM Manual 2016 (Section 1.4.1.4) and Rule 1 1(a) of 
SWM Rules, 2016, stipulated that the Secretary, UDD should prepare the State 
Policy, consistent with these rules, National Policy on SWM and  National 
Urban Sanitation Policy of the MoUD, by April 2017.  Audit observed that this 
was not done.  Non-revision of State policy and strategy is bound to affect 
effective planning in all ULBs adversely.  The State Government  may refer to 
the efforts made by Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) in this regard 
(detailed in Appendix 11.1). 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that State Policy and st rategy as per 
SWM Rules, 2016 was under preparation stage (tender floated). 
3.4 Municipal solid waste management plan  
MSWM Manual, 2000 (Sections 26.1 and 26.2) and 2016 (Section 1. 4.5 and 
1.4.6) emphasised the need for ULBs to prepare a detailed SWM p lan, with 
short term (2-5 years) and long-term (20-25 years) actions.  The short-term plan 
should lead to the achievement of the long-term plan.  Each sho rt-term plan 
should be reviewed every 2-3 years, to ensure higher success of  implementing 
all plan activities.  Short-ter m plan should cover aspects of i nstitutional 
strengthening, community mobilisation, waste minimisation initi atives, waste 
collection and transportation, treatment and disposal, and financial outlay. 
We observed that during the a udit period (2012-13 to 2016-17), municipal 
authorities neither prepared s hort-term plans nor long-term pla ns, which 
deprived ULBs the opportunity of adopting a systematic approach to SWM.  In 
the absence of these plans, the planning and selection of infrastructure projects 
in ULBs was, to a large extent, driven by perceived availability of funds rather 
than a need-based analysis.  Audit observed instances of construction of sanitary 
landfill pit without purchasing sieving/sorting machine, inadmissible works, 
idle investments, etc., as detailed in subsequent chapters. 
The State Government accepted (May 2018) the audit observation and stated 
that as 100 per cent  implementation of Integrated Solid Waste Management 
could take some time, short-term and long-term activities that needed to be 
taken up would be circulated to all ULBs shortly. 
3.5 Detailed project reports fo r solid waste management 
The Government of India launched its flagship scheme of Swachh Bharat 
Mission-Urban (SBM) in October 2014 and SWM was one of its six 
components.  As per Paragraph 7.2 of SBM Guidelines, ULBs were to prepare 
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for SWM of their city in consultation with the 
State Government.  It also stipulated that the State Government  may handhold 
ULBs in quickly preparing DPRs for SWM by shortlisting/identify ing private 
or government agencies. 
We observed that the DUDCs invited (November-December 2015) ten ders for 
preparing DPRs for all ULBs under their jurisdiction from agencies empanelled 
by GoI and entrusted the work on the basis of terms of reference (ToR) provided 
by the State Government.  The ToR stipulated time limit of 50 days for 
completion and finalisation of each DPR. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
10 
As of March 2018, DPRs of 223 out of 281 ULBs (except BBMP) wer e 
prepared; of which, High Powered Committee approved 218.  In the remaining 
58 ULBs, preparation of DPRs did not commence, even after a lapse of more 
than two years. 
In respect of 35 test-checked ULBs, six 6 empanelled agencies prepared DPRs 
for 28 ULBs. CC, Ballari and Hubballi-Dharwad Municipal Corpora tion 
(HDMC) prepared DPRs on their own.  As of March 2018, all the 30 DPRs were 
approved.  In five 7 new ULBs (erstwhile Gram Panchayats), DPR preparation 
was not taken up as these were upgraded during 2015-16. 
Review of DPRs of 30 test-checked ULBs showed the following deficiencies: 
3.5.1 Inadequate estimation of waste generated 
Section 1.4.3.3.1 of Manual on MSWM, 2016 stipulated that for the purpose of 
long term planning, the average amount of waste disposed by a specific class of 
generators may be estimated only by averaging data from several  samples.  
These samples were to be collected continuously for a period of  seven days at 
multiple representative locations within the jurisdiction of the ULB, in each of 
the three main seasons viz. summer, winter and rainy season.  Waste should be 
aggregated over the seven-day period, weighed and averaged. These quantities 
could then be extrapolated to the entire ULB and per capita generation assessed. 
Audit observed that none of the 30 ULBs for which DPRs were prepared, 
adhered to the prescribed methodology. Twenty
8 test-checked ULBs assessed 
waste generated by conducting a sample survey for three consecu tive days in 
one season only.  One ULB (T. Narasipura) assessed waste genera tion by 
conducting a sample survey for seven days in a single season.  One ULB 
(HDMC) did not conduct any surv ey but adopted population estima tion/per 
capita method to arrive at the average waste generated in ULB.  Remaining eight 
ULBs claimed to have quantified the waste by collecting samples but there was 
no documentary evidence for having conducted any survey. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that due to lack of time , 3 to 7 days 
sampling period for short term planning was followed and uniformity could not 
be ensured.  The reply, however, does not address the issue of estimation of 
waste for long term planning as already discussed in Paragraph 3.2. 
 
                                                             
6 M/s. All India Institute of Local Self Government (AIILSG), Pu ne (Manvi and Raibag); M/s. 
IRG Systems South Asia Private L imited (Bidar, Dandeli, Karwar, Bhatkal, Humnabad, 
Kumta, T. Narasipura, Honnavara); M/s. MaRS Planning and Engineering Services Pvt Ltd, 
Ahmedabad (Hosapete, Nanjangud, Sagar, Udupi, Magadi, Malur, Ku dligi); M/s. MSV 
International Inc. (Maddur); M/s. Tata Consulting Engineers ltd  (Mangaluru, Bagalkote, 
Koppa, Sringeri); and M/s. Tide Technocrats Pvt Ltd, Bengaluru (Tumakuru,  Chintamani, 
Shidlaghatta, Sira, Hiriyur, Gudibande). 
7 Three TMCs (Kakkera, Mugalkhod and Ugar Khurd); two TPs (Ainap ura and Chinchali). 
8 CC, Tumakuru; CMCs - Bidar, Chintamani, Dandeli, Hosapete, Kar war, Nanjangud, 
Shidlaghatta, Sira and Udupi; TMCs - Bhatkal, Hiriyur, Humnabad , Kumta, Maddur and 
Manvi; TPs - Gudibande, Honnavara, Kudligi and Raibag. 

Chapter-III 
11 
3.5.2 Incomplete coverage of waste generators and non-assessment of 
unprocessed waste dumped at landfill 
A complete and reliable database is essential for effective pla nning.  Section 
1.4.3.3.2 of Manual on MSWM, 2016 stipulated that multiple samp les at 
multiple locations need to be taken to determine waste composit ion as daily, 
seasonal and temporal fluctuations are usually observed within a ULB.  Hence, 
data on waste generation should capture all types of waste generation (including 
temporal fluctuations) and exis ting quantity of unprocessed MSW  dumped in 
landfill sites in and around the city. 
We observed that none of the DPRs included generation of solid waste from 
public buildings such as places of public worship (except Udupi  and Maddur), 
industrial buildings (except HDMC and Sagar), etc.  The DPRs did not capture 
and include temporal fluctuations (festivals/functions – social, economic, 
religious, political, etc.) in generation of waste in urban limits.  Thus, the 
database lacked complete and significant data required for waste assessment. 
Further, 21 out of 30 DPRs did not mention the quantum of unprocessed waste 
dumped at landfill sites.  DPR of CMC, Sira indicated the quant um of waste 
accumulated (3,070 tons) at the dumpsite based on a topographical survey
9 (July 
2016).  We compiled the weighbridge data maintained by CMC, Sira and 
observed that waste dumped at this site during the period of 15  months (April 
2015 to July 2016) was 7,647 tons.  Hence, the quantum of waste  accumulated 
as mentioned in the DPR was inconsistent with ULB’s data. Simil arly, the 
authenticity of quantification as mentioned in DPRs of remaining eight
10 ULBs 
was not verified as these ULBs did not have any/working weighbridge facility. 
The State Government accepted (May 2018) the observation regard ing 
incomplete coverage and stated that actual position in respect of CMC, Sira 
would be intimated to audit. 
3.5.3 Non-coverage of special waste 
The State Level Technical Committee (constituted in January 201 6 to accord 
technical approval to DPRs) opined in its first meeting (February 2016) that 
measures to manage other wastes like e-waste, hazardous waste, hospital waste, 
industrial waste, etc., should be addressed in DPRs. 
We observed that none of the 30 DPRs addressed measures to manage e-waste, 
hazardous waste, hospital waste and industrial waste. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that this issue was cons idered in the 
recent DPRs prepared in the year 2017-18.  It further stated th at assessment of 
e-waste, bio-medical waste and plastic waste was not done earlier as the quantity 
compared with generation of MSW w as very little.  The fact rema ins that the 
directives of State Level Technical Committee were not complied  with and 
documentary evidence in support of the reply was not furnished. 
                                                             
9 Topographical surveys are used to identify and map the contours of the ground and existing 
features on the surface of the earth or slightly above or below the earth's surface (i.e. trees, 
buildings, streets, walkways, manholes, utility poles, retaining walls, etc). 
10 HDMC; CMCs – Chintamani and Shidlaghatta; TMCs - Hiriyur, Madd ur and Manvi;  
TPs - Gudibande and Raibag. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
12 
3.5.4 Incorrect assessment of design capacity 
Quantity of waste generated in the city needs to be assessed to establish 
adequacy of existing systems and to plan for augmentation of tr eatment and 
disposal facilities. 
We observed that 13 of the test-checked DPRs wrongly assessed t he design 
capacity of disposal facilities in ULBs.  Table 3.2 depicts significant cases of 
over/under assessment of design capacity. 
Table 3.2: Statement showing over/under assessment of design capacity in DPRs 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
ULB 
(Weight in TPD) Resultant 
Over(+)/Under(-) 
assessment of 
capital expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Projection of 
waste 
generation 
(2021) 
Existing 
capacity 
Design 
capacity 
required 
Design 
capacity 
exhibited 
in DPR 
Over(+)/Under(-) 
assessment of 
design capacity 
1 Mangaluru 411 200 211 422 (+)211 6.28 
2 Maddur 11.10 0.38 10.72 15.30 (+)4.58 2.20 
3 Bidar 83.68 0 83.68 104.77 (+)21.09 2.25 
4 Bagalkote 56.96 20 36.96 59 (+)22.04 2.28 
5 Koppa 2.49 0.94 1.55 2.59 (+)1.04 0.41 
6 HDMC 478 3 475 400 (-)75 (-)11.28 
Source: DPRs of test-checked ULBs 
There is a possibility of over/under assessment of design capacity due to 
unrealistic assessment of waste as detailed in Paragraph 3.2. 
3.6 Non-preparation of contingency plans 
MSWM Manuals, 2000 (Section 26.1)  and 2016 (Section 5.4) stipulated that 
ULBs should prepare contingency plans for appropriate storage of waste, to tide 
over situations of non-performance of processing/treatment/disposal facilities. 
Requirement of a contingency plan was neither envisaged in the State Policy on 
SWM (2004) nor addressed by any of the test-checked ULBs.  As a result, ULBs 
were not prepared to tackle any unforeseen situation, crises su ch as public 
protest in CC, Tumakuru, when the villagers did not allow (2014 ) passage of 
waste transportation vehicles, resulting in piling up of waste on streets, instances 
of fire at landfill sites in CC, Ballari, HDMC, CMC, Bidar, CMC, Dandeli, etc. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that a contingency plan to tackle any 
unforeseen situations would be included in the State Policy and strategy. 
3.7 Strategy for implemen tation of 3R approach 
MSWM Manuals, 2000 (Section 2.3) and 2016 (Section 2.1) prescri be a step-
wise approach in the order of environmental priority for differ ent waste 
management options with prevention being the most preferred option and 
disposal the least favoured.  It is closely linked to the 3R (R educe, Reuse, and 
Recycle) approach, which helps to reduce the quantity of waste, t h e  c o s t  
associated with its handling, and its environmental impacts. 

Chapter-III 
13 
The Manuals also stipulated that waste minimisation strategies require policy 
interventions at the national, state and local level.  ULBs wer e to play a 
pioneering role by reducing the amount of waste to be handled. 
 
Source: MSWM Manual, 2016 
We observed that though the prin ciple of creating public awaren ess regarding 
minimising of waste was mentioned in the State policy (2004), t he State 
Government had not operationalised a focussed waste minimisation strategy so 
far (December 2017).  With the exception of TMC, Kumta, no othe r test-
checked ULBs took up initiatives to promote waste minimisation and reuse 
activity exclusively. 
Good practice 
TMC, Kumta introduced (January 2016) 
decentralised composting systems such as 
pipe composting (household waste) and pit 
composting (horticulture and market 
waste) for converting wet waste into 
compost. TMC also initiated collection of 
food waste from 40 restaurants and 
marriage halls.  These initiatives resulted in 
processing of 1,684 tons of wet waste 
during the period from January 2016 to 
March 2017, thus, reducing the burden on 
the landfill site to that extent. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that the strategy for wa ste 
minimisation was being adopted in the upcoming State policy. 
3.8 Non-involvement of all stakeholders in planning 
The provisions of MSW Rules, 2000 and 2016, and State Policy (2 004) 
recommended extensive involvement of community in waste managem ent.  
Manual on MSWM, 2016 (Section 1.4.4) provided for constitution of a core 
team or advisory team (internal stakeholders) involving all departments 
concerned with SWM services for developing the MSWM plan and 
involvement of the community (external stakeholders comprising households, 
informal sector, NGOs, CBOs, SHGs, women’s groups, etc.), in MSWM 
planning and implementation. 


Report No.4 of the year 2018 
14 
We observed that neither a core/advisory team (internal stakeho lders) nor a 
stakeholder committee (external stakeholders) was formed in any  of the test-
checked ULBs. 
Although this was not done for 17 years, the State Government stated (May 
2018) that this would be considered in the upcoming SWM State p olicy and 
comprehensive strategy. 
3.9 Non-integration of informal waste collectors in waste 
management 
MSWM Manuals, 2000 (Sections 8.6 and 9.6), 2016 (Section 2.3.7)  and SWM 
Rules, 2016 (Clauses 11(c) and 15(c)) acknowledged the primary role played 
by the informal sector of waste pickers, waste collectors and recycling industry 
in reducing waste.  SWM Rules, 2016 requires the State Government to provide 
broad guidelines regarding integration of waste pickers or informal waste 
collectors with the waste management system.  It is the duty of ULB to establish 
a system to recognise organisations of informal waste collectors and establish a 
system to facilitate their participation in SWM. 
We observed that though the State Policy (2004) proposed utilising the services 
of NGOs to provide support to the informal sector, no guidelines were issued in 
this regard.  The test-checked ULBs (except CMC, Bagalkote) failed to 
recognise organisations of informal waste collectors and to integrate them in 
SWM.  CMC, Bagalkote, made (January 2013) a beginning by identi fying rag 
pickers and issued identity cards to 85 rag pickers (as of September 2017).  The 
model adopted by Pune Municipal Corporation is detailed in Appendix 11.2. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that steps would be take n to 
enumerate waste pickers and impart necessary training. 
Recommendation 1: The State Government may expedite preparation of State 
policy incorporating strategies for waste minimisation and management. 
Recommendation 2: The State Government needs to devise better information 
systems to assist ULBs in prepara tion of action plans for effective 
implementation of waste management.  
Recommendation 3: The State Gover nment may ensure pro-active and 
continuous engagement of non-government sector in waste management. 
3.10 Institutional mechanism 
For planning an efficient and advanced MSWM system, it is essen tial to have 
an efficient institutional structure besides having adequate in frastructure and 
equipment (Sections 19.1 and 25.3 of Manual on MSWM, 2000 and S ection 
1.4.5.4 of Manual on MSWM, 2016).   
The State Government constituted the three state-level committe es required as 
per SBM guidelines (2014) and SWM Rules, 2016.  

Chapter-III 
15 
The District and ULB level Committees were not constituted, indicating lack of 
effective institutional mechanism leading to poor support to th e effective 
implementation of SWM plans.  The Committee-wise details are in dicated in 
Appendix 3.3. 
Good practices on engagement of ward level committees in Corpor ation of 
Cochin and Andhra Pradesh are detailed in Appendix 11.3. 
3.11 Outsourcing of solid was te management activities 
The test-checked ULBs outsourced few of the activities and the extent of 
outsourcing was higher in test-checked CCs compared with other ULBs.  
Majority of the other tiers of t est-checked ULBs (CMCs/TMCs/TPs) were 
managing SWM services on their own, exception being: 
 three CMCs (Dandeli, Nanjangud and Udupi); TMC, Bhatkal and TP, 
Gudibande which engaged SHGs/pri vate agencies for door-to-door 
collection; and 
 four CMCs (Bagalkote, Karwar, Shidlaghatta and Udupi) and two TMCs 
(Maddur and Malur) which engaged private sector for street sweeping and 
transportation. 
Audit reviewed the terms and conditions of the agreements entered into by test-
checked ULBs and observed following deficiencies which adversel y affected 
the interest of the Government/service providers. 
 Grievance redressal mechanism - SWM is a citizen-centric activi ty.  The 
agreements, however, did not have local grievance redressal mec hanism 
against the service provider.  As a result, the status of citizens’ grievances 
and their redressal was not ensured; 
 Force Majeure clause – the agreements contained force majeure c lauses.  
However, the removal of waste after a natural disaster is seminal to public 
health since failure to remove waste would increase the chances  o f  
epidemics and spread of fatal diseases.  Hence, an appropriate clause to 
take care of restoration of services should be included; 
 Arbitration - ULBs function under the control of DCs.  However,  t h e  
agreements contained arbitration c l a u s e  r e f e r r i n g  t h e  a r b i t r a t ion to the 
concerned DCs.  This not only evidenced departmental bias but w as also 
against the spirit of Government Order dated 10.01.2014 which d irected 
all arbitral proceedings to the Karnataka Arbitration Centre; and 
 Segregation - Source segregation by waste generators will not b e 
successful unless segregated collection and transportation of segregated 
waste is practiced by the ULBs. 
a) HDMC entrusted (November 2009) the work of door-to-door coll ection 
of MSW from 49 out of 67 wards to private agencies.  The agreements, however, 
did not mention about segregation of waste.  As a result, mixed waste was being 
transported and dumped at landfill. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
16 
b) Similarly, CC, Tumakuru, entered into an agreement (June 2015) with 
M/s. Sadhana Enviro Engineers Services, Bengaluru for operation  and 
maintenance (O&M) activities wherein one of the conditions was that CC would 
be delivering mixed municipal waste to the agency.  There was no commitment 
clause for reducing the amount of mixed waste over the years to reach a goal of 
100 per cent segregation in a fixed duration.  
 The scope of the agreement entered into by CC, Tumakuru envisag ed 
payment of electricity charges, water charges, payments for staff, etc., by 
the contractor.  We observed that CC, Tumakuru incorrectly computed the 
monthly deductible amount resulting in excess payment of `40.86 lakh 
during the period from June 2015 to February 2017. 
 Ambiguous terms and conditions - The terms of agreements should  b e  
clear and free from ambiguity.  CC, Tumakuru engaged (February 2014) 
a service provider for door-to-door collection and transportation of MSW.  
Instead of prescribing specific periodicity for collection of dry waste, CC 
stipulated that dry waste was to be collected ‘daily or twice i n a week 
periodically whichever was convenient to the service provider’.  Further, 
the penalty for non-collection of MSW even for a single day was specified 
as ‘non-collection part of that area’s amount’.  Such a condition was vague 
and therefore, difficult to enforce.  Further, the agreement did not specify 
the method of calculation of penalty. 
 Basis for payments - Moisture increases the weight of MSW, and therefore 
the cost of collection and transportation increase. To prevent an increase 
in weight, waste should be insulated from rainfall or other extraneous 
water (Section 3.3.7.2 of Manual 2000 and Section 1.4.3.3.3 of Manual 
2016).  Further, Guidebook on Swachh Bharat stipulated that the cleaning 
work should never be entrusted only on a per-ton-payment basis or per-
trip distance basis.  This would encourage malpractice of falsi fying bills 
for trips made and resist waste minimisation.  So payment should be based 
on a maximum allowed weight per vehicle volume.  Contracts can 
preferably be given on a per-capita or per-household basis (Section 6.6). 
CC, Mangaluru entrusted (August 2014) the work of door-to-door 
collection and transportation to M/s. Antony Waste Handling Cell Private 
Limited, Mumbai, at the rate of 
`3,201 per ton for North Zone and at the 
rate of `2,051 per ton for South Zone.  The work of O&M of composting 
plant, vermi composting and sanitary landfill site at Mangaluru  w a s  
entrusted (May 2013) to M/s. Unique Waste Processing Company Limited 
at rate of `238 per ton (tipping fee) of incoming MSW. 
We observed that the CC did not take cognizance of the fact tha t 
Mangaluru is a coastal city and moisture content of MSW increas es 
considerably during monsoon period (June to October).  We analysed the 
month-wise data for the period from 2013-14 to 2016-17 and obse rved 
that the average quantities of incoming waste during monsoon period were 
higher by 2,319.29 tons than those during normal period (Novemb er to 
May).  The payments to the extent of `51.20 lakh to M/s. Antony Waste 
Handling Cell Private Limited and `26.60 lakh to M/s. Unique Waste 

Chapter-III 
17 
Processing Company Limited towards excess quantities could have been 
avoided had the CC factored the impact of moisture content while 
finalising the contract. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that comments would be submitted to 
audit on receipt of replies from test-checked ULBs. 
Recommendation 4: The State Government may revise the model agreement 
for each SWM service/activity considerin g the deficiencies pointed out.  It 
should be ensured that the terms and conditions of the agreement are clear, 
free from ambiguity and protect the interests of ULB/Government. 
3.12 Service level benchmarks 
Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD), Government of India, laun ched 
(2008) the Service Level Benchmarking (SLB) initiative covering water supply, 
waste water, SWM and storm water drainage.  The 13 th and 14th FCs have also 
endorsed the principle of benchmarking and included SLB as one of the 
conditions for the allocation of  performance-based grants to ULB s .   M o U D  
defined a common minimum framew ork for monitoring and reporting  on 
performance indicators; of which  eight performance indicators (detailed in 
Appendix 3.4) pertain to SWM. 
3.12.1 Targets and achievement in test checked Urban Local Bodies 
Analysis of SLB declarations (2016-17) by 30 test-checked ULBs (except five 
newly formed ULBs) in respect of these performance indicators ( except 
efficiency in redressal of customer complaints) showed that in certain cases, 
targets were set at extremely low levels.  As per ULBs’ declara tions, extent of 
segregation, recovery of MSW, scientific disposal and cost reco very of MSW 
in majority of the test-checked ULBs were significantly below t he targets 
fixed/benchmarks.  Achievements of these ULBs vis-à-vis targets and 
benchmarks in respect of these performance indicators are depic ted in 
Appendix 3.5. 
The correctness of the achievements declared by ULBs was not ve rified as 
ULBs did not furnish any documentary evidence in support of their claims.  The 
Handbook on SLB prescribed by MoUD emphasises the need to ensur e 
reliability of measurement and specifies four levels of reliabi lity for each 
indicator.  ULBs should strive to move towards the highest/pref erred level of 
reliability. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that for any given ULB, performance 
indicators are improving progressively year by year.  The reply, however, does 
not address the audit observation  r e g a r d i n g  c o r r e c t n e s s  o f  t h e  data on 
achievements vis-à-vis SLBs. 
Recommendation 5: The State Government may draw a time-bound plan for 
ULBs to achieve the highest/preferred level of reliability of SLB data. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
18 
3.13 Allocation of responsibility and accountability 
Identification of nodal agency and implementing bodies, and all ocation of 
responsibility and accountability to these are essential for ensuring smooth and 
effective compliance with laws and rules.  Section 1.4.5.4 of M SWM Manual, 
2016 strongly recommends that ULBs should have an SWM cell or S WM 
department having staff with technical and managerial skills sp ecific to MSW 
management. 
As per provisions of MSW Rules, 2000 (Clause 5) and SWM Rules, 2016 
(Clause 11), Secretary, UDD has the overall responsibility for the enforcement 
of the provisions of these rules in the metropolitan cities (ex cept BBMP).  The 
Director of Municipal Administra tion (DMA) assists the Secretary, UDD, in 
ensuring implementation of provisions of these rules by all ULB s and is the 
nodal agency at State level.  An SWM cell, headed by Executive Engineer, 
assists the DMA on technical and managerial aspects of MSWM.  DMA also 
coordinates with State Pollution Control Board to ensure compliance of SWM 
norms prescribed under the relevant rules. 
 Lack of accountability at district level 
At district level, Deputy Commissioner (DC) of the district wit h the assistance 
of Project Director, DUDC, is res ponsible for monitoring activities of ULBs 
including SWM.  Executive Engineer and Assistant Executive Engineer support 
the Project Director in discharg ing his duties.  We, however, o bserved that 
DUDC did not have a dedicated SWM cell or staff with technical and 
managerial skills specific to MSWM.  There is no record to indi cate whether 
DUDC is monitoring SWM related activity.  Its role was confined to obtaining 
approval of DC for action plans (SWM) of ULBs and assist ULBs in obtaining 
approval of DC for designated site identified for C&D waste, co mmon facility 
for bio-medical waste disposal, etc. 
The State Government (May 2018) s tated that posts of Assistant Executive 
Engineer (Environment) were proposed at DUDCs in the recent amendment to 
Municipality (C&R) Rules exclusively for effective implementation of SWM at 
ULB level. 
 Manpower/staff constraints 
At the ULB level, there was no required SWM cell to take care o f SWM 
activities exclusively. The exis ting staff manage both SWM and sanitation 
activities in the ULBs.  The staff position for SWM cum sanitation activities in 
the test-checked ULBs is given in Table 3.3. 
Table 3.3: Statement showing the staff position (sanctioned strength, person-in-
position and vacancy) for SWM cum sanitation activities in test-checked ULBs 
ULB 
Environment Engineers Health inspectors Pourakarmikas 
SS PIP Vacancy 
(Percentage) SS PIP Vacancy 
(Percentage) SS PIP Vacancy 
(Percentage) 
CCs 21 14 7 (33) 120 27 93 (78) 3,379 1,112 2,267 (67) 
CMCs 11 09 2 (18) 66 30 36 (55) 1,600 574 1,026 (64) 
TMCs 12 07 5 (42) 37 12 25 (68) 485 204 281 (58) 
TPs - - - 8 1 7 (88) 120 76 44 (37) 
Total 44 30 14 (32) 231 70 161 (70) 5,584 1,966 3,618 (65) 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked ULBs     SS: Sanctioned strength; PIP: Person-in-position 

Chapter-III 
19 
It is seen from the table above that there was shortage of manpower at all cadres 
viz. Environment Engineer (32 per cent); Health Inspectors (70 per cent) and 
Pourakarmikas (65 per cent ).  For TPs, there was no sanctioned post of 
Environment Engineer.  Hence, existing Health Inspector was in- charge of 
SWM in TPs.  In order to address the vacancies in the post of Pourakarmikas, 
all test-checked ULBs except the five newly upgraded ULBs outso urced 
manpower. 
The posts of Environment Engineers were created during July, 2004.  We 
observed that the post was vacant in five test-checked CMCs/TMC (Dandeli, 
Hosapete, Humnabad, Nanjangud and Sira) for periods ranging up to five years 
during the review period.  Absence of technical officers affect ed the 
implementation of approved action plans. 
In CMC, Nanjangud, purchase of auto tippers was planned in 2013-14, 2015-16 
and 2016-17 but actual purchase was effected (June 2017) only after the posting 
of an Environment Engineer in December 2016.  CMC has been using pushcarts 
for collection of MSW from door-to-door instead of using auto t ippers as per 
norms included in State policy issued in 2004.  The collection of MSW was, 
thus, partial (only 9 out of 27 wards covered).  Purchase of auto tippers would 
have ensured greater coverage in collection of waste. 
More than 50 per cent of the posts of Health Inspector were vacant in the test-
checked ULBs.  Apart from SWM cum sanitation activities, Health  Inspectors 
were also required to manage several other activities such as b irth and death 
registration; preparation and updation of statistics; initiate action for removal of 
unauthorised hoardings; tackle animal menace, etc.  The combination of an 
extensive job profile and acute  shortage of manpower could have  an adverse 
impact on the ability to meet the rigorous demands of SWM activities. 
Severe shortage of manpower affected effective implementation and monitoring 
of SWM activities particularly c ollection and segregation of MS W in ULBs 
(detailed in subsequent paragraphs on collection and segregation). 
The State Government accepted the audit observation and stated (May 2018) 
that necessary steps would be taken to bridge the gap in availa bility of human 
resource. 
Recommendation 6:  The State Governm ent may ensure that the required 
District/ULB level Committees are constituted for effective institutional 
mechanism and implementation of SWM plans. 
3.14 Capacity building 
Manual on MSWM, 2000 (Section 19.1) stipulated that measures must be taken 
for institutional strengthening and internal capacity building,  so that efforts 
made can be sustained over a period and the system put in place c o u l d  b e  
managed well.  Clauses 11(k) and 15 (zc) of SWM Rules, 2016, required UDD 
and ULBs to arrange for capacity building of staff (including contract workers) 
in managing solid waste, segregation and transportation or proc essing of such 
waste at source. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
20 
Test-check of documents collected from training centres viz. State Institute of 
Urban Development, Mysuru (SIUD)  and City Managers’ Association  
Karnataka (CMAK), Bengaluru, showed that training, workshops, c onferences 
on SWM were conducted for various target groups such as Mayors,  Elected 
Representatives, Project Direct ors, Commissioners/Chief Officer s, Engineers, 
Health Inspectors and Pourakarmikas. 
 Poor turnout for training  
SIUD is the nodal agency to develop training modules/content an d provide 
training to personnel of UDD for different urban development related activities.  
Accordingly, DMA provided funds for training courses to SIUD.  The progress 
reports of SIUD revealed that it conducted (2012-13 to 2016-17) 31 training 
courses in connection with SWM activities. 
Check of the training slots provided and those actually attended by officers/staff 
of ULBs showed that th e utilisation of training slots in 21 of these 31 courses 
was less than 75 per cent.  Course-wise details are given in Appendix 3.6.  Poor 
utilisation of training activities rendered the effectiveness o f training 
questionable.  We also observed that there were no mandatory modules 
prescribed for SWM staff. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that the shortcomings in training 
would be addressed. 
Thus, absence of adequate and tr ained staff is indicative of the lack of 
commitment of State Government towards SWM. 
Recommendation 7:  The State Govern ment may devise mandatory modules 
for training all personnel involved in SWM and ensure coverage of all 
personnel within a specified period. 

21 
Chapter IV 
Financial management 
4.1 Assessment of requirement of funds 
In accordance with the provisions11 of KM Act, 1964 and KMC Act, 1976, the 
Commissioner/Chief Officer of ea ch ULB prepares the budget esti mate 
indicating the receipt of funds from various sources and allocates the resources 
to various activities undertaken by it and presents it to the G overning Council 
for approval.  After the approval by the Governing Council, ULB s forward the 
budget to the DMA and the Government. 
It appears that the KM Act, 1964 and the KMC Act, 1976 are not in consonance 
with the Constitution provisions, as contained in the Constitution (74 th 
Amendment) Act, 1992, as the Constitution provisions are silent  about the 
approval of the budget while both the Acts specifically mention  the role of the 
State Government in sanctioning /modifying the budget.  However,  it is 
observed that in practice, in Ka rnataka the Governing Council forwards the 
budget to DMA and the State Government for information. 
Scrutiny of the financial stateme nts of the test-checked ULBs for the years 
2014-15 to 2016-17 revealed that the ULBs were mainly dependent  o n  
Government grants.  The dependency on Government grants was on an average 
in excess of 60 per cent. 
Sustainable financing is paramount to ensure discharge of any f unction.  The 
major types of expenditure 12 are capital expenditure and revenue expenditure, 
which take care of fixed costs for land, plant, machinery, dail y expenses of 
managing MSW, refurbishment costs, O&M costs and contingent costs, etc.   
We observed that until the preparation of DPRs, none of the test-checked ULBs 
assessed the requirement of capital and revenue funds for SWM a ctivities and 
hence, they were unaware of the resource deficit.  Though DPRs prepared 
during 2016-17 assessed the resour ce deficit, these failed to a ddress measures 
for bridging this deficit.  But  audit did not come across any instance of ULB 
asking for funds from the State Government. 
The State Government admitted (May 2018) that ULBs had to depend on grants 
released from Central and State Governments and hence took up t he SWM 
works based on availability of funds. 
4.2 Sources of funds for so lid waste management 
The various sources of financing for waste management are indic ated in 
Table 4.1: 
Table 4.1: Sources of financing in ULBs for waste management 
Sl. 
No. Source Particulars 
1 Central 
Grants 
 13th Finance Commission - capital expenditure,  
 14th Finance Commission - capital expenditure, 
 Swachh Bharat Mission - capital expenditure 
                                                 
11 Section 287 of KM Act, 1964 and  Section 167 to 170 of KMC Act, 1976. 
12 Paragraph 1.4.5.6.1 of MSWM Manual, 2016. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
22 
Sl. 
No. Source Particulars 
2 State 
Grants 
 State Finance Commission (tied) -revenue expenditure, 
 State Finance Commission (Untied) - capital/revenue expenditure, 
 State Finance Commission (entry tax devolution) - capital expenditure 
3 
Own 
Sources 
(Municipal 
Fund) 
 Levy of SWM cess/user charges, 
 Sale of products and by-products (compost, etc.), 
 Sale of recyclables  
(Own sources are utilised for revenue expenditure) 
The funds under 13th and 14th Finance Commissions (FC) in the form of basic 
grants and performance grants and the State Finance Commission (SFC) grants 
were released to ULBs on weighted average method13. 
4.3 Receipts and expenditure  
The details of funds received and spent during the period 2012- 13 to 2016-17 
in 35 test-checked ULBs are shown in Table 4.2. 
Table 4.2: Year-wise details of receipts and expenditure under SWM in 
35 test-checked ULBs 
(` in crore) 
Year 
Opening 
balance 
(Capital) 
Receipts Total funds 
available Expenditure Closing 
balance 
(Capital) Revenue Capital Revenue Capital Revenue Capital 
2012-13 8.10 101.27 38.47 101.27 46.57 101.27 29.68 16.89 
2013-14 16.89 119.53 48.12 119.53 65.01 119.53 27.14 37.87 
2014-15 37.87 127.12 34.17 127.12 72.04 127.12 18.54 53.50 
2015-16 53.50 152.01 22.13 152.01 75.63 152.01 10.57 65.06 
2016-17 65.06 177.45 44.83 177.45 109.89 177.45 16.70 93.19 
Total  677.38 187.72   677.38 102.63  
Source: Information furnished by ULBs 
It could be seen from the above table that the capital expenditure on SWM was 
not commensurate with the funds available resulting in accumulation of 
balances to the tune of `93.19 crore at the end of March 2017.  ULBs did not 
utilise the funds provided for creation of capital assets.  In comparison, the funds 
provided for revenue expenditure were utilised in full by the ULBs.   
Table 4.3 shows the source-wise details of receipts and expenditure in the test-
checked ULBs during the period 2012-13 to 2016-17. 
Table 4.3: Source-wise details of receipts and expenditure under SWM in 
35 ULBs 
(` in crore) 
Source of funds Opening 
balance Receipts
Total 
funds 
available
Expenditure Closing 
balance 
Percentage of  
unspent amount 
13th FC 6.40 68.25 74.65 46.82 27.83 37 
14th FC 0.00 35.35 35.35 6.10 29.25 83 
SFC-Untied 1.70 52.41 54.11 43.84 10.27 19 
                                                 
13 In weighted average method, funds are allocated to ULBs on per centage basis determined in 
proportion to total population (40 per cent), area (20 per cent), Scheduled Caste/Scheduled 
Tribe population (20 per cent) and literacy (20 per cent). 

Chapter-IV 
23 
Source of funds Opening 
balance Receipts
Total 
funds 
available
Expenditure Closing 
balance 
Percentage of  
unspent amount 
SFC-Entry tax 
devolution 0.00 17.79 17.79 3.53 14.26 80 
Municipal Fund 0.00 405.70 405.70 405.70 0.00 - 
Others (SFC 
tied, SBM, etc.) 0.00 285.60 285.60 274.02 11.58   4 
Total 8.10 865.10 873.20 780.01 93.19 11 
Source: Information furnished by ULBs 
Table above indicates that municipal fund which is used for revenue expenditure 
was spent fully on daily expenses of managing MSW, refurbishment costs, and 
O&M, etc.  However, ULBs were deficient in asset creation as can be seen from 
the expenditure incurred under 13th FC (37 per cent), 14th FC (83 per cent) and 
the grants provided under SFC-entry tax devolution (80 per cent).  ULB-wise 
details are indicated in Appendix 4.1 .  Further analysis revealed that the 
utilisation of the grants was less in CCs when compared to CMCs , TMCs and 
TPs.  The category-wise utilisation of capital funds in the test-checked ULBs is 
depicted in Chart 4.1: 
Chart 4.1: Category-wise utilisation of funds in test-checked ULBs 
 
We observed that: 
(i) Fifteen test-checked ULBs did not utilise even a single rupee of the grant 
of `11.71 crore released as at the end of March 2017 under SFC.  ULBs 
attributed this to non-preparation of action plan, procedural lapses, etc.;   
(ii) Twenty-six test-checked ULBs did not utilise the entire allocat ion as of 
March 2017 despite the end of the 13th FC period.  CC, Tumakuru utilised 
`79.10 lakh (towards purchase of enzyme culture for preventing b ad 
smell in SWM plant - `27.76 lakh and yearly maintenance of SWM plant 
-`51.34 lakh) that were of the nat ure of revenue expenditure.  Th is was 
against the 13th FC guidelines, which stipulated use of funds for creation 
of capital assets; and 
(iii) Nine and 19 ULBs test-checked allocated less than 15 per cent of the 14th 
FC grants received during 2015-16 and 2016-17 respectively. Twe lve14 
ULBs did not utilise any amount allocated for SWM under the 14th FC. 
                                                 
14 CCs - Ballari, HDMC and Mangaluru; CMCs - Dandeli, Hosapete, N anjangud, Shidlaghatta 
and Udupi; TMCs - Kakkera, Magadi and Ugar Khurd; TP, Chinchali. 
0 1 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 0
CCs
CMCs
TMCs
TPs
43
79
79
84
8
20
45
69
6
22
24
43
Percentage of utilisation
SFC-Entry tax devolution 14th FC 13th FC

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
24 
The non-utilisation of funds received under the CFC/SFC thus, resulted in non-
creation of infrastructure at landfill sites such as constructi on of compound 
walls, windrow platforms, interna l drains and roads; purchase of segregating 
and screening machineries; purchase of vehicles for collection and 
transportation, construction of v ermi-compost sheds, dry waste collection 
centres, etc. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that ULBs were asked to hold back 
procurement and other infrastructure activities till the SWM DPRs are approved 
in order to prevent ineffectual expenditure in waste management sector due to 
lack of detailed comprehensive plan.  It further stated that th e funds would be 
utilised in due course.  The Government’s reply is non-committa l since it does 
not specify the period within which the funds would be utilised. 
4.4 Resource-expenditure gap 
Own resources form a major source of revenue of ULBs in meeting their O&M 
expenses.  Hence, strict enforcem ent of levy and collection of SWM cess is 
essential.  The levy and collection of SWM cess was found to be deficient as 
discussed in Paragraph 4.5.  The i mpact thereof is the increase  in the gap 
between generation of own resour ces and the expenditure in rela tion to SWM 
activities as indicated in the Chart 4.2. 
Chart 4.2: Resource-expenditure Gap in 
` per ton (average for the period 
from 2012-13 to 2016-17) 
 
As could be seen from the above chart, the resource-expenditure gap was more 
in CCs and TPs.  Further analysis revealed that the gap during the year 2016-17 
increased in 24 out of 30 test-checked ULBs and decreased in si x ULBs in 
comparison with the year 2012-13 as detailed in Appendix 4.2. 
This gap is being met out by ULBs from out of their own revenue (property tax, 
license fee, etc.).  A case study of CC, Mangaluru is illustrated below. 
CC, Mangaluru outsourced (Novemb er 2014) the door-to-door colle ction, 
sweeping and transportation of waste to M/s Antony Waste Handli ng Cell Pvt. 
Ltd., Mumbai (service provider) and the work of O&M of composti ng plant, 
vermi-composting and sanitary landfill site at Mangaluru to M/s Unique Waste 
Processing Company Ltd.  It received 
`10 crore towards capital expenditure and 
allocated `106.40 crore towards revenue expenditure during the period 2012-13 
663 
1,560 1,384 1,580 
2,888 
2,633 2,557 
3,047 
0
700
1,400
2,100
2,800
3,500
CC CMC TMC TP
` per ton
Own resources Revenue expenditure

Chapter-IV 
25 
to 2016-17 against which the utilisation was `2.33 crore and `106.40 crore 
respectively.  CC had pending payments of `13.89 crore towards price 
escalation ( `0.23 crore) and difference of minimum wage reimbursement 
(`13.66 crore). 
The Commissioner of CC, Mangaluru requested (December 2015) the DMA to 
permit utilisation of funds received under the 13th/14th FC and SFC for O&M of 
SWM activities.  The matter is under consideration by DMA.  It also stated that 
payment would be made as per the availability of funds and veri fication of the 
bills concerned to that period.  It is pertinent to mention that utilisation of such 
funds for revenue expenditure cannot be permitted as these are meant for capital 
expenditure. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that steps were being taken to recover 
30 to 50 per cent of the total O&M cost from levy of SWM cess, sale of compost 
and recyclables, etc., and to address other shortcomings in the existing system 
of levy of SWM cess/user charges.  The reply is not consistent with the SLB, 
which mandated 100 per cent recovery of all operating expenses from operating 
revenues.  In the instant case of CC, Mangaluru, O&M cost was 
`106.40 crore 
and cess collected was `19.36 crore.  The sale proceeds on account of compost, 
recyclables, etc., were nil.  Hence, the recovery works out to less than 19 per 
cent and thus, the possibility of achieving 30 to 50 per cent of total O&M cost 
is remote. 
Recommendation 8:  The Central and State Governments may devise a system 
for need-based allocation of funds and accord greater flexibility to ULBs in 
their utilisation to bridge the resource-expenditure gap. 
4.5 Levy and collection of solid waste management cess 
Section 103B (2) of KMC Act, 1976 provides for levy of SWM cess  for the 
purpose of collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste.  There was no 
such provision under the KM Act, 1964.  However, as per Chart o f Accounts 
under the Karnataka Municipal Accounting Manual (KMAM), the Government 
a s  a  m a t t e r  o f  p o l i c y ,  a n d  w i t h  a  v i e w  t o  k e e p  t h e  t o w n  i n  a  b etter 
hygienic/sanitary condition i.e., to maintain ‘litter free zone s’, may direct the 
municipalities to levy and collect a cess, in the nature of rev enue income, for 
this purpose.  Accordingly, DMA issued (September 2009) instruc tions 
directing all ULBs to collect SWM cess.  To facilitate collecti on of SWM cess 
with greater efficiency, the DMA directed ULBs to collect the c ess along with 
property tax through the property tax returns. 
As per Clause 15 (f) of SWM Rules, 2016 (effective from 8 April , 2016), the 
l o c a l  a u t h o r i t i e s  s h a l l  p r e s c r i b e  f r o m  t i m e  t o  t i m e  u s e r  f e e  a s  d e e m e d  
appropriate and collect the fee from the waste generators on its own or through 
authorised agency. 
4.5.1 Non-collection of cess  
Scrutiny of the records relating to collection of SWM cess revealed that there is 
an appreciable increase in the number of test-checked ULBs coll ecting SWM 
cess. The quantum of cess increased significantly during the period 2012-13 to 
2016-17.  As of March 2017, 11 test-checked ULBs were yet to levy SWM cess 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
26 
and thus, deprived themselves of the own revenue source.  Table 4.4 gives the 
status of collection of SWM cess in test-checked ULBs.  ULB-wis e details are 
given in Appendix 4.3. 
Table 4.4: Status of ULBs collecting SWM cess during the period 2012-13 
to 2016-17 
(` in crore) 
Year 
ULBs collecting 
SWM cess 
ULBs not collecting 
SWM cess Revenue 
expenditure for all 
test-checked ULBs Number Amount Number Amount 
foregone15 
2012-13   4 4.81¥ 26 9.29 101.27 
2013-14   7 6.69¥ 23 5.95 119.53 
2014-15 11 9.38 19 5.13 127.12 
2015-16 21 18.78 9 2.00 152.01 
2016-17 24 21.93 11 1.76 177.45 
Total  61.59  24.13 677.38 
   ¥ - Though CC, Ballari stated to have collected SWM Cess, the amo unt of cess collected was  
not furnished. 
  Source: Information furnished by ULBs 
The reasons for non-collection of cess by ULBs were not forthcoming from the 
records made available to audit. 
We, further, observed that test- checked ULBs were not collectin g cess from 
places of public worship, occupiers of buildings/shops owned by  U L B s  a n d  
Government buildings as these properties were either exempt from payment of 
property tax or service charges were not collected.  ULBs also did not levy cess 
on vacant lands despite enabling provisions.  Consequently, the  ULBs lost 
revenue of `3.07 crore16 during the period 2012-13 to 2016-17. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that provisions were mad e in draft 
bye-laws for collection of SWM cess/user charges from such properties. 
4.5.2 Collection of cess on plinth area of the building 
The rates of cess prescribed under Rule 19A of Part II under Sc hedule III to 
KMC Act, 1976 and by DMA were based on the plinth area of the building with 
rates ranging from `10 (for residential buildings with plinth area less than 1,000 
sq. ft.) to `600 (for hotels, kalyana mantaps, nursing homes with plinth area 
exceeding 50,000 sq. ft.) per month.  The cess payable was irre spective of the 
extent of waste generated and the number of individual units in the building.  To 
cite an example, scrutiny of the property tax return of a build ing belonging to 
Ballari Urban Development Authority with a built up area of 10,880 sq. ft. and 
housing 128 shops showed that the SWM cess paid during the peri od 2013-14 
to 2015-16 was `2,400 per year (@ `200 per month for co mmercial buildings 
with plinth area of more than 5,000 sq. ft.).  As each shop is a commercial entity 
in itself and generates certain quantity of waste, the minimum cess that should 
be collected from the building would amount to `76,800 per year (@ of `50 per 
month, the rate for commercial buildings with plinth area less than 1,000 sq. ft., 
for 128 shops). 
                                                 
15 Calculated at the minimum rate prescribed (2009) by Government  for residential and 
commercial buildings. 
16 `2.57 crore from places of public worship (24 ULBs); `0.34 crore from buildings/shops 
owned by ULBs (19 ULBs) and `0.16 crore from Government buildings (20 ULBs). 

Chapter-IV 
27 
The absence of provision to collect cess from each occupier of the units in a 
building, thus, resulted in a loss of revenue income to ULBs. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that suitable provisions  would be 
made to levy cess from all the units existing in complex/single building. 
4.5.3 Non/short accounting of cess 
ULBs collect various cesses such as health cess, library cess, beggary cess and 
urban transport cess as a percentage of property tax along with  property tax.  
The cesses so collected are to be remitted by ULBs to the conce rned 
departments or the specified heads of account after deducting 1 0 per cent as 
collection charges.  SWM cess, on the other hand, is also colle cted along with 
property tax (at prescribed rates) and is to be utilised by ULBs.  Hence, proper 
and separate accounting of this cess is required to be ensured so that ULBs can 
monitor its collection and utilise it exclusively for SWM.  Cha rt of Accounts 
under the KMAM provides a separate code for accounting SWM cess. 
We observed that 14 out of 24 test-checked ULBs collecting SWM cess were 
not accounting for the cess in the assigned code.  While 3 of the 14 ULBs were 
accounting for it along with property tax, two ULBs were accounting for it 
under a different code.  The status of accounting in the balance nine ULBs was 
not verifiable from the records m ade available to audit.  Of th e remaining 10 
ULBs that were accounting the cess in the assigned code, we obs erved short 
accounting of cess of `5.41 crore in 6 ULBs. HDMC alone short accounted to 
the extent of `5.11 crore.  Chartered Accountants also failed to point out sho rt 
accounting of cess in their reports accompanying the financial statements. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that issue would be exam ined and 
duly addressed. 
4.6 Diversion of funds  
Scrutiny of approved action plans (approved by respective DCs) for the period 
2012-13 to 2016-17 showed that in 1017 out of 35 test-checked ULBs, the funds 
allocated for SWM activities included works and purchase of 
equipment/machineries/vehicles related to Underground Drainage (UGD) 
purposes and other activities not connected with SWM.   An amou nt of 
`3.81 
crore was incurred (February 2013 to January 2017) out of the allocation of 
`4.76 crore on the above activities (detailed in Appendix 4.4).  This not only 
contravened the CFC guidelines but also resulted in reduced allocation of funds 
for SWM activities. 
We also observed that in CMC, Sira, SWM works estimated to cost `42.01 lakh 
under SFC during the period 2009-10 to 2012-13 were not implemented, the 
reasons for which were not forthcoming from the records made av ailable to 
audit.  These works were subsequently dropped and the Council resolved 
(November 2015) to take up works not relating to SWM, which were approved 
                                                 
17 C C s  -  B a l l a r i ,  H D M C  a n d  T u m a k u r u ;  C M C s  -  C h i n t a m a n i ,  D a n d e l i ,  Karwar and Sira;  
TMCs - Bhatkal, Humnabad and Kumta. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
28 
(February 2016) by the DC.  An expenditure of `15.80 lakh incurred, as detailed 
in Appendix 4.5, thus, amounted to diversion of funds and non-achievement of 
intended objective of constructing bio-methanation plant, purchasing secondary 
storage containers, etc. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that since SWM was an in tegral part 
of Health Section along with UGD, ULBs utilised SWM funds on eq uipment 
such as sucking and jetting machines, open drain desilting machine, manhole 
desilting machine, etc.  The reply is silent about diversion of funds relating to 
CMC, Sira and it was not consistent with the guidelines of CFC, which stipulate 
allocation and utilisation of certain percentage of funds for S WM and UGD 
activities separately. 
4.7 Collection of user charges from railway authorities/other 
establishments 
Provisions of SWM Rules, 2016 are also applicable to industrial townships, 
areas under the control of Indian  Railways, airports, airbases,  Ports and 
harbours, defence establishments, special economic zones, etc. (Section 2.2.1.5 
of MSWM Manual, 2016). 
In 19 test-checked ULBs, areas under the control of Indian Rail ways were 
within the municipal area limits.  In six 18 of these ULBs, the waste generated 
within the railway premises were handed over to municipalities. O f  t h e  s i x  
ULBs, only CC, Mangaluru was collecting user fee of `300 per ton of waste 
received and the remaining five ULBs did not collect any user fee.   In HDMC, 
the railway authorities were directly dumping the waste in the landfill site.  The 
status in respect of other 12 ULBs is awaited. 
As Indian Railways is a bulk generator, the Government/ULBs may  consider 
levying user charges on the lines of CC, Mangaluru to augment the own revenue 
of ULBs. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that suitable action would be taken. 
Recommendation 9: While the number of ULBs collecting SWM cess as well 
as the amount being collected by these ULBs showed a rising trend, it is 
necessary that ULBs conduct a realistic assessment of the O&M cost involved 
in SWM and levy and collect SWM cess accordingly with a view to achieving 
SLBs.  The State Government may make  suitable amendments to KM Act, 
1964 for levy and collection of SWM cess as was done in case of KMC Act, 
1976. 
ULBs may ensure maximisation of own resources through efficient collection 
and widening of SWM cess base through measures such as collection of cess 
from (i) individual units instead of on plinth area; (ii) functions/activities 
conducted in open spaces; (iii) unorganis ed sector and levy of interest for 
belated payment of cess, (iv) railway authorities, etc. 
                                                 
18 CCs - Mangaluru and Tumakuru; CMCs - Sagar and Shidlaghatta; T MC, Ugar Khurd; 
TP, Chinchali. 

 
29 
Chapter V 
Information, Education & Communication activities 
5.1 Introduction 
Behavioural change is vital for effective SWM.  Information, ed ucation and 
communication (IEC) is a multilevel tool for promoting and sust aining risk-
reducing behaviour change in individuals and communities.  The IEC campaign 
should target households, shops, and commercial and institution al premises as 
well as other stakeholders such as municipal officials, elected  representatives, 
schools, non-government organisations (NGOs), the informal sect or, media, 
etc., to ensure their participation in managing city waste by disch arging their 
role effectively. 
Provisions of MSW Rules, 2000 (S. No. 2 of Schedule II) and SWM  Rules,  
2016 (Clause 15 (zg)); Manuals on MSWM, 2000 (Section 25.4.2.12) and 2016 
(Section 1.4.5.13) underscored the importance of IEC activities and required the 
State Government and ULBs to create public awareness and educat e waste 
generators to achieve the overall objectives of MSWM. 
5.2 Deficiencies in Informatio n, Education & Communication 
activities 
The State Government developed (August 2004) a strategy documen t for IEC 
with the objective of creating awareness among citizens, bulk waste generators 
and agencies involved in handling of Municipal Solid Waste.  Th e document 
detailed various IEC activities for target groups from public t o municipal staff 
and officers including various associations.   
Thirty-three out of 35 test-checked ULBs conducted IEC activities, encouraging 
waste generators to ‘segregate waste into wet and dry’ and ‘not to litter’ by issue 
of bills, banners, stickers, wall paintings, advertisement in l ocal channels, etc.  
Table 5.1 indicates the status of various  modes of communication used in  the 
test-checked ULBs. 
Table 5.1: Modes of communication used in the test-checked ULBs 
Sl. 
No.
Modes of 
communication used 
Number of ULBs 
Yes No Details not available
1 Audio 13 19 3 
2 Video 10 22 3 
3 Mass communication 10 22 3 
4 Wall Paintings 7 25 3 
5 Schools 13 19 3 
6 Hoardings 11 21 3 
7 Street Jathas 8 22 5 
8 Pamphlets 24 8 3 
Source: Records of test-checked ULBs 
ULB-wise details are given in Appendix 5.1.   

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
30 
Good practice 
TMC, Kumta, promoted (October 2016) production of biogas from d omestic 
waste by creating awareness through handbills.  Based on the me eting 
conducted with street vendors and shop owners in October 2016, the TMC tied 
sack bags on street light poles to address littering issues.  T he TMC also made 
(March 2017) a documentary film  on pipe composting and aired it  i n  l o c a l  
channels. 
 
(Handbill on Swachhta Andolan by TM C, Kumta – Promoting behaviour 
change through segregation of dry and wet waste and use of wet waste for 
production of bio gas through pipe composting) 
Source: Records of TMC, Kumta 
We, however, observed that the following issues related to IEC were not 
addressed: 
 The State Government claimed to have prepared six booklets for various 
target groups namely children, public, NGOs, ULBs, elected 
representatives and pourakarmikas and distributed them to ULBs during 
the year 2004.  The Government , through Karnataka Urban 
Infrastructure Development and Fi nance Corporation (KUIDFC), al so 
produced two documentary films on SWM (a) for general awareness and 
(b) exclusively on municipal landfill, for creating awareness a nd 
educating ULBs.  We observed that these booklets and Compact Di scs 
(CDs) were not available/accessi ble in any of the test-checked ULBs.  
DMA stated (June 2017) that the booklets were not in use at present. 
 CMC, Shidlaghatta and TP, Honnavara did not conduct any IEC activity 
during the period 2012-13 to 2016-17. 
 Domestic hazardous waste included both toxic and bio-medical wastes.  
However, neither the State level authorities (UDD, DMA and KSPCB) 
nor district/ULB level authorities notified and publicised the list of 


Chapter-V 
31 
domestic hazardous waste.  We observed that ULBs in Uttara Kann ada 
district (as shown below) and TP, Kudligi distributed pamphlets  t h a t  
indicated segregation of domestic hazardous waste.  In the remaining 
test-checked ULBs, segregation of waste at source was not encouraged. 
Pamphlet circulated by DC, Uttara Kannada 
 
 E-waste consists of different com ponents that are both hazardou s and 
non-hazardous. Hence, e-waste should be segregated at source and 
should not be mixed with MSW. The estimated quantum of e-waste 
generated in the State was 86,118 metric ton (MT) per annum. However, 
no specific IEC activity focussed on e-waste segregation or Ext ended 
Producer Responsibility (EPR) was carried out. 
 None of the test-checked ULBs created awareness on provisions 
regarding levy of penalty (Section 224 of KM Act, 1964 and Sect ion 
431A of KMC Act, 1976) for litte ring, non-segregation of different 
waste, etc. 
 IEC activities conducted by test-checked ULBs did not emphasise  ‘not 
to burn’ and ‘not to bury’ soli d waste, and did not propagate t he waste 
minimisation through 3R concept.   
 None of the test-checked ULBs (except CMC, Bagalkote) encourage d 
community participation adequately to conduct awareness program me.  
In CMC, Bagalkote, though the segregation of waste was not adequately 
promoted, the CMC ensured active community participation in 
maintaining cleanliness in the city.  It also supported the cau se of 
Bagalkote Social Workers Group, which is a non-political group of 
social workers striving to ensure overall development of Bagalkote City 
and make it more peaceful through the community service.  The impact 
of community involvement was evident during JPV conducted (August 
2017) with ULB staff as general level of cleanliness in the areas visited 
was significantly better as compared to other cities (Exhibit 5.1). 


Report No.4 of the year 2018 
32 
 We also observed that ULBs did not create adequate awareness amongst 
the work force for utilisation of protective equipment as detai led in 
Paragraph 6.2.5. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that issues observed by audit would 
be addressed and DMA floated tenders to select suitable agencie s to carry out 
various IEC programmes at ULB level. 
Recommendation 10: The State Government should accord required priority 
to IEC and ensure that IEC activitie s are appropriate and create awareness 
about the harmful effects of ineffective SWM management on health and 
environment.  It may explore us age of more effective means of 
communication for increasing the impact and efficacy of IEC activities. 
The IEC activities should be undertaken, keeping in view the particular 
wastes in particular areas and particul ar seasons.  This may be taken up 
consequent to assessments and pilots. 

Exhibit 5.1: Status of cleanliness (Paragraph 5.2) 
CMC, Bagalkote (29.8.2017) 
 
CMC, Shidlaghatta (7.6.2017) 
 
CMC, Bidar (10.8.2017) 
 


Exhibit 5.1: Status of cleanliness (Paragraph 5.2) 
CMC, Bagalkote (29.8.2017) 
 
CMC, Hosapete (11.5.2017) 
 
HDMC (28.4.2017) 


33 
Chapter VI 
Segregation, Collection and Transportation of waste 
6.1 Segregation 
Segregation refers to the process of separa tion of municipal solid waste in to 
four groups i.e., organic, inorganic, recyclables and hazardous wastes. It is a 
critical requirement since it en ables recycling, reuse, treatme nt and scientific 
disposal of different components of waste.  Chapter 8 of Manual  on MSWM, 
2000 deals with the importance of sorting19 waste. 
Sorting/segregation shall take place at different levels such as 
source/household level; transfer station or centralised sorting  facility; waste 
processing site and landfill site to segregate waste into diffe rent streams such 
as dry recyclables, biodegradable waste, C&D waste, hazardous w aste, etc., to 
minimise waste and ensure reduction in landfill space for final  disposal 
besides ensuring appropriate processing. 
6.1.1 Segregation of waste at  source/household level 
MSWM Manuals, 2000 (Section 8.10.1(a)) and 2016 (Section 2.2.1)  stipulate 
that ULBs must accord highest priority for segregation of waste at source.  
DMA stated (June 2017) that only 105 out of 270 ULBs in the Sta te started 
segregation at source (partially in few selected wards). 
The test-checked ULBs also declared having achieved service lev el 
benchmarks between zero and 55 per cent  for segregation. As per SLB 
declarations by the ULBs themselves, segregation was totally ab sent in seven 
ULBs and averaged 31 per cent in 28 ULBs during 2016-17, indicating poor 
segregation of waste.  Based on JPVs, we found that segregation at source was 
not followed in 32 out of 35 test-checked ULBs and it was partially carried out 
in three test-checked ULBs (CC,  Tumakuru, CMC, Dandeli and TMC,  
Kumta). 
6.1.1.1 Issue of bins 
Scrutiny of records revealed that 11
20 test-checked ULBs procured bins at a 
total cost of `3.45 crore during the review period and issued them to 35 per 
cent of households to encourage segregation of waste at source.  We  observed 
during JPV conducted along with the  officials of ULBs that segregation of 
waste was not adopted despite the issue of bins (Exhibit 6.1). 
The JPV also showed that mixed waste was handed over to waste collectors by 
households despite audio announcements regarding the importance  o f  
                                                 
19 The word ‘sorting’ is used synonymously with ‘separation’ and ‘segregation’ in this 
Chapter. 
20 CCs - HDMC, Mangaluru and Tumakuru; CMCs - Bagalkote, Hosapete , Sira and Udupi; 
TMCs - Hiriyur and Manvi; TPs - Koppa and Kudligi. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
34 
s e g re g a tio n  in to  w e t a n d  d ry  w a s te  in  2 6  te s t-c h e c k e d  U L B s .   In  s ix21 o th e r  
ULBs, there was no segregation as the mechanism of door-to-door  collection 
was totally absent resulting in dumping of waste on roadsides, streets, etc. 
In CC, Tumakuru, though segregated waste was handed over to the  w a s t e  
collector (observed during JPV in one ward), the segregated was te was getting 
mixed in the secondary collection vehicle (Compactor).  In CMC,  Dandeli, 
segregation of waste at source was followed in 4 out of 31 ward s that were 
managed voluntarily by West Coast Paper Mills (a company locate d at 
Dandeli).  In TMC, Kumta, wet waste was being processed through pipe/pit 
composting at source level and therefore, only dry waste was being collected. 
The good practices in segregated collection of MSW in CMCs, Dan deli and 
Kolar are detailed in Appendix 11.4. 
6.1.1.2 Non-segregation of domestic hazardous waste 
Domestic hazardous waste requires special handling and disposal  because of 
its harmful physical and chemical characteristics, or biologica l properties.  
Hence, there is a greater need for  proper segregation of such w aste.  Manual 
on MSWM, 2000 and SWM Rules, 2016 specify the roles and respons ibilities 
of ULBs in this regard. 
As stated in Paragraph 5.2 of IEC , the concerned authorities bo th at the 
State/district level and in all the 35 test-checked ULBs did no t notify and 
publicise the list of items classified as domestic hazardous waste to be 
segregated at source.  Consequently, people were not aware of th e  e f f e c t  o f  
non-segregation of domestic haza rdous waste and contaminated mixed waste 
was reaching the landfills. 
6.1.1.3 Non-segregation of sanitary waste 
Sanitary waste generated by households was to be wrapped in old  
newspaper/pouches provided by th e manufacturers and handed over  t o  t h e  
waste collectors separately as per the guidelines of KSPCB and clause 4 under 
Section 2.2.1 of SWM Manual, 2016.   
We observed that none of the test-checked ULBs emphasised segre gation and 
disposal of sanitary waste as required (except ULBs in Uttara K annada 
District and TP, Kudligi). 
6.1.1.4 Absence of incentive m echanism and enforcement 
MSWM Manuals, 2000 (Sections 18.3 and 18.4) and 2016 (Section 2.1.4) 
specify the various activities and methodologies required to be  adopted by 
ULBs to ensure proper segregation of waste at source.  One such  methodology 
is providing incentives in the form of rewards/grants/subsidies. 
Similarly, Section 18.5 of MSWM Manual, 2000 provides for enforcement. 
While all efforts should be made to educate people to effectively participate in 
                                                 
21 CMC, Shidlaghatta; TMCs - Kakkera, Mugalkhod and T. Narasipura ; TPs - Ainapura and 
Chinchali. 

Chapter-VI 
35 
the management of waste through IEC, they also need to be made aware of 
penalties if they fail to discharge their civic duties. The pro vision for penalties 
should be made known to the people and details of those punishe d should be 
publicised widely to deter others. 
Audit did not notice any instances of incentive/disincentive me chanism to 
promote segregation of waste in any of the test-checked ULBs.  We also 
noticed that penalty provisions under Schedule XIII to Section 431A of KMC 
Act, 1976 were not enforced. 
The above observations indicate that the test-checked ULBs made  very little 
effort to emphasise the importance of segregation of waste at source.  DMA 
attributed (July 2017) this to lack of (i) micro-level planning, (ii) citizen’s co-
operation and awareness, (iii) stringent laws, bye-laws, etc., (iv) infrastructure 
such as bins, partitioned vehicles, storage facilities, etc. and (v) incentivisation 
for effective segregation at source and further stated (July 20 17) that 
segregation of waste at source wa s prioritised and presently 10 5 ULBs started 
segregation at source (partially in few selected wards) and con tinuous efforts 
were being  made to accomplish 100 per cent segregation at source. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that 100 per cent source segregation 
cannot be achieved in a single stretch.  It further stated that  efforts were being 
continuously taken to achieve source segregation in a progressive manner with 
the help of IEC tools and introducing penal clauses for non-com pliance in the 
draft bye-laws.  Top priority needs to be accorded to the opera tion of these 
two strategies for achieving higher levels of segregation. 
6.1.2 Segregation of waste at transfer  station/central sorting facility 
Section 8.10.3(a) of the Manual on  MSWM, 2000 states that sorti ng at the 
waste storage depot/transfer sta tion is not desirable. However,  if source level 
sorting is not developed, then suc h sorting may be allowed till a household-
level sorting and collection syst em is established. Since sourc e level 
segregation was absent/deficient in the ULBs as stated above, there was a need 
for ensuring segregation of waste at least before it reaches th e 
processing/landfill site.  Further, as per Clause 15 (h) of SWM  Rules, 2016, 
the local authorities shall set up material recovery facilities  or secondary 
storage facilities for sorting of recyclable materials. 
We observed that: 
 In all the test-checked ULBs, waste was transferred in mixed fo rm from 
primary transportation vehicles to secondary transportation veh icles 
(mechanically-without manual intervention) near roadsides or va cant 
lands.  In CC, Ballari, the primary transportation vehicles wer e 
transferring mixed waste to secondary transportation vehicles at a 
centralised point (transfer station); and 
 Out of the 35 test-checked ULBs, dry waste collection centres w ere 
functioning only in three ULBs (CC, Tumakuru, CC, Mangaluru and  
TMC, K
umta).  The dry waste collection centres constructed at C C, 
Ballari (July 2016 at a cost of `21.52 lakh); CMC, Chintamani (March 
2017 at a cost of `15 lakh) and TMC, Humnabad (April 2015 at a cost of 
`1.75 lakh) were yet to be made functional (May 2017).   

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
36 
Failure to segregate resulted in failure to recover the recycla bles, thereby 
leading to dumping these resources in landfills.  It also led t o sub-optimal use 
of precious landfill space. 
The State Government accepted (May 2018) the audit observation. 
6.1.3 Segregation of waste at processing site 
Segregation of waste at processing site is desirable to ensure that the processed 
output (such as compost) meets the regulatory standards (Sectio n 8.10.5 of 
Manual on MSWM, 2000). 
We observed that five 22 out of 35 test-checked ULB s had compost processing 
facilities within the landfill site and TMC, Maddur had a decen tralised 
processing facility.  Hence, partial segregation was being prac tised in these 
ULBs. 
Failure to segregate waste at di fferent stages resulted in dump ing of mixed 
waste on windrow platforms/landfill (Exhibit 6.2) leading to ineffective waste 
management.  Dumping of mixed waste on windrow platforms also r esults in 
reduction in quality and quantity of compost. 
The State Government accepted (May 2018) the audit observation and stated 
that efforts were being taken at all levels to increase the per centage of source 
segregation. 
Recommendation 11:  Segregation shou ld be given greater emphasis by 
means of publicity and awareness cam paigns and holding regular meetings 
with housing associations and NGOs.  The State Government should 
encourage segregation of waste at source by devising a system for 
incentivising waste generators and collectors for segregation of waste, and 
should prevent mixing of segregated waste during various stages of SWM. 
6.2 Collection 
Collection of segregated waste is the second step of SWM proces s. Waste 
collection system is necessary to ensure that waste stored at source is collected 
regularly and it is not disposed of on the streets, drains, wat er bodies, etc.  
Inefficient waste collection has an impact on public health and aesthetics of 
urban areas.  Waste collection service is divided into primary and secondary 
collection.  
Sections 10.3 and 10.4 of Manual on MSWM, 2000, state that ULBs  shall 
arrange for the collection of domestic, trade and institutional, 
food/biodegradable waste, recycl able waste material/non-biodegr adable waste 
besides domestic hazardous/toxic waste from doorstep or communi ty bins or 
waste deposition centres specially established for the purposes.  The collection 
service provided by ULBs should be regular and reliable. 
6.2.1 Inadequate collection of waste generated 
The quantum of waste generated and collected during the period 2012-13 to 
2016-17 in the State (other than BBMP) and in the test-checked ULBs is 
shown in Table 6.1. 
                                                 
22 CCs - Mangaluru and Tumakuru; CMCs - Bagalkote and Sira; TP, K oppa. 

Chapter-VI 
37 
Table 6.1: Statement showing the status of quantum of waste generated 
and collected in the State and the test-checked ULBs 
(in tons) 
Period State  Test-checked ULBs 
Generated Collected Uncollected Generated Collected Uncollected
2012-13 Not Available 4,90,305 4,45,782 44,523
2013-14 19,28,660 16,79,730 2,48,930 4,99,868 4,55,600 44,268
2014-15 18,96,905 15,10,370 3,86,535 5,21,074 4,77,829 43,245
2015-16 19,55,172 16,71,156 2,84,016 5,59,523 5,14,914 44,609
2016-17 20,09,690 15,71,690 4,38,000 5,67,652 5,24,881 42,771
Total 77,90,427 64,32,946 13,57,481 26,38,422 24,19,006 2,19,416
Source: Information furnished by KSPCB and test-checked ULBs  
On an average, 13-22 per cent  of waste generated was not collected in the 
State and 8-9 per cent in the test-checked ULBs. 
Section 6.9.4.1 of MSWM Manual, 2000 stipulated that every land fill must 
have a weighbridge for assessi ng the quantum of waste.  The availability and 
status of weighbridge in landfill sites is detailed in Paragrap h 7.3.1.  Only four 
test-checked ULBs had working weighbridge facility.  Other ULBs  did not 
maintain any documents to assess the actual extent of the collection.  This led 
to poor oversight and monitoring as ULBs had no means to quanti fy SWM in 
order to address it suitably. 
Audit attempted to verify 23 the correctness of data furnished by two ULBs 
(CC, Tumakuru and CMC, Sira) for the year 2016-17 with referenc e to the 
records made available.  We found that the data was inconsistent in respect of 
both these ULBs as detailed in Table 6.2. 
Table 6.2: Comparison of data furnished by ULBs with the records 
(Quantity in TPD) 
Sl. 
No. Name of ULB 
As per information 
furnished by ULB 
As per records 
(weighbridge data) As per DPR 
G C CE G C CE G C CE
1 CMC, Sira 22 20 91 22 13 59 29 26 90
2 CC, Tumakuru 120 110 92 120 84 70 130 77 59
G – Generation; C – Collection and CE – Collection efficiency in percentage 
The State Government cited (May 2018) inadequate number of vehicles and 
manpower with ULBs and non-existe nce of micro-level planning fo r 
inadequate collection of waste.  The reply was silent on the in consistency in 
data pointed out by audit. 
6.2.2 Ward-wise collection of waste 
The status of ward-wise collection of waste in the State and te st-checked 
ULBs is indicated in Table 6.3. 
 
                                                 
23 In CC, Mangaluru and CMC, Udupi, the landfills were provided w ith weighbridge facility 
and were also used by other ULBs.  Hence, data of these ULBs was not compared. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
38 
Table 6.3: Status of ward-wise collection 
Sl. No.  Position in 
Number of ULBs 
Complete coverage 
of wards
Partial coverage of 
wards 
No 
coverage
1 State 128 76 66 
2 Test-checked ULBs  20   9   6 
Source: Information furnished by KSPCB and test-checked ULBs  
Four24 of the ULBs where there was no door-to-door collection were up graded 
from Gram Panchayats in the year 2015.  Two 25 ULBs where door-to-door 
collection was absent and nine 26 ULBs where the collection was partial, cited 
shortage of manpower and vehicles as the main reasons.  Twenty test-checked 
ULBs with complete coverage of wards claimed household coverage  between 
70 to 100 per cent.  We observed that the claims of 16 of these ULBs were 
inconsistent with their own SLB declaration on household coverage. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that replies would be ob tained from 
concerned ULBs and furnished. 
6.2.2.1 Use of community bins for collection 
DMA issued directions (October 2014) prohibiting purchase of co mmunity 
bins.  In contravention of these directions, TMC, Humnabad purchased (July 
2017) containers (community bins) at a cost of `9.00 lakh.  Chief Officer, 
TMC, Humnabad cited (August 2017) lack of awareness among citizens and 
non-implementation of 100 per cent door-to-door collection as the reasons for 
purchase of containers.  The justification offered by Chief Officer, Humnabad, 
was not convincing.  It was observed during JPV that the purcha se of bins did 
not bring in improvement in waste collection (Exhibit 6.3). 
6.2.2.2 Non-involvement of Self Hel p Groups and waste pickers i n door-
to-door waste collection 
Manual on MSWM, 2000 and SWM Rules, 2016 stipulate that ULBs mu st 
establish a system for formation of SHGs and recognise organisa tion of waste 
pickers and integrate them into the waste management system inc luding door-
to-door collection.  We observed that only five
27 test-checked ULBs involved 
SHGs in door-to-door collection of waste.  In CMC, Shidlaghatta , SHGs were 
involved in street sweeping. 
Thus, failure to enforce efficient and effective door-to-door c ollection resulted 
in littering/dumping of MSW/food w aste on roadsides and encoura ged the 
movement of stray animals towards the waste leading to serious consequences 
as illustrated in Paragraph 8.1.2.1. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that suitable action wou ld be taken 
to involve SHGs and waste pickers. 
 
                                                 
24 TMCs - Kakkera and Mugalkhod; TPs - Ainapura and Chinchali. 
25 CMC, Shidlaghatta and TMC, T. Narasipura. 
26 CMC, Bidar (63 per cent), CMC, Hosapete (40 per cent), CMC, Nanjangud (33 per cent), 
TMC, Hiriyur (93 per cent), TMC, Humnabad (22 per cent), TMC, Maddur (87 per cent), 
TMC, Manvi (78 per cent), TMC, Ugar Khurd (22 per cent) and TP, Kudligi (40 per cent). 
27 CMCs -Dandeli (only during 2012 -13 and 2013-14), Nanjangud and Udupi; TMC, Bhatkal 
and TP, Gudibande. 

Chapter-VI 
39 
6.2.3 Street sweeping/street cleaning 
Street cleaning is one of the primary services rendered by muni cipal 
authorities to ensure clean and hygienic urban conditions. Sect ion 11.3.1 of 
Manual on MSWM, 2000 and Section 2.4.2 of Manual, 2016 stipulate that it is 
necessary to have a well-planned, time-bound daily system for s treet sweeping 
including adequate staffing and equipment.  Further, the Suprem e Court, 
keeping in view Articles 48A and 51A(g) of the Constitution, di rected (1996) 
in one case that the streets, public premises, parks, etc., should be surface 
cleaned on daily basis, including on holidays (B.L. Wadhera vs.  Union of 
India and others case). 
We observed that the 35 test-checked ULBs did not carry out str eet sweeping 
of 6,935 (83 per cent) out of 8,324 km of roads on daily basis.   
The State Government stated (May 2018) that ULBs based on the a ctivities 
and population density decided th e frequency of street sweeping  and it varied 
from city to city.  The reply is not consistent with the spirit  of the Constitution 
enshrined in Articles 48A and 51A(g), which talk about protecti on and 
improvement of the environment.  It is also in violation of the  Supreme Court 
directives and does not address th e fact of keeping the streets c l e a n  a n d  
hygienic at all times. 
6.2.4 Mixing of occupational wast e with Municipal Solid Waste 
The provisions of Manual on MSWM, 2000 and SWM Rules, 2016 prohibit 
mixing of other wastes with MSW.  We, however, observed mixing of 
occupational waste with MSW as detailed below: 
6.2.4.1 Collection of cut beedi leaves 
The activity of beedi rolling was prevalent in five 28 test-checked ULBs.  The 
door-to-door collection of MSW in these ULBs involved sizeable quantity of 
‘cut beedi leaves’, the residual product of the activity.   
CC, Tumakuru and CMC, Sira, generated two TPD of cut beedi leaves each.  
Similarly, in CMC, Nanjangud (10 kg) and TMC, Maddur (300 kg), cut beedi 
leaves were generated each day on an average.  A Beedi Karmikara Nagara , 
an exclusive colony of 200 houses established in Ward 66 in HDMC generated 
150 kg of cut beedi leaf waste per day, which was found dumped openly in the 
colony as well as in the empty water sump (Exhibit 6.4 ).  As cut beedi  leaves 
waste is organic in nature and biodegradable, the collection of  such waste 
along with MSW and transporting the mixed waste to the landfill  contravenes 
the provisions of SWM Rules and may result in poor quality of compost. 
The ULBs should have made separate arrangements for collection of this 
waste on collection of user charges or directed the concerned t o arrange for 
collection and disposal of the wa ste either under ‘Polluter pay s principle’ or 
‘Extended Producer Responsibility’. 
6.2.4.2 Collection of ash waste generated from silk reeling units 
CMC, Shidlaghatta houses appr oximately 1,450 to 1,650 silk reel ing units, 
wherein, ash waste is generated by conventional method of burning wood to 
                                                 
28 CCs - HDMC and Tumakuru; CMCs - Nanjangud and Sira; TMC, Maddur. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
40 
boil water for reeling silk (2 TPD which constitutes about 10 per cent of total 
waste generated).  Similarly, TP, Sringeri generates ash waste (0.42 TPD – 12 
per cent of total waste) from hotel industry (burning of rice husk).  T hese two 
ULBs failed to make special arrangements to collect the ash was te from the 
generators and the ash waste was being mixed with MSW, ultimate ly, 
reaching the landfill site, without segregation (Exhibit 6.5). 
Though DPR of CMC, Shidlaghatta suggested an economical way of disposal 
by channelising the ash waste to cement/brick industry, no step s were taken to 
implement the same.  The DPR of TP, Sringeri did not suggest ef fective and 
economical way of ash disposal.  Thus, failure to enforce segregation resulted 
in letting the ash waste mix with MSW. The ash waste generated,  collected 
and dumped in landfill site in the two ULBs was 4,052 tonnes during the 
period 2012-17. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that steps were being ta ken in SWM 
DPRs to ensure that different types of waste including cut beedi leaves would 
not mix up with other wastes. 
6.2.5 Personal protection equipment 
MSWM Manuals, 2000 and 2016 prohibit manual handling of waste.  If 
manual handling is unavoidable due to constraints, it should be  carried out 
under proper precaution with due care for safety of workers.  A s per clause 15 
(zd) of SWM Rules, 2016, local bodies shall ensure that the ope rator of a 
facility provides personal protection equipment including uniform, fluorescent 
jacket, hand gloves, raincoats, appropriate foot wear and masks  to all workers 
handling solid waste and the same are used by workforce. 
We observed during JPV in 30 test -checked ULBs (other than new upgraded 
ULBs) that majority of the work force involved in manual handli ng of waste 
were not using protective equipment particularly gloves and boots though they 
were provided with such equipment by the ULBs/contractors (Exhibit 6.6) .  
Non-utilisation of protective equipment is risky and may lead t o serious health 
hazards especially in view of non-segregation of waste.  ULBs need to analyse 
the reasons for non-utilisation of protective equipment by the work force and 
take steps to ensure utilisation. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that steps to educate th e workers 
regarding significance of protec tion equipment would be taken u p 
continuously. 
Recommendation 12:  ULBs should ensure that the informal system co-
exists and supplements the formal syst em of waste collection, treatment and 
disposal and larger percentage of MSW generated is collected.  ULBs should 
also ensure that workers involved in handling waste follow occupational 
health and safety protocols by wear ing safety gear and other protective 
equipment. 
Recommendation 13:  The State Government may issue suitable instructions 
to enable ULBs to manage occupationa l waste such as beedi leaves, wood 
ash, etc., effectively and efficiently. 

Exhibit 6.1: Unsegregated waste being handed over (Paragraph 6.1.1.1) 
HDMC (28.4.2017)  
 
CMC, Bagalkote (29.8.2017) 
 
TMC, Humnabad (4.8.2017) 
 


Exhibit 6.2: Dumping of mixed waste on windrow platform  
(Paragraph 6.1.3) 
CC, Tumakuru (21.3.2017) 
 
 
  


Exhibit 6.3: Status of waste collection (Paragraph 6.2.2.1) 
TMC, Humnabad (3.8.2017) 
 
 
 
  


Exhibit 6.4: Cut beedi leaf waste (Paragraph 6.2.4.1) 
HDMC (5.5.2017) 
 
CMC, Sira (17.6.2017) 


Exhibit 6.5: Ash waste (Paragraph 6.2.4.2) 
CMC, Shidlaghatta (8.6.2017) 
 
TP, Sringeri (5.7.2017) 


Exhibit 6.6: Handling of waste without protective equipment 
(Paragraph 6.2.5) 
TMC, Maddur (5.6.2017) 
 
CC, Ballari (4.8.2017) 
 
CMC, Shidlaghatta (7.6.2017) 
 


Chapter-VI 
41 
6.3 Transportation 
Transportation plays a vital role in SWM services. Depending on  the local 
conditions and location of landfill site, ULBs use different ty pes of vehicles 
such as pushcarts, auto tippers, tractors, tipper trucks and co mpactors for 
collection and transportation of waste. 
6.3.1 Shortage of vehicles for door-to-door collection 
The State policy, 2004 envisaged use of auto tippers for door-to-door 
collection of MSW.  In accordance  with the normative standards prescribed 
under the policy for use of auto tippers for door-to-door waste  collection, one 
auto tipper is required for 1,000 households.  The status of av ailability of auto 
tippers in the test-checked ULBs as of March 2017 is indicated in Table 6.4. 
Table 6.4: Statement showing the status of auto tippers 
Category of 
ULB29 
No. of auto tippers 
required as per 
normative standards 
No. of auto 
tippers 
available 
Shortage 
Percentage 
of 
shortage 
CMC 249 94 155 62 
TMC 86 51   35 41 
TP 29 11   18 62 
Total 364 156 208 57 
     Source: Information furnished by test-checked ULBs 
It is seen from the table that there was acute shortage of auto  tippers despite 
availability of funds.  The impact of shortage of collection vehicles in few test-
checked ULBs is detailed below: 
 In CMC, Hosapete, only 14 out of 35 wards were covered due to non-
availability of sufficient number of vehicles; 
 TMC, Ugar Khurd had one mini truck that was used for collection  of 
waste in five wards on alternate days; and 
 TP, Kudligi had only one tipper that was used to cover 8 out of  20 
wards. 
Therefore, shortage of vehicles up to 62 per cent  led to serious inefficiency 
and irregularity in collection and transportation of MSW. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that integrated SWM plan was being 
prepared to include/procure vehicles required to achieve 100 per cent door-to-
door collection.  The reply indicates lack of commitment toward s this activity 
of SWM despite Rules being in force for last 17 years.  Further, in the absence 
of 100 per cent  door-to-door collection, unscientific dumping of waste is 
bound to continue. 
6.3.2 Use of vehicles without partition/ open vehicles for transportation of 
Municipal Solid Waste 
Source segregation is successful only when the segregated strea ms are not 
mixed at any stage of transportation while being taken to the respective 
processing or disposal facility d irectly or through a transfer station.  Hence, 
segregated transportation of solid waste from source to destination is essential.  
Further, Section 7.7.4 of Manual on MSWM, 2000 and Section 2.3. 2 of 
                                                 
29 In all the test-checked CCs, the door-to-door collection activ ity was outsourced. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
42 
Manual, 2016 stipulate that vehicles used for transportation of waste should be 
covered so that waste is not visible to public and that they sh ould have the 
facility for preventing spillage of waste.  For this purpose, MSW vehicles need 
to be covered and provided with two separate containers or a si ngle container 
with an effective partition. 
We observed during JPV that majority of the vehicles used for door-to-door 
collection did not have partition to collect the segregated was te, if any.  In 
four30 ULBs, though the new vehicles procured had partitions for collection of 
wet and dry waste, the waste col lectors were depositing both we t and dry 
waste in both the sections thereby defeating the purpose of seg regation of 
waste (Exhibit 6.7).  The JPV also revealed that the test-checked ULBs were 
using open vehicles for transportation ( Exhibit 6.8), leading to scattering of 
waste, which caused littering and could also be a health hazard .   K S P C B  
confirmed (December 2017) that open vehicles were used by ULBs for 
transportation of MSW. 
HDMC, CMC, Bidar and TP, Kudligi purchased new vehicles with a provision 
of slider opening for depositing waste ( Exhibit 6.9).   T h e s e  v e h i c l e s  w e r e  
more appropriate as they prevented visibility of waste during transportation. 
Thus, even after 18 years of MSW Rules, 2000 coming into force, ULBs have 
failed to comply with minimal requirements of hygiene such as c overed 
vehicles and vehicles with part ition.  This also indicates fail ure of 
IEC/enforcement of training given to waste collectors. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that ULBs would procure vehicles 
with partition to ensure non-mixing of wet and dry waste and th at ULBs have 
been instructed to use covered vehicles for transportation of waste. 
6.3.3 Use of transportation vehi cles without authorisation 
Government of Karnataka directed  (January 2004) that transporta tion vehicles 
used for MSW should have to be registered with KSPCB within 30 days and 
the same has been reiterated by KSPCB.  Further, as per Motor V ehicle Act, 
all public transport vehicles are required to obtain fitness ce rtificate for use of 
the vehicle besides possession of a valid insurance for the vehicle.  
Scrutiny of records in 35 ULBs showed that the vehicles used fo r 
transportation of MSW were deficient in: 
(i) authorisation from KSPCB - all 463 vehicles (100 per cent ). Thus, 
the vehicles were being used by ULBs unauthorisedly for SWM 
activities; 
(ii) fitness certificate from Regional Transport Office - 255 out of  463 
vehicles (55 per cent); and   
(iii) valid insurance for the vehicles - 101 out of 463 vehicles (22 per 
cent). This indicates a general laps e of internal control on part o f 
ULBs.   
We further observed that 14 vehicles (13 vehicles in 2016 and one rapid action 
vehicle in 2013) purchased by CC, Ballari were not registered with RTO.  
                                                 
30 HDMC; CMCs – Bagalkote and Hosapete; TP, Kudligi. 

Chapter-VI 
43 
Similarly, in TMC, Humnabad, six vehicles purchased during the period 2009 
to 2016 were not registered (August 2017) and in TP, Raibag, four auto tippers 
were not registered. Thus, ULBs were using the vehicles for SWM  purposes 
without necessary registration for periods ranging up to nine years. 
The above deficiencies highlight the absence of internal contro l mechanism 
within the department. 
6.3.4 Monitoring of transportation vehicles 
Transportation of MSW from source of generation to the authoris ed 
destination is important to ensu re its proper disposal.  MSWM Manual, 2016 
stipulates that communication tech nologies such as global posit ioning system 
(GPS) are to be integrated as part of monitoring of SWM system.   This also 
helps in improving the collection and transportation efficiency of the vehicles. 
Out of 463 transportation vehicl es, 139 vehicles were affixed w ith GPS 
devices in 10 31 test-checked ULBs.  In 56 vehicles, in five ULBs (CC, 
Mangaluru, CMC, Bidar, CMC, Hosapete, CMC, Udupi and TMC, Maddu r), 
the devices were functional and in the other five ULBs, GPS dev ices were not 
functional due to issues such as software problems, damages due  to short 
circuit (CMC, Chintamani).  In the absence of GPS, ULBs were deprived of an 
effective tracking mechanism.   
Further, the test-checked ULBs,  other than CC, Mangaluru, CC, T umakuru 
and CMC, Sira did not have the facility of weighbridge and CC TV cameras 
resulting in absence of effective monitoring of transportation activity. 
Illustration - Unauthorised dumping of waste in CMC, Nanjangud 
The authorised landfill site was located at a distance of eight  kilometres from 
Nanjangud city and the ULB stated that waste collected was bein g dumped in 
the authorised site. ULB neither fixed GPS in MSW transportatio n vehicles 
nor installed closed circuit television (CCTV) camera and weigh bridge in the 
landfill site. 
We observed that huge quantity of mixed waste including plastics, food waste, 
chicken waste, clothes, cut-hair was dumped in a vast area of 6 acres close to 
the bank of River Kabini (50 me tres), which passes through Nanj angud city. 
This unauthorised dumpsite was located at a distance of one kil ometre from 
the city.  The above area, which was enroute to the landfill si te, was found to 
be grazed by pigs and stray dogs and unbearable foul smell was emanating 
from the area (Exhibit 6.10). 
The quantum of waste seen in the area only indicate dumping of waste in an 
unauthorised area. Regional Office, KSPCB, Mysuru (Rural) also 
communicated (2015) this observa tion to CMC, Nanjangud. The CMC , 
however, failed to take preventive measures by way of either installing GPS to 
each MSW transporting vehicle or installing CCTV camera in the landfill site, 
which could have prevented dumpi ng of waste at unauthorised sit e besides 
ensuring proper monitoring of movement of MSW vehicles by ULB. 
The State Government agreed (May 2018) to look into the matter. 
                                                 
31 CCs - Mangaluru and Tumakuru; C MCs - Bagalkote, Bidar, Chintamani, Hosapete, 
Karwar, Sira and Udupi; TMC, Maddur. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
44 
6.3.5 Usage of compactor trucks for transportation of Municipal Solid 
Waste against State policy  
The State policy, 2004 stipulates that compactors have a separa te system for 
secondary collection and these vehicles are not recommended for towns with 
population of less than 20 lakh.  The population of all ULBs in  the State other 
than BBMP is less than 20 lakh and hence use of compactors for 
transportation was not permitted. 
We observed that nine
32 test-checked ULBs were using 47 compactors for 
secondary collection and trans portation of MSW to landfill.  In  six ULBs, the 
DC/DMA, responsible for monitoring the functioning of ULBs, app roved the 
action plans for purchase of compactors.  In CC, Mangaluru, the  agency 
entrusted with the work of secondary transportation was using c ompactors.  
Thus, the approval, purchase and usage of compactors was agains t the State 
policy. 
As the unsegregated MSW which include domestic hazardous waste is 
compressed in the compactors, chances of contamination of MSW b y toxic 
wastes such as batteries, glass pieces, etc., is significant.  Therefore, handling 
of such waste would not only be risky but quality of by-product s would be 
adversely affected.  The usage of compactors also goes against the principle of 
facilitating aerobic composting in windrow platforms as it comp resses waste, 
whereas windrows are meant to aerate waste to enhance the speed  of aerobic 
decomposition. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that the State Policy wo uld be 
suitably amended. 
Recommendation 14:  The ULBs, in add ition to increasing the number of 
vehicles, should also ensure that the vehicles already procured comply with 
the statutory requirements of regi stration, obtaining authorisation, 
insurance, fitness certificate, etc. Th e vehicles procured should be suitably 
designed to collect and transport segregated waste efficiently. 
                                                 
32 CCs – Ballari, HDMC, Mangaluru a nd Tumakuru; CMCs - Bidar, Hosapete and Udupi; 
TMCs – Hiriyur and Maddur. 

Exhibit 6.7: Transportation of unsegregated waste (Paragraph 6.3.2) 
CMC, Bagalkote (29.8.2017) 
 
HDMC (28.4.2017) 
 
CMC, Hosapete (11.5.2017) 
 


Exhibit 6.8: Open vehicles used for transportation (Paragraph 6.3.2) 
CMC, Shidlaghatta (8.6.2017) 
 
CMC, Sira (17.6.2017) 
 
TMC, Bhatkal (11.5.2017) 
  


Exhibit 6.9: Vehicles with slider used for transportation (Paragraph 6.3.2) 
HDMC (28.4.2017) 
 
CMC, Bidar (8.8.2017) 
 
 


Exhibit 6.10: Unauthorised dumping of waste (Paragraph 6.3.4) 
CMC, Nanjangud (11.5.2017) 
 
 
 


45 
Chapter VII 
Processing, Treatment and Disposal of Waste 
7.1 Processing 
In accordance with Section 4.1 of MSWM Manual, 2016 (Volume I), selection 
and adoption of MSW processing technologies should be based on defined 
selection criteria and subject to a detailed due diligence study which ascertains 
the appropriateness of the tec hnology to the prevailing conditi ons of the 
respective ULB. Treatment and processing of segregated waste st reams not 
only reduces operational costs but also increases the efficienc y of the process.  
The waste processing technologies available for ULBs are compos ting, waste 
to energy, bio-methanation, etc. 
7.1.1 Status of waste processing  
The status of waste collected and processed in the test-checked ULBs during 
the period 2012-13 to 2016-17 is given in Table 7.1. 
Table 7.1: Status of waste processed in test-checked ULBs 
 (in tons) 
Year 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 
MSW collected 4,45,782 4,55,600 4,77,829 5,14,914 5,24,881
Processed 1,01,204 1,05,219 1,17,994 1,48,230 1,60,783
Percentage 23 23 25 29 31
      Source: Information furnished by ULBs. 
It can be seen from the above that on an average 26 per cent  o f  t h e  w a s t e  
collected was processed in the test-checked ULBs during the per iod 2012-13 
to 2016-17.  The other 74 per cent was being dumped in the landfill.  Low rate 
of processing in the test-checked ULBs was due to inadequate in frastructure 
and under-utilisation of infrastru cture as explained in the sub sequent 
paragraphs. 
The State Government assured (May 2018) that necessary vehicles/machinery 
would be procured and all ULBs would have fully operational com post plants 
over a period of time. 
7.2 Waste processing technology adopted by test-checked urban 
local bodies 
7.2.1 Composting 
Out of the 35 ULBs test-checked, only 11 33 ULBs processed MSW.  Only 
three34 of them processed MSW throughout the audit period (2012-13 to 2016-
17) whereas two35 ULBs processed MSW for three out of five years and four 36 
ULBs processed MSW for two out of five years. TMC, Kumta and TM C, 
Maddur, processed only during 2016-17 in decentralised processi ng centres 
located in the urban limit. 
                                                 
33 CCs - HDMC, Mangaluru and Tumakuru; CMCs - Bagalkote, Bidar, C hintamani, Karwar 
and Sira; TMCs - Kumta, Maddur and Malur. 
34 CC, Mangaluru; CMCs - Karwar and Sira. 
35 HDMC and CMC, Chintamani. 
36 CC, Tumakuru; CMCs - Bagalkote and Bidar; TMC, Malur. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
46 
7.2.1.1 Inadequate creation and poor utilisation of infrastruct ure 
The extent of infrastructure created (windrow platforms, vermi-compost sheds, 
etc.) and utilised in 35 test-checked ULBs as per the JPV conducted  during 
audit is indicated in Chart 7.1. 
Chart 7.1: Availability and utilisation of infrastructure 
 
 
As can be seen from the chart, more than 50 per cent of the ULBs did not have 
any kind of processing facility despite availability of capital funds (as detailed 
in Paragraph 4.3), 20 per cent   and 31 per cent of ULBs test-checked did not 
utilise the infrastructure creat ed for windrow composting and v ermi-
composting respectively. 
Scrutiny of the records revealed that infrastructure created in nine test-checked 
ULBs was not put to use, resulting in inadequate quantity of MS W being 
processed and unfruitful expenditure of 
`365.75 lakh as detailed in Table 7.2. 
Table 7.2: Unfruitful expenditure on infrastructure 
Sl. 
No. ULB Amount 
(` in lakh) Remarks 
1 CMC, 
Nanjangud 
39.11 Four windrow platforms (February 2014) (Exhibit 7.1) 
62.96 Three large sheds constructed (2013 to 2016) 
18.94 Sorting/segregating machinery purchased (2013-14) not 
utilised for lack of electricity  
2 CMC, Hiriyur 24.35 Vermi composting pits 
25.39 Machinery and solar lights (January 2014) 
3 CMC, 
Hosapete 26.94 Vermi compost shed partially constructed and 
equipment (2015-16) lying idle 
4 CMC, Bidar 40.00 Screening machine with conveyor belts (June 2016) 
kept idle for want of trained manpower 
5 CMC, 
Shidlaghatta 8.57 Vermi compost pits constructed (May 2015) lying 
unutilised (Exhibit 7.2) 
6 TMC, 
Humnabad 
10.18 Vermi compost pits constructed (prior to 2012) lying 
unutilised (Exhibit 7.3) 
4.50 Segregating machine (2011-12) kept idle for want of 
power supply 
7 TMC, Magadi 
38.61
Sanitary pit (with High Density Polyethylene (HDPE) 
liner) constructed (August 2013) without constructing 
windrow platforms 
28.70 Processing equipment purchased in May 2015 kept idle 
for want of power supply 
6
3
6
8
11
11
7
18
32
18
20
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Sanitary pit
Bio-methanation plant
Vermi composting
Windrow composting
Number of ULBs
Facility provided and being used
 Facility provided but not being used
 Facility not available

Chapter-VII 
47 
Sl. 
No. ULB Amount 
(` in lakh) Remarks 
8 TP, Gudibande 4.00 Shredder purchased (October 2014) lying idle due to 
non-availability of shed 
9 CC, Ballari 33.50 Funds released (2013) to Nirmithi Kendra for 
construction of windrow platform remained unutilised 
Total  365.75  
Source: Information furnished by test-checked ULBs 
7.2.2 Bio-methanation 
Only three 37 test-checked ULBs had functional Bio-methanation plants.  
Review of records showed that biogas produced in the three plan ts was used 
for running Diesel Generator set, crusher/air compressor/water pumps and 
lighting in market areas. 
HDMC entered into an agreement (September 2014) with M/s Mailhe m 
Engineers Private Limited for installation of a biogas plant (3  Ton capacity) 
including its O&M for 12 months, at a cost of `63 lakh. 
Bio-methanation plant was commissioned only in July 2016, two y ears after 
the agreement.  During the period from July 2016 to March 2017,  the plant 
with a capacity of 3 ton, received only 20 kgs to 1,300 kgs per  day.  The plant 
did not get a supply of waste for 112 days (41 per cent) during the period of 
operation of 274 days.  Though 0.75 TPD of slaughterhouse waste (suitable 
for bio-methanation) was generated in old Hubballi and Manikilla, Dharwad, it 
was not supplied to the plant but was dumped in the landfill site.  This resulted 
in under utilisation of the capacity of the plant to obtain bio gas and dumping 
of these waste in the landfill site causing additional burden o n space and 
polluting the environment. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that reply would be furnished on 
receipt of reports from respective ULBs. 
7.3 Disposal of waste 
All the waste that cannot be reused/recycled/processed further finds its way to 
the landfills, the ultimate destination of the solid waste.  The landfills are 
designed to minimise the impact of the waste on the environment  b y  
containment of the waste. 
7.3.1 Status of landfills in Karnataka 
As per the Annual Report (2015-16) of KSPCB (February 2017), ou t of 270 
ULBs in the State, (excluding BBMP and all the four Notified Area 
Committees), 207 ULBs had designated landfill sites including f our
38 U L B s  
which used the landfills of other neighbouring ULBs.  Thus, 63 ULBs did not 
have landfill sites for disposal  o f  M S W .   O f  t h e  3 5  t e s t - c h e c k ed ULBs, 29 
                                                 
37 HDMC from July 2016; CC, Mangaluru and CMC, Udupi. 
38 CMC, Ullal and TMC, Bantwal (Ma ngaluru landfill); TMC, Kumta ( landfill site of 
TP, Honnavara) and TP, Saligrama (landfill of CMC, Udupi). 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
48 
ULBs operated 32 landfill sites, 5 39 newly formed ULBs did not have landfill 
site and TMC, Kumta was using the landfill site of TP, Honnavara. 
7.3.1.1 Failure to designate land for setting up landfills 
The provisions of Rule 11 (f) and 12 (a) of SWM Rules, 2016, st ate that the 
State and District authorities shall facilitate identification and allocation of 
suitable land for setting up solid waste processing and disposa l facilities to 
local authorities within one year from the date of notification of the Rules.   
We observed that six test-checked ULBs were yet to identify lan d for setting 
up of landfill facility (November 2017).  The five test-checked  ULBs that did 
not have a landfill site disposed the waste on sides of State h ighways, near 
hospitals, river canals, graveyards and within open areas of wards, as observed 
during JPV with the ULBs’ staff, resulting in unauthorised and unhygienic 
disposal of mixed MSW including bio-medical waste posing health  and 
environment hazards in the area (Exhibit 7.4). 
Non-allocation of suitable land for landfill to ULBs indicates lack of effective 
monitoring by District/State lev el authorities to ensure settin g up of disposal 
facility in time for scientific disposal of MSW in an authorise d area and 
amounts to non-compliance with the SWM Rules. 
The State Government accepted the audit observation and stated (May 2018) 
t h a t  l e t t e r s  w e r e  a d d r e s s e d  t o  a l l  D C s  t o  f a c i l i t a t e  U L B s  i n  p rocuring waste 
processing sites. 
7.3.1.2 No authorisation from Karnat aka State Pollution Control  Board 
for setting up of Landfill 
As per Clause 4 (2), of MSW Rules, 2000, the municipal authorit y or an 
operator of a facility shall obt ain grant of authorisation for setting up of waste 
disposal facility including landfills from the KSPCB in order t o comply with 
the implementation programme laid down in Schedule I to the Rul es. As per 
SWM Rules, 2016, ULBs shall obtain authorisation from KSPCB for  disposal 
facility if the volume of waste exceeds five metric tons per day. 
Records reveal that ULBs operating landfills sought authorisati on of KSPCB 
every year.  The authorisation status of the 32 test-checked la ndfills is as 
below: 
 authorisation of 13 landfills were renewed by KSPCB for the yea r 
2017; 
 Of the three landfills in HDMC, two were operating without 
authorisation during the review  period and one was refused 
authorisation from 2014 onwards  due to non-compliance with the 
conditions of authorisation; 
                                                 
39 TMCs - Kakkera, Mugalkhod and Ugar Khurd; TPs - Ainapura and C hinchali. 

Chapter-VII 
49 
 Four40 landfills did not apply for authorisation during the review period 
and hence were functioning unauthorisedly; 
 In case of five 41 landfills, though renewal for authorisation was 
submitted (March and May 2017) to KSPCB for the year 2017, the 
decision of KSPCB was awaited; 
 Six ULBs have not furnished the status of authorisation of six landfills; 
and 
 CMC, Bagalkote continued to ope rate a landfill, though KSPCB di d 
not issue an authorisation from the year 2011 onwards. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that appropriate action would be 
taken in this regard. 
7.3.1.3 Irregularities in grant of authorisation by Karnataka S tate 
Pollution Control Board 
The RPCB, Ballari in its Inspection Report on the landfill in C C, Ballari to 
KSPCB listed out its non-compliance to waste rules from the yea r 2011 such 
as (a) non-segregation of solid waste (b) plastics lying in and around the dump 
site (c) unscientific dumping of  solid waste in site without co verings and 
without segregation (d) waste dumped in sanitary pit, burnt in pit and lining 
has been burnt (e) odour and smoke due to burning of waste and (f) movement 
of stray animals and dogs within the site.  The RPCB sought per mission for 
filing a criminal case against ULB and recommended for refusing  o f  
authorisation. However, the State level Authorisation Committee, ignoring the 
recommendations of RPCB, issued authorisation to operate the la ndfill for all 
the years.  This was clearly against the provisions of Rule 16( 1)(h) of SWM 
Rules, 2016 and the non-complian ce as listed above has an adver se effect on 
the surrounding environment.  
7.3.1.4 Operation of municipal solid waste management facility without 
obtaining Environment Clearance 
In accordance with National Environmental Policy, GoI notified (September 
2006) that construction of new projects or activities or the ex pansion or 
modernisation of existing projects or activities entailing capacity addition with 
change in process and or techno logy including Common Municipal Solid 
Waste Management Facility (CMSWMF)
42 shall be undertaken in any part of 
India only after the prior Environmental Clearance from the Cen tral 
Government or as the case may be, by the State Environment Impa ct 
Assessment Authority (SEIAA), duly constituted by GoI. 
                                                 
40 CMC, Dandeli, TMC, Malur, TM C, Manvi and TP, Koppa. 
41 CC, Mangaluru, CMC, Bidar (March  2017), TMC, Magadi (May 2017), TP, Raibag and 
TP, Sringeri (May 2017). 
42 CMSWMF is referred as centra lised MSW facility for a given town, city, region. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
50 
SEIAA, Bengaluru furnished (September 2017) information that En vironment 
Clearance was given to 16 CMSWMF which included six 43 ULBs other than 
B B M P .   O u t  o f  3 5  t e s t - c h e c k e d  U L B s ,  C M S W M F  w a s  e s t a b l i s h e d  i n  four 
ULBs prior to issue of notification.  Seventeen ULBs which were  allotted site 
for development of landfills during the period 2006-17 were to obtain 
Environmental Clearance from SEIAA for operating MSWM Facility.   W e  
observed that only three 44 ULBs applied for Environment Clearance with 
SEIAA, and all the three applications were treated as closed wi thout issuing 
clearance due to non-submission of requisite information.  CMC,  Bagalkote 
was also operating a Common Bio-M edical Waste Treatment Facility 
(CBMWTF) within the premises of the landfill.  
Operation of MSWM facilities w ithout the mandatory environmenta l 
clearance indicated lack of basic monitoring by ULBs and distri ct /State level 
authorities to ensure compliance to the GoI notification and po sed a serious 
threat to the environment besides leading to health hazards. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that instructions were g iven (March 
2018) to all ULBs to obtain necessary clearances from competent authority. 
7.3.1.5 Irregularities in selection/operation of landfill sites  
Schedule III of MSW Rules, 2000 and Schedule I (A) of SWM Rules , 2016 
lay down the criteria for selec tion of sites for landfills such as, landfill site 
shall be 100 metre away from river, 200 metre from a pond, high ways, 
habitations, public parks and water supply wells and 20 km away  f r o m  
Airports or Airbase. 
The status of compliance to the criteria at 32 test-checked landfills is exhibited 
in Chart 7.2. 
Chart 7.2: Status of compliance at landfills 
 
                                                 
43 CCs - Belagavi and Mysuru; TMC, Hanagal; TPs - Hirekerur, Sull ia and Yellapura. 
44 CC, Mangaluru (25.07.2013); CMCs - Bagalkote (31.08.2012) and Dandeli (20.11.2010). 
11
30
32
30
23
26
31
31
32
32
21
2
2
9
6
1
1
0 4 8 1 21 62 02 42 83 2
Buffer zone declared
Proposal for buffer zone sent by ULB
20 Km away from Airport/Airbase
200 m away from water supply wells
200 m away from public parks
200 m away from habitations
200 m away from highway
200 m away from pond
100 m away from river
Total number of landfill sites
Number of landfillsYes No

Chapter-VII 
51 
Analysis of the above revealed the following: 
1) None of the test-checked ULBs (32 landfills) declared a Buff er zone of 
no development around the landfills.  To cite an example, in TM C, 
T. Narasipura, Kittur Rani Chennamma Residential School was 
constructed (2009) adjacent to t he landfill that was acquired i n 2003 
(Exhibit 7.5). 
2) Landfill sites in following three test-checked ULBs were sel ected 
within a distance of 200 metres from existing residential colonies. 
 CMC, Karwar – The landfill site was identified within100 metres  
of fully developed layouts; 
 CMC, Nanjangud – The landfill si te was developed within 100 
metres from a residential layout (Ashraya Colony); and 
 CMC, Bagalkote – The landfill site was developed adjacent to 
Leprosy colony consisting of more than 20 residences. 
3) Activities that do not confor m to the provisions of MSW/SWM Rules 
were taken up in the landfill sites. 
 CC, Tumakuru - Four dwelling units were constructed for workers 
within the landfill in contravention of the norms; 
 CMC, Bagalkote – Children play equipment was installed (October  
2016) in the landfill (Exhibit 7.6); and 
 CMC, Sira – A park with walk path and covered with chain fencing 
was formed within the landfill (Exhibit 7.7). 
4) Six
45 ULBs had landfills located near highways. 
5) In the landfill site of TMC, Bhatkal, a seasonal natural str eam was 
traversing through the stretch of landfill.  While developing t he landfill 
site, the TMC provided stone embankment along the canal from one 
end of the landfill site to the other ( Exhibit 7.8).  We observed during 
JPV that leachate tank was under construction.  KSPCB observed that 
the leachate generated was allowed to stagnate at the site and was 
getting mixed with rain water in  the natural valley during the rainy 
season.  KSPCB seeking compliance to arrest the discharge of le achate 
did not renew the authorisation for the landfill after January 2016.  
6) In TMC, Maddur, the land required for landfill site was iden tified and 
after obtaining the approval of the RPCB, Mandya, the Chief Off icer 
purchased (February 2011) 3 acres 21 guntas in Survey no. 118/P6 
(New Sy.no. 733) and 3 acres 32 guntas in Survey no. 118/P26 (N ew 
Sy.no. 623) land from the concerned for 
`31.82 lakh.  It was presumed 
that both the lands were adjacent to each other at the time of purchase.  
Subsequently on verification of the land before taking up devel opment 
activities, it was found that the  sites purchased by ULB were n ot 
                                                 
45 HDMC; CMCs - Chintamani and Shidlaghatta; TMC, Bhatkal; TPs - Honnavara and 
Koppa. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
52 
adjacent to each other.  A legal notice was served (August 2013) on the 
owners of the land.  During JPV (June 2017), we observed that b oth 
the lands were at a distance of approximately 10 kms and there was no 
proper connectivity and traces of crop cultivation was noticed in the 
intermediary lands.  The ULB was using only 3 acres and 21 gunt as in 
Sy.no. 733 for dumping of unprocessed waste.  Thus, failure to ensure 
the exact location of the land before its purchase resulted in non-
utilisation of the 3 acres and 32 guntas of land for more than seven 
years for processing and disposal of waste. Consequently, there  was a 
possibility of polluting the agricultural lands adjacent to the  landfill 
sites (Exhibit 7.9). 
The State Government cited (May 2018) public litigation and non-availability 
of suitable land for failure to achieve 100 per cent compliance at landfills.  It 
further stated that reports were sought from respective ULBs. 
7.3.1.6 Absence of basic f acilities in landfills 
Schedule III of MSW Rules, 2000 and Schedule I (B) of SWM Rules , 2016 
lay down the facilities that should be available at landfill si tes.  Chart 7.3 
depicts the status of the availability of these facilities in the 32 landfills. 
Chart 7.3: Status of availability of basic facilities in landfills 
 
Management at 29 landfills did not maintain any records, 31 lan dfills did not 
have any waste inspection facilities to monitor waste brought in for landfilling, 
hence, there was no check/preventive mechanism to reduce mixed waste to be 
brought to the landfills.  Out of 21 landfills with windrow platforms, 15 had 
leachate drains and only nine had connection to leachate tanks.  Weighbridge 
was not available in 22 landfills and it was not working in six of the balance 
10 landfills. Firefighting equipment was not available in 30 landfills, drinking 
water in 23 landfills and toilet facilities in 22 landfills.   
9
10
18
2
10
3
12
29
9
1
16
17
24
30
23
23
23
22
14
30
22
29
20
3
23
31
16
15
8
2
9
9
0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32
Drinking water
Toilet facility
Lighting facility
Fire protection equipment
Weighbridge
Maintenance of record
Shelter for equipment and machinery
Watchman shed
Office facility
Waste inspection facility
Vegetative covering/plantation
Storm water drains
Internal roads
Approach roads
Compound wall and gate
Windrow platforms
Number of landfills
Yes
 No
Facilities Availability
 

Chapter-VII 
53 
We further observed that 1446 test-checked landfills did not have 10 or more of 
these facilities within the landfills. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that DPRs prepared under  S B M  
would address these issues by proposing a system with adequate collection, 
transportation, treatment and disposal facility.  The reply was not relevant to 
the audit observation. 
7.3.1.7 Burning of waste in landfill sites 
The JPV of landfill sites revealed burning / traces of burning of mixed waste 
in nine 47 U L B s  (Exhibit 7.10 ).  Failure of the ULBs to contain burning of 
waste in landfill site resulted in air pollution with reduced air quality index.  
NGT directed (December 2016) ULBs to implement complete prohibi tion on 
open burning of waste on lands, including at landfill sites and  to penalise 
violators including ULBs responsib le for such burning with an environmental 
compensation of `5,000 in case of simple burning and `25,000 in cases of 
burning of bulk waste. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that the issue would be taken up 
with KSPCB for issue of necessary guidelines. 
7.3.2 Disposal of municipal solid wa ste by Town Municipal Council, 
Kumta in forest land 
Government of Karnataka accorded (November 2007) permission for 
diversion of two hectares of forest land in Survey no. 108A of Manaki village 
after obtaining approval from Government of India.  Marur Gudda 
Hitharakshna Samithi  objected to the establishment of solid waste disposal 
unit in the said land alleging ground water pollution.  Hence, the TMC 
identified an alternate land.  The State Government accorded (A pril 2009) 
fresh approval without obtaining sanction from GoI, which was against the 
Forests (Conservation) Act, 1980.  There was an objection to this by a few 
petitioners who filed a writ pe tition (WP no. 36467 of 2011) be fore the NGT.  
The NGT in its judgement (February 2017) held the Government or der of 
April 2009 null and void. 
I n  t h e  m e a n t i m e ,  T M C ,  K u m t a ,  i n  anticipation of clearance by NG T started 
dumping MSW in the said land.  Waste (27,740 tons) was dumped t ill 
February 2017 ( Exhibit 7.11).  Waste was transported to the landfill of TP, 
Honnavara from March 2017 onwards, based on the directions of DC, Karwar.  
TMC also had incurred an amount of 
`37.60 lakh towards lease rent, 
afforestation, etc. 
The action of ULB to dump waste in forest land when the matter was 
subjudice was, therefore, incorrect, resulting in pollution of the forest area 
besides resulting in unfruitful expenditure. 
                                                 
46 TMC, Manvi-New landfill (14); TMC, Manvi-Old landfill (14); TM C, Malur (13); 
H D M C - H os a y a l l a pur a  ( 1 2 ) ;  T P ,  R a i ba g ( 1 2) ;  T P ,  S r i nge r i  ( 1 2) ;  C C, Ballari (11); TMC, 
T. Narasipura (11); CMC, Dandeli ( 1 0 ) ;  C M C ,  N a n j a n g u d  ( 1 0 ) ;  T M C, Humnabad (10); 
TMC, Magadi (10); TP, Honnavara (10) and TP, Kudligi (10). 
47 C C s  -  B a l l a r i  a n d  H D M C ;  C M C s  -  B i d a r ,  D a n d e l i ,  H o s a p e t e ,  N a n j angud and Sira; 
TMC, Maddur; TP, Kudligi. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
54 
7.4 Works proposed without e nsuring post-closure care 
CC, Ballari, was dumping MSW in the old compost yard in Roopanagudi area 
up to the period 2009-10. With the development of new landfill site at 
Haraginadoni village, MSW was s ent to the new landfill site fro m the year 
2010.   
As per Schedule III of MSW Rules, 2000, post-closure care of la ndfill site 
shall be conducted for at least fifteen years and use of closed landfill sites after 
fifteen years of post-closure monitoring can be considered for human 
settlement or otherwise only after ensuring that gaseous emission and leachate 
quality analysis complies with t he specified standards and the soil stability is 
ensured.  Further, as per Section 6.9.4.3 of MSWM Manual, 2000,  the 
operating agency should submit a certificate of completion of c losure and 
post-closure to the State Boards. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that the Council of CC approved (July 2015) for 
formation of residential layout for Pourakarmikas o f  C C  at th e  o ld  c o m p o s t  
yard to construct G +2 housing complex.  Similarly, the State Level High 
Powered Steering Committee approved (June 2017) development of a park 
under Atal Mission for Rejuvenati on and Urban Transformation (A MRUT) 
Scheme. 
We also observed that cement concrete approach road at old comp ost yard 
(ward no.17) and reinforced cement concrete ramp was constructe d 
(December 2015 and February 2016) at a cost of 
`24.29 lakh and `12 lakh 
respectively out of 13 th FC grants.  Though the works of (a) construction of 
compound wall to old compost yard at an estimated cost of `98 lakh and (b) 
construction of secondary collect ion platform & providing mecha nical 
conveyor system at old compost yard at an estimated cost of `25 lakh were 
approved under the 13 th F C ,  t h e s e  t w o  w o r k s  w e r e  n o t  t a k e n  u p  s o  f a r  
(December 2017). 
In all the above cases, the requi red approval/consent of the KS PCB was not 
obtained. It is pertinent to mention that the RPCB, Ballari, in  its report (April 
2010) stated that 35,000 tons of solid waste was dumped in the old compost 
yard and termed it as degraded land.  Thus, according approval to take up 
construction of residential layout for Pourakarmikas and develop a park in the 
old compost yard besides other construction works in and around  compost 
yard contravened the norms of taking up post closure activities as envisaged in 
MSW/ SWM Rules.  This is bound to pose hazards to public health.  
Recommendation 15: The State Go vernment/ULBs should maximise 
processing of waste through complete  utilisation of the infrastructure 
created and encourage adoption of bio-methanation technology by ULBs. 
Recommendation 16:  The State Government should ensure that all landfill 
sites are operating with valid authoris ation and environmental clearances.  
It should also enforce and monitor sc ientific and proper disposal of the 
unprocessed waste through periodic checks. 

Exhibits for Paragraph 7.2.1.1 
Exhibit 7.1: Windrow platforms with sheds in CMC, Nanjangud (5.7.2017) 
  
Exhibit 7.2: Vermi compost pits lying idle in CMC, Shidlaghatta (6.6.2017) 
 
Exhibit 7.3: Unutilised vermicompost sheds at TMC, Humnabad (3.8.2017) 
 


Exhibit 7.4: Dumping of waste on sides of State highways, near hospitals, 
river canals, etc. (Paragraph 7.3.1.1) 
TP, Ainapura (16.6.2017) 
TMC, Mugalkhod (30.8.2017) 
 
TMC, Kakkera (7.9.2017) 
 


Exhibits for Paragraph 7.3.1.5 
Exhibit 7.5: Residential school adjacent to landfill at TMC, T. Narasipura (4.7.2017) 
  
Exhibit 7.6: Children play equipment in landfill at CMC, Bagalkote (31.8.2017) 
 
Exhibit 7.7: Park with walk path within the landfill at CMC, Sira (15.6.2017) 
 


Exhibit 7.8: Seasonal stream passing through landfill (Paragraph 7.3.1.5) 
TMC, Bhatkal (9.5.2017) 
 
Exhibit 7.9: Landfill sites of CMC, Maddur (Paragraph 7.3.1.5) (3.6.2017) 
  
 
 


Exhibit 7.10: Burning of mixed waste (Paragraph 7.3.1.7) 
CC, Ballari (1.8.2017) 
 
CMC, Bidar (8.8.2017) 
 
HDMC (26.4.2017) 
 


Exhibit 7.11: Dumping of waste in forest land (Paragraph 7.3.2) 
TMC, Kumta (22.5.2017) 
 
 


 
55 
Chapter VIII 
Special waste and  
Construction and Demolition waste 
As per Section 7.1 of MSWM Manual, 2016, the following wastes are defined 
as special waste namely (a) Plastic waste, (b) Bio-medical wast e (BMW), (c) 
Electric and Electronic waste (e-waste), and (d) Slaughterhouse waste.  
8.1 Plastic waste 
MoEFCC notified (February 2011) the Plastic Waste (Management and 
Handling) Rules, 2011 (PW Rules, 2011).  It was replaced by the  P l a s t i c  
Waste Management Rules, 2016 (PWM Rules, 2016) notified (18 Mar ch 
2016) by Government of India. These rules shall apply to every waste 
generator, local body, manufacturer, importers and producer. 
8.1.1 Usage of banned plastic 
Rule 5 (c) of PW Rules, 2011 prohibit manufacture, stock, distribution or sale 
of any carry bag made of virgin or recycled plastic, which is l ess than 40 
microns in thickness.  Subsequently, as per Rule 4(c) of PWM Rules, 2016, 
carry bag made of virgin or recycled plastic, shall not be less than 50 microns 
in thickness. 
Government of Karnataka notified (11 March 2016) a ban on manuf acture, 
supply, sale and usage of plastic carry bags, plastic banners, plastic buntings, 
flex, plastic flags, plastic plates, plastic cups, plastic spoo ns, cling films and 
plastic sheets used for spreading on dining table including the  above items 
made of thermocol and plastic, which use plastic micro beads in the State. 
As per the returns (2016-17) submitted by DMA to KSPCB, 760 TPD  o f  
plastic waste is generated in the State.  To ensure compliance to the ban, ULBs 
(other than BBMP) conducted 3,588 raids on commercial establishments and 
seized 162 tons of banned plastic and collected 
`31.68 lakh towards 
fine/penalty. 
We observed that 28 of the test-checked ULBs conducted 1,889 raids along 
with officials of the KSPCB during the period 2012-13 to 2016-1 7 and seized 
86 tons of banned plastic.  They were stored within the premises of ULBs, dry 
waste collection centres and at landfill sites.  ULBs were yet to initiate action 
for disposal of the banned plastic.  An amount of 
`9.30 lakh was collected as 
fine for non-compliance.  Two ULBs (CMCs, Karwar and Sira) did not furnish 
replies and five
48 ULBs did not conduct any raid. 
We further observed during JPV that banned plastic waste was co llected at 
source from households, indicating that the ban was not impleme nted 
effectively. 
                                                 
48 TMCs – Humnabad and Mugalkhod; TPs - Ainapura, Chinchali and R aibag. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
56 
The State Government stated (M ay 2018) that despite the ban, qu antum of 
plastic carry bags in MSW had not reduced.  However, raids were conducted 
throughout the State to recover banned plastic items and also i mpose fine on 
such units.  Steps would also be taken to dispose seized plastic material. 
8.1.2 Status of compliance to Pl astic Waste Management Rules 
Clause 6 of PW Rules, 2011 and Clauses 5 and 6 of PWM Rules, 20 16 spell 
out the responsibility of the m unicipal authority/local body fo r plastic waste 
management.  The status of compliance to these provisions in th e test-checked 
ULBs is shown in Table 8.1.  
Table 8.1: Status of compliance to PW Rules, 2011 and PWM Rules, 2016 
Sl. 
No. Requirement 
Provision under 
Compliance/Remarks PW Rules, 
2011 
PWM 
Rules, 2016 
1 
Ensuring segregation, collection, storage, 
transportation, processing and disposal of 
plastic waste 
Rule 6 (c) (i) Rule 6 (2) 
(a) 
Segregation followed only by TMC, Kumta.  
In the absence of segregation, the other test-
checked ULBs were collecting and 
transporting mixed waste to the landfill site. 
2 Creating awareness among all 
stakeholders about their responsibilities 
Rule 6 (c) 
(v) 
Rule 6 (2) 
(e) 
Awareness on use of alternative products in 
place of plastic was promoted by the test-
checked ULBs except the five newly 
upgraded ULBs.   
3 
Engaging civil societies or groups working 
in waste management including waste 
pickers 
Rule 6 (c) 
(vi) 
Rule 6 (2) 
(f) 
No test-checked ULBs (other than CC, 
Tumakuru and CMC, Bagalkot) engaged 
civil societies or groups working in waste 
management including waste pickers. 
4 
For setting up of system for plastic waste 
management, the local body shall seek 
assistance of producers in line with the 
principle of Extended Producer 
Responsibility (EPR)   
Rule 6 (d) Rule 6(3) No test-checked ULBs established an EPR 
based plastic waste management system. 
5 The local body to frame bye-laws 
incorporating the provisions of these rules. Rule 6(g) Rule 6(4) 
HDMC and CC, Mangaluru framed bye-
laws during 2011.  Councils in three49 
ULBs, passed resolutions adopting the 
Rules.  However, they did not frame the 
bye-laws.  
 
Thus, failure by ULBs to follow several stages prescribed in th e rules for 
PWM (2011 and 2016) resulted in low rates of segregation.  Thus , 
unsegregated mixed waste reached  the landfill sites.  The JPV a lso showed 
that banned plastic waste was dumped in the landfill site. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that directions had been  issued 
(September 2017) to all DCs to implement the provisions of PWM Rules, 
2016.  It further stated that the draft bye-laws had been prepa red for State 
incorporating certain provisions of PWM Rules, 2016 and the pos sibility of 
integrating EPR in plastic waste management would be taken up i n the next 
State Level Plastic Advisory Committee. 
8.1.2.1 Ingestion of plastic by cattle and resultant death 
As per Schedule II to MSW Rules, 2000 and 2016, storage facilities should be 
maintained in such a way that stray animals do not have access to the waste.  
                                                 
49 CC, Tumakuru (8.9.2011); TMCs, Hiriyur (21.3.2012) and T. Nara sipura (27.2.2017). 

Chapter-VIII 
57 
Poor segregation at source, def iciency in door-to-door collecti on resulted in 
kitchen waste/discarded food packed in plastic bags being impro perly 
disposed on roadsides, vacant lands and near market areas.  Dis posal of such 
waste at such places attract cattle (stray and domestic) and ca ttle eat food 
leftovers including the plastic. 
JPV conducted in test-checked ULBs showed that stray animals we re seen 
feeding on the MSW dumped on roadsides/bins kept on roadsides a nd found 
pulling out or scattering/consumi ng the food waste that was pac ked in plastic 
bags rendering the surroundings more unclean and unhygienic ( Exhibit 8.1).  
Accumulation of large quantities of plastic inside their stomach overtime leads 
to ruminal infection, indigestion, anestrus50 and weakness leading to death.  In 
response to audit query about cases of plastic ingestion by cat tle in 35 test-
checked ULBs, four51 ULBs informed that: 
 out of 895 such cases, surgeries were conducted in 97 cases and  2,319 
kilograms of plastic was removed (Exhibit 8.2); and 
 37 deaths were reported (Exhibit 8.3). 
 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that instructions had already been 
issued to all ULBs to take measures for preventing stray animal s feeding on 
waste. 
8.1.3 Non-usage of plastic in form ation of roads/energy recovery 
Rule 6(h) of PW Rules, 2011 and Rule 5(b) of PWM Rules, 2016 stipulate that 
the municipal authorities/local bodies shall encourage the use of plastic waste 
(preferably the plastic waste which cannot be further recycled)  f o r  r o a d  
construction as per Indian Roads Congress guidelines or energy recovery or 
waste to oil, etc., in compliance with the standards and pollution control norms 
specified by the prescribed authority. 
The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) in its overview of plastic waste 
management (June 2013) indicated  the technologies that could be  adopted for 
plastic waste management such as utilisation of plastic waste i n road 
construction, co-processing of plastic waste as Alternative Fuel and Raw 
Material (AFR) in cement kilns and power plants, conversion of plastic waste 
into liquid RDF (Oil) and Plasma Pyrolysis Technology.  
We observed that none of the test-checked ULBs adopted the use of plastic 
waste in formation of roads/ene rgy recovery/waste to oil, etc., despite 28 of 
these ULBs having recovered 86 tons of banned plastic.  Illustrations of use of 
plastic in road formation by Karnataka Rural Road Development Agency 
(KRRDA) is given in Appendix 11.5.  The CPCB in its evaluation report 
(2008) on built roads (2002-2007) in Tamil Nadu, stated that ro ads using 
plastic waste are stronger with better resistance towards rain water and water 
stagnation, no stripping and no potholes, cost effective, etc.  It also mentioned 
that maintenance cost of such roads is almost nil and for 1km X  3.75m road, 1 
ton of plastic (10 lakh carry bags) is used and 1 ton of bitumen is saved.   
                                                 
50 Anestrus is the primary factor reducing reproductive efficiency in beef  cow-calf 
operations. 
51 Bidar, Chikkamagaluru (TP, Kopp a), Kolar (TMC, Malur) and Uttara Kannada. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
58 
As already been discussed in P aragraph 8.1.1 that 86 tons of pl astic waste was 
seized, audit did not come acro ss any instance of these seized plastic waste 
being transmitted by ULBs to any Road Development Authority/Age ncy for 
usage in laying roads.  In this regard, the Government also did  not give any 
directions to reuse the plastic waste in road formation. 
Thus, failure of the ULBs to perform the prescribed responsibilities and devise 
methods of utilisation of plas tic in roads resulted not only in  mismanagement 
of plastic waste but also in environmental degradation and death of cattle. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that usage of plastic wa ste in 
formation of roads would be examined positively.  It also state d that 
provisions were made in the DPRs to collect the plastic waste s eparately and 
sell these as RDF after being baled. 
Recommendation 17:  The State Gover nment may promote use of plastic 
waste in laying of both urban and rura l roads as this enables reduction of 
considerable amount of waste reac hing the landfill and lessens the 
expenditure on maintenance of roads.  It may also explore other areas 
where plastic can be used. 
8.2 Bio-medical waste 
GoI notified (July 1998) the Bio-medical Waste (Management and Handling) 
Rules, 1998, which provided a regulatory framework for manageme nt of 
BMW generated in the country.  This was replaced by the Bio-med ical Waste 
Management Rules, 2016 (BMW Rules, 2016) notified (March 2016) by GoI.  
KSPCB is the authority designated for implementation of the pro visions of 
these rules.  Every occupier o r operator handling BMW, irrespec tive of the 
quantity should obtain authorisat ion from KSPCB and shall hand over 
segregated waste to a common bio-medical waste treatment facili ty 
(CBMWTF) for treatment, processing and final disposal.  Disposa l by deep 
burial is permitted only in rural or remote areas where there i s no access to 
CBMWTF and needs to be carried out with prior approval from the prescribed 
authority and as per the Standards specified. 
8.2.1 Status of authorisation of Health  Care Establishments in the State 
There are 29,874 Health Care Establishments (HCE) functioning in Karnataka, 
which include hospitals, nursing homes and other units such as veterinary 
institutes, diagnostic laborato ries, clinical research and indu stry with medical 
officer for emergency.  There are 25 CBMWTF functioning in the State.  
As of December 2017, nine per cent of HCE (2,595) were functioning without 
a valid authorisation from KSPCB.  While 17 per cent  of HCE (5,061) 
followed deep burial system, 18 per cent of HCE (5,427) were disposing 
BMW without authorisation.  
8.2.2 Status of Bio-medical waste in Karnataka 
The quantum of BMW generated and disposed in the State during t he period 
2012 to 2016 is given in Chart 8.1. 

Chapter-VIII 
59 
Chart 8.1: Status of Bio-medical waste generation in Karnataka 
 
Source: Information furnished by KSPCB 
As depicted in Chart 8.1 , data available with KSPCB indicates that the 
quantum of waste generated and the number of HCEs remained more or less 
the same during the period 2012 to 2014 and that the entire BMW  generated 
was collected, treated and dis posed of during the period 2014 t o 2016.  The 
data furnished by KSPCB was incorrect, as we noticed during JPV  that BMW 
was mixed with MSW and BMW was burnt within the hospital premis es as 
detailed in subsequent paragraphs. 
The drastic fall in the quantum of waste generated (37 per cent) during 2015 
was not commensurate with the decrease in the number of HCE (2 per cent) 
and the reasons for the decrease were not explained by KSPCB.  There was an 
increase in the number of HCEs functioning in the State during 2016 whereas 
the quantum of waste generated did not increase proportionally and remained 
lower than the quantum generated during the period 2012 to 2014.   
8.2.3 Status of authorisation for Bio- medical waste management in test-
checked government and veterinary hospitals 
All Government (36) and Veterina ry (34) hospitals within the ju risdiction of 
33 ULBs 52 were test-checked in audit.  The status of authorisation of th ese 
hospitals by KSPCB for BMW is given in Table 8.2: 
Table 8.2: Status of authorisation of 70 Government/Veterinary hospitals 
Sl. No. Category Details of authorisation for BMW 
Obtained Not obtained Data not furnished
1 Government hospitals 14 21 01 
2 Veterinary hospitals 08 19 07 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked ULBs 
Thus, 58 per cent of the government hospitals and 56 per cent of veterinary 
hospitals test-checked were functioning without the required au thorisation as 
of March 2017.  This is bound to render the compilation of data  ( B M W  
generated, treated, etc.) at KSPCB incomplete and the monitoring/enforcement 
by KSPCB ineffective. 
                                                 
52 In one ULB (TP, Gudibande), the re was no Government/Veterinary hospital and in another 
ULB (TMC, Ugar Khurd), the only Veterinary hospital was found closed. 
30,309 30,519 29,974 18,819 24,327
27,779 28,786 29,974
18,819
24,327
27,779 28,786 29,974 18,819 24,327
26,788 26,927 27,211 26,724 26,724
0
8,000
16,000
24,000
32,000
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Quantum in tons
BMW generated BMW collected
BMW treated and disposed No. of HCE

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
60 
8.2.4 Role of Urban Local Bodies in management of Bi o-medical waste 
As per Rule 6(6) and Rule 14 of BMW Rules, 1998, amended in 200 0 and 
Schedule III (7) to BMW Rules, 2016, ULBs shall  
(a) provide or allocate suitable land for development of CBMWTF  i n  t h e i r  
respective jurisdictions as per the guidelines of CPCB.  
In all the test-checked ULBs, we observed that the government h ospitals have 
entered into agreement with CBMWTF and these facilities were lo cated at 
places away from urban limits. CC, Ballari and CMC, Bagalkote h ave 
provided place for CBMWTF in their MSW landfill site.   
(b) collect other solid waste (other than BMW) from the health care facilities.  
Eight
53 ULBs were not collecting MSW from the government hospitals 
located within their jurisdiction.  Instances of BMW mixed with  MSW were 
noticed during JPV besides burning of the mixed waste in these eight ULBs. 
In CC, Tumakuru, MSW was being collected once in a week from th e 
government hospitals. No irregularity in collection found during JPV in other 
ULBs.  MSW was not handed over to ULBs by 15 veterinary hospita ls. Traces 
of burning of MSW within the premises was observed during JPV i n 20 
hospitals. 
(c) Further as per Schedule I (12) of BMW Rules, 2016, ULBs are required to 
collect segregated BMW generate d in households and have an arrangement 
with the CBMWTF to collect this waste from the Material Recover y Facility 
or from the household directly for final disposal. 
Segregation at source in the test-checked ULBs ranged 54 from zero to 55 
per cent.  Therefore, the mixed waste collected that also included hous ehold 
BMW was being transported and dumped in the landfill site.  The ULBs did 
not have a mechanism to segregate BMW during the intermediary s tages 
either.  This not only violated B MW Rules but would also cause 
contamination of environment and public health hazard due to un sanitary 
conditions. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that provisions for collecting 
household BMW were included in the draft SWM bye-laws and KSPCB  
would be requested to provide guidelines for collection of domestic BMW. 
8.2.5 Management of Bio-medical waste by Government hospitals 
Rule 6(5) of BMW Rules, 1998 stipulate that untreated BMW shall not be kept 
stored for more than 48 hours. 
We observed that the CBMWTF collected BMW daily from seven dist rict 
hospitals and two teaching hospita ls located within the jurisdiction of the test-
checked ULBs.  District Hospital, Karwar entered into an agreem ent with 
CBMWTF which provided for collection of BMW on alternate days.  The 
actual frequency of collection was once in two to six days.  Th e periodicity of 
BMW collection in other government hospitals ranged from daily to once in a 
                                                 
53 CMC, Nanjangud; TMCs - Kakkera, Mugalkhod and T. Narasipura; T Ps - Ainapura, 
Chinchali, Kudligi and Raibag. 
54 Zero in 7 ULBs; 1 to 25 per cent in 12 ULBs; 26 to 50 per cent in 15 ULBs and more than 
50 per cent in 1 ULB. 

Chapter-VIII 
61 
week. Comparison of actual period icity of collection with the p eriodicity 
mentioned in the agreements revealed certain variations (detailed in Appendix 
8.1), indicating laxity on part of few hospitals to enforce proper di sposal of 
BMW. 
We observed that in respect of four 55 hospitals where the periodicity of 
collection of BMW was more than three days, substantial portion s of human 
tissue was dumped/burnt in deep burial pits within the premises  o f  t h e  
hospital. 
None of the veterinary hospitals  test-checked tied up with CBMW TF for 
disposal of BMW generated.  These hospitals were resorting to d eep burial for 
BMW within their premises (Exhibit 8.4). 
8.2.6 Absence of liquid chemic al waste treatment system 
In accordance with the BMW Rules, 1998 and 2016, the occupier ( HCE) shall 
ensure segregation of liquid chemical waste at source and ensure pre-treatment 
or neutralisation (disinfection using at least one per cent hypochlorite solution 
or any other equivalent chemical r eagent) prior to mixing with other effluent 
generated from health care facilities before discharging it into the drains. 
We observed that there was no system to treat the liquid chemic al waste in 12 
out of 36 government hospitals and 25 out of 34 veterinary hosp i t a l s .   T h e  
effluent treatment plant require d for treating liquid waste before letting into 
the drains was not working in a ny of the test-checked hospitals except one in 
Mangaluru, and untreated liquid chemical waste was being discharged directly 
into the drains leading to contamination of the connected watercourse. 
8.2.7 Dumping and burning of Bio-medi cal waste in hospital premises 
The provisions of the MSW/SWM Rules prohibit burning of waste i n the open 
and mixing of different types of waste.  As per Rule 4(b) of BM W Rules, 
2016, it shall be the duty of every occupier (HCE) to make a pr ovision within 
the premises for a safe, ventilated and secured location for st orage of 
segregated BMW to ensure that there shall be no secondary handling, pilferage 
of recyclables or inadvertent sca ttering or spillage by animals.   T h e  B M W  
from such place or premises shall be directly transported in th e manner as 
prescribed in these rules to the CBMWTF or for the appropriate treatment and 
disposal. 
We observed during JPV that: 
(a) huge quantity of BMW was scattered in a large stretch of open a rea 
within the premises of Vijayanaga r Institute of Medical Science s 
(VIMS), Ballari and bundles of MSW mixed with BMW were seen pil ed 
in a tractor trailer in the hospital (Exhibit 8.5);  
(b) In Bidar Institute of Medical Sciences (BRIMS), Bidar, the cont ainer 
kept for collection of MSW was found mixed with BMW ( Exhibit 8.6); 
and 
                                                 
55 TMCs - Hiriyur, Mugalkhod, T. Narasipura and Ugar Khurd. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
62 
(c) Cases of dumping of BMW were observed in 21 hospitals and cases of 
burning were noticed in 36 test-checked government/veterinary h ospitals 
(Exhibit 8.7). 
Thus, it is evident from the above observations that compliance  t o  B M W  
Rules was weak in test-checked ULBs, which would not only affec t public 
health but also lead to contamination of environment. 
8.3 E-waste 
E-Waste (Management & Handling) Rules, 2011 (EW Rules, 2011) we re 
notified in 2011 and came into force with effect from 1 st May, 2012. 
MoEFCC, Government of India notified (March 2016) the E-Waste 
(Management) Rules, 2016 (EWM Rules, 2016) which came to be eff ective 
from 1 October 2016.  These rules are applicable to every produ cer, consumer 
or bulk consumer, collection centre, dismantler and recycler of  e - w a s t e  
involved in the manufacture, sale, purchase and processing of e lectrical and 
electronic equipment or components specified in Schedule-I of these Rules. 
8.3.1 Status of e-waste in Karnataka 
As per the information furnished by KSPCB, the generation of e-waste in the 
State was estimated (March 2014) at 86,118 MT/ annum by the Env ironment 
Management Policy and Research Institute, Bengaluru.  The detai ls of e-waste 
generated, collected and channelised to recyclers, dismantlers or otherwise 
disposed of in the State during the period 2012-13 to 2016-17 w as not 
available either with KSPCB/DMA. 
As of March 2017, KSPCB issued the Consent for Establishment (C FE) to 91 
units (59 dismantlers, 23 recyclers and 9 dismantlers and recyc lers) for 
recycling/dismantling of e-waste.  We observed that Consent for Operation 
(CFO) was issued to only 77 units and CFOs for the remaining 14  units were 
in process.  We further observed that out of 77 units to which CFOs were 
issued, 17 units were yet to be commissioned, 9 units were clos ed and 13 units 
did not receive any e-waste for further processing. 
8.3.2 Role of local body as bulk consumer of e-waste 
Section 87 of KM Act, 1964 and Section 58(5) of KMC Act, 1976 s tipulate 
that lighting of public streets, municipal markets, etc., is one of the obligatory 
functions of the Corporation.  ULBs are, therefore, responsible  for 
management of tube lights in public streets, market places, etc.  Further, EW 
Rules, 2011 and EWM Rules, 2016 define bulk consumer as bulk us ers of 
electrical and electronic equipment such as Central Government or State 
Government Departments, public sector undertakings, banks, educ ational 
institutions, multinational organisations, international agenci es, partnership 
and public or private companies that are registered under the F actories Act, 
1948 (63 of 1948) and the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013) and health care 
facilities which have turnover of  more than one crore or have m ore than 
twenty employees.  The Rules, however, do not categorise ULBs a s bulk 
consumers.  As such, none of the test-checked ULBs were disposi ng discarded 
street lights in the prescribed manner. 

Chapter-VIII 
63 
In light of the above provisions and definition, ULBs are requi red to comply 
with the provisions in the Rules that are applicable to bulk co nsumers along 
with the provisions stipulating the responsibility of ULBs.  It  i s  a l s o  
recommended to amend the extant Rules by incorporating provisio ns for 
ULBs so that such e-waste is managed/disposed effectively by ULBs. 
8.3.3 Status of compliance to E-waste Management Rules 
The status of compliance in the test-checked ULBs with the prov isions of e-
waste management rules is as discussed below: 
8.3.3.1 Responsibility of Urban Local Bodies 
Schedule III of EW Rules, 2011 and Schedule IV of EWM Rules, 20 16 
stipulates the responsibilities of municipal authorities/local bodies as  
(i) to ensure that e-waste if found to be mixed with MSW is properl y 
segregated, collected and channelised to authorised dismantler or 
recycler; and  
(ii) to ensure that e-waste per taining to orphan products 56 is collected and 
channelised to authorised dismantler or recycler.  
Further, the KSPCB directed (Fe bruary 2016) that local bodies s hall make 
arrangements to separately collect e-waste from the household l evels and see 
that arrangement is made to store them scientifically at the la ndfill sites and 
disposed to the authorised e-waste recyclers once in a while.  Alternatively, 
municipal authorities can also establish e-waste collection cen tres in their 
towns at important locations and separately take care of the ho usehold e-
wastes. 
We observed that e-waste was not handed over separately by the households in 
any the test-checked ULBs but was mixed with MSW.  The waste collectors 
also did not insist/direct the households regarding segregation and separate 
collection of e-waste.  ULBs did not collect and channelise e-w aste to 
authorised dismantlers/recyclers so far (December 2017).  The J PV showed 
that e-waste was found mixed with MSW (Exhibit 8.8). 
Except CMC, Hosapete, none of the other ULBs established e-waste collection 
centres.  The centre established at CMC, Hosapete was non-functional as no e-
waste was collected by ULB.   
8.3.3.2 Retention of e-waste by Urban Local Body 
Rule 12 of EW Rules, 2011 and Rule 15 of EWM Rules, 2016, stipu late that 
every manufacturer, producer, bu lk consumer, collection centre,  d e a l e r ,  
refurbisher, dismantler and recycler may store the e-waste for a period not 
exceeding 180 days and shall maintain a record of collection, sale, transfer and 
storage of wastes and make these records available for inspection.  
Retention of huge quantity of e-waste would occupy more space in the 
premises of ULB and causes unclean/unhygienic condition in the area. 
Therefore, periodical disposal of e-waste was required to be do ne by ULBs. 
                                                 
56 Orphan products mean non-branded or assembled electrical and electronic equipment as 
specified in Schedule-I of the Rules or those produced by a com pany which has closed its 
operations or has stopped product support. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
64 
However, huge quantity of e-waste particularly tube lights were found dumped 
within the premises of ULBs. The quantum of tube lights dumped in HDMC 
and CC, Tumakuru indicates that tube lights have not been dispo sed by ULBs 
for years (Exhibit 8.9). 
Out of the 35 test-checked ULBs, only two ULBs (HDMC, other tha n tube 
lights as indicated above and CMC, Chintamani) disposed e-waste  during the 
review period.  In 22 ULBs, e-wast e generated were kept undispo sed and 11 
ULBs did not furnish any information about the disposal.  The retention of e-
waste by ULBs for more than 180 days of generation was in contr avention of 
the rules.  Further, scrutiny of records of e-waste disposed by  the two ULBs 
revealed that the e-waste was auctioned and handed over to the local kabadi 
wallas and not to the authorised e-waste recyclers or dismantlers.  T hus, e-
waste was not channelised to authorised agencies for proper dis posal which 
contravened the norms prescribed under the rules. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that provisions have bee n made in 
DPRs and draft bye-laws to ensure e-waste is collected separate ly and handed 
over to KSPCB authorised recyclers. 
8.3.3.3 Non-maintenance of e-waste record 
In accordance with Rule 9 (respons ibilities of bulk consumer) o f EWM Rules, 
2016, ULBs were required to maintain records for management of e-waste in 
Form II indicating the nature a nd quantity of e-waste generated , stored and 
transferred to recyclers, etc. We observed that the test-checked ULBs did not 
maintain the required records i ndicating the nature and quantit y of e-waste 
generated, stored and disposed. 
Therefore, ULBs did not plan or monitor management of e-waste effectively. 
8.3.3.4 Non-submission of annual returns 
Bulk consumers of electrical and electronic equipment shall file annual returns 
in Form-3 to the concerned State Pollution Control Board on or before the 
30
th day of June following the financial year to which that return r elates in 
accordance with Rule 9(4) of EWM Rules, 2016. (Filing of annual returns not 
envisaged in 2011 rules). 
Check of records showed that none of the 35 test-checked ULBs f iled the 
annual returns for the year 2016-17 to KSPCB and hence did not comply with 
the requirements. The monitoring authorities concerned also failed to ensure 
the necessary compliance. 
Thus, it is clear from the above that ULBs did not take measure s  t o  p u t  i n  
place the requisite mechanism resulting in deficient/improper management of 
e-waste. 
The State Government accepted (May 2018) the audit observations  and stated 
that necessary steps would be taken to submit annual reports henceforth. 
8.4 Slaughterhouse waste 
Rule 3(1) of Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Slaughterhouse) Rules, 2001, 
stipulate that no person shall slaughter any animal within a mu nicipal area 

Chapter-VIII 
65 
except in a slaughterhouse recogn ised or licensed by the concer ned authority 
empowered under the law for the time being in force to do so.  
8.4.1 Status of slaughterhouses in Karnataka 
There are 23 slaughterhouses in Karnataka spread across 11 dist r i c t s .   A l l  
slaughterhouses in the State except the slaughterhouse at Tanne ry Road 57 i n  
Bengaluru are categorised as ‘small’.  Ten slaughterhouses were  constructed 
in seven of the test-checked ULBs, of which six slaughterhouses  located in 
four58 ULBs were functioning. The other four 59 though constructed (July 2012 
t o  J u n e  2 0 1 4 )  a t  a  c o s t  o f  `1.44 crore have not been put to use due to 
opposition from public, etc.  Thus, absence of slaughterhouses in 28 ULBs and 
non-functioning of the four constr ucted would only provide more  scope for 
activities such as illegal slaughtering within the urban limits.  
8.4.2 Operation of slaughterhouses without authorisation 
Section 25 and 26 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollu tion) Act, 
1974 (Water Act, 1974), stipulate that any industry, operation or proc e ss, or 
any treatment and disposal system or any extension or addition thereto, which 
is likely to discharge sewage or trade effluent into a stream o r well or sewer or 
on land is required to obtain CFE and CFO from KSPCB. According ly, 
slaughterhouses were also required to obtain the consent of KSPCB. 
We observed that the five slaughterhouses were functioning without obtaining 
consent (authorisation) from KSPCB.  Though CC, Mangaluru and H DMC 
obtained consents up to 30.6.2014, the same were not renewed. The other units 
did not obtain CFO of slaughterhouse so far.  Operation of slaughterhouses 
without authorisation of KSPCB am ounted to illegal slaughtering  of animals 
in the urban limit.  This implies that the compliance criteria were not adhered 
to, which would result in hazard s to public health as well as c ontamination of 
the environment. 
The State Government assured (May 2018) that authorisation woul d be 
insisted upon. 
8.4.3 Construction of slaughterhouse in landfill site 
KSPCB notified (February 2014) guidelines for siting of slaught erhouse 
according to which the slaughterhouses shall be located prefera bly at an aerial 
distance of one kilometre away from SWM processing facility/landfill site.
 
We observed that DC, Raichur app roved (September 2014) construc tion of 
slaughterhouse in MSW landfill site of TMC, Manvi for an estimated cost of 
`33.33 lakh under Backward Regions Grant Fund scheme ( Exhibit 8.10 ).  
Accordance of approval by distri ct authority for construction o f 
slaughterhouse in a landfill site violated the guidelines of KS PCB.  Further, it 
was observed that the constructed slaughterhouse was not put to  u s e  
(September 2017). 
                                                 
57 Slaughterhouse at Tannery Road , Bengaluru still continues to exist despite being 
pointed out in Paragraph 4.1.13 of Audit Report-2013 (Report No.5 of the year 2014). 
58 CC, Ballari – 2; HDMC – 2; CC, M angaluru – 1 and TMC, Manvi – 1. 
59 CMC, Nanjangud - 1; TMC, Magadi – 1; TMC, Manvi  – 1 and TMC, T. Narasipura -1. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
66 
8.4.4 Management of slaughterhouse waste 
Waste material produced in the slaughterhouses is of three type s: solid, liquid, 
and gas. Solid waste is generated from manure, intestinal contents, hair, horns, 
hooves, trimmings, internal organs, condemned carcasses or body  p a r t s ,  
carton, and plastics. Liquid wastes of slaughterhouses come fro m urine, blood, 
and waste water from the slaughter processes.  Gaseous waste materials (odour 
and emissions) are also produced in the operations. 
These waste materials if not handled and managed properly pose a hazard to 
the health and environment. High concentration of animal blood and fat, dirt, 
and other pollutants in slaughterhouse effluent renders it very  t o x i c  t o  t h e  
receiving water bodies. Hence, s cientific processing and dispos al of 
slaughterhouse waste is essentia l to recover useful fractions a nd for safe 
disposal of residual pathogenic biological waste.  
In the absence of a proper slaughterhouse waste processing or disposal facility, 
ULBs can practice deep burial of carcasses and animals killed i n accidents 
with adequate precaution (Section 7.6 of MSWM Manual, 2016).  
We observed that: 
(i) None of the slaughterhouses had Effluent Treatment Plants to 
discharge the effluent except CC,  Mangaluru.  The liquid waste 
generated in other five slaughterhouses were allowed directly into the 
drain contravening the norms prescribed; 
(ii) In all the test-checked slaughterhouses, control equipment for odour/ 
air emissions were not provided; and 
(iii) solid waste generated in th e slaughterhouses and retail 
mutton/chicken/fish shops, carcasses and dead animals were 
transported to landfill site and dumped in burial pits.  In 13 60 ULBs, 
the slaughterhouse waste was mixed with MSW (Exhibit 8.11). 
Thus, the ULBs failed to manage slaughterhouse waste effectively, which led 
to mixing of waste and unhygienic conditions, causing problems to health and 
contamination of the environment. 
8.5 Construction and Demolition Waste 
MSWM, 2000 stipulates that C&D waste, being predominantly inert  in nature 
does not create chemical or biochemical pollution.  Hence maxim um effort 
should be made to reuse and recycle them.  It was only in 2016 that separate 
rules for C&D waste was notified by Government of India.  In th e meantime, 
KSPCB issued (February 2014) gui delines for construction debris  
management and its disposal. 
 
                                                 
60 CCs - Ballari and HDMC; CMCs -B agalkote, Hiriyur, Hosapete, Nanjangud and Sagar; 
TMCs – Bhatkal, Maddur, Manvi and T. Narasipura; TPs - Honnavara and Kudligi. 

Chapter-VIII 
67 
8.5.1 Status of generation of cons truction and demolition waste  
MoEFCC has admitted that there is no systematic database on C&D  w a s t e .  
According to the Technology Information, Forecasting and Assess ment 
Council, the total C&D waste generation estimated in India from  buildings 
activities in the year 2013 was 530 million tons.  The informat ion on quantum 
of C&D waste generated in the State and in ULBs (other than BBM P) is not 
available with KSPCB and DMA. Similarly, test-checked ULBs also  do not 
have the data on C&D waste gene ration in their jurisdiction. However, the 
DPRs prepared for 20 test-checked  ULBs, estimated C&D waste gen erated at 
138 TPD in the year 2016.  C&D waste generated was not quantifi ed in the 
DPRs of 10 ULBs.  DPRs for five newly upgraded ULBs were not prepared. 
8.5.2 Non-identification of site for disposal of construction and 
demolition waste 
In accordance with KSPCB guidelines, debris shall be removed wi thin 48 
hours from the place of construction by ULBs, by engaging debri s contractor 
and transported to a place desi gnated by ULB for its disposal preferably an 
abandoned quarry away from city/town with prior authorisation f rom KSPCB.   
The guidelines also state that UL Bs shall constitute a separate  squad to ensure 
timely lifting, transporting and disposal of debris in the designated place.   
We observed that except HDMC, CC, Mangaluru and CC, Tumakuru, n one of 
the other ULBs identified the site for disposal of C&D waste.  In HDMC, an 
abandoned quarry at Adargunchi village (seven kilometres from Hubballi) was 
notified only in September, 2017.  In CC, Mangaluru, two acres of quarry land 
identified was taken up with concerned Tahsildar during 2015 an d the 
proposal was yet to be approved. In respect of CC, Tumakuru, th ough the 
proposal was sent (January 2016) to DC seeking approval, the sa me was yet to 
be accorded (July 2017).   
Thus, failure to identify the site for disposal of debris by te st-checked ULBs, 
and delay in according approval for C&D disposal sites, denied ULBs of 
separate disposal area for C&D wa ste.  In the absence of debris  disposal site, 
public were allowed to dump C&D wa ste in low-lying areas, roads ides and 
near water bodies which is evident from the JPV conducted in the test-checked 
ULBs.  Separate squads were also not identified by the test-checked ULBs. 
Case study of TP, Raibag 
The joint physical verification conducted (7 June 2017) by audi t with the 
officials of TP, Raibag showed heaps of C&D waste dumped across  various 
parts of the town ( Exhibit 8.12).  Public Works Department (PWD) was the 
major generator of C&D waste as it took up works of road wideni ng and 
demolition of buildings. 
The TP stated (January 2018) tha t immediate action to clear the  w a s t e  w a s  
difficult till the road widening work was completed by PWD.  Th e reply was 
not consistent with the KSPCB guidelines as it mandated removal  of debris 
within 48 hours. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that instructions had been issued to 
all ULBs to identify suitable land for disposal of C&D waste. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
68 
8.5.3 Non-levy of charges for management of construction and 
demolition waste 
The provisions of MSWM, 2000, C&D Rules, 2016 and KSPCB guideli nes 
authorise local bodies to levy charges from the debris generators and make use 
of this money for lifting, transporting and disposal of C&D waste.   
We observed that other than CMC, Nanjangud and TP, Kudligi, non e of the 
other test-checked ULBs fixed any charges of management of C&D waste. 
CMC, Nanjangud and TP, Kudligi collected `4.17 lakh and `1.40 lakh 
respectively during the period 2012-13 to 2016-17.  We observed  that despite 
collecting charges, CMC, Nanjangud did not lift C&D waste.  TP, Kudligi was 
collecting the waste but dumping in low-lying areas. 
Thus, despite the enabling provisions, ULBs failed to augment t his source of 
revenue. 
8.5.4 Non-levy of penalty for illegal dumping of debris 
KSPCB guidelines (February 2014) f or C&D waste in ULBs stipulate that 
ULBs shall introduce penalty clause in their bye-laws for stock ing/dumping of 
debris illegally by the construc tion agencies and shall enforce  the same.  The 
quarterly report of violation/pe nalty shall be furnished to KSP CB for 
monitoring.  Further, as per Section 431 A of KMC Act, 1976 (Sc hedule XIII) 
applicable for CCs, dumping of building waste irregularly attra cts penalty of 
`1,000 for first offence and `5,000 for second and subsequent offence. KM 
Act, 1964 does not contain a similar provision, but Section 224  s t i p u l a t e s  a  
fine of up to `25 for dumping of dust, dirt or other rubbish, etc., which is not 
significant in comparison with the quantum of C&D waste. 
We observed that only two ULBs prescribed levy of penalty.  CMC, Bagalkote 
prescribed (June 2016) `500 fine per day for dumping of debris in public 
places and TMC, Kumta passed (March 2017) resolution for imposi ng penalty 
of `1,000 for first offence and `5,000 for second offence onwards towards 
unauthorised disposal of C&D waste.  None of the ULBs furnished the report 
on violations/penalty to KSPCB. 
The State Government stated (May 2018) that as per the draft by e-laws, ULBs 
can fix the user fee for collection, transportation and disposa l of C&D waste 
and provisions have also been made for levy of fine for non-compliance. 
Recommendation 18:  The State Polluti on Control Board needs to ensure 
that all health care institutions, sl aughterhouses, recyclers, etc., obtain 
necessary authorisation for their functioning and enforce adherence to 
prescribed standards. 
Recommendation 19:  KSPCB/ULBs may maintain a comprehensive 
database of health care institutions, slaughterhouses, recyclers, etc., and 
strictly enforce their adherence to B MW, plastic, e-waste, slaughterhouse 
and construction and demolition rules. 
Recommendation 20: The State Government and ULBs may put in place 
suitable systems to enforce Extended Producer Responsibility for specific 
waste categories as per the relevant rules. 

Exhibit 8.1: Animals feeding on MSW dumped on roadside (Paragraph 8.1.2.1) 
HDMC (4.5.2017) 
 
Exhibit 8.2:  Surgery performed on cattle for removal of plastic (Paragraph 8.1.2.1) 
CMC, Bidar 
 
Exhibit 8.3: Death of cattle at TMC, Malur (Paragraph 8.1.2.1) 
 


Exhibit 8.4: Deep burial pits in Veterinary Hospitals (Paragraph 8.2.5) 
CC, Ballari (8.8.2017) 
 
CMC, Nanjangud (5.7.2017) 
 
  


Exhibit 8.5: Scattering and dumping of BMW in hospital premises 
(Paragraph 8.2.7) 
VIMS, Ballari (9.8.2017) 
 
 
Exhibit 8.6: BMW mixed with MSW in BRIMS, Bidar (9.8.2017) 
 
  


Exhibit 8.7: Scattering and dumping of BMW in hospital premises 
(Paragraph 8.2.7) 
General Hospital, Nanjangud (6.7.2017) 
 
 
General Hospital, Malur (18.8.2017) 
 
  


Exhibit 8.8: E-waste mixed with MSW (Paragraph 8.3.3.1) 
TP, Kudligi (18.5.2017) 
 
CMC, Karwar (26.5.2017) 
 
CMC, Nanjangud (5.7.2017) 
 


Exhibit 8.9: Dumping of Tube lights (Paragraph 8.3.3.2) 
CC, Tumakuru (31.3.2017) 
 
HDMC (27.4.2017) 
 
CMC, Karwar (26.5.2017) 
 


Exhibit 8.10: Slaughterhouse constructed in landfill (Paragraph 8.4.3) 
TMC, Manvi (8.9.2017) 
 
Exhibit 8.11: Slaughterhouse waste mixed with MSW (Paragraph 8.4.4) 
HDMC (28.4.2017) 
 
TMC, Bhatkal (9.5.2017) 
 


Exhibit 8.12: Dumping of C & D waste in TP, Raibag (7.6.2017) 
(Paragraph 8.5.2) 
 
Shantinagar Ward no. 2 
 
Chikkodi Road Ward no. 3 
 
Chikkodi Road Ward no. 1 
 


 
69 
Chapter IX 
Conclusion 
The status of devolution of funds for urban governance disclosed that ULBs are 
dependent on Central/State Governments.  In addition, the ULBs do not have 
powers to appoint personnel – o fficers/officials.  The lack of capacity, both in 
terms of funds and functionaries, tends to affect the implement ation of SWM 
activities.  
The test-checked ULBs had not conducted any survey during the period 2010-
16 but had adopted per capita estimates that had low level of reliability.  The 
per capita estimates adopted were also not realistic.   Action plans and strategy 
documents envisaged in the State policy formulated in 2004 was not prepared 
and State policy and strategy in accordance with the SWM Rules, 2016 was yet 
to be formulated.  ULBs neither prepared short term nor long-term plans.  DPRs 
prepared during 2016 were deficient. The State Government did n ot 
operationalise any waste minimisation strategy during the revie w period and 
ULBs did not take up initiatives to promote waste minimisation activity 
exclusively other than TMC, Kumta. 
Though requisite committees were formed at the State level, the  District and 
ULB level Committees were not formed in any of the test-checked  districts 
leading to poor support for effective implementation of SWM plans.  
Dedicated SWM Cell was absent at ULB level.  There was shortage  o f  
manpower in all cadres viz. Environment Engineer (32 per cent ); Health 
Inspectors (70 per cent) and Pourakarmikas (65 per cent). 
None of the test-checked ULBs assessed the requirement of capital and revenue 
funds for SWM activities until t he preparation of DPRs and henc e, they were 
unaware of the resource deficit.  Though DPRs prepared during 2 016-17 
assessed the resource deficit, these failed to address measures  for bridging this 
deficit.  But audit did not come across any instance of ULB ask ing for funds 
from the State Government. 
ULBs did not utilise the funds provided for creation of capital  assets by the 
Central and State Finance Commissions.  In comparison, funds al located for 
revenue expenditure were utilis ed in full by the ULBs.  The exp enditure on 
SWM was not commensurate with the funds available resulting in accumulation 
of balances to the tune of 
`93.19 crore at the end of March 2017.   
There was an appreciable increase in the number of test-checked  U L B s  
collecting SWM cess and the quantum of cess increased significantly during the 
period 2012-13 to 2016-17.  The test-checked ULBs were not coll ecting cess 
from places of public worship, occupiers of buildings/shops own ed by ULBs 
and Government buildings as these properties were either exempt from payment 
of property tax or service charges.  ULBs also did not levy cess on vacant lands 
despite the enabling provisions.  Consequently, the ULBs lost revenue of `3.07 
crore during the period 2012-13 to 2016-17.  There was short accounting of cess 
of `5.41 crore in six ULBs and HDMC alone short accounted to the ex tent of 
`5.11 crore. 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
70 
Ten ULBs diverted funds of `3.81 crore for works and purchase of 
equipment/machinery/vehicles related to UGD purposes and other activities not 
connected with SWM. CMC, Sira diverted `15.80 lakh resulting in non-
achievement of intended objectiv e of constructing bio-methanati on plant, 
purchasing secondary storage containers, etc. 
The IEC activities did not specifically focus on segregation of special waste and 
did not emphasise ‘not to bury’ and ‘not to burn’ waste. 
Segregation of waste at different levels was either absent or p artial in all the 
test-checked ULBs. The State/District/ULBs did not notify the classification of 
items as domestic hazardous waste and therefore, the need to se gregate them 
separately was not publicised.  C onsequently, segregation of do mestic 
hazardous waste was not done.  Similarly, sanitary waste was no t collected 
separately.  Hence, mixed waste was transported to landfills.   
Ward-wise collection of waste was absent in six of the test-checked ULBs and 
it was partial in nine ULBs.  The test-checked ULBs did not car ry out street 
sweeping of 6,935 (83 per cent ) out of 8,324 km of roads on daily basis.  
Occupational waste (cut beedi leaves and ash) was mixed with regular MSW 
during collection.  Shortage of primary collection vehicles was  to the extent of 
57 per cent.   
Open vehicles and vehicles without necessary partition were use d for 
transportation of waste.  Absen ce of functional GPS and trackin g systems 
resulted in unauthorised dumping of waste near the bank of Rive r Kabini in 
CMC, Nanjangud.   
The test-checked ULBs were able to process only 26 per cent of waste collected 
during the review period.  This was because of non-creation of required 
infrastructure and under-utilisati on of infrastructure created.   Eleven ULBs 
processed waste through composting and only three ULBs adopted bio-
methanation technology.   
The ULBs were operating disposal facilities without valid autho risation from 
KSPCB and necessary environmental clearance.  The required buff er zone 
round the landfill sites were not maintained.  Activities that do not conform to 
the provisions of MSW/SWM Rules were taken up in the landfill s ites.  Many 
of the landfills test-checked lacked basic infrastructure such as waste inspection 
facilities, weighbridge, fire-fighting equipment, toilet, etc.  There was evidence 
of unscientific dumping and burning of mixed waste in the landfills. 
The above lapses indicate lack of basic monitoring by ULBs and district /State 
level authorities to ensure compliance to statutory requirements and posed a 
serious threat to the environment besides leading to health hazards. 
The absence of proper segregation of waste led to mixing of MSW with plastic 
waste, bio-medical waste, e-waste and slaughterhouse waste.  The ULBs did not 
comply with the directions/instructions stipulated under the va rious acts and 
rules governing management of special waste.   

Chapter-IX 
71 
Plastic waste, though found feasible for use in laying of roads, was not used for 
the purpose. This not only resulted in mismanagement of plastic waste but also 
in environmental degradation and death of cattle.  Health care institutions were 
functioning without authorisation and resorting to unauthorised disposal of bio-
medical waste. 
Test-checked ULBs did not colle ct and channelise e-waste to authorised 
dismantlers/recyclers and e-waste was found mixed with MSW.  
Slaughterhouses in the test checked ULBs were functioning witho ut 
authorisation and slaughterhouse waste was not managed properly.  Thirty-two 
of the 35 test-checked ULBs were  yet to identify sites for disp osal of 
construction and demolition waste. Consequently, construction d ebris was 
dumped on roadsides, near water bodies and low-lying areas.  Inefficient 
management of special waste would lead to environment degradation, pollution 
and health hazards besides affecting the aesthetics of the cities/towns. 
 
 
 
 
 
Bengaluru                                                        (E P Nivedita) 
The 17 August 2018                           Principal Accountant General 
                                                          (General and Social Sector Audit) 
                                                                             Karnataka 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                                                   (Rajiv Mehrishi) 
The 21 August 2018           Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 


Appendices 
73 
Appendix 1.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.3/Page 2) 
Regulatory framework governing the management of different types of 
waste 
 
  
Municipal 
solid waste
• MSW (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000 
• Manual on MSW management and handling Rules, 2000
• National Enviornment Policy, 2006
• National Mission on Sustainable Habitat, 2010
• Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016
Bio-medical 
waste
• The Bio-medical Waste (Management & Handling) Rules, 1998 and 
amended further in 2000 and again in 2003
• The Bio-medical Waste Management Rules, 2016
Plastic waste
• The Recycled Plastics Manufacture and Usage Rules, 1999
• Plastic Waste (Management & Handling) Rules, 2011
• Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016
E-waste • E-waste (Management & Handling) Rules, 2011
• E-waste (Management) Rules, 2016
Hazardous 
waste
• The Hazardous Waste (Management & Handling) Rules, 1989
• The  Hazardous Waste (Management, Handling and Transboundary) 
Rules, 2008
• Hazardous and Other Wastes (Management and Transboundary 
Movement) Rules, 2016
Construction 
and 
Demolition 
waste
• Construction and Demolition Waste Management Rules, 2016

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
74 
Appendix 1.2 
 (Reference: Paragraph 1.3/Page 2) 
Organisational structure with respect to functioning of ULBs in the State  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
CCs
Elected body headed by Mayor and
assisted by Standing Committees Commissioner
Chief 
Accounts 
Officer
Chief 
Engineer
Revenue 
Officer
Chief 
Development 
Officer
Town 
Planning 
Officer
Chief 
Health 
Officer
CMCs/TMCs/TPs
Elected body headed by 
President and assisted by 
Standing Committees
Municipal 
Commissioner/     Chief 
Officer
Health Officer Engineer Revenue Officer Accountant
Additional Chief Secretary to Government (ACS), UDD 
Secretary to Government, UDD Commissioner, BBMP 
Director, Municipal 
Administration 
Director, Town 
Planning
Director, Urban 
Land Transport 
City 
Corporation
City Municipal 
Councils 
Town  
Panchayats 
Town Municipal 
Councils 

Appendices 
75 
Appendix 2.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.3/Page 6) 
List of selected ULBs 
Sl. 
No. Division District 
Units selected for sample 
City 
Corporation
City 
Municipal 
Council 
Town 
Municipal 
Council 
Town 
Panchayat
1. 
Belagavi 
Bagalkote  Bagalkote   
2. 
Belagavi 
 
 Mugalkhod 
 
Ugar Khurd 
Ainapura 
 
Chinchali 
 
Raibag 
3. Dharwad Hubballi-
Dharwad 
   
4. Gadag     
5. Haveri     
6. 
Uttara Kannada 
 
Dandeli 
 
Karwar 
Bhatkal 
 
Kumta 
Honnavara 
7. Vijayapura     
8. 
Bengaluru 
Bengaluru Rural     
9. Bengaluru Urban     
10. 
Chikkaballapura 
 
Chintamani 
 
Shidlaghatta
 Gudibande 
11. Chitradurga   Hiriyur  
12. Davanagere     
13. Kolar   Malur  
14. Ramanagara   Magadi  
15. Shivamogga  Sagar   
16. Tumakuru Tumakuru Sira   
17. 
Kalaburagi
Ballari Ballari Hosapete  Kudligi 
18. Bidar  Bidar Humnabad  
19. Kalaburagi     
20. Koppal     
21. Raichur   Manvi  
22. Yadgir   Kakkera  
23. 
Mysuru 
Chamarajanagara     
24. 
Chikkamagaluru 
 
  Koppa 
 
Sringeri 
25. Dakshina 
Kannada Mangaluru    
26. Hassan     
27. Kodagu     
28. Mandya   Maddur  
29. Mysuru  Nanjangud T. Narasipura  
30. Udupi  Udupi   
Total number of ULBs selected 4 11 12 8 
  

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
76 
Appendix 2.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.4/Page 6) 
Brief profile of Mrs. Almitra Patel 
 
Almitra Patel is an 82 years young 
biologist and chemist with an 
engineering degree  a n d  M a s t e r s  f r o m  
MIT, USA.   After 31 years of heading 
a refractories firm, she has become 
since 1991 a self-taught garbologist.  
After the Surat plague she joined the 
late Capt J S Velu in two Clean India 
Campaigns by road in 1994 and 1995.  
She filed a countrywide PIL to enforce 
hygienic waste management and was 
appointed to a Supreme Court 
Committee for Solid Waste Management that produced a comprehens ive 
blueprint for reform. That led to the country’s first Municipal  W a s t e  
Management Rules 2000, which require minimising waste to landfi ll by 
recycling dry waste and stabilising wet waste to enrich Bharat’s soils.  For this, 
source-separation of dry and wet waste and daily doorstep colle ction of wet 
waste is a must and is now compulsory for all citizens in the new SWM Rules 
2016.  
Till date she has visited 189 Indian cities to share best practices. She also works 
to minimise polluting wastes and promote eco-friendly packaging . She is 
currently Swachh Bharat Mission National Expert.  Her current p assions are 
cleaning up old dumpsites and getting phosphorus out of waste w ater to save 
India’s surface waters. 
Mrs Almitra H. Patel  
Member, Supreme Court Committee for SWM.  
National Expert, Swachh Bharat Mission.  
50, Kothnur, Bagalur Road, Bangalore 560077 
+91 98443-02914  
www.almitrapatel.com  
Youtube Almitra Patel 
 
  


Appendices 
77 
Appendix 3.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.1/Page 7) 
Roles and responsibilities of different institutions in SWM 
Level/Responsible 
Institution Role and responsibilities in SWM 
Central Government  
(MoEFCC, MoUD 
and CPCB) 
Laws and Rules; Policies and Norms; Guidelines, 
Manuals, and Technical Assistance; Financial Support; 
Monitoring implementation of laws and rules. 
State Government 
(UDD headed by 
ACS and KSPCB 
headed by 
Chairperson) 
Monitoring implementati on of laws and rules in 
metropolitan cities; State Policy and SWM Strategy; 
Guidelines, Manuals, and Technical Assistance; Financial 
Support; Reporting on Service Level Benchmarks to the 
MoUD; Capacity Building of local bodies; Granting 
consent to set up treatment and disposal activities. 
District (DC assisted 
by Project Director, 
DUDC) 
Review the performance of ULBs on waste management 
process; Facilitate identification and allotment of suitable 
land for solid waste processing and disposal facilities. 
ULBs (headed by 
Commissioner, 
Municipal 
Commissioner or 
Chief Officer) 
Providing MSWM services; Preparation of SWM plan; 
Framing byelaws; Levy and collection of fees; Financing 
SWM system; Creating public awareness; Involvement of 
informal sector in SWM. 
Informal Sector 
(waste recyclers, 
NGOs, CBOs and 
private partners) 
Resource recovery and recycling at different stages; 
Providing support to the loc al recycling industry; 
Involvement of community; Creating awareness; 
Collection and transporta tion of waste; Technology 
providers. 
Source:  Manuals on MSWM, 2000 and 2016 
  

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
78 
Appendix 3.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2/Page 8) 
Variations in per capita estimates indicated by ULBs and as worked out by audit 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
ULB Population Residential 
Refuse (0.3) 
Commercial 
refuse (0.1) 
Street 
sweepings 
(0.05) 
Institutional 
refuse (0.05) 
Total in 
kg/day 
Total in 
TPD 
Waste generation 
as per ULB 
(2012-13) 
Difference 
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h)=d+e+f+g (i)=h/1,000 (j) (k)=h-j 
1 Ballari 4,10,447 1,23,134 41,045 20,522 20,522 2,05,223 205 145 60 
2 HDMC 9,43,788 2,83,136 94,379 47,189 47,189 4,71,893 472 400 72 
3 Mangaluru 4,89,488 1,46,846 48,949 24,474 24,474 2,44,743 245 212 33 
4 Tumakuru 3,05,821 91,746 30,582 15,291 15,291 1,52,910 153 114 39 
5 Bagalkote 1,20,000 36,000 12,000 6,000 6,000 60,000 60 35 25 
6 Bidar 2,16,080 64,824 21,608 10,804 10,804 1,08,040 108 45 63 
7 Chintamani 76,068 22,820 7,607 3,803 3,803 38,033 38 26 12 
8 Dandeli 52,069 15,621 5,207 2,603 2,603 26,034 26 14 12 
9 Hosapete 2,06,167 61,850 20,617 10,308 10,308 1,03,083 103 60 43 
10 Karwar 63,755 19,127 6,376 3,188 3,188 31,879 32 20 12 
11 Nanjangud 50,598 15,179 5,060 2,530 2,530 25,299 25 20 5 
12 Sagar 53,660 16,098 5,366 2,683 2,683 26,830 27 21 6 
13 Shidlaghatta 51,159 15,348 5,116 2,558 2,558 25,580 26 23 3 
14 Sira 57,749 17,325 5,775 2,887 2,887 28,874 29 18 11 
15 Udupi 1,25,306 37,592 12,531 6,265 6,265 62,653 63 55 8 
16 Bhatkal 32,000 9,600 3,200 1,600 1,600 16,000 16 14 2 
17 Hiriyur  56,416 16,925 5,642 2,821 2,821 28,209 28 20 8 
18 Humnabad  44,483 13,345 4,448 2,224 2,224 22,241 22 14 8 
19 Kumta  29,297 8,789 2,930 1,465 1,465 14,649 15 9 6 
20 Maddur  28,906 8,672 2,891 1,445 1,445 14,453 14 9 5 
21 Magadi  27,605 8,282 2,761 1,380 1,380 13,803 14 11 3 
22 Malur  40,050 12,015 4,005 2,003 2,003 20,026 20 14 6 
23 Manvi  46,465 13,940 4,647 2,323 2,323 23,233 23 16 7 
24 T. Narasipura  31,498 9,449 3,150 1,575 1,575 15,749 16 2 14 
25 Gudibande  9,441 2,832 944 472 472 4,720 5 3 2 
26 Honnavara  19,109 5,733 1,911 955 955 9,554 10 9 1 
27 Koppa  5,004 1,501 500 250 250 2,501 3 2 1 
28 Kudligi  26,680 8,004 2,668 1,334 1,334 13,340 13 7 6 
29 Raibag  18,736 5,621 1,874 937 937 9,369 9 4 5 
30 Sringeri  3,925 1,178 393 196 196 1,963 2 4 -2 
Source: Census, 2011; MSWM Manual, 2000 and information furnished by test-checked ULBs 
 Note: Minimum rates for refuse generation as given in Section 3.3.6.2 of MSWM Manual, 2000, are considered for calculation.  

Appendices 
79 
Appendix 3.3 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.10/Page 15) 
Status of committees prescribed to oversee the implementation of MSWM 
Sl. 
No. 
Committee 
(Chairperson) Purpose Remarks 
1 
State High Powered 
Committee (Chief 
Secretary) 
To empanel consultants for 
preparation of DPRs, 
authorise institutes for 
appraisal of DPRs, approve 
DPR and financial model of 
SWM and sanction projects 
-Constituted in August 2015. 
-Conducted eight meetings till 
March 2018 and approved 218 
DPRs. 
-DPRs had shortcomings as detailed 
in Paragraph 3.5. 
2 State Level Advisory 
Body (ACS, UDD) 
To review the matters related 
to implementation of SWM 
rules, state policy and strategy 
on SWM and give advice to 
State Government 
-Constituted in November 2016 and 
conducted two meetings till March 
2018. 
-Due to overlapping functions, 
Empowered Committee constituted 
during August 2010 became non-
functional. 
3 
State Level Technical 
Committee under 
SBM (Chief 
Engineer, KUIDFC) 
To examine the technical 
feasibility of the DPR 
submitted by the ULBs 
-Constituted in January 2016 and met 
nine times and technically approved 
DPRs of 218 ULBs. 
-Directive (February 2016) to 
address measures for managing 
special wastes in DPRs was not 
adhered to. 
-Due to overlapping functions, a 
Technical Committee constituted 
during November 2008 became non-
functional. 
4 
District Level Review 
and Monitoring 
Committee (Member 
of Lok Sabha from the 
district) 
To monitor the progress of 
SBM in the districts 
-Despite a lapse of two years, District 
Level Review and Monitoring 
Committees were yet to be formed. 
5 
District Level 
Supervision 
Committee (Minister 
in-charge) 
To monitor the 
implementation of SBM by 
conducting monthly/quarterly 
meetings, to approve the 
DPRs and to assist/guide 
ULBs 
-Not constituted in any of the test-
checked districts despite issue of 
orders in August 2015. 
6 City Level Task Force 
(Mayor) 
To review action plans and to 
review progress of SWM 
projects 
-Delay of eight months by State 
Government in issuing (February 
2017) necessary instructions 
-Not constituted in test-checked 
ULBs (December 2017). 
7 Ward Committees 
To monitor MSWM service 
provision at CC level and 
publicise contact details of 
ward committee members 
-Not constituted in any of the four 
test-checked CCs. 
Source: Information furnished by UDD and DMA 
  

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
80 
Appendix 3.4 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.12/Page 17) 
SLB performance indicators and benchmarks pertaining to SWM 
Sl. 
No. 
Performance 
indicator 
Unit 
As percentage of 
Benchmark
(in per 
cent) 
1 
Household level 
coverage of SWM 
services 
households and establishments covered 
by daily doorstep collection system 100 
2 
Efficiency of 
collection of 
municipal solid 
waste 
total waste collected against waste 
generated within the project area 100 
3 
Extent of 
segregation of 
municipal solid 
waste 
households and establishments that 
segregate their waste 100 
4 
Extent of municipal 
solid waste 
recovered 
quantum of waste collected, which is 
either recycled or processed 80 
5 
Extent of scientific 
disposal of 
municipal solid 
waste 
waste disposed in a sanitary landfill 
against total quantum of waste disposed 
in landfills and dumpsites 
100 
6 
Extent of cost 
recovery in SWM 
services 
recovery of all operating expenses 
related to MSWM services that the ULB 
is able to meet from the operating 
revenues of sources related exclusively 
to MSWM 
100 
7 
Efficiency in 
redressal of 
customer 
complaints 
total number of MSWM related 
complaints resolved against total number 
of MSWM complaints received within 
24 hours 
80 
8 
Efficiency in 
collection of SWM 
user charges 
current year revenues collected against 
total operating revenues for the 
corresponding period 
90 
Source: MoUD website 
  

Appendices 
81 
Appendix 3.5 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.12.1/Page 17) 
Status of achievements (2016-17) of 30 test-checked ULBs vis-à-vis targets 
fixed and benchmarks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Ballari
HDMC
Mangaluru
Tumakuru
Bagalkote
Bidar
Chintamani
Dandeli
Hosapete
Karwar
Nanjangud
Sagar
Shidlaghatta
Sira
Udupi
Bhatkal
Hiriyur
Humnabad
Kumta
Maddur
Magadi
Malur
Manvi
T. Narasipura
Gudibande
Honnavara
Koppa
Kudligi
Raibag
Sringeri
Per cent
Extent of segregation of MSW
Target Benchmark Achievement
0
20
40
60
80
100
Ballari
HDMC
Mangaluru
Tumakuru
Bagalkote
Bidar
Chintamani
Dandeli
Hosapete
Karwar
Nanjangud
Sagar
Shidlaghatta
Sira
Udupi
Bhatkal
Hiriyur
Humnabad
Kumta
Maddur
Magadi
Malur
Manvi
T. Narasipura
Gudibande
Honnavara
Koppa
Kudligi
Raibag
Sringeri
Per cent
Extent of MSW recovered
0
20
40
60
80
100
Ballari
HDMC
Mangaluru
Tumakuru
Bagalkote
Bidar
Chintamani
Dandeli
Hosapete
Karwar
Nanjangud
Sagar
Shidlaghatta
Sira
Udupi
Bhatkal
Hiriyur
Humnabad
Kumta
Maddur
Magadi
Malur
Manvi
T. Narasipura
Gudibande
Honnavara
Koppa
Kudligi
Raibag
Sringeri
Per cent
Extent of scientific disposal of MSW 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
82 
Appendix 3.5 (concld.) 
 
 
 
 
Source: Information furnished by test-checked ULBs  
0
20
40
60
80
100
Ballari
HDMC
Mangaluru
Tumakuru
Bagalkote
Bidar
Chintamani
Dandeli
Hosapete
Karwar
Nanjangud
Sagar
Shidlaghatta
Sira
Udupi
Bhatkal
Hiriyur
Humnabad
Kumta
Maddur
Magadi
Malur
Manvi
T. Narasipura
Gudibande
Honnavara
Koppa
Kudligi
Raibag
Sringeri
Per cent
Household level coverage of SWM services
Target Benchmark Achievement
0
20
40
60
80
100
Ballari
HDMC
Mangaluru
Tumakuru
Bagalkote
Bidar
Chintamani
Dandeli
Hosapete
Karwar
Nanjangud
Sagar
Shidlaghatta
Sira
Udupi
Bhatkal
Hiriyur
Humnabad
Kumta
Maddur
Magadi
Malur
Manvi
T. Narasipura
Gudibande
Honnavara
Koppa
Kudligi
Raibag
Sringeri
Per cent
Extent of cost recovery in SWM services 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Ballari
HDMC
Mangaluru
Tumakuru
Bagalkote
Bidar
Chintamani
Dandeli
Hosapete
Karwar
Nanjangud
Sagar
Shidlaghatta
Sira
Udupi
Bhatkal
Hiriyur
Humnabad
Kumta
Maddur
Magadi
Malur
Manvi
T. Narasipura
Gudibande
Honnavara
Koppa
Kudligi
Raibag
Sringeri
Per cent
Efficiency of collection of MSW
0
20
40
60
80
100
Ballari
HDMC
Mangaluru
Tumakuru
Bagalkote
Bidar
Chintamani
Dandeli
Hosapete
Karwar
Nanjangud
Sagar
Shidlaghatta
Sira
Udupi
Bhatkal
Hiriyur
Humnabad
Kumta
Maddur
Magadi
Malur
Manvi
T. Narasipura
Gudibande
Honnavara
Koppa
Kudligi
Raibag
Sringeri
Per cent
Efficiency in collection of SWM user charges 

Appendices 
83 
Appendix 3.6 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.14/Page 20) 
Course-wise details of training relating to SWM activities conducted 
during 2012-13 to 2016-17 
Year Sl. 
No. Name of the course Number  
of courses 
Nomi-
nated 
Atte-
nded 
Per-
centage 
Expenditure 
(₹ in lakh) 
2012-13 
1 Job Course for Environmental 
Engineers  1  48  45   94   8.38 
2 Solid Waste Management  10  390  221   57   11.93 
3 Seminar on Solid Waste 
management  1  177  177   100   1.73 
4 Training needs analysis (TNA) for 
Environmental Engg, & Health Staff  1  26  14   54   0.34 
5 Workshop on Solid Waste 
Management / City Sanitation Plan   5  568  351   62   7.81 
2013-14 
6 Training of Trainers on manual 
scavengers  1  100  81   81   0.82 
7 Workshop on Prohibition of manual 
scavenging  1  150  126   84   2.16 
8 Sustainable environment 
management  4  160  74   46   3.01 
9 Workshop on urban sanitation   1  142  118   83   0.96 
10 Water & sanitation system in urban 
India (Jn-NURM)  1  38  29   76   7.14 
2014-15 
11 Climate Change  1  35  17   49   0.46 
12 Sustainable Environment 
Management  5  203  122   60   7.93 
13 Water and Waste Water 
Management  6  271  139   51   4.74 
14 Pourakarmika Training  25  1,252  1,133   90   8.77 
15 Prohibition of Manual Scavengers   2  397  261   66   0.69 
2015-16 
16 SWM Act – 2000, Bio 
methanisation, DEWATs   5  234  100   43   2.87 
17 UGD Safety Manual   2  90  40   44   0.89 
18 Urban Lake Management  2  147  52   35   0.85 
19 Waste to Energy Concepts   5  234  98   42   0.97 
20 Sustainable Environment 
Management  1  45  16   36   1.23 
2016-17 
21 
Workshop on Animal Birth Control 
(Dogs) Rules 2001 and its 
implementation 
 2  140  42   30   0.76 
22 Foundation Course for Environment 
Engineers  1  38  36   95   7.71 
23 Urban Lake Management  1  82  19   23   0.30 
24 Green Building Concepts   3  150  65   43   2.03 
25 Climate Change  1  100  66   66   0.35 
26 
Orientation Programme under 
AMRUT including TNA for 
Environmental Engineers of ULBs 
 1  30  24   80   3.02 
27 Capsule-II Training for 
Environmental Engineers  1  21  13   62   2.06 
28 Capsule -III Training for 
Environment Engineers  1  21  13   62   2.07 
29 
Orientation Programme under 
AMRUT including TNA for Senior 
Health Inspectors of ULBs 
 3  90  63   70   6.12 
30 Capsule-II Training for Health 
Inspectors  2  63  46   73   4.45 
31 Capsule - III Training for Health 
Inspectors  1  46  36   78   3.01 
Total 97 5,488 3,637 66 105.56 
Source: Information furnished by SIUD    

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
84 
Appendix 4.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.3/Page 23) 
Details of utilisation of funds in test-checked ULBs during the period 
from 2012-13 to 2016-17 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
ULB 
13th Finance Commission 14th Finance Commission SFC-Entry tax devolution 
OB R E Unspent 
amount R E Unspent 
amount R E Unspent 
amount 
City Corporations 
1 Ballari 0.14 9.64 3.17 6.61 (68) 4.06 0.00 4.06 (100) 1.15 0.00 1.15 (100) 
2 HDMC 0.08 13.90 4.35 9.63 ( 69) 9.18 0.00 9.18 ( 100) 1.20 0.00 1.20 ( 100) 
3 Mangaluru 0.18 4.59 2.09 2.68 (56) 3.58 0.00 3.58 (100) 1.15 0.00 1.15 (100) 
4 Tumakuru 0.08 6.15 5.41 0.82 ( 13) 3.23 1.55 1.68 ( 52) 0.76 0.26 0.50 ( 66) 
City Municipal Councils 
5 Bagalkote 0.25 3.06 2.77 0.54 ( 16) 0.70 0.55 0.15 ( 21) 0.41 0.04 0.37 ( 90) 
6 Bidar 0.28 1.28 1.21 0.35 (22) 1.87 0.18 1.69 (90) 0.76 0.11 0.65 (86) 
7 Chintamani 0.00 1.47 1.27 0.20 ( 14) 0.81 0.43 0.38 ( 47) 0.66 0.49 0.17 ( 26) 
8 Dandeli 0.11 1.43 0.73 0.81 (53) 0.50 0.00 0.50 (100) 1.16 0.00 1.16 (100) 
9 Hosapete 0.01 2.02 1.14 0.89 ( 44) 2.21 0.00 2.21 ( 100) 4.14 0.00 4.14 ( 100) 
10 Karwar 0.00 1.72 1.16 0.56 (33) 0.66 0.20 0.46 (70) 0.56 0.51 0.05 (9) 
11 Nanjangud 0.07 2.02 1.31 0.78 (37 ) 0.51 0.00 0.51 ( 100) 0.15 0.00 0.15 ( 100) 
12 Sagar 0.00 1.71 1.71 0.00 (0) 0.91 0.50 0.41 (45) 0.71 0.36 0.35 (49) 
13 Shidlaghatta 0.32 0.89 1.09 0.12 ( 10) 0.51 0.00 0.51 ( 100) 0.15 0.06 0.09 ( 60) 
14 Sira 0.13 1.09 0.85 0.37 (30) 0.65 0.24 0.41 (63) 0.61 0.00 0.61 (100) 
15 Udupi 3.48 2.86 5.88 0.46 ( 7) 1.26 0.00 1.26 ( 100) 0.61 0.61 0.00 ( 0) 
Town Municipal Councils 
16 Bhatkal 0.00 1.62 1.53 0.09 ( 6) 0.23 0.23 0.00 ( 0) 0.25 0.16 0.09 ( 36) 
17 Hiriyur  0.00 0.80 0.64 0.16 (20) 0.42 0.17 0.25 (60) 0.20 0.00 0.20 (100) 
18 Humnabad  0.00 1.07 1.07 0.00 ( 0) 0.34 0.11 0.23 ( 68) 0.25 0.25 0.00 ( 0) 
19 Kakkera 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 (0) 0.20 0.00 0.20 (100) 0.00 0.00 0.00 (0) 
20 Kumta  0.00 1.03 0.24 0.79 ( 77) 0.39 0.21 0.18 ( 46) 0.75 0.00 0.75 ( 100) 
21 Maddur  0.09 1.21 0.96 0.34 (26) 0.25 0.19 0.06 (24) 0.25 0.00 0.25 (100) 
22 Magadi  0.00 1.23 1.08 0.15 ( 12) 0.27 0.00 0.27 ( 100) 0.20 0.18 0.02 ( 10) 
23 Malur  0.00 0.93 0.91 0.02 (2) 0.36 0.16 0.20 (56) 0.15 0.00 0.15 (100) 
24 Manvi  0.45 1.67 1.42 0.70 ( 33) 0.25 0.25 0.00 ( 0) 0.25 0.00 0.25 ( 100) 
25 Mugalkhod 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 (0) 0.30 0.05 0.25 (83) 0.00 0.00 0.00 (0) 
26 T. Narasipura 0.00 0.69 0.69 0.00 ( 0) 0.10 0.10 0.00 ( 0) 0.15 0.00 0.15 ( 100) 
27 Ugar Khurd 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 (0) 0.20 0.00 0.20 (100) 0.00 0.00 0.00 (0) 
Town Panchayats 
28 Ainapura  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 (0) 0.17 0.17 0.00 (0) 0.00 0.00 0.00 (0) 
29 Chinchali  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 ( 0) 0.16 0.00 0.16 ( 100) 0.00 0.00 0.00 ( 0) 
30 Gudibande  0.13 0.67 0.77 0.03 (4) 0.06 0.04 0.02 (33) 0.20 0.00 0.20 (100) 
31 Honnavara  0.02 0.87 0.82 0.07 ( 8) 0.27 0.09 0.18 ( 67) 0.15 0.15 0.00 ( 0) 
32 Koppa  0.00 0.45 0.32 0.13 (29) 0.04 0.02 0.02 (50) 0.30 0.16 0.14 (47) 
33 Kudligi  0.36 0.89 0.74 0.51 ( 41) 0.39 0.34 0.05 ( 13) 0.20 0.00 0.20 ( 100) 
34 Raibag  0.00 0.82 0.82 0.00 (0) 0.27 0.27 0.00 (0) 0.15 0.09 0.06 (40) 
35 Sringeri  0.22 0.51 0.69 0.04 ( 5) 0.04 0.04 0.00 ( 0) 0.16 0.10 0.06 ( 38) 
Total 6.40 68.29 46.84 27.85 (37) 35.35 6.09 29.26 (83) 17.79 3.53 14.26 (80) 
          OB: Opening balance; R: Receipts; E: Expenditure 
Source:  Information furnished by test-checked ULBs 
  

Appendices 
85 
Appendix 4.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.4/Page 24) 
Increase/decrease in resource-expenditure gap in test-checked ULBs 
                                                                                         (` per ton) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
ULB 
Resource-expenditure gap Increase 
/Decrease (-) 2012-13 2016-17 
City Corporations
1 Ballari 1,010 1,655 645
2 HDMC 2,614 3,920 1,306
3 Mangaluru 844 1,806 962
4 Tumakuru 1,755 3,131 1,376
City Municipal Councils 
5 Bagalkote 933 800 (-)133
6 Bidar 1,081 1,441 360
7 Chintamani 747 2,162 1,415
8 Dandeli 917 671 (-)246
9 Hosapete 501 661 160
10 Karwar 990 1,282 292
11 Nanjangud 167 1,771 1,604
12 Sagar 1,045 1,853 808
13 Shidlaghatta 404 907 503
14 Sira 1,085 1,024 (-)61
15 Udupi 1,268 1,690 422
Town Municipal Councils 
16 Bhatkal 80 104 24
17 Hiriyur 2,258 3,158 900
18 Humnabad 547 704 157
19 Kumta 357 463 106
20 Maddur 2,433 3,047 614
21 Magadi 998 1,993 995
22 Malur 761 554 (-)207
23 Manvi 225 144 (-)81
24 T.Narasipur 4,119 2,944 (-)1,175
Town Panchayats 
25 Gudibande 2,040 2,121 81
26 Honnavar 239 1,197 958
27 Koppa 2,634 4,187 1,553
28 Kudligi 1,936 2,035 99
29 Raibhag 738 1,585 847
30 Sringeri 699 1,670 971
               Source: Information furnished by test-checked ULBs 
  

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
86 
Appendix 4.3 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.5.1/Page 26) 
ULB-wise details of SWM cess collected and foregone, and revenue 
expenditure incurred during the period 2012-13 to 2016-17 
 (` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the ULB SWM cess 
collected 
SWM cess 
foregone 
Revenue expenditure for 
the test-checked ULBs 
City Corporations 
1 Ballari 3.51 0.00 59.18
2 HDMC 27.13 0.00 236.47
3 Mangaluru 19.37 3.12 106.40
4 Tumakuru 5.44 0.00 55.09
City Municipal Councils 
5 Bagalkote 0.32 1.32 17.74
6 Bidar 0.42 2.60 25.69
7 Chintamani 0.00 1.99 11.28
8 Dandeli 0.39 0.46 6.83
9 Hosapete 2.05 2.70 29.01
10 Karwar 0.43 0.68 11.47
11 Nanjangud 0.18 0.48 8.73
12 Sagar 0.26 1.43 12.58
13 Shidlaghatta 0.06 0.60 4.71
14 Sira 0.42 0.00 8.87
15 Udupi 0.00 3.86 19.76
Town Municipal Councils 
16 Bhatkal 0.00 0.39 3.75
17 Hiriyur  0.42 0.57 16.06
18 Humnabad  0.01 0.43 5.12
19 Kakkera 0.00 0.04 0.10
20 Kumta  0.28 0.30 3.14
21 Maddur  0.16 0.13 6.40
22 Magadi  0.14 0.09 4.57
23 Malur  0.23 0.40 4.30
24 Manvi  0.28 0.46 2.68
25 Mugalkhod 0.00 0.05 0.11
26 T. Narasipura  0.03 0.34 3.35
27 Ugar Khurd 0.00 0.07 0.20
Town Panchayats 
28 Ainapura  0.00 0.07 0.09
29 Chinchali  0.00 0.08 0.14
30 Gudibande  0.03 0.10 1.79
31 Honnavara  0.01 0.35 2.97
32 Koppa  0.02 0.04 1.66
33 Kudligi  0.00 0.63 3.53
34 Raibag  0.00 0.24 2.42
35 Sringeri  0.00 0.11 1.19
Total 61.59 24.13 677.38
Source:  Information furnished by test-checked ULBs  

Appendices 
87 
Appendix 4.4 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.6/Page 27) 
Statement showing the details of diversion of funds allocated for SWM 
(` in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the ULB 
Name of 
the fund Name of the item Estimated 
cost Amount Date of 
payment 
1 
CC Ballari 
2012-13 
13th FCG 
Open nala de-silting machine 42.00 41.90 27.02.14
2 Sewer Suction cum jetting machine 40.00 35.25 27.12.13
3 Power radar for cleaning UGD 5.00 5.00 27.02.13
4 Man hole de-silting machine 3.50 3.50 21.01.14
5 Hand held non-motorised cleaners 1.50 0.00 -
6 Truck-mounted water tanker 8.00 7.90 14.06.16
7 2013-14 
13th FCG 
Purchasing of 4,000 litres capacity 
sucking cum jetting machine 28.97 0.00 -
8 HDMC 2012-13 
13th FCG 
4,000 litre capacity Suction cum 
Jetting machine (2 Nos) 52.00 52.51 15.12.14
9 Manhole Desilting Machine 8.50 7.35 09.05.16
10 
CC 
Tumakuru 
SFC 
2012-13 
Purchase of Sucking & Jetting 
vehicle for UGD Purpose 24.82 0.00 -
11 Purchase of fogging machine 25.00 23.80 01.06.15
12 Purchase of Manhole De-silting 
Machine 25.00 29.80 23.05.14
13 
SFC 
2014-15 
Yearly cleaning solution using of 
Microbial infusion in STP Unit 40.00 40.00 NA
14 
Purchase of 2 vehicles of 6,000 litre 
capacity Suction & Jetting machine 
for UG complaint Reliefs 
25.00 25.00 NA
15 Purchase of Mobile Toilet 12.00 11.50 NA
16 Purchase of Corpse Vehicle 20.00 12.50 NA
17 SFC 
2015-16 
Purchase of Sucking & Jetting 
vehicle for UGD Purpose 12.00 10.25 NA
18 CMC 
Karwar 
2013-14 
13th FCG 
Purchase of De-silting Machine 14.00 10.26 NA
19 Purchase of fogging machine 4.00 0.96 NA
20 CMC 
Chintamani 
2012-13 
13th FCG 
Truck mounted Suction cum Jetting 
machine having 4,000 litre capacity 28.00 24.88 28.09.13
21 CMC 
Dandeli 
2012-13 
13th FCG 
Purchase of vehicle mounted 
fogging machine 5.00 4.92 NA
22 
CMC Sira 
2013-14 
13th FCG Purchase of land for STP Unit 14.40 14.40 31.10.15
23 2014-15 
13th FCG Purchase of De-silting Machine 13.00 0.00 -
24 TMC 
Bhatkal 
2012-13 
13th FCG 
Purchase of auto mounted fogging 
machine 2.00 2.00 NA
25 TMC 
Humnabad 
2012-13 
13th FCG 
Purchase of jetting machine 5.20 5.20 11.02.13
Purchase of drain cleaning machine 7.50 7.50 11.02.13
2016-17 
14th FCG Purchase of fogging machine 3.00 0.00 -
26 TMC 
Kumta 
2012-13 
13th FCG 
Purchase of water tanker 3.00 3.00 NA
Purchase of fogging machine 3.54 1.80 17.01.17
Total  475.93 381.18 
Source:  Information furnished by test-checked ULBs 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
88 
Appendix 4.5 
(Reference: Paragraph 4.6/Page 28) 
Statement showing the diversion of funds in CMC, Sira 
(` in lakh) 
Year of 
action 
Plan  
Name of the 
originally 
approved work 
Estimated 
Amount  
Name of the work 
now approved 
Estimated 
Amount  Expenditure  Date of 
payment 
2009-10 
SFC 
Purchase of 
Twin container 
Dumper placer 
10.50 
Construction of CC 
drain near St. Anns 
school in ward no.2 
4.00 
10.23 
27.09.16  
27.10.16 
17.02.17 
Construction of 
additional Room for 
Home Guard office 
1.50 
Construction of 
Anganwadi building 
at Kalidas nagar in 
ward no.8 
5.00 
3 cum secondary 
storage 
container-2 
0.90 
Laying of interlock 
pavers from Canara 
bank to Swathi 
Hospital in ward 
no.29 
3.40 3.25 27.10.16 
4.5 Cum 
secondary 
storage 
container-4 
2.20 
Construction of 
SWM platform 0.30 
2011-12 
SFC 
Purchase of 
Sucking and 
Jetting machine 
5.11 
Construction of CC 
drain in Jyothinagar 
in ward no.3 
3.50 
2.32 20.07.16 Iron Grill work for 
Social Welfare 
department in ward 
no.2 
1.61 
2012-13 
SFC 
Construction of 
Bio-methanation 
plant 
23.00 
Laying Bituminous 
road from NH 47 to 
Morarji Desai 
residential school  
11.00 
00  
Bituminous road for 
cross roads in 
Mallikapura region 
in ward 26  
4.00 
Construction of CC 
drain in wards 19 
and 20 
8.00 
 Total 42.01  42.01 15.80  
Source: Records of CMC, Sira 
  

Appendices 
89 
Appendix 5.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2/Page 29) 
Statement showing details of modes of communication used for IEC 
activities 
Sl. 
No. ULB Audio Video Mass 
communication 
Wall 
Paintings Schools Hoardings Street 
Jathas Pamphlets 
City Corporations 
1  Ballari Yes No No Yes Yes Yes NA No 
2  HDMC Yes Yes No No No No NA Yes 
3  Mangaluru Yes Yes TV Channel Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
4  Tumakuru Yes Yes TV Channel Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
City Municipal Councils 
5  Bagalkote No Yes Newspaper No No Yes No Yes 
6  Bidar No No Newspaper No No Yes No Yes 
7  Chintamani No No No No No No No Yes 
8  Dandeli No No Newspaper No Yes Yes No Yes 
9  Hosapete Yes Yes TV Channel Yes Yes Yes No Yes 
10  Karwar Yes Yes No No No Yes No Yes 
11  Nanjangud NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
12  Sagar Yes Yes TV Channel No Yes Yes Yes Yes 
13  Shidlaghatta No No No No No No No No 
14  Sira Yes No Newspaper Yes No No Yes Yes 
15  Udupi Yes No No No Yes No No Yes 
Town Municipal Councils 
16  Bhatkal Yes Yes No No No No No Yes 
17  Hiriyur  No No No No No No No Yes 
18  Humnabad  No No No No Yes No Yes No 
19  Kakkera No No No No No No No Yes 
20  Kumta  Yes Yes TV Channel Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
21  Maddur  NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
22  Magadi  No No No No No No No Yes 
23  Malur  No No No No No No No Yes 
24  Manvi  No No No No No No No Yes 
25  Mugalkhod No No No No No No No No 
26  T.Narasipura  Yes No No No No No Yes Yes 
27  Ugar Khurd NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
Town Panchayats 
28  Ainapura  No No No No No No No Yes 
29  Chinchali  No No No No No No No Yes 
30  Gudibande  No No No No Yes No No No 
31  Honnavara  No No No No No No No No 
32  Koppa  No No No No Yes No Yes No 
33  Kudligi  Yes Yes TV Channel Yes Yes Yes No Yes 
34  Raibag  No No No No No No No Yes 
35  Sringeri  No No No No Yes No No No 
Source:  Information furnished by test-checked ULBs                              NA: Not available 
  

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
90 
Appendix 8.1 
(Reference: Paragraph 8.2.5/Page 61) 
Statement showing the actual periodicity of collection of BMW in 
Government hospitals compared with that prescribed in the agreements  
Sl. 
No. Name of the ULB Periodicity as 
per agreement Actual periodicity 
1  HDMC Not available Not available 
2  CMC, Chintamani 3 days in  a 
week Daily 
3  CMC, Dandeli Not specified Alternate days 
4  CMC, Hosapete Daily Daily 
5  CMC, Nanjangud Not specified Alternate days 
6  CMC, Sagar 2 days in a week Once in 3 days 
7  CMC, Shidlaghatta 3 days in a week Daily 
8  CMC, Sira Daily Alternate days 
9  TMC, Bhatkal Alternate days Alternate days 
10  TMC, Hiriyur Daily Once in 3 days 
11  TMC, Humnabad Not available Not available 
12  TMC, Kakkera Not available Once in a week 
13  TMC, Kumta Not specified Alternate days 
14  TMC, Maddur Not specified Alternate days 
15  TMC, Magadi Except Sunday Once in 3 days 
16  TMC, Malur Thrice a week Thrice a week 
17  TMC, Manvi Not specified Alternate days 
18  TMC, Mugalkhod Daily Once in a week 
19  TMC, T. Narasipura Not specified 3-7 days 
20  TMC, Ugar Khurd Daily Once in a week 
21  TP, Ainapura Daily Alternate days 
22  TP, Chinchali Not specified Weekly twice 
23  TP, Honnavara Alternate days Alternate days 
24  TP, Koppa Daily Alternate days 
25  TP, Kudligi Daily Alternate days 
26  TP, Raibag Regularly Daily 
Source:  Information furnished by test-checked ULBs 
  

Appendices 
91 
Appendix 11 
Compilation of Good practices 
1. Municipal Solid Waste Management Plan (Paragraph 3.3/Page 9) 
Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) 
AMC developed (March-May 2012) a road map for zero waste city, which 
consists of ten focal areas and 34 strategic actions, to guide AMC to introduce 
and implement policies and strategies, and to raise awareness a mongst private, 
business, industrial, scientific and research communities in Ahmedabad to work 
together towards a resource efficient and zero waste society.  The road map for 
zero waste provided a conceptual framework to address SWM issues in the city.  
AMC engaged a non-profit organisation to prepare a master plan for SWM.  The 
methodology adopted for preparing the master plan included the following: 
 Developing a city profile; 
 Assessment of existing waste management practices; 
 Stakeholder consultations; 
 Future population and waste generation projections; 
 Developing alternate scenarios for strengthening SWM; 
 Drafting key recommendation fo r strengthening municipal SWM 
services; 
 Institutional arrangements and human resource requirements; and 
 Capital investment plan and potential funding sources. 
Along with devising a SWM master plan that guides policy decisi ons and 
investments in the sector, AMC has framed public health bye-laws for creating 
standards and norms at the local level, for various SWM processes.   
The Health bye-laws are applicable to every public and private space, 
commercial centres, residences and all other premises and inclu de detailed 
regulations on waste management process, prevention of waterbor ne, vector 
borne and food borne diseases, offences under the bye-laws, gen eral offences 
which are applicable to all the citizens within city limit, enf orcement of the 
provisions and schedule of fines. 
Apart from the above, AMC initiated IEC campaign and established mobile 
courts to address violations. 
Source: Compendium of Good Practices under Urban Solid Waste Management in India 
Cities - National Institute of Urban Affairs (2015) 
  

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
92 
Appendix 11 (contd.) 
2. Integration of informal waste collector in waste management 
(Paragraph 3.9/Page 14) 
Pune Municipal Corporation 
Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) launched (2005-06) a pilot pro gram for 
door-to-door collection in partnership with Kagad Kach Patra Kashtakari  
Panchayat (KKPKP).  PMC played th e role of enabler and facilita tor and 
provided equipment, infrastructure and management support.  KKP KP trained 
1500 waste pickers in door-to-door collection to provide servic e to 1.25 Lakh 
households in exchange of a user fee.  The pilot proved to be a  success, as it 
offered a sustainable mechanism for institutionalizing door-to- door collection 
in Pune and improved the working conditions for the waste pickers. 
The pilot project continued for two years from 2006-2008 after which PMC 
decided to scale up the initiative to cover the whole city.  Th e waste picker 
members of KKPKP came together to form SWaCH (Solid Waste Colle ction 
and Handling or, officially SWaCH Seva Sahakari Sanstha Maryadit , Pune) a 
co-operative of self-employed wast e pickers to provide front-en d waste 
management services to the citizens of Pune. 
Today SWaCH provides door-to-door waste collection services to 4 lakh 
households in the city and covers 60 per cent  of PMC’s geographical area. 
Remaining 40 per cent  households are dependent on PMC’s trucks or 
community bins for disposal. Out of 144 municipal wards, SWaCH covers 122 
wards. 
Source: Compendium of Good Practices under Urban Solid Waste Management in India 
Cities - National Institute of Urban Affairs (2015)  
 
3. Constitution of Ward Committees (Paragraph 3.10/Page 15) 
 The Corporation of Cochin, in its endeavor (2007) to ensure sou rce 
segregation of MSW and its institutionalisation at Kochi, formed, inter alia, 
Ward level Sanitation Committees  with the respective ward Counc ilor as 
Chairman and Junior Health Inspect or, representatives of RWAs, 
Confederation of Real Estate Developers Association of India (C REDAI), 
NGOs, etc., as members for each ward.  As a result, institutional and 
managerial models were established. Intensive interactive meeti ngs on the 
overall concept of segregation with residents and citizens of wards were held 
by the Ward Council, Corporation officials, Councilors as well as 
representatives of NGOs and Sanitation committees. 
 The Government of Andhra Pradesh, while formulating (February 2 014) 
Integrated Municipal Solid Waste Management Strategy, 2014, inc luded 
greater emphasis on civic engage ment by involving NGOs, women 
community groups, Ward Committees/Sabhas, Area Sabhas, etc., in 
awareness generation as one of the guiding principles of the SWM strategy. 
Source:  Manual on MSWM, 2016 
  

Appendices 
93 
Appendix 11 (contd.) 
4. Good practices in segregated collection of MSW (Paragraph 
6.1.1.1/Page 34) 
CMC, Dandeli has an arrangement for collecting waste from 27 out of 31 ward s.  Other four 
wards come under West Coast Paper Mills (Organisation) area and  the door-to-door collection 
of waste and its disposal are managed by the Organisation itself.
Exhibit 11.1: Collection of waste (27.04.2017)               Vermicomposting (27.04.2017) 
 
Source: Joint Physical Verification 
CMC, Kolar - The door-to-door waste collection is carried out by pourakarmikas who come by 
each street with a cart carrying four bins each. A single cart is managed by 2 municipal sweepers 
provided with all safety and hygiene equipment including gloves , masks and coats. They also 
carry with them a weighing scale in order to 
weigh each batch of waste they collect. This 
helps in monitoring the system, finding 
discrepancies in segregation as well as serves as 
a continuous waste audit of the city.  At each 
collection point, bins are offloaded and fresh 
bins are placed at the site for the next round of 
collection. A municipal truck collects waste 
from the collection point. The municipal 
corporation has tied up with local waste dealers, 
itinerant buyers (raddi wallah) and larger waste 
traders to whom all dry recyclables are sold. 
 
Source: An Inclusive Swachh Bharat through the 
Integration of the Informal Recycling Sector: A Step 
by Step Guide 
  
Exhibit 11.2: Neatly segregated wet 
waste in CMC, Kolar 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
94 
Appendix 11 (concld.) 
5. Usage of Plastic waste in road formation by KRRDA (Paragraph 
8.1.3/Page 57) 
Use of plastic waste for laying of roads under Pradhan Mantri Gram 
Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) and Namma Grama Namma Rasthe Yojane 
(NGNRY) 
Karnataka Rural Road Development Agency (KRRDA), as part of pro moting 
cost effective and fast construction technology focused on use of locally 
available marginal materials for construction of rural roads in the State.  Use of 
waste plastic was one of the technology adopted.  The extent of length of plastic 
road sanctioned and completed during the period 2012-13 to 2016 -17 is 
indicated below. 
Details of sanctioned and completed length of plastic roads by KRRDA  
(in kilometres)
Sl. No. Scheme Year of sanction Sanctioned length Completed length 
1 PMGSY II 2013-14 129.74  121.37
2 NGNRY II 2012-13 3.73  6.75
3 NGNRY III 2014-15 200.22 177.09
4 NGNRY IV 2016-17 96.18 -
Total 429.87 305.21
The performance studies carried  out indicated satisfactory perf ormance with 
good skid resistance, good texture value and stronger road. 
 
Source: Information furnished by KRRDA
 

Glossary 
95 
Glossary 
3R Reduce, Reuse and Recycle 
ACS Additional Chief Secretary to Government 
AFR Alternative Fuel and Raw Material 
AIILSG All India Institute of Local Self Government, Pune 
AMC Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation 
AMRUT Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation 
BBMP Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike 
BMW Bio-medical Waste 
BRIMS Bidar Institute of Medical Sciences 
C&D Construction and Demolition 
CBMWTF Common Bio-medical W aste Treatment Facility 
CBO Community-based organizations 
CC City Corporation 
CCTV Closed Circuit Television 
CD Compact Disc 
CEERA Centre for Environmental Education, Research and 
Advocacy 
CFC Central Finance Commission 
CFE Consent for Establishment 
CFL Compact Fluorescent Lamp 
CFO Consent for Operation 
CMAK City Managers’ Association, Karnataka 
CMC City Municipal Council 
CMSWMF Common Municipal Solid Waste Management Facility 
CPCB Central Pollution Control Board 
CREDAI Confederation of Real Estate Developers Association of 
India 
DC Deputy Commissioner 
DEWATs Decentralised Waste Water Treatment Systems 
DMA Director of Municipal Administration 
DPRs Detailed Project Reports 
DUDC District Urban Development Cell 
EPR Extended Producer Responsibility 
EW Rules, 2011 E-Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2011 
E-waste Electronic waste 
EWM Rules, 2016 E-Waste Management Rules, 2016 
FC Finance Commission 
GoI Government of India 
GPS Global Positioning System 
HCE Health Care Establishment 
HDMC Hubballi-Dharwad Municipal Corporation 
HDPE High Density Polyethylene 
IEC Information, Education and Communication 
JPV Joint Physical Verification 
KKPKP Kagad Kach Patra Kashtakari Panchayat  
KM Act, 1964 Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964 
KMAM Karnataka Municipal Accounting Manual 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
96 
Glossary 
KMC Act, 1976 Karnataka Muni cipal Corporations Act, 1976 
KRRDA Karnataka Rural Road Development Agency 
KSPCB Karnataka State Pollution Control Board 
KUIDFC Karnataka Urban Infrastructure Development and 
Finance Corporation 
MoEFCC Ministry of Environment , Forest and Climate Change 
MoUD Ministry of Urban Development 
MSW Municipal Solid Waste 
MSW Rules, 2000 Municipal Solid Waste (Management and Handling) 
Rules, 2000 
MSWM Municipal Solid Waste Management 
MT Metric ton 
NGNRY Namma Grama Namma Raste Yojane 
NGO Non-Government Organisation 
NGT National Green Tribunal 
O&M Operation and Maintenance 
OB Opening Balance 
PIP Persons in position 
PMC Pune Municipal Corporation 
PMGSY Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana 
PRIs Panchayat Raj Institutions 
PW Rules, 2011 Plastic Waste (Man agement and Handling) Rules, 2011 
PWD Public Works Department 
PWM Rules, 2016 Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016 
RDF Refuse-derived Fuel 
RPCB Regional Pollution Control Board 
SBM Swachh Bharat Mission 
SEIAA State Environment Impact Assessment Authority 
SFC State Finance Commission 
SHG Self Help Group 
SIUD State Institute of Urban Development, Mysuru 
SLB Service Level Benchmark 
SS Sanctioned strength 
SWaCH Solid Waste Collection and Handling or, officially 
SWaCH Seva Sahakari Sanstha Maryadit, Pune 
SWM Solid Waste Management 
TMC Town Municipal Council 
TNA Training needs analysis 
ToR Terms of Reference 
TP Town Panchayat 
TPD Tons per day 
UDD Urban Development Department 
UGD Underground Drainage 
ULB Urban Local Body 
VIMS Vijayanagar Institute of Medical Sciences 
Water Act, 1974 Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act , 1974 
WP Writ Petition 

Glossary 
97 
Definitions 
Bio-medical waste - Any waste, which is generated during the di agnosis, 
treatment or immunisation of human beings or animals or researc h activities 
pertaining thereto or in the production or testing thereof. 
Bio-methanation - Anaerobic (in the absence of air or free oxygen) digestion of 
biodegradable organic waste in an enclosed space under controll ed conditions 
of temperature, moisture, pH, etc.   
Compactor vehicle - Collection vehicle using high-power mechani cal or 
hydraulic equipment to reduce the volume of solid waste. 
Composting - Controlled aerobic process of biologically “digesting” the MSW.  
Construction and demolition (C&D) waste - Waste materials gener ated by the 
construction, refurbishment, repair and demolition of houses, c ommercial 
buildings and other structures. It mainly consists of earth, st ones, concrete, 
bricks, lumber, roofing materials, plumbing materials, heating systems and 
electrical wires and parts of the general municipal waste strea m, but when 
generated in large amounts at bui lding and demolition sites, it  is generally 
removed by contractors for filling low-lying areas and by urban local bodies for 
disposal at landfills. 
Domestic hazardous waste - Hazardous waste generated in the households and 
includes items such as batteries, shoe polish, paints, thinners , medicated 
shampoos, light bulbs, Compact Fluorescent Lamp (CFLs), cosmetic products, 
etc. 
E-waste or electronic waste - Electrical and electronic equipme nt, whole or in 
part discarded as waste by the consumer or bulk consumer as wel l as rejects 
from manufacturing, refurbishment and repair processes. 
I n c i n e r a t i o n  -  W a s t e  t r e a t m e n t  process that involves combustion  o f  w a s t e  a t  
very high temperatures in the presence of oxygen, resulting in the production of 
ash, flue gas, and heat.  
Plastic waste - Any plastic product such as carry bags, pouches or multilayered 
packaging discarded after use or after their intended use is over. 
Primary collection - Process of c ollecting waste from household s, markets, 
institutions and other commercial establishments and taking the  w a s t e  t o  a  
storage depot or transfer station or directly to the disposal site.  
Processing - Any scientific process by which segregated solid waste is handled 
for the purpose of reuse, recycling or transformation into new products (Rule 
3(35) of SWM Rules, 2016). 
Refuse Derived Fuel - The high calorific non-recyclable combust ible fraction 
o f  p r o c e s s e d  M S W ,  w h i c h  i s  u s e d  e i t h e r  a s  a  f u e l  f o r  s t e a m  a n d  electricity 
generation or as alternate fuel  in industrial furnaces and boil ers. The 
composition of RDF is a mixture that has higher concentrations of combustible 
materials than those present in the parent mixed MSW (Section 4.3.6 of MSWM 
Manual, 2016 -Volume I). 

Report No.4 of the year 2018 
98 
Sanitary waste - Waste comprising of used diapers, sanitary towels or napkins, 
tampons, condoms, incontinence sheets and any other similar waste (Rule 3(41) 
of SWM Rules, 2016). 
Secondary collection - Picking up waste from community bins, wa ste storage 
depots or transfer stations and transporting it to waste proces sing sites or final 
disposal site. 
Slaughterhouse - A place where 10 or more than 10 animals are slaughtered per 
day and is duly licensed or rec ognised under a Central, State or Provincial Act 
or any rules or regulations made thereunder. 
Special waste - Any solid waste or a combination of solid waste s that requires 
special handling and disposal because of its quantity, concentration, physical 
and chemical characteristics, or biological properties, in order to protect human 
health, as well as the environment and to exploit its potential for recycling.  
Transportation - Conveyance of solid waste, either treated, par t l y  t r e a t e d  o r  
untreated from a location to another location in an environmentally sound 
manner through specially designed and covered transport system to prevent the 
foul odour, littering, and unsightly conditions. 
Treatment - The method, techniqu e or process designed to modify  physical, 
chemical or biological characteristics or composition of any wa ste so as to 
reduce its volume and potential to cause harm (Rule 3(53) of SW M Rules, 
2016). 
Vermi composting - A process of conversion of bio-degradable waste into 
compost using earthworms. 
Waste to Energy - Where material recovery and composting from M SW is not 
possible or desirable due to local conditions or because of the nature of waste, 
recovery of energy from MSW is suggested as a feasible alternative. When high 
calorific value fractions of MSW are either incinerated (therma l process) or 
biodegradable fraction of MSW is processed anaerobically (bio-methanation), 
the resultant energy, either as heat (incineration) or biogas ( methane) can be 
reused either directly or converted to electricity using approp riate generators 
(Section 4.3.3 of MSWM Manual, 2016 -Volume I). 
Windrow composting - A process of  placing the pre-sorted feedst ock in long 
narrow piles called windrows that are turned on a regular basis for boosting 
passive aeration. 