Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on  
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment 
and 
Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation 
of the Government Lands 
for the year ended March 2017 
Government of Karnataka 
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

i 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
Preface v 
Highlights vii-xi 
Chapter-I Introduction  
1.1 Disposal of lands belonging to the Government 2 
1.2 Computerisation of land records 2 
1.3 General Administration of land 2 
1.4 Encroachment of public land and regularisation 3 
Chapter-II Audit Framework  
2.1 Audit Objectives 5 
2.2 Audit Criteria 5 
2.3 Scope 5 
2.4 Methodology 7 
2.5 Acknowledgement 7 
Chapter-III Inventory Management of Government land   
3.1 Non-identification of Government land available for 
disposal 9 
3.2 Absence of database of land granted/leased 10 
Chapter-IV Disposal of Government land by Grant/Lease  
4.1 Non-maintenance of separate register for applications 
made and received 14 
4.2 Verification of eligibility of grantees 15 
4.3 Verification of status of land before grant/lease 17 
4.4 Assessment of land requirement/grant of excess land 19 
4.5 Grant of excess land to persons whose land were 
acquired for public purposes 21 
  

ii 
 
  Page 
Chapter-V Lands prohibited for grant/lease under the KLR 
Rules  
5.1 Lands prohibited for grant/lease under the KLR Rules 24 
5.2 Inconsistencies in disposal of Gomala land 25 
Chapter-VI Valuation of land granted/leased  
6.1 Concessions in the Valuation of land 29 
6.2 Application of Rule 22A of the KLG Rules 32 
Chapter-VII Monitoring the usage of land   
7.1 Mechanism to monitor compliance to the conditions 35 
7.2 Joint Physical Verifications to ascertain usage of land  37 
7.3 Non-demand of lease rent 40 
Chapter-VIII Eviction of Encroachment of Government land  
8.1 Working of Karnataka Public Land Corporation 43 
8.2 Identification, accounting and eviction of 
encroachments 44 
8.3 Disposal of public complaints on encroachment  46 
8.4 Grant of land to the Encroachers 47 
8.5 Non-levy of penalty for encroachment of 
Government land 48 
8.6 Protection of evicted lands 48 
8.7 Disposal of dispute cases of Government land  49 
Chapter IX Regularisation of the Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government land  
9.1 Regularisation of the Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government land for agricultural purposes 51 
9.2 
Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government land for dwelling purpose under 
Sections 94 C and 94 CC of the KLR Act 
55 
  

iii 
 
9.3 
Non-repealing of the Karnataka Land Revenue 
(Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of Land) 
Rules, 1970 
57 
 Conclusion 59 
 Glossary 63 
 Annexure I 65 
 Annexure II 66 
 Annexure III 67 
 Annexure IV 71 
 Annexure V 72 
 Annexure VI 73 
 Annexure VII 78 
 Annexure VIII 83 
 Annexure IX 88 
 Annexure X 89 
 Annexure XI 92 
 Annexure XII 96 
 Annexure XIII 97 
 
  

v 
PREFACE 
1. This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the y ear ended
March 2017 has been prepared for submission to the Governor of Karnataka
under Article 151 (2) of the Constitution of India for being laid before the State
Legislature.
2. The Report covering the period 2012-17 contains the results of the Performance
Audit of ‘Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of
Unauthorised Occupation of Government Lands’.
3. Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

vii 
Highlights Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and 
Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government Lands 
Why CAG did this Audit 
Government land is 
granted/leased to facilitate and 
accelerate socio -economic 
development activities in the 
State.  Besides, Government also 
distributes land to the under -
privileged for agricultural and 
dwelling purposes through 
notified schemes  for 
regularisation of unauthorise d 
occupation of Government land. 
Given the importance of 
grant/lease and regularisation 
schemes of Government land in 
the socio-economic development 
on the one hand, and possible 
risks of misuse on the other, this 
Performance Audit was 
undertaken to examine  (i) 
whether the process of 
grant/lease of land was 
transparent and judicious , 
(ii) whether the land 
granted/leased was valued 
appropriately and monitored to 
ensure the stated utilisation for 
intended purposes , and (iii) 
whether the risk of 
encroachment was mitigated 
adequately and schem es for 
regularisation were effective. 
What CAG Recommends 
Ten recommendations are 
relating to building up of 
database for lands 
available/granted/leased; 
review of Rules ; strengthening 
of systems ; and ensuring 
compliance to internal controls.  
The Department has generally 
accepted the recommendations. 
What CAG Found 
During the period 2012 to 2017 , the Government had 
granted/leased nearly 5650.60 Acres of Government land in the 11 
Districts (out of 30) selected for this Performance Audit. 
Inventory management of the Reve nue Department was 
unstructured. The Government neither maintained databases 
relating to lands available for disposal nor the lands disposed as 
grants/leases. The transparency in disposal of applications could 
not be  assessed as the applications for grant/lease w ere not 
systematically compiled. Eligibility criteria of applicants were not 
met in some instances and set procedures were deviated. Absence 
of mechanism in the Department to assess the extent of land sought 
vis-à-vis that required for the intended project of the applicant 
resulted in transfer of excess/surplus land. 
The Karnataka Government (Transaction of Business) Rules, 1977 
empowered the Government to consider grant/lease of lands 
reserved for public purposes, whi ch were specifically prohibited 
from being granted/leased under the Karnataka Land Revenue  
Rules. Grant of such prohibited land was neither according to the 
extant Rules/Court Judgements nor wa s an environment friendly 
act. There were issues in grant of pr ice concessions and adoption 
of Market Value of lands which resulted in incorrect 
computation/short-levy of the value of land.  
There was no monitoring of lands disposed, which resulted in non-
retrieval of land after expiry of lease periods, non -collection of 
lease rent, non -usage of land granted/leased for considerable 
periods, etc. 
As per statistics maintained by the Government, encroachments 
were static and no additions were recorded (except in Bengaluru 
Urban District) after Aug ust 2013 even though ther e were public 
complaints regarding encroachments. Significant number of public 
complaints on encroachment of Government land was pending for 
over five years. Further, the passive role of Karnataka Public 
Lands Corporation (the agency meant for protecting land on which 
encroachment is evicted ), lack of proper security to the lands 
recovered after eviction of encroachment  and the non -transfer of 
the cases of encroachment to the Specially Designated Court 
slackened the process of evictions.  
The fulfilment of  prescribed criteria for regularisation was not 
documented sufficiently to verify the correctness of claims made 
by the applicants. There were cases of regularisation of 
unauthorised occupation of land contrary to prescribed provisions. 

ix 
Grant /Lease  of Government Land  
Key Facts 
Types of Government land 
Land with Public  User Rights like 
Gomala, Tank bed, Gunduthopu , 
burial grounds, etc., which are not to 
be granted/leased. 
Land with sole Government privileges 
and available for grant/lease. 
Grant/lease of Government land in the 
eleven Districts selected out of 30. 
5650-24 Acres-Guntas, covering  260 
beneficiaries during 2012-17. 
Findings 
Subject Findings 
Inventory 
(Paragraphs 
3.1 and 3.2) 
 No database of lands available for disposal, though required
to be prepared annually. Lands for grant were identified by
beneficiaries themselves.
 No database of lands already granted/leased.
 Seven institutions continued to be in use of lands  even after
expiry of lease periods.
Due process 
before 
grant/lease 
(Paragraphs 
4.1 to 4.4) 
 47-21 Acres-Guntas granted to eleven beneficiaries even
without receipt of application for land grant.
 132-15 Acres -Guntas granted to 27 beneficiaries despite
non-fulfillment of eligibility conditions.
 390-38 Acres-Guntas of unavailable/ineligible lands granted
in 10 instances.
 Non-assessment of extent of land required resulted in excess
grant/non- usage in 9 cases.
Grant of 
prohibited 
land 
(Paragraph 
5.1) 
 Grant of 487-30 Acres-Guntas of prohibited lands such as
Phut B Kharab (water bodies, Gunduthopu, crematory, burial
ground, etc .), and la nd within municipal limits, to 8 6
beneficiaries.
Valuation of 
Land 
(Paragraphs 
6.1 t and 6.2) 
 Uniform policy introduced in 2015 vide Rule 22A;
ambiguities in implementation need to be sorted out.
 ` 176.01 crore concession in land price granted in 51 cases.
Monitoring 
and 
enforcement 
(Paragraphs 
7.1 and 7.2) 
 No mechanism existed for periodic inspection and reporting.
 Joint Physical Verification with Departmental officers
revealed non -usage/partial use/diversion of lands
granted/leased in 81 out of 234 cases covering 726-29 Acres-
Guntas.
 Non-demand of ` 7.33 crore as lease rent due in 46 cases.

x 
Encroachment of Government Land 
Key Facts 
Types of 
encroachment 
For agricultural or dwelling purposes 
Schemes available for regularization of such 
encroachment. 
For purposes other than mentioned above 
To be summarily evicted and fine levied. 
Karnataka Public 
Lands Corporation 
Set up in 2008 , to protect land resumed from 
encroachment besides distributing such resumed lands to 
various Government Departments and agencies. 
Total encroachment 
in the State 
4,48,615 Acres (57 per cent reported as evicted, as of 
March 2017). 
(Excludes cases under regularisation schemes and litigation). 
Total encroachment 
in eleven selected 
Districts 
2,05,221 Acres (63 per cent reported as evicted, as of 
March 2017). 
Findings 
Subject Findings 
Identification, accounting 
and eviction of 
encroachments 
(Paragraph 8.2)  
 Encroachment figure is s tatic as of August
2013. 
 No mechanism of periodic inspections and
identification of new encroachments.
Public complaints on 
encroachment 
(Paragraph 8.3) 
 Good initiative but poor follow-up.
 1856 out of 2608 complaints  received were
pending verification and eviction.
Grant of encroached land to 
the encroachers 
(Paragraph 8.4) 
 89-31 Acres-Guntas encroached in four
Districts for different purposes were granted
to the encroacher s; potentially encourages
further encroachment.
Protection of encroachment 
evicted lands  
(Paragraph 8.6) 
 Only seven percent of the encroachment
evicted land were protected.
Disposal of dispute cases 
(Paragraph 8.7) 
 Special Court set up in 2016 for speedy
disposal of cases.
 1,131 cases were not transferred from various
other Civil and Revenue Courts to this Court.

xi 
Regularisation  of Unauthoris ed Occupation  
Key Facts 
Schemes for 
Regularisation 
Sections 94 A and 94 B of the KLR Act 
Unauthorised occupation of Government lands prior to 
14 April 1990 for cultivation. Last date of application 
was 15 July 1999. 
Sections 94 C and 94 CC of the KLR Act 
Unauthorised occupation of Government lands for 
dwelling. Introduced from  2013 for rural areas  and 
from 2015 for urban areas. 
Implementation of 
schemes for 
regularisation in the 
eleven selected Districts 
Agricultural purposes  
Regularised 1,55,226-27 A cres-Guntas in respect of 
93,462 applicants. 
Dwelling purposes  
Applications were received to the end of September 
2016 and are under process. 
Findings 
Subject Findings 
Delay in disposal 
(Paragraph 9.1.1) 
 47348 applications involving 164874 -24 Acres-Guntas
still pending disposal, delay of upto 18 years.
Discrepancies in 
regularisation for 
agriculture 
(Paragraph 9.1.2) 
 1,055-19 Acres-Guntas of land regularised contrary to
the eligibility conditions/provisions of the
Scheme/Act/Rules.
 Loss of ` 31.57 crore worth of Government land (437-
30 Acres-Guntas) due to excess grant of land , grant to
ineligible beneficiaries and regularisation of Gomala
land.
Discrepancies in 
regularisation for 
dwelling purposes 
(Paragraph 9.2.1) 
 No documentation of fulfillment of eligibility conditions.
 Excess grant of 8872 sq.ft. of land costing ` 10.56 lakh
in 31 cases.
Non-repeal of 
earlier Rules 
(Paragraph 9.3) 
 The Karnataka Land Revenue (Regularisation of
Unauthorised Occupation of Lands) Rules, 1970 deals
with regularisation and was open ended with no cut -off
dates for application.
 Even on introduction of Sections 94 A and 94 B with
specific cut -off dates for filing applications, the Rules
ibid have not been repealed.

1 
 
Chapter I 
 
Introduction 
 
Karnataka has a total land area of 1,91,791 square kilometres, of which, the 
total land owned by the Government1 is 63,83,634 Acres2.   
Public land, i.e., the land which the Government owns and manages directly 
can fall under two broad categories. The first category of public land – 
referred to as common land - is one , which is owned and managed by the 
Government but the people may have some user rights on s uch land. The 
second category of public land – referred to as Government land - is the land 
owned and managed by the Government, on which, the people have no such 
user rights. The public land , on which, people have rights collectively include 
lands such as  grazing land, burial lands, tank -beds and so on. Some of these 
lands, which were used for grazing and other common purposes became 
common property resources over time. These include Gomala lands (those 
used for grazing the cattle); Gunduthopu (those used for planting trees for 
common use); Poramboku (or the cultivable wa ste); uncultivable waste lands 
and lands used for public utilities including lakes and roads, etc.  
The Government did not have database of all lands granted/leased 3 and 
therefore, the exact number of grants/leases are not known .  As per the files 
made available  in the Revenue Department , there were 144 grants/leases 
across all the Districts in the State  for the period 2012 -13 to 2016 -17.  Audit 
verified all the 144 files.  Audit selected 11 Districts using simple random 
technique for detailed examination/verification at field level.  During  the visit 
to the field offices, the offices of the Deputy Commissioner/Tahsildars of the 
11 selected Districts made available a nother 176 grant/lease files.  Audit 
examined/verified all the 176 files.  Thus, in total, Audit verified 320 files o f 
which, 260 pertained to the 11 Districts selected in Audit. Besides, 150 
files/records of grant/lease made prior to 2012 were made available in the 
selected 11 Districts.  Audit conducted joint inspections in respect of all 150 
files with officials of the Revenue Department  to verify the system of 
monitoring the usage of land for the purpose granted.  
Audit verified progress  reports relating to eviction of encroachment of 
Government land in the 11 selected Districts and also conducted joint 
inspection in 43 cases on random basis.  In these 11 selected districts, there 
were 1,948 case files relating to regularisation of unauthorise d occupation of 
Government lands  during the audit period.  Audi t examined 1,559 of these 
files.   
Audit has made observations on availability of land, procedures for 
verification of eligibility of beneficiaries, grant of prohibited lands, grant of 
incorrect/excess concessions, absence of system to monitor the usage of land , 
deficiencies in accounting and eviction of encroachments and irregularities in 
regularisation of unauthorised occupation.   These observations point to lapses 
                                                           
1 Land exclusively under the Revenue Department of the Government of Karnataka.  
2  1 Acre = 40 Guntas. 
3  Refer Paragraph 3.2. 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

2 
 
of internal controls  and procedures which need to be strengthened to ensure 
fair and transparent disposal of Government land.   
1.1 Disposal of lands belonging to the Government 
As per Section 67 of the K arnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964 (KLR Act) , 
public roads, etc., and all lands, which are not the property of others belong to 
the Government. 
According to Section 69 of the KLR Act, subject to such rules as may be made 
in this behalf, the State Government, the Regional Commissioner, the Deputy 
Commissioner, the Assistant Commissioner in -charge of a Taluk or Taluks 
and the Tahsildar, may dispose of land or other property belonging to the State 
Government under Section 67 or otherwise, for purposes of agriculture, 
industry or any public utility and subject to the p rovisions of Chapter XII for 
the construction of buildings.  
1.2 Computerisation of land records 
The Central Government’s Computeris ation of Land Records project was 
enthusiastically pursued in Karnataka under the name Bhoomi since the early 
2000. As a result, rural land records were made available in a digitised format 
for easy access by farmers , etc. Fees for accessing records from the Bhoomi 
database are reasonable and anyone can collect copies of the Record of Rights, 
Tenancy and Crop Informat ion (RTC) on payment of the fee. Information in 
respect of the RTC were also made available online.  
1.3 General Administration of land 
Although the Revenue Department is responsible in general for land 
administration, the actual management of land is shared primarily by four 
Departments and a number of agencies under these Departments. The forest 
land is managed by the Forest Department while non-forest land, rural 
agricultural land, both public  and private, and common lands are under the 
Revenue Department, urban land is under the Urban Local Bodies and rural 
housing site land (gramthana) is under the Rural Local Bodies. Besides, Land 
Use Planning is under the Town and Country Planning Departmen t, which is 
under the Urban Development Department.  
The Revenue Department is headed by the Principal Secretary to the 
Government and is administratively sub -divided into four Regions, viz. 
Bengaluru, Mysuru, Belagavi and Kalaburgi, each headed by a Regional 
Commissioner (RC). At the District level, Deputy Commissioners (DCs) are in 
charge, while Assistant Commissioners (ACs) are in charge for each Sub -
Division in the District. The Tahsilda rs are in charge of the respective Taluks 
and are assisted by Revenue Inspectors for each Circle comprising villages. At 
the village level, the Village Accountants are the root functionaries for the 
Revenue Department. 
The Government in December 2008 incorporated a Company, namely the 
Karnataka Public Lands Corporation (KPLC), with the main objective of 
securing the Government land, which were recovered following eviction, from 
further encroachment, classifying  Government lands based on its value and 
distribution of recovered land among various Government Departments. The 
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

3 
 
Principal Secretary, Revenue Department , is the ex -officio Chairman of the 
Corporation. KPLC is headed by a Managing Director and other Directors 
nominated by the Government. 
1.4 Encroachment of public land and regularisation 
Encroachment of public land can take place in two ways. Sometimes people 
who do not have shelter or any means of livelihood may occupy the public 
land for the purposes of housing or cultivation. Generally, such encroachments 
or occupation of public land is regularis ed, from time to time, through various 
regularisation schemes of the Government under Sections 94 A, B, C and CC 
of the KLR Act. The other kind of encroachment is land grabbing , which 
happens when pr ivate individuals or entities illegally occupy public land or 
create fake documents and claim the public land. 
  
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

5 
 
Chapter II  
 
Audit Framework 
 
2.1 Audit Objectives 
The objectives of the Performance Audit were to assess whether: 
i) Inventory of Government land available for grant/lease is  available and 
the transfer of Government land for private/ public purpose by way of 
lease/grant is carried out through a clear, tra nsparent and judicious 
process; 
ii) System of pricing for transfer of land is adequate;  
iii) Effective monitoring exists to ensure the usage of the land for the  
intended purposes; and 
iv) System for timely detection and eviction of encroached Government 
land and the process of  regularisation of unauthorised occupation of 
Government land is effective. 
2.2 Audit Criteria 
The main sources of criteria for the Performance Audit were: 
 Karnataka Land Revenue (KLR) Act, 1964; 
 Karnataka Land Revenue Rules, 1966; 
 Karnataka Land Grant (KLG) Rules, 1969; 
 Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961; 
 Karnataka Land Revenue (Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation 
of Lands) Rules, 1970; 
 Karnataka Grant of Land in case of construction of dwelling houses in 
occupied land Rules, 1999; 
 Karnataka Government (Transaction of Business) Rules, 1977; 
 Relevant notifications issued by the Government from time to time;  
and  
 Relevant Court Judgements. 
2.3 Scope 
Cases of grant, lease, encroachment and eviction thereof and regularisation of 
unauthorised occupation of Government lands coming under the jurisdiction 
of the Revenue Department during the period from 201 2-13 to 2016 -17 were 
examined. Cases of grants/leases/regularisation granted prior to 2012 -13 were 
also verified to check the compliance of conditions , on which such lands were 
granted/leased. This Per formance Audit excludes lands assigned/transferred/ 
reserved by Revenue Department in favour of other Government Departments. 
Audit verified all files of grant/lease across all Districts of the State as made 
available by the Revenue Department and selected 11 Districts using the  
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

6 
simple random technique to verify the internal controls and procedures at field 
level.  The 11 Districts4 representing 35 per cent of the total 30 Districts in the 
State and 30 Taluks representing 40 per cent of 74 Taluks under the selected 
Districts were also selected using random sampling method. In addi tion, 
records in the Revenue Department and Karnataka Public Land Corporation 
(KPLC) were also examined. 
4 Ballari, Bengaluru (Urban), Bengaluru (Rural) , Belagavi, Chikkaballapura, 
Chikkamagaluru, Dharwad, Kalaburgi, Mysuru, Ramanagara and Tumakuru. 
Selection of Districts:
11 out of 30 Districts
were selected through
Random Sampling
Method.
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

7 
 
2.4 Methodology 
The Revenue Department did not maintain a database of lands granted/leased. 
Hence, records as available with the Government5, 11 Deputy Commissioners, 
and selected Tahsildars, were reviewed. Cases of grants /leases prior to 2012 -
13, were also selected from the old records and individual files as made 
available by the Revenue Department, Offices of the DC s and Tahsildars, to 
verify monitoring of compliance of conditions of grant/lease. 
In respect of encroachment of Government land, data was obtained from the 
KPLC (established specifically to deal with encroachment of Government 
lands as mentioned earlier in para 1.3 ) to review the status of encroachment 
and eviction thereof in selected cases. Cases of regularisation of unauthorised 
occupation of Government land for agriculture and dwelling purpose were 
collected from the respective Tahsildar Offices and test-checked. 
Joint inspection s in 277 cases were conducted along with officials of the 
Revenue Department. Out of these, 150 cases (90 grants and 60 leases) were 
for verification of the usage of land granted /leased, 84 cases were those 
regularised in favour of the occupant  and 43 cases to verify reported eviction 
of encroachments. Photographs taken during the joint inspections are included 
in the relevant paragraphs.   
2.5 Acknowledgement 
We acknowledge the co -operation extended by the Revenue Department . An 
Entry Conference was held with the Principal Secretary, Revenue Department 
in April 2017, wherein the Audit Objectives, scope of audit and methodology 
including sampling were explained to the Department. The draft Performance 
Audit Report was forwarded to the Government in August 201 7 and discussed 
in the Exit Conference held in September 2017 with the Principal Secretary to 
Government, Revenue Department. The views of the Government and replies 
of the field Offices received during the Exit Conference are suitably included. 
Audit findings are discussed in the following chapters. 
  
                                                           
5 All grants/leases sanctioned across the State by Government during the audit period.  
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

9 
 
Chapter III  
 
Inventory Management of Government land 
[[ 
Any State has to  balance needs of economic growth, ecological conservation 
and equity concerns while managing its land resources. Therefore, it is critical 
that the S tate possesses an estima te of available land, develops a balanced 
approach for its management and maintains a detailed and accessible land 
records system to manage the available land resour ces efficiently and 
equitably. 
Effective management of land resources  requires a database of its land 
resources, identification of lands f or disposal and database of land s 
granted/leased.  Bhoomi6 software contains details of all Government lands.  
Audit scrutiny in to the State’s efforts in building up a database  of lands 
available for disposal and lands granted/leased revealed the following: 
3.1 Non-identification of Government land available for disposal 
Audit noticed that in nine8, of the 11 test-checked Districts, such lists were not 
prepared, and the reasons thereto were not recorded either. Even though all the 
Tahsildars in Ballari District prepared such lists, the same were not notified. In 
Mysuru District, it was notified that Government lands we re not available for 
disposal. 
 
                                                           
6 Bhoomi – software used in the Land Revenue Department containing Record of Rights, 
Tenancy and Crops. 
7 A Category - lands having facilities for assured irrigation from such Government Canals 
and Government Tanks as are capable of supplying water for growing two crops of paddy 
or one crop of sugar cane in a year.  B Category  – lands having facilities f or assured 
irrigation from such Government Canals and Government Tanks as are capable of 
supplying water for growing only one crop of paddy in a year and lands irrigated by such 
lift irrigation projects capable of supplying water for growing two crops of p addy or one 
crop of sugarcane in a year.  C Category – lands irrigated from Government sources of 
irrigation including lift irrigation other than A and B Categories, lands on which, paddy 
can be raised with rain water and lands irrigated by lifting water from a river or 
Government Canal or tank where lifting or pumping devices maintained by the land 
owner. D Category – lands classified as dry and not having any irrig ation facilities from 
Government sources , but growing paddy or garden crops not coming under any of the 
above classes. 
8 Belagavi, Bengaluru (Rural), Bengaluru (Urban), Chikkaballapura, Chikkamagaluru, 
Dharwad, Kalaburgi, Ramanagara and Tumakuru. 
The Tahsildar is required under Rule 3 of the Karnataka Land Grant (KLG) 
Rules, to prepare a list of lands available for disposal in  the villages under 
his jurisdiction. The list excludes lands reserved for free pasturage, forest 
reserves, lands classified as ‘ C’ and ‘ D’ categories 7, by the Department of 
Agriculture and lands reserved for other public purposes. The list was to be 
updated each year and notified within 1 st July every year, in order to identify 
availability and status of lands for disposal. 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

10 
 
 
 
3.2 Absence of database of land granted/leased 
Audit also found that the Department did not maintain database of the land s 
granted/leased which was a key aspect of land management. It  was crucial in 
monitoring the lands transferred to ensure due compliance with the conditions 
of transfer of land and also to verify the intended utilisation of the same. 
Due to the absence of a database of grants/leases, the Department was not in a 
position to identify: 
(i) Repetitive grants to same beneficiaries; 
(ii) Expired leases during the year and its retrieval; 
(iii) Progress of renewal of leases; 
(iv) Payments under default; and 
                                                           
9 Deemed forest land is Government land which , has more than 80 full grown trees per 
hectare (2.34 acres). 
10 Change of title in the Record of Rights, Tenancy and Crop Information. 
What Audit did in the absence of a database? 
Audit collected information from  the Revenue Department and the DC 
Offices concerned, and found that there were 260 cases of grant/leases 
covering 5650-24 Acres-Guntas (A-G) to various persons/institutions during 
2012-17 in the selected Districts. Out of these, 217 cases comprising 3778-
11 A-G were allotted as grant and the remaining 43 cases covering 1872-13 
A-G were disposed as leases (Annexure –I). 
What were the impacts of not having a database? 
It was noticed that in all 320 cases of grants/leases for non -agricultural 
purposes, the beneficiaries identified the Government land  themselves. 
Thereafter, the process of grant/lease was  initiated even though the land was 
not identified by the Department as available for disposal. Cases of  irregular 
grant/lease of deemed 9 forest/forest/forest buffer zone  (five cases), land 
already granted to other parties  (two cases), lands specifically prohibited by 
the KLR Act/Rules  (96 cases), etc. were noticed  as discussed in the 
paragraphs Nos. 4.4 and 5.1 of this Report.  Such irregular grants could have 
been avoided if the Department had finalised the list of lands available for 
grant as required under Rule 3 and made grants of only such identified lands.  
Why Bhoomi software is not adequate in indexing Government lands? 
The land grant process involved creation of a new Record of Rights in favour 
of the grantee for the extent granted , out of the Record of Rights of the 
Government land. However, there was a pendency of mutations 10 in respect 
of land grants in Bhoomi. Besides, even in cases of muta tion, there was no 
tagging of the new survey number allocated to the granted land with the 
earlier Government land survey number. Hence, Bhoomi was not sufficient 
in indexing all alienation of Government land. 
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

11 
 
(v) Deviation from purposes of grant/lease, etc. 
Such deficiencies led to non -collection of lease rents, non -use of lands for 
periods ranging from 3 to 22 years and non -retrieval of lands after expiry of 
lease, etc. Audit brought out two case studies , which were indicative of the 
problems on account of absence of database with the Government.  
Case Study No.01: Lack of timely action  and retention of land after 
expiry of lease period 
Case Study No.02: Ambiguity in land records 
                                                           
11  Certificate authorising the individual to cultivate the land.  
12 Survey No. 37/6b1 and 37/7, Harisandra village, Ramanagara Taluk. 
Seven leases allotted for: 
(i) AIDS Counselling 
Centre in Bengaluru East 
Taluk, (ii) Veda Vignana  
Peeta, in B engaluru South 
Taluk, (iii) a Ladies 
Association, and (iv) a 
petrol pump in Ballari 
Taluk, (v) a Trust in 
Dharwad and  (vi) a school 
in Chikkamagaluru Taluk. 
 
(vii) 6-19 A -G granted to 
Karnataka Education Board, 
Dharwad 
These leases expired between 2005 and 
2015. However, the lessees continued to be 
in possession of the l ands as of March 2017. 
Of these, four lessees applied for renewal of 
lease after periods ranging from 1 month to 
11 years after expiry of lease. In the 
remaining two cases relating to Ballari 
District, the lessees did not apply for renewal 
of lease as of March 2017. The Department 
on its own did not identif y the cases and 
initiate timely action, for either renewal of 
lease or resumption of Government land.  
 
The land was initially leased, which expired 
on 31 July 1973. The lessee applied for 
extension after 33 years (July 2006 and 
November 2007). The Government granted 
the land to the lessee in October 2011. The 
Government was unaware of the expiry of 
the lease and did not collect lease rent for 38 
years. Even penalty of ` 2.28 lakh was also 
not levied for un -authorised occupation after 
expiry of lease. 
Two acres each in 20 cases 
in Survey Number 8, 
Mavallipura, Bengaluru 
North Additional Taluk.  
As per entries in RTCs , these lands were 
stated to be granted for agricultural purpose . 
However, the Tahsildar repo rted these cases 
as doubtful as the corresponding initial 
entries in the Saguvali Chit 11 Register could 
not be verified since the register was not 
traceable, which is the basic land document. 
2 cases 12 (11-06 A -G), of 
temporary grant (Hangami) 
in Ramanagaram Taluk 
mutated in favour of the 
beneficiaries. 
In these cases, the lands which were  granted 
for temporary cultivation as per the entries in 
RTCs, were mutated to the beneficiaries 
stating that the lands were obtained through 
auction sale. There was no documentary 
evidence to the same. 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

12 
 
Government Orders, Grant Certificates, Saguvali Chit Issue Register, etc. are 
basic entities of land records management. These help in confirming title of 
the beneficiaries and to resolve disputes relating to land issues. Deterioration 
and non -availability of very old manual records will hinder resolution of 
disputes and pose  risk of creation of fraudulent records for land grabbing. 
Hence the following recommendations are made.  
The Government accepted the aud it observations and agreed to build up a 
database. 
 
  
Recommendation 1 – The Government may consider: 
i. Compilation of electronic database of all grants/leases 
incorporating beneficiary, location of land, purpose of 
grant/lease, period of lease, special conditions, if any, etc.; and 
ii. Digitisation of all manual records  relating to alienation of 
Government land to mitigate the risk of fraudulent records. 
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

13 
 
Chapter IV 
 
Disposal of Government land by Grant/Lease 
The process of transfer of Government land in Karnataka is governed by the 
KLG Rules, 1969, and the KLR Rules, 1966. The chart below depicts the flow 
of the Departmental process to grant/lease Government land: 
Chart No.4.1 – Process for Grant/Lease of Government land 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Application for grant /lease 
Report of the Village Accountant/Revenue Inspector after 
spot inspection 
Recommendation of the Tahsildar to DC after verifying the 
eligibility criteria as per KLG Rules 
Grant by Government or Submission of proposal to the 
Cabinet under GoK (Transaction of Business) Rules 
Issue of Government Order based on cabinet decision 
Grant by DC, if within his power, or Recommendation of the 
DC to Government through Regional Commissioner 
Handing over physical possession by Tahsildar and follow-up on 
collection of annual rent, in cases of leases 
Issue of Office Memorandum by DC 
Grant/lease of lands  
Creation of new Record of Rights by assigning a new survey number to 
the portion granted. In case of lease, an endorsement regarding portion 
of land leased is recorded in the RTC (Record of Rights, Tenancy and 
Crops information) of the Government land. 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

14 
 
As mentioned in paragraph 3.1, the Government did not maintain a list of land 
available for grant s or leases and hence, the person in need of land identifies 
the land himself and applies for grant/lease. Land is either granted or leased 
accordingly. 
Audit examined the process right from the stage of application to the final 
grant to ensure compliance to the process with  the Rules prescribed and also 
whether the process  was unambiguous, transparent and judicious . Audit 
observations are discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
4.1 Non-maintenance of separate register for applications made 
and received 
As per Rule 17A of the KLG Rules, on receipt of an application for grant/lease 
of land, the Tahsildar should cause the particulars of an application to be 
entered into a register for that purpose. 
None of the test -checked Offices of the Tahsildars  maintained separate 
registers for indexing applications received for grant /lease. The applications 
were indexed in the General Register and  thereafter processed separately as 
individual files.  
The M anagement Information System (MIS) Reports of the Department did 
not include details such as applications received, recommended and pending at 
Tahsildar/DC/RC/Government level. Hence, Audit could not ascertain the 
total number of applications received, processed and pending at various stages. 
Information called for in this regard from the test -checked Tahsildar Offices 
were not furnished. 
 
 
  
Whether disposal of applications was fair and transparent? 
Transparency and equal opportunity in considering all applications for grant 
of land requires that all applications are chronologically indexed, priority 
criteria fixed and reasons recorded for selection of an application over 
another for grant/lease of Government land. 
In the absence of a specific regis ter or an electronic database to monitor 
receipt of applications, disposal of applications was not be ing monitored. 
The transparency in evaluating all applications uniformly vis-a-vis available 
land therefore not assessed  by Audit . Besides, the risk of an out of turn 
consideration of application could not be ruled out. 
Grant of lands even without application by beneficiary 
In 11 out of 320 cases checked, the due process for grant/lease of land took 
place without even an application from the be neficiary. In these cases, 47-21 
A-G were granted/leased.  
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

15 
 
Details in this regard are given below: 
 
 
Grant of land even without application by the persons/institutions was 
deviation from set procedures. In the absence of information on all 
applications received and their disposal, Audit could not verify the transparent 
processing of all applications. 
4.2 Verification of eligibility of grantees 
As per Rule 17A(2) of the KLG Rules, on receipt of an application, the 
Tahsildar shall make such enquiry as necessary to ensure that the applicant has 
bona fide intention of using the land for the purpose for which it was sought 
                                                           
13 Lease since cancelled in July 2017. 
14 Sendivan land – Toddy Palm Grove. 
15 Estimated market values of properties notified by the Central Valuation Committee for 
the purpose of assessment of Stamp Duty. 
Lease of 10 acres in 
January 2012 – Mythic 
Society13 –Study of 
Indology, B engaluru 
(North) Additional Taluk 
There was no application from the beneficiary. 
The Government in the Exit Conference 
(September 2017) informed that the lease had 
since been cancelled 
12-21 A-G14 leased in 
December 2015 to 9 
institutions in Sira  Taluk 
for educational and 
charitable activities 
 
The Regional Commissioner , while 
forwarding proposals for 14 institutions , 
indicated non -availability of applications in 
respect of 9 of the intended beneficiaries.  
However, these cases were considered and 
land leased in 2015 to 15 institutions  
(Annexure-II) by deletion of one institution 
proposed by Regional Commissioner and 
addition of two other institutions  in the 
Government Order.  
Further, the lease of land at 10 per cent of the 
Guidance Value ( GV)15 of the land was later 
converted (December 2016) as grant in all the 
15 cases without charging the land cost as 
prescribed under Rule 22A of the KLG Rules.  
The Government accepted the au dit 
observations in the Exit Conference 
(September 2017). 
25 acres in January 2012 to 
Mata Amrithanandamayi  
Charitable Trust, Bengaluru 
North Taluk 
Suo motu proposal of Government (April 
2010) for grant of 15 -0 A-G land for hospital 
was converted into grant of 25 -0 A -G for 
Medical College -cum Hospital . Here also, 
there was no application from the Trust for the 
grant of land for either the intended hospital or 
the subsequent addition of Medical College. 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

16 
 
and if the land was available for grant, to submit a report to the DC along with 
connected records, viz. Checklist, Revenue Sketch of the land, Spot Inspection 
Report, etc.  
 
 
Details are given below: 
 
                                                           
16 Sira Taluk –Valmiki Nayaka Sanga (0 -20), Nandini  Pattina Sahakara Sanga 
Niyamitha (0-20), Chalavadhi  Mahasaba (Arya Dravida) (0 -20), Sevalal Banjara 
(Lambani) kshemabivriddi Sanga (0-20), Arya Ediga Sanga (0-20), Kanaka Samskruthika 
Vedike Sanga (0 -20), Balija  Mahila Sanga (0 -20), Chowdeshwari  Medha ST Bidiru  
Kelasagarara Kshemabivriddi Sanga (0 -20), Ramakrishna Vivekananda Ashrama (4 -01), 
Savitha Samaja (0-20) Bengaluru North Additional Taluk –Mythic Society (0-20). 
17 No. RD 126 LGP 87 dated 30 June, 1988. 
18 Bengaluru North Taluk – Srinivasa Educational and Charitable Trust (23 -00), Gowtham 
Medical Education and Technologies (6 -00), Buddha Education Society and Trust (1 -29), 
Ragavendra Education Institutions Society (7 -00), Deccan Education Society (5 -30), 
Mathru Education Trust (8 -00). Chamarajanagara Taluk – Buddhist Monks Charitable 
Trust (R) (25 -00). Chikkaballapura Taluk  – Bharatha Rathna Sir  M. Visveshvara iah 
National Training Facility for Skills for All (BMVNTFSA) (10 -00). Sira Taluk  – 
Chalavadhi Mahasaba (Arya Dravida) (0 -20), Hallikarara Sanga (1 -00), Kanaka 
Samskruthika Vedike Sanga (0-20). 
The KLG Rules and Circulars issued by the Department inter alia provide 
for submission of adequate documentation such as permission from 
competent authorities for education activities, annual accounts of the 
institutions for five years and ensuring involvement in the education activity 
for a prescribed period of five years before grant/lease of Government land. 
Was eligibility of beneficiaries verified before grant/lease? 
In 27 out of 320 checked cases, Audit noticed that complete details of the 
applicant as prescribed under the KLG Rules /Circulars of the Department  
were not verified before the cases were recommended for grant/lease. Lands 
granted/leased in these cases involved 132-15 A-G. 
As a result, land was granted to institutions , which did not have specified 
experience in the field of activity granted for or the bye laws of the 
institution did not envisage such an activity. 
Further, land was granted to a political party and to an Association for 
residential purpose, which was not provided under the Rules.  
18-21 A -G to 11 16 
institutions for educational 
purposes in Sira  (December 
2015) and B engaluru North 
Additional Taluks (January 
2012). 
Submission of documents permitting 
applicants to run educational institution was 
not documented though required as per 
Circular17. Of these, in respect of two trusts, 
their bye-laws did no t envisage education 
activity.  
88-19 A -G to 11 18 Rule 19(2) of KLG Rules , 1969,  prescribes 
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

17 
 
Grant/lease of land without ensuring fulfilment of eligibility criteria can result 
in grant of lands to ineligible parties, which defeats the purpose of having such 
criteria for fair, bonafide grants /lease. Besides, it can also abet grabbing of 
Government land by the ins titutions/persons and result in depletion of land 
resource for future projects. 
4.3 Verification of status of land before grant/lease 
The process of grant /lease is well-defined by a comprehensive checklist to be 
filled in by the Tahsildar and forwarded to the DC , which will enable 
decisions regarding grant or otherwise of the land.  
 
                                                           
19 Shimoga Taluk – Sree Kanaka Seva Trust  (2-00). Bengaluru North Taluk – Vishwa 
Ganigara Samudaya Trust (8-00). 
20 Channapatna Taluk – District Congress Committee, Bolappanahalli (0 -10), District 
Congress Committee, Mangalavarapete (0-05). 
21 Bengaluru North Additional Taluk –Karnataka Government Secretariat Group-D 
Employees Association (R) (15-00). 
institutions for educational 
purposes in B engaluru 
(North), Chamarajanagar, 
Chikkaballapura and Sira  
Taluks between February 
2004 and January 2017. 
grant of land for educational activities for 
institutions, which were in the field of 
education for a period of five years before 
grant of land.  However, the same was not 
verified and documented in the cases 
noticed. 
10-0 A -G to 2 19 institutions 
for education and charitable 
purposes (September 
2011/January 2013). 
The trusts were granted land within one year 
of their registration and were not involved in 
education activities for five years prior to 
date of grant as required under Rule 19(2) of 
the KLG Rules, 1969.  
0-15 A -G in 2 instances  
(October 2015)  for Political 
party office20. 
The KLG Rules do not provide for grant of 
land to political parties. 
15-0 A -G to One 
Association21 for residential 
purposes (August 2013). 
The KLG Rules do not provide for grant of 
land to an Association for residential 
purposes. 
Whether status of the land was ascertained before grant? 
In ten out of 320 cases checked, incomplete or incorrect details regarding the 
status of  land in the checklist resulted in grant of lands , which were not 
available for disposal. 
In all these cases, possession of the land granted /leased could not be handed 
over and necessitated  grant of alternative land . This  caused consequent 
delays/inconveniences to the grantees/lessees.  
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

18 
 
Details are given below: 
The Government accepted the audit observations and stated that instructions 
for verification and complete filling of the checklist correctly would be 
reiterated.  Government in April 2018 issued a revised checklist for collecting 
all information necessary for grant/lease of Government land.   
 
 
 
7-00 A-G to Bengaluru Institute of 
Higher Education and Research   
(January 2014)  in Bengaluru East 
Taluk, 170-38 A -G to 31 grantees in 
Ramanagar Taluk and 2-0 A-G to Dr. 
Vishnuvardhan Smarakha  (March 
2014) in Bengaluru (South) Taluk. 
Land originally granted  was Forest 
land/Forest Buffer Zone and hence 
necessitated grant of alternative 
land. 
2-0 A -G granted (April 1980 ) to Sri. 
Kodimath Maha Samstha in Bengaluru 
North Taluk and 1 -25 A -G land to 
Bengaluru Metropolitan  Transport 
Corporation (April 2008)  in Anekal  
Taluk. 
Land granted was already granted 
for a Government housing scheme 
(2 acres) and to another individual 
in 1979-80. 
1-0A-G granted (March 2016) to 
Syndicate Rural Self Em ployment 
Training Institute and 2-0 A -G 
Karnataka State Open University  
(February 2013) in Ballari Taluk. 
Land originally granted was marked 
as Open Space in Comprehensive 
Development Plan of the town.  
Alternative land was granted to the 
institute (2017). 
110-0 A-G granted (February 2013) to 
Indian Institute of Management in 
Anekal Taluk and  leased 0-25 A-G to 
Narcotics Control Bureau (March 
2013) in Bengaluru North Additional 
Taluk. 
In both these grants, the persons 
whose applications under the 
regularisation of unauthorised 
occupation over the same land was 
were pending decision, disputed the 
grant.  Consequently , while l and 
was not handed over to Indian 
Institute of Management , the 
Narcotics Control Bureau c ould not 
utilise the land pending decision of 
the Judiciary on the dispute claims 
filed (2014).    
93-30 A -G in Ballari to BMM Ispat 
Ltd  (July 2013). 
Land could not be handed over as 
the same was already granted to 
other beneficiaries under the 
scheme for regularisation of 
unauthorised occupation. 
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

19 
 
4.4 Assessment of land requirement/grant of excess land 
Land is a valuable resource , which should be granted judiciously and in 
accordance with the extent required for immediate use, so as to preserve the 
land for future public purposes. As per Rule 21(i) of the KLG Rules, the extent 
of land to be granted shall be assessed keeping in view  the purpose of grant, 
the present financial condition and the capability of the grantee institution.  
Besides, no land shall be granted in excess of the immediate requirement of 
the institution concerned.  Further, as per the check list derived from the KL G 
Rules for grant of land, the Government shall grant /lease land duly 
considering the land already owned by the grantee. 
Implications of non-assessment 
Audit brings out the implications of non -assessment in the form of two 
illustrations as shown below: 
                                                           
22 Buddha Education S ociety, Bengaluru Institute for  Higher Education and Research, 
Karnataka State Government Secretariat Group ‘D’ Employees Association. 
23 National Academy for RUDSETI. 
24 Buddha Education Society - 6 acres in Survey No. 38 , Gidadhakonenahalli village, 
Bengaluru North T aluk and Bengaluru Institute for  Higher Education and Research – 
7 acres in Suvey No.109, Gunjuru village, Bengaluru East Taluk. 
Whether there was a system for assessment of extent of land required? 
There was no system in place to assess the extent of land required by 
obtaining details of pla ns for immediate usage of land vis-a-vis available 
funds for construction, etc from the beneficiary institutions.  In all the cases, 
the extent of land granted was based on the extent of land requested and /or 
its availability. Absence of a mechanism of assessment in this respect may 
result in granting land in excess of the actual requirement. 
Illustration No. 01: Lesser extent accepted in lieu of the original demand 
Three22 beneficiaries, who were 
initially granted (between 2000 and 
2011) 33-00A-G of land , 
subsequently settled (between 2012 
and 2015) for 18-29 A-G.  
In another 23 case, as against five 
acres applied (2010) by the 
beneficiary, Government sanctioned 
3-20 A-G in 2012. 
Possession could not be handed over 
in original grant due to land dispute, 
issues with land use pattern, etc.  
Grantees settled for lesser extents of 
land when alternative land was to be 
granted in lieu of original land. In the 
absence of details of the envisaged 
project, Audit could not verify if the 
beneficiaries h ad scaled down their 
project due to reduction in extent of 
land granted, or the reduced extent of 
land itself was sufficient and they 
had asked for extra land initially.   
Further, in two24 of the three cases, 
the original grant of 1 3-0 A -G was 
not cancelled. 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

20 
 
 
The above cases indicate that non -assessment of land required based on 
proposals for execution of the project could result in grant of lands  in excess 
of requirement and locking up of Government lands. Absence of a mechanism 
to assess the requirement of land could be mis -utilised by the applicants by 
seeking more land than needed for their immediate use. Considering the poor 
record maintenance by the Government, the chances of the beneficiaries 
disposing of f the excess land without the knowledge of the Government 
cannot be ruled out. 
During the Exit Conference (September 2017), the Government agreed to 
examine the modalities of assessing the extent of land required. Thereafter, the 
Government issued (January 2018) a revised Checklist which required details 
of lan d already owned by the applicant and usage of the same  to be 
specifically recorded.   
                                                           
25 Mythic Society, Karnataka AdiJambhava Social and Educational Trust and Golden Valley 
Educational Trust. 
26 Vokkaligara Sangha. 
27 M/s KNR Constructions. 
Illustration No.02: Non -usage of lands indicating lack of immediate 
requirement 
Three25 cases totalling 50 -00 A -G of 
land were granted/leased in 1967, 
2006 and 2012 (one lease was 
cancelled in 2012 after lease expired 
in 1997). 
Land was not put  to use for periods 
of five, seven and 43 years 
respectively from the year of 
grant/lease. 
10-0026 A-G leased for a period of 30 
years (1967 to 1997). 
Though remained unutilised for 30 
years, the same land was again 
leased (2012) to the same entity. 
58-26 A-G27of land was given in 
February 2007 to a contractor on 
lease for storage of materials utilised 
in the work of National Highway in 
Chikkballapura District. 
On spot verification of the land by 
Audit along with the Departmental 
Officers, it was noticed th at 
approximately three acres of land  
was put to use and the remaining 
extent was unutilised. It was further 
observed that excess land available 
with the lessee was not retrieved 
back even after the work on the  
National Highway was completed in 
2009.  
Absence of mechanism to assess and monitor usage of land resulted in 
locking up of Government lands with the beneficiaries. 
Recommendation 2 – The Government may consider instituting a 
mechanism to assess the exact requirement of land.  
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

21 
 
4.5 Grant of excess land to persons whose land were acquired 
for public purposes 
During scrutiny of records relating to grant of alternative lands to the affected 
persons, whose lands were acquired for Government projects, Audit noticed 
two instances, wherein lands in excess of prescribed limits were granted due to 
non-adherence to the scales prescribed in the Grant Orders. Details are given 
below; 
 
After this was pointed out in May 2017, DC, Chikkamagalur u reported in 
October 2017 that excess land was given since the beneficiaries lost plantation 
land against which land given was Khuski land (dry land). However, in all 
these cases it was clearly stated in the Grant Certificates ( Hakku Patra) that 
the lands were granted for coffee plantation crop.  As per the KLR Act 28, land 
in which plantation crops can be grown are plantation lands . Hence, grant of 
land suitable for coffee plantation amounted to grant of plantation land and the 
grant of excess land was not justified.  
  
                                                           
28 Section 2(8)(d). 
Bhadra Wildlife Project, Chikkamagaluru 
Affected Persons of the Project were eligible for alternative lands at 
prescribed scales. Land of one, three and five acres were to be granted in lieu 
of acquired extents of less than one acre, one to five acres and above five 
acres respectively. 
As per the prescribed scale, only 192 acres were to be granted to the 60 
affected persons. However, due to non - adherence to the prescribed scale, 
309 acres were granted to 60 persons. This resulted in excess grant of 117 
acres valued at ` 6.02 crore. Details in Annexure-III. 
Yegachi Reservoir Project, Hassan District 
Two grantees surrendered lands measuring 12 -15 A -G and 4 -13 A -G 
respectively for the Project. As per the Government Order (1971) for land 
acquisition, those who lost more tha n four acres were entitled to one half of 
the land lost subject to a minimum of four acres and maximum of 10 acres, 
in addition to the monetary compensation. 
In the instant cases, the grantees were allotted 16 -00 A-G of land (four Acres 
in Hassan District and 12  Acres in Chikkamagaluru District) as against the 
entitlement of 10-7.5 A-G (6-7.5 A-G and four Acres). The Land Acquisition 
Officer erroneously computed land to be granted at one and a half times 
(instead of one half) the extent of land lost, which resulted in excess grant of 
5-32.5 A-G valued at ` 0.23 crore. Details in Annexure-III. 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

23 
 
Chapter V 
 
Lands prohibited for grant/lease under the KLR Rules 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
29 Unassessed land reserved for public purpose, occupied by road, burial ground and water 
bodies, etc. 
30 Gomala is Government land reserved for pasture of the animals. 
31 Land reserved as Village Forest. 
32 Sendivan: Toddy Palm Grove. 
33  Rule 108 -I: Certain  lands not to be granted: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
this chapter, lands assigned for special pur poses under Section 71 of the Act, and lands 
described in revenue records, as  Devarakadu, Urduve, Gunduthopu, tank bed , Phut 
Kharab, Halla Kharab, burial grounds and such lands, which in the opinion of the 
Government is required for public purpose, shall not be granted: 
Provided that the provisions of this rule shall not apply to lands set -apart for free 
pasturage under Section 71 of Karnataka Land Revenue Act, which will be governed by 
Rule 97. 
(2) No Government land within the limits of a city or town, sh all not be granted to any 
individual or a private institution. All such lands shall be reserved for public or 
Government purposes to provide for public needs of a growing city or town.  
Provided that the lands, which have not lost the characteristics for wh ich they were 
reserved shall not be declassified and granted or leased for any other purposes.  
34  The St. Annes Education Society and Anr. Vs State of Karnataka and Ors. 
  Are there lands which are prohibited from disposal? 
The public land, on which people have rights collectively, include lands such 
as Phut ‘B’ Kharab29, Gomala30, Gunduthopu31, Sendivan32, etc.,  apart from 
roads, pathways, lanes and streets.  
Section 68 of the KLR Act empowers Government to extinguish public 
rights over roads, streets, paths and lanes which are no longer required for 
public use.  Thereafter, the lands ibid become available to Government for 
disposal. 
There is no provision in the KLR Act to either extinguish or prohibit 
extinguishing of public rights over public lands such as Phut ‘B’ Kharab , 
Gunduthopu, tank bed, burial ground, etc. 
However, Rule 108 I33 of the KLR Rules specifically prohibits grant of Phut 
‘B’ Kharab  Gunduthopu, etc. which in the opinion of the Government are 
required for public use. Further, the KLR Rules also prohibit grant/lease of 
lands situated within the municipal limits of a city/town for private purpose. 
Besides, the Hon’ble High Court of Karnataka in its judgement 34 of 2002 has 
held that types of lands prohibited from grant/lease under Rule 108 -I could 
not be granted at all.   
Hence, though the KLR Act is silent about the g rant of Phut ‘B’ Kharab, 
Gunduthopu, etc., KLR Rules and the judgement of Hon’ble High Court of 
the State prohibits grant of such lands. 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

24 
 
 
5.1 Lands prohibited for grant/lease under the KLR Rules  
Out of 79 cases approved under the ToB Rules, Government Orders in respect 
of 50 cas es were made available to Audit.   It was noticed that powers under 
Rule 27 of the KLG Rules was found to have been exercised in eight cases 
without recording specific reasons as required. Audit pointed out that Rule 27 
of the KLG Rules could be exercised to relax only the provisions of the KLG 
Rules and not provisions of the  KLR Rules. In the remaining 42 cases, no 
reference of any provisions for grant of prohibited land was made.    
                                                           
35 Government of Karnataka (Transaction of Business) Rules, 1977, were framed for 
guidance of the administrative Departments for smooth functioning of the Government.  
36  Includes three cases of grant of land to Government Departments which is outside the 
scope of Audit.  
37  In addition, there were 10 cases of Gomala land (169-16 A-G), the grant of which was 
prohibited under various judgements of Hon’ble High Court, were also approved under 
ToB Rules. 
Power of  the Government to relax provisions of the KLG Rules 
Rule 27 of the KLG Rules empowers the Government to, suo motu, or on 
the recommendation of the RC/DC, relax any of the provisions of the KLG 
Rules in appropriate cases with reasons suitably recorded, and subject to the 
conditions specified in the orders passed in this regard. 
Item 12 of the Karnataka Government (Transaction of Business) Rules, 1977 
as amended in the year 2000 provided for submission of all proposals which 
are not in accordance with the KLR Act and allied Rules to the Cabinet. 
Whether lands prohibited under KLR Rules were granted? 
Audit noticed that due to specific prohibition under the KLR Rules  in 
respect of certain types of lands  such as Gunduthopu, tank bed etc ,   
proposals for grant/lease of such lands were referred to the Cabinet under 
Item 12 of the Schedule I of the Karnataka Government (Transaction of 
Business) (ToB) Rules35, 1977. 
Out of the 320 cases of grants/leases approved during 2012 -17, 8636 cases of 
grants/leases involved 487 -30 A -G of lands specifically prohibited by the 
KLR Rules. Of the 86 cases, 79 cases were approved by the Cabinet under 
the ToB Rules37 and the remaining 7 cases were orders of lease issued by the 
Deputy Commissioner concerned.  Details in Annexure-IV.  
Whether extinction of public rights over certain lands were made in 
contravention to extant Rules? 
Audit noticed that of the above 86 cases, Government issued orders in 14 
cases under Section 68 of the KLR Act for extinguishing public rights over 
water stream, Gunduthopu, B  Kharab, Halla Kharab, etc., involving 13-37 
A-G even though Section 68 of the KLR  Act empowers Government to 
extinguish public rights only in respect of street, road, land or path.  
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

25 
 
Audit concludes that the amendment of ToB Rules which read that ‘ proposals 
not in accordance with the Land Revenue Act and Rules or any general  
scheme of the Government ’ resulted in submission of all proposals of 
grant/lease contrary to the KLR Rules  to the Cabinet . In effect, the 
amendment of ToB, which was an instrument framed to ease and streamline 
the conduct of business of the Government, had the unintended outcome of 
amending the Karnataka Land Act/Rules. Consequent grant of public lands 
such as Phut ‘B’ Kharab, Gunduthopu, tank bed, burial ground etc., led to loss 
of Government lands marked for public purposes and environmentally 
sensitive areas. 
The Government agreed to review the amendment to the Karnataka 
Government (ToB) Rules, 1977, in consultation with the Department of 
Parliamentary Affairs. 
5.2  Inconsistencies in disposal of Gomala land 
 
                                                           
38 As per Rule 97(4) of the KLR Rules, the Deputy Commissioner can reduce the extent of 
Gomala below the prescribed limit of 12 hectares per  100 head count of cattle, if he 
considers the area so set apart is much larger than what is really required. However, the 
DC should do so only after obtaining the prior approval of the Regional Commissioner.  
39 Writ Appeal No. 1353/06(KLR -RES), Writ Applic ation nos. 3315/05 (KLR -RES) and 
21225/05 (KLR-LG) dated 18.11.2006. 
40 No. RD 83 LGP 2006 dated 05.01.2007. 
41 No. RD 57 LGP 2008 dated 20.08.2009. 
42 Amendment inserted vide notification dated 25.1.2008 with effect from 6 February 2008. 
Recommendation 3 – The Government may re -consider grant of public 
lands not provided under the KLR Act and  prohibited under KLR 
Rules through the Karnataka Government (Transaction of Business) 
Rules, 1977. 
Whether Gomala land could be disposed ? 
Rule 97(1) of the KLR Rules stipulate s for earmarking 30 acres of land per 
100 headcount of cattle  as Gomala land. Rule 97(4) 38 of the said Rules 
empowers the DC to reduce Gomala land limit below the prescribed limit 
subject to prior approval of RC.  
However, the Hon’ble High Court of Karnataka, vide various 
judgements39directed the State Government not to grant Gomala land, which 
would reduce the Gomala land below the prescribed limit. Consequently, the 
Government in acceptance of the Court judgments issued Circulars in 200740 
and 2009 41, which clearly prohibited grant of Gomala land to private 
bodies/institutions. 
Further, as per Rule 97(5) 42 of KLR Rules, Gomala land situated within the 
city limits and within specified distance from city limit may be granted with 
the General Order of the Government. 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

26 
 
Audit noticed that the Government did not frame any General Orders in 
respect of Gomala land within city limits (September 2017).  In spite of the 
Circulars issued for not granting Gomala land, the Government had granted 
Gomala land.  
Audit brings out three case studies to point out the discrepancies noticed in the 
processing of grants of Gomala land as below: 
 
{{{ 
 
 
                                                           
43 Bengaluru (Rural), Belgaum, Ramanagaram, Tumakuru. 
44 Bengaluru (Urban), Koppal. 
45 Survey No. 64, Doddabidakallu, Bengaluru North taluk,  Survey No. 57 and 15, 
Chikkabanavara and Chikkasandra, Bengaluru North taluk, Survey No. 30, 
Kumbalagodu, Bengaluru South Taluk. 
Whether Gomala lands were disposed off in a consistent manner after fair 
evaluation? 
Government processed grants on Gomala land in violation of its own 
Circular. Even in grant of Gomala land, there was inconsistency in decision 
to grant or otherwise. Cases were decided without recording reasons for 
disbursing Gomala land even in places whe re shortage of Gomala land was 
reported. 
Case Study No.01  
Inconsistent decision making 
(i) In four43 cases, (three grants and 
one lease) 88-00 A-G of Gomala 
land were granted/leased  
between 2011 and 2016. 
(ii) In t wo44 cases, proposals were 
made for grant of 112-21 A-G of 
land in 2011/2016. 
Granted Gomala land despite 
reports of the DC on shortage of 
grazing land. 
 
Proposals were rejected on the 
ground of shortage of Gomala land. 
Case Study No.02  
No evaluation before disposal 
The Government granted 10-0945 A-
G of Gomala land out of 203 -07 A-
G in the three survey numbers of the 
villages in Bengaluru Urban District 
between August 2012 and November 
2013. 
However, the remaining 192 -38 A-G 
of Gomala land (i .e. 203 -07 A -G 
minus 10 -09 A -G) in the said three 
survey numbers were already 
granted/leased to various other 
entities. Thus, with the grant of 10 -
09 A-G of Gomala land, the Gomala 
land in these three survey numbers 
was completely ex hausted. The 
grants were processed without 
ascertaining the cattle count and 
minimum land required /available in 
these villages concerned for grazing 
purpose. 
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

27 
 
 
These case studies show that the provisions of the Act /Rules/Circular 
instructions were not applied uniformly under similar circumstances by 
allowing grants in some cases while rejecting in other cases. 
                                                           
46 Bengaluru (Urban) (eight cases), Chickmagaluru (one case), Gulbarga (one case). 
Case Study No.03 
Grant of land without setting modalities for grant 
1046 cases (seven grants and three 
leases), of 117-21 A -G of Gomala 
land situated within the city limit 
(i.e. with 25 km) between January 
2012 and September 2015. 
Land was granted , notwithstanding 
the absence of a General Order of the 
Government to prescribe modalities 
for disposal of the Gomala land 
within city limits. 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

29 
 
Chapter-VI 
[ 
Valuation of land granted/leased 
The objective of the land grant is generally to promot e a socio -beneficial 
activity. While promoting this cause, the Government should consider the 
economic aspects like the valuation of land during its transfer. 
6.1 Concessions in the valuation of land 
The KLG Rules prescribe the extent of concession in the value of land that can 
be allowed for grant of land for various purposes. The concession depends on 
the purpose for which , land was granted and the status of the grantee, viz. 
statutory bodies, charitable institutions, etc.  
                                                           
47  By insertion of Rule 22A in the KLG Rules, 1969. 
48 A Committee constituted under Section 45 A of the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957.  
Mechanism for valuation of land granted/leased 
Rules 19 to 22 of the K arnataka Land Grant (KLG) Rules clearly prescribe 
levy of cost of land granted/leased at either Market Value or Guidance 
Value.  
Prior to June 2015, Revenue Authorities were empowered to determine 
Market Value by themselves. 
From June 2015, Market Value was fixed47 as the average of the highest 
transaction that has occurred in the village during each of  the preceding 
three years or the cost fixed for similar land acquired as per the Right of Fair 
Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Act, 2013, whichever is higher. 
Guidance Value (GV) is the estimated value of property as notified by the 
Central Valuation Committee48.  
The KLG Rules also prescribe fulfilment of certain conditions for granting 
concessions to institutions for religious and charitable purposes.  
Whether concessions in valuation were as per Rules? 
Concessions granted were found to be not according to the Rules and 
reasons for going overboard were not stated. 
Concessions were granted suo motu by the Government without any 
application from the beneficiary. 
Concessions were also higher than the rates prescribed by the KLG Rules 
Though the decision on grant of concession was taken under the KG (ToB) 
Rules, no reasons were recorded as required under Rule 27 of the KLG 
Rules. 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

30 
 
Issues in detail are discussed below: 
6.1.1 Grant of concession without application by beneficiary 
As per Rule 21 of the KLG Rules, no concession in the price of land shall be 
allowed in respect of land grants for religiou s and charitable institutions. 
However, the Rule has a provisio n for grant of concession of 50  per cent, on 
application made by the institution, provided the institution runs purely for 
religious and charitable purposes , such as temples, leprosy treatment centres, 
old age homes, orphanages, etc. without collecting any fee or service charges. 
The application for concession shall be accompanied with supporting 
documents pertaining to a period  of five years preceding the date of 
application, in proof of their satisfactory functioning. 
Details in this respect are given below: 
6.1.2 Grant of excess concession  
The KLG Rules prescribe the extent of concession in price of land depending 
on the grantee and the purpose of the grant.  
                                                           
49 Sri Janaseva  Vishwastha Mandala  at Survey No. 19, Channenahalli, Bangalore South 
Taluk, Bangalore Urban District in February 2009.  
50 Karnataka Education Board, Dharwad District  in October 2011 , Rashtrothanna Parishath, 
Bengaluru (Rural) District in October 2009/March 2011 , Mahatma Gandhi Vidhya  Peeta, 
Survey No. 72 & 78, Devarakaggalahalli, Kanakapura, Ramanagara  in June 2016  and 
Krishna Sevashrama Trust, Bengaluru (Urban) District in June 2011. 
Whether the concessions granted were duly applied for by the 
beneficiaries? 
Concessions were granted suo motu by the Government without application 
by the beneficiary or recording any reasons for the same.  
One49 case, where six acres of land 
was granted to a trust for educational 
and social activities. 
Original order (February 2009) for 
grant of land at 50 per cent  
concession was subsequently 
modified (July 2012) to 75 per cent 
concession and was stated to be at 
the request of the grantee. However, 
there was no request letter on 
record. The GV of the land was ` 45 
lakh per acre and the extra 
concession amounted to  ` 67.50 
lakh. 
Four50 cases involving grant of 89 -29 
A-G of land to charitable activities. 
Government suo motu accorded 
concession ranging from 20 to 100 
per cent  without recording any 
reasons there against. This resulted 
in undue concession of ` 18.93 crore 
(Annexure -V). 
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

31 
 
In 51 out of 320 cases, either the concession was in excess of the limits 
prescribed in KLG Rules  or the concessions prescribed were allowed without 
verifying the conditions to be fulfilled for availing concession. This resulted in 
grant of extra concession of ` 176.01crore. These decisions were made under 
the KG (ToB) Rules and Government Orders issued under Rule 27 of the KLG 
Rules without recording specific reasons for the excess concession granted . 
Details of cases are given in Annexure-VI. 
In reply, the Government stated that the concessions were granted by relaxing 
the provisions of the KLG Rules under Rule 27  but agreed to the audit 
observation that specific reasons, as required under Rule 27, were not 
recorded.  Further, no specific reply was given to the audit observation on the 
lack of uniformity in grant of concession. 
6.1.3 Short levy of land cost due to incorrect adoption of Market 
Value/Guidance Value in computation. 
Government Order issued in respect of grant/lease prescribes the value of land 
to be collected, based either on the market value or the GV of the land as the 
case may be. The DC shall issue a demand for the value of the land. 
 
6.1.4 Non-adoption of general principles of valuation notified by 
Revenue Department  
The Central Valuation Committee (CVC)51 notifies the Guidance Value of all 
properties  for purposes of stamp duty . The CVC has also prescribed certain 
general principles to be followed while valuing land for stamp duty which 
inter alia  stipulates that undeveloped agricultural lands converted for 
commercial and residential purpose s shall be calculated respectively at 180  
per cent and 16552per cent of the GV applicable for agriculture land  for the 
year 2016-17. 
                                                           
51  As per the Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957, Revenue Department had set up a  CVC and Sub-
Committees thereof in each District. The GVs of all properties in a District as approved 
by the CVC are notified in the Gazette for the guidance of the Sub -Registrars for Stamp 
Duty assessment. 
52  For the period 2012 -17, enhancement for commercial purposes varied between 60 and 80 
per cent of value of agricultural land while for residential purposes, enhancement varied 
between 50 and 65 per cent of value of agricultural land. 
Whether land cost was collected as envisaged in the GOs? 
On a comparison of the demands raised by the DCs vis-a-vis the 
Government Orders, Audit noticed that in 30 out of 320 cases, the cost to be 
collected as stipulated in the Government Order worked out to ` 39.81 crore, 
whereas the cost to be collected arrived at by the DCs was ` 21.98 crore. 
This resulted in short demand and consequent lo ss of Government revenue 
of ` 17.83 crore as given in Annexure-VII. 
The short demand was due to adoption of lesser market value, GV, etc ., by 
DC. 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

32 
 
Audit noticed that Government lands granted/leased were valued as 
agricultural lands even though they were granted for non -agricultural 
purposes.     
Hence, non -adoption of the general principle s of valuation notified by 
Revenue Department itself for valuing lands for stamp duty assessment while 
valuing cost of Government lands granted for non -agricultural purposes 
resulted in under-valuation and consequent short -realisation of revenue to the  
Government. 
The Government agreed to examine principles of land valuation involved in 
the observations and furnish further remarks. 
6.2 Application of Rule 22A of the Karnataka Land Grant Rules 
With effect from 9 June 2015 , uniform sets of rates for grant /lease were 
prescribed for Government lands for different purposes vide insertion of Rule 
22A of the KLG Rules through an amendment in 2015. Rent was prescribed at 
5 or 10 per cent of the GV of the land depending on the category of grantee 
such as individuals, statutory bodies, educational institutions, religious and 
charitable institutions, industries, etc. and the purpose of grant , such as for 
education, charitable, industrial, etc. Further, as per conditions attached in the 
Office Memoranda/Lease Agreement, lease rent was to be enhanced by 10 per 
cent every two years. 
Whether general principles of valuation prescribed under GV were 
followed to optimise revenue? 
Government used the Guidance Value of agricultural lands notified by CVC 
while determining the cost of the land. The principle of CVC to enhance the 
GV by prescribed percentage for lands converted for commercial/residential 
purposes was not ad opted. As an illustration, in 29 cases involving 243-29 
A-G of land , Audit calculated that  an increase of revenue of ` 35.40 crore 
would have resulted if the said principle of CVC was adopted . Details in 
Annexure-VIII. 
Recommendation 4 – The Government may fix price of land by 
enhancement of GV for lands converted for commercial /residential 
purposes as notified by the CVC. 
Whether the amendment addressed the issue of inconsistency in fixation 
of rates? 
Though Rule 22A prescribed fixation of land value uniform ly based on 
status of beneficiary and purpose for which land granted/leased , the 
implementation of the same at the field level posed challenges with regard 
to periodicity and increment of charging the lease rents. 
Tahsildars were  not clear if the lease rent were annual or for the entire 
period of lease. This in turn created problems with the collection of 
increments also, as it depended on the initial fixation of lease rent. 
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

33 
 
In the absence of clear directions, the field offices could not raise demands 
correctly and compute arrears, if any.  Audit noticed that while Ballari District 
demanded and collected lease rent on annual basis with prescribed increments, 
Bengaluru North (Additional) Taluk did not raise any demand for lease rent 
after collection of the initial lease rent at 10 per cent of the market value. 
The Government concurred (September 2017) with the audit observations and 
stated that clarifications would be issued shortly. 
  
Recommendation 5  – The Government may consider issuing suitable 
clarifications with respect to Rule 22A of the KLG Rules for calculation 
of lease rent, so as to enable correct demand and collection. 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

35 
 
Chapter VII 
 
Monitoring the usage of land   
  
 
7.1 Mechanism to monitor compliance to the conditions 
Audit noticed, that the usage of the land was verified only in case of public 
complaints regarding non -use, sub -lease or other diversions. Even in such 
cases, prompt action was not initiated to resume the land back to the 
Government. Details of some test-checked cases are given below: 
 
 
 
Why is monitoring necessary? 
Land is the driving factor behind the socio -economic progress of a State. 
Monitoring of lands granted/leased is important in ensuring the correct and 
efficient utilisation of the scarce land resource. It is also necessary to check 
compliance to the conditions laid down during grant/lease regarding its 
usage, payment of lease rent/interest, prohibition from sub -letting, etc. 
Maintenance of relevant records in respect of such grants /leases and 
periodical inspections, duly recorded, are key to achieving this objective. 
What are the conditions laid down? 
Conditions in the grant/lease order stipulate that the land shall be put to use 
for the intended purpose within two years from the date of lease/grant order 
or else the lease/grant is liable to be cancelled. 
Grantees of land for non-agricultural purposes are to execute an agreement 
in Form-VI, which stipulates that the grantee or the representatives or heirs 
shall not, at any time, by partition, inheritance, lease, mortgage or otherwise, 
transfer the land or allow any portion of it to be cultivated, used or occupied 
by any other person so as to divide it. 
Was there a mechanism to monitor the usage of land? 
There was no institutional mechanism to monitor compliance to the 
conditions of lease /grant. The Village Accountant, who is the primary level 
functionary at the Village level, was not carrying out the task of monitoring. 
There were no information/reports consolidated at the Tahsildar’s office. In 
the absence of a database as already mentioned in paragraph 3.2, there was 
no mechanism for timely alerts regarding the expiry of two year period afte r 
grant/lease. 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

36 
 
 7.1.1 Implications of non-monitoring 
                                                           
53 M/s. Mythic Society  (January 2012) , M/s.  Gowtham Medical Education and 
Technologies (March 2004), M/s. Deccan Education Society (March 2004), Lions Service 
Foundation Organisation Education Society  (March 2004) , New Cambridge Education 
Trust (May 2004) , M/s. Machidevaguru Peeta Samithi Trust  (March 2004) , M/s.  
Adichunchanagiri Shikshana Trust  (August 2003) , M/s.  Vidya Manasa Education Trust  
(February 2004). 
54 M/s. Imperial Cancer Hospital and Research Centre. 
55 Apollo Hospitals, Bengaluru South Taluk. 
56 Navajeevana Nilaya. 
Lease of 12 Acres in  
Sy.No.57, Chikkabanavara, 
Bengaluru (North) Taluk, to 
Kanteerava Pragathi Vidya 
Samsthe (November 2007)  
and Srinivasa Education 
and Charitable Trust  (April 
2003). 
The lessees pledged (August 2008/May 2010) 
the lands to financial institutions to avail 
loans, in contravention to the conditions of 
lease. In these cases , the Government also 
issued NOCs for the same.  
Eight cases 53 of grant/lease 
between August 2003 and 
Janaury 2012 involving 
50.21 A -G in Bengaluru 
(Urban) and Ramanagara 
Districts. 
The land was either used partially or not used 
for period ranging from 5 to 14 years. The 
Department is yet to  initiate action to resume 
these lands wor th ` 101.40 crore, even after 
being aware of the non/partial use.  
5 acres granted in 1991 for 
the purpose of Cancer 
Research Institute54. 
The land was sub -let to be used for another 
Hospital55. The land was not resumed back, 
despite a Government Order (2015).  
9-18 A -G granted  in 1959  
to Leprosy Hospital56. 
The land was diverted for building a School. 
On receipt of a public complaint (June 2013) 
regarding the diversion, the land was resumed 
back (April 2015). 
18 guntas granted  in 
December 2009 to a temple. 
The land was diverted for building a 
commercial complex which was also reported 
(December 2010) by the jurisdictional 
Tahsildar. The land is yet to be resumed. 
124 acres of tank bed land 
leased (May 1980) for 30 
years to Tourism 
Department was sub -let to 
Golf Club, Bengaluru. 
The lease expired in 2010, but the Department 
has still not resumed the land, despite a 
direction (2011) from the Hon’ble High Court 
of Karnataka to vacate the land. Meanwhile 
the Tourism Departme nt renewed (October 
2013) the lease for a further period of 30 years 
without concurrence from the Revenue 
Department.  
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

37 
 
7.2 Joint Physical Verifications to ascertain usage of land 
Table 7.1 
Deviations in usage of land 
Sl. 
No. 
Usage No. of cases Extent 
(A-G) Grants Leases Regularisation of 
unauthorised occupation 
1 Not put to use 29 21 16 633-38 
2 Partly used 4 6 -- 89-05 
3 Diverted for other 
purposes 4 - 1 3-26 
 Total 37 27 17 726-29 
From the above, it can be seen that out of the total joint physical verification 
cases, 32 per cent  of the lands granted and 58 per cent of the land leased 
remained unused.  
It is also pointed out that there is no deterrent provision in the Act /Rules such 
as levy of penalty or disqualification from applying for future grant/lease in 
cases of  not utilising the granted/leased land within the stipulated period, 
except cancellation of grant/lease and resuming the land.  
A few of the cases noticed during joint physical verification are shown below: 
  
What Audit did in the absence of a mechanism to monitor? 
To assess the extent of non -adherence to the conditions of the grant/lease 
and to ascertain the usage of land, Audit conducted joint physical 
verifications of granted/leased lands with the Revenue Department officials. 
90 land grants, 60 land leases and 84 cases of lands granted on regularisation 
of unauthorised occupation in 30 Taluks were checked. Joint inspection 
revealed that l and to the extent of 726 -29 A-G was not used/partially used 
for the intended purposes and diverted for other purposes due to l ack of 
monitoring by the Department.  The details of joint physical verification are 
consolidated in Table 7.1. 
Locking up of land resource 
Out of the cases mentioned in the Table 7.1, an extent of 361-23 A-G of land 
granted to 29 institutions remained locked up with the beneficiary 
institutions without being put to use for  periods ranging from 3 to 18 years. 
The estimated present value of the lands locked up was ` 256.35 crore.  
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

38 
 
Exhibit 1 
 
 
 
5 Acres (Sy.No.115, Channasandra village, Bengaluru East Taluk) was leased to 
Rajarajeshwari Education Trust for educational purposes which was not put to use even after 
13 years ( 2nd June 2017). 
  
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

39 
 
 Exhibit 2 
 
 
 
1-15 A -G (Sy.No.74, Urukere  Majare Bovipalya (Siddaramanagara) village, Kasaba  Hobali, 
Tumakuru Taluk) was granted to M/s. Mallikarjuna  Swamy Vidya Samsthe for religious/ 
education / social activities , which was used partially leaving large extents of granted land 
vacant even after 5 years (1st March 2017). 
  
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

40 
 
 
Exhibit 3 
 
 
 
2 acres (Maralur village, Tumakuru Taluk) was granted to Arya Ediga Sangha for construction 
of school hostel, which was diverted for commercial purposes (1st March 2017). 
7.3 Non-demand of lease rent 
As per conditions stipulated in the lease deed, lease rent is to be paid on 
prescribed dates, in advance. A Demand, Collection and Balance (DCB) 
Register with relevant details such as name of lessee, area, lease rent fixed, 
due for the year, balance if any, etc. is an effective monito ring tool which 
helps in collection of lease rent.   Default in payment of lease rent renders the 
lease liable to be cancelled. 
 
 
 
 
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

41 
 
 
The Government accepted the audit findings and agreed to institu te a 
mechanism for periodic follow-up. 
  
                                                           
57 Rajatha Complex, Bengaluru North Taluk. 
Whether lease rents were demanded and paid in a timely manner? 
There were 46 cases out of 103 leases where lease rent amounting to ` 7.33 
crore was not demanded and collected for the period from 1979 -80 to 2017-
18. Out of these, ` 5.02 crore pertained to one lease 57 alone in Bengaluru 
(North) Taluk. Details in Annexure-IX. 
Audit noticed that the Tahsildars concerned did not maintain Demand, 
Collection and Balance (DCB) Registers and therefore did not notice 
defaults in payment of lease rent and raise demands promptly. 
Recommendation 6 – The Government may consider closer monitoring 
of usage of land and collection of revenue due from the grantees /lessees 
at periodic intervals, preferably through periodic reminders from the 
electronic database suggested in Recommendation 1. 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

43 
 
Chapter VIII 
 
Eviction of Encroachment of Government land 
Encroachment of Government land adversely affects the inventory and 
reduces the availability, disposal and equity in distribution of land resource. 
The KLR  Act/Rules prescribe summary eviction of encroachment of 
Government land.  
8.1  Working of Karnataka Public Land Corporation 
KPLC was incorporated in December 2008  with the main objective of being 
the primary agency for all transactions of land. Besides this main objective, 
KPLC was entrusted with collection and maintenance of data about 
Government lands, valuation of Government lands, devising methods for 
prevention of encroachment, allotment of lands recovered after eviction of 
encroachment to different Government Departments, etc. 
In reply, KPLC stated (August 2017) that proposals were sent in June 2015 to 
the Government regarding strengthening of KPLC and to project KPLC as a 
nodal agency for allotment of Government land for various purposes to 
Government/Public Sector Enterprises. 
Government in the Exit Conference stated that KPLC was a small organization 
with skeleton staff and would not be in a position to handle the eviction of 
encroachments, as it also lacked eviction powers.  Audit is of the opinion that 
KPLC should be strengthened /empowered to play a proactive role in the 
identification and eviction of encroachment of Government land. 
Was there an Action Plan to deal with encroachment? 
A Joint Legislative Committee submitted its Report on the issue of 
Encroachment in July 2007, based on which the Government directed (2013) 
the DCs to prepare an Action Plan for eviction of encroachment of 
Government lands. 
The DCs were required to report progress on eviction in the prescribed 
formats to Karnataka Public Land Corporation (KPLC), which would in turn 
submit a monthly consolidated report to the Government. 
Limitations of KPLC 
The objective of KPLC was to manage  and ensure optimum usage of 
Government lands but it had not formulated a road map  for the same.  The 
activities of KPLC were restricted to monitoring  submission of progress 
reports by the DCs concerned  on the Action Plan for eviction of 
encroachments and reporting the same to the Government. KPLC released 
Government grants  received by it to DCs concerned for protection of 
Government land.  KPLC had instituted a mechanism of public complaints 
regarding encroachment of Government land and forwarded the complaints 
received to the DCs concerned for necessary action.  
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

44 
 
8.2 Identification, accounting and eviction of encroachments 
8.2.1 Deficiencies in the process of identification, accounting and 
eviction of encroachments 
Audit analysed the process of identification, accounting and eviction of 
encroachments existing in the Department and noticed the following 
deficiencies: 
 
 
 
Progress of eviction 
As per the progress report of KPLC for the month of March 2017, out of 
4,48,615 acres identified as encroached  in the State , 2,61,174 acres (57 per 
cent) was reported to be evicted leaving a balance of 1,87,441 acres (42 per 
cent). The encroachments identified excluded cases pending in various 
Courts and applications pending under the Scheme for Regularisation under 
Section 94 A, 94 B and 94 C of the KLR Act. 
In respect of the 11 test -checked Districts, the encroachment stated to be 
evicted was 1,29,576 acres out of 2,05,221 acres of encroachments identified 
in the respective Action Plans. While Bengaluru Rural achieved 100 per cent 
eviction, Chikkamagaluru and Kalburgi  with 14 per cent eviction were the 
least in progress of eviction as of March 2017. 
Issues of identification 
The Action Plan did not contain any plans to identify new encroachments 
and no new encroachments were listed after August 2013 except in 
Bengaluru Urban District. 
On introduction (July 2013  - rural areas and January 2015-urban areas ) of 
the scheme for regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government 
land for dwelling house, 1,16,904 applications involving 1397 -08 A-G were 
received by March/June 2017.   However, none of them were reckoned by 
the Department as encroachment of Government land in the Action Plan of 
the Department. 
Issues of accounting 
Encroachment of 4 0-11 A-G by 14 individuals and two Government 
institutions (Annexure X ) was recorded (between 2003 and 2014) in the 
files of eight Offices of DC/Tahsildar. However, the same was not accounted 
for under the total encroached area maintained either by the Department or 
KPLC. 
Applications rejected under regularisation for agricultur al purposes were not 
accounted for under encroachment. There were 1,81,167 such applications 
covering an extent of 4,62,637 A-G. 
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

45 
 
Illustration of a case which continued under encroachment is picturised below: 
 
12-10 A-G of land in Survey Number 63 of Hulimavu village, Begur  Hobli, Bangalore South 
Taluk, Bangalore Urban district is basically a Mufthkaval (grazing) land. An  extent of 5 -0 
A-G out of this encroached by Islamia Institute of Technology , was to be evicted as per order 
No.NCR/CR-08/09-10 dated 27 July 2009 of the Tahsildar . As per the board displayed above , 
it has to be taken possession of along with the building on 1 October 2016. 
 
Date of Joint Inspection – 20 April 2017 
5 Acres (Sy.No.63, Hulimavu  village, Bengaluru South) encroached by Islamia  Institute of 
Technology was found not evicted  during joint inspection with the Department  though an 
eviction board as shown above had been put up at the spot.  
 
 
Joint Inspection with the Department 
Audit conducted Joint Inspection with the personnel from the Revenue 
Department to verify the stated eviction of encroachments. In 43 cases of 
encroachments stated to be evicted, 22 cases involving 219-14 A -G 
continued to be under encroachment.  Details in Annexure XI. 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

46 
 
In reply, the Government agreed to ensure updating of all encroachments and 
to account lands involved in applications rejected under the scheme for 
regularisation as encroachment. 
8.3 Disposal of public complaints on encroachment 
KPLC instituted (2009) a system for receipt of public complaints and 
compiled a database of all complaints and forwarded the same to the DC 
Offices concerned for disposal . The procedure for disposal of a public 
complaint involves a field verification report and issue of notice to the 
encroacher before eviction is initiated.  
In effect, the Department did not have an established mechanism for follow-up 
on complaints.   The action against established encroachments was not time -
bound and  systematic, and was ineffective in identifying further 
encroachments and timely eviction of the same.  
 
 
 
Recommendation 7 – The Government may consider: 
i) Updating the ex isting Action Plan by addition of new 
encroachments reported /identified subsequent to 
preparation of the Action Plan; and  
ii) Including time-bound eviction procedures in the Action Plan 
in respect of Government lands in the possession of the 
applicants whose applications under the scheme for 
regularisation were rejected. 
How good was the complaints redressal mechanism? 
Creating awareness among the public and encour aging reporting of 
encroachment is a method of monitoring encroachment of Governmen t land. 
Hence, a mechanism for receipt of complaints from the public will have 
considerable effect in the timely detecti on and eviction of encroachment, if 
acted upon prudently. 
Out of 2,608 State-wide complaints received and sent by KPLC to the 
DCs/Tahsildars between 2009 and 2017, only 753 complaints were disposed  
of, leaving a balance of  1,856 cases pending disposal.  Pending cases 
included 1,271 complaints which were more than  five years old. Besides, no 
time-frames were prescribed for field verification  of complaints  and 
reporting at various levels. Details in Annexure-XII. 
No database was maintained for public  complaints received in the field 
offices of the Department, viz. the Tahsildar and DC Offices and the 
complaints were not compiled either at the DC or the Tahsildars Offices. 
Information called for in this regard from the DCs were not furnished. 
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

47 
 
The Government accepted the audit recommendations and agreed to constitute 
an Enforcement Cell in a few Districts. 
8.4 Grant of land to the Encroachers 
As per Section 39 and 94 of KLR Act, 1964, any person who has 
unauthorisedly occupied any Government land shall be summarily evicted by 
the jurisdictional DC, besides being liable to be levied penalty58. No Acts and 
Rules made thereunder empower the Government to r egularise the 
encroachment, except encroachment for agriculture purpose59 and for dwelling 
house. 
From the above, it is imperative that all encroachments should be dealt with 
strictly in accordance with law and evicted to deter future encroachments.  
Two illustrations in this regard are as below: 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
58 Penalty of twice the land revenue for the land and also liable, at the discretion of the DC, 
to a fine not exceeding ` 500 per acre per year (for agricultural purposes) and not 
exceeding ` 1,000 per acre per year (for non-agricultural purposes). 
59  By individual of insufficient land holding. 
60 Ballari, Bengaluru (Urban), Mysuru and Ramanagara. 
Recommendation 8 – The Government may consider: 
i) Fixing time-frames for field verification and confirmation of 
cases of complaints regarding encroachment to make the 
redressal mechanism effective; and 
ii) Constitution of Enforcement Cell for each District on the lines 
of Bengaluru (Urban) District. 
Whether eviction of encroachment strictly complied with extant Rules? 
Audit noticed instances where the Government granted the encroached land 
to the encroachers. In  the test -checked cases, Government granted land 
involving 89-31 A-G encroached by 1 1 individuals in four Districts 60 for 
non-agricultural purposes , such as construction of church /school, golf 
village and resort. 
Illustration-1: Grant of land contrary to DC recommendation 
Two Acres of Kaveri 
River shore, Mysuru 
District, un -authorisedly 
occupied by M/s.Talakadu  
Jaladama Resorts.  
The occupant constructed a building and a road. 
However, on request from the encroacher, 
instead of eviction and contrary to the 
recommendation of the DC, the Government 
accorded permission in June 2014 to utilise the 
said land though the Act/Rules did not permit it. 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

48 
 
The injudicious action of the Government in granting the encroached land 
would only encourage grabbing of Government land by unscrupulous 
means/individuals. 
8.5 Non-levy of penalty for encroachment of Government land 
As per Section 94 of the KLR Act, 1964, encroachment of Government land 
shall be evicted on levy of penalty at two times of land revenue and also be 
liable, at the discretion of the Deputy Commissioner, to a fine not exceeding 
` 500 per acre per year (for agricultural purposes) and not exceeding ` 1,000 
per acre per year (for non -agricultural purposes). However, it was noticed that 
such fine was not levied in any of the test-checked Districts. The fine involved 
in respect of evicted lands in the test-checked Districts worked out to ` 32.96 
crore62 covering an extent of 1,31,831 acres of Government land.  
8.6 Protection of evicted lands 
KPLC releases grants received from the Government, to the DCs to meet the 
expenditure towards protection of Government land viz., removal of 
encroachment, fencing of evicted land, etc. The amount was released based on 
the requirements of the DC. 
                                                           
61 M/s. Chamundi Build Infotech. 
62  Computed at ` 500 per acre for the extent of evicted lands. 
Illustration-2: Mis-interpretation of Court direction 
77-19 A-G in Ramanagara 
District encroached for 
Golf Club Village by a 
private builder61. 
The Hon’ble High Court of Karnataka 
dismissed the plea of the encroacher for grant. 
On appeal, the Hon’ble Supreme Court directed 
(2009) the Government to grant the said land if 
the relevant provision of the Rules permitted to 
do so after collecting price of the land 
determined by the Government. Though the 
Rules did not provide for grant of the land, the 
Government agreed to grant the land, 
misconstruing the Court direction as direction 
for grant. 
The value of the land assessed by the 
Department was ` 982.07 crore and  the 
Department issued notice in September 2016 
for collection of the amount. 
During the Exit Conference (September 2017), 
the Government informed that the encroacher 
had not paid the amount as of  September 2017. 
However, n o further action  was taken by the 
Government and the land remained under the 
illegal occupation of the encroacher. 
 
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

49 
 
As of July 2017 , out of ` 17.46 crore released between 2012 -13 and 2016-17 
towards protection of previously encroached lands to all 30 Districts, 
Utilisation Certificates were received for only ` 10.39 crore. KPLC needs to 
monitor usage of the balance amount of ` 7.07 crore. 
An illustration showing re-encroachment of evicted land is given below: 
 
Date of Joint Inspection – 28 May 2017 
Encroachment evicted area (Sy.No. 70, Banavadi village, Magadi Taluk) found to be re -
encroached during joint physical inspection with Department.  
8.7 Disposal of dispute cases of Government land  
 
                                                           
63 Bengaluru Urban - 18441 acres and Bengaluru Rural District -12609 acres. 
64 Present day GV of land in Bengaluru ranges from 14.00 lakh to 12.00 crore per acre. 
Whether measures taken for protection of evicted land were adequate? 
Out of the  total 2,62,293 acres of land recovered after eviction of 
encroachment, only 18,273.74 acres were stated to be protected by way of 
fencing, digging trench and putting name plates. 
In Bengaluru District, out of 31,050 acres 63 of land recovered after eviction 
of encroachment,  only 482.69 acres ( i.e.1.55 per cent ) was stated to be 
protected as of March 2017, though the land in and around Bengaluru is very 
valuable64. 
Mechanism for resolution of land disputes 
As per the KLR Act/Rules, dispute resolution takes place both through the 
Revenue Courts, Revenue Appellate Tribunals and the Civil Courts. In the 
Revenue Court system, the Tahsildar, who heads the Revenue Department at 
the Taluk level, is identified as the first level dispute resolution officer. The 
Revenue Officers heading the sub-divisions, districts and division also have 
dispute resolution powers. The civil litigation system mainly comprises the 
High Court, District Courts and Courts of Civil Judge.  
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

50 
 
As per the information furnished by KPLC, there were 1200 cases pending 
before various Courts as o f March 2017. Audit noticed that the Government 
lost 17 -11 A -G of land in five instances due to improper /delayed/un-timely 
representation on the part of the Department in various Courts of law. All 
these cases were decreed in favour of the beneficiaries /encroachers due to 
delay in action in registering cases or filing Government remarks or in-action 
by the Department (Annexure-XIII). 
Protection of Government land from encroachment is a continuous process 
and requires active and timely action in identification and eviction p rocedures.  
Though the District Offices had identified encroachments and formulated an 
Action Plan for eviction, it was noticed that there was no system of periodic 
inspections and identification of new encroachments.  Instances of non -
eviction of encroachments reported as evicted by the District Of fices to 
Government were also noticed during joint inspection s.  Grant of land by 
Government to encroachers 65 would encourage land grabbing.  The 
Department had not levied penalty in any of the encroachment cases.  KPLC 
could only monitor the progress of ev iction and disposal of complaints on 
encroachments reported by District Offices in the absence of powers under the 
KLR Act for any executive action.  Though the Government set up (March 
2016) Special Court s for speedy disposal of disputes relating to Gover nment 
land, it was noticed that 94 per cent of the cases pending in various Courts 
were yet to be transferred (June 2017).    
The Government accepted the audit recommendations.  
  
                                                           
65  Encroached for purposes other than agriculture and dwelling houses. 
Constitution of Special Court and its effectiveness 
In order to ensure speedy disposal of disputes relating to encroachment or 
otherwise of Government land, the Government constituted (March 2016) a 
Special Court under Section 7 of the Karnataka Land Grabbing (Prohibition) 
Act, 2011. Further, Section 20 of the Act provided for transfer of all land 
related cases pending before various Courts on ‘as is where is ’ basis to the 
Special Court constituted. 
Despite a reference from KPLC to all the DCs /Tahsildars, only 69 cases 
were transferred as of August 2017 to the Special Court for speedy disposal 
leaving a balance of 1 ,131 cases yet to be transferred.  Delay in transferring 
the cases to the Special Court defeated the very objective of setting up the 
Special Court for speedy disposal of cases .  Consequently, the  land under 
these cases continued to be under encroachment. 
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

51 
 
Chapter IX 
 
Regularisation of the Unauthorised Occupation of Government 
land 
 
9.1 Regularisation of the Unauthorised O ccupation of 
Government land for agricultural purposes 
The Government vide insertion of Section 94A 66 in 1991 to the KLR Act, 
1964, introduced a scheme for regularisation of unauthorised occupation of 
Government lands prior to 14 April 1990 inviting applications from people in 
unauthorised occupation. Section 94B inserted in 1998 provided an 
opportunity for those who had not applied under Section 94A to apply for such 
regularisation. The last date for applications under Sections 94 A and 94B was 
5 August 1991 and 15 July 1999  respectively. Rules 108-B to 108 -M of the 
KLR Rules prescribe the procedures and eligibility for regularisation of such 
unauthorised occupation for agricultural purposes.   The process flow for the 
regularisation is as given below:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
66 Salient features of 94A and B - The conditions for grant of land, under the Act and Rules,  
inter alia stipulates that: 
i) As per Rule 108 -F (iv) the applicant shall be in occup ation of land prior to 
13.4.1990 in general case and 13.4.1989 in case of SC/ST; 
ii) The land granted together with the land already held by the grantee shall not exceed 
two hectares of land. (provision u/s. 94A(4)); and 
iii) No B K harab land such as Devarakadu (Forest for God) , Urduve , Gunduthopu, 
tank bed, Phut Kharab, H alla Kharab, burial  ground, etc., assigned for special 
purpose, shall be regularised (Rule 108-I). 
Application for regularisation of unauthorised 
Field verification of Village Accountant/Revenue 
Inspector 
Recommendation of the Tahsildar to DC 
Approval by Committee 
Issue of Saguvali Chit (Certificate authorising the individual 
to cultivate the land)/Grant Certificate by Tahsildar 
Submission of the case to the Constituency-wise 
Committee for Regularisation 
 
Creation of new Record of Rights by assigning a new 
survey number to the portion granted 
 
Regularisation of unauthorised occupation 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

52 
 
9.1.1 Status of disposal of applications 
The status of applications disposed under Section 94A and Section 94B as of 
March 2017 in the test-checked Districts is as shown Table 9.1 below: 
Table 9.1 
Disposal of cases under Section 94 A and 94 B as of March 2017 
The applicants whose applications were pending for disposal continued to be 
in possession of the Government lands for over 18 years, awaiting a decision.  
9.1.2 Discrepancies in regularisation of unauthorised occupation of 
Government land under Sections 94 A and B 
Sections 94 A and B of the KLR Act, read with Rule 108-B to 108-M of KLR 
Rules, provide for regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government 
land for cultivation purpose based on the conditions for gran t of land, under 
the said Act and Rules. 
                                                           
67 Chikkaballapura, Chikkamagaluru, Chinthamani, Doddaballapura, Gubbi, Hosakote, 
Mudigere, Ramanagara, Tumakuru, Sedam and Sira. 
Whether disposal of applications went off as planned? 
The intention of the Legislature was to consider and dispose the applications 
within one year from the date of the Amendment Act of 1997 , with effect 
from 27 April 2000 . However,  the pendency of the disposal of the 
applications necessitated several amendments  to the Act with respect to the 
time frame for disposing off the applications. At the end of March 2017, 
there were 47,348 applications pending in the test -checked Districts, which 
covered an area of 1,64,874-24 A-G. 
Sl. 
No. 
Section No. of 
applications 
received/ 
Extent of 
land (in A-G) 
No. of 
applications 
regularised/ 
Extent of land  
(in A-G) 
No. of 
applications 
rejected/ 
Extent of land  
(in A-G) 
No. of 
applications 
pending/Extent 
of land  
(in A-G) 
1. 94A 157792 
334769-25 
67843 
105739 
88491 
214370-01 
1458 
14660-24 
2. 94B 164185 
447967-05 
25619 
49487-27 
92676 
248266-18 
45890 
150213 
 Total 321977 
782736-30 
93462 
155226-27 
181167 
462636-19 
47348 
164873-24 
Whether regularisation of agricultural land was as per the stipulated 
conditions/provisions? 
Audit reviewed  1,022 files in 11 67Tahsildars’ Offices pertaining to 
regularisation of land under Sections 94 A and B during 2011-12 to 2016-17. 
Non-compliances like grant of excess land, grant of Gomala land (where 
shortage was reported), grant to ineligible beneficiaries, grant of land 
without applications, etc. were noticed. As a result, 1,055-19 A -G of land 
was alienated under the scheme for regularisation contrary to the eligibility 
conditions/provisions of the scheme/Act/Rules.  
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

53 
 
Details in this regard are given below: 
9.1.3 Non-inclusion of names of beneficiaries in the RTC 
On regularising the land under Sections 94 A and B by issuing Saguvali Chit 
(Grant Certificate), the Department is required to reduce the extent of land so 
regularised from the original survey number (which is Government land)  and 
allot a new survey number exhibiting the extent of land, name of the grantee  
and a remark incorporating the condition of grant for non -alienation for 15 
years/25 years, etc.  
 
 
 
 
                                                           
68  One year in case of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes. 
172-11 A -G of 
land valuing 
` 22.68 crore  in 
110 cases  
between 2012-17. 
Revenue Inspector/Tahsildar of the respective Villages 
reported shortage of Gomala land and recommended 
for rejection of applications . But the Committee for 
Regularisation headed by the jurisdictional elected 
representative granted land overlooking the 
recommendation. 
89-17A-G of land 
valuing ` 2.89 
crore in 77  cases 
between 2012-17.. 
Applications were  for grant of 159 -01 A -G of land  
against which , the Committee granted 248 -18 A -G, 
resulting in excess grant of  89-17 A -G over that 
applied for. 
176-02 A-G of 
land valuing ` 6 
crore in 69  cases 
between 2012-17. 
As per Rule 108 F, no person shall be eligible for grant 
of land unless he has attained the age of eighteen years 
and has been in unauthorised  occupation of land for at 
least a continuous period of not less than 368 years prior 
to 14 April 1990. 
Audit analy sis of the date of birth/age on the 
applications revealed that a ge of the applicants would 
be between 8 and17 years when they were purportedly 
cultivating the land. Such unrealistic applications 
should have been rendered invalid, bu t were accepted 
and land granted. 
585-14 A-G of 
land in 240 cases 
in six Taluks.  
Land was granted though applications were reported to 
be not available. 
32-15 A-G of land 
in 14 cases.  
Land was granted in a different Village/survey number 
than the ones applied for. 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

54 
 
9.1.4 Benefit impact assessment and alienation of land regularised  for 
agricultural purposes 
In the test -checked Districts, the Government regularis ed and granted 
1,55,226-27A-G of Government land  as of March/June 2017 . However, the 
Government did not envisage monitoring the usage of the land granted for 
agricultural purposes. Data such as crop grown by the grantees, annual income 
earned from the land granted, etc. were not collected. Thus, the benefits 
accrued to poor landless cultivators remained unassessed. It would be prudent 
for the Government to conduct a benefit impact assessment of such 
regularisation policy.  
  
Whether the modifications required in RTC were carried out after 
regularisation? 
In 201 out of 503 test-checked cases of regularisation involving 327-06 A-G 
of land, modifications were not carried out in RTC. I ndividual beneficiaries’ 
names, along with the extent of land granted , was neither included in the 
RTC relating to the Government land nor allotted a new survey number. 
Consequently, the overall extent of Government land in that particular 
survey number becomes overstated and title of the land does not get created 
in the nam e of the grantee. This has a risk of re -grant of the same land to 
others and litigations in the future. 
Whether land regularised for cultivation could be alienated? 
As per the  KLR Rules governing the conditions of regularisation under 
Sections 94 A and 94 B of KLR Act , land shall not be alienated  or used for 
non-agricultural purpose for a period of 25 years (15 years up to 24.8.2011) 
from the date of issue of Saguvali Chit/Grant Certificate. Besides, the 
grantee shall plant (and replant in case of damage) and maintain 10 trees , at 
his cost per hectare of land granted, within six months of such grant order. 
In 23 cases, the Government accorded permission (between June 2006 and 
May 2016) under Rule 9 of the KLG Rules for sale of 43 -38 A-G of land, 
regularised u nder Sections  94A and B of the KLR Act  (between August 
1994 and July 2005) , after 10 to 12 years of regularisation.  Rule 9 of the 
KLG Rules provides for alienation of land within the stipulated period in 
cases of lands granted for agricultural purposes under the KLG Rules.  
Hence, permission to alienate regularised land under Rule 9  of the KLG 
Rules was irregular and contrary to the scheme for regularisation. 
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

55 
 
9.2 Regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government 
land for dwelling purpose under Sections 94 C and 94 CC of 
the Karnataka Land Revenue Act 
The Government introduced in the KLR Act Section 94 C 69 with effect from 
11 July 2013 and Section 94 CC 70 with effect from 12 January 2015 , which 
provided for regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government lands 
for dwelling purposes in rural and urban areas respectively. 
Audit scrutiny of the provisions of the Section 94 C and 94 CC revealed the 
following deficiencies in the impleme ntation of the conditions envisaged 
under the sections: 
 
                                                           
69 Section 94 C of the KLR Act, 1964, which was substituted by the Act No. 51 of 2013, 
w.e.f 11  July 2013 read with Rules 108-O to 108 -T of KLR Rules, 1969, provides for 
regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government land for dwelling purpose in 
rural areas. 
70 Section 94 CC of the KLR Act, 1964, which was inserted by the Act No. 7 of 2015, w.e.f  
12.1.2015 read with Rules 108-U to 108 -Z of KLR Rules, 1969, provides for 
regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government land for dwelling purpose in  
urban areas. 
 
Conditions envisaged Deficiency in implementation 
Applicant or his family 
should not own a house or 
site other than the  one 
sought to be regularised. 
Applications were processed based on a self -
certificate of the applicant and there was no 
mechanism to verify the correctn ess. As the 
Government implements many housing 
schemes like Ashraya, distribution of sites to 
poor, etc. and allot houses /sites to identified 
beneficiaries, the risk of overlap ping of such 
beneficiaries could not be ruled out.  
House should  have been 
constructed before 
1 January 2012. 
Proof of the house having been constructed on 
Government land before 1 January 2012 was 
not documented in any of the cases. 
Section 94 C permitted 
regularisation of land up 
to 4,000 sq .ft. in rural 
areas, Section 94 CC 
permitted regularisation of 
land up to 600 sq .ft. in 
urban areas. 
The Tahsildars did not initiate action to 
recover the Government land under 
encroachment in excess of 600 sq.ft. 
Recommendation 9 – The Department may consider instituting a 
mechanism to verify and document fulfilment of eligibility conditions 
and also devise an Action Plan to resume Government land 
encroachment in excess of 600 sq .ft. in urban areas  and 4000 sq.ft . in 
rural areas.  
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

56 
 
 
The Government accepted the audit recommendation and stated that the field 
offices had to evict encroachments in excess of 600sq .ft. and 4000 sq.ft . in 
urban and rural areas respectively. 
9.2.1 Discrepancies in Regularisation under Sections 94 C and 94 CC 
Details in this respect are given below: 
                                                           
71  Devanahalli (164 cases) and Dodaballapura (56 cases) Taluks between 2014 and 2016. 
72  Dodaballapura Taluk. 
73  Dodaballapura Taluk. 
74  Dodaballapura Taluk. 
Whether regularisation for dwelling purposes was as per the stipulated 
conditions/provisions? 
Reviewed all 397 cases under Section 94 C and 140 files out of 529 files of 
land grants under Section 94 CC approved by the Tahsildars (b etween 
October  2014 and March 2017) for issue of provisional grant order /Demand 
Notice. 
Discrepancies like short collection of cost, non -collection of conversion/  
compounding fine and grant of excess built -up area were noticed in 332 
cases under Section 94C. 
There were 14 applications under Section 94CC where built up area was in 
excess of 600 sq.ft. These cases were not evicted. 
Short collection of cost of land 
of ` 24.38 lakh  in 2 2071 cases. 
(Section 94C). 
Guidance value for agricultural land was 
collected in 220 cases instead of Site rate. 
Further, in 20 cases, though the Sites 
were having roads on two sides, 
additional 10 per cent of the GV was not 
levied and collected 
Non-collection of conversion 
fine/compounding fee  of ` 3.86 
lakh in 5672 cases.  
(Section 94C). 
Though land was utilised for residential 
purpose, conversion fine /compounding 
fee applicable was not collected. 
Excess grant of 8872 sq .ft.of 
land, costing ` 10.56 lakh  in 
3173 cases.  
(Section 94C).  
As against 23,640 sq .ft. of actual built up 
area as applied for by the beneficiary, the 
Department granted 32,512 sq .ft. 
resulting in excess grant of 8872 sq.ft. 
Grant of 5,277 sq .ft. of built -up 
area in five74 cases.  
(Section 94C).  
In these cases , applications were not on 
record. 
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

57 
 
9.3 Non-repealing of the Karnataka Land Revenue 
(Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of Land) Rules, 
1970 
The Karnataka Land Revenue (Regularisation of Unauth orised Occupation of 
Lands) (RUOL) Rules, 1970, deals with grant of land both for agricultural and 
dwelling purposes. The person in unauthorised occupation of Government 
land should apply in Form I to the DC for grant of the land. No cut-off date for 
submission of applications was prescribed under these Rules.  
 
During the Exit Conference (September 2017), the Government informed that 
the repeal status of the said Rules was not readily available and wou ld be 
informed to Audit early. No reply was received in this regard (October 2017). 
  
                                                           
75  Bangalore (East) Taluk. 
Excess built -up area of 
6762.25 sq.ft. in 1475 cases. 
(Section 94 CC).  
In all these cases, applications submitted 
for regularisation were more than the 
permissible limit of 600 sq.ft. These cases 
were not evicted. 
What were the implications of Karnataka  Land Revenue (RUOL) Rules, 
1970 after insertion of Sections 94A and 94B of KLR Act and Rules? 
After introduction of Sections 94A and 94B, cases of lands under 
unauthorised occupation beyond the city l imits for cultivation purpose  are 
being regularised under these Sections  only. The last date for receipt of 
applications under the KLR Act was 15 July 1998. 
However, ‘Karnataka Land Revenue (RUOL) Rules, 1970’ was not repealed 
on introduction of Sections 94A and 94B under the KLR Act. This resulted 
in an o pen opportunity for people under unauthorised occupation of 
Government lands even after 1998 to apply for grant of such lands. 
Recommendation 10 – The Government may consider the necessity of 
the Karnataka (RUOL) Rules in the present scenario of encroach ments 
for agricultural purposes, and propose for its repeal in view of later 
laws, so as to avoid any confusion regarding regularisation of land 
under unauthorised occupation. 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

59 
 
Conclusion 
Land is a precious resource , which should be managed in a scientific manner 
striking a bala nce between the sustenance of environment an d the 
developmental activities.  It requires definite policies for the ma nagement and 
disposal of land.  This Performance Audit revealed the following deficiencies 
apropos the Audit Objectives: 
Audit Objective 1:  Whether inventory of Government land available for 
grant/lease is available and the transfer of Government land for 
private/public purpose by way of lease/grant is carried out through a 
clear, transparent and judicious process.  
Under the Karnataka Land R evenue Act, while the Karnataka Land Grant 
Rules 1969 govern the grant/lease of Government lands, the Karnataka Land 
Revenue Rules, 1966 govern the general administration of the Government 
land and impose restrictions on disposal of certain types of Govern ment land 
meant for public purpose.  It was observed that the Karnataka Government 
(Transaction of Business) Rules provided for all land grant/lease proposals not 
in accordance with the KLR Act and allied Rules to be submitted to the 
Cabinet for decision.  The grant of lands under the Karnataka Government 
(Transaction of Business) Rules in exercise of Rule 27 of the KLG Rules or 
otherwise is in direct contravention of the KLR Rules, which specifically 
prohibited the grant of such lands and thus defeated the  intention of the 
Legislature in protecting certain kinds of public lands.   
There was no strategic planning in identification and disposal of Government 
land. Databases relating to the lands available for disposal and also the lands 
already disposed as grants/leases were not maintained. Identification of the 
land by the b eneficiaries themselves, coupled with incomplete verification of 
the information regarding the land or the beneficiary, resulted in grant/lease of 
deemed forest/forest/forest buffer zone , land al ready granted to other parties, 
etc.  
Applications for grant /lease were not systematically compiled and hence the  
processing of the applications was not verifiable. A few  grants were made  
even without application by the beneficiaries. These depict ed lack of fairness 
and transparency in the transfer of Government lands.  No mechanism existed 
in the Department for evaluation of the extent of land required for the 
grantees/lessees which resulted in grant of excess/surplus land. 
Lands reserved for publi c purposes, which were specifically prohibited from 
being granted /leased by the KLR Rules, were granted under Rule 27 of the 
KLG Rules and using the provisions of Karnataka Government (ToB) Rules.  
Hence, the process of inventory management was weak and consequently, the 
transfer of land suffered from non-transparent and injudicious processes. 
 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

60 
 
Audit Objective 2: Whether system of pricing for transfer of land is 
adequate. 
The Government granted more concessions to Institutions than those 
prescribed in the KLG Rules without recording specific reasons. There was no 
uniformity in the grant of concessions.  
Incorrect adoption of Guidance /Market Value of lands resulted in incorrect 
computation/short-levy of the value of land  amounting ` 17.83 crore.  Non-
adoption of the principles under the Central Valuation Committee guidelines 
led to undervaluation of lands transferred . Besides, an ambiguity in the Rule s 
related to lease rents prevented field Offices from  raising demands correctly 
and computing arrears. 
Audit Objective 3 : Whether effective monitoring exists to ensure the 
usage of the land for the intended purposes. 
Monitoring of the land grants/lease s was not satisfactory and consequently  
resulted in non-collection of lease rent, non -retrieval of land after expiry of 
lease period and more importantly , locking up of Government lands with the 
grantees/lessees without being used for the purpose for which it was granted. 
Audit Objective 4 : Whether system f or timely detection and eviction of 
encroached Government land and process of regularisation of 
unauthorised occupation of Government land was effective. 
As per statistics maintained by the Government, encroachments were static 
and no additions were record ed (except in Bengaluru Urban District) after 
August 2013, which was found to be not in consonance with the public 
complaints made to the KPLC /DCs/Tahsildars. The Government did not 
formulate an Action Plan to resume land in respect of rejected applications 
under the scheme of regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government 
lands. 
Significant number of public complaints on encroachment of Government land 
pending over five years indicated lack of due diligence in the protection of  
Government lands. Further, lack of proper security to the evicted lands , and 
non-transfer of the cases of encroachment to the Specially Designated Court , 
etc., slackened the process of evictions. 
Action of the Department in regularising unauthorised occup ation of land 
contrary to provisions of KLR Act /Rules resulted in irregular grant of 
Government land. No mechanism was established to cross-verify the 
correctness of claims made by the applicants for regularisation  of land for 
dwelling purposes. 
  
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

61 
Hence, it is necessary that while the process of regularisation of unauthorised 
occupation of Government  lands needs to be swiftly completed ensuring 
fulfilment of all eligibility criteria, the system for identification and eviction of 
encroachment needs to be strengthened. 
     (Bijit Kumar Mukherjee) 
Bengaluru   Accountant General  
The (Economic and Revenue Sector Audit) 
 Karnataka 
Countersigned 
New Delhi     (Rajiv Mehrishi) 
The     Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  


63 
Glossary 
AC Assistant Commissioner 
A-G Acre-Gunta 
Bhoomi Project of computerisation of Land records in Karnataka 
BMVNTFSA Bharatha Rathna Sir M. Visveshvaraiah National 
Training Facility for Skills for All 
CVC Central Valuation Committee 
DC Deputy Commissioner 
DCB Demand, Collection and Balance 
DPAR Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms 
Department of Personnel and Training 
Gomala Government land reserved for pasture of animals 
Gramathana Rural housing site land 
Gunduthopu Land reserved as Village Forest 
GV Guidance Value 
Hakku Patra Grant Certificate 
KG(ToB) 
Rules 
Karnataka Government (Transaction of Business) Rules 
Khuski land Dry Land 
KLG Rules Karnataka Land Grant Rules 
KLR Act Karnataka Land Revenue Act 
KPLC Karnataka Public Land Corporation 
KPTCL Karnataka Power Transmission Corporation Limited 
MV Market Value 
Phut ‘B’ 
Kharab 
Unassessed land reserved for public purpose, occupied 
by road, burial ground and water bodies etc. 
Poramboku Cultivable waste 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

64 
 
PWD Public Works Department 
RC Regional Commissioner 
RTC Right, Tenancy and Crop 
RUDSETI Rural Development and Self Employment Training 
Institute 
RUOL Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of Lands 
Saguvali chit A Grant Certificate which demarcates the extent of land 
granted to an individual 
Sendivan land Toddy Palm Grove 
 
  
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

65 
 
 
Annexure -I (Paragraph 3.1) 
Details of grants/leases  
Sl. No. District No of 
Grants 
Extent76 
(A-G) 
No of 
Leases 
Extent 
(A-G) 
01. Bengaluru (Urban) 28 155-06 10 284-05 
02. Bengaluru (Rural) 3 25-20 1 5-00 
03. Ballari 16 1767-34 8 101-25 
04. Belagavi 7 145-13 2 36-20 
05. Chikkaballapura 5 187-38 4 67-01 
06. Chikkamagaluru 84 209-29 2 7-00 
07. Dharwad 9 204-03 1 0-05 
08. Kalaburgi 6 99-29 2 1348-28 
09. Mysuru 3 17-05 1 0-15 
10. Ramanagara 28 276-34 4 16-26 
11. Tumakuru 28 689-00 8 5-08 
 Total 21777 3778-11 43 1872.13 
 
  
                                                           
76 Includes approximately 1492  acres granted to various mining lease holders for 
compensatory afforestation purposes and lands for Government housing schemes. 
77 Only two cases relate to grant of land for agricultural purposes. 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of Unauthorised Occupation of 
Government lands  

66 
 
Annexure – II (Paragraph 4.1) 
Grant of land without application by the beneficiary 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Lessee/Grantee District Taluk Village Survey 
No 
Extent - 
Acre 
Extent - 
Gunta 
Purpose of Grant Remarks 
1 Arya Ediga Sanga, Sira Tumakuru Sira Kallikote 71 & 72 0 20 Education/ public Without application 
2 Agnivansha Kshathriya (thigalara) kshemabivriddi Sanga Tumakuru Sira Kallikote 71 & 72 0 20 Student Hostel   
3 Sri. Sevalal Banjara (Lambani) kshemabivriddi Sanga Tumakuru Sira Kallikote 71 & 72 0 20 Education/ public Without application 
4 Balija Mahila Sanga Tumakuru Sira Kallikote 71 & 72 0 20 Education/ public   
5 Valmiki Nayaka Sanga Tumakuru Sira Kallikote 71 & 72 0 20 Education/ public Without application 
6 Kumbararasanga Tumakuru Sira Kallikote 71 & 72 0 20 Education Newly inserted in RD 
7 Ramakrishna Vivekananda Ashrama, Tumakuruu Tumakuru Sira Kallikote 71 & 72 4 1 Education Without application 
8 Nandini Pattina Sahakara Sanga Niyamitha, Sira Tumakuru Sira Kallikote 71 & 72 0 20 Education/ public   
9 Sri. Chowdeshwari Medha ST Bidiru 
Kelasagararakshemabivriddi Sanga 
Tumakuru Sira Kallikote 71 & 72 0 20 Education/ public Without application 
10 Savitha Samaja Tumakuru Sira Kallikote 71 & 72 0 20 Education/ public Without application 
11 Sri. Lakshmi Ranganatha Adhijambavantha 
Vividoddeshasahakarasanga 
Tumakuru Sira Kallikote 71 & 72 1 0 Education/ public Without application 
12 Kunchitigara Sanga, Sira Tumakuru Sira Kallikote 71 & 72 1 0 Education Without application 
13 Chalavadhi Mahasaba (Arya Dravida) Tumakuru Sira Kallikote 71 & 72 0 20 Education/ public Without application 
14 Hallikararasanga, Sira Tumakuru Sira Kallikote 71 & 72 1 0 Education   
15 Kanaka Samskruthikavedikesanga, sira Tumakuru Sira Kallikote 71 & 72 0 20 - Newly inserted in RD 
 TOTAL  7 221 =12 Acres -21 Guntas 
NOTE: Kurubara Sanga, Sira, which applied for 20 guntas was removed in R evenue Department (RD). In its place, new grantees Kumbarara Sanga, Sira (20 guntas) and 
Kanaka Samskruthika Vedike Sanga, Sira (20 guntas) were included in RD. 
 
 
 
  
Report No. 5 of the year 2018 

67 
 
ANNEXURE – III (Paragraph 4.5) 
Grant of excess land to persons whose land were acquired for public purposes 
 
                (` in crore) 
Sl 
No 
Name of the Grantee Extent of Land 
Acquired 
Extent of Land 
Granted 
Extent of land 
to be granted 78 
Excess grant of 
land in acres 
GV / 
Acre 
FC of excess 
land granted  
Acre Gunta Acre Gunta Acre Gunta Acre Gunta 
 A. Bhadra Wildlife Reserve Project,  
Chikkamagalur 
 
          
1 M.S. Manje Gowda s/o. Shakaregowda 8 12 10 0 5 0 5 0 4.74 0.24 
2 M.C. Prakash /Channappa Gowda 10 19 10 0 5 0 5 0 4.93 0.25 
3 M.S. Manjegowda s/o Siddegowda 11 5 10 0 5 0 5 0 4.93 0.25 
4 Basha S/o. Sheik Moyiddin 6 0 10 0 5 0 5 0 4.93 0.25 
5 S. Subramanya s/o. Anandarao, Kum. Nireeksha 
G/o mother sumitraprasad, sumitraprasad W/o 
Anandarao, Sachhidanandanadig G/o mother 
Sumitra prasad 
49 35 10 0 5 0 5 0 4.93 0.25 
6 Girijappashetty 4 1 5 0 3 0 2 0 4.74 0.09 
7 Devamma 2 4 5 0 3 0 2 0 6.64 0.13 
8 Ganesh (puttaswammy) 2 35 5 0 3 0 2 0 4.93 0.09 
9 Beerashetty 2 33 5 0 3 0 2 0 4.93 0.09 
10 B.Fathima 2 0 5 0 3 0 2 0 4.74 0.09 
11 H.S.Krishna pujari 3 2 5 0 3 0 2 0 4.74 0.09 
12 Ningashetty 2 29 5 0 3 0 2 0 4.93 0.09 
13 Kanchamma 2 3 5 0 3 0 2 0 6.88 0.14 
14 Appannashetty 2 0 5 0 3 0 2 0 4.93 0.09 
15 Ningashetty 3 0 5 0 3 0 2 0 4.74 0.09 
16 Uddashetty 3 0 5 0 3 0 2 0 3.08 0.06 
                                                           
78  Land of one, three and five acres were to be granted in lieu of acquired extents of less than one acre, one to five acres and above five acres respectively . 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government lands  

68 
 
ANNEXURE – III (Contd…) 
                (` in crore) 
Sl 
No 
Name of the Grantee Extent of Land 
Acquired 
Extent of Land 
Granted 
Extent of land 
to be granted 79 
Excess grant of 
land in acres 
GV / 
Acre 
FC of excess 
land granted  
Acre Gunta Acre Gunta Acre Gunta Acre Gunta 
17 Honnaiah 4 0 5 0 3 0 2 0 6.88 0.14 
18 H.R. Sundara Pujari 2 0 5 0 3 0 2 0 4.93 0.10 
19 H.S. Annegowds 1 22 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.8 0.05 
20 H.S. Eregowda 1 29 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.74 0.05 
21 H.S. Dharmegowda 1 22 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.74 0.05 
22 H.S. Huliyappagowda 1 0 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.93 0.05 
23 Chamundamma, Suresh 1 39 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.8 0.05 
24 Sheshaiah 1 1 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.8 0.05 
25 Nanjaiah 1 1 4 0 3 0 1 0 6.88 0.07 
26 Subbaiah 1 1 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.8 0.05 
27 Shankarappa 1 1 4 0 3 0 1 0 11.01 0.11 
28 Ramappa 1 12 4 0 3 0 1 0 6.64 0.07 
29 Isamma 1 2 4 0 3 0 1 0 6.64 0.07 
30 Puttaswamishetty 1 0 4 0 3 0 1 0 6.64 0.07 
31 M.K .Lakshmamma 1 2 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.93 0.05 
32 Darmaiah 1 13 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.74 0.05 
33 Chariyamma 1 0 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.74 0.05 
34 Lakshmanmodaliya 1 0 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.74 0.05 
35 Premakshi 1 0 4 0 3 0 1 0 6.64 0.07 
36 Siddalinga 1 0 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.93 0.05 
37 Murthy 1 0 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.8 0.05 
38 Krishna 1 0 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.74 0.05 
 
                                                           
79  Land of one, three and five acres were to be granted in lieu of acquired extents of less than one acre, one to five acres and  above five acres respectively. 
Report No. 5 of the year 2018 

69 
 
ANNEXURE – III (Contd…) 
                (` in crore) 
Sl 
No 
Name of the Grantee Extent of Land 
Acquired 
Extent of Land 
Granted 
Extent of land 
to be granted 80 
Excess grant of 
land in acres 
GV / 
Acre 
FC of excess 
land granted  
  Acre Gunta Acre Gunta Acre Gunta Acre Gunta   
39 Ramapujari 1 36 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.8 0.05 
40 H.S. PuttaswamiGowda 1 0 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.8 0.05 
39 Ramapujari 1 36 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.8 0.05 
40 H.S. PuttaswamiGowda 1 0 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.8 0.05 
41 Meenakshmma 7 34 10 0 5 0 5 0 4.93 0.25 
42 Steevan AS rebelloa 10 39 10 0 5 0 5 0 4.93 0.25 
43 Annappashetty 12 6 10 0 5 0 5 0 4.74 0.24 
44 Basappashetty 3 15 5 0 3 0 2 0 4.93 0.09 
45 Snehanadiga, Hoysalanadiga 2 8 5 0 3 0 2 0 4.93 0.09 
46 S.H. Channegowda 2 38 5 0 3 0 2 0 6.88 0.14 
47 Hoovappa 2 0 5 0 3 0 2 0 4.93 0.09 
48 Shivamma, M.G. Gopalagowda 4 3 5 0 3 0 2 0 4.93 0.09 
49 Mulashetty 2 11 5 0 3 0 2 0 4.93 0.09 
50 K.R. Parvathamma 1 26 4 0 3 0 1 0 6.64 0.07 
51 Mujib 1 38 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.74 0.05 
52 Seethamma 1 25 4 0 3 0 1 0 6.64 0.07 
53 Smithanadiga 1 0 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.93 0.05 
54 Gangamma 1 0 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.93 0.05 
55 B.S.Shivashankara 1 1 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.8 0.05 
56 B.S.Balamuralikrishna 1 1 4 0 3 0 1 0 4.8 0.05 
57 Subbashetty, kalamma 1 11 4 0 3 0 1 0 6.64 0.07 
 
 
                                                           
80  Land of one, three and five acres were to be granted in lieu of acquired extents of less than one acre, one to five acres and  above five acres respectively. 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government lands  

70 
 
ANNEXURE – III (Contd…) 
                (` in crore) 
 
Sl 
No 
Name of the Grantee Extent of Land 
Acquired 
Extent of Land 
Granted 
Extent of land 
to be granted in 
acres81 
Excess grant of 
land in acres 
GV / 
Acre 
FC of excess 
land granted  
  Acre Gunta Acre Gunta Acre Gunta Acre Gunta   
58 D.P. Eshware Gowda 4 38 14 0 
 
5 0 9 0 
 
4.93 0.44 
59 H. B. Shakunthala w/o. D.P. Eshware Gowda,  5 16 
60 Shubada D/o D.P.Eshware Gowda. 1 10 
TOTAL 201 679 309 0 192 0 117 0   6.02 
 B. Yegachi Reservoir Project, Hassan           
1 Smt. Sushilamma W/O. Y.B.Padme Gowda1 12 15 10 0 6 7.5 3 32.5 3.90 0.15 
2 Sri. Y.P.Devaraju S/o. Y.P.Devaraju 4 13 6 0 4 0 2 0 3.90 0.08 
TOTAL 16 28 16 7.5 10 7.5 5 32.5  0.23 
GRAND TOTAL 217 707 325 7.5 202 7.5 122 32.5  6.25 
 
 
 
  
                                                           
81  Land of one, three and five acres were to be granted in lieu of acquired extents of less than one acre, one to five acres and above five acres respectively. 
Report No. 5 of the year 2018 

71 
 
 
Annexure -IV (Paragraph 5.1 and footnote no. 37) 
Cases of Grant/leases of prohibited lands 
 
Sl. 
No. Nature of land 
Reference to provisions 
of the KLR Act/Rules 
prohibiting the grant 
No. of cases 
granted/leased 
Extent of 
land 
involved 
(A-G) 
Purpose 
1 
Phut B Kharab  (water bodies, 
Gunduthopu, crematory, burial 
ground, etc.) 
108-I of KLR Rules, 1966, 
Court Judgments 61 283-16 Golf course, stone crushing, 
KPTCL, Charitable, Residential. 
2 Gomala 
High Court Order dt. 
18.11.2006, Govt Circular 
2009 and 2011, Rule 97(5) 
of KLR Rules, 1966 
10 169-16 Education, Industry and community 
Bhavans, gurupeeta, Hospital. 
3 Lands within municipal limits 
Rule 10(2) and 22A of 
KLG Rules, 1969, Rule 
108-I of KLR Rules, 1966 
25 204-14 
Commercial, Petrol pump, 
education, Bus depot, Hospital, 
playground, Political party Bhavan, 
private purpose, Agriculture. 
 TOTAL  96 657-06  
 
  
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government lands  

72 
 
      Annexure - V (Paragraph 6.1.1) 
Grant of concession without application by beneficiary 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Beneficiary/purpose of grant District/Taluk/Village Survey 
No. 
Extent  
A-G 
Percentage of 
value fixed in 
Government 
order 
GV per 
acre 
MV per 
acre 
Monetary 
impact 
1 M/s. Mahatma Gandhi Vidya 
Peetha trust/Educational 
 
Ramanagaram/Kanakapura
/Devarakaggalahalli 
72 &78 5-7 100% of GV 0.80 0.95 5.69 
 Monetary impact calculated at double the MV for land locked property. 
 
2 M/s. Karnataka Education 
Board/ 
Educational 
Dharwad/Dharwad/ 
Dharwad 
CTS 
134/1 
6-19 50% of GV 0.51 NA 1.65 
 Monetary impact calculated at 50 per cent of GV. 
 
3 M/s. Rastrothanaparishath/ 
Goshala 
Bengaluru Rural/ 
Dodaballapura/ 
Kelagina 
Naikarandalli 
5 50-0 30% of GV 0.10 NA 5.59 
47 26-3 20% of GV 
 
Monetary impact calculated at full GV. 
 
4 M/s. Krishna Sevashrama 
Trust/ 
Hospital 
 
Bengaluru Urban/ 
Bengaluru East/ 
Munnekolala 
36 2-0 Free of cost 1.50 3.00 6.00 
 Monetary impact calculated at full Market Value. 
 
 Total   89-29    18.93 
 
  
Report No. 5 of the year 2018 

73 
 
Annexure – VI (Paragraph 6.1.2) 
Grant of excess concession 
(` in Crore) 
Sl.No
. 
Name of the Lessee/Grantee Extent/Survey 
No/Village/Taluk/District 
Grant or 
lease 
Rule 
under 
which 
granted 
Purpose of 
Lease/ 
Grant. 
Percentage 
of value 
fixed in 
Government 
Order 
Amount 
levied 
Leviable 
as per 
rules 
Short 
levy 
1 M/s. Srinikethan trust 04-00 (A-G), Survey No.108, 
Gunjur, Bengaluru East Taluk, 
Bengaluru Urban 
Grant 21 Educational 25% of GV 1.00 4.00 3.00 
2 M/s. Srinivasa Educational 
and Charitable trust 
13-00 (A-G), Survey No. 15, 
Chikkabanavara, Bengaluru South 
Taluk, Bengaluru Urban 
Grant 21 Educational 50% of GV 4.23 8.45 4.22 
3 M/s. Swamy Vivekananda 
Vidya Niketana, 
03-30 (A-G), Survey No. 63, 
Yedavanahalli, Anekal Taluk, 
Bengaluru Urban 
Grant 21 Educational 50% of GV 2.34 4.68 2.34 
4 M/s. Matha 
Amritanandamayi Math 
25-00 (A-G), Survey No. 41, 
Kanaminike, Bengaluru South 
Taluk, Bengaluru Urban 
Grant 21 Hospital 
cum 
Medical 
College 
30% of GV 6.00 25.00 19.00 
5 M/s. Mithic Society  10-00 (A-G), Survey No. 79, 
Avalahalli, Bengaluru South 
Taluk, Bengaluru Urban 
Grant 21 Educational 30% of GV 1.80 8.00 6.20 
6 SriJanaseva Vishwasta 
Mandali 
06-00 (A-G), Survey No. 19, 
Channenahalli, Bengaluru South 
Taluk, Bengaluru Urban 
Grant 21 Educational 25% of GV 0.67 2.70 2.03 
7 M/s. Mahatma Gandhi Vidya 
Peetha 
05-07 (A-G), Survey No. 72 & 78, 
Devarakaggalahalli, Kanakapura, 
Ramanagara 
Grant 21 Educational 100% of GV  4.14 9.94 5.80 
8 Karnataka Sanskrit 
University 
100-00 (A-G), Survey No. 40, 
Surappanahalli and Thippasandra, 
Magadi, Ramanagara 
Grant 20(1)(c ) Educational NA 0 2.25 2.25 
9 M/s. Vishwachethana 
Kuvempu Adyathmika 
Kendra 
10-00 (A-G), Survey No. 67, 
Abburu, Channapatna Taluk, 
Ramanagaram 
Grant 21 Educational 30% of GV 0.05 0.18 0.13 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government lands  

74 
 
Annexure – VI (Contd…) 
       (` in Crore) 
Sl.No
. 
Name of the 
Lessee/Grantee 
Extent/Survey 
No/Village/Taluk/District 
Grant or 
lease 
Rule 
under 
which 
granted 
Purpose of 
Lease/ 
Grant. 
Percentage 
of value 
fixed in 
Government 
Order 
Amount 
levied 
 
Leviable 
as per 
rules 
 
Short 
levy 
10 Panchasheela Welfare 
Association 
09-00 (A-G), Survey No. 182, 
Kumbalgodu, Bengaluru South 
Taluk, Bengaluru Urban 
Grant 21 Educational 50% of GV 0.90 7.20 6.30 
11 to 
22 
12 institutions 10-01 (A-G), Survey No. 71&72, 
Kallikote , Sira Taluk, Tumakuru 
Grant 21 Educational 
and Students 
hostel 
10% of GV 0.19 0.96 0.77 
23 M/s. Shri Dohar 
Kakkayyajnanapeetavrad
hashram 
1367.90 smt, Survey No. CTS 
4958, Gokak, Gokak Taluk, 
Belgaum 
Grant 21 Educational 10% of GV 0.02 0.23 0.21 
24 M/s. Karnataka 
Adijambava Social and 
Educational 
25-00 (A-G), Survey No. 100, 
Dasanapura, Bengaluru North 
Taluk, Bengaluru Urban 
Grant 21 Medical 
College 
1 lakh per 
Acre 
0.25 3.75 3.50 
25 Y A N Charitable Trust 03-00 (A-G), Survey No. 21, 
Hasahalli , Bengaluru North 
Additional Taluk, Bengaluru 
Urban 
Grant 21 Educational 50% of GV 0.75 2.55 1.80 
26 Y A N Charitable Trust 04-24 (A-G), Survey No. 21, 
Hasahalli , Bengaluru North 
Additional Taluk, Bengaluru 
Urban 
Grant 21 Educational 50% of GV 0.57 4.60 4.03 
27 M/s. Ramakrishna 
Vivekananda Ashram  
16-36 (A-G), Survey No. 1192, 
Raichur, Raichur Taluk, Raichur 
Grant 21 Educational 
and 
Charitable 
50% of GV 0.33 1.01 0.68 
28 M/s. Karnataka 
Education Board, 
06-19 (A-G), Survey No. 134/1 
CTS, Dharwad, Dharwad Taluk, 
Dharwad 
Grant 21 Educational 50% of GV 1.65 8.96 7.31 
29 M/s. Vivekananda 
Vidyavardhaka Sangha, 
Puttur 
53-28 (A-G), Puttur, Puttur Taluk, 
Dakshina Kannada 
Grant 21 Educational 25% of GV 7.06 28.28 21.22 
Report No. 5 of the year 2018 

75 
 
Annexure – VI (Contd…) 
        (` in Crore) 
Sl.No
. 
Name of the 
Lessee/Grantee 
Extent/Survey 
No/Village/Taluk/District 
Grant or 
lease 
Rule 
under 
which 
granted 
Purpose of 
Lease/ 
Grant. 
Percentage 
of value 
fixed in 
Government 
Order 
Amount 
levied 
 
Leviable 
as per 
rules 
 
Short 
levy 
30 M/s. Buddist Monks 
Charitable Trust(R) 
25-00 (A-G), Uttuvalli, 
Chamarajnagar Taluk, 
Chamarajanagar 
Grant 20 Educational 50% of GV 0.97 1.94 0.97 
31 M/s. BMVNTFSA 
Bharatha Rathna Sir M. 
Visveshvaraiah National 
Training Facility for 
Skills for All  
10-00 (A-G), Survey No. 28, 
Angatti , Chickballapura Taluk, 
Chickballapura 
Grant 21 Educational NA 0 1.20 1.20 
32 International institute of 
Pali, Sanskrit and 
Comparative Philosophy 
Trust, Gulbarga Sanskrit 
University 
19-00 (A-G), Survey No. 88/1, 
Gulbarga, Gulbarga Taluk, 
Gulbarga 
Grant 20(1)(c) Educational NA 0 2.53 2.53 
33 M/s. Vokkaligarasanga 10-00 (A-G), Survey No. 130, Sri 
Gandada Kaval, Bengaluru North 
Taluk, Bengaluru Urban 
Lease 21 Educational 10% of GV 0.95 7.09 6.14 
34 M/s. Srinikethan trust 01-00 (A-G), Survey No. 108, 
Gunjuru, Bengaluru East Taluk, 
Bengaluru Urban 
Grant 21 Old age 
home 
25% of GV 0.25 0.50 0.25 
35 M/s. Krishna 
Sevashrama Trust  
02-00 (A-G), Survey No. 36, 
Munekollala, Bengaluru East 
Taluk, Bengaluru Urban  
Grant 21 Hospital Free of cost 0 6.00 6.00 
36 M/s. Nirmalananda Trust 01-35 (A-G), Survey No. 69, 
Kengeri, Bengaluru South Taluk, 
Bengaluru Urban  
Grant 21 Charitable 
activities 
10% of GV 0.19 0.47 0.28 
37 M/s. Ballari Youth 
Prayer Fellowship 
7320 Sq.ft., Survey No. 171, 
Ballari, Ballari Taluk, Ballari 
Grant 21 Religious   0.08 0.40 0.32 
38 M/s. Santha Sevalal 
Janmasthana Maha Math 
Samithi 
13-20 (A-G), Survey No. 213, 
Chennikatte , Honnali Taluk, 
Davanagere 
Grant 21 Religious 10% of GV 0.04 0.11 0.07 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government lands  

76 
 
Annexure – VI (Contd…) 
        (` in Crore) 
Sl.No
. 
Name of the 
Lessee/Grantee 
Extent/Survey 
No/Village/Taluk/District 
Grant or 
lease 
Rule 
under 
which 
granted 
Purpose of 
Lease/ 
Grant. 
Percentage 
of value 
fixed in 
Government 
Order 
Amount 
levied 
 
Leviable 
as per 
rules 
 
Short 
levy 
39 M/s. Buddha Bhoomi 
Prathistana 
02-00 (A-G), Survey No. , 
Doddabanahalli , Bengaluru East 
Taluk, Bengaluru Urban 
Grant 21 Buddha 
vihara and 
formation of 
Ambedkar 
garden. 
25% of GV 0.15 1.00 0.85 
40 M/s Vokkaligara Sangha 25-00 (A-G), Survey No. 167/P-
59, Agasavalli, Shivvamogga 
Taluk, Shivvamogga 
Grant 21 Student 
hostel 
25% of GV 0.23 0.41 0.18 
41 M/s Kurubara Sangha 25-00 (A-G), Survey No. 169/P-2, 
Agasavalli, Shivvamogga Taluk, 
Shivvamogga 
Grant 21 Student 
hostel 
25% of GV 0.23 0.41 0.18 
42 Sri Ramanjaneya Trust 00-18 (A-G), Survey No. 35(1), 
Golthamajalu , Bantwal Taluk, 
Dakshina Kannada 
Grant 21 Temple 25% of GV 0.0018 0.0074 0.0056 
43 Sri. Adi Chinchunagiri 
Educational Trust 
25-00 (A-G), Survey No. 83, 
Thippenahalli , Chikkballapura 
Taluk, Chikkaballapura 
Lease 21 Goshala 10% of GV 0 0.82 0.82 
44 Karnataka Government 
Secretariat Group-D 
Employees Association 
(R) 
15-00 (A-G), Survey No. 81, 
Belahalli, Bengaluru North Taluk, 
Bengaluru Urban 
Grant   Residential 50% of GV 3.00 18.00 15.00 
45 M/s Rajatha Complex 
Tenants Welfare 
Association 
64756 sq.ft built-up area, Survey 
No. 812, Chickpet, Bengaluru 
North Taluk, Bengaluru Urban 
Lease 19 Commercial Different 
rates per sft 
for different 
floors 
7.70 50.51 42.81 
46 Standard Brick and Tiles 
Company (P) ltd 
00-11 (A-G), Survey No. 144, 
Yelahanka, Bengaluru North 
Taluk, Bengaluru Urban 
Grant 22 Brick 
Factory 
100% of MV 0.48 0.96 0.48 
 
Report No. 5 of the year 2018 

77 
 
Annexure – VI (Contd…) 
        (` in Crore) 
Sl.No
. 
Name of the 
Lessee/Grantee 
Extent/Survey 
No/Village/Taluk/District 
Grant or 
lease 
Rule 
under 
which 
granted 
Purpose of 
Lease/ 
Grant. 
Percentage 
of value 
fixed in 
Government 
Order 
Amount 
levied 
 
Liveable 
as per 
rules 
 
Short 
levy 
47 M/s. Sterling Urban 
Developments  
01-32 (A-G), Survey No. 109-116, 
Seegehalli, Bengaluru East Taluk, 
Bengaluru Urban 
Grant 22 Residential 100% of MV 3.15 9.00 5.85 
48 M/s. Shree Cements 
Limited  
243-00 (A-G), Various survey 
numbers, Benakanhalli and Kodla , 
Sedam Taluk, Kalburgi 
Lease 22 Industrial Fixed amount 
of 10000/acre 
0.08 0.97 0.89 
49 KSRTC 07-04 (A-G), Survey No. 95/p13, 
SanthKadur, Shivvamogga Taluk, 
Shivamogga 
Grant 20(1)(c) Transport 0 0 0.28 0.28 
50 KSRTC 05-00 (A-G), Survey No. 416, 
Masige, Chikkamagalur Taluk, 
Chikkamagalur 
Grant 20(1)(c) Transport 0 0 0.02 0.02 
51 Smt. Usha Srinivasan 00-04 (A-G), Survey No. 129/2, 
Munekollala, Bengaluru East 
Taluk, Bengaluru Urban,  
Grant   Residential 100% of GV  0.25 0.35 0.10 
TOTAL 737-29 Acres-Guntas         49.7018 225.7174 176.0156 
 
  
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government lands  

78 
 
Annexure – VII (Paragraph 6.1.3) 
Short levy of land cost due to incorrect adoption of Market Value/Guidance Value 
(` in crore) 
Sl.
No. 
Name of 
Lessee/ 
Grantee 
Extent/Survey No/ 
Village/Taluk/ 
District 
Grant or 
lease 
Purpose of 
Lease/Grant 
Cost fixed in 
Government 
order 
Basis on 
which cost 
calculated 
in Demand 
Notice 
MV of 
land 
(Rs.in 
lakh 
/acre) 
GV of 
land 
(Rs.in 
lakh 
/acre) 
Amount 
to be 
levied  
Amount 
levied  
Short 
levy 
1 BMTC 00-34 (A-G), Survey No. 3, Ragihalli, 
Anekal, Bengaluru Urban 
Grant Transport 50% of MV Levied at 
50% of GV 
23 6 0.10 0.03 0.07 
2 BMTC 60-37 (A-G), Survey No. 90, Kallabalu, 
Anekal, Bengaluru Urban 
Grant Transport 50% of MV Levied at 
50% of GV 
45 22 13.71 7.37 6.34 
3 BMTC 03-30 (A-G), Survey No. 114/1, 
Boothanahalli, Anekal, Bengaluru 
Urban 
Grant Transport 50% of MV Levied at 
50% of GV 
35 15 0.65 0.61 0.04 
4 BMTC 02-02 (A-G), Survey No. 59, 
Dasanapura, Anekal, Bengaluru Urban 
Grant Transport 50% of MV Levied at 
50% of GV 
45 17 0.46 0.38 0.08 
5 BMTC 01-18 (A-G), Survey No. 216, 
Gattahalli, Anekal, Bengaluru Urban 
Grant Transport 50% of MV Levied at 
50% of GV 
80 30 0.58 0.20 0.38 
6 BMTC 00-32 (A-G), Survey No. 437, 
Bidarakuppe, Anekal, Bengaluru Urban 
Grant Transport 50% of MV Levied at 
50% of GV 
35 21 0.14 0.09 0.05 
7 BMTC 02-00 (A-G), Survey No. 17, 
Chinthalamadivala, Anekal, Bengaluru 
Urban 
Grant Transport 50% of MV Levied at 
50% of GV 
45 30 0.45 0.44 0.01 
8 BMTC 10-00 (A-G), Survey No. 97, 
Bukkasagara, Anekal, Bengaluru Urban 
Grant Transport 50% of MV Levied at 
50% of GV 
50 20 2.50 1.65 0.85 
9 KPTCL 02-00 (A-G), Survey No. 48, 
Mahanthalingapura, Anekal, Bengaluru 
Urban 
Grant Electricity 50% of MV Levied at 
50% of GV 
40 15 0.40 0.33 0.07 
10 BMTC 03-29 (A-G), Survey No. 43, 
Shivanahalli, Anekal, Bengaluru Urban 
Grant Transport 50% of MV Levied at 
50% of GV 
15 10 0.2769 0.2697 0.0072 
 
 
 
Report No. 5 of the year 2018 

79 
 
Annexure – VII (Contd….) 
(` in crore) 
 
Sl.
No. 
Name of Lessee/ 
Grantee 
Extent/Survey No/ 
Village/Taluk/ 
District 
Grant or 
lease 
Purpose 
of 
Lease/Gr
ant 
Cost fixed 
in 
Governm
ent order 
Basis on which 
cost calculated in 
Demand Notice 
MV of 
land 
(Rs.in 
lakh 
/acre) 
GV of 
land 
(Rs.in 
lakh 
/acre) 
Amount 
to be 
levied  
Amount 
levied  
Short 
levy    
11 KSSIDC 14-04 (A-G), Survey No. 
11/b1,2,3,4, 
Bidarakadahalli, Anekal, 
Bengaluru Urban 
Grant Industrial 50% of 
MV 
Levied at 50% of 
GV 
25.90 7.5 1.82 1.16 0.66 
12 BMTC 01-27 (A-G), Survey No. 
97, Kodlipura, Anekal, 
Bengaluru Urban 
Grant Transport 50% of 
MV 
Levied at 50% of 
GV 
20 11 0.17 0.10 0.07 
13 BMTC 03-14 (A-G), Survey No. 
58, Shivanahalli, Anekal, 
Bengaluru Urban 
Grant Transport 50% of 
MV 
Levied at 50% of 
GV 
15 10 0.25 0.18 0.07 
14 BMTC 02-00 (A-G), Survey No. 
366, Bidarakuppe , Anekal, 
Bengaluru Urban 
Grant Transport 50% of 
MV 
Levied at 50% of 
GV 
35 21 0.35 0.23 0.12 
15 M/s. Karranataka 
Rajay Sahakara 
Marata 
Mahamandala 
Niyamathi 
05-31 (A-G), Survey No. 
138 & 193, Theguru , 
Chickmagalur, 
Chickmagalur 
Grant  Godown 50% of 
MV 
Levied at 50% of 
GV 
6.49 3.93 0.19 0.10 0.09 
16 KPTCL 02-20 (A-G), Survey No. 
100, Shedbala , Dharwad, 
Dharwad 
Grant 110 KVA 
sub-
station  
50% of 
MV 
DC considered GV 
instead of MV of 
`14 lakh fixed for 
acquiring approach 
road to the same 
land granted 
14 0.95 0.18 0.01 0.17 
17 M/s. Devaraj Urs 
Trucks Terminal 
Limited 
56-13 (A-G), Survey No. 
128, 87 and 86, 
Anchettagere,  Hubli, 
Dharwad 
Grant Commerci
al 
50% of 
MV 
DC considered GV 
instead of MV of 
`7.72 lakh fixed by 
AC for acquiring 
land adjacent to the 
land granted 
7.72 2.63 2.17 0.75 1.42 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government lands  

80 
 
Annexure – VII (Contd….) 
(` in crore) 
Sl.
No. 
Name of 
Lessee/Grantee 
Extent/Survey No/ 
Village/Taluk/ 
District 
Grant 
or lease 
Purpose of 
Lease/Gra
nt 
Cost fixed 
in 
Governme
nt order 
Basis on which cost 
calculated in 
Demand Notice 
MV of 
land 
(Rs.in 
lakh 
/acre) 
GV of 
land 
(Rs.in 
lakh 
/acre) 
Amount 
to be 
levied  
Amount 
levied  
Short 
levy    
18 KPTCL 01-20 (A-G), Survey 
No. 11, Balagere, 
Chickballapura, 
Chickballapura 
Grant Sub-station 50% of 
MV 
Though SRO reported 
GV of `29.22 lakh for 
land abutting NH, DC 
considered `3.90 lakh 
even though the said 
survey number was 
on the service road of 
the NH. 
NA 29.22 0.22 0.05 0.17 
19  Kuvempu 
university  
40-00 (A-G), Survey 
No.273, kadrimidri , 
Chikkmagalur Taluk 
Chikkamgalur 
Grant   50% of GV DC considered 
`51780/acres instead 
of GV of `62500/acre 
NA 0.63 0.12 0.10 0.02 
20 M/s. Sundaram 
Clayton Ltd 
03-24 (A-G), Survey 
No. 190, Ballur , 
Anekal, Bengaluru 
Urban 
Grant Commercia
l 
Full MV DC considered `40 
lakh/acre as against ` 
70 lakh/acre reported 
by Tahsildar 
70 NA 2.52 1.44 1.08 
Value of trees 
assessed by Forest 
Department. 
  0.30 0 0.30 
21 Sri. 
Suryaprakash 
and Smt 
Vijalakshmi 
00-21 (A-G), Survey 
No. 13, 
Kundanahalli, 
Bengaluru East, 
Bengaluru Urban 
 Grant Commercia
l 
Full MV Levied on pre -revised 
rate of `400 lakh/acre 
as MV 
NA 600 3.15 2.10 1.05 
22 M/s. 
Ramakrishna 
Vivekananda 
Ashram  
16-36 (A-G), Survey 
No. 1192, Raichur, 
Raichur, Raichur 
Grant Educationa
l and 
Charitable 
50% of GV GV on date of OM 
was `6 lakh/acre as 
against `4 lakh/acre 
considered. 
NA 6 0.50 0.33 0.17 
 
Report No. 5 of the year 2018 

81 
 
Annexure – VII (Contd….) 
(` in crore) 
Sl.
No. 
Name of 
Lessee/Grantee 
Extent/Survey No/ 
Village/Taluk/ 
District 
Grant or 
lease 
Purpose of 
Lease/ 
Grant 
Cost fixed 
in 
Governmen
t order 
Basis on which cost 
calculated in 
Demand Notice 
MV of 
land (Rs.in 
lakh /acre) 
GV of land 
(Rs.in lakh 
/acre) 
Amo
unt 
to be 
levied  
Amount 
levied  
Short 
levy    
23 M/s. 
Mallikarjuna 
Swamy Vidya 
Samsthe 
01-15 (A-G), Survey 
No. 74, Urukere Majare 
Bovipalya, Tumakuru, 
Tumakuru 
Grant Education, 
social and 
religious 
Full MV DC collected 50% 
of MV as against 
Government 
direction to collect 
full MV 
0.03 NA 4.25 0.06 0.03 
24 KPTCL 19-00 (A-G), Survey 
No. 102, Kallukote , 
Sira, Tumakuru 
Grant  power 
transmission 
tower 
50% of MV CVC guidelines 
prescribe 
enhancement of 
50% of GV for 
properties abutting 
NH 
NA 17.55 2.50 1.67 0.83 
25 M/s. Taralabalu 
Jagadguru 
Vidyasamsthe 
08-00 (A-G), Survey 
No. 30, Ganapathihalli , 
Bengaluru South, 
Bengaluru Urban 
Lease Educational 
and 
Charitable 
enhance by 
50% every 
five years 
Rent for 2015-16 
and 2016-17 were 
not enhanced by 
50% as stipulated in 
OM 
NA NA 0.002
7 
0.0018 0.0009 
26 District 
Congress 
Committee, 
Ramanagara, 
00-05 (A-G), Survey 
No. 527, 
Mangalavarapete, 
Chennapattana, 
Bengaluru Urban 
Gant Political 
party office 
GV To be calculated at 
sital rate  and 
enhancement of 
40% for non -
residential purpose. 
NA Rs.988/sft 0.53 0.10 0.43 
27 M/s. Bagalur 
Agricultural Co-
operative 
Society  
00-02 (A-G), Survey 
No. 1, Bagalur, 
Bengaluru North 
Additional, Bengaluru 
Urban 
Grant Go down MV To be calculated at 
sital rate  and 
enhancement of 
40% for non -
residential purpose. 
NA Rs.13100/smt 0.27 0.03 0.24 
28 M/s. Kukkahalli 
Milk federation, 
00-02 (A-G), Survey 
No. 10, Kadukunte , 
DB Pura, Bengaluru 
Urban 
Grant Building MV To be calculated at 
sital rate  and 
enhancement of 
40% for non -
residential purpose. 
NA Rs.143/sft 0.031 0.002 0.029 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government lands  

82 
 
Annexure – VII (Contd….) 
(` in crore) 
Sl.
No. 
Name of 
Lessee/Gr
antee 
Extent/Survey No/ 
Village/Taluk/ 
District 
Grant or 
lease 
Purpose of 
Lease/ 
Grant 
Cost fixed in 
Government 
order 
Basis on which cost 
calculated in Demand 
Notice 
MV of 
land 
(Rs.in 
lakh 
/acre) 
GV of 
land 
(Rs.in 
lakh 
/acre) 
Amount 
to be 
levied  
Amount 
levied  
Short 
levy    
29 Y A N 
Charitable 
Trust 
04-24 (A-G), Survey 
No. 21, Hasahalli , 
Bengaluru North 
Additional, Bengaluru 
Urban 
Grant Educational 50% of GV GV on date of OM was 
`50 lakh/acre, the land 
was granted at 50% of 
GV. Hence 50% value 
of land works out to  ` 
1.15 crore where as 
amount levied and 
collected was` 0.58 lakh 
by DC. 
100 50 1.15 0.58 0.57 
30 M/s. 
Karnataka 
Education 
Board, 
06-19 (A-G), Survey 
No. 134/1 CTS, 
Dharwad, Dharwad, 
Dharwad 
Grant Educational 50% of GV Value of land towards 
park and de velopment 
charges was deducted. 
This was not necessary 
as the land was being 
developed as a single 
user piece of land and 
does not require release 
of land portion for civic 
amenities. 
86 50 4.06 1.65 2.41 
   TOTAL            39.8106 21.9835 17.8271 
 
 
  
Report No. 5 of the year 2018 

83 
 
Annexure –VIII (Paragraph 6.1.4) 
Non-adoption of general principles of valuation notified by Revenue Department for the purpose of Stamp Duty assessment  
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the 
Lessee/Grantee 
 
 
Extent/Survey 
No/Village/Taluk/District 
Lease/
Grant 
Purpose of 
Lease/Grant 
Percentage 
of value as 
fixed in 
Government 
Order 
Percentage 
increase for 
converted 
land as per 
CVC spl 
instructions 
Enhance
d value 
per acre 
as per 
CVC 
Amount 
levied 
Amount 
leviable 
Difference 
A. Grant cases  
1 M/s. Srinikethan 
trust 
05-00 (A-G), Survey No. 
73, Gunjuru, Bengaluru 
East Taluk, Bengaluru 
Urban 
Grant Educational and 
social purpose 
25% of GV 60 1.60 1.25 2.00 0.75 
2 Sri. Suryaprakash 
and Smt Vijalakshmi 
00-21 (A-G), Survey No. 
13, Kundanahalli, 
Bengaluru East Taluk, 
Bengaluru Urban 
Grant Commercial 100% of MV 60 6.40 2.10 3.36 1.26 
3 M/s. Swamy 
Vivekananda Vidya 
Niketana, 
03-30 (A-G), Survey No. 
63, Yedavanahalli , Anekal 
Taluk, Bengaluru Urban 
Grant Educational 50% of GV 60 2.00 2.34 3.75 1.41 
4 Karnataka 
Government 
Secretariat Group-D 
Employees 
Association (R) 
15-00 (A-G), Survey No. 
81, Belahalli, Bengaluru 
North Taluk, Bengaluru 
Urban 
Grant Residential 50% of GV 50 1.80 3.00 13.50 10.50 
5 M/s. Ramakrishna 
Vivekananda 
Ashram  
16-36 (A-G), Survey No. 
1192, Raichur, Raichur 
Taluk, Raichur 
Grant Educational and 
Charitable 
50% of GV 75 0.11 0.33 0.89 0.56 
6 M/s. Matha 
Amritanandamayi 
Math 
25-00 (A-G), Survey No. 
41, Kanaminike , 
Bengaluru South Taluk, 
Bengaluru Urban 
Grant Hospital cum 
Medical 
College 
30% of GV 60 1.28 6.00 9.60 3.60 
 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government lands  

84 
 
Annexure –VIII (Contd…) 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the 
Lessee/Grantee 
 
 
Extent/Survey 
No/Village/Taluk/District 
Lease/
Grant 
Purpose of 
Lease/Grant 
Percentage 
of value as 
fixed in 
Government 
Order 
Percentage 
increase for 
converted 
land as per 
CVC spl 
instructions 
Enhance
d value 
per acre 
as per 
CVC 
Amount 
levied 
Amount 
leviable 
Difference 
7 M/s. Mithic Society  10-00 (A-G), Survey No. 
79, Avalahalli, Bengaluru 
North Additional Taluk, 
Bengaluru Urban 
Grant Educational 30% of GV 60 0.96 1.80 2.88 1.08 
8 M/s. Vivekananda 
Vidyavardhaka 
Sangha, Puttur 
53-28 (A-G), Survey No 
Puttur, Puttur Taluk, 
Dakshina Kannada 
Grant Educational 50% of GV 60 0.75 6.29 10.74 4.45 
9 Sri Janaseva 
Vishwasta Mandali 
06-00 (A-G), Survey No. 
19, Channenahalli , 
Bengaluru South Taluk, 
Bengaluru Urban 
Grant Educational 25% of GV 60 0.72 0.67 1.08 0.41 
10 M/s. Karanataka 
PradeshaKurubara 
Sangha  
06-19 (A-G), Survey No. 
254, Magadi, Magadi 
Taluk, Ramanagaram 
Grant Kanaka 
Bhavana, 
educational and 
social 
100% of MV 80 0.43 1.59 2.80 1.21 
11 M/s. Mallikarjuna 
Swamy Vidya 
Samsthe 
01-15 (A-G), Survey No. 
74, Urukere Majare 
Bovipalya 
(siddaramanagara), 
Tumakuru Taluk, 
Tumakuru 
Grant Education and 
social activities 
100% of MV 60 0.07 0.03 0.09 0.06 
12 KPTCL 19-00 (A-G), Survey No. 
102, Kallukote , Sira 
Taluk, Tumakuru 
Grant Power 
Transimission 
towers 
50% of MV 75 0.31 1.66 2.92 1.26 
 
 
Report No. 5 of the year 2018 

85 
 
Annexure –VIII (Contd…) 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the 
Lessee/Grantee 
 
 
Extent/Survey 
No/Village/Taluk/District 
Lease/
Grant 
Purpose of 
Lease/Grant 
Percentage 
of value as 
fixed in 
Government 
Order 
Percentage 
increase for 
converted 
land as per 
CVC spl 
instructions 
Enhance
d value 
per acre 
as per 
CVC 
Amount 
levied 
Amount 
leviable 
Difference 
13 Sri. Pillekamma 
Maheshwara Temple 
Trust  
00-27 (A-G), Survey No. 
24, Singasandra , 
Bengaluru South Taluk, 
Bengaluru Urban 
Grant Religious 100% of MV 60 2.40 1.08 1.62 0.54 
14 M/s. Karnataka 
Neeravari Nigama 
Niyamitha 
15-38 (A-G), Survey No. 
16 & 57, Kusuburu , N R 
Pura Taluk, Chickmagalur 
Grant Public utility 50% of GV 80 0.03 0.14 0.26 0.11 
15 C. Sampath Kumar 00-18 (A-G), Survey No. , 
Billakempanahalli, 
ramanagaram Taluk, 
Ramanagaram 
Grant   100% of MV 60 1.04 0.29 0.47 0.18 
16 KPTCL 01-00 (A-G), Survey No. 
8, Vandaraguppe, 
Channapatna Taluk, 
Ramanagaram 
Grant Sub-station 50% of GV 75 0.44 0.13 0.22 0.09 
17 KPTCL 01-00 (A-G), Survey No. 
337, Virupakshapura, 
Channapatna Taluk, 
Ramanagaram 
Grant Sub-station 50% of GV 75 0.07 0.02 0.03 0.01 
18 KPTCL 01-06 (A-G), Survey No. 
30, Shivanasandra, Magadi 
Taluk, Ramanagaram 
Grant Sub-station 50% of GV 75 0.18 0.06 0.10 0.04 
19 
 
KPTCL 02-00 (A-G), Survey No. 
127, Srigiripura, Magadi 
Taluk, Ramanagaram 
Grant Sub-station 50% of GV 75 0.18 0.10 0.18 0.08 
 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government lands  

86 
 
Annexure –VIII (Contd…) 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the 
Lessee/Grantee 
 
 
Extent/Survey 
No/Village/Taluk/District 
Lease/
Grant 
Purpose of 
Lease/Grant 
Percentage 
of value as 
fixed in 
Government 
Order 
Percentage 
increase for 
converted 
land as per 
CVC spl 
instructions 
Enhance
d value 
per acre 
as per 
CVC 
Amount 
levied 
Amount 
leviable 
Difference 
20 KPTCL 02-00 (A-G), Survey No. 
83, Bijjahalli, Kanakapura 
Taluk, Ramanagaram 
Grant Sub-station 50% of GV 75 0.07 0.04 0.07 0.03 
21 KPTCL 00-39 (A-G), Survey No. 
114, Acchalu, Kanakapura 
Taluk, Ramanagaram 
Grant Sub-station 50% of GV 80 0.20 0.05 0.09 0.04 
22 KPTCL 00-34 (A-G), Survey No. 
68, Hukunda, Kanakapura 
Taluk, Ramanagaram 
Grant Sub-station 50% of GV 60 0.02 0.0076 0.0122 0.0046 
23 M/s. Vishwachethana 
Kuvempu 
Adyathmika Kendra 
10-00 (A-G), Survey No. 
67, Abburu, Channapatna 
Taluk, Ramanagaram 
Grant Educational 30% of GV 60 2.88 0.06 0.09 0.03 
24 KPTCL 02-00 (A-G), Survey No. 
40, Hallimaranahalli , 
Kanakapura Taluk, 
Bengaluru Urban 
Grant Substation 50% of GV 75 0.12 0.07 0.12 0.05 
25 KPTCL 01-15 (A-G), Survey No., 
Taluk, Bengaluru Urban 
Grant Substation 50% of GV 75 1.01 0.33 0.70 0.37 
26 ISKCON 27-38 (A-G), Survey No. 
55, Vasanthapura, Taluk, 
Bengaluru Urban 
Grant Heritage theme 
Park 
50% of GV 60 1.28 11.18 17.89 6.71 
       TOTAL 40.6176 75.4622 34.8446 
 
Report No. 5 of the year 2018 

87 
 
 
Annexure –VIII (Contd…) 
(` in crore) 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the 
Lessee/Grantee 
 
 
Extent/Survey 
No/Village/Taluk/District 
Lease/
Grant 
Purpose of 
Lease/Grant 
Percentage 
of value as 
fixed in 
Government 
Order 
Percentage 
increase for 
converted 
land as per 
CVC spl 
instructions 
Enhance
d value 
per acre 
as per 
CVC 
Amount 
levied 
Amount 
leviable 
Difference 
 B -Leases 
1 M/s. Gunjur Club. 06-00 (A-G), Survey No. 
71 & 72, Gunjur, 
Bengaluru East Taluk, 
Bengaluru Urban 
Lease Club 10% of MV 60 0.96 0.60 0.96 0.36 
2 M/s. KodavaSamaja 07-00 (A-G), Survey No. 
21, Hosahalli, Bengaluru 
North Additional Taluk, 
Bengaluru Urban 
Lease Hospital and 
Old age home 
10% of MV 60 0.80 0.49 0.56 0.07 
3 M/s. Narcotics 
Control Bureau 
00-25 (A-G), Survey No. 
39, Sonnappanahalli, 
Bengaluru North 
Additional Taluk, 
Bengaluru Urban 
Lease Social 10% of GV 60 5.60 0.22 0.35 0.13 
TOTAL 1.31 1.87 0.56 
 
  
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government lands  

 
88 
 
 
Annexure - IX (Paragraph 7.3) 
Non-demand of lease rent 
  (` in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Office No. of 
leases 
Amount of lease 
rent due and 
not paid 
 
Period from which 
not paid 
1 Tahsildar, Bengaluru North 16 527.29 1979-80 to 2017-18 
2 Tahsildar, Anekal 02 2.39 1994-95 to 2014-15 
3 Tahsildar, Channapatna 01 0.03 2016-17 to 2017-18 
4 Tahsildar, Chikkamagaluru 05 0.46 2011-12 to 2017-18 
5 Tahsildar, Chintamani 01 0.61 2004-05 to 2017-18 
6 Tahsildar, Bengaluru East 03 22.94 2005-06 to 2017-18 
7 Tahsildar, Kalaburgi 01 57.10 2015-16 to 2016-17 
8 Tahsildar, Bengaluru North 
Additional 
04 7.21 2006-07 to 2017-18 
9 Tahsildar, Ramanagara 02 04.29 2010-11 to 2017-18 
10 Tahsildar, Sira 02 5.16 2013-14 to 2016-17 
11 Tahsildar, Bengaluru South 09 105.84 2005-06 to 2017-18 
TOTAL 46 733.32  
 
 
Report No.5 of the year 2018 

89 
 
ANNEXURE X (Paragraph 8.2.1) 
Issues of Accounting – Encroachments not accounted 
 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Encroacher Taluk/ 
Village 
Survey 
No. 
Extent  of 
encroachment 
Acres-Guntas 
Purpose of 
encroachment 
Remarks 
1 Tumkur 5 private persons/institutions                  
(residence of priests of 
temple, Madhumeha Arogya 
Kendra,  Mahila Sweekruthi 
Kendra, Sri. Nagarjuna 
Pattina Sahakara Sangha, Sr i 
Shirdi Sainath Seva Samithi) 
and 2 Government 
Institutions (Hemavathy 
Canal Office and Sericulture 
Department) 
 
Tumkur/ 
Maralur 
52 11-9 Residential, 
Health Centre, 
Government 
office 
In the spot inspection report 
prepared (August 2012) for the 
grant of land to a charitable 
organisation, the report indicated 
occupation by two Government 
offices and private institutions 
for which no grant/lease records 
were available.  However, no 
action was initiated to probe 
further. 
2 Bangalore 
Urban 
M/s Volkkaligara Trust  Bangalore North/ 
Sri Gandada 
Kaval 
129 2-30  Educational  Government resumed (2012)  15 
acres land on expiry of lease 
granted to M/s Golden Valley 
Educational Trust. In the sketch 
prepared for resumption of land, 
it was indicated that M/s 
Vokkaligara Sangha had 
constructed and was running 
schools and colleges in the land 
leased to M/s Golden Valley 
Educational Trust.  Order was 
passed for resumption of 15 
acres without accounting 
encroachment by lessee of 
adjacent land or initiating action 
for removal. 
 
 
 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government lands  

90 
 
ANNEXURE X (Contd……) 
 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Encroacher Taluk/ 
Village 
Survey 
No. 
Extent  of 
encroachme
nt Acres-
Guntas 
Purpose of 
encroachment 
Remarks 
3 Tumkur Private persons Gunni/ 
Kadaba 
149 0-5 Agriculture (3/4) 
Shop (1/2) and 
Temple (2.5) and 
private purpose 
(1) 
 In the s pot inspection report prepared 
(June 2009) for grant of land to KSRTC, 
the encroachments were identified.  
However, these were not included in the 
Action Plan for eviction of 
encroachments.   
4 Bangalore 
Urban 
M/s JSS Mahadvidya 
Peeta 
Bangalore South/ 
Ganakallu 
14 0-18  Educational Tahsildar reported in March 2012 the 
encroachment of 18 guntas in the area of 
8 acres leased to M/s Omkar Ashram in 
Sy.No.14 while reporting on request of 
M/s JSS Mahavidya Peeta for grant of 
additional land in Sy.No. 14.   
 5 Bangalore 
Urban   
M/s. Omkar Ashram   Bangalore 
South/ 
Ganakallu 
14 1-10  Religious As per Tahsildar’s report of March 2012, 
Lessee M/s Omkar Ashram had 
encroached 1-10 apart from what had 
been leased to it and built a temple.   
6 Ramanagaram M/s. Siddalingeshwara 
Yogavana Bettagalu 
Seva Samsthe 
Ramanagaram/ 
K.G. 
Gollarapalya 
36 15-0  Religious Tahsildar had issued notice in 2014 to 
grantee to vacate unauthorised 
occupation of 15-0 A-G in addition to 
land granted.  The same was not 
included in the list of encroachments to 
be evicted and followed up as of March 
2017.  
7 Ramanagaram Sri. Premarangappa Ramanagaram/ 
Billakempana 
33/2 0-4 Not available As per Tahsildars report for grant to 
Shri. Sampath Kumar.  However,no 
details of action to evict. 
 
 
 
Report No. 5 of the year 2018 

91 
 
ANNEXURE X (Contd……) 
 
Sl 
No 
District Name of Encroacher Taluk/ 
Village 
Survey 
No. 
Extent  of 
encroachme
nt Acres-
Guntas 
Purpose of 
encroachment 
Remarks 
8 Bangalore 
Urban 
NA Bangalore East/ 
Challagatta 
16 and 
145 
0-35 Not available As per Tahsidlar Report to the Special 
DC, Enforcement cell that, there was an 
encroachment of 9 guntas in Sy. no. 145  
of Kodihalli village and 26 guntas in Sy. 
no. 112 of Challagatta village. However, 
no action was found to be taken for 
eviction of encroachment.  
9 Bangalore 
Urban 
 Shri. Prabhakar Anekal/ 
Bommasandra 
tank 
254 1-5    Based on public complaint,  Tahsildar, 
Anekal taluk confirmed encroachment 
and requested (May 2010) the DC, 
Enforcement, Bangalore Urban for 
assistance in evicting the encroachment.  
However,   there was no record of either 
eviction thereafter or inclusion  of the 
encroachment in the list of 
encroachments identified in the Action 
Plan for eviction.    
10 Bangalore 
urban 
Sri, Yellappa Anekal/ 
Guddahatti 
47 0-8 Not available After Tahsildar reported eviction in 
April 2012, the land had been re -
encroached as per public complaint in 
September 2012. No action as of March 
2017. 
11 Chickmagaluru Sri. B.T. Aurnkurmar  Mudigere/ 
Kolagodu 
19 7-07  Agriculture While processing the application for 
permanent grant of land , the Tahisildar 
reported (18.8.1995) that besides 
cultivation of 5 acres of land temporarily 
granted, the grantee had unauthorisedly 
occupied another 7.07 A/G of land. 
However, 5 acres of land was converted 
to permanent grant wit hout evicting the 
unauthorised occupation of 7.07 A/G.  
          40-11     
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government lands  

 
92 
 
 
Annexure XI (Paragraph 8.2.1) 
Joint inspection with Department – Encroachments not evicted 
Sl. 
No. 
District 
 
Taluk Name of the Encroacher Nature of 
Encroachment 
Village Sy. 
No. 
Extent 
Acre-
Gunta 
Remarks 
1 Bangalore 
Urban 
Anekal Doddapapamma & 
Chikkapapamma 
Agriculture Hulimngala 155 1-10 It was stated by the departmental 
officials that the encroachers who are 
Form 50/53 applicants are in possession 
of the land and cultivating.  Further, it 
was stated that  a case is pending in 
Assistant Commissioner’s Court. 
 
2 Bangalore 
Urban 
Bangalore 
South 
Islamia Institute of Technology Education Hulimavu 63 5-0 The land has been encroached by Islamia 
Institute of Information for Education 
Purpose. The Tahsildar has passed 
eviction order, but the college building 
which is on the encroached land still in 
existence / functioning. 
 
3 Belgaum Belgaum Shrikant Fakirappa Mahar 
Savitha Santhosh Kolkar 
Ashok Basavanni Kolkar 
Primary & 
High School 
Mastmardi 21 17-0 Nearly 220  people have applied under 
94CC for regularisation. However, in the 
progress report sent to KPLC it was 
mentioned as encroachment evicted. 
 
4 Belgaum Belgaum Govt. Primary Boys School, Jain 
Samudhaya Bhavan, Anganwadi 
Centre Basarikatti, Anganwadi 
Centre Shindolli, Govt Lower 
Marathi Boys School, Vithal 
Rukmini Mandir, Jal Nirman 
Office, Chaitanya Gram 
Sudharan Sangh School Building 
School & 
Marriage Hall 
Alarwad 241 6-14 Apart from G ovt school, there is a 
private school by name Chaitanya Gram  
Sudharan Sangha and Gomatesha H igh 
school in the said survey number. There 
is also an incomplete building of Jain 
Samudhaya Bhavan which is encroached.  
It was stated by the village accountant 
that the remaining encroachments belong 
to another village which  has been 
erroneously included in the said survey 
number. However, in the progress report 
sent to KPLC it was mentioned as 
encroachment evicted. 
Report No. 5 of the year 2018 

93 
 
Annexure XI (Contd …..) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
District 
 
Taluk Name of the 
Encroacher 
Nature of 
Encroachment 
Village Sy. 
No. 
Extent 
Acre-
Gunta 
Remarks 
5 Belgaum Belgaum Lalitha Mahadev 
Pujari 
School Kondaskoppa 1 3-0 Applicant has applied for regularisation of 
building under 94CC. However, in the progress 
report sent to KPLC it was mentioned as 
encroachment evicted. 
6 Ramanagara Kanakapura NA   Bijjahalli, 
Kodihalli 
85 1-38 The land is stated to be under encroachment for 
agricultural purpose.  Fencing or trenches were 
not found to be present at the time of visit but as 
per information obtained from the DC, 
Ramanagara encroachment was removed and 
fencing was done.  
7 Ramanagara Magadi Adjacent Owners of 
Lake 
Agriculture Uduvegere  63 46-07 It was stated by the village accountant that in 
Uduvegere Village, the lake bed has been 
encroached for agricultural purposes by adjacent 
land owners. Whereas some portion of the 
encroachment was removed and trenches were 
dug.  But still major portion of l ake bed is still 
under encroachment. The departmental official 
has stated that exact extent of encroachment can 
be ascertained only after detail survey is done.  
8 Ramanagara Magadi Adjacent Owners of 
Lake 
Agriculture & 
brick factory 
Belavadi  20 30-11 It was stated by the visiting departmental 
representative Village Assistant Sri. Nagaraj . N 
that lake has been encroached for agricultural 
purposed by adjacent land owners. However, it 
was noticed that a cement bricks factory was 
constructed and functioning close to the lake and 
the village assistant has confirmed that lake be 
has been encroached for construction of the said 
factory.  Whereas some portion of the 
encroachment was removed, still major portion 
of lake bed is still under encroachment. The 
departmental official has stated that exact extent 
of encroachment can be ascertained only after 
detail survey is done 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government lands  

94 
 
Annexure XI (Contd …..) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
District 
 
Taluk Name of the 
Encroacher 
Nature of 
Encroachment 
Village Sy. 
No. 
Extent 
Acre-
Gunta 
Remarks 
9 Bangalore 
Urban 
Anekal Muninagappa & 
Krishnappa 
Agriculture Chikkahosahalli 102 3-0 It was stated that the land has been re -
encroached for agricultural purpose and being 
cultivated. The said land is a Government lake 
10 Ramanagara Channapatna NA Agriculture Mylanayakanahalli 294 2-39 These lands have been re -encroached for 
agricultural purpose.  Village Assistant who 
accompanied Audit Team for spot inspection has 
opined that exact extent of encroachment cannot 
be ascertained without survey.  
11 Ramanagara Channapatna Mallamma D/o. 
Bettashetty 
Agriculture Mylanayakanahalli 500 0-20 These lands have been re -encroached for 
agricultural purpose.  Village Assistant who 
accompanied Audit Team for spot inspection has 
opined that exact extent of encroachment cannot 
be ascertained without survey.  
12 Ramanagara Channapatna Channegowda Agriculture Mylanayakanahalli 505 0-25 These lands have been re -encroached for 
agricultural purpose.  Village Assistant who 
accompanied Audit Team for spot inspection has 
opined that exact extent of encroachment cannot 
be ascertained without survey.  
13 Ramanagara Channapatna Kempaiah S/o. 
Marihyadaiah 
Agriculture H.Mogenahallii 207 1-31 These lands have been re -encroached for 
agricultural purpose.  Village Assistant who 
accompanied Audit Team for spot inspection has 
opined that exact extent of encroachment cannot 
be ascertained without survey.  
14 Ramanagara Channapatna Ramalingaiah Agriculture H.Mogenahallii 282 0-01 These lands have been re -encroached for 
agricultural purpose.  Village Assistant who 
accompanied Audit Team for spot inspection has 
opined that exact extent of encroachment cannot 
be ascertained without survey.  
15 Ramanagara Magadi Abddula Sharief 
S/o. Razak Sharief 
Agriculture Adarangi 90 6-0 Even though it was stated that encroachment has 
been removed on 15 -06-2014.  The land has 
been re -encroached for agricultural purpose 
(May 2017) 
 
Report No. 5 of the year 2018 

95 
 
Annexure XI (Contd …..) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
District 
 
Taluk Name of the 
Encroacher 
Nature of 
Encroachment 
Village Sy. 
No. 
Extent 
Acre-
Gunta 
Remarks 
16 Ramanagara Magadi Javaraiah Agriculture Banavadi 70 0-30 Even though it was stated that encroachment has 
been removed on 3 -04-2014.  The land has been 
re-encroached for agricultural purpose (May 
2017) 
17 Ramanagara Magadi Thimmarayappa Agriculture Banavadi 70 1-10 Even though it was stated that encroachment has 
been removed on 3 -04-2014.  The land has been 
re-encroached for agricultural purpose (May 
2017) 
18 Ramanagara Magadi Honnaiah Agriculture Banavadi 70 0-26 Even though it was stated that encroachment has 
been removed on 3 -04-2014.  The land has been 
re-encroached for agricultural purpose (May 
2017) 
19 Ramanagara Magadi Dhalathimmaiah Agriculture Banavadi 70 1-0 Even though it was stated that encroachment has 
been removed on 3 -04-2014.  The land has been 
re-encroached for agricultural purpose (May 
2017) 
20 Ramanagara Magadi Chikkathimmaiah Agriculture Banavadi 70 1-02 Even though it was stated that encroachment has 
been removed on 3 -04-2014.  The land has been 
re-encroached for agricultural purpose (May 
2017) 
21 Ramanagara Magadi Thimmaiah Agriculture Banavadi 70 0-35 Even though it was stated that encroachment has 
been removed on 3-04-2014.  The land has been 
re-encroached for agricultural purpose (May 
2017) 
22 Chikkamagaluru Chikkamagaluru Dr. Setharamma 
shetty 
Coffee 
plantation 
Kadavanthi 278 87-35 Though earth work has been carried out and 
fencing removed from the encroached coffee 
plantation, possession is in the control of the 
unauthorised occupant. The revenue from the 
coffee produce is enjoyed the occupant 
       219-14  
 
  
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government lands  

 
96 
 
 
Annexure - XII (Paragraph 8.3) 
Disposal of public complaints by KPLC 
Year Opening 
Balance 
Additions 
 
Total Disposal Closing 
Balance 
2009     1 665 666 93 573 
2010 573 780 1353 294 1059 
2011 1059 434 1493 177 1316 
2012 1316 143 1459 80 1379 
2013 1379 135 1514 17 1497 
2014 1497 152 1649 8 1641 
2015 1641 122 1763 10 1753 
2016 1753 110 1863 67 1796 
2017 1796 67 1863 7 1856 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report No. 5 of the year 2018 

97 
 
Annexure - XIII (Paragraph 8.7) 
 Disposal of dispute cases of Government land in the Judicial Courts 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Lessee/Grantee 
District Taluk Village Survey 
No. 
Extent 
Acre 
Extent 
Gunta 
Lease/ 
Grant 
Purpose 
1 Shivanna Bengaluru Urban Devanahalli Devanahalli 438 0 36 Grant Agriculture 
2 R.M. 
Venkataramaiah 
Bengaluru Urban Doddaballapura Huskur 44 5 2 Grant Agriculture 
3 Chikkasidde Gowda Ramanagara Channapatna Chikkenalli 44 2 28 Grant Agriculture 
4 Thimmarayappa and 
Kempaiah 
Bengaluru Urban Anekal Sonnanaya kanapura 37 & 38 4 0 Grant Agriculture 
5 C.K. Srinivasa Rao Bengaluru Urban Bengaluru North Kachohalli 71 4 25 Grant Agriculture 
           TOTAL  15 91 = 17 Acres - 11Guntas 
 
 
Grant, Lease, Eviction of Encroachment and Regularisation of unauthorised occupation of Government lands  