=

This Report has been prepared for submission to the Governor under Article

151 of the Constitution of India.

Chapter I deals with the findings of performance audits in Forests and
Environment, Narmada, Water Resources, Water Supply & Kalpsar and
Sports, Youth Services and Cultural Activities Departments. Chapter II deals
with findings on transaction audit in Narmada, Water Resources, Water
Supply & Kalpsar; Education, Roads and Buildings, Ports and Transport and
Urban Housing & Urban Development Departments. Chapter III deals with

the Chief Controlling Officer based audit of Revenue Department.

Reports containing (a) observations arising out of audit of Statutory
Corporations, Boards and Government Companies, (b) observations on
revenue receipts of the State Government and (c) observations on the finances

of the State Government are being presented separately.

The cases mentioned in this Report are among those which came to notice in
the course of test audit of accounts during the year 2010-11 as well as those
which had come to notice in earlier years but could not be dealt with in
previous Reports. Matters relating to the period subsequent to 2010-11 have

also been included, wherever necessary.

vii



E

This Report contains three chapters containing three Performance Audits, nine
paragraphs based on audit of certain selected programmes, schemes, activities
and transactions of the Government and one Chief Controlling Officer based
Audit.

The audit has been conducted in accordance with the Auditing Standards
prescribed for the Indian Audit and Accounts Department. The specific audit
methodology adopted for audit of programmes and schemes has been
mentioned in the Performance Audits. The audit conclusions drawn and the
recommendations have been made taking into consideration the views of the
Government, wherever received.

1. Water Pollution in rivers, lakes and ground water in Gujarat

The Performance Audit was undertaken to ascertain whether —

¢ Inventory of water sources has been prepared and whether the overall
status of quality of water in rivers, lakes and groundwater has been
adequately assessed;

¢ Risks of polluted water to health of living organisms and impact on
environment have been adequately addressed;

° Adequate policies, legislations and programmes have been formulated:

¢ Programmes for pollution prevention, treatment and restoration of
polluted water in rivers, lakes and ground water have been planned,
implemented and monitored; and

° Programmes for the control of pollution had succeeded in reducing
pollution levels in ground/surface water.

The State has not formulated any water policy specific to the State as it would
result in unhealthy competition among States in relaxation of norms or
industrial development. State had not identified keystone species associated
with each river and lake and existing pollution level. Government was still
analyzing contamination in lakes. Study of risks to seven wetlands out of 831
wetlands was conducted. Incidence of water borne disease had shown upward
trend during 2009-10. National River Conservation Plan was implemented, but
without conducting study on the level of pollution at the point of discharge.
Out of 170 Urban Local Bodies, 158 had not established sewage treatment
plants. Four major rivers were not selected for cleaning project. Monitoring of
the Sabarmati River Cleaning Projects was not adequate.

Untreated sewages, domestic waste water, slaughter house wastage, etc. were
discharged to Gorva lake, overflow of which resulted in further polluting Gotri
lake. Common Effluent Treatment Plants were established for Small Scale
Industrial units; but the individual industrial units did not effectively carry out



Ez treatment before transferring it to the CETPs. At CETP, Veraval, out
of 411 non-member units, one or other unit was discharging untreated waste
water directly into natural open drain without proper pre-discharge treatment
of waste water, which resulted in health hazards and environment pollution in
the surrounding area of GIDC. Big industrial units of Hazira released treated
water to the estuary of Tapi with high level hydro-carbon resulting in loss of
fish-stock.

Water Quality Review Committee (WQRC) was set up (2002) to function as
the nodal agency for compilation of reports, convening meetings of
implementing/testing agencies. But WQRC had convened only six meetings
(2003-11) and did not meet even once in 2006, 2007, 2009 and 2010.

(Paragraph 1.1)

2. Facilitation of drinking water supply in villages by WASMO

The Performance Audit was taken up to ascertain whether —

° Centrally Sponsored Swajaldhara Scheme (14 districts), State
sponsored Sector Scheme (11 districts) and Earthquake Rehabilitation
and Reconstruction Scheme (Kachchh district) could ensure
implementation and maintenance of ‘in village’ drinking water supply
network throughout the State;

¢ National Drinking Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance
Programme could effectively monitor surveillance of all drinking water
sources in villages; and

¢ State Government could achieve ‘Golden Goal’ of completing ‘in
village’ water distribution in all 18200 villages of the State by the year
2010.

The State Government could achieve water distribution schemes in 7932
(44 per cent) villages by 2010. In violation of guidelines, wells were dug in
private land benefiting the private land owners, who used these wells for
irrigation purpose. WASMO dropped 276 village water supply schemes after
their approval for want of social mobilization. There were delays ranging 18 to
45 months in rendering services of social mobilization, capacity development,
etc. by the Implementation Support Agencies. Testing of water by Field Test
Kits and feed back to affected villages, etc. had not achieved desired results.
Operation and Maintenance Fund meant for Swajaldhara was paid to Gujarat
Water Supply and Sewerage Bord by Government of Gujarat.

WASMO sent UCs for %356.51 crore on the basis of allotment of funds.
Mandatory audit of Chartered Accountants was completed only in 17 per cent
Schemes. There was incomplete reporting of misappropriation cases; thus
monitoring did not work efficiently.

(Paragraph 1.2)



छू Creation and utilization of infrastructure under Sports Authority of
Gujarat

The Performance Audit was undertaken to ascertain whether —

¢ Sports Authority of Gujarat undertook action to promote and develop
sports activities in the State;

¢ Sports Authority of Gujarat constructed Sports Complexes in all
districts with all modern facilities for indoor/outdoor sports under
“Sardar Patel Sports Complexes’ (SPSC) scheme;

¢ Adequate mechanism existed to monitor the activities of Sports
Authority of Gujarat; and

* Sports Authority of Gujarat drew up and implemented plans for
promotion of sports by acquisition and maintenance of sports
infrastructure at convenient places

The State Government had not framed any Sports Policy and training to
sportsmen was imparted on the basis of National Calendar of School Games
Federation of India. Coaches were deployed for administrative duties;
deployment of coaches was not with reference to the facilities created. Sports
Hostels were either not operational or intake was much less than their
capacity. Decisions taken in General Body and Governing Body of the Sports
Authority of Gujarat were not implemented.

Land for Sports Complexes were not allotted in five places and in three places,
uninterrupted possession was not available. Roads and Buildings Department
obtained grants for construction of Sports Complexes and expenditure
incurred and user department had no control over it. The services of the
architect engaged for construction of Sports Complexes were deficient; several
extra/new items were introduced and excess quantities executed.

(Paragraph 1.3)
4. Audit of Transactions

Energy Management of pumping stations of Gujarat Water Supply and
Sewerage Board

Out of 66 HT connections having contract demand of 200 KVA and above,
energy audit was done (2006-10) in respect of 13 connections (20 per cent)
only. There were 81 HT connections in the test-checked 12 Divisions, of
which in 15 connections, the actual demand was consistently less (2006-11)
than the contract demand. The power supply company charged Gujarat Water
Supply and Sewerage Board minimum demand charges (July 2001 to August
2011) aggregating to 71.42 crore, which resulted in avoidable expenditure on
Electricity Duty of the said amount. It was noticed that Gujarat Water Supply
and Sewerage Board was being irregularly charged Electricity Duty amounting
to %6.81 crore (2006-11). It was also noticed that power supplier levied Power
Factor adjustment charges of %1.20 crore (2006-11). Audit scrutiny revealed

xi



= power supplier wrongly classified GWSSB under category (a) though
these fell under lesser category (b) or (c) for power tariff resulting in excess
payment of fixed charges/energy charges of 713.14 crore in respect of 302 LT
connections.

(Paragraph 2.1)

Audit of transactions in various departments of the Government and their field
offices revealed cases of loss, infructuous and wasteful expenditure, unfruitful
expenditure, blockage of funds and other irregularities aggregating हैं 48.30
crore as mentioned below:

A case of under-realisation of premium of %5.56 crore on account of
reduction of the value of the land for the purpose of conversion of
leasehold to freehold.

(Paragraph 2.2.1)

Infructuous/wasteful expenditure and overpayment in Narmada, Water
Resources, Water Supply and Kalpsar Department (% 7.99 crore) and
Panchayats and Roads and Buildings Department (= 0.33 crore).

(Paragraphs 2.2.2.1 to 2.2.2.3)

Avoidable/excess/unfruitful expenditure of हैं 2.34 crore was noticed in
the Narmada, Water Resources, Water Supply and Kalpsar Department
(® 1.61 crore) and Roads and Buildings Department (% 0.73 crore).

(Paragraphs 2.2.3.1 and 2.2.3.2)

Unauthorised parking of Government of India funds amounting to
¥3.35 crore was noticed in Education Department.

(Paragraph 2.2.4.1)
Gujarat Maritime Board failed to recover its dues of 28.73 crore from
a licensee on account of interest on belated payments and deficiency in
wharfage not handled.

(Paragraph 2.2.5.1)

5. Chief Controlling Officer based audit of Revenue Department

The Chief Controlling Officer based audit of Revenue Department was
undertaken to ascertain whether —

Revenue Department effectively carried out the task of land
management, recovery of land revenue, registration of land documents,
survey, measurement and documentation of land records as well as
adjudication of land disputes and levy of stamp duties, etc.;

Revenue Department effectively carried out implementation of
schemes and programmes of GOI and State Government;

Revenue Department had an effective budget control in place;

xii



- Revenue Department had an effective accounting procedure in place;
and

¢ Internal control mechanism was effective to visualize all hindrances in
carrying out the day to day affairs.

There were persistent shortfalls in achieving Annual Action Plans. Surplus
land of 15,587 acres taken over by Government was not distributed among the
needy. Delays of one month to six months were noticed in 71 per cent
applications for changes in land records. A fund of %71.18 crore remained
unutilized under a Strengthening of Revenue Administration and Updating of
Land Records and National Land Records Modernization Programme.

Budgeting was unrealistic in view of the persistent and substantial savings.
Drawing and Disbursing Officers deposited funds allotted to them for specific
schemes in their Personal Leger Account. Several irregularities were noticed
in the maintenance of Cash Book by different Drawing and Disbursing
Officers. In 60 cases (nine DDOs) Detailed Contingent Bills for %10.58 crore
were not submitted. Out of Government receipts of 774,689 (October 2008 to
January 2011), 752,134 was remitted into Government account in March 2011
and %22,555 was not remitted (March 2011), Internal Audit was in arrears with
Revenue Inspection Commissioner (75 per cent), Settlement Commissioner
and Director of Land Records (six per cent to 60 per cent) and Superintendent
of Stamps (21 per cent to 100 per cent).

(Paragraph 3.1)

xiii



E

FORMANCE AUDIT

This chapter contains three performance audits on “Water Pollution in
rivers, lakes and ground-water in Gujarat”, “Facilitation of drinking water
supply in villages by WASMO” and “Creation and utilization of Sports
infrastructure under Sports Authority of Gujarat”.

FORESTS AND ENVIRONMENT DEPARTM

1.1 Water Pollution in rivers, lakes and ground-water in Gujarat
1.1.1 Introduction

Water is a prime natural resource and a basic human need. As per Entry 56 of
the List I of the Constitution, development and management of water is
primarily a State Subject.

Water is prone to pollution owing to presence of harmful material in excessive
concentration that makes it unfit for use. Pollution takes place due to harmful
substances like sewage, industrial waste etc. being emitted directly into the
water body from a point source as well as through contamination of ground-
water, streams and lakes from a non-point source. Ground-water pollution has
two sources, viz., geogenic (due to rock-water interaction) and anthropogenic
(caused by human sources like seepage of untreated water). While point
source pollution’ can be regulated and controlled easier, it is difficult to
monitor and control non-point source’ of pollution.

Government of India launched (December 1996) National River Conservation
Plan (NRCP) with the objectives of improving the quality of water of the major
rivers through preventive and corrective measures. NRCP envisages
interception of sewages directly discharged to the rivers, transmission to
Sewage Treatment Plants, its treatment and release of treated water into river.
It also envisaged establishment of Low Cost Sanitation for those slum-
dwellers residing nearby the river so as to keep the river clean. It also provides
for shifting of traditional cremation sites from river bed to crematorium in the
vicinity of rivers to facilitate pollution free cremation of dead bodies.

1.1.2 Audit Objectives
The objectives of Performance Audit were to ascertain —

¢ Whether overall status and quality of water in rivers, lakes and ground-
water had been adequately assessed;

Point source means, pollution created by human source like seepage, sewage, ete. directly discharged to the water
body through outlets

Non-point source means, discharge of pollutants into water body without outlets, like those from agriculture,
mining, seepage, sewage, etc. reaching from command area when it rains



Ez Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 Me

2011

Whether adequate policies and programmes had been formulated,
legislations enacted and effective institutions put in place for
prevention of pollution besides treatment and restoration of polluted
water at source and whether schemes formulated for the purpose were
implemented and monitored efficiently and effectively;

Whether risks from polluted water to health of living organism and its
impact on environment were adequately assessed and those risks
effectively disseminated to the impacted target group; and

Whether Common Effluent Treatment Plants (CETPs) were functioning
properly and whether the effluents reaching at CETPs and Final
Effluent Treatment Plants conformed to the norms.

1.1.3 Audit criteria

To achieve the audit objectives, following audit criteria were adopted —

Agenda 21 document of World Commission on Sustainable
Development of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, held in Rio in June 1992 to which, India is a signatory;

National Environment Policy, 2006; and

Guidelines for implementation and monitoring of National River
Conservation Plan;

1.1.4 Audit coverage and methodology

In pursuance of audit objectives, records (2006-2011) of the implementing
organizations’ were test checked during September-December 2010 and in
May 2011 to analyze —

quality of ground-water in eight sampled districts* ;

condition of treated effluent and its effect on water bodies in 13° out of
26 industrial clusters; and

implementation and monitoring of Sabarmati River Project covered
under National River Conservation Plan® (NRCP).

The audit methodology consisted of document analysis, securing responses to
questionnaires and examination of related reports/records at various levels.
Entry Conference (October 2010) with Deputy Secretary (Forest and Environment
Department) and Exit Conference (June 2011) with Principal Secretary

3 Secretaries of Forest and Environment Department, Urban Development Department, Water Resources Department,
GWRDC, GPCB and Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation

“ Ahmedabad, Gandhinayer, magadh, Panchmahals, Sabarkantha, Surat, Surendranagar and Vadodara.

5 Ankleshwar, Jetpur, Kadodara, Nandesari, Naroda, Narol, Odhav, Padra, Vatva, Sachin, Sanand, Vapi and Veraval

* Sabarmati River Project is the lone scheme sanctioned under National River Conservation Plan

2



Chapter I: Performance Audits

(Environment Department) were held along with representatives of other
concerned departments/authorities to explain audit objectives as also to obtain
response on findings.

1.1.5 Organizational set up

Forests and Environment Department (FED) coordinated activities of various
bodies’ involved in prevention and control of water pollution. This included
Gujarat Pollution Control Board (GPCB), a statutory body, which acts as a
nodal agency for assisting FED. Programmes for controlling water polution
were implemented by Narmada, Water Resources, Water Supply and Kalpsar
Department, Urban Development and Urban Housing Department (UD&UHD)
and Agriculture Department. They were assisted by Director of Agriculture,
Gujarat Water Resources Development Corporation (GWRDC), Gujarat Water
Supply and Sewerage Board (GWSSB) and Ahmadabad Municipal
Corporation (AMC).

Organizational Chart

1.1.6 Scope limitation

In order to examine the extent of success of the implementation of any
programme, proper documentation of activities was necessary. The
departmental officers were also required to make available these documents
for audit scrutiny. This report has been prepared within the scope limitation as
detailed in Table 1.

7 Urban Development Department, Water Resources Department and field offices under them



a had not
identified keystone
species associated
with cach
Jake and ९:
pollution level

2011

Table

‘cope limitation

Sr. Name of the Objective Remarks
No. component
हर National Public participation | No information was
Green programme to provided by Ahmedabad
Volunteers improve the Municipal
(Sabarmati aesthetics of the Corporation/Government on
River project area and to such a vital component
Conservation | check river bank
Project) erosion
2 Operation and | Assets created under | Records were not made
Maintenance Sabarmati River available to verify (i)
(Sabarmati Cleaning Project adequacy of resources in
River seven* out of nine sub-
Conservation projects; (ii) whether
Project) Government had allocated
the responsibility of O&M
to a nodal agency and (iii)
whether designated agency
took up preventive
maintenance and periodical
cleaning of assets
3 Monitoring of | Review of the Due to non availability of
Sabarmati project by three tier | documents, it could not be
River Committees verified whether monitoring
Conservation by State Steering Committee
Project headed by Chief Minister/
Secretary took place or
whether Citizens’
Monitoring Committee was
ever formed
Audit findings

1.1.7 Assessment of water quality at source and framing of policies

1.1.7.1 Inventory of water/pollution in rivers, lakes and ground-water and
assessment of quality of water

United Nations Agenda 21, to which India is a signatory, provides for survey
and identification of all rivers/lakes/ponds/tanks/ground-water sources for
preparation of an exhaustive list of all water sources and assessment of the
quantity of water available. The State was also required to identify keystone
species, which is so critical to an ecosystem that its removal could potentially
destroy the entire system, associated with each river and lake.

5 (1) Interception & Diversion (I&D) De-silting of sewer, (2) 1&D Western Trunk Sewer (WTS) Zone V Part 1, (3)
I&D Easter Trunk Sewer (ETS) Zone TV Part T including of sewer cleaning equipment, (4) Renovation of 4 Sewage
Pumping Stations (SPS), (5) Renovation of 3 SPSs, (6) WTS Zone V Part I and (7) Low Cost Sanitation (LCS)

q



i nce Audits

Government (Water Resources Department) conducted surveys to identify all the
rivers (1993) and lakes (2003-05) and notified the inventory of water bodies at
the end of each survey. The water quality-testing agencies’ like GPCB
identified existing scale of pollution'® in 26 rivers'', identified/quantified on a
regular basis contaminants and effect of industrial activities on quality of
rivers and ground-water. GPCB monitored pollution level of rivers/lakes
through bio-monitoring stations at selected locations.

Survey to identify all ground-water sources was conducted by two agencies
Gujarat Water Supply Sewerage Board (2002) and Gujarat Water
Resources Development Corporation (2006-07). District-wise assessment was
made and existing pollution levels of nitrate, fluoride and salinity identified.

We observed (November 2010) that water testing agencies had —

* not identified the keystone species or assessed pollution levels"? in
lakes;

* not collected information on the effect of human activities on quality
of water in rivers and lakes; and

* not assessed the level of contaminants against norms (Appendix-I) in
river/lake/ground-water.

Thus, the Government remained unaware of the ecological health of rivers,
lakes and ground-water, which could lead to deterioration of ecosystem
beyond redemption and loss of valuable species, besides affecting human
health.

During the Exit Conference (June 2011), Government stated that discharge of
industrial effluents in lakes was banned and since drinking water was supplied
from river and under-ground sources, testing of lake water for chemical
indicators was not necessary. In a later reply (September 2011) Government
clarified that GPCB was analyzing contamination“ in lakes. The reply of the
Government was not justified as discharge of untreated domestic-
sewage/industrial-effMuents to the water body would result in further
percolation and destruction of ground-water quality. Further, as mentioned in
para 1.1.12.1, the untreated sewage has indeed being discharged into lakes.
Moreover, apart from being different from its previous reply, the tests were

() GPCB (PH, Colour, Tempratutre DO, BOD, COD, Cll, 502, NO2, NOB, PO4, NH3N, TC, FC); (ii) CWC (PH,
TC, EC, Turbidity, TH, Ca, Mg, Cl, CO3, HCO3, Amonia, Nitrite, Nitrate, Silicate, Sulfate, Ion, Aluminium,
SAR, RSC, TDS, TSS, Phosphate and Flouride); (iii) GWSSB (Flouride, Salinity.
Nitrates); (iv) GWRDC (EC, PH, TDS, Temperature, Ca, Mg, Na, K, (03, HCO3, 504, Cl, F, 1६03. Total
Hardness); (v) Gujarat Engineering and Research Institute (PH, EC, DO, Turbidity, TDS,.NH4,N, NO2 + NO3, Total
P, BOD, COD, Na, K, Ca, Mg, Carbonate, Bio Carbonate, Chloride Sulphate, Fluoride, Brone, Nitrates, SAR,
Dissolved Solids, TCOL, FCOL) and (vi) Central Ground Water Board (Temrature, Colour, Odour, PH, EC, TDS,
C03, HCO3, Cl, NOB, PO3, 803, AIK, F, Hardness, Ca, My, Na, K, Fe, SAR, DO, Pb, Hy, Li, Se, As, Cu, Cr, Mo,
Cd, Zn, Ni, Ag, CO)

" Chemical indicators like fecal coliform, total coliform, dissolved oxygen and bio-chemical oxygen demand
Ambika, Anas, Bhadar, Damanyanya, Kolak, Mahi, Meshwo, Narmada, Panam, Par, Sebarmati, Tapi, etc. as
mentioned in Annual Report 2009-10 of GPCB

Like nutrients, water temperature, acidification, and pathogenic organisms which affect quality of rivers water
3 Chemical indicators like fecal coliform, total coliform, dissolved oxygen and bio-chemical oxygen and bio-oxygen
demand
* By tecal coliform, total coliform, dissolved oxygen and biologal oxygen



E Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 Me

2011

being conducted only in 19 out of 2094 lakes/ponds. Government also had no
information on the effect of human activities on the quality of water in
rivers/lakes and no assessment of the contaminants in rivers/lakes/ground-
water had been made.

1.1.8 PolicyNegislation/programmes to address water pollution did not exist

National Environment Policy, 2006 stipulates that environmental standards
cannot be universal and that each State Government may formulate stricter
environmental standards’? based on local considerations for addressing
pollution related issues.

A review of Water Policy of some of the States revealed that —

¢ Rajasthan State framed policy for optimization of water resources
exploitation and raising the level of reliability of supplies through
conjunctive use of surface and ground water; maintenance of water
quality at acceptable standards and reduction of water resources’
pollution by urban and industrial sewage; and minimizing adverse
impacts of water resources development on the natural environment
and on population affected by project implementation works.

* Karnataka State framed policy for water quality problems like
degradation from agro-chemicals, industrial and domestic pollution,
groundwater depletion, water logging, salinization and reducing the
effective water availability.

* Madhya Pradesh framed policy, which provides that while planning
projections, attention should be given for development and conjunctive
of surface and ground water and it should be made part of the project.
Availability of ground water potential should be assessed after every
ten years compulsorily and exploitation of ground water should be
controlled on scientific basis. The ground water should be utilized only
to the extent which can be recharged.

However, Government of Gujarat had not formulated any policy based on the
local conditions for prevention of pollution of rivers, lakes and ground-water.
While treatment of industrial effluents before its discharge is compulsory, no
programme had been introduced to prevent such pollution from agriculture.

Government stated during Exit Conference (June 2011) that separate State
policies in the country would lead to internal competition with other States as
some States may prescribe relaxed norms for industrial development. The
reply was not tenable as National Environment Policy, 2006 envisaged
formulation of State Environment Policy to achieve objectives as desired in
National Policy. Moreover, the question of inter-State competition cannot hold
justification in an existential issue like water pollution and environment
protection.

'S These stricter standards require concurrence of the Government of India

6



= of risks
to wetlands from
pollution of river and
lake water, was not
done

Incidence of water-
borne disease had
shown upward trend
during 2009-10

Performance Audits

1.1.9 Identification of risks

1.1.9.1 Identification of risks to environment not conducted

Gujarat has a wetland area of 27175 sqkm which sustains rare flora and fauna
besides being home to migratory birds during winters. To Protect thi
wetlands, Government was required to assess risks to wetlands'® due to water
pollution from rivers and lakes. No such assessment has been made as of
September 2011.

Further, Government had not identified major aquatic species, birds, plants
and animals facing risks due to pollution of rivers. Non-identification of risks
from polluted water to environment in a comprehensive manner could result in
irreversible loss of species and destruction of habitats as well as impairment of
the ecosystem.

Government during the Exit Conference (June 2011) stated that study of seven
(0.84 per cent) out of 831 wetlands was conducted by Gujarat Ecological
Education and Research (GEER) Foundation’” and study of 40 wetlands was
under consideration. Government also stated (September 2011) that a remote
sensing based inventory of over 200 wetlands has been done. It is thus clear
that the magnitude of base line survey of wetland was very low and much
remains to be done. Moreover, the focus of such survey is essentially on
ecological aspects and not on risks associated with water pollution.

1.1.9.2 Assessment of risk to public health not done

The National Environment Policy, 2006 provides that sources of social risk
from water be regulated. Thus, the Government was required to assess risks to
human health from waterborne and water based diseases, among other things,
due to pollution of rivers, lakes and ground-water.

We observed" that risks to human health from water borne and water based
diseases due to pollution of rivers and from presence of arsenic, zinc, iron,
mercury, copper, chromium, cadmium, lead, persistent organic pollutants’? in
rivers, lakes and ground-water was not assessed by the Government. Thus, the
negative consequence on health of people depending on these water sources
for drinking and other purposes was also not assessed. Details of cases
detected and number of deaths due to water borne diseases are detailed in
Table 2 and shown graphically thereunder.

* Usually lie in the proximity of human society and get directly atlected trom biodiversity point of view due to
human development processes like urbanization, agricultural intensification, industrialization, etc.

An autonomous Body of Goverament of Gujarat under Forest and Environment Department, yovemed by Board of
Governors chaired by Chief Minister; objectives of the body are (i) ecological education and research, (ii) creating
public awareness and sensitizing people about nature and environment, (iii) carrying out ecology, ecosystem and
environment related studies and (iv) promoting the cause of conservation
* Maintained by Director of Health
" Dioxins, furans, polychlorinated biphenyls, ete.



€ Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

Table 2: Water borne disease cases detected and deaths reported

|... Disease जज झ।
Acute diarrheal ‘Viral hepatitis Enteric fever Cholera
Year Cases | Deaths | Cases | Deaths | Cases | Deaths | Cases | Deaths
[2005 | 900231 32 |. 14272 19 |. 13197 ० iss 2
2007 638412 20 8141 110 12563 0 122 0
| 2008 | 567030 10 10051 94 12850 0 50 0
| 2009 | 646457 13 11099 97 15878 0 318 [|
2010 673455 0 16234 o 38775, 0 573 9

(Source: Director of Health, Gandhinagar)

Graph showing year-wise details of water borne disease cases detected

No. of water borne disease c:

45000 =

40000 $$ $m;

35000

30000

25000

20000

15000

10000

0

ae Enteric fever 1]
__ 08३ खाता HteuteDiarel diseases
saan
40000
5000 क्रणशशशणशरशणश"/िाओई 520000
$9 ञ000
200 2007 2008 २009 200 100 2007 2008 709 700
Year Year

Acute Diarheal iseases,

0000
soto
seta
«sooo

Viral Hepatitis szoeon

Ne. of water borne disease c:

(Source: Director of Health, Gandhinagar)

Thus, incidence of acute diarrhea requiring emergency medical assistance
remained very high in the State. Rapid response teams (RST) have been made
functional at regional and district levels to investigate all major water worms
and other objects throughout the year. The RST was responsible for proper
documentation of the cause of outbreak and to suggest actions to be taken to
minimize recurrence of such incidences. However water pollution continued to
pose a perennial challenge to the public health system in the State.

1.1.10 Planning/Implementation of pollution control programme for river
water

1.1.10.1 Implementation of the National River Conservation Plan

To ensure effective abatement of pollution and conservation of river water by
adopting river basin approach with the aim of ensuring water quality and
sustainable development, Government of India (Ministry of Environment and
Forest) launched (December 1996) National River Conservation Plan (NRCP).



Chapter I: Performance Audits

The objectives of NRCP were to improve the quality of water of the major
rivers” by —

Interception and diversion works to capture the raw sewage flowing
into the river through open drains and divert them for treatment;

Sewage Treatment Plants for treating the diverted sewage;
Low Cost Sanitation works to prevent open defecation on riverbanks;

Electric Crematoria and Improved Wood Crematoria to reduce use of
wood and ensure proper cremation of bodies brought to burning ghats;

River Front Development works such as improvement of bathing
ghats;

Public awareness and public participation; and

Human resource development, capacity building, training and research
in the area of River Conservation.

Before implementation of NRCP, Government was required to conduct survey
to quantify pollution caused by sewage/industrial waste/solid waste/agriculture
discharged by all towns/cities situated on the banks of rivers. However, no
study on the level of contamination at any discharge point was conducted by
ULBs or Government.

‘Map showing rivers in Gujarat State

(Source: Web-site of Narmada, Water Resources, Water Supply & Kalpsar Department)

2 abetment works in 167 towns along the polluted stretches of 34 rivers spread over 20 States



=z Report No.2 (Ci

il) for the year ended 31 March 2011

Domestic sewage is one of the major sources of water pollution especially due
Out of 170 Urban to rapid urbanization. Under the provisions of Bombay Provincial Municipal
Local Bodies, 158 had Corporation Act, 1949?! (as applicable to Municipal Corporations in Gujarat) and
mot ereated sewage Gujarat Municipalities Act, 1963 (applicable to Municipalities), it shall be the
Plans duty of every Urban Local Body (ULB) to make reasonable and adequate
provision for cleansing public streets, places and sewers. However, we
observed that out of 170 ULBs in the State, 158 (93 per cent) ULBs had no
facility for treatment of sewage. These ULBs discharged the untreated sewage
in the lakes (nine ULBs), ground water (18 ULBs), open land (46 ULBs), rivers
(40 ULBs), natural drains (26 ULBs) and sea creak (nine ULBs). Eight ULBs
diverted sewage water for irrigation, while in respect of five ULBs, actual

position was un-ascertainable.

We observed that of the 170 ULBs, 46 ULBs™ were discharging sewage into
rivers. It was also seen during audit that of the 46 ULBs, only six ULBs have
Sewage Treatment Plants”* (STPs) and treated sewage is being released into
rivers; rest were discharging their sewage untreated.

Government during Exit Conference (June 2011) stated that establishment of
Sewerage Treatment Plant (STP) by Jamnagar Municipal Corporation under
the Integrated Coastal Zone Monitoring Project was under consideration and
that 20 per cent funds of Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission
(JNNURM) would be provided for construction of STPs in urban areas.

The reply itself underlines the inadequacy of current efforts on the part of
Government as only 13 per cent of ULBs discharging sewage into rivers have
established sewage treatment facilities.

1.1.10.2 Major polluted rivers not selected under NRCP

Report of CPCB identified four major rivers” in the State as most polluted. OF
these, only Sabarmati river was selected for cleaning under NRCP. On being
asked, Government could not provide details either of the total amount of
contaminants flowing into its major rivers or of other polluted rivers, as sent to
Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEFF).

Principal Secretary, Forests and Environment Department during Exit
Conference (June 2011) stated that —

¢ Sabarmati river uniquely features high urbanization, high
industrialization and high agricultural activities coupled with lowest
per capita availability of water, hence it was chosen;

" Continued to be applicable to Gujarat State after re-organisation of erstwhile Bombay State (1960) and as amended
trom time to time by way of Gujarat Amendment Acts

This include GIDCs of Ankaleshwar and Vapi and Ahmedabad Urban Development Authority (AUDA), the
sewage of these were treated in STP/CEPT before releasing to rivers

* Ahmedabad, AUDA, Ankaleshwar GIDC, Vadodara, Valsad and Vapi GIDC

26 amlakhadi, Damanganga, Vautha (downstream of Sabarmati) and Bhogavo

10



है River Damanganga flows through Gujarat and Union Territories (UTs)
of Daman and Dadra & Nagar Haveli. While discharge of effluent
from the industries within Gujarat was being monitored, distilleries
situated in the UTs and discharging untreated effluents into river,
which were highly organic” in nature, required treatment facilities and
round the clock monitoring. However, these were not within the
territorial jurisdiction of the State or the nodal agency, the GPCB.

Government further stated (September 2011) that GPCB had prepared action
plan for improvement of the performance of CETP and thereby the quality of
the Damanganga river was improving. It was also stated that CETP, Vapi was
laying pipeline for conveyance of treated waste water into deep sea. After
commissioning of the pipeline, discharge of effluents into estuary zone of
Damanganga river would be stopped.

While not disagreeing with Principal Secretary’s, contention about the need to
clean Sabarmati river there is also need for cleaning of other major polluted
rivers in the State. The Government also needs to engage Dadra and Nagar
Haveli Administration in checking water pollution emanating from within
these territories.

1.1.11 Pollution prevention, treatment and restoration of polluted water
1111.1 Sabavmati river conservation project

Government in 1995 selected Sabarmati river for ‘pollution abatement
projects’ under the NRCP in Gujarat. The project was implemented in
Ahmedabad city alone. Urban Development and Urban Housing Department
was the nodal department and Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation (AMC) was
the implementing agency.

The sanctioned project cost of 7101.95 crore was revised to 93.83 crore and
divided into 13 sub-projects. All the sub-projects were completed (March 2008)
at total cost of $95.28 crore.

Of the 13 sub-projects, nine sub-projects costing %89.63 crore were taken up
for audit scrutiny. These involved construction of two STPs, three Interception
and Diversion projects, two constructions of Main Pumping Stations, one
construction of Low Cost Sanitation and one construction of Western Trunk
Sewer.

1.1,11,2 Belated completion of projects

Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation had created capacity to treat 730 MLD of
sewage, out of which 650 MLD capacity was being utilized and no untreated
wewage was flowing directly into the Sabarmati river (except in case of shut-
down of STPs). However, in Dani-limbda area, in absence of sewage lines,
sewerage was being by-passed to Sabarmati river through strom-drainage
pipeline.

?5 This required very sophisticated secondary and tertiary level treatment facilities

11



2 Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

Details of the projects taken up and their status are as shown in
Table 3.

Table 3: Status of projects under Sabarmati River Conservation Project

‘Name of the

Expenditure | Date of

Project incurred completion Remarks
ome Completed with a time over-run of nine months;
1 | Sewerag 28.60 28.13 | October 2003 | stated to be due to bandh calls (traders) and strike
Treatment Plant,
(transporters)
Pirana
126 MLD Time overrun of 13 months and cost overrun of
2 | Sewerage 28.86 3159 | December 22.73 crore; stated to be due to extra items/exce:
Treatment Plant, 28 2004 quantities (cost overrun) and prolonged riots and
Vasna delay in supply of raw material (time overrun)
Interception and Division of Western Trunk Sewer
Interception and Zone V Part ! and IT completed; no information
3 | Diversion projects 0.21 0.23 | 1998-2004 _| available on [&D Eastern Trunk Sewer Zone 1५
8 ‘ Part [. Completion certificates not found on record;
UCs submitted in 2008
cost sa 34 LCS units completed after delay of one year,
4 poe mnitation 0.02 0.01 September belatedly due to encroachment of site and threats
Project by local residents; only 28 LCS were in use
[व्छा__| उ6[_ 60.0 |

उ.7.44.3 Outcome on implementation of the project

The Government had not assessed whether there was measurable improvement
in the trophic”® status of Sabarmati which was a key indicator of its quality.
No information was available whether the Government had assessed
improvement in ecological or bio-chemical indices of Sabarmati after project
was executed.

We observed that sewage discharged from STPs was not conforming to the
norms stipulated by GPCB resulting in poor water quality of Sabarmati river.
Accordingly GPCB issued notice to AMC to improve the treatment level in the
STPs and to treat all the sewage generated from city instead of by-passing it to
river.

During Exit Conference (June 2011), AMC furnished status of Sabarmati at
Hansol bridge (entry point) and Ambedkar bridge (exit point) of the city in
terms of Dissolved Oxygen (DO) 8.9 and Biochemical Oxygen Demand
(BOD) below detectable level (entry point) and DO 3.9 and BOD 12
respectively (exit point) as on 15 December 2010. However, AMC was silent
about contamination due to presence of FCOL and TCOL in the water.

* Yearly fishastock across entire area or eco-system

12



8B I: Performance Audits



Audit Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

Furthermore, tests of river water by GPCB at Miroli pumping station in the
outskirts of Ahmedabad city, i.e. afier its confluence with discharge from
Mega pipeline of GIDC Industrial Estate revealed contamination of BOD,
Fecal Coliform (FCOL) and Total Coliform (TCOL) beyond permissible limits
as per the chart below —

TCOL wea
1 intry
Exit
FOL es
|

100 1000 10000 © 100000
(Source: Data furnished by Gujarat Pollution Control Board)

It may be seen from the graphic that the contamination of the river water had
increased alarmingly from BOD 5 to 87 (290 per cent), FCOL 23 to 4300 (860
per cent) and TCOL 93 to 24000 (480 per cent) after the exit point of the city
limit as against their permissible limits of 30, 500 and 5000 respectively. This
had enhanced the pollution level in the river even further, thus defeating the
objectives of the Sabarmati project. Reasons for non achievement of
prescribed results were not ascertainable from records.

The Government while accepting the audit observation stated (September 2011)
that —

* Since treated industrial effluents from four CETPs were not complying
with norms, the quality of discharge from mega pipeline was not
complying with the norms stipulated by the GPCB; and

* CETPs were upgraded and action plan was prepared to improve the
quality of the industrial effluents at the outlet of mega pipeline.

It is therefore obvious that Sabarmati River Conservation Project was taken up
without taking into consideration all the relevant factors. To that extent
planning and scope of the project was inadequate.

1.1.11.4 Operation and Maintenance of the assets

The life of Sabarmati River Conservation Project has been fixed as 20 to 25
years. It was, however, observed in audit that no records were available to
verify whether the Government had assessed the performance of the project
assets at continuous intervals to ensure their optimum utilization. As such,

14



Chapter I: Performance Audits

after spending 95 crore on the creation of these assets, the Government was
unaware whether the project was performing effectively.

1.1.12 Conservation of static water bodies
1.1.12.1 Discharge of untreated wastage/sewage in Gorva lake

Though discharge of untreated sewage or industrial effluents to any water
body was banned (1974), Audit scrutiny revealed that 10 Municipalities”
were discharging their untreated sewage in lakes, the contamination of which
could result in its percolation into and eventual pollution of sub-soil water.

The hutment -residents and slaughter houses adjoining Gorva lake in Vadodra
were discharging domestic waste water/untreated sewage/slaughter house
waste into the lake. Overflow from Gorva lake flooded Gotri lake” further
polluting the latter water body. Since water quality of Gotri lake had not been
tested, pollution caused due to flooding from Gorva lake could not be
quantified in audit.

(Conceptual sketch showing Gotri lake polluted by flood-water of Gorva lake)

There were public/judicial complaints against contaminating Gorva Lake and
Judicial Magistrate, First Class (Municipal), Vadodara observed (19 July 2010)
in his order that the Vadodara Municipal Corporation (VMC) admitted
discharging of drainage of nearby hutments and those of slaughter houses into
the lake. The Court directed VMC to clear Gorva Lake within six months,
keep the lake free from all pollution and take appropriate legal action against
the persons, who polluted the lake, including owners of slaughter houses.
Accordingly, GPCB Head Office (Gandhinagar) issued notice (October 2010) to
VMC to divert sewage’ domestic waste water flowing to the lake.

| Bavla, Harij, Jetpur, Kanjari, Sanand, Tarsali, Thara, Tharad, Vadodara and Vijapur
® Gotti lake is on the down-stream side of Gorva lake

15



Audit Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

(Photographs of Gorva Lake, Vadodara with floating garbage on the bank)

Without stating what corrective action had been taken on the judicial order or
the notice of GPCB Head Office, Regional Officer, GPCB, Vadodara merely
stated (September 2011) that there was no slaughter house located near Govra
lake or in the vicinity. The reply of GPCB is not tenable as (i) it is silent on the
discharge of sewage/domestic waste to the lake and (ii) discharge of slaughter
house wastage to lake was factually correct and subject matter of a judicial
pronouncement.

Gujarat Pollution Control Board furnished (September 2011) test results of
water (2008-11) of both Gorva and Gotri lakes. However, these tests were
conducted for chemicals; test for ascertaining existence of bacteria was never
conducted.

Government stated (September 2011) that GPCB had not given permission to
slaughter house in the area and therefore, there was no possibility of discharge
of effluent into Gorva lake. The reply of Government is not tenable, in view of
the fact that VMC had already admitted before the Court of Law, the existence
of slaughter house and discharge of their wastage into Gorva lake. GPCB was
therefore, required to take such measures as necessary under law to keep the
water body free of contamination from sewage/effluents/wastage/garbage, etc.

1.1.12.2 Discharge of polluted water
° Functioning of Common Effluent Treatment Plants

There were 83 industrial clusters in the State with 3000 large scale and 1.69
lakh small scale industries (2000), which had grown to 9000 large scale and
3.13 lakh small scale industries (2010). Large scale industries are required to
establish their own individual Effluent Treatment Plants (ETPs) for treating
industrial effluents and safe release to rivers/channels/backwater. For Small

16



a
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100

Chapter I: Performance Audits

Scale Industries (SSIs), Common Effluent Treatment Plants are established
jointly by such units.

Government of India (GOI) sponsored (1991) a scheme of financing Common
Effluent Treatment Plants (CETPs)”’ wherein it provided to industrial
associations aid up to 25 per cent of sanctioned project cost. State Government
was to contribute 25 per cent of the cost and the rest was to be contributed by
beneficiaries. There was no pending application from SSI units for setting up
CETPs (December 2010).

For efficient functioning of ETPs, Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)
prescribed norms for effluent discharge at both the inlet and outlet points.

Test-check of records pertaining to 13 selected CETPs revealed that inlet
effluent characteristic at Ankleshwar, Sanand, Vapi and Veraval CETPs were
in excess of those prescribed by the CPCB indicating that individual members
were not carrying out effective primary treatment before sending effluents to
CETPs.

—— GPCB Norms

Narol(20.9.10 35000
)

Naroda(25.11

30000

—— Odhav(29.11,

10)

— Vatva(23.11.4 25000
0)

Sachin(SIEL)
20000

Sachin(GECL
)

Kadodara(22. 15000
03.11)
Nandesari(12

01.14) 10000
Padra(10.04,

11)

Vapi(29.09.11 5000 |
)

Ankleshwar(
29.09.11) o

Veraval
aaion CHL COD COL TDs

(Chart showing details of treated effluents discharged by CETPs)

None of the CETPs discharged treated effluent as per norms of the GPCB and
most of the achieved parameters were much above the normative levels
(Appendix-II).

Government stated (September 2011) that action for up-gradation of existing
CETP was taken (Vapi), action plan for improvement of performance
submitted (Veraval), inlet and discharge norms of Final Effluent Treatment
Plant (FETP) was not complied with; action plan has been prepared and was
under implementation (Ankaleshwar) and show-cause notice issued for non-
compliance of the environmental Acts/Rules (Sanand).

* for cluster of small scale industrial (551) units

17



Audit Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

This indicated ineffective treatment at CETPs and consequent pollution of
natural water bodies, into which these effluents were being discharged.

° Discharge of untreated effluents by fisheries industries

CETP, Veraval was receiving waste water from 59 member fisheries
industries. The final treated effluent was discharged to harbour area through
underground pipe line at a point identified by the Central Salt Marine
Chemical Research Institute (CSMCRI), Bhavnagar and approved by GPCB.

(Photograph showing channel with untreated effluent flowing to harbor)

We observed from the records of GPCB that out of 411 non-member units,
one or other unit was discharging untreated waste water directly into natural
open drain without proper pre-discharge treatment of waste water, which
resulted in health hazards and environment pollution in the surrounding area
of GIDC.

© Improper maintenance of CETP at Sanand

In CETPs, effluents were being collected from member industries and water
got evaporated in RCC tank under open sky. The wet sludge was to be then
burnt in incinerator and the dry sludge packed in gunny bags and transferred to
Treatment Stabilization Disposal Facility (TSDF) sites. During the transitory
period, the wet sludge was to be stored in closed roof on CC bedding. GPCB
was to watch compliance to the above process.

A CETP at Sanand was set up (September 2002) jointly by 49 industrial units of
GIDC; field visit (January 2011) of Audit at the CETP revealed that huge
quantity of untreated waste water had accumulated and the wet sludge packed
in bags was found stored on ground near incinerator exposing ground-water to
tisk of contamination.

18



Chapter I: Performance Audits

(Wet sludge lying on floor of Sanand Eco Project)

Sample testing of water in bore wells of GIDC (April 2009 to March 2011)
detected high concentration of Total Dissolved Solids (TDS) ranging between
1110 mg and 2210 mg/I against prescribed norm of 500 mg/l (Appendix-IIT).
Thus, the CETP was not maintained as required.

¢ Release of industrial effluents to water bodies

As per the decision taken by the Industries Association of Ankleshwar, GIDC,
all industries/plants were responsible for primary treatment of effluents after
which these partially treated effluents were treated by CETPs at Ankaleshwar
and Panoli. After secondary treatment in CETPs, treated effluents were
transferred through GIDC pipeline to Final ETP (FETP) for sea-treatment™.
There was no CEPT at Zagadia, hence secondary treatment was also given by
FETP. The effluents received from GIDCs of Ankaleshwar, Panoli and Zagadia
were being finally treated at FETP and discharged into deep-sea though
pipeline.

We observed from the records of the GPCB that units were unauthorizedly
discharging untreated concentrated acidic and hazardous waste water directly
into the GIDC manhole without primary and secondary treatment resulting in
accumulation of effluents in FETP. Since the effluents received in FETP were
not in conformity with the inlet norms, the outlet norms also could not be
maintained resulting in release of hazardous waste water into the deep sea
(Appendix-IV).

* Treating the effluent to make it fit to discharge to the sea

19



= Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

4500
000
z
53600
J
$3000
é
2500
2000
1500
4000
500

Performance Evaluation of FETP by CPCB

oh
— hoo

fo

07.03.08
22.04.08
27.05.08
26.09.08
22.10.08
07.11.08
19.12.08
28.01.08
05.03.08

29.09.10

Month & Year

* Second Sample

(Graph showing performance evaluation of FETP by CPCB)

It was also seen from GPCB records that direct release of untreated effluents in
GIDC manhole resulted in choking of effluent pipeline leading to FETP. It was
also seen from records that industrial units were directly discharging effluents
into adjoining backwater through water tankers.

The TDS content in the sub-soil water near the GIDC ranged between 950mg/I
and 2482mg/I as against permissible norms of 500 mg/l (Appendix-V). Thus
the direct discharge of contaminated water caused threat to environment and
aquatic life, death of cattle drinking contaminated water and affected the
quality of sub-soil water.

* Loss of aquatic life due to release of industrial effluents

We observed from the records of GPCB that large scale industries, viz. Oil
and Natural Gas Corporation Limited, Indian Oil Corporation Limited,
National Thermal Power Corporation Limited, Bharat Petro-Chemical
Company Limited, KRIBHCO Limited, Reliance Industries Limited, Larson
and Toubro Limited, ESSAR Industries Limited, etc. located at Hajira (Surat)
were discharging treated water in estuary of Tapi river. Due to the presence of
high level hydro carbons in the waste water so discharged, large scale death of
aqua-stock in the river was reported in the recent past (2007-08 and
backwards).

Principal Secretary, Forest and Environment Department directed (August
2009) Hajira Area Industries Association to convey entire quantity of waste
water through a closed pipe line into the mid sea at a point to be decided by
the National Institute of Oceanography (NIO). However, no papers were found
on record to show that the Industries Association had ever approached NIO to
identify the mid-sea point for release of the treated water. Hence the river
water too was contaminated with high level of hydro carbons, which was
hazardous to aqua life.

20



डर stated (September 2011) that GPCB has since requested NIO to
prepare monitoring and investigation report pertaining to Tapi and Mindhola
estuary and that a drafi report in this regard has been submitted (August 2011)
to NIO.

© Direct discharge of untreated waste water

Dhagadhra Chemical Works Limited, a manufacturer of salt based chemical
was discharging effluent into the little Rann of Kutchch through a 22 km long
effluent pipe line. Records revealed that due to leakage of pipe line at many
places, the effluent mixed with rain water and had contaminated water stored
in check dams. This resulted in discharge of untreated water into Falku river of
Dhangadhra with adverse impact on agricultural land located near the banks of
the river making it unfit for agriculture.

We further observed that the local Member of Legislative Assembly
complained (August 2010) that repairs stated to have been executed remained
on paper only and that effluents leaking out of the pipelines at many places
mixes up with rain water and flows into the check-dams. On inquiry and site
inspection, GPCB found that untreated industrial effluents were being directly
discharged to the river. GPCB therefore reported (August 2010) that the
pipelines needed maintenance and that the treated effluents were required to
be discharged into Rann of Kachchh instead of Falku river.

Government stated (September 2011) that during monsoon in the past, effluent
pipeline passing near Falku river bank was damaged at three places due to
flood; the repairing work was immediately started and completed. However,
this could not be verified from the available records.

¢ Effluent channel not maintained

There were 1,050 units under Jetpur Dying and Printing Association
(Association). The Association had established CETP for treatment of water of
member industries. The untreated water was conveyed through open effluent
channel (constructed parallel to Bhadar river) to the CETP. The treated water
was then conveyed through pipeline to a pond (Fatel talav).

We observed that sludge which settled at the bottom of open channel was not
cleaned regularly. As a result, the water overflowing from the channel was
mixing with Bhadar river which caused damage to agriculture in nearby area,
apart from polluting the river water.

Government stated (September 2011) that GPCB has not received complaints in
respect of overflowing during the current year (2011-12). However,
Government did not confirm that channel had not overflowed anywhere during
the current year; hence the reply of the Government was vague and therefore
not tenable.

° Unattended breakages of effluent conveying pipelines

There were 1,501 industries in GIDCs at Kadodra, Pandesara, Palsana and
Sachin (Surat). Their effluent was treated in five CETPs and treated effluent
was discharged into backwater and Arabian sea through Mindhola river.

We observed from the complaints and investigation reports by GPCB that the
delivery pipes to CETPs were broken at many places from time to time.

21



= Quality
Review Committee
had convened only
six meetings
(2003-11)

Audit Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

Consequently, the untreated waste water was directly flowing to river and
backwater. In the absence of any survey on the adverse effect of discharging
of untreated effluent directly into the river/backwater, their impact on aquatic
life could not be ascertained in audit.

Government stated (September 2011) that during early months of 2011, there
was leakage of pipeline leading to discharge of effluents to backwater, but —

* A new pipeline has since been laid and at present no leakage was
observed in Kadodara;

* Non-member industries in Padesara were in the process of joining
pipeline-network leading to CETP and that it was expected that no
more industrial waste would be discharged to backwater;

* ACCEPT at Palsana was under proposal and that construction is likely to
be commenced soon; and

* Tender for repairs of pipeline in Sachin has been finalized and
approval of GIDC was awaited for issue of work order.

1.1.13 Monitoring
1.1.13.1 Ineffective monitoring by WORC

The State Government assigned responsibility of water pollution issues to
GPCB and Forest and Environment Department. Water Quality Review
Committee*! (WQRC) was set up (2002) to function as the nodal agency for
compilation of reports, convening meetings of implementing/testing agencies.
But, from the verification of brief prepared (February 2009) for submission to
Government, it was seen that WQRC had convened only six meetings”
(2003-11) and did not meet even once in 2006, 2007, 2009 and 2010.

Further, no details of any follow up action on decisions taken in the meeting
were made available to audit.

3 Committee is headed by Secretary of Water Resources Department (Chairperson) and MS (GWSSB), Director of
Agriculture Department, MS (GPCB), Director (GERD, MD (GWRDC), Regional Director (CGWB), Additional
Director (NRCD), SE (WRI Circle No.1), CE (QC) or Director (GITI), CE (QC) and Additional Secretary of Water
Resources (Members); WQRC was expected to evolve its own procedure carrying out the activities

321 (1) 1” meeting (7-3-2003) discussed regarding the status of activity on uniformity in collection of data and its
frequency; compilation of the parameters, testing, location/ station and frequency of tests; SEWRIC-1, Ahmedabad
nominated as a compiling officer; publication and circulation of data Research and development; all agencies
instructed to do RD work; R & D work is to be circulated; (ii) 2" Meeting (10-6-2004)- to send the details regarding
the R&D works; (iii) 3" Meeting (06-10-2005)-To prepare directory of Water Quality laboratory and testing facilities
available; valuation of type of WQ Stations as suggested by the World Bank; review of equipment & laboratory
standards to implement uniform protocol; to decide Hot Spot Areas by each Agency in consultation with GERI,
Vadodara; Recommendations by each agency for reyional workshop to be held at Pune; (iv) 4" Meetiny(29-12-2005)-
strengthening of the Existing Testing Facilities; Scientific Statt tor testing; Training to testing staff; Financial
requirement for establishing new (a) Stations & procurement of Laboratory equipments (b) Cost of Annual
maintenance & repairs of Stations & Laboratory; (v) 5" Meeting (1-1-2008)- Uniformity in collection of data and its
frequency; R&D work to be cartied out by GERI, and all implementing agencies shall submit there data to GERI,
Vadodara; Evaluation and classitication of type of WQ station as per protocol of MOWR; Scientific staff for testing
and training of testing staff; Hot Spot areas identified by each implementing agencies; Financial requirement for
establishing; new stations and procurements of laboratory equipments; cost of annual maintenance and repairs of
stations and laboratories: (vi) 6” meeting-Details not available

22



2 1. Performance Audits

Government stated that change in the constitution of the committee was under
consideration and afier reconstitution regular meeting would be convened;
Government has since re-constituted WQRC (7 September 2011).

1.1.13.2 Monitoring network for tracking pollution of ground-water

Ground-water is contaminated by salinity, fluoride and nitrate as shown in the
map below —

Rajasthan

Madhya
Pradesh

Maharastra

= Nitrate

HEB = Fluoride
Il = Seasonal Scarcity
[5 = Salinity

(Map showing availability of contaminated groundwater in Gujarat)

Water Resources Department was responsible for laying down policy
guidelines and programme for the development and regulation of State’s water
resources and overall planning, policy formulation, co-ordination and
guidance in water resources sector. Gujarat Water Resource Development
Corporation under the Department was responsible for investigation,
exploration, management and recharge works in the State.

However, no specific preventive or restorative programmes have been
introduced by Water Resources Department for prevention and control of
ground-water pollution despite evidence of contaminants like fluoride,
salinity, chloride, iron, nitrate etc. being found in ground water samples as
indicated in Appendix VI.

1.1,13.3 Jammed testing wells

In the eight districts sampled for assessment of monitoring network with
respect to ground-water, we observed that water quality laboratories were
established in all the districts. All the ground-water sources were being tested
at least once in a year.

23



E Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

State Government had also selectively established wells specifically meant for
testing ground-water. However, we observed that 86 out of 4437 monitoring
wells (19 per cent) and 220 out of 643** open wells (34 per cent) were either
filled with mud or had been abandoned or had dried up. No action was
initiated for re-drilling of these wells.

1.1.14 Conclusion

Clean, safe and adequate fresh water is vital for the survival of organisms,
human beings and other species. Water pollution and contamination weakens
or destroys natural eco systems that support human health as well as
biodiversity. Water pollution can lead to serious problems with disease and
death of human beings, animals, plants and vegetation. While the Government
had prepared an inventory and quality assessment of river and ground-water in
the state; only an inventory of lakes had been prepared but their water quality
assessments were not carried out. Assessment of contaminants present in
river/lake/ground-water and quantification of the impact of human activities
contributing to pollution were also not carried out. The Government had not
identified major aquatic species, birds, plants and animals facing risks due to
pollution of rives and lakes and was totally unaware of the risks to human
health being posed by polluted water sources. The quality of planning was
poor because of the absence of these assessments. Further, the State had not
laid out a pollution control policy.

The implementation of the NRCP in the state left much to be desired. Sampled
pollution control programme of Sabarmati River at Ahmedabad though
seemingly working, did not succeed in bringing down pollution levels to the
prescribed norms. Present status of Sabarmati shows the presence of fecal-
related disease causing pathogens as well as organic pollution at the outskirts
of city limit. No action was taken by the Government to check the
deterioration in quality of ground-water. GPCB failed to take effective steps to
control unauthorized disposal of untreated waste water by industries.
Continuous monitoring of water quality through the creation of an adequate
monitoring mechanism was also missing. WQRC responsible for monitoring
the control of water pollution in the state was not working at the desired level.
Its meetings were held infrequently and records of follow up action not
maintained.

1.1.15 Recommendations

¢ Keystone species associated with each river and lake should be
identified;

* Major aquatic flora and fauna and animals facing risks due to pollution
of water bodies should be identified;

* Pizo-metre installed in the well and testing done
¥ Open wells trom which samples collected and tested

24



रा Performance Audits

Complete assessment and quantification of contaminants present in
river/lake/ground-water and quantification of human activities
contributing to pollution should be done;

Implementation and monitoring of programmes related to water
pollution should be strengthened through WQRC;

More rivers and lakes, which need remediation, should be covered
under NRCP/NLCP to avail central assistance; and

Sewage and effluent treatment infrastructure should be strengthened
and existing STPs and CETPs should be upgraded to match level of
contamination.

25



> Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

NARMADA, WATER RESOURCES, WATER SUPPLY AND
KALPSAR DEPARTMENT

1.2 Facilitation of drinking water supply in villages by WASMO

1.2.1 Introduction

Government of India (GOI), Ministry of Rural Development, Department of
Drinking Water Supply launched (1999) as a reform initiative through a pilot
project in the Rural Drinking Water Sector, which was later (December 2002)
scaled up by launching Swajaldhara Scheme. The reform was focused on
bringing about community participation in the planning, implementation,
operation and maintenance of ‘in village’? drinking water supply schemes.
Swajaldhara project envisaged building up water supply network from the
storage facility upto the household. The project was implemented in 14 (out of
26) districts in the State.

On the lines of Swajaldhara guidelines, Sector Reform Scheme (SRS) funded
by Government of Gujarat (GOG) was being implemented in the remaining
11 districts, except Kachchh district, which was parallely covered under
Earthquake Rehabilitation and Re-construction (ERR) scheme funded by GOI.

GEER Project
[J Swajaltdhara Project
[EG State Reform Scheme

(Map showing the districts in which different schemes were implemented)

४ The in.village water supply system includes a range of components like pumping machinery; storage structures;
distribution networks and water points etc.

26



=

Water and Sanitation Management Organization (WASMO) functioning under
Narmada, Water Resources, Water Supply and Kalpsar (NWRWS&K)
Department was entrusted with the responsibility of implementation of
Swajaldhara/SRS/ERR and to facilitate the village community in planning,
implementation, owning, operation and maintaining its ‘in village’ water
supply scheme. WASMO also implemented an ancillary scheme, viz. National
Rural Drinking Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance Programme”®
(NRDWQMSP), which were aimed at monitoring and surveillance of all
drinking water sources in the villages by the community, thus furthering the
overall objective of providing clean drinking water in all the villages.

Tt was the duty of Gujarat Water Supply and Sewerage Board (GWSSB) to
develop infrastructure in order to bring water upto storage facility in the
villages. The role of WASMO was only to provide distribution network within
each village.

In 2007, State Government set the ‘Golden Goal’ of completing community
managed ‘in village’ water distribution schemes in all the 18200” villages of
the State by the year 2010.

1.2.2 Organizational set-up

The Chief Executive Officer (CEO) is the key officer of WASMO and is
responsible for its day to day administration. He functions under the overall
direction of Secretary, NWRWS&K Department of GOG and co-ordinates with
GWSSB.

At the district level, WASMO has 167 Coordination, Monitoring and Support
Units (CMSU) each headed by Unit Manager (UM) and 112? District Water and
Sanitation Committees (DWSC)“" each headed by a Member Secretary (MS)
that facilitated the implementation of the programme in the villages through
the Village Water and Sanitation Committee"! (VWSC). The water supply
scheme was to be managed and maintained at village level through the VWSC.

Introduced by GO] in January 2006

* Out of total 18266 villages in the State, 66 villages already had in-village water supply scheme

3 (i) Amreli, (ii) Banaskautha, (iii) Bharuch, (iv) Bhavnagar, (v) Dharampur (taluka place), (vi) Jammayar , (vii)
Junagadh, (viii) Kheda, (ix) Kachehh, (x) Narmada, (xi) Panchmahal, (xii) Patan, (xiii) Rajkot, (xiv) Sabarkantha,
(xv) Surendranaar and (xvi) Vadodara

290) Ahmedabad, (ii) Anand, (iii) Dahod, (iv) Dangs, (v) Gandhinagar, (vi) Mehsana, (vii) Navsari, (viii) Porbandar,
(ix) Surat, (x) Tapi and (xi) Valsad

# CMSU and DWSC ate district-level offices of WASMO

“A sub-committee of the Gram Panchayat; the Committee was to consist 10 to 12 members, of which '/3" were
being reserved tor women, Reservation far SC and ST are also to be made in proportion with their population in the
village (subject to minimum one)

27



Audit Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

VILLAGE WATER AND
SANITATION COMMETTIES
(10785)

(Organogram of Water and Sanitation Management Organization)
1.2.3 Audit Methodology and scope

Records relating to the conception, planning, implementation and evaluation
of rural drinking water supply schemes for the period 2006-11 were test-
checked by audit at the Water Supply Department of GOG, WASMO (Head
Office), eight’? (out of 26) selected district level offices and 69 selected
villages (Appendix-VII) between February and June 2011. The selection of
the test checked district units was made on the basis of random sampling and
that of villages based on financial and physical progress of work in different
villages. The water supply schemes under ERR scheme in Kachchh district
were completed in years prior to period covered under audit. Hence, these do
not fall within the scope of this report.

The audit objectives were discussed with Principal Secretary (Water Supply) in

an Entry Conference in April 2011. Exit Conference was held (October 2011)
to discuss the audit findings with Principal Secretary (Water Supply).

* (i) Ahmedabad, (ji) Dahod, (ii) Kheda, (iv) Navsari, (६) Patan, (vi) Rajkot, (vii) Surendranagar and (viii) Valsad

28



E I: Performance Audits

1.2.4 Audit Objectives

The performance audit was conducted to assess the following —

* Whether the water supply scheme to be implemented in the villages
were properly planned and executed by WASMO;

* Whether all the approved schemes were completed within stipulated
time;

¢ Whether water supplied to the villages was potable and free from
impurities;
¢ Whether regular monitoring and evaluation of the schemes were being
carried out; and
* Whether funds provided by GOV/GOG for the implementation of the
schemes were properly accounted for and utilized by WASMO.
1.2.5 Audit Criteria
The performance of facilitation of Drinking Water Supply Scheme in villages
by WASMO was assessed with reference to —
* Guidelines for Swajaldhara, and National Rural Drinking Water
Quality Monitoring and Surveillance programmes;
¢ Financial Rules, regulations and Budget Estimates; and
* Orders issued by GOI, GOG and WASMO from time to time.

Audit findings
Finance Management

1.2.6 Funding pattern

Funding pattern of Swajaldhara Project provides for sharing of the cost by GOT
and village community in the ratio of 90:10. However, GOI (August 2007) left
collection of community contribution to the discretion of the State
Government. Where State Government decides not to collect community share
it is expected to substitute it with its own funds. Under SRS, the cost sharing
ratio between GOG and village community was 90:10.

29



Audit Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

Chart showing flow of funds

*Aceelerated Rural Water Supply Programme

Funding by GOI for GOG fund for Sector
Swajaldhara Scheme Reform Scheme (SRS)

#National Rural Drinking Water Programme

1.2.6.1 Financial management

Water and Sanitation Management Orgazanation implemented Swajaldhara
Scheme/Sector Reforms Scheme out of grants received from GOI and GOG,
either directly or through GWSSB. Details of grants received (including
miscellaneous receipts and interest on deposit) and expenditure incurred during
2006-11 are given in Table 1.

Table 1: Grants received and expenditure incurred by WASMO

_ Rupees in crore]
Openin; GOG income Total Closin
Year Balance | GOLgrant |. दफा ‘and funds | Expenditure | flyers
interese_|_*vailable
2006-07 47.67 64.12 117.57 3.63 232.99 78.30 154.69 |
2007-08 154.69 92.61 105.00 6.90 359.20 115.80 243.40 |
2008-09 243.40 183.89 87.50 14.51 529.30 161.68 367.62 |
2009-10 367.62 143.62 201.00 25.11 737.35 428.01 309.34 |
2010-11 309.34 58.09 98.88 14.54 480.85 251.76 229.09 |
Total 542.33 609.95 64.69 | 1035.55 | |

* OB, expenditure and CB figures include those pertaining to district level offices also

(Source: Statement furnished by WASMO)

30



= incurring
al expenditure,
zation
Certificates for
2356.51 crore were
furnished

Chapter I: Performance Audits

1.2.6.2 Unutilized balances with district offices

Principle of prudent financial management provides that while allocating
funds to the subordinate offices, Controlling Officer should satisfy himself
that these offices would actually use the funds allotted to them and all attempts
should be made to prevent accumulation of large unspent balance with these
offices.

Despite the district offices of WASMO being already saddled with ongoing
schemes, we observed that on the approval of any new scheme by the DWSCs,
WASMO (Head Office) allotted funds to the districts without making any
attempt to assess/scrutinize whether these offices had in fact the capability to
undertake new works/schemes.

Delays in completion of schemes“ resulted in accumulation of unspent
balances of %207.13 crore (March 2011) in district offices. Year-wise and
selected district-wise details of grants received, expenditure incurred and
unspent balances accumulated are as shown in Appendix-VIII. Accumulated
corpus of such large unspent balances in the district units carried potential risk
of diversion of such funds, their misappropriation or fraud as is evident from
our observations in Paragraph 1.2.11.2.

The CEO stated (April 2011) that funds were allocated to the districts to
expedite new schemes on their approval. The reply of the CEO did not clarify
position on the potential risks of large unspent balances lying in the district
units and was untenable.

1.2.6.3 Submission of incorrect Utilization Certificates

Para 15.6.2 of Swajardhara guidelines provides that Utilization Certificates
(UC) in the prescribed format should be prepared annually by VWSC/district
level offices/WASMO and on the basis of available funds and utilization of
funds, State Government/WASMO may send proposal to GOI for further
release of fund supported by UC in respect of the funds utilized.

We observed that in violation of the above provisions, WASMO transferred
%356.51 crore to the district offices during 2006-10 as final expenditure and
submitted UCs to GOI on the basis of such transfers. This resulted in
submission of incorrect UCs of the said amount to GOI. Preparation of UCs
not based on actual expenditure not only inflated the financial progress of
work/schemes undertaken, but also allowed the State to claim subsequent
grants from GOI even though previous grants are still to be utilized.

The CEO in his reply accepted (April 2011) that UCs were being prepared
based on transfer of funds to districts and not on the basis of actual
expenditure.

1.2.6.4 Unsatisfactory Audit Arrangement

Para 17.1 of Swajaldhara guidelines provide that project accounts maintained
at Gram Panchayat (VWSC) level should be audited every year by Chartered

+ As mention in paragraph |.2.8.2 of this Report

31



E Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

Accountants (CA) engaged by WASMO and submitted to CMSUs/DWSCs. We
observed in test checked district units that no regular audit of accounts of
VWSCs was carried out by CAs. Further, no mechanism was developed by
WASMO for follow up action on the audit points as and when raised by CAs.

Moreover, out of 7932 completed schemes, accounts of only 1349 schemes
(17 per cent) were audited by CA (March 2011). In the test-checked eight
districts", out of 2354 schemes completed, accounts of 259 schemes
(11 per cent) only were audited by the CA.

Chief Executive Officer, WASMO stated (August 2011) that pending audits
would be taken up by CA in due course and also ensured that a suitable
mechanism would be developed for follow up action on audit reports. Failure
to carry out regular audits of accounts of schemes may lead to wasteful
expenditure and financial malpractices, if any, may remain undetected.

1.2.6.5 District offices not availing sweep-in facility

On request made by WASMO, Chief Manager, State Bank of India (SBI),
Gandhinagar allowed (August 2009) sweep-in facility“® for funds kept by

district offices. WASMO instructed (September 2009) all its district offices to
avail of sweep-in facility for funds kept in SBI account.

However, out of 26 district offices, six offices” did not operate sweep-in
facility till June 2011 and eight offices availed it (March 2010 to
March 2011) with delay ranging from 18 months to 30 months. In Kheda
district, SBI branch did not allow sweep-in facility on WASMO funds, but no
corrective action was initiated by respective UM. Loss of interest on the basis
of average balance™ in the five districts” worked out to $91.01 lakh*!.

1.2.6.6 Loss of interest as separate accounts of Swajaldhara funds not
opened

Swajaldhara guideline provides that separate bank account for funds received
from GOI was to be operated and interest earned there on was to be added to
the total corpus of the fund. We observed that seven” out of eight selected
districts did not follow these provisions and a common bank account was
maintained for various schemes. Interest pertaining to Swajaldhara funds were
also not worked out and added to the books of accounts of the Scheme
maintained in these offices. As such, interest received on GOI fund was not
worked out and credited to Swajaladhara funds, thus depriving the scheme of
the additional funds which it could have received as interest.

Reasons for not operating separate bank account for Swajaldhara funds were
not provided to audit by UMs/MSs of selected districts.

Ahmedabad, Dahod, Kheda, Navsari, Patan, Rajkot, Surendranayar and Valsad

* By this facility, any amount in excess of a particular limit will be automatically converted into Fixed Deposit and
remitted back required amount as and when contingency arises

* Anand , Bharuch, Danys, Kheda, Panchmahals and Surat

“ Bhavnagar, Dahod, Dharampur, Jamnagar, Navsari, Porbandar, Surendranagar and Valsad

* For the periods for which sweep-in facility was not availed

२0 Kheda, Dahod, Navsari, Surendranayar and Valsad

3 Atthe differential rate of 2.5 per cent

3 | Dahod, 2.Kheda, 3.Navsari, 4. Patan, 5.Rajkot, 6.Surendranagar and 7.Valsad

32



= were
implemented without
proper assessment of
availability of source
of water and its
quality

Chapter I: Performance Audits

Programme Management

1.2.7 Planning

For the effective implementation of rural water supply scheme, Swajaldhara
guidelines provide that State Governments should prepare a comprehensive
vision statement, action plan and time-frame for covering all the villages in the
State. Accordingly, base line survey in the State was to be carried out within
three months for identification of existing water supply schemes in villages.

Villages were to be selected for implementation of project in the various
phases depending on the demand from them and the available resources.
However, no such vision statement or action plan was prepared nor base line
survey carried out by the State Government. In the absence of vision
statement, action plan and time frame, schemes were implemented without
ascertaining availability of water source or its quality. As a result, project was
delayed as shown in the chart below—

G Number of schemes

completed
7905, 43% 17932, 44%
@ Number of schemes

in progress

ONumber of schems
yet to be taken up

2363, 13%

(Chart showing number of schemes completed/in progress/yet to be taken up)

We observed that of the eight selected districts initial work of base line survey
was not carried out and criteria were not fixed for selection of villages for
implementation of the project thus leaving ample scope for faulty planning of
schemes in the villages. As a result, the schemes were implemented in villages
without proper assessment of either the availability of water source or its
quality. Thus the scheme was not implemented with adequate planning; the
impact of these inadequacies is discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.

Proper planning coupled with awareness programme sufficient enough to
motivate the villagers were pre-requisites for the successful implementation of
the programme. The CEO and the UMs/MSs of the selected districts, however,
stated (March-June 2011) that the programme was ‘demand driven’ and
accordingly villages which demanded the scheme and were willing to pay
10 per cent contribution, were selected and that the baseline survey was not
conducted. The reply is not tenable because even if the programme was
demand driven as per GOI guidelines, State Government had set ‘Golden
Goal’ for cent per cent achievement of ‘in village’ water supply scheme.
Further, community mobilization was not effective enough to motivate the
rural community for implementation of the scheme by way of paying
10 per cent contribution. Thus, WASMO failed in planning, community
mobilization and demand generation.

33



= Goal’ of
covering all the
villages by 2010 was
not achieved

Audit Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

1.2.7.1 Constitution of Village Water and Sanitation Committees

Swajaldhara guidelines provide that VWSCs be constituted in each village for
implementation of the scheme and in the Committee, one-third membership be
reserved for women. The VWSCs were to be re-constituted in every two years.

We observed from the records maintained in 69 randomly selected VWSCs in
eight selected districts that in 20 villages, one-third members of VWSC were
not women and in 35 villages VWSCs were not re-constituted after two years.

The UMs/MSs stated (March-June 2011) that deviations from guidelines would
be rectified in future.

1.2.8 Execution of water supply schemes
1.2.8.1 ‘Golden Goal’ of covering all villages not achieved

Government of Gujarat had set (2007) the ‘Golden Goal’ of covering all the
18200 villages under ‘in village’ drinking water supply scheme by 2010. The
physical progress report of WASMO however showed that only in 7932
villages (44 per cent), ‘in-village’ schemes were completed (March 2011). The
details of ‘in village’ drinking water supply schemes approved and completed
by WASMO (March 2011) is given in Table 2 and district-wise number of
schemes approved and completed are given in Appendix-IX

Table 2: Physical progress of implementation of schemes
Number of Number of Number of
Year schemes completed as at the | ongoing | schemes not | schemes
approved end of March 2011 | _ schemes started dropped
Up to March 3981 3811 102 00 68
2007
2007-08 1179 1036 106 00 4
2008-09 2444 1973 395 14 61
2009-10 1854 915 813, 33 90
2010-11 1327 197 947 167 16
Total 10785 7932 2363 214 276

(Source: Data furnished by WASMO)

Thus, WASMO was not able to achieve ‘Golden Goal’ target of providing ‘in
village’ drinking water supply schemes to all villages in State by 2010 as
Water Supply Schemes in 7415 villages (41 per cent) were yet to be taken up
(March 2011). Of 2363 ongoing schemes, 102 schemes were approved during
2006-07 and earlier periods, 106 schemes during 2007-08 and 395 schemes
during 2008-09.

Chief Executive Officer, WASMO stated that the project was ‘demand driven’
and totally dependant on the involvement of the Gram Panchayats and the
communities. The reply is not tenable as the objective of ‘Golden Goal’ was to
provide ‘in village’ water supply schemes in all the villages of the State by
mobilizing the villagers. WASMO had not undertaken sufficient awareness
programme to educate the targeted population.

1.2.8.2 Delay in completion of schemes

Swajaldhara guidelines provide that ‘in village’ water supply schemes are
required to be completed within 12 months from the date of signing of MOU
between DWSC and VWSC. However, scrutiny of records revealed that

34



= could not
ensure social
mobilization as
envisaged

Chapter I: Performance Audits

completion of schemes was delayed for the period ranging from one to three
years as shown in the graph below —

700.

600:

500-

400

300. Bone year
two years
छल three years

200.

No. of schemes delayed

100:

0.

Year of approval of schemes

(Source: Information furnished by WASMO)

Out of 7932 schemes completed (March 2011), 2381 schemes (30 per cent)
were delayed for periods ranging from one year to three years”.

On being inquired (August 2011), CEO did not furnish any reasons for delay.

1.2.8.3 Dropping of schemes due to failure of social mobilization

Village water supply schemes were to be approved by WASMO after
formation of VWSC, organizing of awareness programme, preparation of
village action गा, etc. We observed that in 19 districts, WASMO had
dropped 276 village water supply schemes (March 2011) for want of
community contribution and awareness about the benefits of potable drinking
water in the homes.

During field audit visits in four villages where approved schemes had been
subsequently dropped, people in three villages stated that they faced hardship
in the absence of regular piped drinking water supply. The interviewed
villagers also expressed their willingness to pay community contribution. It is
thus apparent that WASMO had not built up sufficient awareness about the
benefits of the scheme in the villages where schemes had been dropped.

© 1626 schemes were delayed for one year, 602 schemes were delayed for two years and 153 schemes were delayed
for three years
“This was to be done in consultation and with the help of technical staff of district offices

35



Audit Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

(Picture showing vessels kept in advance at stand-post by villagers of Hasanpur village)

WASMO attributed dropping of schemes to (i) failure of local community to
pay their contribution and (ii) dispute amongst villagers. The reply is not
tenable as social mobilization is an important activity mandated to be
undertaken by WASMO to make villagers aware of the benefits of having safe
potable water supply in their homes and to make them active participants in
the programme.

1.2.8.4 Status of completed projects

Audit analyzed veracity/status of the schemes shown as completed by
WASMO by scrutinizing the records in eight selected districts, which revealed
the following —

* Completion of wells in private land without water supply network

As per the policy of the State Government ‘in village’ water supply schemes
has been conceived as a village centric water supply network that includes a
storage structure, pumping facility and a distribution lines which can service
each home in the villages on an individual basis.

Scrutiny of records of DWSC, Dahod revealed that contrary to the basic
concept of the scheme, 125 wells (30 schemes) were dug at a cost of %4.30
crore (Appendix-X) in private farms without storage tank, pipeline network,
etc. The individual private land owners, in whose farm the wells were

36



Chapter I: Performance Audits

executed, have utilized water from the wells for irrigation in their field. Thus,
the piped water was not supplied to the targeted population. Instead, the
individual land owners benefited out of the wells completed.

In 20 out of 30 schemes, components like pumping machineries, storage tanks,
pipelines, etc. were planned, but all the above mentioned components not
executed. In the remaining 10 schemes only wells were planned and
completed.

The MS stated (June 2011) that due to non-availability of Government land
and in absence of demand by the villagers, wells were executed at private
land. He also stated that these wells were being utilized for drinking purpose
by drawing water through pulley and ropes.

—

(Picture showing well with succession pipe, executed in private farm in Kakadkhila village — DWSC Dahod)

The reply of the MS is not correct, as during field visit of audit, it was seen
that a well constructed in Kakadkhila village in a private farm was being
utilized for irrigation purpose by the land owner and villagers were fetching
drinking water from nearby hand-pumps.

¢ Defunct schemes
During field audit visits to 55 villages, six cases, where the schemes already

completed at an aggregate cost of = 88.70 lakh, were found defunct as detailed
in Table 3.

37



2 Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

Table 3: Defunct schemes found during field visit
Sr. | Name of scheme Expenditure Date of कि रानी
No, (Rupees in lakh) | Completion
|| Fulgram village 10.23 | 2005-2006 | Village was at the tail end of Jasapar Group
pwsc, Water Supply Scheme of GWSSB, hence water
Surendranagar was not available
2 | Parabadi village 338 | 2009 Work on bore/tank completed; but laying of
CMSU, pipelines was not taken up due to dispute:
Surendranagar community contribution refunded
3 | Pipradi village 20.16 | January 2011 | The chemical analysis of the water sample
CMSU, taken earlier showing water not potable was
Surendranayar disregarded. Majority of villagers did not take
water connection due to presence of
contaminants in water and inadequate quantit
2 | Pipaliya (Raj) 45.53 | January 2009 | Water supplied was not potable due to presence
village, CMSU, of contaminant in form of high Total Dissolved
Rajkot Solid (TDS); UM stated that contaminants in
form of high TDS were noticed during summer
eriods
5 | lyava village, 601 | July 2007 No water was available in the two bores dug
DWSC, Ahmedabad
© | anjali village, 3.39 | January 2008 | Tn the absence of underground sump, water
CMSU, Rajkot received from Group Water Supply Scheme in
the existing cistern was in-adequate due to the
lack of gravit
‘Total 88.70

Failure of WASMO to regularly scrutinize progress of completed/operational
schemes and institute a proper system of feedback and monitoring of the
completed schemes resulted in non-achievement of the intended results.

1.2.8.5 Deficient services of Implementation Support Agencies

Swajaldhara guidelines provide for social mobilization, communication and
capacity development, participatory rural appraisal, training and
implementation of schemes through NGOs acting as Implementation Support
Agencies (ISAs)

WASMO executed MOUs with 75 NGOs and assigned them different
activities associated with the implementation of the scheme, which were to be
completed by them within 18 months from the date of signing of the MOU.
Remuneration to [ISAs was to be made in stages keeping pace with completion
of prescribed activities/progress reports”. We observed that 53 10057 had
not completed the activities assigned to them within the stipulated period.
Such delays ranged between 18 and 45 months (Appendix-XI).

Chief Executive Officer of WASMO attributed (June 2011) deficiencies in the
services of ISAs to lack of response from villagers, slow progress and
abandonment of work mid-way by ISAs. The reply is not tenable as WASMO
should have monitored the performance of these ISAs more effectively to
ensure successful implementation of the scheme.

® part payment of & 3.04 crore had been made (March 2011) for the work carried out by them
* Siymed (December 2005 to March 2008) MoUs for ₹ 4.71 crore for various activities which were to he completed
within 18 months

38



— taken for
centralized purchase
of pipes delayed
completion of
individual schemes

Chapter I: Performance Audits

1.2.8.6 Irregular decision of centralised purchase of pipes

Swajaldhara guidelines provide that GPs/VWSCs shall directly purchase the
materials for execution of the schemes and no centralized purchasing should
be made. However, based on exigencies and that too after receipt of requests
from GPs/VWSCs, centralized purchase could be made in exceptional cases.
GWSSB had existing Rate Contracts (RCs) for purchase of pipes with different
agencies. Accordingly up to March 2010 purchases were made by VWSCs
through these RCs. Thereafter WASMO decided (March 2010) to opt for
centralized purchase through 09853, stating that purchases through RCs
were causing delays. Accordingly, it deposited (March 2010) 160 crore with
GWSSB without ascertaining the actual requirements. However, GWSSB could
supply only pipes worth %7.17 crore upto May 2011.

Scrutiny of records of WASMO revealed that in 203 schemes being
implemented by VWSC in 10 districts, delays in execution of schemes was
attributable to non receipt of pipes from GWSSB. Consequently VWSCs
requests for permission to procure pipes locally were acceded to by WASMO
on a case to case basis. Thus, strategy of centralized procurement of pipes
resulted in delay in execution of works, besides blockage of funds to the tune
of %152.83 crore.

Chief Executive Officer, WASMO stated (June 2011) that Chief Engineer,
GWSSB would be requested for early purchase of pipes. The reply is not
tenable as decision to purchase centrally through GWSSB was not only in
violation of Swajaldhara guidelines, but also resulted in delay in execution of
work.

1.2.8.7 Operation and Maintenance funds

Operation and maintenance cost of Water Supply projects under Swajaldhara
scheme involved expenditure on procurement of water, supply of water and
maintenance of the network created.

Swajaldhara guidelines provide that upon completion of schemes and their
successful operation for at least 12 months from the date of completion, GOI
may provide up to 10 per cent of the capital cost to VWSC as one-time
incentive for Operation and Maintenance (O&M) fund. GOG was also to make
matching contribution; release of O&M funds to VWSCs were subject to
fulfillment of prescribed conditions®”. However, we observed that GOG had
not released their matching contribution towards the O&M fund (June 2011).
WASMO also did not maintain details of payments of O&M funds (GOI share)
to VWSCs by district offices.

In eight selected districts, though 1,008 VWSCs were eligible to receive O&M
grant of 7.77 crore, only €2.69 crore was paid to 332 VWSCs with delays
upto one year (82 cases), one year to two years (38 cases) and more than two

37 Water tariff to be fixed and charges collected by VWSCs; financial transactions to be carried out through banks;
O&M fund to be created, ete.

39



Ee two per cent
water sources were
found contaminated
during pre-monsoon
survey, but affected
villagers were not
alerted

Audit Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

years (30 cases) (Appendix-XIIL). The concerned UMs/MSs stated (April-June
2011) that payment of O&M fund was delayed due to non-fulfillment of
prescribed conditions™*.

The CEO stated (June 2011) that the GOG was providing O&M fund, but instead
of providing it to the VWSCs, it was being used to meet the O&M of Regional

Group Water Supply Scheme (RGWSS).”” The reply is untenable as it was not
in conformity with Swajaldhara guidelines.

Assurance of Water Quality
1.2.9 Controlling water contamination

1.

I Villagers not conducted testing of the quality of water

National Rural Drinking Water Quality, Monitoring and Surveillance
Programme (NRDWQMSP) provides that all GPs/VWSCs should test drinking
water sources in their villages and furnish report to district laboratories four
times in a year. This water quality testing data was also to be updated in the
online MIS package developed by WASMO. To facilitate water testing by
GPs/VWSCs, WASMO procured 14216 Field Test Kits (FTKs) at a cost of
%3.08 crore and distributed (2005-09) those to 13912 VWSCs.

We observed during field visit that FTKs were not utilized and that none of the
GPs/VWSCs had submitted any such water testing reports to
laboratorics/WASMO. Thus, the objective of surveillance programme
envisaged in WQMSP was not achieved.

Chief Executive Officer, WASMO accepted (April 2011) that despite their best
efforts villagers had not been responsive in getting water quality tested. The
reply is not tenable as the programme enjoins WASMO to carry out active
social mobilization so that communities become active participants in all
components of the scheme, including testing of water quality which is aimed
at improving public health standards of the targeted population.

1.2.9.2 Test result by WASMO found contaminated water

Swajaldhara guidelines provide that VWSCs to get water samples tested four
times in a year and to furnish it to WASMO, which in turn is required to
forward the data on-line to GOI.

Since VWSCs had not got the water samples tested for ascertaining the quality
of drinking water source, WASMO collected (May 2010) water samples from
16427 villages for ascertaining the quality of drinking water at source. Test
result of these samples revealed that water source in respect of 5260 villages

* Water tariff not fixed by VWSCs, documents not submitted by VWSCs, financial transaction not carried out
through banks etc.

8 are developed by GWSSB for extraction of water from source and to supply to two or more villages upto
facility of those villages.



a I: Performance Audits

was contaminated or the water was unfit for drinking for one or more
reasons” .

Out of these 5260 villages, only 4215 villages had alternate source of safe-
drinking water. WASMO had not alerted the affected villages/VWSCs about
these test results“ or taken any preventive action to stop the consumption of
contaminated water by villagers.

Chief Executive Officer, WASMO stated (June 2011) that reports for only
unfit sources were provided to villages through talatis®, health workers, etc.
and that instruction had been issued for undertaking remedial measures.
However, the reply was not based on facts as no records of either supply of
test results to the affected villages or details of preventive measures
undertaken were produced to audit. Interviews with villagers during our field
visits indicated that they were ignorant about the results of water
contamination tests conducted by WASMO in their respective villages.

Further, scrutiny of records revealed that there was no reduction in the
incidence of water-borne diseases (2006-10) across the State, as detailed in
Table 4 which would underscore continuing risks of villagers being compelled
to drink contaminated water.

Table 4: Cases of water borne diseases

न Name of Number of cases reported

है 2006 2007[ 2008 [2009 2010

| | Acute 666231 638412 567030 646457 673455
Diarrhoea

2 | Viral Hepatitis 14272 8141 10051 11099 16234

3 | Enteric Fever 13197 12563 12850 15878 38775

| a4 Cholera 185 122 50 318 573
Total 693885 659238 589981 673752 729037

(Source: Information furnished by Commissioner of Health through WASMO)
1.2.9.3 Failure to ensure follow up action on the test reports in Schools

With a view to create awareness among school children as well as to carry out
bacteriological test on water being provided in schools, WASMO supplied vial
kits to 34439 and 34459 rural schools during 2007-08 and 2008-09
respectively at a cost of $78.67 lakh with return postcards for submitting the
result of water testing.

Of the above, only 13852 (40 per cent) and 8009 (23 per cent) rural schools sent
water testing results to WASMO during 2007-08 and 2008-09 respectively.
Results of the schools who responded showed that bacteriological

™ 1507 villages had high fluoride content, 818 villages had Total Dissolved Solid (TDS) contamination and 3074 had.
high nitrate content

' Since contamination was in terms of high fluoride, TDS and high nitrate, this pertains to underground water

* Revenue head in village

41



हि Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

contamination was found reported by 6787 (49 per cent) schools in 2007-08
and 4485 (56 per cent) schools in 2008-09.

When details of corrective action taken by WASMO were called for, the CEO
stated that necessary instructions wei ued (July 2008) to schools as well as
Taluka Development Officers/District Development Officers for remedial
measures. However, details of such follow up action were not made available
to audit.

Manpower Management
1.2.10 Manpower policy not evolved

We observed that WASMO did not assess the number of staff needed for
implementation of Swajaldhara Scheme at the district level; the number of
sanctioned strength of different cadres of staff had not been fixed. Recruitment
of ad-hoc staff was being done on contractual basis without any norms. Thus,
audit could not ascertain whether staff pattern was on need basis.

We also observed high turnover during 2006-11; as 144 out of 218 persons
recruited on contractual basis in eight selected districts had left their job
(Appendix-XIII). In four" districts, posts of UM/MS were lying vacant and
were being manned by Executive Engineers of GWSSB as their additional
charge. This could have potentially compromised the efficiency of service
delivery by WASMO.

Chief Executive Officer, WASMO stated (June 2011) that as the programme
was demand driven staff were being hired on contractual basis. However, he
agreed that district level offices needed to be strengthened by recruiting more
staff.

Monitoring and Evaluation
1.2.11 Review Mission not constituted

As per the provisions of Swajaldhara guidelines, a Review Mission
comprising of officers from GOI, GOG and Subject Matter Specialist/Experts
was to be constituted to review implementation of the scheme and recommend
remedial action and to guide the Project Authorities in the process of
implementation. However, Review Mission was not constituted by the State
Government.

WASMO stated (April 2011) that they were not aware of the constitution of

Review Mission. Thus the important activity of assessing the strengths and
weaknesses in implementation of the Scheme had remained neglected.

 Dahod, Kheda , Naysari and Patan

42



E of
completed schemes
was not done

Chapter I: Performance Audits

1.2,11.1 Monitoring of completed schemes

Swajaldhara guidelines provide that CMSUs/DWSCs and WASMO should
arrange for periodical monitoring and review of the functioning of completed
schemes by officers, experts, NGOs, institutions, ete. We observed that
periodical field visits were carried out by the officials from the WASMO head
office. However, review of completed schemes was not done by
CMSUs/DWSCs, experts, NGOs or institutions.

Further, WASMO had not prescribed any feed-back on the operations of
completed schemes by VWSCs so as to ascertain the exact status of the
completed schemes Paragraph 1.2.8.4 above details cases where completed
schemes had become defunct and remedial measures were not initiated.

The MSs/UMs of the selected districts stated (April-June 2011) that schemes
completed were monitored by district staff whenever they visited the villages.
However no details/records of such monitoring were made available to audit.

1.2.11.2 Unreported misappropriation cases

On inquiry, WASMO furnished details of four misappropriation cases in four
districts after calling for the same from the districts. We observed from MS,
DWSC, Dahod (June 2011) that there were eight more cases of
misappropriation, details of which were not known/reported to Head Office.
Subsequently WASMO reported (September 2011) one more misappropriation
case from Narmada district.

Money involved in these 13 cases was %55.77 lakh (Appendix-XIV); part
recovery (three lakh rupees out of five lakh rupees) in one case of Valsad district
was reported.

Failure of WASMO to evolve an adequate control and monitoring system
resulted in serious cases like misappropriation remaining unreported; timely
follow up action thereon also could not therefore, be taken.

1.2.12 Conclusion

Provision of safe drinking water plays an important role in the well being of
people. While WASMO has been doing a good service in providing rural
households with drinking water supply, its efforts can at best be deemed
partially successful as the “Golden Goal” of providing in-village water supply
to all rural house hold is yet to be achieved. Proper assessment of available
water sources through a base line survey has not been carried out and in the
absence of such vital data, the quality of planning for the implementation of
the scheme suffered. The scheme envisaged community participation by
mobilizing villagers to take ownership of the scheme, but deficiencies were
noticed in facilitating community mobilization through Implementation
Support Agencies; many of whom left the programme mid way without
completing the work assigned to them. The financial management of the
scheme revealed weakness with CA audit of only 17 per cent of the
implemented schemes having been carried out. Water can also be a source of

43



- Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

disease and ill-health if contaminated or improperly handled or stored. Regular
quality testing of the supplied water was not being carried out. Also regular
follow up on reports received from schools where contaminated water was
being supplied was not being done thus exposing children to the risk of
disease. Monitoring of the scheme was deficient with a robust monitoring
mechanism not having been developed. The Review Mission to review the
scheme had not been constituted.

1.2.13 Recommendations

Action may be taken to release funds to VWSCs for operation and
maintenance;

Services of Implementation Support Agencies/NGOs may be
monitored to ensure that they render required services in time;
Committees, as envisaged in the guidelines may be set up immediately
and made operational;

Reporting system may be streamlined to ensure that Head Office gets
prescribed feed-back from the district/field offices; and

System may be streamlined to get the accounts of schemes audited by
CA every year.

a4



E Performance Audits

SPORTS, YOUTH SERVICES AND
ACTIVITIES DEPARTME

LTURAL

1.3 Creation and utilization of Sports infrastructure under Sports
Authority of Gujarat

1.3.1 Introductory

Sports Authority of Gujarat (SAG) was registered (May 1993) under the
Societies (Registration) Act, 1860 to draw up and implement plans for
promotion of sports. The responsibilities of SAG include acquisition and
maintenance of sports infrastructure at convenient places and to promote and
develop sports activities in the State.

Government celebrated 2005 as ‘Urban Development Year’, as a part of
which, it was decided to construct Sports Complexes in all districts with all
modem facilities for indoor/outdoor sports under ‘Sardar Patel Sports
Complexes’ (SPSC) scheme. Prior to launching the Scheme, five sports
complexes™ existed in the State. Construction of Sports Complexes was in the
charge of the Roads and Buildings (R&B) Department, the Executive
Engineers (EEs), R&B having territorial jurisdiction executed the works.

There are 17 Sports Complexes” and five Sports Hostels” (August 2011) with
SAG", of which 10 Sports complexes were constructed under SPSC scheme.
Activities of SAG are restricted to organizing and promoting School games at
State level; while boys upto 19 years are eligible to compete in these games,
but no age restriction has been prescribed for girls/women in order to
encourage their participation in sports.

There are 17 State level Sports Associations (August 2011) registered with
Sports, Youth and Cultural Activities Department. These Associations are
engaged in training of sportspersons and holding District/State level
competitions and to sponsor sportspersons from various schools for national
level competitions. These Sports Associations were functioning independent
of SAG.

1.3.2 Organizational set up

The affairs of SAG are looked after by a General Body assisted by a
Governing Body. The Minister of the Youth Services and Cultural Activities is
the President of the General Body and Chairman of the Governing Body.

* Ahmedabad, Bhavuayer, Devyadh Baria, Janmayar and Porbandar. However, only cricket yround existed at
Jamnagar and Porband:

© Amveli, Gandhidham, 00919, Himatnagar, Junagadh, Limbdi, Nadiad, Patan, Rajpipla, Saputara under Sardar
Patel Sports Complexes. Sports Complexes and at Ahmedabad, Bhavnagar, Devyadh Baria, Jamnagar & Porbander
(only Cricket ground at Jamnagar & Porbander ) already existed and at Varahi & Sui Gam construction were under
progtess under Border Aread Development Programme

© Bhavnagar, Devgadh Baria, Limdi, Nadiad and Porbandar

© Nine Sports Complexes at Anand, Bharuch, Gandhinagar, Navsari, Rajkot, Surat, Tapi, Vadodara and Valsad, were
under planning

45



The State
Government had no
sports policy;
training given as per
sports calendar

Audit Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

Director General of SAG is the Principal Executive Officer of the Authority
and looks after its day to day administration. He is assisted by Secretary of
SAG, Administrative Officer, etc. The organization set up is given in
Appendix—XV.

1.3.3 Audit objectives
* Whether SAG drew up plans for promotion of sports;
¢ Whether construction of SPSC were completed in an effective manner;
* Whether existing Sports complexes were maintained properly;
* Whether sports infrastructure available were effectively utilized;
¢ Whether human resources management was effective; and

¢ Whether State could effectively represent in national/international
sports

Audit findings
1.3.4 No sports policy defined by State Government

The National Sports Policy 2001 envisaged upgradation and development of
other sports infrastructure, support to the national sports federations and other
appropriate bodies, strengthening of scientific and coaching support to sports,
incentives to sportspersons, enhanced participation of women, tribals and rural
youth, involvement of the corporate sector in sports promotion and creation of
greater awareness among the public.

However, the State Government had not enunciated any specific sports policy.
Consequently, Commissioner of Youth Services and Cultural Activities has
restricted his role to identification of players for School games on the basis of
competitions held in accordance with the National Calendar of School Games
Federation of India. Annual Calendar for school level sports competition was
prepared accordingly and training imparted to potential competitors. There
was also no system of sponsoring players and their grooming. Therefore, there
was no proactive planning for promotion of sports; in the absence of any
sports policy, formulation of budget, action plan lacked direction. Sports
department exists merely for adherence to Annual Calendar. Further, almost
all the above mentioned components of National Sports Policy were missing
in the State.

The School Games Federation of India introduced (2008-09) 53 new events in
the National Schools Games competition. However, SAG did not take any
action to impart training or send sports-men to the competition during the
period 2008-10 to these newly introduced events which adversely affected the
performance of the State in the National School Games.

46



= I: Performance Audits

1.3.5 Construction of Sports Complexes
1.3.5.1 Financial Management of Sports Complexes

The user department | Depending on the availability of land, Department of Youth and Cultural

had not control over Activities, accorded (August 2006) administrative approval for construction of

expenditure on Sports Complexes at 10 districts’ at a cost of 22.10 crore. CE, R&B

construction activities Department had, in all accorded Overall Technical Sanction of %21.59 crore,
whereas works estimated to cost ¥20.03 crore were awarded at tendered cost
of 18.30 crore, the actual expenditure upto March 2011 was %31.67 crore”.
Allotment of funds and expenditure (2006-11) for construction of Sports
Complexes are given in Table 1.

Table 1; Allotment of funds and expenditure
(Rupees in crore)

Year Funds allotted Expenditure Excess ता Savings :

incurred Q excess/savings
2006-07 38 2.60 (0068 21
2007-08 12.05 11.67 (0.38 | |
2008-09 9.67 8.21 21.46 15
2009-10 8.20 5.81 (32.39 29
2010-11 3.53, 338, Oals re |

Total 36.73 31.67

(Source: Information furnished by Roads & Buildings Department)

Since the grants for construction of Sports Complexes were appropriated by
Roads and Buildings Department, Department of Sports, Youth Services and
Cultural Activities had no control over the construction activity.

1.3.5.2 Status of construction of Sports Complexes

The status of construction of Sports complexes in 10 districts was as in

Table 2.
Table 2: Status of construction of Sports Complexes
(Rupees in crore)
; Date of
sr. | Dateot | Tendered | Stipulated |. ककूलाबाधार | एम कराए. nanding over | Delays,
Centre date of * of ड़ हु
No. work order | cost " incurred . possession to | ifany
completion completion sae
1 | Anweli 25.9.2006 on — | 246.2007 0x2 | 27.%2009 | Not tanded 2 ns
ठ 7 5 qa Not handed
2 | Gandhidham — | 1.3.200 186 | 31.1.2008 3.13. | progress | NOt
3 | Godhra 16.12.2006 2.35 | 15.11.2007 457. 28.2.2009 | 31.1.2009 1
months
4 | Himatnagar | 2.1.2007 2.74 | 112.2007 650 315.2009. | 23.3.2010 is
४ months
5 | Junagadh 19.12.2006 255 | 18.11.2007 231 In progress | Not handed
| «| Limbdi 26.12.2006 154 | 259.2007 372 144.2009 | 25.1.2010 19 as
months
7 | Naudiad 27.2.2007 181 | 26.1.2008 3.13 | 24.11.2009 | 178.2011 * hs
3
8 | Patan 23.12.2006 2.13. | 22.11.2007 3.80 12.8.2010 | 28.12.2010 ths
| >| Rajpipla 4.12.2006 173 3.112007 231 3.6.2009 148.2009 9
4 ‘months
10 | Saputara 562007 088 | 542008 13s To.1.2008 | 25.2.2008 No delay
Total 18.30 31.67

(Source: Information furnished by respective R&B Divisions)

“ Amreli, Gandhidham, Godhra, Himatnagar, Junagadh, Limbdi, Nadiad, Patan, Rajpipla and Saputara
“the revised Technical Sanction is yet to be accorded

47



= work
was badly delayed

Due to deficient
services of architect,
several extra/new

excess quantities
executed

Audit Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

Against the stipulated period of completion of nine to 11 months, all works
(except Saputara) were badly delayed (upto one to two years: five works, and
two to three years: two works). In respect of two ongoing works, delays as on
31 March 2011 were 38 months (Gandhidham) and 40 months (Junagadh).

Roads and Building Department attributed delays to the faulty preparation of
estimates and late submission of designs/drawings by architect and execution
of substantial excess and extra items due to revision of designs. No action was
taken to either terminate the contract with the Architect or to impose any
penalty on him for delayed services.

1.

3 Deficient services of Architect

Executive Engineer, R&B Division, Himatnagar executed (March 2006)
agreement with an architect” to design 10 Sadar Patel Sports Complexes,
prepare plans and estimates, working drawings and structural design and to
supervise the work periodically, in respect of all the centres. The architect was
entitled for a fee of 2.25 per cent of the estimated costs and was paid a total
fee of $34.15 lakh upto February 2011 on the basis of certification of work by
the concerned EEs.

¢ Execution of excess quantities and extra/new items

We observed that on the recommendations of the architect, in all 93 extra/new
items (2.19 crore) were executed. The nature of changes was pertaining to
structural design, cement concrete work, etc.

° Benefits of ‘rates quoted below estimates’ not received

The rates quoted by contractors ranged 3.77 per cent to 16.41 per cent below
the estimated costs (EC). Contract conditions provided that agencies would be
paid at the tendered cost (TC) for extra/new items and excess quantities
executed. Tender conditions further provide that in cases where the quantities
executed were in excess of 130 per cent of the estimated quantity, the agencies
were entitled for payment at the EC. We observed that the agencies executed
quantities in excess of 130 per cent amounting to 44.24 lakh, but could not
get benefits of the TC, which were below the EC. Thus, the services rendered
by the architect were defective.

1.3.5.4 Poor utilization of Bhavnagar Sports Complex

A Sports Complex at Bhavnagar was constructed in 1996 at a cost of %1.24
crore and entered (July 2006) in the Property Record Book of R&B Division,
Bhavnagar.

™ Jawahar Mori, Rajkot

48



E were
sanctioned without
availability of land

The complex was situated far away from the city. Therefore its facilities were
not being utilized to the optimum level. Senior Coach stated (January 2011)
that construction of a new Sports Complex that can be optimally utilized was
under consideration.

Moreover, the athletic track and multi-purpose hall of the Sports Complex
were damaged in the earthquake of January 2001, but both of them were
continued to be utilized. The officers of the R&B Division inspected the
Sports Complex in August 2010 and on verification of the damages, directed
the Sports Complex authorities to stop utilization of it.

The Senior Coach stated (April 2011) that the Executive Engineer of R&B
Division has been asked (April 2011) to carry out necessary repairs to the
athletic track and multipurpose hall. However, the fact remains that damaged
track and multipurpose hall, despite being hazardous to the users, were utilized
during the period 2001-10.

1.3.6 Land Acquisition

1.3.6.1 Unavailability of Land

Chief Secretary, GOG/Secretary, Sports, Youths and Cultural Activities/SAG
made requests (April 2005, December 2006, February 2008) to Collector,
Bharuch/Tapi/Vadodara/Navasari and Surat Urban Development Authority,
Surat for allotment of land for the Sport Complexes in the respective districts.
However, the concerned authorities have not allotted land, as a result of which
construction could not start at these places as planned.

1.3.6.2 Inadequate planning of expenditure

Scrutiny of records revealed that as shown in Table 3, in certain cases,
sanctions for construction of Sports Complexes were accorded and processed
even as clear possession of the land was not available.

Table 3: Allotment of land without clear possession

sl का Area ‘Amount of
Sr. Centre | Atlotted by Date of Remarks works
No. whom allotment कक
expenditure
There were encroachments in the land allotted ३ 32.18 lakh
Roads and When construction of compound wall was in
| Gandhinagar | Buildings August 2007 | 25 acre F है
Department progress, the encroachers obtained stay order
ep against their evacuation (May 2008) trom Court
The land was under occupation with Valsad 0
Sarvajanik Kelavani Mandal on lease; since the
Collector, 2 5 lease period expired (September 1994) Collector,
2 | Valsad Valsad May 2000 | 9230.67 sam JV, Jead allotted land to SAG. However, leasee-trust
obtained stay order from the Court aj t
construction of Sports Complex on the land
Collector There was perennial water logging in the land and 0
3 | Anand Soleo | uly 2008 | 15 acre also a crude-oil pipeline crossing through it. Hence
construction of Sports Complex could not start

(Source: Information furnished SAG)

49



= were heavy
savings against
grants made
available for
purchase of sports
equipments

Audit Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

In this connection, we observe that —

¢ During 2007-08, R&B Department allotted encroachment-free land to
five other agencies’ at Gandhinagar (including two private
entrepreneurs), all admeasuring 25 acre or more, but did not provide
land for SAG

¢ As for Valsad Sports Complex, Budget provisions were being made of
₹10 lakh in 2003-04 and %1.30 crore in 2011-12 notwithstanding the
land being not under the possession of R&B Department.

e SAG’s request (December 2008) to Collector for allotment of
alternative site for Anand Sports Complex had borne no fruits (March
2011); consequently budget provision of £1.30 crore made during
2011-12 would serve no purpose apart from presenting a misleading
picture to the legislature.

Thus, planning for construction of Sports Complexes as above was inadequate.
This resulted in allocation of funds unfruitful.

1.3.7 Sports equipment

1.3.7.1 Savings out of grants for purchase of equipment
Grants received by SAG and expenditure incurred during 2006-1 1on purchase
of sports equipment are as in Table 4.

Table 4: Grants received and expenditure incurred on purchase of sports equipment
Rupees in lakh)

Yi Grants Expenditure A Percentage of
ear गे हे Savings नि
received incurred savings
2006-07 10.00 3.14 6.86 69
2007-08 10.00 wss[ Of ०0 |
2008-09 30.00 9.85 20.15 67
2009-10 30.00 8.26 21.74 72
2010-11 30.00 11.87 1813 | 6560 |
पर |_ 110.00 | 43.67 66.88

(Source: Information furnished by Sports Authority of Gujarat)

It may be seen from the above that even out of meager budget outlay of 71.10
crore allotted over a period of five years, expenditure was %43.67 lakh only
(40 per cent) resulting in a saving of %66.88 lakh (60 per cent). The
expenditure incurred was mostly on petty purchases, for which a grant of
%19,500 was allotted to each district. This underlined the low priority accorded
by the GOG for promotion of sports in the State.

Sports Authority of Gujarat received demands (2010-11) from five” District
Sports Centres for purchase of various sports equipment, but these equipment
could neither be provided nor funded by SAG.

* (ji) Public Health Foundation of India, New Delhi-SO acre; (ii) GIDC, Gandhinagar-SS acre; (iii) National Institute
of Pharmaceutical Education and Research-60 acre; (iv) Satyam Computers Private Limited.25 acre (since
surrendered back in April 2010); (v) Tata Consultancy services Limited.25.5 acre

” Devgadh Batia, Hitmatnagar, Nadiad, Porbandar and Rajpipla

50



3 Hostels
constructed were
grossly under-utilized

Sports Authority of Gujarat stated (April 2011) that whereas earlier
equipments from vendors at the rates approved by Sports Authority of India,
in 2009-10 tenders were floated for procurement of sports equipments. But
tenders were cancelled owing to high variation of rates between the bidders
and quality of equipments offered. Tenders were re-invited in August 2010,
but the parties failed to provide samples and therefore purchase procedure
could not be completed. The fact remains that the SAG could not procure
sports equipment, which adversely affected coaching programme for various
sports competitions.

1.3.8 Hostel facilities for sportsmen
1.3.8.1 Poor intake in sports hostels
There were five hostel buildings under the control of SAG, one each at
Bhavnagar, Devgadh Baria, Limbdi, Nadiad and Porbandar. The created and

utilized intake capacity is given at Table 5.

Table 5: Intake capacity created and utilization in Sports hostels

Sr. [Pace | Intake Utilization

No. capacity | 2006-07 | 2007-08 | 2008-09 | 2009-10 | 2010-11
1 | Bhavnagar 64 30 38 44 49 25
2 peveadh 50 Not yet operational
3 [ Limbdi 6 Not yet operational
4 | Nadiad 64 49 38 38 38 43
3 | Porbandar 31 39 34 28 37 28

(Source: Information furnished by SAG)

It may be seen from the above that the facilities created were grossly under-
utilized. SAG replied (August 2011) that different private institutions were
carrying out coaching activities and despite wide publicity, sportsmen from
outstation had not preferred to join the institutions.

Hostel buildings at Devgadh Baria and Limbdi were purchased/completed in
1993-94 (%30lakh) and 1998 (%67.39 lakh) respectively. SAG deposited
215.36 lakh (July 2005) with R&B Division, Dahod for repairing of Devgadh
Baria hostel. However, records pertaining to remittance of deposit were not
available in R&B Division, Dahod (September 2011).

At Limbdi, damage caused by earthquake in 2001 was repaired seven years
later (September 2008) at a cost of $18.85 lakh. Further, furniture purchased in
1998 was transferred to Nadiad hostel (January 2004). Furniture worth %8.74
lakh was purchased and provided to hostel after another four years as late as in
2008. SAG stated that hostels at Devgadh Baria and Limbdi are
not-operational due to damaged hostel not being repaired completely and for
want of qualified staff.

Thus, the purpose for which these hostels were purchased/constructed was by
and large not fulfilled despite incurring expenditure on construction of

51



— were
appointed without
facilities and facilities
created, where no
coach were posted

Audit Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

buildings, repairs, furniture, etc. All this underscores the attitude of the
administrator towards the promotion of sports in the State.

1.3.9 Coaches in sports complexes

Coaches are the most important instrument in developing any sports team, but
no annual work programme has ever been prepared for optimum utilization of
the coaches and filling up vacancies of coaches. Further there was no specific
charter of duties prescribed for coaches.

1.

Scrutiny of records revealed sanctioned strength of coaches was not made on
game-wise and district-wise. Further scrutiny revealed instances of mismatch
between availability of coaches and that of sports facilities (Appendix-XVI).
SAG stated (April 2011) that as the Sports Complexes were not available,
coaches were performing duties at University/School play fields, clubs and
private complexes. This however, did not explain the mismatching resources.
It was also stated that action would be taken for shifting the coaches.

1 Synchronization facilities vis-a-vis manpower not achieved

1.3.9.2 Vacant posts of coaches

Scrutiny of records revealed that there were 63 sanctioned posts of coaches
(March 2011), of which 21 posts (33 per cent) were vacant. Further, there
were 131 posts of contractual coaches, of which 69 posts (53 per cent) were
vacant. Thus, coaching facilities actually available were far below the assessed
requirement.

1.3.9.3 Diversion of coaches for other duties

We observed that out of 42 regular coaches in position, as many as 277 were
deployed for administrative works. Further, while regular coaches were only
supervising coaching camps and regular coaching activities in schools were
being handled by contractual coaches. Thus, engagement of coaches was
without direction and without evolving a proper coaching programme. SAG
stated (May 2011) that services of coaches were otherwise utilized due to
administrative expediency.

1.3.9.4 Appointment of overaged coaches

Government accorded permission (November 2009) for appointment of 131
coaches on contractual basis, out of which 70 coaches were appointed (August
2010). We observed that of the 70 coaches, 14 coaches were older than the
permitted age of 35 years. Though the contractual services were for only 11
months, approval for such appointment from the competent authority was not
obtained (July 2011).

7° 25 at district places and 2 in SAG

52



ड्ड I: Performance Audits

1.3.10 Monitoring SAG activities

1.3.10.1 Decisions taken in General Body meeting not implemented

Memorandum of Association of SAG provide that General Body™ shall meet
at least once in a year for review of its performance and give such directions to
the Governing Body, as deemed necessary. However, the Society met only
once (November 2008) during the period 2006-11.

In the said meeting, it was

¢ decided to create a Technical Division to look after technical matters in
relation to creation of infrastructural facilities in Sports Complexes and

° principally agreed to develop a Sports City in the State.

However, no progress was made in the matter (March 2011) for which reasons
were not found on record.

Sports Authority of Gujarat stated (September 2011) that action would be
taken to convene General Body meet and to create Technical Division/develop
Spots City. The reply of SAG is not tenable as important functions of the
General Body remained unaccomplished and Technical Wing/Sports City did
not come into existence even three years after a decision had been taken in
November 2008.

1.3.10.2 Decisions taken in Governing Body not implemented

Memorandum of Association also provides that the Governing Body’ shall
meet as often as necessary and at least once in each quarter. However, it was
seen that during 2006-11, only five meetings were held.

¢ In the meeting held in August 2008, it was decided to appoint coaches
upto Taluka level

¢ In another meeting (April 2010), it was proposed to identify one or two
popular games of Gujarat State to nurture the talent in the State.

The Society (SAG) consists of 33 members. Hon, Minister for Youth Services and Cultural Activities is the
president of the society, The State Minister lor Sports is the vice president of the society, Minister for R&B, Hon.
Parliamentary Secretary (Sports), Director General, Secretary Youth Services and Cultural Activities
Finance Department (Expenditure), Secretary H&FW Department, The Industries Commissioner, Secretary R&B
Department, Director of Higher Education, Three members of the Legislative Assembly to be nominated by the
Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, Five collectors to be nominated by rotation by the Government of Gujarat,
President Gujarat State Olympic Association, Vice-Chancellor of Universities in Gujarat State to be nominated by
rotation, President/Secretary of the Association of Gujarat State Chambers of Commerce and Industry, Three Sports
Promoters and persons knowledyeable in maiters relating to promotion organization and administration of
sports(including at least one woman) to be nominated by the Government of jarat, Three outstanding sports
persons including at least one woman to be nominated by the Government of Gujarat, Join Deputy Secretary Youth
Services and Cultural Activities Department, Director of physical Education and Youth Welfare of three Universities
of the State to be nominated by the Government of Gujarat by rotation, Regional Director Western Region SAT
Gandhinagar and the Director of Youth Services and Cultural Activities Gujarat State are the members of the Society
(i.e. SAG).
5 Hon, Minister for Youth Services and Cultural Activities is the Chairman of the Governing Body, Hon, State
Minister for Sports Gujarat is V Chairman of the Governing Body, Director General SAG is Dy, Chairman of
Governing Body, Parliamentary Secretary (Sports), Secretary Youth Services and Cultural Activities, Secretary
Finance Department, Secretary R&B, Director Youth Services and Cultural Activities, Regional Director Sports
Authority of India Westen Region are the members of the Governing Body

53



हे Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

However, both the above decisions have not been implemented (March 2011)
for which no reasons were found on record.

1.3.11 Performance of Gujarat in National School Games

Amongst the 39 participating States/UTs in the 55" National School Games,
2009-10, Gujarat stood at ninth position with 80 medals (36 gold, 23 silver
and 21 bronze), whereas States like Delhi, Maharashtra, Punjab, Haryana,
West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Kerala and Karnataka were the States ahead of
Gujarat. Gujarat however had left behind prominent States like, Tamil Nadu,
Madhya, Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar and Rajasthan, which underline the
existing sports potential of the State.

At the 567" National School Games, 2010-11, Gujarat stood at seventh position
with 117 medals (38 gold, 30 silver and 49 bronze). During the games States
of Maharashtra, Delhi, Haryana, Punjab, Kerala and Manipur were ahead of
Gujarat. The prominent States, Gujarat left behind were Karnataka, Tamil
Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar
and Rajasthan.

1.3.12 Conclusion

While the state has a good potential to achieve glory in sporting activity, there
is a lack of planning to tap the sporting talent of the state. The Government is
yet to frame a state specific sports policy. To groom the budding sports talent
of the state it is imperative that adequate infrastructure in form of sports
complexes and hostels are provided to them. Concerned Revenue authorities
did not allot land for sports complexes in five places and in three places clear
possession of the land allotted was not available. Delays were also noticed in
the construction of sports complexes. Budgetary support for operation of
sports complexes was also low. Sports hostels were cither not operational or
did not operate to capacity. Proper coaching is a must for the athletes to
achieve their true sporting potential. There were vacancies of coaches and
their postings too were not made scientifically based on the facilities and
requirements in their place of posting.

1.3.13 Recommendations

* Sports policy specific to the State may be framed and action plan
prepared to tap the talents of the State;

* Action may be taken for allotment of land for construction of Sports
Complexes

* Vacant posts of coaches may be filled up early; placement of coaches
planned properly and according to availability of facilities; and

* Decisions taken at management bodies be promptly implemented.

The matter was reported to Government (June 2011); reply has not been
received (December 2011).

54



Ez chapter contains one paragraph on “Energy Management of pumping
stations of Gujarat Water Supply and Sewerage Board” and eight individual
paragraphs on audit of transactions.

TRANSACTION AUDITS

KALPSAR DEPARTMENT

2.1 Energy Management of pumping stations of Gujarat Water Supply
and Sewerage Board

2.1.1 Introduction

The Gujarat Water Supply and Sewerage Board (GWSSB), established in April
1981, is responsible to provide water supply and sanitation services in the rural
areas of the State. GWSSB operates various bulk/regional/group/individual water
supply schemes and water drawn from sources are treated and supplied to end
users. These activities require high energy consumption; therefore, proper
functioning of the machineries and energy costs are key risk areas.

The Chief Engineer (Mechanical), GWSSB is responsible for operation and
maintenance of water pumping stations and is assisted by Superintending
Engineers (SEs) and Executive Engineers (EEs) at Circle and Division level
respectively. Audit test checked records of 10 SEs and 12 EEs'. The important
findings are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.

The core activity of GWSSB is extraction by pumping and conveyance of water;
the expenditure incurred during 2006-10 on Water Supply Schemes is detailed in
Table 1.

Table 1: Expenditure on Water Supply Schemes

(Rupees in crore

Total Of which total Of which, Percentage of
Year expenditure O&M Expenditure on | expenditure on
of GWSSB expenditure power power to TE
2006-07 337.57 243.44 116.58 35
2007-08 448.17 307.71 174.25 39
2008-09 468.65 324.30 164.78 35
2009-10 484.91 345.36 180.14 37

(Source: Annual Accounts of Gujarat Water Supply & Sewerage Board)

' With a view to ascertain the efficiency of energy management practices adopted by them

55



डे Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 Mar

2011

We observed that expenditure on power to total expenditure (TE) of Water Supply
(WS) Schemes ranged between 35 per cent and 39 per cent (2006-10).

2.1.2 Power saving measures not adopted
2.1.2.1 Norms for ‘energy audit’ not fixed

Considering the ever increasing demand for energy and the critical importance of
energy in economic growth, Government of Gujarat (GOG) made it mandatory
for all High Tension (HT) consumers having contract demand of 200 KVA and
above to carry out energy audit by approved auditors once in three years.
However, it was seen that GWSSB had not fixed any norms for conducting
energy audit.

We observed that out of 66° HT connections having contract demand of 200 KVA
and above by GWSSB, energy audit was conducted (2006-10) in respect of 13
connections’ only. Therefore, areas of inefficiencies and consequent
leakage/wastage of energy remained unascertained in the remaining 53
connections.

While accepting (May 2011) the audit observation, EEs stated that GWSSB had
not fixed any norms for energy audit, but the EEs of the Divisions had conducted
energy audit of their own. They had received no instruction to do so from
GWSSB. Thus, whatever energy audit conducted was done due to the initiative of
the incumbent EE.

2.1.2.2 Norms for reduction of friction not fixed

Government instructed GWSSB (January 2006) to take various measures for
reduction of friction in pumps so that energy costs could be controlled. However,
GWSSB did not take any action in the matter.

2.1.3 Contract demands

While applying for HT connection, consumer has to specify the contract demand
based on load requirement and execute an agreement with the power supplier. The
contract demand could be increased/decreased subsequently, depending on actual
requirements. The charges leviable by the power supplier as per tariff fixed by
Gujarat Electricity Regulatory Commission’ (GERC) were —

(i) Fixed demand charges° at 85 per cent of contract demand or actual
maximum demand during the billing cycle, which ever was higher;
and

2 6) Abmedabad-7 connections, (ii) Bhavnagar-10 connections, (iii) Bhuj-5 connections, (iv) Gandhi 5 connections,
(v) Jamnagar-10 connections, (vi) Junagadh -3 connections, (vii) Mehsana-6 connections, (viii) Palanpur-9 connections,
(ix) Rajkot-3 connections and (x) Surendranagar- है connections

3 (i) Jamnayar-3 connections, (ii) Mehsana -4 connections, (iii) Palanpur-3 connections and (iv) Rajkot-3 connections

‘The regulatory body empowered to fix tariffs for power consumed by consumers

3 Z98/KVA (kilovolt per ampere) upto 31.3.2010 and ₹10010 0 from 1.4.2010

56



= U: Thematic and Tra

(ii) Energy charges on actual units of electricity consumed.

° Avoidable payments due to excess contracted demand

There were 81 HT connections in the test-checked Divisions, of which in 15
connections, the actual demand was consistently less (2006-11) than the contract
demand. However, review of actual demand with reference to contract demand
was not done with a view to get the contract demand reduced. This resulted in
avoidable payment of 794.27 lakh (Appendix-XVID) on demand charges during
the period.

The EEs agreed to take up the matter with the power supply company; but
attributed higher contract demand to incomplete projects (Ahmedabad and
Jamnagar), mandatory payment of 85 per cent of demand charges during first two
years (Bhavnagar and Rajkot) and HT connection being obtained on installed
capacity of pumps. The replies are not tenable because demands should have been
synchronized with the progress of work.

° Avoidable payments due to excess consumption than contracted demand

In the case of HT connection of EE, PH Works Division, Mehsana, actual
maximum demand was 796 to 921 (2007-08), 895 to 982 (2008-09), 890 to 1038
(2009-10) and 873 to 988 (2010-11). However, the Division had a contract
demand of 550 KVA (upto December 2008) and 850 KVA (January 2009
onwards) and paid for the excess demand. Failure to review and increase the
contract demand resulted in avoidable expenditure of 715.84 lakh.

° Avoidable expenditure due to obtaining HT connection for pump house
without water at source

Gujarat Water Supply and Sewerage Board got executed (December 2006) Dhari
Group Regional Water Supply Scheme* (Amreli district). The source of Water
Supply Scheme was Saurashtra Pipeline Project’ (SPP).

Executive Engineer, Mechanical Division, Bhavnagar established pumping
stations and accordingly obtained five HT connections® (July 2001 to February
2005). However, due to non-availability of water because of low carrying
capacity of the pipelines of SPP, the pumping stations could not be made
operational.

Meanwhile, the power supply company charged GWSSB minimum demand
charges (July 2001 to August 2011) aggregating to €1.42 crore. Thus, action of

“ Expenditure incurred on the project was 230.41 crore

7 Saurashtra Pipeline Project drawing water from Pariej and Kanewal tanks fed by Mahi Canal System. Under this project,
pump-houscs (Paricj/Kaneweal and Piple) and sumps (Pipli, Navda, Vallabhipur and Botad) were constructed. Water under
the project was conveyed through MS bulk pipes (paragraph 3.3 of Audit Report tor the year ended March 2003)

* Chhatadiya, Devla, Gavadaka, Malsika and Morzer

57



E Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 Mar

2011

GWSSB to obtain HT power connection without ascertaining availability of water
at source resulted in avoidable expenditure of the amount.

2.1.4 Irregular levy/payment of electricity duty

Section 3 (2) of Gujarat Electricity Act provides that electricity consumed for
public water works are exempt from payment of Electricity Duty (ED). Scrutiny
of energy bills of 37 HT? connections at pumping stations under nine Divisions
revealed that GWSSB was being irregularly charged ED amounting to %6.81 crore
(2006-11).

Of these, the power supply company stopped levy of ED in respect of eight
connections; but the concerned EEs have not yet taken up the matter with the
appropriate authority'® for refund of ED already paid. And in the remaining 27
connections, GWSSB continued pay the ED (July 2011).

The EEs, while accepting avoidable payment, took-up or agreed to take-up the
matter with the suppliers for refunds.

2.1.5 Avoidable expenditure due to non-maintenance of power factor

Power factor (PF) of an HT supply was defined to mean as ‘ratio of real power
flowing to the load to apparent power in the circuit’. Maintenance of PF is
required to avoid (i) power loss in cables/switch gears, (ii) additional load
requirement for running machineries and (iii) increased wear and tear to
machineries. A consumer is required to maintain 90 per cent PF, failing which, PF
adjustment charges at one per cent (for shortfall from 90-85 per cent for per unit
of drop) and at two per cent (for shortfall below 85 per cent for each unit drop).
Wherever, operation of pumping stations was out-sourced, liability for making
payment of PF adjustment charges rest with concerned agency.

We observed that of the billing of 43 HT connections (nine Divisions) at pumping
stations, power supplier levied PF adjustment charges of 21.20 crore!’
(2006-11), which was avoidable. Of these, 754.37 [बता pertained to pumping
stations operated by GWSSB and rest pertained to outsourced agencies'*, which
was recoverable.

* Ahmedabad (7 connections-8.70 lakh); Gandhinagar (3 connections-11.19 lakh); Mehsana (6 connections-2291.06
lakh); Rajkot (3 connections 235.10 lakh); Junagadh (1 connection-35.86 lakh); Surendranagar (2 connec 31.67
lakh); Himatnagar (9 connections-235.62 lakh); Anjar I and 2 (5 conneetions-8206.97 lakh); Jamnagar (1 connection-
225.33 lakh) — Total 7681.50 lakh

1१ Commissioner of Electricity Duty was entrusted with the power to collect ED from consumers through power supplier
companies

॥ 2006-07-11 to 1 per cent (82.40 lakh); 2007-086 to 1 per cent (836.33 lakh); 2008-09-9 to 1 per cent (847.23 lakh):
2009-10-7 to 1 per cent (816.12 lakh); 2010-11-10 to 1 per cent (18.03 lakh) — Total 7120.11 lakh

"= (i) PH Works Division, Jamangar - 712.99 lakh, (ii) PH Works Division, Junagadh 2.82 lakh, (iii) PH Works Division,
Surendranagar - 25.48 lakh, (iv) PH Works division, Himatnagar - 226.39 lakh and (v) PH Works Division No.1, Anjar -
२6.69 lakh

॥ 01२66 lakh due from oursourced agencies, recovery of $52.43 lakh has been effected (May 2011)

58



5 HU: Thematic and Transact

2.1.6 Excess payments of energy charges
2.1.6.1 Excess payment due to incorrect tariff

Under the electricity tariff in respect of LT consumers, rates for water works were
classified under three distinct categories as in Table2.

Table 2: Classification of water works

4/2006 to 1/2009 4/2010 to 3/2011
Fixed Energy Energy [rat] Energy
charges | charges _| charges | charges ges | charges
Amount in rupees per BHP (fixed charges)/unit (energy charges)

Category

Water works (WW) 15.00 3.40] 15.00 3.50] 15.00 3.60
sewerage pumps (SP)
operated by other than local
body

WW and SP operated by local 9.00 3.20 9.00 3.30 9.00 3.40

७ | authority and GWSSB
located outside Gram

Panchayats

WW of Municipalities and 0 2.30 0 2.40 0 2.50
c | GWSSB located within Gram
Panchayats

(Source: Electricity tariff of power supply company)

Audit scrutiny revealed that power supplier wrongly classified GWSSB under
category (a) though these fell under lesser category of (b) or (c). Such
categorization resulted in excess payment of fixed charges/energy charges of
%13.14 crore in respect of 302 LT connections at pumping stations under 12
divisions as in Table 3.

(Table 3: Excess payment due to wrong classification)
(Rupees in lakh)

sr. Number of LT Excess Excess payment
No, | Place of division connection at payment of of energy Total
a pumping stations | _ fixed charges charges
1 | Ahmedabad 2 5.63 53.28 58.91
2 | Anjar 28 1.89 71.42 73.31
3 | Bhuj 2 0.05 191 1.96
4 | Bhavnagar 7 0.71 8.83 9.54
5 | Gandhinagar 5 1.30 6.87 8.17
6 | Palanpur 156 38.73, 784.58 823.31
7_| Jamnagar 15 3.84 62.62 66.46
[8 | 1णाबडब0ी 11 2.29 45.37 47.66
9 | Rajkot (3 divisions’ 40 871 180.86 189.57
10 | Surendranagar 12 2.54 32.85 35.39
Total 302 | 65.69 |[ 1248.59 1314.28

(Source: Information collected from GWSSB Divisions)

Scrutiny of the energy bills of 23 HT connections of pumping stations under four
divisions revealed that supplier had incorrectly levied demand charges at higher

59



Audit Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 Mar

2011

rates. These bills were paid by the divisions resulting in excess payment of
demand charges of 734.41 lakh'*.

The EEs, while accepting the incorrect categorization, took up or agreed to take
up the matter with the electricity supplier licensees.

2.1.6.2 Excess payment due to improper scrutiny of bills

Scrutiny of records revealed that energy bills, as received from power supply
companies were not scrutinized by Divisional/sub-Divisional Offices and
payments made by SEs after bills were ‘passed for payments’ by the EEs/DEEs.
Scrutiny of the bills of Palanpur Circle/Division revealed excess payment/double
payment of 11.66 lakh due to improper scrutiny as detailed in Table 4.

Table 4: Excess payment
(Rupees in lakh)

Name of Excess Reasons for excess payment
Division/Circle payment

Public Health 5.67 | Actual bill was for %63013.50 for June 2009. But supplier

Division, Palanpur issued bill for हैं 630135.00 which was paid without
checking.

Public Health Circle, 4.92 _| Incorrect recording of units consumed (June 2008, January

Palanpur 2009, October and November 2010) without checking
reading of the previous bills.

Public Health Circle, 1.07 | The charges were levied by the supplier on 53844 units

Palanpur (November 2010) against actual consumption of 26922
units.

Total 11.66

(Source: Information collected from GWSSB Divisions)

The EEs, while accepting the excess payment, took up or agreed to take up the
matter with the electricity supplier licensees for refund.

The matter was reported to Government (August 2011), reply was not received
(December 2011).

id PH Works Division, Ahmedabad ‘Six cases - 23.98 lakli; (2) Mechanical Division and PH
jandhinas = ₹4.83 lakh; (3) PH Works Division, Mehsana :Five eases - £23.82 lakh; (4)
PH Works Division, Surendranagar : Four cases - हैं 1.78 laklt

60



E UL

matic and Transaction Audits

2.2.1 Fraudulent drawal/misappropriation/embezzelement/losses

URBAN DEVELOPMENT AND URBAN HOUSING
DEPARTMENT

Reduction of the value of the land for the purpose of conversion of leasehold
to freehold resulted in loss of $5.56 crore

The Gujarat Housing Board Act, 1961 (the Act) provides that the Board may
retain, lease, sell, exchange or otherwise dispose of any land, building, or other
property vested in it and situated in area comprised in any housing scheme
sanctioned under the Act. But, under the Act, there was no provision to dispose of
the land for any purpose other than housing

Scrutiny of records (September 2010) of Executive Engineer (EE), Housing
Division, Ahmedabad revealed that GHB allotted (1978) 1,58,921 sqm land at
Vastrapur (Ahmedabad city) to Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC) on
99 years leasehold for their housing colony. Of the said land, LIC requested
(December 2006) GHB for conversion of 81,770 sqm land from leasehold to
freehold for construction of a commercial project.

In violation of the provisions of the Act, GHB resolved in their meeting
(December 2006) to convert the land from lease-hold to free-hold for commercial
purpose. It was also decided to levy 30 per cent premium of the value of the land
as fixed by the Town Planner for such conversion, which worked out to %89.11
crore.

However Chairman’? of GHB, on a request by LIC reduced the value to 83.55
crore, which was paid (December 2007) and conveyance deed registered (August
2010) transferring the title of the land to LIC. This resulted in under-realization of
premium of %5.56 crore.

On being pointed out, Government stated (August 2011) that since LIC was a
Government of India Corporation, in order to make their commercial project
viable, it has been decided to reduce the rate. Government also stated that GHB,
being the owner of the land could make revision in the suggestive price given by
Town Planner, especially when the decision was taken by Chairman, GHB-cum-
Principal Secretary, Urban Development and Urban Housing Department. The
reply of Government was not tenable as —

(i) GHB was not authorized by the Act to dispose of the land for any
purpose other than housing; hence it could not allow conversion of
land from lease-hold to free-hold for commercial purpose;

४ Chairman has his original charge of Principal Secretary, Urban Housing and Urban Development Department

61



Et Report No.2

ivil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

(ii) Contention of Government to subsidize the rate of land for a
commercial project is not justifiable;

(iii) Decision to charge LIC at 30 per cent of the market rate, as fixed by
the Town Planner, was taken during the meeting of the Board of
Directors of GHB; hence Chairman-cum-Principal Secretary was not
authorized to modify the decision, especially when it was taken against
the financial interests of the GHB.

2.2.2 Infructuous/Wasteful expenditure and overpayments

NARMADA, WATER RESOURCES, WATER SUPPLY AND
KALPSAR DEPARTMENT

2.2.2.1 Wasteful expenditure of %7.43 crore on a water supply project

Execution of Water Supply Scheme without ensuring ‘source’ resulted in
wasteful expenditure of र 7.43 crore

In order to serve Mahuva taluka (Surat district) with safe drinking water, Chief
Engineer (Zone 1), Gujarat Water Supply and Sewerage Board (GWSSB)
accorded Administrative Approval and Overall Technical Sanction (June 2007)
for Vanskui Group Water Supply Scheme (VGWSS) at an estimated cost of %8.67
crore. Superintending Engineer (SE), Public Health Circle, GWSSB, Surat was in
the charge of work.

Work order for the head-works'® and distribution network was issued (October

2008) to a contractor at their tendered cost of %8.48 crore. The contractor
executed the work (except those pertaining to canal crossing) costing %7.43 crore
(April 2011). We observed that works related to canal crossing were not executed
in the above sanction (July 2001).

We also observed that that work on VGWSS was started without getting water
reserved from the source, viz. Ukal Left Bank Canal (ULBC). Though formal
orders have not been received (July 2011), Water Resources Department (WRD)
‘in principle’ sanctioned (February 2011) permission to draw water from
Kakrapar Left Bank Canal (KLBC). But, Government stated (July 2011) that
source of KLBD was not feasible from techno-economical point of view.
Moreover, identifying a new source would render the structures already
constructed at the intake point of ULBC redundant making the expenditure
wasteful.

When pointed out, Government stated (July 2011) that the work was started in
anticipation of getting water reserved and permission to ‘open cut cross design’
for canal crossings; KLBC as source has been sanctioned in principle and that

"Construction of intake chamber, Water Treatment Plant, underground sump, pump house, etc

62



Ez HU: Thematic and Transaction Audits

GWSSB was making all possible efforts for early approval. The reply of the
Government is not justifiable as —

(i) GWSSB took up the work without ensuring availability of ‘source’ of
water;

(ii) Identification of a new source to KLBC would result the expenditure
wasteful on construction of head-works at the vicinity of ULBC;

(iii) The question of canal crossings was still not solved with WRD.
Thus, taking up VGWSS without any water source and without obtaining

permission to cross canals resulted in wasteful expenditure of % 7.43 crore.

2.2.2.2 Wasteful expenditure on payment of minimum demand charge of
55.73 lakh

in wasteful expenditure of % 55.73 lakh

Electricity Supply Code and Related Matters Regulations, 2005 provides that
where a High Tension (HT) consumer fails to avail of the power within 60 days
from the date of intimation of commencement of power supply, he shall be liable
to pay the demand charges and minimum monthly charges as applicable from the
date from which the above period expires or such period as may be extended by
the power distribution licensee.

Scrutiny of records (July 2010) of Executive Engineer (EE), Drainage Division,
Gandhinagar revealed that the Division applied (April 2006) for HT power
connection with contract demand of 2400 KWA from the power distribution
licensee (Utter Gujarat Vij Company Limited) for Khed pumping station and an
agreement was executed (November 2006). The distribution licensee notified
(13 April 2007) release of power and thus, the Division became liable to avail
power supply from 12 June 2007, which was extended for two months
(12 August 2007) on a request from the EE.

We observed that the pumping station was completed (January 2009) and for the
intervening period (August 2007 to December 2008), the Division paid (January
2009) minimum demand charges aggregating to €55.73 lakh without utilization of
power. Thus failure to get completion of pumping station synchronized with
obtaining HT power connection resulted in wasteful expenditure of the amount.

On being pointed out, Government stated (September 2011) that EE was not in a
position to utilize power within the period of sixty days from the date of
intimation regarding commencement of power supply by UGVCL and that a
proposal (August 2010) to waive the idle charge submitted to UGVCL was
rejected (September 2010). The reply of Government was not tenable as EE
applied for HT power supply before its actual requirement.

63



Ez 2.2.3 Wasteful expenditure of % 32.63 lakh

Taking up construction of Taluka Seva Sadan at Borsad in the regulated
area of a protected monument resulted in wasteful expenditure of
₹ 32.63 lakh

Provisions contained in Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains Rules 1959 (AMASRR) read with Archaeological Survey of India (ASI)
notification (June 1992) provides that every person intending to undertake any
construction in a prohibited area upto 100 mtr from protected limits and regulated
area of further beyond it upto 200 mtr near or adjoining protected monuments
shall apply to the Director General of Archeology at least three months before the
date of commencement of such construction and obtain requisite permission.

The Governor in Council of erstwhile Bomaby State declared (June 1923) the
step-well at Borsad (Anand district) as a protected monument under Section 3(1)
of Ancient Monuments Preservation Act, 1904.

Scrutiny of records (July 2010) of Executive Engineer (EE), Roads and Buildings
(R&B) Division, Anand revealed that Government i.e. Revenue Department and
R&B Department respectively accorded Administrative Approval (July 2009) and
Technical Sanction (January 2009) for construction of Taluka Seva Sadan (TSS)
at Borsad at an estimated cost of हैं 3.88 crore. The work order was awarded
(October 2009) at a tendered cost of $3.30 crore and the work commenced.

Since the site of work was within the regulated area of the protected monument
and permission under AMASRR was not obtained, ASI directed (February 2010)
EE to stop the construction. ASI also turned down (April 2010) the request for
post-facto sanction for construction. The contractor was finally relieved (March
2011) under foreclosure clause of the agreement and was paid (March 2011)
%32.63 lakh for the work already executed, which proved wasteful.

When pointed out, Government stated (July 2011) that work order was issued as
EE learnt from Mamlatdar, Borsad about non-inclusion of the step-well in the list
of monuments as on 31 December 1992, published by Archeological Department.

The reply of the Government is not tenable as the work order was issued (October
2009) without due diligence and ascertaining complete facts.

64



E HU: Thematic and Transaction Audits

2.2.3 Avoidable/excess/unfruitful expenditure

NARMADA, WATER RESOURCES, WATER SUPPLY AND
KALPSAR DEPARTMENT

2.2.3.1 Avoidable payment of Electricity Duty of %1.61 crore

Providing power supply to residential units without separate power
connection resulted in avoidable payment of Electricity Duty of २1.61 crore

The Bombay Electricity Duty Act, 1958 provides that Electricity Duty (ED) shall
not be leviable on the power consumed by the Government, except those utilized
for residential purposes. The subordinate legislation thereto further provides that
where separate meters are not installed for the power consumed for different
purposes, ED as applicable at the higher rate shall be levied for the whole of the
power consumed.

Scrutiny of records (July 2010) of Executive Engineer (EE), Drainage Division.
Gandhinagar revealed that the Division obtained power connection for two
pumping stations from the power distribution company. We observed that out of
this power connection, Division provided power supply to the residential-units
also without installing separate meters, which resulted in avoidable payment of
1.61 crore.

On being pointed out, Government stated (September 2011) that separate meters
for residential blocks had now been installed and that exemption from payment of
ED from the Commissioner for Electricity Duty is expected. The reply of the
Government was not tenable as the Government had to pay the ED due to failure
of the EE to install separate meters and that power consumption prior to
installation of separate meters between Government and domestic purposes was
not divisible.

ROADS AND BUILDINGS DEPARTMENT

2.2.3.2 Avoidable expenditure of ₹ 72.68 lakh due to defective estimates
Failure to draw correct estimates and appropriate tender conditions resulted
in avoidable expenditure of 7 72.68 lakh

Work orders for construction of four structures'* were issued (July 2006 to
January 2008) at an aggregate tendered cost of %67.86 crore against their
estimated cost of € 64.97 crore. Out of the above, work of three structures (except
Engineering College Building at Surat) were completed (July 2008 to October
2010) at a cost of %50.06 crore, whereas the remaining one was under progress,
for which payment of €19.71 crore has been made (February 2011). Executive

77 Sujalam Sutalam Canal Pumping station at Khed and Fatepur on Hathmati Guhai Pipeline Project
2 (1) Polytechnic Building at Godhra, (2) Engineering College Building at Dahod, (3) Engincering College Building at
Surat (under construction) and (4) Multi storeyed Building at Surat

65



= Report No.2

ivil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

Engineers (EE) of Roads and Buildings Division at Godhra, Dahod and Surat
were in charge of the works in their jurisdiction.

The contracts, inter-alia provides for execution of ‘controlled cement concrete’
(mix-design) of the strength of M.150, M.200 and M.250. In Government orders
(December 1986) instructions were issued for making provisions of 320 kg/cum,
400 kg/cum and 450 kg/cum cement for the above grades respectively for
preparation of estimates. Estimates were accordingly approved, tenders floated
and work orders issued.

Technical specification of the tenders state that proportion of cement in the ‘mix
design’ be determined so as to achieve the appropriate strength. However, there
was no condition therein for price adjustment for variation of the cement
proportion.

Verification of test results of ‘mix design’ revealed that actual consumption of
cement was 248/260/300 kg/cum (M.150 grade), 300/350/360 kg/cum (M.200
grade) and 330/375/385 kg/cum (M.250 grade) against the estimated provisions of
320 kg/cum, 400 kg/cum and 450 kg/cum respectively.

As a result of reduction in proportion of cement, there was, in all savings of
2793.29 MT cement as compared to the quantity provided for in the estimates, the
cost of which works out to %72.68 lakh (Appendix-XVIID). Thus, failure to
incorporate appropriate contract conditions resulted in avoidable expenditure of
272.68 lakh.

When pointed out, Department stated (July 2011) that in absence of enabling
conditions in the contract, recovery could not be made for consumption of
reduced quantity of cement.

The reply of the Department is not tenable as the above payment could have been
avoided, had tender specifications been drawn in conformity with IS
specifications and conditions for price adjustment incorporated for variation of
quantity of prime material. Meanwhile, it was seen that Superintending Engineer,
Vadodara R&B Circle instructed (December 2008) to incorporate a ‘special
condition’ in the agreement for price adjustment depending upon the consumption
of cement.

When reported, Principal Secretary to Government of Gujarat, R&B Department
stated (November 2011) that to bring uniform practice in department, finalization
of cement consumption for different grade of cement concrete was in process of
collection of data of mix design for different regions of State according to source
of material available in the respective region. On the basis of this a circular would
be issued and the same would be followed in future.

66



E U: Thematic and Transaction Audits

2.2.4 Idle investment/idle establishment/blockage of funds

EDUCATION DEPARTMENT

2.2.4.1 Unauthorized parking of Government of India funds of % 3.35 crore

Commissioner, Mid Day Meals did not utilize Government of India grant
and furnished incorrect Utilization Certificates

Government of India (GOI), Ministry of Human Resources Development,
Department of School Education and Literacy sanctioned (February 2008) a grant
of % 3.35 crore to Government of Gujarat for procurement of kitchen devices in
6707 schools under National Programme of Nutritional Support to Primary
Education, 2006 (the Programme). The Programme provides that the devices shall
be procured in de-centralized manner, preferably at school/block level, to avoid
delays. Commissioner, Mid-Day Meal Scheme (MDM), was in charge of
implementation of the Programme.

Scrutiny of records (October 2009) of the Commissioner, MDM revealed that
GOI revalidated (February 2009) sanction subject to condition that amounts shall
not be carried forward to 2009-10. However the Commissioner unauthorizedly
credited (March 2009) the grant to Gujarat Children Fund’? and then deposited
(June 2009) with State-owned Gujarat State Financial Services (GSFS).
Commissioner also furnished (July 2009) Utilization Certificate to GOI.

The Commissioner withdrew (December 2010) the amount together with interest
amounting to %3.68 crore and allotted (February 2011) to Deputy Collectors,
MDM of all the districts. Details of actual utilization of the grant by the Deputy
Collectors are awaited (July 2011). Thus the Commissioner, instead of refunding
the amount to GOI at the end of 2008-09, unauthorizedly parked the amount in
Children Fund/GSFS and thereafter allotted to Deputy Collectors of MDM for its
utilization.

The Commissioner. MDM stated (May 2011) that GOG decided centralized
procurement of kitchen devices through e-Tendering”’. However, due to non-
finalization of e-Tendering procedure, the grant could not be utilized within the
stipulated period. The reply of the Commissioner is not tenable as the Pragramme
itself provides for de-centralized purchases so as to avoid delays and therefore the
whole purpose of sanction of GOI grant was defeated. Further, Commissioner
furnished Utilization Certificates to GOI without actual utilization of funds.

The matter was reported to Government (June 2011); reply has not been received
(September 2011).

A fund created by Education Department of GOG (January 1985) to encourage development of children
® State Government made e-tendering compulsory for estimated value of @10 lakh and above from June 2007

67



I Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

2.2.5 Regulatory issues and other points

PORTS AND TRANSPORT DEPARTMENT

2.2.5.1 Outstanding recovery of dues

Gujarat Maritime Board failed to recover %28.73 crore due to it from a
licensee towards interest on belated payments and deficiency in wharfage not
handled

Gujarat Maritime Board (GMB), constituted under the GMB Act, 1981 (the Act)
was entrusted with inter-alia the responsibilities of providing facilities for
handling cargo and powers to levy port dues and other charges for services
rendered, as per Schedule of Port Charges (SoPC) as notified from time to time.

Gujarat Maritime Board entered into an agreement”! (December 2006) with
Continental Warehousing Corporation Limited, Mumbai” (licensee) to lease out
250 metre long existing jetty of the former at Rozi pier”’ of Jamnagar port to the
latter for a period of 25 years. Analysis of conditions of the agreement inter-alia
provided that —

* Licensee was to pay one time premium of %2.50 crore and the cost of
construction of jetty amounting to €11.30 crore in four equal quarterly
installments. The first installment was to be paid before execution of the
agreement;

¢ Licensee was to handle the minimum guaranteed cargo of 9.2 lakh MT in
a year. Even if it failed to do so, it would be liable to pay wharfage
charges at the then prevailing rates on the difference between the
guaranteed minimum tonnage and actual cargo handled;

* Delayed payment would attract levy of interest at 18 per cent per annum
and that failure to comply with the conditions of agreement or any rules,
regulations and notifications of GMB would entail termination of the
contract after serving such notices as provided in the agreement; and

* Licensee may take loan on the basis of collateral security of the jetty with
the approval of the GMB.

However, we observed that there was no provision in the contract to safeguard the
interest of GMB in case any loan was taken by the lincensee and it failed to repay
it.

Scrutiny of records of GMB (November 2010) and information subsequently
made available by GMB/Government revealed that —

21 Atter inviting offers (February 2005) for private investment to use on lease basis the existing GMB jetty
2 A company in private sector registered under Companies Act, 1956
® Declared by Customs Department as landing place (February 2007)

68



Ez Ut

matic and Transaction Audits

* The licensee requested (April 2007 and March 2008) for approval for
obtaining collateral security for availing term loan of %3.50 crore and
%14.75 crore from Indian Overseas Bank, Chennai and GMB accordingly
issued approval letters (July 2007 and August 2011)

¢ The licensee paid the first installment in time (November 2006), but
defaulted in the payment of further installments for over a year
(April 2008) and therefore was liable to pay interest.

* The licensee failed to handle minimum guaranteed cargo during 2006-11.

Thus, the licensee was liable to pay %28.73 crore“ which was not paid
(March 2011). GMB served notices (February and September 2009), but the
contract has not been terminated as per agreement.

When reported, Government stated (September 2011) that against collateral
security for the term loan taken by the licensee from IOB, there was
un-discharged liability (July 2011) of 1.47 crore. This term loan was
subsequently taken over by AXIS Bank (April 2010). The Government further
stated that this was done without consent of GMB and owing to these facts, it was
not found appropriate to take action to terminate the agreement.

The reply of the Government is not justified as in August 2011 when the GMB
issued a collateral security to the licensee, it had already defaulted on the
following counts:

(i) Payment of second and subsequent installment of the premium,

(ii) Handle minimum guaranteed cargo,

(iii) Payment of interest for delayed payments.
There also existed an audit observation (November 2010) to this effect.
Thus, not having adequate provisions in the contract safeguarding the interest of

the Government as well as overlooking the deficiencies mentioned above by
GMB led to non-realization of 28.73 crore.

% Interest on belated payment of premium and cost of jetty (71.62 crore), wharfage on deficient cargo handled (220.91
crore), and interest (upto March 2011) on the wharfage dues (२6.20 crore)

69



CHAPTER-III

CCO BASED AUDIT

REVENUE DEPARTMENT

3.1 Chief Controlling Officer based audit of Revenue Department

3.1.1 Introduction

Revenue Department in Gujarat State is entrusted with the task of land
management, recovery of land revenue, registration of land documents,
survey, measurement and documentation of land records as well as
adjudication of land disputes and levy of stamp duties, etc.

3.1.2 Organizational set up

There are five Principal Secretaries/Secretaries in the Revenue Department
working under the Revenue Minister of the State. The organogram of
Revenue Department is as below:

(Revenue),
Gandhinagar

Deputy
Collectors

Deputy (Prant) (41)
Collector
(Stamp Duty Inspector of Deputy Director of

Registration | | of Land Land Records (22)

(24)

Valuation)
(24) Records
(6)

The main responsibilities of Revenue Department officers are —

¢ The Commissioner of Land Reforms is responsible for the
implementation and monitoring of ‘award of rights’ (Hakk Patrak),
Tenancy Act and Agricultural Land Ceiling Act;

¢ The Revenue Inspection Commissioner is responsible for internal
audit;

71



£ Principal Secretary (Revenue) is responsible for conversion of
land from agricultural use to any non-agricultural use and new and
restricted tenure to old tenure and levy of occupancy price (OP),
premium price (PP), conversion tax (CT), non-agricultural
assessment (NAA), measurement fees (MF) and fine for breach of
conditions in respect of such conversion;

The Special Secretary (Appeals) is responsible for hearing and
finalizing the cases where appeals against decisions of the Collectors
in matters related to land are made to him;

The Superintendent of Stamps and Inspector General of Registration
is responsible for the levy of stamp duties on various documents
registered and the valuation of stamp duty on the documents
registered under Bombay Stamp Duty Act, 1958; and

The Settlement Commissioner and Director of Land Records is
responsible for the survey of lands, consolidation of holdings,
maintaining and updating of lands, survey and re-survey of villages
of tribal areas, deciding the arcas/borders of personal land holdings,
providing copies of land records and advising Government on
matters relating to the survey and consolidation of land holdings.

3.1.3 Audit Objectives

The broad objective of audit was to assess the performance of the department
on the following parameters:

Financial Management;
Planning, programme management and supervision;
Human Resource Management; and

Internal Control Mechanism.

3.1.4 Audit Criteria

Audit criteria adopted for the evaluation of performance of the Department

were —
.

Provisions of the Budget Manual;

Rules and orders framed by the Department and orders and
instructions of the Government issued from time to time; and

Guidelines of the schemes implemented by the department.

3.1.5 Audit Coverage and Methodology

There were 524 units under the Department which were divided into three
categories! based on annual expenditure for audit purpose. Based on stratified
sampling method, records of 67° units (2007-10) including six Departmental

 Category—A (units cach having an annual expenditure above one ctore rupees )-82 units; Category—B (units each

having an annual expenditure of २50 lakh but less than one crore rupees)-239 units; C:
an annual expendi
2 Category-A— 54 units; Category-B— 13 units

ory-C (units each having,

ire less than €50 lakh)-203 units
Category-B - 13 units

72



a was
unrealistic and
lacked credibility due
to persistent savings
occurring each year

Heads’ (Appendix-XIX) were selected (April 2010 to May 2011) for
detailed check. Exit Conference with Principal Secretary, Revenue
Department was held (October 2011) to explain the audit findings.

Audit Findings
Financial Management

3.1.6 Excess expenditure

The budgetary allocations for the Revenue department are made under Grant
No. 76 to 82. The budget provision, expenditure there against and savings
during 2007-10 were as detailed in Table 1 below.

Table-1: Budget provisions, expenditure and savings

(Rupees in crore)
, Percentage
Year Budget Expenditure Savings of ४
Provision हि
Savings
A. Revenue Expenditure
2007-08 739.04 590.83 148.21 20.05
2008-09 985.27 957.79 27.48 2.79
2009-10 1244.93 961.97 282.96 22.73
B. Capital Expenditure
2007-08 6.34 482 1.52 2397
2008-09 263.87 218.80 45.07 17.08
2009-10 212.86 211.66 1.20 0.56

(Source: - Appropriation accounts for the year 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10)

We observed several deficiencies in financial management including poor
budgeting and expenditure control, as discussed in the succeeding
paragraphs.

3.1.6.1 Budgeting

According to Paragraph 11 of Gujarat Budget Manual (Volume 1), the
Controlling Executive Officers are required to prepare Budget Estimates
(BEs) in a realistic manner taking into account all relevant factors like staff
strength, scheme outlay, past trends etc. As per the manual, the Principal
Secretary/Secretary and Commissioners are entrusted with the responsibility
of preparing realistic budgets for the department. A review of the budget
provisions and expenditure in the last three years indicated that BEs were
unrealistic and lacked credibility in view of the persistent and substantial
savings. Timely action for surrender of savings was not initiated. These are
elaborated below —

* The savings at the end of the year were more than the supplementary
grants as can be seen from Table 2 given below. This indicates that
supplementary grants were obtained without proper analysis/
justification and that the expenditure werenot monitored or reviewed
by controlling officers, defeating the very purpose of effective
budgeting.

* (i) Pr. Secretary, Revenue Department, Gandhinayar; (ii) Commissioner, Land Reforms, Gandhinayar; (iii)
Revenue Inspection Commissioner, Gandhinayar; (iv) Scttlement Commissioner and Director of Land Records,
Gandhinagar; (४) Pr. Secretary (Appeal), Revenue Department, Gandhinagar; abd (vi) Superintendent of Stamps and
Inspector General of Registration, Gandhinagar

73



Rush of expenditure
during the month of
March was noticed in
nine DDOs

Table-2: Supplementary grants and savings
(Rupees in crore)

Grant No. Year Amount saved
Té(Revenue 2008-09 1.97 6.16
76(Revenue) 2009-10 1.71 4.11
77(Revenue) 2008-09 5.23 9.61
81 (Revenue) 2008.09 0.35 1.85
82 (Capital) 2007-08 0.10 0.16

(Source: Appropriation accounts for the years 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10)

* Scrutiny of records of 16 offices* revealed huge difference between
the BEs and actual allotment during the years 2008-09 and 2009-10.
The shortfall in actual allotment against the BEs ranged between three
per cent and 69 per cent as shown in Appendix XX. Delays ranging
from five days to three months in sending the monthly expenditure
returns to the Department by 11 Drawing and Disbursing Officers®
(DDOs) were also noticed.

When pointed out, Deputy Secretary, Revenue Department stated (November
2011) that a minimum of 33 per cent of anticipated expenditure on
construction was provided for in the BEs as per instructions of Finance
Department. However, due to non receipt of Plans and Estimates (P&E) from
the executing department, the provisions resulted in savings and ultimate
surrender. DS also stated that expenditure against provisions made for relief
work, disaster work, jantri work, etc. depends upon occurrence of events, in
the absence of which the amounts were surrendered.

The reply of the DS is not justified because —

* Non-receipt of P&E from the work executing departments indicate
lack of co-ordination between the owner and work executing
departments; and

¢ Making provision in the BEs for uncertain items resulted in wasteful
provisions in the Budget, which could have been otherwise provided
for any other priority items.

3.1.6.2 Rush of expenditure

As per para 109 of the Gujarat Budget Manual, expenditure during the year
should as far as possible, be uniformly spread over during the year and rush
of expenditure during the last quarter and particularly during the last month
should be avoided. Scrutiny of records of Settlement Commissioner and
Director of Land Records, Gandhinagar revealed that there were cases of rush
of expenditure (Appendix XXI) ranging from 23 per cent to 100 per cent
under different heads of account (2007-10).

+ (i) Settlement Commissioner and Director of Land Records, Gandhinayar; (ii) Collectors at Dahod, Rajkot,
Sabarkantha, Gandhinagar, Godhra, Ahmedabad, Bhuj, Narmada, Bhavnagar, Dang-Ahwa and Valsad; (iii)
Mamlatdars at Navsari (City), Bhuj, Zalod, and Deputy Collector (Prant), Vadodara.

* Collectors at Sabarkantha (32 Days), Gandhinagar (five days), Godhra (3 months), Kutch (39 days), Rajkot (seven
days), Mehsana (26 days), Bhavnagar (16 days), Dangs (20 days) Settlement Commissioner and Director of Land
Records (two months), Dy. Collector (Prant) Navsari (45 days), Mamlatdar Bhuj (12 Days)

74



5 ग॑श्4.77 crore
allotted for specific
scheme remain
parked in PLAs of
DDOs

Detailed Contingent
bills to the extent of
217.15 crore were not
submitted in time by
20 DDOs

Chapter III: CCO based Audit

Similar rush of expenditure (for procurement of articles) under different
heads of account ranging between 20 per cent’ and 100 per cent’ (2008-10)
was found in nine field offices test checked (Appendix XXII).

The Settlement Commissioner and Director of Land Records attributed
reasons for heavy expenditure in the last month of the financial year to late
issue of administrative sanctions and time consumed in tendering process.
The reply was not tenable as this indicated lack of planning of departmental
activities, as the time required for tendering is known. This also indicated
inadequate monitoring of expenditure.

When reported, Deputy Secretary, Revenue Department stated (November
2011) that resurvey of land due in every decade was in arrears for 130 years.
SCDLR handled the entire operation with new technology and machine based
survey programme, replacing the old technology. The activities involved
digitalized and geo-referenced data, establishing of control points across the
resurvey area using DGPS* and establishing its network. This involved pre-
tendering process for standardization of new benchmarks, detailed planning
of logistics and manpower, etc.

The reply of the Deputy Secretary was not tenable as provisions in the
Budget were made without any ground-work, as a result of which much time
was lost in completing the procedure warranting a rush of expenditure at the
fag end of the financial year.

3.1.6.3 Parking of funds in Personal Ledger Accounts

Under Rule 193 of Gujarat Treasury Rules, 2000 withdrawal of funds from
treasuries to avoid lapse of budget grants and keeping them in PLA/Bank is
prohibited.

Funds sanctioned for implementation of the schemes were being placed at the
disposal of Collectors/Mamlatdars; this could be kept in Personal Ledger
Account (PLA) of respective officers till the end of the year and incur
expenditure incurred from this account. However, unspent balances, if any, at
the end of the year were to be credited into Government account.

We observed that there was an unspent balance of $10.54 crore in the PLA of
Collector, Godhra (March 2010), of which, in contravention to codal
provisions 1.56 crore and %3.21 crore were lying since March 2008 and
March 2009 respectively”.

3.1.6.4 Detailed Contingent Bills not submitted or submitted late

Rule 211 of Gujarat Treasury Rules, 2000 provides that Detailed Contingent
(DC) Bills should be sent to the Accountant General (Accounts and
Entitlement) Gujarat, Rajkot by Drawing and Disbursing officers within three

* Collector, Dahod : Major Head 2014 in 2009-10

7 Collector, Gandhinagar : Major Head 2053-093-05 in 2009-10

“Differential Global Positioning System

+ This included 25.39 lakh for Sardar Sarovar Project, 71.02 crore tor eclebration of Independence Day by
yarpalikas, 21.94 crore for tourism, etc. since 2009

75



= of land
revenue arrears
mounted to €56.47
crore

Audit Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

months from the date of drawal of the funds on Abstract Contingent (AC)
Bills.

During scrutiny of records, it was noticed that in nine out of 67 DDOs
(Appendix XXIII), 60 DC Bills amounting to 710.58 crore were not
submitted (May 2010 to March 2011) despite lapse of one month to 23
months beyond the due dates'°. Further, cases of delayed submission of DC
bills were noticed (April 2010 to March 2011) in 11 DDOs, where 211 DC
Bills amounting %6.57 crore were submitted after delays ranging from one
month to 41 months'! (Appendix XXIV). DDOs attributed delays in sending
DC Bills to heavy work load and shortage of staff.

3.1.6.5 Arrears in recovery of Land Revenue

As per Rule 117-C of Gujarat Land Revenue Rules, 1972, Mamlatdars were
required to maintain detailed account”? of revenue demands raised during the
year, collections made there-against and amounts in arrears at the end of the
respective year. Scrutiny of records of sampled Mamlatdars revealed that
recovery of Land Revenues on agriculture and non-agricultural land and
education cess thereon amounting to %56.47 crore was in arrears
(March 2011); arrears of recovery ranged between 40 per cent and
97 per cent (Appendix XXV).

Mamlatdar, Dahod had not maintained any account of land revenue charges
and no demands were being raised. Only random collections based on
assessments filed by the landowners were being made. Hence, the pending
dues could neither be assessed nor demands raised. No notices were served to
the defaulters for recovery of arrears and accounts were not closed since
2001-02.

When pointed out, Deputy Secretary, Revenue Department stated (November
2011) that Revenue Inspection Commissioner (RIC) gave guidance and
instructions periodically to all taluka Mamlatdars. But due to Panchayat
election and staff shortage, total recovery could not be effected.

The reply of the DS is not tenable as (i) guidance given to the Mamlatdars
failed to make any impact, (ii) Panchayat election happens for a very short
duration and the remaining period was not fruitfully utilized and
(iii) necessary manpower should have been provided for collection of the
revenues of the State.

3.1.6.6 Penalty from defaulting shopkeepers not recovered

District Supply Officer may impose such penalties under Section 6A and 6B
of Essential Commodities (License, Control and Declaration of stock) Act,
1955 for violation of the provisions of the Act from fair price shopkeepers,
petrol pumps, etc. Wherever these penalties were not paid by the concerned
shop-keepers, etc., cases are forwarded to the Mamlatdars having jurisdiction
to recover the amount as ‘arrears of land revenue’.

'° This includes 18 bills (898.72 बता) not submitted for over 12 months
‘! This includes 44 bills amountiny to 777.44 lakh delayed for over 12 months
*? Survey number-wise and land halder-wise

76



E III: CCO based Audit

We observed from the records of 19 Mamlatdars selected that in nine
talukas'*, though DSOs imposed penalties amounting to 719.01 lakh (2007-
10) on the defaulting shopkeepers, the concerned Mamlatdars had not
effected any recovery. As penalties are prescribed to serve as deterrent
against the violation of provisions of the Act, non-recovery may encourage
defaulters.

When pointed out, Deputy Secretary, Revenue Department stated
(November 2011) that the issue pertains to Food & Civil Supply Department.
However, the fact remains that when it pertain to recovery, respective
Mamlatdars were to take necessary action for realization of the penalty
imposed from the defaulting shop-keepers.

3.1.6.7 TDS from contractors not recovered

As per Section 194-C of Income Tax Act, 1961, wherever payment to
contractors/sub-contractors in a single case was more than %30,000'4 or
payment was more than 775,000 per annum’, besides the surcharge/cess as
applicable from time to time, tax at two per cent was required to be deducted
at source (TDS).

We observed from the records of six 0005 that TDS amounting to 71.89 lakh
(inclusive of surcharge and cess) was not deducted by the paying authorities
while making payments to various contractors (Appendix XXVI). Thus the
recovery was not monitored by Income Tax Department/ Government of
Gujarat. The DDOs stated (May-December 2010) that necessary deduction
would be effected in due course.

When pointed out, Deputy Secretary, Revenue Department stated (November
2011) that instructions have been issued to effect TDS without exception.

Planning and Programme Management
3.1.7 Shortcomings in Planning and Programme Management

Annual action plans were prepared by HODs for the programmes to be carried
out by the department during the year. Important schemes'® like consolidation
of land holdings, carrying out land surveys, creation of a databank of land
records and its proper preservation by lamination of survey records and
creating an adequate IT infrastructure for scanning and maintenance of land
records were in operation. Audit scrutiny however revealed several
shortcomings in the planning and implementation of the schemes which are
discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.

3.1.7.1 Shortfall in the achievement of targets

The Annual Action Plans (AAPs) were being prepared setting out financial
and physical targets for the various activities to be undertaken. Audit analysis

© Mamlatdars at (i) Lunawada (81.99 lakh); (ii) Limkheda (30.03 lakh); (iii) Navsari (81,05 lakh); (iv) Godhra
(1.80 lakh); (v) Santrampur (0.38 lakh); (vi) Dahod (2.25 lakh); (vii) Zalod (80.04 lakh); (था) Vadodara (City)
(9.83 lakh); (ix) Shchara (21.64 lakh)

"20,000 up to 30.06.2010

© ₹ 50,000 per amnum up to 30.06.2010

‘Implemented by Settlement Commissioner and Director of Land Records

77



= Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

revealed that AAPs prepared by Settlement Commissioner and Director of
Land Records were not realistic and there were persistent shortfalls
(eight per cent to 100 per cent) in achievements of physical targets fixed
(Appendix XXVID).

Settlement Commissioner and Director of Land Records attributed
(March 2011) reasons for such shortfalls to delay in Government approval to
programmes, staff shortage, late release of grants, less survey works, etc.
Thus, there were deficiencies in planning as well as execution of
programmes.

Similarly, though the work of introduction of City Surveys'’ in important
towns and cities was being planned every year since 2007-08, the work was
not yet started (March 2011). Thus, despite vacant posts, unachievable targets
were being fixed, which was attributed to vacancies.

When pointed out, Deputy Secretary, Revenue Department stated
(November 2011) that Heads of Departments have since prepared ‘targets’
and ‘action plan’. The reply of the DS is not justified in view of the
persistent/high short fall in achieving the targets.

3.1.7.2 Implementation of the Gujarat Land Ceiling Act
° Surplus land not distributed to the beneficiaries

As per Gujarat Land Ceiling Act, 1960 (GLC Act), Government shall take
possession of land beyond ceiling limit from land owners and distribute it
among agricultural workers or to needy agricultural labourers of SC/ST and
other weaker sections as per yearly targets.

We observed from the records of Commissioner of Land Reforms that as of
November 2009, as against declaration'® of 2,38,339 acres of land as surplus,
possession of only 1,79,327 acres of land was taken by Government, of
which 15,587 acres of land was yet to be distributed (March 2011) among the
eligible beneficiaries, as detailed in Table 3.

Table-3: Details of distribution of surplus land

Declared Possession of surplus Land Total No. of
Year surplus land taken by the distributed beneficiaries
land (Acre) Government (Acre) | (७००)
Up to 2007-08 237737 179134 162505 36350
Up to 2008-09 237758 179175 162721 36682
Upto 2009-10 238339 179327 163314 37091
Upto 2010-11 238339 179327 163740 37353

(Source: Information collected from Commissioner of Land Reforms Office)

The Commissioner attributed (April 2011) the shortfall to portion of land
being under litigation, but could not furnish the details of actual areas under
litigation as the details of the same were not available with him. However,
Commissioner, being the controlling authority was required to have all
requisite details, non-availability of which indicated lack of monitoring.

"” Survey of city lands and measurements, issuing of property cards to property holders
"Declarations are made from time to time since 1960

78



Ez 11: CCO based Audit

When pointed out, Deputy Secretary, Revenue Department stated (November
2011) that there were a number of litigation cases, still Collectors were given
a target of distribution of 1453 acres of land.

¢ = Financial assistance to the land allottees not paid

Under GLC Act, provision existed for financial assistance (FA) of
%5000/hectare to the beneficiaries for purchase of agriculture equipment, etc.
We observed that of the 1003 beneficiaries (2008-11) who were
allotted surplus land, 520 beneficiaries (52 per cent) alone were given FA
(March 2011). Thus, though the entitled groups were either agricultural
workers/labourers of SC/ST, etc. who needed FA, all of them were not
provided FA. Further, nothing was found on record to show that the
beneficiaries were motivated to file applications for FA and to avail benefits
of the scheme.

When pointed out, Deputy Secretary, Revenue Department stated (November
2011) that FA was given on selective basis on the basis of recommendations
of Agricultural Officers and Collectors. The reply of the Deputy Secretary
was not tenable as the entitled group for allotment of land itself was of
agricultural workers/labourers of SC/ST, etc. were the theory of selective FA
was without any basis.

3.1.7.3 Preservation of important records

¢ Pending Lamination Works

Settlement Commissioner and Director of Land Records instructed
(May 1999) Superintendents of Land Records (Vadodara and Surat) to
laminate important records like Tippan Books, Gunakar Books, etc. for their
preservation; lamination work of Tippan Books was given priority.

We observed from the records of Deputy Director, Land Records, Surat
that work taken up in 1999 was stopped (2004-05) when 541 out of 2412
Tippan Books (22 per cent) were pending for lamination; there were 3447
Gunakar Books, but none of them was laminated.

The lamination work was held up as the machines were shut-down (February
2005). Similarly, information in respect of other four districts’? under the
control of Deputy Director, Land Records, Surat revealed that 43286 Tippan
Books” were yet to be laminated. This indicated that the planning made for
preservation of important documents was not implemented.

When pointed out, Deputy Secretary, Revenue Department stated (November
2011) stated that City Superintendent, Surat has been instructed to complete
the work by March 2012.

¢ Pending work of scanning of city survey records

Settlement Commissioner and Director of Land Records awarded (March
2007) the work of scanning of city survey records of seven cities to an
agency”". On completion of the work, the agency was to provide the data~-CD
of property cards after correcting the entries as directed by the authorities.

® Bharuch, Narmada, Navsari and Valsad
* Bharuch-2044, Narmada-687, Navsari-S1 and Valsad-40504
2! Sanghvi Computer Center Private Ltd., Rajkot

79



= Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

However the agency had not submitted (March 2011) the data-CD, due to
which the updated records were not available with the department.

When pointed out, Deputy Secretary has stated that CDs and hard-dise of
scanned property cards have since been deposited by the original agency at
the office of the Settlement Commissioner. The reply of the Deputy Secretary
was not tenable as soft copies of these documents were delivered only after
four years after award of work in March 2007.

3.1.7.4 Delay in providing services to common people by e-Dhara Centers

Section 135-D of Land Revenue Code, 1879 provides that application
received for change in holding of lands was required to be disposed of within
thirty days of its receipt. The work of change in holdings was being done
electronically through e-Dhara centers. Scrutiny of records of Mamlatdar of
selected talukas revealed that out of 30255 applications, delays ranging from
one month to six months were noticed in 21386 applications (71 per cent) in
making changes in land records (Appendix-XXVIII).

The concerned Mamlatdars attributed (March 2011) reasons for the delay to
staff shortage and heavy work load. The reply was not tenable as the public
was deprived of getting the services within the prescribed time.

When pointed out, Deputy Secretary, Revenue Department stated (November
2011) that review of pending entries was taken up at Collector conference.

3.1.7.5 Assistance under a GOI sponsored scheme not utilized

Government of India (Ministry of Rural Development) introduced (1990-91)
Strengthening of Revenue Administration and Updating of Land Records and
National Land Records Modernization Programme; GOI and _ State
Government shared the expenditure equally. Settlement Commissioner and
Director of Land Records (SCDLR) was the implementing authority. In all
%122.53 crore was allotted (1990-2011), of which expenditure of %51.35
crore incurred (42 per cent) as shown in Table 4.

Table_4: Assistance under CSS and its utilization
Rup

Year Funds allotted Expenditure Percentage of
during the year expenditure
1990-2007 19.16 16.65 87
2007-08 21.44 1.65 [8
2008-09 18.84 0.26 [a
2009-10 36.35 6.05 17
2010-11 26.74 26.74 100
Total 122.53 51.35 42

(Source:-Information collected from Department)

Non-utilization of fund for updating and modernizing of land records
indicated inadequacies in preparation of project proposals, slow progress of
work as well as inadequate departmental monitoring and supervision.

Settlement Commissioner and Director of Land Records stated (March 2011)
that due to late revalidation of grant and Parliamentary election during the
period (2009), funds could not be utilized. The reply of SCDLR is not tenable
as progress of expenditure during 2007-10 was negligible and that out of total

80



= of internal
audit by RIC was less
due to shortage of
staff

Chapter III: CCO based Audit

expenditure of %51.35 crore (1990-2011), %26.74 (52 per cent) was spent in
2010-11 only.

Internal controls

3.1.8 Internal control and vulnerability to fraud and corruption
3.1.8.1 Internal Audit

Internal Audit (IA) was provided to obtain compliance to Government rules,
regulations, orders, etc. General Administration Department (GAD) directed
(August 1987) that all the departments shall carry out IA to assess the work
done, the schemes and programmes carried out, the implementation of rules
and regulations, hearing and redressal of complaints of public/Government
servants and maintenance of office records. The IA work was being attended
by staff specifically allotted.

Revenue Inspection Commissioner (RIC) was responsible for IA of various
field offices” under Revenue Department. Test check of records revealed that
RIC did not conduct IA in 648 (75 per cent) offices.

Settlement Commissioner & Director of Land Records (SCDLR) and
Superintendent of Stamps (SS) were conducting IA in the offices under their
respective charge. Scrutiny of records revealed shortfall in IA ranging from
six per cent to 100 per cent as given in Table 5.

Table_S: Shortfall in conducting internal audit by the SCDLR and SS.

Year Target * Achievement ‘Shortfall
(August to July) Number of offices (in per cent)
SCDLAR | SS SCDLAR | SS SCDLAR 58
2007-08 119 28 48 [0०0 | 60 100
2008-09 118 [_ 28 68 | 22 42 21
2009-10 121 | 28 m4] 0 6 100

(Source: - Information collected from Department)

Out of 67 units test-checked, IA was not conducted in 36 units (2007-11).
This indicated that the existent internal control mechanism was not adhered
to as planned. The deficiencies and irregularities may remain undetected in
absence of a sound internal control system.

3.1.8.2 Shortfall in inspection

Government in General Administration Department Circular (February 1965,
November 1971) provides that inspection of different offices was required to
be conducted by the Secretary and other Heads of Offices/Departments to
ensure proper functioning of various offices under the Department. During
test check of records of 16 offices, shortfall ranging from 25 per cent to 76
per cent was noticed, whereas the shortfall in inspection by the subordinate
officers ranged between five per cent and 93 per cent (Appendix XXIX).

tuch as Collector offices, District Panchayat Offices, Prant offices, Land Reforms offices, Mamlatdar offices. etc.
Excluding backlog

81



= Report No.2

ivil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

The shortfall was attributed by the concerned officers to shortage of staff and
heavy workload. The replies of the officers were not tenable as this is an
important function to be carried out by them.

When pointed out, Deputy Secretary, Revenue Department stated (November
2011) that inspections of the office of Settlement Commissioner & Director
of Land Records and City Survey Superintendent, Rajpipla were conducted in
July 2011.

3.1.8.3 Lack of response to inspection by the Accountant General

Compliance to 996 Accountant General (Civil Audit), Gujarat, Rajkot conducts periodical

paragraphs of 422 inspections of all the Heads of Offices to test check their transactions and to

Inspection Reports verify the maintenance records as per prescribed rules and procedures. After

was yet to be made . है हे Far .

by Revenue inspection, Inspection Reports containing audit observations were being

Department issued to Heads of the Department, with copies to Heads of Offices
inspected.

Rule 14 of the Gujarat Financial Rules, 1971 stipulates that prompt reply to
audit observations be furnished to ensure corrective action and
accountability. However, compliance to 996 paragraphs of 422 Inspection
reports were outstanding (March 2011) as mentioned in Table 6 given.

Table-6: Details of outstanding Inspection Reports
No. of No. of
ti . Inspection No. of ending | No. of pendin;
Office Name Audit Year Reports Paragraphs Inspection Paragraphs
issued Reports
Collectors 1993-2011 181 792 109 375
Mamlatdars 1993-2011 220 425 220 423
Dy. Collectors 1999-2011 44 18 44 118
Land Records 1993-2011 38 313 40 67
Otices
Rexistration 1997-2011 7 26 07 09
Offices
Ambaji Temple 2002-2011 छ | 0 | @ 04
Total 702 1878 422 | 9» |

Lack of remedial action by the departmental authorities resulted in non-
settlement of these outstanding paragraphs. As a result, the deficiencies and
lapses pointed out continued to remain unaddressed.

When pointed out, Deputy Secretary, Revenue Department stated (November
2011) that instructions have since been issued to all concerned in the matter.

3.

.4 Delay in credit of receipts in Government account

Rule 25 of Gujarat Treasury Rules, 2000 provides that all moneys received
by or tendered to the Government should be paid in full within the next two
working days into Government account.

We observed instances of receipts” not being credited into Government
account in time. In the office of Principal Secretary (Appeals), it was noticed
that fees amounting to %74,689 were received during October 2008 to
January 2011, of which %52,134 was remitted into Government account in

26 Copying fee, survey fee, RTI tee, ration card fee, Land Revenue Receipt, ete

82



= III: CCO based Audit

March 2011 after delay ranging from two to five months; the remaining
amount of 22,555 was yet to be remitted (March 2011).

In respect of other four offices > test checked, such delays in crediting the
receipts into Government account ranged between one month and 26 months.

Retention of Government moneys beyond the stipulated time indicated
inadequate financial control and monitoring of Government receipts, besides
facilitating temporary misappropriation of Government money.

When pointed out, Deputy Secretary, Revenue Department stated (November
2011) that PS (Appeal) has deposited %22,555 into Government account and
that instructions have been issued to all officers to remit receipts within the
stipulated period. The reply of the Deputy Secretary was not tenable as the
system in this regard was not followed by the concerned officers.

3.1.8.5 Deficiencies in execution of security bonds

Rule 176 of Gujarat Finance Rules, 1971 provides that Government servants,
entrusted with handling of cash, stamps, library books, etc. were required to
submit security bonds of value as prescribed by the competent authority and
if personal security was given by another employee, solvency certificate was
required to be obtained every year from him.

We observed from the records of 67 DDOs that neither security bond from the
employees handling cash/valuables nor solvency certificates from other
employees were obtained. Failure to obtain security bonds from employees
entrusted with the responsibility of handling cash, etc. increases risk of
pecuniary losses.

3.1.8.6 Irregularities in maintaining Cash Books
Rule 28 of the Gujarat Treasury Rules, 2000 stipulates that —

° Every officer receiving money on behalf of the Government shall
maintain a Cash Book in Form GTR-2;

* All monetary transactions should be entered in the Cash Book as soon
as they occur and attested by the head of the office in token of having
been verified;

* The Cash Book should be closed regularly and completely checked.
The Head of the Office should verify the totalling of Cash Book or
have it checked by some responsible officer other than the writer of
the Cash Book and certify them accordingly;

¢ At the end of each month, the head of office should verify the Cash
Balance in the Cash Book and record a signed and dated certificate to
that effect mentioning therein the balance both in words and figures;

» 0) Deputy Collector (Prant), Vadodara: %16495 (delay upto 26 months); (ji) Mamlatdar, Bhuj: 2253405 (delay
upto 1] months); (iii) Mamlatdar, Kalol: ₹1820 (delay upto two months); and (iv) Mamlatdar, Dabhoi: ₹ै 13932
(delay upto one month)

83



= physical
verification of dead
stock registers
remained pending
since long in nine
offices

Audit Report No.2 (Ci

il) for the year ended 31 March 2011

Use of erasure or overwriting of an entry once made in the Cash Book
was strictly prohibited;

Monthly physical verification of cash was required to be done by the
DDO; and

Surprise check of cash was required to be done by the officer other
than the DDO at a regular interval.

We observed from the cash books (2007-11) maintained in 1976 offices the
following omissions/deficiencies —

No periodical surprise checks were conducted (2007-10) by
competent authority in any office test checked; overwriting and
corrections remained un-attested;

In the test checked offices (except SCDLR), Drawing and Disbursing
Officers did not certify cash balances at the end of the month;

In Cash Book of City Survey Superintendent, Surat-I, transactions
were not entered for the period 3 December 2010 to 30 March 2011.
From 30 November 2010 to 2 December 2010, entries were made
only on the receipt side and there was no entry on the payment side
though payments were made. From 7 August 2010 to 29 November
2010, there were no entries related to opening balance and closing
balance on many pages;

In the Cash Book of Mamlatdar, Bhuj, full details such as from/to
whom amounts were received/paid and nature of transaction were not
recorded for the years 2009-11; and

Transactions made for the period from 3 August 2008 to 24 August
2010 in respect of Disaster Branch of the Collector, Bhuj were not
reflected in the cash book.

Failure to maintain the cash book as per the codal provisions has the potential
of fraud and misuse of funds.

3.1.8.7 Dead stock registers/ verification

Rule 98 of the Gujarat Contingent Expenditure Rules, 1958 provides that a
register prescribed under the rules should be maintained in Form-8 for
recording purchase of furniture, fixture and other dead stock articles. Rule 98
ibid further provides that the Head of Office would be responsible for
verification of ground stock of the articles annually with reference to the
register and would record a certificate to that effect.

> Three Heads of Departments : (i) Principal Secretary (Appeal), Ahmedabad; (ii) Commissioner (Land Reforms),
Gandhinagar; (iii) Settlement Commissioner and Director of Land Records, Gandhinagar; five Collectors at
(iv)Vadodara; (४) Gandhinagar; (vi) Ahmedabad; (vii) Bharuch; (viii) Bhuj; Eight Mamlatdars at : (ix) Bhuj; (x)
Kalol; (xi) Dabhoi; (xii) Santrampur; (xiii) Vadodara; (xiv) Ahmedalad; (xv) Shehra; (xvi) Limkheda: Two Deputy.
Collectors (Pranty: at (xvii) Himatnagar; (xviii) Viramgamy and One (xix) City Survey Superintendent at Surat (1)

84



= ranged
between 14 and 100
per cent in various
HoDs of Revenue
Department

Chapter IIL

"CO based Audit

On test check in nine offices”, it was noticed that annual physical
verification of the articles and dead-stock registers was not conducted.
Pendency of such verification ranged between two years and 34 years.

Receipts of some items/articles were not recorded in the Dead Stock
Registers of three offices viz. Principal Secretary (Appeal), Ahmedabad (one
lap-top), Commissioner (Land Reforms), Gandhinagar (two mobile handsets,
one vehicle and one fax machine) and Mamlatdar, Lunawada (10 computers).
Failure to regularly verify dead stock articles has the risk of theft and loss of
Government assets un-noticed. Concerned DDOs stated that thenceforth the
Register would be maintained as per rules.

3.1.8.8 Delay in completing preliminary inquiry and finalization of
vigilance cases

Gujarat Civil Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1971 provide that on
receipt of complaint (major and minor) against staff, preliminary inquiry is
required to be completed by the competent authority within three months and
the case is to be finalized in a reasonable time. It was noticed that in SCDLR
office, of 81 complaints received (2004-11), as at the end of February 2011—

* In 38 cases preliminary inquiry was not completed; and

* Period of delay ranged from one to two years (10 cases); two to three
years (six cases); three to four years (two cases); four to five years
(four cases); five to six years (one); four to five years (three); three to
four years (two); and two to three years (12).

Thus, the preliminary enquiries were badly delayed. Failure to act quickly on
complaints against the charged officials can result in denial of justice for a
long period.

Human Resource Management

3.1.9 Shortages/Resource Development
3.1.9.1 Acute shortage of officers and staffs

To carry out various functions of the department, it is essential that vacant
posts of different categories be filled up immediately. Shortage of staff for
considerable period eventually affects the performance of the department.

Recruitment to Class 1 and II posts are made through Gujarat Public Service
Commission and Class III and IV posts through Collectors. As of January
2011, shortage of man-power ranged between 14 per cent and 100 per cent in
different categories of staff under four HoDs** (Appendix XXX). In many
cases, as commented in the foregoing paragraphs, Departmental/Office heads

27 (i) Principal Secretary (Appeal), Ahmedabad, (ii) Commissioner of Land Reforms, Gandhinagar, (iii) Settlement
Commissioner and Director of Land Records, Gandhinagar, (iv) City Survey Superintendent, Surat, (v) Deputy
Director of Land Records, Surat, (vi) Superintendent of Stamps. Gandhinagar, (vii) Mamlatdar, Halol, (viii)
Mamlatdar, Lunawada and (ix) Mamlatdar, Shehara

मऊ (i) Principal Secretary (Revenue); (ii) Settlement Commissioner and Director of Land Records;, (iii)
Superintendent of Stamps and (iv) Inspector General of Registration

85



= substantial
moneys were
available with ‘Dangs
District Reserve
Fund’, it was not
d for welfare of

Audit Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

attributed non-achievement of targets to shortage of manpower. Thus,
shortages of manpower adversely affected the performance of the Department
in carrying out various activities.

When pointed out, Deputy Secretary, Revenue Department stated (November
2011) that the process of filling the vacant posts has since been set in motion.

3.1.9.2 Training to staff and officers

Revenue Inspection Commissioner (RIC) was responsible for providing
Revenue Training to staff of the department for upgradation of their skill and
knowledge. The syllabus was prepared by RIC, while training was given by
two institutes viz. Din Dayal Institute, Gandhinagar and Sardar Patel Institute
of Public Administration, Ahmedabad. Subject matter of training was Land
Revenue administration.

Tt was observed that RIC did not have the details of staff who were trained,
coverage made, office-wise staff trained and to be trained, etc. The details of
officers/staff who were imparted training during the last three years were as
shown in Table 7.

Table-7: Details of training imparted

Sr. No. Name of Training Institute 2007-08 | 2008-09 Total
1 | Din Dayal Institute, 1607 1119 3748
Gandhinagar
2 | Sardar Patel Institute of Public 998 1171 1055 3224
Administration, Ahmedabad
Total 2605 | 2290 2077 | 6972

(Source: Information collected from Department)

We also observed that the department had no records regarding the number of
officers/officials trained. In the absence of proper data-base, systematic
training of staff according to their training needs was not ensured.

Other points of interest
3.1.10 Management of other activities
3.1.10.1 Failure to utilize Dangs Reserve Fund

Dangs area was being administered by Crown Representatives of erstwhile
Bombay under British rule. Consequent on Constitutional changes and
abolition of Residencies (August 1947), Dangs area was merged (January
1948) in Bombay Province under Bombay (Enlargement of Area and
Alteration of Boundaries) Order, 1947.

With a view to utilizing surplus revenues, if any, realized from Dangs,
Government of Bombay decided (August 1948) preparation of separate
accounts for the receipts and payments of Dangs. Accordingly, it was decided
to deposit any difference between receipts and expenditure in Deposit head
(Reserve Fund). This Fund has been held separately for the exclusive purpose
of welfare of people of Dangs district.

86



है III: CCO based Audit

Afier the merger of Dangs district in Gujarat State (May 1960), available
balances with Bombay Government under the ‘Dangs District Reserve
Fund’? (DDRF) were transferred to Gujarat and DDRF was being
administered by Collector, Dangs. The said fund had a corpus of $3.04 crore
(July 2010).

We observed that no expenditure had been incurred from DDRF since
February 2001. On being pointed out, the Collector stated (March 2011) that
correspondence with the Government to get the permission to utilize the Fund
was made, but there was no response from the Government.

When pointed out, Deputy Secretary, Revenue Department stated (November
2011) that Finance Department has since decided to merge the Dangs
Reserve Fund in the Consolidated Fund of Gujarat. The reply of the Deputy
Secretary was not tenable as Fund remained unutilized since February 2001.

* Moneys invested in a company not realized

We observed that out of DDRF, 82 lakh was invested (1985-86) in Fixed
Deposit (FD) with Gujarat Electronics and Communication Limited (GECL),
Vadodara; the deposit was last due for maturity in April 1999.

On maturity (April 1999), Finance Department was required to take action to
encash the Fixed Deposit and the matter was stated to have been taken up
(June 1999) with Finance Department by the Collector. GECL continued to
make payment of interest till October 1999 and the company eventually went
into liquidation (February 2001). Collector reported the matter to Finance
Department and Revenue Department (June 1999), but no money could be
realized from the liquidator (March 2011).

Thus, as a result of failure to promptly encash the Fixed Deposit on maturity,
possibility of recovery of the money was bleak.

When pointed out. Deputy Secretary, Revenue Department stated (November
2011) that the deposit was an unsecured claim and the liability would be
discharged only after settlement of dues of secured creditors. Thus, money
meant for development of a backward tribal district has become
irrecoverable.

3.1.10.2 BPL status for deciding beneficiaries under Old Age Pension
scheme not verified

Under GOI ‘Vaya Vandana’ scheme launched during 1990-91, pension at a
rate of ¥200/month was payable to BPL beneficiaries above 65 years of age.
State Government also launched ‘Niradhar Pension Scheme’ (1990-91) to
those above 60 years and having no earning member in the family; however,

27 Fund exclusively created for the benefits of the people of Dangs under which the surplus
of the receipts of Dangs district over its expenditure was being transferred

87



E Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

there was no condition of the beneficiary being a BPL person. Those who
were above 65 years would be eligible for benefits under both the schemes if
they fulfilled conditions of the respective schemes.

Since launching (April 2008) of Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension
Scheme (IGNOAPS), Government of India discontinued ‘Vaya Vandana’
scheme. Pension at ¥200/month was payable under IGNOAPS to the BPL
beneficiaries on attaining 65 years of age.

We observed from the records of four 97008 that pension amounting to
%6.49 crore was paid (April 2008 to September 2010) under IGNOAPS at a
rate of $200 to 11,193 beneficiaries identified under the Niradhar Pension
Scheme (State) without verification of their BPL status for eligibility under
IGNOAPS.

On being pointed out, the DDOs agreed to the audit observation and stated
(August 2010) that BPL criteria of the pensioners would be verified under
intimation to audit.

3.1.11 Conclusion

Revenue department is an important department of the state and is
responsible for land management in the state. It is entrusted with the
important responsibility of maintenance and documentation of land records,
collection of land revenue etc. Weaknesses were however noticed in the
delivery of services to the people by the department. Full quantum of surplus
land acquired was not distributed to the landless labourers, and eligible
financial assistance for agricultural equipments to the allottees did not reach
them for want of their applications. Pendency with e-Dhara Centres for
making changes in land records was substantial.

Weaknesses were also noticed in the internal control mechanism of the
department. There were savings in the grants under the revenue department
which was attributed to the delay in receiving the plans and estimates from
the Roads and Building department. Rush of expenditure was reported due to
late receipt of administrative sanctions and delay in finalizing tenders.
Instances of parking of funds in PLA to avoid lapse of grants were also
noticed. Instances of Government receipts not promptly remitted into
Treasury as well as deficiencies in the maintenance of Cash Book were also
noticed. Penalties imposed by District Supply Officer on defaulting
shopkeepers were not being done promptly which could encourage them to
continue violation of the Essential Commodities Act. Internal audit, an
important tool to strengthen accountability, was in arrears with all the
Department Heads of the Revenue department.

® @) Dy. Collector (Prant), Rajkot - 1.75 crore upto September 2010 in 2914 cases (average), (ii) Deputy Collector
(Prant), Himatnagar - %1,97 crore upto Jume 2010 in 3654 cases (average), (iii) Dy. Collector (Prant), Navsari -
₹1.61 crore upto September 2010 in 2691 cases and (iv) Deputy Collector (Prant), Viramyam - %1.16 crore upto
September 2010 in 1934 cases (average)

88



= II: CCO based Audit

3.1.12 Recommendations

Savings out of Budget allotment be avoided and unspent balances
surrendered within the stipulated time frame; funds should not be
parked in PLAs and DC Bills against AC Bills drawn should be
submitted in time;

System may be streamlined to ensure that Government revenues are
recovered scrupulously and in time;

Landless labourers may be allotted surplus land already acquired and
mechanism evolved to ensure that they apply for and get due financial

assistance;

Working of e-Dhara Centres may be streamlined to make changes in
land records as per codal provisions;

Departmental Heads may take appropriate action to complete Internal
Audits in time; and

Cash Books should be maintained as per rules and receipts remitted
into Treasury immediately.

che WH.

(CHANDRA MAULI SINGH)

Rajkot Accountant General (Civil Audit), Gujarat

The

Countersigned

Ih

(VINOD RAI)

New Delhi Comptroller and Auditor General of India

The

89



90



BH

APPENDIX-I
Norms for contaminants in river/lake/ground water was not done
(Reference: Paragraph 1.1.7.1; Page 4)

Designated Best Use Class of | Criteria
Water
Drinking Water Source A * Total Coliforms Organism
without conventional MPN/100ml shall be 50 or less
treatment but after * Ph between 6.5 and 8.5
disinfection * Dissolved Oxygen (DO) 6mg/I
or more
¢ Biochemical Oxygen Demand
(BOD) 5 days 20* C 2mg/I or
less
Outdoor bathing रे * Total Coliforms Organism
(Organised) MPN/100 ml shall be 500 or
less pH between 6.5 and 8.5
Dissolved Oxygen 5mg/I or
more
¢ Biochemical Oxygen Demand -
5 days 20* C 3mg/I or less
Drinking water source after | C © Total Coliforms Organism
conventional treatment and MPN/100 ml shall be 5000 or
disinfection less pH between 6 and 9
Dissolved Oxygen 4mg/I or
more
© Biochemical Oxygen Demand -
5 days 20* C 3mg/l or less
Propagation of Wild life 7 © pH between 6.5 and 8.5
and Fisheries Dissolved Oxygen 4mg/I or
more
° Free Ammonia (as N) 1.2 mg/l
or less.
Irrigation, Industrial E © pH between 6.0 to 8.5
Cooling, Controlled Waste * Electrical Conductivity at 25*C
disposal micro mhos/cm Max. 2250
¢ Sodium absorption Ratio Max.
26
* Boron Max. 2 mg/l
¢ Fecal Coliform 500/100 ml
(MPN)
Below E Not meeting A,B,C, & E Criteria.

91



am Report No.2 (Ci

2011

vil) for the year ended 31 Mar

APPENDIX-IL
Statement showing sample analysis results of outlets of CEPTs
(Reference: Paragraph 1.1.12.2; Page 17)

Parameters BoD cop [| CoOL | Nu3 | ०७० SUL[ Tos | Temp
GPCB standards | __30 | 1000 | 250 | 100 | 50 | 10 | | 1000 | 200 [30
Narol 20-09-2010 195 | 1400 414 800 | 15 1 3566 29
जिओ 490 1493 | 6000 | 246 | 142] 73 | Nil ह2 15614 29
Odhay 29-11-2010 775 1408 100 | 9 | 12.4 [746 [Nil i 5016 a
Vatva 23-11-2010 370 1036 | 7000 [128 | 14 | 7.7 [Nil 840 18528 28
Sachin 7 5 2 7 5
PSIEL, 07-12-10 1 | 6020 302 50 | 50 | 12 | 7.04 | 017 286 | 556 | 14576 30
2. GCL 10-01-11 356 | 4950 | 1048 150 | 12.88 | 32 | 6.9 || 321 नि 30
Kadodara 22-03- 5 360 | -| 40 | -| 3.6 | 7.68 | 6.28 12 | 309 | 1378 29
2011 a5
Nandesari 12-01- हि Dark] हि 9 5
2011 68 | _-| 23 brown | -| 12 | 7.8 | Nil 9% | -| 31668 | -|
Padre 8 | 7ia3| 331 50 | -| wi] 738 | 01 nil |. 709 | 1244 | -|
10.04.2011 हि “ हि हि दि
Vapi 29-03-2011 ml) sas a ee | ae -|
Aakleshwar 29- 287 | -| 1156 | -| 24s | 23 | 7.48 | -| 205 | -| 15413 | -|
Sanand 23.
2010)
Ban (10-03- 89 | 990 275 50 | -| 3.60 | 7.74 [ -| 116 | 930 | 3852 29
Veraval Feb" 2011 | 1328 | -| ssa] -| 49s] -| 686] -| 82] -| -|  -|

92



if

APPENDIX-IIT

Statement showing details of water sample analysis of Borewell of Sanand
Eco-Project Limited at GIDC, Sanand during April 2009 to March 2011
(Reference: Paragraph 1.1.12.2; Page 19)

coD Nitrate | Flouride
Month BOD a | TDS | ०० | (mgittr) | (mg/itr) | (18100

April 2009 [0.91 | 7.5 1215 3.32 8.15 2.2[ 0.18 |
May 2009 0.95 7.65 1119 2.91 7.95 0.98 0.25
June 2009 0.85 7.7 | 1221 3.05 8.05 0.35 0.61
July 2009 0.90 7.65 1315 2.5 8.5 0.56 0.55
August 2009 0.75 7.8 1615 4.5 7.85 0.38 0.31
September 2009 0.65 7.5 1225 3.1] 6.90 | 0.25 0.25
October 2009 0.72 7.7 | 1400 4.1 8.5 0.09 0.18
November 2009 0.85 7.6 | 1230 4.8 7.92 0.85 0.22
December 2009 0.75 7.8 1500 3.8 7.96 0.89 0.19
January 2010 0.81 7.5 1195 2.21 8.32 0.65 0.21
February 2010 0.85 7.6 | 1505 5.2 7.95| 1.18 | 0.13
March 2010 0.79 7.55 1602 5.8 8.02 1.25 0.18
April 2010 0.85 7.8 1555 [ 6.0 | 9.05 0.78 0.20
May 2010 Loi; 8.0] 1800 5.0 8.50 0.56 0.09
June 2010 1.05 7.8 | 2000 4.9 8.20 045[ 0.1 |
July 2010 1.00 7.85 1995 5.1 8.10 0.09 0.06
August 2010 1.02 7.5 | 2010 4.5 8.00 1.50 0.53
September 2010 1.12 78 1890 4.3 8.50 | _ 1.60 | 0.49
October 2010 1.81 7.5 | 2210 48 9.10 1.67 0.55
November 2010 1.92 7.9 | 1910 5.8 8.95 175; 0.60 |
December 2010 0.98 7.5 1560 4.5 8.2 1.65 0.08
January 2011 0.89 7.78 1110 3.1 9.00 1.5 0.10
February 2011 1.11 7.55 1510 2.9 10.00 1.9 0.80
March 2011 0.95 7.75 1675 4.5 11.00 2.21 0.62

93



if Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

APPENDIX-IV

Statement showing performance of FETP at Ankaleshwar during January
2009 to September 2010

(Reference: Paragraph 1.1.12.2; Page 19)

Permissible Limit

Month [ PH | NH3-N CoD [ BOD | O&G Phenol
5.5 -8.5 50Mg/Itr | 250Mg/Itr | 100mg/Itr | 10mg/Itr | 5mg/Itr
Actual

January 2009 7.53 806.4 2369 835 [8.8] 2.16
February 2009 7.48 817.6 3002 1427 72 9.16
March 2009 75 784 1407 439 1.2 1.42
April 2009 6.86 714 2349 662.5 4.2 | 6.16 |
May 2009 7.16 342.4 1545 428 2.8 5.16
June 2009 7.46 418 1407 403 24 3.39
July 2009 7.88 621.6 1217 375 2.8 6.66
August 2009 7.72 961 1106 338 2.2 4.965
September 2009 7.64 543 974 216 2.7 6.83
October 2009 797 868 876 210 3.2 5.33
November 2009 7.72 563 904 | 188 | 2.4 3.83
December 2009 TIT 638 1148 228 4 3.83
January 2010 73 742 1496 287 3.2 2.83
February 2010 8.19 733.6 1731 393 3.6 1.75
March 2010 7.16 664 1703 302 5.6 3.33
April 2010 7.39 599 1945 597 NA NA
May 2010 7.65 795 1953 642 9.2 3
June 2010 7.21 560 1397 360 7.2 2.67
July 2010 7.64 762 1240 241 2.0 BDL
August 2010 7.46 403 762 175 2.8 BDL
September 2010 7.65 304 598 116 1.2 1.1
January 2010 7.64 515 634 213 4.8 0.69

Red colour denotes above permissible limits

94



a

APPENDIX-V
Statement showing water sample analysis of bore wells around GIDC Ankaleshwar

(Reference: Paragraph 1.1.12.2; Page 20)

Year [ om | TDS mg/l DO mg/l | COD mg/l |NO3-N mg/l] Fimg/l | NO2-N mg/l | NH3-N mg/l
[Borewell of Shri Ahmedbhai Patel, Piraman Village
|PermissibleLimit 65.8.5 [| 500 | | - | [- | 45 [| _- |] [| - | [| - |
[2005-06 8.31 1422 [| [| 1 3.6 0.3]
[2006-07 713 1604 5.02 19 24 0.8)
(2007-08 745 1588 6.08 18 554 056 0.04 BDL
[2008-09 7.82 1504 3.25 3.95 1.425 0.0208 0.05 BDL
(2009-10 1.78 2482 5.91 197 054 0.०2 04 BDL
[Borewell of Khadiwala, Mottafalia Piraman Village
[2005-06 3.25 676 6.5 5.3 6.5 0.28|
[2006-07 8.15 976 5.77 78 16 0.89}
(2007-08 755 116 5.21 8 3.32 056 0.08 BDL.
2008-09 [sa] 1128 3.22 3.95 2.875 0.0208] BDL BDL
2009-10 8.28 1788 | 46 | 797 054 0.02| 0.45 BDL.
[Borewell of Piraman Village Panchayat
[2005-06 8.36 1100 [| 5.7 0.4]
2006-07 7.62 1586 5.1 18.1 6.6 0.73
2007-08 8.05 106 577 16 2] oad 0.09 BDL
(2008-09 8.28 192 337 3.95 3.325 0.0234] 0.02 BDL
(2009-10 8.46 604 3.82 197 0.05 0.02] 03 BDL

‘Borewell at Alunj

Month BOD PH TDS DO. COD mg/ite) | Niteate(mgite)

‘April 2009 [098 | TIT 1784 3.96 7.82

May 2009 0.94 7.43 950 3.1 x

Tune 2009 0.82 7.88 1282 2.84 8.06

uly 2009 09 7.57 1434 3.45 8.03

‘August 2009 07 7.84 1818 5.55 8

September 2009 0.67 7.84 1832 3.96 7.84

October 2009 0.76 7.8 1872 3.98 797

November 2009 0.89 7.68 1972 5.1 7.94

December 2009 0.79 7.82 2812 439 79

Tanuary 2010 0.82 8.17 1906 497 794

February 2010 0.83 8.2 1798 7.15 79

March 2010 0.81 737 1858 4.88 8

April 2010 0.83 R15 1922 472 12.00 0.36
May 2010 [1.09 | 8.29 1796 497 7.94 0.64
Tune 2010 1.06 7.78 1972, 4.89 8 0.32
Tuly 2010 097 7.98 1932, 3.34 8

August 2070 157 7.89 1938 421 8 16
September 2010 29 8.25 1760 439 [8 | 245
October 2010 271 7.89 1942 4a | ६8 | 197
November 2010 1.39 8.16 1774 602 [8 | 0.90
December 2010 <3 8.20 1934 3.87 26 1.85
January 2011 236 7.63 1890 4.81 12 0.042
February 2011 2.11 7.46 1030 12 0.95
March 2011 0.93 7.80 2040 2.6 2.28

95



a Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

APPENDIX-VI
Statement showing the number of villages with water contamination from fluoride
salinity/TDS and nitrate out of the total 18,192 villages
(Reference: Paragraph 1.1.13.2; Page 23)

Year [Fluoride | Nitrate
2005-06 860 276
2006-07 618 397
2007-08 898 1025
2008-09 1038 1572
2009-10 591 2016
2010-11 1259 2673

96



a es

APPENDIX-VIL
Statement showing details of field visit of villages of selected districts by audit

(Reference: Paragraph 1.2.3; Page 28)

Sr. Name of District | Name of Taluka Name of village Status of
No. scheme
1 Sanand Vasna
2 Tyava
3 Gibpura
[4| Dascroi Kasindra Completed
3] Ahmedabad Dholka Ranoda
| 6| Shekhadi
7 Rampur
| 6 | Sanand Virochannagar On going
[9 Bavala Rupal
10 Dhanpur Kakadkhila
i Zalod Raniar-Inami Falia
12 Zalod Raniar-Sarkari Falia
13 Fatehpura hojela Completed
14| Dahod Fatehpura Dhadheli
15 Garbada Bharsada
16 Dhanput Mandor On going
7 Garbada Nalvai
18 Tandel
19 Nadiad Dumral
20 Gutal
21 Kheda Rampur Completed
22 Mahudha Ramnagar (Alina)
23 Nizampur
24 Sheri
25 Chunel
26 Jalalpor Kalakachcha
27 Ponsara
28 Aat
29 Naysari Chijgam Completed
30 Gandevi Kotha
31 Dholai-Salabet
32 Movasa
33 Vasan Dropped
34 Patan Sarva
35 Gaja
36 Radhanpur Joravargan)
37 Lotiya Completed
38 Patan Hari Jashomayv
39 Sidhpur Lalpur On going
40 Tavadia
41 Patan Ghacheli
42 Sami ~~ | Dropped

97



© Report No.2 (Ci

1) for the year ended 31 March 2011

Sr. | Name of District. | Name of Taluka Name of village Status of
No. scheme
43 Morbi Mansar
44 Adepar
45 Hajnali
46 Lodhika Sanganva Completed
47| Rajkot Gondal Gundasara
[as Devla
49 Wankaner Khijadia - Raj
50 Pipalia-raj
51 Wankaner Hasanpar Dropped
52 Muli Manpar
53 Gadhad
34 Wadhvan Rajpur
55 Rai Completed
56 Fulgram
37 Limdi Borna
58| Surendranagar - Devpara
59 Chotila Piprali
60 Muli Parbadi On going
| 61| Navania Dropped
62 Valsad Chikhal(Agasimata)
63 ‘Ambach (Vania Falia)
64 Dharampur Lakadmal(Nashan Falia)| Completed
65 Pardi Pariya
66| Valsad Chhiri
67 Kaprada Jogvel (Nashan Falia)
68 Valsad Malvan (Kardiva) On going
6 Kaprada Kothar

98



[orisz 00%छदा क््च्छ STELL T8001 ISL61 10°06 997799 soun[eg हणड्ग्‌उ

L991 00 529 91६08 ##69# 5६88६ ५508 Ost 65% एप sunpusdxs,

पिया (0076061 365 69 कटा 1S 1681 79% 151001 STLOPI TOL

Lye 0020: 686६ Let Tor UN UN LLL TAOS “ISIAH SIMUL

TIN TN ord 90ST Feber TIN TIN 9801 PONTBORT STEAD,

99°F6E 00 छा फटा 26861 10:घ्दा 9506 TS TOOT e9°81c1 sounjng SuIUedS | 11-0107

99%6& 005061 ककया ८6861 105 79'S07 1S 1001 छड़ादा

(66४9 08४9४ 65001 ॥ ६15 109८ E651 Test 611#6 ‘poumou; amurpuodxsy

EN FSR 00055६ 9EERTT Le TILT ZEST sS1et ww ESIe TR OSIT TOL

carl 007091 AWTS ore LOR IN PREC SUNS IA ROMS UL

00005 over क्ण्ण्छ 0015 0०० TN 007हा TOSEEL

69८८6 001८6] SP TIS LSOLOT SORT 56 हट PCO 90:66/ 95फाइच्च गण | 01-6002

69८८६ 001८6] बात] ८90201 $6+891 9916६ छकदर 9066: 957 HUISO]S

18226 008# 19089 79689 0८9 60ST brele 50 टा5 pounsdy यापफ़्क्प्त॒

070५४ ease nea 610951 SOVOLT bo pre 9/% ६6 जात छठ,

30°01 009& 860८ ee, SEL TIN TIN Ie SHOT] DAW DRO AON

LOWOF 0059 96791 SLC 00 0010 0016 vETEL paajooyl SHED

TREE 008६८ 51999 ट६519 60८7६ क््क्ता 9८582 SOLES souvjeg Surueda | 60-8007

298६६ 008६८ 99 6040६ #9छ्षा 9८582 SOLSS soured SUSO|D

ZO8T 006टा 96८6 ZR ORT £9161 598६ 5000 ८0६61 pouinout sumipusdxa

pRRIS 00098 11661] 51506 ZLNES Gaal ४८ 5४9 CONSE BOL

zs 00:61 lel sear iv IN UN OSHA FOUIO ASIN

00005 00005 91४78 00 526 000६ हक 005 छा TUBID

zoel 008४६ कह 865 08896 Te Loz act 59752 TOOL Soupjeg Rurusdo | g0-L00z

Zed 0४६ PO'R6T 088६ 1६०0६ 6TTRI 59852 100 soue[eg SUIS]

6S TEL ०्छ झट 80681 58 L961 vst IESST peuinou; aanipuadxsy

का 001 eles 88255 89 265 96106 90015 ZesoT TOL,

O87 00st 8८६ डा ws TN TIN ero SOSA TST PROMPT

05६6 0058६ 8४605 STISS orsoz TIN Ov Sar TLtt POATSOOY SBI

1६? 00101 89६6 roo L618 96106 99% (6८ £0-9007
PPA TOTAL weed TRRAEN, Goin pour. Peqrpounyy sua जय

| LSI

(पत्र णु soadny)

soolpuaddy

(६ ग्हैप्व ६79८1 Ydeaseaeg २०००, गभुम्प)
TI-O10Z ५ £0-9007 SULANp घरजपरशत एगम्ग०४ णु एभ्यजा>ए भ्या॥एए३क त्ु/॥०५०००प्त SJULAD Jo भाए1०० ay) 5एु७०प६४ 1077ग19

TITA-XIGNAddV

| |



ill Report No.2 (Ci

1) for the year ended 31 March 2011

APPENDIX-IX

Statement showing district-wise details of schemes completed, ongoing and
dropped
(Reference: Paragraph 1.2.8.1; Page 34)

Sr. District Number of Schemes
No. Approved | Completed | On going/ Dropped
Not started
1 Ahmedabad 395 294 62/19 20
2 Bharuch 246 138 902 | 6 |
3 Patan 437 353 47120 7
4 Anand 216 130 60/10 16
5 Banaskantha 359 276 77100 6
6 Bhavnagar 375 264 81/06 24
7 Junagadh 328 172 141/00 15
[8 Panchmahals 412 271 11129 1
9 Rajkot 613 401 160/17 35
10 Sabarkantha 685 383 217/72 13
ul Surat 569 489 79100 I
12 Tapi 568 465 103/00 0
B Vadodara 366 250 10700 | 9 |
14 Valsad 584 513 (7 0 |
15 Amreli 347 223 124/00 0
16 Dahod 273 112 155/00 6
7 Dang 238 143 95/00 0
18 Gandhinagar 183 153 3000 | ०0 |
19 Jamnagar 478 343 81/00 54
20 Kheda 207 131 7300 3
21 Mehsana 655 600 34/00 21
22 Narmada 488 339 149/00 0
23 Navsari 278 | 180 | 34/00 14
24 Porbandar 96 60 2201 13
25 Surendranagar 474 367 9977 | ०0 |
26 Kachhh 915 882 24/07 2
10785 7932 2363/214 276

100



it
Statement showing expenditure on wells in violation of Swajaldhara
guidelines
(Reference: Paragraph 1.2.8.4; Page 36)

(Rupees in lakh)

Sr. | Name of Date of | st | Funds | Communit Total No. of Date of

No. village MoU otal cost | reteased | contribution | expenditure | Yl! | completion
executed
[1 | Kharoda 13.2007 [24.24 16.15 1.84 17.99 5 26.1.2009
2 | Sagadapada 1.3.2007 | 24.10 16.32 1.85 18.17 5 31.3.2010
3 | Nani 1.5.2007 [25.32 21.86 2.45 24.29 4 28.2.2010
Dhadheli
Z| Dablara 15.2007 [17.56 13.82 154 15.36 3 282.2010
3 | Sampoi 13.2007 | 18.56 16.61 1.85 18.46 5 26.1.2009
6 | Madmakhunta 1.3 2007 [_17.32 13.30 LB 15.03 5 31 5.2010
व Pethapur 1.3.2007 | 2120 13.38 1.49 14.87 4 318.2010
४ | Rupakhoda 13.2007 | 18.56 16.62 1.86 18.48 3 28.2.2010
9 | Pawadi 5.1.2007 [24.51 17.74 1.97 19.71 6 28.2.2010
10 | Rukhadi 13.2007 | 2078 16.81 1.87 18.68 6 26.1.2009
11 | Kali Mahudi 1.3.2007 [24.44 13.10 1.80 14.90 5 25.2.2011
12 | Parthampur 1.3.2007 | 10.39 852 [| 1.0 [| 9.52 3 26.1.2009
13 | Sharada 13.2007 [15.67 13.81 1.53 15.34 4 25.2.2011
14 | Mundha 1.3.2007 [18.56 10.00 1.86 11.86 5 31.3.2011
15 | Vankoi 1.3.2007 | 24.2 17.68 1.95 19.63 7 25.2.2011
16 | Chhasiya 13.2007 | 20.21 10.91 1.10 12.01 3 25.2.2011
17 | Pipero 13.2007 [17.82 9.62 1.10 10.72 3 313.2011
18 | Agaswani 13.2007 [_12.79 6.90 0.70 7.60 2 31.3.2011
19 | Kakadkhila 13.2007 | 14.85 10.67 1.49 12.16 4 28.2.2010
20 | Dhanapaliya 13.2007 [22.27 13.42 2.10 15.52 6 25.2.2011
21 | Padaliya 1.5.2007 | 24.95 13.48 1.45 14.93 4 313.2011
22 | Fotan 15.2007 | 23.2 12.58 1.45 14.03 4 31.8.2010
23 | Nani Vav 15.2007 | 24.95 13.48 | 1.49 | 14.9 4 25.2.2010
24 | Bhilpaniya 15.2007 [18.56 13.36 1.86 15.22 5 25.2.2010
25 | Pahad 15.2007 | 2057 11.08 1.49 12.57 4 25.2.2010
26 | Moti Vav 15.2007 | 21.59 13.21 1.85 15.06 5 25.2.2010
27 | Hirapur 1.5.2007 [21.66 11.69 1.85 13.54 5 25.2.2010
28 | Tutaghati 1.5.2007 | 2165 5.84 0.67 651 _ [1 | 313.2011
29 | Polisimal 15.2007 [_18.48 4.99 0.55 554 [| 1 | 313.2011
30 | Valundi 15.2007 | 25.19 6.80 0.75 7.55 2 31.3.2011
[Total | 614.26 383.75 46.47 430.22 125

101



85050 OFOZLS + 1007/90 S007 er TE ST Anduejed तन SIesTeN %
LYSELZ OFOTLS क्र 1007/90 SOOTTTE SI andypys wey PSY | eyueyseura | SZ
1091 फछादा हट 8007/90 9007 21-07 0६ जतण्श्ष्प्‌ Cast SIN, rd
008 0000% कट 6007/0 L00z Or'T ST गत TEP MNITeL SEAL SeuEG &
68566 00005 कट 6004& Looe orl 5 एपछ5प०६ 'प०तष्एए१०4 LEYPNEYD FeqROW w
हक OLOT6PI 0६ 8007/60 200 £080 0६ छएपृष्णवएगपत्र॒ WALL WeATEY एफ Zz
घ्छ्फः 000८6 कट 60068 Loow ort SI Induvjeg Wonepunog apreuy | ryueyseueY
666EES OfI9LL + 1007/90 9007 TOTO 0६ uonepuno.{ गपयाए छ्व्पञ्
क््घ्द्क् OoseeL aa L00¢/60 9002 COKE 0६ छगापप्त 1ण्जाह | PyUPEqeS
#ढ््ऋट 0057६ छः 200च80 900८ 011 5 प्रमाण पञफपृष्त
0०७८ OOSLEP él 6007/80 800६ TST SI
PeRING S7RG0TI छः L007/80 9007'€0"T 0६ उध्छपश्पुए०4 ४५४५ उश्छपश्पण्त्‌
00052 000६5 Iz 6007/90 8007 10°10 st @asuav ypetieuny
दाछ दाह (4 6007/L0 8006 6010 SI POTPH-MPISH
O8PIST S99S9L छः 200580 900 &10 ST veg ypesacc-Ipueuy
b6r09y SPOLOIL vy Lo0z/LO 9007 10'0E 0६ 2]
आतणाशशप्ण्छप्य, Iypop

Iszgpr “काददा tr LOOT/LO 9007 10'LZ 0६ seypoo-tunes | ‘Teyeunppurd | 01
000001 O98T6E 6 6007/80 8007 ६010 ST Tepuody ISAT OTquIEEYDD SeyA WRN BAGSEMES 6
09091 816६ Te 3007/80 LOOT COLT ST Tepuon ISNU, aqereyD) SEYA WEI BAYsEIES g
ZOESEL 055908 tr LOOT/LO 900% F0z 0६ 1००8 ISAT, A1qeIEYN SYA Wey स्यपुछछाए5 L
0000/# StPLLIT 8 6007/60 8007 €0'FI 0६ Peqepewyy उप 9
ZO60IE O98T6E aa 1007/60 9007 EOE SI Peqepowyy “LAW उणष्ति [5
609059 00099 6्ट 8007/01 LOOT FIT 0६ DID fa
PS8EL6 00550 4 8007/01 200८%01८ 0६ aCUVNV €
19299 O9STLOI Lt gooc/et LOOT 90ST 0६ dS, epeunen [7
f0S7IL O0ST6L €€ 8007/90 20 ६010 0६ कण्णए SEXLA एएछ ८०णजत फ़्ड्ण्प [ T

(oadna कप ह Tonatdaros क़फ्ण्मत्रकष्त panone 7

uy) apew uy) junomy | Seu Jo qiuou Jounpursomayy | sadeqpa ODN Jo गण PLIST oN

¥ J ur <eaq Y ON ६ LISI us

quaured penyoy ye3png poywindyg joo Jo xoquiny,

(g¢ oded :६*३ ८1 qdeaseseg :aouar19j0y)
sopuasy Joddng Sunusmsdury Jo sadtA.tos JUOIDIFOp JO भाष्ठयक SUIMOYS JUIUII}L}S

IX-XIGNaddV

TINZ 4०००७ 1६ Papua Awad ay) 40f (7०0) CON Moday Hipny

@



[

पाछछ६ S0609SLF Bier TOL,
00005 0S7995 er L00z/80 9007 ८01८ SI aivaanaya छ
0000 057995 er L00z/80 9007 COKE SI jupueo Aiea zs
SOBLI9 05:६8 vr LO0T/LO 9007 TOTE 0६ [0017] ssueq [Ts
005005 000016 fz 6007/0 LOOT OTT 0६ “antsy Hoddng ऋागखउत 0s
05/562 000569 ve 60048 ८002011 s SHEL SeILA BAUIEID BNYSEANES oy
SLBSO8 000<& ve 60058 200ट01 0६ Tupuoy एष्पुपणपाए5 छत 220४७ | 8४
90FSTE 05595% कट 6007/60 Looz ort st Tonepumog HeypHeY.) A एपवएणर a
e96ELP O0SLS6 ve G00z/EO Looz ort 0६ SNL SHA HOT ow
1R96bE OPOzLS id 8002/01 L007 SI st SAAT WOHEPUMO UOISPYOD कर
965016 पडा 6ट 80050 200ट% 9 0६ Tee tr
60956 डा ze 800Z/L0 Lo0z TZ 0६ ISN] ALSIUSIEN, tr
Teeely SZOSLIT ६६ 8007/90 ८00८11 0६ sn, ur UMALYpE A wy
L&SLE OvOTLS cr L00z/60 9007 E91 st ISAT, UPIOUIEATYPEA werd [1p
0८889 SZ906TT fd 600z/r0. LOOT ITT 0६ MAYPIS-SEHA जग OF
11667 05908 0६ 8002/60 L007 I 0६ BUBSELTES TESLA of
ग्र्छ्छ 059908 ee 8007/90 LOOT TT 0६ TRINH SETA, BE
StHELO 055908 Sr L00z/90 Soozzrer 0६ TRIN AETE SALA vues [Ze
80६८८ STILOTL sr L007/90. SOOT टा 1६ 0६ Wonepumogy PeMY TPM ALTE 9
#0888५ 051966 sy L00z/90 500८ टा 1६ 0६ गत] peste | ५६
1511/02 SLECESE vr Louz/LO 9001-61 06 ए०छणफाग्प JORS wrepopea | Pe
SLPOLP sizes w 600550 ए्काबा। SI INET OTFeHTEY YSOPV te
909SEIT 5८9 sh 1007/90. 9007 TOTO 0६ "SHIT गवगाफपु YSOPV ze
फतह प्र्त्ध्धा tr LO0T/LO 9002 5010 oe weing “eq INAS, Te
OOSEIOT C906 TT aT 6007/60 ROOT EO'ST 0६ “uonepunog daaq फाव्य TeMY TypUPH APY 0६
68591 570 क्र L007/90 9007 1010 ०६ "ागपक्णान्पक्त प्राए०५ छाप प्रएफछ Arley wens | 62
390987. 055908 छः (00580 900ट८८0 ८0 87 aepopeA “WO 87
89095/ 055908 6६ LOCI 90079" 0६ Deqepauiyy “EYP pueuy [Lz
(oodna (ood suum | wonerdaros Bujpuwssopuy, enone “ON
uy) का ए! )1ए००७७ | koa Jo पाए jounpuesouayy | sedan ODN Jo amen PENS aS
quaurded [३०७ १ pareindyg Jooa Jo aaquinyy

sanipuaddy

दि



OE ww OST 6009 OTLLL zee छ0 [छत

7 0 9 bss ey 9 981 PesieA [8

id we OF PLOT 00st ost ost qeseuespuaing | ५

0 $I $I ८609 LOVSE Lr ole joyfey | 9

0 0 0 00°00 5८16 0 fal ured | $

६ 6 01 a4 ५681 602५ 74 cL UPSABN | 7

sl LAI ५0 7६ 792६ 892६ ५६ 96 epeyy | ६

0 0 0 0 00°00 005८ 0 SE pouea [८

8 90 0्ट घट ध्रट+६ 6६865 a tb peqepaugy [1
saeax omy | Saeax eax panepp (ore Cored a apeut yaouced | yuoutAed soy
uey oso 0५9 ८०1 | ००० | juomded yorym | ursaodny) | saadmy) poatoaas | yorya or SSMA | जाए SISA रन
गण dep | a0y kejaq | गा dejoq | णु 5०5४३ yo soquiny | pred qunowry quesd [eo 4, yo soquiny; Jo z0quiny 40 OMEN

S}9LSIP एग२ग२६४ UL puny JA २? O Jo JuowAed ur Apap Jo भाष्यक oy) SurMoys yuuIIeIg

(op 958g ६८४८1 Ydeaseaeg :99U010;9y)

वात

ddV

1105 Yolo 1६ papua aad ays 10f (1492) (०७७ laoday Lpny

104



Ll bri bik €L [ej0], pueay
we 19 179 <4 os OL ey 78 £6 ca 67 1६ 1७1०1,
६ 6 gs 0 0 00 ६ LO v 0 4 ] 7४७४७ |8
L ol 8 9 दा ST [4 80 v or tl 61 qeseurspuans |Z
6 L or ६ s 60 01 ol oI 4 4 ६ joxley [9
६ 6 9 6 6 SI (ai SI 6 0 ६ 4 urqed |¢
६ 9 1| 0 (4 80 c LO at 1 ] 4 UeSARN |#
I 9 8 I 9 LO (4 ol tl 0 [4 I epeyy | €
(4 ६ [4 L 01 60 ६ ol ol 0 ६ if poued |Z
v IL v ५ 90 LO 6 $l 6 0 4 c peqepowyy | 1
PHO | [POS | WAL | 0 | POS | YaAL PO | POS | WAL | PHO | [pos PAL pLOsIG “ON
10८ udze IW Jo 11-9002 11-9002 9007-1 joouey | «ag
एए० dy} 1४ poysixa yes SULINp 449] JJRIS SuLanp poynasaa eg UO 5९ PdJSIX9 उठ

(Zp ade 0८1 qdeaseavg :a9ua1aJay)
SddGJO JAI] JILSIC Ul ग्रुष्१5 Jo UOIIsod Surmoys 1ए0०००1४)७
TITX-XIGNddV

saaipuaddy

ft



PasOAOAI SEM TAL] OO'E'SA WAP] OO'S'SA JO INO |

८८959 1301,
WN WN LOE ६69 0601 60-8007 sel एप्प eandwry | दा
0107-S0-S0 80-L00T | 88८ VN VN VN VN peqepewyy yomueg | C1
OLOZ-ZI-9T | OLOT-TI-91 | 70८ VN VN VN VN sedeuaryg | fepumynow | [[
900t-r—-9 1 9007-£-6 Sob VN VN VN VN euesya | andjexyueys | 01
8007@-L-1Z | 8007-10-1€ 00's VN VN VN VN pes[e A. bpemepue(] | 6
Pal ION WN कष्ट 00६ ८५५ 80-L007 Wi poured ueavdiiey | 8
एगप् ION VN 0्टा ose 50६1 L0-9007 SLIT poured yoryjequry | L
Pel ION WN 8५८ Os Ol 80 ६1 L0-9007 E14 poyed oles | 9
POTN ION VN घ्घ्ट 006 cell L0-9007 18 ¢L poyed epemneyg | ५
POT ION VN Lo@ ५801 cred 80-L007 S8VT poured Ipewey | 9?
श्गुप्न ION VN 608 Sol 1८6 L0-9007 er ol poyed youuey | ६
POT ION WN 6LT 068६ 699 L0-9007 ट6#ट poured eyarg | ८
Pal ION WN sis ५8५ 00 [1 L0-9007 ca 14 poured epemnegg | [
wa aouvysul yo | payetidoidde po.insul गधे jeaoidde | ouoyos ens गया “on ag
Bury joajeq | aeax jayeq | -sturjunoury | aanypuadxy puny Joueax | jo ysop jo ouey, jo aweny
(qpyey ur saadny)

(ep ase (7171 ydeaseavg :2ouatajay)

T1-9007 Suranp ४२४४० uoTetidosddestm 1० sprezap 94) SurMoys 10/0)ए0819

ATX-XIGNdddV

1106 420 1६ Papua wat ays sof (7072) TON uodry Npny

EE



&

APPENDIX-XV
Organisational set up of Sports Authority of Gujarat
(Reference: Paragraph 1.3.2; Page 46)

General Body
33 members)

‘Accounts Otticer. Officer on Special
Duty
‘Asst. Director (Scheme) ‘Avcounts Branch Sports Promotion in
Education Sector

Cashier Panchayat Yuva Khel
Krida Abhiyaan

Play Branch (Budget)

107



z Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 Mar

APPE
Synchronisation facilities vis a vis manpower
(Reference: Paragraph 1.3.9.1 ; Page 52)

2011

NDIX-XVI

Table Tennis, (iii)
Gymnastic

Sr. | District Date of Fa 5 available Coaches available without facilities
No. Starting without coaches
| ‘Ahmedabad Existing @ Badminton (@ Grickei (ii) Lawn Tennis * (iii) Football
(ii) Boxing *(iv)Handball * (v) Hockey*
(iii) Volleyball
2 | Amreli Not handed (@ Hockey
over
3. Anand Not created (@ Kho-kho* (ii) Athleties* (iii) Volleyball
4 | Bharuch Not created (i) Gymnastics (ii) Athletics * (iii) Cricket*
(iv) Lawn Tennis*
5 | Bhavnagar Existing 6) Cricket* (ii) Table Tennis* (iii)
Gymnastics* (iv)Judo*(v) Athletics *(Athletic
Track damaged for the last two years)
6 | Bhuj- Work in G) Basketball (ii) Cricket*
Gandhidham progress
7 | Devgadh-Bariya | Existing oO Wrestling | (Basketball ता) Football * (iii) Hockey*
(Dahod) (ji) Handball
(iii) Athletics
(iv) Kabaddi
५) Kho-kho
8 | Gandhinagar Not created (@ Volleyball (ii) Athletics (iii) Kabaddi (SAG
Hq.)
9 | Gandhinagar Not created 0) Tennis (ii) Hockey (ii) Badminton (iv)
(State Center) Football *(v) Athletics* (vi) Handball* (vii)
Wrestling
10 | Godhra 31.1.2009 | (i)TableTennis (i) Archery*
(ii) Wrestling
(iii) Volleyball
(iv)SwimmingPool
(v)Kabaddi (vi)Kho-
100 (vii)Basket-Ball
Himmatnagar 20.3.2010 | (Badminton (i)Archery* (ii) Hockey*
(ii) Wrestling
(iii)Judo
(iv) Swimming Pool
(v) Basketball
12 | Jamnagar @Athleties (ii) Basketball * (iii) Table
existed Tennis* (iv)Badminton*
13 | Junagadh Work in (i) Hockey (ii) Athletics*
rogress
14. | Limbdi 25.1.2010 | (@) Badminton (ii) (i) Hockey*
(Surendranagar) Table Tennis (iii)
Wrestling (iv)
Judo(v)Athletic
Track (400 meter)
15 | Mahesana Not created @ Volleyball Gi) Athletios* (iii) Football*
(iv) Tudo*
| | Nadiad 17.8.2011 (i)Badminton (ii) (i) Volleyball*

108



ES District Date of Facilities available _ | Coaches available without facilities

No. Starting __| without coaches

17 | Navsari Not created @ Volleyball (ii) Judo* (iii) Table Tennis*
(iv) Wrestling*

18 | Palanpur Not created () Kho-kho *(ii) Hockey (iii) Athleties* (iv)
Cricket* (v) Wrestling *

19 | Patan 28.12.2010 | 6) Badminton (ii) | @ Lawn Tennis*
Table Tennis (iii)
Wrestling (iv)
Judo(v) Volleyball
(vi)Basketball (vii)
Swimming Pool (viii)
Kho-kho (ix)
Kabaddi

20__| Porbandar Existing @ Athletics *

21 | Rajkot Not created (i) Kho-kho (ii) Hockey (iii) Table Tennis
(iv) Football* (v) Athletics* (vi) Cricket* (vii)
Basketball*

22 | Rajpipla 14.8.2009 | 6) Badminton (ii) (@Archery* (ii) Gymmastics*
Table Tennis (iii)
Wrestling (iv)
Judo(v) Volleyball
(vi) Basketball (vii)
Kho-kho (viii)
Kabaddi

23 | Saputara 25.2.2008 @ Athletics (i) Archery*

24 | Surat Not created (i) Kho-kho (ii) Athletics* (iii) Volleyball (iv)
Basketball*

25 | Vadodara Not created ( Kho-kho (ii) Hockey (iii) Badminton (iv)
Football (v) Archery *(vi) Gymnasties*(vii)
Wrestling *

26 Not created (i) Cricket* (ii) Volleyball *(iii) Hockey *Giv)
Kho-kho

27_[ Vyara Not created 6) Volleyball* ता) Athletics *

aches appointed on contract basis

109



- No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

_ (Reference

APPENDIX-XVII
Statement showing the avoidable expenditure due to excess contract demand

Paragraph 2.1.3; Page 57)
हू

si हि aT Contract A y

Sr. Name of ;

No. Division | ComBection | demand | 99697 | 2907.08 | 2008.09 | 2009.10 | 2010-11 | Payment

No. (units) @
[TT Ahmedabad [18044 200 0 7B 76 76 2 450972
2 18413 300 0 134 125 150 NA 347268
3 18045 400 0 173 205 194 208 704780
4 18304 600 0 286 358 370 381 687634
3 19262 300 [iO | 128 123 2A 219 538234
6 | Rajkot 26411 180 of of 64 104 1i3 221789
TJ Bhavnagar [23714 275 [_ % | 94 208 93 101 617022
x 23514 275 170 1x7 183 160 160 321520
— 43116 250 157 NA 165 159 | 160 | 318051
10 43305 160 0 0 0 4 22 701658
11 43304 225 es |! 36 0 0 968832
12 | Jamnagar 27158 7500 of 0०; 0 536 836 1603308
13 26415 850 जाना 0 546 524 622668
14 27159 500 of 0०; 0 217 299 321720
15 | Tumagadh 43302 250 0 i) B 0 0 1001160
[Total | 9426616

110



09159/97८ 6८६८1 srezoor ८988 | ८८69 98:49 Loo
Tang
Spying
989109
Sunpoursuy,
fo
oorooretsz | ooroosz | 96900 | or osos | ७८599 | wet 607 F661 soto | o0otz | ५09060 | ५0010 wonannsuog | #
Tang
Taeing | mpping's
‘azauiuy | [euonsppy Jo
ooossoss | 00002 | #६०७६ exzse__| cresse | eer see lel 0805८ | 802190 | 902५0 | 90501६ | +0ट0८ | onmpoxg | _uonsnnsuog | ६
pout
osroriest | 0006ट८ | #८66८ seosss | 050599 | os bz fara 00८ vor | 8020 ६८ | 9080+% | ६090 ६८ | 9०0६080 | २फ्स्ख्प | पणाणपणा० | z
POD
जणाशाणप्त
omuporsjoq
raypon |. ynourmreaog,
००७७० 4०
00.000890८ | 0000८६ | ४299 &छ6:6 [8०5८० | ष्टटा 81 oot 0708८ | 0900६ | 801010 | coro | 9090's | oamsaxg | uononnsuo3 | 1
soadna uy] mn Wi LW (27०7० uy s9admy)
1107
व ५३४०० dia Aaenaged
vos | womuy | xuracd | jayemgso
40398309 " won, uaa
asmey | paunsuos | seyson uy | sad se ५ 3 | wopaqdatos 4 .
ayy 0} pred i s pouanouy 1803, yoo | -ayduio 49ps0 SL vw uot जु०७ vou
anowe | aS" | Wout go | pauimsuos | pouimsue? | ious | posopuay | parwunysg | yoowg | 24 | sow | yoo | yoareq | tunnsovg | oypsoouey | “NS
मर quou> | <yyuenb | quowra zo aq f i paieindy n के
जज एगभवा॥०३ हा 929 उ०्गष्द
joa |. ss] Syuenb | 0} james
m9) imo, | Sonne
fen कि 3809 (BO,

छ9 a8egS TET Yduaseaeg :99UI10;9y)
yuaurXed ssaoxa Jo splejap ay) SulMoys JuauIA}EIS
IAX-XIQNadddV

saoipuaddy

i



EF Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

APPENDIX-XIX

Statement showing names of offices test checked

(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.5; Page 73)
Sr Name of Office No. of omces!

: Heads of Department
Principal Secretary, Revenue Department, 1
Gandhinagar.
Commissioner, Land Reforms, Gandhinagar. 1
Revenue Inspection Commissioner, Gandhinagar. 1
Settlement Commissioner and Director of Land 1
Records, Gandhinagar.
Principal Secretary (Appeal), Revenue Department, 1
Gandhinagar.
Superintendent of Stamps and Inspector General of 2
Registration, Gandhinagar

2 | Collectors at Ahmedabad, Amreli, Anand, Bharuch, 23
Bhavnagar, Dahod, Dangs, Gandhinagar, Jamnagar,
Kachh, Mehsana, Nadiad, Narmada, Navsari,
Panchmahals, Patan, Porbandar, Rajkot, Sabarkantha,
Surat, Surendranagar, Vadodara and Valsad

3 | Mamlatdars at Ahmedabad (City), Anand (Rural), 19
Bhuj, Bhavnagar (City), Borsad, Dabhoi, Dahod,
Gadhda, Godhra, Halol, Jalod, Kalol, Limkheda,
Lunawada, Navsari (City), Navsari (Rural),
Santrampur, Shehara, Vadodara (City)

4 | Dy. Collectors (Prant) at, Amreli, Choryashi, 10
Himatnagar, Petlad, Nadiad, Navsari, Rajkot,
Vadodara, Valsad and Viramgam

5 | Superintendents of Land Records at Anand and 2
Navsari

6 | Deputy. Collectors (Stamp Duty Valuation) at 4
Gandhinagar, Ahmedabad (Division 1), Ahmedabad
(Division 2) and Surat (Division 1)

7 | Deputy. Director of Land Records, Surat 1

8 | City Survey Superintendent, Surat — I. 1
Total 67

112



a es

APPENDIX-XX
Difference between Budget estimates and Actual allotment
(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.6.1; Page 74)

(Rupees in lakh )
Percent age
Budget | Actual t age
Name of office Year Se Estimates | allotment | °! Shortfall in
actual
allotment
Collector Dahod 2008.09 | 2053-093 Le 055 66.05
-do- 2053-094 2.17 1.23 43.32
2009-10 [2089-09 175 130 25.71
[-do- | 2053-094 2.38 1.97 17.23
Collector Rajkot 2008.09 | 2053.93-1 3.52 1B 50.85
-do- 2053-094 4.33 3.66 15.47
[-do- | 2053-800 011 | 0.09 | 18.18
[=do- | 2053-93-7 0.62 0.48 22.58
-do- 2053-93-9 0.20 0.10 50.00
2009-10 | 2053.93-1 4.90 2.65 45.92
-do- 2053-094 8.33 4.80 42.38
[-do- [2053-80 021 0.1 47.62
[=do. | 2053.93.7 0.97 0.68 29.90
-do- 2053-93-9 0.20 0.18 10.00
Collector Sabarkantha | 2008-09 | 2053 1.02 0.93 8.82
Collector 2008-09 | 2053-093 1.00 0.83 17.00
Gandhinagar ~do- 2014(01) 023 0.16 30.43
2009-10 | 2053-093 154 1.40 9.09
-do- 2014(01) 0.45 0.31 31.11
Collector Godhara [20065 [2053-09 2.82 136 SLT
-do- 2014(01) 0.23 0.18 21.74
2009-10 | 2053.093 2.32 2.25 3.02
~do- 2014001 0.26 0.14 46.15
Collector Ahmedabad | 2008-09 2053-093 4.14 2.91 29.71
Collector Bhuj 2008-09 | 2053 157 1.29 17.83
Collector Narmada [2008-09 | 2053 ला [0.76 2475
2009-10 | 2053 139 124 10.79
Collector, Bhavnagar 2008-09 2053 1.14 0.89 21.93
Collector Dang-Ahwa_| 2008-09 | 2053 0.04 0.03 25.00
~do- 2009-10 | 2245 0.16 0.05 68.75
Collector Valsad 2008-09 2053 1.59 1.14 28.30
Settlement 2008.09 |. ~*~ 33.01 21.12
Commissioner and [2009-10 | | 54.00 | 39.49 26.87
Director of Land
Records
Mamlatdar Navsari | 2008.09 _| 2014 016 0.10 37.50
(City) 2009-10 | 2014 0.29 0.20 31.03
Manmlatdar Bhuj 2008-09 [- [ 1.03 0.78 24.27
-40- 2009-10 |-~+«|-+i1.10 | 0७87 2727
Mamilidar Talod 2009-10 | 2053 0.24 0.22 8.33
Dy. Collector (Pranty | 2008.09 | 2053.92 LIS 1.03 12.71
Vadodara 2009-10 [1.08 | 0.90 16.67

(Source: Information collected from these offices)

113



a No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

APPENDIX -XXI
Statement showing rush of expenditure in the month of March
(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.6.2; Page 74)

_(Rupees in lakh

Pi
me | up to the last quarter
February of the year

Percentage of Percentage of
expenditure in last | expenditure
quarter of the year in March

Expenditure | Total
in March | Expenditure

Year: 2007-08

Major Head: 2029 Land
Revenue

Minor Head: 103 land records
Sub Head: 03 LND 3 19.90 71.93 68.10 88.00 81.74
Strengthening of Revenue
Administration and Updating of
land records,

Major Head: 2053 Dist
Administration

Minor Head: 800 Other Exp.
Sub Head: (1) LND 12 Training
of establishment engaged in
Revenue Department

2.44 1.85 1.40 3.84 48.17 36.46

Major Head: 2029 Land
Revenue

Minor Head: 102 Land Records 0 681 681 681 100 100
Sub Head: LND 21 Introduction
of city survey operation

“Major Head: 2052 Secretarial
Services

Minor Heal: 800 Other Exp. 136.46 154.63 41.60 178.06 86.84 23.36
Sub Head: (01) LND 17
Information Technology

Major Head: 4059 Capital
Outlay of Publie Work

Sub Major Head: 01 Ortice
Building

Minor Head: 051 Construction
Accommodation

Sub Head: 42 Buildings (1)
General Service Buildings

WAL 142.64 46.82 158.53 89.98 29.53

Year 2008-09

Major Head: 2029 Land
Revenuc

Minor Head: 103 land records
Sub Head: 03 LND 3 2.04 11.42 11.05 13.09 87.24 84.42
Strengthening of Re
Administration and Upd:
land records (Plan)

Major Head: 2029 Land
Revenue

Minor Head: 103 land records
Sub Head: 03 LND 3 2.04 11.42 11.05 13.09 87.24 84.42
Strengthening of Revenue
Administration and Updati
Jand records (Non Plan)

of

Major Head: 2053 District
Administration

Minor Head: #00 Other Exp. 7
Sub Head: (1) LND 12 Training aaa 820 686 1130 72.57 60.71
of establishment e1
Revenue Department

Major Head: 2052 Secretarial
Services

Minor Head: 800 Other Exp. 11.08 5141 46.23 5734 89.66 80.62
Sub Head: (01) LND 17
Information Technology

114



—

ixpenditure | Expenditure in
up to the last quarter
February of the year

Expenditure
in March

Total
Expenditure

Percentage of
expenditure in last
quarter of the year

Percentage ०
expenditure
in March

‘Year 2009-10

Major Head: 2029 Land
Revenue

Minor Head: 103 land records
Sub Head: 03 LND 3
Strengthening of Revenue
Administration and Updating of
land records (Plan)

69.95 285.26

232.62

302.57

94.28

76.88

Major Head: 2029 Land
Revenue

Minor Head: 103 land records
Sub Head: 03 LND 3
Strengthening of Revenue
Administration and Updating of
Jand records (Non Plan)

69.95 285.26

232.62

302.57

94.28

76.88

‘Major Head: 2053 District
Administration

Minor Head: 800 Other Exp.
Sub Head: (1) LND 12 Training
of establishment enyayed in
Revenue Department

941 5.75

3.10

12.51

45.96

24.78

(Source: Information collected from the Department)

115



= the year ended 31 March 2011

APPENDIX -XXII
Statement showing rush of expenditure in field offices
(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.6.2; Page 75)

(Amount in Rupees
॥ Percentage of
Expenditure | Expenditure . expenditure Percentage
Name of Office | Year Head upto in last | Expenditure E otal during last of
February | uarterof | inMarch | Expenditure | पाल 0 the | €xpenditure
the year in March
(1) Collector, 2009-10 | 2053094 17418227 6823421 4962441 22380668 22.17
Dahod 2014 2274121 1142567 584996 2H60117 20.45
(2) Collector, | 2008-09 | 2047 654000 260660 162000, 816000 19.85
Gandhinagar 2053-800 «000 13500 12000 18000 66.67
2053-093-LND 6 349000 521685, 415000 04000 51.62
2009-10 [2053-800 8000 3678 7000 15000 46.67
2053-093-05-LND 0 148000 148000 148000 100
10
2053-93-14300- 0 67000 67000 67000 100 100
LND-10
@) Collector, [200809 | 2255. Social 3000 1470 1470 6470 272 2M
Dang Ahwa Security
2009-10 | 2235- Social 8250 4000 4000 12230 3271 3271
Securit
(@Mamlatdar, [2008-09 177414 313215 230478 407892 76.79 36.50
Limkheda 2009-10 283600 825637 769960 1053560 78.37 73.08
(@)Mamlatdar, | 2009-10 70950894 9944523 2882549 35.74 20.84
Vadodara
(City)
(@)Mamiatdar, [2008-09 | 2053 2056847 1074682 कक हक़ 35.66 26.01
Dahod
(7)Mamlatéar, [2009-10 | 2053 3013629 1341762 810786 3824415 35.08 21.20
Navsari City
@Mamiatéar, [2009-10 | 3053-93 छह वड़ह्ब्छ 294451 1374723 35.40 TaD
Godhra
(@)Mamiaidar, [2009-10 | 2053-93 11031454 3530261 3589336 14620790 3782 2455
Bhavnagar

(Source: Information collected from concerned offices)

116



जा

APPENDIX -XXIII
Details of outstanding DC Bills

(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.6.4; Page 76)

(Rupees in lakh)

Number of

Delay period as on

No. | NameofOffice | acpins | Amount date of audit

||| Mamlatdar, 1 715.00 | 9 months
Vadodara (City)

2 | Mamlatdar, Dahod 22 124.78 | 2 to 23 months

3 | Mamlatdar, Navsari 3 0.95 | 3 to 15 months
(Rural)

4 | Mamlatdar, Bhuj [8 39.58 16 months

5 | Mamlatdar, Navsari 2 2.50 | 7 months
(City)

6 | Mamlatdar, Kalol 6 31.60 1 to 5 months

7 | Collector, Valsad 4 71.88 | 4 months

| 3 Manmnlatdar, |_ | 42.20 | 5 to 9 months
Lunawada

|? Mamlatdar, 6 29.05 | 1 to 6 months
Santrampur
TOTAL [| 60 | 1057.54

(Source: Information collected from respective offices)

117



a Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

APPENDIX -XXIV
Delayed submission of Detailed Contingent Bills

(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.6.4; Page 76)

_ (Rupees in lakh)
Sr Name of Office Numperor Amount Period of delay

1 | Collector, Kutch 3 7.19 1 month

2 | Collector, Dahod [| 5.00 1 month

3 | Collector, 4 0.27 1 to 13 months
Ahmedabad

4 | Mamlatdar, Bhuj 4 5.51 1 month

5 | Mamlatdar, 4 28.50 1 to 2 months
Santrampur

6 | Collector, Navsari 123 212.00 4 to 41 months

7 | Mamlatdar, 13 13.00 1 to 13 months
Navsari (City)

8 | Superintendent of 1 109.07 9 months
Stamps

9 | Mamlatdar, 6 31.68 1 to 9 months
Limkheda

10 | Mamlatdar, 25 111.02 1 to 9 months
Lunawada
|| Mamlatdar, 27 133.76 1 to 5 months

Shehra
TOTAL 211 657.00

118

(Source: Information collected from respective offices)



ii

APPENDIX -XXV
Statement showing arrears of land revenue as on 31 March 2011

(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.6.5; Page 76)

seve.) am, | Revenue de | Aa | Percentage
(2010-11)
1 | Bhuj 2851.52 2323.64 81.49
2 | Kalol 16.40 |__11.08 | 1.08 67.56
3 | Vadodara City 1284.78 1075.44 83.71
4 | Ahmedabad City 2019.14 1883.31 93.27
5 | Godhra City 102.96 94.51 91.79
6 | Navasari 26.36 25.65 97.30
7 | Santrampur 2.19 1.45 66.21
| 8 Bhavnagar 230.33 178.92 77.68
9 | Gadhda 737 2.95 40.02
10 | Halol 21.50 10.07 46.84
11 | Lunawada 10.65 6.24 58.59
12 | Anand Rural 62.50 34.20 54.72
6635.70 5647.46 85.11

(Source: Information collected from respective offices)

119



Audit Report No.2 (Ci

1) for the year ended 31 March 2011

APPENDIX-XXVI

Cases of non-deduction of Tax at Source (inclusive of surcharge and cess)

(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.6.7; Page 77)

(Rupees
Name of Amount of
sr. | Drawing and ca ० Name of the Amount of | Income Tax
No. Disbursing contractor bill paid not deducted at
Officer source
| | Collector, 2006-09 Gujarat Infotech Pvt. 28.52 0.63
Godhara Limited,
Ahmedabad
2 | Mamlatdar, 2008-09 Roop Vilas Catering, 3.95 0.09
Zalod Dahod
2008-09 | Ravi Tent House, 437 0.10
Dahod
3 | Mamlaidar, 2009-10 | MP Decoration, 17.25 038
Lunawada Lunawada
4 | Mamlatdar, 2009-10 | Gayatri Faraskhana, 12.44 0.28
Dabhoi Dabhoi
5 | Collector, Dangs | 2009-10 RD Lodge 415 | ९७ |
2009-10. Patel Mandap 3.15 On
Service
6 | Collector, 2009-10 | Ramgir Decorators, 9.34 0.21
Valsad Valsad
TOTAL 85.17 | 1.७9 |

(Source: Information collected from the respective offices)

120



Z

APPENDIX-XXVII
Shortfall in achieving physical targets

: Paragraph 3.1.7.1; Page 78)

Scheme No. orks under the Year Targets fixed | ‘Targetsachieved | Pertentage Rew
[Plan | Non Plan
TNDT Consolidation 3007-08 | 14 Villages 3 Villages कु | No reason furnished
of Holdings 2008-09 | 14 Villages Village 33
2009-10 6 Villages. 4 Villages: 33
LND3 Purchase of Purchase 2007-08 25 ETS Machines 1 ETS Machine 96 | Delay in
equipment — | of 8 Lakh payes 21.55 Lakh pa Goverment
equipment seanning scanniny approval and less re-
37 Computer 0 Computer 100 | survey work
Hardware Hardware
70 Printers वी Printers: 100
45 CD Writer 0 CD Writer 100
Re sunvey Resurvey | 2008-09 | Jamnagar, Patan | 0 100 | Work not approved
and Gandhnaar | 0 100 | by Goverment in
districts time
(Survey of Equipment not
desitrict) purchased because
of election
Re suney Re survey 200910 | Jammavar, Patan | Works in progress
and Gandinayar
districts
IND 4 Re survey 2009-10 50 Villages 19 Villages 2 | Vacant post of
surveyer
TNDT2 Class) Trainee 2007-08 | 100 classes 2000 81 classes? 19” | Grant was received
(Training of trainees 1841 trainees 8 | late
Establishment}
2008-09 100 classes /2000 47 classes /1406 53/30 | Grant was less
trainees trainees
2009-10 100 classes /2500 56 classes /980 44/61 | -do-
trainees trainees
LND 15 Lamination of 2007-08 4000 Villages Nil 100 | SDPC was not
Survey Tippan Book and approved
Records Gunakars payes,
Scanning 2008-09 40 Lakh pages Nil 100
Recurds Tippan Baok and
Gunakars pages
INDI7 Property card 2007-08 [13 lakh property | 3 lakh property 76.92 | Delay in Govt
data catry, cards cards approval, shortage
scanning 30 lakh pages 31.69 lakh pages of data entry
gunakar book, seanning scanning operator
hardware 16.60 lakh pages _ | 236 lakh pages
TND3I Office 3007-08 | 12 offices Nil T00 | Vacant post of
inspection DILR office
2008-09 12 offices. Nil 100
UDP Properties 2007-08 | 3000 Properties | 50 Properties 98.33 | Vacant post
Hakk Choksy
TP Schemes 1.25 lakh 0 100
ropert Properties
Properties 2008-09 | 3000 Properties | 00 Properties TOO | Vacant Post
Hak Choksy
TP Schemes 50000 Properties 00 Properties 100
property
Multi stories 75000 Properties | 230 Properties 99.69
Buildings
Properties 2008-10 [3000 Properties | 00 Properties 100
Hakk Choksy 50000 Properties | 352 Properties 99,30
TP Schemes 75000 Properties 00 Properties 100
property
Multi stories
Buildings

(Source: Information collected from the Department)

121



= No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011

APPENDIX-XXVIII

Statement detailing delays in making changes in land records
Reference: Paragraph 3.1.7.4; page 80)

‘Applications AP applications
Name of received Total disposed
Dhara कि oer i Ea to3 | 3t06 | Aboves
during the | applications | during the Total
centres mouth mouth months | months | months
Tunawada #06 | March 225 1029 208 ois Tot 12 Ti
2010
1099 | March 37 1626 car 521 601 70 1192
2011
Shehara का March 172 | 2R4 a4 | 30 65
2010
TOR’ | March 29 1305 Dar 40 344 0 1024
2011
Vadodara, का. | March 387 1124 364 oF 7 | _* | 760
City 2010
676 ६ March | 77 cr 38 123 10 526
2011
ताला] हक. March 107 655 314 3a 7 a MT
2010
736 | March 268 | _ » | 219 $99 281 0 730
2011
Dahod उतर | March 334 351 190 35R छठ a 361
2010
678 | March 327 1005 357 aT | [| 7 oa
2011
Halor 360 | March 32 7 369 28 गा] a 363
2010
1182 | March BB 1670 266 799 310 5 1404
2011
Godhara 2863 | March 095 3858 1070 ig 320 30 TRB
2010
Haat March 67 3588 1322 aR | #ऋ | 310 F266
2011
‘Ahmedabad 2014 | March झड़ 2809 1050 1789 30 a 1839
City 2010
1996 | March TOT 3087 ToIs 2029 B rt 2072
2011
Navsari 728 | March 303 1031 23 wd Ea 20 तक
Rural 2010
398 | March oa 1520 32 386 | | | | पा
2011
Total 30255 woay__[_tesia_[ आता | इछ | 21386
(Source: Information collected from Mamilatdar offices.)

122



&

APPENDIX-XXIX
Shortfall in inspections

_ Reference: P: जा
No. of units [Actual No. of units Actual
sr. required to | inspection | Percentage | required to be | inspection | Percentage
No. Name of the office | be inspected | done by | shortfallin | inspected by | done by | shortfall in
“Ne byhead of | headof | inspection | subordinate | subordina | inspection
office office officers te officers
1 | Mamlatdar Kalol 8 (09-10) 3 उाछ0[__|_| -|/  -[
2 | Collector Vadodara 4 (09-10) 3 25.00 B 3 76.92
3 | Collector Dahod [ST ti—“C*d:C“(<;«(‘‘S)SNC~S* 309-19 | 1[ 66.66
4 | Mamlatdar Vadodara | 21 (09-10) 5 jf -| -i|.—s*«d||
=do- 28x09) [| 8 | mel -|-|.—-~+i|
5 | Mamlatdar Jalod 74 (09-10) 46 37.83 “4 6 92.86
6 | Mamlatdar Santrampur_| 132 (09-10) 110 1666. - /( -[ [| ्डद-
7 | Mamlatdar Navsari | Co | || 2(09-10) 50.00
Rural
8 | Mamtatdar Navsavi 72 (08-09) 45 37.50 | || ||] | |
City
=do- 75 (09-10) 35 wool -+i|-+i|——S
[9 | Mamlatdar छाए 106 (08-09 32 os, -|-+i|—-~+d|
~do- 106 (09-10) 44 Ee |
10 | Dy. Collector 7 (09-10) 2 7143 | || ||] | ||
Himatnagar
1] | Collector Narmada 12 (10-11 7 aol -+i|  -+it|~St—‘—~C~S +d
12 | Dy. Collector Rajkot [ 309-10) [| CA -+[  - |
13 | Mamlatdar Kalol 58 (08.09) 38 344s[ C60 | 36 6.67
=do- 58 (09-10) 46 20.69 60 56 6.67
14 | Mamlatdar Lunawada_|148(09-10) | 8४ | 40.54 148 125 15.54
15 | Mamlatdar Shehra 149 (09-10) 100 32.89 150 143 4.67
16 | Settlement 4 (08-09) | | 75.00 48 35 27.08
Commissioner and
Director of Land
Records
=do- 0 36 40

(Source: Information collected from these offices)

123



Pa Report No.2 (Ci

1) for the year ended 31 March 2011

APPENDIX-XXX
Statement showing the men-in-position against the sanctioned strength

(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.9.1; Page 85)

Sanctioned ‘Actual Per
Class of officers Strength Strength vacane,
Class T (Dy. Collectors) 435 148 [66
C lass 1 Mamlatdars 500 320 36
Class TIIDy. Mamilatdars 3380 2868 15
ass III Clerks 2439 | Notavailable | - ~|  —- |
Class 11 Typist and C/T 598 396 202 34
Class ता Talati 2399 273 226 «| 9७9 |

Staff Strength under Settlement Commissioner and Director of Land Records

Name of the post Sanctioned Actual Vacant | Percentage of
Strength Strength Posts vacancy
Settlement Commissioner | 1 [ 1 0 0
Deputy Director | 9 [ 3 6 67
Superintendent of Land 20 14 6 30
Records
D.LL.R. Cadre 142 49 93 65
Account officer [| 1 0 | 0 |
PS to Settlement Commissioner | _ 1 | 1 0 0
PA to Settlement Commissioner [LH 0 | 1 |[ 100
Auditor 3 3 0 [| 0 |
Statistical Assistant | 1 [ it 0 0
Shirastedar 237 201 36 15
Surveyor/ Sr. Clerks 1487 773 714 48
Clerk 285 | 180" | 105 37
Driver 4 4 0 0
Peon 889 731 158 17

Staff Strength under Superintendent of Stamps as at the end of January 2011

Class of officers Sanctioned actual Vacant Posts | Percentage of
Strength Strength vacancy
Class T 29 22 7 24
Class I 4 3 I 25
Class IIT 183 136 47 26
Class 1५ 35 30 05 14

Class of officers S: anctioned किया Vacant Posts | Percentage of
strength trength vacancy
Class I I 1 | o | 0 |
Class I 29 6 23 79
Class ता 454 341 13 25
Class TV is | 8 65 | 44

(Source: Information collected from the Department)

124