 

 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
on  
Audit of 
Preparedness for the Implementation  
of Sustainable Development Goals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government (Civil) 
NITI Aayog 
Report No. 8 of 2019 
  

 

Report No. 8 of 2019 
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs 
 
i 
Contents 
 
 
 Description Page 
 Glossary of Hindi terms used in the Report ii 
 Preface iii 
 Executive Summary v 
Chapter-I Overview and Audit Approach 1 
1.1 Introduction 1 
1.2 Structure of the 2030 Agenda 1 
1.3 Guidance Areas for the 2030 Agenda 2 
1.4 Implementation Framework for the 2030 Agenda in India 3 
1.5 Audit Approach 4 
1.6 Post Audit developments reported by NITI Aayog 6 
1.7 Acknowledgement 
Chapter-II Adapting the 2030 Agenda 8 
2.1 Introduction 8 
2.2 Institutional Arrangements for adapting the 2030 Agenda into 
Government Planning Processes, Policies and Strategies 
8 
2.3 Reviewing Plans and Adapting SDGs 9 
2.4 Building Awareness and Stakeholder Involvement 12 
2.5 Policy Coherence 15 
2.6 Audit Summation 18 
Chapter-III Resource Mobilisation for the 2030 Agenda 19 
3.1 Introduction 19 
3.2 Financing and Budgeting for SDGs 19 
3.3 Managing Human Resources and Infrastructure 22 
3.4 Audit Summation 23 
Chapter-IV Monitoring and Reporting 24 
4.1 Introduction 24 
4.2 Institutional Arrangements for Monitoring and Reporting 24 
4.3 Indicators, Data Availability, Monitoring and Reporting 25 
4.4 Audit Summation 29 
Chapter-V Goal 3: Good Health and Well Being  31 
5.1 Introduction 31 
5.2 Institutional Arrangement for Integrating Goal 3 in Government 
Planning  
31 
5.3 Reviewing Plans and Adapting Goal 3 32 
5.4 Promoting Awareness and Stakeholder Involvement 34 
5.5 Policy Coherence 35 
5.6 Resource Mobilisation for Goal 3 37 
5.7 Monitoring for Goal 3 40 
5.8 Audit Summation 42 
Chapter-VI Conclusion and Recommendations 43 - 45 
 
7 

Report No. 8 of 2019 
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs 
 
ii 
Glossary of Hindi terms used in the Report 
Hindi terms Meaning 
Bal Sanjeevan tatha Surakshit Matritva 
Yojana 
Child Life and Safe Maternity Scheme 
Gram Panchayat Village level local self-governance 
Kishori Swasthya Suraksha Yojana Girls Health Protection Scheme 
Mukhyamantri Shahri Swasthya Karyakram Chief Minister Programme for Urban Health 
Nyuntam Avashyakta Karyakram Minimum Need Programme 
Panchayati Raj System of local (village) self-Government  
Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana Prime Minister Scheme for Maternal 
Obeisance 
Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana Prime Minister Health Protection Scheme 
Rashtriya AYUSH Mission National AYUSH (Ayurveda, Yoga & 
Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, and 
Homoeopathy) Mission 
Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram National Child Health Programme 
Rashtriya Mansik Swasthya Karyakram National Mental Health Programme 
Sanjeevani Sahayata Kosh Health Aid Fund 
Susrusha Financial assistance for health 
Zila Parishad District level local self-governance 
Zila Yojana District Scheme 
 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
 Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
iii 
Preface  
The 70 th session of the United Nations General Assembly adop ted the resolution 
titled ´ Transforming our World: the 2030 Agenda for Sustain able Development ’ 
consisting of 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDG s) and 169 associated 
targets. In this Assembly, Government of India affi rmed its commitment to the 
2030 Agenda and SDGs. SDGs are expected to set up t he development agenda and 
policies to eradicate poverty, protect the planet, foster peace and promoting 
prosperity for all. The audit was aimed at contribu ting to the process of follow-up 
and review by providing an assessment of the Govern ment’s preparedness for 
implementation of SDGs and making suitable recommen dations for augmenting 
preparedness at various levels. Preparedness was al so examined specifically for 
´Goal 3-Good Health and Well Being’.  
The work leading to this report was done by a team from the Office of the Director 
General of Audit (Central Expenditure), New Delhi w ith inputs from Accountants 
General from the States of Assam, Chhattisgarh, Har yana, Kerala, Maharashtra, 
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. The report brings ou t key initiatives being 
undertaken by the Government for the implementation  of SDGs and suggests ways 
to improve by highlighting areas of concern. The au dit was conducted in 
conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by th e Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India. 
This report has been prepared for submission to the  President of India under Article 
151 of the Constitution of India. 
  

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
v 
Executive Summary  
 
Introduction 
A)  The 2030 Agenda/SDGs  
The 70 th  Session of the United Nations General Assembly (Se ptember 2015) adopted a 
resolution titled ´ Transforming our World: the 2030 Agenda for Sustain able Development ’ 
consisting of 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and 169 associated targets.   
The Agenda allows each Government to set its own na tional targets based on national 
circumstances and decide how global targets would b e incorporated into national planning 
processes, policies and strategies. To assist this process, the United Nations Development 
Group created a Reference Guide for mainstreaming the 2030 Agenda and SDGs. 
B)  Implementation Framework for the 2030 Agenda in India 
NITI Aayog has been entrusted with the responsibili ty for coordination and overseeing the 
implementation of the 2030 Agenda in India.  The Mi nistry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation (MoSPI) has been entrusted with the task of preparing monitoring 
indicators for SDG targets. NITI Aayog has involved  the States and UTs in the 
preparedness exercise by associating them with the formulation of the Vision and Strategy 
documents and advising them to undertake mapping of  Goals and Targets with various 
departments, while building their institutional cap acities for implementing, monitoring and 
evaluation of the SDGs.  
C)  Audit Approach 
The audit was taken up with the overall objective o f ascertaining ‘Preparedness of the 
Government for the Implementation of SDGs’ covering  aspects such as extent to which  
the 2030 Agenda has been adapted in the national co ntext; identification and mobilisation 
of resources and capacities, and creation of mechan ism for monitoring and reporting 
progress. To assess preparedness at the State level, seven States 1 were selected. In addition, 
‘Goal 3- Good Health and Well-Being’ was selected f or detailed examination of 
preparedness.  
 
                                                           
1     Assam, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Kerala, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal 

Report No. 8 of 2019 
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs 
 
vi 
Key Findings 
Key findings in each of the focus area of examinati on, and with respect to Goal 3, are 
provided in the subsequent sections. 
Initiatives Areas of concern 
A)  Adapting the 2030 Agenda 
Institutional Arrangements for the 2030 Agenda  (Para 2.2) 
NITI Aayog, identified as nodal agency for 
coordination and overseeing implementation of 
SDGs, has undertaken various mainstreaming 
activities. A multi-disciplinary Task Force has 
been set up to analyse and review 
implementation of SDGs. States have also 
identified nodal agencies for SDGs. 
A roadmap is yet to be aligned with defined 
milestones for SDG targets to be achieved 
in the year 2020, 2025 and 2030. 
Reviewing Plans and Adapting SDGs (Para 2.3) 
NITI Aayog, tasked with preparation of Vision, 
Strategy and Action Agenda documents and 
identification/allocation of national targets, had 
released “Three Year Action Agenda” and 
“Strategy for New India @75” documents 
broadly mirroring SDGs and carried out mapping 
of Goals/Targets.  Similar exercises were also 
undertaken by States. 
Vision document is still under preparation. 
States are yet to prepare policy documents. 
Mapping of Goals/Targets undertaken by 
NITI Aayog and selected States is still 
ongoing. 
Building Awareness and Stakeholder Involvement (Para 2.4) 
NITI Aayog had organised stakeholders’ 
workshops, consultations and meetings. At the 
State level, initiatives were undertaken for 
raising awareness, involving stakeholders, and 
capacity building of officials. 
Efforts to raise public awareness about 
SDGs and initiatives undertaken in the 
selected States were not comprehensive, 
focussed or sustained. 
Policy Coherence (Para 2.5) 
Existing governance structures provide for inter-
ministerial and inter-agency mechanisms for 
policy coherence. The multi-disciplinary Task 
Force for SDGs had representation of the Central 
Ministries and States. Further, States had 
commenced setting up institutional mechanisms 
for addressing inter-connectedness. 
States may need to strengthen institutional 
arrangements by identifying support 
departments and defining roles and 
responsibilities. 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
vii 
Initiatives Areas of concern 
B) Resource Mobilisation for the 2030 Agenda 
Financing and Budgeting for SDGs ( Para 3.2 ) 
Government of India has taken several steps to 
optimise domestic resource mobilisation 2 and 
measures for improving expenditure efficiency 
and effectiveness. The Three Year Action 
Agenda projects availability of financial 
resources and sector-wise requirement of funds 
over a limited period of three-year.  
The Strategy document did not project the 
financing and budgeting requirements. 
While it is recognised that projecting 
financial resources for achieving the Targets 
by 2030 is a challenging task, Ministry of 
Finance and State Governments are yet to 
integrate SDG related financial resources in 
national budgeting for implementing SDGs. 
C) Monitoring and Reporting 
Institutional Arrangements for Monitoring and Reporting ( Para 4.2 ) 
NITI Aayog is responsible for overseeing 
implementation of SDGs while MoSPI was 
tasked with preparation of the National Indicator 
Framework (NIF). States had also taken 
initiatives for establishing required monitoring 
frameworks.  
Delay in approval of NIF held up 
finalisation of monitoring and reporting 
framework on implementation of SDGs. 
Initiatives undertaken in selected States 
were still in progress.  
Indicators, Data Availability, Monitoring and Reporting ( Para 4.3 ) 
NIF consisting of 306 indicators and their base 
line data have been prepared by MoSPI in 
consultation with the Central Ministries and 
State Governments.  NITI Aayog has also 
released a “SDG India Index: Baseline Report” 
containing 62 priority indicators to measure 
progress of States/UTs with respect to 
implementation of SDGs.  
There was no proposal to identify 
milestones for the national indicators. Out 
of 306 indicators included in NIF, data for 
137 indicators were not yet available.  
D) Goal 3: Good Health and Well Being 
Institutional Arrangement for Integrating Goal 3 ( Para 5.2 ) 
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
(MoH&FW) and other Central Ministries were 
mapped for achieving Goal 3. Nodal departments 
or working groups had been designated in States. 
Mapping in respect of Goal 3 was not 
comprehensive in selected States. 
Reviewing Plans and Adapting Goal 3 ( Para 5.3 ) 
The Three Year Action Agenda cover several 
key areas relating to health sector and broadly 
reflect the targets relating to Goal 3. A National 
Health Policy (NHP) promulgated in 2017 also 
recognize the pivotal importance of SDGs. In 
States, actions to formulate plans and policies in 
line with Goal 3 initiated.  
Though States had indicated actions to 
formulate plans and policies in line with 
Goal 3, delays and absence of a holistic 
approach were noted.  
                                                           
2  Eliminating the generation of black money and com bating illicit fund flows, expanding the tax base, 
 supporting investments through a predictable and s table tax policy 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
viii 
Initiatives Areas of concern 
Promoting Awareness and Stakeholder Involvement ( Para 5.4 ) 
MoH&FW had organised national consultation 
on transitioning from MDGs to SDGs and State 
Level Conferences on Goal 3. Electronic and 
Social Media also used for increasing awareness.  
Three Ministries 3 linked with Goal 3, were 
not involved in national consultation. 
Specific and sustained measures for 
promoting awareness and stakeholder 
involvement with Goal 3 were not seen in 
the States.  
Policy Coherence ( Para 5.5 ) 
MoH&FW had undertaken several initiatives 
supporting policy coherence for achieving 
horizontal and vertical coherence. 
Ministries associated with Goal 3 were not 
represented in Task Force and working 
groups/sub-groups. Policy coherence 
initiatives undertaken were either absent or 
inadequate in States. 
Resource Mobilisation for Goal 3  ( Para 5.6 ) 
NHP envisage to increase the Public Health 
Expenditure to 2.5 per cent of GDP by 2025. 
Similarly, Three Year Action Agenda projects 
central allocation for health sector to ` one lakh 
crore by 2019-20. 
There is still a long way to go before the 
target of public health expenditure is 
achieved and the central allocation for 
health for 2019-20 was far short of target. In 
States, health spending as a percentage of 
total States expenditure, ranged from 3.29 to 
5.32 per cent  which shows that this need 
considerable augmentation. 
Monitoring for Goal 3  ( Para 5.7 ) 
MoH&FW had set up a working group for 
formulating monitoring framework for Goal 3. 
Data for certain health indicators were not 
regularly or uniformly available. 
 
                                                           
3    AYUSH, Tribal Affairs, and Home Affairs. 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
1 
Chapter-I: Overview and Audit Approach  
 
1.1 Introduction 
The 70 th session of the United Nations (UN) General Assembly  held on 25-27 
September 2015, adopted the resolution titled ´ Transforming our World: the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development ’ consisting of 17 Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) and 169 associated targets.  The 2030 Agenda  came into effect from January 
2016 and seeks to build on the Millennium Developme nt Goals (MDGs) that were 
adopted in 2000. 
1.2 Structure of the 2030 Agenda 
The 2030 Agenda aims to end poverty and hunger ever ywhere; combat inequalities 
within and among countries; build peaceful, just an d inclusive societies; protect human 
rights, promote gender equality and the empowerment  of women and girls; and ensure 
the lasting protection of the planet and its natural resources.  It also endeavours to create 
conditions for inclusive and sustained economic gro wth, shared prosperity and decent 
work for all.  The 2030 Agenda is structured into four parts: 
 
The17 Goals are as below: 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
2 
Salient features of the 2030 Agenda are in Table 1.1 : 
Table 1.1: The 2030 Agenda-Salient Features  
• Seeks to achieve sustainable development in all thr ee dimensions i.e. , Economic, 
Social and Environmental in a balanced and integrat ed manner both for present 
and future generations. 
• Identifies and lays stress on five components of de velopment i.e. , People, Planet, 
Prosperity, Peace and Partnership and focuses on th e principle of ‘leaving no one 
behind’ by reaching the farthest first. 
• Allows each Government to set its own national targ ets based on national 
circumstances and also incorporate global targets into national planning processes, 
policies and strategies. 
• Envisages achievement of 21 Targets by 2020, three Targets by 2025 and 
remaining Targets by 2030. 
• Envisages regular reviews of progress at national a nd sub-national (State) levels.  
The outcomes from national level reviews will form the foundation for reviews at 
regional and global levels. 
1.3 Guidance Areas for the 2030 Agenda 
In response to requests from Member States for cohe rent and integrated support in 
adapting the global SDGs to national context, the U nited Nations Development Group 
(UNDG) created a Reference Guide titled ‘Mainstream ing the 2030 Agenda’. The areas 
identified in the Reference Guide are as below: 
 
 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
3 
1.4 Implementation Framework for the 2030 Agenda in  India 
Government of India (GoI) entrusted (September 2015 ) NITI Aayog 1 with the 
responsibility of coordinating and overseeing the i mplementation of the 2030 Agenda.  
NITI Aayog was specifically given the task of identifying national targets and assigning 
them to concerned Ministries/Departments for implem entation of SDGs in India.  In 
addition, it has been tasked (May 2016) to formulat e, a longer vision of 15 years 
keeping in view the social goals and SDGs, a Seven Year Strategy document as part of 
“National Development Agenda” and a Three Year Acti on Agenda for goals to be 
achieved.  
 
Source: NITI Aayog 
NITI Aayog advised State Governments to undertake m apping of Goals and Targets 
and sought inputs for formulation of a Vision docum ent for the country. Subsequently, 
States were asked to take up budgeting for SDGs and  organise capacity building 
activities. The Ministry of Statistics and Programm e Implementation (MoSPI) has been 
entrusted (September 2015) with the task of prepari ng a National Indicator Framework 
(NIF) in consultation with all the Central Ministri es for the monitoring of SDGs. Key 
initiatives taken by the Government for mainstreaming SDGs in the national context are 
given in Table 1.2 : 
 
                                                           
1 National Institution for Transforming India (NITI Aayog) is the premier policy ‘Think Tank’ of the 
Government of India, providing both directional and policy inputs.  

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
4 
Table 1.2: SDGs Preparedness - Key Initiatives  
Government’s 
Commitment 
 
• Cabinet was informed (September 2015) about the 2030 Agenda. 
• Prime Minister affirmed India’s commitment to the 2 030 Agenda and SDGs 
during Sustainable Development Summit in New York (25 September 2015).  
Institutional 
Framework 
• NITI Aayog mandated with task of coordinating and o verseeing the 
implementation of SDGs. 
• MoSPI responsible for preparation of National Indicator Framework. 
• States/Union Territories (UTs) involved in mainstreaming activities.  
• NITI Aayog constituted a Task Force (August 2017) w ith stakeholders drawn 
from Central Ministries, State Governments and institutions, as members.   
Dovetailing 
SDGs with 
Development 
Agenda  
• NITI Aayog undertook exercise for mapping all 17 Goals and 169 Targets with 
Ministries, Central Schemes, related interventions. 
• NITI Aayog prepared a ‘Three Year Action Agenda’ co vering the period  
2017-20 and ‘Strategy for New India@75’ covering the period upto 2022-23. 
• States at various stages of preparation of their Vi sion and Strategy documents 
and mapping of Goals/Targets. 
Raising  
Awareness and 
Stakeholder 
Involvement 
• Workshops/consultations at Regional, National and S tate levels organised for 
exchange of ideas/experiences and raising awareness  on SDGs amongst 
stakeholders. 
• Indian Parliament launched a ‘Speaker’s Research Initiative’ 2 to provide SDGs 
related insights to the Members of Parliament. 
Policy 
Coherence  
• Institutional arrangements exist for both horizontal and vertical convergence. 
Mobilisation of 
Resources 
• Government of India is implementing a nationwide Go ods and Services Tax 
reform to optimize domestic resource mobilization.  
• Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management being i mplemented for 
ensuring predictable and sustainable budgeting. 
• Expenditure reforms implemented.  
Monitoring and  
Reporting  
• Voluntary National Review 3 (VNR) Report presented in the UN (July 2017). 
• National Indicator Framework (NIF) and Baseline data published in November 
2018 and March 2019 respectively for monitoring implementation of SDGs. 
• High Level Steering Committee constituted (January 2019) to periodically 
review and refine NIF. 
• A ‘SDG India Index: Baseline Report 2018’ based on 62 Priority Indicators 
along with dashboard released (December 2018) for m onitoring the progress 
of SDGs at the national and sub-national level. 
                                                           
2 Speaker’s Research Initiative (SRI) started in Jul y 2015 seeks to assist Members of Parliament in 
playing a more effective role in law-making, parlia mentary debates, oversight of governance and to 
respond to the ever increasing, ever more complex issues of national and international importance. 
3 The 2030 Agenda provides for Member States to unde rtake and present voluntary reviews during 
High Level Political Forum (HLPF) meets in UN.  

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
5 
1.5 Audit Approach 
The 2030 Agenda/SDGs constitute an ambitious and lo ng term plan of action for 
addressing several problems faced by the country an d for ensuring sustainable 
development. The audit was aimed at contributing to  the process of follow-up and 
review by providing an assessment of the Government ’s preparedness for 
implementation of the SDGs and making suitable reco mmendations for augmenting 
preparedness at various levels. 
1.5.1 Audit Objectives and Scope 
The audit was taken up with the overall purpose of ascertaining ‘Preparedness of the 
Government for the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda’.  The specific audit objectives 
are as follows: 
•• •• to what extent has the Government adapted the 2030 Agenda into its national 
context; 
•• •• to what extent has the Government identified and se cured resources and 
capacities needed to implement the 2030 Agenda; 
•• •• to assess the robustness and accuracy of procedures  put in place to track 
allocation of resources against targets within the SDG; 
•• •• to what extent has the Government established a mec hanism to monitor, 
follow-up, review and report on the progress toward s the implementation of 
the 2030 Agenda. 
Entities covered during audit examination included the NITI Aayog, Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI), Mi nistry of Health and Family 
Welfare (MoH&FW) and 14 other Ministries 4 of GoI. Out of the 17 Goals, 
preparedness with respect to implementation of ‘Goal 3- Good Health and Well-
Being’ was selected for detailed examination . To assess preparedness activities for 
implementation of SDGs in the States, seven States (Assam, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, 
Kerala , Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal ) were selected on the basis of 
ranking 5 of Health indices for 2015-16. 
 
                                                           
4 AYUSH, Commerce and Industry, Drinking Water and S anitation, Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change, External Affairs, Finance, Food Processing Industries, Home Affairs, Housing and Urban 
Affairs, Information and Broadcasting, Panchayati Raj , Road Transport and Highways, Tribal 
Affairs, Women and Child Development. 
5 Top ranking (Kerala), middle ranking (Haryana and Maharashtra) and low ranking (Assam, 
Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal). 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
6 
1.5.2 Source of Audit Criteria 
Audit criteria were derived from the 2030 Agenda fo r Sustainable Development; 
Reference Guidelines to UN Country Teams- ‘Mainstre aming the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development’ issued by United Nations D evelopment Group and 
instructions/Orders/Circulars/Policy documents issu ed by the Central/State 
Governments on preparedness for implementation of SDGs.  
1.5.3 Audit Methodology 
An entry conference (5 January 2018) was held with NITI Aayog, MoSPI and 
MoH&FW, wherein the audit methodology, scope, objec tives and criteria were 
discussed. Information on the approach for this aud it was also shared with the Central 
Ministries (January 2018) and the selected States. Based on discussions with officials, 
replies to audit questionnaires, examination of rec ords, review of reports and other 
material, a draft report was prepared and issued to  NITI Aayog and concerned 
Ministries (June 2018). An exit conference was held (27 July 2018), wherein draft audit 
findings were discussed.  Similar exit conferences were also held in the selected States. 
After considering additional material/inputs and re plies, a revised draft of the report 
was issued to NITI Aayog and concerned Ministries ( September 2018) for comments. 
In addition, up to date developments relating to pr eparedness have also been 
incorporated to the extent feasible. 
1.6 Post Audit developments reported by NITI Aayog 
A meeting was held with NITI Aayog, in May 2019 whe rein it was intimated that NITI 
Aayog had “while working in the spirit of cooperati ve and competitive federalism” 
taken various specific actions to implement SDGs an d for measurement of performance 
against SDGs. These include: 
a)  Launching of ‘Aspirational District Programme’ in 112 backward districts 
across 27 States which is based “on the core princi ple of improvement in SDGs 
in backward districts of India for ensuring inclusive growth”. These cover areas 
such as health & nutrition, education, financial in clusion, agriculture & water 
management and skill development.  
b) Development of indices such as Composite Water M anagement Index, Health 
Outcomes Index and School Education Quality Index.  
c)  SDG India Index 2018 has been developed for mea surement of performance on 
SDG targets at the level of States and UTs.  

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
7 
1.7  Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the co-operation and assistance extended by NITI Aayog, 
Ministries and Departments at the Centre and in sel ected States during the conduct of 
this audit. 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
8 
 
2.1 Introduction 
The 2030 Agenda allows each Government to define na tional targets based on national 
priorities and determine how global targets would b e incorporated into national 
planning processes, policies and strategies.  India  has been pursuing development 
initiatives that mirror most of the SDGs and hence adapting existing development 
programmes and initiatives to the SDGs would be key  to their successful 
implementation. Thus, a key objective of this audit was to assess the extent to which the 
Government has adapted the 2030 Agenda into nationa l context. The areas covered and 
audit findings are given in the succeeding paragraphs.  
2.2 Institutional Arrangements for adapting the 203 0 Agenda into 
Government Planning Processes, Policies and Strategies 
Governments require institutional arrangements for leading and coordinating 
preparedness and implementation of the 2030 Agenda.   Audit examined if such 
arrangements existed both at the Central and State levels and were effective.  
2.2.1 Institutional Arrangements at Central Level 
NITI Aayog has been identified as the nodal institu tion for coordination and overseeing 
the implementation of the Agenda 2030 and was entru sted with the tasks of identifying 
national targets, assigning the same to Ministries/ Departments and communicating the 
commitments undertaken by India under the 2030 Agen da, to the State Governments 
for seeking their participation. NITI Aayog informe d (May 2019) that it has followed a 
strategy of involving States/UTs “in improving SDGs  by using the framework of 
competitive as well as cooperative federalism”.  
NITI Aayog has undertaken several multi-disciplinar y stakeholder consultations and 
issued advisories to various stakeholders. It also conducted periodic reviews with States 
and UTs of mainstreaming activities such as prepara tion of Vision/Strategy documents; 
creation of nodal structures; mapping of targets; c apacity building for implementing, 
monitoring and evaluation; formulation of State-spe cific Indicators and orienting 
budgets with SDGs. A roadmap with defined milestones aligned with SDG targets to be 
achieved in the year 2020, 2025 and 2030, is however, yet to be prepared. 
Chapter-II: Adapting the 2030 Agenda  

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
9 
NITI Aayog had mapped 6 Schemes/Programmes with Goals/Targets. In the mapp ing 
document prepared in August 2017, the NITI Aayog id entified nodal Ministries with 
respect to all the SDGs along with Ministries/Depar tments associated with specific 
Targets under each Goal. However, the specific role  of the nodal and associated 
Ministries was not defined. As a result, it was obs erved in some cases that Central 
Ministries were unaware of their role with respect to specific Targets.  In a revised 
mapping document issued by the NITI Aayog in August  2018, the designation of a 
particular Ministry as nodal for specific SDGs has been removed.  As per this mapping 
document, coordination and monitoring of achievemen t of SDGs would be done by 
NITI Aayog while individual Ministries would be responsible for specific SDG targets.  
Apart from directly reviewing the work on SDGs in S tates and Central Ministries, NITI 
Aayog had constituted (August 2017) a multi-discipl inary Task Force to analyse and 
review implementation of SDGs. The Task Force which  was required to meet at least 
once in each quarter however, held only two meetings since its constitution.  
2.2.2 Institutional Arrangements at State Level 
The NITI Aayog reported (June 2018) that all the St ates have identified their Planning 
Department or its equivalent as the nodal departmen t for action on SDGs.  Audit noted 
that for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, nodal departments have been identified 
in all the seven selected States. Further, support institutions have also been identified in 
five out of the seven States viz . Assam, Haryana, Kerala, Maharashtra  and Uttar 
Pradesh . Assam  was unable to furnish details of nodal officers/de partments appointed 
for specific SDGs. In Haryana , a SDG Coordination Centre (SDGCC) has been set up  
to coordinate the preparedness and implementation o f the 2030 Agenda. In 
Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh, nodal officers for different SDGs/group of SDGs 
have been identified but roles and responsibilities  of these officers were yet to be 
defined. In West Bengal , SDGs have been divided into eight Sectoral groups , but these 
groups are yet to function.  
Thus, while all the selected States had initiated a ction for creating institutional 
arrangements, further steps are required to strengthen these arrangements by identifying 
support departments and defining roles and responsibilities of officers.  
2.3 Reviewing Plans and Adapting SDGs  
In the national strategy outlined by NITI Aayog for implementing SDGs, two of the key 
initiatives highlighted are ‘dovetailing’ the Natio nal Development Agenda with SDGs 
and mapping of the Ministries and Schemes/Programme s with SDGs. These initiatives 
are linked to two specific tasks entrusted to the N ITI Aayog viz.,  preparation of 15 Year 
                                                           
6 Mapping documents was prepared by NITI Aayog in De cember 2015 and further revised in April 
2016, June 2016, August 2017 and August 2018. 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
10  
Vision, Seven Year Strategy and Three Year Action A genda documents, inter-alia , 
taking into account SDGs (May 2016) and identificat ion and allocation of Goals and 
Targets to Ministries/Departments (September 2015). 
Central Level 
2.3.1 Preparation of Vision, Strategy and Action Ag enda 
Documents 
For the preparation of Vision, Strategy and Action Agenda documents for the country, 
NITI Aayog had asked Central Ministries (May 2016) to provide inputs so that the 
document adequately reflects the priorities and con cerns of various sectors and regions.  
In this regard, information on inputs provided was sought by audit from 20 Central 
Ministries of which 19 Ministries responded and con firmed providing inputs to NITI 
Aayog 7. 
Out of the three mandated documents, NITI Aayog rel eased (August 2017) the “Three 
Year Action Agenda” covering the period 2017-20 and  in December 2018 released  
a Strategy document titled “Strategy for New India @75” covering the period upto 
2022-23.  The third mandated document i.e ., the “15 Year Vision Document” was yet to 
be released even though this was supposed to be the  basis for the Strategy and Action 
Agenda documents. With respect to the Action Agenda , NITI Aayog had explained 
(November 2018) that this was taken up on priority as the 12 th  Five Year Plan was 
ending in 2017. The sequencing of the documents was  however, not in accordance with 
the extant directions.  NITI Aayog stated (May 2019) that the Vision docume nt will be 
finalised by March 2020.  
The NITI Aayog was specifically required to formula te these planning documents 
keeping in view the SDGs. It was, however, observed  that while the areas and actions 
covered in the Three Year Action Agenda broadly enc ompass all the dimensions of the 
2030 Agenda 8, the document does not specifically refer to SDGs.  The Strategy 
document notes that each chapter has been mapped to  relevant Goals/Targets so as to 
align the “Strategy for New India @75” with India’s  commitment to the UN SDGs. 
Aspects of the Strategy document related to the Hea lth sector (Goal 3) were examined 
to assess relevance of the same to various targets under Goal 3 and for consistency of 
approach with the Three Year Action Agenda. It was found that there was broad 
congruence between the Three Year Action Agenda and  the Strategy Document on 
Health sector related subjects. However, specific a ctions envisaged in the Three Year 
Action Agenda had not been clearly mapped with vari ous strategy elements. In 
addition, while the association of various aspects of the Strategy Document with 
                                                           
7 Ministry of Home Affairs stated (March 2019) that the Vision document is being finalised. 
8 Agriculture, Trade, Industry, Services, Transport,  Energy, Education, Health, Environment and 
Forests, Water Resources, Urban Development, Rural Transformation, Social Justice and 
Governance. 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
11  
different SDGs have been depicted, their specific i mpact on these SDGs has not been 
detailed. 
2.3.2 Mapping of Goals and Targets 
India has been pursuing a comprehensive development  agenda which has encompassed 
the economic, social and environmental dimensions a nd cuts across sectors and levels 
of Government. As noted in India’s Voluntary Nation al Review (VNR) Report, India’s 
national development agenda is mirrored in the SDGs . Thus, identification of national 
targets and indicators and mapping of existing deve lopment schemes, programmes, 
interventions and Ministries/Departments with SDG targets were important for adapting 
SDGs into the national context.  
Assigning of Goals and Targets 
As part of the task of assigning Goals and Targets to the Ministries, NITI Aayog 
undertook an exercise of mapping SDGs and their rel ated targets with Ministries/ 
Departments, Centrally Sponsored Schemes and other Government initiatives. It has 
released various versions of the mapping document.  
Audit examined the mapping document released by NIT I Aayog in August 2017 and 
the revised version of the document released in August 2018. The mapping document of 
August 2017 identified Nodal Ministries, associated  Ministries, Central Schemes and 
major Government initiatives for different SDGs and Targets.  
In the revised mapping document, specific Targets h ave been linked to Schemes and 
interventions; list of linked Ministries and Scheme s have been updated and a mention 
has been made of linkage between SDGs 9. The SDG India Index: Baseline Report 
brought out by the NITI Aayog (December 2018) has f urther elaborated the inter- 
linkages of SDGs to bring out synergy with other SDGs.  
State Level 
2.3.3  Adapting SDGs in selected States  
In a National Conference of the Chief Secretaries a nd Planning Secretaries of the States 
(July 2016), NITI Aayog asked each State to have it s own Vision, Strategy and Action 
Plan. Prior to this (April 2016), NITI Aayog had ad vised the State Governments to 
undertake a mapping exercise similar to the one car ried by it, to facilitate fast track 
achievement of the SDGs and related Targets. 
                                                           
9 e.g . Goal-1 was mentioned to have linkages with Goal- 2,3,4,5,6,7,8,10,11,13. 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
12  
According to the SDG India Index Baseline Report, 1 9 States/UTs (including Assam, 
Haryana, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh  and West Bengal selected for this audit) have 
prepared their Vision document and 22 States/UTs ha ve completed their mapping 
exercise. 
Status of preparation of Vision, Strategy and Action Agenda documents and mapping of 
Goals/Targets in the seven selected States as examined by audit is given in Table 2.1 : 
Table 2.1 : Adapting SDGs in selected States 
State Vision Strategy Action Agenda  Mapping 
Assam     
Chhattisgarh     
Haryana     
Kerala     
Maharashtra     
Uttar Pradesh     
West Bengal     
Audit noted that the work of Vision/Strategy/Action  Agenda documents in  
Uttar Pradesh  and West Bengal was at a preparatory stage. Kerala  had prepared a 
Perspective Plan 2030 in 2014 which was not reviewe d and realigned with SDGs. 
Chhattisgarh  had published its Vision 2030 document in March 2019. 
The mapping exercise undertaken in the selected Sta tes was not comprehensive. For 
instance, certain Schemes/Goals/Targets were not ma pped in Assam , Chhattisgarh , 
Haryana , Maharashtra  and Uttar Pradesh . 
Thus, both at the Central and State levels, the exe rcise of formulating policy documents 
in the context of SDGs was still ongoing. Prescript ion of a time frame along with 
effective follow-up by nodal agencies would have as sisted in the timely completion of 
these key tasks. Further, the process needs close m onitoring to get adequate assurance 
about the effectiveness of the exercise for adapting existing plans with SDGs. 
2.4 Building Awareness and Stakeholder Involvement 
Building awareness of the SDGs and adoption of a pa rticipatory multi-stakeholder 
approach is aimed at ensuring inclusive, effective and sustainable implementation of the 
2030 Agenda. Audit examined measures taken by the Central and State Governments to 
raise awareness among Government officials, stakeho lders and general public and also 
the existence and effectiveness of structures for e ncouraging stakeholder consultations 
and partnerships. 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
13  
2.4.1 Initiatives at Central Level 
Steps suggested in the Reference Guide of the UNDG for increasing awareness 
included holding introductory workshops for sensiti sing Government officials and 
stakeholders and organizing awareness campaign for communicating the 2030 Agenda 
to the general public. Training and capacity buildi ng was an important element for 
increasing awareness and stakeholder engagement. 
Initiatives taken for increasing awareness and prom oting stakeholder involvement and 
key areas of concern relating to these initiatives are discussed in Table2.2 : 
Table 2.2: Awareness Raising and Stakeholder involvement 
Initiatives Areas of Concern 
A.  Multi-stakeholder interactions   
• NITI Aayog, along with partner 
institutions 10 , held national and regional 
level workshops/consultations for raising 
awareness, exchanging ideas and 
experiences and assisting preparedness in 
States.  
• GoI partnered with Civil Society 
Organisations in areas such as preparation 
of Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) material and taking 
up research and documentation on SDGs.   
• Multi-disciplinary Task Force facilitated 
stakeholder consultations. 
• ‘Speaker’s Research Initiative’ (SRI) 
workshops were organised in July 2015, 
August 2016, December 2016 and March 
2017 to provide SDG-related insights to 
Members of Parliament.   
• There were delays in finalising 
outcome of these consultations and 
placing of the reports in public 
domain. 
 
• In case of most consultations, definite 
outcomes and recommendations for 
time-bound follow up action were not 
identified. Thus, there was limited 
assurance that deliberations shaped 
roadmap/policies for SDGs.  
 
• According to its website, SRI 
workshops on SDG related issues have 
not been held post March 2017.  
B.  Raising public awareness  
• NITI Aayog’s consultations aimed at 
reaching out to stakeholders spearheading 
public awareness exercises.  
• These consultations expected to “set off an 
iterative process of information 
dissemination” across the country.  
• Schemes/Programmes of the Government 
have provision for outreach and publicity.  
• Extent and effectiveness of efforts 
made by stakeholders to increase 
public awareness not ascertainable in 
the absence of feedback. 
• No centralised public awareness 
campaign envisaged.  
• Absence of dedicated awareness 
measures for general public may dilute 
objective of making the 2030 Agenda 
inclusive and participatory.  
                                                           
10  Research and Information Systems for Developing Co untries (RIS) and United Nations. RIS is an 
autonomous policy research institute under the Ministry of External Affairs. 
 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
14  
C.  Capacity Building  
• The NITI Aayog advised (December 2017) 
Central Ministries and State Governments 
to initiate capacity building measures.  
• Instructions issued for training and 
resource centres to incorporate sessions on 
SDGs in their training modules/ 
programmes.  
• Test check in 15 Ministries showed that 10 
Ministries have taken up capacity building 
exercises.  
• Five out of the 15 Ministries where 
this aspect was reviewed were yet to 
initiate/report any capacity building 
exercise. 
 
2.4.2 Actions and Initiatives at State Level 
NITI Aayog intimated that State Governments partici pating in consultations/workshops 
are spearheading public awareness initiatives in th eir own domains.  NITI Aayog had 
also advised the State Governments to undertake cap acity building initiatives. 
Initiatives undertaken for raising awareness, enhan cing stakeholder engagement and 
capacity building were examined in seven selected States and the findings are discussed 
in Table 2.3. 
Table 2.3: Awareness Raising, Stakeholder’s Involve ment and Capacity 
Building initiatives by selected States  
Assam • Awareness programme/workshops organised in 19 out o f 33 Districts 
for autonomous councils, civil society organization s and district 
planning officers.  
• 52 inter-departmental meetings organised resulting in a ‘Process 
Document on Journey towards SDGs in Assam’ . 
• State Level Training Institute and four Regional Tr aining Institutes 
planned by 2020 but no progress on implementation r eported as of 
December 2018.  
Chhattisgarh  
 
• E-material for publicity of SDGs issued.  
• 11 departmental working groups with designated noda l departments 
set-up for SDGs.  However, workshops for sensitizin g officials and 
public awareness were not conducted except for Memb ers of 
Legislative Assembly (February 2019). 
• Officials trained on preparation of decentralized District plan based on 
SDGs at all five divisions (July 2017).  
• Sensitization workshop for GPDP ( Gram Panchayat  Development 
Plan) members conducted, who would further dissemin ate the 
information at lower levels.  
Haryana • SDG Coordination Centre with responsibility inter-alia , for capacity 
building and raising awareness has been set up.  
• Seven inter-departmental working groups formed for facilitating 
convergence but had not met since adoption of the Vision document.  
Kerala 
 
• Workshops, trainings and review meetings held for r aising awareness 
among Government officials, public representatives,  civil society 
organizations   and other stakeholders but action f or raising public 
awareness not initiated.  

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
15  
• National Foundation of India (NFI) identified for m obilizing and 
sharing knowledge, expertise, technologies and financial resources.   
Maharashtra • Meetings of officials held for sensitising them on SDGs but 
sensitisation of departments at the third tier of G overnment yet to be 
conducted.  
• Training programmes for Municipal/ Zila Parishad  members and 
District Level Officers planned and training module  for continuous 
Education and Skill Development proposed.  
Uttar 
Pradesh 
• Awareness programme held only at the State level.  
• Workshops and inter-agency consultations held but p roceedings in 
many cases were not documented.   
• Working Groups (October 2016) consisting of differe nt departments 
constituted but they remained non-functional.  
• Website developed to disseminate information on SDGs was removed 
due to lack of technical support.   
West Bengal • Inter-departmental/sectoral meetings held for mains treaming of the 
2030 Agenda.  
• Awareness schemes specifically linked to SDGs not taken up.  
It is evident that while some initiatives involving  stakeholders and capacity building of 
officials at the Centre and States have been taken for raising awareness, these were not 
comprehensive, focussed and sustained.  As such, th e task of engendering inclusiveness 
and participatory decision making in implementation  of the 2030 Agenda could face 
constraints.  
2.5 Policy Coherence 
Implementation of the 2030 Agenda requires an integ rated ‘Whole of Government’ 
approach, a balanced coverage of all dimensions of sustainable development and 
ensuring that ‘ no one is left behind’ . In this context, the UNDG guidance on 
mainstreaming the 2030 Agenda identifies creation o f “Horizontal Policy Coherence” 
and “Vertical Policy Coherence” which are complemen tary, as key to the 
mainstreaming process.   The existence of arrangeme nts for horizontal and vertical 
policy coherence both at the Centre and States exam ined during audit are discussed in 
the subsequent paragraphs. 
2.5.1 Horizontal Policy Coherence  
Identification of inter-connection between Goals and Targets 
Horizontal Policy Coherence involves policy-making processes which break down 
traditional sectoral silos and takes into account t he interdependences between 
dimensions and sectors so that an integrated and ba lanced approach to SDGs can be 
adopted. As already brought out in Para 2.3.2, whil e mapping Schemes/Programmes 
and Ministries with SDGs, an exercise had been carr ied out to identify interconnections 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
16  
between Goals/Targets and their implementing Minist ries. In addition, NITI Aayog 
stated that the issue of trade-offs and synergies w ill be examined by the Ministries 
implementing SDGs in due course.  
Institutional mechanisms for coordination between Ministries and agencies 
Coordinated institutional mechanisms are required f or creating partnerships across 
sectoral Ministries and agencies, and for managing inter-connections between Goals 
and Targets.  Past audits have shown existence of established inter-ministerial and inter-
agency mechanisms within governance structures both  at the Central and State levels.  
Most development programmes and initiatives also pr ovide for institutional 
arrangements for convergence and co-ordination betw een all the concerned Ministries 
and agencies. Audit reports 11  have however, also highlighted shortcomings in the  
functioning of these mechanisms and have recommended remedial action.  
Audit examined whether institutional mechanisms hav e been specifically created for 
addressing coordination issues relating to SDGs. NI TI Aayog has cited the multi-
disciplinary Task Force as an example of an institu tional mechanism created for 
addressing coordination aspects. Audit noted that a  decision taken by this Task Force 
(October 2017) to create an administrative mechanis m for enabling the nodal Ministry 
for each SDG to coordinate with other Ministries ha d not been implemented and 
subsequently the concept of a nodal Ministry itself  was done away with in the revised 
mapping document. NITI Aayog explained (May 2019) t hat as various goals are 
interconnected in a matrix-like structure no groupi ng of goals can be assigned to any 
specific Ministry.  
At the State level, initiative for creating institu tional mechanisms for addressing inter-
connectedness of SDGs have been taken in all the se ven selected States.  Findings in 
this respect for each State are dealt within Para 2.4.2 above. 
                                                           
11  
CAG’s  Report Concern Recommendation No.  Subject 
15 of 
2018 
National Rural 
Drinking Water 
Programme 
In many States, institutional framework for 
planning and delivery at State, District, Block and 
Village level were non -functional. The Council for 
co-ordination and convergence among different 
Ministries/States remained dormant.  
Feasibility and practicality of 
existing mechanism needs 
review to ensure they serve 
the intended purpose. 
10 of 
2018 
Pradhan Mantri 
Swasthya 
Suraksha Yojana 
Scheme guidelines providing reference tools for 
policy makers, stakeholders and implementing 
agencies to ensure consistent and rule based 
implementation/ monitoring of scheme was not 
existing. 
Operational guidelines should 
be framed to regulate 
implementation of the scheme 
across the States. 
23 of 
2017 
Implementation 
of Right to 
Education (RTE) 
National Advisory Council to advice the 
Government on implementation of the provisions of 
RTE Act was not reconstituted and remained non-
functional. 
National Advisory Council 
needs to be reconstituted. 
 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
17  
2.5.2 Vertical Policy Coherence (Localisation)  
India’s VNR Report mentions that ‘ India is fortunate to have highly committed 
Governments at the Centre as well as States .  In the spirit of cooperative federalism, the 
two levels of the Government have joined hands to bring about the change India needs ’. 
The VNR Report also highlights that India has a tra dition of strong local government 12  
institutions both in rural and urban areas. These i nstitutions, to which substantial 
financial resources have been devolved, are support ed by the Centre and the States in 
planning and implementing various development initiatives. 
Audits of various development schemes and programme s (refer footnote 11) show that 
these provide for close integration across differen t levels of Government and 
local/regional authorities playing an important rol e. These audits have however, 
frequently made observations with regard to infirmi ties in their functioning along with 
recommendations of improvements.  
With specific reference to SDGs at the Centre, NITI  Aayog had involved the States in 
various initiatives viz. consultations, workshops, meetings, mapping of Goal s and 
Targets, preparation of Vision and Strategy documen ts, Capacity Building, Task Force. 
A dedicated National Workshop on “Building Capacity  to Localise the SDGs” was also 
organised. By launching the SDG India Index & Dashb oard in 2018 and ranking the 
States and UTs, NITI Aayog has sought to promote th e spirit of competitive federalism 
among the sub-national governments. At the level of  States, vertical coherence is 
required to be achieved by the State authorities wi th subordinate administrative 
formations and local self-government structures (th ird tier of Government).  Findings 
with regard to this aspect reported from the selected States are discussed in Table 2.4 : 
Table 2.4: Vertical coherence in selected States  
Assam  • The nodal department undertook consultations at Dis tricts and 
department levels for raising awareness but did not cover 14 out of 33 
Districts and seven out of 59 departments.   
Kerala • The SDG Monitoring Group (January 2018) decided to form teams to 
coordinate the implementation of SDGs at District, Urban Local and 
Panchayat  levels.  
• Teams to be constituted after training to elected r epresentatives and 
officials of Urban and Rural local bodies which is in process.  
Maharashtra  • State and District level Steering Committees set up  to guide and 
monitor progress on implementation of SDGs.  
Uttar Pradesh  • Initiatives identified for vertical coherence and t heir status are as 
under: 
o Localising indicators: A State level workshop was h eld but 
decisions taken were not recorded. 
                                                           
12     Panchayati Raj  Institutions in rural areas and Urban Local Bodies 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
18  
o Clustering of Goals led by Department of Panchayati Raj :  
Consultation held for review of Gram Panchayat  Development 
Plan (GPDP) guidelines; integrating SDGs in the GPD Ps and 
preparation of a Goal wise list of activities to be  taken at GP 
level.  However, headway held up due to non-submiss ion of 
framework of GPDP by Panchayati Raj  Department. 
o SDG Implementation Task Matrix at District level an d review 
framework at the State and District levels: These t asks were still 
underway.  
• A State Level Task Force created (January 2019) und er the 
chairmanship of Chief Secretary, for implementation  of SDGs at the 
lower formations.  
West Bengal  • District Level Monitoring Committees have been form ed for 
implementing the 2030 Agenda. However, there was no  institutional 
links at the lower levels. 
From the above, it is evident that gaps still exist ed in the creation of “Horizontal Policy 
Coherence” and Vertical Policy Coherence” which cou ld hamper both securing 
sustainable development in a balanced manner and ensuring that ‘ no one is left behind’ . 
NITI Aayog has however, highlighted in its latest c ommunication (May 2019) that it 
works directly with all Central Ministries, States and UTs and their Planning 
Departments, through periodic workshops and review meetings, so as to bring about 
required coherence. 
2.6 Audit Summation 
NITI Aayog as the nodal institution for coordinatin g the 2030 Agenda undertook 
several initiatives. However, a roadmap with define d milestones aligned with SDG 
targets to be achieved in the year 2020, 2025 and 2 030 is yet to be prepared.  It brought 
out a Three Year Action Agenda and a Seven Year Str ategy document but action on 
preparing the Vision 2030 document was still underway. In the selected States, progress 
on preparation of similar documents was lagging. NI TI Aayog had undertaken 
extensive consultations with stakeholders to raise awareness but a national strategy to 
create public awareness on SDGs needs to be formula ted. Similarly, efforts to enhance 
public awareness at State level would also need imp etus. Policy coherence is key to 
ensuring “inclusiveness” and a “Whole of Government ” approach in the 
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for which existin g mechanisms for co-ordination 
amongst the Ministries and agencies, and different levels of Government would need 
strengthening by identifying and addressing interco nnections between Goals/Targets 
and their implementing Ministries. 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
19  
Chapter-III: Resource Mobilisation for the 2030 Agenda  
3.1    Introduction 
The 2030 Agenda lays stress on the national strateg ies for sustainable development 
supported through national financing frameworks. The UNDG Guide on mainstreaming 
SDGs thus, recognises effective mobilisation and be tter use of financial resources as 
areas of primary focus. The present audit exercise examines preparedness in terms of 
securing financial resources, and their availabilit y and management of human and 
infrastructure resources.  These are discussed below. 
3.2 Financing and Budgeting for SDGs  
For increased mobilisation of financial resources, important aspects comprise measures 
to strengthen domestic resource availability such a s improving effectiveness of tax 
systems and strengthening international tax coopera tion. Better use of financial 
resources involves improving expenditure efficiency  and effectiveness through 
instruments such as functional and outcome budgetin g; expenditure reforms and 
expenditure targeting.  
3.2.1 Optimising Availability of Financial Resource s 
The Addis Ababa Action Agenda (AAAA) 13  identifies mobilisation of domestic 
resources consisting of measures aimed at widening of revenue base, improving tax 
collection and combating tax evasion and illicit fi nancial flows as central to the 2030 
Agenda.   
The VNR Report and the Three Year Action Agenda hav e highlighted several steps 
taken for optimising domestic resource mobilisation  including the measures identified 
in the AAAA.  These include implementation of a tax  reform agenda based on three 
strategic objectives (i) eliminating the generation  of black money and combating illicit 
fund flows, (ii) expanding the tax base and (iii) s upporting investments through a 
predictable and stable tax policy. In addition, ces ses have been introduced for 
mobilizing resources for specific sectors viz. Health and Education. The Government 
envisages that these measures would lead to an incr ease in the tax to GDP ratio and 
direct tax buoyancy rates over the next three years  (2017-20). In the VNR Report, 
Government also commits to focus on establishing pa rtnerships with private sector 
through Public Private Partnership (PPP) initiative s, to meet the financing requirements 
of SDGs and to provide the private sector access to  global finance through reforms to 
attract Foreign Direct Investment (FDI). 
                                                           
13  Addis Ababa Action Agenda is an integral part of t he 2030 Agenda. 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
20  
In the Three Year Action Agenda, the Government has  made projections for tax and 
non-tax receipts, non-debt capital receipts (procee ds from disinvestment/strategic sales) 
and for fiscal deficit consistent with fiscal roadm ap provided in the budget 
responsibility legislation. However, these projecti ons do not include estimates for 
availability of internal extra-budgetary resources,  external aid and FDI . The Strategy 
document viz.  “Strategy for New India @75” highlights the need t o raise rate of 
investment as a percentage of GDP, the tax-GDP rati o and Government’s contribution 
to fixed capital formation by 2022-23. It also iden tifies some broad measures to 
increase tax-GDP ratio and attracting foreign inves tment.  However, no projections for 
availability of financial resources have been made in this document. As a result, 
projections exist only for the three-year period covered by the Action Agenda. 
As involvement of States and local bodies would be critical for implementing SDGs, 
the VNR Report highlights measures for States, such as increase in the fiscal devolution 
from 32 to 42 per cent of the central pool of tax proceeds; release of spe cial purpose 
grants for specific programmes and supplementary fi nances to local bodies. However, 
none of the selected States had taken up any compre hensive exercise to identify 
financial resources for implementing SDGs. 
3.2.2 Assessment of Requirement of Financial Resour ces 
The Three Year Action Agenda provides a projection of Union Government 
expenditure for the period 2017-20.  However, the b asis on which these projections 
were made was not clear and no specific linkage with Goals and Targets was made. The 
Strategy document viz.  “Strategy for New India @75” sets targets for expe nditure as 
percentage of GDP  in the case of some sectors 14  to be achieved by 2022-23, but does 
not make year to year expenditure projections for i mplementing the strategy for various 
sectors.  
In the SDG India Index: Baseline Report (December 2 018) and the Strategy Document, 
NITI Aayog recognises that financial resources are a fundamental driver for achieving 
the SDGs in time. Audit however, noted that Ministr y of Finance had not undertaken 
any exercise for assessment of financial resources for implementing the 2030 Agenda. 
It was also noted that similarly, none of the selec ted States had undertaken any 
concerted exercise for assessing resource requirements for implementing SDGs.  
NITI Aayog intimated (July 2018) that it would requ est all the Ministries to analyse 
their budget allocations with respect to achieving relevant SDG targets. Subsequently, it 
also brought out (May 2019) that financial resource s to support various 
Schemes/Programmes are identified each year during the budgeting process which in 
turn support SDGs.  
                                                           
14  Education Sector- 6 per cent of GDP by 2022, Health Sector- 2.5 per cent  of GDP by 2025. 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
21  
3.2.3 Effective use of Financing 
Effective use of financial resources has been highlighted in the UNDG Reference Guide 
as a critical dimension in the achievement of SDGs.   Audit reports on various 
development initiatives and on the finances of the Government both at the Central and 
State levels, have frequently highlighted inefficac ies in expenditure such as persistent 
non-spending of allocated funds, diversion and park ing of funds, irregular and wasteful 
expenditure, misallocation of funds and delayed and  escalated payments. In this 
context, measures to enhance effectiveness of expen diture such as introduction of 
Outcome Budgeting, expenditure reforms, rationalisa tion of subsidies, improving 
accountability and transparency in areas of governa nce become important. The transfer 
of funds directly to the beneficiaries would help a voiding leakages and thus enhance 
effective use of finances.  
The VNR Report and the Three Year Action Agenda lis t out several measures taken by 
the Government for improving expenditure efficiency  and effectiveness.  Some of the 
measures and the audit observations thereon are dealt with in the following paragraphs.  
3.2.3.1  Outcome Budgeting 
The VNR Report has stated that the Government has r estructured the framework of the 
expenditure budget which would help monitor results  of different public expenditure 
initiatives in terms of their impact on SDGs.  Prep aration of the “Outcome Budget” 
mandated since 2006-07 has been modified from 2017- 18 onwards. An Output-
Outcome Framework for schemes was presented as part  of the Budget documents in 
2017-18 and 2018-19, in which the financial outlay,  output and deliverables and 
projected medium term outcomes for each Scheme/Proj ect was made available in a 
single, consolidated document.  Audit noted that wh ile the Scheme/Programmes in the 
modified Outcome Budgets mirrored the SDGs, these h ad not been reoriented to 
specifically reflect outlays and outcomes with resp ect to various Goals and Targets.  
Further, the Output-Outcome Framework for 2018-19 d id not reflect details of 
achievement against planned targets and outcomes for previous financial years. 
With respect to the States, audit noted that NITI A ayog had advised the States  
(January-February 2018) to start orienting their bu dgets to SDGs by linking allocations 
to Goals/Targets.  Audit examination in the seven s elected States showed that four 
States viz. Chhattisgarh , Kerala , Uttar Pradesh  and West Bengal  had not taken any 
substantive action for aligning their Budget with SDGs.  Assam  had prepared ‘Outcome 
Budget’ for the financial years 2017-18 to 2019-20 wherein allocations were linked to 
specific SDG targets.  In Haryana , a budget document was prepared for financial year  
2018-19 where some of the existing schemes were lin ked with 15 Goals and allocations 
were aggregated Goal wise. In Maharashtra , the software “Maharashtra Plan Schemes 
Information System (MP-SIMS)” has been modified to capture assignment of budget 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
22  
outlays under the State and District Level Schemes with SDGs. As such, most of the 
States are only at the preliminary stage of orienting their budgets with SDGs. 
3.2.3.2 Expenditure Reforms 
Expenditure reforms implemented by the Government c omprised a wide variety of 
measures.  These include  introduction of sunset cl auses in all public expenditure 
programmes so that unproductive legacy expenditures  can be brought to an end; 
introduction of Public Financial Management System (PFMS) for tracking expenditure 
flows to its objectives; reorganisation of developm ent schemes leading to 
rationalisation, merger and dropping of schemes so as to ensure efficient management 
of public expenditure; introduction of Direct Benef it Transfer (DBT) in a large number 
of schemes for better targeting of subsidies and public expenditure, use of technology in 
tracking asset creation, introduction of e-procurem ent and adoption of a Government  
e-Marketplace (GeM) model. 
3.2.3.3 Expenditure Reforms at State Level 
As regards expenditure reforms undertaken in the se lected States, several of the 
aforesaid measures such as DBT, PFMS and use of e-p latforms would also be 
applicable to them. Specific steps taken by some of  the selected States to improve 
expenditure efficiency are discussed in Table 3.1 : 
Table 3.1: Expenditure reforms in selected States  
Assam The Departmental Strategic and Action Plan for the State Finance 
Department contained a number of measures for expen diture reform 
including a system of online payments, augmentation  of resources through 
systems restructuring and use of technology.   
Haryana The Vision 2030 document has identified SDG Coordin ation Centre as the 
mechanism for implementing measures such as DBT on real time basis and 
creation of a tool for concurrent monitoring and data collection.   
Maharashtra Departments asked to propose innovative schemes for achievement of SDGs 
while preparing plans for 2018-19. 
Uttar Pradesh  The State Government intimated that measures for im proving expenditure 
efficiency and effectiveness will be taken up after  finalisation of the Vision 
2030 document.  
The impact of reforms on rationalising public expen diture would be the subject of audit 
examination over time as implementation strategy of PFMS continues to evolve.   
3.3 Managing Human Resources and Infrastructure 
The 2030 Agenda focuses on mobilising various means  of implementation, which 
besides financial resources covers human resources and infrastructure. NITI Aayog 
intimated that at the Central level, capacity build ing was primarily focussed on 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
23  
sensitisation and raising awareness on SDGs and for  formulation of implementation 
strategies. These were accomplished through the lar ge number of consultations 
organised by it. No exercise was taken to assess ga ps in human resources and 
infrastructure to implement SDGs. 
The position with regard to initiatives taken for p rovision of human resources and 
infrastructure in the selected States are discussed in Table 3.2 : 
Table 3.2: Managing human resources and infrastructure in selected States  
Assam The Administrative Reforms and Training Department and the IT 
department have provided for studies, setting up of  training institutes and 
for identification of constraints in Information an d Communication 
Technology (ICT). 
Chhattisgarh The State Nodal Organisation for SDG (State Plannin g Commission) 
intimated (June 2019) that the process regarding hu man resources is 
underway. 
Haryana The assessment of requirement of physical resources was yet to be taken up 
by the SDG Coordination Centre. 
Kerala To meet the human resource requirement a SDG Cell h as been constituted.  
Necessary ICT equipment has been procured for the u se of nodal 
departments and nodal officers. 
Uttar Pradesh  Though the draft Vision document mentions intervent ions in the form of 
infrastructure, human resources and ICT, their quan titative assessment has 
not been done.   
West Bengal Steps to assess requirement in terms of human and I CT resources were yet 
to be undertaken. 
Thus, steps are yet to be taken both at the Central  and State levels, to assess the 
requirement and gaps in availability of physical re sources needed to support the 
implementation of SDGs. 
3.4 Audit Summation  
The 2030 Agenda lays stress on identifying and secu ring all means of implementation 
of the Agenda including financial resources. The Vo luntary National Review Report 
and the Three Year Action Agenda have highlighted s everal steps taken by the 
Government for optimizing domestic resource mobilis ation.  However, no 
comprehensive exercise for assessing and identifyin g financial resources required for 
implementing SDGs had been undertaken either by the  Ministry of Finance at the 
Centre or by the selected States. No steps had also  been initiated at the Central level for 
integrating SDGs in national budgeting and most of the selected States were only at the 
preliminary stage of orienting their budgets with S DGs. The VNR and the Three Year 
Action Agenda have highlighted several steps for im proving efficiency of expenditure, 
their efficacy and impact would need to be established through suitable audits. 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
24  
 
4.1 Introduction  
The 2030 Agenda envisages systematic follow-up, monitoring and review of progress at 
all levels to ensure its effective and expeditious implementation.  The Agenda 
recognises that the core of the review framework wo uld be at the national and state 
levels which would feed into reviews at the regiona l and global levels.  At the initial 
stage, these reviews would concentrate on preparedn ess activities and thereafter on 
actual implementation of SDGs and reporting on prog rams.  Audit examined 
preparedness for monitoring and undertaking reviews  in terms of existence of 
institutional arrangements for monitoring; identifi cation of performance indicators for 
monitoring and reporting on SDGs implementation and  mechanisms for ensuring 
availability of quality, and disaggregated data. Th e audit findings are given in the 
following paragraphs.  
4.2 Institutional Arrangements for Monitoring and R eporting 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation  (MoSPI) has been assigned the 
responsibility of development of monitoring indicat ors for SDGs and related Targets. 
MoSPI is required to define indicators, periodicity , sources of data, and prepare 
reporting mechanisms including dashboards. A SDG un it has been created in MoSPI to 
co-ordinate with data source Ministries and concern ed UN and other International 
agencies. 
MoSPI has prepared a National Indicator Framework ( NIF) and Government has 
approved (October 2018) the constitution of a High- Level Steering Committee under 
the Chairmanship of Secretary, MoSPI, for periodica lly reviewing and refining the NIF 
for monitoring SDGs and Targets. MoSPI has since fi nalised the Terms of Reference 
and the composition of the Committee (January 2019). 
NITI Aayog which is the nodal institution responsib le for coordinating and overseeing 
the implementation of SDGs, intimated that pending finalisation of the NIF, it was 
reviewing progress with respect to SDGs through the  multi-disciplinary Task Force, 
and holding periodic reviews with Central Ministrie s and Planning departments of 
States and UTs. 
Examination of this aspect in the selected States h as disclosed differing levels of 
progress achieved as discussed in Table 4.1 : 
 
Chapter-IV: Monitoring and Reporting  

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
25  
Table 4.1: Institutional arrangements for monitorin g and reporting in selected 
States  
Assam The nodal department was yet to formulate any monit oring mechanism and 
it stated that this would be accomplished through a n IT based platform 
which was yet to be developed.   
Chhattisgarh  The State Nodal Organisation for SDG intimated (Jun e 2019) that the 
institutional arrangements for monitoring would be made. 
Haryana In the State, the SDG Coordination Centre was envis aged as the nodal 
agency for monitoring and reporting purposes.   
Kerala A State Monitoring Group and a State Steering Group  have been set up to 
review progress with respect to SDGs.  The Economic s and Statistics 
Department has been designated as the nodal departm ent for data 
management.  
Maharashtra State has signed a MoU with UN India for inter-alia  developing a 
monitoring system at the State and District levels.   
Uttar 
Pradesh 
A monitoring committee for regular review of the im plementation of SDG 
was constituted (January 2018) at the State level.  Similar exercise for 
districts and lower levels or in respect of each Goal was yet to be initiated. 
West Bengal The State Government intimated that it would develo p a monitoring system 
through a State dashboard which was at the pilot stage.  
From the above, it is evident that while certain in itiatives were undertaken for 
establishing institutional arrangements for monitor ing and reporting of SDGs both at 
the Centre and States, these were still works in progress. Progress on this front appeared 
to have been hindered by the delay in finalisation of the NIF and putting in place the 
required institutional mechanisms for monitoring and reporting. 
4.3 Indicators, Data Availability, Monitoring and R eporting 
Central level 
4.3.1  Indicators, Baselines Data and Milestones 
An Inter-Agency and Expert Group on SDGs (IAEG-SDGs) with India as member, was 
constituted by the UN (March 2015) for development of a Global Indicator Framework 
(GIF) on SDGs.  Based on the recommendations of the  IAEG-SDGs, a GIF with  
232 global indicators was adopted by the UN General  Assembly in July 2017.  In the 
GIF, based on their level of methodological develop ment and data availability, 
indicators were categorised, as Tier-I, Tier-II and  Tier-III 15 . Examination of this issue 
involved ascertaining if data gaps had been assessed, indicators and baselines have been 
                                                           
15  Tier-I -Indicators conceptually clear, established methodo logy, standards available and data 
regularly produced. Tier-II- Indicators conceptually clear, established method ology and standards 
available, but data is not being regularly produced . Tier-III -Indicators for which there is no 
established methodology and standards, or methodology/standards are being developed/ tested. 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
26  
established and milestones had been set to monitor and report on implementation and 
the findings are discussed below: 
a)  MoSPI, in consultation with the Central Ministries and State Governments, had 
prepared draft NIF for obtaining approval of the Go I (June 2017). In January 2018, 
a revised proposal was submitted on which no decisi on was provided till October 
2018, when it was conveyed by the GoI that MoSPI co uld itself take a decision on 
the NIF. There was thus avoidable delay in taking a  decision on the NIF which has 
held up tasks such as assessment of data gaps and p reparation of baseline data for 
which MoSPI issued instructions to the Central Ministries only in November 2018. 
b)  The NIF consists of 306 indicators but does not inc lude indicators with respect to  
41 Targets 16  pertaining to 13 Goals. MoSPI has recognised that there are a number 
of Targets for which either indicators/accepted met hodology do not exist/or were 
being developed, or for which data was not being re gularly produced. It was in this 
context that constitution of a High Level Steering Committee was approved to 
review and update the NIF from time to time.  
c)  The GIF had categorised indicators into Tiers I to III. However, no such 
categorisation has been done in the NIF proposed by  MoSPI on the grounds that 
data on all the indicators included in the NIF woul d be available with the concerned 
Ministries/departments and tier-wise classification  was not applicable. It was 
however, noted that MoSPI in its proposal for the N IF, recognised the existence of 
several indicators for which data was not being pro duced regularly or methodology 
was not developed. Non-classification of the indica tors into tiers carries the risk of 
the indicators having been inadequately assessed in  terms of availability of data, 
standards and methodology which could affect their usefulness for measuring 
outcomes. 
d)  MoSPI intimated to audit (July 2018) that no milest ones for the indicators have 
been proposed. Non-identification of milestones may  affect the preparation of an 
effective road-map/policy for achieving the related Targets. 
e)  MoSPI had released a Baseline Report 2015-16 (March  2019) for NIF. The Report 
provides baseline and metadata for 169 out of 306 n ational indicators which will 
serve as a tool for policy making, planning, etc.  
4.3.2 SDG India Index: Baseline Report 2018 
NITI Aayog has released a SDG India Index: Baseline  Report 2018 and Dashboard 
(December 2018) prepared in collaboration with United Nations and other stakeholders. 
The SDG Index has been envisaged as a comprehensive  index to measure progress of 
the States/UTs with respect to implementation of SD Gs. The index is based on  
62 priority indicators pertaining to 13 Goals and 3 9 Targets. The Report provides the 
                                                           
16  Includes all 19 Targets for SDG 17. 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
27  
basis for selecting the priority indicators, identi fies data challenges, benefits and 
limitations of the Index, and seeks to promote comp etition among State Governments 
by ranking them on SDGs, using a defined methodology. 
The utility of the index would depend upon improved  availability of data and increase 
in coverage in terms of goals, targets and indicators. Further, as MoSPI has commenced 
an exercise for setting up of a dashboard based on the NIF, the possibility of any 
ambiguity among stakeholders due to presence of two  frameworks would need to be 
averted at a later stage. 
NITI Aayog stated (March 2019) that the purpose of the SDG Index with limited 
indicators was to make the tool more easily and wid ely usable as well as less 
encumbered by data challenges. It also mentioned th at the indicators included in SDG 
Index was a sub-set of NIF and do not constitute an y parallel framework. Audit 
however, noted that according to NIF Baseline Repor t, data was not yet available in 
respect of 14 priority indicators.  NITI Aayog stated (May 2019) that the next edition of 
the SDG India Index would be based on indicators drawn from the NIF. 
4.3.3 Availability of Quality and Disaggregated Dat a  
As reported in the VNR (July 2017), MoSPI has overa ll responsibility for ensuring 
quality and timeliness of statistics and for identi fying gaps in data availability.  At the 
State level, the Directorate of Economics and Stati stics (or equivalent) is required to 
perform the same functions as MoSPI.  In the VNR Re port, it has also been stated that 
MoSPI regularly organises conferences with data pro ducers and users for updates; 
identification of gaps in data and methods and take remedial measures. 
In the context of MDGs, MoSPI had highlighted sever al constraints with respect to data 
availability such as data gap issues at sub-state l evels, lack of annual data updates, 
irregular periodicity of data, and incomplete cover age of data sourced from 
administrative records.  NITI Aayog has also highlighted several challenges with regard 
to data availability especially at the State, District and Gram Panchayat  levels. 
The VNR Report makes mention of measures to strengt hen the statistical system in the 
country by providing required financial and human resources; bridging of data gaps and 
identification of new data sources. It also highlig hted initiatives for modernising the 
data system by leveraging technology.  
On data availability for indicators, MoSPI informed  audit that indicators have been 
incorporated in the NIF after extensive consultatio ns with data source 
Ministries/Departments and other stakeholders and a fter considering the aspect of data 
availability. A study of the NIF discloses that but  for two indicators, periodicity of data 
availability has been exhibited in the framework fo r all the indicators with periodicity 
being annual in the case of 81 per cent  of the indicators.  

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
28  
4.3.4 Monitoring and Reporting Process 
Systematic follow-up, monitoring and review of prog ress is a key feature of the 2030 
Agenda.  At a general level, NITI Aayog stated (Jul y 2018) that it is committed to a 
systematic follow-up, monitoring and review of prog ress in implementation of SDGs at 
the National and State levels. As noted in para 4.2 , MoSPI is required to prepare 
reporting mechanisms including dashboards. After th e publication of the NIF in 
November 2018, baseline data in respect of 169 indi cators was prepared in March 2019 
and a process has been initiated in collaboration w ith the United Nations to develop a 
SDG dashboard based on the NIF. However, the delay in finalising the NIF and 
baseline data, and in the absence of any plan to fr ame milestones the monitoring and 
reporting process for SDGs is likely to be impeded. In the meantime, NITI Aayog as the 
body responsible for overseeing implementation of S DGs, created a SDG India Index 
and Dashboard based on 62 priority indicators for r anking of the States & UTs, and has 
released a SDG India Index: Baseline Report which h as been dealt with in para 4.3.2 of 
this report.  
4.3.5 Indicators, Data Availability and Monitoring at State Level  
While MoSPI had held regional consultations on issu es such as NIF, local level data 
sources, state statistical system for SDG and strat egy for bridging data gaps, no written 
instructions were issued to the States/UTs to use M oSPI’s NIF for developing State 
Indicator Framework.  Audit examination in the seve n selected States disclosed varying 
levels of action on aspects such as identification of data sources; preparation of 
indicators framework and monitoring and reporting process as given in Table 4.2 : 
Table 4.2: Indicators, Data Availability and Monitoring in selected States  
Assam • 45 out of 59 indicators finalised (March 2018) base d on outdated data  
(as old as 2008). 
• Lack of mechanism to ensure correctness of data and  information to 
monitor progress of work under SDGs at various levels. 
• The State Government intimated (February 2018) that  monitoring would 
be done through an IT based platform to be functional by June 2019. 
Chhattisgarh • The State Nodal Organisation for SDG informed (June  2019) that work 
for State Indicator Framework is under process. It also intimated that the 
national dashboard would be accessed for uploading state data and a 
mechanism for monitoring and evaluation would be developed. 
Haryana • The State identified milestones and 108 indicators of the 60 SDG targets 
based on the current flagship schemes in the Vision 2030.   
• The State Government intends to take a relook at these indicators based on 
the NIF prepared by MoSPI.   
• Though the SDG Co-ordination Centre has been set up  (October 2018), 
mechanism for concurrent monitoring and data feedba ck through SDG 
website and online dashboard, though contemplated, is yet to commence. 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
29  
Kerala • Task Forces discussed availability of data for each  indicator, their source, 
periodicity, reviewed the indicators proposed by NI TI Aayog and 
compiled data for 134 out of 306 indicators.  
• Steps being initiated for getting consistent data f rom multiple sources for 
the same indicator. New surveys are proposed for 32 indicators.  
• State Monitoring Group (SMG) had not taken any acti on to build capacity 
and for undertaking special surveys.   
• A data management system including dashboard for SD Gs is under 
preparation. 
Maharashtra • No specific action with regard to identification of  indicators, data source 
observed during audit.  
• Nodal department stated that various data sources w ith respect to SDGs 
will be fine-tuned based on the NIF. 
• The State Government entered into an agreement with UN India inter-alia  
for developing a monitoring system to track progres s of key development 
outcomes at both the State and District level.   
• The State Government intimated NITI Aayog (February  2018), its plan to 
develop a dashboard for monitoring SDGs with the he lp of UN agencies, 
which was reported to be under preparation (January 2019). 
Uttar Pradesh  • Pending finalisation of the State Vision-2030, no action has been taken to 
finalise indicators or data for monitoring progress  of SDGs 
implementation. 
West Bengal • Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) pertaining to tar gets under eight 
sectors developed, however, the sectoral papers wer e yet to be approved 
by the State Government.  
• The State was yet to initiate any action regarding identification of data 
required for monitoring implementation of SDGs.  
• The State Government intimated (April 2018) that ba sed on indicators 
identified by its departments, a robust mechanism f or monitoring through 
a state dashboard would be developed, which was yet  to be put in place 
(January 2019). 
It is evident from the above that the critical task  of finalising and promulgating the NIF 
had been delayed, which had held up identification of baseline data and formulation of 
national targets for the 2030 Agenda. The States we re also yet to firm up their indicator 
frameworks and baseline data with progress being af fected due to delay in finalisation 
of the NIF. These delays would hamper establishment  of a robust monitoring and 
reporting mechanism required for ensuring time boun d and effective implementation of 
the 2030 Agenda. 
4.4 Audit Summation 
The 2030 Agenda envisages systematic follow-up, monitoring and review of progress at 
all levels to ensure its effective and expeditious implementation. NITI Aayog is the 
nodal institution responsible for coordinating and overseeing the implementation of 
SDGs. To enable monitoring and review, MoSPI was en trusted with the task of 
developing a NIF which was published only in Novemb er 2018. As a result, tasks key 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
30  
to the institution of a proper monitoring and repor ting framework, such as preparation  
of baseline data was completed only in March 2019. Milestones were yet to be aligned 
with timeline for targets achievement. In the seven selected States, action on developing 
indicators and identification of data sources had not achieved required level of progress. 
The creation of a robust mechanism for monitoring, evaluating and reporting progress 
on implementation of SDGs therefore, remains an are a requiring immediate and 
focussed action. 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
31  
5.1 Introduction 
As part of the audit of preparedness, Goal 3 “ensur e healthy lives and promote well-
being for all at all ages” which covers the Health sector, was selected for detailed 
examination to assess preparedness at the sectoral level. This Goal was selected as it is 
key to protecting individuals, families and societi es. In addition, the new National 
Health Policy (NHP) 2017 is set in the context of S DGs and central outlay on health is 
envisaged to increase to ` one lakh crore by 2019-20. Audit examination of 
preparedness in the Health sector broadly addresses  the same aspects as discussed in 
previous chapters with respect to SDGs in general.  
5.2 Institutional Arrangement for Integrating Goal 3 in Government 
 Planning 
One of the issues checked during audit was whether mechanisms had been established 
for leading and coordinating preparedness activitie s with respect to Goal 3. Audit 
observed that action has been initiated for creatio n of nodal agencies and working 
groups for Goal 3 both at the Central and State levels. Details are given below. 
Central Level 
In NITI Aayog’s mapping document released in August  2017, Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare (MoH&FW) has been identified as the nodal Ministry along with nine 
other implementing Ministries with respect to Goal 3 17 . In the revised mapping 
document (August 2018), Targets across Goal 3 along  with related interventions and 
schemes to be undertaken by these Ministries, had b een delineated. However, regular 
monitoring of roles and tasks needs to be done.   
In MoH&FW, the task of overall policy with regard t o SDGs has been specifically 
allotted to a Joint Secretary. Ministry stated (Mar ch 2018) that the implementation of 
Goal 3 has been entrusted to National Health Missio n (NHM) and other Programme 
Divisions of MoH&FW. 
A National Task Force specific to Goal 3 with repre sentation from MoH&FW, NITI 
Aayog and MoSPI, States, agencies and experts, has been constituted along with 
working groups/sub-groups on specific items of work . Ministries identified as 
implementing for Goal 3 were, however, not represen ted on the Task Force and the 
working groups and sub-groups.  
                                                           
17   The mapping document was revised in August 2018 w hich lists 19 “concerned Ministries” with 
respect to SDG including MoH&FW, without distinguis hing between nodal and other implementing 
Ministries.  
Chapter-V: Goal 3: Good Health and Well Being  

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
32  
The Mission Steering Group (MSG) was an apex level inter-ministerial and inter-
governmental group for implementation of NHM and wa s critical for implementing 
SDGs. However, no specific tasks relating to SDGs h ad been assigned to the MSG 
despite suggestions made during national consultations. 
State Level 
Audit noted that a nodal department for Goal 3 was identified in five out of the seven 
selected States viz. Assam , Chhattisgarh , Kerala , Maharashtra  and Uttar Pradesh . 
In Haryana , a working group subsuming three Goals (2, 3 and 6 ) has been constituted. 
In West Bengal , Goal 3 formed part of two of the eight Sectoral G roups set up for 
SDGs viz. the Health Welfare and Rural Development. In Kerala , 22 Groups had been 
constituted for developing state specific health ta rgets. In Uttar Pradesh , a State Task 
Force for inter-departmental coordination was const ituted for Goal 3. In Maharashtra , 
two departments i.e ., Women & Child Development and Water Supply & San itation, 
though related to Goal 3 had not been identified as associated departments. 
5.3 Reviewing Plans and Adapting Goal 3  
Audit examined steps taken at the Central and State  levels to dovetail plans for the 
Health Sector with Goal 3 and for mapping of scheme s, programmes and initiatives 
with Goal 3. Observations and findings on this aspe ct are given in the following 
paragraphs. 
Central Level 
5.3.1  Dovetailing Plans with Goal 3 
 
Based on the inputs of MoH&FW and other stakeholder s, NITI Aayog prepared a draft 
titled “A Vision for a Healthy India” covering the Vision, Strategy and Action Agenda 
for the health sector for consultation with stakeholders including the Ministry.  
NITI Aayog has brought out the “Three Year Action A genda” (August 2017) and the 
Strategy Document titled “Strategy for New India @7 5” (December 2018). The Action 
Agenda does not specifically refer to SDG targets b ut it covers planned interventions in 
the key areas relating to the health sector and spe lls out specific health targets to be 
achieved by 2020. The Strategy document details the  strategy with respect to Health 
and Nutrition and deals with Public Health Manageme nt; Human Resources for Health, 
Universal Health Coverage, and Nutrition. However, while this document shows the 
association of the above mentioned aspects with SDG s, these have not been dealt with 
in detail. 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
33  
The National Health Policy, 2017 (NHP) issued by th e MoH&FW also recognizes the 
pivotal importance of SDGs, and provides for time bound quantitative goals which were 
aligned both to ongoing national efforts as well as to Goal 3. 
5.3.2 Mapping of Schemes 
NITI Aayog had undertaken an exercise of mapping SD Gs and Targets with Ministries, 
schemes and initiatives, mapping the National Healt h Mission with Goal 3 which the 
MoH&FW has identified as the primary vehicle to ach ieve this Goal. The MoH&FW 
intimated (March 2018) that after undertaking a rev iew, the Ministry has specifically 
aligned different interventions/initiatives/schemes  and targets with Goal 3 in the  
2017-2020 phase of NHM. It was however noted that, Ministry of Railways which 
implements road safety measures at railway crossing s, had not been mapped with 
Target 3.6 dealing with road safety. 
State Level 
5.3.3 Adapting Goal 3 in selected States 
Observations on adapting Goal 3 in selected States are given in Table 5.1 : 
Table 5.1: Adapting Goal 3 in selected States 
State Vision/Strategy/Action Plan Mapping 
Assam The Health and Family Welfare 
Department prepared (December 
2017) the Departmental Strategic Plan 
and Action Plan targeting 
implementation of the SDG in three 
phases 18 . 
Four 19  State sponsored Health 
Schemes not mapped with the 
Goal 3. 
Chhattisgarh Draft Strategy and Action plan for 
Goal 3 prepared but not sent for 
approval (March 2018).  
Six departments viz. AYUSH, 
Medical Education, Public Health 
Engineering, Home, Commerce & 
Industry and Environment though 
linked were not mapped with Goal 3 .  
Besides, four State Health Schemes 20  
were not mapped with Goal 3. 
                                                           
18  2016-17 to 2019-20; 2020-21 to 2023-24 and 2024-25  to 2030-31. 
19  Sanjeebani , Operation Smile, Accredited Social Health Activist Assam (ASHA), Susrusha.  
20  CM Medicine Kit, Mukhyamantri Shahri Swasthya Karyakram , Universal Immunization 
Programme, and Sanjeevani Sahayata Kosh . 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
34  
Haryana Vision document deals only with 
Health department and seven 
targets/interventions under Goal 3 
whereas the budget document shows 
linkage with 88 schemes of 12 
departments under Goal 3. 
No separate mapping document was 
prepared and mapping was done 
through the vision and budget 
documents which were not in sync.  
Kerala The nodal department for Goal 3 
conducted a review of strategies plans 
and schemes keeping in view SDG 
targets, so that gaps could be 
identified.   
The Expert Groups constituted to 
develop State specific targets had 
identified indicators and performed 
responsibility mapping.  
Maharashtra The State’s Vision 2030 document did 
not address Targets 3.6, 3.9, 3.a, 3.c 
under Goal 3. 
Two departments (Women and 
Child, Water Supply and Sanitation) 
and two State schemes 21  though 
linked with Health were not mapped 
with Goal 3.  
Uttar Pradesh  The State Government was yet to 
formulate any new policy/plan as per 
SDG targets.  Preparation of a State 
Health Policy aligned to SDG targets 
and the National Health Policy 2017 
was reported to be underway.  
Eight schemes 22  though connected to 
health were not mapped with it.  
West Bengal Sectoral plan documents for the 
Sectoral Groups covering Goal 3 had 
been submitted in July 2018 but was 
awaiting approval.  
Sectoral Report for Health and 
Welfare aligned Goal 3 with Goals 1, 
2,4,5,8 and 16 for achieving health 
targets.  Target 3.6, 3a and 3d were 
not included and aligned with Key 
Performance Indicators and the 
scheme ‘Safe Drive Save Life’ was 
not aligned with the Target 3.6 in the 
absence of measurable indices.   
5.4 Promoting Awareness and Stakeholder Involvement  
Initiatives for raising awareness and enhancing sta ke-holder engagement in respect of 
Goal 3, both at the Central and State levels were n ot comprehensive, as discussed 
below. 
Central Level 
The MoH&FW organised a national consultation on tra nsitioning from MDGs to SDGs 
(May 2016) which was attended by participants from the Central Ministries, States and 
                                                           
21  Village Child Development Centres for Severely Mal nourished Children and Pradhan Mantri 
Matru Vandana Yojana  
22  Nyuntam Avashyakta Karyakram; Rashtriya AYUSH  Mission; Rashtriya Mansik Swasthya 
Karyakram; Zila Yojana; Kishori Swasthya Suraksha Y ojana; Uttar Pradesh Health System 
Strengthening Project ; Bal Sanjeevan tatha Surakshit Matritva Yojana; Pr adhan Mantri Matru 
Vandana Yojana  

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
35  
Union Territories, international organisations, ins titutions and experts. In 2017, the 
MoH&FW organised five State level conferences on Goal 3. The Ministry has also used 
electronic media and social media for increasing awareness about Goal 3.  
State Level 
Table 5.2: Awareness raising initiatives by States in respect of Goal 3  
Assam • The nodal Agency for Goal 3 viz . ‘Health and Family Welfare 
Department’ was involved with awareness programme i n only one out 
of the 17 Districts covered under the awareness programme. 
• In the Health Sector, stakeholders like hospitals, nursing homes, 
diagnostic centers were not involved during awareness programme. 
Chhattisgarh • Draft Vision document for Health identifies several  initiatives for IEC 
activities and awareness programmes against various  targets under 
Goal 3. 
Haryana • The SDG Coordination Centre has been set up to take  action for 
increasing public awareness, etc. , for SDGs including Goal 3. 
Kerala • The Health and Family Welfare Department had taken action for 
raising awareness regarding the 2030 Agenda among G overnment 
officials and other stakeholders through workshops,  trainings and 
review meetings. 
• The Information and Public Relation Department will be entrusted with 
the responsibility to conduct specific awareness ge neration programme 
for SDGs among general public. 
Maharashtra • The State has not taken any action regarding raising public awareness.  
• The State Government intends to assign funds out of  the District 
Annual Plan to conduct training programme for the M unicipal 
Councillor and Zila Parishad  members etc. , for creating greater 
awareness of the importance of SDGs by March 2019. 
Uttar Pradesh  • In respect of Goal 3, the State Health Ministry did not undertake public 
awareness programmes and workshops/meetings to enga ge with civil 
society organizations and other stakeholders. The M inistry however, 
held inter-departmental/sectoral meetings involving  different levels of 
Government officials. 
• The Medical Health & Family Welfare (MH&FW) Departm ent did not 
earmark budget for publicity of the 2030 Agenda and  did not plan to 
incorporate awareness raising issues of the Agenda. 
West Bengal • Although various health awareness programmes were h eld in the State, 
in the absence of sectoral papers on SDGs, their li nkage with SDGs 
were not established. 
5.5 Policy Coherence 
Central Level 
 
MoH&FW informed audit (April 2018) about several in itiatives taken by it that 
supported both vertical and horizontal coherence wi th respect to Goal 3. These include 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
36  
adoption of “Delhi Commitment on SDG for Health” af ter a National Consultation of 
Health secretaries; constitution of an Inter-Minist erial committee to support the Full 
Immunization Programme; approval of State Programme  Implementation Plans (PIP) 
under NHM and convergence between Central agencies with respect to targets relating 
to non-communicable diseases and the Rashtriya Bal Swasthya Karyakram .   
However, audit examination of the aspect of policy coherence with respect to Goal 3 
disclosed that important agencies such as Indian Co uncil of Medical Research and 
Central Health Education Bureau were not formally a ssociated with the implementation 
of Goal 3 23 . In addition, three Ministries linked with Goal 3 viz. AYUSH, Tribal Affairs 
and Home Affairs were not associated during the Nat ional Consultation on 
Transitioning from MDGs to SDGs. Moreover, as point ed out in Para 5.2, other 
Ministries connected with Goal 3 had not been made part of the Task Force constituted 
by the MoH&FW. With respect to vertical coherence, a Working Group set up by the 
MoH&FW for implementing Goal 3 in the States and UTs had not held any meeting.  
State Level 
Observations on policy coherence in States in respect of Goal 3 are given in Table 5.3: 
Table 5.3: Policy coherence in selected States  
Assam Nodal Department had not identified other associate d departments under 
Goal 3 such as Public Health Engineering Department  (PHED), Transport 
Department, Environment and Forests, etc.  
Chhattisgarh As reported under para 5.3.3, six departments viz. AYUSH, Medical 
Education, Public Health Engineering, Home, Commerc e & Industry, 
Environment though linked to Goal 3 were not mapped with it. 
Haryana In the Vision document, only one department has bee n linked with Goal 3 
even though 11 other departments viz . Ayush, Medical Education and 
Research, Rural Development, Women and Child Develo pment, etc. are 
also linked with this SDG. The nodal department (SD GCC) stated that, 
detailed sector wise plan will be prepared for bett er implementation of 
SDGs. 
Kerala The Department of Health and Family Welfare had tak en up issues relating 
to road safety and deaths due to road accidents; he alth education and 
pollution, with the concerned departments. 
Maharashtra There was no evidence on any specific steps having been taken with respect 
to Goal 3 for horizontal mapping and identifying in terconnections between 
SDGs. 
Uttar Pradesh  The State Government had selected (October 2016) MH &FW as a nodal 
department for Goal 3 but specific roles for relate d entities and for different 
levels of administration had not been defined.  Dep artment (MH&FW) 
                                                           
23  Under MoH&FW, Indian Council of Medical Research i s the apex body for biomedical and health 
research and Central Health Education Bureau deals with promotion of health education in the 
country. 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
37  
explained (May 2018) that these aspects would be addressed in the proposed 
State Health Policy and Gram Panchayat  Development Plan  after the 
approval of the Department’s Vision Document. 
West Bengal No institutional links at the local/district/block levels for promoting vertical 
coherence and integration were identified in the ab sence of approval for 
sectoral plans. 
5.6 Resource Mobilisation for Goal 3 
The 2030 Agenda reaffirms a strong commitment to it s implementation, which requires 
the effective mobilisation of resources.  Issues re lated to availability and allocation of 
financial resources for Goal 3 are discussed in subsequent paragraphs; 
5.6.1 Mobilisation of Financial Resources and Budge t Allocation 
5.6.1.1 Expenditure under National Health Policy  
Goal 3 envisages substantial increases in health fi nancing to meet various targets under 
the Goal. NHP, 2017 released by the MoH&FW proposes  raising public health 
expenditure in a time bound manner from around one per cent (2015-16) to 2.5 per cent 
of GDP (at current price) by 2025. The Ministry aff irmed its commitment to audit to 
increase the public health expenditure in a time bo und manner and intimated 
(September 2018) that under NHM, States are mandate d to increase health spending on 
primary care by at least 10 per cent  every year. It also highlighted steps taken at a 
policy level for augmenting resources for the healt h sector such as levy of a combined 
four per cent health and education cess and provision of funds fo r health education 
infrastructure through the Higher Education Financing Agency.  
 The trend in public expenditure on health as perce ntage of GDP during 2009-18 is 
shown in Graph 5.1 : 
Graph 5.1: Trend in Public Expenditure on Health 
 
Note: Public Health Expenditure as percentage of GD P, BE=  Budget Estimates & RE= Revised Estimates. 
Source: National Health Profile, 2018 published by Central Bureau of Health Intelligence. 
Though Public Health Expenditure as a percentage of  GDP has been increasing since 
2015-16, it has remained within a narrow band of 1. 02- 1.28 per cent  of GDP. A study 
of data on trend of spending in the States and budg et allocations at the Central level as 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
38  
given in subsequent paras would show that concerted  efforts would be needed to reach 
the target levels of spending on Public Health by 2025.  
5.6.1.2 Budget Allocation for Health Sector at the Centre  
a) Financial allocation for Health at Centre 
Following projections of the Three Year Action Agen da (2017-20) to increase the 
Central allocation for the health sector to ` one lakh crore by 2019-20, GoI allocated 
` 54,852.00 crore in 2017-18 (RE), ` 57,671.60 crore in 2018-19 (RE)  and ` 65,037.88 
crore in 2019-20 (BE) to the MoH&FW 24  and AYUSH, which is far short of the target.  
b) Allocation for National Health Mission 
The MoH&FW intimated that NHM is the primary vehicl e for achieving Goal 3. The 
budget projection and allocation for NHM during 201 7-18 and 2018-19 is depicted in 
Table 5.4 and shows a shortfall in allocations in both the years:  
Table 5.4: Budget Allocation for NHM            (` in crore)  
Financial 
Year Projection Allocation 
Shortfall 
Amount Percentage 
2017-18 34,315.7 26,690.7 7,625.0 22.2 
2018-19 34,882.3 30,129.6 4,752.7 13.6 
Source: Report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee 
The Standing Committee of Parliament on Health whil e examining the allocations had 
observed that these shortfalls would affect strengthening of Health facilities. 
5.6.1.3 Mobilisation of Funds and allocation for He alth Sector in 
States 
The National Health Policy prescribes increasing he alth spending to more than  
eight per cent of State’s Budget by the year 2020. Audit examinati on of records in the 
seven selected States revealed that the achievement  ranged between 3.29 to  
5.32 per cent  as detailed in Table 5.5 : 
Table 5.5: Average Health Expenditure in selected States 
State Assam  Chhattisgarh  Haryana  Kerala  Maharashtra  Uttar 
Pradesh  
West 
Bengal  
Average 
Health 
Expenditure * 
5.32 4.78 3.29 5.24 4.15 4.74 4.47 
*As percentage of average State Expenditure for the period 2012-17 
Source: CAG’s Reports on Finance Accounts of the State  
                                                           
24  Including Department of Health Research. 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
39  
In respect of action taken for assessment and mobil isation of financial resources for 
Goal 3, audit noted that none of the States except Assam  had undertaken an assessment 
of financial requirements for the medium to long te rm. Assam  had prepared an 
Outcome Budget for three years linked to SDGs including Goal 3.  
5.6.2 Physical Infrastructure and Human Resources i n Health Sector  
NHP, 2017 focuses on closing of infrastructure and human resource gaps, optimum use 
of existing manpower and infrastructure as availabl e in the health sector. Examination 
of budget items that support physical infrastructur e and human resources in the health 
sector 25  shows augmentation in financial allocations in the  last three years for ensuring 
availability of required infrastructure and human r esources. MoH&FW (September 
2018) has highlighted initiatives to upgrade existi ng Sub-Centres and Primary Health 
Centres to Health and Wellness Centres so as to ens ure comprehensive primary care. In 
addition, it intimated that several measures such a s increased recruitment of medical 
personnel and augmenting capacity of medical educat ional institutions were being 
undertaken to improve availability of human resources in the health sector. 
The Performance Audit Report of the Comptroller and  Auditor General of India  
(Report No. 25 of 2017), on National Rural Health M ission (NRHM 26 ) which seeks  to 
strengthen the delivery of public health services in the rural areas, highlighted shortfalls 
(ranging between 24 and 38 per cent ) in the availability of SCs, PHCs and Community 
Health Centres in 28 States/UTs. The report also di sclosed shortages of doctors and 
paramedical staff in almost all centres selected by  audit. The annual report of the 
MoH&FW (2016-17) also accepts that health care serv ice delivery requires intensive 
human resource inputs. The position with respect to  availability of physical 
infrastructure (PHCs) and human resources (doctors)  in selected States is provided in 
Table 5.6: 
Table 5.6: Distribution of Health Resources (Infrastructure and Human)  
States  
Infrastructure Human 
PHCs required 
as per 
population 
norms* 
PHCs 
Functioning  Shortfall 
Total 
number of 
Doctors in 
PHCs 
Availability 
of Doctors 
per PHC 27  
 
A B C D =(B-C) E F =(E/C) 
Assam 1,112 1,014 98 1,048 1.03 
Chhattisgarh 870 785 85 341 0.43 
                                                           
25  Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana  (PMSSY) for new AIIMs; Health System strengthening  
under NRHM; Infrastructure Maintenance; Human Resources for Health and Medical Education 
26  NRHM is a sub-mission of NHM 
27  According to Indian Public Health Standards, one M edical Officer is required under each PHC with 
delivery load of less than 20 deliveries in a month  (Type A PHCs), while for high load of deliveries 
(Type B PHCs) one more Medical Officer is desirable. 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
40  
Haryana 501 366 135 429 1.17 
Kerala 1,141 849 292 1,169 1.38 
Maharashtra 2,461 1,814 647 2,929 1.62 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
5,183 3,621 1,562 2,209 0.61 
West Bengal 3,046      914 2,132 918 1.00 
Source: National Health Profile 2018 issued by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
*as on 31 st  March 2016 sourced from Report of CAG (No. 25 of 2017) 
Thus, despite existence of plans/policies and incre ased allocations for augmenting 
physical and human resources, significant shortages  persist in physical resources in all 
seven states. In respect of human resources, there were considerable shortages in the 
States of Chhattisgarh  and Uttar Pradesh . 
5.7 Monitoring for Goal 3 
Follow up and review of the implementation process is a core component of the 2030 
Agenda to ensure that data systems, capacities, met hodologies and mechanisms are in 
place to track progress. Issues related to availabi lity of data for monitoring progress of 
Goal 3 and their reliability are discussed below. 
5.7.1 Framework and Data for Monitoring at Central Level  
The MoH&FW set up a Working Group for formulating a  monitoring framework, 
identifying data sources, developing metadata for i ndicators, recommending targets for 
each indicator and development of a dashboard for G oal 3. In addition, two sub-groups 
were set up for fixing Universal Health Care indica tors and strengthen the Health 
Information Systems for SDGs.  
With regard to the monitoring framework, audit note d that the MoH&FW commenced 
(November 2016) developing the Health Indicator Fra mework (HIF) and in August 
2017 identified 47 health indicators out of 232 ind icators from the Global Indicator 
Framework (GIF). After deliberations and refinement s, this was expanded to 
73 indicators and also included health related indi cators pertaining to other SDGs. In 
comparison, the NIF prepared by the MoSPI consists of 50 indicators relating to 
Health/MoH&FW. 
The difference in the number of indicators covered by the two frameworks i.e., HIF and 
NIF was due to exclusion of 23 indicators from NIF due to non-availability of data/data 
sources. Despite this, MoSPI included five indicato rs 
28  in the NIF, for which data were 
not available and some important indicators such as  maternal mortality ratio, under-five 
child mortality rate and neonatal mortality rate, f or which according to MoH&FW, data 
were not regularly or uniformly available.  
                                                           
28  According to Baseline Data Report, for indicators such as hepatitis incidence, adults consuming 
alcohol, number of HIV infections, women screened f or cervical cancer and official development 
assistance for health research data is not yet available. 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
41  
5.7.2 Framework and Data for Monitoring at State Le vel  
State wise observations on formulation of monitoring framework and data identification 
with respect to Goal 3 are given in Table 5.7: 
Table 5.7: Monitoring of Goal 3 in selected States  
Chhattisgarh No separate framework was designed for monitoring and evaluation of data 
collection, transmission and coordination. 
Kerala Health and Family Department stated that it had ini tiated action regarding 
mainstreaming of the 2030 Agenda by identification of agencies for 
development of indicators, production of disaggrega ted data, collection, 
monitoring, follow-up, reporting and reviewing the progress achieved in 
implementation of SDGs. 
Maharashtra Data sources for 13 global health indicators were n ot available with the 
State Government.  
Uttar Pradesh  MH&FW neither took any action for identification of  agencies for 
indicators development, data collection, and produc tion of disaggregated 
data and for reviewing the progress of SDGs nor ass essed gaps in the 
existing monitoring mechanism for corrective actions. 
West Bengal Department of Planning, Statistics and Programme Mo nitoring set 80 Key 
Performance Indicators (KPIs) for measuring health targets. However, in 
respect of 25 KPIs, data source was not mentioned.  In respect of four 
KPIs, baseline data were outdated and the data avai lability /data 
source/methodology was yet to be devised by the H&FW department. 
Thus, both at the Central and State levels there wa s evidence of insufficient efforts at 
putting in place a comprehensive indicator framewor k, identification of data sources, 
production of disaggregated data for Goal 3 which w as essential for creating a robust 
monitoring and reporting framework.  
5.7.3 Data Reliability  
A Health Management Information System (HMIS) was i ntroduced by the MoH&FW 
for obtaining information on inputs, outputs and ou tcome indicators for monitoring 
achievement of objectives of NRHM.  This system was studied as part of a Performance 
Audit of NRHM (Report no. 25 of 2017) and gaps such  as non-reporting of data by a 
large number of facilities, reporting of incomplete  data, mis-match between reported 
data and basic records and absence of validation ch ecks on data were reported. In its 
Action Taken Report on the Report of CAG, MoH&FW has intimated reporting by over 
97 per cent  facilities on HMIS and several other measures take n for ensuring data 
verifications and validation. 
 
 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
42  
5.8 Audit Summation 
MoH&FW is one of the key Ministry responsible for i mplementing Goal 3, and a 
National Task Force has been created for multi-stak eholder coordination. The National 
Health Policy, 2017 provides for time bound quantit ative targets aligned to Goal 3. The 
MoH&FW also taken several steps for raising public awareness, stakeholder 
engagement and promoting both horizontal and vertic al coherence. However, some 
linked Ministries have not been included in the Tas k Force and Working Groups. 
Annual financial allocations for the health sector has been rising but targets for outlays 
in 2019-20 had been missed which indicated that the re is a long way to go before the 
goal of raising Public Health Expenditure to 2.5 per cent of GDP by 2025 could be met. 
Besides, providing adequate physical infrastructure  and human resources critical for 
achievement of Goal 3 targets would be an area of challenge. 

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
43  
Chapter-VI: Conclusion and Recommendations  
 
The 2030 Agenda comprising of 17 Sustainable Develo pment Goals (SDGs) constitutes 
an ambitious and long term plan of action for addre ssing several challenges faced by all 
countries.  India at several forums has stated its commitment towards achieving the 
SDGs and drawing attention to its several developme nt programmes, has highlighted 
that its national development goals are mirrored in  the SDGs. In this context 
implementation of the 2030 Agenda in India would be critically dependent on initiatives 
taken for converging the SDGs with our national developmental agenda and governance 
structures. This audit has thus attempted to assess  preparedness of the Government, in 
terms of the extent of adaption of the 2030 Agenda in the national context; efforts made 
for identification and mobilisation of resources fo r implementation, and arrangements 
made for monitoring and reporting progress.  
The audit has shown that the Government of India (G oI) has undertaken several 
initiatives both at the Central and State levels fo r mainstreaming the 2030 Agenda. At 
the Central level, nodal institutions have been ide ntified; extensive stakeholder 
engagement and consultations have been organised; t wo planning documents viz. the 
“Three Year Action Agenda” and the “Strategy for New India @75” have been released 
and an exercise to map Goals and Targets with the M inistries/Departments and existing 
Schemes/Programmes were undertaken. Similar initiat ives have also been taken in the 
seven selected States. Steps have also been taken f or optimizing domestic resource 
mobilisation and improving the efficiency of public  expenditure. Projections for funds 
required for implementing the Three Year Action Agenda has been made. In the area of 
‘Monitoring and Reporting’, NITI Aayog, which is re sponsible for overseeing 
implementation of SDGs, periodically reviews and monitors the preparedness of States, 
UTs and Central Ministries in achieving the SDG tar gets. Additionally, it had 
constituted a multi-disciplinary Task Force to moni tor the implementation of SDGs.  It 
has also developed the SDG India Index and Dashboar d in 2018 based on 62 priority 
indicators for rapid assessment of SDG implementati on in the States and UTs. MoSPI 
has prepared a National Indicator Framework (NIF) i n consultation with the Ministries 
and States. Linked with these initiatives, States h ave also taken initial steps for creating 
monitoring and reporting frameworks. 
 
However, as highlighted at several places in the re port, there are aspects in each area, 
which require attention and remedial action. Both a t the Central and State levels, the 
exercise of formulating policy documents in the con text of SDGs was still ongoing.  

Report No. 8 of 2019  
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs  
 
44  
A roadmap with defined milestones aligned with UN S DG Targets for 2020, 2025, 
2030 was yet to be prepared. Greater efforts also a ppeared necessary for localising and 
publicising the SDGs to ensure inclusiveness. With respect to resource mobilisation for 
achieving the SDG targets, a financial gap analysis  had not yet been undertaken. 
Further, integration of SDGs into the accounting an d budgeting framework was still to 
be done at the Centre and most of the States. With respect to Monitoring and Reporting, 
the delay in publication of the NIF had held back s everal key tasks such as 
development of indicators and monitoring frameworks  in the States and identification 
of baseline data and milestones. 
Despite the initiatives of the GoI across several a reas for implementing the 2030 
Agenda, the gaps highlighted above represent risks for the achievement of the key 
objectives of the 2030 Agenda. Timely and well-coor dinated action by all key 
stakeholders at the Centre and the States, for reme dying the gaps would thus be critical 
for ensuring time bound and effective implementatio n of the 2030 Agenda in 
accordance with national priorities.   
Recommendations 
Based on findings relating to gaps in preparedness and the risks that these represent for 
the successful and timely implementation of the 203 0 agenda, the following actions are 
recommended: 
  A comprehensive charter and action plan with well-d efined milestones for 
implementing SDGs, should be formulated after due consultations.  
  Finalisation of Vision document should be expedited.  
  Initiatives for enhancing public awareness and sensitisation about SDGs must be 
stepped up so that the process of implementation be comes participatory and 
inclusive.  
  NITI Aayog in association with the Ministry of Fina nce must make an 
assessment of requirement and availability of finan cial resources for 
implementing SDGs for different time frames. States should also take up similar 
exercise. In addition, urgent steps may be taken to  integrate SDGs into the 
accounting and budgeting framework both at the Centre and the States.  

Report No. 8 of 2019 
Preparedness for the Implementation of SDGs 
 
45 
  Use of ‘Direct Benefit Transfers’ should be expande d and strengthened to avoid 
leakages and to improve efficiency in usage of financial resources. 
  Following the publication of the NIF, tasks critica l for monitoring and reporting 
on implementation of SDGs such as identifying basel ine data for remaining 137 
indicators, assessing availability of data and crea tion of a monitoring and 
reporting framework should be expedited. 
 
 
New Delhi 
Dated: Director General of Audit 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi 
Dated: 
(RAJIV MEHRISHI) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Central Expenditure) 
(SUNIL DADHE) 