 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General 
of India 
 
for the year ended March 2018 
 
 
 
Union Government 
Department of Revenue 
(Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
Report No. 11 of 2019 
Laid on the table of Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha on ____________ 
  

 
 
Table of Contents 
Contents Page 
Preface i 
Executive summary iii 
Chapter I : Implementation of GST  1-23 
1.1 Background of GST 1 
1.2 Concept of GST 1 
1.3 Key legislations 3 
1.4 New factors in GST 3 
1.5 Central Administrative Structure 7 
1.6 The objectives of GST 8 
Chapter II : Revenue and return filing trends 25-39 
2.1 Revenue trend 25 
2.2 GST Registrations 30 
2.3 GST Return filing pattern 33 
2.4 Conclusion 38 
Chapter III  : Planning and Implementation of GST IT Project 41-83 
3.1 Introduction 41 
3.2 Organisational setup of GSTN 41 
3.3 Background of Implementation of GST IT Project 42 
3.4 IT Audit of GSTN 43 
3.5 Overview of IT Audit findings 45 
3.6 Introduction 46 
3.7 Failure to validate and debar ineligible taxpay ers from 
availing Composition Levy Scheme (CLS) 
46 
3.8 Issues related to other categories of taxpayers  51  
3.9 Issues affecting user friendliness of the regis tration module 54  
3.10 Findings accepted and corrective action taken or initiated 55 
3.11 Conclusion on Registration Module 56 
3.12 Introduction 57 
3.13 Shortcomings in updating ECL 58 
3.14 Non-implementation of service requirements of banks 60  
3.15 Non–reconciliation with accounting authorities  61  
3.16 Non-acceptance of payment where payment detail s were 
received after expiry of Challan 
62 
3.17 System level controls found absent in reconcil iation files 62 
3.18 Payment through debit/credit cards not provide d in the GST 
IT system 
63 
3.19 Display of messages was not in sync with the a ctual status of 
the transaction 
63 
3.20 Conclusion on Payment Module 64 
3.21 The Provisions for IGST Settlement 64  

 
 
Contents Page 
3.22 Incomplete IGST Settlement 66 
3.23 Duplicate records 69 
3.24 Incorrect computation of IGST Settlement 70 
3.25 Erroneous entries in settlement reports 71 
3.26 Unrealistic claims of ITC of IGST 74 
3.27 Conclusion on IGST Settlement Reports 75 
3.28 Business Continuity 76 
3.29 Change Management 78 
3.30 Conclusion on Business Continuity and Change M anagement 81  
3.31 A summary of the IT audit findings 82 
Chapter IV : Compliance Audit of GST 85-106 
4.1 Lack of access to data 85 
4.2 Audit examination 86 
4.3 Introduction 86 
4.4 Provisions for transitional credit 86 
4.5 CBIC instructions for verification of transitio nal credits 88 
4.6 Leveraging IT for verification of transitional credit claims 89 
4.7 Audit of transitional credits 90 
4.8 Irregular registration in Composition Scheme 100 
4.9 Allocation and mapping of taxpayers to jurisdic tional tax 
officers 
101 
4.10 Overview of audit of Refund claims 103 
4.11 Non-adherence of provisions of Refund 104 
4.12 Conclusion 107 
Appendix-I 109 
Appendix-II 110 
Appendix-III 113 
Appendix-IV 116 
Appendix-V 117 
Appendix-VI 119 
Appendix-VII 121 
Glossary 122 
  

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
i 
Preface 
This Report has been prepared for submission to the  President of India under 
Article 151 of the Constitution of India. 
The magnitude of the tax reform that GST has been, cannot be over-stated.  
Elsewhere in the Report it has been noted that the efforts of all the 
stakeholders, including the businesses, in transiti ng to this system are 
appreciable.  That there would be teething problems  in such a major 
transition is also not unexpected.  The issues that  remain, and that have been 
pointed out in the report, should not therefore be seen by the stakeholders as 
a fault-finding exercise.  The gaps / shortcomings have been pointed out in the 
spirit of constructive suggestions to realise the f ull potential of this major 
reform.  Issues raised in the report are consistent  with the spirit of the reform 
itself : to relieve the consumer from the burden of  cascading taxes; to make 
the system as fool-proof as possible; to provide th e taxpayers an IT-based 
system that would ease compliance burden, and add t o the ease of doing 
business; and in this context, to reduce the tax of ficial-assessee interface to 
the very minimal. 
The system of payment and settlement of tax that wa s envisaged for GST was 
based on one hundred per cent invoice-matching and availment of input tax 
credit, as well as settlement of IGST on the basis of invoice-matching.  Neither 
is possible as of now, as an invoice-matching syste m has not kicked-in.  This 
report identifies invoice-matching as the critical requirement that would yield 
the full benefits of this major tax reform.  It wou ld protect the tax revenues of 
both the Centre and the States, it would lead to proper settlement of IGST and 
would minimise, if not eliminate, the tax official- assessee interface.  In fact, 
even “assessment” in the sense understood in the ma nual system may no 
longer be necessary (returns themselves can be gene rated by a system that 
matches invoices); and cases of evasion etc., can b e traced by applying 
analytical tools and AI to the massive data that crores of invoices generate.  
 
 
  

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
iii 
Executive Summary 
Chapter I : Implementation of Goods and Services Ta x (GST) 
− GST was rolled out with effect from 1 July 2017 wit h the objectives of 
reducing tax cascading, ushering in a common market  for goods and 
services and bringing in a simplified, self-regulat ing and non-intrusive 
tax compliance regime. 
(Paragraph 1.6) 
− The roll out of GST has been a landmark achievement  of the 
Government with respect to unifying multiple centra l and state taxes 
barring a few goods / sectors and availability of I nput Tax Credit (ITC) 
across the entire value chain. Multiplicity of tax rates has also been 
eliminated to a large extent.  The objective of roll out of single IT based 
interface for taxpayer has also been achieved to some extent. 
(Paragraph 1.6.2) 
− One significant area where the full potential of GS T roll out has not 
been achieved is the roll out of the simplified tax compliance regime. 
o Even after two years of roll out of GST, system val idated Input 
Tax Credit through “invoice matching” is not in pla ce and non-
intrusive e-tax system still remains elusive. 
o The complexity of return mechanism and the technica l glitches 
resulted in roll back of invoice-matching, renderin g the system 
prone to ITC frauds.  Thus, on the whole, the envis aged GST tax 
compliance system is non-functional.  The deficienc ies in the 
GST system also point to a serious lack of coordina tion 
between the Executive and the developers. 
(Paragraph 1.6.3) 
Chapter II : Revenue and return filing trends 
Revenue analysis 
• The growth of indirect taxes slowed down to 5.80 pe r cent in 2017-18 
over 2016-17, while this growth rate was 21.33 per cent during 2016-17. 
(Paragraph 2.1.1) 
• During 2017-18, Government of India (GoI) resorted to devolution of 
IGST year-end balance to the States as per Finance Commission formula, 
which is in contravention of the provisions of the Constitution of India 
and the IGST Act.  This also has the impact of dist ribution of funds to the 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
iv 
States on a completely different basis instead of ‘ Place of Supply’ 
concept as envisaged in the IGST Act. 
(Paragraph 2.1.3) 
• Post implementation of GST, the Centre’s revenue on goods and services 
(excluding central excise on Petroleum and Tobacco) registered a decline 
of 10 per cent in 2017-18 as compared to revenue of  subsumed taxes in 
2016-17. 
(Paragraph 2.1.4) 
• There was a short transfer of ` 6,466 crore of GST Compensation cess to 
the Public Account during 2017-18. 
(Paragraph 2.1.5) 
Returns filing 
• While it was expected that compliance would improve  as the system 
would stabilise, all returns being filed showed a d eclining trend of filing 
from April 2018 to December 2018. 
• The filing percentage of GSTR-1 returns (monthly re turns on outward 
supplies) were throughout less in comparison to the  corresponding filing 
of GSTR-3B returns (summary self-assessed return). The introduction of 
GSTR-3B resulted in filing of returns with ITC clai ms which could not be 
verified and it appears to have disincentivised fil ing of even GSTR-1.  
Since filing of GSTR-1 is mandatory, short-filing i s an area of concern and 
needs to be addressed. 
• GSTR-3B being only a summary return, short-filing o f GSTR-1 implied 
that the tax departments did not have complete invo ice level details as 
filed by the suppliers, which could be used to veri fy details given in 
GSTR-3B or to arrive at turnover. 
(Paragraph 2.3.1) 
Chapter III : IT audit of GSTN 
In 16 cases, the key validations / functionalities as existing in the rolled out 
modules were not found aligned to the applicable pr ovisions. Of these 16 
cases, the required validation was not included in the Software Requirement 
Specification (SRS) itself in seven cases, the vali dations were not built-in even 
though SRS was correctly framed in eight cases and the SRS provision included 
a condition not prescribed in the Act in one case. 
(Paragraph 3.5) 
 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
v 
Registration Module 
System validations were not aligned to the provisio ns of the GST Acts and 
Rules, leaving the following crucial gaps in GST Registration module:- 
• System failed to validate and debar ineligible taxp ayers from availing 
Composition Levy Scheme.  
(Paragraph 3.7.2) 
• Mandatory fields were found made optional or accepting junk values. 
(Paragraph 3.8.1) 
• TDS registrations were allowed under invalid category. 
(Paragraph 3.8.3) 
• Lack of validation of key fields in Registration (L egal Name, Type of 
Business and CIN) with CBDT and MCA Databases. 
(Paragraph 3.10.2) 
Payment Module 
The payment module, despite being in operation sinc e 1 July 2017, was 
fraught with operational deficiencies like  
• Delay in updating the Electronic Cash Ledger (ECL) even after 
successful payment of tax by the taxpayer. 
(Paragraph 3.13.1) 
• Lack of assurance on minimum service requirements p rescribed for 
banks. 
(Paragraph 3.14) 
• Issues in reconciliation of GST receipts. 
(Paragraph 3.15) 
• Issues such as payment initiated before expiry of C ommon Portal 
Identification Number (CPIN) but Challan Identifica tion Number (CIN) 
generated after expiry of CPIN and incorrect displa y of messages to 
taxpayers were not dealt with until pointed out by audit. 
(Paragraph 3.16) 
• Facility of payment through Debit / Credit cards co uld not be made 
available as Ministry did not decide on how to deal  with the financial 
implications. 
(Paragraph 3.18) 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
vi 
In a system with automated interface between the IT  applications of the 
banks and GST portal, there should be no scope for errors such as invalid 
GSTIN and expiry of CPIN leading to non-reconciliation of GST receipts. 
(Paragraph 3.15) 
IGST Settlement reports 
All the IGST Settlement Ledgers were not being gene rated due to  
non-implementation of corresponding GST modules, li ke imports and appeals.  
This, coupled with the inaccuracies in the settleme nt algorithm and limitation 
of the GSTR-3B return in capturing all the information required for settlement, 
had a bearing on the settlement of funds to the Centre and various States. 
− The incomplete IGST ledgers were partly responsible  for 
` 2,11,688 crore of IGST balance remaining unsettled during 2017-18. 
(Paragraph 3.22) 
− Duplicate records were noticed in 6,748 cases in 5 Settlement ledgers, 
leading to inaccurate settlement of ` 416.07 crore IGST funds for the 
period from July 2017 to July 2018. 
(Paragraph 3.23) 
− Incorrect settlement of IGST amounting to ` 359.46 crore during the 
period from July 2017 to July 2018 was noticed beca use of erroneous 
entries in settlement ledgers due to the algorithm picking up entries 
from wrong category of taxpayers. 
(Paragraph 3.25) 
− Unrealistic erroneous claim of ITC of IGST by one t axpayer, 
representing 79 per cent of total ITC claim by all taxpayers for a 
month, was allowed by the system, exposing the vuln erability of the 
system to fraudulent ITC claims. 
(Paragraph 3.26) 
System design deficiencies  
• There were no control totals like check sums or rec ord level totals in 
files shared with Accounting authorities. 
(Paragraph 3.17) 
• The IGST algorithm was found to be defective pickin g up entries from 
wrong reports in IGST module. 
(Paragraph 3.25) 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
vii 
• A field like turnover limit, prone to changes, was not made 
configurable. 
(Paragraph 3.7.1) 
• No alert was issued when the threshold of turnover prescribed for 
Composition Levy Scheme was crossed. 
(Paragraph 3.7.1) 
Business Continuity and Change Management 
Business Continuity Policy was not finalised and on ly Disaster Recovery Plan 
had been in place. 
(Paragraph 3.28.1) 
Lack of a systemic approach to change management, c oupled with some of 
the deficiencies pointed by this audit remaining un addressed even after GSTN 
reported corrective action, indicated the crucial r isks existing in the 
application running on the GST portal. 
(Paragraph 3.29) 
To sum up the IT Audit findings: 
While acknowledging that GST is a completely new sy stem being developed, 
in view of its magnitude and Pan-India impact, it i s all the more necessary that 
due care is taken both in development and in testin g of the system before roll 
out.  The failure to map business rules correctly a nd the absence of key 
validations in the rolled out system points to inad equacies in the functioning 
of GSTN. 
The issues brought out in IT audit also pointed tow ards the need for GSTN to 
re-examine prioritisation of development of various  functionalities, 
strengthen their root cause analysis and testing pr ocess to ensure that critical 
deficiencies in application are detected and rectif ied before rollout to public.  
The role of the executive in UAT / SRS sign off also needs to be re-examined. 
The problem of accumulation of IGST balance due to unavailable IGST 
settlement reports should be resolved on priority t o minimize the need for 
resorting to ad hoc apportionment of unsettled IGST , to be adjusted against 
future apportionments due to the States. 
(Paragraph 3.31) 
Chapter IV : Compliance audit of GST  
• Unhindered and full access to pan-India data is cru cial for meaningful 
audit and to draw required assurances needed, other wise certifying 
revenue receipts may become difficult. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
viii 
• In absence of access to GST data, the conclusions i n this chapter on 
compliance audit were based on limited audits carri ed out in the field.  
However, the gamut of issues brought out even in th is limited audit 
point to serious systemic deficiencies that need to be addressed by the 
department. 
(Paragraph 4.1) 
• Some of the audit findings on Transition Credits in dicated that data / 
red flags available in ACES have not been efficient ly leveraged to 
identify and reject inadmissible credits. 
(Paragraph 4.7) 
• Non-allocation or wrong mapping of registered taxpa yers carried the 
risk of the returns filed/ not filed by such taxpay ers not being subject 
to any kind of scrutiny by the jurisdictional offic er.  In this highly IT 
intensive environment also, Range Offices had to ph ysically take up 
problems created by an IT system for resolution. 
(Paragraph 4.9.2) 
• The instances of non-adherence to the provisions re lating to Refunds, 
pointed towards the need for expediting automation of refund 
processing with proper checks and validations besid es improving the 
system for monitoring manual processing of refunds,  till automation is 
completed. 
(Paragraph 4.11) 
The system of payment and settlement of tax that wa s envisaged for GST was 
based on one hundred per cent invoice-matching and availment of input tax 
credit, as well as settlement of IGST on the basis of invoice-matching.  Neither 
is possible as of now, as an invoice-matching syste m has not kicked-in.  
Invoice-matching is the critical requirement that w ould yield the full benefits 
of this major tax reform.  It would protect the tax  revenues of both the Centre 
and the States, it would lead to proper settlement of IGST and would 
minimise, if not eliminate, the tax official-assess ee interface.  In fact, even 
“assessment” in the sense understood in the manual system may no longer be 
necessary (returns themselves can be generated by a  system that matches 
invoices); and cases of evasion etc., can be traced  by applying analytical tools 
and AI to the massive data that crores of invoices generate. 
 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
1 
Chapter I : Implementation of GST 
This chapter gives an overview of the features of t he Goods and Services Tax 
(GST) including GST returns mechanism and the statu s of implementation of 
GST. 
1.1 Background of GST 
A comprehensive GST based on the Value Added Tax (V AT) principle was first 
suggested by the Kelkar Task Force in December 2002 . The introduction of 
GST in India was first announced in the Union Budge t 2006-07. Since then the 
Empowered Committee of Ministers had worked on prep aring the back 
ground material for GST and the draft GST Acts.  Im plementation of GST 
finally materialised with the Parliament passing th e Constitutional 
Amendment Act in September 2016, followed by the St ate Legislatures and 
GST was rolled out with effect from 1 July 2017 (in cluding Jammu and 
Kashmir with effect from 8 July 2017).   
As stated by the President of India Sri Pranab Mukherjee on the launch of 
GST from the Central Hall of Parliament on 30 June 2017, “GST is the result 
of a broad consensus arrived at between the Centre and the States and is a 
tribute to the maturity and wisdom of India’s democracy”. 
1.2 Concept of GST 
1.2.1 Definition of GST 
GST is a tax on supply of goods or services or both  and a single tax on entire 
value chain of supply, right from the manufacturer to the consumer.  Credit 
of input taxes paid at each stage will be available  in the subsequent stage of 
value addition, which makes GST essentially a tax o nly on value addition at 
each stage. The final consumer will thus bear only the GST charged by the last 
dealer in the supply chain, with set-off benefits at all the previous stages. 
GST is a consumption based tax i.e. tax accrues to the State where goods and 
/ or services are finally consumed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
2 
1.2.2 Taxes subsumed 
GST subsumed the following central and state taxes: - 
Central Taxes subsumed State Taxes subsumed 
• Central Excise Duty  (except five 
Petroleum1 and tobacco 
products) 
• Additional Excise Duty 
• Service Tax 
• Additional Customs Duty 
commonly known as 
Countervailing Duty 
• Special Additional Duty of 
Customs. 
• State Value Added Tax 
(VAT)/Sales Tax (except five 
petroleum products and 
alcoholic liquor for human 
consumption) 
• Entertainment Tax (other than 
the tax levied by the local 
bodies)  
• Central Sales Tax (levied by the 
Centre and collected by the 
States) 
• Octroi and Entry tax 
• Purchase tax 
• Luxury tax 
• Taxes on lottery, betting and 
gambling 
Central / State Excise duty and VAT would be contin ued on five Petroleum 
products, which would be subject to the levy of GST whenever notified on the 
recommendation of the GST Council. Tobacco products  could be subjected to 
both Central Excise duty and GST.  Alcoholic liquor  for human consumption 
had been kept outside the ambit of GST.   
1.2.3 Components of GST 
There are three components of GST as follows : - 
• Central Goods and Services Tax (CGST) : payable to the Central 
Government on supply of goods and services within t he State/Union 
Territory.  
• State/Union Territory Goods and Services Tax (SGST/UTGST) : payable to 
the State/Union Territory Government on supply of g oods and services 
within the State/Union Territory.  
• Integrated Goods and Services Tax (IGST) : in case of inter-state supply of 
goods and services, IGST is levied by the Governmen t of India. Equivalent 
                                                           
1  petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit (commonly known as petrol), natural gas 
and aviation turbine fuel. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
3 
IGST is also levied on imports into India. IGST sha ll be apportioned 
between the Union and the States as per the provisions of IGST Act. 
• GST Compensation Cess:  In addition to GST, a cess named GST 
Compensation Cess can be levied on notified goods a nd services and 
currently such cess is levied on pan masala, tobacc o, aerated drinks, cars 
and coal. 
1.3 Key legislations 
The Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty Second Ame ndment) Bill, 2016, 
for introduction of Goods and Services Tax in the c ountry was passed by 
Rajya Sabha on 3 August 2016 and by Lok Sabha on 8 August 2016. 
Consequent upon this, the President of India accord ed assent on 8 
September 2016, and the same was notified as the Co nstitution (One 
Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016. 
The following Acts were passed for implementation o f GST with effect from 
1 July 2017: -  
• The CGST Act, 2017; 
• The UTGST Act, 2017,  
• The IGST Act, 2017;  
• The GST (Compensation to States) Act, 2017 
The above Acts were assented by the President of In dia on 12 April 2017 and 
enacted with effect from 2 1 July 2017.  In addition to the above, each of th e 
States have also passed the SGST Act. 
All the above Acts were further amended vide the CG ST Amendment Act, 
2018 and the GST (Compensation to States) Amendment  Act, 2018, the IGST 
(Amendment) Act, 2018 and the UTGST (Amendment) Act , 2018 notified on 
29 August 2018 and made effective from 1 February 2019. 
1.4 New factors in GST 
Some of the notable factors introduced in GST, whic h were not there in the 
pre-GST era, have been detailed below : - 
1.4.1 GST Council 
In terms of Article 279A (1) of the Constitution of  India, as amended, the 
President of India constituted the GST Council with  effect from 12 September 
2016.  The GST Council is a constitutional body for  making recommendations 
to the Union and the State Governments on the issue s related to GST.  The 
                                                           
2  applicable to the State of Jammu and Kashmir with  effect from 8 July 2017 after the State 
passed these Acts as Extension to Jammu and Kashmir Acts in view of Article 370. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
4 
GST Council, a joint forum of the Centre and the St ates, is chaired by the 
Union Finance Minister and members are the Union St ate Minister of 
Revenue or Finance and Ministers in-charge of Finan ce or Taxation or any 
other Minister nominated by each of the States. 
As per Article 279A (4), the Council will make reco mmendations to the Union 
and the States on: -  
a) the taxes, cesses and surcharges levied by the Unio n, the States and 
the local bodies which may be subsumed in the GST; 
b) the goods and services that may be subjected to, or  exempted from 
GST;  
c) the model GST Laws, principles of levy, apportionme nt of GST levied 
on inter-State trade supplies and the principles th at govern the place 
of supply (POS);  
d) the threshold limit of turnover below which goods a nd services may 
be exempted from GST;  
e) the rates including floor rates with bands of GST;  
f) any special rate or rates for a specified period, t o raise additional 
resources during any natural calamity or disaster;  
g) special provision with respect to the States of Aru nachal Pradesh, 
Assam, Jammu and Kashmir, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizor am, 
Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand; and  
h) any other matter relating to the GST, as the Council may decide.  
While discharging the functions conferred by this a rticle, the GST Council 
shall be guided by the need for a harmonised struct ure of goods and services 
and for the development of a harmonised national ma rket for goods and 
services. 
1.4.2 Goods and Services Tax Network
 
Goods and Services Tax Network (GSTN) was registere d on 28 March 2013 
under Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013 as a Non -Government Company 
and a ‘Not for Profit Organisation’. It was formed to provide common and 
shared Information Technology (IT) infrastructure a nd services to the Central 
and State Governments, taxpayers and other stakehol ders for 
implementation of the GST.   
The Government of India holds 24.5 per cent equity in GSTN and all the 
States of the Indian Union, including NCT of Delhi and Puducherry and the 
Council, together hold another 24.5 per cent.  The balance 51 per cent equity 
is with Non-Government financial institutions.  It was decided (May 2018) to 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
5 
convert GSTN into a fully owned Government Company.  Further action on 
this decision was yet to be taken by the Government.   
The objectives and organizational structure have be en further detailed in 
Chapter III of this report. 
1.4.3 Cross empowerment and distribution of taxpaye rs 
Under GST, the taxpayers have to obtain separate re gistration in each State 
where they operate. A single challan is generated f or paying all taxes of GST 
(viz. CGST, IGST, SGST and UTGST) under each regist ration and one single 
return is filed for both the central and state taxes.   
In view of this dual control, the GST Acts provide for cross empowerment of 
the Central and State tax officers to administer all the components of GST viz. 
CGST, SGST, UTGST and IGST.  The tax officers carry  out administration of all 
components of GST in respect of the taxpayers or sp ecific areas allocated to 
them.  While the State Commercial tax departments a re responsible for 
administering functions assigned to the States, the  Central Board of Indirect 
Taxes and Customs (CBIC) and its field formations c arry out functions 
assigned to the Centre. 
As per circular of the GST Council dated 20 Septemb er 2017, the following 
criteria should be followed for the division of tax payer base registered in a 
State between the Centre and the State to ensure single interface : - 
a) Of the total number of taxpayers with turnover belo w ` 1.5 crore, all 
the administrative control over 90 per cent of the taxpayers shall vest 
with the State3 tax administration and 10 per cent with the Central tax 
administration;  
b) In respect of the taxpayers with turnover above ` 1.5 crore, all the 
administrative control shall be divided equally in the ratio of 50 per 
cent each for the Central and the State tax administration;  
c) The division of taxpayers in each State shall be do ne by computer at 
the State level based on stratified random sampling  and could also 
take into account the geographical location and typ e of the taxpayers, 
as may be mutually agreed.  
The State tax officers have been empowered 4 (October 2017) to grant refund 
of IGST and CGST and similar instructions on the St ate side were also issued 
empowering the Central tax officers to grant refund of SGST.  The GST Council 
in its 9th meeting (16 January 2017) recommended th at both the Central and 
                                                           
3  Except for the State of Jammu and Kashmir where a ll the taxpayers below ` 1.5 crore 
were allocated to the State. 
4  Vide notifications No.11/2017–Integrated Tax and No.39/2017-Central Tax, both dated 13 
October 2017. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
6 
State tax administrations shall have the power to t ake intelligence-based 
enforcement action in respect of the entire value chain and CBIC gave effect to 
this decision through a DO letter5 issued (October 2018) to its field formations. 
1.4.4 Compensation to the States for loss due to im plementation of GST 
The Constitution Amendment Act, effective from 16 S eptember 2016, has 
provided that Parliament should, on recommendation of GST Council, provide 
for compensation to the States for loss of revenue arising on account of 
implementation of GST for a period up to five years .  The GST (Compensation 
to the States) Act, 2017 was passed to give effect to these provisions.  This 
Act also provided for levy of a cess for the purpose of GST Compensation. 
The States should be compensated for any shortfall in getting a revenue of 14 
per cent over the base year (2015-16) revenue relat ing to taxes / duties 
subsumed into GST.  The shortfall in revenue was to  be arrived at after taking 
into account the SGST collection (collected as SGST  as well as IGST settled as 
SGST) and collection of arrears of state taxes subs umed into GST.  The GST 
compensation is payable bi-monthly and should be calculated finally for every 
financial year after the receipt of final revenue figures, as audited by the CAG.  
1.4.5 Anti-profiteering 
Section 171 of CGST Act, 2017 stipulated that any r eduction in rate of GST on 
any supply of goods or services as compared to pre- GST tax rates, or the 
benefit of ITC, should have been passed on to the r ecipient by way of 
commensurate reduction in the prices. The wilful ac tion of not changing the 
final price of the good or service by various means , despite the reduction in 
the rate of the tax for that particular goods or se rvices, would amount to 
“profiteering”.  The CGST Act, 2017 provided for a 3-tier structure for 
investigation and adjudication of the complaints regarding profiteering. 
• National Anti-profiteering Authority  
• Directorate General of Anti-profiteering 
• State-level screening committees and standing committee 
Any consumer or organisation experiencing the non-r eduction in the price of 
the goods or services despite reduction in the rate  of GST could file the 
complaint with proper evidences. 
Any supplier, trader, wholesaler or retailer, who c ould not get benefit of ITC 
on account of reduction in the rate of GST, can als o file the complaint with 
proper evidence.  The Authority might inquire into any alleged contravention 
of the provisions of section 171 of the CGST Act, 2 017 on its own motion or 
on receipt of information from any interested party  as defined in the Rule 
137 (c) of CGST Rules, 2017, person, body, associat ion or on a reference 
having been made to it by the Central Government or  the State Government.  
                                                           
5  D.O. F.No. CBEC/20/43/01/2017-GST (Pt.) dated 5 O ctober 2018. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
7 
The Authority shall cease to exist after the expiry  of two years from the date 
on which the Chairman enters upon his office unless the Council recommends 
otherwise. 
1.4.6 Pan-India roll out of E way bill 
After introduction of GST, for quick and easy movem ent of goods across India 
without any hindrance, all the check posts across t he country have been 
abolished. The E-way (electronic way) bill has envisaged one e lectronic way 
bill, to be carried by the person in charge of conv eyance, providing for a 
hassle free movement of goods throughout the countr y. The e-way bill 
system, a web based solution designed and developed  by National 
Informatics Centre (NIC), has been introduced natio n-wide for all inter-State 
supplies with effect from 1 April 2018 and has been  made compulsory for 
movement of goods of consignment value exceeding ` 50,000. As regards 
intra-State supplies, option was given to the State s to choose any date on or 
before 3 June 2018.  All the States have notified e -way bill rules for intra-
State supplies, the last being NCT of Delhi where it was introduced with effect 
from 16 June 2018.  Different threshold limits have  been fixed by different 
States for generation of e-way bills for intra-state supplies. 
1.5 Central Administrative Structure 
The Department of Revenue (DoR) of Ministry of Fina nce (MoF) functions 
under the overall direction and control of the Secr etary (Revenue) and co-
ordinates matters relating to all the Direct and In direct Union Taxes through 
two statutory Boards namely, the Central Board of I ndirect Taxes and 
Customs (CBIC 6), and the Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) con stituted 
under the Central Board of Revenue Act, 1963.  Matt ers relating to the levy 
and collection of GST are looked after by the CBIC.  
Indirect Tax laws are administered by the CBIC thro ugh its field offices, the 
Commissionerates.  In view of implementation of GST , CBIC restructured its 
field offices into 21 Zones of GST headed by the Pr incipal Chief 
Commissioner/Chief Commissioner vide circular dated  16 June 2017.  Under 
these 21 Zones of GST, there are 107 GST Taxpayers Services 
Commissionerates that deal with GST and Central Exc ise, headed by the 
Principal Commissioner/Commissioner. Divisions and Ranges are the 
subsequent formations, headed by Deputy/Assistant C ommissioner and 
Superintendents respectively. Apart from these Comm issionerates, there are 
49 GST Appeal Commissionerates, 48 GST Audit Commis sionerates and 
22 Directorates dealing with specific functions suc h as DG (Systems) for 
management of Information Technology projects and D G, NACEN for training 
needs. 
                                                           
6  formerly Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBE C). 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
8 
1.6 The objectives of GST 
It was envisaged that GST would subsume a number of  indirect taxes 
presently being levied by Central and State Governm ents into a single tax, 
thereby reducing the cascading of taxes and providi ng a common national 
market for Goods and Services.  GST was also expect ed to simplify the tax 
regime and result in better tax compliance and a no n-intrusive E tax system 
due to a robust IT Infrastructure.  Due to the seam less transfer of input tax 
credit from one stage to another in the chain of va lue addition, GST was to 
have an in-built mechanism in its design that would  incentivise tax 
compliance by trader. 
1.6.1 Mechanisms to achieve these objectives: 
The key mechanisms to achieve the objectives of GST were: -  
• Unifying multiple central and state taxes; 
• Simplified tax structure by eliminating multiple ta x rates and 
introducing simplified forms and procedures; 
• IT enabled compliance, with system verified seamles s flow of ITC 
credit forming the core of IT system, providing for  a single IT 
interface for taxpayer and IT based tax administration. 
1.6.2 Implementation status of envisaged mechanisms  
By the end of first month of roll out of GST (i.e. by 31 July 2017), 63.9 lakh 
taxpayers from Central Excise, Service Tax and VAT were migrated into the 
GST portal and 10.9 lakh taxpayers applied for new registrations.  The tax 
payment functionality was available on the GST port al from the date of roll 
out of GST i.e. 1 July 2017.  GST revenue amounting  to ` 92,283 crore was 
collected in the first month i.e. July 2017 which i ncluded ` 14,894 crore of 
CGST, ` 22,722 crore of SGST, ` 47,469 crore of IGST and GST Compensation 
Cess of ` 7,198 crore. 
51.4 per cent of the taxpayers filed GSTR-3B return  for July 2017 by due date 
(28 August 2017). The monthly returns GSTR-1 and 2 were released on the 
portal by 1 September 2017. 
But changes were made to the formats of the reports . Due dates for various 
key activities were postponed and GSTR-2 and 3 kept  in abeyance.  These 
changes were due to various factors like complexity  of the formats or 
technical glitches on GST portal or the claimed lack of preparedness of stake 
holders and further changes triggered by these chan ges.  As a result, GST 
System has remained a system still in the making even after nearly two years 
of roll out with the entire return mechanism undergoing major changes. 
The chart No.1 maps the objectives of the GST with the mechanisms 
envisaged and their current status of implementation 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
9 
 
1 
 
 
IMPLEMENTATION   
STATUS 
IMPACT 
MECHANISM  
ENVISAGED  
ACHIEVEMENT  
MEANS TO  
ACHIEVE  
- Reduce tax cascading 
- Ushering in a common market
- Simplified tax regime and 
-Self regulating and non-intrusive E-tax  
system
Unifying 
multiple 
central and 
state taxes
Subsuming of 
37 central 
and state 
taxes 
Only a few goods 
/ sectors outside 
GST.  ITC eligible 
across chain
Mostly 
achieved
Simplified Tax 
structure
Eliminating 
multiplicity of 
tax rates
Same rates across 
states. Multiple 
rates on same 
category for a few  
products
Mostly 
achieved
Simplified 
forms and 
procedures
Key monthly 
returns(GSTR 2 
& 3  kept on 
hold)
Not achieved
New simplified 
returns yet to be 
rolled out
IT enabled 
compliance
System verified 
seamless flow 
of ITC (GSTR 1, 
2 & 3)
Self Assessed 
Summary 
Return(GSTR 3B) 
with no matching
Not Achieved
Unverified ITC
Complication in 
finalisation of 
annual returns
Single IT 
based 
Interface for 
Tax Payer
System still 
evolving.
Processing of 
refunds still 
manual 
Partly 
Achieved
Manual processes 
still continuing
IT based Tax 
Administration
Modules like Refund, 
Adjudication, Appeal 
yet to be built 
E-way bills replaced 
manual check posts
Partly 
Achieved
Avodable physical 
interface with tax 
officials 
Chart 1: Objectives of GST, ext ent of achievement and fall out  

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
10 
The following is the status of implementation of me chanisms envisaged 
under GST, as depicted in Chart No.1. 
(a) Multiple taxes 
The objective of subsuming multiple taxes has been mostly achieved with 
GST subsuming 37 different central and state taxes with ITC eligible across 
the value chain.  Only a few goods / sectors have b een kept outside GST, with 
a provision in constitutional amendment to subsume the major product viz. 
petroleum products as and when decided by the GST Council.   
(b) Tax structure 
GST ushered in a tax structure in which the same go od or service has been 
subjected to same tax rate across the States. There  are four major tax slabs 
right now (5 per cent, 12 per cent, 18 per cent and  28 per cent tax rates) with 
some luxury and sin goods in the 28 per cent slab s uch as cars, tobacco 
products, pan masala and aerated drinks, being furt her subject to GST 
Compensation cess.  An indicative list of GST rates  on goods and services has 
been given in Appendix-I. 
There are a few products where the goods or service s of same nature (i.e. 
same HSN / SAC code) attract multiple tax rates dep ending on the nature of 
the product or the unit value of the product as ill ustrated in table No.1 
below: 
Table No.1 : Multiple tax rates on same category of goods / services 
Foot wear Up to `1000 
` 1000 and above 
5 per cent 
12 per cent 
Fiber Silk and Jute 
Cotton and natural 
Manmade 
Nil 
5 per cent 
18 per cent 
Readymade apparel priced below `1000  
` 1000 and above 
5 per cent 
12 per cent 
Hotels and Lodges Tariff  
Below ` 1000 
` 1000  -  ` 2500 
` 2500  -  ` 7500 
` 7500 and above 
 
Nil 
12 per cent 
18 per cent 
28 per cent 
From the above table, it could be seen that goods o r services of same nature 
have been subjected to multiple tax rates.  

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
11 
The GST Council, through its various meetings, revi ewed the slab and rate 
structure from time to time.  Since the inception o f GST, CBIC issued 47, 30 
and 9 notifications relating to changing of CGST ra tes in 2017, 2018 and 2019 
(up to 31 March 2019) respectively.  Similarly, 50,  31 and 8 notifications were 
issued changing IGST rates in 2017, 2018 and 2019 ( up to 31 March 2019) 
respectively. 
Thus, though the tax rate structure has been simpli fied as compared to pre-
GST tax era, there is scope for further simplification.   
(c) Returns prescribed 
In GST, the taxpayers have to file a single return for all GST taxes viz CGST, 
SGST, IGST and GST Compensation Cess.   The basic f eatures of the return 
mechanism in GST envisaged electronic filing of ret urns, uploading of invoice 
level information, auto-population of information relating to ITC from returns 
of supplier to that of recipient, invoice level inf ormation matching and auto-
reversal of input tax credit in case of mismatch. T he returns mechanism was 
designed to assist the taxpayer to file returns and  avail ITC. The various 
returns prescribed in GST have been detailed in Appendix-II.   
The GST Council announced (July 2018) that a new si mplified return 
mechanism would be implemented with effect from 1 J anuary 2019.  These 
new simplified forms were yet to be rolled out (Jun e 2019).  The very need 
for simplifying the returns indicates that the init ially designed forms and the 
supporting IT features were not in line with the ob jective of a simplified tax 
regime. 
(d) System verified seamless flow of ITC 
The system verified seamless flow of ITC was envisa ged to be achieved 
through the returns GSTR 1, 2 & 3.  It was original ly envisaged that suppliers 
would file invoice-wise details of outward supplies  made by them during the 
month through GSTR-1.  The details of outward suppl ies so furnished by the 
supplier in GSTR-1 were be made available electroni cally to the registered 
recipients through form GSTR-2A.  Similarly, detail s of supplies relating to 
composition taxpayers, Input Service Distributors a nd Non-Resident 
taxpayers as well as Tax Deducted at Source (TDS) b y Government 
departments / agencies and E-commerce operators als o were to be made 
available electronically to the recipients. Thereaf ter, based on details 
available in form GSTR-2A, the taxpayer was supposed to furnish form GSTR-2 
after including details of other inward supplies.   
The details of inward supplies added, corrected or deleted by the recipient in 
his form GSTR-2 were to be made available to the su pplier electronically in 
form GSTR-1A through the common portal.  The suppli er may either accept 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
12 
or reject the modifications made by the recipient a nd Form GSTR-1 furnished 
earlier by the supplier should stand amended to the  extent of modifications 
accepted by him. 
GSTR-3 is a monthly return with the details of sale s and purchases during the 
month along with the amount of GST liability.  Most  of GSTR-3 was supposed 
to be auto-generated from GSTR-1 and GSTR-2 while t he taxpayer had to 
include the details of discharge of liability of ta x, interest, penalty, refund 
claimed from electronic cash ledger and debit entri es in electronic 
cash/credit ledger while filing GSTR-3.  The flow o f data and auto population 
of details in GST monthly returns as originally env isaged, has been shown 
pictorially in chart No.2 given below: 
Chart No.2: GST Returns as originally envisaged 
 
NB: Similarly details from GSTRs-4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 r epresenting supplies from 
composition taxpayers, Non-Resident taxpayers, Inpu t Service Distributors, 
Tax Deducted at Source (TDS) by Government departme nts / agencies and 
TDS by E-commerce operators respectively were also to auto-populate GSTR-
2A of recipient.  Only GSTR-1 has been shown in the  above flow chart for 
illustrative purposes. 
While this was the system originally envisaged and designed, the due dates of 
these key returns were postponed, a fortnight befor e launch of GST quoting 
lack of familiarity of the trade and apprehensions expressed with regard to 
the system readiness, as informed to the 17 th GST Council meeting held on 
18th June 2017.  It was also informed to the Council in  the same meeting that 
though the systems were ready for roll out of GST f rom 1 st July 2017, trade 
and industry, specifically from the banking, civil aviation and telecom sector 
had requested for some more time to test the system s, get themselves 
familiarised and get assurance about the stability and robustness of the 


Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
13 
system.  It was further stated that though GSTN was  ready, big businesses 
and their Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) softwa re were not ready and 
that GST Suvidha Providers (GSPs) needed time to test the software.  
However, this contention is not fully justified.  G STN was formed in March 
2013, the constitutional amendment to bring in GST was passed in 
September 2016 and it was announced in January 2017  that GST would be 
implemented from 1st July 2017.  Even before the constitutional amendme nt 
was passed, the Empowered Committee of Ministers (E CM) had started 
working on the model GST Acts and business processe s and the first model 
GST Act was placed in public domain in June 2016. T he Business Process 
Documents on Registration, Payment, Registration and  Refund were also 
placed in public domain during April 2015 to Octobe r 2015.  The GST model 
laws were prepared by Nov 2016 and Acts passed by Parliament in April 2017.  
The Draft Rules on Returns, Registration, Payments,  Refunds, Invoice initially 
prepared in Sep 2016 and the next version of draft rules duly adding ITC, 
Transition, Valuation and, Composition were finalis ed in March 2017 and 
approved by Council in May 2017.  The draft forms ( Invoice, Payments, 
Registration, Refund, Return and Mismatch) were fin alised in Sep 2016 and 
further set of draft forms covering Composition, IT C, Payment, Refund and 
Registration were finalised in May 2017.  Final rul es and forms were notified 
on 19 June 2017.   
GST is a major tax reform and Government had made its intent very clear that 
GST would be rolled out from 1 st July 2017. Under the circumstances, it was 
expected that the system design would be firmed up well in advance and that 
the system would be robust enough to take care of c hanges.  Even though 
the rules and formats were finalised very close to the roll out date, it is 
equally true that enough preparation could have bee n done on the basis of 
draft rules, and fine-tuned on the basis of finally approved rules.   
The GST Council approved (June 2017) GSTR-3B, a sim pler temporary 
measure for two months citing lack of preparedness of industry and GSPs.  
GSTR-3B was designed as a self-assessed summary ret urn which captured 
summary of outward supplies and inward supplies lia ble to reverse charge.  
ITC was being settled based on these self-assessed summary returns filed by 
taxpayers.  This temporary return, initially introd uced for two months, has 
been continued till date and GSTRs-2 and 3 have bee n kept in abeyance. As a 
result the key mechanism of system verified ITC and  invoice matching was 
not achieved.  As on date ITC as reported by the ta xpayer in the summary 
return is used for further transactions. 
In July 2018, i.e. one year after introduction of G STR-3B putting GSTRs-2 and 
3 on hold, the GST Council announced that a new sim plified return 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
14 
mechanism would be implemented from 1 January 2019.   The new return 
mechanism is yet to be finally rolled out (June 201 9), which is two years after 
introduction of GSTR-3B as a temporary measure.  Wi th the delay in framing 
a revised return mechanism, the summary return GSTR-3B, which is more of a 
self-declaration continued since the roll out of GS T instead of the system-
generated return based on verified invoices.    
The processes and returns kept in abeyance have been shown in red colour in 
the flow chart No.3 depicting current status of returns. 
Chart No.3: Current status of Key GST Returns 
 
Currently, the IT system only captures the outward supplies as filed by 
supplier in GSTR-1, which can be viewed by recipien t in GSTR-2A.  The further 
processes of verification and correction of supplie s by the recipient through 
GSTR-1A and 2 and the monthly return GSTR-3, based on matched invoice 
details, have been kept in abeyance. 
The sequence of events clearly points to the comple xity of 
the format and the design of the original returns. 
(e) Impact of keeping GSTRs-2 and 3 in abeyance 
• Unverified ITC 
ITC claimed by the taxpayers was not system verifie d and ITC ledger was 
getting auto populated based on un-verified ITC flo wing from self-assessed 
summary monthly return (GSTR-3B) filed by the taxpayers.   
• No self-regulating system 
As ITC and monthly returns were not based on system -verified details, the 
self-regulating system was not in place.  Further, in the originally envisaged 


Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
15 
returns mechanism, it could be verified if the supp liers have paid their overall 
tax liability as emanating in GSTR-3 from the match ed outward and inward 
supplies, as taxpayer had to furnish payment detail s while filing GSTR-3.  No 
such check could be in-built into the summary self-assessed GSTR-3B. 
• Manual check of details in returns 
In the absence of a self-regulating system, data an alytics and Business 
Intelligence tools were being used by the tax departments to cross check data 
available in GSTRs 1 and 3B as well as E-way bill d ata.  Information or 
clarifications had to be sought from the taxpayers in the manual form.  This is 
disadvantageous to the taxpayers also as they have been denied a chance to 
get details in GSTRs-1 filed by their suppliers mod ified or rectified while such 
information was being used for verification.  
• Roll out without key safeguards made the system vulnerable 
There were several reports of detection of fraudule nt ITC claims made by 
certain taxpayers including use of fake invoices to  claim ITC.  Thus, partial roll 
out of GST IT system withdrawing key control mechan isms originally 
envisaged, without any other safeguards or impact a ssessment, made the 
system vulnerable.   
• Impact on annual returns 
The Annual return was to contain crucial informatio n like the details of 
outward and inward supplies, ITC declared in return s and details of tax paid.  
It also has other information like demands and refu nds, supplies received 
from composition taxpayers and HSN wise summary of outward and inward 
supplies. 
The discontinuation of GSTR-2 and 3 has complicated  the process of filing 
annual returns as very limited data from GSTR-2A an d 3B would auto 
populate the annual return.  The taxpayers are requ ired to tally the data 
available in GSTR-1 being filed with their GSTR-3B before finalising the annual 
return.   
It was originally envisaged in the GST Acts that th e annual return pertaining 
to a financial year would be filed by the following 31 December. The due date 
for annual return of 2017-18 has been extended from  time to time and the 
date has been finally extended to 31
st August 2019.   
It was envisaged in the GST law that any unmatched credit in the monthly 
returns should be rectified only up to the filing o f annual return or filing of 
return for the month of September of the financial year whichever is earlier.  
The last date for claiming ITC on invoices relating  to Financial Year 2017-18 
originally was September of the financial year or s ubmission of annual 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
16 
returns whichever is earlier.  Thus with the extens ions, the utilisation of ITC 
as well as finalisation of returns of 2017-18 continue to remain open-ended.   
• Incomplete IGST settlement 
All the details required for IGST settlement or app ortionment could not be 
captured in GSTR-3B, being a summary return introdu ced as a stop-gap 
arrangement initially.  This has been detailed in t he findings of IT audit of 
GSTN (Paragraph 3.22 of Chapter III refers) .  
When we pointed out the absence of key aspects in G ST Return mechanism, 
resulting in the system being still a system still in the making (March 2019), 
the Ministry stated (April 2019) that the GST Counc il recommended to do 
away with the steps like invoice matching as a conc essionary measure to give 
more time to the trade and industry to adjust to th e new regime.  They also 
informed that parallelly, the Government introduced  alternative mechanisms 
to plug revenue leakages through data analytics and  Business Intelligence (BI) 
tools. Though envisaged as a self-correcting system , the Ministry has held 
that due to difficulties to trade and industry, the  system was being fine-
tuned.  
Thus, the self-correcting system, as originally env isaged, was not in place 
and this led to continuation of avoidable assessee- tax officer physical 
interface instead of IT based interface.  This goes  against the objective of 
reducing the avoidable physical interface to minimu m, if not eliminated 
completely.   
(f) Other envisaged self-policing mechanisms 
• Non-implementation of reverse charge mechanism for supplies by 
unregistered person 
Generally, the supplier of goods or services is lia ble to pay GST.  However, in 
specified cases, the liability to pay tax is on the recipient of supply of goods or 
services instead of the supplier, which is called t he reverse charge. The GST 
Acts provide that wherever a registered person proc ures supplies from an 
unregistered supplier, the registered person needs to pay GST on reverse 
charge basis.   
Initially7 (June 2017) the supplies received by a registered person from any or 
all the unregistered suppliers up to five thousand rupees in a day have been 
exempted from reverse charge.  However, all categories of registered persons 
were exempted 8 (October 2017) from the provisions of reverse char ge on 
supplies by unregistered persons till 31 March 2018  initially.  Such exemption 
                                                           
7  Notification No.8/2017-Central Tax(Rate) dated 28  June 2017. 
8  vide notification no.38/2017-Central Tax (Rate) d ated 13 October 2017, (corresponding 
IGST notification no.32/2017-Integrated Tax (Rate) dated 13 October 2017). 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
17 
was extended9 from time to time up to 30 June 2018, 30 September 2018 and 
finally up to 30 September 2019. 
The rationale for introduction of RCM and the impac t of its subsequent 
deferral needs to be examined before further change s in this mechanism are 
made. 
• Tax Deduction at Source 
Section 51 of the CGST Act, 2017, provided for Tax Deduction at Source (TDS) 
by the Government departments, Local authority and the Governmental 
agencies. TDS is applicable for payments above ` 2.5 lakh. 
TDS provisions were postponed from time to time. Th e reasons for this 
postponement, as mentioned in the 18 th GST Council meeting minutes, were 
lack of preparedness of the Government agencies to deduct TDS and the 
need for TDS to be linked to fund settlement mechan ism of respective States.  
It was also pointed out that since GSTR-2 was not g etting filed, the TDS 
benefit could not be passed on to the taxpayer.  
TDS provisions were finally made operational from 1  October 2018.  Tax 
deductors were supposed to file a return by 10 th of the succeeding month.  
However, the due date for this return for the month s of October 2018 to 
December 2018 was extended 10 to 31 January 2019 stating that certain 
operators were unable to obtain registration becaus e of technical issues 
being faced by them on GST Portal.   
TDS data could be used to arrive at the turnover of  suppliers, at least where 
supplies were made to the Government and thereby, i dentify non-registrants 
and tax evaders.  Given the glitches being faced an d the fact that tax 
collection is a function of tax department and not all the government 
departments, it is recommended that Government may review 
implementation of TDS and consider alternative ways  of achieving what is 
sought to be achieved through TDS.  For instance, h aving a Service Tax 
registration was made compulsory for a bidder provi ding consultancy and 
other services to government.  Similarly, by making  GST registration 
compulsory for providing goods or services above a certain threshold to 
Government, real time analysis of the other data of  payments made by 
Government departments to its suppliers and similar  methods that 
Government may identify might serve the same purpos e as this whole 
process of TDS.  
 
                                                           
9  Notifications No. 10/2018–Central Tax (Rate) date d 23 March 2018, No. 12/2018-Central 
Tax (Rate) dated 29 June 2018 and No.22/2018–Central Tax (Rate) dated 6 August 2018. 
10  Order No.4/2018–Central Tax dated 31 December 201 8. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
18 
(g) Partially rolled out GST Portal 
For implementing the project, GSTN prepared Project  Management Plan in 
which various use-cases 11 and functionalities of different modules were 
planned with timelines for implementation. The impl ementation of GST 
portal was conceived to be implemented in three phases as discussed below. 
Phase-I 
Phase-I consisted of taxpayer registration, taxpaye r registration approval, 
Invoice upload, Payments, Return, Input Credit reco nciliation, IGST 
Settlement, MIS Reports, System Administration, Sec urity Management and 
Help Desk.  
The functionalities for this phase of the project, as envisaged in the Software 
Requirement Specifications (SRS), were initially ca tegorised into 184 use 
cases targeted to be completed over a period from J anuary 2017 to August 
2017.  However, only 35 functionalities of Phase-I were in production 
environment at the time of GST roll out as on 1 Jul y 2017.  Out of the 184 use 
cases, 25 use cases were not in production as of Ja nuary 2019.  GSTN 
informed (January 2019) that 12 of these 25 use cas es were de-scoped, 11 
were moved to Phase-II and two cases pertaining to Annual Returns (forms 
notified in September 2018) were work-in-progress. The de-scoped use cases 
were primarily those related to GSTR-3 returns (hel d in abeyance) and those 
which had become redundant due to changes in law/rules. 
Phase-II 
Phase-II consisted of Assessment, Refund, Adjudicat ion and Appeal, Audit 
and investigation, Recovery and Write-off (for 27 States / UTs). 
Total 122 use cases covering various functionalities of this Phase were planned 
to be taken into User Acceptance Testing 12 (UAT) environment over a period 
starting from January 2017 to March 2019. SRS for m ost of these modules, 
however, were signed off between January and Septem ber 2018 and SRS of 
two modules (MIS and Audit) was yet to be signed of f.  103 use cases of this 
Phase were to be taken into UAT environment by October 2018.  However, we 
noticed that only 87 use cases were implemented as of January 2019.   
These delays had an impact on implementation of GST  which could be clearly 
seen in case of the refund module as detailed below: -  
                                                           
11 A use case is a list of actions or event steps typ ically defining the interactions between a 
role and a system to achieve a goal. 
12  UAT is the last phase of the software testing pro cess. During UAT, virtual software users 
test the software to make sure it can handle requir ed tasks in real-world scenarios, 
according to specifications.  

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
19 
The module for processing the refund of IGST paid on export of goods 
outside India , with linkage between Customs IT system and GST po rtal was 
provided during September- October 2017.  But for the other categories of 
refunds, it was originally envisaged that taxpayer would fil e Refund 
application on GST Portal, the application filed wo uld be made available to 
tax officers online and the entire processing of re fund would be automated.  
However, as refund module was not provided on GST portal, it  was decided 
(October 2017) that the application pertaining to r efund claim should be 
filed and processed manually.   Hence, a workaround was created by 
developing a functionality RFD-01A to facilitate ta xpayers to file refund 
applications on GST Portal and give a print out to the jurisdictional tax officer 
for manual processing, necessitating avoidable interface with tax officer 
instead of a faceless IT interface, which defeated the original purpose of 
having non-intrusive E-Tax system. 
The refund application that could be transferred on line to the tax officer, as 
originally envisaged, was made available on the GST  portal for one category 
of refunds (viz. Exports of services- With payment of Tax) in October 2017 
and for the remaining seven categories 13 during August to October 2018. The 
back office module relating to online processing of  refunds was not ready 
(May 2018).   
As per the phase wise implementation plan of GSTN, the crucial module of 
refund was originally planned for phase II.  On the  recommendation of the 
GST Council and the instructions of the GoI, the wo rk on Refund functionality 
was commenced along with Phase I.  As the module wa s not ready, however, 
manual processing of refunds continued. 
The automated refund application which would be mad e 
available online to tax officer, was introduced in most of the 
cases more than one year after the roll out of GST,  while the 
processing of refunds was still being done manually  except 
refund of IGST paid on export of goods. This pointe d 
towards the faulty planning of Refund module.   
 
                                                           
13  (i) Excess balance in Electronic Cash ledger, (ii ) Exports of goods / services- Without 
payment of Tax, i.e., ITC accumulated, (iii)On acco unt of assessment/provisional 
assessment/ appeal/ any other order, (iv) ITC accum ulated due to inverted tax structure, 
(v) On account of supplies made to SEZ unit/ SEZ De veloper (with payment of tax), (vi) On 
account of supplies made to SEZ unit/ SEZ developer  (without payment of tax) and (vii) 
Tax paid on an intra-State supply which is subseque ntly held to be inter-State supply and 
vice versa (change of POS). 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
20 
Phase III 
Phase-III consisted of BI, Management Dashboards and Dynamic Reporting.  
M/s. Infosys, the Managed Service Provider of GSTN,  was to deliver 50 BI 
reports based on statistical analysis which were to  be made available to 500 
users from the States/UTs and CBIC.  The reports we re to be based on 
analysis of return, registration, payment and e-way  bill data to identify 
anomalies in database and comparison of data like G STR-1, GSTR-3B, e-way 
bill data to find out ITC mismatch and other anomal ies.  As per Request for 
Proposal (RFP), the execution plan of BI was to be finalised based on the 
requirement for reports.  GSTN was in the process o f identifying the required 
BI reports as of October 2018 and hence, the execut ion plan was under 
preparation stage only, with no timelines finalised for implementation. 
Response of GSTN to partial roll out of GST portal and our comments 
When we pointed out (November 2018) the status of p hase-wise 
implementation of GST portal, GSTN stated (January 2019) that GST was to be 
rolled out from July 2017 and there were changes subsequent to signing-off of 
SRS in December 2016. Therefore, implementation of the functionalities of 
Phase-I was re-prioritised.  For both Phases I and II, in view of the frequent 
changes in rules, notifications and decisions of th e GST Council, Change 
Requests (CR) were planned and implemented in the G ST portal on a 
continuous basis. 
The reply of the GSTN should be seen in light of the following facts : - 
i. There had been no inadequacy as far as funding and hired human 
resource capacity was concerned. 
ii. Scope for fast and recurring changes in the rules /  forms and 
consequent changes in enabling IT system was expect ed and should 
have been factored into the project governance syst em to ensure 
smooth transitioning of the current indirect tax re gime to the GST 
regime. 
iii. Deficiencies were noticed in the implemented system s and also in the 
changes made thereafter as could be seen from the f indings of the ‘IT 
audit of GSTN’ reported in Chapter II of this repor t.  Deficiencies 
pointed by this audit remained unaddressed in some cases even after 
corrective action was reported by GSTN.  
iv. GSTN management was given independence to fix its o wn timelines 
for implementation of functionalities within the br oad timelines for 
the activities given by the GST Council / the Government.  

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
21 
GSTN in its response endorsed by DoR (June 2019) st ated that the 
preparation of IT Business Processes of Registration, Payment and Return had 
started on the basis of draft Business Process Docu ment and Model GST Acts, 
which were provided during April to October 2015 and June 2016. Thereafter, 
GST Rules were placed in the public domain in Decem ber 2016 and January 
2017. These were not complete rules and the same we re published for 
comments of the public. After receiving feedback fr om the taxpayers and tax 
consultants, and other stakeholders, these rules ha d undergone changes. 
Therefore, significant changes in the processes tha t were provided in 2015 
and June 2016 were inevitable. Though GSTN had done  proper planning and 
monitoring mechanism were in place, however, due to  evolving nature of 
Law and rules there has been revision in the plan. 
It was also stated that they had successfully imple mented IT processes of a 
complex GST system and had integrated with differen t systems of tax 
departments, banks, accounting authorities and other stakeholders. 
Audit holds that delays and changes are not entirel y unexpected for a system 
as complex as GST.  An organisation of GSTN has bee n created exclusively for 
the purpose of providing IT backbone for GST in Mar ch 2013 and has been in 
existence for four years before actual roll out of GST.  Hence it would be 
assumed that they were preparing for this mammoth t ax reform. GSTN 
attributing delays in system development to frequen t changes in Act / Rule 
provisions indicated that the evolving nature of GS T was not factored into the 
project management . Taxpayers, especially exporters suffered due to G ST 
refunds being held up, which was due to faulty planning of Refunds module.  
The efficiency of the system is the combined responsibility of all stake holders 
involved in its development. The implementation and  progress of GST was 
also being regularly monitored by DoR, which was aw are of the timelines for 
GST roll out.  Inadequacies in the system show that  there was a failure in not 
just system design but its testing by GSTN and acce ptance by the tax 
departments before a pan-India roll out.  As such, the executive who have 
endorsed the system as developed is equally account able for the problems 
being faced.  
1.6.3 Conclusion and Recommendations: 
The implementation of GST in India is perhaps the b iggest tax reform in the 
world and the effort made by all the stake holders,  including the Central 
Government, the State Governments, DoR, CBIC, GSTN,  MSP and those of 
businesses which were ready, that made it possible is commendable. The 
advent of GST has provided a common national market  for goods and 
services and paved the way to reduce tax cascading by providing ITC across 
the value chain of supply of all goods and services  barring a few goods / 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
22 
sectors kept outside the ambit of GST. GST ushered in uniformity in tax rates 
as well as formats of registration forms, returns a nd challans across the 
country.  E-way bills have by and large replaced the manual check posts. 
One significant area where the full potential of GS T has not been achieved is 
roll out of the simplified tax compliance regime.  The chart No.4 below 
explains what happened on GST front and how it impa cted the GST 
Compliance system: 
 
The complexity of return mechanism and the technica l glitches resulted in 
roll back of the originally envisaged system-verifi ed ITC based on invoice 
matching, using GST returns (GSTRs-1, 2 and 3). The  summary self-assessed 
GSTR-3B return, introduced as a stop-gap measure ha s continued. Thus the 
system as in vogue today is an unverified return, w ithout an IT based 
checking of invoices and is prone to ITC frauds.  The self-correcting system, as 
originally envisaged, is not in place and this has led to continuation of 
avoidable assessee-tax officer physical interface instead of IT based interface. 
Without invoice matching and auto generation of ref unds, assessments etc. 
on the whole, the envisaged GST tax compliance system is non-functional.  
The settlement of IGST to the States also is impact ed as the IGST settlement 
reports were linked to data flowing from returns an d also from modules such 
as appeals and refunds. 
Overall, when a major system change was on the anvil and was being thought 
about for quite some time, it was expected that all  involved would be geared 
up enough to make this change possible. It is under stood that a major 
transformation in the tax administration with Pan-I ndia impact may have a 
few initial problems. The adherence to the business  rules and the system 
design are the responsibility of DoR, CBIC, State T ax authorities and GSTN.  


Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
23 
The extent of changes, having to be now undertaken,  as well as the 
suspension of the key aspects of the system,  however, points to inadequate 
co-ordination among the stake holders such as DoR, CBIC and GSTN as well as 
failure to try out the system adequately before roll out. The GST portal, to the 
extent implemented, was not fully aligned to the pr ovisions of GST Acts and 
Rules and was fraught with operational deficiencies  and system design 
deficiencies in certain areas as brought out in our IT audit findings reported in 
Chapter III of this report. 
The system of payment and settlement of tax that wa s envisaged for GST was 
based on one hundred per cent invoice-matching and availment of input tax 
credit, as well as settlement of IGST on the basis of invoice-matching.  
Neither is possible as of now, as an invoice-matchi ng system has not kicked-
in.  Invoice-matching is the critical requirement t hat would yield the full 
benefits of this major tax reform.  It would protec t the tax revenues of both 
the Centre and the States, it would lead to proper settlement of IGST and 
would minimise, if not eliminate, the tax official- assessee interface.  In fact, 
even “assessment” in the sense understood in the ma nual system may no 
longer be necessary (returns themselves can be gene rated by a system that 
matches invoices); and cases of evasion etc., can b e traced by applying 
analytical tools and AI to the massive data that crores of invoices generate.  
 
 
 
  

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
25 
Chapter II : Revenue and return filing trends 
This chapter deals with the analysis of GST revenue  of the Government of 
India, accounting of IGST and the return filing trends. 
2.1 Revenue trend 
2.1.1 Overall resources of Government of India  
Tax revenue of the Union Government consisted of re venue receipts from 
Direct and Indirect Taxes.  In the pre GST regime, Indirect Taxes comprised of 
Central Excise, Service Tax and Customs duties.  Af ter the implementation of 
GST, service tax and duties of Central Excise other  than Petroleum products 
have been replaced with GST. Central Excise was con tinued to be levied on 
petroleum products and tobacco has been subjected to GST as well as Central 
Excise. The overall tax revenue of the Union Govern ment for 2016-17 and 
2017-18 has been given in table No.2 below : -  
Table No. 2 : Resources of the Government of India 
(`` `` in crore) 
Tax component 2016-17  
(Pre GST) 
2017-18 
(Post GST) 
A.   Total Revenue Receipts 22,23,988 23,64,148 
i. Direct Tax Receipts  8,49,801 10,02,738 
ii. Indirect Tax Receipts including other taxes 8,66,167 9,16,445 
iii. Non-Tax Receipts  5,06,721 4,41,383 
iv. Grants-in-aid & contributions 1,299 3,582 
B.   Miscellaneous Capital Receipts 47,743  1,00,049 
C.   Recovery of Loans and Advances 40,971 70,639 
D.   Public Debt Receipts 61,34,137 65,54,002 
Receipts of Government of India (A+B+C+D) 84,46,839 90,88,838 
Source:  Union Finance Accounts of respective years. 
The overall receipts of the Union Government increa sed by ` 6,41,999 crores 
in 2017-18 over 2016-17.  The share of Indirect taxes in total revenue receipts 
remained almost constant, accounting for 38.76 per cent in 2017-18, as 
compared to 38.95 per cent in 2016-17.  The Indirect taxes registered a 
growth of 5.80 per cent in 2017-18 over 2016-17, wh ile this growth rate was 
21.33 per cent during 2016-17.  The details of GST revenue have been 
discussed in succeeding paras :- 
 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
26 
2.1.2 GST revenue of Government of India : Budget e stimate vs actual 
receipts 
The table No.3 below depicts a comparison of the Bu dget Estimates and the 
corresponding actuals for GST receipts. 
Table No.3 : Budget, Revised estimates and Actual receipts (GST) 
(`` `` in crore) 
Year Budget Estimates (BE) Revised Estimates (RE) Actual 
CGST IGST Cess CGST IGST Cess CGST IGST Cess 
2017-18 No BE. Only RE. 2,21,400 1,61,900 61,331 2,03,261 1,76,688* 62,612 
2018-19 6,03,900 50,000 90,000 5,03,900 50,000 90,000 4,57,535#  28,947# 95081# 
Source:  Union Finance Accounts and receipt budget documents of respective years.  
* ` 67,998 crore assigned to the States and balance ` 1,08,690 crore retained by the Centre 
# March 2019 provisional figures as available on CGA website. 
As could be seen from table 3 above, the CGST reven ue was short of the 
estimates and the provisional figures of 2018-19 al so indicate that CGST 
revenue did not meet the target of RE which is redu ced by One lakh crore 
rupees as compared to original BE of CGST. The deta ils of IGST are discussed 
in succeeding para.  
2.1.3 Accounting and treatment of IGST  
IGST, a levy on inter-state supplies and import / e xport of goods and services, 
is levied and collected by the Government of India and apportioned between 
the Union and the States as prescribed in the IGST Act.  IGST is initially 
collected under Major Head 0008 in Consolidated Fun d of India and then 
once taxpayer uses this as ITC to pay CGST / SGST /  UTGST on further supply 
(here in after referred to as ITC cross utilisation ), the amount is transferred 
from IGST to relevant head of account viz. CGST / UTGST under CFI or to SGST 
head of State Government concerned.  Also, when ITC  of IGST is rendered 
ineligible for further utilisation for any reason or gets lapsed (breaking the ITC 
chain), the same shall be apportioned between the U nion and the States.  
The ITC Cross utilisation and apportionment amounts  are arrived at every 
month using an algorithm that runs on GST portal based on returns filed. 
As per the accounting procedure for IGST, the colle ctions under IGST are to 
be booked under Major Head 0008 which has Sub Major  Heads ‘01’ for 
booking IGST on Import / Export of Goods and Servic es and ‘02’ for IGST on 
Domestic Supply of goods and services.  Minor heads  are also available under 
these heads to capture ITC Cross utilisation as wel l as apportionment of IGST 
to CGST, SGST and UTGST separately.   

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
27 
The gist of entries booked under the Major Head 000 8 IGST in the Finance 
Accounts of the Union Government for the year 2017- 18 is given in table 
No.4 below : - 
Table No.4 : Bookings under Major Head 0008- IGST 
(`` `` in crore) 
Description 0008-01 
IGST on Import / 
Export of Goods 
and Services 
0008-02 
IGST on Domestic 
Supply of goods 
and services 
Total 
Collection during the year 2,02,141 1,80,485 3,82,626 
ITC Cross utilization Nil (-)1,45,350 (-)1,45,350* 
Apportionment of IGST  Nil (-)25,587 (-)25,587* 
Balance after settlement 
and  apportionment 
2,02,141 9,547 2,11,688 
Advance apportionment Nil (-)35,000 (-) 35,000 
 
Balance after advance 
apportionment 
2,02,141
 (-) 25,453 1,76,688 
Share assigned to the 
States (Devolution) 
(-) 67,998 Nil (-)67,998 
 1,34,143  (-)25,453 1,08,690 
*Correctness of IGST settlement and apportionment a re subject to the 
inaccuracies and deficiencies in IGST settlement / apportionment algorithm, 
identified as part of findings of IT audit of GSTN,  have been reported in 
Chapter III of this report. 
As could be seen from table No.4, against a collect ion of ` 1,80,485 crore 
under Sub Major Head 02 (IGST on Domestic Supply of  goods and services), 
` 1,45,350 crore was transferred out of IGST on acco unt of ITC cross 
utilisation and ` 25,587 on account of apportionment, leaving a bala nce of 
` 9,547 crore after these adjustments. 
No adjustments on account of apportionment or ITC C ross utilisation were 
made from the sub major head 01 (IGST on Import / E xport of Goods and 
Services), though an amount of ` 2,02,141 crore was collected during the 
year. The deficiencies in IGST algorithm on account  of non-utilisation of data 
of imports and refunds have been commented upon as part of our 
observations on IT audit of GSTN (Part C of Chapter III of this report refers).   
Owing to the huge unsettled balance in IGST, the GS T Council in its 25 th 
meeting held in January 2018 recommended advance se ttlement of 
` 35,000 crore to the Centre and the States on provisional basis.  This advance 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
28 
settlement was done taking the 2015-16 revenue of the States from the taxes 
subsumed into GST as the basis and was proposed to be adjusted in ten equal 
instalments against regular settlement due to the States in 2018-19. 
After this advance settlement, there was a balance of ` 1,76,688 crore left in 
IGST at the end of the year.  GoI has devolved ` 67,998 crore under IGST to 
the States/UTs adopting Finance commission formula for devolution of 
central taxes.  Devolution of IGST is in contravention of the provis ions of 
Constitution of India as Article 270 (1) of the Con stitution excludes duties 
levied under Article 269 (A) (i.e. IGST) from list of taxes and duties to be 
distributed between the Union and the  States. When the Ministry sent the 
accounting procedure for IGST to CAG for approval, the procedure for 
advance apportionment of IGST to the Centre and the  States, as 
recommended by the GST council was agreed to by the  CAG.  But the 
procedure for devolution was not agreed to by the C AG stating that 
devolution of IGST was against the provisions of Constitution of India.   
Further, devolution of funds using Finance Commissi on formula also has the 
impact of distribution of IGST funds among the Stat es in a manner quite 
different from the ratio in which funds would have gone to the States in 
normal course as ITC cross utilisation or apportion ment is based on Place of 
Supply concept. 
When we pointed this out (April 2019) the Ministry of Finance intimated (May 
2019) that in 2017-18 devolution of IGST was done, pending finalisation of 
accounting procedure for accounting of IGST balance , after taking formal 
opinion from Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice.  It 
further stated that Section 49 (5) of the CGST Act has been amended (August 
2018), which provided that the ITC of IGST to be ut ilised first and then only to 
utilise ITC of CGST and SGST to pay CGST/SGST. This was done to ensure faster 
settlement of IGST.  Ministry further stated that d uring 2018-19, the balance 
IGST has not been devolved as was done in 2017-18 and IGST balance available 
after regular settlement and refund is being apportioned provisionally.   
The reply of the Ministry is silent on the aspect o f corrective action taken by 
it for setting right the IGST amount devolved durin g the year 2017-18.  Steps 
like amendment of Section 49 (5) of IGST Act providing for faster utilisation of 
IGST and provisional settlement of IGST balance dur ing 2018-19 will only 
impact the settlement of IGST from 2018-19 onwards.  The reply of the 
Ministry was also silent on the aspect of impact on  state revenues due to 
adoption of Finance Commission formula for distribution of IGST balance.    
It would be pertinent to mention here that in CAG’s  report on Account of the 
Union Government (Report No.2 of 2019), tabled in P arliament on 12 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
29 
February 2019, it was advised that GoI needed to ac count for its share 
correctly and devolution should take place from Cen tral share only and that 
the remaining 50 per cent should be apportioned to the States as per IGST 
Act. In view of this, the States’ share of IGST sho uld be accounted for 
properly, duly booking the subsequent adjustments a s the Centre’s 
expenditure.  
2.1.4 Comparison of indirect tax revenue on goods a nd services 
To compare the indirect tax collections of GoI pre and post GST on goods and 
services, as shown in table No.5 given below, we co nsidered revenues 
pertaining to all the components of central taxes subsumed into GST Viz.  
• For 2016-17 : Subsumed components of Central Excise , Service tax 
and Customs duties of CVD and SAD of 2016-17 and  
• For 2017-18 : CGST, UTGST and the Centre’s share in  year-end IGST 
balance for 2017-18 besides the subsumed taxes coll ected in the first 
quarter of 2017-18 as well as collection of arrears  relating to the 
subsumed taxes during the remaining period of 2017- 18. The IGST 
balance is the share retained by the Centre after d evolution to the 
States. 
GST revenue for March was due in April, while March  revenue was payable in 
March itself in case of Central Excise and Service Tax.  Hence for a reasonable 
comparison of revenue growth of indirect taxes, we considered the Centre’s 
March 2018 GST revenue collected in April 2018 also  as shown in column 4 of 
table No.5 given below: -  
Table No.5 : Comparison of indirect tax revenue on goods and services 
(`` `` in crore) 
Tax components 
Year 
2016-17 2017-18 2017-18* 
Central Excise on Goods other than 
Petroleum and Tobacco 1,16,901 9,034 9,034 
Service Tax 2,54,499 81,229 81,229 
Central GST Taxes (CGST and UTGST) 0 2,04,896 2,37,075 
IGST** 0 1,08,690 1,08,690 
CVD and SAD of Customs 1,51,927 43,092 43,092 
Central Sales Tax 495 102 102 
Subsumed items revenue 5,23,822 4,47,043 4,79,222 
Revenue difference for GST subsumed 
items in 17-18 over 18-19   -76,779 -44,600 
Revenue difference for GST subsumed 
items in 17-18 over 18-19 (per cent)   -15 -10 
* Including March 2018 GST collected in April 2018 
** year-end balance retained by the Centre, as explained in para 1.7.4 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
30 
As can be seen from the table above, post implement ation of GST, the 
revenue on goods and services (excluding central ex cise on Petroleum and 
Tobacco) registered a decline of 15 per cent in 201 7-18 as compared to 
revenue of subsumed taxes in 2016-17.  Even after c onsidering the March 
2018 revenue of CGST collected in April 2018, the d ecline in revenue has 
been to the extent of 10 per cent.  Reasons for suc h decline in revenue, if 
analysed and any action taken based on such analysi s were called for from 
the Ministry and the reply was awaited.   
2.1.5 Short Transfer of Compensation Cess to Public  Account 
As per the provisions of Article 266 of the Constit ution of India, the GST 
Compensation Act and the accounting procedure for C ompensation Cess as 
agreed to by the CAG of India, the compensation ces s should be transferred 
to the Public Account.  However, from the Finance A ccounts 2017-18, it was 
noticed that there was a short transfer of ` 6,466 crore of Compensation Cess 
to the Public Account.  It was further noticed that  as per the agreed 
accounting procedure, GST Compensation Cess should be transferred to the 
Public Account by debiting major head 2047-Other fi scal services, Minor 
Head 797-Transfer to reserve fund.  However, as per  the Finance Accounts 
2017-18, no such entry was found in the major head 2047. 
The reasons for the same were called for (February 2019) from the Ministry 
and their reply was awaited.   
2.1.6 Transition Credit, Refunds and Cost of collec tion 
The Statistics on (a) Transitional credits, (b) Ref unds claimed by taxpayers, 
processed and pending and (c) Cost of collection ha ve not been provided by 
the Ministry.  Hence we could not analyse the same and include in this report. 
2.2 GST Registrations 
2.2.1 Pan-India GST Registrations 
The category-wise registrations under GST have been  given in table No.6  
below : - 
Table No.6 : Details of registrations 
Category of Registrant No. of 
Registrants 
Percentage of 
total 
Normal taxpayers 1,00,49,983 84.05 
Composition taxpayers 17,48,885  14.63 
Tax Deductors at Source 1,40,930 1.18 
Tax Collectors at Source 5,500 0.05 
Input Service Distributors 8,885 0.06 
Others (Casual, NRTP, OIDAR) 1,741 0.01 
Total Registrants 1,19,55,924  
Source: GSTN Daily summary reports 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
31 
The total registrations under GST as on 28 February  2019 were 1.20 crore, of 
which normal taxpayers accounted for 84.05 per cent  and composition 
taxpayers were around 14.63 per cent.  Of the total  registrations, 59,74,885 
were migrated from pre-GST regime, accounting for a round 50 per cent, 
while balance were new registrations. 
The following chart No. 5 depicts the distribution of normal taxpayers and 
composition taxpayers across the top 16 States/Unio n Territories (UTs), 
constituting 90 per cent registration under these two categories: -  
Chart No.5 : Normal Vs. Composition taxpayers 
 
 
Source:  Statistical data obtained through GSTN reports as on 28 February 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
32 
2.2.2 Distribution of normal taxpayers 
The distribution of 
normal taxpayers across 
India as on 28 February 
2019 has been depicted 
in the pictorial graph 
No. 1 (statistical 
information in  Appendix-
III). 
In normal taxpayers 
category, Maharashtra 
and Uttar Pradesh were 
among the top States 
falling in more than 10 
per cent category and 
together these two States 
accounted for 24.51 per 
cent of total normal 
taxpayer registrations in 
the country.  Sixteen States/UTs were in less than one per cent registrations 
category. 
2.2.3 Distribution of Composition taxpayers 
The distribution of taxpayers, 
who opted for composition 
levy, across India as on 28 
February 2019 has been 
depicted in the pictorial graph 
No.2 (statistical information in 
Appendix-III). 
Uttar Pradesh accounted for 
20 per cent of the total 
composition taxpayers, 
followed by Rajasthan (9.2 per 
cent) and Maharashtra (8.9 
per cent). Fifteen States/UTs 
figured in less than one per 
cent category. 
 
Graph No.1 : Distribution of normal taxpayers 
 
Source: Statistical data obtained through GSTN repo rts as 
on 28 February 2019 
Graph No.2 : Distribution of Composition taxpayers  
 
Source: Statistical data obtained through GSTN repo rts as 
on 28 February 2019 


Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
33 
2.3 GST Return filing pattern 
2.3.1 Filing pattern of GSTR-1 and 3B 
The trends of filing of GSTR-1 and 3B as on 28 Febr uary 2019 for the period 
from April 2018 to December 2018, as compiled from the summary reports 
shared by GSTN, have been depicted in table No.7 : -  
Table No.7 : - Filing pattern of GSTR-1 and 3B 
Return 
Type GSTR-1 GSTR-3B 
Months Due for 
filing 
Returns  
filed 
Return  
filing 
per cent 
Due for 
filing 
Returns filed 
as on 28 Feb 
2019 
Return 
filing  
per cent 
Returns  
filed by  
due date 
Per cent  
filed by 
due date 
April'18 44,96,316 27,28,772 61 88,17,798 76,94,460 87 56,38,813 64 
May'18 46,82,345 27,48,617 59 91,22,309 78,18,233 86 56,18,925 62 
June'18 93,16,710 70,48,521 76 93,16,710 78,97,701 85 58,39,034 63 
July'18 47,75,626 27,50,521 58 94,70,282 79,57,565 84 64,39,259 68 
Aug '18 47,26,891 27,28,177 58 96,15,273 80,14,906 83 57,02,349 59 
Sep '18 96,57,239 69,98,553 72 96,57,239 80,41,279 83 64,19,403 66 
Oct '18 46,09,444 26,53,997 58 97,57,664 80,52,558 83 59,28,822 61 
Nov '18 45,72,118 25,83,371 57 98,46,645 79,13,241 80 63,36,787 64 
Dec '18 99,01,997 64,36,328 65 99,01,997 78,18,108 79 62,49,078 63 
The filing of GSTR-3B for April 2018 was 87 per cen t while the filing per cent 
for December 2018 was only 79 per cent.  It was not iced that GSTR-3B 
returns were being filed within the due date on an average by 63 per cent 
taxpayers and 20 per cent filed the returns after d ue date.  GSTR-3B returns 
filed by the due date remained at a low per cent ra nging from 59 per cent to 
68 per cent during April to December 2018.  Thus, w hile it was expected that 
compliance would improve as the system would stabil ize with passage of 
time, it was seen that there was no improvement in filing of GSTR-3B by due 
date.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
34 
 
Chart No.6: Filing of GSTR-1 and 3B for April to De cember 2018 
 
Source: Statistical data obtained through GSTN reports as on 28 February 2019 
• The filing percentages of GSTR-1 returns were throu ghout less in 
comparison to the corresponding filing of GSTR-3B r eturns during the 
period April 2018 to December 2018.  The introducti on of GSTR-3B 
resulted in filing of returns with ITC claims which  could not be verified 
and it appears to have disincentivised filing of even GSTR-1. 
• With the changes made to returns mechanism, GSTR-1 has been the only 
return which would provide invoice level details. Further, GSTR-1 contains 
GSTIN-wise details of supplies made and hence by co llating details from 
across various GSTR-1 returns, it would be possible  to prepare a profile of 
taxpayers which could be used to identify liable bu sinesses not registered 
under GST or those under-reporting their turnover.    
GSTR-3B being only a summary return, short-filing o f GSTR-
1 implied that the tax departments did not have com plete 
invoice level details as filed by the suppliers, wh ich could be 
used to verify details given in GSTR-3B or to arriv e at 
turnover.  Since filing of GSTR-1 is mandatory, sho rt-filing is 
an area of concern and needs to be addressed.   
• Interestingly, GSTR-1 filing percentage at the end of each quarter was 
higher than the monthly filing per cent.  As could be seen from table No.7 
against 45 lakh and 47 lakh taxpayers due to file G STR-1 for April and May 
2018 respectively, only 27 lakh taxpayers filed the se returns.  But for the 


Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
35 
month of June in which taxpayers with turnover belo w ` 1.5 crore were 
also due to file returns (i.e. quarterly returns), the total taxpayers due to 
file GSTR-1 increased to 93 lakhs against which GST R-1 was filed by 70 
lakh people.  Similar trend could be seen in the next two quarters also.  
Quarterly hike in filing rates of GSTR-1 might happ en either 
due to (i) small players being better compliant to filing 
GSTR-1 as compared to those with turnover above 
` 1.5 crore or (ii) due to those with turnover above  
` 1.5 crore also filing quarterly return instead of monthly 
returns.   
• Ministry was requested (April 2019) to examine the reasons for this trend 
and to provide break up of taxpayers with turnover above and below 
` 1.5 crore due to file GSTR-1, those who filed by t he due date and the 
returns filed as on 31 December 2018.  Reply was awaited (June 2019). 
2.3.2 State-wise filing pattern of GSTR-1 and 3B 
Chart No.7 : State wise filing pattern of GSTR-1 an d 3B for December 2018 
 
Source: Statistical data obtained through GSTN reports as on 28 February 2019 
The filing of GSTR-1 across the country or the nati onal average (returns filed 
as a percentage of returns due to be filed) stood a t 65 per cent for the month 
of December 2018.  Highest filing was noticed in Pu njab (82 per cent), 
followed by Gujarat and UT of Chandigarh (79 per cent). Amongst the General 
Category States, the filing of GSTR-1 was below the  all India average in Orissa 
(48 per cent), Bihar (50 per cent), Jharkhand (54 p er cent), Chhattisgarh (56 
per cent), Telangana (59 per cent), Goa (60 per cen t), Karnataka (61 per cent) 
and West Bengal (62 per cent).  Amongst UTs, Chandi garh accounted for 
highest filing of 79 per cent closely followed by D aman and Diu and Dadra 


Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
36 
and Nagar Haveli (75 per cent), while Puducherry (57 per cent) recorded filing 
rate below national average.   
The national average filing of GSTR-3B across the c ountry stood at 79 per 
cent.  The highest filing was noticed in UT of Chan digarh (89 per cent), 
followed by Punjab (88 per cent), Gujarat (86 per c ent) and Madhya Pradesh 
(83 per cent).   Most of the General Category States were above or a lmost at 
par with national average rate of filing of GSTR-3B. 
Ministry was asked if the reasons for such low retu rn filing of GSTR-1 have 
been analysed and any action taken based on such an alysis and reply was 
awaited (June 2019).   
2.3.3 Filing of GSTR-4 
The trends of filing of GSTR-4, a quarterly return to be filed by composition 
taxpayers, as on 28 February 2019 for the period fr om April 2018 to 
December 2018, have been given in chart No.8 below (corresponding 
statistical details in Appendix-IV). 
Chart No.8 : Filing of GSTR-4 as on 28 February 201 9 
 
Source: Statistical data obtained through GSTN reports as on 28 February 2019 
While the filing of returns by composition taxpayer s appeared to be better 
than the return filing rate of normal taxpayers (i. e. GSTR-1) and almost at par 
with filing of summary return (i.e. GSTR-3B) by nor mal taxpayers, Ministry 
was required to examine reasons for decline in filing of GSTR-4. 
The State wise filing rate of GSTR-4 for the quarter ending December 2018, as 
on 28 February 2019 has been given in chart No.9 below : - 
 
 


Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
37 
Chart No.9 : State wise filing of GSTR-4 for Decembe r 2018 
 
Source: Statistical data obtained through GSTN reports as on 28 February 2019 
Highest filing of GSTR-4 was noticed in Punjab (88 per cent), followed by UT 
of Chandigarh (86 per cent), Gujarat (85 per cent) and Himachal Pradesh (84 
per cent). Among General Category States, filing rates for Tel angana (68 per 
cent), Maharashtra (70 per cent) and Tamil Nadu (71  per cent) were below 
the national average of 78 per cent. While the fili ng of GSTR-4 in most of the 
Special Category States was below national average,  J&K (76 per cent), 
Himachal Pradesh (84 per cent) and Uttarakhand (80 per cent) registered 
above national average filing rates.  
2.3.4 GSTR-5, 5A and 6 
GSTR-5 is a monthly return to be filed by Non-resid ent taxpayers / Casual 
taxpayers.  GSTR-5A is to be filed by those providi ng Online Information and 
Database Access or Retrieval services (OIDAR) from outside India to non-
taxable person in India. GSTR-6 is filed by Input S ervice Distributor (ISD) 
giving the details of input tax credit received and distributed.  
The trends of filing of GSTR-5, 5A and 6 as on 28 F ebruary 2019 for the period 
from April 2018 to December 2018 has been given in chart no.10 below 
(corresponding statistical details in Appendix-IV). 
 
 
 
 


Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
38 
Chart No.10 : - Filing of GSTR-5, 5A and 6 as on 28 February 2019 
 
Source: Statistical data obtained through GSTN reports as on 28 February 2019 
As could be seen from the graph above, the filing o f GSTR-5A by OIDAR 
service providers has crossed 50 per cent only in A pril and May 2018 and has 
shown a declining trend since June 2018.  Given tha t a separate registration 
category and return form has been prescribed for th is category with a 
provision for administration of all OIDAR taxpayers  centrally by Principal 
Commissioner of Central Tax, Bengaluru (West), Mini stry was requested to 
intimate if reasons for such low filing of returns by this category have been 
analysed and any action taken based on such analysis.  Similarly analysis done 
or action taken in respect of filing of GSTR-6 by I SDs, which was also around 
50 per cent, have also been sought from the Ministr y.  Reply was awaited 
(June 2019). 
2.4 Conclusion 
Revenue analysis 
• The growth of indirect taxes slowed down to 5.80 pe r cent in 2017-18 
over 2016-17, while this growth rate was 21.33 per cent during 2016-17. 
• Post implementation of GST, the Centre’s revenue on  goods and 
services (excluding Central Excise on Petroleum and Tobacco) registered 
a decline of 10 per cent in 2017-18 as compared to revenue of 
subsumed taxes in 2016-17.   
• GoI resorted to devolution of IGST year-end balance to the States as per 
Finance Commission formula, which is in contraventi on of the 
provisions of the Constitution of India and the IGS T Act.  This also has 
the impact of distribution of funds to the States o n a completely 


Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
39 
different basis instead of ‘Place of Supply’ concep t as envisaged in the 
IGST Act. 
• There was a short transfer of ` 6,466 crore of GST Compensation Cess 
to the Public Account during 2017-18. 
Returns filing 
• While it was expected that compliance would improve  as the system 
would stabilise, all returns being filed (GSTR-1, 3 B, 4, 5A and 6) showed 
a declining trend of filing from April 2018 to December 2018. 
• The filing percentage of GSTR-1 returns were throug hout less in 
comparison to the corresponding filing of GSTR-3B r eturns. The 
introduction of GSTR-3B resulted in filing of retur ns with ITC claims 
which could not be verified and it appears to have disincentivised filing 
of even GSTR-1.  Since filing of GSTR-1 is mandator y, short-filing is an 
area of concern and needs to be addressed.    
• GSTR-3B being only a summary return,  short-filing of GSTR-1 implied 
that the tax departments did not have complete invo ice level details as 
filed by the suppliers, which could be used to veri fy details given in 
GSTR-3B or to arrive at turnover.   
  

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
41 
Chapter III : Planning and Implementation of GST IT Project 
This chapter deals with the results of our IT Audit  of GSTN covering 
Registration and Payment modules and IGST settlement reports. 
3.1 Introduction  
GST has envisaged integration of tax administration across the country, which 
required a robust IT backbone.  GSTN was formed to provide common and 
shared IT infrastructure and services to the stakeh olders14 for the 
implementation of GST. The main objectives of GSTN included : - 
• To assist and engage with various stakeholders in p reparing IT and 
communications related infrastructure for smooth ro ll out of any IT 
driven initiatives and other e-governance initiativ es of the 
Government or any department or agency of the Gover nment, 
specifically for the roll out of the GST; 
• To provide for smooth transitioning of the current indirect tax regime 
to the GST regime; and 
• To provide IT and communications related services t o various 
stakeholders including implementation and managemen t of GST IT 
System. 
The common GST Portal developed by GSTN has been fu nctioning as the 
front-end interface of the overall GST IT eco-syste m and includes filing of 
registration application, filing of return, creatio n of challans for tax payment, 
payment of GST, settlement of IGST payment, and gen eration of BI and 
analytics. M/s Infosys has been the System Develope r and Managed Service 
Provider (MSP).  The IT systems of CBIC and State T ax Departments were to 
be used to handle tax administration functions such  as registration approval, 
assessment, audit, appeal enforcement, adjudication .  While nine States 15 
and CBIC have been developing their own IT systems for tax administration, 
GSTN was entrusted with the development of the same for 20 States.   
3.2 Organisational setup of GSTN 
According to the Articles of Association, the Board  of Directors of the 
Company (the Board) should have a minimum of two an d a maximum of 14 
Directors. The Chairman of GSTN should be nominated  through a joint 
approval mechanism of the Central Government and th e State Governments. 
                                                           
14  Finance departments of Government of India and St ate Governments, taxpayers, CBIC, 
State Tax Authorities, Principal Chief Controller o f Accounts (PCCA), State Treasuries, 
Reserve Bank of India and authorised banks. 
15  Tamilnadu, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Mah arashtra, Goa, Haryana, Sikkim and 
Meghalaya. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
42 
The Board would appoint a Chief Executive Officer ( CEO) for managing the 
business of the company, subject to the control and  supervision of the Board. 
Under the present organisational setup, the CEO was  being assisted by 
Executive Vice Presidents (EVP) and Senior Vice Pre sidents (SVP) looking after 
different functions of the company. 
The strategic control of the Government over GSTN w as ensured through 
measures such as adequate Government representation  on the Board, 
mechanisms of Special Resolution on important matte rs and induction of the 
Government officers on deputation. 
3.3 Background of Implementation of GST IT Project  
GST was implemented with effect from 1 July 2017, w ith the background 
work being started well in advance.  The constituti onal amendment needed 
for implementing GST was passed in September 2016 a nd the CGST and the 
IGST Acts passed in April 2017.   However, the Empo wered Committee of 
Ministers (ECM), formed in May 2007, started the wo rk on GST Acts, Rules 
and business processes.  The draft Business Process  Documents and model 
GST Acts were placed in public domain during April- October 2015 and June 
2016, respectively. The GST Rules were also made av ailable to the public for 
comments in two phases in December 2016 and January  2017.  Hence, while 
changes were being made to Acts / Rules and Busines s Process Documents, 
the draft documents were made available well before roll out of GST.   
Given the criticality of the IT infrastructure, whi ch was to be the backbone of 
GST, GSTN was formed in March 2013 itself.  The yea r wise expenditure on 
GSTN in each of these years, up to 2018-19 is as follows: 
Table No.8 : Year-wise expenditure on GSTN 
Year Actual Expenditure (`` `` in crores) 
2013-14 3.04 
2014-15 12.29 
2015-16 48.07 
2016-17 69.59 
2017-18 544.07 
2018-19 427.37 
GSTN has incurred an expenditure of ` 133 crore till March 2017. 
GSTN was able to ensure that the GST IT system was up and running with 
some basic features on the date fixed for roll out viz. 1 July 2017.  It was 
also able to roll out form GSTR-3B in a very short time.  Therefore, the 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
43 
shortcomings and glitches in the system cannot be a scribed to short notice 
before start.  Proper planning of systems that woul d be flexible enough to 
adjust for changes (which are only to be expected w hen transiting to a new 
system, that too a major change such as to GST) and  sufficient advance 
checking is likely to have yielded a more sound sys tem than has been 
available for the first two years of GST.  Proper c o-ordination between the 
committee setting out the Business Process Document,  CBIC and GSTN too 
seems to have been missing. 
3.4 IT Audit of GSTN 
3.4.1 The Background for IT audit 
GST portal has been at the core of the entire GST e cosystem, providing a 
single interface for around a crore taxpayers for t heir GST compliance 
functions. It has facilitated integration of tax ad ministration across the Union 
and the States. With the entire GST related transac tions originating on the 
GST portal, this has been the original and primary source of GST data, holding 
crucial tax data of the country and sensitive busin ess data of the taxpayers.  
Hence, there emanated a need for CAG to carry out I T audit of GSTN 
periodically as part of mandate to conduct audit of  receipts under Section 16 
of CAG’s (DPC) Act, 1971.   We initiated the first IT audit of GSTN in May 
2018, the details of which have been given in the subsequent paras. 
3.4.2 Scope of IT audit 
As on 31 December 2017, when we started planning th e IT audit, 50 per cent 
of the functionalities planned for Phase I and 12 p er cent of the 
functionalities planned for Phase II were completed .  The status of 
implementation of various modules in Phase I had been detailed below : - 
Table No.9 : Details of implementation of modules in Phase-I  
as on 31 Dec 2017 
Modules (grouped) Functionalities 
planned 
In Production as 
on 31 December 
2017 
Percent 
completed 
Registration 48 30 63 
Payment 10  10 100 
Returns# 37 17 46 
Reports and Stand alone 89 35 39 
Total of Phase I 184 92 50 
# Included IGST Settlement Reports, which were completed by September 2017 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
44 
As could be seen from table No.9, Registration and Payments modules in 
Phase-I were the ones implemented to a large extent .  The IGST settlement 
reports generated on the GST portal would determine  the amount of IGST to 
be settled or apportioned to the Centre and the Sta tes / UTs.  As this had a 
bearing on the flow of revenues into the Consolidat ed Fund of India and of 
the States, verifying the IGST Settlement reports, which have already been 
implemented, was important.  Hence, it was decided to focus on Registration 
and Payments modules and IGST settlement reports du ring the first IT audit 
of GSTN. 
The scope of the IT Security audit was limited to t he review of IT security 
related reports of Standardisation Testing and Quality Certification (STQC), an 
attached office under Department of Information Tec hnology, GoI and 
implementation of STQC’s recommendations.  Aspects of Business Continuity 
Plan (BCP) and change management processes which ca me to our notice in 
the course of audit of the selected modules, howeve r, were covered in this 
audit.  
3.4.3 Audit objectives 
The main objectives of this IT audit were to assess  whether the IT modules 
for the taxpayer Registration, GST Payment and IGST  settlement, 
implemented by GSTN, were in line with the provisio ns of the Acts and Rules 
governing the GST regime and the SRS.     
3.4.4 Audit Methodology 
We test checked the aspects of Registration, GST Pa yment and the IGST 
settlement reports in operation as on 1 May 2018.  
We conducted (May 2018) an entry conference with th e GSTN team to 
discuss our audit plan and programme followed by di scussions, presentations 
and walkthrough to understand the business process and the flow of 
information through the GST IT System.  We also rec eived feedback from 
some stakeholders of the GST IT System, namely Prin cipal Chief Controller of 
Accounts (PCCA), Confederation of Indian Industry  (CII) and VAT Department 
of Delhi Government.  
Audit testing of important forms and functionalitie s as envisaged in the 
relevant Acts and Rules governing GST and SRS were first conducted on 
Training and User Acceptance Testing (UAT) environm ent of the GST system 
followed by audit testing in production environment .  Data from production 
environment was analysed for validation of various audit checks.  
The complete GSTN data has been divided into four s hards (partitions) and 
each shard consists of data related to certain Stat es.  For a majority of the 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
45 
audit checks, we analysed data of Shard-1 database consisting of nine 
States/UTs namely, Jammu & Kashmir, Delhi, Nagaland , Mizoram, Jharkhand, 
Madhya Pradesh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Goa, Pondic herry and Other 
Territory (Code-97). We also analysed the data main tained by GSTN on 
complaints and grievances of users. 
Audit was conducted during May-October 2018.  An In spection Report was 
issued to GSTN on 29 November 2018, followed by an exit conference on 26 
December 2018.  GSTN replies thereon received in Ja nuary 2019 have been 
suitably incorporated in this IT audit report. The replies given by GSTN were 
also verified again in January 2019 and the results  of the verification duly 
included in this report.  The findings of this IT a udit were brought to the 
notice of the Ministry in March 2019 and the reply of the Ministry forwarding 
the response of GSTN was received in June 2019. The  replies have been duly 
incorporated in the report. 
3.4.5 Audit Criteria 
Sources from where we derived the audit criteria fo r this IT audit included 
the Constitutional provisions related to GST; relev ant provisions of the CGST 
Act, the IGST Act, the UTGST Act, the SGST Acts and their associated rules and 
regulations, notifications of the tax authorities l ike CBIC, relevant Business 
Process Documents and SRS. For ease of reference, w e quoted only CGST Act 
/ Rule provisions but the provisions quoted and fin dings emanating 
therefrom would be relevant for similar provisions of SGST / UTGST / IGST 
Acts, wherever applicable. 
3.4.6 Acknowledgement 
Audit acknowledges the co-operation of the GSTN in providing necessary 
information and records to audit and for furnishing  replies to the audit 
observations. 
3.5 Overview of IT Audit findings 
We issued 37 audit observations pertaining to IT au dit of GSTN to the 
Ministry.  Out of these, 25 were accepted by GSTN a nd for 11, GSTN 
explained the constraints / reasons.  Based on the reply of GSTN, one 
observation was closed.  Against the 25 accepted ob servations, GSTN 
intimated corrective action (January 2019) in respe ct of nine observations 
and that action had been initiated on others.  Out of these nine, we have no 
comments on compliance to five observations.  But i n four observations, we 
found that the issues pointed out by Audit continue d even after corrective 
action was reported by GSTN, the comments on which have been given in the 
respective paras. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
46 
In 16 cases (Appendix-V), the key validations / fun ctionalities as 
existing in the rolled out modules were not found a ligned to the 
applicable provisions. Of these 16 cases, the requi red validation 
was not included in the Software Requirement Specif ication (SRS) 
itself in seven cases, the validations were not built-in even though 
SRS was correctly framed in eight cases and the SRS  provision 
included a condition not prescribed in the Act in one case. 
Audit findings on Registration module, Payments mod ule, IGST settlement 
reports, Business Continuity and Change Management have been given in the 
following four parts.  
Part A : Registration Module 
3.6 Introduction 
In the GST regime, registration has been made fully  online and any legal 
person wishing to register would have to access the  GST IT system for the 
same.  While applying for a new registration, the a pplicant has to first fill 
Part-A of the application form, which consists of L egal Name, Permanent 
Account Number (PAN) as issued under the Income-tax  Act, 1961, Email 
Address and Mobile Number along-with State and Dist rict.  After Part A is 
submitted and validated, a Temporary Reference Numb er (TRN) is generated 
and sent to the Applicant.  Based on the same, he w ould be able to retrieve 
the application and fill balance information in Par t B of the form.  On 
successful submission of Registration application w ith authentication, 
Application Reference Number (ARN) would be generat ed and intimated to 
the applicant.  On approval of the application by t he tax department, a 
fifteen digit GST Identification Number (GSTIN) wou ld be generated and the 
same along with temporary Password would be sent to  the primary 
authorised signatory via email. These credentials s hould be used by the 
Registrant to access the GST Common Portal. 
The IT audit revealed deficiencies in the taxpayer Registration Module of GST 
IT system, including areas where the GST IT system was not aligned with the 
provisions of the GST Acts and the Rules. Detailed audit findings have been 
given below : -  
3.7 Failure to validate and debar ineligible taxpay ers from availing 
Composition Levy Scheme (CLS) 
3.7.1 Same PAN holder found under CLS as well as no rmal taxpayer 
The key conditions for a registered person to opt f or CLS under Section 10 of 
CGST Act were : - 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
47 
(i) The aggregate turnover, on all India basis against the taxpayer’s PAN, 
in the preceding financial year should not exceed t he prescribed 
amount (` one crore at the time of this audit).  
(ii) Multiple registrations under the same PAN could opt  for CLS only if all 
such registrations opted for the scheme.  
(iii) The option availed for CLS would lapse with effect from the day on 
which the aggregate turnover during a financial yea r exceeded the 
prescribed limit.  
Test check by Audit revealed that the system validations were not adequately 
mapped to the above provisions of the Act as detailed below : - 
(a) As of August 2018, 168 PAN holders out of total 1, 27,995 active 
taxpayers in sampled the States/UTs 16 were found to be registered under CLS 
as well as Normal taxpayers for different business verticals.  
GSTN, agreeing to the lack of validation, cited the  constraint to deliver critical 
applications on priority as the reason and stated t hat the validation was 
implemented with effect from 5 October 2018, in whi ch all the registrations 
on common PAN across India, would be converted auto matically into 
Composition, if a taxpayer had opted-in for composition for a single GSTIN. 
However, subsequent Audit verification (January 201 9) revealed 358 cases 
where the same taxpayer was found under Normal taxpayer and Composition 
category indicating failure of validation implemented from 5 October 2018. 
GSTN had earlier replied (January 2019) that this w as due to technical issue in 
Cache and the corrective action for the issue was l ikely to be completed by 
15 March 2019.  
GSTN further replied (June 2019 through DoR) that a s the migration process 
was not completed before the new taxpayers were all owed to opt in for 
composition, the validation was not implemented at that point of time. They 
reported completion of corrective action regarding 168 PAN holders 
registered under CLS as well as Normal taxpayers fo r different business 
verticals, which remains to be verified by Audit. 
GSTN reply could not be accepted since audit was co nducted more than one 
year after the rollout of GST. Further, this issue was noticed in some of the 
registrations that happened even in July 2018.  By that time, validation issues 
if any due to migration should have been rectified by GSTN. The persistence 
of such issues remaining in the application/data ev en after intimation of 
                                                           
16  Shard-1 database consisting of Jammu & Kashmir, D elhi, Nagaland, Mizoram, Jharkhand, 
Madhya Pradesh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Goa, Pondic herry and Other Territory 
(Code-97). 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
48 
rectification measures points to weakness in the pr ocess of testing the 
application.   
(b) GST IT system did not debar a PAN holder from regi stering under CLS 
in case their aggregate turnover from all registrat ions on all India basis 
exceeded the threshold of turnover prescribed for C LS.  Similarly, GST IT 
system did not have provision to determine aggregat e turnover of all 
registered persons under the same PAN to force the taxpayers enjoying CLS 
to move to Normal taxpayers category as soon as they crossed the prescribed 
turnover. 
GSTN had replied (January 2019) that the functional ity to validate the 
aggregate turnover of all the GSTINs issued on a co mmon PAN at the time of 
opting-in for composition scheme, was under develop ment.  GSTN had also 
stated that the System was also being designed to m ake the turnover limit 
configurable to accommodate the frequent changes in  the turnover limits as 
and when legal provisions were changed.  These chan ges were expected to be 
implemented by June 2019.  
GSTN, in their reply endorsed by DoR (June 2019) ci ted the following reasons 
as to why validation on the PAN based cumulative tu rnover was not tenable 
at that point of time:  
• The turnover limit fixed for composition scheme kept on changing  
• The criterion to opt in for composition under VAT o r Central Excise 
being different in comparison to GST  
• Non-availability of the Return data based on PAN in  respect of 
migrated taxpayers in the system  
GSTN informed that the validations were hence kept in abeyance and have 
been implemented during 2018-19. 
The above reply is not tenable due to multiple reas ons. A field like turnover 
limit not being made configurable in the first plac e indicated faulty design of 
the system. Similarly PAN based turnover data not b eing used for validating 
composition scheme indicates flaws in the way appli cation was mapped with 
the applicable provisions initially. The different criteria for GST and erstwhile 
taxes for composition cited are not relevant since the issue is not of having 
adequate validation in GST and hence composition cr iteria of GST is only 
relevant. Since Normal and Composition taxpayers ha ve different tax 
liabilities, not addressing this missing validation  on priority even after being 
pointed out by audit is also a matter of concern si nce the issue has revenue 
implication. 
 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
49 
In view of the criticality of turnover limit in det ermining 
eligibility for composition scheme, GSTN should hav e, on 
their own, ensured that these basic validations wer e 
included in the application.   Besides ensuring 
implementation of the crucial functionality of maki ng 
turnover limit configurable, Ministry may also cons ider 
reviewing the system design across modules to see i f any 
other fields, similar to the ‘aggregate turnover’ r eferred to 
here, have to be made configurable to accommodate 
possible changes over a period of time. 
3.7.2 Ineligible taxpayers allowed registration und er CLS 
(a) As per Section 10(2) of CGST Act, the taxpayers eng aged in following 
activities were not eligible to opt for CLS : - 
• inter-State outward supplies  
• supply of goods through an Electronic Commerce Oper ator 
(ECOM) who were required to collect tax at source u nder Section 
52 of the CGST Act.  
• Supplies to or by SEZ units / developers (treated 17 as inter-State 
supply).  
A data analysis of 37,225 Composition taxpayers rev ealed that the data 
contained 679 taxpayers belonging to the above cate gories (Inter-state 
suppliers, ECOM, SEZ developers / units). GST IT Sy stem, thus, failed to 
validate and debar these ineligible taxpayers from availing CLS. 
GSTN had replied (January 2019) that the validation s for Inter-state suppliers, 
ECOM, SEZ developers and SEZ units from opting-in f or composition scheme 
was fixed and deployed to production on 29 June 201 8 and that the data fix 
for the existing cases was completed on 29 November  2018.  GSTN had also 
replied that based on the recommendation of the jurisdictional officer, the SEZ 
flags from the GSTIN of normal taxpayers, who had s elected SEZ by mistake 
while migrating, were removed in all cases by 30 August 2018.  
However, audit verification (January 2019) revealed 12 inter -state taxpayers 
registered under CLS, indicating deficiency in the corrective action taken.  
GSTN had replied that correction for these 12 cases  was estimated to be 
completed by 15 February 2019.  
                                                           
17  As per Section 7(5) of IGST Act, 2017. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
50 
GSTN further replied (June 2019 through DoR) that t he necessary validations 
have been put in place for E-com operators, interst ate suppliers and SEZ units 
/ Developers and they are not allowed by the system  to opt in for 
composition. However, the reply remains to be verified by Audit. 
(b) The Government vide notification dated 27 June 2017  notified that 
the registered person should not be eligible to opt  for CLS if such 
person was a manufacturer of the following goods : - 
• Ice-cream and other edible ice, whether or not cont aining cocoa 
(Tariff Heading 21050000); 
• Pan Masala (Tariff Heading 21069020); and 
• Tobacco and manufactured tobacco substitutes (Chapter 24). 
GST IT system, however, did not restrict the manufacturers of the above goods 
identified through HSN codes from registering as a Composition taxpayer.  
GSTN had replied (January 2019) that validation on this account would be 
implemented by July 2019 and that the approving aut horities of the Centre 
and the States were supposed to check such discrepancies at  the time of 
approving the registration application and get such  errors rectified. GSTN has 
further replied (June 2019 through DoR) that the ne cessary data captured at 
the time of registration was indicative and in the registration module, the 
system was capturing only the top five commodities. 
GSTN’s reply is untenable from system design perspe ctive and registration 
module capturing only top five commodities cannot be quoted as a reason for 
not implementing validation for another requirement  prescribed.  Since the 
issue is of violation of applicable provisions, thi s could have been addressed 
with simple validation checks in the application at the time of registration. 
Further, the reply regarding check of such discrepancies by tax officers should 
also be seen in light of audit observations made du ring field audit regarding 
non-verification of ineligible registrants under CLS by field formations of CBIC, 
as reported in paragraph 4.8 of Chapter IV of this report. 
Thus GSTN failed in ensuring that the basic validat ions, as 
mandated by law and other applicable provisions, we re 
properly built in to the system and these were incl uded only 
after being pointed out by CAG audit. GSTN should 
strengthen their root cause analysis and testing pr ocess to 
ensure that such critical deficiencies in applicati on are 
detected and rectified before rollout to public.   
 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
51 
3.8 Issues related to other categories of taxpayers  
3.8.1 Other Notified Persons (ONPs) for allotment o f Unique Identification 
Number (UIN) 
GST Acts provided for allotment of Unique Identific ation Number (UIN) to UN 
bodies and Embassies to enable them to claim refund  of GST paid on 
purchases made by them.  The Act also provided that  the Other Notified 
Persons (ONPs), as notified by various Central and State authorities, were 
eligible to take registration under ONPs category f or allotment of UIN. 
Organisations like ISRO have been notified under this category.  The following 
discrepancies were noticed in respect registrations of ONPs. 
(a) PAN made optional for registration of ONPs 
PAN of the authorised signatory was mandatory18 for getting UIN under ONPs 
category.  Audit noticed that GST IT system did not  list this requirement as a 
compulsory field and that in 273 cases 19 out of total 449 registrations for 
ONPs, PAN was not mentioned. 
GSTN stated (June 2019 through DoR) that this defect has been fixed in March 
2019. This remains to be verified by Audit. 
(b) Registration for ONPs – Non-availability of facilit y for validating 
notification number or for obtaining/uploading the required 
documents  
Our audit testing of registration data for UIN unde r ONPs revealed that the 
GST IT system accepted junk values (like 0118000128 39TRN, GST REG-13, 
U74999DL2018PTC332229, IN-DL00404261406469Q) filled  by the applicants 
in the column of ‘Notification Number,’ which was a  mandatory field as per 
SRS. Further, applicants were allowed to choose eit her State or Central 
jurisdiction, when the jurisdiction should have bee n based on notification 
issuing authority. 
GSTN stated (June 2019 through DoR) that the uploading of notification by UIN 
along with the application was expected to be available by 30 September 2019. 
For a category of Registration, which is permitted only 
based on specific notification(s), not having a pro vision in 
place to upload the notification at the time of reg istration is 
a basic deficiency in the system. 
                                                           
18  As per the application form (Part-A) REG-13 under  Rule 17 of CGST Rules 2017. 
19  All four shards. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
52 
3.8.2 Deficiencies in Online Information Database Acc ess and Retrieval 
Services (OIDAR) 
As per Section 2(17) of IGST Act, 2017,  OIDAR referred to services whose 
delivery was mediated by information technology ove r the internet or an 
electronic network and the nature of which rendered  their supply essentially 
automated involving minimal human intervention. The se included services 
such as advertising on internet, cloud services, di gital storage, online gaming.  
The following deficiencies were noted with regard t o registration of OIDAR 
taxpayers : - 
(i) The module had no facility for uploading vital docu ments like scanned 
copies of passport with visa details, certificate of incorpor ation of the 
company, license issued by the country of origin an d clearance 
certificate issued by the GoI, as envisaged in SRS. 
(ii) System accepted junk values (such as Bxspa1851r, 6,  NA, na) against 
Tax Identification Number (TIN), which was a mandat ory field to be 
filled while applying for registration.  There was no provision for 
uploading the documents pertaining to TIN for verif ication by the tax 
officials. 
(iii) PAN and address of authorised representatives of OI DAR applicants, 
mandatory for filing the application of registratio n for OIDAR, were 
not made mandatory in the GST IT system. 
While initially GSTN replied (January 2019)  that f acility for uploading vital 
documents was a product backlog item and was expect ed to be implemented 
by March 2019, this date was further extended to Se ptember 2019 vide their 
reply sent (June 2019) through DoR. 
Regarding validation of TIN, GSTN had stated (Janua ry 2019) that single 
authentic data source of TIN at international level  was not available as it 
varied from one country to the other.  GSTN had als o stated that the 
functionality to upload document pertaining to TIN/ or identity certificate and 
credentials of authorised representative would be provided by June 2019. 
Audit holds that in view of non-availability of any  authentic data source of 
TIN, it is even more important to have the facility  to upload vital documents 
needed for registering under OIDAR category.  GSTN seeking so much time to 
build-in this small but critical functionality, and  DoR endorsing the same, is 
unacceptable. 
3.8.3 Deficiencies in Registration process of Tax Ded uctor at Source (TDS) 
Section 51 of CGST Act 2017 stipulated that the Gov ernment might mandate 
the following category of authorities/persons to de duct tax at the rate of one 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
53 
per cent from the payment made or credited to the s upplier of taxable goods 
or services or both, where the total value of such supply, under a contract, 
exceeded two lakh and fifty thousand rupees: 
(i) Department or establishment of the Central Governme nt or State 
Government; or 
(ii) Local authority; or 
(iii) Governmental agencies; or 
(iv) Such persons or category of persons as may be notif ied by the 
Government on the recommendations of the Council,  
The Category (iv) was to be enabled only on issue o f notification from the 
Government on the recommendations of the GST Counci l. At the time of 
verification of this feature by audit (June 2018), the Government had not 
issued any notification for adding any new category  of Tax Deductor.  But 
there were 700 applicants who had registered themselves under the category 
(iv) through the portal.  
GSTN confirmed (January and June 2019) that the cat egory was built in for 
future receipt of notifications and considering the  behaviour of applicants, 
category (iv) was masked so that it might not be se lected by the  
applicant by mistake. They had also stated (January  2019) that all the TDS 
registrants, who selected this option, were being a dvised by email to amend 
the category as per law through the amendment proce ss and that another 
round of similar exercise would be performed after removing the drop down 
menu. 
The masking of category (iv) did not hold good now in view of notification 
dated 13 September 2018, which notified specified a utonomous bodies 20, 
societies and Public Sector Undertakings under this  category.  Audit advised 
(March 2019) that GSTN should re-consider the corrective action proposed as 
the TDS provisions were made effective from 1 Octob er 2018, including for 
the categories notified under sl. no. (iv) of section 51. 
Even though the Government notified certain organis ations under the fourth 
category of TDS with effect from 1 October 2018, GS TN replied in January 
2019 that they would mask this category.  This rais ed doubts about the way 
up-to-date GST provisions were given effect in the IT system and the 
apparent lack of keeping track of latest developmen ts and the failure of DoR 
/ CBIC in ensuring that GSTN is kept updated. 
                                                           
20  An authority or a board or any other body, - (i) set up by an Act of Parliament or a State 
Legislature; or (ii) established by any Government,  with fifty-one per cent, or more 
participation by way of equity or control, to carry out any function 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
54 
3.9 Issues affecting user friendliness of the regis tration module 
3.9.1 Search gave output beyond the criteria period  at GST portal 
During testing of the search functionality on GST p ortal, we noticed that a 
search result for taxpayer who opted out from CLS f or West Bengal and Bihar 
for the year 2018-19 included dates outside the ran ge specified in search 
criteria, indicating incorrect logic / criteria inc orporated in the search 
condition. 
GSTN agreed that it was a defect and stated that it  had been fixed in 
October 2018.  
However, during verification (January 2019), we not iced deficiencies in the 
search functionality even after the fix. 
3.9.2 No option for different Languages on GST port al 
Contrary to the SRS, there was no language option f or taxpayers other than 
English in the GST portal.  
GSTN replied (January 2019) that on implementation of all the critical 
functionalities, development and implementation of the multi-lingual support 
would be taken up on priority and might be completed by October 2020.  
Delay in implementation of Multi-Lingual Support me ant increase in 
compliance cost to the taxpayers who are not used to English language. 
3.9.3 Registration for multiple business verticals 
Taxpayers requiring separate registration for any o f its business verticals 
under the same PAN should submit a separate applica tion in FORM GST REG-
01 in respect of each such vertical.  Further, SRS for registration stated that 
where a GSTIN or ARN already existed against the PAN, many fields would get 
auto-populated and would be non-editable.  
GSTN did not implement this feature.  Implementing this feature along with 
validations would have helped in the system flaggin g some violations of law 
at the time of registration, noticed during audit, such as (i) same taxpayers 
being registered under both composition levy and no rmal taxpayer category 
in contravention of the law and (ii) legal names an d constitution of business 
being different for same PAN holder in a number of cases.  
GSTN had replied (January 2019) that auto-populatio n of composition levy 
had since been implemented. Auto-population of rema ining fields i.e. Legal 
Name, Constitution of Business, Name of the Proprie tor, PAN of the 
Business/entity, Promotors/Partners’ details, GSTIN  in existing Registrations 
as in same PAN, which was part of SRS, was under de velopment and was 
expected to be implemented by June 2019. GSTN furth er stated (June 2019) 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
55 
through DoR that the same was under development and  expected to be 
implemented by September 2019. 
Details such as PAN number were the same for multip le registrations.  Non-
implementation of such a basic functionality result ed in losing basic 
advantage of having an IT system.   
3.9.4 Jurisdiction Mapping with PIN Code not enable d 
During the process of filling up Part-B of registra tion, while selecting a State’s 
circle/ward, users were allowed to select any Centr al jurisdiction from all 
over India.  Ideally the State and Central jurisdic tions must have been 
mapped to each other and there should have been onl y one Central 
jurisdiction for a specific State GST jurisdiction. 
Data analysis also showed that there were large num bers of incorrect 
jurisdictions. Out of about 14 lakh taxpayers regis tered in the State of UP, a 
total 13,432 were either mapped with central jurisd ictions outside UP or 
central jurisdiction was left blank. Considering th at most of registration 
approval happened through deemed approval mode, there could be far more 
taxpayers across the Country, registered with incorrect jurisdiction.  Absence of 
such a basic feature of jurisdictional mapping of t he place of business might 
adversely impact tax administration, like incorrect reporting, lack of monitoring 
by the jurisdictional tax officer and pendency of grievance redressal.  
GSTN had intimated (January 2019) that they had sin ce received PIN Code 
based directory from all the States and from CBIC.  GSTN also replied that on 
implementation of PIN Code based jurisdictional dir ectory, the problem of 
selecting incorrect jurisdiction would be automatic ally minimised. GSTN 
initially (January 2019) stated that the functional ity was likely to be released 
by April 2019, which was extended to September 2019  vide their reply (June 
2019) sent through DoR.  
Issues of incorrect mapping of taxpayers were noticed by us during field audit 
also, as brought out in paragraph 4.9.2 of chapter IV. 
3.10 Findings accepted and corrective action taken or initiated 
3.10.1 Technical glitches leading to delay in issuance of ARN and GSTIN, were 
identified by GSTN based on audit objection, were p artly rectified by GSTN in 
January 2019.  . 
3.10.2 Issues regarding validation of key fields in Regist ration (Legal Name, 
Type of Business and CIN) with CBDT and MCA Databas es pointed out by 
Audit were identified by GSTN and it was stated (January 2019) that the same 
were expected to be rectified by March 2019.   GSTN further stated  (June 
2019) in their reply forwarded by DoR that  

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
56 
• Validation of Legal Name was expected to be closed by April 2019.  
• For validation of Type of Business, the communicati on for the same 
has been sent by GSTN to the taxpayers and the list will be shared with 
tax authority for getting the correction done on priority.  
• CIN validation, was expected to be implemented by September 2019. 
3.10.3  It was made mandatory on GST portal for a taxpayer  to provide a 
unique combination of PAN, Mobile and e-mail for ea ch business vertical to 
be registered, though not mandated by Law. This sho ws the failure in 
mapping the applicable provisions correctly into th e system, causing 
inconvenience to taxpayers.  
GSTN had replied that a Change Request in this rega rd would be completed 
by April 2019. GSTN further stated (June 2019) in their reply sent  through DoR 
that this was under implementation and was expected  to be in production 
environment by 30 September 2019.  
3.10.4  Data analysis revealed that under Tax Collected at  Source (TCS) 
category, there were blanks or NP against ‘Registra tion Name’, which was a 
mandatory field and another field ‘jurisdictional a pproving authority’, 
pointing towards absence of validations.  GSTN, agreeing with the audit 
observation, stated that the data fix was expected to be completed by 31 
January 2019. Further progress was awaited (June 2019). 
3.10.5  There was no provision for raising an alert to the  tax officer in case a 
Non Resident Taxable Person (NRTP)/Casual taxpayer had not filed for 
registration five days prior to date of commencemen t of business, as 
required under Section 25 of CGST Act read with Rul e 13(i) of CGST Rules. 
GSTN implemented this feature with effect from 2 August 2018. 
3.10.6  Based on audit observation, GSTN merged into one, the two separate 
portals21 that existed for complaint / grievance redressal, without any specific 
purpose for such separate portals. 
3.11 Conclusion on Registration Module 
Registration being the first step in tax administra tion and given the IT 
intensive system that GST was designed to be, Minis try should have ensured 
that a fool-proof Registration module was in place.  The IT audit of 
Registration module revealed that the System did no t provide for basic 
validations prescribed in the Act and Rules for Com position levy and that 
mandatory fields prescribed for categories like OID AR and ONPs were not 
made compulsory in the System.  GSTN cited constraints to deliver critical 
                                                           
21  (i)  https://services.gst.gov.in/services/grievan ce and (ii) https://selfservice.gstsystem.in. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
57 
applications on priority or the functionality being  a backlog item as reasons 
for non-implementation of certain validations or features. 
We also found that critical fields like turnover were not made configu rable 
while designing the system  and Ministry should consider reviewing the 
design of all similar fields in this background.  E ven though the Government 
notified certain organisations under the fourth cat egory of TDS with effect 
from 1 October 2018, GSTN replied in January 2019, that they would mask 
this category, raises doubts about the way up-to-da te GST provisions were 
given effect in the IT system.   
CBIC’s reply to the IT audit findings was that the issues raised pertained to 
GSTN and a reply should be sought from DoR.  The fac t remained that CBIC, 
as a stakeholder of GST IT system, has a key role t o play in proper design 
and development of system by GSTN as well as in str engthening the system 
by ensuring removal of deficiencies pointed out by audit. CBIC, being a part 
of DoR, asking audit to seek a reply from DoR also points towards lack of co-
ordination between DoR and CBIC with reference to functioning of GSTN. 
Audit found (May to October 2018) that certain basi c validations were absent 
in the GST Registration module, most of which has b een in use since the 
beginning of GST.  The timelines initially indicated by GSTN in January 20 19 
to fix these validations were extended further  in their reply sent through 
DoR in June 2019. This shows that fixing these deficiencies was neither 
prioritised by GSTN nor insisted by DoR , which has merely forwarded the 
reply of GSTN containing extension of timelines for fixing these deficiencies. 
Part B : Payment Module 
3.12 Introduction 
The process of payment of GST by the taxpayer is in itiated with the taxpayer 
generating an e-Challan on the GST portal and being  assigned a Common 
Portal Identification Number (CPIN).  The taxpayer can then pay the taxes in 
any one of the available modes of payment (viz. Ove r-the-counter payment, 
e-payment, NEFT/RTGS).  If the payment is successfu l, the Challan 
Identification Number (CIN) is received from the ba nk.  GST Portal validates 
the data received from bank with the GST IT system data i.e. GSTIN, CPIN and 
Total Challan Amount. If the validations are succes sful, GST Portal sets the 
CPIN status as “PAID” and updates the Electronic Ca sh Ledger (ECL) of the 
taxpayer. If a transaction cycle is not completed b ecause of some technical 
failure, the same is marked as “FAILED” transaction . The payment process for 
e-payments is schematically represented as below : - 
 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
58 
Chart No.11 : Payment process for e-payments 
 
The GST portal receives the e-scroll from RBI on th e next day (T+1) 22. The 
portal carries out reconciliation between the e-scr olls received from RBI and 
the challan details available on the GST portal and  reports the reconciliation 
results to the Accounting Authorities in Reconciled  and Non-reconciled 
(Recon and Non-Recon) files, depending upon the status of the transactions. 
The reconciliation protocol of GST was devised to a chieve the following 
objectives : - 
• timely credit of deposits in the ECL of taxpayer, 
• timely realisation of funds by the Government, 
• reducing the discrepancies / errors, 
• zero discrepancy between GST IT system data and e-s croll (received 
from RBI), and  
• minimising the volume of errors leading to Memorand um of Error 
process. 
Audit reviewed the payment and reconciliation proce ss and noticed the 
following deficiencies : -  
3.13 Shortcomings in updating ECL 
3.13.1 Delay in updating of ECL 
As per the Business Process Report on payments, ban ks were required to 
communicate the details of payments with CIN to GST  IT system in real time 
                                                           
22  T+1 stands for Transaction day plus one day, whic h is the next day after the date of 
transaction. 


Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
59 
so that the cash ledger of the taxpayer could be up dated on a real time basis.  
However, analysis of payment data showed that in 80 ,816 cases, the 
payment date and the date on which the transaction was credited to the ECL 
of taxpayer were different.  There were delays of m ore than three days in 
10,088 cases. Of these, the delays were to the exte nt of five days in 3,345 
cases and of ten days in 1,228 cases.  
GSTN had informed (January 2019) that in majority o f cases, the ECL got 
credited either on real time basis or via On-Demand -Calls made automatically 
to the banks in case taxpayers closed the browser before the payment process 
was completed.  
However, despite all these arrangements, a few paym ents were still not 
getting updated in ECL because of various reasons. The breakup of 10,088 
transactions pointed out by audit where there had b een delay of more than 
three days, as explained by GSTN, had been given below : -   
(i) 2,658 transactions related to the period prior to t he date of roll 
out of the functionality to update ECL on basis of RBI e-scroll i.e. 
24 August 2017. For all these transactions, ECL upd ates based on 
RBI e-scroll were done on 25 August 2017. 
(ii) In 465 cases, delays were due to receiving transact ion details late 
from RBI. 
(iii) In 5,620 cases, delays were due to receiving transa ction details 
late from the banks.  
(iv) There were issues with RBI e-scroll processing, amo unt mismatch 
and signature verification which caused delay in up dating ECL for 
687 cases. This was on account of system integratio n issues with 
RBI which had been resolved thereafter. 
As clear from above, delays in updating ECL were du e to systemic issues on 
the part of all key players including GSTN, authori sed banks and RBI. This has 
to be read together with absence of a mechanism of monitoring performance 
of authorised banks in meeting service requirements  as mentioned in 
subsequent paragraph 3.14. Taxpayers not being able  to discharge tax 
liabilities due to non-updation of their ECL, in sp ite of money being already 
deducted from their bank accounts, defeated the obj ective of providing 
timely credits to the taxpayer. It could lead to un necessary demands being 
made on a taxpayer to pay the taxes and hence the n eed to sort and settle 
the payment system fully.  
3.13.2  ECL getting updated without confirmation fr om banks 
As prescribed in the Business Process for Payment, it was included in SRS that 
the GST portal had to update the ECL of the taxpaye r after confirming the 
payment from the authorised banks.  However, there were transactions where 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
60 
CIN was reported by the authorised banks to the RBI but not to the GST Portal.  
Audit noticed that in such cases, ECL was getting c redited based on e-scroll 
data from RBI without confirming the payment from authorised bank.  
GSTN informed (January 2019) that the details were there in e-scroll of RBI 
which meant that the tax amount had been deducted f rom the account of the 
taxpayer by the bank and the same had been received  by the Government 
through RBI. In order to avoid hardship to the taxp ayer and facilitate them to 
pay their taxes, the ECL of the taxpayer was update d based on the e-scroll 
received from RBI. 
GSTN also informed that this issue was communicated  to DoR and discussed 
in meeting of GSTN representatives with DoR and acc ounting authorities on 
13 October 2017. In the meeting it was not categori cally stated to stop 
updating of ECL on the basis of RBI e-scroll and it  was decided that the issue 
would be referred by DoR to the GST Policy wing for  seeking 
clarifications/directions. GSTN informed that they had not been informed of 
any further decision in this regard.  GSTN also inf ormed that with subsequent 
development of a utility to make an on-demand-call to the respective banks 
to fetch the signed CIN record, instances of such t ransactions reduced 
substantially. 
Thus, DoR had not taken a decision on the matter ev en though this issue had 
been flagged by GSTN in October 2017. No reply has been received from DoR 
(June 2019) to this issue.  Rather than continuing such an ad-hoc 
arrangement, DoR has to set the process right by ta king a decision to ensure 
proper accounting and reconciliation. 
3.14 Non-implementation of service requirements of banks 
The Joint Committee for Business Process on GST Payment recommended the 
following minimum service requirements for the banks, which had not y et 
been implemented : - 
• There should be an assurance that all transactions credited to 
respective CGST, IGST, Additional Tax and SGST Acco unts were being 
reported to RBI and no balances were left in these accounts.  
• New parameters of bank performance including timely  remittance 
and reporting of error-free data to all the stakeho lders were to be 
developed. 
• A system of incentives / penalties (on banks) was t o be administered 
by the respective Accounting Authority if defaults arose in remission 
of CGST/SGST/IGST/Additional Tax in accordance with  a transparent 
evaluation mechanism of the quality of data of coll ection reported by 
banks for accounting and reconciliation purposes. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
61 
• Over a long term, the Accounting Authority should d evelop a service 
quality rating for the participating banks based on  identified 
transparent and quantifiable parameters. 
• There should be an upfront (before being authorised ) as well as 
periodic audit of the IT system of banks and the centralised system for 
handling GST receipts. The system audit should cove r operational, 
technical and security aspects as per terms of refe rence and 
periodicity set by GSTN in consultation with Accounting Authorities.  
In the absence of periodic audit of IT systems of t he banks and parameters 
for evaluation and penalties, deficiencies in perfo rmance like delayed 
remittances/reporting of the Government receipts ha d been continuing on 
the part of authorised banks as explained in paragraph 3.13. 
GSTN had informed (January 2019) that they took up this matter with the 
Principal Chief Controller of Accounts (Pr. CCA), w ho, in turn, initiated 
(December 2018) discussions to finalise the service /audit and other issues 
related to the banks. GSTN further stated in their reply sent through DoR 
(June 2019) that the payment success ratio for inte rnet banking payment, 
presented by GSTN in a meeting held in December 201 8, has been circulated 
to all the banks individually as per instructions of PCCA. 
The shortcomings mentioned above pointed towards la ck of coordination 
between various agencies and inadequate monitoring on the part of Ministry 
of Finance (MoF).  MoF has to take up this issue on priority. 
3.15 Non–reconciliation with accounting authorities 
Payment data with the PCCA showed that receipt of 2 44 CINs pertaining to 
2017-18 for an amount of ` 3.58 crore and 136 CINs pertaining to April-June 
2018 amounting to ` 14.53 lakh were pending with GSTN and the same wer e 
booked under suspense head.   
GSTN had reported (January and June 2019) updating of ECL in 188 cases out 
of 244 CINs for 2017-18 and in 64 cases out of 136 CINs pertaining to April-
June 2018.  For non-updating of ECL in other cases,  various reasons were 
provided like Challan cancelled by user, expiry of CPIN, Invalid date, Invalid 
GSTIN and Unsigned CINs.  
Audit observed that some of these issues (like inva lid GSTIN, expiry of CPIN) 
were due to deficiency in GST IT system and others due to deficiency in the IT 
system of the bank and its interface with GST IT sy stem. It is difficult to 
comprehend how such errors can occur in a system wi th automated interface 
between the IT applications of the banks and the GS T portal. In view of the 
criticality of the function, it is expected that ad equate testing would have 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
62 
taken place at the design stage itself. Being direc tly related to tax payments, 
these issues need to be rectified on a priority basis. 
3.16 Non-acceptance of payment where payment detail s were 
received after expiry of Challan 
SRS for Payment Module envisaged a scenario where a payment was initiated 
but no response was received from the bank and subs equently bank sent CIN 
details after the challan had expired (i.e. for the  expired CPIN).  In such a 
scenario, it was prescribed that the GST IT system should accept this payment 
only if payment date was within the validity period  of challan i.e. within 15 
days from the date of challan generation. 
Audit noticed that there were seven cases of e-paym ents and OTC (over the 
counter payments) where the payment was initiated w ithin 15 days (when 
CPIN was active) but the payment was completed (CIN  generated) after 15 
days i.e. payment date was after the expiry date.  However, GST IT system did 
not recognise these transactions as successful paym ents. Non-credit of 
payment in ECL even after successful payment would cause inconvenience 
and hardships to taxpayers. GSTN intimated (January 2019) that a Change 
Request for acceptance of CIN generated after expir y of CPIN but payment 
initiated before expiry of CPIN through Net Banking  was implemented on 4 
October 2018. 
3.17 System level controls found absent in reconcil iation files 
Controls should be in place to ensure accuracy, com pleteness and 
consistency of data elements and relationships.  Wh ile control total helps to 
verify integrity of data extracted based on its con tents, checksums help to 
verify the integrity of the files containing the da ta extract. The following files 
were being shared with the Accounting Authorities f or reconciliation 
purposes : -  
• CIN and CPIN data of transactions. 
• All End of Day (EOD) CINs and CPINs created from pr evious day 8.00 
PM to that day 8.00 PM (24 hrs)  
• RECON (reconciled) and NON RECON files based on e-s crolls received 
from RBI. 
The Control Total files shared with the Accounting Authorities did not create 
‘Record Level Total’, ‘Major and Minor Head Totals’  and ‘Checksums’. There 
was a risk that in the absence of these system leve l controls, the 
completeness and accuracy of transmission of files might not be adequately 
validated.  

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
63 
GSTN had informed (January and June 2019) that the payment module was 
designed as per the approved Business Process Docum ent and the BARM 
(Bank Authorization Reference Model), which did not  prescribe the control 
totals. On approval of PCCA, the control totals, as  suggested by the audit, 
were expected to be implemented by September 2019. 
Thus, basic application controls, required to ensur e integrity 
of data transfer, were not considered while designi ng the 
system. 
3.18 Payment through debit/credit cards not provide d in the GST IT 
system 
The modes of payments specified in the GST Act incl uded payments by Debit 
and Credit Cards.  The Joint Committee on Business Processes also stated 
that this mode of payment would facilitate ease of doing business.  This 
feature was also included in the SRS. GST portal, h owever, had not yet 
provided for GST payments by Debit and Credit Cards .  Delay in 
implementation meant denial of this payment option to the taxpayers.  
GSTN stated (July 2018) that a clarification on thi s mode of payment was 
awaited from DoR since July 2017 on financial impli cation of the following 
issues: (i) Payment of Merchant Discount, which ran ged between 0.5 per cent 
to 2 per cent of the amount being paid and (ii) Han dling of a payment 
disputed by the payer. 
Ministry had not taken any decision in this regard even after about two years 
of roll out of GST. 
3.19 Display of messages was not in sync with the a ctual status of 
the transaction 
As per SRS, in case of an e-payment, if no response  (neither success or 
failure), was received from the bank after three ro unds of pinging, then 
transaction status had to be kept as ‘Initiated’ un til a response was received 
from bank / e-Scroll or Challan expired.  In such a  scenario, taxpayer had to 
be displayed the message ‘No response from the Bank ’.  However, audit 
noticed that in case of no response from bank, syst em showed the status as 
‘Failed’ instead of ‘No response from the Bank’. If  appropriate message was 
not displayed, there was a risk that the taxpayer m ight initiate the payment 
by generating another challan. 
Similarly, on expiry of 15 days from the date of CP IN, the status of challan 
was to be changed to ‘Expired’.  However, data anal ysis of sampled database 
(Shard-1) revealed that status of 19,842 challans w as shown as ‘Initiated’ 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
64 
even after the expiry of the challan when ideally t he challan status should 
have been shown as ‘Expired.’  
GSTN had intimated (January 2019) that the change r equirement for taking 
care of this deficiency was likely to be implemente d by April 2019. GSTN 
further informed (June 2019 through DoR) that this was under development 
and expected to be released in June 2019. 
3.20 Conclusion on Payment Module 
The Payment Module had been up and running from the  day of roll out of 
GST (i.e. 1 July 2017) and had been in use for almo st one year by the time IT 
audit started.  Still, there were delays in updatin g of ECL, in spite of money 
being already deducted from the bank accounts, whic h could lead to 
unnecessary demands being made on a taxpayer to res olve the issues.  It was 
also noticed that there was lack of assurance on mi nimum service 
requirements prescribed for banks, issues with reco nciliation of GST receipts 
with PCCA and absence of system level controls like  control totals.  Issues 
such as payment initiated before expiry of CPIN but  CIN generated after 
expiry of CPIN and incorrect display of messages to  taxpayers were not dealt 
with until pointed out by audit.  Facility of payme nt through Debit / Credit 
cards could not be made available as Ministry had n ot decided on how to 
deal with the financial implications. 
Part C : IGST Settlement reports 
3.21 The Provisions for IGST Settlement  
Section 18 of the IGST Act specified that on utilis ation of Input Tax Credit 
(ITC) of IGST for payment of CGST or STGST/UTGST, t he Central Government 
should transfer the ITC amount from IGST account to  CGST or SGST / UTGST 
account in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed. Further, 
Section 17 of the IGST Act provided that where ITC of IGST was rendered 
ineligible for further utilisation for any reason or lapse (breaking of ITC chain), 
the same should be apportioned between the Union and the States. 
Central Government notified GST Settlement of Fund Rules, 2017 (GSTSF 
Rule) to apportion the IGST amount between the Unio n and the States.  As 
per these rules, GSTN was to prepare the following 23 settlement reports and 
transmit them to the tax authorities. 
Form Form details 
01.01 Monthly report containing State-wise details which is prepared from 
various other reports from 01.02 to 01.12  
01.02 IGST liability adjusted against ITC of SGST/ UTGST (including cross 
utilization by ISD) 
01.03 SGST/UTGST liability adjusted against IGST ITC. 
01.04 SGST/ UTGST portion of IGST collected on B2C supplies including ISD 
distribution to unregistered unit, exports and supplies to SEZ. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
65 
Form Form details 
01.05 SGST/UTGST portion of IGST for inter-State/UT supplies made to 
Composition taxable person/ Non-resident taxable person/UIN 
holders. 
01.06 SGST/ UTGST portion of IGST collected on B to B supplies where ITC 
is declared as ineligible, including lapsed ITC due to opting 
composition scheme. 
01.07 SGST/UTGST portion of IGST collected on B to B supplies where ITC 
remains unutilised till specified period. 
01.08 SGST/ UTGST portion of IGST collected on supplies imported by 
unregistered persons. 
01.09 SGST/UTGST portion of IGST for supplies imported by Composition 
taxable persons/UIN holders. 
01.10 SGST/UTGST portion of IGST collected on goods/services imported 
by registered person (other than composition) where ITC is declared 
as ineligible. 
01.11 SGST/UTGST portion of IGST collected on goods imported by 
registered person where ITC remains unutilised till specified period. 
01.12 SGST/ UTGST portion of interest related to returns paid on IGST. 
02.01 Monthly reports containing State-wise details conta ining list of 
registered persons who have adjusted liability of Central Tax from the 
ITC of Integrated Tax; this contains summary reports from table 2.02. 
02.02 Monthly reports containing State-wise details conta ining list of 
registered persons who have adjusted liability of Central Tax from the 
ITC of Integrated Tax, as provided under section 18 of the IGST Act. 
03.01 Monthly State-wise consolidated statement showing a  summary of 
amount recovered as Integrated Tax, and the interes t and penalty 
thereon, or compounding amount, or deposited for fi ling appeal; 
This contains reports from 3.02. 
03.02 List of registered persons in a State or UT from wh om recovery of 
Integrated Tax has been made with interest and pena lty thereon, or 
compounding amount against demand, or amount deposi ted for 
filing appeal of the IGST Act as provided for in se ctions 79, 107, 112 
and 138 of the CGST Act and the SGST Act of the con cerned State 
and Section 21 of the UTGST Act. 
04.01 Monthly State-wise consolidated statement showing a  summary of 
the apportionment of Integrated Tax to the State (S tate Tax) or the 
Centre (Union Territory Tax), and to the Centre (Ce ntral Tax), in a 
particular month relating to Integrated Tax collect ed in respect of 
which POS could not be determined or the taxable pe rson making 
such supplies is not identifiable; reports from table 4.02 and 4.03 
04.02 List of registered persons from whom Integrated Tax  has been 
collected in respect of which POS made by taxable p erson could not 
be determined, and is to be apportioned as provided  under first 
proviso of sub-section (2) of section 17 of the IGST Act 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
66 
Form Form details 
04.03 Details of Integrated Tax collected in respect of w hich the taxable 
person making such supplies is not identifiable, an d is to be 
apportioned as provided under second proviso of sub -section (2) of 
section 17 of the IGST Act and this shall be an ann ual report to be 
submitted in October each year. 
05.01 Monthly State-wise consolidated statement sho wing a summary 
wherein Integrated Tax paid by taxpayer has already  been 
apportioned but subsequently refunded to the person. 
06.01 Report of settlement arising between the Centre (Ce ntral Tax) and 
the State (State Tax) or the Centre (Union Territor y Tax) on account 
of recovery of any tax, interest, penalty, fees or any other amount 
from refund. 
07.01 Consolidated Settlement Register for each Sta te and Union Territory 
and for the Centre. 
07.02 This register contained consolidated details of tra nsfer of funds to 
be made from Central Tax account to Integrated Tax account and 
vice versa based on consolidated summary of settlem ent details 
contained in Report Form GST Settlement Ledgers (ST L) 01.01, 
02.01, 04.01, 05.01 and 06.01. 
The SRS for Returns Module - Settlement Reports (ve rsion 6.00) prepared by 
GSTN covered the functionality for creation and dis play of the Settlement 
Reports. These reports showed the settlement/apport ionment of amounts 
(payable/receivable) between the Union and the Stat es/UTs originating due 
to cross-utilisation of credit between SGST/UTGST, CGST and IGST and 
breaking of ITC chain. The SRS covered all the rele vant returns (GSTR-2, 3, 4, 
5, 6, 9, 10, 11) and other modules such as assessme nt, appeal, refund for 
generating the desired settlement reports. 
Audit analysed the settlement reports of Delhi Stat e for the month of May 
2018 to identify issues relating to IGST settlement.  The issues identified were 
further cross checked with the IGST settlement data  on all India basis. Audit 
found the following inadequacies in IGST settlement reports. 
3.22 Incomplete IGST Settlement 
It was noticed that IGST settlement for many transa ctions was not happening 
as discussed in the following paras.  This was part ly responsible for 
accumulation of huge unsettled balance under IGST, as commented upon in 
paragraph 2.1.3 of Chapter II of this report. 
3.22.1 Reports not being prepared 
As of June 2018, out of total 23 STLs, GSTN include d only 11 STLs 23 in the 
reports transmitted to the tax authorities. Many of  the remaining reports 
                                                           
23   GST STL 01.01, 01.02, 01.03, 01.04, 01.05, 01.06, 01.09, 01.12, 05.03, 05.07 and 07.01. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
67 
could not be generated due to reasons like non-impl ementation of 
corresponding GST modules relating to imports and a ppeals (like GST STL 
01.08, 01.09, 03.01) and limitation of the GSTR-3B return in capturing all the 
information required for settlement (like GST STL 04.03).  
Some of the reports (01.07, 01.10 and 01.11) were s till not being generated 
(May 2019) since they were based on erstwhile GSTR- 2 and GSTR-3 returns.  
GSTN informed that the information required for gen erating these two 
reports was intended to be captured through the Ann ual Returns with the 
permission of the Government.  
Hence, in the absence of all reports which were to be prepared for the 
settlement of IGST in accordance with GST Settlemen t of Fund Rules, 2017, 
the IGST settlement remained incomplete and accurac y of the settlement 
could not be assured. 
GSTN had stated (January 2019) that the existing se ttlement algorithm had 
been designed keeping in view data available in GST R-3B. The reports 
prescribed in the Settlement Rules could be generat ed with greater degree of 
accuracy if GSTR-2 and GSTR-3 were implemented. 
GSTR-3B, being only the self-assessed summary return being 
filed by taxpayers, the data in this return was not  validated 
with invoice details as originally envisaged since GSTR-2 and 
GSTR-3 were kept in abeyance.  Hence, the settlemen t of 
funds between the Centre and the States using GSTR-3B was 
based on data which was not validated. 
GSTN further stated (June 2019 through DoR) that  
• Report No. 01.07, 01.10 and 01.11, which were impacted due to GSTR-
2 being put on hold, will be generated based on annual return GSTR-9.  
• Generation of Report No. 01.08 has been started fro m February 2019 
based on the data received from Indian Customs Elec tronic 
Commerce/Electronic Data interchange Gateway (ICEGA TE), (not 
verified by Audit).  
•  Report No. 01.09 will be generated based on data r eceived from 
ICEGATE by July 2019. 
• Report No. 04.02 and 04.03 may not be required to b e generated by 
GSTN since DoR was taking care of the same by relea sing amount on 
adhoc basis to the States out of the IGST pool.  
Reply of GSTN in respect of Reports 04.02 and 04.03  and its endorsement by 
DoR need to be reconsidered for the following reasons: 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
68 
• Section 17 (2) of the IGST Act clearly laid down pr ovisions for 
apportioning IGST in these cases.  
• A provision for release of IGST on ad-hoc basis has  been made by 
amending IGST Act in August 2018 to facilitate appo rtionment of 
unsettled IGST, for the time being , on the recommendations of the 
Council.   
• GSTN discontinuing two reports, quoting a temporary  provision 
introduced for the time being and its endorsement b y DoR in 
forwarding such a reply of GSTN are not tenable.   
3.22.2 Non-utilisation of data on Imports, Appeal, Refund and Prosecution 
Under GST, all imports have been considered as inte r-state supplies and have 
attracted IGST.  We noticed that import data, however, was not being utilised 
during settlement of IGST due to non-integration of  GST System with the 
ICEGATE system used by Customs.  Similarly, the pay ments made under 
Appeal, Refund and Prosecution for settlement of IG ST were also not being 
considered for preparing IGST settlement reports as  required by SRS.  Thus, 
the IGST settlement reports were incomplete. 
GSTN had stated (January 2019) that IGST data from ICEGATE had started 
flowing to GST IT system since December 2018.  Once  the backlog data was 
received in the GST IT system, the same would be us ed to settle the IGST paid 
by unregistered persons / Composition taxpayers, wh ich was likely to be 
completed by 31 May 2019 for 2017-18. They further stated that in case of 
IGST paid on import, claimed by the registered taxp ayer as eligible ITC in 
GSTR-3B, the same would be cross utilised subsequen tly and accounted for in 
normal settlement process.  
GSTN further stated (June 2019 through DoR) that Re port No. 01.09 will be 
generated based on data received from ICEGATE by Ju ly 2019 and that 
reports based on Phase II modules will be generated  after implementation of 
those modules. They informed that generation of Rep ort No. 01.08 has 
started from February 2019. However, the same remains to be verified by 
Audit.  
GSTN had also replied (September 2018) that the set tlement of funds 
pertaining to Refund, Appeal and Prosecution modules would be implemented 
once development of all these modules was completed .  With regard to 
Refund, GSTN mentioned that since refunds of Centra l and the States’ taxes 
were disbursed separately by Central and State Acco unting Authorities, 
settlement of funds was not required in such cases.  However, settlement of 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
69 
the amount cross-adjusted against any liability wou ld be taken up once 
complete Refund and Recovery Modules were implemented.  
3.22.3 Non-Settlement of interest  
The provisions of Section 17 of IGST Act, 2017, on apportionment of 
Integrated Tax would also apply to the apportionmen t of interest realised in 
connection with the tax so apportioned.  The amount  of interest, however, 
was not being taken into consideration while doing settlement process of 
IGST. 
GSTN had stated (September 2018) that in the absenc e of processing of  
GSTR-1, GSTR-2 and GSTR-3 returns, it was not possi ble to determine the 
amount of interest due to be settled in favour of a  particular State. GSTR-3B 
had no such information to process settlement report of interest paid on IGST.  
GSTN further stated (June 2019 through DoR) that wo rk on Report No. 01.12 
will be taken up after filing of annual return. 
It would be pertinent to note that the IGST Act was  
amended in August 2018 to facilitate apportionment of 
such amount of unsettled IGST balance, as recommended by 
the GST Council, to the Centre and the States on ad -hoc 
basis.  Incomplete IGST algorithm would result in c ontinued 
accumulation of higher balances in IGST and consequ ent 
distribution of IGST on ad-hoc basis between the Ce ntre and 
the States. 
3.23 Duplicate records 
SRS for Returns Module – Settlement Reports envisag ed that various 
settlement reports would capture the return data of  taxpayers which would 
be utilised for arriving at the settlement of IGST between the Union and 
various States.  While capturing the return data in to various settlement 
reports, it needed to be ensured that return data o f one taxpayer appeared 
only once in the settlement reports.  
Audit noticed that in five reports (viz. 01.02, 01. 03, 01.04, 01.05 and 01.06), 
records for the same taxpayer for the same return p eriod appeared more 
than once in 6,748 cases in respect of all GST regi stered taxpayers for the 
period from July 2017 to July 2018, thereby leading  to inaccurate settlement 
of `` `` 416.07 crore of IGST funds.  
GSTN had stated (January 2019) that the defect was identified and corrected 
vide initial bug fix in June 2018 and subsequently by another fix in November 
2018. It was also informed that the financial impli cation on account of this 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
70 
defect for the previous periods would be taken care  of by a separate 
programme/ utility which was likely to be completed by 31 March 2019.  
In spite of the corrections made by GSTN, audit in its 
verification in January 2019 noted that the issue o f 
duplicate records still persisted and 1,507 cases o f duplicate 
records were found in Settlement Reports 1.02 & 1.0 3 for 
December 2018. 
GSTN further stated (June 2019 through DoR) that de fect has already been 
fixed but its effect on previous months will be com pleted by end of June 2019. 
The rectification remains to be verified by Audit. 
3.24 Incorrect computation of IGST Settlement 
As per the extant statutes, at the time of audit ta xpayers may utilize the ITC 
available in the credit ledger for discharging thei r tax liabilities.  The following 
general rule should be adhered for utilisation of ITC : - 
• ITC of IGST could be utilised for making payment of  IGST, CGST and 
SGST in that order 
• ITC of CGST could be utilised for making payment of  CGST and IGST in 
that order 
• ITC of SGST could be utilised for making payment of  SGST and IGST in 
that order 
Cross utilisation of credit between CGST and SGST a nd vice versa was not 
permitted under the statute. 
In 1,65,557 numbers of returns, IGST to SGST and vi ce versa and IGST liability 
from CGST-ITC were settled with Delhi in May 2018 r eport. Audit observed 
that there were discrepancies in the Settlement as computed by audit using 
returns data related to Delhi taxpayers for May 2018 and those provided in 
Settlement report in 37 cases involving `` `` 37.68 lakh.    
Out of these 37 cases, in 11 cases, the taxpayer re cords did not appear in the 
Settlement Reports though cross-utilisation happene d in GSTR-3B.  On this 
being pointed out (July 2018), GSTN replied that this defect was identified and 
fixed (November 2018) by GSTN.  GSTN further stated (June 2019 through DoR) 
that missing records would be included in the settlement report of April 2019.  
In the remaining 26 cases, GSTN attributed the inco rrect values in the 
Settlement Report to following reasons : -  
• In 23 cases, the manner/order in which ITC of IGST was required to be 
utilised as per law was not followed.  

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
71 
• In one case, additional entry was posted for an excess amount in STL.  
• In two cases, negative liability was adjusted against the total liability. 
Regarding order of utilisation of ITC, GSTN stated that while the order may 
not have been as per norms, there is no financial i mplication due to the same. 
The effect of such transactions are targeted to be included in June 2019 
settlement period. 
Thus sample data analysis of one month (May 2018) f or Delhi alone shows 
that the basic algorithm for settlement had defects  leading to incorrect IGST 
settlement. The overall impact of the issue would b e much higher. Ministry 
may review the matter and ensure that settlement ha ppens as per the extant 
legal provisions.   
Regarding order of utilization of ITC of IGST, subs equent to completion of IT 
audit, Rule 88A was inserted (April 2019) which all owed utilization of ITC of 
IGST towards payment of CGST and SGST / UTGST in an y order with effect 
from 1 February 2019 subject to the condition that entire ITC of IGST should 
be completely exhausted first before using ITC of CGST or SGST / UTGST.  DoR 
should ensure that this change is duly considered w hile addressing the defect 
pointed out in audit. 
3.25 Erroneous entries in settlement reports 
Incorrect settlement of IGST amounting to `` `` 359.46 crore was noticed 
during the period from July 2017 to July 2018 becau se of erroneous entries in 
Pan India STLs due to the algorithm picking up entries from wrong category of 
taxpayers as detailed below : - 
Settlement 
Report 
Observation Reply of GSTN 
(January and June 
2019) 
STL 01.02 / 
01.03 
These reports should include 
taxpayers only from the States to 
which reports pertain to. However, 
these reports had 11,911 cases 
related to the other States, involving 
incorrect settlement of cross 
utilisation of ` 198 crore. 
The defect has been 
fixed on 31 January 
2019 (To be verified 
by audit).  
Effect on previous 
month’s settlement 
will be completed by 
June 2019. 
STL 
01.02/01.03 
Entries at an interval of 10,000 (viz. 
Sl. Nos. 10000, 20000, 30000 and so 
on) were found to be missing. Due to 
this, summation of the entries did 
not match with the sum total 
mentioned in the report. As 
The defect had been 
fixed (September 
2018). It has no 
financial implication. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
72 
Settlement 
Report 
Observation Reply of GSTN 
(January and June 
2019) 
settlement was based on sum total 
of the report, this issue had no 
financial implication on the 
settlement of funds. However, the 
issue of incorrect reporting to tax 
authorities remained in the system. 
Category A 
of STL 01.04 
This report was based on inter-state 
supplies made to unregistered 
persons in the State.  Hence for this 
report, the supplier must be outside 
the State concerned. However, there 
were 37,723 records against 
category A where the suppliers were 
located in the same State to which 
the report pertained, involving 
settlement of ` 153 crore. 
The settlement was 
done on the basis of 
details provided by 
taxpayer in GSTR-3B.  
Hence, there was no 
check for validating 
the POS due to 
which the issue had 
arisen. A Change 
Request (CR) has 
been initiated, which 
was expected to be 
completed by March 
2019. 
When the matter 
was placed before 
the Law Committee, 
they directed that no 
such validation is 
required in GSTR-3B 
being self-assessed 
and the CR is being 
modified 
accordingly. 
Categories E 
and F of STL 
01.04 
 
These dealt with exports / supplies 
to SEZs with payment of tax. No 
entries were found against these 
categories, thereby implying that the 
transactions falling under these 
categories were not being 
considered for settlement of IGST 
funds. 
No accumulation of 
IGST is happening 
due to non-
implementation of 
category E and F. 
Taxpayer making 
export with payment 
of IGST are claiming 
refund subsequently. 
The refund is 
processed by 
Customs department 
directly. No 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
73 
Settlement 
Report 
Observation Reply of GSTN 
(January and June 
2019) 
settlement is 
required for the 
same. 
Audit does not agree 
with the contention 
that there is non-
accumulation of 
IGST due to this 
reason since there 
could be instances of 
not claiming of IGST 
refund by exporters 
and instances of 
delayed payment of 
refunds by Customs.  
STL 01.05 This report should have included 
transactions only pertaining to a 
State other than the one for which 
report was generated. However, it 
included 1,713 records related to the 
suppliers from the same State to 
which the report pertained to, 
involving incorrect settlement of 
` 4.13 crore. 
This had arisen due 
to absence of 
validation of Place of 
Supply (POS) in the 
current system.  
Change Request for 
implementing 
validation of POS 
was to be 
implemented by 
March 2019. 
 There was no entry against one 
category of transactions (supplies to 
non-resident taxable person) in this 
report, thereby implying that the 
transactions falling under this 
category were not being accounted 
for in the IGST settlement process.  
 
Non-resident taxable 
persons are bringing 
the goods from 
outside the country 
and may not be 
making any 
purchase. However, 
after filing of annual 
return, the effect will 
be checked. 
Presently, GSTR-3B 
does not contain 
details of supplies 
made to non-
resident taxpayers. 
STL 01.06 Category A under this report was for 
ineligible ITC for the recipients in a 
The defect has 
already been fixed 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
74 
Settlement 
Report 
Observation Reply of GSTN 
(January and June 
2019) 
State who received inward supply 
from other State. Hence, this 
category should have included 
taxpayers belonging to the State to 
which report pertained. However, 
this report contained 132 records of 
Category ‘A’ where taxpayer 
belonged to the State other than the 
State to which the report pertained 
to, involving incorrect settlement of 
` 4.33 crore. 
on 31 January 2019 
(To be verified by 
audit). Effect on 
previous month’s 
settlement will be 
completed by June 
2019. 
The deficiencies pointed out by audit on IGST settl ement 
cover a gamut of issues such as duplicate records, incorrect 
computation of IGST settlement and erroneous entrie s in 
settlement reports.  This shows that the algorithm 
determining IGST settlement is not correct and woul d mean 
that proper testing was not done before running thi s 
important functionality.  Audit checks showed weakn esses 
in the output generated based on this algorithm.  H ence 
audit requires access to full data for the purpose of deriving 
assurance on IGST settlement / apportionment for certifying 
the accounts of the Government. 
3.26 Unrealistic claims of ITC of IGST 
As per law, the recipient of supplies would take credit of the input tax paid on 
such supplies.  Recipient should utilize the ITC av ailable in the credit ledger 
for discharging his tax liabilities.  As per GST Ru les, ITC could not be claimed 
by a taxpayer unless it had been paid by the suppli er.  This was supposed to 
be ensured through the provisions for matching of i nvoices of ‘suppliers and 
recipients’ through filing of returns GSTR-1 and 2 and generation of monthly 
return GSTR-3 based on GSTR-1 and 2 filed by taxpay ers, with taxpayer 
adding details of tax paid in GSTR-3.   
However, for the time being, filling of GSTR-2 retu rn had been kept in 
abeyance and taxpayers were allowed to claim ITC in  GSTR-3B return without 
any such cross-verification. Under GSTR-3B, ITC was  claimed by the taxpayer 
on self-assessment basis. Hence, in the absence of evidence that ITC was 
being claimed by a taxpayer after payment of tax by the supplier, there was a 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
75 
risk that the irregular ITC claims by the taxpayers  might go undetected.  
Certain instances noticed in audit in this regard have been detailed below : - 
` 8.19 lakh crore of ITC of IGST was claimed by the taxpayers in their returns 
during 1 July 2017 to 8 August 2018 against total C GST, SGST and IGST of 
` 11.93 lakh crore collected during 1 July 2017 to 3 1 July 2018. This meant 
that ITC claimed was significant relative to tax collected. 
Out of ` 8.19 lakh crore as stated above, taxpayers of Andh ra Pradesh (State 
code 37) alone claimed (19 July 2018) IGST-ITC for ` 6.49 lakh crore which 
was considered as highly unlikely.  This was brough t to the notice of GSTN by 
audit on 21 August 2018. 
GSTN replied (September 2018) that the excess IGST credit of ` 6.45 lakh crore 
pertaining to a particular taxpayer of Andhra Prade sh was erroneously 
claimed by the taxpayer while filing GSTR-3B for th e month of June 2018 and 
the same had been reversed by him on 28 August 2018. 
Thus, unrealistic erroneous claim of ITC of IGST by  one taxpayer, 
representing 79 per cent of total ITC claim by all taxpayers for a month, was 
allowed by the system, exposing the vulnerability o f the system to 
fraudulent ITC claims. 
Audit further observed that after removing the abov e figure from Andhra 
Pradesh, the State of Punjab constituted the highest IGST-ITC of 32.6 per cent 
of all India IGST-ITC balance and risk of irregular ITC credits could not be ruled 
out. 
GSTN had stated (September 2018) that in the absence of GSTR-2 and GSTR-3, 
which were kept in abeyance by the Government, it w as difficult to compare 
and validate the ITC of IGST (or CGST/SGST) availed  by the taxpayer in GSTR-
3B with the corresponding inward supply data. Under  GSTR-3B, ITC was 
claimed by the taxpayer on self-assessment basis.  Further, they also stated 
(January 2019 and June 2019) that since settlement was not made out of ITC 
claimed but after cross-utilisation, such wrong cla ims did not affect the 
settlement process. 
It should be noted that GSTR-3B being a self-assess ed return as of now 
(June 2019), any ITC claimed erroneously could subsequently be cross utilised 
and thereby enter the IGST settlement process.   
3.27 Conclusion on IGST Settlement Reports 
The IGST settlement algorithm was being run using i ncomplete sets of data 
either due to non-implementation of related modules  or due to non-
availability of data in case of returns kept in abe yance.  To the extent the 
settlement reports were generated, audit found vari ous inaccuracies in the 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
76 
algorithm.  As these have a bearing on the settleme nt of funds to the Centre 
and various States, the Ministry of Finance should undertake a 
comprehensive review of IGST settlements done so fa r, duly considering the 
inaccuracies brought out by Audit.   
In view of the weaknesses noticed during audit in t he output generated 
based on this algorithm,  audit requires to access full data for the purpose of 
deriving assurance on IGST settlement / apportionme nt for certifying the 
accounts of the Government. 
A solution should also be devised to resolve the pr oblem of accumulation of 
IGST balance due to incomplete IGST algorithm. 
Part D : Business Continuity and Change Management 
3.28 Business Continuity  
Business Continuity Management System (BCMS) is a s et of interrelated 
elements that organisations use to establish, imple ment, operate, monitor, 
review, maintain, and improve their business contin uity capabilities.  BCMS 
comprises of Business Continuity Plan (BCP) which i s the process an 
organisation uses to plan and test the recovery of its business processes after 
a disruption.  Disaster Recovery Plan (DRP), a subset of BCP, encompasses the 
steps taken to implement and support the firm’s inf rastructure, including 
hardware, software and sites necessary for the reco very of mission-critical 
services and applications. 
3.28.1 Business continuity policy not yet finalised  
Any kind of disruption in functioning of GST IT Sys tem, even of temporary 
nature, will severely impact the indirect tax admin istration of the country. 
Hence a comprehensive policy of BCMS and its proper  implementation are 
very crucial for all stakeholders of the project.   
We noticed that GSTN was still in the process of finalising the BCMS.  The first 
draft of BCP-disaster recovery policy was prepared in August 2017 and 
updated in May 2018 but it had not been approved.  Only the DRP was 
finalised in May 2018, 11 months later after roll out of GST IT System. 
GSTN had stated (January 2019) that BCMS plan was b eing refined and same 
would be released by March 2019. To address the ava ilability of the current 
GST IT System, the approved DRP was released and the disaster recovery drills 
were performed as per this plan. GSTN further state d (June 2019 through 
DoR) that BCMS Plan (Ver 1.4) has been released on 28 March 2019.  
However, the same remains to be verified in audit. 
 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
77 
3.28.2 Disaster Recovery Performance short of target  
The IT infrastructure in GSTN had been operating fr om one primary Data 
Centre24 (DC-1) and Near Line Data Centre 25 (NDC-1). The Disaster Recovery 
Mechanism (DRM) was to be implemented through secon dary Data Centre 
(DC-2) and Near Data Centre (NDC-2) at an alternate  location.  The DC-2 was 
expected to take over in case of disruption of serv ice in the DC-1 within 
specific time and ensure continuity of service.  GS TN had set a target of zero 
data loss and 30 minutes time as Recovery Point Obj ective26 (RPO) and 
Recovery Time Objective 27 (RTO) respectively for switch over data from DC-1 
to DC-2 or vice-versa.  
Our scrutiny of incident root cause analysis linkag e report revealed that the 
services of GST portal were affected 25 times durin g 1 July 2017 to 30 June 
2018.  Out of these, during four incidents, all the  services of GST portal were 
affected and server was down for the time ranging f rom 01:10 hours to 12:00 
hours.  The services were restored only after fixing the issue in DC-1 and were 
not transferred to DC-2 as intended in the BCP sinc e the secondary fall back 
DC-2 facility was not ready.  
Audit also noted that to test the readiness of DRM,  GSTN performed two 
mock drills
28 in June and July 2018.  In the first mock drill, a  total of 14 hours 
50 minutes were taken against planned duration of s ix hours.  The second 
Mock drill took three hours in excess of the planned duration.   
GSTN had stated (August 2018) that due to frequent changes in business 
process, the system software in GST IT system were being deployed twice 
every week and often unforeseen scenarios had cause d these outages. During 
application outages, moving Data Centres would be o f no value unless the 
affected application was first corrected. 
Audit did not agree with this contention since in 1 1 cases out of 25 incidents 
mentioned above, GSTN had identified infrastructure  as responsible for the 
incident.  All the four incidents, when all the ser vices were affected, were 
                                                           
24  Data Centres comprise of networked computers and storage that businesses or other 
organisations use to organise, process, store and disseminate large amounts of data. 
25  In some organisations there will also be a Near L ine Data Centre at the location of primary 
DC for data replication where copy of data is repli cated on real time to prevent any data 
loss in the event of a disaster. 
26  RPO refers to the amount of data at risk and refl ects the amount of data that potentially 
could be lost during a disaster recovery. 
27  RTO is the targeted duration of time and a servic e level within which a business process 
must be restored after a disaster (or disruption) i n order to avoid unacceptable 
consequences associated with a break in business continuity. 
28  The primary objective of the mock drill is assess ing the readiness of the alternate Data 
Centre to provide services in adequate time.  It al so assesses if the estimated time for 
each activity is adequate. During the mock drill, a pplication and monitoring services will 
be failed over to the alternate Data Centre, howeve r the same will not be made available 
to public.   

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
78 
attributed to issues in infrastructure.  In such ca ses, the lengthy outage 
period could have been avoided if the DRM was avail able, adequate and 
functioning. 
GSTN informed in Exit conference (December 2018) th at DC-2 was fully 
functional. However, the same remains to be verifie d in Audit. GSTN also 
replied that as per RFP, RTO and RPO would be measu red during Operation 
and Maintenance (O & M) phase and not in the Develo pment phase. During 
all the incidents, zero RPO was achieved and this w as demonstrated via 
Disaster Recovery Drills (DRD). The DRD involving s hifting of operations from 
primary DC to alternate DC were being performed so as to ensure 
preparedness within agreed RTO and RPO in phased ma nner. GSTN further 
reported (June 2019 through DoR) achievement of RTO of less than 30 minutes 
for Critical function (Invoice upload, Return Filin g, Tax Payment and Ledger 
Generation) and RTO of less than 4 hours  for other functions. 
GSTN’s reply should be seen in the light of critica lity of GST System in the 
national economy.  Even though GSTN might have got into the O&M Phase 
recently, the fact was that GST portal had gone liv e since July 2017.  A 
functional DRM taking care of all disaster scenario s with target performance 
criteria should have been ready long time back.  Th e failure to ensure this for 
nearly two years after rollout of such a critical application was an unmitigated 
risk for the entire GST-ecosystem and its stakeholders.   
Thus, GSTN was still in the process of streamlining  the BCMS which remained 
work-in-progress and the recovery time noted was no t as per the intended 
targets.  Hence, disruption in service in primary D C might affect the GST 
services causing inconvenience to all the stakeholders. 
3.29 Change Management 
According to the change management process, GSTN sh ould create the 
Change Request (CR) on the basis of new requirement  from the Government 
or deviation from approved SRS.  The MSP should pro vide a CR document 
with a sequential number of the CR containing the p roposed change item, 
description of the proposed change, including busin ess impact, cost impact, 
risk, training (if any), timelines of delivery of c hange and Service Level 
Agreement (SLA’s) for delayed delivery. 
The impact analysis document should be prepared to identify the potential 
consequences of the CR, the modification needed to accomplish the required 
change and also covers the high level timeline of d elivery. In case the cost 
impact of CR crossed ` five lakh, it required the approval of the Change 
Approval Board (CAB), otherwise Sr. Vice President (Software Development) 
could give the approval, informing CAB subsequently .  CRs, as approved, 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
79 
should be communicated to the MSP for development.  Reasons of rejection 
of the CRs, if any, should also be noted and commun icated to the initiator of 
the CR.  
The MSP would acknowledge receipt of the CR documen t and responsible for 
delivery of the change as per cost and timelines approved by the CAB.  Delays 
in delivery of changes should be placed before the CAB, for applying the 
penalty as applicable for approval. 
A total of 271 CRs were raised from 1 July 2017 onw ards till 13 July 2018 
across all modules.  Audit reviewed the change mana gement process in GSTN 
and noticed the following deficiencies : - 
3.29.1 Timeline for activities not prescribed 
Audit noticed that no individual timelines were defined for each activity/step 
for below mentioned activities:- 
• Preparation, review & approval of CR and impact analysis documents 
• CAB or GSTN approval on the basis of cost 
• Implementation, testing and verification of CR 
• Acceptance certificate 
• Processing of invoice raised by MSP 
As no time limits were fixed for the above activiti es, it was not possible to 
ensure that CRs were being handled in a timely mann er and to fix 
responsibility in case of delay on part of the MSP/ GSTN in implementing the 
change. 
GSTN had stated (January 2019) that RFP was drafted  considering the 
waterfall methodology for development of applicatio n software.  However, 
due to multiple changes in requirements from the Go vernment, the Agile 
methodology was adopted to continue the development.  With this, GSTN was 
deploying services to production in a continuous ma nner and at the same 
time new features were being developed. GSTN intima ted that they were 
running in development and operational phases toget her and the timeline 
mentioned in the RFP were applicable only for operational phase.  The change 
management process was being revised to optimise th e changes being raised 
and timeline for individual activities. 
Reply of the GSTN was not agreeable since desired t imelines for the activity 
could be defined and implemented from the initial d ays of rollout of GST 
since it was a matter of internal business process to handle CR. Keeping the 
timelines open-ended for a running system was an in efficient project 
management methodology.  

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
80 
GSTN informed (June 2019) that they have re-visited the change management 
process in December 2018 to establish an orderly an d effective procedure for 
tracking the change from initiation till production along with delay, if any.  
3.29.2 Impact analysis either retrospectively done or not done 
Out of the 271 CRs reviewed, audit noticed that imp act analysis was done 
retrospectively in 168 CRs raised between 1 July 20 17 and 22 February 2018.  
Further, in 103 CRs, impact analysis was not done b y December 2018.  Audit 
noticed that in only 112 CRs, cost analysis was don e and in rest of the 159 
CRs, cost analysis was yet to be done.  Among the 1 12 CRs where cost 
analysis had been done, 19 CRs involved costing mor e than ` five lakh and 
hence needed approval of CAB.  14 CRs were approved  by CAB post facto 
(July 2018) and the remaining five CRs were yet to be given approval. 
GSTN stated (January 2019) that impact analysis and  approval of CAB started 
in Phase 3 from February 2018 onwards in order to r ealise the effort spent in 
implementing the CRs.  An estimation framework was formalised with impact 
analysis template to provide the details of effort and timeline of a CR. This 
proposal was formally approved by CAB on 22 Februar y 2018.  For the earlier 
cases, since the CRs were already executed, post facto approval from CAB was 
being accorded.  
3.29.3 Acceptance certificate not issued 
After successful implementation of CR, ‘Acceptance Certificate’ was required 
to be issued by CAB.  As per RFP, if in any case th ere was no response from 
CAB, the said implementation would automatically be deemed accepted.   
‘Acceptance Certificate’ was not issued (January 20 19) in 135 CRs which were 
in live production. Thus, these changes were deemed to be accepted by GSTN 
even if the due process of accepting the change might still be pending.  
GSTN had stated (January 2019) that CAB was reviewi ng and approving the 
effort and cost required to implement the change an d provide the go-ahead 
to start the change implementation.  Since the chan ges were being initiated 
by GSTN Services team, it should have been reviewed /approved by GSTN 
Services team after the successful implementation.  This was an anomaly in 
RFP that the acceptance and completion certificates  would be issued by CAB. 
This was corrected by taking the approval from CAB in the meeting held on 14 
December 2018, that change requester would provide the acceptance post 
implementation of CR in production, as per defined Standard Operating 
Procedure of Procurement & Contract department and Change Management 
of GSTN. GSTN further stated (June 2019 through DoR ) that the new 
procedure defined has been mutually agreed between MSP and GSTN. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
81 
It should be noted that if any shortcomings were to  be 
noticed in changes already made, there existed a ri sk of the 
MSP absolving from their responsibility since they were 
deemed to have received the Acceptance Certificate for the 
change. 
3.29.4 Lack of effective monitoring over CRs due to  deficient documentation 
Audit observed that there was no formal documentati on and end to end 
software solution in 85 CRs prior to November 2017.   Due to this, various 
processes of changes were spread across multiple te ams and spreadsheets 
making the effective monitoring of CRs difficult. 
GSTN had stated (January 2019) that the change mana gement process was 
streamlined in a phased manner.  Initially the focu s was on tracking and 
monitoring since the system was new and operational  mechanism was not 
completely established.  In order to strengthen the process, control was added 
in phased manner. To evaluate the impact analysis a nd effort estimation of a 
change, the framework was approved by CAB in Februa ry 2018.  Subsequent 
to that, the changes raised and implemented before that date were evaluated 
in retrospective manner and CAB approval was accord ed post facto.  For the 
new changes, the revised process was being used. 
The above shortcomings showed that change managemen t process was yet 
to be streamlined even after about two years of rol lout of the application.  In 
the absence of defined timelines, and effective cha nge approval, acceptance 
and monitoring mechanism, Audit was not in a positi on to comment whether 
the changes implemented met the desired standard an d had led to the 
intended outcomes.  
GSTN further stated (June 2019 through DoR) that th e change management 
process has been revised in December 2018 to effectively manage the changes.  
3.30 Conclusion on Business Continuity and Change M anagement 
Any kind of disruption in functioning of GST IT Sys tem even of temporary 
nature would severely impact the indirect tax admin istration and cause 
inconvenience to all the stakeholders. Business Con tinuity Policy still being 
work-in progress and a long disaster recovery time against a 30-minute 
targeted recovery time, as reflected in the mock dr ills, pointed towards the 
risks to the system in case of any disruption.  Lac k of a systemic approach to 
change management indicated the crucial risks exist ing in the application 
running on the GST portal. 
 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
82 
3.31 A summary of the IT audit findings  
The IT audit of GSTN revealed, inter alia, following issues : - 
In 16 cases, the key validations / functionalities as existing in the rolled out 
modules were not found aligned to the applicable pr ovisions. Of these 16 
cases, the required validation was not included in the SRS itself in seven 
cases, the validations were not built-in even though SRS was correctly framed 
in eight cases and the SRS provision included a con dition not prescribed in 
the Act in one case. 
System validations were not aligned to the provisio ns of the GST Acts and 
rules, leaving the following crucial gaps in GST Registration module : - 
− System failed to validate and debar ineligible taxp ayers from availing 
Composition Levy Scheme.  
− Mandatory fields were found made optional or accepting junk values.  
− TDS registrations were allowed under invalid category. 
− Lack of validation of key fields in Registration (L egal Name, Type of 
Business and CIN) with CBDT and MCA Databases. 
The Payment Module, despite being in operation sinc e 1 July 2017, was 
fraught with operational deficiencies like: -  
− Delay in updating the ECL even after successful pay ment of tax by the 
taxpayer. 
− Lack of assurance on minimum service requirements p rescribed for 
banks.  
− Issues in reconciliation of GST receipts. 
− Issues such as payment initiated before expiry of C PIN but CIN 
generated after expiry of CPIN and incorrect displa y of messages to 
taxpayers were not dealt with until pointed out by audit.   
− Facility of payment through Debit / Credit cards co uld not be made 
available as Ministry did not decide on how to deal  with the financial 
implications. 
All the IGST Settlement Ledgers were not being gene rated due to non-
implementation of corresponding GST modules, e.g., imports and appeals.  
This, coupled with the inaccuracies in the settleme nt algorithm and limitation 
of the GSTR-3B return in capturing all the informat ion required for 
settlement, had a bearing on the settlement of fund s to the Centre and 
various States. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
83 
Unrealistic erroneous claim of ITC of IGST by one t axpayer, representing 
79 per cent of total ITC claim by all taxpayers for a month, was allowed by the 
system, exposing the vulnerability of the system to fraudulent ITC claims. 
In a system with automated interface between the IT  applications of the 
banks and GST portal, there should be no scope for errors such as invalid 
GSTIN and expiry of CPIN leading to non-reconciliation of GST receipts. 
The following system design deficiencies have been noticed : - 
− There were no control totals like check sums or rec ord level totals in 
files shared with Accounting Authorities. 
− The IGST algorithm was found to be defective pickin g up entries from 
wrong reports in IGST module. 
− A field like turnover limit, prone to changes, was not made 
configurable. 
− No alert was issued when the threshold of turnover prescribed for 
Composition Levy Scheme was crossed. 
Business Continuity Policy was not finalised and on ly Disaster Recovery Plan 
had been in place.  The Disaster Recovery drills to ok longer than the 30-
minute targeted recovery time. These pointed toward s the risks to system in 
case of any disruption.   
Lack of a systemic approach to change management, c oupled with some of 
the deficiencies pointed by this audit remaining unaddressed even after GSTN 
reported corrective action, indicated the crucial r isks existing in the 
application running on the GST portal. 
While acknowledging that GST is a complete new syst em being developed, 
the fact remains that in view of its magnitude and Pan-India impact, it is all 
the more necessary that due care is taken both in d evelopment and in 
testing of the system before roll out.  The failure  to map business rules 
correctly and the absence of key validations in the  rolled out system points 
to inadequacies in the functioning of GSTN.  The is sues brought out in IT 
audit also pointed towards the need for GSTN to re- examine prioritisation 
of development of various functionalities, strength en their root cause 
analysis and testing process to ensure that critical deficiencies in application 
are detected and rectified before rollout to public .  The need to involve 
executive in UAT / SRS sign off also needs to be re-examined. 
The problem of accumulation of IGST balance due to incomplete IGST 
algorithm should be resolved on priority to minimiz e the need for resorting 
to ad hoc apportionment of unsettled IGST, to be ad justed against future 
apportionments due to the States.  

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
85 
Chapter IV : Compliance Audit of GST 
The instances mentioned in this Report are those wh ich came to notice in the 
course of test audit conducted during the period 20 18-19.  The audit has 
been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Stan dards issued by the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
4.1 Lack of access to data 
GST is envisaged as a highly IT-intensive system of  tax administration with a 
single interface for taxpayers across the country f or their GST compliance 
functions. With all the steps in tax collection rig ht from challan generation to 
accounting of receipts and from registration to ret urn filing / scrutiny being 
automated, it provides a good opportunity for the f irst time ever to the 
Government and the Parliament to have a full assurance29 from the CAG on the 
correct implementation of tax laws.  In a manual system, audits were done on 
“test checks” and there were limitations in providi ng assurance. Unhindered 
and full access to pan-India data is crucial for me aningful audit and to draw 
assurances, otherwise certifying the revenue receipts may become difficult.  In 
this background, and in view of the need for data a nalysis in audit of GST, the 
office of the CAG took up the matter of access to Pan-India GST data with DoR 
as far back as 2016 itself.  DoR’s offer of providing data based on CAG’s queries 
is not workable, as without the full data, it is ne ither possible to formulate 
queries, nor run the required algorithms on the dat a.  The CAG had sought 
data through the Application Programme Interface (APIs) already designed by 
GSTN.  It need hardly be stated that providing such data as CAG may require is 
a constitutional and legal requirement. 
After much pursuance, CBIC has shared only the MIS reports which give 
aggregate statistics at Commissionerate level (for Central data) and State 
level (for State data). Audit, therefore, was hampe red in the detailed analysis 
of pan–India transactions. 
In the absence of access to GST data, the conclusio ns in this 
chapter on compliance audit were perforce based on limited 
audits carried out in the field.  However, the gamut of issues 
brought out even in this limited audit point to ser ious 
systemic deficiencies that need to be addressed by the 
department. 
                                                           
29  ‘expressing a conclusion designed to enhance the degree of confidence of the intended  
users  other  than  the  responsible  party  about  the  outcome  of  the  evaluation or 
measurement of a subject matter against criteria ’ 
 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
86 
4.2 Audit examination 
The GST return mechanism has been undergoing major changes since 
implementation of GST.  The due date for filing ann ual return for 2017-18 by 
December 2018 originally was subsequently extended to August 2019.  
Hence, during the year 2018-19, we focused mainly o n audit of transitional 
credits, registrations and refunds. 
The findings on each of the identified areas are given below in three parts : -  
Part A : Transitional credit 
4.3 Introduction 
With the introduction and implementation of GST, wh ich subsumed multiple 
indirect taxes, there was also a need to clearly sp ell out provisions and 
arrangements to ensure smooth transition from the o ld tax regime to GST.  
This was needed especially to provide for carry for ward of ITCs, relating to 
pre-GST taxes that were available with the taxpayer s on the day of roll out of 
GST, into GST regime (herein after referred to as transitional credits).   
Transitional credit provisions are important for bo th the Government and 
business.  For business, these credits should be ca rried forward properly to 
give them benefit of taxes they had already paid on inputs or input services in 
the pre-GST regime.  From the view point of the Gov ernment, the amount of 
admissible transitional credits will determine the extent of cash flow of GST 
revenue and hence in the interest of revenue, only admissible and eligible 
transitional credits should be carried forward into GST.  
4.4 Provisions for transitional credit  
4.4.1 Conditions for availing transitional credits 
Section 140 of the GST Act contains elaborate provi sions relating to 
transitional arrangements for ITC.  This section pr ovides for a registered 
person, other than composition taxpayer, to carry f orward closing balance of 
input tax credit under Central Excise and Service T ax Act as CGST and input 
credit under State VAT Acts as SGST, subject to spe cified conditions.  The 
important conditions are discussed below : - 
a) Credit can be carried forward as given in the last return filed under 
pre-GST statutes  
b) Such credit should be admissible as ITC under GST A ct and pre-GST 
Acts 
c) Returns for at least previous six months before rol l out of GST should 
have been furnished.   

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
87 
A registered person, not liable to be registered un der the pre-GST law, or 
who was dealing with exempted goods / services or a  first / second stage 
dealer or a registered importer or a depot of a man ufacturer, is also entitled 
to carry forward credit of eligible duties in respect of inputs held  in stock and 
inputs contained in semi-finished or finished goods  held in stock.  The 
important conditions prescribed for this are that t he said registered person 
should be in possession of invoice or other prescri bed documents, evidencing 
payment of duty under the existing law in respect o f such inputs, which were 
issued not earlier than twelve months immediately p receding the appointed 
day (viz. 1 July 2017).  
Similarly, provisions were made to facilitate taxpa yers to carry forward ITC in 
respect of capital goods, Input Service Distributor s (ISD) and Centralised 
Registrations.   
CGST Act has been amended (August 2018) in order to  clarify, with 
retrospective effect from 1st July 2017, that the c esses shall not be a part of 
the transitional ITC under GST. 
4.4.2 Timelines for transitional credit returns 
Rule 117 of the CGST Rule, 2017, provides that ever y registered person 
entitled to transitional credit, has to file a decl aration electronically in FORM 
GST Tran-1, on the GST portal within 90 days of rol l out of GST. This rule also 
provides for extension of this ninety day period by  a further period not 
exceeding ninety days by the Commissioner, on recom mendation of the GST 
Council. Thus, the CGST Rules initially provided for a maximum of 6 mo nths to 
file Tran-1.  However, to facilitate those taxpayers who could  not file Tran-1  
by the due date on account of technical difficultie s on GST portal,  a provision 
was inserted30 in this rule for extension of date for Tran-1 by a  further period 
not beyond 31 March 2019, on the recommendations of the Council. 
4.4.3 Due date(s) for filing Tran-1 
The due date for filing or revising Tran-1, which originally was 28 September 
2017 has been extended from time to time with final dea dline extended to 
31 March 2019 as detailed below : - 
Date of 
Order 
Extended due 
date 
Reason for extension  
18 and 21 
Sep 2017 
31 Oct 2017 The due date for submission of Tran-1 return 
was extended to facilitate revision of Tran-1.  
28  Oct 
2017 
30 Nov 2017 No specific reason was found for extens ion 
but the GST Council discussed about the delay 
                                                           
30 Vide Notification no. 48/2018-CT dated 10 September 2018. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
88 
Date of 
Order 
Extended due 
date 
Reason for extension  
in development of the functionality for 
revision of Tran-1. 
15 Nov 
2017 
27 Dec 2017 Based on deadlines provided by GSTN and 
discussions with GSTN, the due date for 
submission extended.   
17 Sep 
2018 
Up to 31 Jan 
2019 in 
certain cases 
Owing to technical difficulties on common 
portal, extension recommended by the GST 
Council, for the class of registered persons 
who could not submit Tran-1 by the due date 
on account of technical difficulties on GST 
portal.  
31 Jan 2019 Up to 31 
March 2019 in 
certain cases 
CBIC also set up (April 2018) an IT grievance redre ssal for taxpayers’ 
grievances due to technical glitches on GST portal vide circular dated 3 April 
2018.  It was mentioned in this circular that a lar ge number of taxpayers 
could not complete the process of Tran-1 filing eit her at the stage of original 
or revised filing as they could not digitally authe nticate the Tran-1s due to IT 
related glitches.  As a result, a large number of s uch Tran-1s were stuck in the 
system.  GSTN was asked to identify such taxpayers who could not file Tran-1 
on the basis of electronic audit trail.  It has bee n decided that all such 
taxpayers, who tried but were not able to complete Tran-1 procedure 
(original or revised) of filing them on or before 2 7 December 2017 due to 
IT-glitches, shall be provided the facility to complete Tran-1 filing. 
The technical glitches and delays in making Tran-1 available on 
GST Portal has led to repeated extension of due dat e for filing 
the return Tran-1. 
4.5 CBIC instructions for verification of transitio nal credits 
CBIC issued instructions from time to time during S eptember 2017 to March 
2018 regarding verification of transitional credits  by its field formations as 
detailed below : - 
i. In September 2017, CBIC informed its field formatio ns that the 
registered persons had claimed over ` 65,000 crore as CGST 
transitional credit till then. (It is worthwhile to mention here that 
CGST collected during July and August 2017 was ` 29,296 crore). 
CBIC flagged the possibility of registered persons claiming ineligible 
credit due to mistake or confusion.  It asked its f ield formations to 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
89 
verify claims of ITC of more than ` One crore by matching the credit 
claimed in transitional returns with the closing ba lance in returns filed 
under earlier laws and checking eligibility of credit under GST regime. 
ii. Through instructions dated 1 December 2017, field f ormations were 
directed to verify cases of transitional credit ove r ` One crore with 
special care and thereafter to undertake verificati on in descending 
order of credit availed. 
iii. The circular issued (March 2018) by CBIC indicated that Central Tax 
Offices would verify transitional credit claims in respect of CGST in 
case of all taxpayers irrespective of whether the t axpayer was allotted 
to Central or State Tax Office. CBIC also shared th e list of identified 
50,000 cases of CGST credits along with datasets wi th Central Tax 
Offices and asked them to complete verification of 1/3rd of cases 
assigned in each quarter starting from March-June 2018 and ending in 
Jan-Mar 2019. 
4.6 Leveraging IT for verification of transitional credit claims 
Prior to introduction of GST portal, the department  has been using the IT 
application “Automation of Central Excise and Servi ce Tax” (ACES) through 
which filing of returns, payment of duty/tax and pr ocessing of returns 
relating to Central Excise and Service Tax were car ried out. Hence, the 
department had a database relating to returns filed by taxpayers in respect of 
goods manufactured / services provided and the deta ils of Cenvat credit 
closing balance and other details available from th e returns as on 
30 June 2017.   
In the initial instruction issued in September 2017 , CBIC asked field 
formations to match transitional credit claims with  Cenvat credit balances.  
However, in March 2018, CBIC shared data sets of to p 50,000 transitional 
credit claims on their intranet portal “ANTARANG” t o assist field formations 
in verification of transitional credits.   
As informed by CBIC,  
• Tran-1 data is received from GST portal on the CBIC  backend system.  
This data has been integrated with appropriate vali dation to enable 
automated verification of correctness of credit car ried forward to 
Tran-1 by the taxpayers.   
• This validation ensures that the details of Tran-1 are cross checked 
with (i) pre-GST registration, (ii) status of retur ns filed under pre-GST 
laws and (iii) Cenvat credit balance available in t he last return filed by 
the taxpayers.   

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
90 
• Where the validation is successful, a green tick wo uld be shown on 
dashboard of departmental officer viewing Tran-1 an d a red tick 
would appear in case the validation failed. 
4.7 Audit of transitional credits  
Given the importance of transitional credits, being  a one-time activity during 
transition to GST and its impact on revenue inflows  in GST regime, we 
focussed on verification of transitional credit cas es by CBIC field formations 
during our field audit in 2018-19.   
To conduct data analysis and identify areas of focu s and to select units / 
cases for audit, we requested (April 2018 and June 2018) CBIC to provide data 
relating to transitional credits and sought (December 2018) transitional credit 
data of selected fields.  The requisitioned data has not been provided by 
CBIC and even the readily available data sets relat ing to the 50,000 cases 
identified by CBIC have not been made available to us.   
In absence of data, we carried out a limited audit of transitional credit claims 
in the units which we selected for audit based on o ther risk parameters.  The 
individual cases noticed and the system lapses iden tified based on these 
cases are included in this report.   
Some of the audit findings indicate that data / red  flags 
available in ACES have not been efficiently leverag ed to 
identify and reject inadmissible credits and correc tive action 
was taken only after being pointed out by us.  CBIC  also did not 
devise any methodology through which the inadmissib le claims 
can be addressed at the central level with the aid of 
information technology. 
Ministry, in its reply stated (March 2019) that all  possible steps have been 
taken at Board level for denial of ineligible credi t to be transitioned in GST 
regime. They also said that the decision to allow o r disallow ITC is of quasi-
judicial nature to be taken by proper officers in t erms of provisions of the Act 
in each such case individually.  They further held that this cannot be done at 
central level as the same would be ultravires the provisions of the Act.    
Audit found inadmissible claims in cases already ve rified by the department 
and where the data validation results should be ava ilable with the 
department and the tax officer.  This showed that d espite CBIC taking steps 
of issuing circulars and providing data sets and va lidations to assist tax 
officers to verify transitional credits, all availa ble details have not been fully 
utilised for validation and even the available lead s have not been effectively 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
91 
used by the tax officers or monitored by CBIC.  Aud it’s suggestion of 
leveraging IT to identify inadmissible credits and address the same at central 
level through automated system is more from the poi nt of view of Business 
Process  
Re-Engineering to effectively assist tax officers t o discharge their statutory 
functions.   
4.7.1 Overview of audit of transitional credits 
We focused on verification of transitional credit c ases by the department 
during our audit of selected ranges in 47 Central G ST Commissionerates.  We 
verified 2,119 cases and found 309 instances (15 pe r cent) of omissions in 
verification of transitional credits amounting to ` 392.91 crore, which were 
issued as observations to the CBIC field formations .  As already mentioned in 
paragraph 4.7, in the absence of data, we carried o ut limited audit of 
transitional credits.    
In the absence of data, we carried out a limited fi eld audit 
of transitional credits.  Despite the limited audit , we found 
deviations in a significant 15 per cent of cases te st checked.  
This points to the likelihood of a large number of 
errors/omissions in the overall population of trans itional 
credits claimed by the taxpayers. 
Forty two significant observations relating to 39 t axpayers in 13 
Commissionerates have been issued to the Ministry ( Appendix-VI) and 
included in this report, involving a money value of  ` 107.39 crore as detailed 
below : - 
(`` `` in crore) 
Issue noticed Commissionerates 
involved 
No. of 
cases 
Amount of 
audit objection  
Carry forward of excess 
Cenvat balance 
6 6 2.58 
Irregular availing of 
transitional credit 
4 4 2.02 
No systemic check to prevent 
double availing of credit 
1 1 0.00 
Irregular Availing of Cess 
credit not detected 
6
 21 9.74 
Non-restriction of utilization 
of disputed credit 
2 2 78.49 
Non-payment of interest on 
reversal of transitional credit 
4
 8 14.56 
Total  42 107.39 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
92 
Out of these 42 cases, Ministry accepted the observation in 33 cases involving 
an amount of ` 14.58 crore and intimated recovery of ` 3.72 crore in 
18 cases.   
4.7.2 Carry forward of Excess Cenvat Credit  
As per Section 140 of the CGST Act, 2017, a registe red person, other than a 
Composition taxpayer, is entitled to take, in his E lectronic Credit Ledger, the 
amount of Cenvat credit carried forward in the retu rn relating to the period 
up to 30 June 2017, furnished under the existing la w.  The registered person 
shall not be allowed to take the credit unless the said credit was admissible 
as Cenvat Credit under the existing law (Central Ex cise Act, 1944 and Finance 
Act, 1994) and is also admissible as ITC under CGST Act, 2017.   
Section 140(3) of CGST, Act, 2017 facilitates trans it of tax credit on stock into 
the GST regime. One of the conditions for allowing the transitional credit 
under section 140 (3) is that the invoice should no t be before 1 July 2016 i.e. 
not more than one year old. 
We noticed six cases  of excess availing of transitional credit amountin g to 
` 2.58 crore in six Commissionerates31 (Appendix-VI) in violation of provisions 
quoted above. The excess carry forward of transitio nal credits in all these 
cases was not detected during transitional credit v erification process.  This 
resulted in the excess carried forward transitional  credit of ` 2.58 crore 
remaining undetected until pointed out by us.  
Of these, four cases in four Commissionerates, pertained to incorrect claim of 
transitional credit on account of excess availing, incorrect computation of 
reversal of Cenvat credit on common inputs and serv ices, short payment of 
excise duty and incorrect credit based on invoices which were more than one 
year old.   
When we pointed this out (between May 2018 and Febr uary 2019), the 
Ministry, while admitting the observation in three cases, intimated (between 
May and June 2019) recovery of ` 1.16 crore including interest.  In one case, 
while not admitting the failure of department in ve rifying transitional credit 
claims, the Ministry stated (June 2019) that there was a partial default in 
payment of duty by the taxpayer in June 2017 and th at  separate action 
would be initiated under the existing law (i.e. Cen tral Excise).  The reply of 
the Ministry was not acceptable since the departmen t did not identify this 
lapse though the claim of transitional credit in this case was already verified. 
The remaining two cases have been narrated below : - 
                                                           
31 Chennai North, Chennai South, Coimbatore, Dehradun, Pune-I, and Delhi East. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
93 
(a) Omission in detection of wrong carry forward of  credit despite 
being red flagged by ACES 
Scrutiny of the Tran-1 of a taxpayer in Delhi East Commissionerate, revealed 
that the taxpayer had claimed credit of ` 2.33 crore.  Audit noticed that in the 
ST-3 return of the taxpayer for the period April to  June 2017, the opening 
balance of Cenvat credit of Service Tax was ` 1.38 crore.  This was pointed 
out as ‘an error’ in the return by ACES as the taxp ayer had ‘Nil’ closing 
balance in the previous return (i.e. for the period  October 2016 to March 
2017).  Thus, the transitional credit to the tune o f ` 1.38 crore was 
inadmissible. 
The Department had verified this case but this irre gular credit, though red 
flagged by the ACES System in the return for the qu arter April – June 2017, 
was not noticed by the department.  Further, this a udit finding points 
towards non-utilisation of information available in ACES to ensure automated 
verification of correctness of transactional credits. 
When we pointed this out (May 2018), the Ministry w hile admitting the 
objection intimated (April 2019) the deposit of ` 1.38 crore by the taxpayer 
under protest.  Further, it stated that although th e return was marked with 
the Error detected, the return was not marked for R eview & Correction by 
the System.  Hence, Audit’s contention that data/in formation available in 
ACES were not utilised for automated verification was not fully correct. 
Reply of the Ministry could not be accepted as the details of the previous 
credits availed by the taxpayer were available in t he ACES system.  It would 
be pertinent to mention that though the issue was f lagged by the ACES 
system, the same was not used even during the verif ication of credits 
undertaken by the department.  This and other obser vations on verification 
of transitional credits included in this report hav e shown that electronic 
information available in ACES has not been fully ut ilised during the 
verification process. 
(b) Credit involving multiple units 
We noticed that a taxpayer in Pune I GST Commission erate, claimed 
transitional credit of ` 214.58 crore as ITC of all their registered/unregi stered 
units under existing law.  The above said Tran-1 fo rm was verified by the 
department as per the Board instructions issued fro m time to time and 
reported (July 2018) to Pune Zone.  
On scrutiny of Central Excise Return ER-1 (Excise R eturn-1) of one of the 
units, say Unit ‘X’ for the month of June 2017, it was found that the closing 
balance of eligible credit was ` 15.04 crore, however, the taxpayer had 
claimed transitional credit amounting to ` 17.32 crore in Tran-1 of that unit. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
94 
Further, verification of ER-1 returns of all other existing units for the month 
of June 2017, revealed that the transitional credit  in respect of two other 
units, say Units ‘Y’ and ‘Z’ having Cenvat closing balance of ` 0.03 crore and 
` 2.24 crore (including cess) respectively, was not claimed in Tran-1 of units Y 
and Z.  However, the total amount of credit of ` 2.27 crore of the said two 
existing units was carried forward under unit X.  
On verification of the GST registration certificate  (form GST REG-06), it was 
found that the above units Y and Z were neither reg istered as principal place 
of business nor additional place of business under GST.  Hence, the Cenvat 
balance of these units was not eligible for carry f orward through Tran-1.  
Thus, the claim of transitional credit of ` 2.27 crore was required to be 
recovered. 
When we pointed this out (February 2019) the Minist ry, while not accepting 
the observation, stated (May 2019) that the assesse e tried to add the above 
two units as additional place of businesses before filing TRAN-1, but GSTN 
portal was not allowing to add additional places of  business.  However, an 
SCN for ` 2.27 crore had been issued to the taxpayer. 
The argument put forth by the Ministry appeared fla wed on account of the 
following reasons : - 
• The functionality to apply for amendment to Registr ation was made 
available on the GST portal in September 2017. 
• Instead of issuing SCN for recovery of the amount, Ministry should 
have instructed the field formation to facilitate t axpayer to correct 
the registration details and thereby regularise the  TRAN-1 which 
appeared as an irregular availment due to the initial technical glitches. 
The Ministry should verify all similar cases where difficulty was faced by the 
taxpayer due to technical glitch on the GST portal and ensure corrective 
action. 
4.7.3 Irregular availing of transitional credit 
As per Section 140 of the CGST Act, 2017, the taxpa yers should have 
furnished all the returns required under the existi ng law to avail transitional 
credit. 
CBIC has clarified vide instructions dated 14 March  2018 that balance in 
Personal Ledger Account would not be under transiti on to GST and that on 
completion of the pending assessment, the same coul d be claimed as refund 
under Central Excise/ Service Tax provisions.  

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
95 
Transitional credit can be availed in respect of in puts or input services 
received on or after 1 July 2017, the duty or tax i n respect of which has been 
paid by the supplier under the existing law, subjec t to the condition that the 
invoice or any other duty or tax paying document of  the same was recorded 
in the books of account of such person within a per iod of thirty days from the 
appointed day (1 July 2017).  The CBIC clarified in  its letter dated 14 March 
2018 that the provisions of this Section did not apply to capital goods.   
It has been judicially held that the terms “inputs”  and “capital goods” are 
distinctly defined in the Act and thus, in the abse nce of matching provisions 
pertaining to capital goods in section 140(5), ther e would be no possibility of 
availing credit on such tax under the GST regime. 
In respect of four cases in four Commissionerates 32, Audit noticed irregular 
availment of transitional credit involving revenue of ` 2.85 crore (Appendix 
VI) without adhering to provisions quoted above.   
The Ministry accepted the observation in two cases and intimated issuance of 
Show Cause Notice (SCN).   
In another case issued to department in November 20 18, Ministry, while not 
admitting the observation, stated (May 2019) that t he lapse was procedural 
in nature and that the mismatch was because of wron g filing of ER1 return by 
the concerned unit and that the mistake was suo mot o intimated by the 
taxpayer to the department.  It was also stated tha t the department’s 
verification was in progress and as abundant precau tion, SCN was issued 
(May 2019) to the taxpayer.  The reply of the Minis try was not acceptable as 
there was no provision for transfer of credit which  has not been claimed by 
the taxpayer through original or revised return. He nce taxpayer directly 
availing ITC, which was not available in the return, was irregular.  
Reply was awaited (June 2019) in one case.  
Instances involving incorrect availing of Cenvat cr edit on capital goods and 
availing credit without filing ST returns have been narrated below : - 
(a) Non-detection of incorrect availing of Cenvat c redit on capital 
goods 
We noticed that a taxpayer in Coimbatore Executive Commissionerates, had 
carried forward Cenvat credit on capital goods or p arts of capital goods, as 
transitional credit which was not in order.  This e xcess carry forward of 
transitional credit of ` 22.74 lakh was not pointed out by the department 
during verification of transitional credit. This ex cess credit of ` 22.74 lakh has 
to be recovered. 
                                                           
32  Coimbatore, Chennai South, Gandhidham, Pune I. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
96 
When we pointed this out (January 2019) the Ministr y, admitted the 
objection and informed (June 2019) that SCN would be issued.  
(b) Cenvat credit allowed without filing returns of  service tax 
Audit observed that a taxpayer in Gandhidham Commissionerate had claimed 
ITC of service tax amounting to ` 73.51 lakh in its Tran-1 form without filing 
the last service tax return – ST-3 (for the period up to June 2017).  This lapse 
was not observed by the department despite conducti ng verification (Jan – 
Mar 2018) of the Tran-1 of the taxpayer.   
When we pointed this out (July 2018), the Ministry while admitting the 
observation intimated (April 2019), the issue of SCN to the taxpayer. 
4.7.4 No systemic check to prevent double availing of credit 
We noticed that a taxpayer having two registration numbers in Belapur GST 
Commissionerate, had filed Tran-1 for both GST regi strations in the month of 
November 2017 and claimed transitional credit of ` 25.51 crore and 
` 4.27 crore.  The same were reflected as ITC in the respective credit ledgers 
on 13 December 2017.  The taxpayer had again filed revised Tran-1 in the 
month of December 2017 and claimed transitional cre dit of ` 4.27 crore 
under the other registration number and the same wa s reflected in the ECL 
on 27 December 2017. 
On verification, the department noticed that the ta xpayer had carried 
forward same transitional credit of ` 4.27 crore under both GST registrations. 
The department had pointed out incorrect transition  of ITC amounting to 
` 4.27 crore as credited in ECL and the same was deb ited by the taxpayer 
from his credit ledger on 29 June 2018. This indicated that the taxpayer had 
rectified the double credit only when it was pointe d out by the department 
during verification and there was no systemic check  to prevent double 
credit. 
While examining the above, it appeared that the CBI C- GST system could not 
detect such irregularity of same credit being carri ed forward through form 
Tran-1 for more than one GST registrations.  It was  evident that in the above 
mentioned case, such irregularity was detected only  when both the Tran-1 
forms were verified by the Commissionerate.  This l imitation of CBIC-GST 
system might be a serious concern and the scope of such double credits in 
other cases could not be ruled out. 
Further, it could also be concluded that CBIC-GST s ystem did not have 
adequate checks to identify availing of multiple cr edits by a taxpayer having 
multiple registrations.  

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
97 
When we pointed this out (September 2018), the Mini stry while admitting 
the observation re-iterated the guidance note issue d by CBIC.  They also 
stated that the decision to allow or disallow ITC i s of quasi-judicial nature to 
be taken by the proper officer in terms of the prov isions of the Act in each 
such case individually.   
The reply of the Ministry was silent on non-detecti on of such credits by the 
CBIC-GST system.   
4.7.5 Irregular Availing of cess credit not detecte d 
Through the Taxation Law Amendment Act, 2017, the E ducation Cess (EC), 
Secondary and Higher Education Cess (SHEC), Swachh Bharat Cess (SBC), Krishi 
Kalyan Cess (KKC), were abolished with effect from 1 July 2017 and had, thus, 
become ineligible to be carried forward to GST regime as input tax credit (ITC). 
This was also clarified by the directions of the CBIC in March 2018. 
We noticed in 21 cases in six 33 Commissionerates that the taxpayer had 
availed input tax credit of the above mentioned ces ses in Tran-1 amounting 
to ` 9.74 crore (Appendix-VI), which was inadmissible. 
In one case relating to Delhi-East Commissionerate,  the department had 
verified the case but failed to point out ineligibl e Cenvat credit availed by the 
taxpayer, the details of which were available in ST-3 return. 
In two cases relating to Gandhidham Commissionerate , the department had 
not conducted any scrutiny of Tran-I of these taxpa yers although total ITC 
claimed by these taxpayers amounted to ` 16.18 crore and transitional credit 
in one case was above ` one crore . Hence, the instructions of Board to ve rify 
cases above ` 1 crore first and then in descending order were no t complied 
with, resulting in non-detection of incorrectly ava iled ITC. Further, the details 
of verification of transitional returns by the depa rtment were not provided in 
the remaining 18 cases.  Hence, audit could not com ment on whether these 
cases were already scrutinised by the department or not.  
Though the details of cesses were available in ACES , the same were not 
effectively used to disallow ineligible transitional credit on cesses.  
When we pointed this out (between March 2018 and Fe bruary 2019), the 
Ministry, while admitting the objection in all the cases intimated (between 
April and May 2019) recovery of ` 1.19 crore in 14 cases and issue of SCN for 
` 28.08 lakh in two cases.  Further, it stated that the decision to allow or 
disallow ITC is of quasi-judicial nature to be take n by the proper officer in 
terms of the provisions of the Act in each such cas e individually.  It was also 
                                                           
33  Bengaluru East, Bengaluru South, Daman, Dehradun,  Delhi-East and Gandhidham. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
98 
stated that this could not be done at central level  as the same would be ultra 
vires the provisions of the Act.   
The reply of the Ministry regarding IT system was n ot relevant since the audit 
comment was about non-utilisation of information available in ACES.   
4.7.6 Non-restriction of utilization of disputed cr edit 
Board’s circular dated 23 February 2018 dealt with cases where an SCN 
issued for recovery of Cenvat credit or erroneously  refunded has been 
adjudicated and in the last adjudication order or the last order-in-appeal, as it 
existed on 1 July 2017, it was held that such Cenvat credit was not admissible.  
The circular stipulated that such Cenvat credit (herein and after referred to as 
“disputed credit”), credited to the electronic cred it ledger as transitional 
credit, should not be utilised by a registered taxa ble person to discharge his 
tax liability under the CGST Act or under the IGST Act 2017, till the order-in-
original or the last order-in-appeal, holding that disputed credit as 
inadmissible, would be in existence.  During such p eriod, if the said disputed 
credit is utilised, it shall be recovered from the taxpayer, with interest and 
penalty as per the provisions of the Act. 
We noticed that disputed credits amounting to ` 78.49 crore were claimed 
and utilised as transitional credit by two taxpayer s in Chennai South and 
Outer Commissionerates, which was irregular. Even t hough the details of 
claims of such disputed credits were available with  the department, the IAD 
in their verification reports failed to point out b oth (i) utilisation of the 
disputed credits and (ii) the non-compliance as to the submission of required 
undertaking as prescribed in the circular.  The con cerned Range Offices also 
did not initiate any action in this regard. The ina dequate verification process 
resulted in irregular utilisation of disputed credi ts amounting to 
` 78.49 crore, which should be recovered along with interest amounting to 
` 15.17 crore. 
When we pointed this out (September 2018) the Minis try, while not 
admitting the observation, stated that there was no  field in Tran-1 form to 
show the disputed credit separately.  There was no facility for the taxpayer to 
maintain any credit equivalent to the disputed in the ECL till February 2018 as 
GSTN used to automatically debit the entire credit available in ECL against the 
tax liability of the taxpayer. Further, in respect of all the disputed matters, 
the taxpayers preferred an appeal on payment of man datory pre-deposit.  
Thus, the matter being sub-judice in an appellate f orum, no recovery action 
could be initiated as an automatic stay operated against any recovery action.    
The Ministry’s reply in bringing out functional dif ficulties with regard to 
monitoring of disputed credit included as part of t ransitional credit and its 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
99 
subsequent utilisation thereof, has pointed to the systemic inadequacies in 
relation to transitional credits.  As regards opera tion of automatic stay when 
an appeal is filed by the taxpayer, the provisions of circular dated 23 February 
2018 issued by the CBIC as detailed below indicated the need for clarification. 
Para 2.1 of the circular prescribed that so long as the Order-In-Original34 (OIO) 
or the last Order-In-Appeal (OIA), as it existed on 1 July 2017, holding the 
Cenvat credit as inadmissible is in existence, such Cenvat credit should be 
treated as disputed credit and shall not be utilised.  
Para 2.2 said that so long as such OIO or OIA holdi ng that disputed credit as 
inadmissible is in operation, if the said disputed credit is utilised, it shall  be 
recovered from the taxpayer. 
Thus, two words ‘existence’ and ‘operation’, which have different meanings 
were used in the circular, as an existing OIO or OI A would cease to be in 
operation, once stayed. It can be inferred that dis puted credit cannot be 
utilised during the existence of such OIO or OIA bu t such disputed credit, if 
utilised, shall be recovered only if such OIO or OIA is in operation. 
Ministry may like to eliminate this ambiguity by is suing suitable clarification 
in order to avoid litigation and to protect the interest of revenue. 
4.7.7 Non-payment of interest on reversal of transi tional credit 
Section 50(3) of CGST Act, 2017, provides that a ta xable person, shall pay 
interest on such undue or excess claim at such rate  as notified. The current 
notified rate of interest is 24 per cent.  Eight ob servations noticed on non-
payment of interest on reversal have been detailed below: 
(a) During audit of Audit I & II Chennai and Coimbator e 
Commissionerates we noticed that ineligible credits  on cesses claimed earlier 
were reversed by 7 taxpayers 35.  It was observed that interest liability on 
reversal of ineligible credits was neither pointed out by the department, nor 
any action was initiated by the concerned Range Off ices to levy and collect 
applicable interest. This resulted in non-levy of interest of ` 1.91 crore. 
(b) The Board in their guidelines indicated that Cenvat  credit cannot be 
availed as transitional credit twice. The double av ailment could happen in 
situations such as, availing Cenvat credit as trans itional credit through Tran-1 
and also through return in form GSTR-3B or availing  same credit twice 
through two different tables of Form Tran-1.  As pe r Section 50 of CGST Act, 
2017, a taxpayer is liable to pay interest on excess claim of ITC. 
                                                           
34  An order issued by adjudicating authority disposi ng off the SCN. 
35  Falling under jurisdictional executive Commission erates - Chennai South, Chennai Outer, 
Coimbatore and Salem 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
100 
In Chennai South Commissionerate, it was noticed fr om the ECL of a taxpayer 
that he had claimed transitional credit of ` 57.08 crore twice, as ITC accrued 
through inputs in GSTR-3B return (on 18 August 2017 ) and once as 
transitional credit brought forward through Tran-1 (on 23 August 2017).  The 
taxpayer rectified the same by reversing transition al credit claim made in 
GSTR-3B in July 2018.   
While the taxpayer has reversed the wrongly availed dual credit on his own in 
this case, this also indicated that the system had no check to deter or at least 
to red flag availment of same Cenvat credit more th an once by the taxpayers, 
though this was identified as a risk by CBIC.  This  coupled with existence of a 
functionality36 till February 2018, wherein GSTN used to automatic ally debit 
the entire credit available in ECL against the tax liability of the taxpayer, 
indicated the risk of utilisation of such irregular credits by the taxpayers. 
Even though the taxpayer reversed the excess claim after a lapse of 11 
months, no interest liability was pointed out by IA D during their verification. 
The liability of taxpayer to pay interest on excess  availed credit amounting to 
` 12.65 crore should be examined.   
When we pointed out these eight cases (between Dece mber 2018 and 
January 2019), the Ministry admitted the objection (June 2019) in four cases, 
while reply was awaited (June 2019) in the remaining four cases . 
Part B : - Registration 
We examined records of 80,874 registrations in sele cted ten 
Commissionerates and we noticed deficiencies/lacuna e in 12,912 cases (16 
per cent), which were issued as observations to the  CBIC field formations. 
Three significant observations involving 5,496 regi strations relating to 
composition scheme and mapping of registered taxpay ers to jurisdictional 
officers, issued to Ministry, have been narrated below : -  
4.8 Irregular registration in composition scheme 
Section 10 of the CGST Act, 2017, stipulates that a  registered person cannot 
opt for Composition scheme if he is engaged in the supply of works contract 
services.  As taxpayers have to apply for GST regis tration centrally on GST 
portal, the portal should have proper validation to  ensure that only the 
eligible taxpayers opt for Composition scheme.  As per Rule 9 of CGST Rules, 
2017, a registration is treated as deemed approved if no objection is raised 
by tax officer within three days.  Hence, in case o f inadequacies in key 
validations of Registration Module on GST portal an d non-verification of the 
                                                           
36  As per reply given by the Ministry to paragraph 4 .7.6. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
101 
registration application within three days by juris dictional tax officers, the 
irregular registrations stand approved. 
During the audit of Siliguri and Kolkata North GST Commissionerates, it was 
observed that ten taxpayers opted for ‘composition levy’ though they 
provided works contract services.  
The lack of key validations noticed during IT audit  of Registration Module 
were brought out in Part-A of Chapter III  of this report.  Thus, while there 
was no proper validation in the system to debar tho se dealing in works 
contract services from registering as composition t axpayers, the field 
formations have also failed to verify the details o f registration.  As the tax 
rates and compliance requirements are completely di fferent for composition 
taxpayers, the department should take effective act ion to ensure that these 
and other such ineligible taxpayers are registered under the correct category.  
Any returns already filed by such wrongly registere d taxpayers need to be 
reviewed and corrective action taken. 
When we pointed this out (between April and June 20 18), the Ministry, while 
admitting the objection, intimated (April 2019) tha t out of ten, seven 
taxpayers had already opted out of the scheme, one mentioned works 
contract service by mistake while they actually dea lt in hosiery and leather 
and action had been initiated against the remaining  two taxpayers. Regarding 
filing of returns by nine of these taxpayers who de al in works contract 
service, Ministry informed that four taxpayers file d nil returns and hence 
there was no revenue impact, while one taxpayer fil ed revised returns paying 
differential tax and action has been initiated against four taxpayers.   
Ministry further stated that composition scheme being an optional scheme, it 
was not feasible to put built in system check to pr event ineligible taxpayers 
from opting for the scheme.   
The reply of the Ministry as regards built in syste m check is not tenable as 
though the scheme is optional, the terms and condit ions prescribed for 
opting for the scheme are mandatory, which should b e taken care of by the 
system. It is very much possible to deter taxpayers  from opting for 
composition levy by mistake or out of ignorance by designing suitable 
validations on GST Portal. 
4.9 Allocation and mapping of taxpayers to jurisdic tional tax 
officers 
The allocation of taxpayers between Central and Sta te tax departments is 
based on turnover as already mentioned in paragraph 1.4.3 of Chapter I . 
Notification issued (June 2017) by the appointed Ce ntral tax officers decided 
the jurisdiction up to the Commissionerate level an d Trade Notices issued by 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
102 
the Zonal Chief Commissioners further demarcated th e jurisdiction of each 
officer up to the Range level.  Based on this alloc ation, the mapping of 
registered taxpayers to the jurisdiction was to be carried out on GST portal. 
4.9.1 Non allocation of registrations of taxpayers to their proper 
jurisdiction 
During the audit (June 2018) of Divisions IV and VI  of Thane GST 
Commissionerate, it was observed that 734 number of existing taxpayers were 
still “unallocated” to their proper jurisdiction.  Even after a lapse of nearly one 
year at the time of audit (June 2018) after implementation of GST (w.e.f. 1 July 
2017), the assesse allocation to proper jurisdiction was not completed.   
The Division replied (June 2018) that as the alloca tion of taxpayers was 
handled by the GST portal, division office had no role in this regard. 
The reply could not be accepted as the department should take up the matter 
with appropriate authority for allocation of proper jurisdiction to the taxpayers 
in the interest of revenue and to mitigate the taxpayers’ difficulties.  
While bringing this to the notice of Ministry (Apri l 2019), we requested 
Ministry to comment on the reasons for taxpayers re maining unallocated and 
the current status of allocation of these taxpayers . Further, the total number 
of unallocated taxpayers under the entire jurisdict ion of CBIC as on date and 
reason for the same along with action plan to mitig ate the same have also 
been sought. 
The Ministry informed (May 2019) that a total of 42,428 GSTINs were yet to be 
allocated under the entire jurisdiction of CBIC for  want of distribution orders 
from the jurisdictional authorities and that the department has been regularly 
following up with the GST Zones for bifurcation of the pending taxpayers. In 
respect of Thane Commissionerate, while not admitti ng the objection, the 
Ministry stated (May 2019) that the as per their de tails, a total of 114 
assessees remained unallocated in the divisions IV and VI and that details of 
734 GSTINs were not available with them for providing any current status.   
Even two years after roll out of GST, the allocatio n of assessees, which is the 
basis for administration of GST by tax departments,  remained incomplete.  
Ministry neither gave any reasons regarding why the  distribution orders 
regarding assesse allocation could not be finalised nor indicated any timelines 
/ action plan for resolving the same. 
As regards variation in number of pending allocatio ns of 114 as per the CBIC 
and as pointed out in observation as 734, the numbe rs quoted by Audit were 
as per the MIS reports of the concerned Commissione rate, which can be 
obtained by the Ministry from the concerned Commissionerate..  

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
103 
4.9.2 Incorrect mapping of taxpayers 
During audit (August 2018) of seventeen ranges unde r Bengaluru East 
Commissionerate, we noticed that 3,161 taxpayers, o ut of a total of 16,352 
taxpayers mapped to 17 Ranges by the system, did no t belong to these 
Ranges as per the Notification and Trade Notice. Th us, 19.33 per cent of the 
taxpayers mapped to these Ranges were incorrectly mapped. The number of 
incorrectly mapped taxpayers in the individual Rang es varied from 2 per cent 
to 58 per cent of the total number of taxpayers und er the respective Ranges.  
Although the Range Officer reported these discrepan cies to the Public 
Relation Officer (PRO) in the respective Commission erate, proper mapping 
was yet to be done in these cases as of August 2018. 
It was further noticed that 1,612 taxpayers (10 per cent) belonging to these 17 
Ranges as per the Trade Notice were wrongly mapped to other Ranges within 
the same Commissionerate.  However, this issue was not considered by the 
Range offices while taking up the issue of mapping of taxpayers with the PRO. 
Wrong mapping carried the risk of the returns filed /non-
filing of returns by the wrongly mapped taxpayers not being 
subject to any kind of scrutiny by the jurisdictional officer or 
taxpayer grievances remaining unaddressed as tax of ficers 
access to information was based on the mapping. 
When we pointed this out (August 2018), the Ministr y while not admitting 
the observation stated (May 2019) that action had a lready been initiated for 
correct mapping by Range Officer by sending a request to PRO.   
The reply of the Ministry is not acceptable as in s pite of being aware and 
bringing it to the notice of PRO, wrong mapping of taxpayers persisted in the 
system at the time of audit (after nearly one year of implementation of GST). 
This para also indicated that there was no mechanis m in CBIC-GST system to 
address this issue on Pan-India basis and in this h ighly IT intensive 
environment also, Range Offices had to physically t ake up problems created 
by an IT system for resolution.   
Part C : Refunds 
4.10 Overview of audit of Refund claims 
We examined the records relating to Refunds of 543 out of 727 claims in 
selected five Commissionerates 37.  We noticed non-adherence to extant 
provisions in processing of refunds in 28 claims (5  per cent) involving an 
                                                           
37  Aurangabad, Bhiwandi, Daman, Mumbai East and Sura t 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
104 
amount of ` 2.72 crore.  In 27 cases involving ` 2.40 crore, Ministry accepted 
the audit observations.   
It is pertinent to mention here that the Central ta x officers were cross 
empowered to process refund of both SGST and CGST i n respect of GST 
taxpayers allotted to them.  Hence irregularities i n refunds would impact 
both Consolidated Fund of India as well as the States.   
Out of the total objection amount of ` 2.72 crore on Refunds, an amount of 
` 42.71 lakh involving three claims pertains to SGST  refunds impacting the 
revenue of Gujarat, while two claims involving ` 20.79 lakh pertain to 
Maharashtra SGST.   
All these 28 cases were issued to Ministry (Appendix-VII) and seven 
significant cases have been narrated below : - 
4.11 Non-adherence of provisions of Refund 
Section 54 of the CGST Act, 2017, provides that any person claiming refund of 
any duty and interest, may make an application for refund to the department 
before the expiry of two years from the relevant da te in the prescribed form.  
The refund application should be accompanied by such documentary or other 
evidence as the applicant may furnish to establish that the amount in relation 
to which refund is claimed was collected from him o r paid by him and the 
incidence of such duty/interest had not been passed  on by him to any other 
person.  Further, the proper officer has to issue t he order sanctioning the 
refund after due verification and examination of cl aim within sixty days from 
the date of receipt of application.  
In accordance with section 54 (3) of the CGST Act 2 017, a registered person 
may claim refund of any unutilised Input Tax Credit (ITC) at the end of any tax 
period where the credit has accumulated on account of rate of tax on inputs 
being higher than the rate of tax on output supplie s (i.e. Inverted Duty 
Structure).  Further, Rule 89(5) of the CGST Rules,  2017, prescribes the 
formula for maximum refund of unutilised ITC on acc ount of inverted duty 
structure. As per the rule ibid, net ITC means the ITC availed only on inputs 
during the relevant period. Thus, credit availed on  input services is not to be 
considered for net ITC. 
As per Para 3.1 of the circular dated 4 September 2 018, regarding the 
provisions in case of refund of unutilised ITC, the  refundable amount is 
calculated as the least of the following amounts: 
(a) The maximum refund amount as per the formula la id down in Rule 
89(4) or Rule 89(5) of the CGST Rules, 2017; 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
105 
(b) The balance in the electronic credit ledger of the claimant at the end 
of the tax period for which the refund claim is bei ng filed after the return for 
the said period has been filed; and 
(c) The balance in the electronic credit ledger of the claimant at the time 
of filing the refund application. 
4.11.1  Excess allowance of refund  
(a) A taxpayer falling under Mumbai East GST Commission erate claimed 
refund of ` 27.18 lakh on account of inverted duty structure f or the month of 
March 2018 and the same was allowed as claimed. Scrutiny of the documents 
available on record revealed that the Net ITC of ` 41.74 lakh considered for 
computation of the maximum amount of refund also in cluded credit availed 
on input services of ` 38.77 lakh.  Thus, the admissible Net ITC as per R ule 
89(5) of the CGST Rules, 2017 would be input credit  of ` 2.98 lakh only. 
Hence, after taking ` 2.98 lakh as Net ITC into consideration, the maxim um 
amount of refund as per prescribed formula works out to nil.  Thus, there was 
an irregular grant of refund of ` 27.18 lakh by the department, which is 
required to be recovered.  
When we pointed this out (February 2019), the Minis try, while accepting the 
observation (May 2019) reported issuance of SCN to the taxpayer. 
(b) A taxpayer under Mumbai East GST Commissionerate cl aimed refund 
of ` 76.42 lakh on account of zero-rated supply of goods for the month of July 
2017 and the same was allowed by the department. Sc rutiny of the 
documents available on record revealed that the bal ance in the electronic 
credit ledger of the claimant at the end of the tax  period after the return for 
the said period has been filed was ` 44.72 lakh only. This being the least, the 
claimant was entitled to allowance of refund of ` 44.72 lakh. This has 
resulted in excess allowance of refund of ` 31.70 lakh. 
When we pointed this out (February 2019), the Minis try, while not accepting 
the observation, stated (May 2019) that the formula  to be used for 
calculating the refund pertained to the period prio r to issue of circular dated 
4 September 2018.   
The reply of the Ministry could not be accepted as the circular quoted was 
clarificatory in nature and hence the Act provision s clarified by the circular 
would apply to period prior to the circular as well .  The reply of the Ministry 
indicated the need to review all cases processed pr ior to the issue of the 
circular. 
(c) The Board vide Circular dated 4 September 2018 cla rified that after 
determination of amount refundable, the equivalent amount is to be debited 
to electronic credit ledger by the taxpayer in the following order: First against 
Integrated Tax to the extent of balance available and thereafter to Central tax 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
106 
and State/Union territory tax equally to the extent  of balance   available and 
in the event of shortfall in the balance available in a particular electronic 
credit ledger, the differential amount is to be deb ited from the other 
electronic credit ledger. Further this procedure wa s to be followed for all 
refund application filed after the date of issue of aforesaid circular. 
A taxpayer falling under Mumbai East GST Commission erate filed refund 
application (GST RFD-01A) on the GST portal on 18 S eptember 2018 and filed 
a copy of the application with the department on 1 October 2018.  It was 
observed from GST RFD-01A that at the time of filin g of refund application, 
the taxpayer’s electronic credit ledger had a balan ce of IGST of ` 28.45 lakh, 
CGST of ` 17.49 lakh and SGST of ` 17.49 lakh.  Further, the taxpayer had 
claimed refund of IGST of ` 12.37 lakh, CGST of ` 12.87 lakh and SGST of 
` 12.87 lakh.  After scrutiny, the department rejecte d claim of ` 5,456 and 
sanctioned refund of IGST of ` 12.37 lakh, CGST of ` 12.84 lakh and SGST of 
` 12.84 lakh. Thus, it was observed that the department had not followed the 
order of debiting the refund amount to electronic c redit ledger as envisaged 
in the above referred circular.  The error resulted  in excess allowance of 
refund from CGST and SGST aggregating to ` 16.08 lakh ( ` 28.45 lakh-
` 12.37 lakh), which further resulted in excess credi t balance in IGST 
electronic credit ledger to that extent. 
When we pointed this out (February 2019), the Minis try while admitting the 
objection (May 2019) intimated the issuance of SCN. 
4.11.2 Irregular grant of provisional refund 
As per section 54(6) of CGST Act, 2017, in the case  of any claim for refund on 
account of zero rated supply of goods or services o r both made by registered 
persons, 90 per cent of refund claimed may be sanct ioned on a provisional 
basis and thereafter an order made under sub sectio n (5) for final settlement 
of the refund claim after due verification of docum ents furnished by the 
applicant.  Thus, sanction of provisional refund is allowed on account of zero 
rated supply of goods and / or services and not in other categories. 
(i) During the examination of records relating to refun ds in division IV of 
Bhivandi GST Commissionerate, we noticed that the d epartment had issued 
the provisional refund of 90 per cent pertaining to  refund on account of 
excess cash balance in electronic ledger in case of  two taxpayers and on 
account of inverted duty structure in case of one t axpayer which are other 
than the cases of zero rated supply of goods or ser vices.  Thus, the 
provisional grant of refund in these cases resulted  in irregular grant of refund 
of ` 34.86 lakh. 
(ii) Similarly, while examining records relating to ref und in Division-V 
under Surat Commissionerate, we observed that the d epartment had issued 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
107 
the provisional refund of 90 per cent on account of  inverted duty structure 
amounting to ` 1.39 crore to a taxpayer.  The refund claim was se nt to 
jurisdictional Range office for verification, which  had opined that the 
provisional refund clause would apply only in cases  of zero rated supply of 
goods/services. However, the Division office had al ready sanctioned and 
disbursed the refund on provisional basis even befo re receipt of negative 
verification report from Range office.  This result ed in incorrect grant of 
provisional refund of ` 1.39 crore against ineligible category of refund.  
When we pointed this out (between June and Septembe r 2018), the Ministry 
partially admitting the observations, stated (May 2 019) that it was a 
procedural lapse and refund was anyway admissible t o taxpayer.  Further 
they intimated that at the instance of the CBIC, th e jurisdictional 
Commissionerates have issued instructions to the fi eld formations to follow 
the correct procedure. 
The Ministry, vested with the responsibility of ens uring compliance with the 
provisions of the CGST Act, holding non-compliance with the provisions of the 
Act as only a procedural lapse, is highly unaccepta ble.  Ministry should 
identify all similar cases and seek assurance from field formations about 
proper verification of all the refund claims which were sanctioned 
provisionally, in contravention of the Provisions of the Act. 
4.12 Conclusion  
− Unhindered and full access to pan-India data is cru cial for meaningful 
audit and to draw required assurances needed, other wise certifying 
revenue receipts may become difficult. DoR’s offer of providing data 
based on CAG’s queries is not workable, as without the full data, it is 
neither possible to formulate queries, nor run the required algorithms 
on the data.  The CAG sought data through the Appli cation 
Programme Interface (APIs) already designed by GSTN .  It need hardly 
be stated that providing such data as CAG may requi re is a 
constitutional and legal requirement. 
− In the absence of access to GST data, the conclusio ns in this chapter 
on compliance audit were based on limited audits ca rried out in the 
field.  However, the gamut of issues brought out ev en in this limited 
audit point to serious systemic deficiencies that n eed to be addressed 
by the department. 
− The technical glitches and delays in making Tran-1 available on GST 
Portal has led to repeated extensions of due date f or filing the Tran-1 
returns. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
108 
− Some of the audit findings on transitional credits indicated that data / 
red flags available in ACES have not been efficient ly leveraged to 
identify and reject inadmissible credits and correc tive action was 
taken only after being pointed out by us. 
− Non-allocation or wrong mapping of registered taxpa yers carried the 
risk of the returns filed/non-filing of returns in such cases not being 
subject to any kind of scrutiny by the jurisdiction al officer.  Further, 
the Ministry’s reply that Range Offices initiated c orrective action by 
writing to the PRO indicated that there was no mech anism in CBIC-
GST system to address this issue on pan-India basis  and in this highly 
IT intensive environment also, Range Offices had to  physically take up 
problems created by an IT system for resolution. 
− The instances of non-adherence to the provisions re lating to refunds, 
pointed towards the need for expediting automation of refund 
processing with proper checks and validations besid es improving the 
system for monitoring manual processing of refunds, till automation is 
completed. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi (HIMABINDU MUDUMBAI)
 
Dated: Principal Director (Goods and Services Tax-I) 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi (RAJIV MEHRISHI)
 
Dated: Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
  

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
109 
Appendix-I : GST rates on goods and services 
(Reference : Paragraph 1.6.2 (b)) 
GST rates on goods 
Slab Indicative items 
0 per cent Food grains,  Cereals, Milk, Jaggery, Common Salt 
5 per cent Coal, Sugar, Tea & Coffee, Drugs & Medic ine, Edible Oil, 
Packaged and branded food items, Indian Sweets, org anic 
fertilizers 
12 per cent Frozen meat products, Fruit Juices, Vegetable Juice s, Beverages 
containing milk, Tractor 
18 per cent Capital goods, Hair Oil, Soap, Toothpas te, School Bags, 
Refrigerators, Chewing gum, chocolate, Wafers coate d with 
chocolate 
28 per cent Air conditioner, molasses, Monitors and Projectors 
28 per 
cent+ Cess 
Small cars (1 per cent / 3 per cent cess), Luxury c ars (15 per 
cent cess), tobacco products, pan masala and aerated water 
GST rates on services 
Slab Indicative items 
0 per cent Hotel/ Lodges with tariff below INR 1000 
5 per cent Goods transport, Rail tickets (other tha n sleeper class), 
Economy class air tickets, Cab aggregators, Restaurants 
12 per cent Works contract, Business Class air travel 
18 per cent Telecom services, IT services, branded garments and financial 
services  
28 per cent Cinema tickets above ` 100, Betting, Gambling 
 
  

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
110 
Appendix-II : Returns under GST 
(Reference : Paragraph 1.6.2 (c)) 
GSTR Description Who has to 
file 
Standard due 
date of filing 
Remarks 
1 Statement of 
outward supplies 
of Goods or 
Services 
Normal 
Registered 
Person 
10th of next 
month 
Due date for monthly 
returns of July 2017 to 
September 2018 was 
extended to 31 October 
2018.  Due date for 
quarterly returns for the 
quarters October–
December 2018 and 
January-March 2019 was 
extended to last date of 
following month instead of 
10th of following month 
2 Statement of 
inward supplies of 
Goods and 
Services 
Normal 
registered 
person 
15
th of next 
month 
Kept in abeyance 
3 Return for normal 
taxpayer 
Normal 
registered 
person 
20th of next 
month 
Kept in abeyance 
3B Simple monthly 
return 
Normal 
registered 
persons 
20
th of next 
month 
Initially introduced for two 
months and continued 
thereafter till date 
4 Quarterly-return Composition 
taxpayers 
18th of the 
month 
succeeding 
the quarter 
No extension 
5 Monthly return for 
non-resident 
taxpayer 
Non-resident 
taxpayer 
20th of the 
month 
succeeding tax 
period & 
within 7 days 
after expiry of 
registration 
Due date for monthly 
returns of July – December 
2017 were extended till 31 
January 2018. 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
111 
GSTR Description Who has to 
file 
Standard due 
date of filing 
Remarks 
5A Monthly return for 
a person supplying 
OIDAR services 
from a place 
outside India to a 
non-taxable online 
recipient 
Supplier of 
OIDAR 
Services 
20th of the 
next month 
Due date for monthly 
returns of July – December 
2017 were extended till 31 
January 2018. 
6 Monthly return for 
an Input Service 
Distributor (ISD) 
Input Service 
Distributor 
13th of next 
month 
Due date for monthly 
returns of July 2017 – 
August 2018 were 
extended till 30 September 
2018. 
7 Monthly return for 
authorities 
deducting tax at 
source 
Tax Deductor 10th of next 
month 
Due date was extended to 
28 February 2019 for the 
returns for the period 
October 2018 to January 
2019 
8 Monthly 
statement for E-
Commerce 
Operator depicting 
supplies made 
through it 
E-Commerce 
Operator 
10th of next 
month 
Due date was extended to 
7 February 2019 for the 
returns for the period 
October 2018 to January 
2019 
9 Annual return Normal 
Registered 
Person  
31st December 
of next 
Financial Year 
Extended till 31 August 
2019 for year 2017-18 
9A Simplified Annual 
Return under 
Composition 
Scheme 
Composition 
taxpayers 
31st December 
of next 
Financial Year 
Extended till 31 August 
2019 for year 2017-18 
10 Final return Taxable 
person 
whose 
Within three 
months of the 
date of 
--- 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
112 
GSTR Description Who has to 
file 
Standard due 
date of filing 
Remarks 
registration 
has been 
surrendered 
or cancelled. 
cancellation or 
date of order 
of 
cancellation, 
whichever is 
later. 
11 Details of inward 
supplies to be 
furnished by a 
person having UIN 
UN agencies 
and 
Embassies 
 File their returns only when 
they apply for refunds on 
quarterly basis 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
113 
Appendix-III : Distribution of Normal and Composition taxpayers 
(Reference : Paragraphs 2.2.2 and 2.2.3) 
State 
Code 
State Name Normal 
taxpayers 
Normal 
taxpayers as  
 a percentage 
of all India 
Normal 
taxpayers 
Composition 
taxpayers 
Composition 
taxpayers as   
a percentage 
of all India 
Composition 
taxpayers 
Others (including 
ISD, Casual 
taxpayers, TCS, 
TDS, NR 
taxpayers, 
OIDAR) 
Others as a 
percentage 
of total 
Others as a 
percentage 
of total 
Others 
Total Migrated 
out of 
Total 
Migrated  
as a 
percentage 
within  
State 
1 Jammu and Kashmir 87364 0.87 94 40 0.54 1267 0.01 0.81 98071 46309 47 
2 Himachal Pradesh 85293 0.85 21192 1.21 969 0.01 0.62 107454 52175 49 
3 Punjab 300047 2.99 46220 2.64 1862 0.02 1.19 348129 182464 52 
4 Chandigarh 27387 0.27 2071 0.12 885 0.01 0.56 30343 16951 56 
5 Uttarakhand 126162 1.26 31947 1.83 2942 0.02 1.87 161051 75467 47 
6 Haryana 419365 4.17 24654 1.41 2698 0.02 1.72 446717 214678 48 
7 Delhi 719515 7.16 18558 1.06 4076 0.03 2.60 742149 382229 52 
8 Rajasthan 545063 5.42 160877 9.20 16194 0.14 10.31 722134 410251 57 
9 Uttar Pradesh 1099885 10.94 350689 20.05 9332 0.08 5.94 1459906 667853 46 
10 Bihar 298693 2.97 92344 5.28 5219 0.04 3.32 396256 161456 41 
11 Sikkim 6599 0.07 839 0.05 289 0.00 0.18 7727 2676 35 
12 Arunachal Pradesh 10561 0.11 2476 0.14 916 0.01 0.58 13953 3199 23 
13 Nagaland 6243 0.06 2201 0.13 240 0.00 0.15 8684 2985 34 
14 Manipur 10741 0.11 1749 0.10 462 0.00 0.29 12952 2972 23 
15 Mizoram 5100 0.05 97 0.01 224 0.00 0.14 5421 1850 34 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
114 
State 
Code 
State Name Normal 
taxpayers 
Normal 
taxpayers as  
 a percentage 
of all India 
Normal 
taxpayers 
Composition 
taxpayers 
Composition 
taxpayers as   
a percentage 
of all India 
Composition 
taxpayers 
Others (including 
ISD, Casual 
taxpayers, TCS, 
TDS, NR 
taxpayers, 
OIDAR) 
Others as a 
percentage 
of total 
Others as a 
percentage 
of total 
Others 
Total Migrated 
out of 
Total 
Migrated  
as a 
percentage 
within  
State 
16 Tripura 22938 0.23 2786 0.16 914 0.01 0.58 26638 11488 43 
17 Meghalaya 23573 0.23 2598 0.15 375 0.00 0.24 26546 9885 37 
18 Assam 154875 1.54 45741 2.62 2420 0.02 1.54 203036 85942 42 
19 West Bengal 575614 5.73 80120 4.58 10464 0.09 6.66 666198 257847 39 
20 Jharkhand 143600 1.43 21543 1.23 2790 0.02 1.78 167933 72721 43 
21 Odisha 217261 2.16 32235 1.84 2424 0.02 1.54 251920 121410 48 
22 Chattisgarh 100867 1.00 35333 2.02 2521 0.02 1.61 138721 74278 54 
23 Madhya Pradesh 341926 3.40 65346 3.74 3474 0.03 2.21 410746 239894 58 
24 Gujarat 854308 8.50 112360 6.42 9791 0.08 6.23 976459 474971 49 
25 Daman and Diu 5971 0.06 334 0.02 181 0.00 0.12 6486 3690 57 
26 Dadra and Nagar Haveli 8065 0.08 408 0.02 109 0.00 0.07 8582 4154 48 
27 Maharastra 1363979 13.57 155907 8.91 34035 0.28 21.67 1553921 778504 50 
29 Karnataka 701003 6.98 111517 6.38 14034 0.12 8.94 826554 482660 58 
30 Goa 32864 0.33 4907 0.28 670 0.01 0.43 38441 21166 55 
31 Lakshadweep 202 0.00 30 0.00 43 0.00 0.03 275 11 4 
32 Kerala 287751 2.86 48653 2.78 5389 0.05 3.43 341793 219762 64 
33 Tamil Nadu 853294 8.49 90710 5.19 7899 0.07 5.03 951903 511558 54 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
115 
State 
Code 
State Name Normal 
taxpayers 
Normal 
taxpayers as  
 a percentage 
of all India 
Normal 
taxpayers 
Composition 
taxpayers 
Composition 
taxpayers as   
a percentage 
of all India 
Composition 
taxpayers 
Others (including 
ISD, Casual 
taxpayers, TCS, 
TDS, NR 
taxpayers, 
OIDAR) 
Others as a 
percentage 
of total 
Others as a 
percentage 
of total 
Others 
Total Migrated 
out of 
Total 
Migrated  
as a 
percentage 
within  
State 
34 Puducherry 20615 0.21 2562 0.15 343 0.00 0.22 23520 13095 56 
35 Andaman and Nicobar 
Island 
3934 0.04 882 0.05 251 0.00 0.16 5067 949 19 
36 Telangana 313292 3.12 57619 3.29 8974 0.08 5.71 379885 175000 46 
37 Andhra Pradesh 275967 2.75 111940 6.40 2093 0.02 1.33 390000 192385 49 
97 Other Territory 66 0.00 0 0.00 1 0.00 0.00 67 0 0 
99 Center Jurisdiction 0 0.00 0 0.00 286 0.00 0.18 286 0 0 
 Grand Total 10049983 100.00 1748885 100.00 157056 1.31 100.00 11955924 5974885 50 
 
  

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
116 
Appendix-IV : Filing of GSTR-1, 3B, 4, 5, 5A and 6 
(Reference : Paragraphs 2.3.3 and 2.3.4) 
Return Type Particulars April'18 May'18 June'18 July'18 August'18 September'18 October'18 November'18 December'18 
GSTR-1 
Due for filing 4496316 4682345 9316710 4775626 4726891 9657239 4609444 4572118 9901997 
Returns Filed 2728772 2748617 7048521 27505 21 2728177 6998553 2653997 2583371 64 36328 
Return Filing % 60.69% 58.70% 75.65% 57.5 9% 57.72% 72.47% 57.58% 56.50% 6 5.00% 
GSTR-3B 
Due for filing 8817798 9122309 9316710 9470282 9615273 9657239 9757664 9846645 9901997 
Returns Filed 7694460 7818233 7897701 7957565 8014906 8041279 8052558 7913241 7818108 
Return Filing % 87.26% 85.70% 84.77% 84.03% 83.36% 83.27% 82.53% 80.36% 78.95% 
GSTR-4 
Due for filing 1766630 1774379 1757919 
Returns Filed 1506595 1453121 1371088 
Return Filing % 85.28% 81.89% 77.99% 
GSTR-5 
Due for filing 109 366 101 61 49 32 29 30 28 
Returns Filed 12 40 47 46 35 20 20 26 17 
Return Filing % 11.01% 10.93% 46.53% 75.41% 71.43% 62.50% 68.97% 86.67% 60.71% 
GSTR-5A 
Due for filing 158 158 188 210 224 236 251 260 266 
Returns Filed 80 84 86 89 93 95 95 98 99 
Return Filing % 50.63% 53.16% 45.74% 42.3 8% 41.52% 40.25% 37.85% 37.69% 3 7.22% 
GSTR-6 
Due for filing 9749 9875 9832 9904 9936 9852 9413 9288 9220 
Returns Filed 5129 5129 5120 4936 4809 4572 4465 4379 4312 
Return Filing % 52.61% 51.94% 52.07% 49.84% 48.40% 46.41% 47.43% 47.15% 46.77% 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
117 
Appendix-V: Key Validations / functionalities not aligned to provisions 
(Reference : Paragraph 3.5) 
Para No. Issue in brief Provided 
in SRS 
Implementation 
failure 
3.7.1 (a) PAN holders found registered under CLS as  well as 
Normal taxpayer, which was not allowed by the Act 
Yes Yes 
3.7.1 (b) GST System did not debar a PAN holder from 
registering under CLS in case their aggregate turno ver 
from all registrations on all India basis exceeded the 
threshold of turnover prescribed for CLS 
No –– 
3.7.2 (a) GST IT System failed to validate and deba r Inter-state 
suppliers, ECOM, SEZ developers / units from availi ng 
CLS. 
Yes Yes 
3.7.2 (b) GST IT system did not restrict the manufacturers of Ice 
Cream, Pan Masala, Tobacco from registering as a 
Composition taxpayer. 
No –– 
3.8.1 (a) PAN, which was mandatory, was made option al for 
registration of ONPs 
Yes Yes 
3.8.1 (b) Registration for ONPs – Non-availability of facilit y for 
validating notification number. 
No –– 
3.8.2 (i) No facility for uploading vital documents  in case of 
OIDAR 
Yes Yes 
3.8.2 (ii) System accepted junk values  against Tax 
Identification Number (TIN),  a mandatory field for  
OIDAR.  There was no provision for uploading the 
documents pertaining to TIN for verification by the tax 
officials. 
No –– 
3.8.2 (iii) PAN and address of authorised represent atives of 
OIDAR applicants, mandatory for filing the applicat ion 
of registration for OIDAR, were not made mandatory 
in the GST IT system. 
Yes Yes 
3.8.3 The Category (iv) to be made available on when 
notified by the Government found operational before  
any such notification was issued 
No –– 
3.9.3 No provision for auto-population of required fields for 
multiple registrations under the same PAN 
Yes Yes 
3.9.4 Jurisdiction Mapping with PIN Code not enabled No –– 
3.10.3 It was made mandatory on GST portal for a ta xpayer 
to provide a unique combination of PAN, Mobile and 
e-mail for each business vertical to be registered,  
though not mandated by Law. 
Yes No 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
118 
Para No. Issue in brief Provided 
in SRS 
Implementation 
failure 
3.10.4 Under Tax Collected at Source (TCS) category, there  
were blanks or NP against ‘Registration Name’, whic h 
was a mandatory field and another field ‘jurisdicti onal 
approving authority’, pointing towards absence of 
validations. 
Yes Yes 
3.10.5 There was no provision for raising an alert to the tax 
officer in case a Non Resident Taxable Person 
(NRTP)/Casual taxpayer had not filed for registrati on 
five days prior to date of commencement of business , 
as required under Section 25 of CGST Act, 2017 read  
with Rule 13(i) of CGST Rules, 2017. 
No –– 
3.19 Display of messages was not in sync with the actual  
status of the transaction 
Yes Yes 
 
  

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
119 
Appendix-VI : Overview of audit of transitional credits 
(Reference : Paragraph 4.7.1) 
(`` `` in lakh) 
DAP 
No. 
Name of Commissionerates 
involved 
No. of 
cases 
Objection 
Amount 
Accepted 
Amount 
Recovered 
Amount 
Paragraph 4.7.2 : Carry forward of Excess Cenvat Credit 
13 Chennai North 1 50.09 50.09 50.09 
13 Chennai South 1 7.11 0.00 0.00 
13 Coimbatore 1 53.06 53.06 53.06 
25 Dehradun 1 10.09 10.09 12.53 
3 Delhi East 1 138.00 138.00 138.00 
31 Pune I 1 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Paragraph 4.7.3 : Irregular availing of Transition Credit 
30 Pune I 1 74.69 0.00 0.00 
13 Chennai South 1 31.17 31.17 0.00 
13 Coimbatore 1 22.74 22.74 0.00 
2 Gandhidham 1 73.51 73.51 0.00 
Paragraph 4.7.4 : No systemic check to prevent double availing of credit 
26 Belapur 1  0.00 0.00 0.00 
Paragraph 4.7.5 : Irregular Availing of Cess credit not detected 
7 Dehradun 1 37.09 37.09 37.09 
9 Gandhidham 2 27.30 27.30 0.98 
8 Delhi East 1 19.51 19.51 19.51 
15 Bengaluru East 11  345.02 345.02 46.15 
15 Bengaluru South 5 533.47 533.47 2.99 
23 Daman 1  11.92 11.92 11.92 
Paragraph 4.7.6 : Non-restriction of utilization of disputed credit 
11 Chennai South 1 729.00 0.00 0.00 
11 Chennai Outer 1  7119.97 0.00 0.00 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
120 
DAP 
No. 
Name of Commissionerates 
involved 
No. of 
cases 
Objection 
Amount 
Accepted 
Amount 
Recovered 
Amount 
Paragraph 4.7.7 : Non-payment of interest on reversal of transitional credit 
13 Chennai South 4 1338.31 9.80 0.00 
13 Chennai Outer 1  21.99 0.00 0.00 
13 Coimbatore 2 29.03 29.03 0.00 
13 Salem 1 66.44 66.44 0.00 
  

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
121 
Appendix-VII : Overview of audit of Refund claims 
(Reference : Paragraph 4.10) 
(`` `` in lakh) 
DAP No. 
Name of 
Commissionerates 
involved 
No. of cases Objection 
Amount 
Accepted 
Amount 
Recovered 
Amount 
18 Mumbai East 2 58.88 27.18 0.00 
20 Bhiwandi 3 34.86 34.86 0.00 
22 Daman 21  22.80 18.27 0.00 
24 Surat 1 139.00 139.00 0.00 
27 Mumbai East 1 16.08 16.08 0.00 
 Total 28 271.62 235.39 0.00 
 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
122 
Glossary 
ACES Automation of Central Excise and Service Tax 
ARN Application Reference Number 
BARM Bank Authorisation Reference Model 
BCMS Business Community Management System 
BCP Business Continuity Plan 
BI Business Intelligence 
CAB Change Approval Board 
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
CBDT Central Board of Direct Taxes 
CBEC Central Board of Excise and Customs 
CBIC Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs 
CCA Chief Controller of Accounts 
Cenvat Central Value Added Tax 
CEO Chief Executive Officer 
CGST Central Goods and Services Tax 
CII Confederation of Indian Industry 
CIN Challan Identification Number 
CLS Compensation Levy Scheme 
CPIN Common Portal Identification Number 
CR Change Request 
CVD Countervailing Duty 
DC Data Centre 
DEA Department of Economic Affairs 
DG Director General 
DoR Department of Revenue 
DRD Disaster Recovery Drills 
DRM Disaster Recovery Mechanism 
DRP Disaster Recovery Plan 
EC Education Cess 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
123 
ECL Electronic Cash Ledger 
ECM Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers 
ECOM Electronic Commerce Operator 
EOD End of Day 
EVP Executive Vice President 
E-way Electronic way 
GoI Government of India 
GST Goods and Service Tax 
GSTIN Goods and Services Tax Identification Number 
GSTN Goods and Service Tax Network 
GSTR Goods and Services Tax Return 
GSTSF Rule Goods and Services Tax Settlement of Fund Rule 
GTA Goods Transport Agency 
HUF Hindu Undivided family 
ICEGATE Indian Customs Electronic Commerce/Electronic Data interchange 
IGST Integrated Goods and Services Tax 
ISD Input Service Distributor 
IT Information Technology 
ITC Input Tax Credit 
KKC Krishi Kalyan Cess 
LLP Limited Labiality Partnership 
Ltd. Limited 
MCA Ministry of Corporate Affairs 
MIS Management Information System 
MoF Ministry of Finance 
MSP Managed Service Provider 
NACIN National Academy of Customs, Indirect Taxes a nd Narcotics 
NCT National Capital Territory 
NDC Near Line Data Centre 
NIC National Informatics Centre 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
124 
Non-Recon Non-reconciled 
NRTP Non-Resident Taxable Person 
O & M Operation and Maintenance 
OIDAR Online Information Database Access and Retrieval Services  
ONPs Other Notified Persons 
PAN Permanent Account Number 
PCCA Principal Chief Controller of Accounts 
PII Personally Identification Number 
PLA Personal Ledger Account 
POS Place of supply 
PRO Public Relation Officer 
Pvt. Private 
RBI Reserve Bank of India 
Recon Reconciled 
RFP Request for proposal 
RPO Recovery Point Objective 
RS Revenue Secretary 
RTO Recovery Time Objective 
SAD Special Additional Duty 
SBC Swachh Bharat Cess 
SCN Show Cause Notice 
SEZ Special Economic Zone 
SGST State Goods and Services Tax 
SHEC Secondary and Higher Education Cess 
SLA Service Level Agreement 
SRS Software Requirement Specifications 
ST Service Tax 
STL Settlement Ledgers 
STQC Standardisation Testing and Quality Certification 
SVP Senior Vice President 

Report No. 11 of 2019 (Indirect Taxes – Goods and Services Tax) 
125 
TCS Tax Collected at Source 
TDS Tax Deducted at Source 
TIN Tax Identification Number 
TRN Temporary Reference Number 
UAT User Acceptance Testing 
UIN Unique Identification Number 
UT Union Territory 
UTGST Union Territory Goods and Services Tax 
VAT Value Added Tax 
 
 