P cctacn |

1.

This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India contains the
results of district centric Audit of Sirmaur district in Himachal Pradesh. The
Report has been prepared for submission to the Governor under Article 151
(2) of the Constitution of India.

Audit conducted a review of the significant socio-economic developmental
activities implemented in the district Sirmaur during the period 2004 to 2009.
Audit process involved test check of records pertaining to the district Sirmaur,
in the State Planning Department, the office of the Deputy Commissioner,
District Rural Development Agency, selected Blocks, Gram Panchayats,
Nagar Panchayat Rajgarh and Municipal Councils Nahan and Paonta Sahib,
other departments and various district level implementing agencies.

The Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

कि
5
=
e
हे



Es Summary

Recognising the importance accorded by the Planning Commission, Government of India for
a district-centric approach to devolution of finances for an integrated local area development,
a district centric audit of Sirmaur district was carried out to assess the status and impact of
implementation of various socio-economic developmental activities in the district during
2004-09 and to evaluate whether quality of life of people has improved.

The review covered key social sector programmes relating to Health, Education and Water
supply, economic sector programmes relating to creation of Roads and other infrastructure,
Employment generation, provision of basic civic amenities and use of Information
Technology (IT) to provide better public services, etc.

While audit brought out many positives in the social sector programmes relating to health and
education; however, there were quite a few areas where the State/District administration
needs to focus its attention.

Planning

Audit scrutiny revealed that the District Planning, Development and Twenty Point
Programme Review Committee (DPDC) had not prepared any Perspective Plan or Annual
Action Plans, or even a shelf of schemes for the overall development of the district. The local
levels of administration like the Blocks and GPs were not involved in providing any inputs to
the planning process. Schemes were sanctioned on an adhoc basis by the Deputy
Commissioner (DC) based on the proposals submitted by the MPs/MLAs/Other individuals
as per the perceived benefit to the local populace. In fact, there was no integrated District
Plan.

In the absence of perspective plans and annual action plans for the development of the district
with inputs from Blocks and GPs, gaps in various developmental schemes/programmes
remained unidentified with the result that the felt needs of the weaker sections of the society
and the disparities between various regions and communities within the district could not be
addressed.

Recommendations:

Holistic perspective and integrated annual plans should be prepared for the district, based on
a structured process of obtaining inputs from Blocks and GPs and other stakeholders for a
more realistic assessment of the district.

Accounting Framework and Financial Management

The total flow of funds in the District during 2004-09 and expenditure incurred was not
available either with the Additional DC who is the Chief Planning Officer or with the District
Planning Officer and other district authorities like DRDA.

There is an absence of a uniform system for maintenance of separate bank accounts for
various schemes. The receipt, utilisation and accountal of developmental funds is done on
mere release of funds to implementing agencies rather than after their actual utilisation, as

=
a
e
e
=
=A
=
o
n
i=]
|
8
=)
=
te



(8) Audit Report on District Sirmaur

Ee the reported progress and achievement of these schemes depicting the outcomes do not
reflect the true picture and result in skewing the planning process for overall development.

Large amounts of funds obtained from GOI and State Government are parked in banks
without utilising them within the prescribed timeframe, as works could not progress due to
non-availability of clearances for utilising forest land and other land disputes.

Recommendations:

Financial management, in general, needs improvement, and funds provided for various
socio-economic developmental programmes need to he efficiently and effectively utilised.

A uniform accounting system should be put in place for showing actual utilisation of funds
relating to various developmental schemes as distinct from mere release of funds to
implementing agencies. Also, a mechanism to ensure release of funds only for works and
schemes for which all preliminary and preparatory works have been completed, needs to be
evolved.

Social Services

Health

The process of assessing the health care requirements and gaps in infrastructure, equipment,
manpower, etc., as per NRHM stipulation is yet to be completed in the district. The district
had three CHCs, 36 PHCs and 145 SCs. Except PHCs, the number of other institutions was
less than the norms prescribed. The basic health care services required to be provided in the
health centres were not available at many of the centres visited by the audit team. Moreover,
due to non-availability of adequate number of skilled manpower the purpose of setting up the
health centres was not achieved in the district.

The prevalence of vaccine preventable diseases was negligible in the district as no case of
infant and child diseases like neonatal tetanus, diphtheria, tetanus and whooping cough was
detected in the district during 2005-09. However, 220 cases of measles were detected during
2005-09. No new case of Polio was detected during 2005-09 in the district. Out of 2,845
persons screened up to March 2009 under National AIDS Control Programme in the district,
39 persons were found HIV positive.

Separate targets/health indicators for the districts were not prescribed despite the
Mission (NRHM) requirement to do so. Therefore, the progress of achievement of the
crucial health indicators for the district could not be ascertained and the authenticity of
the data reported at the State level could also not be verified.

Community participation in planning, implementation and monitoring of the NRHM
programme was not ensured. No Village Health and Sanitation Committees (VHSC) had
been formed in the district. Though Rogi Kalyan Samities (RKSs) have been formed in all the
CHCs and PHCs in the district, these are yet to become fully operational.

In the absence of proper planning involving identification of gaps in the healthcare
infrastructure and non-availability of stipulated facilities and skilled manpower in the
health institutions, the aim of providing accessible and affordable healthcare to people
remained to be achieved in the District.



Be

Recommendations:

The District Health Society should play a more proactive role in commissioning a survey to
identify the gaps in health care infrastructure and facilities and draw up a specific timeframe
as per the NRHM guidelines, to provide accessible and affordable health care to the rural
poor and vulnerable sections of the district. All the health centres should be equipped with
adequate and skilled manpower to achieve the objectives of the programme.

Education

A review of the status of education in the district, especially in the context of implementation
of SSA, revealed that the number of primary and upper primary schools (upto standard VIII)
increased but enrolment of children in the targeted age group of 6-14 years in these schools
decreased during 2004-09.

Higher education is being imparted in the district through a network of 61 Government High
Schools (GHS), 79 Government Senior Secondary Schools (GSSS), one Post Graduate
Degree College, four Degree Colleges and one Sanskrit College.

Enrolment in classes [X to XII has declined from 23,237 in 2005-06 to 20,436 in 2008-09 in
the district. The class XII pass percentage showed a declining trend in 2008-09 as compared
to 2005-08.

The infrastructural facilities available in 140 High Schools and Senior Secondary Schools in
the district are deficient as, 5 Schools do not have pucca building, 9 Schools are running
without electricity connection, 43 schools have no separate labs for science subjects, 104
schools do not have separate toilets for boys and girls, 7 schools do not have safe drinking
water facilities and 18 do not have spacious playground.

The scholarship schemes were not effectively managed as a database of the beneficiaries and
its periodical updation for identification of actual students to be covered and requirement of
funds for the purpose was not being maintained. This either deprived or delayed the benefits
of the scholarships to the eligible students.

The inspection of schools is to be done at least once a year by the Director of Education
(DE); however, the DE or any other officer authorised by him had not conducted inspection
of the schools in the district during 2004-09.

To sum up, many schools in the district were lacking basic infrastructure/facilities and
the scholarship schemes were not effectively managed as a database of the actual
students to be covered and its periodical updation for assessing the requirement of
funds was not being maintained which deprived and delayed the benefits of the
scholarships to the eligible students. Shortage of teachers in schools impacted the board
results which was far from satisfactory.

Recommendations:

Basic infrastructure/facilities should be provided on a priority basis in all the schools,
especially at the elementary level, to ensure an appropriate environment for teaching and
learning. Appropriate steps should be taken by the Education Department to arrest the
declining trend in enrolment in the schools.

(3) AIVUIUING dAQNIOX|



5
5
&
3
g
Q
5
5
है
=
x
3
=
x

j=] State Government should carry out a survey and create a database of the beneficiaries to
be covered under various scholarship schemes. This database should be updated on a yearly
basis and all the eligible students should be provided scholarship as per norms, in a timely
manner.

Drinking Water

Out of 4312 habitations in the district, 45 per cent of the habitations were fully covered with
drinking water facility, 30 per cent were partially covered and the remaining were yet to be
covered.

Lack of adequate supervision at departmental level and at required frequency, not only
delayed the completion of schemes on time, but also raised doubts about the quality of works.
Further, the targeted beneficiaries were denied adequate and safe drinking water.

Unsafe water was being supplied to the public in the district as the quality of water to
the habitations was not being ensured by conducting the required water sample tests; as
a result substantial number of cases of water borne diseases were noticed in the district.

Recommendations:

The State Government/district administration needs to prepare a strategic action plan to
provide potable drinking water to the uncovered habitations in a time bound manner.

Water quality testing system should be improv ed/upgraded to ensure supply of safe drinking
water to the public.

Economic Services

Infrastructure-Transportation and Road connectivity

There is no airport and railway connectivity in the district. The nearest airport at Chandigarh
is 90 kms away from Nahan town. The nearest railway station is Ambala Cantt (Haryana)

which is 65 kms from Nahan town. Out of the total 971 villages in the district, only

680 villages have been provided road connectivity as of March 2009. Thus, 30 per cent of
the villages in Sirmour district still remain to be provided with road connectivity; acquisition
of forest/private land being the main bottleneck.

Out of 103 works taken up during 2004-09 under PMGSY and State Sector schemes, only
37 works (36 per cent) were completed, within the stipulated completion period, 21 works
were still in progress and remaining 45 works were lying incomplete as of March 2009.

Thus, in the absence of a viable mechanism to resolve the land disputes to facilitate timely
completion of road works, the Public Works Department has delayed in providing road
connectivity to all the villages in the district.

Other Developmental Schemes

Other developmental schemes like Vikas Mein Jan Sahyog (VMJS), Sectoral Decentralised
Planning (SDP), Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS),
Vidhayak Kshetriya Vikas Nidhi Yojana (MLALADS), etc. were taken up in the district in an
uncoordinated way as the works were neither properly planned nor completed within the
specified timelines. The assets created out of these schemes also remained unknown to the
district administration as no asset register was maintained at any level.



[== |

The State/district administration should ensure greater coordination with the executing
agencies to ensure that the works are planned, taken up and completed within the specified
timelines and accountability should be fixed for delay and slippages in this regard.

Employment Generation

Under the National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA), the shortfall in providing
legally guaranteed 100 days wage employment to card holders who had demanded
employment ranged between 94 and 98 per cent. No unemployment allowance was granted
to eligible job card holders who were not provided employment. Moreover, the women
beneficiaries were not given adequate employment opportunities as required under the Act.

Thus, the district authorities failed to provide the guaranteed wage employment in rural
areas of the district thereby defeating the objective of security of livelihood to the needy
and the vulnerable sections viz. SC/ST and women; the extent of poverty alleviation
through these schemes remains doubtful.

Energy

Out of the 971 villages in the district, 965 villages (99 per cent) have been electrified as of
March 2009. The State Government chalked out plans for electrifying the remaining villages
also through the Rajiv Gandhi Gramin Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY).

The delay of over four years since March 2005 in sanctioning the DPR for electrification of
unelectrified households resulted in cost escalation of Rs 19.93 crore, besides, depriving 3805
eligible householders of Sirmaur district of the benefits under RGGVY.

Recommendation:

The State Government should streamline its internal processes to ensure that project
proposals are formulated on time and pursued with the GOI to ensure that adequate funds
are provided for electrifying all the unelectrified habitations/villages within a specific
timeframe.

General Services

E-Governance-Sugam Centres

As regards the e-governance activities, only 2 to 5 services were being provided as of
July 2009 through the Sugam centres against 33 to 37 services envisaged to be provided at
tehsil to district level. Besides, offering envisaged services through Sugam efforts should
also be made to bring all services under one roof as is presently not the case.

Civic Amenities by Municipal Administration

Management of solid waste by Municipal Councils(MCs)/Nagar Panchayats(NPs) was
characterised by inherent defects of usage of open vehicles for transportation of waste and
non-development of suitable sites for setting up of Solid Waste Management Projects. The
MCs and NPs in the district did not have an integrated waste management plan for collection,

@) AIVUIUING dAQNIOX|



j=] segregation, transportation, processing and disposal of municipal solid waste thereby
exposing the public to the dangers of untreated waste and pollution.

Recommendation:

Waste management plans need to be finalised by the MCs on priority basis for pollution free
environment.

Monitoring Mechanism and Impact Evaluation

In sum, monitoring and supervision of the progress of implementation of various schemes at
all tiers of local administration in the district was perfunctory which impacted the progress of

a developmental works/projects undertaken by various departments/implementing agencies.
E There were number of works in the social and economic sector which were plagued by cost
a and time overruns thereby depriving the public of the benefits of these developmental
डे schemes.

8 Recommendation:

s Monitoring, inspection and supervision needs to be strengthened at all the tiers of local
है, administration to ensure that the programmes are executed on time and within cost and
mS timely corrective action is taken in cases of slippage.

= Conclusion

(x) The GOT has increasingly been entrusting the responsibility at the local level, especially the

PRIs to ensure efficiency and effectiveness in delivery of key services like education, health,
employment, etc. However, Audit analysis revealed that absence of adequate people’s
participation from the block and GP levels in the planning process has hindered the planned
progress of the district and address the felt needs at the grass root level. While the PRIs are
empowered to prepare specific plans for an integrated development of their area, lack of
structured annual action plans from these levels and absence of capacity building have
resulted in their inability to expend the funds provided to them for implementation of various
programmes.

There are multiplicity of programmes and schemes and even larger number of implementing
agencies, making it difficult for the district administration to effectively monitor and
supervise the developmental activities. While almost all the developmental programmes are
targeted at the same set of beneficiaries, the existence of myriad programmes without an
integrated focus, has led to each of them being implemented in a stand alone mode. Adequate
monitoring mechanism is either not instituted, or is not functioning as envisaged, with regard
to execution of schemes.

The State Government needs to put in place a robust district centric planning process by
mapping the gaps in infrastructure under various sectors like health, education, employment
generation, drinking water etc. through inputs from all tiers of local administration and public
at large. A clear roadmap to achieve the targets set through such plans for the development of
the district should be drawn so that the benefits of the schemes reach the intended
beneficiaries in time. District specific Human development indicators to gauge the extent of
development and the effectiveness of various schemes being implemented by the State in the

District should be evolved by the State Government. People’s participation is essential for
ensuring sustainable development of the District.



un.

BOUNDARY, STATE.
= sraer’ |

= TAHSIL/SUB-TARSIL. ५ «

> cB. Block
DISTRICT HEADQUARTERS,
‘TAMSIL/SUB~TANSML
HEADQUARTERS...
[NATIONAL mIGHWAY.
STATE HIGHWAY

IMPORTANT METALLED ROAD...

RIVER AND KHAD
IMPORTANT VILLAGE HAVING
500 AND ABOVE POPULATION
जाग॥ NAME

TOWNS WITH POPULATION
SIE AND CLASS IL, 1४ & Vi
DEGREE COLLEGE AND
TROHNICAL INSTITUTION

© SARAHAN
(PACHHAD)

C.D. BLOCK

RAJGARH
PACHHAD
SANGRAH
SHALAL

NAHAN
PAONTA SAHIB

amoo@m>

Be
HIMACHAL PRADESH

DISTRICT SIRMAUR

KILOMETRES:

‘HEADQUARTERS
RAJGARH

A. Mhere the name of tahsil/sub-tehstl
po Aiffers from ils hesdquerters name
SANGRAB the former is given within brackets
डंडा 2% Boundary shown is updated upto

ist December, 1998,

NAHAN

3. CD. Block boundary excludes

PAONTA SAHIB Statutory Towne.

@) ANVULIIS JILNSIG Jo 0



l= | Profile of the District

District Sirmaur is bound by Shimla district in the North, Solan district in the
North-West and the States of Uttrakhand in the East and Haryana in the South. This
district spans an area of 2,825 square kilometres and is headquartered at Nahan. The
district accounts for 4.59 lakh (eight per cent) of the population of the State (60.78
lakh) with 90 per cent of them residing in rural areas. The district comprises three
Sub-Divisions and 10 Tehsils and Sub-Tehsils. To cater to rural development, the
district has been divided into six Community Development Blocks covering 228
Gram Panchayats (GPs) with 966 inhabited and five uninhabited villages. The literacy
rate is 71 per cent as against 77 per cent at the State level but higher than the national
average of 65 per cent. Out of 70,439 families of the district, 19 per cent (13,695
families) live below the poverty line (BPL) as compared to 24 per cent at the State
level.

Administrative Structure

> The District Planning and Development Committee is the apex body at the district
level for approving the shelf of schemes for the development of the district. The
Deputy Commissioner (DC) is in charge of the district and is the sanctioning
authority for all developmental programmes in the district. He is also the Chief
Executive Officer (CEO) of the District Rural Development Agency (DRDA), and
ensures co-ordination between the DRDA, Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs),
field officers and all other departments of the State Government.

(-) प्रण]1॥7०-1णु

The DC is assisted by an additional DC, who is the Chief Planning Officer, for
preparation and prioritisation of schemes and their monitoring and review. The
ADC is further assisted by a District Planning Officer (DPO) and a Credit
Planning Officer, who maintains the accounts of the schemes and audits them.

> District Rural Development Agency (DRDA)

The DRDA is the main organ at the district level to oversee the implementation of
various developmental programmes. It is responsible for planning of programmes,
coordinating with other agencies-Governmental, non-governmental, technical and
financial for successful programme implementation; enabling the community and the
rural poor to participate in the decision making process, overseeing the
implementation of various programmes to ensure adherence to guidelines, quality,
equity and efficiency and reporting to the concerned authorities at prescribed
intervals. It is also responsible for overseeing the conduct of various surveys relating
to BPL families, etc., by the State Government from time to time.

The Zilla Parishad (ZP) Chairman functions as the Chairman of the DRDA and the
DC is the CEO, as mentioned above. The CEO exercises administrative control over
the Project Director (PD) and the Project Officer (PO). The PD is the executive in



[ game | of the DRDA and is responsible for interaction with the District/State
administration as well as the GOI. He/she reports to the Secretary, Rural Development
Department (RDD) and ensures co-ordination with the Zilla Parishad for
implementation of various rural development programmes. The PD is also the
controlling officer for all the Block Development Officers (BDOs) and District
Panchayat Officer (070).

The administrative set up of the District is shown below:

Chart-1

Deputy Commissioner

Overall Incharge of the district, CEO of DRDA. Ensures coordination between
DRDA, PRIs, Field Officers and all other departments

Additional == Commissioner
Chief Planning Officer - responsible for
preparation, prioritisation, monitoring
and review of schemes

Project Director (DRDA)
Coordinates with district/State
administration/GOL

5
:
&
3
5
Q
5
डर
5
me
हि
S
=
N

District Planning Officer

Releases funds to BDOs - responsible for
monitoring financial and physical
progress of works

Project Officer (DRDA)

DDO, maintains accounts, plans, monitors
and reports on schemes

Block Development Officers

Release funds to GPs, monitor and measure works, make
payments, submit reports to PO

Pradhan Gram Panchayat
Executes all schemes in the GP and renders accounts te BDO



Ga of Audit

Audit of district Sirmaur involved a review of the significant socio-economic
developmental programmes implemented in the district during the period 2004-09.
The audit encompassed an appraisal of social sector programmes relating to health,
education, water supply and sanitation. In the economic sector, infrastructure
development was reviewed through an assessment of the projects and schemes
implemented for improvement of road connectivity in the district, provision of
employment to the poor and vulnerable sections of the society. This audit covered the
developmental initiatives and the associated expenditure in the district- whether from
Central or State funds, and focused on the role and responsibilities of the District
Administration in providing the essential public services and improving the general
standard of living of the people of the district and the extent of community
participation in programme implementation and monitoring. The initiatives of the
State Government in facilitating the processing of public requests for various utilities
and services by electronic means through a single window ‘Sugam’ centres was also
reviewed along with the status of provision of basic civic amenities by the municipal
authorities.

Audit was based on a scrutiny of the records in the State Planning Department, the
office of the DC, DRDA, selected Blocks and GPs.

(») अग०७०एरष्ट- प्‌ शणाप्त

Audit Objectives

The objectives of audit were as follows:

e Assessing the adequacy and effectiveness of the annual planning process for
different programmes;

e Assessing the overall impact and effectiveness of the developmental programmes
in terms of achievement of targeted outputs and outcomes and their economical
and efficient execution;

© Verification of the reported expenditure on the major development programmes
(Central and State) with reference to detailed Statements of Expenditure and
original vouchers at lower level in a hierarchical manner (State to district, district
to block and block to GP);

¢ Assessing the adequacy and effectiveness of procedures for receipt, utilisation and
accounting of funds; and

e Assessing the adequacy and effectiveness of the processes for monitoring,
reporting and evaluation.



(*) Audit Report on District Sirmaur.

Sa Criteria

The audit criteria applied for assessing the implementation of various developmental
programmes/schemes were:

¢ Annual Action Plans.
* Guidelines of the concerned programmes/schemes.

¢ Prescribed monitoring mechanism.
Audit Methodology

Discussions were held with the stakeholders interalia, Deputy Commissioner (DC),
Principal Secretary (Health), Principal Secretary (Education), Rural Development and
other departments, in an entry conference in June 2009.

Three Blocks viz. Nahan, Pachhad and Sangrah were selected for detailed scrutiny on
the basis of their remoteness from the district headquarters. Further, 20 per cent of
the Gram Panchayats (GPs) in these Blocks and 20 per cent of villages in these GPs
were also selected for extensive audit based on Simple Random Sampling Without
Replacement (SRSWOR) method. Besides, the records of the DC, District Project
Officer (DPO), Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, Chief Engineers of Public Works Department
(PWD) and Irrigation and Public Health Department (I&PHD), District Health
Mission, Divisional Forest Officer, District Information Centre, two Municipal
Committees (Nahan and Paonta), Nagar Panchayat Rajgarh and H.P. State Electricity
Board were also scrutinised.

Audit findings were discussed with the Departmental functionaries at various levels in
exit conference held in October 2009 and their views incorporated in the Report at
appropriate places in Chapters 3 to 8.


lacs | Policy and Planning

Government of India envisages an inclusive and participative planning process for the
development of districts. The 74" Amendment to the Constitution mandated the
establishment of a District Planning Committee (DPC) for consolidating the plans
prepared by the Panchayats and municipalities in the district into an integrated District
Plan. All the three tiers of local administration viz. DRDA, Blocks and GPs were to
prepare an Annual Action Plan (AAP) at the beginning of each financial year
equivalent in value of about 125 percent of their share of funds allocated in the
preceding year and no work is to be taken up unless it forms part of the AAP.

The District Planning, Development and Twenty Point Programme Review
Committee (DPDC) for district Sirmaur was constituted in August 2003 with the
Minister of the district as the Chairman and the MPs, MLAs, Chairperson Zilla
Parishad and other district party workers of the ruling party as members. The DC and
other district level heads of offices and the SEs of PWD/IPH/HPSEB and Conservator
of Forests of the district were the other members. The DPDC was to function as the
Policy and Planning Council at the district level and oversee the implementation of
the developmental programmes to be executed in the district. It was to accord
approval for the shelf of schemes/projects to be executed in the district and give
directions to the administrative and technical personnel. It was to meet thrice a year
for this purpose and review/monitor the progress of implementation of the schemes.

() suruuelg

Audit findings

Audit scrutiny revealed that the DPDC had not prepared any Perspective Plan or
Annual Action Plans, or even a shelf of schemes for the overall development of the
district. The local levels of administration like the Blocks and GPs were not involved
in providing any inputs to the planning process. Schemes were sanctioned on an
adhoc basis by the DC based on the proposals submitted by the MPs/MLAs/Other
individuals as per the perceived benefit to the local populace. During 2004-09 against
the required 15 meetings, the DPDC held only five meetings. In fact, there was no
integrated District Plan.

In the absence of perspective plans and integrated annual action plans for the
development of the district with inputs from Blocks and GPs, gaps in various
developmental schemes/programmes remained unidentified with the result that
the felt needs of the weaker sections of the society and the disparities between
various regions and communities within the district could not be addressed.

Recommendation

Holistic perspective and integrated annual plans should be prepared for the district,
based on a structured process of obtaining inputs from Blocks and GPs and other
stakeholders for a more realistic assessment of the district.



| = | are allocated to the district through the State budget for various developmental
activities. In addition, funds are directly released to the DRDA and implementing
agencies for various socio-economic programmes by the State and Gol. The DRDA
releases the funds to the Blocks and other executing agencies based on the approved
allocation for the individual schemes.

> Gaps in the Funds flow and Expenditure incurred

The total flow of funds in the district during 2004-09 and expenditure incurred was
not available either with the Addl. Deputy Commissioner who is the Chief Planning
Officer or with the District Planning Officer and other district authorities like DRDA.
However, information on funds received and reported expenditure in respect of
certain significant departments and programmes as collected by Audit from various
departments is detailed below.

3
iS
2
a
g
g
by
Ss
8
=
x
©

Table: 1
(Rupees in crore)

National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) 737 2.03
National ATDS Control Programme (NACP) | 044 | 0.44
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) 4754 38.63
Higher Education 114.81 129.32
Water Supply 83.21 83.63
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) 146.30 38.93
Mukhya Mantri Gram Path Yojana (MMGPY) 0.66 0.11
Vikas Mein Jan Sahyog (VMJS) 421 1.27
Sectoral Decentralised Planning 9.35 0.86
Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme 2.98 2.06
(MPLADS)

Vidhayak Kshetriya Vikas Nidhi Yojana (MLALADS) 6.25 131
Sampooma Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) 797 6.72
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA) 47.05 43.98
E-governance 005 |[__- |
Municipal Councils and Nayar Panchayats 28.40 23.17

Source: Departmental figures

Audit analysis revealed that there was a big gap between the funds received and
expenditure incurred as large amounts of funds received from GOI and State
Government are parked in banks without being utilised within the prescribed
timeframe, as works could not progress due to non-availability of clearances for
utilising forest land and other land disputes (as discussed in succeeding chapters).

> Opening of Bank Accounts

While there were separate bank accounts for various schemes at the DRDA and Block
levels, there was only one bank account for all the schemes at the GP level wherein
the funds relating to all the programmes are deposited and operated. Due to non-
maintenance of separate bank accounts for all the schemes as envisaged in the GOT
guidelines, the scheme wise information was not readily available at the GP level.

ye el


| ces | the exit conference the DC stated (October 2009) that plan to review the position
relating to unspent balance with the BDOs and other implementing agencies is
underway and reasons for accumulation of funds would be examined and utilisation of
funds ensured on the schemes/programmes for the benefit of the public. This
indicated that an adequate mechanism to ensure release of funds only for works and
schemes for which all preliminary and preparatory works have been completed was
absent.

> Maintenance of Records

Scrutiny of records of the DC, DRDA and the test checked blocks and GPs revealed
that the funds are shown as expended as soon as these are released to the next level
ie. the DRDA shows utilisation of funds as soon as these are released to the Blocks
and the Blocks in turn show utilisation on release to the GPs.

> Internal Controls

The BDO holds monthly meetings to apprise the concerned Panchayat Secretaries
about the works sanctioned and releases the first installment on the basis of resolution
passed by the concerned GP for preliminary work. However, Audit scrutiny revealed
that no control was exercised by the BDOs to see that the resolutions from GPs are
received without delay and works were executed in a timely manner, as a result, large
amount of funds have remained unutilised for long periods.

In essence, in the absence of a integrated system of internal checks and controls
of receipt, utilization and accounting of developmental funds there were huge
sums lying unutilized and there was also a big gap between the funds released
and funds reported as utilized.

Recommendations

> A mechanism to ensure release of funds only for works and schemes for which
all preliminary and preparatory works have been completed, needs to be evolved.

> A uniform system should be put in place for receipt, utilisation and accountal
of funds and a system needs to be evolved for showing actual utilisation of funds as
distinct from mere release of funds.

@) अुग०७०प्रा्ट पर SUQUNOIDY Pp



=== | review of the implementation of the flagship programmes in the Social sector like-

e Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA),

¢ National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) and.

* Accelerated Rural Water supply Programme (ARWSP).
revealed that there is a need to provide adequate and skilled manpower in these
sectors for full utilization of the infrastructure to achieve the intended objective of
providing quality health care, education, water and basic amenities to the people of
the district, as evidenced from the audit findings discussed below.

5.1 Health

The Chief Medical Officer (CMO), Sirmaur at Nahan, functioning under the State
Health and Family Welfare Department, is responsible for providing health care
services to the people through a network of five hospitals. The health care services in
the rural areas are delivered through three Community Health Centres (CHCs), 36
Primary Health Centres (PHCs) and 145 Sub Centres (SCs).

i) Planning

As a first step towards provision of accessible, affordable and equitable health care
under NRHM, a household and facility survey was to be carried out to identify the
gaps in health care facilities in rural areas. Audit scrutiny revealed that the process of
assessing the health care requirements and gaps in infrastructure, equipment,
manpower, etc., is yet to be completed in the district.

(=) Audit Report on District Sirma

The District Health Society (DHS) is required to prepare a perspective plan for the
entire Mission period (2005-12) and Annual plans for the district with inputs from the
lower tiers of the Government. Audit analysis revealed that these plans had been
prepared without receipt of household and facilities survey reports from the lower
functionaries.

The Mission activities were to have been converged with other departments’
programmes and working of non governmental stakeholders, Village Health and
Sanitation Committees (VHSCs) and Rogi Kalyan Samitis (RKSs). However, Audit
scrutiny revealed that the DHS did not interact with or obtain inputs from the
concerned departmental functionaries relating to drinking water, sanitation and
hygiene, nutrition, etc., leading to disconcerted efforts by various agencies towards
the same goal. Further, community participation in planning, implementation and
monitoring of the programme was not ensured. Scrutiny of records revealed that no
VHSC had been formed in the district. Though the RKSs have been formed in all the
CHCs and PHCs in the district but in the four test checked PHCs; operationalisation
of RKSs was not done as of July 2009. The Principal Secretary (Health) in exit



Ea admitted (October 2009) the shortcomings and stated that committees at
Gram Panchayat level are being formed from 2009-10.

ii) Infrastructure

As per GOI guidelines, for every 80,000 population, there should be a CHC, for
population over 20,000 there should be one PHC, and for population over 3,000, one
SC. In terms of these norms, the requirement of CHCs, PHCs and SCs works out to
6, 23 and 153 respectively. The district had three CHCs, 36 PHCs and 145 SCs.
Except PHCs, the number of other institutions was less than the norms prescribed.

Further, many of these health centres were not operational, as these lacked the basic
minimum infrastructure as can be seen from the details of two CHCs', four PHCs”
and eight SCs’ test-checked in audit, given below:

: D
Table: 2 &
ic}
J
7
[1 | Total number of health centres audited 2 [8k | n
2 Waiting room for patients Ld a | fe)
3 Labour Room | 0 a | s.
4 Operation theatre a NA fe}
5 Clinic Room | 0 |: 2 na
[6 | Emergency/Casualty Room Lid NA
T Residential facilities for staff er | 6 (9)
3 Separate utility for Male and Female [ 0] [ 8 |]

Source: Figures supplied by the Test checked Units

Photograph: 1 Photograph: 2

Broken Beds and furniture at PHC Jakhna

Rajpura and Shillai.
Jakhna, Kaffota, Majra and Rohnat.
Dugana, Gumott, Jama, Jhakando, Puruwala, Sainwala, Sarli and Shawaga.

I POLI ee ७: चा|"'।|[ा॑ं|ऋऋच एज


Photograph: 3

for the year ended 31 March 2009

irmaur.

Dilapidated condition of operation theatre at CHC Rajpura

Photograph: 4 Photograp

Audit Report on District Si

an
J

Unhygienic environment at CHC Rajpura due Building of CHC Rajpura covered with wild
to dumping of medical waste in open growth

In the absence of above physical infrastructure at health centres, the basic facilities
could not be provided to the rural population.

> Basic Healthcare Services

The basic health care services required to be provided in the health centres were not
available at many of the centres visited by the audit team. The details in this regard
are tabulated below:

Table: 3
(In numbers)
Particulars Number of centres where service was not
available

CHCs PHCs SCs
Total number of health centres audited | 2 | 4 | 8 |
Blood storage of health centres 2 NA NA
New born care | 1 ee ee & |
24 x 7 deliveries a ee 4 [ NA
In patient services | 0 | 4 | ४०४
X-rays [0 | 4 | ४५
Ultra-sound 2 NA NA
ECG 2 NA NA
Obstetric care 2 | 4 | NA
Emergency services (24 hours [0 [4 ७&
Family Planning(Tubectomy and Vasectomy) 2 NA NA
Intra-natal examination of gynecological conditions 2 | 4 | NA
Paediatrics 2 NA NA

Source: Figures supplied by the Test checked Units


| ees | District Health Society (DHS) received Rs two crore during 2005-09 for
upgrading two CHCs (Shillai and Sangrah) and three hospitals (Nahan, Paonta and
Rajgarh) to First Referral Units (FRUs) at the rate of Rs 40 lakh per FRU. The DHS
spent Rs 28.16 lakh on procurement of equipment and purchase of medicines and
released Rs 10.18 lakh as an advance to the Public Works Department for
development of infrastructure. However, in audit, it was noticed that none of the five
units were upgraded to FRU as of June 2009 due to non posting of specialist and other
support staff.

Thus, the Department failed to provide appropriate health infrastructure to ensure
timely availability of referral services in these institutions despite availability of
adequate funds.

iii) Manpower Resources

NRHM aimed at providing adequate skilled manpower at all the health centres as per
the norms of Indian Public Health Standard (IPHS). Scrutiny of two CHCs, four
PHCs and eight SCs selected for test check revealed that none of these centres was
staffed adequately as per the IPHS norms, as detailed below:

Chart: 2

(2) $०जु41०७ [B10

CHCs PHCs SCs
Source: Figures supplied by the Test checked Units

As can be seen from the above chart, the shortfall in manpower was 72 per cent in
respect of the CHCs, 79 per cent and 63 per cent in respect of the PHCs and SCs
respectively. Audit analysis further revealed the following:

> Against the required strength of 14 staff nurses, there were only two in the two
CHCs test checked and in four test checked PHCs, staff nurses were not posted.

> — Two out of the four PHCs test checked (Jakhna and Rohnat) were functioning
without any Medical Officer and all the four test checked PHCs did not have
any Pharmacist and Laboratory technician.

> Three SCs (Gumot, Jamna and Jhakhando) were functioning without female
health worker and one SC (Dugana) without male health worker. Two SCs
(Sarli and Shawag) were functioning without any Male and Female health
workers. There was no voluntary worker in any of the eight test checked SCs.



| een | above, in 10 PHCs of the district, Medical Officer and paramedical staff were
not posted and these were being manned by non-paramedical staff.

Thus, due to non-availability of adequate number of skilled manpower the
purpose of setting up the health centres was not achieved in the district.
Moreover, due to the non availability/shortage of Medical staff and
infrastructure facilities as detailed in the above paragraphs the Bed occupancy in
the test checked CHCs was abysmally low and ranged between 5 and 55 per cent,
while it was zero per cent in the PHCs.

The Principal Secretary in exit conference of NRHM stated (October 2009) that State
Government has now devised its own norms for rationalisation of health institutions
for space, equipment and staff but are yet to be published. He further stated that these
norms would be followed from the current year and the Government would be able to
provide medical staff/paramedical staff in all the institutions.

iv) Achievement against Performance Indicators
Performance indicators quantifying the targets for reducing infant mortality rate
(IMR), maternal mortality rate (MMR), total fertility rate (TFR), reducing morbidity

and mortality rate and increasing cure rate of different endemic diseases are generally
prescribed by the State Government.

a) Reproductive and Child Health Care (RCH)

(3) Audit Report on District Sirmaur.

To achieve the NRHM goal of reducing the infant mortality rate (MMR) and total
fertility rate (TFR), the State Government prescribed various health indicators to be
achieved by 2008. As per the details provided by the State Government, all the
prescribed targets were achieved/exceeded.

However, in Audit it was noticed that separate targets/indicators for the districts were
not prescribed despite the Mission requirement to do so. Therefore, the progress of
achievement of the crucial health indicators for the district could not be ascertained
and the authenticity of the data reported at the State level could also not be verified.

b) Non-deployment of trained female community health workers

One of the strategies envisaged by the Mission for achievement of the goal of
reduction in IMR, MMR and TFR is appointment of a trained female community
health worker called Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA). The ASHA is to be

appointed for every thousand population and act as an interface between the
community and the health care system. The State Government decided to employ one
ASHA for every 800 people. For selection and training of 543 ASHAs in the district,
Rs 28.59 lakh were sanctioned in December 2007. The Department, however,

selected only 329 ASHAs and spent Rs 0.26 lakh on the selection process but did not
impart any training to them for deployment in the concerned villages rendering the
entire efforts an exercise in futility.



je | Principal Secretary (Health) informed (October 2009) that according to modified
policy, the work of ASHA is being assigned to the Anganwari Workers (AWWs).
The fact remains that the work of ASHAs has not been assigned to AWWs. Training
to 329 ASHAs selected was not imparted to deploy them on the job for which they
were selected.

v) Janani Suraksha Yojana

One of the important components of the RCH programme is the Janani Suraksha
Yojna (JSY), to encourage pregnant women to have an institutional delivery rather
than domiciliary delivery in order to reduce maternal and neo-natal mortality. Under
this programme, all the pregnant women belonging to the SC, ST and BPL categories
above 19 years of age, upto two live births are entitled to Rs 500 to meet the cost of
domiciliary delivery and Rs 700 for institutional delivery.

a) Institutional Deliveries

The details relating to institutional and domiciliary deliveries and cash assistance
provided by the DHS are given below:

Table: 4
(in 7
2005-06 698 829 2 4,600
2006-07 829 186 a आर 1,200
2007-08 672 850 | 65 [ 4,200
2008-09 605 930 |_ 6 |[ 28,800

Source: Figures supplied by the CMO.

Audit analysis revealed that the DHS has been able to increase the number of
institutional deliveries. However, the categories of beneficiaries viz SC/ST/BPL were
not recorded in the Maternal and Child Health (MCH) registers. Consequently, it
could not be ascertained whether cash assistance was indeed provided to the eligible
beneficiaries.

The status of achievement with regard to institutional deliveries in the district and in
the sampled units’ is given below:

Table: 5
Tn numbers
Sirmaur 2005-06 11,839 2.136 18
2006-07 11,584 2,246 19
2007-08 11,903 3,229 27
2008-09 11,189 4,071 36
Sampled 2005-06 5,834 | 900 15
units 2006-07 5,687 1,033 | 18 |
2007-08 6,018 1,496 25
2008-09 5,696 1,020 [is

Source: Figures supplied by the DHS and Test checked Units

* CHCs Rajpura and Shillai.

® SAd1A1ag [B10



5
ड़
छै
3
:
g
§
5
S
&
हि
8
=
x

| ees | can be seen in the above table, the percentage of pregnant women opting for
institutional delivery facilities in district as well as in the test checked health centres is
far behind the goal of 45 per cent envisaged to be achieved by March 2008 under
NRHM. Clearly, this was due to the inadequate facilities in the health centres in the
sampled units as brought out in Tables 2 and 3. The CMO attributed (July 2009)
shortfall in achievements to lack of awareness among the rural population and
shortage of staff. The reply does not explain why efforts to create awareness in this
regard could not be made and why adequate staff were not provided in the health
centres.

b) Antenatal care

Scrutiny revealed that the percentage of pregnant women in the district who had
received three antenatal check ups (ANCs) during 2005-09 ranged between 67 and
72 per cent as of March 2009 as against the target of 90 per cent.

vi) Immunisation Programme

The overall achievement in the District with regard to immunisation of children
between zero to one year age group covering BCG, DPT and OPV was 100 per cent
during 2005-09. However, the shortfall in achievement of targets in the secondary
immunisation of children ranged between zero and 12 per cent for DT( 5 years age
group), zero and 13 per cent for TT (10 years age group) and zero and 18 per cent
for TT (16 years age group) during 2005-09. In the test checked units, the
achievement of fully immunized children was 100 per cent.

Data shows that the prevalence of vaccine preventable diseases was negligible in the
district as no case of infant and child diseases like neonatal tetanus, diphtheria, tetanus
and whooping cough was detected in the district during 2005-09. However, 220 cases
of measles were detected during 2005-09. No new case of Polio was detected during
2005-09 in the district. The coverage of targeted children under the pulse polio
programme in the district was 100 per cent.

vii) National Programme for Control of Blindness (NPCB)

The NPCB aimed at reducing the prevalence of blindness to 0.8 per cent by 2007
through increased cataract surgery, eye screening of school children, collection of
donated eyes, creation of donation centres, eye bank, strengthening of infrastructure,
ete,

During 2004-09 no targets for cataract surgeries and screening of school children
were prescribed. In the district 1,263 cataract surgeries and screening of
53,654 school children was done. The facility for eye donation had not been created
in any of the hospitals in the district.



| ex | National Leprosy Eradication Programme (NLEP)

The NLEP aimed at eliminating leprosy by the end of Eleventh Plan and ensure that
the leprosy prevalence rate is less than one per ten thousand. The total number of
leprosy patients undergoing treatment in the district during 2004-05, 2005-06, 2006-
07, 2007-08 and 2008-09 were 20, 16, 16, 20 and 34 respectively with the incidence
of 21, 21, 17, 28 and 36 new cases. The rate of prevalence of leprosy in the district
during 2005-06, 2006-07, 2007-08 and 2008-09 was higher at 0.34, 0.34, 0.39 and
0.65 per 1,000 respectively against 0.31, 0.28, 0.38 and 0.25 per thousand respectively
during these years at the State level.

ix) National Aids Control Programme (NACP)

The Programme was launched by the GOI in September 1992 with the assistance of
World Bank and has been extended upto the year 2012. The main objectives of the
programme are to:

¢ — reduce the spread of HIV infection in the country and;
¢ — strengthen the capacity to respond to HIV/AIDS on a long term basis.

To achieve the above objectives, funds were to be utilised on different
components/activities of the programme like priority intervention for the general
community, low cost AIDS care/STI/HIV/AIDS sentinel surveillance, training, etc.

a) Funds allocated during 2004-09 (Rs 44.15 lakh) were fully utlised by the
District AIDS Programme Officer (DAPO).

As per guidelines of National AIDS Control Programme (NACO), one Voluntary
Blood Testing Centre (VBTC) was to be established in each district. The State
Government had established one VBTC (now Integrated Counselling & Testing
Centre) in all the districts of the State, including Sirmaur. Audit scrutiny revealed that
the first HIV positive case was detected in Sirmaur district in 2003. Out of 2,845
persons screened up to March 2009 in the district, 39 persons were found HIV
positive. These included eight fully blown AIDS cases. The DAPO stated (June
2009) that the increase in cases was due to counselling and surveillance and number
of people tested.

b) Family Health Awareness Camps

To increase awareness about HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted diseases (STD)
among the community and to provide facilities for early diagnosis and treatment of
the targeted population falling in the age group of 15-49 years, the GOI decided
(November 1999) to organize Family Health Awareness Camps (FHACSs) in all the
States in a phased manner. The position emerging out of the one FHACs held in
Sirmaur district during 2005-06 is given in table-6:

(७) $०जु41०७ [B10



| —-—- | 6

2005-06 1.51 lakh 0.33 lakh 22

Source: Figures provided by DAPO

The low turnout in the district indicates poor mobilisation at grass root level and
affects the Government’s efforts at creating/increasing awareness among the
public. No further camp was held in the district after 2005-06 due to non receipt
of budget for the purpose.

०) Blood Safety

Under the blood safety component, the existing blood banks are to be modernised and
new blood banks are to be opened. Blood component separation facility centres and
skilled manpower are also to be made available. There is one blood bank in the
district which did not have blood separation facility though skilled manpower was
available.

Summing up:

In the absence of proper planning involving identification of gaps in the healthcare
infrastructure and non-availability of stipulated facilities and skilled manpower in the
health institutions, the aim of providing accessible and affordable healthcare to people
remained to be achieved in the District.

(5) Audit Report on District Sirma

an

Recommendations

> The District health Society should play a more proactive role in commissioning a
survey to identify the gaps in health care infrastructure and facilities and draw up
a specific timeframe as per the NRHM guidelines, to provide accessible and
affordable health care to the rural poor and vulnerable sections of the district.

> Community involvement should be ensured at every stage in planning,
implementation and monitoring of the programme.

> Funds should be utilised for the intended purpose, especially for creation of basic
health infrastructure and amenities to provide confidence to the community that
health centres not only exist but are fully operational.

> All the health centres should be equipped with adequate and skilled manpower to
achieve the objectives of the programme.



| 2: | Education

Education is one of the most important indicators of social progress of a nation. Both
the State and the Central Governments have been spending enormous amounts on
increasing the enrolment and retention of children in schools, especially in the primary
and elementary segments. Focus is also on an inclusive progress, with special
attention to girls, SC/ST communities, other vulnerable sections of the society and
remote and backward areas. The Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) is one of the flagship
programmes of the Government for universalization of primary education.

i Elementary Education

> Enrolment

A review of the status of education in the district, especially in the context of
implementation of SSA, revealed that the number of primary and upper primary
schools (upto standard VIII) increased but enrolment of children in the targeted age
group of 6-14 years in these schools decreased during 2004-09, as can be seen from
the chart below:

Chart: 3

90000
80000
70000
60000
50000
40000
30000
20000
10000

_ 2004-05 2008-09 _ _ __
GNumber of Schools GB Number of children enrolled ]

Source: Departmental figures

The above diagram shows an increase in the number of schools in the district and
decrease in the number of children enrolled in these schools. The Project Officer
attributed (June 2009) it mainly to economic background and earning compulsions and
work migration of households. However, as per the Village Education Registers
prepared on the basis of annual household survey during 2004-08 the percentage of
out of school children decreased from 71 percent in 2004-05 to 11 percent in
2007-08. Position of children not attending the school during 2008-09 was not made
available to Audit.

Enrolment of students in schools under three® test-checked Block Elementary

5
BEFOs, Nahan, Dadahu and Sarahan.

(5) $०जु41०७ [B10



| ssc | Officers (BEEO) and in 10 primary and upper primary test checked schools
has decreased during 2005-09 due to opening of new private schools.

In the absence of any enrolment data of private schools, the position of increase
in enrolment in the private schools and consequent effect of decrease in
enrolment in Government schools could not be correlated in audit.

> Dropout

Deputy Director Elementary Education (DDEE) was not monitoring the dropout level
in the elementary schools as data relating to drop outs was not kept for the period
2004-09. However, audit scrutiny revealed that in 10 test-checked Primary and Upper
Primary schools the number of dropout students ranged between eight and 36 per cent
during 2005-09.

> Infrastructure

The status of infrastructure in primary schools in the district as of March 2009 is given
below:

Chart: 4
Primary schools as of April 2004
822

@®) Audit Report on District Siri

बह No. of schools without
| accommodation,

No. of schools having one
room

ह No. of schools having two
rooms

674 No. of schools with two

rooms and Verandas

Source: Departmental figures

Chart: 5
Primary schools as of March 2009
26

हा No. of schools having one
room

No. of schools having two
rooms

No. of schools with two
rooms and Verandas

Source: Departmental figures



rb 6

Government Primary School, Banog (Nahan) without building- running in a shed

The charts 4 and 5 indicate an improvement in the provision of infrastructure.
However, the veracity of data is doubtful as the data suggests that there are no
schools as of March 2009 that are without accommodation but Audit found that
GPS Banog had no accommodation. The number of schools with more than two
rooms has come down from 674 in 2004-05 to 566 schools in 2008-09 the reasons for
which were not furnished to audit. Out of the total number of 977 primary and 340
upper primary schools in the district as of March 2009, a significant number required
major repairs to the classrooms as depicted below.

® SAd1A1ag [B10

Chart: 6
3000 2816 ee
2500 Number of class rooms in
2000 good conditions
1500 1396 WNumber of class rooms:
requiring minor repairs
1000 req is it
1603 249 [394 ONumber of class rooms
500 tos छल major repairs
0 T T
Primary Upper Primary

Source: Departmental figures

During 2005-09, the DPO, SSA paid Rs 2.39 crore to all the above schools for repair
works at the rates of Rs 4,000 and Rs 7,000 per school per annum for primary and
Upper primary schools respectively. In the absence of any follow-up action in this
regard by the DPO and lack of evidence relating to utilisation of funds, the
authenticity of expenditure could not be verified in audit.



Photograph: 7

Classroom in GPS Barachowk Nahan in a dilapidated condition
> Basic Amenities

A majority of the schools at the elementary level did not have the basic minimum
amenities as detailed below:

ty) Audit Report on District Sirmaur for the year ended 31 March 2009

0 Table: 7
(In numbers)

Category Total Toilets | Girls | Drinking | Access | Boundary | Playground | Kitchen

Schools in Toilets | water | ramp wall tor mid-

district day-meal
Primary 977 356 524 127 697 808 439 567
Upper Primary 340 160 153 56 234 282 136 338

Source: Figures provided by DPO
Photograph: 8 Photograph: 9

Classroom-cum-kitchen in GPS Barachowk Kitchen for Mid-Day-meal in the open ina
(Nahan) temporary structure in GMS, Bohlion

> Availability of Teachers

As against the norm of two teachers per primary school and one teacher for every class
in upper primary school, there were a number of schools-both primary and upper
primary, which did not comply with this norm as can be seen from the table-8:



| comin | 8
2004-05 965 | 66 | 4 1] | _ 9 |
2005-06 965 [us | 7 17 13
2006-07 | %6 | 91 18 15 Nil
2007-08 975 | 8४8 | 21 | os | 7
2008-09 977 117 20 24 Nil

Source: Figure provided by DPO

The above details show availability of poor infrastructure facilities/amenities and staff
position in the schools.

ii) Higher Education

Higher education is being imparted in the district through a network of 61 Government
High Schools (GHS), 79 Government Senior Secondary Schools (GSSS), one Post
Graduate Degree College, four Degree Colleges and one Sanskrit College. The
Deputy Director, Higher Education (DDHE) is the Controlling Officer at the district
level for implementation of the schemes for educational development. Enrollment in
classes IX to XII has declined in the district during 2006-09 as compared to 2005-06.
The DDHE stated (June 2009) that the enrolment decreased from 23,237 in 2005-06 to
20,436 in 2008-09 due to migration of students out of State/district and domestic
circumstances.

® SAd1A1ag [B10

> Planning

The DDHE did not carry out any survey to assess the adequacy of accommodation for
students, staff and availability of infrastructure in the schools. An amount of Rs. 6.28
crore was allotted to the Public Works Department for construction of 49 school
buildings in the district during 2005-09. The DDHE did not monitor the status of
construction of these school buildings and was not having complete information on its
status. As such, he could not provide any information regarding the physical/financial
progress of these buildings.

> Infrastructure and Amenities

The infrastructural facilities available in 140 High Schools and Senior Secondary
Schools in the district are given below:



हज Figures provided by DDHE. This information has been reported as per DISE data of SSA. No
record has been maintained at district level due to shortage of staff

. Government Post Graduate College, Nahan, has no land and building of its
own and was being run in the premises of Government Senior Secondary
School, Nahan. During 2006-09 the Education Department had deposited
Rs 4.65 crore® with PWD Nahan for construction of college building at Nahan
but land was yet to be transferred by Municipal Council, Nahan as of June
2009.

. Six schools were not having science laboratories, seven schools have no
library, three schools have no play ground, six schools have no furniture for
students and one school was without toilet facility for boys. The DDHE in the
exit conference admitted (October 2009) the facts.

iii) Quality of Education

® Audit Report on District

Quality education can be imparted only when there is an adequate availability of
teachers in schools/colleges and the quality of teaching is reflected in the level of
improvement evident from the board results of class X and XII.

> Availability of Teachers

The category wise position of teachers in the district as of March 2009 was as under.

Chart: 7

1400 1256
1200
1000
800
600
400
200 —_— 65 61

Sanctioned Strength

@ In Position

Source: Departmental figures

6
2006-07: Rs 2.00 crore, 2007-08: Rs 2.00 crore and 2008-09 : Rs 0.65 crore.



l= | 12 test checked institutions, there was a shortage of two to 33 posts in different
categories (Principals: two; Lecturers: 27; TGTs: 10; and others: 33) during 2004-09.

> Board results

The data relating to overall pass percentage of students in different examinations of
the Board of School Education had not been maintained by the DDHE at the district
level. As such, the quality improvement in educational level of the students and
impact of the schemes could not be vouchsafed in audit.

In ten out of 12 test checked schools’, the pass percentage in respect of class VIIT
during 2008-09 decreased as compared to 2004-05 and 2007-08. In case of X and XI
classes; it increased as compared to the year 2004-05 whereas in respect of class XII
pass percentage showed a declining trend in 2008-09 as compared to 2005-08 as given
below:

Source: Departmental figures

छः

Table:10 (In percentage =.

Classes [200805 [2005-06 | 2006-07 [2007-08 —[_2008-09- =
VIL 52 55 30 61 49 ऐ

xX 44 56 49 61 70 =

XI 54 64 36 67 70 3
XIL 75 | 80 | | 80 | 84 77 g

The DDHE admitted (October 2009) in the exit conference that Board’s results were
not satisfactory and further stated that detailed analysis of poor results is being
conducted.

> Inspections of Schools

The Himachal Pradesh Education Code provides that the DE or any other Officer
authorised by him is responsible for the supervision and inspection of schools. The
inspection of schools is to be done at least once a year.

Scrutiny revealed that the DE or any other officer authorised by him had not
conducted inspection of the schools in the district during 2004-09.

Test check of records in the office of DDHE revealed that in respect of GSSSs and.
GHSs against the requirement of 633 inspections during 2004-09, the DDHE carried
out only 187 inspections resulting in shortfall of 446 inspections (70 per cent). The
DDHE stated (July 2009) that inspections could not be carried out due to non
availability of a driver for the vehicle and frequent transfers of DDHE.

iv) Scholarship schemes
The extent of implementation of these schemes is discussed below:

> Pre-matric scholarship for OBC students

The scheme was implemented in the district from the year 2005-06. During 2005-07,
there were 1087 eligible students of OBC category to whom pre-matric scholarship

"
Out of 79 GSSSs and 61 GHSs.



| cece: | to be provided but due to non-receipt of budget under this scheme these students
were denied of the scholarship. For the years 2007-08 to 2008-09; identification of
beneficiaries to be covered and requirement of funds for the purpose was not done.
The scheme was thus not managed effectively.

In five test checked GSSS" all the eligible 129 students were denied the benefit due to
non-availability of budget. No data of eligible students was supplied by the five test
checked GHSs’.

> Integrated Rural Development Programme (IRDP) Scholarships

This scholarship is being granted to students of Ist to XII standards of families
identified under IRDP from 1991-92 annually’? to enable them to complete their
studies. Budget provision and expenditure incurred under this scholarship programme
during 2004-09 and the number of students covered in the district is given below:

Table: 11
2004-05 23.91 23.60 6,466 6,466
2005-06 24.50 24.25 6,927 6,927
2006-07 24.08 23.89 3,502 3,502
2007-08 26.99 26.99 5,824 5,824
2008-09 26.71 26.71 3,011 3,011

@) Audit Report on District Sirm

Source: Figures provided by DDHE & DDEE

Note: Figures of application received and students covered only in respect of classes IX to XII. Data
relating to the enrolment of IRDP students in classes I to V for the period 2004-09, classes VI to
VIL for the years 2007-09 was not maintained in the district. However, the enrolment data for
the period 2004-06 in respect of classes VI to VIII and Classes IX to XII for the period 2004-09
was available in the district.

In the twelve! test checked colleges and schools and three'? educational blocks,
11,253 out of 11,562 students of TIRDP families were given the benefit of IRDP
scholarship and 309 students were deprived of the intended benefit due to non receipt
of budget allocation.

. Dadahu 2, Sarahan 3. Nahan (Boys) 4. Nahan (Girls) and 5. Kaffota.
. Ajoli 2. Bata Mandi 3. Bikram Bag 4. Haripur Khol and 5. Rampur Bharapur.

Classes Amount of Scholarship per students
Boys Girls
11०४ 150 150
Vito VL 250 500
IX toX 300 [600 |
xiwoxm | ६४६0७ | ४६०0७ |

. Government Post Graduate College, Nahan 2. Government Sanskrit College, Nahan 3. GSSS, Dadahu
4. GSSS, Sarahan 5. GSSS (Boys), Nahan 6. GSSS (Girls), Nahan 7. GSSS, Kaffota 8. GHS, Ajoli
9. GHS, Bata Mandi 10. GHS, Bikram Bag 11. GHS, Haripur Khol and 12. GHS, Rampur Bharapur.

BEEOs, Nahan, Dadahu and Sarahan.



| ccm | Post-matric scholarship scheme (PMSS)

As per information made available by the DDHE, all the 4,946 eligible students in the
district were covered under the scheme by providing the financial assistance of
Rs 73.84 lakh at the rate of Rs 140 per month for SC/ST and Rs 90 per month for
OBC during 2004-09.

However, in seven’ (out of 12) test checked institutions, out of 1241 students, 908
were given the benefit of PMSS and 333 students were deprived due to non-
availability of budget. This shows that data compiled at district headquarters was not
based on factual position.

> Kasturba Gandhi Balika Scholarship Scheme

Kasturba Gandhi Balika Scholarship Scheme was introduced by the GOI from 2008-
09. Under this scheme financial assistance was to be provided to girls belonging to
SC/ST category below 16 years of age and studying in IX and X classes. In the
district, 147 such girls were identified in the district during 2008-09 but benefit could
not be extended due to non allocation of budget by the State Government.

To sum up, many schools in the district were lacking basic
infrastructure/facilities and the scholarship schemes were not effectively
managed as a database of the actual students to be covered and its periodical
updation for assessing the requirement of funds was not being maintained which
deprived and delayed the benefits of the scholarships to the eligible students.
Shortage of teachers in schools impacted the board results which was far from
satisfactory.

® SAd1A1ag [B10

The DC in the exit conference advised the DDHE to prepare a data base of all eligible
students for the purpose of payment of scholarships. The DDHE agreed to do so.

Recommendations

> Accommodation and basic infrastructure/facilities should be provided on a
priority basis in respect of all the schools, especially at the elementary level, to
ensure an appropriate environment for teaching and learning.

> The State Government should carry out a survey and create a database of the
beneficiaries to be covered under various scholarship schemes. This database
should be updated on a yearly basis and all the eligible students should be
provided scholarship as per norms, in a timely manner.

3

1, Government Post Graduate College, Nahan 2. Government Sanskrit College, Nahan 3. GSSS, Dadahu
4. GSSS, Sarahan 5. GSSS (Boys), Nahan 6. GSSS (Girls), Nahan and 7. GSSS, Kaffota.

Af


3
5
g
§
5
S
&
हि
8
=
x

| ions | Water Supply

Provision of adequate and safe drinking water to all the citizens, especially those
living in the rural areas, has been a priority area for both the Central and the State
governments. In Sirmour district, as with the State as a whole, three centrally
sponsored schemes and four State Plan schemes are being implemented for provision
of drinking water through three divisions'* by the Irrigation and Pubic Health
Department. The budget allocation and expenditure on water supply schemes in the
district during 2004-09 was as follows:

Table: 12

(Rupees in crore)

Source: Departmental Figures

i) Status of Water Supply

Out of 4312 habitations in the district, 45 per cent of the habitations were fully
covered with drinking water facility, 30 per cent were partially covered and the
remaining were yet to be covered.

Chart -8
Habitations
=
1938
1303
MFully covered lM Partially covered ™ Not covered

ii) Status of execution of schemes

In the three sampled divisions, 939 habitations were to have been covered during
2004-09 as per Comprehensive Action Plan (CAP) 2003. The Department, however
took-up execution of 154 water supply schemes at a cost of Rs 62.17 crore to cover
829 habitations. Of these, only 32 schemes covering 66 habitations were completed
as of March 2009 after expending Rs 6.92 crore. Thirteen out of these 32 schemes
were completed with a delay ranging from three to 33 months involving cost overrun

7
Nahan, Nohradhar and Paonta Sahib.



| वन | Rs 0.79 crore. The remaining 122 water supply schemes to cover 763 habitations
were in progress after incurring an expenditure of Rs 31.51 crore. The execution of
28 water supply schemes to cover 110 habitations approved during 2007-09 had not
yet been taken up as of June 2009.

Audit scrutiny revealed that lack of adequate supervision at departmental level
and at required frequency, had not only delayed the completion of schemes on
time, but also raised doubts about the quality of works. Further, the targeted
beneficiaries were denied adequate and safe drinking water.

iii) Water Quality

As per departmental instructions, fortnightly testing of water samples of rural water
supply schemes to ensure sate drinking water during the rainy season and monthly
testing thereafter is required to be conducted in the State laboratories. Scrutiny of
records of three sampled divisions revealed that in respect of 783 schemes, against the
required 40,938 water sample tests to be conducted during 2004-09 only 12,780 tests
were actually done resulting in shortfall of 69 per cent. It was further noticed that no
water testing kits had been procured during the last five years in all the three sampled
divisions. Further, there is only one water testing laboratory at Nahan in the district
where no water testing had been carried out since January 2009 due to non posting of
any lab technician.

® SOITAIIG [B10

As per information supplied by the CMO, Sirmaur at Nahan, there were
1,24,361 cases of water born diseases (Diarrhoea/dysentery: 1,18,365 and
Gastroenteritis: 5,996) noticed in Sirmour district during 2004-09, apart from
occurrences of two deaths due to Gastroenteritis during 2004-05.

The EEs of Nahan and Paonta divisions in the exit conference stated (October 2009)
that one laboratory at Nahan is not sufficient for catering the services of water testing
in the district and more laboratories are being setup separately.

To sum up, unsafe water was being supplied to the public in the district as the
quality of water to the habitations was not being ensured by conducting the
required water sample tests; as a result substantial number of cases of water
borne diseases were noticed in the district.

5.4 Sanitation facilities

There are two towns viz. Nahan and Paonta Sahib in the district where sewerage
facilities are yet to be provided. For Paonta Sahib town, sewerage scheme was
approved (October 1995) for Rs 2.62 crore and was stipulated to be completed within
a period of five years (i.e. by September 2000). Despite expending Rs 8.81 crore,
the scheme was lying incomplete as of June 2009 and sewerage facility in the
town remained to be provided within the prescribed time.

The Executive Engineer attributed (June 2009) delay to non-availability of funds, land
disputes and time taken for procurement of material. The reply indicates poor
planning of the Department before taking up the execution of the scheme.

POS FI ON ae


=. in the absence of sewerage facilities in Nahan and Paonta Sahib, the
residents of these towns are exposed to untreated waste and sewage which is a
health hazard.

Recommendations

> The State Government/district administration needs to prepare a strategic action
plan to provide potable drinking water to the uncovered habitations in a time
bound manner.

> Water quality testing system should be improved/upgraded to ensure supply of
safe drinking water to the public.

> Effective steps needs to be taken to ensure early completion of the sewerage
scheme to Paonia Sahib town. Besides, Nahan town should also be considered for

5
8
5
3
$
a providing sewerage facility.
§

5

S

&

3

=

xX



| sss | Infrastructure

Good infrastructure will go a long way in enhancing the growth potential of the
district and bridging the gap between the urban and rural areas. It will also bring the
remote and backward areas closer to the district headquarters and bring about equity
and inclusive growth of the economy. Infrastructure includes provision of good all
weather roads, adequate electricity for household, industrial and irrigation needs,
railway connectivity, air services and reliable communication facilities.

Audit analysis revealed that there is no airport and railway connectivity in the
district. The nearest airport at Chandigarh is 90 kms away from Nahan town.
The nearest railway station is Ambala Cantt (Haryana) which is 65 kms from
Nahan town. A review of the development of roads in the district revealed that
70 per cent villages had been provided road connectivity upto March 2009. Audit
findings in this regard are discussed below.

i Roads

a) Status of Road Connectivity

Out of the total 971 villages in the district, only 680 villages have been provided road
connectivity as of March 2009. The distance of various places from the district
headquarters ranges from 18 kms (Kala Amb) to 125 kms (Rajgarh). The distances from
the Blocks to the district headquarters is given below:

(8) SIIIAIIS IIWIOUOI |,

Table: 13
Nahan This block is at district headquarter.
Paonta Sahib 45
Rajgarh 125
[shila . .7[़झह&हश/; 117
Sangrah 65
Pacchad 39

Source: State Planning Department

The status of road connectivity in the district as of 31 March 2009 is given below:

Chart: 9
Road Connectivity

971

1000;-  छ

ian
535
aa | |
— कक

Villages Connectivity Connectivity
(March 2004) (March 2009)



laa | 10
Road Length (Kms)
OO 2TTS ||
3000
gi
2000 a
1000
0 ग्रह
March 2004 March 2009

Source: State Planning Department

As can be seen from the charts above, there has only been an increase of 145 villages
(15 per cent) connected through roads and 778 kms (39 per cent) in the length of
roads provided during the last five years. The EEs attributed (May-July 2009) the
poor progress to disputes in road alignments on private/forest land.

b) Schemes for Development of Roads

5S)
£
Q
§
§
SI
x
=
g
=
N

The most important scheme being implemented for the construction/development of
roads is the Centrally Sponsored Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) and
Bharat Nirman Programme. Another scheme which aimed at construction of village
link roads is Mukhya Mantri Gram Path Yojana (MMGPY).

The progress with regard to implementation of PMGSY is discussed in the succeeding
paragraphs.

The PMGSY was launched in 2000 and aimed at connecting every habitation that has
a population of 1000 or more through good all weather roads within three years i.e. by
2003 and habitations with 500 people or more, by the end of the Tenth Plan. The
status in this regard as of March 2009 was as follows:

Table: 14

With over

1000 people | oe | 12 7 37
With over 500

people 55 39 16 29

Source: Departmental figures

During 2004-09, funds amounting to Rs 91.31 crore were provided by the GOI for
this programme and the State Government allocated Rs 75.06 crore out of State
budget for construction of roads for the district. Of this, expenditure incurred was
Rs 91.52 crore and Rs 71.68 crore respectively.

The details of road works taken up in the district during the review period and
progress of their execution are tabulated in table-15:



| crete | 15
2004-05 17 4 20.77 4.04 12 3 13.05 2.07
2005-06 7 4 11.29 |_11.46 | 1.46 5 [ot | 7.05 5.27
2006-07 39 12 74.19 4.50 13 | 1 | 9.47 0.05
2007-08 | 9 | 3 10.44 4.63 2, - | 197 | = |
2008-09 2 | 6 | 4.20 4 | - | - {| - {| - |

Source: Data compiled by Audit from information supplied by the respective divisions

Audit analysis revealed that out of 103 works taken up during 2004-09 under
PMGSY and State Sector schemes, only 37 works (36 per cent) were completed,
within the stipulated completion period, 21 works were still in progress and
remaining 45 works were lying incomplete as of March 2009. The delay in
completion of 45 works ranged between two and 32 months. The EEs attributed
(May-July 2009) the delay to acquisition of private land and for want of sanction for
the use of forest land for non-forestry purpose.

(8) $9)[44198 जूप्रणा००

In sum, 30 per cent of the villages in Sirmour district still remain to be provided
with road connectivity; acquisition of forest/private land being the main
bottleneck.

Recommendations

> To ensure timely completion of road connectivity projects, mechanism to resolve
the land disputes needs to be set up on priority basis.

ii) Schemes for other developmental activities

Other developmental activities like renovation/repairs of Government Schools, health
institutions, water supply schemes, etc., were taken up in the district under Vikas
Mein Jan Sahyog (VMIJS), Sectoral Decentralised Planning (SDP), Members of
Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS), Vidhayak Kshetriya Vikas

Nidhi Yojana (MLALADS), ete.

a) Vikas Mein Jan Sahyog (VMJS)

VMJS scheme was launched in January 1993 with the objective of ensuring
community participation in developmental activities like construction of Government
buildings for education, rural water supply schemes, rural roads, minor irrigation
schemes, multipurpose community centres and other infrastructural facilities. It is a
State sponsored scheme with funding in the ratio of 85:15 between the State
Government and the public in areas where the SC/ST population comprise over 50
per cent, 75:25 in backward areas, and 50:50 in urban areas and rural areas with
population being predominantly of general category.



EI 2004-09, Rs 4.24 crore was released by the DC to the executing agencies for
developmental works in the district. Of this, Rs 1.27 crore was utilised by the
executing agencies and the balance amount was lying with the latter as of March
2009. The percentage utilisation of budget allocation declined from 79 during 2004-
05 to three during 2008-09.

b) Sectoral Decentralised Planning (SDP)

The SDP was introduced in all the districts except the tribal areas to execute works
relating to renovation/repair of Government owned public assets like schools, health
institutions, water supply schemes, irrigation kuhls and village link roads. The works
under this scheme are approved by the District Planning Development and Twenty
Point Programme Review Committee. Under this scheme, five per cent funds are
taken from the approved Plan in respect of selected heads of development and are
placed at the disposal of the DC as ‘untied funds’ to be utilised on smaller works
which do not find place in the budget and to ensure that public grievances are
redressed instantly.

During 2004-09, Rs.10.93 crore was released to the executing agencies against which
only Rs. 0.86 crore (eight per cent) was utilised. Despite a specific stipulation to
refund the unutilised funds at the close of the financial year, the executing agencies
retained the funds. As per the DPO, 82 works worth Rs 0.86 crore were completed
and 434 works costing Rs 10.07 crore remained incomplete due to site dispute/site
selection as of June 2009.

(8) Audit Report on District Sirmaur.

०) Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLADS)

District Sirmaur is a part of Shimla Parliamentary constituency which includes
Shimla and Solan districts also. DC Shimla is the Nodal Officer for release of funds
to the Sirmaur district.

During 2004-09, Rs 25 crore was received by the DC, Shimla for approval and
sanction of works relating to the development of the constituency under MPLADS.
Out of this Rs 2.98 crore was allocated to Sirmaur district. Besides, the DC had an
unspent amount of Rs 2.65 lakh in the beginning of 2004-05 and also received
Rs 34.30 lakh from the executing agencies on account of savings surrendered by them
and interest of Rs 4.35 lakh credited in the bank accounts. Of the total available
amount of Rs 3.39 crore, Rs 2.94 crore was released to the executing agencies in the
district and the balance Rs 0.45 crore remained unutilised with the DC as of June
2009.

Scrutiny of the details of the works sanctioned under MPLADS revealed the
following:

As per the revised guidelines (November 2005), an amount of Rs 44.07 lakh and
Rs 22.03 lakh were to have been released for the development of the areas inhabitated
by SC and ST communities respectively. However, no amount was either
recommended by the Member of Parliament or sanctioned by the DC during 2004-09.
The DC admitted (July 2009) the facts.



| cee | Rs 2.94 crore sanctioned and released to the executing agencies, the details of
expenditure for only Rs 2.06 crore incurred by them during 2004-08 were available
with the DC’s office though Utilisation Certificates were given for the entire amount.
For the financial year 2008-09, the details of amount actually spent were, however,
not furnished by that office. While admitting the facts, the DC in the exit conference
stated (October 2009) that concerned MP would be requested to recommend more
works to ensure optimum utilisation of funds.

d) Vidhayak Kshetriya Vikas Nidhi Yojana (VKVNY)

District Sirmaur has five Vidhayaks (Members of Legislature). Under MLALAD
scheme, Rs. 25 lakh was released to each of the Vidhayaks with effect from 2004-05
to ensure execution of developmental works in their respective constituencies. The
works are to be selected by the Vidhayaks as per the guidelines of the scheme and
sanction from the DC is to be obtained for their execution.

During 2004-09 the DC received Rs. 6.25 crore and released to the implementing
agencies. Of this, only Rs 1.31 crore was expended and the balance was lying with
the implementing agencies as of March 2009.

The DPO stated (July 2009) that due to non completion of codal formalities in time,
the amount spilled over to the next year.

® SIIIAIIS IIWIOUOI |,

Common Implementation Issues

Scrutiny of implementation of these four schemes brought out the following common
aspects:

> All the works sanctioned under VMJS, SDP, MPLADS and VKVNY are
required to be completed within a year. However, in the three test checked blocks, it
was observed that 88'° works relating to construction of link roads, community
centres, etc. sanctioned during 2004-09 for Rs 84.17 lakh were not at all taken up for
execution as of June 2009 resulting in denial of the intended benefits to the public.

> 1181 works" like construction of community centres/mahila mandal bhawans,
school buildings, roads, etc., costing Rs 19.44 crore sanctioned between April 2004
and June 2008 were lying incomplete as of July 2009. In the three test-checked
blocks, 128 works'’ costing Rs 1.98 crore sanctioned during April 2004 to June 2008
which were to have been completed by July 2009, were yet to be completed. The
delay in completion of these works ranged between one and 52 months.

The BDOs attributed (June-July 2009) the non-commencement of works/delay in
completion works to the diversion of works to other places, non-availability of
land/land disputes, late site selection and non co-operation of GPs.

15
MPLADS: 35; SDP: 26 and VKVNY: 27

16
MPLADS: 151; SDP: 434; VKVNY: 510 and VMIS: 86.
"7
MPLADS: 19; SDP: 33; VKVNY: 58 and VMIJS: 18.



®) Audit Report on District Sirmaur fo

| cx J Asset registers are required to be maintained to keep track of the assets
created out of the funds sanctioned. However, these registers were not maintained at
District/Block/GP level resulting in creation of assets in an unplanned way with the
benefits envisaged out of these assets remaining unknown to the district
administration.

Thus, other developmental schemes like Vikas Mein Jan Sahyog (VMJS),
Sectoral Decentralised Planning (SDP), Members of Parliament Local Area
Development Scheme (MPLADS), Vidhayak Kshetriya Vikas Nidhi Yojana
(MLALADS), etc. were taken up in the district in an uncoordinated way as the
works were neither properly planned nor completed within the specified
timelines resulting thereby in a situatioin of huge funds lying unutilised. The
assets created out of these schemes also remained unknown to the district
administration as no asset register was maintained at any level.

Recommendations

> A coordinated approach needs to be adopted by the State/district administration
with the executing agencies to ensure that the works are planned and completed in
time to ensure that benefits percolate down to the people.

6.2 Employment Generation

The GOT and the State Government have initiated numerous measures to tackle
problems of poverty, unemployment and the slow pace of progress in rural economy.
In addition, provision of food security, especially to the poor and vulnerable sections
of the society, has been envisioned as one of the important components of an
inclusive growth of the economy. The two most important schemes sponsored by the
Central Government for providing employment in the rural areas as a means of
poverty alleviation are Sampoorna Gramin Rozgar Yojana (SGRY) and
Swarnajayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY). The SGRY was subsequently
subsumed in National Rural Employment Guarantee Programme (NREGP) in
February 2006.

i) | SGRY

The objectives of the SGRY were to provide additional wage employment to the rural
poor who were in need and willing to do manual and unskilled work in and around
their village, and to create durable community, social and economic assets and
infrastructure in rural areas. Towards this end, the GPs were to submit work proposals
through the BDOs to the DRDA, based on a comprehensive shelf of works to be
approved at the beginning of the year. As mentioned in paragraph-7 relating to
Planning, schemes were sanctioned by the DC in an adhoc manner, since the GPs and
the Blocks had not prepared any Perspective Plan or Annual Action Plans.



lec | works were proposed on a perceived need basis, rather than in a
planned and coordinated manner, resulting in overlaps in execution of works
and underutilisation of available funds. Also, there was no database at the
district/DRDA level, detailing the developmental works undertaken in various
Blocks and GPs.

The SGRY was funded on 75:25 basis by the GOI and the State Government. The
year-wise position relating to the funds received by DRDA, Nahan and utilisation
there against during 2004-06 (upto February 2006) is given below:

Table: 16

Rupees in crore)

1.19 (24

Source: Departmental figures

The details of funds received and expended during this period by the three sampled
Blocks are as follows:

Table: 17

® $9)[44196 IIWOUO:

(Rupees in lakh)

155.50 1.26 7.79 (05
134.90 3.25 145.94 | 116.04 | 29.90 (20

Source: Departmental figures

After merger of SGRY under NREGA, the unspent balance of Rs 29.90 lakh was not
transferred to it and remained parked in a saving bank account.

> Employment Generation under SGRY

The details of employment generated under this scheme during 2004-06 as reported by
DRDA to the GOI are as follows.

Table: 18

(Mandays in lakh)

Source: Departmental figures



(&) Audit Report on District Sirma

| ome | were no annual targets relating to employment generation although the DRDA
planned to execute small works like construction of tanks, playground, etc. for
generating employment. Therefore, the extent of employment generated vis-a-vis
targets could not be ascertained. Out of 4,858 works sanctioned in the district during
2004-06, 3,713 works had been completed and 1,145 works were lying incomplete as
of July 2009. The PO, DRDA stated (July 2009) that works were sanctioned at the
fag end of financial year and resulted in non-execution of works/delay in execution of
works by GPs.

The fact remains that these works were supposed to be completed within a period of
one year from the date of sanction and even after 2004-06, a period of more than three
years has already elapsed. The status relating to employment generation in these
Blocks was reported as follows.

Table: 19 (Mandays in lakh)

200:
2005-06 [| _0.90 __|
Source: Departmental figures

According to the guidelines, 30 per cent employment opportunities were earmarked
for women beneficiaries.

As can be seen from the tables above, negligible employment opportunities to women
were provided in the district and in the sampled blocks no employment to women
beneficiaries was provided during 2004-09.

The DRDA and the sampled Blocks had not maintained employment registers in the
prescribed format indicating the category wise details of people provided employment
and the number of mandays generated for each work. In the absence of these details,
the figures of employment generated were compiled from the muster rolls directly. In
the absence of complete details in the employment registers, the employment reported
to have been generated, especially in respect of women and SC/ST categories, could
not be verified in audit.

In all the 21 test-checked GPs, the category-wise details of SC/ST and women
beneficiaries provided wage employment were not recorded in the muster rolls. While
30 per cent of employment generated should have been in respect of women
beneficiaries, the DRDA reported only 0.04 lakh mandays for women out of 8.63 lakh
mandays generated in the district during 2004-06, resulting in less wage employment
of 2.55 lakh mandays. The Project Officer stated (July 2009) that being conservative
society the women in Sirmaur district did not come forward to do manual works.


Ea National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA)

The National Rural Employment Guarantee Act-2005 (NREGA) is being
implemented in the district since February 2006. The basic objective of the Act is to
enhance security of livelihood in rural areas by providing at least 100 days of
guaranteed wage employment.

Under NREGA, the wages of skilled and semi-skilled workers and cost of material is
shared in the ratio of 75:25 by GOI and State Government. In addition, the State
Government bears the unemployment allowance and the administrative expenses of
State Employment Guarantee Council. The year-wise position of funds received by
the DRDA, Sirmaur at Nahan and utilisation thereagainst during 2005-09 is given

हर below:
Table: 20 8
(00९०४ in crore) s
i}
2
6
2005-06 | - | 5.35 |. | 0.01 5.36 | 0.40 | 4.96 (93 =
2006-07 | 4.96 | 8.70 | 0.96 | 0.52 | 15.14 | VI7 7.37 (49: <
2007-08 7.37 5.86 1.20 0.15 14.58 10.18 4.40 (30) ठ्ठ
2008-09 | 4.40 | 22.09 2.06 | 0.15 | 28.70 25.63 3.07 (11 a
Source: Departmental figures (7)

The details of funds received and expended during this period by the three sampled
blocks are as follows:

Table: 21

‘Rupees in crore)

2005-06 | - | 070 | - | .. 0.48 (69,
2006-07 0.48 3.66 | 0.10 | है \: 0.94 (22)
2007-08 0.94 3.80 0.05 5 0.39 (08)
2008-09 0.39 11.48 03 5(10,

Source: Departmental figures
Note: Figures in the parenthesis denote percentage

The BDOs of the sampled blocks stated (June-July 2009) that the under utilisation of
funds was due to slow progress of works by the GPs which in turn resulted in less
opportunity for employment generation.

> Employment Generation under NREGA

The details of employment generated under this scheme during 2005-09 as reported
by DRDA to the GOI are as follows:



E=] 22 (Numbers in lakh)
2005-06 |  - | - | - | - |
2006-07 6.71 2.58 0.20 4.13
2007-08 7.39 2.53 0.12 4.86
2008-09 14.28 5.58 0.58 8.70

Source: Departmental figures

In the first year (2005-06) of implementation of the scheme, no employment was
generated by the implementation agencies due to non-receipt of funds during the year.

Scrutiny of records relating to implementation of the scheme revealed the following
points:

The details of job card holders registered, those who demanded employment and
those who were provided employment in the district during 2006-09 are as under:

=
if
Q
§
5
S
&
= Ti
3 ‘able: 23
N

(In numbers)

2006-07 31,534 20,453
2007-08 35,927 22,444 404 | 9#%१ | |
2008-09 54,619 28,796 1,681 94

Source: Figures supplied by the Department

The shortfall in providing legally guaranteed 100 days wage employment to card
holders who had demanded employment ranged between 94 and 98 per cent. No
unemployment allowance was granted to eligible job card holders who were not
provided employment. This shows lack of adequate efforts on the part of
implementing agencies for ensuring effective implementation of the scheme.

During 2006-09, 28.38 lakh mandays were generated by providing employment to
66,138 workers (job card holders). Of these women workers were provided only
0.93 lakh mandays against the required mandays of 9.36 lakh (33 per cent). Thus, the
women beneficiaries were not given adequate employment opportunities as required
under the Act.

In the shelf of projects for the period 2006-09, 9,852 works were projected to be
completed. Against this, achievement was only 5,508 works (56 per cent). Thus,
creation of durable assets for strengthening livelihood of rural poor was not ensured to
the desired level.



| cee | Muster rolls and payments

As per provisions of NREGA guidelines, the Muster Rolls (MRs) in the prescribed
format with a unique identity number are to be issued by the Programme Officers of
the blocks to the Gram Panchayats/executing agencies. The MRs are also required to
be maintained by the GPs and other executing agencies in the prescribed manner.

In 21 test checked GPs, it was noticed that the MRs were not being maintained in the
prescribed manner and the following discrepancies were noticed:

© In all test checked GPs of Nahan, Pachhad and Sangrah blocks of the district,
MRs in old formats without a column for mentioning the job card number
were found issued during 2006-07.

e Dates of payment of wages were not indicated on the MRs. mS
i}

e The MRs were not countersigned by the Inspecting Officers in token of having 5
inspected the work by them. =}

=.

¢ No unique number was given to the work mentioned in the MRs. a
e

e Attendance of workers was marked on MRs for seven days a week without <
any weekly rest. g

an

Disbursement of daily wages is required to be made on a weekly basis or in any case
not later than a fortnight after the date on which work was done. In the event of any
delay in payment of wages, workers are entitled to compensation as per provision of
the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 to be borne by the State Government.
Rupees 12.75 lakh was earned by 1,274 workers employed on 123 Muster Rolls in
eight out of 21 selected Panchayats between May 2006 and March 2009 but they were
not paid on weekly or fortnightly basis due to cheque collection and non-completion
of codal formalities. The delay in payment of wages in these cases ranged between
six and 645 days beyond the maximum period of a fortnight. No compensation was
paid to them.

> Recording and Monitoring

The guidelines of both the schemes (SGRY and NREGA) provided for maintenance
of inventory of the assets created in the rural areas, detailing the date of
commencement and completion of the project, cost involved, benefits derived,
employment generated, etc. There was, however, no inventory of assets created under
the programme.

Summing up:

The district authorities failed to provide the guaranteed wage employment in
rural areas of the district thereby defeating the objective of security of livelihood
to the needy and the vulnerable sections viz. SC/ST and women; the extent of
poverty alleviation through these schemes remains doubtful.



5
:
&
3
:
g
§
5
S
&
हि
8
=
x

| cc | Energy

Out of the 971 villages in the district, 965 villages (99 per cent) have been electrified
as of March 2009. The State Government chalked out plans for electrifying the
remaining villages also through the Rajiv Gandhi Gramin Vidyutikaran Yojana
(RGGVY).

> Rajiv Gandhi Gramin Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY)

The RGGVY was launched by the GOI in March 2005 to provide electricity to all the
rural households within a period of five years. The Rural Electrification Corporation
(REC) is the nodal agency for implementation of this scheme aimed at facilitating
overall rural development, employment generation and poverty alleviation. The
scheme is to be implemented with 90 per cent funding from GOI. Electrification of
BPL households is to be financed 100 per cent by the Central Government.

The HP State Electricity Board prepared a detailed project report (DPR) in March

2005 for Sirmaur district with the aim of:

. Electrification of 3805 un-electrified households among electrified villages
including 1024 BPL households;

. Provision of new sub-stations/transmission lines and distribution transformers
in 965 electrified villages; and

. Electrification one un-electrified habitation.

Scrutiny revealed that the above plans of the Board for electrification of rural areas
did not fructify since the DPR was sent to the REC for approval only in
September 2005, 1.९. after a delay of five months from the date of sanction
(March 2005). The DPR was approved by the REC in March 2008 i.e. after the lapse
of two and half years from the date of submission (September 2005) of the scheme.

Thereafter the Board finalised tenders for Rs 45.93 crore and awarded the works in
February 2009 to different contractors on turnkey basis with completion period of one
year. As the tendered cost exceeded the sanctioned amount (Rs 29.76 crore) of the
scheme, the project cost was further revised and got sanctioned (February 2009) from
REC for Rs 49.69 crore.

Thus, the delay in sanctioning the DPR resulted in cost escalation of
Rs 19.93 crore, besides, depriving eligible householders of Sirmaur district of the
benefits even after over four years of launching (March 2005) of the scheme.

Recommendation

> The State Government should streamline its internal processes to ensure that
project proposals are formulated on time and pursued with the GOI to ensure that
adequate funds are provided for electrifying all the  unelectrified
habitations/villages within a specific timeframe.


l= | E-Governance

NIC, a Government of India agency had setup a District Informatics Centre in
District Headquarters to support the District Administration in promoting awareness
about the use of Information Technology in various departments. The State
Government setup Integrated Community Service Centres (i-CoSC) known as ‘Sugam’
Centres up to tehsil level in districts for providing 50 services under one roof to the

— citizens of the district through a single window. The i-CoSCs are operated and
managed by a district e-governance society with support from the Society for
Promotion of Information Technology and e-Governance (SITEG).

i) Services 9
The system was developed basically to provide the following services electronically: धर
Table: प्र
7 ces 7 _ PA
Certificates Relating to Birth/Death, Caste, OBC, Domicile, Handicapped status, 2
Marriage, Nationality, Non-Encumbrance, Solvency, Surviving Members =P
and Income. &
Registration Relating to Birth/Death, Marriage, Electoral Rolls.
Revenue Property registration, certified copy of Khatauni/
Jamabandi/K hasara/Girdawari.
Licenses/Permits Issue of Driving License, Registration Certiticates of new vehicles, Token

Tax of commercial vehicles, change of address, Transfer of Ownership of
Non-transport Vehicles, Issuance of Conductor License and Ration Cards.

Agriculture/ Information about Mandi rates in respect of identified commodities in
Horticulture important mandis, remedy for crop diseases from experts through
remote assistance.

Utilities Application for electricity connection/additional loads, payment of
electricity, water, sewerage and telephone bills, property tax and house
Tax. HRTC on-line bus tickets booking, HPTDC on-line hotel reservation,
private hotel reservation.

Social Services Information about Family Pension, old age pension, Government

Pensioners Helpline, Police on-line complaints, ete.

Source: Sugam records

ii) Functioning of Sugam Centres

There are 10'*e-governance Centres in the district covering various Sub-divisions,
Tehsils and Sub Tehsils. The position of services to be provided and actually available
in these centres was as under :

eT er
Three at Sub Division level (Nahan, Rajgarh and Paonta Sahib), Three at Tehsil Level (Shillai,
Renuka Ji and Pachhad) and Four at Sub Tehsil level (Dadahu, Nohradhar, Kamrau and Ronhat).



Audit Report on District

|= | 25
SRLS COO
District level 37 5. (Vahan, Sarthi, Himris, Himbhoomi and
e Parman)
Sub-division level 35 4. (Vahan, Sarthi, Himris and 6 Parman
Tehsil level 33 2. (Himris and e_Parman)
Sub Tehsil level = 3. (Himris, ९ Parman and Himbhoomi)

For strengthening of these centres the Director (IT) released Rs five lakh in
November 2008 which remained unutilised in a bank account as of July 2009.

Functioning of four centres viz. Nahan (District), Rajgarh (Sub Divisional Office
(Civil), Pachhad (Tehsil) and Dadahu (Sub Tehsil) reviewed on a random basis,
revealed the following:

> As per the directions of the State Government (November 2007) all the centres
set up at District/Sub Division/ Tehsil/ Sub Tehsil level were to be subsumed
under a common brand name Sugam with an identical logo and common sign
board. It was however, observed in audit (July, 2009) that centres were either
using different brand names like ‘Sugam’, ‘Jan Suvidha e_governance Centre’
etc. or did not have any sign boards as prescribed for indicating the location and
the facilities available at these centres. This resulted in avoidable inconvenience
to the public.

Photograph: 10 Photograph: 11

Nahan and Rajyarh centres using different brand names

> Sugam centres were to provide services at the doorstep of rural community by
bringing all citizens related services and information under a single roof cutting
across different tiers of administration. During test check, audit observed that
the services in Nahan relating to e_Parman, Vahan and Sarthi were being
provided in Sub-Division office (civil) and Himris and Himbhoomi were being
provided at Teshil Office causing unecessary inconvenience to the public.

> The State level connectivity through Himachal State Wide Area Network
(HIMSWAN) Points of Presence (PoPs) has been established at all centers. The
HIMSWAN facility provided in Rajgarh Sub divisional Office was not
functioning as the PoP centre established for HIMSWAN connectivity was far
away from Sub Division Office (Civil).



| eee | was not backed up at regular intervals and there was no business continuity
plan to operationalise the system in case of any emergency failure. Only the data
relating to Himbhoomi was being backed up at the district level.

It was envisaged that with the implementation of Sugam, the processes relating
to all the services proposed to be made available electronically, would be re-
engineered and automated. Scrutiny revealed that the citizens continue to follow
up their applications for various services manually from one place to another
defeating the main objective of providing all the services under one roof.

In conclusion, as regards the e-governance activities, only 2 to 5 services were being
provided as of July 2009 through the Sugam centres against 33 to 37 services
envisaged to be provided at tehsil to district level.

Recommendation

>

>

Besides, offering envisaged services through Sugam, efforts should also be made
to bring all services under one roof as is presently not the case.

The Sugam/ e-governance centres should have a standardized name and logo
which is applied uniformly in all the districts and tehsils.

Disaster recovery plans should be put in place to deal with any eventuality and
data in the system should be backed up on a regular basis.

a
is)
a
Z
ge
3
&



5
:
&
3
5
Q
5
5
5
me
=
S
=
N

l= | Civic Amenities by Municipal Administration

Provision of basic civic amenities in the towns is the responsibility of the municipal
administration. Sirmaur district has two MCs for Nahan and Paonta towns and one
NP for Rajgarh town. The MCs and NP function as an institution of self governance
and were receiving grants and funds from the Government. These institutions also
earn revenue through taxes, rents, issue of licenses, car parking, etc. and are mandated
to utilise these funds for provision of adequate civic amenities to the public.

i) Execution of developmental works

The functioning of both the MCs and NP for the period 2004-09 was reviewed
(July 2009) in audit and there were instances of mismanagement of funds meant for
developmental works which deprived the general public of the intended benefits; as is
evidenced from the following findings.

> MCs Paonta and Nahan received (April 2007) Rs35lakh each’? for
construction of parking, toilets and parks from Director, UDD under Rajiv
Gandhi Urban Renewal Facility (RGURF) for infrastructure and sanitation
improvement in urban areas. Despite the fact that the conditions governing
the sanction of these funds stipulated the completion of these works and
utilisation of funds within the financial year 2007-08, none of these works
have been taken up as of July 2009. MC Paonta had incurred an expenditure
of Rs 7.27 lakh only for purchase of play equipments for main park in front of
MC office and soil filling in the Park and the balance amount of Rs 27.73 lakh
was lying unutilised. The funds allotted to MC Nahan were still lying
unutilised.

> Under the scheme Integrated Development of Small and Medium Towns
(IDSMTs) construction of ‘Parking-cum-community hall’ at Paonta was
awarded (July 2002) to a contractor for Rs 92.79 lakh with a stipulation to
complete the work within 18 months. The contractor started the work in
August 2002 and Rs 39.18 lakh was paid for the work executed upto
March 2006. Thereafter, the work was stopped and the funds available for this
work were spent on another work i.e. shopping complex sanctioned under the
above scheme. With a view to complete the work, the DC Sirmaur accorded
(July 2008) administrative approval and expenditure sanction of Rs 23.75 lakh
under Backward Regions Grant Fund Scheme (BRGF) and released (July
2008) Rs 19 lakh for this purpose. The funds provided by the DC also could
not be utilised for want of approval of the estimate for remaining work as of
July 2009. Thus, due to keeping the work in a suspended state for more than
three years, the amount of Rs 39.18 lakh spent remained unfruitful and
intended benefits could not be provided to the public as is evidenced from the
photograph-12:

ss है
MC Nahan: for parking at Naya Bazar Nahan; and MC Paonta: for main park and toilets.



Abandoned work of Parking-cum-Community hall Paonta after incurring expenditure of Rs 39.18 lakh

ii) ‘Waste Management

Municipal authorities are responsible for collection, storage, segregation,

transportation, processing and disposal of municipal solid waste. A review of the

processes involved in solid waste management in the district revealed the following:

> The MC Paonta area produces nine to 10 tonnes of garbage per day. To collect
this waste, 75 open dustbins and 25 dumper containers have been provided in the
town. The Director, UDD released (March 2006) Rs 51.29 lakh under 12"
Finance Commission for implementation of Solid Waste Management Project.
For this purpose, 2.10 bigha land situated near Kedarpur village had already been
transferred (December 2003) to MC Paonta. Out of Rs 51.29 lakh, Rs 12.86 lakh
(Dumper placer: Rs 7.38 lakh; dumper containers: Rs. 2.86 lakh: Garbage
Rickshaw: Rs 1.79 lakh and development of dumping site: Rs 0.83 lakh) were
spent and the balance amount of Rs 38.43 lakh remained unutilised as of
July 2009 due to stoppage of work of dumping site (May 2007) by the villagers
residing near the dumping site. In the absence of any dumping site the whole
garbage of the town was being dumped on the banks of river Yamuna as can be
seen from the following photograph.

Photographs: 13

i=

ry
re)

§ [एन०7०.

89419

(७)



‘) Audit Report on District Sirmaur for the year ended 31 March 2009

a

Photograph: 14

‘Abandoned work of Solid Waste Management Project after incurring expenditure of Rs 0.83 lakh

The EO, Paonta while admitting (July 2009) the facts stated that matter had been.
discussed in the House and efforts were being made to persuade the people of
Kedarpur village to settle their objection relating to development of dumping site.

> The MC Nahan area generates seven to nine tonnes of garbage per day. In order to
collect this waste, 45 open dustbins and 19 dumper containers have been provided.
In both the MCs-Paonta and Nahan the dumpers are transporting the garbage to the
bank of river Yamuna/SWM through Dumper Placers and garbage collected in
open dustbins is transported in open tractor trolley which can be seen from the
photograph below:

Photograph: 15

Garbage being transported in open tractor trolley by MC Paonta

It was noticed that out of 7 to 9 tonnes of garbage, about 60 per cent garbage is non—
biodegradable. In Solid Waste Plant only biodegradable solid waste is converted into
compost. Thus, 60 per cent garbage was lying in the open near the Solid Waste Plant
as can be seen from the photographs-16 and 17:


| coma | 16

Q

Solid Waste Plant Nahan g
oC

be

Photograph: 17 S
Dn

ce
4
<
=
a
e
a

Non-biodegradable waste lying undisposed off near Solid Waste Management Plant Nahan

The EO Nahan while admitting (July 2009) the facts stated that a proposal under
BRGEF has been included in the project report wherein the funds of Rs 75 lakh had
been demanded for dumping the non-biodegradable material. He further stated that as
soon as the funds are received, immediate action to prepare the dumping site would be
taken in hand.

> In Rajgarh NP area about six quintal garbage is generated every day. To
collect this garbage, NP has placed 12 open and 20 covered dustbins. NP has no
solid waste plant to convert this garbage into compost. The garbage was being
transported in open tipper to reserve forest which is about 3 kms away from NP
area. The Forest Department impounded (April 2009) the vehicle of the NP for
dumping the garbage in reserve forest. A dumping site measuring 1.17 bigha land
has been proposed adjacent to the present site where the garbage was being
dumped and the process of transferring the land in the name of NP was under
process. The people living in nearby villages of the present dumping site objected
to the disposal of garbage in the present site and threatened the NP authority to
manhandle the staff of the NP and safai karamcharies. With the result the whole
garbage was scattered in the NP as can be seen from the photograph-18:



a 18

Garbage Scattered out of overflowing dustbin at Bus Stand Rajgarh

Secretary NP Rajgarh while admitting the facts stated (July 2009) that requests were
being made regularly with the revenue authorities to transfer the land in the name of
NP. He further stated that there exists no other plan to dispose off the garbage as no
suitable site was available with NP.

Audit Report on District Sirmaw

To sum up, the Municipal Councils and Nagar panchayats in the district did not
have an integrated waste management plan for collection, storage, segregation,
transportation, processing and disposal of municipal solid waste thereby
exposing the public to the dangers of untreated waste and pollution.

Recommendations

> Execution of developmental works by the MCs need to be monitored effectively to
avoid cost escalation and to ensure completion of works in a time bound manner.

> Waste management plans also need to be developed in an integrated manner to
ensure proper management of disposal of municipal solid waste.



l= | Inspection and Supervision

The DC is responsible for monitoring the overall progress of implementation of
various developmental programmes in the district and ensuring that these are executed
within the specified timeframe and approved budget. While most of the Central and
State plan schemes specify the monitoring requirements, in general, most schemes
require that the DC closely monitor the progress on a monthly/quarterly basis. The
District Planning and Development Committee is also required to review the progress
of schemes every quarter. In addition, the State Government has also specified the
extent of supervision to be carried out at various levels with regard to the
developmental works/projects, as follows:

Table: 26
gnated Officer .्््््््््ऊसऊसऊ1-_प़
Block Development Officer / Junior Engineer 100
District Planning Officer 15
Addl. DC / Addl. DM. 5
Sub-Divisional Officer 10
Deputy Commissioner 4
Official from State Planning Department 1

Apart from the stipulated personal inspection and supervision, review of the execution
of schemes was also to be done through periodical review reports and statements of
expenditure (SOE) to be sent from various levels — GPs to the Blocks, Blocks to the
DRDA/DC, DC to the State Government and onwards to the Central Government, for
the Central schemes.

Audit scrutiny, however, revealed that monitoring and supervision of the progress of
implementation of various schemes in the district was perfunctory. The District
Planning and Development Committee convened only five meetings against
requirement of 15 during 2004-09. The DC reportedly held monthly meetings with the
BDOs to review the progress of execution of works/schemes. There is, however, no
record of the discussions or the decisions taken in such meetings or further directions
to overcome the bottlenecks, if any, in the execution of the schemes. While the DPO
stated (July 2009) that field visits and inspections were carried out both by the DC
and the Addl. DC, there were no reports available in the office relating to such visits.

The sampled blocks and GPs, do not send the Statements of Expenditure on a monthly
basis to the DC. The DPO (July 2009) stated that efforts were being made to get the
information regularly from the concerned agencies.

8.2 Grievance Redressal

The State Government has instituted a mechanism at the district level to address the
grievances of the public relating to the services/utilities provided by various
departments and agencies of the State. A Grievance Cell has been set up in the office

प्रणाणाए*प्रु yovduy



Ss
=
=
:
&
3
:
g
§
5
S
&
हि
8
=
x

| eee | the DC with staff, which caters to two types of grievances — those received through
(a) Governor, Chief Minister and Minister of the State and (b) from the general
public. The timeframe specified by the State Government for redressing the
grievances in (a) is one month and those in (b) is one and a half months. The position
relating to the number of grievances received and those addressed during the last five
years (up to March 2009) as reported by the DC’s office, is depicted in the charts
below:

Chart- 11

Governor/CM

2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09

Chart- 12
Public/Others

2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09

In sum, monitoring and supervision of the progress of implementation of various
schemes at all tiers of local administration in the district was perfunctory which
impacted the progress of developmental works/projects undertaken by various
departments/implementing agencies. Consequently, there were number of works
in the social and economic sectors which were plagued by cost and time overruns
thereby depriving the public of the benefits of these developmental schemes.

Recommendation

> Monitoring, inspection and supervision needs to be strengthened at all the tiers of
local administration to ensure that the programmes are executed on time and within
cost and timely corrective action is taken in cases of slippage.



| eee | are multiplicity of programmes and schemes and even larger number of
implementing agencies, making it difficult for the district administration to effectively
monitor and supervise the developmental activities. While almost all the
developmental programmes are targeted at the same set of beneficiaries, the existence
of myriad programmes without an integrated focus, has led to each of them being
implemented in a stand alone mode.

To ensure efficiency and effectiveness in delivery of key services like education,
health, employment, etc., the GOI has increasingly been entrusting the responsibility
at the local level, especially the PRIs. This is also intended to ensure that the local
Government at the district, block and GP level are empowered to discharge the
functions that are constitutionally assigned to them. It was observed that absence of
adequate participation from these levels in the planning process is hindering the
planned progress of the district and address the felt needs at the grass root level.
While the PRIs are empowered to prepare specific plans for an integrated
development of their area, lack of structured annual action plans from these levels and
absence of capacity building have resulted in their inability to expend the funds
provided to them for implementation of various programmes.

Adequate monitoring mechanism is either not instituted, or is not functioning as
envisaged, with regard to execution of schemes. While plans have been formulated for
providing integrated development of a sector/service, these could not be executed in a
time bound manner due to non-compliance with the required formalities like
obtaining clearance for forest land or clear title to land. The State Government will
have to address these serious issues in order to achieve real development of the
district at the desired pace.

(2) प्रणुशा[>1०3

2988 1 22 मा
(Rita Mitra)

Shimla Principal Accountant General (Audit)
The Himachal Pradesh

Countersigned

We

(Vinod Rai)
New Delhi Comptroller and Auditor General of India
The



r=] form
AA/ES Administrative Approval/Expenditure Sanction
AAP. Annual Action Plan
ABER Annual Blood Examination Rate
ADC Additional Deputy Commissioner
ANC Antenatal Care
ARWSP. Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme
ASHA Accredited Social Health Activist
ASHI Association for Social Health of India
BCG Bacilus Calamide Gurine
BDO Block Development Officer
BPL Below Poverty Line
| C&V Craft and Vernacular 5
CAP Comprehensive Action Plan a
CEO Chief Executive Officer o
CH Civil Hospital =
CHC Community Health Centre >>
CMO Chief Medical Officer छः
CSC Common Services Centre BS
DAPO District Aids Programme Officer <
DC Deputy Commissioner Db
|DcP_____| Decentralised Planning Fe
|DDHE _| Deputy Director Higher Education 5
DE Director Education a
DHE Director Higher Education
DHS District Health Socie (53)
DIC District Informatics Centre
DM District Magistrate
DPC District Planning Committee
DPDC District Planning Development and Twenty Point Review Committee
[DPO____| District Project Officer
DPR Draft Project Report
DPT Diptheria Pertussis Tetanus
DRDA District Rural Development Agene
DT Diptheria Tatanus
FHAC Family Health Awareness Camp
FRU First Referral Unit
GHS Government High School
[GOI | Government of India
GP. Gram Panchayat
GSSS Government Senior Secondary School
HM Headmaster
HPSEB Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board
ICDS Integrated Child Development Services
i-CoSC Integrated Community Service Centre
ICTC Integrated Counseling and Testing Centre
IEC Information Education and Communication
TPA Iron Folic Acid
IGMC Indira Gandhi Medical College
IMR Infant Mortality Rate
[IPH __| Irrigation and Public Heath
TRDP Integrated Rural Development Programme
IT Information Technology
JBT Junior Basic Teacher
INNURM Jawahar Lal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission
IJSY Janani Suraksha Yojana



ie | Municipal Council
MCH Maternal and Child Health
MCS Municipal Corporation Shimla
MD. Mission Director
MGMSC Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Sciences Complex
MLA Member of Legislative Assembl
MLALADS Vidhayak Kshetriya Vikas Nidhi Yojana
MMGPY Mukhya Maniri Gram Path Yojana
MMR Maternal Mortality Rate
MP Member of Parliament
MPLADS Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme
NABARD. National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
NACO National Aids Control Organisation
= NACP National Aids Control Programme.
= NPCB National Programme for Control of Blindness
a NGO Non-Government Organisation
3 NLEP National Leprosy Eradication Programme
z NP. Nagar Panchayat
g NREGP National Rural Employment Guarantee Programme
S [NRHM___| National Rural Health Mission
E NVBDCP National Vector Boe Control Programme
& OBC Other Backward Class
2 OPV Oral Polio Vaccine
= [PD Project Director
3 PHC Primary Health Centre
x PMGSY Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana’
[70 | Project Officer
(54) [शा | Panchayati Raj Institution
[PWD [एण्ाल Works Department
RCH Reproductive and Child Health
[RDD__| Rural Development Agenc}
REC Rural Electrification Corporation
RGGVY Rajiv Gandhi Gramin Vidyutikaran Yojana
RKS Rogi Kalyan Samiti
sc Sub Centre
sc Schedule Caste
SDM Sub-Divisional Magistrate
[SDP____| Sectoral Decentralised Planning
SGRY Sampoorna Gramin Rozgar Yojana
SGSY Sampoorna Gramin Swarojgar Yojana
SITEG Society for Promotion of Information Technology and E-Governance
SOE Statement of Expenditure
SSA Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan
ST Schedule Tribe
STD Sexually Transmitted Diseases
STI Sexually Transmitted Infections
sTP Sewage Treatment Plant
TFR Total Fertility Rate
TGT Trained Graduate Teacher
TIP Targeted Intervention Project
TT Tetanus Toxoid
UC Utilisation Certificate
[UD Urban Development
UPS Uninterrupted Power Suppl:
VBIC Voluntary Blood Testing Centre
VHSC Village Health Sanitation Committee
MIS Vikas Mein Jan Sahyog

ZP Zila Parishad