Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
On 
Assessment of Environmental Impact due to Mining 
Activities and its Mitigation in Coal India Limited 
and its Subsidiaries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the year ended March 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Union Government (Commercial) 
Ministry of Coal 
Report No. 12 of 2019 
(Performance Audit) 

 

 
Index  
 
 Contents Pages 
 Preface iii 
 Executive Summary v 
Chapter 1 Introduction 1 
Chapter 2 Good Practices and Green Initiatives 7 
Chapter 3 Environment Management System 10 
Chapter 4 Air Pollution and Control Measures  12 
Chapter 5 Water  Pollution and Control Measures 26 
Chapter 6 Land Management – Mitigation of Land Degradation an d 
Reclamation  35 
Chapter 7 Adherence  to Other Regularity Conditions  for Protection of 
Environment 41 
Chapter 8 Rehabilitation and Resettlement for Mine Fire  52 
Chapter 9 Monitoring of Environmental Activities 55  
Chapter 10 Conclusions and Recommendations 59 
 Annexures 63 
 List of References 68 
 List of Abbreviations 69 

 

 
iii 
Preface 
 
 
This Report of the Comptroller & Auditor General of  India contains the results of the 
Performance Audit on “Assessment of Environmental I mpact due to Mining Activities 
and its Mitigation in Coal India Limited and its Su bsidiaries”. The impact on 
environment due to large scale extraction of coal f rom opencast as well as underground 
mines along with compliance to various environmenta l mitigation rules and regulations 
has assumed significance warranting a study to examine and to ensure that coal mining, 
as an economic activity, is carried out in a social ly responsible and environmentally 
sustainable manner, with due consideration and comp liance to requisite environmental 
stipulations.  
 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the  Auditing Standards issued by the 
Comptroller & Auditor General of India. The Report highlights deficiencies of the 
public sector coal companies to mitigate the enviro nmental hazards of mining and 
adherence to various statutory compliances related to environmental stipulations. Based 
on the audit findings, several recommendations are made in the Report which would 
serve as an aid to the better environmental managem ent in the coal mines . The Report 
has been prepared under the provisions of Section 1 9-A of the Comptroller & Auditor 
General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971. 
Audit wishes to acknowledge the cooperation receive d from Coal India Limited, its 
Subsidiaries and the Ministry of Coal at each stage of audit process. 
 
  

 
 
 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
v 
Executive Summary 
 
Indiscriminate utilisation of natural resources to meet development demands, rapid 
industrialisation and unplanned urbanisation advers ely impact the environment. 
Dumping of wastes into rivers and lakes, diverting forest land for other purposes and 
increased emission of harmful pollutants into the environment contribute to degradation 
of environment.  
Over the last few decades in India, protection and conservation of the environment and 
sustainable development have become increasingly im portant, in the light of climate 
change which had devastating consequences on the su rvival of humanity. Effective 
environmental governance is, therefore, of utmost i mportance. Accordingly, the thrust 
of this Audit Report is to highlight issues relatin g to the adequacy and effectiveness of 
the efforts made by the public sector coal companie s to address important 
environmental issues like air pollution, water pollution, land degradation, etc .  
Coal, a fossil fuel, is composed mainly of carbon. It is extracted predominantly through 
open cast mining (OCM). OCM disfigures the countrys ide and tends to pollute the 
atmosphere within the locality. The main activities  involved in coal mining are drilling 
of bore holes, blasting and loosening of coal seams , extraction of coal reserve and 
transportation of coal from mines to railway siding  or to washeries. Extraction of coal, 
therefore, involves serious environmental and socia l concerns, including, air, noise, 
water pollution, land degradation and far reaching consequences on local bio-diversity. 
Most of the coal reserves in India are located in r iver basins which are rich in forest 
cover and are habitats of precious wild life and in digenous tribal communities. In view 
of the above factors, a Performance Audit on “Assessment of environmental impact due 
to mining activities and its mitigation in Coal Ind ia Limited and its Subsidiaries” was 
conducted. The Report on the Performance Audit cont ains nine specific 
recommendations. The significant audit findings are discussed below: 
Environment Management System 
 
i.  The National Environmental Policy (NEP) was formula ted by the Government 
of India in September 2006. The NEP enjoined upon a ll concerned - Central, 
State/UT and local - to prepare action plans on ide ntified themes and formulate 
their own strategies to be consistent with the NEP.   However, Coal India 
Limited (CIL) amended its original Corporate Enviro nment Policy (CEP) and 
formulated a comprehensive Environment Policy only in March 2012, followed 
by a revised policy in December 2018 (Para 3.1.1). 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
vi 
ii.  Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) while 
according environment clearance (EC) for the projec ts of the subsidiaries from 
time to time, stipulated that a well laid down Environment Policy duly approved 
by the Board of Directors (BoD) of the subsidiaries needs to be in place. Six out 
of seven coal producing subsidiaries of CIL did not  formulate a policy as 
mandated. Further, although guidelines containing t he responsibility and 
delegation at different levels in environment discipline were formulated by CIL, 
the same were not dovetailed in their operating man ual by the subsidiaries. 
(Para 3.1.2 & Para 3.1.3).  
Air Pollution and Control Measures 
iii.  According to the Environment Impact Assessment – En vironment Management 
Plan of the mines, requisite number of air quality monitoring stations as 
specified in EC were to be established in core zone  (within 3 km of the mining 
area) and buffer zone (within 10 km of the mining a rea) of each mine for 
monitoring air quality. In 12 of the sampled 30 ope rating mines/washeries, 
against 96 monitoring stations, only 58 (60 per cent ) were established  
(Para 4.1.1).  
iv.  Continuous Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Stations were to be installed and 
equipped with connectivity to the server of State P ollution Control Boards 
(SPCB) to facilitate online monitoring of ambient a ir quality. 12 mines of four 
subsidiaries did not comply with these directives (Para 4.2). 
v.  The average ash content in the coal extracted by Hi ngula, Jagannath, 
Basundhara (W) and IB Valley mines of Mahanadi Coal fields Limited (MCL) 
ranged between 40.1 per cent  and 43.8 per cent . Although MCL contemplated 
setting of four washeries as early as in March 2008  for supply of beneficiated 
coal to thermal plants, these have not been commiss ioned so far (November 
2018). The ash content in the coal supplies execute d by Central Coalfields 
Limited (CCL) also exceeded 34 per cent . (Para 4.3 ) 
vi.  The National Ambient Air Quality Standards, 2009  ( NAAQS) notified by 
MoEF&CC in November 2009 mandated monitoring of Par ticulate Matters 
(PM 10  and PM 2.5 ) on annual and 24 hour basis. Although these norms came into 
effect from November 2009, ambient air quality was monitored in Eastern 
Coalfields Limited (ECL) only from May 2015 for the  cluster of mines.  
Further,  s ix locations of ECL were monitored only till March 2015, although 
PM 10  level in these stations always exceeded the prescr ibed norm (100 µg/cum) 
under NAAQS (Paras 4.4.1 & 4.4.2).  

Report No. 12 of 2019 
vii 
vii.  The concentration of PM 10  and PM 2.5 in air exceeded the levels prescribed in 
NAAQS in six mines across three subsidiaries during 2013-18 (Para 4.4.3).  
viii.  Shortcomings were noticed in the implementation of prescribed CIL guidelines 
(March 2014), in 17 out of the 28 operating mines s elected for scrutiny (Para 
4.6.1). 
ix.  Construction of silo at Gevra OCM was completed bel atedly in February 2016 
at a cost of ` 138.85 crore. However, works relating to railway si ding remained 
(November 2018) incomplete and coal produced from G evra OCM continued to 
be transported through road, thereby contributing to dust generation. In Lingaraj 
and Lakhanpur projects of MCL, silo was not operati onalised due to absence of 
railway connectivity and coal continued to be trans ported by road. In Block B 
mines of Northern Coalfields Limited, coal could no t be dispatched through 
Coal Handling Plant  due to absence of rail connect ivity and, hence, coal 
continued to be transported by road beyond August 2 016, thereby contributing 
to air pollution.  (Paras 4.9.1, 4.9.2 and 4.9.3). 
Water Pollution and Control Measures 
x.  During 2013-18, out of 28 mines selected for audit scrutiny, in eight mines 
across three subsidiaries, the pollutants exceeded the limits prescribed by 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) (Para 5.1). 
xi.  During 2013-18, 62 lakh Kilo-litre (KL) of untreate d water was discharged in 
nearby water bodies by Lakhanpur (2.95 lakh KL) and  Basundhara (W) mines 
(59.05 lakh KL) of MCL thereby contaminating ground  water. Further, CCL, 
Bharat Coking Coalfields Limited (BCCL) and South E astern Coalfields 
Limited (SECL)  continued to use ground water for their mining oper ations 
without obtaining No Objection Certificate (NOC) fr om Central Ground Water 
Authority (CGWA) (Paras 5.2.1& 5.8.1). 
xii.  The subsidiaries did not install Sewage Treatment P lant (STP) at the residential 
colonies of the collieries, thereby contaminating the ground water (Para 5.6). 
xiii.  Due to absence of mechanical brooming / industrial cleaner  in Piparwar OCM, 
the spillage from overloaded  trucks / dumpers  accumulated along the sides  
of the bridge of Safi River, was not cleaned period ically. These eventually 
drained into the river thereby contaminating the ri ver water. Further, rejects 
of Kathara washery of CCL was found to be contamina ting Damodar River 
(Paras 5.7.1 & 5.7.2). 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
viii 
xiv.  NCL did not get the coal seam samples analysed for mercury content on annual 
basis. Further, no analysis of coal seam samples wa s made beyond June 2016, 
thereby, thwarting the measures for occupational health and safety (Para 5.9). 
Land Management – Mitigation of Land Degradation and Reclamation 
xv.  Out of 23 OC/mixed mines selected for audit, in 13 mines across five 
subsidiaries, though topsoil was stacked in the ear marked area and reported 
periodically, basic records of topsoil indicating t he quantity and areas of 
stacking were not maintained. As at the end of Marc h 2018, in three mines of 
Western Coalfields Limited (WCL), although 75.30 la kh cum of topsoil was 
stacked at earmarked sites, it remained unutilised since 2013-14 (Paras 6.1.1 & 
6.1.2). 
xvi.  Director General of Mines Safety (DGMS) suspended (June 2017) operations in 
a patch of Rajmahal OCP as the Overburden (OB) benc hes in coal II and III 
seams did not conform to the norms specified in the  Regulations. DGMS 
suspended (January 2017) operations in Quarry 3 of Sonepur Bazari OCP also 
as the height of the benches of R-VIII coal seam de viated from the Regulation 
(Para 6.2.1). 
xvii.  ECL did not set year-wise internal targets for biol ogical reclamation of mined 
out area through plantation activities. Against the  de-coaled area of 3922.85 ha, 
MCL biologically reclaimed only 2024.73 ha (51.61 per cent ) as at the end of 
March 2018 (Para 6.3.1). 
Adherence to Other Regulatory Conditions for Protection of Environment 
xviii.  35 mines of ECL which were closed between April 194 6 and July 2009 
(including six mines which were closed prior to nat ionalization), did not have 
Mine Closure Status Report (Para 7.1.1). 
xix.  MCL did not adopt a uniform policy for the dumping of fly ash.  Between April 
2009 and December 2014, ECL permitted five thermal power plants to dump 
201.26 lakh cubic meter of fly ash in eight abandon ed mines without 
consideration. Further, fly ash generated in the pr ocess of power generation by 
Kathara Captive Power Plant of CCL was dumped in th e open space, posing 
environmental hazard (Para 7.1.3.2, 7.1.3.3 & 7.1.3.4). 
xx.  Deputy Director of Mines, Odisha levied (June 2017)  penalty of ` 50.97 crore 
invoking the provisions of the Mines and Mineral (D evelopment and 
Regulation) (MMDR) Act for production of coal in excess of the mine plan. The 
violation of mining plan was affirmed (August 2017)  by the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court (Para 7.2.2). 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
ix 
xxi.  As at the end of March 2018, 16  units relating to two subsidiaries comprising 
mines (13) and washeries (3) were being operated wi thout valid EC in 9 units, 
Consent to Establish (CTE) in 1 unit and Consent to  Operate (CTO) in 6 units. 
Consequently, the adequacy of the mitigative measur es in vogue to handle 
environmental pollution as prescribed under various  rules / regulations could 
not be assessed (Para 7.2.3). 
xxii.  EC for Hurilong Underground (UG) coal project which  was in close proximity 
to the Palamau tiger reserve, was rejected (August 1998) by MoEF. In advance  
of  obtaining the EC, CCL acquired and destroyed 6. 58 acre non forest land and 
constructed infrastructural facilities at a cost of ` 2.98 crore (Para 7.2.4). 
xxiii.  MCL did not install meters and submit waste water a nalysis report as stipulated 
under the Cess Act and hence could not avail of con cessional rates of cess. The 
saving it had to forego on account of this non-comp liance was in the amount of 
` 2.48 crore during 2013-18 (Para 7.3.3). 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement for Mine Fire 
xxiv.  Even after a lapse of nine years, since Jharia Mast er Plan was approved, BCCL 
did not formulate fire fighting activities as envis aged therein. Fire fighting 
activities commenced only in 25 projects (as agains t 45 projects identified). The 
fires thus continued to endanger the lives of the p eople residing in and around 
the fire area, besides adversely impacting the environment (Para 8.1.2). 
Monitoring of Environmental Activities  
xxv.  While the deployment of executives exceeded the san ctioned strength at CIL 
Headquarters (HQ) in all the years, it fell short a t mines, during the period 
2013-18.  The extent of excess deployment in CIL HQ  ranged between 20 per 
cent  and 120 per cent  of the sanctioned strength during 2013-18. North E astern 
Coalfield (NEC) mines experienced shortage of execu tives ranging between 33 
per cent  and 100 per cent. There were inconsistencies in deployment of 
manpower for environmental activities in the subsid iaries also.  (Para 9.1.1 and 
9.1.2) . 
xxvi.  We observed that while the quality parameters relat ing to air and water were 
being monitored on fortnightly basis, the reports were prepared by Central Mine 
Planning and Design Institute Limited (CMPDIL) and reported to the 
subsidiaries on quarterly basis, thereby offering n o scope for initiating remedial 
measures on the basis of adverse fortnightly readings recorded (Para 9.2).    
 
 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
x 
Recommendations 
1.  The companies under coal sector may put in place an  Environment Policy 
duly approved by their respective BoD as mandated by MoEF&CC.  
2.  The subsidiaries may adopt two-pronged strategy for  pollution control. The 
capital works relating to pollution control measure s may be completed 
expeditiously. The plantation works may also be tak en up simultaneously 
and aggressively to increase green cover and restor e ecological balance in 
and around the mines.  
3.  CIL should frame uniform and scientific policy towa rds use of fly ash in 
the mines so as to ensure environmental sustainability. 
4.  Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) expenses may be dovetailed to 
ensure sustainable community development around spe cific mines as 
mandated under EC so as to avoid lopsided development. 
5.  Remedial actions for mitigating and arresting the a dverse impact of 
subsidence and fire at Jharia Coalfields on the env ironment may be 
expedited . 
6.  Implementation of solar power project may be put on  fast track so that the 
environmental benefits fructify as envisaged.   
7.  Manpower in the Environment Department of CIL and s ubsidiaries may 
also be rationalised and Environmental Manual be fo rmulated to serve as a 
guide in the operations in specific mines under their control. 
8.  The monitoring mechanism in the subsidiaries may be  strengthened by 
streamlining the existing reporting process for maintaining neutrality and to 
ensure proper checks and balances in the system of compliance 
mechanism. The oversight role of CIL be directed to  ensure compliance to 
prescribed environmental standards.  
9.  Deficiencies observed in mitigation of environmenta l pollution were based 
on audit of sample mines which may be reviewed in o ther mines to ensure 
compliance of environmental rules and regulations.   
 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
1 
CHAPTER 1  
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Minerals are valuable natural resources which are f inite and non-renewable. Mineral 
exploration and development is closely linked with the development of the country’s 
economy. However, as it interferes with the environ ment and social structure, harmony 
and balance are to be maintained between extraction  and conservation in the interest of 
sustainable development.  
Article 48 A of the Constitution of India brings ou t that the State shall endeavour to 
protect and improve the environment. Further Articl e 51(A)(g) of the Constitution 
enjoins upon the citizens of India to protect and i mprove the natural environment. Also, 
the Government of India (GoI) enacted  the Environm ent (Protection) (EP) Act, 1986  
for protection and improvement of the environment. 
1.1  Sources of Pollution  
Coal, a fossil fuel, composed mainly of carbon, is extracted predominantly through 
open cast mining (OCM). OCM disfigures the countrys ide and tends to pollute the 
atmosphere within the locality. . The main activities involved in coal mining are drilling 
of bore holes, blasting and loosening of coal seams , extraction of coal reserve and 
transportation of coal from mines to the washeries or to  railway siding. Extraction of 
coal, therefore, involves serious environmental and social concerns, including air, noise 
and water pollution, land degradation and far reach ing consequences on local bio-
diversity. The concerns are further compounded in t he Indian context as most of the 
coal reserves  are located in river basins which ar e rich in forest cover and are habitats 
of precious wild life and indigenous tribal communities.  
 


Report No. 12 of 2019 
2 
The life cycle of a coal mine involves phases viz. prospecting, exploration, 
development, exploitation, and finally closure. The  impact of coal mining on 
environment is maximum during the exploitation phas e. In the process of coal mining, 
transportation and other allied operations, differe nt types of mining pollutants are 
generated. Mining must, therefore, be carried out i n a wise, socially responsible and 
environmentally sustainable manner.  
1.2 Regulatory Framework 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change   
1.2.1    Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Chan ge (MoEF&CC) is the nodal 
agency for planning, promoting, coordinating and ov erseeing the implementation of 
India’s environmental and forestry policies and pro grammes. Mining of coal is to be 
carried out in conformity with stipulated environme ntal standards as prescribed under 
the relevant Acts and statutes. For new and existin g mines (involving capacity 
augmentation), Environment Impact Assessment 1 and Environment Management Plan 2 
(EIA-EMP) are formulated as per approved Terms of R eference (ToR) and involve 
public consultations. On the basis of EIA-EMP Envir onment Clearance (EC) is granted 
by the MoEF&CC. Where mining involves forest land, Forest Clearance (FC) is 
required to be obtained from the MoEF&CC for divers ion of forest land for non-forest 
purposes.  
State Pollution Control Board 
1.2.2    Prior to establishment of the mining project, al l new intending project 
proponents are required to obtain ‘No Objection Cer tificate’ (NOC) from the 
jurisdictional State Pollution Control Board (SPCB)  in the form of ‘Consent to 
Establish’ (CTE). Subsequently, for carrying out op erations, the units are required to 
obtain ‘Consent to Operate’ (CTO) from the respecti ve SPCBs. SPCBs are expected to 
play oversight role through periodical inspections in order to ensure compliance of 
standards prescribed under the Acts / statutes. 
1.3 Coal India Limited and its subsidiaries 
Consequent to the nationalization of coal mines in May 1973, Coal India Limited (CIL) 
was incorporated in November 1975 as a Central Publ ic Sector Enterprise under GoI 
with its Headquarters (HQ) in Kolkata. North Easter n Coalfields (NEC), Margherita, 
Assam, is directly under the control of CIL. CIL ha s seven coal producing subsidiary 
companies (subsidiaries) under its fold as detailed below.  
                                                           
1  EIA highlights the beneficial and adverse effects of coal mining on the environmental system. 
2  EMP details all mitigation measures to be underta ken for item-wise activity during the construction, 
operation and the entire life cycle of the coal mines to minimise adverse environmental impacts. 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
3 
Table  01: Coal producing subsidiaries of CIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The major coalfields of India are depicted in the following map: 
 
 
 
(Source: Energy Statistics 2015, Central Statistics  Office, National Statistical Organisation, 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation) 
 
With an average consolidated annual production of 523.38 
3 million tonnes (MT) of coal 
during 2013-14 to 2017-18, CIL operates through 82  mining areas spread over eight 
provincial states of India, besides owning and oper ating 15 coal washeries through its 
subsidiaries. About 95 per cent  of coal production in India is through OCM. The choice 
of the particular method of mining, i.e.  underground (UG) or opencast (OC), depends 
on the depth, extent, quality and geology of the deposit. While OCM is much safer than 
                                                           
3  Source: Computed based on the data available in the Annual Report of CIL for the year 2017-18. 
Sl. No. Name of the subsidiary 
1. Bharat Coking Coal Limited  (BCCL), Dhanbad 
2. Central Coalfields Limited  (CCL), Ranchi 
3. Eastern Coalfields Limited  (ECL), Sanctoria 
4. Mahanadi Coalfields Limited  (MCL), Sambalpur 
5. Northern Coalfields Limited  (NCL), Singrauli 
6. South Eastern Coalfields Limited  (SECL), Bilaspur 
7. Western Coalfields Limited  (WCL), Nagpur 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
4 
UG, it creates much more pollution. CIL was accorde d Maharatna status in April 2011 
and six of the coal producing subsidiaries (except ECL) enjoy Miniratna status. 
1.3.1   Role of Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited 
Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited (C MPDIL), Ranchi, established 
(November 1975) as a subsidiary of CIL, is an agenc y accredited by Quality Council of 
India for carrying out environmental monitoring as specified in the EP Act. CMPDIL 
functions through seven 4 Regional Institutes (RIs) each catering to one of the seven 
coal producing subsidiaries. CIL and its subsidiari es avail of the technical expertise of 
CMPDIL for environmental monitoring, processing and  award of works relating to 
environmental monitoring, selection of monitoring s tations and compliance of statutory 
requirements.  
1.4 Organizational Structure for Environmental Acti vities 
CIL and subsidiaries implement their environmental activities at their HQ and at project 
sites where mining and related activities are actually carried out. The organization chart 
relating to the environment activities is as follows: 
 
 
 
 
1.5  Audit Framework 
1.5.1  Audit Objectives 
The objectives of the Performance Audit were to: 
(i)  examine whether CIL / subsidiaries adhered to the r elevant laws, rules and 
regulations as prescribed for environmental protect ion under the EP Act for 
prevention of pollution; 
                                                           
4  RI (Asansol), RI-II (Dhanbad), RI-III (Ranchi), RI- IV (Nagpur), RI-V (Bilaspur,), RI-VI (Singrauli) 
and RI-VII (Bhubaneswar). 
Chairman cum 
Managing Director 
– Coal India 
Limited/ Subsidiary 
Director (Technical) 
General Manager 
(Environment) 
HQ 
Chief Manager 
(HQ) 
General Manager 
(Project/ Area) 
Chief Manager 
(Project/ Area) 
Director (Personnel) 
General Manager 
(Corporate Social 
Responsibility) 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
5 
(ii)   assess the implementation and effectiveness of sus tainable development 
measures taken up by CIL / subsidiaries for environ ment protection in the 
mining area; and  
(iii) assess whether adequate monitoring mechanism existed in CIL / subsidiaries 
for taking up remedial measures to control environmental degradation.  
The Performance Audit also sought to examine the ef fectiveness of measures 
adopted for mitigation of land degradation, land re clamation, hazardous 
substance management, Corporate Social Responsibili ty (CSR) and 
occupational health and safety that impinge on environmental aspects.  
1.5.2  Audit Criteria 
The performance of CIL and its subsidiaries was eva luated with reference to the 
following criteria: 
1.  EP Act 1986 and related Rules, Notifications and Circulars  
2.  Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977. 
3.  Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991. 
4.  Standards prescribed by Bureau of Indian Standards in 2012. 
5.  Environmental Policy 2012 of CIL. 
6.  CIL guidelines issued in March 2014 for personnel o f Environment 
Department deployed in mines and guidelines issued in November 2015 by 
Central Ground Water Authority.  
7.  Mine closure guidelines 2009 and 2013 
8.  Environment Impact Assessment and Environment Management Plan. 
9.  EC of Mines and washery projects and conditions att ached to EC accorded 
by MoEF&CC. 
10.  Conditions stipulated by SPCB / CPCB for CTE and CTO. 
11.  Approved Raniganj and Jharia Action Plans (2009). 
 
1.5.3 Audit Scope, Coverage and Methodology  
We conducted Performance Audit of CIL and its subsidiaries  for the period from 2013-
14 to 2017-18. Out of 500 mines and 15 washeries,  41 mines and 2 washeries 
(representing 8 per cent  and 13 per cent  of mines and washeries respectively) were 
taken up for detailed scrutiny based on random samp ling, keeping in view the type of 
mines which are more prone to environmental damage,  geographical locations and 
availability of audit resources. The share of the s ampled operating mines to the total 
production of the respective subsidiaries during 20 17-18 ranged between 10 per cent  
and 65 per cent . The sample selected was heterogeneous and compris ed of UG, OC, 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
6 
mixed and closed mines. The total production of sam pled mines was 226.03 million 
tonne and the total production of CIL and its subsi diaries was 567.37 million tonne 
during the year 2017-18. Besides, we  also reviewed  the records of CMPDIL relating to 
the technical support services provided to CIL / subsidiaries. 
We conducted (April / June 2018) Entry Conference w ith the Managements of CIL / 
subsidiaries wherein the Audit objectives and scope  of audit were explained. We 
examined the records maintained at their HQ, operat ing mines and washeries. Based on 
the examination of records, preliminary observation s were issued to the Management. 
Their replies  and the deliberations in the Exit Co nference held with them in November 
2018 have been considered in firming up the report.  The draft PA Report was issued to 
the Ministry in December 2018 and the reply receive d in April 2019 were incorporated 
in the draft PA Report. The Exit Conference with Mo C was held on 21 May 2019 
wherein Audit observations and recommendations of t he draft PA Report were 
discussed and views expressed in the Exit Conferenc e have been duly considered while 
finalising the Report. 
1.6  Acknowledgement 
We acknowledge the co-operation provided by CIL and  the subsidiaries which 
facilitated the completion of this Performance Audit. 
1.7  Audit Findings 
Audit findings are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
  

Report No. 12 of 2019 
7 
CHAPTER 2 
GOOD PRACTICES AND GREEN INITIATIVES 
 
2.1  Good Practices 
We have observed that CIL and its subsidiaries have  undertaken considerable eco-
restoration works in some mines/nearby places as described below: 
Sl. 
No  
Name of 
the 
Subsidiary 
Good Practice 
observed 
Pictures 
1. MCL MCL developed 
green belt and park 
at South Balanda, a 
closed mine. 
 
2. NCL Nigahi mines of 
NCL are 
ecologically restored 
with bamboo 
plantations.   
 
 
 
3. WCL WCL restored 
Saoner UG Closed 
Mine ecologically.   
 


Report No. 12 of 2019 
8 
4. CCL CCL developed 
Kayakalp Vatika, a 
unique mine 
reclamation initiative 
for eco-balancing 
with sustainable 
development through 
rain water 
harvesting, drip 
irrigation, plantation 
activities, nursery 
development, mixed 
forestry 
development, and 
development of 
vermin compost unit. 
 
5. BCCL 
 
 
 
 
BCCL converted 
Jhunkundar closed 
OC mine into a lake 
for rain water 
harvesting thereby 
recharging the 
ground water level. 
 
 
6. ECL The closed mine of 
Dalmiya OC was 
filled with water and 
pisci-culture and 
water treatment plant 
has been initiated. 
 
7. SECL SECL converted an 
old abandoned 
overburden dump in 
Rajnagar OCP of 
Hasdeo Area into 
Ananya Vatika, an 
exotic park. 
 


Report No. 12 of 2019 
9 
2.2    Renewable Energy 
Solar energy is environment friendly as it has zero emission while generating electricity 
or heat. GoI   launched Jawaharlal Nehru National S olar Mission (Mission) in June 
2008. The Mission adopted a three phase approach to achieve the targeted generation of 
20000 megawatt (MW) by March 2022. 
The mission envisaged an achievement of 32 per cent  of the targeted generation by 
March 2018.  
As a sequel to the launch of the Mission by GoI, CI L intended to invest in the 
development of 1000 MW solar power project in a pha sed manner. Based on the level 
of achievement projected by the Mission by March 20 18, CIL’s proposal envisaged 
savings in energy charges of 
` 55.50 crore 5 annually. As it had no expertise in power 
generation and power related business, it retained the services of Solar Energy 
Corporation of India (SECI) and concluded (October 2014) MoU with SECI for the 
development of 250 MW in the first phase, which was subsequently ratified (November 
2014) by its BoD.  
In February 2015, CIL confirmed to GoI its commitme nt to develop 1000 MW 
Renewable Energy projects by March 2019.  Based on the assurance received from 
Government of Madhya Pradesh on allotment of land i n solar park of Neemuch and 
open access, SECI floated (November 2015) tender fo r setting up 2 X 100 MW solar 
power plants (one each for SECL and NCL) at an esti mated cost of 
` 1300 crore. SECI 
also firmed up DPR and recommendations for the awar d of work. Subsequently, SECI 
advised (December 2016) scrapping the tender on the  plea that substantial time elapsed 
since price discovery of these tenders and that sol ar power tariff witnessed declining 
trend. The tender floated in November 2015 was even tually cancelled. Notwithstanding 
this, SECI claimed (December 2015) an amount of ` 7.44 crore as their fee for 
preparation of DPRs for these plants and CIL settle d the claim in December 2015. 
Payment to SECI was thus without rendering service. 
CIL stated (November 2018) that implementation of s olar power project involved 
liaising with external agencies for statutory appro vals which were beyond its control. 
However, we observed that CIL failed to align the p ace of progress of its phases of 
development of 1000 MW to be co-terminus  with the progress of the Mission.  
 
 
  
                                                           
5  {320x1000x24x365/1000000x0.18 Million kWh x ` 1.10 per kWh (Rs.4.94/kWh minus  3.84/kWh)}  

Report No. 12 of 2019 
10 
CHAPTER 3 
ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
 
A well documented Environmental Management System in the form of Policy / Manual 
acts as a tool in implementing and improving variou s environmental programmes 
through judicious allocation of manpower, assignmen t/ delegation of responsibilities 
and optimum utilization of resources. 
3.1    Corporate Environmental Policy  
3.1.1  The Corporate Environment Policy (CEP) of CIL was originally approved by its 
Board of Directors (BoD) in December 1995. The Nati onal Environmental Policy 
(NEP) was formulated by the GoI in September 2006. The NEP enjoined upon all 
concerned – Central, State/UT and local – to prepar e action plans on identified themes 
and formulate their own strategies for environment protection to be consistent with the 
NEP.  However, CIL amended its original CEP and for mulated a comprehensive 
Environment Policy (Policy) only in March 2012. No reason was found on record for 
the delay of six years in its revision to be in line with NEP.  
We also observed that the Policy in vogue in CIL wa s due for revision in March 2017. 
However, this was reviewed and revised policy was p ut in place only in December 
2018 after a delay of 20 months.  
3.1.2    While according EC for the projects of the subsidia ries from time to time, 
MoEF&CC stipulated that a well laid down Environmen t Policy duly approved by the 
BoD of the subsidiaries needs to be in place. We observed that six 6 out of its seven coal 
producing subsidiaries did not formulate a policy a s mandated, on the plea that they 
followed the policy formulated by CIL. We further o bserved that the policy of CIL was 
not even put up to the BoD of these subsidiaries ex cept BCCL for consideration, 
thereby disregarding the mandatory conditions stipu lated in the EC. We also observed 
that the Policy approved by BoD of BCCL for adherence, was not revised as it followed 
the policy formulated by CIL.  
In the absence of an approved policy, different sub sidiaries dealt with similar issues in 
different manner as discussed in paras 7.1.3.2, 7.1 .3.3 and 7.3.1.2 infra.  This also 
offered scope for discretion in the implementation of environmental activities. In the 
Exit Conference, the subsidiaries stated (November 2018) that the revised Policy of 
CIL would be referred to their respective BoD. Furt her developments are awaited 
(November 2018). 
                                                           
6  ECL, CCL, WCL, SECL, NCL and MCL  

Report No. 12 of 2019 
11 
3.1.3    We further observed that although guidelines con taining the responsibility and 
delegation at different levels in environment disci pline were formulated by CIL, the 
same were not dovetailed in their operating manual by the subsidiaries.  
 
Audit Summation 
Coal India Limited (CIL) amended its original Corpo rate Environment Policy (CEP) 
and formulated a comprehensive Environment Policy o nly in March 2012, followed by 
a revised policy in December 2018. However, six out  of seven coal producing 
subsidiaries of CIL did not formulate a policy as m andated by MoEF&CC which 
stipulated that a well laid down Environment Policy  duly approved by the Board of 
Directors of the subsidiaries needs to be in place.  Further, guidelines containing the 
responsibility and delegation at different levels i n Environment discipline were 
formulated by CIL, but the same were not dovetailed  in their operating manual by the 
subsidiaries.  
 
 
  

Report No. 12 of 2019 
12 
CHAPTER 4 
AIR POLLUTION & CONTROL MEASURES 
In coal mines, air pollution starts with removal of  massive overburden 7 (OB) which 
discharges fine particles. It is followed by drilli ng/ extraction of coal and movement of 
extracted coal to the washery/ crusher/ Coal Handli ng Plant (CHP) 8 and finally 
transportation of coal to the consumer. These operations generate Suspended Particulate 
Matter (PM 10 ) and Respirable Particulate Matter (PM 2.5 ) in the surroundings which are 
the main sources of air pollution. Emissions of som e fugitive gases like carbon dioxide, 
carbon monoxide, sulphur dioxide and oxides of nitr ogen are also caused by 
automotive, generators and blasting operations.  
Various means used by the coal companies to reduce air pollution are installation of 
monitoring stations to assess the level of pollutants in the air, installation of CHP, piped 
conveyor belt system, use of SILO for rapid and dus t free loading of coal into wagons, 
installation of Merry-Go-Round, dust suppression by  water sprinklers, mist blowers, 
mechanical brooming, plantation of trees along the route of transportation etc .  
4.1     Inadequate / absence of air quality monitoring stations 
4.1.1   According to the EIA – EMP of the mines, requisit e number of air quality 
monitoring stations (AQMS) as specified in EC were to be established in core zone 
(within 3 km of the mining area) and buffer zone (w ithin 10 km of the mining area) of 
each mine/washery for monitoring air quality. While  granting EC, MoEF&CC also 
affirmed the proposals contained in EIA-EMP.  
Out of the 28 sampled (operating) mines and 2 washe ries, we observed that in 12 
mines/washeries of three subsidiaries, against 96 m onitoring stations to be established, 
only 58 monitoring stations (60 per cent ) were established as detailed below, thereby 
rendering the process of air quality monitoring ineffective. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                                                           
7  Overburden is the natural rock and soil that sits above and around the ore body 
8  Coal Handling Plant (CHP) is the facility used in  the coal mining industry for crushing, cleaning an d 
transportation of coal.  

Report No. 12 of 2019 
13 
Table 02: Status of installation of Air Quality Monitoring Stations 
Company 
No. of 
mines/ 
washeries  
No. of monitoring 
stations to be 
installed 
No. of monitoring 
stations actually 
installed 
Shortfall 
Core 
Zone 
Buffer 
Zone Total Core 
Zone 
Buffer 
Zone Total Core 
Zone 
Buffer 
Zone Total 
CCL     5 9 20 20 40 4 16 20 16 4 20 
SECL   410  16 16 32 11 15 26 5 1 6 
WCL   3 11  12 12 24 6 6 12 6 6 12 
TOTAL 12 48 48 96 21 37 58 27 11 38 
 
The subsidiaries attributed (November 2018) the sho rtfall to overlapping monitoring 
stations wherein the core zone of one project could  fall within the buffer zone of 
adjacent project. While endorsing the above views o f the management, the Ministry 
also stated (April 2019) that as per Standard EC co nditions and EIA Guidance Manual 
for Mining of Minerals of MoEF&CC, sampling station s are fixed in core zone and in 
buffer zone based on environmentally and ecological ly sensitive receptors in 
consultation with concerned SPCB and that this gave  a fairly representative picture of 
pollution generation in the core zone and impact on the surrounding.  
While admitting the contentions of the Ministry tha t monitoring stations are installed 
based on standard EC conditions and guidelines of M oEF&CC in consultation with 
concerned SPCB, the fact remains that audit highlig hted only those instances where the 
number of monitoring stations required to be instal led as per the approved EC 
conditions of MoEF&CC differ with the monitoring st ations actually installed in the 
sample mines.  
In the Exit Conference, the Ministry stated (May 20 19) that the recent ECs have not 
indicated regarding number of monitoring stations t o be set up and these were installed 
based on consultation with the concerned SPCB, whic h grants Consent to Operate 
(CTO) to the respective mines on annual basis.  
Audit observed that EC was not revised to reflect  the reduced requirement of 
monitoring stations due to overlapping of core and buffer zones.. Besides, in absence of 
necessary records made available to Audit, it could not be substantiated that the number 
of monitoring stations were established in concurrence with the requirements of SPCBs 
for the particular projects during 2013-18. 
  
                                                           
9   Piparwar OC, Rajrappa OC, Kathara OC, AKK OC and  Kathara Washery 
10   Gevra, Kusmunda,  Baroud, Rajendra,  
11   New Majri IIA, Penganga,  Gokul,  

Report No. 12 of 2019 
14 
Audit observations mentioned above are restricted t o the sampled mines only. CIL 
subsidiaries need to review the position internally regarding installation of AQMS in all 
other mines under their operation to comply with th e EC conditions and control air 
pollution. 
4.2    Absence of Continuous Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Stations 
in some mines 
With a view to strengthen the monitoring mechanism for effective compliance through 
self-regulatory mechanism, the SPCBs exercising jur isdictional control over the mines 
of the subsidiaries, directed while issuing the cer tificate of CTE / CTO or its renewal 
from time to time, that Continuous Ambient Air Qual ity Monitoring Stations 
(CAAQMS) be installed. The CAAQMS were to be equipp ed with connectivity to the 
server of SPCBs to facilitate  online monitoring of ambient air quality.   
We observed that out of 28 operating mines taken up  for detailed scrutiny, 12 mines of 
four subsidiaries did not comply with these directives as detailed below: 
 
 Table 03: Status of installation of CAAQMS in the mines of subsidiaries 
Subsidiary Directives issued Mines that did not comply 
with the directives By In 
ECL 
Jharkhand State 
Pollution Control 
Board (JSPCB) 
 
August 2014/ January 
2017 Rajmahal OCP 
NCL 
Madhya Pradesh  
Pollution Control 
Board (MPPCB) 
December 2013 Nigahi, Jayant, Block-B, Khadia 
mines 
MCL 
Orissa State 
Pollution Control 
Board (OSPCB) 
July/ September 2016 
Bharatpur OCP, Lingaraj OCP, 
Lakhanpur OCP and Basundhara 
(W) OCP 
WCL 
Maharashtra 
Pollution Control 
Board (MPCB) 
October 2015/ March 
2017/ August 2017 
Penganga OC, Majri II A OC and 
Gokul OC 
ECL stated (November 2018) that action was on hand to adhere to these stipulations. 
We observed that the process in ECL was mired in administrative delay.  
Although the procurement of CAAQMS was approved (March 2017) by NCL, it placed 
orders for their supply only in September 2018, att ributing the delay to implementation 
of Goods & Services Tax (GST).  We observed that th ere was time lag of 42 months 
from the issue (December 2013) of directives by MPP CB for installation of CAAQMS 
and the roll out (July 2017) of GST, and, hence, th e delay attributed to implementation 
of GST is not tenable. We also observed that after a lapse of 18 months from the date of 
approval of the proposal, MCL retained (March 2018)  CMPDIL as consultants for the 
work relating to procurement, maintenance and monit oring of CAAQMS for a 
consideration of ` 19.88 crore without following the tender process, which was 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
15 
financially imprudent. The avoidable delay in initi ating action for procurement of 
CAAQMS by 60 months is a pointer to deficiency in monitoring.  
WCL stated (November 2018) that action was on hand to install CAAQMS as directed. 
Further developments are awaited (November 2018).  
Thus, absence of CAAQMS is a pointer to the fact th at scope existed for further 
strengthening of monitoring mechanism for effective  compliance through self-
regulatory mechanism.  
Audit observations mentioned above are restricted t o the sampled mines only. CIL 
subsidiaries need to review the position internally  regarding installation of CAAQMS 
in all other mines under their operation to comply with the EC conditions and control 
air pollution. 
4.3     Beneficiation of coal: non-establishment of washeries in MCL 
MoEF&CC mandated (January 2014) that coal based the rmal power plants be supplied 
with coal having ash content not exceeding 34 per cent.  The coal companies were also 
advised (April 2015) to adhere to this stipulation.  Beneficiation of coal was to be taken 
up for reduction of ash content. It involves washin g of coal through a washery which 
produces clean coal by separation of ash or extrane ous material as well as associated 
impurities like shale, sand, stones etc . of the raw coal. 
We observed that the ash content in the coal suppli ed by ECL and NCL was less than 
34 per cent. Therefore, beneficiation of coal in respect of ECL and NCL is not required. 
In case of mines of MCL i.e. Hingula, Jagannath, Ba sundhara (W) and IB Valley 
mines, average ash content in coal ranged between 4 0.1 per cent  and 43.8 per cent . 
Though MCL contemplated setting of four washeries a s early as in March 2008 for 
supply of beneficiated 12  coal to thermal plants, these have not been commis sioned so 
far (November 2018). The delay was due to belated r eceipt of forest clearance and EC 
for setting up of washeries, besides delay in firmi ng up the method of project 
financing.. MCL stated (November 2018) that action was on hand to establish the 
washeries as contemplated. Further developments are awaited (November 2018). 
It was observed that in the sample mines of CCL the  ash content exceeded 34  
per cent  despite beneficiation of coal carried out in its w asheries. Relevant information/ 
records relating to other subsidiaries (BCCL, SECL and WCL) were not made available 
to audit till date. 
 
  
                                                           
12   Beneficiated coal means coal containing higher ca lorific value but lower ash than the original ash 
content in the raw coal obtained through physical separation or washing process. 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
16 
4.4    Deviation from the prescribed standards 
The National Ambient Air Quality Standards, 2009, ( NAAQS) notified by MoEF&CC 
in November 2009 mandated monitoring of PM 10  and PM 2.5  on annual basis and on 24 
hours basis. The monitoring is carried out by the s even subsidiaries of CIL through the 
RIs  of CMPDIL. 
4.4.1   Although these norms came into effect from November  2009, ambient air 
quality was monitored in all the seven subsidiaries  except ECL, which started 
monitoring only from May 2015 for their cluster of mines 
13 .  Further, ECL monitored 
the ambient air quality of the standalone projects only from September 2016.  
4.4.2 We observed that six locations of ECL at Sonepur Ba zari (two), Kunustoria 
(one) and Jhanjra (three) were monitored only till March 2015 and discontinued 
thereafter on the plea that the monitoring stations  were rationalised to reflect the entire 
cluster. The monitoring in the stations should not have been discontinued as PM 10  level 
in these stations always exceeded the prescribed no rm (100 µg/cum 14 ) under NAAQS 
as detailed below:   
  Table 04: Monitoring of air pollution discontinued at ECL Mines  
Sl. 
No. Mine 
Name of 
monitoring 
Station 
Period of monitoring 
Level of PM 10  in 
excess level 
prescribed in  
NAAQS ( per cent ) 
1. Sonepur 
Bazari 
Training Centre May 2013 to February 2015 100 
CISF Camp  56 
2. Kunustoria Incline No. 3 April 2013 to March 2015 100 
3. 
Jhanjra 
MIC September 2013 to February 
2015 
100 
1 & 2 Incline 100 
3 & 4 Incline 100 
  
We also observed that ECL did not analyse the pollu tion levels in these locations post-
rationalization for their conformity with the prescribed norms.  
4.4.3  NAAQS prescribed the maximum permissible level of emissions of PM 
10  (100 
µg/cum) and PM 2.5  (60 µg/cum) concentration in industrial, residenti al, rural and other 
areas. We observed that the concentration of PM 10  and PM 2.5 in air exceeded the levels 
prescribed in NAAQS in six mines across three subsi diaries during 2013-18 as detailed 
below: 
 
  
                                                           
13   A group of mines in close proximity to one another 
14   Micrograms per cubic metre 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
17 
Table 05: Levels of air pollutant in the mines of subsidiaries  
Subsidiary  Pollutant  
No. of 
occasions 
monitored  
Range of 
actual 
levels 
recorded  
(µg/cum)  
Readings in excess of the 
specified standards 
No. of 
occasions  
Per 
centage 
of (5) 
to (3) 
Mines 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
BCCL 
PM 10  130 101 to 660 64 49 Dahibari-
Bansantimata 
OCP and  
Moonidih UG   
PM 2.5 130 61 to 480 57 44 
ECL PM 10  107 101 to 196 67 63 Rajmahal 
WCL 
PM 10  823 101 to 647 260 32 New Majri 
IIA OC, 
Gokul OC 
and Penganga 
OC 
PM 2.5 411 61 to 228 65 16 
We did not come across instances of breach of the p ermitted levels in 22 other sampled 
operating mines.    
We observed that the subsidiaries monitored the par ameters through Routine 
Environment Monitoring (REM) reports without analyz ing the reasons for variation of 
the parameters as against the standards fixed, for remedial action. We also observed that 
in case of WCL, Maharashtra Pollution Control Board  (MPCB) forfeited (between 
September 2013 and September 2016) bank guarantee ( BG) amounting to 
` 32.5 lakh 
tendered by them, for exceeding ambient air quality  norms during the period 2013-18. 
Yet, no action was taken to reduce emission levels.  BCCL attributed (November 2018) 
the pollution at Dahibari OCP (DBOCP) in excess of the norms to vehicular movement 
on National Highway 19.  
WCL confirmed (November 2018) that the levels excee ded in buffer zone which were 
beyond their control. However, this was not assessed further for necessary action.  
ECL stated (December 2018) that monitoring was done  as per the Standards of GSR 
742 (E) dated September, 2000, issued by MoEF&CC.  
The Ministry also stated (April 2019) that air qual ity of core zone is being monitored as 
per Notification No. GSR 742(E) dated 25 September 2000 as prescribed in Clause (i) of 
Air quality Monitoring and Preservation of the Stan dard EC conditions prescribed by 
MoEF&CC. As per the aforesaid notifications, if any  residential or commercial or 
industrial place falls within 500 metres of any dus t generating sources, NAAQS notified 
becomes applicable. The receptors in buffer zone are being monitored for the parameters 
of NAAQS, 2009 as specified in Standard EC Conditions of MoEF&CC.  
The reply of the Management/Ministry is not accepta ble in view of the fact that as per 
the provision of the Air (Prevention and Control of  Pollution) Act, 1981, the CPCB 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
18 
notified NAAQS in 2009 which aimed to provide uniform air quality for all, irrespective 
of land use pattern, across the country. Further, t he guidelines issued (March 2014) by 
CIL reiterated that the standards prescribed in NAAQS be complied with.  
In the Exit Conference (May 2019), it was agreed up on to revisit the existing CIL  
guidelines for necessary modification regarding imp lementation of NAAQS 2009, in 
totality, for core as well as buffer zone.  
4.4.4    EC issued (between February 2013 and December 20 13) for clusters of mines of 
BCCL stipulated that Source Apportionment Study and  Mineralogical Composition 
Study (Study) be conducted for Jharia coalfield in order to ascertain the source and 
extent of air pollution due to mining activities so  that appropriate mitigating measures 
could be taken. These Studies are undertaken by Gov ernment research agencies on 
receipt of advance by them as consideration for services.  
We observed that the proposal for conducting these studies received from National 
Environmental Engineering Research Institute (NEERI ) as early as in September 2013 
followed by in January 2014 for a consideration of 
` 1.12 crore was not acted upon. We 
further observed that the study was entrusted to th e same agency, i.e.,  NEERI, only in 
May 2018 for enhanced consideration of ` 1.42 crore and to submit the report within  
12 months.  This resulted in delay ranging between 53 and 64 months.  
BCCL stated (November 2018) that action could not b e initiated as no response was 
received to their tenders floated originally. The r eply is not tenable as not only was the 
original tender floated late (in January / March 20 15) but also the clause relating to 
advance payment for undertaking the Study was not i ncorporated in the tender 
notification, thereby forcing the Government resear ch agencies to abstain from 
participating in the tender. The belated award of w ork to NEERI resulted in 
corresponding delay in initiating the process of remedial measures.   
4.5      Transportation of coal  
Coal after excavation in the mine is transferred to  the pit head stock, which is then 
transferred to crusher/ washery by dumper/ truck. T he coal from the crusher/washery is 
transferred to the customers either by road (truck)  or rail. Transportation by road 
generates a lot of air pollutants for which EMP emp hasised the need to minimise road 
transportation.  
As per CIL guidelines prescribed (March 2014), for mitigating air pollution, generation 
of dust is to be controlled at the source with nece ssary measures viz., CHP,  piped 
conveyor belt system, SILO including Rapid Loading System, Merry-Go-Round 
15 , dust 
                                                           
15   The Merry-Go-Round (MGR) system is a closed-circuit  dedicated rail transportation system between 
the production and consumption points. 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
19 
suppression by water sprinklers, mist blowers, mech anical brooming etc.  Further, dust 
generation is to be minimised along coal / waste tr ansportation roads and green belt is 
to be created around the source of dust. 
4.6     Violation of guidelines  
4.6.1  During the course of joint inspection of mines, we  observed the following 
shortcomings in the implementation of the guideline s in 17 out of the 28 operating 
mines selected for scrutiny. 
 
Table 06: Status of Implementation of CIL Guidelines in the mines of subsidiaries  
Sl. 
No. 
Parameter indicated 
in the Guidelines 
Non-adherence observed  
Subsidiary Mines Percentage 
(%) of mines 
that failed to 
adhere with 
reference to 
sampled 
mines 16  
1 Use of covered 
conveyer belt / system 
for transporting coal 
from mines to railway 
siding / washery for 
reducing air pollution  
ECL Sonepur Bazari, Kunustoria, 
Dabor and Jhanjra 
80 
CCL Rajrappa OCM 25 
MCL Lingaraj and Bharatpur 50 
SECL Gevra OCM 25 
2 Use of silos for rapid 
and dust free loading 
of coal into wagons 
ECL Jhanjra and Sonepur Bazari. 40 
3 Wetting of top surface 
of coal loaded trucks 
by sprinklers / mist 
sprays for dust 
suppression 
WCL Majri IIA, Penganga and Gokul 
mines 
100 
4 Use of fixed sprinkler 
for dust suppression at 
railway siding 
ECL Sonepur Bazari and Kunustoria 40 
CCL Jarangdih railway siding of AKK 
OCM and Kathara OCM 
50 
MCL Lakhanpur and Basundhara (W) 50 
5 Use of mechanical 
brooming / industrial 
cleaner to suppress 
dust 
ECL Rajmahal, Jhanjra, Sonepur 
Bazari,  Kunustoria and Dabor 
100 
CCL Piparwar OCM 25 
WCL Majri IIA, Penganga OC, and 
Gokul mines 
100 
MCL Bharatpur, Lakhanpur and 
Basundhara (W) 
75 
6 Plantation at railway 
siding / stockyard / 
approach roads to 
reduce air pollution 
MCL Lakhanpur and Basundhara (W) 50 
CCL AKK OCM 25 
WCL Penganga and Gokul mines 67 
                                                           
16   BCCL=4, CCL= 4, ECL= 5, MCL= 4, NCL= 4, SECL= 4 and WCL=3. 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
20 
     
 
Pic. 01: Para No. 4.6.1, Table No. 06, Sl. No. 
01: Un-covered conveyor belt at CHP in 
Lingraj Mine of MCL  
Pic. 02: Covered conveyor belt at CHP in 
Mungoli mine of WCL  
 
Pic. 03: Para No. 4.6.1, Table No. 06, Sl. No. 
04: Jarangdih Railway siding of CCL without 
fixed sprinklers  
Pic. 04:  Ghugus Railway siding of WCL 
with fixed sprinklers  
As regards the reasons for various shortcomings in implementation of CIL guidelines, 
Audit observed the following: 
• The old damaged GI sheets of the covered conveyor s ystem of Lingaraj and 
Bharatpur mines of MCL required replacement. Damage d sprinklers of 
Lakhanpur mine of MCL was under repair and a propos al was initiated for fixed 
sprinkler at Basundhara (W). For suppression of dus t in the mines of MCL, a 
proposal for filters required for road sweeper mach ine of Bharatpur had been 
initiated. The plantation along the railway siding at Basundhara(W) and 
Lakhanpur mines of MCL was at proposal stage. 
• In Dabor and Kunustoria mines of ECL, being small i n size, conveyer belt was 
not installed, although management assured that stu dy would be made for 
construction of silos with conveyer belt system for catering such small mines at a 


Report No. 12 of 2019 
21 
centralized place based on the road connectivity. F urther, installation of silos 
(12 MTY) and conveyor belt system for rapid and dus t free loading of coal was 
under process at Sonepur Bazari and Jhanjra mines o f ECL. It was also observed 
that the project for construction of CHP with silo facility at Sonepur Bazari 
mines, conceived as early as in May 2013 did not ma terialise so far (November 
2018) due to delay in finalizing technical and fina ncial parameters and coal 
continued to be transported by road disregarding st ipulations in the EC. Fixed 
sprinklers for dust suppression at railway sidings of Sonepur Bazari and 
Kunustoria mines of ECL were under construction and  management assured that 
the possibility of provision of mechanical brooming  in the coal mining area of 
ECL would be explored.  
• In case of Rajrappa mine of CCL, the washery was in  close proximity and hence 
transportation of coal from mine to washery through  belt conveyor was not 
techno-economically feasible. Further, for dust sup pression, water was sprinkled 
regularly through mobile water sprinklers at washer y and sidings at AKK and 
Kathara mines of CCL and management assured that th e suitability of 
mechanical brooming at Piparwar mine would be asses sed based upon 
experience of other coal companies before its deplo yment in CCL. It was also 
observed that the subsidiary assured for three tier  plantation at railway siding at 
AKK mine.    
• In Gevra mine of SECL, departmental issues/site con straints were responsible 
for delay in commissioning of conveyor system.  
• In WCL, coal transportation trucks were covered com pletely by tarpaulin and 
thus arrangement of wetting of top surface of coal loaded trucks by sprinklers for 
dust suppression did not exist in all the mines of WCL. For use of mechanical 
brooming/ industrial cleaner to suppress dust, thre e mechanical sweeping 
machines had been procured and deployed at Chandrap ur, Wani North and 
Nagpur mines of WCL and procurement for other mines  was under process. 
Three-tier plantation was under process at Penganga and Gokul mines of WCL.  
The coal subsidiaries accepted (October/November 20 18) the audit observations and 
stated that corrective actions would be taken.  
4.6.2      While granting EC to Lakhanpur, Bharatpur and Basundhara (W) projects of 
MCL, MoEF&CC specified (July 2008, October 2008 and  February 2013) that mist 
blower be commissioned.  Further, MCL was to operat ionalise mist spray system of 
water for control of air borne dust at different lo ading and transportation points. We 
observed that MCL did not comply with these directi ves (November 2018) on the plea 
that the technology was the latest and that it did not have the expertise for procurement, 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
22 
operation and maintenance of such machines. The reply is not tenable as the technology 
was adopted by WCL as early as in February 2015 and  MCL could have replicated it. 
We further observed that considerable time (29 mont hs) lapsed in evaluating the 
proposal of hiring vis-a-vis  procurement, which was avoidable.  
4.7     Delay in commissioning rapid loading system  
Transportation of coal to consumers and from mine t o washery / siding through piped 
conveyor and wagon loading through silo reduces dus t pollution. There were 
shortcomings in adherence as detailed below: 
4.7.1 
 While granting EC for the expansions of Piparwar OC M of CCL, the 
MoEF&CC stipulated (2007, 2012 and 2014) that a rap id loading system 17  (RLS) 
consisting of railway siding and silo be constructe d with adequate dust suppression 
arrangements in a time bound manner so as to replac e transportation of coal by road. 
We observed that although the silo was constructed in April 1997, the work relating to 
the railway siding was completed belatedly and the RLS was commissioned only in 
June 2018. The delay was attributed to delay in initiating the process of land acquisition 
for construction of the railway siding and lack of effective follow-up action by the 
Management with the State/District administrative a uthorities for physical possession 
of land.  
Meanwhile, due to absence of RLS, coal was transpor ted by road to Bachara siding 
(involving a distance of 10 kilometres) from Piparw ar till June 2018. The mitigative 
measures put in place for handling air pollution we re thus not commensurate to handle 
the level of pollution as the EMP of the project wa s based on the premise that coal 
would be transported by rail, while it was actually transported by road till June 2018.  
4.8  Delay in firming up tender for capacity augmen tation  
4.8.1     Initially, Jayant project of NCL was sanctione d for 10 million tonne per year 
(MTY) capacity and accordingly CHP for the same cap acity was in operation in the 
project. Later on,  expansion of the project to the  capacity of 15 MTY was approved 
(June 2008) by NCL Board. While according approval of expansion project, 
MoEF&CC stipulated (December 2008) that coal be tra nsported by MGR with silo 
loading facility only. This necessitated constructi on of a new CHP of 5 MTY 
incremental capacity to match the production capaci ty of the mine.  Madhya Pradesh 
Pollution Control Board (MPPCB), quoting National G reen Tribunal (NGT) directives, 
directed (April 2016) NCL to discontinue coal trans port by road.  Notwithstanding 
these directives, quantities to the extent of 21 per cent  and 23 per cent  of its supply 
                                                           
17   RLS(Rapid Loading System) is the facility used in t he coal industry for quick loading of coal into the  
wagons/trucks. 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
23 
were transported to Morwa siding by road during the  years 2016-17 and 2017-18 
respectively. We  observed that NCL was forced to resort to road transport as the tender 
for capacity augmentation of CHP from 10 MTY to 15 MTY was cancelled (2012)  on 
the plea that the quotations received were too low as compared to the estimated cost put 
to the tender. Subsequently, NCL Board approved (Ma rch 2016) the expansion of 
Jayant project to 25 MTY, leading to a gap of 15 MT Y in the capacity of CHP as 
compared to the then existing capacity. 
NCL stated (October 2018) that consequent to augmen tation of mine capacity to 25 
MTY, it was decided to construct CHP with a capacit y to handle 25 MTY and that 
action was on hand to prepare tender documents for the same. However, delay of over 
six years (between 2012 and 2018) in firming up the  tender was not justified and coal 
continued to be transported by road disregarding st ipulations in the EC, thereby 
contributing to pollution.  
4.9     Idling of infrastructural facilities  
For minimizing air pollution, coal is to be transpo rted by rail with silo as mandated in 
the EC issued by MoEF&CC to the projects from time to time. To minimise costs and 
to maximise benefits, it is imperative that idling of facilities created be avoided, by 
synchronizing the  pace of progress of construction of silos with that  of the progress of 
work relating to railway line. We observed the foll owing shortcomings in project 
management which resulted in idling of facilities created at cost of ` 742.42 crore. 
4.9.1   While granting EC for Gevra expansion project of SE CL, MoEF&CC stipulated 
(June 2009) that the extracted coal be supplied by rail / MGR to consumers. 
Accordingly, work relating to railway siding with s ilo loading facility which was under 
execution by RITES Limited, was to be completed by July 2010. We observed that 
though construction of silo was completed belatedly  in February 2016 at a cost of ` 
138.85 crore, works relating to railway siding rema ined (November 2018) incomplete 
and, hence, coal produced from Gevra OCM continued to be transported through road, 
thereby contributing to dust generation.  
SECL attributed (November 2018) the delay in completion of siding works to structural 
hindrances at site which impeded the progress of wo rk and subsequent (August 2014) 
foreclosure of the contract subsisting between RITE S and their contractor. SECL 
further stated that track laying work was completed  by RITES and that fitness 
certificate from the Railways was awaited.  
The Ministry stated (April 2019) that construction of conveyor belt, CHP and railway 
lines are major civil/electrical/mechanical work, w hich require considerable time and 
are also subject to unforeseen obstacles such as la nd acquisition issues, delay in 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
24 
obtaining various clearances, law & order problem etc . The projects were constantly 
being reviewed involving all stakeholders to ensure early commissioning. 
The replies of Management/ Ministry are not tenable  as the above factors contributing 
to delays in project implementation are known facts  and challenges prevailing in the 
coal mining sector. Due to ineffective project mana gement, SECL took substantial time 
to dismantle structures such as siding office, cant een building, HT electric poles, 
workshop boundary, huge quantity of construction ma terials etc. which were required 
to be removed from the proposed railway alignment. This delayed the progress in 
completion of railway siding by 33 months (November  2018) since completion of 
construction of Silo in February 2016.  
In the Exit Conference, the Ministry stated (May 20 19) that the progress of projects 
was being monitored by them on regular basis and ne cessary steps would be taken to 
complete the pending projects expeditiously.  
4.9.2  While granting EC for Lakhanpur and Lingaraj proje cts of MCL, MoEF&CC 
stipulated (May 2014 and November 2015) that coal t ransportation to consumers be 
made by rail so as to reduce the dust pollution. Co al transportation from mine to 
washery / siding 
 was to be through piped conveyor and wagon loading through silo. 
MoEF&CC also directed that no road transportation o f coal be resorted to after the 
stipulated period. 
We observed that silos were not commissioned till N ovember 2018 though these were 
mandated to be completed by December 2016 (Lingaraj ) and December 2017 
(Lakhanpur). We further observed that though the wo rk relating to construction of silo 
was completed in Lingaraj mine at a cost of 
` 227.42 crore, this could not be 
operationalised due to absence of railway connectiv ity. Further, the contract for 
construction of silos was not awarded for Lakhanpur  mines. We also observed that 
though EC did not stipulate construction of silo at  Bharatpur mines, MCL constructed 
(June 2017) silos at a cost of ` 165 crore. However, the facility could not be 
operationalised so far (November 2018) due to defec tive conveyor system and, 
consequently, coal continued to be transported by r oad, thereby contributing to 
pollution.   
 
Pic. 05: Para No. 4.9.2: Idling of SILO at Lingaraj mine of MCL 
and resorting to road transportation. 


Report No. 12 of 2019 
25 
MCL stated (October 2018) that actions would be tak en for early commencement of 
silo. Further developments are awaited (November 2018). 
4.9.3 EC relating to Block B mines of NCL stipulated (Aug ust 2014) that the road 
transport from mine to siding be discontinued from August 2016 and coal dispatch be 
made through Coal Handling Plant (CHP) / railway wa gons with silo loading. We 
observed that CHP having a capacity to handle 3.5 M TPA was completed in January 
2016 at a cost of ` 211.15 crore.  However, coal could not be dispatch ed through CHP 
due to absence of rail connectivity and hence coal continued to be transported by road 
beyond August 2016, thereby contributing to air pollution.  
NCL  stated (October 2018)  that laying of railway lines was held up due to opposition 
from local villagers demanding employment for land losers among them and that action 
was on hand for resolution of disputes. NCL further stated that the CHP was being used 
for crushing of coal. The reply is not tenable as l and being an emotive issue, the 
consequences arising out of its acquisition and the  demands of the land losers should 
have been addressed beforehand so as to ensure that  the work relating to track laying 
remained synchronous with the pace of progress of c onstruction of silos / CHP, so as to 
utilise the facility for the intended purpose. 
 
Audit Summation 
Air quality monitoring in three subsidiaries of CIL  was found deficient as against 96 
monitoring stations, only 58 were established. Furt her, 12 mines of four subsidiaries 
did not comply the SPCB directives  for installatio n of Continuous Ambient Air 
Quality Monitoring Stations to facilitate online mo nitoring of ambient air quality. The 
average ash content in the coal extracted from some  of the mines of Mahanadi 
Coalfields Limited (MCL) was more than 34 per cent  and the same was supplied to 
various consumers. Although MCL contemplated settin g of four washeries as early as 
in March 2008 for supply of beneficiated coal to th ermal plants, these have not been 
commissioned so far. The concentration of PM 10  and PM 2.5 in air exceeded the levels 
prescribed in NAAQS in six mines across three subsi diaries during 2013-18. 
Shortcomings were noticed in the implementation of prescribed CIL guidelines (March 
2014), in 17 out of the 28 operating mines selected  for scrutiny. Due to delay in 
commissioning of rapid loading system in CCL, firmi ng up tender for capacity 
augmentation of CHP at NCL, idle infrastructure on construction  of railway siding/silo 
at SECL, MCL and NCL, coal continued to be transpor ted by road, thereby 
contributing to air pollution.  
  

Report No. 12 of 2019 
26 
CHAPTER 5 
WATER POLLUTION & CONTROL MEASURES 
Mining is likely to have significant effects on gro und water as well as surface water. 
Mining operations can both contaminate and cause se vere physical dislocation of 
aquifers.  
The major source of water pollution in coal mines i s the suspended solids in the 
drainage system of mine water 
18  and storm water 19 . In some coal mines, the mine water 
is acidic due to the presence of sulphur / pyrites / pyritic compounds. Effluent from 
washeries and coal preparation plants generally con tain fine coal particles, suspended 
solids, washery medium, reagents etc . and sometimes oil and grease. In Heavy Earth 
Moving Machineries (HEMM) and light vehicles worksh ops, the workshop floors mix 
oil and oily matter into water along with dirt that  is being washed. Besides, the sewage 
from residential complexes contaminates water mainly with organic matter.   
To mitigate water pollution caused by mining activi ties, measures such as installation 
of water treatment plants (Effluent Treatment Plant  or ETP) for eliminating pollutants 
from mine water as well as storm water and discharg e from the workshops, installation 
of Sewage Treatment Plant (STP ) for treatment of effluents from the residential 
colonies of the mines were adopted. 
5.1     Excessive levels of pollutants 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) prescribed (May 20 12) the maximum levels of water 
pollutants in mine water which is subsequently used  for drinking and other purposes 
after treatment.  
We observed that during 2013-18, out of 28 mines se lected for audit scrutiny, in eight 
mines across three subsidiaries, viz. , BCCL (one 20 ), CCL (four 21 ) and MCL  (three 22 ) 
the pollutants exceeded the prescribed limits as detailed below.   
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
18   Mine water is water that collects in a mine and which has to be brought to the surface by water 
treatment method in order to enable the mine to continue working. 
19   Storm water is surface water in abnormal quantity  resulting from heavy falls of rain or snow. 
20   DBOCP 
21   Rajrappa (including washery), Piparwar, Kathara a nd AKK 
22   Lakhanpur, Bharatpur and Basundhara (West) 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
27 
Table 07: Levels of water pollutant in Subsidiaries 
 
Potable water         
Parameter Unit 
Maximum 
prescribed 
level 
Actual level 
(Range) 
Mines where 
pollutants 
exceed the limits 
Turbidity NTU 23    5   7-15 
Lakhanpur, 
Bharatpur and 
Basundhara (W) 
mines of MCL 
 
Total Coli form / Faecal 
Coli form 
mg/litre 24     0.0 1.8-22 
Cadmium mg/litre       0.003 0.05 
Manganese mg/litre     0.3 0.31-0.94 
PH Hydrogen ions/ 
litre 
       6.5-8.5 4.04-8.76 
Biochemical Oxygen 
Demand 
mg/litre 3  3.1-20 
Total Chromium mg/litre    0.05 0.06-0.36 
Calcium mg/litre   75 76.8-179 Rajrappa, 
Piparwar, 
Kathara and 
AKK mines of 
CCL 
Alkalinity mg/litre  200 220-  420 
Total dissolved solids 
(TDS) 
mg/litre  500 512-1860 
Total Hardness mg/litre  200 236-  744 
      Source: CMPDIL monthly monitoring reports.  
Effluent water           
Parameter Unit 
Maximum 
prescribed 
level 
Actual level 
(Range) 
Mines where 
pollutants 
exceed the limits 
Chemical Oxygen 
Demand (COD) 
mg/litre 
 250 300-980 Rajrappa, 
Piparwar, 
Kathara and 
AKK mines of 
CCL 
Oil and grease mg/litre    10 12-16 
Total Suspended  Solids 
(TSS) 
mg/litre 
 
100 
104-
12628 
138-142 DBOCP of 
BCCL 
                   Source: CMPDIL monthly monitoring reports.  
Although MCL claimed (October 2018) that corrective  measures were taken, the level 
of pollutants exceeded the prescribed limits succes sively during 2013-18. CCL 
attributed the pollutants in excess of the prescribed limits in potable water to geological 
deposits and stated (October 2018) that effluent ma nagement system would be further 
strengthened. Further developments are awaited (Nov ember 2018). BCCL stated 
(November 2018) that currently pollution level is under control.  
5.2 Zero discharge of water 
5.2.1    As per the directives of Odisha State Pollution Control Board (OSPCB), zero 
discharge of untreated water was to be ensured by M arch 2016.  We observed that 
during 2013-18, 62 lakh KL of untreated water was d ischarged in nearby water bodies 
                                                           
23   Nephelometric Turbidity Units 
24   Milligram per litre 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
28 
by Lakhanpur (2.95 lakh KL) and Basundhara (W) mine s (59.05 lakh KL) of MCL 
thereby contaminating ground water, disregarding th e conditions stipulated in EC and 
the directives of OSPCB. 
MCL stated (October 2018) that remedial measures fo r adherence of zero discharge in 
these mines were under consideration. The reply is not tenable as we observed that the 
proposal was only under conceptual stage despite la pse of over 30 months since the 
date fixed for completion.  
5.3   Treatment of acidic mine water 
While according EC for Block-B expansion project (5 .47 MTPA) of NCL, MoEF&CC 
stipulated (August 2014) that acidic mine water be treated and the progress thereof be 
intimated. NCL was also directed by MoEF&CC to impl ement the acid mine treatment 
based on report of IIT, Bombay. Further NEERI was t o monitor the implementation of 
acid mine water treatment in the mine and also asse ss the impact of acid mine water on 
the nearby villages. NCL engaged (October 2014) CMP DIL for evaluation of the 
impact of acidity. CMPDIL recommended (March 2017) utilization of the OB materials 
from the dumps for filling up the mine pits in orde r to prevent the pyritic material from 
getting exposed to oxygen and moisture thereby preventing the formation of Acid Mine 
Drainage. However, no action was taken on these rec ommendations on the plea that 
modalities of permitting National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) for ash filling in 
Gorbi mines was under finalization as discussed in paras 7.1.2.1 and 7.1.2.2 infra .  
NCL stated (October 2018) that the mine voids of ab andoned Gorbi mines were 
identified for fly ash filling and filling of overb urden from Block-B mine. We observed 
that the MOU was concluded with NTPC only in Januar y 2019, though CMPDIL 
recommended the course of action to be adopted as e arly as in March 2017. The delay 
of over 21 months was thus avoidable. 
5.4     Drainage of excess mine water 
Council of Scientific & Industrial Research in coll aboration with Central Institute of 
Mining and Fuel Research (CSIR-CIMFR), Dhanbad supp lied, installed and 
commissioned (November 2014) a pilot plant with cap acity to produce 4000 litres 
potable water per hour from waste mine water, at BC CL. CIL intimated (January 2016) 
MCL that with a view to providing treated water to the villages for drinking purpose 
from the surrounding underground  mines, a detailed study be conducted so as to 
standardise the mechanism for utilization of excess  mine water and directed MCL to 
identify the areas where this technology could be i mplemented. MCL identified 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
29 
(November 2016 / May 2017) six locations in two 25  areas for implementation. The local 
administration of these areas was to operate and ma intain these plants and distribute the 
water to the beneficiaries. BoD of MCL directed (Ja nuary 2018) that CSIR-CIMFR be 
engaged for preparation of detailed project report for one project on pilot basis and the 
proposal be resubmitted along with the consent lett ers from the local administration for 
operation and maintenance of the plants.  We observ ed abnormal delay ranging between 
10 and 16 months in identifying the locations and e ight months thereafter in referring 
the proposal to the BoD.   The project is yet to take off (November 2018). 
MCL stated (October 2018) that the matter would be pursued with the local 
administration for concluding Memorandum of Underst anding (MoU) for operation and 
maintenance of the plant.  Meanwhile, 51.10 lakh KL 26  of surplus mine water remains 
untapped and is discharged as waste annually. 
5.5     Effluent management system at workshop 
5.5.1   In its guidelines, CIL stipulated (March 2014) th at the treatment plants of 
workshop  re-circulate the treated water for washin g purpose, duly adhering to zero 
discharge concept i.e. , reused within the workshop. We observed that faci lity at 
workshops of Dabor and Sonepur Bazari of ECL suffer ed from the following 
shortcomings, thereby impeding the process of water treatment. 
 
    Table 8: Status of Effluent Management System at Workshops of ECL 
Sl. No. Shortcomings Workshops of Indicative of 
1. Existence of weeds in HEMM 
washing facility Dabor Lying unutilised for the entire 
monsoon season 
2. 
Choked drains and chambers of 
HEMM washing facility 
resulting in overflow of sludge 
Sonepur Bazari Poor maintenance 
                       
 
Pic. 06: Para No. 5.5.1 (Sl. No. 01): 
Existence of weeds in HEMM washing 
facility at Dabor, ECL 
Pic. 07: Para No. 5.5.1 (Sl. No. 02): Choked drains 
and chambers of HEMM washing facility at Sonepur 
Bazari, ECL, resulting in overflow of sludge 
                                                           
25   Four in Orient Area and two in Talcher Area. 
26   14000  KL/day x 365 days  


Report No. 12 of 2019 
30 
ECL stated (November 2018) that weeds outgrew at th e HEMM washing facility at 
Dabor during monsoon season and that the drains and  chamber of HEMM washing 
facility were maintained regularly. While accumulation of weeds is a pointer to absence 
of plan of action in place to ensure proper maintenance during monsoon season, records 
indicating the periodicity of actual cleaning vis-à -vis planned, were not maintained and 
hence the ECL’s claims as regards regular maintenan ce was not susceptible to 
verification. 
5.6      Sewage Treatment Plant   
Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) cleans the effluents f rom the sewage water of the 
residential colonies of the mines so that it can be recycled before releasing it back to the 
environment. While according EC for projects from time to time, MoEF&CC stipulated 
that STP be installed in the following residential colonies of the collieries. We observed 
that the subsidiaries did not install STP, thereby contaminating the ground water as 
detailed below: 
 Table 9: Non-installation of STP in residential colonies of subsidiaries  
Sl. No. Subsidiary Location where STP was not installed 
1 CCL Residential colonies of Piparwar, Kathara and  AKK mines  
2 ECL Residential colonies of Dabor, Kunustoria, Jhanjra and Sonepur Bazari 
mines 
3 MCL Residential colonies of Lingaraj and Basundha ra mines 
4 NCL Residential colonies of  Block B mine 
5 SECL Residential colonies of Rajendra mine 
6 WCL Residential colonies of Majri II A , Gokul and Penganga mines 
 
We also observed that the STP installed at Lakhanpu r mines of MCL was inoperative 
since May 2008. MCL issued work order only in Augus t 2018 (after a delay of 10 
years) for its rectification at a cost of 
` 98.38 lakh. The work is still to be completed 
(November 2018). Meanwhile, the sewage water remained untreated.  
The subsidiaries stated (October / November 2018) t hat their residential colonies at 
mines were equipped with soak pit and septic tanks and that action was on hand to 
install STPs. We further observed that although MPC B forfeited the BG amounting to 
` 10.00 lakh in June 2013, STP was constructed  in t he residential colony of Umrer 
mines of WCL only in August 2018, involving a delay of 62 months. 
The fact remains that delay in installation of STPs  by the subsidiaries, exposed the 
ground water to contamination.  
 
  

Report No. 12 of 2019 
31 
5.7  Pollution in water bodies 
5.7.1     We observed that due to absence of mechanical b rooming / industrial cleaner  in 
Piparwar OCM, as discussed in para 4.6.1 supra , the spillage from overloaded  trucks / 
dumpers  accumulated along the sides of the bridge of Safi R iver. As the spillage was 
not cleaned periodically, these eventually drained into the river thereby contaminating 
the river water. 
CCL stated (November 2018) that the deployment of m echanical booming / industrial 
cleaner would be explored. Further developments are awaited (November 2018). 
 
Pic. 08: Para No. 5.7.1: Spillage from overloaded  trucks coal 
accumulated along the sides of the bridge of Safi River at 
Piparwar OCM of CCL 
5.7.2 . We further observed that the rejects of Kathara was hery of CCL was found to be 
contaminating Damodar River as discussed in para no. 7.3.1.1  infra. 
 
Pic. 09: Para No. 5.7.2: Rejects of Kathara washery of 
CCL contaminating Damodar River 
 
In the Exit Conference, CCL stated (November 2018) that action would be initiated to 
prevent contamination.  
5.7.3    EC relating to cluster of DBOCP of BCCL stipulat ed (February 2013) that no 
OB was to be dumped near water bodies and rivers an d a safety barrier of at least 60 
metres be maintained along the water bodies to avoi d their contamination with mine 
waste.  
We observed that OB was dumped on the bank of Khudia river without maintaining the 
minimum distance, thereby contaminating the river. BCCL stated (November 2018) 


Report No. 12 of 2019 
32 
that action was on hand for construction of toe wal l / stone pitching. Further 
developments are awaited (November 2018).  
 
 
                                              Pic. 10: Para No.5.7.3: OB dumped on the bank of Khudia river  
 
5.8  Non-adherence to guidelines of Central Ground Water 
Authority 
5.8.1  In accordance with guidelines issued by Central Gr ound Water Authority 
(CGWA), industries / infrastructure / mining projec ts were required to obtain NOC for 
the use of ground water. We observed that CCL (Pipa rwar OCM), BCCL (DBOCP, 
Kuya, Moonidih UG and Putki Balihari mines) and SECL (Baroud, Gevra and Rajendra 
mines) continued to use ground water for their mining oper ations without obtaining 
NOC from CGWA.  
BCCL stated (November 2018) that application for NO C was submitted in off-line 
mode (February 2013, June 2015 and January 2017) to  CGWA and that follow-up 
action was initiated for submission of application in on-line mode, based on proposals 
prepared by CMPDIL in March 2018. SECL also stated (November 2018) that 
application was submitted through on-line mode and that NOC was awaited. In the Exit 
Conference, CCL agreed (November 2018) to initiate corrective action. Meanwhile, 
ground water continued to be used without authorization. 
5.9  Mercury content 
Mercury is one of the natural and harmful component s of coal. Central Pollution 
Control Board (CPCB) recommended (February 2013) that: 
• mercury levels be analysed in all coal seam samples  of all the projects of NCL 
on annual basis through Indian Institute of Technol ogy, Banaras Hindu 
University (IIT BHU) / IIT Kanpur 
• mercury level be analysed in blood samples of its e mployees to generate a data 
bank and 


Report No. 12 of 2019 
33 
• a study be conducted through Indian Medical Council  for assessing the impact 
of mercury pollution on the population of the Singrauli region within a radius of 
15 km area.  
We observed that NCL did not get the coal seam samp les analysed for mercury content 
on annual basis. It engaged Indian Institute of Tec hnology, Banaras Hindu University 
(IIT, BHU) in July 2013 and Indian School of Mines,  Dhanbad (ISM) in June 2016, 
leaving the intervening spell (June 2014 to May 201 6) bereft of analysis. Further, 
National Institute of Occupational Health, Ahmedaba d reported (June 2016) that the 
level of mercury in 6.8 per cent and 8 per cent  of the samples drawn from the mining 
group and the residence group respectively, exceede d the permissible limits. ISM also 
reported (November 2016) that the level of mercury was abnormally high and that it 
ranged between 13.729 mg / kg and 24.936 mg / kg (a gainst the permissible limit of 
0.005 mg / kg) in 22 coal samples. ISM reaffirmed ( October 2017) that the results 
reported were true. Yet, NCL referred (November 201 8) these samples to IIT BHU for 
retesting, the results of which were awaited (March  2019). We also observed that no 
analysis of coal seam samples was made beyond June 2016, thereby, thwarting the 
remedial measures of occupational health and safety. 
5.10  Threat of Subsidence 
Mining operations in Deulbera of MCL which commence d in 1926, was discontinued 
since July 2006 due to threat of surface water. Fou r panels having inadequate cover 
between 18.5 metres and 50 metres were identified f or complete stabilization of the 
water on priority basis. The surface area above the  identified panels was stated to pose 
danger to structures due to subsidence of strata th at could take place in future. Sand 
stowing to the extent of 3.30 lakh cum was required  for stabilization. Sand stowing was 
discontinued in 2016 after stowing to the extent of  1.02 lakh cum on the plea that its 
sand mining lease period expired and its renewal / compliance with formalities would 
take considerable time. As the period of lease is p re-determined, MCL should have 
initiated advance action either for its renewal or for locating alternative sources, more 
specifically since it was known beforehand that ren ewal/compliance with formalities 
for alternative sources would take considerable time.  
MCL stated (October 2018) that hydro-pneumatic meth od of stowing was presently 
under execution.  We further observed that against the residual quantity of 2.28 lakh 
cum of sand stowing to be completed to mitigate the  threat of subsidence, stowing was 
carried out only to the extent of 2852 cum. The thr eat of subsidence, therefore, 
remained unmitigated (November 2018). 
  

Report No. 12 of 2019 
34 
 
Audit Summation  
The pollutants exceeded the limits prescribed by Bu reau of Indian Standards (BIS) in 
eight mines across three subsidiaries. Further, dur ing 2013-18, 62 lakh Kilo-litre (KL) 
of untreated water was discharged to nearby water b odies by Lakhanpur and 
Basundhara (W) mines of MCL thereby contaminating g round water. CCL, BCCL and 
SECL  continued to use ground water for their mining oper ations without obtaining No 
Objection Certificate from Central Ground Water Aut hority. The subsidiaries did not 
install Sewage Treatment Plant at the residential c olonies of the collieries, thereby 
contaminating the ground water. Due to absence of m echanical brooming / industrial 
cleaner  i n Piparwar OCM of CCL, the spillage from overloaded  trucks / dumpers  
accumulated along the sides of the bridge of Safi R iver, was not cleaned periodically. 
These eventually drained into the river thereby con taminating the river water. Further, 
rejects of Kathara washery of CCL was found to be c ontaminating Damodar River. 
NCL did not get the coal seam samples analysed for mercury content on annual basis. 
Further, no analysis of coal seam samples was made beyond June 2016, thereby, 
thwarting the remedial measures of  occupational health and safety. 
  

Report No. 12 of 2019 
35 
CHAPTER 6 
LAND MANAGEMENT - MITIGATION OF LAND 
DEGRADATION AND RECLAMATION 
Mining involves forest land, Government non-forest land and tenancy or private land 
for its developmental as well as operational activi ties. During exploitation, land 
degradation due to change in land use takes place. An external dump is created to 
accommodate OB removed to extract coal and is accum ulated till internal dumping or 
backfilling commences. 
The process of land management includes top soil ma nagement, technical reclamation 
of external OB dump, internal dump / backfilled are a, management of void left after 
completion of extraction, technical reclamation of subsidence due to UG mining, 
plantation i.e.,  biological reclamation of technically reclaimed du mps and monitoring 
progress of reclamation by satellite surveillance. 
6.1 Topsoil management   
Topsoil is the upper and outer most layer of soil, usually the top 5 cm to 20 cm. It has 
the highest concentration of organic matter and mic roorganisms wherein most of the 
earth’s biological soil activity occurs. It takes approximately 1000 years for one inch of 
topsoil deposit to be formed. The topsoil also cont ains a range of nutrients and trace 
elements essential to plant growth and may also con tain native seeds that are 
concentrated in the top 50 mm of the soil profile. In order to re-establish of native 
species, the thin layer of top soil needs to be rem oved during excavation of coal in the 
OCM, stacked separately and preserved carefully for  beneficial soil organisms and 
future vegetation. However, the duration of stockpi ling needs to be minimised since 
excessive time of storage could cause structural de gradation, death of seeds and micro-
organisms, especially when soil moisture content is high.  
Considering the time taken to generate and the impo rtance of topsoil, MoEF&CC 
stipulated that topsoil be stacked at earmarked spe cific sites with adequate measures to 
preserve and be used either concurrently for backfi lling or as top layer for reclamation 
of mined out areas. A record of topsoil indicating the area of stacking along with the 
date was to be maintained. The stipulations did not  exempt the subsidiaries from 
maintaining the records related to topsoil, notwith standing the fact that topsoil was 
either used concurrently for backfilling or the inv entory of topsoil that existed was 
minimum. 
 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
36 
6.1.1     We observed that out of 23 OC/mixed mines selected for detailed scrutiny, in 13 
mines across five subsidiaries, as detailed below, though topsoil was stacked in the 
earmarked area and reported periodically, basic rec ords of topsoil indicating the 
quantity and areas of stacking were not maintained: 
Table 10: Non-maintenance of records of Top Soil in the mines of subsidiaries 
Sl. No. Subsidiary Mines where records were not maintained. 
1 BCCL Kuya and Dahibari Basantimata  
2 CCL Piparwar OCM, Rajrappa OCM, Kathara OCM and AKK OCM  
3 ECL Dabor, Rajmahal and Sonepur Bazari 
4 NCL Nigahi (till March 2014) and Khadia 
5 SECL Gevra OCM and Kusmunda OCM. 
The subsidiaries accepted (October/November 2018) t he audit observation and agreed 
to take remedial action. Further developments are awaited (March 2019).  
In the C&AG’s Performance Audit Report No. 9 of 201 1-12, it was recommended that 
proper records of topsoil storage and use should be maintained.   
6.1.2    We also observed that as at the end of March 201 8, in three mines of WCL 
although 75.30 lakh cum of topsoil was stacked at e armarked sites, it remained 
unutilised since 2013-14. Further leguminous plants  were not planted on it to retain / 
improve the nitrogen content in the topsoil as reco mmended (August 2000) by Indian 
Bureau of Mines.  
6.1.3     We also observed that out of 9.69 lakh cum of topso il generated during 2013-
18 by three 
27  mines of NCL, top soil actually used was 5.79 lakh  cum (60 per cent) as 
detailed below. 
      Table 11: Utilization of Top Soil in NCL 
Year 
Quantity in lakh cubic 
metre (cum)  
Percentage 
of 
utilization removed  utilised 
2013-14 0.84 0.59 70.24 
2014-15 1.55 0.71 45.81 
2015-16 2.05 1.13 55.12 
2016-17 2.30 0.96 41.74 
2017-18 2.95 2.40 81.36 
Total 9.69 5.79 59.75 
We further observed that as at the end of March 201 8, 4.95 lakh cum 28  of top soil 
remained accumulated which is indicative of the fac t that these were not being utilised 
concurrently as envisaged (para 6.1), thereby exposing its quality to deteriorate.  
While accepting (November 2018) the accumulation of  top soil, NCL’s reply was silent 
as regards its concurrent use.  
                                                           
27   Nigahi, Jayant and Block B 
28   1.05 lakh cum (opening balance) + 9.69 lakh cum (generation) - 5.79 lakh cum (utilisation)  

Report No. 12 of 2019 
37 
6.2     Non-adherence to norms relating to OB dump  
In open cast mining method of coal extraction, benc hing 29  is to be made for coal seam 
and the OB with extraction of coal, as specified in  the Coal Mines Regulations, 1957 
(Regulation). The Regulations prescribe the maximum  height and breadth of the OB 
dump to be maintained in the mines. Further, the conditions for maintenance of slope of 
OB dump are also affirmed by MoEF&CC from time to t ime through the EIA-EMP of 
the projects. 
Audit test checked the records relating to OB dumps  in the sample OC mines and 
observed the following: 
6.2.1  A fatal accident occurred (December 2016) in Dahar  Nangi patch of Rajmahal 
OCP of ECL wherein OB slid down due to failing of t he floor burying 12 tippers, 6 
excavators and 23 workmen in the process. This resulted in not only loss of 23 lives but 
also stoppage of production in the affected patch. Director General of Mines Safety 
(DGMS) suspended (June 2017) operations in this pat ch on the plea that the benches in 
coal II and III seams did not conform to the norms regarding height of the bench, 
specified in the Regulations.  
The work relating to removal of OB and extraction o f coal in Sonepur Bazari mines 
was entrusted (October 2014) to a contractor 
30 . The scope of work awarded to the 
contractor included benching the OB in accordance w ith the prescribed norms. The 
Engineer–in–charge (EIC) of mines was to exercise g eneral superintendence over the 
work of the contractor. We observed that DGMS suspe nded (January 2017) operations 
in Quarry 3 of Sonepur Bazari OCP also on the plea that the height of the benches of R-
VIII coal seam deviated from the regulations. The f indings of DGMS are indicative of 
defective monitoring. 
Consequently, ECL had to resort to unscheduled prod uction in other patches of 
Rajmahal and Sonepur Bazari OCP so as to recoup 37.92 lakh tonnes of coal (Rajmahal 
26.25 lakh tonnes 
31  and Sonepur Bazari 11.67 lakh tonnes) up to March 2018.  
ECL attributed (November 2018) the failure of OB du mps at Rajmahal to absence of 
adequate land and reluctance of villagers to handov er physical possession of their land, 
though notified under CBA Act. However, the reply w as silent as regards failure to 
conform to the prescribed norms of benching in Sone pur Bazari. We also observed that 
ECL did not resume operations relating to extractio n of coal in these patches so far 
(November 2018), implying that the suspension of operations remained in force.  
                                                           
29   Benching: A method of working small quarries or open pits in steps or benches . 
30   M/s. International Commerce Limited (ICL) 
31   1.25 lakh te for the period from December 2016 to  March 2017 and 25.00 lakh te during the year 
2017-18 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
38 
6.3  Plantation for green cover 
Biological reclamation by way of broadcasting of gr ass seeds and plantation / 
afforestation was to be undertaken for stabilizatio n of OB dumps against erosion and to 
put the land to best use. Tree plantation was to be  taken up on external OB dumps and 
on back filled / internal dump areas including terr aced slope, vacant land and avenue 
plantation as a remedial measure to mitigate air an d noise pollution. CIL guidelines 
prescribed a green cover of at least one-third of t he mining area.  EC accorded to the 
mines and the related EIA-EMP envisaged developing heterogeneous mix of forest 
with local species having combined properties like medicinal, timber yielding and fruit 
bearing, so as to ensure perennial green cover and high survival rate.  
6.3.1   Audit observed that there was no uniform strategy among subsidiaries for 
biological reclamation of mined out area through plantation activities as detailed below. 
• ECL did not set year-wise internal targets for itse lf. As against 491.23 hectares 
(ha) of land technically reclaimed during 2013-18, the extent of land 
biologically reclaimed during the same period was 3 68.43 ha, leaving an 
accumulated area of 122.80 ha still to be biologica lly reclaimed as at the end of 
March 2018. We observed that during 2013-18, no plantation was undertaken in 
three 32  mines and the green cover in Rajmahal constituted less than one-third of 
mine area.  
• Against the de–coaled area of 3922.85 ha, MCL biolo gically reclaimed only 
2024.73 ha (51.61 per cent ) as at the end of March 2018. No target was fixed 
for plantation during 2013-14 and hence no plantati on was undertaken during 
that year. The details of consolidated internal tar get fixed for biological 
reclamation of de-coaled land by way of plantation and actual achievement 
there against by MCL during 2014-18 is furnished in Annexure – I.  
• The actual achievement of plantation of saplings as  compared to the internal 
target ranged between 47.16 per cent  (2014-15) and 149.17 per cent  (2015-16) 
during the four years ended March 2018. MCL could r eflect better achievement 
in 2015-16 only due to reduction in target for that  year, for which no reasons 
were found on record.  
• We observed that out of 7.01 lakh saplings planted during 2014-18, 0.42 lakh 
saplings (6 per cent ) were destroyed due to avoidable reasons such as f ire, road 
widening, OB dumping and dump slide, which is indicative of the fact that these 
were not nurtured to their finality.  
                                                           
32   Dabor, Rajmahal and Kunustoria  

Report No. 12 of 2019 
39 
• No target for biological reclamation was fixed for Jayant OCP of NCL during 
2013-18. The mine-wise targets fixed for biological  reclamation for Nigahi, 
Block-B and Khadia mines of NCL for the period from  2013-18 is also 
furnished in Annexure – I.  We observed that in these mines, the actual 
achievement of biological reclamation both in terms  of area and in terms of 
number of plants fell short of targets and ranged f rom 29 per cent to 75 per cent 
(area) and from 22 per cent to 65 per cent (plants) respectively. 
NCL stated (October 2018) that targets were fixed b ased on projected technical 
reclamation, which could not be achieved due to fre quent dragline 33  failure, less 
utilization of existing dumpers on account of short age of tyres and inadequate 
logistics capacity to handle the excavated muck. Th e reply is not tenable as 
these were avoidable and no action was initiated to  overcome these constraints. 
We also observed that NCL did not take up three tie r avenue plantation as 
stipulated in the EC due to space constraint, which  is pointer to defective 
planning.  
6.3.2    We further observed the following deviations fro m the stipulations in EIA-EMP 
as regards plantations in the mines of three subsidiaries: 
Table 12: Details of deviations regarding plantation in the mines of subsidiaries 
Sl. 
No. 
As prescribed in 
EIA-EMP/EC 
Deviation 
observed 
Subsidiary Mines 
1 Plantation to be done on 
OB dumps 
No plantation cover 
on the OB dumps. CCL  
Kathara OCP & 
Khansmahal mines of AKK 
OCP 
2 
Three tier green belt 
plantation cover with 
combination of fast and 
slow growing species 
was to be developed 
along both sides of the 
roads and railway siding 
No three tier green 
belt plantation was 
observed.  
CCL 
AKK OCM, platform 1 and 
2 of Jarangdih Railway 
Siding (Kathara OCM) and   
Kargali washery (AKK 
OCM) respectively  
WCL  Gokul OC, Majri II A OC 
and Penganga OC  
3 
Plantation of varieties 
of native species 
including herb, shrubs 
and climbers under 
social forestry and 
natural vegetation in 
core and buffer zones. 
Plantation confined 
only to two 
varieties of species 
CCL 
Piparwar OCM, Rajrappa 
OCM, Kathara OCM and 
AKK OCM 
Records maintained 
indicated that 
plantation did not 
include herbs, 
shrubs and climbers 
ECL Sonepur Bazari and  Jhanjra 
WCL New Majri IIA OC and  
New Majri UG to OC.  
4 
Plantation along the 
river banks to be done 
to avoid soil erosion.  
No plantation cover 
along river banks. CCL Piparwar OCM and Kathara 
OCM 
 
                                                           
33   Dragline is a Heavy Earth Moving Machinery used for removal of OB in the OC mine. 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
40 
There was also no mechanism to monitor and ensure survival of the existing plantations 
in mines of CCL.  
While shifting the onus of survival of the plantati ons on the State Forest department, 
CCL stated (November 2018) that further improvement s would be made in its 
plantation activities. Further developments are awaited (November 2018).  
WCL stated (November 2018) that three tier plantati on was in the process and further 
plantation would be done gradually. 
ECL stated (November 2018) that plantation was bein g carried out by State Forest 
Department and they plant native species as per the ir norms. However, the fact remains 
that these did not conform to the stipulations of EIA-EMP.  
Pic. 11: Para No. 6.3.2, Table No. 14, Sl. No. 01: OB dumps 
without Plantation at Kathara OCP of CCL 
Pic. 12:  Plantation on OB dump at Jayant OCP of NCL 
 
Audit Summation 
In 13 mines across five subsidiaries, though topsoi l was stacked in the earmarked area 
and reported periodically, basic records of topsoil  indicating the quantity and areas of 
stacking were not maintained. As at the end of Marc h 2018, in three mines of WCL, 
although 75.30 lakh cum of topsoil was stacked at e armarked sites, it remained 
unutilised since 2013-14. Audit also observed that Director General of Mines Safety 
suspended (June 2017) operations in a patch of Rajm ahal OCP of ECL as the 
Overburden (OB) benches in coal II and III seams di d not conform to the norms 
specified in the Regulations. DGMS suspended (Janua ry 2017) operations in Quarry 3 
of Sonepur Bazari OCP also as the height of the ben ches of R-VIII coal seam deviated 
from the Regulation. Further, ECL did not set year- wise internal targets for biological 
reclamation of mined out area through plantation ac tivities. Against the de-coaled area 
of 3922.85 ha, MCL biologically reclaimed only 2024 .73 ha (51.61 per cent ) as at the 
end of March 2018. 
  


Report No. 12 of 2019 
41 
CHAPTER  7  
ADHERENCE TO OTHER REGULATORY CONDITIONS 
FOR PROTECTION OF ENVIRONMENT 
Mining companies are required to follow various rul es, regulations and guidelines for 
mine closure activities, fly ash dumping, use of ha zardous wastes, corporate social 
responsibility and directives of State Pollution Control Boards issued from time to time.  
7.1     Closed Mines 
There is a need for closure of mine on completion o f the process of economical 
extraction as mining deposits are exhausted. Planning for mine closure is necessary and 
is to be done systematically so as to ensure safety , post closure monitoring, control of 
safety hazards, decommissioning of infrastructure, closure of entries to the mine, 
management of final voids, reclamation of vegetatio n / forest, financial aspects and 
closure costs.  
A proper mine closure plan aims at leaving the area  safe and not as a burden to the 
society, ensuring that it is a source of sustainabl e livelihood of local community in a 
self-sustaining ecosystem.  
Audit test checked the records relating to closed mines and observed the following: 
7.1.1     Mine Closure Status Reports 
GoI issued (August 2009) guidelines for preparation  of Mine Closure Plan (MCP) and 
stipulated that all coal mine owners, operating the  mines without the approval of MCP, 
obtain approved MCP within a period of one year the re from (by August 2010) or two 
years in advance of mine closure, whichever was ear lier. For mines closed prior to 
August 2009, CIL stipulated (November 2016) that mine closure status reports (MCSR) 
be prepared.   
We observed that for 35 mines of ECL ( Annexure – II ) which were closed between 
April 1946 and July 2009 (including six mines which  were closed prior to 
nationalization), it did not prepare (November 2018) MCSR.    
ECL stated (November 2018) that work relating to MC SR was assigned to CMPDIL in 
May 2018. No reason was found on record for the del ay in entrustment of the work to 
CMPDIL.                                 
  

Report No. 12 of 2019 
42 
7.1.2     Escrow account for mine closure expenses 
For financial assurance of mine closure expenses, a n escrow account was to be opened 
by the subsidiary with a scheduled bank in consulta tion with the Coal Controller 
Organization (CCO) and money equivalent to the expe nses to be covered periodically, 
be deposited at prescribed rates. Up to 80 per cent  of the total amount deposited 
including interest accrued in the escrow account or  the expenditure incurred towards 
progressive mine closure in the past five years, wh ichever is less, could be claimed 
from CCO towards reimbursement of mine closure expenses. 
7.1.2.1     Gorbi mines of NCL was declared (July 1997) as abandoned due to the 
exhaustion of coal reserve. MCP prepared (November 2008) by CMPDIL and approved 
(April 2010) by the BoD of NCL, projected the mine closure expenses to be ` 23.00 
crore. However, no action was initiated by NCL for mine closure on the plea that 
National Green Tribunal (NGT) raised the issue of p roviding an old / abandoned 
mining pit to NTPC for fly ash dumping. The inactio n was not justified as we observed 
that the matter under consideration by NGT did not prevent NCL to undertake mine 
closure activities at Gorbi mines.  
7.1.2.2      In accordance with the Guidelines issued (January 2 013) by the Ministry, 
final MCP along with the details of the updated cos t estimates for various mine closure 
activities and the amount deposited in the Escrow A ccount was to be submitted to the 
Ministry, at least five years before the intended final closure of mine.  
The projected life of Jhingurdah and Kakri mines of  NCL lapsed during 2015-16. Yet 
18.25 million tonnes (MT) of residual coal reserves  were estimated in Jhingurdah  
(8.24 MT) and Kakri (10.01 MT) mines. This required  OB removal to the extent of 
53.77 million cum in Jhingurdah (39.02 million cum)  and Kakri (14.75 million cum). 
The filling of mine void is thus necessitated, ther eby entailing revision of MCP 
originally approved.   
NCL stated (October 2018) that MCP of Jhingurdah pr oject was updated. We observed 
that while MCP relating to Jhingurdah project was u pdated, NCL did not update the 
MCP relating to Kakri project. Further NCL did not deposit the additional amounts 
relating to mine closure expenses of these projects  in the escrow account so far 
(October 2018). 
 
7.1.2.3   We also observed that NCL did not conclude MoU w ith NTPC till January 
2019 for utilizing the abandoned mine void of Gorbi  mines for fly ash dumping as 
discussed in para 7.1.3.1 infra.  Meanwhile, delay in firming up the decision as reg ards 
mine closure resulted in escalation of mine closure  expenses to ` 33.44 crore, imposing 
additional burden to the extent of  ` 10.44 crore. We further observed that NCL did not 
earmark this additional amount required for mine closure.  

Report No. 12 of 2019 
43 
NCL stated (October 2018) that with the proposed fl y ash dumping by NTPC in mine 
voids, the incremental amount for mine closure may not be required. The reply is not 
tenable as it is merely speculative and does not fa ctor in time value of mine closure 
cost, which was originally estimated by CMPDIL as early as in November 2008. 
7.1.2.4 Against amounts deposited by MCL towards mine closu re expenses into the 
designated escrow account in various tranches from time to time, claims amounting to 
` 220.39 crore relating to eight mines 34  were pending settlement as at the end of March 
2018. Of this, claims amounting to  ` 1.93 crore were pending with CCO as at the end 
of March 2018. We observed that out of the residual  amount of ` 218.46 crore, claims 
amounting to ` 67.21 crore was preferred by MCL with CCO during S eptember-
December 2018, while claims amounting to ` 151.25 crore were yet to be forwarded by 
CMPDIL to CCO for settlement and these were pending  for want of related audit 
reports.  
7.1.3     Ecological restoration of closed mine  
A plan for the ecological restoration of the mined out area and for land use was to be 
prepared with details of cost involved. The ToR of MoEF&CC for preparation of EIA-
EMP of the clusters / mines stipulated that the aba ndoned quarries / mined out pits / 
voids relating to pre-nationalization period be pro perly backfilled and biologically 
reclaimed. Filling of mine voids with fly ash has b een considered as one of the viable 
options to the coal companies. Fly ash in bulk quan tity can be utilised in stowing of 
underground mines in lieu of sand and filling up ab andoned open cast mine voids. 
These results in higher percentage of utilization o f fly ash generated which is otherwise 
a major pollutant.   
Fly ash dumping 
7.1.3.1      MOC identified (November 2016) Gorbi mine of N CL for fly ash dumping.  
Vindhyachal Super Thermal Power Station, a unit of NTPC expressed (January 2017) 
its interest to conclude MoU with NCL for utilizing  the abandoned mine void of Gorbi 
mines for fly ash dumping. The Core committee of th e National Green Tribunal (NGT) 
directed (January 2017) NCL to provide closed Gorbi  mine to NTPC for fly ash 
dumping and to complete the process of signing of M OU with NTPC within one month 
i.e. by February 2017.  While evaluating the propos al, DGMS observed (January 2017) 
that safety of operations needed to be exercised an d scientific study along with 
necessary statutory clearances were required to be obtained from MoEF before 
commencement of the ash dumping by the NTPC. We obs erved that NCL concluded 
                                                           
34   Bhubaneswari OCP, Samaleswari OCP, Lakhanpur OCP, Talchar UG, Mandira UG, Belpahari OCM, 
Lilari OCP and Jagannath OCP  

Report No. 12 of 2019 
44 
MoU with NTPC only in January 2019 after lapse of 2 4 months. By virtue of this 
arrangement, NCL shifted the onus of obtaining all statutory clearances before 
commencement of fly ash dumping on NTPC. The delay in concluding MoU by  
24 months, was thus avoidable.  
7.1.3.2      MCL did not adopt a uniform policy for the dum ping of fly ash. It permitted 
Talcher Thermal Power Station (TTPS), a unit of NTP C, to dump fly ash at Jagannath 
OCP and firmed up (February 2011) rates to be paid by TTPS for fly ash dumping. It 
also permitted Bhusan Steel Limited (BSL) to dump 5 .58 lakh cum of fly ash from 
March 2014 to February 2016 at Jagannath OCP for a consideration of 
` 1.23 crore. 
However, no charge was fixed for fly ash dumping by  TTPS at South Balanda mines 
although a subsisting MoU concluded (July 2004) wit h TTPS provided for its review 
arising out of new developments in posterity. This deprived MCL of revenue 
amounting to ` 4.78 crore 35 . 
MCL stated (October 2018) that action would be take n to raise bills on TTPS for fly 
ash dumping in South Balanda mines. Further develop ments are awaited (November 
2018). 
7.1.3.3 Between April 2009 and December 2014, ECL permitted  five thermal power 
plants 
36  to dump 201.26 lakh cum of fly ash in eight abando ned mines 37 , without any 
charges, thereby being deprived of revenue amounting to ` 142.89 lakh 38 .  
7.1.3.4 We also observed that fly ash generated in the proc ess of power generation by 
Kathara Captive Power Plant of CCL was dumped in th e open space, posing 
environmental hazard. CCL stated (November 2018) th at action would be taken to 
utilise the fly ash for filling the mine voids. Fur ther developments are awaited 
(November 2018).  
7.1.3.5 There are different practices followed in subsidia ries towards use of fly ash for 
filling mine voids. While MCL allowed fly ash dumpi ng in their mine voids, 
MoEF&CC imposed (January 2015) restriction on fly a sh utilization in the mine voids 
of ECL. The issues on use of fly ash in coal mines were discussed (July 2016) in a 
meeting held between CIL, CMPDIL and its Ministry w ith MoEF&CC and it was 
concluded that fly ash contained significant quanti ties of hazardous leachable trace 
elements which could contaminate ground water. In a bsence of uniform policy, CIL 
                                                           
35   Calculated for the period from April 2011 to Marc h 2018 at rates prescribed for TTPS for dumping of 
fly ash at Jagannath  mines. 
36   Mejia Thermal Power Station, Durgapur Thermal Pow er Station and Durgapur Steel Thermal Power 
Station of Damodar Valley Corporation, Balaji Construction and Maithon Power Limited 
37   Parascoli (W), Dhandadih, Paracea, Topsi patch, O ld Belbad, J.K.Nagar (Nimcha fire trench), 
Mandman and Lakhimata. 
38   Calculated at the minimum rate of Re.0.71 per cub ic meter charged by Jagannath OCP of MCL 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
45 
stated (November 2018) that NITI Aayog was seized o f the matter and that a 
comprehensive policy was under finalization by them.  
The Ministry also stated (April 2019) that utilizat ion of fly ash in mines involved 
several technical, environmental & safety issues. T his needs addressal in the Fly Ash 
Notification, 2009. The expert committee constitute d in this regard by the NITI Aayog 
has deliberated the issue in detail and proposed th at MoEF&CC should revisit the 
condition stipulated in the existing EC for fly ash  utilization and modify them in 
consonance with the fly ash notification. The circu lar and guidelines of MoEF&CC for 
utilization of fly ash shall be followed by all con cerned. Further developments are 
awaited (April 2019). 
In the Exit Conference, the Ministry stated (May 20 19) that a uniform policy would be 
adopted based on the recommendations of NITI Aayog.  
7.1.3.6   During joint inspection of sampled mines, we foun d that Sheebpur mines 
(closed in 1984) of ECL, was left with a mine void.  We observed that several brick 
kilns operated alongside the mining area. ECL did not initiate action for filling this void 
which offered scope for illegal mining or any accident.  
     
Pic. 13: Para No.7.1.3.6: Mine void at Sheebpur 
closed mine of ECL  
Pic. 14: Para No. 7.1.1: Improper closure of 
Dalmiya UG pit at ECL closed prior to 
nationalisation  
 
7.2     Adherence to Regulatory conditions 
7.2.1  Production in excess of quantities permitted  in CTO  
The EC and FC issued by MoEF&CC permitted the maxim um quantity of coal to be 
extracted from the mines after compliance of variou s measures specified therein. In 
accordance with the Water (Prevention and Control o f Pollution) Act 1974 and section 
31A of Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Ac t 1981 read with clause 3.2 of the 
guidelines, operation of plant or facility prior to  obtaining consent attracted pollution 
charges equivalent to five times the CTE fee.  However, coal could be extracted only to 
the extent quantities permitted under CTE /CTO for each mine, notwithstanding the 
fact that EC permitted higher quantities.  


Report No. 12 of 2019 
46 
Audit test checked the compliance of various statut ory conditions in the 28 sample 
mines and 2 washeries and observed the following: 
7.2.1.1  Sonepur Bazari OCP under ECL was permitted to extr act coal to the extent of 
12 MTPA since March 2016 under the EC granted by Mo EF&CC. However, CTO 
issued by West Bengal State Pollution Control Board  (WBSPCB) in June 2016 
permitted extraction of only 8 MTPA. Yet, Sonepur B azari produced 8.93 MT coal 
during 2016-17 thereby violating the condition in CTO.  
ECL stated (November 2018) that production was with in the permitted quantity under 
EC. The reply is not tenable as the quantity specified in CTO was not to be exceeded.  
7.2.1.2 We observed that MCL did not obtain the requisite c onsent in advance of 
increased production. Consequently, between April 2013 and June 2017, OSPCB levied 
pollution charges amounting to 
` 6.57 crore for production of coal in excess of the  
quantities permitted in the CTE in nine mines 39 . MCL was thus saddled with avoidable 
payment of penal charges which is a pointer to systemic lapse. 
MCL stated (October 2018) that the process of grant  of EC was long drawn and in the 
instant case of nine mines it ranged from 13-76 mon ths and that due to huge demand, 
coal was produced in excess in national interest.  
7.2.2   Production in excess of mining plan 
In accordance with the modified (February 2015) app roved mining plan of Basundhara 
(W) of MCL, 3.0 MT of coal was to be extracted duri ng 2015-16 against which MCL 
produced 3.728 MT. We observed that Deputy Director  of Mines (DDM), Odisha 
levied (June 2017) penalty of 
` 50.97 crore invoking the provisions of the MMDR Ac t. 
We also observed that violation of mining plan was affirmed (August 2017) by the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court and that MCL did not dispute the demand till March 2018. We 
further observed that MCL created (March 2018) a pr ovision of ` 50.97 crore in its 
books for discharge of the liability. 
MCL stated (October 2018) that production in excess  of the mining plan was resorted 
to off-set shortfall in production in other mines.  
7.2.3 Operation of units without EC, CTE and CTO 
The sequence of obtaining Environment Clearance, Co nsent to Establish  and Consent 
to Operate for mines and washeries is discussed in para 1.2.2 supra . We observed that 
as at the end of March 2018, 16  units relating to two subsidiaries comprising of mi nes 
(13) and washeries (3) were being operated without valid EC (9), CTE (1) and CTO (6) 
as follows: 
                                                           
39   Lakhanpur, Samaleswari, Belpahar, Hirakhand Bundi a, Orient 4, Lajkura, Lingaraj, Ananta and 
Orient 3  

Report No. 12 of 2019 
47 
Table 13: Operation of mines/washeies without EC, CTE and CTO in  
BCCL and CCL 
Sl. 
No. Subsidiary 
Operations without 
EC CTE CTO 
Mines Washeries Mines Washeries Mines 
1 BCCL 4 3 - - 2 
2 CCL 2 - 1 - 4 
TOTAL 6 3 140  - 641  
  
Operation of these units as detailed in the Annexure – III  was in violation of the 
regulatory mechanism. As these Units were being ope rated  without obtaining EC, CTE 
and CTO, adequacy of the mitigative measures in vog ue to handle environmental 
pollution as prescribed under various rules / regulations could not be assessed.  
BCCL and CCL accepted (November 2018) the audit obs ervation and stated that 
necessary corrective actions had been taken.  
7.2.4   Infructuous expenditure  
Wild Life Protection Act, 1972 and Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act , 2006, prohibit 
unsustainable use of land within the tiger reserve area. National Environment Policy, 
2006 and CIL’s Policy 2012 are committed to protect  the wild life in compliance of 
Article 48(A) of the Constitution.   
We observed that a proposal which was approved (Mar ch 1988) by the BOD of CCL 
for   Hurilong UG coal project, was rejected (Augus t 1998) by MoEF on the plea that 
the location was in close proximity to the Palamau tiger reserve. Yet, CCL, while 
following up (August 2007) the matter with MoEF&CC,  acquired 6.58 acre non forest 
land and constructed service building, besides equi pping the area with overhead 
electricity transmission line and two inclines - 10 0 metres and 77 metres long for 
mining. These facilities were created at a cost of 
` 2.98 crore.  However, MoEF&CC 
rejected (October 2007) the subsequent proposal als o and hence the expenditure of  
` 2.98 crore was rendered infructuous.      
CCL stated (November 2018) that at present there wa s no activity in the Hurilong UG 
coal project.  
7.3 Hazardous Substance Management 
Hazardous wastes in coal mines include used / spent  oil and wastes / residue containing 
oil arising out of the process of industrial operat ion using mineral / synthetic oil as 
lubricant in hydraulic systems or other application s, chemical sludge from waste water 
                                                           
40   Other than the mines which did not have EC, as this was prerequisite for CTE 
41   Other than the mines which did not have CTE as th is was prerequisite for CTO 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
48 
treatment and oil and grease skimming residue resul ting from the process of 
purification of air, water and waste water.  
Hazardous Wastes (Management, Handling and Trans bo undary Movement) Rules, 
2008, which was in vogue till March 2016, and Hazar dous and other Wastes 
(Management and Trans boundary Movement) Rules, 201 6 (Rules) which was 
applicable thereafter defined hazardous waste as an y waste which could endanger 
health or environment. Their handling, generation, collection, storage, packaging and 
transportation required authorization from the SPCB  under the Rules. The Rules also 
stipulated that these wastes could be stored only up to ninety days. 
7.3.1     Storage and associated risks 
7.3.1.1 As at the end of March 2018, two items of hazardous  wastes were held in stock 
by two subsidiaries for a period exceeding 90 days as detailed below.    
  
Table 14: Storage of hazardous waste in the mines/washery of CCL and MCL 
Sl. 
No. Subsidiary Item of waste Quantity Unit where 
lying 
Period of 
holding 
1 CCL Washery rejects 26 lakh tonnes Kathara washery Over  13 years 
Burnt / Used oil 227.54 KL Rajrappa OCM Exceeding 9 0 days 
2 MCL Burnt / Used oil 101.59 KL Bharatpur mine Exceeding 90 days 
We observed that MCL stored burnt / used oil in exc ess of the authorised quantities 
(62 KL). We further observed that as at the end of March 2018, eight 42  mines and two 
washeries of three subsidiaries handled hazardous w astes without obtaining the 
authorization from the respective SPCBs.  Besides, while Basundhara (W) handled the 
hazardous waste without authorization from OSPCB fr om April 2014 to September 
2017, Lakhanpur handled them without authorization from April 2015 to February 
2017. We further observed that Basundhara (W) did n ot initiate advance action for 
renewal of authorization for handling hazardous was tes during the above period and 
that the application was filed with OSPCB only in April / September 2017.  
MCL stated (October 2018) that actions had been tak en for auctioning of burnt oil. 
CCL accepted (November 2018) the fact and stated th at necessary actions would be 
taken for early disposal of old rejects and burnt o il. Further developments are awaited 
(November 2018). 
7.3.1.2     Under clause 23 of Hazardous Waste (Management,  Handling and 
Transboundary Movement) Rules 2016, the subsidiaries were to obtain insurance cover 
as contemplated under Section 4 of the Public Liabi lity Insurance Act, 1991, as a 
safeguard against liability for damages caused to t he environment or third party due to 
                                                           
42   Kathara OCM (including washery) of CCL, Sonepur Bazari, Jhanjra, Dabor and Kunustoria of ECL, 
DBOCP, Putki Balihari and Moonidih mines (till July 2017) and Bhojudih Washery of  BCCL. 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
49 
improper handling and management of hazardous and o ther wastes. We observed that 
NCL and SECL did not handle the hazardous wastes in  excess of the prescribed limits 
and hence did not attract the provisions of the Rul es. However, none of the other 
subsidiaries complied with this and thus remained e xposed to risks. MCL stated 
(October 2018) that the projects were directed to comply with the provisions of the Act. 
Further developments are awaited (November 2018). 
7.3.2 Under recovery of burnt oil  
Lubricating oil is used in the engines of HEMM deployed for extraction of coal. During 
the course of oil change and maintenance, the used oil (burnt oil) is drained out. A 
Committee constituted (November 2014) by NCL for fi xing the norms for recovery of 
burnt oil recommended equipment-wise rates of recovery.   
The equipment-wise norms prescribed for recovery of  burnt oil and the actual recovery 
during the period from 2014-18 in three mines (Niga hi, Khadia and Jayant) were as 
follows: 
Table 15 : Status of recovery of burnt oil in NCL 
                                                  (All figures in percentage)  
Equipment Norm 
Actual  recovery Mines in which under 
recovery was observed Minimum Maximum 
Dumper 50 19.76 43.24 Nigahi 
Dozer 37 14.94 34.32 Nigahi and Khadia 
Dragline 29   1.12 14.39 Jayant and Khadia 
Drill 27 10.19 24.47 Nigahi and Khadia 
Shovel 17   2.57 15.10 Jayant and Khadia  
While confirming (October 2018) that scope existed for minimizing oil leakage, NCL 
stated that the HEMMs deployed exceeded their technically estimated life. NCL further 
stated that action was on hand to replace the HEMMs  which outlived their life so as to 
arrest leakage of burnt oil and prevent its ill-eff ects due to contamination. Further 
developments are awaited (November 2018).  
7.3.3 Payment of water cess at higher rates  
As per the provisions of the Cess Act, water cess a t rates specified was collected for 
utilization for the purposes specified in the Act, ibid. Compliance with the standards 
laid down by GoI under EP Act, 1986 entitled the co nsumer for payment of water cess 
at concessional rates. We observed that MCL failed to install meters as stipulated  
under the Cess Act and to submit waste water analys is report and hence could not avail 
of concessional rates of cess. The saving it had to  forego on account of this  
non-compliance was in the amount of  
` 2.48 crore during 2013-18 as detailed in 
Annexure – IV. 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
50 
MCL accepted (October 2018) the audit observation a nd stated that no water cess was 
paid from July 2017 due to abolition of the relevant Act.  
7.4 Corporate Social Responsibility 
Mining of coal has adverse impact on the ecosystem and biodiversity in and around the 
areas where the mines are in operation. Therefore, projects need to be designed on the 
principle of sustainable development with due consi deration for environment, 
conservation, safety, quality and aspirations of th e community around it. Expenditure 
on CSR is required to be incurred for activities re lating to protection and safeguard of 
environment and for maintaining ecological balance.  
In accordance with the specific condition of EC gra nted by the MoEF&CC to 
subsidiaries, five rupees per tonne of coal produce d was to be earmarked for activities 
under CSR. The amount was to be spent for community  development under CSR 
activities. We observed that the subsidiaries colle ctively expended only 41 per cent  of 
the overall amount mandated by MoEF&CC during 2013-18.  
The shortfall in actual expenses across subsidiarie s ranged between 40 per cent  and 87 
per cent  as detailed below:          
Table 16: Shortfall in actual CSR expenses against mandated by MoEF&CC  
                  (`` `` in crore) 
Subsidiary CSR  mandated 
by MoEF&CC 
Actual CSR 
Expenses 
Shortfall 
(2) – (3) 
Percentage of 
(4) to (2) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
BCCL 86.33 51.99 34.34 40 
CCL 43  32.96 13.11 19.85 60 
ECL 44  62.60 21.26 41.34 66 
MCL 45  59.95 22.63 37.32 62 
NCL 46  54.80 30.58 24.22 44 
SECL 47  193.51 63.16        130.35 67 
WCL 48  14.21  1.78 12.43 87 
TOTAL 504.36 204.51 299.85 59 
 
BCCL stated (November 2018) that its CSR expenses w ere based on corporate 
budgetary allocations. CCL, ECL and SECL stated (No vember 2018) that provision for 
CSR expenses was made in the books at two per cent  of average net profits for the 
immediate preceding three financial years as mandated under the Companies’ Act 2013. 
CCL further stated that project-wise allocation of CSR fund was not made.  MCL and 
                                                           
43   Piparwar OCM  and AKK OCM 
44   Except Rajmahal and Kalidaspur 
45   Lakhanpur (May 2014) and Lingaraj (November 2015)  mines 
46   Nigahi and Bina mines 
47   Gevra, Kusmunda and Dipka mines (2014-15 onwards)  
48   Majri, Wani and Umrer Areas 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
51 
NCL stated (October 2018) that their overall corpor ate expenses under CSR exceeded 
the budgeted amount during 2013-18. WCL stated (Oct ober 2018) that their overall 
corporate expenses under CSR exceeded the amount ma ndated by MoEF&CC. The 
Ministry also endorsed (April 2019) the views of the Managements.  
In the Exit Conference, the Ministry stated (May 2019) that even if a subsidiary was not 
obliged as per financial parameters provided in the  Company’s Act 2013, the CIL 
policy on CSR provided for CSR funding @ Rs.2.0 per  tonne. Additionally, CIL also 
deposited fund under District Mineral Fund (DMF) fo r expenditure on development of 
local area which also had CSR activities in its envelope.   
The above contentions  are not tenable as the point  at issue is the shortfall in CSR 
expenses at specific mines mandated by MoEF&CC with out reference to the 
Companies’ Act / consolidated budgetary allocations  under CSR. Further, the principle 
of sustainable community development around specifi c mines is to be duly considered 
for which the expenses under CSR was mandated by Mo EF&CC so as to avoid 
lopsided development.  
 
Audit Summation 
35 mines of ECL which were closed between April 194 6 and July 2009 (including six 
mines which were closed prior to nationalization), did not have Mine Closure Status 
Report. Fly ash generated in the process of power generation by Kathara Captive Power 
Plant of CCL was dumped in the open space, posing e nvironmental hazard. In MCL, 
Deputy Director of Mines, Odisha levied (June 2017) penalty of ` 50.97 crore invoking 
the provisions of MMDR Act for production of coal i n excess of the mine plan. As at 
the end of March 2018, 16  units relating to two subsidiaries comprising mines  (13) and 
washeries (3) were being operated without valid Env ironment Clearance (EC in 9 
units), Consent to Establish (CTE in 1 unit) and Co nsent to Operate (CTO in 6 units). 
Consequently, the adequacy of the mitigative measur es in vogue to handle 
environmental pollution as prescribed under various  rules / regulations could not be 
assessed. EC for Hurilong Underground (UG) coal pro ject which was in close 
proximity to the Palamau tiger reserve, was rejecte d (August 1998) by MoEF. In 
advance  of  obtaining the EC, CCL acquired and des troyed 6.58 acre non forest land 
and constructed infrastructural facilities at a cos t of ` 2.98 crore, which rendered 
infructuous. Further, MCL did not install meters and submit waste water analysis report 
as stipulated under the Cess Act and hence could not avail of concessional rates of cess. 
  

Report No. 12 of 2019 
52 
CHAPTER 8 
REHABILITATION AND RESETTLEMENT FOR MINE 
FIRE  
The problems of subsidence and fires of Raniganj co alfields (RCF) and Jharia 
coalfields (JCF), presently under ECL and BCCL resp ectively, are the result of 
unscientific mining carried out by the erstwhile mi ne owners over more than 200 years 
of operations prior to nationalization.  The popula tion living in the old mining areas 
increased unabated over the years though these area s were declared unsafe for 
habitation by the local administration.  A High Lev el Committee was set up (December 
1996) by the Ministry by co-opting members from the  Ministry, other government 
departments, coal companies and the concerned State  Governments to deal with the 
problem of fire, subsidence and rehabilitation. Bas ed on the recommendations of the 
Committee, GoI approved (August 2009) a Master Plan  to deal with fire, subsidence 
and rehabilitation and diversion of surface infrast ructure within the leasehold areas of 
ECL and BCCL at an estimated investment of ` 9773.84 crore for coalfields of 
Raniganj ( ` 2661.73 crore) and Jharia ( ` 7112.11 crore). The salient features of the 
approved Master plan are indicated in Annexure  V. 
While ECL and BCCL were notified as the Implementin g Agencies for handling fire 
projects and rehabilitation / resettlement of their  employees and their families from the 
unsafe areas of Raniganj and Jharia coalfields resp ectively, Governments of West 
Bengal and Jharkhand were to rehabilitate and resettle others (including encroachers) in 
their respective provincial jurisdiction.   
8.1    Implementation of Master Plans  
8.1.1  Raniganj Master Plan 
ECL shifted the families of all employees from unst able locations.  The task relating to 
rehabilitation of non-ECL families was taken up by Government of West Bengal 
(GoWB) through Asansol Durgapur Development Authori ty (ADDA), its 
administrative agency. ECL also conducted meetings with representatives of ADDA to 
emphasise timely elimination of constraints hinderi ng the implementation of 
rehabilitation programme. 
8.1.2  Jharia Master Plan 
We observed the following shortcomings in the imple mentation of fire projects by 
BCCL and rehabilitation of the families of its employees. 
  

Report No. 12 of 2019 
53 
• Even after lapse of nine years since JMP was approv ed, BCCL did not 
formulate fire fighting activities as envisaged in the JMP. Firefighting activities 
commenced only in 25 projects (as against 45 projec ts identified), thereby 
endangering the lives of the people residing in and  around the fire area, besides 
impacting the environment adversely. 
• Although JMP recommended adoption of excavation and  back filling technique 
only in six projects, BCCL adopted it in all 25 pro jects thereby deviating from 
the JMP for which no reasons were found on record. National Remote Sensing 
Centre, Hyderabad reported that the quantum of surf ace fire which covered an 
area of 2.018 sq. km in 2014, expanded to 3.28 squa re km in 2018 due to 
excavation. We also observed that the extent of und erground fire was not 
assessed. BCCL stated (November 2018) that it did n ot have the expertise to 
assess it. We further observed BCCL did not explore  the possibility of hiring 
other agencies to assess the extent of underground fire so far (November 2018). 
Pic. 15 & 16: Para No. 8.1.2: Mine fire at Jharia of BCCL 
• 70011 quarters 49  (originally assessed as 79159 quarters but subsequ ently 
reduced due to reduction of manpower on the rolls o f BCCL) were to be 
constructed in identified non-coal bearing area. Ag ainst this, the status as at the 
end of November 2018 was as follows. 
  
                                                           
49   Including 15852 quarters for employees and 54159 quarters for others 


Report No. 12 of 2019 
54 
Table 17: Status of occupancy of quarters in BCCL under JMP 
 
 
 
 
Out of the quarters constructed, only 6668 quarters  (87 per cent ) were allotted 
to its employees. No action was taken to allot the residual 971 quarters. Further 
49 per cent  of quarters allotted to employees were lying vacan t. Thus 
infrastructural facilities for resettlement created at a cost of 
` 51.35 crore 52  were 
lying idle. The slow pace of progress in the implem entation of JMP exposed the 
inhabitants to the threat of subsidence and other environmental hazards. 
• The stretch of National Highway 32 (NH) between Put ki and Godhur, passing 
over coal bearing fire affected area was to be hand ed over to BCCL on lease 
under JMP as decided (November 2009) by Government of Jharkhand to 
facilitate excavation of coal. Meanwhile, as an int erim measure, an alternate 
route was to be developed and its cost was to be bo rne by BCCL. Although 
BCCL deposited (February 2012) ` 19.85 crore towards this with the JRDA, it 
did not obtain possession of the stretch of NH betw een Putki and Godhur so far 
(November 2018).  
Rehabilitation of encroachers and private legal tit le holders was taken up by 
Government of Jharkhand through JRDA.   
 
Audit Summation 
BCCL did not formulate fire fighting activities as envisaged in Jharia Master Plan. Fire 
fighting activities commenced only in 25 projects ( as against 45 projects identified). 
The fires thus continued to endanger the lives of t he people residing in and around the 
fire area, besides adversely impacting the environment. 
 
                                                           
50   to be constructed by BCCL 
51   to be constructed by Jharia Rehabilitation and De velopment Authority (JRDA) 
52   Total   cost of 5576 quarters= ` 294.86 crore Total   cost of 971 unallotted quarters (on average basis) 
=` 294.86*971/5576= ` 51.35 crore  
Sl. No. Quarters For  
Total Employees 50  Others 51  
1 To be constructed 15852 54159 70011 
2 Actually constructed 7639 6352 13991 
3 Percentage of (2) to (1)     48      12       20 
4 Actually occupied 3366 2122    5488 
5 Percentage of (4) to (2)     44    33     39 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
55 
CHAPTER 9 
MONITORING OF ENVIRONMENTAL ACTIVITIES 
 
9.1     Environment Management Cell  
A mine can be started after obtaining various clearances and permissions from different 
statutory bodies. Once the mining activities are ma de operational, various pollution 
control and mitigation measures and other activitie s are required to be undertaken as 
per the EMP, EC, FC and CTE and CTO. To ensure that  the compliance mechanism is 
fully and effectively operational, it is necessary that the mitigation measures required 
for control of pollution are appropriately monitore d at different levels. Environment 
Management Cell plays an important role in this regard.  
9.1.1  MoEF&CC, while granting EC to projects, stipulated  a separate Environment 
Management Cell (EMC) comprising of qualified perso nnel directly reporting to the 
HQ to be set up. Accordingly CIL and subsidiaries set up EMCs.   
In CIL, we observed that, while deployment of Execu tives 53  exceeded the sanctioned 
strength at HQ in all the years, it fell short in i ts mines, during the period 2013-18 as 
detailed below: 
Table 18: Deployment of Executives in CIL HQ and NEC Mines 
 
From the above, it is evident that deployment was s kewed towards CIL HQ. While 
excess deployment was observed in CIL HQ, NEC mines  experienced shortage of 
Executives.  
  
                                                           
53   Q ualified personnel deployed as Executives as per EC stipulations .  
54   4 mines of  North Eastern Coalfields under the control of CIL   
Year 
CIL HQ  NEC mines 54  Total 
Percentage 
of excess/ 
shortage(-) 
with 
respect to 
sanctioned 
strength 
Sanctioned 
strength 
Men in 
position  
Sanctioned 
strength 
Men in 
position  
Sanctioned 
strength 
Men in 
position  
HQ  Mines  
2013-14 5 7 2 0 7 7 40 (-)100 
2014-15 5 6 3 2 8 8 20 (-)33 
2015-16 5 6 3 2 8 8 20 (-)33 
2016-17 5 8 3 1 8 9 60 (-)67 
2017-18 5 11 3 2 8 13 120 (-)33 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
56 
CIL justified (November 2018) the deployment of Exe cutives in excess of the 
sanctioned strength in its HQ on the plea that the scope of work considerably increased 
over the years and that the incumbents handled othe r assignments not related to 
environment also. The reply confirms the fact that CIL did not rationalise its manpower 
requirements to keep pace with its increased respon sibilities and reassessed the 
sanctioned strength. Further, the manpower was alwa ys deficient in the mines/projects 
and was not proportional to the increased scope of work, thus having an adverse impact 
on monitoring environmental activities, as discussed in preceding paragraphs. 
9.1.2    We observed inconsistencies in deployment of man power for environmental 
activities in the seven subsidiaries of CIL as depicted in the following table: 
Table 19: Deployment of Executives in Subsidiary HQs and Mines (March 2018) 
Sl. 
No. Subsidiary  Sanctioned strength Actual deployment  Variation 55  
Percentage 
of excess 
deployment  
HQ Mines Total HQ Mines Total 
1 BCCL NA NA NA 12 27 39 - - 
2 CCL NA NA 29 8 13 21 (8) - 
3 ECL NA NA 33 9 21 30 (3) - 
4 MCL 3 32 35 9 41 50 15  43 
5 NCL NA NA 5 8 17 25 20 400 
6 SECL 8 17 25 5 25 30  5  20 
7 WCL NA NA 10 11 21 32 22 220 
While BCCL did not assess and fix the sanctioned st rength of Executives required for 
its environmental activities either in the HQ or in  the mines, four 56  other subsidiaries 
did not assess the strength of Executives required for deployment in the mines. Separate 
sanctioned strength for the HQ and mines were avail able in MCL and SECL. In MCL, 
deployment of Executives in the HQ (9) and in mines  (41) exceeded the respective 
sanctioned strength by 200 per cent  and 28 per cent  respectively. In SECL, deployment 
of Executives in the HQ (5) fell short of the sanct ioned strength by 38 per cent  while at 
mines (25) it exceeded the sanctioned strength by 4 7 per cent . The overall excess 
deployment of Executives in four subsidiaries range d between 20 per cent  and 400 per 
cent  of their sanctioned strength. These are indicative  of the fact that the subsidiaries 
also did not assess their manpower requirements rat ionally and there was no uniform 
policy for deployment of manpower in the EMC. 
                                                           
55   Figures in the brackets indicate shortage in deployment 
56   CCL, ECL, NCL and WCL  

Report No. 12 of 2019 
57 
The subsidiaries stated (October / November 2018) t hat the tasks under the 
Environment department were multi-disciplinary in n ature and hence manpower of 
other disciplines was utilised. The reply confirms the fact that the sanctioned strength 
of Environment department required rationalization.  The subsidiaries further stated 
(November 2018) that action would be taken to ratio nalise the sanctioned strength. 
Further developments are awaited (November 2018). 
9.2  Absence of adequate monitoring mechanism 
MoEF&CC, through its EC conditions, directed from t ime to time that to ensure proper 
checks and balances the subsidiaries need to have well laid down system of reporting.  
Audit observed from the records of MCL and NCL that  the reports prepared by 
CMPDIL based on the samples taken from the mines we re forwarded to the subsidiary 
HQ and concerned Area Offices. In case of any abnor mal deviations found in the 
report, necessary instructions were communicated by  the subsidiary HQ to the 
concerned Area Office for taking necessary remedial  measures. However, such records 
for taking actions based on the reports of CMPDIL w ere not found available to audit in 
other subsidiaries of CIL.  
We also observed that while the quality parameters relating to air and water were being 
monitored on fortnightly basis, the reports were pr epared by CMPDIL and reported to 
the subsidiaries on quarterly 
57  basis, thereby offering no scope for initiating re medial 
measures on the basis of adverse quarterly readings recorded.    
We further observed that third party audit of envir onment department was not 
conducted for evaluation of its environmental activities. Besides, several good practices 
which were in vogue in some subsidiaries were not d isseminated for adoption by the 
other subsidiaries. Further, the general superinten dence exercised   by CIL on the 
subsidiaries and by the subsidiary HQs on the mines  in the field of manpower 
deployment, project monitoring and adherence to env ironmental norms / stipulations 
was also not found uniform and effective.  
We observed weaknesses in the monitoring mechanism as regards adherence to 
pollution control measures, execution of works, mit igation of identified threats and 
safety measures as discussed in paras 4.1, 4.2, 4.4, 4.6, 4.9, 5.10 and 6.2 supra.   
 
 
 
 
                                                           
57   In MCL, it is on monthly basis. 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
58 
Audit Summation 
The deployment of Executives exceeded the sanctioned strength at CIL Headquarters in 
all the years but it fell short at mines, during th e period 2013-18.  There were 
inconsistencies in deployment of manpower for envir onmental activities in the 
subsidiaries also . Further, though the quality parameters relating to air and water were 
being monitored on fortnightly basis, the reports w ere prepared by Central Mine 
Planning and Design Institute Limited and reported to the subsidiaries on quarterly 
basis, thereby offering no scope for initiating remedial measures on the basis of adverse 
fortnightly readings recorded. Besides, the general  superintendence exercised   by CIL 
on the subsidiaries and by the subsidiary HQs on th e mines in the field of manpower 
deployment, project monitoring and adherence to env ironmental norms / stipulations 
was also not found uniform and effective. 
  

Report No. 12 of 2019 
59 
CHAPTER 10 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
10.1 CONCLUSIONS: 
1.  Six out of its seven coal producing subsidiaries of  CIL did not have a Corporate 
Environment Policy approved by their respective Boa rd of Directors as 
mandated by MoEF&CC. Further, guidelines containing  the responsibility and 
delegation of powers of different levels in the Env ironmental wing was not 
dovetailed by the subsidiaries as a Manual to serve  as a guide in the operations 
in specific mines under their control. 
2.  Despite adopting various clean coal technologies fo r mitigating air, water and 
land related pollution, many instances of non-compl iance of the environmental 
regulations have been observed in CIL and its subsidiaries. 
3.  Due to absence of uniform policy, different practic es are followed in coal 
subsidiaries as regards use of fly ash for filling mine voids.  
4.  The subsidiaries produced coal in excess of the qua ntities permitted under CTO 
and mining plan, besides operating without EC, CTE and CTO. CCL ventured 
into mining by destroying forest and constructing b uilding in the vicinity of 
Palamau tiger reserve without environmental clearance.   
5.  The subsidiaries collectively expended only 41 per cent  of the overall amount 
mandated by MoEF&CC on CSR during 2013-18. The shor tfall in actual 
expenses across subsidiaries ranged between 40 per cent  and 87 per cent , 
thereby impeding the process of sustainable communi ty development around 
specific mines.  
6.  Against 45 identified fire projects under the Jhari a Master Plan for resettlement 
/ rehabilitation, firefighting activities commenced  only in 25 projects. Neither 
did BCCL have the expertise to assess the extent of  underground fire nor did it 
avail of the services of experts. National Remote S ensing Centre reported that 
the quantum of surface fire which covered an area o f 2.018 sq. km in 2014, 
expanded to 3.28 square km in 2018, thereby endange ring the lives of the 
people residing in and around the fire area besides  impacting the environment 
adversely.  
7.  There was no progress in the implementation of the solar project although CIL 
projected to set up 1000 MW by March 2019.  Besides , the envisaged 
environmental benefits by switching over to solar power also did not fructify.   

Report No. 12 of 2019 
60 
8.  There is no consistency among CIL and its subsidiar ies for determining 
sanctioned strength vis-à-vis deployment of environ ment executives in their 
mines and HQs.  
9.  The monitoring mechanism in the subsidiaries and th e oversight role played by 
CIL were found to be inadequate. Third party audit of environment department 
was not conducted for evaluation of its environment al activities in all the 
subsidiaries. 
10.2 RECOMMENDATIONS: 
We recommend that: 
1.  The companies under coal sector may put in place an  Environment Policy 
duly approved by their respective BoD as mandated by MoEF&CC.  
2.  The subsidiaries may adopt two pronged strategy for  pollution control. The 
capital works relating to pollution control measure s may be completed 
expeditiously. The plantation works may also be tak en up simultaneously 
and aggressively to increase green cover and restor e ecological balance in 
and around the mines.  
3.  CIL should frame uniform and scientific policy towards use of fly ash in the 
mines so as to ensure environmental sustainability. 
4.  Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) expenses may be dovetailed to 
ensure sustainable community development around spe cific mines as 
mandated under EC so as to avoid lopsided development. 
5.  Remedial actions for mitigation and arresting the a dverse impact of 
subsidence and fire at Jharia Coalfields on the env ironment may be 
expedited. 
6.  Implementation of solar power project may be put on  fast track so that the 
environmental benefits fructify as envisaged.   
7.  Manpower in the Environment Department of CIL and subsidiaries may also 
be rationalised and Environmental Manual be formulated to serve as a guide 
in the operations in specific mines under their control. 
8.  The monitoring mechanism in the subsidiaries may be  strengthened by 
streamlining the existing reporting process for mai ntaining neutrality and to 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
61 
ensure proper checks and balances in the system of compliance mechanism. 
The oversight role of CIL be directed to ensure com pliance to prescribed 
environmental standards.  
9. Deficiencies observed in mitigation of environmenta l pollution were based 
on audit of sample mines which may be reviewed in o ther mines to ensure 
compliance of environmental rules and regulations.   
Ministry of Coal accepted the recommendations and s tated that these 
recommendations would be applicable to entire coal sector which included 
companies other than CIL also and assured to take appropriate action. 
 
 
 
 
 (VENKATESH MOHAN) 
New Delhi Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General 
Dated: (Commercial) 
 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
New Delhi (RAJIV MEHRISHI) 
Dated: Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexures 
  

 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
63 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
(Ref: Para 6.3.1) 
 
MAHANADI COAL FIELDS LIMITED 
 
DETAILS OF INTERNAL TARGET FIXED FOR BIOLOGICAL REC LAMATION AND 
ACTUAL ACHIEVEMENT DURING 2014-18 
Year 
Target Fixed Actual Achievement Percentage of 
achievement No. of 
saplings 
Area to be 
covered (Ha) No. of saplings Area to be 
covered (Ha) 
2014-15 251764 100.71 118733 47.49 47.16 
2015-16 115800 46.32 172742 69.09 149.17 
2016-17 263555 105.42 138540 55.41 52.57 
2017-18 300275 120.11 270752 108.30 90.17 
Total  931394 372.56 700767 280.29 75.24 
 
NORTHERN COAL FIELDS LIMITED 
TARGET AND ACTUAL BIOLOGICAL RECLAMATION FOR NIGAHI , BLOCK-B AND 
KHADIA MINES FOR THE PERIOD FROM 2013-18 
Target Fixed for / in Actual 
Achievement 
Percentage of 
achievement 
Area Source Area (Ha) No of 
plants 
Area 
(Ha) 
No of 
plants 
Area 
(Ha) 
No of 
plants 
Nigahi EIA/EMP 236.8 994560 101.29 319695 42.77 32. 14 
Block-B58 Land Reclamation 
Plan 
77.88 275000 58.28 178000 74.83 64.73 
Khadia59 EIA/EMP 149.2 523400 43 117500 28.82 22.45 
TOTAL 463.88 1792960 202.57 615195 43.67 34.31 
                                                           
58   No target in terms of area as well as plantation during 2016-17 in case of Block-B 
59  For the year 2013-14 and 2014-15, no plantation was done against the target fixed for Khadia Project. 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
64 
Annexure –II 
(Ref: Para 7.1.1) 
 
DETAILS OF MINES OF ECL WITHOUT APPROVED MINE CLOSU RE STATUS REPORT 
 
Sl. No. Name of the mine Month /Year of closure 
1 Banksimulia 7&8 1974-75 
2 Rana 1989 
3 Gourangdi UG Closed before nationalization 
4 Khoirabad October 2005 
5 B.Dhemo/Ramjibanpur 1946-47 
6 Dalmiya OC 1995 
7 Kendra 1998 
8 Dalmiya UG Closed before nationalization 
9 Damra April1997 
10 Sanctoria 1971 
11 Shampur A 1996-97 
12 Seetalpur 1971 
13 Deoli 1965 
14 Belrui Dishergarh 1976 
15 Beldanga UG 1994-95 
16 Jorekuri UG 1995-96 
17 Bhanora 1996-97 
18 Jpalasthali UG 1992-93 
19 Kankartala 3 & 4 November 1998 
20 Kakartala 1&2 November 1998 
21 Sripur 1998 
22 Toposi UG 1998-99 
23 Toposi OC 2008 
24 Madhujore UG February 2001 
25 Krishnanagar 2001 
26 Palasthali OC 1993-94 
27 Pariharpur UG 1993-94 
28 Central Jamuria January 1986 
29 Ranipur 1986 
30 Sangramgarh July 2009 
31 Sangramgarh OC August 2008 
32 Sheebpur OC 1984 
33 Jamuria 1996 
34 Poidih OC 1999 
35 Kasta UG 1992-93 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
65 
Annexure – III 
(Ref: Para 7.2.3) 
 
DETAILS OF UNITS BEING OPERATED WITHOUT EC/ CTE / C TO 
 
 
 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Subsidiary Mine / Washery Operating without EC/ CTE/ 
CTO 
1 BCCL Gaslitand OCP EC 
2 BCCL Dobari OCP EC 
3 BCCL Damagoria OCP EC 
4 BCCL Kusunda OC EC 
5 BCCL Bhojudih Washery EC 
6 BCCL Dugda  Washery EC 
7 BCCL Mahuda  Washery EC 
8 CCL Giridih OCM EC 
9 CCL Kabribad OCM EC 
10 CCL Kathara OCM CTE 
11 BCCL Gaslitand OCP CTO 
12 BCCL Godhur OCP CTO 
13 CCL Kathara OCM CTO 
14 CCL Kargali OCM CTO 
15 CCL Bokaro colliery CTO 
16 CCL Kabribad OCM CTO 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
66 
Annexure-IV 
(Ref: Para 7.3.3) 
 
STATEMENT OF FOREGONE SAVINGS ON PAYMENT OF WATER C ESS 
 
(Amount in Rupees) 
Water Cess paid by the areas of MCL 
Mine Year 
2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18 
Ananta 198142 171625 211531 77916 85027 
Bharatpur 338660 500552 526331 418055 337650 
Bharatpur 239548 0 0 0 0 
Belpahar 470069 49178 228245 2917081 1004681 
Bhubaneswari 0 2964812 136901 0 0 
Balaram 0 4311292 870400 840883 908916 
Basundhara 103491 33983 140045 500653 328532 
Deulbera 225940 184830 241560 243380 74420 
Handidhua 293603 244535 319079 365993 98136 
Hirakhand 107661 37957 54594 27614 141376 
Himgiri 168835 13059 40047 6510 0 
Hingula 312036 181804 142455 300084 164485 
IB Valley 82681 62520 75659 7022 0 
IWSS Lingaraj 288900 317276 581751 411750 0 
IWSS Talcher 37800 0 0 0 201150 
IWSS Belpahar 170185 74710 94240 9610 0 
Jaganath 124664 89840 162324 156813 83968 
Kulda 0 0 2194736 938142 0 
Lajkura 296366 128753 478942 895581 224740 
Lakhanpur 557472 682361 1061594 2131044 2316701 
Lingaraj 329542 321897 140288 952251 185146 
Lilari 306487 214831 384693 66858 0 
Nandira 704183 407919 246657 686780 183380 
Orient1,11 174129 169344 189023 29226 266352 
Orient111 247153 184899 240460 34162 326074 
Orient IV 151840 151491 176549 17496 202883 
Samaleswari 256173 266105 523921 511673 216224 
Talcher 543120 452352 498480 669079 181536 
Total 6728680 12217925 9960505 13215656 7531377 
Grand Total Water Cess at 
enhanced rate (a) 
49654143 
Cess at normal rate (b) 24827072 
Savings Foregone (a-b) 24827072 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
67 
Annexure-V 
(Ref: Chapter 8) 
 
Salient Features of Approved Master Plan for Raniganj Coalfields and Jharia Coalfields 
 
Sl. No. Particulars of the different 
components of Master Plan 
RCF (ECL)  JCF (BCCL)  
A Dealing with fire     
1 Total no. of existing fires 7 67 (under 45 fire 
projects) 
2 Estimated Cost (` in crore) 40.28 2311.5 
B Rehabilitation     
1 No. of sites to be Rehabilitated 139 595 
2 Area affected in sq.km 8.62 25.69 
3 No. of houses to be 
vacated/rehabilitated 
    
i) BCCL (taking into account 
superannuation) 
- 44155/25000 
ii) Private (Authorised) - 29444 
iii) Encroachers (Unauthorised) - 23847 
iv) Others 0 868 
 Total no. of houses 33196 98314/79159 
 Poputation covered 180263 395795 
4 Land required for rehabilitation (Ha) 896.29 1504.99 
5 Estimated Cost (` in crore) 2610.1 4780.6 
C Diversion of Railway line/Road/OC 
Pipeline 
7 sites Planning and survey 
with an outlay of ` 
20 crore 
 Estimated Cost (` in crore) 11.35 20 
D Implementing Agency for fire 
projects & rehabilitaion of 
BCCL/ECL houses 
ECL BCCL 
E Implementing Agency for 
rehabilitation of Non-BCCL/ECL 
houses - Private & Encrochers Govt. 
of WB 
Asansol 
Durgapur 
Development 
Authority 
(ADDA) 
Jharia Rehabilitation 
& Development 
Authority (JRDA) of 
Govt. of Jharkhand 
F Implementation schedule, years 10 (in two 
phases each of 5 
years) 
10 (in two phases 
each of 5 years) + 2 
years for pre-
implementation 
phase 
G Estimated Capital Requirement for 
fire projects/rehabilitation & 
diversion of rail/road/pipeline etc.  
(` in crore) 
2661.73 7112.11 
 
 
 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
68 
List of References 
 
1. National Environment Policy of India.  
2. Mines Act, 1952, Coal Mines Regulations 1957 (Revis ed in 2017) and Mines 
and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act (MMDR Act), 1957 and 2015. 
3. Land Acquisition Act 2013 and the Coal Bearing Area s (Acquisition and 
Development) Act, 1957 (CBA Act). 
4. Forest Conservation Act 1980 and related Rules & Regulation. 
5. Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 , Water (Prevention and 
Control), Act, 1974 and Biological Diversity Act, 2002. 
6. Standard ToR for Coal Mining & Washeries issued by MoEF&CC. 
7. Hazardous Wastes (Management, Handling and Transbou ndary Movement) 
Rules, 2008 and Hazardous and Other Wastes (Management and Transboundary 
Movement) Rules, 2016. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
69 
List of Abbreviations 
 
Abbreviation Full Form 
ADDA Asansol Durgapur Development Authority 
BG Bank Guarantee 
BIS Bureau of Indian Standards 
BoD Board of Directors 
BOD Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
BSL Bhusan Steel Limited 
CAAQMS Continuous Ambient Air Quality Monitoring St ation 
CBA Act Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and Development) Act, 1957 
CEP Corporate Environment Policy 
CGWA Central Ground Water Authority 
CHP Coal Handling Plant 
CIL Coal India Limited 
CIMFR Central Institute of Mining and Fuel Research 
COD Chemical Oxygen Demand 
CPCB Central Pollution Control Board 
CSE Centre for Science and Environment 
CSIR Council of Scientific Industrial Research  
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
CTE Consent to Establish  
CTO Consent to Operate 
DDM Deputy Director of Mines 
DGMS Director General of Mines Safety 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
EAC Expert Appraisal Committee 
EC Environment Clearance 
EIA Environment Impact Assessment 
EMC Environment Management Cell 
EMP Environment Management Plan 
EP Act Environment Protection Act, 1986 
FC Forest Clearance 
GoI Government of India 
GoWB Government of West Bengal 
GST Goods & Services Tax 
HEMM Heavy Earth Moving Machineries 
IIT BHU Indian Institute of Technology, Banaras Hin du University 
ISM Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad 
JMP Jharia Master Plan 
JRDA Jharia Rehabilitation and Development Authority 
JSPCB Jharkhand State Pollution Control Board 

Report No. 12 of 2019 
70 
MCP Mine Closure Plan 
MCSR Mine Closure Status Report 
MGR Merry- Go- Round 
MMDR Act Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 and 2015 
MoEF&CC Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate  Change 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MPCB Maharashtra Pollution Control Board  
MPPCB Madhya Pradesh  Pollution Control Board 
MW Megawatt 
NAAQS National Ambient Air Quality Standards, 2009 
NEERI National Environmental Engineering Research Institute 
NEP National Environmental Policy 
NGT National Green Tribunal 
NH National Highway 
NOC No Objection Certificate 
NTPC National Thermal Power Corporation 
NTU Nephelometric Turbidity Unit 
OB Overburden 
OC Opencast 
OCM Open Cast Mining 
OSPCB Odisha State Pollution Control Board 
PM10 Suspended Particulate Matter  
PM2.5 Respirable Particulate Matter  
REM Routine Environment Monitoring 
RI Regional Institute 
RITES Limited Rail India Technical and Economic Service Limited 
RLS Rapid Loading System 
SECI Solar Energy Corporation of India  
SPCB State Pollution Control Board 
STP Sewage Treatment Plant 
TDS Total Dissolved Solids 
ToR Terms of Reference 
TSS Total Suspended  Solids 
TTPS Talcher Thermal Power Station 
UG Underground 
WBSPCB West Bengal State Pollution Control Board 
 
 