(iii)


Executive Summary

Summary

Context

In our assessment, the operations of the State Excise Department did not
rank high in terms of financial materiality of the revenue generated and
financial risk. However, the Department emerged with high priority in
terms of significance and visibility of its operations, operational risks and
estimated audit impact. In our view as only limited effort is needed from
the Excise Department to generate and collect revenue, the Department
activities are more geared towards regulation and enforcement.

ort

Our audit was conducted between January and May 2011 with focus on
identification of key risks by the Department, efficacy in enforcement of
provision of Acts and Rules relating to production, transportation and
consumption of illicit/harmful spirituous preparations, and effective
implementation of annual Abkari policies of the Government. The
Report has been prepared by using the COSO frame work of internal
controls.

Audit Findings|

In this report we present several lapses such as non-imposition of import
fee, non-levy of permit fee, etc. with financial impact of = 253.75 crore.
We noticed that the Government adopted inconsistent policies and that
the Department had not effectively implemented the Government policies.

Waiver of import fee on rectified spirit,

We consider that the Government and the top management of the
Department did not follow transparent procedures to get an amendment
to the Abkari Act enacted to waive import fee on rectified spirit which
involves an annual revenue loss of about हैं 77 core.

Permit fee on movement of IMFL|

The Department had not collected permit fee of हैं 16.45 crore on
movement of IMFL from FL 9 Licencees to other licencees

System deficiencies}

We noticed that the printing of permits and security labels were prone to
misuse. Effective control measures were not applied in collection of
arrears, issue of licenses and supervision of foreign liquor shops. 61 per
cent of the bar hotels were functioning without satisfying the eligibility
conditions. There was no effective system of supervision of interdivision
transport of toddy. The Department did not effectively discharge its
enforcement responsibilities. The functioning of check posts was
hampered by lack of infrastructure facilities.

(गे


Performance Audit of State Excise Department for the year ended 31 March 2011

Internal Audit wing}

The Department did not prepare a risk based annual / biennial audit plan
to cover the field units. The Department audited only 31 per cent of the
total units during 2010-11

‘Our conclusion!

The Government must amend the Rules so that bar hotels are not situated
near educational institutions and places of worship. It may take effective
steps to facilitate easy identification of artificial toddy and to ensure that
toddy is distributed to other divisions under excise escort.

The Department may be provided with necessary manpower and
infrastructure to enable effective discharge of its enforcement functions.

(vi)


CHAPTER-I: BACKDROP FOR AUDIT

We ranked the operations of the Excise Department against commonly used
criteria for selection of audit areas for performance review. The details of our
assessment is at Appendix. Our assessment revealed that Excise Department
did not rank high in terms of financial materiality of the revenue generated and
financial risk. However, the Department emerged as ‘high priority’ in terms of
significance and visibility of its operations, operational risks and estimated
audit impact. Our overall assessment revealed that working of the Excise
Department was a ‘high priority’ area for audit.

We undertook the review to ascertain what internal controls exist and whether
these are functioning effectively, particularly with regard to:

e Identification of key risks to the achievement of the Department’s
objectives and management of such risks;

e Demand and collection of excise revenue leviable under the various
Acts and Rules administered by the Excise Department;

e Enforcing provisions of the Acts and Rules effectively to prevent
production, transportation and consumption of illicit/harmful spirituous
preparations;

e Allotment and utilisation of resources efficiently to carry out the
responsibilities entrusted to the Department; and

e Effective implementation of objectives envisaged in the annual abkari
policies of the Government.

was the a

As our audit focus was on the functioning of internal controls in the
Department, we conducted our audit against the COSO! framework of internal
controls, which is an internationally established and accepted control
framework. According to the COSO framework, the following are the five
elements of an effective internal control system:

e Control environment — This provides a foundation for all other control
elements. It is the responsibility of the top management of the
Department to establish the control environment through measures
such as adopting consistent policies, ensuring timely action to
implement the policies, ensuring availability of employees, making
available updated manuals to guide work, tacking timely and strict
action against violations and initiating measures to strengthen systems.

Committee of Sponsoring Organisations.


Performance Audit of State Excise Department for the year ended 31 March 2011

e Risk assessment - The management must clearly identify strategic
objectives of the Department, risks to achieving such objectives and
measures to manage such risks.

e Control activities - These are the policies, procedures and practices
that enable the Department to achieve objectives

e Information and communication — This entails establishing systems for
assimilating financial, operational and compliance information and
passing on such information to those who need it.

e Monitoring — This covers day-to-day monitoring of activities as well as
periodic assessment of activities through internal audit and/or external
evaluation.

conducted?

The functioning of the Excise Department was compared against the audit
criteria listed below and incorporated within the COSO control framework
explained in para 1.3:

e Rates of taxes/duties and the provisions contained in various Abkari
Acts/Rules.

e Abkari policy of the Government.

e Standards and specifications fixed by the Government for various
spirituous preparations.

e Instructions issued by the Department.

We selected samples from all the three geographical zones. Six out of the 14
divisions and a minimum of 25 per cent of the circles, from the six identified
divisions, were selected by simple random sampling using the audit software
IDEA’. Twenty five per cent Ranges from the selected circles and a minimum
of 25 per cent of the distilleries in the selected divisions were also selected. In
addition, three major border check posts* , the Commissionerate of Excise and
the bonded ware houses of the Kerala State Beverages Corporation (KSBC)
(FL-9 Licence*) in the selected districts were also selected. The units selected
are detailed below:

(Two from
each Zone)

2 Interactive Data Extraction and Analysis
Amaravila, Manjeswaram and Walayar
Foreign Liquor 9 - Licence for possession and supply of foreign liquor in wholesale



Chapter I- Backdrop for audit

Zone Division(Two from Circle
each Zone)

the scope udit and audit methodology?

We conducted the review during January to May 2011 mainly through
scrutiny of files and records at the selected units and by collecting information
from other Government agencies like the Kerala State Mental Health
Authority, the Directorate of Health Services, the Chemical Examiners
Laboratory, Thiruvananthapuram, and the State Crime Records Bureau. Our
audit team also physically observed the functioning of the border checkposts.
The review covered a five year period from 2006-07 to 2010-11.

in the conduct of the r

Before taking up the review, we organised an entry conference in January
2011 with the Secretary (Taxes), wherein the scope and methodology of audit
was discussed. The Secretary assured us full co-operation in the conduct of
audit. On behalf of the Indian Audit and Accounts Department, we
acknowledge the co-operation of the Kerala State Excise Department, the
Chief Chemical Examiner and the State Crime Records Bureau in providing
necessary information and records for audit. The Report was sent (August
2011) to the Department/Government and an exit conference was held on
31 October 2011 with the Additional Secretary, Taxes Department wherein the
key audit findings and recommendations were discussed. The response of the
Government during the exit conference and on other occasions has been
suitably incorporated in the Report.



CHA.

The Secretary to the Government (Taxes) is in charge of the Department at the
Government level and Excise Commissioner is in charge of the Department at
the Department level. The Excise Commissioner is assisted by two Additional
Excise Commissioners for General Administration and Enforcement
respectively. The State is divided into three zones for administrative purpose,
each under the control of a Joint Excise Commissioner. The divisions at the
district level are under the Deputy Commissioners. The circles at taluk level
are under the control of the Circle Inspector of Excise. The circles are further
divided into various ranges administered by Inspectors of Excise. The Excise
Inspectors are assisted by preventive officers and guards. In addition, a Drugs
and Narcotic Cell and an Excise Intelligence and Investigation Bureau
function under the Department. There are also various border check posts for
preventing illegal transportation of goods.

The organogram of the Department is given below:

[ cevermerctever | Level |_| Secretary to Government
(Taxes)
७७७७४ level ‘Commissioner of Excise
£
‘Addl. Commissioner of
Excise (General) ॥
¥ ¥ + + =
Zonal Offices (3) Excise Academy| [Internal Audit Excise
(Joint Excise (Joint Excise (Joint Excise | | | intettigence and
Commissioner) Commissioner) | | Commissicnen | | | Investigation
r3 Bureau
(Joint Excise
Divisions (14) (Deputy | sae ay, |
Commissioners) —_[~*] Commissioners (23) Commissions)
| semana __|
Inspector)
Le ee [ er |
fenaee [ [३७४०० | [Finance ०11०» |
(Inspectors)
+
Check Posts
(Circle Inspectors/
Inspectors)

hat are the main functions of the Di

As per the Annual Administrative report of the Excise Department, the main
functions are as listed below:

न Administer the Abkari Act, the Prohibition Act 1950, the Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985, the Medicinal and
Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties) Act, 1955 and the Spirituous
Preparations (Inter State Trade and Commerce) Central Act, 1955;

° Submit proposals for the annual Abkari policy of the Government;

. Issue licenses for setting up outlets for sale of liquor;


Performance Audit of State Excise Department for the year ended 31 March 2011

न Demand and collect excise revenue leviable under the various Acts and
Rules administered by the Department;

. Supervise breweries, distilleries and godowns; and

° Prevent production, transportation and consumption of illicit/harmful

spirituous preparations.

Department a

The total revenue realised from State excise and the tax revenue of the State
for the last five years was as follows:

Total tax receipts Excise revenue entage of
(in crore) excise revenue

The table indicates that excise revenues accounted for 7-9 per cent of the total
tax revenue of the state. The actual receipts under different minor heads were
as follows:

(₹ in crore)
Minor heads 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11

* The reason for the large variation under these heads could not be identified as there was no
reconciliation of receipts



Chapter Il- Background Information

0.28% 1.87% —_-

0.03%:

10039-00-101 Country spirits

1.102 Country fermented liquor

103 Malt liquor

1105 Foreign liquor & spirits

बह 106 Commercial and Denatured Spirits and Medicated wines

11107 Medicinal & Toilet preparations containing aleohol and opium ete
बह 108 Opium, hemp and other drugs

150 Fines and confiscations

11800 Other Receipts

We noticed that 90 to 95 per cent of the excise revenue relates to foreign
liquor and spirits. The revenue from spirit and foreign liquor is remitted from
the distilleries or the KSBC, which is the sole licensee in the State for storage,
distribution and sale of foreign liquor, where the Excise department performs
only supervisory functions. In the toddy sector also, the rentals and tree tax are
being remitted in advance from the year 2002 vide the Kerala Abkari Shops
Disposal Rules, 2002.

We are of the view that as only limited effort is needed from the Excise
Department to generate and collect revenue, the departmental activities are
more geared towards regulation and enforcement.



It is the responsibility of the Government and the top management of the
Department to establish the control environment through measures such as
adopting consistent policies, ensuring timely action to implement the policies,
ensuring availability of qualified employees, making available updated
manuals to guide work, taking timely and strict action against violations and
initiating measures to strengthen systems. We noticed several weaknesses in
the control environment, which are described below:

As per the Abkari Act and the Foreign Liquor Rules, 1953, Foreign Liquor
includes plain rectified spirit including absolute alcohol intended to be used
for manufacture of liquor meant for human consumption. Import fee of = 5 per
litre was leviable on import of IMFL other than beer, vide notification issued
in March 1996. As such Extra Neutral Alcohol (ENA) imported into the State
from other States for manufacture of potable liquor comes under the
classification of IMFL and attracts levy of import fee.

Test check of the records of the distilleries revealed that the import fee was not
levied in the State and this was pointed out in the Report of the C&AG for the
periods ended 31 March 2007 and 31 March 2008. In reply to this, the
Government cited the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Synthetic
and Chemicals vs State of UP and others (October 1989) for not levying the
import fee. The Supreme Court, in this case, held that rectified spirit was not
alcohol fit for human consumption but an industrial alcohol which was outside
the purview of State legislation. However, later in January 1997, the Supreme
Court in the case of Bihar Distillery and ANR vs Union of India and others
held that so far as the rectified spirit supplied or utilised for potable purpose
was concerned, levy of excise duty and all other controls shall be with the
States. Thus as per the notification issued in 1996 and the latter decision of the
Supreme Court in 1997, the import fee was leviable on rectified spirit.

The Public Accounts Committee, after discussion of the paragraphs observed
(July 2008) that in reality IMFL was a finished product and rectified spirit, a
raw material and since the definition creates confusion and much practical
difficulties, recommended necessary amendment to be made in the Act as well
as the Rules in such a way so as to fix separate rates for finished goods and
raw material. However, the Government, instead of fixing separate import fee
for finished goods and raw materials, abolished (December 2009) the import
fee for rectified spirit or Extra Neutral Alcohol including absolute alcohol
intended to be used for the manufacture of liquor meant for human
consumption by amending the Act with retrospective effect from 30 March
1996,

We examined the procedures followed to bring about an amendment in the
Abkari Act to waive import fee. We noticed that three amendments to the
Abkari Act were under consideration of the Government, one for giving effect
to the recommendations of the Expert Committee (Lalithambika Committee)
and two other bills (Bill Nos. 37 and 47) for inserting a new section/modifying


Performance Audit of State Excise Department for the year ended 31 March 2011

a section (these bills were earlier presented in 2006). As per the orders of the
Minster for Labour and Excise the amendment of Section 6, for abolition of
import fee, was also incorporated and a common Bill (Bill No 313) was
presented and issued as an Ordinance (January 2010). Our observations are
detailed below:-

e The note for the Council of Ministers indicated that the proposed
amendment would not involve any financial commitments/
implications. While the amendments to give effect to the
recommendations of the Lalithambika Committee and to Bill Nos 37
and 47 did not involve any financial implications, amendment to
Section 6 had major financial impact. In fact, in the Subject Committee
on Economic Affairs to which the bill was referred, five members gave
a dissent note against the bill on the grounds that the State Exchequer
would lose a considerable amount of revenue if import fee was not
levied.

e We noticed that the Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the
bill indicated that amendments were proposed to the Abkari Act in
consideration of the recommendations of the Expert Committee
(Lalithambika Committee) along with amendments proposed in the
Bill Nos. 37 and 47. Amendment to Sn. 6 to waive import fee was
neither based on the Expert Committee’s recommendations nor based
on Bill Nos. 37 and 47. Thus, there was no information about the
reasons for amending Section 6 to waive import fees.

We are of the opinion that the bill was proposed to the Council of Ministers by
including an incorrect statement on financial impact and to the Legislature
without complete information about the Section 6. In the Audit Reports
considered by the PAC, a revenue loss of हैं 142.18 crore was pointed out.
Further, based on the number of permits/No Objection Certificates
the distilleries for import of ENA during 2010-11, we are of the view that
there would be a recurring annual loss of approximately हैं 77 crore to the
Exchequer due to abolition of import fee.

We consider that the Government and top management of the Department did
not adopt transparent procedures to get an amendment to the Abkari Act
enacted.

After we pointed out the matter the Government stated (November 2011) that
the top management acted as a role model by adopting transparent procedure
as reflected in the Abkari policy announced from time to time. The
Department prevented illicit liquor in the market substantially which might be
one of the major reasons for increased consumption of IMFL sold through
authorised outlets. Further with the objective of reducing alcoholism and
intensifying campaign against alcoholism, Excise Department has taken
earnest efforts by revising existing Budget provision of = 20 lakh to हैं crore.

The reply is not acceptable as it is not specific to the point raised in audit.



Chapter III- Control Environment

The consumption
of IMFL in the
State increased
by 63 per cent
from 133 lakh
cases to 217 lakh
cases in five
years

rnment adopt consistent pol

Every year the Government announces an Abkari policy stating briefly the
strategies/activities to be undertaken during the year and announcing the
changes in the rate of fees/rentals ete for various kinds of licenses issued under
the Abkari laws. We noticed contradictions between different policies of the
Government. For instance, though the Government’s annual Abkari policy
emphasised on discouraging consumption of alcohol, yet the Government’s
action to grant more licences for liquor outlets and to regularise ineligible bar
hotels contradicted this broad policy objective. The number of liquor outlets
and liquor consumption in the state increased steadily during the five year
period 2006-07 to 2010-11 as shown in the following table. Further, Kerala
has the highest per capita consumption of liquor in the country as per the
publication of the Public Relations Department titled “Substance Abuse
Prevention and Control — A master plan for Kerala”.

Major Foreign Liquor Outlets

Type of Licence No of licences sanctioned Total number as on
during 2006-07 to 2010-11 31.03.2011

Details of Liquor Consumption

Sales in lakh cases Increase over the Gross sale
IMFL Beer previous year in crore)
~~ _ (in lakh cases)

Source.

25077

200:

150.

@IMFL
100 Beer

Sales in lakh cases

50:

2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10. 2010-11

We noticed that the population of the State increased by about 1.5 lakh
persons per year (based on the population of 318.41 lakh in 2001 and 333.8
lakh in 2011) whereas the increase in annual liquor consumption ranged from
24 lakh to 35 lakh cases during the review period, indicating an increase in the
rate of consumption.

11


Performance Audit of State Excise Department.

for the year ended 31 March 2011

3

.3 Were the policies implemented effectively?|

It is the responsibility of the top management of the Department to ensure that
action is taken to implement the policies of the Government. We noticed that
many of the policy statements were not followed up by action plans or their
implementation was tardy. As a result, implementation of Government

policies was ineffective.

itatements

Major p

Government is fully committed to
discourage alcohol consumption as it leads
to serious social problems. (Abkari Policy
2007-08)

Consumption is increasing each year.

Stringent action will be initiated against
illicit liquor trade in the State. (Abkari
Policy 2007-08)

Inielligence inputs and minutes of field
level conference reveal illicit liquor trade is
still rampant in the State

Enforcement will be strengthened with
popular committees. (Abkari Policy 2007-
08)

Popular committees were formed. But only
27 to 53 per cent of the targeted meetings
were convened during the period 2006-07
to 2010-11.

Production and distribution of sweet toddy
is under active consideration. (Abkari Policy
2007-08 and 2008-09)

Not implemented

Awareness programme to create awareness
among students/ public about the ill effects
of alcohol consumption. (Abkari Policy
2007-08)

र 20 lakh was provided in each budget for
the programmes and the campaigns, street
shows, etc. were being conducted regularly.
We consider that the allocation is meagre to
have a perceptible impact.

Creation of an apex body for cooperative
societies and to give permission to them for
production of sweet toddy. (Abkari Policy
2007-08 and 2008-09)

Not implemented

Production of cheap IMFL at CHICOPS
distillery at Palakkad (Abkari Policy 2008-
09)

Not implemented

Starting of de-addiction centres in selected

Government ordered (2009-10) deaddiction



Even though
various study
reports on Excise
department were
given, no follow
up action was
taken

Chapter II[- Control Environment

Major policy statements Status of implementation

Government hospitals with the co-operation | centres to be started in government
of Health department (Abkari Policy 2009- hospitals in eight districts. However, the
10) centres have not yet been started so far.

As part of improving the toddy sector, Not yet started

Government proposed to start toddy
parlours in all districts (Abkari Policy 2011-
12)

3.4 Was the Excise manual useful in

The Kerala Excise Manual currently used by the Department was prepared
inl1972. We noticed that it has not been revised so far despite several major
changes relating to prohibition of alcohol, creation of intelligence wing and
amendments to Abkari laws. As the manual is outdated it could only be of
limited use in guiding the work of departmental employees. The employees of
the Department confirmed that the manual, though useful, needs to be updated.

3.5 Was prompt follow up action taken on study reports?

We noticed that during the period under review, various study reports were
submitted to the Department for improvement of its functioning. However, no
action was taken on a majority of the recommendations as shown below.

SI Study Report of tus/Remarks
No report

Report ‘on | 2008 The report contained many
Simplification of recommendations relating to
procedures and methods confiscation, personnel, modernisation
inthe —_ Excise of check posts, starting a website,
Department revision of excise manual, providing
facility for consumption of IMFL in FL1
shops, etc. No follow up action was
taken on these recommendations.

2 Expert Committee | December The Abkari Act was amended vide Act 3

formed to study and to | 2009 of 2010 in April 2010 by introducing
report changes required new sections/provisions, etc. based on
in Abkari Act one of the recommendations of the

committee.

3 |Report by the | January Pending with Government.
Committee on | 2009
Chemical Composition
of Toddy

3.6 Was effective action initiated against violations at_ the

We noticed from the correspondence files between the Commissionerate and
field offices, kept in the Commissionerate, that even though violation of
licence conditions/permit system was reported from the field offices, effective
corrective measures were not taken at the Commissionerate. In response to our



Performance Audit of State Excise Department for the year ended 31 March 2011

audit query, the Commissionerate replied that data regarding FL-3! licences
cancelled for violation of license conditions was not available with them and
that such data was available at the Division offices. As the Excise
Commissioner was the competent authority to cancel licences under the
Abkari Act and the Foreign Liquor Rules, non-availability of such basic
details at the Commissionerate raises doubts about the seriousness with which
reports of violations are treated.

Foreign Liquor-3 Hotel (Restaurant) Licence

14


CHAPTER-IV: RISK ASSESSMENT

It is the responsibility of the management of the Department to clearly define
strategic objectives and identify the major risks in achieving such objectives of
the Department. Our findings on the risk assessment practices adopted in the
Department are detailed below:

4.1 Did the department define its strategic objectives and targets?|

We noticed that the Department has not so far set forth mission and vision
statements and the main objectives of the Department. We consider that in the
absence of such strategic guidelines, the Department faces a risk of
functioning without a clear and consistent purpose. For instance, the
employees may not be sure as to whether to focus on collection of revenue or
on prevention of consumption of illicit liquor.

Recommendation 1: The Department may consider preparing a strategic
plan covering mission, vision and objectives. Further, such a plan may be
published widely amongst employees and the public.

4.2 Did the Department assess risks to achieving its objectives?|

We noticed that the Department has not carried out risk assessment to identify
the significant risks to achieving its objectives. We consider that identification
of key risks will enable the Department to focus its efforts towards mitigating
risks,

4.3 What were the significant strategic risks identified by audit?

It is the responsibility of the Department to identify risks and initiate measures
to counter the risks. As the Department has not identified risks, we made an
attempt to identify a few significant strategic risks that we consider could
affect the functioning of the Department adversely. In addition to the strategic
risks that are described below, various operational risks are covered in later
chapters.

4.3.1 Is there a conflict of interest between a major licensee for liquor
trade and the Excise Department?

The Excise Department is entrusted with the supervision and control over the
production, distribution and sale of spirit/IMFL within the State and the
Department acts as a regulatory authority. Kerala State Beverages
(Manufacturing and Marketing) Corporation (KSBC), a Government
Company, has sole rights over the procurement, distribution and sale of IMFL
within the state. KSBC is a major licensee for liquor trade.

The Excise Department is one of the promoters of KSBC and the Excise
Commissioner is the Chairman of KSBC. As both agencies are headed by the
same person, we consider that there is a conflict of interest, as KSBC as a
licensee is engaged in promotion of liquor trade and the Department as a
regulatory authority, is responsible for regulating liquor trade. We feel that the
present arrangement may adversely impact the Excise Department from
functioning as an effective regulator.


Performance Audit of State Excise Department for the year ended 31 March 2011

Misuse of permit
books for liquor
transport in the
State cannot be
ruled out in the
present system of
printing and
distribution of the
permits

The Licensee
itself was
printing the
security labels
through a
private party
and affixing it
on the IMFL
bottles. At no
stage the
Licensing
Authority, the
Excise
Department has
control over it

Afier we pointed out the matter the Government stated (November 2011) that
the Excise Commissioner only acts as Chairman of KSBC in order to exercise
control on the decision taken by the Board of Directors and that for more than
25 years the Excise Commissioner is the Chairman and that there was no
conflict of interest.

The remarks furnished by the Government are not acceptable since there is
conflict of interest as one entity is the licensing authority and the other is the
licencee.

4.3.2 Is the present system of printing and custody of permit books prone
to misuse?

Transportation of spirituous preparations/IMFL is controlled by issuing
permits. Permits are issued for transportation of IMFL from distilleries to FL9
godowns', and from FL9 to various retail outlets, etc. These permits were
being printed at the Government press in book form, each containing 25
permits and stocked at the Commissionerate and issued from there as per
requirement of the field units.

We noticed that the serial numbers to the permits are assigned by the press and
the numbers are not continuous. Our verification of the stock register at the
Commissionerate revealed several sets of numbers to be missing. Further, the
register was not closed regularly. As the numbers were assigned by the press
and the numbering was not continuous, we are unable to conclude whether the
permit books with the missing numbers were actually printed or not.

We consider that the various weaknesses described above relating to the
printing of permits and its custody poses a serious strategic risk. We are of the
opinion that the weaknesses could be misused to facilitate transportation of
illicit liquor by printing permits with the missing numbers. Responding to an
audit enquiry on irregular maintenance of stock register of permits, the
Commissionerate stated that it was a usual practice and the weaknesses
pointed out by audit would be noted for future guidance. However, the fact
remains that it was an important control which was not implemented
effectively.

4.3.3 How effective was the role of the Department over printing, supply
and affixing of security labels?

In order to avoid the risk of production and sale of duplicate/ spurious liquor
in the State, the Department introduced (June 2003) a system of affixing a
security hologram label in all IMFL bottles sold in the State. As directed by
Government (September 2001) KSBC entered into an agreement with the
Centre for Development of Imaging Technology (C-DIT), a State Government
autonomous body, in November 2001 for printing and supply of holographic
security labels at the rate of 13.86 paise per label. The agreement was for 10
years and C-DIT has been supplying the necessary security labels to KSBC.
When the liquor reaches the KSBC godown from the distilleries it is unloaded
at the FL-9 warehouses and the casual labourers employed by the KSBC affix

Licensee for possession and supply of foreign liquor in wholesale for sale to other retail
licence holders like FL1, FL3, FL4 club licenses, etc.

16


Chapter IV-Risk Assessment

excise officials,
the designated
authority for
supervision of
production and
distribution of
IMFL, cannot
authenticate the
genuineness of a
hologram as they
were not aware of
the hologram details

the security labels supplied from KSBC before despatch to liquor outlets like
FL1, FL3 and FL4 licensees in the State.

Our examination of the records revealed the following:

e Though KSBC entrusted the printing and supply of security labels to
C-DIT, C-DIT in turn entrusted the work to a private agency’, vide
agreement dated 17 April 2002 violating the agreement conditions relating
to non-transfer of work and maintaining secrecy.

e In April 2009 a section of C-DIT employees submitted a memorandum to
the Director General of Police alleging that the private party was printing
the labels at two places, near the Walayar Check post and at Ernakulam.
The memorandum was forwarded to the Excise Commissioner by the
DGP. The Intelligence wing of the Department investigated the issue and
reported (December 2009) that entrusting the printing of security labels to
a private agency by C-DIT was in violation of the agreement between
C-DIT and KSBC relating to secrecy, non-transfer of work, printing labels
only at C-DIT, Thiruvananthapuram. However, no further action was taken
on the issue.

e The Assistant Excise Commissioner, KSBC (HQ), Thiruvananthapuram
wrote (June 2010) to the Excise Commissioner that at present the security
labels which are affixed on liquor bottles bearing the signature of the
Excise Commissioner are fully handled by KSBC and in the current
scenario even on booking a case of ‘seconds*’ it cannot be effectively
prosecuted as the excise officials are not the competent authority to affirm
whether the stickers affixed are genuine or not. The officials of C-
DIT/KSBC have to be cited as private witness for proving that the labels
are counterfeited. They can act only as private witness, as they are not
declared as competent authority in Abkari Act. Hence effective
prosecution is a remote possibility. He also submitted (June 2010) a
proposal to the Excise Commissioner for bringing the printing and custody
of security label under the direct supervision of the Excise Department
citing that the Excise Department of Tamil Nadu owns a press to print the
security labels. No action was taken on this proposal.

e We observed that thousands of bottles of IMFL are affixed with security
labels at the FL9 godowns everyday. We are of the opinion that the
Department is unable to exercise effective supervision as only four to cight
employees of the Department were working in these godowns and the
employees were only entering the serial numbers of the labels supplied by
KSBC in the registers.

We are of the opinion that as the security labels are being printed by a private

agency and as the Department is exercising minimal supervision over the

production, supply and affixing of the labels, there is a risk of supply of
security labels to illicit liquor producers/sellers.

Recommendation 2: The Department must ensure that security labels are
printed under the direct supervision of the Department.

the ‘Process colour’, Emakulam
Low Quality/unaccounted liquor sold in the market

17


CHAPTER-V: CONTROL ACTIVITIES

This chapter contains our assessment on the efficacy of controls in discharging
key functions of the Department like financial and budget management,
generation and collection of revenue, issue of licenses and enforcement. The
major source of revenue is from IMFL, the collection of which is by the
KSBC, a State public sector undertaking and we did not notice any significant
observation to comment in this report.

5.1 Was budget managed effectively?

The budget provision and expenditure and the excise revenue for the period
2006-07 to 2010-11 were as follows.

@ in crore)

Expenditure Receipts
Budget Expenditure Savings Budget

“ite Receipts Exce:

₹ in 000 of crore

18

2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11

—# Actual Receipts —l— Budget Estimate

We noticed that actual expenditure was lower than the budget provision in all
the years except 2007-08. The variation between the budget estimates and the
actual expenditure was less than 10 per cent during all the years and less than
five per cent in three out of the five years under review.

We also noticed that actual receipts were in excess of the estimates in all the
years and the variation was high during 2007-08 (18.5 per cent) and 2010-11
(18 per cent). The Department replied that the large difference in receipts
during 2007-08 was due to increase in licence fee, rentals, etc.

We are of the view that the Department managed its budget effectively as
generally the variation between the budget and actual revenue and expense
was within reasonable limits.


Performance Audit of State Excise Department for the year ended 31 March 2011

Revenue recovery
cases relating to
%17.05 crore were
returned by
revenue
department
stating it as non
recoverable as
there were no
property in the
name of the
defaulter

5.1.1 Did the Department officials use the powers vested in them to
collect arrears of revenue?

The Government vide notification dated 21 July 1970 appointed Deputy
Commissioners and Assistant Commissioners of the Excise Department to
exercise the powers and perform the functions of a Collector under clause(e)
of Section 2 of the Revenue Recovery Act, 1968, for the collection of both the
current and old abkari arrears. However, this power given to the Excise
Department has not been exercised by them. Instead the departmental officers
were reporting arrears to the Revenue Department for collection. The Revenue
Department returned cases amounting to € 17.05 crore, stating that the persons
were insolvent. Further, an amount of हैं 17.15 crore was also waived under
Amnesty Scheme.

We are of the opinion that if the departmental officials had exercised the
powers vested in them and taken timely action against defaulters, the loss of
र₹ 34.20 crore (¥ 17.15 crore + = 17.05 crore) to the Government could have
been avoided to a great extent.

5.1.2 Did the Department have effective systems to collect arrears of
revenue?

From April 2002, the Department introduced a new system for collection of
monthly rentals and fees from the concerned licensees such as distilleries, FL
3 bar hotels, toddy shops etc. Under the new system the licensees have to pay
the rentals in advance. As a result there has been no major accretion to abkari
arrears since 2002. The abkari arrears as on 31 March 2002, before the
introduction of the new system, was = 179.30 crore and the arrears as of
31 March 2011 were % 230.29 crore.

Even in respect of cases referred to the Revenue Department for revenue
recovery, it is the responsibility of the departmental officers to regularly
follow up such cases to see that prompt action is being taken by the Revenue
authorities to recover the dues. We, however, noticed that even after nine
years, the Department could not recover the arrears outstanding for very long
periods as there has been an increase in arrears as stated in the previous para.

We also noticed differences between the total demand under Abkari arrears as
per the records of the Excise Department and that of the Land Revenue
Commissioner, as noted below:

in crore)
Amount as per records of | Amount as per records of
Excise Department Land Revenue Commissioner

We are of the opinion that the Department did not have controls in place to
periodically reconcile the differences in the amounts with the Land Revenue
Department. Further, the Department was not communicating details of
vacation of stay to the revenue authorities for taking further action.

20


By introduction of
Amnesty scheme
Government could
collect a sum of

& 21.87 crore

Permit fee of
% 16.45 crore was
not levied

Chapter V-Control Activities

5.1.3 Did the Amnesty Scheme achieve its objectives?

Considering the abkari arrears outstanding for long periods, the State
Government introduced an Amnesty Scheme in May 2008 for payment of
abkari arrears allowing certain conditional concessions. Through this scheme
the Government could collect an amount of हैं 21.87 crore as on 31 March
2011 and clear 949 cases out of 1919 cases outstanding before the introduction
of the scheme. As withdrawal of court cases was a precondition, the long
standing court cases related to 37 arrear cases were also closed.

We are of the view that the Department partially achieved some of the
objectives of the amnesty scheme by clearing about 50 per cent of the
outstanding cases.

5.2.1 Did the Department levy all the fees payable under the Abkari Act?

As per Section 10 and 11 of the Abkari Act, the Government fixes the
minimum quantity of liquor or intoxicating drug that can be transported
without permit and permit is neeeded for transporting quantities in excess of
such prescribed limit. Under Section 6 and 7 of the Act, spirit can be imported
or exported by the various licensees for which No Objection Certificates
(NOC) are issued under the specific Rules under which licences were issued.

As per SRO 388/95 (March 1995), Government directed that a fee of = 500
must be levied with effect from April 1995 on each permit to be issued under
sections 6, 7 and 11 of the Abkari Act 1 of 1077. Further, हैं 50 was to be
levied on each ‘No Objection Certificate’ to be issued under section 6 and 7 of
the said Act to all licensees under the Kerala Distillery and Warehouse Rules
1968, the Kerala Foreign Liquor (Compounding, Blending and Bottling) Rules
1975, the Brewery Rules 1967, the Kerala Winery Rules 1970 and the Kerala
Rectified Spirit Rules 1972, for the purpose of importing, exporting or
transporting any kind of liquor and rectified spirit including absolute alcohol.

After we pointed out the matter the Government stated (November 2011) that
in the light of the observation the Excise Commissioner was directed to
forward a draft amendment proposal to amend FL Rules enabling Government
to levy permit fee.

Further developments have not been received (December 2011).

In 2004, vide SRO 317/04 issued in partial modification of SRO 388/95, the
rates of fee for the issue of NOC under Section 6 and 7 of the Abkari Act were
increased to हैं 1,000 and the permit fee was left unchanged at हैं 500.

In 2009 vide SRO 1023/2009 the Government increased the fee of ‘No
Objection Certificate’ issued under sections 6 and 7 of the Abkari Act also to
र₹ 1,000. By the above stated notifications, the rate for permits and ‘No
Objection Certificates’ issued under Section 6 and 7 of the Act only was
increased. No change was effected in the fee of € 500 for the transport permit
issued under Section 11 of the Act and such a fee was neither withdrawn nor
modified.

21


Performance Audit of State Excise Department for the year ended 31 March 2011

The basic eligible
criteria for
granting an FL3
licence was
overlooked in
majority of the
cases while
granting the
licences

We test checked records in FL9 warehouses and noticed that the permit fee for
the permits issued under section 11 of the Abkari Act from FL9 godowns for
the transport of IMFL to other licensees was not levied. This resulted in short
levy of permit fees of = 16.45 crore during 2006-07 to 2010-11 as detailed in
the following table:

ied

When we pointed out the loss of revenue, the Department replied that SRO
No 1023/09 related to all licensees under the Kerala Distillery and Warehouse
Rules 1968, the Kerala Foreign Liquor (Compounding, Blending and Bottling)
Rules 1975, the Brewery Rules 1967, the Kerala Winery Rules 1970 and the
Kerala Rectified Spirit Rules 1972, for the purpose of importing and exporting
any kind of rectified spirit including absolute alcohol, wherein the required fee
was being collected and was not related to the Foreign Liquor Rules. The
Department also stated that as per Section 11 of the Abkari Act, transport
permit was being issued from KSBC FL9 warehouse, for which no fee was
stipulated.

We do not agree with this reply of the Department as the Government had not
changed the rate of permit fee for the permits issued under section 11 of the
Act, which remained unchanged since its introduction in 1995. Moreover, the
explanatory note attached to the SRO 1023/09 inter alia states that
‘Government finds it necessary to continue the existing fee to be levied on
each permit to be issued under Sections 6, 7, and 11 of the said Act’.

Did the Department

5.3.1 Were Foreign Liquor 3 Hotel (restaurant) licences granted
according to Rules?

The FL3 Hotel (Restaurant) licences were issued under Rule 13(3) of the
Foreign Liquor Rules by the Excise Commissioner under orders of the
Government, in the interest of promotion of tourism in the State to hotels
which have obtained 3-star and above classification from the Ministry of
Tourism, The main criteria for granting an FL3 licence were as follows:

e Hotels should have a rating of 2-star (till March 2002)/3-star and above
° It should be in the interest of promoting tourism

22


Chapter V-Control Activities

. The hotel should be located beyond a minimum distance from
educational institutions/ temple/church/mosque, burial ground etc;

e Local need must justify a bar hotel.

The licences were issued for one year on payment of the prescribed rental and
the licensees were required to renew it every year. As per rules, the cost of
liquor shall be billed along with the cost of meals, fe. liquor can be sold only
to those who dine in the restaurant.

We noticed that in a majority of the cases these criteria were overlooked as
detailed in the ensuing paragraphs.

5.3.1.1 Were FL3 licenses issued and renewed to non-standard
hotels/restaurants?

The minimum standard eligible for obtaining an FL3 licence was 2-star
standards from April 1982 and 3-star and above from April 2002. We noticed
that licenses were issued and renewed to 418 bar hotels, ie. 61 per cent of the
total bar hotels in the state even though they were not eligible for the FL3
licenses as per the Rules.

We noticed that the Government first allowed time up to 30 June 1992 for
those licensees who had not attained the prescribed two star standards to attain
the prescribed standard and subsequently extended the period. During the
review period, we noticed that the Excise Commissioner submitted his
proposals for the Abkari policy for the year 2007-08 vide letter dated 11
January 2007 which did not include the proposal for regularisation of 418 non
standard bar hotels, the list of which was sent to the Government in January
2006. However, based on a discussion with the Hon’ble Minister for Labour
and Excise on 22 January 2007, the Excise Commissioner sent a revised
proposal on 23 January 2007 including the proposal that “Bar Licenses (FL3
licences) which have not attained 2-star classification and functioning at
present may be regularised”.

After we pointed out the matter the Government stated (November 2011) that
there are certain bar hotels functioning with standard below two star
specifications. As these hotels were functioning for long periods, they were
regularised based on Abkari Policy 2007-08.

The point is not acceptable for the reason that as per Rules the licences are
issued each year and the standard for granting licence are still three star
standard.

We noticed that the Government, 15 years after extending time limit for the
first time, again extended (12 March 2007) the time limit up to 31 March 2007
and stated that failure to comply with the standards would lead to cancellation
of licences. However, on the very next day, 7.९. 13 March 2007 the
Government added a proviso to Rule 13 that all existing licensees not having
the above classification and which were functional as on 31 March 2007 shall
be regularised. The Abkari policy for 2008-09 (February 2008) stated that the
Government would insist on minimum facility and hygienic conditions in all
the 418 bar hotels which did not have 2-star status, but which were regularised
during 2007-08.

23


Performance Audit of State Excise Department for the year ended 31 March 2011

Restaurants in
bar hotels
function for name
sake only. Seven
persons died of
overdrinking in
the bars

We noticed that the field officers of the Department had reported violation of
licence conditions like unhygienic conditions, lack of facilities, non adherence
of the time schedule, selling on dry days, opening more than one counter, etc.
in these bar hotels. However, no action was taken by the Department on these
reports.

The Excise Commissioner sent a letter (January 2011) to the Government
highlighting the poor standards maintained by the 418 unclassified bars and
requested not to grant fresh FL3 licenses for areas other than tourism notified
areas. In the letter the Excise Commissioner, infer alia, stated that the
restaurant segment of the unclassified hotels were functioning for name sake
only and during the last one year seven people had died due to excessive
drinking in the unclassified hotels. He also pointed out that he had personally
seen that almost all the customers went there to drink liquor and not for taking
food.

We noticed that even though the Excise Commissioner had requested not to
issue fresh FL3 licenses, seven more FL3 licenses were issued between 12
January and 31 March 2011. Moreover in the Abkari Policy for 2010-11, the
Government declared that the FL3 licensees not having the requisite star
qualification and who were functional during 2009-10 should be regularised.
Thus, the Government has made it a regular feature to regularise ineligible
licensees.

We are of the opinion that the Government has not taken a firm stand to
ensure that only hotels of a minimum standard are issued FL3 licenses.
Further, we opine that the Government has seriously compromised public
safety by (a) regularising 418 unclassified bars, though they were not able to
attain the minimum standards despite repeated extension of time and (b) by
turning a blind eye towards the various complaints against these unclassified
bars. On this being pointed out in audit the Department stated (June 2011) that
the Government is the competent authority to issue orders allowing relaxation,
if any, for the functioning of FL3 licensees/bar hotels.

5.3.1.2 Is “interest of promotion of tourism” clearly defined?

Even though the FL3 licenses were to be issued in the interest of promotion of
tourism in the State, the Government has so far not issued guidelines for
determining “interest of promotion of tourism” for this purpose.

24


Chapter V-Control Ac

5.3.1.3 Did the Department effectively enforce minimum distance of bar
hotels from educational institutions/religious places etc.?

The Foreign Liquor
Rules, 1953 and
Kerala Abkari
Shops Disposal
Rules, 2002
=r prohibits sanctioning
of bar hotels in the
vicinity of
an educational
institution, temple,
church, mosque,
burial ground or
SC/ST colony.
Condition No. 22
for the FL3 licence
2 stipulates that no
licence should be issued for a shop which is situated or which is intended to be
opened in a place where on grounds of public interest of expediency it is
objectionable to permit any traffic in liquor. The purpose of keeping the
student community away from the vicinity of the concerned premises had been
explained by a Division Bench of the Hon’ble High Court of Kerala in the
decision reported in 1988(2) K.L.T. 261.

TOTAL DISTANCE FROM THE cA
ARENA TO THE GATE OF
COLLEGE THROUGH THE NEAREST

PEDESTRIAN CROSSING 166 + 8 + 210 = 3845

The distance as
per tules has to be

determined as the विक्का

jecondary
shortest path School
way/lane/ — street/

road generally
used by the public
and the same shall
be measured from
gate 10 gate. The
Hon’ble High
Court of Kerala in
a judgment (1993)
held that the
distance had to be "
measured by taking the distance that a law abiding pedestrian would walk
through, using zebra crossing. Hence, after this judgment, bar licenses were
being issued by the Department even in cases where the prohibited structures
are just across the road.

The Government has not so far amended the Rules to make the distance
restriction more specific so as to keep away the student community from the
vicinity of bar hotels. Hence, the intention of the Government of not allowing
bar hotels in the vicinity of educational institutions/temple, church, mosque,
etc. is compromised for want of amendment of the Rules.

25


Performance Audit of State Excise Department for the year ended 31 March 2011

Our test check of records
have shown that even in
the capital city, along the
toad where the
Government Secretariat
is situated, licences were
granted to bar hotels
located opposite reputed
educational institutions.
Bar licence to a 4-star
hotel sharing the
compound walls of a
Government College and
a church was granted when distance restriction for private 4-star hotels was
withdrawn during 1994-96. All these licenses were being renewed every year.

We are of the opinion that the condition that bars should not be in the vicinity
of educational institutions, places of worship etc remained only on paper in the
Rules and was not being enforced.

Recommendation 4: The Government may consider amending the Rules
(like prescribing aerial distance) to ensure that the distance restriction
principle of prohibiting functioning of bars near educational institutions,
places of worship etc is applied in practice.

There was no
effective
supervision by
Excise
department in
FLI retail shops

5.3.2 Did the Department effectively supervise Foreign Liquor 1' (FL1)
licensee shops?

The privilege for the retail sale of IMFL was granted exclusively to KSBC and

Kerala State Cooperative Consumer’s Federation Ltd. at annual rentals fixed

by the Government. The rental at present is हैं. 63 lakh. The licence is granted

subject to the condition of distance restriction prescribed in the Rules. The FL-

Foreign liquor 1 shops are the retail outlets for foreign liquor in the State.

26



Chapter V-Control Activities

1 licensees have to procure the supplies only from the FL-9 licensees. FL-9
licenses are given exclusively to KSBC, As on 31 March 2011 there were 384
FL-1 shops of which 338 (88 per cent) are owned by KSBC and 46 by the
Consumer Federation.

Our examination revealed that though the Excise Department was required to
inspect and take samples of IMFL from the FL-1 shops for chemical
examination, the inspection and taking of samples from the FL 1 shops was
less/ negligible compared to other licensed liquor or toddy outlets as shown in
the following table:

2006-07 18 2008-09 2009-10 | 2010-11

2 2
नि g
a a a
z 5

5
4
5

No. of times

We noticed that the Personnel and Administrative Reforms Department
(PARD) in their report (2008) on “Simplification of Procedures and Methods
in the Excise Department” pointed out lack of proper inspection/non-taking of
samples and even the possibility of collusion with outsiders to sell seconds in
FI-1 outlets.

We are of the opinion that as major part of the IMFL sales were effected
through the FL1 shops, the lack of effective supervision by the Department
increases the risk of sale of low quality/seconds liquor.

5.3.3, Did the Department exercise effective supervision over distilleries?

Under the Distillery and Warehouse Rules all manholes, locks and other
apparatus of stills and spirit vessels must be locked with Abkari locks for
effective control by the Excise Department. The Abkari locks and tickets
should be under the personal custody of the Distillery officer. Rule 27 to 35 of
the Distillery and Warehousing Rules- Part II describes the use and storage of
Abkari locks and tickets. When an Abkari lock is affixed to any pipe, cock,
receptacle, door, etc. the officer affixing it shall enter the details of the pipe,
time, etc. on the counterfoil and remove the ticket from the book and place it

27


Even the specific
intelligence
inputs, giving
location / names
of toddy shops/
vehicles ete.,
involved in
violation of
Abkari Laws,
were not
properly
followed up by
the enforcement
wing

Performance Audit of State Excise Department for the year ended 31 March 2011

in the space provided for the purpose in front of the lock. The flap may then be
closed on top of the ticket and the locks fastened to the pipe, cock, etc. For
removal of locks, the officer should first move the keyhole cover to one side to
ascertain that the tickets are not tampered with. Our test check in seven
distilleries revealed shortage of Abkari locks as detailed in the following table:

As the Abkari Lock is an important control tool used by the Department to
check usage of spirit, manufacture and disposal of liquor, we are of the view
that shortage of locks would affect the efficacy of supervision by the Excise
Department over the distilleries.

5.4.1 Was there effective follow up action on Intelligence inputs?

The Excise Department has an Excise Intelligence and Investigative Bureau
(EI&IB) under a Joint Excise Commissioner. The information on illegal
activities gathered by them was transferred to the Enforcement wing of the
Department for taking necessary corrective/legal measures to stop the illegal
activities. Details of inputs provided by the Intelligence wing and the number
of cases of occurrence of crime/violation of Acts and Rules detected out of
these inputs during 2006-07 to 2010-11 were as follows:

Name of Zone No of inputs No of cases detected Percentage of cases
on the basis of detected to inputs
inputs

Even though the enforcement wing acknowledged the intelligence inputs the
action taken by them was not effective as detailed below :

. The JEC (EI&IB) gave (5 May 2010) detailed information to AEC
Palakkad listing the ranges where artificial toddy was being sold. It was
stated that the licensees were using smuggled spirit for enhancing the
strength of the toddy and accidents may happen in the abkari sector. He
also directed that urgent steps should be taken to stop the sale of
artificial toddy through the toddy shops. We noticed that no effective
action was taken on this input as the Intelligence Wing again reported
(June and August 2010) that sale of artificial toddy/illegal activities was
continuing and provided further detailed information.

28


Chapter V-Control Act

As of 31 March
2011, 46,183
cases were
pending either
in the Excise
Offices or in
courts

. In one case in Alappuzha division (December 2010), the intelligence
official had to accompany the enforcement employees to detect and
register a case of illicit transport of toddy as the enforcement staff did
not respond to the earlier inputs given.

. The intelligence wing gave (20 August 2010) detailed information about
the spurious liquor sold in Malappuram district. Had rigorous raids been
conducted and spurious liquor seized, the liquor tragedy at Malappuram
in September 2010 which resulted in the death of 25 persons, could have
been avoided.

We are of the opinion that the intelligence reports on the sale of artificial
toddy are not being followed up by the enforcement wing with the seriousness
they deserve. We are of the view that ineffective follow up action poses
serious health problems to the regular consumers and could even lead to liquor
tragedies.

Our examination of records revealed that lack of sufficient manpower and
infrastructure facilities as detailed below were adversely affecting effective
enforcement work like raids/patrolling etc:

e Forty eight offices (field units) do not have sanctioned post of drivers
and in 51 offices the vehicles were manned by drivers on daily wages.
Deploying daily wage drivers for raids/intelligence gathering may
affect the secrecy/quality of work

e Lack of communication systems like walkie-talkies and wireless
systems.

5.4.2 Was effective action taken on abkari cases where violations were
detected?

The enforcement activities of the Department was being carried out through
the Excise Enforcement and Anti Narcotic Cell at district level, circles at taluk
level and the Ranges, border check posts and patrol units. In addition to
following up on the intelligence inputs, these units detect violation of Abkari
jaws through regular inspection of the premises of the licensees, verification at
check posts, raids conducted at suspected areas, etc. The cases in which
violations were noticed were registered and followed up through the
concerned circles/ranges.

We noted that during 2006-07 to 2010-11, 39,674 abkari cases were registered
in the state and as on 31 March 2011, 46,183 cases were pending either in the
courts or in the excise offices as shown below:

Pending with excise Pending with Court

29


Performance Audit of State Excise Department for the year ended 31 March 2011

Out of the total
cases detected
during the last
five years,
major cases
were only two
percent.
Others being
UD cases /
minor cases

The details of cases detected, charge sheeted and pending as of 31 March
201 lin the selected districts from 2006-07 to 2010-11 were as follows:

Name of office | Number No of UD Noof Noofcases No of
of cases out of jor’ गा which
the detected cases out
cases ofthe completed charge
cases detected and chai sheeting
detected

Our analysis of the abkari cases revealed as follows:

e 4 to 30 per cent of the total cases were treated as undetected (UD) cases,
i.e. cases where there was violation of Abkari laws but the Department
could not identify/catch the offenders/culprits and hence could not
proceed with the cases. The percentage of UD cases for the six districts
worked to 14 per cent, which we consider high.

. We noticed that enforcement employees were being diverted to attend to
the cases pending in the courts and for charge sheeting. We are of the
view that diversion of enforcement employees would impede normal
enforcement activities like inspections, raids, etc.

. We found that charge sheets were not prepared in 86 major cases
relating to Thiruvananthapuram, Thrissur and Palakkad Divisions due to
delay in identifying the offenders, getting details of actual owners of the
vehicles involved, bogus registration certificates etc.

As per the records of the State Crime Records Bureau, the Police department
had also registered 79,571 cases during 2006-2011 involving both major and
minor cases.

5.4.3, Were the confiscated vehicles disposed expeditiously?

The vehicles seized in Abkari cases were to be kept under safe custody,
confiscated and finally disposed as prescribed under the Kerala Abkari
Disposal of Confiscated Articles Rules, 1996. Under the Rules, on seizure of
the vehicle, the Divisional officer after giving an opportunity to the accused
for being heard and after obtaining chemical analysis report, issues the
confiscation orders. We noticed significant delays in confiscating the seized
vehicles and in the disposal of the confiscated vehicles as detailed in the
following table:

Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
Cases involving spirit above 500 litres / vehicle involved

30


During the five
year period from
2006-07 to 2010-
11, 2.96 Lakh
bulk litres of
seized spirit was
lost due to
leakage having
revenue impact
of € 1.07 crore

Chapter V-Control Act

Details of vehicles pending confiscation

Up to

2 2007. 2 2009 हर
2005. 2006. 2007 008. 2009. 2010. 2011 _ Total

Out of the 228 vehicles pending confiscation, 169 were pending for want of
chemical analysis report or due to non completion of investigation. Fifty three
vehicles were pending because of procedural delays and six cases were
pending in court.

Details of confiscated vehicles pending disposal
2000

to 2006 2007 2008 2009. 2010
2005

Up to
2000

Out of 255 vehicles pending disposal, 40 vehicles (15.7 per cent) were
pending disposal for more than six years. Out of 255 vehicles, 16 vehicles
were released temporarily on the basis of bank guarantee, 32 cases were
pending in the court, in 72 cases appeals were pending with the departmental
authorities and 135 cases were pending for completion of departmental
procedures. We also noticed that five vehicles kept in the premises of
Parassala, Vizhinjam and Aryanad Police Stations were missing.

5.4.4 Did the Department manage to dispose the seized spirit efficiently?

The spirit seized was sold to Government owned distilleries in Thiruvalla
(Travancore Sugars and Chemicals Ltd) and Palakkad (CHICOPS) at the rate
of &% 10 per litre up to September 2009 and thereafter at the rate of £15 per
litre. From these distilleries it was sold to Government institutions or to
licensees under the Rectified Spirits Rules, 1972 or the Cochin Denatured
spirits and Methyl Alcohol Rules after collecting excise duty in addition to the
sale price.

31


Performance Audit of State Excise Department for the year ended 31 March 2011

Details of leakage of seized spirit for the five year period under review were as
follows.

(in litres)
Year si Total josal Leakage Closing Percentage
balance _ of leakage

We noticed a reduction in the percentage of leakage of seized spirit during the
last two years as compared to earlier years. However, in the absence of a norm
relating to permissible percentage of leakage, we are unable to conclude
whether the Department efficiently disposed of seized spirit.

We are of the opinion that absence of a norm may result in excessive leakage
with a resultant adverse impact on revenue, in the form of cost of spirit and
excise duty thereon. For instance, leakage of 2.96 lakh bulk litres of seized
spirit during the five year period from 2006-07 to 2010-11, has a potential
revenue impact of = 1.07 crore. Further, absence of norms for leakage may
lead to misuse of seized spirit for making illicit liquor.

5.4.5 Was enforcement work at the checkposts managed effectively and

efficiently?
The Department जुबान न am -
established major and S. : 5, > XACISE CHECK POST

minor check posts
along the border
districts like
Thiruvananthapuram,
Palakkad, Kasargod
ete. The details of the
check posts were as
follows:

32


Chapter V-Control Activities

Name of District Number of Check Posts
Major Minor

Our physical observation of the check posts revealed that:

. In Thiruvananthapuram, the minor check posts were in temporary
sheds without any facilities.
. The staff working

in the check posts was not
provided with wireless
equipment or arms. Hence,
they were unable to stop a
suspected vehicle or to
give information to other
offices for taking
immediate action.

e The ineffective
enforcement is reflected in
low detection /registration
of cases through check
posts. During the five year
period the numbers of
cases detected through the check posts in Thiruvananthapuram and Kasargod
divisions were as below:

SI.No Check po: ir 006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 Total

SI.No. 1 to 5 at Thiruvananthapuram and 6 at Kasargod

The details of cases detected from Walayar check post in Palakkad district were not separately
recorded.

. We were informed that there are 14 entry points from Karnataka State
in Kasargod, against which only three check posts were operated. In the other
11 entry points, commercial tax check posts were functioning. The border
patrol units of the Excise Department detected 73 cases in these routes during
the last five years pointing to the need for setting up check posts at these entry
points also.

33


Performance Audit of State Excise Department for the year ended 31 March 2011

Case study: Irregular exemption granted at Walayar check post

A priority for a class of vehicles coming through the sales tax check posts was
granted under the Kerala General Sales Tax/Kerala Value Added Tax Act
termed Green Channel facility. This was granted to M/s Malabar Cements
Ltd., Walayar and the vehicles with cement bags coming from the factory
were allowed to pass through the check post without verification of vehicles.
However this facility was not applicable to Excise Department and all the
vehicles were to be checked at excise check posts. Records of vehicles
checked were not being maintained at the check posts. Hence, we interacted
with check post officials and were informed that all vehicles of Malabar
Cements with Green Channel card coming through the excise check posts
were allowed to pass through without verification.

The Excise Department had registered (January 2008) a case of illicit spirit
transported through Walayar excise check post by misusing the system of
green channel facility. As per media reports 150 trucks containing more than
8000 litres per load of illicit spirit were allowed to pass through without
verification. We consider that the irregular exemption granted at the excise
check post had caused transportation of illicit spirit into the State which could
be used for production of unaccounted liquor or for mixing with toddy.

° We noticed that in all the border areas, the taxes department of the
Government has two check posts, one each for the Commercial taxes and the
Excise Department. We consider that this arrangement leads to duplication of
infrastructure facilities and further, the vehicles have to be stopped at both
check posts, often, within a short distance.

5.4.6 Did the Department exercise effective supervision over toddy shops?

The privilege for vending toddy was
granted through public sale as prescribed
in the Kerala Abkari Shop Disposal Rules,
2002 for a fixed annual rental for each
if toddy shop as may be decided by the
© Government from time to time. The right
under this licence was confined to
manufacture and sale of fermented toddy
tapped from Coconut, Palmyra or
Choondapana palms on which tree tax
under the Act was paid. During the years
2009-10 and 2010-11 there were 5,214 and
5,215 toddy shops respectively in the
State.

34



Out of the total
tree tax
collected during
the last five
years, 34
percent was
collection from
Chittoor range
alone and out of
the total tree tax
from Palakkad
division 87
percent was
from Chittoor
range

Chapter V-Control Act

5.4.6.1 Was tree tax under assessed?

Tree tax is levied under Rule 2,4 and 6 of the Tree Tax Rules. Under the
tules, the Department issued licences for each half year from April to
September and from October to March for collecting toddy from coconut tree
and Choondapana (sago) tree. In case of Palmyrah trees the licence is issued
for one year. As per rules, all the trees shall be marked within three weeks
afler issue of licence, under the personal supervision of the Excise Inspector or
other competent person and toddy can be drawn for sale only from the marked
trees.

Details of revenue under tree tax in the selected divisions for the last five years
were as follows:

Tree tax realised (@ in lakh) Total
2006-07 | 2007-08 2008-09 | 2009-10 2010-11

_ , 8.6%

ब Thiravananthapuram Bl Alappuzha O Thrissur
O Palakkad Bi Kozhikode DKasargod
बह Other districts

Our analysis of collection of tree tax revealed the following:

. The total tree tax for the selected district was $11.17 crore and for the
State for the last five years was = 17.37 crore of which 39 per cent was
contributed by Palakkad division and 34 per cent by Chittoor range in
Palakkad division.

. Coconut trees were tapped in the Chittoor range from large plantations
for inter division transport of toddy. The Intelligence report (June 2010) on
toddy shops concluded that for the interdivision transfer of toddy, tree tax was
paid for lakhs of trees belonging to Chittoor Range. However, in the large
plantations where tapping was taking place, there were areas with no
numbering and duplicate numbering. Based on the report, we are of the

35


Performance Audit of State Excise Department for the year ended 31 March 2011

The check post
established at
Kombazha for
checking
interdivision
transport of toddy
was not effective

opinion that the Department does not have effective controls to ensure that

toddy was tapped only from the marked trees.

. As per the State Excise Manual the yield per tree is 1.5 litre of toddy.
However the Expert Committee after detailed studies on yield of toddy
recommended (December 2009) fixing an average of three litre per tree.
However, for the issue of permits and for calculating total toddy production in
the State, yield is calculated at 1.5 litre per tree. Further, it is assumed that
toddy was tapped only from marked trees.

We are of the opinion that as the actual yield of toddy was higher than the
estimated yield and further as toddy was tapped from unmarked trees, the tree
tax towards toddy is under assessed. We are unable to quantify the probable
loss of revenue in the absence of details of number of trees from which toddy
was actually drawn.

5.4.6.2. Was the Kombazha check post effective in controlling misuse of
permit system?

Palakkad division was the main toddy production centre in the State and large
quantities of toddy were being transported from Palakkad division to other
divisions in the State for which the Deputy Commissioner of Excise, Palakkad
issues inter division transport permits. The permits were issued for each half
year.

In order to control the misuse of permits, the Department established
(April 2009) a check post at Kombazha near Kuthiran Hills at NH 47 between
Thrissur and Palakkad districts which was placed under the Assistant Excise
Commissioner (Enforcement), Thrissur. It was decided that all the
consignments of toddy transported should pass through this check post and be
subjected to verification by the Excise Officials. A register for noting the
vehicle number, permit number and date, quantity of toddy transported, shop
number, range of destination, etc. was also prescribed. The quantity allowed
for daily transport, numbers of the vehicles used for transport, etc. were to be
noted in the permits. The excise officials had to ensure at the check posts that
only the permitted quantity of natural toddy was transported and the vehicle
used was the permitted one.

We scrutinised the records and observed the procedures followed at the check
post which revealed the following:

. There was no facility at the check post to verify the quality/quantity of
toddy transported. In reply to an audit query, the Department replied that there
was no mechanism to measure the actual quantity of toddy transported or to
collect toddy samples at the check posts.

. Even though the permit was prescribed with daily columns for
punching, to avoid repeated transportation, the permits were not punched.
Instead, the quantities transported were noted in a note book kept by the
licensee, which was not subjected to any inspection.

° Cans used for transporting toddy were not filled completely and the
quantity was often below the permitted level. This provided scope for filling
the cans with spurious toddy after passing through the check post.

36


Chapter V-Control Act

. Toddy intended for different shops were transported in a single can,
which again provides an opportunity for emptying the entire quantity in a
single shop and filling and transporting illicit toddy to other shops in the
absence of proper excise supervision.

न We cross checked records at Kombazha check post and the stock
registers of twenty toddy shops relating to eight different groups in Kottayam
district. Our analysis revealed significant variation between the quantities
noted at the check post and at the toddy shops as detailed below:
(in litres)
Permit | Quantity brought as Quai Variation

Quantity 1 per shop stock
account

. Even though it was decided (10 May 2010) to collect all the toddy
transported through interdivision permit relating to a particular range in the
collection centre of the range to the concerned toddy shops under escort of
excise guards, this instruction was kept in abeyance.

We are of the view that the permit system for transportation of inter division
toddy and the functioning of the check post created for controlling inter
division transport were largely ineffective. We are of the opinion that due to
several flaws, the existing controls will not be able to ensure that
spurious/artificial toddy was not transported under the garb of inter division
transportation.

5.4.6.3 Was the permit system for inter division transport of toddy
misused?

During the last five years the revenue realised at the rate of हैं 1 per litre
through inter division transfer of toddy in Palakkad division was as follows:

Fee Collected (% in crore)

The total quantity of toddy that was permitted for inter division transport as
per the number of permits issued and quantity fixed per day and the fee

37


Performance Audit of State Excise Department for the year ended 31 March 2011

The field offices
had suggested
stoppage of
interdivision
transport of toddy
as it was being
used as a cover
for centralized
production and
distribution of
artificial toddy

actually collected at % 1 per litre for the period 2008-09 to 2010-11 were as
follows.

Total
Quantity Total for the
No of of quantity
Permits toddy(litre for 180

Quantity of
toddy for
which fee was
collected at 1
per litre)

Year

We noticed that during all the three years the quantity actually transported was
much higher than what was permitted. However, considering higher yield of
toddy, the licensees were allowed to transport excess toddy by paying the
permit fee @ हैं per litre. The average yield recorded by the Expert
Committee was 3 litre per tree instead of 1.5 litre prescribed at present.

We noticed that the field officers of the Department recommended stoppage of
inter division transport of toddy as the system was being used as a cover for
centralised production of artificial toddy and their distribution through toddy
shops creating health hazards. However, the Department has not taken any
action on this matter.

We are of the opinion that even if the higher yield suggested by the Expert
Committee is adopted, still the toddy actually transported was much higher
than the quantity for which license was issued due to the weaknesses in the
functioning of the checkposts as explained in para 5.4.6.2, which indicated the
possibility of artificial toddy being transported under the cover of permits.

5.4.7 Was enforcement compromised due to delay in providing
infrastructure?

5.4.7.1 Did non-availability of speed boat hamper enforcement?

Alappuzha division has vast areas covered by backwaters and network of
waterways alienated from the mainland by circumscribing lagoons and lakes.
A boat available with Kuttanad range was auctioned in 1998 and since then
the office had no boat for enforcement activities. The Department also found
that the enforcement work of the Range office was not effective and that
smugglers and hooligans were utilising this area as a safe haven and as a
transit point to smuggle spirit, illicit liquor and narcotic substances into other
parts of the State.

38


Chapter V-Control Activities

The Department
took eight years to
purchase 110
pistols for its
enforcement
officials. As no
ammunition was
purchased, these
pistols could not
be used

The Government accorded administrative sanction (March 2004) for the
purchase of a big boat and a speed boat. Though the Excise Commissioner
invited tenders (March 2004) for supply of the boats and two parties had
submitted quotations, no further action was taken on the matter. The
Department stated (May 2004) that funds provided for purchase of boats was
mainly used for purchase of vehicles and hence the purchase of boat had to be
deferred.

After five years, the Excise Commissioner proposed (August 2009) purchase
of boats for Kuttanad range of Alappuzha division. The Commissioner
proposed purchase of a speed boat from M/s Steel Industries Limited, Kerala
(SILK) for हैं 33.35 lakh and the Government accorded administrative sanction
(May 2010) for the procurement of the speed boat. An agreement was signed
with M/s SILK for delivery of the boat within 180 days from payment of the
first instalment. Though the first instalment of = 3.36 lakh was paid (May
2010), the boat has not been delivered so far (June 2011).

We are of the opinion that the lukewarm approach of the Department deprived
the Kuttanad range of the services of a boat for twelve years from the date of
auctioning the departmental boat. We consider that enforcement work was
seriously compromised due to inaction on the purchase of a boat, particularly
considering the fact that the region was used by nefarious elements for
smuggling.

5.4.7.2 Were the enforcement employees adequately armed?

As part of the programme for modernisation of the Department, a sum of
& 1.06 crore was provided separately in the budget for the years 2003-04 to
2010-11 for purchase of arms and ammunition as shown below:

Budget Provision | Expenditure
in lakh) in lakh)

We noticed that though budget provision was available, no expenditure was
incurred up to 2008-09. The Excise Commissioner submitted a proposal (May
2008) for purchase of 0.32 pistols and the Government sanctioned (July 2009)
the purchase. The Excise Commissioner placed (January 2010) a revised
purchase order on Gun and Shell Factory, Cossipore, Kolkata (Purchase order
submitted in July 2009 was defective) and purchased 110 pistols at a cost of
र₹ 93.89 lakh by utilising the fund of = 28.13 lakh available for 2009-10 and
2010-11 and % 65.76 lakh from the balance available in the allocation for
modernisation.

We noticed that the pistols purchased were kept idle as ammunition was not
purchased. Further, even after the purchase of 110 pistols, only 160 pistols and
revolvers were available against the requirement of 420. We are of the opinion
that due to delays in procuring arms and ammunition, the Department failed to
adequately arm the enforcement employees despite availability of funds.

39


Samples given
for chemical
analysis even
five years before
were pending at
chemical
examination
labs

Performance Audit of State Excise Department for the year ended 31 March 2011

In response to our observation, the Department replied that it was decided to
purchase ammunition after the purchase of pistols and that only 300 officers
were working in the field units of which well trained officers were even less
and hence the stock of 160 pistols and revolvers was sufficient.

We are unable to accept the reply of the Department as it was the duty of the
top management of the Department to sufficiently train and arm all the
employees engaged in enforcement work.

5.5.1 Did the Department maintain complete and accurate records of
samples sent for chemical analysis?

Samples of IMFL and toddy were regularly taken during routine inspections of
IMFL /toddy outlets or during raids conducted and were sent to the three
Regional Chemical Laboratories for analysis. Test check of the records
revealed that in two‘ offices the sample register was not properly maintained.
We noticed that the register did not contain details of all the samples sent for
analysis and the test results received. In Kozhikode Division, as per the
register, 1569 samples were sent for chemical analysis, but test results were
noted only in 26 cases. As the Chemical Examiner stated (May 2011) that no
test results were pending for Kozhikode, it can be concluded that the test
results were not noted in the register maintained at the Division.

We are of the opinion that absence of complete details in the register would
hinder generation of important data on the number of cases in which
adulterated/spurious liquor was found and the follow up action taken on such
cases.

5.5.2 Was the Department able to perform chemical analysis of the
samples in a timely manner?

We noticed that as on March 2011 a large number of chemical analysis reports
were pending for more than five years in all the test checked circles except
Kozhikode as shown below:

Name of Circle No. of toddy sa No. of samples Percent of
sent for chemic न ० samples pending
examination

* ECO Chittoor, EDO Kozhikode

40


Chapter V-Control Activities

More than
19000 samples
received in
Regional
Chemical
Laboratories
during the
period 2004 to
2011 were not
analyzed so far

We also noticed that while the chemical analysis reports relating to samples
sent from the distilleries were given by the Chemical laboratories on the same
day/next day itself, the toddy samples were pending analysis for years.

The Chief Chemical Examiner, replying (May 2011) to our audit query, stated
that the samples were getting accumulated in the laboratory, which created a
time gap of one to two years between the date of collection and examination of
samples. Lack of sufficient staff strength and priority being given to distillery
samples and those involved in the Abkari cases were cited as the other reasons
for the delay. The Chief Chemical Examiner also stated that as no purpose was
served in examination of samples afler the licence period, the Department
decided to deviate from the analysis of samples on the order of receipt and
started analysing current samples after giving permission to destroy more than
7000 toddy samples relating to old periods. For instance, the samples taken up
to July 2005 were not analysed and only samples taken from August 2005
onwards were taken up for analysis. However, due to the huge disparity
between receipt and disposal, samples pending analysis increased and it was
again decided to analyse fresh samples from July 2009 onwards.

The Chief Chemical Examiner stated that the number of samples pending with
them was as follows:

Period No of samples pending

The Chief Chemical Examiner also stated that even if analysis was completed,
there was delay in issuing certificates of chemical analysis due to the large
number of cases pending in the typing section for want of sufficient number of
typists. This was being cleared by engaging typists on contract basis. A new
report generating software was also being developed for preparing and
printing the certificates by the analysts immediately after analysis.

We consider that the undue delay in analysing the samples severely impedes
enforcement action against erring licensees/spurious liquor traders and delays
the preparation of charge sheets. Further, non-analysis of the samples sent to
the laboratories may encourage the sale of illicit liquor.

41


Performance Audit of State Excise Department for the year ended 31 March 2011

Even when
artificial toddy
was detected
Chief
Chemical
Examiner
could not
report it

5.5.3 Were the test results of chemical analysis useful?

5.5.3.1 Were the test results of toddy samples useful?

The Government fixed 8.1 per cent alcohol as the maximum alcohol
permissible in toddy. The Department requested the Chief Chemical Examiner
to state specifically whether a toddy sample was artificial or natural. We
noticed that the chemical analysis report states the percentage of alcohol
contained in the sample and whether the sample contained any noxious
substance, but does not specify whether the toddy is natural or artificial.

The Chief Chemical Examiner informed (August 2009) the Excise
Commissioner that the Chemical Laboratory could not give a definite opinion
as to whether the samples of toddy analysed were artificial or natural due to
lack of specific norms for natural toddy. He stated that he had requested the
SRO 144/07 to be modified by incorporating the recommendations of the
Committee on Chemical Composition of Toddy, so that the artificial or
adulterated toddy could be clearly identified and reported. The Committee’s
report (dated 19 January 2009) was still pending with the Government.

We are of the opinion that non-prescription of correct parameters of natural
toddy was preventing the Chief Chemical Examiner from reporting samples of
artificial toddy, and this lacuna has rendered the chemical analysis of samples
a futile exercise. We are of the view that this serious shortcoming may lead to
severe health problems to consumers of artificial toddy and facilitate spurious
toddy traders to escape from the clutches of law.

After we pointed out the matter the Government stated (November 2011) that
the Technical Committee constituted for the purpose of finding out parameters
to distinguish natural and artificial toddy had submitted only a preliminary
report and that the final report is awaited. Further, due to retirement of certain
members, Government is actively considering the reconstitution of the
Committee.

Further developments have not been received.

5.5.3.2 Were test results of IMFL/Beer samples useful?

We noticed that the test results submitted by distilleries from other states
contain detailed analytical reports based on BIS/IS standards. However, the
test results given from the State Chemical Examination Laboratories only
mention the alcohol percentage/ volume and whether it was harmful for
human consumption or not, ete. It could not be ascertained from the report as
to whether IMFL samples taken from IMFL retail outlets included low quality
(seconds) liquor.

व


There is no
separate
ministerial
staff in the
Excise
Department

Against 279
vehicles there are
only 229
sanctioned post
of drivers and in
48 field offices
there are 10
sanctioned post
of driver

5.6 Did the Department manage m

As on 31 March 2011 the total sanctioned strength of the Department was
4841 out of which there were 173 vacant positions. The vacancy position was
as follows.

Name of Po Sanctioned Sti

5.6.1 Did the Department have adequate manpower to discharge its
functions?

Our analysis revealed that the Department did not possess adequate manpower
as detailed below:

e All the functions of the Department were being carried out by the
uniformed personnel. There were no ministerial cadre to carry out the
routine office work in the Department. We noticed that the
enforcement employees were posted for office duty for short terms
which in our view would adversely affect both the enforcement work
and the office work as the employees were posted to sections for short
periods.

This problem was highlighted in three different study reports submitted by the
Personnel And Administrative Reforms Department (P&ARD) in 1998, 2008
and 2010 and it was recommended that ministerial wing abolished in 1968
should be reintroduced. We also observed that the Excise Commissioner sent
proposals to the Government for introduction of ministerial staff only in
January 2011, which was pending with the Government.

. The Department has 279 vehicles against which there were only 229
sanctioned posts of drivers. The Department informed us that there
were 48 offices having four wheelers without sanctioned post of
drivers and that a proposal for creation of post of drivers had been sent
to the Government in May 2011. We also noticed that in 51 field units
the vehicles were manned by drivers on daily wages. As the field units
of the Department were engaged in enforcement work that required
quick mobility and reliable drivers, we are of the view that absence of
regular drivers hampered the enforcement work.

° Though the department has to pursue hundreds of cases in the courts
there was no legal section and a law officer on deputation was
functioning without any supporting staff.

e P&ARD in their report (2008) on ‘Simplification of procedures and
methods in Excise Department’ recommended recruitment of women
Excise Guards, as women were also involved in abkari cases. It was

B


Performance Audit of State Excise Department for the year ended 31 March 2011

also recommended to provide quota to Excise Guards and Preventive
Officers in the recruitment of Excise Inspectors. This recommendation
has not been acted upon so far.

. KSBC had monopoly rights over the procurement and distribution of
IMEFL in the State. All the permits for such procurement/transport were
issued from the office of the Assistant Excise Commissioner (AEC)
attached to KSBC. We noted that the staff strength of AEC office,
fixed in June 1997, has not been changed till now though the work load
had increased manifold, from 5,183 permits issued in 1997 to 35,085
permits in 2009-10. Similarly, the number of FL1 shops and godowns
had also increased during this period.

Recommendation 11: The Department may carry out a work study to
clearly assess the manpower needs.

5.6.2 Did the Department provide adequate training to its employees?

The Department has not so far conducted any training needs analysis. Till
1996 the uniformed personnel of the Department were trained at the Police
Training College. However, there was no regular training programme in the
Department during 1996 to 2004. We noticed that even after setting up of the
State Excise Academy and Research Centre at Thrissur in March 2004 only
1,730 persons belonging to different cadres were given three months training
and there are still 1,184 personnel in the Department without any training.
Even though an annual plan was prepared for the year 2011-12 it could not be
adhered to for want of infrastructure facilities. In his letter dated October 2011
to the Excise Commissioner, the Principal of the Training Academy stated that
the present building had no space to conduct the proposed training and that the
new building constructed for the Academy had not been handed over to them
till date.

We also observed that even though an Excise Intelligence and Investigating
wing was started in 2004, no special training was provided to the staff for this
specific function. We are unable to comment on the quality of training as there
are no records of feedback from trainees.

address social concerns 0

As pointed out in previous chapters, even though the State revenues from
Excise was steadily increasing, studies conducted by UN agencies and NGOs
revealed increasing health and social problems in the State due to alcoholism.

Kerala has the highest per capita consumption of alcohol in India, consuming
more than 8 litres of liquor per person annually. According to a study by
Global Alcohol Policy Alliance, over the past 20 years the number of drinkers
has increased from one in 300 to one in 20 in India and the age at which
youngsters begin to consume liquor has come down in Kerala from 19 in 1986
to 17 in 1990 and 14 in 1994.

According to a WHO report (February 2011), 3.2 lakh young people between
the age of 15 and 29 die annually from alcohol related causes which represents
9 per cent of all deaths in that age group. Even though such statistics for the

44


Chapter V-Control Activities

As per Police
records,
sudden death
due to
alcoholism
was 67 in
2006-07 which
increased to
93 in 2010-11

State is not available, as the age of initiation was 14 or less, the situation may
not be different in Kerala. Decreasing mental health indicators for the state
like increase in suicide rate, rising number of divorces linked to alcoholism,
etc. are also areas of concern.

One of the policy measures commonly adopted against alcoholism is to
increase the statutory minimum age for drinking. According to studies an
increase in the age of legal drinking from 18 to 21 achieves 60 per cent of the
effort of prohibition on alcohol consumption. In Kerala the minimum legal
drinking age is 18, whereas in Delhi it is 25 and recently Maharashtra also
increased the age to 25 and introduced permit system for drinking.

We are of the view that increase in the number of de-addiction centres in the
state in recent years is a pointer to the increasing scourge of alcoholism. We
also noticed that none of the de-addiction centres has obtained licence from
the Kerala State Mental Health Authority, the licensing authority as per
Mental Health Act, 1987, to issue licences to de-addiction centres.

Data obtained from the State Crime Records Bureau revealed that cases of
sudden death and suicide due to alcoholism in the State were as shown below:

Sudden death due Suicide due to
to alcoholism over alcoholism

registered

As these are only reported cases, the actual numbers would be much higher.
The P&ARD report on ‘Simplification of Procedures and Methods’ stated that
a study had shown that nearly 70 per cent of 42,365 road accidents in the State
during 2007 were due to drunken driving.

We are of the opinion that the Department does not have an effective strategy
to counter various social ills caused by alcoholism like suicides, road
accidents, falling health and premature death.

45


The work of
computerisation of
issue of permits for
import/ export/
transportation of
spirit/ liquor
started 6 years
back was not yet
completed

CHAPTER-VI: INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS

6.1.1 Was computerisation by M/s Keltron effective?

The Department started computerisation in 2002-03 by purchasing from M/s
Keltron 18 computers, of which four were installed in the Commissionerate
and the other 14 issued to the 14 divisions. Work was awarded (April 2004) to
M/s Keltron for development of six software modules!. As per records, M/s
Keltron completed the work (April 2005) and the software was demonstrated
(May 2005) to the officials of the Department. Further details regarding
utilisation of the software were not available in the records provided to us.
However, we noticed from the letter (26 October 2007) sent by the Excise
Commissioner to the Government that the Department did not have any
software except SPARK system, for preparing the pay rolls. The Government
sanctioned (March 2011) purchase of a web based solution from M/s Keltron
at a cost of = 11 lakh for issuing No Objection Certificates, permits for ENA,
approving labels, etc. We noticed that during 2002-03 to 2010-11 the
Department purchased 277 computers and peripherals for = 1.22 crore. As the
Department did not maintain stock register of computers, we could not
comment on the issue and usage of the computers.

In reply to our audit query, the Department agreed (May 2011) that no
software other than SPARK was being used in the Department and that
discussion was being held with NIC for development of various softwares.
Regarding non-maintenance of stock register, the Department replied that
absence of stock register of computers was already noticed and that urgent
steps will be taken to verify the stock.

6.1.2. Was computerisation of issue of transport/import permit system
put to effective use?

We noticed that on an average the Assistant Excise Commissioner, attached to
KSBC, issued 1,750 transport permits and 110 import permits every month.
The Department proposed (2005) and the Government sanctioned (April 2007)
computerisation of the permit issue system. The work was entrusted to C-DIT
and funds were provided by KSBC. The software was prepared by C-DIT and
handed over (June 2008) to KSBC. However, as final approval of the software
has not been given by the Commissioner of Excise so far, the software could
not be put to use.

We are of the view that despite the high volume of work and even eight years
after initiation of computerisation, the Department has been unable to
computerise any of its core functions.

' Crime monitoring, Abkari arrears & Licence Managing system, Court cases tracking &
monitoring system, Establishment Management System, Old arrears and reconciliation
system, and audit system

47


Performance Audit of State Excise Department for the year ended 31 March 2011

16.2 Was the Department publishing its administrative report timely?

The annual administrative report published by the Department is the document
that highlights the functions and achievements of the Department. It is thus an
important information tool to reach the public. We noticed that the
administrative reports of the Department were pending from 2001-02 onwards.

6.3 Does the Department have an informative website?|

We noticed that though hosting of the website of the Department was included
in the modernisation programme statement of 2003-04 and recommended in
various study reports it has not been done so far. We are of the view that as the
Department’s functions necessitates constant interaction with the general
public and stake holders like the licensees, a comprehensive website would
have helped in speedy dissemination of information.

48


CHAPTER-VII: MONITORING

Monitoring of work was done in the Department through internal audit,
internal inspection, periodical meetings at field level offices and through
closing of various registers. Our findings on the effectiveness of the
monitoring mechanism are given in the ensuing paragraphs

7.1 १४७६ internal inspection being used as an effective monitoring
mechanism?

Internal Inspection was being conducted by the Deputy Commissioners and
Circle Inspectors. The Deputy Commissioner inspects Circle Offices and
Ranges under his jurisdiction once in six months and Circle Inspectors inspect
Ranges/ Check posts, ete once in three months. An inspection register was
being maintained in these offices in which the dates of inspections were being
noted,

In the six districts test checked by us, we noticed that internal inspections were
being carried out regularly and the dates of inspections were being noted in the
register. We noticed some instances where the inspecting officers had
recorded their observations in the register. Follow-up action taken on the
inspecting officer’s observations was not available and hence we are unable to
comment on the efficacy of these inspections.

Were periodical meetings used as effective monitorin

We appreciate that monthly meetings were being held regularly to review the
progress of court cases, enforcement activities undertaken, progress in
realisation of arrears, raids etc and instructions were being issued for timely
action on the discussed issues. Minutes of these meetings were also being
prepared.

We are of the opinion that effectiveness of the periodical meetings was
hampered slightly as action taken on instructions issued in past meetings were
not followed up in subsequent meetings.

7.3 Was the Internal Audit department effective?|

The Internal Audit Department (IAD) was headed by a Joint Excise
Commissioner with Assistant Excise Commissioner (1), Superintendents (3),
Excise Inspectors (2) and Preventive Officers (5).

Our examination of the records relating to the functioning of the IAD revealed
that:

e Though there are 300 field units to be covered in audit, the IAD did not
prepare annual/biennial audit plans to cover these units at specified
intervals.

न During 2010-11 the IAD audited 93 units, which works out to only 31
per cent of the total field units.


The various
stock registers
were not
properly
maintained or
annual stock
taking/
physical
verification
conducted

Performance Audit of State Excise Department for the year ended 31 March 2011

. As on 31 March 2011, 226 Inspection reports and 277 paras were
outstanding as shown in the following table:

Year No of Inspection No of paras to be
reports pending cleared

. Our test check revealed that effective action was not being taken on the
internal audit reports.

7.4.1 Was the Stock Register of receipt/permit books maintained
properly?

A stock register of various forms, books, etc. like TR5 receipt books, Transit
permit books and Export and Import permit books was being maintained in the
Excise Commissionerate. We observed that:

. The balance was not arrived at after each receipt/issue of the books

. The register was not closed periodically

. Physical verification was not done periodically

e In case of permits which were printed in the Government press, the

numbers were being assigned by the press, and the numbers were not
continuous. On this being pointed out by us, the Department stated that
our observations were noted for future guidance.

7.4.2 Was Vehicle Register maintained properly?
We noticed that:

. The Department did not maintain a stock register for vehicles
containing details of vehicles purchased, issued, condemned, etc.

न Expenses incurred on repairs and maintenance of each vehicle was not
noted. Only the total amount incurred on repairs and maintenance was
being noted.

Responding to our audit observations, the Department replied that absence of
stock registers of departmental vehicles purchased was already noticed and
urgent steps were being taken to verify the stock.

50


Chapter Vil-Monitoring

7.4.3 Were all details available in the Allotment/Appropriation register?

Our scrutiny of the allotment/appropriation register maintained at the
Commissionerate revealed that expenditure against allotment was not
properly/completely noted. Expenditure was not seen noted against Pay and
Allowances allotment.

On this being pointed out, the Finance Officer stated that Pay, DA, HRA and
other allowances under the heads of accounts viz. 2039-00-001-99-01, 98-01
and 97-01 were seen drawn without allocation and that was the practise
followed in that Department. Hence no expenditure was recorded in the
allotment register and that during the current financial year (2011-12)
expenditure would be recorded. The Finance Officer also stated that there was
no proper Finance Section with Superintendents/Section Officers. Preventive
Officers and Excise Inspectors were being taken for ministerial work and they
were not given proper training in financial matters and budgetary work.

7.4.4 Did the Department conduct periodical verification of Arms and
Ammunition?

We noticed that physical verification of the arms issued to the field units was
not conducted. The Deputy Commissioner, Palakkad stated that after 2002, the
physical verification was being done by the possessor himself which shows
there was no control mechanism to verify the stock of arms and ammunition.

51


The Excise Department has not set forth a mission and vision for itself nor
identified risks to the achievement of its goals. Lack of vision has resulted in
declaration of conflicting policy statements like reduction of alcohol
consumption on the one hand and opening more outlets for liquor
consumption on the other.

The Department though entrusted with the task of collection of excise revenue,
along with regulatory and enforcement activities, has only a limited role in
respect of revenue generation. The Department did not levy permit fee
amounting to %16.45 crore due on the transport permits issued from FL9
godowns to the retail outlets. It was able to achieve some of the objectives of
the Amnesty Scheme by clearing about 50 per cent of the outstanding cases.

There was laxity in enforcement activities and the cases detected were also
accumulating due to delay in registration/charge sheeting. 46,183 cases were
pending as on 31 March 2011. Even though the department has its own
intelligence wing, and sufficient inputs are given, the enforcement wing did
not utilise/follow up the inputs to prevent illegal activities.

Chemical analysis results were pending for more than five years due to lack of
infrastructure facilities at the laboratories, causing delay in registration/charge
sheeting of cases wherever necessary. Around 20,000 samples were pending
analysis even after the Department sanctioned destruction of more than 7,000
samples. Even artificial toddy detected was not being reported due to technical
reasons.

418 bar hotels were functioning though they were not entitled for licence
under the existing rules. Though the declared policy of Government was to
discourage alcohol consumption, during the last five years, the Government
granted 153 bar licences and the liquor consumption in the state increased by
63 percent.

Lack of sufficient infrastructure facilities, training and proper equipments for
the personnel were among the factors contributing to the ineffective
enforcement.


Performance Audit of State Excise Department for the year ended 31 March 2011

of Recommendations

The Government/Department may consider implementing the following
recommendations:

e The Department may consider preparing a strategic plan covering
mission, vision and objectives. Further, such a plan may be published
widely amongst employees and the public.

e The Department must ensure that security labels are printed under its
direct supervision.

e The Department may take immediate steps to levy and recover the
permit fees under Section 11 of the Abkari Act for the period from
2006-07 onwards.

e The Government may consider amending the Rules (like prescribing
aerial distance) to ensure that the distance restriction principle of
prohibiting functioning of bars near educational institutions, places of
worship etc is applied in practice.

e The Department may immediately provide the required infrastructure
support to the enforcement wing, so that enforcement activities can be
carried out more effectively.

e The Department may prescribe norms for leakage of seized spirit and
monitor adherence of such norms.

e Fresh toddy collection centres may be started under direct supervision
of the Excise Department and toddy distributed to other divisions
under excise escort.

e The Department may take timely action to equip enforcement
employees with arms, ammunition and provide other support facilities
like boat.

e The Department may prescribe time limits for completion of chemical
analysis and submission of test results. Chemical laboratories may be
provided necessary human resources to enable them to discharge their
functions effectively.

e The Government may consider taking action to prescribe clear
parameters for identifying natural and artificial toddy. The chemical
analysis report should specify whether the sample was of natural or
artificial toddy.

54


Chapter VIlI-Conclusion and Summary of Recommendation

e The Department may carry out a work study to clearly assess the

manpower needs.
“9

Thiruvananthapuram, (K.S. SUBRAMANIAN)
The Accountant General (WF&RA)
Kerala
Countersigned

New Delhi, (VINOD RAI)
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India

55


Appendix

(Criteria for selection of Excise Department for review)

Financial materiality Medium Excise revenue constitutes eight to
nine per cent of the total tax revenue
of the state.

Significance of the High The Department discharges important

activities of the functions of collection of excise

Department revenue, supervision of distilleries
and breweries and preventing
production and consumption of illicit
liquor

Visibility of the activities High Liquor tragedies and various social

of the Department ills caused due to liquor consumption
were being regularly highlighted in
the media

Risk to management:

(a) Financial Risk Medium | Revenue is paid by Kerala State
Beverages Corporation, a public
sector unit and hence major revenue
leakage was not expected.

b) Operational Risk High पु है

(b) Op 8 Past local audit reports and media
reports indicated weaknesses in
functioning of several key controls

Estimated audit impact High Review of the Department has not
been taken up by us in the recent past

Overall assessment High As the assessment revealed four

criteria to be ‘high’ and two as
‘medium’ priority.