v
PREFACE
1. This Report has been prepared for submission to the Governor under 
Article 151 of the Constitution.
2. Chapter-1 of this report indicates auditee profile, authority for audit, 
planning and conduct of audit, organisational structure of the offices of 
the Principal Accountant General (WF&RA) and Principal Accountant 
General (C&CA) and responses of the departments to the draft 
paragraphs. Highlights of audit observations included in this report have 
also been brought out in this Chapter. 
3. Chapter-2 deals with the findings of performance audits while 
Chapter-3 covers audit of transactions in various State Government 
departments and autonomous bodies, etc.  
4. The Reports containing points arising from audit of the financial 
transactions relating to Zilla Panchayats, Statutory Corporations & 
Government Companies and Revenue Receipts are presented separately. 
5. The cases mentioned in the Report are among those which came to notice 
in the course of test-audit of accounts during the year 2010-11 as well as 
those which had come to notice in earlier years but could not be dealt 
with in previous Reports; matters relating to the periods subsequent to
2010-11 have also been included, wherever necessary.

1
Chapter 1 
Introduction
1.1 About this Report
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) relates 
to matters arising from performance audit of selected programmes and 
activities and compliance audit of Government departments and autonomous 
bodies. 
Compliance audit refers to examination of the transactions relating to 
expenditure of the audited entities to ascertain whether the provisions of the 
Constitution of India, applicable laws, rules, regulations and various orders 
and instructions issued by competent authorities are being complied with. On 
the other hand, performance audit, besides conducting a compliance audit, also 
examines whether the objectives of the programme/activity/department are 
achieved economically and efficiently.
The primary purpose of the Report is to bring to the notice of the State 
Legislature, important results of audit.  Auditing Standards require that the 
materiality level for reporting should be commensurate with the nature, 
volume and magnitude of transactions.  The findings of audit are expected to 
enable the Executive to take corrective actions as also to frame policies and 
directives that will lead to improved financial management of the 
organisations, thus, contributing to better governance.
This chapter, in addition to explaining the planning and extent of audit, 
provides a synopsis of the significant deficiencies and achievements in 
implementation of selected schemes, significant audit observations made 
during the audit of transactions and follow-up on previous Audit Reports. 
Chapter-2 of this report contains findings arising out of performance audit of 
selected programmes/activities/departments. Chapter-3 contains observations 
on audit of transactions in Government departments and autonomous bodies. 
1.2 Auditee Profile
There are 74 departments in the State at the Secretariat level, headed by 
Additional Chief Secretaries/Principal Secretaries/Secretaries, who are 
assisted by Directors/Commissioners and subordinate officers under them, and 
10 autonomous bodies which are audited by the Principal Accountant General 
(Works, Forest & Receipt Audit), Bangalore and the Principal Accountant 
General (Commercial & Civil Audit), Bangalore. 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
2
The comparative position of expenditure incurred by the Government during
the year 2010-11 and in the preceding two years is given in Table-1 below.
Table 1: Comparative position of expenditure
(` in crore)
Disbursements
2008-09 2009-10 2010-11
Plan Non-
plan Total Plan Non-
plan Total Plan Non-
plan Total
Revenue expenditure
General services 110 12,165 12,275 98 12,664 12,762 96 13,959 14,055
Social services 5,925 9,948 15,873 7,245 11,874 19,119 9,807 12,301 22,108
Economic services 3,699 7,438 11,137 4,191 8,991 13,182 4,206 10,686 14,892
Grants-in-aid and 
contributions
796 1,578 2,374 769 1,705 2,474 1,079 1,900 2,979
Total 10,530 31,129 41,659 12,303 35,234 47,537 15,188 38,846 54,034
Capital Expenditure
Capital outlay 9,135 735 9,870 11,118 1,018 12,136 12,582 773 13,355
Loans and advances 
disbursed
223 508 731 916 65 981 1,736 2 1,738
Repayment of public 
debt (including 
transactions under 
ways and means 
advances)
- 1,778 1,778 - 2,308 2,308 - 2,807 2,807
Contingency fund - 2 2 - - - 1 12 13 
Public account 
disbursements
- - 54,783 - - 64,029 - - 75,626
Total 9,358 3,023 67,164 12,034 3,391 79,454 14,319 3,594 93,539
Grand Total 19,888 34,152 1,08,823 24,337 38,625 1,26,991 29,507 42,440 1,47,573
1.3 Authority for Audit
The authority for audit by the C&AG is derived from Articles 149 and 151 of 
the Constitution of India and the Comptroller and Auditor General's (Duties, 
Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971. C&AG conducts audit of 
expenditure of the Departments of Government of Karnataka under Section 
13
1 of the C&AG's (DPC) Act. C&AG is the sole auditor in respect of 10
autonomous bodies which are audited under sections 19(2) 2 and 20(1)3 of the 
C&AG's (DPC) Act. In addition, C&AG also conducts audit of 310 other 
autonomous bodies, under Section 14 4 of C&AG's (DPC) Act, which are 
substantially funded by the Government. Principles and methodologies for 
various audits are prescribed in the Auditing Standards and the Regulations on 
Audit and Accounts, 2007 issued by the C&AG.
1 Audit of (i) all transactions from the Consolidated Fund of the State, (ii) all transactions 
relating to the Contingency Fund and Public Accounts and (iii) all trading, manufacturing, 
profit & loss accounts, balance sheets & other subsidiary accounts 
2 Audit of the accounts of Corporations (not being Companies) established by or under law 
made by the State Legislature in accordance with the provisions of the respective 
legislations
3 Audit of accounts of any body or authority on the request of the Governor, on such terms and 
conditions as may be agreed upon between the C&AG and the Government 
4 Audit of all receipts and expenditure of a body/authority substantially financed by grants or 
loans from the Consolidated Fund of the State and (ii) all receipts and expenditure of any 
body or authority where the grants or loans to such body or authority from the Consolidated 
fund of the State in a financial year is not less than ` one crore.

Chapter 1 : Introduction 
3
1.4 Organisational structure of the Offices of the Principal 
Accountant General (WF&RA) and Principal Accountant 
General (C&CA) Bangalore
Under the directions of the C&AG, the Offices of the Principal Accountant 
General (WF&RA) and Principal Accountant General (C&CA), Bangalore 
conduct audit of Government Departments/Offices/Autonomous Bodies/
Institutions under them which are spread all over the State. The Principal 
Accountants General are assisted by six Group Officers. 
1.5 Planning and conduct of Audit
Audit process starts with the assessment of risks faced by various departments 
of Government based on expenditure incurred, criticality/complexity of 
activities, level of delegated financial powers, assessment of overall internal 
controls and concerns of stakeholders. Previous audit findings are also
considered in this exercise. Based on this risk assessment, the frequency and 
extent of audit are decided.  
After completion of audit of each unit, Inspection Reports containing audit 
findings are issued to the heads of the departments.  The departments are 
requested to furnish replies to the audit findings within one month of receipt of 
the Inspection Reports. Whenever replies are received, audit findings are
either settled or further action for compliance is advised. The important audit 
observations arising out of these Inspection Reports are processed for 
inclusion in the Audit Reports, which are submitted to the Governor of State 
under Article 151 of the Constitution of India.  
During 2010-11, in the Civil Audit Wing, 6,579 party-days were used to carry 
out audit of 460 units and to conduct of three performance audits. In the 
Works and Forest Wing, 113 units were audited by utilising 1,038 party-days. 
The audit plan covered those units/entities which were vulnerable to 
significant risk as per our assessment.  
1.6 Significant audit observations
In the last few years, Audit has reported on several significant deficiencies in 
implementation of various programmes/activities through performance audits, 
as well as on the quality of internal controls in selected departments which 
impact the success of programmes and functioning of the departments. 
Similarly, the deficiencies noticed during compliance audit of the Government 
departments/organisations were also reported upon. 
1.6.1 Performance audits of programmes/activities/departments 
The present report contains three performance audits and one long paragraph.
The highlights are given in the following paragraphs.

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
4
1.6.1.1  Comprehensive Computerisation Project of the Department of 
Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs
A comprehensive computerisation project to digitise the data collected through 
a house-to-house survey and issue computerised ration cards to the eligible 
families in the State was approved by Government (August 2005) for the 
Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs.  The project 
sought to eliminate ineligible ration cards, besides creating an effective 
distribution management system to ensure availability of rationed articles, 
reduce leakages and provide an efficient and real-time Management 
Information System.  
The Department selected (March 2006) a Partner under the Build, Operate and 
Transfer (BOT) model of Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) through a bidding 
process to implement the project over a period of five and a half years. 
However, Government’s decision to adopt the PPP route had not been taken 
after considering all alternatives. Balanced sharing of risks between the 
Government and private sector Partner had not been ensured for enduring 
success of the PPP arrangement and the choice of PPP was not taken after due 
diligence.  The selection of the private Partner and the qualifying procedures 
were flawed, resulting in selection of the Partner who did not have the 
capacity to deliver.  
The oversight over implementation of computerisation was so defective that 
the Partner persistently bypassed the contracted procedures and carried on 
with the work in a totally uncontrolled environment.  This resulted in an 
abnormal increase in the number of ration cards including those for the 
families below poverty line.  The Department failed to enforce various 
provisions in the agreement, resulting in several inadmissible payments to the 
Partner, non-remittance/delayed remittance by the Partner of the user charges 
collected from public etc.  Although the Partner was to complete the project 
set-up phase by October 2006, it remained incomplete even five years after the 
scheduled date of completion.  After receiving a payment of 
` 54.23 crore, the 
Partner closed the operations prematurely in November 2010 without 
transferring any of the assets except the database of ration cards.  An 
evaluation of the database by a third party showed that it was incomplete in 
many respects, suffered from many deficiencies and was not capable of 
preventing duplication of ration cards.  
The Department had taken upon itself the responsibility of rectifying the 
mistakes in the database created by the Partner.  As the rectification process 
was still in progress, the process of issue, modification and deletion of ration 
cards in the State had come to a standstill since November 2010. Thus, various 
lapses of the Department/Partner defeated the very objective of providing 
improved services to the public and protecting their interests adequately. The 
PPP project ended up as an example of highly doubtful value for money in a 
crucial area of governance.  
(Paragraph 2.1)

Chapter 1 : Introduction 
5
1.6.1.2 Fire and Emergency Services in Karnataka
The Department of Karnataka State Fire and Emergency Services is 
responsible fire prevention, fire safety, fire fighting/suppression besides 
disaster preparedness and management. The Department embarked (August 
2005) upon  a project viz. K-SAFE 2010 for establishing fire stations in all the 
taluks and places of high risk industries in the State besides upgradation of the 
existing fire stations and modernisation. K-SAFE 2010 was to be implemented 
by the Karnataka State Police Housing Corporation over a period of five years.  
The implementation period was subsequently extended up to March 2013. 
Against the total requirement of 201 fire stations in the State, only 176 had 
been established as of December 2011.  Out of 176 fire stations that had been 
functional, 43 were housed in temporary and rented buildings which lacked 
basic infrastructure facilities.  Out of 1,647 vehicles/equipment required by the 
fire stations, only 1,054 had been procured as of December 2011.  Even the 
basic vehicles/equipment such as jeeps, utility vehicles, water tenders and 
bouzers, portable pumps, etc., had not been procured to the extent required.  
Except for Bangalore and Hubli, other cities in the State did not have special 
equipment to manage fire accidents in high-rise buildings. Search and Rescue 
units had not been established at the metropolitan, district and taluk levels as 
planned.  While the yearly increase in the number of fire incidents ranged 
from 9 to 13 per cent during 2007-11, the proportion of lives lost to those 
saved decreased from 113 per cent in 2007-08 to 79 per cent in 2010-11. The 
value of property lost and saved as assessed by the Department was not 
reliable as this was not professionally assessed. The Department failed to 
analyse the fire reports prepared by the fire stations and in the process, lost the 
opportunity of identifying the shortcomings and improving upon its 
preparedness.  
Hazmat vans required for dealing with industrial disasters had also not been 
procured. The Department lacked facilities and staff for undertaking major 
repairs of vehicles at the Central Workshop in Bangalore, which catered to 
only routine maintenance of vehicles predominantly from Bangalore. Routine 
and major repairs to vehicles in other places were carried out at private 
workshops without adequate checks and balances to ensure that these had been 
executed economically and efficiently.
Vacancies in the post of operating staff aggregated 2,521 (40 per cent) as of 
December 2011 and the Department had not initiated the recruitment process 
despite Government’s approval in December 2009, due to non-finalisation of 
cadre and recruitment rules. Training of personnel was ineffective as there was 
shortage of trainers in the Training Academy. 
The Department did not have a well-functioning communication system to 
communicate effectively with the fire companies at the accident spots.  While 
obsolete wireless sets had not been replaced, repeater facilities had not been 
established in 18 out of 30 districts. Ten out of 11 posts sanctioned for the 
communication wing remained vacant.  The modernisation of the Department 
had not progressed as envisaged in K-SAFE 2010. The Department’s role in 
fire-safety education was also limited. The enforcement of fire code was 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
6
ineffective due to absence of adequate enforcement provisions in the Fire 
Services Act, 1964.
(Paragraph 2.2)
1.6.1.3 Preservation and conservation of heritage in Karnataka
The protection and conservation of heritage monuments in the State other than 
those under the control of Archaeological Survey of India vest with the 
Commissioner of Archaeology, Museums and Heritage, Bangalore and 
Director of Archaeology and Museums, Mysore. 
There was no coordinated strategic approach to heritage management, 
resulting in ad hoc approach to decision making, resource allocation and 
conservation practice. The Commissioner/Director did not focus on 
identification and inventorisation of the heritage monuments and 
consequently, a large number of ancient monuments remained unidentified in 
the State.  
Resource allocation by the Government for heritage conservation during 
2006-10 was very meagre and was not based on need analysis.  There was also 
no funding base for cyclical maintenance of heritage monuments. Twenty-
three technical posts (40 per cent) remained vacant in the Directorate for 
periods ranging from one to 21 years.  Most of the technical staff responsible 
for heritage conservation lacked heritage management competencies and had 
also not been trained.  
Land adjoining the monuments had not been declared as protected despite 
orders issued by Government in March 1998.  Only 31 out of 763 protected 
monuments had protective fencing. Watch and ward engaged for the 
monuments was also very meagre.  Nineteen out of 47 monuments jointly 
inspected had either been encroached upon or had buildings constructed 
adjacent to them.  Annual maintenance of the monuments had not been 
undertaken and the Commissioner/Director failed to project the requirement of 
funds to Government for maintenance.  
The action plans for conservation were ad hoc and not based on an assessment 
of relative significance of the monuments.  There was no prioritisation of the 
meagre resources allocated for conservation which was taken up in bits and 
pieces without a holistic approach. There was also no effort to present the 
heritage monuments to public and most of the monuments jointly inspected 
did not even have a sign board or a display board.  Monitoring of the heritage 
monuments was very limited and no targets had been fixed for their periodical 
inspection.
 (Paragraph 2.3)
1.6.1.4 Working of the Irrigation Central Zone
The financial management in the Zone was deficient resulting in 
under-utilisation of grants under capital heads and increasing liability of 
pending bills under both capital and maintenance heads.  The tendering 
process of modernisation works was deficient as the contracts were not firmed 
up before the commencement of canal closure period for utilising full working 
period and contracts were awarded at higher tender premium. Government did 

Chapter 1 : Introduction 
7
not pursue vigorously for recovering of dues from Andhra Pradesh towards 
expenditure incurred on RDS.  The command area to the extent of 1.12 lakh 
hectares was deprived of irrigation benefits due to failure in controlling 
cropping pattern violations & unauthorised irrigation.  There was laxity on the 
part of Sub-divisional Officers in demanding water rates and levy of penalty 
for such violations.
(Paragraph 2.4)
1.6.2 Compliance audit of transactions
Audit has also reported on several significant deficiencies in critical areas 
which impact the effective functioning of the Government departments/ 
organisations. These are broadly categorised and grouped as:  
/head2rightNon-compliance with rules. 
/head2rightAudit against propriety/Expenditure without justification.  
/head2rightPersistent and pervasive irregularities.
/head2rightFailure of oversight/governance.  
1.6.2.1 Non-compliance with rules
For sound financial administration and financial control, it is essential that 
expenditure conforms to financial rules, regulations and orders issued by the 
competent authority. This not only prevents irregularities, misappropriation 
and frauds, but helps in maintaining good financial discipline. This report 
contains instances of non-compliance with rules involving 
` 27.45 crore.
Some significant audit findings are as under:
/head2rightTwo forest divisions failed to recover the net present value of ` 8.86 crore 
from the user agencies for diversion of 133.96 hectare of forest land for 
non-forest purpose even after more than four years. 
(Paragraph 3.1.3)
/head2rightState Government sanctioned additional 31 posts for Railway Police 
without obtaining clearance from the Zonal Railways and continued to 
meet the entire cost of these additional posts from its resources instead of 
passing on 50 per cent of the expenditure to the Railways.  The loss to the 
State exchequer during 2005-09 alone aggregated 
` 1.48 crore.  
Inadmissible house rent allowance of ` 63.09 lakh had also been paid to 
Railway Police staff working in 18 stations.
(Paragraph 3.1.4) 
/head2rightWrong adoption of period of quarter to reckon base index and non-
deduction of payments of variation items from the value of work done in 
price adjustment bills resulted in excess payment of 
` 9.43 crore to a
company in the construction of a building work. 
(Paragraph 3.1.5) 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
8
/head2rightContrary to Indian Road Congress norms, four Divisional Officers 
executed surface dres sing in improvements to village r oad works, 
resulting in extra expenditure of ` 2.48 crore.
(Paragraph 3.1.6) 
1.6.2.2 Audit against propriety/Expenditure without justification
Authorisation of expenditure from public funds is to be guided by the 
principles of propriety and efficiency of public expenditure. Authorities 
empowered to incur expenditure are expected to enforce the same vigilance as 
a person of ordinary prudence would exercise in respect of his own money and 
should enforce financial order and strict economy at every step.  Audit has 
detected instances of impropriety and extra expenditure involving 
` 38.82 crore, some of which were as under: 
/head2rightKarnataka Housing Board failed to measure the floor area before renting 
out its buildings  and, consequently, collected rent from the occupants for 
a reduced carpet area, resulting in loss of revenue of 
` 7.32 crore.
(Paragraph 3.2.1) 
/head2rightKarnataka Urban Water Supply and Drainage Board awarded the work 
of improvements to a reservoir without resolving a long pending dispute 
over sharing of water and without preparing the estimate based on 
investigation.  These lapses resulted in long delay in commencement of 
work and cost overrun of 
` 9.17 crore including  avoidable payment of 
` 2.26 crore to the contractor on account of revised higher rates for 
comparable items, apart from delay in providing drinking water to the 
targeted population.  The Board also made an excess payment of 
` 1.63 
crore to the contractor towards lead charges for casing material.
(Paragraph 3.2.3) 
/head2rightBangalore Development Authority no tified a forest l and for acquisition, 
acquired it and developed residential sites on it, despite objections from 
the Forest Department.  The Authority, however, had to return the 
acquired land to the Forest Department after incurring wasteful 
expenditure of 
` 1.28 crore.
(Paragraph 3.2.4) 
/head2rightBangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board awarded the work of 
providing and laying feeder mains for 82.12 kms in the newly added areas
of Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike without being in possession of 
clear work fronts along the approved alignments.  There was delay in 
handing over the work fronts, resu lting in an avoidable extra payment of 
` 12.69 crore to a construction company.  
(Paragraph 3.2.5) 

Chapter 1 : Introduction 
9
/head2rightKarnataka Urban Water Supply Drainage Board executed a drinking 
water supply scheme without diverting the sewage flow draining into a 
tank which was the source for the scheme.  The drinking water supply 
scheme remained non-functional despite a huge investment of 
` 5.11 crore, depriving the intended population of drinking water supply.
(Paragraph 3.2.6) 
1.6.2.3 Persistent and pervasive irregularities
An irregularity is considered persistent if it occurs year after year.  It becomes 
pervasive when it is prevailing in the entire system. Recurrence of 
irregularities, despite being pointed out in earlier audits, is not only indicative 
of non-seriousness on the part of the Executive, but is also an indication of 
lack of effective monitoring. This, in turn, encourages wilful deviations from 
observance of rules/regulations and results in weakening of the administrative 
structure.  A significant case was as under:
/head2rightDuring 2009-10, in 772 cases relating to 30 district treasuries, Public 
Sector Banks made payment of family pension at enhanced rate beyond 
the period indicated in the Pension Payment Orders, resulting in excess 
payment of 
` 2.36 crore.
(Paragraph 3.3.1)
1.6.2.4 Failure of oversight/governance
The Government has an obligation to improve the quality of life of the people 
for which it works towards fulfilment of certain goals in the area of health,
education, development and upgradation of infrastructure and public service 
etc. However, Audit noticed instances where the funds released by 
Government for creating public assets for the benefit of the community 
remained unutilised/blocked and/or proved unfruitful/unproductive due to 
indecisiveness, lack of administrative oversight and concerted action at 
various levels involving ` 16.14 crore. A few such cases are mentioned below.
/head2rightIn order to promote tourism, the Department of Tourism took up 
improvements to a road connecting a tourist place without initiating 
proposal for securing the release of forest land from the Central 
Government.  The road remained incomplete despite huge investment of 
` 7.64 crore due to non-availability of forest land defeating the objective 
of promoting tourism.
(Paragraph 3.4.1) 
/head2rightConstruction of a minor irrigation tank taken up in January 2000 was not 
completed even after eleven years of its commencement and the drought 
area was deprived of the benefit of irrigation despite impounding water in 
the tank and spending 
` 8.50 crore.  
(Paragraph 3.4.2) 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
10
1.7 Lack of responsiveness of Government to Audit 
1.7.1 Inspection reports outstanding 
The Hand Book of Instructions for Speedy Se ttlement of Audit Observations 
issued by the Finance Department in 2001 provides for prompt response by the 
Executive to the Inspection Reports (IRs) issued by the Accountant General 
(AG) to ensure rectificatory action in compliance with the prescribed rules and 
procedures and accountability for the deficiencies, lapses, etc., noticed during 
the inspections.  The Heads of Offices and next higher authorities are required 
to comply with the observations contained in the IRs, rectify the defects and 
omissions promptly and report their compliance to the AG, who forwards a 
half yearly report of pending IRs to the Secretary of the Department to 
facilitate monitoring of the audit observations.  
As of 31 December 2011, 804 IRs (3,508 paragraphs) were outstanding 
against Health and Family Welfare, Water Resources (Major and Medium) 
and Public Works, Ports and Inland Water Transport departments. Year-wise 
details of IRs and paragraphs outstanding are detailed in Appendix-1.1. 
A review of the IRs, pending due to non-receipt of replies from these three 
departments, showed that the Heads of Offices had not sent even the initial 
replies in respect of 269 IRs containing 1118 paragraphs issued between 
1980-81 and 2009-10. 
1.7.2 Response of departments to the draft paragraphs 
The Draft paragraphs/Reviews were forwarded demi-officially to the Principal 
Secretaries/Secretaries of the concerned departments between June and 
September 2011 with the request to send their responses within six weeks.  
The Government replies for two out of three Reviews and seven out of 16
paragraphs featured in this Report have been received.  The replies, wherever 
received, have been suitably incorporated in the Report.
1.7.3 Follow-up on Audit Reports 
The Hand Book, the Rules of Procedure (Internal Working), 1999 of the 
Public Accounts Committee provide for furnishing by all the departments of 
Government, detailed explanations in the form of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) 
to the observations which featured in Audit Reports, within four months of 
their being laid on the Table of Legislature to the Karnataka Legislature 
Secretariat with copies thereof to Audit Office. 
The administrative departments did not comply with these instructions and 21
departments as detailed in Appendix 1.2 had not submitted ATNs for 72
paragraphs for the period 1995-96 to 2009-10 even as of 18 January 2012.
1.7.4 Paragraphs to be discussed by the Public Accounts Committee
Details of paragraphs (excluding General and Statistical) pending discussion 
by the Public Accounts Committee as of 18 January 2012 are detailed in 
Appendix 1.3. 
Ἷ5Ἷ5Ἷ5Ἷ5Ἷ5

13
Chapter 2 
Performance Audit
Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs Department
2.1 Comprehensive Computerisation Project of the Department of 
Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs
Executive Summary
A comprehensive computerisation project to digitise the data collected through a house-to-
house survey and issue computerised ration cards to the eligible families in the State was 
approved by Government (August 2005) for the Department of Food, Civil Supplies and 
Consumer Affairs.  The project sought to eliminate ineligible ration cards, besides creating 
an effective distribution management system to ensure availability of rationed articles, 
reduce leakages and provide an efficient and real-time Management Information System.  
The Department selected (March 2006) a partner under the Build, Operate and Transfer 
(BOT) model of Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) through a bidding process to implement 
the project over a period of five and a half years. However, Government’s decision to 
adopt the PPP route had not been taken after considering all alternatives. Balanced sharing 
of risks between the Government and private sector partner had not been ensured for 
enduring success of the PPP arrangement and the choice of PPP was not taken after due 
diligence.  The selection of the private partner and the qualifying procedures were flawed, 
resulting in selection of the partner who did not have the capacity to deliver.  
The oversight over implementation of computerisation was so defective that the partner 
persistently bypassed the contracted procedures and carried on with the work in a totally 
uncontrolled environment.  This resulted in an abnormal increase in the number of ration 
cards including those for the families below poverty line.  The Department failed to 
enforce various provisions in the agreement resulting in several inadmissible payments to 
the partner, non-remittance/delayed remittance by the partner of the user charges collected 
from public etc.  Although the partner was to complete the project set-up phase by October 
2006, it remained incomplete even five years after the scheduled date of completion.  After 
receiving a payment of ` 54.23 crore, the partner closed the operations prematurely in 
November 2010 without transferring any of the assets except the database of ration cards.  
An evaluation of the database by a third party showed that it was incomplete in many 
respects, suffered from many deficiencies and was not capable of preventing duplication of 
ration cards. 
The Department had taken upon itself the responsibility of rectifying the mistakes in the 
database created by the partner.  As the rectification process was still in progress, the 
process of issue, modification and deletion of ration cards in the State had come to a 
standstill since November 2010. Thus, various lapses of the Department/partner defeated 
the very objective of providing improved services to the public and protecting their 
interests adequately. The PPP project ended up as an example of doubtful value for money 
in a crucial area of governance.

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
14
2.1.1 Introduction
During 2002-03, the Department of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer 
Affairs (Department) digitised the data of 42 lakh Below Poverty Line (BPL) 
families and issued 40 lakh BPL ration cards.  However, the digitisation failed 
to address the needs of the Department as there was no mechanism for 
updating data.  Further, while many ineligible families had been issued BPL 
ration cards, many eligible families had been left out. The need to eliminate 
ineligible ration cards and cover all the eligible families under the Public 
Distribution System (PDS) prompted the Government to order (January 2005) 
a house-to-house survey which identified (March 2005) 1.27 crore fam ilies in 
the State including 65.79 lakh belonging to the BPL category. In August 2005, 
the Government set out its vision of issuing computerised ration cards to the 
eligible families by approving a comprehensive computerisation project. The 
project sought to (i) improve the targeting of benefits to the citizens by 
eliminating ineligible ration cards and ensuring ration cards to all the eligible 
families, (ii) create an effective distribution management system to ensure 
availability of rationed articles and reduce leakage, (iii) increase the efficiency 
of the Department by business process reengineering and reducing paper based 
processes, (iv) align with e-governance initiatives of other departments and
leverage the infrastructure set up by these departments, and (v) provide 
efficient and real-time Management Information System to the Department 
etc. The Department selected (March 2006) a partner under the Build, Operate 
and Transfer (BOT) model of Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) through a 
bidding process to implement the project.
The partner was to develop, build, construct and commission the project 
within 6½ months (set-up phase) and operate and maintain it for a period of 
five years (operation and support phase).  During the set-up phase, the partner
was to digitise the survey data and supply temporary ration cards or coupons 
(TCs) for issue to the families.  Thereafter, the photographs and finger 
biometrics of family members above the age of 12 years were to be captured.  
After validating the data collected and verifying these with other external data 
bases, the partner was to issue permanent ration cards to the families.  The 
partner was also required to put in place necessary infrastructure such as 
hardware, software, networking, connectivity, etc., and host the data on the 
servers of the Revenue Department available at the State and taluk levels. This 
would complete the set-up phase, after which the operational support activity 
was to remain active for a period of five years.  
Against the projected expenditure of ` 104.52 crore, the Department had spent 
` 54.53 crore and even the set-up phase of the project has not been completed 
(September 2011). 
2.1.2 Organisational set-up  
Secretary, Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs (Secretary) was 
responsible for implementing the project.  He was assisted by the 
Commissioner of the Department, Deputy Commissioners and Deputy 
Directors (DDs) at the district level and Tahsildars at the taluk level.  

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
15
A Project Management Committee (PMC) headed by the Secretary and 
consisting of Commissioner, Secretary, e-Governance and others 1 was 
entrusted with the responsibility of monitoring the implementation of the 
project and advising the Department in matters related to the project.
2.1.3 Audit objectives
The Audit was taken up with the objectives of ascertaining whether the:
/head2rightinduction of the private sector agency into the project resulted in 
improving the value for money for the Government and served public 
interest;
/head2rightselection of partner was fair, transparent and competitive;
/head2rightDepartment had put in place a sound system to oversee the efficiency of 
the project implementation including infrastructure set-up, quality 
management and compliance with the contract conditions; and
/head2rightpublic resources had been responsibly and effectively utilised to achieve 
the intended results. 
2.1.4 Audit Scope and Methodology
The audit of the comprehensive computerisation project was conducted during 
January to May 2011 covering the period 2005-11 on the basis of records 
made available by the Secretary, Commissioner, Deputy Commissioners 
(DCs), DDs of nine
2 out of 30 districts and 18 out of 177 taluk offices.  The 
Secretary accepted the audit findings and stated (August 2011) that he had no 
comments to offer.
2.1.5 Audit Findings
2.1.5.1 Adoption of PPP model for the project was not justified 
Under the BOT category of PPP model, the private partner is made 
responsible for designing, building and operating the facilities created during 
the contracted period and thereafter transferring back these facilities to the 
public sector.  The private partner is to bring the finance for the project and 
take responsibility for creating the facilities and maintaining these.  The public 
sector either pays a rent to the private partner for using these facilities or 
allows the private partner to collect revenue from the users. 
Audit observed that the decision to adopt the PPP route had not been taken 
after considering all alternatives.  The decision to take the PPP route for the 
computerisation project was taken (August 2005) by the Empowered 
1 (a) Senior Technical Director and State Information Officer, National Informatics Centre, 
Bangalore,  (b) Deputy Secretary, e-Governance, Computer Research Centre, Indian 
Institute of Science, Bangalore, (c) Director, Bangalore One,  (d) Deputy Director, 
Bangalore Informal Rationing Area (South),  (e) Deputy Director, Food and Civil Supplies, 
Chickmagalur, (f) Chief Executive Officer of the partner,  (g) Deputy Director, East Zone, 
and (h) Chief Information Officer.
2  Bangalore (Rural), Bellary, Bijapur, Chamarajanagara, Gulbarga, Haveri,  Mandya, Raichur 
and Ramnagara
PPP route 
taken without 
due diligence 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
16
Committee considering the success of the Bhoomi Computerisation Project
implemented by the Revenue Department based on the PPP model.  The 
computersiation plan envisaged that the project would be implemented 
without budgetary support.  The Department’s role was to finance the project 
by collecting user charges from the public for issue of ration cards.  The 
partner, on the other hand, was to implement the project in two phases (as 
discussed in paragraph 2.1.1).
According to the agreement, the partner was to be paid at the agreed rates for 
each of the activities under the set-up phase like a construction and service 
contract as shown in Appendix-2.1.  Under the operation and support phase 
also, the partner was to be paid every month for the services as shown in 
Appendix-2.2. The PPP model as conceived by the Department was flawed
as there was reversal of roles of public sector and private partner.  The partner
was not required to bring in any finance and the Department undertook the 
responsibility of mobilising financial resources.  The Department failed to 
analyse in this context whether it would have been possible to create the 
project on its own under regular contracting procedures instead of taking the 
PPP route.  The Department also did not analyse the risks faced by the project, 
especially the one arising from dismal performance of the partner disrupting 
services to the public.  While the assets for the project were created with user 
charges collected from the public, the control of assets remained solely with 
the partner during the set-up and operation and support phases and the 
Department did not have any control over these assets.  Thus, the project 
characteristics and objectives did not logically call for the PPP arrangement. 
The Department underestimated the project complexities and perceived that 
development of IT system and its operation would be straightforward.   The 
complexities were compounded by enlargement of the scope of the work in the 
set-up phase [as discussed in Paragraph 2.1.6.2 (i) & (iv)] resulting in 
additional risks, which the Department failed to manage. 
Further, qualifying procedures, the selection of the partner, reporting, 
oversight system etc., were also flawed, resulting in selection of a partner
inadequately equipped to deliver and the consequent failure of the PPP.  After 
receiving a payment of ` 54.23 crore, the partner closed their operations
prematurely in November 2010 without transferring to the Department any of 
the assets except the ration card database. The progress achieved by the 
partner under various items on the date of closure of operations is shown in 
Table-2, Table-3 and Table-4 in the later part of this report. As the Department 
failed to consider all relevant risks at the time of embarking upon the PPP 
arrangement, the process of issue, modification and deletion of ration cards 
had come to a standstill since November 2010, as discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs.
2.1.5.2 Bidding process and selection of partner
(i) Time limit prescribed for receipt of tenders not adhered to 
The Department invited Expressions of Interest (EOI) from companies/
consortia of companies for the computerisation project on 5 October 2005, 
fixing 29 October 2005 as the last date for their receipt. This process was to 
Time for 
receipt of 
tenders 
reduced 

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
17
facilitate short-listing of the companies eligible for submitting the Request for 
Proposal (RFP).  The Karnataka Transparency and Public Procurement Act 
(Act) prescribes that 60 days are to be allowed for receipt of tenders where the 
cost of work put to tender is more than ` 2 crore. Although the estimated cost 
of computerisation was ` 75 crore, the time allowed to the bidders for 
submission of EOI was only 25 days. Government approved (October 2005) 
the shortened timeframe on grounds of urgency in completing the project. 
However, Government’s decision failed to appreciate the complexity of the 
project and glossed over the need to allow sufficient time to get good response 
to the tender in such a complex project.  Besides, the Department had never 
raised the issue of urgency till it approached (October 2005) the Government 
for grant of exemption from the provisions of the Act.  Even thereafter, the 
Department showed no urgency in completing the project which remained 
incomplete even as of December 2011.  Thus, the rules prescribed for ensuring 
competitive bidding had been disregarded without adequate justification.
Out of nine EOI received, the Department shortlisted three bidders for 
submission of RFP. Government approved (March 2006) entrustment of the 
computerisation project to a partner whose financial bid was the lowest.
(ii) The project was awarded to a partner not satisfying the 
eligibility criteria
The eligibility criteria prescribed at the time of inviting EOI permitted a 
consortium of businesses to submit the EOI.  The partner, instead of forming a 
consortium, entered into two separate teaming agreements with companies.  
The scope of these two teaming agreements was to sub-contract certain 
portions of computerisation to these companies in the event of the partner
being awarded the contract for computerisation.  One teaming agreement had 
been entered into on 15 October 2005 with three relatively smaller businesses 
for subcontracting creation of beneficiary database and issue of ration cards in 
seven districts and providing support functions. The other was executed on 7 
November 2005, after the last date fixed for submission of EOI, with a 
business entity subcontracting the work of setting up the infrastructure for 
computerisation.   As one of the teaming agreements was got executed only 
after submission of EOI, the partner failed to meet the criteria prescribed for 
short-listing on the date of submission of EOI. Even otherwise, the partner
with two separate teaming agreements for subcontracting certain portions of 
computerisation did not qualify as a consortium. The Department, 
nevertheless, recognised the partner as a consortium and shortlisted it for 
submitting RFP.  
Further, after referring the offer of the partner to Government for approval, the 
Department issued letter of intent to the partner on 25 January 2006 without 
waiting for approval of Government.  The Department also erred (March 
2006) in executing the agreement with the partner in its individual capacity 
instead of its capacity as the lead partner of the consortium.  While the 
business entity responsible for infrastructure creation did not participate in the 
computerisation project at all, two out of the three business entities entrusted 
with database creation and issue of ration cards also left (February 2007) the 
Partner was 
selected bypassing 
the eligibility 
criteria 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
18
partner. When the Commissioner sought (April 2007) clarification on this 
issue, the partner informed (May 2007) that the consortium members had 
withdrawn due to inordinate delay in completion of the project and it would 
complete the remaining activities on its own. Thus, the partner who did not 
meet the eligibility criteria and who did not possess the requisite resources was
injudiciously entrusted with the work of implementing the computerisation
project.
(iii) Terms of contract modified at the time of agreement
The Department issued RFP during January 2006 to three shortlisted consortia
of companies and the selection of partner was based on the terms and 
conditions contained in the RFP, which were, therefore, not to be varied or 
modified when entering into agreement with the selected partner.  Scrutiny, 
however, showed that the Commissioner materially altered the terms and 
conditions and nature of deliverables specified in the RFP at the time of 
entering into agreement with the partner as discussed below:
(a) The RFP did not envisage payment of interest for delayed payment of 
bills.  However, the agreement with the partner required the Department to 
settle all the bills within a period of 15 days, failing which interest at one per 
cent per month or part thereof was to be paid on delayed payments.  This 
unauthorised change facilitated an extra payment of ` 1.16 crore to the 
partner, out of which ` 73.56 lakh was not even as per the approved rate as 
discussed below: 
/head2rightThe PMC approved (September 2009) extra payment at the rate of ` 425 
per manday for the additional mandays involved in grievance processing. 
The PMC also approved payment of interest for delay in payment for 
grievance processing. Accordingly, the Department paid interest of          
` 91.85 lakh to the partner.  It was further seen that as per the approval, 
interest at the rate of 8 per cent was to be paid.  The approved rate 
together with interest translated to ` 459 per manday.  However, the 
Department paid ` 513 per manday for 104375 additional mandays, 
resulting in an excess payment of interest of ` 56.36 lakh to the partner.
/head2rightAccording to the agreement, payment was to be made within 15 days 
from the date of receiving a claim from the partner failing which interest 
at the prescribed rate was payable.  In respect of Bangalore Informal 
Rationing Area, the partner submitted a claim for ` 1.18 crore on 26 
March 2009 and the PMC approved payment thereof only in September 
2009.  Though the delay of five months and 7 days attracted payment of 
interest at 6 per cent , the PMC approved interest for a period of 31 
months at the rate of 8 per cent per annum.  PMC’s approval facilitated an 
excess payment of ` 17.20 lakh out of the interest of   ` 24.28 lakh paid to 
the partner.
(b) As per the RFP, the partner was to initially submit a Performance 
Guarantee for 6.5 per cent of the total value of the contract. On successful 
completion of creation of beneficiary database, ration card issue and 
infrastructure creation, the partner could replace the bank guarantee initially 
submitted, with a guarantee for a value that would be the total cost of the 
Material changes 
were made at the 
time of agreement

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
19
project minus the cost of the work successfully completed.  However, as per 
the agreement, the partner was required to keep the initial performance 
guarantee only for a period of one year starting from 27 March 2006 
irrespective of the progress achieved. This enabled the partner to reduce the 
guarantee amount from ` 6.10 crore to ` 1.62 crore from the second year in 
spite of non-completion of the activities prescribed.  Though the partner
stopped the work in November 2010 and there were serious deficiencies in 
performance, the Department failed to take any action for invoking the 
performance guarantee. The partner did not renew the performance guarantee 
even for the reduced value beyond 24 January 2011.
(c) The payment schedule for each of the milestones for the set-up phase 
was also substantially altered to the advantage of the partner at the time of 
agreement as shown in Appendix-2.3. The altered payment schedules 
particularly for (i) online photography and biometric data capture, and (ii) data 
consolidation, validation, issue of ration cards and printing of final assignment 
register extended substantial business advantage to the partner.  While the RFP 
linked the payments with deliverables at the district level, the agreement 
provided for payments for deliverables at the taluk/village level.  The RFP 
mandated the partner to collect add-on data required by other departments 
desiring to use the computerisation project to create their database. The partner
was to collect this add-on data during photography and biometric data capture.  
The payment schedule as per RFP, therefore, clubbed the add-on data 
collection with the activity of online photography and biometric data capture.   
However, the payment schedule of the agreement delinked this deliverable 
from photography and biometric capture and listed it as a separate milestone, 
enabling the partner to become entitled to payment for photography and 
biometric capture without collection of add-on data.  Further, the percentage 
payments as per the agreement were totally at variance with those stipulated in 
the RFP.
Further, according to the schedule of work in the RFP, work on the critical 
component of the project viz., ‘Infrastructure creation, ICT tools procurement 
and deployment, manpower training, and application/software deployment on 
Pilot basis’ was to commence after the first month of the project set-up phase.  
However, the agreement pushed this important deliverable to the fifth month 
towards the end of the set-up phase.
(d) As the project was service oriented, the operational portion of the 
agreement between the Department and the partner was in the form of a 
service level agreement (SLA) which specified the levels of service to be 
provided by the partner.  The SLA also prescribed the limits and metrics for 
lower performance besides specifying the penalties for breach of the metrics.
The RFP envisaged that the Department would reserve all rights to update/ 
modify/change/negotiate the SLAs for better implementation of the project.  
However, the agreement modified this provision to the effect that the parties to 
the agreement might mutually agree to update/modify/change/ negotiate the 
SLAs for better implementation of the project.  It was further seen that the 
penalties for breach of metrics prescribed in the RFP for some key milestones 
were altered in the SLA to the advantage of the partner at the time of 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
20
agreement even before commencement of work on the project as shown in 
Table-2.1 below:
Table-2.1: Penalties as per RFP and SLA
Service Penalty as per RFP Penalty as per SLA
Online photography & 
biometric data capture, 
add-on collection and 
issue of bar coded 
coupons
Deduction of  one performance 
point (PP) for every incomplete 
or incorrect record
- Penalty of ` 10000 per record if 
errors were detected subsequent 
to approval and payment
Deduction of 1 PP for every 
wrong linkage beyond 0.2 per 
cent wrong linkage
Add-on data collection Deduction of 
- 1 PP for every incomplete or 
incorrect record
- Penalty of ` 10000 per record if 
errors were detected subsequent 
to approval and payment
Deduction of 2 PPs for each 
percentage point beyond the 
data error rate of 10 per cent
Data consolidation & 
validation
Deduction of 2 PPs for each 
percentage point beyond the 
accepted data error rate of 10 per 
cent
Penalty of ` 10000 per record if 
errors were noticed after approval 
and payment. 
Nil
Nil
Issuance of ration cards If errors in ration cards were 
detected, partner was to be 
penalised ` 10000 per record
Penalty of ` 10000 per 
category error noticed after 
approval and payment. 
The issue of ration cards was the eighth milestone in the project set-up phase.  
The SLA with the partner envisaged that if the ration card issue at village level
was completed without any penalty, any schedule related penalties levied 
earlier for the activities leading to issue of ration cards would be cancelled, 
entitling the partner to receive full payment.  However, these provisions had 
not been part of the RFP. The provision for cancelling earlier penalties levied 
was uncalled for and amounted to extension of undue benefit.
(e) The performance points to be deducted for delays in deliverables were 
also altered to the advantage of the partner as shown in Appendix-2.4.  For 
instance, for a delay of 4 weeks in delivery of a key milestone, the 
performance point to be deducted as per RFP was 70 while it was only 38.50 
as per the agreement. 
(f) As per the RFP, the partner was required to create an infrastructure 
capacity of 200 transactions per hour at the district level. This was, however, 
modified to 100 transactions per hour to the advantage of the partner in the 
SLA. 
2.1.6 Project implementation
According to the Agreement, the partner was to develop, build, construct and
commission the project within 6.5 months (Project set-up phase) and operate 
and maintain it for a period of five years (Operation and support phase).  The 

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
21
key activities envisaged in the set-up phase as shown below and 
implementation of these activities is discussed in the succeeding paragraphs: 
2.1.6.1 Detailed system study
(i) The partner implemented the project without testing of systems 
The RFP envisaged that the first activity to be taken up by the partner would 
be the detailed study of various systems and processes for achieving the 
project objectives.  The agreement also prescribed that while the study for data 
digitisation to be taken up initially was to be completed within two weeks, the 
detailed system study was to be completed within 2.5 months from the date of 
award of the contract. 
The system study involved a detailed analysis of the existing system, 
preparation and finalisation of a software development plan, software 
requirement specifications (SRS), design document, testing and acceptance 
plan, change management process, third party auditing and finalisation of a 
training plan etc. The partner ignored the system development procedures 
while implementing the project and carried on without finalising the SRS, 
design documents etc. As per the agreement, the Department was to undertake 
testing, acceptance and certification of the deliverables under the project.  The 
Department and the partner were to first jointly prepare a comprehensive 
“Acceptance Test Plan”.  The acceptance tests of the systems designed to meet 
the functionality and performance requirements were to be carried out jointly 
by the Department, the partner and an independent third party.  The 
Detailed system 
study
Scanning, 
digitisation and 
issue of temporary 
coupons
Online photography 
and biometric 
capture
Data 
consolidation 
and validation
Issue of ration 
cards and bar 
coded coupons
Roll-out 
User acceptance 
testing of systems 
not done 
Project set-up

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
22
acceptance tests would be complete only on issue of acceptance certificate by 
the Department to the partner. As no system test plans had been in place, the 
partner did not conduct user acceptance testing and obtain the approval of the 
Department. The Commissioner failed to invoke the agreemental provisions 
and restrain the partner from carrying out the computerisation without 
conducting user acceptance testing of the systems and did not also verify the 
appropriateness and adequacy of application software modules that had been 
used by the partner for the project. In a report submitted to the Commissioner 
in October 2010,  the partner claimed to have developed and deployed various 
softwares for data validation, bulk ration card issue, ration card management, 
data export capability, grievance redressal, etc.  This effectively meant that the 
partner continued to deploy untested and unaccepted deliverables for capture 
and processing of data and the Department never had any access to the 
database throughout the project implementation period.  The Commissioner 
failed to ascertain and assess the procedures put in place by the partner to 
ensure data security, physical and logical access controls, operational 
continuity, data back-up and disaster recovery.  Thus, the lapses of the 
Department in enforcing the contracted processes facilitated the 
implementation of the computerisation project in a totally uncontrolled 
environment.
2.1.6.2 Data Digitisation and issue of Temporary Coupons 
(i) Grievance processing led to abnormal increase of BPL cards 
and delayed project implementation
The door-to-door survey (March 2005) identified 1.27 crore families (65.79 
lakh BPL and 61.05 lakh APL families).  Although sufficient time had elapsed 
between the survey and award of the contract to the partner, the Department 
failed to assess the risks in digitising the survey data without updation.  The 
risks consisted of families not covered by the survey, families splitting up 
during the intervening period due to various reasons, inaccuracies in the 
survey etc. The Department’s decision to proceed with the digitisation without 
managing these risks was, therefore, flawed.  The project design evolved by 
the Department also underestimated the complexity of issuing TCs 
immediately after digitisation.  The succe ss of this process depended largely 
on the reliability of the survey data.  If TCs were to be issued based on the 
untested survey data, the Department would be confronted with the risk of 
having issued TCs to ineligible families, particularly BPL families, in the 
event of survey data proving to be unreliable.  In such a situation, the 
Department would be burdened with the complicated process of cancelling the 
TCs already issued to ineligible families after their identification.  As the 
project envisaged capture of photographs and finger print biometrics of the 
families, issue of permanent ration cards to the eligible families after data 
validation would have ensured that only eligible families were issued ration 
cards.  However, issue of TCs immediately on digitisation of the untested 
survey data led to abnormal increase in the number of ration cards, particularly 
BPL cards, as discussed below: 
BPL families 
increased 
abnormally after 
grievance 
processing 

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
23
/head2rightAs per the agreement, the partner was to complete the digitisation work 
within 45 days.  Against 1.27 crore families as per the survey, the partner
supplied 1.19 crore TCs to the Department between August and October 
2006.  Even before the partner supplied the TCs, the DDs in the districts 
reported (July 2006) to the Commissioner on the possibility of several 
types of discrepancies in the TCs to be issued viz., discrepancies in names 
and ages of the beneficiaries, differences between details as per survey 
and TCs, changes in categories of APL and BPL beneficiaries, omission 
of beneficiaries during survey, changes in Fair Price Depots etc. The 
Commissioner authorised (July and September 2006) the partner to 
receive grievances from the beneficiaries at taluk offices and process 
these within 15 days.  This was a post-survey opportunity given to the 
beneficiaries to submit their grievances and get the discrepancies 
rectified.  This initiative by the Department was belated and untimely as 
the exercise ought to have been done before issuing the TCs. The 
Commissioner directed (October 2006) the partner to grade the grievances 
under nine distinct categories viz., G1 to G9. Grievances under G1 to G7 
related to rectification of errors.  While G8 related to change of category 
from APL to BPL, G-9 related to issue of new cards to those not covered 
by the survey. 
/head2rightAs of December 2006, the partner had received 58.72 lakh applications 
containing 64.22 lakh grievances including 10.39 lakh grievances relating 
to G1 to G7 categories.  It was seen in test-checked taluks that the 
grievances were processed during November and December 2006 and 
TCs in respect of G8 and G9 grievances were supplied by the partner very 
belatedly between February 2007 and November 2008. Further, G1 to G7 
grievances relating to errors in the database were not acted upon.  Non-
rectification of these errors pointed out in 10.39 lakh grievance 
applications resulted in wasting an opportunity to rid the database of 
errors.
The details of TCs supplied by the partner on the basis of digitisation of 
the survey data/grievances and those distributed to the beneficiaries were 
as shown in Table-2.2 below:
Table-2.2: Number of TCs distributed to the beneficiaries
(Numbers in lakh)
Digitisation Number of 
TCs issued
Number of 
BPL TCs 
issued
Percentage of 
BPL TCs to total 
number of TCs
As per survey (including 
Bangalore Informal 
Rationing Area)
118.96 65.79 55
Additional TCs issued based 
on grievance processing  
21.24 20.43 96
Total 140.20 86.22 68
(Source: Information furnished by the Commissioner) 
/head2rightAs of 1 January 2004, Karnataka had about 78 lakh BPL ration cards out 
of 1.05 crore families.  The number of BPL cards was 2.5 times the 
estimate of 31.29 lakh BPL families estimated by the Planning 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
24
Commission.  According to a subsequent sample survey done (January 
2004) by the Planning Co mmission in the State, the exclusion error was 
about 22 per cent while the inclusion error was in excess of 40 per cent.
According to a subsequent report sent (September 2005) by the Principal 
Secretary of the Department to Government of India, the departmental 
survey had brought down the BPL families to a much more reasonable 
number of 60 lakh.  However, while the number of BPL ration cards
increased to 86.22 lakh after acting on the grievances, the number of 
families shot up to 1.40 crore as per the TCs issued.  As per the 
agreement, data validation using business rules and external database look 
up was to be carried out by the partner, wherever possible.  However, the 
partner did not carry out data validation against external databases as the 
Department handed over these to the partner only in March 2009.  Even 
data validation within the beneficiary database was partially carried out 
and the partner did not submit exception reports to the Department.  The 
Department also failed to take sufficient steps to sort out the delay in 
processing of grievances and to examine the reasons for abnormal 
increase in number of BPL families and take corrective action.
(ii) Irregular payments for grievance processing
The Commissioner issued (April 2007) a notice to the partner pointing out 
various lapses on its part including grievance processing and sought to know 
why the contract should not be terminated.  The notice highlighted that more 
than 22 lakh grievances received were due to the mistakes of the partner such 
as (i) wrong names of the card holders, their age, their relationship with family 
members, (ii) wrong addresses, (iii) wrong printing of the APL beneficiary on 
BPL cards and vice-versa, (iv) large number of missing coupons, (v) printing 
of similar coupons up to seven times, (vi) wrong ward numbers, (vii) 
deployment of inexperienced data entry operators, and (viii) non-deployment 
of sufficient infrastructure and manpower, etc. However, the Commissioner in 
his report (May 2007) sent to Government recommended against termination 
of the contract as the project was at a critical stage and any decision to change 
the agency would result in inordinate delay in implementation of the project. 
The partner claimed (August 2007) separate payments for processing the 
grievances on the ground that it was not part of the agreement and that laptops 
and manpower had been additionally deployed for carrying out this work.  The 
PMC approved (January 2008 and September 2009) additional payment of 
` 2.21 crore and ` 5.35 crore for the work at taluk and district levels 
respectively subject to the DDs of the districts certifying the additional 
systems and manpower claimed to have been deployed by the partner.  The 
PMC’s decision to make additional payment of ` 7.56 crore to the partner was 
irregular as it glossed over the lapses of the partner that led to receipt of 
grievances.  It was further seen that the DDs did not maintain any records in 
respect of the additional systems and manpower deployed by the partner for 
grievance processing. The Commissioner also had failed to instruct the DDs in 
the districts to monitor this aspect while authorising the partner to process 
grievance applications.  The DDs, nevertheless, certified the claims of the 
partner based on the information furnished by the latter without having any 
PMC ignored 
the lapses of 
the partner  

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
25
record to check the veracity of the claim.  Thus, DDs also facilitated the 
irregular payment to the partner by furnishing false certificates.  
(iii) Excess payment towards printing of grievances
The partner was to collect the grievances at the taluk office, log in the 
corrections manually and generate two print-outs of the grievances.  While one 
print out was to be given to the beneficiary, the other was to be filed for 
further processing.  The payment of ` 7.56 crore made to the partner included 
` 56.99 lakh towards printing of 87.68 lakh pages of grievance applications. It 
was, however, seen that the partner submitted only 54.52 lakh pages of printed 
grievances in respect of G8 and G9 and did not print and hand over 33.16 lakh 
grievance application pages in respect of G1 to G7.  This resulted in excess 
payment of ` 21.55 lakh to the partner.
(iv) Government ordered issue of temporary ration cards without 
checks and balances
As several eligible families were not covered under the PDS even after acting 
on the grievances, Government instructed (November 2008) the partner to 
receive applications from the left-out families at Nemmadi centres established 
by the e-Governance Department at the Hoblis. These centres provided 
convenient access point for citizens to avail of a number of government 
services.  Each application was to be accompanied by an affidavit furnishing 
the requisite details and applicants furnishing false information were liable to 
face criminal action.  Government, however, authorised (January 2009) the 
partner to issue TCs based only on the affidavits without exercising any 
checks and balances.  The partner was to do the verification after issue of 
temporary coupons at the Nemmadi centres. Against 34.47 lakh applications 
received during January to March 2009, the partner issued 28.99 lakh TCs, 
including 28.44 lakh relating to the BPL category on the basis of self-
declarations. Government’s decision to issue TCs based on self declarations 
without any checks and balances was evidently flawed as it gave unlimited 
scope for bogus ration cards which defeated the very objective of the 
computerisation project.  Further, with the issue of 28.44 lakh TCs relating to 
BPL category, the number of BPL cards in the State increased from 86.22 lakh 
to 114.66 lakh, while the total number of ration cards rose to 1.69 crore, which 
numbers were evidently suspect.
As in the case of grievance processing, PMC approved (September 2009) 
payment of  ` 3.74 crore for processing self declarations received at 
Nemmadhi centres. Though the PMC’s approval was subject to the DDs 
certifying the additional systems and manpower deployed for the purpose, the 
Commissioner paid ` 3.74 crore to the partner without insisting on certificates 
from the DDs. 
2.1.6.3 On-line photography and biometric data capture
After handing over the TCs, the partner’s teams were to visit each village with 
the requisite equipment and capture individual colour photographs and finger 
biometrics of family members above the age of 12 . According to the 
Excess 
payment for 
printing of 
grievances 
Temporary 
ration cards 
issued on the 
basis of  
affidavits 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
26
agreement, this work was to be completed by 27 August 2006.  The partner
was to complete online photography and biometrics for at least 70 per cent of 
the families at the village level and was to make multiple visits to the villages, 
if necessary. The remaining families were to be covered at the taluks/districts.
(i) Biometric system’s capacity not demonstrated
The Project proposed to use biometrics for unique identification of the 
beneficiaries. The process involved capturing biometric data, storing it in a 
central database and comparing new biometrics with what had been stored 
already in the database. It required installation of a biometric infrastructure 
system for capturing the data at the field level, establishment of a central 
database for holding the data already enrolled and a communication 
infrastructure connecting the central database and the field level biometric 
devices. 
The capability and performance of a biometric system is determined through 
two quantitative measures viz., the False Rejection Rate (FRR), and the False 
Acceptance Rate (FAR). The FRR is the proportion of the eligible people 
whom the system fails to enroll after validating with biometrics. The FAR is 
the proportion of ineligible people whom the system permits to enroll after 
biometric validation. The project proposed a combination of two biometrics 
for validation viz., finger print and face to uniquely identify each person. 
The RFP specified a FRR of 1/1000 and FAR of 1/100000 for finger print 
validation. The FRR and FAR of face biometrics were not specified in the 
RFP. The fingerprint and face biometrics combined was to ensure higher 
performance efficiency in terms of FRR and FAR. The Department was 
expected to ensure that the partner deployed a biometric infrastructure that 
was capable of meeting the level of FRR and FAR envisaged in the RFP. 
Audit observed that the FRR and FAR of finger biometric prescribed in the 
RFP were omitted from the agreement entered into with the partner. The 
suitability of the partner’s biometric infrastructure system to meet the 
prescribed levels of FAR and FRR was never checked as no system testing 
had been done and no third party audit had been conducted. Thus, the partner
captured fingerprint biometrics without demonstrating the capability of the 
system to meet the prescribed levels of FAR and FRR.
(ii) Tardy performance in biometrics and photography capture 
Although the agreement envisaged online photography and biometric capture, 
the teams deputed by the partner used individual laptops to capture the 
photographs and biometrics of the beneficiaries.  The requisite infrastructure 
to carry out biometric validation either at the time of capturing photographs 
and biometrics of the beneficiaries at the village level or at the time of 
consolidation of data at the taluk level had not been in place to eliminate the 
ineligible families concurrently.  The partner started the capture of biometrics 
and photographs only in February 2008 and the progress achieved as of 
November 2010 was as shown in Table-2.3 below: 
Partner used 
untested 
biometric 
system 
Capture of 
photographs 
and biometrics 
was incomplete 

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
27
Table-2.3: Progress in capture of photographs and biometrics
(Numbers in lakh)
Stage No. of 
temporary 
coupons issued
No. of families 
photographed and 
biometrics captured
Percentage 
of 
coverage
Data digitisation based on survey 
and processing of grievances
140.20 99.29 71
Self-declaration by beneficiaries 28.99 24.88 86
Total 169.19 124.17 74
(Source: Information furnished by the Commissioner) 
According to the agreement, the partner was entitled to a payment of ` 22 per 
family on completion of capture of colour photographs of all the family 
members and biometrics of those above the age of 12. Even though 74 per 
cent progress was reported to have been achieved, it was seen that biometrics 
of only one member had been captured in respect of 8.40 lakh families.
Records did not evidence whether there were such unusually large number of 
single member families or whether the partner had only partially captured the 
photographs and biometrics of family members in these cases.  Audit could 
not also verify whether full payment at the agreed rates had been made in 
these cases.
It was further seen in Mandya and Bijapur districts that the Commissioner paid 
for partial photography overlooking the information regarding the partial 
completion furnished (December 2008 and January 2009) by the DDs in the 
certificates. DDs of Gulbarga, Raichur, Bellary and Ramnagaram districts had 
also reported (June 2010 to December 2010) that while bio-metrics had been 
collected from 26,270 families, photographs of the family members did not 
appear in the display list. DD of Raichur district additionally reported 
(October 2010) that photographs were captured for the second time in some 
cases for which the partner had additionally collected ` 45 from each of the 
families. However, the Commissioner failed to investigate these lapses and 
make suitable deductions from the bills of the partner. 
(iii) PMC approved payments for idle labour and equipment 
deployed by the partner
The Commissioner instructed (January 2007) the partner to establish 68 
designated photographic locations (19 in Bangalore Urban and 49 in 
Bangalore Informal Rationing Area) by 20 January 2007.  Subsequently, the 
work was limited to Bangalore Informal Rationing Area and the partner was 
directed to keep the infrastructure ready by 24 January 2007. However, the 
Commissioner instructed (April 2007) the partner to stop the entire process as 
it had been decided to collect the applications manually without involving the 
partner.
The partner claimed that during the period 25 January 2007 to 7 April 2007, 
manpower and infrastructure deployed at 23 locations for 73 days remained 
idle and sought compensation. The PMC approved (September 2009) the 
claim and directed the Commissioner to make payments subject to the DDs 
certifying the manpower and infrastructure claimed to have been deployed by 
Partner received 
payment for idle 
labour and 
equipment 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
28
the partner.  Commissioner irregularly paid an amount of ` 1.42 crore to the 
partner without obtaining the certificates from the respective DDs. The 
irregular expenditure of ` 1.42 crore was indicative of lack of due diligence by 
the Commissioner before directing the partner to deploy manpower and 
infrastructure.
2.1.6.4 Data Consolidation and validation
(i) The partner did not validate the data collected
After completion of capture of photographs and biometrics, the partner was to 
validate the data collected and verify the data against other databases such as 
those of voters list, Bhoomi, LPG, Rural Development and Panchayat Raj
Department and telephone list to be provided by the Department to detect 
ineligible beneficiaries. The comparison was to be made across all 
beneficiaries in a taluk.  Permanent ration cards to the eligible beneficiaries 
were to be issued only after data consolidation and validation.  The partner
claimed (February 2011) to have consolidated and validated the data and 
identified 8.64 lakh ineligible families.  However, there was no follow up 
action for removing these ineligible families from the database.  The 
validation exercise done by the partner was also incomplete as capture of 
biometrics and photographs of beneficiaries had been only partially done.  
Any validation done with incomplete biometrics and photographs was not 
capable of identifying the ineligible families fully. Further, there was 
significant delay by the Department in handing over the external databases to 
the partner. The voters list and Bhoomi databases were handed over to the 
partner only by March 2009.  However, the partner failed to validate the data 
against these external databases.
As per the agreement, the partner was to be paid ` 3.30 per family on 
completion of data validation and submission of exception reports. Although 
the partner had completed internal validation only partially on account of 
incomplete biometrics and photographs and also did not verify the data against 
external databases, Commissioner irregularly paid ` 3.05 crore to the partner
for data consolidation and validation of 92.40 lakh records.
2.1.6.5 Issue of ration cards
After finalisation of the list of beneficiaries, the partner’s teams were to visit 
the villages and issue ration cards to the beneficiaries after verification of their 
photographs and biometrics.  On completion of the village level exercise, the 
database was to be updated at the taluk office and beneficiaries who had not 
collected ration cards at the villages were to collect these at the taluk office 
against biometric validation.
Validation of 
data not done  

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
29
(i) Department did not have information on ration cards issued 
The progress in issue of ration cards as of December 2010 was poor as shown 
in Table-2.4 below: 
Table-2.4 : Status of issue of ration cards in the Project
(Figures in lakh)
Stage
No. of 
temporary 
coupons 
issued
No. of 
families 
photo-bio 
captured
No. of 
permanent 
ration cards 
printed by 
the partner
No. of 
permanent 
ration 
cards 
issued
Percentage of 
printed cards 
to temporary 
coupons 
issued
Percentage 
of 
permanent 
cards 
issued to 
families 
photo-bio 
captured
No. of 
permanent 
ration cards 
printed but 
not  issued
Data digitisation 
based on Survey data 
and grievance 
processing
140.19 99.29 86.95 74.17
62 75 12.78
Self declaration by 
beneficiaries
28.99 24.88 0.29 0.29 1 1 ------
Total 169.18 124.17 87.24 74.46 52 60 12.78
(Source: Information furnished by the Commissioner) 
The Commissioner stated (September 2011) that the partner had dumped about 
7.77 lakh ration cards (including 1.19 lakh TCs) in various offices of the 
Department in the month of November 2009 and these had been lying 
undistributed for reasons not known to him.  It was further stated that the 
information furnished to audit by his predecessor had been based entirely on 
figures submitted by the partner and the Department did not have any database 
to verify and validate these figures.  A field enquiry would thus be necessary 
to verify the TCs and ration cards printed and distributed.  The Secretary also 
reiterated (September 2011) the Co mmissioner’s reply.  The reply evidenced 
that the Department was not in possession of any independent information on 
the progress achieved by the partner from time to time against each milestone.  
As the oversight mechanism remained inefficient and ineffective, the project 
was in an unsatisfactory condition and at a significant risk of failing to deliver. 
(ii) The partner did not set up infrastructure for operation and 
support  
The RFP envisaged infrastructure creation and manpower training for the 
operation and support phase concurrently with digitisation of survey data, data 
consolidation and validation during the second to sixth month of the project 
set-up phase.   However, the partner did not even commence this activity till 
closure of operations prematurely in November 2010 and the Department also 
did not enforce the contractual obligation of the partner.
2.1.7 Premature closure of operations by the partner  
Although the partner was to complete the set-up phase by October 2006 as per 
the agreement, the work remained incomplete even as of November 2010.   
The various activities undertaken by the partner till November 2010 are as 
shown in the Table-2.5 below:
Issue of ration 
cards not 
monitored 
Infrastructure 
for operation    
and support      
not created 
The partner
stopped the 
work abruptly  

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
30
Table-2.5: Various activities undertaken by the partner
Activity Duration of the activity
From To
Data Digitisation based on survey April 2006 July 2006
Issue of TCs August 2006 September 2006
Receipt of grievances August 2006 November 2006
Digitisation of grievances November 2006 December 2006
Issue of TCs for G8 grievances February 2007 September 2007
Issue of TCs for G9 grievances February 2007 November 2008
Capture of photography and biometrics February 2008 September 2008
Self-declarations
Issue of TCs January 2009 March 2009
Photographs and biometrics August 2009 November 2009
Permanent ration cards to the beneficiaries March 2010 November 2010
(Source: Information furnished by the DDOs) 
Although the partner was way behind the agreed schedule, the 
Secretary/Commissioner/PMC never explored the feasibility of fixing a fresh 
timeframe for completion of the set-up phase and the project lacked clear lines 
of decision making, accountability or responsibility. The Department failed to 
ensure that the partner followed the approach that it had been contracted to 
follow in implementing the project. Ineffective performance management of 
the contracted process by the Department seriously undermined its ability to 
hold the partner accountable or pursue it for breach of contract.  
The Secretary, in his report (August 2010) sent to the Chief Secretary
observed that the data gathered by the partner was nothing but a huge junk and 
that refining it would involve great effort and time.  Observing that the partner
had not set up a database yet even after receiving more than 
` 54 crore, the 
Secretary reported that the data gathered by the partner was beyond the reach 
of the Department.  The Secretary assessed the loss to the State exchequer at 
` 720 crore during 2007-08 to 2009-10 as a result of delay in completing the 
set-up phase, during which the illegal card holders drew rationed articles at 
subsidised rates.
The partner closed the operations in November 2010 without handing over any 
of the assets. According to the Secretary of the Department, the partner hosted 
only the RCMIS
3 data subsequently on the State Data Centre by March 2011.  
However, the Department did not cancel the contract with the partner to gain 
time to ascertain the facts correctly and secure the data which the partner had 
gathered and retained. As the Department decided to rectify the mistakes in 
the database on its own, it procured (March 2011) 205 computers with 
accessories such as laser printers, biometric devices, laminating machines, 
scanners and UPS for deployment in taluk and range offices at a cost of 
` 2.04 
crore. This expenditure was necessitated by the failure of the Department to 
ensure installation of the ICT infrastructure during the set-up phase by the 
partner. 
Government stated (August 2011 & September 2011) that after the transfer of 
RCMIS data to the State Data Centre in March 2011, the Department brought 
3  Ration Card Management Information System  

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
31
in National Informatics Centre (NIC) to control further damage and to evolve 
a better system of managing the ration cards.  NIC was to refine the data and 
build a proper database by developing softwares and applications.  To identify 
ineligible cards, the NIC was linking the electricity meter numbers of 
residences of beneficiaries in urban areas and the house tax assessment 
numbers in rural areas.  The objective behind roping in NIC was not to 
complete the set-up phase but to (i) prevent further mis-management by the 
partner and deterioration of the system, (ii) take hold of the ration card data 
from the partner in  view of the huge payments made and time spent and set-
up a proper database, (iii) identify ineligible ration cards issued by the partner
and eliminate them and rework the APL, BPL and AAY
4 classification of 
families, and (iv) arrange for issue of ration cards to eligible families denied of 
the benefit. Government further stated that very good progress had been 
achieved and the Department had already identified 16.45 lakh ineligible 
ration cards in urban areas and another 26.29 lakh illegal LPG gas connections 
in the State.   
2.1.8 The partner’s database was technically evaluated  
The findings on various issues included in the draft report submitted 
(December 2011) by the company appointed by Government for a technical 
evaluation of the computerisation project were as under:
Issue Findings
Adequacy of the database vis-à-vis 
the promised specification or 
industry practices
Data in the database was not complete.  Many of the 
significant tables were empty. There were fields for 
which no data was computed.  “Audit Trail” was not 
populated for any of the 11 districts taken as sample.  
The table structure was not consistent across the 
districts. Database was not in accordance with the 
specification listed in the agreement.
Appropriateness of the use of 
database – entry, updation and
validation
Due to lack of standard operating procedures (SOPs) and 
relevant documents, commenting on the process/
procedure followed was rendered difficult.
Assessment of the integrity and 
completeness of the data during 
digitisation  for both biometric and 
pictorial data 
Establishing the integrity and completeness of data was 
found to be difficult due to non-production of SOPs, 
relevant documents, final assignment register and 
display lists.  
Biometric and pictorial data was in encrypted format and 
analysis of the same was not possible due to absence of 
any relevant supporting documents
Instances where more than one 
ration card was issued to household
The inconsistencies in the database made it impossible to 
come out with the total number of beneficiaries whose 
data was captured by the partner. As relevant documents 
were not provided, establishing instances, where more 
than one ration card was issued to a household, b ecame 
practically impossible. 
Assessment of outputs with 
reference to the deliverables and 
time schedule as per the agreement
Most of the deliverables were not delivered to the 
Department and no details of the same were provided 
either by the partner or the Department. 
4 Annapoorna Anthyodaya Yojane

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
32
Besides, the company undertook demonstrations on the field on a sample basis 
to assess the adequacy of mechanism to prevent duplication of biometric data.  
Persons whose photographs and biometrics had been taken earlier by the 
partner were called to a common place in the randomly selected villages.  
Each person was asked to place the finger on the biometric device.  Once the 
finger print was read, the module searched for a match in the database.  This 
matching was categorised as ‘one to many matching’.  In cases where the 
‘one-to-many’ search failed, the ration card number was entered and the data 
retrieved from the data base.  The biometric was then verified on a ‘one-to-
one’ basis. 
The results showed that the matching percentage of ‘one-to-many’ was very 
low and the quality of biometrics was not adequate for use in de-duplication of 
ration cards.  The matching percentage ranged from 81 to 36 per cent.  Though 
one-to-one match percentage was better, it was found to be of no use in de-
duplication.  The draft report of the company was under the consideration of 
the Department/Government (January 2012). 
Thus, computerisation by the partner in a totally uncontrolled environment led 
to creation of a database full of defects and the pictorial and biometric data 
collected at a cost of  ` 27.15 crore were not capable of de-duplication of 
ration cards. The project ultimately ended up as an example of highly doubtful
value for money. 
2.1.9 Collection of user charges  
2.1.9.1 Non-remittance of user charges by the partner  
The computerisation project was to be financed through collection of ` 65 per 
card as user charges from the beneficiaries. While the Department was to 
collect ` five for every TC issued, the partner was to collect ` 45 from each 
family at the time of capturing photography and biometrics and another ` 15 at 
the time of issuing permanent ration cards for bar coded coupons to be 
supplied to the beneficiaries. The Department also authorised the partner to 
collect ` one for each grievance application received. The partner was to remit 
the amounts collected to the Personal Deposit (PD) account of the 
Commissioner and all payments to the partner were to be made out of the 
accumulations in the PD account. In addition, the Department authorised the 
partner to collect and retain ` five for each application collected at the 
Nemmadi centres.
The partner was to remit the user charges collected within three working days 
to the PD account failing which interest at 0.5 per cent per day on the 
unremitted amount was to be levied by the Department.  A comparison of the 
remittances to the PD account with the progress reported by the partner
showed that ` 9.08 crore had been short-remitted to the PD account. On this 
being pointed out, the partner issued (April and May 2011) cheques for ` 6.47 
crore which the Department credited to the PD account.  The balance amount 
of ` 2.61 crore remained unremitted (October 2011).  Though stipulated in the
contract, the partner failed to submit daily reports to the Commissioner on the 
Partner did not 
remit the user 
charges collected 
from the public 

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
33
user charges collected and the various activities accomplished. As the 
Department failed to enforce submission of daily reports by the partner, it was 
not in a position to monitor remittance of user charges collected by the partner.
As the daily reports had not been submitted by the partner, audit could not 
work out the delay in remittances of the user charges from time to time and the 
consequent interest leviable till the stoppage of work by the partner
(November 2010).  For the period thereafter till July 2011, the interest payable 
by the partner aggregated ` 16 crore after taking into the cheques received in 
April and May 2011. It was seen that the Department failed to invoke the 
penal provisions in the agreement for delayed remittances at any stage.
2.1.9.2 The partner collected user charges which were not authorised 
by Government
Apart from the user charges authorised by the Government, the Commissioner 
approved (March 2010) user charges for various activities during the operation 
and support phase.  These charges were towards issue of application ( ` 5), 
issue of new ration card on surrender of the old card, demographic corrections 
(` 15), member additions ( ` 50), card category change ( ` 15), deletion of 
family members ( ` 15),  photography for members who had not turned up 
during the village visits ( ` 50) and issue of duplicate cards ( ` 60). It was 
seen that neither the agreement with the partner provided for recovery of these 
charges nor did the Government approve these.  Scrutiny of the ration card 
database of five taluks provided by the Commissioner showed that the partner
had collected these charges in test-checked taluks even before completing the 
set-up phase. The partner neither submitted the details of such fees collected 
nor remitted these amounts to the PD account. Audit could not assess the fees 
unauthorisedly collected by the partner as the complete database had not been 
made available for audit scrutiny. 
2.1.9.3 The departmental officials misappropriated the user charges 
collected
The departmental officials entrusted with the task of collecting ` five for 
every TC distributed failed to remit in full to the PD account the amounts 
collected. It was seen that against ` 7.98 crore collected by the 
departmental officials during August 2006 to November 2006, the 
amounts remitted to PD account aggregated only ` 7.49 crore, resulting in 
a short remittance of ` 0.49 crore. The Department failed to take action 
against the officials responsible for misappropriation of funds even as of 
July 2011.
Unauthorised 
collection of user 
charges 
Misappropriation 
of user charges 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
34
2.1.10 Irregular payments
2.1.10.1 Release of payments to the partner disregarding the 
provisions in the agreement
As per the agreement, payments to the partner were to be regulated based on 
the level of service delivered by the partner. The level of service to be met by 
the partner and the penalty for deficiency in service etc., had been specified in 
the SLA.  At the time of submission of invoices for payments, the partner was 
to provide detailed supporting documents evidencing SLA compliance and 
also to host on the departmental web site information regarding SLA 
compliance, from which service level performance point was to be computed. 
The partner was also to provide a mobile browser-accessible website for 
collection of SLA performance statistics from the field. 
As the Department did not have the requisite technical competence, it 
appointed (November 2005) a consultant for assisting in the project 
implementation.  The consultancy was for a period of 16 months ending 
March 2007, whereafter the contract was not renewed.  The reasons for not 
renewing the consultancy contract or appointing a fresh consultant after March 
2007 were not forthcoming.  The partner provided supporting documents for 
computation of service level metrics for the invoices submitted till March 
2007. Against the claim of ` 7.71 crore made by the partner, an amount of 
` 1.14 crore was disallowed on the basis of SLA metrics computed by the 
consultant. Thereafter, the partner did not provide supporting documents 
showing evidence of SLA compliance. The web-based system for uploading 
the SLA metrics had also not been set up.  Although the partner did not furnish 
any information regarding SLA compliance, the Commissioner paid an 
amount of ` 47.66 crore to the partner without performance level metrics 
computation in violation of the agreement.
2.1.10.2 Non-imposition of penalty for erroneous BPL cards
The agreement prescribed a penalty of ` 10,000 per error in the category of 
beneficiaries attributable to the partner. As per the report sent (October 2010) 
by DD, Ramanagara District, the partner had issued 14,436 permanent ration 
cards in BPL category, although he had identified these families in four taluks 
as belonging to APL category and instructed the partner to issue only APL 
cards. Despite the advice, the partner issued permanent BPL ration cards to 
these 14,436 families. As the DD failed to bring this lapse to the notice of the 
Commissioner, penalty of ` 14.44 crore for error in the category of cards 
attributable solely to the partner had not been recovered.
2.1.10.3 Non-recovery of income tax at the prescribed rates
As per Section 194J of the Income Tax Act, any payment made with regard to 
services rendered for professional or technical services would attract TDS at 
10 per cent along with surcharge, education cess and secondary and higher 
education cess as applicable (the rate was 5.66 per cent for the financial year 
2006-07 and 11.33 per cent from financial year 2007-08). The Co mmissioner 
Performance was 
not assessed
before payment
Partner was not 
penalised for 
defective cards 
Income tax was 
not recovered 
from bills 

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
35
failed to deduct TDS of ` 71.05 lakh from the bills of the partner.  However, 
the Department agreed (April 2011) to recover it from the partner.
2.1.11 Monitoring
2.1.11.1 State level monitoring cell was not set up
As per the agreement, a State level monitoring cell, which would act as a 
single point of contact for all issues, was to be set up for the project. The 
monitoring cell was to be set up by a cross-functional project management 
team and the required equipment was to be installed. Within one week of 
award of contact, a portal was needed to be set up by the partner that would 
start providing online status of various activities in progress at all 
implementation locations. The partner was to provide five computers at 
various key food offices to access and update information on this portal for 
effective communication between the partner and the Department. The 
monitoring cell was to have sufficient storage facility to act as an offsite 
backup for the data generated during ration card issue. It was seen that no 
monitoring cell had been set up as envisaged in the agreement.
2.1.11.2 Project Management Committee did not meet as prescribed
The Project Management Committee (PMC) under the chairmanship of 
Secretary was to meet every month for considering the monthly performance 
reports, change control notes etc. The PMC met only seven times during the 
period May 2006 to September 2009 and did not meet thereafter. The 
Secretary stated (August 2011) that the PMC did not meet after April 2010 as 
steps had been initiated to contain the damage and payment to the partner was 
stopped in April 2010.  Though the downslide had been arrested since April 
2010, PMC’s failure to meet at the prescribed interval till April 2010, the 
PMC rendered the project management ineffective. 
2.1.11.3 The partner did not submit the reports prescribed  
The partner was to submit to the Commissioner daily and monthly reports of 
all work done besides developing a web-based project monitoring tool to 
enable the Department to monitor the progress of work at the taluk level. 
However, the partner failed to submit daily and monthly reports and did not 
put in place the web-based monitoring tool.  The Department did not obtain 
from the partner reports relating to even major project components like 
beneficiary database creation, ration card issue, infrastructure creation etc., 
and thus, lacked necessary inputs to monitor the implementation of the project.
2.1.12 Conclusion
This is an example of highly doubtful value for money in a crucial area of 
governance. The Department wasted ` 54.53 crore through its failure to 
enforce the agreed terms of implementation during the project’s lifetime.  The 
Department rushed through the project initiation, ended up with an ill-
equipped partner, under-appreciated the project’s complexity and risk and 
Monitoring cell 
not set up
PMC failed 
to meet at 
prescribed 
interval 
Department 
failed to obtain 
reports from 
the partner

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
36
mismanaged the partner’s performance and delivery. The key aims of creating 
an effective public distribution management system remained undelivered. 
The Department limited the downslide and undertook a cleansing process by 
tying up with the NIC but the successful delivery of this initiative continued to 
remain a serious concern as elimination of ineligible families and coverage of 
all eligible families under this process was not fully guaranteed. 
All PPP models aim at providing improved public services by sharing risks in 
a balanced manner.  Any PPP arrangement should, therefore, yield value for 
money and protect public interests adequately.  The PPP arrangement for 
computerisation was heavily loaded in favour of the partner who was not 
required to bring in finance for the project and share most of the risks 
associated with the implementation of the project.  As the project was financed 
fully from moneys collected from public, the partner ought to have provided 
value for the money paid by the public.
As there were chronic delays in issue of permanent ration cards, the 
Department and partner failed to deliver the expected services to the public 
even after collecting the charges well in advance.  As of December 2010, 
58.57 lakh families who had been subject to photography and biometric 
capture had not received permanent ration cards even after having remitted 
` 26.36 crore for the purpose.  Similarly, 68.59 lakh families who had paid         
` 10.29 crore for bar coded coupons were yet to receive the assured services.  
It was seen that though the Department dropped the idea of issuing bar coded 
coupon, as it was not a feasible option, it continued to collect ` 15 per family 
at the time of issuing permanent ration cards.  Thus, various lapses of the 
Department/partner defeated the very objective of providing improved 
services to the public and protecting their interests adequately.
2.1.13 Recommendations
/head2rightThere is a compelling need to fix responsibility for various lapses in the 
project formulation, contract award and implementation of the project 
which caused huge loss to the State exchequer in the form of subsidy 
given to ineligible families besides frittering away
` 54.53 crore out of 
the resources collected from the public and bringing the process of 
issue, modification and deletion of ration cards in the State to halt since 
November 2010. 
/head2rightThe rectification of the mistakes in the database needs to be taken up on 
a war footing so as to remove the errors and improve the targeting of 
benefits to the citizens by eliminating ineligible ration cards and 
ensuring ration cards to the eligible families.

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
37
HOME DEPARTMENT
2.2 Fire and Emergency Services in Karnataka 
Executive Summary
The Department of Karnataka State Fire and Emergency Services is responsible for fire 
prevention, fire safety, fire fighting/suppression besides disaster preparedness and 
management. The Department embarked (August 2005) upon  a project viz. K-SAFE 2010 
for establishing fire stations in all the taluks and places of high risk industries in the State 
besides upgradation of the existing fire stations and modernisation. K-SAFE 2010 was to 
be implemented by the Karnataka State Police Housing Corporation over a period of five 
years.  The implementation period was further extended up to March 2013. 
Against the total requirement of 201 fire stations in the State, only 176 had been 
established as of December 2011.  Out of 176 fire stations that had been functional, 43
were housed in temporary and rented buildings which lacked basic infrastructure facilities.  
Out of 1,647 vehicles/equipment required by the fire stations, only 1,054 had been 
procured as of December 2011.  Even the basic vehicles/equipment such as jeeps, u tility 
vehicles, water tenders and bouzers, portable pumps, etc., had not been procured to the 
extent required.  Except for Bangalore and Hubli, other cities in the State did not have 
special equipment to manage fire accidents in high-rise buildings. Search and Rescue units 
had not been established at the metropolitan, district and taluk levels as planned.   While 
the yearly increase in the number of fire incidents ranged from 9 to 13 per cent during 
2006-11, the proportion of lives lost to those saved decreased from 113 per cent in 2007-
08 to 79 per cent in 2010-11. The value of property lost and saved as assessed by the 
Department was not reliable as this was not professionally assessed. The Department failed 
to analyse the fire reports prepared by the fire stations and in the process, lost the 
opportunity of identifying the shortcomings and improving upon its preparedness.  
Hazmat vans required for dealing with industrial disasters had also not been procured. The 
Department lacked facilities and staff for undertaking major repairs of vehicles at the 
Central Workshop in Bangalore, which catered to only routine maintenance of vehicles 
predominantly from Bangalore. Routine and major repairs to vehicles in other places were 
carried out at private workshops without adequate checks and balances to ensure that these 
had been executed economically and efficiently.
Vacancies in the post of operating staff aggregated 2,521 (40 per cent) and the Department 
had not initiated the recruitment process de spite Government’s approval in December 
2009, due to non-finalisation of cadre and recruitment rules. Training of personnel was 
ineffective as there was huge shortage of trainers in the Training Academy. 
The Department did not have a well-functioning communication system to communicate 
effectively with the fire companies at the accident spots.  While obsolete wireless sets had 
not been replaced, repeater facilities had not been established in 18 out of 30 districts. Ten 
out of 11 posts sanctioned for the communication wing remained vacant. The 
modernisation of the Department had not progressed as envisaged in K-SAFE 2010. The 
Department’s role in fire-safety education was also limited. The enforcement of fire code 
was ineffective due to absence of adequate enforcement provisions in the Fire Services 
Act, 1964.

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
38
2.2.1 Introduction
The Karnataka State Fire Service was constituted under the Karnataka State 
Fire Services Act 1964 which came into effect from 15 May 1971.  The Fire 
Force Department which was an integral part of the Police Department till 
5 November 1965 started functioning as a separate department thereafter.  The 
overall control of the Department vested with the Home Department.  With its 
increased responsibilities to cover all kinds of hazards, the Department was
re-designated as Karnataka State Fire and Emergency Services in 2004. The 
Department which started with 11 fire stations in 1971 had grown over the 
years and had established 113 fire stations by 2005. The number of fire 
stations in the State had increased to 176 as of December 2011.  
2.2.2 Organisational set-up
The Department of Fire and Emergency Services (Department) is headed by 
Principal Secretary, Home Department.  At the organisational level, the 
Department is headed by a Director General of Police (DGP) who is assisted 
by an Inspector General of Police & Additional Director General, a Deputy 
Inspector General of Fire Services, a Director and other officers as shown in 
the chart below:
Principal Secretary to Government, Home Department
Director General of Police
Inspector General of Police and Additional Director General 
Deputy Inspector General of Police
Director
Deputy Director (Administration) Deputy Director (Technical)
Chief Fire Officers (CFOs)
CFO 
East
CFO 
West
CFO 
Mangalore 
CFO 
Hubli
Commandant

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
39
The CFOs are assisted by Regional Fire Officers, District Fire Officers and 
Fire Station Officers. 
2.2.3 Audit Objectives
The audit was conducted with a view to assess the preparedness of the 
Department in fire prevention/suppression and disaster management. The main 
objectives of the performance audit were to ascertain whether: 
/head2rightthe Department had adequate institutional mechanism, competent 
manpower and deployment of equipment to protect citizens’ life and 
property against the dangers of fire and other emergencies that might 
occur in the response area;
/head2rightthe Department assessed risks, developed long term plans and 
maintained a response capability that was safe and effective; and
/head2rightthe enforcement of fire and life safety codes for the prevention and 
control of structure fires was efficient and effective. 
2.2.4 Audit Scope and Methodology
The audit of the Department covered the transactions for the period 2006-11.    
The audit sample covered the Directorate, four Chief Fire Officers (CFOs),
Commandant, Training Academy, Central Workshop, Search and Rescue Unit, 
Emergency Paramedical Services Wing, seven Regional Fire Officers (RFOs),
twelve District Fire Officers (DFOs) and sixty fire stations ( Appendix-2.5) in 
fourteen districts. These sixty fire stations were also jointly inspected by audit 
with the officers nominated by the Department. 
The audit commenced with an entry conference with the Secretary, Home 
Department (Fire and Emergency Services) on 18 April 2011 wherein the 
audit methodology, scope, objectives and criteria were explained. Field audit 
of records of the selected CFOs, RFOs, DFOs and the fire stations was 
conducted between 14 February 2011 to 11 July 2011. The audit comprised 
scrutiny of records, discussion with the Departmental officials and field visits. 
An exit conference was held with the Principal Secretary on 28 September 
2011 to discuss the audit findings.  The replies of the Department have been 
incorporated at appropriate places in this report.
2.2.5 Perspective Plan
A long-range perspective plan provides an organisation with a framework to 
develop goals and programmes, strategies and work plans for implementing 
programmes and deploying resources and setting performance indicators for 
quality assurance and measurement of the Department’s progress towards its 
goals.
During 2004, the Fire Services Department was re-designated as Fire and 
Emergency Services responsible for (a) fire prevention/safety, fire 
fighting/suppression, and (b) disaster preparedness and management. To firm 
K-SAFE 2010 
was taken up 
based on 
Perspective 
Plan 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
40
up the strategies for achieving the modified goals,   the Department prepared a 
Perspective Plan through a consultant in February 2005. The Plan provided for 
a project viz., K-SAFE 2010 which would establish fire stations in all the 
taluks of the State, besides up-gradation of the existing fire stations and 
modernisation of the Department.  The Plan assessed the institutional 
strengthening and capacity building requirements, prepared the road map for 
establishment of a network of fire stations in the State, worked out the 
up-gradation requirements of the existing fire stations, highlighted the 
manpower and training requirements etc.
Based on the recommendations made in the Perspective Plan, Government 
accorded (August 2005) sanction for implementation of K-SAFE 2010.  The 
project was to be implemented during 2005-10 with an estimated investment 
of 
` 323.30 crore. The main objectives of the Project were to:
/head2rightestablish 80 fire stations in taluks and seven additional fire stations in 
Bangalore and one fire station at Dharwad district headquarters;
/head2rightup-grade 96 existing fire stations;
/head2rightestablish Search and Rescue Services and Emergency Paramedical 
Services; and
/head2rightup-grade the Training Academy, computerise the Department and 
install wireless communication system.
The project was to be funded by different sources as shown in Appendix-2.6
The Empowered Committee constituted for implementation of the project 
nominated (August 2005) the Karnataka State Police Housing Corporation 
(KSPHC) as the implementation agency for the project.  
2.2.6 Budget and expenditure
The details of budget provision under Plan and Non-Plan for the regular
activities of the Department and the expenditure incurred thereagainst during 
2006-11 were as shown in Table-2.6 below:
Table-2.6 Budget provision and expenditure during 2006-11 
  (Rupees in lakh) 
Year Budget Provision Expenditure Percentage of savings
Plan Non-plan Plan Non-plan Plan Non-plan
2006-07 100.00 936.12 98.79 911.99 1 3
2007-08 500.00 1001.95 500.00 943.66 - 6
2008-09 100.00 981.93 100.00 1,023.48 - - 
2009-10 100.00 1,155.57 94.84 806.19 5 30 
2010-11 1,100.00 1,235.05 1,095.25 1052.73 - 15 
(Source: Information furnished by the Directorate) 
While the savings under Plan was very meagre, those under Non-plan were 
higher during 2009-10 mainly due to non-filling up of vacancies.  In addition 
to these funds, ` 241.95 crore 5 had been released by various agencies to 
5 ` 147.40 crore by Finance Department, ` 31.40 crore from North Karnataka Urban 
Infrastructure Development Project ,   ` 33.75 crore by Urban Development Department 
and `  29.40 crore by the Revenue Department 
Shortfall in 
provision of 
funds for K-
SAFE 2010 

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
41
KSPHC for K-SAFE 2010 as of December 2011.  Against this, expenditure of 
` 246.37 crore 6 had been reported by KSPHC.   K-SAFE 2010 could not be 
completed by 2010 mainly due to non-receipt of funds from the targeted
sources.  The releases to KSPHC upto December 2011 accounted for only 75 
per cent of the project cost of ` 323.30 crore.  Though K-SAFE 2010 expected 
to generate ` 120 crore from NABARD, Government of India and XII Finance 
Commission, it did not materialise.  As a result, the Finance Department 
supplemented (December 2006 to December 2011) the resources with 
additional funds of ` 94.90 crore. As there was still shortfall in receipt of 
funds by KSPHC, the implementation period of K-SAFE 2010 was extended 
by the Empowered Committee up to March 2013.
2.2.7 Infrastructure creation
2.2.7.1 Fire stations
(i) Targeted number of fire stations not established
The norms laid down by the national level Standing Fire Advisory Council 
(SFAC) prescribed setting up of at least one fire station in a 10 sq km radius 
for urban areas and 50 sq km radius for rural areas.  As per these norms, 4,130 
fire stations were to be established in the State.  However, the State gave 
priority to establishing fire stations at every district and taluk headquarters and 
places of high risk industries as the SFAC norms had been considered 
unrealistic.  Based on the State’s priority, the Perspective Plan assessed the 
requirement of fire stations at 201 against 113 already existing as of February 
2005.  K-SAFE 2010 was to establish the remaining 88 fire stations.  As of 
December 2011, only 176 fire stations had been established.  Of the remaining 
25 fire stations not set up in the taluks, 16 belonged to the medium risk 
category and 9 to the low risk category. Out of 60 civil works taken up 
exclusively for upgrading the existing fire stations including staff quarters, 
only 31 had been completed.  As the State’s prioritisation of establishing one 
fire station in each taluk had been founded on the basic need to respond to 
emergencies threatening lives, property, economy and businesses, delay in 
establishment of 25 fire stations in the taluks even as of December 2011 
resulted in continued neglect of these places with varying degrees of risk 
potential. 
(ii) Fire stations functioning in rented and temporary buildings
The Perspective Plan highlighted that space in fire stations housed in rented 
buildings was generally inadequate to accommodate all firemen and officers, 
resulting in overcrowding.  It further observed that vehicles in fire stations 
housed in temporary buildings were exposed to the weather and, therefore, to 
frequent wear and tear, leading to increased running cost.  It was observed that 
out of 176 fire stations established, 133 had been housed in own buildings, 31 
6 ` 147.40 crore against Finance Department, ` 31.43 crore against North Karnataka Urban 
Infrastructure Development Project, ` 51.63 crore against Urban Development Department 
and ` 15.91 crore against Revenue Department 
Delay in 
establishing 
25 fire 
stations 
Fire stations 
did not have 
their own 
buildings

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
42
in temporary buildings and 12 in rented buildings as of December 2011. It was 
further seen during the joint inspection that fire stations functioning in the 
temporary and rented buildings lacked basic infrastructure like separate rooms 
for office, store, rest, record etc., as per SFAC norms. 
(iii) Non-availability of water in fire stations 
SFAC norms stipulate the availability of continuous water supply as a pre-
requisite for the functioning of a fire station. The Perspective Plan identified 
water scarcity as a problem which most fire stations had been continuously 
struggling with.  As dedicated water hydrants were not available across the 
State, there was a compelling need for each of the fire stations to have water 
tanks with adequate storage capacity to tide over the water scarcity problem.  
It was, however, seen that while the newly constructed fire stations were 
provided with storage tanks of 1.50 lakh litres capacity, the existing fire 
stations had no storage tanks or tanks with only limited storage capacity.  
The Director stated (September 2011) that while fire stations with permanent 
infrastructure had underground static water tanks, other fire stations having 
space constraints arranged water supply through water lorries and water 
bouzers.  It was further stated that all the vehicles and pumps available with 
Department were designed to draw water from any open source or static tanks 
in and around the incident area.  Though audit did not notice any problem 
faced by the Department while responding to fire calls due to non-availability 
of dependable sources of water, the fire stations having no storage facility 
were exposed to the risk of inadequate water availability during emergencies.  
2.2.7.2 Equipment
(i) Shortage of vehicles/equipment
As per SFAC norms, each fire station is to be equipped with one pumping 
unit, one water tanker (water lorry) and one ambulance van. Further, in urban 
areas, depending on the population within the jurisdiction of each fire station, 
the number of pumping units is to be increased at the rate of one unit for every 
50,000 persons. Fire stations serving a population greater than 3 lakh  should 
have one rescue van (RV) per 3,00,000 persons and an additional RV for 
every 10 lakh persons.  These norms have been prescribed to ensure improved 
operational efficiency.
Based on these norms, the Perspective Plan had assessed that 4,017 units each 
of Water Tender, Water Lorry and Ambulance were to be provided against the 
availability of 192, 40 and 23 respectively as shown in Appendix-2.7.  As the 
SFAC norms were too stiff to achieve and vehicles on such a large scale were 
not really required, the Perspective Plan reworked the requirement of various 
vehicles/equipment based on the norms fixed by the State Government.  The 
Perspective Plan also highlighted that the State norms were practicable and 
achievable by March 2010.  However, there was huge shortfall in procurement 
of vehicles/equipment even as per the State norms as of December 2011 as 
shown in Table-2.7 below:
Fire stations did 
not have adequate 
water storage 
facility 
Huge shortfall in 
procurement of 
vehicles/ 
equipment

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
43
Table-2.7: Procurement of vehicles/equipment
Sl. 
No. Type of equipment
Vehicles /Equipment 
available before the 
Project commenced
Vehicles/Equipmen
t required as per 
State norms
Vehicle/ 
Equipment 
available
Shortfall Percentage  
of shortfall
1. Hazmat van 0 4 0 4 100
2. Advance Rescue 
tender
0 23 12 11 48
3. Rescue tender 3 19 11 8 42
4. Sky lift 1 7 3 4 57
5. Control Post van 1 5 1 4 80
6. Foam tender 1 6 2 4 67
7. Jeep/utility vehicle -
Varuna
7 176 6 170 97
8. Flood Rescue van 0 6 0 6 100
9. Rapid response team 0 176 4 172 98
10. Water Tender 195 412 362 50 12
11. Water Bouzer 1 39 12 27 69
12. Portable pumps 144 406 328 78 19
13. Trailor pump 34 34 34 0 0 
14. Towing tender 48 48 55 -7 0 
15. Water lorry 40 40 40 0 0 
16. Ambulance 23 43 21 22 51
17. Generator 16 202 162 40 20
18. TTL 1 1 1 0 0 
TOTAL 515 1,647 1,054 593
(Source: Information furnished by the Directorate)
Only four vehicles/equipment were available as per State Government norms and
the shortfall in availability of the remaining vehicles/equipment ranged from 12 to 
one hundred per cent .  Even the basic equipment such as jeep/utility vehicles, 
rapid response team, water tenders/water bouzers, portable pumps, generators etc., 
had not been procured to the extent required.  Sophisticated equipment like 
Hazmat van to deal with oil and electrical fires in high risk areas, sky lifts in 
urban areas having multi-storied buildings, flood rescue vans for flood prone and 
coastal areas, control post van in major towns had also not been procured as 
planned due to delay in receipt of funds by KSPHC (as discussed in 
Paragraph-2.2.6).  It was further seen that t
here were delays ranging from 73 to 
371 days in the allotment of new vehicles/equipment to the fire stations after 
procurement in respect of eight advance rescue vans, one sky lift (52 mtrs), 
three medium rescue tenders and two bouzers, 34 water tenders and seven 
utility vehicles.  Delays ranging from 370 to 690 days were also noticed in the 
allotment of portable pumps to 14 fire stations.  The RFO, Central Workshop 
attributed (April 2011) the delays to late commissioning of these by the 
suppliers, rectification of defects noticed during inspections and other 
formalities like training, insurance etc. The reply was not acceptable as the 
Department took only 5 to 15 days to complete the forma lity in respect of 15 
vehicles and abnormally delayed these in respect of other vehicles.  Abnormal 
delay in allotment of these vehicles/equipment after procurement would defeat 
the very objective of their procurement.  

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
44
The impact of the non-availability of vehicles/ equipment is discussed below:
 Non-existence of Rapid Response Teams and Jeep/Utility Vehicle 
in most fire stations
The Perspective Plan prescribed a minimum of two water tenders for every 
fire station. Further, the plan envisaged deployment of rapid response team 
with a motor cycle and a jeep/utility vehicle in all the fire stations.  These 
vehicles were to be fitted with modern firefighting equipment and latest 
communication gadgets. It was, however, seen that 17 out of 60 fire stations 
jointly inspected had only one water tender. Rapid response vehicles and 
jeep/utility vehicles had not been supplied to 170 fire stations across the State 
even five years after commencement of K-SAFE 2010.  
The Director stated (July 2011) that vehicles for rapid response were not 
readily available and were to be got fabricated against orders.  It was further, 
stated that this process was time consuming and depended on the availability 
of budget.  The reply was not acceptable as the Department had not even 
firmed up proposals for procurement of these vehicles by KSPHC.  Non-
availability of these vehicles affected the preparedness of the Department to 
respond timely and adequately to emergencies. 
 Advance rescue vans in short supply
It was seen that only 19 districts had been provided with the rescue vans for 
emergencies. However, the fire personnel in these districts had not been 
trained on rescue activities including swimming and diving, resulting in non-
utilisation of the diving sets available in the advance rescue vans and the 
rescue vans. The remaining 11 districts did not have the wherewithal to handle 
rescue activities during emergencies. 
 Special equipment for high rise buildings
Special equipment are required in cities with high rise buildings like 
Bangalore, Belgaum, Hubli, Mangalore, Mysore etc. As of December 2011, 
the Department had in its possession one turn table ladder (TTL), one 
hydraulic platform (Snorkel) and two newly procured sky lifts for the entire 
State. However, except for one vehicle stationed at Hubli, the others had been 
retained in Bangalore. Thus, all major cities in the State except Bangalore and 
Hubli were ill-equipped to manage fire incidents in high rise buildings.
 Non-procurement of Hazmat van and flood rescue vehicles
The Perspective Plan had recommended procurement of four Hazmat vans for 
deployment in places having hazardous industrial companies.  Deployment of 
Hazmat van in Mangalore city was to be accorded priority as the city and its 
neighbourhood had 12 most hazardous industrial companies. The Plan had 
also recommended deployment of six flood rescue vans in flood prone
districts. The Department had not procured these vehicles as of December
2011. The Director stated (January 2012) that the Department had examined 
170 fire stations 
did not have 
vehicles for rapid 
response
11 districts did not 
have rescue vans 
for emergencies 
The Department 
was not equipped 
to manage fire 
accidents in high 
rise buildin
gs
Lack of capacity 
building for 
industrial 
accidents and 
floods 

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
45
the quality of Hazmat vans procured by the States of Andhra Pradesh, Delhi 
and Tamil Nadu and decided not to procure this vehicle immediately as the 
design was defective and not suited to handle nuclear, biological and chemical 
disasters. It was further stated that the Department was designing a new 
vehicle to cater to these disasters. The fact, however, remains that the 
Department did not possess the wherewithal to deal with industrial accidents 
and hazards caused by floods. 
 Generators lying idle
The Perspective Plan had envisaged procurement of 202 generators. As of 
December 2011, 162 generators had been procured and distributed to various 
fire stations.  A joint inspection of the 60 stations showed that while 
generators had not been supplied to 11 fire stations, 16 fire stations had not put 
these to use for want of kerosene though the warranty period had expired in all 
these cases. Director stated (July 2011) that the unit officers had been 
instructed to purchase kerosene from available sources and maintain reserve 
stock.  It was further stated that the places where generators had remained idle 
would be examined and the problem would be sorted out.  Thus, generators, 
though available, did not serve the intended purpose of uninterrupted power 
supply in times of need.
 Delay in fabrication of 18 mini water tenders 
The Department had purchased (August 2010) 18 chassis at a cost of ` 1.86 
crore from a company having rate contract with Director General of Supplies 
and Disposals. The Department invited (September 2010) tenders for 
fabrication of these chassis into medium size water tenders under the two bids 
system. The Department was to open and evaluate the financial bids of only 
those tenderers whose technical bids had been scrutinised and accepted. Out of 
13 tenders received, the Department cleared the technical bids of eleven as 
these had satisfied the prescribed criteria like past performance, experience, 
capability in terms of manpower and equipment, etc.  After evaluation of these 
eleven financial bids, the Department accepted (January 2011) the lowest offer 
of a company amounting to ` 12 lakh per vehicle. However, while 
communicating the acceptance, the Department intimated the company that 
the acceptance was subject to inspection of its premises for assessing the 
availability of the infrastructure and capability to execute the work as per the 
specifications within the time schedule.  It was, however, seen that inspection 
of the premises of the company did not form part of the tender conditions. The 
inspection report (January 2011) highlighted that the company had adequate 
infrastructure, manpower, testing facilities and had also carried out similar 
fabrication works. The report, however, highlighted that the company had not
fabricated vehicles as per the requirements specified in the tender. Based on 
this report, the Department cancelled (February 2011) the award of the work 
to the company.  However, the firm challenged the decision before the High 
Court of Karnataka which quashed (August 2011) the cancellation on the 
ground that the power of rejection had been exercised in an arbitrary manner. 
The High Court directed the Department to finalise the bid from the stage it 
was prior to cancellation.  Consequently, the Department entrusted 
Generators in
fire stations
not put to use
Fabrication of 
18 mini water 
tenders delayed

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
46
(October 2011) the fabrication of 18 chassis to the company which was to 
deliver the fabricated water tenders by February 2012. 
Thus, incorrect cancellation of the lowest tender delayed the fabrication of 18 
chassis and deprived the needy fire stations of water tenders.
 Breathing apparatus not replaced
Breathing apparatus is one of the important components carried in water
tender and rescue vehicle for use in non-breathable condition.  The SFAC 
norms prescribe a normal life of four years for breathing apparatus. The joint 
inspection of 60 fire stations, however, showed that while two fire stations did 
not have breathing apparatus, the apparatus in another 37 fire stations were 4 
to 33 years old. 
The Director stated (July 2011) that replacement of the breathing apparatus on 
completion of four years was not mandatory and the damaged components like 
face mask, gauges, etc., were replaced and the a pparatus was reconditioned 
periodically.  As this equipment is a basic requirement for fire fighting, its
non-availability or over-reliance on reconditioning the available apparatus 
irrespective of its normal life has the potential of affecting the preparedness of 
the Department for combating emergencies.
 Inadequate stock of foam compound
The requirement as per SFAC norms is that each fire station is to maintain a 
minimum stock of 500 litres of foam compound to combat chemical fires.  The 
joint inspection of 60 fire stations showed that while the one at  Peenya, 
Bangalore had no foam compound in stock for eight months, forty six  others had 
less quantity of foam ranging from 40 litres to 480 litres.  Of these, seven stations 
had less than 100 litres of foam compound in stock and  therefore, were ill-
equipped to combat chemical fires.
 Old vehicles not replaced
Though vehicles are to be replaced after 10 years as per SFAC norms, 281 (53 
per cent) out of 528 vehicles in the Department were more than 15 years old, 
the earliest being a water tender procured in 1975. These included 218 special 
vehicles, 10 ambulances, 41 towing tenders and 12 utility vehicles. The 
Department had not prepared any plan for replacement of these old vehicles.
(ii)  Functioning of the Central Workshop at Bangalore
To provide all-round maintenance assistance to vehicles and undertake repairs 
of special equipment, the Department had established during 1967 a central 
workshop in Bangalore which functioned under the control of a RFO.  It was, 
however, seen that while one post of Fitter, one post of Welder and one post of 
Electrician had remained vacant since March 1980 to October 1998, 45 per 
cent of the posts of Driver Mechanics remained unfilled since 1982.   
Breathing 
apparatus not 
replaced after 
normal life 
period
Stock of foam 
compound 
inadequate in 
fire stations 
53 per cent of 
the vehicles 
were more than 
15 years old 
Running of the 
workshop 
became non-
viable 

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
47
In the absence of the requisite technical manpower, the central workshop 
attended to only routine repairs and the major repairs were outsourced to 
private workshops.  The details of repairs undertaken at the central workshop 
during the last five years were as shown in Table-2.8 below: 
Table-2.8: Repairs undertaken by the Central workshop
Year No. of repairs 
under taken
No. of 
vehicles 
repaired
No. of vehicles 
from Bangalore 
repaired
Percentage
of vehicles 
from 
Bangalore
No. of vehicles 
from other 
districts
repaired
Percentage
2006 163 153 151 99 2 1
2007 112 103 101 98 2 2
2008 142 133 119 89 14 11 
2009 165 156 150 96 6 4
2010 151 131 124 95 7 5
Total 733 676 645 97 31
(Source: Information furnished by the RFO, Central Workshop) 
Only 31 vehicles from other districts had been repaired during 2006-10 at the 
central workshop which catered predominantly to the needs of vehicles in 
Bangalore.  Further, as per the provisions in the Departmental Manual, the 
officer-in-charge of the central workshop was to conduct inspections of the 
fire stations to ensure that the vehicles were in good cond ition and were 
provided routine maintenance. However, no such inspections had been 
conducted during the period covered by audit. No standard operating 
procedure had been framed for maintenance and circulated to the fire stations 
for compliance. Thus, the role of the central workshop was limited to 
undertaking routine repair works of vehicles predominantly from Bangalore 
and the objective of establishing the central workshop was, therefore, not 
achieved.
As per SFAC norms, each of the district fire stations is to be provided with a 
mobile workshop to ensure continuous maintenance of vehicles, besides spare 
vehicles in case of vehicle break-downs. It was, however, seen that neither the 
mobile workshops nor spare vehicles had been provided in the district fire 
stations. 
The repairs to vehicles in districts other than Bangalore and major repairs to 
vehicles in Bangalore were carried out at private workshops. It was seen that 
the Department had not shortlisted the private workshops based on any criteria 
such as infrastructure and technical manpower to handle special equipment.  
On the other hand, whenever repairs were found necessary, the fire station 
officer obtained three quotations from local workshops and sent these for 
Director’s approval of the lowest through DFO and RFO.  After approval, 
repair works were got done at the local workshops.  This centralised system of 
according sanctions for undertaking repairs in private workshops has the 
potential of affecting the timely upkeep of the vehicles. Records of 60 fire 
stations showed that 44 vehicles in 16 fire stations were off the road during 
2006-11 for periods ranging from 13 days to 11 months.  With no spare 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
48
vehicles at their disposal, the fire stations were not adequately equipped to 
handle emergencies during the long periods of break-down of vehicles.   
Further, the reasonableness of the amounts quoted by the workshops was not 
verifiable by the Department as it did not have the requisite technical expertise 
to scrutinise the quotations. Thus, adequate checks and balances did not exist 
to ensure that the repair works at the private workshops were executed 
economically and efficiently.  
2.2.7.3 Search and rescue
K-SAFE 2010 envisaged establishment of Search and Rescue (SAR) wings in 
all fire stations across the State.  Vehicles and equipment required for the SAR 
were to be procured out of Calamity Relief Fund released by the Revenue 
Department. 
It was, however, seen that only one SAR wing headed by a RFO and assisted 
by two fire station officers and six leading fireman had been established at 
Bangalore and this wing had not conducted any rescue operation as of 
December 2011.  Director stated (December 2011) that the task of the SAR 
Wing created was to impart training to the staff on SAR operations and not to 
carry out rescue operations.  It was, however, seen that apart from creation of 
a SAR training centre, K-SAFE 2010 envisaged establishment of a state level 
specialised SAR team besides SAR units at the metropolitan, district and taluk 
levels.  However, the state level SAR team and SAR units at other levels had 
not been created (December 2011).  The standard operating procedure (SOP) 
of the Department also did not cover SAR operation in the pre-incident plan 
for disaster management. The Deputy Director (Administration) stated 
(September 2011) that a standing order with respect to SAR was being 
finalised.  Thus, due to non-establishment of SAR units as planned, the 
Department did not have the wherewithal to respond to all kinds of 
emergencies.  
It was further seen that 28 ambulances available with the Department were 
neither staffed with professionally trained personnel nor equipped for medical 
emergency. These ambulances were provided only with stretchers and were 
used mainly to carry departmental staff to hospitals. During the joint 
inspection of 60 fire stations, it was seen that the medicines stored in the first-
aid boxes of fire tenders and other utility vehicles of these fire stations were 
not replaced periodically and the shelf-life of the medicines stocked had also 
expired, rendering these useless. DGP stated (June 2011) that action had been 
taken to replace the expired medicines in the first-aid boxes.  As the fire 
fighters are prone to injuries, the availability of potent medicines at all times 
assumes a lot of significance.
Search and 
rescue units 
not set up at 
districts and 
taluks 

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
49
2.2.8 On-scene response
2.2.8.1 Response to fire calls 
The details of fire incidents reported and attended to by the Department, 
human lives lost, property lost and property saved during 2006-11 were as 
shown in Table-2.9 below: 
Table-2.9 : Fire calls statistics
Year
No. of fire 
incidents 
reported 
and 
attended
Percenta
ge of 
increase 
in fire 
accidents
Human 
lives lost
Human 
lives 
saved
Property 
lost
Property 
saved
Percentage of 
property lost 
against 
property 
saved
Percentage 
of lives lost 
to lives 
saved(` in crore)
2006-07 9,854 - 239 248 47 183 26 96
2007-08 10,766 9 465 412 64 223 29 113
2008-09 10,344 - 323 372 136 337 40 87
2009-10 11,638 13 557 780 140 437 32 71
2010-11 12,866 11 681 863 117 836 14 79
(Source: Information furnished by the Directorate)
Even though fire incidents reported and attended to by the Department had 
increased by 9 to 13 per cent during 2007-08 to 2010-11, the proportion of 
lives lost to those saved decreased from 113 per cent in 2007-08 to 79 per cent
in 2010-11.  Further, the proportion of property saved to property lost also 
showed improvement. It was, however, seen that the value of property lost and 
saved was based on assessments made by the fire station officers without any 
professional inputs. Thus, value of property lost or saved as assessed by the 
Department was not reliable.
To determine how effectively the resources are utilised, the Department
should periodically assess its own performance.  This would mean evaluating 
how well the Department provides each service from fire prevention to fire 
suppression. By identifying strengths and weaknesses in performance, the 
Department can determine training, equipment, and personnel needs; modify 
and improve its programmes and plans; reallocate resources as needed; and 
make informed strategic decisions about the types and levels of service it
should provide. It was, however, seen that the fire reports prepared by the fire 
stations were not analysed by the Directorate.  Thus, the Department has been 
losing the opportunity of evaluating its performance and identifying the 
shortcomings to improve upon its preparedness to deal with similar situations 
in future. Some of the major fire accidents where the response of the 
Department had been inadequate are as follows:
(i) Carlton Towers, Bangalore 
In one of the major fire accidents in high-rise buildings, 9 people lost their 
lives and 57 others were injured at Carlton Towers, Bangalore on 23 February 
2010.    Though fire broke out reportedly at 3.00 PM, the fire call was received 
in the control room only at 4.30 PM and vehicles were deployed immediately. 
However, the special vehicle stationed on Bannerghatta Road for rescue from 
high rise buildings was summoned only at 4.45 PM as evidenced by the entries 
in the log book of the vehicle. The vehicle did not reach the accident spot as it 
Fire reports       
not analysed  
The Department’s 
preparedness was 
weak in a fire 
accident 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
50
developed technical problems.  Deputy Director (Administration) stated 
(September 2011) that a TTL unit statione d at the Hebbal fire station was 
deployed and it reached the spot late due to heavy traffic.  Scrutiny of records,
however, showed that no TTL was available at Hebbal and no fire call was 
recorded at Hebbal fire station for this fire incident. A departmental 
investigation (March 2010) into the fire accident found that the exit doors had 
been locked and the common passage between the staircases had been 
modified and blocked with additional constructions/alterations.  The report, 
inter alia , recommended for (i) revamping the existing training system for 
skill development in specialised areas of fire and rescue (ii) procurement of 
more specialised vehicles suitable for high-rise structures, and (iii) 
upgradation of control room with state of art communication and monitoring 
facilities. The Department had not fully acted upon these recommendations so 
far (September 2011).  
(ii) Mangalore Air crash
An Air India Express carrier from Dubai crashed at Mangalore on 22 May 
2010 and 158 people including the crew members lost their lives. Since the 
accident occurred outside Mangalore’s Bajpe Airport, the Department was the 
first responder to the air crash. Even though human lives could not be saved, 
the Department was successful in dousing the flames and recovering the 
baggages and bodies of the dead. Even one year after the crash, the 
Department had neither finalised a standing operating procedure for air crash 
accidents nor conceived specialised training for search and rescue operations 
in such situations. The Director stated (September 2011) that a separate 
training would be arranged, if needed. 
2.2.8.2 Standard operating procedures 
For successful operations at emergency incidents, the Department should 
develop and use standard operating guidelines for all functions and activities.  
Standard guidelines provide a structure for conducting operations in a 
systematic, organised manner, and enhance the Departments’ capabilities for 
effective and reliable fire suppression, rescue or other emergency responses.
Standard guidelines applied consistently also enhance safety for fire personnel. 
With such guidelines, members can coordinate and prioritise tasks on the basis 
of a common understanding of standard approaches and strategies, regardless 
of the scale of the incident.  
As the Department was identified during 2004 as the 'first responder' for all 
emergencies, it needed to function as a multi-hazard response unit. It was seen 
that the Department had been following only a common standard operating 
procedure (SOP) for all kinds of emergencies. As the nature of response 
required was different for different emergencies, like fires in high-rise 
buildings, floods, earthquakes, landslides, air crash, etc., separate SOPs were 
to be designed to ensure a quick and appropriate response to the type of 
emergency.  This was, however, not done, handicapping the Department in 
providing the appropriate response during emergencies.
Standard 
operating 
procedure for 
air crash 
accidents not 
prepared
The Department 
had only one 
standard 
operating 
procedure 

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
51
2.2.9 Manpower management  
The details of men in position as of December 2011 were as shown in 
Table-2.10 below:
Table-2.10:  Men in position
Sl. 
No. Category of staff Sanctioned Men-in-
position Vacancies Percentage 
of vacancies
1. Senior Officers 25 24 1 4
2. Operating staff 6,354 3,833 2521 40
3. Office/ clerical staff 69 45 24 35
Total 6,448 3,902 2,546
(Source: Information furnished by the Directorate)
Cadre-wise details of vacancies were as given in Appendix-2.8. While there 
were hundred per cent vacancies in 6 cadres, the vacancy position in other 
cadres ranged from 3 per cent to 72 per cent . While the highest number of 
vacancies was noticed in Mangalore region (41 per cent), the lowest was in 
Hubli region (16 per cent) (Appendix-2.9).  
Thus, audit observed less than optimum manpower deployment to meet local 
service demands. Besides, the Department had not taken any action to recruit 
additional personnel required for operating three shifts in twelve fire stations, 
including four fire stations functioning since 1996. Further, permanent staff 
numbering 1,158 for 48 newly established fire stations had not been recruited 
though Government approval had been given in December 2009.
  These fire 
stations were being managed with deficit staff or by drawing staff on deputation 
basis from the other stations already facing staff deficit.  
The Department had 
sent a proposal to the Government in October 2009 for f illing up 1,854 vacant 
posts in the four cadres of fire station officer, firemen, firemen driver and 
driver mechanics. Although Government approved (December 2009) the 
proposal, the Department had not initiated the recru itment process even 24
months after Government’s approval due to non-finalisation of cadre and 
recruitment rules.
Besides, 35 per cent of the ministerial posts remained vacant as of December 
2011.   Deputy Director (Administration) stated (June 2011) that proposal for 
amending the cadre and recruitment rules had been sent to Government during 
May 2011 and Government’s approval was awaited.  The reply was not 
acceptable as the Department initiated the process of revising the cadre and 
recruitment rules only after Government approved the recruitment process  in 
December 2009.  Delay in finalising the cadre and recru itment rules delayed 
the recruitment process which had the potential of affecting the preparedness 
of the Department in responding to emergencies due to huge shortage of 
manpower.  
SFAC norms prescribe that for each fire station, which functions as an 
independent unit having its own cash and store, one clerk is to be provided.
However, test-check of 60 fire stations and the Directorate showed that the fire 
men on duty were assigned clerical work as no ministerial post had been 
sanctioned.  
40 per cent of the 
posts of operating 
staff remained 
vacant 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
52
2.2.9.1 Training 
To support safe and effective operations in emergencies, the Department
should have a well-trained workforce for efficient and effective operations to 
reduce the risk of injury to fire fighters. In order to meet the in-house training 
needs of the Department and spreading awareness about the fire fighting and 
fire fighting techniques, a training institute had been established in Bangalore 
during 1970 which was later upgraded to an Academy headed by a 
Commandant of the rank of CFO. 
It was seen that 17 per cent of the posts of Fire Station Officers (Training) and 
53 per cent of posts of fire men remained vacant in the Academy as of 
December 2011. The Academy trained in-service personnel as well as general 
public on fire fighting, fire prevention and rescue operations.  Although 
several officers belonging to different cadres, including four CFOs who were 
trained abroad, had undergone special training on a variety of subjects, the 
services of these officers were not utilised for training the other in-service 
personnel. The Academy lacked basic infrastructure facilities like library, 
vehicles, equipment etc.  There was no system of obtaining feedback from 
those receiving training to gauge the effectiveness of the training imparted.  
Although modernisation of the Academy had been approved under 
K-SAFE 2010, it had not been taken up (December 2011).  
The Commandant, Training Academy stated (April 2011) that the procedure 
of obtaining feedback was implemented immediately as per the audit 
observations and it would be continued in future also.   Deputy Director 
(Administration) accepted (September 2011) the lack of training staff and 
facilities in the Academy.  It was further stated that a draft modernisation plan 
was being prepared to modernise the Academy.
2.2.9.2 Protective clothing and equipment to fire fighters 
Given the adverse environm ental conditions that fi re fighters  face, the 
Department should provide each member with the protective clothing and 
equipment necessary to shield them from health hazards likely to be 
encountered during emergency operations. Protective clothing and equipment, 
such as thermal coats and trousers, gloves, goggles, boots, and self-contained 
breathing apparatus, reduce the occurrence of heat stress, burns, abrasions and 
punctures, and exposure to blood-borne pathogens. SFAC norms and the 
Perspective Plan also envisaged supply of these to the firemen.
It was, however, seen that the Department had provided only uniforms, 
gumboots and helmets for emergency operations. No protective clothing and 
equipment had been supplied to the firemen.
2.2.9.3 Lack of staff quarters and dormitory facility
The SFAC norms prescribe allotment of quarters to all the fire personnel in the 
premises of fire stations to ensure their availability at all times. It was seen
that while 1,121 quarters had been allotted to staff across the State, another 
906 were under construction as of December 2011. This is only 52 per cent of 
Lack of 
trainers and 
facilities in 
the Training 
Academy
Protective 
clothing not  
given to  
firemen
48 per cent of 
staff lacked 
facility of 
staff quarters 

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
53
the requirement.  Similarly, SFAC norms prescribe provision of dormitory in 
fire stations. It was, however, seen that dormitory facilities were available only 
in two
7 out of 60 fire stations test-checked.  Even in the new fire stations 
constructed under K-SAFE 2010, dormitory facilities had not been provided.  
2.2.10 Communication
The Department has to necessarily rely heavily on good communication to do 
its work.  Communications hardware and protocols, and fire fighters’ 
familiarity with them, are the underpinnings of successful emergency 
management. Without a well-functioning communications system, the 
Department cannot work effectively with fire companies on the scene, track 
the fire fighters’ whereabouts etc.  
The Department used both landlines and wireless for communication within 
and outside.  The existing communication network consisted mainly of VHF 
conventional wireless equipment which operated on two frequencies. It had a 
limited range of 12 kms and required installation of repeater facilities. It was 
seen that the Department had established repeater facilities only in 12 
districts
8. Although wireless sets had been supplied to the remaining 18 
districts, the network was not accessible due to the limited range. Further, the 
Department had not replaced 321 obsolete wireless sets. Against 11 posts 
sanctioned for the communication wing established at Bangalore, only one
personnel (Police Inspector, Wireless) was working as of December 2011.
Thus, lack of repeater facilities in all the districts and huge shortage of 
manpower in the communication wing had the potential of making 
communication during emergencies ineffective. 
2.2.11 Modernisation  
The Perspective Plan scripted a modernisation plan for the Department which 
included full computerisation of the Department with intranet facilities, 
creation of an Intelligence Management Information System, installation and 
training on Geographical Information System/ Global Positioning system, etc.
Even five years after the commencement of K-SAFE 2010, no progress had 
been made in this regard. As the ultimate goal of modernisation was to 
improve operational efficiency, lack of initiative for modernisation resulted in 
non-rectification of the shortcomings highlighted by the Perspective Plan and 
consequent non-improvement of the operational efficiency of the Department.
2.2.12 Public awareness of fire safety
2.2.12.1 Mock drills
To develop public awareness of fire risks, help prevent fires, and control the 
severity of fires and possible injuries, fire-safety education programmes are 
necessary. SFAC norms also prescribe conduct of mock drills at regular 
intervals by the fire stations. Through a typical public education programme,
7 Electronic City- Bangalore and Hebbal-Mysore Fire Station
8 Bangalore (Urban), Bangalore (Rural), Belgaum, Bellary, Chickmagalur, Davanagere, 
Gulbarga, Hubli, Mangalore, Mysore, Raichur and Shimoga 
Weak 
communication 
system 
Department did 
not undertake 
modernisation  
Limited fire-
safety education 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
54
citizens learn about specific hazards, the need for exit drills and fire escape 
plans. Although certain basic information is useful in all communities, it is 
important that the Fire Department identifies the most important local fire 
risks in its service area and tailor its public education programme accordingly. 
The target and achievements of mock drills conducted across the State during 
2006-11 were as shown in Table-2.11 below: 
Table-2.11: Mock drills conducted in the State
                                                                (Figures in number)
Year Target Achievement
2006-07 Minimum of 150 186
2007-08 Minimum of 200 295
2008-09 Minimum of 500 609
2009-10 Minimum of 700 776
2010-11 Minimum of 1000 1,275
Deputy Director (Administration) stated (September 2011) that mock drills 
had been conducted in schools, colleges, NCC camps, lion clubs, villages, 
Government officers, apartments, etc. It was further stated that 5,370 lectures 
were organised during 2006-11 to educate the public.  It was, however, seen in 
60 test-checked fire stations that 64 per cent of the mock drills had been 
conducted in schools during 2006-11 as shown in Table-2.12 below:
Table-2.12 : Mock drills statistics
Year Total mock 
drills
Mock drills in Schools
Schools Industries Offices Public
2006-07 16 8 3 3 2
2007-08 81 37 15 26 3
2008-09 290 196 18 44 32
2009-10 424 271 25 71 57
2010-11 739 476 39 133 91
Total 1,550 988 100 277 185
(Source: Information furnished by the Directorate)
The mock drills in industries, offices and public accounted for only 36 per 
cent of the total mock drills. Further, the proportion of the mock drills 
conducted during 2008-11 by the 60 test-checked fire stations ranged between 
48 to 58 per cent of the total mock drills.  Considering that the State had 176
fire stations, the contribution of the remaining 116 fire stations was evidently 
limited.  Further, as industries had been ranked high in the risk assessment, the 
Department’s priority of conducting a majority of the mock drills in schools 
was flawed as industries, offices and general public did not receive the same 
attention. It was further seen that 12 out of 37 rural fire stations had not 
conducted mock drills in the last five years. 
The benefits of fire-safety education lie in the potential to prevent fires. 
Besides avoiding the direct costs of fire suppression, prevention efforts help 
avoid the personal losses and tragedies resulting from fires. In addition, the 
indirect costs of fires, such as reduced property values, lost business income, 

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
55
unemployment, the destruction of natural habitat, represent a substantial 
savings when fires are prevented. However, the Department’s role in fire-
safety education was limited.
2.2.13 Enforcement of fire code
The Karnataka Fire Services Act, 1964 (Act) provides the legal framework for 
enforcement of fire code.  The Perspective Plan highlighted that the provisions 
in the Act did not reflect the Department’s roles and responsibilities and 
recommended for including the following provisions which did not exist in the 
Act:
/head2rightPenalty provisions for wilful contravention of the Act
/head2rightProvisions for revision of penalty from time to time
/head2rightClear provisions specifying that buildings above 15 metres in height 
were to obtain a No Objection Certificate (NOC) from the Department
/head2rightProvisions relating to citizens’ right to appeal against notices issued by 
the Department
/head2rightProvisions relating to powers to seal buildings/premises posing a threat 
to property or life
A proposal for amendment of the Act on these lines was under consideration 
of the Government (December 2011). Director stated (January 2012) that 
Government had directed the Department to modify the sections relating to the 
penal provisions and punishments for violations.  It was further stated that 
redrafting was in the final stages and the modified details would be 
resubmitted to Government by January 2012. 
The primary benefit of fire code enforcement and building-plan reviews lies in 
the potential to prevent fires. The National Building Code requires all the 
buildings classified as high rise to obtain fire safety clearance by way of NOC 
from the Fire Department.  It was seen that there was no mechanism in the 
Department to ensure that bodies/authorities empowered to sanction building 
plans sanctioned these only after obtaining NOC from the Department, 
wherever necessary. There were no inter-departmental linkages to ensure 
consultation with or participation of the Department in the plan sanction 
processes or issue of occupancy certificates for buildings.   
Further, there was no uniformity in the regulations followed by the 
bodies/authorities for sanction of building plans.  For instance, while  the 
building regulations of Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) 
recognised all buildings above 15 metres height as high-rise buildings, those 
of  Bangalore Development Authority (BDA) considered buildings of height 
24 metres and above as high rise buildings.  The Act did not contain 
provisions for obtaining NOC from the Department and periodical inspections
for high–rise buildings.  The Department processed only those applications for 
NOC which had been received, without being aware of the number of high-
rise buildings in the State.   During 2006-11, the Department had issued 1063 
NOC for buildings constructed across the State.  It was seen in Bangalore that 
out of 368 building plans sanctioned by BDA during 2006-11, the height of 
the 58 buildings was between 15 and 24 metres. These 58 buildings did not 
Lack of legal 
framework to 
enforce fire 
safety

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
56
obtain NOC from the Department as the regulations of BDA exempted these 
buildings from obtaining NOC.  
It was further seen that as a result of insufficient legal framework for 
enforcement of fire code, even the following prominent buildings had not 
obtained NOC from the Department.
/head2rightVikasa Soudha- Karnataka Government Secretariat
/head2rightCity Centre Mangalore
/head2rightCentral jail, Parappana Agrahara
/head2rightSagar Hospital, Jayanagar, Bangalore
/head2rightMother Dairy, Bangalore.
/head2rightPai Vista Hotels, Mysore
/head2rightRajeev Education Trust, Mysore and 
/head2rightKPTCL Building, Hassan
The Government issued (July 2011) a notification mandating the BBMP or 
local Municipal Authority to obtain NOC from the Department before 
sanctioning building plans/licenses.  Additional safeguards like grant of 
occupancy certificate only on the basis of a certificate issued by the 
Department, periodical renewal of fire safety certificates, surprise inspection 
of high rise buildings at least once in two years, disconnection of electricity in 
cases of non-compliance with the measur es prescribed by the Department for 
fire safety etc., were also envisaged in the notification.  The Director stated 
(January 2012) that the teams created for inspection of buildings had already 
started their work and their inspection reports were being scrutinised for 
initiating further action. 
2.2.13.1 Enforcement of fire safety measures in schools.
The Hon’ble Supreme Court had directed (April 2009) the State Governments
and Union Territories to grant recognition or aff iliation to schools only after 
ensuring, inter alia , that the schools complied with the safety norms 
prescribed in the National Building Code, installed fire extinguishers within 
six months and imparted training to the staff in extinguishing fire.
It was seen that against 58,295 lower and higher primary schools and 12,453 
high schools in the State, only 95 schools across the State had approached the 
Department for NOC as of December 2011. Of these, while applications of 
three schools had been rejected, 18 cases were pending.  The Director stated 
(July 2011) that the response of the Education Department was very poor.  The 
reply was not acceptable as, though it was the responsibility of Education 
Department to comply with the Supreme Court direction, the Department was 
also equally responsible for enforcing the implementation of the directive. In 
case of poor response from the Education Department, the Department should 
have taken up the matter with higher authorities.
Schools 
disregarded 
Supreme Court’s 
directive on fire 
safety 

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
57
2.2.14 Monitoring
The Department’s monitoring of various activities was weak.  Although the 
Memorandum of Understanding with KSPHC permitted the Department to 
request for third party inspection and joint inspection of the works executed by 
KSPHC, the Department did not conduct any inspection to ensure quality.  As 
per the standing order (May 2008) of the Department, the supervisory officers 
were to inspect the offices and report the findings with respect to discipline in 
personnel, condition of vehicles, infrastructure and equipment usage, 
requirement of equipment, administrative issues, etc.  However, no such 
inspections had been carried out.  Thus, the Department lacked necessary 
inputs to identify deficiencies in performance and take necessary rectificatory 
measures. 
2.2.15 Conclusion
Non-establishment of the requisite number of fire stations, non-procurement of 
vehicles/equipment as per the Perspective Plan, shortage of manpower and 
inefficient communication system had the potential of adversely affecting the 
preparedness of the Department in dealing with emergencies and undermining 
Department’s mandate of protecting citizens’ life and property against the 
dangers of fire and other emergencies.  The inadequate legal framework also 
hampered the efforts of the Department in enforcing fire safety.   
2.2.16 Recommendations
/head2rightThe Department needs to increase its capabilities particularly in the areas 
of infrastructure to the levels envisaged in K-SAFE 2010 for effective 
fire suppression, rescue and other emergency responses. 
/head2rightThe Department should periodically assess its performance so as to be in 
a position to determine training, equipment and personnel needs, modify 
and improve the programmes and make informed strategic decisions 
about the level and type of service it should provide. 
The matter was referred to Government in August 2011; reply had not been 
received (December 2011).
Deficient 
monitoring  

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
58
KANNADA AND CULTURE DEPARTMENT
2.3 Preservation and conservation of heritage in Karnataka
Executive Summary
The protection and conservation of heritage monuments in the State other 
than those under the control of Archaeological Survey of India vest with the 
Commissioner of Archaeology, Museums and Heritage, Bangalore and 
Director of Archaeology and Museums, Mysore. 
There was no coordinated strategic approach to heritage management, 
resulting in ad hoc approach to decision making, resource allocation and 
conservation practice. The Commissioner/Director did not focus on 
identification and inventorisation of the heritage monuments and 
consequently, a large number of ancient monuments remained unidentified in 
the State.  
Resource allocation by the Government for heritage conservation during 
2006-10 was very meagre and was not based on need analysis.  There was 
also no funding base for cyclical maintenance of heritage monuments. 
Twenty three technical posts (40 per cent) remained vacant in the Directorate 
for periods ranging from one to 21 years.  Most of the technical staff 
responsible for heritage conservation lacked heritage management 
competencies and had also not been trained.  
Land adjoining the monuments had not been declared as protected despite 
orders issued by Government in March 1998.  Only 31 out of 763 protected 
monuments had protective fencing.  Watch and ward engaged for the 
monuments was also very meagre.  Nineteen out of 47 monuments jointly 
inspected had either been encroached upon or had buildings constructed 
adjacent to them.  Annual maintenance of the monuments had not been 
undertaken and the Commissioner/Director failed to project the requirement 
of funds to Government for maintenance.  
The action plans for conservation were ad hoc and not based on an 
assessment of relative significance of the monuments.  There was no 
prioritisation of the meagre resources allocated for conservation which was 
also taken up in bits and pieces without a holistic approach. There was also 
no effort to present the heritage monuments to public and most of the 
monuments jointly inspected did not even have a sign board or a display 
board.  Monitoring of the heritage monuments was very limited and no 
targets had been fixed for their periodical inspection.  

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
59
2.3.1 Introduction
Karnataka has a rich and varied heritage. Various ruling dynasties have left 
behind their indelible impression on the cultural legacy of this State and 
several monuments in the State stand testimony to this rich heritage. The State 
has the second highest number of protected monuments in the country (518 
protected by the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) and another 763 by the 
State Government). The protection and preservation of this invaluable heritage 
is, therefore, of utmost importance. The Directorate of Archaeology and 
Museums, Mysore and the Commissionerate of Archaeol ogy, Museums and 
Heritage, Bangalore, established during 1885 and 2005 respectively, are 
entrusted with the responsibility of protecting and preserving 763 monuments 
under the control of the State Government. In addition, the Directorate 
maintains 14 museums and one art gallery. 
2.3.2 Organisational set-up
The protection and conservation of heritage in the State is under the overall 
control of Secretary, Kannada, Culture and Information Department 
(Secretary) who is assisted by Commissioner of Archaeol ogy, Museums and 
Heritage, Bangalore (Commissioner) and Director of Archaeol ogy and 
Museums, Mysore (Director). While the Commissioner is assisted by a Deputy 
Director (DD) at Mysore, the Director is assisted by four DDs of four 
divisions at Bangalore, Belgaum, Gulbarga and Mysore.  DDs are assisted by 
Archaeological Conservation Engineers (ACEs), Archaeological Conservation 
Assistants (ACAs) and Archaeological Assistants (AAs) in preservation and 
conservation of heritage monuments and by Assistant Directors and Curators 
in maintenance of 14 museums and one art gallery.
2.3.3 Audit Objectives
Audit was taken up with the objectives of ascertaining as to whether: 
 the institutional mechanism and the current practices were designed to 
discover, inventorise and preserve heritage monuments in all their
manifestations; 
 sufficient financial resource was provided in the State Budget and 
financial discipline maintained while preserving and conserving heritage 
assets; and
 the actual performance and impact of the legal, financial and human 
resources employed in pursuit of preservation and development of 
heritage monuments had yielded the desired results.
2.3.4 Audit Scope and Methodology
The Performance Audit started with an entry conference held on 14 March 
2011 with the Secretary, Kannada, Culture and Information Department in 
which audit scope and methodology were explained.  The audit was conducted 
during March to June 2011 covering the period 2006-07 to 2010-11 through a 
test check of records of the Commissioner, Director, four DDs and eight out of 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
60
14 museums and one art gallery.  Audit was confined to scrutiny of records 
relating to protection and conservation of heritage monuments under the 
control of only the State Government.  A joint inspection of 47 out of 127
monuments conserved by the Director was conducted by audit during March 
to May 2011 with the representatives nominated by the Director.  The Report 
takes into account the replies furnished by the Government/Commissioner/
Director in response to the audit observations communicated to them and the 
joint inspection notes confirmed by the nominated representatives.  The audit 
findings were discussed with the Secretary in the exit conference held on 
23 September 2011.
2.3.5 Audit Findings
The key processes involved in protection and conservation of heritage 
monuments and the results of audit of these processes in the Commissionerate 
/Directorate are discussed below:
2.3.6 Strategic Heritage Management  
Strategic Heritage Management (HM) requires that systems and processes 
drive the organisation towards the strategic goals. An overall strategy 
incorporating planning, budget setting capability to focus on priorities, 
standard operating procedures like cyclical and catch-up maintenance plans, 
opportunities to share information and resources to further strategic 
management goals etc., must be visible at all levels of management and across 
all functional areas. It was, however, seen that there was no coordinated 
Identification 
and assessment
Allocation of 
resources
Protection 
Conservation  
Presentation 
Monitoring
Strategic Heritage 
Management

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
61
strategic approach to cultural HM, resulting in ad hoc approach to decision 
making, resource allocation and conservation practice. The Commissionerate/
Directorate lacked the resources or support to implement standard HM
methodologies across the land it managed. 
2.3.7 Identification and assessment  
Identification and assessment cover the processes used to identify heritage 
places, create inventories and assess comparative significance. It includes 
research, recording, investigation and assessment. Inventory is always a key 
management tool in the area of identification and assessment. Key heritage 
sites are to be identified either by a thematic analysis or by a survey of land for 
key places.  Each designated land area is to be analysed for relevant themes 
and the identified heritage places ranked within that theme. Thus, the aim of 
an identification and assessment process is to not only identify places, but also 
establish a hierarchy of significant places under a thematic system.
Although the Department had identified 763 monuments as of March 2011
and declared these to be protected, a large number of ancient monuments 
remained unidentified in the State. Government approved (October 2003) the 
proposal of the Director to identify such monuments and prepare an inventory 
of monuments.  Although Government released 
` 10 lakh for this purpose 
during March 2004, the Director did not undertake this work.  Even in respect 
of 763 already identified monuments, the Commissionerate/Directorate did not 
maintain a proper inventory of heritage monuments incorporating details such
as location of site, description of site, theme represented by the site, 
assessment of the significance of the site, management recommendation viz., 
benign neglect, restoration, stabilisation etc., and the conservation works 
undertaken from time to time. Thus, the Commissionerate/Directorate did not 
focus on identification and inventorisation of the heritage monuments either 
on the basis of geographic areas or themes and a potential threat, therefore, 
existed to unrecorded sites.  In the absence of any assessment criteria or 
process, distribution of resources for preservation and conservation of heritage 
monuments was not based on comparative merits  and was not guided by 
relative significance of the assets in both a thematic and individual context (as 
discussed in paragraphs 2.3.8.1 & 2.3.10.2). Government stated (December 
2011) that while documentation of protected monuments had been completed 
in Bangalore, Belgaum and Mysore Divisions, monuments in Gulbarga 
Division would be completed in six months.  It was further stated that 
necessary action would be taken to survey and collect information about 
unprotected monuments within six months.
2.3.8 Allocation of resources  
Allocating resources covers the ways in which financial, human and other 
resources are obtained and allocated to the HM structure within the 
organisation and allocation of resources to specific heritage monuments.
  
Identification and 
inventorisation of 
heritage 
monuments not 
undertaken

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
62
2.3.8.1 Financial resources
The financial resources provided to the Commissioner and Director during 
2006-11 consisted of funds from the annual budget and grants received from 
the Twelfth Finance Commission (TFC). The financial resources of the 
Directorate and Commissionerate during 2006-11 were as shown in 
Table-2.13 below: 
Table-2.13:   Financial resources provided to the Directorate and 
Commissionerate during 2006-11 
Directorate
(` in lakh)
Year
Plan Non-plan
Budget 
provision
Expendi
-ture
TFC 
grant
Expendi
-ture
Budget 
provision
Expendi-
ture TFC grant Expendi
-ture
2006-07 98.51 97.17 - - 439.90 426.89 452.71 452.71
2007-08 106.21 106.20 - - 525.39 524.59 391.04 381.75
2008-09 92.14 91.90 522.46 522.46 569.54 557.04 276.00 259.20
2009-10 883.13 881.64 607.79 558.20 519.81 520.87 - -
2010-11 1,690.10 1,691.51 - - 585.80 586.38 - -
Commissionerate 
            ( ` in lakh)
Year
Plan
Budget 
provision Expenditure TFC 
grant Expenditure
2006-07 35.00 33.64 125.00 125.00
2007-08 41.61 41.54 125.00 125.00
2008-09 46.25 44.26 121.80 121.80
2009-10 46.65 42.41 58.20 33.14
2010-11 596.97 493.25 - -
(Source: Information furnished by the Commissionerate/Directorate)
The plan resources provided by the State Government from its annual budget 
during 2006-09 to the Director and during 2006-10 to the Commissioner were 
very meagre.  Bulk of the resources during this period was in the form of 
grants from the TFC.  The budget estimates prepared by the Director and the 
Commissioner did not project requirement of funds for catch up maintenance 
or cyclical maintenance and consequently, there was no funding base for 
cyclical maintenance of heritage monuments.  This was indicative of skewed 
preparation of budget estimates and the resultant risk of the heritage 
monuments deteriorating due to non-maintenance.
It was also seen that the Commissioner and the Director did not prepare 
budget estimates for plan resources.  The Department of Planning, Programme 
Monitoring and Statistics intimated plan resources earmarked for preservation 
and conservation of heritage monuments to the Commissioner and Director 
before the commencement of the financial year. These earmarked provisions 
were included by Government in the annual budget.  At the beginning of each 
financial year, the Commissioner and Director prepared action plan for 
spending these plan resources and got it approved by Government. Thus, 
allocation of funds by Government for heritage conservation was not need 
based and the Director and Commissioner did not assess the requirement of 
funds for conservation works and project these in the annual budget estimates.  
Government stated (December 2011) that budget requirements of the 
Department would be taken into consideration in future and funds would be 
earmarked for annual maintenance of monuments. 
Allocation of 
funds for heritage 
conservation was 
not need based 

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
63
2.3.8.2 Human resources
While the Directorate with four divisional offices viz., Bangalore, Belgaum, 
Gulbarga and Mysore, each headed by a DD, had been in existence over the 
years, Government established
9 the Commissionerate in February 2004 with 
one technical post and nine non-technical posts and entrusted protection and 
conservation of heritage monuments at six places viz., Bidar, Bijapur, 
Gulbarga, Kittur, Mysore and Srirangapatna besides the following 
responsibilities: 
/head2rightIdentifying heritage buildings and areas on the basis of their historical, 
architectural, environmental and ecological values and grading them
/head2rightProposing legal provisions for heritage conservation
/head2rightPrinting publications on heritage towns, arranging exhibitions, bringing 
out manual on heritage conservation, arranging cultural programmes and 
producing documentary films 
/head2rightCreating heritage fund in association with UNESCO, Government of 
India, State Government and other private bodies
/head2rightPreparation of maps of the heritage areas through Geographical 
Information System, remote sensing and survey
/head2rightPromoting tourism and creating a website
/head2rightProducing documentary films and arranging cultural programmes, and
/head2rightPolicy and important issues concerning the Directorate
The Commissionerate functioned without a full time DD since 2009 as the DD 
of State Archives Department at Mysore was only holding additional charge of 
the post of DD.  The post of ACE which was essential for undertaking 
protective and conservation works was filled up only during October 2008.
Only one ACA, who was a civil engineer drawn on deputation from the Public
Works Department (PWD) with no HM competency, had been working in the 
Commissionerate. Consequently, the conservation works of the 
Commissionerate had been executed only by the Directorate till 2008-09 
although payments for these works were debited to the budget of the 
Commissionerate. As a result, the Commissionerate’s contribution to HM was 
limited to mere identification of 449 heritage buildings in the State without 
any concrete follow up action for protection, creation of 168 heritage clubs for 
publicity campaign and printing of pamphlets, brochures, heritage series books 
etc. 
Out of 449 heritage buildings, 139 had been identified only in Mysore. These 
heritage structures faced threat due to rapid urbanisation.  However, the State 
had not amended the Town and Country Planning Act (TCPA) to restrict new 
constructions in the vicinity of heritage structures.  It was further seen that 
Commissioner sent a proposal to Government in this regard only during 
November 2010 and it had not been acted upon (June 2011).  Government 
stated (December 2011) that amendment to TCPA was under consideration. 
Thus, in the absence of a legislative framework to regulate new constructions 
around heritage structure, identification of 449 heritage buildings by the 
9   Commissionerate became functional in September 2005 
The 
Commissionerate’s
contribution to 
heritage 
management was 
very limited 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
64
Commissioner did not serve the objective of protection of these heritage 
structures.   
2.3.8.3 Huge shortage of technical staff in the Directorate
As of March 2011, against the sanctioned strength of 214 staff members 
(Technical 57; Non-technical 157), only 149 (Technical 34; Non-technical 
115) were in position.  Vacancies in technical posts were as shown in 
Appendix-2.10. While the Director made good the vacancies in non-technical 
posts by outsourcing, vacancies in technical posts such as Additional Director, 
Assistant Director, Archaeological Assistant, Registering Officer, 
Archaeological Conservation Assistant, Curator, Assistant Curator, and 
Surveyor remained unfilled for periods ranging from one to 21 years.
Admitting that the Department was facing shortage of staff, Government
stated (December 2011) that the posts of Archaeological Assistant, Epigraphist 
and Surveyor would be filled up shortly.  Thus, non-availability of staff with 
the requisite technical expertise over an extended period of time resulted in the 
Directorate drifting away from discharging its mandated functions. 
As of March 2011, the proportion of HM technical staff to heritage 
monuments was also dissimilar in the four divisions of the Directorate as 
shown in Table-2.14 below:
Table-2.14 : Proportion of HM technical staff to heritage monuments
Sl
No
Name of the 
division10
Jurisdictional 
area (in sq kms)
Number of 
protected 
monuments
Available technical 
manpower
1 Bangalore 49,954 92 1 ACE and  2 ACAs
2 Belgaum 54,514 359 1 ACE and 1 ACA
3 Gulbarga 44,138 196 1 ACE and 1 ACA
4 Mysore 43,473 116 1 ACE and 2 ACAs
(Source: Information furnished by the Directorate) 
Besides, regular analysis of heritage monuments is a pre-requisite to ensure 
that each monument is managed by the organisation with the best expertise 
and resources. This would require that technical staff with necessary HM
competencies were recruited to take care of protection and conservation of 
heritage monuments.  It was seen that out of four ACEs, only two at Mysore 
and Belgaum had HM competencies and the other two were civil engineers 
drawn on deputation from the PWD. The ACAs had also no HM competencies 
and they had also been drawn on deputation from PWD.
Training in core HM competencies including HM principles and specific 
standard operating procedures are to be integrated into organisation-wide 
training programmes as integrated training provides for consistency of 
treatment of places and raises awareness of HM issues.  It was seen that except
the two ACEs having HM competencies, others had not been trained in HM 
10 Bangalore Division includes Bangalore Urban / Rural, Chitradurga, Davanagere, Kolar, Shimoga and Tumkur districts
Belgaum Division includes Bagalkot, Belgaum, Bijapur, Dharwad, Gadag, Haveri, Uttara Kannada districts
Gulbarga Division includes Bellary, Bidar, Gulbarga, Koppal, Raichur districts
Mysore Division includes Chamarajanagar, Chickmagalur, Dakshina Kannada, Hassan, Kodagu, Mandya, Mysore, 
Udupi districts
Huge vacancies 
in technical posts 
not filled up

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
65
competencies.  As well meaning, but undertrained staff making significant 
decisions are a potential threat to cultural heritage resources, the threat is to be 
factored in the organisation’s risk management. Training of staff in core HM 
competencies, therefore, assumes a lot of significance.
2.3.8.4 A Deputy Director in a museum without work
Government prescribed (June 2005) that while DDs were to be assigned the 
work of protection, conservation and monitoring of unprotected and protected 
monuments, Assistant Director/Curator/Assistant Curators posted to museums 
were responsible for maintenance and overall supervision.  Although a DD 
had no role to play in the routine/day-to-day functioning of museums, 
Government, nevertheless, posted (December 2006) a DD, in contravention of 
its earlier order of June 2005, to the museum at Mangalore citing 
administrative reasons.  
It was noticed that the DD remained idle since the date of his reporting for 
duty. Even the routine correspondences were not routed through the DD and 
the Curator/Assistant Curator were managing the affairs of the museum. As 
the DD had not been assigned any work, he remained idle till March 2011 and 
his pay and allowances aggregating 
` 18.74 lakh proved wasteful. Government 
stated (December 2011) that the DD was usually invited to attend all meetings 
convened by the Directorate and he was also entrusted with inspection of 
monuments and submission of reports. The reply was not acceptable as the 
DD had not attended the departmental meetings, though invited.  Nothing was 
on record regarding inspection of monuments and submission of reports by the 
DD. It was further seen that while one out of four posts of DD remained 
vacant in the Directorate since December 2006, the DD at Mangalore was 
allowed to remain idle.  This was indicative of skewed manpower 
management, resulting in sub-optimal utilisation of the scarce manpower 
resources available.
2.3.9 Protection
The following legal and regulatory instruments empower the 
Commissionerate/Directorate to declare, conserve and protect the monuments/ 
treasure.
 The Karnataka Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological 
Sites and Remains Act 1961 (Act) and the Karnataka Ancient and 
Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Rules 1965 
(Rules).
2.3.9.1 Agreements with private owners not entered into
Out of 763 protected monuments, the ownership of 758 monuments rested 
with the Government and the remaining with five private parties.  The Act 
stipulates that Government shall propose to the owner of a protected 
monument (in case of private ownership) to enter into an agreement which 
shall cover the maintenance/custody of the monument, restrictions of the 
owner’s right etc.  Of these five monuments under the private ownership, 
Sub-optimal 
utilisation of 
manpower  
The Department 
did not enter into 
agreements with 
private owners

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
66
agreements had not been entered into with the private owners in respect of 
four monuments11 and the process was only partially completed in respect of 
the remaining monument12. In the absence of agreements, the Government did 
not have any legal instrument to enforce restrictions on the private owners.  
Government stated (December 2011) that the Department would enter into 
agreements with the private owners of monuments.
2.3.9.2 Identified monuments not declared as protected
The Directorate undertook conservation of 56 unprotected monuments during 
the period 2006-11. As these monuments had already come to the notice of the 
Director, action should have been taken to declare these as protected through a 
Gazette Notification.  However, no action had been taken in this regard.  
Government stated (December 2011) that some of the proposals to declare the 
monuments as protected were under consideration.  It was further stated that 
the Department was also being instructed to send proposals for the remaining 
monuments. The reply was indicative of lack of initiative to declare these 
monuments as protected even after spending the scarce resources on their 
conservation.
2.3.9.3 Land adjoining the monuments not declared as protected
Sections 11 and 12 of the Rules confer powers on the Government to declare a 
prohibited or regulated area after duly issuing the notice of intention to declare 
the same. In exercise of these powers, Government declared (March 1998) the 
first 100 metres of land adjoining the monuments as prohibited and the next 
200 metres of land as protected areas.  However, no action had been taken to 
enforce these provisions till November 2003 when it was decided in a meeting 
under the Chairmanship of the Minister of Kannada and Culture to fix the 
prohibited and protected areas of each monument depending on its 
importance, instead of fixing the area uniformly for all the monuments. The 
Director was to seek advice from experts and prepare necessary guidelines and 
the work was to be completed within six months.  It was, however, seen that 
the decision had not been acted upon. Government stated (December 2011) 
that a policy decision would be taken in consultation with experts in regard to 
monuments in the world heritage sites and towns/cities. As land adjacent to 
the monuments is needed for their preservation, non-declaration of the 
adjoining land as protected was fraught with the risk of structures coming up 
very close to these monuments in an uncontrolled manner, posing threats to 
the monuments.
2.3.9.4 Poor watch and ward for monuments 
As of March 2011, the Director had appointed only 27 Monument 
Attendants/Chowkidars and 13 security staff towards watch and ward of 763 
protected monuments in the State, while ASI had engaged 280 Monument 
Attendants and 172 security staff in respect of 518 protected monuments under 
11 Raja Madakarinayaka Samadhi at Mayakonda, Ramathirtha Palace at Jamakhandi, 
Sangameshwara Temple at Indi and  Suralu Mud Palace at  Udupi 
12 Diwan Purnaiah Jahgir Bungalow at Yelandur
Monuments not 
declared as 
protected despite 
taking up 
conservation 
works
Government’s
decision to declare 
the land adjoining 
the monuments as 
protected not 
acted upon 
Watch and ward 
arrangements 
were grossly 
insufficient

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
67
their control in the State. Further, protective fencing had been provided for 
only 31 out of 763 protected monuments. Government stated (December 
2011) that staff strength for watch and ward would be increased with the 
sanction of Finance Department.  It was further stated that fencing would be 
provided after fixing the boundaries of the monuments.   
Though budget and other priorities would determine the extent of engagement 
of manpower for protection and maintenance, the manpower actually deployed 
for protection and maintenance was grossly insufficient, facilitating 
encroachment of the monuments in the absence of fencing as discussed below: 
2.3.9.5 Encroachments/structures adjacent to monuments
It was seen during joint inspection that out of 47 monuments, 14 (30 per cent) 
had been encroached upon while another five (11 per cent ) had buildings 
constructed adjacent to them.  Some photographs of monuments taken during 
the joint inspection are shown below:
Jain Basadi, Chikmagadi, Shikaripur taluk, 
Shimoga district with a huge community 
water tank in front of the monument
Rameshwara Temple Chittur, Soraba taluk,
Shimoga district with an Anganawadi Centre
in front of the monument
Shivappanayaka Palace, Shimoga – Two forest 
quarters situated within the boundar y of the palace
Buildings situated inside the Ranganatha Temple 
Complex, Anegundi, Gangavathi taluk, Koppal district
Government stated (December 2011) that encroachments at Hampi and 
Srirangapatna had been removed. However, a large number of monuments 
remained encroached upon.
Encroachment 
of monuments

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
68
2.3.9.6 Local level committees not constituted
Government approved (April 1997) formation of comm ittees headed by the 
local Tahsildar and consisting of a Mandal Panchayat member, Village 
Accountant and other members for protection and maintenance of conserved 
monuments under their jurisdiction. However, no such committees had been 
constituted.  Government stated (December 2011) that local level committees 
would be formed shortly.  In the absence of these committees, the protection 
and maintenance of conserved monuments continued to suffer.  
2.3.10 Conservation
Conservation is the safeguarding of a cultural resource, retaining its heritage 
values and extending its physical life.  It includes all works undertaken to 
remedy and mitigate deterioration in the condition of cultural resources, 
including restoration or adaptation.
2.3.10.1 Heritage conservation management plan not in place
Places identified as being of sufficient cultural heritage significance are to 
have vision statement prepared for them, outlining sustainable future 
management and anticipated use(s).  These may include appropriate 
commercial activities, stabilisation, benign neglect, adaptive reuse etc.  The 
purpose of the vision statement is to make some fundamental management 
decisions based on, say,  a five year time span.  These decisions would include 
the brief for a management plan, a budget estimate, future funding sources, the 
future use of the place and the desirability (and the possible form) of 
presentation of the place. It was, however, noticed that no conservation 
management plan had been prepared.  Government stated (December 2011) 
that heritage management plan would be prepared keeping in view a five year 
time span.  Thus, the Directorate and the Commissionerate lacked
conservation management plan to ensure sustained management of heritage 
monuments.
2.3.10.2 Conservation of monuments taken up on ad hoc basis
As many historic monuments were to be managed by the Commissioner and 
the Director with very limited financial resources provided by Government on 
an ad hoc basis, prudent financial management required prioritisation of the 
resource allocation after making choices about which monuments were more 
significant than others. Though the Department was established during 1885, it 
had not prepared any guidelines/norms for prioritising the conservation works.  
As a result, there was no prioritisation of the meagre resources allocated and 
the action plans drawn up by the Commissioner/Director had not been based 
on an assessment of relative significance of the monuments but were firmed 
up largely on the basis of representations received from the local public and 
elected representatives and to a limited extent, on the pr oposals sent by the 
ACEs. As the action plans were ad hoc in nature, the Director and 
Commissioner undertook protection and conservation works for more number 
of unprotected monuments although many protected monuments suffered due 
Committees for 
protection and 
maintenance of 
monuments non-
functional 
The Department 
did not prepare 
conservation 
management plan 
No holistic 
approach to 
conservation        
of monuments 

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
69
to lack of funds as noticed by audit during joint inspection.  While the number 
of conservation works undertaken by the Director for unprotected monuments 
during 2006-11 was 56 (44 per cent) out of 127, the number of unprotected 
monuments conserved by the Commissioner during the same period was 17 
(46 per cent ) out of 37. Further, there was no holistic approach as the 
conservation of a monument was taken up in bits and pieces and as a result, 
the Director failed to dovetail all works relating to a monument into an 
integrated programme to restore it to its original glory.  Out of 47 monuments 
jointly inspected, 10 (21 per cent) monuments taken up for conservation had 
been only partially conserved and restoration of these monuments had not 
been completed. Government stated (December 2011) that conservation of the
monuments would be undertaken with a holistic approach on a priority basis.  
It was also stated that a proper strategy would be devised for conservation and 
development of monuments. 
Some of the conservation works taken up partially in bits and pieces which did 
not help in restoration of the monuments to their original shape are discussed 
below:
 Partial conservation of Suralu Mud Palace
Suralu mud palace is an ancient palace situated in the coastal belt of Udupi 
district. The palace had been built during the seventeenth century by the Jain 
king, Tolahar. The palace has a living Jain Basadi in its premises. The palace 
was declared as a protected monument during 1993. Thereafter, the 
Department had taken up conservation of the palace in various phases and 
spent 
` 68.48 lakh (March 2011).  Scrutiny showed that ACE, Mysore had 
reported (March-2005) to the Director that the partially conserved mud palace 
was in bad condition and the expenditure incurred would be wasteful if further 
conservation works were not taken up.  Although an es timate for further 
conservation had been prepared during 2006-07 for 
` 42.75 lakh, the work was 
not taken up. It was noticed during joint inspection (April 2011) that the 
palace was in a bad shape as shown below:
Portions of roof and a wall inside the palace had collapsed and some of the 
wooden planks had bent on account of usage of heavy weight bricks during 
conservation. Government stated (December 2011) that further conservation 
Suralu mud 
palace in bad 
condition 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
70
works, for which technical approval had been given would be taken up out of 
` 160 lakh earmarked under XIII Finance Commission Grants.  
 Partial conservation of Sandur Fort
The Department had undertaken partial conservation work of the Sandur Fort 
during 2008-11 and incurred an expenditure of ` 31.34 lakh.
It was seen during joint inspection (April 2011) that the fort was in ruins and 
had been encroached upon fully, as a village (Krishnanagar) had been located 
within the fort. The residents of the village moved around the premises of the 
fort freely and no watch and ward had been engaged.  The fort was in an 
advanced stage of decay and restoration of the fort to its original shape seemed 
impossible.  Government stated (December 2011) that action would be taken 
to clear the encroachments and provide a monument attender.
2.3.10.3    Conservation estimates not routed through the DD
As per the orders (June 2005) of Government, DDs were responsible for 
protection/conservation/ monitoring of protected and unprotected monuments, 
excavation, scrutiny of estimates etc.  A review of the conservation works 
undertaken by the Director showed that estimates thereof prepared by ACEs 
were submitted to the Director directly bypassing their divisional heads i.e., 
DDs. Thus, the divisional heads did not play any role in identifying and 
proposing conservation works which were left entirely to the ACEs.  As there 
were no guidelines or norms for selection of works for conservation, the 
selection of monuments for conservation was evidently guided by the 
subjective assessment of ACEs.  Government stated (December 2011) that as 
per the guidelines, ACEs were to prepare the estimates in consultation with the 
DDs and submit these through DDs. Audit, however, observed that the ACEs/ 
Director had not followed these guidelines. 
Sandur fort in 
advanced stage of 
decay 
DDs did not have 
any role in 
selection of 
conservation 
works

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
71
2.3.10.4 Regional bias in conservation works
A review of the conservation works executed by the Director showed that 
while allocation of funds for conservation works in respect of Bangalore and 
Mysore divisions with a total of 208 monuments had been 
` 21.63 crore during 
2006-11, it was only ` 11.20 crore during the same period in respect of 
Belgaum and Gulbarga divisions with a total of 555 monuments as shown 
Table-2.15 below:
Table-2.15: Allocation of funds for conservation works
Sl.No. Name of the 
Division
Number of different works 
taken up during 06-07 to 10-11 
Actual Cost  
(` in lakh)
Number of 
Protected 
Monuments
01 Bangalore 25 1,176.55 92
02 Belgaum 29 609.85 359
03 Gulbarga 25 510.21 196
04 Mysore 55 986.28 116
Total 134* 3,282.89 763
* This included both conservation works of monuments and seven other works
(Source: Information furnished by the Directorate)
Thus, absence of any guidelines or norms for prioritisation of conservation 
works created opportunities for the implementing authorities to select the 
works subjectively, resulting in regional bias.  Government agreed (December 
2011) to remove the bias in selection of monuments for conservation.  Unless 
subjectivity in selection of monuments for conservation is removed through a 
transparent process of selection based on the merits as per norms, the bias in 
regional allocations for heritage conservation cannot be eliminated.
2.3.10.5 Delay in completion of conservation works
Scrutiny of  conservation works taken up for 71 protected monuments and 56
unprotected monuments during the period 2006-11 showed delays in 
completion ranging up to 42 months (Gulbarga division–up to 13 months; 
Mysore division–up to 26 months, Bangalore division–up to 42 months and 
Belgaum division–up to 12 months).    As conservation works were taken up 
as an emergency measure in many cases, any abnormal delay in completion 
was fraught with the risk of further damages to the monuments. Government 
agreed (December 2011) to avoid the delays in future.
A review of payments made to the contractors for conservation works during 
January 2007 to March 2011 also showed that Director and Co mmissioner 
failed to deduct labour cess of
` 32.82 lakh and ` 8.91 lakh respectively from 
the bills in contravention of instructions issued by Government in January 
2007. Government stated (December 2011) that labour cess would be 
deducted from the bills and remitted in the forthcoming years commencing 
from 2011-12.  The reply was silent about the labour cess not recovered from 
the bills during January 2007 to March 2011. 
Absence of 
guidelines for 
prioritising 
conservation 
works 
Conservation
works were not 
completed as 
planned

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
72
2.3.10.6 Annual maintenance not undertaken
The best practices of conservation include conservation, protection and upkeep 
of monuments on a regular basis. The ASI which undertakes protection/
conservation works in different parts of the State follows the best practices and 
makes separate financial provision for annual maintenance of conserved 
monuments. The best practices stipulate that the annual maintenance work of 
protecting and preserving the conserved monuments must go on with 
unbroken regularity every year, as the neglect of the same may necessitate a 
greater outlay than would otherwise require. Further, to protect the monument 
from further decay/deterioration, annual maintenance is necessary.
However, it was seen that the Department neither had any policy in place for 
maintenance of monuments nor had it sought grants for maintenance in the 
budget estimates sent to Government. It was seen that maintenance of 11 out 
of 47 monuments jointly inspected was very poor and there was growth of 
vegetation all-round these monuments threatening their existence.  
Government stated (December 2011) that necessary funds would be 
earmarked for annual maintenance of monuments. 
Some of the poorly maintained monuments noticed during the joint inspection 
are shown below:
Govindeswara, Nakeswara Temple, 
Koravangala, Hassan district
Mallikarjuna Temple, Mallappanagudi, Hospet 
taluk, Bellary district 
Mallikarjuna Temple, Mallappanagudi, Hospet 
taluk, Bellary district 
Kalleswara Temple, Hulikal, Tiptur taluk, Tumkur 
district 
No funding base 
for upkeep of 
monuments 

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
73
Khalia Masjid, Lakshmeswara, Shirahatti taluk, 
Gadag district 
Eshwara Temple, Virupakshipura, Mulbagilu taluk, 
Kolar district 
Shiva Temple, Sitarama Thanda, Kamalapura, 
Bellary district
Shiva Temple, Talavaraghatta, Kamalapur, Bellary 
District
Trishulini Durga Parameshwari Temple,   
Balapa, Sulya, Dakshina Kannada 
It was further seen that only 31 out of 763 monuments had complete protective 
fencing.
2.3.10.7    Works carried out through Public-Private-Partnerships
Government accorded (November 2001) approval for taking up of 
conservation works at 12 temples in eight districts through Sri Dharmastala 
Manjunatheswara Dharmothana Trust under a Public-Private-Partnership 
(PPP) arrangement subject to the following terms and conditions.
Monitoring of 
PPP project 
was tardy

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
74
/head2rightThe expenditure was to be shared in the ratio of 40:40:20 by 
Government, the private Trust and the Public.
/head2rightThe estimates of the conservation works should be jointly prepared by 
the Directorate and the Trust.
/head2rightThe Trust should send physical and financial progress of works every 
month to the Director, Deputy Commissioner and Government.
/head2rightThe Trust and the Directorate should send a joint-utilisation certificate 
to the Government.
/head2rightThe Officers/Engineers of the Directorate should constantly monitor 
the progress of works.
Government released its share of ` 1.91 crore to the Trust during 2006-11. 
Scrutiny showed that the estimates were prepared only by the Trust, monthly 
progress reports were not sent to the Directorate, utilisation certificates were 
sent directly to Government by the Trust and the conservation works were not 
monitored by the Directorate.  Government stated (December 2011) that 
monitoring of the works undertaken under the PPP model would be 
undertaken by the Directorate.
2.3.11 Presentation of monuments to public  
Presentation includes all the processes undertaken to present cultural heritage 
resources to the public.  For effective presentation of heritage monuments to 
the public, there should be an assessment system to determine whether a place 
merits presentation. Presentation that is developed from a range of different 
perspectives has the potential to engage the visitors.
Karnataka is the country’s fourth most popular tourist destination. The tourism 
sector attracts significant investment by domestic and global players as 
infrastructure is ramped up to meet the needs of the growing tourist activity. 
The number of foreign tourists increased from 2.53 lakh in 2005 to 3.23 lakh 
in 2010 and that of domestic tourists from 244.90 lakh in 2005 to 359.82 lakh 
in 2010. The contribution of tourism to the State GDP has increased from 13 
in 2005 to 15 in 2010. However, the contribution of tourism to the State GDP 
has come mainly from sources other than the heritage monuments maintained 
by the State Government. No effort to present the heritage monuments of the 
State was visible in either the Directorate or Commissionerate.  No system had 
also been in place to assess the presentation of the heritage sites to the public.  
It was seen that while all the forty seven monuments jointly inspected did not 
have any sign board showing the location of the monument, 45 (96 per cent) 
did not have any display board depicting the background information 
regarding the historic and heritage values.  Twelve monuments (25 per cent) 
did not have a monument board displaying the restrictions imposed on 
handling the protected monuments. Government stated (December 2011) that 
sign boards had been fixed at Bidar, Bijapur, Gulbarga, Mysore and 
Srirangapatna and further progress would be achieved based on the heritage 
management plan. 
Presentation of 
heritage 
monuments to 
the public was 
not effective

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
75
2.3.11.1  Publications
The Director did not follow any policy on printing of publications.  The 
selection of books for publications had been done by the Director. During 
2006-11, the Directorate printed 29 publications at a cost of 
` 78.38 lakh. 
These publications were sold at selected places, exhibitions and museums.  As 
of March 2009, 88,000 copies of various publications had been held in stock.  
It was seen that these publications had been printed in bulk to reduce the cost 
of printing and no trend analysis of sales during previous years had been made 
before printing.  Further, the Director did not evolve any policy for fixation of 
the selling price of the publications. While in 15 cases, the sale price was 
higher than the printing cost, it was lower in four cases and almost equal in 10 
cases.  As the objective of printing publications is to present the heritage 
monuments to the public, the sale price needs to be so fixed as to facilitate 
affordability to the public to purchase these publications.
It was also seen that annual verification of publications held in stock had been 
last carried out for the year ended March 2009. During this physical 
verification, several shortages of publications costing 
` 16 lakh had been 
noticed. The Director had not taken action (March 2011) to get the differences 
reconciled and the final cost of shortages assessed. Government stated 
(December 2011) that a policy on fixation of price would be framed and 
internal audit would be conducted to fix the responsibility for the shortages.
2.3.11.2 Functioning of museums 
The museums preserve, interpret and promote the natural and cultural 
inheritance of humanity, provide for understanding and promotion of natural 
and cultural heritage and hold the collections for the benefit of the society.  
The Directorate maintains 14 museums and one art gallery. It was seen during 
joint inspection of one out of eight museums that the antiques had been kept 
outside in the open due to space constraints, exposing these to the risk of 
deterioration and damage. Four out of eight museums had not conducted 
physical verification of antiques/artifacts which carried high heritage value for 
periods ranging up to two years.
Further, the Director had not fixed any targets for collection of ancient 
sculptures, antiques, artifacts, paintings etc., by the museums. The collections 
made by the museums during 2006-11 were very minimal. Government stated
(December 2011) that officers in-charge of the museums had been instructed 
to collect art and archaeological objects to enrich the collections.   
2.3.11.3 Physical verification of Treasure Trove 
The Directorate has in its possession a huge collection of ancient valuable 
treasures which are preserved in the strong room of the Mysore palace due to 
security reasons. It was seen from the day book of Treasure Trove articles that 
there were 362 different articles of gold, silver, copper, bronze etc., and the 
Directorate had not conducted any physical verification of the valuable articles 
in possession. The period of last physical verification was also not 
forthcoming from the Directorate.  The present Director had also not taken 
Huge stock 
of unsold 
publications 
in stock 
Physical 
verification not 
conducted in 
four museums 
The Treasure 
Trove had not 
been physically 
verified

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
76
over charge of the articles.  Although the Government had constituted 
(February 2008) a committee for preparing an inventory of valuables in the 
Treasure Trove, the work had not commenced (March 2011). Government 
stated (December 2011) that reconstitution of the committee was under 
consideration. Failure to conduct physical verification was fraught with the 
risk of loss of ancient treasures and fixing responsibility for losses, if any, 
would be rendered difficult with passage of time. 
2.3.11.4 Epigraphy and Numismatics
Epigraphy is the science of identifying the graphemes 13 and of classifying 
their use as to cultural context and date, elucidating their meaning and 
assessing what conclusions can be deduced concerning the writing and the 
writers.  Numismatics is the study or collection of currency, including coins, 
tokens, paper money and related objects.
It was seen that the Department had not undertaken any significant work in the 
field of Epigraphy and Numismatics during 2006-11 as the posts of Additional 
Director and Epigraphist remained vacant since May 2007 and March 2000 
respectively. Government stated (December 2011) that while the post of 
Epigraphist was being filled up, a suitable post would be identified for the 
Numismatics study. 
2.3.12 Monitoring
Monitoring covers the monitoring and evaluation of resource delivery, 
identification and assessment, protection effectiveness, conservation work and 
presentation of cultural heritage.  It includes formal and informal monitoring 
and audit, performance measurement, visitor satisfaction surveys and any 
other evaluation and feedback mechanisms. Monitoring in the Department was 
extremely limited. The Commissioner/Director had not fixed any annual 
targets for DDs/ACEs/ACAs for periodical inspection of the monuments.  
Scrutiny of the tour notes of these officers showed that they had been visiting 
only monuments where the conservation works were in progress and they had 
not been visiting other monuments at periodical intervals to review the status. 
It was further seen that vehicles for supervision had also not been available as 
these were provided to the Belgaum division during June 2008, Gulbarga 
division during March 2009 and Bangalore and Mysore divisions during 
September 2010.  In the absence of periodical monitoring, the Department 
lacked the inputs necessary for effective protection and conservation of the
heritage monuments under its control. Government stated (December 2011) 
that necessary instructions were given to the Commissionerate and Directorate 
for effective monitoring of protected and conservation of heritage monuments.
13 Letters or combination of letters that may be used to express a group of speech sounds in a 
language 
No significant 
work in 
Epigraphy and 
Numismatics
Monitoring 
was extremely 
limited

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
77
2.3.13 Conclusion
There was no coordinated approach to heritage management, resulting in 
ad hoc approach to decision making, resource allocation and conservation 
practice.  Key heritage sites were not identified by a survey of land and 
distribution of meagre resources available for preservation and conservation 
was not driven by the relative significance of the assets. The budget 
preparation exercise was also flawed as it did not project requirement of funds 
for cyclical maintenance and capital expenditure.  Most of the technical staff 
had no heritage competencies and had also not been trained.  Forty per cent of 
the technical posts also remained vacant for periods ranging from 1 to 21 
years.  The protection of the monuments was ineffective as the land adjoining 
these had not been declared as protected.  Forty per cent of the monuments 
jointly inspected had either been encroached upon or had buildings 
constructed adjacent to them.  Only 31 out of 763 monuments had protective 
fencing and watch and ward staff were also meagre.  There was no effort to 
present the monuments to public and most of the monuments jointly inspected 
did not even have a sign/display board. The monitoring of the heritage 
monuments was also very deficient. 
2.3.14 Recommendations
/head2rightA heritage management database containing all information relating to 
history and management of assets needs to be maintained. The 
Department should follow a holistic approach for conservation of 
heritage sites with due prioritisation of resources.
/head2rightRegular analysis of the heritage monuments needs to be done to ensure 
that each asset is managed by the organisation with the best expertise, 
resources, motivation and local presence to effectively conserve that 
place and to present the place, wherever feasible. 
Government, while thanking the Indian Audit and Accounts Department for 
their valuable guidance, suggestions and recommendations, agreed to 
implement the recommendations. 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
78
WATER RESOURCES DEPARTMENT
2.4 Working of the Irrigation Central Zone
2.4.1  Introduction
Tungabhadra Project (TBP) is an interstate multipurpose project, benefitting 
Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh (AP), consisting of a reservoir across the river 
Tungabhadra, with five canal systems
14 and was completed more than 50 years 
ago.  Tungabhadra Left Bank Canal (TLBC), a 227 km long canal with an 
unlined distributaries network of 707 km, is having a command area of 2.44 
lakh hectares (ha).  The two right bank inter-state canals are under the control 
of Tungabhadra Board and expenditure on them are to be shared
15 by both the 
States.  The erstwhile, TBP Zone located at Munirabad was rechristened in 
1987 as Irrigation Central Zone (Zone).  The Zone is in charge of water 
management, improvements and maintenance of left bank canals with 
distributaries and distributaries under right banks canals, Rajolibanda 
Diversion Scheme (RDS), three medium projects, Vijayanagara channels, etc.
The modernisation of TLBC and distributaries of Right Bank High Level 
Canal (RBHLC) was commenced from 2009-10 and is in progress.  
INDEX MAP OF TUNGABHADRA PROJECT
The Zone is headed by a Chief Engineer (CE) assisted by two Superintending 
Engineers (SEs) at Munirabad and Yermarus with six Divisional Officers
16
(EEs) and one Quality Control (QC) Division at Munirabad.  
Records of the Zone covering the period from 2006-07 to 2010-11 were test 
checked in audit during January to April 2011 to examine compliance to rules 
14 Two right bank interstate canals,  Tungabhadra Left Bank Canal, Tungabhadra High Level 
Left Bank Canal and Vijayanagara Canal
15 In accordance with Krishna Water Dispute Tribunal Award (KWDTA)
16 Stationed at Bellary, Munirabad, Odderahatti, Sindhanur, Sirwar and Yermarus 

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
79
and procedures in relation to financial management, programme formulation, 
execution of works, water management etc, and results thereof are brought out
in the succeeding paragraphs:
2.4.2 Financial management – Budget allocation and
utilisation
Control over budget and expenditure is essential for optimum utilisation of 
grants made available to achieve the intended objectives.
The State Government provides funds to the CE for construction, 
improvement and maintenance of works through annual budget.  The CE in 
turn releases funds through letter of credit to various divisions. As per the 
provisions of the Budget Manual, funds should be surrendered wherever there 
are savings and supplementary grants should be obtained for additional/extra 
works found necessary before its execution.  The grant, outlay and pending 
bills under capital heads and maintenance heads during 2006-10 were as 
shown in Table-2.16 below: 
Table-2.16: Grant, outlay and pending bills
(` in crore)
Year
Capital Heads Maintenance Heads 
Budget 
allotment Expenditure Pending 
bills
Budget 
allotment Expenditure Pending 
bills
2006-07 102.93 87.72 4.00 18.18 23.30 9.03
2007-08 58.19 46.41 4.44 20.00 23.40 9.80
2008-09 116.41 47.51 1.79 21.77 21.76 8.48
2009-10 226.98 221.09 20.49 22.85 22.85 14.08
2010-11 86.29 83.38 40.78 24.10 23.88 20.37
(Source: Details furnished by Water Resources Department) 
As can be seen from the above Table, liabilities in the form of pending bills 
persisted both under capital and maintenance heads during 2006-11.  Under 
capital head during 2006-09, all the bills were not paid despite availability of 
funds, for which no reasons were furnished by the divisional officers.  The 
huge savings during 2008-09 were due to delay in sanction of estimate and 
tender process as the Government approved the modernisation programme in 
October 2008 only.  The increase in pending bills thereafter under capital head 
was on account of enlargement of scope of modernisation works. The 
persistent increase in pending bills on one side and regular savings on the 
other side under capital head indicate ineffective budgetary control.
Under maintenance head, the divisional officers executed the works in excess 
of the approved works without obtaining supplementary grants in 
contravention of provisions of the budget manual.  As the Government 
released the funds with reference to the budget allotment, the divisional 
officers could not make payment for all the bills resulting in huge outstanding 
bills year after year.  The practice of executing works more than the approved 
works without obtaining supplementary grants amounts to creation of 
unauthorised liability and by-passing the authority of the legislature.  The 
controlling officers failed to take remedial action on this matter and therefore 
pending bills increased from ` 9.03 crore at the end of 2006-07 to ` 20.37 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
80
crore at the end of 2010-11 for maintenance heads and ` 4 crore at the end of 
2006-07 to ` 40.78 crore at the end of 2010-11 for capital heads.  These 
pending bills constituted 85 per cent and 47 per cent for maintenance and 
capital heads respectively of the budget allotment during 2010-11. 
The matter of unauthorised expenditure was also not brought to the notice of 
the legislature for regularisation through supplementary/additional demand for 
grant which would have provided legislative scrutiny of these practices.  This 
has been brought to the notice (September 2011) of the Finance Department.
No reply has been received from the Department (December 2011). 
The Government for savings under capital head attributed (November 2011) to 
short release of funds for pendency of bills and huge savings in 2008-09 for 
not taking up of works to the extent of grants allocated due to the 
announcement of parliamentary elections.  For the maintenance expenditure, it 
was stated that the grant at the rate of ` 140 per ha fixed in 1984-85 was 
exclusively utilised for maintenance of canal net work and previously 
supernumerary staff borne on establishment was being utilised for water 
management.  The supernumerary staff was regularised and transferred to 
other departments.  Hence, labourers for water management were being 
deployed through contractors and expenditure was being met out of 
maintenance grant which is insufficient and inevitable therefore exceeding the 
grant.  While submitting the budget requirements, demand for pending bills
was also included but the grants were not released accordingly.  The reply was 
not acceptable as grant under capital head available in 2008-09 was not 
utilised to clear the pending bills. The reply as regard to insufficient 
maintenance grant was not tenable as maintenance grant was provided at the 
rate more than ` 140 per ha.  For 3.91 lakh ha of command area under Zone,
the maintenance grant at ` 140 per ha works out to ` 5.47 crore only but 
maintenance grant provided during the period between 2005-06 and 2010-11 
ranged between ` 18.18 crore and ` 24.10 crore.  Despite this, unauthorised 
liability was being created resulting in pendency of bills and no reply was 
furnished for not obtaining supplementary grants. 
2.4.3 Planning
For successful implementation of a time bound programme, it is essential that 
financial and physical planning is done in a phased manner along with a 
targeted implementation schedule of all construction activities.  Audit 
observed that no planning by prioritising the works in a systematic manner for 
modernisation was done as is evidenced in the following:
2.4.3.1 Modernisation programme of TLBC and Distributaries
TLBC was constructed more than 50 years ago with available soil in the
adjoining borrow areas without providing zonal section for embankment 
reaches. As breaches and bongas17 were occurring in the main canal, the inner 
and outer strengthening works as suggested by expert committee were carried 
17 Large cavity
Scope of the TLBC 
modernisation works 
was enlarged and 
were commenced 
without a detailed 
pro
ject report

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
81
out in the vulnerable reaches from the year 1975 onwards and cement concrete 
bed to the entire length of TLBC was carried out between 1982 and 1996 .
Further, strengthening works were also carried out during 1999 to 2003 as per 
the recommendations of Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore (IISc).  Due to 
occurrence of breaches and bongas in 2004 in some of the banking reaches of 
the canal, the Government constituted (February 2005) a committee headed by 
Shri H.S. Chinival for suggesting remedial measures. The committee 
recommended (December 2005) completion of the inner strengthening works 
of left over vulnerable reaches (60.78 km), bed treatment (5.42 km), 
improvement to several cross drainage works, etc.  The Government accorded 
administrative approval (October 2008) for ` 210 crore by calling the work as 
“Modernisation of TLBC/Distributaries of TLBC” for completion in five 
years.  The works could be taken up only during closure period of the canal 
(between April and July), which was for about 75 days in a year.  However, 
scope of the modernisation works was enlarged by taking Cement Concrete 
(CC) lining for entire TLBC against the selected vulnerable reaches and lining 
of distributaries from 2008-09 and onwards.  
2.4.3.2 Commencement of works without a project report 
As enumerated in Paragraph 2.4.3.1, the modernisation programme was not 
restricted to the recommendations made by the Chinival Committee but the 
scope of modernisation works was increased to cover entire TLBC with its 84 
distributaries and RBHLC. Though, the scope of the modernisation 
programme increased substantially, fresh comprehensive project report 
detailing cost of different works, year-wise physical and financial targets, 
schedule of implementation, anticipated benefits, etc., was not prepared by the 
CE for obtaining clearance of the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) and 
administrative approval of the Government.  The CE instead submitted
18
estimates of CC lining works in piece meal to the TAC for clearance, which 
was mandatory for all the works costing ` 2.50 crore19  and above as per the 
procedure in vogue.  The TAC remarked that as the Government had already 
decided to carry out the modernisation works and estimates were placed 
before the cabinet, it would be prudent for Government to decide in the matter.  
The works were commenced as per the administrative approval accorded by 
the Government to the Chinival Committee Report. This amounted to 
circumventing the procedure as Chinival Committee Report was no longer 
relevant due to the enlarged scope of the modernisation programme.  Further, 
the TAC also could not appraise the project comprehensively as the estimates 
were submitted for clearance in piece meal.  Thus, the works were commenced
without detailed project report (DPR) and revised administrative approval in 
violation of codal provisions
20. 
The Government stated (November 2011) that the Chinival Committee had 
also recommended improvement of the main canal every year wherever 
section had deteriorated and modernisation of distributaries.  Further, 
18 Estimates of works for 2009 closure period in February 2009 and 2010 closure period in        
April 2010 
19 ` 5 crore from February 2010 onwards
20 Paragraphs 107, 115 and 148 of Karnataka Public Works Departmental (KPWD) Code  

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
82
Government contended that scope of works was not increased and stated that 
the DPR is being prepared by Karnataka Neeravari Nigam Limited (KNNL)
for obtaining approval of competent authority.  The reply is not acceptable as 
the proposed works involved modernisation of canal network of 2,270 km 
whereas Chinival Committee recommendation only relates to treatment of 
vulnerable reaches of TLBC.  Though Chinival Committee had made 
recommendation of modernisation of distributaries, it did not include cost of 
modernisation of distributaries in its total project cost of ` 210 crore. The fact 
that the DPR is under preparation itself affirms the audit observation that 
scope of the modernisation works was enlarged and being executed without a 
DPR.
2.4.4  Award of works
2.4.4.1 Delay in awarding of contracts 
As per codal provisions 21, before awarding of contracts for execution of the 
works, pre-requisites like preparation of detailed estimate after conducting 
necessary investigations, preparation of designs and drawings, obtaining
sanction of funds, invitation of tenders should be firmed up so as to avoid 
slippages.  These inputs assume greater importance in such programme as the 
works should be completed during closure period; the reason being the 
availability of shorter working period (90 days) for the execution of works. 
Audit scrutiny revealed delay in tendering process during 2009-10 and 2010-
11 and tenders for modernisation works were not finalised before
commencement of the canal closure period. Consequently, all the 39 works
contracted during 2009-11 could not be completed by the contractors during 
the canal closure period.  
Government in reply (November 2011) attributed to observance of tender 
procedures for delay in awarding of contracts and consequent reduction in the 
working period. The reply is not acceptable as the Department invited short 
term tenders for awarding the contracts early.  As a result of skewed planning, 
the mile stone for various activities could not be fixed which led to delay in 
awarding of contracts defeating the very purpose of invitation of short term 
tenders. 
2.4.4.2 Works were tendered at higher rates 
For 2009 closure period, tenders for 29 works costing ` 184.29 crore were 
called for in November 2008 and the bid amount quoted by the lowest bidders 
was ` 284.51 crore.  After negotiation with the contractors for lowering rates, 
the works were entrusted at a total cost of ` 230.29 crore with tender premium 
ranging between 24.35 and 25 per cent above the updated cost 22.  Similarly, 
tenders for ten works costing ` 231.45 crore for execution during 2010 closure 
period were called for during February 2010 and the works were awarded in 
June 2010 for an amount of ` 359.48 crore to the lowest bidders after 
21 Paragraphs 104, 135 and  211 of  KPWD Code 
22 Cost worked out considering the current prices of materials, revised royalty rates and labour 
cess of one per cent on WRD SR and labour rates of PWD SR. 
Extra burden to 
Government due to 
acceptance of 
tenders at higher 
tender premium of   
` 93.54 crore 

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
83
conducting negotiation for lowering the rates.  The tenders were accepted with 
tender premium ranging between 10.17 and 13.95 per cent with reference to
Water Resources Department schedule of rates (WRD SR) of 2010-11 which 
came into effect from 15 th June 2010 and not with reference to the updated 
cost as was done in the previous year. The WRD SR incidentally had 
recommended 25 per cent weightage to the cement concrete items for works 
of modernisation programme.  The tender premium with reference to updated 
cost works out to 22.88 to 25 per cent. The CE recommended acceptance of 
tenders with high percentage of tender premium as competitive on the ground 
that contractors had to mobilise huge labour, machinery and materials in a 
short working period, as stipulated period of completion was only 90 days. 
However, it was observed from the CC lining contracts of Right Bank High 
Level Canal and Right Bank Low Level Canal awarded by the Tungabhadra 
Board during the period 2007-11 that the tender percentage ranged between 
minus 39.99 per cent and plus 4.99 per cent.  The Board for its works also 
adopts the WRD SR of Government of Karnataka (GoK) for preparation of 
work estimates.  Since, the works were executed under similar conditions, 
during identical closure periods and also based on the same SR, the rates 
contracted by the CE were on higher side compared to the rates at which the 
Board awarded the contracts. Hence, action of the CE, who is also the CE of 
the Board, in recommending tenders with tender premium of 25 per cent
above the estimated cost as competitive was not wholly justified.  Even 
considering the highest tendered premium of 4.99 per cent at which the Board 
awarded the contract, the extra burden to Government in acceptance of tenders 
at higher tendered rates in two years worked out to ` 93.54 crore  
(Appendix-2.11).
Government stated (November 2011) that the works taken up by TB Board 
were of small magnitude costing few lakh and tender parameters and ground 
realities were different.  The contracts awarded by ICZ were of each costing 
several crore involving stringent pre-qualification procedure, require large 
quantity of men, machinery, materials, works were to be executed during 
closure period etc., and hence not comparable.  The reply was not acceptable 
as the item rate tenders were invited and rates were quoted with reference to 
quantities, the usage of machinery translates into more output at lower costs 
and coupled with large quantities enabling competitive rates as compared to 
tender with less quantity. 
2.4.4.3 Improper evaluation of bids for 2010 closure period 
modernisation works
The short term tenders for four packages relating to modernisation works of 
TLBC and its distributaries were invited in February 2010; much before the 
draft tender papers were cleared (April 2010) by TAC and administratively 
approved (May 2010) by the Government.  Against the budget provision of 
` 69.94 crore, the amount put to tender based on WRD SR of 2007-08 which 
continued for 2008-09, was ` 211.75 crore.  The rates quoted by the bidders 
for the four packages were as high as ` 409.26 crore and tender premium 
working out to more than 90 per cent above amount put to tender.  The re-
casted cost of the four packages with reference to WRD SR and present cost of 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
84
labour/materials worked out to ` 242.27 crore and tender premium with 
reference to the re-casted cost ranged between 65.85 per cent and 72.33 per 
cent.  The same was recommended by CE for acceptance of tenders by TAC 
and Government.  In the meanwhile, the bidders reduced their tender amount 
by ` 81.01 crore after negotiation and the tender premium of the reduced 
amount with reference to the re-casted cost worked out between 31.03 per cent
and 40.40 per cent.  For the acceptance of tenders, the quoted rates should be 
compared with such re-casted amount as per the norms in vogue.  However, 
the Department did not follow the procedure in view of the high tender
premium and waited for WRD SR for 2010-11, which came into effect from 
15 June 2010. This effectively meant that the working period available was 
reduced (as the release of water into the canal was fixed on 28 July 2010).
Finally, the Government awarded the contracts at ` 328.25 crore with tender 
premium ranging between 10.17 and 13.95 per cent on 22 June 2010 with only 
35 days was available against 90 days for execution of works.  The tender for 
the two packages (` 215.42 crore) was bagged by the same contractor. 
The scope of works included removal of existing Pre-Cast Cement Concrete 
(PCC) slabs of the sides of the canal, removal of concrete bed, dismantling of 
several structures, excavation, construction of embankment before laying 
Reinforced Cement Concrete (RCC) lining in respect of TLBC and
excavation, re-sectioning, cement concrete lining for distributaries, etc.
Further, the lining works of TLBC were to be tackled in scattered locations 
requiring frequent assembling/disassembling of the paver machinery. Thus, 
considering the scope of the work, numerous activities involved, scattered 
location of the works, the necessity of awarding of the contracts by the 
Government when almost two-third of the working period had elapsed lacks
any justification.  
Audit scrutiny revealed that considerable progress of 71 to 91 per cent of 
contract amount was achieved by the contractors during working period of 
35-40 days.  It was also seen that one day prior to agreement and within two 
days from the date of agreement, the quality control test of aggregates and 
casting of cement concrete cubes were carried out by the third party 
consultants appointed for the purpose. This evidently shows that works were 
commenced by the contractors much before the conclusion of the agreement 
undermining the process of tendering, which was reduced to a mere formality.  
The huge reduction in tendered amount offered by the contractors and loading 
of estimates with 25 per cent weightage after receipt of tender for evaluation 
purpose was only to regularise the work already commenced into a binding 
contract. This 25 per cent weightage prescribed in WRD SR 2010-11 towards 
concrete items for estimation was in force for that year only even tho ugh 
modernisation works were executed earlier also.  For next year, this weightage 
in estimation of works was withdrawn and recommended to be paid as 
incentive for completion within the closure period, forming a part of the tender 
condition. Thus, the loading of 25 per cent weightage boosted the
departmental estimates thereby making the rates offered by the contractors’ 
look competitive but in fact were on higher side even with reference to the re-
casted amount.  Thus, tender process was not proper and awarding of contacts 
with availability of 35 days working period was not justified.  

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
85
Government replied (November 2011) that activities like mobilising materials, 
machinery, labour were commenced by the lowest quoted bidder in 
anticipation of approval of the tenders and rules provides for commencement 
of work in emergent situations before agreement, sanction, etc.  It was further 
stated that 25 per cent weightage to concrete items was applicable to all 
modernisation works carried out in the State.  The reply was not acceptable for 
the reason that works were not in vulnerable reaches to consider as emergent 
works but improvement works for which DPR was still under preparation.  
Though it was within the knowledge of the Department that contractors had 
commenced the mobilisation activities, the Government did not award the 
contracts even after reduction of the rates by the contractors and instead 
delayed award till WRD SR 2010-11 came into effect.  Incidentally, the WRD 
SR 2010-11 recommended 25 per cent weightage which facilitated narrowing 
the tender premium.  Further, the Transparency Act, emphasise against 
conducting negotiation with the contractors for the sole purpose of reduction 
of rates as it would set a bad precedent encouraging contractors to quote 
highly erratic rates only to lower their rates later, which was the case in the 
last two years.  
2.4.5  Execution of works
2.4.5.1 Extra expenditure on replacement of existing CC bed of TLBC 
The Chinival Committee, inter alia , identified certain reaches of TLBC 
totaling 5.42 km for providing bed treatment with RCC as it was damaged/ 
deteriorated/distressed and to extend the treatment gradually based on further 
observations during closure periods as suggested by IISc.  There were no 
suggestions for removal of existing CC bed and replacement with RCC in 
reaches where the same was in good cond ition.  However, scrutiny of records 
revealed that removal of existing CC bed and fresh RCC laying was taken up 
in 91 km length of TLBC. In all these cases, the works were proposed by 
indicating it as recommended by Chinival Committee whereas the committee 
had specifically identified the vulnerable reaches of 5.42 km for replacement 
of bed.  Thus, justifying the works as being taken up as per committee’s
recommendation was incorrect.  The total area of CC bed taken up for 
replacement in the non-critical reaches in four divisions was 3,98,993 Sqm 
involving extra expenditure of ` 29.01 crore as shown in Table-2.17 below: 
Table-2.17: Statement of fresh lining to canal bed
(Source: Details furnished by Executive Engineers) 
Extra expenditure of 
`` 29.01 crore due to 
removal of existing CC 
bed with fresh RCC in 
non-critical reaches
Division TLBC reaches
Bed length 
removed 
(km)
Area of 
fresh CC 
lining 
(Sqm)
Total 
expenditure
(` in crore )
Odderahatti Km 32 to 39 4.15 68,526 4.51 
Sindhanur Between Chainage  2,475 and 3,458 16.73 2,16,919 16.21 
Sirwar Km 116 to 137 and 143 to 155 7.95 72,711 5.25 
Yermarus Between Chainage 6,074 and 7,093 9.07 40,837 3.04 
TOTAL 37.90 3,98,993 29.01

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
86
The Government stated (November 2011) that the canal bed was provided 
during original construction period.  The modernisation works not only meant 
for strengthening but also included improvement and CC bed was replaced 
after identifying the reaches. The reply is not acceptable as Chinival 
Committee had identified the vulnerable reaches for a length of 5.42 km after 
inspection of the condition of the canal.  However, CC bed replaced was for a 
length of 91 km and audit comment relates only to a length of 37.90 km where 
condition of existing CC bed was not indicated as bad/heaved up against total 
additional length of 85.58 km taken up for replacement of CC bed as seen 
from the estimates.  This was also commented upon by the TAC that no proper 
justification was forthcoming from the estimates for the necessity of the work. 
2.4.5.2 Extra cost due to non-adherence to technical norms
The existing sections of the distributaries were designed with reference to 
those required for unlined canal and accordingly, the full supply depth (FSD)23
and free board 24 (FB) are worked out.  The capacity of a canal can be 
increased by lining it.  The lining provides smooth surface thereby causing 
less resistance to the flow of water.  The capacity is a function of velocity, the 
higher the velocity, the greater is the carrying capacity of the canal and 
consequently it reduces canal section required. 
When unlined canals are taken up for lining, the option either would be to line 
the canal without changing the section or reducing the section of the canal.  In 
first option, original section is retained for lining i.e., without changing the bed 
width, height of the FSD would decrease as the carrying capacity in a canal is 
the function of velocity of water.  The lining is to be restricted to reduced FSD 
plus free board as per norms.  In case, the second option is selected for 
execution, the original FSD would be retained by decreasing the bed width 
and top width of the canal but it involve s expenditure on filling to reduce the 
section of the canal. 
Audit scrutiny of lining estimates of distributaries of TLBC/RBHLC revealed 
that though the original section of the distributary was retained, side lining 
height was not reduced by working out revised FSD.  It was done up to
original FSD plus FB level leading to unwarranted execution of side lining 
above the revised FSD levels and hence expenditure thereon was avoidable. 
An illustrative diagram indicating water level in the unlined and lined canal 
having same cross section at designed discharge of 4.03 cumecs is shown 
below:
23 Water level in the  canal at its designed discharge
24 The minimum vertical distance provided above FSD in the water way of the canal
Extra cost of             
` 17.89 crore due 
to unwarranted 
execution of side 
lining to 
distributaries

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
87
The revised FSD was calculated25 in audit in respect of 47 distributaries.  The 
avoidable expenditure on sidelining above the revised FSD levels worked out 
to ` 17.84 crore as shown in Table-2.18 below: 
Table-2.18: Statement showing extra cost on free board
Division
Number of 
distributaries/
Sub-distributaries
Length in 
mtrs
Excess area of 
side lining in Sqm
Avoidable 
expenditure
(` in crore) 
Munirabad 11 23,652 36,898.06 1.46
Odderahatti 5 56,001 91,902.82 5.20
Sindhanur 8 36,266 64,117.88 4.26
Sirwar 9 28,223 34,515.46 1.92
Yermarus 6 18,970 29,148.60 1.63
Bellary 8 43,887 60,797.92 3.37
TOTAL 47 206,999 317,380.74 17.84
(Source: Details furnished by Executive Engineers) 
The Government stated (November 2011) that the original section was 
retained to overcome the prevailing irrigation practice i.e. cropping pattern 
violation and unauthorised irrigation.  The rush irrigation due to changed 
cropping pattern and rotational irrigation needs 15 to 25 per cent of extra 
water.  The reply was not acceptable as even after allowance of 20 per cent
over the existing discharges towards rush irrigation, the side lining above FSD 
plus FB provided was still more in the canals having discharges between 0.11 
and 10 cumecs as recalculated in the audit and extra cost works out to ` 17.84 
crore for an area of 3.17 lakh sq mtrs.  The TAC had also observed that side 
lining up to original levels were proposed without calculating revised levels.  
Further, the canal network to utilise the water allocated from TB Dam had 
already been constructed and outlets had been designed accordingly to serve 
the command area.  If more water is allowed to feed the existing localised area 
in the upper reaches, the tail end reaches would continue to suffer even after 
modernisation works as the water utilisation cannot exceed the quantum 
allotted by the Krishna Water Dispute Tribunal Award.
25 As per Manning’s formula by taking ‘N’ value as 0.018 for CC lining surface.  The ’N’ 
value represents roughness index of the surface.  

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
88
2.4.5.3 Extra cost due to excess thickness for side lining 
The Code of Practice for lining channels published by the Bureau of Indian 
Standards, New Delhi (BIS) (IS 3973 of 1993) prescribes thickness of 50-60 
mm and 60-75 mm for side lining of canals for discharge capacity of 0 to 5 
cumecs and 5 to 50 cumecs respectively considering the depth of the water in 
the canal.  Test check of the approved estimates of 37 works taken up by the 
five divisions
26 disclosed that CC lining of side walls of the distributaries 
(total length 50.5 km) was uniformly provided with thickness of 100 mm 
instead of maximum 60 mm and 75 mm, accordingly to their carrying capacity 
and location, required as per IS specifications.  The provision of excess 
thickness of CC lining in 37 works resulted in extra cost of ` 31.58 crore on 
15.38 lakh Sqm of extra CC lining to sides of distributaries.
The Government stated (November 2011) that thickness specified in IS Code 
is minimum thickness to be provided and higher thickness was provided based 
on canal characteristics, type of strata, climatic conditions and other factors 
affecting the flow of water in the canal. Further, Government stated that sizes
of the aggregates in the RCC are interrelated with maximum size of aggregates 
up to 20 mm (with oversize up to 25 mm).  The maximum Reinforced Cement 
to be provided is four times of oversize of the aggregate member i.e. 25 mm 
and hence 100 mm thickness for side lining was provided.
The reply is not acceptable as audit observation was not related to RCC lining 
but Cement Concrete (CC) lining.  The RCC lining executed was for small 
portions such as embankment and templates which had not been objected in 
audit and side lining to distributaries predominantly done was CC lining.  The 
IS code recommends increased thickness only in case of freezing climate and 
provides tolerance of plus or minus 10 mm in the specified thickness.  Further,
cohesive non-swelling soil as per norms was provided to counter the swelling 
pressure of black cotton soil.  However, the thickness of CC lining provided in 
all the cases pointed out in audit exceeded the prescribed thickness by more 
than 10 mm and the estimates did not mention existence of such adverse 
conditions necessitating uniform thickness of 100 mm for all the distributaries 
irrespective of their carrying capacity and soil characteristics. 
2.4.5.4 Imposition of nominal penalty 
The agreement provided that in the event of the contractor failing to give 
proportionate progress of work, the compensation on account of liquidated 
damages equal to 0.1 per cent of the contract value per day limited to 10 per 
cent of contract value was to be levied.
It was, however, seen in audit that while fixing the time extension in 24 cases, 
the CE imposed nominal penalty of ` 100 and ` 200 per day for the delay
ranging from 26 to 303 days without analysing the period attributable to the 
contractors.  Thus, the imposition of nominal penalty in contravention of the
scope of the agreement and in disregard to delays that has been worked out by 
26 Bellary, Odderahatti, Sindhanur, Sirwar and Yermarus 
Extra cost of            
`` 31.58 crore due 
to provision of 
additional 
thickness of CC 
lining
Imposition of 
nominal penalty 
resulted in undue 
benefit of ` 15.80 
crore to the 
contractors

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
89
EEs resulted in undue financial benefit of ` 15.80 crore to the contractors as 
shown in the Table-2.19 below: 
Table-2.19: Non-recovery of liquidated damages
Division No. of 
works
Contract 
price
(` in crore)
Range of 
delay in days
Liquidated 
damages 
recoverable
Nominal 
Penalty 
levied27
Shortage 
in levy
(` in lakh)
Odderahatti 4 33.31 90 to 240 326.40 0 326.40
Sindhanur 2 22.81 286 228.06 0.36 227.70
Sirwar 4 29.34 303 293.44 0 293.44
Yermarus 9 85.01 More than 
300 653.94 0 653.94
Bellary 5 12.22 26 to 66 79.00 0.25 78.75
TOTAL 24 182.69 1,580.84 0.61 1,580.23
(Source: Details furnished by Executive Engineers) 
The Government stated (November 2011) that the rate of levy of liquidated 
damage was discretionary and hence nominal penalty for the extended period 
was levied on the contractors who have failed to complete the works in the 
stipulated period.  The reply was not accepted as 0.1 per cent of the contract 
amount per day delay was the minimum penalty leviable as per the terms of 
the agreement.  The minimum penalty was not levied in cases where penalty 
was imposed and not at all levied in other cases as could be seen from the 
Table-2.19.
2.4.6   Sharing of expenditure on Rajolibanda Diversion
Scheme  
2.4.6.1 Non-recovery of dues from the Andhra Pradesh Government 
A mention was made in Paragraph 3.5.6 of the Report of the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India for the year ended 31 March 2005 (Civil) – GoK, 
regarding non-recovery of dues ( ` 13.86 crore) from Government of AP 
towards maintenance of Rajolibanda Diversion Scheme, an inter-state medium 
irrigation project completed in 1960.  The maintenance charges were to be
borne by Karnataka initially and later reimbursed by AP as per agreed pattern 
of sharing since head works and initial reaches are situated in Karnataka. 
It was noticed that EE, Canal Division No. 5, Yermarus had not raised demand 
against Government of AP after March 2004.  The Government, in reply to 
Public Accounts Committee (PAC) for Audit Report of 2004-05 stated (June 
2010) that the issue had been taken up with AP Government in March 2006.  
However, it was noticed that Government had not pursued vigorously for 
obtaining reimbursement despite intimating PAC.  Failure to pursue the issue 
at Government level resulted in reimbursable amount escalating to ` 18.66 
crore
28 to the end of March 2010. 
An arrangement is in vogue for monthly settlement of Karnataka’s portion of 
maintenance expenditure of Dam and Right Bank Canals of the Tungabhadra 
Project incurred by the AP through Tungabhadra Board.  The settlement is 
done by Reserve Bank of India by operating Inter-State suspense Account.  
27 Levied but not recovered 
28 Principal of ` 9.96 crore with interest of ` 8.70 crore
` 18.66 crore is due 
from Government 
of Andhra Pradesh

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
90
The absence of similar arrangement to adjust the maintenance expenditure 
incurred by Government of Karnataka had resulted in dues outstanding against 
AP Government for so many years. 
The Government stated (November 2011) that concerned Division Officer had 
taken up the issue with his counterpart.  However, Government failed to 
provide reasons for not taking up the matter with AP Government.  
2.4.6.2 Failure to recover establishment, tools and plant charges 
For the modernisation of RDS head works and main canal to augment the 
discharge capacity, the Government of AP deposited (August 2007) ` 58.94 
crore with Government of Karnataka, as the components of the RDS are 
situated in Karnataka.  The works were taken up as Deposit Contribution work 
by EE, No. 5 Canal Division, Yermarus in four packages ( ` 67.86 crore) 
during 2008-09.  The progress achieved to the end of March 2011 was ` 41.99 
crore.
The Codal provisions
29 envisage levy of Establishment, Tools and Plant (ETP) 
charges at 17 per cent of value of work done for non-Government works.  
Scrutiny of records revealed that ETP charges amounting to ` 7.14 crore was 
not levied on the value of work done and not adjusted against the deposit 
available.  It was noticed that ETP component was not included in the estimate 
forwarded to AP. In reply, the Divisional Officer accepted the omission and 
stated that matter would be taken up with authorities of AP for recovering the 
ETP charges. 
The Government stated (November 2011) that the ETP charges would be 
recovered by incorporating the charges in extra financial implication 
proposals. 
2.4.7  Water management  
The success of an irrigation project depends upon supplying water to all parts 
of the command area including tail end areas.  In order to achieve this 
objective, before commencement of each season, the SE notifies the extent of 
command area for each distributary indicating the date(s) of supply of water, 
the type of crops to be grown.  The farmers of the notified area are required to 
adhere to the notified cropping pattern and are liable for payment of water 
rates.  The growing of non-notified wet crops such as paddy and sugarcane 
against the notified semi-dry crops in the area affects the irrigation in lower 
reaches of the command area as wet crops consume more water and therefore 
the benefits of irrigation accrue to a fewer number of persons.  Because of this, 
the cropping pattern violation attracts levy of penalty in the form of penal 
water rates at five times the normal water rates.  The violation in cropping 
pattern is generally prevalent in upper reaches of the command area as these 
areas get water first.  The farmers at lower reaches get deprived of irrigation 
benefit also due to un-authorised drawal of water by the farmers of non-
command area which is also liable for penalty at 15 times the normal water 
rates. 
29 Paragraph 512 read with Appendix 3 of Karnataka Public Works Accounts Code (KPWA) 
` 7.14 crore was not 
recovered from 
Government of 
Andhra Pradesh 
towards 
establishment, tools 
and plant charges
Huge area under 
violations of 
cropping pattern 
was irrigated and 
penalty for 
violations was 
short levied by            
` 79.13 crore

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
91
The year-wise details of extent of total area irrigated, area irrigated without 
cropping pattern violation, area irrigated with cropping pattern violation, and 
unauthorised irrigated area during 2005-10 under Tungabhadra Project as 
furnished by the divisions were as shown in Table-2.20 below: 
Table-2.20: Cropping pattern and unauthorised irrigation
(Area in hectares)
Year Total Area 
irrigated
irrigation without violation of 
cropping pattern
Irrigation violating 
cropping Pattern Unauthorised  irrigation
Area Percentage Area Percentage Area Percentage
2005-06 3,68,090.16 1,24,748.22 33.89 1,55,365.95 42.21 87,975.99 23.90
2006-07 3,34,877.77 1,44,710.80 43.21 1,26,254.23 37.7 63,912.74 19.09
2007-08 3,38,309.81 1,20,511.17 35.62 1,69,782.94 50.19 4,8015.7 14.19
2008-09 3,80,967.73 1,24,403.85 32.65 1,40,641.66 36.92 1,15,922.22 30.43
2009-10 4,34,090.17 1,28,035.85 29.5 2,09,466.88 48.25 96,587.43 22.25
TOTAL 18,56,335.64 6,42,409.89 34.61 8,01,511.66 43.18 4,12,414.08 22.22
(Source: Details furnished by the Chief Engineer) 
It could be observed from the above table that the extent of command area 
irrigated without violations was only 29.5 to 43.21 per cent of the total area 
irrigated and violations constituted 56.79 to 71.5 per cent of the total irrigated 
area during 2005-10.  The irrigation violating cropping pattern was higher and 
constituted 36.92 to 50.19 per cent of the total irrigated area while area under 
unauthorised irrigation ranged between 14.19 and 30.43 per cent.
2.4.7.1 Part of command area deprived of irrigation facilities due to 
violations
As a result of violations, not only the tail end reaches of main canal were 
deprived of water for irrigation but the upper reaches of the command area 
was also deprived of irrigation.  The division-wise details of notified area, 
average area irrigated and average suffering atchkat
30 for the years 2005-06 to
2009-10 were as shown in Table-2.21 below: 
Table-2.21: Suffering atchkat 
(Area in hectares)
Division Notified 
Area
Average area 
irrigated during 
2005-06 to   
2009-10
Average area 
under 
violations
Irrigation without 
violation Suffering atchkat
Average 
area
Percen-
tage
Average 
area
Percen-
tage
TLBC
Odderahatti 46,923.00 78,203.18 64,632.16 13,571.02 28.92 5,652.01 12.05
Sindhanur 76,360.96 87,957.41 74,788.09 13,169.32 17.25 35,561.07 46.57
Sirwar 81,929.83 72,380.13 58,192.94 14,187.20 16.56 11,390.52 13.9
Yermarus 49,673.00 14,269.89 6,046.50 8,223.40 16.99 42,677.07 85.92
Total 2,54,886.79 2,52,810.61 2,03,659.69 49,150.94 19.28 95,280.67 37.38
Other than TLBC
Munirabad 32,447.65 27,931.26 11,453.07 16,478.19 50.78 NA NA
Yermarus 4,042.04 3,601.65 2,525.43 1,076.22 26.63 1,305.04 32.29
Bellary 99,550 86,923.63 25,146.98 61,776.65 62.06 15,308.15 15.38
Total 1,36,039.69 1,18,456.54 39,125.48 79,331.06 56.98 16,613.19 11.93
Grand Total 3,90,926.48 3,71,267.15 2,42,785.17 1,28,482.00 32.87 1,11,893.86 28.62
(Source: Details furnished by Divisional Officers) 
The command area under Sindhanur Division,  situated in the upper reach of 
the TLBC, the extent of area deprived of irrigation was as high as 46.57 per 
cent of the notified area due to huge violations when compared to the area in
30 Command area deprived of water

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
92
the immediate lower reaches that comes under Sirwar Division.  However, no 
reasons were furnished by Divisional Officer of Sindhanur for high percentage 
of area deprived of irrigation though situated at upper reach.  Due to violations 
in upper reaches, 85.92 per cent of the area under the Yermarus Division was 
deprived of irrigation, which constituted 16.74 per cent of the TLBC notified 
area. 
Thus, the huge area under violations being irrigated and atchkat area deprived 
of irrigation indicates improper management of water and inability of the 
Government in bringing about discipline in equitable distribution of water.
The Government stated (November 2011) that the original DPR contemplated 
to cover more physical area and adjacent lands were notified either for kariff 
or rabi crops.  Further, all higher lands have been leveled and brought under 
gravity flow.  On account of violations of cropping pattern coupled with 
unauthorised irrigation area existing for decades, it has become difficult to 
follow localisation as envisaged in original DPR.  Government further stated 
that the TAC had also opined (February 2002) that it is almost impossible to
change cropping pattern and deny irrigation to the existing unauthorised area 
which had stabilised.  Finally, it was stated that the cropping pattern needs to 
be reviewed and revised as per prevailing conditions.  Though Government 
acknowledges that review and revision was vital, necessary action had not 
been taken in this regard despite violations existing for decades.  The 
Administrator, Command Area Development Authority (CADA), TBP in 
August 2002 had sought details from CE, ICZ for realistic assessment of 
command area by de-notifying the tail end reaches and regularising the 
unauthorised area.  This would ease out maintenance work and also water 
management to some extent.  However, no progress had been made in this 
regard although suffering atchkat constituted 28.62 per cent of the command 
area.  Further, modernisation programme for existing TBP is being taken up 
without reviewing the prevailing conditions and revising the command area.
2.4.7.2 Failure to impose penalty for violations
To control the offenders committing violations, the irrigation rules provide for 
levy of penalty at five and 15 times of the normal water rates for cropping 
pattern violation and unauthorised irrigation in non-notified area respectively.
However, it was seen that prescribed rates of penalty for violations were not 
levied by the irrigation officers thereby abetting the violations and loss of 
revenue.  The division-wise short demand in penal water rates during 2006-10 
worked out to ` 79.13 crore as shown in Table-2.22 below:
Table-2.22: Short demand in penal rates
Division Area under 
violation (ha)
Area under unauthorised 
irrigation (ha)
Penal water rate (` in lakh)
Leviable Levied Difference
Odderahatti 1,66,735.50 1,56,425.30 7,849.70 4,593.36 3,256.34
Sindhanur 2,83,931.60 90,008.85 6,833.82 5,214.78 1,619.04
Sirwar 1,88,461.08 1,02,503.60 6,119.73 3,623.40 2,496.33
Yermarus 23,799.28 18,657.81 966.37 458.70 507.67
Bellary 88,364.61 37,370.30 2,426.86 2,393.51 33.35
Total 7,51,292.07 4,04,965.86 24,196.48 16,283.75 7,912.73
(Source: Details furnished by Executive Engineers) 

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
93
The Government stated (November 2011) that further demand would be 
forwarded to Revenue Department after verification.
2.4.7.3 Extra expenditure on deployment of sowdies
The Irrigation Manual of WRD prescribes engagement of one sowdy 31 for a 
command area of 243 ha for managing the distribution of water according to 
prescribed schedule.  Many Sowdies are working in the Subdivisions under 
regular and supernumerary posts for water management.  In addition, the         
Sub-divisions had resorted to large scale deployment of Sowdies through 
contractors under task work agreements. The details of deployment of 
sowdies during 2005-10 were furnished by three
32 out of six divisions.  Audit 
scrutiny of the information revealed excess deployment of 16,31,037 man days 
of sowdies than admissible as per norms leading to extra expenditure of ` 5.18 
crore to Government during 2005-10.  The annual programmes of works were 
approved by SE; based on which annual maintenance estimates (AME) of 
distributaries were sanctioned by EE.  It was seen that EEs had not indicated 
the requirement of excess requirement of sowdies for water management while 
submitting the programme of works to SE nor AME’s contained the basis for 
calculation. 
Further, a committee constituted (February 2006) by Government to study and 
report various aspects of maintenance of irrigation projects is yet to submit its 
report even after lapse of six years.
The Government stated (November 2011) that the norms for Sowdies were 
devised when supernumerary staff was available in the subdivisions and they 
were being utilised for water management.  As supernumerary staff was no 
longer available for water management, labourers were engaged through 
contractors for water management. Hence excess labourers were not engaged.  
The reply was not acceptable as norms were fixed with reference to extent of 
area that could be effectively managed by a Sowdy and applicable to all 
projects.  Taking supernumerary staff into consideration for fixing norms 
would be unscientific as their number varied in each division.
2.4.7.4 Non-formation of Water User’s Co-operative Societies
Government of India formulated National Water Policy 2002, which envisage 
formation of Water User’s Co-operative Societies (WUCS) by farmers to take 
over water management to ensure equitable distribution of water to all parts of 
the command area.  As per the details furnished by CADA, as against the 
target of 835 WUCS to cover total command area of TBP of 3.63 lakh ha, 493 
WUCS were registered but only 254 WUCS covering 0.59 lakh ha had taken 
over water management as of March 2011.  Thus, 83 per cent of the command 
area was not covered through mechanism of WUCS.  The Administrator, 
CADA stated (April 2011) that the failure was primarily due to the fact that 
farmers in the upper reaches were not affected by water supply and hence not 
interested in the scheme and though the farmers in the lower reaches were 
31 Labourers engaged for regulating water supply in the canal
32 Bellary, Munirabad and Odderahatti 
Excess deployment 
of sowdies lead to 
extra expenditure 
of ` 5.18 crore 
Failure in
implementing the 
policy of formation 
of Water User’s 
Co-operative 
Societies

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
94
interested, WUCS could not be formed due to non-availability of water.  The
Department failed to implement the policy of formation of WUCS and to 
ensure WUCS managed by farmers, wherever established, for equitable 
distribution of water.
The Government stated (November 2011) that efforts would be continued to 
form the WUC’s in the command area.  However, Government did not furnish 
the plan of action to achieve the objective.
2.4.8  Demand of Water Rate
2.4.8.1  Short demand by the irrigation officers leading to loss of 
revenue
According to the provisions of Karnataka Irrigation (levy of Water Rates) 
Rules 1965 (WR Rules), the Irrigation officials are responsible for raising 
demand of water rate (WR) and maintenance Cess prescribed.  The rates 
prescribed by the Government in July 1985 and July 2000 inter alia included
WR of 5 times and 15 times the normal rates for violation of cropping pattern 
and unauthorised irrigation respectively.  Audit scrutiny revealed short raising 
of demand due to incorrect application of rates leading to loss of revenue of 
` 67.86 crore during 2005-06 to 2009-10 in respect of five divisions as shown 
in Table-2.23 below:
Table-2.23: Short raising of demand
(Area in ha – Amount in ` lakh)
Division33
Area irrigated in both seasons during
5 years for 2005-06 to 2009-10 WR Penal water rate
(PWR) Difference
Normal Violation Unauthorised Leviable Levied Leviable Levied WR PWR Total
Odderahatti 67,855.11 1,66,735.50 1,56,425.30 157.96 673.64 7,849.70 4,593.36 -515.68 3,256.34 2,740.66
Sindhanur 65,846.60 2,83,931.60 90,008.85 103.34 92.18 6,833.82 5,214.78 11.16 1,619.04 1,630.20
Sirwar 70,935.96 1,88,461.08 1,02,503.60 141.82 388.86 6,119.73 3,623.40 -247.04 2,496.33 2,249.29
Yermarus 47,958.33 23,799.28 18,657.81 83.84 504.38 966.37 458.70 -420.54 507.67 87.13
Bellary 3,08,883.24 88,364.61 37,370.30 470.84 425.65 2,426.86 2,393.51 45.19 33.35 78.54
Total 5,61,479.24 7,51,292.09 4,04,965.86 957.80 2,084.71 24,196.48 16,283.75 6,785.82
(Source: Details furnished by Executive Engineers) 
Audit scrutiny further revealed that No.1 Sub division, Odderahatti of No.2 
Canal Division did not raise demand of PWR for five years from 2005-06 to 
2009-10 and also of WR for two years from 2008-09 to 2009-10 resulting in 
short demand of WR amounting to ` 19.46 crore.
Though the annual statements of demands subm itted by the subdivisions are 
received in the divisions, circles and zonal offices, the correctness of the same 
were not scrutinised at any level leading to continued short demand over the 
years. The total short demand of WR in respect of five divisions worked out 
to ` 87.32 crore.
The Government stated (November 2011) that further demand would be 
forwarded to Revenue Authorities after verifying the details.  
33 The crop wise details of water  rates levied by the No. 1, TR Division, Munirabad were not 
furnished  
Short raising and 
short registration of 
water rate demand 
lead to loss of             
` 195.36 crore

Chapter 2: Performance Audit 
95
2.4.8.2 Short registration of demands by the Revenue authority 
leading to loss of revenue
As per the provisions of WR Rules, the demands of WR raised by the 
irrigation officers (IOs) against each farmer are to be forwarded to the 
concerned Revenue Authorities (RA) of the taluk/village for registering and 
recovering the same from the farmers benefitted through irrigation.  The taluk 
offices are required to maintain watch register of Demand, Collection and 
Balance (DCB).  Any short registration of demand by the RA leads to non 
recovery of WR from the concerned farmers resulting in loss of revenue to 
Government.  Audit scrutiny of DCBs of Revenue Department and demands 
stated to have been raised by the IOs revealed that there were huge difference
between the demands registered by the RA and those stated to be demanded 
by IOs.  The short registration of demands by 6 taluks relating to 4 divisions 
was ` 108.04 crore as shown in Table-2.24 below:
Table-2.24: Loss of revenue
(` in lakh) 
Division
WR and 
Maintenance 
Cess (MC)
PW R Total
Registered in Revenue De pt Difference
TotalTaluk 
Office
WR +
MC PW R WR +
MC PW R
Odderahatti 398.46 1,939.59 2,338.05 Koppal 13.96 34.07 103.51 1,667.72 1,771.23Gangavathi 280.99 237.8
Sindhanur 115.05 5,214.78 5,329.83 Sindhanur 586.17 982.7 -471.12 4,232.08 3,760.96
Sirwar 414.76 3,623.40 4,038.16 Manvi 109.76 83.1 305.00 3,540.30 3,845.30
Bellary 466.76 2,393.51 2,860.27 Bellary 189.29 335.72 93.26 1,333.39 1,426.65Siruguppa 184.21 724.4
TOTAL 10,804.14
(Source: Details furnished by Executive Engineers and Revenue authorities) 
In one taluk, the demand of WR and cess registered were far more than those 
demanded by IOs. The differences are attributable to non reconciliation of 
demands by the EEs and also non prescription of adequate system by the 
Zonal office in this regard. The matter of short registration may be 
investigated to establish the reasons for the same and to fix responsibility for 
such loss of revenue and also to ensure non recurrence of such irregularity.
The Government stated (November 2011) that further demand would be 
forwarded to Revenue Authorities after verifying the details.  
2.4.9  Idle investment on Lift Irrigation Schemes  
The two lift irrigation schemes estimated to cost ` 73 lakh and ` 58 lakh with 
potential of 480 ha and 182 ha respectively were approved by Government
during 2003-04.  Both works were awarded during May 2005 and the value of 
work executed by 2007 and 2008 was ` 1.22 crore 34 and the works were 
completed except external power supply connection. However, during 2009 
floods, the approach roads and electro mechanical installations were damaged 
and some parts were stolen requiring repairs and replacement at a cost of ` 10 
34 Bylamarchard - ` 62.91 lakh (completed March 2007) and Katharaki  - ` 59.18 lakh     
(completed March 2008) 
Non-completion of 
the work rendered 
the investment of      
` 1.22 crore idle 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011
96
lakh.  However, no action was taken to complete the work which required 
small amount rendering the investment of ` 1.22 crore idle.
The Government stated (November 2011) that these schemes would be 
completed during 2011-12. 
2.4.10  Conclusion
The financial management in the Zone was deficient resulting in under-
utilisation of grants under capital heads and increasing liability of pending 
bills under both capital and maintenance heads.  The tendering process of 
modernisation works was deficient as the contracts were not firmed up before 
the commencement of canal closure period for utilising full working period 
and contracts were awarded at higher tender premium. Government did not 
pursue vigorously for recovering of dues from Andhra Pradesh towards
expenditure incurred on RDS.  The command area to the extent of 1.12 lakh 
hectares was deprived of irrigation benefits due to failure in controlling 
cropping pattern violations & unauthorised irrigation.  There was laxity on the 
part of Sub-divisional Officers in demanding water rates and levy of penalty 
for such violations.
2.4.11  Recommendations
/head2rightThe controlling officer should ensure that sanction to works is limited to 
grants allotted.
/head2rightThe contracts should be awarded before commencement of the canal 
closure period.
/head2rightThe IS specifications should be adhered to in execution of works to 
achieve economy in expenditure.
/head2rightInter-state settlement suspense mechanism should be followed for 
recovering dues from the neighboring state.
/head2rightFor effective water management and maintenance, the lands under 
unauthorised irrigation should be notified by de-notifying the suffering 
atchkat as suggested by the Administrator, CADA.
  

99
Chapter 3 
Audit of Transactions  
Audit of transactions of the Government departments, their field formations as 
well as that of the autonomous bodies brought out several instances of lapses 
in management of resources and failures in the observance of the norms of 
regularity, propriety and economy. These have been presented in the 
succeeding paragraphs under broad objective heads.
3.1 Non-compliance with the rules 
For sound financial administration and financial control, it is essential that 
expenditure conforms to financial rules, regulations and orders issued by the 
competent authority. This not only prevents irregularities, misappropriation 
and frauds, but helps in maintaining good financial discipline. Some of the 
audit findings on non-compliance with rules and regulations are as under:
COMMERCE AND INDUSTRIES DEPARTMENT
3.1.1 Road works executed in disregard of norms resulted in 
wasteful expenditure
The Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board prepared estimates 
for road works in an industrial area in disregard of the specifications 
prescribed by the Indian Road Congress and executed an item of work in 
excess of requirement, incurring a wasteful expenditure of ` 90.10 lakh in 
the process.
Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board (Board), inter alia, constructs 
roads in the industrial estates developed by it across the State. For constructing 
these roads, the Board is to adhere to the specifications of the Indian Road 
Congress (IRC), which is the standard setting body prescribing the design of 
pavements for all categories of roads carrying motorised vehicles.  IRC  issued 
(2001) revised guidelines in the form of IRC-37-2001 recommending the 
design of new pavements based on traffic measured in terms of cumulative 
million standard axles (msa)  and California Bearing Ratio (CBR
1) of the 
sub-grade2. 
In respect of seven estimates sanctioned for constructing roads in the Harohalli 
Industrial Area, Phase II, Kanakapura taluk, the Board adopted a CBR value 
of six per cent .  According to IRC-37-2001, the maximum thickness of 
1 CBR is a measure of resistance to direct penetration of any soil or granular material which 
is expressed as a percentage of the load carrying capacity of a standard crushed rock 
specimen determined by a penetration test.
2  Sub-grade is the surface of the natural ground on which the whole road structure rests.  It 
is the soil foundation receiving the traffic load from the pavement. 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
100
Granular sub-base (GSB) 3 to be provided for roads with a CBR value of six 
per cent was 260 mm for cumulative traffic up to 150 msa.  However, the 
sanctioned estimates for the above road works provided for a GSB of 300 mm 
thickness for a cumulative traffic of 10 msa, which was in excess of even the 
maximum thickness of 260 mm prescribed by the IRC. This resulted in 
unnecessary construction of 9,034 cum of the GSB by contractors.  On this 
being pointed out by Audit, the Board referred the audit observation to a 
consultant and requested for a technical evaluation of the pavement design.  
The consultant reported (August 2011) that the designer of the pavement had, 
at his discretion, adopted the following layers for a CBR value of six per cent
and a cumulative traffic of 10 msa instead of those recommended by 
IRC- 37-2001. 
Pavement layers 
adopted by the designer 
(quantity in mm)
Pavement layers
as per IRC-37-2001 
(quantity in mm)
Granular  Sub Base (GSB) 300 260
Granular Base (Base) 250 250
Bituminous overlays
Bituminous Macadam (BM) 70 -
Dense Bituminous Macadam (DBM) - 65
Bituminous Concrete 40 40
It was further reported that IRC-37-2001 was only a guideline and not a code 
and deviations from the IRC design were permitted provided the modified 
design guaranteed the same performance as that of the IRC design.  Though 
avoidable expenditure had been incurred for the GSB in one sense, it was 
more than offset by savings on account of adoption of less expensive BM of 
70 mm thickness against DBM of 65 mm thickness recommended by the IRC.  
The consultant justified the adoption of BM in lieu of DBM on the ground that 
the traffic in any industrial area would be initially of very low volume and 
would gradually increase over a period of 10 years when industrial 
establishments were set up progressively.  It was, therefore, not bad to use a 
cheaper BM to cater to the low volume of traffic initially and to provide 
further overlays in future when the volume of traffic increased.  The 
Government endorsed (September 2011) the report of the consultant.  The 
reply was not acceptable for the following reasons:
The IRC guidelines are to be followed for all categories of roads 
predominantly carrying motorised vehicles and deviations, if any, are to be 
justified. There is no freedom to use discretion while designing pavements.  It 
was seen that the estimates for the seven works had been prepared by another 
consultant who unjustifiably deviated from the IRC specifications while 
designing the thickness of GSB. These estimates did not discuss the deviations 
from the IRC guidelines and the Board also failed to notice the change before 
according sanction. 
It was further noticed that replacement of DBM with BM did not result in any 
savings in cost as this change was not done by the consultant on his own but 
only on the basis of IRC-37-2001 which permitted this change depending on 
3 GSB consists of laying and compacting granular material such as natural sand, murram, 
gravel, etc., on prepared sub-grade. 

Chapter 3: Audit of Transactions 
101
the traffic over the service life of the road.  As the traffic during the initial 
stages of development of an industrial area would be low, provision of BM 
overlay was appropriate as per the IRC and no credit could be given to the 
consultant for this change.  However, IRC-37-2001 does not permit increasing 
the thickness of GSB beyond 260 mm due to changes in the composition of 
bituminous overlays.  Thus, there was no justification for increasing the 
thickness of GSB beyond 260 mm. According to the final bills of the 
contractors for these seven works paid between December 2009 and 
September 2010, the cost of unnecessary quantity of GSB executed aggregated 
` 90.10 lakh which proved wasteful.
FOREST, ECOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENT DEPARTMENT
3.1.2 Unauthorised diversion of forest land 
Ignoring the observation of Forest Department, the Revenue Department 
transferred 184.03 acres of land in Gulbarga district for establishing 
Central University, in contravention of Forest Conservation Act.
Section 2 of the Forest Conservation Act 1980, (FC Act) prohibits diversion of 
forest land4 for non-forestry purposes without the prior approval of Ministry of 
Environment and Forest, Government of India (Ministry). In all cases of 
diversion of forest land for non-forest purposes, Net Present Value 
(NPV)/Compensatory Afforestation charges (CA) are recoverable from the 
user agency and State Government should transfer equivalent area of non-
forest land to the Forest Department (FD) for afforestation purposes.
Government of Karnataka, Revenue Department (RD) issued (October 2008) 
orders for withdrawal of 285.39 acres of ‘C’ & ‘D’ category 5 land from the 
Land Bank in Aland taluk of Gulbarga district for establishment of a Central 
University.  The Deputy Commissioner, Gulbarga district, (DC) issued 
allotment order (March 2009) of the land spread over two villages viz.,
Kadaganchi village (184.03 acres in Survey No.196/1) and Suntanur village 
(101.36 acres in Survey No.10) in favour of the university.
Scrutiny of records of Deputy Conservator of Forest (Territorial) Division, 
Gulbarga (DCF), revealed (February 2011) that 184.03 acres of land in 
Kadaganchi village belongs to the FD as per the Record of Rights, Tenancy 
and Crop Certificate (RTC) issued by the Tahsildhar, Aland taluk.  The DCF 
in letter dated 24 September 2008 apprised the DC that the said land was 
transferred by RD to FD during 1980-81 and afforestation being carried out 
since then under various programmes. The DCF also stated that the diversion 
of land for non-forest purposes required prior approval of Ministry, as per    
4 The Supreme Court of India in Godavarman’s case vs. Union of India  (WP-202/95) clarified 
(December 1996) that term ‘forest land’ occurring in the Act not only includes “forest” as 
understood in the dictionary sense but also any area recorded as forest in the Government 
records irrespective of the nature of ownership.  Evidently this implies that the provisions of 
the Act enacted for the conservation of forests and with matters connected therewith, shall 
apply to all forest area irrespective of the nature of ownership or classification thereof.  
5 “C” category of land means land suitable only for afforestation and  “D” category means                   
land suitable for grazing as per Government letter dated 16.6.1970. 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
102
FC Act.  However, these facts were not considered by the DC while allotting 
the land to the university on the ground that RD had transferred the ‘C’ & ‘D’ 
category land to FD only for the purpose of land bank and no notification 
declaring the land as “forest land” had been issued.  It was noticed that a 
similar stand taken by RD earlier in another case (Writ Appeal No.1020/07) 
was dismissed (November 2007) by High Court of Karnataka citing Supreme 
Court judgement referred supra and provisions of the FC Act were followed in 
that case by realising NPV/CA and alternate land was also made available to 
FD for afforestation.  Further, as verified in audit, the land in Sy No.196/1 did
not form part of the Land Bank as stated by the RD in their withdrawal order 
issued in October 2008 and hence unauthorised. 
In view of the ownership as per RTC and judicial pronouncement, the 
184.03 acres of land in Kadaganchi village is forest land and its diversion for 
non-forestry purpose requires prior approval of the Ministry and NPV/CA 
charges amounting to ` 3.67 crore
6 were leviable. In addition, the Government 
should provide alternate land to FD for afforestation purposes.
In reply to audit observation, the DCF stated (February 2011) that the matter 
would be taken up with the Revenue Authorities.
The matter was referred to Government (March/April 2011); reply had not 
been received (December 2011).
3.1.3  Non-recovery of Net Present Value from the user agencies 
Two forest divisions failed to recover the net present value of  
` 8.86 crore from the user agencies for diversion of 133.96 hectares of 
forest land for non-forest purpose even after more than four years.
In pursuance of Apex Court judgments of October 2002/September 2006 for 
recovery of Net Present Value (NPV) of the forest land diverted under Forest 
(Conservation) Act, 1980 for non-forest purposes, Compensatory 
Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA)
7 clarified 
(October 2006) that NPV was recoverable in all cases from the user agencies 
where final approval for diversion of forest land was granted by the Ministry 
of Environment and Forest, Government of India on or after 30 October 2002 
irrespective of the date of in-principle approval.  The NPV is recoverable at 
varying rates prescribed by Apex Court ranging between ` 5.80 lakh and 
` 9.20 lakh per hectare (ha) depending upon the quality, density and type of 
species.  CAMPA further instructed (September 2007) that State Governments 
should stop all activities of the agencies to whom, land had been transferred in 
cases where NPV was not recovered. 
Scrutiny of records (June 2010 and November 2010) of Deputy Conservator of 
Forest, (DCF) Ramanagaram and Gadag revealed that NPV was not recovered 
from user agencies for diversion of 133.96 ha of forest land even though the 
final approval for diversion were granted after 30
th October 2002.  The final 
6 NPV- ` 326.22 lakh (74.48 ha x ` 4.38 lakh) + CA - ` 40.37 lakh ( 74.48 ha x ` 54,200) 
7 An ad hoc body constituted by the Supreme Court of India 

Chapter 3: Audit of Transactions 
103
approval for diversion of forest land of 68.13 ha under the jurisdiction of DCF, 
Ramanagaram, for implementation of a road project 8 was granted in January 
2003 and for diversion of 65.74 ha of forest land under the jurisdiction of 
DCF, Gadag, for a windmill power project
9 was granted in July 2004.  
However, NPV aggregating ` 8.86 crore 10 had not been recovered from the 
user agencies by the concerned DCFs even after four years of circular 
instructions and no action was taken to stop their activities. Though DCF 
Ramanagaram issued notice in November 2003 for payment of NPV, the 
proceedings were dropped by accepting the user agency’s contention that NPV 
was not payable as the in-principal approval was granted before October 2002. 
But the NPV was payable in view of Apex Court judgement and CAMPA’s 
clarification.
On this being pointed out (June and November 2010), DCF, Gadag replied 
that notice was issued in November 2008 and reminders were being issued to 
the agency.  DCF, Ramanagaram issued notice to the agency in March 2011 
for the payment of NPV of ` 6.28 crore after this was pointed out by the audit.  
However, NPV of ` 8.86 crore from the user agencies is yet to be recovered.
The matter was referred to Government (March 2011); reply had not been 
received (December 2011). 
HOME DEPARTMENT
3.1.4 Failure to follow the prescribed procedure resulting in 
avoidable recurring financial burden
State Government sanctioned additional 31 posts for Railway Police 
without obtaining clearance from the Zonal Railways and continued to 
meet the entire cost of these additional posts from its resources instead of 
passing on 50 per cent of the expenditure to the Railways.  The loss to the 
State exchequer during 2005-09 alone aggregated ` 1.48 crore.  
Inadmissible house rent allowance of ` 63.09 lakh had also been paid to 
Railway Police staff working in 18 stations. 
According to Government Accounting Rules, 1990, the cost of Police 
functions on Railways, without distinction of Crime and Order Police, is to be 
shared between the State Government and Railways on 50:50 basis provided 
that the strength of the Government Railway Police (GRP) is determined with 
the approval of the Railways.  Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India 
(Ministry) had clarified (May 1979) that cases for increase of GRP should be 
based on merit and justification and individual cases were to be cleared by the 
State and the Zonal Railways concerned.  
8 By M/s Nandi Infrastructure Corridor Enterprise Limited for Bangalore-Mysore 
Infrastructure Corridor Project
9 By M/s Subhash Projects and Marketing Limited
10 Calculated as per Government of Karnataka Notification dated 17-01-2004: 
(a) ` 5.05 crore (DCF Ramanagaram – 68.215 ha × ` 7.4 lakh/ha) 
(b) ` 3.81 crore (DCF Gadag – 65.74 ha × ` 5.8 lakh/ha) 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
104
The State Government’s sanctioned strength of GRP consisted of 949 posts 
distributed among four Zonal Railways. Of these, Government sanctioned 
(December 1980/September 1998) 31 posts (18 and 13 in the offices of 
Superintendent of Police, Railways, Bangalore and Inspector General of 
Police, Railways, Bangalore respectively) without the approval of the 
concerned Zonal Railways. As a result, the State Government had been 
burdened with the responsibility of meeting the entire cost of these 31 
additional posts.  During 2005-09 alone, the State Government spent ` 2.96 
crore on these additional posts.  Details of information for the remaining 
periods were awaited (December 2011).  Failure of the State Government to 
obtain approval of the Railways for these additional posts of GRP for over 30 
years resulted in recurring avoidable expenditure on the cost of GRP year after 
year.  The loss to the State exchequer during 2005-09 alone aggregated ` 1.48 
crore. Government stated (August 2011) that the Railway Board had been 
addressed to accord post facto approval for creation of these additional posts.
However, the fact remains that Railway Board had not accorded approval for 
creation of these posts so far (December 2011).
According to Karnataka Government (Allotment of Government Quarters) 
Rules, 1999, a Government servant provided with rent free accommodation 
shall not be eligible for payment of House Rent Allowance (HRA).  In 
disregard of these provisions, Superintendent of Police, Railways, Bangalore 
(SP) authorised payment of HRA to GRP staff who had been provided with 
rent free accommodation in 18 stations.  This resulted in an excess payment of 
` 63.09 lakh to the GRP staff during March 2008 to April 2010. Government 
stated (August 2011) that suitable instructions had been issued for recovery of 
excess payment of HRA.  Details of recoveries were awaited (December
2011). 
Thus, failure to follow the prescribed procedure for sanction of additional 
posts of GRP and irregular payment of HRA resulted in an avoidable financial 
burden of ` 2.11 crore (` 1.48 crore + ` 0.63 crore) to the State exchequer.
PUBLIC WORKS, PORTS AND INLAND WATER TRANSPORT 
DEPARTMENT – COMMUNICATION AND BUILDINGS
3.1.5 Excess payment due to incorrect computation 
Wrong adoption of period of quarter to reckon base index and non-
deduction of payments of variation items from the value of work done in 
price adjustment bills resulted in excess payment of ` 9.43 crore to a
company in the construction of a building work.
The construction of circuit bench of High Court at Dharwad was entrusted 
(August 2006) by the Government to a construction company for ` 61.25 crore 
for completion in 18 months.  Clause 44 of the agreement inter alia provided 
for Price Adjustment (PA) towards increase or decrease in cost of material and 
labour based on average consumer price index for the relevant quarter as 
compared to the base index.  The base index for materials, labour was the 
average wholesale/consumer price index for commodities/ industrial workers 

Chapter 3: Audit of Transactions 
105
for the quarter preceding the date of opening of bids, and for bitumen/petrol, 
oil and lubricants (POL), the official retail price at the local depots on the day 
30 days prior to the date of opening of bids was applicable.  The PA was 
payable on the value of work done during each quarter excluding the value of 
work of variation items paid at mutually agreed rates.  The rate payable for 
variation items was governed by Clause 13 of the agreement i.e., schedule of 
rates prevalent at the time of execution of variation items with plus or minus 
tender premium.
The work was completed in September 2008 and a sum of ` 94.14 crore was 
paid
11 to the company which included ` 43.37 crore for work executed under 
variation items through running account bills.  These bills included purchase 
of items such as furniture, consumer durables and inaugural expenses.  In 
addition, the company was paid ` 15.44 crore as PA in seven bills.  Scrutiny of 
the records of the Executive Engineer, PWP&IWT Division, Dharwad (EE) 
revealed excess payment towards PA on two counts i.e. (a) adoption of 
incorrect quarter for calculation of base index (b) inclusion of payments for
variation items in the value of work done.  The bids were opened on 01 July 
2006 and as per terms of the agreement, the average index of three months
12
for the quarter ended June 2006 should be considered for the base index. But, 
the EE had considered average index of three months for quarter ended March 
2006.  The mistake in reckoning the quarter resulted in lower base index, 
which in turn resulted in excess payment of PA. Further, the variation items 
payments of ` 43.37 crore were not deducted from the value of work done for 
the purpose of PA. The total PA payable works out to ` 6.01 crore as against 
` 15.44 crore paid resulting in excess payment of ` 9.43 crore.  Thus, failure 
to regulate PA as per the terms of the agreement resulted in excess payment of 
` 9.43 crore to the contractor as shown in the Appendix-3.1.
On the matter being referred to, the Government replied (September 2011) that 
the tender was originally scheduled for opening on 29 June 2006 but due to 
unavoidable reasons it was opened on 01 July 2006. Therefore, base index for 
the quarter ending March 2006 with reference to scheduled date of opening of 
bid was considered. Further, Government stated that PA was admissible for 
variation items as per mutually agreed terms even though these were paid as 
per the provisions of clause 13 and all the conditions of contract were 
applicable to such variation items also, hence PA was also paid on value of 
variations items executed.
The reply was not acceptable as Clause 44 of the agreement specified that date 
of opening of bid as the criteria for reckoning base index calculation. The 
Government’s justification on payment of PA on variation items on mutually 
agreed terms was also not acceptable as Clause 13 of agreement specifies rates 
payable for variation items, which did not contemplate payment of PA on 
variation items as these items were paid at current SR with tender premium.  It 
was admissible only if separately agreed upon between the parties with such 
terms and conditions while executing variation items and EE had clarified
11 XV & final bill
12 Average of consumer  price index of material and labour for the months of April, May and 
June 2006  

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
106
(May 2011) that no agreement was concluded in this regard. Hence, ` 9.43 
crore paid to the contractor was outside the scope of the agreement and 
recoverable. 
3.1.6 Extra expenditure due to deviation from norms
Contrary to Indian Road Congress norms, four Divisional Officers 
executed surface dressing in improvements to village road works 
resulting in extra expenditure of ` 2.48 crore.
The construction of rural roads (village roads and other district roads) is 
governed by Rural Road Manual (SP-20-2002) issued by the Indian Road 
Congress. The specifications ibid recommend bituminous surfacing of the 
road on previously prepared base course on the basis of rainfall of the area and 
traffic volume excluding two wheelers as given in the Table 5.1 of the manual 
to serve as wearing course, which is either with surface dressing (SD) or    
Pre-mix Carpet (PMC) with seal coat.
Executive Engineers of PWP&IWT Divisions, Chamarajanagar, 
Chikkaballapur, Davanagere and Sirsi (EE) took up 29 works of 
‘improvements to village road’ under NABARD
13 assistance which were 
executed during 2007-2011.  Scrutiny of the records (between August 2010 
and May 2011) revealed that the sanctioned es timates of these works 
comprised construction of granular sub-base, three grades of metalling i.e. 
water bound macadam (WBM) as base course and two wearing courses viz., 
single coat of SD as intermediate wearing course and PMC as final wearing 
course. The intermediate wearing course (SD) was executed in between base 
course (WBM) and final wearing course (PMC), which tantamount to 
execution of two wearing courses. The providing of intermediate wearing 
course was contrary to IRC norms as either of the wearing courses viz., SD or 
PMC was to be provided over the base course. Conceding that the PMC being 
a richer wearing course provides longer life as compared to single coat SD, the 
execution of SD was avoidable. Hence, the extra expenditure incurred on SD 
in respect of 29 works aggregating to ` 2.48 crore (Appendix-3.2) was 
avoidable. 
The Government replied (September 2011) that SD was necessary to serve as 
temporary wearing course as diversion of traffic was not possible on these 
single lane roads flanked by agricultural lands.  Reply also stated that for 
smooth movement of traffic/pavers and for filling the voids in WBM, the SD 
was laid in lieu of primer coat to protect the WBM. Their reply was not 
acceptable for the following reasons:
/head2rightAccording to Clause 112 of 
Specifications for Road and Bridge Works 
(fourth revision), the works are to be carried out in half width of the single 
lane road where traffic diversion was not possible. Further, the WBM-
Grade III metalling with screenings to fill the voids was carried out which
form smooth surface to serve as temporary wearing course.
13 National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 

Chapter 3: Audit of Transactions 
107
/head2rightThe practice of SD in lieu of primer coat is not recommended by Ministry 
of Road Transport and Highways.  The Clause 502 of Specifications for 
Road and Bridge Works (fourth revision) specifies application of primer 
coat over WBM before laying of any kind of bituminous courses.  The 
primer coat not only functions as adhesion but also water proofs the 
surface thereby protect the WBM.
Hence, execution of SD either to serve as wearing course or to protect the 
WBM was not warranted and expenditure of ` 2.48 crore incurred on SD was 
avoidable.  
3.2 Audit against propriety/Expenditure without justification 
Authorisation of expenditure from public funds is to be guided by the 
principles of propriety and efficiency of public expenditure.  Authorities 
empowered to incur expenditure are expected to enforce the same vigilance as 
a person of ordinary prudence would exercise in respect of his own money and 
should enforce financial order and strict economy at every step.  Audit has 
detected instances of impropriety and extra expenditure, some of which are 
hereunder.
HOUSING DEPARTMENT
3.2.1 Poor estate management resulting in loss of revenue
Karnataka Housing Board failed to measure the floor area before renting 
out its buildings  and, consequently, collected rent from the occupants for
a reduced carpet area, resulting in loss of revenue of ` 7.32 crore.
Karnataka Housing Board (Board) has in its possession several buildings 
across the State.  The Board lets out these buildings and realises rent from the
occupants at agreed rates after entering into agreements.  One of the pre-
requisites for letting out a property is that its floor area is correctly measured 
and incorporated in the agreement with the occupant.  The Board let out its 
Combined Board Administrative Building Complex in Bangalore to 18
organisations including banks, Indian Airlines, State/Central Government 
Departments and private organisations since 1994 and kept renewing the 
agreements periodically. However, before entering into agreements with these 
organisations, the Board had not checked with the approved plan of the 
building nor measured the premises to be let out for reckoning the floor area.  
When the Board finally measured (October 2009) the let out premises, it found 
that except in the case of five organisations, the floor areas incorporated in the 
agreements with the occupants was far lower than the actuals. The Board sent 
notices to the occupants demanding higher rent prospectively from October 
2009. However, only one organisation paid higher rent from October 2009 
while the remaining twelve had not executed (September 2011) fresh 
agreements to facilitate recovery of higher rent for increased floor area.
While the Board sustained a loss of ` 5.93 crore upto September 2009 due to 
inclusion of lower floor area in the agreements with 13 organisations, it could 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
108
not enforce recovery of the differential rent aggregating ` 1.39 crore from 12 
organisations even prospectively from October 2009 due to failure to enter 
into fresh agreements.
Government stated  (September 2011) that various organisations had requested 
the Board at the time of entering into agreements not to consider common 
areas like steps, veranda etc., for calculation of rent, as a result of which a 
reduced area based on mutual understanding was included in the agreements.  
The reply was not acceptable as the claim of the Government was not borne 
out by records.  Scrutiny of the official notings on the file relating to the case 
showed that there was acceptance of the mistake committed in calculating the 
floor area initially and there was no reference in the notings to the mutual 
understanding between the Board and the organisations. Further, any 
concession to the occupants should have been given with proper justification 
and due approval of the Board.  It was seen that the Board had not approved 
reduced floor area in these cases based on mutual understanding. Thus, while 
the Board lost ` 5.93 crore till September 2009 due to poor estate 
management, it faced the threat of losing another ` 1.39 crore due to failure to 
enter into fresh agreements with the tenants to facilitate recovery of higher 
rent from October 2009.
PUBLIC WORKS, PORTS AND INLAND WATER TRANSPORT 
DEPARTMENT – COMMUNICATION AND BUILDINGS
3.2.2 Doubtful execution of works
Pothole filling works costing ` 1.62 crore was irregularly taken up 
through piece work contractors after the issue of satisfactory 
maintenance certificate and without rescinding of contracts in four 
State Highway maintenance packages.
The maintenance of State Highways (SH) for three years in Tumkur district 
was taken by the Executive Engineer, Public Works, Ports and Inland Water 
Transport Division, Tumkur (EE) with financial assistance from Karnataka 
Road Development Corporation Limited (KRDCL). The scope of the work 
included carrying out improvements in selected reaches of the SHs as per 
Schedule ‘B’ of the contract document in the first year and maintenance of the 
SH free from potholes for the next two years at contractors cost.  The 
provisions of the contract envisaged deduction of additional security deposit 
from the bills of the improvement works which was refundable every month 
after issue of satisfactory maintenance certificate by the EE.  For the 
maintenance works remaining unattended as per the rectification standards, a
penalty of two times the cost of unattended work was recoverable.  The EE 
was responsible for the execution of works and forwarding the bills to 
KRDCL for making payment to the contractors.
The maintenance of 430.30 kms of SH comprising four packages was 
entrusted to three agencies for a sum of ` 17.02 crore between December 2005 
and December 2006 as per the contracts approved by KRDCL. The 
contractors did not complete the improvement works in the first year within

Chapter 3: Audit of Transactions 
109
the scheduled period and extension of time was allowed for completion of 
improvement works.  The improvement works of the four packages were
completed between March 2008 and March 2009 at an expenditure of ` 14.83 
crore.  During third year of the maintenance period, the EE took up 
rectification works on the ground that the contractors of the four packages did 
not maintain the SHs free from potholes.  The approval of KRDCL was not 
obtained by EE before execution of rectification works.  But it was noticed 
that EE (through the SE) had submitted a certificate of satisfactory 
maintenance of roads by the contractors. Despite issue of satisfactory 
maintenance certificate, the EE took up rectification works through piece work 
contractors at a cost of ` 1.62 crore as detailed below.
(` in lakh)
Sl 
No.
Name of the 
contractor/ 
package
Length 
of SH 
(kms)
Date of 
commencement 
of work
Date of actual 
completion of 
first year work 
& expenditure 
incurred
Date of 
completion of 
two year’s 
maintenance 
period
Expenditure 
incurred on 
rectification 
works
1 Abdul Rehman/ 
Package ‘A’ 166 26.12.2005 20.11.2008
527.40 20.11.2010 78.56 
2 B. Ibrahim/ 
Package ‘C’ 115 29.03.2006 31.12.2008
578.12 31.12.2010 66.25 
3
Karnataka 
Crushers/ 
Package ‘E’
104 03.04.2006 21.03.2008
201.70 21.03.2010 4.53
4
Karnataka 
Crushers/ 
Package ‘F’
45.20 18.12.2006 05.03.2009
175.17 05.03.2011 12.60 
TOTAL 161.94
The EE during the contract period certified that roads were maintained by the 
contractors in good condition but executed rectification works during the same
period which could not co-exist simultaneously.  As such, the necessity of 
carrying out rectification works did not arise and rectification works executed 
at a cost of ` 1.62 crore were doubtful.  In case of default by the contractors in 
proper maintenance of roads, the EE was required to terminate the contracts 
and obtain KRDCL approval for taking up rectification works.  The 
rectification bills were required to be forwarded to KRDCL for adjusting 
against the additional security deposit.  Further, penalty of ` 3.24 crore being 
the double the cost of rectification works was also recoverable from the 
contractors.  This procedure was not followed by EE while taking up 
rectification works for ` 1.62 crore out of which ` one crore had already been 
paid which was irregular. The bills for the balance amount of ` 62 lakh were 
not forwarded to KRDCL as of August 2011. 
The Chief Engineer (CE) in his reply (October 2011) accepted that the 
expenditure of ` 1.62 crore for maintenance of the road was incurred within 
the contract period and stated that recovery of ` 17.13 lakh in respect of one 
contractor has been recommended and balance amount would be recovered.  
The CE also stated that the satisfactory maintenance certificate was noted in 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
110
the measurement books (MB). The reply indicates that there was no scope for 
carrying out rectification works for ` 1.62 crore. 
The matter was referred to Government in March 2011; reply had not been 
received (November 2011).
URBAN DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
3.2.3 Skewed planning and faulty estimation resulted in escalating 
the cost of the reservoir and delaying its completion
Karnataka Urban Water Supply and Drainage Board awarded the work 
of improvements to a reservoir without resolving a long pending dispute 
over sharing of water and without preparing the estimate based on 
investigation.  These lapses resulted in long delay in commencement of 
work  and cost overrun of ` 9.17 crore including  avoidable payment of 
` 2.26 crore to the contractor on account of revised higher rates for 
comparable items, apart from delay in providing drinking water to the 
targeted population.  The Board also made an excess payment of ` 1.63 
crore to the contractor towards lead charges for casing material.
Karnataka Urban Water Supply and Drainage Board (Board) awarded (March 
2006) the work of improvements to Jakkalamadagu reservoir, a source of 
drinking water to Chikkaballapur and Doddaballapur towns, to a contractor for 
` 5.66 crore (1.68 per cent below the estimated cost of work put to tender) 
with the stipulation for completion within 9 months.  The contractor did not 
commence the work as a dispute had been raised by the City Municipal 
Council, Chikkaballapur (CMC) and the local population regarding sharing of 
water from the reservoir.  The dispute existed even at the time of the Board 
approving the estimate for the work for ` 6.25 crore in February 2005 and, 
consequently, the CMC had not allowed the Board to conduct any 
investigation of the tank before preparing the estimate.  The Technical 
Committee which examined (July 2009) the work found that a comprehensive 
investigation of the reservoir had not been carried out, resulting in preparation 
of the estimate based on approximation.  
The Board resolved the dispute only on 28 March 2007.  As the contractor 
expressed inability to carry out the work at the quoted rates in view of the long 
delay in commencement, the Board approved (February 2008) higher rates for 
the entire work calculated at the Schedule of Rates of 2007-08 minus the 
tender abatement of 1.68 per cent.  This resulted in an additional liability of    
` 1.45 crore to the Board as the contract price increased to ` 7.11 crore. The 
Board stated (October 2011) that the dispute arose when the contractor 
commenced the work and the Board initiated action at various levels to solve 
the dispute. The reply was not factually correct as the dispute was within the 
knowledge of the Board at the time of approving the defective estimate in 
February 2005 as evidenced by Technical Committee’s report of July 2009
and it was not prudent to take up the work without resolving the dispute. 

Chapter 3: Audit of Transactions 
111
Even after resolving the dispute, the Board could take possession of the 
reservoir only on 12 January 2009 after sanctioning a separate water supply 
scheme for Chikkaballapura town and delivering the materials for the scheme 
at the site of work.  During execution, there was considerable mismatch 
between the scope of work as per tender and the requirement based on detailed 
investigation done after resolving the dispute.  The major changes in the scope 
of work were as shown below:
 (In metres)
Description of the work As per tender As per site conditions
Length of bund 340 345 
Bed level/stripping level 805.80 798 
Height of dam 17.27 25.03 
Bottom width of bund 104.12 154.82 
As these changes, due to faulty estimation, resulted in increases over the 
tendered quantities under several items besides many extra items, the Board 
approved (October 2009) extra payments to the contractor for the additional 
quantities and extra items based on Schedule of Rates of 2007-08 minus the 
tender abatement of 1.68 per cent.  This further increased the contract price 
from ` 7.11 crore to ` 14.83 crore.  The Board also approved (November 
2011) extension of time upto November 2011. The contractor had been paid 
(December 2011) ` 7.91 crore and the work was in progress.
Thus, the long pending dispute over sharing of water from the reservoir, 
preparation of estimate based on approximation without any preliminary 
investigation and the consequences thereof in the event of awarding the work 
to a contractor were known to the Board.  Absence of due diligence before 
commencement of work resulted in the cost of the work escalating by ` 9.17 
crore including ` 2.26 crore on account of difference between the tendered 
rates and the revised higher rates for comparable items of work which was
avoidable.  Long delay in completion of the work also deprived the targeted
population of drinking water supply.
Excess payment of lead charges for casing material
Consequent upon the Board’s decision (February 2008 and October 2009) to 
make payments for the entire work based on Schedule of Rates of 2007-08 
minus the tender abatement of 1.68 per cent , the scope of the work was 
revised wholesale, tendered rates were rendered invalid and the rate for any 
item of work was to be worked out afresh based on the site conditions.  In the 
case of casing material brought by the contractor for constructing the 
embankment, a rate of ` 220.95 per cum had been worked out by the Board 
considering a lead of 20 kilometres (kms).  Scrutiny of the test reports of 
borrow area samples, however, showed that the casing material had been 
brought from private lands only three kms away from the reservoir.  A joint-
inspection of the borrow areas for casing material by the audit staff and the 
representatives from the Board on 29 March 2011 also confirmed that the lead 
involved was only three Km.  Although the results of the joint inspection were 
communicated to the Board through the Inspection Report on the accounts of
the Board’s Division at Bangalore, no action had been taken for downward 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
112
revision of the rate based on actual lead involved.  As of December 2011,  
1.75 lakh cum of embankment constructed with casing material had been paid 
for at a part rate of ` 199 per cum against the admissible rate of ` 105.90 per 
cum, resulting in an excess payment of ` 1.63 crore to the contractor. 
The Board stated (October 2011) that a lead of 20 kms for casing soil had been 
considered while preparing the estimate after verifying its availability and the 
lead charges were calculated accordingly. It was further stated that the 
contractor was paying more than the rate approved for Government quarry to 
bring the casing material from a nearby private land and there was no loss to 
Government.  The Board’s reply implied that though the actual lead for the 
casing soil was less, a lead of 20 kms was nevertheless allowed to compensate 
the contractor for the extra cost incurred to bring the material from the private 
land.  The reply was not acceptable as the Board’s decision of February 2008 
and October 2009 was to regulate payment for the entire work based on 
Schedule of Rates of 2007-08 minus the tender abatement of 1.68 per cent and 
the original tender conditions and rates were modified to that extent.  While 
working out the revised rates, the Board should have considered the actual 
lead involved for the casing soil and not the presumptive lead of 20 kms
adopted for preparing the original estimate. Thus, failure to regulate payments 
on the basis of actual lead facilitated an excess payment of` 1.63 crore.
The matter was referred to Government in July 2011; reply had not been 
received (December 2011). 
3.2.4 Wasteful expenditure on development of forest land
Bangalore Development Authority notified a forest land for acquisition, 
acquired it and developed residential sites on it, despite objections from 
the Forest Department.  The Authority, however, had to return the 
acquired land to the Forest Department after incurring wasteful 
expenditure of ` 1.28 crore.
Bangalore Development Authority (BDA) issued (November 2002) 
preliminary notification under Section 17 (5) of the BDA Act 1975 for 
acquiring 1,532 acres and 17 guntas of land for the purpose of forming a 
residential lay out called Banashankari VI Stage Further Extension. The 
notification included 41 acres and 15 guntas of land in Survey No.5(P), 41 and 
42 of Uttarahalli Manavarthe Kaval (UM Kaval). The Special Land 
Acquisition Officer (SLAO) of BDA served (January 2003) notices on the 
khatedars requesting them to file objections, if any.   Deputy Conservator of 
Forests, Bangalore Urban Division (DCF) filed (June 2003) objections with 
the SLAO claiming that land in these three survey numbers belonged to the 
Forest Department and formed part of Turahalli Mini Forest as notified 
through a Government order of August 1934.  In support of this claim, the 
DCF had submitted a comprehensive set of documents containing copies of 
Record of Rights, Tenancy and Crop Certificate (RTC), Pahani and Khatha 
certificates.  DCF further brought to notice of the SLAO that the forest land 
had been encroached upon by unauthorised persons who had been attempting 

Chapter 3: Audit of Transactions 
113
to get the encroachments regularised illegally in their favour. The SLAO 
concurrently received objections from several persons who had claimed that 
they had been cultivating the land in these three survey numbers for more than 
sixty years.  These persons had also brought to the notice of the SLAO that the 
High Court of Karnataka in response to a writ petition (December 2001) had 
ordered to maintain status quo.
Scrutiny of the writ petition showed that the RTC for 2000-01 described the 
land in these three survey numbers as Turahalli Mini Forest based on the entry 
in the Mutation Register.  This had been challenged by the cultivators of the 
land before the High Court which observed that during the pendency of the 
writ petition, the mutation entry made in the name of the Forest Department 
should not be taken into consideration as legal and valid unless the said entry 
was proved by the Forest Department by producing relevant records.  BDA 
did not delete these three survey numbers from the final notification 
(September 2003) despite production of records by the Forest Department 
evidencing that the land formed part of the Turahalli Mini Forest.  DCF again 
requested (October 2003) the Co mmissioner, BDA to instruct the SLAO to 
drop acquisition of forest land in these three survey numbers.  However, 
instead of dropping the acquisition proceedings, the SLAO passed (January
2004) an award for ` 3.65 crore for land in one of the survey numbers in 
favour of 20 persons who had claimed to have been cultivating the land.  
SLAO justified the award on the ground that though the mutation records 
showed the land as Turahall Mini Forest, the survey records described it as 
Government Kharab land. DCF subsequently informed (February 2004) the 
SLAO not to proceed with any developmental work on the forest land and also 
not to cut the standing trees.  The final notification and the award were 
evidently finalised in haste without examining the evidence submitted by the 
Forest Department and without investigating the discrepancies between the 
mutation and survey records.
Meanwhile, BDA awarded (November/December 2003) the work of formation 
of sites, roads and other allied works in the acquired areas including the 
disputed land to two contractors and completed it in November 2004 at a cost 
of ` 6.17 crore.  However, DCF by virtue of powers contained in Section 
64 (a) of Karnataka Forest Act 1963 (amended in 1998) passed (January 2007) 
orders directing the Commis sioner, BDA to vacate the forest land in these 
three survey numbers within 30 days.  In his speaking order, the DCF 
observed that the revenue department had assigned new survey numbers to the 
forest land illegally and had transferred it to private parties.  The order also 
explained how the evidence produced and correspondence initiated by the 
Forest Department had been persistently ignored by the SLAO.  The order was 
made ex-parte as BDA did not participate in the proceedings to defend its 
position.
BDA returned the forest land to the Forest Department in February 2007 and 
did not make payment for the award passed by the SLAO in January 2004.  
According to the information furnished by the BDA in March 2009, the 
expenditure on developmental works undertaken on forest land aggregated      

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
114
` 1.13 crore. In addition, the Forest Department had assessed the 
environmental loss and loss of timber/firewood at ` 14.60 lakh which had not 
been paid (July 2011) by BDA.  Thus, hasty acquisition by BDA of forest land 
and completion of developmental works in disregard of the objections filed by 
the Forest Department resulted in wasteful expenditure of ` 1.28 crore. Details 
of action taken to fix responsibility for the lapses resulting in wasteful 
expenditure were awaited (December 2011). 
The matter was referred to Government in July 2011; reply had not been 
received (December 2011). 
3.2.5 Lack of due diligence resulting in extra payments to a 
company
Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board awarded the work of 
providing and laying feeder mains for 82.12 kms in the newly added areas 
of Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike without being in possession of 
clear work fronts along the approved alignments.  There was delay in 
handing over the work fronts, resulting in an avoidable extra payment of 
` 12.69 crore to a construction company. 
Consequent upon formation of Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike (BBMP), 
the geographical area of Bangalore increased from 598 to 800 square 
kilometres due to inclusion of the areas coming under seven City Municipal 
Councils (CMCs) and one Town Municipal Council (TMC).  To provide water 
supply facilities to these newly added areas, Bangalore Water Supply and 
Sewerage Board (Board) awarded (April 2007) the work of providing and 
laying  feeder mains to a construction company at a cost of ` 99.63 crore 
under three separate packages with the stipulation for completion by January 
2008. 
According to the contract agreements for these three packages, the Board was 
to hand over 75 per cent of the work fronts in a continuous block.  As the 
work entrusted to the company consisted mainly of laying pipelines along the 
approved alignment in urban areas, the Board was required to work in close 
coordination with other agencies such as Railways, Bangalore Development 
Authority (BDA), Public Works Department (PWD), National Highways 
Authority of India (NHAI), BBMP etc., to ensure that necessary clearances for 
laying the pipeline were secured and the existing utilities, wherever required, 
were relocated to provide clear work fronts on the date of entering into 
agreement with the company.  Scrutiny, however, showed that the Board 
entered into agreements with the company without being in possession of 75 
per cent of the work fronts, resulting in their delayed handing over as shown 
below:

Chapter 3: Audit of Transactions 
115
Package 
No
Total length of 
pipeline Areas handed over/Date of handing over
9a 24.40 kms 8.30 kms during the contract period
5.30 kms during March 2008
4.7 kms during the second half of 2008
9b 28.45 kms 13.50 kms during the contract period
3 kms during March 2008
10.80 kms during the second half of 2008
9c 29.27 kms 20.35 kms during the contract period
The balance during the second half of 2008
Besides the delay in handing over the work fronts, the Board made changes in 
the approved alignment at many places based on the suggestions of agencies 
such as BDA, BBMP, NHAI etc. These changes resulted in increases over 
tendered quantities under many items besides several extra items not included 
in the tender. The company demanded (June 2009) higher rates for the balance 
work executed after the contract period and also for the excess quantities and 
extra items. Based on the company’s demand, the Board approved (August 
2010) extra payment of ` 17.05 crore to the company for the balance work 
executed beyond the contract period at the Schedule of Rates of 2007-08 and 
2008-09 plus or minus the tender percentage. The Board also approved 
additional payment of  ` 4.96 crore due to increase in quantities under 
tendered items and another ` four crore on account of extra items, escalating 
the cost of the three packages from ` 99.63 crore to ` 125.64 crore.
The Board stated (December 2011) that it entered into an agreement with the 
company, expecting that 75 per cent of the work fronts would be acquired as 
per plan.  However, problems were encountered when coordinating with other 
agencies and acquisition of work fronts was consequently delayed.  It was 
further stated that though approval had been given for additional payment of 
` 17.05 crore to the company, effective measures were taken to restrict the 
additional payment to ` 12.69 crore. The reply was not tenable as there were 
deviations from the approved alignment at many places, changing the scope of 
the work and resulting in quantity overruns and many extra items.  
Coordination with other agencies should have been done before fixing the 
agency for the work instead of after commencement of work.  These lapses 
evidenced lack of due diligence, resulting in avoidable extra payment of 
` 12.69 crore to the company. 
The matter was referred to Government in May 2011; reply had not been 
received (December 2011).

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
116
3.2.6 Faulty execution of a drinking water supply scheme rendered 
the scheme non-functional due to contamination of its source 
by sewage water
Karnataka Urban Water Supply Drainage Board executed a drinking 
water supply scheme without diverting the sewage flow draining into a 
tank which was the source for the scheme.  The drinking water supply 
scheme remained non-functional despite a huge investment of 
` 5.11 crore, depriving the intended population of drinking water supply.
Government approved (August 2007) a drinking water supply scheme to 
Chintamani town at a cost of ` 4.42 crore with Nekkundi tank as the source. 
The Karnataka Urban Water Supply and Drainage Board (Board) awarded 
(October 2007) the work to a contractor at the tendered amount of
` 3.71 crore for completion within a year.  As of December 2011, the Board 
had made a payment of ` 3.47 crore to the contractor and incurred an 
expenditure of ` 5.11 crore
14 on the work.  However, despite completion of all 
components of work, the drinking water supply scheme had not been 
commissioned (November 2011) as the tank had not f illed and had also been 
contaminated by  sewage water from the town draining into it. Audit scrutiny 
of the case showed the following:
During the initial investigation (September 2006) of the tank, Executive 
Engineer (EE) of the Board’s Division at Bangalore had found that the tank 
had not filled during the last four years due to closure of its feeder channels.  
The report accompanying the estimate for the scheme had also highlighted this 
aspect. The estimate was sanctioned by the Board as the City Municipal 
Council (CMC) had taken action through the Minor Irrigation (MI) 
Department to clear the feeder channels in the catchment of the tank.  Besides, 
the Board also cleared 10,033 cum of silt from eight feeder channels during 
May 2008. It was within the knowledge of the Board that the sewage water 
from the town was let into the valley draining into the tank and it was,
therefore, imperative that the sewage was diverted before the tank could be 
used as a source for the drinking water supply scheme.  The Board, however, 
failed to complete the work on diversion of sewage before taking up the 
drinking water supply scheme, resulting in sustained contamination of its 
source.  Even as of December 2010, sewage water was found entering the tank 
during a joint-inspection of the tank by Audit and the Assistant Executive 
Engineer of the Board’s sub-division at Chikkaballapur. Government stated 
(November 2011) that while the sewage entering the tank at the waste-weir 
had been diverted during August 2008, the diversion of sewage on the south-
eastern side was in progress and nearing completion.  It was further stated that 
the sewage flow on the south-eastern side was very meagre and it dried up 
before entering the tank. The reply was not acceptable as the scheme should 
have been commissioned, if there was no sewage inflow into the tank from the 
south-eastern side. However, the sewage diversion works had not been 
completed and the scheme had not been commissioned (November 2011) 
14 Civil works:  ` 4.79 crore and electrical works:  ` 0.32 crore 

Chapter 3: Audit of Transactions 
117
despite its completion at a cost of ` 5.11 crore. The water treatment 
plant/pump sets, which are likely to become dysfunctional if not put to use, 
had also not been tested and commissioned.  
Thus, lack of planning in the execution of the drinking water supply scheme 
rendered it non-functional despite huge investment of ` 5.11 crore, resulting in 
denial of drinking water facility to the intended population.
3.3 Persistent and pervasive irregularities 
An irregularity is considered persistent if it occurs year after year.  It becomes 
pervasive when it is prevailing in the entire system. Recurrence of 
irregularities, despite being pointed out in earlier audits, is not only indicative 
of non-seriousness on the part of the Executive but is also an indication of lack 
of effective monitoring.  This, in turn, encourages wilful deviations from 
observance of rules/regulations and results in weakening of the administrative 
structure.  One such case is discussed below:
FINANCE DEPARTMENT
3.3.1 Excess payment of Family Pension
Karnataka Government’s (Family Pension) Rules, 1964 provide that when a 
Government servant dies while in service, his/her family is entitled to Family 
Pension at the enhanced rate of double the normal rate or fifty per cent of the 
last pay drawn by the deceased Government servant whichever is less, for a 
period of seven years from the date following the date of death or till the date 
on which the Government Servant would have attained the age of sixty five 
years had he/she remained alive, whichever is earlier.
Failure on the part of the Public Sector Banks to monitor and adhere to the 
cutoff date for payment of Family Pension at enhanced rates resulted in excess 
payment of ` 2.36 crore in 772 cases by 30 District Treasuries during 
2009-10, which were noticed in audit during 2010-11 (Appendix 3.3 ). In 
respect of 20 treasuries, further excess payment of ` 92.57 lakh was noticed in 
255 cases, in spite of the excess having been pointed out in earlier years, 
resulting in continued excess payment of ` 1.61 crore (Appendix 3.4). These 
are only illustrative cases.
Though such excess payments of Family Pension had been pointed out 
repeatedly in the Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, no 
effective steps were taken by the Government to guard against the excess 
payments.  Further, the Government did not enforce the provisions of 
Indemnity Bonds executed by the Public Sector Banks for recovery of the 
excess payments made to the pensioners. As a result, the irregularity has 
persisted. 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
118
The matter was referred to Government (July 2011); reply had not been 
received (December 2011).
3.4 Failure of oversight/governance  
The Government has an obligation to improve the quality of life of the people 
for which it works towards fulfilment of certain goals in the area of health, 
education, development and upgradation of infrastructure and public service 
etc. However, Audit noticed instances where the funds released by 
Government for creating public assets for the benefit of the community 
remained unutilised/blocked and/or proved unfruitful/unproductive due to 
indecisiveness, lack of administrative oversight and concerted action at 
various levels.  A few such cases are discussed below:
TOURISM DEPARTMENT
3.4.1 Investment on an incomplete road due to failure to secure the 
requisite forest land
In order to promote tourism, the Department of Tourism took up 
improvements to a road connecting a tourist place without initiating 
proposal for securing the release of forest land from the Central 
Government.  The road remained incomplete despite huge investment of 
` 7.64 crore due to non-availability of forest land defeating the objective 
of promoting tourism.
According to the guidelines on Forest (Conservation) Act 1980 issued by the 
Ministry of Environment and Forest, Government of India (Ministry), where a 
project involves forest and non-forest land, work should not be commenced on 
non-forest land till approval of the Central Government for release of forest 
land under the Act has been given.
Based on the proposal of the Department of Tourism (Department) to take up 
improvements to the road from Sampekatte to Kodachadri, a tourist spot in 
Karnataka, through Karnataka Road Development Corporation Limited 
(Corporation), Government approved (March 2007) the road project at a cost 
of ` 9.96 crore.  Although the project road involved forest land from 
Kattinahole to Kodachadri, the Department had not secured the release of 
forest land required for the road project.  However, it released ` 10 crore and 
` 7.79 crore to the Corporation during March 2007 and May 2009 respectively
for the road project and other works of the department.  Prior to taking up the 
work, the Corporation, which was only an agency for executing the road 
project against funds deposited by the Department, submitted the proposals to 
the Forest Department in September 2008 and February 2009. The 
Corporation informed (August 2009) the Department that the proposal for 
release of 4.64 hectares of forest land in the reach from Kattinahole to 
Kodachadri had been pending with Deputy Conservator of Forests, Sagar due 
to non-allotment of an equal area of non-forest land by the Revenue 

Chapter 3: Audit of Transactions 
119
authorities.  Permission for release of another 750 metres of the road in the 
same reach was to be obtained from Wild Life Board, Government of India as 
it came under the Kudremukh Wild Life Division and Kollur Wild Life Area.  
The Corporation requested the Department to obtain permission from the Wild 
Life Board and also from the Ministry to facilitate completion of the road. 
Meanwhile, the Corporation, without waiting for release of forest land, 
completed (July 2009) improvements to the road from Sampekatte to 
Kattinahole at a cost of ` 7.64 crore, except for a distance of 900 metres where 
a bridge was to be constructed.  Government entrusted the bridge work 
(Cost: ` 2.9 crore) to the Corporation in July 2011 and expenditure of 
` 65.25 lakh had been incurred (August 2011). After adjustment of 
consultancy and other charges, ` 6.79 crore was lying with the Corporation 
unutilised (September 2011).  
As no further progress had been achieved on the work despite availability of 
funds, the purpose for which the road project had been taken up remained 
unachieved despite a huge investment of ` 7.64 crore. The Director stated 
(November 2011) that the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Head and 
Forest Force) had requested (October 2011) the Add itional Chief Secretary to 
send the proposal for diversion of 4.95 hectares of land to Government of 
India (GOI).  It was further stated that the project would be completed once 
the approval of GOI was received.  The reply was not tenable as the proposal 
for diversion of land had not been submitted to GOI even three years after the 
Corporation sought release of land from the Forest Department in September 
2008.  Consequently, the road project taken up in disregard of the Ministry’s 
guidelines, resulted in blockage of ` 7.64 crore. The objective of promoting 
tourism by providing a dedicated standalone link to Kodachadri was also not 
achieved. 
The matter was referred to Government in June 2011; reply had not been 
received (December 2011). 
WATER RESOURCES DEPARTMENT – MINOR IRRIGATION
3.4.2 Unfruitful expenditure due to non-acquisition of land  
Construction of a minor irrigation tank taken up in January 2000 was 
not completed even after eleven years of its commencement and the 
drought area was deprived of the benefit of irrigation despite 
impounding water in the tank and spending ` 8.50 crore.   
The codal provisions15 requires taking up of projects of works after obtaining 
sanction, preparation of design & drawings after proper survey, ensuring 
provision of funds and availability of required land so that the project could be 
completed within the stipulated time to realise the intended benefits. Any 
15 Paragraphs 193(1), 209 and 211 of Karnataka Public Works Departmental Code Vol I 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
120
delay in providing these inputs results only in time and cost overrun and 
postponement of benefits.
Government sanctioned (January 1999) construction of a minor irrigation tank 
near Alur Belur, a drought prone area in Aurad taluk of Bidar district to 
irrigate 934 hectare (ha) land at an estimated cost of ` 4.30 crore under
NABARD16 assistance. The work was entrusted (June 1999) to Karnataka 
State Construction Corporation Limited (KSCC) for ` 3.65 crore for 
completion by March 2002 and the cost was revised to ` 8.35 crore and a 
supplementary agreement was executed (July 2002) on account of additional 
items/extra quantities. The additional items were due to change in scope of 
work such as, increase in foundation for bund, extra lead charges, change in 
alignment of tail channel etc., which indicates inadequate survey and 
investigation.  KSCC had executed bund and allied works costing ` 6.42 crore 
and NABARD assistance was fully utilised . As the Government ordered 
(December 2002) for withdrawing of all the works entrusted to KSCC , this 
work was also withdrawn from KSCC. The balance work relating to canals, 
cross drainage works etc., had not been taken up since December 2002.  As at 
the end of March 2011, total expenditure of ` 8.50 crore was incurred and 
construction of canals with cement concrete lining had not been taken up.
Scrutiny of records of the Executive Engineer, Minor Irrigation Division, 
Bidar (EE) revealed (March 2010) inordinate delay in taking up balance work 
of construction of canals to achieve the objective of providing irrigation.  
Though tenders for the balance works costing ` 2.13 crore were invited    
(May 2003) it had to be cancelled as NABARD declined to provide further 
assistance. In the meanwhile ` 25 lakh was deposited with Revenue authorities 
against demand of ` 75.45 lakh for initiating land acquisition proceeding for 
65 acres and 30 guntas of land required for the construction of canals.  
Sufficient grant was not made available by the Government for taking up the 
balance work. The revised project cost of ` 14.94 crore was approved 
(September 2009) by Government with balance works costing ` 6.45 crore.  
The Government decided (July 2010) to take up the balance works under 
AIBP
17.  It was noticed from the revised estimate that irrigable area was 
reduced by 54 per cent from 934 ha to 430 ha. As a result of tardy 
implementation, the project cost has increased from ` 4.30 crore to 
` 14.94 crore and cost per hectare works out to ` 3.47 lakh against ` 75,000 
per hectare applicable for new works as per the prevailing norms. 
Thus, due to non-completion of canals, the expenditure of ` 8.50 crore was 
rendered largely unfruitful as the command area could not be irrigated despite
storage of water in the tank.
The EE replied (June 2011) that AIBP approval had since been received,
tenders for balance works had been invited and these would be completed in 
18 months after entrustment.  However, the fact remains that land acquisition 
16 National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
17 Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme

Chapter 3: Audit of Transactions 
121
process is still in a preliminary stage and amount demanded for land 
acquisition has not been deposited fully. The invitation of tenders for 
execution of the balance works without being in possession of land was 
imprudent and violated codal provisions. 
The matter was referred to Government in February 2011; reply had not been 
received (December 2011). 
BANGALORE                        (D. J. BHADRA) 
THE                Principal Accountant General
      (Civil and Commercial Audit)
COUNTERSIGNED
NEW DELHI              (VINOD RAI)
THE         Comptroller and Auditor General of India

Appendices
125
Appendix-1.1
(Reference: Paragraph 1.7.1, Page 10)
Year-wise breakup of Outstanding Inspection Reports and paragraphs 
(issued up to 31 December 2011)
Year
Health and Family 
Welfare Department
Public Works, Ports and 
Inland Water Transport 
Department
Department of Water 
Resources (Major and 
Medium)
Total
Number 
of IRs
Number 
of paras
Number 
of IRs
Number 
of paras
Number of 
IRs
Number 
of paras
Number of 
IRs
Number 
of paras
Upto 
2000-01
64 93 54 64 20 31 138 188
2001-02 11 16 10 16 5 6 26 38
2002-03 11 18 17 34 5 5 33 57
2003-04 21 34 33 81 14 38 68 153
2004-05 11 14 35 88 18 40 64 142
2005-06 18 23 13 24 1 5 32 52
2006-07 23 40 39 162 24 108 86 310
2007-08 33 87 19 89 8 18 60 194
2008-09 32 97 57 357 27 191 116 645
2009-10 49 303 40 464 10 113 99 880
2010-11 23 170 55 643 4 36 82 849
Total 296 895 372 2,022 136 591 804 3,508

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
126
Appendix-1.2
(Reference: Paragraph 1.7.3,  Page 10) 
Details of Departmental Notes pending as of 18 January 2012
(Excluding General and Statistical Paragraphs)
Sl. No. Department 95- 
96
96- 
97
97- 
98
98- 
99
1999-
00
2000- 
01
01- 
02
02-
03
03-
04
04-
05
05-
06
06- 
07
07-
08
08- 
09
09- 
10 Total
1. Animal Husbandry & Veterinary 
Services - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1 
2. Commerce and Industries - - 1 - - - - - - - - 1 - 1 - 3 
3. Co-operation - - - - - - - - - - 1 - - - - 1 
4. Ecology and Environment - - - - - - 1 - - - - - - 1 1 3 
5. Education - - - - - - - - 1 - - 1 1 3 2 8 
6. Finance - - - - - 1 - - - - - 1 1 1 1 5 
7. Forest - - - - - - - - 1 - - - 1 1 - 3 
8. Health & Family Welfare 3 - - - 2 - - - - - - - - 1 - 6 
9. Housing 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 
10. Labour - - - - - - - - - - - 1 - 1 - 2 
11. Legislature Secretariat - - - - 1 - - - - - - - - - - 1 
12. Planning - - - - 1 - - - - - - - - - - 1 
13. Public Works - - - - - - - 1 1 - - - - 3 4 9 
14. Revenue - - 1 - - - - - - - 1 - - 1 - 3 
15. Social Welfare - - 1 1 - 1 - - - - - 1 - - - 4 
16. Urban Development - - - - - - - - - 1 - 1 - - 5 7 

Appendices
127
Sl. No. Department 95-
96
96-
97
97-
98
98-
99
1999-
00
2000-
01
01-
02
02-
03
03-
04
04-
05
05-
06
06-
07
07-
08
08-
09
09-
10 Total
17. Water Resources
(Major & Medium Irrigation) - - - - - - - 1 - - - - - 1 1 3 
18. Water Resources 
(Minor Irrigation) - - 1 - - - - - - 2 - - - 3 2 8 
19. Women and Child Development  - - - - - - - 1 - - - - - - - 1 
20. Youth Services and Sports - - - - 1 - - - - - - - - - - 1 
21. Forest  & Transport - 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 
Total 4 1 4 1 5 2 1 3 3 3 2 6 3 17 17 72
  

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
128
Appendix-1.3
(Reference: Paragraph 1.7.4, Page 10)
Paragraphs (excluding General and Statistical) yet to be discussed by PAC as of 18 January 2012
Sl.
No. Department 92-93 93-94 94-95 95-96 96-97 97-98 98-99 99-00 00-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06 06-07 07-08 08-09 09-10 Total
1 . A g r i c u l t u r e  ----2 ---------- 1 --3
2. Animal 
Husbandry and 
Veterinary 
Services
- - - - - 3 1 1 2 - - - 1 - - - - 1 9 
3. Commerce and 
Industries - - - - - 3 2 1 - - - - - - 1 - 1 - 8 
4 . C o - o p e r a t i o n 1 ------------1- 1 --3
5. Ecology and 
Environment - - - - - - - - 1 1 - - - - - - 1 1 4 
6 . E d u c a t i o n 21451-122111-22 1 32 3 1
7 . F i n a n c e  -------- 1----1 1 1 116
8 . F o r e s t 1 -1 2---- 1 2-1 --- 1 1- 1 0
9. Health and Family 
Welfare 3 - 1 4 4 1 2 2 1 - - - - - - - 1 - 19
1 0 . H o m e - 2 2-2 --2 -2----- - -- 1 0
1 1 . H o r t i c u l t u r e ----1 1-------1- - --3
1 2 . H o u s i n g ---2-------- 1 1 1 - --5
13. Information, 
Tourism, 
Kannada and 
Culture
- - - - - - 3 1 - - - - 1 - - - - - 5 
14. Information 
Technology 
and Bio-
Technology 
- - - - - - - - - - - 2 - - - - - - 2 
15. Labour - --------1-1 --1 - 1-4
16. Legislature 
Secretariat - - - - - - - 1 - - - - - - - - - - 1 
1 7 . P l a n n i n g -------1 ------- - --1
1 8 . P u b l i c  W o r k s -2241- - - - - -1- - - - 34 1 7
19. Revenue - - - 1 1 1 - 1 - - - - 1 1 - - 1 - 7 

Appendices
129
Sl.
No. Department 92-93 93-94 94-95 95-96 96-97 97-98 98-99 99-00 00-01 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06 06-07 07-08 08-09 09-10 Total
20. Rural 
Development & 
Panchayat Raj
- 1 - - - - - - - 1 - - - - - - - - 2 
21. Social Welfare - - - 2 - 3 3 1 1 - - 1 - - 2 - -- 1 3
2 2 . T r a n s p o r t - 1------------- - --1
23. Urban 
Development - - - - - - - - - - - - 4 - 2 1 1 8 16
24. Water Resources 
(Major & Medium 
Irrigation)
14 7 7 6 8 7 2 2 2 6 2 2 1 - - - 1 1 68
25. Water Resources 
(Minor Irrigation ) 1 6 3 5 4 3 - - - - - 2 2 1 - - 3 2 32
26. Women & Child 
Development - - - - 1 - - - - - 1 - - - - - - - 2 
27. Youth Services 
and Sports - - - - - 2 - 2 - - - - - - - - - - 4 
28. Agriculture, 
Forest, 
Home & 
Transport
- - - - 1 - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 
29. H&FW, PWD, & 
RDPR - - - - - - - - - - 1 - - - - - - - 1 
30. Forest, Ecology 
&Environment, 
Urban 
Development and 
H&FW
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 - - 1 
Total 22 20 20 31 26 24 14 17 11 14 5 11 11 8 10 7 18 20 289

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
130
Appendix 2.1
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.5.1, Page 16) 
Payment schedule for set-up phase
Sl.
No. Service Unit price Payment schedule
1. Data digitisation 
(scanning and data 
entry)
Rs.6.00
(Per family)
(a) 15 per cent of the total amount upon 
submission of data digitisation plan 
and database designs
(b) 85 per cent of the total amount upon 
supply of temporary coupons at 
taluk office
2. Printing temporary 
coupons for all 
beneficiaries for a 
period of six months 
with one coupon per 
month
Rs.1.00
(Set of 6 
coupons)
100 per cent of total amount upon 
submission of printed temporary 
coupons to the Department.
3. Detailed system study Rs.10,00,000 
(Lumpsum 
amount)
100 per cent of total amount upon 
approval of all the deliverables, data 
management, BPR, SRS, functional 
specification and infrastructure 
specifications 
4 Online photography and 
biometric data capture
Rs.22.00
(Per family)
(a) 60 per per cent of the amount for 
the beneficiaries covered in Taluk
(b) 40 per cent of the amount on 
coverage of beneficiaries at the 
percent stated in PED
5. Collection of add on 
question
Rs.2.00 (per 
family)
(a) 60 per per cent of the amount for 
the beneficiaries covered in Taluk
(b) 40 per cent of the amount on 
submission of data for the coverage 
stated in PED
6. Data consolidation and 
validation, issuance of 
ration cards and bar 
coded coupons and 
printing of final 
assignment register
Rs.11
(Per family)
(a) 30 per cent of amount on 
completion of data validation and 
exceptional report submission
(b) 50 per cent of amount on issue of 
ration cards and bar coded coupons 
at village/Taluk level
(c) 10 per cent of amount on 
submission of final assignment 
register
(d) 10 per cent of amount on 
acceptance of final database. 

Appendices
131
Appendix 2.2
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.5.1, Page 16) 
Payment schedule for operation and support phase
Sl.
No. Service Unit price Payment schedule
1 Infrastructure creation 
and ICT tools 
deployment (including 
all the activities
mentioned for this 
under the scope of 
work)
Rs.58,00,000 
per month
(a) 60 per cent of MOS payment is 
paid monthly without linkage to 
SLA
(b) 40 per cent paid monthly based on 
SLA performance 
2 Cost of annual renewal 
of FPD license.  The 
renewal for 46000 
FPDs will happen 4 
times during the 
contract period
Rs.50 per FPD
(a) 60 per cent of MOS payment is 
paid monthly without linkage to 
SLA
(b) 40 per cent paid monthly based on 
SLA performance 
3. Cost of application 
issue, processing and 
issue of ration cards 
during the operations 
support period
Rs.5.00 per 
card
(a) 60 per cent of MOS payment is 
paid monthly without linkage to 
SLA
(b) 40 per cent paid monthly based on 
SLA performance 
4. Cost of processing 
individual beneficiary 
off take information for 
initial 12 months. 
Payment will be made 
only for beneficiary 
information which is 
processed and updated 
into the database
Rs.0.12 per 
month per 
ration card
(a) 60 per cent of MOS payment is 
paid monthly without linkage to 
SLA
(b) 40 per cent paid monthly based on 
SLA performance 
5. Cost of printing and 
issue of bar coded 
coupons, at village 
level, for incremental 
periods of six months, 
for a period of two 
years
Rs.0.40 per 
month per 
ration card
(a) 60 per cent of MOS payment is 
paid monthly without linkage to 
SLA
(b) 40 per cent paid monthly based on 
SLA performance 
6. Cost of processing 
individual beneficiary 
off take information 
for incremental 
periods of six months 
for a total period of 
two years
Rs.0.12 per 
month per 
ration card
(a) 60 per cent of MOS payment is 
paid monthly without linkage to 
SLA
(b) 40 per cent paid monthly based on 
SLA performance 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
132
Appendix-2.3 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.5.2(iii), Page 19)
Payment schedule as per RFP and agreement
Sl.No. Service Payment Schedule as per 
RFP
Payment schedule as per 
agreement
1 Data 
Digitization Study for Data digitization 
& database design
 20% of total amount upon 
submission of Data 
Digitization Plan & 
Database Designs
 20% of total amount upon 
finalization (and 
approval) of databases, 
forms & applications for 
data digitization.
 30% of the total amount 
upon generation of 
display list (for 
photography)
 30% of the total amount 
upon approval of display 
list
 15% of the total amount upon 
submission of data 
digitisation plan and database 
designs
 85% of the total amount upon 
supply of temporary coupons 
at Taluk Office.
Design of databases, 
Forms & applications for 
data digitization
Data Digitization 
(Scanning and Data Entry)
2 Printing temporary coupons for all 
beneficiaries for a period of six months 
with one coupon per month
 20% of Total Amount 
upon submission of 
formats for temporary 
coupons 
 80% of Total Amount 
upon submission of 
submission of printed 
coupons to the 
Department
 100% of Total Amount upon 
submission of submission of 
printed coupons to the 
Department
3 Detailed System study  20% of total Amount 
upon submission of data 
management 
specifications (capture, 
storage, usage, security 
and updation polices
 20% of total Amount 
upon submission of 
detailed study of 
Department, Analysis of 
key processes and BPR 
recommendations for 
achieving project 
objectives.
 20% of total Amount 
upon submission 
functional specifications 
 20% of total Amount 
upon submission 
infrastructure 
specifications (hardware 
& system software 
specifications, application 
software specifications)
 20% of total Amount 
upon approval of all the 
above deliverables.
 100% of Total Amount upon 
approval of all the 
deliverables – Data 
management, BPR, SRS, 
functional specification and 
infrastructure specification.

Appendices
133
Sl.No. Service Payment Schedule as per 
RFP
Payment schedule as per 
agreement
4 Online photography and Biometric Data 
Capture (including Add on questions)
 20% of total amount in
month one upon coverage 
of minimum 25% 
beneficiaries in each 
District.
 20% of total amount in 
month two upon coverage 
of minimum 25% 
beneficiaries in each 
District (in addition to 
those covered 
previously).
 20% of total amount in 
month three upon 
coverage of minimum 
25% beneficiaries in each 
District (in addition to 
those covered 
previously).
 40% of total amount in 
month four upon
coverage of all 
beneficiaries in each 
District.
 Online 
photograph
y and 
Biometric 
Data 
Capture
 60% of the 
amount for the 
beneficiaries 
covered in 
taluk
 40% of the 
amount on 
coverage of 
beneficiaries at 
the percentage 
stated in PED
 Collection 
of Add on 
questions
 60% of the 
amount for the 
beneficiaries 
covered in 
taluk
 40% of the 
amount on 
submission  of 
data for the 
coverage 
stated in  PED
5 Data consolidatin and validation, 
issuance of Ration Cards and printing of 
final Assignment Register
 10% of total amount in  
upon initiation of task
 20% of total amount in 
month one upon coverage 
of minimum 30% 
beneficiaries in each 
District
 20% of total amount in 
month two upon coverage 
of minimum 30% 
beneficiaries in each 
District (in addition to 
those covered previously)
 20% of total amount in 
month three  upon 
completion of  all 
beneficiaries in each 
District
 30% of total amount upon 
acceptance of Final 
Assignment Register
 30% of amount on completion 
of data validation and 
exception Report Submission
 50% of amount on issue of 
Ration Cards and bar coded 
coupons
 10% amount on submission of 
Final Assignment Register
 10% amount on acceptance of  
Final Data Base

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
134
Appendix-2.4 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.5.2(iii), Page 20)
Performance points to be deducted as per RFP and agreement
Service 
level
As per RFP As per agreement
Delay
Performance 
points to be 
deducted
Delay Performance points to 
be deducted
S1 Less than 7 
days
7 Up to 7 
days
1 point for each 
days delay
S2 Between 7 to 
14 days
7+14 8 to 14 
days
S1 +1.25 PP for 
every days delay
S3 Between 14 
to 21 days
7+14+21 15 to 21 
days 
S2+1.50 PP for 
every days delay
S4 Between 21 
to 28 days
7+14+21+28 22 days or 
more
S3+1.75 PP for 
every days delay 
  

Appendices
135
Appendix-2.5 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.4, Page 39)
List of fire stations test-checked by audit
Sl.No. Fire Station
1. Harihar
2. Jagalur
3. Yeshwantpur
4. Belthangadi
5. Sulia
6. Bangalore South
7. Kunigal
8. Madikeri
9. T.Narasipura
10. Channagiri
11. Hubli
12. Nanjanagud
13. Chikkodi
14. Gangavati
15. Nelamangala
16. Bannimantap
17. Byadgi
18. Chikkanayakanahalli
19. Tiptur
20. Honnali
21. Anigeri
22. Chikkamagalur
23. Puttur
24. Koppal
25. Bangalore North
26. Bailhongal
27. Kadri (Mangalore)
28. Shringeri
29. Madhugiri
30. Kukkanur
31. Karatagi
32. Hebbal (Bangalore)
33. Hirekerur
34. Kalghatgi
35. Belgaum
36. Mudigere
37. Turuvekere
38. Kushtagi
39. Shiggaon
40. Mudbidri
41. Banashankari
42. High Grounds
43. Tumkur
44. Savadatti

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
136
Sl.No. Fire Station
45. Kadur
46. Doddaballapur
47. Athani
48. Saraswatipuram
49. Shira
50. Tarikere
51. Hubli City
52. Electronic City
53. Periyapatna
54. Udupi
55. NR Pura
56. Koppa
57. RBI, Mysore
58. Hebbal, Mysore
59. Jayanagar, Bangalore 
60. Gundlupet
  

Appendices
137
Appendix-2.6 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.5, Page 40)
Planned source of funds for K-SAFE 2010 project
Sl. No. Source of funds Amount
(` in crore)
1. Budgetary Provision 35.4 
2. North Karnataka Urban 
Infrastructure Development 
Project(NKUIDP)
31.4 
3. NABARD under RIDF project 33.08 
4.  Government of India- Fire 
Service Modernisation Project
54.92  
5. Unutilised GIC Loan 17.10 
6. Urban Development Department 
(Upgradation) 
90.00 
7. Revenue Department (Calamity 
Relief Fund) for SAR
29.40 
8. XII Finance Commission funds 
for EPMS
25.00 
9. Modernisation of the 
Department (GOI)
7.00 
TOTAL 323.30 
  

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
138
Appendix-2.7 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.7.2 (i), Page 42) 
Shortfall in vehicles based on SFAC norms 
Sl. 
No. Type
No. of 
vehicles/ 
equipment 
required
No. of vehicle/
equipment available as 
on date of perspective 
plan report
Shortfall
1. Water Tender/
Pumping unit
4,017 192 3,825
2. Water lorry 4,017 40 3,977
3. Ambulance 4,017 23 3,994
Total 12,051 255 11,796

Appendices
139
Appendix-2.8 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.9, Page 51)
Cadre-wise manpower sanctioned, available and vacancy position
Sl. 
No. Designation Sanctioned Available Vacant Percentage
1. District Fire Officer  33 32 1 3
2. Fire station Officer 180 137 43 24 
3. Asst Fire station 
Officer
191 145 46 24 
4. Leading fire man 782 712 70 9
5. Fire men drivers 894 643 251 28 
6. Driver mechanics 145 41 104 72 
7. Fire men 3,218 2,073 1,145 36 
8. Fitter Class- I 1 0 1 100 
9. Fitter Class-2 1 1 0 - 
10. Welder 1 0 1 100 
11. Electrician 1 0 1 100 
12. Cleaner 1 0 1 100 
13. Sub-inspector 
(wireless)
2 0 2 100 
14. Asst. Sub inspector 6 0 6 100 
  

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
140
Appendix-2.9 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.2.9, Page 51)
Region-wise vacancy position
Name of the Region Sanctioned Available Vacancy Percentage
Bangalore East 360 251 109 30 
Bangalore West 430 291 139 32 
Bangalore South 385 243 142 37 
Bangalore North 280 193 87 31 
Mysore 703 437 266 38 
Mangalore 443 260 183 41 
Shimoga 515 367 148 29 
Davangere 501 356 145 29 
Hubli 676 568 108 16 
Bellary 557 402 155 28 
Gulbarga 571 431 140 25 

Appendices
141
Appendix 2.10
(Reference: Paragraph 2.3.8.3, Page 64) 
Vacancies in technical posts as of 31 March 2011
Sl.
No. Post Sanctioned 
Strength
Working 
Strength Vacancies How long vacant 
Commissionerate
1. Archaeological Conservation 
Engineer
11 - -
2. Archaeological Conservation 
Assistant
11 - -
Total 2 2 - -
Directorate
1. Director 1 1 - -
2. Additional Director 1 - 1 May 2007 to March 2011
3. Deputy Director 4 4 - -
4. Archaeological Conservation 
Engineer
44 - -
5. Assistant Director 5 4 1 February 2003 to March 2011
6. Registering Officers 1 - 1 October 1997 to March 2011
7. Archaeological Assistant 4 - 4 One post - From November 2005 
to March 2011.  
Three posts - From July 1996 to 
March 2011 
8. Epigraphist 1 - 1 March 2000 to March 2011
9. Archaeological Conservation 
Assistant
8 7 1 August 2007 to March 2011
10. Photographer 1 - 1 October 2005 to March 2011
11. Librarian 1 - 1 Since 20 years
12. Curator 9 9 - -
13. Assistant Curator 12 1 11 7  Posts - From November 2010 to 
March 2011. 
2 Posts - From July 2009 to March 
2011
1 Post – From October 2009 to 
March 2011 
1 Post –From December 2010 to 
March 2011 
14. Explorer 2 2 - -
15. Mechanic 1 1 - -
16. Surveyor 1 - 1 July 1989 to March 2011
17. Artist 1 1 - -
Total 57 34 23 -

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
142
Appendix 2.11
(Ref: Paragraph 2.4.4.2, Page 83) 
Extra cost due to award of contract at higher rates  
 (` in lakh) 
Sl 
No. Work
Amount 
put to 
tender
Updated 
cost of 
work
Contract 
amount 
after 
negotiation
Tender 
premium 
above 
updated 
cost
(per cent) 
Amount of 
contract plus
4.99% tender 
premium 
(col4+4.99%)
Extra 
cost
(col 5-7)
-1- -2- -3- -4- -5- -6- -7- -8-
2009-10
Odderahatti Division
1 
Providing RCC lining from Mechanical Paver 
machine in selected reaches of TLBC – km 0 to 
17
817.67 817.67 1022.08 25 858.47 163.61
2 -do- km 17 to 36 815.30 815.30 1,019.12 25 855.98 163.14
3 -do- km 36 to 45 853.97 853.97 1,067.46 25 896.58 170.88
4 -do- km 47 to 59 920.89 920.89 1,151.11 25 966.84 184.27
5 -do- km 69 to 73  534.64 534.64 668.30 25 561.32 106.98
6 Providing RCC lining & improvement to 
structures of TLBC – km 0 to 7 of Dy No.17 518.98 518.98 648.72 25 544.88 103.84
7 -do- km 0 to 10 of Dy No.25 704.89 704.89 881.11 25 740.06 141.05
8 -do- km 0 to 1 & 10 to 20 of Dy No.31 762.23 762.23 952.78 25 800.27 152.51
9 -do- km 0 to 10 of Dy No.32 855.14 855.14 1,068.92 25 897.81 171.11
Sindhanur Division
10
Providing RCC lining with Mechanical  paver in 
selected reaches of TLBC – km 76, 77, 78, 83, 
85, 86, 87 & 90
892.95 892.95 1,116.18 25 937.51 178.67
11 -do- km 94, 95, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 105 & 
106 879.32 879.32 1,099.15 25 923.20 175.95
12
Providing RCC lining with Mechanical  paver –
km 0 to 6.15 including CD works of Dy No.36 of 
TLBC
874.49 874.49 1,093.11 25 918.13 174.98
13 -do- km 0 to 8.85 of Dy No.54 of TLBC 949.99 949.99 1,187.48 25 997.39 190.09
Sirwar Division
14
Providing RCC lining with Mechanical  paver, 
strengthening to RCC trough culvert 
improvements to Head sluice in selected reaches 
of TLBC – km 113 to 121
834.35 834.35 1,042.93 25 875.98 166.95
15
Providing RCC lining with Mechanical  paver, 
strengthening to RCC trough culvert, inner 
strengthening work in selected reaches of TLBC 
– km 127 to 142
606.52 606.52 758.15 25 636.79 121.36
16
Providing RCC lining with Mechanical  paver, 
improvement to Head sluice inner strengthening 
work, etc., in selected reaches of TLBC – km 143 
to 153
716.43 716.43 895.53 25 752.18 143.35
17
Restoration of design section providing CC lining 
with Mechanical paver – km 0 to 6 of Dy No.65 
of TLBC
341.16 341.16 426.45 25 358.18 68.27
18
Remodeling of canal section and improvements 
to drops, POs, etc., restoration of design section 
and providing CC lining to TLBC – km 5.73 to 
13 of Dy No.76
797.70 797.70 997.12 25 837.51 159.61
19 -do- km 13 to 20 of Dy No.76 551.76 551.76 689.70 25 579.29 110.41
20
Restoration of design section providing CC lining 
with Mechanical paver to TLBC – km 0 to 4 of     
Dy No.85
380.86 380.86 476.07 25 399.86 76.21
21 -do- km 0 to 9 of Dy No.89 796.10 796.10 995.12 25 835.83 159.29
Yermarus Division
22
Providing RCC lining with Mechanical  paver, 
including improvements to CDs from ch 10 to 33, 
34 to 65, 66 to 120 in Dy 98; CC lining from ch 0 
to 30 & construction of  RCC trough and POs in     
sub-Dy No. 2L and 3L of Dy No. 98 of TLBC
414.28 414.28 517.85 25 434.95 82.90
23
Providing RCC lining with Mechanical  paver, 
from ch 11 to 156, 209 to 232, 248 to 265; repairs 
to drops at ch 102, 112, 132, 149, 163, 180, 196, 
211 & 239 and CDs at ch 114, 124, 172, 197; 
constn of  POs at ch 123, 147, 159, 183, 210, 231, 
249, 255 & 265 in Dy No. 99 of TLBC
418.09 418.09 522.61 25 438.95 83.66 

Appendices
143
Sl 
No. Work
Amount 
put to 
tender
Updated 
cost of 
work
Contract 
amount 
after 
negotiation
Tender 
premium 
above 
updated 
cost
(per cent) 
Amount of 
contract plus
4.99% tender 
premium 
(col4+4.99%)
Extra 
cost
(col 5-7)
24
Providing RCC lining with Mechanical  paver, 
constn of  POs, repairs to drops & CD in km 1 to 
4 & selected reaches of km 4 to 15 in Dy No. 102 
of TLBC
475.79 475.79 594.73 25 499.53 95.20
Bellary Division
25
Providing RCC lining with Mechanical  paver 
between km 0 to 3 including improvement to 
structures of Dy No. 14 of RBHLC
354.96 354.96 443.70 25 372.67 71.03
26 -do- km 3 to 6 of Dy No. 7 of RBHLC 313.79 313.79 390.19 24.35 329.45 60.74
27 -do- km 6 to 10 of Dy No. 7 of RBHLC 491.04 491.04 613.80 25 515.54 98.26
28 -do- km 0 to 3 of Bagewady Dy of RBHLC 269.52 269.52 336.90 25 282.97 53.93
29 -do- km 3 to 4, 8 to 10 of Bagewady  Dy of 
RBHLC 266.39 266.39 332.98 25 279.68 53.30 
TOTAL (A) 18,409.20 18,409.20 23,009.40 19,327.80 3,681.55
2010-11
Odderahatti Division
30
Providing RCC/CC lining by using mechanical 
paver in km 0 to 73.60 (in selected reaches of 
TLBC) and Dy No. 17, 21, 25, 31 & 32
6,625.85 8,292.42 10,365.50 25 8,706.21 1,659.33
Sirwar Division
31
-do- in mile 70 to 104 of TLBC and its Dy  No. 
66, 69, 71A, 73, 76, 82, 85, 89 & 92 in selected 
reaches
7,248.27 8,978.09 11,175.80 24.5 9,426.10 1,749.70
Sindhanur Division
32 -do- in mile 47 to 69 of TLBC and its Dy  36, 40, 
45, 46, 48, 54 & 55 in selected reaches 5,434.77 6,686.75 8,358.44 25 7,020.42 1,338.02
Yermarus Division
33
-do- in mile 104 to 136 of TLBC and its Dy  94, 
95, 96, 98, 99, 100, 102 & 102A in selected 
reaches
1,866.03 2,379.52 2,924.00 22.88 2,498.26 425.74
Bellary Division
34
Package I – Providing CC lining including 
improvements to structures from km 10 to 13 of 
Dy 7 and km 2 to 7 of Dy 12 in RBHLC
467.76 590.20 737.75 25 619.65 118.10
35
Package II – Providing CC lining including 
improvements to structures from km 3.30 to 3.80, 
6 to 7 of Dy 14 and km 0 to 2 of Dy 16A in 
RBHLC
299.76 376.64 470.80 25 395.43 75.37
36
Package III – Providing CC lining from km 4.58 
to 5, 5 to 8 and constn of low level cause way at 
km 3.945 D/s of Aqueduct and improvement to 
UT at km 1.80 of Bagewady Dy in RBLLC
250.41 313.36 391.70 25 329.00 62.70
37
Package IV – Providing CC lining including 
improvements to structures from km 12.45 to 13, 
13 to 14, 14 to 15 and 15 to 16 of Dy No. 7 of 
RBHLC
299.83 385.79 482.24 25 405.04 77.20
38
Package V – Providing CC lining including
improvements to structures from km 12 to 13, 13 
to 14, 14 to 15 of Dy No. 13 and from km 7 to 
8.20 and 17 to 18.30 of Dy No. 14 of RBHLC
391.51 493.99 617.49 25 518.64 98.85
39
Package VI – Providing CC lining including 
improvements to structures from km 10.50 to 
11.20 of Bagewady Dy; km 3.75 to 6 of Kotehal 
Dy and km 16 to 18 of Hatcholli Dy of RBLLC
260.89 339.70 424.62 25 356.65 67.97
TOTAL (B) 23,145.10 28,836.50 35,948.40 30,275.40 5,672.98
GRAND TOTAL (A + B) 41,554.30 47,245.70 58,957.70 49,603.20 9,354.53
  

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
144
Appendix-3.1
(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.5, Page 105) 
Excess payment of price adjustment
(Amount in `) 
Quarter 
ending
RA 
bill 
No.
Value of 
work done*
Value of 
work slip 
items*
Value of 
‘Extra Items 
Rate List’ 
items*
Net value of 
work done 
for which 
price 
adjustment is 
allowable*
Price adjustment payable
Total price 
adjustment 
allowableLabour Cement Steel Bitumen Fuel Machinery Others
January
2007 I & II 13,69,20,911 1,22,09,832 48,42,434 11,98,68,645 10,04,899 11,40,133 4,65,333 6,74,435 4,90,372 4,75,843 40,125 42,91,140
April
2007 III 9,60,13,638 0 1,27,32,081 8,32,81,557 8,91,339 20,14,982 3,91,622 2,88,382 3,40,697 5,07,143 (-) 32,886 44,01,279
July
2007 IV 8,54,38,784 4,28,92,368 98,78,142 3,26,68,274 4,40,930 11,01,128 1,95,892 1,65,776 1,33,643 2,58,265 4,584 23,00,218
January
2008 V 1,73,11,308 0 0 1,73,11,308 3,87,004 7,72,729 1,49,918 2,70,365 70,819 1,59,927 16,552 18,27,314
April
2008
VI & 
VII 17,23,95,847 6,45,48,594 6,03,24,561 4,75,22,692 13,49,907 21,96,488 9,56,418 11,88,948 1,92,706 4,76,437 1,20,023 64,80,927
July
2008
VIII, 
IX & 
X 
19,42,01,555 1,43,69,037 7,34,71,334 10,63,61,184 35,65,158 50,77,369 29,63,769 35,02,358 25,91,600 14,37,111 5,14,437 1,96,51,802
October
2008
XI to 
XV
&
Final
23,91,77,490 2,24,70,576 11,59,77,350 10,07,29,564 41,27,950 51,32,278 28,99,561 47,43,490 22,15,809 14,26,153 5,91,988 2,11,37,229
TOTAL 94,14,59,533 15,64,90,407 27,72,25,902 50,77,43,224 1,17,67,187 1,74,35,107 80,22,513 1,08,33,754 60,35,646 47,40,879 12,54,823 6,00,89,909
Price adjustment allowed 15,44,00,000
Excess paid 9,43,10,091
(*) Value of work done is as per work executed during the quarter and at the rates finally paid 

Appendices
145
Appendix-3.2 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.6,  Page 106) 
Avoidable expenditure on Surface Dressing
(Quantity in Sqm & Amount in `) 
Sl No. Name of the work
Quantity of 
SD layer 
executed
Rate per sqm Amount
PW, P&IWT Division, Chamarajanagar
1
Improvements to road from 
Kollegal to Surapura in 
Kollegal taluk
12,000.00 37.80 4,53,600 
2
Improvements to road from 
Chandakavadi cross on SH 80 
to Nagavalli
18,562.50 49.39 9,16,802 
3
Improvement to road from SH 
80 to join NH 209 in 
Chamarajanagar
16,500.00 25.00 4,12,500 
4
Improvements to road from 
Bagalakote BR Hills road to T 
Narasipura in 0 to 7 km 
16,500.00 49.39 8,14,935 
5
Improvement to Kabbahalli 
Hooradhalli road from 1.20 to 
3.20 km in Gundlupet taluk 
7,437.00 57.50 4,27,627 
PW, P&IWT Division, Chikkaballapur
6 Improvement to DT road to 
Talakayalabetta 25,500.00 55.00 14,02,500 
7
Improvement to road from BH 
road to Gedate in Gowribidanur 
taluk
22,640.00 52.00 11,77,280 
8
Improvement to road from 
Attur Hosahalli road to BC road 
in Chintamani taluk
18,300.00 64.00 11,71,200 
9
Improvement to road from 
Gundapura to join Kotaladinne
in Gowribidanur taluk 
21,724.99 45.00 9,77,625 
10
Improvement to road from BB 
road to join YC road in 
Bagepalli taluk
15,750.00 45.00 7,08,750 
11
Improvement to road from YC 
road to PBRCP road in 
Bagepalli taluk
11,936.25 56.00 6.68,430 
12 Improvement to road from SD 
road to Seetahalli 12,185.00 52.00 6,33,620 
13
Improvement to road from 
Gollahalla to BB road in 
Sidlaghatta taluk
13125.00 45.00 5,90,625 
14
Improvement to road from 
Dibburahalli to D.T road  via 
Bachanahalli in Sidlaghatta 
taluk
11,250.00 50.00 5,62,500 
PW, P&IWT Division, Davanagere
15
Improvement & asphalting to 
Kuruva name board to join 
CNT road, Honnali taluk
29,897.00 38.00 11,36,086 
16
Improvement & asphalting to 
Kanchuguranahalli, 
Hanumanahalli road in 
Channagiri taluk 
22,481.25 47.00 10,56,619 

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
146
Sl No. Name of the work
Quantity of 
SD layer 
executed
Rate per sqm Amount
17
Improvement & asphalting to 
road from Davanagere Anaji 
Jalalur road to Denchanahalli in 
Jagalur taluk
20,883.75 39.00 8,14,466 
18
Improvement & asphalting to 
Kakkaragolla Chikkabidare 
road in Harihara taluk
18,089.00 33.00 5,96,937 
19
Improvement & asphalting 
from Gudda Kummaranahalli to 
Lingadahalli road in Channagiri 
taluk
22,500.00 54.00 12,15,000 
20
Improvement & asphalting to 
Bendigere Dodapura road in 
Harapanahalli taluk
31,072.93 48.53 15,07,969 
21
Improvement & asphalting to 
road from Mittalakatte to NH 4 
in Harihara taluk
17,540.10 53.64 9,40,850 
22
Improvement & asphalting to 
BS road to Sokke in Jagalur 
taluk
19,333.44 49.00 9,47,339 
23
Improvement & asphalting to 
Attigere to join MH road in 
Davanagere
29,202.50 49.35 14,41,143 
24 Improvement & asphalting to 
Nichapura Mattihalli road 21,431.25 52.85 11,32,642 
25
Improvement & asphalting to 
Santebennur Madikere 
Anebereu road (km 0 to 7.50) in 
Channagiri taluk
13,660.16 50.00 6,83,008 
PW, P&IWT Division, Sirsi 
26 Improvement to Isloor 
Doddahalli road in Sirsi taluk 12,750.00 51.00 6,50,250 
27
Improvement to Badasagoa 
Umachagi road in Mundgod 
taluk
13,875.00 52.00 7,21,500 
28
Improvement to Bilagi 
Hemmanbail road in Siddapur 
taluk
5,437.50 52.14 2,83,511 
29
Improvement to Bandal 
Kanchikai road in Siddapur 
taluk
12,099.50 62.00 7,50,169 
TOTAL 2,47,95,482

Appendices
147
Appendix-3.3 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3.1, Page 117)
Excess payment of family pension
 (Amount in `)
SL.
No. District Number of 
cases Amount Period
1 Bagalkot 30 652928 11/07 to 6/2010
2 Bangalore (Rural) 12 339375 2/07 to 8/10
3 Bangalore (Urban) 2 346835 8/01 to 10/10
4 Belgaum 103 2985065 10/05 to 3/10
5 Bellary 32 1212792 10/07 to 12/10
6 Bidar 32 661187 3/08 to 8/10
7 Bijapur 17 254306 11/09 to 7/10
8 Chamarajanagar 18 452316 1/03 to 3/10
9 Chickballapura 17 426089 7/04 to  3/10
10 Chikkmagalur 13 650634 4/06 to 12/10
11 Chitradurga 9 244161 4/09 to 5/10
12 Dakshina Kannada 8 101499 1/10 to 11/10
13 Davangere 67 1481740 9/05 to 5/10
14 Dharwad 15 195941 3/08 to 1/11
15 Gadag 8 152854 4/09 to 6/10
16 Gulburga 14 804817 10/07 to 9/10
17 Hassan 65 2145909 07/07 to 10/10
18 Haveri 23 844999 1/08 to 7/10
19 Karwar 7 192398 09/06 to 12/10
20 Kolar 18 786731 12/06 to 3/10
21 Koppal 2 8188 11/08 to 8/10
22 Madikeri 17 162802 2/10 to 12/10
23 Mandya 28 559158 6/07 to 4/10
24 Mysore 16 553097 3/03 to 8/10
25
Pension Payment 
Treasury, Bangalore
72 1700795 8/08 to 8/10
26 Raichur 29 1292126 2/05 to 8/10
27 Ramnagara 6 403511 12/05 to 9/10
28 Shimoga 14 216705 7/09 to 5/10
29 Tumkur 62 3454421 1/05 to 10/10
30 Udupi 16 359857 10/08 to 12/10
TOTAL 772 23643236

Report No.2 (Civil) for the year ended 31 March 2011 
148
Appendix-3.4 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.3.1, Page 117) 
Continued excess payment of family pension
 (Amount in `)  
SL 
No District
CEP during 2009-10 Overall Excess Payment (including cases which 
appeared in earlier Audit Reports)
Number 
of cases Amount Amount Total Amount Period
1 Bagalkaot 4 79311 85218 164529 9/08 to 6/10
2 Bangalore (Rural) 28 1080802 192317 1273119 4/07 to 8/10
3 Bellary 7 355892 148322 504214 8/08 to 12/10
4 Bijapur 10 301974 384095 686069 9/02 to 7/10
5 Chamarajnagar 3 52037 40946 92983 5/08 to 3/10
6 Chikballapur 13 344486 191930 536416 10/05 to3/10
7 Chikmagalur 2 49376 7716 57092 11/08 to12/10
8 Chitradurga 34 583370 1121773 1705143 11/05 to 5/10
9 Davangare 14 343532 126382 469914 6/07 to 5/10
10 Gadag 1 30716 74417 105133 5/07 to 06/10
11 Gulbarga 11 342041 613002 955043 6/06 to 9/10
12 Hassan 10 195070 341032 536102 7/07 to 9/10
13 Haveri 2 76116 78074 154190 2/06 to 7/10
14 Karwar 2 60522 25940 86462 7/09 to 12/10
15 Mandya 6 131628 194207 325835 1/07 to 4/10
16 Pension Payment
Treasury 21 2281525 63353 2344878 04/08 to 8/10
17 Raichur 64 1119264 2590518 3709782 2/00 to 8/10
18 Ramnagara 1 296561 - 296561 Upto 9/2010
19 Shimoga 3 63972 215533 279505 09/05 to 5/10
20 Tumkur 19 1468416 357125 1825541 03/08to10/10
Total 255 9256611 6851900 16108511
  