1. This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India contains the results of
district centric Audit of Mandi district in Himachal Pradesh. The Report has been
prepared for submission to the Governor under Article 151(2) of the Constitution
of India.

2. Audit conducted a review of the significant socio-economic developmental
activities implemented in Mandi district during the period 2006 to 2011. Audit
process involved test check of records pertaining to the Mandi district, in the State
Planning Department, the offices of the Deputy Commissioner, District Rural
Development Agency, District Welfare Officer and District Programme Officer
(Integrated Child Development Services), five out of 10 Blocks, 45 Gram
Panchayats falling in the jurisdiction of selected Blocks, three Nagar Panchayats
viz., Jogindernagar, Rewalsar and Sarkaghat, two Municipal Committees Mandi
and Sundernagar, other departments and various district level implementing

agencies.

3. The Audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued by
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.


Executive Summary

Recognising the importance accorded by the
Planning Commission, Government of India, fora
district-centric approach to devolution of
finances for integrated local area development, a
district centric audit of Mandi district was carried
out to assess the status and impact of
implementation of various socio-economic
developmental activities in the district during
2006-11 and to evaluate whether the quality of
life of the people in the district has improved.

The review covered key social sector
programmes relating to Health, Education and
Water supply, Economic Sector programmes
relating to creation of Roads and other
infrastructure, Employment generation,
provision of basic civic amenities and use of
Information Technology (IT) to provide better
public services, etc.

Audit noticed certain positive points in the social
and economic services sector programmes
relating to health, education, water supply and
rural electrification but there were quite a few
areas where the State/District administration
needs to focusits attention.

Planning

Audit scrutiny revealed that the District Planning
Development and Twenty Point Programme
Review Committee (DPDC) had not prepared any
Perspective Plan or Annual Action Plan, or evena
shelf of schemes for the overall development of
the district. The local levels of administration like
the Blocks and Gram Panchayats (GPs) were not
involved in providing any inputs to the planning
process. Schemes were sanctioned on an adhoc
basis by the Deputy Commissioner (DC) based on
proposals submitted by the MPs/MLAs/Other
individuals as per the perceived benefit to the
local populace. In fact, there was no integrated
District Plan.

In the absence of perspective plans and annual
action plans for the development of the district
with inputs from Blocks and GPs, gaps in various

developmental schemes/programmes remained
unidentified with the result that the felt needs of
the weaker sections of the society and the
disparities between various regions and
communities within the district could not be
addressed.

(Paragraphs 3.1 to 3.3)
Recommendation

> Holistic perspective and integrated annual
plans should be prepared for the district,
based on a structured process of obtaining
inputs from Blocks and GPs and other
stakeholders for a more realistic assessment
of the district. Preparation of annual plans
by the district should be made mandatory
and should have the approval of the State
Government.

Financial Management and Accounting
Framework

The total flow of funds to the District during
2006-11 and expenditure incurred was not
available either with the Additional DC whois the
Chief Planning Officer or with the District
Planning Officer and other district authorities
like DRDA.

There is no uniform system for maintenance of
accounts for various schemes. The receipt,
utilisation and accountal of developmental funds
is done on mere release of funds to
implementing agencies rather than after their
actual utilisation. Hence, the reported progress
and achievement of these schemes depicting the
outcomes do not reflect the true state of affairs.

Large amounts of funds obtained from 601 and
State Government are parked in banks without
utilising them within the prescribed timeframe,
as works could not progress due to non-
availability of clearances for utilising forest land
and other land disputes.

(Paragraphs 4.1 and 4.2)


Recommendations

> Financial management, in general, needs
improvement, and funds provided for various
socio-economic developmental programmes
need to be efficiently and effectively utilised.

> Auniform accounting system should be put in
place for showing actual utilisation of funds
relating to various developmental schemes
as distinct from mere release of funds to
implementing agencies.

Social Services
Health

The District Health Society (DHS) was required to
prepare a perspective plan for the entire mission
period and Annual Plan with inputs from the
lower tiers of the Government. Since DHS was
constituted only in October 2010, Perspective
Plan and Annual Plan for the period 2006-11
were not prepared. The process of assessing the
health care requirements and gaps in
infrastructure, equipment, manpower, etc., as
per NRHM stipulation is yet to be done in the
district. The district had six Hospitals, 11 CHCs,
61 PHCs and 311 SCs. Except PHCs, the number
of other institutions was less than the prescribed
norms. The basic health care services required to
be provided in the health centres were not
available at many centres visited by the audit
team. Moreover, due to non-availability of
adequate number of skilled manpower, the
purpose of setting up the health centres was not
achieved in the district.

The prevalence of vaccine preventable diseases
was negligible in the District as no case of infant
and child diseases like neonatal tetanus,
diphtheria and whooping cough was detected in
the district during 2006-11. However, 611 cases
of measles were detected during 2006-11. No
new case of Polio was detected during 2006-11 in
the district. Out of 31,197 persons screened up
to March 2011 under National AIDS Control
Programme in the district, 263 persons were
found HIV positive (including 102 fully blown
cases).

Separate targets/health indicators for the district

were not prescribed despite the NRHM
requirement to doso. Therefore, the progress of
achievement of the crucial health indicators for
the district could not be ascertained and the
authenticity of the data reported at the State
level could also not be verified.

Community participation in planning,
implementation and monitoring of the NRHM
programme was not ensured. No Village Health
and Sanitation Committee (VHSC) had been
formed in the district. Rogi Kalyan Samities
(RKSs) have been formed in all the test checked
CHCs and PHCs in the district. Except in one PHC,
all RKSs were operational.

In the absence of proper planning involving
identification of gaps in the healthcare
infrastructure and non-availability of stipulated
facilities and skilled manpower in the health
institutions, the aim of providing accessible and
affordable healthcare to people remained to be
achieved in the District.

(Paragraphs 5.1 to 5.1.9)
Recommendations

> The District Health Society (DHS) was
constituted only in October 2010 in the
district. It should play a proactive role in
implementation of NRHM by commissioning
a survey to identify the gaps in health care
infrastructure and facilities and draw up a
specific timeframe as per the NRHM
guidelines, to provide accessible and
affordable health care to the rural poor and
vulnerable sections of the district.

v

All the health centres should be equipped
with adequate and skilled manpower to
achieve the objectives of the programme.

Education

Areview of the status of education in the district,
especially in the context of implementation of
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) revealed that the
number of primary and upper primary schools
(upto standard VIII) increased but enrolment of
children in the targeted age group of 6-14 years
in these schools decreased during 2006-11.


Higher education is being imparted in the district
through a network of 121 Government High
Schools (GHS), 206 Government Senior
Secondary Schools (GSSS), one Post Graduate
Degree College, seven Degree Colleges and one
Sanskrit College.

Enrolment in class X has declined from 15,752 in
2006-07 to 15,570 in 2010-11 in the district. The
pass percentage in respect of Class X had
decreased during 2007-08 as compared to
2006-07. The pass percentage of XI class increased
during the period 2007-10 while it decreased
substantially during 2010-11. The class XII pass
percentage came down by 26 per cent during
2010-11 (70 percent) as compared to 2009-10.

The infrastructural facilities available in 327 High
Schools and Senior Secondary Schools in the
district are deficient as 19 schools do not have
pucca building, 174 schools have no separate
labs for science subjects, 237 schools do not have
facility of library for students, 14 schools do not
have separate toilets for boys and girls and 201
schools do not have furniture, such as
wooden-desks, etc.

The inspection of schools is to be done at least
once a year by the Director of Education (DE);
however, the DE or any other officers authorised
by him had not conducted inspection of the
schools in the district during 2006-11.

Thus, many schools in the district lacked basic
infrastructure/facilities and the scholarship
schemes were not effectively managed due to
non-maintenance of updated database of the
actual students to be covered for assessing the
requirement of funds and delayed the benefits of
the scholarships to the eligible students.
Shortage of teachers in schools impacted the
board results.

(Paragraphs 5.2 to 5.2.4)
Recommendations

> Basic infrastructure/facilities should be
provided on a priority basis in all the schools,
especially at the elementary level, to ensure
an appropriate environment both for
teaching and learning. Appropriate steps

should be taken by the Education
Department to arrest the declining trend in
enrolment in the schools.

Vv

The State Government should carry out a
survey and create a database of the
beneficiaries to be covered under various
scholarship schemes. This database should
be updated periodically and all the eligible
students should be provided scholarship as
pernorms, ina timely manner.

> To ensure effective monitoring, the annual
inspection of the schools by the DE should be
made mandatory.

Integrated Child Development Services

Five to eight per cent mothers (expectant and
nursing) and 16 to 28 per cent children in the age
group of six months to six years were not given
the benefit of supplementary nutrition during
2006-11. Out of 2950 Anganwadi Centres
(AWCs) in the district, only 473 AWCs have
Government buildings and the remaining 2477
AWCs were running in private accommodation.
There was delay in completion of AWCs ranging
from one to 48 months and construction of AWCs
in 14 cases could not be taken up due to
non-availability of land.

(Paragraph 5.3)
Recommendations

» The district administration should ensure
that land for construction of AWCs is made
available before release of funds to executing
agencies.

» A co-ordinated approach needs to be
adopted by the District Programme Officer
and the BDOs to ensure timely completion of
building works.

Social Security Pension

Benefit of social security pension to 638
ineligible persons involving an amount of
%62.59 lakh was given until March 2011 despite
their identification in October 2008.

(Paragraph 5.4)


Recommendation

> To avoid disbursement of social security
pension to ineligible persons, district
administration should issue suitable
instructions to field functionaries viz., Tehsil
Welfare Officer to conduct proper
verification of applicant's livelihood status in
the presence of representatives of Gram
Panchayats/Municipalities.

Water Supply

Out of 10,237 habitations in the district, 67.03
per cent of the habitations were fully covered
with drinking water facility, 32.56 per cent were
partially covered and the remaining were yet to
be covered.

Lack of adequate supervision at departmental
level had not only delayed the completion of
water supply schemes, but also raised doubts
about the quality of works. Further, the targeted
beneficiaries were denied adequate and safe
drinking water due to non-completion of
schemes.

Unsafe water was being supplied to the public in
the district as the quality of water to the
habitations was not being ensured by conducting
the required water sample tests; as a result
substantial number of cases of water borne
diseases were noticed in the district.

(Paragraphs 5.5 (i) to 5.5 (iii))
Recommendations

> The State Government/district
administration needs to prepare a strategic
action plan to provide potable drinking water
to the uncovered habitations in a time bound
manner.

> Water quality testing system should be
improved/upgraded to ensure supply of safe
drinking water to the public.

Sanitation and Sewerage

While schemes for sewerage facilities in three
out of five towns were yet to be provided, two
schemes approved for providing sanitation
facilities by March 1997 and December 2000

respectively remained incomplete as of May 2011.
(Paragraph 5.6 (ii))

Recommendation

> The State/district administration should take
effective steps for providing sanitation
facilities in the towns in a timely manner.

Economic Services

Infrastructure-Transportation and Road
connectivity

Jogindernagar town of the district has a rail link
which is 56 kms away from district headquarters
Mandi. The nearest airport at Bhunter (Kullu
district) is 62 kms away from Mandi town. Out of
the total inhabited 2833 villages in the district,
only 1596 villages (as per E-in-C's records) have
road connectivity as of March 2011. Thus,
43 per cent of the villages in Mandi district still
remain to be provided with road connectivity;
acquisition of forest/private land being the main
bottleneck.

Out of 981 works taken up during 2006-11 under
PMGSY and State Sector schemes, only 144
works (15 per cent) were completed, 757 works
were still in progress and the remaining 80 works
were lying in a suspended state as of March 2011
due to land disputes, forest clearance and court
cases.

Thus, in the absence of a viable mechanism to
resolve the land disputes to facilitate timely
completion of road works, the Public Works
Department has delayed in providing road
connectivity to all the villages in the district.

(Paragraphs 6.1 to 6.1.1)
Other Developmental Schemes

Other developmental schemes like Vikas Mein
Jan Sahyog (VMJS), Sectoral Decentralised
Planning (SDP), Members of Parliament Local
Area Development Scheme (MPLADS), Vidhayak
Kshetriya Vikas Nidhi Yojana (VKVNY), etc., were
taken up in the district in an uncoordinated way
as the works were neither properly planned nor
completed within the specified timelines. The
assets created out of these schemes also


remained unknown to the district administration
as no asset register was maintained at any level.

(Paragraphs 6.1.2 (a) to (d))
Recommendations

> The State/district administration should
ensure greater coordination with the
executing agencies to ensure that the works
are planned, taken up and completed within
the specified timelines and accountability
should be fixed for delay and slippages in this
regard.

> Asset register should be maintained for
keeping records of the assets created under
various schemes.

Employment Generation

Under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act (MNREGA), audit
did not notice any case where 100 days
employment demanded was not provided to the
beneficiaries. Works such as water
conservation, water harvesting and drought
proofing etc., which were important to
strengthen the natural resource base and to
address the cause of poverty were not given
priority as envisaged in the MNREGA guidelines.
Payment of wages was not made to the workers
within the prescribed period of fortnight to
ensure security of livelihood.

(Paragraphs 6.2.2 to 6.2.3)
Recommendation

> State Government should issue instructions
to the implementing agencies to ensure
prioritisation of works as per MNREGA
guidelines and also ensure payment of
wages to the workers in time as per
provisions of the Act.

Energy

Out of the 2,833 villages in the district, 2,830
villages have been electrified as of March 2011.

The delay in sanctioning the DPR/finalisation of
tenders for electrification of unelectrified

households under RGGVY resulted in cost

escalation of ¥10.93 crore.
(Paragraph 6.3)
Recommendation

> The State Government should streamline its
internal processes to ensure that project
proposals are formulated on time and
pursued with the Gol to ensure that adequate
funds are provided for electrifying all the
unelectrified habitations/villages within a
specific timeframe.

Calamity Relief Fund Scheme

There is recurring problem of diversion of funds
under the scheme. Besides, 673 out of 2,819
repair and restoration works after incurring an
expenditure of 6.51 crore remained incomplete
as of May 2011.

(Paragraphs 6.4 (i) to (iii))
Recommendation

> Toavoid diversion of funds under the scheme,
the State Government should issue suitable
instructions to the district administration to
ensure utilisation of funds strictly as per Gol's
norms.

General Services
E-Governance-Sugam Centres

Of the total 50 services to be provided at each
Sugam centre, the services to be provided
through IT applications at District, Sub Division
and Tehsil/Sub Tehsil level were 37, 35 and 33
respectively whereas the remaining informatory
services were available over internet. In Mandi
District, only 3 to 7 main services with IT
applications were being provided as of April 2011
through the Sugam centres against 33 to 37 main
services envisaged to be provided at tehsil to
district level.

Besides, offering envisaged services through
Sugam, efforts should also be made to bring all
services under one roof as is presently not the
case.

(Paragraphs 7.1 to 7.1.2)


Civic Amenities by Municipal Administration

Management of solid waste by Municipal
Councils (MCs)/Nagar Panchayats (NPs) was
characterised by inherent defects of usage of
open vehicles for transportation of waste and
non-development of suitable sites for setting up
of Solid Waste Management Projects. The MCs
and NPs in the district did not have an integrated
waste management plan for collection, storage,
segregation, transportation, processing and
disposal of municipal solid waste thereby
exposing the public to the dangers of untreated
waste and pollution.

(Paragraphs 7.2.3)
Recommendation

> Waste management plans need to be
finalised by the MCs on priority basis for
ensuring pollution free environment.

Monitoring Mechanism and Impact Evaluation

In sum, monitoring and supervision of the
progress of implementation of various schemes
at all tiers of local administration in the district
was perfunctory which impacted the progress of
developmental works/projects undertaken by
various departments/implementing agencies.
There were number of works in the social and
economic sectors which were plagued by cost
and time overruns thereby depriving the public
of the benefits of these developmental schemes.

(Paragraphs 9.1 to 9.2)
Recommendation

» Monitoring, inspection and supervision
needs to be strengthened at all the levels of
local administration to ensure that the
programmes are executed timely within the
cost and timely corrective action taken in
cases of slippage.

Conclusion

The Gol has increasingly been entrusting the
responsibility at the local level, especially the
PRIs to ensure efficiency and effectiveness in

delivery of key services like education, health,
employment, etc. However, Audit analysis
revealed that absence of adequate people's
participation from the block and GP levels in the
planning process has hindered the planned
progress of the district and failed to address the
felt needs at the grass root level. While the PRIs
are empowered to prepare specific plans for an
integrated development of their area, lack of
structured annual action plans from these levels
and absence of capacity building have resulted
in their inability to expend the funds provided
to them for implementation of various
programmes.

There are multiplicity of programmes and
schemes and even larger number of
implementing agencies, making it difficult for the
district administration to effectively coordinate,
monitor and supervise the developmental
activities. While almost all the developmental
programmes are targeted at the same set of
beneficiaries, the existence of myriad
programmes without an integrated focus, has led
to each of them being implemented in a stand
alone mode. Adequate monitoring mechanism is
either not instituted, or is not functioning as
envisaged, with regard to execution of schemes.

The State Government needs to put in place a
robust district centric planning process by
mapping the gaps in infrastructure under various
sectors like health, education, employment
generation, drinking water, etc., through inputs
from all tiers of local administration and public at
large. A clear roadmap to achieve the targets set
through such plans for the development of the
district should be drawn so that the benefits of
the schemes reach the intended beneficiaries in
time. District specific human development
indicators to gauge the extent of development
and the effectiveness of various schemes being
implemented by the State in the District should
be evolved by the State Government. People's
participation is essential for ensuring sustainable
development of the District.

(Chapter 10)


a MANDI

MEADQUARTERS

A Wy i
LES

ii idle il
SE

HHH HH Hl

Tae pen Serre at fetta डक THN the periment he Berra पन्‍मकक Me tain



1.1

General Profile of the District

District Mandi is one of the 12 districts of
Himachal Pradesh located on the central part of
the State. In terms of population it is the second
largest district in the State bounded by Kangra in
the North-West, Hamirpur and Bilaspur in the
West, Solan district in the South, Shimla district
in the South-East and Kullu district in the East.
This district spans an area of 3,950 square
kilometres and is headquartered at Mandi witha
population of 9.01 lakh (15 per cent) of the
population of the State (60.78 lakh as per 2001
census) 93 percent (8.40 lakh) of them residing in
rural areas. The district comprises seven Sub-
Divisions, nine Tehsils and seven Sub-Tehsils. To
cater to rural development, the district has been
divided into ten Community Development Blocks
covering 473 Gram Panchayats (GPs) with 2,833
inhabited and 505 uninhabited villages. The
literacy rate is 76 percent as against 77 percentat
the State level but higher than the national
average of 65 per cent. Out of 2,06,096 families
of the district, 20 per cent (41,339 families) live
below the poverty line (BPL) as compared to 24
per cent at the State level. SC/ST population (as
per 2001 census) comprises 30 per cent of the
total population of the District.

1.2 Administrative Structure

Deputy Commissioner

Deputy Commissioner (DC) is the head of the
district administration and also functions as
District Collector and District Magistrate. The
District Planning and Development Committee is
the apex body at the district level for approving
the shelf of schemes for the development of the
district. DC being in charge of the district is the
sanctioning authority for all developmental
programmes in the district. He is also the Chief
Executive Officer (CEO) of the District Rural

Development Agency (DRDA) and ensures
co-ordination between the DRDA, Panchayati Raj
Institutions (PRIs), field officers and all other
departments of the State Government.

The DCis assisted by an Additional DC, (ADC) who
is the Chief Planning Officer, for preparation and
prioritisation of schemes and their monitoring
and review. The ADC is further assisted by a
District Planning Officer (DPO) and a Credit
Planning Officer, who maintains the accounts of
the schemes and audits them.

District Rural Development Agency (DRDA)

The DRDAis the main organ at the district level to
oversee the implementation of various
developmental programmes. It is responsible
for planning of programmes, coordinating with
other agencies-Governmental, non-
governmental, technical and financial for
successful programme implementation. It is also
responsible for overseeing the conduct of
various surveys relating to BPL families, etc.

The Zilla Parishad (ZP) Chairman functions as
the Chairman of the DRDA and the DC is the
CEO, as mentioned above. The CEO exercises
administrative control over the Project
Director (PD) and the Project Officer (PO) of
the DRDA. The PD is the executive in charge of
the DRDA and is responsible for interaction
with the District/State administration as well
as the Gol. He/she reports to the Secretary,
Rural Development Department (RDD) and
ensures co-ordination with the Zilla Parishad
for implementation of various rural
development programmes. The PD is also the
controlling officer for all the Block
Development Officers (BDOs) and District
Panchayat Officer (DPO).



The administrative setup of the District is shown below:

Chart 1: Administrative setup at District level

Deputy Commissioner

ll incharge of the district and CEO of |
5 co-ordination between 0808, PRI:
ficers and all other departments

नि Director (DRDA

Co-ordinates with district/State
administration/Gol

jief Planning Officer-responsibl
for preparation, prioritisation,
nitoring and review of sche

प्- छः 7 Project Officer (DRDA|
leases funds to BDOs-responsibl
monitoring financial and physic
progress of works

aintains accounts, plans, monito
reports on schemes

lock Development Officers

ses funds to GPs, monitors and mea
, make payments, submit reports

radhan Gram Panchaya

dl
all schemes in the GP and ret
accounts to BDO



21

Scope of Audit

Audit of district Mandi involved a review of the
significant socio-economic developmental
programmes implemented in the district during
the period 2006-11. The audit encompassed an
appraisal of social sector programmes relating to
health, education, water supply, Integrated Child
Development services, Old Age Pension scheme
and total sanitation campaign. In the economic
sector, infrastructure development was
reviewed through an assessment of the projects
and schemes implemented for improvement of
road connectivity in the District (PMGSY and
other road sector schemes), provision of
employment to the poor and vulnerable sections
of society. The audit covered the developmental
initiatives and the associated expenditure in the
district and focused on the role and
responsibilities of the District Administration in
providing essential public services and improving
the general standard of living of the people of the
district and the extent of community
participation in programme implementation and
monitoring. The initiatives of the State
Government in facilitating the processing of
public requests for various utilities and services
by electronic means through the single window
‘Sugam' centres was also reviewed along with
the status of provision of basic civic amenities by
the municipal authorities.

Audit was based on a scrutiny of records in the
State Planning Department, the office of the DC,
DRDA, selected Blocks, GPs, Public Works,
Education, I&PH, Health, Welfare Departments,
Municipal Committee/ Nagar Panchayats and
Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board
(HPSEB).

2.2 Audit Objectives

The objectives of audit were to assess:

e the adequacy and effectiveness of the
annual planning process for different
programmes;

e [116 overall impact and effectiveness of the
developmental programmes in terms of
achievement of targeted outputs and
outcomes and their economical and
efficient execution;

e the adequacy and effectiveness of
procedures for receipt, utilisation and
accounting of funds;

e the adequacy and effectiveness of the
processes for monitoring, reporting and
evaluation; and

e verification of the reported expenditure on
major development programmes (Central
and State) with reference to detailed
Statements of Expenditure and original
vouchers at lower level in a hierarchical
manner (State to district, district to block

and block to GP).
2.3 Audit Criteria

The audit applied the following criteria in
assessing the implementation of various
developmental programmes/schemes:

>>. Annual Action Plans

> Guidelines of the concerned programmes/
schemes

> Prescribed monitoring mechanism



Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March 2011 Hi!

2.4 Audit Methodology

Discussions were held with the Deputy
Commissioner (DC), and representatives of all
other Departments in Mandi district, in an entry
conference in May 2010.

Five’ out of 10 Blocks were selected for detailed
scrutiny on the basis of Simple Random Sampling
Without Replacement (SRSWOR) method.
Further, 20 per cent of the Gram Panchayats
(GPs) in these Blocks and 20 per cent of villages in
these GPs were also selected for extensive audit
based on SRSWOR method.

Besides, the records of the DC, District Project
Officer, Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, Chief Engineers
of Public Works (PW) and Irrigation and Public
Health (\&PH) Departments, District Health
Mission, District Information Centre, District

Welfare Officer, Project Officer Integrated Child
Development services, two Municipal
Committees (Mandi and Sundernagar), three
Nagar Panchayats (Jogindernagar, Rewalsar and
Sarkaghat) and HPSEB were also scrutinised.

Audit findings were discussed with the Deputy
Commissioner and the Departmental
functionaries in the exit conference held on
4 October 2011 and their views have been
incorporated in the Report at appropriate places.

25 Acknowledgement

The Office of the Accountant General (Audit)
Himachal Pradesh, acknowledges the
co-operation and assistance extended by DC and
district heads of the concerned departments, the
concerned BDOs and Gram Panchayat Pradhans
during the course of Audit.

Chauntra, Drang at Padhar, Gohar, Karsog and Sundernagar.


3.1

District Planning Committee

Government of India envisages an inclusive and
participative planning process for the
development of districts. The 747 Amendment to
the Constitution mandated the establishment of
a District Planning Committee (DPC) for
consolidating the plans prepared by the
Panchayats and municipalities in the district into
an integrated District Plan. All the three tiers of
local administration viz., DRDA, Blocks and GPs
were to prepare an Annual Action Plan (AAP) at
the beginning of each financial year equivalent in
value of about 125 per cent of their share of
funds allocated in the preceding year and no
work was to be taken up unless it formed part of
the AAP.

3.2 Policy and Planning

The District Planning, Development and Twenty
Point Programme Review Committee (DPDC) for
district Mandi was constituted in August 2003
with the Minister of the district as the Chairman
and the MPs, MLAs, Chairperson Zila Parishad,
Ex-MLAs and other persons of different sections
of society as non-official members. The DC and
other district level heads of offices and the SEs of
PWD/IPH/HPSEB and Conservator of Forests of
the district were the official members. The DPDC
was to function as the Policy and Planning
Council at the district level and oversee the
implementation of the developmental
programmes to be executed. It was to accord
approval for the shelf of schemes/projects to be
executed in the district and give directions to the
administrative and technical personnel. It wasto

meet thrice a year for this purpose and
review/monitor the progress of implementation
of the schemes.

3.3 Perspective and Annual Plans

Audit scrutiny revealed that the DPDC had not
prepared any Perspective Plan or Annual Action
Plans. The local levels of administration like the
Blocks and GPs were not involved in providing
any inputs to the planning process. Schemes
were sanctioned on an adhoc basis by the DC
based on the proposals submitted by the
MPs/MLAs/Other individuals as per the
perceived benefit to the local populace. During
2006-11 against the required 15 meetings, the
DPDC held only six meetings. In fact, there was
no integrated District Plan.

In the absence of perspective plans and
integrated annual action plans for the
development of the district with inputs from
Blocks and GPs, gaps in various developmental
schemes/ programmes remained unidentified
with the result that the felt needs of the weaker
sections of the society and the disparities
between various regions and communities
within the district could not be addressed.

Recommendation



Funds are allocated to the district through the
State budget for various developmental activities.
In addition, funds are directly released to the
DRDA and implementing agencies for various

socio-economic programmes by the State and
Gol. The DRDA releases the funds to the Blocks
and other executing agencies based on the
approved allocation for the individual schemes.

4.1 Gaps in the Funds flow and Expenditure incurred

The total flow of funds to the District during
2006-11 and expenditure incurred was not
available either with the Addl. Deputy
Commissioner who is the Chief Planning Officer or
with the District Planning Officer and other district

authorities like DRDA. However, information on
funds received and reported expenditure in
respect of certain significant departments and
programmes as collected by Audit from various
departments is detailed below:

Table 1: Position of funds received and expenditure incurred in

respect of certain key programmes
(Zin crore)

{A) Social Services

National AIDS Control Programme (NACP)

Higher Education

Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC)

Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS)

Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) and State
budget

11 | Vikas Mein Jan Sahyog (VMJS) 16.96 14.85

13 Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme 16.00 15.21

(MPLADS)

Sampoorna Grameen Rozgar Yojana (SGRY)

Calamity Relief Fund (CRF)

18 Rajiv Gandhi Gramin Vidyutikaran Yojna (RGGVY)

| 20 | Municipal Councils and Nagar Panchayats

Source: Departmental figures
Note: ‘Figures are for the year 2008-11.
“Figures are for the year 2005-07.
Figures are for the year 2007-11.



Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March 2011 FT

Audit analysis revealed that there was a gap
between the funds received and expenditure
incurred as funds received from Gol and State
Government are parked in different banks
accounts (scheme-wise) without being utilised
within the prescribed timeframe, as works could
not progress due to non-availability of clearances
for utilising forest land and other land disputes
(as discussed in succeeding chapters).

4.2 Maintenance of Records

Scrutiny of records of the DC, DRDA and the test
checked blocks and GPs revealed that the funds
are shown as expended as soon as these are
released to the next level i.e., the DRDA shows
utilisation of funds as soon as these are released
to the Blocks and the Blocks in turn show
utilisation on release to the GPs without ensuring
the actual utilisation of funds.

4.3 Internal Controls

The BDO holds monthly meetings to apprise the
concerned Panchayat Secretaries about the
works sanctioned and releases the first
installment on the basis of resolution passed by
the concerned GP for preliminary work.
However, Audit scrutiny revealed that no control
was exercised by the BDOs to see that the

resolutions from GPs are received in time and
works were executed in a timely manner. As a
result, large amount of funds remained
unutilised for long periods as discussed in the
succeeding paragraphs.

internal checks and controls of receipt,
utilisation and accounting of developmental

funds, there were huge sums lying unutilised
and there was also a big gap between the funds
released and funds reported as utilised.

Recommendations



Audit reviewed implementation of the following
flagship programmes in the Social sector:

* National Rural Health Mission (NRHM);
* 531४9 Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA);

* — Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme
(ARWSP/NRDWP);

* Integrated Child Development Services;
* — Old Age Pension Scheme; and
* Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC).

It was revealed that there is a need to provide
adequate and skilled manpower in these sectors
for optimal utilisation of the infrastructure and to
achieve the intended objective of providing
quality health care, education, water and basic
amenities to the people of the district.

5.1. Health

The Chief Medical Officer (CMO) Mandi,
functioning under the State Health and Family
Welfare Department, is responsible for providing
health care services to the people through a
network of six’ hospitals. The health care
services in the rural areas are delivered through
11 Community Health Centres (CHCs),
61 Primary Health Centres (PHCs) and 311
Sub-Centres (SCs) under the overall control of
CMOat District level.

5.1.1 Planning

As a first step towards providing accessible,
affordable and equitable health care under
NRHM, a household and facility survey was to be
carried out to identify the gaps in health care
facilities in rural areas. Audit scrutiny revealed
that the process of assessing the health care

requirements and gaps in infrastructure,
equipment, manpower in the district remained
to be completed though the mission period was
to end on 31 March 2012.

The District Health Society (DHS) was required to
prepare a perspective plan for the entire mission
period and Annual plans for the district with
inputs from the lower tiers of the Government.
Audit analysis revealed that DHS was constituted
only recently on 12 October 2010 and as such the
perspective plan and Annual Plans had not been
prepared as of May 2011.

The Mission activities were to be converged with
other departmental programmes and working of
non governmental stakeholders, Village Health
and Sanitation Committees (VHSCs) and Rogi
Kalyan Samitis (RKSs). However, Audit scrutiny
revealed that the CMO did not interact with or
obtained inputs from the concerned
departmental functionaries relating to drinking
water, sanitation and hygiene, nutrition, etc.,
leading to disconcerted efforts by various
agencies towards the same goal. Further,
community participation in planning,
implementation and monitoring of the
programme was not ensured. Scrutiny of
records revealed that no VHSC had been formed
in the district. The RKSs were stated to have
been formed in all the CHCs and 59 PHCs (out of
61) in the district but in one PHC (Chattri), RKS
formed yet to be made functional as of
May 2011.

> Financial Position

Following is the year wise position of funds
received and expenditure incurred thereagainst
under NRHM during 2006-11 in the district:

Jogindernagar, Karsog, Sandhole, Sarkaghat, Sundernagar and Zonal Hospital Mandi.



Table 2: Funds available under NRHM against all components and expenditure incurred thereagainst
during 2006-11
(@ in crore)

200 0 sons) | 1506

57080 27060)

5,08 (86)

0.84 (14)

Source: Departmental figures; figures in parenthesis indicate percentage

It is evident from the above table that the respectively. Against this, the district had

utilisation of NRHM funds ranged between
35 per cent and 88 per cent during 2006-11. On
this being pointed out, the CMO stated
(May 2011) that non-utilisation of funds was due

11 CHCs, 61 PHCs and 311 SCs. While PHCs were
opened in excess of norms, the number of other
health centres was less than the prescribed
norms.

to shortage of Medical and technical staff. Looe दि
Basic minimum infrastructure

5.1.2 Infrastructure

> — Status of infrastructure at health centres
According to Gol guidelines there should be one
CHC for every 80,000 population, one PHC for
population over 20,000 and one SC for
population over 3,000. In terms of these norms,
the requirement of CHCs, PHCs and SCs for
Mandi district worked out to 12, 49 and 326

Many of the health centres lacked the basic
minimum infrastructure and health care services
required to be provided in the health centres in
the district which can be seen from the details
given below:

Table 3: Non-availability of infrastructure and basic health care facilities in health centres

ec ३३ 8

Infrastructure facil
district

Residential facilities for staff 2:
Provision for water supply ee > ee:
Facility for medical waste disposal ee 09 ऋ ्उछऊउ8/ #|४*



Chapter 5: Social Services

Blood storage facility at health centres 11 61 NA
New born care 65. 87 ४
24 x7 deliveries 3 | 49 | NA
In patient services 2 37 NA
X-rays 1 55 NA
[Ultrasound —(isi‘“‘s‘“‘“‘“‘ él ऋ#४9४# 6 ४&+ख
ECG 3 55 NA
Obstetric care [337 NA
Emergency services (24 hours) | 2 | | 49 | NA
Family Planning(Tubectomy and Vasectomy) 3 | 49 | NA
Intra-natal examination of gynecological conditions 3 11 NA
Pediatrics ee 49 NA

Source: Figures supplied by the CMO Mandi
NA: Notapplicable.

Photograph: 1

Non-availability of stretcher and staff to carry
the patient to ward at Zonal Hospital, Mandi
(June 2010)

Photograph: 2

Shortage of man power resulting in long queue
outside the lab testing centre at Zonal Hospital,
Mandi (June 2010)

Photograph: 3

Photograph: 4

Patient accommodated in corridor at CHC,
Janjehli (June 2010)

४ eee bility of waiting room at CHC, Janjehli

(June 2010)



Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March 2011 FT

Photograph: 5

Condition of Operation Theatre at CHC, Kotli
(June 2010)

Photograph: 6

Stagnation of rain water in IPD of CHC, Janjehli
(June 2010)

Photograph: 7

Dumping of medicines on floor at CHC, Kotli
(June 2010)

Photograph: 8

Open pit for burning medical waste at PHC,
Nanawan (June 2010)

In the absence of proper infrastructure and
adequate health care services at health centres,
the basic facilities could not be provided to the
rural population,

> First Referral Units

The CMO received %2.80 crore between
December 2005 and March 2009 for upgrading
four’ CHCs and 018९ hospitals to First Referral
Units (FRUs) at the rate of %40 lakh per FRU,
without specifying any time frame for

> Bagsaid, Baldwara, Karsog and Padhar.

Jogindernagar, Mandi (Zonal Hospital) and Sarkaghat.

completion of upgradation of work. The CMO
spent %1.89 crore on procurement of equipment
and released %46.65 lakh as an advance to the
Public Works Department for development of
infrastructure. Besides, an amount of %44.11
lakh was also paid to three BMOs and two Senior
Medical Officers for civil works (¥29.81 lakh) and
purchase of Hospital furniture (%14.30 lakh).
However, none of the seven units were upgraded
to FRU as of May 2011 due to non posting of
specialist and other supporting staff.



CMO replied to audit (May 2011) that the FRUs
could not be made functional due to non posting
of Specialisits by the State Government and lack
of proper infrastructure. Thus, the Department

failed to provide appropriate health
infrastructure to ensure timely availability of
referral services in these institutions despite
availability of funds.

> Availability of beds

The status with regard to the availability of beds in test checked CHCs/PHCs were as given below:

Table 4: Details of availability of beds in test checked CHCs/PHCs

PHC Thunag

Source: Figures supplied by the Department
NA: Not Available.

5.1.3 Manpower Resources

NRHM aimed at providing adequate skilled
manpower at all the health centres as per the
norms of Indian Public Health Standard (IPHS).

Scrutiny of three CHCs, six PHCs and 12 SCs
selected for test check revealed that none of
these centres was staffed adequately as per the
IPHS norms, as detailed below:

Table 5: Availability of manpower as per IPHS norm at selected health centres physically verified

Volunteer Workers 12

|... - | 12 (100)

Source: Departmental figures



Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March 2011 Hi!

Audit analysis further revealed the shortage of
the key functionaries manifested in the
following ways:

> Against the required strength of 21 staff
nurses, there were only 11 in the three
CHCs test checked and in one test checked
PHC (Nanawan), staff nurse was not posted.

> Two (Kataula and Nanawan), out of the six
PHCs test checked were functioning with
one Medical Officer as against required
strength of two. One PHC (Nanawan) out
of six test checked PHCs, did not have any
Laboratory technician.

> Three’, out of 12 SCs test checked were
functioning without male health worker.
There was no voluntary worker in any of the
12 test checked SCs.

> Besides above, in five’ PHCs of the district,
Medical Officers were not posted and 19
PHCs of the district were running without
Pharmacist. Twenty nine SCs of the district
were not functioning due to non-posting of
male and female health workers.

> Two PHCs (Kotsnore and Thalot) though
opened between July and October 2007
were not functioning as no infrastructure
was created.

Thus, due to non-availability of adequate
number of skilled manpower, the purpose of
setting up the health centres was not achieved
in the district. Moreover, due to the
non availability/shortage of Medical staff
and infrastructure facilities as detailed
above, the bed occupancy in the test checked
CHCs was quite low and ranged between 11
and 69 per cent, while it was zero to 11 per cent
inthe PHCs.

Dharwar Thach, Somnachan and Sarkidhar.
Jhungi, Dhalwan, Fatehpur, Draman and Balh Tikkar.

5.1.4 Achievement against Performance
Indicators

Performance indicators qualifying the targets for
reducing infant mortality rate (IMR), maternal
mortality rate (MMR), total fertility rate (TFR),
reducing morbidity and mortality rate and
increasing cure rate of different endemic
diseases are generally prescribed by the State
Government.

> Reproductive and Child Health Care (RCH)

To achieve the NRHM goal of reducing the infant
mortality rate (IMR) and total fertility rate (TFR),
the State Government prescribed various health
indicators to be achieved by 2008. As per the
details provided by the State Government, all the
prescribed targets were achieved.

However, it was noticed in audit that separate
targets/indicators for the District were not
prescribed despite the Mission requirement to
do so. On being pointed out in audit, the CMO
stated (May 2011) that indicators were not
prescribed for the District and were drawn for
the State as a whole. Therefore, in the absence of
such data the progress of achievement of the
crucial health indicators for the district could not
be ascertained and the authenticity of the data
reported at the State level could also not be
verified.

> Non-deployment of trained female
community health workers

One of the strategies envisaged by the Mission
for achievement of the goal of reduction in IMR,
MMR and TFR is the appointment of a trained
female community health worker called
Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA). The
ASHA is to be appointed for every thousand
population and act as an interface between the


community and the health care system. The
State Government decided to employ one ASHA
for every 800 people. For selection and training
of 1,123 ASHAs in the district, 2.37 lakh was
sanctioned in October 2007. The Department,
however, selected only 112 ASHAs and spent
%0.71 lakh on the selection process but neither
any training was imparted nor were they
deployed as of May 2011 rendering the entire
effort and exercise futile. Unspent amount of
२1.66 lakh was transferred to flexible pool for
family planning programme.

The CMO stated (May 2011) that the
appointment of ASHAs is sub-judice. The fact
remains that desired activity of interface
between community and health care system still

remains to be undertaken in the district.
5.1.5 JananiSuraksha Yojana

One of the important components of

Reproductive and Child Health (RCH) programme
is the Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY), to encourage
pregnant women to have an_ institutional
delivery rather than domiciliary delivery in order
to reduce maternal and neo-natal mortality.
Under this programme, all the pregnant women
belonging to the SC, ST and BPL categories above
19 years of age, upto two live births are entitled
to %700 for institutional delivery.

Besides, under the modified parameters of JSY,
cash benefit of $500 per live birth would also be
available to all pregnant women of BPL category
on registration for Antenatal Care with
ASHA/ANM/PHC.

The details of institutional and domiciliary
deliveries in respect of which cash assistance
provided by the CMO in Zonal Hospital Mandi
during 2006-11 are given below:

Table 6: Position of institutional and domiciliary deliveries

2006-07

The record was not maintained due to non-availability of prescribed proforma

2008-09 6 1988

2010-11 1911 1747

3658 22.11

Source: Figures supplied by the CMO

As can be seen from the above table there was
increase in the number of institutional deliveries
over the period in respect of above categories of
beneficiaries. Audit scrutiny, however, revealed
that the categories of beneficiaries viz.,

SC/ST/BPL were not recorded in the Maternal
and Child Health (MCH) registers. Consequently,
it could not be ascertained whether cash
assistance was indeed provided to the eligible
beneficiaries.



Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March 2011 Hi!

The overall status of achievement with regard to institutional deliveries in the district and in three

sampled units’ is given below:

Table 7: Position of institutional delivery

in the district and three sampled CHCs

(In numbers)

Mandi District 2006-07 20,916 7,633
2007-08 18,997 7,968 42
2008-09 20,042 9,805 49
2009-10 19,372 6104 re
2010-11 17,968 7,285 41

Three Sampled CHCs 2006-07 6,694 | 6530 | oid
2007-08 6,692 681 10
2008-09 6350 480 Dey
2009-10 6,272 604 10
2010-11 / 5,900 | 1,070 es ee

Source: Figures supplied by the CMO for district as a whole and three test-checked CHCs

The above table shows that, the percentage of
pregnant women opting for institutional
delivery facilities in district as well as in the test
checked health centres was far behind the goal
of 65 per cent that was to be achieved by
March 2010 under NRHM. Clearly, this was due
to the inadequate facilities in the health centres
in the sampled units as brought out in Table 3.
On this being pointed out, the CMO attributed
(May 2011) the shortfall in achievements to
shortage of manpower and lack of
infrastructure. The reply does not explain as to
why efforts to create proper infrastructure and
to provide adequate staff in the health centres
could not be made by the authorities.

> Antenatal care

Scrutiny revealed that the percentage of
pregnant women in the District who had
received three antenatal check ups (ANCs)
during 2006-11 ranged between 91 and
99 per cent as of May 2011 as against the State
level achievement of 77 percent.

In the records of CMO, the shortfall of Iron Folic
Acid (IFA) was 19 to 40 per cent and it was zero to

CHCs Kotli, Janjheli and Ratti.

11 per cent in respect of Tetanus Toxoid (TT) in
the District. However, in three out of 11 test
checked blocks, the shortfall was between two
to 28 per cent for IFA and four to seven per cent
forTT.

5.1.6 Immunisation Programme

During 2006-11 the overall achievement in the
District in immunisation of children in the age
group of upto one year with respect to Bacillus
Calmette and Guerin (BCG), was 100 per cent
except during 2008-09 where shortfall was
10 per cent due to manpower shortage.
However, the shortfall ranged between eight
and 12 per cent for Diphtheria Pertussis Tetanus
(DPT) and Oral Polio Vaccine (OPV). The shortfall
in achievement of targets in the secondary
immunisation of children ranged between nine
and 19 percent for DT (5 years age group), one
and 34 percent for TT (10 years age group) and
upto 22 per cent for TT (16 years age group)
during 2006-11. In the test checked units, the
achievement of fully immunised children was
between 79 and 100 percent.



Data shows that the prevalence of vaccine
preventable diseases was negligible in the
District as no case of infant and child diseases like
neonatal tetanus, diphtheria, and whooping
cough was detected in the district during
2006-11. However, 611 cases of measles were
detected during 2006-11. No new case of Polio
was detected during 2006-11 in the district. The
coverage of targeted children under pulse polio
programme in the district ranged between
97 and 100 percent.

Scrutiny revealed that in eight® (13 per cent) PHCs
in the district, cold chain facilities were not
provided due to non-availability of space. CMO
stated (May 2011) that vaccination was carried
outin nearby PHCs.

However, to support immunisation programme,
cold chain maintenance was to be ensured in all
the CHCs and PHCs.

5.1.7. National Programme for Control of
Blindness (NPCB)

The NPCB aimed at reducing the prevalence of
blindness to 0.8 per cent by 2007 through
increased cataract surgery, eye screening of
school children, collection of donated eyes,
creation of donation centres, eye bank,
strengthening of infrastructure, etc.

During 2006-11 against the target of 16,500
cataract surgeries and screening of 85,746 school
children, achievement was 61 per cent in respect
of cataract surgeries and 71 per cent for
screening of school children.

On being pointed out in audit, the CMO stated
(May 2011) that the shortfall in achievement of
targets was due to non-availability of skilled
doctors. The facility for eye donation had not
been created in any of the hospitals in the
district.

> National Vector Borne Disease Control
Programme (NVBDCP)

The NVBDCP aims at control of vector borne

Chapter 5: Social Services

diseases by reducing mortality and morbidity
due to malaria, filaria, kala azar, dengue,
chikungunia and japanese encephalitis in
endemic areas through close surveillance,
controlling of mosquitoes through indoor
residual spray of larvicides, insecticides and
improved diagnostic and treatment facilities at
health centres. The programme was aimed at
achieving Annual Blood Examination Rate (ABER)
of 10 per cent of the targeted population under
surveillance by 2007-08 and Annual Parasitic
Incidence (API) of less than 0.5 per thousand
throughout the country by that date.

The percentage of ABER in the district ranged
between 7.4 (2008-09) and 8.7 (2010-11).

The API rate per thousand had decreased from
0.02 (2008-09) to 0.01 in 2010-11.

5.1.8 National Leprosy Eradication
Programme (NLEP)

The NLEP aimed at eliminating leprosy by the end
of Eleventh Plan and to ensure that the leprosy
prevalence rate is less than one per ten
thousand. The total number of leprosy patients
undergoing treatment in the district during
2006-07, 2007-08, 2008-09, 2009-10 and
2010-11 were 15, 18, 18, 14 and 16 respectively
with the incidence of 15, 17, 16, 14 and 15 new
cases in the corresponding period. The rate of
prevalence of leprosy in the District during
2006-07, 2007-08, 2008-09, 2009-10 and
2010-11 was lower at 0.18, 0.18, 0.16, 0.13 and
0.15 per 10,000 respectively against 0.28, 0.30,
0.25, 0.21 and 0.23 per 10,000 respectively
during these years at the State level.

5.1.9 National
(NACP)

Aids Control Programme

The Programme was launched by the Gol in
September 1992 with the assistance of World
Bank and has been extended upto the year 2012.
The main objectives of the programme are to:

* — reduce the spread of HIV infection in the
country; and

Bhambla, Chamiar, Khuhan, Dharanda, Pandole, Sajaoo Piplu, Sudhar and Chuku.


Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March 2011 Hi!

* strengthen the capacity to respond to
HIV/AIDS onalong term basis.

To achieve the above objectives, funds were to
be utilised on different components/activities of
the programme like priority intervention for the
general community, low cost AIDS
care/STI/HIV/AIDS sentinel surveillance,
training, etc.

> — Utilisation of funds

Out of allocated funds of %81.01 lakh during
2006-11, $80.28 lakh (99 per cent) was utilised by
the District AIDS Programme Officer (DAPO).

As per guidelines of National AIDS Control
Programme (NACP), one Voluntary Blood Testing
Centre (VBTC) was to be established in each
district. The State Government had established
one VBTC (now Integrated Counselling and
Testing Centre) in each district of the State,
including Mandi. Scrutiny revealed that the first
HIV positive case was detected in Mandi district
in April 2002. Out of 31,197 persons screened up
to March 2011 in the district, 263 persons were
found HIV positive. These included 102 fully
blown AIDS cases. The rate of sero positivity
achieved in the State as of March 2011 was
0.1 per cent and in Mandi district, it was below
0.36 per cent which is stated to be national sero
positivity. The DAPO stated (May 2011) that the
increase in cases was due to awareness and more
testing facilities whereby such cases could be
detected in the district.

> Family Health Awareness Camps

To increase awareness about HIV/AIDS and
sexually transmitted diseases (STD) among the
community and to provide facilities for early
diagnosis and treatment of the targeted
population falling in the age group of 15-49
years, the Gol decided (November 1999) to
organise Family Health Awareness Camps
(FHACs) in all the States in a phased manner.
Intensive propaganda about STD epidemic was
to be carried out through Information, Education
and Communication (IEC) methodology.

However, no family health awareness camps
were held in the district during 2006-11 due to
non-receipt of budget for this purpose. Thus,
due to financial constraints IEC activities for
creating awareness among the community
about HIV/AIDS were severely affected.

> Blood Safety

Under the blood safety component, the existing
blood banks are to be modernised and new
blood banks are to be opened. Blood
component separation facility centres and skilled
manpower are also to be made available. There
is one blood bank in the district but blood
separation facility had not yet been
operationalised for want of license and
availability of skilled manpower.

In the absence of proper planning involving
identification of gaps in the healthcare
infrastructure and non-availability of stipulated
facilities and skilled manpower in the health
institutions, the aim of providing accessible and
affordable healthcare to people remains to be
achieved in the District.

Recommendations



5.2. Education

Education is one of the most important
indicators of social progress of anation. Both the
State and the Central Governments have been
spending enormous amounts on increasing the
enrolment and retention of children in schools,
especially in the primary and elementary

segments. Focus is also on an inclusive progress,
with special attention to girls, SC/ST
communities, other vulnerable sections of the
society and remote and backward areas. The
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) is one of the flagship
programmes of the Government for
universalisation of primary education.

The year-wise position of funds received and
expenditure incurred under SSA during 2006-11
is given in the table below:

Table 8: Position of funds received and expenditure incurred under SSA during 2006-11

(% in crore)

ee

Source: Figures supplied by the DPO, SSA

The above table shows that during 2006-11 out
of available funds, ~108.94 crore was utilised
leaving a balance of %7.99 crore as of
March 2011.

5.2.1 Elementary Education
> Enrolment

A review of the status of education in the district,
especially in the context of implementation of

SSA, revealed that the number of primary and
upper primary schools (upto standard VIII)
increased but enrolment of children in the
targeted age group of 6-14 years in these schools
decreased during 2006-11, as can be seen from
the following chart:



Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March 2011 Hi!

Chart 2: Chart showing position of number of Schools and Children enrolled

140000 |

120000 108256

1900000

80000

60000

40000

20000
| aw |

2s

2006-07 2010-11

@ Number of Schools

@ Number of children enrolled

Source: Departmental figures

Enrolment of students in 10’ test-checked
primary and upper primary schools has
decreased to 22 per cent during 2010-11 as
compared to 2006-07 due to opening of
private schools.

The Deputy Director of Elementary Education
(DDEE) attributed (April 2011) this decrease
mainly to migration of students to the private
institutions/schools.

In the absence of any enrolment data of private
schools, the position of increase in enrolment in
the private schools and consequent effect of
decrease in enrolment in Government schools
could not be correlated in audit.

> Dropout

Deputy Director Elementary Education had not
monitored the dropout level in the elementary

* Dharampur-iland Sundernagar.

schools of the district as a whole as data relating
to drop outs was not kept for the period 2006-11.
However, audit scrutiny revealed that in two”
out of four test-checked Block Elementary
Education Officers (BEEOs), the number of
dropout students ranged between four and
11 per cent during 2006-11 due to migration of
parents.

In ten test-checked Primary and Upper Primary
schools, the number of dropout students ranged
between one and 11 percent during 2006-11.

> Infrastructure

The status of infrastructure in primary schools in
the district as on 1 April 2006 and 31 March 2011
is given in charts 3 and 4:

6755 8971, Bari, Chauntra-, Dherampur, Jai Devi and GMSs Bhojpur, Bharouri, Bhariyara, Fagwao and Tikri Mushehra.


Chart 3: Chart showing position of Primary Schools as on 1 April 2006

No. of schools without

accommodation

No. of schools having one room

No. of schools having two

rooms

No. of schools with two rooms
and Verandas

Source: Departmental figures

No. of total schools

Chart 4: Chart showing position of Primary Schools as of 31 March 2011

Source: Departmental figures

The charts above indicate an improvement in the
provision of infrastructure.

The construction of rooms in 693 schools were
sanctioned during 2009-11 for %11.97 crore
against which the Director Elementary Education
released an amount of %8.76 crore to the
respective School Management Committees
(SMCs) in June 2010 through bank drafts for the
construction of 395 rooms in the school buildings
in the district but detail regarding status of works
was not available with the office. The balance

No. of schools without
accommodation

No. of schools having one
room

No. of schools having two
rooms

No. of schools with two
rooms and Verandas

No. of total schools

funds of %3.21 crore were not released further to
the institutions concerned for taking up the
construction of class rooms and remained
unutilised in a saving bank account as of
March 2011.

Out of the total number of 8,221 class rooms of
primary (5,561 class rooms) and upper primary
(2,660 class rooms) schools in the district as of
March 2011 eight per cent required major
repairs as depicted in chart 5:



Chart 5: Chart depicting the status of classrooms in the district as on 31 March 2011

@ Number of class rooms

in good conditions

@ Number of class rooms:

requiring minor repairs

@ Number of class rooms

requiring major repairs

Source: Departmental figures

It was noticed that during 2006-07 and 2008-09,
no funds were provided for repair works, though
under SSA, School Management Grant (SMG) at
the rate of %5,000 for a school upto three class
rooms and %10,000 for more than three class
rooms per annum for primary and upper primary
schools was permissible for carrying out repair
works. The Director of Elementary Education
intimated (September 2011) that funds

amounting to %37.71 lakh were directly provided
by the Deputy Commissioner, Mandi to schools
during 2010-11. However, status of repair works
was not furnished to audit.

> BasicAmenities

A majority of schools at the elementary level did
not have the basic minimum amenities as
detailed below:

Category Total schools in Separate girls Drinking Access Jayground
district toilets water ramp

> Availability of teachers

As against the norm of two teachers per primary
school and one teacher for every class in upper
primary school (Class-VI to VIII) there were a

number of schools-both primary and upper
primary, which did not comply with this norm as
canbe seen from the table 9:



Table 9: Primary and Upper Primary schools without minimum number of teachers

a ०9
385 ७ 0० 75 28 |

Source: Figures provided by the Department

The above details show availability of poor
infrastructure facilities/amenities and staff
position in the schools which indicated failure of
the district authority in ensuring appropriate
environment for teaching and learning besides
improvement of quality of education at the
desired level. The DDEE stated (April 2011) that
in the schools where regular teachers have not
been posted, teachers were deployed from
nearby schools by rotation.

5.2.2 Higher Education

Higher education is being imparted in the district

through a network of 121 Government High
Schools (GHS), 206 Government Senior
Secondary Schools (GSSS), one Post Graduate
Degree College, seven Degree Colleges and one
Sanskrit College. The Deputy Director, Higher
Education (DDHE) is the Controlling Officer at the
district level for implementation of the schemes
for educational development.

The year wise and class-wise detail of enrolment
of students in the district during 2006-11 is
asunder:

Table 10: Details of enrolment of students in the district during 2006-11

{In numbers)

2006-07 15,776 15,752 14,558 | 8,253 | 54,339

2008-09

2010-11

Source: Figures supplied by the DDHE

Enrolment in class X has declined in the district
and came down from 15,752 in 2006-07 to
15,570 in 2010-11 whereas enrolment in classes
IX, Xl and XII increased during 2010-11 as
compared to 2006-07. The DDHE stated
(April 2011) that enrolment in class X decreased
due to shifting of students to private schools.

> Planning

An amount of %57.83 crore was allotted to the
Public Works Department (PWD) for
construction of 161 school buildings in the
district during 2006-11 of which 22 school
buildings were completed by incurring an
expenditure of %2.60 crore as of March 2011.
The progress of remaining 139 school buildings
was not available with the DDHE.



Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March 2011 Hi!

The DDHE stated (April 2011) that the details of
expenditure was furnished by the PWD through
UCs/CCs in respect of completed works.

As such, DDHE did not monitor the status of
construction of these school buildings to ensure
timely completion of works.

> — Infrastructure and Amenities

As of March 2011, out of 327 High Schools and
Senior Secondary Schools in the district, 19
schools did not have pucca buildings and 14
schools did not have separate toilets for boys and
girls. Besides, 237 schools did not have library
facilities, 174 schools had no separate labs for
science subjects and 201 schools were not
provided furniture for the students.

In ten test-checked GHSs and GSSSs, four schools
were without drinking water facility, two schools
were without spacious playground, five schools
having no library, four schools were not having
science laboratories and six schools had no
furniture for students as of March 2011.

Government Degree College, Dharampur has no
land and building of its own and was being run in
a rented building since April 2007. During
2006-10 the Education Department had

deposited %five crore with HPPWD Division,
Dharampur for the construction of college
building at Dharampur against which an
expenditure of %0.42 lakh was incurred and the
workwasstillin progress as of March 2011.

The Commissioner-cum-Principal Secretary
(Tribal Development) to the Government of
Himachal Pradesh deposited %1.22 crore with
Executive Engineer (EE) HPPWD, Sundernagar
between August 2008 and April 2010 for the
construction of Scheduled Tribe Girls Hostel at
Government Sanskrit College, Sundernagar. As
per information supplied by the EE, an
expenditure of ¥34.64 lakh has been incurred as
of March 2011 and the work is in progress. Thus,
due to non-completion of work, the beneficiaries
were deprived of the intended benefits.

5.2.3 Quality of Education

Quality education can be imparted only when
there is an adequate number of teachers
available in schools/colleges and the quality of
teaching is reflected in the level of improvement
evident from the board results of classes X and XII.

> Availability of Teachers

The category wise position of teachers in the
district as of March 2011 was as under.

Chart 6: Chart showing category wise position of teachers in district

३000
2500 2490
2201
2000 827 ea7e|
1500 l= Sanctioned Strength
1000 761 I In Position
346
500
206 197121 gg
° se : 3 ; f
& oo ea ec SF फी

Source: Departmental figures
Note: TGT: Trained Graduate Teachers.

C&VTs: Classical and Vernacular Teachers (Art and Craft Teachers, Language Teachers and Physical

Education Teachers).
Others: Ministerial Staff.


In 127 out of 12 test-checked institutions there
was a shortage of three to 32 posts in different
categories (Lecturer: 23; HM: 3; C&V: 5 and
Others: 32) as of March 2011.

> Board results

The data relating to overall pass percentage of
students in different examinations of the Board
of School Education had not been maintained by

Chapter 5: Social Services

the DDHE at the district level. As such, the
quality improvement in educational level of the
students and impact of the schemes could not be
vouchsafed in audit.

In fifteen test-checked schools, the pass
percentage in respect of classes X to XII during
2006-11 is depicted as below:

Table 11: Pass percentage of test-checked schools in respect of classes X to XII

x 74 71 79 ee 83

(In percentage)

जा फ्रा 76 |. 82 |

|. 80 | 88 73

Xl 90 88

87 96 | 70

Source: Departmental figures

From the above table it can be seen that as
compared to 2006-07 the pass percentage in
respect of Class X had decreased during 2007-08
and increased during the period 2008-10. The
pass percentage of XI class increased during the
period 2007-10 while it decreased substantially
during 2010-11. The class XII pass percentage
came down by 26 per cent during 2010-11
(70 per cent) as compared to 2009-10
(96 per cent). Reasons for decrease in pass
percentage were not available on record.

> — Inspections of Schools

The Himachal Pradesh Education Code provides
that the DE or any other Officer authorised by
him is responsible for the supervision and
inspection of schools. The inspection of schools
is to be done at least once a year.

officers authorised by him had not conducted

inspection of the schools in the district
during 2006-11.

Test check of records in the office of DDHE
revealed that in respect of GSSSs and GHSs
against the requirement of 420 inspections
during 2006-11, DDHE carried out only 238
inspections resulting in shortfall of 182
inspections (43 per cent). In the exit conference,
DDHE stated (October 2011) that due to large
number and tough geographical locations of the
schools and shortage of manpower, inspections
could not be carried out to the prescribed extent.

5.2.4 Scholarship schemes

>  Pre-matric scholarship scheme for OBC
students

The scheme was implemented in the district
from the year 2005-06. Budget provision and
expenditure incurred under this scholarship
programme during 2006-11 and number of
students identified and covered in the district
wasas following:

Government High Schools (GHSs): Badog, Bari Bari Gumana, Ghasnoo and Reur; Government Senior Secondary

Schools (65559): Dharampur, Mandi (Boys), Mandi (Girls), Baryana, Sundernagar (Boys), Government Degree
College Dharampur and Government Sanskrit College, Sundernagar.



Table 12: Budget provision and expenditure incurred under scholarship programme

vee |_|

ome

| sm] me] ae] 5४» |

owen | 2] ae] se] se] 2७39 | us | | on i | ० | ०७१ | =|

Source: Figures provided by DDHE and 00६६

The identification of eligible students and
requirement of funds for the purpose was not
done by the Deputy Director Higher Education for
the year 2007-08 and Deputy Director Elementary
Education for the year 2006-08 and 2009-10. The
Deputy Director Higher Education identified 545
eligible students during 2010-11 to whom
scholarship were to be provided but due to non-
receipt of budget under this programme, the
students were denied the scholarship. During
2010-11 the Deputy Director Elementary
Education identified 24,343 students of which
only 5,314 students were covered and 19,029
students were denied the benefit of the scheme.
Thus, the scheme was not managed effectively.

In GHSs Ghasnoo and Reur selected for test-
check, 18 out of 41 eligible students were denied
the benefit due to non-availability of funds.

> Integrated Rural Development Programme
(IRDP)

The scholarship under the programme is being
granted to students of Ist to XII standards of
families identified under IRDP from 1991-92
annually to enable them to complete their
studies. Budget provision and expenditure
incurred under this scholarship programme
during 2006-11 and the number of students
covered in the district is given below:

Table 13: Budget provision and expenditure incurred under scholarship programme

Source: Figures provided by the DDHE and DDEE



the benefits of scholarships to the eligible
students. Shortage of teachers in schools

During 2006-11 disbursement of scholarships to
3263 eligible students was not made due to
paucity of funds during 2006-07, 2008-09 and
2010-11 respectively and consequently the
students were deprived of the intended benefits.
Thus, the programme was not managed
effectively at district level.

In 22 test checked colleges and schools, 3197 out
of 3339 students of IRDP families were given the
benefit of IRDP scholarship and 142 students
were deprived of the intended benefit due to
non-receipt of budget allocation.

> Post-matric scholarship scheme (PMSS)

As per information made available by the DDHE,
out of 6046 eligible students in the district, 4394
were covered under the scheme by providing the
financial assistance of $59.57 lakh at the rate of
140 per month for SC/ST and %90 per month for
OBC leaving 1,652 eligible students as uncovered
due to non-receipt of funds during 2006-11.

In seven” out of 22 test-checked institutions, 118
students identified under the scheme were given
the benefit of PMSS.

> Kasturba Gandhi Balika Scholarship
Scheme

Kasturba Gandhi Balika Scholarship Scheme was
introduced by the Gol from 2008-09. Under this
scheme financial assistance was to be provided
to girls belonging to SC/ST category below 16
years of age and studying in IX and X classes. In
the district, 4986 girls were identified during
2008-11 but benefit could not be extended due
to non allocation of funds by the State
Government.

lacking basic infrastructure/facilities. The
scholarship schemes were not effectively

managed as a database of the actual students to
be covered and its periodical updation for
assessing the requirement of funds was not
being maintained which deprived and delayed

and Government Sanskrit College, Sundernagar.
EE

Chapter 5: Social Services

impacted the board results which was far from
satisfactory.

Recommendations

5.3

Integrated Child Development Service
(ICDs)

Integrated Child Development Service (ICDS) is a
centrally sponsored scheme and has been in
operation in the State since 1975-76. The
programme aimed at the holistic development of
children in the age group of 0-6 years, expectant
and nursing mothers belonging to most deprived
sections of the society. As per guidelines,
Anganwari Centres (AWCs), in hilly areas were to
be opened where population is 300 or more. The
district has 2,950 AWCs for population of 9.01
lakh and AWCs were opened as per prescribed
norms. Some of the aspect of the programmes
were covered in audit and discussed below:

> Nutrition programme

As per the ICDS guidelines supplementary
nutrition was required to be provided to the
children in the age group of 6 months to 6 years
of age and expectant and nursing mothers.

The table below indicates the status of

GSSSs Baryara, Dharampur, Mandi (Boys), Mandi (Girls), Sundernagar (Boys), Government Degree College, Dharampur


Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March 2011 FT

identification of beneficiaries and the extent of actual coverage under the programme during

2006-11.

Table 14: Status of identification of beneficiaries and actual coverage during 2006-11

(In numbers)

2006-07 16151 14970 1181 84151 70411 13740

(7 per cent) (16 per cent)
2007-08 17250 16331 919 88920 75139 13781

(5 per cent) (16 per cent)
2008-09 16872 15464 1408 87016 71420 15596

(8 per cent) (18 per cent)
2009-10 16834 15753 1081 86283 68022 18261

(6 per cent) (21 per cent)
2010-11 16239 15114 1125 88315 63932 24383

(7 per cent) (28 per cent)

Source: The data supplied by the District Programme Officer (ICDS) Mandi

Thus, five to eight per cent expectant and nursing
mothers and 16 to 28 per cent children were
denied the benefits of supplementary nutrition
during 2006-11.

On being pointed out in audit, the District
Programme Officer stated (April 2011) that due
to topography of rural areas, expectant nursing
mothers could not attend Anganwadi Centres
(AWCs). Besides, in some cases beneficiaries
due to good economic background were not
interested to take nutrition at AWCs. It was also
stated that there was no provision for home
delivery of nutrition to the age group of three to
six years. However, the specific reason for which
a large population of children below 6 years of
age could not be extended benefits of nutrition
programme under ICDS in the district need be
analysed by the authorities and remedial
measures taken for effective implementation of
the scheme.

> — Infrastructure and amenities

As of March 2011, 473 out of 2,950 AWCs in the
district, had Government accommodation and

2,477 AWCs were running in private premises
made available by the people free of cost.

The District Programme Officer stated
(April 2011) that due to non-availability of land
and insufficient funds, the basic amenities could
not be provided in the AWCs. Action by the
district authorities to overcome the situation of
insufficient funds and amenities should have
beeninitiated.

> Status of execution of Anganwadi
buildings

During 2006-11, €3.21 crore were sanctioned for
the construction of 128 Anganwadi buildings.
As per sanction order the stipulated period for
completion of works was one year reckonable
from the date of sanction. Of these, 67 buildings
works were required to be completed upto
March 2011 whereas 47 works were completed
at a cost of 1.01 crore. It was further observed
that execution of 14 works was not taken up due
to non-availability of land. Completion of 67
works was delayed and it ranged between one
and 48 months as of April 2011.



The District Programme Officer stated (April
2011) that the works are being executed by the
BDOs and they have been directed by the DC to
expedite the works at the earliest or refund the
amount where the works have not been started.

In sum, five to eight per cent expectant and
nursing mothers and 16 to 28 per cent children
in the age group of six months to six years were
denied the benefits of supplementary nutrition.
In 2,477 out of 2,950 AWCs, adequate
infrastructure facilities were not available.
There was delay ranging from one to 48 months.
in completion of 67 works of Anganwadi
building. Besides, 14 building works could not
be commenced due to non-availability of land.

Recommendations

5.4

Social Security Pension Scheme

With the objective of providing social security
and financial assistance to old persons/widows
with inadequate sources of livelihood, the State
Government implemented the Social Security
Pension Scheme. The scheme comprised
inter alia, the following components:

> 010 aged pension (OAP) since 1971;
> Widow pension (WP) since 1979; and
» National old aged pension (NOAP) since

1995.

During 2006-11, all 61,042 beneficiaries were
covered under social security pension scheme in

Chapter 5: Social Services

the district and provided financial assistance of
%92.68 crore by the District Welfare Officer
(DWO), Mandi.

It was also noticed in audit that the Department
identified (October 2008) 1,158 ineligible
persons and stopped disbursement of pension of
only 520 persons. In the case of remaining 638
ineligible persons, the Department disbursed
%62.59 lakh as pension upto March 2011 and
stopped disbursement of pension thereafter
after this being pointed out in audit.

The DWO stated (March 2011) that the cases
were put up to District Welfare Committee for
further review but no action was initiated by the
committee. The reply does not explain as to why
immediate action to stop pension to the
ineligible pensioners was not initiated by the
Department. Thus, an expeditious action to
review such other cases besides effecting
recovery of the past period would also require to
be taken up by the Department to avoid any
further undue financial loss to the exchequer.

To sum up, there was adequate coverage of
beneficiaries under the scheme during the past
five years. However, benefit of pension
involving 62.59 lakh was given to 6338 inel le
persons. While disbursement of pension to 520
persons was stopped in October 2008 itself, the
Department irregularly paid %62.59 lakh to
ineligible persons until March 2011 despite
their identification.

Recommendation



5.5 Water Supply

Provision of adequate and safe drinking water to
all the citizens, especially those living in the rural
areas, has been a priority area for both the
Central and State Governments. In Mandi
district, {as with the State as a whole) one

centrally sponsored scheme and three State Plan
schemes are being implemented for provision of
drinking water through six’ divisions by the
Irrigation and Public Health Department. The
budget allocation and expenditure on water
supply schemes in the district during 2006-11
wasas follows:

Table 15: Position of funds received and expenditure on water supply schemes

(& in crore)

2006-07 16.00 23.09 23.24

2008-09 29.28 29.17 22.52 22.58
2010-11 31.14 31.00 19.59 18.99

Source:Data supplied by Superintending Engineers of Hamirpur and Sundernagar Circles

(i) Status of Water Supply

A survey was carried out in the district in 2003 to
identify the status of habitations for water
supply. The survey revealed that as of
March 2006, out of 10,237 habitations in the
district, 37 per cent habitations were fully
covered, 42 per cent were partially covered and

the remaining were yet to be covered. Based on
population data of 2010, percentage of fully
covered habitations increased to 67.03 per cent
leaving partially covered and non-covered
habitations as 32.56 and 0.41 per cent
respectively upto March 2011. The position is
pictorially depicted below:

Chart 7: Chart showing coverage of habitations with water supply schemes

Gi Fully Covered
Partially Covered

@ Non-covered

@ Total

Source: Data supplied by Superintending Engineers of Hamirpur and Sundernagar

Note:

Availability of water 40 litres and above per day per capita- Fully covered.

Availability of water between 11-39 litres per day per capita- Partially covered.
Availability of water 0-10 litres per day per capita- Non covered.

Baggi, Karsog, Mandi, Padhar, Sarkaghat and Sundernagar.



(ii) Status of Execution of schemes

Three“ out of six divisions were selected for
detailed test-check during the course of audit. In
the three sampled divisions 4,131 habitations
were to have been covered as per
Comprehensive Action Plan (CAP) 2003. Of
these, 3,848 habitations remained uncovered
up-to March 2006. During 2009-10, the data of
uncovered habitation was re-casted and
according to that 2,474 habitations were found
to be uncovered habitation as of March 2010
which came down to 1,796 habitations during
2010-11. The Department took up the
execution of 210 water supply schemes during
2006-11 (including 31 ongoing schemes) at a
cost of 141.19 crore to cover 2,880 habitations.
Of these, only 81 schemes covering 511
habitations were completed as of March 2011
after expending %20.49 crore. Thirty two out of
81 schemes were completed with a cost overrun
of %2.34 crore, besides a delay ranging from one
to 70 months was occurred in 27 schemes. The
remaining 129 schemes to cover 2,369
habitations were in progress after incurring an
expenditure of %83.29 crore. It was, however,
noticed that another 1,393 habitations had been
reported as covered from 87 schemes, although
these schemes were yet to be completed/
commissioned as of March 2011. The execution
of six water supply schemes to cover 70
habitations approved during 2009-10 had not
yet been taken up (March 2011).

On being pointed out, the EEs concerned stated
(May 2011) that cost overrun was due to
increase in labour and material cost and delay
was due to insufficient budgets, land disputes
and increase in scope of work, etc. However,
audit scrutiny revealed that lack of adequate
supervision at departmental level had not only
delayed the completion of schemes on time, but
also raised doubts about the quality of works.
Further, the targeted beneficiaries were denied

” Karsog, Mandi and Sundernagar.

Chapter 5: Social Services

adequate and safe drinking water due to non-
completion of schemes as envisaged.

In the exit conference held in October 2011 SE
(I&PH) Sundernagar stated that these schemes
remained incomplete due to less budget
allotment.

(iii) Water quality

As per departmental instructions, fortnightly
testing of water samples of rural water supply
schemes to ensure safe drinking water during
the rainy season and monthly testing thereafter
is required to be conducted in the State
laboratories. The Public Accounts Committee
(PAC) in its 167" Report (9" Vidhan Sabha ) had
observed (March 2000) that the position
regarding testing of drinking water was not
satisfactory in the State and recommended that
effective steps should be taken to avoid
occurrence of any serious diseases. Scrutiny of
records in sampled divisions revealed that in
respect of 938 schemes, against the required
68,220 water sample tests to be conducted
during 2006-11, only 8,075 tests were actually
done resulting in shortfall of 88 per cent. It was
further noticed that in three sampled divisions,
121 water testing kits had been distributed in
120 Panchayats between January 2009 and
2010-11. However, neither the Panchayats sent
results of tests-conducted nor were the same
obtained by the concerned divisions.

As per information supplied by the Chief Medical
Officer, Mandi, there were 2,44,125 cases of
water borne diseases (Diarrhoea/dysentery
including gastroenteritis: 2,20,811; Typhoid:
21,972 and viral Hepatitis: 1342) noticed in
Mandi district during 2006-11, apart from
occurrence of twelve deaths due to water borne
diseases during 2006-11.

Thus, the Department failed to ensure quality of
water and continued to supply unsafe drinking
water to the public.


Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March 2011 Hi!

In reply, Superintending Engineer, Sundernagar
stated (January 2011) that shortfall in water
testing was due to lack of water testing
laboratories. The reply is not acceptable in view
of the fact that PAC had already recommended
to take effective steps to avoid occurrence of any
serious disease.

public in the district as the quality of water to
the habitations was not being ensured by

conducting the required water sample tests; as
a result substantial number of cases of water
borne diseases were noticed in the district.

Recommendations

5.6

Sanitation and sewerage
(i) Total Sanitation Campaign

The total sanitation campaign (TSC) is a centrally
sponsored scheme. The main objective of the
scheme was to accelerate sanitation coverage in
rural areas to provide toilets to all by 2012.

The project for Mandi district was sanctioned in
July 2005 with project period of five years

i.e. 2005-09 at a cost of $10.37 crore with DRDA
as the implementing agency.

The activities envisaged in the scheme were:

(i) Start-up activities (conducting of baseline
survey, preparation of PIP, etc.);

(ii) IEC activities (creating demand for
sanitation facilities in rural areas through
inter personal communication, use of
folklore media and outdoor media like wall
painting and hoardings, etc.);

Establishment of Rural sanitation Marts and
production centres;

(iii)
(iv)

(v) Construction of individual
latrines (IHHL for BPL and APL);

Solid and liquid waste management work;

household

(vi)

Construction of community sanitary
complexes; and

(vii) Construction of institutional toilets.

The scheme was to be implemented in a project
mode. The cost sharing arrangement between
Centre and State was 80:20 for activities at Sr. No.
(i) to (iii) and 60:20:20 between Centre, State and
beneficiaries for activities at Sr. No. (iv) to (vi) and
70:30 between Centre and State for institutional
toilets such as Anganwadi Centres and Schools.

The year wise position of funds received by
DRDA, and utilisation thereagainst during
2006-11 is given in Table 16:



Table 16: Position of funds received

Chapter 5: Social Services

and expenditure incurred under

Total Sanitation Campaign

(रै॥ lakh)

2006-07 152.09 | 78.49 87.88 (38)
2007-08 87.88 69.21 | 5.00 | 1.32 13.12 176.53 170.13 6.40 (04)
2008-09 |. 6.40 | 245.94 32.97 0.55 22.50 | 308.36 62.51 | 245.85 (80)
2009-10 | 245.85 | [=| 114.47 | 5.96 | 77.54 443.82 | 443.15 0.67 (--)
2010-11 0.67 | 312.16 82.06 1.36 11.66 407.91 329.09 78.82 (19)
Total 627.31 | 312.99 | | 12.33 | |. 125.15 | | 1151.05 |

Source : Figures supplied by the Department

It was noticed that %78.82 lakh remained
unspent due to non taking up of activities under
Solid and Liquid Waste Management and Rural
Sanitary Marts as of May 2011. Besides, against
the targets of 224 Anganwadi toilets and 100
community toilets to be constructed during
2006-11, only 124 and 54 toilets had been
constructed as of May 2011. In reply PO, DRDA
stated (May 2011) that shortfall in achievement
of target would be covered in the extended
project period 2011-12.

Thus, the objective of scheme to accelerate
sanitation coverage in rural area remained to be
achieved despite availability of funds.

(ii)
There are five” towns in the district, out of
which, only Mandi and Jogindernagar have
sewerage facilities. For two towns viz.,
Sundernagar and Sarkaghat sewerage
schemes were approved (March 1992 and
December 1995) for %11.28 crore and were
stipulated to be completed within a period of
five years (i.e. by March 1997 and December
2000 respectively). Despite expending
%16.73 crore, these schemes were still
incomplete as of May 2011 and citizens of these
towns have been deprived of sewerage facilities.

Sewerage

In respect of Rewalsar town, SE, Sundernagar
intimated (May 2011) that an estimate of

%9.02 crore had been sent in November 2010 to
SE, Planning and Investigation-ll, Shimla-9 for
providing the sewerage facilities. However, final
outcome thereof was not intimated to audit.

The EE of Sundernagar and Sarkaghat divisions
attributed (May 2011) the delay to insufficient
funds, change in scope of work and land
disputes. The reply indicates poor planning by
the Department before taking up the execution
ofthe scheme.

due to non-taking up activities of solid and
liquid waste Management, etc. Besides,

targets of construction of AWCs and community
toilets were also not achieved and overall
shortfall in achievement of targets was 45 and

46 percent respectively.

Completion of sewerage systems in Sarkaghat
and Sundernagar were lagging behind the
schedule for more than 10 years due to poor
planning of the I&PH Department.

Recommendation

Jogindernagar, Mandi, Rewalsar, Sarkaghat and Sundernagar.


6.1

Infrastructure

Good infrastructure will go a long way in
enhancing the growth potential of the district
and bridging the gap between urban and rural
areas. It will also bring the remote and backward
areas closer to the district headquarters and
bring about inclusive growth of the economy.
Infrastructure includes provision of good all
weather roads, adequate electricity for
household, industrial and irrigation needs,
railway connectivity, air services and reliable
communication facilities.

District Mandi has no airport. The nearest
airport at Bhunter (Kullu district), is 62 kms away
from Mandi town. Rail connectivity in the
district is limited again to one town viz.,

Jogindernagar situated at a distance of 56 kms
from the district headquarters, Mandi. A review
of the development of roads in the district
revealed that 57 per cent villages had been
provided road connectivity upto March 2011.
Audit findings in this regard are discussed below.

6.1.1 Roads
>>. Status of Road Connectivity

There are 2,833 inhabited villages in the district.
However, in the records of Public Works
Department only 2,823 villages existed. Also,
data relating to road connectivity in the district
maintained in the offices of SE, 1° Circle, Mandi
and Engineer-in-Chief (E-in-C) Shimla, showed
variation as depicted in the table below:

Table 17: Details showing position of road connectivity in the district

Total Number of Villages 2,823 2,823 2,823 |. 2,823

Length of roads (kms)

3,535

4,630 3,572 4,640

Source: Information supplied by SE, HPPWD Circle and E-in-C office, Shimla

It is evident from the above details that
departmental records did not depict exact
picture of villages actually connected through
roads as on 31 March 2011 as there existed
difference of villages between SE's office and
E-in-C's record and raises doubt about the
reliability of the data.

In reply, E-in-C stated (March 2011) that circle
office might have included sub-villages causing

huge difference in village connectivity and most
of the road works are lying held up due to forest
land/land dispute. The reply is not tenable as
periodical reports and returns sent by the field
offices were not closely monitored by the Cc
office to ensure authenticity of data relating to
road connectivity.



Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March 2011 FT

> Schemes for Development of Roads

The most important scheme being implemented
for the construction/development of roads is
Centrally Sponsored Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak
Yojana (PMGSY). Another scheme which aimed
at construction of village link roads is Mukhya
Mantri Gram Path Yojana (MMGPY). Besides, the
State Government is also executing roads out of
state funds.

e Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
(PMGSY) and State Sector Rural Roads

The PMGSY was launched in 2000 and aimed at
connecting every habitation that has a
population of 1000 or more through good all
weather roads within three years i.e. by 2003 and
habitations with 500 people or more by the end
of the Tenth Plan.

To achieve this, PMGSY envisage preparation of
District Rural Roads Plan by the respective
DRDAs. However, the department had prepared
block-wise core network of road during 2005 but

not ensured preparation of District Rural Road
Plan for construction of roads projects in the
district ina time bound manner.

As of March 2011, out of 12 habitations
sanctioned connectivity of roads with population
of over 1000 people, only six were connected
with roads. In the case of habitation with
population of over 500 people connectivity in 23
out of 143 habitations remained to be provided.

During 2006-11, funds amounting to %175.88
crore were provided by the Gol for
implementation of PMGSY and the State
Government also allocated ¥177.73 crore out of
State budget for construction of rural roads inthe
district. Of this, expenditure incurred was
168.83 crore and %171.34 crore respectively.

> Status of rural road works undertaken
under PMGSY and State Sector

The details of road works taken up in the district
during the review period and progress of their
execution are tabulated below:-

Table 18: Details of road works taken up and completed in the district during 2006-11

Ongoing works
ason

31 March 2006
2006-07 छा. 10 55.5 | 7224. HBC
2007-08 38 65 61.51 36.95 14 1 15.83 0.24
2008-09 37 68 73.3 |. 63.22. ss 29
2009-10 26 45 26.86 52.40 | 0 | 1 | 0 | 0.10
2010-11 9) 656. 12.3 4638 OF | O 0०0० ०0०
Total 254 | | मा | | 299.54 | | उ86.21 | | 04 | | ३30 | 80.95 | 55.11 |

Source: Data supplied by the Superintending Engineer, HPPWD Circle, Mandi, Hamirpur and Jogindernagar

Audit analysis revealed that out of 981 works
(including 560 ongoing works of earlier period)
taken up during 2006-11 under PMGSY and State
Sector, only 144 works (PMGSY: 114 and State
Sector: 30) were completed, 757 works were still

in progress and remaining 80 works were lying in
a suspended state for a period ranging from 6 to
60 months due to land disputes, forest clearance
and court cases.



As on 31 March 2006, three” test-checked
divisions had 184 ongoing works during 2006-11,
apart from 112 new works sanctioned. Of these,
41 works (one within stipulated period and 40
works within delay of 3 to 240 months) were
completed. The execution of 184 works was still
in progress. The construction of 179 out of 184
works were lagging behind their schedule of
completion for the period ranging between 3 and
327 months. Thirty (30) works were lying held up
due to land disputes, forest clearance and
abandoning of works by contractors, etc. The
Department had not taken up execution of 41
works as of March 2011.

The EEs attributed (May 2011) the delay to land
disputes in the alignment of roads, forest
clearance, late tendering of works, slow
execution of works by the contractors and
insufficient funds. The reply is not tenable as the
Department should have ensured availability of
lands for construction of roads before taking up
the execution of work. This indicates failure of
the Department to ensure proper planning for
timely availability of road connectivity to the
people of the district.

In the exit conference SE, |" circle Mandi,

accepted (October 2011) the facts.
> Implementationissues

(i) Under PMGSY, construction of three kms
long Sidhyani Patha road was approved (April
2005) for 48.02 lakh. The work was awarded
(January 2006) to a contractor for 46.93 lakh
with a stipulation to complete it in one year.

Scrutiny of records of Mandi division No.Il
revealed that the contractor took up execution of
work in May 2006 according to approved
alignment of the road. However, during
execution of work, the department changed
earlier alignment of the road between km1/720
and 2/195 due to land dispute. As a result,
construction of 15.25 metre span RCC-T-beam
bridge was necessitated to be constructed over a

* Karsog, Mandi and Sundernagar.

Chapter 6: Economic Services

Nallah at km 1/930. The contractor executed
road work valued at %47.50 lakh in length of
2/675km upto March 2008. Thereafter the
contractor left the work and also refused to
execute the bridge work on the plea that tender
rates offered by him were not presently
workable. Against the work done, the contractor
had been paid %47.16 lakh upto eighth running
account bills. The work remained incomplete as
of May 2011.

Thus, failure of the department to get the
balance road and bridge work completed for
three years had resulted in idle investment of
247.16 lakh.

(ii) In Karsog division, construction of 2.200
km long link road to village Parlog alongwith 30
metre span bridge sanctioned (November 2006)
under PMGSY for %79.50 lakh was also awarded
(March 2007) to a contractor for the same
amount. The work was stipulated to be

completed in one year.

It was noticed in audit that after executing road
work valued at €58.48 lakh (upto October 2008),
the contractor left the remaining road and bridge
work midway. Liquidated damages of €7.95 lakh
were levied on him in June 2009. Out of this,
%1.67 lakh was recovered and the balance
amount of %6.28 lakh remained un-recovered as
of May 2011. The work had been lying in
suspended state since October 2008.

Thus, failure of the department to initiate timely
action for getting the balance work completed
for more than two years and seven months not
only resulted in non-achievement of the
objective of rural connectivity but also rendered
expenditure of %58.48 lakh incurred as
unproductive.

(iii) As per Forest Conservation Act, 1980
diversion of forest land for non-forestry
purposes requires prior approval of Gol. In
Karsog division construction of 6.855 km long
road under PMGSY from Janoal to Jaral was


Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March 2011 FT

awarded (September 2006) to a contractor for
%1.40 crore with a stipulation to complete in
one year.

It was noticed in audit that the road work could
not be taken up by the contractor due to
involvement of forest land. Gol, however,
conveyed approval for diversion of forest land in
May 2010 and cutting of trees was got completed
in December 2010. In the meantime, the
contractor had been paid an advance payment of
%21 lakh (Mobilisation Advance: %7 lakh;
Machinery Advance: %14 lakh in March 2007)
which remained un-recovered as of May 2011.
Evidently, payment of advance of %21 lakh
without taking up the work since March 2007 led
to extension of undue financial benefit to
contractor and loss of interest of रैं9.57 lakh at
the rate of 9.4 per cent at borrowing rate of
State Government.

(iv) In Sundernagar division eight roads were
constructed at a cost of %2.71 crore between
November 2005 and July 2008 to provide
connectivity to 10 villages having 5590
inhabitants. These roads were not got passed
from the Road Fitness Committee as of May 2011
since the date of completion of these roads.
Delay in passing of road ranged between 33 and
65 months. Thus, investment of %2.71 crore
remained unproductive as intended objective of
providing all weather road connectivity to the
inhabitants of above villages was not achieved.

The EE concerned stated (May 2011) that efforts
were being made to get the roads passed from
the Road Fitness Committee. The reply does not
explain as to why the matter was not brought to
the notice of district authorities for declaration
of roads fit for plying of vehicles.

In sum, 43 per cent of the
district still remained to be provided with road
connectivity, as acquisition of forest/private
land and court cases being the main bottleneck.

Recommendation

*. Mukhya MantriGram Path Yojana

The Mukhya Mantri Gram Path Yojana (MMGPY)
was launched in 2003-04 as a State plan scheme
for the construction of village link roads to meet
the strengthened centralised planning process
and to meet the aspiration and felt needs of the
local population. The DC is fully empowered to
sanction works under the scheme. But the
scheme was withdrawn in the same year. The
scheme has been re-introduced in 2008-09. The
details of funds received and expenditure
incurred there against during 2008-11 was
asunder:

Table 19: Position of funds received and expenditure incurred under
Mukhya Mantri Gram Path Yojana

(Rin crore)
2008-09 | 00 | 1.63 oo 1.64 1.02 0.62
2009-10 0.62 1.62 005 2.29 2.10 0.19
2010-11 | 019 | 1.62 0.18 1.99 1.64 0.35
Total 487 023 4.76

Source: Departmental figures



During 2008-11, %4.87 crore were allotted and
the whole amount was drawn by the DC and kept
in a bank account. The DC had unspent balance
of Zone lakh at the beginning of 2008-09 and also
received 23 lakh from executive agencies on
account of saving surrendered by them/interest
credited in the bank accounts during the year
2009-11. Out of total available amount of
%5.11 crore, 4.42 crore were released to the
implementing agencies for execution of the 417
pucca path/jeepable road works besides
20.34 crore incurred as other expenditure and
the balance amount of %35 lakh remained
unspent with the DC as of March 2011 for
utilisation in the subsequent financial year in
violation of the guidelines of the scheme.

The DPO stated (April 2011) that funds could not
be released due to shortage of manpower,
introduction of MNREGA, non-execution of
works/agreements by the Gram Panchayats and
site disputes.

As per scheme guidelines 25 per cent of the
allotted budget was required to be spent for the
construction of pucca path and link roads in the
scheduled caste concentrated villages.

During 2008-11, the DC released %4.42 crore for
execution of works under the scheme but the
details of funds spent on SC/ST concentrated
population were not available with them and
therefore incurring of prescribed budget for
construction of roads in SC/ST area could not be
ascertained in audit as envisaged in the scheme.

6.1.2 Schemes for other developmental
activities

Other developmental activities like
renovation/repairs of Government Schools,
health institutions, water supply schemes, etc.,
were taken up in the district under Vikas Mein
Jan Sahyog (VMJS), Sectoral Decentralised
Planning (SDP), Members of Parliament Local
Area Development Scheme (MPLADS), Vidhayak
Kshetriya Vikas Nidhi Yojana (VKVNY), etc.

" Kuhl: Small open irrigation channel.

Chapter 6: Economic Services

(a) Vikas Mein Jan Sahyog (VMJS)

VMJS scheme was launched in January 1993 with
the objective of ensuring community
participation in developmental activities like
construction of Government buildings for
education, rural water supply schemes, rural
roads, minor irrigation schemes, multipurpose
community centres and other infrastructural
facilities. It is a State sponsored scheme with
funding in the ratio of 85:15 between the State
Government and the public in areas where SC/ST
population is over 50 per cent. Where the
population is predominately of general category;
the funding ratio is 75:25 in backward areas, and
50:50 in urban areas and rural areas.

During 2006-11, %11.44 crore was released by
the DC to the executing agencies for
developmental works in the district. Of this
7.18 crore was utilised by the executing
agencies and the balance amount was lying with
the latter as of March 2011.

The DC stated (April 2011) that due to shortage of
manpower/non-cooperation from the GPs and
late receipt of budget, the funds could not be
utilised. The reply is not acceptable as these
aspects should have been taken into
consideration before the drawal of funds.

(b) Sectoral Decentralised Planning (SDP)

The SDP was introduced in 1993 ( except the tribal
areas) inall the districts to execute works relating
to renovation/repair of Government owned
public assets like schools, health institutions,
water supply schemes, irrigation kuhls” and
village link roads. The works under this scheme
are approved by the District Planning
Development and Twenty Point Programme
Review Committee. Under this scheme,
five per cent funds are taken from the approved
Plan in respect of selected heads of development
and are placed at the disposal of the DC as ‘untied
funds' to be utilised on smaller works which do not
find place in the budget and to ensure that public
grievances are redressed instantly.


Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March 2011 Hi!

The works sanctioned under this scheme were
required to be completed within one year from
its sanction. During 2006-11, ¥21.42 crore were
released to the executing agencies against which
only 10.59 crore (49 per cent) was utilised.
Despite a specific stipulation to refund the
unutilised funds at the close of the financial year,
the executing agencies retained the funds. As
per information supplied by the DPO, 1179 works
worth 10.31 crore were completed and 890
works costing 11.11 crore remained incomplete
due to receipt of funds from the Planning
Department at the fag end of respective financial
year and imposition of model code of conduct
during the Assembly, Parliament and Panchayats
elections.

(०) Member of Parliament Local Area
Development Scheme (MPLADS)

District Mandi is a part of Mandi Parliamentary
constituency which includes Kullu, Kinnaur and
Lahaul Spiti districts, Pangi and Bharmaur
sub-divisions of Chamba district and Rampur
sub-division of Shimla district also. DC Mandi is
the Nodal Officer for release of funds to the
above districts/sub-divisions.

During 2006-11, ~12.30 crore was received by
the DC, Mandi for approval and sanction of
works relating to the development of the
constituency under MPLADS. Besides, the DC
had an unspent amount of %1.50 crore at the
beginning of 2006-07 and also received
%1.39 crore from the executing agencies on
account of savings surrendered by them and
interest of %0.81 crore credited in the bank
accounts. Of the total available amount of
%16.00 crore, €6.68 crore was released to the
executing agencies in the district and %8.53 crore
was shown as other expenditure which includes
release of amount to the Shimla, Kullu, Kinnaur,
Chamba and Lahaul & Spiti being nodal district
for execution of works sanctioned under this
scheme and deposit of interest into Government
account detail of which was not available with
them and the balance %0.79 crore remained
unutilised with the DC as of March 2011.

Scrutiny of the details of the works sanctioned
under MPLADS revealed the following:

As per guidelines of MPLADS, the construction of
office/ residential buildings and other works
belonging to private co-operation and
commercial organisation, repairs works and
works within the places of religious worship are
prohibited under the scheme.

Scrutiny of records revealed that eight works
such as club house, press club buildings, works
within the places of religious worship costing
%13 lakh were sanctioned during 2006-11 from
MPLADS in contravention of the above
provisions.

The DPO stated (June 2010) that these works
were sanctioned for community based
utilisation. The reply is not acceptable as such
works were not permissible under the scheme.

Against %6.68 crore sanctioned and released to
the executing agencies, an expenditure of %2.98
crore was incurred by them as of April 2011.

(d) Vidhayak Kshetriya Vikas Nidhi Yojana
(VKVNY)

District Mandi has ten Vidhayaks (Members of
Legislature). Under VKVNY scheme, %25 lakh per
year was released to each of the Vidhayaks
during 2006-08 and %30 lakh during 2008-11 to
ensure execution of developmental works in
their respective constituencies. The works are to
be selected by the Vidhayaks as per the
guidelines of the scheme and sanction from the
DCis to be obtained for their execution.

During 2006-11, the DC received %14.00 crore
and had %1.67 crore unspent balance in the
beginning of 2006-07 and miscellaneous receipts
of %0.61 crore received during 2006-11. Of the
available funds of £16.28 crore, %13.46 crore
were released to the implementing agencies. Of
this, only %7.05 crore was expended and the
balance of %6.41 crore was lying unspent with
the implementing agencies as of March 2011.


* Common Implementation Issues

Scrutiny of implementation of these four
schemes brought out the following common
aspects:

> All the works sanctioned under VMJS, SDP,
MPLADS and VKVNY are required to be
completed within a year. However, in the
five test-checked blocks, it was observed
that 226 works” relating to construction of
link roads, community centres, etc.,
sanctioned during 2006-11 for %2.96 crore
were not taken up for execution as of March
2011 resulting in denial of the intended
benefits to the public.

> 1,272 works’ like construction of
community centres/mahila mandal
bhawans, school buildings, roads etc.,
costing ~13.97 crore sanctioned between
April 2006 and March 2010 were lying
incomplete as of March 2011. In the five
test-checked blocks, 326 works”
sanctioned between April 2006 and March
2010 for 4.28 crore were also yet to be
completed. The delay in completion of
these works ranged between three and 52
months.

The BDOs attributed (April 2011) non-
commencement of works/delay in completion of
works to non-availability of land, non-
cooperation of GPs, shortage of man power and
non-execution of agreements by the GPs, etc.

Thus, other developmental schemes like Vikas
Mein Jan Sahyog (VMS), Sectoral Decentralised

Planning (SDP), Members of Parliament Local
Area Development Scheme (MPLADS),

MPLADS: 32; VKVNY: 80; VMS: 14 and SDP: 100.
MPLADS: 137; VKVNY: 554; VMMS: 74 and SDP: 507.
MPLADS: 26; VKVNY: 127; VMJS: 17 and SDP: 156.

Chapter 6: Economic Services

Vidhayak Kshetriya Vikas Nidhi Yojana (VKVNY),,
etc., were taken up in the district in an
uncoordinated manner as the works were
neither properly planned nor completed within
the specified timelines thereby resulti
situation of huge funds lying unutilised. The
assets created out of these schemes also
remained unknown to the district
administration as no asset register was
maintained at any level.

Recommendation

6.2

Employment Generation

The Gol and the State Government have initiated
numerous measures to tackle problems of
poverty, unemployment and the slow pace of
progress in the rural economy. In addition,
provision of food security, especially to the poor
and vulnerable sections of society, has been
envisioned as one of the important components
of an inclusive growth of the economy. The two
most important schemes sponsored by the
Central Government for providing employment
in the rural areas as a means of poverty
alleviation are Sampoorna Gramin Rozgar Yojana
(SGRY) and Swarnajayanti Gram Swarozgar
Yojana (SGSY). The implementation of SGRY in
the district was subsequently subsumed in
Mahatama Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act (MNREGA) in April 2007.


6.2.1 SGRY

The objectives of the SGRY were to provide
additional wage employment to the rural poor
who were in need and willing to do manual and
unskilled work in and around their village, and to
create durable community, social and economic
assets and infrastructure in rural areas. Towards
this end, the GPs were to submit work proposals
through the BDOs to the DRDA, based on a
comprehensive shelf of works to be approved at
the beginning of the year.

Audit noticed that schemes were sanctioned by
the DC in an adhoc manner, since the GPs and
Blocks had not prepared any Perspective Plan or

Annual Action Plans. Consequently, works were
proposed on a perceived need basis, rather than
in a planned and coordinated manner, resulting
in overlaps in execution of works and
underutilisation of available funds. Also, there
was no database at the district/DRDA level,
detailing the developmental works undertaken
in various Blocks and GPs.

The SGRY was funded on 75:25 basis by the Gol
and the State Government. The year-wise
position relating to the funds received by DRDA,
Mandi and utilisation thereagainst during
2005-07 (upto March 2007) is given below:

Table 20: Position of funds received and expenditure incurred under SGRY

(% in crore)

| 0.20 | 6.34

Source: Departmental figures
Note: Figures in parenthesis denote percentage.

The details of funds received and expended during this period by the five” sampled Blocks

areas follows:

Table 21: Position of funds received and expenditure incurred under SGRY in
sampled blocks

(₹ in lakh)

Source: Departmental figures

After merger of SGRY under MNREGA, the unspent balance of 1.17 crore was transferred to it.

= Chauntra, Drang, Gohar, Karsog and Sundernagar.



> Employment Generation under SGRY

The details of employment generated under this scheme during 2005-07 as reported by DRDA to the

Golareas follows:

Table 22: Details of employment generated under SGRY during 2005-07

(Mandays in lakh)

Source: Departmental figures

There were no annual targets relating to
employment generation although the DRDA
planned to execute small works like construction
of tanks, playground, etc., for generating
employment. Therefore, the extent of
employment generated vis-a-vis targets could
not be ascertained. Out of 6,090 works

sanctioned in the district during 2005-07, 6089
works had been completed after incurring an
expenditure of %3.90 crore leaving one work
incomplete in Karsog block as of May 2011.

The status relating to employment generation in
five test-checked blocks was as follows:

Table 23: Details of employment generated under SGRY in sampled blocks
during 2005-07

(Mandays in lakh)

Source: Data supplied by the BDOs of test-checked Blocks. Figures in parenthesis denote percentage.

While 30 per cent of employment generated
should have been in respect of women
beneficiaries, the DRDA reported only 0.53 lakh
mandays (eight per cent) for women out of
6.43 lakh mandays generated in the district.

In the five test-checked blocks, employment
generation for women was also eight per cent.

In the district wage employment of 1.40 lakh
mandays for women was, thus, less provided.
The PO DRDA stated (May 2011) that due to
non-availability of women power in the
district the target for providing 30 per cent of
the total employment to women could not be
achieved.



Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March 2011 FT

The DRDA and the sampled Blocks had not
maintained employment registers in the
prescribed format indicating the category wise
details of people provided employment and the
number of mandays generated for each work. In
the absence of these details, the figures of
employment generated for women were
compiled from the muster rolls directly. In the
absence of complete details in the employment
registers, the employment reported to have
been generated, especially in respect of women
and SC/ST categories could not be verified
in audit.

6.2.2 Mahatma Gandhi National Rural

Employment Guarantee Act

The Mahatama Gandhi National Rural

Employment Guarantee Act (MNREGA), 2005 is
being implemented in the district from April
2007. The basic objective of the Act is to
enhance livelihood security in rural areas by
providing at least 100 days of guaranteed wage
employment.

Under MNREGA, the wages of skilled and
semi-skilled workers and cost of material is
shared in the ratio of 75:25 by Gol and State
Government. In addition, the State Government
bears the unemployment allowance and
administrative expenses of State Employment
Guarantee Council. The year wise position of
funds received by the DRDA, Mandi and
utilisation thereagainst during 2007-11 is
given below:

Table 24: Position of funds received and expenditure incurred under MNREGA
during 2007-11

(% in crore)

2007-08 1.17 42.73 3.06 5.67 (12)

2008-09 5.67 149.71 846 164.84 86.61. 78.23 (47)

2009-10 78.23 48.48 14.99 141.70 130.70 11.00 (8)

2010-11 | 11.00 | 160.00 13.02 184.02 134.97 49.05 (27)
Source: Departmental figures

Note: 1. Figuresin parenthesis denote percentage.

2. Includes %1.17 lakh transferred from SGRY.

6.2.3 Planning for implementation of
MNREGA

> District Perspective Plan

The MNREGA operational guidelines stipulate
the preparation of a five year District Perspective
Plan (DPP) to facilitate advance planning and to
ensure long term employment generation in the
district. Also, Annual Plans, identifying the
activities to be taken up on priority in a year are
required to be prepared.

Audit scrutiny, revealed that the DPP in Mandi
district was not prepared. In the absence of DPP,
the type of works which should be executed in
the district to ensure long term employment
generation and sustained development were not
identified. Though annual plans were prepared
during 2007-11 in the district but works were
approved in piecemeal ignoring annual plans and
spent %207.60 crore on works. This resulted in
unplanned execution of works on adhoc basis.



The details of funds received and expended during this period by the five sampled blocks are 35
follows:

Table 25: Position of funds received and expenditure incurred under MNREGA in
sampled blocks during 2007-11

(@ in crore)

2007-08 3.38 (14)

Source: Departmental figures
Note: _ Figuresin parenthesis denote percentage.

The BDOs of the sampled blocks (Padhar and > Employment Generation under MNREGA
Gohar) stated (June-July 2010) that the under
utilisation of funds was due to grant received at
the fag end of financial year.

The details of employment generated under this
scheme during 2007-11 as reported by DRDA to
the Gol areas follows:

Table 26: Details of employment generation under MNREGA during 2007-11
(Number in lakh)

2007-08 34.72 13.85 14.81 |. 65.06 |

2009-10 66.08 24.71 40.67

Source: Data supplied by DRDA Mandi

During 2007-11 position with regard to also required to be maintained by the GPs and
employment provided to women was other executing agencies in the prescribed
satisfactory. Audit did not notice any case where = manner.

100 days employment demanded was not

provided tothe beneficiaries. In 47 test-checked GPs it was noticed that the

MRs were not being maintained in the
> Muster Rolls prescribed manner and the following

dit i ticed:
As per provisions of MNREGA guidelines, the iscrepancies werenotice

Muster Roll (MR) in the prescribed format witha ¢ In seven test-checked GPs, MRs used were

unique identity number are to be issued by the not machine numbered.
Programme Officers of the blocks to the Gram e Inthe case of 379 MRs, issue date in the MR
Panchayats/executing agencies. The MRs are issue register was not recorded.



Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March 2011 Hi!

* Assessment of work done with respect to
wages and material was not found recorded
onMRs.

e The signature of Inspecting Officer, on MRs
in token of having the works inspected was
also not available in any of the GP test-
checked in audit.

PO, DRDA Mandi stated (January 2011) that
necessary directions have been given to BDOs to
maintain the MRs as per MNREGA guidelines.

> Payment of wages

Disbursement of wages is required to be made
on a weekly basis or in any case not beyond
fortnight of the date on which work was done. In
the event of delay beyond fortnight, workers are
entitled to compensation as per the provisions of
the Payment of Wages Act, 1936, to be borne by
the State Government.

It was however, noticed that in the district,
workers engaged on 27,028 muster rolls during
2007-11 were not paid wages (% 55.26 crore) on
time i.e. within prescribed period of fortnight.
The delay in payment of wages ranged between
15 and more than 90 days. No compensation for
delay in payment of wages was paid to the
workers. In five test checked blocks, workers
engaged on 19,415 muster rolls during the
period 2007-11 were not paid wages
(%36.60 crore) on weekly or fortnightly basis due
to non-assessment of work beyond the
maximum period of a fortnight.

The PO stated (May 2011) that timely payment of
wages could not be made due to the shortage of
staff and due to non assessment of works in time
by the technical staff at block level.

> Execution of low priority works

As per operational guidelines read with Section
4(3) and schedule-1 of MNREGA, the works were
to be taken up in order of priority as laid down in
the scheme. The works of water conservation
and water harvesting were the first priority and

2 Drang, Gohar, Kersog and Sundernagar.

rural connectivity was at the lowest in the
priority list. Out of 22,807 works executed at a
cost of %207.60 crore during 2007-11, 12,160
(53 per cent) works executed at a cost of
%113.41 crore, were pertaining to rural
connectivity. Similarly, in the test checked five
blocks, out of 10,938 works executed at a cost of
% 92.36 crore, 5,688 (52 per cent) works valuing
244.21 crore were pertaining to rural
connectivity. Works such as water conservation
and harvesting, drought proofing (including
afforestation and plantation) irrigation and
renovation of traditional water bodies- were not
taken up in order of their priorities as execution
of such works was important to strengthen the
natural resource base and to address the main
cause of poverty. This indicated that the
concerned Programme Officers (i.e. BDOs) did
not scrutinise the appropriateness of the plan
proposals received from GPs as required under
the guidelines to ensure that the works were
undertaken according to the provisions
envisaged in the scheme guidelines.

BDOs of concerned blocks stated (May 2011)
that works were executed as per priority given by
the Gram Sabha. The reply is not acceptable as
necessary steps should have been taken to
execute the works as per the provisions given in
the scheme guidelines.

> Construction of roads contrary to
specifications

As per guidelines rural connectivity was to be
provided with all weather access within the
village area. In four” test-checked blocks, 152
works of kutcha roads were executed during
2007-11 at the cost of %2.90 crore without
stabilisation of top surface and adequate
provision for drainage and culverts. Due to this,
it was not possible to make these roads
negotiable in all seasons particularly in rainy
season of the year as is evident from the
following photographs:


Photograph: 9 Photograph: 10

Tractor road Thadhadhar to Upper Khanula
(May 2010)

Chapter 6: Economic Services

Tractor road Bahwa to Dehari (May 2010)

While admitting the facts, BDOs of concerned
blocks stated (May 2011) that Kutcha Roads were
constructed as per shelf approved by GPs. The
reply is not acceptable as minimum prescribed
specification could have been followed for
proper creation of assets under MNREGA
Scheme.

> Execution of works without approval

As per MNREGA operational guidelines in
respect of all works administrative approval and
technical sanction is required to be obtained in
advance by December of the year preceding the
proposed year of implementation. Audit scrutiny
revealed that in three out of five Blocks
test-checked, 378 works costing ~10.73 crore
were started prior to receipt of administrative
approval of the competent authority during the
period 2007-08.

BDOs of the concerned blocks stated (April-May
2010) that normally approval comes after three
to six months and as such works were started
pending administrative approval to provide job
to households within 15 days from the date of
their demand. The reply is not acceptable as
there is no exception for such deviation from the
operational guidelines in any manner.

MNREGA operational guidelines stipulate the
following procedures for Inspection and
monitoring:

© — State, district and Block level officers shall
inspect 2, 10 and 100 per cent of works
respectively every year.

* District Internal Audit Cells shall be
constituted to scrutinise the reports of
Gram Sabha.

Audit scrutiny revealed that against 243
inspections of works, State level officers
inspected only 28 works out of 12,160 works
executed under MNREGA during 2007-11 in
Mandi district. However, no reasons for
non-conducting of inspection of works were
furnished to audit.

The position with regard to inspection of works
by the block level officials also could not be
verified in audit as no proof of inspection of
works carried out by them was available in the
test-checked blocks. Besides, District level
Internal Audit cell had not been established as of
May 2011 to scrutinise the reports of
Gram Sabhas.

The PO stated (May 2011) that due to
involvement of district level officers in other
departmental schemes, the required inspection
could not be carried out. The reply is not
acceptable in view of the statutory provision for
monitoring and reporting on implementation
of MNREGA.



Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March 2011 FT

Recommendations

6.2.4 Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana

Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY) a
holistic programme covering all aspects of self
employment such as organisation of the poor
into Self Help Groups (SHGs), providing training,
credit, technology, infrastructure and marketing
facilities was launched in the State from the year
1999-2000. The objectives of the scheme
aimed at establishing a large number of
micro-enterprises in the rural areas, building

upon the potential of the rural poor and to bring
the assisted poor families (Swarozgaries) above
the poverty line in three years by ensuring
that the family had a monthly net income of
atleast 2000.

> Financial outlay and expenditure

SGSY was funded by Centre and State in the ratio
of 75:25. Fifteen per cent funds out of total SGSY
allocation were set apart by the Government of
India for Special Projects under SGSY. Financial
targets were also fixed by the Gol in terms of
credit mobilisation (bank credit and Government
subsidy). The central allocation of funds to the
State was based on incidence of poverty in the
State. Funds were directly released by the
Gol/State Government to the DRDA.

Yearwise position of funds released by the Gol
and the State vis-a-vis expenditure incurred
thereagainst during 2006-11 is given below:

Table 27: Position of funds received and expenditure incurred under SGSY
during 2007-11

(रे in lakh)
2006-07 9.08 80.57 21.21 32.07 142.93 103.48 39.45
2007-08 | 39.45 | 112.35 | 33.92 | 21.52 207.24 126.82 80.42
2008-09 80.42 145.38 49.77 15.75 291.32 193.38 97.94
2009-10 97.94 142.21 60.36 9.57 310.08 189.01 121.07
2010-11 121.07 85.97 59.78 13.03 279.85 179.10 100.75
Total 566.48 | 225.04 | | 91.94 | |. 79.79

Source: Figures supplied by DRDA Mandi

As per SGSY guidelines allocated funds were to be utilised on various activities in the following

proportions:
Subsidy on economic activities
Training of Swarozgaries for skill development

Infrastructure build up

Creation of revolving fund for capacity building of (Self Help Groups) 5065५

60 percent
10 percent
20 percent

10 per cent



Audit scrutiny revealed that during 2006-11,
expenditure on above activities was not
regulated according to the prescribed norms as
the DRDA mainly concentrated on providing
subsidy for economic activities and utilised
71 per cent funds (including other miscellaneous
expenses) on these activities. On training,
infrastructure building and creation of revolving
fund, percentage of funds utilised was 5,16 and 8
respectively. Thus, DRDA administration failed
to ensure bridging of gaps in training needs of
Swarozgaries, infrastructure building and
capacity building of SHGs.

Audit scrutiny further revealed that 1,467 SHGs
were formed in the district since inception of the
scheme. Of these only 1,132 SHGs are
functioning in the district as of May 2011. Intest
checked blocks, out of 756 SHGs formed since
inception of the scheme only 544 SHGs were
functioning as on May 2011. Project officer
DRDA stated (May 2011) that all the SHGs were
not functioning due to the reasons that some
groups are defaulters from banks and members
of groups are not interested in taking loans from
the banks. However, the fact remains that
department failed to motivate the Swarozgaries
to repay the bank loans or take loans from the
banks for various enterprises.

> Delay in creation of infrastructure for
Swarozgaries

In the five test-checked blocks, infrastructure
development works such as shops, training
centres, village haats, exhibition centres, stores,
etc., were taken up between October 2007 and
November 2010 and were stipulated to be
completed within a period of three months from
the date of sanction. It was noticed that these
works after expending 34.89 lakh remained
incomplete as of May 2011. Abnormal delay in
completion of works resulted in non-accrual of
timely benefits to the beneficiaries and
expenditure incurred on works also remained

Chapter 6: Economic Services

largely unfruitful. The concerned BDOs stated
that the works could not be completed due to
non-availability of funds, material and labour.
The reply is not acceptable as the matter should
have been brought to the notice of PO, DRDA,
Mandi for providing funds for timely completion
of these works.

> Special project

To uplift the BPL population and to solve the
problems of rural un-employment or under
employment in the district, Gol administratively
approved (March 2002) a special project for
%12.04 crore under SGSY for rural development
through diversification in Agriculture. The
Project was stipulated to be completed within
five years. The cost was to be shared by the Gol
and the State Government in the ratio of 75:25.
The Gol, against its share of €9.03 crore released
27.22 crore in two installments (%3.61 crore
each) in March 2002 and June 2006 respectively.
The State Government against its share of
3.01 crore, released 2.41 crore in April 2002
and July 2006 respectively.

Audit scrutiny revealed that the DRDA could not
complete the project within the stipulated
period and Gol granted extension of time for one
year upto March 2008.

Audit scrutiny further revealed that
implementation of some of the components of
the project such as cultivation of medicinal
plants, aromatic plants, construction of seed
stores, room for storage of harvested herbs, cold
storage for planting material, were not taken up
as of May 2011. Thus, the fact remains that the
project could not take off for providing intended
benefits to the rural BPL beneficiaries. Besides,
the State Government failed to avail benefit of
assistance of %1.81 crore due to
non-implementation of the project in the
stipulated period.

central


Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March 2011 Hi!

The PO DRDA stated (July 2010) that some of the
sub-components have lagged behind being a
new concept and some of them were not
undertaken due to lack of technical know how. It
was further stated (May 2011) that the special
project could not be completed in time i.e. upto
March 2008 as the project was having a vast area
of operation and different components The

reply is not acceptable as such eventualities
should have been foreseen at the time of
formulation of project proposal.

Implementation of SGSY programme during
2006-11 was not satisfactory. The funds
allocated could not be utilised optimally due to
poor implementation of the Scheme. The
objectives of the SGSY to bring 30 per cent of the
rural poor above poverty line remained
unachieved.

Recommendation

> — Selection of suitable key activities should be
made for swarozgaries as per local needs,
Skill availability and meaningful support to
rural poor to ensure achievement of
objectives to bring 30 per cent rural poor
above poverty line within the prescribed
time frame.

6.3 Energy

Out of the 2,833 villages in the district, 2,830
villages were electrified upto March 2011. The
State Government chalked out plans in
March 2005 for electrifying the un-electrified 12
villages also through the Rajiv Gandhi Gramin
Vidyutikaran Yojana (RGGVY).

> Rajiv Gandhi Gramin Vidyutikaran
Yojana (RGGVY)

The RGGVY was launched by the Gol in
March 2005 to provide electricity to all the rural
households within a period of five years. The
Rural Electrification Corporation (REC) is the
nodal agency for implementation of this scheme
aimed at facilitating overall rural development,
employment generation and poverty alleviation.
The scheme is to be implemented with

90 per cent funding from Gol. Electrification of
BPL households is to be financed 100 per cent by
the Central Government.

The HP State Electricity Board (Board) prepared a
detailed project report (DPR) in March 2005 for
Mandi district with the aim of:

e Electrification of 12 un-electrified villages;

e Electrification of 6,301 un-electrified
households among electrified villages
including 1,537 BPL households;

. Provision of new Sub-Stations/transmission
lines in blocks where these did not exist and
distribution transformers in electrified
villages; and

e Decentralisation of generation, distribution
and supply of power.

Scrutiny revealed that the above plans of the
Board for electrification of rural areas did not
fructify since the DPR was sent to the REC for
approval only in December 2005, i.e. after a
delay of eight months from the date of sanction
(March 2005). The REC approved the project
proposal for %22.73 crore in April 2008 i.e. after
the lapse of two years and four months from the
date of submission (December 2005) of DPR by
the Board. Thereafter, on the basis of finalised
tender cost (%31.57 crore), the project cost was
further revised and got sanctioned (February
2009) by REC for %33.66 crore. Further audit
scrutiny revealed that as of March 2011 only nine
out of 12 villages were electrified. Besides, 392
(26 per cent) out of 1537 BPL households in the
electrified villages were also covered. Against
sanctioned project cost of %33.66 crore an
amount of %28.19 crore was released by REC. Of
this, ¥17.42 crore (including pending liabilities of
%1.93 crore) was spent leaving $10.77 crore with
the Board unspent as of March 2011.

resulted in cost escalation of ¥10.93 crore, but

ible households of the

also deprived the eli
benefits of electrification even after six years of
launching (March 2005) of the scheme.



Recommendation

6.4

Calamity Relief Fund Scheme

Relief measures in the wake of natural calamities
are provided from two Funds viz; Calamity Relief
Fund (CRF) and National Calamity Contingency
Fund (NCCF). Gol Ministry of Finance (MOF) has
notified the Schemes for constitution and
administration of the CRF/NCCF based on the
recommendations of the 12" Finance
Commission.

The scheme of CRF/NCCF inter alia provides that
the State Level Committee headed by the Chief
Secretary of the each State will be responsible to
ensure that the money drawn from the CRF is

Chapter 6: Economic Services

actually utilised for the purpose for which the
CRF has been set up and on admissible items of
expenditure as per norms approved by the Gol.

The scheme was made operative from the
financial year 2005-06 and continued till the end
of the financial year 2009-10. From 2010-11
onwards CRF has been renamed as State Disaster
Response Fund and NCCF merged into National
Disaster Management Fund.

Funds are provided to the Deputy Commissioner
through budgetary process. After drawal, the
funds are remitted to the implementing agencies
ie, Block Development Officers, Public Works,
Irrigation and Public Health Department, Sub-
Divisional Officer- Civil etc., for execution of
works and providing immediate relief to the
victims of natural calamities.

The year wise position of budget allotment and
expenditure there against in the Mandi district
during 2006-11 was as under:

Table 28: Position of funds received and expenditure incurred under CRF
during 2006-11

(@ in crore)

2006-07 BAB 8.45 [| le
2007-08 10.35 10.35 |
2008-09 10.25 10.25 [| le
2009-10 15.59 | 6 559... न
2010-11 11.47 6.79 (-) 04.68

Source: Figures supplied by DC Mandi
Following points were noticed:
(i) Diversion of relief funds

As per instructions of Gol, funds allotted under
CRF should be utilised on Repair/Restoration of
immediate nature of the damaged infrastructure
relating to Roads and Bridges, drinking water
supply works, irrigation, power, primary
education, health centres and community assets
owned by panchayats.

Scrutiny of records revealed that during 2006-11,
funds amounting to %2.67 crore allotted under

CRF had been diverted towards construction of
new works such as construction of roads,
community bhawans, school playgrounds, etc.
The Deputy Commissioner Mandi stated (May
2011) that funds for new works were sanctioned
under CRF to restore pre-natural calamity
position in the affected areas as well as to
provide immediate employment generation to
the effected people. The reply is not acceptable
because funds allotted under relief should have
been utilised strictly as per instructions of the
Gol for the intended purpose as per the scheme.



Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March 2011 Hi!

(ii) Delay in completion of repair and disputes, etc.

restoration works

Repair and restoration of damaged works
sanctioned under CRF should be completed with
ina period of three to six month.

Audit scrutiny revealed that out of 2819 repair
and restoration works sanctioned at a cost of
%18.98 crore during 2006-11, 673 works after
expending हैं 6.51 crore were lying incomplete as
of May 2011. The delay in completion of these
works ranged between one to four years. DC
Mandi stated (May 2011) that necessary
directions had already been issued to the
executing agencies to complete all the pending
works immediately. The fact, however, remains
that the works still remained to be completed
despite issuance of instructions.

In selected blocks, 598 repair and restoration
works were sanctioned at a cost of $471.70 lakh
during the period 2006-11 and an expenditure of
%380.04 lakh had been incurred on the execution
of these works as of May 2011. However, it was
noticed that 94 works sanctioned at a cost of
%96.50 lakh between October 2005 and
November 2010 were lying incomplete after
incurring an expenditure of %65.75 lakh as of
May 2011.

BDOs of Chauntra, Gohar and Karsog blocks
attributed non completion of works to Panchayat
Election, non-availability of labour and land

The reply is not acceptable as
these factors should have been taken into
account at the time of sanction of works and the
works sanctioned under CRF would require to be
completed within the specific timeframe of
the scheme.

(iii)
Audit scrutiny further revealed that in test
checked blocks, 27 works such as repairs of
roads, retaining walls, school grounds,
community houses, etc., sanctioned during the
period between March 2006 and February 2011
ata cost of 29.60 lakh had not been started as of
May 2011 and the whole amount remained
unspent in bank accounts. 8005 concerned
stated that works could not be started due to
land disputes, non-availability of land and non
cooperation by the Gram Panchayats. The reply
is not acceptable as in the event of non
settlement of land disputes matter should have
been brought to the notice of DC for appropriate
action.

Non-commencement of works

Recommendation



71 E-Governance Technology and e-Governance (SITEG). Sugam
Centres also act as a tool for development by
providing access to Internet which facilitates
faster communication and easy access to
information in the field of health, education,
agriculture, natural resources, social justice and
women welfare and rural development, etc.

The State Government of Himachal Pradesh
started setting up Integrated Community Service
Centres (i-CoSC), also known as 'Sugam' Centres,
upto sub-tehsil level in different districts
(including Mandi District) since August, 2005 for
providing 50 services under one roof to the
citizens of the district through a single window. 7.1.1 Services
The i-CoSC are operated and managed by a
District e-governance society with the support
from the Society for promotion of Information

The Sugam Centres were aimed to provide the
following services electronically:

Table 29: Details of services electronically proposed through Sugam Centres

Issue of Nakal of Records of Rights, Shajra Nasb, HimBhoomi

Customary Rights and Forestry Rights

_

Revenue Sale/ Conveyance/ Gift/ Mortgage with
possession/ Lease/ Exchange of Property/ Govt.
Organisation Transaction/ Trust/ Award/ Decree/
Re-Conveyance of Mortgage/Tatima
Registry/Surrender of Lease/Transfer of
Lease/Instrument of Partition/Certificate of Sale
Deed.

amen Issue of New Driving Licenses, Conductor Licenses, Saarthi and
Renewal of Licenses, Duplicate /Endorsement of e shastra
License and Issue /Renewal/Duplicate of Learner's ~
License



Agriculture/ AGMARKNET

Horticulture

Information about mandi rates in respect of
identified commodities in important mandis; and
Remedy for crop diseases from experts through
remote assistance.

available through
internet

~

Application for electricity connection/ additional
loads, payment of electricity, water, sewerage and
telephone bills, property tax and house tax. HRTC
on-line bus tickets booking, HPTDC on-line hotel
reservation and private hotel reservation.

Source: Sugam records

and Sub-Tehsils. Of these, five” centres were
selected for test-check.

7.1.2 Functioning of Sugam Centres

As per administrative guidelines, Sugam Centres

were to be setup at 16 places” in the Mandi
district in buildings/sites easily accessible to
citizens alongwith display boards fixed at
prominent places indicating the location and a
backlit display boards having Sugam standard
logo.

There are 16” e-Governance centres in the
district covering various Sub-Division, Tehsils

Sandhol, Sarkaghat, Sundernagar and Thunag.

Dharampur, Karsog, Kotli, Mandi and Sarkaghat.

Out of the total 50 services to be provided at
each Sugam Centre, the services to be provided
through IT applications at District, Sub-Division
and Tehsil/Sub-Tehsil level were 37, 35 and 33
respectively whereas the remaining informatory
services were available over internet.

Baldwara, Bali Chowki, Chachyot, Dharampur, Gohar, Jogindernager, Karsog, Kotli, Lad-Bharol, Mandi, Nihri, Padhar,

Seven at Sub-division/Tehsil level and nine at sub-Tehsil level.



enter ener Seis

The position of services to be provided through IT applications and actually available in the five
test-checked centres in the district was as under:

Table 30: Position of services to be provided through IT applications and actually
available in the five test checked centres

District level 37 7. (Vahan, Sarthi, HimRis, HimBhoomi, e_parman,
e_shastra and e_samadhan) through IT application

Sub-Division level 35 5. (Vahan, Sarthi, HimRis, HimBhoomi and e_parman)
through IT application

Tehsil /Sub-Tehsil level 33 ३. (HimRis, HimBhoomi and e_parman) through IT
application

For strengthening of these centres in Mandi * As per the directions of the State

district, the Director (IT) released हैं Five lakh in Government (November 2007), all the
November 2008 which remained unutilised in a centres set up at District/Sub-Division/
bank account as of April 2011. The DC Mandi Tehsil/Sub-Tehsil level were to be
stated (November 2011) that computer subsumed under a common brand name
hardware has been purchased out of grant of ‘Sugam' with an identical logo and common
%five lakh but renovation of the Sugam Centre sign board. It was, however, observed in
was yet to be done. The fact, however, remains audit (April 2011) that three centres
that functioning of Sugam Centre could not take (Dharampur, Kotli and Mandi) were either
place even after three years of release of funds using different brand names like
due to laxity on the part of Department. ‘Computer Kaksh' or ‘Computer Kaksh-2'

etc., and did not have any sign boards as
prescribed for indicating the location and
the facilities available at these centres. This
resulted not only in non-compliance of the
directions of the State Government but
also inconvenience to the public.

A review of the functioning of five test checked
centres viz., Mandi (district headquarter), Karsog
and Sarkaghat (Sub-Divisional level offices) and
Kotli and Dharampur (Sub-Tehsil) revealed the
following:

Photograph: 11 Photograph: 12

Kotli Centre Dharampur Centre
(May 2011) (May 2011)



Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March 2011 FT

© 8570 guidelines issued by the Director (IT),
each Sugam centre should be located in a
building/site which is easily accessible to
the citizens alongwith display boards fixed
at prominent place in the complex
indicating the location. However, there was
no indication relating to the location of
three test checked centres (Dharampur,
Kotli and Mandi) visited by the audit team.
Also when contacted, the public at these
three centres expressed ignorance about
the existence of these centres.

In reply, the DC Mandi stated (January 2011) that
the standardized name and logo would be
displayed in all the Sub-Divisions/Tehsils/Sub-
Tehsils. However, it was noticed in audit that the
same have not been displayed at Dharampur,
Kotliand Mandiso far (April 2011).

e ॥# ४ Mandi centre, the services relating to
e@_parman, Vahan, Sarthi, e_shastra and
e_samadhan were being provided at
Sub-Division office (Civil) and Himris,
Himbhoomi and e_parman were being
provided at Tehsil office. Though newly
constructed Sugam Centre at Sarkaghat has
been functioning since February, 2011 but
the services pertaining to Himbhoomi and
Himris have not been transferred to the
Sugam Centre as yet (April 2011). In
Sub-Tehsil Dharampur, services relating to
Him Bhoomi were being provided in one
room and those relating to Himris and
e-parman in other room causing
unnecessary inconvenience to the public.

e There occurred (February 2010) theft of one
server and three computers valuing
%1.98 lakh in Sub-Tehsil Baldwara due to
non-availability of a Chowkidar for watch
and ward. Also, at Dharampur Sub-Tehsil,
there existed no Chowkidar to obviate
this risk.

Jogindernagar, Rewalsar and Sarkaghat.

In the exit conference, the Additional DC
admitted (October 2011) the facts and assured to
take corrective action.

In conclusion, as regards the e-governance
activities in Mandi district, only 3 to 7 main
services with IT applications were being
provided as of April 2011 through the Sugam
centres against 33 to 37 main services envisaged
to be provided at tehsil to district level.

Recommendations

7.2

Civic Amenities by Municipal
Administration

Provision of basic civic amenities in the towns is
the responsibility of the municipal
administration. Mandi district has two
Municipal Committees (MCs) (Mandi and
Sundernagar) and three Nagar Panchayats”
(NPs). The MCs and NPs function as an institution
of self governance and were receiving grants and
funds from the Government. These institutions
also earn revenue through taxes, rents, issue of
licenses, car parking, etc., and are mandated to
utilise these funds for provision of adequate civic
amenities to the public.



7.2.1 Execution of developmental works

The functioning of both the MCs and all the three
NPs for the period 2006-11 was reviewed (May-
June 2010 and April 2011). It was noticed in
audit that no District Urban Development
Committee (DUDC) was formed for
implementation of the Integrated Development
of Small and Medium Towns (IDSMT). There
were instances of mismanagement of funds
meant for development works which deprived
the general public of the intended benefits as is
evidenced from the following audit findings:

> Non-completion of Suket Shopping
Complex

Under the scheme for IDSMT, construction of
Suket Shopping Complex near Bus Stand at
Sundernager was awarded (November 2004) toa
contractor for %1.75 crore with a stipulation to
complete it within a year. The contractor started
the work in November 2004 and 1.43 crore was
paid to him for the work. The contractor
executed work up to July 2008. Thereafter, the
work was stopped by him without any reason.
The Executive Officer (EO) MC, Sundernagar
levied 10 per cent compensation of %17.51 lakh
under clause of the agreement in July 2009 and
also granted extension of time upto August 2009.
Despite this, the contractor did not resume the
work and the contract was ultimately rescinded
in October 2009 without invoking the provision
of clause 3 (a) of the agreement to get the
balance work executed at the risk and cost of the
contractor from other agency. The balance work
was split up into six parts and awarded (between
November 2010 and April 2011) to four
contractors at tendered cost of 1.11 crore witha
stipulation to complete it within three to six
months. However, only in one case, a contractor
has started (January 2011) the work of basement
of floor and in other five cases, the work was not
taken up by the contractors as of April 2011. In
the meantime the cost of work has also been
escalated by %0.79 crore by rewarding the
balance work and the MC had not taken any

Chapter 7: General Services

action to get revised A/A and E/S from the Urban
Development Department. Audit further noticed
that main reason for not starting the work by the
contractors was due to non-availability of funds
with the MC. In these circumstances the chances
of completion of above work are remote in near
future and the investment of %1.43 crore made
so far, was rendered unfruitful as the objective of
providing shopping complex facilities to the
public still remained to be achieved.

The Executive Officer Sundernagar while
admitting the facts stated (April 2011) that the
remaining work would be executed on receipt of
funds by auction of shops after their completion.
The reply is not acceptable as award of work
without ensuring availability of funds showed
failure of the MC authorities to initiate timely
action for taking up the case with UDD for
sanction and release of funds.

>» Non-commencement of construction of
Rehan Basera building

NP Sarkaghat received (between July 2001 and
August 2008) %18.91 lakh for the construction of
Rehan Basera building at Sarkaghat under the
Environmental Improvement of Urban Slums
(EIUS)/National Slum Development Programme
(NSDP). The work awarded (July 2002) to a
contractor for %9.27 lakh could not be taken up
till 2004 due to non-handing over of site to the
contractor. The land earmarked for the building
was in fact in the possession of the Forest
Department. The matter to transfer the land
remained under correspondence for about three
years and the same was finally handed over to
the NP in February 2007. The NP decided
(April 2007) to get this work executed by HPPWD
division, Sarkaghat and deposited %five lakh with
the division. However, NP Sarkaghat again
decided (December 2007) to execute the work by
itself but construction of the building was not
taken up as of (April 2011).

Thus, due to defective planning, %18.91 lakh
provided for creation of temporary shelter to the
needy people remained unutilised.


Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March 2011 > |

While admitting the facts, the Secretary NP
Sarkaghat stated (April 2011) that the work was
technically sanctioned in March 2010 for
%46.45 lakh and also awarded (August 2010) to a
contractor but could not be started due to non-
availability of additional fund and land
development. This showed laxity on the part of
NP to initiate timely action for placing a demand
for additional funds to get the work done in time.

7.2.2 Lack of Civil Amenities

To ensure the provision of street lights in the
town is the responsibility of the urban local body.
NP Rewalsar decided (May 2008) to provide
street light in all the wards and made a budget
provision of %2.39 lakh therefor in March 2010.
However, none of these wards was provided with
street light as of April 2011. The Secretary, NP
stated (April 2011) that HPSEB refused to
execute the work and NP has awarded it
(November 2010) to a contractor with a
stipulation to complete it within two months.
However, the work remained unexecuted due to
non-conducting of inspection of the site by
the HPSEB.

7.2.3 Waste Management

Municipal authorities are responsible for
collection, storage, segregation, transportation,

Photograph: 13

Sundernagar area (4 June 2010)

processing and disposal of Municipal Solid
Waste. A review of the process involved in solid
wastes management in the district revealed the
following:

. MC Sundernagar area produces 30
tonnes of garbage per day. To collect this waste,
44 dustbins, one dumper placer and one
uncovered tractor have been provided in the
town. There was no proper system for the
disposal of hazardous waste and the dumping
site is also in the open place. The Director, Urban
Development Department (UDD) released
(February 2009) 70 lakh for implementation of
Solid Waste Management Project within a period
of one year. Out of this, %12.94 lakh
(Construction of retaining wall: 10.28 lakh and
Garbage Auto: 2.66 lakh) was spent and the
balance amount of %57.06 lakh remained
unutilised as of April 2011 due to non-
construction of other components of work such
as platform for dry composting, pits/batteries for
garbage and approach roads/internal roads, etc.
Thus, due to non-completion of Solid Waste
Management Project within a laid down
timeframe, disposal of hazardous waste/garbage
was being done in a haphazard manner in open
dustbins leading its spillage on roads and at the
roadside connecting the dumping site as can be
seen from the following photographs:

Photograph: 14

Fe

Garbage dumped at roadside in MC,
Sundernagar area (4 June 2010)



The EO, MC Sundernagar while admitting the
facts stated (April 2011) that the staff remained
busy in other priority works and work on some of
the components of the project could not be
taken up. The reply is not acceptable as the
funds for waste management project were also
required to be utilised within the prescribed
timeframe, to achieve the intended objective.

. MC Mandi area generates 23 to 24 tons
of garbage daily. In order to collect this waste, 66
dustbins, three dumper containers and one
uncovered tractor have been provided. The
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)
sanctioned (September 2005) a project at an
estimated cost of %1.09 crore for creation of
model facilities for solid waste management in
the town. The project was stipulated to be
completed within a period of three years. The
cost sharing between CPCB and MC, Mandi was
in the ratio of 90:10. The CPCB released its share
of %0.98 crore to Himachal Pradesh State
Environment Protection and Pollution Control
Board (HPSEPCB) between August 2005 and
September 2008 for further release to MC
Mandi. Against this, HPSEPCB released only
%0.76 crore to MC, Mandi and retained the
balance amount %0.22 crore which remained
unutilised with HPSEPCB as of April 2011. The
MC Mandi had spent %1.10 crore (%0.34 crore

Photograph: 15

Chapter 7: General Services

from its own funds) on the implementation of
aforesaid project upto April 2011 but could not
establish model facilities of solid waste
management fully due to non-completion of
some components such as storage at community
level, waste processing and disposal facility, and
procurement of a tipper mounted tight
commercial vehicle, etc. The disposal of the
garbage/ waste after street sweeping at dumping
site was also going in an unscientific manner,
causing adverse impact on the recipient
environment and causing air pollution. It shows
that the implementation status of the project
was unsatisfactory.

Thus, despite incurring an expenditure of
%1.10 crore, the objective of creation of model
facilities for solid waste management in the town
remained unachieved.

It was also noticed that waste, after street
sweeping, was being transported in open
vehicles and thrown at dumping site in an
unscientific manner causing air pollution and
health hazards to the general public. Dumping
site was also not fenced/hedged with the proper
gate. As a result stray animals were freely
wandering and scattering the garbage, as is
evidenced from the following photographs:

Photograph: 16

Scattering of garbage by stray animals at
dumping site in MC, Mandi area (10 May 2010)

Garbage transported in open vehicle in MC,

Mandi area (10 May 2010)



Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March201t,0

. Jogindernagar NP area generates about
12 quintals of garbage everyday. To collect this
garbage, NP has placed 20 dustbins and one
uncovered tractor. The HPSEPCB Shimla
released (March 2009) %3.67 lakh under the cess
funds share for the construction of retaining wall
at dumping site. The dumping site was closed in
September 2008 due to objection raised by the
people living in nearby village and the amount

Photograph: 17

remained unspent as of April 2011. Presently no
dumping site is available with the NP and
garbage/waste was being lifted by hiring a tipper
of private person once a week. Dustbins placed in
different places of the town were overflowing
and garbage/waste was scattered around the
dustbins as is evidenced from the following
photographs:

Photograph: 18

Garbage scattered on roadside from open
dustbin in Jogindernagar NP area
(17 May 2010)

Garbage lying on the roadside creating
unhygienic condition in Jogindernagar NP area
(17 May 2010)

The system of segregation, collection, storage of
garbage had collapsed in the town and NP failed
to manage the solid waste of the town
scientifically. The solid waste lying on the
roadside has been creating unhygienic
conditions as well as violating the provisions of
Municipal Solid Waste Rules 2000.

While admitting the facts, Secretary NP,
Jogindernagar stated (April 2011) that the matter
for providing the land for dumping site had been
taken up with the Deputy Commissioner Mandi.

. In Sarkaghat NP area, about 2.8 tonnes of
garbage is generated everyday. To collect this
garbage NP has placed seven open and 28
covered dustbins. There is no proper system for
the disposal of solid waste/garbage. The
dumping site is also in an open place. The
garbage/waste was being lifted by naked hands
by the Safai karamcharies from dustbins for
loading in the open tipper which was hazardous
for their health as would be seen from the
photograph 19:



Photograph: 19

at भ्म्ध्का

WEEP CROTAMCT

Safai Karamchari lifting garbage without gloves in Sarkaghat NP area (24 May 2010)

Recommendations

>

Execution of developmental works by the
MCs/NPs need to be monitored effectively
to avoid cost escalation and to ensure
completion of works in a time bound
manner.

Waste Management plans also need to be
developed in an integrated manner to
ensure proper management of disposal of
municipal solid waste.

Closed Garbage bins of appropriate
standard need to be designed to prevent
spillage of garbage on roads and to ensure
proper hygienic condition in the area.

Action to earmark the dumping ground by
the MCs/NPs for the disposal of solid waste
need to be taken to avoid un-hygienic
conditions.



To assess the impact of the various rural different parameters. Replies were received
developmental schemes in the district, from all the 100 Gram Panchayats and their
questionnaires were issued to 100 Gram_ responsesare given below:

Panchayats regarding their satisfaction level on

1 Condition of the roads connecting Bad: 42 percent
villages, villages with Block | -
Headquarters and district town Repair required: 57 per cent

No road available: one per cent

| Drinking water supply Available: 53 per cent
Partially available: 46 per cent

Not available: one per cent

| | Bank branch in the village Available: 21 per cent

Not available: 79 per cent

7 Medical facilities Available: 59 per cent

Not available: 41 per cent



The responses indicate poor satisfaction level of Recommendation
the people in respect of road conditions, bus,
drinking water supply and availability of cooking
gas and bank facilities, etc.



9.1

Inspection and Supervision

The DCis responsible for monitoring the progress
of implementation of various developmental
programmes in the district and ensuring that
these are executed within the specified
timeframe and approved budget. While most of
the Central and State plan schemes specify the
monitoring requirements, in general, most

schemes require that the DC monitor the
progress on a monthly/quarterly basis. The
District Planning and Development Committee is
also required to review the progress of schemes
every quarter. In addition, the State Government
has also specified the extent of supervision to be
carried out at various levels with regard to the
developmental works/projects, as follows:

Table 31; Percentage of inspections of works/projects to be carried out at various levels

Block Development Officer / Junior Engineer 100
District Planning Officer a Ce
Addl. DC / Add|. DM 5
Sub-Divisional Officer ee  फिडििि
Deputy Commissioner 4
Official from State Planning Department 1

Apart from the stipulated personal inspection
and supervision, review of the execution of
schemes was also to be done through periodical
review reports and statements of expenditure
(SOE) to be sent from various levels-GPs to the
Blocks, Blocks to the DRDA/DC, DC to the State
Government and onwards to the Central
Government, for the Central schemes.

Audit scrutiny, however, revealed that
monitoring and supervision of the progress of
implementation of various schemes in the
district was not satisfactory. The District Planning
and Development Committee convened only six
meetings against requirement of 15 during
2006-11. The DC reportedly held monthly
meetings with the BDOs to review the progress
of execution of works/ schemes. There is,
however, no record of the discussions or the
decisions taken in such meetings or further
directions given to overcome the bottlenecks, if

any, in the execution of the schemes. While the
DPO stated (June 2010) that field visits and
inspections were carried out both by the DC and
the Addl. DC, there were no reports available in
the office relating to such visits.

In the exit conference, the Additional DC stated
(October 2011) that monitoring/inspections of
works was being done at all level but necessary
records of such inspections were not
maintained. The fact, however, remains that in
the absence of any records the issue of
transparency and follow up action on the
execution of works was not addressed.

It was also noticed that the sampled blocks and
GPs, do not send the Statements of Expenditure
ona monthly basis to the DC. District Planning
Officer stated (June 2010) that efforts were being
made to get the information regularly from the
concerned agencies.



Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March 2011 FT

9.2 Grievance Redressal

The State Government has instituted mechanism
at the district level to redress the grievances of
the policy makers and public. The Grievances
Cell has been set up in the office of the DC with
staff, which caters to two types of grievances-
those received through (a) Governor, Chief
Minister and Ministers of the State; and (b) from
the general public. The time frame specified by

the State Government for redressing the
grievances in (a) is one month and those in (b) is
one and a half months. The department has not
maintained separate records of grievances
received through Governor, Chief Minister and
Ministers of the State and from the general
public. The position relating to number of
grievances received and those redressed during
the last five years (upto March 2011) as reported
by the DC's office, is depicted below:

Table 32: Position of number of grievances received and those redressed during 2006-11

Received 1071 856

798 785 4002

Redressed 686 | 49 |

474 | | 3347

The grievances are sent by the cell to the
concerned line departments for taking necessary
action with a copy to the complainant. Once
action is taken on the complaint/grievances, the
line department intimates the cell which in turn
informs the complainant.

The District Planning Officer stated (May 2011)
that for the pending cases pertaining to the
different departments, reminders are being
issued to them for their disposal.

In sum, monitoring and supervision of the
progress of implementation of various schemes
at all tiers of local administration in the district
was perfunctory which impacted the progress

by various departments/implementing
agencies. Consequently, there were number of

works in the social and economic sectors which
were plagued by cost and time overruns
thereby depriving the public of the benefits of
these developmental schemes.

Recommendation



There is multiplicity of programmes and schemes
and even larger number of implementing
agencies, making it difficult for the district
administration to effectively monitor and
supervise the developmental activities. While
almost all the developmental programmes are
targeted at the same set of beneficiaries, the
existence of myriad programmes without an
integrated focus, has led to each of them being
implemented ina stand alone mode.

To ensure efficiency and effectiveness in delivery
of key services like education, health,
employment, etc., the Gol has increasingly been
entrusting the responsibility at the local level,
especially the PRIs. This is also intended to ensure
that the local Government at the district, block
and GP level are empowered to discharge the
functions that are constitutionally assigned to
them. It was observed that absence of adequate
participation from these levels in the planning
process is hindering the planned progress of the

Shimla
The

district and address the felt needs at the grass
root level. While the PRIs are empowered to
prepare specific plans for an integrated
development of their area, lack of structured
annual action plans from these levels and
absence of capacity building have resulted in
their inability to expend the funds provided to
them for implementation of various
programmes.

Adequate monitoring mechanism is either not
instituted, or is not functioning as envisaged, with
regard to execution of schemes. While plans have
been formulated for providing integrated
development of a sector/service, these could not
be executed in a time bound manner due to
non-compliance with the required formalities like
obtaining clearance for forest land or clear title to
land. The State Government will have to address
these serious issues in order to achieve real
development of the district at the desired pace.

(J. Wilson)

Accountant General (Audit)
Himachal Pradesh

Countersigned

New Delhi
The

VR

(Vinod Rai)
Comptroller and Auditor General of India



Glossary of abbreviations

Expanded form
AA/ES Administrative Approval/Expenditure Sanction
AAP Annual Action Plan
ABER Annual Blood Examination Rate
ADC Additional Deputy Commissioner
ANC Antenatal Care
ARWSP Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme
ASHA Accredited Social Health Activist
BCG Bacillus Calmette Guerin
BDO Block Development Officer
BPL Below Poverty Line
C&V Craft and Vernacular
CAP Comprehensive Action Plan
CEO Chief Executive Officer
CH Civil Hospital
CHC Community Health Centre
CMO Chief Medical Officer
(5९ Common Services Centre
DAPO District Aids Programme Officer
Dc Deputy Commissioner
DCP Decentralised Planning
DDHE Deputy Director Higher Education
DE Director Education
DHE Director Higher Education
DHS District Health Society
DIC District Informatics Centre
DM District Magistrate
DPC District Planning Committee
DPDC District Planning Development and Twenty Point Review Committee
DPO District Project Officer
DPR Draft Project Report
DPT Diptheria Pertussis Tetanus
DRDA District Rural Development Agency
DT Diptheria Tetanus
FHAC Family Health Awareness Camp
FRU First Referral Unit
GHS Government High School
Gol Government of India


Audit Report on District Mandi (Report No. 5) for the year ended 31 March 2011

GP Gram Panchayat

GSSS Government Senior Secondary School

HM Headmaster

HPSEB Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board
1005 Integrated Child Development Services
105८ Integrated Community Service Centre

IcTC Integrated Counseling and Testing Centre
IEC Information Education and Communication
IFA Iron Folic Acid

IMR Infant Mortality Rate

IPH Irrigation and Public Health

IRDP Integrated Rural Development Programme
IT Information Technology

JBT Junior Basic Teacher

JSY Janani Suraksha Yojana

MC Municipal Council

MCH Maternal and Child Health

MCs Municipal Committees

MD Mission Director

MLA Member of Legislative Assembly

MLALADS Vidhayak Kshetriya Vikas Nidhi Yojana
MMGPY Mukhya Mantri Gram Path Yojana

MMR Maternal Mortality Rate

MP Member of Parliament

MPLADS. Member of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme
NABARD National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
NACO National Aids Control Organisation

NACP National Aids Control Programme

NPCB National Programme for Control of Blindness
NGO Non-Government Organisation

NLEP National Leprosy Eradication Programme
NP Nagar Panchayat

NREGP National Rural Employment Guarantee Programme
NRHM National Rural Health Mission

NVBDCP National Vector Borne Control Programme
OBC Other Backward Class

07५ Oral Polio Vaccine

PD Project Director

PHC Primary Health Centre

PMGSY Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana

PO Project Officer


Public Works Department

. SDM

SGRY

SITEG

558

STD

STP

VBTC

VMIS

| RD Rural Development Agency
RGGVY Rajiv Gandhi Gramin Vidyutikaran Yojana
sc Sub Centre

Sub-Divisional Magistrate

Sampoorna Gramin Rozgar Yojana

Society for Promotion of Information Technology and E-Governance

Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan

Sexually Transmitted Diseases

Sewage Treatment Plant

Trained Graduate Teacher

Tetanus Toxoid

Urban Development

Voluntary Blood Testing Centre

Vikas Mein Jan Sahyog