Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on

Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in
Karnataka

Government of Karnataka
Report No. 2 of the year 2012



TABLE OF CONTENTS

Preface

| vi

hapter-I

Executive Summary | ix-xi | -xi
Cc

Introduction to Controls and Systems for
Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

| ३ |

| om | Introductory 3

| 2. [Organisationalsetp |
1.3 Audit Criteria aw
| 14 | Audit objectives | 4 |

|. | Reasons for selection and scope of Performance pf
Audit

aw Methodology of audit Ly
1.7 | Productionof MajorMinerals = = | 7
एन Trend of revenue 7
| "9 [Acknowledgement =|
| Mo |ThisReport |

Chapter-I | Management of Mineral Resources
| | 13

Karnataka Mineral Policy

| “४ | Implementation of Mineral Policy | 8 |

(a - बा Grant of Mining Leases for integrated steel plant yj

| / | Implementation of measures to improve ||
environment and livelihood of people

| 25 | Conclusion | 16 |

| “ | Recommendations 17



Chapter-HI Financial Management in Department of Mines

and Geolo:
31 Trend of revenue | 3 |
| ae | Revenue mobilisation Ea
G38) Assessment of royalty Ew al
| | Non/short-collection of royalty by DMG due to | |
incorrect adoption of opening balance and
closing balance
| 38 | Non-levy of interest | 3 |
(ee | Deduction of royalty by other departments |
3; Non-collection of processing fee 31
| | Non-maintenance of records in respect of | |
ornamental stone quarries
a Unrealistic assessment of production of building 33
stone
3.10 Demand, Collection and Balance (DCB) | |
statements
3.11 Arrears of revenue | 35 |
3.12 Internal audit 36
3.13 Conclusion hey
3.14 Recommendations | |

Chapter-IV Sanction and Renewal of Mining Lease

Ew Mining Cycle | 3 |
लि नं Grant of permits/licence/mining leases il
| 8 | Deficiencies in processing of applications 47
| “४ | Renewal of leases El

fo TSSSeS
ii


| | Non/short realisation of stamp duty and [|
registration fee on mining/quarrying lease deeds

| | Conclusion | * |

4.7 Recommendations |

Chapter-V Exploration of Mineral Reserves

aw Classification of reserves 31,

aaa Approval of mining plans 57

| | Non-submission of quarry plan in respect of | |
ornamental quarry leases

| Utilisation of Satellite Imagery and field data for al
assessment of mineral wealth and environmental
impact

me Conclusion | “ |

aa Recommendations meal

Chapter-VI Irregularities in Mining

| ४ | Delay in framing rules to prevent irregular |]
mining and transportation

| 62 Irregular extraction of minerals 70

| | Transportation of minerals without valid |]
permits

| 4 | Conclusion | 9 |

| 6s | Recommendations | 36 | |



Chapter-VII | Enforcement activities of Department of Mines

and Geolo:

wl Deficiencies noticed in functioning of Check | |
posts

7.2 Improper maintenance of Vehicle Check 93
Register

3 Working of the Mobile squad Ea

7.4 Improper maintenance/misuse of Tripsheets | |

75 Conclusion | »5 |

7.6 Recommendations | 3 |

Chapter-VIII_ | Environment Issues

| | Failure to adhere to recommendations of NEERI al
for environmental safe mining

| | Failure to comply with the conditions stipulated |
for diversion of forest land

| = | Execution of reclamation works 103

| ४ | Failure to monitor the plantations raised by the | ४ |
lessees

| Levy and collection of Environment Protection i |
Fee for diversion of non-forest land for mining
purposes

| 86 | Air, noise and water pollution due to mining | 105 |

8.7 Mining without consent from KSPCB | 109 |

8.8 Monitoring of conditions stipulated in the हि
Consent for Establishment

as Mining without environmental clearance Ea 11

| sto | Filing of annual environment statement | 11% |

ia Planting and maintenance of trees in quarry |]
leases



| _$12. | Conclusion | 113 | 13
| #3 | Recommendations | 13 | 13
Chapter-IX Socio-Economic Impact of Mining
Ea Introduction Ey |
| | Environmental Pollution ea 19
9.3 Impact of Mining on Animal Husbandry Sector | 120 |
[4] Impact of Mining on Agriculture |
| 7 | Encroachment of lands by mining companies Ea
Ew) Child Labour Te]
9.1 Damage to roads due to overloading of mine | |
lorries
| | Results of survey on impact on Socio-Economic | |
conditions
} 99 | Conclusion | 125 |
| 9.10. | Recommendations | BS) |
Chapter-X | Summary of Recommendations | 129 |
Glossary of abbreviations ney



PREFACE

This Report contains the results of the Performance Audit on Controls and
Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka under Article 151 (2) of the

Constitution of India.

The audit of non-tax mining receipts of the State Government is conducted
under Section 16 of the Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers

and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971.

The issue regarding illegal mining of Iron Ore has been widely reported in the
print and electronic media. The Lokayukta of Karnataka has submitted the final
report to the Government in July 2011 on illegal mining in Karnataka for the
period from 2006-07 to July 2010. Separately the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
directed the Central Empowered Committee (CEC) and the Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI) to probe into the issue of illegal mining in Karnataka. In the
context of the issues highlighted in the report of the Lokayukta and the concerns
expressed by the CEC, Audit felt it appropriate to conduct a performance
appraisal on the controls and systems in place in the State of Karnataka for
ensuring and regulating legitimate and sustainable mining. This report is in
pursuance of such an audit. The report does not audit issues connected with
illegal mining of Iron Ore as that issue has been adequately examined by the
Lokayukta and under investigation by CBI.

The cases mentioned in this Report relating to the period from 2006-07 to
2010-11, are among those which came to notice in the course of test-audit of
records of selected units during the year 2011-12, as well as, those noticed in

earlier years but could not be included in the previous reports.

vii


A Performance Audit was conducted on Controls and Systems for Sustainable
Mining in Karnataka to ascertain whether policies of the Government were
monitored and implemented; the system of assessment, levy and collection of
revenue was effective and efficient. The impact of mining on socio-economic
and environment sectors has been discussed.

The audit revealed a number of system and compliance deficiencies which are
briefly discussed in this Rerort.

General

Management of mineral resources is the responsibility of both the Central and
the State Governments in terms of entry 54 of the Union list and entry 23 and
50 of the State list of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India. The
Department of Mines and Geology is responsible for the levy and collection of
mineral receipts based on the production and despatch of minerals.

(Paragraph 1.1)
Audit findings

In the course of audit it was noticed that a committee for implementation and
monitoring of Karnataka Mineral Policy (KMP), 2008 was formed in July
2009 under the chairmanship of the Secretary, Commerce and Industries
Department. However, even after a lapse of three years of its formation, the
Government has not formulated any time bound action plan to monitor the
implementation of the KMP, so that the desired objectives of the policy could
be achieved in a time bound manner.

(Paragraph 2.2.2)

Audit revealed that though the Government constituted a high level committee
in May 2007 under the chzirmanship of the Chief Secretary of the State for
working out the modalities for granting leases to integrated steel plants, no
mining lease was sanctioned to these steel plants after 2007.

(Paragraph 2.3)

Incorrect application of sale prices of iron ore published by the India Bureau
of Mines (IBM) in 36 cases in three divisions resulted in short levy of royalty
amounting to हैं 13.11 crore.

(Paragraph 3.3)

There was lack of co-ordination between work executing departments
responsible for deduction cf royalty at source and the Department of Mines
and Geology (DMG). This resulted in non/short collection and remittance of
royalty to the extent of € 23.75 crore to the Government,

(Paragraph 3.6)

Audit found procedural inconsistencies and lack of transparency in the
Department while considering applications for mining lease, which triggered a
number of court cases.

(Paragraph 4.3.1 and 4.3.2)


Non-insistence for registration of lease deeds and short determination of
consideration for levy of stemp duty resulted in non/short realisation of stamp
duty and registration fee of ? 1.11 crore.

(Paragraph 4.5)

Deficiencies in fixation of annual targets for production of iron ore were
noticed, quarry plans in 104 out of 120 granite quarry leases test checked were
not available, leading to no1-monitoring of activities of lessees as per mining
plan.

(Paragraph 5.2.1 and 5.3)

Though the State was empowered to frame rules for preventing illegal mining,
transportation and storage cf minerals, these were not framed till April 2011.
This resulted in irregular mining, transportation, etc. and loss of revenue to the
State exchequer.

(Paragraph 6.1)

In three Divisions, four lessees had extracted 14.68 lakh MT of iron ore valued
बारें 150.59 crore either without the approval of mining scheme or without the
consent of Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB).

(Paragraph 6.2.1)

Iron ore of 9.95 lakh MT valued at = 107.40 crore was extracted beyond the
permissible limit prescribed in the mining plan. The cost of the mineral
though recoverable, was not recovered. Besides, three lessees had extracted
3.26 lakh MT of iron ore valued at & 40.46 crore before entering into mining
leases.

(Paragraph 6.2.2 and 6.2.3)

There was lack of coordination between Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM),
Commercial Tax Department (CTD), Forest Department, Transport
Department and DMG to ascertain the correct quantity of the production
figures of iron ore. We alsc found that the data/information relating to mining
activities available with the departments like Transport, Forest, Commercial
Tax were at variance with the data available with the DMG.

(Paragraph 6.2.7)

The mining operations were taken up without obtaining statutory clearances
from Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF)/Karnataka State Pollution
Control Board (KSPCB) and the quantity of mineral valued at 562.79 crore
produced was more than the quantity prescribed in environment clearance and
the consent issued by KSPCB.

(Paragraph 8.7 and 8.9)


Higher level of air pollution contributed to the growth of diseases like
tuberculosis and other respiratory infections in the mining taluks of Hospet
and Sandur. The area under cultivation and irrigation in Bellary had declined
leading to increase in the extent of barren land. Report on prosecution of the
employers under Child Labour Act was indicative of promotion of child
labour which apart from being unlawful would affect the sustained
development of the society.

(Paragraph 9.9)

xi


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

CHAPTER - I
INTRODUCTION TO CONTROLS AND
SYSTEMS FOR SUSTAINABLE MINING IN

KARNATAKA
Introductory 11
Organisational setup 1.2
Audit Criteria 1.3
Audit objectives 1.4

Reasons for selection and scope of Performance Audit 1.5

Methodology of audit 1.6
Production of Major Minerals 1.7
Trend of revenue 1.8
Acknowledgement 1.9

This Report 1.10


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

CHAP’ -I

INTRODUCTION TO CONTROLS

1.1 Introductory

Minerals are valuable natural resources which are finite and non-renewable.
Mineral exploration and development is closely linked with development of
country’s economy and the people. However, as it intervenes with the
environment and social structure, a harmony and balance is to be maintained
between conservation and extraction in the interest of sustainable
development. Minerals are classified as major minerals (iron ore, manganese,
gold, etc.) and minor mineréls (granite, building stone, gravel, sand, etc).

The responsibility for the management of mineral resources is shared between
the Central and State Govemments'. The Mines and Minerals (Development
and Regulation) (MMDR) Act, 1957 enacted by the Central Government, lays
down the legal framework for regulation of mines and development of
minerals? The Mineral Concession (MC) Rules, 1960, the Mineral
Conservation and Development (MCD) Rules, 1988 and the Granite
Conservation and Development Rules, 1999 have been framed for
conservation and systematic development of minerals and for regulating grant
of permits, licences and leases.

Legislations for exploitation of minor minerals have been delegated to the
States. Accordingly, Karnataka Minor Mineral Concession (KMMC) Rules,
1994 were framed by the State Government.

The Department of Mines and Geology (DMG) is responsible for the levy and
collection of mineral receipts based on the production and dispatch of
minerals. The DMG is under the administrative control of the Principal
Secretary to the Government of Karnataka, Commerce and Industries
Department. The Director of Mines and Geology is responsible for
implementation of the related Acts and Rules for the Controls and systems for
sustainable mining in Karnataka and assisted by Additional Director
(Mineral), Joint Director (Administration), Accounts Officer and Deputy
Directors for Legal, Mineral Administration and Planning & Monitoring at
headquarters besides two Joint Directors for North zone and South zone.
There are 31 district level offices; each office headed by a Deputy Director or
a Senior Geologist.

* Entry 54 of the Union list (list I) and entry 23 and 50 of the State list (list 1) of the Seventh
Schedule of the Constitution of India,
? Other than petroleum and naturel gas and atomic minerals.


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

The audit criteria are derived from the following Central and State Laws and
the Rules made there under to govern the management and regulation of mines
and levy and collection of royalty.

OPN AAPS WD =

The MMDR Act, 1957

The MC Rules, 1966

Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974

Forest Conservation Act, 1980

Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and Rules made thereunder
Mineral Conservation and Development (MCD) Rules, 1988
Kamataka Minor Mineral Concession (KMMC) Rules, 1994
Granite Conservation and Development Rules, 1999

National Mineral Policy 1993 and 2008

Karnataka Mineral Folicy 2000 and 2008

Relevant Notifications/Circulars issued by the Central/State
Government/Directorate of the Mines and Geology

INTOSAI Guidelines on auditing of Mining Sector.

Audit objectives

The main audit objectives were to ascertain whether effective controls and
systems were in place for:

monitoring and implementation of mining policies of the Government;
levy and collection of fees, rent, royalty, penalty etc.;

grant and renewal of mining and quarrying leases for prevention of
illegal excavation of minerals;

estimation of mineral resources and for fixing targets of production;
ensuring that environmental and ecological concerns were addressed and
preventive measures were useful; and

addressing the socio economic concerns of the persons affected by
mining.

to 2005-06 appeared in the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India for the year 2006. The Report is yet to be discussed by the Public
Accounts Committee (PAC). The issue of illegal mining of iron ore was
repeatedly covered in the print and electronic media, The Lokayukta of
Karnataka submitted (July 2011) final report on illegal mining in Karnataka to
the Government covering tke period from 2006-07 to July 2010. The issue of
illegal mining in Karnataka was also taken up by the Hon’ble Supreme Court
who directed the Central Empowered Committee (CEC) and the Central
Bureau of Investigation (CEI) to investigate the matter.

In view of the issues higtlighted in the Report of the Lokayukta and the
concerns expressed by tke CEC, we felt it appropriate to conduct a
performance appraisal on the controls and systems in place in the State of
Karnataka for legitimate and sustainable mining.


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

The controls comprise policy initiatives and their implementation, the
regulatory frame work for processing applications and allotment of leases, the
approval of mining plans, assessments of quantities mined and permission for
transportation of the same along with enforcement activities. The other crucial
systems governing the mining of natural resources in the State include
protective measures for safeguarding the environment as well as the well
being of the local citizenry. The existing processes and status of the controls
have been analysed to see how effective they are, to what extent they conform
to the stated policy objectives including revenue maximization and sustainable
development. The gaps between policy and implementation and their effect on
environment have been higtlighted.

The Performance Audit relies on samples selected for analysis of each of the
controls and individual instances have been quoted to the extent that these
support our observations or recommendations. These instances, however, do
not reflect the whole gamut of transactions connected with mining. The
Performance Audit also does not deal with those examples of individual
irregularities that have already been examined by the Lokayukta, which is a
statutory institution with a mandated procedure for action taken and follow up
on its reports.

To achieve our objectives, we test-checked during 2011-12 the records of the
DMG at the selected districts, records at the Secretariat of Commerce and
Industries Department, Environment and Ecology Department, Indian Bureau
of Mines (IBM), Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) and two
divisional forest offices (Chitradurga and Bellary) for the period from 2006-07
to 2010-11. The mining activities were stopped on the orders of Supreme
Court during most of 2011-12. As such this period has not been covered. We
selected mining of iron ore and stone quarrying in the State as these were the
two major contributors of revenue to the State in major and minor minerals.

Export of iron ore from the three ports of Karnataka viz., Mangalore, Belikere
and Karwar were not checked as it was dealt with extensively in the report of
the Lokayukta.

The Performance Audit also does not cover the activities of the Public Sector
Undertakings involved in mining except to the extent mentioned in Chapter-
VIII. Transactions relating to sale of mineral below the market price by
Mysore Minerals Limited (MML) involving % 82.20 crore have been
commented in the Commercial Audit Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India for the years 2005-06 to 2009-10. The Reports have already
been laid in the State Legislature and action in this regard is being taken by
Committee on Public Undertakings (COPU).

1.6 Methodology of audit

The sample selected by us for audit was a judgmental sampling based on the
criteria mentioned in the following paragraph:


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

1. Iron ore Major contributor of revenue’.
2. Stones Media reports on illegal quarrying.

ffices of the Deputy | Finding in the Hon'ble Lokayukta report,
media reports on illegal mining
regions having maximum contribution of
revenue.

Field offices of DMG
for major minerals

Field offices of DMG Media reports on illegal quarrying and
results of our local audit in the previous

Scrutiny of the systems in dlace
for grant and renewal of mining
leases in the Director’s office
and actual transactions ir the
office of the DD, Hospet were
conducted based on random
sampling. In the field offices of
Tumkur and Chitradurga, the
transactions were checked ‘ully.
In respect of minor minerals,
transactions of the six selzcted
divisions were test checked
based on random sampling.

Districts selected
for Audit

With a view to assess the social
and economic impact of mining,
we scrutinised data available
with the district offices of the
Agriculture, Veterinary services,
Medical, Labour, Health and
Statistics departments of Bellary
district besides conducting a
local survey in Hospet and
Sandur taluks with the help of
the Revenue authorities.
Further, the services of three
subject experts from the Incian Institute of Science, Bangalore were obtained,
We held meetings with lessees viz. MML, Hutti Gold Mines Limited
(HGML) and Sandur Manganese and Iron Ore Limited (SMIORE). We also
consulted Indian Space Research Organisation and Geological Survey of
India.

३ 29 per cent of the revenue frommajor minerals


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

n of major mine

We noticed that the despatches of iron orc was consistently showing a
decreasing trend from 2007-08 to 2009-10 though there was increase in
production from 2006-07 to 2008-09 as is evident from the data* on
production and despatch of major minerals during the years
2006-07 to 2010-11 summarised below:

1.8

The components of the revenue are royalty, penalty, fee, interest etc. The
details of revenue realised under the Head of Account “0853 — Non-Ferrous
Mining and Metallurgical Irdustries” for the years 2006-07 to 2010-11 and the
variations in revenue over previous year and its growth rate were as under:

id of Revenue

47235 28.96

356.07 33.72 i772
5457
| 2010] | 11596 |[ 32646 |

It could be seen from the above that the growth rate of revenue ranged
between 17.72 per cent and 54.57 per cent.

1.9 Acknowledgement

The Indian Audit and Accounts Department acknowledges the co-operation
extended by the Director of Mines and Geology and all the departmental
officers for their cooperation in completing the audit. We have benefited from
the opinions and research findings of three subject experts of the Indian
Institute of Science (15९0, Bangalore namely, Dr. T. V. Ramachandra,
Prof. K. A. Natarajan and Dr. N.K.S. Rajan. Further, we acknowledge the
cooperation of the Indian Space Research Organisation and Geological Survey
of India for sharing their knowledge with us on usage of satellite imagery and
survey.

* As obtained from DMG, Goverrment of Karnataka


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

We held an entry conference with the Principal Secretary, Commerce and
Industries Department on 22 August 2011, wherein we explained objectives,
scope and methodology of audit. We also held an exit conference with the
Secretary, Commerce and Industries Department on 3 September 2012. The
replies received in the exi! conference and other points of time have been
commented in the relevant paragraphs.

1.10 This Report

This Report on "Performance Audit on Controls and Systems for Sustainable
Mining in Karnataka" consists of 47 paragraphs relating to assessment, levy
and collection of revenue and to assess the impact of mining on socio-
economic and environment sectors. It revealed a number of system and
compliance deficiencies in the assessment, collection and accounting of
revenue involving monetary implication of % 3,414.45 crore. Out of these, the
Department accepted audit observations involving हैं 1,212.12 crore and
recovered % 7.22 crore. These are discussed in succeeding Chapters II to IX.


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

CHAPTER - II
MANAGEMENT OF MINERAL RESOURCES



Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

2R Il - MANAG

In this chapter we discuss the policies of the Union Government and the State
Government with regard to minerals, the action plan devised to implement the
policy and the efficacy of the monitoring mechanism which was in place to ensure
proper implementation of the mineral policies.

National Mineral Policy (NMP) 1993, as amended in 2008 was framed with a
view to developing a sustainable framework for optimum utilisation of mineral
wealth for industrial growth while improving the living standards of the affected
population and keeping pace with the national policy goals and encouraging
private investments in the mining sector.

Consequently the Government of Karnataka framed the ‘Karnataka Mineral
Policy (KMP) 2008’ with the following main objectives:

promote transparency in granting mining concessions

maximise value addition to the minerals extracted within the State by

encouraging maximum investments in downstream industries

formulate rules to regulate mineral trade

promote indigenous utilisation of iron ore fines and beneficiation of low

grade ores

pursue the policy of preserving flora, fauna and bio-diversity and ensure

that the invaluable forest wealth is safeguarded while granting mineral

concessions

promote scientific mining and good environmental management

ensure better quality of life for mine workers and their families, enforce

adherence to minimum wages and other statutory requirements as per law,

develop townships nearer to the workplace with health, educational,

recreational and other utilities

> apportion the revenue generated from mining towards development of
mining areas/districts

> encourage companies to practice corporate social responsibility.

vVvVvVVvV VV

vv

ion of the Mineral Policy

2.2.1 Paragraph 15 of the KMP states that the implementation of the policy was
to be monitored by a committee under the Chairmanship of the Additional Chief
Secretary and members drawn from the DMG, Forest Department, Revenue
Department, Public Works Department (PWD), Pollution Control Board, IBM,
Directorate of Mines Safety and representatives of mining and allied industries.
We noticed that no such committee under the chairmanship of the Additional
Chief Secretary was constituted by the State Government to monitor

13


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

implementation of the policy. This clearly shows failure in monitoring of
implementation of KMP at the apex level.

2.2.2 Formation of Committee for implementation of Karnataka Mineral
Policy

We noticed that a committee for implementation and monitoring of KMP, 2008,
was formed in July 2009 under the Chairmanship of the Secretary, Commerce and
Industries Department. This committee held two meetings (July 2009 and
February 2010).

In the first meeting, four task monitoring committees were formed to prepare
guidelines for implementation of the policy and to chalk out programmes to speed
up the implementation of the policy. In the second meeting, based on the
guidelines of the first meeting, an action plan was drawn by the task monitoring
committees for implementation of the policy. The action plan included
digitisation of geological maps of mining lease (ML) and quarrying leases (QL),
clearance of backlog of ML/QL applications, compilation of all mineral location
data, etc.

We noticed that no meeting was held after February 2010 to monitor the
implementation of the action plan. The digitised or compiled database, if any,
prepared by the DMG as per the action plan suggested by the committee, though
called for (January 2012) has not been made available (October 2012).

The Department stated (September 2012) that they had initiated action for
digitisation of the mineral resource maps district wise and mineralised belts have
been identified and plotted. Digitisation work of ML/QL of 4200 leases has been
completed and the balance leases would be digitised for users with online facility
for filing of application for the mining fraternity. However, the Department stated
(October 2012) that only 2984 ML/QL have been digitised and process of
digitisation of all ML/QL maps is underway.

The two sets of figures furnished by the Department regarding digitisation of
ML/QL as mentioned above are in variance and indicate that the data available
with the Department need reconciliation and proper monitoring.

The above facts indicate that even after a lapse of three years of formation of the
committee, the Government of Karnataka has not formulated any time bound
action plan to monitor the implementation of the KMP, so that desired objectives
of the policy are achieved in a time bound manner.

2.2.3. Formation of Coordination Committee for allocation of mining leases

The Government of India, Ministry of Steel, requested (June 2009) the State
Government to set up a Coordination-cum-Empowered Committee under the
chairmanship of the Chief Secretary with State level representatives from all the
concerned departments to speed up allocation of mineral concessions (leases) in
respect of raw materials for steel sector. Accordingly, the Government of
Karnataka, in January 2010, constituted a State level Coordination—cum-

4


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

Empowered Committee under the chairmanship of the Chief Secretary. The
functions of the committee included reviewing the implementation of KMP 2008,
building up of a computerised database, streamlining and simplification of grant
of mineral concessions and to review action taken by different departments to
check illegal mining. Though five meetings were held till January 2012, we
noticed that action plans were not drawn up for speedy allocation of the mining
leases to the steel sector and no efforts for implementation of KMP were found on
record.

After we pointed this out (December 2011 and January 2012), the Department
stated (October 2012) that action plan for implementation of KMP was discussed
in the meetings. However, we found that issues relating to the implementation
were not recorded in the minutes of the meetings, except at one occasion (second
meeting), wherein Chairman (Chief Secretary) had asked the Secretary
(Commerce and Industries) for taking appropriate action for implementation of
the computerisation of mineral administration at the earliest. Thereafter no follow
up for implementation of KMP was found on record.

ed steel plants

With a view to promoting captive consumption of minerals by integrated steel
plants for industrial growth simultancously improving economic development,
revenue mobilisation and employment generation, the Government constituted a
high level committee in May 2007 under the chairmanship of the Chief Secretary
with the Principal Secretaries of Commerce & Industries, Finance, Revenue,
Planning and Forest Departments as members. The committee was required to
work out the modalities of inviting mining lease applications from the existing
and proposed captive mine users preferably for integrated steel plants by duly
incorporating the terms and conditions and to scrutinise the same before finalising
the Memorandum of Understanding. It was also decided that the Member
Secretary (Secretary, Commerce & Industries Department) should come before
the committee with details regarding the modalities of inviting applications, areas
to be notified along with the sketch and other details. We also observed that the
no mining leases were sanctioned to integrated steel plants after 2007.

The Department accepted (September 2012) that no leases were sanctioned to
integrated steel plants after 2007 and stated that thousands of applications were
received over the notified areas which included those who were willing to
establish steel plant in the State. The Government of Karnataka had recommended
to the Government of India iron ore leases to eleven applicants who had
established steel plants in the State.

measures to improve environment and

The objectives KMP included ensuring of better quality of life for mine workers
and their families, development of townships with health, educational and
protection of environment etc. The 11" Five Year Plan (2007-12) suggested
measures which included building up infrastructure development in the Indian


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

mineral sector. We observed that effective steps were not taken for implementing

the suggestions as discussed below.

Setting up a Mineral Development
Fund (MDF), by carmarking fifteen
percent of the annual royalty
collections, in order to undertake the
task of building the infrastructure in
the mining areas.

Development of high quality roads
connecting priority sector mines to
loading stations. For this purpose,
the State Governments were required
to earmark revenue from their royalty

for reducing cost structure of various
steel plants.

Strengthening and improving railway
line carrying capacities in respect of
Bellary-Hospet Sector by increasing
the rake capacity, electrification of
all routes, doubling of tracks and
ensuring availability of wagon
Construction of railway line between
Hubli and Ankola for a distance of
172 Km on fast-track basis

The Department stated (October 2012)

No steps were taken by the Government for
setting up of a MDF.

The status of implementation of the suggestion
is still awaited from Government.

As per information furnished by South Western
Railway (SWR), Hubli, doubling of railway line
from Hospet to Vasco was sanctioned only in
2010-11 by the Railway Board at a cost of
₹ 2127 crore and entrusted to an agency.

With a view to increase the number of rakes
from 24 to 65 per day, remodeling of railway
yard at Hospet, which was sanctioned by the
Railway Board in 2008-09 for % 12.98 crore was
yet to commence as at the end of March 2012.
The SWR did not furnish information regarding
their efforts to deal with the increased demands
prior to 2010-11.

As per the information furnished by the SWR,
five additional sidings were under different
Stages of construction.

that a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV)

headed by the Chief Secretary would be established as recommended by CEC
which will plan and implement measures to improve the livelihood of the people
and improve the environment by providing high quality roads, dedicated freight
corridors, high tech hospitals, etc.

clusion

We noticed that though different committees were formed between May 2007 and
January 2012 to ensure implementation of objectives of the mineral policies, the
details of action plan suggested by those committees and their follow up were not
forthcoming from the records. Though the Government had a policy of granting
ML to integrated steel plants, we noticed that no mining leases were sanctioned to
integrated steel plants after 2007. The Government did not earmark 15 per cent
of the annual royalties collected towards MDF for building infrastructure in
mining areas. No new railway lines were commissioned.

16


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

1, The Government may consider putting in place a system for monitoring
the implementation of the KMP in a time bound manner so that desired
objectives of the KMP are achieved within a fixed time frame.

2. The Government may, in line with the suggestions made in the Five year
plan 2007-12, consider creation of a Mineral Development Fund to
undertake the task of building infrastructure in mining areas and make
efforts to get the railway lines commissioned to augment the transport
facilities in mining areas.

7


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

CHAPTER - III
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT IN

DEPARTMENT OF MINES AND GEOLOGY

Trend of revenue

Revenue mobilisation

Assessment of royalty

Non/short collection of royalty by Mines and Geology
Department due to incorrect adoption of opening
balance and closing balance

Non-levy of interest

Deduction of royalty by other departments

Non-collection of processing fee

Non-accounting of waste rocks in respect of
ornamental stone quarries

Unrealistic assessment of production of building stone
Demand, Collection and Balance (DCB) statements
Arrears of revenue

Internal audit

Conclusion

Recommendations

3.1

3.2

3.3

3.4

3.5

3.6

3.7

shal}

3.14


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

‘HAPTER III

The Department of Mines and Geology (DMG) is responsible for the levy and
collection of mineral receipts based on the production and despatch of
minerals. Receipts from minerals include royalty, dead rent, application fee,
licence fee, permit fee, prospecting charges, penalties, interest on belated
payment of dues, etc. In this chapter we discuss the procedure of budget
estimates, additional resource mobilisation, preparation of Demand, Collection
and Balance (DCB) statements, internal audit of the Department, assessment,
levy and collection of revenue from the lease holders, deduction of royalty at
source by other departments, etc., having a financial impact of € 113.94 crore.

3.1 Trend of Revenue

Details of budget estimates, actual revenue realised and percentage of
variation under the Head of Account “0853 — Non-Ferrous Mining and
Metallurgical Industries” for the years 2006-07 to 2010-11 are as detailed
below:

(in crore)

The revenue realised from iron ore as furnished by the Department was
= 648.90 crore during the period 2006-07 to 2009-10. This was 29 per cent of
the revenue realised during that period. The DMG did not furnish mineral
wise revenue for the year 2010-11.

The variation between the BE and the actual ranged between (-) 21.28 per cent
and 28.16 per cent indicating that the BE framed were not realistic.

During 2007-08 the collection of actual revenue was less by 21.28 per cent
compared to the receipts estimated. After this being pointed out (September
2011), the DMG stated (January 2012) less collection during 2007-08 and
2008-09 was due to non-tevision of rates of royalty in respect of major
minerals. Excess revenue realised during 2009-10 and 2010-11, was stated to
be, due to increased utilisation of minor minerals, auction sale of iron ore and
receipts from licence fees.

ure to r > revenue mobil ion resource

We obtained turnover particulars (for the years for which assessments were
completed) of three prominent companies in the State from the Income Tax
Department to verify whether growth in revenue from royalty was


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

commensurate with the growth in the companies engaged in mining of iron
ore. A comparative statement of turnover of these companies vis-a-vis royalty
paid by them on iron ore despatched as per the records of the DMG is as
under:

576.25 | 4.15 |

=
cs MS Bc
= sl हा आह | | |

It may be seen from the above that despite the accelerated growth in turnover
of the mining companies from 2003-04 onwards, there was no upsurge in
revenue from royalty. The growth in turnover of mining companies was
incongruous with the revenue increase in the State by way of royalty. This
indicates failure of the Government to recognise the revenue mobilisation
opportunity in an industrial sector which was showing an exponential growth.
The incongruity was occasioned by either low rate of royalty or by possible
under reporting of actual quantities mined or a combination of both. The first
problem has been addressed to some extent by the switching of royalty to ad
valorem rates from 13 August 2009.

After this was pointed out (August 2012), the Department stated (October
2012) that the Central Government is empowered to fix/revise royalty rates
and it had been the grouse of the State Government that ad valorem rates were
not the actual rates and therefore the State Governments were not getting the
due royalty from the miners. It is only after the Hon’ble Supreme Court order
the royalty on iron ore has been collected at auction rates and thus the royalty
collection significantly improved.

This indicates that the royalty rate collected by the State before auctioning of
iron ore was lesser as the Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) fixed sale price was
far below the actual rates.

24


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

i Assessment of royalty

Iron ore:

Non/short levy of royalty on iron ore
Three! Deputy Director Offices

We checked
MMDR Act, 1957 stipulates that the holder of a \ records of 73
mining lease shall pay royalty in respect of iron ore major mining
removed or consumed from the lease area at the rate | leases for years
of 10 per cent of the sale price. The State-wise sale | 2009-10 and
price published by the IBM shall be the basis for levy | 2010-11. We
of royalty. The IBM publishes the sale value of iron | noticed in 28
ore for each month in the subsequent month. Further, | cases that royalty
during the period from 13 August 2009 to 9 | was levied on the
December 2009, 20 per cent over and above the value sale price
published by IBM had to be taken as sale price ofthe | published by the
mineral. With effect from 10 December 2009 the | IBM as applicable
IBM sale price only is to be adopted. to the month of
issue of permits.
However, in these
cases the lessees transported the iron ore in the subsequent months. The DD
instead of applying rates applicable on the date of transportation applied rates
applicable on the date of issue of permits. This resulted in short levy of
royalty amounting to हैं 10.20 crore.

After we pointed out (October 2010, September 2011 and November 2011),
the DD, Hospet replied (January 2012) that demand notices for payment of
differential amount of % 8.16 crore in respect of 11 lessees were issued. The
DD, Chitradurga replied (October 2010) that differential amount of हैं 89.47
lakh was adjusted out of the credit available in one case. The DD, Tumkur
replied (May 2012) that notices had been issued.

3.3.2 Short levy of royalty on auctioned iron ore

Two? Deputy Director offices

We noticed seven auction sales of seized iron ore were held in 2008-09 and
2009-10. In these cases, royalty was levied on the sale price published by
IBM which was available with the Department at the time of issue of permits.
However, successful bidders transported the ore subsequently during 2009-10
and 2010-11. The relevant sale price for the month of transportation was
published by IBM subsequently. The concerned DDs failed to obtain an
undertaking from the successful bidders for recovery of additional liability
which may arise due to publication of IBM sale price subsequently. This
resulted in short levy of royalty of ¥ 23.86 lakh.

After we pointed out (November 2011), the DD, Hospet replied (November
2011) that as per the guidelines under Rule 64 D of MC Rules, if the sale price

io. ‘hitradurga (all cases), Hospet (50 per cent), Tumkur (all cases)
* Chitradurga, Hospet.

3


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

for the State for a particular month was not published by IBM, the latest
information available in the State shall be referred failing which the latest
information for ‘All India’ shall be referred. Accordingly, royalty was
collected based on the latest sale value available at the time of issue of permits
since no guidelines were incorporated under 64-D to re-calculate royalty at
subsequent stage.

In respect of lessees, the levy of royalty can be regulated and rectified
annually at the time of assessment. However, in respect of auction cases such
a precaution cannot be taken and a preventive clause should be added in the
agreement for sale.

As the Rules did not provide to re-calculate royalty, we recommend that a
system should be developed to regulate short levy of royalty arising due to late
publication by IBM.

The Director, DMG stated (October 2012) that action has been taken to
regulate recovery of royalty.

alue of the seized iron ore

The Hon’ble Lokayukta noticed (February 2009) illegal mining activities by
M/s.Lakshminarayana Mining Company (Mining Lease No.2487) in forest
area outside its sanctioned lease area. A case was booked by the Forest
Department and 84,622 cubic meters (m*) of illegally extracted iron ore was
seized. The Forest Department released entire quantity of seized iron ore in
December 2009 against the bank guarantee for = 14 crore furnished by the
lessee based on the IBM rates for September 2009. The bank guarantee was
subsequently converted as revenue during September 2011. Though the ore
was released between 13 August 2009 and 9 December 2009, we noticed that
the Forest Department assessed the value of minerals without adding twenty
per cent over and above the sale price published by IBM. This resulted in
short collection of value of minerals by हैं 2.67 crore.

The Deputy Conservator of Forests (DCF) (T), Bellary replied (April 2012)
that the IBM rates as intimated by the Range Forest Officer were adopted for
assessing the value of the minerals. Thus the failure of the Forest Department
to ascertain the value of minerals from DMG resulted in loss of revenue to the
Government,

hort collection of y by ; due to incorrect

losing stock

3.4.1 Major minerals (Iron ore)
Office of the Deputy Director, Hospet

We observed from the annual audit reports and annual reports in respect of
two lessees that the closing stock of minerals at the end of a previous year was
not carried forward as opening balance for the subsequent year. The value of
3,24,334 MT of minerals short accounted was % 27.72 crore and royalty
recoverable worked 00110 रैं 35.68 lakh as shown below:


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

=e al Eel aad Ie
Singh & Co: | एण ०० | 83,900 ॥ 21] (al
ML 2531 lumps

147,994 | 1,167.67 है i

Tron ore
S.B.Minerals:
ML 2559
despatched

Note: Value of the minerals was adopted at हैं 789 and हैं 1,160 per MT for the years
2006-07 and 2007-08 respectively as per Mineral Year Book of IBM.
The Department replied (October 2012) that notices have been issued to the
defaulting lessees and instructions have been given to the DDs to recover
royalty with applicable penalties as per rules.

3.4.2. Minor minerals (stone)

Office of the Deputy Director, Ramanagara

We noticed from the annual
stock returns and annual audit
reports of seven Quarry
Leases (QLs) for the years
2003-04, 2004-05, 2007-08
and 2008-09 that 1231.757
m’ of granite was shown as
closing stock. However, the
same was not carried forward
as opening balance during
the subsequent years. This
indicated possible
transportation of granite
without valid permit involving

27


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

royalty of f 14.94 lakh. Besides, interest of € 9.24 lakh and penalty of € 74.69
lakh were also leviable.

After we pointed out (September 2011), the DMG stated (October 2012) that
after notices were issued (January 2012) to the concerned lessees regarding
short-accounting of stock, five out of the seven lessees replied that granite
blocks are still lying in the quarry heads and not transported. The DD has
been directed to verify the fact and send a detailed report to the Director.

Non- levy of interest

3.5.1 Major Minerals.
Office of the Deputy Director, Hospet

We noticed in respect of
two’ Mining Leases
(MLs) that royalty
amounting to हैं 158.92
lakh was demanded by the
Department in the annual

audit reports issued in
August/September 2010 for the assessment year 2009-10. The lessees paid the
dues during March/April 2011, The delay in payment of royalty, beyond sixty
days from the date of issue of demand notice was 122 and 198 days.
However, interest amounting to % 16.62 lakh was not levied by the
Department.

The DD accepted (October 2012) our observation and issued a demand notice
for entire amount. In one case interest of % 6.52 lakh was recovered while in
another case, the lessee had requested for adjustment of amount from his
credit balance available with the department.

3.5.2 Minor Minerals
Office of the Deputy Director, Ramanagara

In one case* Department

noticed that 193.68 cum

of omamental stone

was extracted = and

transported by a lessee

during January 2001. On

this illegal extraction and transportation of ornamental stone, department

raised demand in January 2011 for = 3.87 lakh towards value of the mineral.

However, we noticed that interest at the rate of fifteen per cent per annum

from 2001-02 (January 2001) to January 2011 amounting to हैं 5.81 lakh was
not levied and demanded by the Department.

3 M/s, P. Balasubba Shetty and Sons (Mining Lease No. 2502), M/s.Gogga Gurushanthaiah
and Brothers (Mining Lease No.2522).
+ Sri.D. Venkataramanaswamy (QL No.636).

28


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

The DD, Ramanagara in response to our observation stated (January 2012)
that demand notice for recovery of interest amount would be issued.

The Department stated that out of f 3.87 lakh the lessee has paid % 50,000 and
the lease period had expired on 9 May 2009. The lessee had applied for
renewal and the DD agreed to recover arrears along with interest before
considering the request for renewal.

We noticed that the
work executing
departments were
sending cheques/
Demand Drafts in
respect of total
royalty deducted
from the bills of the
contractors without
indicating the type
of mineral, total
quantity consumed,

rate of royalty recovered, etc.

The Director, DMG, Bangalore after observing that the work-executing
departments were adopting different conversion factors for arriving at the rates
of royalty per m’ recoverable from the bills of the contractors, circulated (Oct
2010) rates of royalty per m* by specifying relevant conversion factors in
respect of these minor minerals. Subsequently, the Director, DMG,
Bangalore, after noticing (July 2011) that the conversion factors circulated in
October 2010 were incorrect, issued another circular (July 2011) revising the
rates as detailed below.

EE in

We also noticed that there was lack of co-ordination between work executing
departments and DMG in ascertaining the correctness of the amounts collected
as royalty by these departments and prompt credit of such collections to the
Government, as discussed in the following paragraphs:

3.6.1 Short deduction of royalty

We obtained information regarding royalty deducted from contractors’ bills
from Public Works Department, Karnataka Neeravari Nigam Limited,
Cauvery Neeravari Nigam Limited, etc. We noticed that as against = 11.74
crore royalty deductible in respect of building stone, sand, jelly and murram


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

consumed for works in nine® offices during the period from 2008-09 to
2010-11, an amount of % 6.87 crore was deducted. This resulted in short
deduction of royalty by 4.87 crore as detailed below.

| के | 294 |
[Sand | 57227460 | 52 | 29758 | 2254 |

[ss [nat [575 [16706]
[ses]
a ऊ#ऑ _ ख़छ | छा | का |

The basis on which the amount of royalty was collected or deducted was not furnished.

Thus, the absence of a system to check the correctness of the royalty being
deducted by the other departments in DMG resulted in short collection of
royalty.

The Department while accepting the audit observation stated (October 2012)
that efforts would be made to recover the differential royalty from the
concerned Departments.

ehousing

On verification of the annual accounts/ledger accounts of Karnataka
Warehousing Corporation Limited, Bangalore for the years 2006-07 to
2010-11, we noticed that out of f 1.23 crore deducted from the bills of the
contractors towards royalty during 2006-07 to 2010-11 an amount of & 1.20
crore was not remitted (November 2011) to the Government account. The
interest leviable on the amount not remitted to the Government Account
worked out to हैं 38.47 lakh (December 201 1) as detailed below:

* Cauvery Neeravari Nigam Limited - Gorur, Mandya and Ramanagara Offices, Karnataka
Neeravari Nigam Limited - Ramadurga, Ranebennur and Ron offices, Executive Engineer
(Rural Water Supply Division), Tumkur, Executive Engineer (PWD), Koppal and Executive
Engineer (PWD Building Division), Bangalore.

30


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

On scrutiny of the information obtaincd from the office of the Principal
Director, Railway Audit, Hubli, we noticed that 3274976 m? of stone ballast
was procured by SWR during the period from 2007-08 to 2009-10 for open
line and construction works from the contractors. Royalty at the rate of % 54
per cum amounting to 17.68 crore was not deducted from the bills of the
contractors for supplying the stone ballast.

After this was pointed out (January 2012), the Director, DMG, Bangalore
stated (May 2012) that the Department was negotiating with SWR authorities
to deduct royalty in respect of stone ballast from the bills of the contractors for
the works executed between the years 2007 and 2010.

Non-collection of pri sing fee

3.7.1. Minor minerals

As per the information
furnished by the DMG
(pertaining to 25 offices
out of 31 offices), we
noticed that 3.25 crore MT
of building stone were
transported without
obtaining MDPs during the
years 2007-08 to 2010-11.
Failure of the Department to
enforce transportation of building stones with MDPs resulted in foregoing
revenue amounting to = 9.59° crore.

3.7.2. Major minerals

We noticed that there was
no levy of processing fee
in respect of major
minerals as in the case of
minor minerals _ for
transportation, though similar incidental charges towards issue of computer-
generated MDPs and printing/issuing of trip sheets in triplicate for the
corresponding quantity of major minerals were incurred by the department.
Provision for collection of nominal processing fee for each MDP/trip sheet,
atleast on par with the amount levied in respect of minor minerals, should have
been made by the department, in consultation with the Central Government, in
respect of major minerals.

We noticed in the three” test checked offices, 12.87 crore MT of iron ore was
transported during the years from 2007-08 to 2009-10. Taking into account 17
MT as the maximum quantity of iron ore permitted per truck for

© Total quantity transported with out MDP = 3.25 crore MT

1 MDP = 17 MT

Fee for the MDPs = 3.25 crore MT/17 MT = 19.11 lakh x 50 = 9.55 crore
7 Chitradurga, Hospet, Tumkur.

31


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

transportation, 75.70 lakh trip sheets were issued for transportation of 12.87
crore MT of iron ore. Non-collection of processing fee at the time of issue of
trip sheets for transportation of iron ore thus resulted in potential loss of
revenue amounting to रैं 37.85 crore.

During exit conference, the Director stated that processing fee of = 10 was
collected per trip sheet issued for major minerals from April 2012 and agreed
to enhance the same on par with minor minerals in consultation with the
Central Government.

The Department stated (October 2012) that there will be no revenue loss in
future since the mineral administration of the department has been
computerised and online e-permit system has been introduced.

s in respect of

We noticed that the

information relating to
total quantity of
waste rock generated
during the quarrying
operations, its proper
storage and
consequent utilisation
towards __ backfilling
or for commercial
purposes such as tiles,
etc., was not available
in any of the lease
files. The lessees also
did not maintain the account of waste rocks generated. In the absence of any
account regarding wastes generated, audit could not ensure whether royalty at
the rate of & 30 per MT prescribed for such waste rocks was collected or not
from the lessees.

We also noticed that the Department did not fix any norms regarding
generation of waste in the production of ornamental stones.

After we pointed out (September 2011, October 2011, December 2011 and
January 2012), DMG stated (September 2012) that though large quantity of
waste rock is generated in ornamental stone quarries, maintenance of such
accounts is not possible. Useful material out of the waste rock was identified
as khandas and royalty for the same was collected. The reply is not in line
with the provisions of Rule 31 which stipulates proper maintenance of
accounts and levy of royalty for the waste rocks as provided in the Rules.

* Bangalore (Rural), Chamarajanagar, Ramanagar, Tumkur.

32


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

Jing stone

We noticed that no books
of accounts relating to
production, despatch
and closing stock of the
building stone were
maintained by the
quarry lease holders
and permits were also
not obtained for
transportation of
building stone. Due
to non-maintenance of
accounts, assessment of the actual quantity of production of building stone
could not be ascertained by the department.

The Department replied (October 2012) that since most of the quarry holders
were illiterate, maintenance of books of accounts could not be insisted upon.
It was further replied that the assessment of production and despatch of the
building stone was done during spot inspection in Bangalore (Rural),
Chamarajanagar and Ramanagar divisions during the years 2006-07 to
2009-10 by taking into account the number of labourers employed while in
Chitradurga and Hospet divisions, it was done based on local enquiry.

Thus, the assessment of royalty in respect of building stone without taking
measurements of pits was not realistic.

A circular was issued by DMG in April 2010 instructing to record the length,
breadth and depth of the quarried area in the assessment order called Audit
Reports. In this regard, we observed these measurements were not recorded in
the Audit Reports during the year 2010-11 in Ramanagar and Chamarajanagar
districts. The DMG stated that that the pit measurements would be recorded in
future.

The Department accepted (October 2012) our audit observation and stated that
the accounts and auditing process are computerised from 2011-12 and the
lessees are being instructed to file the quarterly reports by e-mail.

3.10 Demand, Collec nd Balance (DCB) statements

As per the Departmental Manual DCB statements are prepared by the
Divisional Offices indicating the actual position of dues outstanding at the
beginning of the year, demands raised, amounts realised and closing balance at
the end of the year against each lessee. The DCB statements are required to be
submitted to the Director, DMG in the first week of July of the following year.
As per the guidelines issued (August 2002) by the Director, DMG, Bangalore,
at least twenty percent of the arrears should be collected along with advance
royalty in cases where huge balances are outstanding. Further, issue of

° Bangalore (Rural), Chamarajanagara, Chitradurga, Hospet, Ramanagara, Tumkur.

33


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

Revenue Recovery Certificates (RRC) may be resorted to for ensuring prompt
recovery of arrears even from ongoing leases.

We noticed (July 2012) that the consolidated DCB statements for the years
2006-07 to 2010-11 were not prepared by DMG. After we called for the DCB,
the information in respect of major minerals only was compiled (excluding
details from Hospet, Udupi and Karwar Divisions) and furnished to us. A
perusal of the statement revealed difference in closing balance and opening
balance of the subsequent year as detailed below:

[0s |
[10५५ |

2009-2010 19658 oe
[२0020 | 9850 [asim | 2521 | 2020 | 21608 | ७5% _|

We also noticed that the arrears had doubled from % 100.65 crore at the
beginning of the year 2006-07 to T 216.68 crore as at the end of 2010-11.

Further scrutiny of DCB statements of major minerals in two test-checked
divisions also revealed differences between the closing balance of the arrears
of previous years and opening balance of arrears in the subsequent year is
given below:

(8 in lakh)

Therefore the DCB statements prepared by the Department were not reliable.

Regarding balances not carried forward to the subsequent year amounting to
= 73.25 lakh, the DMG had not taken any action to reconcile the accounts.
Hence, a probable loss to the tune of = 73.25 lakh not carried forward to the
subsequent year cannot be ruled out.


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

The Department replied (October 2012) that all out efforts will be initiated for
the early recovery of arrears. Regarding differences in closing balance figures,
the Department replied that the differences occurred due to non-incorporating
any revisions in demands in the DCB statement. The Department is
developing new software for systematic accounting of the demand raised,
amount collected and the closing balance of the arrears and statistical positions
in DCB statements to avoid any ambiguity. It was further replied that all
efforts will be made to outsource the accounting process to Chartered
Accountants as is being done in Gujarat.

3

1. Arr

As per provisions of Section 9 of the MMDR Act, royalty has to be paid at the
time of despatch of mineral from the lease area which permits no arrears of
revenue on minerals despatched. However, we noticed that arrears in revenue
accumulated on account of dispute in assessment of royalty on limestone,
differential royalty on sale price due to delayed notification of sale value of
mineral by the IBM, with retrospective effect, non-payment of dead rent by
the idle leases etc.

The arrears of revenue included arrears from existing leases and from expired
leases. We noticed (October 2011, November 2011 and March 2012) that no
mechanism existed to ensure recovery of arrears in respect of expired leases
on priority and that the arrears position of revenue up to the year ending
March 2011 was not analysed and documented in the department. In the
absence of the same, the possibility of recovery of old arrears is doubtful.

The Department stated (October 2012) that the consolidated position of arrears
pending collection as at the end of March 2011 could not be prepared due to
non-preparation of DCB statements in Gulbarga and Hospet. Further, it was
also stated that the periodical position of arrears pending recovery was not
prepared and this would be assessed and documented from 2011-12 onwards
after issuing directions in this regard to all the field officers.

Scrutiny of DCB statements and position of arrears in the test checked
divisions revealed that the recovery of arrears was not monitored Directorate
as the consolidated position of arrears was not prepared.

leases

Analysis of the data available in the DCB statements of 2006-07 to 2010-11
revealed that an amount of हैं 9.29 crore was pending recovery from 857
expired leases in six test-checked offices. There is no time limit within which
arrears of revenue should be declared as arrears as land revenue.

We noticed (September to December 2011 and March 2012) that the cases
were not referred to Land Revenue Department for recovery as arrears of land
revenue. Accumulation of arrears in respect of expired blocks indicates that
the Department did not take effective action to collect the revenue periodically
before closure of the lease period.

The Department stated (October 2012) that the arrears would be
referred to Revenue Department for recovery through Revenue Recovery


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

Certificate (RRC) and assured that due care would be taken in future for
systematic recovery of arrears before the closure of lease period.

3.11.2 Arrears referred to RRC

In five test-checked offices, arrears amounting to = 10.18 crore were pending
recovery under RRC as per the latest DCB statements. In respect of Tumkur,
details of cases pursued for recovery through RRC was not exhibited in the
DCB statements. Further, out of these, only = 15.12 lakh was collected under
RRC during 2006-07 to 2009-10 indicating inadequate action by the
Department in pursuing the recovery process.

The Department stated (October 2012) that persons in default were not
traceable and details of fixed assets held by them, if any, were not available in
many cases and hence the department was unable to recover the dues. Due to
this, the Department issued a circular (June 2011) for submission of TIN
number and fixed assets details from the lease holders. It was also replied that
the arrears at present will be pursued through Revenue Department. Further, it
was replied that non accounting of RRC details in Tumkur has been rectified.

3.11.3 Delay in issuing demand notices

We noticed in six test-
checked offices that in
respect of 233 leases where
spot inspections of quarries
were conducted, demand
notices for royalty and dead
rent, etc., amounting to
₹ 8.18 crore were issued after
delay ranging from two days to
490 days. The Department attributed (October 2012) the delay to shortage of
staff and work load. However, the reply failed to justify the corresponding
delay in realising government revenue due to belated raising of demands.

The Department stated (October 2012) that after computerisation, permits are
issued after checking the royalty credit of the lessee and demand notices will
be issued in respect of old and idle mines.

3.12 Internal audit

3.12.1 The Internal Audit
Wing (IAW) is functional in
the Department since 1985. It
is headed by an Accounts
Officer on deputation from
State Accounts Department
under the overall control of the
Director. However, Internal
है Audit Manual codifying the
practices and procedures relating to conduct of internal audit was not in place


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

in the Department. It was stated (October 2012) that the drafting of the
Manual is under process.

3.12.2 The details of number of offices due for audit and the number of
offices audited by IAW during the years 2006-07 to 2010-11 as furnished by
the DMG is mentioned below:

3.12.3 The shortfall in coverage of offices by IAW varied from 35 per cent to
97 per cent. The Department stated that the sanctioned staff strength of the
IAW was based on the organisation structure as existed in the year 1985.
Subsequent expansion of the Department by formation of new divisional
offices and increase in the volume of operations rendered the staff strength of
IAW inadequate to cover the internal audit work of the entire department.
Where shortfall is 97 per cent, it was stated that the records were not available
for examination as they were taken over by Lokayukta and CEC for
investigation and the majority of the staff were deputed to assist these
investigating agencies.

The year-wise details of the number of objections raised and settled by IAW
along with money value during the years 2006-07 to 2010-11 as furnished by
the Department are detailed below:

As seen from the above, 221 cases involving money value of % 28.81 crore
were pending for settlement out of which 182 cases are pending for over five
years. It was replied that the objections pending settlement up to 2006-07
include the cases referred to RRC and in legal disputes. However, the fact
remains that not a single observation has been settled after 2006-07.

The Department stated (October 2012) that additional posts for internal audit
have been sanctioned by the Government and the State Accounts Department
has been requested to post officials against sanctioned posts.

37


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

3.

We noticed that despite the accclerated growth in turnover of the mining
companies from 2003-04 onwards, there was no upsurge in revenue from
royalty. This indicated that the Government did not recognise the revenue
mobilisation opportunity in an industrial sector which was showing an
exponential growth. There was short levy and collection of royalty on value of
minerals auctioned or removed due to incorrect adoption of sale price
published by IBM. The annual returns submitted by the lessees were not
checked correctly as the closing stock of minerals at the end of a previous year
was not carried forward as opening balance for the subsequent year resulting
in escapement of royalty. We noticed lack of coordination between the
Departments responsible for collection of royalty at source and DMG in
ascertaining the correctness of the amounts collected by the work executing
Department and prompt credit of such collections to the Government. The
unrealistic assessment of the quantity of extraction of the minor minerals, non-
fixing of norms for arriving at the waste rocks generated and the non-
collection of processing fee for issue of permits resulted in loss to the State
exchequer. The DCB statements of major minerals available in the
Department revealed differences between the closing balance of the arrears of
previous years and opening balance of arrears in the subsequent year
indicating that the DCB statements prepared by the Department were not
reliable. We also noticed that the arrears of revenue pending collection had
doubled from 2006-07 to 2010-11. There was delay in raising of demands and
lack of monitoring in recovering the arrears.

Conclusion

Internal Audit Manual codifying the practices and procedures relating to
conduct of internal audit was not prepared by the Department. The shortfall in
coverage of offices by IAW varied from 35 per cent to 97 per cent. We found
that 221 cases involving % 28.81 crore were pending for settlement out of
which 182 cases are pending for over five years and not a single observation
was settled after 2006-07. Thus, not only was the coverage of internal audit
but also the compliance to internal audit objections was poor.

3.14 Recommend

We recommend that;

1. The Department may ensure proper maintenance of DCB Register for
all minerals.

2. A system may be established for proper coordination with the
departments responsible for deducting royalty at source to ensure that
the royalty due is collected and remitted in an efficient manner.

3. The Government may fix norms for waste rock generation in
ornamental stone quarries apart from directing the Department for
maintaining proper accounts as per Rules.

4. The Government may consider prescribing a time limit for declaring
the cases of arrears involved in expired leases as arrears of land
revenue and stipulate a fixed time limit for issue of demand notices
after finalisation of annual assessments.


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

Internal Audit Manval codifying the practices and procedures relating
to conduct of internal audit may be prepared by the Department. The
coverage of internal audit may be enlarged and timely compliance
ensured.


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

CHAPTER - IV

SANCTION AND RENEWAL OF MINING
LEASE



Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

All rights to minerals vest with the Government, The MMDR Act, the MC
Rules and the KMMC Rules prescribe various powers and procedures for
grant of concessions for mining. In this chapter, we discuss the compliance
with procedures for grant of mining concessions,

Mining

The overall mining activity together with the stakeholders involved therein can
be best brought out in the form of mining life cycle. The major stages involved
in a mining cycle are identification of area and application, exploration and
prospecting, grant of lease, monitoring and inspection of the mining activities
and closure of the mines. Authorities/stakeholders empowered to implement,
monitor and regulate the same are depicted below.

IBM, State DMG &
District offices,

Policy Formulation bodies:
Ministry of Mines, State Mi
Controller of ३७४४ आप आये चार Exploratory Bodies:
mines (IBM) GSI, MECL, PSUs and

Private Agencies,
R&D Labs and
Research
Institutes

Regulatory
Bodies:

Grant execution and

Administrative bodies:
Other Approval State DMG, Ministry
Bodies: of Mines

IBM, MoEF, PCB,
Ministry of Labour,
Mines Safety

3 Exploitation of major minerals is described as mining and that of minor minerals as
quarrying. Reconnaissance and prospecting are done only in respect of major minerals.
Leases are given for quarrying on public lands and licenses for operations on private lands.

45


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

CHAPTER - V
EXPLORATION OF MINERAL RESERVES



Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

TION OF MI

A mining plan indicating the kinds of ore, quantity of reserve, life span of the
mine, the programme of annual production and method of disposal of waste
etc., is prepared by a Recognised Qualified Personnel (RQP) and submitted for
approval to the IBM in respect of major minerals. The mining plan approved
by IBM is sent to Government of India for approval and every lessee has to
work the mine in accordance with the approved mining plan. Monitoring the
implementation of mining plan is to ensure that the mineral reserves are
extracted under proper authority. In this chapter we discuss the compliance
with procedures for approval and monitoring of mining plans.

ion of reserves

The classification according to United Nations Framework for Classification
(UNFC) of minerals is a three digit code based system, the economic viability
axis representing the first digit, the feasibility axis the second digit and the
geologic axis the third digit. The three categories of economic viability have
codes 1, 2 and 3 in decreasing order, similarly the three categories of
feasibility study have also codes 1, 2 and 3 while the four stages of geological
assessment are represented by 4 codes i.e. 1 (detailed exploration), 2 (general
exploration), 3 (prospecting) and 4 (reconnaissance). Thus the highest
category of resources under UNFC system will have the code (111) and lowest
category the code (334). As per this codification, proved reserves are 111,
probable reserves are 121 and 122.

Approval of mining plans

The primary mission of IBM is to promote systematic and scientific
development of mineral resources of the country (both onshore and offshore),
through regulatory inspections of the mines, approval of mining plans and
environment management plans to ensure minimal adverse impact on
environment. The audit observations on check of records of IBM are detailed
below :

of annual

We found that no
parameters were
fixed for fixation of
targets of annual
production. In some
cases proved and
probable _ reserves
were taken into
account while in
some cases proved,
probable and
possible —_ reserves
were taken into


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

account for fixation of the targets. No system was put in place to ensure
systematic and scientific mining operations. A few cases are mentioned
below:

> The proved reserves for ML 2315 (Trident Minerals, Hospet), were
originally shown in the mining plan as 11.02 lakh MT during 2006-07. But the
proved reserves were revised (10 January 2008) to 155.65 lakh MT. Further,
the annual target fixed initially at 2.84 lakh MT was revised to 10.02 lakh MT.
At both occasions the estimates of the reserves were without detailed study,
and the target was fixed considering proved, probable and possible reserves.

After this was pointed out by us IBM replied (September 2011) that though
the deposit was economically viable, feasibility study was not conducted and
documented. This indicated that the mining plans were approved without
proper survey and documeniation of feasibility and economic viability was not
obtained.

> As per approved (19 May 2006) mining plan for five years that is from
2006 to 2011 for ML 2290 (V.S.Lad & Sons, Bellary), the IBM accepted a
proved reserve of 1.85 crore MT mentioned in the mining plan. It was found
that this was based on general assessment and not on detailed exploration and
the annual target was fixed considering proved, probable and possible
reserves.

After we pointed this out, IBM stated (August 2012) that in recent years
annual target was being fixed by considering various factors like existence of
proved reserve, capacity of dumping area and the capacity of rural roads, etc.
to support their despatch and transportation to consumers.

> As per approved (5 February 2004) mining plan for ML 1732 (Trident
Mining Company, Hospet), the annual target was approved for one lakh MT
based on proved and probable reserves.

IBM confirmed that the target was fixed with reference to proved and probable
reserves.

Monitoring disposal of waste

5.2.2.1 In ML 2290:
V.S.Lad & Sons, Bellary, as
against an area of 14.28 Ha!
required to be provided in
the mining plan (2006-11)
for dumping 5.71 million
MT of waste to a height of
20m (proposed height in the
mining scheme) during the
plan period, an area of 2.53 Ha was provided in the mining plan. The mining
plan approved on 19 May 2006 by the IRM indicated that viability of waste
disposal was not ensured. The inspection team of IBM during inspection

* 5710000 MT/ (20 m * Bulk density of 2 MT/cum as per mining plan) = 142750 sqm
equivalent to 14.28 Ha.


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

reported (September 2008) that the area already covered with dump in the
lease area was 22.13 Ha (ten times the approved dump area) which included
encroachment of 2.74 Ha of forest area.

Thus, approval of the mining plan in spite of the area proposed in the mining
scheme for dumping of overburden which prima facie appeared to be
inadequate indicated that due importance was not accorded to waste
management. The fact of encroachment of forest land was also not reported
by IBM to DMG and to Forest Department.

We reported the case to IBM and they replied that the height of the dumps was
maintained at 45m and thereby accommodated the total waste generated. The
reply is not correct as the height of the dump waste proposed in the mining
plan was only 20m and no modification was either proposed by the lessee nor
“suo motu” made by IBM while approving mining plan.

-3 Short collection of financial assurance

° In ML 2290:
V.S.Lad & Sons, Bellary,
the financial assurance
for the area utilised for
the dump was collected
for an area of 5.62 Ha
whereas IBM _ during
inspection reported that
an area of 22.13 Ha was
already covered with
dump. Evidently, financial
assurance was short-collected by हैं 4.12 lakh for the balance area of 16.51 Ha.

. In ML 1114: S.B.Minerals, Hospet, an area of 8 Ha approved by IBM
for dumping the overburden was falling outside the lease area and was not
considered for calculation of financial assurance resulting in non-collection of
financial assurance of = 2 lakh. IBM replied that mining activities undertaken
outside the mining area do not come under its purview but the proposal in the
instant case for dumping outside the lease area was approved to make the
document self-contained. Reply is not tenable since the definition of mine as
per the MMDR Act includes ‘any area which is temporarily used for mining or
storage or waste disposal’.


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

5.2.4 Submission of monthly and annual returns

It was noticed that
out of 2,146
monthly returns due
to be — received,
1,360 returns were
not submitted by
the lessees and
509 returns were
furnished belatedly.
However no action
was taken by
DMG to ensure
compliance or to

levy penalty for the

omission. We worked penalty leviable for non-compliance at % 9.35 crore.

Further, out of 183 annual returns due to be received, 150 annual returns were

not submitted by the lessees and 23 returns were furnished belatedly. The

penalty leviable worked out to % 86.50 lakh.

In the absence of such returns, periodical production/closing stock of minerals
was also not monitored by the department.

The Department accepted that the accounts were not submitted regularly by
the lessees and computer enabled Integrated Lease Management System has
been introduced wherein e-returns are to be submitted on line. Further,
software is also being developed to issue of notices automatically to such of
the lessees who fail to file e-returns within the time limit prescribed.

Inspections by IBM

The IBM inspected 1,163 mines through its MCDR inspection team during the
period from 2006-07 to 2010-11. Violations were reported in 219 cases as
detailed below:

(Source: Information furnished by IBM)


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

The status of compliance in respect of the years from 2006-07 to 2008-09 was
not available with IBM and it replied that the same would be furnished after
compilation. The non-compliance in respect of the years 2009-10 to 2010-11
ranged from 30 to 40 per cent. It was stated that the non-compliance was due
to the ban of mining activities in Karnataka by the Hon’ble Supreme Court.

It was noticed in one case (ML 2434: Associated Mining Company, Hospet)
that the height of benches was approved as 8 meters in the mining plan. The
MCDR team during inspection (Sept 2006) reported that the height of the
benches formed in the area of working were 30m and 20m. The lessee was
however allowed by IBM to continue mining without taking action to suspend
the mining lease until April 2010 when the task force team during inspection
ordered for suspension of the lease on the grounds that the height of the
benches formed was 30m and 20m as against the approved height of 8m.
Reasons for not taking action till April 2010 were not furnished.

On verification of 120
granite quarry leases in
three Deputy Director
offices*, we noticed that
quarry plan was not
available in these offices in
respect of 104 quarry
leases. In the absence of
quarry plans, it could not
be ensured in audit as to
how the field offices
ensured adherence to the
conditions envisaged in
quarry plan such as
production, environmental
safeguards, etc.

We noticed that in respect of two quarry leases* in Chamarajanagara and
Ramanagara as against the approved production of 3,750 cum of granite as per
quarry plan for the years 2005-06 to 2010-11, the production of granite was
10,940.734 cum.

The Deputy Director, Ramanagara, stated (January 2012) that no directions
were received from the Director to monitor the activities of the lessees as per
the quarry plan. The Deputy Director, Chamarajanagara replied that notices
were issued to the lessees to furnish quarry plans. The Deputy Director,
Tumkur, replied that the quarry plan would be obtained from the lessees.

Regarding exceeding annual production, the Department stated (October
2012) that at present, the annual production is being entered in the computer

? Chamarajanagara, Ramanagara, Tumkur.
3 Sri.K.M. Basavaraj (QL No.778 in Ramanagara), Sri. Jayaprakash (QL No.589 in
Chamarajanagara).

61


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

and while issuing e-permits, generation of e-permits would stop as soon as the
production exceeds the limit,

ssessment of

The following possibilities can be explored for optimising mineral exploration
and extraction and to mitigate the ill effects of mining.

Using Remote Sensing Data (RSD), the extent of area that will be affected and
the impact on the various natural resources due to taking up of a mining
project can be studied prior to the initiation of the project. Such a project was
undertaken by NRSA (National Remote Sensing Agency) for identifying
distillery sites in Karnataka on the request of Karnataka State Pollution
Control Board (KSPCB) and similar models can be worked out for mining
projects which will go a long way in identifying the adverse impacts on the
environment and mitigating them through planned intervention:

We are of the opinion that Remote Sensing Data coupled with information
obtained from Geological Survey of India (GSI) through physical probes,
sampling, etc., could be used to fix floor level of quantities and quality of
mineral wealth that can be reasonably expected to be extracted from a lease
site within a mining plan timeline and revenue expected in terms of royalty. If
quantity reported as mined and therefore royalty recovered is less than the
floor level quantity, suitable penalties can be fixed to minimise loss to public
exchequer and to curtail illegal mining. Physical verification of adherence to
the commitments made in the mining plan and periodic review of the activities
should be undertaken by the regulatory bodies. Here again the help of satellite
imagery can be taken.

The Director during exit conference stated that the issue has already been
taken up and efforts are being made to accurately determine the mineral
available in the mine with the help of the latest technology. The Department
has also initiated action for establishing Mining Exploration and Resource
Audit Trust “Khanija”.

~ Conclusion

We noticed that there were no parameters for fixing of annual target for
production of minerals. The areas proposed for dumping the overburden in the
mining plan were found inadequate indicating that due importance was not
accorded to waste management. The submissions of periodical returns by the
lessees were also not monitored by the Department. The status of compliance
to the violations noticed by IBM from 2006-07 to 2008-09 was not made
available. It was noticed that the lessees were allowed to continue mining
operations even in cases where violations were noticed or where the
production was more than the approved production.

62


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

The Government may consider putting in place a mechanism to prescribe
parameters for fixation of targets of annual production giving due importance
to the areas proposed for dumping the overburden in the mining plan so as to
discourage unauthorised dumping .


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

CHAPTER - VI
IRREGULARITIES IN MINING



Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

CHAPTER VI -IRREGULA N MINING

In terms of National Mineral Policy, all minerals have to be extracted and
transported under lawful authority, The extraction of mineral should be in
accordance with approved mining plan and despatch of minerals should be on
obtaining mineral despatch permits from the DMG on payment of royalty. In
this chapter, we discuss the extraction and despatch of minerals in violation of
prescribed norms, that is, production of minerals in the absence of mining
plan, in excess over the approved mining plan, mineral extraction before
entering into lease, transportation of minerals without permit/in excess over
the permitted quantity, all of which resulted in illegal extraction and despatch
of mineral.

ules to prevent

Failure to frame Rules in
pursuance of the
provisions of the MMDR
Act was mentioned in
Paragraph No. 7.2.9 of
the Audit Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor
General of India (Revenue Receipts) for the year 2005-06. The Standing
Committee on Coal and Steel, Ministry of Mines, Government of India in their
19" Report (August 2006) commented on the lackadaisical attitude of the
State Governments in framing the Rules resulting in rampant illegal mining
and asked the Ministry of Mines of Government of India to issue directions to
the concerned States to immediately frame the Rules for prevention of illegal
mining.

The Karnataka Mineral (Regulation of Transport) Rules, 2008 were notified in
March 2008. However promulgation of the Rules was stayed by the Hon’ble
High Court of Karnataka based on the writ petitions filed by the miners
challenging the validity of the Rules, 2008 as discriminatory, arbitrary, etc.
Subsequently, the Hon’ble High Court disposed of (September 2010) the writ
petition subject to the mutual agreement on provisions relating to
transportation of ore between the Department and the lessees and amendment
to the Rules accordingly. Consequently, separate Rules viz., Karnataka
(Prevention of Illegal Mining, Transportation and Storage of Minerals) Rules,
2011 were notified (April 2011). These Rules provide for fitting of vehicles
with Global Positioning Device, validity of the permits based on the
destination of the transportation, registration of stock yards/mineral based
industries, establishment of check posts, barriers, weigh bridges, ete. Thus the
delay in framing the Rules till April 2011 resulted in absence of controls with
respect to transportation and huge revenue loss to the State exchequer. This is
evidenced from the statement made by the then Chief Minister of Karnataka
on the Floor of the Karnataka Assembly on 9 July 2010, wherein it was stated
that as against the permitted quantity of 470.43 lakh MT of iron ore, a quantity
of 775.34 lakh MT was exported. This resulted in as much as 304.91 lakh MT
iron ore valued at € 15,245 crore (adopted at a conservative free-on-board rate


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

of हैं 5,000 per MT) exported without valid permits during 2003-04 to
2009-10.

The Director, DMG replied (January 2012) that action was initiated to draft
the Rules in March 2005 but was delayed due to administrative reasons and
also due to litigations pending before the Hon’ble High Court of Karnataka
between the period March 2008 and September 2010. It was also stated that
the issue of loss due to illegal mining was covered in the Second Report of the
Hon’ble Lokayukta and also in the Report of CEC which would be placed
before the Hon’ble Supreme Court and appropriate action to prevent
recurrence of illegal mining and transportation of minerals would be taken up
based on the directions issued by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. Further, the
committee constituted to fix responsibilities on the officers/officials for illegal
mining and transportation of mincrals had submitted its Report to the
Government and certain issues were referred to CBI for investigation.

The Director DMG during exit conference stated that the rules were notified in
2008 after allowing a period of one month for the public to file objections, if
any, before publication of notification. However, during that period no
objections were raised and lessees approached court only after notifying the
rules.

Thus, in spite of the State Government being empowered under Sec 23C of
MMDR Act to frame separate Rules in 1999 itself, administrative delay to
notify initial Rules till 2008 was not justifiable especially in view of rampant
illegal mining in the State.

Major minerals (Iron ore)

Rule 22 (4) of MC Rules states that on receipt of application for the grant of a
mining lease, the State Government shall take a decision to grant precise area
for the said purpose and communicate such decision to the applicant. On
receipt of communication, the applicant shall submit a mining plan, within a
period of six months or such other period as allowed by the State Government,
to the Central Government, i.e. the IBM for its approval. The applicant shall
submit the mining plan thus approved to the State Government to grant mining
lease over that area. MCD Rules, 1988, stipulates that the lessees have to
prepare and submit the mining plans every five years along with the scheme of
mining. The mining plan and the scheme of mining thus becomes extremely
vital documents for the scientific and systematic development of mineral
deposits. Section 21(5) of MMDR Act states that whenever any person raises,
without any lawful authority, any mineral from any land, the State
Government may recover from such person the mineral so raised, or, where
the mineral has already been disposed of, the price thereof, along with royalty.

We test checked 73 out of 120 mining leases in Hospet, Chitradurga and
Tumkur. We noticed violations of Rules/norms in 14 cases which resulted in
illegal extraction and despatch of minerals in the following paragraphs:


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

6.2.1 Production of minerals in the absence of approved Mining

Plan/scheme

We noticed that the field
offices did not monitor
the extraction of iron
ore vis-d-vis approved
mining plan/scheme by
IBM and issued permits
for despatch of ore on
collection of royalty.
The Management
Information System in
the DMG also did not
provide for monitoring
this at Directorate level. We noticed in three test-checked Divisions that four
lessees had extracted 14.68 lakh MT of iron ore valued at % 150.59! crore
without approved mining scheme. The concerned Deputy Director/Senior
Geologist had permitted despatch of mineral on collection of royalty without
ensuring the approval of the mining scheme. Details are given below:

6.2.1.1 We noticed that in respect of mining lease No. 2436 in Chitradurga,
application for mining scheme for the period 2007-08 to 2011-12 was
submitted to IBM only in January 2009 and the same was approved in March
2009. However, as per the annual audit reports finalised by the DD,
Chitradurga, the lessee had produced 3,73,443 MT of iron ore during 2007-08
and 2008-09 without approved mining scheme. The Department had
permitted despatch of mineral on collection of royalty and not recovered the
value of mineral amounting to ~ 44.65 crore under Section 21 (5) of the
MMDR Act.

After we pointed out (October 2011), the DD replied that demand notice was
issued (December 2011). Further, progress made has not been received.

6.2.1.2. A Mining scheme for the period 2006-07 to 2010-11 was approved in
February 2007 in respect of mining lease No. 2220 in Tumkur. In terms of the
approved mining scheme, the lessee had not worked the mine from 2000-01 to
2005-06. Scrutiny of the Annual Audit Reports furnished by the DD,
concerned, revealed that the lessee had produced 1,54,916 MT of iron ore
between April 2005 to January 2007 (before approval of mining scheme).
However, the Department did not recover the value of mineral amounting to
₹ 12.27 crore for this unauthorised extraction.

After we pointed out (September 2011) the irregularities, the DD, Tumkur
stated that the mining scheme approved by IBM on 2 February 2007 was for
the period from 2006-07 to 2010-11. The reply was silent about why the

* For the purpose of computation of value of iron ore, the details of overall quantity of iron
ore produced and value realised in respect of iron ore as available in the Mineral Year Book
published by IBM for the year 2006-07 to 2009-10 were considered, Accordingly, the rate
of iron ore per MT have been adopted as ₹ 789, ₹ 1160, ₹ 1219 and ₹ 1116 for the years
2006-07 to 2009-10 respectively.

7


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

penalty was not levied/leviable for unauthorised extraction of 1,56,120 MT of
iron ore prior to the approval of mining scheme.

Further examination of the production and despatch statement furnished by the
same lessee for the period 2005-06, indicated that the closing stock of iron ore
available was 5144 MT. However, 369032 MT of iron ore was declared by
the lessee as opening stock (March 2007) and the same was allowed to be
transported during the subsequent years. Since the lessee had shown
production of 13,900 MT of iron ore from the start (April 1996-97) of the
mines and only 21,267 MT of waste could be generated as per the ore-waste
ratio (arrived from the mining plan approved on 204 February 2007),
accumulation of such huge quantity of iron ore as opening stock leads to the
suspicions of illegal mining.

Further, on verification of the inspection records in KSPCB regarding the
same lessee, we found that KSPCB had issued closure orders for the mine for
the period from 2006-07 to 2009-10 and had given permission only to
transport the already mined ore. The KSPCB during inspection
(February/April 2009) observed production of iron ore by the lessee using
vehicles and formation of 22 working benches in different directions in the
mines and concluded that the lessee was working continuously without the
consent of the KSPCB thus indulging in illegal, haphazard and unscientific
mining. A copy of the inspection report was also forwarded (February 2009)
to DMG with instructions to stop the issuc of permits for transportation. Thus,
6,90,597 MT produced by the lessee between 2006-07 and 2009-10 valued at
% 76.28 crore made was unauthorised.

6.2.1.3 The Mining scheme for extraction of manganese ore for the period
2003-04 to 2007-08 for lease No.2600 in Tumkur was approved in December
2003. The revised mining plan approved in February 2006 was also for
manganese ore. However, we noticed from the DCB statement of the Division
that the lessee had extracted 3,56,466 MT of iron ore during 2004-2006 which
was not authorised in the approved mining scheme. The Deputy Director,
Tumkur issued MDPs for transportation of iron ore of 3,56,466 MT of iron ore
though there was no mining scheme approved by IBM for extraction of iron
ore which had resulted in loss of revenue of 24.47 crore.

After we pointed out (September 2011), the Deputy Director, Tumkur replied
that the lessee had produced iron ore based on the consent on establishment
issued by KSPCB (August 2004 to June 2006). The reply is not tenable since
the consent given by KSPCB is for environment clearance and not for
extraction of mineral which was to be done in terms of the mining plan
approved by IBM.

6.2.1.4 The Special Task Force of IBM during inspection (April 2010)
noticed that the mining operations in lease No. 2604, Hospet were carried out
without having approved mining scheme and suspended mining operations in
May 2010. Meanwhile, the lessee had extracted 42,000 MT of iron ore (April
and May 2010) without approved mining scheme was unauthorised leading to
loss of revenue of % 4.69 crore.

The Department stated (October 2012) that in cases where the lessee applies
for approval of mining scheme within the prescribed period of 120 days prior

rR


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

to the expiry of the existing scheme of mining and IBM failed to either accept
or reject the application within the stipulated period of 90 days, the lessee have
the rights to continue with mining operations treating it as deemed approval as
per rule 12(3) of MCD rules. The reply is not tenable since in the instant cases
the lessee had not applied for approval of mining scheme within the prescribed
period and hence the question of deemed approval does not arise.

y approved

We noticed that in ten
cases, the Department
failed to monitor the
extraction of iron ore in
accordance with the
approved mining plan.
We verified the annual
audit reports of the DMG
with the approved
mining plans/ schemes
and noticed that as
against 41.24 lakh MT of
iron ore to be extracted, 51.19 lakh MT of iron ore was extracted by ten
lessees resulting in unauthorised extraction of 9.95 lakh MT of iron ore valued
at 107.41 crore as detailed below:

er biel जायहजाहद।
2007-08 473000
Laxminarasimha Mining

Bal al ail lad
ML 2600:

| > | 2354: Ambica
a | |

: | 2009-10 ष्व्य्य्त्ि हि 16726 186.66
2416000 | 2635600 | 219600 2376.7

B


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

Toler eral wo hel we |
| EE [10740:59.|

After we pointed out (September 2011 to November 2011) these deviations,
the DD, Chitradurga stated that demand notices were issued (December 2011)
in respect of three lessees. Reply in respect of the remaining seven leases was
not received (October 2012).

The Department stated (October 2012) that Integrated Lease Management
System (ILMS) has been introduced which has a fool proof mechanism which
locks the system in respect of a particular mining lease where production of
ore in excess of the prescribed limit is noticed.

6.2.3 Extraction of mineral before obtaining a mining

We noticed that the
Department had
permitted some lease
holders to remove the
mineral not specified in
the lease deed prior to
grant of lease for that
mineral as detailed
below:

> Mining Lease
No 836 of Tumkur was
for extraction of
manganese ore in an area of 39.66 ha. Renewal of the lease for an area of
11.33 ha was applied (March 2004) by the lessee. Working permission” was
granted (September 2006) and notification for renewal of the lease for
manganese ore was issued (Nov 2006). The IBM during its inspection (June
2008) found that mine pit had developed two benches below 870m where
there was only iron ore without any occurrence of manganese ore and ordered
for suspension of mining since iron ore was not included in the mining lease.

7 As per Rule 24 (a) (6) of MC Rules, 1960, if the mining lease holder applies for renewal of
mining lease one year prior to the expiry of the lease and the said renewal application is not
renewed within twelve months by the Department, then the mining lease is deemed to have
been renewed. In such cases, the Department will issue working permission for carrying out
the mining operations till the mining leases are not renewed.

4


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

We noticed that the lessee had reported occurrence of iron ore and had applied
for inclusion of the same in the mining lease and the same was under process.
The lessee sought (January 2007) permission for transportation of iron ore
claimed to be encountered while extracting manganese ore but the same was
not granted by the Department. The lessee had extracted 1.60 lakh MT of iron
ore during 2006-07 before inclusion of iron ore in the lease. However, when
approval for extraction was granted, the lessee had declared opening balance
of 80,000 MT during 2010-11 as against 1.60 lakh MT, which indicated that
the lessee had already transported 80000 MT of iron ore before the lease was
granted and also without valid permits. The value of the iron ore thus extracted
and transported without valid lease worked out to ₹ 12.62 crore.

The Director stated (February 2012) that it was difficult to extract manganese
ore only when iron ore was also present in the area. Reply is not tenable since
IBM had observed that there was only iron ore in the mining pit without any
occurrence of manganese ore. Regarding shortage of 80000 MT, the
Department replied that a detailed report had been called for from the DD,
Tumkur. Further compliance is awaited (October 2012).

(ii) In respect of mining lease No.2087, the lessee had applied for renewal
of lease previously held for manganese ore only for a further period of twenty
years in March 1998 and also applied for inclusion of iron ore in the lease.
However, we noticed that before entering into lease for iron ore, the
Department issued working permission for extraction of iron and manganese
ore during the year 2008-09 and later restricted the working permission for
manganese ore during 2009-10 in violation of the provisions of Act/Rules.
The Government accorded (January 2010) sanction for renewal of mining
lease for a period of twenty years with effect from April 1999 for manganese
ore only. We noticed that the lessee had extracted 4000 MT of iron ore during
the year 2008-09 and 51500 MT during 2009-10 out of which 16,044 MT of
iron ore was also permitted to be transported. The value of the iron ore thus
extracted without valid lease works out to हैं 6.23 crore.

The Director, DMG, Bangalore replied (May 2012) that show-cause notice
had been issued (February 2012) to the Deputy Director, Hospet calling for
explanation for issuing permits for transportation of iron ore though extraction
of the iron ore was not included in the lease deed.

(iii) In respect of mining lease No.1266/2601, we noticed that the lease was
determined (February 1988) under rule 27(1) of MC Rules. The revision
application against this was rejected and the lessee filed a fresh application
(December 1991) for grant of mining lease in the same area and the
application was under process. Meanwhile, the Director, DMG gave (August
2004) permission to lift and transport stock of manganese ore and iron ore
lying in the lease area. Further, working permission was also accorded
(October 2004) but was withdrawn (January 2005) subsequently.
Accordingly, the application was processed and lease (ML 2601) was granted
(April 2008) and the deed was executed (April 2009). Meanwhile, the
applicant extracted (2004-06) 1.5 lakh MT of manganese ore and 52000 MT
of iron ore without a valid lease. Out of this, entire stock of manganese ore
was transported by the lessee on payment of royalty whereas the iron ore was

7s


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

kept as stock. The cost of the mineral thus raised without valid lease was
₹ 21.51 crore’.

The Department accepted that if the lessee extracts any other minerals not
included in the lease, he has to stock such minerals separately until lease is
executed for extraction of that mineral also and market value of the mineral
has to be collected from the lessee if the lessee transports the mineral before
inclusion of the mineral in the lease deed. It is further replied that steps were
being taken to recover the value of the minerals from the lessees for such
violations.

f old dumps

We noticed that in
respect of mining lease
No. 2388 of Chitradurga,
stock of six lakh MT of
iron ore was declared
(September 2005) by the
lessee as old dumps of previous activity and was allowed to be transported
during the subsequent years. As verified from the mining scheme for 2006-07
to 2010-11 approved in January 2006, the iron ore production during the
previous years was nil and there was no previous activity. As per the mining
plan the lessee had produced only 58,400 MT of iron ore during the period
from 1988 to 2005, accumulation of such huge quantity of old dumps was
doubtful and declaration of 6 lakh MT of iron ore in September 2005 shows
illegal extraction of iron ore valued at % 47.34 crore which should have been
recovered from the lessee.

After we pointed out, the Department issued notice (December 2011) to the
lessee. Further progress made has not been received (October 2012)

In respect of mining lease No. 2658 of Chitradurga, we noticed that the lessee
had applied (July 2005) for grant of mining lease from a patta land. While the
application was under process, the lessee requested for issue of permits for
transportation of iron ore dumps found in the applied area.

The DD, Chitradurga permitted (March 2006) the lessee to transport the iron
ore found in the applied area after collecting royalty and levying a fine of
₹ 25,000. The grant of permission for transportation of 37,593 MT iron ore
without recovering the cost of the ore was incorrect and resulted in non-
realisation of Government revenue of @ 2.97 crore.

The Department stated (September 2012) that notice was served on the lessee
for the violation and the value of the mineral was being collected from the
lessee.

३ By adopting the rate of @ & 1184 per MT for Manganese ore and @ & 722 per MT for iron

ore


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

In a mining lease of M/s. Sandur Manganese and Iron Ore Limited (Mining
Lease Nos. 2580 and 2581) of Hospet, we noticed that the lessee was
operating two leases for extraction of iron ore and manganese ore. On
verification of modified mining plan for the period 2009-10 to 2010-11 for the
above leases approved by IBM in June 2009, we noticed that the production of
manganese ore achieved in the mining plan for the period from 2006-07 to
2008-09 was 8,79,131 MT. However, cross verification of production
mentioned in the modified mining plan and the production as per the DCB
statement revealed that for the same years the production of manganese ore
was shown as 6,76,768 MT as against 8,79,131 MT reported to IBM, resulting
in short declaration of production by 2,02,363 MT valued at हैं 81.18 crore.
Since royalty is collected for the quantity of ore transported in terms of the
DCB statement, escapement of royalty amounting to 2.44 crore‘ in respect of
2,02,363 MT of manganese ore short declared could not be ruled out.

The Department accepted that the differences were found in the production
declared to IBM and DMG by the lessee and instructions were issued to the
field office to recover the difference in royalty.

n with other Departments

The extraction of minerals and despatch being monitored by various agencies,
co-ordination among these agencies and other departments like Transport and
Commercial Taxes are essential to detect and curb evasions and illegal mining.
To ascertain the effectiveness of co-ordination, we cross verified data of the
DMG with other agencies and Departments like IBM, Transport, Commercial
Taxes and Forest. We noticed that there were differences in the data of these
institutions as relates to mining activities as detailed below.

reported by the less

We obtained production details from IBM, Nagpur and compared the same
with production statement given by DMG district-wise and found that the
figures are at variance indicating that there was lack of coordination between
the IBM and DMG to ascertain the correct position of the production figures.

The following table depicts the difference between the figures of production
furnished by lessees to the DMG and IBM:

* At3 per cent of the sale value of the ore computed on the basis of average price of the ore
declared by the lessee during the period.

7


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

{in lakh १

Thus it could be seen from the above that the figures furnished to the two
departments were at variance and DMG at no time has attempted
reconciliation between the figures to arrive at the actual figure of production.

We obtained the production details in respect of 73 iron ore lessees from the
Regional Controller of Mines, IBM, Bangalore and compared it with the
production figures mentioned as per Annual Audit Reports concluded by
DMG and our scrutiny revealed the following discrepancies between the
productions intimated to DMG and IBM in the following 57 cases:

Production reported in e to Department of Mines

The production reported to IBM during the period from 2006-07 to 2009-10 in
respect of 34 lessees was 282.25 lakh MT whereas the production reported by
DMG in the annual audit reports during the same period was 347.94 lakh MT
resulting in excess reporting of production of iron ore to DMG by 65.69 lakh
MT valued at % 698.30 crore. As the returns furnished by the lessees to IBM
were verified during the periodical inspections conducted by IBM and in none
of these cases any excess production was reported after inspection, the
possibility of the differential production being obtained from outside the mines
through illegal means cannot be ruled out. DMG had not developed any
system for reconciliation of the figures furnished to them by the lessees with
IBM to ascertain the actual production. The sources of excess ore need to be
investigated.

After we pointed out this, the Deputy Directors, Chitradurga and Hospet stated
that notices were issued to the concerned lessees calling for explanation for
violation and necessary action would be initiated after receipt of replies.

If it is established that the ore was illegally extracted penalty of € 698.30 crore
(i.e. value of ore) was recoverable from the perspective of illegal mining.

The Department replied that ILMS introduced in the Department provides for
online submission of monthly returns as per Rule of MCD Rules which would
be helpful in solving the problem of differences in production between DMG
and IBM.


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

6.2.7.1.2 Furnishing of lesser production to Department of Mines

and Geology

In Tumkur, Chitradurga and Hospet, the production reported to IBM during
the period from 2006-07 to 2009-10 in respect of 23 lessees was 141.67 lakh
MT whereas the production reported to DMG by these lessees during the same
period was 108.36 lakh MT. As the dispatches are made on the basis of
production, the differential quantity of 33.31 lakh MT of iron ore valued at
% 315.15 crore was transported without obtaining valid permission from DMG
which was contrary to the provisions of the Act and is liable to be recovered
from the lessees concerned. The loss of royalty in this regard for the period
from 2006-07 to 2009-10 works out to ₹ 5.93 crore®.

DD, Hospet replied that demand notices were issued to the concerned lessees
for payment of & 2.77 crore. DD, Chitradurga replied that notices were issued
to the lessees calling for explanation for differences.

We recommended DMG should put in place a system of periodical
reconciliation of the production figures furnished by the lessees with that of
the IBM to ascertain the actual production of mineral wealth.

Comm Tax Department

We obtained details of the
sales of iron ore made by
10 lessees from the
Commercial Tax
Department as per their
returns and the connected
records maintained and
the same was compared
with the despatch figures
in the annual audit reports
concluded by DMG. We
found the following
discrepancies:

In one case (ML 2236: Sessa Goa Limited: Chitradurga), we noticed that the
lessee had declared sales of 3921172 MT of iron ore as per VAT returns
whereas the quantity of despatch declared in DMG was 2575508 MT during
2005-06 and 2006-07 as detailed below.

[1072613] 62174 S041
2176385 1502895 673490 | 505 |
[Total [3921172 | 2575508 | 1345664 | 109 ।

We noticed from the VAT returns that the assessee had not declared any
purchase of iron ore during the course of his transactions in these years. The

5 Rate of royalty was adopted as % 11 per MT during 2006-07 to 2008-09 and ₹ 80 per MT for
2009-10


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

value of the excess sale of mineral works out to % 100.92 crore® and royalty
realisable thereon was % 1.48 crore (at = 11 per MT), which showed illegal
extraction and sale of iron ore.

> Trading by unregistered dealers: According to section 22 of the
Karnataka Value Added Tax (KVAT) Act 2003, every dealer who at any time
has reason to believe that his turnover is likely to exceed two lakh rupees (₹ 5
lakh from April 2010) shall be liable to be registered from April 2005 and
report such liability forthwith or on such date as may be notified by the
Government. Dealers having the turnover below the above limit are treated as
unregistered dealers (URD) and they have no liability to pay taxes. All the
sanctioned mining leases are registered under KVAT Act (commonly known
as registered commercial tax dealers).

We obtained information from the CTD and found that 97 registered dealers
have purchased of iron ore worth 508.27 crore from URDs during 2006-07
to 2009-10. This information was not passed on to DMG and no efforts were
made by the DMG to trace out URDs. This shows that a lack of co-ordination
between the departments resulted in a large quantity of iron ore being handled
by individuals who were not having any registration either with the CTD or
with the DMG.

After this was pointed out by us, the DD Hospet stated that action was
initiated in this regard by the Director’s Office. However we found that
Director’s Office could not make much headway on the issue as they could not
trace the concerned dealers since most of them were non-existent. This
indicates that the enforcement wing of DMG was weak and could not trace the
URDs engaged in the sales of iron ore and the mineral had been despatched
without the knowledge of the Department.

Absence of a system to register all the dealers engaged in the transaction of
iron ore and lack of timely action in co ordination with the Department of
Commercial Tax resulted loss of royalty to the extent of f 7.09 crore (₹ 11 per
MT). In addition, the value of the iron ore thus illegally extracted worked out
to 508.27 crore.

The Department stated (October 2012) that ILMS introduced in the
Department would resolve such differences between DMG and CTD.

To stop the leakages in the revenue realisation we recommend that DMG in
consultation with CTD may consider putting in place a system by way of cross
verification for registration of all dealers engaged in the transaction of iron
ore.

© By adopting the rate of € 750 per MT arrived as an average of local and interstate sales for
the year 2005-06


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

rtment

mentioned in the following paragraph:

We obtained details of
the quantity of iron ore
permitted to be
transported by the
Deputy Conservator of
Forest, Bellary in respect
of 71 lessees and
compared the same with
the quantity permitted to
be transported as per the
DCB of DMG. The
scrutiny revealed
discrepancies are

Forest

We observed that 399.90 lakh MT of iron ore was permitted by DMG for
transportation by 32 lessees during 2006-07 to 2009-10. Cross verification of
the quantum of iron ore permitted by the Forest Department for these leases,
however, revealed that 437.42 lakh MT of iron ore was permitted by the
Forest Department during the same period. Since geological permits are
mandatory in respect of movement of mineral from the mine head, the
movement of iron ore in excess of the geological permits was not authorised.
The differential quantity of 37.52 lakh MT of iron ore, valued at % 296.02
crore, thus permitted in excess by the Forest Department indicates that the
same was irregularly extracted and transported without payment of royalty
amounting to रैं 4.13 crore. The details are as under:

2006-2010 1828457

Mn

Mineral
ML No.2141

2007-2010 2082160

2006-2010 3153777

i

2006-2009 4509448
2006-2010 5798686

81

4889158



Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

Smt. R. Mallamma, 2006-2010 2337409
ML. No.1806

Transport Department

We noticed from the
records of Regional
Transport Office (RTO)
for the years 2005-06 to
2010-11 that in 3,314
cases where vehicles
were found overloaded
beyond the permissible
limit of 17 MT per truck.
These cases were not
referred by the Transport
Department to DMG
indicating absence of coordination between RTO and DMG authorities in
regulating and controlling movement of overloaded vehicles. Consequently,
the levy of the value of the mineral for transporting iron ore of 38342 MT
amounting to % 4.61 crore thus transported beyond the permitted load and
royalty amounting to & 4.22 lakh could not be levied and collected by DMG as
detailed below.

7 For the purpose of computation of value of iron ore, the details of overall quantity of iron
ore produced and value realized in respect of iron ore as available in the Mineral Year Book
published by IBM for the year 2005-06 to 2010-11 were considered. Accordingly, the rate
of iron ore per MT has been adopted as % 721, ₹ 789, ₹ 1160, ₹ 1219, ₹ 1116 and & 1640 for
the years 2005-06 to 2010-11 respectively.

82


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

mer ae eee
2010-11
a 7 ही आथछगय सकी छा

DD, Chitradurga replied that RTO, Chitradurga had not referred the cases of
overloading of vehicles to DMG.

The Department stated (October 2012) that cases where the District Task
Force Committee noticed overloading of mineral carrying vehicles during
joint operations, action was taken to seize the ore and dispose of the same
through public auction. However, Department has not furnished details in this

The Department adopted
the benchmark rates
prescribed in 1994 for
auction of seized minor
minerals under Schedule
गा of KMMC Rules
1994 for assessing the
value of the minerals
quarried instead = of
assessing the same based
on the prevailing market

value.

In two test-checked cases (Ramanagar and Chitradurga), the Department
found (May 2010 and October 2010) that the lessees had done quarrying
beyond the leased area and had transported 403.842 cum of grey/multi-
coloured granite. Audit observed that in one case in Ramanagar, the
Department adopted the rate of & 2,000 per cum as per Schedule III for
collecting the value of the mineral. The cost of the mineral as per a sale
invoice issued by the lessee was हैं. 12,000 per m*. Thus, non-revision of the
rates resulted in short collection of value of the mineral in of % 40.38 lakh*
Failure to revise the minimum rates thus resulted in short levy of the value of
the mineral. In another case in Chitradurga, the Department did not levy the
value % 9.33 lakh for the mineral extracted irregularly. After we pointed this
out, it was stated that that demand notice was since issued to the lessee.

The Department stated (October 2012) that proposal for revision of market
rates was sent to the Govemment in June 2012 and steps would be taken to
notify the value of the minerals on the basis of value so fixed for the purpose
of recovery.

e The rate of € 12,000 percum prevalent during 2009-10 as per sale invoice is adopted

for calculation of shorvnon-levy.

83


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

6.3 Transportation of minerals without valid permits

The instructions of the
Director, DMG (July
2006), specified that
value of the minerals
transported in excess
over the permitted
quantity in the MDPs
was also required to be
collected along with
corresponding royalty
from the lessees
concerned. We noticed
that the value of the
minerals was not
collected for transportation of minerals in excess over the permitted quantity
as brought out in the following paragraphs.

6.3.1 Delay in recovery of value of the minerals transported without

permits

In respect of mining lease of Sessa Goa Limited (Mining Lease No. 2236) of
Chitradurga, the Department had noticed (July 2006) that as against 5,98,686
MT of iron ore permitted for transportation during April 2006 to July 2006, a
quantity of 6,58,929 MT was transported by the lessee resulting in excess
transportation of 60,243 MT of iron ore without permit. The Department
issued demand notice (August 2006) for payment of value of the mineral
( 6.20 crore) and royalty (₹ 16.27 lakh). Subsequently, the lessee submitted
(November 2006) that the quantity of 60,243 MT was inclusive of 36,867 MT
of fines and paid royalty amounting to 10.37 lakh in November 2006 and
requested not to demand value of the mineral. Consequently, the
Commissioner, DMG, Bangalore put the demand on stay (November 2006)
subject to verification of records at the office of Deputy Director, DMG,
Chitradurga.

We observed that action regarding recovery of the value of 60,243 MT of iron
ore transported without permit was not taken by the Department though five
years had elapsed since then.

After we pointed out, the Director issued (January 2012) instructions to the
Deputy Director, Chitradurga to take action. Accordingly, DD, Chitradurga
replied that notice was issued (February 2012) to the lessee intimating
adjustment of % 6.26 crore towards value of the iron ore thus illegally
transported against the credit balance available with the Department in respect
of the lessee as per DCB of 2010-11.

In one case, the quantity of iron ore despatched during December 2009 in
respect of one lessee (ML 2563: Kannaiayalal Dudheria: Hospet) was 61043
MT whereas the permits were issued only for 52000 MT during the month.


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

Further, no permits were issued during November 2009 and no lapsed permits
were also got renewed by the lessee. Evidently, 9,043 MT of iron ore valued at
% 1.01 crore was transported without permit by the lessee. Similarly, audit
observed that 3,21,668 MT of iron ore lumps and 3,32,185 MT of iron ore
fines valued at % 73.54 crore were transported by 12 lessees (Hospet) during
2006-10 through time barred permits.

The Department stated (October 2012) that notice was served on the
concerned for the lapse and further action would be taken as per rules.

6.3.3. Non-collection of value of minerals

We noticed that DD, Hospet and DD, Tumkur had levied penalty on 293
trucks for carrying minerals without permit during 2006-10. However, value
of the minerals amounting to % 46.46 lakh was not levied and collected from
the concerned transporters.

The Department replied that notice was served on the concerned for the lapse
and further action would be taken as per rules.

6.3.4 Transportation of iron ore in excess over the quantity produced

In one case (Charuchandra: ML 2102: Hospet), the lessee transported
(2003-06) 93,674MT of iron ore fines as against the available stock of 25000
MT declared by the lessee and there was no production during these years.
Thus the Deputy Director allowed the transportation of excess quantity of
68,674 MT valued at ® 4.96 crore. The cost of the quantity transported was
recoverable as it was on account of illegal extraction.

The Department replied that notices were issued to the concerned for the lapse
and further action would be taken as per rules.

not obtaining Mineral Despatch Permits

Mention was made in
Para 7.2.16 of the
Audit Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor
General of India for the
year 2005-06 regarding
non-levy of penalty for
not obtaining MDP for
transportation of building
stones.

As per the information
furnished by the Department (pertaining to 25 offices out of 31 offices), 4.21
crore MT of building stone were transported by the lessees during the years
2006-07 to 2010-11, Out of this, only 0.16 crore MT of building stone were
transported after obtaining MDPs and remaining 4.05 crore MT of building
stone were transported without obtaining MDPs. However, penalty leviable at
five times of royalty of = 109.56 crore for transporting building stone without

85


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

obtaining MDPs which works out to % 547.80 crore was not levied. In
addition, processing fee of 50 per MDP leviable with effect from June 2007
also could not be levied due to non-obtaining MDP resulting in loss of revenue
of 10.15 crore.

The Department stated (October 2012) that most of the stone quarries were
being operated by traditional quarry workers and their education level was
very low and hence the Department was not insisting these lessees for
obtaining permits for mineral transportation. However, on the introduction of
e-permit system, these quarry holders would also be covered in a year or two.
But, the fact still remains that obtaining of MDP was essential to monitor
extraction and despatch of mineral and the Department had not instituted any
other mechanism to monitor the same. Provisions of the Act could not be
violated on plea of ignorance and the Department should initiate action to
educate and assist the quarry holders to comply with the provisions.

6.4 Conclusion

We found that the delay in framing the Rules till 2011 resulted in absence of
control with respect to transportation and huge revenue loss to the State
exchequer. We noticed that the Department had permitted removal of the
mineral prior to grant of lease and had not monitored the extraction of iron ore
in accordance with the approved mining plan. We noticed that there was lack
of coordination among DMG, IBM, CID, Transport Department, etc. to
ascertain the correct position of the production figures. The data/information
relating to mining activities available with the Departments like Transport,
Forest, etc. were at variance with the data available with the DMG. The
lackadaisical control exercised by the Department over the mining activities
resulted in lessees excavating and despatching minerals without lawful
authority. Lack of stringent action in respect of unauthorised transportation
resulted in rampant illegal transportation of ores.

6.5 Recommendations:

It would be advisable to establish proper coordination among various
Departments/Authorities/Agencies involved in mining activities like IBM,
CTD, Transport Department, Forest Department, etc. with DMG to ensure
better control over mining activities.


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

CHAPTER - VII

ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES OF
DEPARTMENT OF MINES AND GEOLOGY



Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

In this Chapter we discuss the deficiencies noticed in the working of check
posts such as deficiencies in vehicle check registers, inadequate inspection of
vehicles, deficient enforcement activities in the absence of prescribed norms
and targets for inspection of mines, unsecured custody of permits/trip sheets
resulting in deficient monitoring of transportation of minerals affecting
Government revenue besides causing theft of valuable trip sheets. As per the
provisions of rule 43 of KMMC Rules 1994, the State Government may, by
notification, direct to establish check posts at such place or places as it thinks
fit with a view to prevent or check unauthorised transportation of minerals and
evasion of royalty. It also provides that till the establishment of such check
posts, the State Government may notify the check posts already established in
such places under the provisions of the Karnataka Sales Tax Act, 1957 or the
Karnataka Forest Rules 1964.

The DMG established 28 check posts (including 13 composite check posts') to
control illegal transportation of minerals. However, we noticed that only one
check post had the facility of weighing machine to weigh minerals.

7.1 Deficiencies noticed at check posts

7.1.1 Penalty collected at check posts

As per the information furnished by DMG, Bangalore, the details of vehicles
checked at check posts and penalty realised are detailed below.

It would be seen from the above table that the DMG collected penalty of
11.36 crore at the check posts. More vigil is required to be exercised at the
check posts to prevent the unauthorised transportation of the mineral as is
evident from the following paragraphs:

We checked the records of Chitradurga and Hospet check posts to ascertain
the extent of inspections conducted in these check posts. We found that total

* These checkposts are functioning in combination with the other Nodal Departments such as
PWD, Forest, Commercial Tax and RTO.

91


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

number of vehicles that passed through Chitradurga and Hospet check posts
were not available with the concerned checkpost. We called for the records
relating to the movement of vehicles carrying iron ore in Chitradurga and
Hospet. Out of these, records were furnished only by DD, Chitradurga. As
regards, DD, Hospet, total despatch of the mineral only was furnished. We
found that the percentage of check conducted at the check posts was very
small as mentioned below:

Our cross check of Trip Sheets, Issue Registers, DCB registers maintained in
the Divisional Offices with the "Vehicle Check Registers" at Checkposts
(Chitradurga and Hospet), revealed that in Hospet Division, the number of
vehicles checked was only eight per cent of the total number of vehicles
during 2009-10 and 2010-11. In Chitradurga Division, the percentage of
vehicles checked ranged from eight to 26 during 2007-08 to 2010-11 as
detailed below:

(*Total number of vehicles in Hospet was arrived from total quantity despatched and
considering 17 MT/lorry as per trip quantity).

The low percentage of check defeated the very purpose for which checkposts
were notified.

tch of iron ore by Railways

We also noticed that 40 to 50 per cent of the iron ore produced in Chitradurga
and Hospet Divisions were lifted from pit mouth of the mines to Railway
sidings/Railway stations. The DMG had made no effort to reconcile/verify the
figures of quantity despatched by Railways to ensure that no iron ore was
moved out from the Railway sidings/stations illegally.

The DD, Chitradurga replied that Railway authorities had been requested to
intimate the quantity despatched through Railway sidings/stations during
2005-06 to 2010-11 for verification. The fact, however, remains that the
DMG failed to verify the quantity transported through railways for more than
six years.

The DMG replied that steps to establish check posts at important locations
have been taken and also introduced a Comprehensive Computerisation of
Mineral Administration and Integrated Lease Management System, which
provides information related to lease holders, end-users, payment transactions,
updated mineral rates, issuance of e-permits, integration with weigh
bridges/check posts, etc.

92


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

According to Rule 43(4) of the KMMC Rules, 1994, the driver or any other
person in-charge of the vehicle, as the case may be, carrying the mineral shall
stop the same at every check post and allow the officer in charge of the check
post to examine and take measurements of the minerals in transit and inspect
all records relating to the minerals in possession of such driver.

We noticed that DMG had not prescribed any format for the Vehicle Check
Register of the vehicles inspected. Test check of Vehicle Check Register in
seven check posts, revealed that in 531 cases no other details were recorded
except the name of the driver. In certain cases only the words ‘lorry driver’
was recorded in place of his name. The essential details of the vehicle like
name of the owner, quantity of mineral in transit, name of the driver, reference
to permit issued and cases of violation, if any, in the check register were not
being recorded. Thus, details of the material transported and offences
committed could not be ascertained.

Absence of these necessary details has rendered the inspection of vehicles at
the check posts ineffective. After we pointed out these omissions, the DD,
Chitradurga replied that all the details are now being indicated in the Vehicle
Check Register. The DD, Hospet replied that no Departmental manual,
notifications or circulars were issued by the Government prescribing
procedure or format for maintenance of registers at the check post.

king of the Mobile squad

To curb illegal mining/quarrying in the State, three mobile squads each
consisting of one DD, three Senior Geologists, four Geologists and four Group
‘D’ officials were formed between March and April 2008 by the Director,
DMG, Bangalore. No posts were sanctioned by the Government for these
squads and the persons were deployed from the existing strength. The squads
were entrusted with the work of inspection of the mining activity besides
checking the vehicles transporting minerals.

We noticed that targets were not fixed for inspection of mines and number of
vehicles to be checked by the squad each year. Besides, criteria for selection
of mines for inspections were also not laid down by the DMG.

As per the information made available by the Director, DMG, Bangalore, out
of 120 mines in operation, 61 mines were inspected and 9,14,721 MT of iron
ore was seized in 65 cases during the years 2008 to 2011. Further, 56,026
vehicles were also checked and 3,83,058 MT of iron ore valued at हैं 30.22
crore was seized after booking 427 cases of illegal transportation during the
above period. The DMG replied that target would be fixed for the mobile
squad to inspect mining lease areas as well as checking of vehicles
transporting the ore.

misuse of Tripshee!

The stock register of trip sheets should indicate the details such as opening
balance, quantity of trip sheets received, issued. The closing balance has to be
worked out at the end of every month.

93


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

Source : Dy. Director Office, Hospet

From the stock registers maintained in Hospet Division, we noticed that the
details such as opening balance, quantity of trip sheets received, quantity
issued and closing balance were not indicated in the register. Periodical
physical stock verification was also not conducted. It was also noticed that the
trip sheets were bundled and piled up in a corner of the office in a highly
insecure manner. Thus, the correctness of the receipts, issues and balances
could not be ascertained. The chances of loss/misuse of trip sheets could not
be ruled out.

Transportation of iron ore through fake trip sheets was detected (September
2010) in Hospet Division. A case was registered before Judicial Magistrate
First Class (JMFC), Sandur in Crime No.171/2010 against Yeriswamy
Minerals, Hospet. The improper maintenance of stock accounts and unsecured
storage of trip sheets may have resulted in misuse of the trip sheets and
consequent loss of revenue.

The DMG accepted the misuse of trip sheets and stated that through Integrated
Lease Management System online e-permits/trip sheets will be generated,
which will be helpful to monitor transportation of minerals and prevent
illegal/excess transportation and misuse of trip sheets.

Though the State Government was conversant with e-enabled technology such
as Global Positioning System (GPS) fitted to transportation vehicles and issue
of online permits, insertion of load sensors at check posts, to check actual
quantities of minerals transported, etc., enabling verification at various toll
gates/ports/railway yards/forest checkposts/RTO checkposts, installation of
the same were reported to be still under consideration (June 2012) of the
Government.

Besides, with no mechanism institutionalised by the State Government to
mark the coordinates of the boundary stones of the lease areas with reference
to specific longitudes and latitudes, the boundary violations often go
unnoticed. The Department may evolve a mechanism of marking the
coordinates with GPS at the time of grant of lease and so as to resolve the
issues of encroachments of lease boundaries.


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

7.5 Conclusion

We noticed that no format was prescribed under the rules for maintaining the
Vehicle Check Register of vehicles inspected. The necessary details like name
and address of the driver or of the vehicles owner were not recorded in the
Vehicle Check Register. Verification of the quantity despatched by Railways
was also not done by the Department to ensure that no excess quantity of iron
ore was moved out from the Railway sidings/stations. We noticed that targets
were not fixed for inspection of mines and number of vehicles to be checked
by the enforcement squad each year. Besides, criteria for selection of mines
for inspection were also not laid down by the department. We noticed that the
trip sheets were bundled up in the corner of the office in a highly insecure
manner. Thus, the chances of loss/misuse of trip sheets could not be ruled out.

7.6 Recommendations

The Government may consider:-

1. Prescribing a proforma/format for maintaining vehicle check register so
as to record all the details required for enforcement purposes and fixing
the targets for inspection of vehicles at check posts and for the mobile
squad to prevent illegal transportation of minerals

N

Technological advances such as GPS on trucks, load sensors at check
points etc., should be leveraged by DMG to improve enforcement
activities.


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

CHAPTER - VIII
ENVIRONMENT ISSUES

Failure to adhere to recommendations of NEERI for
environmental safe mining

Failure to comply with the conditions stipulated for
diversion of forest land

Execution of reclamation works
Failure to monitor the plantations raised by the lessees

Levy and collection of Environment Protection Fee for
diversion of non-forest land for mining purposes

Air, noise and water pollution due to mining
Mining without consent from KSPCB

Monitoring of conditions stipulated in the Consent for
Establishment

Mining without environmental clearance

Filing of annual environment statement

Planting and maintenance of trees in quarry leases
Conclusion

Recommendations

8.1

8.2

8.3
8.4
8.5

8.6
8.7
8.8

8.9
8.10
8.11
8.12
8.13


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

The environmental effects associated with mining activities start at the
exploration stage, extend through the extraction and processing of minerals
and continue even after the closure of mines. Legislation for mining requires
an environmental impact assessment to be carried out before a mine is
developed and operated in an environmentally sound manner with the least
adverse impact on the environment.

In this chapter we discuss the compliance with legislations dealing with
environment protection and other regulatory orders issued for safe,
sustainable, scientific and environment friendly mining operations. A few
cases of non-compliance with such legislations and regulatory orders are
brought out in the succeeding paragraphs.

In order to integrate the environmental concerns with the developmental
activities (inviting specific reference to scientific mining in the Bellary-Hospet
region) as also to plan and implement appropriate strategies for the protection
of environment and maintenance of ecological balance in the region, the State
Government through DMG requested National Environmental Engineering
Research Institute (NEERI), Nagpur for conducting Regional Environmental
Impact Assessment Study in Bellary-Hospet Region.

After considering the present status of the ore reserves and mining activity of
Bellary district, NEERI in its Report (April 2004) proposed for a phase-wise
increase in annual iron ore production, compatible with environmental
preservation. The proposal specified the extraction of ore ranging from 16
million MT during the period 2005-10 to 34 million MT during the period
2026-30. The report had also recommended extraction of 16 million MT of
iron ore from 2004-05 to 2009-10.

The phase wise increase was made considering the status of the ore reserve
and to facilitate the dumping of overburdens and its restoration within a five
year plan period, during which overburdens would be well stabilised by
planting acclimatise vegetation cover. As suitable dumping areas are limited
on hill ranges, this production schedule was devised to suit the dumping
requirements and possibilities existing in the ground.

We observed that the iron ore production made by the lessees in Bellary
district was more than the production recommended by NEERI. The excess
ranged from 108 per cent to 211 per cent during the period from 2006-07 to
2009-10 as shown below:

2009-10 [| . 16 33.37 17.37 | 109 |

101


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

As the recommended production proposed in the NEERI report was
scientifically arrived at and also compatible with the environmental
requirements keeping in view the ore resource and dumps, the adherence to
such a schedule was very much necessary for the conservation of the ore and
to cause as little damage as possible to the environment. Increase in the
production in huge proportions over the recommended quantity lead to
unscientific mining and irreparable damage to the environment.

After this being pointed out by us, the Director DMG in exit conference stated
that the report was not accepted by the State Government. However, the
documentary evidence of the Government rejecting the report was not
produced to us.

On verification of
the lease register
in two Divisional
forest offices',
we noticed
shortfall in
compliance with
the conditions
stipulated while
agreeing to
diversion of
forest land for
mining purposes
as brought out

> Afforestation in degraded forest area at one and half times of the safety
zone area was not done to an extent of 261.26 ha in 72 mines in
Bellary and to an extent of 19.90 ha in nine mines in Chitradurga.

> Regeneration of safety zone area was not done to an extent of 308.48
ha in 58 mines in Bellary and to an extent of 13.3 ha in nine mines in
Chitradurga.

> Fencing around the safety zone was not done to an extent of 264.645
ha in 65 mines in Bellary and in an extent of 36.42 ha in 14 mines in
Chitradurga.

> Compensatory plantations to an extent of 2573.89 ha were not raised in
43 mines in Bellary.

The DCF (Territorial), Bellary replied that afforestation of degraded forest
areas and compensatory plantations would be taken up in the subsequent years
and regeneration of safety zone areas would be done after release of funds.
Regarding fencing of the safety zone areas, the reply stated that the Hon’ble
Supreme Court of India had constituted a committee to carryout survey works

* Bellary, Chitradurga.

102


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

of all the ML areas, after which fencing and afforestation works would be
taken up.
DCF (Territorial), Chitradurga replied that the MLs of the Division were being

re-surveyed and verified by the CEC appointed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court
of India and the balance works would be carried out during the next years.

However, the fact remained that the conditions of afforestation, safety zone,
etc., stipulated with a view to reduce adverse impacts of mining on the
environment and to check encroachments/overlapping of lease area remained
unexecuted to the extent mentioned above.

ion works

As ascertained = from
IBM, as against an area
of 1317.40 Ha (covered
by overburden waste
dumps) was proposed
to be reclaimed/
rehabilitated by the
lessees, an area of
416.72 Ha (31.6 per
cent) was taken up for
the same and the balance
area of 900.68 Ha
was not reclaimed/
rehabilitated. Similarly,
out of the total topsoil to
be preserved in 47.32 ha,
top soil in an extent of 9.74

ha (20.6 per cent) only was utilised.

A review of the lease register in the office of the DCF (Territorial), Bellary
revealed that an amount of = 277.17 lakh was collected from 22 lessees
towards execution of reclamation charges out of which reclamation works
were completed in respect of only five lessees.

When we pointed out the failure to take up of reclamation works in respect of
the remaining 17 lessees, forest authorities stated that the reclamation works
would be taken up after the exhaust of ore body i.e. closure of mines only.
The logic of the Department of Environment and Forest is at variance with the
conditions prescribed by the IBM that the working of mines in subsequent
blocks should not be undertaken without reclamation of the worked block and
need to be resolved in the interest of environment.

103


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

8.4... Failure to monitor the plantations raised by the lessees

According to the provisions of the
Environment Impact Assessment Notification
published by the Central Government, the
projects having an extent of more than 5 Ha
have to obtain the environmental clearance
from MoEF. This was made mandatory for
the mining industry to mitigate the
environmental hazards caused as a result of
the mining operations. While issuing the
Environmental Clearance, the MOEF, puts a
condition that adequate plantation shall be

We noticed that

responsibility to ensure
correctness of the
quantum of seedlings,
reported in the mining
plan by the lessees, as

raised, its proper
maintenance and
periodical survival

status has not been
fixed either by DMG or
by the Forest

aise Gy the 10665 an the MS aca Ga Department of GOK.

consultation with the local Forest Department We checked mining

including selection of plant species. plans in respect of 12

lessees in two’ test-

checked offices and found

that a total of 35.92 lakh seedlings were reported by these lessees as planted

by them during the period from 2006 to 2011. The DDs of DMG did not

ascertain the factual position regarding actual number of seedlings raised and
their survival status in consultation with the Forest Department.

After we pointed out, the Department replied that survival status of the
plantations would be pursued with the Forest Department and action would be
taken to maximise the survival rate. In the exit conference the Additional
PCCF stated that the plantations raised by the lessees were not monitored and
the survival status was really very low.

and collection of ironment Protection Fee fo

diversion of non-forest land for mining purposes

As per the information
Government of Karnataka imposed (February obtained from the
2009) levy and collection of Environment Director, DMG, we
Protection Fee (EPF) at the rate of € 84000 per — noticed that against
Ha on the non-forest land permitted to use for an amount of
mining/quarrying. The order was made effective = 238.23 crore due to
for both ongoing as well as fresh mining/ be collected towards
quarrying leases. The EPF was to be collected EPF, an amount of
by the DMG and remitted under the Head of = 102.82 crore was
account “0406-01-800-0-11-EPF” and periodical collected from the
reconciliation of the figures were also required lessees leaving an
to be done by DMG. arrears of हैं 135.41
crore for collection as

at the end of (March 2011).

? Chitradurga and Hospet

104


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

We noticed that periodical reconciliation of departmental figures with that of
treasury figures was not done by DMG. We also noticed that the Head of
Account “0406-01-800-0-11-EPF” was not in operation in the budget even as
at the end of March 2011. Evidently, the amounts collected towards EPF
could have been misclassified under other budget heads and diverted for
purposes other than for which it was specified.

When we referred the above position to the Finance Department, the Director
was asked (April 2012) to furnish the details of actual credits made towards
EPF and expenditure booked out of it and instructed to ensure that all the
deposits towards EPF are made under ‘0406-01-800-0-11-EPF’ only and the
figures are reconciled periodically.

Regarding adoption of the rate of ¥ 84,000 per Ha for collection towards EPF,
we noticed that the Department did not assess the actual impact of
mining/quarrying on environment taking into various factors such as the type
of mineral extracted, extent of area involved, actual working period in a year,
extent of impact on environment, etc., before arriving at the rate for levying
EPF. Instead, it decided to levy fee at a common rate of € 84,000 per Ha for
all the leases irrespective of whether it was for major or minor mineral.
Consequently, the lessees approached Hon’ble High Court which in its interim
order directed the Department to collect fifty per cent of the amount in cash
and the remaining fifty per cent in the form of Bank guarantee.

The Secretary, Ecology and Environment Department replied (April 2012) that
further action would be taken only after deciding the legality of the issue in
question by the Hon’ble High Court. It was further replied (May 2012) that
guidelines with regard to imposing EPF uniformly throughout the country had
not been issued by the Central Government though request in this regard was
submitted (July 2009) by the department.

The Finance Department (August 2012) accepted that it was not possible to
reconcile the credits already made under EPF and instructed the DMG to
collect and remit EPF into the designated Head of Account “0406-01-800-0-
11” and to reconcile on monthly basis. The Treasury was also advised to
activate the above Head of Account for receiving credits of EPF from DMG.

The Chief Minister addressed a letter (August 2012) to the Hon’ble Minister
of State for Environment and Forest, Government of India, emphasising the
need for an uniform policy applicable to the entire nation with regard to
imposing EPF for mining in non-forest land by adopting the principles of
compensatory afforestation and NPV being levied in case of diversion of
forest land.

The Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) was formed (1974)
with a view to control pollution. The different kinds of pollution due to
mining activities are air pollution during extraction and transportation of
minerals, water pollution on account of tailings and waste dump and noise
pollution due to blasting in open area.

105


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

Source : Ore Dumped near a Lake at Sandur

Scrutiny of the activities of KSPCB indicated the following details of
inspections conducted during the years from 2006-07 to 2010-11 in three field
units (Chitradurga, Bellary and Tumkur) are as under:

We noticed that guidelines/standards for controlling air, noise and water
pollutions in respect of minor mineral quarries were not evolved by MoEF. In
terms of one of the conditions prescribed by MoEF in respect of major
minerals, while according environment clearances, four ambient air quality
monitoring (AAQM) stations shall be established by the lessee for monitoring
air quality in consultation with KSPCB. No standards of ambient air quality
were prescribed by KSPCB till September 2010.

Regarding establishment of AAQM stations, the KSPCB replied that none of
the mines had installed permanent AAQM stations and the lessees were
getting air quality monitored through private laboratories/agencies.

We observed the failure of KSPCB to monitor in the following cases:

106


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

8.6.1 Transportation of iron ore by Road/Rail

In one test-checked office’, we
observed that 79 permits were
issued to three MLs’ for
transportation of 4,49,043 MT of
iron ore valued at = 35.42 crore
from mining area to the
destination Le. Chennai,
Mangalore, Belekere, Karwar and
Gujarat by road. In all these
cases, compliance or to the prescribed conditions by the lessee was not
monitored by KSPCB.

In reply, KSPCB stated that the condition was stipulated with an intention to
check air pollution due to spill over of minerals during transportation,
overloading of roads, etc., and the condition was advisory in nature.

However, we suggest that as the economics of fuel consumption on account of
transportation by rail has other added advantages like reduction in the green
house gas emissions and containing of excessive pollution, including resultant
carbon emission, the same may be consideration by the Government.

Dumping of s in open sp

We noticed ~— in
Chitradurga that
two Icascs (rclating
to Hutti Gold Mines
Limited) granted
for extraction of
copper ore were
remained idle since
1995 and copper
ore tailings (COT)
were found to be
despatched during
2007-08 to 2009-
10. Thus, COT

were lying in the

open space for 15 years
without being suitably terraced and stabilised through vegetation. Adverse
effects of the same on the environment could not be ruled out.

> Chitradurga.
* Canara Minerals (ML No.2556), Lakshmi Narasimha Mining Company (ML No.2566), Sri.
Praveen Chandra (ML No.2294)

107


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

Copper Ore Tailings dumped at Chitradurga

When we brought the above omissions to the notice of KSPCB during entry
conference (December 2011), the KSPCB stated that these mines were not
inspected and no water samples were also collected/analysed as the mines
were not working and agreed to conduct inspection. Subsequently, the mining
areas were inspected by KSPCB authorities on (December 2011) and reported

that
>

The waste dumps were not covered with geo-coir mat and
plantations were not done on the surface of the waste dumps which
lead to erosion during rainy season.

Copper ore tailings were being disposed off to a firm for using as
micronutrients in agriculture and permission for the same was not
obtained from the KSPCB.

The mining authorities had not taken adequate measures to avoid
erosion of ore dumps and no water-sprinkling facilities were
provided.

Metalling of the road for vehicle movement was not done by the
mining authorities resulting in generation of fugitive emission on
the agriculture land.

Further, analysis of water samples of three borewells and one open well
around the mine area conducted (December 2011) by KSPCB indicated that
the results were not conforming to the stipulated standards.

108


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

without consent from KSPCB

On verification of 73
MLs in three Deputy
Director offices*, we
noticed, non-
compliance with
relevant provisions of
the Air Act and Water
Act in 20 cases, as
brought out in the
following paragraphs,

8.7.1 In one case

(ML 958: M/s Latha

Mining Company,

Tumkur), the CFO

granted to the lessee

for extraction of 2400
MT of iron ore per
annum was lapsed in June 2006. While sanction for expansion of production
of iron ore to 5 lakh MT was issued (July 2007) by KSPCB, CFO for the
expanded quantity and Environmental clearance from the Department of
Ecology and Environment was not granted to the lessee (July 2009).

Meanwhile, KSPCB during inspection noticed (April 2008) that the lessee had
continued to produce iron ore in the absence of CFO and environmental
clearance and the quantity thus produced during 2006-08 was 706107 MT.
Further verification in audit revealed that the total production of iron ore made
during 2006-09 was 954161 MT. This production was not reported to IBM
and no inspection was also conducted by IBM during this period. Hence,
954161 MT of iron ore produced during 2006-09 in the absence of CFO and
environmental clearance is unauthorised. The value of the mineral thus
extracted worked out to हैं 90.15 crore. No reply has been furnished by DD,
Tumkur.

8.7.2 In one case (ML 2600: M/s Matha Minerals, Tumkur), the
environmental clearance was granted in March 2007 and issue of CFO by
KSPCB was still pending. Meanwhile, 587635 MT of iron ore was extracted
by the lessee during 2004-07. Out of this, 107455 MT of iron ore was
produced in excess over the quantity approved in the mining plan during
2006-07 and 356466 MT of iron ore which was produced without approved
mining plan during the 2004-2006 has been commented in the earlier
paragraphs. The value of the remaining 123714 MT of iron ore which was
done with out environmental clearance works out to = 9.76 crore. Reply has
not been furnished by DD, Tumkur.

8.7.3 In one case (ML 2087: Kumaraswamy Mining Co: Hospet), 56275 MT
of iron ore was extracted by the lessee during 2008-09 and 2009-10 whereas

5 Chitradurga, Hospet, Tumkur.

109


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

environmental clearance was accorded by the State Level Environment Impact
Assessment Authority in January 2011 and CFE was granted by KSPCB in
March 2011. In addition, the lessee was permitted to extract only manganese
ore and extraction of iron ore during the above period was not included in the
ML as already commented in the earlier paragraphs. Reply has not been
furnished by DD, Hospet.

8.7.4 In 17 other cases® (5 cases in Tumkur, 8 cases in Chitradurga and 4
cases in Hospet), mining was permitted without the consent from KSPCB
during 2006-07 to 2009-10 and production of 31.52 lakh MT of iron ore
valued at % 299.60 crore was reported during this period.

After receiving our observation, the DD, Chitradurga replied that notices were
served to the lessees concerned calling for their explanation. Replics from the
DDs, Hospet and Tumkur were yet to be received (October 2012).

The DMG in the exit conference accepted that there were instances of
production without KSPCB Clearance and Environment Clearance and that all
the clearances are now taken care of through e-permit system.

1 in the Consent for|

Three Deputy Director offices”

We noticed that
KSPCB_has__ not
monitored whether
the mining
companies have
earmarked two per
cent of their annual
turnover —_ towards
afforestation. In
terms of information
furnished by two
Companies®, one
company’ — whose
total turnover during
the period from
2006-07 to 2011-12
was हैं 1528.60 crore,

Out of these, comment regarding production excess over mining plan has already
been made vide paragraph 6.2.2 earlier in two cases (ML. 2585:, ML 2566),
comment regarding production without mining plan vide paragraph 6.2.1 (2) in one
case (ML 2220) and comment regarding excess production declared to DMG vide
paragraph 6.2.7.1 in two cases (ML 2313 and ML 2290).

4 Chitradurga, Hospet, Tumkur.
है Mysore Minerals Limited, Sandur Manganese and Iron Ore Limited.
° Sandur Manganese and Iron Ore Limited.

110


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

spent an amount of % 10.23 crore (constituting 0.67 per cent of the total
turnover) only towards afforestation. The other Company” whose total
turnover during the period from 2008-09 to 2010-11 was हैं 907 crore, spent an
amount of & 0.27 crore (constituting 0.02 per cent of the total turnover) only
towards afforestation.

We also further observed that KSPCB was not aware whether lessees had
invested in rainwater harvesting and ground water recharging immediately
after obtaining CFE. Compliance with the condition regarding maintenance of
road and earmarking two per cent of the profit towards maintenance of the
roads was also not verified by KSPCB.

In reply, KSPCB stated that the main focus of the KSPCB was to implement
provisions of Water Act and Air Act. Consent conditions like afforestation,
soil conservation, etc., were more of advisory in nature and were stipulated as
supplement conditions for environmental clearance and IBM should have
enforced them. Further, for carrying out specific measures to control the
damage to environment and ecology, MoEF brought out (October 2010)
standards for emission and discharge in respect of iron ore mines only and the
same would be incorporated by the KSPCB in the future consents. Regarding
earmarking two per cent of the profit for maintenance of the roads, it is replied
that it was difficult to impose this condition in cases where the mines were in
forest area as the lessees were not getting permission from the Forest
Department for asphalting the road. In cases of leases falling in non-forest
land, compliance of the conditions would be reviewed by the KSPCB.

Reply of the KSPCB relating to monitoring the implementation of the
conditions like afforestation, soil conservation by the lessees is not tenable
since the KSPCB had itself stipulated the conditions and adherence to the
conditions by the lessees was required to be watched by the KSPCB.

without environmental cle

On verification of 73 MLs in three'' DD offices, we noticed that production of
1791766 MT of iron ore valued at हैं 163.28 crore was made in 13 cases'*
without environmental clearance during 2006-07 to 2008-09.

The DD, Chitradurga replied that notices were issued to five lessees calling for
explanation for the above omissions. Replies from the DDs, Hospet and
Tumkur are yet to be received.

10 Mysore Minerals Limited.

u Chitradurga, Hospet, Tumkur.

® Out of these, comment regarding production without approved mining plan/in excess over
the approved mining plan in two cases (ML 2584 and ML 2522) has already been made
vide paragraph 6.2.2, comment regarding excess production in DMG in one case (ML 1842)
has already been made vide paragraph 6.2.7.1 and comment regarding mining without
consent from KSPCB in eight cases (ML 1957, ML 2313, ML 2436, ML 2585, ML 2566
ML 2524, ML 2141 and ML 1842) has already been made vide paragraph 8.7.

111


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

ing of annual environment statement

Rule 14 of the Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986, stipulates every
person carrying on an industry requiring consent under Section 25 of the
Water (Prevention and control of pollution) Act, 1974 or under Section 21
of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981, shall submit an
environmental statement for the financial year ending on 31 March to the
concerned State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) on or before 30
September of every year. Further, as per Section 15 of the Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986, penalty up to हैं 1 lakh shall be levied for
contravention of these Acts/Rules and in case of repeated failures an
additional fine which may extend to हैं 5,000 per day shall be levied.

We noticed in three'* DD offices, that only ten to forty per cent of the lessees
had submitted an environmental statement during the period from 2006-07 to
2010-11. We also observed from the records of KSPCB that penalty for non-
submission of environmental statements was not levied by KSPCB. In the
absence of the Environmental Statement, the Board could not keep a watch
over the areas like discharge of pollutants, management of solid waste etc.
which required attention on a periodical basis.

In reply, KSPCB stated that most of the information sought in the format was
not relevant to mines and does not allow the Board to draw any meaningful
conclusion. Hence, MoEF would be addressed suggesting amendment to the
format specially to suit the mines in order to arrive at noteworthy conclusions.

8.11 Planting and m

We noticed from
As per Rule 37 of Granite Conservation and the review of the
Development Rules 1999, every lease holder shall take = ornamental stone
immediate measures for planting in the leased area quarry records in
such number of trees as are sufficient to improve the four DD offices

environment and to minimise effects of land that the
degradation during the entire period of such lease. He information
shall also look after such tree plantations during the regarding —_ details
subsistence of the lease. of trees planted

and maintained by
each lease holder during the currency of lease was not available in the lease
files.

The DD, Chamarajanagar replied that the areas granted for quarrying are in
rocky belt and unfit for cultivation. Hence, the revenue authorities would be
requested to spare alternative lands for this purpose. However, no efforts were

® Chitradurga, Hospet, Tumkur.
34 Bangalore (Rural), Chamarajanagara, Chitradurga, Tumkur.

112


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

made by the mining authorities to consult with forest authorities for an
alternative green cover.

Thus, adverse impacts on environment due to sufficient number of trees not
being planted in and around the lease area and consequent land degradation
could not be ruled out.

8.12 Conclusion

The guidelines suggested by NEERI report were not implemented resulting in
mining not compatible with environmental preservation. DMG did not
monitor adherence to the conditions by the lessee prescribed in clearances
issued by Pollution Control Board and MoEF. The Head of Account “0406-
01-800-0-11-EPF” could not be made operational and the receipts of EPF
were not reconciled with treasury records at periodical intervals.

8.13 Recommendations

We recommend that:

1. The Government may issue instructions for taking necessary measures
for proper accounting of the plantations raised by the lessees and
monitor their periodical survival status in coordination with Forest
Department.

XN

The Government may take up the matter for framing the
guidelines/standards for controlling air, noise and water pollution in
respect of minor mineral quarries with MoEF.

113


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

CHAPTER - IX

SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF MINING



Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

IC IMPACT OF

1 Introduction

The MMDR Act 1957, Rules and Regulations and the postulates of CSR
prescribe adequate safeguards for scientific, sustainable and eco-friendly
mining. Accordingly, the lessees and regulators should strive to actively
engage with all stakeholders and inform them of inherent risks and deploy
effective measures to mitigate them. Lessees associated with mining should
also provide a safe work place environment and means for training and career
advancement for labour employed in the mines, besides desisting from
employing children and forced labour. Measures should also be taken by
lessees to check and prevent pollution and manage natural resources in a
sustained manner, adopt environment friendly production methods and
undertake activities for economic and social development of communities and
geographical areas particularly in the vicinity of business. Failure of
Government in enforcing the statutory requirements under the Act, Rules and
regulations will have its ill effects on the environment and other Socio-
economic aspects besides causing environmental pollution affecting the lives
of humans and livestock.

Environm I Pollution

Air quality monitoring data obtained by us from the KSPCB, Bellary Region,
for the years 2007-08 to 2009-|0 revealed consistent increase in air pollution
in Bellary District. Against the permissible limit of Respirable Suspended
Particulate Matter (RSPM) at 100 pg/m* and Suspended Particulate Matter
(SPM) at 200ug/m* the pollution level of RSPM ranged between 103 and
1,119 while that of SPM ranged from 201 to 1,195 as per measurements
recorded during the period.

Generation of dust during transportation in Sandur Taluk

The higher level of air pollution liberally contributed to the growth of diseases
like Respiratory infection and Tuberculosis (TB) in the mining taluks of
Hospet and Sandur as abstracted below:

119


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

Source: Health and Family Welfare Officer, Bellary

The growth in respiratory diseases due to air pollution showed an increasing
trend due to the effect of growth in mining activities.

nd

As per the Report on “Impact of mining on animal husbandry sector”
furnished by the Deputy Director, Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Services,
Bellary, the 18" Census of livestock in Bellary, Hospet and Sandur taluks
conducted in 2007 registered a considerable reduction in growth rate and
population of cattle/buffalo compared to the 17" Census (2003) as detailed
below.

Source : Department of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Services

The current estimates made by the Veterinary authorities reported that
(2010-11), the livestock population have declined in the mining affected
villages. It was also reported that the decrease in the livestock population was
due to:

(i) decrease in availability of grazing land due to mining.

(ii) nutritional deficiency disorders due to non-availability of quality
fodder.

(iii) health Hazards.

(iv) high Manganese content in water and soil.

(v) contamination of water source and fodder due to toxic materials
used in mining.

(vi) increased susceptibility to diseases of respiratory, digestive and
reproductive systems.

It was also observed that while the population of livestock declined over the
years, the incidence of various diseases was on the increase as seen from the
information furnished to audit on livestock by Deputy Director, Animal
Husbandry and Veterinary Services, Bellary treated for various diseases
during the years 2006-07 to 2010-11 as shown below.

120


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

Based on the socio economic report for the year 2009-10 prepared by the
Statistics Department, the area under cultivation in Bellary declined from
4,79,188 hectares in 2005-06 to 4,36,067 hectares in 2009-10 showing a
reduction in agricultural operation to the extent of 43,121 hectares.
Consequently the area of barren lands increased to 1,24,157 hectares in 2009-
10 from 81,036 hectares during 2005-06. Similarly, information obtained
from Minor Irrigation Division, Bellary also revealed that the area of irrigated
land consistently reduced from 2,324.80 hectares in 2001-02 to 2,192.51
hectares during 2010-11.

As per the Report of the Joint Director of Agriculture, Bellary on the area
affected due to mining, a large area of land was rendered unusable for
agriculture besides causing crop loss due to dust deposits on plants which
affected the photosynthetic process leading to retarded growth of plants.

——EE ee

Agricultural area dug up for iron ore in Sandur Taluk

The Agricultural Department attributed the reduction in cultivated area and
crop loss to digging and dumping of iron ore resulting in loss of fertile top
soil, alterations in land structure making the land unfit for cultivation, loss of
vegetation due to erosion of top soil and crust formation in arable lands due to
water movement. Unscientific mining and transportation of ore also caused
dust deposits on plants resulting in reduced photosynthetic process causing
loss of yield and quality of the product.

121


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

Ae

#
Bed
Dust deposition on banana crop in Sardur Taluk

Rampant mining activity also resulted in farmers and farm labourers engaging
in mining activity neglecting agriculture operations leaving the fields barren,

farm lands left barren in Sandur Taluk

chment of lands by minir

The Hon’ble Supreme Court ordered, in August 2011, for survey of the mining
leases in Bellary, Hospet, Sandur, Chitradurga and Tumkur areas to detect
forest encroachments and mining outside its allotted areas. The survey work
was entrusted to National Institute of Technology, Suratkal (NITK). As per
the survey report submitted to the CEC, 166 lease holders encroached
1,606.91 hectares of land.

122


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

As per the details obtained from the Deputy Conservator of Forest, Bellary,
931.58 Ha of forest area was encroached by the mining companies between
2008-09 and 2009-10. Details of the encroachments for the years 2006-07,
2007-08 and 2010-11 were not furnished.

Besides, a total of 944 forest offence cases were reported to have been booked
by the Forest Department during the year 2006-07 to 2010-11 towards illegal
mining, illegal transportation, waste dumped outside the lease area,
overloading etc., in Bellary District. The rampant encroachment of forests and
illegal mining in forest area contributed to environmental degradation, besides
being unlawful.

9.6 Child Labour

Uncontrolled mining in the District of Bellary also permitted child labour in
mines. Though statistics on child labour employed in mining activities were
not on record, report on prosecution against 123 employers under child labour
Act in Hospet and Sandur circle involving 167 children was indicative of
employment of children below14 years of age in mines. Evidently, promotion
of child labour apart from being unlawful directly affected the sustained
development of the Society.

Out of 123 cases, 98 cases were acquitted due to insufficient evidence and
documents to prove the existence of the establishment and age, 6 cases were
abated due to death of the accused while in 9 cases penalty has been ordered.
10 cases were reported to be still pending.

Regarding socio-economic issues such as impact of mining on environment,
animal husbandry, agriculture, encroachment of forest lands and child labour,
the Department stated that the CEC had recommended for setting up a Special
Purpose Vehicle under the Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary and also
proposed that the levies and penalties to be collected for illegal mining
activities may be used exclusively for the socio-economic development,
conservation and protection of forest, development of common facilities such
as maintenance and widening of the existing roads, construction of alternate
roads, conveyor belts, railway siding, etc., for the transportation of iron ore.
The matter relating to the plan of action by the Special Purpose Vehicle is
being examined by the Government,

to roads due to overloading of mine lorr

In the deliberations (May 2007) for appointment of the High Level Committee
for finalisation of Mining Lease Applications, the estimated loss on
maintenance of State Highways, District Major Roads and Bridges damaged
due to the transportation of iron ore was stated to be € 1,709 crore (Chief
Engineer, Communications and Buildings, South Zone - रैं 830 crore Chief
Engineer, Communications and Buildings, North Zone - = 879 crore). Details
of the expenditure were not furnished by the Chief Engineers.

123


Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining in Karnataka

cea ne

State Highway-49 Road in Sandur area damaged by mine lorries

Out of three Public Works Divisions test checked, scrutiny of records in the
Bellary Public Works Division revealed that during the years from 2006-07 to
2010-1 1an expenditure of रैं 24.29 crore was incurred towards maintenance of
roads damaged due to overloaded mine lorries.

In Mangalore National Highways Division (NH 17 and NH 48) the percentage
of overloaded mine lorries during 2007 and 2008 ranged between 90.16 per
cent and 100 per cent. Information on premature damages to roads due to
overloaded mine lorries were not furnished by the Executive Engineer. The
Executive Engineer was, however, of the opinion that damage due to
overloading cannot be attributed to mines vehicles only. Information from
on is still awaited.

Results of surve

A survey of local opinion regarding mining was conducted by audit through
personal interaction with the villagers, Social workers, NGOs, Village
Panchayat bodies of Hospet and Sandur taluks. Results of the survey indicate
that the stakeholders largely concurred with the prevailing opinion about the
adverse impact of mining on environment, water and Air pollution,
Agriculture, livestock, Social life and spread of diseases affecting both human
livestock as discussed above. The public opinion also speaks about the
existence of child labour and forest degradation besides disturbing the fabric
of Social life.

Results of opinion poll on the adverse impact on various socio-economic
aspects are expressed as under:

Particulars Pollution Agricultural Spread of Spread of Loss of Child Whether Whether
of Air and loss due to diseases to diseases to forest labour in mining to restart
Water mining mankind livestock cover mines affected mining

social life

124


Performance Audit Report No. 2 of 2012

Evidently, majority opinion concurred with the adverse impacts of mining on
the various socio economic aspects of human life. However, 72 percentage of
the opinion favoured restarting mining activity only if it is taken up in a
scientific and controlled manner.

9.9 Conclusion

We noticed that higher level of air pollution contributed to the growth of
diseases like tuberculosis and other respiratory infections in the mining taluks
of Hospet and Sandur. The growth in respiratory diseases due to air pollution
showed an increasing trend due to the effect of growth in mining activities.
Besides, the growth in the mining activities also increased the incidence of
various diseases in livestock.

The cultivation in Bellary declined from 4,79,188 hectares in 2005-06 to
4,36,067 hectares in 2009-10 showing a decline in agricultural land to the
extent of 43,121 hectares. Consequently, the area of barren lands increased at
an alarming rate of more than 53 per cent to 1, 24,157 hectares from 81,036
hectares during the corresponding period.

Similarly, information obtained from the Minor Irrigation Division, Bellary
also revealed that the area of irrigated land consistently reduced from 2,324.80
hectares in 2001-02 to 2,192.51 hectares in 2010-11.

Unscientific mining and transportation of ore also caused dust deposits on
plants. Rampant mining activity also resulted in farmers and farm labourers
engaged in mining activity neglecting agriculture operations leading to the
fields going barren.

Report on prosecution against 123 employers under Child Labour Act in
Hospet and Sandur circles involving 167 children was indicative of
employment of children below 14 years of age in mines. Evidently, promotion
of child labour apart from being unlawful would affect the sustained
development of the society.

10 commend

The Government may consider evolving a participatory approach by involving
local population after a thorough study of likely impact on life, lifestyle and
livelihood of the communities for greater common good before grant of
mining leases.

125


mmendations

For ensuring effective Controls and Systems for Sustainable Mining we
suggest the following:

. The Government may consider putting in place a system for
monitoring the implementation of the KMP in a time bound manner 50
that desired objectives of the KMP are achieved within a fixed time
frame.

. The Government may, in line with the suggestions made in the Five
year plan 2007-12, consider creation of a Mineral Development Fund
to undertake the task of building infrastructure in mining areas and
make efforts to get the railway lines commissioned to augment the
transport facilities in mining areas.

. The Department may ensure proper maintenance of DCB Register for
all minerals.

. A system may be established for proper coordination with the
departments responsible for deducting royalty at source to ensure that
the royalty due is collected and remitted in an efficient manner.

. The Government may fix norms for waste rock generation in
ornamental stone quarries apart from directing the Department for
maintaining proper accounts as per Rules.

. The Government may consider prescribing a time limit for declaring
the cases of arrears involved in expired leases as arrears of land
revenue and stipulate a fixed time limit for issue of demand notices
after finalisation of annual assessments.

. Internal Audit Manual codifying the practices and procedures relating
to conduct of internal audit may be prepared by the Department. The
coverage of internal audit may be enlarged and timely compliance
ensured.

. Applications for lease should be processed within the time frame as per
statutory provisions.

129


The Government may introduce a system for periodical review of
mining leases, ensure that rules prescribed for renewal of the mining
leases are strictly followed and stamp duty is levied correctly and
collected promptly.

The Government may consider putting in place a mechanism to
prescribe parameters for fixation of targets of annual production giving
due importance to the areas proposed for dumping the overburden in
the mining plan so as to discourage unauthorised dumping.

It would be advisable to establish proper coordination among various
Departments/Authorities/Agencies involved in mining activities like
IBM, CTD, Transport Department, Forest Department, etc. with DMG
to ensure better control over mining activities.

It is essential to prescribe a proforma/format for maintaining vehicle
check register so as to record all the details required for enforcement
purposes and fixing the targets for inspection of vehicles at check posts
and for the mobile squad to prevent illegal transportation of minerals.

Technological advances such as GPS on trucks, load sensors at check
points etc., should be leveraged by DMG to improve enforcement
activities.

The Government may issue instructions for taking necessary measures
for proper accounting of the plantations raised by the lessees and
monitor their periodical survival status in coordination with Forest
Department.

The Government may take up the matter for framing the
guidelines/standards for controlling air, noise and water pollution in
respect of minor mineral quarries with MoEF.

130


The Government may consider evolving a participatory approach by
involving local population after a thorough study of likely impact on
life, lifestyle and livelihood of the communities for greater common
good before grant of mining leases.

The above recommendations were discussed in the exit conference held in
September 2012. The Director while appreciating the audit findings stated that
recommendations suggested would have far reaching effect in streamlining the

mining industry in the State.

(Anita Pattanayak)

Bangalore Principal Accountant General
The (Economic & Revenue Sector Audit)
Karnataka
Countersigned
VR,
d ny
New Delhi (VINOD RAI)
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India

131


-ysayge उएणाएज]407 oyp [fe Japrsuos o1 1WIEMWDADD गण ay PaxoNIp एण suOIS!DOP 2911309]
up tre (01021075) paysenb yn0> swasdng91q,uoq] ‘suoNnad 114m Jo 59.08 ए UO paseg ‘uO उजए-] 'sIUDTE UDIDYJIP|
Joa onrusumusar09 penuay >प Aq (L007 424) PoIURAs sem एुत्र 0८6८1 PUR PH EL'DOT JO ware ए९७१७०७४७७०७०/) 2०४५]
Jour Jo (00८ 29) uonrepusunuiosas >प ७० paseg 7०० (FOOT प००/५) ७०७५२ 19% dup Jo [७५०१५फ 3०0४ “TH CORE
(10 y90dsax ut no परत 9I9,UOH Sy) ७७०. 32000 Kes 180०4 pey uEdTdde avo ‘payynou ४०४४ [e101 ०५) JO INO}

गाए St uoNse [euLY “OLOZ Sy [IN 109090/05०/ ay) ४१ ण्जण |

sea ७०1७७ ON १0201७39000 EIS पा OF OWA Aq (002 AON) 105 Sem SuONRDI|de Jo UDUD}ES 201७1७०000० 94,1 0102 BY pur ६00८ 1009 ७००७४०६ |___/;

S007 १२५ Pur ६002 109७ ७००५० घ

“poweme st wonse peu “Ansnpur Sururwy oy: ut (00 39079 0015 182Aut ० pasodoad pey oym 9०४ 5002: ८8
|७० pardde pey ०५७ 14914 S/W sNOAR] UL २ण्ण णएण Jo UDUUIAAOD ० (900८ ef) P>pUoUUIOd: JDUIALD|
{Ajjoury “Ansnpur Sururur oy ur 22039 QO9'sy 1520ए ० pasodosd pey OYM ६०४७० ०७७ JO INOARS ण २०० ०प|
Purpusunuosos <q usUMUDA0D ARIS 24 1 01५6 Aq (+007 Wes) 105 Sem suONeatdde 1010201208 aAneIEduIOD 24,1}

“POHBALY BF WORSE s9yBNA "PHT "Me XOdUIID Jo aNoAKy UF ७७७०] oy SuYpusUIESA
DING 4q (४002८ Ged) 1055 sem suoHeodde yo ywaUDEs dam au

व wouwarog aris amp ०

Js: 2500] 94], ‘YOHEULO;UI [eLONIPpE डैएज२०510०७४७:०५००७ [END oy 4१ (SOOT 40) PoUAMIDI SEM 5७० ०५1. +#00८|
[-C1-7z ०० ware 4p 205 pordde pey oym “pry s9mod ३ aBuods 41 Jo snoaxy Ut २७०५ (5002 ण्श) 7000०७७५७००००)५०७|
Jowg Sy “WOUTLIDAOD गण D4) ण NWCA (४00: AON) 1075 180॥ sem suOHLoydde 10102000% DANLIEdWIOD ०५ | |
“K[UO G00c UNF Ur {jo posodsip pue yO> Ur Surpusd sem Jone oy ऋ|

0०८ AON UL DING Aq poysiuuny sem cures ox) pueuoNeULOJUt [ए००पधाएएए डैएज995109000:9%0/) [EAI २५1४१ (५00८ |
[Aing) pousmar sem aseo auf, +%002-ट1-टूट UO ware oY 105 poydde pey ०१७ “pry Mod 2p aBuodg NA Jo snonRy
Jut ०० (६00८ 37५) popuoumuoras 10H गध$ dy) ०५३७० “PIT ‘Vd XPdWID Jo 00०58 Ut २४० भप्ररिए्ए0990४७७०००१
[Aq swounusron aris ay ० DWC 44 (४002 १२५) IAS sea suoNRoydde 10 1७०५७ oanesdwos 2प1|
“1107 HEA]

Juo se 109 oun 64 pau sup ut way) soAaMoY ३६७ ७०198 ON "३३७७७ DasIN णापा।७ ७०1०७ [quIINs axe pure ७०॥०४|
Jupadxa ० (600८ 16०5) passpu0 99०0 जप पञप७ ०० LOD YB1H{ 9]9,UOH] OM Ut [४०४०७ 10% ४ (6002) 7/91०००॥१४४|
Jour ‘sign Aq 9002968%9 109फ७99५०० [७०००० ou Jo jeroudde 30.90 oy 40J 1095 100 SEA 900८-50-51 UO It 40} paydde}
[peq ०५५६ yueordde ue 10 money ut २४४० 10 10७8 Jo} WOUIUIDAOD 201५ >प 10 (८002 BAY) ७०/७७७०७४०००००० 94,1}

smyeys )ए28ग्जत

[0002 २०6 Pur ६00८194५ ०००५५०६

002 Suns pur ६002 [Udy ०००५५०ध

7002 २०० 7०० ६00८ 1७०५ ७००७७० ६
7002 २०९ 7०० ६00८ [Edy ७००७४० ४

1८002 १०५ Pur ६002 [Udy ७००५५०ध

yoru उेणुणाए 0०२24

Tey ५५९३8६४3९३ ०1 pasajas
seal JO ३७६५३ 40] 53०९०॥|99९ jo ७०.३००|०५ 90|/४०५५ yuaWaze}s

1381203४ए

z 0/€0

69 £0/E0

S
| ६ |
iS

Fy

ia
६६ ६0/80

ट्ट ६0/६0

॥ 1
if f Fee EU FE

eee PP

mo.

piece

L838

६८671


Glossary of abbreviations

AAQM Stations Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Stations

CAMPA Compensatory Afforestation Management and Planning Authority

CBI Central Bureau of Investigation

CTD Commercial Taxes Department

CEC Central Empowered Committee

CFE Consent for Establishment

CFO Consent for Operation

COT Copper Ore Tailings

CSR Corporate Social Responsibility

DCB Demand, Collection and Balance

DCF Deputy Conservator of Forests

DD Deputy Director

DMG Department of Mines and Geology, Government of Karnataka,
Bangalore

EPD Cell Environment Protection Division Cell

EPF Environment Protection Fund

GPS Global Positioning System

GSI Geological Survey of India

HGML Hutti Gold Mines Limited

HSD High Speed Diesel

IAW Internal Audit Wing

IBM Indian Bureau of Mines

IISc Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore

ILMS Integrated Lease Management System

ISRO Indian Space Research Organisation

KMMC Rules Karnataka Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 1994

KMP Karnataka Mineral Policy

KS Act Karnataka Stamp Act, 1957

KSPCB Karnataka State Pollution Control Board

KVAT Act Karnataka Value Added Tax Act, 2003

mn? Cubic Meter

133


MC Rules Mineral Concession Rules, 1960

MCD Rules Mincral Conservation and Development Rules, 1999
MDF Mineral Development Fund

MDP Mineral Despatch Permit

ML Mining Lease

MMDR Act Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957
MML Mysore Minerals Limited

MOcF Ministry of Environment and Forests

MT Metric Ton

NEERI National Environment Engineering Research Institute
NMDC National Mineral Development Corporation

NMP National Mineral Policy

NPV Net Present Value

NRSA National Remote Sensing Agency

QL Quarrying Lease

107 Recognised Qualified Personnel

RRC Revenue Recovery Certificate

RSD Remote Sensing Data

RSPM Respirable Suspended Particulate Matter

RTO Regional Transport Office

SEC State Executive Committee

SMIORE Sandur Manganese and Iron Ore Limited

SPM Suspended Particulate Matter

SWR South Western Railway

UNFC United Nations Framework for Classification

URD Unregistered Dealers

134