





































Tableofcontents
PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA i

Particulars Paragraph
No.
Page
No.
Preface  vii 
Executive Summary   ix 
Introduction 1 1 
Organisational arrangement 2 3 
Audit scope and methodology 3 4 
Audit objectives 4 4 
Audit  criteria 5 5 
Organisation of audit findings 6 5 
Acknowledgement 7 6 
PART-I  :  Denotification of land by the Government 
Chapter-1 Overview of the legal framework for denotification of land 
Power of the Government to withdraw from acquisition 
proceedings 
1.1 9 
Accepted mode of taking possession 1.2 9 
Notification of the fact of taking possession not 
mandatory 
1.3 10 
No provision for reconveyance of the acquired land to 
the original owners 
1.4 11 
Criteria for audit of denotification of land 1.5 11 
Chapter-2 Denotification not approved by the Denotification 
Committee
Denotification of 610-16½ acres by the Government 
without reference to the Denotification Committee 
2.1 12 
Chapter-3 Denotification of developed lands 
Denotification of 4-35 acres in JP Nagar VIII Phase 
Layout
3.1 14 
Denotification of 3-08 acres in Arkavathy Layout 3.2 16 
Denotification of 2-36 acres in Banashankari-V Stage 
Layout
3.3 17 
Denotification of 1-17 acres in Arkavathy Layout 3.4 18 
Denotification of 2-05 acres in HSR Layout 3.5 19 
Denotification of 1-1.2 acres in HSR Layout 3.6 20 
Denotification of 0-33 acre in JP Nagar VIII Phase 
Layout
3.7 22 
   

ReportNo.3of2012
ii PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

Particulars Paragraph
No.
Page
No.
Chapter-4 Denotification during the pendency of Court cases 
Denotification of 2-10 acres in BTM VI Stage Layout 4.1 23 
De-notification of 1-03 acres in JP Nagar VIII Phase 
Layout
4.2 25 
Denotification of one acre in HBR  I Stage Layout 4.3 26 
Denotification of 0-28 acre in Arkavathy Layout 4.4 28 
Denotification of 0-26 acre in Further Extension of 
Banashankari VI Stage Layout 
4.5 28 
Denotification of 0-25 acre in Nagarabhavi I Stage 
Layout
4.6 30 
Chapter-5 Denotification of land purchased after notification for 
acquisition
Arkavathy Layout 5.1 32 
RMV II Stage Layout 5.2 34 
East of NGEF Layout 5.3 35 
Gnanabharathi Layout 5.4 36 
BTM  IV Stage Layout 5.5 38 
Arkavathy Layout 5.6 39 
Chapter-6 Denotification of land despite Courts upholding the 
acquisition proceedings 
Further Extension of Anjanapura Layout 6.1 42 
Gnanabharathi Layout 6.2 43 
RMV II Stage Layout 6.3 45 
Hennur Road and Bellary Road III Stage Layout 6.4 46 
Denotification of 0-15 acre in the Scheme between 
Banaswadi and Hennur Road 
6.5 47 
Chapter-7 Denotification on other considerations 
Banashankari V Stage Layout 7.1 49 
BTM IV Stage Layout 7.2 50 
HAL III Stage Layout   7.3 51 
West of Chord Road IV Stage Layout 7.4 52 
JP Nagar IX Phase Layout 7.5 53 
Arkavathy Layout 7.6 54 
Gnanabharathi Layout 7.7 55 
Nadaprabhu Kempegowda Layout 7.8 56 
   

Tableofcontents
PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA iii

Particulars Paragraph
No.
Page
No.
Chapter-8 Denotification of land for group housing and site 
development 
Government order disregarded while entering into 
agreement with developer 
8.1 57 
Unjustified concession extended to a developer 8.2 59 
Sites not handed over to BDA after development 8.3 62 
Chapter-9 Denotification of huge tracts of land 
Government denotified huge tracts of land to favour a 
company 
9.1 64 
Chapter-10 Cancellation of denotification orders 
Banashankari V Stage Layout 10.1 69 
Nadaprabhu Kempegowda Layout 10.2 71 
RMV II Stage Layout 10.3 72 
BTM VI Stage Layout 10.4 73 
Further Extension of Mahalakshmi Layout 10.5 74 
Arkavathy Layout 10.6 75 
Nagarabhavi I Stage Layout 10.7 76 
Chapter-11 Restricted awards/compensation 
Exclusion of the notified area from the purview of the 
award
11.1 77 
Payment of compensation not made for the entire area 
covered by the award 
11.2 78 
Chapter-12 Betterment Tax 
Legal framework for collection of betterment tax 12.1 79 
Notified land deleted from the award after collecting 
betterment tax 
12.2 79 
Chapter-13 Payment of compensation 
Payment of compensation not verified before 
denotification of land 
13.1 82 
Development cost not recovered from persons in whose 
favour land had been denotified 
13.2 82 
Payment of land compensation through court not 
monitored 
13.3 82 
Court attached the funds of BDA due to delay in 
payment of enhanced compensation 
13.4 84 
Irregular retention of land compensation in the 
Revenue Deposit account of BDA 
13.5 85 

ReportNo.3of2012
iv PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

Particulars Paragraph
No.
Page
No.
Chapter-14 Possession of notified land not taken in full 
Huge shortfall in taking possession of land notified for 
public purpose 
14.1 86 
PART-II : Allotment of sites by the Bangalore Development 
Authority
Chapter-15 Allotment of stray sites 
List of stray sites not prepared 15.1 90 
Allotments not made in accordance with the rules 15.2 90 
Allotment of ‘G’ Category sites to ineligible persons 15.3 90 
Sites allotted to those having own houses and /or sites 15.4 91 
Allotment of corner and commercial sites under “G” 
category 
15.5 92 
Allotment of sites under ‘G’ Category disregarding the  
High Court Judgment 
15.6 92 
Non-adherence to the terms of allotment 15.7 93 
Suspected fraudulent practices in the allotment of sites 15.8 93 
Allotment on false affidavit 15.9 94 
Bulk allotment of sites under ‘G’ Category 15.10 95 
Chapter-16 Allotment of alternative sites 
Allotment of alternative sites in older layouts 16.1 96 
Irregular allotment of alternative sites of higher 
dimensions 
16.2 97 
Irregular allotment of corner sites 16.3 98 
Alternative sites were allotted on request 16.4 98 
Allotment without the Allotment Committee’s approval 16.5 98 
Allotment of alternative site after cancellation of the 
original allotment 
16.6 98 
Allotment of commercial sites as alternative sites 16.7 99 
Chapter-17 Allotment of Civic Amenity sites 
Provisions for Civic Amenity Sites 17.1 103 
Legal framework for allotment of CA sites 17.2 104 
Irregular allotment of CA sites 17.3 105 
Undue favours to allottees of CA sites 17.4 111 
CA sites used for unauthorised purposes 17.5 113 
   

Tableofcontents
PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA v

Particulars Paragraph
No.
Page
No.
Lease of CA sites not renewed or lease agreements not 
executed 
17.6 115 
CA sites yet to be allotted   17.7 117 
Non-utilisation of the CA sites after allotment 17.8 117 
Encroachment/unauthorized constructions on CA sites 17.9 118 
Chapter-18 Parks and Asset Management 
Parks 18.1 119 
Asset management 18.2 121 
Chapter-19 Other topics of interest 
Unjustified waiver of ground rent  19.1 123 
PART-III : Conclusion and Recommendations 
Chapter-20 Conclusion 127
Chapter-21 Recommendations 129
PART-IV : Appendices 
Details of  land notified for public purpose and taken 
possession of
1 133 
Details of alternative sites allotted in older layouts 2 135 
Allotment of alternative sites in older layouts without 
the approval of the Allotment Committee 
3 137 







PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA vii



1. This Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 has been prepared for 
submission to the Governor under Article 151 of the Constitution. 
2. The Report contains the results of examination by Audit of 
‘Denotification of lands by Government and Allotment of sites by 
Bangalore Development Authority. 
3. The audit was conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 

ExecutiveSummary
PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA ix

The Bangalore Development Authority (BDA) had been set up under the BDA 
Act, 1976 to promote and secure the development of the Bangalore 
Metropolitan Area.  Section 15 of the BDA Act empowers BDA to undertake 
developmental schemes with the previous approval of the Government. While 
Section 17 of the BDA Act e nables BDA to draw up a notification 
(preliminary notification) specifying the land proposed to be acquired for the 
developmental scheme, Section 19 empowers the Government to publish a 
declaration (final notification) stating that land for such developmental scheme 
is required for public purpose. Thereafter, the acquisition of land is regulated 
by the provisions in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (LA Act) which also 
empowers the Government to withdraw acquisition proceedings of any land 
(to denotify the land), of which possession has not been taken. 
While land measuring 34527-17 acres
1 had been acquired for the formation of 
54 layouts in the Bangalore Metropolitan Area, the Government withdrew the 
acquisition proceedings in respect of 1355-01 acres of land at different stages 
during January 1995 to March 2012. A Performance Audit was conducted 
during February to July 2012 covering the period 2007-12 during which the 
Government denotified 212-39 acres of land, possession of which had been 
taken.  The audit sample covered 40 per cent  of the 126 cases of 
denotifications made during 2007-12.  
After the issue of final notification for acquisition of land under the BDA Act, 
the important stages of acquisition leading up to the stage of taking possession 
of land are regulated by the LA Act as shown below: 
¾ Section 11 requires the Deputy Commissioner to make an award of 
compensation for 
the land acquired after hearing objections, if any, 
from all the persons interested in the land.
¾ Section 16(1) empowers the Deputy Commissioner to take possession 
of the land after making an award under Section 11 and the land shall 
thereupon vest absolutely in the BDA, free from all encumbrances. 
¾ Section 16(2) requires the Deputy Commissioner to notify in the 
official Gazette the fact of such taking possession
The audit of denotification of land, which had been taken possession of by 
BDA during 2007-12, was conducted on the basis of the following criteria 

134527-17 acres means 34527 acres and 17 guntas.  Forty guntas make one acre.  While the 
numerical before the hyphen indicates the extent of land in acres, the numerical after the 
hyphen represents the extent of land in g untas – This has been uniformly adopted in the 
Report 
1. Denotification of land by the Government 

ReportNo.3of2012
x PerformanceAudit on
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA


derived from various judgments of the Supreme Court and the High Court of 
Karnataka:
¾ Once land notified for public purpose has been taken possession of under 
Section 16 (1) of the LA Act with the recording of a memorandum or 
Panchanama by the Land Acquisition Officer in the presence of 
witnesses signed by him/them, the Government has no powers to 
withdraw the acquisition proceedings under the LA Act, even if 
publication under Section 16 (2) had not been issued; 
¾ Such land cannot be reconveyed to the erstwhile landowners even if the 
acquired land or part thereof is not needed for public purpose; and 
¾ Subsequent to taking possession of land under Section 16 (1), the 
retention of possession of the acquired land by the erstwhile land owners 
would tantamount only to illegal and unlawful possession. 
(Chapter 1)
The important audit findings relating to denotification of lands during 2007-12 
are discussed below: 
During 2007-11, the Government denotified 123-15.5 acres of land after 
taking possession under Section 16 (1) and another 89-23.5 acres of land after 
notifying the fact of taking possession under Section 16(2).  As the 
Government had no power to denotify land after taking possession, the 
denotification of 212-39 acres of land during 2007-11 had been done in 
defiance of the law.  There were no denotifications during 2011-12. 
Though the Government had constituted a Denotification Committee for 
reviewing every case of denotification in and around Bangalore and 
recommending to the Government the appropriate action to be taken, the 
Government denotified land measuring 610-16½ acres during 2007-12 without 
referring the cases to the Denotification Committee. 
(Chapter 2)
In seven cases, the Government irregularly denotified 16-15.2 acres in four 
layouts between October 2007 and September 2010 after land had been taken 
possession of, and developed by BDA.  These denotifications had been done 
pursuant to the orders of the incumbent Chief Ministers who disregarded the 
well settled law that land, once taken possession of, could not be denotified.  
In three of these cases, denotifications had been done in layouts where sites 
formed on the denotified land had already been allotted to the general public.  
In four cases, the denotified land was subsequently sold to other persons, 
evidencing that the subversion of the acquisition process culminating in the 
denotifications had been done only to facilitate the sale of the land acquired 
for public purpose. 
 (Chapter 3) 

ExecutiveSummary
PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA xi

In six cases, the Government irregularly denotified 6-12 acres in six layouts 
between May 2008 and June 2010 pursuant to the orders of the incumbent 
Chief Ministers.  These denotifications defied law and had been done after 
land had been duly taken possession of and even while many cases 
challenging the acquisition process had been pending in the Courts. 
(Chapter 4) 
The Karnataka Land (Restriction on Transfer) Act, 1991 (KLRT Act) 
prohibits transfer by sale, mortgage, gift, lease or otherwise of any land or part 
thereof which is proposed to be acquired by BDA under Section 19 of the 
BDA Act and no registering authority can register any such document unless 
the transferor produces before such registering office a permission in writing 
of the competent authority for such transfer. 
In nine cases, the Government denotified 23-38 acres in five layouts during 
June 2007 to May 2010.  In three of these cases involving 6-13 acres, 
denotification had been done after land had been taken possession of. In all 
these cases, the Government overlooked the violations of KLRT Act before 
denotifying the lands
. The pattern of transactions in these cases evidenced that 
prime land notified by BDA for various developmental schemes but remaining 
unutilized for a variety of reasons had been targeted for illegal purchases in 
violation of the provisions of KLRT Act. Unjustified denotification of such 
lands by the Government not only regularized the illegal transactions but also 
facilitated exploitation of such prime land for commercial purposes in a few 
cases. 
(Chapter 5) 
In six cases, the Government irregularly denotified 13-25 acres of land during 
August 2007 to October 2010.  In five of these cases involving 6-36 acres, 
possession of land had also been taken.  In all these cases, denotification had 
been done pursuant to the orders of the incumbent Chief Ministers 
overlooking the fact that the acquisition proceedings had been upheld by 
various Courts. 
(Chapter 6) 
In eight cases, the Government denotified 29-24½ acres and 11875.75 sq ft of 
land in eight layouts between March 2006 and June 2010 pursuant to the 
orders of the incumbent Chief Ministers.  In four cases, denotifications had 
been done after the land had been taken possession of.  BDA’s failure to take 
possession of the notified land for 10 to 19 years (two cases), BDA’s inability 
to conclusively establish the fact of  taking possession of land (one case), 
conflicting legal opinions given by the Law Department (one case), fault of 
the administrative department in denotifying land excessively (one case), 
irregular transfer of title of the notified land to the owner (one case) and the 
disregard shown for the legal position (two cases) f acilitated the 
denotifications in these cases. 
(Chapter 7)

ReportNo.3of2012
xii PerformanceAudit on
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA


With a view to encouraging investment in housing projects by private and co-
operative sectors, the Government issued an order (November 1995) with the 
approval of the Cabinet.  In terms of this order, in cases where the acquisition 
proceedings in respect of the notified lands had not been completed and the 
land had not vested with BDA, the owner of the land was free to develop the 
land, with the approval of the Government, either for formation of sites or for 
group housing. While, in the case of group housing projects, the developer 
should relinquish 12 per cent of the total built up area to BDA, in the case of 
formation of sites, the developer should hand over 30 per cent  of the sites 
formed as per the approved plan.  In addition, the areas earmarked for parks 
and civic amenities and open spaces in the approved plan were to be 
relinquished in favour of BDA.  However, the Government order of November 
1995 had not prescribed any time frame for completing the project by the 
developer.
BDA had approved (September 2004) the composite project proposal received 
(February 2004) from a developer for implementing a group housing scheme 
over 28-05 acres of land and developing sites over another 12-06 acres of land 
in Kothnur and Raghuvanapalya villages of Bangalore South taluk.  Against 
6.31 lakh sq ft of area to be relinquished, the developer had relinquished only 
5.19 lakh sq ft.  Though 214 residential sites had been relinquished in April 
2005, BDA could take possession of only 146 sites, as the area where the 
remaining 68 sites had been formed by the developer was under litigation.  
Out of four blocks of apartments sanctioned, the construction of only one 
block had been completed so far and the developer had not handed over 12 per
cent of the built-up area of the block constructed.  Though the terms and 
conditions of Government order of November 1995 had been violated by the 
developer resulting in substantial loss to BDA, BDA had not reported these 
violations to the Government which denotified 41-31 acres in favour of the 
developer in September 2007.   
The Government denotified (December 1996) eight acres of land in Rupena 
Agrahara village in Bangalore South taluk in favour of a company for 
developing it in terms of Government order of November 1995. After a lapse 
of nine years, the company offered to pay, in lieu of 30 per cent of the sital 
area, 50 per cent of the prevailing allotment rate at which BDA was allotting 
sites to the general public.  Overlooking the objections raised by the Urban 
Development Department, the Chief Minister ordered (January 2006) recovery 
at 200 per cent of the prevailing BDA allotment rate for the sital area to be 
given up, though there was no provision in the Government order of 
November 1995 for extending such concession.  While the value of the sital 
area given up by the Government was 
` 51.30 crore on the basis of the average 
bid price received by BDA during the same period in response to auction of 
sites in the same layout, the amount recovered from the company for the sital 
area as per the orders of the Chief Minister was only 
` 2.24 crore, resulting in 
a loss of revenue of ` 49.06 crore to BDA. 

ExecutiveSummary
PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA xiii

The Government had denotified 2-20 acres of land in Sy.No.1/2 of 
Lottegollahalli village subject to the land owner developing it in terms of 
Government order of November 1995.  The land owner had formed sites on 
the entire denotified land without leaving any space for civic amenity or parks 
and utilized the roads already formed by BDA in the layout to provide access 
to the sites.  The land owner had sold all the sites without handing over any 
sital area to BDA and the entire area had been fully built up.  The cost of sites 
not relinquished by the land owner worked out to 
` 16.31 crore. BDA’s poor 
enforcement of the conditions prescribed in Government order of November 
2005 led to this state of affairs. 
(Chapter 8) 
The Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Board had acquired 99-13 acres 
of land in two villages during August 2002 to March 2003 on consent basis 
and handed over the land to a company for setting up an IT park.  The 
acquisition made by the Board had far exceeded the limit of eight acres 
approved by the High Level Committee of the Department of Commerce in 
Industries during September 2000. Subsequently, during May 2007, pursuant 
to the orders of the Chief Minister, the Government denotified before taking 
possession another 60 acres in one of the two villages above in favour of the 
company for the same purpose.  This denotification had been done against the 
recommendations of the Denotification Committee.  The same company 
obtained a No Objection Certificate from BDA for utilizing another 43-09 
acres in these two villages which had been denotified by the Government 
during May 2008 in favour of farmers.  Thus, the company had been 
unjustifiably given huge tracts of land by subjugating public interest to private 
interest. 
(Chapter 9) 
In terms of a judgment delivered by the High Court of Karnataka, once a 
denotification has been issued, it cannot be withdrawn by another notification.  
If the Government or the acquiring body wants to withdraw the denotification, 
they will have to issue fresh preliminary notification and final notification to 
acquire the property. 
In seven cases, the Government irregularly denotified 24-13 acres of land in 
seven layouts during December 2009 to September 2010 pursuant to the 
orders of the Chief Minister.  While land had been taken possession of in six 
cases, there was no valid reason for denotification in the other case.  These 
denotification orders were cancelled subsequently during October 2010 to 
February 2012.  While no reason was given for the cancellation in three cases, 
the cancellation in three other cases was prompted by cases filed before the 
Courts challenging the denotification orders. 
(Chapter 10) 

ReportNo.3of2012
xiv PerformanceAudit on
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA


Land Acquisition Officers/Deputy Commissioners of BDA had excluded 91-
35½ acres of notified land in 94 cases while making the awards for payment of 
compensation.  In 63 other cases, instead of paying compensation for the 
entire area covered by the award, payment had been made for a reduced area.  
The area excluded from payment of compensation in these 63 cases 
aggregated 16-20 acres.  The exclusion of these lands from the purview of the 
award and payment of compensation was unauthorised as the Land 
Acquisition Officers/Deputy Commissioners had no power under the LA Act 
to do so.  Further, possession of the lands had not been taken by BDA in these 
cases on the ground that awards had not been passed and compensation had 
not been paid.   As the final notification for acquisition had been done in 
public interest in these cases, a reversal of that process by excluding the 
notified area from the purview of the award or compensation signified that the 
Land Acquisition Officers/Deputy Commissioners, who had directed it, 
subverted public interest by subjugating it to personal interest.
(Chapter 11) 
Land measuring 162-07 acres included in the final notification for five layouts 
had been deleted from the purview of the award by the Commissioner, after 
collecting betterment tax, without the approval of the BDA.  Under the BDA 
Act, the Commissioner had no power to exclude the notified lands from the 
purview of the award by collecting betterment tax. 
(Chapter 12) 
During 2007-12, the Government had denotified 305-37 acres of land after 
passing the awards under Section 11 of the LA Act.  In these cases, BDA had 
not verified before denotification, whether land compensation had been paid to 
the entitled persons either by the Land Acquisition Officers or by the Court.  
BDA had failed to take action, wherever necessary, to recover the 
compensation already paid or to seek refund of money deposited with the 
Court for disbursing compensation. Though lands in many sampled cases had 
been developed by BDA before these were denotified by the Government, 
BDA did not recover the cost of development from the persons in whose 
favour the land had been denotified.
BDA also failed to monitor the disbursement of compensation against funds 
deposited with the Court. 
(Chapter 13) 
Against 34527-17 acres of land notified for acquisition during the period from 
June 1948 to February 2010 for the formation of 54 layouts, the possession of 
only 19049-02 acres (44 per cent) had been taken by BDA as of April 2012.  
Only in 20 out of 54 layouts, 75 per cent of the notified land had been taken 
possession of.  In other layouts, the extent of land not taken possession of 
ranged from 26 to 100 per cent.  As possession of the land was to be taken 
after making the award within two years from the date of final notification, the 

ExecutiveSummary
PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA xv

inordinate delay in taking possession was not justified.  Huge shortfall in 
taking possession of the land created scope for denotification of the land 
notified for public purpose.
(Chapter 14) 
The BDA (Allotment of Sites) Rules, 1984, the BDA (Disposal of Corner 
Sites and Commercial Sites) Rules, 1984 and the BDA (Allotment of Civic 
Amenity Sites) Rules, 1989 provide the frame work for allotment of different 
categories of sites.  During 2007-12, BDA had allotted 265 civic amenity sites, 
541 corner sites and intermediate sites, 438 stray sites and 924 alternative 
sites.  The audit findings in regard to these sites are given below: 
During 2007-11, BDA had allotted 438 sites under “G” Category, meant for 
persons in public life.  The Government allotted these sites on its own and 
BDA implemented the orders of the Government.  The Government stopped 
the allotment of sites under “G” Category pursuant to a judgment (December 
2010) of the High Court in which it was held that the State Government had 
no power or authority under the BDA Act, 1976 and the BDA  (Allotment of 
Sites) Rules, 1984 to direct the BDA to allot sites to any person under “G” 
Category.  However, BDA allotted 22 sites under “G” Category during 2011 
long after the judgment on the ground that the Government had approved these 
allotments prior to the date of judgment
.   
Sixty per cent  of the allottees under “G” Category were other than 
MLAs/MLCs/MPs/Ministers/artists or sports persons.  In all the cases of 
allotments under “G” Category, BDA did not have any opportunity to 
determine the merits of allotments as it allotted sites on the basis of 
Government orders.    
Though the BDA (Allotment of Sites) Rules, 1984 prescribe that no person 
who or any dependent member of whose family, owns a site or a house within 
the Bangalore Metropolitan Area shall be eligible to apply for allotment of a 
site, BDA had allotted 10 sites under “G” Category during 2007-11 to persons 
who had declared that they or their dependents had their own houses and/or 
sites.  If these sites had been disposed of through public auction, BDA would 
have earned an additional revenue of 
` 9.84 crore.  Similarly, though these 
Rules prohibited allotment of a site to a person who has earlier been allotted a 
site by any agency of the Government, BDA irr egularly allotted a site with a 
sale potential of 
` 1.58 crore under “G” category to a person who had earlier 
been allotted a site. 
As per the BDA (Disposal of Corner Sites and Commercial Sites) Rules, 1984, 
all the corner sites and commercial sites in the layouts are to be disposed of by 
auction.  In violation of these Rules, BDA had allotted four corner sites and 22 
commercial sites under “G’ Category, resulting in a loss of 
` 23.67 crore. 
2. Allotment of sites by BDA 

ReportNo.3of2012
xvi PerformanceAudit on
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA


The Government irregularly approved bulk allotment of 46 sites under “G” 
Category during October 2007 to members belonging to a Samithi.  This 
resulted in a loss of 
` 11.08 crore to BDA. 
(Chapter 15) 
As per the BDA (Allotment of Sites) (Amendment) Rules, 2003, BDA is to 
allot an alternative site to an allottee only where it cannot give possession of 
the originally allotted sites for any reason.  While doing so, BDA should allot 
the alternative site either in the same layout or other layout formed 
subsequently.  It should not allot the alternative site in a layout formed prior to 
the layout in which the original allotment was made.  An alternative site, up to 
ten per cent  over and above the area of the originally allotted site may be 
allotted. The alternative sites are to be allotted by the Allotment Committee 
and approved by BDA. 
While the Allotment Committee of BDA had irregularly allotted 34 alternative 
sites in older layouts during 2007-12, the Commissioner irregularly allotted 
another 11 alternative sites during the same period without the approval of the 
Allotment Committee.  The loss to BDA on account of these irregular 
allotments aggregated 
` 36.83 crore. 
The Allotment Committee and the Commissioner irregularly allotted five 
alternatives of higher dimensions during 2007-12 in excess of the maximum 
permissible limit of 10 per cent, resulting in a loss of 
` 1.14 crore. 
The Commissioner/Secretary irregularly allotted alternative sites in 46 cases 
during 2007-12 without approval of the Allotment Committee.  Had these sites 
been auctioned, BDA could have realized an additional revenue of 
` 54.17 
crore. 
The Allotment Committee/Commissioner allotted four commercial sites as 
alternative sites during 2007-12 instead of disposing of these by auction, 
resulting in a loss of 
` 2.98 crore. 
(Chapter 16) 
The BDA (Allotment of Civic Amenity Sites) Rules, 1989 provide the 
framework for allotment of Civic Amenity (CA) sites which are reserved for 
specific purposes in the layouts developed by BDA as well as the private 
developers.  The CA sites formed in the private layouts are to be relinquished 
by the developers in favour of BDA before commencement of the 
development work.  BDA is to notify the public about the CA sites and the 
purposes for which they have been reserved.  The initial lease period is to be 
thirty years and selection of the lessee is to be done by the “CA Site Allotment 
Committee”.   If the lessee violates the conditions of lease, BDA is at liberty 
to resume the CA site with 30 days’ notice to the lessee and the money paid by 
the lessee is liable to forfeited. 

ExecutiveSummary
PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA xvii

Eighteen CA sites measuring 32584.61 sqm had not been relinquished by 
private house building co-operative societies in favour of BDA as of March 
2012.  These sites, if leased out by BDA for 30 years, had the potential of 
fetching a  revenue of 
` 16.29 crore.
There was no transparency in allotment of CA sites.  Where many applications 
had been received for allotment of a CA site and one of the applicants had 
been preferred over others, there were no recorded reasons as to why that 
particular applicant had been preferred. 
A Trust who had been allotted a CA site during October 1979 encroached 
upon another site which had been earmarked for a park in the approved plan.  
Though there was no provision in the Rules to allot a park as a CA site, BDA 
resolved (September 2010) to allot the site as a CA site to the Trust on lease 
for 30 years by levying penalty and recovering the lease amount at the 
prevailing rate.  Though BDA approved (September 2010) recovery of 
` 4.80 
crore from the lessee, it unjustifiably reduced the amount to ` 88.57 lakh at the 
request of the allottee by reducing the penalty and recovering the lease amount 
only for a part of the area leased out. 
Though CA sites are to be leased only after notifying these to the public, BDA 
leased three CA sites directly to three institutions pursuant to the orders of the 
CM without notifying these to the public. 
BDA allotted two CA sites directly to a developer during January 2012 under 
the orders of the Government.  However, the allotment had been made under 
Revised Master Plan-2015 instead of under Zoning of Land Use and 
Regulations, BDA-1995.  This had exposed BDA to the risk of non-recovery 
of the lease amount of 
` 4.87 crore from the lessee. 
BDA unjustifiably reduced the lease amount payable by a lessee by ` 1.02
crore though the lessee was not eligible for the concession. 
BDA reduced the lease amount payable by a Trust from ` 64.42 lakh to 
` 15 lakh pursuant to the orders of the CM and adjusted the unpaid amount of 
` 49.42 lakh as donation to the lessee, though there was no provision in the 
BDA Act for making donations to a private trust. 
The Commissioner renewed the lease of a CA site 16 months in advance of 
expiry of the lease period by recovering the lease amount of ` 13.23 crore at 
the prevailing rate.  The lessee would have paid the lease amount of 
` 21.12 crore had the lease been renewed in the normal course.  The loss to 
BDA aggregated ` 7.89 crore. 
Eight CA sites had been used for unauthorized purposes.  Though the 
violations were within the knowledge of BDA, no action had been taken 
against the lessees. In 71 out of 1234 CA sites allotted by BDA, the leases (60 

ReportNo.3of2012
xviii PerformanceAudit on
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA


private institutions and 11 Government institutions) had not been renewed as 
of July 2012. The delay in renewal of leases ranged from eight to nine years in 
respect of Government institutions while it was 11 months to 32 years in 
respect of private institutions.  Non-renewa l of the leases in time deprived 
BDA of the opportunity of earning 
` 43.45 crore by way of lease charges 
recoverable.
As of March 2012, 298 CA sites measuring 9.16 lakh sqm available with BDA 
remained unallotted.  These included 140 CA sites in 14 layouts developed by 
BDA and 158 sites in 61 private layouts.  Sub-optimal utilization of the area 
earmarked for civic amenity, besides resulting in lack of the intended civic 
amenities in the layouts, deprived BDA of the opportunity of generating 
substantial financial resources by leasing the CA sites with a revenue potential 
of
` 192.30 crore. 
As of March 2012, 61 CA sites had been encroached upon.  The revenue 
potential of these 61 CA sites encroached upon worked out to ` 60.73 crore on 
the basis of lease amount for 30 years.  BDA had not taken any effective 
action to evict the encroachers and restore its properties. 
(Chapter 17) 
BDA allotted a park to a club and a music Sabha, though there was no 
provision in the Rules for allotment of parks to individuals or private 
institutions.
As of March 2012, 56 parks with an area of 321180.60 sqm under the 
jurisdiction of three out of four divisions of BDA had remained encroached 
upon.  Twenty six of these parks were in layouts developed by BDA.  Temples 
had encroached upon 26 parks, BBMP had encroached upon four parks, 
buildings had been unauthorisedly constructed in 15 parks, one park had been 
encroached upon by a private resort and the remaining parks had been 
encroached upon by schools, Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board 
and Karnataka Power Transmission Company Limited.  Large scale 
encroachment of parks indicated that the system of safeguarding the assets in 
BDA was ineffective, exposing BDA to the risk of losing valuable land due to 
encroachment. 
Land measuring 1039-33 acres and valued at 
` 24075 crore had remained 
encroached upon in 13 layouts formed between 1969 and 2002. 
There were huge differences between the data in respect of the extent of land 
handed over and land developed,  maintained by the Land Acquisition Section 
and the Engineering Divisions.  These differences remained unreconciled.  
BDA had not maintained Asset Register despite the lapse having been 
commented upon persistently over the years by Audit.   
The management of CA sites by BDA was ineffective.  BDA had not devised 
any mechanism for periodical verification of the existence, maintenance and 
utilization of the CA sites for authorised purposes.  BDA had not prepared 

ExecutiveSummary
PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA xix

Demand-Collection-Balance statements for CA sites and there was, therefore, 
no system to keep track of the demand and collection of dues from the 
allottees of CA sites.  No system was also in place to monitor the renewal of 
the leases of the CA sites. 
(Chapter 18) 
BDA unjustifiably waived off ground rent 
` 1.52 crore payable by the Army 
Welfare Housing Organisation for their development plan for residential 
apartments, though there was no provision for such waiver in the BDA Act, 
rules or regulations. 
(Chapter 19) 
¾ The acquisition proceedings in respect of land notified for public 
purpose should not be reversed after its possession has been taken.  To 
guard against recurrence of illegal denotifications, the State 
Government should enforce the LA Act appropriately and impose 
exemplary punishment on those who act against the provisions in the 
LA Act. 
¾ The administration of the KLRT Act needs to be effectively managed to 
guard against illegal sale of land notified for public purpose. 
Government should take appropriate action against such illegal 
registrations.
¾ Any attempt to subvert the acquisition process by unauthorisedly 
deleting the notified land from the purview of the award or 
unauthorisedly collecting betterment tax should be frustrated by 
imposing exemplary punishment on those who resort to such 
subversions.
¾ The allotment of different categor ies of sites should be done strictly in 
accordance with the extant rules. This should be ensured by introducing 
appropriate oversight mechanism at the Government level. The irregular 
allotments, wherever made, should be reversed.  
¾ The asset management requires a thorough overhaul and appropriate 
controls should be put in place to safeguard the assets and ensure their 
proper utilisation.
(Chapter 21)
3. Recommendations 

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 1

Till 1975, different authorities like Bangalore Municipal Corporation, City 
Improvement Trust Board, Bangalore City Planning Authority, Karnataka 
Housing Board, etc., had been exercising jurisdiction over Bangalore city.  
Some functions of these bodies like planning, development etc., were
overlapping, creating avoidable confusion, besides hampering coordinated 
development.  It was, therefore, considered necessary to set up a single 
authority like the Delhi Development Authority for Bangalore city and areas 
adjacent to it.  
The Bangalore Development Authority (BDA) was, therefore, set up under the 
BDA Act, 1976 (BDA Act) to promote and secure the development of the 
Bangalore Metropolitan Area. Section (Sec) 14 of the BDA Act, 1976 
empowers the BDA to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of movable and 
immovable property, to carry out building, engineering and other operations 
and to do all things necessary for the purpose of such development.  Sec 15 of 
the BDA Act empowers BDA to undertake developmental schemes with the 
previous approval of the Government.  
The legal framework provided by the BDA Act for acquisition of land for 
developmental schemes is shown below: 
Sec 15: Vests power in the BDA to draw up a Development Scheme for the 
development of the Bangalore Metropolitan area. 
Sec 17: When a development scheme has been prepared, the BDA is to 
draw up a notification (preliminary notification) specifying, inter 
alia, the land which is proposed to be acquired and the land in 
regard to which a betterment tax
1 may be levied. 
Sec 18: BDA shall submit the scheme to the Government for sanction and 
the Government may sanction the scheme after considering the 
proposal.
Sec 19: Upon sanction of the scheme, the Government shall publish in the 
official Gazette a declaration (fina l notification) stating the fact of 
such sanction and that land is required for a public purpose. 
Sec 27: Where within a period of five years from the date of the final 
notification, BDA fails to execute the scheme substantially, the 
scheme shall lapse. 


1   Where as a consequence of execution of any development scheme, the market value of any 
land comprised in the scheme, which is not required for the execution thereof, has increased 
or will increase, BDA shall be entitled to levy a betterment tax for such land. 
1. Introduction 

ReportNo.3of2012
2 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

Sec 36 The acquisition of land under the BDA Act shall be regulated by 
the provisions, as far as they are applicable, of the Land Acquisition 
Act, 1894 (LA Act). 
After publication of the final notification under the BDA Act, the acquisition 
will be governed by the provisions in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (LA 
Act).  The following provisions in the LA Act deal with the subsequent stages 
of acquisition of land by BDA. 
Sec 11 : Requires the Deputy Commissioner to make an award of 
compensation for the land acquired after hearing objections, if 
any, from all the persons interested in the land. 
Sec 16(1) : Empowers the Deputy Commissioner to take possession of the 
land after making an award under Section 11 and the land shall 
thereupon vest absolutely in the BDA, free from all 
encumbrances. 
Sec 16(2) : Requires the Deputy Commissioner to notify in the official 
Gazette the fact of such taking possession. 
Sec 31 : Requires the DC to tender payment of compensation to the 
interested persons entitled thereto or to deposit the amount of 
compensation in the Court in cases, where the interested persons 
have not consented to receive it or where there are no persons 
competent to alienate the land or there is a dispute to the title of 
the land etc. 
Sec 48(1) : Empowers the Government to withdraw acquisition proceedings 
of any land of which possession has not been taken. 
Land measuring 34527-17 acres had been notified during the period June 1948 
to February 2010 for the formation of 54 layouts in the Bangalore 
Metropolitan Area.  During January 1995 to March 2012, the Government 
withdrew the acquisition proceedings in respect of 1355-01 acres 2 of land at 
different stages under Sec 48(1) of the LA Act as shown in Table-1:
Table-1:  Details of land in respect of which acquisition proceedings had 
been withdrawn 
Stage at which Government withdrew Extent of land withdrawn 
(Acres-Guntas) 
After publication of Final Notification 794-05 
After passing award for compensation 161-00 
After taking possession under Sec 16(1) 281-32 
After publication of notification under Sec 16(2) 118-04 
Total 1355-01 
(Source: Information furnished by BDA) 


2  1355-01 acres means 1355 acres and 01 guntas.  Forty guntas make one acre.  While the 
numerical before the hyphen indicates the extent of land in acres, the numerical after the 
hyphen represents the extent of land in gu ntas – This has been uniformly adopted in the 
Report 

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 3

The BDA (Allotment of Sites) Rules, 1984, the BDA (Allotment of Civic 
Amenity Sites) Rules 1989 and the BDA (Disposal of Corner Sites and 
Commercial Sites) Rules, 1984 provide the framework for allotment of 
different categories of sites formed by BDA in the layouts. 
BDA had not allotted sites to the general public during 2007-12.  However, 
during this period, it had allotted 265 civic amenity sites, 541 corner sites and 
intermediate sites, 438 stray sites and 924 alternative sites.
BDA functioned under the overall control of the Principal Secretary, Urban 
Development Department (PS).  The Authority was headed by a Chairman, 
assisted by a Commissioner, and 12 official and two non-official members.  
The Commissioner was the Chief Executive Officer and Administrative 
Officer of the Authority. The Authority was assisted by a Deputy 
Commissioner (DC) in matters related to acquisition of land, a Town Planning 
Member (TPM) responsible for sanction of development plans and an 
Engineering Member (EM) entrusted with the responsibility of the 
development of the land acquired.  The DC was assisted by four Land 
Acquisition Officers (LAOs), the TPM by two Joint Directors and two Deputy 
Directors and the EM by four Executive Engineers (EEs). While the Law 
Officer assisted by a Deputy Law Officer was responsible for advising the 
Authority on legal matters and handling litigation, the Finance Member (FM) 
assisted by a Chief Accounts Officer (CAO) was responsible for advising the 
Authority on matters related to finance. The Secretary of the BDA, assisted by 
four Deputy Secretaries, was entrusted with allotment of sites, assessment, 
demand and collection of property tax and general administration of the 
Authority. 
Organisational Chart 
2. Organisational arrangement 
Chairman, BDA 
Principal Secretary, Urban Development Department 
Secretary 
Commissioner, BDA 
Deputy 
Commissioner
TPM
 EM
 Law 
Officer 
FM 
Four Deputy 
Secretaries  
 Four LAOs
Two Joint 
Directors 
 Four 
Executive 
Engineers 
Deputy 
Law 
Officer
CAO
Two Deputy 
Directors 

ReportNo.3of2012
4 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

The Performance Audit was conducted during February to July 2012 covering 
the period 2007-12 during which the Government had denotified 610-16½ 
acres of land at various stages of the acquis ition process.  An entry conference 
was held on 29 May 2012 with the Princip al Secretary, Urban Development 
Department (PS), in which the scope and methodology of the Performance 
Audit were explained. The audit sample covered the Urban Development 
Department Secretariat, BDA, four LAOs, Town Planning Section, Law 
Section, Finance and Accounts Wing, Engineering Wing, Secretary including 
four Deputy Secretaries and four revenue officers.
The audit sample covered 40 per cent of 126 cases of denotifications made by 
the Government during 2007-12 after taking possession of land.  Though the 
scope of audit was denotifications made by the Government during 2007-12, 
audit also accessed records relating to previous periods in the sampled cases to 
examine the developments that culminated in the denotifications.  Audit also 
obtained encumbrance certificates from the jurisdictional sub-registrars to 
examine the developments in the sampled cases after denotification.  Audit 
sample for allotment of sites covered 40 per cent of 265 Civic Amenity sites, 
541 corner and intermediate sites, 438 stray sites and 924 alternative sites 
disposed of by BDA during 2007-12. 
The audit findings were discussed with the PS in the exit conference held on 
12 October 2012. The report has taken into account the replies furnished by 
BDA to the audit observations.
Audit was taken up with the objective of ascertaining whether: 
¾ the denotifications made by the Government were consistent with the 
extant Acts and Rules; 
¾ the control mechanism was capable of preventing the subversion of the 
provisions in the Acts and Rules;
¾ the allotment of sites under different categories were compliant with the 
rules framed for the purpose; 
¾ the private layouts relinquished the requisite areas in favour of BDA; and 
¾ BDA had inventorised its assets to have an effective tool for managing 
these, besides guarding against encroachments of its properties.
4. Audit objectives 
3. Audit scope and methodology 

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 5

The audit criteria were derived from the following sources: 
¾ The Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976; 
¾ The Land Acquisition Act, 1894 as amended by the Land Acquisition 
(Karnataka Extension and Amendment) Act, 1961; 
¾ The Karnataka Land (Restriction on Transfer) Act, 1991; 
¾ The Bangalore Development Authority (Allotment of Sites) Rules, 1984 
and amendments thereto; 
¾ The Bangalore Development Authority (Allotment of Civic Amenity 
Sites) Rules, 1989; 
¾ The Bangalore Development Authority (Disposal of Corner Sites and 
Commercial Sites) Rules, 1984;  
¾ Zoning of Land Use  and Regulations, BDA-1995, and Revised Master 
Plan 2015, Bangalore -2007 –Zoning of Land Use and Regulations; and 
¾ Judgments of the Hon’ble Supreme Court and the Hon’ble High Court of 
Karnataka;
¾ Relevant Government orders and instructions. 
The audit findings have been organized into the following four parts and 
chapters for the convenience of understanding: 
Part-I:  Denotification of land by the Government  
 Chapter-1: Overview of the legal framework for denotification of land 
 Chapter-2: Denotifications not approved by the Denotification
 Committee  
 Chapter-3: Denotification of developed lands 
 Chapter-4: Denotifications during the pendency of Court cases
 Chapter-5: Denotification of land purchased after notification for 
   acquisition  
 Chapter-6: Denotification of land despite Courts upholding the
 acquisition proceedings 
 Chapter-7: Denotification on other considerations
 Chapter-8: Denotifications of land for group housing and site  
 development  
 Chapter-9: Denotification of huge tracts of land
 Chapter-10: Cancellation of denotification orders  
 Chapter-11: Restricted awards/compensation,  
 Chapter-12: Betterment Tax 
6. Organisation of audit findings 
5. Audit criteria 

ReportNo.3of2012
6 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

 Chapter-13: Possession of notified land not taken in full 
 Chapter-14: Payment of compensation 
Part-II : Allotment of sites by the Bangalore Development Authority 
 Chapter-15: Allotment of stray sites 
 Chapter-16: Allotment of alternative sites 
 Chapter-17: Allotment of Civic Amenity sites 
 Chapter-18: Parks and Asset Management  
 Chapter-19: Other topics of interest  
Part-III : Conclusions & Recommendations 
 Chapter-20: Conclusion 
 Chapter-21: Recommendations 
Part-IV : Appendices 
We place on record our appreciation for the cooperation extended by the State 
Government and the Bangalore Development Authority in conducting the 
Performance Audit.  
7. Acknowled gement







PART-I

ChapterͲ1
PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 9



Under Section 48 (1) of the LA Act, the Government is at liberty to withdraw 
from acquisition of any land of which possession has not been taken.  Thus, if 
possession of land has been taken following the due procedure under the LA 
Act, Government has no power to withdraw from acquisition proceedings.  
This position has been upheld by the Supreme Court and the High Court of 
Karnataka in many cases.  Extracts from some of the judgments are given 
below:
“If the land is acquired by the State Government for public purpose, then it is 
open to the State Government to withdraw the said acquisition proceedings 
under Sec 48 (1) of the LA Act before taking possession.  The power 
conferred on the Government under Sec 48 (1) of the LA Act is the absolute 
power which can be exercised at its discretion before taking possession if it is 
of the opinion that the said land is not required for public purpose….” –
R.M.S. Telephone Employees’ House Building Co-operative Society Limited, 
Bangalore v Government of Karnataka and others. 
After the vesting of the land and taking possession thereof, the notification 
acquiring the land could not be withdrawn or cancelled in exercise of powers 
under Section 48 of the Land Acquisition Act.  Power under Sec 21 of the 
General Clauses Act cannot be exercised after vesting of the land statutorily 
in the State Government” – BDA and others v Hanumaiah and others 2005 
(6) Kar LJ 161 (SC):ILR 2005 Kar.5533 (SC): 2005 AIR SCW 4881. 
Sec 16 (1) of the LA Act prescribes that when the DC has made an award 
under Sec 11, he may take possession of the land, which shall thereupon vest 
absolutely in the Government free from all encumbrances. 
The Supreme Court and the High Court of Karnataka had held in many cases 
that recording of a memorandum or Panchanama by the Land Acquisition 
Officer in the presence of witnesses signed by him/them is one of the 
accepted modes of taking possession of the acquired land.  Extracts from 
some of the judgments are given below: 
1.2 Accepted mode of taking possession 
1.1 Power of the Government to withdraw from 
acquisition proceedings 

ReportNo.3of2012
10 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

“It is settled by a series of judgments of this Court that one of the accepted 
modes of taking possession is recording of a memorandum or Panchanama by 
the LAO in the presence of witnesses signed by him/them and that would 
constitute taking possession of the land as it would be impossible to take 
physical possession of the acquired land….” - Tamil Nadu Housing Board Vs 
A.Viswam (AIR 1996 SC 3379). 
“It is difficult to take physical possession of the land under compulsory 
acquisition.  The normal mode of taking possession and giving delivery to the 
beneficiaries is the accepted mode of taking possession of the land.  
Subsequent thereto, the retention of possession (by the erstwhile owner) would 
tantamount only to illegal and unlawful possession....” – Kathri Education and 
Industrial Trust v State of Punjab -1996 (4) SCC 212. 
“The Act is silent with regard to the mode of taking possession.  One of the 
accepted modes of taking possession of the acquired land is recording of a 
memorandum or Panchanama by the DC or the LAO in the presence of 
witnesses signed by him/them and that would constitute taking possession of 
the land as it would be impossible to take physical possession of the acquired 
land….” – Muniyamma v State of Karnataka and others, 2007(5) Kar.L.J.11B. 
Sec 16 (2) the LA Act envisages that the fact of taking possession may be 
notified by the DC in the official Gazette and such notification shall be 
evidence of such fact.  It has been held by the High Court of Karnataka that 
the operation of Sec 16 (1) is not subject to and dependent upon compliance 
with Sec 16 (2).  Extracts from some of the judgments are given below: 
“There is nothing to show that the publication in the official gazette is 
mandatory.  Sec 16(2) only states that the notification shall be evidence of 
taking possession of land.  Even without such notification, the effect of Sec 16 
(1) holds good.  The operation of Sec 16 (1) is not subject to and dependent 
upon compliance with Sec 16 (2).  In the instant case, the possession of the 
acquired was taken by recording of a panchanama by the LAO in the presence 
of witnesses and that would constitute the taking possession of the land in 
question.  Non-publication of the notification in the gazette will not vitiate the 
acquisition proceedings….” – Modinbi and others v The Kalal Khatik Samaj 
Seva Sangha, Old Hubli, Dharwad District and others, 2002 (1) Kar. L.J. 180A 
(DB)
“Sec 16 (2) merely authorises the DC to publish the fact of taking possession 
in the Gazette and if there is such a notification, it shall be evidence of such 
fact.  It does not say that the fact of taking possession cannot be proved in any 
other way.  The production of the notification under Sec 16 (2) is not the only 
way of proving the taking of possession of the land acquired….” – 
Basavegowda KC v Seshappa Shetty, ILR 1976. Kar. 1694:1976(2) Kar. LJ 
340.
1.3 Notification of the fact of taking possession not 
mandatory

ChapterͲ1
PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 11

Once land is acquired under the LA Act by operation of Sec 16(1), it vests 
absolutely in the State free from all encumbrances and there is no provision in 
the LA Act to reconvey the acquired land to the erstwhile owners even when it 
is not needed for public purpose.  This position had been clarified by the 
Supreme Court in a case, extract from the judgment of which is given below: 
“In view of admitted position that the land in question was acquired under the 
Land Acquisition Act, it stood vested in the State free from all encumbrances.  
The question emerges, whether the Government can assign the land to the 
erstwhile owners?  It is settled law that if the land is acquired for a public 
purpose, after the public purpose was achieved, the rest of the land could be 
used for any other purpose. In case there is no other public purpose for which 
the land is needed, then instead of disposal by way of sale to the erstwhile 
owner, the land should be put to public auction and the amount fetched in the 
public auction can better utilised for the public purpose envisaged in the 
Directive Principles of the Constitution….” - State of Kerala  Vs Bhaskar 
Pillai, ILR 1997 Page 2196. 
The criteria for audit of denotifications of lands made by the Government 
during 2007-12 derived from the various case laws discussed above are as 
under:
¾ Once land notified for public purpose has been taken possession under 
Sec 16 (1) of the LA Act, the Government has no powers to withdraw 
the acquisition proceedings even if publication under Sec 16 (2) had 
not been issued; 
¾ Such land cannot be reconveyed to the erstwhile landowners even if 
the acquired land or part thereof is not needed for public purpose; and 
¾ Subsequent to taking possession of land under Sec 16 (1), the retention 
of possession of the acquired land by the erstwhile land owners would 
tantamount only to illegal and unlawful possession.
¾ Wherever only Sections are mentioned in the Report without reference 
to the Act, these are to be read as Sections under the Land Acquisition 
Act, 1894.
1.5 Criteria for audit of denotification of land 
1.4 No provision for reconveyance of the acquired land 
to the original owners 

ReportNo.3of2012
12 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA



As the Government had been receiving numerous requests from various 
individuals and organizations for denotification of land notified by BDA for 
acquisition, the Government constituted (January 2003) the Denotification 
Committee, under the Chairmanship of the Additional Chief Secretary (ACS) 
and restructured it in October 2010. The Denotification Committee was 
responsible for reviewing every case of denotification of land in and around 
Bangalore and recommending to the Government the appropriate action to be 
taken.  It would be pertinent to mention here that as land once taken 
possession of, cannot be denotified, the scope of reference to the 
Denotification Committee could have been limited to cases where possession 
of land had not been taken.
During the period 2007-12, the Denotification Committee had met only four 
times in July 2007, August 2007, December 2008 and December 2010.  
During the period from 1 April 2007 to 27 December 2010, the Government 
denotified 610-16½ acres of land which had earlier been notified for 
acquisition by BDA for the formation of several layouts. The details are given 
in Table-2:
Table-2: Details of land denotified by the Government during 2007-12 
Year 
After final 
notification under 
Sec 19 of the BDA 
Act 
After passing of 
award under Sec 
11 of the LA Act 
After taking 
possession under 
Sec 16(1) of the LA 
Act 
After publication 
of notification 
under Sec 16(2) of 
the LA Act 
Acres Guntas Acres Guntas Acres Guntas Acres Guntas 
2007-08 102 12 54 1 48 13 38 29
2008-09 117 10 8 26 5 28 0 0
2009-10 20 9.5 15 14 21 25 11 18
2010-11 64 28 14 37 47 29.5 39 16.5
2011-12 No denotification 
Total 304 19.5 92 38 123 15.5 89 23.5
(Source: Information furnished by BDA) 
Land in all the cases had been denotified by the Government, without referring 
the cases to the Denotification Committee.  Though the Government had no 
power under the LA Act to denotify land after taking possession, 123-15.5 
acres of land had been denotified after taking possession under Sec 16(1) 
while another 89-23.5 acres had been denotified after notifying the fact of 
2.1 Denotification of 610-16½  acres by the Government 
without reference to the Denotification Committee 

ChapterͲ2

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 13

taking possession under Sec 16(2). These denotifications had evidently been 
done in defiance of law. 
Scrutiny showed that the Denotification Committee, in its meeting held on 17 
December 2008, had recommended for denotifying 113-29 ½ acres 3 of land in 
12 villages pursuant to several Court judgments. Of these, the Government 
denotified (June 2010) only 2-03 ½ acres of land in Sy.No.8/8B, 8/9 and 10/2 
of Hosahalli village. In the other meetings held, the Denotification Committee 
had not recommended for denotification of land.


3 Of 113-29 ½  acres, 98-36 acres had been recommended for denotification on the basis of 
court judgments.  Another 14-33 ½ acres had been recommended for denotification on 
other valid grounds. 

ReportNo.3of2012
14 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA


As per the provisions under Section 48(1) of the LA Act and various 
judgments given by the Courts regarding the applicability of Section 48(1), the 
liberty to withdraw from acquisition is available to the Government where it 
has not taken possession of the land under the LA Act.  Scrutiny, however, 
showed that in the cases listed in the Table-3, the Government withdrew from 
acquisition of land (denotified the lands) even after taking possession under 
Sec 16(1) of the LA Act, pursuant to the orders of the incumbent Chief 
Ministers (CMs). 
Table-3: Details of denotifications after taking possession of land 
Sl
No
Name of the 
layout 
Extent of land 
denotified by 
Government 
(Acres-Guntas) 
Sy.No. Village Taluk
Period of taking 
possession by 
BDA under Sec 
16(1) of LA Act 
Period of 
denotification 
1. JP Nagar VIII 
Phase 
4-35 171/3 
172/5
172/6
Kothnur Bangalore 
South
December 1999 January 2010 
2. Arkavathy 3-08 87/4B Thanisandra Bangalore 
East 
November 2004 October 2007 
3. Banashankari V 
Stage 
2-36 104/2 
104/3
104/4
Uttarahalli Bangalore 
South
May 1996 September
2010
4. Arkavathy 1-17 86/2 Thanisandra Bangalore 
East 
November  2004 September
2010
5. HSR 2-05 149 Agara Bangalore 
East 
June 1988 January 2010 
6. HSR 1-01.2 30/6B 
31/1
Rupena
Agrahara
Bangalore 
East 
July 1988 
November 2009 
May 2010 
7. JP Nagar VIII 
Phase  
0-33 24 Kothnur Bangalore 
South
February 1996 June 2010 
Total 16-15.2 
In these cases, the reversal of the acquisition process had been done even after 
layouts had been developed by BDA on the land and sites had been allotted to 
the general public.  As the acquisition of the land by Government in these 
cases had been done in public interest for the purpose of forming residential 
layouts and allotting sites to the general public, the reversal of the process on 
extraneous considerations signified that public interest was subverted.  Details 
of these cases are discussed below: 
Acting on the request (April 2007) from the land owners for denotification of 
of land in Sy.Nos. 171/3, 172/5 and 172/6 of  Kothnur village, Bangalore 
3.1 Denotification of 4-35 acres in JP Nagar VIII Phase 
Layout 

ChapterͲ3

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 15

South taluk,  the Government sought (June 2008) a status report from BDA.  
Earlier, the High Court had dismissed (April 2008) the writ petition 
(3347/2000) as well as the writ appeal filed by the land owners, challenging 
the acquisition proceedings.  BDA clarified (July 2008) to the Government 
that the lands in these survey numbers had been taken possession of under Sec 
16(1) and handed over to the Engineering Section in December 1999.    
Apprising (November 2009) the CM of the status of the land, the PS  informed 
that in view of the dismissal of writ appeal filed by the land owners and 
possession of land having been taken by BDA, it was not possible to denotify 
the land.  However, the CM ordered (December 2009) “Denotify 6-10 acres in 
Sy.No.171/3,172/5 and 172/6, as a special case.” The PS re-submitted 
(December 2009) the file to the CM with a request to re-examine the orders, as 
it was against law to denotify the land after taking possession. However, 
further notings in the file showed that the PS subsequently discussed the 
matter with the CM and approved denotification of only 4-35 acres as the 
remaining 1-15 acres had been already utilised by BDA for formation of road 
in the layout. Accordingly, the Government issued (January 2010) orders 
denotifying  4-35 acres of land in Sy.Nos. 171/3, 172/5 and 172/6 of Kothnur 
village, Bangalore South taluk.  Denotification of 4-35 acres of land after 
taking possession under Sec 16(1) and after the High Court had upheld the 
acquisition proceedings was irregular.   
Besides an 80 feet road, BDA had also formed 42 sites, each measuring 
40’x60’, and 24 sites, each measuring 30‘x40’, on the denotified land.  Of 
these, BDA had also allotted to the general public, eight sites each measuring 
40’x60’ and another 18 sites each measuring 30’x40’ out of 66 sites.  These 
sites had also been registered by BDA in favour of the respective allottees.  
Several allottees of sites appealed to the CM (December 2010) to cancel the 
denotification order, as they had been allotted sites by BDA after making 
several attempts spread over 16 years.  Some of the allottees stated that they 
had also availed of bank loans for construction of houses and they had been 
regularly paying property taxes to BDA.  However, the Government did not 
consider the appeals of the allottees.  
Audit scrutiny showed that immediately after the denotification, the land 
owner had sold (January to May 2010) 3-37 acres of denotified land to two 
persons for a consideration of 
` 98 lakh against the guidance value of ` 3.26 
crore.  In these sale transactions, though stamp duty had been paid by the 
purchasers on the basis of the guidance value, the sale consideration was 
grossly understated.
Thus, the irregular denotification of 4-35 acres of land in this case had been 
evidently done on extraneous considerations to facilitate the reconveyance of 
the acquired land to the owner and its subsequent sale.

ReportNo.3of2012
16 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

BDA had acquired (February 2004) 2750 acres of land in 16 villages of 
Bangalore North and East taluks for the formation of Arkavathy layout.  The 
lands so acquired included 3-08 acres in Sy.No.87/4B of Thanisandra village, 
belonging to two persons.  While the award had been approved by the DC on 
17 September 2004, the possession of the lands taken under Sec 16(1) had 
been handed over to the Engineering Section on 10 November 2004 for 
forming the layout.   
During April 2007, a Minister recommended to the CM for denotification of 
land acquired in this survey number on the ground that the family consisting 
of 15 members had been entirely dependent on this land for livelihood and did 
not own any other land or property elsewhere.  The CM directed that the 
concerned file be called for and the Government sought (April 2007) a 
detailed report from BDA in this regard. 
BDA informed (May 2007) the Government that after taking possession of the 
land on 10 November 2004, a layout had been formed and sites had been 
allotted.  Though the Under Secretary opined (June 2007) that the matter could 
be placed before the Denotification Committee, the PS submitted (September 
2007) the file directly to the CM, as requested.
Overlooking the fact that BDA had already formed a layout and allotted sites, 
the CM noted (September 2007) in the file that the request was considered 
sympathetically and in consideration of the fact that notification under Sec 
16(2) had not been published, the land should be denotified.  Accordingly, the 
Government denotified (October 2007) 3-08 acres of land in favour of the 
erstwhile land owners. 
Scrutiny of the case showed the following: 
¾ Though notification under Sec 16(2) had not been issued, possession of 
land had already been taken by BDA under Sec 16(1) in November 2004.  
In terms of judgment given by the High Court, non-publication of 
notification under Sec 16(2) would not vitiate the acquisition proceedings.  
¾ BDA had formed 57 sites, each of 9 x 12 metre dimension, and also a 12 
metre wide road.  Out of 57 sites so formed, 44 sites had been allotted to 
the public and in all these cases, Lease-cum Sale Agreements had been 
executed and Possession Certificates handed over to the allottees. 
¾ The observation made by the Minister that the land owners did not own 
any other land or property elsewhere was factually incorrect as apart from 
3-08 acres in this survey number, the family members also owned 5-21 
acres of land in five different survey numbers, as declared by themselves. 
3.2 Denotification of 3-08 acres in Arkavathy Layout 

ChapterͲ3

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 17

Further, the land owners had already formed sites on these lands and sold 
these to various persons.
¾ The land owners in their representation (July 2004) had sought 
denotification of their lands on the ground that they had invested huge 
amounts on the formation of a residential layout on the said land with 
amenities such as storm water drainage, road, water, electricity etc., and 
that they had obtained “No Objection Certificate” (NOC) from BDA 
before registration of sites in the  names of the allottees. However, the 
layout formed was also unauthorized, as BDA had not given any approval 
for forming any layout in this survey number. 
¾ Further, the land owners sold the entire land (
` 2.56 crore) in this survey 
number to a person on 14 July 2011, after getting it denotified. 
Thus, the denotification of this case had evidently been done in disregard of 
law to facilitate the sale of the land acquired for public purpose.  BDA stated 
(September 2012) that the Lokayuktha had seized the files in February 2012 
for conducting an enquiry under Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and 
Karnataka Land Revenue Act, 1964. 
The final notification (May 1994) for acquisition of 1458-21 acres in 10 
villages of Bangalore South taluk for the formation of Banashankari-V Stage 
Layout included 2-36 acres of land in Sy.No.104 of Uttarahalli village, as 
shown in Table-4:
Table-4: Extent of land in Sy.No.104 of Uttarahalli village 
Sy.No Extent (Acre-Guntas) 
104/2 1-01 
104/3 0-34 
104/4 1-01 
Total 2-36 
 (Source: Final notification dated 9 May 1994) 
The LAO took possession of the land under Sec 16(1) and handed it over to 
the Engineering Section on 8 May 1996. Following the receipt of 
representation (July 2010) from the erstwhile land owners for denotification of 
these lands on the ground that they had been residing in the houses built on 
these lands and that adjacent lands had not been acquired, the Government 
sought (July 2010) a status report from BDA.  BDA clarified (August 2010) to 
the Government that possession of the lands had been taken during May 1996, 
notification under Sec 16(2) had also been published on 18 August 2009, and 
the layout had also been formed on these lands.  The ACS brought to the 
notice of the CM that it was not permissible to denotify the land, as possession 
of land had already been taken. However, the CM referred to four 
3.3 Denotification of 2-36 acres in Banashankari-V Stage 
Layout  

ReportNo.3of2012
18 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

denotifications made earlier in the same layout and in Banashankari VI Stage
Layout during June 2007 to October 2007 by the previous CMs and ordered 
(September 2010) that this land also be denotified as a special case.  It would 
be pertinent to mention that the CM had not been vested with any special 
powers under the LA Act to denotify land after possession had been taken.
Audit scrutiny showed that BDA had developed the land in Sy.No.104/4 and 
formed 24 residential sites of 30’x40’ dimension and a 33’ wide road. This 
was overlooked by the CM before ordering denotification. Further, after the 
denotification, the land owners in whose favour the Government had 
denotified the land during September 2010, subsequently sold these lands to 
other persons shown in Table-5:
Table-5: Details of lands sold after denotification
Sy.No. Extent (In acres-
guntas)
Sale Consideration 
 (` in lakh) 
104/2 1-01 29.00 
104/3 0-34 28.00 
104/4 1-01 NA 
Total 2-36 
(Source: RTCs from Revenue Department website) 
Thus, the denotification subjugated public interest to private interest and the 
irregular reversal of the acquisition process facilitated the sale of denotified 
lands.
BDA had acquired (February 2004) along with other lands, 2-21 acres of land 
in Sy.No.86/2 of Thanisandra village of Bangalore East Taluk for forming the 
Arkavathy Layout.  Possession of the land taken under Sec 16(1) had been 
handed over on 10 November 2004 to the Engineering Section of BDA for the 
layout formation.  BDA had also developed this land besides forming a 
connecting road on this land. 
After a lapse of six years, the owner of the land represented (July 2010) to the 
CM  for denotification of 1-17 acres of land on the ground that he owned no 
other land, and his family consisting of 15 members had been entirely 
dependent on this land for livelihood. Acting on the request for denotification, 
the CM directed (July 2010) BDA to put up the file along with a detailed 
status report and clear opinion. BDA clarified (August 2010) that except for 
publication of notification under Sec 16(2), all other land acquisition processes 
had been completed, the possession of the land had been handed over to the 
Engineering Section on 10 November 2004, and it was not possible to denotify 
the land. While submitting the file to the CM, the ACS placed on record 
(September 2010) the opinion furnished by BDA.  However, the CM 
overlooked the opinion and ordered (September 2010) denotification of 1-17 
3.4  Denotification of 1-17 acres in Arkavathy Layout 

ChapterͲ3

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 19

acres on humanitarian grounds, as notification under Sec 16(2) of the LA Act 
had not been published.  However, the CM’s order glossed over the well 
settled law that non-publication of notification under Sec 16(2) would not 
vitiate the acquisition proceedings.  Further, the LA Act does not permit 
reversal of the acquisition process on humanitarian grounds.  It was further 
seen by Audit that BDA had already formed roads on land in this survey 
number, before it was denotified by the Government. 
The Government had notified (December 1986) 2-05 acres of land in 
Sy.No.149 of Agara village for the formation of HSR Layout.  After 
possession of the land taken under Sec 16(1) had been handed over to the 
Engineering Section of BDA on 30 June 1988, notification under Sec 16(2) 
was also published on 2 January 1992.   BDA had formed two roads by 
utilising 0-21¾  acre of the acquired land. 
After 11 years, the legal heirs of the deceased owner requested (August 2003) 
the CM to denotify the land on the ground that they had been entirely 
dependent on this land for livelihood and that they had invested huge 
borrowed funds for establishing a dairy and poultry farm on the land. 
Citing several judgments of the Supreme Court, BDA reported (November 
2003) that it was not permissible to denotify the land after taking possession 
and there was no provision to entertain the re quest of the applicant at that 
stage.  The Denotification Committee, which examined (June 2004) the issue 
also recommended rejection of the request of the applicant.  However, the CM 
did not agree with the views of the Denotification Committee and ordered 
(January 2006) denotification of land on the ground that BDA had issued 
notification under Sec 16(2) on 2 January 1992, though there was an 
injunction from the Civil Court against BDA from interfering with or 
demolishing the existing structures and the case was withdrawn by the land 
owner only during 1993.
Thereafter, the PS sought (January 2006) the opinion of the Law Department 
on implementing the order of the CM. The Law Department opined (June 
2006) that since it had not been possible to take possession without 
interference, the notification issued under Sec 16(2) during the operation of 
the stay order was not legally valid.  It further advised the administrative 
department to take a prudent decision. 
The Commissioner again informed (September 2006) the Government that 
denotification of the land would have an adverse impact on the formation of a 
planned layout. In a series of correspondences between BDA and the 
Government, BDA sought to establish that the denotification would dislocate 
the development of sites, road etc., and that the land formed an integral part of 
the layout.  BDA further informed the Government (December 2006) that as 
3.5 Denotification of 2-05 acres in HSR Layout 

ReportNo.3of2012
20 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

per the approved layout plan, 19 th Main Road (40 metres long and 24 metres 
wide) was passing through this survey number and this road was absolutely 
necessary for the residents of Sector 1, 2 and 4 of the HSR Layout.
The PS made (January 2007) the following observations in the file: 
¾ Land had been taken possession under Sec 16(1) on 13 June 1988 itself 
and compensation had also been deposited in the Court.   
¾ The injunction order was dated 2 September 1988, subsequent to 
taking over possession and handing over the land to the Engineering 
Section.
¾ The point made by the Law Department that notification under Sec 
16(2) had been issued when the Court injunction was in force, 
therefore, required review.
The PS proceeded to record that in any event the scope of notification under 
Sec 16(2) was to recognize that the land had been acquired and possession 
taken and thereby vesting of the land in Government was complete, i.e., there 
was formal closure of the acquisition process. The physical possession, 
however, had taken place earlier to the promulgation of the notification under 
Sec 16(2).  The Law Department returned (June 2007) the file to the PS 
informing that there was nothing to add to the legal opinion given earlier.
There were no major developments in this case till December 2008 when the 
wife of the deceased owner represented to the CM that though the Government 
had denotified the land during 2003, the Urban Development Department did 
not publish a Gazette notification.  The PS submitted (June 2009) the file to 
the CM, noting that complete information related to the case was available in 
paras 156 to 162. However, citing paras 35 to 43, wherein the Law 
Department had opined that issue of notification under Sec 16(2) was invalid, 
the CM ordered (January 2010) to denotify 2-05 acres of land.   While doing 
so, the CM not only glossed over the notings of the PS that the possession of 
the land had been taken under Sec 16(1) but also disregarded the well settled 
law that non-publication of notification under Sec 16(2) or any infirmity in the 
said notification would not vitiate the acquisition proceedings. 
Further audit scrutiny showed that the land owner sold the denotified land 
immediately thereafter (March 2010 to May 2010) to five persons for a sale 
consideration of 
` 5.27 crore against the guidance value of ` 8.40 crore.  Thus, 
the irregular denotification of land had evidently been done by subjugating 
public interest to private interest to facilitate the sale of the land by the owner.
Land measuring 1664-21 acres acquired (November 1986) by BDA for 
forming the HSR Layout had included 0-30 acre and 0-20 acre in Sy.No.30/6B 
and Sy.No.31/1 respectively of Rupena Agrahara village. While award had 
3.6 Denotification of 1-1.2 acres in HSR Layout 

ChapterͲ3

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 21

been passed for 0-30 acres in Sy.No. 30/6B on 4 June 1988, the award for only 
0-11.5 acre in Sy.No.31/1 was passed on 23 October 2009.  The land in these 
two survey numbers had been taken possession under Sec 16 (1) and handed 
over to the Engineering Section of BDA in July 1988 and November 2009 
respectively. 
After issue of the final notifica tion, the Joint Director of Town Planning of 
BDA irregularly issued (November 1992) an NOC to the owner permitting 
him to improve and develop the petrol bunk existing in Sy.No.30/6B and 31/1.  
When BDA tried (November 2000) to demolish the existing structures for 
forming a road, the owner filed a suit in the Court against BDA and obtained 
an injunction in November 2000.  While vacating (January 2001) the 
injunction, the Court ordered that BDA was at liberty to take over possession 
of the land in Sy.No.31/1 under due process of law.  BDA took possession of 
land in Sy.No.31/1 on 6 November 2009, eight years after the directions from 
the Court. 
When the owner attempted to get the lands denotified by representing to the 
CM in December 2000, the Commissioner, BDA informed (April 2001) the 
Government that there was absolutely no provision in the LA Act to denotify 
the land in favour of the original owner, as the land had been legally acquired, 
possession had been taken and 28 sites of different dimensions had also been 
formed.  
There was no further development till February 2010, when the Joint Secretary 
to the CM desired (February 2010) submission of the file related to 
Sy.No.30/6B and 31/1 as per the directions of the CM.
After obtaining the status report from BDA, the PS informed (February 2010) 
the CM that there were legal hurdles in denotifying the land as possession 
taken under Sec 16(1) had been handed over to the Engineering Section on 6 
November 2009, though notification under Sec 16(2) had not been issued.  
After the notings of the PS in the file, there was an unsigned noting to the 
effect, “Denotify 0-30 acres in Sy.No.30/6B and 0-11½ acres in Sy.No.31/1” 
and the CM approved it. 
Accordingly, the Government denotified (May 2010) lands measuring 1-1.2 
acres in these survey numbers.  Acting on the requests made (July 2010 and 
January 2012) by BDA for cancellation of denotification order on the ground 
that seven intermediary sites of 40’ x 60’ dimension and three corner sites of 
odd dimensions had already been formed on these lands, the ACS resubmitted 
the file to the CM on 17 August 2010 for reconsideration of his orders.  
However, the Principal Secretary to the CM returned (March 2011) the file 
stating that the Government had changed.
Thus, though non-issue of notification under Sec 16(2) of the LA Act would 
not vitiate the acquisition proceedings, the Government irregularly reversed 

ReportNo.3of2012
22 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

the acquisition proceedings and reconveyed the acquired land to the owner 
pursuant to the orders of the CM.
BDA had acquired (October 1994) 6-31 acres of land in Sy.No.24 of Kothnur 
village for the JP Nagar VIII Phase Layout. While land compensation had 
been awarded in January 1996, the possession of the land taken under Sec 
16(1) had been handed over to the Engineering Section in February 1996.  
However, BDA had not published notification under Sec 16(2), reasons for 
which were not on record.  The Engineering Section formed the layout on the 
land acquired in this survey number and BDA allotted sites and registered 
these during October 2000 to April 2005. 
During May 2010, two persons representing a Trust requested the CM to 
denotify 0-33 acre of land in Sy.No.24 of Kothnur village on the ground that 
they intended to establish a school on this land.  In response to the 
Government directions (May 2010), BDA had reported (May 2010) that the 
layout had already been formed.  BDA also apprised the Government of issues 
related to award of compensation, handing over possession and non-
publication of notification under Sec 16(2). 
Ignoring the report of the BDA that a layout had already been formed, the 
Government irregularly denotified (June 2010) 0-33 acres of land in favour of 
these two persons.  It was observed that BDA had formed 20 sites (12 sites 
measuring 30’ x 40’ each and 8 sites of 40’ x 60’ dimension) on 0-33 acre of 
land denotified by the Government.  Out of 20 sites so formed, BDA had also 
allotted nine sites way back in October 2000 to April 2005.  One of the 
allottees filed a writ petition (February 2011) before the High Court praying 
for staying the execution and operation of denotification order of June 2010 
and the judgment in this case was awaited (July 2012). 
The Government acted swiftly in this case as the denotification order was 
issued within one month from the date of submission of the application by the 
interested persons.  Further, before denotifying the land, the Government also 
failed to ascertain as to whether these two persons possessed genuine title to 
the property, which stood in the names of different persons as per the final 
notification (October 1994).  These two persons evidently purchased the 
notified land in violation of the Karnataka Land (Restriction on Transfer) Act 
which prohibited transfer of any land acquired for a public purpose under the 
LA Act. 
3.7 Denotification of 0-33 acre in JP Nagar VIII Phase 
Layout 

ChapterͲ4

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 23


In the cases listed in Table-6, the Government irregularly denotified 
land on the orders of the incumbent CMs after taking its possession 
under Sec 16(1) and during the pendency of cases in Courts: 
Table-6 : Details of irregular denotification of land after taking possession
Sl
No
Name of the 
layout 
Extent of land 
denotified by 
Government 
(Acres-
Guntas) 
Sy 
No Village Taluk
Period of 
taking
possession by 
BDA under Sec 
16(1) of LA Act 
Period of 
denotification 
1 BTM VI Stage 2-10 23 Hulimavu Bangalore 
South
July 2005 January 2010 
2 JP Nagar VIII 
Phase 
1-03 78/1 Kothnur Bangalore 
South
June 1997 January  2010 
3 HBR I Stage 1-00 222 Kacharakanahalli Bangalore 
North
March 1987 January 2010 
4 Arkavathy 0-28 100/3 Rachenahalli Bangalore 
North
November
2004
May 2008 
5 Further Extension 
of Banashankari 
VI Stage 
0-26 19/3 Talaghattapura Bangalore 
South
February     
2004
January 2010 
6 Nagarabhavi         
I Stage 
0-25 46 Nagarabhavi Bangalore 
North
January       
1988
June 2010 
Total 6-12
(Source: Denotification files of BDA and Secretariat) 
Details of these cases are discussed below:  
The final notification issued on 28 June 1990 for acquisition of lands for the 
formation of BTM VI Stage Layout included 2-10 acres of land in Sy.No.23 of 
Hulimavu village of Bangalore South Taluk.  While award had been passed in 
February1994, the possession of land taken under Sec 16(1) had been handed 
over to the Engineering Section only in July 2005 after dismissal (March 
2005) of the case filed by the land owner against BDA challenging the 
acquisition proceedings.   
The land owner later filed an appeal (RFA 875/2005) before the High Court of 
Karnataka and obtained a stay order (August 2005), restraining BDA from 
interfering with the peaceful possession and enjoyment of the property and 
demolishing the existing structures.  Simultaneously, the land owner submitted 
a memorandum to the CM in August 2005 stating that he had been in 
4.1 Denotification of 2-10 acres in BTM VI Stage Layout 

ReportNo.3of2012
24 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

possession of the property for 57 years and running a poultry, employing 
about 100 persons and that 15 residential houses and labour quarters had been 
built on this land. When the CM’s office sought a status report, BDA informed 
(December 2005) the Government that the interim stay order had been 
extended till further orders and was still in operation. When the land owner 
submitted (January 2006) another representation to the CM in this regard, it 
was decided (March 2006) by the PS that BDA could be informed to take 
suitable action after the disposal of the appeal by the Court.  However, the file 
was reopened in October 2007, when the Secretary to the CM requested for 
submission of the concerned file for perusal by the CM.  The PS submitted the 
file with the factual position and the CM returned (October 2007) the file 
without any remarks. 
After a lapse of more than two years, the land owner submitted (May 2008) 
another representation to the Government seeking denotification on the ground 
that it was not feasible for BDA either to acquire or to form a layout on the 
land and no expenditure had been incurred by BDA on development of these 
lands.  The file was submitted (December 2008) to the CM with the remarks 
of the PS that the temporary injunction was still in force, the possession of the 
land had also been handed over to the Engineering Section and it was not 
possible to denotify the land.
However, the CM recorded (August 2009) that notification under Sec 16(2) 
had been not published and he had come to a conclusion on the basis of the 
representation of the applicant that it had not been appropriate to acquire the 
land.  He approved the denotification of the land subject to withdrawal of the 
case pending before the Court. Thereafter, the Government denotified 
(January 2010) 2-10 acres in Sy.No.23. The appeal was dismissed (June 2011) 
after the land owner filed a memo before the High Court subsequently.
Thus, the CM preferred to rely more on what had been stated by the land 
owner in his representation than on the legal position.  In terms of the 
judgment given by the Supreme Court [1996(4) Sec 212 Kathri Education and 
Industrial Trust V/s State of Punjab], subsequent to taking possession of the 
land notified for acquisition, the retention of possession of the land by the 
owner would tantamount only to illegal and unlawful possession.  Further, if 
the land acquired is not needed for a public purpose, the land should be put to 
auction (ILR 1997 Page 196- State of Kerala V/s Bhaskaran Pillai). The CM 
evidently disregarded the legal position and reversed the acquisition process to 
reconvey the acquired land to the owner, during the pendency of the case filed 
by the land owner.  It would be pertinent to reiterate the fact that possession of 
land under Sec 16(1) had been taken before the stay order (August 2005) was 
given, pursuant to the appeal filed before the High Court.

ChapterͲ4

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 25

The final notification (October 1994) for acquisition of lands required for the 
formation of JP Nagar VIII Phase Layout included 3-18 acres of land in 
Sy.No.78/1 of Kothnur village. Award for this land had been approved in 
February 1996 and possession of land taken under Sec 16(1) had been handed 
over to the Engineering Section in June 1997. 
The General Power of Attorney (GPA) holder for the land owner filed a suit 
(OS 8782/96) before the Additional City Civil Judge, Bangalore seeking 
permanent injunction on the ground that he had purchased the land during 
1976, got it converted for residential purposes, formed sites and built a 
dwelling house for sale to the general public.  The suit was dismissed (March 
1999) on the ground that the acquisition proceedings had been completed and 
possession of land had also been taken. The GPA holder filed another suit (OS 
4927/98) before the City Civil Judge, Bangalore and obtained (June 1998) a 
status-quo order, to be in force till BDA filed its objections to the application.  
Failure on the part of BDA to appear before the Court and file written 
objections resulted in extension of the status-quo orders from time to time 
(February 2009).
Meanwhile, the land owner appealed (July 2008) to the CM to denotify 1-03 
acres on the ground that the land had been scattered and the then 
Commissioner and the DC had opined that it was not possible to form a 
compact layout.  The PS recorded (August 2009) in the file that the possession 
of the land had already been taken by BDA under Sec 16(1) in June 1997, 
notification under Sec 16(2) could not be issued during the pendency of the 
court case and it was, therefore, not permissible to denotify the land according 
to the judgment of the Supreme Court.  The file was then submitted to the CM. 
Recording that the applicants had not been disbursed land compensation and 
that notification under Sec 16(2) had also not been issued, the CM ordered 
(September 2009 and November 2009) denotification of the land as a special 
case, subject to the applicant withdrawing the case filed in the Court. When 
the PS resubmitted (September 2009) the file to the CM with a suggestion for 
obtaining the opinion of the Law Department before denotification, the CM 
recorded that he had noticed in another file that the Law Department had 
opined that the Government could cancel the notification by exercising power 
under Sec 21 of the General Clauses Act, 1897. On this ground, the CM 
ordered (January 2010) denotification of 1-03 acres of land.   However, Audit 
scrutiny of the file referred to by the CM showed that the Law Department had 
opined that land could be denotified under Sec 21 of the General Clauses Act, 
1897 only if the possession of land had not been taken under Sec 16(1) in 
accordance with law.  
4.2 Denotification of 1-03 acres in JP Nagar VIII Phase 
Layout 

ReportNo.3of2012
26 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

The exercise of power by the Government under Section 48(1) of the LA Act 
to denotify the land on grounds of non-payment of compensation and non-
issue of publication under Sec 16(2) was invalid as the land vested absolutely 
with the Government after making an award under Section 11 and taking 
possession of land under Sec 16(1).  Non-issue of notification under Sec 16(2) 
would not vitiate the acquisition proceedings.
Audit scrutiny further showed that even while the status-quo order of the 
Court was in force, the land owner had formed sites on the land and sold seven 
sites of different dimensions measuring 12600 sq ft between December 2004 
and June 2006 for a sale consideration of 
` 36.20 lakh. After the 
denotification, the land owner further sold another six sites for a consideration 
of
` 85.72 lakh. These sale transactions evidenced that the land owner had 
been seeking denotification of this land ma inly to regularize the sale of sites 
he had illegally made during the pendency of the Court case. The irregular 
denotification order not only regularized the illegal sale of sites but also 
facilitated sale of other sites by the land owner after the denotification.
A person submitted an application in November 2002 to the CM stating that 
he had constructed a house on land in Sy.No.222 of Kacharakanahalli village 
of Bangalore North Taluk and had been living on the land with his family 
members, BDA had not taken possession of one acre of land till date and the 
property continued to be in his possession.  On these grounds he requested the 
CM to denotify one acre of land in this survey number.
BDA had acquired (March 1985) eight acres of land in Sy.No.222 of 
Kacharakanahalli village for the formation of HBR I Stage Layout.  
Possession of the land taken under Sec 16(1) had been handed over to the 
Engineering Section on 4 March 1987 and notification under Sec 16(2) had 
been issued in July 1987. However, the layout formed by BDA had consumed 
only seven out of eight acres in this survey number.     
The Denotification Committee, while deliberating (October 2003) upon the 
request of the land owner for denotification of the unutilized land of one acre 
in this survey number, did not take any decision after learning that cases 
related to this land had been pending before the Court.  The file was submitted 
(July 2004) to the CM with the notings that the recommendation of the 
Denotification Committee was to await the outcome of the Court proceedings 
and a decision could be taken thereafter.  The CM returned the file (February 
2006) without any remarks. 
The person submitted another application (May 2007) to the Commissioner, 
BDA and the Government requesting for denotification of the land.  BDA 
gave (June 2007) an endorsement to the land owner that there was no 
4.3 Denotification of one acre in HBR I Stage Layout 

ChapterͲ4

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 27

provision in the law to denotify the said land as it had vested with BDA.   
Thereafter, the person submitted yet another representation (December 2008) 
to the CM in this regard.
The file was again submitted (February 2009) to the CM, highlighting the 
earlier developments and clarifying that several cases filed in the Court were 
yet to be disposed of.  Though the CM observed that the cases were pending 
disposal and no action could be taken, he nevertheless ordered (June 2009) to 
denotify the land, as a special case, on the ground that the land owner 
requested to denotify one acre and that the land acquisition related to very old 
period.
However, the PS resubmitted (June 2009) the file to the CM suggesting that 
the opinion of the Law Department be taken before denotification, as 
notification under Sec 16(2) had been published in this case.  The file was 
referred to the Law Department in July 2009 as per the orders of the CM. The 
Law Department opined (December 2009) that the land could be denotified if 
the possession of the land had not been taken in accordance with law.  BDA 
clarified (November 2009) that possession of eight acres of land in Sy.No.222 
had been taken in March 1987 in accordance with law and handed over to the 
Engineering Section.  It was further clarified that notification under Sec 16(2) 
had also been published.
When the PS resubmitted (November 2009) the file to the Law Department 
with the clarification furnished by BDA, the latter informed (November 2009) 
the PS to take action as per the legal opinion already given.  However, the CM 
recorded in the file that BDA had not taken physical possession of one acre 
which was still in the physical possession of the applicant.  It was further 
recorded that though BDA had claimed to have taken possession, the 
possession had not been taken as per law.  On these grounds, the CM 
denotified (January 2010) one acre of land, as a special case.  As discussed 
already in Paragraph 4.1, subsequent to BDA taking possession of the land, 
retention of possession of the land by the owner was unlawful.  Thus, the CM 
disregarded the legal position and the Law Department’s opinion and 
denotified the land to favour the applicant.   
The Government denotified (January 2010) one acre of land in Sy.No.222 of 
Kacharakanahalli village in favour of the applicant who was not the khatedar 
as per the final notification. Thus, the denotification order reconveyed the 
denotified land in favour of a person who was not the original owner of the 
land.  He subsequently sold (September 2010) this one acre of land to another 
person for a consideration of 
` 1.50 crore.  The irregular denotification had 
been evidently done to facilitate the sale of land acquired for a public purpose.

ReportNo.3of2012
28 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

The total extent of land available in Sy. No.100/3 of Rachenahalli village was 
1-28 acres.  Against this, BDA had acquired (February 2004) 0-28 acre for the 
Arkavathy Layout.  While award for 0-28 acre had been passed on 12 October 
2004, the land taken possession of under Sec 16(1) had been handed over to 
the Engineering Section on 6 November 2004. 
The spot inspection conducted in pursuance of orders issued in November 
2005 by the High Court showed that BDA had formed a layout on this land.  A 
cooperative house building society submitted (June 2006) a representation to 
the CM that they had formed a layout already on a portion of land in this 
survey number, after getting it duly converted for residential purpose and sites 
had also been allotted to its members.  The Society requested for a survey 
sketch of the land it had developed as well as the land that had not been 
acquired by BDA in this survey number.  The CM’s office referred (June 
2006) the representation to BDA for compliance. 
The survey sketch of land in Sy.No.100/3 showed that BDA had formed sites 
over 0-28 acre and a compound wall had been constructed along its periphery 
by the society to secure the land it had purchased, beyond the portion 
developed by the BDA.  Though no representation for denotification had been 
received, BDA resolved (April 2008) to recommend to the Government for 
denotifying 0-28 acre in Sy.No.100/3 on the ground that a layout formed by 
the Society had existed on the land and the sites had also been registered in 
favour of the purchasers.  Though two suits had been pending before the Court 
in respect of this land since 2007, BDA requested (May 2008) the Government 
to denotify the land.  Accordingly, the Government denotified (May 2008) 0-
28 acre in Sy.No.100/3 in favour of the original khatedar.
Denotification of 0-28 acre of land was irregular after taking possession under 
Sec 16(1).
In respect of 1-23 acres of land in Sy.No.19/3 of Talaghattapura village, 
Bangalore South taluk acquired by BDA through a final notification 
(September 2003) for the formation of further extension of Banashankari VI 
Stage Layout, award had been passed in December 2003 for 1-03 acres
4 and 
the possession of the land taken under Sec 16(1) had been handed over to the 
Engineering Section on 19 February 2004. 


4  No award had been passed for 0-20 acre on which a temple had existed 
4.5 Denotification of 0-26 acre in Further Extension of 
Banashankari VI Stage Layout
4.4 Denotification of 0-28 acre in Arkavathy Layout 

ChapterͲ4

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 29

The land owners submitted (June 2004) a representation to an elected 
representative requesting for denotification of 26 guntas of land in Sy.No.19/3 
belonging to them on the ground that 10 residential houses had been 
constructed and some portions of the land had been gifted by them to their 
daughters at the time of their marriages. In turn, the elected representative 
recommended (July 2004) to the CM for denotification of the land. 
The Government obtained (November 2004) an inspection report from BDA 
and placed the matter before the Denotif ication Committee.  Considering the 
various judgments of the Supreme Court, the Committee resolved (January 
and March 2005) to recommend against the denotification. The CM was also 
apprised of the position and the Government closed the file (November 2007). 
Meanwhile, the land owners through the GPA holder filed a suit (OS 
1483/2005) before the City Civil Court, Bangalore seeking permanent 
injunction among other reliefs.  The Court ordered (November 2005) 
maintenance of status-quo, restraining BDA from interfering with the 
petitioner’s peaceful possession and enjoyment of the property.  
The PS apprised (February 2009) the CM of the developments and the CM 
ordered (March 2009) that suitable action, as per law, be taken.  After a 
meeting (July 2009) with the Commissioner, BDA, the Government decided 
not to consider the application for denotif ication, as there was absolutely no 
provision under law to denotify the lands. Further, as a case had also been 
pending before the Court, the Government decided to await the orders of the 
Court.
Audit scrutiny showed that the land in the meanwhile had been sold to the 
GPA holder in November 2004 as per the encumbrance certificate obtained 
from the jurisdictional sub-registrars.  When the file was submitted (October 
2009) for CM’s information, he ordered (December 2009) that the land be 
denotified on humanitarian grounds, subject to withdrawal of the case filed in 
this behalf before the Court. Thereafter, the Government denotified (January 
2010) 0-26 acre of land in favour of the GPA holder who was not the original 
land owner, subject to the condition that the cases pending in the Court should 
be withdrawn.   However, the GPA holder did not withdraw the case and 
pursued it before the Court, which granted (April 2010 permanent injunction 
against BDA.  Thus, denotification of land in favour of the purchaser above 
after taking possession under Sec 16(1) and during the pendency of the Court 
case was irregular.  Further, there was no provision in the LA Act for 
reversing the acquisition process on humanitarian grounds.  

ReportNo.3of2012
30 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

BDA had passed (January 1988) the award for 11-19 acres in Sy.No.46 of 
Nagarabhavi village for the formation of Nagarabhavi Layout I Stage.  The 
possession of the land taken under Sec 16(1) had been handed over to the 
Engineering Wing in January1988 and notification under Sec 16(2) had also 
been published on 6 July 1991.
Between August 1997 and July 2002, the owners of 0-25 acre of land in this 
survey number illegally sold the acquired land in favour of three persons.  The 
sale was illegal in terms of the Karnataka Land (Restriction on Transfer) Act, 
1991 which prohibited transfer by sale, mortgage, gift, lease or otherwise of 
any land acquired by the Government for a public purpose.  These three 
persons further sold (February 2006) this land for 
` 1.32 crore to two other 
persons (purchasers) who got the title of the land also transferred in their 
favour and commenced construction activity on this land.  When BDA 
objected to the construction activity, the purchasers obtained (November 
2009) permanent injunction from the Court, restraining BDA from 
demolishing the structures and dispossessing them of the property. 
BDA on its part filed a Regular First Appeal (RFA) before the High Court, 
which directed (March 2010) both the parties to maintain status-quo. During
the pendency of the case, the purchasers represented (April 2010) to the CM, 
requesting for denotification of the land on the ground that they had purchased 
the land in February 2006 and got the title transferred in their favour and also 
got building plans sanctioned from Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike 
(BBMP).
Though the ACS apprised (May 2010) the CM of the pendency of the Court 
case, the latter ordered (May 2010) denotification of 0-25 acre. The 
Government issued necessary denotification orders in June 2010 in favour of 
the purchasers and the Court case was dismissed in August 2010 on the basis 
of the denotification order.
Thus, the reversal of the acquisition process almost 19 years after the 
completion of the acquisition proceedings was irregular, especially when the 
provisions of the KLRT Act had been violated by the purchasers and the 
appeal filed by BDA had been pending in the Court.
4.6 Denotification of 0-25 acre in Nagarabhavi I Stage 
Layout 

ChapterͲ5

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 31



The Karnataka Land (Restriction on Transfer) Act, (KLRT Act) had been 
enacted in 1991 with a view to impose certain restrictions on transfer of land 
which had been acquired by the Government or in respect of which acquisition 
proceedings had been initiated by the Government. 
The salient features of the Act are: 
¾ No person shall purport to transfer by sale, mortgage, gift, lease or 
otherwise any land or part thereof situated in any urban area which has 
been acquired by the Government under the LA Act, or any other law 
providing for acquisition of land for a public purpose.
¾ No person shall, except with the previous permission in writing of the 
competent authority, transfer, or purport to transfer by sale, mortgage, 
gift, lease or otherwise any land or part thereof situated in any urban area 
which is proposed to be acquired in connection with the Scheme in 
relation to which the declaration has been published under Sec 19 of the 
BDA Act, 1976 or Sec 19 of the Karnataka Urban Development 
Authorities Act, 1987. 
¾ No registering authority appointed under the Registration Act, 1908 shall 
register any such document unless the transferor produces before such 
registering office a permission in writing of the competent authority for 
such transfer.  
¾ If any person contravenes these provisions, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine or 
both.
All preliminary notifications for acquisition of land issued by BDA stipulated 
that any contract for disposal of the notified lands by sale, lease, mortgage, 
assignment, exchange etc., without the sanction of the Deputy Commissioner, 
Bangalore after the date of publication of preliminary notification would be 
disregarded by the officer assessing compensation for such lands. 
Scrutiny showed that in the cases listed in Table-7 the lands notified for 
public purpose had been transferred in violation of the KLRT Act to several 
persons who subsequently got these lands denotified either in their favour or in 
favour of the erstwhile land owners.

ReportNo.3of2012
32 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

Table-7: Details of land purchased after final notification
Sl. 
No
Name of the 
layout 
Extent of land 
denotified by 
Government 
(Acres-Guntas) 
Sy. 
No. Village Taluk
Period of 
taking
possession by 
BDA under 
Sec 16(1) of 
LA Act 
Period of 
denotification 
1. Arkavathy 1-12 
0-16
55/2
56
Rachenahalli Bangalore 
North
Not taken November 2008 
2. RMV-II Stage 0-14 
0-09
10/11F
10/1
Lottegollahalli Bangalore 
North
August 1998 
August 1988 
December 2009 
3. East of NGEF  4-20 50/2 Benniganahalli Bangalore 
East 
Not taken May 2010 
4. Gnanabharathi 0-22 77 
78
Nagadevanahalli Bangalore 
South
August 1997 
& September 
1997
September 2009 
7-00
3-00
20 Nagadevanahalli NA June 2007 
September 2007 
5. BTM IV Stage 1-17 5/1 
6/3
Bilekanahalli Bangalore 
South
Not taken December 2009 
6. Arkavathy 2-19 55/1 Thanisandra Bangalore 
North
December 
2004
August 2009 
2-29 101/2 October  2007 
Total 23-38
(Source: Denotification files of BDA and Secretariat) 
The Government overlooked the violations of KLRT Act before denotifying 
the lands. The pattern of transactions in these cases evidenced that prime land 
notified by BDA but remaining unutilized for a variety of reasons had been 
targeted for illegal purchases in violation of the provisions of KLRT Act and 
unjustified denotification of such lands by the Government not only 
regularized the illegal transactions but also facilitated exploitation of such 
prime land for commercial purposes in a few cases.  
BDA had acquired (February 2004) 1-12 acres and 1-06 acres of land in 
Sy.No.55/2 and 56 respectively, in Rachenahalli village for the Arkavathy 
Layout. While award for land in Sy.No.56 had been approved on 6 September 
2004, the same had not been approved for land in Sy.No.55/2. 
The original files related to the above survey numbers maintained at the 
Secretariat as well as BDA had been handed over to the State Lokayuktha on 
13 January 2011 for investigation.   Scrutiny of photocopies of documents 
given by the Lokayuktha before taking over the original documents for 
investigation showed the following:
5.1 Arkavath y Layout

ChapterͲ5

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 33

¾ Four persons were the khatedars of land in Sy.No.56.  Another person 
(P1) after acquiring the title to the property on 5 March 2007 submitted an 
application in August 2008 to the Commissioner, BDA, seeking 
denotification of 0-16 acre of land in this survey number on the ground 
that the land had been purchased for the family needs.   
¾ P1, who was also the GPA holder for land in Sy.No.55/2 submitted a 
representation to BDA in September 2008, seeking deletion of 1-12 acres 
in Sy.No.55/2 from acquisition on the same ground.  BDA submitted a 
status report to the Government during September 2008. 
In their notings, the case worker, the Section Officer and the Under Secretary, 
Urban Development Department had placed on record that there were no legal 
hurdles in denotifying the land in Sy.No.55/2 as the award had not been 
passed. They, however, recommended that the matter be placed before the 
ensuing Denotification Committee meeting in respect of land in Sy.No.56 as 
the award had already been passed. However, the Joint Secretary, Urban 
Development Department in his notings observed (October 2008) that there 
were no legal hurdles as the possession of the land had not been taken and 
suggested submitting the file directly to the CM as directed by the Joint 
Secretary to the CM.  However, the PS endorsed the views of the Under 
Secretary and marked (October 2008) the file to the CM, who ordered 
(October 2008) denotification of the land in these two survey numbers on the 
ground that there were no legal hurdles. 
Accordingly, the Government denotified (November 2008), both 1-12 acres 
and 0-16 acre of lands in Sy.Nos. 55/2 and 56 respectively. 
Scrutiny showed the following: 
¾ P1 had been appointed the GPA through a registered deed dated 26 April 
2003 for 1-12 acres of land in Sy.No.55/2 by the erstwhile land owners.  
This transaction had taken place after the issue of preliminary notification 
by BDA on 3 February 2003.  P1 sold 0-20 acre of land in Sy.No.55/2 
through a registered sale deed dated 22 March 2006 in favour of two 
persons (` 20 lakh), who in turn sold (November 2010) it to a company 
for
` 10 crore. 
¾ In another sale deed dated 21 April 2006, P1 had sold another 0-20 acre 
(` 20 lakh) in the same survey number to another person.  This person 
sold this land to the company above for ` 10 crore.
¾ After denotification of 0-16 acres of land in Sy.No.56, P1 sold the land on 
5 May 2009 to another company. 
Thus, while denotification of land in Sy.No.55/2 regularized the illegal 
purchase of the notified land after preliminary notification, the denotification 
of land in Sy.No.56 facilitated the sale of land to a company.  The grounds on 
which denotification had been sought were evidently false. 

ReportNo.3of2012
34 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

BDA had acquired lands in the following survey numbers of Lottegollahalli 
village for the formation of RMV II Stage Layout.  
Details Sy.No.10/11F Sy.No.10/1 
Date of final notification 31 August 1978 31 August 1978 
Total extent of land notified  (Acres-
Guntas)
1-03 0-18 
Land taken possession under Sec 16(1) 29 August 1988 2 April 1988 
Notification under Sec 16(2) published  13  February 1992 13 February 1992 
Long after completion of the acquisition process, the land owners requested 
(June 2002 in respect of land in Sy.No.10/1 and June 2006 in respect of land 
in Sy.No.10/11F) the Commissioner, BDA to denotify portions of land not 
utilized by BDA in these survey numbers.  Though BDA sent (November 
2002 and July 2007) proposals to the Government recommending deletion of 
the unutilized portions of land from the purview of acquisition, the 
Government rejected (September 2008) the proposal on the ground that the 
question of denotifying land for which notification under Sec 16(2) had been 
issued would not arise in view of the judgment delivered in several cases by 
the Courts. 
The land owners pursued (October 2009) the matter again by representing to 
the CM, who relied on the recommendation by the BDA sent earlier to the 
Government in November 2002 and July 2007 and ordered (December 2009) 
denotification of 0-14 acre in Sy.No.10/11F and 0-09 acre in Sy.No.10/1.  
Accordingly, Government issued the denotification orders in December 2009. 
Further scrutiny showed that immediately after BDA had sent proposals 
(November 2002 and July 2007) to the Government recommending 
denotification of the unutilized land, the land owners registered the unutilized 
land in favour of a person.  While 0-09 acre in Sy.No.10/1 had been registered 
on 26 February 2003 (
` 3.42 lakh), 0-14 acre in Sy.No.10/11F had been 
registered on 12 November 2007 ( ` 41.25 lakh), though the sale in these two 
cases violated the provisions of KLRT Act.  However, the purchaser registered 
a Gift Deed on 27 August 2011 in favour of BDA, gifting the lands purchased 
by him.  The reason adduced in the gift deed for gifting the lands was that 
certain baseless and frivolous allegations had been made in respect of 
purchase of the property and attempts were made by his political rivals to 
tarnish his image.  The gift in favour of BDA had, therefore, been made to 
keep his record straight and to dispel the public and his political rivals from 
pointing an accusing finger at him.  
The denotification was invalid as it had been done after possession of the land 
had been taken evidently to regularize the irregular transfer of title of the 
5.2 RMV II Stage Layout 

ChapterͲ5

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 35

property. The gifting of the land to BDA did neither reverse the process of 
denotification nor regularize the violation of KLRT Act.
BDA had issued (October 1986) the final notification for acquisition of 523-03 
acres of land in Banaswadi and Benninganahalli villages for the formation of 
East of NGEF Layout. The land included 5-11 acres in Sy.No.50/2 of 
Benniganahalli village. 
Against 5-11 acres notified in Sy.No.50/2, award had been passed only for     
0-25 acres, under the orders of the Commissioner, BDA, on the ground that an 
industrial unit had been set up over 4-20 acres in the survey number and that 
the land had been got duly converted for industrial purpose before BDA had 
notified the land for acquisition.  The Commissioner had taken the decision at 
his level and had not initiated any action to withdraw the acquisition 
proceedings in respect of 4-20 acres, which, therefore, stood notified for 
acquisition and covered by the provisions of the KLRT Act. 
An elected representative submitted (September 2005) a representation to the 
CM and the Commissioner, BDA requesting for denotification of 4-20 acres in 
Sy.No.50/2 on the ground that the land had been converted for industrial 
purpose and BDA had not utilized the land.  BDA apprised (December 2005) 
the Government of the factual position.  Though the file had been submitted 
(January 2006) to the CM, no orders were passed and the file was closed. 
Subsequently, the elected representative submitted (May 2009) another 
representation to the Commissioner, BDA requesting for denotification.  BDA 
referred this representation, along with a status report, to the Government 
(July 2009). 
Though the Section Officer in the Secretariat suggested that the matter be 
placed before the Denotification Committee for a suitable decision, the PS 
submitted (August 2009) the file directly to the CM endorsing the views of the 
Under Secretary that there were no legal hurdles to denotify the land in 
question, as award had not been passed and possession of the land had also not 
been taken.  The CM approved (May 2010) the proposal and the Government 
denotified (May 2010) 4-20 acres of land in Survey No 50/2 in favour of the 
owner of the land. 
The denotification had been not justified for the following reasons: 
¾ Scrutiny showed that the elected representative had purchased (
` 1.62 
crore) this land from the land owner, through a registered sale deed dated 
18 December 2003, much after the land was notified for acquisition.  This 
had been precisely the reason why the purchaser had approached the 
BDA/CM for denotification of the land. 
5.3 East of NGEF Layout 

ReportNo.3of2012
36 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

¾ After the lands had been denotified in May 2010, a company requested 
(November 2010) BDA to fix the boundaries for this land and provide the 
survey sketch for 4-20 acres.
¾ Scrutiny of records obtained by Audit from the jurisdictional sub-registrar 
showed that even before the land had been denotified, the elected 
representative entered into a Joint Development Agreement (10 May 
2004) with the company and appointed the latter as Power of Attorney.  
Subsequently, the Power of Attorney appointed another company to 
undertake the work of development of the land.  These three parties 
entered (March 2011) into a Joint Development Agreement for 
construction of a residential apartment building complex on the property.  
All these developments were violative of the provisions of the KLRT Act, 
when the land stood notified for a public purpose.
(a) BDA had notified (March 1994) 4-00 acres in Sy.Nos.77 and 78 of 
Nagadevanahalli village of Bangalore South Taluk for the formation of 
Gnanabharathi Layout.  Though award had been passed (July 1997) for these 
lands, the compensation had neither been disbursed to the land owners, nor 
deposited in the Civil Court, reasons for which were not on record.  The 
possession of the land taken under Sec 16(1) had been handed over to the 
Engineering Section in August 1997 and September 1997 and notification 
under Sec 16(2) had also been issued in June 1998. 
Scrutiny showed that the Engineering Wing had not developed these lands and 
there were no recorded reasons. The owners of these lands had submitted 
several representations since March 2001 to the CMs, seeking denotification 
of their lands on the ground that BDA had not utilized the acquired land for 
the formation of layout and the possession continued to vest with them.  
However, these representations had not been acted upon. 
During June 2009, the land owner submitted a representation to the 
Government informing that he had sold 0-22 acre of land in these survey 
numbers and that the purchaser had already constructed nursing college, 
students’ hostel and school buildings on the land.  He requested for 
denotification of the land sold by him on the ground that Government had 
already deleted 34 acres of surrounding lands in December 2000. 
While submitting the file to the CM, the PS observed (June 2009) that there 
was no provision to denotify the land as per the Supreme Court orders as BDA 
had taken possession of the land way back during 1997.  However, the CM 
ordered (September 2009) denotification of 0-22 acre on the following 
grounds:
5.4 Gnanabharathi La yout

ChapterͲ5

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 37

¾ “On the basis of the recommendation made (October 2000) by a former 
Minister, the then CM ordered  denotification of 33-37 acres in several 
survey numbers, excepting 4 acres in Sy.No.77 and 78, in favour of a 
Society, although final notification had been issued on 19 January 1994. 
¾ Another former CM had ordered (January 2006) denotification of 0-22 
acre in Sy.Nos.77 and 78 as educational institutions had been 
established and sites had not been formed on this land by BDA. 
¾ Yet another former CM after noting the existence of the nursing college 
and school buildings etc., had ordered (October 2007) that if found 
necessary, the Government might issue notices to BDA as well as the 
applicants, conduct enquiries and take further action in the matter. 
¾ In view of this position and also considering that BDA had not formed 
and allotted sites and since educational institutions were already 
functioning, it is ordered to denotify 0-22 acre.” 
Scrutiny of copies of sale deeds available in the Secretariat file showed that 
the land owner had sold two sites to the purchaser during September 2004 
after the issue of the final notif ication and these two sites had been carved out 
of land acquired by BDA in Sy.No.78.  The details are shown in the Table-8:
Table-8: Details of sites sold after final notification
Date of 
registration Site No Area  
(in sq ft) 
Sale consideration 
(in `) Document No 
4.9.04 50 2,490 2,73,900 22306/2004-05 
4.9.04 47,48,49 21,177 23,2 9,525 22308/2004-05 
Total 23,667
(Source: Copies of sale deeds) 
After selling these two sites, the land owner had executed a rectification deed 
in March 2005 in favour of the purchaser to the effect that though the land 
sold had been notified for acquisition by BDA, the Urban Development 
Department cancelled the same in March 2005.  Audit scrutiny showed that 
this was factually incorrect as the Government had not denotified the land in 
March 2005.
Thus, the denotification of 0-22 acre regularized the illegal purchase of land in 
violation of the KLRT Act.
 (b) The Government issued (March 1994) the final notification for 
acquisition of lands required for the Gnanabharathi Layout.  The lands so 
notified included 12-13 acres of land in Sy.No.20 of Nagadevanahalli village, 
Bangalore South Taluk. The award for the land in this survey number had 
been passed in June 2001.  Ten out of 12-13 acres in this survey number had 
been granted by the Government under the Karnataka Land Grant Rules, 1969 
to three persons before acquisition. 

ReportNo.3of2012
38 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

One person (P1) had purchased (January 2003) seven acres of land in 
Sy.No.20 from the grantees in violation of the provisions of the KLRT Act 
and executed (August 2004) General Power of Attorney (GPA) in favour of 
another person (P2). Yet another person (P3) also irregularly purchased (June 
2004) three acres of land in the same survey number from the grantees in 
violation of the provisions of the KLRT Act. 
P2 and P3 represented (17 March 2006) to the CM requesting for 
denotification of the lands purchased by them on the ground that BDA had not 
developed these lands and had not taken over possession.  The Denotification 
Committee, which examined (August 2006) the case of P3 recommended 
against denotification as the land was required by BDA for the layout.  
Though the case of P2 had not been referred to the Denotification Committee, 
the PS recommended (August 2006) for the rejection of the request for 
denotification on the same ground. 
However, the CM ordered (May and September 2007) denotification of 10 
acres in this survey number (three acres in favour of P3 and seven acres in 
favour of P2, the GPA holder) citing that BDA had not taken possession of the 
lands.  Thereafter, the Government denotified (June 2007) seven acres of land, 
in favour of P2 and three acres in favour of P3 (September 2007). 
Though the denotification made by the Government was per se legally valid as 
possession of land had not been taken, the reconveyance of the land to persons 
who were not the khatedars and who had violated the provisions of the KLRT 
Act by purchasing the land notified by BDA for a public purpose, was 
irregular.   
The Government denotified (December 2009) 1-17 acres in Sy.Nos.5/1 and 
6/3 of Bilekanahalli village of Bangalore South Taluk, which had earlier been 
notified by BDA for acquisition through a final notification dated 3 November 
1990 for the formation of BTM IV Stage Layout.  The lands were denotified  
in favour of the owners on the basis of information furnished (July 2007) to 
the Government by BDA that land compensation had not been awarded and 
that possession of the lands was also not taken.  The reasons for not making an 
award and not taking possession of land for 18 years were not on record. 
Scrutiny showed that several persons had represented (November 2003, 
February 2004,  December 2004 and February 2007) to the Commissioner/ 
Government/CM that they had purchased sites formed on these lands after the 
issue of preliminary notification in August 1988 and requested for 
denotification of land in these survey numbers.  
The Denotification Committee directed (August 2007) BDA to place the 
matter before the Authority and then come up with an appropriate decision.  
5.5 BTM IV Sta ge Layout

ChapterͲ5

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 39

Pending scrutiny by the Denotification Committee, the PS apprised (October 
2009) the CM of the status of the land and the CM ordered (December 2009) 
denotification of the land as BDA had not passed award and possession had 
also not been taken.  Failure to pass award and take possession of the notified 
land facilitated uncontrolled development of the land and its sale in violation 
of the KLRT Act. The denotification by the Government regularized the 
illegal transactions.  
BDA resolved (May 2006) on the basis of orders (November 2005) of the 
High Court to allot an alternative site of 30’x40’ dimension for each of the 
revenue sites acquired for the Arkavathy Layout subject to the condition that 
the revenue site holders should have registered the sites prior to the date of 
issue of preliminary notification for acquisition of lands.  The costs of the 
alternative sites so allotted were to be adjusted against the compensation 
payable to the revenue site holders.
In the case of lands (excluding sites) acquired for the Arkavathy Layout, the 
High Court judgment (November 2005) permitted denotification of the land 
belonging to any of the following six categories: 
(i) Land situated within the green belt area 
(ii) Land totally built-up 
(iii) Land wherein buildings had been constructed by charitable, 
educational or religious institutions 
(iv) Nursery land 
(v) Factories, and  
(vi) Lands similar to the adjoining land which had not been notified for 
acquisition.
For determining the eligibility for denotification, the status of the land as on 
the date of preliminary notification was to be reckoned.   
During October 2007, BDA requested the Government to denotify 15-15 acres 
of land notified for the Arkavathy Layout in six survey numbers in four 
villages. The proposal also included 2-19 acres of land in Sy.No.55/1 of 
Thanisandra village. The proposal was made by BDA as acquisition of 
revenue sites in these lands would necessita te allotment of an alternative site 
for each of the revenue sites so acquired and this would result in huge 
financial burden on the BDA.   
With the approval of the CM (August 2009), the Government denotified 
(August 2009) acquisition of 2-19 acres of land in Sy.No.55/1 of Thanisandra 
village in favour of a person who was different from the khatedars notified in 
5.6 Arkavathy Layout 

ReportNo.3of2012
40 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

the final notification, implying that the person had violated the provisions of 
the KLRT Act and purchased the land after the issue of the final notification. 
The denotification in this case had been proposed by BDA on the basis of an 
inspection report (November 2006) of the Revenue Inspector who had 
reported that 55 revenue sites, each of 30’x40’ dimension had been formed on 
this land and acquisition of these revenue sites would necessitate allotment of 
55 alternative sites, which was not financially viable.  It was further reported 
that these 55 revenue sites had also been sold to several persons.   However, a 
spot inspection committee of BDA consisting of Additional LAO, Executive 
Engineer, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Revenue Inspector and Surveyor 
had inspected this land earlier during April 2006 and found that the entire land 
was vacant and suitable for forming the layout.  Following the inspection, the 
DC informed (June 2006) the land owners figuring in the final notification that 
their request for denotification of the land had been rejected by the Authority 
in its meeting held on 31 May 2006 as the land was vacant and the land did 
not satisfy any of the six criteria laid down by the High Court for 
denotification.  Thus, the inspection report of the Revenue Officer given in 
November 2006 was factually incorrect.  Further, there was no need for the 
Revenue Inspector to inspect the land in November 2006 when a full fledged 
spot inspection committee had earlier found the land vacant and suitable for 
acquisition.
Scrutiny of the Encumbrance Certificate obtained by Audit in respect of this 
survey number from the jurisdictional sub-registrar showed the status of this  
property as land only as of September 2010 and not as revenue site.  Further, 
the person in whose favour the Government denotified the land entered into a 
development agreement for this land only on 2 September 2010 with a private 
company after the land had been denotified.   
Further, the denotification in this case was irregular as on the date of 
preliminary notification (3 February 2003), the land had remained vacant and 
did not meet the eligibility criteria laid down by the High Court for 
denotification. Further, the possession of the land under Sec 16(1) had also 
been taken by BDA in December 2004.  Thus the denotification in this case 
had been facilitated by incorrect reporting of the status of the land and 
fraudulent practices could not be ruled out. The matter, therefore, requires 
investigation.
Though the denotification process in unavoidable circumstances is expected to 
reconvey the acquired land to its original owner, the denotification in this case 
facilitated reconveyance of the land to a person, who had irregularly acquired 
title to the land by violating the provisions of the KLRT Act. 
Similarly, the Government denotified (October 2007) another 2-29 acres in 
Sy.No.101/2 of the same village.  This was a sequel to a representation 
submitted (August 2007) by the land owners to the CM requesting for 

ChapterͲ5

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 41

denotification of the land on the ground that many lands acquired for 
Arkavathy layout had been subsequently deleted from acquisition after 
publication of final notification.  Though BDA reported (September 2007) to 
the Government that the possession of the land in this survey number had 
already been handed over to the Engineering Wing in December 2004 and the 
land did not fall under any of the categories eligible for denotification as per 
the criteria laid down by the High Court, the CM considered (October 2007) 
the applicant’s request sympathetically and denotified the land as notification 
under Sec 16(2) had not been published.  The CM’s order glossed over the 
well settled law that non-publication of notification under Sec 16(2) would not 
vitiate the acquisition proceedings.  

ReportNo.3of2012
42 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA



In the cases listed in Table-9, the Government irregularly denotified land even 
after the Court had upheld the acquisition proceedings:  
    Table-9: Details of denotification of lands even after Court upholding 
acquisition proceedings 
Sl
No
Name of the 
layout 
Extent of land 
denotified by 
Government 
(Acres-Guntas) 
Sy No Village Taluk
Period of 
taking
possession by 
BDA under 
Sec 16(1) of 
LA Act 
Period of 
denotification 
1 Further Extn of 
Anjanapura
6-29 126, 
127/1,
127/2
Gottigere Bangalore 
South
NA August 2007 
2 Gnanabharathi 4-08 77/1, 
77/2
Valagerahalli Bangalore 
South
February 2006 October 2007 
October 2010 
3 RMV II Stage 0-33 1/1 Lottegollahalli Bangalore 
North
September
1986
January 2010 
4 HRBR III 
Stage 
1-20 6/2A, 
6/2B,
7
Guddadahalli Bangalore 
North
September 1989 
November 1989 
January 2010 
5. Scheme
between 
Banaswadi and 
Hennur Road 
0-15 100/1
100/2
Challakere Bangalore 
East 
January 1983 
February 1983 
January 
2010
Total 13-25
(Source: Denotification files of BDA and Secretariat) 
Details of these cases are discussed below:  
The final notification (March 2002) for acquisition of 487 acres in Gollahalli, 
Kembathahalli and Gottigere villages of Bangalore South Taluk for the 
formation of Further Extension of Anjanapura Layout included 6-29 acres in 
Sy.Nos.126, 127/1 and 127/2 of Gottigere village.  Award for these lands had 
been passed in March 2005 and the khatedars were directed to hand over 
possession of the land taken on 17 March 2005. 
Earlier, the land owner had represented (February 2003) to the Government 
seeking denotification of lands belonging to her.  In the report submitted to the 
Government, BDA had informed (May 2003) that it was difficult to form a 
layout on the said lands as these had been fully covered with fruit bearing 
trees, a clinic, a pump house and a labour shed. This report is to be viewed in 
6.1 Further Extension of An janapura Layout 

ChapterͲ6

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 43

the light of the fact that the same owner had agreed (October 2001) to give up 
her land before issue of the final notification and sought a compensation of  
` 10 lakh per acre as a special case. Thus, existence of structures and fruit 
bearing trees on the land had been within the knowledge of BDA even before 
issuing the final notification and the land had b een included in the final 
notification only after hearing objections of the land owner. The CM approved 
(January 2006) the denotification of the land on the basis of the 
recommendations (May 2003) of the Denotification Committee. 
Though the PS approved (February 2006) a draft denotification order subject 
to the condition that the land should be utilized only for the purpose of 
growing plantation/cash crops, the Deputy Secretary withheld the issue of the 
order, reasons for which were not forthcoming. Thereafter, an elected 
representative represented (July 2007) to the CM complaining that though the 
former CM had ordered denotification of land, necessary orders had not been 
issued.  The incumbent CM directed (August 2007) to implement the orders of 
his predecessor. Denotification order was issued in August 2007, removing the 
condition stipulated in the draft denotification order approved during February 
2006.
Earlier, the land owner had filed a writ petition during 2005 challenging the 
acquisition of land and the High Court dismissed (June 2007) the writ petition 
on the following grounds: 
¾ The petitioner had challenged the acquisition proceedings after passing 
of the award; 
¾ There had been inordinate delay of more than three years from the date 
of publication of declaration in filing the writ petition; and 
¾ The acquisition proceedings had already been finalized by BDA. 
Thus, denotification orders were issued after the High Court had dismissed the 
writ petition challenging the acquisition proceedings.
The final notification (January 1994) for acquisition of 729-31 acres of land in 
Valagerahalli and Nagadevanahalli villages of Bangalore South taluk for the 
formation of Gnanabharathi Layout included 5-10 acres in Sy.No.77/1 and 
77/2 of Valagerahalli village.  Awards for the land in Sy.No.77/1 and 77/2 
were passed in August 1996 and January 1997, respectively.  Possession of the 
land measuring 3-10 acres in Sy.No. 77/1 taken under Sec 16(1) had been 
handed over to the Engineering Section on 18 January1997 and notification 
under Sec 16(2) had been also published on 12 March 1997. 
While disposing of the writ petition filed by the owner challenging the 
acquisition of 5-10 acres in Sy.No.77/1 and 77/2, the High Court had upheld 
6.2 Gnanabharathi La yout

ReportNo.3of2012
44 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

(February 2004) the acquisition proceedings on the ground that acquisition 
could not be quashed merely on the ground that petitioner had not participated 
in the award proceedings.  At the same time, the High Court quashed the 
awards passed on 12 August 1996 and 28 January 1997 on the ground that the 
petitioner had not been served with any notice and no opportunity had been 
given to the petitioner to participate in the award proceedings.  The High 
Court directed BDA to issue a fresh notice to the petitioner and proceed to 
pass the awards after hearing.  Revised award had been passed for 2-34 acres 
in Sy.No.77/1 and 0-16 acres in Sy.No.77/2 on 19 December 2005.  The 
possession of these lands taken under Sec 16(1) had been handed over to the 
Engineering Section on 8 February 2006 and notification under Sec 16(2) had 
also been issued on 24 August 2006.
The land owner represented (July 2007) to the Commissioner, BDA and the 
CM stating that his land had been acquired for the Gnanabharathi layout and 
BDA had permitted him to utilize two acres of land, (0-16 acres in Sy.No.77/1 
and 1-24 acres in Sy.No.77/2), by restricting the award and that BDA had not 
published a Gazette notification for these two acres in their possession. He 
requested the CM to publish a Gazette notification deleting these two acres 
from acquisition. Responding to the representation, the Commissioner, BDA 
confirmed (August 2007) that out of 5-10 acres acquired in these survey 
numbers, award had been passed only for 3-10 acres. 
In the file submitted to the PS, the Joint Secretary observed (September 2007) 
that BDA had given up two acres at th e stage of preliminary notification itself 
and the applicant had been merely requesting that the area given up by BDA 
be gazetted. It was further recorded that though the request had been 
unconventional, there was no harm in denotifying the land given up by BDA 
and the Government had no objection to the request made by the applicant for 
denotifying the land. The proposal of the Joint Secretary was approved by the 
PS and the CM and the Government denotified (October 2007) two acres in 
Sy.Nos.77/1 and 77/2.  It would be pertinent to mention here that BDA had 
not been vested with powers under the LA Act to restrict the award after final 
notification and award should be made for the entire land notified. Further, 
BDA had not given up the land at the preliminary notification stage itself as 
stated by the Joint Secretary and the final notification for the land had been 
issued in January 1994 for 5-10 acres.
Subsequently, during August 2010, the land owner submitted one more 
representation to the CM stating that BDA had not formed the layout on the 
remaining 3-10 acres of land in Sy.No.77/1 and 77/2 of Valagerehalli village 
and that a tomb of his father and several valuable trees had existed on the land.
As BDA had already given up acquisition of two acres, he requested to 
denotify the remaining land in these survey numbers also.  BDA submitted a 
status report informing, inter alia, that two acres in these survey numbers had 
already been denotified by the Government on 6 October 2007.  Though the 

ChapterͲ6

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 45

ACS apprised (September 2010) the CM of the status of 3-10 acres of land and 
recorded in the file that there was no provision under law to denotify the land 
as its possession had been taken, the CM denotified (October 2010) another 2-
08 acres of land in these survey numbers, on the ground that the surrounding 
lands had already been denotified and the land was, therefore, not suitable for 
forming a layout. 
Thus, while on the one hand, the land owner got two acres of land denotified 
due to the restricted award passed, he got another 2-08 acres denotified on the 
ground that it was adjacent to the land denotified earlier.  While the first 
denotification would be legally valid as possession of land had not been taken, 
the second denotification of 2-08 acres of land was irregular as the acquisition 
process had been completed in all respects with the issue of notification under 
Sec 16(2) in August 2006.  The remaining 1-02 acres out of 5-10 acres had not 
been denotified as it was kharab
5 land belonging to the Government. Thus, 
irregular passing of the award and the invalid denotification order helped the 
land owner get his entire land reconveyed to him by subjugating public 
interest to private interest.  
Further scrutiny showed that land owner had irregularly sold (November 
2004) a part of the denotified land (0-26 acre in Sy.No.77/1) in violation of the 
KLRT Act even before the revised award was passed in December 2005.
In respect of 3-33 acres in Sy.No.1/1 of Lottegollahalli village notified 
(August 1978) for the formation of RMV II Stage Layout, BDA took 
possession of the land under Sec 16(1) on 29 September 1986 and published 
notification under Sec 16(2) on 30 July 1987. 
When the Government had denotified (October 1996) a portion of land in the 
same survey number after forming and allotting sites, several allottees had 
filed writ petitions challenging the denotification order.  While quashing 
(February 1997) the denotification order of October 1996, the High Court was 
critical of the action of the Government in denotifying the acquired lands 18 
years after the issue of final notification, after the High Court and Supreme 
Court had upheld the acquisition proceedings. 
However, Government denotified (January 2010) 0-33 acre of land in 
Sy.No.1/1 in favour of one person on the basis of his representation to the CM 
though the khatedar as per the final notification was different. Evidently the 
person had purchased this land after issue of the final notification in violation 
of the KLRT Act.   However, the CM ordered (December 2009) denotification 
of the land on the ground that there were several other cases wherein similarly 


5Barren land 
6.3 RMV II Stage Layout 

ReportNo.3of2012
46 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

placed lands had been denotified earlier. Thus, denotification of the land 22 
years after issue of notification under Sec 16(2) and 13 years after a similar 
denotification order had been quashed by the High Court evidenced that the 
denotification had been done it on extraneous considerations without regard 
for the legal position. 
Further audit scrutiny showed that the wife of the deceased person submitted 
an application to DC, Bangalore Urban seeking change of land use for 0-38 
acre instead of 0-33 acre denotified by the Government in Sy.No.1/1A of 
Lottegollahalli.  DC, Bangalore Urban requested (January 2012) BDA to 
confirm whether the land had been acquired by BDA and to issue a NOC for 
the change of land use, if the land   had not been acquired.  Meanwhile, BDA 
received a photocopy of another denotification order (September 2010) issued 
by the Government denotifying an additional 0-05 acre in the same survey 
number in favour of the same person. This was supplied to BDA by the editor 
of a local newspaper.  As BDA was not aware of this denotification order, it 
sought (February 2012) clarification from the Government as to whether such 
an additional order had been issued.  Government’s clarification was awaited 
(July 2012).  Audit scrutiny of the concerned file at the Secretariat showed that 
the file had been closed on 23 April 2010 with the issue of the denotification 
order of January 2010.  As fraudulent practices in this matter could not be 
ruled out, the matter requires investigation. 
The Government denotified (January 2010) land measuring 1-20 acres in 
Sy.No.6/2A (0-22 acre), 6/2B (0-10 acre) and 7 (0-28 acre) of Guddadahalli 
village of Bangalore North taluk.  These lands had earlier been acquired by 
BDA through a final notification (February 1989) for the formation of a layout 
called Hennur Road & Bellary Road III Stage.  The possession of the land 
taken under Sec 16(1) had been handed over to the Engineering Section in 
September and November 1989.  Notification under Sec 16(2) had been issued 
in January 1992. 
Earlier, the High Court had dismissed (October 2003) the writ petition 
challenging the acquisition proceedings on the ground that it was not 
appropriate for the Court to disturb the acquisition proceedings of the year 
1978 and 1989 and that it was open for the petitioners to move the State 
Government for denotification.   
Except for one letter dated 18 May 2004 addressed to the Secretary, Urban 
Development Department by two persons who claimed to be the joint owners 
of land in Sy.No.7 and a letter dated 21 May 2004 from the Government, 
endorsing this representation to the Commissioner, there was no other 
correspondence in the file maintained by BDA.  As regards Sy.No.6/2B, the 
last correspondence in the file ended on 8 March 2000.
6.4 Hennur Road and Bellar y Road III Stage Layout

ChapterͲ6

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 47

Audit scrutiny showed that BDA had not submitted the status report desired by 
the Government in May 2004 and the two applicants were also not the 
khatedars of Sy.No.7 as per the final notification.  It was further seen that an 
elected representative had requested (October 2005) the CM to denotify the 
lands in Sy.No.6/2A and 6/2B on the ground that there were houses and a 
workshop on the land and BDA had not formed the layout.  The file was 
closed by the Under Secretary (March 2006) as acquisition process had been 
completed and the land had vested with BDA. 
The elected representative addressed (June 2008) a letter to the leader of the 
opposition party with a request to direct the authorities concerned, to denotify 
the land.  The leader of the opposition party, in turn, requested (June 2008) the 
CM to consider the request for denotification. While the Joint Secretary in his 
notings suggested (September 2008) that the matter be placed before the 
Denotification Committee, the PS submitted the file to the CM, noting that 
there were legal hurdles in denotifying the land, as notification under Sec 
16(2) had been issued in January 1992.  However, the CM, citing other 
denotification cases, ordered (December 2009) that this land too be denotified 
on humanitarian grounds, treating it as a special case.  It would be pertinent to 
mention here that the irregular denotification had been done in this case 18 
years after completion of the acquisition process in disregard of the provisions 
in the LA Act.   
Further, scrutiny of the latest Record of Rights, Tenancy and Crops Certificate 
(RTC) (April 2012) and Encumbrance Certificate showed that 0-27.5 acre in 
Sy.No. 7 had been sold to other persons after the denotification and changes in 
mutation entries in favour of the purchasers had been made during April and 
October 2011.
The denotification was done evidently to facilitate the sale of land notified for 
a public purpose.
The final notification issued by the Government on 14 May 1980 notifying the 
acquisition of lands for the formation of a layout called “Scheme between 
Banaswadi Road and Hennur Road,” included 2-16 acres and 2-20 acres of 
land in Sy.Nos 100/1 and 100/2, respectively, of Chellakere village of 
Bangalore East Taluk.  Notification under Sec 16(2) had been published in 
July 1983. 
The land owners had requested (May 1984 and June 1988) the Minister for 
Housing and Urban Development and the Commissioner, BDA, seeking 
exemption of 0-15 acre of land in Sy.Nos.100/1 and 100/2 from the acquisition 
process on the ground that three residential buildings and tombs of ancestors 
6.5 Denotification of 0-15 acre in the Scheme between 
Banaswadi and Hennur Road 

ReportNo.3of2012
48 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

existed on this piece of land. As their request had not been acted upon, they 
filed a writ petition before the High Court praying for directions to BDA to 
consider the applications.  The High Court directed (December 1990) BDA to 
consider the application in accordance with law, within three months.   
The file produced to Audit did not contain the developments that took place 
after this event and apparently no action had been taken on the orders of the 
High Court.  As BDA failed to take appropriate action, the land owners filed 
another writ petition (19445/2007) before the High Court.  During the course 
of arguments, BDA had submitted to the Court that it was willing to consider 
the representation of the petitioners.  The High Court disposed (July 2009) of 
the writ petition with a direction to BDA to pass appropriate orders on the 
representation within two months and to maintain status-quo. 
BDA resolved (December 2009) not to denotify the land, as the property had 
vested with BDA after the issue of notification under Sec 16(2).  While BDA 
issued an endorsement to this effect to the land owners on 4 January 2010, the 
Government issued orders withdrawing 0-15 acre of land from acquisition on 
the same day. 
Scrutiny of files at the Secretariat showed that an elected representative had 
recommended (June 2008) to the CM for denotifying the land in favour of the 
land owners and issuing directions to BDA.  After obtaining a report from 
BDA, the PS referred (February 2009) the file to the CM, informing that there 
were legal hurdles in denotifying the land, as possession had been taken way 
back during January-February 1983 and notification under Sec 16(2) had also 
been published.  However, the CM denotified (June 2009) the land on the 
ground that it had been not possible to form sites in the meagre area and that 
the land had been built up.  When the file had been returned, the Under 
Secretary resubmitted (June 2009) the file to the PS after recording that the 
CM had issued orders for denotification, despite the clarification that 
notification under Sec 16(2) had been published and the land acquisition 
proceedings had been completed in all respects.  The PS directed the Under 
Secretary to examine the issue in the light of the Supreme Court judgment and 
submit the file to the CM with proposal to seek the opinion of the Law 
Department. The Under Secretary noted that in view of the orders passed by 
the Supreme Court, it was not permissible to denotify the land as the 
possession had vested with BDA and there was no provision in the LA Act to 
re-grant such lands to the erstwhile owners.  The PS endorsed the views and 
resubmitted (June 2009) the file to the CM.  However, the CM insisted (June 
2009) on denotifying the land, treating it as a special case.  The Government 
issued necessary denotification orders in January 2010.
The exercise of power under Sec 48(1) of the LA Act by the Government in 
denotifying the land was invalid. The reversal of the acquisition process 
almost 23 years after its completion evidently subverted public interest and 
subjugated it to private interest.

ChapterͲ7

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 49


In the cases listed in Table-10, the Government irregularly denotified land on 
the basis of several unjustifiable considerations.   
Table-10: Details of denotification of land on other considerations
Sl
No
Name of the 
layout 
Extent of land 
denotified by 
Government 
(Acres-Guntas) 
Period of taking 
possession by 
BDA u/s 16(1) 
of LA Act 
Sy No Village Taluk
Period of 
denoti-
fication 
1 Banashankari 
V Stage 
10-00 Not taken 121 Uttarahalli Bangalore 
South
December 
2009
2 BTM IV Stage 11875.75 sft Not taken 7/8 Bilekanahalli Bangalore 
South
November
2009
3 HAL III Stage 0-15 December 1979 62/3 Konena
Agrahara
Bangalore 
East 
May 2010 
4 West of Chord 
Road IV Stage 
1-16 ½  November 1986 69/2 Agrahara
Dasarahalli 
Bangalore 
North
August
2007
5 JP Nagar IX 
Phase 
4-11 September 1996 21/1, 
21/2,
21/3,
21/4,
21/5
Arakere Bangalore 
South
March 
2006
6 Arkavathy 2-16 June 2006 39/2B, 
50/2,
50/4,
55/1
Rachenahalli Bangalore 
North
June 2010 
7 Gnanabharathi 7-06 Not taken 80/1, 
80/3
Valagerahalli Bangalore 
South
October
2007
8 Nadaprabhu 
Kempegowda
4-00 Not taken 15 Sulikere Bangalore 
South
April 2010 
Total 29-24 ½ & 
11875.75 sft 
(Source: Denotification files of BDA and Secretariat) 
Details of these cases are as under:
BDA had issued (October 1999) final notification for acquisition of lands in 
several villages of Bangalore South Taluk for the formation of BSK V Stage 
Layout.  Ten acres of land in Sy.No.121 of Uttarahalli village had also been 
included in the final notification.  As BDA had rejected the objections filed by 
the land owner, he filed writ petition before the High Court challenging the 
acquisition proceedings and praying for consideration of his proposal to 
develop the notified land for group housing in terms of Government order of 
November 1995 (as discussed in Para 8.1 subsequently).
7.1 Banashankari V Stage Layout 

ReportNo.3of2012
50 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

The High Court had granted interim stay, which had remained in force till 15 
April 1998.  Further developments in this case were not on record.  Though 
the LAO had passed an award in March 1998, which was also approved by the 
DC, the compensation had not been deposited in the Court, reasons for which 
were not forthcoming from the records. 
During July 2009, the land owner’s son submitted an application to the CM 
seeking denotification of 10 acres of land, on the ground that they were the 
rightful owners of the land and that their group of institutions and hospitals 
catered to the needs of the area and they intended to provide housing to staff 
members working in their institutions. BDA informed (July 2009) the 
Government that the award had been approved, the possession of the land had 
not been taken, and notification under Sec 16(2) had also not been published.  
It was further reported that the entire land had remained vacant, a compound 
wall had been erected and BDA had not formed the layout on these lands. 
The CM ordered (December 2009) that the land be denotified and the 
Government issued (December 2009) necessary orders, denotifying 10 acres 
of land in Sy.No.121 of Uttarahalli village, without even ascertaining the 
status of disposal of the writ petition and enquiring as to why possession of 
land notified for acquisition 10 years ago could not be taken by BDA after 
passing of the award and why compensation had not been disbursed or 
deposited in the Court.  Further, even before denotification of the land by the 
Government, BDA had released 1.5 acres out of 10 acres to the owner during 
September 2000 by collecting betterment tax of 
` 1.24 lakh, though BDA had 
not been vested with the power either to restore the possession of the notified 
land to the owner or collect betterment tax for notified land. 
Land measuring 241-06 acres in Devarachikkanahalli and Bilekanahalli 
villages of Bangalore South Taluk notified (November 1990) for the formation 
of BTM IV Stage Layout included 0-13 acre in Sy.No.7/8 of Bilekanahalli 
village.  Though award for this land had been belatedly prepared by the LAO 
in December 1996, approval of the Deputy Commissioner for the award was 
not obtained and possession of the land was also not taken.  Reasons for not 
making the award and not taking possession of land were not forthcoming on 
record.
The GPA holder for the owner of this land submitted a copy of the order 
(November 2009) issued by the Government denotifying 11875.75 sq ft (0-11 
acre) of land in the survey number and requested BDA to issue a NOC for 
obtaining khatha from the BBMP. BDA was not aware of this denotification 
till the GPA holder submitted a copy of the denotification order.  On the basis 
of the copy of the denotification order, BDA issued (January 2010) an 
endorsement to the GPA holder intimating that 11875.75 sq ft, out of 0-13 
7.2 BTM IV Sta ge Layout

ChapterͲ7

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 51

acre notified for acquisition in Sy.No.7/8 had been denotified by the 
Government in November 2009.  Thus, denotification of land had been done 
without the knowledge of the acquiring agency. 
Though the denotification would be legally valid as the award had not been 
made and possession of land had not been taken, the reasons for BDA not 
making the award and not taking of possession of land for 29 years had not 
been examined before denotification.  As the justification for notifying the 
land for acquisition was the overwhelming public interest, the lapses on the 
part of the BDA in not passing the award and taking possession of the notified 
land facilitated denotification of this land by subjugating public interest to 
private interest.   
Out of 457-12 acres of land acquired (July 1971) by BDA in 6 villages of 
Bangalore East taluk for the formation of HAL III Stage Layout, 2-35 acres in 
Sy.No.62/3 of Konena Agrahara village belonged to a person.  While the 
possession of the land taken under Sec 16(1) had been handed over to the 
Engineering Section in December 1979, notification under Sec 16(2) had been 
issued in December 1983.  BDA did not make use of the land in Sy.No.62/3 
for forming the layout, the reasons for which were not on record.  
During June 1994, BDA noticed that the old buildings which had existed on 
the acquired land had been demolished by a private company claiming 
possession and title to the property.  BDA immediately filed a suit against the 
company seeking permanent injunction. 
While disposing of the suit, the City Civil Court observed (June 2008) that 
BDA was unable to establish that it had been in lawful possession of the 
property as on the date of filing the suit.  The Court further observed that BDA 
had called upon the company to remit 
` 6500 on 24 December 1991 in relation 
to its request for change in the use of land, which indicated that the company 
had been in possession of the schedule property.
Thus, though possession of land had been taken in December 1979, BDA 
failed to establish before the Court that possession had been taken in 
accordance with law under Sec 16(1). The injudicious intimation given by the 
Town Planning Section of BDA for change of land use after completion of the 
acquisition process worked against BDA in the Court. BDA did not prefer any 
appeal against the orders of the Court for which no reasons were on record.   
The company complained (February 2010) to the CM that though the Court 
had dismissed the suit filed by BDA, the matter relating to denotification of 
their land remained unsettled as BDA had failed to furnish relevant 
information sought by the Government.   
7.3 HAL III Sta ge Layout

ReportNo.3of2012
52 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

On the directions of the CM, the Government obtained a report from BDA 
which highlighted (May 2010) that acquisition process had been completed 
with the publication of notification under Sec 16(2) on 14 December 1983.  It 
was further reported that though the land had been handed over to the 
Engineering Section on 22 December 1979, the layout had not been formed, 
the entire area had been covered with unauthorized buildings and multi-
storeyed buildings existed on the land sought to be denotified.  However, the 
report did not explain why the layout had not been formed and how the 
unauthorised buildings came up on the land in the possession of BDA. 
Though the Joint Secretary observed that it was not possible to denotify the 
land as notification under Sec 16(2) had been published and the PS also 
endorsed this view, the CM ordered (May 2010) denotification of 0-15 acre of 
land in Sy.No.62/3 in favour of the land owner from whom the company had 
purchased the land. 
A spot inspection conducted by BDA during 1993-94 showed that the area had 
only seven old buildings.  The second inspection conducted in August 1996 
showed that there were 44 buildings, which included RCC residential 
buildings and multi-storeyed commercial complexes.  All these buildings were 
unauthorized as they had been constructed on the land that had vested with 
BDA.  BDA had evidently failed to check these unauthorized constructions 
after acquisition of the land and take timely action against the encroachers.  
These lapses facilitated denotification of 0-15 acr e of acquired land almost 27 
years after completion of the acquisition process.  BDA did not furnish the 
status of the remaining portion of the land in Sy.No.62/3. 
In respect of 4-30 acres of land in Sy.No.69/2 of Agrahara Dasarahalli village 
of Bangalore North taluk, BDA had taken possession of the land under Sec 
16(1) in November 1986. However, the Government irregularly denotified 
(August 1998) 2-20 acres of land in Sy.No.69/2 on the untenable grounds of 
pending  litigation related to this land, subject to the condition that the owner 
of this land should develop it as per Government guidelines of November 
1995 (as discussed in Para 8.1 subsequently).  As the owner failed to develop 
this land, the Government withdrew (April 2006) the denotification order of 
August 1998.  After obtaining a stay by filing a writ petition (WP5406/2006) 
before the High Court, the owner requested (August 2006) the CM to annul 
the Government Order of April 2006 as he had formed sites on the land and 
sold these to several persons.  The owner had evidently formed sites 
irregularly on the land after the Government withdrew the denotification 
order.
BDA informed the Government (November 2006) that it had already utilised 
1-03½ acres of land in the survey number for formation of roads and the 
7.4 West o f Chord Road IV Stage Layout

ChapterͲ7

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 53

owner was thus left with only 1-16½ acres.  It was further reported that BDA 
had already transferred the title of these 1-16½ acres to the owner and had also 
sanctioned the plan for construction of compound wall on the land.   In the 
notings submitted to the CM, the PS observed (February 2007) that as BDA 
had already utilised 43 per cent of the land for roads and had also collected 
land tax besides permitting the construction of the compound wall in the 
remaining portion of the land, the Government order of April 2006 
withdrawing the denotification could be cancelled.  The CM approved (June 
2007) the proposal for denotifying 1-16½ acres of land in Sy.No.69/2.  The 
Government issued necessary denotification orders in August 2007 and the 
owner withdrew the writ petition in December 2008.  Thus, BDA’s unjustified 
action to transfer the title of the land in favour of the owner, collect land tax 
and sanction the plan for construction of the compound wall even when the 
land owner had not fulfilled the condition prescribed by the Government in 
August 1998 facilitated restoration of the land notified for a public purpose to 
the land owner by subjugating public interest to private interest.  
Before issuing the preliminary notification (November 1988) for acquisition of 
4-11 acres of land in Sy.Nos.21/1 to 21/5 of Arakere village of Bangalore 
South taluk, BDA had issued (September 1988) an NOC to the land owner for 
construction of industrial buildings in Sy.No.21/1, 21/2 and 21/3.  The High 
Court, while considering the writ petition filed by the owners challenging the 
acquisition, directed (March 2002) the Government to consider the request of 
the owners for denotification of the land on merits. BDA resolved (March 
2005) to reject the request citing judgments of the Supreme Court as the 
possession of land had been taken in September 1996.  Earlier, BDA had 
inspected (December 2004) the land in question and found the land vacant and 
suitable for the formation of the layout.  
The PS submitted the file to the CM who ordered (February 2005) 
denotification of the land on the ground that the High Court had directed to 
consider the request of the owners. Thereafter, the file was referred to the Law 
Department for legal opinion. The Law Department, while observing that the 
High Court had directed the Government only to consider the request of the 
applicant, recommended (August 2005) against denotification of the land. On 
a perusal of another legal opinion given (November 2005) by the land owner’s 
advocate, the Law Department modified (February 2006) its opinion to the 
effect that notification dated 1 June 1998 under Sec 16(2), which had been 
published in the Gazette only on 18 March 1999 during the pendency of the 
court case, was defective.  On the basis of this modified legal opinion, the 
Government denotified (March 2006) 4-11 acres in these survey numbers 
subject to the condition that the land should be used only for industrial 
purposes, failing which BDA should resume acquisition proceedings. The 
7.5 JP Na gar IX Phase Layout

ReportNo.3of2012
54 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

modified legal opinion given by the Law Department glossed over several 
landmark judgments given by various Courts that recording of a panchanama
in the presence of witnesses would evidence the fact of taking possession of 
land and non-publication of notification under Sec 16(2) would not vitiate the 
acquisition proceedings. This inconsistent opinion of the Law Department 
facilitated denotification of the land.
Scrutiny of the Encumbrance Certificate obtained from the jurisdictional sub-
registrar and RTC for the land showed that the land owner sold the denotified 
lands in these survey numbers to two persons. The details of sale were as 
shown in Table-11:
Table-11: Details of land sold after denotification
Sy.No Date of 
denotification 
Date of 
transaction 
Extent 
(Acre-Gunta) 
Sale consideration 
 (` in lakh) 
21/2 
2.3.06 
21.3.2007 0-28 30.00 
21/5 15.3.2007 1-16 67.50 
21/3 20.12.2006 0-26 31.25 
21/4 20.12.2006 0-25 30.00 
21/1 26.7.2005 0-35 22.50 
(Source: Encumbrance Certificates obtained from the Sub-Registrar) 
In respect of Sy.No.21/1, the land had been sold even before denotification 
was approved by the Government.  Further, 3-35 acres of land in Sy.No.21/1 
to 21/4 were subsequently got converted (October 2010) for residential use as 
per the RTC for the years 2010-11 and 2011-12. Though the condition 
prescribed at the time of denotification that the denotified land should be used 
only for industrial purpose had been violated by the owner, BDA had not 
taken any action to resume the acquisition proceedings as ordered by the 
Government.  
In a joint representation (November 2009) to the CM, nine persons requested 
for denotification of 7-35½ acres of land in several survey numbers of 
Rachenahalli village. The status report obtained (March 2008) by the 
Government from BDA showed that the award had been passed and 
possession of the land handed over (June 2006) to the Engineering Section in 
respect of land measuring 2-16 acres in four (39/2B, 50/2, 50/4 and 55/1) 
survey numbers. 
However, the PS apprised (January 2010) the CM that barring the land 
measuring 1-30 acres in three survey numbers (39/2B, 50/2 and 50/4), the 
remaining land could be denotified as possession had not been taken.  The CM 
ordered (May 2010) to denotify the land without mentioning the survey 
numbers and the extent of land.  While submitting the draft declaration 
denotifying 7-35½ acres, the Joint Secretary sought (June 2010) specific 
7.6 Arkavath y Layout

ChapterͲ7

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 55

orders of the ACS 6 regarding the extent of land to be denotified as the CM’s 
order had not mentioned it.  However, the ACS approved (June 2010) the draft 
declaration without any remarks.  Accordingly, the Government issued (June 
2010) necessary orders denotifying 7-35½ acres of land including 2-16 acres 
in four survey numbers.  
The CM’s order was pursuant to the notings made by the PS that barring the 
land measuring 1-30 acres in three survey numbers, the remaining land could 
be denotified. When the CM ordered to denotify the land, the order evidently 
meant that the extent of land as proposed by the PS was to be denotified.  
Thus, the action of the ACS to denotify 7-35 acres instead of 6-05½ acres 
proposed by the PS was irregular.  Further, while BDA had reported that 
possession of 2-16 acres had been taken in four survey numbers, the PS 
mentioned in his notings that 1-30 acres had been taken possession of in only 
three survey numbers.  This lapse facilita ted unjustified denotification of 0-26 
acre in Sy.No.55/1. Further scrutiny showed that Government had withdrawn 
(May 2008) acquisition proceedings in respect of 43-09 acres of land in 
several survey numbers of Rachenahalli and Dasarahalli villages where award 
for the land had not been made.  Though owners of land in these four survey 
numbers had also requested (March 2008) for denotification on that occasion, 
their requests had not been considered as possession of lands had been taken.  
However, the lapses on the part of the Additional Chief Secretary led to 
irregular denotification of 2-16 acres of land, possession of which had been 
taken.
The final notification (October 1997) for acquisition of 183-08 acres for the 
formation of Gnanabharathi Layout included 5-30 acres and 1-16 acres in 
Sy.Nos.80/1 and 80/3 respectively of Valagerahalli village of Bangalore South 
taluk. Awards for these lands had been passed on 21 February 1998 and 31 
March 1998 respectively.
After eight years, the land owners jointly submitted (June-July 2006) a petition 
to the CM, seeking denotification of their lands as BDA had not formed the 
layout in the surrounding areas, adjoining lands in Sy.No.80/2 had been 
deleted already from acquisition, and the land in Sy.No.80/3 had already been 
got converted before the lands had been acquired by BDA.
In the status report submitted to the Government during August 2006, BDA 
had reported that the land belonged to BDA and notification under Sec 16(2) 
had not been published.  Thereafter, the Government decided (October 2006) 
to place the matter before the Den otification Committee.  Even before the 
matter could be placed before the Denotification Committee, an elected 


6  The Additional Chief Secretary was posted in place of the PS 
7.7 Gnanabharathi La yout

ReportNo.3of2012
56 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

representative requested (May 2007) the CM to denotify lands in Sy.Nos.80/1 
and 80/3 and the CM desired submission of the related file to him.  Though the 
PS apprised the CM of the status of the land as reported by BDA in October 
2006, the CM recorded (September 2007) in the file that notification under 
Sec 16(2) had not been published and the adjoining land in Sy.No.80/2 had 
been denotified already. Considering the applicant’s request sympathetically, 
the CM irregularly ordered denotification of 7-06 acres.  The reason adduced 
by the CM for the denotification was not valid as non-publication of 
notification under Sec 16(2) would not vitiate the acquisition proceedings as 
held by the Karnataka High Court.  
An elected representative had requested (November 2008 and October 2009) 
the CM for deletion of 4 acres of land in Sy.No.15 of Sulikere village, in 
respect of which preliminary notif ication had been issued by the Government 
in May 2008 for the formation of Nadaprabhu Kempegowda Layout.  He had 
requested for deletion on the ground that the land owner was his close relative, 
poor, exploited and belonged to a particular community.  Deletion of lands in 
the neighbouring Bheemanakoppa village from acquisition was cited as one of 
the grounds. When the Government directed (December 2008) BDA to submit 
the file, BDA informed (January 2009) the Government that the preliminary 
notification had been issued and the acquisition process was being finalized.
The CM ordered (June 2009) deletion of 4 acres from acquisition on the 
ground that only the preliminary notification had been issued. However, BDA 
issued (5 January 2010) an endorsement to the elected representative stating 
(December 2009) that the request for deletion of 4 acres would be reviewed as 
per the rules along with similar applications received from other land owners. 
Though BDA subsequently decided (January 2010) to delete this land from the 
final notification as per the directions of the Government, this land was 
inadvertently included in the final notification issued in February 2010.  
Subsequently, on the basis of BDA’s report that the said land had been 
erroneously included in the final notification, the Government issued another 
notification in April 2010 denotifying these four acres of land from the 
purview of acquisition. 
The CM had evidently ordered deletion of the land from acquisition on the 
basis of the recommendations of the elected representative that the land owner 
belonged to a particular community and was very poor.  However, scrutiny 
showed that the land owner had purchased these four acres of land in February 
2007 for a registered value of 
` 46.48 lakh.  The claim that the land owner was 
poor was evidently false.  Further, the land owner had not submitted any 
application requesting for deletion of his land. 
7.8 Nadaprabhu Kempegowda Layout 

ChapterͲ8

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 57



With a view to encouraging investment in housing projects by private and co-
operative sectors, the Government issued an order (November 1995) with the 
approval of the Cabinet.  In terms of this order, in cases where the acquisition 
proceedings in respect of the notified lands had not been completed and the 
land had not vested with BDA, the owner of the land was free to develop the 
land with the approval of the Government either for formation of sites or for 
group housing. While, in the case of group housing projects, the developer 
should relinquish 12 per cent  of the total built up area to BDA, in case of 
formation of sites, the developer should hand over 30 per cent  of the sites 
formed as per the approved plan.  In addition, the areas earmarked for parks 
and civic amenities and open spaces in the approved plan should be 
relinquished in favour of BDA as per the Zoning of Land Use and 
Regulations, BDA-1995.  Further, where the land owners undertook group 
housing projects, their proposals should include provision for the construction 
of Low Income Group (LIG), Middle Income Group (MIG-II) and High 
Income Group (HIG)-I & II houses and the number of LIG and MIG houses 
should not be less than 25 per cent of the total number of houses proposed to 
be built up.  However, the Government order of November 1995 had not 
prescribed any time frame for completion of the project by the developer. 
BDA had approved (September 2004) the composite project proposal received 
(February 2004) from a developer for implementing a group housing scheme 
over 28-05 acres of land and developing sites over another 12-06 acres of land 
in Kothnur and Raghuvanapalya villages of Bangalore South taluk.  The land 
sought to be developed had already been notified (October 1999) for 
acquisition by BDA which approved the project proposal in terms of 
Government order of November 1995.  The areas to be relinquished by the 
developer to BDA as per the Government order of November 1995 were as 
shown in Table-12:
Table-12 : Details of area to be relinquished by the developer to BDA 
Group housing Development of sites
Area proposed for development 28-05 acres 12-06 acres 
Area to be earmarked for parks, civic 
amenities 
3.06 lakh sq ft 2.38 lakh sq ft 
Developed area to be relinquished 12 per cent of the 
built-up area 
0.87 lakh sq ft  
(Source: Zoning of Land Use and Regulations, BDA-1995) 
8.1 Government order disregarded while entering into 
agreement with developer 

ReportNo.3of2012
58 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

Against this, the developer relinquished (September 2004) only 2.63 lakh sq ft 
towards parks and civic amenities and 2.56 lakh sq ft of the developed site 
area.  No built-up area in respect of the group housing scheme had been 
handed over.  However, BDA glossed over the huge shortfall in the area 
relinquished by the developer.
Further, the Authority had accorded (November 2004) sanction for the 
construction of multi-storeyed apartments, comprising 15 wings in four 
blocks, each wing consisting of basement, ground plus 14 floors and a separate 
building for Recreation Centre, consisting of ground plus 2 floors. BDA 
irregularly approved the development plan though there was no provision for 
construction of apartments for LIG and MIG
7 in the approved plan.  The 
carpet area of the flats as per the approved plan ranged from 1500 to 1950 sq 
ft.  Thus, the flats were designed to target only the HIG and did not cater to the 
needs of LIG and MIG, though prescribed in the Government Order of 
November 1995.
As the project had been implemented on lands notified for acquisition, these 
were to be withdrawn from the acquisition proceedings after fulfillment of the 
terms and conditions prescribed in the Government order of November 1995.  
The developer requested (June 2007) BDA to send proposals to the 
Government for denotifying 40-11 acres as 30 per cent of the land had been 
relinquished. BDA forwarded (August 2007) the proposal to the Government 
for denotification and the Government denotified 41-31 acres in September 
2007.  Further scrutiny of the case showed the following: 
¾ The work order issued (November 2004) by BDA to the developer 
failed to mention any time frame for completion of the project. It did 
not also mention that the developer was to hand over to BDA 12 per 
cent of the built up area and 30 per cent of the sital area in addition to 
parks and civic amenity sites. 
¾ Though the terms and conditions of Government order of November 
1995 had been violated by the developer resulting in substantial loss to 
BDA, these violations had not been reported to the Government by 
BDA at the time of sending proposals for denotification.  Against 6.31 
lakh sq ft of area to be relinquished, the developer had relinquished 
only 5.19 lakh sq ft.  In addition, BDA did not get 12 per cent of the 
built-up area of the apartment constructed.  
¾ Though the developer had relinquished 214 residential sites measuring 
255802.25 sq ft in April 2005,  BDA could take possession of only 146 
sites, as the area where the remaining 68 sites had been formed by the 
developer was under litigation; 


7Houses ranging from 600 sq ft to 1200 sq  ft are classified under MIG category, while 
houses with built up area of 500 sq ft fall under the definition of LIG category

ChapterͲ8

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 59

¾ At the time of according sanction to the layout plan, BDA had already 
developed 14-04 acres of land in Sy.No.5 and 9 of Raghuvanapalya 
village.  Though BDA had resolved (January 2003) to recover the cost 
of development from the developer after ascertaining the expenditure 
from the Engineering Section, details of recovery of the cost were not 
on record; and
¾ Mandatory Slum Cess at the rate of 
` 25000 per hectare aggregating    
` 4.18 lakh for 41-31 acres had also not been recovered from the 
developer.
Out of four blocks of apartments sanctioned, the construction of only one 
block had been completed so far (August 2012).  
Against 393 residential apartments sanctioned in each of the four blocks, the 
developer had constructed only 270 units in the block so far completed.   Thus, 
failure of BDA to enforce the conditions prescribed in Government order of 
November 1995 resulted in the developer relinquishing less than the required 
area and not handing over any built-up area.  The developer also made 
maximum use of the land by exploiting it for construction of multi-storeyed 
apartments designed to suit the needs of the HIG without making any 
provisions for LIG/MIG.  Further, as no time-frame had been prescribed by 
BDA for completion of the development scheme, the developer had staggered 
the development to make the best use of unprecedented growth of the real 
estate sector and the increasing demand for residential space in Bangalore.  
The Government denotified (December 1996) eight acres of land in 
Sy.No.19/1, 20/5 and 27/3 of Rupena Agrahara village in Bangalore South 
taluk in favour of a company for developing it in terms of Government order 
of November 1995. After a lapse of nine years, the company informed 
(November 2005) the CM that they were unable to form the layout as they had 
8.2 Unjustified concession extended to a developer 

ReportNo.3of2012
60 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

to incur huge expenditure on continuous litigation and requested for relaxation 
of the condition prescribed in the Government order of November 1995 that 
the developer should hand over 30 per cent  of the sites formed to BDA.  
Instead, the company offered to pay, in lieu of the sital area, 50 per cent of the 
prevailing rate at which BDA was allotting sites to the general public.
The Commissioner informed (January 2006) the Government that it could 
consider the request of the company subject to levy of auction price for 30 per
cent of the land, in addition to collection of betterment charges and charges for 
layout plan approval.  When the PS apprised the CM of the BDA’s proposal, 
the CM ordered (January 2006) that the condition stipulated earlier be 
withdrawn by collecting 200 per cent of the prevailing BDA allotment rate for 
30 per cent of the land, in addition to other charges/cess to which BDA was 
legally entitled. 
The PS recorded (March 2006) in the file that once the purpose of getting the 
land had been achieved, the company wanted to avoid the obligation of giving 
30 per cent of the sites to BDA.  The PS opined that the condition as per the 
Government order of November 1995 could not be relaxed and the request of 
the developer deserved to be rejected. The file with the observation of the PS 
was submitted to the new CM, who overruled the objection of the PS and 
ordered (March 2007) implementation of the orders of the previous CM and 
issue of necessary notification for collecting 200 per cent of the allotment rate 
for 30 per cent of the land.
Accordingly, the Government issued (May 2007) necessary orders relaxing the 
condition, as ordered by the CM.  BDA raised (May 2007) a demand on the 
company for 
` 2.24 crore, which was duly paid in May 2007.  Subsequently, 
the company, instead of submitting plans for a layout or a group housing 
scheme, submitted a development plan for a commercial complex with four 
basements, ground floor and five upper floors over an area of 24128.93 sqm 
(6-04½ acres) in Sy.No. 19/1 and 27/3 for approval. This was because the land 
was hugging the Outer Ring Road and the whole area had been classified as 
“Mutation Corridor” in the Revised Master Plan–2015 (approved in June 
2007) and the land use now permitted in this zone was commercial activity. 
Thus, while, on the one hand, the company profited from the relaxation given 
by the Government, it stood to gain, on the other hand, from the delay in 
developing the land during which the land use got changed from residential to 
commercial.  Further, in the case of development of a layout or a group 
housing project, the developer ought to earmark areas for parks, civic 
amenities and open spaces, restricting the area available for development to 55 
to 75 per cent.  However, in the case of commercial complexes, the developer 
enjoyed the advantage of constructing the building as per the bye-laws without 
earmarking any space for civic amenities, parks etc. Thus, the change in land 
use benefitted the company greatly  and the Government glossed over these 
advantages accruing to the company at the time of relaxing the conditions in 

ChapterͲ8

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 61

May 2007.  BDA approved (September 2008) the development plan of the 
company and the construction work was in progress (June 2012). 
Rules 20(1)(a) and 21 of the Karnataka Government (Transaction of Business) 
Rules, 1977 prescribe that all cases which require modification or alteration or 
revision of decisions already taken by the Cabinet should be brought before 
the Cabinet.  Relaxation/revision of any of the conditions already approved by 
the Cabinet would necessarily require consent of the Cabinet. However, when 
the Government relaxed the condition in favour of the company, the order was 
issued under the orders of the CM without placing the concession for Cabinet 
approval.
The proposal of BDA made to Government in January 2006 to recover auction 
rate from the company for 30 per cent  of the land was fully justified as 
evidenced by the fact that BDA had auctioned several sites in HSR Layout-
Sector VII on 11 June 2007, the period during which the concession had been 
extended to the company. The rate realized by BDA was in the range of            
` 39,000/sqm to ` 85,000/sqm.  The average of these rates worked out to         
` 52820/sqm against ` 4200/sqm recovered from the company at twice the 
allotment rate of ` 2100 per sqm.  Thus, against the potential revenue of           
` 51.30 crore, BDA realized only ` 2.24 crore for 30 per cent  of the land, 
resulting in a loss of revenue of ` 49.06 crore.  The loss would be much 
higher, if the benefits accruing from non-provision of space for parks, civic 
amenities etc., were also considered.
Further, even while reckoning the amount to be collected from the company, 
BDA had calculated the sital area at 30 per cent of 4-16 acres (being 55 per
cent of the total area), after excluding areas for civic amenities, parks etc.
However, what BDA glossed over was that the development plan submitted by 
the company was for construction of a commercial complex and there was no 
need for the company to earmark 45 per cent of the area for civic amenities, 
parks etc. and relinquish these areas to BDA. Thus, BDA ought to have 
calculated 30 per cent of the sital area on the entire eight acres and not just     

ReportNo.3of2012
62 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

4-16 acres. The irregular calculation resulted in short recovery of `1.83 crore 
from the company. 
The joint-inspection (June 2012) of the property by Audit and officers from 
BDA showed that the basement had been completed.  Thus, though the land 
was denotified during December 1996 for a group housing project/ residential 
layout, the company delayed its implementation as Government order of 
November 1995 had not prescribed any time for completion.  Instead of 
enforcing the conditions prescribed in the Government order of November 
1995, the conditions for development of the land were relaxed pursuant to the 
CM’s order which resulted in a loss of 
` 49.06 crore as above to BDA. 
Government denotified (October 1999) 2-20 acres of land in Sy.No.1/2 of 
Lottegollahalli village subject to the condition that land owner should develop 
this land as per Government Order of November 1995.   
Scrutiny showed that the owners had neither submitted any layout plan for 
BDA’s approval nor relinquished the sites to BDA.   BDA, on its part, failed 
to monitor the development of the area by the owner.  When Audit enquired 
about the status of the land, the Executive Engineer, North Division conducted 
(July 2012) a survey of the area which showed that the land owner had utilized 
the entire land for formation of sites, without earmarking any area for roads, 
parks, civic amenities etc.  He had formed 40 sites (dimensions not furnished) 
on the denotified area and utilized the roads already formed by BDA in the 
layout to provide access to the sites.  The photographs of the area taken by 
BDA showed that it had been fully built up. 
8.3 Sites not handed over to BDA after development 

ChapterͲ8

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 63

The cost of 12 sites (30 per cent) not relinquished by the owner in favour of 
BDA worked out to ` 16.31 crore8. Inaction on the part of the BDA to monitor 
the development of the land after denotif ication facilitated disposal of all the 
sites by the developer without BDA getting its share of sites valued at ` 16.31
crore and the areas required to be earmarked for parks, civic amenities etc.


8  As per the rates obtained in the auction conducted by BDA in the Layout in August 2007 

ReportNo.3of2012
64 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA


The High Level Committee of the Department of Commerce and Industries 
had sanctioned (September 2000) eight acres of land to a Company for setting 
up an IT project in Bangalore and the Government issued (March 2001) 
directions to the Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Board (KIADB) to 
acquire eight acres for the company.  However, the company requested 
(November 2000) KIADB to acquire 100 acres of land on consent basis as it 
proposed to set up a composite project housing IT park and residential area.  
Without referring the request of the company to Karnataka Udyog Mitra 
(KUM), the nodal agency for clearance of projects mooted by private 
entrepreneurs, especially in the context of the company seeking 100 acres 
against eight acres of land sanctioned by the High Level Committee, KIADB 
resolved (November 2000) to acquire 97-21½ acres of land on behalf of the 
company in Rachenahalli and Nagavara villages. KIADB acquired (August 
2002 to March 2003) 99-13 acres in these two villages and handed over these 
lands to the company between January 2003 and February 2007.
Meanwhile, in a meeting (December 2001) chaired by the CM, a decision had 
been taken to acquire a Biotech Park to be developed by the Company over 
130 acres of land.  This park was meant for the Department of IT/BT.  When 
BDA issued (February 2004) the final notification for acquisition of 2750 
acres of lands required for the Arkavathy Layout, the CM ordered (May 2004) 
deletion of 131-07 acres in three
9 villages from the final notification as the 
company’s proposal to set up an IT/BT park over this land had been approved 
in December 2001.  However, the Urban Development Department noticed  
(May 2004) that the Department of IT/BT had earlier requested (July 2003) 
BDA to delete only 50 acres of land from the acquisition process for the park 
to be set up by the company, while the CM ordered (May 2004) deletion of 
131-07 acres in three villages for the same purpose.  When the matter was 
referred to the Department of IT/BT, it clarified (June 2004) that the IT/BT 
project proposed to be established by the company on its behalf had been 
shelved and that it was planning to set up the park on its own on the land to be 
acquired by KIADB near the Electronics City.  


9  Dasarahalli, Nagavara and Rachenahalli 
9.1 Government denotified huge tracts of land to favour a 
company

ChapterͲ9

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 65

When the company’s request for denotification of 131 acres was placed before 
the Denotification Committee, the Committee took note (June 2004) of the 
views expressed by the Commissioner, BDA that these lands had been 
included in the final notification for the mega Arkavathy Layout and in case 
these lands were denotified, the project would be crippled and would also 
adversely affect the formation of the layout by BDA.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommended for rejection of the request of the company for 
denotification of the land.
The PS in the file submitted (January 2006) to the next CM observed that “If 
lands keep getting denotified, BDA will have no land for formation of sites.  If 
open lands of such extent are left out, it would be inequitous and unjust to 
insist on acquisition of lands belonging to small holders only.  Considering all 
these factors, the request for denotification should be rejected.” 
However, the CM noted that the plea of the company should be given due 
consideration as development of IT/BT sectors had been a thrust area of the 
Government as these sectors had brought international repute, enormous 
impetus to the State’s economy and also provided direct/indirect employment 
to several lakhs of Kannadigas. The CM ordered (January 2006) 
implementation of the orders passed by the previous CM in May 2004, by 
limiting the denotification to 60 acres.  BDA was directed to go ahead with the 
acquisition process in respect of the remaining lands. Accordingly, the 
Government denotified (May 2007) 60 acres of land in favour of the company 
in Rachenahalli village.  
Before denotifying 60 acres, the Government failed to consider the following: 
¾ KIADB had already acquired 99-13 acres to facilitate establishment of a 
IT/BT park by the company against eight acres approved by the High 
Level Committee. 
¾ In the project proposal submitted (July 2000) by the company to KUM for 
setting up a IT park, the company claimed to be in possession of 190 acres 
of land and requested for acquisition of only 5 acres by the KIADB to have 
direct access to its land from the ring road.  Against this, the High Level 
Committee approved acquisition of eight acres by KIADB.  The 99-13 
acres of land acquired by KIADB formed part of 190 acres claimed by the 
company to be in its possession.  Thus, while the KIADB had already 
acquired huge tracts of land for the company to set up the IT/BT park, 
denotification of another 60 acres in favour of the company for the same 
purpose was not justified. 
Thus, the denotification of 60 acres pursuant to the orders of CM was not 
based on merits.  As the justification for acquisition of land for the Arkavathy 
Project was the overwhelming public interest, denotification of 60 acres in 
favour of the company subjugated public interest to private interest.

ReportNo.3of2012
66 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

After 60 acres of land were denotified, the company filed (March 2008) an 
application with the KUM requesting for acquisition by KIADB of only 27-
22½ acres of land in Rachenahalli village for setting up a Special Economic 
Zone in Information Technology/Information Technology Enabled Services.   
Of these 27-22½ acres, 25-24½ acres  formed part of 60 acres denotified in 
May 2007.  Evidently, though 60 acres of land had been denotified to enable 
the company to set up the IT park, only 25-24½ acres were needed by the 
company and the remaining 34-15½ acres had been got denotified 
unnecessarily.
Meanwhile, several land owners represented (September 2007) to the CM 
requesting for denotification of lands belonging to them on the ground that 
similarly situated lands had been denotified in favour of the company during 
May 2007.  However, these representations had not been acted upon.  In 
March 2008, the land owners submitted a joint representation to His 
Excellency, the Governor of Karnataka, complaining that the Government had 
not acted upon their representations submitted in September 2007. On the 
basis of information furnished by BDA, the Government apprised the 
Governor that out of 48-39 acres for which requests for denotification had 
been received, award for 43-09 acres had not been passed and possession had 
also not been taken. However, the Denotification Committee rejected (May 
2008) the proposal for denotification as the lands sought to be denotified were 
very vast.  The file was then submitted (May 2008) to the Special Secretary to 
the Governor. 
The Governor recorded (May 2008) that since denotifying the land would help 
poor farmers, it was desirable to denotify in public interest 43-09 acres of land 
in respect of which award had not been passed and possession not taken.  On 
this ground, the Governor ordered (May 2008) that necessary orders to this 
effect be issued immediately.  In pursuance of these orders, the Government 
denotified (May 2008) 43-09 acres of land in different survey numbers of 
Rachenahalli and Dasarahalli villages.
Though denotification had been done in favour of the land owners, the 
company requested (June 2008) BDA to issue an NOC in its favour for these 
43-09 acres to proceed with the project execution without furnishing any 
details of the project.  The NOC issued (July 2008) by BDA in favour of the 
company proved in no uncertain terms that the company planned to utilise the 
denotified land for commercial purposes.  
Thus, the company was shown undue favour on three occasions.
¾ On the first occasion during August 2002 to March 2003, the company 
got 99-13 acres of lands acquired by KIADB for the IT park, against eight 
acres approved by the State High Level Committee.   

ChapterͲ9

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 67

¾ On the second occasion in May 2007, the company got 60 acres of land 
withdrawn from acquisition proceedings for the Arkavathy Layout for the 
same purpose.  Of these, the company proposed to use only  
25-24½ acres.
¾ On the third occasion in May 2008, though 43-09 acres had been 
denotified in favour of farmers, the company planned to utilise these 
lands for commercial purpose.

ReportNo.3of2012
68 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA


Though it has no power to withdraw acquisition proceedings once possession 
of land has been taken, the Government irregularly denotified land in the cases 
listed in Table-13. In six out of seven cases, denotification was done after 
possession of land had been taken.  In all these cases, Government irregularly 
denotified the land initially but subsequently cancelled its orders of 
denotification, without assigning any reason in three cases. 
Table-13 : Details of cases of irregular denotification of land subsequently 
cancelled
Sl.
No. Name of layout Name of 
village Sy.No Extent Date of final 
notification 
Date of taking 
possession
under Sec 
16(1) 
Date of 
Denotification 
under Sec 
48(1) 
Date of 
withdrawal of 
the
denotification 
order
1. BSK V Stage Halage 
vaderahalli
251 5-00 9.5.1994 26.6.2002 12.1.2010 4.11.2011 
2. Nadaprabhu 
Kempegowda  
Challaghatta 45/2 
48/1 
2-10 
2-33 
18.2.2010 Possession not 
taken
29.9.2010 19.10.2010 
3. RMV II Stage Mathikere 109 0-37 2.8.1978 15.4.1982 30.12.2009 20.10.2010 
4. BTM VI Stage Arakere 80/1 3-00 28. 7.1990 12.8.1994 22. 9.2010 13.6.2011 
5. Further 
Extension of 
Mahalakshmi 
layout 
J B Kaval 1 1-00 30.8.1979 8.7.1988 12.1.2010 8.2.2012 
6. Arkavathy Thanisandra 80/2B 3-16 23.2.2004 30.12.2004 29.9. 2010 19.10.2010 
81/3B 0-24 10.11.2004 
7. Nagarabhavi Nagarabhavi 78 5-13 16.8. 1985 27.6.1988 2.6. 2010 19.10.2010 
Total 24-13 
(Source: Information collected from the files of BDA and Secretariat) 
Scrutiny showed that the Urban Development Department had obtained legal 
opinion (March 2012) on the issue of cancellation of denotification orders.  
Relevant extract from the legal opinion is reproduced below:
“It is now a settled issue that legally once a denotification is issued, there 
cannot be a cancellation of the same and if BDA wants the land back, it has to 
start fresh proceedings for acquisition.”   
The Division Bench of the Hon’ble High Court of Karnataka had held in the 
case reported in ILR 2005 KAR 2539 (M/S Vijaya Leasing Ltd v/s State of 
Karnataka & others) that “once a denotification has been issued, it cannot be 
withdrawn by another notification and that if the Government or the acquiring 
body wants to withdraw the denotification, they will have to issue fresh 
preliminary notification and final notification to acquire the property…”.

ChapterͲ10

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 69

Thus, action of the Government in irregularly denotifying the lands in these 
cases in the first instance and later cancelling the denotification orders was 
legally invalid. Scrutiny of these cases showed the following. 
BDA had acquired (May 1994) 6-18 acres of land in Sy.No.251 of 
Halagevaderahalli village of Bangalore South taluk for the formation of 
Banashankari V Stage Layout.  Though award for the land had been approved 
in November 1997, BDA had not deposited the land compensation with the 
Court.  After a number of cases related to this property had been disposed of 
by the Court in favour of BDA, the possession of the land was handed over to 
the Engineering Section on 26 June 2002. 
BDA developed a residential layout on this land by incurring an expenditure 
of
` 30 lakh. The layout comprised 66 sites of various dimensions and a 12 
metre wide road on 5 acres of land in this survey number.  Though the sites 
were ready for allotment, BDA was unable to allot the sites, as the persons 
who purchased this land after issue of preliminary notification had filed a case 
before the Court, seeking permanent injunction. The City Civil Court initially 
granted (July 2008) an interim order of status-quo but subsequently modified 
(July 2008) its order directing BDA not to demolish the structures existing on 
a part of the land till further orders.  
In the intervening period, the purchasers of the land had submitted a 
representation to the CM during February 2004 seeking denotification of the 
land on the ground that they had purchased the land during 1991 with the 
primary objective of imparting free education to children belonging to poor 
families. 
On the directions of the CM, the Government sought (February 2004) a status 
report from BDA.  BDA reported (February 2004) that the possession of the 
land had been handed over to the Engineering Section on 26 June 2002,  the 
notified khatedar was different from the applicant and 10 ACC sheet houses, a 
borewell and 9 RCC buildings had existed on the land, besides tombs, a well 
and a pumphouse.  When the matter was placed before the Denotification 
Committee, it resolved (June 2004) to reject the request for denotification, as 
possession of land had been taken by BDA.  The file was referred to the CM 
on 9 August 2004 with the recommendation for rejecting the request and the 
file was returned to the Administrative Department without any remarks. 
Subsequent developments showed the following: 
Between June 2007 and October 2009, many elected representatives 
recommended to the CM for denotification of this land.  After obtaining a 
status report (February 2009) from the BDA, the PS submitted the file to the 
CM on 13 November 2009, informing about the status of the land, besides 
10.1 Banashankari V Stage Layout 

ReportNo.3of2012
70 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

recording that there was no info rmation on the publication of notification 
under Sec 16(2). However, the CM ordered (December 2009) denotification of 
the land as an exceptional case on humanitarian grounds as notification under 
Sec 16(2) had not been issued. 
Accordingly, the Government denotified (January 2010) 5 acres of land in 
Sy.No. 251 of Halagevaderahalli in favour of the land owner. After the 
denotification, the purchasers got these lands converted (July 2010) for non-
agricultural purpose on the basis of NOC for conversion issued by BDA (July 
2010).  Thereafter, they sold (October 2010) the land to different persons, who 
obtained khatha from the BBMP in their favour by paying prescribed 
betterment charges and property taxes. The purchasers also had got the 
building plan sanctioned and constructed an apartment, consisting of five 
floors in accordance with the sanctioned plan.
At the time of denotifying the lands in question, the cases filed by the 
petitioners seeking permanent injunction had been pending before the City 
Civil Court.  The Commissioner, BDA, therefore, requested (January and June 
2010) the Government to withdraw the denotification order in view of the fact 
that the status-quo order of the Court was in operation, the land had vested 
with BDA and a layout had already been formed incurring huge expenditure. 
The Commissioner also expressed apprehension that if the denotification order 
was not withdrawn, it would set a precedent and there were chances of other 
land owners also approaching the Government for denotification of their lands 
on similar grounds.   
Following this report, the Government withdrew (November 2011, the 
denotification order issued earlier.  BDA informed (November 2011) BBMP 
of the withdrawal of the denotification order and requested it to cancel 
immediately the khathas and building plans sanctioned in relation to this 
survey number. In response to these instructions, the Additional 
Commissioner, BBMP, cancelled (November 2011) all the khathas and 
building plans sanctioned earlier. 
Aggrieved by the withdrawal of denotification order and the subsequent 
developments, the purchasers of the land filed writ petitions before the High 
Court seeking quashing of the Government order cancelling the denotification. 
The High Court observed (December 2011) that no satisfactory explanation 
was forthcoming from the Government as to why the earlier decision of 
denotification was reversed at this stage.  The High Court quashed the 
Government notification of November 2011, cancelling the denotification 
order of January 2010. Though BDA obtained (January 2012) a legal opinion 
from an advocate of the High Court, which suggested filing of an appeal, BDA 
did not prefer any appeal, the reasons for which were not record.
The denotification of five acres of land was irregular as possession of land had 
been taken under Sec 16(1) and the Denotification Committee recommended 

ChapterͲ10

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 71

against it. The cancellation of the denotification order was also equally 
irregular as it lacked legal validity and the High Court quashed the cancelation 
order.
The purchasers of the land had sought denotification (February 2004) on the 
ground that they had purchased it with the primary objective of imparting free 
education to the children, belonging to poor families.  On the contrary, after 
getting the lands denotified, they sold (October 2010) the land to various 
persons at a time when the guidance value of the land was 
` 2500 per sq ft.  
Thus, the irregular denotification only helped the sale of the land notified for a 
public purpose by subjugating public interest to private interest.   
BDA had issued preliminary notification (21 May 2008) for acquiring 4814-15 
acres of land in 12 villages located in the Bangalore North and South taluks 
for the formation of Nadaprabhu Kempegowda layout.  The land included 2-
10 acres in Sy.No.45/2 belonging to one person and 2-33 acres of land 
belonging to another person in Sy.No.48/1 of Challaghatta village.
Three months before the issue of the preliminary notification, another person 
(purchaser) had entered into a sale agreement (10 February 2008) with the 
owners of these lands.  Subsequently , after the preliminary notification, the 
original owners represented (July 2008) to the Minister for Urban 
Development, Law and Parliamentary Affairs as well as the Commissioner, 
BDA seeking denotification of the land on the ground that their livelihood had 
been entirely dependent on the agricultural income from the land.  
Simultaneously, the husband of the purchaser, an elected representative, 
requested (June 2009) the Government to denotify 5-03 acres of land acquired 
in these survey numbers on the ground that the owners were known to him and 
had been enjoying the ancestral property for 40 to 50 years.  He further 
reported that there were several valuable trees like coconut, mango etc., an 
ancient temple, two bore wells and two houses on the land.
Survey of the land taken up (February 2010) by BDA at the instance of PS to 
the CM  showed that only a Honge tree and a Neem tree had existed in 
Sy.No.45/2 and there were trees (type and numbers not mentioned) in 
Sy.No.48/1.  BDA informed (March 2010) the Government of the position.  
Meanwhile, BDA issued the final notification (18 February 2010) which 
included the land in these two survey numbers.  On the same day, the elected 
representative addressed a letter to the CM and requested for denotification of 
the land on the ground that they had developed a garden, a nursery, besides 
constructing a building on the land and that they had been cultivating the land 
as members of the joint family.   
10.2 Nadaprabhu Kempegowda Layout 

ReportNo.3of2012
72 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

The CM ordered (September 2010) denotification of 5-03 acres of land and the 
Government issued (September 2010) n ecessary orders for denotification.  
However, within the next 20 days, the CM recalled the file and cancelled the 
denotification order, without assigning any reason. Accordingly, the 
Government withdrew (October 2010) the denotification order issued earlier.   
The subsequent representation (September 2011) of the elected representative 
requesting denotification of the land was not acted upon.  However, the 
purchaser got the property registered (1 December 2011) in her favour for        
` 2.54 crore, though the sale violated the provisions of the KLRT Act. The 
registering authority also overlooked the provisions of the  KLRT Act, which 
prohibited the registering authority from registering any land notified for 
public purpose without permission of the competent authority.   
BDA completed the acquisition process initiated for acquisition of 2-09 acres 
in Sy.No.109 of Mathikere village of Bangalore North Taluk for the formation 
of RMV II Stage Layout by gazetting the fact of taking possession of land 
under Sec 16(2) on 8 September 1983.  
Out of 2-09 acres acquired in this survey number, land measuring 1-16 acres 
belonged to a person. BDA had utilized only 0-19 acre for the road and the 
remaining 0-37 acre had remained unused. After the demise of the owner, his 
son submitted several representations since January 2001 to various Ministers, 
including the CM, seeking denotification of the unused land of 0-37 acre, 
stating that he had no other source for livelihood and had continued to be in 
possession of the unused land.  However, the representations had not been 
acted upon. 
Meanwhile, the legal heir irregularly sold (November 2004) 0-37 acre of land 
in favour of five persons.  Later, two of these five persons sold (August 2005) 
their share of land to an elected representative.  All these sale transactions 
violated the provisions of KLRT Act, 1991 and the registering authorities 
irregularly registered these sales. The building plan had also been got 
sanctioned by BBMP for developing the land. 
When BDA interfered (November 2007) with the possession of the land, the 
present owners of the land filed a suit before the Court of Additional City 
Civil Judge which granted (May 2008) a temporary injunction, restraining 
BDA from interfering with the possession of the property, pending disposal of 
the suit.  Scrutiny showed that the injunction had been given by the Court as 
BDA failed to produce the possession mahazar, survey sketch, details of 
compensation deposited in the Court etc.
The Principal Secretary to the CM requested (January 2009) the Urban 
Development Department to submit the related file, as per the orders of the 
CM.  The PS suggested that opinion of the Law Department be sought before 
10.3 RMV II Stage Layout 

ChapterͲ10

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 73

denotifying the land.  However, the CM irregularly denotified (December 
2009) the land, citing the Court order granting temporary injunction. 
Subsequently, the CM recalled (October 2010) the file and ordered (October 
2010) cancellation of the denotification order without assigning any reason. 
Thus, the initial denotification and its subseque nt withdrawal betrayed 
disregard of the provisions of the LA Act and KLRT Act. 
However, the present owners of the land challenged (January 2011) the 
cancellation before the High Court in a writ petition (781/2011).  It was 
contended in the writ petition that the cancellation of the denotification order 
had resulted from a letter dated 6 October 2010 written by the elected 
representative to the Governor of Karnataka expressing “No Confidence” in 
the CM.  The case had been pending before the Hon’ble High Court (May 
2012).
Further scrutiny showed that BDA had approved (February 2005) the modified 
development plan of a society.  In the approved plan, the area of 0-37 acre in 
Sy.No.109 of Mathikere village had been reserved for roads, civic amenities 
and park. BDA failed to clarify as to how the development of a private layout 
on land belonging to it had been approved by it.
In respect of 1-03 acres and 3-36 acres of land in Sy.Nos.79 and 80/1 
respectively of Arakere village acquired (July 1990) by BDA for the formation 
of BTM VI Stage Layout, notification under Sec 16(2) had been issued in 
October 1994 in respect of Sy.No.79 and in June 1994 in respect of 
Sy.No.80/1.  The request for denotification of these lands had been turned 
down by the Government/CMs on two occasions during July 2004 and May 
2010.
When the land owners requested (May 2010) the CM for denotification of 
lands for the third time, the PS submitted the related file to the CM 
emphasizing that it was not permissible under law to denotify the land, layout 
had been formed on the land and sites had also been allotted to the general 
public.  However, the CM recorded on the file that the applicants were in 
physical possession of the land, they had no other property and BDA had 
utilized only 0-36 acres out of 3-26 acres acquired in Sy.No.80/1 for road. The 
CM ordered (September 2010) denotification of three acres of land in 
Sy.No.80/1 on humanitarian grounds, as a special case, which was irregular 
BDA had earlier carved out 107 sites of 20’ x 30’ and 30’x40’ dimension over 
3 acres of land in Sy.No. 80/1 a nd allotted these sites to the general public 
during 1994-95.  BDA had also issued khata and executed absolute sale deeds 
in favour of several allottees.  The layout had also been handed over to BBMP 
for maintenance and the allottees had also obtained khata from BBMP.  BDA 
had also auctioned (September 2007) 12 corner sites formed in these survey 
10.4 BTM VI Stage Layout 

ReportNo.3of2012
74 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

numbers. In view of these developments, BDA requested (October 2010 and 
June 2011) the Government to withdraw the denotification order.  However, 
the Government did not act upon the request of BDA.
The allottees of these sites approached the High Court, seeking quashing of 
the denotification order.   The Government withdrew the denotification order 
on 13 June 2011 before the case came up for hearing on 14 June 2011. The 
High Court disposed of the writ petition on the ground that the relief sought by 
the petitioners had been granted. 
Thus, an irregular denotification order was cancelled by another equally 
irregular order and these two orders betrayed lack of regard for law governing 
acquisition.
The Government denotified (January 2010) an extent of one acre of land in 
Sy.No.117 (old Sy.No.1) of J.B.Kaval village of Bangalore North taluk.  This 
one acre of land had been notified by BDA in August 1979 and possession of 
this land was taken in July 1988.
Scrutiny showed that a person addressed a letter to the CM and also to the DC 
(Land Acquisition) on 1 October 2007 and 2 November 2007 respectively 
seeking information whether a layout had been formed on Sy.No.117 and 
whether notification under Sec 16(2) had been issued.  BDA informed 
(December 2007) the Government that the property in question comprised 12 
ACC sheds, a school and some portion of vacant land. After a lapse of 21 
months, the Government sought (October 2009) a status report of the same 
land from BDA, as the owner had requested the  CM for denotification of the 
land. Without verifying the current status of the land, the BDA reiterated 
(December 2009) the facts that had been already conveyed to the Government. 
On the basis of this information, the Government denotified (January 2010) 
one acre of land pursuant to the orders of the CM. 
However, the information furnished to the Government by the DC was 
factually incorrect.  The unauthorized structures existing on the land had been 
demolished under the orders of the Commissioner on 7 January 2006.  
Thereafter, a draft layout plan for formation of 19 sites on the said land was 
prepared by BDA and these sites were also approved for auctioning on 26 
March 2007.  BDA had also formed two roads of 30 feet width and 165 feet 
length on the said land.  As a suit filed by the land owners after demolition of 
the unauthorised structures had been pending before the Court, the auction 
process was stalled.  Thus, misrepresentation of  the facts by BDA facilitated 
the denotification. 
10.5 Further Extension of Mahalakshmi Layout 

ChapterͲ10

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 75

Meanwhile, an elected representative fi led a Public Interest Litigation 
(37938/2010) before the High Court alleging that the CM was instrumental in 
denotifying one acre of land in Sy.No.1 of J B Kaval in a fully developed 
layout and it was a clear case of land grabbing by land mafia with the 
connivance of the CM, as there was no school building.  When the case was 
posted for final hearing on 23 January 2012 before the High Court, the 
Government issued (February 2012) a notification withdrawing the 
denotification order.  The High Court disposed of (March 2012) the case as the 
relief sought by the petitioner had been granted.
Thus, incorrect reporting of the status of the land culminated in an irregular 
denotification which was cancelled through another order lacking legal 
validity.
Land notified (February 2004) by BDA for the formation of Arkavathy Layout 
included 3-16 acres and 0-24 acre in Sy.Nos.80/2B and 81/3B respectively of 
Thanisandra village. Award for these lands had been passed during 
September-October 2004 and possession of the land taken under Sec 16(1) 
was handed over in November and December 2004 to the Engineering Section 
for the layout formation. However, notification under 16(2) had not been 
published.
BDA had carved out 106 sites on these lands, besides utilizing a portion of the 
land in Sy.No.81/3B for constructing two roads as shown in Table-14:
Table-14 : Details of sites and roads formed 
Sy No 6 x 9 mtr 
sites 
9 x 12 mtr 
sites 
12 x 18 
mtr sites 
Odd dimension 
sites 
Civic
amenity sites Roads
80/2B 65 16 -- 18 1 -- 
81/3B -- -- 3 3 
-
Partly utilized for 
12 metre width 
road & 18 metre 
width  road 
Total 65 16 3 21 1
(Source: Information furnished by BDA) 
Of these, 89 sites had been registered in favour of the allottees as of August 
2012.  The land owners’ attempt to seek legal remedy did not fructify as the 
Court held the acquisition valid.  An individual requested (March 2008) the 
Governor of Karnataka to denotify the land in these two survey numbers on 
the ground that the land owners belonged to a very poor family and had no 
other property other than these lands. The matter was referred to the 
Government by the Governor’s Secretariat for further action.  The file with a 
brief on the status of land was submitted to the CM who returned (1 October 
2009) it without any orders. 
10.6 Arkavathy Layout 

ReportNo.3of2012
76 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

The land owners once again approached (August 2010) the CM for 
denotification on the ground that they intended to establish a hospital on the 
property.  The Minister for Municipal Administration and Public Undertaking 
also recommended (September 2010) to the CM for considering the request of 
the applicants.  After calling for the file concerned, the CM ordered 
(September 2010) denotification of land  measuring 4-00 acres in these survey 
numbers as a special case and on humanitarian grounds as BDA had not taken 
over possession of the land which was in the physical possession of the 
applicants.  The CM’s observation that land had not been taken possession 
was incorrect as the land had been taken possession in November 2004 and the 
layout had also been formed on the land.   
The Government then issued (September 2010) orders for denotification of 
four acres.  However, 20 days after denotification of the land, the Government 
issued (October 2010) another notification cancelling the denotification order 
on the basis of the orders of the CM.  Aggrieved by the cancellation of the 
denotification order, the land owners obtained a stay order from the High 
Court, stalling the cancellation of the denotification order.  The allottees of 
sites had also filed objections, seeking to vacate the interim stay order.  The 
case was pending before the Court (July 2012).
BDA had acquired 520-16 acres of land through a final notification (August 
1985) for the formation of “Nagarabhavi I Stage Layout.”  The land acquired 
included 10-08 acres in Sy.No.78 of Nagarabhavi village.  Notification under 
Sec 16(2) had been published in September 1991. 
The cases filed by the owner challenging the acquisition before several Courts 
had been dismissed. Even the Supreme Court (January 2009) dismissed the 
Civil Appeal filed by the owners. On an application made (September 2008) 
by a person, the CM ordered (October 2009) submission of the related file.  
Though the PS observed that several cases filed by the petitioner had been 
dismissed by the High Court and the Supreme Court and it was not possible to 
denotify the land, the CM recorded (October 2009) that he had come across 
several instances where land under similar circumstances had been denotified.     
Accordingly, the Government denotified (June 2010) 5-13 acres in Sy.No.78 
in favour of the khatedar.  However, the Commissioner, BDA requested (June 
2010) the Government to cancel the denotification order.  He reported that the 
petitioners had been unsuccessful in challenging the acquisition proceedings 
before the Supreme Court and the denotification would not only amount to 
contempt of Court, but would set a precedent for other erstwhile owners also 
to request for denotification of their lands. Thereafter, the Government 
withdrew (October 2010) the denotification order.
10.7 Nagarabhavi I Stage Layout 

ChapterͲ11

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 77



As per Sec 11 of the LA Act, 1894, the Deputy Collector shall make an award 
for the true area of the land, the compensation that should be allowed for the 
land and its apportionment among all the persons believed to be interested in 
the land.  Sec 11A further prescribes that the award shall be made within a 
period of two years from the date of publication of the declaration and if no 
award is made within that period, the entire proceedings for the acquisition of 
the land shall lapse.  The genesis of the power of the DC to pass an award is 
the existence of valid declaration under Sec 6 of the LA Act with respect to 
the land.  Once a valid declaration under Sec 6 has been made, the DC shall 
make an award for the land notified for acquisition.  The LA Act does not 
confer any powers on the DC to exclude any part of the notified land from the 
purview of the award.
Scrutiny showed that LAOs/DCs of BDA had so far excluded 91-35½ acres of 
notified land in 94 cases while making the award for lands notified for 
acquisition.  BDA did not furnish the details of the periods during which these 
lands had been excluded from the award.  However, the broad reasons 
adduced by BDA for excluding these lands from the purview of the award 
were:
¾ Residential houses had been constructed before the issue of 
preliminary notification;  
¾ The notified area had been built up; 
¾ Existence of temple, revenue sites, swimming pool etc;
¾ The land owner agreed to part with the land free of cost for formation 
of road;
¾ Entire area was not required for layout formation; 
¾ Land adjacent to village and built up; 
¾ Exclusion as per the orders of the Commissioner/Deputy 
Commissioner; and  
¾ Land acquired in excess of the requirement 
These reasons were not tenable as Sec 6(1) of the LA Act envisages that the 
Government has to be satisfied that a particular land is needed for a public 
purpose and this satisfaction has to be made only after having considered and 
applied its mind to the report submitted by the DC under Sec 5(a) which 
provides for hearing of objections to the acqu isition proceedings by the DC.  
In all these 94 cases, the objection of th e land owners had been heard before 
issue of the final notification and land had been notified for acquisition only 
11.1 Exclusion of the notified area from the purview of the 
award 

ReportNo.3of2012
78 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

after the LAOs/DCs satisfied themselves that the land was fit for acquisition. 
The developments cited by the BDA evidently occurred subsequent to the 
final notification and were unauthorised and illegal.  The exclusion of these 
lands from the purview of the award by the LAOs was unauthorised as the 
LAOs/DCs had no power to exclude these lands from the purview of the 
award.  Further, possession of the lands had not been taken by BDA in these 
cases as awards had not been passed.   As the final notification had been done 
in the public interest in these cases, a reversal of that process by excluding the 
notified area from the purview of the award signified that the LAOs/DCs who 
had directed it subverted public interest by subjugating it to personal interest.
In 63 cases, BDA, instead of paying compensation for the entire area covered 
by the award, had restricted the payment to a reduced area.  BDA did not 
furnish the information about the period to which these cases related.  The area 
excluded from payment of compensation in these 63 cases aggregated 16-20 
acres.  As per Sec 31 of the LA Act, the Deputy Commissioner, upon making 
of the award, is bound to tender payment of compensation to the persons 
interested and entitled to receive the same under the award.  Where he is 
unable to do so due to any of the contingencies referred to in Sec 31(2), the 
DC is required to deposit the amount of compensation in the Court.  
Withholding the payment of compensation after passing of award lacked 
lawful justification.  On the ground of non-payment of compensation, BDA 
had not taken possession of these lands which did not, therefore, vest with 
BDA.  Thus, the land owners in these cases continued to enjoy possession of 
the land for which award had been passed.
The ACS, Urban Development Department informed (July 2011) the 
Commissioner that it had come to the notice of the Government that BDA had, 
in several cases, passed award only for a partial area though there were no 
provisions in the LA Act to restrict the award to a lesser extent.  He directed 
that all cases where restricted awards had been passed during the past 10 years 
be identified, including the officers under whose orders the award had been 
restricted and the matter be placed before the ensuing meeting of the BDA. 
Pursuant to this direction, BDA resolved (October 2011) to: 
¾ take immediate action to pass awards in respect of 94 cases involving 
91-35½ acres; and 
¾ take physical possession of 16-20 acres where payment of 
compensation had been made for a reduced area. 
However, BDA had not taken any action in this regard (July 2012). 
11.2 Payment of compensation not made for the entire area 
covered by the award 

ChapterͲ12

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 79



The legal framework for collection of betterment tax as provided by the BDA 
Act, 1971 is as follows: 
Sec 17: The preliminary notification, besides stating the fact of a scheme 
having been made and the limits of the area comprised therein, 
should contain a statement specifying the land in regard to which a 
betterment tax may be levied.  Notices should be served within 30 
days after publication of the preliminary notification, on every 
interested person in regard to any building or land in regard to 
which betterment tax is proposed to be collected. 
Sec 20: Where, as a consequence of execution of any development scheme, 
the market value of any land in the area comprised in the scheme 
which is not required for the execution thereof has, in the opinion of 
the BDA, increased or will increase, the BDA shall be entitled to 
levy a betterment tax calculated at one-third  of the increase in value 
of the land. 
Sec 21: Where, in the opinion of the BDA, a development scheme is 
sufficiently advanced to enable the amount of betterment tax to be 
determined, BDA shall, by notification, declare that the execution of 
the scheme shall be deemed to have been completed and shall, 
thereupon, give notice to every interested person on whom a notice 
had been served under Sec 17 that BDA proposes to assess the 
amount of betterment tax payable.  BDA shall then assess the 
amount of betterment tax payable by each person after giving an 
opportunity of being heard.
 Where the assessment made by the BDA is not accepted, BDA shall 
make a reference to the District Court for determining the 
betterment tax payable. 
As per the information furnished to Audit, BDA had collected betterment tax 
in 84 cases involving 162-07 acres of land during the last 10 years. The 
betterment tax collected in these cases and the period during which these had 
been collected were not furnished to Audit.  Though betterment tax was to be 
collected as per the prescribed procedure only in respect of land specifically 
12.2 Notified land deleted from the award after collecting 
betterment tax 
12.1 Le gal framework for collection of betterment tax 

ReportNo.3of2012
80 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

notified for this purpose under Sec 17 of the BDA Act, 1971, BDA had 
irregularly collected betterment tax in respect of land notified for final 
acquisition under Sec 19 of the BDA Act, 1971, and on that ground, excluded 
such lands from the purview of acquisition.  Scrutiny showed that 162-07 
acres included in the final notification for acquisition had been deleted from 
the purview of the award by the Commissioner, after collecting betterment tax 
without the approval of the BDA, as shown in Table-15:
Table-15: Details of land deleted from the purview of the award 
Sl. No. Name of the Layout Extent of land deleted from the purview 
of the award  (In acres and guntas) 
1. Anjanapura township 72-30 
2. Further Extension of 
Banashankari VI Stage 
38-25 
3. Further Extension of Sir 
M Vishweswaraiah 
Layout 
11-23 
4. Banashankari VI Stage 
Layout 
15-38 
5. Further Extension of 
Anjanapura Layout 
23-11 
Total 162-07 
(Source: Information furnished by BDA) 
Though declaration under Sec 19 of the BDA Act, 1976 had been done in 
respect of these lands in public interest, the Commissioner of BDA interfered 
with the acquisition process, evidently on extraneous considerations and 
reversed it by collecting betterment tax. Other irregularities noticed in the levy 
of betterment tax were as follows: 
¾ Except in the case of Anjanapura Township, the notification under Sec 17 
of the BDA Act, 1976 did not contain a statement showing the land in 
respect of which betterment tax was proposed to be levied.  In respect of 
two layouts (Sl.No.3 and 5 in Table-15), separate notifications under Sec 
17 proposing to levy betterment tax had been subsequently issued only in 
respect of lands included in the preliminary notification but excluded 
from the final notification.   However, in these two cases, other lands in 
the vicinity, the market value of which was bound to increase due to 
execution of the development scheme, had not been included in the 
separate notifications. 
¾ Though betterment tax was to be calculated at 1/3
rd of the increase in the 
value of land on substantial completion of a scheme as per Sec 20 of the 
BDA Act, BDA collected betterment tax at rates ranging from 
` 30 to          
` 40 per sq ft on the basis of the tentative cost of development of the 
layout.

ChapterͲ12

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 81

¾ No notices had been served on interested persons as required under Sec 
21 of the BDA Act, 1976. 
However, after collecting the betterment tax and issuing NOC, BDA had 
informed (April 2006) the land owners that it had no authority to collect 
betterment tax and directed them to take back the betterment tax paid by them.  
BDA had also informed them that it would proceed with the acquisition.
Several persons filed writ petitions during 2006 before the High Court 
challenging the validity of the betterment tax levied for five layouts and its 
subsequent withdrawal by BDA. 
While disposing of the (February 2010) writ petitions, the High Court held 
that the decision of the BDA to collect betterment tax at 
` 30 or 40 per sq ft 
was without authority of law.  Quashing the resolutions passed by BDA fixing 
the rates of betterment tax, the High Court directed BDA to initiate 
appropriate proceedings under the BDA Act for levy of betterment tax in 
respect of lands which had been given up on the ground that these were not 
necessary while implementing the scheme.  The High Court further directed 
that the amounts paid by the petitioners and similarly placed persons were to 
be held by BDA and adjusted towards betterment tax leviable after following 
the due procedure.
Thus, the action of the Commissioner in reversing the acquisition proceedings 
in respect of 162-07 acres of land by irregularly collecting betterment tax at an 
arbitrary rate was irregular.  As BDA had collected betterment tax on the 
ground that the lands had not been required for implementing the schemes, it 
remained doubtful whether BDA could resume acquisition proceedings in 
respect of  these 162-07 acres. The issue had remained unresolved as of July 
2012.

ReportNo.3of2012
82 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA


During 2007-12, the Government had denotified 305-37 acres of land after 
passing awards under Sec 11 of the LA Act. In these cases, BDA had not 
verified before denotification, whether land compensation had been paid to the 
entitled persons either by the LAOs or by the Court.  It was seen from the 
sampled status reports sent by BDA to the Government before denotification 
that the status of compensation, whether paid or not paid, had not been 
brought to the notice of the Government, which also failed to enquire about it 
before denotifying the land.  BDA had failed to take action, wherever 
necessary, to recover the compensation already paid or to seek refund of 
money deposited with the Court for disbursing compensation.  In the process, 
compensation had not been refunded in any of the cases denotified by the 
Government during 2007-12.   
The possibility of land compensation in these cases having been disbursed by 
either BDA or the Court cannot, therefore, be ruled out.  In the absence of any 
watch register for payment of land compensation, Audit could not assess the 
land compensation paid, if any, in respect of 305-37 acres of land denotified 
by the Government. 
Though lands in many sampled cases had been developed by BDA before 
these were denotified by the Government, BDA did not recover the cost of 
development from the persons in whose favour the land had been denotified.  
In the status reports sent to Government in cases relating to denotification, 
BDA failed to touch upon this issue.  The Government also failed to examine 
this issue before denotifying the land. As a result, in none of the cases where 
developed land had been denotified, the development cost had been recovered.  
BDA did not furnish information on the developmental expenditure incurred 
by BDA on developing lands which were subsequently denotified.
The CAO drew cheques either in favour of the khatedars or the Principal City 
Civil Judge, City Civil Court, as the case may be, on the basis of the bills 
13.3 Payment of land compensation through court not 
monitored
13.2 Development cost not recovered from persons in 
whose favour land had been denotified 
13.1 Payment of compensation not verified before 
denotification of land 

ChapterͲ13

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 83

prepared by the LAOs and sent these cheques to the LAOs for issue.  While 
the LAOs entered the details of the cheques in the land acquisition files 
concerned, they did not maintain any control register to keep track of progress 
in disbursement of compensation, especially in cases where funds had been 
deposited with the Court.  The Finance and Accounts Wing and the Law 
Section also did not have information on the utilization of funds placed at the 
disposal of the Court. 
Scrutiny of the General Ledger showed that BDA had drawn cheques for         
` 10.32 crore during 2007-11 in favour of the Principal City Civil Judge, City 
Civil Court, Bangalore, as shown in Table-16:
Table-16:  Details of amounts deposited with the Court during 2007-11 
Year Amount (` in crore) 
2007-08 3.62 
2008-09 2.65 
2009-10 2.22 
2010-11 1.83 
Total 10.32
Details of compensation disbursed against the deposit of ` 10.32 crore were 
however, not available with the LAOs/Finance and Accounts Wing/Law 
Section.  Though BDA had made an attempt during 2008-09 to reconcile the 
funds deposited with the Court, it failed to take it forward subsequently.  Thus, 
BDA failed to monitor the disbursement of compensation against funds 
deposited with the Court. 
Scrutiny showed that though the advocate representing BDA informed 
(September 2011) the Law Officer that the Court had ordered refund of the 
excess amount of  
` 2.40 crore deposited by BDA in 13 cases, BDA had not 
taken any action to obtain refund from the City Civil Court (July 2012).  
Scrutiny of the Civil Deposit Register and the Register of Lapsed Deposits 
maintained at the City Civil Court, Bangalore for the period 2007-11 further 
showed that the  Court had credited to Government account 
` 1.42 crore 
during March 2007 to March 2011 as miscellaneous revenue.  This amount 
represented residuary balances of deposits made by BDA with the Court for 
disbursing compensation, which had remained unclaimed by BDA for more 
than three years, after these became due for refund.  BDA’s failure to monitor 
the payment of compensation by the Court and seek timely refund of the 
unpaid balances of deposits from the Court resulted in remittance of BDA’s 
funds to the Government account. 

ReportNo.3of2012
84 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA

In cases where the Court passed a decree awarding higher compensation in 
land acquisition cases referred to under Sec 30 and 31 of the LA Act and 
where BDA failed to execute the decree within prescribed time frame, the land 
owners filed Execution Petitions, whereupon the Court issued orders to the 
Canara Bank to attach specified sums  of money out of the cash balances of 
BDA for payment to the decree holders.  The Canara Bank had forwarded 
Demand Drafts for 
` 52.46 crore in 666 cases, (December 2004 to March 
2012) in favour of the Principal Judge/Additional City Civil Judge, by debiting 
the amount to BDA’s account.  Information prior to December 2004 was not 
available with BDA. 
In a note submitted to the Commissioner during April 2008, the FM observed 
that in cases where enhanced land compensation had been awarded by the 
Court, the LAOs had not promptly processed the orders received from the 
Court and only a few cases had been processed and sent to the Finance and 
Accounts Wing.  It was further observed that the delay in payment of 
enhanced compensation, besides resulting in financial loss to the BDA in the 
form of interest payable, led to filing of Execution Petitions by the land 
owners before the Court, resulting in attachment of the balances in the bank 
account of BDA.  The FM highlighted that as the amount demanded in the 
case of Execution Petitions had been worked out by the land owners’ 
advocates, chances of excess payments could not be ruled out.  The 
Commissioner also reiterated (March 2009) the views of the FM and warned 
the DC that personal responsibility would be fixed for any financial loss 
caused to BDA due to delay in payment of enhanced compensation awarded 
by the Court. 
Despite these instructions, 
` 36.81 crore out of ` 52.46 crore had been debited 
to the BDA’s bank account pursuant to the Court attachment orders during 
May 2008 to March 2012.  This evidenced that payment of enhanced 
compensation had not been made in time even after specific instructions from 
the Commissioner/FM. Though huge amounts had been frequently debited to 
BDA’s account by the bank, the Land Acquisition Section had not maintained 
any record for these payments.  The land compensation debited to the bank 
account in execution cases came to light only at the time of monthly 
reconciliation of bank balances with those as per the cash book.  BDA had not 
taken any action to verify the accuracy of land compensation payments made 
in these cases and fix responsibility for financial loss, if any. 
13.4 Court attached the funds of BDA due to delay in 
payment of enhanced compensation 

ChapterͲ13

PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 85

Till 2006-07, the compensation payable as per the award passed by the LAOs 
had been transferred to the Revenue Deposit (RD) account of BDA, where it 
had been retained for three months. If the entitled persons did not come 
forward to receive the compensation, this amount was transferred from the RD 
account and deposited with the Court. 
A review of the RD Register and annual accounts of BDA showed that as at 
the end of March 2012, a sum of 
` 3.81crore had been parked in the RD 
account.  These amounts had been transferred to the RD account during the 
period October 1996 to December 2006.  Evidently, the land compensation to 
the extent of 
` 3.81 crore had neither been disbursed to the entitled persons nor 
deposited with the Court for periods ranging from six to 16 years.
13.5 Irregular retention of land compensation in the 
Revenue Deposit account of BDA  

ReportNo.3of2012
86 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA


Audit scrutiny showed that against 34527-17 acres of land notified for 
acquisition during the period from June 1948 to February 2010 for the 
formation of 54 layouts ( Appendix-1), the possession of only 19049-02 acres 
(44 per cent) had been taken (April 2012).  As possession of the land is to be 
taken after passing the award within two years from the date of final 
notification, the inordinate delay in taking possession was not justified. 
Possession of lands notified in June 1948 for the first layout viz., Further 
Extension of  Jayanagar IX Block had not been taken in full even as of April 
2012.
Since development of the scheme is possible only when the requisite land is 
available, failure to take possession of the notified land resulted in only partial 
development of the layouts by BDA.  In this context, provisions of Sec 27 of 
the BDA Act assumes significance. According to this Section, BDA is to 
substantially complete the scheme within a period of 5 years from the date of 
publication of final notification, failing which the scheme is liable to lapse.  It 
was seen that only in 20 out of 54 layouts, 75 per cent of the notified land had 
been taken possession of.  In other layouts, the extent of land not taken 
possession of ranged from 26 to 100 per cent.  BDA stated (September 2012) 
that many constructions had come up on the notified lands subsequent to the 
issue of preliminary notification and unscrupulous local people with the 
support of anti-social elements had formed revenue layouts on the lands and 
sold sites to various persons.  These persons had approached Civil Courts and 
obtained injunctions against BDA.  In view of these reasons, BDA was unable 
to take possession of the notified land.  The reply was not acceptable as after 
the land is notified for a public purpose, no person can legally develop the 
land or transfer it by way of sale, mortgage, gift etc.  The poor oversight of the 
lands notified for public purpose facilitated and encouraged development of 
the notified area unauthorisedly and this created scope for litigation.  Further, 
though the KLRT Act prohibits the registering authorities from registering the 
land notified for public purpose in favour of any person, the registering 
authorities disregarded these provisions and registered the notified land in 
many cases (as discussed in the previous chapters).  This also created scope 
for litigation in respect of the notified land. 
Thus, poor enforcement of the legal provisions and poor oversight of the 
notified land created scope for uncontrolled and unauthorized development of 
the notified land.  Further, huge shortfall in taking possession of the notified 
land also created scope for denotification of the land notified for public 
purpose.
14.1 Huge shortfall in taking possession of land notified 
for public purpose 

PART-II

ChapterͲ15
Performance Audit on  
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA 89
The BDA (Allotment of Sites) Rules, 1984 define a stray site as a site which 
was once allotted but subsequently the allotment was either cancelled by BDA 
or surrendered by the allottee, or a site which has been formed on account of 
readjustment in the plan, subsequent to the issue of notification inviting 
applications for allotment of sites.    
Further, BDA is to dispose of the stray sites in accordance with the guidelines 
issued by the Government. As per the Government guidelines (August 1997), 
the stray sites should be reserved for allotment under various categories at the 
percentages shown in Table-17:
Table-17: Reservation of sites under various categories 
Sl.
No. Category Description Percentage
1. A Disposal by auction 30 
2. B Persons who have won special recognition in the field of 
sports at international /national levels – persons of 
Karnataka domicile. 
15 
3. C Persons who have won special recognition in the field of 
Arts, Science, Literature, Education, Medicine and Public 
Administration at the national/ international levels. 
10 
4. D Ex-Military personnel, military personnel, persons of 
Karnataka domicile. 
5
5. E Freedom fighters who are residents of Bangalore for a 
period of not less than 10 years. 
5
6. F Dependents of Karnataka Government servants when the 
latter die during the performance of their duties 
5
7. G Persons in public life as may be directed by Government. 30 
TOTAL 100 
The stray sites in respect of categories A to F are to be allotted by a 
Committee consisting of the Chairman, Commissioner, Commissioner/BBMP 
and two other members of BDA. The allotment is subject to the final approval 
of the Authority.  The Government on its own issued orders of allotment of 
stray sites under ‘G’ Category and BDA implemented these orders. 
During the period 2007-2011, the Authority had allotted 438 sites only under 
‘G’ Category. Sites under other categories had not been allotted during this 
period.  The allotment of ‘G’ Category sites was also stopped on the basis of a 
judgement (December 2010) in which the High Court had held that the State 
Government had no power or authority under the BDA Act, 1976 and the 
BDA (Allotment of Sites) Rules, 1984 to direct the BDA to allot sites to any 
person under ‘G’ Category as per circular No.UDD.129.MNJ dated 6 August 
1997.

ReportNo.3of2012
90 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA
Irregularities noticed in the allotment of stray sites under “G” Category are 
discussed below:
According to the Government guidelines of August 1997, the list of stray sites 
available should be compiled by the Secretary, layout-wise and dimension-
wise, and got approved by the Authority, at least once a year. 
However, BDA had not prepared the list of stray sites during 2007-12. Audit 
could not, therefore, determine whether 438 sites allotted under ‘G’ Category 
during 2007-11 satisfied the definition of stray sites.
During the period 2007-11, BDA had allotted 438 sites under “G” Category on 
the directions of the Government. As the list of stray sites had not been 
prepared by BDA, the proportion of the sites allotted under ‘G’ Category to 
the total number of stray sites available was not ascertainable.  By failing to 
prepare the list of stray sites every year, BDA evidently disregarded the 
Government guidelines which prescribed a cap of 30 per cent on allotments 
under ‘G’ Category.  Audit could not verify whether the sites allotted under 
‘G’ Category had exceeded this cap. 
The year-wise allotment of sites under ‘G’ Category to various groups of 
persons were as given in Table-18:
Table-18: Year-wise allotment of sites under ‘G’ Category 
Year 
Number of sites allotted to various groups 
Total MLA/MLC
(percentage) 
MP 
(percentage) 
Ministers 
(percentage) 
Artists 
(percentage) 
Sports 
persons 
(percentage) 
Others 
(percentage) 
2007 39(18) 3(1) NIL 2(1) 1(1) 172(79) 217 
2008 NIL NIL NIL 2(17) NIL 10(83) 12 
2009 83(65) 8(6) 10(8) 2(2) NIL 24(19) 127 
2010 11(18) NIL 1(2) 1(2) NIL 47(78) 60 
2011 11(50) 1(5) NIL NIL NIL 10(45) 22 
Total 144(33) 12(3) 11(3) 7(1)       11 263(60) 438 
(Source: Information furnished by BDA) 
1   Negligible  
15.3 Allotment of ‘G’ Category sites to ineligible persons 
15.2 Allotments not made in accordance with the rules 
15.1 List of stray sites not prepared 

ChapterͲ15
Performance Audit on  
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA 91
Sixty per cent  of the allottees under ‘G’ Category were other than MLAs/ 
MLCs/MPs/Ministers/Artists or sports persons.  As the  allotment under "G" 
category was to be made only for persons in public life, the allottees should 
have proven record in public life. In respect of 263 allottees under the group 
‘Others’, BDA was in possession of the background information of only 28 
allottees. Of these, 12 were Government officials, two house wives, four 
agriculturists, three businessmen, two private employees, one seer, one social 
worker, one doctor, one waiter and one professor. In all the cases of allotments 
under ‘G’ Category, BDA allotted the sites on the basis of Government orders 
and did not, therefore, have any opportunity to determine the merits of 
allotments. 
The BDA ( Allotment of Sites) Rules, 1984 prescribe that no person  who or 
any dependent member of whose family, owns a site or a house, or has been 
allotted a site or a house by the BDA, or a co-operative society registered 
under the Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act, 1959 or any other such 
Authority within the Bangalore Metropolitan Area,  or has been allotted a site 
or a house in any other part in the State by any other Urban Development 
Authority or the Karnataka Housing Board or such agency of the Government, 
shall be eligible to apply for allotment of a site. While applying for allotment 
of a site, the allottees are to submit a declaration to this effect duly signed and 
attested by a notary. 
Scrutiny of the sampled allotments under “G” Category during the period 
2007-2011 showed that 10 applicants had declared that they or their 
dependents had their own houses and/or sites.  Nevertheless, sites under ‘G’ 
Category had been allotted to them. The details are shown in Table-19:
Table-19: ‘G’ Category sites allotted to those who owned houses/sites 
Sl. No. Site No Layout Dimension of site 
 (in feet) 
Year of 
allotment 
1 315 HBR I Stage, V Block 40x60 2007 
2 306 HBR I Stage, V Block 40x60 2007 
3 991 BTM IV Stage, II Block 30x40 2007 
4 1214 BTM IV Stage, II Block 30x40 2007 
5 1081 BTM IV Stage, II Block 30x40 2007 
6 1229/L  BTM IV Stage, II Block 30x40 2008 
7 17/Q HSR Sec-III 50x80 2009 
8 945 BSK VI / X Block 50x80 2009 
9 413/C HSR Sec-VI 50x80 2009 
10 831 J P Nagar VIII Phase, I Block 30x40 2010 
(Source: Information furnished by BDA) 
15.4 Sites allotted to those having own houses and/or 
sites

ReportNo.3of2012
92 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA
These allotments were, prima facie, irregular.  If these sites had been disposed 
of through public auction, BDA would have earned an additional revenue of  
` 9.84 crore2.
The BDA (Disposal of Corner Sites and Commercial Sites) Rules, 1984 
prescribe that whenever the Authority has formed an extension of layout in 
pursuance of any scheme, the Authority may, subject to the general or special 
orders of the Government, dispose of any or all the corner sites
3 or commercial 
sites4 in such extension or layout by auction.
Scrutiny showed that four corner sites and 22 commercial sites had been 
irregularly allotted under ‘G’ Category during 2007-11 in violation of the 
Rules.  BDA stated (September 2012) that as the Correct Dimension Reports 
(CDRs) furnished by the Engineering Divisions had not identified these sites 
as corner or commercial sites, allotments had been made under ‘G’ Category. 
The reply was not acceptable as these sites, as per the approved layout plans, 
were either corner sites or commercial sites which should have been disposed 
of only through auction. The Engineering Divisions should have referred to 
the approved plans before preparing CDRs.  Failure to do so resulted in a loss 
of
` 23.67 crore5 to BDA.
The High Court in its judgment dated 15 December 2010 had held that “the 
State Government has no power or authority under the provisions of the BDA 
Act, 1976 and the Rules made thereunder to direct the BDA to allot the sites to 
any person/ persons under “G” category as per the Circular No.UDD 129 MNJ 
dated 6-8-1997”.
Scrutiny showed that BDA allotted 22 sites of various dimensions under ‘G’ 
Category in 2011, long after the judgment had been delivered in December 
2010.  BDA stated (September 2012) that as the Government had allotted 
these sites prior to the date of judge ment, allotment letters were issued by 
2 Based on the highest bids received for auction of sites in the same layouts.
3 A corner site is defined as a site at the junction of two roads having more than one side of 
the site facing the roads. 
4  A commercial site is defined as any site formed for locating a commercial enterprise or 
undertaking.  The Revised Ma ster Plan 2015 prescribes that a site with an area of more 
than 240 sqm and abutting a road of more than 18 metre wide can be used for commercial 
purposes.
5 Based on the highest bids received for auction of sites in the same layouts.
15.6 Allotment of sites under ‘G’ Category disregarding 
the High Court judgment  
15.5 Allotment of corner and commercial sites under “G” 
category

ChapterͲ15
Performance Audit on  
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA 93
BDA after the judgement.  The reply was not acceptable as BDA failed to 
refer the cases back to the Government for cancellation of allotments. 
As per the BDA (Allotment of Sites) Rules, 1984, the allottee shall, within a 
period of 60 days from the date of receipt of notice of allotment, pay to the 
Authority, the balance sital value deducting the initial deposit. If the balance 
sital value is not paid within a period of sixty days, the Authority may, on 
application of the allottee, extend the time for payment for a further period not 
exceeding 60 days, and the allottee shall pay, in addition, interest at the rate of 
eighteen percent on the said amount for the first thirty days of the extended 
period and at the rate of twenty one percent for the next thirty days of the 
extended period. If the amount is not paid within such extended period also, 
the registration fee shall be liable to be forfeited and the allotment cancelled 
without prior intimation. 
Further, after payment is made, the BDA is to call upon the allottee to execute 
a lease-cum-sale agreement. If the allottee fails to execute the lease-cum-sale 
agreement within 60 days after BDA has called upon him to execute such 
agreement, the registration fee paid by the allottee may be forfeited and the 
allotment of the site cancelled, and the amount paid by the allottee may be 
refunded, after deducting such expenditure as might have been incurred by 
BDA.
Scrutiny showed the following: 
¾ In three out of 127 cases of allotments made during 2009, the allottees of 
sites under ‘G’ Category failed to pay the sital value after the expiry of 
the extended period of 60 days.  However, BDA had not taken action to 
cancel the allotment of these three sites, with a sale potential of 
` 2.88 crore. 
¾ In eight out of 127 cases of allotments made during 2009, the allottees 
had not executed the lease-cum-agreements even after the expiry of the 
prescribed time frame.  BDA had not cancelled the allotments of these 
eight sites with a sale potential of 
` 11.02 crore. 
(i) Smt. Sunila Bhookanakere Sangappa had represented (April 2010) to the 
CM requesting for allotment of a 30’x50’ site in Suryanagar, II Phase of the 
KHB and the CM approved (April 2010) the allotment. However, BDA 
processed this application for allotment of a site under ‘G’ Category.  While 
processing this request, the name of the applicant was changed to Smt. 
15.8  Suspected fraudulent practices in the allotment of 
sites
15.7 Non-adherence to the terms of allotment  

ReportNo.3of2012
94 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA
Surekha Sangappa Bhookanakere while the dimension of the site to be allotted 
was altered as 60’x40’.  Scrutiny showed that while the applicant was a 
resident of Belgaum, the person in whose favour BDA allotted the site was an 
employee of Life Insurance Corporation working in Mumbai.  Thus, the actual 
allottee of the site was different from the one recommended to receive the site.  
Fraudulent practices in the allotment of the site with a sale potential of 
` 72 lakh cannot be ruled out.
(ii) The Commissioner approved (May 2011) the allotment of a site measuring 
60'x40' in HSR I Sector valued at ` 1.60 crore on the basis of a request from 
the  applicant that BDA  had failed to allot the site, despite a resolution having 
been passed by the Authority in June 1984 approving the allotment.  It was 
further reported that he had filed a writ petition (WP13201/2002) before the 
High Court and obtained favourable orders.  The applicant had also enclosed a 
copy of the judgement delivered by the Court in this case. 
Scrutiny of the case by Audit showed the following: 
¾ The writ petition had not been filed by the applicant but by another 
person who was allotted (October 2004) a 60'x40'  site in HSR Layout 
as per the judgment; 
¾ The allotment of site made to the applicant in June 1984 had been 
subsequently cancelled by BDA vide resolution No.68/2002; and 
¾ No other documents like the original allotment letter, certified copy of 
GPA given by the land owner, etc., had been submitted by the 
applicant in support of the claim. 
Thus, the possibility of fraudulent allotment cannot be ruled out. 
The Government had allotted (February 2005) a 60'x40' site under ‘G’ 
Category in HRBR Layout I Block to a journalist. BDA had issued the 
possession certificate for the site in January 2006. Acting on a complaint 
received against the allotment, BDA found (November 2006) that the 
journalist had earlier been allotted site No.94 in Gangenahalli, Hebbal 
measuring 40'x60' during 1972-73. However, the journalist defended (January 
2007) the allotment on the ground that the site allotted earlier before the 
framing of the BDA (Allotment of Sites) Rules, 1984 had already been sold 
for a low price to settle his loans. BDA accepted the explanation of the 
journalist and sent a report to the Government in October 2008. It was seen 
that the erstwhile City Improvement Trust Board (CITB) had allotted a site to 
the journalist during 1972-73.  As per the BDA (Allotment of sites) Rules, 
1984, no person who had been allotted a site by any agency of the 
Government was eligible for a ‘G’ Category site.  The rules did not make any 
distinction whether a site had been allotted before or after these Rules came 
15.9  Allotment on false affidavit 

ChapterͲ15
Performance Audit on  
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA 95
into effect.  Thus, as a site had already been allotted by the CITB to the 
journalist in 1972-73, he was not eligible for a ‘G’ Category site again and he 
was irregularly allotted one with a sale potential of 
` 1.58 crore.
On the basis of representation of the Convener, Dalit Kriya Samithi  submitted 
to the CM in June 2004, the Government approved (October 2007) allotment 
of sites measuring 20'x30' to 46 members of the Dalit Kriya Samithi under ‘G’ 
Category. Accordingly, BDA allotted (April 2008) sites to these 46 members 
at the current allotment rate in well developed layouts which included 
Gnanabharati, BTM IV Stage, BTM VI Stage, HSR Sector III and Nagarbhavi 
Layouts.
Though Section 65 of the BDA Act empowers the Government to give 
directions to the Authority, this power is restricted to giving directions 
necessary for carrying out the pu rposes of the BDA Act. As there is no 
provision in the BDA Act for the Government to direct BDA to allot sites, the 
decision of the Government to approve the allotment of sites to members 
belonging to a particular community was irregular. 
Further, the sites allotted to these 46 members were residuary intermediate 
sites available in the layouts after allotment to the general public. These 
intermediate sites could be allotted as alternative sites in cases where the 
possession of the sites originally allotted could not be given to the allottees by 
BDA. Otherwise, the intermediate sites were being auctioned by BDA.  
During 2007-12, BDA had disposed of 162 such intermediate sites through 
auction. As a result of the irregular bulk allotment of 46 intermediate sites to 
the members of the Dalit Kriya Samithi, the BDA, besides setting a precedent, 
lost the opportunity of disposing of these sites through auction and earning 
more revenue. The loss to BDA in these cases aggregated 
` 11.08 crore.
15.10  Bulk allotment of sites under ‘G’ Category 

ReportNo.3of2012
96 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA
The BDA (Allotment of Sites) (Amendment) Rules, 2003 provide the 
following framework for allotment of alternative sites: 
¾ Where the Authority is unable to hand over possession of a site allotted to 
any allottee, due to stay orders of the Courts or for any other reason, the 
Authority may allot an alternative site to such allottee, subject to the 
following conditions; 
¾ An alternative site may be allotted only where the mistake was on the part 
of the Authority while making the allotment of sites where possession of 
the sites originally allotted could not be given to the allottees;
¾ Alternative sites may be allotted by the Authority in the same layout in 
which the sites were originally allotted or in the layouts formed by the 
Authority subsequent to the formation of the layout in which the sites were 
originally allotted;
¾ Alternative sites shall not be allotted in layouts formed prior to the layout 
in which the sites were originally allotted, even if sites are physically 
available in the layout/s formed prior to the layout in which original 
allotment was made;
¾ While allotting alternative sites, sites bigger in dimension than the sites 
originally allotted shall not be considered for allotment. However, an 
alternative site upto ten percent over and above the area of the originally
allotted site may be allotted.  In such cases, for the extra sital area 
involved, additional sital value applicable in that layout for that site shall 
be collected by the Authority;
BDA had constituted an Allotment Committee as required under Rule 11 of 
BDA (Allotment of Sites) Rules, 1984 which verified the eligibility of the 
applicant before allotting the alternative site.  The Committee was headed by 
the Commissioner and consisted of Town Planning Member, Engineering 
Member, Finance Member and Deputy Secretary.  Subject to approval by the 
Authority, the decision of the Allotment Committee shall be final. 
Scrutiny of the allotment of alternative sites showed the following:  
In 34 cases detailed in the Appendix-2, alternative sites had been allotted in 
older layouts in violation of the rules. It was seen in all these cases that the 
alternative sites identified by the allo ttees themselves had been allotted by the 
Allotment Committee.  In addition, the Commissioner had irregularly allotted 
11 alternative sites in older layouts ( Appendix-3) without the approval of 
Allotment Committee.  As the older layouts had been fully developed in 
16.1 Allotment of alternative sites in older layouts 

ChapterͲ16
Performance Audit on  
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA 97
comparison to the new ones, alternative sites allotted in the older layouts 
carried a higher market value and the allottees in these 45 cases profited 
substantially by getting the alternative sites allotted in the older layouts.  The 
loss to BDA on account of these irregular allotments aggregated 
` 36.83 crore. 
In two cases listed in Table-20, the Allotment Committee had irregularly 
allotted alternative sites of higher dimensions, the additional area being 20 to 
40 per cent  more than the area of the sites originally allotted against the 
maximum permissible limit of 10 per cent.
Table-20: Alternative sites of higher dimensions allotted  
(Area in sqm) 
Sl . 
No.
Name of the layout 
and alternate site 
No. allotted 
Area of the 
alternative site in 
sqm  against 
original allotment 
Additional 
area
allotted in  
sqm in 
excess of 
10 per cent
Month/
year of 
allotment 
Allotment 
rate of BDA   
(` per sqm) 
Average
auction  bid 
received by 
BDA during 
the period of 
allotment (`
per sqm) 
Loss
(` per
sqm) 
Total loss 
 (` in
lakh)
1. MRC R-679 223.05(167.29) 39.03 9/07 2100 55100 53000 20.69 
2. RPC layout-3131 78.07(55.76) 16.73 12/07 2100 55100 53000 8.87 
Total 29.56 
(Source: Information furnished by BDA) 
If these alternative sites had been auctioned, it would have fetched BDA 
additional revenue of ` 29.56 lakh.
In three other cases listed in Table-21, the Commissioner had irregularly 
allotted alternative sites of higher dimensions without the approval of the 
Allotment Committee. 
Table-21: Alternative sites irregularly allotted by the Commissioner 
(Area in sqm) 
Sl . 
No.
Name of the 
layout and 
alternate site 
No. allotted 
Area of the 
alternative site in 
sqm as against 
original allotment 
Additional 
area allotted 
in  sqm in 
excess of 10 
per cent
Month/
year of 
allotment 
Allotment 
rate of 
BDA        
(` per 
sqm) 
Average
auction bid 
received by 
BDA during 
the period of 
allotment (`
per sqm) 
Loss 
 (` per 
sqm) 
Total
Loss
(` in
lakh) 
1 HSR III -1063 111.52(92.94) 9.29 4/2011 2100 70370 68270 6.34 
2 HSR I- 1100 223.05(148.70) 59.48 3/2011 2100 68757 66657 39.65 
3 HSR II -1695 194.52 (124.07) 58.04 1/2010 2100 69623 67523 39.19 
Total 85.18 
(Source: Information furnished by BDA) 
The irregular action of the Commis sioner in allotting these sites of higher 
dimension as alternative sites instead of disposing of these through auction 
resulted in BDA incurring a loss of 
` 85.18 lakh.
16.2 Irregular allotment of alternative sites of higher
dimensions

ReportNo.3of2012
98 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA
As per the BDA (Disposal of Corner Sites) Rules, 1984, all the corner and 
commercial sites are to be disposed of only through auction. In the cases listed 
in Table-22, corner sites had been irregularly allotted as alternative sites: 
Table-22 : Corner sites allotted as alternative sites 
Sl . 
No.
Name of the layout 
and alternative site 
No. allotted 
Area of the site 
allotted in sqm 
Month/ year 
of allotment 
Allotment 
rate of BDA 
(` per sqm) 
Highest auction 
bid received by 
BDA during the 
period of 
allotment (` per 
sqm) 
Loss
(` per
sqm) 
 Total Loss 
(in ` in
lakh)
1 KMSL -4057/D 55.76 12/2009 2100 48000 45900 25.59 
2 JPN IX- 75 111.52 4/2011 2100 27200 25100 27.99 
 Total      53.58 
(Source: Information furnished by BDA) 
Though BDA noticed the irregularity subsequently, the sites were allowed to 
be retained by the allottees.  BDA incurred a loss of ` 53.58 lakh as a result of 
allotting the corner sites as alternative s ites instead of disposing of these 
through auction.
In seven cases, alternative sites had been irregularly allotted (July 2007 to 
September 2010) by the Allotment Committee on the basis of requests made 
by the allottees, citing reasons of non-development of the layout.  Further, the 
Commissioner had approved allotment of one alternative site in an older 
layout on the same ground without the approval of the Allotment Committee.  
All the requests had been considered favourably by the Allotment Committee/ 
Commissioner though the Rules did not permit allotment of alternative sites 
on grounds of non-development of the layout.  
Though only the Allotment Committee was empowered to decide on allotment 
of alternative sites, the Commissioner had irregularly allotted alternative sites 
in 45 cases while the Secretary had irregularly approved the allotment in one 
case.  Had these sites been auctioned, BDA could have realized an additional 
revenue of ` 54.17 crore. 
A site allotted in HSR Sector VII during November 1988 had been cancelled 
in 1990 due to non-payment of the sital value. The allottee’s request for 
allotment of an alternative site was favourably considered by the CM who 
16.6 Allotment of alternative site after cancellation of the 
original allotment
16.5 Allotment without the Allotment Committee’s approval 
16.4 Alternative sites were allotted on request 
16.3 Irregular allotment of corner sites  

ChapterͲ16
Performance Audit on  
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA 99
directed (August 2005) BDA to allot a site in the same layout.  Though the 
Government did not have powers under the BDA Act/Rules to direct BDA to 
allot site, it nevertheless directed (May 2007) BDA to allot a site measuring 
223.26 sqm in HSR Layout, Sector VI. However, the allottee sold the site 
within three months of allotment.   
The allotment of the site in a well developed layout on the directive of the 
Government disregarding the prescribed Rules helped the allottee earn a 
fortune by selling it immediately after the allotment. While the allottee had 
paid
` 12.01 lakh to BDA for the site, the registered value of the site was
` 67.20 lakh.  It would be pertinent to mention here that the sale potential of 
this site on the basis of highest bid received in June 2007 for auction of sites in 
this layout was 
` 99.35 lakh.  BDA stated (August 2012) that the allotment 
had been made on the basis of orders of the Government after the allottee had 
repeatedly represented through the Government, elected representatives and 
Ministers.  It was further stated that only the prevailing allotment rate had 
been recovered from the allottee as there was no provision in the rules to levy 
the auction rate.  The reply was not acceptable as the Government had not 
been vested with powers under the BDA Act/Rules to direct BDA to allot site 
to a person. 
The Commissioner, during his inspection (October 2009) of the BSK VI Stage 
(Further Extension), had ordered auctioning of the odd dimension sites on 80 
feet wide road as commercial sites. After the proposal was cleared by the 
Town Planning Member, 10 commercial sites carved out of land in Sy.No.14/1 
of Raghuvanahalli village had been approved for auction. EE, South Division 
notified (February 2010) these sites for auction. 
The details of the sites offered for auction along with dimensions were as 
given in Table-23:
Table-23: Details of corner sites notified for auction  
Sl. No. Site No. Area in sqm
1 3503 361.50 
2 3504 354.75 
3 3506 338.25 
4 3507 333.00 
5 3508 339.00 
6 3509 366.75 
7 3510 524.40 
8 3515 333.00 
9 3516 340.50 
10 3517 348.75 
(Source: Information furnished by BDA) 
16.7 Allotment of commercial sites as alternative sites 

ReportNo.3of2012
100 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA
BDA had fixed the minimum bid amount at ` 50000 per sqm for the auction.  
During the auction, the bidders requested BDA to reduce the minimum bid 
price to 
` 20000-25000 per sqm. However, BDA did not consider the request 
of the bidders who, therefore, abstained from the auction. The Auction 
Committee comprising the Chairman, Commissioner, Engineering Member 
and the Finance Member decided (February 2010) to wait for some more time 
and auction these sites later. 
However, the Allotment Committee/Commissioner subsequently allotted 
(June 2010 to November 2010) four of these sites as alternative sites. Scrutiny 
of these four allotments showed the following: 
16.7.1 Site No.3506 
A person who had been allotted a 50’x80’ site in Banashankari VI Stage IV-B 
Block requested (June 2010) for an alternative site on the ground that the site 
allotted to him was in a low lying area and that the site might also be taken 
over by the Forest Department. He requested for allotment of site No. 3506 
available in BSK VI Stage, IV-H Block facing the 80 feet road. The Secretary 
suggested (March 2010) obtaining a report from the Engineering Division 
before placing the proposal before the Allotment Committee. However, the 
Commissioner ordered (March 2010) to place the request before the Allotment 
Committee straightaway and the Allotment Committee approved allotment of 
an alternative site in the same layout or in a layout formed subsequent to it. 
The Commissioner approved (June 2010) the Secretary's proposal to allot site 
No.3506 in Banashankari VI Stage, IV-H block.  The allotment of the 
commercial site as alternative site was irregular for the following reasons: 
¾ The claim of the allottee that the site might be taken over by the Forest 
Department had not been verified by BDA for its correctness as an 
alternative site should be allotted only 
where the mistake was on the part of 
BDA. As per the information furnished (November 2012) by the Engineering 
Division (South), the site did not come under forest limits and also remained 
vacant;
¾ Allotment of the commercial site as an alternative site was irregular as 
commercial sites should be disposed of only though auction; and 
¾ While t he value of the site was ` 90 lakh, the allottee paid only 
` 7.56 lakh as the sital value, resulting in a loss of ` 82.44 lakh to BDA. 
16.7.2 Site No. 3507 
A person had been allotted a site measuring 60’x40’ in Banashankari  VI Stage, V 
Block as an incentive site for land losers. As the site had been taken over by the 
Forest Department, an alternative site in Anjanapura II Block was allotted by 
the Allotment Committee in November 2010. Thereafter, the allottee 
transferred the title of the site in favour of his wife through a gift deed. The 
wife of the allottee requested (August 2011) BDA for allotment of site 

ChapterͲ16
Performance Audit on  
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA 101
No.3507 in Banashankari VI/IV-H Block on the ground that this site was 
closer to her land and family. Though the proposed alternative site measured 
333 sqm, i.e., 110 sqm more than the original site, the proposal of the 
Secretary, BDA was approved (November 2011) by the Commissioner. 
However, the Engineering Member requested (January 2012) for staying the 
allotment process as the alternative site was higher in dimension than the 
originally allotted site. Meanwhile, the allottee approached the CM and the 
CM’s office referred (March 2012) the matter to BDA for further action. 
Thereafter, BDA registered the sale deed in April 2012 in favour of the wife, 
overlooking the objections raised by the Engineering Member.  The allotment 
of the alternative site was irregular for the following reasons: 
¾ The alternative site identified by the allottee was a commercial site 
which had earlier been auctioned.   This had not been considered before 
the  allotment was approved; 
¾ The reason advanced for seeking the alternative site was that the allotted 
site was far away from the original site. This was not a valid reason as 
alternative site was to be allotted only in cases where BDA was unable 
to hand over possession of the originally allotted site; 
¾ The Commissioner had approved the alternative site without taking the 
approval of the Allotment Committee; and 
¾ The area of the alternative site was 49 per cent  more than that of the 
originally allotted site. This was in violation of the rules for allotment of 
alternative site which prescribed a cap of 10 per cent for the additional 
area. 
As a result of allotting a commercial site as the alternative site, BDA lost a 
revenue of 
` 72.93 lakh. 
16.7.3 Site No. 3508 
A person had been allotted (January 2004) a site measuring 60’x 40’ in 
Banashankari VI Stage, V Block under the incentive scheme for land losers. 
Subsequently, she sold (January 2006) the site to another person. However, the 
allotment of the site was cancelled (November 2010) by BDA as it was falling 
under the Forest area and an alternative site in Anjanapura II Block was 
allotted (November 2010) by the Allotment Committee. The new owner of the 
site represented (May 2011) for allotment of an alternative site citing non-
development of the layout.  Though the request was refused initially, the 
Commissioner approved (November 2011) the allotment of site No.3508 
subject to the condition that the allottee would pay the sital value for the 
additional sital area of 116 sqm. The site was registered in favour of the new 
owner on 13 December 2011. The allotment of the site was irregular for the 
following reasons: 

ReportNo.3of2012
102 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA
¾ The proposal for allotment had not been placed before the Allotment 
Committee; 
¾ The allotted site was a commercial site which should have been disposed 
of only through auction; and 
¾ The area of alternative site allotted was 52 per cent in excess of that of 
the original site which was not permitted by the Rules. 
Considering that the allotted site was a commercial site, the Authority by 
allotting it as an alternative site instead of disposing it of through auction 
incurred a loss of ` 73.96 lakh.
16.7.4 Site No. 3510 
A person had been allotted (October 2003) a site measuring 223 sqm in 
Banashankari VI Stage, V Block.  The allottee sold the site in 2004 to another 
person.  As the site was later handed over (February 2007) to the Forest 
Department, the Allotment Committee allotted (November 2010) an 
alternative site No.457 measuring 216 sqm in Anjanapura I Block.  However, 
the new owner requested for allotment of Site No.3510 as the alternative site.  
The Commissioner approved (December 2011) the allotment of Site No.3510 
after obtaining the CDR from BDA, South Division in November 2011.  The 
CDR mentioned the area of the site as 216 sqm and accordingly, BDA 
recovered the sital value for only 216 sqm.  Though the Engineering Member 
subsequently requested (January 2012) for cancelling the allotment as the site 
allotted was of higher dimension (279 sqm), no action had been taken.  The 
allotment of the alternative site was irregular for the following reasons:
¾ The proposal for allotment had not been placed before the Allotment 
Committee for approval ; and 
¾ The allotment had been made on the basis of the CDR of the Bangalore, 
South Division which mentioned the area of the site as 216 sqm. 
Subsequently, the Engineering Member had reported that the area of the 
site No. 3510 was 279 sqm. Thus, the incorrect CDR facilitated 
allotment of alternative site of higher dimension.   
As per the auction notification of February 2010, the area of the site No.3510 
notified for auction was 524.40 sqm while the area of site No.3510 allotted as 
an alternative site was only 216 sqm. The reasons for the reduced area were 
not on record.
By allotting a commercial site as the alternative site, BDA lost 
` 68.89 lakh.

ChapterͲ17
Performance Audit on  
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA 103
Civic amenity as defined in the BDA Act means and includes: 
(i) A market, a post office, a telephone exchange, a bank, a fair price 
shop, a milk booth, a school, a dispensary, a hospital, a pathological 
laboratory, a maternity home, a child care centre, a library, a 
gymnasium, a bus stand or a bus depot ;  
(ii)  A recreation centre run by the Government or the Corporation; 
(iii)  A centre for educational, social or cultural activities established by the 
Central Government or the State Government or by a body established 
by the Central Government or the State Government;  
(iv)  A centre for educational, religi ous, social or cultural activities or for 
philanthropic service run by a cooperative society registered under the 
Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act, 1959 or a society registered 
under the Karnataka Societies Registration Act, 1960 or by a trust 
created wholly for charitable, educational or religious purposes;
(v)  A police station, an area office or a service station of the Corporation 
or the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board or the Karnataka 
Electricity Board; and  
(vi)  Such other amenity as the Government may, by notification, specify. 
The extent of reservation of land for parks and open spaces which include 
space for civic amenities (CA) is regulated by the approved Comprehensive 
Development Plans (CDPs). BDA had so far formulated two such plans viz., 
CDP 1995 and RMP 2015.  As per CDP 1995, reservation of 45 per cent of 
the total area for roads, parks, playgrounds and civic amenities is necessary in 
residential layout plans and in the case of Group Housing plans, 25 per cent of 
the total area is to be reserved for civic amenities, parks and open spaces 
subject to a minimum of 15 per cent for parks and open spaces. 
In the case of private layouts, no person can form or attempt to form any 
extension or layout for the purpose of constructing buildings thereon without 
the express sanction in writing of the BDA.  Further, the ownership of the 
roads, drains, water supply mains and open spaces laid out in the private 
layouts should be transferred to BDA permanently without claiming any 
compensation therefor. 
The developers of  the private layouts and Group Housing schemes are further 
required  to execute registered relinquishment deeds for transfer of ownership 
17.1 Provisions for Civic Amenity Sites 

ReportNo.3of2012
104 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA
of parks and CA sites besides roads, drains etc. as per the sanctioned plan 
before the issue of work order by BDA.   The parks and open spaces in the 
private and BDA Layouts are to be transferred to BBMP on completion of the 
layouts for maintenance.  
In the Revised Master Plan 2015 effective from June 2007, the areas to be 
earmarked for CA, park and open spaces were reduced in respect of Group 
Housing plans as shown below: 
  Park and open space: 10 per cent of the total area; and 
 Civic amenities: 5 per cent of the total area  
Further, in respect of Group Housing Development Plans, the developer/owner 
is required to develop the area earmarked for CA and hand it over to the 
resident associations. However, BDA has the power to decide the mode of 
handing over the developed CA space to the resident associations. 
17.1.1  Non-relinquishment of CA sites 
It was seen that 18 CA sites measuring 32,584.61 sqm had not been 
relinquished by private house building co-operative societies in favour of 
BDA as of March 2012. The details of work orders issued to these private 
layouts were not on record.  As the work order for developing a private layout 
was to be issued to the developer only after the relinquishment deed was 
registered in BDA’s favour, the violation of the prescribed procedure in these 
cases had resulted in retention of these sites by the societies which would 
otherwise fetch a revenue of 
` 16.29 crore to BDA if allotted on lease basis for 
30 years.  BDA did not have information on the status of these CA sites and 
the possibility of these CA sites being used for other than the intended 
purposes cannot be ruled out.
The BDA Act empowers the BDA to lease, sell or otherwise transfer any area 
reserved for CA for the purpose for which such area is reserved.
The allotment of CA sites is governed by the BDA (Allotment of Civic 
Amenity Sites) Rules 1989. The rules have been framed in response to the 
High Court judgment that no CA site reserved for a particular purpose in any 
of the layouts formed by it should be disposed of for any other purpose except 
for the purpose for which it was reserved and in conformity with the 
provisions of the Act, and disposal of such sites should not be made unless 
necessary rules were framed. 
The BDA (Allotment of Civic Amenity Sites) Rules, 1989 prescribe the 
following :  
17.2 Legal framework for allotment of CA sites 

ChapterͲ17
Performance Audit on  
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA 105
¾ Due publicity shall be given in respect of CA sites offered for leasing to 
the institutions, specifying their location, number, dimension, purpose and 
the last date of submission of applications by affixing the notice on the 
notice board of the office of BDA and by publishing the notification in not 
less than two daily news papers in English and Kannada, having vide 
circulation in the city of Bangalore. Further, for the purpose of selection of 
the institution for leasing out CA sites, the Authority is to constitute a 
“Civic Amenity Site Allotment Committee” (CASAC) headed by the 
Chairman, BDA and consisting of three official members and three non-
official members. Subject to the approval of BDA, the decision of the 
CASAC shall be final. 
¾ BDA, having regard to the particular type of amenity required to be 
provided in any locality, may offer such CA sites for the purpose of 
allotment on lease basis to any institution; 
¾ The lease amount of the site to be allotted on lease basis in any area  shall 
be fixed by BDA; 
¾ Allotment of CA sites shall be on lease basis for a period of thirty years; 
¾ The lessee shall complete the construction of the building within a period 
of three years from the date of registration of the lease agreement or such 
extended period, not exceeding three years, as BDA may permit subject to 
payment of penalty at such rates notified by the State Government. If the 
building is not constructed even within the extended period, BDA may, 
after giving reasonable notice to the institution, cancel the allotment, 
revoke the agreement and evict the lessee from the site and refund the 
lease amount paid by the lessee after forfeiting 12½ per cent.
As of March 2012, BDA had allotted 1234 sites of various dimensions for 
different purposes to different institutions.  The irregularities noticed in the 
allotment, utilisation and renewal of lease of CA sites are discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs. 
17.3.1  Procedure for Allotment of CA sites not transparent 
A review of the minutes of the CASAC relating to allotments made during 
2007-12 showed that recommendations made for the allotments of CA sites 
lacked duly recorded justifications. Where many applications had been 
received for allotment of a CA site and one of the applicants had been 
preferred over others, there were no recorded reasons as to why that particular 
applicant had been preferred.  As the CA sites had been allotted on the basis of 
such recommendations without recorded justification, there was no 
transparency in allotment of CA sites.  
17.3 Irregular allotment of CA sites 

ReportNo.3of2012
106 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA
17.3.2   Allotment of park as a CA site 
CA site No.7 in RPC layout measuring 37625 sq ft had been allotted (October 
1979) to a Trust for construction of a school building. The request made by the 
Trust for allotment of another CA site No.9 had been rejected (December 
2006) by BDA.  However, the Assistant Executive Engineer (West) reported 
(March 2008) to BDA that the Trust had encroached upon the entire area of 
1692.79 sqm in CA site No.9.  BDA resolved (September 2010) to allot the 
land encroached upon to the Trust on lease basis for 30 years by levying 
penalty suitably and recovering the lease amount at the prevailing rate, as 
agreed to by the Trust in July 2006. BDA approved (September 2010) the 
lease amount and penalty aggregating 
` 4.80 crore as shown in Table-24:
Table-24: Lease amount and penalty as approved by BDA 
Sl. No. Particulars Amount (In `)
1 Lump sum lease amount for 1692.79 sqm at the 
prevailing rate of ` 2500 per sq mtr 
42, 31,975 
2. Additional lease amount - 1/10 of 1692.79 sqm 
= ` 169.28 x 30 years 
5078 
3. Penalty for unauthorised occupation of 1692.79 
sqm or 18221.19 sq ft at `  2400 per sq ft being 
the guidance value fixed by the Government. 
4,37,30,856 
 Total 4,79,67,909 
(Source: Information furnished by BDA) 
On the basis of a request from the Trust for allotment of the CA site being 
used as a playground, without levy of penalty, the site was again inspected 
during March 2011 and it was found that the Trust had utilised 258.08 sqm for 
construction of a school building. On the basis of this report, BDA revised the 
amount to 
` 88.57 lakh as shown in Table-25:
Table-25: Revised amount as approved by BDA
Sl.
No. Particulars Amount (In 
`)
1 Lump sum lease amount for 258.08 sqm at the 
prevailing rate of ` 2500 per sqm 
6,45,200 
2. Additional lease amount- 1/10 of 258.08 sqm = ` 26 
x 30 years 
780 
3. Penalty for unauthorised occupation of 258.08 sqm or 
2777.97 sq ft at ` 2400 per sq ft being the guidance 
value fixed by the Government. 
Penalty for utilising 1434.71 sqm or 15443.21 sq ft  
unauthorizedly at ` 100 per sq ft 
66,67,135 

15,44,322 
 Total 88,57,437 
(Source: Information furnished by BDA) 

ChapterͲ17
Performance Audit on  
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA 107
BDA entered into a lease agreement in August 2011 and  issued the possession 
certificate to the Trust for the entire area of 1692.79 sqm in September 2011.  
The reduction of the dues from ` 4.80 crore to ` 88.57 lakh was not justified 
due to the following reasons: 
(i) Site No.9 had been earmarked for park in the approved plan.  The area 
earmarked for park had been allotted to the Trust to regularize the 
unauthorised occupation and encroachment.  Allotment of the park to a 
private trust was irregular; 
(ii) Though the entire area of 1692.79 sqm in site No.9 had been allotted to 
the Trust as per the possession certificate issued in September 2011, the 
lease amount had been recovered only for the area of 258.08 sqm over 
which a building had been unauthorisedly constructed by the Trust.  The 
Trust had admitted that the site had been used as a playground.  Recovery 
of the lease amount only for 258.08 sqm instead for the entire area of 
1692.79 sqm allotted to the Trust resulted in unauthorised benefit of 
` 35.87 lakh to the Trust; 
(iii) The penalty for unauthorised use of site No.9 had been reduced from  
` 2400 per sq ft to ` 100 per sq ft without any recorded justification. The 
reduction was adhoc and lacked justification; and 
(iv) Commissioner approved the token penalty without placing the proposal 
before the Board.  
BDA stated (September 2012) that the lease amount had been calculated on 
the basis of the area encroached upon.  The reply was not acceptable as the 
entire area of 1692.79 sqm had been leased to the Trust as per the possession 
certificate and the lease amount should have been collected for the entire area.
17.3.3   Direct allotment of CA site to an institution  
On the basis of the instructions of the CM on a representation made by an 
institution during December 2009, a CA site measuring 9062.50 sqm in 
Sadashivanagar was directly allotted (April 2010) to the institution by BDA 
for construction of yoga, gym and health related centre without notifying the 
CA site to the general public. The lease agreement was executed in June 2010 
after the allottee had paid the lumpsum lease amount of 
` 42.10 lakh.  The 
allotment of this CA site violated the prescribed procedure.  BDA stated 
(September 2012) that a suit had been pending in the Court against the 
allotment.  
17.3.4 Direct allotment of CA site to a Homeopathy Foundation  
A Homeopathy Foundation had submitted (November 2008) a representation 
to the CM requesting for allotment of a site in a developed layout for carrying 
out its activities. The Principal Secretary to the CM instructed (December 

ReportNo.3of2012
108 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA
2008) BDA to identify the site. In his representation submitted to the 
Chairman, BDA, the Chairman of the Foundation had requested (March 2009) 
for allotment of site No.117 measuring 352.90 sqm in Dollars Colony, BTM 
Layout II Stage. The Government directed (September 2009) BDA to allot the 
site requisitioned by the Foundation on lease basis after recovering the 
allotment rate applicable for CA sites.  The Commissioner allotted (September 
2009) the site under the BDA (Allotment of Civic Amenity Sites) Rules, 1989.  
The allotment was irregular for the following reasons: 
¾ The allotment had been made directly without following the procedure 
prescribed in BDA (Allotment of CA sites) Rules, 1989; and
¾ On verification of the sanctioned plan of BTM II Stage, it was seen that 
site No.117 was a residential site. The site, being an intermediate 
residential site, was to be auctioned as was being done by BDA in the 
case of other intermediate sites. This residential site measuring 352 sqm 
was allotted at a subsidized price of 
` 5000 per sqm applicable for CA 
sites, while the average bid amount received during auction of a 
similarly placed site in BTM I Stage was 
` 69,500 per sqm during 2007. 
The value of the site allotted to the Foundation, therefore, worked out to 
` 2.45 crore while the Foundation had paid only ` 17.65 lakh to BDA.
BDA stated (September 2012) that the residential site had been allotted as a 
CA site as per the approval of the Government under Rule 6 of the BDA 
(Allotment of sites) Rules, 1984 which empowered the Authority to allot, on 
lease basis, sites other than those reserved for CA, public parks and play 
grounds to educational, religious or charitable institutions which were either 
societies registered under the Soci eties Registration Act or Trusts for public 
purposes.  The reply was not acceptable for the following reasons: 
¾ The Foundation had been allotted the site under the BDA (Allotment 
of CA sites) Rules, 1989 and not under Rule 6 of BDA (Allotment of 
sites) Rules, 1984; and
¾ The Foundation had not submitted any document evidencing that it 
was either a charitable institution registered under the Societies 
Registration Act or a Trust for public purposes.
17.3.5 Allotment of CA sites under inappropriate regulations  
BDA had issued (February 2007) the work order to a developer for 
construction of high-end apartments/houses in Nagasandra Village, 
Yeshwantapur Hobli, Bangalore. As required under the Zoning of Land Use 
and Regulations, BDA-1995, the developer had relinquished 11,623.527 sqm 
for parks and 7749.01 sqm for civic amenities through a relinquishment deed 
registered in December 2006.  
Acting on the request (November 2007) of the developer for allotment of two 
CA sites in the residential complex for construction of a club house for the 

ChapterͲ17
Performance Audit on  
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA 109
residents, BDA authorized the Commissioner to take Government permission 
for allotment of the CA sites under Regulation No.7-1-2 of RMP 2015. The 
Government conveyed (November 2011) its concurrence to the 
Commissioner’s proposal (September 2011) for allotment of the CA sites to 
the developer.  BDA issued (January 2012) the allotment letters fixing the 
lumpsum lease amount at 
` 2.51 crore for CA site No.1 and ` 2.36 crore for 
CA site No.2. The developer was yet to pay these amounts to BDA (July 
2012).
Allotment of these two CA sites to the developer under Regulation 7-1-2 of 
RMP 2015 was irregular as it had come into force only in June 2007 and the 
regulations contained therein were prospective.  Further, allotment of these 
CA sites under RMP-2015 would not arise at all as the area earmarked for CA 
in projects covered by RMP-2015 would vest with the local residential 
associations and not with BDA.  As the work order for the project had been 
issued in February 2007, when the Zoning of Land Use and Regulations, 
BDA-1995 was in force, the two CA sites should have been allotted after 
approval by the CASAC after following the prescribed procedure.  As the 
allotment had been irregularly made under Regulation No.7-1-2, BDA’s 
demand for the lease amount would not be enforceable.  
Thus, irregular allotment of CA sites to the developer under inappropriate 
regulations had exposed BDA to the risk of non-recovery of the lease amount 
of
` 4.87 crore from the developer.  BDA stated (September 2012) that the 
developer had filed a writ petition during February 2012 and action would be 
taken as per the decision of the Court.  The reply was not acceptable as the 
litigation could be attributable to the irregular allotment under RMP-2015. 
17.3.6  Unjustified concession given in the irregular allotment 
of a CA site
BDA issued (January 2009) notification for allotment of CA site No.3 
measuring 8125 sqm in 5 th Block, Banashankari VI Stage. BDA approved 
(March 2010) the allotment of the site to a trust for starting educational 
institutions. The allotment letter was issued on 7 April 2010. BDA had fixed 
the lease amount as follows:
1.  Lease amount, if paid in lumpsum : 
`  2,03,12,500; 
2.  Lease amount, if paid in thirty annual installments : `  36,82,657; and 
3.  Additional lease amount to be paid annually: `  24,390. 
The lease amount was payable within ninety days of issue of the allotment 
letter. However, the Trust requested (June 2010) for reduction of the lease 
amount on the lines of the concessions extended (April 2010) by the 
Government for the welfare of the scheduled caste (SC)/scheduled tribes (ST). 
Considering the request, the lease amount was reduced under the orders (July 

ReportNo.3of2012
110 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA
2010) of the Commissioner by 50 per cent. The details of the revised amounts 
fixed were as under: 
1. Lease amount, if paid in lumpsum : Rs1,01,56,250; 
2. Lease amount, if paid in thirty annual installments : `  18,41,329; and 
3. Additional lease amount to be paid annually: `  24,390. 
Though reduction of the lease amount by 50 per cent was applicable only from 
20 April 2010 in respect of institutions established for the benefit of SC/ST, it 
was irregularly extended in this case wh ere the allotment was approved by the 
Board on 26 March 2010. Further, the reason adduced by the allottee for 
claiming the reduction of the lease amount was that the Trust was managed 
exclusively by members of the SC/ST.  However, Government order of April 
2010 did not allow reduction of the lease amount in respect of Trusts managed 
exclusively by members of SC/ST.  The decision to extend the concession 
available in the Government notification of April 2010 was, therefore, not 
justified, resulting in loss of revenue of 
` 1.02 crore to BDA. 
Further, the allottee had requested (September 2010) for an alternative site 
citing non-development of the layout as the reason.  The request was 
considered favourably and BDA accorded (September 2010) approval for 
allotment of an alternative CA site available in II Block, BTM IV Stage 
measuring 8001 sqm. The allotment letter was issued to the allottee in October 
2010 duly incorporating the 50 per cent  concession available in the 
Government notification of April 2010.  However, the BDA (Allotment of 
Civic Amenity Sites) Rules, 1989 does not have any provision for allotment of 
alternative CA sites.  In this case, the alternative site was allotted irregularly at 
the request of the allottee which was aware of the location of the site and the 
status of the layout at the time of submitting application in response to the 
BDA’s notification.
As per the land audit report of the Engineering Division (East), the alternative 
site remained vacant as of March 2012, evidencing that the proposed 
educational institution was yet to be established.
17.3.7 Irregular allotment of two alternate CA sites of higher 
dimensions
A society had been allotted a CA site in Banashankari III Stage, Srinivasangar 
II Phase, measuring 728.75 sqm for religious activities and the possession 
certificate was issued to the Society in November 2007.  As the allotted site 
had already been in possession of the BBMP SC Workers Co-operative 
Society, the allottee requested (July 2009) for allotment of an alternative site 
in Bangalore South. Though BDA (July 2009) allotted an alternative CA site 
in Banashankari VI Stage, IV Block, the allottee refused to accept the 
allotment as the site was far away from the originally allotted site. Though the 
CASAC initially refused (October 2009) to consider the request, it 
subsequently allotted two CA sites identified by the allottee, one in Canara 

ChapterͲ17
Performance Audit on  
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA 111
Bank, HBCS, Kodigehalli Extension measuring 502 sqm and another in 
Raghuvanahalli village measuring 464.80 sqm. The possession certificates 
were issued to the allottee in January 2012.  The allotment of these two 
alternative sites was irregular due to the following reasons:  
¾ There is no provisions in the BDA (Allotment of Civic Amenity Sites) 
Rules for allotment of alternative CA sites; and  
¾ The area of the two alternative CA sites together was 32 per cent higher 
than that of the original site allotted. 
Further, BDA did not verify before allo tment whether these two alternative 
sites had been earmarked for religious purpose in the approved plan. BDA had 
allotted these CA sites only on the basis of  the request from the society.  After 
the allotment, the Canara Bank Layout Welfare Association had requested 
BDA to cancel  one of the two CA sites as it had been earmarked for a 
Government Hospital in the approved plan. BDA had not cancelled the 
allotment of this site so far (July 2012). 
Thus, BDA failed to follow the prescribed procedure for allotment of CA sites.  
17.3.8  Irregular allotment of a CA site for a corporate office  
A Company had been allotted a CA site in Manyatha Promoters Layout, 
Rachenahalli village for construction of a corporate office. The site measured 
5151.90 sqm and the allotment had been made by BDA on the basis of a 
Government order (December 2009). The lease agreement was executed in 
March 2010 and the possession certificate was issued by BDA in March 2010.  
The allotment was irregular due to the following reasons:  
¾ A corporate office is not covered by the definition of civic amenity; 
¾ The BDA Act or the BDA (Allotment of Civic Amenity Sites) Rules, 
1989 does not permit allotment of CA sites directly to any institution.  
According to the rules, the details of the CA site along with its dimension 
and purpose are to be notified publicly.  This had not been done in this 
case; and 
¾ The allotment had been made on the basis of a Government order which 
had been issued on the directions of the CM.  Though the Government is 
vested with powers to give directions to BDA as per Section 65 of the 
BDA Act, 1976, such power is restricted to giving directions only for 
carrying out the purposes of the Act.
The BDA (Allotment of Civic Amenity Sites) Rules, 1989 prescribes that if 
the lease amount or the annual installment is not paid within a period of 90 
days, further extension of time not exceeding 60 days may be given and the 
allottee shall pay in addition, interest at the rate of eighteen percent on the said 
17.4 Undue favours to allottees of CA sites 

ReportNo.3of2012
112 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA
amount for the extended period. If the lease amount or the installment is not 
paid within such extended period also, then the registration fee and the initial 
deposit shall be liable to be forfeited and the allotment cancelled without any 
prior intimation.  Further, there are no provisions in the Rules for waiver of 
any amount due including interest due.
A review of test checked files showed that BDA had waived the amount due 
or shown undue favour to the allottees in the following cases: 
17.4.1 Waiver of interest  
In the case of CA site measuring 2692.25 sqm allotted (April 2002) to a 
Parishad, BDA approved (February 2011) the waiver of interest of 
` 14.13 lakh levied earlier for belated payment (March 2008 to December 
2009) of the lease amount though there was no provision either in the BDA 
Act or the BDA (Allotment of CA Sites) Rules 1989 for waiving off the 
interest due. 
17.4.2  Irregular contribution to a private trust  
A CA site measuring 2412.60 sqm had been allotted (November 1979) to a 
Trust on lease basis for a period of 30 years. After the completion of the lease 
period of 30 years in December 2009, the site was inspected by the 
Engineering Division, South in January 2010. BDA renewed the lease period 
for a further period of 30 years from December 2009.   BDA asked (August 
2010) the Trust to pay the lease amount either in annual installments of 
`
11.68 lakh or in lump sum of ` 64.42 lakh.   However, the Trust requested 
(October 2010) for reduction of the annual installment to ` 50,000.  BDA 
informed (October 2010) the Trust of its inability to reduce the annuity as 
there was no provision in law for reduction. However, based on the orders 
(October 2010) of the CM, BDA reduced (February 2011) the annual 
installment to 
` 50,000.  Thereafter, the allottee paid (July 2011) ` 15 lakh to 
BDA in lumpsum towards annual installments for the entire lease period of 30 
years.  BDA adjusted the unpaid amount of 
` 49.42 lakh as donation to the 
Trust for construction of cine academy.  The donation is to be viewed in the 
light of the fact that there is no provision in the BDA Act for making 
contributions to a private trust.  Though BDA had acted on the orders of the 
CM, it would be pertinent to mention that any directive given either by the 
Government or by the CM should not be contrary to the provisions in the BDA 
Act.  Thus, the favour extended to the Trust was unauthorised.  BDA stated 
(September 2012) that the decision to treat the unpaid amount as donation had 
been taken on the basis of suggestions from the Finance Member. The reply 
was not acceptable as there was no provision in the BDA Act for making 
donations to a private Trust.

ChapterͲ17
Performance Audit on  
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA 113
17.4.3 Unjustified renewal of the lease in advance 
A CA site measuring 23092.02 sqm had been allotted on lease basis for 30 
years to a Samithi in Sarakki Layout for construction of a college building and 
the lease agreement was registered on 17 May 1983.  Though the lease was to 
be renewed only on 17 May 2013 on completion of the lease period of 30 
years, the Commissioner approved (January 2011) the renewal of the lease for 
another 30 years after remittance of 
` 13.23 crore at the prevailing allotment 
rate on the basis of the request made (October 2010) by the allottee.
Subsequently, BDA revised (December 2011) the lease amounts for CA sites 
on the basis of revised categorization of institutions.  As per the revised rates, 
the allottee would have paid the lease amount of 
` 21.12 crore, if the lease had 
been renewed on expiry of the initial lease period of 30 years in July 2013.  As 
there was no provision in the rules for renewal of the lease before expiry of the 
previous lease period, the action of the Commissioner in renewing the lease in 
advance, besides being irregular, resulted in a loss of 
` 7.89 crore to BDA.  
Whether the renewal of the lease in advance had been influenced by any 
impending proposal before the BDA for revision of lease amount, needs to be 
investigated as BDA had lost substantial revenue in this case.  
BDA entered into agreements with the allottees of CA sites in the standard 
lease agreement form forming part of the BDA (Allotment of CA sites) Rules, 
1989.  The provisions in the agreement prescribed that the lessee should use 
the CA site only for the authorized purpose.  If the lessee were to violate these 
conditions, the lessor (BDA) was at liberty to resume the CA site with 30 
days’ notice to the lessee and the money, if any, paid by the lessee shall also 
be liable to be forfeited by the lessor.
Scrutiny showed that though CA sites had been used by the allottees for 
unauthorised purposes and such violations were within the knowledge of 
BDA, no action had been taken against the violations in terms of the 
agreemental conditions.  There was also no mechanism in BDA for periodical 
inspection of the CA sites to ensure that the CA sites were used by the 
allottees only for authorized purposes.  Cases of CA sites being used for 
unauthorised purposes noticed in sampled cases were as shown in Table-26:
17.5 CA sites used for unauthorised purposes 

ReportNo.3of2012
114 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA
Table-26 :  Details of CA sites used for unauthorised purposes 
Sl.
No. 
CA Site allotted 
with location and 
dimension
When
allotted 
Purpose for 
which allotted Deviation noticed 
1 Site No. 46 of 
Vasanthnagar 
measuring 1163.953 
sqm 
July 1958 Construction 
of school 
hostel 
In addition to the hostel 
building, the allottee had 
constructed a commercial 
complex capable of generating 
a revenue of ` 4.81 lakh per 
month against the lease rent of 
` 12 per month paid by the 
allottee to BDA. These 
deviations had been noticed by 
BDA in March 2008 and May 
2011. 
2. Site No. 1B on 
Magadi Road 
measuring 1870.35  
sqm 
March 
1977 
Construction 
of society 
building and 
staff quarters 
BDA's inspection in January 
2007 showed that several 
buildings including a granite 
stone yard, a central library and 
car parking had been 
constructed unauthorisedly. 
3. Two earmarked  CA 
sites measuring 
21400 sq ft and 
11450 sq ft in 
Jayanagar II  Block 
January 
1964 and 
December
1965 
Construction 
of a temple 
and school/ 
hostel 
A Kalyana Mantapa and a 
school had been constructed by 
the allottee as per the report of 
the Executive Engineer, South 
Division given in Nov. 1997. 
4. Site No. 2 in Defence 
Layout measuring 
4104 sqm 
March 
2002 
Opening a 
Kannada 
medium 
school with a 
play ground 
The allottee had been running 
an English medium school. 
5. Site No. 85/1 
measuring 1637.63 
sqm  in Jayanagar IV 
Block 
July 1981 Constructing a 
community 
hall and other 
developmental 
activities 
The allottee had constructed a 
community hall, library, office 
building and bridge game 
sections in two floors. The 
lease was renewed in October 
2011 despite complaints about 
gambling activities in the 
premises. 
6 Site No. 10 
measuring 3064 Sqm 
in HRBR II Block 
April 1998 Establishing a 
Kannada 
medium 
school 
The allottee had sublet the 
premises to an Academy.  
7. Site No. 2 measuring 
832.65 sqm in 
Vinayaka HBCS, 
Bhoopasandra 
July 2002 Establishing a 
Kannada 
medium 
school 
A gas godown had been 
constructed by the allottee. 
8 Site No.1 measuring 
52650 sq ft in West 
of Chord Road II 
Stage 
August 
1977 
Construction 
of college 
building 
The allottee had encroached 
upon 2561.31 sq ft of the 
adjacent CA allotted to another 
institution. 

ChapterͲ17
Performance Audit on  
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA 115
In terms of the BDA (Allotment of Civic Amenity Sites) Rules, 1989, the 
allotment of CA sites shall be on a lease basis for a period not exceeding 30 
years. If the lease is not renewed, or has been determined or terminated before 
the expiry of lease, the site allotted along with the buildings therein shall vest 
in the BDA and BDA shall have right to enter the premises and take 
possession thereof. 
It was seen that in 71 out of 1234 CA sites allotted by BDA, the lease had not 
been renewed as of July 2012.  The list included 60 private institutions and 11 
Government institutions. The delay in renewal of leases ranged from eight to 
nine years in respect of Government institutions while it was 11 months to 32 
years in respect of private institutions. BDA had not initiated action against 
the allottees for not renewing the leases, thereby allowing them to occupy the 
BDA properties without legal validity.  Non-renewal of the leases in time 
deprived BDA of the opportunity of mobilizing 
` 43.45 crore by way of lease 
charges recoverable.  Non-renewal of the le ases in sampled cases is shown in 
Table-27:
Table-27 : Cases where leases had not been renewed 
(Amount: ` in lakh) 
Sl.
No.
CA Site No., 
location and 
dimension 
Date of 
allotment 
Date on which  
renewal of 
lease was due  
Purpose for 
which allotted Deviations noticed 
Lease amount due 
calculated at the 
prevailing rate 
fixed by BDA 
1 Site measuring 
1739.77 sqm  in 
Jayanagar IV T 
Block 
18-12-1962 18-12-1992 Construction of 
post office 
The lease had not been 
renewed for 20 years and 
BDA did not have records to 
evidence demand and 
collection of rent from the 
allottee
43.49 
2 Site No.2 measuring 
489.31 sqm in 
Jayanagar I and III 
East  Block 
29-12-1979 29-12-2009 Construction of 
Sanskrit school 
The lease had  not been 
renewed 
12.23 
3 Site No.1 measuring 
7496.28  sqm  in 
Jayanagar IV Block 
14-12-1966 14-12-1996 Construction of 
Jain temple 
BDA issued the renewal notice 
to the allottee only in January 
2009 after a delay of 13 years. 
Though the lessee submitted 
the documents for renewal of 
licence in February 2009, 
BDA had not renewed the 
lease (July 2012). 
187.40 
4. Site No. 1349 
measuring 189.12 
sqm in West of 
Chord Road Phase II 
11-5-1977 11-5-2007  For association 
activities
The lease had not been 
renewed since May 2007. 
Though the allotment section 
had requested the Engineering 
Division in August 2008 to 
conduct the inspection of the 
site, it had not been done so 
far (July 2012) 
4.73 
17.6 Lease of CA sites not renewed or lease agreements 
not executed 

ReportNo.3of2012
116 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA
Sl.
No.
CA Site No., 
location and 
dimension 
Date of 
allotment 
Date on which  
renewal of 
lease was due  
Purpose for 
which allotted Deviations noticed 
Lease amount due 
calculated at the 
prevailing rate 
fixed by BDA 
5 Site No. 666 
measuring 1121.34 
sqm in West of 
Chord Road Phase II 
21.-6-1973 21-6-2003 Construction   
of school 
No action had been taken for 
renewal of the lease (July 
2012) 
2.80 
6 Site No. 4 in 
Jayanagar IV Block 
measuring 1104.09 
sqm 
10-9-1975 10-9-2005 Temple and 
Kalyana 
Mantapa
BDA had not raised any 
demand on the lessee. 
27.60 
7 15 sites in different 
locations of 
Bangalore 
21-1-98 Not applicable Implementation 
of IPP 
BBMP had paid only  
` 7.71 lakh against the lease 
amount of  ` 79.01 lakh. Lease 
agreements had also not been 
executed.
71.30 
8 Site No.3 of HMT 
HBCS,
Vidyaranyapura 
measuring 4428 sqm 
23-12-2008 Not applicable Construction of 
higher primary 
school 
The  Education Department  
after paying the first 
installment of  
` 16.86 lakh 
requested for allotment of site 
free of cost,  which was turned 
down by BDA. The lessee was  
yet to pay the remaining 
amount and execute the lease 
agreement (July 2012) 
76.13 
9 Site 6 (c) of RMV II 
Stage,  HIG Layout   
measuring 27.87 
sqm  (Hopcoms) 
30-8-1986 
Not applicable 
For
construction of 
milk booths and 
vegetable
outlets
The allottees had failed to pay 
the amount due to BDA and 
had not executed the lease 
agreements (July 2012) 
1.08 
3(p) of OMBR 
layout measuring 
33.33 sqm 
(Hopcoms)    
8-5-1995 
6 (c) of RMV II 
Stage HIG Layout  
measuring 27.87 
sqm  (KMF) 
24-9-2003 
Matadahalli Further 
Extension measuring 
81.93 sqm  
19.5.1997 
10 Site in Gayathri 
Devi Park  
11-1-1978 NA For 
construction of 
temple 
The allottee had failed to 
execute the lease agreement 
(July 2012). 
26.66 
11 Site 10 A of 
Hosahalli Layout  
measuring 891.03 
sqm 
20-6-1966 20-6-1996 For Vidyapeeta 
activities
Even though the 
Commissioner had approved 
the renewal of lease in 2006, 
the lease agreement was yet to 
be executed (July 2012) . 
Besides, as per the inspection 
report (November 2005), the 
allottee had utilised 6121.25 
sq ft more than the area 
allotted. Action was yet to be 
taken against the lessee. 
36.50 
Total 489.92 

ChapterͲ17
Performance Audit on  
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA 117
As of March 2012, 298 CA sites measuring 9.16 lakh sqm were available with 
BDA for allotment. These included 140 CA sites in 14 layouts developed by 
BDA and 158 CA sites in 61 private layouts. The oldest unallotted CA site 
was in HAL-III Stage Layout formed during 1975.  The division-wise 
availability of CA sites was as shown in Table-28:
Table-28: Details of availability of CA sites  
Sl. No. Name of the Division No. of sites Area in sqm 
Division-wise – BDA Layouts 
1 North 2 2805 
2 South 26 78673 
3 East 19 48846 
4 West 93 304934 
Total  140 435258 
Division-wise – Private Layouts 
1 North 64 117236 
2 South 20 41474 
3 East 35 63492 
4 West 39 258277 
Total  158 480479 
(Source: Information furnished by BDA) 
Of these 298 CA sites, BDA had notified the purpose of the CA sites in only 
24 cases and the notification  for allotment of CA sites had been last issued by 
BDA during January 2009. Sub-optimal utilisation of the area earmarked for 
CA, besides resulting in lack of the intended civic amenities in the layouts, 
deprived BDA of the opportunity of generating substantial financial resources 
by leasing the CA sites with a revenue potential of 
` 192.30 crore6.
In addition, BDA could not allot 29 CA sites measuring 1.45 lakh sqm in four 
divisions due to litigation.  The details on periods of pendency of litigation for 
these CA sites were not on record.
Scrutiny showed that 110 CA sites allotted by BDA between January 1986 and 
January 2011 including 80 CA sites allotted during 2007-12 had not been used 
for the authorized purposes as the requisite infrastructure had not been created 
by the allottees (July 2012).  The period of six years prescribed for setting up 
the requisite infrastructure had expired in 30 cases.
6  At Rs.2100 per sqm 
17.8 Non-utilisation of CA sites after allotment 
17.7 CA Sites yet to be allotted  

ReportNo.3of2012
118 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA
As of March 2012, 61 CA sites had been encroached upon. While temples had 
been constructed on 14 CA sites, another 30 sites including 15 in private 
layouts had been converted as parks or playgrounds.
Further, as per the conditions prescribed in the relinquishment deed for CA 
sites, the private developer/owner was to fence the CA sites before handing 
over these to BDA. It was seen that encroachment of 20 out of 61 CA sites had 
taken place in private layouts. The revenue potential of 61 CA sites 
encroached upon worked out to 
` 60.73 crore on the basis of the lease amount 
for 30 years.  BDA had not taken any effective action to evict the encroachers 
and restore its properties. 
17.9 Encroachment/unauthorised construction on CA Sites 

ChapterͲ18
Performance Audit on  
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA 119
18.1.1 Parks not relinquished by private developers 
Three housing societies had failed to relinquish the 11 parks measuring 
14634.20 sqm in four layouts (March 2012). The action taken against these 
societies along with the details of the work orders issued were not furnished to 
Audit.
18.1.2 Encroachment of parks 
Three out of four BDA divisions had reported (March 2012) encroachment of 
parks. The total area encroached upon was 321180.60 sqm. Out of 56 parks 
encroached upon, 26 (46 per cent ) were in layouts developed by BDA. 
Temples had encroached upon 26 parks, BBMP had encroached upon four 
parks, buildings had been unauthorisedly constructed in 15 parks, one park 
had been encroached upon by a private resort and the remaining parks had 
been encroached upon by schools, Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage 
Board and Karnataka Power Transmission Company Limited.   
Large scale encroachment of parks indicated that the system of safeguarding 
the assets was ineffective in BDA and this was fraught with the risk of BDA 
losing valuable land due to encroachment.  
18.1.3 Irregular allotment of park to private institutions 
A CA site measuring 300'x300' had been allotted to a club in HAL-II Stage. 
Acting on a representation received from the club in July 2004, the Chairman, 
BDA allotted (July 2005) additional area of 1525.10 sqm in a park adjacent to 
the club subject to the condition that the area would be maintained as a park. 
The Assistant Executive Engineer had issued (May 2007) a show cause notice 
to the club on observing construction activity inside the park. BDA had also 
noticed that the club had informed its members about the opening of a lounge 
bar in the park area.
18.1 Parks  

ReportNo.3of2012
120 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA
After issuing (January 2008) a show cause notice, BDA cancelled (May 2008) 
the allotment as the explanation of the club was not acceptable. Acting on the 
representation (May 2008) of the club, the Secretary, Estate Officer and the 
Deputy Secretary of BDA inspected the park and reported (July 2008) that no 
bar was functioning in the park. Thereafter, BDA revoked its order of 
cancellation in November 2008.  The allotment of park to the club was 
irregular for the following reasons: 
¾ There is no provision in the BDA Act or the BDA (Allotment of Civic 
Amenity Sites Rules), 1989 for allotment of parks to individuals or 
private institutions. As per the CDP 1995 and the RMP 2015, the parks 
are to be developed by BDA and later handed over to BBMP for 
maintenance. Parks being open spaces meant for use by the general 
public, the allotment of the park to a private  club for the exclusive use of 
its members was, therefore, irregular. 
¾ The club had informed its members through a letter dated 17 June 2007 
about the opening of the lounge bar in the park. Thus, the revoking of the 
cancellation order was not justified.
Further scrutiny showed that the remaining area of the park measuring 713 
sqm had also been irregularly allotted (July 2005) to a music sabha.  The 
allotment had been made again on the orders of the Chairman, BDA.  Thus, 
the entire park had been used for unauthorised purposes due to irregular 
allotments made by the Chairman.  


ChapterͲ18
Performance Audit on  
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA 121
18.2.1  Differences in the land handed over 
While the Land Acquisition Section claimed that 2874-18 acres had so far 
(March 2012) been handed over to the Engineering Division for the formation 
of four
7 layouts, only 2491-15.46 acres had been handed over as per the land 
audit reports (March 2012) and information furnished by the Engineering 
Division.  The difference in area worked out to 383-12 acres. The reasons for 
the huge shortfall in taking possession of land by the Engineering Division 
were not forthcoming and the same had not been reconciled.  
18.2.2  Differences in land developed 
As per the information furnished by the Land Acquisition Section, the land 
developed in three
8 BDA layouts was 1711- ½ acres as of March 2012, while 
as per the land audit reports and information furnished by the Engineering 
Divisions, it was 1571-29½  acres. The difference of 139-11 acres had not 
been reconciled. 
18.2.3  Unauthorised occupation and encroachments  
BDA had not maintained Asset Register incorpo rating the details of the assets 
available. This omission had been commented upon persistently in the 
Separate Audit Reports on Certification of the Annual Accounts of BDA 
issued year after year. Out of the 149 layouts formed, details of land audit 
conducted in respect of only 13 layouts had been furnished to Audit (March 
2012). Out of the four Engineering Divisions, South Division had not 
furnished any land audit report. Scrutiny of the available information showed 
that land to the extent of 1039 -33 acres had not been  utilised for formation of 
sites as the same had been either built-up or encroached upon in 13 layouts 
formed between 1969 and 2002. The value of the land encroached upon 
aggregated
` 24075 crore9.
18.2.4 Differences in area available for civic amenity 
The information on the area of CA sites furnished by the Town Planning 
Section on the basis of approved plans was at variance with that furnished by 
the four Engineering Divisions as shown in Table-29:
7  Koramangala, Sir M Vishweswaraiah Layout, East of NGEF Layout and JP Nagar VIII Phase 
8  Sir M Vishweswaraiah Layout, East of NGEF Layout and JP Nagar IX Phase 
9  Based on the highest bid obtained from auction held during the last five years 
18.2 Asset management 

ReportNo.3of2012
122 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA
Table-29: Variations in the area of the CA sites 
(Area in sqm) 
Sl.
No. 
Name of the 
division 
Area as per Town 
Planning Section 
Area as per the 
Engineering Division Difference 
1 South 421232.57 219874.41 201358.16 
2 West 180117.2 300603 120485.80 
3 North 232183 487765 255582.00 
4 East 99833.43 95532.75 4300.68 
(Source: Information furnished by BDA) 
The difference had not been reconciled.  Huge difference in the availability of 
area for civic amenities was indicative of ineffective asset management by 
BDA.  
18.2.5 Ineffective management of CA sites 
The Authority had not devised any mechanism for periodical verification of 
the existence, maintenance and utilisation of the CA sites for authorized 
purposes. No efforts were also made to include the CA sites as assets in the 
Annual Accounts inspite of Audit pointing out this lapse year after year while 
certifying the Annual Accounts of BDA. Demand-Collection-Balance 
statements had not been prepared by BDA for CA sites.  There was, therefore, 
no system to keep track of the demand and collection of dues from the 
allottees of CA sites. No system was also in place to monitor the renewal of 
the leases of the CA sites.  

ChapterͲ19
Performance Audit on  
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA 123
The Army Welfare Housing Organisation (AWHO), registered as a society 
under the Societies Registration Act XXI of 1860, had submitted (November 
2008) an application to BDA seeking approval of development plan for 
residential apartments to be built over 29 acres 26 guntas in Kanamangala 
Village, Bidarahalli Hobli, Bangalore East Taluk. BDA approved (April 2010) 
the development plan after the AWHO paid the development charges of 
` 57.60 lakh.  The AWHO had also relinquished (April 2010) 7628.13 sqm of 
land for road widening along with 12,102.49 sqm of land for parks and open 
spaces in favour of BDA. When AWHO submitted (May 2010) the building 
plans for 1524 dwelling units, BDA assessed the fees payable by AWHO at 
` 8.09 crore as shown in the Table-30:
Table-30 : Fees payable by AWHO 
Sl. No. Particulars Fees  (` in crore) 
1 Processing Fee 1.52
2. Ground rent 1.52 
3. Development Charges 0.38 
4. Workers Welfare Cess 2.66 
5. Security Deposits 1.90 
6. Plan Copies 0.06 
7. Slum clearance cess 0.05 
Total 8.09 
(Source: Information furnished by BDA) 
The Commissioner sanctioned the plan in May 2010.  The AWHO represented  
(November 2010) to BDA that the CM, during the foundation stone laying 
ceremony of the project on 12 August 2010, had assured of waiving off some 
of the mandatory charges to be deposited with BDA.  The Principal Secretary 
to the CM had sought (June 2010) a report from BDA regarding the provisions 
available in this regard. When a simila r request was made by AWHO earlier 
(June 2010), BDA expressed (July 2010) its inability to consider the waiver of 
fees as there was no provision in the BDA Act or regulations for such waiver. 
It was further reported that such a waiver might create a precedent for other 
cases in future.   However, the Secretary to the CM, while conveying the 
decision of the CM, directed (August 2010) BDA to waive off 
` one crore as 
committed.  BDA resolved (November 2010) not to consider the proposal for 
waiver as such action would create a precedent for several other organizations 
to make similar demands.  A report on these lines was sent to Government 
seeking specific orders for waiver of 
` one crore from the plan processing fees 
and Government order was awaited (August 2012).   
19.1  Unjustified waiver of ground rent  

ReportNo.3of2012

124 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA
The AWHO had represented (December 2010) again to the Government 
requesting for waiver of the ground rent of ` 1.52 crore on the ground that the 
plant and stores for construction were being kept on the land belonging to 
them and no public land was being used.  
The approved plans were released under the orders (December 2010) of the 
Commissioner after accepting the part payment of 
` 1.48 crore made by 
AWHO subject to the condition that the orga nization would pay the remaining 
amount of ` 6.61 crore.  AWHO subsequently paid ` 4.09 crore during 2012.  
BDA resolved (February 2011) to waive off the ground rent of ` 1.52 crore as 
a special case.  
The waiver of ` 1.52 crore was not justified for the following reasons:
As per Para 3.8 of the Building Bye-Laws-2003 of BBMP, the ground rent is 
charged for stocking of building materials on public land as prescribed by 
BDA without causing obstruction to movement of vehicles and pedestrians 
subject to the permission of BDA.  Para 3.9 stipulates that high rise buildings 
are not exempted from payment of ground rent irrespective of the setbacks and 
coverage. The ground rent is to be exempted only in the cases of individual 
residential bungalows, schools, colleges and other institutions, religious and 
cultural institutions, heavy industries and Government buildings.  BDA stated 
(September 2012) that a detailed report had been sent to Government for 
taking a decision on waiving of ground rent and that occupancy certificate 
would not be issued to the organisation till receipt of approval from the 
Government.  
The waiver of 
` one crore from the plan processing fee was yet to be approved 
by the Government. 

PART-III

ChapterͲ20
PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA 127
The denotifications discussed in the Report con clusively established that the 
well settled law that land cannot be denotified after taking possession had been 
bypassed, resulting in subversion of the acquisition process. The authority 
which directed these subversions subjugated public interest to private interest.  
Acquisition of property for a public purpose is a very serious issue as it 
culminates in the compulsory surrender of the land by its owner for a modest 
compensation in obedience of the law.  In this context, reversal of the 
acquisition proceedings in favour of a few individuals in disregard of the law 
was discriminatory and had evidently been done on extraneous considerations.  
Most of cases of denotifications examined by Audit were found to be illegal 
and the Government needs to put an end to such acts.  
Though the KLRT Act prohibits the registering authority from registering land 
notified for public purpose in favour of any person after issue of the final 
notification, the registering authority acted against law and registered land in 
many cases in favour of several persons after issue of the notification for 
acquisition. This showed that the controls prescribed for preventing illegal sale 
of the notified land were not functional and the administration of the Act was 
ineffective. 
The LAOs on their part subverted the acquisition process by either not making 
award for the notified land or leaving out portions of the notified land while 
making payment of compensation.  The effect of failure to pass the award 
within two years from the date of declaration was that the acquisition 
proceedings stood lapsed, restoring the notified land to its owners and 
defeating the public purpose. 
The Commissioners of BDA subverted the acquisition proceedings and 
reconveyed the notified land to the erstwhile land owners by unauthorisedly 
collecting betterment tax from them for the land notified for public purpose. 
The allotment of various categories of sites by BDA was not consistent with 
the extant rules, as ‘G’ category sites had been allotted to ineligible persons, 
allotment of alternative sites had witnessed several irregularities, CA sites had 
been allotted directly without notifying these to public and several 
unauthorised concessions had been extended to the allottees of CA sites.  The 

ReportNo.3of2012
128 PerformanceAuditon
DenotificationoflandbyGovernmentandAllotmentofsitesbyBDA
management of CA sites and parks by BDA was ineffective as may CA sites 
had been used for unauthorised purposes, the leases of many CA sites had not 
been renewed, a large number of available CA sites had not been notified to 
the general public and many CA sites and parks had been encroached upon. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART-IV 

Appendices 
 
Performance Audit on 
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA  133
 
Appendix-1 
(Reference: Paragraph 14.1, Page 86) 
Details of land notified for public purpose and taken possession of  
Name of the layout Date of final 
notification 
Extent of land as 
per final 
notification 
Extent of land 
taken possession 
of 
Extent  of land 
yet to be taken 
possession of 
Acre Gunta Acre Gunta Acre Gunta 
HAL II Stage 19.8.64 428 10 335 34 92 16 
Further extension of 
Jayanagar IX Block 
28.6.48 39 30 32 15 7 15 
Akkithimmanahally 13.12.63 63 39 34 3 29 36 
Koramanagala 28.9.65 986 34 824 20 162 14 
Sarakki 27.5.70 741 21 624 6 117 15 
Pillanna garden II Stage 5.11.71 24 2 7 12 16 30 
HAL III Stage 15.7.71 457 12 341 3 116 09 
Matadahalli 25.6.74 192 37 107 17 85 20 
Further extension of 
Matadahalli 30.11.77 43 6 32 2 11 04 
BTM Layout 7.2.98 1703 10 987 18 715 32 
Chandra Layout 10.5.78 646 11 367 7 279 04 
RMV  II Stage 2.8.78 1331 4 629 24 701 20 
Kamakshipalya  21.6.79 520 24 97 35 422 29 
Mahalaxmi layout 30.8.79 786 10 569 2 217 08 
HRBR Layout 14.5.80 1129 2 859 31 269 11 
OMBR Layout 13.11.80 341 7 244 26 96 21 
Dr B.R.Ambedkar Nagar 27.12.80 176 2 55 21 120 21 
Further extension of RMV  II 
Stage 
28.12.82 108 18 69 28 38 30 
Further extension of HRBR 
Layout 
15.12.84 113 36 46 33 67 03 
13.2.89            
HBR I Stage 9.1.85 872 28 645 3 227 25 
HBR II Stage 28.2.85 1179 39 335 15 844 24 
Nagarabhavi I Stage 16.8.85 520 16 239 31 280 25 
Nagarabhavi II Stage 5.8.86 604 23 564 39 39 24 
East of NGEF 23.10.86 466 19 194 23 271 36 
HSR Layout 28.11.86 1664 21 1120 32 543 29 
Shinivagilu Tank Bed 23.11.88 293 12 5 24 287 28 
BSK IV Stage 27.1.89 364 2 167 9 196 33 
HBR III Stage 2.2.89 433 32 194 8 239 24 
BTM VI Stage 28.7.90 562 34 359 39 202 35 
BTM IV Stage 3.11.90 241 6 166 10 74 36 
Venkateshwara Layout 30.11.90 137 8 42 19 94 29 
Further extension of east of 
NGEF 
10.12.90 65 10 3 3 62 07 
JP Nagar IX Phase 22.7.91 1111 36 525 31 586 05 
Gnanabharathi 19.1.94 692 8 508 19 183 29 
7.10.99               00  00
6.10.97               00  00
BSK V Stage 9.5.94 1458 21 648 14 810 07 
JP Nagar VIII Phase 19.10.94 958 15 396 12 562 03 
Iron & Steel market 24.1.96 181 20 167 3 14 17 
Sajjepalya 24.5.96 160 0 32 1 127 39 
HSR II Stage 29.5.96 158 25 0 0 158 25 
Anjanapura township 28.8.00 507 3 396 3 111 0 
4.8.01            
BSK VI Stage 21.8.01 1603 17 1587 36 15 21 

Report No.3 of 2012 
134 Performance Audit on 
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA 
 
Name of the layout Date of final 
notification 
Extent of land as 
per final 
notification 
Extent of land 
taken possession 
of 
Extent  of land 
yet to be taken 
possession of 
Acre Gunta Acre Gunta Acre Gunta 
24.5.02            
Further extension of 
Anjanapura 
4.3.02 487 0 410 0 77 0 
Sir M.Vishweshwaraiah 
layout 31.10.02 1337 22 1239 15 98 07 
Further extension of 
Sir.M.Vishweshwaraiah 
layout  9.9.03 510 0 436 7 73 33 
Further extension of BSK VI 
Stage 9.9.03 750 0 571 7 178 33 
Arkavathy 23.2.04 2750 0 1289 31 1460 09 
Nadaprabhu Kempegowda 
layout 18.2.10 4043 27 0 0 4043 27 
Pillanna garden III Stage 24.12.71 92 19 49 32 42 27 
Further extension of OMBR 4.12.88 3 11 3 11 0 0 
Further extension of Domlur  20.6.1960 18 10 18 10 0 0 
West of Chord Road I Stage 9.9.71 147 25 147 25 0 0 
Mini Forest 7.2.78 14 22 14 22 0 0 
Further extension of 
Mahalakshmi Layout 15.7.77 26 25 26 25 0 0 
Kumaraswamy layout 29.5.78 274 26 274 26 0 0 
   34505 897 19026 922 15454 975 
Total 34527 17 19049 2 15478 15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
 
Performance Audit on  
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA  135 
 
Appendix-2 
(Reference: Paragraph 16.1, Page 96) 
Details of alternative sites allotted in older layouts 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Site Originally allotted Alternate site allotted Year of 
allotment 
Dimension 
in sqm 
Average auction rate 
during the period 
of allotment (per sqm) 
BDA’s 
allotment 
rate (` per sqm) 
Loss to BDA 
(` per sqm) 
Total loss 
(` in lakh) Site No. Layout Name Site No. Layout Name 
1 1 BBC-
716 
HRBR I Block 3 M -735  OMBR 2008 223.04 38234 2100 36134 80.59 
2 29 KG -
38 
HBR II stage 27 BSK III  
stage(Avhalli) 
2009 55.76 53600 2100 51500 28.71 
3 413 HBR I stage/ II Block 5M-647 OMBR 2008 223.04 38234 2100 36134 80.59 
4 122 KG-
34 
HBR II stage 2 BM -305 OMBR 2007 223.04 38234 2100 36134 80.59 
5 81 NG -
10 
HBR II stage 2 AM -702 /C OMBR 2007 55.76 38234 2100 36134 20.15 
6 467 HBR I stage/IV Block 4 CM -462 OMBR 2008 111.52 38234 2100 36134 40.30 
7 925 HBR I stage 4C-319 OMBR 2008 111.52 38234 2100 36134 40.30 
8 2 M-217 HRBR III Block 1549/B BTM II stage 2007 55.76 53600 2100 51500 28.72 
9 6 BM-412 HBR II Block 5 M -691 OMBR 2008 371.75 38234 2100 36134 134.33 
10 4EC 226 HRBR III Block 5M-618 OMBR 2010 55.76 38234 2100 36134 20.15 
11 1 M-411 East NGEF 2 C0 427 OMBR 2007 223.04 38234 2100 36134 80.59 
12 1175 SMVL 8th Block 310 AJP XI Block 2011 111.52 27200 2100 25100 27.99 
13 1777 SMVL 8th Block 501 AJP XI Block 2009 111.52 27200 2100 25100 27.99 
14 1778 SMVL 8th Block 681 AJP XI Block 2011 111.52 27200 2100 25100 27.99 
15 1779 SMVL 8th Block 687 AJP XI Block 2010 111.52 27200 2100 25100 27.99 
16 1780 SMVL 8th Block 715 AJP XI Block 2011 111.52 27200 2100 25100 27.99 
17 1781 SMVL 8th Block 736 AJP XI Block 2003 111.52 27200 2100 25100 27.99 
18 1782 SMVL 8th Block 737 AJP XI Block 2011 111.52 27200 2100 25100 27.99 
19 1784 SMVL 8th Block 1010 AJP XI Block 2011 111.52 27200 2100 25100 27.99 
20 1785 SMVL 8th Block 1011 AJP XI Block 2011 111.52 27200 2100 25100 27.99 
21 164 NB II stage/VIII 
Block 
4C-307 OMBR 2007 111.52 38234 2100 36134 40.30 
22 3131 RPC Layout 1589 MRCR Layou t 2007 55.76 55200 2100 53100 29.61 
23 1660 RPC Layout 679 MRCR Layou t 2010 111.52 55200 2100 53100 59.22 
24 406 JP IX phase / III 
Block 
114 HSR Sector VI 2007 223.04 66350 2100 64250 143.31 
25 49 JP IX phase /IV A 
Block 
301 BTM VI stage/ I 
Block 
2011 111.52 27200 2100 25100 27.99 
26 182 AJP VIII block 4 C -307 OMBR 2007 55.76 38234 2100 36134 20.15 
27 3010 SMVL I Block 196 JPVIII phase /I 
Block 
2010 55.76 27200 2100 25100 14.00 

Report No.3 of 2012 
136 Performance Audit on  
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Site Originally allotted Alternate site allotted Year of 
allotment 
Dimension 
in sqm 
Average auction rate 
during the period 
of allotment (per sqm) 
BDA’s 
allotment 
rate (` per sqm) 
Loss to BDA 
(` per sqm) 
Total loss 
(` in lakh) Site No. Layout Name Site No. Layout Name 
28 2645 SMVL I Block 501 JPVIII  phase/I 
Block 
2010 55.76 27200 2100 25100 14.00 
29 955 BTM  IV stage/ II 
Block 
51 S T Bed, 
Koramangala 
2009 223.04 40100 2100 38000 84.75 
30 727 BTM VI stage/I Block 1020 BTM IV stage/ II 
Block 
2011 55.76 30500 2100 28400 15.84 
31 489 BSK VI stage/X block 1073 HBR I stage/V 
block 
2009 371.75 49322 2100 47222 175.55 
32 103 HSR Sector I 2 BM-739 OMBR 2009 223.04 38234 2100 36134 80.59 
33 1343 JP VIII phase/III 
block 
204 / A HSR III Sector 2011 111.52 72680 2100 70580 78.71 
34 135 BTM VI stage/ I block 1073 HSR III Sector 2009 111.52 66350 2100 64250 71.65 
  Total 1742.60 
(Source: Information furnished by BDA) 
 
 

Appendices 
 
Performance Audit on  
Denotification of land by Government and  Allotment of sites by BDA  137 
 
Appendix-3 
(Reference: Paragraph 16.1, Page 96) 
Allotment of alternative sites in older layouts without the approval of the Allotment Committee 
 
Sl. No. 
Site Originally allotted Alternate site allotted 
Month 
of 
approval 
Average 
auction rate 
(` per sqm) 
BDA 
Allotment 
rate (` 
per sqm) 
 
Loss to BDA 
per sqm (` 
per sqm)  
Loss 
(` in lakh)  Site No. Layout Name Site No. Layout Name Dimension 
1 1565 SMVL II Block 1004 HSR Sector VI 371.75 Feb-11 73100 2100 71000 263.94 
2 1317 BTM IV stage/II block 1006 HSR  Sector VI 371.75 Feb-10 75300 2100 73200 272.12 
3 1315 BTM IV stage/I block 1002 HSR  Sector VI 371.75 Feb-11 73100 2100 71000 263.94 
4 22 NB II stage/ VIII block 213/A HSR Sector I 111.52 Jun-11 71067 2100 68967 76.92 
5 1567 SMVL II block 1002 HSR V 371.75 Feb-11 73100 2100 71000 263.94 
6 1350 BTM IV stage/II block 1210/A HSR II 223.04 Mar-08 46571 2100 44471 99.19 
7 541 SMVL V block 1151 HSR III 371.75 Jul-09 56000 2100 53900 200.37 
8 3841 JPN IX phase/II block 365/A HSR III 111.52 Dec-11 72680 2100 70580 78.71 
9 1346 H BTM IV stage/II block 688 HSR VI 223.04 Dec-09 66350 2100 64250 143.30 
10 637 GB( Vhalli) 1014 HSR VI 223.04 Mar-11 73100 2100 71000 158.35 
11 187 BTM VI stage/I block 112 HSR I 223.04 Oct-08 55730 2100 53630 119.62 
Total 1940.40 
 
 
 
 
 