© COMPTROLLER AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
www.cag.gov.in

www.agua.cag.gov.in

Prntad a Shiva Ofst Press, Dehradun Ph 01352715748,

e107 7००८ ayy Jo ZON Hoday pueypyereng jo juauTuZaA05

'रत्यमेव at

Report of
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
District Nainital

for the year ended 31 March 2012

Government of Uttarakhand
Report No. 2 of the year 2013



Uttarakhand Map

Source: Maps of India.com

Source: Maps of India.com


Table of Contents

Preface

Introduction

Executive Summary

vii

District planning Committee and District Plan

3.1

Audit objectives 21 7
Audit mandate 2.2 7
Audit criteria 2.3 7
Audit scope and methodology 24 7
Acknowledgement 2.5 8

Financial management

3.2

Decentralisation 4.1 13
Organisational arrangements in PRIs and ULBs 42 14
Planning 43 14
Financial Management 44 15
Maintenance of Accounts 45 16
Monitoring of executed works 46 17



Project

National Rural Health Mission 5.1 19
National Rural Drinking Water Programme 5.2 30
National Rural Drinking Water Quality Monitoring and 5.3 35
Surveillance Programme

Uttarakhand Decentralised Watershed Development 5.4 38

Civic Amenities

TA

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 6.1 43
Guarantee Scheme

Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme 6.2 50
National Afforestation Programme 6.3 57

| 6 |

National Lake Conservation Plan

Human Resource Management

72

8.1

| 6 |

77

Internal Control

Impact of Schemes and Services

8.2

79

85

ii



APPENDICES

Appendix Particulars Reference to

No Paragraph(s) | Page No.

[1.1 | Status of Human Development infrastructure 1.1 91

2.1 Statement showing developmental schemes selected 2.4 92
for district Audit

3.1 Mismatch in the opening and closing balance 3.2.1 93

3.2 Financial status of the significant schemes being 3.2.1 94
implemented in the district

33 Financial status of selected schemes being 3.2.1 |
implemented in the district

Al The organisational arrangements of PRIs 42 97

42 Organisational Structure for ULBs 42 98

43 Total funds available and expenditure incurred in the 44 99
test checked PRIs and ULBs (2007-08 to 2011-12)

44 Funds received under SFC, TFC and ThFC by the 44.1 a
PRIs in Nainital District

51 Cost escalation in selected GPs 5.4.2.1 100

5.2 Component wise expenditure under UDWDP 5.4.2.2 101

6.1 Position of 11 canals which were already irrigating
more area than Proposed Potential Area (PPA) as well 6.2.3.2 102
as Culturable Command Area (CCA)

6.2 Available funds and expenditure under NAP (2007-08 6.3.1 102
to 2011-12)

8.1 Details of Sanctioned Strength and Men in Position of 8.1 103
the line departments

8.2 Details of Sanctioned Strength and Men in Position in 8.1.1 104
the selected schemes

8.3 Detail of Audit conducted by District Local Fund 8.2.1 104
Audit

Glossary of abbreviations 105

iii



PREFACE
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India contains the results
of audit of Nainital District in Uttarakhand. The Report has been prepared for
submission to the Governor of the State of Uttarakhand under Article 151 (2) of

the Constitution of India.

Audit conducted a review of the significant socio-economic developmental
programmes implemented in Nainital District during the period 2007 to 2012. The
audit process involved test-check of records pertaining to Nainital District in the
District Economic and Statistical Office, District Panchayati Raj Office, District
Development Office, selected blocks, Gram Panchayats, Municipal Corporation

and boards, line departments and various district level implementing agencies.

The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued

(2002) by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.



| |[__________  1_0०0ए००_______ | |

1.1. General Profile of the District

Nainital District is located in the Kumaon Division of Uttarakhand. The District is spread over
hilly as well as plains areas. Nainital District has earned the epithet of Lake District of India due
to the presence of many big and small lakes in the vicinity. It is surrounded by Almora District
in north, Udham Singh Nagar District in south, Champawat District in east and District Pauri
Garhwal in the west. The most prominent of the lakes is Naini Lake ringed by hills. Nainital has
a varied topography. Some of the important places in the District are Nainital, Haldwani,
Kaladhungi, Ramgarh, Bhowali, Ramnagar, Mukteshwar, Bhimtal, Sattal and Naukuchiatal.

The District spans an area of 3,853 sq km, which is 7.20 per cent of the total area of the State
(53,483 sq km) and has its headquarter at Nainital. The District comprises of eight tehsils. To
cater to rural development, the District has been divided into eight Community Development
Blocks! covering 460 Gram Panchayats (GPs), three Nagar Palika Parishad (NPP), three Nagar
Panchayats (NP)’ and Nagar Nigam (NN) Haldwani. Out of 1.41 lakh families‘ of the District,
31 per cent (0.43 lakh families) live below the poverty line (BPL). The status of Human
Resources Development Infrastructure and significant developmental schemes in the district are
given in Appendix-1.1. The profile of the District is described in Table 1.1 below:

Table 1.1: Demographic profile

Features of Profile | District | State
Total population (in lakh) 9.55 101.16
Male population (in lakh) 4.94 51.54
Female Population (in lakh) 4.61 49.62
Sex Ratio 933 963
Total literacy rate 84.85 79.63
Male literacy rate 91.09 88.33
Female literacy rate 78.21 70.70
Infant Mortality Rate (IMR) per 1000 lives 31 43
Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR) per 1,00,000 live births 183 188
Total Fertility Rate (children per woman) 2.1 2.3

Source: Census 2011, Annual Health Survey, 2010-11

Bhimtal, Ramgarh, Dhari, Okhalkanda, Betalghat, Haldwani, Ramnagar & Kotabagh.
Nagar Palika Parishad- Nainital, Ramnagar & Bhowali.
Nagar Panchayat- Bhimtal, Kaladhungi & Lalkuwan
As per census 2001.

vii


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

1.2 Organisational set-up

The District Magistrate is the head of the district administration. He is assisted by the Chief
Development Officer (CDO) in formulation of district plan and the Project Director, District
Rural Development Agency (DRDA) in implementation of different developmental programmes
in the district. In addition to above, he supervises and monitors different sectoral programmes
implemented by the district level heads of the line departments, the structure of which is given
below. However, the District Planning Committee (DPC) is the apex plan approving and
monitoring body in the district.

Chart 1.1: Organizational set-up

District Magistrate
Over all incharge of the district. Ensures coordination between District Rural Development
Agency (DRDA), Panchayat Raj Institutions (PRIs), Field Offices and all other departments &
reviews the schemes/programmes implemented in the district

Chief Development Officer

हि बे nae Societies
Responsible for preparation, prioritization, monitoring
of schemes
District Development Officer Project Director, DRDA
Releases funds to Block Development Releases funds to BDOs, responsible for
Officers, responsible for monitoring physical monitoring physical and financial progress of
and financial progress of developmental developmental schemes & coordinates with
schemes of the state district/state/GOT

Block Development Officers
Releases funds to GPs, monitors physical and financial progress at block level &
reports to DDO/DRDA for utilisation of funds etc.

Pradhans
Gram Panchayats execute schemes at
GP level and render accounts to BDOs

viii


I SChapter-1: ExecutiveSummary xecutive Summary |

e Planning Commission, Government of India (GOT), has been according considerable importance to
a district-centric approach in the devolution of finances for integrated local area development for
the district. Similarly, the State Government has also been devolving funds district wise for
holistic development of a district. Recognizing the importance of such district oriented
development, a district-centric audit of Nainital district was carried out to assess the status and
impact of implementation of various socio-economic developmental programmes in the district
during 2007-12. The review covered key social sector programmes relating to health, water
supply, watershed development (an externally aided project) and other developmental
programmes of economic sector like employment generation, irrigation and forestation under
National Afforestation Programme. Besides, General services relating to civic amenities by
municipal administration and Lake Conservation Programme were also covered.

District Planning

The district planning in Nainital was deficient due to delayed constitution of District Planning
Committee (DPC) and delay in framing of rules and regulations. DPC did not hold quarterly
meetings after it was constituted in November 2010.

The DPC had not prepared any Perspective Plan or even a shelf of schemes for the overall
development of the district. The local levels of the government were not involved in providing
any inputs to the planning process. The State Government during 2007-08 to 2011-12 had
released हैं 187.15 crore towards District Development Plan (DDP) of Nainital District without
assessing linkage to the bottom-up planning projection. Thus, the functions of the DPC remained
incomplete and perfunctory in absence of ground level participation.

[Paragraph 3.1]
Recommendations
The Government may consider to ensure:

. Preparing holistic perspective and integrated plans for the district, based on a structured
process of obtaining inputs from local bodies and shelf of projects for a more realistic
assessment of the district.

. Regular meeting of the DPC for more effective planning and monitoring of the various
schemes in the district.

Financial Management

There is no integrated reporting mechanism of scheme wise physical and financial status of the
district available in the district or at the State Government level. There was mismatch of figures
in certain schemes provided in the compiled data of District Economic and Statistical Office
(DESTO) with respect to the information collected from various departments individually by



Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

Audit. Audit noticed mismatch in the opening and closing balances of the available compiled
figures by DESTO.

[Paragraph 3.2 and 3.3 ]
Recommendations
The State Government may consider to ensure:

. Introducing a mechanism of an integrated reporting system at district and State level to
monitor funds flows, deployment of funds and expenditure of the different developmental
programmes/ schemes.

Decentralised Governance
The empowerment of Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) as
envisaged in the XIth schedule of the Constitution has not been completely achieved even after a
lapse of 19 years from Constitutional amendment. The integrated annual plans of Zila Parishad
(ZP) and ULBs had not been submitted to DPC for integration with district development plan. In
the district, only 98 Village Development Officers (VDOs)/ Multi-purpose workers (MPWs)
were working for 460 GPs. The shortage of VDOs/ MPWs resulted in non-maintenance of
accounting formats, assets registers etc. No monitoring or supervision was carried out by ZP in
respect of the works carried out by the GPs and KPs.

[Paragraph 4.1]
Recommendations

The State Government/ District Administration may consider to ensure:

. Devolving all the subjects to PRIs and ULBs as envisaged in the XIth and XIIth schedules
of the Constitution.
. Integration of district development plan with the plans prepared by PRIs and ULBs.

Social Services

National Rural Health Mission (NRHM)

The District Health Society (DHS) met infrequently and no Perspective Plan was prepared for
the mission period (2005-12). District Plans were prepared without inputs from Villages and
Blocks. Maternity Mortality Rate (MMR) and Infant Mortality Rate (IMR) stood at 183 and 31
against the NRHM targets of a maximum of 100 and 28 respectively by the end of Mission
period 2012, which was an area of concern for the district. Tardy implementation of health
programmes, shortage of doctors and paramedical staff and inadequate infrastructure as per IPHS
norms were the main reasons behind underachievement of targets. Integration of AYUSH as
envisaged under NRHM was not achieved in all the health centres of the district.

[Paragraph 5.1]



Chapter-1: Executive Summary

Recommendations

The State Government/ District Administration may consider to ensure:

. Equipping all health centres with adequate and skilled manpower as per IPHS norms.
. Community involvement at every stage of planning, implementation and monitoring of the
programme.

National Rural Drinking Water Programme

The objective to cover all habitations by providing safe and potable drinking water by the end of
2009 as per the target envisaged in the Eleventh Five Year Plan could not be achieved in the
district. Although, significant number of habitations has been covered during the last five years,
regular water quality testing was not carried out regularly to ensure quality of drinking water.

[Paragraph 5.2]
Recommendation

The State Government/ District Administration may consider to ensure:

. Fixing timeline for covering all habitations with safe and potable drinking water.
. Conducting regular testing of Water quality as per norms to ensure supply of safe and
potable drinking water to the people.

Externally Aided Project (Uttarakhand Decentralized Watershed Development Project)

The selection of watershed areas was made by the project authorities in a non-transparent
manner. Annual Work Plans were approved post facto on the basis of expenditure incurred
during the year and were therefore not based on actual need. Budget caps of Gram Panchayats
were enhanced arbitrarily. Works under the project in the district suffered from cost and time
overruns.

[Paragraph 5.4]

Economic Services
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme

The primary objective of ensuring livelihood security by providing 100 days of annual
employment to the targeted community was not achieved at all as only up to four per cent of
registered households were provided 100 days of employment during the period of 2007-08 to
2011-12. The scheme suffered from non-approval of Perspective Plan, delay in submission of
Annual Plans, unrealistic labour budgets, delay in payment of wages to the beneficiaries and
poor monitoring. The mismatch between the data of MIS and MPR indicated non-existence of
any mechanism to verify the authenticity of data before being uploaded to the MGNREGS



Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

website. Shortage of human resource in GRS and JE cadres ranged from 97 to 70 per cent.
There were shortfalls in conducting Social Audits, Inspections and Monitoring of works in the
district.

[Paragraph 6.1]
Recommendations

The State Government/ District Administration may consider to ensure:

. Deployment of adequate human resources for effective implementation of scheme.

. Increasing the awareness about the scheme in rural population so that every registered
household is aware about employment on demand within 15 days, unemployment
allowance in case of non-employment in scheduled time frame, compensation in case of
delayed payment etc.

. Paying special attention to check the existing mismatch between MPR and MIS data.
Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Scheme

The schemes of Irrigation Department and Minor Irrigation Department for the period 2007-12
in the district suffered from lack of planning and survey which led to under utilisation of funds,
delay in implementation of the various schemes, non-achievement of the objectives of irrigating
the targeted area and non-maintenance of completed schemes.

[Paragraph 6.2]
Recommendations

The State Government/ District Administration may consider to ensure:

. Putting in place monitoring mechanisms for proper operation and maintenance of
completed schemes.
. Preparing revenue village wise data base of canals and guls for better planning.

National Afforestation Programme

Although plantation works have been completed in most of the projects in the district but yearly
survival rate of plantations was not being assessed by the Forest Development Agencies (FDA).

[Paragraph 6.3]
Recommendations

The State Government/ District Administration may consider to ensure:

. Timely release of funds for maintenance, watch and ward of the raised plantation as per
norms.
. Maintaining and monitoring the yearly survival rate of plantations by the FDAs.



Chapter-1: Executive Summary

General Services

Civic Amenities by Municipal Administration

The construction of 923 houses under Integrated Housing Slum Development Project (IHSDP)
and 200 houses under Basic Service to the Urban Poor (BSUP) scheme of Haldwani and Nainital
towns could not be completed by the executing agencies despite availability of adequate funds.
Construction of 141 houses under BSUP scheme for Nainital town could not be started due to
non-availability of land.

Municipal waste was not being handled in accordance to MSW Act, 2000 and the waste
collected by the municipalities was finally dumped at nearby forest areas and in rivers. Failure to
obtain grant for modernization of the slaughter houses led to animals being slaughtered in open.

[Paragraph 7.1]
Recommendations

The State Government/ District Administration may consider to ensure:

. Availability of land before taking up of housing projects related to slum areas.

. Completion of the projects for management of solid wastes in all the four ULBs.

National Lake Conservation Plan

There were instances of irregular and unfruitful expenditure in various components of the project
like Solid Waste Management, Low Cost Sanitation and Social Awareness etc. Due to
non-preparation of Program Evaluation Review Technique chart, the project works were
executed without fixed timelines which led to delayed execution and works remaining
incomplete even after a lapse of six years from the stipulated date of completion. However, an
improvement in lake water quality parameters was noticed.

[Paragraph 7.2]

Human Resource Management and Internal Control System

There were shortages of staff in all the sample selected agencies of the district. Shortages were
noticed in every office, especially in key posts such as doctors, engineers and forest security
staff, which adversely affected the progress of the schemes. Besides, no internal auditing
mechanism was found to be established in majority of the departments. Multiple bank accounts
were being operated by ULBs, UJS and NLRSADA. Monitoring and supervision of the progress
of implementation of various schemes at all tiers of local administration in the district was
perfunctory, which impacted progress of the schemes.

[Paragraphs 8.1 to 8.2.7]



Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

Recommendations

The State Government/ District Administration may consider to ensure:

. Strengthening monitoring and supervision at all the tiers of local district administration
so that the programmes are executed on time and well within cost.

. periodical assessment of sanctioned strength, postings of functionary at each level,
especially in key post like doctors, engineers and forest security staff for smooth
implementation of the programmes/ schemes.

Conclusion

Planning was not based on structural process of obtaining inputs from Blocks, Gram Panchayats
and other stakeholders. There is multiplicity of programme and scheme and even larger number
of implementing agencies, making it difficult for the district administration to effectively
co-ordinate monitoring and supervise the developmental activities. While almost all the
developmental programmes are targeted at the same set of beneficiaries, the existence of myriad
programmes without an integrated focus, had led to each of them being implemented in a
standalone mode.

The District Administration needs to put in place a robust District Centric Planning Process by
mapping the gaps in infrastructure under various sectors like health, employment generation,
drinking water, etc though inputs from all tiers of local administration and Public at large. A
clear roadmap to achieve the targets set through such plans for the development indicators to
gauge the extent of development and the effectiveness of various schemes being implemented by
the state in the district should be evolved by the State Government. People’s participation is
essential for ensuring sustainable development of the district.



I —SCChapter-2AuditFramework | Audit Framework |

2.1 Audit Objectives
The Audit objectives were to ascertain whether:
e Planning for implementation of programmes and schemes was effective;
e Financial Management was efficient;
e Implementation of the Social, Economic and General Sector programmes and schemes were
efficient, effective and economical;
e Decentralisation was carried out efficiently;

e The extent of organisational cohesion and intra-agency synergy in the district against a
variety of bodies such as DDOs, Parallel Bodies, Local Bodies and Autonomous Bodies was
appropriate;

e Human Resource Management was efficient to carry out the implementation of the
programmes and schemes;

e Internal Control System was efficient and effective; and
¢ Monitoring mechanism was in place and effective.
2.2 Audit Mandate
The audit of schemes and programmes implemented in the district was conducted under Sections
13, 14, 20 (1) of the CAG's DPC Act, 1971.
2.3 Audit Criteria

The audit criteria applied for assessing the performance of various development schemes/
programmes was derived from the following sources:

. District plans and annual plans;

. Guidelines of the concerned programmes/ schemes issued by the Central/ State
Government;

. Provisions of State Financial Rules, Procurement Rules, 2008 and supplementary

instructions/ orders issued by the Central and State Government from time to time;
. Department Manuals; and

. Prescribed monitoring mechanism.
2.4 Audit Scope and methodology

The Performance Audit of district Nainital involved a review of seven significant socio-
economic development programmes and schemes implemented by the different departments
during the period 2007-08 to 2011-12. The Sector wise programmes/ schemes selected for audit
are listed in Appendix -2.1. The audit was undertaken during May 2012 to September 2012.



Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

Before the commencement of audit, discussions were held with the District Magistrate (DM) and
other district level officers present in an entry conference on 20" April 2012 wherein the audit
objectives and scope of audit were discussed and inputs relating to various development
programmes/schemes were obtained. Separate meetings were also held with district, Block level
officers and Gram Panchayats by the team.

The district has eight Development Blocks and 460 Gram Panchayats. Blocks within the district
were stratified into two groups as hill and plain out of which 50 per cent blocks of the district
were selected by Simple Random Sampling Without Replacement (SRSWOR) using Random
Number Table. In each sampled block, 10 per cent Gram Panchayat/Nagar Palika/Nagar Nigam
were selected using the aforesaid method.

Audit was based on the scrutiny of the records of District Development Officer (DDO), local
bodies, parallel bodies and district heads of the line departments of the sampled schemes in the
selected blocks’ during May to September 2012. Information relating to district sector planning
and monitoring mechanism was also sought from the District Economic & Statistical Office
(DESTO) and District Panchayat Raj Officer (DPRO). The satisfaction level of the beneficiaries
on different parameters was evaluated by using detailed questionnaires devised by audit from
minimum 20 beneficiary/villagers of the selected 24 Gram Panchayats. Photographic evidence
and results of joint physical verification were used to substantiate audit observations.

Audit findings were discussed with the District Magistrate and the departmental functionaries in
the exit conference held on 26 February 2013 and their views have been incorporated in the
Report at appropriate places. The updated audit findings are discussed in the succeeding
chapters.

2.5 Acknowledgement

The office of the Principal Accountant General (Audit), Uttarakhand acknowledges the
cooperation extended by the District Magistrate, Chief Development Officer and district heads of
the concerned departments in conducting this audit.

1 Bhimtal, Ramgarh, Ramnagar and Haldwani



|| लिकाश-3 District Planning and Financial Management District Planning and Financial Management |

3.1 District Planning Committee and District Plan

The 74" constitutional amendment inserted Article 243 ZD in the Constitution which states that
"there shall be constituted in every State at the district level a District Planning Committee
(DPC) to consolidate the plans prepared by the Panchayats and the Municipalities in the district
and to prepare a draft development plan for the district as a whole". It exhorts the State
Legislature to “make provision with respect to the composition of the District Planning
Committees and the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall be filled.”

Prior to the formation of District Planning Committee, the District Planning & Monitoring
Committee (DPMC) was an alternate body in place of DPC in the district. The DPMC
comprised of Cabinet Minister as the Chairperson, Members of Parliament and Legislative
Assembly belonging to the district, the District Magistrate (DM) and the Chief Development
Officer (CDO) as members. It was to meet, on quarterly basis, to review/ monitor the progress
of the schemes implemented in the district and was mandated to finalise the Perspective and
Annual District Plans.

Pursuant to the constitutional provisions, Uttarakhand (UK) Legislature passed the Uttarakhand
District Planning Committee Act, 2007 (July 2007) after seven years of its creation as a new
State. The Government framed rules under the Act in March 2010, i.e. after three years of
enactment of the Act. In Nainital, DPC? came into existence in November 2010.

3.1.1 Functions of District Planning Committee

District Planning Committees functions include: framing policies for preparation of the draft
development plan for the district as a whole; preparation of data base of all natural and human
resources with the lists of facilities available in each village, block and district; listing out
activities to be undertaken; revision and consolidation of development plans prepared by
Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) and holding quarterly
meetings to review the progress of implementation of the district development plan (DDP).

The salient points of DPC rules were: (a) DPC should prepare the DDP taking into account the
resources of PRIs including funds sanctioned by Government; (b) every Gram Panchayat (GP)
should prepare its development plan (DP) after discussing it in Gram Sabha (GS) and submit it to
Kshetra Panchayat (KP); (c) KP should integrate all DPs received from GPs in its DP and
prepare one DP for the entire KP for submission to Zila Panchayat (ZP); and (d) ZP should
consolidate all DPs received from KPs in its DP to prepare one draft development plan for the

2 Twenty six member committee comprising of State Cabinet Minister, Chairperson-ZP, District Magistrate, two

members nominated by the State Government and 21 elected members of ZP and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs).
The Chief Development Officer (CDO) and District Economic and Statistical Officer (DESTO) provide
secretarial assistance to DPC.



Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

district. Similarly, all ULBs should send their DPs to DPC. Thus, the district planning process
was envisaged to be a bottom-up process. Audit findings on the functioning of DPC/ DPMC
were as follows:

e In the absence of District Planning Committee (DPC), District Planning & Monitoring
Committee (DPMC) had not prepared any Perspective Plan or shelf of schemes for overall
development of the district on the basis of a need analysis in various areas/ sectors. The
DPMC approved the proposals of various district level offices for inclusion in the annual
district plan, only with reference to the budgetary allocation of the previous years during the
period 2007-08 to 2011-12.

e Since the constitution of DPC, only one meeting against the required six was held. The
district plan for the year 2012-13 was scheduled to be submitted to the State Planning
Commission by November 2011. It was noticed that the tentative district plan was submitted
(February 2012) to the State Planning Commission without the approval of DPC and was
then placed (May 2012) before DPC for approval.

e DPMC did not hold any quarterly meeting as prescribed and, consequently, could not review
the progress of the schemes.

e District Planning Committee was required to determine a strategy for the development of the
district as a whole and accordingly provide guidelines to the Panchayati Raj Institutions
(PRIs) and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) for formulating their Plans. Nothing was found to
have been done by the Committee in this regard since its formation.

© The State Government during 2007-08 to 2011-12 had released ₹ 187.15 crore’ towards DDP
of Nainital District without assessing linkage to the bottom-up planning projection. It was
further noticed that no funds were released to GPs and KPs out of the released funds for
executing development plans of their own.

«  PRIs and ULBs did not prepare any DPs during the period 2007-08 to 2011-12.

In exit conference, the facts were accepted by the District Magistrate. It was further stated that
quarterly meetings could not be held due to time constraints faced by the Honorable Ministers.
However, monthly meetings were held at DM level to ascertain the progress of schemes. The
reply was not acceptable as no records relating to monthly meetings held by the District
Magistrate were provided to Audit.

Information provided by District Economic and Statistical Officer (DESTO).

10


District Planning and Financial Management

Recommendations
The Government may consider to ensure:

e Preparing holistic perspective and integrated plans for the district, based on a structured
process of obtaining inputs from local bodies and shelf of projects for a more realistic
assessment of the district.

. Regular meeting of the DPC for more effective planning and monitoring of the various
schemes in the district.

३.2... Financial Management

Funds are allocated to the district through the State budget for various developmental activities.
In addition, funds are directly released to District Rural Development Agency (DRDA) and
implementing agencies for various socio-economic programmes by the State and GOI. The
DRDA releases funds to the Blocks and other executing agencies based on the approved
allocation for individual schemes.

3.2.1 Reliability and completeness of the financial data

In the district, Department wise allocation and expenditure was compiled by the District
Economic and Statistical Office (DESTO) for the monitoring of District Magistrate. The
financial data in the DESTO did not contain segregated figures on annual receipts from various
sources like 11" Plan, Central Finance Commission, State Finance Commission, devolution to
local bodies and various flagship programmes. Further, audit noticed a mismatch in the opening
and closing balances of the available compiled figures as can be seen in Appendix-3.1. Thus,
audit could not get information regarding totality of Government investments in the various
development schemes in the district. However, information on funds received and expenditure
incurred during 2007-08 to 2011-12 in respect of certain significant departments and
programmes was % 511.34 crore and % 483.91 crore respectively as detailed in Appendix -3.2
along with Pie chart.

Out of the total expenditure of % 483.91 crore, an expenditure of € 252.36 crore (52 per cent) was
incurred on the test checked schemes as shown in Appendix -3.3. The trends of availability’ of
funds and expenditure thereon and scheme wise expenditure of funds of the test checked
schemes/ programmes are shown in the line chart-1 and pie chart-2 below respectively.

* Includes closing balance of the last year.



Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

Line Chart-1 Pie Chart-2
200 (in crore)
Nap NLCP
6.41 IGNREGS
13
150 a A
ow 62.56 70
100 45.04 NRHM
56.47 92.32 (86%) 37.63
50 डी न-अआ
2 39.79 (82%) AIBP NRDWP
(63%) 70% 78.44 21.99
9 र र र * ७०७०7
2007-08 200809 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 41.35
——<=Expenditure —===Available fund
Line chart-1: Trends of available fund and | Pie chart-2: Scheme wise expenditure of the selected
expenditure of selected schemes (% in crore). schemes.
Source: Departmental figures Source: Departmental figures

The above chart-1 indicates that expenditure ranging from 63 to 86 per cent against the available
funds were utilized in test checked schemes/ programmes. A few significant observations on
financial management in the implementation of the test checked schemes have been discussed in
the succeeding chapters.

In exit conference, the District Magistrate accepted the facts and stated that it is difficult to
compile the data at one place as the funds under various schemes such as CFC, SFC, EAP and
Centrally Sponsored Schemes are directly released to the PRIs, ULBs and parallel bodies etc.
However, receipt and expenditure of certain significant Centrally Sponsored Schemes are now
being maintained by the District Economic and Statistical Office (DESTO).

Recommendations
The State Government may consider to ensure:

. Introducing a mechanism of an integrated reporting system at district and State level to
monitor funds flows, deployment of funds and expenditure of the different developmental
programmes/ schemes.



L——————CChapter-4Decentralised Governance 4 Decentralised Governance |

The 73" Constitution Amendment Act envisaged establishment of a democratic decentralised
development process through people’s participation in decision making, implementation and
delivery with devolution of powers and responsibilities upon Panchayats at appropriate levels.
Further, 74" Constitutional Amendment paved the way for decentralisation of powers, transfer
and devolution of more functions and funds to the Urban Local Bodies (ULBs).

Prior to the bifurcation of the State of Uttar Pradesh, the enabling Act governing the Panchayat
Raj System was Uttar Pradesh Panchayati Raj Act, 1947 and the Uttar Pradesh Kshetra
Panchayat and Zila Panchayat Act, 1961 and the rules framed thereunder, which formed the legal
basis for Gram Panchayats (GPs), Kshetra Panchayats (KPs) and Zila Panchayats (ZPs),
respectively. The system of democratic governance down to grass root level in Urban Local
Bodies (ULBs) was implemented through Uttar Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1959 and
Uttar Pradesh Municipalities Act, 1916. The operation of these Act(s) continued in Uttarakhand
after its formation and were amended through Uttaranchal Tristariya Panchayat Raj Amendment
Act, 2002 and Uttar Pradesh Municipalities Act (Uttaranchal Amendment) Act, 2001. In the
State, a draft Municipal Bill, 2008 was prepared to amend Uttar Pradesh Municipalities Act,
1916 but the same is pending approval of the Cabinet as on date (November 2012).

In the district, for implementation and delivery of democratic decentralised development process
through people’s participation, there exists one ZP, eight KPs and 460 GPs and one Nagar
Nigam (NN), three Nagar Palika Parishads (NPPs) and three Nagar Panchayats (NPs).

4.1... Decentralisation

The Eleventh Schedule in the Constitution contains a list of twenty nine subjects which State
Legislature may, by law, transfer to the PRIs. In respect of ULBs, the State Legislature may, by
law, transfer 18 functions as listed in the XII" Schedule. The Government of Uttarakhand had
entrusted only 14 subjects* to PRIs in the year 2003 and thereafter no subject was devolved to
PRIs. In case of ULBs, only thirteen® functions have been transferred till date. With regard to
the performance in empowerment of the PRIs and arrangements for their accountability in
discharge of their functions, the State is ranked at number 14 amongst all the States as per the
cumulative ranking of Devolution Index assessed (2011-12) by the Ministry of Panchayati Raj,
GOI.

5. Drinking Water; Rural Housing; Poverty Alleviation; Primary Education; Praud Evam Anaupcharik Shiksha;
Library; Cultural Activities; Family Welfare; Health and Sanitation Programme; Women & Child Development;
Social Welfare; Public Distribution System; Minor Irrigation and Agriculture (watershed)

Registration of Death and Birth; Slum Improvement; Urban Poverty Alleviation; Provision of Urban Amenities;
Burial Ground; Cattle Pounds; Regulation of Slaughter Houses; Public Amenities; Safeguarding the Interest of
Weaker Sections; Promotion of Cultural, Educational & Aesthetic Aspect; Urban Forestry; Roads & Bridges and
Public Health.



Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

4.2 Organisational arrangements in PRIs and ULBs

The organisational arrangements of PRIs and ULBs in Nainital District including at the State
level is given below:

At the State level, the Principal Secretary cum Forest and Rural Development Commissioner
(FRDC) heads the PRIs while, the Secretary Panchayati Raj and the Secretary Rural
Development Department are the Chief Controlling Officers. In the district, District Panchayati
Raj Officer reports to the Joint Director, Panchayati Raj while KPs fall within the purview of the
Rural Development Department. The organisational chart of PRIs is given in Appendix-4.1.

At the State level, the Urban Development Department coordinates the functioning of all ULBs
as shown in the chart in Appendix-4.2. The ULBs perform its duties as per Section 7 of the UP
Municipalities Act, 1916. Besides, the ULBs may, where so required, under Section 104 of the
UP Municipalities Act, 1916 decide to perform its functions through committees by making their
regulations, exercising such powers and performing such duties or discharging such functions as
may be delegated to the committee under Section 112 of the UP Municipalities Act, 1916.

4.2.1 Availability of Village Development Officers

Both Government of India (GOI) and State Government are implementing schemes through GPs
such as works under SSA, MGNREGS, Single Village Schemes under NRDWP and NRHM

activities, etc. As a result, the outlay of the GPs had considerably increased and it has become
vital to provide adequate staff to the GPs.

In the district, only 98 Village Development Officers (VDOs)/ Multi-purpose workers (MPWs)
were working for 460 GPs. Consequently, one VDO/ MPW on an average was looking after the
task of more than four GPs. In the test checked blocks, it was noticed that one VDO was looking
after the charge of five GPs. The shortage of VDOs/ MPWs resulted in non-maintenance of
accounting formats, asset registers etc.

In exit conference, it was stated by the District Magistrate that recruitment process is underway to
meet the shortage.

4.3 Planning
4.3.1 Holding of Meetings
As per Para 61 & 84 of UP Zila Panchayat Act, 1961 and Para 11 of UP Panchayati Raj Act,

1947, ZP and KPs should ordinarily meet for the transaction of business at least once in every
two months while GPs were to convene two general body meetings in a year.

Test-check of the records of ZP, KPs and GPs for the period 2007-08 to 2011-12 revealed the
following:



Chapter-4: Decentralised Governance

© General body of the ZP met only 11 times’ as against the required 30 times.

* Records of four KPs revealed that only 67 meetings were held as against the required
120.

* Records of 24 GPs revealed that they had held meetings as per prescribed norms except
for two GPs which had met once in the year while two other GPs could not produce the
supporting records.

4.3.2 Preparation of plans

As per Paragraph 63 of UP Panchayati Raj Act, 1961, the ZP was required to integrate annual
plans of the KPs with its plan and to submit it to the DPC for further integration with the District
Development Plan. But no such activity was carried out by it during the period 2007-08 to
2011-12. On this being pointed out, the Apar Mukhya Adhikari of Zila Panchayat stated
(September 2012) that no such plan was being prepared.

Section 127-B of the UP Municipalities Act, 1916 envisages for the preparation of plans by
ULBs and submit it to DPC for integration with district development plans. Scrutiny revealed
that the ULBs also did not prepare and submit their annual plans to DPC in any of the years. The
annual performance/ working reports were also not being prepared by the ULBs.

44 Financial Management

The main sources of revenue/ income for PRIs and ULBs in the State are funds devolved by GOI
under the various Centrally Sponsored Schemes (css), Grants received from the State
Government besides grants recommended by the Twelfth Finance Commission (TFC) and
Thirteenth Finance Commission (ThFC) for specific purposes. In addition, PRIs and ULBs are
also required to mobilize resources from own sources such as taxes, rents, license fees etc.

Test-check of records of PRIs’ and ULBs” revealed that 15 per cent and six per cent funds
were lying unutilised respectively at the end of March 2012 (Appendix-4.3). During the period
2007-12 an amount of % 4.91 crore and % 34.99 crore were realized by the PRIs and ULBs
respectively from their own resources. However, it was found in audit that PRIs and ULBs
failed to collect an amount of € three crore leviable on house tax, rent, hat bazaar, animal fare
etc. during the period 2007-08 to 2011-12. The ULBs apprised that recoveries were being made
while ZP intimated that notices for = 0.15 crore had been issued. The replies were not justifiable
as the recoverable amount was piling up from year to year.

4.4.1 Utilisation certificates

Government of India and State Government released grants to ZPs, KPs and GPs for
implementation of various schemes. A total amount of रैं 56.47 crore were received by the PRIs

7 Meetings held in 2007-08 not available

8 CEC, JNNURM, MP & MLALAD, MNREGS, SSA, NRHM etc.
2 GPs-24, KPs-4 & ZP-1

10 NN-1, NPP-2 & NP-1



Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

during the period 2007-08 to 2011-12. The details of funds received under SFC, TFC and ThFC
by the PRIs in Nainital District is given in Appendix-4.4.

As per Government Order (November 2006), the District Panchayati Raj Officer (DPRO) is
required to submit Utilisation Certificates, duly countersigned by the DM, to the Finance
Department along with the statement of works against the released funds and for further release
of next installment.

Scrutiny of the records revealed that District Panchayati Raj Officer (DPRO) received & 44 crore
for further release to KPs and GPs of the district during the period 2007-08 to
2011-12. In contravention of the financial rules, the released amounts were reported as utilized
without ensuring actual expenditure incurred by the KPs and GPs and statement of works as
required in the Government Orders (GO). Besides, an unspent balance of € 42.35 lakh was lying
in the accounts of DPRO pertaining to the SFC funds released in 2007-08 for which UCs had
already been submitted.

The DPRO stated (July 2012) that efforts were made to collect UCs and the blocked funds would
be released only after information from BDOs regarding status of executed works and amount
due to each GP is received. The reply itself indicates that UCs were submitted by the DPRO
despite funds remaining unutilised. Further, records of the ZP revealed that € 2.96 crore
remained unspent as of March 2012 under SFC, TFC and ThFC due to incomplete construction
works.

4.5 Maintenance of Accounts

The Comptroller and Auditor General of India had prescribed the accounting formats, with
coding pattern for each tier of PRIs, to strengthen their accounting system and enable the
authorities to monitor the progress of receipts and expenditure under different schemes. Test-
check of records of 24 GPs, four KPs and one Zila Panchayat revealed as under:

° Gram Panchayats: They were required to maintain, inter alia, cash book, asset register,
stock register, register of movable and immovable properties and Measurement Book (MB).
However, none of the 24 sampled GPs maintained their accounts in these formats. It was
found that due to shortage of staff only Cash Book could be maintained by these GPs.

. Kshetra Panchayats: KPs did not maintain Bank Reconciliation Statement while the Cash
Book was not maintained properly.

. Zila Panchayat. Asset register was not properly maintained or updated.
4.5.1 Panchayati Raj Institutions

The Ministry of Panchayati Raj, GOI in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General
of India and State Governments prepared a Model Accounting System (MAS) for the PRIs to
ensure transparency and accountability in their operations. Directions were issued

16


Chapter-4: Decentralised Governance

(September 2010) by the GOI to adopt MAS for Panchayat Accounting System by the PRIs.
Accordingly, PRIA Soft-Accounting Software for PRIs was introduced from 1 April 2011.

Scrutiny of records revealed that ZP was not using this software. Entry of only 164 out of 460
GPs and three out of eight KPs were found uploaded (July 2012) after a lapse of one year. It was
also observed that broadband facility was not installed in the DPRO (July 2012) to upload online
entries of approved plans and funds received/ utilized by the GPs. The DPRO stated that due to
insufficient infrastructure and supporting staff, data could not be uploaded in the MAS; while,
ZP was in the process of uploading the data.

4.5.2 Urban Local Bodies

The Ministry of Urban Development, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General
of India, developed National Municipal Accounting Manual (NMAM). The Government of
Uttarakhand had introduced (2009-10) the same only in mission city Nainital under Jawaharlal
Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (InNURM). The other three selected ULBs had not
adopted double entry system of accounting as of November 2012.

4.6 Monitoring of executed works

As per the directions issued (September 2011) by the Director Panchayati Raj, ten works per
month, executed by the Village Panchayats, were to be physically visited and inspected by the
DPRO while cent per cent works were to be physically inspected and verified by the Assistant
Development Officers (Panchayat) posted in the blocks. A report was to be submitted monthly
for each physically inspected work to the Director, Panchayati Raj’. No records were produced
before audit to confirm that inspections were carried out by these authorities and that reports
were submitted to the Director, Panchayati Raj. However, the DPRO produced few inspection
reports carried under twenty point programme in support but the same had no relation with the
works executed by the PRIs.

Paragraph 33 (iii) of U.P Zila Panchayat Act, 1961 envisages that ZP should supervise the
activities of KPs and GPs. Scrutiny revealed that no monitoring or supervision was carried out
by ZP in respect of the works carried out by the GPs and KPs. The Zila Panchayat admitted the
facts.

Recommendations

The State Government/ District Administration may consider to ensure:

. Devolving all the subjects to PRIs and ULBs as envisaged in the XIth and XIIth schedules
of the Constitution.
. Integration of district development plan with the plans prepared by PRIs and ULBs.

1 As per order of Director, Panchayati Raj dated September 2011.

17


I CChapter-SSocialServiess | Social Services |

Various flagship programmes like Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), National Rural Health Mission
(NRHM), National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP), Total Sanitation Campaign
(TSC), Old Age Pension Scheme, Integrated Child Development Scheme (ICDS) and
Uttarakhand Decentralisation Watershed Development Programme (UDWDP) were
implemented in the district. Out of these, three schemes namely NRHM, NRDWP and an
externally aided project, namely UDWDP, were selected for detailed scrutiny and results thereof
are discussed in this chapter.

Health Services

5.1. National Rural Health Mission

Government of India (GOT) launched (April 2005) National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) for
providing accessible, affordable, accountable, effective and reliable health care facilities in the
rural areas with community participation. In Uttarakhand it was launched in October 2005.

In Nainital, the programmes were to be implemented through District Hospitals (Male &
Female), five sub district Hospitals'?, four Community Health Centres (CHCs), 19 Primary
Health Centres (PHCs), 136 Sub Centres (SCs). Of these, one district hospital, four sub district
hospitals, one CHC, four PHCs and 24 Sub Centres were selected for test-check. The
implementation of various Disease Control Programmes (DCPs) were to be supervised by the
respective heads of the DCPs.

The District Health Mission (DHM) under the Chairperson, Zila Parishad (ZP) was the apex
body at the district level to control, guide and manage all public health institutions in the district.
The District Health Society (DHS) was to prepare the annual plans and proposals for
consideration and approval of DHM. The Chief Medical Officer (CMO) headed the executive
body of DHS.

Delete Planning

As per guidelines, the Perspective Plan was required to be prepared for the entire mission period
(2005-12). It was observed that no such plan was prepared and the fact was also confirmed by
the DHS (June 2012).

SALI District Health Society (DHS)

The Governing body of the DHS was required to meet at least once in every three months as
envisaged in the bylaws to provide valuable inputs, monitoring, framing policies and guidance
for the preparation and implementation of Annual Working Plans.

Including one Base Hospital



Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

Although DHS was registered in December 2005 but its registration had not been renewed since
July 2007. It was further seen that the Governing Body of the DHS, Nainital did not meet as per
bylaws. Against the total of 20 meetings required, only six meetings were held during the period
2007-08 to 2011-12. On this being pointed out, the facts were confirmed (June 2012) by the DHS
but failed to provide any reasons for not holding the meetings. Thus, the scheme lacked valuable
inputs, monitoring and guidance from the said body.

5.1.1.2 District Health Action Plan

The District Health Action Plans (DHAPs) were required to be prepared on the basis of the
Village and Block Health Action Plans (BHAPs) and approved by the District Health Mission'>
(DHM) before submission to the State Health Society (SHS).

Audit scrutiny revealed that in all the five years, the DHAPs were prepared without receipt of
Village and BHAPs and were submitted to the State Health Society without approval of DHM.
No DHAP was provided to audit for the year 2007-08.

5.1.1.3 Institutional arrangements for monitoring

Monitoring and planning committees'* at district, block and PHC levels to ensure regular
community based monitoring of activities and facilitating relevant inputs for integrated planning
covering other determinants of health like drinking water, sanitation etc. had not been formed.

5.1.1.4 Community participation

The mission activities were to be converged with programmes of other departments and working
of non-government stakeholders, Village Health and Sanitation Committees (VHSCs) and
Rogi Kalyan Samities (RKSs) or Chikitsa Prabandhan Samities (CPSs). As per guidelines, VHSCs
and RKSs/ CPSs at village and CHC levels were to be formed by 2008 and 2009 respectively for
planning and monitoring.

Scrutiny revealed that 1,078 VHSCs" were formed against 1,082 revenue villages in the year
2009-10, with a delay of upto two years, due to late approval accorded by the State Government.
Further, funds of € 1.09 crore in 2009-10 could also not be utilized by the VHSCs due to its late
release’ by DHS.

Zila Panchayat Adhyaksh, District Magistrate as convener and all relevant departments, NGOs, private
professionals etc.

District Committee: 30 per cent members of Zilla Parishad members, 25 per cent health officials, 15 per cent
members of Block health committees, 20 per cent NGOs/eminent citizens, and 10 per cent-members of CHCs
RKSs.

Block Committees: 30 per cent members of Block Panchayat, 20 per cent members of PHC health committees,
20 per cent NGOs/ eminent citizens, 20 per cent health officials and 10 per cent members of PHCs/ RKSs.

PHC Committee: 30 per cent members of Panchayat Samities, 20 per cent members of village health sanitation
_ committees, 20 per cent NGO/ eminent citizen, 20 per cent- health officials.

15 Reduced to 1,071 in 2010-11

January and February 2010.

20


Social Services

Chapter.

Thus, due to delay in formation of the VHSCs and late release of funds, the villages were not
only deprived of untied grants of = 10,000 each but the role of VHSC in taking initiative for
nutrition; sanitation; and Information, Education & Communication (IEC) activities and other public
health measures also remained unfulfilled for more than two years. However, RKSs/ CPSs in all
four CHCs were formed well in time.

5.1.2 Financial Management

The details of funds available and expenditure incurred under NRHM during 2007-08 to 2011-12
in the district is shown in Table 5.1 below:

Table 5.1: Funds available and expenditure incurred under NRHM during 2007-08 to 2011-12
(in crore)

Year Available fund Expenditure Unspent at the Expenditure
(includes CB and interest)!” close of year (Per cent)
2007-08 4.17 3.07 1.10 74
2008-09 7.60 5.92 1.68 78
2009-10 10.75 6.38 4.37 59
[2010-11 | 14.03 11.14 2.89 79
2011-12 15.67 11.12 4.55 7

Source: CMO, Nainital

The above table shows that utilisation of NRHM funds was 59 to 79 per cent of the total
available funds during 2007-12,leaving an unspent balance of € 4.55 crore at the close of
March 2012. Further, it was observed that out of € 3.22 crore released to VHSCs during
2009-10 to 2011-12, utilisation certificates of ¥ 1.80 crore remained pending as of June 2012 and
yet the entire amount was booked as final expenditure in the books of accounts.

5.1.2.1 Irregular release of funds

A State Level Training Centre at Motinagar, Haldwani costing हैं 2.88 crore was approved on
23 November 2006. Records revealed that even after incurring an expenditure of € 3.50 crore,
the centre had not been completed (June 2012) despite scheduled date of completion being
December 2010. Further, scrutiny revealed that estimates of the building were submitted for
revision'® twice during the period 2009-10 and 2010-11. However, the Department, in
anticipation of approval of the revised estimates, irregularly released (February 2010) ₹ 75 lakh
in excess of the approved estimates.

5.1.2.2 Blockade of funds

An amount of % 6.80 lakh”® released for the construction of a residential building of G.B.Pant
Hospital, Nainital was lying unutilized in the current account of CMO, Nainital since 2007 due
to failure of the Director, Medical Health and Family Welfare in finalizing the construction
agency.

17 Mismatch in opening and closing balance of 2008-09 and 2009-10.

'S Ist revised estimate on March 2010 for 3.78 crore and IInd in October 2010 for %4.12 crore.
1° Excludes हैं 20 thousand utilized on survey work.

21


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

5.1.3 Infrastructure

S131 Status of Health Centres

As per census 2011, the total population of the district was 9.55 lakh. Out of this, 5.83 lakh
(61 per cent) population was rural. Accordingly, a total of 194 SCs, 29 PHCs and seven CHCs
were required”? to be set up in the district. The status of the infrastructure at the end of 2011-12
against the requirement is depicted in Table-5.2 below:

Table 5.2: Shortfall in Health Centres

Name of Health Centres Requirement Available Shortfall
Community Health Centre 07 04 03
Primary Health Centre 29 19 10
Sub-Centre 194 136 58

As can be seen from the above table there was shortage of 58 Sub-Centres, 10 PHCs and three
CHCs in the district as of March 2012.

In order to reduce the gaps in the number of CHCs, upgradation works of four PHCs/ additional
PHCs”! into CHC were taken up between 2004 and 2006 and the construction works of the same
were completed” between 2008 and 2012. Audit scrutiny revealed that these centres were not
functioning as CHCs (as of March 2012) due to non-sanctioning of requisite staff for these

CHCs.

5.1.3.2. Basic minimum infrastructure at CHCs/ PHCs/ SCs

Test-check of one CHC, four PHCs and 24 Sub-Centres showed deficiencies in infrastructure
and basic health care facilities as can be seen in Table 5.3 below:

Table 5.3: Deficiency in the availability of infrastructure and basic health care facilities in Health

__ _ Centres
Particulars of infrastructure
Availability of infrastructure facilities in the test checked health CHCs PHCs SCs
os व कर व] % [24 | %
(i) Status of Infrastructure Centres where services was not

available

Labour Room [| | - | [- | | - | [18 | 75
Separate ward for men and women | - | | - | 2 50 NA NA
Operation theatre | |] = = NA | NA
Residential facilities for staff - - 1 25 8 33
Government Building | - | | - | | | | - | | 8 | 33
Power supply [-|-[-[- [7 29

2° One SC for 3,000 population, one PHC for 20,000 population and one CHC for 80,000 population.
21 Main buildings of PHC, Bhimtal, Add. PHC Ramgarh, Suyalbari & Kaladungi.
22 PHC, Bhimtal in 2010, Add. PHC Ramgath in October 2008, Suyalbari in June 2011 & Kaladungi in 2011-12.

22



Water Supply =|, = ll-] = 13 | 54

No provision of storage of water f- | -

2
Separate utilities for men and women | - | [= | 2 | 50 20 83
Nurse Rest Room [- | [- | 2

(ii) Basic health care services

New born care | - | [ - | | | - | NA NA
24X7 deliveries [- | [- | | - | | - | NA NA
Intra- natal examination of gynaecological conditions [- | - [2] 50 | NA | NA
Cataract Surgery | - | [ - | 3 75 NA NA
Family planning (Tubectomy and Vasectomy) [- | [- | -] - | - | NA NA

Source: Result of survey and health centres records
NA-Not applicable and ( -) stands for having facility

The following deficiencies were also noticed in the health centres:

e In the sampled CHC, operations were not conducted despite the presence of Operation
Theatre (OT) as no Anaesthetist was posted in the Health Centre.

e The Operation Theater of the CHC was not equipped with items like Cardiac Monitor,
Ventilator, EMO Machine, Vertical High Pressure Sterilizer, Shadow less Lamp for Ceiling
Track Mounted, Defibrillator, OT care/ fumigation apparatus and Horizontal High Pressure
Sterilizer. Further, the CHC had X-ray Machine but it was also non-functional since August
2011 due to non-posting of X-Ray technician in the health centre (June 2012).

e PHC, Bailparao (Ramnagar) was provided X-ray machine and Semi Auto Analyzer worth
&3.24lakh in March 2005 and July 2005 respectively but these equipments were
non-functional (July 2012) due to non-availability of X-ray and lab-technician.

5.1.3.3. Maintenance of cold chain storage

Cold chain management was to be ensured in all the CHCs and PHCs to support the
immunization programme. Availability of cold chain was a prerequisite to maintain the potency
of the vaccines. Test-check of records of Dy. CMO, Immunization revealed that out of 1830
pieces of cold chain equipments such as large Ice Line Refrigerators (ILR), Deep Freezers
(DFs), stabilizers, cold boxes and vaccine carriers, only 1233 items were functional and 597
items were non-functional in the district as of June 2012. Scrutiny of records further revealed
that five cold chain points” were partially functional due to damaged ILRs and Deep freezer.
Annual maintenance contract for maintaining the cold chain equipments was not done in the
district. Further, only one refrigerator mechanic was available for the maintenance of the cold
chain. The Dy. CMO, Immunization stated (July 2012) that demand had been placed to the State
Immunization Officer for replacement of damaged cold chain equipment and the process for
Annual Maintenance Contract (AMC) of the equipments will be initiated.

* Excludes Ice Packs.
24 Kania, Motahaldu, Chorgaliya, Ramgarh and Lalkuan.

23



Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

5.1.4 Human Resources

5.1.4.1 Insufficient Doctors in CHCs and PHCs

As per Indian Public Health Standards (IPHS) norms, seven specialist doctors viz. Physician,
General Surgeon, Obstetrician/ Gynaecologist, Paediatrician, Dentist, Anaesthetist and Eye
Surgeon were to be posted at each CHC and two Medical Officers at each PHC.

Test-check of records of CMO revealed the following:

* Out of four CHCs, two were not having Paediatricians, two were not having General
Surgeons and two were not having Gynaecologists. No Anaesthetist, Eye Surgeon or
Physician were provided to any CHCs (March 2012). In the test checked CHC no
Anaesthetist, Physician, Paediatricians or Eye Surgeon were posted.

e Eleven out of 19 PHCs/ Additional Primary Health Centres had only one Medical Officer
(MO) while two” had no MO posted (March 2012). All four test checked PHCs were
provided with two medical officers as per IPHS norms.

5.1.4.2 Deployment of Staff Nurse and ANM

As per IPHS norms, nine staff nurse in each CHC, three Staff nurse in each PHC and 2 ANMs in
each Sub-Centre was required to be posted. Audit noticed that the sanctioned strength to these
health centres were not provided as per IPHS norms. Against the required sanctioned strength of
93 Staff Nurses in four CHCs and 19 PHCs/ APHCs and 272 ANMs for 136 SCs only 39 regular
posts of staff nurse and 173 ANMs were sanctioned in the district. It was further noticed as
under:

« None of the CHCs were provided with the required nine Staff Nurses. In the test checked
CHC, three staff Nurses were posted as against the required nine.

¢ Twelve out of 19 PHCs/ Additional PHCs did not have any Staff Nurse. Three staff nurses in
each test checked four PHCs were posted as per IPHS norms.

© Two out of five PHCs”° working as 24x7 with delivery facility did not have three Staff
Nurses.

* Only 19 SCs out of total 136 SCs were provided with two ANMs. Out of the test checked 24
SCs only one SC was having more than one ANM posted.

5.1.5 Performance Indicators

Eleventh Five Year Plan and NRHM had a time bound goal to be achieved by 2011-12 for the
following indicators.

* Reducing Maternal Mortality Rate (MMR) to 100 per 1,00,000 live births.
e Reducing Infant Mortality Rate (IMR) to 28 per 1,000 live births.
e Reducing Total Fertility Rate (TFR) to 2.1.

>5 Add. PHC, Unchakot and Add. PHC Josuda.
® PHC Okhalkanda and Dhari.

24


Social Services

Chapter.

NRHM had launched a number of initiatives such as safe motherhood through Ante-Natal Care
(ANC), immunization and family planning to reduce MMR, IMR and TFR. However, it was
observed that targets for MMR and IMR could not be achieved as discussed in the succeeding
paragraphs.

5.1.5.1 Antenatal Care of pregnant women

In order to provide safe motherhood, pregnant women were to be registered and provided with
three antenatal checkups, 100 days intake of Iron Folic Acid (IFA) tablets to protect pregnant
women from anaemia and two doses of Tetanus Toxoid (TT). The detail of antenatal care
provided to pregnant women during 2007-12 is shown in Table 5.4 below:

Table 5.4: Position of antenatal care

Particulars 2007-08 | 2008-09 | 2009-10 | 2010-11 | 2011-12 | Total
Registered pregnant women. 20,598 20,785 20,794 20,854 20,870 1,03,901
A | 18,811 | 17,232 17,104 | 17,881
Provided with three ANCs NA (91%) (83%) (82%) (86%) 71,028
A 19,321 19,743 | 20,561 20,457 | 20,672
Provided two doses of TT (04%) (95%) (99%) (98%) (09%) 1,00,754
Provided with 100 IFA 8,910 3,138 13,049 | 15,923 2,660 ED
tablets?” (43%) (15%) (63%) (11%) (13%) है

Source: CMO, Nainital

As can be seen from the above table, the administration of two doses of Tetanus Toxoid (TT) had
almost been achieved. The marginal difference was justified by Dy CMO, Immunization on
account of migrations and pregnant women preferring to go to their maternal place for better
care.

In the records of the CMO, the overall shortfall in providing ANC to pregnant women was 9 to
18 per cent and in respect of IFA the shortfall was 23 to 87 per cent. Audit observed that the
main reason for shortfall in providing IFA was non-availability of adequate stock of IFA in the
Central Medical Store Department.

As per Annual Health Survey, 2011 of Registrar General of India, the district had not achieved

target of Maternal Mortality Rate and Infant Mortality Rate which stood at 183 and 31
respectively.

5.1.5.2 Institutional deliveries

One of the important interventions of the Reproductive and Child Health (RCH) programmes
were to promote institutional delivery rather than domiciliary delivery in order to reduce maternal
mortality and neo natal mortality. The detail of total deliveries carried out in the district during
2007-12 is given in the Table 5.5 below:

7 Excludes pregnant ladies given initial dose of IFA.

25


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

Particulars 2007-08 | 2008-09 | 2009-10 | 2010-11 | 2011-12
Total deliveries (TD) 16,796 | 17,847 | 17,203 | 16,330 | 15,542
Institutional deliveries (ID) 6,295 7,874 9,006 9,318 9,835
Per cent of ID against TD 37 44 52 57 63
Per cent of Domiciliary deliveries against TD 63 56 48 43 37

Source: CMO Nainital

The above table shows that there is a continuous increase in institutional deliveries which is
appreciated.

5.1.5.3 Janani Suraksha Yojana

Janani Suraksha Yoajna (JSY) was introduced under NRHM to encourage pregnant women to
opt for institutional delivery by providing cash assistance of = 1,400 and % 1,000 to mothers in
rural and urban areas respectively and = 600 to Accredit Social Health Activist (ASHA). This
assistance was to be provided within seven days of the delivery.

Records of the test checked PHCs revealed that payments to 611 beneficiaries were made with
the delay ranging from one to six months. No payments were made in 17 cases during the period
2008-09 to 2011-12. No initiative was taken by the Medical Officers in-charge (MOIC) to make
payment to these 17 beneficiaries. The MOIC, while accepting the facts, attributed (June 2012)
the delay to non-availability of funds under JSY and delay in submission of requisite papers by
the beneficiaries.

In the exit conference, the Chief Medical Officer while accepting the fact stated that action will
be taken for early release of payments to these 17 beneficiaries.

5.1.5.4 Administering Vitamin A

In the district, there was a shortfall in achievement of target fixed for administering the first dose
of Vitamin A. The shortfall ranged between 8 and 92 per cent during the period 2007-08 to
2011-12 as can be seen in the Table 5.6 below:

Table 5.6: Administering Vitamin A

Achievement (per cent)
Year Target T Dose
2007-08 18,968 5,388 (28%)
2008-09 18,371 1,460 (8%)
2009-10 19,500 17,015 (87%)
2010-11 19,143 17,573 (92%)
2011-12 18,905 8,462 (45%)

Source: CMO Nainital

As can be seen from the above table, the targets were not achieved in any of the years. On this
being pointed out, the Dy. CMO, Immunisation attributed the shortfall in achievement to the
shortage of Vitamin A. Audit observed that the targets were not achieved despite availability of
stock of Vitamin A during the period 2009-10 to 2011-12.

26



Chapter-5: Social Services

5.1.5.5 Health and Family Welfare

Terminal Methods and Spacing Methods are used to control the total fertility rate and improving
the couple protection ratio. The detail of targets and achievement during 2007-12 under these
methods is given in the Table 5.7 below:

Table No 5.7: Targets and Achievement under Terminal and Spacing Method

on Terminal Method Spacing Method (IUD)

Target Achieved (per cent) Target Achieved (per cent)
2007-08 2,805 2,865(102) 7,000 6,869(98)
2008-09 3,393 3,086(91) 7.490 7,000(93)
2009-10 3,009 2,707(90) 7,490 6,866(92)
[2010-11 | 2,950 2,548(86) 7,078 7,144(101)
2011-12 3,100 2,587(83) 9,551 8,406 (88)

Source: CMO Nainital

As can be seen from the above table that targets in respect of total sterilization for the period
2008-09 to 2011-12 were never achieved and the achievement ranged between 83 and 91 per
cent. The CMO stated (June 2012) that due to geographical conditions, shortage of doctors and
prevalence of alternative modern contraceptives, the targets under sterilization could not be
achieved.

As per Annual Health Survey, 2011 of Registrar General of India, the district had achieved the
target of TFR by reducing it to 2.1, which is appreciated.

5.1.6 National Programme for Control of Blindness
5.1.6.1 Achievement of target

The National Programme for Control of Blindness (NPCB) aimed to reduce the prevalence of
blindness to 0.8 per cent by 2007 through increased cataract surgery, eye screening of school
children, collection of donated eyes, creation of donation centres, eye bank and strengthening of
infrastructure etc.

Audit scrutiny revealed that the district had achieved the targets set for cataract surgery during
the period 2007-08 to 2011-12 and the achievement ranged between 102 and 120 per cent which
is appreciated.

5.1.6.2 Distribution of free spectacles

The programme envisaged screening of school children for refractive errors and free distribution
of spectacles to the students having refractive errors. Out of 65,492 students screened in 825
schools of the district during 2007-12, 3,115 students were found with refractive errors and only
457 (15 per cent) students were provided with free spectacles. Further, the targets fixed for
screening children for the year 2010-11 and 2011-12 were also not achieved. The CMO stated
that the targets could not be achieved due to availability of only four Ophthalmic Assistants in
eight blocks, geographical conditions of the district and long distances between the schools.

27



Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

5.1.7 National Leprosy Eradication Programme

The National Leprosy Eradication Programme (NLEP) aimed at eliminating leprosy by the end
of Eleventh Plan Period and to ensure that the leprosy prevalence rate is less than one per 10,000.
The total number of leprosy patients undergoing treatment in the district during 2007-12 was 237
out of which 181 were identified during the last five years. The rate of prevalence of leprosy in
the district during 2007-12, was 0.52, 0.25, 0.23, 0.22 and 0.23 per 10,000 population
respectively.

The district achieved the goal of Leprosy elimination during the last five years, which is
appreciated.

5.1.8 Ayurveda Yoga Unani Siddha and Homoeopathy

In Nainital District, thirteen Ayurveda Yoga Unani Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH) wings
were functioning in eleven PHCs and two CHCs against the sanctioned 14 wings under NRHM.
The reason for non-functioning of one AYUSH wing was that Doctor and Pharmacist were not
posted since January 2011.

5.1.8.1 | Human resources for AYUSH

As per the guidelines, each wing of PHC was to be provided with one Doctor, one Pharmacist
and one Ward Boy and each CHC with two Doctors, two Pharmacists and two Ward Boys to run
the AYUSH wings.

Scrutiny of records of the District Ayurvedic and Unani Officer (DAO), Nainital revealed the
following deficiencies:
¢ Two CHCs were provided with only one Doctor and one Pharmacist which was contrary to
the guidelines.
e The appointments of Doctors and Pharmacist were made on contractual basis with a delay
ranging from 6 to 33 months.
e AYUSH wings functional in two 1५५ ० were not provided with Doctors at all and were
being run by Pharmacists since 2010.
e The agreements of deployed Doctors and Pharmacists were not renewed since March 2012.
However, they were performing their duties without renewal of agreement till the date of
audit (July 2012) which was highly irregular.

The DAO, Nainital stated (July 2012) that all the decisions related to the posting of staff and
other matters, as pointed out by audit, were taken by the Director, Ayurvedic and Unani (DAU).

5.1.8.2 Creation of infrastructure

To provide adequate infrastructure to AYUSH wing, District Ayurvedic and Unani Officer
(DAO), Nainital was directed (January 2008) by the DAU to prepare estimates at a cost of

8 PHC, Okhalkanda since September 2010 & PHC, Kaladungi since July 2010.

28


Social Services

Chapter.

% five lakh and three lakh for each functional CHC and PHC respectively for building repair,
renovation, alteration and partitioning efc.

Scrutiny of records revealed that the estimates for construction of nine AYUSH wings were
prepared and submitted by DAO (March 2008) to the DAU for sanction. No action was initiated
by DAU on these estimates and the DAO resubmitted estimates for seven wings in June 2011.
These estimates were yet to be sanctioned by the DAU and meanwhile the AYUSH wings were
functioning with inadequate space.

In exit conference, the District Ayurvedic Officer stated that directions were issued to get
estimates prepared from an authorized construction agency instead of Junior Engineer, Health
Department. Further, it was also stated that the estimates of two wings could not be prepared
due to non-availability of land for the said purpose.

5.1.8.3 Equipment lying idle

Audit scrutiny revealed that purchases of equipment and furniture for the AYUSH wings were
made by the Directorate without any actual demand being received from them. Audit noticed that
many equipment and furniture worth हैं 6.87 lakh purchased by the DAU were lying idle as can
be seen in the photographs below. On this being pointed out, the DAO and concerned MOIC of
the AYUSH wings accepted (July 2012) the facts and attributed it to insufficient space and
non-utility of some equipment”? meant for emergency cases. Further, it was also noticed that two
AYUSH wings* functioning since May 2010 were not provided basic furniture’! as demanded
by them (April 2011 to 2012) which reflects that the purchasing were done without planning.

a

Partition kept unused at PHC Garam Pani Nadi Shwedan Yantra kept packed at CHC Garam Pani
Recommendations

The State Government/ District Administration may consider to ensure:

. Equipping all health centres with adequate and skilled man power as per IPHS norms.
e Community involvement at every stage of planning, implementation and monitoring of the
programme.

29
30
31

Wheel chair, Dressing Drum, Sterilizer and Cylinder Trolley efc.
Kaladungi and Suyalbari.
Doctors’ table and chair, visitors chair etc.

29


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

Drinking Water
5.2... National Rural Drinking Water Programme

Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme (ARWSP) was reintroduced with Rajiv Gandhi
National Drinking Water Mission (RGNDWM) in 1991 with the following objectives:

e To ensure coverage of all rural habitations especially to reach the un-reached with access to
safe drinking water.

e To preserve quality of water by institutionalising water quality monitoring and surveillance
through a Catchment Area approach.

The ARWSP was renamed (April 2009) National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP)
and its guidelines further envisaged:

* Delivery of services by the system for its entire design period of quality of water in
conformity with the prescribed standards both at the supply and consumption points.

¢ To provide enabling environment for Panchayati Raj Institutions and local communities to
manage their own drinking water sources and systems.

*¢ To provide access to information through online reporting mechanism with information
placed in public domain to bring in transparency, accountability and informed decision
making.

Under NRDWP, GOI was to release funds for implementation of Rural Water Supply (RWS)
schemes in the ratio of 50:50 i.e. the GOI was to provide an amount equal to the amount invested
by the State Government. In the programme, 15 per cent of the allocation was earmarked for
Operation and Maintenance (O&M) and 35 per cent was to be spent on the coverage of SC/ ST
habitations.

In Nainital District, the schemes under NRDWP were implemented by three divisions” of
Uttaranchal Peyjal Sansadhan Vikas Avam Nirman Nigam (UJN). The completed multi village
water supply schemes were handed over to Uttaranchal Jal Sansthan (UJS) for O&M. O&M of
single village water supply schemes was the responsibility of Village Water and Sanitation
Committee (VWSC) of GPs under supervision of the Rural Development Department (RDD).

5.2.1 Coverage of habitations

The target of the Eleventh Five Year Plan was to provide safe and potable water for all by 2009
and ensure that there were no slip-backs of habitations by the end of the Eleventh Plan. Audit
scrutiny revealed that as on March 2012, out of 2,748 habitations of the district, 347 (SC-44;
ST-2; Gen-301) remained partially covered. The details of partially covered habitations are depicted
in Table 5.8 below:

* Construction Division, Peyjal Nigam, Bhimtal, Construction Division, Peyjal Nigam, Haldwani and
Construction Division, Peyjal Nigam, Ramnagar.

30


Chapter-5: Social Services

Table 5.8: Coverage of Habitation

Total habitation | Fully covered as on Number of partially covered habitations as of March
2012 disaggregated on population coverage percentage
April 2007 | March 2012 Total | 0-24 | 25-49 | 50-74 75-99

2748 1,852 2,401 347 113 192 18 24

Source: Divisional data and Integrated Management Information System (IMIS)

Further, it was noticed that 108 habitations slipped back from Fully Covered (FC) to Partially
Covered (PC) during 2010-12 due to population migration, drying of source, less supply at
delivery point and age of system 22. Thus, the target set under Eleventh Plan could not be
achieved in the district.

The Executive Engineers (EEs) stated that all the habitations could not be covered due to
non-availability of sufficient technical staff and higher per capita cost of the schemes.

5.2.2 Dovetailing of schemes under NRDWP

The Government of India (GOI) allowed (March 2008) the State Government to dovetail State
sponsored Rural Water Supply (RWS) schemes with NRDWP with the following conditions:

i. RWS schemes should be covering NC/ PC habitations;
ii. RWS schemes should be ongoing; and
iii. RWS schemes were to be selected after the approval of the State Level Scheme
Sanctioning Committee (SLSSC) headed by the Chief Secretary, Government of
Uttarakhand.

A total of 35 State RWS schemes {20 under Minimum Need Programme (MNP) and 15 under
State Sector Rural (SSR)} were dovetailed with NRDWP. Out of these, 22 schemes pertained
to sampled blocks of which ten schemes of 24 GPs were selected for detailed audit scrutiny.
Test-check of the dovetailed schemes under NRDWP revealed the following:

¢ Five schemes*? costing रैं 3.61 crore were dovetailed even as these schemes were
completed and handed over to Uttarakhand Jal Sansthan/ Gram Panchayat before March
2008. Out of these five schemes, two pertained to Fully Covered habitations. Besides,
one schemes wz. Dabaliya rain water harvesting scheme costing = 12.15 lakh was also
dovetailed although it pertained to FC habitation.

e 13 State Sponsored RWS schemes costing हैं 8.76 crore were not considered for
dovetailing despite being ongoing schemes for which only % 4.18 crore was released till
March 2008.

The EEs accepted the above facts and stated that the decision for dovetailing of State RWS
schemes was taken at the State level. The reply was not acceptable as the Managing Director,
Uttarakhand Jal Nigam was also a member of the SLSCC.

33. Kanakpur scheme (₹ 98.35 lakh), Dharampur Auliya scheme (₹ 82.15 lakh), Dhamola scheme (® 67.71 lakh),
Titoli scheme & 17.18 lakh) of CD, Ramnagar and Fatehpur part- I scheme ( 95.97 lakh) of CD, Haldwani.

31



Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

5.2.3 Financial Management and control

The details of budgetary allotment and expenditure incurred on all the schemes under NRDWP
during 2007-08 to 2011-12 is shown in the Table 5.9 below:

Table 5.9: Allotment and Expenditure incurred (®in crore)

Financial | Opening balance Receipt Total available Expenditure Closing
ear funds balance
2007-08 3.56 9.30 12.86 6.37 6.49
2008-09 6.49 3.01 9.50 8.33 1.17
2009-10 1.17 0.94 2.11 2.97 (0.86
2010-11 (0.86 141 0.55 1.06 (0.51
2011-12 (00.51 3.90 3.39 3.09 0.30
Total [| 1856 | | 2.32 |

Source: Divisional figures

During the period 2007-08 to 2011-12, 47 schemes against a total of 51 schemes were completed
under NRDWP. An expenditure of हैं 21.82 crore was incurred against the available funds of
₹ 22.12 crore on these schemes. No new schemes under NRDWP were sanctioned during
2007-10, while 35 RWS schemes were dovetailed with NRDWP in the year 2007-08 and three
new schemes™ under NRDWP were sanctioned by GOI in 2010-12.

5.2.3.1 Excess deduction of centage charges

As per the instructions issued by the State Government, departmental centage was to be charged/
deducted according to decided norms of 12.50 per cent of the basic cost of State sponsored RWS
schemes. Scrutiny of four dovetailed schemes of sampled blocks** revealed that the divisions
deducted excess centage charges amounting to = 7.68 lakh against the norms as detailed in
Table 5.10 below:

Table 5.10: Excess deduction of Centage Charges (@ in lakh)

Sanctioned cost Expenditure Excess

Name of scheme Basic Centage [tot | incurred on Centage

_ cost charges Centage charges charges
Motinagar part -I 88.48 11.06 99.54 12.44 1.38
Damuadunga part — II 88.74 11.09 99.83 12.34 1.25
Fatehpur part I 85.31 10.66 95.97 13.12 2.46
Kaniya chilkiya Zone A 88.47 11.06 99.53 13.65 2.59
[Total s—~—<C*~s—SCSCSsSCé8S OD 43.87 39487 [| 555 | 7.68

Source: Divisional figures

On this being pointed out, the EEs replied that expenditure incurred on the schemes was within
the sanctioned cost. The reply was not acceptable as excess centage charges were deducted
against the norms.

4 CD, Haldwani was sanctioned two schemes in 2010-12 while Ramnagar was sanctioned one scheme in 2010-11
ऊँ. Bhimtal, Haldwani, Ramgarh and Ramnagar block.

32


5.2.3.2 Excess expenditure on Work Charged Establishment

In State Sponsored Schemes, provision for Work Charged Establishment (WCE) @ two per cent
of the Basic Cost (BC) is included in the estimates.

While scrutinising the schemes of the selected blocks, it was noticed that an amount of & 41 lakh
was charged as WCE in excess of the norms as detailed in the Table 5.11 below:

Table 5.11: Excess expenditure on work charged Establishment (7 in lakh)
Name of scheme Basic Cost (BC) | Amount of WCE Total WCE Excess WCE
_ _ as per sanction | included in BC charged on BC __
Fatehpur part - वा 88.71 1.68 6.39 4.71
Damuadunga part - IL 88.74 1.69 2.50 0.81
Motinagar part II 88.22 1.67 5.73 4.06
Paniyali part वा 88.72 1.68 3.77 2.09
Nathuakhan 183.11 3.64 19.48 15.84
[Dungro-mungro | 162.22 3.34 11.31 7.97
Mauna 35.40 0.65 3.77 3.12
Kulgad sirsa 35.41 0.65 2.18 1.53
Dharampur auliya 73.02 1.39 2.26 0.87
Total | 84355 | 1639. | 57.39 | 4.0 |

Source: Divisional figures.

In exit conference, the Executive Engineer while admitting the facts stated that expenditure on
WCE was incurred on actual basis. The reply was not acceptable as the WCE was charged
beyond the prescribed limit of two per cent of the basic cost of estimates resulting in an excess
expenditure of € 41 lakh.

5.2.4 Programme Implementation
5.2.4.1 Physical progress of schemes

As per DPRs/ estimates, the State Sponsored schemes were to be completed within two years. It
was noticed that the completion period of the schemes ranged between 20 to 83 months in 34
schemes out of 35 test checked schemes as can be seen in the Table 5.12 below:

Table 5.12: Physical progress of schemes

Division p= | No. of Sanction Range of completion | Incomplete
Schemes period period (in months) schemes
G हु MNP | _ 06.__._._[ 2004-0 30 to 66 | 0 |
Seelam SSR 01 2000-01 63 [oo |
८ हु MNP 07 2004-07 20 to 65 | ०0 |
मा SSR 05 2005-07 29 to 68 1
MNP 07 2001-07 30 to 83 po |
CD, Ramnagar
SSR 09 2003-07 28 to 57 [| ०0 |

Source: Divisions records

The divisions admitted the facts and stated that schemes could not be completed in time due to
delay in release of funds to the divisions by State Government/ MD, UJN.

33



Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

5.2.4.2 Closing of accounts of schemes

As per departmental procedure, the executing divisions send Advice of Transfer Debit (ATD) to
the Finance Director, UJN for closing of accounts of the scheme and after receipt of Advice of
Transfer Credit (ATC) the accounts of schemes are closed.

Scrutiny of records of test checked divisions revealed that out of total 34 handed over schemes,
accounts of only 27 schemes were closed with delay ranging from two to 59 months from the
date of handing over of the schemes.

In the test checked Gram Panchayats, there was a delay in closing the accounts of eight schemes
while the accounts of two schemes were still to be closed as indicated in the Table 5.13 below:

Table 5.13: Delay in closing of accounts

Name of Name of schemes Date of Delay in months from
division | Sanction | Completion | Handing | Closure of | Completion | Handing
over accounts over
Construction | Dharampur Auliya_| 31.05.03 02/2006 03/2006 02/2011 59 58
Division, Gojani 22.09.03 06/2008 06/2009 03/2011 32 20
Ramnagar Kaniya Zone ‘A’ 03.08.01 07/2008 06/2009 02/2011 30 19
Dhamola 31.05.03 01/2007 NA 01/2011 47 NA
Construction | Fatehpur part I 15.09.00 12/2005 07/2007 01/2010 48 29
Division, Moti nagar part I 03.09.04 03/2010 06/2010 07/2011 15 08
Haldwani Paniyali part I 22.06.06 05/2009 07/2009 08/2011 26 24
Fatehpur part IT 25.09.06 03/2009 07/2009 08/2011 28 24
Construction | Nathuakhan 11.07.05 O1/2011 03/2011 | Notclosed | -- | -- |
ey MungroDungro | 55.95.05 | 01/2011 | 03/2011 | Not closed | - | | - |

Source: Divisional figures

It can be seen from the above table that there was a delay ranging from eight to 58 months in
closing the accounts of eight schemes from the date of handing over of the schemes. On this
being pointed out, the EEs stated that accounts could not be closed due to pending adjustment of
materials booked on the schemes. The reply is not acceptable as the delay in closing the accounts
of the schemes could provide scope for irregular adjustments.

5.2.4.3. Operation and Maintenance of the schemes

Operation and Maintenance (O&M) work of Single Village water supply scheme (SVS) was
entrusted to the concerned Gram Panchayat/ Village Water Sanitation Committee (GP/ VWSC).

Funds were released for the purpose of O&M of these SVSs through District Development
Officer (DDO) by the Commissioner, RDD on cost sharing basis of 90:10.

Test-check of records of DDO, Nainital revealed that O&M works of 20 SVSs were sanctioned
during 2009-10 at an estimated cost of = 45.54 lakh*® in order to ensure continuous drinking
water supply to 878 families. It was noticed that only 12 works were completed till July 2010 at
a cost of € 19.70 lakh. The remaining eight SVSs 57 costing & 25.84 lakh (excluding 10 per cent

56 Excludes 10 per cent share of SVS.
57 Okhalkanda 6 and Bhimtal 2.

34



Social Services

Chapter.

community contribution) were to be completed by March 2011. However, no record was
available (July 2012) with the DDO regarding status of completion of these works.

Tt was noticed that an amount of = 13.10 lakh was not released (July 2012) by RDD for want of
UCs amounting to = 12.74 lakh. On this being pointed out, the DDO stated that letters to furnish
UCs had been sent to the concerned VWSCs.

5.2.5 Coverage of Rural population

The status of coverage of rural population of the district with the normative requirement of 40
Liter Per Capita Per day (19०0) of water supply at the close of Eleventh Five year Plan is shown
in Table 5.14 below:

Table 5.14: Coverage of Rural Population

| District/ Total population Population fully covered Shortfall
Block sc ST General | Total SC ST General Total (Per cent)
Nainital 1,23,495 | 4,649 | 4,19,006 | 5,47,150 | 94,400] 3,865 2,91,880 | 3,90,145 29
Sampled blocks
Bhimtal 14,341 72 43,384 57,797 | 13,393 72 37,263 50,728 12
Haldwani 25,558 887 | 1,57,834 | 1,84,279 9,160 297 65,375 74,832 59
Ramgarh 11,714 54 30,200 | 41,968 | 11,289 54 26,763 38,106 09
Ramnagar 28,471 | 3,366 63,800 | 95,637 | 20,394 | 3,172 49,343 72,909 24
[Total | 80,084 | 4,379 | 2,95,218 | 3,79,681 | 54,236 | 3,595 | 1,78,744 2,36,575 | 38 |

Source: IMIS

It can be seen from the above table that 29 per cent of the rural population in the district and
38 per cent of the rural population in the sampled blocks were not provided the minimum of
40 [लत of drinking water. Further, audit noticed that in 50 localities of the sampled blocks,
drinking water had to be supplied by water tankers in summer 2011-12.

5.3. National Rural Drinking Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance Programme

The National Rural Drinking Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance Programme
(NRDWQM & SP) was launched in February 2006 with the prime objective of
institutionalisation of community participation and involvement of PRIs for water quality
monitoring and surveillance. The guidelines envisaged providing one Field Test Kit (FTK) to
each GP to test chemical parameters of all sources, Human Resource Development (HRD)
activities aimed to impart training to the PRIs functionaries in water quality monitoring and
surveillance and specific Information, Education and Communication (IEC) activities involving
PRIs. The programme was implemented by Project Management Unit (PMU), Swajal Project at
the State level and through District Project Management Unit (DPMU) at the District level. The
programme was fully funded by GOI.

35


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

5.3.1 Utilization of funds

The NRDWQM & SP was initiated in the year 2005-06 whereas the funds were released to the
DPMU for the first time in the year 2008-09. The details of year-wise allotment and expenditure
incurred there against are shown in Table 5.15 below:

Table 5.15: Utilisation of funds (®in lakh)
Year Opening | Released | Interest | Total Expenditure Closing
balance | fund fund | IEC | HRD | M&S38| Total | balance
2008-09 Nil 4.57* 0.06 4.63 0.02 1.39 0.12 1.53 3.10
2009-10 3.10 | 9.90 | 0.05 13.05 L= | 1.05 L= | 1.05 12.00
[2010-11 | | 9.00 | 4.47 0.15 13.62 | - | 12.00 | - | 12.00 1.62
2011-12 1.62 | 0 | 0.03 1.65 1.17 | 0 | | - [ 1.17 0.48

Source: figures taken from DPMU
* Includes IEC: & 2.23 lakh, HRD: ₹ 1.89 lakh, M&S: 0.45 lakh; # Under HRD; $ Includes IEC: ₹ 1.47 lakh and
HRD: ₹ 3 lakh.
@ 23 lakh was surrendered to PMU.
From the above table it may be seen that an amount of हैं 16.23 lakh were available under the
programme against which an expenditure of = 15.75 lakh was incurred, leaving an unspent
balance of € 0.48 lakh at the end March 2012.

5.3.2 Programme implementation

5.3.2.1 IEC Activities

As per guidelines, the main purpose of IEC activities was to bring awareness about water quality
monitoring and surveillance at all levels i.e. district, block and especially at GP level through
various mediums like advertising through hoardings, folk media/ village performance functions,
audio-visual programmes, inter personal communication (door to door interaction), mass media
campaign (GP and Block level), wall painting, distribution of posters and pamphlets, radio talk
and audio visual clippings erc.

Test-check of records at blocks and GPs level revealed that only = 2,080 out of total available
funds amounting to % 3.70 lakh was expended on folk media, village performance, functions,
distribution of posters/ pamphlets during the period 2008-11 and रैं 1.17 lakh (32 per cent) was
utilised by DPMU in the year 2011-12. The annual targets of 500 for inter-personal
communication at GP level were not achieved during the period 2008-12. The shortfall ranged
between 19 to 72 per cent.

The Project Manager (PM), DPMU replied that IEC activities were done under a World Bank
Aided programme called Sector Wide Approach (SWAp). The reply was not acceptable as
IEC activities under SWAp were limited to only a few habitations.

क्र
Monitoring and surveillance.

36


Chapter-5: Social Services

5.3.2.2 HRD activities

Under NRDWQM & SP guidelines, HRD activities aimed to impart training to district, block
and GP level functionaries in respect of water quality issues including health related diseases,
water quality monitoring, sanitation and hygiene. Further, four persons at district, five at block
level and at least five persons at GP level preferably school teachers, health workers, Anganwadi
workers were to be trained for this purpose.

It was noticed that training at district and block level were imparted as per norms. Further,
scrutiny of records revealed that DPMU misreported (March 2011) that all 460 GPs had been
covered despite the fact that five GPs had not been covered for HRD training. The following
short comings were noticed:

e In 131 GPs out of 455 GPs in the district, only 445 functionaries (68 per cent) were
provided training against the requirement of providing training to a minimum of 655
functionaries.

e Preference in training for water quality monitoring and surveillance was to be given to
school teachers, health workers (ASHA) and Anganwadi workers. It was found that out
of selected 24 GPs, training to ASHA in 22 GPs, teachers in 24 GPs and Anganwadi
workers in 21 GPs was not provided.

The Project Manager, DPMU replied (August 2012) that all functionaries could not participate in
HRD training due to difficult terrain of the district. The reply was not acceptable as 68 per cent
functionaries who resided in these very GPs participated in the training programmes.

5.3.2.3 Distribution of Field Test Kits

Field Testing Kits (FTKs) were to be distributed by DPMU to 460 GPs for testing the quality of
water sources. Test-check of records revealed that 495 FTKs out of 515 FTKs*? were provided to
460 GPs by DPMU (March 2012). Further, scrutiny revealed that the reagent* of 186 distributed
FTKs were expired on March 2010 and July 2011 as these were procured by the PMU in
2008-09 and 2010-11 respectively with expiry date of reagent of each FTK being after one year.
Moreover, the reagent had not been procured for refilling of FTKs till the date of audit
(August 2012).

While accepting the facts in exit conference, the District Project Manager stated that refills for
311 FTKs have now been distributed (January 2013) and assured that regular tests in all sources
will be carried out to check out chemical and bacteriological contamination.

39 36 FTKs in 2008-09; 150 FTKs in September 2010; and 329 FTKs in October 2011.
40. Chemicals in FTKs which are used in water testing to show the level & type of contamination.

37


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

5.3.3 Water Quality Testing of Water Source

Programme guidelines envisaged that all sources would be tested once a year for chemical
contamination and twice a year (pre and post monsoon) for bacteriological contamination by
GPs. Audit scrutiny revealed the shortfall in number of tests to be carried out in respect of
chemical and bacteriological testing of water sources in the district is given in the Table 5.16
below:

Table 5.16: Status of water testing

No. of | No. of tests to be carried out(2008-12) No. of tests conducted Contaminated sources

water (2008-12)

source Chemical Bacteriological Chemical | Bacteriological | Chemical | Bacteriological
2,690 10,760 (2690x4) 21,520 (2690x8) 1,465 1,465 | 0 | 0 |

Short fall in per cents (86%) (93%)

Source: Data provided by DPMU

It is evident from the above table that only 14 per cent and seven per cent sources were tested for
chemical and bacteriological contamination respectively in four years. However, as per water
testing report uploaded in the IMIS it was noticed that eight out of 115 sources were
contaminated with faecal coliform in 2011-12. On this being pointed out, the DPMU while
accepting the fact stated that all water sources could not be tested due to non availabilities of
FTKs at GP level.

Recommendations

The State Government/ District Administration may consider to ensure:
. Fixing timeline for covering all habitations with safe and potable drinking water.

. Conducting regular testing of Water quality as per norms to ensure supply of safe and

potable drinking water to the people.

Watershed Development
5.4 Uttarakhand Decentralised Watershed Development Project

An agreement for borrowing loan amounting to ~405 crore from the World Bank for
implementation of Uttarakhand Decentralised Watershed*! Project (UDWDP) was signed
between World Bank and Government of Uttarakhand on 30 July 2004. The period of agreement
was from 24 September 2004 to 31 March 2012. The project was to be implemented by
Uttarakhand Watershed Management Directorate (WMD). The focus of this project was on development
of rural population and watersheds with special emphasis on enhancement of productivity
through socially inclusive, institutionally and environmentally sustainable approaches.
Therefore, areas of the State facing problems like erosion, poverty and lack of infrastructure

“| The term watershed refers to the geographic boundaries of a particular water body, its ecosystem and the land
that drains to it,

38



Chapter-5: Social Services

facilities were chosen to select the target Gram Panchayats. The project had three components;
Watershed treatment; enhancing and improving livelihood opportunities with a focus on
increasing income levels and institutional strengthening.

In Nainital District, the project authority selected (December 2004) 28 GPs of Okhalkanda and
six GPs of Dhari blocks for implementing the project*?. Out of these, four Gram Panchayats
(GPsy* were selected for audit.

5.4.1 Planning

5.4.1.1 Annual Working Plan

The loan agreement entered into between the State Government and the World Bank envisaged
that “Uttarakhand shall (a) Not later than January 31 each year, furnish to the association for its
review and comments, a proposed annual work programme and budget for the following fiscal
year, giving details of its proposed work programme activities and budget estimates for the
project and (b) proceed thereafter to implement the annual work programme and budget, taking into
account such comments as may have been made thereon by the Association.”

Scrutiny of the process of preparation and implementation of Annual Work Plan (AWP) showed
that the prescribed procedure for budget estimation and actual expenditure was not followed.
The details of AWPs during the period 2007-08 to 2011-12 are shown in the Table 5.17 below:

Table 5.17: Approval of AWPs (®in crore)
Budgeted Estimates Post facto approval of AWP based
Year Submitted Proposed AWP | on Actual Expenditure [ next FY]
2007-08 4.50 6.58 5.64 (09.06.2008:
2008-09 6.80 6.29 4.75(02.09.2009)
2009-10 [600 5.57 5.84(23.08.2010)
| 2010-11 | |. 4.00... | 2.45 4.42(28.06.2011)
| 2091-12 | 3.60 8.06 6.82(19.07.2012)
Total [490895 | 27.47

It is evident from the above table that during 2007-08 and 2011-12, against BE of € 4.50 crore
and & 3.60 crore, the WMD proposed an amount of % 6.58 crore and % 8.06 crore in the AWP
respectively. Further, even the amount approved in the AWP could not be utilised by the Deputy
Project Director (DPD) and expenditure of only हैं 5.64 crore and हैं 6.82 crore could be incurred
in 2007-08 and 2011-12 respectively. It was further noticed that the DPD incurred excess
expenditure against the Budget Estimates submitted during 2007-08 and 2011-12. DPD stated
that the budget was utilized according to budget released by controlling authority. This indicated
that Annual Work Plans were not need based.

The AWP was being approved post facto by the State Steering Committee on the basis of actual
expenditure incurred by the project authority.

“Revised to 39 GPs of Okhalkanda and Dhari Block in May 2006
43 Manjuli, Dholigoun, Kaana and Talla Kanda

39


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

5.4.1.2 Selection of watershed areas

While selecting watershed areas under the project, a weightage of 50 per cent was to be given to
erosion intensity, 25 per cent to socio-economic status of communities and 25 per cent to caste and
remote villages. Areas where any such schemes were already in operation and areas falling under
National Parks and Sanctuaries were to be excluded for coverage under the project.

Scrutiny of base data/ information for selection of watersheds at Deputy Project Director (DPD),
UDWDP Nainital revealed that the selection of Okhalkanda block was not made on the basis of
points earned on the above mentioned three parameters. There was only a database** available
for eight hilly districts of the State showing categories of the erosion intensity of agriculture,
forest and blank land use, under which the selection of these blocks in the district was made. It
was noticed that in the two selected sub watershed“ areas, three micro watersheds namely;
Dautagad, Khujetigad and Sunkot involving 16 07४77 of Okhalkanda block had not earned any
points under erosion intensity’, which had a weightage of 50 per cent in selection, while no
detailed data of socio-economic and backward and deprived areas parameters*® (which had a
weightage of 25 per cent each) were available in the DPD office.

On this being pointed out, the DPD replied that the selection of blocks and GPs was made by the
WMD on the basis of fixed parameters. The reply of the DPD is not acceptable as the
DPD/WMD failed to furnish the detailed information of socio-economic status of communities
and caste and remote villages’, on which the selection of the blocks and areas of GPs were made.
Thus, the selection of micro watersheds (blocks and areas of GPs) in Nainital district was not
done in a transparent manner.

5.4.2 Project Implementation
5.4.2.1 Cost escalation of €2.37 crore

The project was target oriented with a fixed time frame for completion of each component. Audit
revealed that works proposed in the AWP of the district could not be completed within the
stipulated period despite availability of adequate funds and were completed with a delay of two
years. This forced WMD to revise the time schedule of Gram Panchayat Watershed
Development Plans and resulted in cost escalation of = 2.37% crore in respect of works
undertaken by the GPs.

In the four test checked GPs, an excess expenditure of = 25.60 lakh was incurred due to revision
of Standard Schedule of Rates (SSR) as detailed in Appendix 5.1.

4 Prepared by Forest Department in January 1992

45 Ladhia and Kalsagola.

46 Dautagad-4GPs, Khujetigad-5 GPs,Sunkot-7 GPs=16 GPs.

47 Erosion Intensity of Agriculture, Forest and blank land.

48 BPL families, SCs, STs and women etc. in accordance to the last paragraph of para 2.2 of the operational
guidelines.

Original approved cost % 12.02 crore & revised to हैं 14.39 Crore in respect of works of thirty nine village
Panchayats

49

40


Chapter-5: Social Services

5.4.2.2. Component wise expenditure of the district

As per the Project Approval Document (PAD), the Deputy Project Directors (DPDs) were
required to incur expenditure on the above three components in the ratio of 63:16:19 and two
per cent of the total funds were earmarked for physical and financial contingency. During the
entire project period (2005-12), DPD, Nainital incurred total expenditure of % 46.75 crore in the
ratio of 61:29:10 on these components. The component wise expenditure incurred by the DPD
during 2005-12 is shown in Appendix 5.2. The DPD attributed the disproportionate expenditure
on need and demands.

Low expenditure on ‘Institutional Strengthening’ could deprive the department of consolidating
the gains made during the project period and reaping long term benefits.

5.4.2.3. Irregular revision of budget caps of selected GPs

As per Operation Manual for implementation of UDWDP, the ceiling for allocation of funds to a
GP was to be fixed as per standard formula of calculation. Paragraph 7.1 also envisaged that if
any shortcoming is found or if the GPWDP proposes to spend beyond the financial ceiling set for
the GP, then the DPD will send it back to the Water and Watershed Committee (WWC) with
written observations and recommendations for carrying out necessary changes in the proposal.

It was noticed that the Government of Uttarakhand approved (December 2004) budget caps of
% 9.80 crore for the implementation of the project*? in the district and accordingly the DPD was
directed to prepare the Gram Panchayat Watershed Development Plans (GPWDP). Details of
actual expenditure incurred under GPWDPs of selected GPs are given in Table 5.18 below:

Table 5.18 : Budget caps of GPs @ in crore)
Name of the GP | Approved GPWDP Revised Additional Revised Actual
budget cap Outlay budget works enhanced Expenditure

cap approved Cap incurred
Year Dec. 2004 NA* Jan.2010 | June 2010 June 2010 | Mar.2012 | 2012
[Manjui | 0.48 0.48 0.68 0.29 0.97 0.89
Dholigaon 0.46 0.51 | 060" | 0.11 0.71 | ०0०69 |
[हा | 0.54 | 0.60 | 0.67 0.17 0.84 0.91
Talla Kanda 0.38 0.42 0.45 0.11 0.56 | 0०659 |
[Totals 1.86 2.01 | 2.4" | 0.68 | 3.08 | 3.18

Source: DPD records

*NA=Not Available

It is evident from the above table that contrary to the provisions and approved budget caps, the
GPWDP outlays were arbitrarily enhanced on the basis of revised budget caps. The DPD
justified the enhancement and attributed it to the devaluation of Indian Rupee (INR) against the
US$ and increase in SSR (Standard Schedule of Rates). The reply was not acceptable because as
per standard formula, budget caps were to be based on population and area of GPs and were not
linked to the devaluation of INR and revision of SSR.

50. For the entire project period of 2005-12.

41


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

Impact analysis

As per the project agreement,a third party midterm and final review/evaluation was assigned to
M/s Energy and Resources Institute (TERI), New Delhi. Component wise significant results are
being narrated below:

Watershed treatment: This improved the productive potential of natural resources. The

increase in irrigated area (21 per cent) and value (27 per cent) were significantly higher than the
target values.

Enhancing and improving livelihood opportunities: Holdings of improved breed of cows and
buffaloes increased by 19 per cent and 191 per cent respectively, while dependency on fodder
from forests and feed purchased from market had declined by eight per cent and five per cent
respectively.

Institutional Strengthening: Enhancing the capacity of GPs and village community members
led to a sharp increase in the participation in Gram Sabha and Gram Panchayat meetings.

28/09/2012

Biomass of the treated areas has increased

28/09/2012

Livestock of improved breeds increase

Farming of cash crops

During joint physical inspection (September 2012) of the test checked GPs, performance of sub
components were found satisfactory.

42


I SCChapter-6EconomicServiess | Economic Services |

Various schemes viz. Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
(MGNREGS) Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP), Indira Awas Yojana (IAY),
Pradhan Mantri Grameen Sadak Yojana (PMGSY), Rajeev Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran
Yojana (RGGVY), National Afforestation Programme (NAP), Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban
Renewal Mission (JInNURM) etc. were implemented in the district. Out of these, three schemes
namely MGNREGS, AIBP and NAP were selected for detailed scrutiny and the results thereof
are discussed in this chapter.

Employment generation

61 Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme

The National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 (NREGA) guarantees 100 days
employment in a financial year to every registered household on demand. In Nainital,
Government of India (GOI) launched the scheme from 1“ April 2008. District Programme
Coordinator (DPC) at district level, Programme officer (PO) at block level and Gram Rozgar
Sahayak (GRS) at Gram Panchayat (GP) level are responsible for its implementation.

Under MGNREGS, the wages of skilled and semi-skilled workers and cost of material is shared
in the ratio of 75:25 between GOI and the State Government. In addition, the State Government
bears the cost of unemployment allowance and the administrative expenses of State Employment
Guarantee Council.

6.1.1 Ensuring livelihood security in rural areas

The year wise position of employment provided under the scheme during the period 2008-09 to
2011-12 is indicated in Table 6.1 below:

Table 6.1: Employment generation

Year Number of Number of household provided Person days of | Share of women
Household | Job cards | Employment 100 days employment per | in employment
registered issued employment rural household (in %)

2008-09 31,210 31,210 4,980 10% 52.71 8.57

2009-10 35,951 35,951 9,657 14 (0.1%) 58.83 15.71

2010-11 38,674 38,674 21,898 816 (3.7%) 36.06 19.84

2011-12 40,499 40,499 15,266 500 (3.3%) 47.37 16.95

Source: DPC, Nainital

(i) During the period 2008-12, employment provided to households ranged between 36 to 59
person days per rural households, while households that were provided 100 days of employment
ranged from 0 to 3.7 per cent. Thus, targets of employment as outlined in the Act could not be
achieved in the district.

43



Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

(ii) Participation of women in employment ranged from 8.57 per cent to 19.84 per cent against
the required norm of 33 per cent. Thus, target of share of women in employment specified under
the Act could not be achieved in the district.

(iii) It was observed that the format of application for seeking employment under the scheme did
not contain a column for ‘Date from which the employment was sought’. Thus, delay in
providing employment to beneficiaries could not be ascertained in audit. During beneficiary
survey, all the 480 surveyed beneficiaries responded that application for demanding work was
taken from them only after availability of works at GPs level.

6.1.2 Planning

Nainital received (November 2007) ₹ 10 lakh for the preparation of District Perspective Plan
(DPP) for the period 2008-09 to 2011-12. Audit found that the DPP was prepared (November
2009) by an NGO™ and was forwarded (November 2009) to the State Employment Guarantee
Council (SEGC) for approval. The same had not been approved by the SEGC till the date of
audit (August 2012). Moreover, as per the MOU executed (June 2008) with the NGO, the final
payment, against the total agreed cost of = 7.60 lakh, was to be made only after approval of the
plan. However, the District Planning Committee (DPC) made (February 2012) full payment to
the NGO without the Plan being approved by the SEGC. The DPC stated (August 2012) that
entire payment was made to the firm in anticipation of approval of DPP. The reply was not
acceptable as payment was made in contravention of the provisions of the MOU.

6.1.2.1 Preparation of Annual Development Plans

Each Gram Panchayat was required to prepare an Annual Development Plan that would include
assessment of labour demand, estimated cost of works and wages and identification of works to
meet the estimated labour demand. The following deficiencies were noticed in the preparation of
Annual Development Plans:

(i) There was no assessment of labour demand, estimated cost of works and wages, and proper
identification of works in the plan. Test checked GPs stated that same could not be worked

out due to lack of technical expertise at GP level.

(ii) A time frame (October 02 to January 31 each year) existed for the planning process in respect
of preparation of shelf of projects and projection of labour budget on it with clearly
demarcated timelines for GPs, Blocks, District and finally the State Government.

Although, the test checked blocks and GPs furnished the details regarding dates of preparation,
approval and submission of plan; yet no supporting documents in this regard were furnished to
audit. The dates of submission of plans by GPs were cross-checked with the dates of receiving
of GP plans at block level and the same did not match. In view of the above facts, audit could
not ascertain the delay, if any, in submission of plans. Further, it was found that DPC was
submitting the block wise shelf of projects and labour budget to Zila Panchayat in the months of

51 Society for Uttaranchal Development & Himalayan Action (SUDHA).

44


Chapter-6: Economic Services

May to July during the period 2008-12; whereas, the same should have been sent by
December 15 of the year preceding the year for which the shelf of project was being formulated.

6.1.2.2 Nominal Role of District Panchayat in implementation of scheme

MGNREGS Operational Guidelines clearly stated that the block wise shelf of projects and labour
budget based on it were to be submitted to the District Panchayat by the DPC for approval and
modification, if necessary. Further, the District Panchayat was to monitor all aspects of
implementation, especially timely issue of Job Cards, provision of employment, social audits,
fund flow, progress and quality of works.

During the test-check of records, it was found that District Panchayat was only according the
approval of Annual Work Plan, leaving out the monitoring of scheme.

6.1.3 Financial Management

As per the financial statement provided to audit, an amount of & 41.78 crore™, including opening
balance of € 0.31 crore of Sampoorna Gramin Rozgar Yojna (SGRY), were available during
2007-08 to 2011-12, against which an expenditure of % 40.93 crore was incurred in the district;
leaving an unspent balance of = 0.85 crore at the end of March 2012. Receipt, expenditure and
utilization of funds could not be verified either at DPC or Blocks or GPs as the records were
neither completed nor maintained properly. Further, financial statement for the period 2009-12
provided to audit did not match either with the Monthly Progress Report (MPR) or Management
Information System (MIS) data.

6.1.3.1 Blockade of funds

Government of Uttarakhand released (October 2009) ₹ 3.82 lakh to the DPC for setting up
rolling fund at Post Office so that payments to workers could be made on time. It was observed
that this fund was not utilised by the DPC and remained blocked for three years. However, the
rolling fund at Post Office was set up (November 2012) at the instance of audit.

6.1.3.2 Unrealistic labour budget

District was to formulate labour budget on the basis of labour demand, identification of works to
meet this demand and estimated cost of works and wages in the GP development plan giving due
consideration to the actual achievement trends of previous years in terms of households’
demands, days of employment demanded and expenditure incurred. Audit observed
(November 2012) that the DPC estimated creating 67.42 lakh man days in labour budget during
2008-12 against which only 23.45 lakh man days could be generated. Thus, the average
projected man days were 187 per cent higher than the actual man days generated. In 2009-10, the
projection stood at 813 percent higher than the actual achievement trend of employment
generation of previous years. District Development Officer attributed variation to the actual
demand raised by rural households and delay in release of funds by the centre. The reply was

°° Central share:-% 37.14 crore, State share:-% 3.93 crore and Miscellaneous Receipt:-% 0.40 crore.

45


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

not justifiable as the actual achievement trend of employment generation of previous years
should have been taken into account prior to formulation of labour budget.

6.1.3.3 Delay in payment of wages

As per guidelines, payment of wages was to be made on weekly basis and in no case, later than
15 days of such payment becoming due. In case of any delay, labourers were entitled to
compensation. During the test-check of 101 works of 24 Gram Panchayats in four blocks, it was
noticed that there was an average delay of 48 days in 51 works with a maximum delay of 347
days in making payment to the beneficiaries. No amount was found to have been paid as
compensation to any worker in 24 test-checked GPs.

The DPC admitted (December 2012) the above facts and attributed the reason for delay in
payment of wages to non-availability of funds at GPs level.

6.1.4 Inadequate staff

Audit scrutiny of records of test-checked Blocks and GPs revealed (September, 2012) that there
was acute shortage of staff at both the levels as detailed below:

e Full time dedicated Programme Officers were not posted in the four test checked
Blocks. Instead BDOs were entrusted the work of MGNREGS in addition to their regular
duties.

e Paragraph 3.1.1 of MGNREGS operational guidelines states that there should be one GRS in
each GP to maintain the records and to ensure that Gram Sabha meetings are held regularly.
In contravention of the guidelines, the State Government notified (July 2009) that there
would be one GRS for four GPs in hills and six GPs in plains. It was found that only four
GRSs were posted in Nainital District against the requirement of a minimum of 115 GRSs.
Due to non availability of adequate number of GRSs at GP level, VDOs/GPAs were
entrusted MGNREGS works in addition to their original duties.

© One VDO on an average is looking after the work of more than four 57587,

« In the district, only 13 Junior Engineers (JEs) (30 per cent) have been posted against the
Sanctioned Strength (SS) of 44 while in test-checked four blocks only four JEs
(17 per cent) were posted against the SS of 24. Thus, one JE on an average was looking after
the works of 35 GPs™ as against the norm of 11 0787,

6.1.5 Maintenance of records

6.1.5.1 Non-maintenance of records

Scrutiny of records of test checked 24 GPs, four POs and DPC revealed the following:

3 460 GPs/98 VDOs=4.69GPs.
34 460 GPs /13JEs=35GPs.
5. 460 GPs/ 44 SS of JEs in Nyay Panchayat=11GPs.

46


Chapter-6: Economic Services

e Job Card registers were not maintained at Bhavanipur khulbe and Nathupur Gram
Panchayats of Ramnagar Block.

¢ Muster Roll Receipt Registers had not been maintained in nine out of 24 GPs. In the
absence of same audit failed to reconcile Muster Roll account.

e Complaint Registers were to be maintained at DPC and POs levels for receiving and
disposing of complaints within 15 days from the date of receipts. Although, the DPC and
four POs provided the details of complaints received and disposed off the complaint registers
were not provided to audit. In the absence of complaint registers, audit could not ascertain
the delay in disposal of complaints.

¢ Cash book at the GP level were not being maintained properly and closing of the cash
books was not being done on daily/monthly basis. Receipts were being shown on payment
side and vice versa in some of the GPs. Cash book of Chiyori GP showed negative balance
of = 1,177, which was due to drawal of cheques in spite of non availability of funds in the
bank.

¢ Cash book at the DPC and blocks level are not being maintained in the prescribed form.
Cash book of Haldwani Block only showed entries in respect of payments through cheques,
leaving out entries of receipts and payments in cash while some entries of receipts and
payments were not entered in the cash book of Ramnagar Block.

e During the scrutiny of 712 Muster Rolls (MRs) used in 101 works, cuttings were found in 28,
erasing in 24 and over writing in four MRs.

e During the scrutiny of job card registers, involving 1,743 Households of 24 test checked GPs,
it was noticed that photos of 172 beneficiaries (10 per cent) had not been pasted, signatures
of 361 beneficiaries (21 per cent), signatures of VDOs in respect of 206 beneficiaries
(12 per cent) and Bank/ Post Office Account number had not been recorded in 608
(35 per cent) cases.

6.1.5.2 Non-Issue of wage slips to the workers

For every payment due to the workers, a wage slip in prescribed format (Annexure B-3 (i) of the
guidelines) was required to be issued by the implementing agency to the workers stating the
amount and the period for which the work was done. Test-check of the records of 24 GPs
revealed (September 2012) that none of the GPs had issued wage slips.

6.1.6 Mismatch between Management Information System and Monthly Progress Report data
Reliability of data uploaded in the website (http://www.nrega.nic.in) pertaining to selected four
blocks, was cross checked with the data available in the MPRs for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12

and it was found that there was marked mismatch between data uploaded in MIS with that of the
MPR. The details are given in the Table 6.2 below:

47


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

Table 6 2: Mismatch between MIS and MPR data (As on September 2012)

Block Ramgarh Bhimtal Haldwani Ramnagar

2009-10 | आधा | 201112 | 200-10 | 20-1 | 201142 | 20010 | आधा | आए | 2७७ | 201 | 211-2

MIS | 4,428 | 4,503 | 4,605 | 5,412 | 5,576] 5,611 | 4308 | 4,626 | 4,901 3,770 | 4,019 | 4,236

xo Fe [ Mpr [3,860 | 5245 | 5,251 | 4.942 | 4.977 | 4.977 | 3.880 | 4348 | 4884 3,348 | 3,770 | 4,180
card oo | 22 | 16.32 | 140० | 8.68 | 10.74 | 11.29 | 9.93 | «७ | 34 11.19 | 6.19 13
Cumulative | MIS | 1,008 | 2,767 | 2,263 694 | 2,242 | 1,974 372 | 1,278 | 1,594 341 | 2,178 | 2,381
No of HH [MPR | 2,000 920 | 1,612 | 1,700 | 1,800 | 1,750 800 | 1,210 | 1,434 377 967 | 1,398

demanded | Diff

employment | (%) | 9841 | 66.75 | 28:76 | 14495 | 19.71 | 11.34) 115.05 | 532 | 1003 10.05 | 55.08 | 42.40

Cumulative | MIS | 1,008 | 2,750 | 2,260 673 | 2,240 | 1,971 338 | 1,277 | 1,592 300 | 2,116 | 2,318
No of मात्र | MPR | 2,000 920 | 1,612 | 1,700 | 1,800 | 1,750 800 | 1,210 | 1434 377 967 | 1,398
provided Diff

employment | (%) | शिवा | «ss | 28.67 | 152.60 | ७& | 11.21 | 136.68 | 5.24 |. 9.92 25.66 [5430 18.11

MIS | 16,957 | 95,714 | 84,941 | 18,674 | 78,756 | 77,077 | 6,923 | 46,101 | 73,729 5,134 | 76,904 | 87,194

Man days | MPR | 97,470 | 77,445 | 81,965 | 71,090 | 69,418 | 71,400 | 41,639 | 56,232 | 74,500 | 56,807 | 73,560 | 95,845

generated | Diff

(aw | 47443 | 19.07] 350 | 280.68 [35 7.36 [sous | 21.97 | 2५ | 1,006.64 | 434 |. 9.92

Source: Scheme website and DPC Nainital

It is evident from the above table that there was a difference, ranging from 0.34 per cent to 1,006
per cent between MIS & MPR data. The DPC accepted (November 2012) the facts and replied
that due to shortage of staff and resources at block level, the data could not be uploaded timely.

6.1.7 Social Audit

The Act provided for Social Audit to be conducted in each Gram Panchayat twice in a year with
an objective to ensure transparency and public accountability in the implementation of the
scheme. Besides, Social audit meetings were to be chaired by a person who is not part of
Panchayat or any other implementing agencies.

Scrutiny of records of test-checked 24 GPs revealed that Social Audit had been conducted only
once in a year in 12 GPs; while, in eight GPs number of Social Audits conducted could not be
ascertained due to non-maintenance of records in this regard. Besides, contrary to the provision
of the Act, the meetings were chaired by Gram Pradhans.

6.1.8 Worksite facilities

Beneficiary survey of 480 beneficiaries of 24 test-checked GPs revealed that the facilities of
Shed, Drinking Water and Créche were not provided to 480, 339 and 480 beneficiaries
respectively. Thus, worksite facilities were not provided to a majority of beneficiaries.

6.1.9 Lack of supervision of works and monitoring

The details of inspections carried out in District and sampled Blocks are shown in Table 6.3
below:

48


Chapter-6: Economic Services

Table 6.3: Inspection of MGNREGS works

Year Total District Sampled block
works | Norms (10 % of | Inspected | Shortfall | Norms (100% | Inspected | Shortfall
total works) (%) of total works) (%)
2008-09 639 63 62 1.58 639 269 57.90
2009-10 1,632 163 56 65.64 1,632 861 47.24
2010-11 2,289 229 | 168 | 26.65 2,289 1,340 41.45
2011-12 2,381 238 602 [= 2,381 1,646 30.86

Source: DPC, Nainital

It is evident from the table above, that shortfall in number of works inspected ranged from 1.58
per cent to 65.64 per cent at District level; while it ranged from 30.86 per cent to 57.90 per cent
at block level. The DPC stated (November 2012) that shortfall in supervision and monitoring
occurred due to shortage of staff and non appointment of separate staff for MGNREGS.

6.1.10 Non-formation of Technical Resource System

As per MGNREGS guidelines, Technical Resource System (TRS) comprising agencies and
institutions was to be set up at district level for simplifying the process of estimate preparation to
enable Panchayats and non technical persons to prepare estimates for works and assess
requirement of labour and materials. The Secretaries of Panchayats and members of PRIs were to

be trained by TRS for estimation, quality control and monitoring. Scrutiny of records of DPC
revealed (August 2012) that no TRS was formed in the district.

6.1.11 Maintenance of Assets

During joint physical verification of 101 works executed by GPs during 2008-09 to 2011-12, it
was found that 51 works on land development, Sampark marg, water conservation etc. costing
₹ 40.55 lakh were damaged for which no reasons were on records. Besides, in 76 cases, worksite
sign boards costing = 1000 each were also not found in place. There was no provision of funds
for maintenance of created assets.

Recommendations

The State Government/ District Administration may consider to ensure:

. Deployment of adequate human resources for effective implementation of scheme.

. Increasing the awareness about the scheme in rural population so that every registered
household is aware about employment on demand within 15 days, unemployment
allowance in case of non-employment in scheduled time frame, compensation in case of

delayed payment etc.

. Paying special attention to check the existing mismatch between MPR and MIS data.

49


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

Irrigation

6.2... Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme

In the Nainital district, net sown area was only 12 per cent (49,069 hectare) against the total area
of 406,308 hectare, of which 57 per cent (28045 hectare) of sown area was irrigated through
various irrigation sources as shown in the Pie Charts 3 and 4 below:

Chart-3: Land use (Reported area) in Nainital Chart-4: Sources of irrigation in Nainital district
district (In hectare) (In hectare)
1 Canal rigaton 1 Other mode of Irigation

Not 8000 Area, = Govt, Tubewell Irigation 1m Pvt. Tubewell Irigation
aL

1214, 4%

tts et
2608 5%
Uneutvate Land
18॥/4%

Barren 400000018 Land,
22280, 6%

11605,42%
14896, 53%

Forest Area,
298236, 73%

330.1%

Source: Chief Agriculture Officer, Nainital

Nainital district had a net irrigated area of 28,326 hectare in 2007-08 which decreased to 27,695
hectare®® in 2009-10 and again increased to 28,045 hectare in 2010-11.

Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP) was launched (1996-97) by GOI to accelerate
creation of Irrigation Potential (IP) by providing financial assistance to State Governments.
Surface Minor Irrigation Schemes (both new and ongoing) were included for grant of assistance
under AIBP from the year 2001-02. Projects which were already being funded from external/
domestic agencies such as NABARD etc. were not eligible under AIBP. Projects under the
programme were to be routed and approved by the State Technical Advisory Committee (TAC)
before its submission to GOI.

Surface Minor Irrigation (MI) schemes were to be funded under AIBP, provided that the
proposed schemes met the following pre-conditions:

e The project cost of these schemes per hectare should not exceed हैं 1.50 lakh; and

« Individual schemes should benefit at least 20 hectare (ha) and group of schemes (within a
radius of 5 kms) should benefit at least 50 ha.

Projects for Extension, Renovation and Modernization (ERM) were also included under the
programme from December 2006.

°° As per Statistical Diary,201 1.

50


Chapter-6: Economic Services

AIBP schemes were implemented by two different departments in the district ie. Minor
Irrigation Department (MID) and Irrigation Department (ID). In Nainital, there were one Minor
Irrigation division and three Irrigation divisions, headed by Executive Engineers (EEs). These
divisions executed 162 schemes at the sanctioned cost of हैं 106.92 crore with a view to
create/regenerate Irrigation Potential (IP) for 12,790 hectare under AIBP during 2007-12 in the
district. The division wise break-up is given in Table 6.4 below:

Table 6.4: Division wise break-up of AIBP schemes

Name of Division No. of No. of Sanctioned IP to be created/
schemes sub- cost @ in regenerated (in

schemes crore) hectare)

Tarai Irrigation Division (TID), Nainital | 099 [ 115 34.03 3,521

Kosi Construction Division-2 (KCD-2), | % | 20 pe | 1,733

Ramnagar

Irrigation Division, Haldwani (IDH) 01 [6 | 1.04 70

Minor Irrigation Division (MI Division), | 146 PF! 52.16 7,466

Bhimtal

7) 878 106.92 12,790

Source: Department figures

During the year 2007-12, 162 schemes were sanctioned under AIBP, out of which, five schemes
of Irrigation Divisions falling within four selected™ blocks and 41 sub schemes of MI Division
out of 737 sub schemes falling within 24 test-checked Gram Panchayats (GPs) of these blocks
were selected for detailed scrutiny. Audit findings pertaining to these AIBP schemes are
discussed in succeeding paragraphs.

6.2.1 Planning
6.2.1.1 Submission of proposals

As per State Government instructions (March 2005), proposals for construction of irrigation
schemes should be passed in the Gram Sabha (GS) meeting before preparation of Detailed
Project Report (DPR).

Scrutiny of the selected schemes/ sub-schemes revealed (June 2012) that MI Division and
Irrigation Divisions prepared DPRs of the schemes/ sub-schemes on the basis of proposals
submitted by individual beneficiaries, Gram Pradhans, public representatives and by the
departments on their own accord. The divisions stated (June 2012) that the proposals of the
schemes were received through Gram Sabha/ Gram Panchayat (GS/GP) but they failed to
produce any records confirming the same.

6.2.1.2 Formulation and approval of schemes
AIBP guidelines envisaged that the DPRs of the schemes should be prepared after a detailed

survey on water requirements with an assessment on hydrological, meteorological,

57 Includes 77 sub schemes costing हैं 3.10 crore executed against 66 dropped sub-schemes having money value of
₹ 2.69 crore.
Ramnagar, Ramgarh, Bhimtal and Haldwani Blocks.

51


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

environmental and ecological aspects of the project and should reflect the detailed cost estimates
and other economic parameters such as Culturable Command Area (CCA), annual irrigation,
intensity of irrigation etc.

Test-check of DPRs of the schemes/ sub schemes pertaining to sampled blocks and GPs revealed
(June 2012) that although the divisions had incorporated the aforementioned requirements, yet
the data included in the DPRs were not supported by relevant documents”. Audit scrutiny
revealed following further shortcomings in the process of formulation and approval of schemes:

A. Keeping in view priorities given in 11" Five Year Plan, Government of Uttarakhand issued
(August 2007) instructions to Department for preparation of shelf of projects to cover such
areas where enhancing of Irrigation Potential (IP) was essential. Scrutiny of the records
revealed that no shelf of projects was prepared by the Irrigation Division during the review
period. Divisions replied (June 2012) that no action was required at the division level in this
regard. The reply was not acceptable as the State Government had clearly instructed that
shelf of projects was to be prepared at the division and circle levels.

B. The State Government accorded (October 2007) administrative approval and financial
sanction for 419 sub-schemes of 89 schemes of MI Division costing % 23.86 crore for
implementation in the block year 2007-09. Out of these, 66 sub-schemes costing हैं 2.69 crore
were dropped (March 2011) by the Department due to reasons like non-availability of water
at source, guls constructed by other departments and disputes among the villagers.

C. Four schemes costing = 82.83 lakh of MI division for the block year 2007-09 were
sanctioned (October 2007) with combined CCA of 123.70 hectare against the required norms
of 170 hectare®. Thus, at the formulation stage, the CCA of proposed schemes were neither
checked at the division level nor at the levels of Chief Engineer (regional level) and
Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) while sanctioning the schemes.

D. Irrigation Division, KCD-2 Ramnagar, submitted (September 2007) two DPRs*“! to SE for
executing two schemes (IP of 155 hectare) amounting to हैं 1.5 crore for approval of the State
Government. The administrative approval and financial sanction of & 1.31 crore for the
same was accorded (September 2009) by the State Government. Audit scrutiny revealed
(June 2012) that the Executive Engineer (EE), KCD-2 Ramnagar reduced the scope of work
by 44 and 46 per cent respectively due to revision of schedule of rates. Consequently, the IP
of these schemes was reduced to 87 hectare from the originally planned IP of 155 hectare
without the approval of higher authorities.

Detailed survey report, seasonal discharge of water and demarcated area (Khasra) etc.

CCA of one single scheme = 1x20 hectare and CCA of three group of schemes = 3x50 ha.[20hectare +
150hectare=170 hectare].

Lining of guls in Mansa devi and Beljudi canals €95.78 lakh and lining of guls in Jassa Ganja and Satgaon canals
53.91 lakh.

Lining of guls in Mansa devi and Beljudi canals $82.52 lakh and lining of guls in Jassa Ganja and Satgaon canals
₹ 48.97 lakh.

60

61

62

52


Chapter-6: Economic Services

E. AIBP guidelines envisaged that eligible schemes covered under the programme during
previous years would get preference over new schemes proposed for inclusion during the
current year. Further, schemes should be completed in two financial years. Despite the fact
that 150 out of 419 sub-schemes of MI Division, Bhimtal, was sanctioned in biennium
2007-09 and remained incomplete as of March 2010, the MI Division took up 307 new sub
schemes for implementation in the biennium 2010-12.

6.2.2 Financial Management

Total available funds under the schemes during 2007-12 were % 78.44 crore against the
sanctioned cost of = 106.92 crore and the same were fully utilized by the four divisions.
Shortcomings in financial management of these funds are discussed below:

6.2.2.1 Under utilization of funds

The MI Division, Bhimtal formulated 89 MI schemes for the block period 2007-09 for which
₹ 23.86 crore were sanctioned. Funds were to be released quarterly, based on the actual
expenditure incurred by the Division. Audit scrutiny revealed (June 2012) that the division could
only utilize funds amounting to = 16.41 crore in the block period 2007-09.

The Executive Engineer stated (June 2012) that basic preparations like constitution of Water
User Associations (WUAs), procurement of stocks and stores and disputes among the villagers
affected timely utilisation of funds.

6.2.2.2 Updation of Stock Account

Audit scrutiny revealed that (June 2012) MI division, Nainital had not updated stock accounts
since March 2008. Consequently, actual utilization of = 17.51 lakh booked against material
pertaining to 13 sub-schemes of the block year 2007-09 which were later declared dropped in the
year 2010-11, could not be verified in audit.

6.2.3 Execution of schemes
6.2.3.1 Delay in completion of schemes

As per the guidelines, the AIBP schemes were to be completed in two financial years. Scrutiny
of records revealed (June 2012) that a total of 156 schemes®’ were sanctioned during the period
2007-11. Status of the completion of schemes/ sub-schemes is given in the Table 6.5 below:

® 146 schemes for MI Division and 10 schemes for Irrigation Divisions.

53


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

Table 6.5: Delay in completion of schemes

Year No. of Number of schemes completed

sanctioned Within After scheduled time with delays

Schemes air ti Between one and More than two
eduled time Upto one year
two years ears:

| s | ss | s | Ss | S | Ss [ S [ Ss | S | Ss
2007-08 93% 475 37° 225 25 | 89 | 8 | 42 23 119
2008-09 2 32 2 32 = = |= | |. | 2] = [=|
2009-10 4 28 3 19 1 9 = = = =
[2010-11 | 57 307 17* 200" | -- | 5» [| >> | “>> | >> [ दि
Total 156 | 842 | 59 | 47% | 26 | 98 | 8 | 42 23 119
Source: Departmental figures. _S for Scheme and Ss for Sub-schemes.

*rest of the schemes and sub-schemes are in progress as of March 2012.

It is evident from the above table that 57 schemes® (37 per cent) were completed with delays
ranging from one to more than two years.

The Executive Engineer, MI Division accepted (June 2012) the facts and attributed the delay in
completion of schemes to disputes among the villagers. However, audit noticed that apart from
dispute among villagers, the other reasons such as faulty preparation of DPRs, delay in approval
of schemes and under-utilisation of funds also contributed to these delays as discussed in the
paragraphs 6.2.1.2 & 6.2.2.1.

6.2.3.2 Non-achievement of Irrigation Potential

AIBP guidelines envisaged that 10 per cent irrigation potential (IP) will be achieved in first year
and 100 per cent in second year of implementation of a scheme.

Sixteen schemes costing = 54.76 crore were sanctioned for the Irrigation divisions during the
period 2007-12 for regeneration of additional IP of 5,324 hectare. Against this, the divisions
reported regeneration of 3,438 hectare (up to March 2012) with an expenditure of % 34.63 crore.
Despite regeneration of additional IP, actual irrigated area decreased by 395 hectare during the
period 2007-08 to 2011-12 as shown in the Table 6.6 below:

Table 6.6: Decline in irrigated area

Name of Division Irrigated area (In hectare) Difference in
In 2007-08 In 2011-12 total irrigation
| Kharif | Rabi Total | Kharif | Rabi | Total |
TID, Nainital* 1,329 1,837 3,166 1,020 1,595 2,615 © 551
KCD-2, Ramnagar 8,814 6,995 15,809 | 8,896 7,067 15,963 (4) 154
ID, Haldwani* 690 865 1,555 701 856 1,557 (+) 2
Total 10,833 9,697 | 20,530 | 10,617 | 9,518 | 20,135 | © 395

‘Source: Department figures.
* Details of actual irrigation except Bhawar canals pertaining to Kham area where actual irrigated area is
not recorded.

© 89 (MI Division)+4 (Irrigation Divisions)=93.

6 33 (MI Division)+4(hrrigation Divisions)=37.
66. 56 schemes for MI Division and one scheme for Irrigation Divisions.

54


Chapter-6: Economic Services

Five selected schemes (having 36 sub-schemes) were undertaken by the Irrigation divisions

during the period 2007-10 for regeneration of additional IP of 497 hectare. Audit observed that

the actual irrigated area decreased by 125 hectare during the period 2007-12. Thus, there was an
overall shortfall of 622 hectare®’ in achievement of IP. The following shortcomings in
implementation of selected schemes were noticed (June 2012) during audit:

A. Two field guls were constructed (2007-10) in 20 hectare (CCA) of selected Gethiya canal to
regenerate 28 hectare additional IP and the same were completed during the aforesaid period
despite damaged state of canal prior to formation of field guls. Records of the division
revealed that canal was irrigating only four hectare since 2010-11 against the target of 28
hectare.

B. Field guls costing हैं 27.25 lakh were constructed (2007-10) under three sub schemes in three
canals®* to regenerate 28.40 Ha despite scarcity of water at the source of canals resulting in
decline of irrigation potential. This was corroborated during physical verification of the two
canals as can be seen in the photographs below:

Non-functional Alchauna Canal Non-functional Sarna Canal

C. Scrutiny of the DPRs revealed that the additional IP of one sub scheme formulated
(2007-08) in Kulgad canal was calculated on the basis of assumption factor® to regenerate
the IP of 12.24 hectare while the CCA of the canal was only three hectare. The IP of canal
could have been increased to a maximum of six hectare, taking into consideration the two
crop seasons (Kharif and Rabi). Audit analysis revealed that the calculation of additional IP
to be regenerated was independent of the CCA of the canal/gul.

°T Short fall of 622 hectare= actual Irrigated area in 2007-08(12093 hectare)+Under taken for regeneration of
additional IP (497 hectare)- Irrgated area in 201 1-12(11968 hectare)

68 Nalena (€ 4.37 lakh,5 Ha), Alchauna (रे 17.06 lakh, 20.40 Ha) & Sarana canals(® 5.82 lakh, 3 Ha).

© In the factor, it was assumed that loss of water in construction of Kuccha gul and pucca gul of 1 Km will be 0.45
cusec and 0.15 cusec respectively. Thus after converting one km. kuchha into pucca gul it will save 0.30 cusec. It
was further assumed that one cusec will irrigate 14 Ha in Kharif and 20 Ha in Rabi season. Thus, saved 0.30
cusec water will regenerate 4.20 (14x0.30) Ha and 6.0 (20x0.30) Ha additional IP in Kharif and Rabi seasons
respectively. on the above basis divisions finally assumed that after converting one km. kuchha into pucca gul
they will regenerate 10.20 Ha (4.20 + 6.0) additional IP in both seasons.

55


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

D. In Ramnagar, 11 sub-schemes for regeneration of 302.90 hectare was formulated (2007-10)
in 11 canals which were already irrigating more area than the Proposed Potential Area
(PPA) as well as CCA as shown in Appendix- 6.1.

In exit conference, the EEs, while accepting the facts, attributed the non-achievement of

irrigation potential (IP) to crop rotation, migration and less discharge of water at source. As
these facts were not taken into consideration before preparation of estimates, it indicates poor
planning of the department.

6.2.4 Operation and Maintenance

The guidelines envisaged that the State Government should provide sufficient Operation and
Maintenance (O&M) funds for completed AIBP schemes. Accordingly, State Government
issued instructions (March 2005) under which it was provided that three per cent provision of
labour component for O&M was to be collected from the members of the Water User
Association before completion of the scheme which was to be deposited in a joint bank account
of the Gram Pradhan and Junior Engineer of the concerned division.

Audit scrutiny revealed that the MI Division could collect only = 1.84 lakh against the required
amount of % 38.11 lakh”’ as O&M fund of the schemes implemented in 2007-09 biennium.
Further, it was found that no provision was made for O&M in 307 sub-schemes of 2010-12
biennium and 77 new sub-schemes of 2007-09 awarded to the contractor on tendering basis.

Moreover, during physical verification of 14 out of 307! completed sub-schemes of the selected
GPs, it was found that six sub-schemes were non-functional due to damaged guls/ pipelines etc.
as depicted in the following photographs.

12.09.2012

43.01 =

Debris over the Pichaltana kulu gul Hauz at Sakuna-1 without connecting pipeline

Pichhaltana Kulu gul, constructed (October 2011) at a cost | Sakuna-I hauz and pipeline, constructed (January
of %5.13lakh to create 4.50 hectare CCA, was non- | 2011) at a cost of & 2.09 lakh to create 2.40 hectare
functional due to damages caused by landslide. CCA was non-functional as the pipes were not
connected to the hauz.

Recommendations

The State Government/ District Administration may consider to ensure:

. Putting in place monitoring mechanisms for proper operation and maintenance of
completed schemes.
. Preparing revenue village wise data base of canals and guls for better planning.

Required amount= 2117.41 lakh x 60 % x 3% = %38.11 lakh.
11 Out of 41 sub-schemes of selected GPs, 30 sub-schemes were completed upto March 2012.

56



Chapter-6: Economic Services

Forestry
6.3... National Afforestation Programme

Total geographical area of the Nainital District is 4,251 sq.km, out of which 2,982.36 sq. km
(70 per cent) is recorded under forests. Out of the total forest area, 2,574.45 sq. km (86 per cent)
is managed by the Forest Department, while 111.89 sq. km. (3.75 per cent), 280.68 sq. km.
(9.41 per cent) is controlled and managed by Revenue Department (Civil & Soyam) and Van
Panchayats (a locally existing statutory institution of the State) and under private/other agencies
15.34 sq. km (0.51 percent). In the district, there are 495 Van Panchayats falling within the
territorial area of six forest divisions”.

As per “State of Forest Report 2011”, the forest cover of the district has slightly increased as
compared to 2005. The trend of forest cover of the district since 2005 to 2011 is shown in the
Chart 6.1 below:

Chart 6 1: Trends of forest covers (in sq Km)

ya 1936 1919 1923
2000
1500 babdh
1000:
| 604 J 573 J 566

500

ol

2005 2009 2011
Dense न Moderate Open

National Afforestation Programme (NAP) is a Central Sector Scheme. The main purpose of
NAP programme is rehabilitation of degraded forests and other areas by institutionalizing
decentralized/ participatory forest management and supplementing livelihood improvement
processes with a goal to increase and/ or improve the forest and tree cover and alongwith
sustainable development and management of forest resources.

6.3.1 Programme Implementation

As per the programme guidelines, NAP was to be implemented by the Forest Development
Agency (FDA) through Joint Forest Management Committees (JFMC) at village level. The
constituted FDAs were to be registered societies while the JFMCs/ Eco Development

n

DFO, Nainital Division-285, DFO, Soil Conservation Division, Nainital -105, DFO, Haldwani Division-10, DFO
Ramnagar Division-37, DFO Champawat Division-30 & DFO Almora Division-28.

57


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

Committees were to be registered with the Conservator of Forests. It was noticed that six”? out
of total seven FDAs in the district were functioning with expired registrations.

A total of = 7.18 crore was available with seven FDAs during the coverage period against which
% 6.41 crore™ were utilized by them Appendix-6.2. However, only three FDAs” had running
projects during the period 2007-12.

Audit findings pertaining to the implementation of the programme are discussed in the following
paragraphs.
6.3.1.1 FDA, Ramnagar

FDA, Ramnagar Division had proposed (2006-07) a project costing = 1.65 crore to treat
degraded forest land of 740 hectare for a period of five years (March 2011) through 10 JFMCs.
An amount of % 95.89 lakh”® was released by GOI during 2006-07 & 2007-08 for the purpose.
Audit scrutiny revealed the following:

e Against the target of 740 hectare, plantation work in only 656 hectare could be taken up as
one JFMC could not take up the work due to internal disputes. It was noticed that the
maintenance of the project was not taken up after 2008-09 due to non-release of funds by
GOI State Government for the said purpose.

e DAs were required to take necessary steps to ensure at least 60 per cent survival of plants
by the end of first to third year, 55 per cent by the end of fourth year and 50 per cent by the
end of 5" year. However, as per assessment of the project carried out by Amity University,
Noida in 2008-09, the survival rate of plantation was only 43 per cent.

* Out of total unspent balance of % 23 lakh (including interest) lying with the FDA and defunct
JFMCs, the FDA obtained (September 2012) a bank draft of हैं 14.99 lakh to surrender the
amount to Pramukh Van Sanrakshak Van Panchayat Uttarakhand after a lapse of three years
from the close of the project; while, funds amounting to हैं 7.55 lakh were still lying with the
defunct JFMCs. The FDA, Ramnagar stated (September 2012) that funds for maintenance
were not released by GOI and recovery of the blocked funds from the defunct JFMC was
being initiated.

6.3.1.2 FDA, Nainital

The GOI approved (2006-07) plantation work in 700 hectare”? costing %1.63 crore, to be
implemented through 35 JFMCs, for FDA, Nainital division. The project was to be completed by
2012. An amount of = 1.25 crore was released for the project by the GOI up to 2009-10.
Audit scrutiny revealed (September 2012) the following:

73. EDA-Tarai West Division, Tarai East Division, Tarai Central Division, Haldwani Division, Nainital Division &
Soil Conservation Division, Nainital.

Includes amount of & 0.46 crore to the project not covered during 2007-12, the details of which have been
discussed in para 7.3.1.4.

FDA Soil Conservation Division, Nainital; FDA, Nainital Division and FDA, Ramnagar Division.

7 Includes excess release of €10 lakh by GOL

77 Project approved for 950 hectare. and was revised to 700 hectare.

4

15

58


Chapter-6: Economic Services

e Plantation of 700 hectare were carried out through 35 JFMCs during 2007-08 to 2008-09,
but no records to show that survival rate was monitored annually at division level were
made available to audit.

e UCs amounting to = 9.84 lakh were pending with the 35 JFMCs since 2009-10.

6.3.1.3 7704, Soil Conservation Division, Nainital

The GOI approved (2006-07) plantation work in 1,200 hectare for implementation through
74 JFMCs. The plantation work was carried out in 2007-08. As per the project plan,
maintenance work was to be carried out in 2008-09, 2009-10 & 2010-11. Audit scrutiny
revealed (September 2012) that only ₹ 0.32 crore were released (March 2011) by the GOI as
against the requirement of % 0.57 crore”® at the closing of project period (March 2011). No
records to show the yearly survival rate of the plantation carried under the project was available
with the division. The FDA stated that periodical checks are carried out by Range Officers and
instructions have been issued to them to furnish information on survival rate of the plantation.

6.3.1.4 FDA, Tarai West Division, Ramnagar

Government of India (GOI) had approved a project in 2004-05 costing हैं 1.73 crore for treating a
total area of 1,274 hectare of degraded forest area through 21 JFMCs. As per the sanction order,
the interest accrued on the released funds should form part of FDA's additional resources and
was to be adjusted towards further installment of the grant. The project was initially approved
for three years i.e. up to March 2007. An amount of €1.09 crore was released during 2004-05
and 2005-06 and the project was closed (March 2007) after spending ₹ 0.63 crore”. In the
implementation of the project, Audit noticed the following:

e Against the target of 1,274 hectare, plantation work was taken up in only 804 hectare.
The plantation was subsequently declared unsuccessful by the FDA due to very low
survival rate (30 per cent) of plants in the first year because of failures in plant protection
work by JFMCs and lack of interest shown by them for its improvement.

e Against a provision of ¥9.88 lakh for monitoring & evaluation, fencing, awareness raising
etc., the FDA could utilize only ₹ 3.21 lakh during the period 2004-07.

© Out of total unspent balance of % 55.12 lakh (including interest), the FDA surrendered
(May 2011) ₹ 45.60 lakh after the close (March 2007) of the project. The interest of
₹ 9.52 lakh earned on the unspent grant amount was retained by the FDA in violation of
the Sanction Order and was lying in their bank accounts (September 2012).

¢ UCs for हैं 0.42 lakh were also not obtained (September 2012) from the JFMCs.

Thus, in the implementation of the project, हैं 35.90 lakh spent on forestry in 804 hectare was
rendered wasteful while no afforestation could take place in 470 hectare. Besides, = 10 lakh
(i.e. हैं 9.52 lakh as bank balance and pending UCs of € 0.42 lakh) are still blocked with the FDA,
Tarai West Division (August 2012).

** Calculated on the basis of sanction.

Afforestation, Entry Point Activities, Monitoring & Micro Planning, overhead expenses etc.

59


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

Recommendations

The State Government/ District Administration may consider to ensure:
.

Timely release of funds for maintenance, watch and ward of the raised plantation as per

norms.

Maintaining and monitoring the yearly survival rate of plantations by the FDAs.

60


I CChapter-7GeneralServies | 7 General Services |

General services include District Administration, Law & Order, Civic Ameniti

5, Management
of Solid Waste, e-Governance, Conservation of Lake efc. Of these, Civic Amenities and
Conservation of Lakes were selected for detailed scrutiny and the results thereof are discussed in
this chapter.

7.1 Civic Amenities

Out of the total population (9.55 lakh) of Nainital District (as per 2011 census), 39 per cent live
in urban regions. Nainital District has one Nagar Nigam (NN) at Haldwani, three Nagar Palika
Parishads (NPPs) at Nainital, Ramnagar, Bhowali and three Nagar Panchayats (NPs) at Bhimtal,
Lalkuwan, Kaladhungi. The NN, NPP and NP function as institutions of self governance and
receive grants and funds from the Government. These institutions also earn revenue through
taxes, rents, issue of licenses, parking fees etc. and are mandated to utilize these funds for
provision of adequate civic amenities like parking spaces, street lights, parks, disposal of waste,
houses for urban poor and slaughter houses etc. Four Urban Local Bodies*® (ULBs) were
selected for detailed scrutiny in audit.

Test-check of the records of four selected ULBs revealed that five project works®! under Jawahar
Lal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (IaNURM) flagship scheme were sanctioned for
Nainital District by GOI during the period 2007-11. Of these, four project works viz., IHSDP
Haldwani (costing = 25.32 crore), BSUP, Durgapur and Narainnagar (costing = 9.30 crore and
% 10.49 crore) and Management of solid waste of Nainital town (costing हैं 9.31 crore) were
selected for detailed scrutiny. Further, ‘Modernization of slaughter houses’ at Ramnagar was
also scrutinized. The results there of are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.

TAA Housing to urban poor
7.1.1.1 Excess release of funds

Nagar Nigam, Haldwani entered into two agreements (July 2010) with U P Project Corporation
Ltd., Roorkee, amounting to = 12.55 crore and = 14.37 crore for construction of 422 and 501
houses respectively, for urban poor residing in the slum areas of Haldwani city under IHSDP,
against which हैं 6.64 crore was released as of March 2012. Details of release of funds are
indicated in Table 7.1 below:

8° Nagar Nigam Haldwani, Nagar Palika Parishad Ramnagar, Nagar Palika Parishad, Nainital and Nagar Panchayat

Bhimtal

Integrated Housing and Slum Development Project (IHSDP), Haldwani (¥ 25.32 crore-2010-11), Basic Service
to the Urban Poor (BSUP), Durgapur Nainital € 9.30 crore-2007-08), BSUP, Narainnagar, Nainital © 10.49
crore-2009-10), Reorganization of Nainital water supply (€ 5.47 crore-2007-08), Sewerage System Nainital
(₹ 19.60 crore) and Management of Solid Waste, Nainital (€ 9.31 crore-2010-11)

81

61


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

Table-7.1: Detail of fund released under IHSDP project
(®in crore)

Funds released by State Government Funds released by Nigam to executing agenc:

Date of release Amount Date of release Amount
20 January 2011 6.68 26 February 2011 2.64
11 July 2011 3.00
20 January 2011 5.84 उठ January 2012 [1.00 _|
Total 12.52 6.64

Source: Nagar Nigam Data
Clause 3 of the agreement envisaged that the Nagar Nigam, Haldwani will ensure adequate fund
flow to the construction agency commensurate with the physical progress and financial progress
of previously released funds/ last disbursement. The stipulated date of starting of construction
work was July 2010 and the work was scheduled to be completed by December 2011.
Accordingly, the site was handed over (August 2010) to the executing agency.

Audit scrutiny revealed that the executing agency started construction work of only 166
(18 per cent) houses against the required 923 houses and only 84 houses were completed
(May 2012) at a cost of हैं 1.89 crore after a delay of six months. The completed houses had
various infrastructural problems such as non-construction of toilet pits, stairs and seepage in the
rooms. The beneficiaries had taken possession of these houses. It was noticed that contrary to
the agreement, funds released by Nigam to the executing agency were not proportionate to the
physical progress of the construction, which resulted in excess release/ payment of
% 3.12 crore”?

Further, as per the agreement, penalty was to be levied on the centage charges paid to the
executing agency in case of delay in completion of works. It was found that penalty amounting
to = 0.77 lakh was not deducted from the centage charges by the Nigam.

In exit conference, the District Magistrate while accepting the facts intimated that the agreement
with the executing agency has been cancelled (December 2012) and a new agency will be
selected for construction of the remaining houses and recovery of the excess amount from the
defaulter executing agency is being initiated.

7.1.1.2 Delay in construction

The Government of Uttarakhand accorded (March 2008) approval for construction of 200
houses, for 64 poor families of Dhobighat and 136 families of Harinagar slum areas, costing
₹ 9.30 crore under BSUP programme in Durgapur, Nainital town. Accordingly, the State
Government selected (August 2008) PWD as the executing agency and Nagar Palika Parishad,
Nainital (NPPN) as the nodal agency. The scheduled date of start of the project was August
2008 and the stipulated date of completion was November 2009. The site was handed over
belatedly (September 2009) to the executing agency. It was noticed that against an amount of

* Cost of 84 completed houses was 1.89 crore, while 82 houses were under construction-{%2.25 lakh x 75 per cent}®1.68
lakhx82 houses =%1.38 crore +¥1.89 crore =%3,27 crore and centage @7.5 per cent on %3.27=%25 lakh
[₹1.89+₹1.38+₹0.25-₹3.52 crore]. Hence excess release was %6.64 crore-X3.52 crore=¥3.12 crore.

62



Chapter-7: General Services

% 2.33 crore received by the nodal agency, only हैं 2.30 crore was released (2009-10 & 2011-12)
to the executing agency.

Audit scrutiny revealed that the executing agency had started (July 2010) construction of 112
houses against the required 200. It was noticed that none of the houses were completed till the
date of audit (September 2012). Even though the completion of the project was already delayed
by 34 months, no initiative was taken by the nodal agency to fix the time line for completion of
this project.

The Nagar Palika Parishad, Nainital replied that due to hilly area, time was taken in selection of
the site and attributed the delay to the internal affairs of the executing agency. The reply was not
acceptable as the NPPN had spent 18 months in selection of site from the date of approval of the
project.

7.1.1.3 Non-starting of the BSUP, Narainnagar housing project

Government of Uttarakhand accorded (July 2010) approval for construction of 141 houses, for
16 poor families of Narainnagar, 71 of Breside, one family of bakery compound, five of
Mangawali, four of Rajpura, 13 of Jublihaal compound and 31 of Sukhatal slum areas, under
BSUP programme in Narainnagar, Nainital town. The approved cost of the project was
₹ 10.49 crore.

The NPPN selected (July 2010) UP Project Corporation Ltd., Roorkee as executing agency from
the approved panel of executing agencies prepared by the State Government. The State
Government released ₹ 2.18 crore for the project to the NPPN whereas the NPPN released
(March 2011) only ₹ 2.44 lakh® to the executing agency and IIT Roorkee toward inception of
project work and survey works. But the construction work had not been started even after a
lapse of 25 months (September 2012) due to non-availability of land and led to dropping of the
project; thus, depriving the poor urban families of housing facility.

712 Management of Solid Waste

Municipal Solid Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000 make every municipal
authority within the territorial area of municipality responsible for the implementation of the
provisions of these rules and for any infrastructure development for collection"*, segregation’

storage**, transportation*’, processing*® and disposal*® of municipal solid waste. Management of
Solid Waste (MSW) works were test checked in four out of seven ULBs of the district and the
results thereof are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.

8. % two lakh to executing agency for inception of project and 20.44 lakh to IIT Roorkee for geological survey.
“Collection” means lifting and removal of solid wastes from collection point or any other location.

“Segregation” means to separate the municipal wastes into the groups of organic, inorganic, recyclable and
hazardous wastes.

86 “Storage” means the temporary containment of municipal solid waste in a manner so as to prevent littering,
attraction to vectors, stray animals and excessive foul odour.

“Transportation” means conveyance of municipal solid waste from place to place hygienically through specially
designed transport system so as to prevent foul odour, littering, unsightly conditions and accessibility to vectors.
“Processing” means the process by which solid waste are transformed into new or recycled product.

“Disposal” means final disposal of municipal solid waste in term of the specified measures to prevent
contamination of ground water and ambient air quality

87

88
89

63


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

7.1.2.1 Blockade of funds
Paragraph 48 of Chapter III of Uttarakhand Procurement Rules, 2008 envisaged that ordinarily,
advances to contractors are prohibited and payments should be made only against the work
actually done. However, exceptions may be permitted in a few cases or only with the sanction of
the Government, subject to payment of interest till the amount is deducted or adjusted.
The NPPN entered (December 2011) into an agreement with M/s A 2 Z Maintenance and
Engineering, Gurgaon, Haryana for = 13.49 crore for handling of solid waste of Nainital town.
Audit scrutiny revealed that prior to signing of the agreement, a complaint by an advocate
against the selected firm was received (April 2011) at the NPPN intimating therein the failure of
the aforesaid firm in executing MSW works of Bihar Sharif Municipal Corporation and the
matter being pending in a Court of Law.
On this being pointed out that legal opinion should have been obtained before entering into the
agreement, the NPPN stated that as the case of the firm was pending before the Court of Law and
had not been decided, the firm could not be considered a defaulter. Audit observed that entering
into an agreement with a tainted firm was inappropriate in the first place.
Further, it was found that NPPN released (December 2011) interest free advance of = 80 lakh
(10 per cent of the capital cost) to the firm. As per agreement schedule, the firm was required to
complete the construction within a year of the agreement, but even after lapse of nine months
(September 2012), the firm had neither procured any items nor started the construction works
and the amount was lying unspent (September 2012) with the firm.
Audit noticed that despite various instructions issued by the Executive Officer, NPPN, the firm
had not started the work and municipal waste was not being collected.
Thus, the NPPN, despite being aware of the conduct of the firm, selected a tainted firm, who had.
not started the work after a delay of nine months despite the availability of funds of € 80 lakh,
which remained blocked with the agency.
7.1.2.2 Insufficient infrastructure for handling of Waste
The four selected ULBs having population of 3.05 lakh” were generating (2011-12) 95 MT”! of
waste per day. The details of requirements and availability of equipment to handle the waste is
shown in Table7.2 below:

Table-7.2: Requirement and availability of equipment in ULBs

Name of item Haldwani [_Ramnagar [| _‘Bhimtal___—|
Req Av Req Av [ee | Av
Dumper Placer 5 3 4 2 0 0
Refuse collector bins 2 [1 | fo | o | o | o |
६ लाश» श्च 0 o [ 1 [| o |
Tractor Trolle: 2 2 2 1 1 1
Utility Jeep/ Tempo 3 [1 | 2 1 4 | 1 |
Dustbins (RCC, Large) 150 42 24 24 [| 4 [| 4 |

Source: ULBs figures
Avl- Available, Req- Total Required.

°° Information provided by ULBs (2011-12)-Nainital-41461,Bhimtal-7718, Haldwani-201433 and Ramnagar-
54812=305424,
2. Nainital:-16 MT, Haldwani:-60 MT, Ramnagar:-18 MT and Bhimtal:-1 MT.

64


Chapter-7: General Services

As can be seen from the above table that the ULBs were not having adequate infrastructure such
as dumper placer, tipper and refuse collection bins to handle the generated waste. It was also
noticed that the waste was handled by ULB employees without protective gears and was finally
dumped in nearby forest areas and river banks. Besides, open transportation was used to carry
the waste in contravention to the MSW Rule as can be seen in the photograph below:

whe < — =
z ees .. wae ail
Handling of waste without protective gears and Transportation of municipal waste un-hygienically at
disposing it near Saladi village in NP Bhimtal Nagar Nigam, Haldwani

Audit further noticed that projects for management of solid waste had not taken off in any of the
four ULBs and were still in formulation stage in three ULBs” even after a decade of enactment
of MSW Rules, 2000.

7.1.2.3 Handling of municipal waste
(A) Nagar Nigam Haldwani

As per MSW Rules, an authorisation is to be sought by the municipalities from SPCB for
handling MSW waste. It was noticed that SPCB had not issued authorisation to Nagar Nigam,
Haldwani. Further, NN Haldwani had prepared (March 2012) a Detailed Project Report (DPR)
costing = 16.46 crore for Management of Solid Waste which was not sanctioned by the State
Government as of August 2012. It was further noticed that NN Haldwani was dumping
generated waste in un-segregated manner at Gola Rokhar dumping ground (as can be seen in the
photographs below).

22 NN Haldwani, NPP Ramnagar and NP Bhimtal

65


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

30.08.2012

oe बल z a =
Unsegregated dumped waste at Gola Rokhar, Waste being washed away by flood in Gola river

Haldwani Haldwani (old dumping site)

During joint physical verification, audit came across with the evidences of waste being washed
away in the Gola River (as can be seen in the photograph above) thus,polluting the river water.

(B) Nagar Palika Parishad, Ramnagar

Nagar Palika Parishad, Ramnagar had submitted (April 2012) a proposal for trenching ground on
forest land which was rejected (July 2012) by the Forest Department. Test-check of records of
NPP, Ramnagar revealed that door to door collection of segregated biodegradable and non-
biodegradable waste were initiated by the NPP (August 2012). In the preliminary stage only five
wards out of 15 wards were selected for the collection through Mohalla Swachhata Samitis.
However, physical verification revealed that the waste of the remaining ten wards were being
collected in an un-segregated manner and dumped on the Kosi River bank causing the
contamination of the river water: The facts were accepted by the NNP authorities. The

photographs below show the un-segregated waste dumped on the bank of Kosi River.

Un-segregated dumped waste at Kosi River,
(C) Nagar Palika Parishad Nainital

Nagar Palika Parishad, Nainital failed to start the Management of Solid Waste works even after a
lapse of nine months despite entering into an agreement with a firm as discussed in Paragraph
7.1.2.1. Meanwhile the ULB engaged a firm which was earlier working in Nainital area under
National Lake Conservation Plan project to continue with collection and segregation of the

Ramnagar Dumped waste overflowed to Kosi River

2 Lok Chetna Manch.

66


Chapter-7: General Services

waste. It was observed that the firm was collecting un-segregated waste and dumping it in the
forest land near Hanumangarhi temple thus, polluting the forest area as shown in the
photographs below:

12.09.2012

12.09.2042

Collection of un-segregated waste by the firm Un-segregated waste dumped at forest land near

Hanumangarhi temple.
(D) Nagar Panchayat, Bhimtal

Nagar Panchayat, Bhimtal had neither prepared any plan for MSW work nor formed Mohalla
Swachhata Samitis for door to door collection and segregation of waste. On this being
pointed out, the NP, Bhimtal stated that they had no land for composting the waste thus, no plans
could be formulated. However, audit noticed that NP, Bhimtal had constructed (April 2007) a
trenching ground in a populated area from Awasthapana Nidhi at a cost of = 5.79 lakh but the
same was not being used for disposing off the waste as shown in the photographs below:

07.09.2012

07,09:2012.

ae wn

Un segregated waste dumped at hill slope near | Unused Trenching Ground constructed besides
Saladi village NP Bhimtal

As this trenching ground was not used for the intended purpose, the entire waste was being
dumped unauthorisedly at the slopes near Saladi village on Bhimtal-Haldwani road as shown in
the above photographs.

Thus, all the selected ULBs were not following MSW rules, 2000 and collected waste were
finally dumped at nearby forest areas and in river banks causing pollution to the environment.

67


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

7.1.3 Modernization of abattoir™

Ministry of Food Processing Industries, GOI, had launched a scheme for modernization of
abattoirs during 2008-09. It was a comprehensive scheme, which included modernization of
existing abattoirs with higher level of financial assistance of 75 per cent for difficult areas such
as Uttarakhand State. The regulatory functions of the scheme were to be discharged through
local bodies.

Audit scrutiny revealed that NPP Ramnagar prepared a DPR amounting to = 1.70 crore for
modernization of abattoir at Khatari locality and forwarded (February 2009) it to the State
Government. The State Government directed (March 2009) and issued reminders (June, August
and October 2009) to NPP, Ramnagar to submit elaborated financial viability assessment (as
required under paragraphs 4.3 (b) and 5 of the guidelines), report/ comments of the Veterinary
Department and approved proposals of the Municipal Board in the DPR.

Audit observed that NPP, Ramnagar failed to submit the same in proper format as required by
the Authorities, which led to non-approval of the DPR even after 29 months from the date of
submission of proposal. Physical inspection during audit revealed that the animals were openly
being slaughtered daily in unhygienic conditions as shown in the photographs below and waste
was flowing directly into the Nallah.

ms :
Animals being slaughtered in the open near closed) Slaughtered animals wastes flowing into the
slaughter house. Nallah.

The NPP, Ramnagar stated that foolproof proposal was submitted to the Directorate of Urban
Development, Uttarakhand, but no sanction was communicated till date (September 2012). It
was further stated that action will be taken against the unauthorized persons involved in
slaughtering of animals in the open. The reply of NPP Ramnagar was not acceptable as
elaborated financial viability assessment report was not submitted with DPR as required under
the guidelines.

In the exit conference, the Executive officer accepted the facts and stated that notices were issued
to responsible persons and slaughtering in open has been stopped since January 2013.

24. Slaughter house.

68


Chapter-7: General Services

Thus, the indifferent approach of the functionaries deprived NPP Ramnagar of grants for
modernization of the slaughter house amounting to = 1.70 crore. Slaughtering of animals was
being done in an unscientific and unhygienic manner, which remains a serious health hazard.

Recommendations

The State Government/ District Administration may consider to ensure:

. Availability of land before taking up of housing projects related to slum areas.
. Completion of the projects for management of solid waste in all the four ULBs.
Conservation of lakes

7.2 National Lake Conservation Plan

Recognizing the importance of lakes, the National River Conservation Directorate (NRCD),
Ministry of Environment and Forests (MOEF), Government of India (GOI) launched (2001)
National Lake Conservation Plan (NLCP), a Centrally Sponsored Scheme, with the objective of
conserving urban and semi-urban lakes degraded due to waste water discharge into the lakes and
restoring other unique fresh water ecosystems through an integrated ecosystem approach.

Nainital District has earned the epithet - ‘Lake District of India’. GOI sanctioned (June 2003 and
August 2003) projects amounting to हैं 16.85 crore for conservation and management of four
lakes namely Bhimtal, Naukuchiyatal, Sattal & Khurpatal and हैं 47.97 crore for Nainital Lake
under NLCP. The Nainital Lake Region Special Area Development Authority (NLRSADA),
Nainital with Divisional Commissioner, Kumaon as its ex-officio chairperson, was selected
(September 2003) as nodal agency to execute and monitor the works. A total of 29 project
works®> were to be executed under the project at a cost of = 64.82 crore. The projects were to be
completed within August 2006.

721 Financial Management

The scheme was funded by the Centre and State on 70:30 cost sharing basis. The 30 per cent
State share included the share of local bodies (up to 10 per cent) for ensuring public participation
in the project.

The GOI and State Government released %61.55 crore to the nodal agency up to
September 2010. Against this, the executing agencies incurred expenditure amounting to
% 56.59 crore up to March 2012. An amount of हैं 7.76 crore®® was lying unspent with the nodal
agency and % 2.05 crore was lying with the executing agencies as of March 2012. Apart from
this, an interest of = 4.86 crore was accrued on the unspent balance at the nodal office. The status
of release of funds by GOI vis-a-vis State share is depicted in Table 7.3 below:

# 10 project works of other four lakes and 19 project works of Nainital Lake.

© % 2.90 crore project amount pending for release with nodal agency + हैं 4.86 crore interest.

69


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

Table- 7.3: Details of State Share under NUCP (सैफ crore)
Year Fund released for Nainital Lake works Fund released for other four lakes works
GOI State Share GOI State Share
share | Required Actual _| Shortfall share | Required Actual Shortfall
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7 (8) (9)
1997-03 [oo] 10.75 0 [oo
2003-04 5.60 6.407 2.00 0.85
2004-05 10.00 0.75 3.00 [00 |
2005-06 00 00 00 00
2006-07 7.33 14.39 00 (-)3.51 3.50 5.06 00 3.51
2007-08 1.60 00 2.68 0.70
2008-09 3.40 00 00 [00 |
2009-10 | 00 | 00 00 [00 |
2010-11 3.00 00 00 00
Total | 30.93 14.39 17.90 | ()3.51(24%) 11.18 5.06 1.55 3.51 (69%)

Source: Records of NLRSADA

It is evident from the above table that there was a shortfall (69 per cent) in release of the State
share for other four lakes and an excess amount (24 per cent) was released in case of Nainital
Lake.

7.2.1.1 Irregular expenditure

Mentioned was made in Paragraph 3.1.5 of the Report of C&AG of India for the year ended
31 March 2011, Government of Uttarakhand that the Nainital Lake Region Special Area
Development Authority, without obtaining approval from the GOI, constructed an aquarium
costing = 1.40 crore at Bhimtal Lake. The cost of the aquarium was met by diverting funds
meant for soil conservation works (₹ 80 lakh), Low Cost Sanitation (LCS) and dredging works
(₹ 25 lakh each) and % 10 lakh from Miscellaneous Funds allocated for other four lakes under
NLCP.

Audit scrutiny further revealed that two works costing % 28.32 lakh®® were irregularly executed
by the orders of Project Monitoring Committee headed by Divisional Commissioner by diverting
funds meant for NLCP. These works were neither included in the Detailed Project Report of
NLCP nor approved by the National River Conservation Directorate.

Thus, in contravention to financial rules the funds under the NLCP project were diverted without
approval of the GOI.

7.2.2 Project implementation
7.2.2.1 Non submission of Program Evaluation Review Technique (PERT) chart

As per instructions contained in the sanction orders of the projects, the PERT chart” for
implementation of the schemes was required to be submitted by the NLRSADA to National

°7 2.40 crore (November 2003) plus हैं 4.00 crore (December 2003).

°§ Repairs, renovation and railing work of Nainital-Almora B-2 road through एस): 16.32 lakh, Installation of
CCTV cameras in and around Nainital Lake through SSP Nainital: ₹ 12.00 lakh.

°° A PERT (Program Evaluation Review Technique) chart is a project management tool used to schedule, organize
and coordinate tasks within a project.

70


Chapter-7: General Services

River Conservation Directorate. It was noticed that the NLRSADA had not prepared or
submitted the PERT chart as required under the project and submitted (July 2004) only the
up-to-date physical and financial progress of the projects. Thus, in absence of PERT chart, the
project works were taken up by the executing agencies without fixed timelines.

7.2.2.2 Delay in completion of project works
Audit scrutiny revealed that out of a total of 29 works sanctioned under NLCP in the district, 11

works remained incomplete as of March 2012 even as six years had elapsed from their scheduled
date of completion. Details of incomplete works are shown in the Table 7.4 below:

Table- 7.4: Status of completion of works under NUCP (@in crore)
Name of Component Sanctioned | Number Status of works Works not
amount of works | Completed | Incomplete | started
(1) (2) (3) (4) 6) (6)
Nainital Lake
Sewerage system 15.20 3 31[... 0  0|
Hydraulic Works 15.87 3 if 2
Restoration & Dev. Works. 7.44 4 4[. 0 0|
Catchment Conservation works 1.25 2 2 | 0
Infrastructure facilities 3.80 6 2 1 3
Social Awareness 0.87 if oft
Unforeseen Misc.exp. 355[ Otis
Total (A) 47.98 | 19|_ _12[ 2,5)
Other four lakes
Soil Conservation & Watershed 5.91 1 1 | 0
Ment.
Sewerage & Sanitation works 4.63 3 3 [| |
Hydraulic & Restoration works 2.42 2 [| [io | [|
Bio-manipulation & 2.48 2 || 2 |
developmental works
Water conservation & |
Infrastructure facilities Om | 4 fo 4 aa
Social Awareness 0.46 if if
Unforeseen Misc.exp. 0.80 0 0 0 0
Total (B) 16.84 10 6 3 1
Grand total (A+B) 6482 | 29[. 18[. TC

Source: NLRSADA records.

The NLRSADA admitted the above facts and attributed the delay to geographical conditions and
atmosphere of the lake areas. The reply was not acceptable as the DPRs of the project works
should have been prepared with due consideration to the atmosphere of the lake areas. Moreover,
if the PERT chart had been prepared, the project works could have been completed within
stipulated period.

Thus, the nodal agency could not complete the sanctioned works even after considerable delay of
six years from the scheduled date of completion.

71


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

7.2.2.3, Management of Solid Waste

Government of India sanctioned % 81 lakh (August 2003) and % 70 lakh (June 2003) for the
purchase of equipment for handling of waste in Nainital Lake and other four lakes area
respectively. Against this, NURSADA prepared a comprehensive plan for Management of Solid

Waste

100 and spent an amount of रैं 4.14 crore for the work. The additional amount of

% 2.63 crore'®! was met out by diverting funds from other components!”? of NLCP. Audit
scrutiny revealed the following deficiencies in execution of the comprehensive MSW plan:

.

100

101
102

Out of % 1.51 crore NLRSADA spent only = 68.30 lakh on the purchase of equipment while
an amount of & 82.70 lakh was spent on other works for which separate account was not kept.
An agreement, for three years (2008-11) was entered into with Lok Chetna Manch for door to
door collection and segregation of waste of Nainital Lake area and areas surrounding the
other four lakes to minimize the bin/receptors culture, composting the biodegradable waste
and scientific end use disposal of non-biodegradable waste. An amount of % 68.30 lakh and
₹ 81.25 lakh were spent on purchase of equipment and Operation and Maintenance (O&M)
works respectively. It was noticed that the firm could collect only 7,100 MT (50 per cent) of
waste against the total 14,100 MT generated. Further, the firm was able to segregate only
4,615 MT (65 per cent) of collected waste, of which, only 180 MT (six per cent) of
bio-degradable waste and 2.43 MT (0.21 per cent) non-biodegradable wastes could be
disposed off scientifically. Thus, the expenditure incurred on O&M (₹ 81 lakh) remained
unfruitful as the firm could dispose only 1.3 per cent of the total generated waste.

In violation of the Forest Conservation Act, 1980, the NLRSADA constructed composting

pits costing हैं 41.77 lakh on the forest land without its transfer from the Forest Department at
Narain Nagar. It was noticed that the firm could compost only 180 MT waste out of a total

of 3,230 MT bio-degradable waste. Further, during joint physical verification, it was noticed
that the site had not been in use since May 2011 as shown in the photograph below:

z ¥ i :
Unused composting pit at Narain Nagar, Nainital

Door to door collection, segregation, composting and recycling of waste generated in Nainital Lake and other
four lake areas.

Total expenditure of € 4.14 crore-% 1.51 crore € 0.81 crore+¥ 0.70 crore).

% two crore from low cost sanitation, 80 lakh from soil conservation works and हैं 50 lakh from unforeseen
miscellaneous fund.

72


Chapter-7: General Services

On this being pointed out, NURSADA replied that the pit, now transferred to NPPN, was not
found suitable for composting due its inadequate size and water retention capacity. The reply
of the NLRSADA was not acceptable as these factors should have been considered at the
time of construction of the pits. Further, use of forest land without the approval of GOI was
in violation of the Act. Thus, the expenditure of € 41.77 lakh remained unfruitful.

An amount of = 1.79 lakh was spent on construction of trenching ground at Bhimtal for
composting of bio- degradable waste generated. The trench was not being used by the firm due
to non-collection of waste and non-formation of Mohalla Swachhta Samitis. Thus,
expenditure incurred on construction of trenching ground remained unfruitful.

A Recycling plant costing हैं 2.21 crore was constructed (March 2010) at Kathgodam
(Haldwani) for recycling the non-biodegradable waste generated in Nainital district. ULBs of
the district were to segregate non-biodegradable waste which was to be recycled through this
plant. Audit scrutiny revealed that due to erratic supply of electricity to the plant since
inception and non-posting of operator, the plant remained non-functional till August 2012.
Further, it was also observed that the ULBs have failed’ to segregate the municipal waste
into bio-degradable and non-bio-degradable so as to supply (referred to in Paragraph 7.1.2.3
above) adequate raw material to the plant. Thus, the expenditure incurred on the recycling
plant remained unfruitful.

Thus, only 1.3 per cent of the total generated waste could be processed even after incurring an
expenditure of % 4.14 crore!%.

7.2.2.4 Low Cost Sanitation

Low Cost Sanitation means conversion of the existing dry latrines into low cost flush latrines and
to construct new ones where none exist. Due to inadequate sewerage lines in the district,
National River Conservation Directorate, GOI sanctioned (August and June 2003) ₹ 3.54 crore
for Nainital Lake and % 2.59 crore for other four lakes for construction of household toilets,
community toilets and urinal blocks.

103

104

Audit scrutiny of LCS works of Nainital Lake revealed that against 1,574 sanctioned
household toilets, no toilets were constructed. It was also observed that against 16 sanctioned
community toilets, 27 were constructed at a cost of = 1.16 crore, which included 14 toilets
constructed at unapproved places. Further, during joint physical verification, audit found that
the LCS constructed had various infrastructural problems like broken seats and urinal pots.

Due to expiry of MSW agreement with Lok Chetna Manch and the firm was handling municipal waste without
segregation.

₹ 68.30 lakh (Purchase of Equipment) + हैं 81.25 lakh (O&M) + ₹ 41.77 lakh (construction of composting pits
at Nainital) + हैं 1.79 lakh (construction of composting pits at Bhimtal) + & 2.21crore (construction of Recycling
plant)

13


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

e Audit scrutiny of LCS works of other four lakes revealed that no household toilets against the
sanctioned 943 were constructed. Against 13 sanctioned community toilets, only nine were
constructed.

In reply, NURSADA attributed the non-construction of household toilets to laying of sewer lines
in catchment area of Nainital lake and stated that the construction of community toilets were
made as per requirement felt in joint physical inspection by the municipal ward members and
various departmental delegates. The reply was not acceptable as the decision to not construct
household/community toilets should have been communicated to GOI.

7.2.2.5 Social Awareness

(A) — Government of India approved (August and June 2003) ₹ 87.09 lakh and & 45.79 lakh for
Public Awareness programme under NLCP for Nainital lake and four other lakes respectively.
Activities under this programme included group meetings, slide shows and audio visual films for
local community, educational cum entertainment programmes, Tourist Information Centres and
access to literature on eco-tourism for tourists.

Scrutiny of the records revealed that the NLRSADA could spend only % 36.74 lakh'®
(42 percent) against the sanctioned amount of हैं 87.09 lakh for Nainital Lake. Further,
NLRSADA had not proposed various activities for local communities; tourists efc. in its public
awareness plan in the DPR even after a lapse of six years of the approval of the project.

On this being pointed out, the NURSADA replied that the Social awareness programme, being a
continuous process, funds were utilized as and when required. The reply was not acceptable as
all the sanctioned project works were to be completed within August 2006, which cannot be
spent for indefinite period.

(B) The GOI accorded approval of हैं 45.79 lakh for public awareness programmes under
other four lakes projects. Scrutiny of records revealed that the Chairman (Divisional
Commissioner), Project Monitoring Committee (PMC), approved (December 2005) construction
of hall-cum-office below the parking of the Bhimtal Lake for public awareness which was not
provided for under public awareness programmes. The construction work was arbitrarily!
assigned, without adopting tendering process, to a firm'®’ on turnkey!” basis. The NURSADA
released (March to August 2006) advance payments of हैं 20 lakh to the executing agency. The
firm had partly constructed the building at a cost of = 12.88 lakh and left the remaining works
incomplete (August 2007). The balance amount of हैं 7.12 lakh was lying with the firm since

16. ₹ 33.41 lakh on print media and हैं 3.33 lakh (र 2.31 lakh on glow sign board and हैं 1.02 lakh on Lake Warden
programme).

The selection of the construction firm without calling for tenders was in violation of paragraph 360 of Financial

Hand Book (FHB) Volume-VI.

M/s Design & Development Forum, New Delhi.

Turnkey is a product or service that is designed, supplied, built or installed fully complete and ready to operate.

The term implies that the end user just has to turnkey and start using the product or service.

106

107
108

74


Chapter-7: General Services

last six years. The firm had not responded to the correspondence made in this regard by
NLRSADA and no effort was made by NLRSADA to take action against the concerned firm.

The NLRSADA stated that the balance amount will be recovered from other works undertaken
by the firm. The reply was not acceptable as NURSADA had not made any correspondence with
the firm since last two years. Moreover, it failed to produce any documentary evidence for
making efforts to recover the said amount from another project.

7.2.2.6 Operation and Maintenance

The guidelines envisaged that the O&M shall be a part of the project and the cost thereon shall
be borne entirely by the State/ local bodies for which additional resources have to be
demonstrably raised and committed to O&M. Further, the assets created under NLCP shall be
handed over to local bodies after completion and construction agency shall continue to maintain
assets on contract basis till such time the local body acquires the necessary technical expertise
for this purpose.

Scrutiny of records revealed that the State Government did not mobilize the share of the local
bodies for O&M and issued orders, contrary to the instructions, for maintaining the assets by
executing agencies. The maintenance of assets by executing agencies was to be a temporary
arrangement till the local bodies attained technical expertise. It was noticed that the local bodies
were not handed over assets barring two Low Cost Sanitation and few equipment of MSW and
the assets were being maintained by the executing agencies from one to six years as of March
2012.

In exit conference, the District Magistrate stated that instructions were issued to NLRSADA to
hand over the assets to the concerned municipalities.

7.2.3 Water quality

National Lake Conservation Plan guidelines envisaged that in the absence of specific water
quality criteria developed in respect of lakes, designated best use criteria for surface water for
bathing quality as given in Central Pollution Control Boards (CPCB) norms shall be the target
for lake water quality. Scrutiny of records of NLRSADA revealed that during the audit period,
testing of quality of water in other four lakes was conducted only in the year 2010-11. A
comparison of various indicators of pollution at the time of initiation (2003-04) of NLCP and in
2010-11 showed an improving trend of water quality. Water quality data maintained by
NLRSADA is shown Table 7.5 below:

75


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

Table 7.5 : Water quality of lakes

Name of Lake pH Dissolved Oxygen (mg/1) ae
ornate Between 6.5 and 8.5 जाए or more 6mg/I or less
(1) (2) (3) (4:

Year 2003-04 | 2010-11 | 2003-04 2010-11 2003-04 2010-11
Nainital | 8.10 | 8.02 4.63 9.45 21.00 7.15
Bhimtal 8.00 8.20 6.80 5.20 7.00 6.20

Naukuchiyatal 8.88 8.50 10.00 6.90 20.00 15.2

Sattal 8.42 8.20 9.40 7.50 13.40 12.50

Khurpatal 8.23 8.20 5.90 8.50 8.83 6.50

Source: Records of NLRSADA

It is evident from the above table that the water quality of Nainital lake has improved, as the
Dissolved Oxygen parameter rose from 4.63 mg/l to 9.45 mg/l while, the presence of
Bio-chemical oxygen demand has reduced from 21 mg/1 to 7.15 mg/1 from 2003-04 (i.e. since
inception) to 2010-11. Further, in other four lakes (Bhimtal, Naukuchiyatal, Sattal and
Khurpatal) the presence of Bio-chemical oxygen demand have also decreased ranging from
20 mg/1 to 6.20 mg/1 during 2003-04 to 2010-11.

Thus, the water quality of the all lakes has improved after the initiation of lake conservation
project under National lake Conservation Plan.

76



||___Chapter-8 Human Resource Management and Internal Control System | Human Resource Management and Internal Control System |

8.1 Human Resource Management

The sufficiency of staff is necessary for successful implementation of schemes/ programmes.
The overall Sanctioned Strength (SS) and Men-in-Position (MIP) of all the departments in the
district was not available. However, data relating to 21 line departments out of 52 line
departments of Nainital District was compiled (2012) by the District Economic & Statistical
Officer as shown in Table 8.1 below:

Table 8.1: Details of Sanctioned Strength and Men in Position of 21 departments of Nainital District

| Group-‘A’ & ‘B’ Group-‘C’_ & ‘D’

“| Department Sanctioned | Men in | Shortage | Sanctioned Men _ in| Shortage
XB Strength Position | (per cent) | Strength Position | (per cent
1 Line departments 753 603 150(20) 9780 8273 1507(15)
2 PRIs 3 1 2(67) 506 135 371(73)
3 ULBs!® | 0 | 2 | 0 | 1446 904 542(37)
4 Other (UDWDP) 17 | 9 | 8(47) 28 29 -1
Total 773 | 615 | 160 (20) 11760 9341 2419 (21)

Source: District Economic & Statistical Officer

Audit noticed that even this data was not complete as information relating to various units within
the 21 departments was not included. The shortage in these line departments ranged between
11 to 57 per cent for Group ‘A’ and ‘B’ cadre and 02 to 52 per cent in ‘C’ and ‘D’ cadre as
shown in Appendix-8.1. The shortage was noticed especially in key posts, i.e. Assistant
Engineers (AEs), Junior Engineers (JEs), Doctors, Teachers and Gram Rojgar Sahayak
(GRS) as discussed in the subsequent paragraphs.

8.1.1 Non-revision of Sanctioned Strength

Test-check of selected departments/ divisions revealed that despite considerable increase in
budgets'!? for implementation of various schemes, the deployment of staff was not according to
the sanctioned strength during 2007-08 to 2011-12 in respect of Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), Urban Local Bodies (ULBs), Forest, Nainital
Lake Region Special Area Development Authority (NLRSADA), Medical Department, District
Ayurvedic & Unani Office, Uttarakhand Jal Nigam (UJN)/ Uttarakhand Jan Sansthan (UJS) and
Uttarakhand Decentralised Watershed Development Project (UDWDP), as shown in the
Appendix-8.2. The deficiency of staff ranged from 5 to 83 per cent against the Sanction
Strength (SS) in these departments/ divisions. Besides, no revisions in the staff strength was
done in respect of the test checked ULBs.

109

{SS=ZP-49, GP-460}{MIP=ZP -38, 67-98)
70 55.02 crore in 2007-08 and हैं 80.12 crore in 2011-12

77



Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

8.1.2 Shortage of key functionaries

The doctors and para medical staff are responsible for providing adequate health services to the
people and perform its role as key functionaries in the Medical Health and Family Welfare
Department, while Assistant Engineers (AE) and Junior Engineers (JE) are the key functionaries
for executing civil works in various engineering departments which are executing different
flagship schemes. The Range Officer, Van Daroga and Forest Guard are meant for protection of
forest. Besides, Gram Rozgar Sahayaks are responsible for implementation of MGNREGS
works at GP level. The shortage noticed against key posts is detailed in Table 8.2 below:

Table - 8.2: Status of shortage in key posts

Name of selected schemes Key Post Sanctioned ve In | Shortage | Percentage
Strength position
एीजापीएा दीपीपीणाए Assistant Engineer 14 13 1 07
Junior Engineer 58 39 19 33
Doctors 203 143 | 60 | 30
Medical Health & Family | X-Ray technician 13 5 | 8 | 62
Welfare Lab Technician 24 16 8 33
Pharmacist 93 82 11 12
. . Doctors 53 40 13 25
iain maa Pbarmacist 37 4 B 2
Assistant Engineer 23 15 | 8 | 35
UJIN & UJS Junior Engineer 69 36 33 48
Fitter & Draftsman 130 88 42 32
Unit Officer 4 3 1 25
UDWDP (EAP) Asstt. Development 4 3 1 25
Officer
Ranger 51 11 40 18
Dy. Ranger 92 69 23 25
Forest Department Van Daroga 337 205 132 39
Forest Guard 923 510 413 45
Surveyor | 6 | | 0 | | 6 | 100
Junior Engineer 2 1 1 50
Wns Sweeper 688 560 128 19
Assistant Engineer 3 1 2 67
REED Junior Engineer ; 6 | 4 2 33
Gram Rojgar Sahayak 115 | 4 | 111 97
RESUMES) Junior Engineer 44 13 31 70

Source: Departments figures
Scrutiny of records revealed the following:

e In Minor Irrigation Division, Bhimtal, an AE was looking after the works of two sub-
divisions (Nainital & Dhari) having responsibility for execution of 350 schemes

78


Chapter-8: Human Resource Management and Internal Control System

(® 17.38 crore) of five blocks during 2007-12. An Additional Assistant Engineer (AAE) was
also looking after the charge of AE, Haldwani sub division and monitoring his own work of
201 schemes amounting to = 19.60 crore. Further, the duty of Draughtsman, responsible for
technical assistance to Executive Engineer, was being performed by a ministerial staff i.e. by
Head Assistant;

e¢ In NLRSADA no Project Implementing Unit (PIU) was established as envisaged in the
NLCP guidelines. Only one project engineer was deployed on contract basis for
implementing the project works.

8.1.3. Capacity building-Training

Training is a continuous process for improvement of the skills of an organization’s manpower.
Training assumes greater significance in the public service departments because of rising public
expectations.

Audit observed lack of/inadequate incidence of training under the selected schemes/
implementing departments and local bodies except in projects such as UDWDP and SWAJAL,
who had prepared their training plan and nominated the staff for training. The staff of MGNREG
scheme was provided training only at the beginning of the scheme in the year 2007-08. While in
NRDWOM & S, out of a total 655 functionaries of 131 GPs, 210 functionaries (32 per cent) had
not been provided training. Moreover, in NRHM, 920 Accredited Social Health Activists
(ASHA) against the total of 940 ASHAs were successfully trained up to March 2012.

8.2... Internal control

Internal control is an integral part of an organization’s operations which provides an excellent
tool for managers to ensure efficient, effective and economic utilisation of resources. It also
ensures that financial interests and resources are safeguarded and reliable information is
available to the administration. Internal audit (IA), as an independent entity, examines and
evaluates the level of compliance to the Departmental rules and procedures and provides
independent assurance to management on the adequacy or otherwise of the existing internal
controls.

8.2.1 Internal audit

It was noticed that the audit of all the eight Kshetra Panchayats (KPs) of the district had not been
conducted and the audit of Gram Panchayats (GPs) had declined from 85 to three since 2007-08
to 2011-12. The shortfall in conducting audit by District Local Fund Audit (DLFA) and
Co-operative & Panchayat Audit (CPA) against the units planned during the period 2007-08 to
2011-12 ranged between 71 to 93 per cent and 45 to 62 per cent respectively as indicated in
Appendix-8.3. A total number of 6,986 Audit paragraphs of DLFA and 7463 Paragraphs of CPA
were outstanding as of March 2012. On this being pointed out, the District Local Fund Audit
(DLFA) attributed the shortfall in conducting inspections to the shortage of manpower.

79


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

Scrutiny of internal audit in test checked schemes revealed that no records of Internal Audit (IA)
existed in majority of the selected units. In NRHM the balance sheet was prepared by Chartered
Accountants up to 2011-12. No details of internal audit were provided by the District Programme
coordinator (DPC) in respect of MGNREG scheme.

8.2.2 Accounts and reconciliation

Effective management of accounts and reconciliation activities greatly increases the
department’s ability to proactively identify lapses, if any, and resolve other issues related to
accounts. Accounting information and reconciliation enable the authorities to monitor the
progress of receipts and expenditure under different schemes/ programmes.

Scrutiny of records of implementing agencies of selected schemes/ programme revealed the
following deficiencies in the maintenance of accounts.

8.2.2.1 Multiple Bank Accounts: The departments, namely ULBs, UJS and NLRSADA did
not maintain scheme specific accounts and deposited the funds of various schemes in multiple
bank accounts.

8.2.2.2 Bank Reconciliation Statement (BRS): BRSs were not maintained by six units
namely NP Bhimtal, UJS Nainital, NURSADA, PHC Bhimtal, Female Hospital Haldwani and
BD Pandey (Female) Hospital, Nainital. BRS for MGNREG scheme was also not maintained
either at DPC, Blocks and GP level.

8.2.2.3. Accounting system: The Ministry of Urban Development, in consultation with the
Comptroller & Auditor General of India, developed National Municipal Accounting Manual
(NMAM) for double entry system of accounting for ULBs. None of the selected ULBs had
adopted the same as of November 2012.

8.2.2.4 Cash Book: Cash Book of MGNREG scheme was not being made as per format in
the DPC, Blocks and GPs.

8.2.2.5 Other Accounts: Minor Irrigation Bhimtal and Kosi Construction Division-2
Ramnagar did not maintain Form 63, in the absence of which, Audit could not ascertain and
verify the actual expenditure incurred on various works/ schemes. Further, Female Hospital,
Haldwani had not maintained the details of expenditure (९1.78 Lakh) incurred in Pulse Polio
programme. Moreover, vouchers were being made on plain papers and were not being
countersigned/ certified by the Medical Officer-in-Charge.

8.2.3. Upkeep of records

Record keeping is a fundamental activity of public administration without which, there can be no
tule of law and no accountability. Public servants must have information to carry out their work.
Further, records provide a reliable and legally verifiable source of evidence of decisions and
actions.

Scrutiny of records of implementing agencies of selected schemes/ programmes revealed the
following:

80


Chapter-8: Human Resource Management and Internal Control System

e None of the test checked ULBs had updated their assets register.

e NPP Ramnagar maintained non-consumable and consumable stock in the same stock
register. The ULB had not worked out the closing balance of the stocks nor verified stock as
required by the financial rules.

¢ Minor Irrigation division, Bhimtal had neither maintained the assets register nor monitored
the created assets. Further, the stock account had also not been updated since March 2008.

e The District Ayurvedic & Unani Officer (DAO), Nainital had not maintained the stock
register as per prescribed norms, in the absence of which audit could not ascertain the
closing balance of medicines.

e In MGNREGS, Job card registers were not maintained at Bhavanipur Khulbe and Nathupur
GPs of Ramnagar Block while nine out of 24 selected GPs did not maintain the Muster Roll
Receipt Registers. Thus, the Muster Rolls issued by the blocks could not be reconciled at
GPs level.

8.2.4 Right to Information

Right to Information (RTI) was enacted in all the departments/ executing agencies and was
working effectively. A total of 3661 RTIs, 161 appeals and 55 cases had been filed and disposed
of, while in four cases the penalty was also imposed.

8.2.5 Citizens charter

As per “Citizens Right to Grievance Redress Bill, 2011” every public authority shall publish a
Citizens Charter within six months of the commencement of the Act. Scrutiny of the records of
public authorities in respect of sampled schemes!!! showed that DPC, Jal Sansthan, NURSADA
and ULBs had not displayed citizens charter while in Medical Department, citizens charter was
found to have been placed in two out of four selected PHCs and in three out of 24 selected Sub
Centers only.

8.2.6 Public grievance mechanism

As per Citizens Right to Grievance Redress Bill, 2011 every public authority shall establish
Information and Facilitation Centre for efficient and effective delivery of services and redressal
of grievances which may include establishment of customer care centre, call center, help desk,
people’s support center etc.

Audit scrutiny of the records of implementing agencies of the selected schemes revealed that no
complaint registers were maintained in B. D Pandey Female Hospital, Nainital, CHC Bhowali
and four PHCs'””. Similarly, no grievance redressal mechanism was found in existence in ULBs
and NLRSADA. However, UJS divisions had maintained complaint register and compliances

गा. MH&EW, UJBs, LDA and UJS.
42° Bhimtal, Motahaldu, Bailparao and Ramgarh.

81


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

were made accordingly. Besides, a help line had been established at DPC level for Grievance
Redressal of MGNREGS but no register was maintained for the same.

8.2.7. Monitoring Mechanism

The District Project Monitoring Committee (DPMC), in the absence of the statutory DPC, was
required to review/monitor the progress of schemes on quarterly basis. In addition, the State
Government constituted a District Task Force to supervise major flagship schemes in the district.
Each member of the task force was to physically verify 25 units ina month. The details of target
and achievement of inspections carried out by DPMC during the period 2007-12 is indicated in
Table 8.3 below:

Table 8.3: Detail of Monitoring by DPMC

Year 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
Target 2400 2400 2400 2400 1800
Achievement

(897 ७०00) 1234 (51) 911(38) 720(30) 1854(77) 1510(84)

Source: Records of DESTO

From the above table it may be seen that there was a shortfall in the supervision of schemes
ranging between 16 to 17 per cent during 2007-08 to 2011-12. Scrutiny revealed that during
2010-12, members of the task force verified large numbers of units in the month of March which
was disproportionate to the normative requirement of 25 units in a month. The DESTO stated
that due to heavy departmental workload the targets could not be achieved. Besides, the DPMC
convened only five meetings against the requirement of 20 during 2007-12. Thus, the monitoring
and supervision of the progress of implementation of various schemes in the district was
perfunctory.

Scrutiny of records revealed the following shortcomings in monitoring of the
schemes/programmes:

* In MGNREGS only 4116 (59 per cent) works against total 6,976 were inspected at block
level during period 2008-12.

e In NRHM no monitoring and planning committees were formed in the district, blocks and
PHC. The Governing body of the DHS met only six times (2007-12) to assess and examine
the implementation and progress of NRHM scheme as against the required 20 meetings.

e In NLCP no Steering Committee and Scientific Advisory committees were formed as
required.

e Under Irrigation Department, the State Level Monitoring Cell and State Level Technical
Advisory Committee for monitoring and evaluation of AIBP schemes were constituted in
July 2011, after a lapse of eight years'!? from the launch of the programme. Besides, inter-
department coordination committee meant to coordinate all concerning departments to

From 2002-03 i.e. the year when AIBP launched in the State.

82



Chapter-8: Human Resource Management and Internal Control System

facilitate pre and post benefit of irrigation facility was constituted by State Government in
January 2011, after nine years of launching of the scheme/ programme.

Recommendations
The State Government/ District Administration may consider to ensure:

e Strengthening monitoring and supervision is strengthened at all the tiers of local district

administration so that the programmes are executed on time and well within cost.

. Periodical assessment of sanctioned strength, postings of functionary at each level,
especially in key post like doctors, engineers and forest security staff for smooth

implementation of the programmes/ schemes.

83


||. लाकाथ-जएएफब्त of Schemes andServices 9 Impact of Schemes and Services |

The Audit team visited the selected 24 Gram Panchayats of four sample selected blocks to assess
the impact of various rural developmental schemes implemented in the district. Responses on six
services namely: Infrastructure, Poverty Alleviation through Employment Generation, Education,

Drinking Water and Sanitation, Irrigation and Health were elicited from 480 people’! and the
results thereof are summarized in the Table 9.1 below:
Table 9.1: Results of beneficiary survey
Sl. Parameters Response Percentage
No.
1 Whether meetings held by Gram Panchayat to discuss development Yes | + |
plans No 1
Infrastructure
2 Benefitted by Indira Awas Yojana and Deen Dayal Upadhyay Awas Yes 32
Yojana ete. No 68
3 Existence of Ration shop in the village Yes 82
No 18
4 Existence of Bank Branch in the village Yes 24
No 76
5 Electricity supply No 9
5 to 10 hours 43
10 to 12 hours 47
24 hours 1
6 Condition of Roads connecting the village to block headquarters and No road 1
district headquarters. Rallemnitifien 26
Good condition 41
Required repair 32

na

480 people= 20 people each in selected 24 GPs.

85



Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

7 Regular Bus services between the villages, village and block Sufficient- 18
headquarters and district town Not sufficient 33

Not available 49

| Availability of cooking gas (LPG) Regular 4
Irregular 25

Not available 71

Poverty Alleviation/Employment
9 Existence of Small scale/ Handicrafts/Kutir industries in the village No 100
10 Whether adequate employment opportunities provided by Government Yes 48
No 52
Education

11 Education facility (upto class VITI) Yes 100
12 Adequacy of teachers posted in the schools Yes 53
No 47

13 Whether satisfied with the facilities provided by Government for Yes 83
education. No 17
14 Whether Mid Day Meal provided to students in the school Yes 100

Drinking Water & Sanitation
15 Source of water Domestic pipe
line 66
Public hand

pump 7

Hand pump 9

Natural source 18

| Distance of water source from home 100 to 200 metre 20
200 to 500 metre 52

More than 500
metre 28

86



Chapter-9: Impact of Schemes and Services

17 Duration of drinking water supply 24 hours 44
Morning and
evening 43
Only morning
Daily
After interval of
few days 7
18 Awareness about Village Health and Sanitation Committee (VHSC) Yes 35
No 65
19 Regular VHSC meetings held Yes 19
No 18
Not Aware 63
20 Whether satisfied with water and sanitation facility provided by Yes 68
Government No 32
Irrigation
21 Types of irrigation facility available in the village No 28
Canal 6
Guls 33
Govt. Tube well 20
Private Tube
well 9
Minor Lift
Irrigation 4
22 Availability of water for irrigation throughout the year Yes 20
No 71
Not Applicable 9
23 Whether dependant on rain water for irrigation Yes 59
No 41
24 Whether satisfied with the irrigation facility provided by Government Yes 55
No 45

87



Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

Health

25 Proximity of health centre Near 63
Far 37

26 Availability of medicines Sufficient 18
Inadequate 81

Not Available 1

27 Whether satisfied with the work of ASHA and ANMs. Yes 99
No 1
28 Whether awareness spread by health workers to adopt modern Yes 56
contraceptives. No 19

Not Aware 25
29 Whether availability of Contraceptive was adequate Yes 56
No ul

Not Aware 33

30 Whether aware about Janani Suraksha Yojana Yes 51
No 12

Not Aware 37

31 Whether Cash assistance provided after delivery No 1

Just after leaving

hospital 1

After 1 week 5

After 15 days 9

After 1 month 14

Not Applicable 10

32 Polio dose is administered at door step or at booth centre At door step 49
At polio booth 51

The responses indicate that meetings were regularly held by the Gram Panchayats to discuss
development of the village. The education facilities provided up to class eighth level and
provision of Mid Day Meal was also very sa

sfactory in the District. However, the facilities in
respect of road conditions, bus services, irrigation, availability of cooking gas and bank services
needs to be improved further.

Recommendations
The State Government/ District Administration may consider to ensure:

. Implementation of the developmental programmes efficiently in order to improve the

quality of rural people in the District.

88



Chapter-9: Impact of Schemes and Services

Conclusion

Planning was not based on structural process of obtaining inputs from Blocks, Gram Panchayats
and other Stakeholders. There is multiplicity of programme and scheme and even larger number
of implementing agencies, making it difficult for the district administration to effectively
co-ordinate monitoring and supervise the developmental activities. While almost all the
developmental programmes are targeted at the same set of beneficiaries, the existence of myriad
programmes without an integrated focus, had led to each of them being implemented in a
standalone mode.

The District Administration needs to put in place a robust District Centric Planning Process by
mapping the gaps in infrastructure under various sectors like health, employment generation,
drinking water, etc through inputs from all tiers of local administration and Public at large. A
clear roadmap to achieve the targets set through such plans for the development indicators to
gauge the extent of development and the effectiveness of various schemes being implemented by
the State in the district should be evolved by the State Government. People’s participation is
essential for ensuring sustainable development of the district.

Dehradun (ASHWINI ATTRI)

The Principal Accountant General (Audit), Uttarakhand
Countersigned.

New Delhi (VINOD RAI)

The Comptroller and Auditor General of India

89


Appendix-1.1

(Reference: Paragraph 1.1; Page vii)

Status of Human Development infrastructure

The district has functional District Hospitals Male & Female, 5 sub district

Medical Hospital’, 4 Community Health Centers (CHCs), 19 Primary Health Centers

facilities (PHCs), 136 sub centers (SCs) headed by Medical Officer-in-charge and a
Medical College at Haldwani.

Education There were 1,203 Primary Schools (PS), 300 Upper Primary schools (UPS), 220

facilities High schools, 4 Degree Colleges, 8 Industrial Training Institutes (ITI) and 3

Engineering Colleges in the district".

All 1,065 villages of the district have been provided water supply however, 347

Water supply Soe . a हे
habitations (13 per cent) out of 2,748 habitations were partially covered (March
2012).
Status of The District consists of 4,407 km of roads. As far as public transportation is
Road concerned there exist 815 bus/tempo and taxi stands and road transportation is

connectivity provided by the State Government as well as private operators.

In the district, there were 6,119 Industries''” which provide employment to

Economic 13,506 persons. Besides, there were availability of 380 hotels, Tourist Rest
Activities houses and Dharmshalas to manage the tourists.
Other There are 686 Public Distribution Centers''® while there are 36 PDS stores
inf having storage capacity of 17,080 Metric ton in the district. All 1065
rastructure |. 119 spe

villages” have been electrified.

The district have a maximum temperature of 40.2 degree Celsius in summer
Other aa Celsius in wi
features season and minimum temperature of (-) 5.4 degree Celsius in winter season.

The average rainfall of the District is 1, 487 mm.

Includes Base Hospital Haldwani.

Uttarakhand portal.

117 As per Statistical Diary 2011

18. Urban-118 & Rural-568 per Statistical Diary, 2011
119 Uttarakhand portal.

16

91



Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme

Centrally (MGNREGS), National Rural Health Mission (NRHM), Sarva Shiksha

Sponsored Abhiyan (SSA), National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP),

Schemes Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) and Total Sanitation Campaign
(TSC).

State schemes | Deen Dayal Awas Yojna and Veer Chandra Singh Garhwali

Appendix-2.1

(Reference: Paragraph 2.4; Page 7)

Statement showing developmental schemes selected for district Audit

e National Rural Health Mission (NRHM).

Social Sector: ¢ National Drinking Water Supply Programme (NRDWP).

e Uttarakhand Decentralization Watershed Development
Programme (UDWDP).

e Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Economic Sector: Scheme (MGNREGS).

e Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP).

e National Afforestation Programme (NAP).

General Sector: ¢ Civic Amenities by Municipal Administration.
e National Lake Conservation Plan (NLCP).

92


Appendices

| Appendix-3.1

(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.1; Page 11)

Mismatch in the opening and closing balance

(@in crore)

Financial Soares Budget | Opening | Released Total Closing
Year Outlay | balance | Amount | Expenditure | Balance
District Sector 28.08 5.98 43.30 40.87 8.41

State Sector 255.27 14.43 183.23 186.02 11.64

2007-08 | Central Sponsored Schemes | 157.75 8.00 86.46 84.28 10.18
Externally Aided Schemes 8.45 0 4.32 4.13 0.19

Grand Total (A) 449.55 28.41 317.31 315.30 30.42

District Sector 31.59 6.46 36.27 38.94 3.79

State Sector 219.90 11.58 182.46 176.77 17.27

2008-09 | Central Sponsored Schemes | 196.60 9.47 135.57 129.91 15.13
Externally Aided Schemes 32.53] 0| 16.74 15.73 1.01

Grand Total (B) 480.62 27.51 371.04 361.35 37.20

District Sector 35.10 4.37 36.72 37.34 3.75

State Sector 221.31 7.64 126.40 117.03 17.01

2009-10 | Central Sponsored Schemes | 227.71 5.30 162.18 152.17 15.31
Externally Aided Schemes 26.96 0.37 19.26 18.94 0.69

Grand Total (C) 511.08 17.68 | 344.56 | 325.48 36.78

District Sector 35.10 3.48 36.50 37.03 2.95

State Sector 148.75 9.01 130.54 116.18 23.37

2010-11 | Central Sponsored Schemes | 437.74 | 9.00 | 255.14 229.01 35.13
Externally Aided Schemes 30.10 | 0.66 | 26.76 27.42 0

Grand Total (D) | 651.69 | 22.14 448.94 409.63 61.45

District Sector 35.10 2.88 34.36 35.28 1.96

State Sector 201.63 21.29 129.46 144.99 5.76
a] Central Sponsored Schemes | 413.31 27.19 197.96 208.87 16.28
Externally Aided Schemes 38.94] | 38.22 36.19 2.03

Grand Total (E) 688.98 51.36 400.00 425.33 26.03

Grand total (A+B+C+D+E) 2781.91 1881.85 1837.09

Source: DESTO

93


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

| Appendix-3.2

(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.1; Page 11)

Financial status of the significant schemes being implemented in the district

(7in crore)

200748 2009-10 | आधा | | आए | Progresive
Namecfthe हु

| Schemes! ee
No A LF | A LF | A | * | A | | A | | balance
1. NRHM 417 307 760 | 592 1075 638 1405 11.14 1567 11.12 37.63 455
2 SSA 1622 | 1292 1831 | 1493 2033 | 1757 3091 23.83 [=] 26.06 9531 491
3. TAY 556 318 527 434 1035 981 798 684 1007 524 241 483
4 | SGRY 468 | 437 o| 0 of ० 0 0 0 | ७ 437 |
5. SRY 148 121 068 06 029 | 029 021 021 023 023 259 0
6 | SGSY 129 092 177 150 163 161 183 182 150 147 732 Ly
7. | DRDA@) [ “४ 058] 072] 068] 0०७| O75] 112 [2 14] 13] 431 [=
[8 [iwop [| 283| 216] 219| 108| 389] 19| 325[ 180| 276| 245| 943 031
[a | | MGNREGS | 102 015 ३90 | 327 1242 878 16.17 13.69 1589 1504 4093 [085]
10. | MPLADS 227 079 348 | 090 | 4.15 127 460 194 653 173 663 480
[41 | MLALADs | 1038| 75| 127| 806| 1343| 722| 9101 1147| ॥8&6| 1694] 5084 12
12. | DDUGAY 374 216 211 | 16 | O71 064 | 064 | 036 029 023 505 | 0७|
13. | AIBP 1078 | 1078 | 19.47| 1947 958 | 958 1261 1261 2600 2600 TBA4 | 0|
14. | NLP 1600 595 | 1846 | 1097 831 412 771 253 574 204 2561 370
5. | FDA 329| 21| आ| 20] 141 033| 150] 0५] 160] 0&8| 64 O77
16 | vescseS | 091 076| 064] 042| 176] 026] 240| 183| om7| 059| 386 038
17. | NRDWP??! 1286 [638 | 954) 835 | 2» | 298 068 1.18 340 3.10 2199 [| (030)
18. | CAMPA 0 a, 0 0 | o| 0 566 532 712 Tl 1243 001
19. | UDWDP 692 648 59 | 589 768 | 762 980 949 1283 1187 4135 0
Total 10505 | 7112 | 11508 | 9059| 106 | 8120| 13826 | 10762 | 16177 | 13338| 48391 2148

Source: Departmental figures
A= Available funds includes closing balances of last years, E= Expenditure

120

Closing balance of SGRY amounting to %0.31 crore transferred to MGNREGS in the year 2008-09 while there is

a difference in opening and closing balance of SSA and NRHM in the year 2008-09. No Closing balance is
included in the UDEDP as the funds are surrendered in the treasury.
Erstwhile ARWSP includes receipts and expenditure of Water Quality Programme of Swajal Dhara.

94


Appendices

Sector wise available funds of the significant schemes implemented in the district
during 2007-12

2167.82 crore >> हैं 29.31 crore

₹ं 314.21 crore

M Social Sector Economic Sector General Sector

Sector wise expenditure of the significant schemes implemented in the distri
during 2007-12

%165.71 crore _-~ हैं 25.6] crore

—& 292.59 crore
हा Social Sector हा Economic Sector हा General Sector

95


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

Appendix-3.3

(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.1; Page 11)

Financial status of selected schemes being implemented in the district

(@in crore)

Nameof the 2007-8 2008-09 2009-10 [210-11 | 2011-12 Progressive Total

‘Schemes!?? A | छ | A | = | A A | & | A | ऋ | unspent balance | Expenditure
1 2 3 | 4 | | 5 | | 6 | 7 | & | | 9 | 10 nl 12 BHA
है. | 417 307 7.60 592 | 1075 हल 1403 | 11.14 | 1567 | 11.12 455 3763
MGNREGS | 10 | 015 | 390| 327| 1242) 878 | 1617 | 1369 | 1589 | 15.04 | 0% | 4093
AIBP 1078 | 1078 | 19.4 | 1947 958 958 | 1261 | 1261 | 2600 | 2600 | [| 7844
NAP 329 211 371 260 134 033 | 150} O54 1.60 083 077 641
NRDWP 1286 | 638 | 954) 835} 223} 298 | 068 | 1.18 | 340} 310 030 2199
[Nice | 1600 59 | 1846 | 109 831 412 | 7771 253 574 204 370 2561
[ uDwoP | 692 | 648 | 59 | 589| 768 | 762| 980 | 949| 1283 | 1187 | ( /| 4135
Total 5504 | 4» | 6864 | 5647 | 5231 | 3979 | | 6256 | | 5118 | 81.3 | 7| 1017 25236

Source: Departmental figures
A= Available funds includes closing balances of last years
E=Expenditure

Under NRHM it includes receipts and expenditure of National Programmes and there is difference in opening

and closing balance of 2008-09. Under UDWDP unspent balance is surrender treasury Head. NRDWP scheme

includes receipt and expenditure of Water Quality Programme under NRDWP.

96


Appendices

Appendix-4.1
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2 ; Page 14)

The organizational arrangements of PRIs

Panchayati Raj in Nainital

के

Principal Secretary cum Forest & Rural Development Commissioner (FRDC)

t t

Secretary Panchayati Raj

State Level

Secretary Rural Development

| t

= Commissioner Rural
Additional Secretary cum Development
Director Panchayat

t

Joint Director
Panchayat Raj

Project Director DRDA 1
District Level
CDO ex-officio
oa a Mukhya Adhikari

4

| ppo
Apar
Mukhya Adhikari = |
BDO
Pramukh लेख लग
ADO Kshetra Panchayat — ee y
(Panchayat) (Block Pramukh)
At Block level
| >
Gram
Gram _¢—— Panchayat Vikas
Pradhan ‘Adhikari

97


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

‘Appendix-4.2
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2; Page 14)

Organizational structure of ULBs

Principal Secretary/Secretary
Urban Development

Additional Secretary
Urban Development

Director Urban Development

Executive officer,

Up Nagar Adhikari Executive Officers, Nagar agen amiirayt

Municipal Corporation Palika Parishad, (Nainital,
Haldwani Bhowali and Ramnagar)

(Bhimtal, Kaladhungi and
Lalkuwan)

98


Appendices

| Append

(Reference: Paragraph 4.4; Page 15)

(2007-08 to 2011-12)

Total funds available and expenditure incurred in the test checked PRIs and ULBs

(@in crore)

Name of No of Opening Receipt | Total | Expenditure | Progressive Unspent
the LBs selected LBs | balance balance/ per cent
PRIs
ZP 1 3.60 47.88 51.48 43.37 8.11
KP 4 0.35 41.16 41.51 35.65 5.86
GP 24 0.17 4.57 4.74 4.14 0.60
Total PRIs 4.12 93.61 97.73 83.16 14.57/15
ULBs'*
NN 1 11.35 61.61 72.96 66.74 6.22
NPP 2 3.27 62.92 | 66.19 64.59 1.60
NP | [| 0.36 2.06 2.42 2.29 0.13
Total ULBs 14.98 | 126.59 | 141.57 133.62 7.95 16
Total (PRIs & ULBs) 19.10 | 220.20 | 239.30 216.78 22.52

Source: Financial Statements

| Appendix-4.4

(Reference: Paragraph 4.4.1; Page 15)

Funds received under SFC, TFC and ThFC by the PRIs in Nainital District

(@in crore)

Year 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 | 2010-11 | 2011-12
Released GPs 4.61 4.61 4.61 6.11 2.29
under SFC KPs 2.72 2.72 2.72 3.61 1.35
ZP 1.82 1.82 1.82 2.41 2.41
Total (A) [9s] 9s | 8S | 12.13| 6.05 |
Released GPs 094 | 0| 0.94 1.57 2.01
under TFC & | KPs 0.55 0 0.55 0.93 1.19
ThFC ZP 0.37 0 0.37 031 1.11
Total (B) 1.86 |. _0| 1.86 [| 2.80 | 4.31
Total (A+B) 11.01 9.15 11.01 14.93 10.36

Source: DPRO & ZP

123

Excludes own receipts of NP Bhimtal.

99


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

Appendix-5.1

(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.2.1; Page 40)

Cost escalation in selected GPs

| * | Name of the work Initial Initial | Unit cost | Difference | Total delayed Cost
No Physical Unit at in Rupees | executed item escalation
item cost increased (INR)
rate
Village Panchayat - Dholigaun
1 Animal Shelter 20 | 2,2000 36,390 14,390 20 2,87,800.00
2 Rain water harvesting 66 | 11,000 15,300 4,300 7 30,100.00
tank
3 Cretwire Chekdam 1,233.86 620 907 287 194.50 55,821.50
Total 3,73,721.50
Village Panchayat - Katana
1 Rain water harvesting 100 | 11,000 15,300 4,300 40.00 1,72,000
tank
2 Irrigation Tank [48 | 54,000 67,200 13,200 7.00 92,400
3 Cretwire Chekdam 828.30 620 907 287 115.58 33,171.46
[4 | Cretwire Structure 1,322.73 620 907 287 400.00 1,14,800
5 Animal Shelter 20 | 22,000 36,390 14,390 20.00 2,87,800
Total 7,00,171.46
Village Panchayat - Manjuli
1 Rain water harvesting 154 | 11,000 15,300 4,300 5.00 21,500
tank
2 Irrigation Tank 46 | 54,000 67,200 13,200 8.00 1,05,600
3 Pusta Repair 620 130 228 [98 | 620.00 60,760
[4 | Cretwire Chekdam 1,785 620 907 287 1,484.00 4,25,908
5 Animal Shelter 50 | 22,000 36,390 14,390 32.00 4,60,480
Total 10,74,248.00
Village Panchayat - TallaKanda
1 Animal Shelter 20 | 22,000 36,390 14,390 20.00 2,87,800.00
2 Pusta Repair 263.11 130 228 [98 | 263.11 25,785.00
3 Rain water harvesting 82 11,000 15,300 14,300 5.00 21,500.00
tank
4 Naula, Chal/ Khala 27 | 10,000 14,000 3,000 10.00 40,000.00
5 Irrigation Tank 13 | 54,000 67,200 13,200 1.00 13,200.00
les Dry Stone Chekdam 2,121.40 225 285 | 60 | 391.00 23,460.00
Total 4,11,745.00
Grand Total 25,59,885.96

Source: Projects records

100



Appendices

(Reference: Paragraph 5.4.2.2; Page 41)

Component wise expenditure under UDWDP

(@in crore)

Name of components
Year Participatory Watershed Enhancing Institutional
Development & Management Livelihood Strengthening

2005-06 0.87 0.75 0.65
2006-07 4.44 1.14 0.63
2007-08 4.73 1.54 0.65
2008-09 3.80 1.83 0.69
2009-10 4.87 2.27 0.64
2010-11 3.40 3.16 0.81
2011-12 6.60 2.64 0.64
Total 28.71 (61%) 13.33 (29%) 4.71 (10%)

Source: Data of UDWDP Haldwani (Nainital)

101



Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

Appendix-6.1

: Paragraph 6.2.

Page 54)

ES
Area (PPA) as well as Culturable Command Area (CCA)

Name of canal CCA PPA (in hectare) Irrigated Area in Proposed IP
(hectare) hectare in schemes
2007-08 (in hectare)
Kharif [Rabi | Total | Kharif | Rabi__| Total
Pawalgarh canal 497 405 406 | 811 734 | 891 | 1,545 45.90
Khichdi canal 844 1,342 | 1,340 | 2,682 | 1,242 | 1,324 | 2,566 18.36
Chandra pur canal 134 112 111 223 203 367 570 8.16
Dhamola canal 416 370 371 741 420 810 1,230 20.40
Patkot canal 202 204 203 | 407 242 236 478 38.76
Eastern dabka canal 103 72 100 172 102 193 295 11.22
Shivlal pur canal 89 61 61 122 131 124 255 5.10
Jassaganja canal 769 574 541 | 1,115 172 753 1,525 56.00
Satgaon canal 219 197 185 382 230 215 445 i
Beljudi canal 566 509 482 | 991 566 535 1,101 99.00
Manshadevi canal 784 705 667 | 1,372 | 784 773 1,557 है
Total 4,623 4,551 | 4,467 | 9,018 | 5,426 | 6,221 | 11,567 302.90

Source: Divisional figures

@ in crore)

Sl. | Name of the FDA Available | Expenditure | Closing Balance
No funds@ As on 31-03-2012
1. FDA, Ram Nagar 1.33 1.10 0.23
2. FDA, Tarai West 0.56 0.46 0.10
3. FDA, Soil Conservation division Nainital 3.39 3.05 0.34
4. FDA, Nainital 1.88 1.80 0.08
5. FDA, Tarai East [| [oo किक)
6. FDA, Tarai Central 0.01 [ol 0.01
7. FDA, Haldwani 0.01 0 0.01
Total 718] 6.41 | 0.77

Source: Divisional records & Audited Accounts
@ includes interest and unspent balance with JFMCs

102


Appendices

| Appendix-8.1

(Reference: Paragraph 8.1; Page 77)

Sl. Group & B’ Group-‘C’ & ‘D’

No Department/ Office Sanctioned] Menin Shortage | Sanctioned) Men in Shortage
2 Strength | Position (percent)| Strength | Position | (per cent)
| 1. | Uttarakhand Peyjal Nigam 5 5 0(0) 30 18 12(40)
2.| Social Welfare Department 14 | 6 | 8657) 107 51 56(52)
3.| Chief Agriculture Office | 9 | 7 2(22) 21 19 2(10)

4. Co-Operative Societies 1 1 000) 42 34 8(19)
5.| Dy. Director Sericulture | 0 | | oo | 0(0) 17 8 9(53)
6] ICDS 10 | ४ | 2(20) 74 56 18(24)
7.| Dairy Development Department 18 16 2(11) 187 112 75(40)
| 8. Ayurvedic & Unani Office | 69 | 48 21(30) 143 111 32(22)
| 9. Irrigation Department [| 6 | | 6 | 00) 147 122 25(17)

10] Industry Department | 4 | 4 0(0) 30 27 3(10)
11) Public Works Department 11 5 6(55) 80 57 23(29)
12] Rural Engineering Services 5 4 1(20) 41 40 1(02)
13] Fisheries Department 3 3 0(0) 20 13 7(35)
14] Chief Development Officer 13 11 2(15) 306 197 109(36)
15| Youth Welfare Department 1 1 0(0) 12 11 1(08)
16] District Supply Office 2 1 1(50) 39 25 14(36)
17| Chief Veterinarian Office 20 17 3(15) 134 91 43(32)
18 Medical Health & Family 213 169 44(21) 1126 1089 37(03)
Welfare
19| GITI (Pains) 1 [0 [1600 33 19 14(42)
20| Education Department 326 274 52(16) 6759 5,881 878(13)
21) Electricity Department 22 17 5(23) 432 292 140(32)
Total: 753 603 150(20) 9,780 8,273 | 150715)

Source: District Economic & Statistical Officer

103



Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

(Reference: Paragraph 8.1.1; Page 77)

Details of Sanctioned Strength and Men in Position in the selected schemes

2007 2012
Name of line departments (schemes) ss to aa os) sar a
cent) cent)

Irrigation divisions (AIBP) 374 342 [| 380 359 ||
Medical Department (NRHM) 1,050 | 833 21 | 1,072 869 19
Ayurvedic Evam Uanani Officer (AYUSH) 90 59 34 90 54 40
UJN & UJS (NRDWP) 621 | 519 16 613 484 21
SWAJAL (Water testing Surveillance) 22 Bl 41 | 22 21 5
UDWDP (EAP) 46 34 26 45 38 16
Forest Department (NAP) 1806 | 983 46 | 1,796 1,156 36
ULBs (InNURM) 1,446 | 1029 29 | 1,446 [ 906 | 37
NLRSADA Nainital (NLCP) 34 26 24 33 22 33
RDD (MGNREGS) 176 30 83 176 30 83

Grand Total [5,665 | 3,868 32 | 5,673 | 3,939 31

Source: Department figure

Appendix-8.3

(Reference: Paragraph 8.2.1; Page 79)

_ Audit organization | Total no. of Units Units actually | Shortfall
(0) (2) @) (4) (5) (6)
2007-08 | Local Fund Audit 565 70 5 65(93)
Co-op. & Panchayats 877 877 336 541(62)
2008-09 | Local Fund Audit 565 52 11 41(79)
Co-op. & Panchayats 943 943 522 421(45)
2009-10 | Local Fund Audit 565 52 15 37(71)
Co-op. & Panchayats 955 955 447 508(53)
2010-11 | Local Fund Audit 565 51 13 38(75)
Co-op. & Panchayats 976 976 439 537(55)
2011-12 | Local Fund Audit 565 67 [ 9| 58(87)
Co-op. & Panchayats 986 986 443 543(55)

Source: Departmental figure

104


Appendices

| Glossary of Abbreviations

S.No. | Abbreviation | Expanded Form

1 ABDOs Assistant Block Development Officers
2. ADO Assistant Development Officer

3 AIBP Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme
4 AMC Annual Maintenance Contracts

5. ANC Ante Natal Care

[6 | ANR Aided Natural Regeneration

7 ANS Auxiliary Nurse Midwife

(8. | AP Annual Plan

[9. | apuc Additional Primary Health Centre

10. AR Artificial Regeneration

11. ARWSP Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme
12. ASHA Accredited Social Health Activist

13. ASW Advance Soil Work

14. ATC Advice of Transfer Credit

15. ATD Advice of Transfer Debit

16. AWP Annual Working Plan

17. AYUSH Ayurvedic Unani Siddha & Homoepath;
(18. | BC Basic Cost

19. BDO Block Development Officer

20. BHAPs Block Health Action Plans

21. BOD Biochemical Oxygen Demand

22. [pp Bamboo Plantation

23. BPL Below Poverty Line

24. BSUP. Basic Services for Urban Poor

25. CAMPA. Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management & Planning Authorit
26. CAO Chief Accounts Officer

27. CCA Culturable Command Area

28. CCL Cash Credit Limit

29. cD Construction Division

30. ७90 Chief Development Officer

31. CE Chief Engineer

32. CFC Centre Finance Commission

33. CHCs Community Health Centres

34. CMO Chief Medical Officer

35. cP Cane Plantation

36. CPCB Central Pollution Control Board

105


Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

37. ces Chikitsa Prabhandan Samitis

38. CSR Cataract Surgery Rate

39. DAO District Ayurvedic & Unani Officer
40. DDO District Development Officer

41. [ppp __| District Development Plan

42. DESTO District Economic and Statistical office
43. DFO Divisional Forest officer

44 DFs Deep Freezers

45. DHAPs District Health Action Plans

46. DHM District Health Mission

47. DHS District Health Societ

48. DM District Magistrate

49. DO Dissolved Oxygen

50. | Development Plan

351. DPC District Planning Committee

52. DPC District Programme Coordinator
53. DPD Deputy Project Director

54. DPMC District Planning & Monitoring Committee
55. DPMU District Project Management Unit
56. DPP. District Perspective Plan

57. DPR Detailed Project Report

58. DPRO District Panchayati Raj Officer

59. DPT. Diptnenia Polio Tetanus

60. DRDA District Rural Development Agenc
61. E&S Economics & Statistics

62. EDC Eco Development Committee

63. EE Executive Engineer

64. EMO Emergency Medical officer

65. EPA Entry Point Activities

66. ERM Extension Renovation & Modernization
67. FC Fully Covered

[68 | FDA Forest Development Agenc’

69. FIK Field Test Kit

70. GOI Government of India

71. GPA Gram Panchayat Adhikari

72. GPs Gram Panchayats

73 GPS Global Positioning System

74. GPWDP Gram Panchayat Watershed Development Plan
75. GRS Gram Rojgar Sahayak

16. GS Gram Sabha

71. HOD Head of Department

106



Appendices

7B.

HRD. Human Resource Development

79. 10५ Indira Awas Yojna

(80. | ICDS Integrated Child Development Scheme
81. 1D Irrigation Department

82. IEC Information Education Communication
83. IFA Iron Folic Acid

84. IGA Income Generation Activities

85. IHSDP Integrated Housing & Slum Development Project
86. ILR ICC Line Refrigerator

87. IMA Indian Medical Association

(88. | IMIS Integrated Management Information System
89. IMO Irrigation Manual of Order

90. IMR Infant Mortality Rate

91. INR Indian Rupee

92. IP Irrigation Potential

93. IPHS Indian Public Health Standards

94. 1॥8। Industrial Training Institutes

95. IUD Intra Uterine Devices

96. JEMC Joint Forest Management Committee
97. InNURM Jawahar Lal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission
[ox | IJSY Janani Suraksha Yojana

99. KCD Kosi Construction Division

100. | KP Kshetra Panchayat

101 LCs Low Cost Sanitation

102. | LDA Lake Development Authorit

103. LPCD Liter per Capita per day

104 MAS Model Accounting System

105. [५8 Measurement Book

106. | MD Managing Director

107. _ | MGNREGS Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Schemes
108. | Mr Minor Irrigation

109. | MID Minor Irrigation Department

110. _| MIs Management Information System

1. | MLD Million Liter Per dai

112. _| MMR Maternal Mortality Rate

113. | MNP Minimum Need Programme

114. | MoEF Ministry of Environment & Forest

115... | MoIcs Medical Officers in Charge

116 MOU Memorandum of Understanding

117. | MPN Multiple Probability Number

118. | MRs Muster Rolls

107



Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

119. | Msw Management of Solid Waste

120. | MT Metric Tone

121. _| MVSs Multi Village Schemes

122. __| mws Micro Watershed

123. _ | NABARD National Agriculture Bank for Rural Development
124. NAEB National Afforestation & Eco Board

125... NAP National Afforestation Programme

126. | NC Not Covered

127. _| NGO Non Government Organization

128. NIC National Information Centre

129. | NLCP National Lake Conservation Programme
130. | NLEP National Leprosy Education Programme
131. | NLRSADA Nainital Lake Region Special Area Development Authorit
132. NMAM National Municipal Accounting Manual
133. | NN Nagar Nigam

134. NPCB National Programme For Control of Blindness
135. | NPP Nagar Palika Parishad

136. | NP Nagar Panchayat

137. श्र Nagar Palika Parishad Nainital

138 NRCD National River Conservation Directorate
139. | NRDWP. National Rural Drinking Water Programme
140. | NRDWQM&SP__| National Rural Drinking Water Quality Monitoring & Surveillance Programme
141. | NREGA National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
142. NRHM National Rural Health Mission

143. | O&M Operation & Maintenance

144. OPV Oral Polio vaccine

145. | or Operation Theatre

146. | PC Partially Covered

147. | ppc Public Distribution Centres

148. | PERT Programme Evaluation Review Technique
149. | PHCs Primary Health Centres

150. [pp Project Implementation Plan

151. | PMC Project Monitoring Committee

152. PMGSY Pradhan Mantri Gramin Sarak Yojana

153. | PMU Project Management Unit

154. PNDT Pre-Natal Detection Test

155. | POs Programme Officers

156. PPA Proposed Potential Area

157. [pep ——_| Public Private Partnershi

158. |छर॒_._._ | Panchayati Ra

159. | PRA Participatory Rural Appraisal

108


Appendices

160. PRIs Panchayati Raj Institutions

161. | Ps Primary Schools

162. | RCH-IL Reproductive Child Health-II

16. [RD __| Rural Development

164. | RDD Rural Development Department

165 RGNDWM Rajiv Gandhi National Drinking Water Mission
166. | RKS Rogi Kalyan Samities

167 RST Remote Sensing Technique

168. | RWS Rural Water Suppl

169. __| scs Sub Centres

170. SE Superintendent Engineer

17... | SEGC State Employment Guarantee Council

172 SFC State Finance Commission

173. SFDA State Forest Development Agency

174. SG State Government

175, SHM State Health Mission

176 SHS State Health Society

177._| SLSsc State Level Scheme Sanction Committee
178 SMCs Subject Matter Committees

179. __| SPCB State Pollution Control Board

180. SRSWOR Simple Random Sampling Without Replacement
181 55 Sanctioned Strength

182. | SSA Sarva Siksha Abhiyan

183. 550 State Steering Committee

184. | SSR State Sector Rural

185, SSR Standard Schedule of Rate

186. | SVSs Single Village Schemes

187 SWAP Sector Wide Area Programme

188. | SWM Solid Waste Management

189 TAC Technical Advisory Committee

190. | TRC Twelth & Thirteenth Finance Commission
191. | TFR/Th FC Total Ferlitity Rate

192. | TID Tarai Inigation Division

193. | Ts Technical Sanction

194 TSC Total Sanitation Campaign

195. | Tr Tetanus Toxoid

196. | TT Tubectomy

197. UCs Utilization Certificates

198. | UpwDP. Uttarakhand Decentralization Watershed Development Programme
199. | UIN Uttarakhand Peyajal Sansadhan Vikas & Nirman Nigam
200. UIS Uttarakhand Jal Sansthan

109



Audit Report on District Nainital for the year ended 31 March 2012

201. | UK Uttarakhand

202. ULBs Urban Local Bodies

203. | UPS Upper Primary Schools

204. VDOs Village Development Officers

205. | VGF Vulnerable Group Fund

206, VHSCs Village Health & Sanitation Committees
207. | vwsc Village Water & Sanitation Committee
208. | WCE Work Charge Establishment

209. | WMD Watershed Management Directorate
210. WUAs Water Users Associations

211. | 77 Zila Panchayat

110