Government of Maharashtra
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Performance Audit on
Government land given on lease
Report No. 5 of the year 2013

www.cag.gov.in 
REPORT OF THE 
COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL 
OF INDIA 
LAND GIVEN ON LEASE 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2012 
GOVERNMENT OF MAHARASHTRA 
(REPORT NO. 5 OF THE YEAR 2013) 
PERFORMANCE AUDIT ON GOVERNMENT 

i
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
PARAGRAPH HEADINGS PARA PAGE 
Preface v
Executive Summary vi-xi 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION
General 1.1 1
Organisational set up 1.2 1
Audit objectives 1.3 2
Audit criteria 1.4 2
Definitions 1.5 3
Procedure of allotment in the Collectorates 1.6 3
Scope and methodology of Audit 1.7 3
Audit constraints 1.8 4
Acknowledgement 1.9 5
CHAPTER II 
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS
Incorrect maintenance of lease records 2.1 6
Non-uniformity of norms for the leasing of land 2.2 6
Lack of transparency in grant of leases of Government 
land
2.3 7
Preparation of model lease agreement 2.4 8
Implementation of MLR Code 2.5 8
Non-renewal of expired lease cases 2.5.1 8
Absence of provisions in the MLR Code for levy of 
premium (unearned income) for regularisation of 
breaches 
2.5.2 9
Recovery of lease rent, etc. through Government 
Resolutions, etc. without  drawing reference to MLR 
Code
2.5.3 11
Non-revision of lease rent 2.6 11
Monitoring and control 2.7 12
Internal control 2.7.1 12

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
ii
PARAGRAPH HEADINGS PARA PAGE 
Internal Audit 2.7.2 14
Land revenue 2.8 14
Trend of revenue 2.8.1 14
Arrears of land revenue 2.8.2 15
Non-recovery of amount relating to lessor's interests 2.9 16
Instructions to local bodies to curb lessees from 
misuse of Government land 
2.10 16
CHAPTER III 
COLLECTOR, MUMBAI CITY 
Non-execution/registration of lease deed 3.1 18
Incorrect application of Annual Schedule of Rates 3.2 19
Breach of lease agreements 3.3 19
Unauthorised auction of lease land belonging to 
Collectorate to M/s Jainam Construction by MCGM 
3.3.1 19
Lease of land to M/s Eastern Chemical Co. Ltd. 3.3.2 20
Lease of land to Maharashtra Rajya Sahakari Sakhar 
Karkhana Sangh Ltd. 
3.3.3 22
Lease of land to MTDC 3.3.4 23
Grant of building on sub lease by Ayurved Prachar 
Sanstha
3.3.5 23
Failure to take action against encroachment 3.4 24
Lease of foreshore land 3.4.1 24
Land leased to Mumbai Gymkhana 3.4.2 25
Non-recovery of lease rent 3.5 26
Lease of land to Sportsfield Co-operative Housing 
Society 
3.5.1 26
Lease of land to Foreshore Co-operative Housing 
Society 
3.5.2 27
CHAPTER IV 
COLLECTOR, MUMBAI SUBURBAN DISTRICT 
Grant of land on lease despite non-fulfilment of 
mandatory conditions 
4.1 28

Table of Contents 
iii
PARAGRAPH HEADINGS PARA PAGE 
Non-resumption of land on lease despite repeated 
violations/breaches 
4.2 28
Encroachment on land 4.3 37
Non-revision of premium for utilisation of TDR 4.4.1 38
Short levy of premium (unearned income) 4.4.2 39
Recovery of licence fee for functions organised in 
Gymkhana - regarding 
4.4.3 40
Non-fixation of lease rent 4.4.4 41
CHAPTER V 
COLLECTOR, PUNE 
Grant of land on lease without fulfillment of 
mandatory conditions for education purpose 
5.1 42
Non-execution of lease agreement 5.2 43
Non-utilisation of land for the purpose of education 5.3 44
Utilisation of land for other than the allotted purpose 5.4 46
Unauthorised transfer of flats/plots 5.5 46
Other irregularities 5.6 47
CHAPTER VI 
MUMBAI METROPOLITAN REGION DEVELOPMENT 
AUTHORITY 
Acts and Rules 6.1 50
Organisational set up 6.2 50
System of allotment 6.3 50
Non-recovery of lease premium, lease rent, etc. 6.4 51
Monitoring and control 6.5 55
Failure to invoke Bank Guarantee 6.5.1 55
Irregular amalgamation of area leading to increase in 
size of flats 
6.5.2 55
CHAPTER VII 
MAHARASHTRA HOUSING AND AREA DEVELOPMENT 
AUTHORITY 
Organisational set up 7.1 57

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
iv 
PARAGRAPH HEADINGS PARA PAGE 
System of allotment 7.2 57
Non-resumption of land 7.3 58
Violations of Act/Rules 7.4 59
Allotment of land in violation of regulations 7.4.1 59
Delay in execution of lease agreement in violation of 
the provision of Act/Rules 
7.4.2 60
Lease premium, lease rent, etc. 7.5 60
Non-levy of interest on delayed payment 7.5.1 60
Short levy of lease premium 7.5.2 61
Non-recovery of lease rent 7.5.3 61
CHAPTER VIII 
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF GREATER MUMBAI 
Organisational set up 8.1 63
System of allotment 8.2 63
Non-resumption of land 8.2.1 64
Non-utilisation of land and non-execution of lease 
agreements 
8.2.2 64
Financial gain made by lessees 8.2.3 64
Encroachment 8.3 65
Breach of conditions and encroachment of 
Government land 
8.3.1 65
Lease rent 8.4 66
Non-finalisation of the rate of lease rent 8.4.1 66
Non-recovery of arrears of lease rent 8.4.2 66
CHAPTER-IX: CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
Conclusions 9.1 68
Recommendations 9.2 68
APPENDICES 73-96

v
PREFACE 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India containing the 
performance of the Government land given on lease has been prepared for 
submission to the Governor under Article 151(2) of the Constitution. 
The audit of the receipts of the State Governments and that of accounts of 
corporations and local bodies is conducted under Sections 16, 19(3) and 20(1) 
of the &RPSWUROOHUDQG $XGLWRU*HQHUDO¶V 'XWLHV3RZHUV DQG&RQGLWLRQVRI
Service) Act, 1971. 
The audit was conducted between May 2012 and September 2012 through a 
test check of records of the Collectors at Mumbai City, Mumbai Suburban, 
Pune and development agencies viz. Mumbai Metropolitan Region 
Development Authority, Maharashtra Housing and Area Development 
Authority, Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai and Municipal 
Corporation of Pune. 

vii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Land is a premium asset and an important resource which contributes 
significantly to the economy of the State.  Government lands not required for 
immediate use are given on lease to various individuals/institutions for various 
purposes such as residential, industrial, commercial and others.  The leased 
lands also enable the Government to augment their revenue by levy of lease 
rent, premium/unearned income for change in use of the leased lands, 
development charges, transfer charges, etc.  
The Government leases the land for various purposes such as agricultural, 
residential, industrial, commercial, social, etc. In Maharashtra the land is 
allotted through the Collectors and development agencies such as Municipal 
Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM), Pune Municipal Corporation 
(PMC), Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority (MHADA) 
and Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority (MMRDA) dealing 
with Government land.  Government land is granted either on lease basis or on 
occupancy price.  
Major findings during the course of Performance Audit on the lands leased by 
the Collectors and other development agencies are as follows: 
Chapter II: General observations 
x The data on leased land was not complete in the Collectorates.  
(Paragraph 2.1) 
x There was no uniformity in the procedures for allotment of land among 
the Collectorates and the development agencies. 
(Paragraph 2.2) 
x There was lack of transparency in grant of land on lease as publicity 
through advertisement in newspapers, etc., was not resorted to. 
(Paragraph 2.3) 
x Information received from the Collectorates at Mumbai City, Mumbai 
Suburban and Pune revealed that out of 1,766 lease cases, 757 leases 
had expired between 1940 and 2008; while in MCGM in 17 cases 
leases had expired.  No action was taken for their renewal or eviction 
from leased land. 
(Paragraph 2.5.1) 
x Though Section 53 of MLR Code provides for eviction of the lessee 
after giving reasonable opportunity of being heard in case of breach of 
conditions of lease, the Department was regularising the breach by 
levying premium/unearned income as per the Government Resolution 
(GR) issued in November 1957 which was incorrect. 
(Paragraph 2.5.2) 
x Recoveries of various components of land revenue such as unearned 
income/premium, lease rent, additional lease rent, redevelopment 
charges, transfer charges were being effected through executive orders 

Executive Summary 
viii 
(GRs and memoranda) and the GRs and memoranda are issued without 
drawing reference to the codal provisions. 
 (Paragraph 2.5.3) 
x GR of October 1999 provides for levy of revised lease rent on the basis 
of market value of land. Aggrieved by this GR, the lessees approached 
the Mumbai High Court claiming the revised lease rent to be high.  The 
Court laid down certain parameters for fixing the lease rent in August 
2004. However, even after a lapse of eight years no action for revision 
of lease rent had been taken.  
(Paragraph 2.6) 
x Monitoring, co-ordination and internal control measures were 
inadequate in the Collectorates as inspection of leased lands to ensure 
compliance to the conditions of lease as well as utility of land for the 
allotted purpose was lacking. Even in cases where breaches were 
detected, follow up mechanism was absent due to which action was not 
taken to its logical conclusion for evicting the erring lessees as 
provided in the MLR Code.  
(Paragraph 2.7.1.1) 
x Committee constituted for detection and penal action on breaches in 
Mumbai City was almost non-functional since its inception. 
Constitution of such committees was not even envisaged by the 
Government in other districts. 
(Paragraph 2.7.1.2) 
x In Mumbai City though internal audit was conducted, remedial action 
on the observations were yet to be taken and in Mumbai Suburban and 
Pune Districts no internal audit was conducted indicating that the 
internal control measures were weak. 
(Paragraph 2.7.2) 
x Data on arrears of land revenue was not complete due to which 
effective action could not be taken. 
(Paragraph 2.8.2) 
Chapter III: Collector, Mumbai City 
x In five cases, while computing the redevelopment charges, the 
Department valued the land at the rate of one FSI instead of 1.33 FSI. 
The revenue potential forgone in the shape of redevelopment 
charges/transfer charges aggregated to ` 5.89 crore. 
(Paragraph 3.2) 
x In four cases breach of terms and conditions of lease agreements of 
land on lease admeasuring area of 39,151.37 sq m was noticed.  Of 
these in two cases the gradual relaxations and concessions allowed to 
the lessees resulted in undue favour. 
(Paragraph 3.3.1 to 3.3.4) 

Performance audit on Government land given on lease 
ix
x The Ayurved Prachar Sanstha sub-leased five floors of its building to a 
Central Government Department (Income Tax) on annual rent of 
` 4.25 lakh in 1976, contrary to the terms and conditions of the 
sanction order which stipulated that the land shall be used only for 
running Ayurvedic College and ancillary purposes.  Further, the 
Department had not executed a lease agreement with the Sanstha. 
(Paragraph 3.3.5) 
x A lessee sold the lease rights of leased land without approval of the 
Collector to Chunilal Co-operative Housing Society which constructed 
a 16 storey building on the land. The period of lease expired in 1991, 
however, no action had been taken for renewal/eviction. 
(Paragraph 3.4.1) 
x Superintendent, City Survey and Land Records found that a Gymkhana 
encroached 4,268.81 sq m of land adjoining the land leased to it. 
Though eight years had elapsed after the encroachment was detected 
no action for eviction/regularisation as prescribed in the MLR Code 
had been initiated by the Department.  
(Paragraph 3.4.2) 
Chapter IV: Collector, Mumbai Suburban 
x A lessee while applying for grant of land on lease had not submitted 
the mandatory documents required for grant of lease.  Despite this, the 
Government allotted 2,880 sq m land to the institution.  
(Paragraph 4.1) 
x A lessee violated the terms and conditions of lease from time to time. 
However, the land was not resumed even after a lapse of 28 years.  
Through repeated violations the lessee gained financially at the cost of 
the state exchequer. 
(Paragraph 4.2.1) 
x It was noticed that on land admeasuring 15,461.23 sq m allotted on 
lease in 1985, for a period of 30 years, only a shed had been 
constructed and the remaining land was lying idle. No action was taken 
in the matter to resume the land.  
(Paragraph 4.2.3) 
x The Government granted (July 1978) land admeasuring 16,722.54 
sq m to a Trust for a lease period of 99 years on an annual rent of 
` one for construction of hospital-cum-medical college. But no 
medical college was constructed on the plot.  Instead only a hospital-
cum-research centre was functioning on it.  
(Paragraph 4.2.5) 
x The State Government leased (November 1966) land admeasuring 
984.76 sq m (1,177.77 sq yards) to M/s Gannon Dunkerly and Co. Ltd. 
at Santacruz, Mumbai, for industrial purpose for a period of 99 years.  
The lessee failed to develop and use the land.  The rights were 

Executive Summary 
x 
transferred to a party and then to another party without any 
development.  Despite this, land was not resumed. 
(Paragraph 4.2.6) 
x The Government in November 1941 leased out land admeasuring 
1,882.89 sq m at Juhu, Mumbai to Maharaja of Jodhpur, for  the 
development of a  garden for a lease period of 50 years.  He sold the 
leased land to M/s Juhu Beach Resort Pvt. Ltd. in September 1984. 
Instead of resuming the land, the Collector regularised the 
unauthorised sale of land. 
(Paragraph 4.2.9) 
 
x Unauthorised sale and transfer of plots in Bandra to developers were 
noticed by the Collector in respect of 31 out of 48 plots. No penal 
action was proposed/taken by the Collectorate despite Government 
directives in this regard. 
(Paragraph 4.2.11) 
x M/s Jolly Boards Ltd. entered into (December 2005) a development 
agreement without prior permission of the Collector for construction of 
an IT park and for carrying out residential and commercial activities on 
the land admeasuring 39,690.85 sq m at Kanjur allotted in 1985.  
Contrary to the lease conditions that there should be no third party 
interest, the developer got 52.5 per cent share in the property creating 
third party interest. 
 (Paragraph 4.2.12) 
x In April 1974 land admeasuring 10,206 sq m was allotted to a lessee 
for industrial purpose which remained unutilised till 2006 on the 
ground that it was under encroachment.  However, the same lessee 
found the very land fit for residential and commercial purpose. He 
applied for the change in land use from industrial to 
commercial/residential purpose which was allowed by the Department.  
(Paragraph 4.2.15) 
x In two cases, land admeasuring 1,86,446.06 sq m was under 
encroachment, action for eviction as provided in the MLR Code was 
not taken, despite a lapse of 19 and 60 years, respectively. 
(Paragraphs 4.3.1 and 4.3.2) 
Chapter V: Collector, Pune 
x In two cases, the Department did not verify the fulfilment of the 
mandatory conditions before the grant of land on lease. In two other 
cases the lease agreements were not executed, despite a lapse of 29 and 
47 years, respectively. 
(Paragraphs 5.1 and 5.2) 
x In seven cases the lessees had not commenced construction of the 
schools for which lands were granted, the lands were lying vacant and 
had not been resumed despite lapse ranging from nine to 26 years. 
(Paragraph 5.3) 

Performance audit on Government land given on lease 
xi 
x In two cases, the leased lands were not being utilised for the purpose 
for which it was allotted by the Government.  Of these, in one case the 
property allotted for educational purposes was being partly used for 
commercial purpose while in another case the land allotted for the 
construction of a swimming pool and a stadium was being utilised as 
football and parade ground. 
(Paragraph 5.4) 
x Land admeasuring one lakh sq m allotted to Maharashtra Gandhi 
Samarak Nidhi on lease was not utilised despite a lapse of 19 years. It 
was encroached upon by 288 slum dwellers. No action was taken for 
removing the encroachments. 
(Paragraph 5.6.2) 
Chapter VI: MMRDA 
x In six cases additional lease premium aggregating ` 272.36 crore due 
to non-completion of construction within the stipulated period was not 
recovered. 
 (Paragraph 6.4.1)  
x Recovery of lease premium and penal interest totalling to ` 9.39 crore 
for additional built-up area (BUA) was not effected. 
(Paragraph 6.4.2)  
x Short determination of built-up area resulted in forgoing of revenue 
amounting to ` 3.12 crore in one case. 
(Paragraph 6.4.3)  
x Fixing reserve price for lease of a plot without considering prevailing 
market price resulted in loss of lease premium of ` 205.91 crore. 
(Paragraph 6.4.4)  
x Absence of an effective follow-up mechanism for recovery resulted in 
outstanding dues of ground lease rent of ` 67.85 lakh for periods 
ranging from one to seven years as on 31 March 2012. 
(Paragraph 6.4.5)  
x Failure of MMRDA to inspect the construction to ensure adherence to 
the terms and conditions of the lease agreement resulted in violation of 
the tripartite agreement among State Government, MMRDA and 
developer. 
(Paragraph 6.5.2) 
 
Chapter VII: MHADA 
x In two cases, lands were lying idle for nine and 12 years, respectively 
but were not resumed, while in another case, land was sub-leased 
without the approval of MHADA. 
(Paragraph 7.3) 
 

Executive Summary 
xii 
x In one case, land comprising mangroves was allotted in violation of 
High Court orders. 
(Paragraph 7.4.1) 
x In two cases, possession of land was handed over to the lessees prior to 
the date of agreement; the lessees did not complete construction within 
the stipulated period in these cases, despite this, no action was taken 
against the lessees. 
(Paragraph 7.4.2)  
x In three cases, incorrect application of rate resulted in short recovery of 
lease premium by ` 3.45 crore. 
(Paragraph 7.5.2)  
x Six lessees had not paid lease rent of ` 1.93 crore for periods ranging 
from 10 to 16 years. 
(Paragraph 7.5.3)  
Chapter VIII: MCGM 
x Instead of resuming the land from six mills, on their having shut down, 
three mills were allowed change of use from industrial purpose to 
commercial/industrial purposes by MCGM resulting in financial gains 
to the lessees. 
(Paragraph 8.2.1)

1
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1  General 
Land is a premium asset and an important resource which contributes 
significantly to the economy of the State.  Government lands not required for 
immediate use are given on lease to various individuals/institutions for various 
purposes such as residential, industrial, commercial and others.  The leased 
lands also enable the Government to augment their revenue by levy of lease 
rent, premium/unearned income for change in use of the leased lands, 
development charges, transfer charges, etc..  Different Government 
organisations are dealing with leasing of Government land at Mumbai and 
Pune.  These are through the Collectors of Mumbai City, Mumbai Suburban 
and Pune, Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority (MMRDA), 
Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority (MHADA), Municipal 
Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM) and Pune Municipal Corporation 
(PMC).  The grant of lease of land is governed by various provisions of the 
Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966 (MLR Code), Maharashtra Land 
Revenue (Disposal of Government Lands) Rules, 1971, Government 
Resolutions, Circulars, Memoranda, etc. and concerned Acts of the various 
development agencies such as MHADA, MMRDA and Municipal 
Corporations. 
The powers of Collectors in respect of leased lands are vested in the following 
Sections of the MLR Code: 
1. Section 38 confers upon the Collector the power to lawfully lease 
under grant or contract any unalienated unoccupied land to any person 
for such period for such purpose and on such conditions as he may, 
subject to rules made by the State Government, determine. 
2. Section 53 confers upon the Collector the power to evict, after giving a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard, any person unauthorisedly or 
wrongfully occupying the Government land by reason of expiry of 
lease period or termination of lease or breach of conditions of lease. 
1.2  Organisational set-up 
The monitoring and control of Government land given on lease at Government 
level is done by Additional Chief Secretary, Revenue & Forest Department 
(R&FD), Government of Maharashtra, Mumbai.  The superintendence of the 
leasing of land is vested with the 35 Collectors in the State.  They are assisted 
by the Sub Divisional Officers and Tahsildars in their respective districts.  The 
District Plan
1 is prepared by Town Planning Department under the Urban 
Development Department (UDD) in consultation with other Government 
Departments.  The same record is maintained by City Survey Officer working 
1 A District Plan is prepared by a committee constituted for this purpose at the district level for 
planning at the district and below.  The Committee in each district should consolidate the 
plans prepared by the Panchayats and the Municipalities in the district and prepare a draft 
development plan for the district. 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
2
under the Director of land records and Settlement Commissioner, Revenue 
Department, Maharashtra State. 
In respect of development agencies viz. MMRDA, MCGM and PMC (under 
the UDD) and MHADA (under the Housing Department (HD)), the details of 
organisational set up are given in the respective chapters, viz. VI, VII and VIII 
respectively. 
1.3 Audit objectives 
For this performance audit three major districts 2 in Maharashtra were taken up 
as the land cost in these cities has been increasing, so as to ascertain whether 
the grant of Government land on lease was in accordance with the existing 
Act, Rules and Regulations, Government Resolutions (GRs), etc. 
Test check of the records of Government land given on lease was conducted 
with a view to ascertain whether: 
x the grant of Government land on lease was in accordance with the 
existing provisions of the concerned Act(s), Rules and Regulations, 
GRs, etc., framed by the Government from time to time; 
x there exists a proper monitoring/mechanism to ensure that the process 
of allotment was transparent, terms and conditions of lease of the 
land/renewal of lease exist and were being followed uniformly; 
x system and procedures in the Department to ensure correct assessment 
and timely collection of the lease rent and renewal of expired leases are 
adequate; 
x action was taken for resumption of non-utilised land allotted on lease 
and breach of conditions of lease agreement/renewal of leases are 
followed up and dealt with as per the provisions of the MLR Code; and 
x action was taken by the concerned competent authority to evict the 
encroachments found on the leased Government lands. 
1.4 Audit criteria 
The audit criteria for Performance Audit were derived from the provisions 
of the following Acts, Rules, GRs and notifications/orders issued there 
under:
For grant of lease by the Collectorates 
x Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966 
x Maharashtra Land Revenue (Disposal of Government Lands) MLR 
(DGL) Rules, 1971 
x Maharashtra Land Revenue (Conversion of use of land and non-
agricultural assessment) Rules, 1969 
x Village, Town and City Survey Rules, 1969 
x GRs, orders, circulars, etc. regarding leased lands and its assessment, 
levy and collection of revenue 
2 Mumbai City, Mumbai Suburban District and Pune. 

Chapter I: Introduction 
3
For grant of lease by MHADA 
x Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority Act, 1976 
x Maharashtra Housing and Area Development (Disposal of Land) 
Rules, 1981 
x Maharashtra Housing and Area Development (Disposal of Land) 
Regulations, 1982 
x Any general policy matters communicated through GRs, circulars, etc. 
For grant of lease by MMRDA 
x MMRDA Act, 1974, for planning and co-ordination of development 
activities in the Mumbai Metropolitan Region 
x MMRDA (Disposal of Land) Regulations, 1977, as amended from 
time to time 
x Any general policy matters communicated through GRs, circulars, etc. 
For grant of lease by MCGM 
x Mumbai Municipal Corporation (MMC) Act, 1888 
x Any general policy matters communicated through GRs, circulars, etc. 
1.5 Definitions 
The definitions of the various terms as per the MLR Code used in the
Performance Audit are given in Appendix-I.
1.6 Procedure of allotment in the Collectorates 
On receipt of application from individual/trust/institution/co-operative society 
etc., for grant of land on lease for any specified purpose (education, 
residential, industrial, commercial and other purposes), the Collector initially 
ascertains the availability of land and its status as per development plan from 
the Tahsildar and Survey Officer and on receipt of the same prepares a 
proposal after obtaining the necessary documents and submits the same to the 
Government for obtaining sanction.  On receipt of the sanction from the 
Government, the Collector issues an allotment order to the lessee spelling 
forth the terms and conditions of lease and the purpose, area, lease rent, 
period, etc., which is followed in the execution of lease agreement.  
The procedures followed by MHADA, MMRDA and MCGM are brought out 
in the respective chapters. 
1.7 Scope and methodology of Audit 
The Performance Audit of the records of leases granted by the District 
Collectors of Mumbai City, Mumbai Suburban and Pune up to 31 March 2012 
was conducted between May and September 2012.  The records of other 
agencies such as MCGM, PMC, MHADA and MMRDA which are also 
responsible for grant of land on lease were selected for the Performance Audit. 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
4
Selection of these three districts was based on the cost of the land that has 
shown a steep rise in these districts as compared to other districts.  Selection 
of the cases was based on analysis of parameters such as the value of the land, 
locality, area, usage, duration of lease, etc..  The leases granted before and 
after independence, which are in operation, or lands that are in occupation of 
the lessees after the expiry of the lease periods, have also been selected for this 
audit.
The number of lease cases as provided by the various offices selected for test 
check and the sample cases test checked are as follows: 
Name of office selected  
for test check 
No. of 
lease cases 
Sample 
selected 
Remarks 
Collector, Mumbai City 1,257 320 All relevant records relating to 223 cases 
were produced whereas for the remaining 
97 cases, only copy of lease deeds, property 
cards and extract of the land lease 
information system were furnished. 
Collector, Mumbai Suburban 295 74 All cases produced. 
Collector, Pune 214 55 22 cases fully produced.  The balance 33 
cases were incomplete.  
MHADA 112 40 All cases produced, except two. 
MMRDA 152 53 All cases produced. 
MCGM 184 52 All cases produced. 
PMC 2 2 Only one case produced. 
Total 2,216 596 
The draft Performance Audit Report was forwarded to the Government in 
November 2012.  The audit conclusions and recommendations in respect of 
Collectorates were discussed in the exit conference held in January 2013 
which was attended by the Additional Chief Secretary, R&FD, Dy. 
Secretaries, respective Collectors and other senior officials from the 
Department.  The audit conclusions and recommendations in respect of 
MMRDA, MHADA and MCGM were discussed in the exit conference held in 
February 2013 which was attended by the Principal Secretary, UDD, Vice 
President and Chief Executive Officer/MHADA, Additional Metropolitan 
Commissioner/MMRDA, Additional Municipal Commissioner/MCGM and 
other senior officers from the respective Departments.  The replies given 
during the exit conferences and at other points of time have been appropriately 
included in the relevant paragraphs. 
1.8 Audit constraints 
After examining the files at the Collectorates of Mumbai City, Mumbai 
Suburban and Pune, it was found necessary to examine the records of some 
cases at Government level for which records were requisitioned from the 
R&FD in Mantralaya.  However, the R&FD informed that all the records were 
destroyed in the fire which took place on 21 June 2012.  Due to non-
availability of records in respect of the above cases at Mantralaya, we could 

Chapter I: Introduction 
5
not examine the considerations based on which the sanctions, relaxations in 
conditions, concessions/discounts/rebates in lease rents, etc., were allowed.  
1.9 Acknowledgement 
Indian Audit and Accounts Department acknowledges the co-operation of the 
R&FD, UDD and the HD as well as Collectorates, MHADA, MMRDA, 
MCGM and PMC for providing necessary information and records to audit.  
The criteria for selection of records of leased cases for scrutiny is explained in 
WKH3DUDJUDSK³6FRSHand methodology RI$XGLW´ibid.  Entry conferences for 
the Performance Audit were held on 7 August 2012 with Additional Chief 
Secretary, R&FD and the Collectorates and on 23 August 2012 with Principal 
Secretary, HD, Municipal Commissioners and other senior officers of 
MHADA and MMRDA.  The Executives were informed about the scope, 
objective and criteria for selection of cases and methodology of audit.  The 
Additional Chief Secretary, R&FD, the Principal Secretary, HD and the 
Municipal Commissioners explained the various aspects of Government land 
which are given on lease and its administration and implementation. 

6
CHAPTER II
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS
The general observations made and conclusions drawn during the course of 
audit are brought out in this Chapter.
2.1 Incorrect maintenance of lease records
As per the Government instruction dated 22 February 1996, the Collector is 
required to maintain a land distribution register containing the details of 
Government land, i.e. name of grantee, area, purpose, period of grant and 
terms and conditions, etc. Further, periodic review of the said register is also 
required to be carried out so as to keep track of the cases of expiry of lease 
period, breach of conditions of lease, etc..
Audit made a comparison between information on leased lands obtained from 
the Collectorates with individual lease records and property cards available in
the files and the following discrepancies were noticed:
x Names of the lessee did not tally in 12 cases in Mumbai City.
x Lease periods did not tally in 10 cases in Mumbai City.
x Area of land given on lease did not tally in 30 cases in Mumbai City 
with the variation ranging from (-) 10,000 sq m to 4,312 sq m and in 
10 cases in Mumbai Suburban with the variation ranging from 
(-) 4,000 sq m to 4.47 lakh sq m.
Further, in case of Collector, Pune, a list of 214 cases was furnished to audit in 
May 2012 and in October 2012 the number of cases was revised to 258.
The above facts indicated that the data was not maintained correctly.  Since 
maintenance of the data is vital in monitoring of leased lands, it is 
recommended that correct data may be maintained.
The Collectorates may get the data maintained in the register and reconcile it 
with the information available in the individual lease records as well as the 
property cards.
In the exit conference the Additional Chief Secretary directed all the 
Collectors to maintain records properly in the proforma prescribed.
2.2 Non-uniformity of norms for the leasing of land
Lands on lease are given by the Government, MMRDA, MHADA and 
MCGM.  During the course of the Performance Audit it was noticed that there
was no uniformity in the procedures adopted for grant of lease of land by the 
agencies which are given in Appendix-II.  A few of them are discussed as 
follows:
1. Procedure for allotment
The Collectorates/Government, MMRDA, MHADA and MCGM were 
adopting different methods in leasing of Government land. MMRDA was 
leasing land through auctions, MHADA gave land on lease under Regulation 
16 as per the directives of the Government, whereas in MCGM and 

Chapter II: General Observations 
7
Collectorates, land was allotted on the basis of applications received from 
individuals, institutions, etc.. 
2. Procedure for levy and collection of lease rent and lease premium 
Different methods were being adopted by different agencies for levy of lease 
rent and lease premium.  The Government was levying lease rent on the basis 
of the ready reckoner while in MCGM and MMRDA, the lease rent was being 
levied considering the maximum permissible Floor Space Index (FSI), 
whereas in respect of MHADA, lease rent was fixed on the basis of resolutions 
issued from time to time.  MMRDA recovered a one time premium equal to 
the value of the plot at which it was auctioned at the time of lease agreement 
and levied a nominal lease rent thereafter.  In respect of MHADA lease 
premium was fixed on the basis of resolutions issued from case to case and 
lease rent for the entire lease period was either taken as one time capitalised 
lease rent at the time of agreement or was recovered annually as decided in the 
resolutions.  In respect of Collectorates and MCGM there was no policy to 
collect one time lease premium and lease rent ranging from 
 ` one to amounts 
based on prescribed percentages of market value was being charged based on 
the extant orders and circulars. 
3. Standard form of lease agreement 
It was seen that only MMRDA had provided for a standardised form of lease 
agreement in its Regulations.  The leases given by MMRDA were for a period 
of 80 years whereas in respect of other agencies fresh lease or lease renewal 
was being done for a maximum period of 30 years. 
4. Monitoring mechanism in respect of leased lands 
Periodical monitoring of leased lands for detecting breach of lease conditions 
was absent in MMRDA and MHADA, weak in the Collectorates while 
MCGM has introduced a system of monitoring as late as in March 2012. 
2.3 Lack of transparency in grant of leases of Government land 
In order to bring transparency in allotment of land to co-operative housing 
societies, Government made a policy vide GR No. G-4 issued in May 1983 
and GR No. G-1 issued in May 2007.  It was decided that in cases where 
adequate plots are available for allotment under any lay out sanctioned by the 
local authority, the Collector should advertise in the local newspapers for the 
information of the general public so that people could form societies and apply 
for allotment of land for Co-operative Housing Societies (CHS). The 
applications received by the competent authority were to be scrutinised and 
proposal submitted to Government for approval. This was found necessary due 
to the fact that applications for allotment of land were being received only 
from those people who were aware of the availability of Government land and 
due to lack of publicity, many deserving people could not apply due to which 
they were not able to avail of the benefit of the policy. 
During the scrutiny of 319 lease cases (including cases of CHS) of Mumbai 
City, Mumbai Suburban and Pune which were produced in complete form out 
of 449 sampled cases, we did not come across any case where selection of 
eligible persons was made on the basis of applications received from 
co-operative societies/persons in response to advertisements for the purpose of 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
8
allotment of Government land on lease, indicating that the procedure was not 
being followed by the Department.  No advertisements for the vacant lands to 
be granted/re-granted on lease were being issued. 
Government may consider directing the Collectors to give wide publicity 
for grant of vacant lands on lease so as to make the process of allotment 
transparent. 
In the exit conference the Additional Chief Secretary accepted the 
recommendation and stated that the GR issued in this regard would be 
implemented and that in cases of lands to be allotted for educational purpose, 
hospitals, etc., the decision would be taken after examining the matter. 
2.4 Preparation of model lease agreement 
A format for grant of ³lease´ of land to educational institutions or local 
authorities and for gymnasiums to be used as a playground/gymnasium or for 
other recreation purposes is provided in the MLR Code.  Though lands are 
also given for other purposes, such as, industrial, commercial, residential, etc., 
no format for such lease agreements incorporating conditions specific to such 
purposes are incorporated in the MLR Code. 
In this regard it is pertinent to mention that many of the lands given on lease 
by the Government date back to the pre-independence era and the lease 
agreements inter alia  provide for rights of assignment/transfer or alienation 
and inheritance. In some cases, the lease conditions also state that the authority 
would renew the lease for a further period on the same terms and conditions 
on expiry of the lease period. In some other cases the lease agreements do not 
envisage permission of the competent authority or payment of unearned 
income to recognise or legitimise the assignment/transfer of leased land or 
prevent entering into development agreements. 
In order to protect the interests of the leased property as well as the land 
revenue involved, it is necessary to enact laws to prevent the lessees of the 
past as well as fresh lessees from taking undue advantage of absence of 
conditions in the codal provision as well as in the lease agreements.  In 
addition, the requirement of a periodical return to ensure fulfilment of purpose 
for which land was granted on lease may be necessary in a model lease 
agreement. 
The Government may consider enactment of a law to enforce the 
necessary conditions on subsisting leases in consultation with Law and 
Judiciary Department to safeguard leased property and land revenue. 
The Government may also consider pre SDULQJ D µ0RGHO /HDVH
$JUHHPHQW¶DQGLQFRUSRUDWHWKHVDPHLQWKH&RGH5XOHV.
2.5 Implementation of MLR Code 
2.5.1 Non-renewal of expired lease cases  
Under the provisions of the MLR Code, 1966 and the rules framed thereunder, 
Government land can be leased out to any person for such period and purpose 
and on such conditions as may be determined in this regard. The grantee of 

Chapter II: General Observations 
9
such land shall be called Government lessee and shall pay lease rent for the 
lease period as per the terms and conditions of the lease.  Further, under the 
Code, the Collector is empowered vide Sections 53 and 242 of the MLR Code 
to evict a person holding land unauthorisedly by reason of expiry of lease. The 
lessee shall also be liable to pay penalty not exceeding two times the 
assessment of rent for the land for the period of such unauthorised use or 
occupation. 
Information furnished by the Collectorates at Mumbai City, Mumbai Suburban 
and Pune revealed that out of 1,766 lease cases, 757 had expired between 1940 
and 2008 and were pending renewal. 
During test check of the lease cases of the Collectorates, we noticed that in 
respect of 153 cases the lease had expired between 1947 and 2011 (Appendix-
III). The Collector-wise breakup is as follows: 
Collectorate Resi-
dential 
Comm-
ercial 
Indus-
trial 
Educational 
and Social 
Others Total 
Mumbai City 74 3 9 - 11 97 
Mumbai Suburban 12 10 - 11 4 37 
Pune 3 1 - 14 1 19 
Total 89 14 9 25 16 153 
In January 1971, the Collector of Bombay had approached the Government 
regarding treatment to be given in respect of expired leases. However, no 
further action taken or any clarification issued in this regard by the 
Government was found on record. This was due to the fact that there was no 
express provision in the lease agreements issued in the past requiring the 
lessees to approach the Government for renewal of lease before the expiry of 
lease period.   
In MCGM, in 17 cases (Residential ± 2, Commercial ± 13, Industrial ± 1, 
Others ± 1) as detailed in Appendix-III, the lease periods had expired 
between 1996 and 2012.  However, no steps were taken by the MCGM for 
renewal of the leases under Section 91B or for eviction under Section 105 of 
the MMC Act, 1888. 
Failure of the Departments to renew the lease agreements in time resulted in 
lessees continuing to occupy the premises paying old rate of lease rent even 
after expiry of lease period and in wrongful occupation of premises and 
perpetual revenue loss to the Government due to non-revision of lease rent. 
In the exit conference the Government stated that decision to renew expired 
leases has been taken and a GR to this effect has been issued on 
12 December 2012 wherein option for converting the lease hold land into the 
occupancy right, conversion charges payable and determination of lease rent 
or renewals etc., have been prescribed. 
2.5.2 Absence of provisions in the MLR Code for levy of premium 
(unearned income) for regularisation of breaches  
According to Section 53 of the MLR Code, if in the opinion of the Collector 
any person is unauthorisedly occupying or wrongfully in possession of any 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
10
land by reasons which inter alia include breach of any conditions annexed to 
the tenure, the Collector may remove him from such land after giving the 
person reasonable opportunity  of being heard.  Such a person is also liable at 
the discretion of the Collector to pay penalty not exceeding two times the 
assessment of rent for the period of such unauthorised use or occupation.  The 
said Section does not provide for any regularisation of the unauthorised 
occupation. 
As per Resolution issued by the Government of Bombay in Revenue 
Department on 21 November 1957, the Collector may grant permission for 
sale of non-agricultural plots, conversion of new tenure into old tenure and 
regularisation of unauthorized sale of new tenure plots on payment of 
³SUHPLXP´7KHSUHPLXPLVUHFRYHUDEOHDWper cent when the plot is used 
for residential purpose and at 62.5 to 75 per cent for industrial and commercial 
purpose. In case prior permission for such transfer/sale/assignment is not 
obtained from the Government, the premium at the rate of 62.5 to 75 per cent
is recoverable in all cases. The premium amount is equal to the difference 
between the sale price to be approved by the Collector and the original price 
(occupancy price) paid to Government plus the value of improvements made 
in the plot by the grantee. 
As far as levy of unearned income in respect of lands given on lease is 
concerned, there is no provision in the Act.  However, the Department has 
been levying unearned income in cases of transfer of lease lands instead of 
resuming the lands under Section 53 of the MLR Code.   
During the course of the Audit, it was noticed that the Department had 
regularised transfer of leased land, after levy of premium in seven cases 
(Appendix IV ). However, in three other cases ( Appendix V ) wherein the 
lessees had transferred the plots to others during the period from 1981 to 2011, 
no action was taken by the Department to compute and recover the premium. 
After we pointed out these cases, the Collector, stated that provisions of the 
GR dated 21 November 1957 had been repealed in the Maharashtra Land 
Revenue (Disposal of Government Land) Rules, 1971, hence not applicable to 
Mumbai City.  It was further stated that there was no provision in the MLR 
Code for levy of premium.  In respect of the seven cases where demands had 
been raised, it was stated that the said GR had been challenged in the Mumbai 
High Court. 
Though premium (unearned) as stated above was not recoverable it was found 
in audit that the Collectorate continued to compute and send proposals to 
Government and issued demand notices for recovery of unearned income. 
Notwithstanding the fact mentioned above regarding absence of an express 
provision in the Code for recovery of premium/unearned income, we noticed 
that even the GR issued in 1957 was not applied correctly. There was 
non/short levy of premium/unearned income in 12 cases amounting to 
` 341.50 crore in Mumbai City and in seven cases amounting to ` 203.44 
crore in Mumbai Suburban District, aggregating ` 544.94 crore (Appendices 
IV, V and VI).  These mistakes had occurred due to application of incorrect 
rates for valuation of land, incorrect computation, etc.  There was no 

Chapter II: General Observations 
11
mechanism to ensure that the premium/unearned income was correctly levied 
and recovered. 
The Government may enact suitable provisions for levy and recovery of 
unearned income and for ensuring that all the lessees obtain prior 
permission before transferring the lease lands. 
In the exit conference the Additional Chief Secretary stated that necessary 
amendments would be made in the MLR Code for levy of unearned income. 
2.5.3 Recovery of lease rent, etc., through Government Resolutions, 
etc. without drawing reference to MLR Code  
The State Legislature has power to direct levy of revenue on all lands so long 
as the exigencies of the State may render such levy necessary.  That power is 
restated in the proviso to Section 64 of the MLR Code. 
During audit, we noticed that GRs, Circulars, and Memoranda (for individual 
lease cases) are being issued for fixation and recovery of lease rent, premium 
(unearned income), redevelopment charges, transfer fee and licence fee in 
respect of land given on lease and also other matters.  These GRs, Circulars 
and Memoranda issued by the Government did not however draw reference to 
the codal provisions (Appendix-VII).
In view of above, it is recommended that the GRs relating to components of 
land revenue, such as, lease rent, premium (unearned income), redevelopment 
charges, transfer fee and licence fee may draw reference of the relevant 
provisions of the MLR Code.  
In the exit conference the Additional Chief Secretary stated that requisite 
amendments had been proposed in MLR Code for levy of redevelopment 
charges, licence fee, transfer fee, etc.  
2.6 Non-revision of lease rent 
In October 1999, Government issued a Resolution for fixing lease rent based 
on the market value of the property as per the Ready Reckoner prepared by the 
Inspector General of Registration, Maharashtra State, Pune and the 
Collectorate issued demand notices accordingly.  Aggrieved by the demands 
so raised on the basis of the said GR, some of the lessees filed petition in the 
Mumbai High Court against the GR.  Consequent to this, Government 
withdrew the G.R. issued in October 1999.  The Mumbai High Court in its 
judgement dated 25 August 2004 laid down certain parameters for fixing the 
lease rent and also ordered that the proposed lease rent be communicated to 
the petitioners with the basis and the manner in which the amount is computed 
so as to enable the petitioners to make a representation against the same. It 
added that in the meanwhile, all the petitioners continue to pay the lease rent 
as per the old rates. 
Though eight years have elapsed since the High Court laid down the 
parameters for fixation of lease rent/revised lease rent, action in the matter is 
still pending. Consequently, the revenue that would have accrued to 
Government stands foregone. 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
12
According to the current practice, fixing of lease rent and its periodic revision 
is always being done by means of GRs rather than by making legislative 
enactment. 
In the exit conference the Government stated that a policy for revision of lease 
rent had been approved by the Cabinet and a GR issued on 12 December 2012. 
Further, Additional Chief Secretary stated that requisite amendments had been 
proposed in MLR Code for levy of redevelopment charges, licence fee, 
transfer fee, etc.  
2.7 Monitoring and control 
2.7.1 Internal control 
Internal controls are intended to provide reasonable assurance of proper 
enforcement of laws, rules and departmental instructions.  It also helps in the 
creation of reliable financial and management information system for prompt 
and efficient service and for adequate safeguards for recovery of dues.
 We 
examined the adequacy of internal control and observed the following: 
2.7.1.1 Non-receipt of Action Taken Note (ATN) on Public 
Accounts Committee (PAC) recommendations  
With a view to tone up the land management procedures, the PAC in its 
5th report of 2006-07 and 6th report of 2007-08, on the basis of paragraphs 3.10 
(Audit Report 1997-98) and 4.2.7 and 4.2.10 (Audit Report 1998-99) had 
recommended a review every three months by the Collector on the extent of 
Government land given on rent, under encroachment etc. an enquiry on land 
allotments from 1947 to ascertain whether the lands were used for the purpose 
for which they were given, physical verification, eviction of encroachers, etc., 
as detailed in Appendix VIII. Though these recommendations were issued on 
18 July 2006 and on 13 April 2007, the ATNs in respect of these 
recommendations have not been received from the Government (December 
2012).
Despite the recommendations of the PAC, we noticed that monitoring, co-
ordination and internal control measures were grossly inadequate in the 
Collectorates, as inspection of leased lands to ensure compliance to the 
conditions of the lease agreements as well as utilisation of lands for the 
purpose for which they were leased were lacking.  Even in cases where 
breaches were detected, follow up mechanism was absent due to which action 
was not taken to its logical conclusion for evicting the erring lessees as 
provided in the MLR Code.  This led to unauthorised sale/transfer, creation of 
third party interest and misuse for commercial gain. Audit observations are 
incorporated in the respective Chapters. 
The Collector, Mumbai City stated that there is no staff for detection of 
breaches and due to inadequate staff action could not be taken in cases where 
breaches were already detected.  
Government may instruct the Collectorates to display on site the details of 
lease to ensure that the plot is not sold/transferred unauthorisedly. 

Chapter II: General Observations 
13
Further, the Department may ensure that adequate staff is in place for 
carrying out the inspection of the leased lands for detection of breaches. 
2.7.1.2  Non-functioning of Breaches Committee
The Government in R&FD vide GR No. J-2 issued in July 1995 decided to 
constitute a Breaches Committee so as to detect cases relating to breach of 
terms and conditions of lease agreement/deed and to levy fine on such lessees.  
The Committee was to consist of six members with the Collector, Mumbai 
City as the Chairman.  The Collector was to inspect the leased properties and 
bring to notice the cases of breach of conditions to the Breaches Committee.  
The Committee in its monthly meeting was required to discuss the matter and 
consider levy of penalty and forward a proposal to the Government. 
However, Superintendent, Mumbai City Survey and Land Records stated 
(September 2012) that the Breaches Committee was not functioning and that 
since 1995 only five meetings were held.  This was stated to be due to absence 
of experienced staff as also reduction of existing staff by the Government. 
The Collectors at MSD, Mumbai and Pune were asked about the existence of 
such a Committee and action taken by it; their replies are awaited. 
The Government may consider reviving the Committee constituted for 
detecting breaches. 
In the exit conference the Additional Chief Secretary accepted the 
recommendation and stated that this would be implemented in the other 
districts also. 
2.7.1.3 Verification of utilisation of land for allotted purpose 
Land is granted on lease for residential, commercial, industrial, educational, 
social, medical, sports purposes, etc.  As per Rule 6 and 7 of MLR (DGL) 
Rules, 1971 land can be given rent free or at nominal rent of ` one for 
specified purposes for a period not exceeding 15 years.  Therefore the 
Department should ensure that the land is utilised for the purpose for which it 
is leased.  However, there is no prescribed system of verification to ensure that 
land is being used for the purpose allotted. 
During test check of the records of the Collectorates we noticed that in 30 
cases admeasuring 7,83,996.28 sq m, information regarding the lessees having 
utilised the land for the purpose for which it was granted was not available.  
The sample lease agreement prescribed in MLR Code did not draw reference 
for VXEPLVVLRQRID³SXUSRVHIXOILOPHQWFHUWLILFDWH´E\WKHOHVVHH)XUWKHUDV
site visits for verification were almost negligible such breaches came to the 
knowledge of Government much later either leading to delayed action or 
litigation.  These are discussed in the succeeding chapters. 
The Government may consider incorporating D ³SXUSRVH IXOILOPHnt
FHUWLILFDWH´LQWKHOHDVHDJUHHPHQWVDQGHQVXUHLWVFRPSOLDQFHthrough the 
Collectorates, as it would act as a deterrent against misuse/non-use of the 
leased land and also promote timely penal action.  There should be a 
system of regular monitoring and verification by the Government 
Department. 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
14
In the exit conference the Additional Chief Secretary accepted the 
recommendation and added that such certificate would be taken as a periodical 
return from the lessee. 
2.7.2  Internal Audit 
COLLECTORS
There are Internal Audit wings (IAW) in existence in the offices of the 
Collectors of Mumbai City, Mumbai Suburban District and Pune.  However, 
periodical inspections are conducted by the IAW in Mumbai City only.  
Internal Audit upto 2010-11 has been completed.  As per the information 
furnished by the Collectorate, 214 paras (separate information in respect of 
lease cases was not furnished) of IAW are pending clearance as of August 
2012, out of which 180 paras related to the periods 1992-93 to 2003-04. 
We called for details of outstanding paras and reasons for pendency in 
clearance. The Collector, Mumbai City stated that the details of paras were not 
readily available and added that the paras had not been complied with in the 
absence of adequate experienced staff.  Thus, compliance to internal audit 
paras was inadequate. 
Internal audit is an effective tool of the internal control mechanism, we 
recommend that immediate steps may be taken to comply with the paras raised 
in Mumbai City and to establish IAW in Mumbai Suburban and Pune 
Districts. 
MHADA 
MHADA had not set up an Internal Audit wing, a fact which has been 
repeatedly commented upon in the Separate Audit Reports of MHADA. No 
monitoring system was in place by way of periodical verification/inspection of 
the leased land to ensure that the property was being used for the intended 
purpose. 
MMRDA 
There is an Internal Audit wing for scrutinising accounts and other 
establishment matters. However, MMRDA (Disposal of Land) Regulations 
1977, does not provide for monitoring the progress of work on the leased 
plots.
MCGM 
MCGM formulated guidelines for inspections and procedure to deal with the 
cases of breach of conditions as late as in March 2012. 
2.8 Land revenue 
2.8.1 Trend of revenue  
The demand raised and recovery effected of lease rent in respect of Collectors 
at Mumbai City, Mumbai Suburban and Pune during the periods 2007-08 to 
2011-12 as furnished by the Department are given below. The demand raised 
was constant through the period of review with a minor exception:  

Chapter II: General Observations 
15
(`  in lakh) 
Year Mumbai City Mumbai Suburban District Pune 
Demand 
raised
Actual 
recovery
Percent-
age of 
recovery
Demand 
raised
Actual 
recovery
Percent-
age of 
recovery
Demand 
raised
Actual 
recovery
Percent-
age of 
recovery
2007-08 2,788.89 1,376.88 49.37 643.72 614.21 95.42 8.68 8.60 99.08 
2008-09 2,788.89 1,635.68 58.66 644.97 562.80 87.26 8.68 8.65 99.65 
2009-10 2,788.89 1,497.22 53.68 644.97 423.04  65.59 16.59# 16.37# 98.67#
2010-11 2,788.89 1,561.53 55.99 644.97 728.07 112.88 8.68 8.69 100.12 
2011-12 2,788.89 1,476.05 52.92 644.97 2,162.90* 335.35 8.68 8.57 98.73 
# Increase on account of demand ` 7.91 lakh in one case in Pune, which was not done for the 
following years. * Mazagon Docks Ltd. paid revised lease rent including arrears amounting to 
` 1,536.79 lakh. 
2.8.2 Arrears of land revenue  
The District Collector/Tahsildar has the delegated power to initiate recovery 
proceedings by following any one or more of the processes prescribed under 
the MLR Code, 1966 and the Revenue Recovery Act, 1890. These Acts 
provide for attachment/auction of property and confinement of defaulters in 
jail if they failed to respond to the demand notices issued to them. 
We called for (May 2012) the status of arrears of lease rent as of 31 March 
2012, from the Collectors at Mumbai City, Mumbai Suburban District and 
Pune. Collector, Mumbai Suburban intimated arrears as ` 1.50 crore, while 
Collector, Pune City intimated that there were no such arrears.  
The Collector, Mumbai City intimated that as against the total demand of 
` 139.44 crore between 2007-08 and 2011-12, ` 75.47 crore was recovered, 
leaving a balance of ` 63.97 crore which is obviously in arrears.  Action taken 
by the Collectors to recover the dues was not available on record.  
The three Tahsildars under the Collector, MSD, namely, Andheri, Borivali and 
Kurla stated that lease rent of ` 21.78 crore was in arrears in eight out of 109 
cases.  In remaining 101 cases, there were no arrears.  This information might 
not be complete, as out of 295 leased cases, data of lease rent in respect of 186 
cases was not furnished by the concerned Tahsildars. Variation in above 
figures reflected absence of flow of information from Tahsildar to the 
Collector.
Thus, the position of arrears of lease rent, etc. was not complete. Under the 
circumstances it was absolutely necessary to have a category-wise register at 
Collectorates/Tahsildars/Talatis with full details for effective monitoring of 
arrears. The registers maintained at the Collectorates should be periodically 
reviewed and reconciled with the data available with the Tahsildars/Talatis.
Further, category-wise abstract of arrears of revenue could be prepared 
indicating the stages (such as in appeals with Department, Courts, etc.) so that 
senior management/middle management can consider remedial measures.  
Government may consider streamlining the procedure for maintaining 
data relating to arrears of land revenue, for taking timely action. 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
16
In the exit conference the Additional Chief Secretary, agreed to formulate 
procedure for maintaining data on arrears of lease rent, etc. as recommended. 
2.9 Non-recovery of amoun WUHODWLQJWROHVVRU¶VLQWHUHVW
Section 126 of the Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning (MR&TP) Act, 
1966 provides for acquisition of lands reserved in the Development Plan (DP) 
by the Planning Authority. The Development Control Regulations (DCR) for 
Greater Mumbai, 1991, contain provisions enabling the land owner to avail of 
Floor Space Index (FSI) in lieu of monetary compensation based on the 
concept of Transferable Development Rights (TDR). Section 126 (1) of the 
MR&TP Act, 1966, was amended in October 1993 to accommodate the 
concept of TDR which provided that whenever a Planning Authority acquires 
any land reserved in the DP by granting the land owner TDR against the area 
of land surrendered free of cost, the lessee must either pay the lessor or deposit 
an equal amount to the planning authority which is payable to the lessor as 
OHVVRU¶V LQWHUHVW  7KLV DPRXQW LV WR EH GHWHUPLQHG RQ WKH EDVLV RI SULQFLSOHV
laid down in Land Acquisition Act, 1984.  The Government in UDD vide 
Resolution dated 10 September 1996 confirmed the method of apportionment 
of interests of the lessor/lessee in respect of Government lands acquired by 
way of grant of TDRs. 
On going through the MLR Code, we noticed that there is no provision for 
SURWHFWLRQRIOHVVRU¶V*RYHUQPHQWLQWHUHVWZKHQ7'5LVDOORZHGIRUWKHDUHD
of land surrendered free of cost to the planning authorities. 
The Government may make provision in the Act for safeguarding its 
interest as lessor in the profits made by the lessee and recovery of the 
same. 
In the exit conference the Additional Chief Secretary assured that the matter 
would be looked into with a view to make provisions in the Act. 
2.10 Instructions to local bodies to curb lessees from misuse of 
Government land  
During the course of the performance audit, it was noticed that the Municipal 
Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM) had allowed development of the 
property in two cases without obtaining No Objection Certificate (NOC) from 
the Government and in one case had auctioned the land without the permission 
of the Government as detailed below: 
x In the case of land leased to an individual for agricultural purpose, the 
individual entered into development agreement with a private builder 
for construction of residential flats for which permission was given by 
the MCGM without obtaining NOC from the Government. (Paragraph 
4.2.16)
x In the case of M/s Chunilal Co-op Housing Society to whom the lease 
rights were sold by the lessee, the MCGM had permitted the lessee to 
utilise the FSI of adjacent encroached land without obtaining NOC 
from the Government. (Paragraph 3.4.1) 

Chapter II: General Observations 
17
x In case of a trust held by an individual, MCGM had auctioned the land 
to M/s Jainam Construction without obtaining NOC from the 
Government. (Paragraph 3.3.1) 
Since Government is the owner of the leased properties, MCGM should have 
obtained NOC from the Government before taking action in the above cases. 
The Government in R&FD may co-ordinate in the matter with the UDD 
and registering authorities in order to ensure that the sale/sub-lease of 
lease rights, clearance of development plans, building plans, etc. are not 
effected before obtaining NOC from the R&FD. 

18
CHAPTER III 
COLLECTOR, MUMBAI CITY 
This chapter contains the results of audit of the lands given on lease in 
Mumbai City.  There were 1,257 lease cases out of which 320 cases were 
selected for detailed scrutiny. Of these 320 cases, in 97 cases, copy of the 
lease deed, property card and land lease information system alone were 
furnished.  We have noticed 162 irregularities, these are mentioned below: 
Sr. 
No.
Category No. of 
observations
1. Breach of lease conditions relating to change in purpose, 
transfer of leasehold rights 
34 
2. Action for eviction not taken in case of breach of conditions  15 
3. Non-recovery of lease rent 16 
4. Non-renewal of expired leases 97 
Total 162 
A few observations are discussed in the following paragraphs: 
3.1 Non-execution/registration of lease deed  
According to Section 17(1)(d) of the Registration Act, 1908, the lease 
documents of immovable property either executed year to year, or for any 
term exceeding one year, or reserving a yearly rent are to be compulsorily 
registered.  Thus, in respect of Government Land given on lease it is necessary 
to have a lease deed/agreement prepared incorporating all the terms and 
conditions under which the lease is granted and also get it registered with the 
Registering Authority. 
x During test check of the lease cases, we noticed that in 11 cases, the 
possession of the leased plots admeasuring 84,089.57 sq m had been 
given between 1958 and 1983.  Though 29 to 54 years had elapsed 
after the possession of the plots had been taken by the lessees, in none 
of these cases, lease deeds had been executed/registered with the 
registering authorities as shown in Appendix-IX. This resulted in non-
fulfilment of the above provision.  Registration of the lease deeds also 
attracted Stamp Duty and Registration Fee, hence, non-registration 
resulted in non-realisation of Stamp Duty and Registration Fee as well. 
After this being pointed out, the Department stated (September 2012) that 
necessary action would be taken to execute and register the deeds on priority. 
x In SDUDJUDSK  RI WKH &RPSWUROOHU DQG $XGLWRU *HQHUDO¶V $XGLW
Report (Revenue Receipts) for the year ending 31 March 1998, we had 
pointed out 57 lease cases in Mumbai City wherein registration of the 
lease deeds had not been done with the registering authorities.  In this 
regard, the Collector informed (November 2012) that 56 of these lease 
deeds are yet to be executed and registered and also stated that this 
work is being taken up on a priority basis.  This indicated that the 

Chapter III: Collector, Mumbai City 
19
Department is not monitoring the execution and registration of the 
leases.  Thus, despite a lapse of 15 years, since the matter was pointed 
out by audit, the leases have not been executed and registered. 
3.2 Incorrect application of Annual Schedule of Rates 
In Mumbai City, since May 2006, the valuation of land is being done by 
adopting the Annual Schedule of Rates (ASR) prescribed for the year in which 
the land was allotted on lease or permission for redevelopment was accorded. 
The ASR provides for the rate of base value of open land with one FSI only 
and in case if the FSI is more than one or less than one then the rate has to be 
increased or decreased accordingly. 
As per Regulation No. 32 of the Development Control Regulations, 1991 for 
Mumbai City, the maximum permissible FSI of the land used for residential 
and residential-cum-shop purposes in the island city of Mumbai is 1.33.  
However, it was noticed that in the following instances, FSI of one was 
applied instead of 1.33, which resulted in short recovery of various charges. 
x Redevelopment charge: Redevelopment charge is a charge levied by 
the Government for permitting redevelopment on leased Government 
lands.  The concept of redevelopment charge is not present in the MLR 
Code.  However, redevelopment charge is being levied at 10 per cent
of the market value of the land.  During test check of the lease cases in 
Mumbai City, we noticed that in five cases, while computing the 
redevelopment charges recoverable, the Department had valued the 
land at the rate of one FSI instead of proportionately increasing the 
rates, though 1.33 FSI was admissible.  The potential revenue forgone 
was ` 5.75 crore as shown in Appendix-X.
x Transfer charge: In another case of leased land the lessee M/s Simplex 
Reality applied for change of use of land from industrial to residential 
purpose.  As per the GR of May 2009 issued in the case, transfer 
charges among other charges was leviable @ three per cent  of the 
market value of the land, though the concept of transfer charges is not 
present in the MLR Code. In this case, the transfer charges were 
calculated taking FSI as one instead of 1.33.  This resulted in short 
realisation of ` 13.81 lakh
1.
The Department while accepting the audit observation stated that the MLR 
code needed modification so as to make the concept of FSI clear. 
3.3 Breach of lease agreements  
3.3.1 Unauthorised auction of lease land belonging to 
Collectorate to M/s Jainam Construction by MCGM 
Land admeasuring 3,811.49 sq m at Mazgaon, Mumbai, was given on lease for 
a period of 99 years with effect from 1 September 1903 under two separate 
                                                           
1 Recovered ` 41.84 lakh, as against, ` 55.65 lakh. 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
20
lease orders of February 1910 and September 1919 to a Trust held by an 
individual. The lease expired on 31 August 2002. This allotment on lease was 
made by the Collector as this was land belonging to the Collectorate. 
Test check of the records revealed that the lessee had made a number of 
breaches before the expiry of lease.  A few are mentioned below:  
x As per the lease agreement the lessee was required to pay the annual 
lease rent and in case of non-payment of the lease rent, the lessee could 
be evicted from the land under section 53 of the MLR code, 1966.  We 
noticed that the lessee had not paid lease rent since 1991.  The 
Collectorate cancelled the lease in 1997 i.e. after a lapse of six years 
from which the lessee had stopped paying the lease rent.  However, in 
the meantime the following development occurred:  
x The lessee had to pay dues (such as property tax) to MCGM. MCGM 
found that ` 3 lakh due to it had not been paid by the lessee and 
therefore, in September 1996 it auctioned this property to M/s Jainam 
Construction (a partnership firm) who bought the property for ` 11.31
lakh. There was nothing on record to indicate that the land was 
auctioned with the knowledge and approval of Collectorate/ 
Government. 
x The firm (M/s Jainam Construction) redeveloped the property and 
constructed flats in 2005 and requested for execution of sale agreement 
to the Collector.  However, the request was not acceded to by the 
Government on the grounds that the process of redevelopment of the 
property was without the permission of the Government.  Thereafter, 
no action was taken and the land continued to be in the unauthorised 
occupation of the firm despite lapse of seven years from when it came 
to notice. 
x Thus, Government land was unauthorisedly auctioned by MCGM and 
a third party interest created. 
3.3.2 Lease of land to M/s Eastern Chemical Co. Ltd. 
Two plots of land at C.S No. 85 (measuring 17,769.43 Sq. m.) and C.S No. 93 
(measuring 14,418.88 Sq. m)  of Saltpan Division, Wadala, were leased to 
Eastern Chemical Company Ltd for a period of 99 years in 1913. As per the 
Property Card M/s J.K Chemical is the present lessee in respect of the above 
property. As per the condition of the original leases, the above lands were to 
be used for erecting a chemical factory for the manufacture of certain 
permitted chemicals. 
a) We found that the gradual relaxations allowed to the lessee in a phased 
manner enabled commercial exploitation of the property. 

Chapter III: Collector, Mumbai City 
21
Relaxation 
No. 
Government 
order
Relaxation provided 
1 R&FD
Memorandum dt 
23 July 1974 also 
resolution dt 16 
April 1980 
The first relaxation permitted change of use from 
chemical factory to purely residential purpose subject to 
the condition that the land shall be used for providing 
residential flats to employees of the firm and that the 
land shall not be used for commercial purposes. 
2 R&FD Resolution 
dt 18 August 1984 
The lessee constructed residential flats and shops and 
sought relaxation for permitting him to sell the 
constructed residential flats and shops in the open 
market.  This was allowed subject to the condition that 
the construction should be completed within a period of 
three years (17 August 1987) and should be sold to the 
middle income group with the family income of 
members not exceeding ` 2,999 per month. Lease rent 
should be recovered from the date of signing of the 
agreement or from the date of occupation certificate 
(OC) whichever was earlier.  
3 R&FD letter dt 
06 November 
1984 to the 
company 
The ceiling on income limit of ` 2,999 mentioned in the 
above resolution was deleted on request from the lessee. 
Thus the lessee could sell in the open market without 
any restriction by forming a co-operative housing 
society (CHS). 
Further, the lease rent was allowed to be recovered from 
CHS from the date of issue of OC. 
4 R&FD letter dt 5 
October 1988 to 
the Developer 
(M/s Kalpak 
Development 
Corporation) 
Time for completion of the project was extended upto 
17 August 1989 from 17 August 1987, however, lessee 
had to pay the enhanced lease rent fixed at 8 per cent of 
50 per cent of market value with effect from 18 August 
1987 i.e. original stipulated date of completion. 
5 Order of Revenue 
Minister dt. 4 
February 1993 on 
petition under 
section 257 of 
MLR Code 
Extension in time limit for completion of project 
provided up to 17 August 1994. 
Lease rent recovery at enhanced rate was to be made 
from the date of issue of OC. 
Thus, freedom was given to the lessee to exploit the Government land for 
commercial gains.   
b) Non-realisation of enhanced lease rent 
As per the GR No. 18 issued in August 1984, read with R&F letter dated 5 
October 1988, (mentioned at Sl. No. 2 and 4 of the above table). The above 
Co-operative Housing Society CHS in whose favour fresh lease was created 
was required to pay lease rent at eight per cent of 50 per cent of market value 
of the land from 18 August 1987.  
The CHS did not execute the revised lease agreement and continued to pay the 
lease rent at old rates of ` 691.13 per annum. The lease rent payable by the 
CHS as per the above mentioned GR worked out to ` 7.36 lakh per annum. 
Most of the buildings had received occupation certificate between 1987 and 
1996, however, full details were not available in the lease records due to 
which the exact amount of short recovery could not be ascertained.  

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
22
In reply, the Collector stated (September 2012) that necessary action to 
recover lease rent from the lessee was being taken and added that the land in 
question was allowed to be commercially exploited by the Government 
without recovering any additional premium on the orders of the Revenue 
Minister (February 2003).  
Thus, the land which was originally intended to be used for a chemical factory 
was permitted to be used for residential purpose for low income groups. 
Subsequently, even this condition was waived off and it was allowed to be 
sold in the open market. In addition to this, lease rent payable was also relaxed 
thereby leading to a loss of revenue to the Government. 
3.3.3 Lease of land to Maharashtra Rajya Sahakari Sakhar 
Karkhana Sangh Ltd. 
In August 1973, Government approved lease of land admeasuring 2,440.57 
sq m (CS No. 1971) of Fort division, Mumbai to Maharashtra Rajya Sahakari 
Sakhar Karkhana Sangh Ltd. (MRSSKSL) for a period of 99 years to build 
commercial RIILFHV IRU ³PHPEHU VXJDU IDFWRULHV´ ZKLFKalso encompassed a 
receiving station of the Bombay Electric Supply and Transport (BEST), at an 
annual lease rent of ` 5.71 lakh.  This lease rent was fixed at a concessional 
rate of ` 3,600 per sq m instead of the market value of ` 4,750 per sq m. 
MRSSKSL was given possession of the land in March 1975 without executing 
any lease agreement. Instead a sanction order (May 1977), was issued which 
stipulated that the lease deed should be executed within three months and the 
construction of the building should be completed within five years from the 
date of possession. However, no lease deed has been executed and registered 
till date. The plot was also rent free for a period of first two years. 
Our examination of records revealed that irregular relaxations and concessions 
granted to the lessee from time to time resulted in undue favour to the lessee 
as mentioned below: 
x The lessee did not start the construction work, instead asked R&FD 
(1
 February 1978) for outright sale/subleasing of the plot on the plea 
WKDW WKH ³PHPEHU VXJDU IDFWRULHV´ VKRZHG UHOXFWDQFH WR RZQ
commercial office space in the proposed building to be constructed. 
Since this violated the very purpose for which land was leased, the 
land could have been resumed at this stage by the Collectorate.  
However, no action was taken by the Collector. 
x R&FD on 23 February 1978, relaxed the rent free condition extending 
the rent free period from two to five years (i.e. from 1975 to 1980).  
There was nothing on record to indicate that the lessee had asked for it. 
x On 20 February 1978, the lessee handed over the possession of the plot 
to a developer
2 and entered into an agreement with him in July 1978 
for construction of a multi-storeyed building. The agreement stipulated 
that the developer would pay the ground rent for the plot to the 
Government from the date of possession. As per information obtained 
                                                           
2 M/s Aesthetic Builders Pvt. Ltd.

Chapter III: Collector, Mumbai City 
23
on 9 November 2012 from Superintendent, Mumbai City Survey and 
Land Records, the total built up area was 1.27 lakh sq ft, out of which, 
1/5
th area was occupied by BEST, 1/5 th by the original lessee and the 
remaining 3/5th was occupied by 20 private parties (not member sugar 
factories) and the developer. 
x R&FD was responsible for grant of permission for construction and 
change in use.  However, in this case we noticed that the above 
deviations were approved (March and July 1978) by the General 
Administrative Department, Government of Maharashtra, though 
initially it had also not approved the proposal for grant of land on lease 
in February 1978. 
Thus, MRSSKSL did not utilise the land for the purpose for which it was 
allotted but misused the lease rights.  The land could have been resumed to the 
Government in terms of Section 53 of the MLR Code, had timely action been 
taken. 
3.3.4 Lease of land to MTDC 
The Government in R&FD vide Resolution of 21 October 1989 approved the 
leasing of property admeasuring 711 sq m (C.S.No.1761 and 1762, Plot 
No.100A and 100B, BBR-I, Fort Division) to Maharashtra Tourism 
Development Corporation (MTDC) on an annual lease rent of ` 11.38 lakh.  
MTDC took possession of the plot in September 1990.  However, the lease 
agreement had not been executed and registered till date. 
We noticed that 
x MTDC subleased a portion of the above land on 21 October 1989 to 
Indian Oil Corporation (IOC) for a consideration of ` 1.42 crore 
without obtaining prior permission from the Government.  Though the 
Government cancelled the allotment to MTDC and ordered 
resumption in October 1999, we found that the land was not resumed 
and a portion of it was still in the possession of IOC. 
x Government also ordered for recovery of ` 1.42 crore which was 
received by MTDC from IOC.  This amount has not been recovered so 
far.  Besides, lease rent of ` 1.93 crore and interest of ` 2.70 crore 
payable by the lessee as of August 2010 has also not been recovered. 
After the case was pointed out in Audit, the Department stated (September 
2012) that in response to the notices issued to MTDC for payment of dues and 
resumption of land, MTDC had approached the Principal Secretary, Home 
Department in December 2001.  However, resumption of land and action for 
recovery of dues are pending though 13 years had elapsed since the issue of 
Government orders in the matter.  Further, IOC is still in possession of the 
plot.
3.3.5 Grant of building on sub lease by Ayurved Prachar Sanstha 
As per sanction order dated 29 October 1971, Government allotted land 
admeasuring 1,974.56 sq m of Bhuleshwar, Mumbai to Ayurved Prachar 
Sanstha on lease basis for period of 99 years at an annual concessional lease 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
24
rent of ` 19,2523 with effect from 1 April 1970.  However, the lease 
agreement was not executed and registered by the lessee till now.   
The terms and conditions of the sanction order stipulated that the land was to 
be used for running an Ayurvedic hospital/college and ancillary purposes 
including residence of bonafide members of the staff of the hospital and 
college and not for any other purpose. 
x We found that the Sanstha constructed a building with 12 floors in 
1975 having 7,580.12 sq m of built-up area.  Out of which, five floors 
were given on lease to a Central Government Department (Income 
Tax) on annual rent of ` 4.25 lakh.  Of this, as per R&FD 
memorandum of October 1997, 50 per cent  of the rent was to be 
remitted to the Government as lease rent. However, we noticed that the 
50 per cent of the lease rent paid by the ITD was not demanded from 
the Sanstha.  The minimum amount recoverable from the Sanstha 
amounted to ` 55.25 lakh
4  for the period from July 1986 to June 2012. 
x The Sanstha approached the Chief Secretary for getting back the sub-
leased floors in July 1994 for expanding medical facilities.  However, 
the floors have not been given back to the Sanstha till date.  Thus, the 
sub-leased portion of land continued to be used contrary to the purpose 
for which the land was leased. 
x there was nothing on record to confirm whether the bonafide staff of 
the hospital/college was accommodated in the building itself. 
After non-recovery of rent was pointed out by Audit, the Collector stated that 
the Sanstha had represented for waiver of the rent received from the ITD, it 
further stated that the Sanstha was involved in welfare activities and therefore, 
concessional lease rent had been allowed.  However, the reply was silent about 
the non-execution of the lease deed with the lessee, return of the sub-leased 
floors to the lessee and on whether accommodation of the building was being 
provided only to the bonafide staff of hospital/college by the Sanstha. 
3.4 Failure to take action against encroachment 
The MLR Code, 1966, prescribes that in case encroachment is detected by the 
authority, the encroacher shall be evicted forthwith and assessed for non-
agricultural assessment/land revenue at the prescribed rate and fines. In case 
the encroachment is regularised on occupancy rights, the encroacher would 
have to pay penal occupancy price and penal land revenue at the prescribed 
rates. 
3.4.1 Lease of foreshore land  
The Government in October 1951 leased land admeasuring 3,525 sq. yard and 
168 sq. yard at Colaba, Mumbai for 21 years from December 1949 to Shri 
                                                           
3  calculated at the rate of 6.5 per cent per annum on value of the land @ ` 150 per sq m. 
4  The amount to be recovered may be worked out by the Department after obtaining the 
details of the actual rent received by the Sanstha from ITD during the periods from July 
1986 to June 2012.  (50 per cent of ` 4.25 lakh per annum X 26 years). 

Chapter III: Collector, Mumbai City 
25
Shivchandra Poddar for residential purpose. As per Clause 2(f) of the lease 
deed, if the lessee sold, assigned or parted with the leased land, he was 
required to intimate the Collector within 21 days of such action.  We found 
that lease periods were extended from time to time for 21 years up to 1991.  
However, in 1981, the lessee sold the lease rights to Chunnilal Co-operative 
Housing Society (CCHS) without intimating/approval of the Collector. 
During test check of lease records of the CCHS, we noticed that  
x In 1982 CCHS had constructed a 16 storey building after obtaining the 
approval of the building plan from MCGM in 1981. The building plan 
included an encroached foreshore land of 622.08 sq m which was not 
leased/allotted to the original lessee or to CCHS.  By including this 
foreshore land in the plan, CCHS obtained a higher FSI for its building 
and constructed the building accordingly.  The approval of the building 
plan on encroached land by MCGM was irregular as the encroached 
land did not belong to the lessee. 
x To get the above encroached land regularised, CCHS approached 
(September 1984) the Revenue Minister for allotment of the foreshore 
land on lease for utilisation as a playground, garden and other 
recreational purpose for the society.  It was stated that the land was in 
the possession of the original lessee and was now in possession of 
CCHS. 
x The period of lease expired in 1991, however, no action had been taken 
for renewal/eviction. 
After we pointed out the case, the Collector, stated (September 2012) that the 
matter was reported to the Government between 1989 and 1994 after which a 
meeting was convened with the Chief Secretary in February 1995. However, 
no final decision has been taken till date.  
3.4.2  Land leased to Mumbai Gymkhana 
As per the lease agreement of November 1908, Government leased 37, 044 sq. 
yards of Azad Maidan land, Mumbai to Mumbai Gymkhana for a period of 99 
years.   
During the audit of Deputy Director, Sport and Youth Services, Mumbai, we 
found that: 
x Superintendent, City Survey and Land Records (SCSLR) had carried 
out measurement of the land leased to Mumbai Gymkhana in 
November 2004. He had found that the Gymkhana had encroached 
upon 4,268.81 sq m of land adjoining the land leased to it. Though 
eight years had elapsed after the encroachment was detected by 
SCSLR, no action for eviction/regularisation as prescribed in the MLR 
Code has been initiated by the Department.  
x The lease expired in December 2006, extension of lease period was not 
granted and the land continued to be in the unauthorised occupation of 
Gymkhana. 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease
26
After this was pointed out, the lessee filed (April 2013) a writ petition in the 
Bombay High Court challenging the contention of the Department that there 
was encroachment of the land and had prayed for ordering/directing the 
Department to initiate a joint survey strictly in accordance with the provisions 
of the MLR Code.  Further progress in this case has not been intimated.
3.5 Non-recovery of lease rent
3.5.1 Lease of land to Sportsfield Co-operative Housing Society
Government in R&FD decided in January 1983 to allot plot No. 9A under CS 
No.734 at Worli to Sportsfield Co-operative Housing Society (SCHS), under 
certain terms and conditions. The Society took possession of the plot (1,674 
sq m) on 9 August 1984. Government order was passed in July 1997, granting 
the land on lease to the SCHS for 99 years as per the Government policy for 
allotment of land dated 12 May 1983. The yearly lease rent was fixed at eight
per cent of 50 per cent of market value as of 1 February 1976 (i.e. ` 900 per 
sq m).  Interest at the rate of eight per cent per annum was to be recovered on 
the unpaid amount.
We noticed a number of irregularities while examining the lease record of the 
society in the Collectorate office, as follows:
x As per the Collectorate ¶s official record, area of the leased plot was 
1,674 sq m.  However, in 1984 as per joint survey conducted by Public 
Works Department, lessee and the Collectorate, the area of the leased
plot was found to be 1,716.85 sq m.  The excess area of 42.85 sq m 
was neither resumed nor included in the lease order. The lease rent of 
` 0.86 lakh had also not been recovered.
x In April 1985, the Department amalgamated an adjacent plot 
admeasuring 87.84 sq m for generation of additional FSI of the plot.  A 
flat of approximately 2,000 sq. ft. was built and leased out.  However, 
the lease rent of ` 1.77 lakh for the additional plot area provided had 
not been demanded.
x In April 1989, the lease rights of a flat were sold by one member to 
another member of the SCHS with the approval of the Government 
subject to payment of premium ` 3.02 lakh to the Government.  The 
amount has not been recovered so far though 23 years have elapsed.
x As per Government Resolution of June 1988 the lease rent was payable 
at commercial rate for commencement of commercial activities in a 
housing society. The commercial lease rent was 15 per cent of the 
market value of the leased area.  It was noticed that an area of 1,959 
sq ft was sub-leased to the Punjab National Bank.  The lease rent of 
` 55.39 lakh had not been recovered from SCHS.
After we pointed out the case, Collector, Mumbai City accepted (September
2012) the facts and stated that necessary action to recover the dues as arrears 
of land revenue would be carried out.

Chapter III: Collector, Mumbai City 
27
3.5.2 Lease of land to Foreshore Co-operative Housing Society 
GR dated 14 June 1988 stipulates that 15 per cent of the demised premises 
could be utilised for commercial purposes, in which case additional lease rent 
at the rate prescribed in the said GR is payable by the lessee to the 
Government. 
We noticed in October 1989 that Foreshore Co-operative Housing Society had 
leased 596.82 sq m of the constructed premises to Bank of Baroda for monthly 
lease rent of ` 1.60 lakh for 10 years with a clause for further renewal. In June 
1995 and December 2003, the Collector sought order from the Government for 
recovery of additional lease rent of ` 3.36 crore @ ` 3.56 lakh per annum from 
October 1989 to December 2003. 
The Collector stated (September 2012) that order from the Government was 
awaited.  The reply of the Collector was not correct as demand for additional 
lease rent should have been raised as provided in the Government Resolution. 
There was no need to seek any order from the Government in this regard. 

28
CHAPTER IV 
COLLECTOR, MUMBAI SUBURBAN DISTRICT 
This chapter contains the results of audit of the lands given on lease in 
Mumbai Suburban District.  There are 295 lease cases out of which 74 cases 
were selected for detailed scrutiny.  Results of analysis of the selected cases 
are mentioned below:  
Sr. No. Category No. of observations 
1 Non-fulfilment of conditions for grant of lease 1
2 Breach of lease conditions due to change in 
purpose, transfer of leasehold rights 
46 
3 Non-recovery of lease rent 3
4 Details of recovery of lease rent not available 37 
5 Non-renewal of expired leases 37 
Total 124 
A few observations are discussed in the following paragraphs: 
4.1 Grant of land on lease despite non-fulfilment of mandatory 
conditions  
As per GR of February 1983, Government land can be allotted for educational 
purposes at concessional rate subject to production of project proposal, 
information regarding financial status of the lessee, etc.. 
The State Government in September 1994 allotted 2,880 sq m of land for 
secondary school building on occupancy basis and 5,236 sq m of land for play 
ground attached to the school on lease basis to Samajonnati Shikshan Sanstha, 
Borivali, Mumbai. The period of lease was 15 years from February 1995.   
We noticed that the Collector while forwarding the application of the lessee 
had informed the Government (August 1991) that the applicant institution had 
not submitted the mandatory project documents of the proposed school as well 
as the financial status of the institution. However, the Government allotted the 
land to the said institution.  The Sanstha did not construct the school but 
constructed only three classrooms and an office.  The lease period of the 
playground had expired in 2010 which had neither been renewed nor resumed 
till date.  The possibility of the land having been used for some other purpose 
cannot be ruled out. 
After we pointed out the case (July 2012), the Department accepted that only 
three classrooms and an office were constructed, however, the reply was silent 
regarding resumption of land for breach of condition. 
4.2 Non-resumption of land on lease despite repeated 
violations/breaches  
4.2.1  The State Government in March 1977 leased out land admeasuring 
91,057.6 sq m at Mankhurd to M/s Bombay Soap Factory, for industrial 
purpose i.e. for setting up a synthetic detergent plant for a lease period of 99 

Chapter IV: Collector, Mumbai Suburban District 
29
years at an annual rent of ` 1,91,909.  The lessee was to utilise the land for the 
purpose for which it was granted within a period of three years from the date 
of taking over possession of land. 
We noticed that the lessee violated the terms and conditions of lease from time 
to time. However, the land has not been resumed till date. The facts of the case 
are as follows:- 
x The lessee has not utilised the land till date.  The Collector issued a 
show cause notice to lessee in December 2004 and issued an order for 
resumption of land in January 2005 after a lapse of 28 years.   
x The lessee filed an appeal before the Additional Commissioner, 
Konkan Division who quashed the resumption order and ordered 
(August 2008) a fresh enquiry. On fresh enquiry the Collector divided 
(February 2009) the land amongst the partners. 
x In April 2010 the lessees (partners) entered into an agreement for the 
development of the said land with D.B. HI-Sky Construction Private 
Limited without the permission of the Government for which 
consideration of ` 53.56 crore was received by the lessees (partners).  
x On 1 July 2011 and 26 July 2011 the Collector  issued show cause 
notices for breach.  As the lessees did not present themselves for the 
hearing in August 2011, the Collector issued notice to the lessees 
intimating that in case the lessees would not attend, action would be 
taken unilaterally in the case. The land has not been resumed till date. 
x Out of ` 67.17 lakh lease rent payable from 1977 to 2012, lease rent of 
` 19.81 lakh was outstanding. 
Thus, through repeated violations the lessees gained financially at the cost of 
the state exchequer due to inaction on the part of the Government to resume 
the land in time. 
4.2.2 The State Government in November 1966 allotted 952.75 sq m of land 
at Vile Parle, Taluka Andheri, Mumbai, for industrial purpose on lease basis to 
M/s Mohamad Ibrahim and Sons for a period of 99 years $VSHU&ROOHFWRU¶V
orders in July 2003, the rent was fixed at ` 71,316.60 per annum.  As per 
scrutiny sheet of the Talathi, the lessee had paid rent till date. 
A perusal of lease records showed that  
x The land was reserved for service industry (commercial purposes) but 
was incorrectly allotted (1966) for industrial purpose. The mistake 
came to the notice of the Department in April 1972 and land was 
resumed by the Government (April 1972).  
x It was again allotted to the same lessee in August 1983 for service 
industry purpose. It was stated that the land continued to be in his 
possession since 1972. The rate of annual lease rent was fixed on the 
basis of market value of the land at the rate of ` 1,150 per sq m against 
which he preferred an appeal before the High Court, which fixed in 
1993 the annual lease rent as ` 71,316.60 with effect from 1983. 
x The lessee did not start any service industry and sought permission for 
redevelopment of the land from the Government in 2003 which was 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
30
granted subject to the condition that service industry would be put up 
by July 2005 i.e. within a period of two years. 
x Thereafter, lessee regularly sought extension in July 2007, which were 
granted by the Government, the latest being up to January 2014. 
The facts indicate that the lessee was allowed repeated extensions for a period 
of 45 years though there were enough grounds to resume the land. 
4.2.3 The State Government in May 1985 sanctioned 15,461.23 sq m of land 
at Kanjur, Mumbai, for industrial purpose on lease basis to M/s Jolly Anil 
India Ltd. for a period of 30 years with an annual lease rent of ` 16,104.  A 
lease agreement was executed in October 1999. 
We noticed that the Collector issued notice to the lessee in February 2011 for 
breach of terms and conditions of the lease agreement based on the inspection 
report of Tahsildar, Kurla wherein it was noticed that only a shed had been 
constructed on the land and the remaining land was lying idle for a period of 
more than 27 years.  Further action taken in the matter was not available on 
record. 
After we pointed out the case, the Collector, stated (October 2012) that as the 
leased land fell under the Coastal Regulatory Zone (CRZ), the lessee could not 
utilise the land. However, action taken to resume the land was not intimated.
4.2.4 The State Government in September 1977 and March 1979 allotted 
4,839.503 sq m land for the construction of secondary school building and
1,146.60 sq m land for play ground at Chembur, Mumbai, on lease basis to 
Janata Seva Mandal (Trust). The lease periods for secondary school building 
and play ground were for a period of 30 years and 15 years and their annual 
lease rents were  ` 10,091.44 and ` 1,028.10, respectively. It was stipulated in 
the lease conditions that the land or interest therein shall not be transferred 
except with the prior sanction of the Government and the land would be used 
within a period of two years from the date of possession. 
The Trust violated the terms and conditions of the lease deed as detailed 
below:
x Construction of school building : The Trust was required to construct 
the school building within a period of two years i.e. by 1980.  
However, the school building had not been constructed till 1989.  In 
view of this, the Collector invited applications from other societies 
which may qualify to take this land on lease through an advertisement 
in the news paper and in response received 24 applications and 
forwarded the proposal/application for reallotment of land to the 
Government in December 1989. The Government rejected the 
applications/proposal and extended the period of construction by two 
more years in favour of the lessee i.e. upto 31 July 1991.  The reason 
for not considering the proposal of the Collector was not on record. 
x Surrender of rights : After a lapse of seven years, the lessee in 1988 
informed the collectorate that due to financial constraints he could not 
construct the building and sought approval for amalgamation of his 
trust with an another society. The Collector did not accept the 
amalgamation on the grounds that the two different entities were 
governed by the different Acts (i.e. Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950 

Chapter IV: Collector, Mumbai Suburban District 
31
and Societies Registration Act, 1860), and had different registration 
numbers.  Despite this, the lessee allowed the society to construct and 
run Primary School, High School and Junior College on the land leased 
to him.  The terms and the conditions under which the amalgamation 
was done, date of construction of the buildings by the Society were not 
found on record.  
x Incorrect regularisation by levy of unearned income  : There is no 
provision in the MLR code for regularisation of the irregularity 
committed by the lessee in transfer of land to the society. However, the 
Collector levied in August 2011 ` 7.80 crore as unearned income 
instead of resuming the land. Aggrieved by this, the lessee filed an 
appeal (February 2012) before the Revenue Minister who granted 
interim stay order in March 2012. The matter is still pending 
(November 2012). 
The above facts reveal that despite gross violation of the lease conditions, the 
lessee was allowed to hold the land. 
In the exit conference the Government accepted the facts.   
4.2.5 Government (July 1978) granted land admeasuring 16,722.54 sq m at 
Bandra, Taluka Andheri, Mumbai to Guru Nanak Quincentenary Memorial 
Hospital Trust for a lease period of 99 years on an annual rent of ` one.  The 
land was to be used for construction of hospital cum medical college.  
We noticed from the records that no medical college was constructed on the 
plot. Instead only a hospital-cum-research centre was functioning on it. For 
breach, notices were issued to the Trust in November 2006 and December 
2006 by the Collectorate. However, no further action for resumption of the 
land allotted for medical college was initiated despite a lapse of 34 years. 
4.2.6  The State Government (November 1966) leased land admeasuring 
984.76 sq m (1,177.77 sq yards) to M/s Gannon Dunkerly and Co. Ltd. at 
Santacruz, Mumbai, for industrial purpose for a period of 99 years.  The lessee 
failed to develop and use the land and the Government resumed the land in 
February 1990. 
However, the Government in May 1992, again leased out the resumed land to 
M/s Gannon Dunkerly and Co Ltd. for a lease period of 30 years for service 
industry purpose. An agreement was executed with the lessee in July 1993. 
The lease condition stipulated that lessee could not transfer the 
land/commercial building or interest therein without prior approval of the 
Government. 
The lease records revealed that: 
x in 1994, the lessee assigned the development rights of the land without 
prior permission of the Government to M/s Riaz Trading Ltd. 
x The Collector permitted the lessee to change the use of land to 
commercial purpose in June 2002 with directions to utilise the land 
within a period of two years from the date of taking possession though 
by this time the land had already been transferred to M/s Riaz Trading 
Ltd. 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
32
x M/s Riaz Trading Ltd. merged with Reliance Properties Management 
(RPM) Services Pvt. Ltd. and in turn had transferred the development 
right to RPM without prior permission of the Government in December 
2009.
x There was nothing on record to indicate that the property had so far 
been developed. 
x Notwithstanding the fact of non-applicability of the GR of November 
1957 to leased lands, the Collector regularised (November 2009) the 
breach by levying unearned income of ` 91.42 lakh. 
Even the unearned income was not levied correctly.  The Department should 
have determined the unearned income based on the rate of land ( ` 19,600) for 
the year 2002 i.e. the year in which the Collector permitted the change of use 
of land and not on the market rate as applicable in 1994. This resulted in the 
short levy of unearned income of ` 53.34 lakh. 
Thus, it would be seen from the above that the rights of the land were 
transferred from one party to another party without any development. 
As there was breach, the land was required to be resumed under Section 53 of 
the MLR Code. 
4.2.7 The Government in January 1983 allotted 810 sq m of land on lease 
(Survey No. 14) for construction of gymnasium and conducting sports and 
cultural activities on lease basis to Shivsrushti Sport and Cultural Centre 
(SSCC) at Chembur, Mumbai. The lease was for a period of 30 years with a 
condition that the land be used within a period of two years from the date of 
grant. 
We noticed that
x The lessee did not construct the sports complex. A proposal for 
resumption of land and also recovery of arrears of lease rent, interest 
and outstanding rent for commercial use aggregating ` 49.57 lakh was 
submitted to the Government in May 2008. 
x Till date no decision has been taken by the Government. In the mean 
time, the lessee entered into a development agreement with a developer 
in May 2010 for a consideration of ` 1.87 crore without the consent of 
the Collector.   
x This was communicated to the Collector in March 2011. The Collector, 
instead of taking action under Section 53 to resume the land, directed 
the lessee in February 2012 to pay outstanding rent and interest of 
` 59.78 lakh to the Government within a period of 15 days. 
The above facts indicate that for the breach, the land was required to be 
resumed under Section 53 of the MLR Code which the Department has failed 
to do. 
4.2.8  The Government in May 2002 allotted 5,572 sq m of land for 
construction of sports complex and play ground on lease basis to Dadasaheb 
Gaikwad Sanskrutik Kendra at Ambivali, Mumbai. The lease was for 15 years.  
The lessee was to construct a sports complex within a period of three years. 

Chapter IV: Collector, Mumbai Suburban District 
33
We noticed that the lessee had not completed construction of the sports 
complex. A notice for breach of condition was issued by the Collector in 
November 2011. 
The Collector stated (October 2012) that action against lessee would be 
intimated to audit.
4.2.9  The Government in November 1941 leased out land admeasuring 
1,882.89 sq m at Juhu, Mumbai to Maharaja of Jodhpur, for the development 
of a garden for a lease period of 50 years.  This leased land was a narrow strip 
of land between the sea and the private land belonging to the Maharaja. The 
lease expired in 1992. 
We noticed that  
x the lessee had sold the leased land along with the adjacent owned land 
to M/s Juhu Beach Resort Pvt. Ltd. in September 1984. 
x Instead of resuming the land under Section 53 of the MLR Code, the 
Collector, in June 2008, regularised the unathorised transaction by 
charging unearned income of ` 9.53 lakh. 
4.2.10  The Government (October 1967) leased land admeasuring 505.85 sq m 
(605 sq. yards), to Shri Madhusudan Shastri (Upadhyaya) at Bandra for a 
mandir and for residential purpose at an annual lease rent of ` 1,210 for a 
lease period of 30 years.  As per the request of the lessee, the Government 
(November 1970) allowed him to surrender 338.63 sq m (405 sq. yards) of the 
land and allowed him to retain the remaining area of 167.22 sq m (200 sq. 
yards). 
We noticed that  
x As the lessee had surrendered 338.63 sq m in November 1970, the land 
in possession should have been only 167.22 sq m. But the property 
card of the incumbent showed a land admeasuring 563.4 sq m (673.8 
sq. yards) in possession as of March 2008. 
x The Tahsildar, Andheri reported to the Collector (August 2009) that 
the legal heirs of the lessee in March 2009 had sold the land to 
M/s Dominant Developers Pvt. Ltd. for a consideration of ` 2.01 crore 
which included the surrendered area. 
x The Department issued a demand notice for ` 1.51 crore as unearned 
income which has not been recovered till date. Since the land had been 
surrendered the entire amount received by the lessee should have been 
demanded. 
The Collector, in July 2011, issued an order to the Tahsildar, Andheri to 
resume the land and take punitive action against the lessee as well as 
purchaser and also instructed that the name of Government be entered in the 
property card.  However, no action has been taken so far (March 2013). 
4.2.11 48 plots situated at Mount Mary, Band Stand, Bandra, Mumbai were 
leased to private parties/co-operative societies from 1901 onwards for 50 years 
by the Council of State. The term was extended for a period of 30 years from 
1 January 1951 to 31 December 1980 and further renewed for a period of 10 
years from 1 January 1981 to 31 December 1990.  There was nothing on 
record to indicate whether the lease was renewed beyond 1990. 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
34
As per the general terms and conditions of lease agreement, the lessees were 
prohibited from transferring or assigning the allotted plot or part thereof 
without the consent in writing of Collector and, the lessee could not at any 
time construct a building covering or projecting more than the area prescribed 
for the said plot of land. 
x In November 2006, the Collector, MSD, Mumbai informed the 
Principal Secretary (Revenue) that in 22 cases (Appendix XI)  the 
lessees transferred the allotted plot without the consent of the Collector 
and covered by way of construction, more area than was allowed as per 
the agreement. 
x In nine cases (Appendix XI) the lessee covered/projected more than an 
area prescribed for the said plot of land. 
After a lapse of 16 months (April 2008) the Collector sought guidance from 
the Government regarding action to be taken in the cases.  
The Government, after a lapse of three years, in August 2011 directed the 
Collector to submit a case-wise proposal giving the nature of breach and penal 
action proposed for regularisation.  
4.2.12 In May 1985 R&FD sanctioned 39,690.85 sq m of land at Kanjur, 
Mumbai, to M/s Jolly Boards Ltd. for industrial purpose on lease basis for a 
period of 30 years at an annual lease rent of ` 3,300.  As per the Development 
Plan of MCGM, the land was reserved for a district commercial centre.  
The Government granted approval (June 2010) to the lessee for change of use 
of land from industrial to partially commercial, industrial and residential 
purpose with a condition that the land was to be developed without third party 
interest and the draft agreement between lessee and developers had to be 
submitted for approval of the Collector to ensure the interest of the 
Government. 
Detailed scrutiny of records revealed that the lessee had entered into a 
development agreement in December 2005 itself (i.e. five years before 
Government granted approval for change of use) without prior permission of 
the Collector for construction of an IT park and for carrying out residential 
and commercial activities wherein the lessee and the Developer agreed to 
share the constructed area in proportion of 47.5 and 52.5 per cent ,
respectively. 
As a result, a third party interest was generated and an IT Park was also 
constructed on 2,480 sq m of land without approval of the Collector. The 
Collector should have resumed the land for breach of condition. 
We brought the matter to the notice of the Collector, MSD, in July 2012; reply 
is awaited (March 2013). 
4.2.13 An individual informed (date not available) the Collector that an area 
of five acre and 23 gunthas at Chembur, Taluka Kurla, Mumbai was granted 
WR KLV IRUHIDWKHUV RQ ³(NVDOL OHDVH´ LQ  IRUagricultural purpose and 
requested Collector, MSD, Mumbai to grant the land on lease for a period of 
99 years. As per record, lease rent was paid by the lessee from 1949 to 1962. 
A proposal was submitted by the Collector in October 2002 and March 2009 
to the Government.  Meanwhile, the applicant also made an application before 

Chapter IV: Collector, Mumbai Suburban District 
35
the Revenue Minister in November 2008.  The Revenue Minister decided 
(June 2009) the case in favour of the applicant and directed the Collector to 
lease the land for agricultural purpose with retrospective effect from February 
1962 by charging lease rent and premium and renew the lease period for 30 
years with effect from January 2009. A lease agreement was executed between 
the Government and the lessee in July 2009. Condition no. (vi) of the 
registered lease agreement envisaged that the lessee would not develop the 
said land without the prior permission of the Collector. Condition (xi) 
stipulated resumption of the land in case of breach of any of the conditions of 
the said agreement. The land measuring 18,722.9 sq m was handed over to the 
lessee in February 2010. 
We noticed that immediately after getting possession of the land in February 
2010, the lessee entered into a development agreement with M/s Supreme 
Constructions and Developers in June 2010 without the permission of the 
Collector. This reflects the intention of the lessee to make a financial gain 
from the land and not utilise it for agricultural purposes. 
A notice for breach of lease condition was issued by the Collector in February 
2011.  The Collector referred (March 2011) the matter to the Government for 
their decision. Despite lapse of one year no action had been taken.  
4.2.14 The Government (May 1970) passed a resolution granting 80 acres of 
land which was already in their possession since 1957 to M/s Jolly Brothers 
Pvt. Ltd. on lease basis for a period of 99 years from 1970 for industrial 
purpose.  As the lessee had sub-leased 14 acres of land out of 80 acres to four 
sister concerns, the Government issued a fresh resolution in February 1984 
regularising the area of 66 acres in favour of the lessee M/s Jolly Brothers Pvt. 
Ltd. for 99 years.  It was also decided to execute separate lease agreements 
with the four sub-lessees for the remaining area of 14 acres for a period of 30 
years.  
We noticed that the Government (June 2010), based on the request made by 
the lessee, accorded sanction for change of use, from industrial to other 
purpose
1 by charging five per cent premium i.e. ` 32.74 crore in respect of 66 
acres of land in favour of M/s Jolly Brothers Pvt. Ltd, even though no such 
provision exists in the MLR Code.  In the same order, permission to raise loan 
for development of land as well as to sell, transfer the constructed residential / 
commercial property was also given.  
It is pertinent to mention here that under similar circumstances in the case of 
M/s Vidhyavihar Containers (M/s Nathani Steel) the Government (2005) had 
ordered the lessee to pay fifty per cent provisional unearned income. The same 
treatment in the instant case, would have fetched a revenue of ` 199.14 crore 
to the Government. 
In the exit conference it was stated by the Department that the land was 
resumed by the Government. However, detailed reply from the 
Department/Government has not been received (March 2013). 
4.2.15 Government in April 1974 allotted 10,206 sq m of land at Kurla-Kirol, 
Mumbai, for industrial purpose on lease basis to M/s Sahani Kirkwood Pvt. 
1 commercial, industrial and residential. 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
36
Ltd. for 90 years and fixed an annual lease rent of ` 15,934 in September 
1974.
We noticed that
x The lessee had not utilised the land upto 2006 i.e., even after a lapse of 
32 years for the purpose for which it was allotted.    
x The lessee in 2006 cited encroachment in the approach road to the plot 
as the reason for non-utilisation.  However, it was noticed from the 
records that encroachment took place in the year 1984-85. 
x Notwithstanding the non-applicability of the GR of November 1957 to 
leased lands, it was noticed in 2006, that the Collector granted 
permission for change of use of land from industrial to residential and 
commercial , by levying unearned income of ` 2.99 crore on land area 
of 8,443.79 sq m, the area as stated in the property card.  The Revenue 
Minister in a suo motu review order issued on 26 October 2007 under 
Section 258 of the MLR Code directed the Collector to rectify the area 
LQ OHVVHH¶V SRVVHVVLRQ DV  VT P LQ WKH SURSHUW\ FDUG LQVWHDG RI
8,443.79 sq m. Thus, the adjoining piece of land was also granted to 
the same lessee.  However, the Collector did not revise the unearned 
income accordingly.  This resulted in short levy of unearned income of 
` 61.89 lakh. 
It is not clear as to how the lessee had found the very land with encroachment 
as fit enough for residential and commercial purpose and not for industrial use. 
It is also not clear as to how this was accepted by the Department and change 
in land use allowed instead of resumption of the land. 
4.2.16 Land admeasuring 42 acres and 15 gunthas (1,71,485.54 sq m) CTS 
No. 5 and 8 of village Malvani, Taluka Borivali, Mumbai was granted on lease 
to an individual in 1936 for a period of 999 years.  As per sanctions of lease, 
half of the land was to be reclaimed within first 10 years and the remaining 
land in another 10 years i.e. by 1956.  Among other conditions, whole or part 
of land was not to be leased till it was reclaimed, lessee could not assign, 
bequeath, alienate the land without prior sanction from the Collector, the 
lessee was to pay concessional lease rent fixed for 30 years and thereafter pay 
rent as per the prevailing rate and in case of breach of conditions the lessor 
could re-enter the land. 
During scrutiny of the individual case file, we noticed that in October 1974, 
the lessee had transferred the land to M/s Baf-Hira Builder Pvt. Ltd. (BBPL) 
for a consideration of ` 2.38 lakh.  The builder also started construction of 
buildings and applied to the Sub Divisional Officer for non-agricultural use.  
On 20 January 1976, the Collector requested the Municipal Commissioner for 
stopping the construction (obviously indicating that the go ahead for the 
construction work and approval was granted by the municipal authority, as a 
result of which work was stopped).  The builder filed a writ petition before the 
High Court against the order of stoppage of work.  However, a compromise 
was reached where by the letter dated 20 January 1976 was withdrawn and the 
court ordered that action in accordance with the MLR code was to be taken.  
Accordingly, a notice was served upon the builder for breach of condition on 
15 April 1981 and proceedings were initiated but were not taken to logical 

Chapter IV: Collector, Mumbai Suburban District 
37
conclusion.  Twenty years later, in September 2001 another notice was served 
upon the builder.  In April 2002, the Collector came to know that the builder 
had transferred 34,990 sq m of the land in his possession to Daryanani 
Construction (DC) for a consideration of ` 44.75 lakh.  The Collector served 
notice on BBPL for recovery of unearned income of ` 35.35 lakh on the 
consideration received by him. This order was challenged by BBPL in the 
Mumbai High Court who granted interim relief to the builder vide its orders of 
December 2002 and April 2003 and dissuaded the Department from taking 
any coercive steps against the petitioner.  Final decision in the matter is 
pending. 
As per the order passed by the Collector in October 2002 the following breach 
of conditions were committed by the original lessee as well as the builder. 
x As per the panchnama and report of the Tahsildar only six acres out of 
the total land given on lease was reclaimed till 1976 and three of which 
was only utilised for agricultural activity, in fact the reclamation of 
land and agricultural activity should have started from 1956 itself.
x The land was illegally transferred by a legal heir of the lessee in 
October 1974 to BBPL without obtaining prior permission from the 
Collector.
x Though the lessee was required to pay lease rent at the prescribed rates 
from 1966, no lease rent is being paid till date (October 2002).
x Out of the total land given on lease, 22 acres were found to be barren 
and in the remaining 20 acres building were constructed, in respect of 
22 acres of barren land, direction was issued to the Tahsildar, Borivali 
to resume the land.
x Utilisation of an agricultural land for non-agricultural purpose was 
contrary to the provisions of Section 63 of the Bombay Tenants and 
Agricultural Land Act (BTAL).
x The names of the builders, BBPL and DC were entered in the 7/12 
extract but the name of DC was deleted as the transfer of land was 
illegal.
From the above facts it is clear that there were several instances of breach of 
conditions right from 1956 itself, however, except for issuing some routine 
notices effective action for resumption of land was not taken by the 
Collectorate allowing the lessee as well as builders to make use of the land as 
per their own will alongwith third party interest created on the property 
resulting in litigation.  The Government remained a spectator to the 
irregularities committed on the leased property   Thus ineffective monitoring 
of land given on lease resulted in interest of the Government not being 
safeguarded.
4.3 Encroachment on land 
4.3.1  The Government (April 1952), granted land admeasuring 1,86,028 
sq m at Juhu, Koliwada, Mumbai to Juhutara Koli Samaj for the purpose of 
drying nets, curing fish, etc. on lease basis for a period of 30 years with an 
annual lease rent of ` one. From April 1982, the Government assigned the 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
38
land to the Koli Samaj for promotion of fishing activities vide memorandum 
of December 1985.  
We noticed that the Tahsildar, Andheri reported to the Collector in August 
2011 that the above leased land was under encroachment. The date from 
which it was under encroachment was not available, however, it was stated by 
the Tahsildar that the land was under encroachment prior to December 2010. It 
was further stated that most of the land continued to be occupied by 
unauthorised garages, shops and hutments. The Collector stated that failure to 
erect a compound wall by the Samaj resulted in the encroachment. However, 
the records revealed that Samaj had lodged several complaints from time to 
time against the encroachers with the district and police authorities.  
Thus, the land granted 60 years back for fulfilling the social objective of 
facilitating the fishing activities of the Koli Samaj remained largely unfulfilled 
due to large scale encroachments, lack of monitoring and apathy towards the 
complaints of the Samaj. 
After this was pointed out, the Collector stated (October 2012) that a proposal 
to lease the land to the Koli Samaj had been forwarded to the Government. 
4.3.2 The Collector (June 1959) granted 418.06 sq m of land at Danda Khar, 
Taluka Andheri, Mumbai, on lease basis for a period of seven years to a lessee 
for being utilised as a Dhobi Ghat by the lessee and by others at an annual 
lease rent of ` 100. Details of the lease agreement were not on record.   
We noticed that on instructions of the Additional Collector (July 1987), the 
Tahsildar, Andheri in August 1993, i.e. five years later, informed that the plot 
had been encroached upon and that slums had sprung up on the land. There 
was nothing on records to indicate that the encroachment had been removed. 
4.4.1  Non-revision of premium for utilisation of TDR 
Transferable Development Rights (TDR) may be made available to the owner 
of a plot of a land which is reserved for a public purpose in the development 
plan in the form of Floor Space Index (FSI) subject to certain conditions. Such 
award will entitle the owner of the land to FSI in the form of a Development 
Rights Certificate (DRC) which he may either use himself or transfer to any 
other person. 
The Government (June 1969) granted land admeasuring 4,515 sq m to 
M/s Maharashtra Theatre Pvt. Ltd. at Bandra, Mumbai on lease basis for 
commercial purpose for a period of 99 years. 
The Collector issued (April 2004) after approval from the R&FD, an order 
permitting the use of TDR by charging provisional premium of ` 42,293 i.e., 
@ 3 per cent of the market value of the land ( ` 327 per sq m) applicable for 
the year 1969, with a condition that the lessee would pay the difference 
between the provisional premium and final premium determined on the basis 
of a fresh policy.  In September 2010, the Government framed the revised 
policy for charging premium at the rate of 2.5 to 5 per cent (depending on the 
utilisation of TDR) to be charged on the market value of land at the time of 
sanction of TDR.  However, we noticed that the Department had not 
determined the final premium to be paid by the lessee in accordance with the 

Chapter IV: Collector, Mumbai Suburban District 
39
revised policy of the Government till date.  As per the Ready Reckoner for the 
year 2004, the rate of land was ` 21,500 per sq m and the final premium works 
out to ` 48.53 lakh.  Thus, premium amounting to ` 48.11 lakh remained to be 
recovered from the lessee.  
After we pointed out the case, the Collector, MSD, Mumbai stated that notice 
would be issued to the lessee for the recovery of the premium of ` 48.11 lakh. 
The Government may direct the Department to review cases wherein 
provisional premium had been levied and take necessary action to levy 
final premium and recover the difference. 
In the exit conference the Additional Chief Secretary accepted the 
recommendation. 
4.4.2 Short levy of premium (unearned income) 
(i)  One Shri P.Y. Pawar informed the Collector in 1991 that land admeasuring 
40,468.56 sq m (ten acres) at Malvani, Taluka Borivali was granted to his 
forefathers for a period of 999 years on lease for agricultural purpose.  In 
support of his claim he produced a photocopy of letter dated 19 December 
1936 from the Pranth Officer (currently Sub Divisional Officer) and requested 
grant of development permission on the said land.  The contention of the 
individual was rejected by the Collector. The individual took up the matter 
before the Revenue Minister in August 1992 who accepted the contention of 
the individual in February 1993.  Accordingly, the Collector granted 
development permission to the lessee in February 2004. 
An examination of the records revealed as under: 
x A lease agreement was executed between the lessee and the Collector 
in June 2004 and the Collector levied an unearned income of ` 7.31
crore instead of ` 8.09 crore for change of use of land. The unearned 
income was determined short due to allowing deductions on account of 
expenses towards the cost of land yet to be developed and security cost 
for protecting the land. These deductions from the market value of land 
were not permissible as per the GR of September 1983. 
After we pointed out the case the Collector, MSD, Mumbai stated (October 
2012) that the computation was correct. The contention of the Collector is not 
acceptable as it is not as per the GR of September 1983 as mentioned above. 
(ii)  The lessee immediately on receipt of permission in February 2004 from 
the Collector for development of the land, disclosed on 8 April 2004 that an 
additional area of 6,070.28 sq m (one acre 20 gunthas) which was in his 
possession may also be granted on lease basis on the same terms and 
conditions on which the earlier land had been given. The Collector, in May 
2006, transferred the additional land to the lessee by recovering an unearned 
income of ` 1.35 crore.  
x The land claimed by the lessee to be in his posssission was not in his 
property card and a separate CTS
2 number was generated on the orders 
of Collector in May 2006. Therefore, there is a reason to believe that 
2   Chain and Trangulation Survey. 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
40
the lessee was in unauthorised possession of this land and had not 
brought the fact of possession of this land to the notice of the Collector 
earlier. Under these circumstances the land should been taken back by 
the Government under the MLR code.  
x The unearned income recoverable from the lessee was ` 2.92 crore as 
per the latest Ready Reckoner rate for 2005. This resulted in short levy 
of unearned income of ` 1.57 crore. The value was wrongly computed 
by incorrect application of rates of 1998 instead of 2005. 
The reply from the Department is awaited (March 2013).
(iii) The lessee mentioned above entered into an agreement in June 2004 
with M/s Ami Corporation for development of land.  The developer requested 
the Collector for permission to use TDR of 22,445.5 sq m, 3,784.34 sq m and 
3,056.60 sq m in November 2004, June 2005 and June 2006 respectively.  
Permission was granted by the Collector in November 2004, July 2005 and 
June 2006 by charging premium of ` 15.71 lakh, ` 2.65 lakh and ` 2.14 lakh 
respectively as per the market value of the land of 1998 instead of the market 
value as prevailing in 2004, 2005 and 2006. The short levy of premium works 
out to ` 31.87 lakh as shown in the following table: 
Year Quantum 
of TDR 
in sq m 
Market 
rate/sq m 
as per 
R.R.
`
Market  
rate/sq m 
for the 
year 1998 
`
Amount of 
premium to 
be charged  
(Col.2 x 3) 
(` in lakh) 
Amount of 
premium 
charged as per 
rate of 1998  
(Col. 2 x 4) 
(` in lakh) 
Short 
amount of 
premium 
charged 
(Col. 5-6) 
(` in lakh) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
2004 22,445.10 7,000 2,800 39.28 15.71 23.57 
2005 3,784.38 7,650 2,800 7.24 2.65 4.59 
2006 3,056.60 7,6503 2,800 5.85 2.14 3.71 
Total 52.37 20.50 31.87 
After we pointed out the case, the Collector, MSD, Mumbai stated (October 
2012) that the Revenue Minister in his order dated November 2003 had 
directed that the market value of 1998 be taken for calculation and the same 
had, therefore, been adopted. However, this is not correct as the market values 
as prevailing in 2004-06 should have been adopted. 
In the exit conference the Department stated that a reply would be furnished 
after examining the case in detail. 
4.4.3 Recovery of licence fee for functions organised in Gymkhana-
regarding 
The Government granted permission to various Gymkhanas & Sports 
Institutions to use halls and open spaces for marriage, reception functions, 
exhibition, etc., on payment of the applicable licence fee.  Prior permission of 
the Collector was required to be taken in organisation of every such non-sports 
activity. Licence fee was required to be charged at double the rate if any such 
3   Rate of 2005. 

Chapter IV: Collector, Mumbai Suburban District 
41
non-sports activity was conducted without the prior permission of the 
Collector.
The Government (August 1975) allotted land admeasuring 12,180.7 sq m of 
land at village Chembur, Taluka Kurla, Mumbai, on lease basis to Chembur 
Gymkhana for 30 years and fixed an annual lease rent of ` 201 and revised it 
in February 2005 to ` 2,98,501.
During test check of the records, we noticed that the Chembur Gymkhana had 
been allowing the use of their grounds for marriage/social functions for rent 
from 1994 onwards, without the permission of the Collector. 
The residents living nearby filed a petition against the sound pollution created 
at the Gymkhana in the High Court. In response to the petition, the High Court 
directed (January 1999) Chembur Gymkhana that the club could not hold 
more than 36 functions in a year and not more than six functions in a month 
during the marriage season. 
A notice was issued by the Collector in December 2007 for not taking prior 
permission of the Collector for having held these functions and non-payment 
of licence fee in advance.  However, no licence fee has been recovered till date 
(October 2012). 
No mechanism was found available to monitor these activities in respect of the 
gymkhanas and clubs as no records/registers were being maintained by the 
Department to monitor such social functions organised by the lessee and 
details of the amount paid in advance.  
After we pointed out the case, the Collector replied that the information 
regarding the number of such activities conducted by the lessee had been 
sought for and on receipt of the same, further action would be taken. 
4.4.4 Non-fixation of lease rent 
The Government in September 1999 allotted a land admeasuring 1,720 sq m at 
Amboli, Taluka Andheri, Mumbai to Mukti Foundation on a provisional lease 
rent of ` 11,296.27 per annum for a lease period of 30 years. The leased 
property was to be used for the purpose of construction of a cultural centre.  
The final lease rent was to be fixed based on the valuation by the Town 
Planning and Valuation Department. 
During scrutiny of records, we noticed that the lessee was paying lease rent at 
provisional rate till date as the Department had not fixed the final lease rent till 
date.
After we brought the facts to the notice of the Department, the Collector, 
MSD, Mumbai stated (October 2012) that the final rent would be fixed after 
receipt of the same from the Town Planning and Valuation Department.  The 
fact remains that no action has been taken for fixing the final lease rent for the 
last 13 years. 

42
CHAPTER V  
COLLECTOR, PUNE 
This chapter contains the results of audit of leased land in Pune district.  There 
were 214 lease cases out of which 55 cases were selected for detailed scrutiny. 
Results of analysis are mentioned below:  
Sr. No. Category No. of 
observations  
1 Incorrect grant of lease 2
2 Breach of lease conditions leading to change in purpose, 
transfer of leasehold rights 
36 
3 Non-renewal of expired leases 19 
4 Irregular sale/transfer of lease hold rights  4
Total 61 
The observations are discussed in the following paragraphs: 
5.1 Grant of land on lease without fulfillment of mandatory 
conditions for education purpose 
5.1.1 Government Resolution issued in February 1983 stipulated that an 
education institution applying for the grant of land should be recognised by the 
Education Department.  Further, R&FD should satisfy itself that 25 per cent of 
the capital expenditure required for putting up the building is immediately 
available with the applicant and remaining 75 per cent is likely to be available 
within a period of two years.  As per lease agreement the lessee was to 
complete the construction of building within a period of two years. 
The Government (August 2009) allotted, land admeasuring 47,300 sq m at 
mauza Jambe, Taluka Mulshi, Pune to Maharashtra Mahila Udyam Trust, 
Pune on occupancy basis for a primary school, secondary school, hostel and 
college building and 32,000 sq m of land for playground on lease of ` one per 
annum for a period of 30 years.  
We noticed that: 
x the estimated capital expenditure of the educational project was 
` 13.44 crore.  Thus the lessee was required to have ` 3.36 crore i.e. 25 
per cent of capital expenditure but as per the records, it was noticed 
that the lessee, at the time of application, had ` 83.87 lakh only.  This 
indicated that the Trust did not fulfill the mandatory condition at the 
time of allotment and was not entitled to get land on lease.  However, 
the land was granted on lease. 
x There was nothing on record to show that the lessee had completed the 
construction.  The Collector also confirmed (August 2012) that the 
land had not been utilised so far.  However, no action was taken for 
resumption of the land. 
5.1.2 The Government in July 1990 allotted land admeasuring 10,000 sq m 
at mauza Gunvadi, Taluka Baramati, Pune to Vidya Pratishthan, Baramati on 

Chapter V: Collector, Pune 
43
occupancy basis for a college building and 10,000 sq m for a playground on 
lease basis with a lease rent of ` one per annum for a period of 15 years.  The 
lease period expired in 2005. 
x We noticed from the letter written by the Secretary of the institution to 
the Collector (February 2009) that no lease agreement had been 
executed by the Collector with the applicant institution. 
x We also noticed that the institution had received recognition from the 
Education Department in 2004 for running a primary school and not 
for a college for which the land was allotted.  The institution had also 
admitted (February 2009) that the required fund for construction of 
building was not available even at the time of allotment of the land.  
Thus, the institute did not fulfil the mandatory condition and was not 
entitled to get the land on lease.  However, it was incorrectly allotted 
the same. 
In reply, the Collector stated (August 2012) that necessary action would be 
taken for completing the lease agreement and added that notice would be 
issued to the institution.  However, no reasons were furnished for allotment of 
land without fulfilling the mandatory conditions.  Thus, the fact remained that 
the allotment of land was irregular.   
5.2 Non-execution of lease agreement 
5.2.1  As per the Government memorandum (February 1965) and the 
&ROOHFWRU¶V RUGHU(September 1965), land admeasuring 19,117.8 sq m at 
Survey No. 165/A, (Plot No. 139 to 149) at Hadapsar, Pune was granted to 
Rayat Shikshan Sanstha for being used as a playground of Sadhna Vidyalaya 
on lease basis at the annual rent of ` one. 
We noticed that no lease agreement had been executed by the Collector with 
the lessee.  Besides, the period of lease was not mentioned in the Government 
Memorandum.  The land continued to be in possession of the lessee for 47 
years. 
In reply, the Collector stated (August 2012) that lease agreement would be 
executed and the matter regarding fixation of the period of lease would be 
referred to the Government for orders.  Thus, it was noticed that the land 
continued to be in possession of the lessee for 47 years without a lease 
agreement. 
5.2.2 $V SHU WKH &ROOHFWRU¶V RUGHUs of February 1983, land admeasuring 
5,401 sq m of survey no. 165/A (Plot No.103 to 109 and 130 to 134) at 
Hadapsar, Pune, was granted to Rayat Shikshan Sanstha, Satara for being 
utilised as a playground to be attached to its Sadhna Girls Vidyalaya at the 
annual lease rent of ` 518.60 per annum for a period of 15 years. 
We noticed that though the period of lease had expired in 1998 no action had 
been taken either to renew the lease period or resume the land.  There was 
nothing on record to indicate that a lease agreement had been executed even at 
the time of allotment of this land on lease in 1983. 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
44
5.3 Non-utilisation of land for the purpose of education 
5.3.1 The Government allotted (October 1996) land admeasuring 4,000 sq m 
on occupancy basis for the construction of a secondary school building within 
two years and 4,000 sq m of land on lease basis for being utilised as a 
playground at an annual lease rent of ` one for a period of 15 years to 
Chatrapati Shikshan Sanstha. 
We noticed that the lessee institution has not constructed the school building 
till date (September 2012).  The Collectorate issued a show cause notice in 
April 2004. 
Further, the lease period for the playground had also expired in December 
2011.  There was nothing on record to indicate that the lessee has opted for 
renewal of the lease period.  No action was taken to resume the land. 
After we pointed out the case, the Collector stated (August 2012) that the 
proposal regarding regularisation of breach of conditions and extension of 
lease period would be submitted to the Government for directives. 
The fact remained that the lessee should have been evicted and the land 
resumed as provided for under Section 53 of the MLR Code. 
5.3.2  The Government in March 2005 allotted land admeasuring 30,000 sq 
m at Mauza Kunenama, Taluka Baramati, Pune to Kasegaon Shikshan 
Sanstha, Sangli on occupancy basis for construction of a primary school 
building and 36,200 sq m for being used as a playground on lease basis with a 
lease rent of ` one per annum for a period of 15 years.  The lessee was 
required to complete the construction of the building within a period of two 
years. 
We noticed that
x The institution had not commenced the construction of the school 
building though more than six years had elapsed. 
x The Collectorate stated (April 2012), that the demarcation of the land 
had not been done by the Land Record Office, Maval till May 2012 
which had resulted in non-utilisation of the land for more than seven 
years. 
After we pointed the case, the Collectorate stated that on the basis of request 
from the institution (May 2012), a proposal for extension of time was sent to 
the Divisional Commissioner, Pune in July 2012 for onward submission to the 
Government.  However, the fact remained that the land remained unutilised 
for the purpose for which it was granted. 
5.3.3 The Government in October 1986 allotted  land admeasuring 20,242 sq 
m at mauza Karmoli, Taluka Mulshi, Pune to Pune Zilla Sikshan Mandal, 
Pune, on occupancy basis for construction of Arts and Commerce college 
building and 20,241 sq m for being used as a playground on lease of ` one per 
annum for a period of 15 years. 
A perusal of lease records revealed the following: 
x No lease agreement had been executed for the playground despite a 
lapse of 26 years. 

Chapter V: Collector, Pune 
45
x The lease period for the playground has expired in 2001, however, no 
information was available on records to show that the period of lease 
had been renewed. 
x On receipt of a notice (October 2011) from the Collector for breach of 
condition, the lessee stated (November 2011) that the access to the 
proposed college for the students was difficult due to the location of 
the land.  However, it was found that the lessee had sought permission 
for opening of a Vocational Training Centre instead.  Further, action 
taken by the Collector, in this regard, was not available on record. 
5.3.4 The Collector in June 2009 allotted land admeasuring 1,000 sq m at 
mauza Khadki, Taluka Daund, Pune to Pune Zilla Sikshan Mandal, Pune, on 
occupancy basis for construction of school building and 14,000 sq m for the 
purpose of a playground on lease rent of ` one per annum for a period of 15 
years.  A V SHU WKH WHUPV DQG FRQGLWLRQV RI WKH &ROOHFWRU¶V RUGHU D OHDVH
agreement was to be executed within three months of an undertaking to be 
given by the lessee for acceptance of the terms and condition.  Further, though 
the conditions specified that land would be resumed by the Government for 
EUHDFKRIFRQGLWLRQQRPHQWLRQZDVPDGHLQWKH&ROOHFWRU¶VRUGHUUHJDUGLQJ
the time period within which the construction was to be completed and the 
stipulated activity started. 
We noticed that the land was lying idle even though more than three years had 
elapsed.  Further, no lease agreement had been executed till date. 
As no time frame was stipulated for commencing the school activities the 
Government was not in a position to resume the land.  Thus, the codal 
provisions for resumption of land in case of a breach were rendered 
ineffective. 
5.3.5 Information furnished by the Department revealed that in the following 
three cases also, land given for educational purpose was lying unutilised for 
periods ranging from nine to 22 years but had not been resumed by the 
Government for breach of condition. 
Sr.
No. 
Name of lessee Sanction
date/
purpose 
Area in sq m Currency of 
lease  
Present
status of 
land School
(Occupa-
ncy rights 
basis) 
Playground 
(Lease basis) 
1 Nageshwar 
Vidhyalaya, Nazare, 
Taluka Purandar 
December 
2003 
----------- 
School 
310.73 860.26  
for 15 years 
Not expired Vacant for 
last 9 years 
2 Bhartiya 
Vidhyapeeth 
Velu, Taluka Bhor 
August 
1990 
----------- 
School 
12,000.00 8,000 for 15 
years 
Expired in 
December 
2005 
Vacant for 
last 22 years 
3 Dada Jadhavrao 
Trust 
November 
2003 
----------- 
School 
2,000.00 6,000 for 15 
years 
Not expired Vacant for 
last 9 years 
Total 14,310.73 14,860.26 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
46
In none of the above cases verified by Audit there was anything on record to 
indicate fulfillment of the conditions provided in Government Resolution of 
February 1983 (like registration and recognition by Education Department, 
technical qualifications, financial strength and project report of the 
institutions) that were necessary for grant of land for education purposes, for 
which it was granted. 
5.4 Utilisation of land for other than the allotted purpose 
5.4.1 The Government (August 1974)  allotted a piece of land admeasuring 
36,700 sq m (9 acre and 7 gunthas) at Talegaon Dabhade, Taluka Maval, Pune 
to Balmohan Vidya Mandir for construction of a swimming pool and a 
stadium on lease basis for a initial period of 15 years at an annual rent of 
` one. 
On scrutiny of the case, we noticed from the panchnama report (July 2012) of 
Talathi, Maval that the land allotted in 1974 was being utilised as football and 
parade ground and that no swimming pool and stadium had been constructed 
even after a lapse of 38 years from the date of allotment.  It was interesting to 
note that though there was breach of condition, the Collector had renewed the 
lease period twice, once in 1989 and then in 2004, instead of resuming the 
land.
After we pointed out the case, the Collector, Pune stated that action would be 
taken on receipt of report from Tahsildar, Maval. 
5.4.2 As per the property card, land admeasuring 4.99 ha (survey no. 1428) 
was granted to Shivaji Shikshan Prasarak Mandal, Bawada, Taluka-Indapur, 
3XQH E\ &ROOHFWRU¶V RUGHU RI 0D\  IRU WKH SXUSRVH RI FRQVWUXFWLRQ RI
school building, hostel and playground.  Part of the land was on occupancy 
right and part was on lease at the rate of ` one. 
We noticed from the panchnama report (December 2011) of the Circle 
Officer, Bawada that, in addition to the school activity, the Mandal had 
constructed 15 shops on the said property and given these shops on rent, from 
2002 onwards, without the consent of the Collector.  This resulted in breach of 
condition under which the land was leased to the institution.  Though, the 
breach had occurred 10 years ago, action against the lessee had not been 
initiated as envisaged under Section 53 of the MLR Code. 
In reply, the Collector stated (August 2012) that notice was being issued to the 
institution with a view to take penal action for the breach. 
5.5 Unauthorised transfer of flats/plots  
In respect of Co-operative Housing Societies which are registered under the 
Bombay Co-operative Societies Act, 1925/ Maharashtra Co-operative 
Societies Act, 1960 plots/lands are given on lease subject to fulfillment of 
certain terms and conditions.  As per condition (i)(f) of the order of Collector, 
the societies shall not transfer by way of sale, mortgage or lease the said land 
and/or building thereon to any person other than the members of the Lessee 
Society without obtaining the previous consent in writing of the Collector or 
such other Officer as may be authorised by him in this behalf. 

Chapter V: Collector, Pune 
47
5.5.1 The Collector  (November 1966) allotted 15 plots at village Parvati, 
Taluka Pune City to Shri Sahakari Co-operative Housing Society Ltd. on lease 
for 99 years. 
On scrutiny of records, we noticed from the panchnama report (August 2012) 
of Circle Officer, Pune City that one member
1 had transferred his plot (No. 
236) along with the constructed premises to an individual 2 without the prior 
approval of the Collector.  No information was available on record as to when 
the plot was transferred. 
After we pointed out the case, the Collector stated (September 2012) that 
detailed inquiry would be made from Tahsildar, Pune City regarding transfer 
of plot and action taken accordingly. 
5.5.2 The Collector in May 1969 allotted 21 plots at village Parvati Taluka 
Pune City to Shri Abhinav Co-operative Housing Society Ltd. on lease for 99 
years. 
Circle Officer, Pune had informed the Collectorate that two plots were 
transferred by two member to two individuals without the prior approval of the 
Collector.  No information was available on record as to when the plots were 
transferred.  
After we pointed out the case, the Collector stated (September 2012) that 
detailed inquiry would be made from Tahsildar, Pune City regarding transfer 
of plot and action taken accordingly. 
5.6 Other irregularities 
5.6.1 Based on the R&FD Memorandum (February 1969), the Collector, 
Pune issued an order (April 1969) granting government land admeasuring 20 
acres at Katraj-Dhankawadi, Taluka Haveli to Maharashtra Rajya Milk 
Sahakari Sangh Ltd., Pune on lease basis subject to fulfilment of certain terms 
and conditions for an initial period of 10 years for dairy farm at the annual 
lease rent of ` 3,500 from the date of taking over possession of land.  The said 
order stipulated that after expiry of the lease period, if the Sangh is not in a 
position to purchase the land, full rent at 5 per cent of existing market value is 
to be recovered.  As per the sanction order, transfer of leasehold rights was not 
allowed. 
However, we noticed that the lessee had transferred all assets and liabilities as 
of June 1972 itself to Pune District Co-operative Milk Federation Ltd. without 
the approval of the Government, resulting in breach of condition. 
The lessee should have been evicted and the land resumed as provided for 
under Section 53 of the MLR Code. 
5.6.2  A land admeasuring 1,00,000 sq m at mauja Dehu, Tahsil Haveli, Pune 
was allotted to Maharashtra Gandhi Smarak Nidhi, Kothrud, Pune in 1993 for 
plantation purpose on lease basis at an annual lease rent of `  one for a period 
of 30 years.  The lessee had been prohibited from constructing huts on the 
plot.
                                                           
1 Shri Arun Shankar Risbud. 
2 Shri Shirish Sable. 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
48
During test check of the lease records, we noticed that the lessee had not 
utilised the land for plantation purpose for the past 19 years resulting not only 
in breach of condition of lease but also in encroachment by 288 slum dwellers. 
The Circle Officer, Chinchwad, Pune brought the fact about the encroachment 
of the land to the notice of Tahsildar, Haveli, Pune in November 2011 but no 
action was taken by the Tahsildar to remove the encroachment nor was the 
issue brought to the notice of the Collector. 
The fact remained that the land should have been resumed as provided for 
under Section 53 of the MLR Code. 
5.6.3  As per the Government memorandum (June 2005) land admeasuring 
9,500 sq m at Survey No. 165/A, at Hadapsar, Pune was granted to Rayat 
Shikshan Sanstha for being used as a playground attached to College and I.T.I 
on lease basis for a period of 15 years.  The lease rent was to be charged as per 
the GR issued in May 1984. 
During test check of lease records, we noticed that the lease rent was not fixed 
despite a lapse of more than six years. 
The Collector accepted (August 2012) the observation and determined the 
total lease rent of ` 21,664 for the periods 2006 to 2012 and stated that same 
would be recovered. 
5.6.4    Based on the Government letter of April 2007, the Collector, Pune 
sanctioned (November 2009) land admeasuring 12.5 acre at Lonikand, Taluka 
Haveli, Pune to Smt. Swati Vinayak Nimhan on lease for a period of 10 years, 
for mining purpose.  The copy of the lease agreement was not available on 
record.  The lease rent was to be determined annually.  The consent for 
manufacture of crushed stone was granted by the Maharashtra Pollution 
Control Board in October 2007 for a period of five years. 
Audit scrutiny of records revealed that 
x There was nothing on record to ascertain whether the land is being 
utilised for carrying out mining activity. 
x The sanction order of the Collector was silent about the time frame 
within which the mining activity ought to have commenced. 
x There was nothing on record to indicate that the lease rent after  
2008-09 had been recovered. 
After we pointed out (September 2012), the Collectorate confirmed that land 
was not being used for mining purposes and stated that a panchnama in this 
case was done (October 2012) by the Talathi.  Information on further action 
taken in this regard had not been received (March 2013). 
5.6.5 Based on the Government memorandum (July 1984), the Collector 
allotted (July 1984) land admeasuring 1,011.7 sq m at Yerawada, Pune to an 
individual on provisional annual lease rent of ` 18,635 for a lease period of 30 
years on the conditions that differential amount, after final rent is fixed would 
be paid by him along with interest.  The land was to be used for construction 
of gas godown and showroom.  An undertaking to this effect was also required 
to be furnished by the lessee before taking possession of the land. 

Chapter V: Collector, Pune 
49
We noticed that the lessee was paying lease rent at the provisional rate till date 
as the Government had not fixed the final lease rent.  Failure to initiate 
appropriate action by the Collector led to inordinate delay in fixing the final 
lease rent and interest though 28 years had elapsed since allotment of land.  
Further, neither a lease agreement had been executed nor was an undertaking 
obtained from the lessee for fulfillment of purpose for which the land had been 
allotted. 
It is suggested that all such cases be reviewed and lease rent fixed.  
5.6.6 Based on Government Memorandum (September 1981), the Collector, 
Pune allotted (June 1982) land admeasuring 900 sq m for a school building 
(Shri Sant Muktabai Vidyalaya) and 600 sq m for a building a hostel on 
occupancy rights and 34,875 sq m of land on lease basis for 15 years for the 
purpose of a playground at an annual rent of ` one to Rayat Shikshan Sanstha, 
Shelgaon, Taluka Indapur, Pune.  Further, 24 acres of land was also allotted on 
eksali (one year) basis on charging of D³XVXDOUHQW´IRUFXOWLYDWLRQSXUSRVH
We noticed from the panchnama report (date not mentioned in the Report) of 
the Talathi and 7/12 extract
3  that the institution had not utilised the land for 
which the land had been allotted.  Though the lease for the playground had 
expired in June 1997, neither had the lease been renewed nor had the land 
been resumed by the Collector.  We also noticed that in respect of the land 
leased out for cultivation, though the lease had expired in June 1983, the 
³XVXDOUHQW´had neither been determined nor recovered.  No information was 
available on record to confirm that the Department had initiated any action for 
breach of conditions though 30 years had elapsed since allotment of land. 
In reply, the Collector stated (August 2012) that notice was being issued to the 
lessee for breach of condition.  The fact remained that no action had been 
taken to resume the land even though condition for allotment of land had not 
been fulfilled. 
                                                           
3 Record indicating the occupant of the land and the purpose for which the land is utilised. 

50
CHAPTER VI 
MUMBAI METROPOLITAN REGION DEVELOPMENT 
AUTHORITY
Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority (MMRDA) was 
established in January 1975 by the Government of Maharashtra under the 
MMRDA Act, 1974, as an apex body for planning and co-ordination of 
development activities in the Mumbai Metropolitan Region.  The MMRDA 
functions under the administrative control of the Urban Development 
Department (UDD), Government of Maharashtra. 
There are 152 cases of Government land admeasuring 20,15,906.98 sq m 
given on lease by MMRDA in Mumbai and Thane Districts.  Of these, 53 
cases in Mumbai (recreation-7, commercial-33, social-8, residential-5) 
admeasuring 6,56,725.55 sq m were selected for detailed scrutiny. 
6.1 Acts and Rules
MMRDA (Disposal of Land) Regulations, 1977, subsequently amended in 
1984 and 1997 stipulates that land can be leased out in consideration of a 
premium or rent or both for a term not exceeding 80 years. The land can be 
disposed of by public auction, public advertisements, inviting/ accepting offers 
from the Government, Local Authority or Public Sector Undertakings, public 
charitable trusts for educational or medical purposes, inviting applications 
through public advertisements on the basis of pre-determined premium and/or 
other considerations and accepting these applications by drawing lots and in 
FDVH RI LQDGHTXDWH DSSOLFDWLRQV RQ µILUVW FRPH ILUVW VHUYH¶ EDVLV )RU
development of land in Bandra- .XUOD µ7KH %DQGUD .XUOD 1RWLILHG $UHD
'HYHORSPHQW &RQWURO 5HJXODWLRQV ¶ DQG IRU GHYHORSPHnt of land in 
:DGDOD 7UXFN 7HUPLQDO µ'HYHORSPHQW &RQWURO 5HJXODWLRQV ¶ ZHUH
framed. 
6.2 Organisational set up 
MMRDA is constituted of 17 members headed by the Minister, UDD, 
Government of Maharashtra.  All decisions on the land allocation made by the 
Committee are implemented by the Metropolitan Commissioner aided by the 
Dy. Metropolitan Commissioner (Land/Estates). 
6.3 System of allotment 
/DQGDGPHDVXULQJVTPLQµ(¶µ*¶DQGµ+¶%ORFNRI%DQGUD.XUOD
Complex (BKC) was allotted to MMRDA by the Government between 
January 1979 and February 1985.  The occupancy price payable by MMRDA 
to the Government for the gross area of land in undeveloped and unreclaimed 
condition was fixed at ` SHUVTPIRUµ(¶%ORFNDQG` SHUVTPIRUµ*¶
Block.  Government (October 2005) handed over an additional 6,55,100 sq m 
of land at Wadala Truck Terminal to MMRDA for which ground rent at a 
nominal rate of ` one was to be paid by MMRDA to the Government. 
MMRDA gives land on lease by way of inviting tenders through public 
advertisements. The tender is finalised in favour of the highest bidder. 

Chapter VI : Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority 
51
MMRDA executes the Lease Deed and the possession of land is delivered to 
the lessee after the receipt of premium in full.  Clause 2(d) of the lease deed 
executed between MMRDA and the lessees, states that the lessee shall 
commence construction on the plot within three months from the receipt of 
approval for plans and specifications and complete it for occupation within 
four years from the date of lease.  Further Clause 2(e) (i) of the lease deed and 
Regulation 11
1 of MMRDA (Disposal of Land) Regulations, 1977 state that if 
the lessee does not adhere to the time limit as mentioned in clause 2(d) for 
reasons beyond control, the Metropolitan Commissioner (MC) may, on  
payment of additional premium, at the following rates, by the lessee, permit 
extension of such time: 
Up to 1 year   25 per cent of the premium 
Between 1 and 2 years 35 per cent of the premium 
Between 2 and 3 years 40 per cent of the premium 
Clause 2(e)(ii) of the lease deed provides that if the MC refuses to permit such 
extension of time or shall find the lessee of having committed breach of any 
condition or covenant during the time limit mentioned in clause 2(d), he may 
forfeit and determine the lease; provided that in the event of such 
determination of lease, 25 per cent of the premium paid by the lessee to the 
Authority shall stand forfeited and the remaining 75 per cent of such premium 
shall be refunded; provided further that the MC shall have given to the lessee a 
notice in writing of intention to do so and of the specific breach of the 
covenant or condition in respect of which forfeiture is intended and default 
shall have been made by the lessee in remedying such breach within three 
months from the serving of notice. 
The floor space index (FSI) applicable in MMRDA is 4 as compared to 1, 1.33 
and 2.5 applicable to Government, Municipal and MHADA lands respectively 
in Greater Mumbai. 
6.4 Non-recovery of lease premium, lease rent, etc.  
6.4.1 MMRDA (Disposal of Land) Regulations 1977 does not provide any 
specific provision for monitoring the progress of work on the allotted plots. 
Clause 3(g) of the lease deed provides that the lessee has to build according to 
Development Control Regulations and Building Regulations or Municipal 
Regulations in force from time to time and to observe and confirm that the 
building or erection thereof or addition thereto is completed as per rules and 
regulations. If the lessee
2 does not adhere to the prescribed time limit, 
extension of time can be granted subject to the payment of additional premium 
at the rate of 10 per cent of the lease premium upto three years, thereafter the 
rate of  additional premium is 15 per cent of lease premium. 
We found in six cases that the construction was not completed within the 
prescribed period of four years. No system was put in place by way of returns 
and inspections to ascertain the status of construction.  There was nothing on 
                                                           
1 Amended in March 1997. 
2 Semi Government and public and private sector organizations. 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease
52
record to indicate that the lessees had sought extension for construction. The 
lessees were liable to pay additional premium aggregating to ` 272.36 crore @
10 per cent as mentioned in the following table:
(` in crore)
Sr. 
No.
Name of the 
lessee
Purpose Date of 
lease deed
Probable 
date of 
completion
Lease 
premium 
charged 
10 per cent
addl. lease 
premium
to be 
recovered 
1 Naman BKC 
Co-op. Hsg. 
Socy. Ltd.
Residential 4-12-2007 3-12-2011 20.39 2.04
2 Starlight 
Systems Pvt. 
Ltd.
Residential 27-7-2006 26-7-2010 136.90 13.69
3 Reliance Inds. 
Ltd.
Commercial 1-9-2006 31-8-2010 1,104.00 110.40
4 Shree Naman 
Developers
Commercial 9-6-2006 8-6-2010 204.60 20.46
5 Jet Airways 
(India) Ltd.
Commercial 17-8-2006 16-8-2010 339.73 33.97
6 Reliance Inds. 
Ltd.
Commercial 15-7-2008 14-7-2012 918.06 91.80
Total 2,723.68 272.36
The above facts were communicated to the Government in  November 2012.
In the exit conference the department stated that the amount would be 
recovered at the time of issue of occupancy certificate.  However, the reasons 
for not demanding it at the time when the time period for completion as 
provided in the Act was over in such cases were not provided.
It is recommended that the Government advise MMRDA to put in place a 
system of periodical returns and regular inspections to ascertain status of 
construction and levy premium when grant of time extension was due to 
be sought.
6.4.2 MMRDA allotted a plot admeasuring 3,637.04 sq m in G Block of 
BKC to M/s. Enam Financial Consultants Pvt. Ltd. with maximum permissible 
built-up area (BUA) of 7,700 sq m and executed (August 2006) lease deed for 
development of Commercial office building for a period of 80 years on 
payment of lease premium of ` 87.98 crore.
Government increased (May 2008) the FSI for commercial use from 2 to 4.  
The lessee requested on 5 November 2009, 26 August 2010 and 11 March
2011 for additional BUA of 2000, 515 and 150 sq m to be allotted to lessee.
MMRDA allotted additional BUA of 2,665 sq m for a premium of ` 19.65 
crore, ` 5.55 crore and ` 2.10 crore to the lessee.
The premium was payable in five equal installments of 20 per cent with
simple interest @ 10 per cent per annum and delay in payment of instalment 
attracted penal interest at the Prime Lending Rate (PLR) decided by Reserve 

Chapter VI : Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority 
53
Bank of India. The lessee paid the first installment on 31 March 2010 but did 
not pay the subsequent instalments due on 31 March 2011 and 31 March 2012.  
For delayed payment of the instalments, the lessee was required to pay interest 
at the PLR.  However, MMRDA neither levied the interest of ` 1.13 crore 
(payable upto October 2012) nor demanded the premium amount of ` 8.26 
crore.  This resulted in non-realisation of revenue of ` 9.39 crore. 
The matter was brought to the notice of MMRDA (July 2012). Reply is 
awaited (March 2013). 
6.4.3 As per the Bandra Kurla Notified Area Development Control 
Regulations, 1979, FSI
3 for commercial plots is two. 
MMRDA accepted (May1995) the offer of Citibank for lease of commercial 
plot admeasuring 3,637.04 sq m @ ` 86,086 per sq m at G Block of BKC with 
a BUA of 7,274.08 sq m. The possession was given in October 1995. As the 
allotted land came under the purview of Coastal Regulation Zone as per 
Supreme Court orders of April 1996, a new plot admeasuring 3,818.19 sq m 
was allotted (August 1996) with the same BUA of  7,274.08 sq m. However, 
as the FSI of two for commercial plots was applicable, the BUA to be 
provided was 7,636.38 sq m and not 7,274.08 sq m as allotted by MMRDA.  
This resulted in short determination of BUA to the extent of 362.30 sq m and 
resulted in foregoing a revenue of ` 3.12 crore
4 by MMRDA. 
The matter was brought to the notice of MMRDA (July 2012).  Reply is 
awaited (March 2013). 
6.4.4 MMRDA disposes land by way of inviting tenders through public 
advertisements.
MMRDA decided (December 2007) to lease out land admeasuring 5,900 sq m 
situated in GN block at Bandra-Kurla Complex for educational or medical 
purposes by calling for bids and fixed the reserve price @ ` 1.53 lakh per 
sq m. It was also decided that four conditions be met by the applicants/bidders.  
x work area be based in Mumbai. 
x five years experience in the field of education, 
x financial capacity to construct the building, and  
x institution should be registered under Public Trust Act.  
Audit scrutiny of the records revealed that: 
x condition pertaining to work area was deleted under the instructions of 
the Metropolitan Commissioner.  No reason for relaxation of the 
condition and his express approval for the same was found on record. 
Thereafter, MMRDA invited (July 2008) bids and received only one bid for 
the plot i.e., Taleem Research Foundation (TRF) whose offer price was ` 1.55
lakh per sq m.  MMRDA while evaluating the bid observed that: 
                                                           
3  FSI is prescribed by Bandra Kurla Notified Area Development Control Regulations, 1979 
and is used for working of BUA. 
4  362.30 sq m x ` 86,086. 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
54
x TRF had submitted insufficient documents relating to its experience in 
the field of education and financial capacity to construct the building. 
However, TRF was given (August 2008) a chance to rectify the 
deficiencies noticed in the bid and on receipt (September 2008) of the 
same the bid was accepted. The land was allotted (October 2008) for 
80 years at premium of ` 92 crore to TRF which paid (10 December 
2008) being 50 per cent  of the lease premium and paid the balance 
lease premium in November 2009 after obtaining extensions from 
time to time.  
The above facts revealed that the allottee was given undue favour.  
It was further observed that the reserve price fixed in the 120
th Meeting held 
on 21 December 2007 was incorrect as discussed below: 
The last bid that took place was of J. H. Ambani Foundation in 2007. The 
reserve price in this case ( i.e. J. H. Ambani Foundation) was fixed at the 
market rates applicable at that time.  However, in the present case reserve 
price was fixed (in the 120
th Meeting) at the highest price fetched in the last 
bid, which was one year old. Thus, reserve price was fixed at ` 1.53 lakh per 
sq m instead of ` 5.04 lakh per sq m at current market rate (2008).  Adoption 
of lower rates resulted in short fixation of reserve price by ` 3.49 lakh 5 per 
sq m and loss of lease premium of ` 205.91 crore6.
MMRDA stated (June 2012) that the reserve price fixed was based on the 
current market and global economic conditions. As regards submission of 
insufficient documents by the bidder, MMRDA stated that TRF had only 
submitted additional information, supporting documents and original 
documents for verification. 
The reply is not acceptable as the reserve price of ` 1.53 lakh per sq m was 
fixed (December 2007) by MMRDA only by considering the rate offered to 
M/s J. H. Ambani Foundation without any reference to the market and global 
economic conditions.  %HVLGHVLWZDVUHFRUGHGLQWKH0LQXWHVRI005'$¶V
Meeting (15 October 2008) that TRF had submitted incomplete information 
along with the bid. 
6.4.5 Outstanding recovery of ground lease rent 
As per the information of the Land Cell, an amount of ` 67.85 lakh, on 
account of ground lease rent, was outstanding as on 31 March 2012.  Of these, 
two cases pertain to private associations as mentioned below: 
(` in lakh) 
Sr.
No. 
Area Name of the defaulters Pending
since 
Outstanding
amount of 
rent
1 Wadala Truck 
Terminal 
Mahasang March 2006 42.62 
2 Wadala Truck 
Terminal 
Bombay Goods Transport 
Association (BGTA) 
March 2006 21.68 
Total 64.30 
                                                           
5 Prevailing market rate (` 5.04 lakh per sq m) ± 75)¶VRIIHUSULFH(` 1.55 lakh per sq m). 
6 ` 3.49 lakh per sq m x area of 5,900 sq m =  ` 20,591 lakh. 

Chapter VI : Mumbai Metropolitan Region Development Authority 
55
MMRDA stated that notices and reminders were issued to the defaulters for 
recovery of the outstanding amount (June 2012). 
Further, ` 3.55 lakh were outstanding against the Income Tax department and 
Reserve Bank of India on account of ground lease rent. 
Non-existence of an effective mechanism for recovery resulted in ground lease 
rent remaining outstanding for periods ranging from one to seven years. 
Government may devise effective mechanism for timely recovery of dues. 
6.5 Monitoring and control 
6.5.1 Failure to invoke Bank Guarantee 
As per the lease deed executed in January 2007, MMRDA allotted a plot 
(recreational ground) admea VXULQJ  VT P LQ µ*¶ %ORFN RI %.&, to 
M/s Reliance Industries Ltd (RIL), with a permissible BUA of 67,092 sq m, on 
lease for 80 years, for construction of a two level underground car parking 
space with a garden above. The lease deed was executed (July 2007) after 
payment of a premium of ` 11 lakh. As per Clause no. 4.13 (s) of the bid 
document, the allottee was to complete construction of the two level under 
ground car park and develop a garden on the plot within a period of four years 
from the date of execution of the lease agreement. For the faithful compliance 
of this condition, the allottee was to give a bank guarantee of ` 50 crore which 
would be kept valid for four years from the date of agreement. If the 
construction of the two level underground car park was not completed within 
four years, the bank guarantee of ` 50 crore was required to be invoked by 
MMRDA. It was noticed that RIL did not construct the two level underground 
car parking.  The bank guarantee valid upto July 2011 ought to have been 
encashed by MMRDA.  Instead, it was found to have been extended upto July 
2013.
The matter was brought to the notice of MMRDA (July 2012). Reply is 
awaited (March 2013). 
6.5.2 Irregular amalgamation of area leading to increase in size of 
flats 
Urban Development Department (UDD) notified (May 1983) that MMRDA 
would be implementing the Powai Area Development Scheme (PADS) in 
selected Mumbai suburban districts. A tripartite agreement was executed 
(November 1986) between State Government, MMRDA and the developer on 
behalf of initial land holders of Powai. The agreement to lease was executed 
(November 1986) for a lease period of 80 years at a premium of ` one per 
hectare and the total area of construction for residential tenements was 
4,54,817.62 sq m. 
Clause 7(iii) of the tripartite agreement provided that each of the 50 per cent
of such units shall not exceed 40 sq m as measured in terms of FSI and each of 
the remaining 50 per cent units shall not exceed 80 sq m in terms of FSI. 
The developer requested (June 1989) MMRDA to permit amalgamation of 
µDGMDFHQWWZRIODWVRURQHIODWDERYHWKHRWKHU¶IRUMRLQWXVDJHZKLFKZLOOQRW

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
56
exceed 15 per cent of the overall development. MMRDA conveyed (August 
 ³QR REMHFWLRQ´ SHUPLWWLQJ WKH DPDOJDPDWLRQ VXEMHFW WR FHUWDLQ
conditions. 
A complaint (January 2007) was made against the developer stating that the 
developer had amalgamated all the premises constructed by them and laid 
them out as bigger sized tenements. 
UDD directed (March 2008) MMRDA to calculate the area of the tenements 
which were more than 40 sq m and 80 sq m respectively and recover a penalty 
of ` 300 lakh (part payment) as deposit from the developer for violation of the 
tripartite agreement and obtain an undertaking that he would abide by the final 
decision of the Government and observe the conditions of the Tripartite 
Agreement for ongoing construction works. 
A six member Committee appointed by the Government submitted (December 
2008) a report to the Government stating that the developer amalgamated/ 
combined 2,026 flats of 40 sq m area and 443 flats of 80 sq m area violating 
the conditions for amalgamation. 
MMRDA reported (January 2009) the gross violation of the Tripartite 
Agreement to the Government and requested for levy of a penalty of 
` 1,993.22 crore on the developer.  The developer went in arbitration and it 
was decided (August 2011) to set aside the joint claims made by MMRDA and 
the Government for recovering the penalty. 
The Government and MMRDA jointly filed a petition (November 2011) in the 
High Court against the orders passed by arbitrator.  However, in 2008 Motilal 
Kamlakar Satve, Rajendra Thacker and Medha Patkar also filed public interest 
litigation (PIL) in this matter.  The Court in its order dated February 2012 
directed the developer to construct 1,511 flats of 40 sq m and 1,593 flats of 80 
sq m without any amalgamation on the vacant land available. 
The above facts indicated that the amalgamation of flats could have been 
avoided had the project been monitored by MMRDA at regular intervals. 

57
CHAPTER VII 
MAHARASHTRA HOUSING AND AREA DEVELOPMENT 
AUTHORITY
Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority (MHADA) has been 
established by the Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Act, 1976.  
MHADA co-ordinates and controls the activities of seven Regional Housing 
Boards set-up for each revenue division in the State viz. Mumbai, Konkan, 
Pune, Nashik, Nagpur, Amravati, Aurangabad.  The Authority functions 
under the administrative control of the Housing Department, Government of 
Maharashtra. 
The disposal of land of MHADA on lease is governed by: 
x Maharashtra Housing and Area Development (Disposal of Land) 
Rules, 1981 [MHAD(DL) Rules] 
x Maharashtra Housing and Area Development (Disposal of Land) 
Regulations, 1982 [MHAD(DL) Regulations]  
7.1 Organisational set up 
The Authority constitutes of a President, a Vice President & Chief Executive 
Officer and seven other members all appointed by the State Government. The 
Vice President and Chief Executive Officer is the administrative head of the 
Authority. The issues relating to allotment of land, verification of eligibility 
conditions, execution of lease deed, etc., for Mumbai and Pune are handled 
by the Mumbai and Pune Boards, respectively. 
The Mumbai Board is headed by a Chief Officer assisted by a Joint Chief 
Officer and three Asst. Land Managers.  The Pune Board is headed by a Chief 
Officer and assisted by a Dy. Engineer (Land). 
7.2 System of allotment 
MHADA allots the vacant land by inviting tenders/application or by 
offering/accepting bids from the Government, local authority, public sector 
undertaking, public charitable trusts or societies. The plots are also allotted in 
accordance with the directions of the State Government under Regulation 16 
of MHAD(DL) Regulations, 1982.  Land admeasuring 3,55,355.18 sq m in 
112 cases was allotted under Regulation 16 by MHADA. 
In order to allot the land under Regulation 16 a cabinet sub-committee is 
constituted with Minister of Housing as President and Ministers of Finance 
and Industry, State Minister of Housing and Principal Secretary, Housing as 
Members. 
Regulation 16 of MHAD (DL) Regulations, 1982 framed under MHAD Act 
requires that the plots reserved for amenities or for purely commercial 
purposes in any layout prepared by the concerned Municipal Corporation in a 
land situated in Greater Bombay, Thane, Ulhasnagar, Pune, Kolhapur, Sangli-
Miraj, Solapur, Nashik and Nagpur and two per cent  plots reserved for 
residential use and to be allotted to the individual or co-operative housing 
societies shall be dealt in accordance with the directions of the State 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
58
Government.  Only land allotted as per Regulation 16 were selected by Audit 
for test check. 
Land is given for commercial, residential, educational and social purposes. 
The period of lease is 30 years and lease premium and lease rent is recovered 
vide Resolution No. 3094 of MHADA dated 16 November 1992  revised by 
MHADA from time to time.  
On the request of the applicant, the Government of Maharashtra in exercise of 
the powers under Regulation 16 of MHAD (DL) Regulations, 1982, decides 
in its cabinet sub-committee meeting to lease out the plot of land developed 
by MHADA to the applicant and Government in Housing Department directs 
MHADA to allot the plot of land on lease to the applicant on the terms and 
conditions as given below: 
1. As per the Development Control Regulation 
2. As per the rules and regulations of Municipal Corporation of 
Greater Mumbai 
3. As per the rules and regulation of MHADA 
4. As per the pricing policy of  MHADA 
In response to the Government directives, MHADA allots the plot of land to 
the applicant and after verification of all the eligibility conditions,  issues  
offer letter communicating the terms and conditions of allotment to the 
applicant and requests the lessee to make payment towards lease premium 
and lease rent. Once the lessee accepts the terms and conditions of allotment 
and makes the full payment towards lease premium and lease rent, as per 
Regulation 10 MHAD (DL) Regulations, 1982 lease deed is executed 
between the lessee and MHADA. 
The results of the Performance Audit are mentioned in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
7.3 Non-resumption of land 
Section 10 of the MHAD(DL) Regulations, stipulated that the possession of  
land shall not be delivered in the hands of the lessee before the execution of 
the lease deed. 
7.3.1 A plot admeasuring 3,104 sq m  was reserved for a drama theatre in 
Kannamwar Nagar, Vikhroli, however, it was allotted to Maharashtra Kamgar 
Kalyan Mandal for construction of a swimming pool with the instructions that 
deresrvation shall be got done by the lessee and construction of the pool was 
to be completed within one and a  half years from the date of handing over 
possession of the land. No lease deed was, however,  executed. 
Though, the possession of the plot was handed over in 1998, the swimming 
pool had not been constructed.  
MHADA directed (July 2003) the Mandal to return possession of the land. 
However the said plot had not been resumed by MHADA in spite of a lapse 
of nine years. 

Chapter VII: Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority 
59
7.3.2 A reference is invited to para no. 3.3.1 of the Comptroller and Auditor 
*HQHUDO¶V &LYLO $XGLW 5HSRUW -09.  Land admeasuring 10,000 sq m at 
Oshiwara reserved for a hospital was allotted to Nargis Dutt Memorial Trust 
in October 2000 for establishing a hospital.  The Trust was required to make 
payment of ` 21.37 crore towards lease premium in December 2007, which 
was reduced to ` 11.71 crore in February 2009.  The Trust paid an amount of 
` 2.93 crore only in February 2009.  No further payments have been made by 
the Trust till date.
Thus, despite a lapse of more than 12 years neither  action has been taken to 
resume the land nor the Trust has been directed to construct the hospital. 
The Government in Housing Department may consider directing 
MHADA to institute strict action in the event of non-compliance of the 
terms and conditions of lease. 
7.3.3 Land admeasuring 924 sq m at Oshiwara was allotted (February 1993) 
to Bruhad Mumbai Gujarathi Samaj (Trust) for construction of a Health 
Centre.  As per clause 2(c) of the lease deed, the land was to be used for  
construction of  a building for social and educational activities and not for any 
other purpose not specifically permitted by MHADA.  Further, as per clause 
2(k) of the lease deed, the Trust could not assign, sublet, underlet or transfer 
the possession in whole or in part and also change the use of land without 
previous written permission of MHADA.  
We noticed from the order (May 2010) passed by the Joint Charity 
Commissioner, Greater Mumbai Region, Mumbai that the Trust had sub-
leased 224.35 sq m of constructed area to M/s Satra Properties (I) Ltd for 
commercial use for a premium of ` 2.17 crore and a monthly rent of 
` 15,000. Subsequently, the Trust requested (July 2010) MHADA for a ³1R
2EMHFWLRQ &HUWLILFDWH´ for the sub-lease. MHADA directed (April 2011) the 
Trust to furnish the dates on which the land was subleased and the premium 
amount accepted since the same had not been communicated to them. 
Thus, the property was sub-leased without the prior permission of MHADA.  
The Government in Housing Department may consider directing 
MHADA to ensure that the lessees fulfill the eligibility criteria laid down 
to prevent commercial exploitation of land meant for social purpose. 
7.4  Violations of Act/Rules 
7.4.1 Allotment of land in violation of regulations 
Regulation 5 of the  MHAD(DL) Regulations stipulates that vacant land to be 
used for other than residential purpose shall be allotted to a public charitable 
trust or a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860. 
Government in Housing Department allotted (December 2002) a plot 
admeasuring 40,000 sq m (comprising some land reclaimed by MHADA, 
mangroves
1 and creek2) to  Crescent 3M Gymkhana at Andheri (W), Mumbai, 
1 A class of medium sized trees growing in the saline coastal sediments in the tropics.  They 
are of ecological importance. 
2 A water channel connected to the sea which is affected by ebb and flow of ocean tides. 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
60
a company incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 for a Recreation 
Centre. MHADA issued (April 2005) an offer letter and a lease deed was 
executed on 14 October 2005 on receipt of lease premium of ` 75 lakh and 
capitalized lease rent of ` 23.43 lakh from the lessee.  However, the High 
Court vide judgement dated 6 October 2005, ordered a total freeze on the 
destruction and cutting of mangroves, dumping of debris in mangrove areas 
and carrying of construction activity within 50 meters of such areas in the 
entire State of Maharashtra. The order also forbade any authority from 
granting permission for development activity in lands falling under the 
mangrove areas regardless of the nature of ownership of the land. 
Thus, the allotment made subsequent to the Court judgement was in violation 
of the directions of the High Court. 
7.4.2 Delay in execution of lease agreement in violation of the 
provision of Act/Rules  
Section 10 of the MHAD(DL) Regulations, stipulated that the lease deed shall 
be executed in favour of  the allottee after full payment of the lease premium 
and possession of the land shall not be delivered prior to the execution of 
lease deed. Further, as per the terms and conditions of the offer letter, the 
construction work should be completed within three years from the date of 
taking over possession of the land or such period as extended by the 
Authority for an additional premium and/or lease rent on the request of the 
lessee. 
We observed that possession of land was given three months prior to the 
execution of lease deed (March 1994) to Anchor Foundation and about six 
years prior to the execution of lease deed (October 1993) to Vagad Vishal 
Oswal Vikas Samaj.  The lessees failed to complete the construction within 
the stipulated period. MHADA failed to take action against the lessees. 
The matter was brought to the notice of MHADA (August 2012). Reply is 
awaited (March 2013).  
7.5 Lease premium, lease rent, etc. 
7.5.1 Non-levy of interest on delayed payment  
As per the provisions of Resolution no. 5882 of MHADA dated 20 February 
2003, delayed payments by the lessee on account of cost of land including 
lease premium and/or capitalised amount of lease rent attracts interest @ 18 
per cent in case of commercial use and 13.5 per cent in  other cases. 
A recreation ground admeasuring 4,425 sq m was allotted (March 2002) to 
M/s Legend Recreation Club by the Government in Housing Department. 
Letter demanding payment of ` 1.65 crore was issued (January 2006) to the 
Club and the payment was to be made within 30 days from date of the receipt 
of the letter by the Club. 
We observed that the Club paid  ` 5 lakh and the balance amount of  ` 1.60
crore in four installments between April 2006 and November 2007. The 
installments were paid after delays ranging from 28 days to 626 days and 

Chapter VII: Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority 
61
attracted interest of ` 33.42 lakh on the delayed payments.  However, interest 
for delayed payments was not levied. 
Failure of MHADA to institute any action for the recovery of interest from 
the club resulted in loss of revenue amounting to ` 33.42 lakh. 
The matter was brought to the notice of MHADA (August 2012). Reply is 
awaited (March 2013).  
7.5.2 Short levy of lease premium 
We noticed in the following three cases, lease premium rate was incorrectly 
applied which resulted in short levy thereof as follows: 
Name of housing society Built-up Area 
(sq m) /Rate 
(`)
Premium 
Leviable  Levied Short levy  
(` in crore) 
As per Resolution No.3094 dated 16 November 1992 the rate of premium included three 
elements viz, rate of under developed plot five years prior, interest thereon and updated 
Development Cost. In the following two cases, interest portion on land was omitted to be 
levied .  
Akashganga Housing Co-
op. Society (Yashodeep), 
Oshiwara  
3,492 
3,610 
1.26 0.87 0.39
Shivai Co-operative 
Hsg.Society (Tarangan), 
Oshiwara 
1,320 
8,330 
1.10 0.80 0.30
The premium is payable at the rates prescribed in Annual Schedule of Rates (ASR). The 
land was offered in 2005. In accordance with the Resolution No.5931 dated 21 June 2003 
the rate of the ASR of that year should be applied in which the land is offered. But rates of 
ASR of 2002 were incorrectly applied as mentioned below :
Siddhant Sahkari 
Grihnirman Sanstha, 
Aramnagar, Versova 
1,394.75 
25,515 
3.34 0.58 2.76
After we pointed out these cases, MHADA stated that Government had directed (March 
2004) to charge the premium and lease rent based on the market rate applicable at the time 
of decision taken by the cabinet sub committee (August 2002).  The reasons for this undue 
favour were not found on record as the prevailing market rates ought to have been applied. 
7.5.3 Non-recovery of lease rent  
As per the conditions of lease deed, lease rent is payable annually by the 
lessees within five days from the completion of the year of lease.  In case of 
default in payment of lease rent for 30 days, penal interest @ 16.5 per cent
per annum is leviable on the amount of lease rent due.  
We noticed that there was no system of raising demands in MHADA, the 
payment of the lease rent was left to the lessees. Audit observed that in six 
cases the lessees  had not paid their lease rent for periods ranging from 10 to 
16 years. In the absence of any system, this had escaped the notice of 
MHADA. Based on the lease rents calculated as per the lease deeds of the 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
62
respective lessees lease rent of ` 1.93 crore as detailed in Appendix ±XII 
was recoverable from the lessees.
The matter was brought to the notice of MHADA (July 2012). Reply is 
awaited (March 2013). 
The Government in Housing Department may issue necessary instruction 
to MHADA for reviewing all cases in respect of lease rent and demands 
for outstanding lease rent may be worked out and issued. 

63
CHAPTER VIII 
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF GREATER MUMBAI 
The Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM) is the custodian of 
Government land entrusted to it under Section 91A of the Mumbai Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1888 (MMC Act) from the date on which the City of 
Bombay Municipal (Amendment) Act, 1933 came into operation. The 
Corporation works under the administrative control of the Urban Development 
Department, Government of Maharashtra. All the immovable and other 
properties and all other interest and rights of the Board of Trustees for the 
improvement of the city of Bombay constituted (prior to 1933) under the City 
of Bombay Improvement Trust Transfer Act, 1925, including all the estates, 
rights, titles and interest of the said Board in and to the lands specified in 
Schedule µW¶ and µV¶ (Section 89 A) were transferred to the Corporation. 
There were 184 cases of Government land given on lease and regulated by 
MCGM.  The lease records were not computerised and as per the records, the 
total area involved in 167 cases was 19,05,980 sq m and in 17 cases the area 
was not available.  Out of these, 52 cases [Residential (28), Commercial (18) 
and Industrial (06)] were scrutinised during the Performance Audit. The 
period for which land was given on lease ranged from 19 years to 999 years
. 
8.1 Organisational set up 
MCGM is headed by the Municipal Commissioner who is assisted by the 
Additional Commissioner and Assistant Commissioner (Estate). The 
Government land which was leased by the erstwhile Bombay Improvement 
Trust vested in the Corporation. As per Section 49A of MMC Act, MCGM 
shall appoint a committee to be called the Improvements Committee (IC) for 
the purpose of improvement of the City in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act. 
8.2 System of allotment 
Section 91 B of the Act provided that on termination of existing lease, the 
property shall vest with the Government. As per amendment to Section 91B of 
the Act, from October 1998 such revested property can be leased afresh for a 
further period of 30 years. MCGM may revise the rates of lease rent after 
every 10 years, provided that, while revising such rates it shall be bound by 
the policy of Revenue and Forest Department for leasing of Government land.  
Furthermore, MCGM shall pay to the Government, an amount equal to half of 
the lease rent received by it. After expiry of lease period, the land, free from 
all encumbrances shall again vest or revest with the Government.  As per the 
Estate Manual of MCGM, the lessee shall not change the use of the land 
without prior permission of MCGM.  Such change of use may be allowed with 
the approval of the IC on payment of additional premium. If the lessee had 
unauthorisedly changed the use, MCGM may regularise the breach on 
payment of penalty along with additional premium chargeable. Under Section 
105 B of MMC Act, MCGM had the power to evict the lessee by giving one 
month notice. Transfer of land is allowed either by surrender method or by 

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
64
assignment method as provided in Part III (A)(d) of chapter-II of the Estate 
Manual of MCGM. 
8.2.1 Non-resumption of land 
As per Section 105 B of the MMC Act, the lessee is required to be evicted in 
case of breach of condition(s). The Act does not provide for regularisation of 
the breaches. However, the Estate Manual provides for regularisation of 
breaches.   
We noticed that in six cases
1, lands were leased (41,716 sq m) to five textile 
and one Dal mill. These plots of land were granted primarily for purposes like 
industrial, residential, etc.  As the mills had shut down their operations, these 
plots of lands could not be put to use for the intended purpose, hence should 
have been resumed.  However, this was not done.  Out of these six cases, in 
two cases the purposes were changed from residential to commercial and in 
one case it was changed from residential to industrial. The land continues to be 
in the possession of the lessees. The two lessees who have got the land use 
changed to commercial have gained financially.
MCGM should have terminated the lease agreements and resumed the land to 
the Government in all these six cases.   
8.2.2 Non-utilisation of land and non-execution of lease agreements 
A plot admeasuring 3,480 sq m was leased (May 1982) for a period of 60 
years with effect from 11 July 1986 to the Indian National Theatre for 
redevelopment of the existing municipal market by constructing a market on 
the ground floor and a drama theatre on the first  floor.  No lease agreement 
was executed by MCGM. 
We noticed that although redevelopment work of market-cum-drama theatre 
building had not been completed even after a lapse of 26 years, MCGM did 
not resume the land. In two
2 more lease cases, no lease agreements were 
executed by MCGM even after a lapse of 72 and 46 years, respectively, from 
the date of lease.  
8.2.3 Financial gain made by lessees 
(i)  Land admeasuring 5,96,953 sq m was leased by the Government to 
MCGM for 99 years from May 1914 with a condition to revest the same in the 
Government on expiry of lease. MCGM was allowed to lease out the land for 
periods not exceeding 30 years at a time for horse racing, public recreation or 
amusement after obtaining prior sanction of the Government. Accordingly, 
this land along with an adjoining municipal land admeasuring 2,58,245 sq m 
was leased to Royal Western India Turf Club Ltd (RWITCL). The lease was 
last renewed in February 2000 for 19 years with retrospective effect from 
                                                           
1  Bansiwala Mills Pvt. Ltd., Haji Bilal Patrawala and ten others, M/s Morarjee Gokuldas 
Spg. & Wvg. Co. Ltd., The Phoenix Mills Ltd., Raghuvanshi Mills Ltd. and Shri Laxmi 
Woollen Mills Estate Pvt. Ltd.. 
2  (1) Shri Gokul Das Pujari & six others and (2) Government of Maharashtra for Police 
accommodation. 

Chapter VIII: Municipal Corporations of Greater Mumbai 
65
1 June 1994 upto 31 May 2013 at a lease rent of ` 20 lakh per annum to be 
increased by 10 per cent every year.  The basis on which the revised rent was 
fixed was not available on record.  The lease agreement was made in April 
2004 and did not permit third party to enter into the premises. 
We noticed that, though the lease was due to expire on 31 May 2013, the 
lessee in violation of the terms of lease agreement, entered into an agreement 
-XO\  ZLWK 0V %-5¶V &RQGXFWRU WR FRQGXFW FDWHULQJ VHUYLFHV IRU10 
years upto June 2018, for which the Conductor would pay to the lessee 
conducting fees of 
` 3.25 crore per annum fixed for first three years and 
thereafter with 10 per cent  increase every year.  The Improvements 
Department of MCGM issued (November 2008) notice to RWITCL for the 
breach of condition by allowing a third party to enter the leased premises 
without permission.  It is pertinent to note that though the  issue of 
regularisation of breach as per the Estate Manual was pending, the Health 
Department of MCGM continued granting licenses to M/s %-5¶VWRFDUU\RXW
the business of eating house and liquor bar upto December 2012.  This 
indicated absence of co-ordination between the Health Department and the 
Improvements Department of MCGM which had issued notice for breach.  
Further, though the MCGM was realising revenue of only 
` 20 lakh per annum 
towards lease rent on the entire leased plot, the lessee continued to make 
financial gain of  
` 3.25 crore per annum from the Conductor without passing 
on any share to MCGM.  Though four years had elapsed after MCGM came to 
know of the breach, action in the matter is still pending. 
(ii) Similarly, land admeasuring 1,278.69 sq m situated at Esplanade Estate, 
Fort Division, was leased (December 1903) for 99 years by the Bombay 
Improvement Trust to Robert Laidlaw of Kolkata, an European at an annual 
ground rent of 
` 1,128 for the first 10 years, ` 1,340 for the next 10 years, 
` 1,551 for subsequent 30 years and ` 1,763 for the remaining 49 years.  The 
lease expired in 2002. 
As per the lease, the plot was to be utilised for shops, offices and residential 
purposes. The land was transferred four times to different parties and in 1987 
it was in the possession of M/s Stallion Investment Pvt. Ltd who had applied 
for transfer of lease in their name only in 1990.  Thereupon, MCGM issued a 
notice (September 1991) to M/s Stallion Investment Pvt. Ltd for the 
unauthorised construction of mezzanine floors in violation of the lease 
agreement and directed to pay security deposit of 
` 2,88,343 to rectify the 
breaches within a period of six months, failing which the security deposit was 
to be forfeited.  The security deposit was paid by the lessee in February 1992.  
There was nothing on record to indicate that the land was regularised by 
MCGM and additional lease/ground rent has been demanded and recovered
though 21 years have elapsed after the notice was served upon the lessee. 
8.3 Encroachment 
8.3.1 Breach of conditions and encroachment of Government land 
Land admeasuring 1,66,851.89 sq m was leased to Willingdon Sports Club 
from October 1922 for a period of 99 years at an annual ground rent of 
` 13,469.

Performance Audit Report on Government land given on lease 
66
MCGM had issued notices to the lessee in January 1998 and April 2009 for 18 
breaches noticed on the property.  This included erecting permanent as well as 
temporary structures such as residences, gas cabins, godowns, etc.. Though 
more than 14 years had elapsed, final decision to resume the land as provided 
for in the MMC Act is still pending (November 2012). In addition, MCGM 
had noticed that part of the leased plot had been encroached by Akhade 
Brothers.  The encroachers had constructed chawls /structures and put them to 
use for residential/commercial purposes. No effective steps were taken by 
MCGM/lessee to prevent or remove encroachers and part of leased land 
continued to be in the possession of encroachers (November 2012). 
The matter was brought to the notice of MCGM.  In reply, MCGM stated that 
the concerned ward office was intimated to institute action against breaches in 
September 2011.  Further action taken in this regard was not made available to 
audit. 
8.4 Lease rent 
8.4.1 Non-finalisation of the rate of lease rent  
Land admeasuring 5,797 sq m situated opposite CST Railway Station was 
leased to M/s Bennett, Coleman & Co. Ltd. by the erstwhile Bombay 
Improvement Trust for 99 years from 4 April 1901 at an annual ground rent of 
` 15,166. As per the lease agreement, the land was to be used for steam 
printing, publishing newspapers, books or periodicals, residential purpose and 
a portion of the building for shops and offices. The said lease expired on 
3 April 2000. 
In September 1994, the Estate Department of MCGM noticed that the lessee 
breached the lease agreement by way of unauthorised construction of 
mezzanine floor and commenced several commercial activities without 
obtaining prior permission. The lessee applied (March 1999) for renewal of 
lease and MCGM fixed (March 2002) annual lease rent of 
` 1.18 crore 
applying the rate applicable to industrial users at two per cent of the market 
value of land. However, renewal and execution of lease deed had not been 
finalised yet (November 2012). 
On a Writ Petition filed by the lessee, the High Court passed (March 2003) 
order for ad-hoc payment of lease rent at 
` 50 lakh per annum for four years 
from 1 April 2000 and directed MCGM to appoint an officer for deciding the 
appropriate amount of rent to be recovered after giving opportunity to the 
lessee to present their stand. Accordingly, the lessee paid an amount of 
` two
crore between May 2003 and December 2003. But even after lapse of more 
than nine years and reminder from the lessee in this regard MCGM failed to 
finalise the annual rent (November 2012). The abnormal delay of 18 years in 
regularisation of breach, delay in fixation of rent and renewal of lease deed 
resulted in huge loss of revenue to MCGM. 
8.4.2 Non-recovery of arrears of lease rent 
Land admeasuring 1,338.29 sq m in Marine Lines Estate, Fort Division was 
initially leased (December 1901) by the erstwhile Bombay Improvement Trust 

Chapter VIII: Municipal Corporations of Greater Mumbai 
67
to Hormusji Sorabji Battliwalla for a period of 99 years for residential 
purposes at an annual ground rent of ` 1,226.68. The lease was subsequently 
transferred (April 1995) in the name of the Secretary of the United States of 
America.  The lease period expired in December 2000 and MCGM fixed 
(April 2010) the rent at 
` 8.45 lakh per annum which was to be increased by 
10 per cent every 10 years. The lessee, however, did not pay the rent resulting 
in accumulation of arrears of ` 112.41 lakh for the period from 5 December 
2000 to 4 December 2012. 
MCGM stated (September 2012) that as a new lease policy is being finalised 
for levy of lease rent, the lease rent could not be recovered. However, the fact 
remained that the lease rent had not been recovered. 

68
CHAPTER IX 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
9.1 Conclusions 
The performance Audit revealed the following: 
There was lack of uniformity in the process adopted for allotment of land on 
lease due to the absence of a uniform policy.  Different procedures were 
adopted by the Collectorates and other agencies for allotment of land on lease. 
The data on leased land was not complete in the Collectorates.  The 
Collectorates and the agencies had not developed any system for conducting 
periodical inspections of the land granted on lease.  They were not monitoring 
the conditions governing the grant of lease.  Though a number of lessees had 
indulged in serious violation of terms and conditions of lease, no decisive 
action had been taken.  In addition, in some cases even the eligibility 
conditions for grant of land on lease had not been observed. In the 
Collectorates and MCGM, cases were found where the lease agreements had 
not been executed and registered. 
The Collectorates and the Government in violation of the MLR Code, had in a 
number of cases, regularised violations of the conditions of the lease 
agreement by levy of unearned income.  
Data on arrears of land revenue was not complete due to which effective 
action could not be taken.  There was lack of co-ordination between 
Government departments and local bodies as sale/sub-lease of lease rights, 
clearance of development plans and building plans on leased land in violation 
of lease terms and conditions were noticed in the test checked cases.   
9.2 Recommendations 
The Government may consider: 
x updation and maintenance  of accurate data of leased land, execute the 
pending lease agreements and follow up of eviction of illegal 
encroachments through effective action;  
x enactment of a law to enforce necessary conditions on subsisting leases 
in consultation with Law and Judiciary Department to safeguard leased 
property and land revenue; 
x enacting suitable provisions for levy and recovery of unearned income 
and for ensuring that all lessees obtain prior permission for change of 
purpose/sub-lease/sale of the leased lands;  
x evolving a clear policy on regularisation of encroachments which are 
administratively considered necessary;  
x streamlining the procedure for maintaining data relating to arrears of 
land revenue for monitoring recovery; 
x co-ordinating with the competent authorities concerned, in order to 
ensure that the transfer/sub-lease of leased land/clearance by Local 

Chapter XI: Conclusions and Recommendations 
69
Bodies of the development plans, building plans, etc., are effected only 
after obtaining NOC from the R&FD; 
x instructing the Collectorates to display on site the details of lease to 
ensure that the plot is not sold/transferred unauthorisedly. Further, the 
Department may ensure that adequate staff is in place for carrying out 
the inspection of all the leased lands at regular intervals for detection 
of breaches; 
x reviving the Committee constituted for detecting breaches;  
x directing the Collectorates to give wide publicity for grant of vacant 
lands on lease so as to make the process of allotment transparent; 
x SUHSDULQJ D µ0RGHO /HDVH $JUHHPHQW¶ DQG LQFRUSRUDWLQJ WKH VDPHLQ
the Code/Rules; 
x incorporating D³SXUSRVHIXOILOPHQWFHUWLILFDWH´LQWKHOHDVHDJUHHPHQWV
and ensure its compliance through the Collectorates and agencies 
alongwith a system of regular monitoring and verification by the 
Government Department; and 
x directing the Department to review cases wherein provisional rent and 
premium had been levied and take necessary action to levy final rates 
and recover the difference. 
(MALA SINHA) 
Mumbai, Principal Accountant General (Audit)-I, 
Countersigned 
(VINOD RAI) 
New Delhi, Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
The 16 May, 2013  
The 17 May, 2013   


APPENDIX-I 
Glossary of definition 
(Reference: Paragraph 1.5) 
Term Definition 
Land means that land situated in the State and does not include the land 
situated outside the State 
Building means any structure, not being a farm building 
Alienated means transferred in so far as the rights of the State Government to 
payment of rent or land revenue are concerned, wholly or partially, 
to the ownership of any person 
Lease a transfer of a right to enjoy such a property, made for a certain 
time, express or implied or in perpetuity, in consideration of a price 
paid or promised to the transferor by the transferee, who accepts the 
transfer on such terms 
Lessor the transferor of the property on lease 
Lessee the transferee of the property transferred on lease 
Possession of land it is not necessary as a owner, it may be as a tenant, trustee or 
mortgagee in possession 
To occupy land means to possess or to take possession of land 
Superior holder means a land-holder entitled to receive rent or land revenue from 
other land-holders (called "inferior holders") whether he is 
accountable or not for such rent or land revenue, or any part thereof, 
to the State Government 
Holding means a portion of land held by a holder 
Rent the money, share, service or other thing to be so rendered is called 
the rent 
Non-agricultural 
assessment 
means the assessment fixed on any land under the provisions of 
MLR Code or rules thereunder with reference to the use of the land 
for a non-agricultural purpose 
Survey it includes the measurement of village land and preparation of 
survey records based on it.  Every holding is separately measured, 
classified, assessed and defined by boundary mark in the land 
records and a specific number known as survey no. is given 
Survey number means a portion of land of which the area and assessment are 
separately entered, under an indicative number in the land records 
Revenue Officers means every officer of any rank whatsoever appointed under any of 
the provisions of MLR Code, and employed in or about the business 
of the land revenue or of the surveys, assessment, accounts, or 
records connected therewith  
Classes of persons 
holding land. 
(a) Occupants - Class I, (b) Occupants - Class II, (c) Government 
lessees 
As per Section 29 of the MLR Code, Occupants ± class I shall 
consist of persons who hold unalienated land in perpetuity and 
without any restriction on the right to transfer; occupants ± class II 
shall consist of persons who hold unalienated land in perpetuity 
subject to restrictions on the right of transfer; the grantee of lease 
under grant or contract by the Collector of unalienated unoccupied 
land is called a Government lessee 
73

APPENDIX-I (Continued) 
Description Definition 
Land records means records maintained under the provisions of, or for the 
purposes of, the MLR Code and includes all documents, plans, 
maps, registers, accounts and records 
Corporation means the Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai 
City µWKH FLW\¶ PHDQV WKH DUHD VSHFLILHG LQ part I of Schedule A to the 
Greater Bombay Laws and the Bombay High Court (Declaration of 
Limits) Act, 1945 
Suburbs means the area specified in Parts II and III of Schedule A to the 
Greater Bombay Laws and the Bombay High Court (Declaration of 
Limits) Act, 1945 
Mumbai Metropolitan 
Region 
means the area specified in Schedule I of MMRDA Act, 1974.  The 
State Government may, from time to time, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, amend that Schedule by adding thereto or deleting 
therefrom any area specified in such notification; and thereupon the 
modified area shall be the Mumbai Metropolitan Region 
Regional Plan means a plan prepared under the provision of Maharashtra Regional 
and Town Planning Act, 1966, for the development or 
redevelopment of Mumbai Metropolitan Region as defined in this 
Act, or for any part thereof, and includes a draft or final regional 
plan prepared for the same region or any part thereof whether before 
or after the commencement of this Act which is for the time being in 
force 
Registration or transfer 
not to affect right of 
Government 
According to Section 301 of MLR Code, the registration or transfer 
WRDQ\WLWOHLQWKH&ROOHFWRU¶VUHFRUGVVKDOOQRWEHGHHPHGWRRSHUDWH
so as in any way to affect any right, title or interest of the 
Government in the land, house or other immovable property in 
respect of which any such transfer is made or registered 
Old tenure Term is used in office records means the title of land without any 
restriction for sale and transfer 
New tenure Term is used in office records for the title of land with restriction.  
This land cannot be sold/transferred unless its title is converted into 
old tenure 
Occupancy Means a portion of land held by an occupant. "Occupant" means a 
holder in actual possession of unalienated land 
74

APPENDIX -II 
Comparative statement of various aspects of lease of land by different authorities 
(Reference Paragraph 2.2) 
SR.
NO
ITEM GOVERNMENT MMRDA MHADA MCGM 
1 Purpose of lease Residential, Industrial, 
Commercial, Social, Educational, 
Agricultural 
Residential, Commercial Residential, Commercial, 
Educational 
Social, Industrial, 
Commercial, 
Residential, mixed 
2 Identity of the lessee Individuals, societies, firms, 
companies, trusts, social 
organisations etc. 
Societies, Industries and 
commercial organisations 
Individuals, societies, 
industries, trusts, social 
organisations etc. 
Individuals, societies, 
industries, trusts, social 
organisations etc. 
3 Standardized model lease 
document  
Does not exist. Exists Does not exist 
Lease deed prepared by 
Legal Cell as per the 
conditions of the case 
Does not exist 
Lease deed prepared by 
Legal Cell as per the 
conditions of the case 
4 Lease periods involved 1 year to 999 years for the past and 
now proposed for 30 years 
80 years except WTT where 
it is 99 years 
30 years 30 to 999 years and 30 
years with effect from 
October 1998 as per 
retrospective amendment 
of 2002  
5 Maximum permissible FSI 1.33 in Mumbai City, 
1 in Mumbai suburbs and up to 1 
in Pune District 
4 2.5 1.33 
6 Method of allotment on 
lease 
Allotment made on the basis of 
application received from 
individuals, co-operative societies, 
industries, Trusts, etc. (Allotment 
prescribed through advertisement 
to co-operative Housing Societies 
but not being followed) 
Through public 
advertisements for auction 
and selection of the highest 
bidder  
Under the orders of the 
Government as per 
Regulation 16 
No specific method 
followed 
75

APPENDIX ±II (Continued) 
SR.
NO
ITEM GOVERNMENT MMRDA MHADA MCGM 
7 Execution of lease 
agreement 
After handing over possession of 
land 
Prior to handing over 
possession of land 
Prior to handing over 
possession of land 
After handing over 
possession of land 
8 Method of valuation of 
land 
As per ASR prepared by Jt. 
Director of Town Planning, Pune 
Minimum reserve price fixed 
on the basis of rate at which 
plot in the same locality was 
auctioned in the near past 
As per ASR prepared by Jt. 
Director of Town Planning, 
Pune 
As per ASR prepared by 
Jt. Director of Town 
Planning, Pune 
9 Lease premium No lease premium is levied One time premium on the 
value of the plot at which it 
was auctioned  
Fixed on the basis of 
resolutions issued from 
case to case 
No lease premium is 
levied 
10 Lease rent Ranges from Re.1 to amounts 
based on prescribed percentages of 
market value. 
Nominal lease rent. Fixed on the basis of 
different resolutions issued 
from time to time and case 
to case. Lease rent for the 
entire lease period is taken 
one time as capitalized 
lease rent at the time of 
agreement or recovered 
annually as may be decided 
in the resolutions. 
Ranges from Re.1 to 
amounts based on 
prescribed percentages 
of market value. 
11 Periodical revision of lease 
rent  
Not present in cases prior to 1999.  
Government has introduced clause 
of periodic revision of lease, which 
has been challenged in the court of 
law and hence pending 
implementation 
Not applicable as one time 
lease premium 
Provision exists, however 
period of 30 years not yet 
over 
Not present in cases 
prior to 1999.  
Government has 
introduced clause of 
periodic revision of 
lease, which has been 
challenged in the court 
of law and hence 
pending implementation 
76

APPENDIX ±II (Continued) 
SR.
NO
ITEM GOVERNMENT MMRDA MHADA MCGM 
12 Monitoring of leased 
properties 
Carried out but not on regular 
basis. 
System of monitoring till the 
construction work is 
completed. 
No system in place for 
periodical monitoring. 
System of monitoring on 
the basis of complaints 
received. 
13 Penalties for breach of 
conditions 
Ranges from issue of warnings to 
the lessee to resumption of land 
Recovery of additional lease 
premium to resumption of 
land 
Lands to be resumed as per 
conditions of lease 
agreement 
Imposition of penalties. 
14 Policy on eligibility Exists Exists Exists Government policy 
being followed 
15 Is transfer, inheritance with 
or without conditions 
With existing condition With existing condition With existing condition With existing condition 
77

APPENDIX III 
Cases in which renewal is not done after expiry of lease  
(Reference : Paragraph 2.5.1) 
Sr.
No. 
Name of the Government lessee Location Purpose Lease 
period 
Date of 
lease 
Date of 
expiry 
Current
date
No of years 
after
expiry 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
(A)  MUMBAI CITY 
1 RESERVE BANK OF INDIA Colaba Residential 99 01-12-1907 01-12-2006 30-11-2012 6
2 JEROM FERNANDES & 1 ORS Colaba Residential 50 18-04-1956 18-04-2006 30-11-2012 6
3 DR.FALI(FRAMROZ) S.MEHTA&DR.KERKI 
R.MEHTA(TRUSTEE) 
Colaba Residential 66 22-07-1940 22-07-2006 30-11-2012 6
4 BOMBAY GYMKHANA LIMITED Fort Residential 65 25-01-1941 25-01-2006 30-11-2012 6
5 THE KHATAN MAKANJI SPG & WVG CO LTD Mazgaon Residential 99 01-09-1906 01-09-2005 30-11-2012 7
6 ABUBKAR USMAN DARVESH & 2 OTHERS Mazgaon Residential 99 01-09-1906 01-09-2005 30-11-2012 7
7 AMINABAI MOHOMEDALLY MOHSINBHAI 
KADERBHAI 
Byculla Residential 50 01-10-1955 01-10-2005 30-11-2012 7
8 ABDUL KADAR GULAM HUSAIN DAYA Byculla Residential 50 01-07-1953 01-07-2003 30-11-2012 9
9 ABDUL SATAR MOHMED HAJI V AHEDIN & 6 ORS Mazgaon Residential 45 01-09-1958 01-09-2003 30-11-2012 9
10 ESMAIL EBRAHIM Mazgaon Residential 45 01-09-1958 01-09-2003 30-11-2012 9
11 ERACH SHAPURJI MISTRY & 4 OTHERS TRUSTEES Mazgaon Residential 99 01-09-1903 01-09-2002 30-11-2012 10 
12 ARAVIND PROPERTIES LTD Mazgaon Residential 99 01-09-1903 01-09-2002 30-11-2012 10 
13 H H SULTAN MOHAMMAD SHAH Mazgaon Residential 99 01-09-1903 01-09-2002 30-11-2012 10 
14 THE BOMBAY MUNICIPAL CORPORATION Mazgaon Residential 99 01-09-1903 01-09-2002 30-11-2012 10 
78

APPENDIX III (Continued) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
15 VICENTA MARIA SOCIAL SERVICE SOCIETY. Mazgaon Residential 99 01-09-1903 01-09-2002 30-11-2012 10 
16 SULEBHAI ALIBHAI RANGWALA Mazgaon Residential 99 01-09-1903 01-09-2002 30-11-2012 10 
17 IBRAHIM HUSAIN BHOMBAL & OTHERS Mazgaon Residential 99 01-09-1903 01-09-2002 30-11-2012 10 
18 RAMESHCHANDRA G.KANSARA Mazgaon Residential 99 01-09-1903 01-09-2002 30-11-2012 10 
19 M/S.HEMALI INVESTMENT &  FINANCE PVT.LTD. Mazgaon Residential 99 01-09-1903 01-09-2002 30-11-2012 10 
20 THAKIRDAS PANCHAND ZAVERI & ANOTHER Mazgaon Residential 99 01-09-1903 01-09-2002 30-11-2012 10 
21 SYED ABDUL HAMID KADRI Mazgaon Residential 99 01-09-1903 01-09-2002 30-11-2012 10 
22 SHAIKH CASSAM VALAD LAL MOHOMED 
HADIWALA 
Mazgaon Residential 99 01-09-1903 01-09-2002 30-11-2012 10 
23 SHAIKH CASSAM VALAD LAL MOHOMED 
HADIWALA 
Mazgaon Residential 99 01-09-1903 01-09-2002 30-11-2012 10 
24 THE BOMBAY DIOSISAN TRUST ASOSIATION PVT 
LTD 
Mazgaon Residential 89 01-02-1913 01-02-2002 30-11-2012 10 
25 HAFIZA BEGUM W/O SYED ABDUL HAMID KADRI Mazgaon Residential 99 01-09-1903 01-09-2002 30-11-2012 10 
26 THE MERCANTILE BANK OF INDIA PVT LTD Malabar Hills Residential 50 04-04-1952 04-04-2002 30-11-2012 10 
27 GULAM MOHAMMAD NABIBUX Byculla Residential 50 29-04-1950 29-04-2000 30-11-2012 12 
28 MR.SURESH R.CHAVAN &     OTHERS Byculla Residential 50 01-09-1949 01-09-1999 30-11-2012 13 
29 MAKHMUDULLA KHAN ALIAS HUSEINLALA 
KARAMDADKHAN 
Byculla Residential 50 03-05-1949 03-05-1999 30-11-2012 13 
30 SAYYAD MAHOMAD BAKAR Byculla Residential 50 01-09-1949 01-09-1999 30-11-2012 13 
31 SHAMSUDDIN NOMANBHAI Byculla Residential 50 05-05-1949 05-05-1999 30-11-2012 13 
79

APPENDIX III (Continued) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
32 BOMBAY MUNICIPAL CORPORATION BOMBAY 
CITY 
Colaba Residential 50 18-06-1948 18-06-1998 30-11-2012 14 
33 ABDUL HAMID MOHMED HASSAN SHAIK AHMED 
MUCKBA 
Mandvi Residential 50 01-05-1947 01-05-1997 30-11-2012 15 
34 RAGHUNATH VITHHAL KOTHMIRE & 2 OTHERS Girgaon Residential 50 22-11-1945 22-11-1995 30-11-2012 17 
35 THE SAT TAD KADIM MOSQUE TRUST Mandvi Residential 50 01-05-1944 01-05-1994 30-11-2012 18 
36 M/S.SUMER ASSOCIATES. Mazgaon Residential 99 20-12-1894 20-12-1993 30-11-2012 19 
37 THE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND TRUST Fort Residential 99 14-06-1894 01-06-1993 30-11-2012 19 
38 WALLACE FLOOR MILLS COMPANY LTD Mazgaon Residential 99 01-10-1893 01-10-1992 30-11-2012 20 
39 SHEVCHANDRA ROY PODDAR Colaba Residential 21 01-12-1970 01-12-1991 30-11-2012 21 
40 RUSTOM DANIAR IRANI Byculla Residential 50 01-05-1941 01-05-1991 30-11-2012 21 
41 ISAAC NEYYARAPALLY THOMAS Fort Residential 55 26-06-1933 26-06-1988 30-11-2012 24 
42 MOHAMED HANIF ISMAIL Fort Residential 53 01-03-1935 01-03-1988 30-11-2012 24 
43 RATANSI MULJI & TWO OTHERS Fort Residential 52 01-10-1936 01-10-1988 30-11-2012 24 
44 THE MAHARASHTRA STATE BHARAT SCOUTS & 
GUIDES 
Mahim Residential 10 26-08-1978 26-08-1988 30-11-2012 24 
45 M/S.PRITHVI COTTON MILLS LTD Malabar Hills Residential 99 10-01-1887 10-01-1986 30-11-2012 26 
46 BOMBAY MUNICIPAL CORPORATION Colaba Residential 6 13-06-1980 13-06-1986 30-11-2012 26 
47 KHUSHALDAS YALLABHADAS & ONE OTHERS Lower Parel Residential 33 31-12-1952 31-12-1985 30-11-2012 27 
48 MEHERJIBHOY PALLONJI MISTRY & 5 OTHERS Colaba Residential 30 15-04-1955 15-04-1985 30-11-2012 27 
49 NEW RIDGE APARTMENT CO-OP HSG SOC LTD Malabar Hills Residential 50 01-12-1932 01-12-1982 30-11-2012 30 
80

APPENDIX III (Continued) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
50 CAWASSHAW SORABJI PAUWALA & 3 OTHERS Malabar Hills Residential 50 01-12-1932 01-12-1982 30-11-2012 30 
51 HABIB JANMOHMED & ANOTHER Mazgaon Residential 45 14-11-1937 14-11-1982 30-11-2012 30 
52 MORESHWAR ANANTRAO MHATRE & 1 OTHERS Mazgaon Residential 45 14-11-1937 14-11-1982 30-11-2012 30 
53 PRABHAKAR RAMCHANDRA MHATRE & 4 OTHERS Mazgaon Residential 45 14-11-1937 14-11-1982 30-11-2012 30 
54 KANTA LAKHUMAL HIRANANDANI & 4 OTHERS Malabar Hills Residential 25 01-10-1957 01-10-1982 30-11-2012 30 
55 PAVLOVA CO-OPERATIVE HOUSING SOCIETY 
LIMITED 
Malabar Hills Residential 25 01-10-1957 01-10-1982 30-11-2012 30 
56 STERLING INVESTMENT CORPORATION PRIVATE 
LIMITED 
Malabar Hills Residential 25 01-10-1957 01-10-1982 30-11-2012 30 
57 MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF GREATER BOMBAY Byculla Residential 50 01-05-1931 01-05-1981 30-11-2012 31 
58 NARIMAN DOSSABHAI UMRIGAR Byculla Residential 50 01-05-1930 01-05-1980 30-11-2012 32 
59 FATMABAI SAYED ABDUL KADAR. Mazgaon Residential 99 01-01-1880 01-01-1979 30-11-2012 33 
60 GREATER BOMBAY POLICE CLUB Fort Residential 15 04-04-1963 04-04-1978 30-11-2012 34 
61 MALIK LIYAQAT HUSAIN GULAM NABI Byculla Residential 50 01-05-1927 01-05-1977 30-11-2012 35 
62 REV. MANUAL XAVIER GOMES ROSE & FIVE 
TRUSTEES 
Mazgaon Residential 99 01-08-1873 01-08-1972 30-11-2012 40 
63 SHIVDAS CHAPSI & SIX ORS Mazgaon Residential 99 01-01-1873 01-01-1972 30-11-2012 40 
64 MULJI ALIAS SHANKAR CHAPSI & OTHERS. Mazgaon Residential 99 01-01-1873 01-01-1972 30-11-2012 40 
65 BAI LADAKABAI W/O NANAJI HARIRAM. Mazgaon Residential 99 01-01-1873 01-01-1972 30-11-2012 40 
66 SHETH RANCHODDAS VALLABHDAS & ANOTHER Mazgaon Residential 99 01-01-1873 01-01-1972 30-11-2012 40 
67 K S THAKKAR & 4 OTHERS Mazgaon Residential 99 01-01-1873 01-01-1972 30-11-2012 40 
81

APPENDIX III (Continued) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
68 KASAMALI K.PORBANDRAWALA AND 7  OTHERS Mazgaon Residential 99 01-08-1873 01-08-1972 30-11-2012 40 
69 MARGARET RUBY AND OTHERS Mazgaon Residential 99 01-01-1873 01-01-1972 30-11-2012 40 
70 DINANATH RAMRAO JAIKAR & 4 ORS Matunga Residential 21 01-05-1950 01-05-1971 30-11-2012 41 
71 THE BOMBAY DIOSISAN TRUST ASSOCIATION LTD Colaba Residential 30 24-06-1932 24-06-1962 30-11-2012 50 
72 STERLING INVESTMENT CORP.PVT.LTD. Colaba Residential 21 06-08-1938 06-08-1959 30-11-2012 53 
73 MULAJI HARIDAS Colaba Residential 50 01-05-1904 01-05-1954 30-11-2012 58 
74 BAI FATMABAI W/O HAJIALI MOHOMED HAJI 
KASAM 
Girgaon Residential 50 01-05-1897 01-05-1947 30-11-2012 65 
75 MOHANLAL N MEHTA & FOUR OTHERS TRUSTEES Girgaon Commercial 60 24-10-1939 24-10-1999 30-11-2012 13 
76 INDIAN OIL CORPORATION Byculla Commercial 30 15-02-1933 15-02-1963 30-11-2012 49 
77 THE COLABA RAJAK CONSUMERS CO OP SOC Colaba Commercial 5 19-11-1957 19-11-1962 30-11-2012 50 
78 RICHARDSON & CRUDDAS LTD. Byculla Industrial 99 01-09-1903 01-09-2002 30-11-2012 10 
79 RICHARDSON & CRUDDAS LTD. Byculla Industrial 99 01-09-1903 01-09-2002 30-11-2012 10 
80 RICHARDSON & CRUDDAS LTD. Byculla Industrial 99 12-08-1893 12-08-1992 30-11-2012 20 
81 M/S HINDUSTAN PETROLEUM CORPORATION LTD. Fort Industrial 21 01-01-1965 01-01-1986 30-11-2012 26 
82 SHREE SHAKTI MILLS LTD Lower Parel Industrial 50 01-11-1935 01-11-1985 30-11-2012 27 
83 THE NATIONAL RAYON CORPORATION OF INDIA Lower Parel Industrial 21 28-07-1964 28-07-1985 30-11-2012 27 
84 THE SIMPLEX MILLS CO LTD Byculla Industrial 99 22-04-1884 22-04-1983 30-11-2012 29 
85 RICHARDSON & CRUDDAS LTD. Byculla Industrial 99 28-03-1875 28-03-1974 30-11-2012 38 
86 M/S BOMBAY CHEMICALS LTD Mazgaon Industrial 99 01-01-1873 01-01-1972 30-11-2012 40 
82

APPENDIX III (Continued) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
87 THE BOMBAY DIOSISAN TRUST ASSOCIATION PVT 
LTD 
Mazgaon Others 99 07-01-1907 07-01-2006 30-11-2012 6
88 SHAPURJI PALLANJI MISTRY & 6 ORS TRUSTEES Mazgaon Others 99 01-09-1903 01-09-2002 30-11-2012 10 
89 MRS REGINA ALBINA ROCHA PINTO Mazgaon Others 99 01-09-1903 01-09-2002 30-11-2012 10 
90 TRUSTEES OF THE MERWANJI FRAMJI CHARITABLE 
FUND 
Mazgaon Others 99 01-09-1903 01-09-2002 30-11-2012 10 
91 THE PARSI GYMKHANA Bhuleshwar Others 30 01-01-1970 01-01-2000 30-11-2012 12 
92 THE ISLAM GYMKHANA Bhuleshwar Others 30 01-01-1970 01-01-2000 30-11-2012 12 
93 THE WILSON COLLEGE GYMKHANA Bhuleshwar Others 30 01-01-1970 01-01-2000 30-11-2012 12 
94 THE WOODHOUSE GYMKHANA Fort Others 60 01-01-1939 01-01-1999 30-11-2012 13 
95 TYEBAILY MAHOMEDALI Byculla Others 50 01-05-1948 01-05-1998 30-11-2012 14 
96 THE HINDU GYMKHANA Bhuleshwar Others 30 01-01-1970 01-01-2000 30-11-2012 12 
97 THE CATHOLIC GYMKHANA LTD Bhuleshwar Others 30 06-01-1947 06-01-1977 30-11-2012 35 
(B)   MUMBAI SUBURBAN DISTRICT 
1 SHRI MADHUSUDAN UPADHYAY Bandra Residential 30 09-11-1967 09-11-1997 30-11-2012 15 
2 SHRI. J.A.BAIRO Bandra Residential 30 04-12-1961 04-12-1991 30-11-2012 21 
3 SHRI. CHUNNILAL DHARAMDAS GANDHI, SHRI. 
M.M.GANDHI 
Bandra Residential 30 01-01-1951 01-01-1981 30-11-2012 31 
4 M/S SIKING PREMISES CO-OPERATIVE HOUSING 
SOCIETY LTD 
Bandra Residential 30 01-01-1951 01-01-1981 30-11-2012 31 
83

APPENDIX III (Continued) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
5 SMT. MERRY SIBIL PARERA (BANDSTAND CO-
OPERATIVE HOUSING SOCIETY) 
Bandra Residential 30 01-01-1951 01-01-1981 30-11-2012 31 
6 SMT. GAURI KHAN AND SHAHRUKH KHAN (SHRI. 
NARIMAN K.DUBHASH) 
Bandra Residential 30 01-01-1951 01-01-1981 30-11-2012 31 
7 SEEMA APARTMENT SMT. ZOHRA S. NAYANI Bandra Residential 30 01-01-1951 01-01-1981 30-11-2012 31 
8 SHRI HAJI HABIB HAJIKARIM Bandra Residential 30 01-01-1951 01-01-1981 30-11-2012 31 
9 SMT  GRESI MARTHA LOPIS Bandra Residential 30 01-01-1951 01-01-1981 30-11-2012 31 
10 ARCH BISHOP OF BOMBAY Bandra Residential 30 01-01-1951 01-01-1981 30-11-2012 31 
11 M/S RAJESH CONSTRUCTIONS Bandra Residential 30 01-01-1951 01-01-1981 30-11-2012 31 
12 SHRI SIMALNATH Danda Residential 7 08-01-1958 08-01-1978 30-11-2012 34 
13 KURLA SCRAP MERCHANT ASSOCIATION Mandala Commercial 30 16-09-1976 16-09-2006 30-11-2012 6
14 MAHARASHTRA CHAMBER OF COMMERCE  Parighkhar Commercial 30 17-11-1976 17-11-2006 30-11-2012 6
15 M/S KANAJI MANAJI AND COMPANY Kurla Kirol Commercial 15 17-01-1989 17-01-2004 30-11-2012 8
16 MULTI USE GOODS SHOP CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETY Juhu Commercial 30 12-07-1972 12-07-2002 30-11-2012 10 
17 ENCROACHMENT OF SINDHI SHOP VENDORS Wadavli Commercial 50 1948 01-01-1998 30-11-2012 14 
18 GONAN DANKARLI AND COMPANY Vileparle Commercial 30 15-05-1967 15-05-1997 30-11-2012 15 
19 M/S JUHU BEACH RESORT PVT LTD Juhu Commercial 50 25-03-1942 25-03-1992 30-11-2012 20 
20 HOTEL CORPORATION OF INDIA Juhu Commercial 50 01-08-1951 01-08-1991 30-11-2012 21 
21 M/S RAHEJA REALTY SERVICES PVT. LTD Juhu Commercial 30 09-06-1942 09-06-1972 30-11-2012 40 
22 M/S SUN AND SAND HOTEL Juhu Commercial 2 30-11-1968 30-11-1970 30-11-2012 42 
84

APPENDIX III (Continued) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
23 NATIONAL SOCIETY FOR CLEAN CITIES Bandra Social 20 03-11-1975 03-11-2005 30-11-2012 7
24 M.N.SINGH Darivali Social 10 24/3/1994 24-03-2004 30-11-2012 8
25 POST AND TELEGRAPH DEPARTMENT Danda Social 30 09-01-1968 09-01-1998 30-11-2012 14 
26 JUHUTARA KOLI SAMAJ Juhu Social 30 14-04-1952 14-04-1982 30-11-2012 30 
27 SPASTIC SOCIETY OF INDIA Bandra Educational  30 15-01-1981 15-01-2011 30-11-2012 1
28 SAMAJONNATI EDUCATION INSTITUTE Boriwali Educational  15 02-02-1995 02-02-2010 30-11-2012 2
29 JANTA SEWA MANDAL Chembur Educational  30 08-06-1979 08-06-2009 30-11-2012 3
30 NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MUTE AND DEAF Bandra Educational  30 19/12/1978 19-12-2008 30-11-2012 4
31 GYAN KENDRA Ambivali Educational  15 31-07-1990 31-07-2005 30-11-2012 7
32 UTTAR BHARATIYA SANGH Bandra Educational  15 12-11-1981 12-11-1996 30-11-2012 16 
33 JANTA SEWA MANDAL Chembur Educational  15 16-06-1977 16-06-1992 30-11-2012 20 
34 HINDUSTAN PETROLEUM CORPORATION Mahul Others 5 01-06-2006 01-06-2011 30-11-2012 1
35 MAHARASHTRA STATE LAWN TENNIS 
ASSOCIATION 
Chembur Others 15 01-01-1986 01-01-2001 30-11-2012 11 
36 M/S PARAMOUNT HOTEL PVT. LTD Akse Others 3 15-07-1995 01-07-1998 30-11-2012 14 
37 M/S KANDY FILTERS INDIA LTD Kandivli Others 5 11-08-1987 11-08-1992 30-11-2012 20 
(C)  PUNE DISTRICT 
1 NANABHAU DEOGI NAIKWADI Khed Residential 50 11-02-1920 11-02-1970 30-11-2012 42 
2 NANABHAU DEOGI NAIKWADI Khed Residential 50 11-02-1920 11-02-1970 30-11-2012 42 
3 SAMBHAJI NANABHAU NAIKWADI Khed Residential 50 11-02-1920 11-02-1970 30-11-2012 42 
85

APPENDIX III (Continued) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
4 GOLF CLUB S.NO.257, YERWADA, PUNE Pune City Commercial 30 29-11-1977 29-11-2007 30-11-2012 5
5 CHAIRMAN SHRI CHATRAPATI SHIKSHAN 
SANSTHA BHAVANINAGAR 
Indapur Educational 15 19-12-1996 19-12-2011 30-11-2012 1
6 SANEGURUJI EDUCATION SANSTHA, URALEDEVI Haveli Educational 15 09-06-1994 09-06-2009 30-11-2012 3
7 ADHYAKSH PUNE ZILLA SHIKSHAN MANDAL , 
PUNE, MAUJE, PANDESHWAR 
Purandare Educational 15 10-01-1993 10-01-2008 30-11-2012 4
8 RAYYAT SHIKSHAN SANSTHA PARGAON , TAL 
DAUND, PUNE 
Dound Educational 15 13-10-1992 13-10-2007 30-11-2012 5
9 ALL INDIA SHIVAJI MEMORIAL SOCIETY 
BORIBHADAK , TAL DAUND , PUNE 
Dound Educational 15 27-05-1991 27-05-2006 30-11-2012 6
10 SUHAD MANDAL PUNE 805 SCRUTI BHANDARKAR 
PATH SHIVAJINAGAR, DHAYARI, PUNE-5 
Haveli Educational 15 20-10-1994 20-10-2004 30-11-2012 8
11 BALMOHAN VIDHYA MANDIR TRUST, TALEGAON Mawal Educational 30 09-02-1972 09-02-2002 30-11-2012 10 
12 PUNE DISTRICT EDUCATION MANDAL PUNE 
MOUZE KARMOLI, TQ. MULSHI, PUNE 
Mulshi Educational 15 18-11-1986 18-11-2001 30-11-2012 11 
13 BALMOHAN VIDHYA MANDIR TRUST, TALEGAON Mawal Educational 15 17-10-1974 17-10-1989 30-11-2012 23 
14 BALMOHAN VIDHYA MANDIR TRUST, TALEGAON Mawal Educational 15 09-02-1972 09-02-1987 30-11-2012 25 
15 SHIVAJI SHIKSHAN PRASARK MANDAL, BAWADA Indapur Educational 15 02-05-1969 02-05-1984 30-11-2012 28 
16 SANT MUKTI BAI VIDYALYA, SHELGAON TARFE  Indapur Educational 15 02-05-1969 02-05-1984 30-11-2012 28 
17 BALMOHAN VIDHYA MANDIR TRUST, TALEGAON Mawal Educational 15 14-10-1967 14-10-1983 30-11-2012 29 
18 MAHARASHTRA STATE MILK SAHAKARI SANGH 
LTD. KATRAJ, PUNE 
Haveli Social 10 01-01-1969 01-01-1979 30-11-2012 33 
19 SMT. SWATI VINAYAK NIMHAN, ZUNG BANGLOW, 
SWARWADI, PUNE 
Haveli Others 10 27-08-1993 27-08-2003 30-11-2012 9
86

APPENDIX III (Continued) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
(D)   MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF GREATER MUMBAI 
1 WESTERN RAILWAY  Marine Lines Residential 93 01-06-1915 31-05-2008 30-11-2012 4
2 N.L. MEHTA GENERAL POWER OF ATTORNEY Fort Residential 99 11-11-1904 10-11-2003 30-11-2012 9
3 GRACY THOMAS & OTHER Chawpatty Commercial 99 13-03-1913 12-03-2012 30-11-2012 1
4 GULABSINGH GOCULDAS  Chawpatty Commercial 99 20-04-1910 19-04-2009 30-11-2012 3
5 M/S. F.M. CHINOY & PVT. LTD. Chawpatty Commercial 93 15-02-1916 14-02-2009 30-11-2012 3
6 ARDESHIR EDUJI SERVAI & ANR. Fort Commercial 99 21-12-1909 20-12-2008 30-11-2012 4
7 THE PEOPLE EDUCATION SOCIETY Fort Commercial 99 21-12-1907 20-12-2006 30-11-2012 6
8 M/S.FORBES, CAMPBELL & CO. LTD., Fort Commercial 99 25-09-1907 24-09-2006 30-11-2012 6
9 GOOLBAI  W/O JEHANGIR PALLONJI KAVARANA Colaba Commercial 99 06-08-1902 05-08-2001 30-11-2012 11 
10 DEUTSCHE BANK (AG)  Fort Commercial 99 24-04-1902 23-04-2001 30-11-2012 11 
11 THE ORIENTAL FIRE AND GENERAL INSURANCE 
CO.LTD.,  
Colaba Commercial 99 05-12-1901 04-12-2000 30-11-2012 12 
12 ELLEN KEKI MODI & OTHERS PARTNERS OF THE 
FIRM OF M/S.EMPIRE ESTATES  
Fort Commercial 99 13-12-1901 12-12-2000 30-11-2012 12 
13 BENNETT COLEMAN & CO. LTD. Fort Commercial 99 04-04-1901 03-04-2000 30-11-2012 12 
14 TAJ BUILDING CONDOMINIUM OF INDIA Fort Commercial 99 05-12-1901 04-12-2000 30-11-2012 12 
15 THE AGENT CHARTERED BANK OF INDIA 
AUSTRALIA & CHINA 
Fort Commercial 99 04-01-1897 03-01-1996 30-11-2012 16 
16 SHRI LAXMI WOOLLEN MILLS ESTATE PVT. LTD. Mahalaxmi Industrial 30 04-03-1982 03-03-2012 30-11-2012 1
17 THE WESTLEYAN METHODIST MISSONARY 
TRUSTASSOCIATION 
Colaba Other 99 01-09-1909 31-08-2008 30-11-2012 4
87

APPENDIX IV
Details of cases in which unearned income levied by the Collector, 
Mumbai City
(Reference: Paragraph 2.5.2)
Sr.
No.
Name of lessee, CS No. and 
location
Area in  sq m Amount 
(`` in lakh)
Date of issue 
of demand by 
the
department
1 Raghunath Narayan & others, 302 
& 303, Mazgaon
485.83 59.03 21-5-2012
2 Bhanushali Brothers Pvt. Ltd., 
3/207 & 4/207, Salt Pan
5,400.09 189.88 29-9-2007
3 Dwarkadas Govardhandas; 396 
(CTS), 1/396, Mazgaon
4,893.66 1,318.20 2-1-2010
4 Maharashtra Rajya Sahakari 
Sakhar Karkhana Sangh Ltd 
(MRSSKSL), 1971, Fort
2,440.57 150.65 27-5-1997
5 Shree Laxmi Woolen Mill Pvt. 
Ltd., 66, Lower Parel subleased to 
Khushaldas Vallabhdas and 
Lanchand Khushaldas
4,579.47 1,559.31 19-10-2010
6 Raghunath Narayan & Others,  
448, Mazgaon
1,339.47 222.01 21-1-2012
7 Isaac Neyyar Pally, 1140; Pt.110, 
Fort
204.01 129.75 27-2-2012
Total 3,628.83
APPENDIX V
Details of cases in which unearned income was not computed
by the Department for recovery
(Reference: Paragraph 2.5.2)
(` in lakh)
Sr.
No.
Name of lessee, CS No. and 
location
Area in sq m Date of 
transfer/ 
sale/
assignment
Amount
(``)
1 Mafatlal Industries Ltd., 592 and 
593, Mazgaon
59,201.50 & 
11,150.60
17-6-2011 30,290.00
2 Sultan Mahammad Shah 
Agakhan & Others, 362, 
Mazgaon.
3,769.91 20-6-1981 85.20 
3 Shree Hashim Premji, 31 and 
Colaba
2,589.39 15-1-1982 1.98
Total 30,377.18
88

APPENDIX-VI 
Recovery of unearned income/premium  
(Reference: Paragraph 2.5.2) 
 (` in crore) 
Sr.
no.
Para No. Name of the lessee Unearned income/ 
premium 
(``)
MUMBAI CITY
1. 3.3.4 MTDC 1.42 
2. 3.5.1 Sportsfield Co-operative Housing Society 0.03 
Total  (a): 1.45 
MUMBAI SUBURBAN DISTRICT
1 4.2.6 M/s Ganon Dunkerly and Co. Ltd. 0.53 
2 4.2.14 M/s Jolly Brothers 199.14  
3 4.2.15 M/s Sahani Kirkood Pvt. Ltd. 0.62 
4 4.4.1 Maharashtra Theatre 0.48 
5 4.4.2 Held by individual 0.78 
6 4.4.2 Held by individual 1.57 
7 4.4.2 Held by individual 0.32 
Total (b) 203.44 
Grand Total (a)+(b) 204.89 
ABSTRACT
No. of cases Amount 
(`` in crore) 
Appendix-IV Mumbai City 7 36.28 
Appendix-V Mumbai City 3 303.77 
Appendix-VI Mumbai City 2 1.45 
Total (c) 12 341.50 
Appendix-VI Mumbai Suburban 7 203.44 
Total (d) 7 203.44 
Grand Total (c)+(d) 19 544.94 
89

APPENDIX VII 
List of GR's, Circulars and Memoranda wherein reference to the codal 
provisions were not made  
(Reference: Paragraph 2.5.3) 
Sr.
No. 
Particulars No. and Date of publication Subject 
1 2 3 4
1 Government 
Resolution 
LND 1067/122964-AI No. 
5723/51 dated 1 October 1954 
Fixation of rent of leased land at market value 
2 Government 
Resolution 
LND 4857/169146-AI, 
Sachivalaya, Bombay, 21 
November 1957 
Building Plots- (i) Permission for sale of land on lease 
(2) Breaches of conditions and (3) Extension of period 
for construction of building(s). 
3 Government 
Resolution 
LND 1067/122964-AI dated 3 
November 1969 
Fixation of rent of leased land at market value 
4 Circular LRF 1069/ 182496-B dated 20 
December 1969 
Submission of proposals of grant of land for 
Educational, Charitable or public purposes, revenue 
free on concessional terms to Institutions/ Local 
Authorities 
5 Circular LND-1077/ 3507/ CR-263/ G-5 
dated 16 May 1978 
Charging of interest in cases where advance possession 
of the land is given and lease rent in cases where land 
is granted on lease basis. 
6 Circular NO.LRF-1083/71134/CR-3478/ 
G-6, Mantralaya, Bombay, 
dated  
8 February 1983 
Government Lands: Revenue Free / Concessional 
grants of land for education and other purposes policy 
regarding thereto. 
7 Government 
Resolution 
No.LCS-1083/1882/CR-222/G-
4 dated 12 May 1983 
Policy for allotment of land to the Co-operative 
Housing Society. 
8 Government 
Resolution 
LRF 1083/ 1496/ CR-3700/ G-6 
dated 11 May 1984 
Grant of Government land at concessional rates for the 
promotion of Educational, Charitable or public 
purposes. 
9 Government 
Resolution 
LBS-1086/ 2644/ Pr. Kr. 196/ 
G-8 dated 14 June 1988 
Levy of additional rent for change in use of premises in 
buildings of hospitals, schools, colleges, Co-op. Hsg. 
Soc. for other profitable purpose than that originally 
granted  
10 Circular LND 1088/ 222336/ 2162/ G-9 
dated 23 January 1989 
Inclusion of terms and conditions in lease allotment 
orders for all lease cases- Revision of rent every ten 
years 
 11 Circular LND-1090/Pr.Kr.94-J-1, 
Mantralaya, Mumbai dated 22 
May 1990 
Action to be taken by the Collector in case of any 
breach in the allotment of land on lease/ occupancy 
price.
12 Government 
Resolution 
LND 1092/ Pr. Kr. 84/ J-1 
dated 30th June 1992 
Annual lease rent to be levied from date of possession 
of land at revised rates 
13 Government 
Resolution 
LRF 1092/ Pr. Kr. 85/ J-1 dated  
20 July 1992 
Grant of Government land to charitable organisations/ 
private institutions/ trusts etc. revenue free/ 
concessional rates for the construction of hospitals. 
14 Circular No.LND 
1096/341/P.Kr.4/96/AI 
Mantralaya, Mumbai. Dated 22 
February 1996 
Allotment of land on occupancy price/lease-
maintenance of register relating to allotment of land 
and action to be taken in case of breach. 
90

1 2 3 4
15 Government 
Resolution 
No.LCS 1095/Pr.Kr.37/95/J-1, 
Mantralaya, Mumbai., dated 9 
July 1999 
Policy regarding allotment of Government land to Co-
operative Housing Society. 
16 Government 
Resolution 
No.LND 
1085/134222/Pr.Kr.184 / J-2, 
Mantralaya, Mumbai dated  
5 October 1999 
Renewal of Lease on expiry in Mumbai City and 
Mumbai Suburban District. 
17 Government 
Resolution 
LBR 252000/ 175756/ M-963/ 
J-2 dated 23 November 2001 
Sale/ Transfer of premises in buildings standing over 
land sanctioned by the Government for industrial/ 
commercial purpose i.e. Transfer/ License fee, penalty 
for unauthorized change in use/ sale/ breach of 
conditions, Unearned income for vacant land 
18 Government 
Resolution 
LBL 1002/ Pr. Kr. 154/ J-2 
dated 24 August 2004 
Transfer/ License fee leviable for sale/ transfer/ sub 
letting on rental basis of flats/ premises for industrial/ 
commercial use in buildings on Government land 
sanctioned for Industrial, Commercial and Residential 
purpose 
19 Circular No.Misc.1004/Pr.Kr.336/J-2 
R&F department, Mantralaya, 
Mumbai, dated 6 January 2005 
Permission for redevelopment of leased land. 
20 Government 
Resolution 
LND 10/ 2002/ Pr. Kr. 387/ J-1 
dated 29th May 2006 
Implementing the revised policy of valuation on the 
basis of ready reckoner in all cases where Government 
land is leased/ ownership transferred or where 
valuation of land is involved 
21 Circular LBS 2502/ 115050/ Pr. Kr. 142/ 
J-2 dated 4 August 2006 
Levy of License fee on Gymkhana/ Sports 
organisations for renting Hall/ Open space for 
marriage/ reception functions/ shows etc. 
22 Government 
Circular 
No.Misc.-05/2006/Pr.Kr. 43/ J-
1 R&FD Department, 
Mantralaya, Mumbai dated 31 
October 2006 
Registration of lease land /occupancy price while 
renewal or granting permission for renewal under 
Bombay Stamps Act 1958 
23 Government 
circular 
No.Land-01/2007/Pr.Kr.4/J-1 
Mantralaya, Mumbai, dated 22 
February 2007 
Change of use with the prior permission of the 
Collector 
24 Circular LND 2007/ 184/ Pr. Kr. 151/ J-
2 dated 11 June 2007 
Grant of 'No Objection Certificate' for redevelopment 
of Government land by the Collector office should not 
be done without prior permission of Government 
25 Government 
Resolution 
LBR 2586/ Pr. Kr. 266/ J-2 
dated  
7 September 2007 
Policy regarding permission for use of Government 
land building premises for profitable purposes by 
levying additional ground rent/ license fee 
26 Circular LND 11/ 2007/ Pr. Kr. 98/ J-1 
dated 31 December 2007 
Implementing the revised policy of valuation on the 
basis of ready reckoner in all cases where Government 
land is leased/ ownership transferred or where 
valuation of land is involved 
27 Memoranda 
on case to 
case basis 
_ Levy of redevelopment charge / transfer charge 
91

APPENDIX-VIII 
Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) on 
paragraphs featured in the Audit Reports 
(Reference: Paragraph 2.7.1.1) 
Sr
No. 
Reference 
to Audit 
Report/ 
paragraph 
Depar
tment 
Subject Report No. and Year of PAC meeting and 
their recommendations 
Action 
Taken 
Notes 
1 1997-98 
Paragraph 
No. 3.10 
R & 
FD 
Loss of 
revenue due 
to non-
registration 
of property 
5th Report  2006-07:  
Enquiry must be made to ascertain whether the 
land allotted from 1947 till date to various 
individuals/organisations are being used for 
the purpose for which they were originally 
allotted, if not, the Revenue Department must 
undertake a drive to find out the cases where 
the original purpose of the land allotted has 
changed and recover penalty from the 
concerned persons.  This drive must be 
conducted on a war footing and the action 
taken in this regard must be submitted to the 
committee within three months. 
(Sr. No. 2.46 of the PAC Report) 
Not 
received 
2 1998-99 
Paragraph 
No. 4.2.7 
-do- Loss due to 
failure to 
evict
encroach-
ments and 
non-levy of  
occupancy
price
6th Report 2007-08. 
A review of the land which is allotted / leased 
should be taken by the Collector every three 
months and how much land is in possession of 
the Government, its present status, how much 
land is given on rent and to whom, how much 
land is under encroachment, etc., and issue 
instruction to all the Collectors to submit their 
Report to the Government.  
(Sr. No. 3.96 of the PAC Report) 
Not 
received 
3 1998-99 
Paragraph 
No. 4.2.10 
-do- Non-
recovery of 
penal
occupancy 
price/penal 
lease rent 
6th Report 2007-08. 
The Committee has clearly recommended that 
DV SHU *RYHUQPHQW¶V FLUFXODU GDWHG th March 
1996, the implementation of detailed 
suggestions should be done and to find out 
illegal encroachments and evict them and curb 
the tendency of encroachment.  
(Sr. No. 5.39 of the PAC Report) 
It was necessary that the land given on lease 
rent for 30 years in the year 1966 should have 
been taken back by Government after the 
expiry of 30 years in 1996. Committee is of the 
clear opinion that, except sending the notices 
no action was taken by the Government in this 
regard.   
It is recommended that it is necessary to 
physically verify the site and realistic 
information should be submitted to the 
Committee.  
(Sr. No. 5.42 of the PAC Report) 
Not 
received 
92

APPENDIX-IX  
Non-registration of Lease Deed (Mumbai city) 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.1) 
Sr.
No. 
Name of lessee, CS No. and Location Area in
sq m 
Amount of 
lease rent per 
annum in ``
Date of 
possession 
Period for 
which lease 
deed not 
registered
(in years) 
1 MCGM 2/600 , Colaba  21,385.87 5,56,035 15-06-1980 32 
2 M/s R.R. Investment and Estate Private 
Limited, 
1923/BBR-III, Fort Division 
3,218.25 7,67,900 14-05-1970 42 
3 Sindh Work Co-operative Housing 
Society, Malabar Hills Mumbai-6, 
4/697 Malabar Division 
6,637.46 11,400 21-04-1970 42 
4 Maliram Mittal, 1933 Plot No.228 
BBR-III Fort Division 
4,325.40 11,38,662 05-05-1972 40 
5 M/s Maker Development Services 
Pvt.Ltd., Plot No. 734,74,83,84 Block 
V BBR 
16,834.08 43,76,861 19-04-1974 38 
6 Nirmal Commercial Pvt. Ltd., 
1919/BBR-III, Fort Division 
3,449.00 Not 
available 
28-11-1964 47 
7 BEST under taking, 1967/BBR-III, Fort 
Division CS No.(149-150)  
7,944.44 2,58,193 March 1974 38 
8 Greater Bombay Police Club, 1/1448 & 
3/1448 Fort Division 
1,870.93 1 05-06-1979 33 
9 Prerana Premises Pvt. Ltd. Maker 
Bhavan New Marine Lines,1963/BBR-
III,Fort Division 
10,320.64 36,22,545 30-04-1974 38 
10 (i) Mumbai University,1708/Plot 
No.30,BBR Fort Division 
1,442.32 1 14-04-1958 54 
(ii) Mumbai University,1715/Plot 
No.39 BBR Fort Division 
1,563.56 1 19-05-1958 54 
(iii) Mumbai University, 1721/Plot 
No.45,BBR Fort Division 
1,567.74 1 28-12-1961 50 
11 Foreshore Co-operative Housing 
Society Pvt. Ltd., CS No. 1938 and 
1939, Worli 
3,529.88 6,44,000 November 
1983 
29 
Total 84,089.57 
93

APPENDIX- X 
Revenue potential involved at 1.33 FSI in respect of redevelopment charges 
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2) 
Sr.
No. 
Name of the lessee / 
Cadastral Survey No / 
Location 
Date of 
Government 
sanction
Area in 
sq m 
Rate as 
per ASR 
for Single 
FSI 
(`)
Rate of 
land for 
1.33 FSI 
(`)
Market 
value of 
land at 1.33 
FSI ` 
(col. 4 X 6) 
Market 
value of land 
as per 1 FSI  
(col. 5 X 4) 
Short 
determination 
of market 
value
(col. 7 ± 8) 
Estimated short 
recovery of 
redevelopment 
charges  
(col. 9 X 10 per cent)
(`  in crore)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
1 Simplex Reality 
Limited*1960/ Byculla 
May 2009 7,836.18 17,800 23,674 18.55 13.95 4.6 0.46 
2 Patrical Erasmar Turner 
(Legal Heirs);/ 448/ 
Mazgaon 
August 2009 1,339.47 22,100 29,393 3.94 2.96 0.98 0.09 
3 R.R.Builders; 1/716/ 
Mazgaon Division 
August 2009 9,197.43 24,100 32,053 29.48 22.17 7.31 0.73 
4 Shah Agakhan; 362/ 
Mazgaon Division 
February 2012 3,769.91 34,300 45,619 17.20 12.93 4.27 0.43 
5 Sasoon Spinning and 
Weaving Company Ltd.; 592 
& 593/ Mazgaon 
March 2012 3,0910.15 33,600 44,688 138.13 97.77 40.36 4.04 
Total 53,053.14 207.3 149.78 57.52 5.75 
* Earlier known as Simplex Mills Company Limited but name changed as per certificate of incorporation issued by the Registrar o f Companies, Mumbai on 
9 September 2005. 
#  Proposal sent to Government in February 2012. 
94

APPENDIX-XI 
List of lessees who have committed breach of conditions  
(Reference: Paragraph 4.2.11) 
Sr.No. Name of the lessee Area in sq. meter Breach of condition 
1 Shri Chunnilal Dharamdas Gandhi Shri M.M. 
Gandhi 
2,282.60 2(H)
2 M/s. Sea King Premises Co-op Hsg. Soc. Ltd. 3,089.46 2(H)
3 Hilmeri Premises Co-op Hsg. Soc. 1,814.54 2(H)
4 M/s. Sea Breez Apartment 2,732.50 2(H)
5 Smt. Sibil Parera (Band Stand Co-op Soc. 5,593.20 2(H)
6 Asudha Kutir Maount Meri Road Co-op Hsg. 
Soc. 
2,621.20 2(H)
7 Mount Meri Co-op Hsg. Ltd. 2,134.61 2(H)
8 Shri M.D. Kuka, Smt. G.M. Kuka, Shri 
Vasudeo Vadhwa 
1,000.28 2(H)
9 Shri S.B. Jain & U.B. Jain (Vindhyachal Co-op 
Hsg. Soc.) 
3,071.90 2(H)
10 Seema Apartment, Smt. Johora S. Nayani 3,914.71 2(H) & 2 (G) 
11 Shri Barbarji Jiwaji Mestri, Shri Dinshaw B. 
Mestri 
1,010.86 2(H) & 2 (G) 
12 M/s. Fair Premises Co-op Hsg. Soc. 2,257.50 2(H) & 2 (G) 
13 West Steel Traders (Vrindavan Co-op Hsg. 
Soc. 
2,801.00 2(H) & 2 (G) 
14 Haji Daud Ilyas & other three 3,066.00 2(H) & 2 (G) 
15 Zefire Co-op Hsg. Soc 2,991.63 2(H) & 2 (G) 
16 Vaikunth Co-op Hsg. Soc 1,523.41 2(H) & 2 (G) 
17 Shri A. M. Disoza, Smt. Meri Z. Disoza, M/s. 
Asit Premises Co-op Hsg. Soc. 
4,145.01 2(H) & 2 (G) 
18 Smt. Sirinbai N. J. Dadi 3,449.89 2(H) & 2 (G) 
19 Smt. Sirinbai N. J. Dadi 3,449.89 2(H) & 2 (G) 
20 Shri A.A. Natalwala 3,115.35 2(H) & 2 (G) 
21 Shri V.A. Parera 1,551.60 2(H) & 2 (G) 
22 Shri Haji Habib Haji Karim 4,345.40 2(H) & 2 (G) 
23 Smt. Gresi Martha Lopis 27,330.00 2(H) & 2 (G) 
24 Sagar Resham Co-op Hsg. Soc. Ltd. 2,483.27 2(H) & 2 (G) 
25 Sagar Resham Co-op Hsg. Soc. Ltd. 2,483.27 2(H) & 2 (G) 
26 Shri Govardhandas Khilnani 3,293.50 2(H) & 2 (G) 
27 Lady Nawab Bhai Ratan Tata (Silver Cascade 
Society) 
4,480.25 2(H) & 2 (G) 
28 Smt. Gulbano, M.H. Premji 989.96 2(H) & 2 (G) 
29 Shri V. A. Parera 2,115.00 2(H) & 2 (G) 
30 Shri V. A. Parera 1,533.00 2(H) & 2 (G) 
31 M/s. Rajesh Construction 2,427.28 2(H) & 2 (G) 
Condition 2(G), the lessees were prohibited from transferring or assigning the allotted plot or 
part thereof without the consent in writing of Collector. 
Condition 2(H) the lessee could not at any time have building covering or projecting over 
more than an area prescribed for the said plot of land. 
95

APPENDIX-XII 
Loss due to short recovery of lease rent 
(Reference : Paragraph 7.5.3) 
Sr.
No. 
Name of person/Society to 
whom land allotted 
Annual
Lease Rent 
(` ) 
Total lease rent 
upto 2011-12  
(`)
Lease rent 
paid
(` ) 
Total lease rent 
recoverable  
(`)
1. Bilawar Association, Anand 
Nagar colony, Santacruz (E) 
Agreement date-02.03.2002 
12,324 1,23,240 
(12,324 X 10 years) 
0 1,23,240 
2. Maharashtra State Police 
Employees Co-operative 
Housing Society , Poisar - 
Kandivili, Agreement date-
03.06.1996 
7,34,815 1,17,57,040 
(7,34,815 X 16 
years) 
37,23,076 80,33,964 
3. Vagadvisha Oshwal Society, 
Oshiwara  Phase I colony 
Agreement date-16.08.1999 
19,330 2,31,960 
(19,330 X 12 years) 
0 2,31,960 
4. Brihad-Mumbai Gujrati 
Samaj Oshiwara Phase I 
colony Agreement date-
19.07.2001 
27,720 2,77,200 
(27720 X 10 years) 
0 2,77,200 
5. Shri Sai Housing Co-op. 
Society Oshiwara colony 
Agreement date-28.02.2002 
8,34,982 83,49,820 
(8,34,982 X 10 
years) 
0 83,49,820 
6. Shivanjali Sahkari 
Grihnirman Sanstha (kabij)  
Oshiwara Agreement date-
29.01.1997 
1,61,897.60 
(1,46,602.60
+15,295) 
25,75,067 
(1,46,602.60 X 16 
years + 15,295 X 15 
years) 
3,23,795 22,51,272 
Total 1,92,67,456, 
96