Contents
iPerformance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
PagesSubject
Preface v
Executive Summary vii
2.1Audit Approach 7
2.2Previous audit findings 11
2.3 Action taken by the Government on previous Performance 11
Audit Report
2.4Organisation of current audit findings 13
2.5 Acknowledgement 13
3.1Introduction 15
3.2Annual Work Plan/Development Plan 15
3.3 Shortfall in actual execution of the labour budget 19
3.4Works executed outside the Annual Plan 20
3.5 Shortfall in execution of Works in Annual Plans 21
3.6 Preparation of District Perspective Plan 22
4.1 Introduction 23
4.2State Government Rules 23
4.3 Constitution and functioning of Employment Guarantee Councils 24
4.4Personnel Support 25
4.5TechnicTT al Support 27
4.6 Training 28
4.7Information, Education and Communication (IEC) activities29
5.1 Introduction 31
5.2Financial Position under the Scheme 31
5.3 Unauthorised release of funds to States 32
Chapter 1 Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme - An Overview
Chapter 2 Audit Approach, Previous audit findings and organisation of 07
current audit findings
Chapter 3 Planning 15
Chapter 4 Capacity Building 23
Chapter 5 Financial Management 31
01

iiPerformance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Pages
5.4Release of funds for subsequent financial year 35
5.5 Excess release of funds by the Ministry without adjusting 36
the unspent balance
5.6 Excess Release of funds by the Centre 37
5.7Other Irregularities- Irregular claim of expenditure by Karnataka 38
5.8 Short release of State Share 38
5.9Delay in release of State share 39
5.10 Non-creation of SEG Fund 39
5.11Non transfer of funds from SGRY and NFFWP 40
5.12Utilisation of interest income 41
5.13Irregularities in management of Administrative expenses 41
5.14Expenditure on inadmissible items and diversion of funds 42
5.15Unaccounted expenditure or misappropriation of funds 43
5.16 Monthly squaring of Accounts 43
5.17 Prescribed format of Accounts 44
6.1 Introduction 45
6.2 Household Survey 45
6.3Issue of Job Cards 46
6.4Maintenance of records relating to Job Card and employment 49
6.5Employment Guarantee Day 50
6.6 State specific findings 50
7.1Introduction 53
7.2Delay in providing Employment and 53
Unemployment Allowance
7.3 Payment of Wages 56
7.4 Deployment of mates 62
7.5 Irregularities in Muster Roll 62
8.1Introduction 73
8.2Wage-Material Ratio 73
8.3Non Permissible Works 75
8.4Work on personal land of ineligible beneficiaries 77
8.5Abandonment/Unfruitful Works 77
8.6 Maintenance of plantation work 78
8.7Creation of Durable Assets 79
Chapter 6 Registration and Issue of Job cards 45
Chapter 7 Employment Generation and Payment of Wages 53
Chapter 8 Works 73
Subject

iiiPerformance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Pages
Procurement Procedures 80
8.9 Deficient Stock Maintenance Practices 83
8.10Unique number for each work 83
8.11TechnicTT al support to Gram Panchayats 83
8.12Use of Contractors 84
8.13 Use of Machinery 84
8.14Prior Sanction of Works 85
8.15 Transparency Requirements 85
8.16Schedule of Rates (SoR) 85
8.17Measurement Books 86
8.18 Worksite Facilities 86
8.19Project Completion Report 86
8.20 Suspected Misappropriation 87
8.21Expenditure of ` 1,935.49 crore in violation of the Act. 87
9.1 Introduction 89
9.2 Absence of convergence activities 89
9.3 Poorly executed convergence activities 91
10.1Introduction 95
10.2Non-maintenance of records 96
10.3 Incorrect  maintenance of records 98
10.4Other inadequacies in records 100
10.5Monitoring Information System (MIS) 101
11.1Monitoring and Evaluation framework 103
11.2Central Monitoring and Evaluation 104
11.3State Level monitoring and evaluation 108
11.4Internal verification of works at field level 109
11.5 Appointment of State and District Quality Monitors 110
11.6 Vigilance and Monitoring Committees 110
11.7Transparency and Accountability 111
11.8 Social Audit 111
11.9Grievance Redressal Mechanism 114
11.10 Citizens' Charter 114
11.11 Impact Assessment 115
Chapter 9 Convergence with other Schemes 89
Chapter 10 Maintenance of Records 95
Chapter 11 Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanisms 103
Subject

Pages
Chapter 12 IT Audit of NREGASoft 117
Chapter 13 Findings of the Beneficiary Survey 129
Chapter 14 Conclusion 139
Annexes 145
Introduction 117
12.2Objective of IT Audit 118
12.3IT Audit methodology 118
12.4Audit Findings 119
Subject
ivPerformance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme

Preface
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
containing the results of performance audit of the 
implementation of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) has been 
prepared for submission to the President of India under 
Article 151 of the Constitution.
The performance audit covered the period from April 2007 to 
March 2012. Field audit of the relevant records of the Ministry 
of Rural Development, state governments and district, block 
and panchayat level offices was conducted between February 
to September 2012. 
vPerformance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme

viiPerformance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
he Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, (MGNREGA) was enacted 
Twith the objective of enhancing livelihood security in rural areas by providing at least 100 
days of guaranteed wage employment in a financial year, to every household whose adult 
members volunteer to do unskilled manual work. The Act initially came into force in 200 districts 
with effect from 2 February 2006 and was expanded to cover all the rural districts by 1 April 2008. 
This is the second performance audit of the Scheme. The first performance audit was undertaken 
in 2007-08. The period of coverage of the first audit was February 2006 to March 2007.  The 
present performance audit of the implementation of MGNREGA was taken up in response to a 
request from the Ministry of Rural Development and covers the period from April 2007 to March 
2012. Implementation of the Scheme was checked in 3,848 gram panchayats in 28 states and four 
union territories.
The important findings of the performance audit are given below:
n Analysis of data related to the performance of the Scheme showed that there has been 
significant decline in per rural household employment generation in the last two years. The 
per rural household employment, declined from 54 days in 2009-10 to 43 days in 2011-12.  
There was also a substantial decline in the proportion of works completed in 2011-12. It 
was also seen that Bihar, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh, which together account for 46 
per cent of the rural poor, utilised only about 20 per cent of the Central Scheme funds. This 
indicated that the correlation between poverty levels and implementation of MGNREGA 
was not very high.
n As per section 16(3) of the Act, gram panchayats were required to prepare the annual 
development plan on the basis of recommendations of the gram sabha. In 1,201 GPs (31 
per cent of all test checked GPs) in 11 states and one UT , annual plans were either not 
prepared, or were prepared in an incomplete manner .
n In 14 states and one UT , 129.22 lakh works amounting to ` 1,26,961.11 crore were 
approved in the annual plans. But only 38.65 lakh works (30 per cent of planned works) 
amounting to ` 27,792.13 crore were completed during the audit period, indicating 
significant inefficiencies in implementation of annual plans.
Executive Summary

Executive Summary
n In terms of the MGNREGA, the states were to notify schemes and rules for its 
implementation. However, it was seen that despite passage of seven years, after the Act 
came into force, state governments of Haryana, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttar 
Pradesh (five states) did not formulate rules, as of March 2012.
n Audit observed that Information, Education and Communication (IEC) plans were not 
formulated in 12 states and two UTs. Shortfalls in utilization of IEC funds were also noticed. 
In a demand driven scheme like MGNREGS, awareness of beneficiary rights would be a 
critical factor in its success. The low level of IEC activities would have an adverse effect on 
the awareness levels of the beneficiaries and would, in turn, hamper the beneficiaries from 
fully realizing their rights. 
n Governments of four states (Arunachal Pradesh, Kerala, Manipur and Tamil Nadu) had not 
appointed dedicated Gram Rozgar Sahayaks. Further, persistent and widespread shortages 
of Gram Rozgar Sahayaks as against the requirements were noticed in the case of nine 
states (Assam, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, 
Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand). The shortages ranged from 20 to 93 per cent.
n The Ministry relaxed all conditionalities and released a sum of ` 1,960.45 crore in March 
2011 to the states, contravening norms of financial accountability. An amount of ` 4,072.99 
crore was released by the Ministry between 2008-12 to states for use in the subsequent 
financial year, in contravention of budgetary provisions and General Financial Rules. Also, 
excess funds of ` 2,374.86 crore were released by the Ministry to six states, either due to 
wrong calculation or without taking note of the balances available with the states.
n Job cards were not issued to 12,455 households in six states. Photographs on job cards 
represent an important control against fraud and misrepresentation. Photographs on 4.33 
lakh job cards were not found pasted in seven states. Non payment/under payment of 
wages of ` 36.97 crore was noticed in 14 states.  There were several cases of delayed 
payment of wages for which no compensation was paid. 
n Schedule I of the Act prescribes that the material component of the work should not exceed 
40 per cent of the total work cost. In 12 states and one UT , cases of the material cost 
exceeding the prescribed ratio were noticed. The material cost exceeded the prescribed 
level by ` 1,594.37 crore in the test checked cases.
n In the test checked districts of 25 states/UTs, 1,02,100 inadmissible works amounting to 
` 2,252.43 crore were undertaken.  These inadmissible works included construction of 
earthen/kutcha roads, cement concrete roads, construction of raised platforms for cattle 
and other animals, construction of bathing ghats, etc. Works amounting to ` 4,070.76 crore 
were incomplete despite passage of significant time, rendering the expenditure unfruitful.
n In 10 states and four UTs, Governments had not constituted Social Audit Units to facilitate 
the social audit forums.  In 11 states and one UT , it was seen that significantly fewer social 
audits from prescribed norms were conducted. 
viiiPerformance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013

Executive Summary
ixPerformance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
n Monitoring at the Central level was unsatisfactory. The Central Council could not fulfil its 
statutory mandate of establishing a central evaluation and monitoring system even after six 
years of its existence. The only monitoring activity carried out was in the form of 13 ad-hoc 
field visits to six states by the Council members. No follow up action was taken on these 
visits by the Council.
n Deficiencies, relating to both non-maintenance and incorrect maintenance of prescribed 
basic records, were noticed in 18 to 54 per cent of the all test checked GPs, for various types 
of records. Widespread deficiencies in the maintenance of records restricted the process of 
proper verification of the outputs and outcomes of the Scheme. 
n There were substantial differences between the data uploaded in the MIS and actual 
records maintained/information available with Directorate/DPC. Apart from the 
erroneous entries made in the database, a number of cases were noticed where the states 
were not entering data on a regular basis.  Hence, the MIS data on physical and financial 
performance of the Scheme was not reliable. In addition, the MIS suffered from faulty 
programming logic and missing validation controls. Cases of data manipulation, without 
any reference to basic records and without any apparent basis, were also noticed. 
Summary of Recommendations
n The widespread shortage of staff at all levels, adversely affects the implementation 
of the Scheme. The staff position should be closely monitored by the Ministry and 
shortfall on this account should be taken up with the state governments.
n MGNREGS, being a demand driven programme, requires the beneficiaries to be 
aware of their rights. However, the shortfall in IEC expenditure and non-
formulation of IEC plans indicated gaps in the creation of awareness among 
beneficiaries. IEC activities need to be stepped up for better beneficiary awareness. 
n Monthly squaring of accounts is an important control over utilization of funds. 
Progress of monthly squaring of accounts should be checked during release of funds 
by the Ministry. 
n In the interest of uniformity and for easier consolidation of accounts, the Ministry 
may consider developing a model format of accounts.
n Ministry of Rural Development should invariably ensure compliance with required 
rules and prescribed guidelines for transparency in release of funds.
n Non-payment of unemployment allowance and non-maintenance of essential 
records were noticed by Audit across all states. A possible reason for non-payment 
of unemployment allowance could be the non-sharing of unemployment allowance 
by Central Government and the perceived burden on the state exchequer.  In order 
to safeguard the interests of the beneficiaries, the Ministry may consider partial 
reimbursement of unemployment allowance. Further, strict action may be taken 

Executive Summary
x Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
against erring officials when any case of non-payment of unemployment 
allowance is noticed.
n The Ministry may monitor the maintenance of the prescribed wage material ratio 
strictly. State governments may be asked to make good, the amounts spent in 
excess of 60:40 ratio.
n The absence of physical records and their incorrect maintenance at the GP level 
makes verification of the achievements of the Scheme an extremely difficult task; it 
also increases the risk of mis-appropriation of funds. Record maintenance at GP 
level needs to be streamlined. Record maintenance should be monitored closely at 
all levels and fund release should be linked to proper maintenance of records.
n The CEGC and the Ministry need to ensure intensive monitoring of the Scheme for its 
proper implementation. They need to design a system for verification and audit of 
work.
n The Ministry or CEGC may consider undertaking a national level, comprehensive, 
independent evaluation of the Scheme.
n The Ministry should examine and reconcile the deficiencies in software design and 
make necessary changes to the NREGASoft. There is a need to put in place stricter 
controls for data modification after authentication and closure of data entry.

01Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
UrbanYears CombinedRural
1973
1983
1993
2004
56.4
45.7
37.3
28.3
49.0
40.8
32.3
25.7
54.9
44.5
36.0
27.5
1.1 Introduction
TheEleventhFiveYear YY Plan documentestimated thatIndiahad more than 30crorepeople below
the poverty line. Italso noted thatt henumber of poor had barely declined overthe lastthree
decades and also thattheabsolutenumber of poor had actually increasedin some of thelarger 
states likeBihar (including Jharkhand), MadhyaPradesh (including Chhattisgarh), Maharashtra, 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh.
TheEleventhFiveYearYY Plan documentrecognised thatpovertywouldbe reduced throughrapid 
growth,increasein employmentopportunitiesand directlytargeted poverty-reduction 
programmes.I talso recognised thefactt hatMahatmaGandhi National RuralEmployment 
GuaranteeScheme(MGNREGS)would be one of the main planksof rapid povertyreduction
duringthe Eleventh FiveYearYY Plan period.
Employment generation programmes had always been important Government interventions in 
India forreducingpoverty.Theseprogrammesprovidedshort-term employmenton publicworks 
to unskilled workers. Theywerebasedon the premise thatinareaswith high unemployment
ratesand under employment, such programmescan preventpovertyfrom worsening, especially
during lean periods of seasonal unemployment. Durable assetscreated bythese programmes 
were also expected to havethe potentialto generatesecond-round employmentbenefitsasthe 
requisiteinfrastructurehad been developed.
Employmentgenerationprogrammeshad always been astaple of planning initiatives,both atthe
Central and the state level, though itwas onlywith theintroduction of Jawahar RojagarYojana YY in 
Table 1: Percentage of People Below Poverty Line in India (1973-2004)
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme 
– An Overview
Chapter
1
e: Eleventh Five Year Plan 2007-12 VYY olume IIIVV

Chapter 1 - Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme – An Overview
1989 thattheoutreachof theseprogrammesincreased.Theexpansion in both thesize and
number of such programmes ultimately culminated in the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment GuaranteeAct (MGNREGA).
MGNREGA was notified on 7 September 2005. The objective of MGNREGA was enhancementof 
livelihood security of households in rural areas of thecountrybyp roviding at least 100 daysof 
guaranteed wage employment in everyfinancialyear to every household whose adult members
volunteerfor unskilled manual work. Creation of durable assets and strengthening the livelihood 
resourcebaseof therural poor wereother important objectivesof theScheme.
Through MGNREGA, the Governmentwascommittedto providing employmenttoevery rural 
family which demands such work and whose adult members volunteerto do such work. Such
workwas to beprovided at theminimum wagerateand, asfaraspossible, within aradius of five
kilometer of the village where the applicant resided. Failure to provide such wage employment
within15days of thereceipt of the applicationentitled the applicantto receive unemployment
allowance.
The principalimplementing agencies under the Act were the gram panchayats( GPs). MGNREGA 
alsoemphasized community participation in planning,implementation, social audit and 
transparency. Another importantfeatureof MGNREGA was thatit placed acompleteban on the
useof contractors.Italso laid emphasis on labour-intensiveworksfor water conservation, 
droughtand flood-proofing as priorityworks underMGNREGA.
1.2 Coverage of MGNREGS
1.3 Funding Pattern
Starting with 200districtsacross thecountry in Phase-I during2006–07, MGNREGSwasextended 
toan additional 130districtsin Phase-II during 2007–08.From 1 April 2008onwards MGNREGS
coveredthewhole of rural India. 
Asa districtwas notified undertheAct(i.e., itwascovered underMGNREGS), two existing 
schemes,namely, yySampoorna Grameen RozgarYojana YY (SGRY) and theNational Food for Work 
Programme (NFFWP) wereautomaticallymerged in MGNREGS. Hence,SGRY and NFFWP fully 
ceasedto existwith effffectfrom 1April 2008,after MGNREGScovered all thedistricts.
Thebulk of theexpenditurefor implementation of the Scheme wasborne by Central Government
in the form of grants-in-aid. The fundingpatternof the Scheme isdepicted inTable-2TT :
02Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013

Component
Wages for unskilled labour
Wages for skilled and semi-
skilled labour and cost
of material
Other components
Employment Guarantee
Councils
100per cent
75per cent
Administrative expenses as
may be determined by 
the Central Government.
Administrative expenses of the 
Central Employment
Guarantee Council.
-
25per cent
Unemployment allowance
payable in case wage
employment was not provided 
within 15 days of application.
Administrative expenses of 
the State Employment
Guarantee Council.
Central Share State Share
Table-2: Funding Pattern
Chapter 1 - Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme – An Overview
03Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
1.4 Organisational Setup
Thenodal Ministryin theGovernmentof India (GoI) for MGNREGSwastheMinistryof Rural 
Development (MoRD).Chart-1depicts therole of the variousauthorities atthe Central and State 
level in planning, executionand monitoringof theScheme.
Chart-1: Organisational structure of MGNREGS
Policy Making,
Monitoring &
Evaluation
Advisory, 
Monitoring &
Evaluation
MoRD Central Employment
Guarantee Council
State Employment
Guarantee CouncilState Government
District District Panchayat
Intermediate Panchayat
DPC
PO
Block
Village
Planning and Monitoring
Execution
Line Agencies
Report No. 6 of 2013
Gram Panchayat
Gram Sabha

Expenditure on MGNREGS
Persondays of employment
generated
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
Total expenditure (` in crore)
Average expenditure per District 
(` in crore)
Average expenditure per 
personday (in `)
Average wage cost per personday (in `)
15,856.89
48.05
110
75
27,250.10
44.31
126
84
37,905.23
61.24
134
90
39,377.27
63.61
153
100
38,034.70
49.35
176
115
Total (in crore)
Per rural household (in days)
143.59
42
216.32
48
283.59
54
257.15
47
216.34
43
Table-3: Performance Parameters of MGNREGS
Chapter 1 - Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme – An Overview
04Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
1.5 Financial Outlay and Physical Performance
A summary of expenditure reported on MGNREGS along with some performance parameters
during the period 2007-08 to 2011-12 is given below:
Source: Information provided bff y Central EmploEE yment Guarantee Council 
The above table shows that expenditure on the Scheme in the last three years had not increased
significantly; rather it declined in 2011-12. The chart below also indicates that even though the
average wage cost or wages paid was rising, the benefits to a rural household was negated by the
decline in employment provided per household.
Chart-2: Average wages (in `) and employment per household
Source: Information Provided bff y Central EmploEE yment Guarantee Council 
2007-08 2008-09
Employment Per Rural
Household (in days)
Average wage cost per
person-day
2009-10 2010-110
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2011-12
Report No. 6 of 2013

Thechartbelowshowstheshareof Scheduled Castes(SCs),ScheduledTribes (STs) TT and women in 
the employment provided under the Scheme.As per the data,women were fairly represented at
around 48per centduring the lastthreey e ars. However,rthe share of bothSCs andSTsTTshowed a
declining trend, with theshareof STsTTdeclining from 29per centin 2007-08to 19per centin 
2011-12.
An analysis of theworkstaken up under the Scheme showsthat while the number of works taken 
upi ncreasedsteadily, yythenumber of workscompleted declined by28per centin 2011-12with 
referenceto t heprevious yearand stood at22.5per centof the total worksundertakenin 
2011-12. The decline in per householdemploymentgeneration and in thecompletionof works
indicatesadisturbing trend in achievingtheprimaryobjectiveof theSchemei.e.,providing 
livelihoodsecurityandcreation of assets.
Chart-3: Share of SC, ST and Women in Employment Generation
Chart-4: Works taken up under MGNREGS
Source: Information provided bff y Central EmploEE yment Guarantee Council 
Source: Information provided bff y Central EmploEE yment Guarantee Council 
2007-08 2008-09
Women
Scheduled Tribes (STs)
Scheduled Castes (SCs)
2009-10 2010-11
0
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
2011-12
Chapter 1 - Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme – An Overview
05Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Works taken up
Works taken up
Works completed
Works completed
Works in progress
Works in progress
17.88
8.22
12.53
27.75
12.14
17.31
46.17
22.59
21.45
50.99
25.90
49.26
82.51
18.56
63.95
0
10
20
30
40
50
No. of Works (in lakh)
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
60
70
80
90


Chapter 1 - Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme – An Overview
06Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
As noted, MGNREGS was the main plank of the Eleventh Five Year Plan fYY or poverty eradication. 
The graph below correlates thestate rural povertyfigures (2009-10) with theaverage numberof 
householdsprovided employment (during 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12).At an aggregatelevel 
thereappeared to be acorrelation between thenumber of rural poor inastateandthe number of 
households given employment under MGNREGS. There were, however,rsome notable exceptions 
to this.StateslikeAndhraPradesh, Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan, Tamil TT Nadu andWestBengal seemto 
have made greater utilisation of MGNREGS ascomparedto the poverty levelsin thesestates.At
thesame time states likeBihar,rMaharashtra, Odisha and Uttar Pradesh seemto be relative 
laggards in utilization of MGNREGSfunds when compared to their poverty levels.
Analysisof state-wisereleases made bythe Ministryshowed thatfour states(AndhraPradesh, 
MadhyaPradesh, Rajasthan and UttarPradesh) accounted for 50per centof the totalexpenditure
made under theScheme. Itwasalso seent hatthreestates,viz.Bihar, rMaharashtra and Uttar 
Pradesh accounted for 46per centof the rural poor but utilized about 20per centof thefunds and 
consequently only 20per centof total households wereprovided employmentunder the 
Scheme. This indicatesthatt herewaslittlecorrelation between povertylevel in astate and the 
implementation of MGNREGS. State-wisedetailsaregiven inAnnex -1A.
Chart-5: Poverty Levels and Average Annual Number of 
Households Provided Employment in States
Source: Planning Commission data on poverty and NREGASoft fE or emploff yment data
Report No. 6 of 2013

07Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
2.1 Audit Approach
2.1.1 Audit Methodology
2.1.2 Audit Objectives
n
n
n
n
The Ministryof Rural Development (the Ministry) made arequestforaudit of the Schemein 
November 2011. Considering the importance, financial outlayand impactof the Scheme, a
performance audit wasconducted.After preparation of auditguidelines, the performance audit 
commenced with an entryconference with the Ministryon1May2012,where the audit
methodology, yyscope, objectivesandcriteria were discussed.
In order to assess the economy, yy efficiency ff and effffectivenessof processesrelated to the 
implementation of MGNREGS,thea udit procedure included inspectionof various records,
procedures and also physical inspection of selected worksatthegram panchayat(GP) level.A 
beneficiarysurveywas also conducted with thehelp of a structured questionnaire designed to 
capture theperception of thebeneficiaries about the Scheme.The audit wasconducted atthe 
block, district and statelevel and also atthe Ministryof Rural Development. After theconclusion 
of audit and theconsolidation and analysis of auditfindings,an exitconferencewas held withthe 
team of the Ministryheaded byMinisterof RuralDevelopmenton 24 December 2012,in which 
thedraft audit findings and recommendations werediscussed.In addition, exit conferenceswere 
also heldwith thestategovernments,wherethe state-specific findings werediscussed.
Performanceaudit wasundertaken to ascertain whether:
Structural mechanismswereput in placeand adequatecapacity building measureswere 
taken bytheCentral and stategovernmentsfor implementationof theAct;
Proceduresfor preparingperspectiveand annual plan atdifffferentlevelsfor estimating the 
likely demand for work, and preparing shelf of projects,were adequateand effffective;
Funds werereleased,accounted for andutilised bythe Central and stategovernmentsin 
compliance with theprovisions of theAct and other extantrules;
Processof registration of households, allotmentof job cards, and allocation of employment
in compliance with theActand rules waseffffective;
Audit Approach, Previous 
Performance Audit Findings and 
Organisation of Current Audit 
Findings
Chapter
2

Chapter 2 - Audit Approach, Previous Performance Audit Findings and Organisation of Current Audit Findings
Primaryobjectiveof ensuring the livelihood securitywasprovided bygiving 100 daysof 
annual employmentt o  households in rural areas on demand and wages as declared, were 
paid;
MGNREGS workswereefficienff tly and effffectivelyexecuted in a time-bound manner and in 
compliance with the Act and Rules, and durable assets werecreated, maintained and
accounted for;
Convergence of the Scheme with other rural developmentprogrammes as envisaged was
effffectively achieved in enhancing the employmentopportunities under MGNREGS;
All requiredrecords atvarious levelswereproperly maintained and MGNREGSMIS data
wasaccurate,reliable and timely;
Transparencywas maintained byinvolvingall stakeholdersin various stages of i t s
implementation;and
Effffectivemechanism atCentre and statelevel existed to assesstheimpact of MGNREGSon
individual households, locallabour market,migrationcycleand efficff acyof assetscreated.
The mainsourcesof audit criteria for theperformance audit were:
National Rural EmploymentGuaranteeAct-2005 (the Act) and amendmentsthereto;
Operational Guidelines 2006 and 2008 issued byMinistryof RuralDevelopment, GoI; 
TheNational EmploymentGuarantee (Central Council) Rules,2006;
The National EmploymentGuaranteeFund Rules, 2006;
The MahatamaGandhi National RuralE mploymentGuaranteeAudit of SchemesRules, 
2011;
Circulars issued byMoRD regarding the Scheme;
Guidelines/checklistfor internal monitoring bystates;
Scheme Rules, Schedule of Ratesand performance indicatorsframed by state 
governments/UTs;TT and
General Financial Rules (GFRs), 2005.
The performance audit covered activities under the Schemefrom 2007-08to 2011-12in 28states
and fourUnion TerritTT ories. The sample wasselected using stratified multi stage sampling design 
i.e., selection wasatdistrict, block, gram panchayat(GP), works and beneficiarylevel. The 
samplingplan used is shownin Chart-6below.
n
n
n
n
n
n
2.1.3 Audit Criteria
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
2.1.4 Audit Scope and Sample
08Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013

As aresultof thesampling plan, thetotal samplesizewasas follows:
28 statesand four Union TerritTT ories;
182 districts;
458blockswithin the
selected districts; and, 
1
3,848G Ps in the
selected blocks.
Details ofthe sample
selected are given in
Annexes-2Aand 2B. T he 
coverage of t hedistricts is
depictedin themap below.
Thedistricts shadedin gray
were selected underthe
sample plan.
n
n
n
n
Chapter 2 - Audit Approach, Previous Performance Audit Findings and Organisation of Current Audit Findings
09Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Chart-6 : Sampling Plan
District level: Each state was divided into strata, 25 per cent districts from
each strata selected subject to a minimum of two, using SRSWOR*
Block level: two blocks (in case number of blocks in selected district was 
less than 10), else three blocks, using SRSWOR*
Works level: 10 works from each
selected GP using SRSWOR*
Beneficiary level: 10 beneficiaries 
using systematic random sampling
Gram Panchayat level: 25 per cent GPs subject to a maximum of 
10 from each selected block, using PPSWOR#
*SRSWOR: Simple Random Sampling Without RWW eplacement
# PPSWOR: Probability Proportional tWW o Size Without Replacement
1
Village development board(VDB) in Nagaland, village council (VC) in Mizoram, village dweep panchayat (VDP) in Lakshadweep, 
  are equivilant to gram panchayat (GP) in other states/UTs
Map : 1 Selected districts under sample plan
Districts selected
for audit

Chapter 2 - Audit Approach, Previous Performance Audit Findings and Organisation of Current Audit Findings
10Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
2.2 Previous Audit Findings
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
Performance audit of MGNREGSfor the period Febuary 2006to March 2007was conducted in 
2007-08 and the findingsreported toParliament throughReport No. PA PP 11 of 2008 (Union 
Government- Performance Appraisal). The mainfindings wereasfollows:
According to theMinistry'sfigures,3.81 crore households had registered underthe Act.
Outof these,while 2.12crorehouseholdshad demanded employment,2.10 crore 
households were provided employment during2006-07.However, rthe Ministry's figures
cannotbe saidto be veryreliable or verifiable, astherecord maintenance particularly at
the GP level, waspoor. rrTherewasahigh probability of only partialcaptureof the demand 
for work.
The applications for work weretobe submitted primarily atthe gram panchayat, though
the applications for work could also be submitted to the Programme Officer of the block.ff
Besides,50per centof theworkswereto be allotted to GP.PPItwasthereforecrucial to
maintain proper records of employmentdemanded, employmentprovided, number of 
daysof employmentgenerated, entitlement for employmentallowance, etc.Itwas noticed 
thatthemaintenance of basicrecordsat theGP and block levelswaspoor, rasaresultof 
whicht heauthenticityof thefiguresof employmentdemanded, employmentprovided, 
number of days of employmentgenerated, entitlementfor employmentallowance, etc.
could not be verified in audit. Significantdeficiencies were also noticed in maintenance of 
muster rolls.
Photographson job cardsrepresentan importantcontrolagainstfraud and
misrepresentation. Therewere significantdelays in affixing ff photographs on thejob cards.
Astheapplications for demand for work werenot documented or dated, and dated receipts
for such applications werenot issued in mostcases, theeligibilityof rural householdsfor
unemploymentallowance, in thesecases,wasunverifiable.
Therewereseveral cases of delayed paymentof wages,for whichno compensation was
paid. Therewerealsoinstancesof non-paymentof unemploymentallowancewhich 
becamedue to theemploymentseekers.
Deficiencies werenoticed in thesetup of implementing machinery, yyparticularly atthe
block and GPl evelslikenon-appointmentof full-time Programme Officerff sand non-
appointmentof GramRozgarSewaks. This insufficiency ff of manpower, rparticularly atGP 
level, had adverseimpact on themaintenance of records atGP level, which madeitdifficult ff
to verifycompliance with the legal guarantee of 100 daysof employmenton demand.
Thereweredeficiencies in the planningprocess, particularly in thepreparation of fiveyears
districtperspectiveplans (DPPs).
Moststateshad notprepareddistrict-wise Schedule of Ratesand had adopted the
Schedule of Ratesof PWD/Rural DevelopmentDepartment, whichmaynot necessarily

ensureminimumwagesfor seven hoursof work bylabourers of weakerbuildlikewomen in 
difficult ff geomorphological conditions.
Thesystemsfor financial managementandtracking were deficient, with significantcases of 
failureto conductmonthly squaring and reconciliation of accounts.Severali nstancesof 
diversion and misutilisation of funds and non-rendering of utilisation certificates and 
expendituredetailswere noticed.
The status of inspection of worksat the state, district and block levelswaspoor, rand most
stateshad not designated Stateand District QualityMonitors.A lso, in mostcases,gram 
sabhawas not heldtwiceayearto conduct Social Audit Forums.
All state governmentshad constituted StateEmploymentGuaranteeCouncil(SEGC) and 
formulatedStateRuralEmploymentGuaranteeSchemeasper provisions of MGNREGA.
TheMinistryconstituted difffferentworking groups to recommend m easures to 
strengthen implementation of the Scheme. The deficiencies brought out by Audit would 
be taken careo f  bythese working groups. On submission of thereportsbytheworking 
groupsMinistrywould takenecessaryfollow up action and w herever considered 
necessaryappropriateamendmentsin the Actaswell asOperational Guidelines wouldbe 
made.
Government of India had approved enhancement of administrative expenses from four 
tosixper centof theannual costof implementing MGNREGA.The stategovernmentshad 
also beenadvised to utilizeenhanced administrativeexpensesinawaythatrespondsto
theneeds of thedistricts. 
Stategovernments had been allowed to engagestaff ffoncontractual basisasper the 
requirements.
Formatfor National Level Monitors(NLMs) monitoring had also been prescribed and 
updated regularly to captureall relevantstatutoryinformationasper feedback received 
from difffferentsources.
The Ministryhad also taken up the issue of strengthening Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) activities through AllIndia Radio. 
n
n
2.3 Action taken reported by the Central and State Governments on 
the Observations/Recommendations as reported (February 2011) 
by Ministry of Rural Development to the Public Accounts 
Committee based on the findings of the CAG's Performance Audit 
Report:
n
n
n
n
n
n
Chapter 2 - Audit Approach, Previous Performance Audit Findings and Organisation of Current Audit Findings
11Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013

Chapter 2 - Audit Approach, Previous Performance Audit Findings and Organisation of Current Audit Findings
12Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
Working Groupon Wageswould look into issuesrelated to non-paymentof minimum
prescribed wages under the Act. Appropriatestepswould be taken by the Ministry on 
receipt of recommendations of the group. 
The Ministryhadtaken up the issue of inadequatestaff ffwith both Departmentof Posts
(DoP) and Departmentof Financial Services (DFS). The Planning Commission had 
sanctioned funds to DoP to strengthen itsinfrastructureincludingengaging staff ffin rural 
postofficesff to cope with the increased quantum of work regarding disbursementof 
wagesto the workersunderMGNREGA.
Ministryhad permitted stategovernmentsto explorethe possibility of engaging business 
correspondentsin inaccessibleareaswhere outreachof postofficesff andbankswasnot 
available. 
Regarding per accountpaymentto Departmentof Posts, pursuantto the Ministry's
initiative, Ministryof Financehad effffected c h a ngesin PostOffice ff Saving Accounts
(Second Amendment) Rules, 2008 and accordingly no deposit was required for opening 
of single/jointaccountof theworkersof MGNREGS.
Appropriatemeasureswould betaken to amendtheOperational Guidelines on receiptof 
recommendations of theworking groups regarding measurementof work.
NLM Division in theMinistrywouldbe advised to ensure thatNational Level Monitors
crossverify Monthly ProgressReports (MPRs) furnished byProgramme Officerff salong 
with documents furnishedbyG P sto POs during their visits.
Conducting of social audit asper thestatutory provisions wasprescribed asone of the
conditions before release of funds to the state governments on the basis of projections 
outlined in thelabour budget. FinancialRules, 2009 would also include conductingof 
social audit asper thestatutoryprovisions asone of the conditions for release of Central
fundsto thestategovernments/unionterritories.
Ministry had also instructed stategovernments/UTsTTto setup theoffice ff of Ombudsmanto 
effffectively and expeditiously deal with grievances. Progress in thisregard wasbeing 
regularly monitored. 
Aspartof transparencyand accountability,yyMinistryhadselected 61eminentcitizensfor 
independentmonitoringof the MahatmaGandhi NREGA. 
The states would once again be advised to conduct prescribed level of inspections as well 
as constitutevigilance monitoring committee wherever itwas not constituted. 
In addition, NationalLevel Monitorswould also be asked to ascertain compliance with the 
prescribed level of inspection bythestategovernments.
The Ministrywould conduct a study of best and good practicesin statesto explorethe 
possibilities of their replication in the states/UTs.TT Thesewould be shared with states and 
postedon NREGA website.
Report No. 6 of 2013

n
n
n
2.4 Organisation of Current Audit findings
2.5 Acknowledgement
The Ministry would conduct comprehensive review to examine reasons for wide variation
in implementation in consultation with states and take appropriate corrective/remedial 
measures.
The Ministry in consultation with Ministry of Finance had extended the benefits of the
Janashree Bima Yojana to the MGNREGS workers and states had been advised to take
necessary action to cover workers under the Janashree Bima Yojana. 
The Ministry would examine the recommendation of the Committee to suitably enhance 
theex gratia amount and effect necessary amendment in the MGNREGA.
The audit issues have been analysed from a nation-wide perspective and only brief, summarized 
information on findings in different states are provided. Audit findings are reported in 14 different
chapters.  Chapters 1 and 2 of this Report give a brief overview, and the audit methodology 
adopted to arrive at the audit findings. In chapter 3 we have narrated the audit findings related to
planning aspects of the Scheme.  Chapter 4 details the lapses in capacity building under the 
Scheme and chapter 5 brings out  irregularities in financial management of the Scheme.  Chapter
6 highlights the lacunae in processes relating to issue and maintainence of job cards and chapter 7
gives the picture under the employment generation objective.  Chapter 8 deals with the lapses 
observed in execution of works taken up by the states under the Scheme.  Chapter 9 covers the
convergence aspects of the Scheme.  Chapter 10 deals with the lapses in maintenance of records
and chapter 11 highlights the lapses in the monitoring and evaluation of the Scheme.  A separate
chapter 12 has been devoted to findings related to the IT audit of NREGASoft/MIS. Chapter 13
relates to the findings of the interviews with the beneficiaries.  Chapter 14 outlines the 
conclusions of the performance audit. State-specific highlights are given inAnnex-13. In this 
annex summary of findings pertaining to a particular state have been presented for all 28 states
and four UTs.
Audit acknowledges the cooperation and assistance extended by the Ministry, state 
governments, implementing d epartments and their officials, Panchayati Raj officals, Central
Employment Guarantee Council and State Employment Guarantee Councils at various stages 
during conduct of the performance audit.
Chapter 2 - Audit Approach, Previous Performance Audit Findings and Organisation of Current Audit Findings
13Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013

15Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
3.1 Introduction
3.2 Annual Work Plan /Development Plan
n
n
n
n
The obligation to provide employmentwithin 15daysof receipt of application necessitates
advanceplanning. The basicaim of theplanning processis to ensurethat thedistrict isprepared 
well inadvanceto offffer productiveemployment on demand (para4.1.1of Operational 
Guidelines). To TTadequately match thedemand for work, prior assessmentof the quantum of work 
likelytobe demanded aswell the timing of this demand is required. The Act and the Operational 
Guidelines require theimplementing agenciesto draw up two typesof plans – the development
plan {section 16(3)}, whichisan annual work plan, and t heperspectiveplan (para4.5.1of 
Operational Guidelines), which attemptsto integratework priorities with thelongterm strategy 
of poverty alleviation through employmentgeneration and sustaineddevelopment.
The annualwork plan/developmentplan identifiestheactivitiesto be taken up inayear.rrThe 
developmentplan is supposed to comprise four components:
Assessmentof labour demand;
Identification of worksto meettheestimated labour demand for work;
Estimated costof worksand wages;a nd
Benefitsexpected in termsof employmentgeneration and assets creation.
Astheprimaryresponsibility of implementation of the Schemeiswith the gram panchayat,it is
also theprimaryunit in theprocessof planning. An intermediate consolidation of all theplans 
preparedbythegram panchayatisto becarried out atblock level; these wereto be t hen
consolidated into thedistrict plan/labour budgetand senttotheMinistrythrough therespective
stategovernment.The labour budgets ubmitted bythestates/UTsTTisavitaltoolfor assessingthe 
employmentgeneration and forms thebasisforfundallocation to the states/UTsTT duringthe
ensuing financial year.rrThe Operational Guidelines prescribe a detailed schedule for preparation 
of the annual plan, which issummarised below:
Planning
Chapter
3

Chapter 3 - Planning
16Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Chart-7: Process of Preparation of Annual Plans
Gram
Panchayat
n To prepare
   development
   plan on basis of 
   Gram Sabha
   recommendations
n Should include
   Village shelf of
   projects
n Programme Officer
   to consolidate GP
   plans
n Can add works
    covering more
   than one GP
Intermediate
Panchayat
District
Panchayat
n District
   programme
   Coordinator to
   consolidate GP
   plans
n Should also
   include the 
   labour budget 
   and the 
   technical 
   estimates and 
   sanctions
State
Government
n To forward
    the Labour 
    Budget to the
    Ministry by
    31 January
    along with its
    recommendations
To be
prepared by
15 October
To be 
prepared by 
30 November
District Plan
to be approved 
by 31 December
3.2.1 Gram Sabha Meeting 
3.2.2 Non-Preparation of Plan at GP Level
A
sindicated in Chart-7above,t hefirststep in theplanning processpertainstothe gram sabhas.
Asperpara4.4.5 of theOperational Guidelines, meeting of gram sabhas shouldbe held on 2
Octobereachyearfor identificationof implementable worksduring thefollowing financial year, r
inorder of priority.The responsibilityfor ensuring timely schedule of meetings vestsw i th the 
Programme Officerff . rrAudit observed thatthe meetings of gram sabha werenot held in 231GPs(six 
per cent of all tt est checked GPs) in three states and one UTviz. Karnataka, Punjab, West Bengal 
andLakshadweep for identification and recommendations of worksatthe GP level (Annex-3A). 
This indicated that in these cases the plans prepared did not incorporate the needs of the local
community.
Under section 16(3) of the Act,gram panchayati srequired to preparethedevelopmentplan on 
the basis of recommendations of thegram sabha. Audit observed thatin 1,201 GPs(31per cent) 
in 11 statesand one UT out of 3,848 testchecked GPsof 28statesand four UTs,TT annual plans were
either not prepared, or were prepared inan incompletemanner.rrThe shortcomings werenoticed 
inAndhraPradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Gujarat,Jharkhand, Maharashtra,Meghalaya,
Nagaland, Punjab, Sikkim, Tamil TT Nadu and Puducherry.The detailsaregiven in Annex-3A.

Further,rplans werenot prepared inanyof thetestcheckedGPsof threeof theabovementioned 
states viz. AndhraPradesh, Goa and Gujarat. The absence of the annual work plan would make it
difficult ff to meet thedemandfor employmentwithin the legally mandated 15 days. Besides, it
could alsoresultin execution of non-priority worksfor localcommunity.
The Ministryi ni t sreply stated (November 2012) thatstates werebeing asked to submit 
commentson the audit observation.
District panchayat is required to consolidate the block level plan and prepare labour budget for
forwarding it tothestategovernment forapproval. Itwasobserved thatthe district annual plans 
werenotprepared in 49districts(26per centof all testchecked districts) in nine statesand one UT 
viz. Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Goa, Gujarat, Sikkim, Tamil TT Nadu, UttarPradesh, 
West Bengal and Dadra&NagarHaveli. Thesecasesare detailed in Annex-3A.
Shelf of projects isan importantcomponentof thedevelopmentplan (para4.2.1of Operational 
Guidelines),asan adequatenumber of such plannedworkswere necessaryto ensure thatworks
couldbe taken up assoonasanydemand for work wasplaced beforetheGP.PPItwasobserved that
thedevelopmentplan in 41 districts (22per centof all testchecked districts) in eightstatesand 
two UTsTTviz.Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Gujarat,Kerala,Punjab, Tamil TT Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, West
Bengal, Dadra&NagarHaveli and Puducherrydid not contain the block-wise shelf of projects.
Theabsenceof the shelf of projects isfraughtwith the riskof selectionof worksunder the 
Scheme in an ad-hoc mannerortheriskof delays in commencementof works.An associated 
problemdueto theabsenceof theshelf of projectswasobserved in Punjab where52GPsin 
blocksBhungaandTalwTT ara(Hoshiarpur district)returned`36.42 lakh during April 2008to 
October 2010 astheycould not utilizethegrantreleasedin 2007-08to 2010-11for wantof shelf 
of projects. Thestate-wisedetailsaregiven in Annex-3A.
Under para4.3(iiia) of theOperational Guidelines,the estimated benefits in termsof 
employmentgenerated measurable in persondayswasto be the guiding principle for preparing 
theannual plan. This wasnecessaryto ensurethatthe planwasable to meet theestimated 
labour demand.
Audit observed that in 58 districts (31per centof all testchecked districts)in nine states and one
UTviz. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,Bihar,rHaryana,Jharkhand, Karnataka,MadhyaPradesh,
Odisha,Tamil TT Nadu and Puducherry, yythe projected employmentgeneration wasnot included in
the plan. Further, rthe district plans in 12 districts (6.5per centof all testchecked districts)in five
states viz. Assam, Haryana, Nagaland, Punjab andTamilTT Nadu did not indicatethetotal costfor 
each project in violation of para 4.2.2(iii) of the Operational Guidelines. The details are given in
Annex-3A.
3.2.3 District Annual Plan/Labour Budget
3.2.4 Shelf of Projects
3.2.5 Non-inclusion of the Projected Employment Generation in the Annual Plan
Chapter 3 - Planning
17Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013

Chapter 3 - Planning
18Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
3.2.6 Fifty per cent of Works by GPs
3.2.7 Other Discrepancies in the Planning Process
3.2.8 Delay in Preparation of Plan
A minimum of 50per cent of the wt orks in terms of cost were to be executed by the GP (section 
16(5) of the Act). It wasobserved that the district plans in 10 districts of four statesviz.Bihar, r
Haryana, Maharashtraand Punjab did not envisageexecution of 50per centof works by the GPs. 
Thislapseat the planning stage itself would be difficult ff to control attheexecution stage. The 
state-wise details aregiven inAnnex-3B.
Enduring outcomes likearea irrigated, villageconnectivity, yyetc.were to be partof thedistrict
plans (para4.3(iii c) of theOperational Guidelines). Thesewerenot incorporated in caseof 87
districts (48per centof alltest checked districts)in 13statesviz.Arunachal Pradesh,Assam,Bihar, r
Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, MadhyaPradesh, Nagaland, Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttar
Pradeshand Uttrakhand(Annex-3B).Further,runique work codes wereto be allotted to each
planned work. In 58districts(32per centof all testchecked districts) in 10statesand one UT viz.
Assam, Bihar, rJharkhand, Kerala,Maharashtra,Mizoram,Nagaland, Rajasthan, TamilTT Nadu, 
Uttarakhand and Lakshadweep, thesewerenot allotted.Further, rin 67districts(37per centof all 
test checked districts)of nine statesi.e. Assam,Bihar,rJharkhand, Kerala,Maharashtra,Nagaland, 
Rajasthan, UttarPradesh and WestBengal,crop pattern datawas not used in plans. Thesecases
are detailed inAnnex-3B.
TheOperational Guidelines notethatthesequence of approvalslaid down underthe Act
necessitates time bound coordinationbetween difffferentlevels, so that the spirit and intent of the
Actwasmaintained. Itfurther notesthat itislegally imperativethat there areno delays in the
approval of plan at anylevel.Italso prescribesthe timeschedule asshown in Chart 7above.
However, rtherewerepersistentdelaysin submission of theannual plans as shown in the Table-4TT
below:
Annual Plan submission
Gram Panchayat to Block
 
Block to District Programme 
Co-ordinator
District to State Government 
State to the MoRD
15 October 
30 November
31 December
31 January
197  GPs in 5 states  
47  blocks in 8 states 
36  districts in 9 states 
8 states
1 to 21
1 to 12 
10 days to 
11 months
23 days to 
10 months
9
9
4
2
1
2
3
4
States where 
records/dates not 
produced to Audit
Delay range
(in months)
Delay 
noticed in
Target date
(every year)
Table 4: Delay in submission of Annual Plans/Labour Budgets
1
2
3
4
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand.
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Maharashtra, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh.
Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Odisha.
Gujarat, Karnataka.

Chapter 3 - Planning
19Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
The details of thedelayaregiven in theAnnex-3C(i-iv).The delayswereof 187days(average) by 
197 gram panchayats in five states where recordswere provided. Inthe remainingstates/UTsTT
also, whererecords werenot producedto Audit or undated plan was submitted, no assurance
couldbederived regarding timely submission of plan.
Audit noticed statespecific irregularities relating to preparation and submission of the labour
budget as detailed below:
Arunachal Pradesh did not submit labourbudgetfor theyear 2008-09.
Threestatesviz. Arunachal Pradesh,Goa and West Bengal did not submit labour budgetin
the prescribed format.
Nine districtsin threestatesviz. Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland and WestBengal did not 
submit the annualplansto theS t ate EmploymentGuarantee Council within thes cheduled 
date i.e., by31Decemberof eachyear.rr
Three districts of MadhyaPradesh didnot submit their labourbudgetsto thestate 
government.
In Odisha, GPswerenot involved in preparation of labour budget.
InAndhraPradesh,labour budgetwasfinalised at thestatelevel based on MIS dataand was
notprepared atdistrictlevel.
In Puducherry, yythep r ojected number of MGNREGShouseholds wasm orethan thetotal
householdsin theUT,TTthusindicatingthatthelabour budgetwasprepared on unrealistic
basis.
TheMinistrystated thatstateswerebeing asked to submit commentson theseissues.The 
Ministry also stated t hatithadrepeatedly e mphasized t heneed tofollowt heprescribed 
procedure for preparation of shelf of projectsand labour budgetatthepanchayat level. This was
to be kept readyin advancefor thenextfinancial year.rrOn 24August 2012,the Ministry issued a 
frame work for planningof worksunder MGNREGSto enablecompletionof the consolidation 
process of labour budgetsfor all GPsin astateand submissionof thesameto the Central
Governmentby 31 December.rr
The effffectiveness of theplanning process hasto be measured againstthe actual execution of the 
planned labourbudgets. Audit observed large shortfall/variations between the planned 
employmentgeneration, asshown in the labour budgetso f  states/UTsTTand actualgeneration of 
3.2.9 Other Irregularities in Labour Budget
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
3.3 Shortfall in Actual Execution of the Labour Budget
5
6
5 
6 
Anjaw, Lower Dibang Valley, Papumpare, West Siang, Dimapur,  Mon, Tuensang, South 24 Pargana, Vardhman
Ashoknagar, Balaghat, Datiya

Chapter 3 - Planning
20Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
viz. Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Tripura,
Uttarakhand and Dadra & Nagar Haveli, the shortfall in actual employment generationvis-a-vis
the projected employment ranged from 2 to 100per cent in respect of annual plans for the period t
covered in audit. The details are given in the table below:
The Ministry replied that MGNREGS was a demand based Scheme and the labour budget was
prepared on the basis of projection of labour demand in a given period which could change due to
various reasons like rainfall, other employment opportunities in rural areas, etc. The basic
objective of the Act was to provide employment to rural people whenever there was a demand. 
The shortfall in demand and actual projection was inevitable in rural India where demand of 
employment varies due to monsoon and other reasons. 
The reasons for shortfall in employment generation are not justifiable as monsoon is a regular 
phenomenon and plans could have been prepared accordingly. In those states where the
quantum of shortfall was large, it indicated a systemic weakness in the planning process.
Audit observed that in 25 test checked districts in eight states 4,907 works amounting` 158.83
crore were executed outside the annual plans.  The details of these works are given inAnnex-3D. 
The selection of works beyond those mentioned in the annual plans indicated deficiencies in the
planning process.
3.4 Works Executed Outside the Annual Plan
Sl. No. Range of shortfall in per centState/UT
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Bihar
Chhattisgarh 
Gujarat
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh
Jharkhand
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Rajasthan
Sikkim
Tamil Nadu
Tripura
Uttarakhand
Dadra & Nagar Haveli
27 to 98
9 to 31
2 to 62
55 to 62
13 to 41
40 to 59
27 to 94
30 to 100
13 to 50
46 to 65
17 to 59
2 to 37
23 to 61
42  to 96
Table-5: Variations in actual execution of the planned Labour Budgets of States/ UTs
Shortfall in actual employment generation against the planned employment

Chapter 3 - Planning
21Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
The Ministrystated thattheannual plan wasprepared basedon theprojection of demand, which 
maybe on thehigher side, to takeinto accountall potentialemployment seekers.The shelf of 
projectsprepared on thebasis of annualplandoes not suggestthatallthe projects need to be 
eithertaken up or completed in afinancial year.rrDemand forMGNREGSwork wasdependent 
upon several factorsincludingavailability of alternativeemploymentopportunities. Therefore(a) 
not allwork included in the annual plan werecommenced, and (b) not all theworksthatwere
started got completed in afinancial year. rrMinistryhad issued guidelinesto improvethe work
completion rate. Work completion rate was reviewed regularly in the Performance Review 
Committee Meetings and in regional review meetings with the states. Area Officerff s visiting the 
GPs a nd blockswererequested to focus on incompleteworksand take up this issue with 
executing authorities.
The fact thatonly 30per centof the planned workstaken upunder the Schemewere completed
indicates deficientplanning.  
3.5 Shortfall in Execution of Works in Annual Plans
Auditobserved thatin 14statesand one UT 129.22 lakh worksamountingto `1,26,961.11 crore 
wereapproved in annual plans but only 38.65 lakh works (30 per centof planned works)
amounting to `27,792.13 crorewere completed during the audit period. The details areshown in
theAnnex-3E.
Case Study: Deviations from approved works
Jammu & Kashmir:
In seven blocks of three districts (Poonch, Rajouri and Udhampur) there was wide variation 
between the planned works and the actual works undertaken. 2,950 works with an 
estimated cost of ` 2,779.32 lakh included in the annual action plans (AAP) for the years 
2007-12 were not taken up for execution. The reason for not taking up these approved 
works was attributed to non-allotment of sufficient funds. The reasons put forth by the 
Block Development Officers (BDOs) were not substantiated by records as significant closing 
balances were available with the BDOs at the close of the respective years.  The BDOs had 
taken up 785 works which were not a part of AAP .   
Nagaland:
n It was observed that 810 works amounting to ` 114.56 crore were reported as 
completed against the 772 projects planned for ` 130.59 crore. However, none of the 
seven test checked blocks executed the planned works.  
n Out of 99 afforestation and plantation works planned at a cost of ` 8.17 crore to be 
executed during 2007-12, only 32 works (32 per cent) worth ` 7.15 crore could be 
completed in 54 test checked Gps. 
n Only 25 projects (21 per cent) were executed at a cost of ` 3.45 crore out of 119 
projects planned for land development worth ` 15.70 crore. 

Chapter 3 - Planning
22Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
3.6 Preparation of District Perspective Plan 
The Operational Guidelines stipulated preparation of afive yeardistrictperspectiveplan (DPP)to 
facilitateadvanceplanningand provide adevelopmentperspectivefor the district (para 4.5.2 of 
Operational Guidelines). The aim wastoidentifythe typesof MGNREGSworksthatshouldbe 
encouraged in the district, and the potential linkages between these works and long-term
employmentgeneration. StateEmploymentGuarantee Councils (SEGCs)wereto decide on the 
'preferred works' to be implemented under MGNREGS, and recommend works for submission to
the Central Government.
Audit observed thatthe DPPwasnot prepared in 84 districts(46 per centof all test checked 
districts) in 17statesand threeUTs.TT Non-preparation of DPPadverselyaffffected thecontinuity of 
the planningprocessat thedistrict level.Further,rthe Ministryreleased `7.60croreto these84
districts for thepreparation of DPPs,but only`94.59lakh was utilised. Details aregiven in 
Annex-3F.
The Ministrystated t hati thad requested thestategovernmenttoprovide reasonsfor not 
preparing DPPin atimely manner.rr
Further, rin 42 districts(23per centof all testchecked districts) in 13statesviz. Assam,Bihar, r
Gujarat, Haryana,Kerala, MadhyaPradesh, Maharashtra,Manipur, rPunjab, Rajasthan, Tripura, 
UttrakhandandWestBengal theDPPswereprepared but therequired approvalsof theSEGC 
werenotobtained. Further,rtheMinistryreleased`3.40croreto thesedistrictsout of which only 
`2.14 crore wasspentfor the preparation of DPP.PPThe detailsaregiven in theAnnex-3G.
The Ministrystated thattheActdid n ot prescribeanyapproval from the SEGCfor district
perspectiveplan. 
The replydid not recognise thefactt hatthe SEGCwasgiven acentralrole intheimplementation 
of theAct,at thestatelevel.SEGCwasalsoresponsible for monitoring the implementation of 
Scheme asper section 12 of the Actand all importantactivitiesrelating to Scheme
implementation were to be done throughSEGCatthestatelevel.
Case Study: District Perspective Plan in Nagaland
In three districts (Dimapur, Mon and Tuensang) of Nagaland, the agency involved in 
preparation of district perspective plan did not conduct any survey of the villages to identify 
the local needs. The district perspective plan therefore did not include all relevant data 
pertaining to local needs.  In Mon district, a sum of ` 23.02 lakh was paid to the contracted 
agency without approval of the district authority. The perspective plans were also not 
uploaded in the state website. The agency completed the process of perspective plan by 
March 2009.  

23Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
4.1 Introduction
n
n
n
4.2 State Government Rules
A key pre-requisite for proper implementation of any scheme is to ensure that adequate
capacities exist at all levels. For a large Scheme like MGNREGS, that requires gram panchayats to 
carry out most of the implementation activities, capacities at the lower levels are even more
important. This fact has been recognised in the Act and the Operational Guidelines. Capacity
building activities consist of promulgating the necessary rules, setting up the required
administrative structures, manning these structures adequately and ensuring that the personnel 
are adequately trained for proper implementation of the Scheme. 
Several shortcomings were noticed during audit of the Scheme. These included:
States  not formulating rules for implementation of the Scheme;
Councils not being constituted for effective monitoring of the Scheme, and;
Deployment of insufficient manpower, and not investing enough effort and resources
towards training. 
These are discussed below.
Under section 32 (1) of the Act, the state governments have powers to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Act. The rules, inter alia, may determine the arrangements for proper
implementation of the Scheme, for ensuring transparency and accountability, terms and
conditions of payment of unemployment allowance, setting up the state councils, the grievance 
redressal mechanism, and manner of maintaining books of accounts. 
These rules were to be formulated within one year from the implementation of the Act i.e., by 
February 2007. Audit scrutiny revealed that the state governments of Haryana, Maharashtra, 
Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh (five states) did not formulate rules for carrying out the
provisions of the Act as of March 2012. Further, in Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, 
Mizoram and Sikkim (five states) rules were notified with a delay ranging from seven months to
four years. The state-wise position is detailed in Annex-4A. Karnataka, Mizoram, Nagaland and 
Sikkim (four states) had formulated rules but they did not incorporate all provisions as required
under the Act. 
Capacity Building
Chapter
4

Case Study- SEGC in Uttar Pradesh
The SEGC in Uttar Pradesh was constituted on 31 May 2006. However, 15 non-official 
members were nominated in the SEGC only on 15 January 2008, a year and a half after its 
constitution. The SEGC rules did not prescribe the number of meetings to be held or quorum 
for the meeting. Audit noted that SEGC met only once or twice in a year .  The SEGC, thus,  
was functioning in an unstructured manner .
Chapter 4 - Capacity Building
24Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Formulation of such rules was crucialfor effffectiveimplementation of theScheme.In the absence
of a defined framework, the implementing agencies at GP, Pblock and district levels wouldbe 
working arbitrarily and withoutproper guidance. Theywould find itdifficult ff torespond in atime 
bound manner to demands for employmentand alsotoplan for creation of sustainable assets.
The Ministrystated that the states had been repeatedly advised toformulate unemployment
allowance rules, establish a suitable mechanism for effffective grievance redressal and set up the 
state councils. States had also been requestedto follow therelevant provisions of the Actfor 
proper implementationof theScheme.
Under section10and12 of theAct, EmploymentGuaranteeCouncilswereto be setup both by 
the Central and state governments. The major functions of these councils included monitoring, 
evaluating implementation of theScheme, advising therespectivegovernmentson all matters
concerning the Scheme,etc.The functioning of the Central EmploymentGuaranteeCouncil 
(CEGC)is discussed in Chapter 11 of thisReport.
Interms of section 12of theAct,eachstatewasto setup aStateEmploymentGuaranteeCouncil
(SEGC) within one year of enactment of the Act.Audit noted thatthegovernmentsof 
Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana,Mizoram, Nagaland, Uttarakhand, WestBengal and 
Andaman &Nicobar Islands (eightstatesand one UT) had constituted the Councilwith delays
ranging between one and fouryears.D adra&N agarHaveli had not constituted the Council
(September2012). 
The stateg o vernments arerequired to designate an officerff ,rnot below therank of acommissioner 
asmembersecretaryof SEGC. The member secretarywould be responsible for all theactivities
related totheS cheme.However,rthegovernments of Assam,Karnatakaand Uttar Pradesh (three 
states) had not designated an officer as member secretary (March 2012). Further, the SEr GCs of 
Maharashtra, Nagaland and WestBengal (threestates)had not initiated anymeasuresto devise 
thesystem of grievance redressal,social audit or takeanyother public accountability/
transparencymeasuresas requiredunder the Act. Thus, thereweredeficiencies bothin the
formation and in the support extended to thecouncils.
Theworking of thecouncils in relation to monitoring isdiscussedin Chapter-11.
4.3 Constitution and Functioning of Employment Guarantee Councils

Chapter 4 - Capacity Building
25Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
The delays in the constitution of the SEGCs and the other lapses noticed indicated significant gaps 
in the working of the councils from what was envisaged in the Act.
The Ministry replied that section 12(1) of MGNREG Act provides for constitution of State
Employment Guarantee Council by each state for the purpose of regular monitoring and
reviewing implementation of the Act at the state level. Though the Act did not prescribe any time-
frame for constitution of state council and number of meetings to be held within a fixed time 
frame, keeping in view the importance of role of SEGCs, the Ministry had constantly taken up 
these issues. For specific issues related to states, the states were being requested by the Ministry
for compliance with audit observations.
The reply of the Ministry was not convincing as section 4 of the Act provides that, for the 
implementation of the Act, each state should make a Scheme within one year of enactment of 
MGNREG Act having the minimum features given in paragraph 4 of Schedule I of the Act which 
includes the role of state council also. 
The Act recognises the crucial role of adequate manpower support for implementation of the
Scheme. The Act not only requires the state government to designate a Programme Coordinator
and Programme Officer at the district and block level respectively, but also makes it mandatory
for the state government to make available to these officials necessary staff and technical support
as required for the effective implementation of the Scheme. In addition, the Operational
Guidelines (para 3.1.1) also suggest appointment of one Gram Rozgar Sahayak (GRS) in each GP . 
The functions of these officials are outlined in the table below:
4.4 Personnel Support
Functionary Functions
District Programme 
Coordinator  (DPC)
DPC was responsible for ensuring proper Scheme implementation at 
the district level. He/she is also responsible for information 
dissemination, training, consolidation of the block plan, release and 
utilization of funds, monitoring of works and submission of monthly 
progress report, etc.
PO was responsible for the implementation of the Scheme at the block 
level and for consolidation of the GP plan, monitoring and supervision, 
disposal of complaints, ensuring that social audits are conducted by GP , 
payment of unemployment allowance, etc.
Maintaining all documents at GP level, overseeing the process of 
registration, distribution of job cards, providing dated receipts against 
job applications, overseeing job applications, allocation of work, 
payment of wages and unemployment allowances, ensuring that the 
requisite gram sabha meetings and social audits are held, etc. 
Table 6
Programme Officer (PO)
Gram Rozgar Sahayak

Chapter 4 - Capacity Building
26Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Table – 7: Shortage of Gram Rozgar Sahayaks
Audit scrutinyrevealed thatfull-timededicated POswerenot appointedin twostatesand one UT 
viz.Manipur, rUttar Pradesh and Lakshadweep and in Bihar,r161 posts of thePOs out of 207 posts
in 15test checked districts werevacant. The Operational Guidelines stipulate thatif a full time 
Programme Officer ff wasnot appointed,then theProgramme Officer ff should be supported byan 
Assistant Programme Officerff . rrHowever,rin Manipur and Rajasthan, posts of nine and 159 Assistant
ProgrammeOfficerff swerevacantin four and eightof thetestchecked districtsrespectively.State
government of UttarPradesh appointed APOswith a view to assistregular PO atam onthly
remuneration of `20,000, but theywere posted in officesff other than block offices.ff Thus, `15.17
crore were incurred as inadmissibleexpenditurein the state, of which `1.43crore pertained to
37 APOs posted in 14 test checked districts.
At village level, theGramRozgar Sahayak(GRS) wasrequired to assist thegram panchayat in the 
implementation of the Scheme. GramRozgarSahayaksassumeparticular importancein viewof 
the fact thatgram panchayatsare the focus of the Scheme.T he costof GRSwasthefirstcharge on 
the administrativeexpense under MGNREGS.Audit observed thatthegovernmentsof Arunachal 
Pradesh, Kerala, Manipur and Tamil TT Nadu (four states)had not appointed dedicated Gram Rozgar 
Sahayaks.Further, rpersistent and widespread shortageswere noticed in thecase of nine states
rangingfrom 20to 93 per cent.Theseareoutlined in thetable below:
TheMinistryreplied thatstategovernment should make available to the DistrictProgramme 
Coordinatorand theProgramme Officerff necessarystaff ffand technical support asmaybe 
necessaryfor theeffffective implementation of the Scheme. The Ministryissued advisories to the
state governmentto enable them to assessthe staffing ff requirementa nd to deploy adequatestaff ff
atvariouslevelsfor MGNREGS. The Ministryfurther stated thatitsuggested broad administrative
frameworkswith stategovernmentsbeing afffforded some flexibilityto decide for themselves. 
Keeping in view the challengesin implementationof MGNREGS, permissibleadministrative 
expenditurelimit was also enhanced from fourto six per centfor deployment of dedicated staffff.ff
Sl. No. Required Actual Shortage Percentage
of shortage
State/UT
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Assam
Gujarat*
Haryana
Himachal Pradesh*
Jammu & Kashmir*
Madhya Pradesh*
Punjab*
Uttar Pradesh
Uttarakhand*
243
13,715
202
3,243
4,131
23,336
12,776
15,145
1,811
136
5,371
54
1,055
889
6,438
772
12,050
648
107
8,344
148
2,188
3,242
16,898
12,004
3,095
1,163
44
61
73
67
78
72
93
20
64
*Data is for the enff tire state, in other cases it is for the tff est checked GPs.kk

Chapter 4 - Capacity Building
27Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
According to theconditions required for releaseof second tranche, Ministrywas to ensure 
adequates t affing ff in accordance with the GoI instructions.But the shortages indicated thatthe
Ministryfailed to do so. The absence of essentialfunctionaries like Programme Officer ff and Gram
Rozgar Sahayakwouldhavean adverseeffffecton theimplementation of MGNREGS.
TheAct recognised creation of durable assetsas an importantobjectiveof theScheme.T hemain
implementing agency under MGNREGSwasthe gram panchayatwhich did not have any 
dedicated technical resourcefor supporting theplanning and execution of worksrequired for 
creation of such assets.Therefore,t h eOperational Guidelines required the stategovernmentsto 
constitutepanels of accredited engineersat thedistrict and block levelsto assist with estimation 
and measurementof works.T he suggested modelfor administrativeexpensesalso included a
technical assistantfor every10 gram panchyats.Further,rstategovernments wererequired to 
ensure TechnicTT al ResourceSupport Systemsatthestate and districtlevelsto help in the process of 
planning, designing, monitoring, evaluation and to improvethequality and costeffffectivenessof 
the Scheme (para13.3of theOperational Guidelines).
Audit observed that Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarr at, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand,
Karnataka, Maharashtra,Manipur, rMeghalaya,M izoram, Nagaland, Odisha, Rajasthan, Tripura 
and WestBengal (16 states)had not constituted the panels of accredited engineers.In Assam, it
was observed thatengineershaving no technicalknowledgewere appointed as accredited 
engineer, rbut subsequentlyretrenched. Detailsaregiven in Annex-4B.
Further,rAssam,Bihar, rHaryana,Karnataka, Meghalaya, Mizoram,Nagaland Sikkim, Uttar
Pradesh,and WestBengal (10 states) had not setup TechnicTT alResourcesystemsatthestateand
districtlevels.In Maharashtra,TechnicTT al Resource Support System did not existin threedistricts
i.e.,Ahmednagar, rBhandaraand Nanded. Detailsaregiven in Annex-4C.
Audit noted thatfull time regular TechnicTT alAssistantswere not engaged in Arunachal Pradesh, 
while in eight other statesviz: Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhar ttisgarh, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, r
MadhyaPradesh,Punjab and UttarPradesht herewasashortageof technical assistants. In 
Odisha,additional work of other schemes wasgiven to technical support and in Maharashtra 
additional chargewasgiven to the Junior Engineer for technical supervision. Detailsare given in
Annex 4D. Absence of dedicatedsupport personnel for dischargingthemandatedfunctions 
wouldhavean adverseimpact on thequality of theSchemedelivery.
TheMinistrystated thatOperational Guidelines suggested thatstatescould constitutepanels of 
accredited engineersand setup technical resourcesupport group. The Operational Guidelines 
also suggested training of all keyagenciesin discharging their responsibilities, but this advice was
intended to suggestwaysin which statescould strengthen their own technicalresources and train 
their personnel,if required.To TT address the issueof the shortageof technicalpersonnel in the
blocks and gram panchayats, the stateswere permitted to deploytwo engineers per 6,000 
population of rural households. In the North-Easternstatesand hilly stateslike Jammu & Kashmir, r
4.5 Technical Support 

Table – 8: Unutilized training funds 
Name of the State/UT Period
of release
Funds released
(` in lakh)
Unspent amount
(` in lakh)
Punjab
Rajasthan
Uttar Pradesh
Dadra & Nagar Haveli
2007-08
2007-09
2010-11
2007-08
57.50
636.99
994
5.00
38.05
155.43
736.58
0.95
Chapter 4 - Capacity Building
28Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
HimachalPradesh and Uttarakhand, deploymentof two engineers per 3,000 rural households
was permitted.The auditreport needed to take thisfact into accountthat thesewere merely 
suggested arrangements and thestates had theflexibility to adopt/adapt them.
Thefactremains that the technical support for proper implementation of the Schemewas
inadequate. The absence of adequatetechnical support would have adverse impact in the 
planning and execution of works.
Training of personnel engaged in the implementation of theScheme isessentialto ensure that
theydischarge their duties as envisaged in the Act.For this purpose, all stateswereto designate
an institute specifically for training of MGNREGSfunctionaries. The Operational Guidelines 
provide thatall thekeyagencieswererequired to be trained for dischargingtheir responsibilities
in effffectivemanner.rr A training calendar wasto bem ade and training modulescalibrated in 
contentand processaccording to the needs of difffferentstakeholders.
Audit observed that thetraining instituteswerenot designated i none stateand aUT( West
Bengaland ANI). In 11states (Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka,
Meghalaya,Nagaland,Odisha, Sikkim, Tripura and UttarPradesh) inadequate trainingwas 
imparted to thekey functionaries. Training calendar and training modules werenotp r e p ared in 
two states(Jammu &Kashmir and Uttarakhand).
Further, ritwas seenthatin threestatesandone UT substantial funds meantfor training remained 
un-utilisedasof March 2012, asdetailedin TableTT 8.
4.6 Training
Further, rin thecase of Dadra&NagarHaveli funds of `4.05 lakh were diverted on stationery, yy
printing and videography.
Thus,this important toolfor effffective capacity building was inadequately used.
Four states(Goa, Haryana,R ajasthan and UttarPradesh) spent`1.97 croreon training 
programmeof 28,343 employeesatGP,Pblock and districtlevels.However, rtrainingwasimparted 

Chapter 4 - Capacity Building
29Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
to21,994 employees.Thus, therewasshortfall in imparting training to the keystakeholders. 
Details are given inAnnex-4E.
The Ministrystated thattraining of functionaries engaged in the implementation of MGNREGS
was oneof thepermissibleactivities. Statesincollaborationwith State I nstitutefor Rural
Development (SIRD) prepare training calendar and modules for training of functionaries.Central 
Governmentfrom time to time provides financial supporttoSIRDfor training of MGNREGS
functionaries of state, districts, block and GP level.
However, rdespitetheeffffortsoutlinedbyt heMinistry,yytraining wasnot beingprovided to the
functionaries as envisagedin the Operational Guidelines.
MGNREGS isenvisioned as a demand driven employmentgeneration programme. Thus, 
awarenessof potentialbeneficiaries and other stakeholdersiskeyto ensuring thattheyareable 
to articulatetheir demand and claim their entitlements. The Operational Guidelines providefor 
thestategovernmentsdrawing up an IECplanand taking up an intensiveIECexercise. This 
exercise should targetworkers,rural households, PRIsand pay specialattention to deprived areas
and marginalized communities.
Audit observed t hatIECplanswerenot formulated i n A ndhraPradesh,ArunachalPradesh,
Assam, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, MadhyaPradesh,Manipur,rOdisha, Punjab, Rajasthan,Uttar
Pradesh,West Bengal, Dadra&Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep (12 states andtwo UTs).TT
Further, it wr as also seen that 32 districts of seven states and four UTs had rTT eceived ` 2.57 crore
from the Ministryfor IECactivities. However,ronly `1.59crore wasincurred on these activitiesas
of March2012asdetailed in Annex-4F.
4.7 Information, Education and Communication (IEC) activities
Case Study: Uttar Pradesh
In Balarampur district, payment of ` 9.77 lakh was made to a contractor for slogan painting 
at 2,819 places.  On verification by Junior Engineer, slogan painting was found at 546 places 
only which was worth ` 1.89 lakh. However, payment was made to the contractor on the 
ground that due to passage of time and rain, the written slogans would have been washed 
away. The payment of ` 7.88 lakh against 2,273 unverified slogan paintings was therefore 
irregular . In Lucknow, payment of ` 46.50 lakh was made for purchase of 1.50 lakh calendars 
at the rate of ` 31 per calendar without adopting the required purchase procedure. Further, 
only 30,000 calendars were supplied by the vendor resulting in excess payment of ` 37.20 
lakh.

Chapter 4 - Capacity Building
30Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Ministrystated that ithad undertaken various initiativesfor IEC for generating awareness
such as engagement of Nehru YuvaKendra (NYK)to generateawareness among theworkers,
prepared FAQs,prepared workers' book in pictorial form, developed TV/Radio V spots,developed 
training films, organized MGNREGA Sammelan to disseminategoodpractices,facilitated state
governments to organizeRozgar Mela, etc.The Ministry also engaged StateInstitutes of Rural
Development/ National Instituteof RuralDevelopmentfor awareness generation and training of 
workers, encouraged the state governments to go infor wall writing and pamphlets in local
languagestodisseminateinformation on workers' rights.Regular newspaper advertisements, 
railways tickets,trade fair ticketswere also used as medium of communication. The Ministrywas
also reviewingIEC initiatives carried out by districts and states. 
The fact remains that several states had not formulated IEC plans and the level of expenditure on 
IEC activitieswas quitelow.
ToTT implementthe Scheme effffectively,yyit isnecessaryto develop required capacities andto have 
enough people with requisiteskill setsateachlevel. The shortcomings noticed duringaudit 
indicated thatconsistenteffffortswererequired to build capacitiesof Scheme functionaries at
eachlevel.The Ministrymayundertakesuitable initiativesto strengthen the existing capacity for
betteri mplementation of theScheme.
Recommendations:
n The widespread shortage of staff at all levels, adversely affects the implementation of the 
Scheme. The staff position should be closely monitored by the Ministry and shortfall on 
this account should be taken up with the state governments.
n MGNREGS, being a demand driven programme, requires the beneficiaries to be aware of 
their rights. However, the shortfall in IEC expenditure and non-formulation of IEC plans 
indicated gaps in the creation of awareness among beneficiaries. IEC activities need to be 
stepped up for better beneficiary awareness.

31Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
5.1 Introduction
Section 22 of the Act lays down the funding pattern of the Scheme which is summarized in the
table below:
Financial Management
Chapter
5
State ShareCentral Share
Entire cost of wages for unskilled  workers
75 per cent of the cost of material and wages for 
skilled and semi-skilled workers.
Administrative expenses as may be determined 
by the Central Government including inter alia, 
the salary and allowances of Programme Officers 
and their support staff and work site facilities.
Administrative expenses of the Central 
Employment Guarantee Council
-
25 per cent of the cost of material and wages for 
skilled and semi-skilled workers.
Unemployment allowance payable in case the 
state government cannot provide employment 
within 15 days of application.
Administrative expenses of the State 
Employment Guarantee Council.
Table-9: Funding Pattern
Under section 21(1) of the Act the state government may, by notification, establish a fund to be 
called the State Employment Guarantee Fund (SEGF) for the purposes of the implementation of 
the Scheme. Central grants are released to State Employment Guarantee Fund or to districts (in
case of states where such funds were not established). This fund was to be expended and 
administered as a revolving fund, with rules that govern and ensure its utilization according to the
purpose of the Act. Grant from the Central Government and corresponding due from state share 
were to be credited to the state fund. According to the Operational Guidelines, it was the
responsibility of the state government to establish State Employment Guarantee Fund.
The position of the Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and Actual Expenditure by the Ministry
for the period of audit was as shown inChart-8.
5.2 Financial Position under the Scheme

Chapter 5 - Financial Management
32Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Ascanbe seenfrom the chart above, for the lastthreeyearstherehad been a consistent
overestimation of thebudgetaryestimatesof theexpenditureto be made under MGNREGS.
Further, rthegap between the budgetestimateand theactualexpenditurehad been increasing.In 
the year 2011-12, the actualexpenditure wasonly73per centof the budgetestimate.
OperationalGuidelines (para 8.4.1)stipulaterelease of Centralfunds tostates in two tranches. In 
case of non-SEGFstates, funds arereleasedto MGNREGSaccountmaintained in a districtt hrough
concerned Chief ExecutiveOfficer ff of District RuralDevelopmentAgency.Incase of states where 
SEGF has been established, funds are released to bank account of this fund maintained at state
level from which funds arefurther releasedtodistrictsin thatstate.The firsttranche is
proportional to thepercentageof persondaysprojected for the firstsix monthsof theyear (up to 
September)in thelabour budget.However,ritwasnot to exceed 50per centof the total amount
approved in the labour budget. 
The labourbudgetwastobe submitted bystate governmentto GoI latestby31Januaryeachyear
projecting thefunds requirementfor the succeeding financial year.rrAfter utilizing60per centof 
thefunds earlier released, thestategovernmentcould apply to the Ministryfor the next
installment.Quantum of thesubsequentreleasewasbased on the pastperformance in respect of 
persondays generated and funds utilised. 
During audit it was o bservedthatfunds werereleasedto states/districtsin morethan two 
tranches. States/districts had approached the Ministryfor funds whenevertheir funds utilization 
reached 60per centof funds available with them. MGNREGSbeing ademand based Scheme, the
funds werereleasedin morethan two tranchesin order to meet thestates' demand.
The Operational Guidelines (paras8.4.2,8.4.3 and 8.4.4)along with theinstructions issued (May 
2010) by the Secretary, yyRural Developmentstipulateconditionsfor the release of funds to the 
5.3 Unauthorised Release of Funds to States
Chart-8: Budget and Releases
Source: Ministry of Rural Der velopment
Budget Estimates
Budget Estimates
Revised Estimates
Revised Estimates
Actual Release
Actual Release
12,000
12,000
12,661.22
16,000
30,000.19
30,000.19
39,100
39,100
33,539.38
40,100
40,100
35,841.49
40,000
31,000
29,215.05
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
Amount in ` crore
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12
30,000
35,000
40,000
45,000


Chapter 5 - Financial Management
33Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
states/UTsTT intwo tranches.The firsttranche wastobe proportionalto the percentage of 
persondays projected for the firstsix months of the year (up to September) in the labour budget.
However, ritwas not to exceed 50per centof the total amount approved in the labour budget.
After utilizing 60per cent of the funds earlier rt eleased, the state governments were to apply to 
the Ministryof Rural Developmentfor the next instalment (second tranche) out of the National 
EmploymentGuaranteeFund. The conditions for releasesof tranchesare given in thebox below:
(A) Conditions for release of first tranche include:
n District wise opening balance as on 1 April of the financial year, and district wise 
and month wise projections of the labour demand and fund requirement are to 
be considered.
n A certificate or the copy of the zila parishad's approval indicating the fulfilment 
of statutory provisions that have been taken care of while preparing the labour 
budget should be provided.
n Audit Report (AR) for the previous year should be provided.
n Chartered Accountant to certify in the Audit Report itself that he/she had seen, 
verified and was satisfied that Utilization Certificates and the Audit Reports of 
the districts were in order and no deviation from the prescribed financial norms 
by any of the districts had been observed. He/she had also seen and verified 
Bank Reconciliation Statements of the districts. He/she was also to certify that 
block-wise and agency-wise expenditure had been verified and no advances 
were shown as expenditure. Interest accrued had been shown separately and 
included in the programme availability.
(B) Conditions for the release of second tranche:
Physicaln Actual performance reported in the MIS/Monthly Progress 
Reports, compared with labour budget projections are 
considered.
Financial
n At least 60 per cent utilization (including opening balance).
n Conforms to the 60:40 wage material ratio in cost. Unskilled 
wage cost may be more than 60 per cent but material cost 
cannot exceed 40 per cent.
n Centre is informed in advance about wage rate change as it 
impacts Central share.
n Compliance with Ministry's instructions on Schedule of Rates 
as it impacts Central share.

Chapter 5 - Financial Management
34Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
As can be seenfromt h eabovebox, the Ministryhad prescribed detailed conditionsfor release of 
both the tranches.However,ritwas noted thatthe Ministry relaxed (February2011)all conditions 
attached with therelease of 2nd or subsequenttranche till 31 March2011 except submissionof 
UCs,reportedly in thebetter interestof theprogramme and to provide statessomeelbow time.
Therelease for remaining two months(February and March) of theyear2011 wasto be made on 
the basis of balance of projected labour budget.In addition to releasing the balance amountof 
the labour budget, theMinistryalso decided to releasean additional 10per centof the balance 
labour budget.This was done whether or not actual performance matched the labour budget 
projected upto theperiodof report.
It wasseent hat`1,960.45 crorewasreleasedduring March 2011alone. This included`161.84 
crore towards additional 10per centreleasedto Chhattisgarh (threedistricts`13.06crore), 
Gujarat(`27.94 crore), MadhyaPradesh(`39.34 crore), Odisha (`38.55crore) and UttarPradesh
(`42.95 crore) without considering the pastperformance of thesestates and ensuring adherence
to all thestipulated conditionsfor release.
The Operational Guidelines clearlystatethatthe release of Centralfunds under the Schemeare
tobebased onstates'proposals rather thanonpre-determined allocations. Thus, the actionof 
theMinistry toreleasefundsin excess of thestates'proposals by10per cent, without ensuring 
utilisation of previous tranche and checking onthepastperformance seemed inappropriate.
Administrativen Staffing as per Government of India's instructions to be in place.
n Monitoring and Vigilance:100 per cent, 10 per cent and two 
per cent monitoring done at block/district/state levels and 100 
per cent muster rolls to be verified.
n MIS to be fully operational.  Submission of authentic Monthly 
Progress Reports.
Transparency n Social audit of all works, timely disposal of complaints and
and publicaction against wilful defaulters, accounts to be opened in post 
accountabilityoffices/banks for wage disbursement.
Other n Utilization Certificate up till 31 March of the previous year 
conditionsincluding opening balance as on 1 April of the current financial 
year to be submitted.
n Certificate regarding release and receipt of the state share 
against the amount of the Central funds released so far, 
including copy of the order sanctioning the state share; and a 
certified copy of the bank statement indicating the credit of 
the state share. Submission of non-diversion and non-
embezzlement certificate.
n Any other condition indicated.

Chapter 5 - Financial Management
35Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
This also indicated thatfunds were releasedbytheMinistrywithoutconsidering the states' 
absorptive capacity.
The Ministrystated thatitwasdecided to release additional 10per centto ensures ustainable 
floatof funds with statestowards meeting anyeventualityand upsurgein the labourdemand 
during the lastquarter of 2010-11and April2011.Further,rthe releaseso madewas well within 
theB udgetEstimates/RevisedEstimates and approved labour budgetfor states. Therehad not 
been any violation of GFRs as therelaxation wasg iven to stateson thoseconditions which were 
imposed by the Ministryitself.ff
Thereplyof the Ministry does not address thefollowing issues:
The action of theMinistry violatedGFR 212(1) whichrequiressubmission of annual audited 
statement relating to grants-in-aid released during the previous year in case of release of 
grants-in-aid in excess of 50 per centof the totalamount sanctioned for the subsequent 
financial year.rr
Evidence of anyupsurge in labour demand or any demandfor relaxation of conditionalities 
by thestateswasnot availableon record.
1
The action of theMinistryresulted in accumulation of heavyunspentbalanceswith the
states at theend of March 2011.
The Ministry, yyin several cases,had releasedfunds prematurely to difffferentstates/districts in a
financialyearfor projectedexpenditure inthe subsequentfinancialyear.rr The release of the
Centralfunds to thestates/UTsTTwithoutParliamentaryapproval rendered thereleaseof funds 
unauthorised.Itwasalso noticed thatsuch releases occurred atthee nd of theyearasdetailed in 
Table-10TT .
n
n
n
5.4 Release of Funds for subsequent financial year
Table-10: Releases for Subsequent Years
( ` in crore)
Funds released for
utilization during 
financial year
Amount
released
Date of
release
States/DistrictsFunds released
in the financial year
2008-09
2009-10
2011-12
2009-10
2010-11
2012-13
871.08
1,201.91
2,000.00
4,072.99Total
30.03.2009
31.03.2010
15.03.2012
94 districts
78 districts
27 states
1
Chhattisgarh (Bastar- ` 43.88 crore, Koria- ` 24.97 crore and Raipur- ` 61.45 crore),  Gujarat- ` 429.74 crore, 
  Madhya Pradesh - ` 1,894.25 crore, Odisha- ` 407.70 crore and Uttar Pradesh ` 1,882.22 crore, 

Chapter 5 - Financial Management
36Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Thus, theMinistryunauthorisedlyreleasedfunds amountingto ` 4,072.99crore to the
states/UTs.TT Audit further noted that therelease on the same pattern for the financial year2010-
11 was objected to by the Integrated Finance Division (IFD) of the Ministry. The IFD did not concur 
to the release at the end of the year to avoid adverse comments from C & AG and the Standing
Committee onDemandsfor Grants. Consequently,yyfunds were not released during 2010-11.
The Ministrystated thatfor meeting the increase in labour demand and to ensure sufficienff tfloat
of funds with the statesduring March and April 2011, funds werereleased during March2011.
Further, runpaidbills arising out of MGNREGSimplementation during thesecond fortnightof 
March in a financialyear were generally settled during the1st fortnight of April of the subsequent
financial year.rrTherefore, afloatof funds was a mustduring April to settlethe unpaidbills carried 
over from theprevious financial year.rrFurther,ritwasadded t hatextant policy approveda
reasonablefloatof funds with thestatesand themoneyreleasedduring March 2011was already 
votedupon, thereleaseof funds aiming atmaintaining balance with thestatewasnot 
unauthorized release and moreover,rthe floatof fundsavailable with statesatthe beginning of 
thenextfinancial yearwastreated as unspentbalance and deductedfrom thetotalentitlement
towards firstinstallment.
The reply of theMinistry does not takei nto accountthe factthatthe releaseof funds atthe end of 
thefinancial yearto meetnextyear'sexpenditureviolatesthe provisions of GFRsand budgetary 
principlesrequiring approval of Parliament.Parliamentary approvalsare meantfor aspecific
year and do not allowcarryforward of unspentbalancestos ubsequentyears.
According to R ule 209(6)(iii)of GFRs, when recurring grants aresanctioned to thesame 
organisation for thesamepurpose, unspentbalance of previousgrantsshouldbe taken into 
accountwhile sanctioning thes ubsequentgrant.The Operational Guidelines also require that
any unspentbalancesfrom theprevious releases be adjusted while making anynew release.
It wasobserved thatduring theyear2010-11,theMinistryreleased`6,733.25croreto nine 
stateswithout taking into accountt heunspentbalances of `10,104.71croreason 31March 2010
with these states. The detailsaregiven in Annex-5A.
Similarly, yyduring 2011-12, the Ministryreleased`2,440 croreon 1 April2011to four states
withouttaking into accountthe unspentbalance of `3,758.91 croreason 31 March 2011. This is 
showninAnnex-5 B.
Thus, the release of `9,173.25 crore during2010-11and2011-12 made in violation of the 
provisions of theGFRs and the Operational Guidelines, was irregular.rr
The Ministryin itsreply statedthat the unspentbalance figuresconsidered byAudit wereaudited 
figures. Receipt of aconsolidated and audited UC indicating unspentbalancesof astatein agiven 
financial yearweregenerally submitted on or after themonth of October in asubsequent
5.5 Excess release of funds by the Ministry without adjusting the 
unspent balance

Chapter 5 - Financial Management
37Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
financial year.rr Itwasalso added thatreleasesobjected to byAudit weretowards the first
instalment which was releasedbased on provisional figureof unspent balance asreported by 
states during the beginning of thefinancial year.rrAudited figureswereconsidered during the next
financialyear while releasing second and subsequenttranches.T heMinistryhad considered 
unspent balance figures as endorsed bythe state and released thefirstinstalmentsaccordingly.
Further, rthe funds soreleasedbytheMinistryhad been utilized for programme implementation 
and accordingly accounted for during the annual audits. Therefore, thereleaseof Central share 
should not be treated as 'excessrelease'.
Therecords however, rindicated thatthe Ministry had not considered even provisional figures of 
unspent balances of `7,748.10crorea nd `3,737.42croreattheclose of financial years2009-10
and 2010-11 respectively.(Annexes-5Aand5B).
As per thefunding pattern of theScheme, the quantum of Central share isclearly specified under 
section 22(1) theAct.Audit,however,robserved thatincase of six statesviz. AndhraPradesh,
Gujarat,Himachal Pradesh, MadhyaPradesh, Rajasthan and WestBengalthe Ministryreleased
fundsof `2,374.86 crorein excessof theCentralshare.Some of thereasonsfor excessrelease
were-Centralliability not being restricted to whatwasdue,releasefor pending liabilities which 
hadalreadybeen adjusted, non adjustmentof unspentbalance, understatementof closing 
balance and releasing fundstwicefor the sameperiod. This indicated t hatthechecksand 
balances in placeswereinadequate. The detailsaregiven in theAnnex-5C.
The Ministryin itsreply stated thattherewasno incorrectcalculation in respectof WestBengal, 
HimachalPradesh and AndhraPradesh.In respect of Gujaratacceptanceof pendingliabilities as
claims and release thereof in 2010-11 and 2011-12 wasnot tobe treated asirregular.rrThiswas
because pending liability occurreddue to sudden riseinlabourdemand and payablesthereof 
towards generating excesswageemployment in agiven period. Further, rthe expenditure wasin 
thenatureof committed liability for which bills wereraisedbut settlements/paymentswere due. 
Hence, while calculating eligibility, yythisamountwasdeducted from thetotal unspentbalance 
reported bythe states/districts.    
Thereplyof the Ministrywasnot correctbecausein thecaseof AndhraPradesh the Central
releasewasnot restricted to itsmaximum liability. In thecaseof Himachal Pradesh, unspent 
balance with it was not adjusted while releasing funds and in the case of West Bengal, releases
were made twicefor the same period. In respect of Gujarat,pending liabilities in both theyears
werefirstadjusted byreducingthesefrom funds available with thestate, but then added backat
thetimeof finalrelease.This isalso established from the factthatGujarathad demandedonly 
`350 croreagainstwhich the Ministryreleased`492.02 crore.
5.6 Excess Release of Funds by the Centre

Chapter 5 - Financial Management
38Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
5.7 Other Irregularities- Irregular Claim of Expenditure by Karnataka
5.8 Short Release of State Share
The state government of Karnataka (via email) requested (8 March 2011) the Ministryto release
additional `461.22 croreto adjustpending liability of financial year2009-10. The Ministry
accepted pending liability of `461.22 croreandafteradjustmentreleased`400 crore on 21
March 2011.
Audit however, rnoted thatno such liability for `461.22 crorewas shown bythe stategovernment
in the UC or annual accountsfor theyear2009-10. The stategovernment had in fact shown 
unspent balance of `821.87 croreat thecloseof 2009-10. Thus, Ministryhad accepted irregular
claim of pending liability of `461.22 crorewithoutproperverification of documents.
Itwasalso noted thatKarnataka had a fund balance of `1,084.37crore as on 10March 2011. A
significantproportionof thisamount was relatedto releases from theCentre.Astheavailable 
funds wereinexcessof whatwasbeing demanded asapending liability, yythereason for releasing 
the additionalamountwasunclear.rr
The Ministry in itsreply stated that Central liabilitywasbased on the labourdemand; the 
entitlementswereestimated byassessingpersondaysgenerated duringagiven yearandthe
eligible Central share.In caseof short releaseof Central sharein agiven year, rthesamewasto be 
released during thesucceeding yearto liquidate pending payments.
The reply wasnot relevantto thefactsof thecaseasthisdid not explain theaction of theMinistry 
in acceptingan irregular claim.
Examination of therecords of stategovernmentsrelating to release of funds disclosed thatin 
seven statestherewasshortreleasebystategovernmentof their sharesamounting to `456.55 
crore for 2007-12. The details of short release aregivenin theAnnex-5D.The shortfall in states'
shareadverselyaffffectsthetotal availability of funds for t heimplementation of theScheme 
therebyreducing thequantum of workstaken up and employmentgeneration plannedin the 
labour budgetsof thestates/UTs. TT
The Ministryinitsreply stated thatthe due statesharewasassessedbyexamining UCs and audit 
reports submitted by the states and in case of any short release made by the states towards its
share, letterswerewritten tostatesfor immediatecompliance. Itwasalso added thatmatter was
discussedin labour budgetmeetings, regional review meetings and Performance Review
Committee Meetings from time to time.
Thereply of theMinistry is notpertinent asit is silentwithregard to specific casespointed out by 
Audit.

5.9 Delay in Release of State Share
5.10 Non-Creation of SEG Fund
Intermsof theOperational Guidelines(para8.4.4), states'sharewasto bereleasedwithin 15
days from thedateof releaseof Central sharebyt heCentralGovernment. This provisionwasto 
ensurethat funds were available withthe implementing agencyatthe righttime. Audit noted 
thatin AndhraPradesh, ArunachalPradeshand UttarPradesh, thestates' sharewasnot released
within thestipulated period of 15days. Further,rduring testscheckof records, it wasseenthatthe 
release of states' sharewasdelayed on aregular basis. Thedetails of the delaysnoted in 13
additionalstatesarementionedinAnnex-5E.
The governmentof Punjab stated thatthedelay in releaseof statesharewasdue to the receipt of 
Centralshare atthe end of theyear.rr The governmentof Himachal Pradesh stated thatdelay
occurred due to thelengthyprocedureof obtaining sanction for expenditurefrom theFinance 
Department.T he replies werenot convincing asbetter coordination atthestatelevel could have
ensured timelyreleaseof fundsto implementing agencies.
The Ministry in itsreply stated thatfor ensuring betterand expeditious compliance on the matter, r
stateswerebeing instructed to adhereto the timelines given in the sanctionorders.
Under section 21(1)of theAct thestategovernmentmay, yybynotification, establish afundcalled 
the State EmploymentGuarantee(SEG) Fund for the purposeof implementation of the Scheme.
The amount standing to the credit of the state fund should be expended and administered as a
revolvingfundin such amanner and subjectto such conditions and limitations asmay be 
prescribed bythestategovernmentfor thepurpose of implementation of this Act.The 
OperationalGuidelinesalso provide for establishingsimilar revolving funds atthe district,block 
andgram panchayatlevels.
Chapter 5 - Financial Management
39Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Case study: Short Release of State Share by Haryana
As per policy of the Government of India, difference in minimum wages notified by state 
government and the GoI was to be borne by the state government from its own resources.  
The minimum wages prescribed by state government of Haryana were higher than that of 
GoI.  Therefore, the amount of ` 10.06 crore on account of difference in minimum wages for 
the period January 2009 to March 2010 was required to be paid by the state government.  
Audit, however, observed that the difference in amount was adjusted out of the Central 
share.  The Ministry in its reply to the proposal of the state government clarified that the 
additional burden of higher labour rate would have to be borne by the state government.  
However, the funds amounting ` 10.06 crore were not adjusted by the Ministry from 
subsequent releases to the state. 

Chapter 5 - Financial Management
40Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Asof 31 March 2012, in 14statesand four UTsTTviz.,A runachal Pradesh,Assam, Chhattisgarh, Goa,
Haryana, Jammu &Kashmir,rKerala,Manipur,rMizoram, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, 
Uttarakhand,Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Dadra & NagarH aveli, Lakshadweep and Puducherry, yy
creationof the SEG Fund waseither not notified or wasnot operationalised. 
Further, rin MaharashtraSEG fund was operationalised only in March 2012.In MadhyaPradesh
SEGFund was notified in April 2009butguidelines were not formulated for itsoperation. 
In Odisha, Audit noticed thatthestatehad created (June 2006)acorpus fundby investing `3.90
crore out of the Schemefund releasedbyGoI in thePostOfficesff defeating the verypurpose of 
creating arevolving fund. In UttarPradesh,the fund was establishedwith delayof 42 monthsin 
September2009and thattoo withoutthe notification by the stategovernment.
In MadhyaPradesh, Maharashtraand Nagaland, therevolving fundsatdistrict,blockand gram 
panchayatlevelswereyet tobe established. In Jharkhand, therevolvingfund wasestablishedat
district level, but the samewasyetto be established atblock and GP levels.In Punjab in three out 
of sixselected districts, revolvingfunds atdistrict,block and gram panchayatlevelswereyetto be 
established.In UttarPradesh, the state government issued orders (August2009)to 
operate/maintain blocklevel accountsof MGNREGSasrevolving fundsand funds werealso 
released accordingly but Rules for operation and maintenance of these funds werenot framed.
Subsequently, yyfromNovember 2009itwasdecided thatfunds wouldbe credited directly from 
state fund to GPsand therefore maintenance of the revolving fund wasdiscontinued. 
In the absenceof therevolving fund inthe states/UTs,TT the GoI directlyreleasedthe Centralfunds 
for MGNREGS to the implementing agencies i.e., DistrictProgramme Coordinatorsat the district 
level. The releaseof fundsdirectlyto thedistrict implementing authorities led to deficiencies in 
controland monitoring of expenditurebytheauthorities atstatelevel.
TheMinistryin itsreply stated thatunder section 21of the Acti twasnot imperativeto establish a
SEGF.ToTTensuresmooth flowof funds and to havean effffectivefundmanagement system atstate
level, theimplementing stateswerebeing asked to constituterespectiveSEGFs.Direct fund 
releaseto districtsin caseof non-SEGFstatesdid not hamper proper monitoring or state'scontrol 
of expenditureof thedistrictsunder MGNREGS.
The Ministryshould takeup the issue with theconcerned stategovernmentsto expeditethe
operationalisation of these funds.
Asper Operational Guidelines, erstwhile schemes of National Food for Work Programme 
(NFFWP) and Sampoorna Grameen RozgarYojanaYY (SGRY) programmeswereto be subsumed in 
MGNREGS.The balance funds in these schemeswere alsoto be transferred to MGNREGS.
Scrutinyof records in test checked districts of seven statesviz. Bihar, rChhattisgarh, Jharkhand, 
Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, revealed that` 110.22 crore were yet to be 
transferred from the schemes of NFFWP and SGRYto MGNREGS. This resulted in idling of funds 
5.11 Non transfer of funds from SGRY and NFFWP

Case study: Irregular expenditure under SGRY funds
In 2007-08, in Kamrup (Rural) and Karbi Anglong districts of Assam, implementing agencies 
spent ` 31.07 lakh out of SGRY fund on inadmissible works like extension of staff quarters, 
lifting Mid-Day Meal rice, Godown rent and purchase of RCC spun pipe, etc. instead of 
transferring the unutilised balance to MGNREGS account.
Chapter 5 - Financial Management
41Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
undernon-functional schemeswhich could be utilized in MGNREGS.This also raisesthe
possibility of mis-utilisation of thesefunds. Further,rin two statesviz. Madhya Pradesh and 
Rajasthan,`11.72 crorewas transferred with delaysranging from 5to 60 months. The details of 
non-transfer and delayed transfer aregiven in the Annex-5F.
The Ministrystated thatstateswere being instructed to submit latest position on the issues.
5.12 Utilisation of Interest Income
5.13 Irregularities in management of Administrative Expenses 
terestearned on theavailablefunds isto be accounted for as receiptunder theScheme.Audit 
however, robserved that in fivestatesinterestearned on the funds amountingto `1.26 crorewere 
spent on non-permitted itemsorn o t  accounted for in thecashbooksas receipt. The details are 
givenin theAnnex-5G.
Audit further noted i nstances w herefunds werekept in currentaccounts,leading to lossof 
interest income. In thetestchecked districtsof Jharkhand,`49.78 crorewerekept in current
accounts with difffferentbanks. Similar caseswere noticed in Kerala(intwo G P s ,one eachin 
Palakkad and Kottayam districts),M aharashtra(one block eachin Sindhudurg and Nanded 
districts) and Mizoram (Lunglei-Hnathial and Lawngtlai-Sangau districts).
TheOperational Guidelines provide thatfunds received from theCentral and stategovernment 
werenot to be invested in fixed or term deposits. Contraryto thisstipulation, in BelgaumZ Pand 
BangaloreRuralZP of Karnataka,funds amounting to `5.00croreand`30lakh, respectively, yywere 
invested in theform of term deposits.
TheMinistryin itsreply stated thatstateswerebeing instructed to submit lateststatuson the
issue.
Under section 22(1)(C) of the Act, such percentage of the totalcost of the Scheme asdetermined 
bythe Central Governmentwasto be incurred for administrativeexpenses, which could include 
the salaryand allowancesof theProgramme Officerff and his supportingstaffff, fetc.Further, rthe
Ministryclarified (August2006)thatadministrativeexpenseswere to be incurred onwagesof 
ProgrammeOfficerff , rhisstaffff,fassistancetoGPs,expenseson stationery, yymobility (excluding 
purchaseof new vehicles), travel, computerization, training, IECactivities,monitoring, social 

Chapter 5 - Financial Management
42Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
auditsand audit related expenses and worksite facilities.Further, ritwasalso clarified that the 
Central Governmentwould meet theexpenses only to the extent of prescribed ceiling (four per 
centupto March 2009 and sixper centthereafter). The expenses over and abovetheceiling were 
to be bornebyt hestate government.
Scrutiny of records revealed thatin 24districts (13per centof all testchecked districts) of eight
states and twoUTsTTviz.Bihar, rJharkhand,Kerala, Maharashtra,N agaland, Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttar
Pradesh, Dadra&N a g a rH aveli and Lakshadweep, administrative expenditurein excess of the
prescribedpercentage amounting `32.04 crore during 2007-12wasincurred asmentioned inthe 
Annex-5H. 
In Churachandpur, rImphal Eastand Tamenglong TT districts of Manipur, r`5.85crorewas incurred on 
inadmissibleworkssuch asconstruction worksatDeputyCommissioner office ff and residential 
bungalow, w construction of training hall, etc. out of thefund earmarked for administrative 
expenses.In Durgdistrictof Chhattisgarh, `4.92lakh were incurred from administrativehead for 
furnishingof District Collectorate,payment of mobile bills, etc.InBolangir andBhadrakdistricts
of Odisha, inadmissible expenditure of `14.41 lakh was incurred during 2007-12towards 
purchase of generator,rfurniture, spare parts,paymentof telephone bills, repair of office ff jeep 
and purchase of levelling machine.
Further, rin thethreetestchecked DPCsof Dimapur,rMon and Tuensang in Nagaland, Audit noted 
thattheexpenditurecharged to administrativeexpenses included inadmissible itemssuch as
purchase of vehicles, civil worksand computers.The threeDPCs incurred an expenditure of 
`2.21 crorefor thepurchase of 36vehicles during 2007-12. The itemssuch aspurchase of 
vehicles and transfer of funds to SEGCweredistinctlyshown in approved annual accounts.
However, rthegovernmentof Nagalandand theMinistrydid not takeany correctiveaction by 
taking cognizanceof the reported facts. This indicated failure of internal controls.Further, rit was
observed in t hethreetestchecked DPCs in N agalandthatan expenditureof `59lakh for 
construction of new buildingswasincurred though itwasinadmissiblein MGNREGS.
As per theOperational Guidelines (para8.4.4), funds allocated for MGNREGS should not be 
diverted or used for otherpurposes. However, rtestcheckof records revealed thatfunds 
amounting`25.96 crorewereincurred on inadmissible itemsin 12states. These arementioned 
in Annex-5I.
Further, r`135.02croreinfivestateswerediverted to purposesother than specifiedunder the
Scheme.  Statespecific findings aredetailed in the Annex-5J.
5.13.1 Excess Administrative Expense
5.13.2 Inadmissible expenditure
5.14 Expenditure on Inadmissible Items and Diversion of Funds  

Chapter 5 - Financial Management
43Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
The Ministryin itsreply stated thatstateswerebeing instructed to submit lateststatuson these 
issues and in case of any inadmissible administrativeexpenses,the stateswould be asked to 
recoup such amount to MGNREGS account.
Case Study: Diversion for State Scheme
To promote better participation of women, state government of Rajasthan launched Amrita 
Devi Bishnoi Yojana as an incentive scheme for women, who had completed 100 days in 
MGNREGS.  The expenditure of ` 48.35 lakh incurred for this purpose was borne by the state 
government from the state share during 2008-09.  Audit noted that MGNREGS had no 
provision to finance such state specific initiatives.  Thus, the action of the state government 
amounted to diversion of funds. 
5.15 Unaccounted Expenditure or Misappropriation of Funds
5.16 Monthly Squaring of Accounts
Audit also noted financial irregularities in the procedures for payment of wages or material.  In 
eight states, there werecasesof suspected misappropriation of funds asno supporting vouchers
relating to paymentswereavailable on record. This had afinancial implicationof `128.23crore.
Inaddition clear misappropriation caseswith afinancial implication of `5.05crore were 
observedin four statesviz. Assam,Punjab, Rajasthan and UttarPradesh. In these caseseither 
departmental inquiry had been instituted or the mattersweresub-judice. The detailsof 
suspectedmisappropriation casesare given in theAnnex-5K.
The Ministry in itsreply stated thatstateswerebeing instructed tosubmit lateststatuson the 
issues andin caseof anymisappropriation of funds or unaccounted expenditure o ut of 
programme fund, thestates would be asked to recoup suchamountto MGNREGSaccount.
The Operational Guidelines (para8.6)provide for the practice of 'Monthly Squaring' of accounts
so that the risk of financial 'leakages' isreduced, andboth transparencyandaccuracyin fund
management areensured. This consistsof procedures for verifying that allthe moneyreleased
under MGNREGSis accounted for under thethreeheadsviz.moneyheldin bank accountsat
variouslevels,advances to implementing or paymentagenciesand vouchersof actualexpenses.
Further, rthedetails of the monthly squaring of accountsshould be put on thewebsiteof 
MGNREGS fortransparency.
Audit noted that themonthly squaringof accounts wasnot carried out uniformlyin the test
checkeddistricts,blocksand gram panchayatsof nine statesviz.Bihar, rGujarat, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Kerala, MadhyaPradesh, Manipur,rSikkim and UttarPradesh.In the case of 
UttarPradesh it wasobserved thatin 16out of the 18testchecked districts, fundswere not 
accounted for, on monr thly basis as required under the Scheme.  Sikkim had not yet introduced 
thesystemof reconciliation. 

Chapter 5 - Financial Management
44Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
The Ministryin its reply stated thatstates werebeing instructed to submit lateststatuson the
issue. 
As per theAct, thestategovernment is authorized to p rescribe formatof accountsto be 
maintained atdistrict, block and gram panchayatlevels. Audit noted that no formatof accounts
was prescribed by thestate governments of Assam,Haryana,Maharashtra,Tripura, Uttar
Pradeshand Andaman & Nicobar Islands.In Maharashtra, thestategovernment issued (April 
2012) instructions to chartered accountants to formulate an accounting system to maintain 
uniformity in accounting formats,but had not yetprescribed any formatof accounts.
MGNREGS, though implemented in difffferentstates,can be thoughtof as asingle accounting 
entity. This isalso importantfor ensuring consolidation and uniformity of theaccountsprepared 
by thevarious implementing agencies.In such ascenario, the Ministrymay take the lead and
prepare a model setof accountswhich can be adopted byall thestates.
The Ministryin its reply stated thatsuggestions had been noted for implementation.  
5.17 Prescribed Format of Accounts
Recommendations:
n Monthly squaring of accounts is an important control over utilization of funds. Progress 
of monthly squaring of accounts should be checked during release of funds by the 
Ministry.
n In the interest of uniformity and for easier consolidation of accounts, the Ministry may 
consider developing a model format of accounts.
n Ministry of Rural Development should invariably ensure compliance with required rules 
and prescribed guidelines for transparency in release of funds.

45Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
6.1 Introduction
Thefirst step inguaranteeing thebeneficiary's rightto 100daysof employmentundert he 
Scheme wasensuring registration of thehousehold with the gram panchayat.Under paragraph 2
of Schedule II of the Act, it was the duty of the gram panchayat to register the household, after 
making suitableenquiries, and issueajob card. The application for registration could be given on 
plain paper to the GP or an individual could appear personally and makean oral request(para 5.2
of OperationalGuidelines).The Operational Guidelines also require thatthej ob cardsbe issued 
tobeneficiaries within 15 daysof receiptof application. The various activitiesrelated to t he
registration process, issueof thejobcard and employment allocation areoutlined in Chart-9.
6.2 Household Survey
Para5.2.5 of the Operational Guidelines envisagesthatadoor-to-door surveybe undertaken to 
identifypersonswilling to register themselvesunder the Act. The surveywasto be conducted by a
teamheadedby thePresidentof the grampanchayatand involving ward members,S C/ST and 
womenresidents,avillage-level governmentfunctionaryand thegram panchayat Secretary. 
Registration and Issue of 
Job Cards
Chapter
6
Registration 
activities
Job card
Employment 
allocation activities
n Door-to-door survey for identifying people willing to register, to 
be conducted by GP
n Person/households can also register by applying at GP office
n All applications to be verified within a fortnight
n Unique registration number for each household
n To be issued within a fortnight of application
n Its should contain photograph of adult members
n To be in custody of household
n Valid for five years
n Provision for addition/deletion of members
n Issue, addition/deletion to be done in presence of local 
community / Gram Sabha
n Application for work can be given at GP office, work-site or to 
Programme Officer
n Dated receipt to each application to be given
n Employment to be given within 15 days of application, if not 
unemployment allowance to be paid
n PO responsible for ensuring each applicant gets employment
Chart-9: Registration Process, Job Card and Employment Allocation

Chapter 6 - Registration and Issue of Job Cards
46Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
6.2.1 Door-to-Door Survey not Conducted
6.2.2 Non-Updation/Display of Registration List
6.3 Issue of Job Cards
Audit noted thatthedoor-to-doorsurveyto identifypersons willingto register wasnot 
conducted in 1,479GPs(38.43per centof 3,848test checked GPs) and in villagesof seven districts
in 16 statesviz. Assam,Bihar,rChhattisgarh, Haryana, Jammu &Kashmir, rJharkhand, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Mizoram, Nagaland, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tripura and Uttar Pradesh. The 
state-wisedetails are given in theAnnex-6A.
The Ministrystated thatadoor-to-doorsurveywasneeded when the programme was in its initial 
yearsof implementation. The Ministry alsostated thatvarious stategovernments had started 
other meansfor registration like help line, info kiosk, application from postoffice, ff school and 
anganwadi center, retc.
Audit however, rnoted thatinalargepercentageof thegrampanchayats, thedoor-to-doorsurvey 
wasnotconducted even att heinitial stagesof theScheme.A door-to-door surveywasnecessary
for wider communication to ensure thatno potentialbeneficiarywas left out. 
The Operational Guidelines envisagethattheregistration listbe annually updated to add eligible
workers and delete ineligibleworkers due to death, migration, getting governmentemployment, 
etc.T he Operational Guidelines furtherrequirethatthecancellation of ineligibleregistered 
household be made publicand be readout in thegrams abha (paras5.2.12and 5.3.5).
In219 GPs(5.69per centof all testchecked GPs) in threestatesviz.Nagaland, UttarP radesh and 
WestBengal theregistration listwasnot updated.In 763GPs(19.82per centof all testchecked 
GPs), threeblocksand sixdistricts in Assam, Nagaland, Odisha, Tamil TT Nadu, Tripura,Uttar Pradesh
andWestBengal (seven states)itwasnot made public. The practiceof non-displayof registration 
list waswidespread in Assam,Odisha, Tripuraand UttarPradesh. As aresult,itcould not be 
ascertained if all thepotentialbeneficiaries wereincludedin theregistration list. The details are 
shown in theAnnex-6B.
TheOperational Guidelines envisagethatt hegram panchayats,afterdue verification, should 
issueajob card to theregistered beneficiaries.Job cards wereto be issued within afortnight of 
the application forregistration (para5.3.2). Photographs of adult member applicantswere to be 
attached to thejob cards (para5.3.3).Further,rthejob card wasto contain information including
theregistration number, rparticulars of age and sex of all adult membersof thefamily whoare
willingto work. The job card wasto be in the custody of the household to whom itwas issued 
(para 5.3.4).  The timely issue of a well-designed job card was essential to ensure transparency
and protect beneficiaries againstfraud (para 5.3.1). The job card had avalidity of fiveyears and 
wasto be updated asrequired. The irregularities noticed in thisregardarediscussed below:

Case Study: Non Segregation of Families
Andhra Pradesh:
Para 5.1.3 of Operational Guidelines stipulates that 'household' means a nuclear family 
comprising mother, father and their children and may include any person wholly or 
substantially dependent on the head of the family.
However, analysis of electronic data in respect of the three selected districts (Rangareddy, 
Nalgonda and Vizianagaram) revealed 58 households with 20 or more members and 1,962 
households with 10 to 19 members. Clearly, in these cases, households had not been 
properly segregated into nuclear families, adversely affecting their statutory annual right to 
employment for at least 100 days per 'household'.
Chapter 6 - Registration and Issue of Job Cards
47Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
6.3.1 Non-issue of Job Cards
It was seen that job cardswerenot issued in respect of 12,455registered households in six GPs,
seven blocksa nd 11districts inAndhraPradesh, Karnataka,Manipur, rOdisha, Punjab and Uttar 
Pradesh (six states)outof thetestchecked units.T hedetailsareshown inTable-11.TT Inthe
absence of jobcards, thebeneficiaries would not be able to demand their basic rightto 100days
of employment.
Table-11 : Non-issue of Job Cards
No. of job
cards not
issued
No. of
Job Card
issued
No. of
Regd.
Household
No. of 
GPs/Blocks/
Districts
Name of
State
Sl.
No. Remarks
No record for issue of 183 job 
cards produced to audit. 
Not issued during 2007-12.
Not issued during 2009-12.
Pending since one  to 
four years.
Pending since one to 
two years.
--
1
2
3
4
5
6
Andhra 
Pradesh
Karnataka*
Manipur
Odisha
Punjab
Uttar 
Pradesh
6 GPs
8 districts
1 district 
(Emphal East)
6 blocks
1 district 
1 district
1 block
--
14,21,470
75,574
--
--
1,05,369
12,062
--
14,17,340
70,656
--
--
1,05,318
10,815
183
4,130
4,918
1,915
11
51
1,247
12,455
Total

Chapter 6 - Registration and Issue of Job Cards
48Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
6.3.2 Multiple Job Cards
In four states itwasnoticed that multiple job cards were issued in the name of thesame person.
Issue of m ultiplej ob cards was noticedin 18,325cases in 109 GPs and one district inBihar, r
Jharkhand, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. In Bihar instancesof threeor four job cardsbeing issued
to the same persons were also noticed. The details areg iven in theAnnex-6C. Thesecasessuggest
possibilityof misuse of fundsand need to be investigated.
6.3.3 Delay in issue of Job Cards
6.3.4 Other discrepancies in Job Cards
Job cards wereto be issued within 15daysof application for registration. This wasimportantto 
ensurethatthebeneficiarywasableto demand and get employmentin time. Delaysin issueof 
job cards in 12,008casesranging from2daysto 51months werenoticed in 28 GPs,oneblock and 
four districts in Assam, Jharkhand, Maharashtra,Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan and UttarPradesh
(sevenstates) out of test checked units.State-wise details are given inthe Annex-6D.
Photographs of the applicants werenot pasted on 4.33lakh job cards in 143GPsand 19districts in 
ArunachalPradesh, Assam,Bihar,rHimachal Pradesh,Maharashtra, Manipur and Rajasthan 
(sevenstates).Out of this,asignificantnumber was noticed in thecaseof Maharashtrawhere
3.83 lakhjob cards werewithoutphotographs.In one GP and fivedistrictsin Arunachal Pradesh,
Assamand Manipur (threestates),jointphotographs of adult membersof householdswerenot 
pasted on 391job cards.Further,rin 125GPsand 13districtsin Bihar,rJharkhand, Uttarakhand, 
UttarPradesh and Dadra&NagarHaveli (four states and one UT), photographs of theapplicants
werenot pasted onjob card registers in 8,717cases. Thesecases aredetailed in Annex-6E.
In 59 GPsand 13districtsin Bihar,rJharkhand andRajasthan (threestates), registration 
number/dateof issue of job cards were not mentionedin 39,359cases. In 190 GPsand four
districts inArunachalPradesh, Assam, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand 
and Dadra&N agarHaveli (six states and one UT), signature of the member of householdwas not 
observed in respect of 22,302job cards. Further,rin 137GPsand 17districts in Arunachal Pradesh,
Bihar, rHimachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Dadra&NagarHaveli (fourstatesand oneUT) out of 
testchecked units, signatureof thecompetentauthority for issuing job card werenot foundin 
5,002 cases. These cases ared etailed in Annex-6E.
Case Study:Possible misuse of job cards
Assam:
In order to prevent any misuse of job cards, Operational Guidelines stipulate that the job 
cards should only be in the custody of the beneficiary.  In the records of three GPs, 428 job 
cards were received by persons other than the households i.e., by members/staff of 
respective gram panchayats.  Possibility of misuse of job cards in such cases could not be 
ruled out.

Chapter 6 - Registration and Issue of Job Cards
49Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
In one GP in Assam, job cards were not in the custody of households in 840 cases.  Further, in 13
districts in Bihar, entry of payment made in other records did not tally with the entry in job cards in
523 cases. These cases are detailed inAnnex-6E.
The job card was the basic document which the beneficiary could use to enforce his right to work
guaranteed under the Act. However, the large scale and persistent deficiencies relating to job
cards and their custody indicates lack of awareness and official apathy which adversely affected 
the implementation of the Scheme.
In response, the Ministry stated that the matters relating to delay in issue/non-issuance of job 
cards and pasting of photographs of applicants on job cards were regularly reviewed with the 
state governments during Performance Review Committee (PRC) meetings, regional review 
meetings and during the visit to the states by senior officers.  The Ministry also stated that for 
specific issues pointed out in the audit report, states were instructed to submit comments on the 
audit observations.
Para 9.1.1(iv) of Operational Guidelines envisages that job card application register was to be 
maintained by the gram panchyats/Programme Officer . In the register, the name of the applicant,
date of receipt of application and the details of job cards issued were to be provided.  Reasons for
not issuing of the job card were also to be recorded. 
The details of the members of the households who were issued job cards are given in a job card
register which was to be maintained by the gram panchayat/Programme Officer (para 9.1.1(iv) of 
Operational Guidelines).
Further, para 5.2.10 of Operational Guidelines envisages that copies of the registration be sent to 
the Programme Officer for the purpose of reporting to the intermediate panchayat and district 
panchayat for further planning, tracking and recording. This should have been done immediately,
so that the Programme Officer has a consolidated record of likely demand to organize resources
accordingly.
Job card registers were not maintained or were incorrectly maintained in 1,374 GPs (35.71 per 
cent of all test checked GPs) and 94 blocks in Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir,t
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Odisha, Punjab, Sikkim, 
Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and Dadra & Nagar Haveli (15 states and one UT).
 Job card application registers were not maintained/properly maintained in 1,769 GPs (45.97 per 
cent of all test checked GPs) and 204 blocks in Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana,t
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Nagaland, Punjab, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttrakhand, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and
Dadra & Nagar Haveli (20 states and one UT).
In the absence of these registers it was not possible to ascertain whether all the potential
beneficiaries were able to apply for job cards and get them issued on time. Further, lists of 
6.4 Maintenance of records relating to Job Card and Employment

Chapter 6 - Registration and Issue of Job Cards
50Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
registration of job cards werenot sentto POin 442GPsin Odisha,UttarPradesh and WestBengal
(three states). In such a situation the POwould not be able to properly monitor the registration 
process. The details are given inAnnex-6F.
The Ministry stated that itregularly reviewed the maintenance of records with the state
governments during Performance Review Committee (PRC) meetings, Regional Review meetings 
and during thevisit to thestates by seniorofficerff s. The Ministryalso stated thatfor specific issues
pointed out in the audit report, stateswere being instructed to submit comments on the audit 
observations.
Operational Guidelines envisagethatin eachgram panchayat,aparticular dayof theweek
('employmentguaranteeday' or 'rozgard iwas') shouldbe earmarked for processingwork
applicationsand relatedactivitiessuchas disclosure of information, allocation of work, payment 
of wages and payment of unemploymentallowances(para12.2.1 of Operational Guidelines). The
proceedings of the 'employmentguaranteeday' shouldbe held in an open public space, with 
ampleprovision for proactivedisclosureof information.
In 798GPs(20.74 per centof all testcheckedGPs) and elevendistrictsin Arunachal Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Nagaland, Odisha, Tamil TT Nadu,UttarPradesh,WestBengaland Lakshadweep 
(sevenstatesand one UT), aparticular dayof theweekwasnot earmarked/organized as
employmentguaranteedayasprovided in Operational Guidelines. The detailsare g iven in
Annex-6G.
The Ministrystated thatit had repeatedly requested state governmentsto organize employment
guaranteeday. Some governmentsorganized similar kind of events to processthework 
application like eventatschools, campsataganwadi centre,etc.
Astate-wise summaryof audit findings/irregularities in respectof registration and issue of job
cards areasfollows:
Five hundred and twenty sampled job cards inselected districtsrevealed thatthere 
were10 cases of registration of underage members i.e., below 18years,1 5cases of job 
cards without the signatureof the authorized officer ff in the employmentrecord page, 
and seven cases of applicants' namesmissing from job cards though the names were 
uploaded to MIS.
No oral requestsforregistration of job cards wereentertained. 
6.5 Employment Guarantee Day
6.6 State specific findings
n Arunachal Pradesh:
l
l

Chapter 6 - Registration and Issue of Job Cards
51Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
In two GPs (Achalparaa nd BarkaSatgaon), records relating to issueof 623(90+533)job 
cardsw ere not available with concerned GPs.
In one block under Chirang district,intwo cases,the samejob card number was issued to 
two difffferentpersons.
TwTT o job cards were issued to single household showing difffferentnamesof villages.
In two GPs under Borobazar block,in four cases, separate jobcards were issued to 
husband and wife of the same household.
Minor beneficiaries i.e.,persons below 18yearsof agewereenrolled/registered in 511
cases by 11 GPs under MGNREGS. As per the Act, employment was to be given only to 
adult membersof thehousehold.
In Sitapahari GP of Pakur district, name of the sameperson was found in 18job cards 
either ashead of householdo ra safamily member.rr
In Rampur panchayatof Dumkadistrict,two job cards were issued to one person (Head 
of family) and wagesearned on both job cards were foundcredited to asingle accountof 
postoffice.ff
In ArsandeyGP of WestSinghbhumdistrict,two job cardswereissued to asingle 
householdin threecasesand wagesof both job cards of eachhouseholdwere credited 
to asingle account.
Asper Monitoring Information System (MIS), 262persons aged lessthan 18yearsand 
344persons morethan or equal to 90yearshad been engaged on worksin eighttest
checked districts during 2009-12 and wages of ` 3.62 lakh and ` 3.65 lakh respectively 
had been paid to them.
MIS dataof theeight sampleddistrictsshowed t hatout of 62.81 lakh registered 
individuals, 19.67 lakh individuals had been tagged for deletion and in 93per centof 
thesecases, thereason for deletion wasgiven as'others'.In theabsenceof exactreasons
for deletions, the possibility of thesecards being issued fraudulentlycould not be ruled 
out. An amountof `156.10 crore had been paid to these individualsduring 2008-09to 
2011-12 before theseweretagged for deletion.
Thereweredelaysintagging the individuals for deletion after their identification. During 
this period of delay, yy5,622individuals had been employed and `50.55 lakh had been 
paid aswages.Another 204 individuals had been engaged even aftertagging them for 
deletionand wages of `1.55 lakh werepaid. 
n Assam:
l
l
l
l
n Himachal Pradesh:
l
n Jharkhand:
l
l
l
n Karnataka:
l
l
l

Chapter 6 - Registration and Issue of Job Cards
52Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Asper MIS, in 14,574casesjob cardshad been issued afterthehouseholdshadbeen 
tagged for deletion in eight testchecked districts.
l
Case Study: Irregular Payment on Deleted Job Cards in Karnataka
Analysis of MIS data showed that during 2008-12, 92,889 job cards and 2,32,636 individuals 
had been permanently deleted in the eight test checked districts on grounds of wrong 
entries.  However, as per the data available in the MIS, wages aggregating ` 5.27 crore had 
been disbursed in respect of permanently deleted cards and ` 0.22 crore in respect of 
deleted individuals till the date of deletion.  Further, individual members who had been 
permanently deleted were subsequently engaged on various works during 2008-12 and 
wages aggregating ` 3.42 crore had been disbursed to them.
1 
Moorkanad, Nediyiruppu and Keezhattur
1
In three GPsin Malappuram district, 87 job cards were shown as issued but not handed 
over to beneficiaries. 
AllBPLhouseholdswere registered in asingle dayin one block in Kendraparadistrict i.e.,
on 24 January 2008. The instructions for registering all BPL households were issued by 
thestategovernmentin March 2006. The possibility of registrationof unwilling
households or householdsnot requiring employmentcould not be ruled out.
Atotal number of 842 job card holderswerereported to havedied during the period 
under review,w whereas no action wastaken bytherespectiveblocksto verifythe 
registered households for deletion.
n Kerala: 
l
n Odisha: 
l
n Puducherry: 
l

53Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
7.1 Introduction
n
n
n
n
7.2 Delay in Providing Employment and Unemployment Allowance
7.2.1 Non-payment of Unemployment Allowance
Theprimarypurpose for enacting MGNREGA was to ensurelivelihood securityfor all rural 
households. The Act guarantees100 daysof employmentto every household w hose adult
membersarewilling to undertakemanual unskilled labour.rrIn thelight of the guarantee of 
employment enshrined in the Act, it is imperativethat:
Timely employmentisprovided to whoever needs it.
Incaseit is not possible todo so,unemploymentallowanceas providedfor in theActis
given.
Wages arepaid in full and in time.
Thereisadequatetransparencyin theprocessesinvolved.
Underpara5.4 of Operational Guidelines anyperson having ajob card can apply for work to gram 
panchayat (GP) in writing, upon which the GP would issue him a dated receipt. Further, section r
7(1) of M GNREGA envisaged thatif an applicantunder the Schemewasnot provided
employment, within fifteendaysof receiptof his application seeking employmentor from the
dateon which the employmentwassought in thecase of an advanceapplication, whichever was
later,rhe would be entitled to adaily unemploymentallowance.For this purpose, an Employment
Registerinprescribed proformawasrequired to be maintained byGP (para 9.1.1 (vi)of 
Operational Guidelines). Unemploymentallowancewasto be paid from stategovernment
funds. Weobserved a number of deficiencies in the process.
In 12 GPs, one block and six districtsin Assam, Bihar,rChhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Kerala,
Maharashtraand Punjab (seven states)out of test checked units, employmentwasnot provided
within 15daysfromthedate on whichwork wasrequested. The delayin providing employment 
rangedbetween 2 and 1,218daysin 47,687casesasgiven in Annex-7A. However, runemployment 
allowancewas not paid in thesecases.  
Employment Generation and 
Payment of Wages
Chapter
7

Case study: Avoidable payment of unemployment allowance
Uttar Pradesh:
In two blocks (Misrikh and Piswan) of Sitapur district, 860 workers demanded 
unemployment allowance on the ground that work was not provided to them despite 
written requests made during May 2007 to October 2007. The requests of the workers were 
rejected by the District Programme Coordinator (DPC) on the ground that the workers were 
provided work in another scheme running in the area. The workers' union submitted an 
appeal to the Commissioner for payment of unemployment allowance. During proceedings, 
DPC stated that the workers were offered work but they did not turn up.  The DPC, however, 
failed to furnish any documentary evidence in support of this statement. The 
Commissioner, therefore, directed the DPC to pay unemployment allowance to the 
workers. Thus, avoidable payment of unemployment allowance of  ` 14.99 lakh was made. 
It was also noticed that the payments were made by DPC from the balance of the MGNREGS 
fund, even though, payment of unemployment allowance was the liability of the state 
government.
The Ministry stated that the matter was being referred to the state government.
Chapter 7 - Employment Generation and Payment of Wages
54Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
response, theMinistrystated that the liability to payunemploymentallowancewasthatof the
state government. The stateg overnments had beenreminded several times of their duties under
the Act. The Ministry also stated thatthematter would be forwardedto the respective state 
governments.
7.2.2 Non-maintenance/Poor maintenance of records 
In 1,402 GPs(36.43per centof all testchecked GPs)in Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, rGujarat, Haryana, 
Kerala, Mizoram, Tamil TT Nadu, UttarPradesh,WestBengaland Puducherry(ninestates and one
UT) and GPsof eightblocksof Meghalaya,dated receipt of applications for demand for workwere 
notgiven.
In 2,068GPs(53.74per centof all test checked GPs) and 149blocksin AndhraPradesh,Assam,
Bihar, rGoa, G ujarat,Haryana,Himachal Pradesh,Jammu & Kashmir,rJharkhand, Karnataka,
Kerala,MadhyaPradesh, Maharashtra,Manipur,r Meghalaya,N agaland, Odisha, Punjab,
Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and Puducherry (21 states and 
twoUTs),TT employment registerswere not maintained/not properlymaintained, asrequired 
under para9.1.1(iv) of OperationalGuidelines. 
The matteracquiressignificanceasin the absenceof proper maintenance of records, the 
entitlementof unemploymentallowancecould not be worked o ut, thus depriving the
beneficiaries of their rightsa sper the Act. The lapsecallsforfixing accountability on the erring 
officials. ff The state-wise details areg iven in theAnnex-7B.

Chapter 7 - Employment Generation and Payment of Wages
55Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
The Ministrystated thatithad alreadystarted certification of accountsof gram panchayatby
CA/CA firmsand this wouldfacilitate proper maintenance of records at the grass root level. The 
Ministry also stated that the detailsprovided by Audit would be forwarded to the state 
governmentsfor response and initiation of adequateand necessarycorrectiveaction.
State specific findings/irregularities relatingto paymentof unemploymentallowance aregiven 
below:
In one test checked GP in (Madhubani district), 105 persons having jobcards, applied for 
work but werenot provided work. Itwasobserved thatworkswereexecuted in theGP 
afterthedateof their application for work, yetno unemployment allowancewaspaid to 
them.
Employmentwas not providedto 373households in testchecked GPs during 2009-10to 
2011-12.
Online entries of employmentdemand weremade byentering anydate within 15days
beforecommencementof work. This waspurportedly done to avoid the paymentof 
unemploymentallowance. 
Unemploymentallowancewasnot paid in thestatesince theinception of the Scheme.
In 436GPs(out of 460test-checked GPs) of all thetest-checked districts information on
new applications for work werenot conveyed to thePO regularly.As aresult,the PO
could not ensurethatanyone who applied for worksgote mploymentwithin 15days.
Unemployment allowance wasdueto 1,10,161 households which werenot provided 
anywork intestchecked districtsduring 2007-12. However,ragainstthisonlyasum of 
`83,007 waspaid to 218workers as unemploymentallowance, and thattoo only during 
2008-09 and 2009-10. 
Thus,cases of non-payment of unemployment allowancein respect of 47,687workerswere 
noticedin seven states and essentialrecords for confirmation of unemploymentto be paid were 
not maintained in21states and two UTs.TT
7.2.3 Detailed State-wise findings
n Bihar: 
l
n Chhattisgarh:
l
n Gujarat: 
l
n Haryana: 
l
n Uttar Pradesh: 
l
n West Bengal: 
l

Chapter 7 - Employment Generation and Payment of Wages
56Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
7.3 Payment of Wages
n
n
n
7.3.1 Non-Payment of Wages
Asperpara7.1.1 of theOperational Guidelineseveryperson working under MGNREGSwas
entitled tow agesat theminimumwage ratefixed by the state government (or thecompetent
authority concerned)for agricultural labourersunder the Minimum WagesAct, 1948, unless the
wageshad been notified bythe CentralGovernmentunder section 6(1) of the Act. Wages were
tobepaid according to piece rateor daily rate.T he OperationalGuidelines further stipulatethat:
Workerswere entitled to being paid on aweekly basis, and in anycasewithin afortnightof 
thedateon whichwork wasdone (MGNREGA,section 3(3)). In casethe payment of wages
wasnot made within the period specified under theScheme, the labourerswereentitledto 
receive compensation under theprovisionsof thePaymentof WagesAct, 1936(paragraph 
30 in Schedule II of the MGNREG Act). Compensation costs were to be borne by the state 
government.
Paragraph 6of Schedule-Iof theActprohibits labourersbeing paid lessthan thewagerate.
The schedule of rates (SOR) of wagesfor unskilled labourerswasto beso fixed thataperson 
working for nine hourswould normally earn awageequalto thewagerate(paragraph 8in 
Schedule I of the MGNREG Act).When wages weredirectly linked with the quantity of 
work, the wagesweretobe paidaccordingto t h eschedule of ratesfixed bythe state 
governmentfor difffferenttypes of work everyyear in consultation with state council 
(paragraph 7 in Schedule I of the MGNREG Act).
Measurementswereto be recorded transparently, yyfor verification bytheconcerned 
individuals on adaily basis.
In2 4G Ps, nine blocks, 15 districtsand one line departmentin AndhraPradesh, Bihar, rGoa, 
Gujarat,Haryana,Jharkhand, Punjab, UttarPradeshand WestBengal (nine states) out of test
checked units, workerswerenot paid wagesof `9.59crore,even after15daysof completion of 
work. Detailsaregiven in Annex-7C.
Substantial sumspending for paymentwerenoticed in thecaseof Bihar(`1.18crore), Haryana
(`2.07 crore), Punjab(`1.18crore) a nd WestBengal (`5.04 crore). The reasonsfor non-
paymentswereattributed to non-openingof bank accountof theindividualand non-availability 
of funds. Thisindicated systemic inefficiencies ff which need to be addressed.
The Ministrystated that it had issued a number of advisories regarding various measuresto be
initiated bythestate government to check delaysinpayment. The Ministryhad also encouraged 
the banking correspondent modelfor easing institutional bottlenecksin the opening of bank 
accounts for individuals. The Ministryalso stated thatfundswere immediately released on 
completion of theprescribed requirementsbythestate government.

Case Studies: Pending Liabilities
Karnataka:
As of March 2012, 1.36 lakh muster rolls for ` 415.91 crore remained unpaid.  In addition 
82,534 bills for supply of materials costing ` 238.59 crore were also not paid creating a total 
liability of ` 654.50 crore.  The total expenditure of the state during 2008-09 to 2011-12 was 
` 6,468.97 crore (` 4,092.88 crore on wages and ` 2,376.09 crore for material). In addition to 
these bills, muster rolls and supply bills to the tune of ` 332.72 crore for the year  2009-10, 
which had not been entered in NREGASoft so far, were also pending for payments as of 
March 2012. 
The Ministry considered the matter serious and sought comments from the state 
government.
Bihar:
In six test checked districts, liability amounting to ` 79.54 crore was created on account of 
pending wage and materials bills. The delay from due date of payment ranged between one 
and four years.  
The Ministry stated that the matter was being sent to the state government for investigation 
and for fixing accountability.
Chapter 7 - Employment Generation and Payment of Wages
57Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
7.3.2 Non-issue of Wage Slips
Para 7.2.1 (xi) of Operational Guidelines provides thatfor everyp ayment due to the workers, a
wageslip in prescribed format(Annexure B-3(i) of theOperational Guidelines) should be issued
byt he implementing agencyto theworkersrecording theamountand the period for which the 
workwas done. Amountwas to be disbursedto theworkeronly on production of wageslip and 
the withdrawal slip bytheworker or his authorized representative.
In 1,021 GPs (26.53per centof all test checked GPs), 27 blocksand 26d istricts in Assam,Bihar, r
Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh,Jammu &Kashmir,rJharkhand, Karnataka,Kerala, MadhyaPradesh, 
Maharashtra, Nagaland, Sikkim, Uttarakhand, West Bengal and Lakshadweep (14states and one 
UT), no wageslipswereissued to workers.A udit noted thatthepracticeof non-issuing of wage 
slipswas widespread in all 15states/UT mentioned above. 
As a result, Audit could not ascertain the authenticity of the payment made to theworkersfor the 
work done bythem. This alsorendered theentirepaymentprocesssusceptibletoleakagesand 
misappropriation. The details aregiven inAnnex-7D.
The Ministrystated thatthecases highlighted bytheA udit would be submitted to the respected 
stategovernmentsfor corrective action.

Uttarakhand:
In three test checked blocks (Dhauladevi, Dwarahat and Chakrata), liability amounting to 
` 1.73 crore was created on account of pending wage and materials bills for the years 
2010-11 and 2011-12.  The state government stated that the liability was created due to 
shortage of funds.
Substantial delays in payment processes negated the very purpose of providing guaranteed 
employment under the Act.
Chapter 7 - Employment Generation and Payment of Wages
58Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
7.3.3 Short Payment of Wages
7.3.4 Non-payment of Compensation for Delay in Payment of Wages
Under no circumstances should labourers be paid lessthan the wagerate (paragraph 6in 
1
ScheduleI of theMGNREG Act).However,rin 94GPs,14blocks,12districts and one LDin Assam,
Bihar,rHimachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka,Manipur,rMeghalaya,Tripura,UttarPradesh and 
WestBengal (10states) out of testchecked units, the workerswere paid wageslessthan the
minimumw agerate.T heunder paymentof wagesto the beneficiaries amounted to `27.38 
crore. The details are given in Annex-7E.Substantial short paymentswere noticed in the caseof 
Karnataka(`23.71 crore) in respect of eighttestchecked districts. In thecaseof Tripura, state
governmentstated (August2012)that`34.50lakh had alreadybeen releasedto B DOfor 
paymentof arrearsof wages.
TheMinistrystated thatunder section6of the MGNREGA,thepaymentto the workerswould be 
asper notifiedwagerate for thearea, which mayvarywith respectto the minimumwages
notified in thearea.
Thefact remained thatthewageswerenot paid bythe stategovernmentsasper rates revised
fromtime to time.
In theeventof anydelayin wagepayments,workerswereentitledto compensation under the
provisionsof thePaymentof Wages Act, 1936(paragraph 30in Schedule II of MGNREG Act).
However, rin 574GPs (14.92per centof all testchecked GPs),72blocks,27 districtsand six LDsin 
AndhraPradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,Bihar,rChhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, 
HimachalPradesh, Jharkhand, Kerala, MadhyaPradesh, Maharashtra,Nagaland, Odisha, Punjab, 
Rajasthan,Tamil TT Nadu,Uttarakhand, UttarPradesh, WestBengal, Dadra& NagarHaveli and 
Puducherry(21statesand twoUTs),TT workerswerenot paid wages of `686.72 croreon time i.e.,
within afortnightfrom thedateon which the work wasdone. The detailsaregiven in Annex-7F.
Nocompensation under theprovisions indicated abovewas,h owever, rpaid to them.
The above casesraise serious concernsabout effffective implementation of provisions of the Act.
There is adefiniteneed to ensurepayment of prescribed wages andanyother entitlementdue to 
all workerswithin prescribed time frame.
1 
line department

Chapter 7 - Employment Generation and Payment of Wages
59Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
The Ministrystated thatthematter of delayof wage paymentunderlined byAudit would be 
referred to therespectivestategovernments for corrective action.
7.3.5 Irregular Cash Payment of Wages
Para7.2.1of theOperational Guidelines prescribe paymentof wagesthroughbanksor post
offices ff whereindividualaccountsfor eachworker or joint accounts (onefor eachjob card) were
tobe opened. Separateindividualaccountsfor women membersof the householdwereto be 
opened in thecaseof households headed bymen.Asper GoI instructions issued in September 
2008,cash payments of wagesto workerswerenot to be made after September2008.
In55 GPsand twodistrictsin AndhraPradesh, Bihar,rMaharashtra,Manipur, rPunjab and 
Rajasthan(six states)out of testchecked units, payment of `16.75 crorewasmadei n  cashbythe
implementing agenciesin violation of GoI instructions.Cashpaymentof wagesposes therisk of 
leakage of Scheme funds and payment to fictitious workers. The detailsaregiven in Annex-7G. 
TheMinistrystated thatithad issued anumber of instructions for paymentof wagesthrough
banks andpostoffices.ff The pace of financial inclusionunder MGNREGShad surpassed the pace 
of institutional out reach of banksa nd postofficesff and in someareas the under capacity of these
institutionsto managesuch alargenumber of beneficiaryaccountswasnoticed. The Ministry
further stated thatthismatterwasbeingreviewed seriously in allPerformance Review
Committeemeetings and in other foraaswell. 
Case Study:Irregular Issue of Cheques amounting to ` 69.90 crore 
in favour of Sarpanch instead of banks/post offices.
Chhattisgarh:
Scrutiny of records in Narharpur Janpad Panchayat of Kanker district and Makdi, Bastar and 
Bakawand Janpad Panchayats of Bastar district revealed that accounts were opened in the 
name of job card holders in the banks/post offices.  Wage payments were to be directly 
credited to their accounts.  However, during 2009-12, the POs issued cheques aggregating 
` 69.90 crore (` 35.49 crore in Narharpur, ` 11.59 crore in Makdi, ` 11.26 crore in Bastar and 
` 11.56 crore in Bakawand) in favour of the Sarpanches for making payment of wages to the 
labourers engaged in MGNREGS.  
These payments contravened the Scheme provisions and were therefore irregular .  It could 
not be ascertained if the disbursed amount reached the targeted beneficiaries. The matter 
calls for further probe.
The Ministry stated that the matter was being sent to the state government for 
examination.

Chapter 7 - Employment Generation and Payment of Wages
60Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Case study: Payment of Wages in Cash
Tamil Nadu:
Secretary, Rural Development and Panchayat Raj, government of Tamil Nadu (GoTN) 
communicated (December 2007) to the GoI his apprehensions about the payment of wages 
through banks.  The reasons advanced were that the workers would have to commute long 
distances to get their wages from banks losing one day's wages and that the banks would 
adjust previous arrears from their dues.
State Employment Guarantee Council also directed (March 2008) the government of Tamil 
Nadu (GoTN) to continue the system of payment of wages in cash in the state.
In the Village Payment Committees, formed for the purpose of wage disbursement, 
majority of the members were persons who were responsible for implementing the 
Scheme, viz. President, Vice-President and Ward Member of Village Panchayats.  As a result, 
the practice of making payments to the workers in cash was fraught with the risk of 
malpractices particularly since the wage disbursement agency and the Scheme 
implementing agency were the same. 
Government of Tamil Nadu replied that from 2012-13 it had decided to dispense with the 
existing practice of disbursing wages to the workers in cash to curtail the scope of 
malpractices in wage payments and to separate the wage disbursement agency from the 
implementing agency.   The wages were now being paid through banks on pilot basis in one 
GP in each block.
7.3.6 Detailed State-wise Findings
n Goa: 
l
n Jharkhand:
l
l
State specific findings relatingto paymentof wagesareasfollows:
Wagesof `0.36lakh in respectof 37beneficiaries forA ugust2011werepaid after a 
delayof 40days.The block officeff stated thattheywerenot awareof any compensation 
tobepaid forthedelay.
Wagesamounting to `2.14crorewerepaid through LargeAreaMultipurpose Society
(LAMPS)in two blocksduring the period 2009-12.The LAMPS deducted service charges
at therateof four to fiveper centfrom thewagesof labourers. This resulted in less
paymentof wagesof `8.81 lakh to the labourers.
In 11 GPs, wages of `1.30 lakh relating to 101 job cardholderswerecredited to only 49
accounts of postoffice.ff Thus, thepaymentsproceduresneed to be investigated to rule 
out irregular or fraudulentpayments.

16 districts
* Figures as per MIS
Thus, the Schemeprovisions werenot complied with in thesestates.
The Ministry stated that the cases highlighted by Audit were being forwarded to the respective
stategovernmentsfor their comments and necessarycompliance.
Chapter 7 - Employment Generation and Payment of Wages
61Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
In one GP, Pdelayup to 71daysin paymentof `12.00lakh occurreddue to delayin signing 
of cheques by the Panchayat Secretary.` 6.00 lakh pertaining to the year 2011-12 was
not paid up to May 2012 due to non-releaseof funds by block panchayat.
In 45cases of aGP, Ppaymentof `12.86lakh wasmade without recording measurement
of work done.
In 20test checkedGPs of Imphal East,`31.11lakh were paid for holidays in respectof 78
worksin contravention of theprovisions of theAct.
In the testchecked threeGPs, there weredelaysranging from 15to65days in payment
of wages.
Under theScheme,thecostof providing employmentabove 100dayswasto be bornebythe
stategovernments.In one testchecked GPa n d  16districts of Kerala,Rajasthan,Tripura and Uttar
Pradesh respectively, yyan expenditure of `24.48 crore towards 45.88 lakh persondaysin excess of 
100 days, was metout of theCentral share.  Detailsaregiven in  Table-12TT .
n Kerala:
l
l
n Manipur
l
n Lakshadweep:
l
7.3.7 Unauthorized Payment from Central Share
Table-12: Unauthorised payment from Central share
No. of
households
No. of GPs/
Blocks/
Districts
Sl.
No.
No. of 
excess
persondays
Amount of Excess
payment
(` in lakh)
Name of State
Kerala
Rajasthan*
Tripura*
Uttar Pradesh
Total
1
2
3
4
265
1,72,866
2,80,155
85,884
5,39,170
1 GP
8 districts
4 districts
4 districts
1 GP and 
2,960
33,84,000
9,84,869
2,15,762
45,87,591
4.42
1,196.58
 1,022.00 
224.94 
2,447.94

Chapter 7 - Employment Generation and Payment of Wages
62Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
7.4 Deployment of Mates
n
n
7.5 Irregularities in Muster Rolls
7.5.1 Tampering of Muster Rolls (MRs)
For supervision of work and recording attendance at worksite, a mate may be designated for each
work. Mates were to be selected through a fair, transparent and participatory process with
adequate representation of women. An adequate number of mates were to be trained in each
village, to ensure an adequate 'pool' of trained mates at all times. The ratio of mates to labourers 
at a given worksite was to be at least 1:50. Suitable norms in this regard were to be specified by
the state governments in consultation with the State Employment Guarantee Council. Mates
were to be rotated for work on a fortnightly basis when the muster was usually closed (para 
6.4.4(i) of Operational Guidelines).  The remuneration of the mates was to be included in the 
material component of the work. The following irregularities were noticed during audit:
In 177 GPs and nine districts in Assam, Maharashtra, Mizoram and Uttarakhand (four 
states) out of test checked units, mates had not been engaged in test checked works.  Mates
had not been rotated in six GPs in Kerala out of the test-checked cases.  Further, no training
was given to mates in 10 GPs in West Bengal.
In one GP and 11 blocks in Kerala and Rajasthan (two states) out of test checked units,
wages to mates was classified under unskilled wages under labour component.  As a result,
wage material ratio was not worked out accurately.
Details of above cases are given inAnnex-7H.
The Ministry stated that the cases of violation of the Operational Guidelines as pointed by Audit
would be forwarded to the state governments for necessary corrective action.
Para 6.5.1 of Operational Guidelines provides that before commencing a work, the gram
panchayat was to inform the Programme Officer, so that he could issue the required muster rolls.
Each muster roll was to have a unique identity number and was to be certified by the Programme
Officer . The muster roll would indicate the job card number, name of the worker and days worked. 
Workers attendance and the wages paid would be shown against each name with the 
signature/thumb impression of the worker . A number of irregularities were noticed in the 
maintenance of muster rolls as discussed in succeeding paragraphs.
Cutting, crossing out and overwriting in muster rolls were noticed in 200 GPs and five blocks in
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Manipur, Nagaland, Odisha and
Uttar Pradesh (10 states) out of test checked units.  The corrections were not attested. The
related payments were therefore fraught with the risk of misappropriation of funds. State-wise
details are given inAnnex-7I.
The Ministry stated that the matter was being sent to the state governments for investigation.

Case Study: Irregularities in Muster Rolls
Sample cases of tampering/overwriting/cutting in muster rolls
alamu district (Jharkhand)
Uttarakhand:
In 899 works of 100 test-checked GPs, a total of 10,759 MRs were checked. In 1,110 cases 
cutting, in 771 cases overwriting and in 510 cases use of whitener fluid were noted. Such 
unverified changes in MRs render them unreliable.  Further, in 17 cases job card numbers 
were not recorded and in 2,412 cases signatures/left thumb impressions of job card holders 
were absent.  The related payments were therefore suspect.
The Ministry stated that the matter was being sent to the state government for necessary 
action.
Chapter 7 - Employment Generation and Payment of Wages
63Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013


Chapter 7 - Employment Generation and Payment of Wages
64Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Nagar GP of Sisai block in Gumla district (Jharkhand)

Chapter 7 - Employment Generation and Payment of Wages
65Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Shinghani GP of Jarmuni block in Dumka diskk trict (Jharkhand)


Chapter 7 - Employment Generation and Payment of Wages
66Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
7.5.2 Payment of Wages through Suspected Muster Rolls
Numbered muster rolls (MRs) were to be maintained by the Programme Officer ff (PO). On receipt 
of intimationabout commencementof work, MRs wereto be issued to implementing agencies.It
was theresponsibility of the implementing agencies toensurethat only the MRs received from 
thePOwereused in theworks.In 25GPsand four blocksin Bihar, rGujarat, Jharkhand, Odisha and 
Uttar Pradesh (fivestates), the implementing agencies utilized MRs which had not been issued by 
the PO or even used photocopies of MRs.Payments of wagesof `25.01 lakh were made on such 
unauthorised muster rolls.  State-wisedetailsare givenin the Table-13TT .
Table-13: Cases of Suspected Muster Rolls
Amount
(` in 
lakh)
No. of
Muster
Rolls
No. of 
GPs/Blocks/
Districts
Name of
State
Sl.
No. Remarks
MRs were used prior to the issue/ 
without issue/same MR used in 
two works
MRs not issued by PO 
(photocopies of MRs used)
Payment through un-authorized MRs. 
(without signature of PO)
Two copies of same MR used.
MRs not issued by the PO used.
MRs not signed by PO used.
1
2
3
4
5
Bihar
Gujarat
Jharkhand 
Odisha
Uttar Pradesh
Total
6 GPs and 
3 blocks
1 GP
9 GPs 
2 GPs
1 block
7 Gps
25 GPs &
4 blocks
2,461
7
250
2
1
201
2,922
0.28  
1.99
9.20
0.14
0.17
13.51
25.01
2
The Ministry stated that the matter was being sent to the state governments for investigation.
2 
Amount could be worked out in some MRs only.

Chapter 7 - Employment Generation and Payment of Wages
67Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
7.5.3 Suspected Misappropriation of Scheme Fund through engagement of 
ghost workers in the MRs
Operational Guidelines (para 6.4.4) provide that implementing agencies should ensure that job
card holders who demanded work should be provided work. Only genuine workers should be
engaged at the work site and payment be made to them.
In 15 GPs, four blocks and eight districts in Assam, Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Odisha, 
Punjab, Rajasthan and West Bengal (eight states) out of test checked units, it was noticed that 
5,470 ghost workers were paid` 50.10 lakh. These included cases in which the name of persons to
whom payment was made, were not found in muster rolls or payments were made to persons not
having job cards.  The state-wise details are given in Annex-7J.
The Ministry stated that the matter was being sent to the state governments for proper 
investigation.
Case Study: Suspected Misappropriation of Funds
Gujarat:
Scrutiny of muster rolls issue register at DRDA, Dahod revealed that the following muster 
rolls used at Fatepura taluka were actually issued to other talukas as shown below:
Examination of vouchers for the year 2009-10 disclosed that payment of ` 3.59 crore had 
been made to the workers engaged in Fatepura based on these muster rolls. Further, 
vouchers were not supported by muster rolls and only summary sheets mentioning muster 
roll numbers were attached. Thus, these payments were suspect.
The Ministry stated that the matter was being sent to the state government for 
investigation.
Name of Taluka to 
which  MRs issued
Serial number of Muster Rolls
From To
Payment made 
(` in crore)
Dhanpur
Dahod
DevgadhBaria
Garbada
Zalod
Total 3.59
46001
101001
121001
56001
116001
78001
56000
102500
123000
68000
118000
88000
1.21
0.40
0.13
0.85
0.06
0.94

Chapter 7 - Employment Generation and Payment of Wages
68Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
7.5.4 Engagement of Same Workers under different Muster Rolls for the Same Period
7.5.5 Payment of Wages without Signature of Beneficiaries/Competent Authority
7.5.6 Suspected Misappropriation of Wages
7.5.7 Requisite Details not entered in Muster Rolls
ational Guidelines (para6.5) provide thatitwasthe responsibility of the implementing 
agency to ensure utmost sincerity and care while maintaining musterrolls atthework site. The 
labourerswereto be engaged in the work for the period for which theydemandedwork. In 61
GPs, 10 blocksand two districts in AndhraPradesh, Assam,Bihar, rGujarat, Haryana, Jharkhand, 
Karnataka,Kerala, Odisha, Punjab,WestB e ngal and Lakshadweep (12states/UT), double 
engagement of 4,553workersatdifffferent locations for the same period was noticed. This means
that inall thesecasesthesameperson wasengaged on two workson the samedate.The details 
aregiven in Annex-7K.
The matterrequires investigation and fixing of accountability.
The Ministrystatedthatthematter wasbeing sentto thestategovernmentsfor investigation.
Underpara6.4.4(iii) of the Operational Guidelines, attendance of workers engaged in work was
to be taken bythemate/supervisor atthe work site and signaturewasto be taken atthe end of 
the week in token of their acknowledgementof engagement.In 36GPs,fiveblocksand one 
district in AndhraPradesh,Jharkhand, Karnataka,Manipur, rOdisha, Punjaband Uttar Pradesh 
(sevenstates), `1.12crorewerepaid throughmuster rolls but signatureor thumb impression 
wasnottaken in token of receipt of payments in 9,932cases.In 43GPsin AndhraPradesh,
Jharkhand and Tamil TT Nadu (threestates),`86.23lakh were paid through musterrolls but no 
signature of thec o m p etentauthority/passorder/certified measurementof work for payment
wasfound with the MRs for verification of payments. State-wisedetailsare given inAnnex-7L.
Genuinenessof the payments,in casesof absenceof proper signature/thumb impressionon the 
attendance sheetof workers and paymentmade without passordersfrom competentauthority, yy
could not be ascertained in audit.
The Ministrystated thatt hematter wasbeing sent to thestategovernmentsfor investigation.
Casesof doubtfulpaymentof wageswerenoticed in 33GPs,threeblocksand eightdistrictsin 
Bihar, rGujarat, HimachalPradesh, Karnataka, Punjab and UttarP radesh (six states).T he total 
paymentin thesecasesamountedto `12.31croreasdetailedin Annex-7M.
The suspect payments need tobe appropriately investigated.
The Ministrystated that the matter was being sentto thestate governmentsfor investigation.
Para 6.5.1 of Operational Guidelines provides thatthe musterroll should indicate the jobcard 
number, rname of theworker and daysworked.Workers'attendance and thewagespaid would be 
shownagainst eachname with the signature/thumb impression of theworker.rr

Chapter 7 - Employment Generation and Payment of Wages
69Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
In 317 GPs,four blocksand seven districtsin Bihar,rHimachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, 
Manipur, rPunjab, Sikkim, Tamil TT Nadu and Lakshadweep (eight states and one UT) out of test
checked units, it was observed that the MRs did not contain requisitedetailsviz.the name of the 
person, job card number, rdaysworked/absent,wagespaid and unique identitynumber.rr The 
details are shown in Annex-7N.
The Ministrystated thatthe matter was beingsentto thestategovernments for investigation and
compliance.
State specific findings/irregularities relating to musterrollsareasfollows:
In threedistricts,thesameworker wasshown in two musterrolls for overlapping 
periodsand for difffferentworks. Further,rthetotal number of daysreported forboth
workswere morethan thephysical number of daysavailable in 40,829 entries.
In one district,columnfor bank/postoffice ff accountnumber of labourerswasnot printed 
on themuster roll used (series number 163126 to 163876).
In threeGPs,persondaysasmentionedin musterrolls did not tally with thepersondays
asmeasured bythe junior engineer in measurementbooks.
In one GP, Psignatureof thesamejobcard holder on difffferentmusterrolls did not match.
In two blocks, five muster rolls received from PO were missing. Thirty seven MRs were 
reportedly damaged bytermites.M uster roll forms having moneyvalue should have
beenaccounted for and maintained properly to safeguardagainstdamageand misuse.
Information likeaddress,gender,rtotal wagespaid to thelabourerswerenot indicated in 
the muster rolls in support of receipt of paymentaswell as attendance. In the absence of 
this,actualpaymentof wagesto theentitledlabourerscould not be verified in audit.
Further, ralthough acommitteecomprisingfive membersforverification of muster roll 
wassetup (August2007)atstatelevel, no suchverificationwascarried out in test 
checked GPsduring 2007-12.
7.5.8 Detailed State-wise Findings
n Andhra Pradesh:
l
n Jharkhand:
l
l
n Kerala: 
l
n Maharashtra: 
l
n Nagaland: 
l

Chapter 7 - Employment Generation and Payment of Wages
70Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
In 14GPs, measurementof workswasnot done beforepaymentof wagesto labourers.
On this being pointed out, the POs stated that itwas due to shortage of technical staffff.ff
In one GP, Ppaymentof musterrollswasmade to two job card holdersfor 21 August2007 
whereas thework commencedfrom 22 August2007.
In four blocks andeightGPs, entries in muster rolls were altered using whitener fluid and 
overwriting. Itwasobserved in audit thattheattendance of workerswasnot verified by
anyauthorized official,ff certificateof the inspecting official ff wasnot recorded a nd 
measurementbookwasnot crossreferenced withthe musterrolls.
In one gram panchayat(Vembi) of Thimiri block, 46 bogus MRs werepassed involving 
paymentof `12.54lakh.Attendance in these MRs wasmarked by one person only and
signatures/thumb impressions didnot match with those in thej obcardregistersof 
workersto whom paymentwere made. BDO,Thimirifailed to verifycorrectness of the
musterrolls before passing these for payment. BDO, Thimiriblock stated thataction had 
been initiated to verifythefacts.
In two test-checked GPsand one block, wagesfor 480persondays inrespect of 97j ob 
card holderswerefraudulently paidtoworkers who were presenton two sitesonsame 
dates; paid twiceforsamework; paid to workersshown asabsentin MR; and paidfor 
more than the number of daysthej obcardholdersactuallyw o rked.
In threeGPs,in eight casesit wasobserved thatnames,amountappearing in bank/post
office ff advicesdid not match with those shown in muster rolls and employmentregister.rr
In addition, in onedistrict, wagesof morethanone household had been paidin asingle 
accountin 50cases.
Muster roll issueregister was not maintainedand musterrolls used werenot signed by 
POsin two GPs(Amini and Kavaratti). As such, the MRs used and all wagepayments
made byGPs based on these,were unauthorized.To TT mark attendance 'X' wasrecorded 
instead of signatureof theworkers.  The particularsof job card numbers,wages paid, etc.
were not recorded inmanymusterrolls and in almost all the casestestcheckedunits, 
overwriting/erasureswerenoted.
n Punjab:
l
l
n Sikkim:
l
n Tamil Nadu: 
l
n Uttar Pradesh: 
l
n West Bengal: 
l
n Lakshadweep:
l

Chapter 7 - Employment Generation and Payment of Wages
71Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Case Study: Non Verification of Expenditure of ` 25.97 crore
Haryana:
Additional Deputy Commissioner, Ambala released ` 25.97 crore during 2007-12 to the 
Divisional Forest Officer (DFO) Ambala for afforestation, development of herbal parks, etc. 
The relevant records were not produced to Audit. The DFO Ambala stated (June 2012) that 
the relevant records were damaged during rains. Therefore, the expenditure could not be 
vouchsafed in Audit. However, scrutiny of an inspection report submitted (March 2010) by 
the ADC Ambala to the state government disclosed serious irregularities as summarized 
below: 
n Job cards were issued by the Forest Department itself. Two agencies (GP and Forest 
Department) issued job cards in the village. Under these circumstances, chances of 
issue of double job cards could not be ruled out.
n Muster rolls were issued by the Additional Deputy Commissioner, Ambala in gross 
violation of the Operational Guidelines.
n The works executed by the Forest Department were not recommended by any of the 
gram sabhas.
n Cash withdrawals of ` 8.50 crore were made by the Forest Department during 
October 2008 to March 2010.
n In four villages, expenditure of ` 23.83 lakh was shown on afforestation but ADC 
during inspection found that no plantation was done in those villages.
n In village Firozpur Kath and Abupur, earth work was found to have been done through 
mechanical means at a cost of ` 0.61 lakh (approximates) for which ` 10.43 lakh were 
booked in the cash book on account of muster rolls wages.
n An expenditure of ` 74.03 lakh was shown as incurred on development of three herbal 
parks at village Barara, Holi and Samlehri during 2008-10, but as per assessment 
reports submitted by the SDO (PR), the actual expenditure incurred was assessed as 
` 11.98 lakh only. 
It was noted that final action of the state government on the report was awaited.
The Ministry stated that the matter was being sent to the state government for appropriate 
action as per norms.
The muster rolls wereissued bythePOafter completion of the worksand in some cases
even after two months from the dateof completion of thework. Hence, itwas clearthat
the muster rolls were not maintained atthework site. Therecords of payments made 
based on thesemuster rolls werethereforeunreliable.
l

Chapter 7 - Employment Generation and Payment of Wages
72Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Recommendations:
Non-payment of unemployment allowance and non-maintenance of essential records were 
noticed by Audit across all states. A possible reason for non-payment of unemployment 
allowance could be the non-sharing of unemployment allowance by Central Government and 
the perceived burden on the state exchequer.  In order to safeguard the interests of the 
beneficiaries, the Ministry may consider partial reimbursement of unemployment allowance. 
Further, strict action may be taken against erring officials when any case of non-payment of 
unemployment allowance is noticed.

73Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
8.1 Introduction
n
n
n
n
n
8.2 Wage-Material Ratio
Asmentionedearlier, rtwo main objectivesof the Actareto provide100daysof wageemployment
toevery household in need of it and to createdurable assetsto strengthen the livelihood 
resource base of the rural poor. rrIn thiscontext,the Act and theOperational Guidelinesprescribe a
number of conditions for theworksto be taken up:
The ratio of wageto material costsshould not be less than60:40 (Paragraph 9in Schedule I
of theAct);
Thelist of priority-wise permissible works which can be taken upunder MGNREGS should 
beasindicated intheAct( Paragraph1Bof theSchedule I to theAct);
Use of contractorsand machinery are not allowed (Paragraph 11 and 12 of the Schedule I 
totheAct);
Allotmentof atleast50per centof theworksto GPsforexecution(section 16(5)of the Act);
and
Administrativeand technical sanctionfor all worksto be obtained in advance,byDecember
of theprevious year(Para 6.4.1of theOperational Guidelines).
In the succeedingparagraphs audit findingsrelated to theworksexecutedunder the Schemeare 
discussed.
Accordingto paragraph 9in ScheduleI of theAct, the costof thematerial component of projects,
includingwagesof skilled and semi-skilled workers,taken up under the Scheme shall not exceed 
40 per centof theprojectcost. Further,rthe Actdefines 'project' asanywork takenup underthe 
Schemefor thepurpose of providing employmenttothe applicants(Section 2- Definitions, of the
Act). Essentially, yy eachwork taken up under MGNREGS should havean unskilled labour
componentof not less than 60per centof totalcost of work.
Works
Chapter
8

Chapter 8 - Works
74Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
The Ministry, yyhowever,rfailed to takeadequatestepsto ensurethatthisratio wasmaintained at
'project' level bythe implementing agencies. On the contrarythe Ministrydiluted this provision 
by stipulating in the Operational Guidelines (Para 6.2) thattherequired 60:40ratio should be 
applied 'preferably atthegram panchayat,blockand district levels'. This wasin contravention to 
the provisions of the Act, according to which the ratio wasto be maintained at the project or work 
level.A sa result,alargenumber of workswere taken up in violation of the 60:40wage-material 
ratio. 
Further,ritwas seen thatin 649 GPs (16.87per centof all testchecked GPs), 18blocks and 38
districts in AndhraPradesh, Assam,Bihar,rGujarat,Jharkhand, MadhyaPradesh, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tripura,Uttar Pradesh,Uttarakhand and Dadra&NagarHaveli (12 statesand 
oneUT) thematerialcostexceeded theprescribed level by`1,594.37crore.Detailsaregiven in 
Annex-8Aand case study.
Theexcessexpenditureon material costwasequivalentto short generation of atleast15.03 crore
persondays in Andhra Pradesh,Assam,Jharkhand, MadhyaPradesh, Sikkim, Tripura and
Uttarakhand (seven states) on this account.The state-wise detailsare given in Annex-8Aand 
casestudy.
The Ministrystated thatwagematerial ratio of 60:40will now be considered atGP level through 
an amendmentto the schedule carried out in May2012.Further, rMIS (NREGASoft)generated 
regular 'alerts' on violation of wage-materialratio for necessaryaction by the states.
Furthermore, Ministryhadtaken adecision to engageCAs/CAfirms to assistthe statein assessing
the state share based on accountsof State EmploymentGuaranteeFund and other 
records/documents. The stateswould haveto bear additional liabilities (in additionto that 
mandated bySection 22 of the Act) for violation and incorrectcalculation of wage-material ratio.
The Ministryfurther stated thatparagraph 9in Schedule 1of the Actprovides flexibility to 
aggregate theprojectsatanylevel for thepurpose of calculating the wagesof skilled and semi-
skilled workersaswell as materials.Hence, maintenance of 60:40 ratio between wagesand 
materialatgram panchayat level didnot amountto aviolation of theprovisions of the Actor the 
Schedule. It wasalso clarified in para6.2.2of theOperational Guidelinesthat to ensure creation 
of sustainableassetsa nd aholisticapproach to planning,aprojectapproach shouldbe adopted 
fordefiningawork. This would enable subsuming anumber of worksasactivitiesunder an 
umbrella work or project. The projectmaybeformulated with the blockasaunit so thatt he 
Programme Officer ff maycoordinatethe activities under itat subblock levels.Inter block projects 
may alsobe formulated att hedistrictlevel.
Thereply of the Ministrywas not in consonance with the provisions of the Act as paragraph 9in 
Schedule I of the Act did not provide suchflexibility.The Actclearlydefines aprojectas' any work 
taken up under the Schemefor the purpose of providing employmentto the applicants' which 
was unambiguous. The principle of aggregation can only be applied in caseof aprojectwhich 
servesmanyGPs,which was not thecasehere.

Case Study: Madhya Pradesh
List of permissible works, in order of priority
Audit noted that the wage material ratio of 60:40 as stipulated in the Operational Guidelines 
was not maintained even at the district level.  Out of the 13 test checked districts, the 
material cost exceeded the prescribed level by ` 69.40 crore in three districts (Balaghat, 
Dhar and Satna) during 2007-08, ` 93.61 crore in seven districts (Ashoknagar, Balaghat, 
Datia, Dhar, Indore, Satna and Shahpur) during 2008-09, ` 71.68 crore in ten districts 
(Ashoknagar, Balaghat, Chhindwara, Datia, Dhar, Indore, Satna, Sehore, Shahpur and 
Vidisha) during 2009-10, ` 63.25 crore in six districts (Balaghat, Dhar, Khargone, Satna, 
Sehore and Vidisha) during 2010-11 and ` 11.70 crore in three districts (Balaghat, Satna and 
Vidisha) during 2011-12. The violation of the prescribed wage-material was due to the 
execution of material intensive works like cement concrete roads, construction of wells, etc.  
The excess expenditure of ` 309.64 crore on material was equivalent to employment by 3.51 
crore persondays.
1. Water conservation and water harvesting;
2. Drought proofing (including afforestation and tree plantation);
3. Irrigation canals including micro and minor irrigation works;
4. Provision of irrigation facility, horticulture, plantation and land development of land 
owned by households belonging to the SCs and STs or BPL families or to the beneficiaries 
of land reforms or Indira Awas Yojna, etc.
5. Renovation of traditional water bodies including de-silting of tanks;
6. Land development;
7. Flood control and protection works including drainage in water logged areas; and
8. Rural connectivity to provide all weather access, however, no cement concrete roads 
should be taken up (para 6.1.1 of the Operational Guidelines).
Chapter 8 - Works
75Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
8.3 Non Permissible Works
As per paragraph 1B in Schedule I of the Act,focus of MGNREGSwasto be on eight categories of 
works, in order of priority aslisted in boxbelow.Further,rpara6.1.2 of theOperational Guidelines 
provides that in order to undertakeworksoutsidethe listmentionedin Schedule I of the Act, the 
stategovernments should make use of paragraph 1(ix) in Schedule I of the Act,whereby new
categories of worksmaybe added to theSchedule. For this, notification bytheCentral 
Government in consultation with thestategovernmentwas required. 

Chapter 8 - Works
Report No. 6 of 2013
Scrutinyof recordsrevealed thatduringtheperiod2007-08 to 2011-2012, 1,02,100 inadmissible 
works were undertaken in thetest checked 940 GPs,45 blocks and 40 districts in 23 states and 
twoUTsTT and bytwo line departments in Bihar and UttarPradesh. These inadmissible works
included constructionof earthen/kutcharoad, cement concreteroad, construction of raised
platform for cattle and other animals, construction of bathingghats, repair of roads, construction 
of boundarywallsfor s chools and foundation work of houses under Elamkulam Manakkal
Sankaran Housing Scheme/IndiraA wasYojana,YY etc. The amountspenton these 1,02,100works
1
was`2,252.43 crore . The irregularities were noticed in AndhraPradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Assam, Bihar, rChhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat,H aryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka,
Kerala, MadhyaPradesh, Maharashtra,Manipur,rMizoram,Nagaland,Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan,
TamilTT Nadu, Tripura,UttarPradesh, Andaman &Nicobar Islands and Puducherry(23statesand
two UTs). TT The state/UT-wise details in addition to casestudies are given inAnnex-8B.
TheMinistrystated t hatsome new workswere addedto t helistof permissible worksvide 
notification dated 4May 2012.Further,rduring the courseof field inspections bytheofficialsff of 
the Ministryunder AreaOfficer ff Scheme,such violations weredetected and broughttothe notice
of states for further correctiveaction.
Thereply of the Ministry is not correctbecausenon-permissibleworkshad been executed in 
violationof theprovision of theAct.
76Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
1
includes the amounts in the case studies
Case Study: Execution of inadmissible works valuing ` 1.69 crore
Chhattisgarh:
In Bastar and Bakawand blocks of district Bastar, 105 soil-water conservation works worth
` 1.69 crore were sanctioned during 2007-09.  On physical inspection of the work sites, it 
was found that against the works sanctioned, work of construction of boundary wall was 
carried out in the schools in these blocks in contravention of the provisions of the Act.
On being pointed out by Audit, the CEO, Zila Parishad, Bastar stated (July 2012) that the wall 
was constructed for protection of plants and school building and was helpful for 
conservation of soil and water .
The reply was not correct as construction of boundary wall of school cannot be categorized 
under works for conservation of soil and water . The work was clearly outside the ambit of 
permissible works.

Chapter 8 - Works
77Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Case Study: Andhra Pradesh 
Audit observed that inadmissible payments of ` 33 lakh were made  in January 2009 at 
Allagadda and Dhone blocks in Kurnool district for arrangements for CM's meeting at these 
places. Payments for pandal, superstructure, lights, sound, chairs and sofa, flower 
decoration, transportation, etc., including Service Tax were made to the firm which was not 
registered with the Service Tax Department. Consequently, the genuineness of the 
payments could not be verified during audit. 
8.4 Works on Personal Land of Ineligible Beneficiaries
The listof permissible worksin theActpermits land development activities on the land
belonging to SC/STs, TT BPL families, land of the beneficiaries of land reforms or land of the 
beneficiaries under IAY AA Scheme. Audit,however,robservedthatworkswere carried out on the
land of ineligible beneficiaries in 61GPsin Assam,Goa, Kerala and Uttar Pradesh (four states)
Annex-8C.
Theresponse of the Ministryon thematter wasawaited.
8.5 Abandoned/Unfruitful Works
Audit observed that9,220worksin 256GPs,15blocksand 13districtshad been abandoned in 10
states andone UT of Assam, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Jammu & Kashmir,rJharkhand, Kerala,
Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, UttarPradesh and Lakshadweep. The expenditure of `209.57
crore incurred on theseworkshad become unfruitful. The reasonsfor abandonmentwerepublic 
obstruction, inundation of executedpart, land dispute, absenceof forestclearance,etc. 
This indicated thattheseworksweretakenupwithout adequateplanning. Details aregiven in
Annex-8D. 
Further, ritwasseenthat44worksamountingto `2.36 crorein 16 GPsin seven statesof Assam,
Bihar, rChhattisgarh, Gujarat,Kerala, Punjab and Rajasthan did not serveanypurpose due to faulty
design, land disputesor poor construction.  Detailsaregiven in Annex-8E.
Worksinitiated weretobe completed inatimely manner so asto ensurethat meaningfulbenefits
were received by the local community. However, it wr as seen that 7,69,575 works amounting to 
`4,070.76 crorein 403 GPs, 27 blocksand 20districts in the 12statesand one UT of Andhra
Pradesh, Assam,Bihar, rChhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Karnataka,Manipur, rOdisha, Rajasthan,
Tripura, UttarPradesh and Puducherryand bythree line departmentsin Biharwereincomplete 
evenafter one to fiveyears.U ndue delayin completion of worksrenderedtheexpenditure 
unfruitful. Detailsaregiven inAnnex-8F.

Chapter 8 - Works
78Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
The Ministrystated (November 2012)thatopening of new worksbypanchayatsand line 
departmentswasregulated byan advisory issued on 3 September 2012. With the new system as
alsoreflected in NREGASoft, at the timeof allocation of works on demand, thesystem would 
show only thelistof incomplete works. Thus, theworkerswouldbe assigned to incomplete 
works first and new works from approved shelf of works would be shown only if there were no 
incompleteworksor thelabour demand exceeded thelabourpotentialof incompleteworks.The 
Ministry further stated that, vide advisory issued on 24 August2012, stateswere asked to split 
works (which areto be executed over morethan one year), into annualwork elements,with each
annual segment given a distinctwork identity. Itfurther clarified that some workswere left 
incompletebecause of revisions of wage and material rateswhich raise the actualcostbeyond 
the approved estimates.
According to para6.1.3of Operational Guidelines, themaintenance of assetscreated under the 
Scheme including protection of afffforested landwasto be considered as permissibleworksunder 
MGNREGS.TesTT tcheckof records revealed that56,916 plantation works amounting to `25.19 
crore in 202GPs,one block and fivedistrictsin nine statesof AndhraPradesh,Bihar, rGujarat,
Jharkhand, Kerala,Manipur, rMizoram, Rajasthan and UttarPradesh wererendered wasteful due 
tonon-maintenance of plants. The physical inspectionof plantationworkscorroborated the audit 
findings.  Detailsaregiven in Annex-8Gand casestudy.
The Ministrystated (November 2012)thatithad circulatedto all thestates'Muzzaffffarpur model 
of roadside plantations' for implementation under MGNREGSvide an advisorydated 10
September 2012.In the said model, aged, widowed, handicapped and women job card holders
of adjoining villagewho actedasVan Poshaks,wereemployedin raising and looking after the
roadside plantations under MGNREGS. This gavethe villagersasenseof belonging and 
ownership and there was no need of physicalfencing aroundtheplants. The survivalrate of these
plantations wasalso h igh. Further,rthestateswereasked to find out thereasonsfor non-
completion of incompleteworksandtotakerequired measurestoensuretheir completion. 
8.6 Maintenance of Plantation Works
Case Study: Jharkhand
In Gumla district of Jharkhand, 18 NGOs were allotted 24 works relating to plantation of 
mango trees, Jatropha, different kinds of fruit plantation, mixed intensive lac orchard, Safed 
Musli and Stevia in 10,435.419 acres, at an estimated cost of ` 19.41 crore, under MGNREGS 
during 2007-08.  It was noticed that DRDA Gumla released ` 13.00 crore for completion of 
plantation work.  The balance amount was to be released during successive years for 
maintenance of plantation.  Audit observed the following:
n Works like Stevia Crop Plantation and Safed Musli cultivation were not to be carried 
out as per clarification of MoRD.
n None of these 24 plantation works were approved by the gram sabha but were 
approved by District Programme Coordinator .

Chapter 8 - Works
79Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
n Works of Stevia Crop Plantation and Safed Musli cultivation were awarded on contract  
basis to M/s Brahmanand Farms and Research Center, Jamshedpur for ` 4.92 crore 
against which ` 4.86 crore were released, in contravention of the provisions of the Act. 
n ` 59.00 lakh against the estimated cost of ` 69.00 lakh for Jatropha plantation in 
679.34 acres were released to an NGO. 
n The district administration cancelled all MOUs and agreements with the agencies and 
lodged FIRs (July 2008) against them (except NGO 'Pradan') for fake purchase of 
compost.  Thereafter, physical verifications were conducted by the Department 
(August 2008 to February 2009) and it was found that plantations on only 2,433.74 
acres (23 per cent) were done, against the approved area of 10,435.419 acres.  During 
physical verification, survival of 13 lakh plants as against 74.73 lakh plants sanctioned, 
were reported.  
n Consequent to the verification, cases were filed against all agencies for the recovery 
of  ` 10.13 crore paid to them.  The amount was not recovered till June 2012.
District Development Commissioner, Gumla stated that FIRs had been lodged against NGOs 
and Certificate cases* had also been filed for recovery of government money.  
Notwithstanding the post-facto action initiated by district administration, the entire 
released amount of ` 13 crore was rendered infructuous.
8.7 Creation of Durable Assets
Asalready mentioned, creation of durableassetswasan importantobjectiveof theS cheme as 
listedint heAct.Further,rOperational Guidelines alsoprovide for maintenance of assetscreated
under theS cheme.However,ritwasseenthat assetscreated from 3,91,951worksamounting to
` 6,547.35 crore in 148 GPs in two states and one UT of Mizoram, West Bengal and Puducherry
andall testcheckunits in threestates, Gujarat,Keralaa ndTamil TT Nadu were not of durablenature.
2
Theworks included construction of boribandhs,earthenroads, etc. The detailsof theseworks
are given in Annex-8H.
TheMinistrystated (November 2012)thatthedurability and quality monitoring of assetscreated 
under MGNREGSwereemphasised in thenew draft Operational Guidelines (Chapter15: Quality 
Management of MGNREGA Works). Further,rthe Ministry had asked the statesto effffect
convergenceof MGNREGSwith other programmesto enhance thedurability of assets.States
were asked to deployindependent State Quality Monitors (SQMs) to assess the quality of assets 
to ensure their durability. These SQMswould comprise retired chief engineersand executive
engineers.
2 
Small structure constructed across non-perennial rivulets by stacking gunny-bags filled with mud/sand for the purpose of 
  storage of water during monsoon and its percolation underground, so as to bring up the water-table.
* Certificate case means recovery case under state's Public Demand Recovery Act.

Chapter 8 - Works
80Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
8.8 Procurement Procedures
The General Financial Rules allow purchaseof goods without bids or quotations up to `15,000
only. Purchasesabove`15,000wereto necessarilyinvolve bids/quotations, while for purchases
of more than`one lakh, bids were to be obtained only through limited or advertisedtender 
enquiries.
The Operational Guidelines (para 6.2) also provide for adoption of atransparent and reasonable 
procedure for procurementunder the MGNREGS. Audit observed thatmaterialvaluing `24.90 
crorehad been procured in 73GPs, 10blocksand seven districts and one line departmentof five
states viz.AndhraPradesh, Jammu &Kashmir,rJharkhand, Nagaland and UttarPradesh in an
arbitrary manner without following the laid down rules/procedures. The details are given in 
Annex-8Iand case study.
TheMinistrystated (November 2012) thatitwasone of theparametersof enquiry/inspection 
done byNational Level Monitors/StateLevel Monitors(when an enquirywasassigned tothem)
and Ministryofficials ff under AreaOfficer ff Scheme.
Photographs of non-permissible, 
poorly executed works and non-creation of durable assets
Construction of boundary wall at village  bhond, block Basr tar, disrr trict Bastar, Chhatrr tisgarh

Chapter 8 - Works
81Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Broken earthen road ckk onstructed under MGNREGS, gram panchayat-Khalispur, rr
block Chiraigaon, district Varanasi, UtVV tar Pradesh
WatWW er harvesting structure of Mahatabandha, Jariput village in GP Kunjari, of block Tangi,TT
Khurda district, Odisha

Case Study: Procurement of Material without floating tender and quotation  
Jharkhand:
Jharkhand Financial Rules prescribe purchase of goods above ` 15,000 by inviting 
quotations/tenders.  Further, Jharkahnd Rural Development Department (May 2010) 
directed that purchase of materials costing up to ` 50,000 be made through inviting 
quotation/open tenders.  All DPCs were required to fix the rate of material at the district 
level after inviting open tenders and the name of block wise panel of agencies/firms was to 
be made available to BDOs. All implementing agencies including line departments had to 
purchase material from the empanelled firms only. 
Audit observed that in four test checked blocks (128 works in 26 GPs) and three line 
departments in four districts, material worth ` 1.95 crore was purchased from unregistered 
suppliers on hand receipts during 2007-12, which was in violation of prescribed norms.
The state government accepted the observation and assured to take necessary action in this 
regard.  Further, DPC, Pakur stated that registered suppliers were identified and instructions 
had been issued to procure the material from them.
Chapter 8 - Works
82Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Damaged check dam at Atar Singh ki dhani, GP Bajna block Rajakhera, district Dholpur, Rajasrr than

Chapter 8 - Works
83Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
8.9 Deficient Stock Maintenance Practices
Proper maintenance of stock/raw material is necessaryto avoid anywastage or pilferage.Audit 
observed thatmaterial worth `50.88 crore had not been accounted for atwork sites in the case of 
twostates, AndhraPradesh and Assam, asper details given in Annex8J.
It was also observed that material of `1.05 crore had been procured in excessof requirementin 
three states. Detailsaregiven in Table-14TT .The excess material waseither damaged or in an
unusable condition.
8.10 Unique Number for Each Work
8.11 Technical Support to Gram Panchayats
Under para6.2.1 of Operational Guidelines, aunique identity numberwasto be given to each
worktoavoid duplication. Audit observed thatunique identity number had not been assigned to 
eachwork in66districts(out of 182test checkeddistricts,36.26 per cent) in 13statesand one UT 
viz., ArunachalPradesh, Bihar,rGujarat,Jammu & Kashmir,rKerala,Maharashtra,Manipur, r
Nagaland,Punjab,Rajasthan,TaTTmilNadu,Tripura,UttarPradesh and Lakshadweep.
Interestingly, yyin afew states, unique identity number wasgenerated while feeding the datain the 
MIS. However, rthis number was notreflected in anyof the basicrecords likeAnnual Plan, muster 
rolls,etc. Hence,in such casesthe possibility of duplication of workscannot be ruled out.Further, r
the correctness of data of works entered in the MIS was also doubtful.  The details are given in 
Annex-8K.
Asper Para 6.3.3 of Operational Guidelines, therole of the line departments such as Public Works
Department,ForestDepartment,Water ResourceDepartment, Flood Control Department,etc.,
was togive technicalsupport bywayof estimates,measurementand supervision of theworks
executed. Workswereto be executed byjob card holdersand muster rolls wereto be 
maintained. No overhead chargewasto be given to anyline departmentfor this activity.
Table-14 : Excess purchase of material
Item purchasedGPBlockDistrictSl.
No.
AmountName of State
Assam
Odisha
Rajasthan
1
2
3
First Aid Boxes
Printing of two lakh job cards
Excess cement bags purchased
Procurement of excess tent, 
medical kit, jhula and water 
tank
1
1
-
-
-
-
-
4
-
-
3
-
0.09
0.17
0.01
0.78
Total 2 4 3 1.05
(` in crore)

Chapter 8 - Works
84Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Auditobservedthattechnical support of theline department hadnot been soughtbythe GPsin
theworks executed by them in any of thetest checked 27 districts in four states of Kerala,
Mizoram,Nagaland and Uttar Pradesh. (Annex-8L)
Further,testcheck ofrecords revealed thatoverhead charges amounting to
`73 lakh had been paid to the implementing agency (Rural Engineering Service) for their
technical support in five testchecked districts of MadhyaPradesh.
The Ministrystated (November 2012)thati thad asked thestatesto createand fill up thepostsof 
Gram Rojgar Sahayaks(one for each GP),TechnicTT al Assistants/Junior // Engineers (one JEfor certain 
numberof GPs depending upon thenumber of works,accessibility, yyexpenditure,etc.)and 
Panchayat DevelopmentOfficerff s (PDOs) on contractbasis. The expenditurewas to be met out of 
sixper centadministrative expenses provided to the statesfor effffective implementation of the
Scheme.
Good Practice: Tripura
The state unit of NIC in collaboration with Rural Development Department had designed 
and developed a MIS solution called RuralSoft for online preparation of technical estimate, 
according technical sanction and issuance of online work order . 
For this purpose, individual user ID and password were given to all JEs/ TAs/ AEs/EEs/SEs for 
logging into the system.  The practice adopted by the state government would ensure 
preparation of estimates with more accuracy and transparency.
8.12 Use of Contractors
8.13 Use of machinery
As noted earlier, rtheActprohibits theuse of contractors intheexecution of MGNREGSworks. 
Audit, however, robserved thatworksamounting to `4.83crorewereexecuted byengagement of 
contractorsby the implementing agencies in two GPs,one block and seven districts in five states
viz.Assam, Chhattisgarh, Kerala, Nagaland and Uttar Pradeshincontravention of the Act. The 
details aregiven in Annex-8M.
Operational Guidelinesdo not permit use of machineryfor worksunder MGNERGS.A few 
instances of use of machineryduring execution of rural connectivity workslike d igging, etc.,
valuing `18.21 crorewerenoted in 40 GPs,one block and four districts in six states viz. Bihar, r
Karnataka,Manipur, rOdisha, Punjab and Tripura. Thedetailsare given in Annex-8N.
The Ministrystated (November 2012)that asper paragraph1 2in Schedule I of the Act asfar as 
practicable, atask funded under the Schemewasto be performed byusing manual labour and 
not machines. Machinerywhich could displace labour wasnot to be used in executing the tasks
under the Scheme.

Chapter 8 - Works
85Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
8.14 Prior Sanction of Works
8.15 Transparency Requirements
8.16 Schedule of Rates (SoR)
Para 6.4.1ofOperationalGuidelinesstipulates thatallworks would require
administrative/technical sanction in advance,byDecember of theyearpreceding the proposed 
implementation. Audit observed that334worksand one plantation work for `22.37crorehad 
been executed without obtaining the required sanctions in 53GPs, 14 blocks and one district in 
sixstates viz. ArunachalPradesh, Assam,Chhattisgarh, Mizoram, Odisha and UttarPradesh. The 
cases aredetailed inAnnex-8O.
Audit further observed that asum of `78lakh wasspentin excessof the sanctioned amountson 
124worksin eight GPsand one block out of test checked units in fivestatesviz.Haryana,
Jharkhand, Meghalaya,Nagaland and WestBengal.The implementing agenciesdid not take any
actiontoobtain revised sanction. The detailsare giveninAnnex-8P.
According to para6.6.5 of theOperational Guidelines, theCitizen Information Board with 
MGNREGAlogo wasto be set up atall work sites.T hesewereto contain essentiali n formation viz.
estimate of work,dateof commencementof work, stipulated date of completion of work, SoRs,
workstatus,etc. Thisstipulation wasfor improved transparency of the workstaken up under
MGNREGS. 
Audit observed that Citizen Information Board had not been displayed in 59 districts (32.42per 
centof all testchecked districts)in nine statesviz.Gujarat,Maharashtra,Manipur, rNagaland, 
Odisha, Rajasthan, Tripura,UttarPradesh and WestBengal. The detailsare given in Annex-8Q.
The Ministry stated (November 2012) that the states had been repeatedly requested to ensure
compliance with therequired provisions.
AsperPara 6.7.2of Operational Guidelines, the state governments may undertake 
comprehensive work, time and motion studies for preparation of SoR.The SoRarenecessary to 
ensurea fair wageratefor theworksdone under MGNREGS. 
Audit, however, robserved that thestategovernmentsdid not undertakecomprehensivework, 
time and motion studies required for compiling the SoR in 35 districts in six states of Arunachal
Pradesh, Bihar, rKerala,Manipur, rPunjab and Sikkim. The detailsaregiven in Annex-8R.In the
absence of such studies, thereasonableness of the rates applied for theseworkswas
questionable.
The Ministrystated (November 2012)thatKerala had conducted time and motionstudies in 
Palakkad, Wayanad, Idukki and Kasargod districts during 2011to formulatethe statespecific SoR.
Basedon thedatacollected, theSoR wasbeing piloted in one blockof Palakkad districtinthefirst 

Chapter 8 - Works
86Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
phaseatpresent.Inthesecond phase, the datawould be validated in theremaining 10districtsof 
thestate.
According to para 6.7.5 of Operational Guidelines, measurementof work wasto be recorded in 
the measurementbooks maintained by qualified technical personnel in chargeof theworksite. 
Audit observed thatapayment of `11.43crorewas made bythe implementing agencies without
measurementof theworksor measurementof worksbynon- technical personnel in 709of the
test checked worksin 53GPsand two blocksin sixstatesviz.Assam,Bihar, rJharkhand,Kerala,
TamilTT Nadu and UttarPradesh. The detailsaregiven in Annex-8S.In theabsenceof proper 
measurements, theveracity of theworkscould not beascertained.
Asper paragraphs 27 and 28 in Schedule II to the Actread with Para6.8.1 of Operational 
Guidelines, the implementing agencieswereto provide adequateworksitefacilitiesforworkers. 
Thesewereto include medical aid, safedrinking water,rshade for children and periods of rest, first 
aid box with adequatematerial for emergency treatmentandother health hazards and acrèche, 
if therewere more than five children below the ageof sixyears.
Audit observed thatthereweredeficiencies in theseworksitefacilities in 40districts (22per cent
of all testchecked districts)in seven statesand one UT viz.Gujarat,Kerala, Rajasthan, Sikkim,
TamilTT Nadu, UttarPradesh, West Bengal and Puducherry. T h e  d etailsare given in Annex-8T.
According topara6.9of Operational Guidelines, on completion of everyproject,aproject
completion report (PCR)wasto be prepared asper theprescribed formatint heworksregister
and the detailsentered therein wereto be verifiedbyasenior officerff .rrPre-commencementof 
work, mid work and postwork projectcondition weretoberecorded with photographs. The PCR 
was tobe placed in the file pertaining to the work in theoffice ff of the implementingagency to 
serveasarecord of verification of completion of work.
Audit observed thatthreestagephotographs i.e., pre, mid and postwerenot available in 
completed work files in 55districts(30per centof all testchecked districts)in10statesand two 
UTs TTviz. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Gujarat,Kerala,Maharashtra,Manipur, rNagaland, Odisha,
TamilTT Nadu, UttarPradesh, Lakshadweep and Puducherryandfor theentirestateof Karnataka.
As such, thestatus of projectsexamined wasunascertainable fromrecords. The details are given 
in Annex-8U.
Itwasalso observed that the PCR had not been prepared after completion of 5,92,280works in 75
districts(41per centof all testchecked districts)in 14statesandone UT viz.A runachal Pradesh, 
8.17 Measurement Books
8.18 Worksite Facilities
8.19 Project Completion Report

Chapter 8 - Works
87Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Assam, Bihar,rGujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Nagaland, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil TT
Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and Puducherryand for the entire state of Karnataka .
The details are given in Annex-8V.
The Ministry stated (November 2012) that it had issued an advisoryto thestates on 28 March
2012 for updating status of completed worksi nMIS (NREGASoft).
Joint physical inspection of 794works amounting to `21.78crorebyAudit and officials ff from
implementing agenciesin 184GPs, 15blocksand 18districtsrevealed suspecttransactionsin 10 
statesviz.A ndhraPradesh,Assam,Bihar,rHaryana, Jharkhand,MadhyaPradesh, Manipur, r
Nagaland, Odisha and Rajasthan. Therewas no physicalevidenceof the works. Some works
featuredtwice.Further, rsome cases of material having been purchasedpostcompletion of work 
or incorrectentriesin measurementbooksor withdrawal of moneywithout execution of work 
werealso noticed. Thus, thesepaymentswere suspect and call for investigation. Detailsare
given inAnnex-8W.
The Ministrystated (November 2012)thatit had taken adecision to engage CAs/CA firms to assist
thestates in assessing thestateshare based on accounts of SEGF and otherrecords/documents.
An advisoryin thisregardhadbeenissued to thestateson 22June 2012.  The stateswould have to 
bear additionall iabilities (in addition to thatmandated bySection2 2of M GNREGA)for
misappropriation of funds not recouped.
InAndhraPradesh, asystem of Work Executing Member (WEM) wasintroduced in 2009. Under 
this system GPs were to identify a suitable person as WEM from among the
sarpanch/members/anyother suitable person of gram panchayat, through its resolution, for 
constructionof roads and Rajiv Gandhi Bharat Nirman SewaKendras(RGBNSK).As reported by 
3
internal audit of the Ministrythestate had incurred expenditureof `1,935.49 croreduring2009-
2012(tillAugust 2012),onmaterial component through WEMs and only `54.51 crore onwages
componenton these works. Audit observed thefollowing irregularities in thissystem:
Internal audit conducted bythe Ministryrevealed thatthewage-material ratio in works
executed byWork Executing Member were 5.25:94.75 in caseof water bound macadam 
road,0.27:99.73 in caseof Rajiv Gandhi BharatNirman SewaKendrasand 2:98in caseof 
cementconcreteroads with drainage.
WorkExecuting Member does not fall in thecategoryof implementing agencyasspecified
in theAct.Hewasengaged through aMemorandum of Understandingexecuted between 
thestategovernmentand Work Executing Member.rr Funds weretransferredto the 
personal bank account of Work Executing Member for making further paymentto the
8.20 Suspected Misappropriation
8.21 Expenditure of  ` 1,935.49 crore in violation of the Act 
n
n
3 
2009-10- ` 3.86 crore, 2010-11- `1,098.89 crore, 2011-12- ` 637.68 crore and 2012-13 - ` 195.06 crore - (up to August 2012)

Chapter 8 - Works
88Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
suppliers in cash in violation of financial rules. Work Executing Member was paid 2.5per 
cent supervision charges (agency commission) for his services. Engagement of Workt
Executing Member was in nature of a contract which violated the Act.
Provisions of General Financial Rules, 2005 had not been followed in procurement of 
materials and bills and vouchers for procurement of material were not maintained for
future examination. Government of Andhra Pradesh (February 2012) brought out separate
orders for material procurement through tendering after being pointed out by Audit.
The internal audit report also observed that the quality of works was not of prescribed
standard.
Thus, engaging Work Executing Members was flawed and also defeated  the basic objective of the 
Act of providing wage employment as only 2.74 per cent of total expenditure of t ` 1,990 crore was
incurred on wages.
It was further observed that though Andhra Pradesh government had withdrawn Work Executing 
Member System in June 2012, the following irregularities were still to be rectified:
Excess expenditure on material of ` 1,139.49 crore was to be recovered from the state. It 
was estimated that excess expenditure on material could have resulted in generation of 
additional 10.63 crore persondays, if the prescribed wage material ratio were adhered to.
As supervision charges were not permissible under the Act, they were to be quantified and
recovered.
The Ministry while agreeing with the audit observation stated that clarification had been sought
from the state government.
n
n
n
n
Recommendation:
The Ministry may monitor the maintenance of the prescribed wage material ratio strictly. State 
governments may be asked to make good, the amounts spent in excess of 60:40 ratio.

89Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
9.1 Introduction
9.2 Absence of Convergence Activities
The Operational Guidelines (para14.1.1)allowfor convergence of MGNREGSfunds with funds
from other schemes and sources for creation of durable assets. Funds available with 
implementing agenciesfrom other sources(such astheNational FinanceCommission, State 
Finance Commission, statedepartments)and other Central or Centrally Sponsored Schemescan 
also be dovetailed with MGNREGSfunds for theconstruction of durable community assets/works 
permissible under MGNREGS.
TheOperational Guidelines prohibit use of Scheme funds as a substitute for plan funds of 
difffferent departments and agencies. Funds from other programmesfor workspermissible under 
MGNREGScouldbe merged with MGNREGSfundsbut vice versawas not permitted.Further, rall 
aspects related to t heconvergenceactivitiesof t hestatewereto be i ncorporated in state's 
perspective plans. All initiatives of convergencewereto be within the parameters of MGNREGS 
and wereexpected to address theneedto design labour-intensive works.
The Operational Guidelines (para14.1.1)envisage convergence with other schemes. Audit, 
however, rnoted that in 13statesviz.Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,Jammu &Kashmir, rKarnataka,
Maharashtra,Manipur, rMizoram, Nagaland, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil TT Nadu, Tripuraand West
Bengal no projects using themeansof convergencewere undertaken.
In threeof thesestatesviz.Assam, Jammu&Kashmir and Manipur noguidelinesfor convergence 
of MGNREGS with other rural developmentprogrammeswere prepared. In Karnatakaand 
Rajasthan,guidelines wereframed but convergenceactivitieswerenot noticed in anyof thetest-
checked districts. In Karnataka, the scheme guidelines pertainingto convergence weresentto 
the implementing officerff s and the zila panchayatswere instructed toc onverge programmes of 
Animal Husbandryand Fisherieswith MGNREGS.However,rno suchactivitywas noticed in the
sampleddistricts. In Jammu &Kashmir,racommittee tostudyconvergence wasconstituted in 
March 2012. The WestBengal governmentstated thatguidelines had been prepared for 
convergence but comprehensivePerspectivePlans covering all schemes of Rural Development
Departmentwere not prepared. The guidelines were, however,rnot furnishedto Audit and no
convergenceactivitieswerenoted in the selected GPs.
Convergence with 
other Schemes
Chapter
9

Chapter 9 - Convergence with other Schemes
90Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Integrated Watershed ManagementProgramme (IWMP) wasidentified bytheMinistryof Rural
Development as an important schemefor convergence with MGNREGS as more than 50per cent
MGNREGS worksrelated to soil and water conservation. Jointconvergence guidelineswere 
issuedin May2009 to statesfor convergencebetween MGNREGSand IWMP.PPOne of the 
important measures outlined in guidelineswas creation of DistrictResource Group atdistrict
level w i th representativesfrom Watershed Department,AgricultureDepartment,Water 
Resource Department, Departmentof RuralDevelopmentandPanchayati Rajfor facilitating 
knowledge sharing, planning, communication, training, technical support, resource pooling and 
monitoring and evaluation. Audit observed thatin Manipur andNagaland, no DistrictResource
Group was formed in test checked districts. DistrictResourceGroup was not formed in eightout 
of nine selected districtsin Maharashtra.
Further, r undert he jointconvergence guidelines of MGNREGSand IWMP, P Watershed 
Development Team/PrTT oject Implementation Authority was to submit detailed project report of 
the W atershedDevelopmentProjectto gram sabhafor approval whichwasto contain a 
description of theactivities/structures/tasksproposed for MGNREGS.The PerspectivePlan and 
Annual Work Plan of MGNREGSweretoinclude these activities/structures/tasksand wereto be 
submitted simultaneously with thedetailed projectreportto gram sabhaforensuring proper 
convergence of theprogramme.Audit noticed thatin Mizoram, the processof convergence of 
MGNREGSfunds with funds from othersourcesfor creation of durable assetswasnot carried out 
and shown in theperspective plans of thetestchecked districts.InNagaland, Perspective Plan 
was prepared for the district and availability of resources under various Rural Development
1
Programmesforconvergence was estimated, along with MGNREGSworks. However, rin three 
test checked districts(Dimapur, rMon and Tuensang) the samewereconfined to thePerspective 
Plan and no effffortsweremade for actualconvergence. There wasno convergencewith other 
Rural DevelopmentProgrammes in ArunachalPradesh.
Thus, thisimportantintervention was largely absentin all thestates.
The Ministryin itsreply to shortcomingsin convergencestated thatGuidelines wereadvisoryand
stateswere expected to usethem to establish managementsystemsto implementtheAct. The 
Operational Guidelines thusindicated anormative framework thatstatesmustendeavourto
reach. Non-compliance with theOperational Guidelineswas, thus, not a violation assuch.
Thereply of the Ministrywas not in conformity with the spirit of itsown Operational Guidelines 
whichenvisageadditional employmentgeneration throughconvergence. 
1 
LADP (Local Area Development Programme) Agriculture, Horticulture, R & B, School Education and Forest Programmes 

Chapter 9 - Convergence with other Schemes
91Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
9.3 Poorly Executed Convergence Activities
9.3.1 Entire Cost funded from MGNREGS
As per Operational Guidelines (para 14.1.2), MGNREGS funds should not be used as a substitute 
for departmental plan funds for difffferent departments and agencies. Funds from other 
programme for the works permissible under MGNREGS could be dovetailed with MGNREGS
funds but not vice versa. 
In Jharkhand and Uttarakhand, instances were noticed where the entire cost of the convergence 
project was met from the funds of MGNREGS. The Operational Guidelinesallow the funding of 
onlylabour component under MGNREGS when the work undertaken pertains to any another 
scheme. The details are given in TableTT 15.
Name of the State P/g258rticulars
Jharkhand The Ministry had circulated guidelines on expanding the scope of works 
under para 1(g) in Schedule 1 of the Act to include construction of 
Bharat Nirman Rajiv Gandhi Sewa Kendra (BNRGSK). Under the 
guidelines, construction of BNRGSK was allowed in districts also where 
Backward Region Grant Fund Scheme (BRGF) was implemented with 
the condition that material component was to be met from BRGF and 
labour component from MGNREGS. In case material component from 
BRGF was inadequate the same was allowed from MGNREGS provided 
the material component was restricted to 40 per cent at the district
 level. 
Audit observed that in 18 blocks of Ranchi district, 
` 3.35 crore were 
incurred entirely from MGNREGS to construct 18 BNRGSK during 2010-
12 without allocating cost of construction between MGNREGS and 
BRGF.  Audit further noted that even though sufficient funds (
` 12.47 
crore and ` 11.05 crore at the close of 2009-10 and 2010-11 
respectively) were available under BRGF , ` 2.70 crore was incurred on 
material component from MGNREGS which was irregular as Ranchi was 
covered by BRGF and cost of material was to be met from BRGF .
 
Line departments (Forest Department, Animal Husbandry, Irrigation , 
Agriculture departments, etc.) carried out works on the pretext of 
convergence and  expenditure of 
` 2.57 crore on works was fully met 
from MGNREGS. Further, analysis of wage material ratio in 26 
completed works revealed that material component varied from 41 to 
86 per cent which was in contravention of the Act.
Table 15-Incorrect funding from MGNREGS
Uttarakhand
The Ministry stated that as per the Act, line department could also implement the MGNREGS
works and for such works the Operational Guidelines would be applicable. Some of the line
departments had similar works under departmental schemes and in these works the guidelines

Chapter 9 - Convergence with other Schemes
Report No. 6 of 2013
and norms of respectivedepartmentwouldbe applicable. Further,rit wasstated thatconstruction 
of BNRGSK wasapermissible work under MGNREGS, the norms prescribed in the guidelines for 
BNRGSK would be applicable, and they could construct entire building under MGNREGS also.
The reply of theMinistrywasnot convincing as Jharkhand did not follow BNRGSK guidelines and 
Uttarakhand utilized MGNREGS fundsfor itsregular departmental workswherein wage material 
ratio was not maintained in works undertaken under convergence.
In Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand, instances were noticed where projects under convergence of 
schemes were initiated, but were pending completion or were stopped prematurely. The details
are given in theTable-16TT .
9.3.2 Low Achievement under Convergence
The Ministry stated that as MGNREGS was demand based, no target could be fixed for completion 
of work andworkcould be executed asper the demand for employment.
As per Operational Guidelines (para14.1.3)all initiativesof convergence wereto be within the
parameters of MGNREGS, especially theneed to design labour-intensiveworks and ensure a
completeban on contractors. 
9.3.3 Violation of Operational Guidelines under convergence
92Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Name of the State P/g258rticulars
ChhattisgarhIn Bastar block of Bastar district under MGNREGS, cashew plantation 
work in 157 hectares was sanctioned for ` 41.02 lakh at Bhond and 
Lamker gram panchayats. The work was to be completed in 
convergence with the National Horticulture Mission in July 2009. Audit 
observed that only an expenditure of ` 8.02 lakh (20 ) was 
incurred against the sanctioned amount of ` 41.02 lakh, yet completion 
certificates were issued. GP officials on inspection in Bhond found that 
plantation had not survived. In Lamker details of numbers of plants and 
land where plantation was done were not available on record. 
Therefore, veracity of works completed could not be established in 
Audit.  On being pointed out, the department stated that due to lack of 
interest by beneficiaries, 100 per cent plantation work could not be 
executed.  
In six Backward Region Grant Fund districts, against the target of 
construction of 380 and 540 for 2010-11 and  2011-12 respectively,  
only 98 Bharat Nirman Rajiv Gandhi Sewa Kendras were completed as of 
March 2012 under the convergence option of MGNREGS.
per cent
Table-16: Incomplete works under Convergence activities
Jharkhand

Chapter 9 - Convergence with other Schemes
93Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
MadhyaPradesh:In eightselected districtsof MadhyaPradesh570road worksweresanctioned 
in2010-11 and 2011-12 in convergence withMukhya MantriSadakYojana YY (MMSY) and BRGF for 
`252.92 crore. The implementing agenciesreported an expenditure of `36.45 crore. Audit 
noted thatworkswereexecuted in contravention of theOperational Guidelinesasthewage 
materialratio of 60:40was maintained only on the share of MGNREGSfunds and not on the
wholeamount.Further,rengagement of contractorsand heavymachinerywasresortedto for 
execution of work from shareof MMSY and BRGF missing out on the opportunity for creating 
additional employment. Itwas also observed thatadministrative/technical sanction of these 
works did not contain name of the GPs, where the workswereto be carried out or the details of 
beneficiaries and wage payment.Further,rthough 59road workswere completed, none of these
assetswerehandedoverto theconcerned GPs. 
Ont he abovebeing pointed out, thestategovernmentreplied thattheyhad designedasub-
scheme called Chief Minister Gram SadakYojana YY in which work to be done byun-skilled
manpower could becarried out under MGNREGSand thework whichrequired extensiveuse of 
machineryor involved substantialcomponentof material wasto be carried out throughfunds 
fromstateresourcesor BRGF. Theyfurther stated that (a) itwasnot mandatoryto keep records of 
employmentgeneration through contracting of worksasper staterules, (b) theratio of 60:40, 
thoughvalid and maintainedfor MGNREGScomponentwas not mandatoryfort hewhole work, 
and, (c) the handing over of completed roads wouldbe carried out in due courseof time.
Thereplydoes not take into accounttherequirementof Operational Guidelines of MGNREGS
that60:40ratio between wageand material on totalfunds available under MGNREGSand 
MMSY/BRYY GF were maintained and ban on contractorswasensured. 
In Uttar Pradesh, ` 178.69 crore wasutilized irregularlyfor departmentalworks ( .
afffforestation, de-silting, Ram GangaCommandProject,etc.)from the MGNREGSfunds by the
District Programme Coordinators(DPCs)for 37,236 projects in all 18testchecked districts by line 
departments.In grossviolation of theGuidelinesand objectives,t hestategovernmenthad fixed 
financial targetsof `6,438.12croreto itsdifffferentline departmentsduring 2010-12for executing 
works from MGNREGSfundsfor t heentire state.T hesedepartmentshad actually incurred
`1,432.14crore out of `1,675.25crore releasedto t hem. It wasalso seenthatthestate
governmenttreated MGNREGSfund asthestate'sfund.For i nstance, the Chief Secretary, yy
throughaletter dated 30 September 2009directed theconcerned authorities to manage 
allotmentof sufficienff tfundfrom theMGNREGSassupplementarybudgetfor Irrigation 
department.In an another instance,in ameeting presided overthe byChief Secretaryitwas
decidedthateffffortsshould bemade to getmaximum fundsfrom GoIfunded schemesto save 
funds for staterun schemes. 
The above instances clearlyshow thatthestates had not recognized the potential of 
convergence, asenvisaged under MGNREGS. Thestategovernments had made little effffortfor 
carrying out convergenceactivitiesor used convergenceeffffectively to fund state government
schemes.
viz

Chapter 9 - Convergence with other Schemes
94Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
The Ministry, yyin itsreply, yystated thatthe provision of theActwasonly applicable to thework 
conducted from MGNREGSfund, thestategovernmentcould use additional fundfor the same
worksa sper the norms of respective schemes. For example, if theroad was constructed under 
MukhyaMantriSadakYojana, YY the60:40ratio wouldbeapplicable to the work which was carried 
outunder MGNREGS fund, and statecould use additional moneyfrom other schemes.Further, rit 
wasstated that convergence wasan evolving processand while broad principles could be laid out 
by the Central Government, theactualcontours of convergence would be determined by the 
nature and quantum of resources available atthe field level.
The reply of the Ministrywas notconvincing because Operational Guidelines envisage that in
works involving convergence, all initiativeswereto be within the parametersof MGNREGS.

95Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
10.1 Introduction
Para 9.1.1 of the Operational Guidelines stipulates proper maintenance of records as one of the 
critical success factors in implementation of MGNREGS. Information on critical inputs, processes, 
outputs and outcomes have to be meticulously recorded in prescribed registers at the levels of 
District Programme Coordinator (DPC), Programme Officer (PO), gram panchyat (GP) and other 
implementing agencies to ensure verifiable compliance with 100 days of employment on 
demand and other expected outcomes of the Scheme. The Operational Guidelines provide 
specified details of records and registers to be maintained at different levels. Proper record
maintenance is sine qua non for any accountability mechanism. The effectiveness of the audit 
process also depends on records maintenance to a large extent.
In particular, the following important records were required to be maintained as per Operational 
Guidelines:
Maintenance of Records
Chapter
10
Purpose of the recordName of
the register
Authority responsible 
for maintenance
Muster roll issue 
register  
Muster roll receipt 
register 
Job card application 
register
Job card register
Employment 
register
Records issue and receipt of muster rolls 
(from the PO to the GP/implementing agency)
Records receipt of muster rolls by GPs
Records name of applicant, dated receipt of 
applications/requests. It also contains reasons 
in case job card was not issued
Records details of members of the households 
who were issued job cards
Records for each registered household, details 
of employment demanded, employment allotted 
and employment actually taken up, performance 
of work and the wages or unemployment 
allowance paid to the  worker
Programme Officer 
at the block level
Gram Panchayat
Gram Panchayat/ 
Programme Officer
Gram Panchayat/ 
Programme Officer
Gram Panchayat/ 
Programme Officer

Chapter 10 - Maintenance of Records
96Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Inaddition to t heregistersmentioned above, two other basicdocumentswhich every
implementing agency isrequired to maintain are:
Musterrolls: beneficiary'sdetails includingdaysworked, daysabsent,etc.
Cashbook: records of alltheinflowand outflow of funds.
Audit noted that,out of thetotal testchecked 182 districts,458blocksand 3,848GPsof 28states
and fourUTsTTin alargenumber of casesthe basicrecords werenot maintained. Poor record 
maintenance wasnot onlyatthegram panchyatlevel, wherelackof capacitywasoften cited asa
reason. Therewereequallyseriousdeficiencies attheblock and districtlevel. The findingsrelated 
tonon-maintenance of records aresummarizedbelow:
n
n
10.2 Non Maintenance of Records
Purpose of the recordName of
the register
Authority responsible 
for maintenance
Works register
Assets register
Complaint register
Monthly allotment 
and utilization 
certificate watch 
register
This register records details of the work such 
as number and date of sanction order, 
completion date, expenditure incurred, date 
of social audit and pre-mid-post project 
condition of the work, etc.
Records all works sanctioned, executed and 
completed. It contains details of asset, its cost, 
location, current status, etc. 
Records details of complaints made, and 
action taken on the complaint and date 
of final disposal.
Records date–wise information of allotment, 
expenditure, balance available with the 
implementing agency and the details 
regarding submission and pendency of 
utilization certificate.
Programme Officer/
Gram Panchayat/
Other Implementing 
Agencies
Programme Officer/
Gram Panchayat/
Other Implementing 
Agencies
DPC/Programme 
Officer/Gram 
Panchayat/
Other Implementing
 Agencies
DPC/ Programme 
Officer/ Gram
Panchayat/Other 
Implementing 
Agencies

Chapter 10 - Maintenance of Records
97Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Audit ObservationsTypes of register to
be maintained
Sl.
No.
Percentage of GPs not 
maintaining records
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
In 1,205 GPs and 165 blocks in 56 districts in 
Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, 
Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, 
Meghalaya, Nagaland, Punjab, Uttar 
Pradesh, West Bengal and Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli (15 states and one UT) the job card 
application register/application registration 
register was not maintained.
In 482 GPs and 43 blocks in 4 districts in 
Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, 
Meghalaya, Nagaland, Punjab, Tripura and 
Uttar Pradesh (10 states), the job card 
register was not maintained.
In 1,111 GPs and 108 blocks in 37 districts in 
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, 
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, 
Nagaland, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, West 
Bengal, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and 
Puducherry (16 states and two UTs), the 
employment register was not maintained.
In 1,063 GPs, 167 blocks, in 48 districts in 
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Goa, Jammu 
& Kashmir,  Jharkhand,  Karnataka, Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, Nagaland, 
Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, West 
Bengal, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and 
Puducherry (15 states and two UTs), the 
assets register was not maintained.
In 885 GPs, 74 blocks, in 42 districts in 
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar,  Gujarat, 
Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, 
Nagaland, Odisha, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh 
and Dadra & Nagar Haveli (14 states and 
one UT), the muster roll issue/receipt 
register was not maintained.
In 1,300 GPs, 111 blocks, and 34 districts in 
Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, 
Goa, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh,  
Job card 
application register
Job card 
register
Employment 
register
Assets register
Muster roll 
issue /receipt 
register
Complaint 
register
31.31
12.53
28.87
27.62
22.99
33.78

Chapter 10 - Maintenance of Records
Report No. 6 of 2013
98Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Thus, it wasobserved thatin asignificantlylargenumber of implementing agencies the basic
recordsfor MGNREGSwerenot being maintained, raising serious doubts about the effffectiveness
andtransparency in implementation of the Scheme.State/UT-wise detailsaregiven in 
Annex-10A.
Importantrecords and registersarerequired to be maintained regularly for them to be reliable. In 
additionto non-maintenance of records,anumber of casesof incorrectmaintenance of records 
alsocameto t henotice of Audit. Theseincluded i nstances of registers/records not being
updated, proper entriesnotbeing made, columns in theregistersbeing left blank, etc.T hese are 
summarized below:
10.3 Incorrect Maintenance of Records
Audit ObservationsTypes of register to
be maintained
Sl.
No.
Percentage of GPs not 
maintaining records
7.
8.
Meghalaya, Nagaland, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, 
Uttar Pradesh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and 
Puducherry (15 states and two UTs), the 
complaint register was not maintained.
In 1,665 GPs, 200 blocks in  46 districts in 
Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, 
Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh,  Maharashtra, Meghalaya, 
Nagaland, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Uttar 
Pradesh, West Bengal, Dadra & Nagar Haveli 
and Puducherry (17 states and two UTs), the 
works register was not maintained.
In 442 GPs 56 blocks and 10 districts in 
Andhra Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, 
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, 
Nagaland, Punjab, Dadra & Nagar Haveli and 
Lakshadweep (seven states and two UTs), 
this register was not maintained.
Works 
register
Monthly allotment 
and utilization 
certificate watch 
register
43.26
11.48
Audit ObservationsTypes of
Record
Sl.
No.
Precentage of GPs out of
GPs test checked incorrectly 
maintaining records
1. In 564 GPs and 39 blocks in Himachal Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, 
Manipur, Sikkim, Tripura, Uttarakhand and 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli, (eight states and one UT) 
job card application register was not maintained 
properly.
Job Card
application
register
14.66

99Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Chapter 10 - Maintenance of Records
Audit ObservationsTypes of
Record
Sl.
No.
Precentage of GPs out of
GPs test checked incorrectly 
maintaining records
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
In 892 GPs and 51 blocks in Jharkhand, 
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Odisha, 
Sikkim, West Bengal and Dadra & Nagar Haveli, 
(seven states and one UT), it was observed that 
the job card register was not maintained 
properly.
In 957 GPs, and 41 blocks in Assam, Goa, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand,  Karnataka, 
Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Odisha, Uttarakhand, 
West Bengal and Dadra & Nagar Haveli (10 
states and one UT), the employment register 
was not maintained properly.
In 736 GPs and 42 blocks and two districts in 
Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, 
Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Odisha, Sikkim, 
Uttarakhand, West Bengal and Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli (12 states and one UT), the assets register 
was not maintained properly.
In 442 GPs and 36 blocks in Jharkhand, 
Karnataka, Manipur, Madhya Pradesh and 
Sikkim, (five states) the muster roll issue /receipt 
register was not maintained properly.
In 473 GPs, 57 blocks in 11 districts in Andhra 
Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, 
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur and 
Odisha (seven states), the complaint register 
was not maintained properly.
In 551 GPs 43 blocks in 10 districts In Jharkhand, 
Goa, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, 
Odisha, Uttarakhand and Dadra & Nagar Haveli, 
(seven states and one UT), the works register 
was not maintained properly.
In 255 GPs and 15 blocks in Himachal Pradesh, 
Jharkhand and Madhya Pradesh (three states) 
the monthly allotment and utilization certificate 
watch register was not maintained properly.
Job card 
register
Employment 
register
Assets 
register
Muster 
roll issue /
receipt 
Register
Complaint 
register
Works 
register
Monthly 
allotment 
and 
utilization 
certificate 
watch 
register
23.18
24.87
19.12
14.86
12.29
14.31
6.62

Chapter 10 - Maintenance of Records
100Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
State/UT-wisedetailsof incorrectmaintenance of recordsare given in Annex-10B.
Thus, the deficiencies in terms of both non-maintenance and incorrect maintenance of records 
were in therangeof 18to 54per centof the alltestchecked GPs.Of the registersmentioned
above,i twasseenthat only monthly allotment and utilization certificateregistered were 
maintained reasonablywell. Deficiencies of non-maintenance or incorrectmaintenance were 
significantly high in respect of all other registers.
In addition to theregistersmentionedabove,anumber of other basicrecords likemuster rolls 
andcash bookswerealso required to be maintained. However,ranumber of shortcomingswere
noticedin themaintenance of theserecordsaswell. Operational Guidelines requirethatevery 
musterrollshould haveaunique number and should contain the namesof the person on work, 
job card numbers,daysworked, daysabsentand wagespaid. Signature or thumb impression of 
the beneficiarywasalso to be recorded onthemuster roll. The musterrolls wastobe signed by
persons taking attendance. 
Maintenance of muster rolls: Itwas seent hatmusterrolls were not maintained properly in Goa, 
Gujaratand Pochampalli block of Nalgonda district,Buchayyapetablock of Visakhapatnam
district and all thetest-checked blocksof Nalgonda and RangaReddy districts of Andhra Pradesh.
In Chirang districtof Assamand in Lakshadweep itwas observed thatthe musterrolls were not
maintained in the prescribed format.
Maintenance of cashbooks: In Uttarakhand and Dadra&NagarHaveli (atGP level) deficiencies in 
the maintenance of cash book were noticed. Most of the transactions were not attested by the
Head of Office, ff thetotalswerenot verified, overwriting and correctionswerenot attested bythe 
competent authority and several amounts wereentered with pencil.
Cash bookof DPC Dehradun wasnot being closed onyearlybasis,sincetheinception of the 
Scheme.
Other statespecificissuesrelated to record maintenance aregiveninAnnex- 10C. 
The widespread deficiencies in the maintenance of records as brought out above rendered any
verification of theo utputs and o utcomes of the Schemean impossible task.The absenceof 
records also made itdifficult ff to ascertain whethert he beneficiaries exercisedtheir legal rights. In 
addition,requirements of transparency and accountability of the Schemewerealso severely 
compromised. For instance,incorrect maintenance of cashbook which isabasicrecord of the
receipts and expenditure made under the Schemewould rendermoneytransactions
unverifiable. Financial accountability would then be impossible.
As noted above, the job card application registerwasnot availablein 1,205 GPsand was
incorrectly maintained in 564 GPs. The job carda p plication register is arecord of all the
10.4 Other Inadequacies in Records 

Chapter 10 - Maintenance of Records
101Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
householdswho applied to be registeredin the Scheme.This documentwasnecessarytoverify 
whether all those who wanted to getajob cardwere able to do so.In its absence, Audit could not 
ascertain if all the potential beneficiaries had been included. 
The Ministrystated that it had enhancedthe administrative expensesfrom two per centto four 
per centin March 2007 and four per centto sixper centin March 2009to enablestatesto augment
human resources.
The fact remains that increasein thequantum of administrativeexpenses did not resultin any
perceptible improvementin the maintenance of records.
TheMinistryhad implemented aweb based Monitoring Information System– NREGASoft for data
entry and consolidating thei nformation related to the financial and physicalaspects of the
Schemeatstateand districtlevels. With alargeandcomplex schemesuch asMGNREGS,theuse 
of a computerised MIS was not justafacilitator but theo nly meaningfulwayof consolidating the
informationgenerated in thebasicrecords.The MIS wasused byboth Ministry and statesasa 
tool formonitoring theimplementation of theScheme.Additionally, yytheMIS wasatool for
transparencybyensuring widerdissemination of the collected information. 
Audit noted large discrepancies between the data uploaded in the MIS and actualpaper records 
maintained/information available with Department/DPC. Thesediscrepancies werenoted in all 
types of records suchas number of households registered, number of job cards issued, job card 
number,remployment demanded, employmentprovided, number of works,expenditure,
number of inspections of works, number of social audits,etc. Some of the discrepancies are
discussedbelow:
Job card numbersof beneficiaries fed into the MIS did not match actual records in thecase
of Assam, Goa, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Nagaland, Punjab, Rajasthan and Lakshadweep (seven 
statesand oneUT). Detailsaregiven in Annex-10D.
The position of fund balancesentered in theMIS did not tally with thoseentered in thebank 
pass book and otherbasicrecordsin thecaseof AndhraPradesh, Goa, Kerala, Maharashtra
and Nagaland (fivestates). Detailsaregiven in Annex-10E.
Theemploymentgeneration figuresentered in the MIS didnot match thosegiven in the 
actualrecords in thecase of Bihar,rGoa, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Kerala, Punjab, Rajasthan,
TamilTT Nadu, Uttarakhand and Puducherry(nine statesandone UT). Details are givenin 
Annex-10F.
There wasavariation in theexpenditure figures given in theMIS and those whichwere
available in the Monthly Progress Reports in thecase of Assam,Bihar, rGoa, Gujarat,
Jharkhand, Punjab, UttarPradesh and Lakshadweep (seven statesand one UT). Thesecases
are detailed inAnnex-10G.
10.5 Monitoring Information System (MIS)
n
n
n
n

Chapter 10 - Maintenance of Records
102Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013Good Practices: Electronic Muster and Measurement System 
in Andhra Pradesh
Government of Andhra Pradesh had introduced, in a phased manner, an Electronic Muster 
and Measurement System (eMMS) in order to address serious shortcomings in muster rolls. 
All implementing functionaries were provided with GPS-enabled mobile phones under 
'Own Your Mobile' Scheme, and had also been provided with Closed User Group SIM cards 
with GPRS-Internet connectivity. Mobile-based applications had been developed for 
e-Muster – taking group-wise, work-wise attendance at the worksite by the FA on his/ her 
mobile phone, and immediate uploading of MRs; e-Measurement – taking  group-wise 
work measurements at the worksite and immediate uploading of measurements; e-Muster 
verification – verification of muster data by designated muster verification Officers on their 
mobile phones and immediate uploading of verification data; e-check Measurement –  
verification of works measurement by designated check measurement officers on their 
mobile phones from the worksite, and immediate uploading. In addition, a fingerprint-
based bio-metric and GPS based eMMS had been implemented in Nizamabad district, 
whereby muster attendance data was being captured through fingerprint enabled devices, 
instead of mobile phone.
Apartfrom theerroneous entriesmade inthedatabase,anumber of caseswere noticed where 
thestateswerenot entering data on aregular basis.This deficiencywas noticed in Arunachal 
Pradesh,Bihar, r Gujarat, Jharkhand, Jammu & Kashmir, r Mizoram, Maharashtra, Odisha,
Rajasthan, Sikkim, Uttarakhand and Dadra&NagarHaveli (11 statesandone UT). 
An importantstep to ensure the authenticity of the data in the MIS is to have a mechanism for 
cross-checkingdata w ith original records and correcting anyerrorsnoticed. However, rAudit 
observed thatin Goa, Gujarat,H a ryana, Jharkhand, Kerala, MadhyaPradesh, Maharashtra,
Odisha,Punjab, Rajasthan, WestBengal and Puducherry (11 states and one UT) the original data
fedinto the system was not checked before updating the MIS.
Inaddition to thedeficiencies outlined above, a number of otherstate specific issueswere
noticedwhile carrying outatestcheckof the quality of dataavailable in theMIS.T heseare clear
indicators of weakcontrols and call intoq u estion the reliability of the entire datacontained in the 
MIS. The issues related to programming logic and internal controls of NREGASoftarediscussedin 
detail in the chapter related to theIT Audit of the software. The detailsrelating to state specific 
deficiencies arein Annex–10H.
Recommendation:
The absence of physical records and their incorrect maintenance at the GP level makes 
verification of the achievements of the Scheme an extremely difficult task; it also increases the 
risk of misappropriation of funds. Record maintenance at GP level needs to be streamlined. 
Record maintenance should be monitored closely at all levels and fund release should be linked 
to proper maintenance of records.

103Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
11.1 Monitoring and Evaluation Framework
The substantialamountof funds involved in theimplementation of MGNREGScoupledwith its
implementation across thecountryin two lakh GPs, makesthe monitoring and evaluation of the
Schemechallenging. Itwasthusimperativetohavea robustand efficienff tmonitoring, evaluation 
and review mechanism of theScheme.In addition, t herearealsoincreaseddemands for 
accountability and transparency intheexecution of thep r o g ramme byvarious stakeholders.
The Act and theOperational Guidelines envisageamultipronged and extensivesystem of internal 
andexternal monitoring mechanisms atall levelsof theS cheme. The monitoring mechanism at
the Central and the statelevel are depicted in theCharts-10and11asbelow:
Monitoring and 
Evaluation Mechanisms
Chapter
11
 Chart-10: Frame work of monitoring at the Central level
Chart-11: Framework of monitoring at the state level
MoRDCEGC
National Level
Monitors
National Quality
Monitors MGNREGS MIS Monthly
Progress Reports
State Quality
Monitors
District Quality
Monitors
Vigilance and
Monitoring
Committees
State
GovernmentSEGC
Mandatory
verification of
work
Social Audit

Chapter 11 - Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanisms
104Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Audit findings pertainingto themonitoring,evaluationand review under theSchemeare 
discussed below.
Section 10 (1) of theActrequires theCentral Governmenttos etup the CentralEmployment
Guarantee Council (CEGC). The role of CEGC was to monitor the implementation of the Act and
suggest waysto the Ministryto improvethe Scheme. The Ministry notifiedthe setting up of the 
CEGC in September 2006. 
The CEGCworksunder theChairmanship of theUnion Ministerfor Rural Development.I t
comprises 12officialff members of therank of JointSecretary and aboveto GoI,sixstate
representativesof therank of Secretaryto thestategovernmentand not morethan15non-
officialff membersrepresenting thePanchayati RajInstitutions, organisations of workers and
disadvantaged groups. The main functions of the CEGC are outlined in theboxbelow.
11.2 Central Monitoring and Evaluation
11.2.1 Central Employment Guarantee Council (CEGC)
Under section 11 of the Act, the CEGCwasrequired toestablishacentralevaluation and 
monitoring system. Audit noted thatthoughmeetings of CEGCwereheld as per the Central
Council Rules, 2006 during the last six years, no effffortsweremade bythe Council to establish a
Central monitoringandevaluation system.
Functions of the CEGC as per the Act:
(a) Establish a central evaluation and monitoring system;
(b) Advise the Central Government on all matters concerning the implementation of 
the Act;
(c) Review the monitoring and redressal mechanism from time to time and 
recommend improvements required;
(d) Promote the widest possible dissemination of information about the Schemes 
under the Act;
(e) Monitoring the implementation of the Act; 
(f) Preparation of annual reports to be laid before Parliament by the Central 
Government on the implementation of the Act; and
(g) Any other duty or function assigned by the Central Government.
Further, the Act provides that the CEGC shall have the power to undertake evaluation of the 
various schemes made under this Act and for that purpose collect statistics pertaining to the 
rural economy and the implementation of the Scheme.

Chapter 11 - Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanisms
105Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
The Ministrystated thatmonitoring and evaluation atCentrallevel wasbeing done through Web 
based Monitoring Information System and regular evaluation studies were being conducted by
National Institutional Network comprising IITs,TT IIMs, AgricultureUniversities, NIIT, TTICSSR and 
relatedinstitutions, etc.T heMinistry hadbeen constantlymonitoringthedataentered by the
states/UTs TTon Web basedMonitoring Information System during PRC meetings,Regional Review
meetings and through visitsbyareaofficerff s.Further,rthereports submitted byvarious Institutes
were shared among CEGCmembersfollowed by field visitsto monitor the functioning of 
MGNREGS.
Thereply of the Ministrywas not convincing as the Actrecognises the CEGC as a distinct body and 
requires the Council to setup an independentmonitoringand evaluation mechanism. The 
current practicecannot be asubstituteto themechanism envisagedundert heAct.
It was also noticed that the CEGCp layed avery limited role asfaras monitoring of the Scheme was
concerned. The Council membersconducted atotalof 1 3field visits in six states viz.Uttar 
Pradesh (4), Gujarat(3), MadhyaPradesh (2),Odisha (2),Karnataka(1) and Rajasthan (1) during
the period under performance audit. The details are given inAnnex-11A.
Scrutinyof t herecords pertaining to t hefieldvisitsbyt heCouncil membersrevealed the 
following deficiencies:-
1.Out of atotal 13visits(threevisitsduring 2010-11and 10 visitsduring 2009-10),action
taken reports from only two stategovernments viz.UttarPradesh (Mahoba) and Gujarat
(Dahod), werereceived as of October 2012. This was despitethefactthatthe membersin 
their field reports pointed out casesof suspected frauds among other serious irregularities. 
This indicatesineffffectivefollow-up bytheCouncil.
2.Auditobserved arbitrarinessin theprocessand functioningof CEGCastheydid not adopt 
anydefinedprocedurefor selection of thestatesfor field visitsto be conducted bythe
members.T he Council in its reply (May2012)to the audit observation admitted thata
need wasfeltto laydown aprocedurefor visitsof CEGC membersto thestates.Aswas
evidentfrom an analysisof the13field visitsundertaken, members had been repeatedly
visiting particular states. 
3.The reports of thevisitsoraction taken reports on thesevisitsby thestate governments
were generally not broughtup for discussionin the Council's meetings.
In response, theMinistrystated(September 2012) thataseparatefile for eachv isitof theCouncil 
Memberswas maintained. Thesefiles includefollow up correspondence with respectivestate 
governments. The reports submitted byCEGCmemberswere sentto the stategovernments for 
their comments and action including corrective measures. In caseof serious irregularities, the
Ministry had deputed NationalLevel Monitors(NLMs) to investigateand submit report to the 
Ministry. The Ministryfurther stated thatissues raised bythe Council members and their
observations during field visitswere also reviewed in the Performance Review Committee (PRC) 
meetings, during field visit byA reaOfficerff ,rRegionalReview meetings, visitsby officerff sof the
Ministryand in Empowered Committee meetings on labour budget.

Chapter 11 - Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanisms
Report No. 6 of 2013
106Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Ministry'sreply wasnot convincing asitfailsto recognise CEGCasan independententityand
moreover itdoes not provide thefinal action taken on these reports, despite adequate time 
having been given.
The abovefactsreveal that aproper monitoring and evaluation mechanism had not been evolved 
bytheCouncil and comprehensive monitoring of implementation of the Act was not undertaken, 
thus defeating the purposefor which the Councilwasconstituted.
Thereason forthed eficiencies noticed inthe Council may, yyin part,be attributed to thenon-
functioning of the ExecutiveCommittee as definedin theNational Rural EmploymentGuarantee
(Central Council) Rules 2006. TheExecutive Committee was supposed togiveeffffectto the 
decisions of the Council, appointexpert groupsfor technical support and advise to improvethe 
quality of implementation of the Act and manage the administrative and financial affffairs of the 
Council. 
Audit observed thatthough the ExecutiveCommitteewasconstituted, only four meetings of the
Committeewere held during 2007-08 and 2008-09. Thereafter, rno meetings of the Committee,as
required under section 10(2) of CentralCouncil R ules 2006,took place. Thus, the Executive 
Committeedidnot function inaccordance with therules.Further,rtheCouncilwasdeprived of a
bodywhich would giveeffffectto its decision.  
A related consequence of the Council not havingadministrativesupport can be seenfrom the fact
that there waspoor managementand monitoring of the CEGC'sown financial affffairs. The Council 
hadbeen utilizing funds from its initial corpus of `fivecroregivento itin 2006-07and hadnever 
demanded annual grants thereafter. rrThe Councildid not even maintain a cashbookto record 
transactions of itsfunctioning.  
In its reply, yytheMinistrystated (November 2012)thatExecutiveCommitteeof theCEGChad been 
constituted.  
In the absence of the envisaged support to the Council, it was evident that the Council's role in 
monitoring and evaluation of the Schemewasgrossly inadequate.
For complaints of aserious nature, the Ministrydeputes National Level Monitors(NLMs)to
investigatethecomplaints. Reportsof the NLMs areshared with theconcerned state 
governmentsfor taking correctiveaction.
TheMinistryhad evolved asystem of NLMs byinvolving retired Governmentofficerff sand 
academicians, willing to provide voluntaryservicesfor apubliccause. The basic premisewas that
byinvolving third party independent monitors, unbiased and objective monitoring could be
achieved.
The Ministrydesigned formatsfor m o n itoring bythe NLMs. The Ministryalso formulated 
Guidelines for inspection byNLMs. The Guidelines state that thereshould bequarterly visitsof 
NLMsto thedistricts to monitor allthe importantRural Developmentprogrammes.I twas
11.2.2 National Level Monitors 

107Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
envisaged thatapproximately 150districtswould becovered in eachsuch round. This would 
imply that all districts of the countrywereto be covered in a year.rr
Scrutinyof records revealed thatregular monitoring attheCentrallevel through NLMs could not 
cover all the districts of the country in the years 2007-08 to 2010-11. Out of 622 districts in the
country where MGNREGA wasbeing implemented, NLM could cover only 171, 225,251 and 479
districts during theyears2007-08,2008-09,2009-10and2010-11 respectively. The details are 
given inAnnex11B.Further,r39 districtsin18stateswere not covered even once bythe NLMs till
2010-11. The details are given inAnnex-11C.
Att he Central level, thecomplaints received byMoRDareenquired into byNLMs who submit 
their reportsto the MoRD.MoRD requests theconcerned stategovernmentsto examine the
matter a nd furnish adetailed action taken report.Outof thetotal85casefiles relating to 
complaintsregardingmisappropriation of funds/ corruption in implementationof MGNREGS
thatwerecalled forbyAudit,only21files weremade available. Itwasnoticedthat in eightcases, 
action on reports of NLMs were pending as of October 2012, on the part of stategovernment
ranging from 13to 46months.In seven cases, final outcome/ statusregarding initiating action 
againsterringofficerff sviz.recoveries,filing of appropriateFIRs,waspending from 19to 35
months. In sixcases, thecomplaintswerefound to be false and unverifiable. Ministryhad not 
specifiedanytime frame within which action wasto be taken bythestategovernments.
In response to five casesout of total 21cases,Ministrystated (January2013) thatithad directed 
theconcernedstategovernmentsto submit action taken report and in mostof the cases, action 
takenreport wasstill awaited. 
11.2.3 Ineffective Follow-up Action on NLM Reports
Chapter 11 - Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanisms
Case Study: NLM Inquiry in Uttar Pradesh
Shri Bharat Singh and Shri Rajeev Kumar Singh of district Chandauli, UP requested for a high 
level enquiry into certain irregularities in implementation of MGNREGS.  Sh. G R Gupta was 
deputed as the National Level Monitor (NLM) during 5-9 July 2010 to look into the 
irregularities reported. 
The NLM made investigations and reported that the complaints were false. However, Shri 
Bharat Singh made a further representation in July 2010 raising objections on the findings of 
the NLM and alleged that the NLM had reported with malafide intentions and presented 
fake reports by taking bribe.   
A team {(i) Consultant Works, MGNREGA division, MoRD (ii) another NLM and (iii) Sr . Dy 
Commissioner, Rural Development Division, Government of Uttar Pradesh} was thereafter 
deputed to conduct a fresh inquiry in the matter from 20-24 December 2010. The team 
found seven out of 10 allegations to be correct and three to be false.
As financial irregularities were established, the Ministry on 20 March 2012 again sought 
clarification from the state government whether criminal proceedings and departmental 
enquiry had been initiated against those found guilty in addition to the recovery of the 
amount. 

Since the state government had not taken action either by filing FIR or by initiating 
departmental enquiry against responsible officers, the Ministry again asked the state 
government on 13 September 2012 to take steps and furnish fresh action taken report as 
early as possible. However, no further action was taken as of October 2012.
Thus, not only did the NLM furnish an unreliable report initially but even after lapse of one 
year and nine months from receipt of fresh enquiry report, action was pending on the part 
of state government.   The Ministry also did not take any effective measures in terms of 
issuing directions under section 27 of the Act to the state government.
Chapter 11 - Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanisms
108Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
11.2.4 Monitoring by National Quality Monitors 
11.3 State Level Monitoring and Evaluation
11.3.1 State Employment Guarantee Council 
According to the monitoring methods prescribed in the Operational Guidelines (para 10.3.2) of 
the Scheme,verification and quality audit should also be undertaken byexternal monitors. 
External monitorsarerequired to undertake monitoring atthecentral, state and district levels.
For thispurpose, National QualityMonitors (NQM) attheNational level wereto be designated by 
MoRD witht heapprovalof theCentralCouncil.
The Ministrys tated thatithad engaged NLMs toconduct independent evaluation of the 
processesin theimplementation of MGNREGSaswell asquality monitoring of works. 
Thereplyfailed to recognise thatNQMs wereto be appointed for a specific purpose i.e., quality 
auditof worksunder MGNREGS.T he system of NLMs was mainly startedwith theaim of looking 
into complaints received and to carryout general monitoring of all the schemesoperated by the
Ministrywhilevisiting adistrict. NLMs were notrequired to carryout quality audit of worksnor 
wereanynorms fixed for theactivity. Hence, thesystem of NLMs wasnot asubstitutefor NQMs 
whichweresupposed to carryout aspecific task under theOperational Guidelines.  
Asn oted in Chart-11monitoring of the implementation of the Schemeatthe state a n d  
implementation levelswasto be carried out bythe StateEmploymentGuaranteeCouncil, State
Quality Monitors, mandatoryinternal verification of works, Vigilance and Monitoring
Committees (VMCs) and social audits. The shortcomings noticedin the monitoring mechanism in 
thestatesare discussedbelow.
The Act stipulatessetting up of State EmploymentGuarantee Council (SEGC) atthestatel evelfor 
regular monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of the Scheme. The role of theSEGCin
astatewasanalogous to thatof the CEGC in the Centre.

Chapter 11 - Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanisms
109Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Audit observed thatthough all stateshad setup SEGCs,following shortcomings werenoticedin 
the functioning of theS EGCs:
1.In 10statesviz. Goa, Gujarat,Haryana, Jharkhand,Karnataka,Mizoram, Punjab, Sikkim, 
Uttrakhand and WestBengal, SEGCswerenot constituted withinprescribed period. Union 
TerritTT ory of Dadra &NagarHaveli had not constituted theCouncil till December, r2012.
2.TheSEGCs of KarnatakaandMaharashtraprepared annual reportsfor theyears2006-07to 
2011-12 and 2008-09 to 2009-10 respectively.These reports were not laid before the 
respectiveState Legislatures.
In itsreply, yythe Ministrystated thatanadvisoryoneffffectivefunctioning of SEGC had been issued 
toallstates/UTsTTand functioning of SEGCwasaregular agenda item for review in thePerformance
Review Committee(PRC) meetings and Regional Review meetings held bythe Ministry.
As per para10.3.1 of the Operational Guidelines, thefollowingquarterly targets were fixedfor 
internal verification of worksatthefield level byofficial ff functionaries:
100 per centof theworksatthe block level
10 per centof the worksat thedistrict level
two per centof theworks at thestate level
11.4 Internal Verification of Works at Field Level
n
n
n
Role and functions of the SEGC:
(a) Advising the state government on all matters concerning the Scheme and its 
implementation;
b) Determining the preferred works;
c) Reviewing the monitoring and redressal mechanisms and recommending 
improvements;
d) Promoting dissemination of information about the Act and the Scheme;
e) Monitoring the implementation of the Act and coordination with the Central 
Council;
f) Preparing the annual reports to be laid before the state legislature; and 
g) Any other duty or function assigned to it by the Central Council or the state 
government. 
The Council shall have the power to undertake an evaluation of the Scheme operating in the 
state and for that purpose to collect statistics pertaining to the rural economy and the 
implementation of the Scheme in the state.

Chapter 11 - Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanisms
Report No. 6 of 2013
110Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
analysisrevealed thatin seven statesand oneUT viz.ArunachalPradesh,Chhattisgarh, Goa, 
Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, UttarPradesh and Puducherry, yythereweredeficiencies in 
record keeping about the inspections described above. Details aregiven inAnnex-11D. In the
absence of proper records it was not possible to verify the achievement with regard to internal 
verification.
Further, rin 11 states, therewereshortfalls in the inspections of works inrespect of targets fixed in 
the Guidelines, asspecified above. The shortfall ranged between 82 and 100per centat state
level, 37and 76per centatt he districtlevel and 2and 71per centattheblock level.The details are 
given inAnnex-11E.
The Ministrystated thatto verifyphysical existence of work, ascertain theexecution of work as 
per approved plan and estimate,checkusage of machineryandengagementof contractors,etc.,
census of MGNREGSworkswas undertaken byNational Instituteof RuralDevelopment(NIRD) in 
onedistrict eachin AndhraPradesh(Vizianagaram), MadhyaPradesh (Umaria), Odisha (Deogarh) 
and Rajasthan (Sirohi).
Thereply of the Ministrydoes not addressthe issue of weakness in internal verification of works.
Further, rthestudy conducted byNational Instituteof RuralDevelopmentwasfor only four 
districts.
For thepurpose of verification and quality audit,StateQualityMonitors(SQM) at thestatelevel 
weretobe designated bythestategovernment with the approval of the statecouncil. Each
districtwas also to identifyDistrict Quality Monitors(DQM) with theapprovalof thestate 
government(para10.3.2of theOperational Guidelines).
Scrutiny of records revealed thatbothSQMsand DQMswere not appointed in six statesviz.
ArunachalPradesh, Bihar,rJharkhand, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tamil TT Nadu while in threeother 
states Assam, Karnatakaand Meghalaya SQMswerenot appointed.Further, rin Jammu & Kashmir 
(in Poonchdistrict),UttarPradeshand WestBengalDQM were not appointed.
The Ministrystated thatQualityMonitoring Systemsin stateswerereviewed in thePRCmeetings.
In thePRCmeeting held on 15-16October 2012, all statesweredirectedto expedite Quality
Monitoring System andupload all SQMreportsonwebsites.
Even afterseven yearsof implementation of the Scheme, theprocessof monitoring through SQM
and DQM was ineffffective.
In termsof para10.1.2 of theOperational Guidelines, for everywork sanctioned u nder the
Scheme, thereshouldbe alocal Vigilance and Monitoring Committee(VMC), comprising nine 
membersof the localityor villagewherethework wasundertaken, to monitor theprogressand 
11.5 Appointment of State and District Quality Monitors 
11.6 Vigilance and Monitoring Committees 

111Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
quality of work while it was in progress. Gram sabhas were to elect the members of the 
Committee and Programme Officers were responsible for ensuring that the local VMCs were 
constituted. The final report of the Committee was required to be attached along with the
Completion Certificate of the work.
It was observed that VMCs were not appointed in six states amounting to 24per cent of test t
checked GPs where the work was in progress (Annex-11F).    In case of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar and 
Odisha, in almost all test checked GPs, VMCs were not constituted.
Further, in Goa (Pernem block) and Dadra & Nagar Haveli, VMC reports were not available with 
the completion report of the work.   Thus, the functioning of VMCs in these areas was doubtful.
In addition to the monitoring mechanisms mentioned above, the Act and the Guidelines had also 
mandated a separate set of mechanisms to be put in place for increased transparency and
accountability in the implementation of the Scheme. These are outlined in the table below:
11.7 Transparency and Accountability
Chapter 11 - Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanisms
Grievance RedressalProactive Disclosures Citizens CharterSocial Audits
Annual reports on 
outcomes to be laid 
in    Parliament and 
State Legislatures in
the Centre and the 
states/ UTs,
respectively.
Social audits of all 
works and activities
carried out by GPs 
under MGNREGS
A grievance redressal 
cell to be set up at 
block and district 
level,  to be 
monitored by an 
Ombudsman
To set standards of 
performance of 
officials involved in
the implementation
Table 17: Transparency and accountability
11.8 Social Audit
MGNREGA gives a central role to social audits as means of continuous public accountability. 
Section 17 of the Act requires the gram sabhas to regularly conduct social audits of all the projects
under the Scheme taken up within the gram panchayat. Further, as per para 12.4.1 of the 
Operational Guidelines, gram sabha were required to convene periodic assemblies as a part of 
the process of the social audit.  This was referred to as 'social audit forum'. As per the Operational 
Guidelines, these forums were to be held at least once every six months and to conduct the social
audit as per the mandatory minimum agenda. The Operational Guidelines also require that wide 
publicity regarding the date, time and agenda should be given and all records be made available
for social audit.  All officials responsible for implementation must be present in social audit forum
to answer queries from the members of the Gram Sabha.

Chapter 11 - Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanisms
Report No. 6 of 2013
112Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
11.8.1 Social Audit Units
n
n
n
n
n
11.8.2 Shortfall in Conducting Social Audits
11.8.3 Non Adherence to the Provisions for Social Audit Forum Meetings 
The Ministrystrengthened t heprovisions for socialaudit bynotifyingMGNREGA Audit of 
Schemes Rules, 2011. These rules required the stategovernments to identifyor establish an 
independent organization, called the socialaudit unitto facilitateconduct of social audit bythe 
gram sabhas. The functions of the socialaudit units wereto: 
build capacities of gram sabhasfor conducting social audit, prepare social audit reporting
formats,resourcematerial, guidelinesand manuals for thesocial audit process;
createawarenessamongst the labourersabout their rights and entitlements underthe Act;
facilitate verification of records with primarystakeholdersandworksites;
facilitatesmooth conduct of socialaudit bygramsabhasfor reading out and finalizing 
decisionsafter due discussions; and,
hostthe social audit reports including action taken reports in thep ublic domain.
During audit, itwas noted that thestate governments of 10 states and four UTsTTviz. Arunachal 
Pradesh,Assam,Goa, Gujarat,Haryana,Meghalaya,Nagaland,Tamil TT Nadu, Uttrakhand, West
Bengal, Andaman & Nicobar islands,Dadra&NagarHaveli, Lakshadweep and Puducherry had 
not constituted social audit units.
In thecaseof Odisha, to facilitatesocial audit,the stategovernmenthad constituted an 
autonomous society called Odisha Societyfor Social A udit, Accountability and Transparency 
(OSSAAT) AA in April 2012, while in thecase of Sikkim, thework related to socialaudit unit had been 
assigned to NGOs.
Inresponseto thedeficiencies pointed out inconducting social audits, the Ministry stated thatit
had issuedadetailedadvisoryon social audit of MGNREGA works for all North-Eastern statesin 
July 2012.Also theMinistryhad written to all states/UTsTTinAugust2012 for establishing social 
audit units.
As noted, thegram sabhawas to conduct regular social audits of all projects/worksunder the 
Scheme within the GP. It wPP as noticed in Audit that in 11 states and one UT, social audit wTT as not
conducted asper norms resultingin shortfall.  The detailsaregiven in Annex- 11G. 
The Ministryreplied thatithadpermitted states/UTsTT(August 2012) to spendup to one per cent
within sixper centpermissible limit for administrative charge under MGNREGA for setting up 
social audit unit. 
Asper para12.5.2 of theOperational Guidelines, the socialaudit forum mustselectaperson from 
outsidethepanchayatto chair its meetings whichmustnot be chaired bythe panchayat
presidentor ward member.rrThe secretaryof theforumwasto be an official ff from outside theGP.PP

113Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
During audit, itwasnoticed thattheseprovisions were not observed in respectof 34GPsin Kerala
and one GP (Ketuapal) in Odisha.
Asper para 11.5 of the Operational Guidelines, acopy of all Audit Reports including social audit 
reportswereto  be sentto thestategovernment concerned, to ensure speedy action.
Itwasobserved that in 163GPsin two statesand one UT namely Haryana,Odisha and Andaman&
Nicobar Islands, action taken reports were not available. Moreover, rin Haryana and Andaman &
Nicobar Islands, in all testchecked GPs,action taken report on social audit was not available. 
11.8.4 Action Taken on Social Audits 
11.8.5 District Internal Audit Cell
Asperpara11.3.6 of theOperational Guidelines, in order to processreports of social audit bythe
gram sabha, aDistrictInternal Audit Cellin theofficeff of theDistrictProgramme Coordinator (DPC) 
wastobe constituted to scrutinizethereports of the gramsabhaand toconduct aspecial audit, 
if necessary.
In32per centtestchecked districts in nine statesand two UTs,TT internal cell for examiningsocial
auditrecords wasnot constituted asdetailed in Annex-11H.Itwasalsoobserved thatin noneof 
the test checked districts of four statesand two UTsTT (Bihar, rJharkhand, Manipur, rOdisha, 
Andaman &Nicobar Islands and Puducherry), hadinternal audit cell been constituted. 
Non-compliance with provisions by thesestates/UTsTT as indicated above posed aserious 
limitationto therole of social audit asameans of continuous public vigilance and ensuring 
transparencyand accountability.
Chapter 11 - Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanisms
Case Study:  Action taken on Social Audit in Jharkhand
Scrutiny of records of social audit of DRDA, West Singhbhum revealed that in the course of 
social audit held during July and August 2009, charges of preparation of bogus muster rolls 
and non payment of wages were levelled against different officers.  Subsequently, these 
charges were proved by the Special Investigation Team (SIT) constituted by District 
Programme Coordinator .  Further, after receipt of report of SIT penalties amounting to 
` 1,000 were levied on each of three erring officers. The DPC also recommended suspension 
of two concerned officers. However, the amount had not been recovered from erring 
officers. Further, Format K (required for framing charges) was not furnished to the 
concerned controlling department. This indicates lackadaisical follow up on the matter . On 
being pointed out by Audit, District Development Commissioner, West Singhbhum stated 
(June 2012) that action had been initiated to recover the amount from persons concerned. 

Chapter 11 - Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanisms
Report No. 6 of 2013
114Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
11.9 Grievance Redressal Mechanism
11.9.1 Delays in Disposal of Complaints 
11.9.2 Non-appointment of Ombudsman
11.10 Citizens' Charter
Aspersection 19of theAct, thestategovernmentshaveto determine appropriategrievance
redressal mechanisms at thedistrict and block levels. The Operational Guidelines requirethe 
Programme Officer ff (PO) and the District Programme Coordinator (DPC) to be the Grievance
RedressalOfficerff s at theblock and district levels respectively. The grievances areto be 
acknowledged and disposal intimatedto thepetitioner.rrDetails of grievanceredressalare to be 
uploadedon the Internet on aweekly basis.Further,rin September 2009, GoI directed all state/UT 
governmentsto establish, within threemonths,offices ff of Ombudsmen asan independent
mechanismfor redressal of MGNREGA-related grievances.
Audit observed that in seven states, Assam,Bihar,rChhattisgarh, Karnataka, MadhyaPradesh,
Punjab and UttarP radesh, 17per centof totalcomplaintcases received werepending for 
settlementasdetailed in Annex-11I.Further,rin AndhraPradeshtwo casesof year2009 and 64
casesof year2010 werestill pendingandin Punjab delaysindisposal of complaintsrangingfrom 1
to673 dayswasobserved.  
The Ministryunder section 27of theAct,had directed (September 2009)the states/UTsTT to 
appointoneormoreperson, but not morethan three persons, astheOmbudsman in a district,
within threemonthsfrom thed ateof theorder.rrThe Ombudsman wasto be an independent
grievance enquiryauthority empowered to issuedirectionsforconductingspotinvestigations, 
lodgeFIRs against the erring parties as well as directredressal, disciplinaryand punitive action.
Audit observed thatGovernmentsof two statesandtwo UTs,TT Arunachal Pradesh, UttarPradesh, 
Dadra&NagarHaveli and Puducherryhad not appointed Ombudsmen. Ombudsmen in 12outof 
27 districtsof Assam,seven out of 21districtsof Haryanaand one outof seven districtsof 
Meghalayawere not appointed.In Jammu &Kashmir,rin Poonch districtOmbudsmanwasnot 
appointed. Similarly in Bihar,rthestategovernment had appointed Ombudsmen, in only 13 out of 
38 districts. The Governmentof Kerala and Tripura appointed Ombudsmen in Mayand June 2012
respectively.Non appointment/delayedappointmentof Ombudsman in the abovestates/UTsTT
adversely affffected the grievance redressal mechanism and disposal of complaints pertaining to 
theScheme implementation.
The Ministryreplied(November 2012)thatAssamhad appointed Ombudsmen in 22out of 27
districts but it was observed that asper notification dated 15 November 2011, Ombudsmen were
appointedin only 12districts.
As per para11.6 of theOperational Guidelines, amodel Citizens'C harterwasto be developed 
covering all aspects of theduties of panchayats and officials ff under the Act. The citizens' charter 

Good Practice: Andhra Pradesh
Government of Andhra Pradesh had issued (January 2012) a circular, specifying the 
timelines for completion of various tasks, the responsible functionaries, and the method for 
calculating starting and ending dates for computation of delay. In the case of delay beyond 
the specified periods, 0.3 per cent of wages delayed per day was to be recovered from the 
functionaries and automatically transferred to the labourers' account; recoveries were to 
be approved by Project Director, District Water Management Agency within 24 hours of 
receipt of the list of deductions.
115Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
11.11 Impact Assessment
Accordingto para 10.4 of theOperational Guidelines, theoutlaysfor MGNREGShad to be 
transformed i nto certainoutcomes.Regular evaluations and samplesurveysof specific 
MGNREGSworkswereto be conductedto assess the outcomes.The broad guidelines for 
evaluation studies, including MGNREGSassessmentcriteria, wereto be framed bySEGC. Further, r
SEGCwasto develop itsown evaluation system in collaboration with research Institutionsof 
reputeandreview evaluations conductedbyother agencies (para10.4.4of Operational
Guidelines). Evaluation through agencieson parametersapproved byt heCEGCwasto be 
undertaken.T he findings of t heevaluation studies wereto be usedbySEGC, the district
panchayats and other institutions for initiating correctiveaction.Further, rthe Council wasto 
preparean AnnualReport on the implementation of the MGNREGSin the stateto be presented to
the StateLegislature.
Asdiscussedearlier (para11.2.1)atthe Central level, theCEGCwasresponsible not only for 
setting up a central monitoring and evaluation mechanism but alsoto actually monitor the 
implementation of the Scheme. Itwasnoticed thatthe Council in spiteof its sixyearsof existence
had not taken steps to establish a central evaluation and monitoring system. The CEGC did not
takeanystepsto fix parameters for conducting theevaluation studies, asrequired in the
Operational Guidelines.
The Ministryreplied that it had impactassessment/evaluation studies conducted through
reputed Institutions and forwarded alistof 50 such studies.
shoulddescribe thespecific stepsinvolved in implementing theprovisionsof the Act,and lay
down the minimum service levels mandated bythese provisions on the panchayats and the
officerff sconcerned. 
Scrutiny of records however, rrevealed that the state governments of eight states and one UT viz.
Assam, Haryana, Jharkhand, Manipur, Odisha, Punjab, Sikkim, Wr est Bengal, and Dadra & Nagar
Haveli had not developed the citizens' charter and as aresult MGNREGSin these states had been 
implemented without specific duties and time framesfor execution. 
Chapter 11 - Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanisms

Chapter 11 - Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanisms
Report No. 6 of 2013
116Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
However, the Central evaluation and monitoring system by CEGC was to have a national
perspective and none of the studies covered the entire country nor did they have a uniform
objective or even uniform criteria to judge the impact of the Scheme. Also, these studies were 
commissioned by the Ministry and not by CEGC.
It was also seen during audit that in none of the states was a regular system of evaluations put in 
place by the SEGCs. Also, very few states had carried out evaluation studies and most of them 
were restricted to a few districts. It was seen that in eight states and one UT , namely, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Odisha, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, and 
Puducherry, the concerned SEGCs had not commissioned evaluation studies to gauge the impact
and implementation of the Scheme in the state. 
Recommendations:
n
n The Ministry or CEGC may consider undertaking a national level, comprehensive, 
independent evaluation of the Scheme.
The CEGC and the Ministry need to ensure intensive monitoring of the Scheme for its 
proper implementation. They need to design a system for verification and audit of work.

117Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
12.1 Introduction
n
n
n
n
n
n
The Operational Guidelines envisageextensive use of information technology (IT) in planning, 
execution and monitoring of all the vital aspects of theScheme.Use of IT has been specified in all 
thestages,viz.,
planningtoexecution of projects/worksundertaken;
enrolmentto employment and paymentto workers;and
transferof funds  to accounting of expenditure.
IT tools wereto be used for increasing efficiency ff and enhancing transparency of operations.The 
Operational Guidelines further elaborate that IT would be used in the areas of communication, 
access to information, grievance redressaland in monitoring and evaluation. It was also thought
that a  database of works,resourcerequirements, registered households, paymentof wages,
persondaysof employmentprovided and funds received andexpended atdifffferentlevelswould 
becreatedasacrucial partof theIT initiative under theScheme.
National InformaticsCentre(NIC) was engaged bytheMinistryin 2005to develop asystem to 
fulfill theabove IT requirements. Thisweb based softwareor Monitoring and Information 
1
System working through the Scheme'sofficialff portalprovides facilitiessuch asdataentry, yy
authorization (of worksand expenditure), and monitoring and commoninformation access to all 
thestakeholdersand functionaries of theScheme.N ICstated thatall theinformation related to 
the Scheme wasbeing managed onlinethrough thissystem whichwascurrentlygenerating
approximately one GBd atadaily, yyasinputfrom thestakeholders.The database hasatotal volume 
of abouttwo terabytes of data.
The importanceof theMonitoring and Information System/NREGASoft can be seenfrom the 
application of theinformation contained in thes oftware.These include:
internal monitoring bythe Ministry;
fund releaseto thestates/districts;
response to Parliamentaryquestions;
IT Audit of NREGASoft
Chapter
12
1 
http://www.nrega.nic.in

Chapter 12 - IT Audit of NREGASoft
118Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
oluntarydisclosuresand providing information under RTI.
In addition, the MIS was the only source of consolidated information onthe Schemewhich was
readily available in thepublicdomain.NREGASoft waswidely used byt hebeneficiaries, research
organizations, academicians and other stakeholders.
AnInformation Technology TT Audit (IT Audit) of thissoftware wasundertaken asapart of 
performanceaudit of the MGNREGSto examine whether the software is:
(i) able to incorporateall thenecessarycontrols anduser roles;
(ii) able to ensureproperaccountability of all thefunctionariesmaking/ authorising entry; 
(iii)able to correctlyrecord and report all thefactsabout physicalp r o gressin areasof works
undertaken, workersengaged, wages paid, assetscreated and income generated;
(iv)able to correctlyrecord andreport financial figuresand whetherthefinancial figures
recorded by the softwarecorroborate thedata of physical progress; and  
(v) being used by all the stakeholders in the manner required for proper functioning of the
Scheme as per the Act.
As thesystem was primarily based on inputs byusersthrough thewebsite atdifffferentlevelsof the
implementation hierarchy, yytheSchemewebsite was examined with a
view to gain knowledgeof thevolume,veracity and velocity of information flow.Input forms on 
thewebsitewere examined to ascertain whether theseprovide i nformation/ capabilities 
necessaryfor normal functioningof auserfor itsrole inthe implementation hierarchy.Itwasalso
examinedto seewhether the software wasable to protect privacyof information held by
difffferentusers. Input forms werealso checked to ascertain presence of inputcontrols tofilter out 
datanotconforming to valid values. 
Datagenerated in the implementation process of the Scheme getscollected in NIC servers and is
used for preparingall the summaryreportsavailable on theNREGASoft website. This data is also
used for generating information necessary for monitoring and evaluation of the vital aspects of 
the Scheme.Relevant tables of the databasewerechecked byAudit to ascertain accuracy of 
information being used for thedecision making process. The following aspectswerecovered
duringthe dataanalysis.
n
n
12.2 Objectives of IT audit
12.3 IT Audit Methodology 
12.3.1 Examination of Website 
http://www.nrega.nic.in
12.3.2 Examination of Data 
generating data for variousperformance reports likeMGNREGASameeksha;and

Chapter 12 - IT Audit of NREGASoft
119Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
a.teststo checkwhethervarious interrelated elementsof dataconform to accounting logic.
b.tests to checkwhether various elements of datadepict valid information registering 
actualprogress of work.
Membersof the NIC teamresponsible for development, maintenance and upkeep of thissystem 
wereinterviewed andweregiven questionnairesthrough audit memos for ascertainingtheir 
awareness about risksrelated to consistency,yyfault tolerance, scalability,yyefficiency ff and economy
of a database system of this scale.  It was also ascertained from the NIC team if the system was
ableto withstand common threats posed bymoderndayinternet public domain environment.
Inorder toascertainaccountability and fix responsibility in dataentry/authorisation tasks,the 
Operational Guidelines specifythat"There should beasystem of authentication of datato clearly 
identify ffthe person who preparesand scrutinises the data and thedate on whichsuchdata is
prepared and scrutinized."To TT fulfil this operational requirement"entryby" Column (in all the
major tables) and"authorised by" column (inRegistrations and ApplicantsTables) TT werecreated
at the stageof designing the software. However,rduring examination of datarelating to work 
progress, it wasnoticed thatin substantiallylargenumber of recordsviz.,56,24,004records in 20
states, (Annex-12A)thesecolumns wereeither left blank orhad been filled with ambiguous data
suchas"Guest","TesTT t","Computer IP address", numbersor single/double alphabets,etc. Thus, it
wasnot possible to identifyusersand to tracebacktransactionsto theoriginator.rrThe software 
did nothaveasystem to uniquely identifyall usersand ensurethatdataentrywaspermitted only
to authorisedusers.Hence,itwould be verydifficult ff to fixanyresponsibility for erroneous data
entry– deliberateor otherwise. This indicated aweakcontrol arising from aserious flaw in 
software designand implementation.  
The Ministrystated thatNREGASoft application visualized unique "user id" and password for 
stakeholder institutions andcontained amechanism to captureidentityof institution and entry
date. Further, r"entryby"field existedin the system for institutions with multipleusers. While 
recognising theproblem of incorrect/ambiguous users,the Ministrystated thatan offline ff module
and onlinemechanism of tracking IP addressalong with "entryby"were enoughto takecareof 
audit observations.
Thereply of the Ministrywasnot in consonance with the Operational Guidelines which clearly
envisageidentification of person responsible for preparing andscrutinisingdata. This wasnot 
possiblefrom thepresentdatarecorded by NREGASoft. Additional provision of IP address
trackingcan onlyprovidelocation of dataentryor authorisation and itwasnot amethodfor
identifyingusers. Under thecircumstances,therewasariskof collusion between a few 
stakeholdersfor fudging source data.
12.3.3 Observation and Interview 
12.4 Audit Findings
12.4.1 Ambiguous Users Entering/Authorising Data

Chapter 12 - IT Audit of NREGASoft
Report No. 6 of 2013
120Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
12.4.2 Invalid Beneficiary, Works and Work Progress Details
n
n
n
Large online databases, like the NREGASoft, usually have a largenumber of validations and checks
which work in the background. The purpose of such checksis to:
ensurethat only completeand valid informationentered thedatabase;
throw upwarnings whenever erroneous datawas entered; and
generate periodic reports on thevalidity and authenticity of d ata on pre-determined 
parameters.
Analysisof datacontained in NREGASoft revealedthatthesoftwarenot only accepted invalid and 
incompleteinformation but also failed togenerateanyalerts on occurrence of such an event. 
Following instanceswerenoticed duringaudit:
The Ministrystated thatthe NREGASoft wasUnicode enabled which provides support to local 
languagesand useskeystrokesother than [a-z] character set. Hence itwas not possible to restrict
the fieldto [a-z] character set.Due to thisfeature special characters sometimesgot added to the 
names without the knowledgeof data entryoperator.rrWhile recognising possibility of multiple
jobcards with samename, theMinistrystated thatareport existed in thesystem to identifyand 
report thesecasesto stategovernments.
Thereply of the Ministryfailsto explainexistenceof single or double letternames,sometimes
containing specialcharactersonly(Annex-12B). M oreover,rthereply of theMinistry that special 
charactersgetadded to nameseven without knowledgeof dataentryoperatorsindicatesa
seriousdesign defecti ndataentrymodule. Namesof beneficiaries having special characters
cannot be electronically verifiedwith other sourcesof dataor bank record. Byusing thisdata, it
wouldalso not be possible toidentify multiple jobcards erroneously issued to samebeneficiaries
as anamewould never match name with specialcharacters.
n Ambiguous/invalid names (containing either numbers or special characters) of 
registered beneficiaries (1,23,849 records in 18 states). Details are given in Annex-12B.  
Thus, it would not be possible in these cases to cross verify names of registered persons 
with other databases such as Election Commission, Census, BPL Census, etc.  The data, in 
these cases, was also unsuitable to check instances of same beneficiaries obtaining 
registration more than once.
n Audit observed missing/invalid house numbers (6,42,14,836 instances in 19 states) of 
registered households. Details are given in Annex-12C. In the absence of valid house 
numbers, it would not be possible to ensure physical availability of beneficiaries.  The 
data, in these cases, was unsuitable to check whether the registered beneficiary was a 
local resident, as was required under the Act. 

121Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Chapter 12 - IT Audit of NREGASoft
The Ministrystated thatthefield'house number'had not been kept mandatoryin the system as
in some villages, there may be houses without numbers.Further, rvillage code, panchayat code, 
block code and districtcode which are partof job card numberswereenough to depict residential
status of beneficiary. 
The Ministry'sreply that some villagesmayhave houses without house numbers does not appear 
correct as the number of missing/invalid house numbers (over six crore) indicate that thisdata
was not being entered / erroneously enteredin a large per centof cases. Absence of valid house 
numbersrender the dataunsuitable for immediatesurvey of beneficiaries and, coupled with 
invalid/ambiguous names, itmakesthe system susceptibleto the risk of non entitled persons 
gettingbenefit of theS cheme.
The Ministrystated thatthefields 'khatanumber' and 'plot number'hadnot been kept 
mandatoryin the system as some workswere also being done in fields which had not been 
surveyed. While recognising theproblem of duplicateworks,Ministryhad stated that fields for 
latitude/longitude or theworksite had been providedwhich werebeingrecorded on a pilot basis
in17,226worksinGujarat.
The Ministry'sreply didnot fullyacknowledgethe issueraisedbyAudit. The largenumbersof 
works without 'khatanumber' /'plot number' indicatethattheproblem wasnot limited to some 
works thatwerebeing carried out in fieldsnot yetsurveyed. Despiterecognised riskof duplicate 
works and availability of costeffffectiveGPScoordinate recording tools, pilot projectinvolving only 
onestateindicatealackadaisical approach in mitigating arecognised risk. Datain itspresent
form wasnot suitable for anysurveyof worksactuallyundertaken or checking instancesof same
work being shown ascarried out atsame place repeatedly.
The Ministry stated that it was technically possible to have duplicate financial sanction number
but itcategorically stated thattherecould be no situation where financial sanction number was
absent.  
n Cases of missing plot number/ 'khata' number of the work in progress (53,08,149 
instances in 20 states) were observed.  Details are given in Annex-12D. In the absence of 
valid plot number/ 'khata' number, physical progress of works could not be verified.  
Moreover, it renders data unsuitable for checking instances of same work being carried 
out at same place repeatedly.
n Cases of missing/duplicate financial sanction number in relation to the works sanctioned 
(13,59,816 instances in 17 states) were observed. Details are given in Annex-12E.  
Absence of any checks to compulsorily require financial sanction or restrict duplicate 
financial sanction number renders the data unsuitable for mapping financial sanctions 
vis-a-vis the works carried out.  

Chapter 12 - IT Audit of NREGASoft
122Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
ever, rwhile re-examining datain thelightof the Ministry'sreply, yy46,893cases(Annex-12E)of 
missing/ambiguous (nil, 0,00 or one or two special characters)were observed in testchecked 
data.
The Ministrystated that all detailsof works including name were maintained in thework master 
table which wasaccessed byother tables using the work code. In order to meetsome functional
requirementswork name wasadded to work sanction table atlater stage. 
The reply of theMinistry wasnot convincing due to thelargenumber of missing namesasa result
of which thei ntended functional requirementswould not be fulfilled. On examination of test
data i n thelightof reply of theMinistry2 0,361 instancesduplicate/missing work codewere
observed which shows that no clear link between work and sanction could be established from 
datain thesecases(Annex-12F).
Theaboveinstancesclearlyindicateweakcontrols in the systemasaresultof insufficienff tchecks.
Absence of such checksand validations raises doubts about thereliability of thedata in theMIS.
In the absence of areliable MIS, anyconclusion drawn onthebasis of the MIS datawould be 
prone to significanterrors.
The Ministry stated that thesystem calculates amount paid to labourerson the basis of wage rate,
attendance and TA/DTT A, wherever admissible, but the field was kept editable to record instances
of actual payment,even if it was moreor less than the calculated amount. The Ministry drew 
attentionto areport which listed instanceswherewageswere paid more/less thanthe'wagerate
Xattendance +TA/DTT A' formula.
n Cases of missing work name in sanctioned works (46,06, 482 instances in 18 states) were 
observed.  In the absence of work name, physical progress of works could not be verified.  
Details are given in Annex-12F.  Moreover, it renders data unsuitable for checking 
instances of same work being shown as different works. 
n 94,56,599 instances in 18 states depicted wrong calculation of wages which could be 
worked out by applying the logic 'total Wages = Wage Rate X Work Days'.  Details are 
given in Annex-12G.
12.4.3 Faulty Programming Logic 
Acomputer based transactionrecording system contains programming elements to perform
basic calculations and crosscheckvarious interrelatedbitsof information to maintain accurate 
data.Itcan also generatealertsabout summarily i ncorrectfigures beingentered/already
entered in thedata. During the analysis of datacollecteditwasseenthatthe softwarelacked the 
programming logic even to performbasic calculations conformingto accounting logic. The 
following instancescameto notice duringthe examination of data:

Chapter 12 - IT Audit of NREGASoft
123Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
The logicbehind recordingamounts other than simple 'wagerateX attendance +TA/DTT A' formula 
was not convincing. Moreover,rtherewas a separate field for recording 'TA/DTT A' admissible to 
workers in which amount of 'TA/DTT A' could be recorded instead of merely adding it to total cash 
payment.Anycaseof non-adherenceto thementionedformula wouldindicatethatwageswere 
not paid as per theprevailingwagerate.In such a scenario, a system of immediate flagging and 
time boundreconciliation to correct theseerrors,wherevertheseoccurred, wasexpected.
The Ministrystated thatthesystem calculatesamountusing 'RateX Quantity' logicbut thefield 
hadbeenkepteditable to facilitateentryof actualf igurethatmay include other leviessuch as
VAVVTAA,TToctroi, etc. The Ministryalso drew attention to areport which listed instances where
amounts calculated did not match 'RateXQuantity'formula.
The reply of theMinistryindicatesaserious design flaw in material costrecording module of the
system asit failsto recognise all thecomponentso f  costs such asVAVVTAA,TToctroi, etc. Moreover, rit
also violatesthe legal requirementof separatetreatmentof tax elementsto enable tax 
authorities to checkinstancesof tax charged but not deposited bycollecting vendor.rrIn the
presentform of data,miscalculations inbills of material cannot be segregated fromcases where
final amountswereworked out after includingother components of material costssuch asVAVVTAA, TT
octroi, etc.
The Ministrystated thatthereweretwo types of opening balances(closing balance of previous 
yearand audited opening balance) appearing in MIS which werederived using difffferent
methodologies.The Ministryfurther stated thatin manystatesthe opening balance entered in 
theMIS for financial year2012-13also diffffered from openingbalance shown in utilization 
certificates of statesfor which corrective actionwas beingtaken.
Thereplyof Ministrywasnot convincing asadoption of difffferentmethodologies showsthe
absence of a clear accounting logic. Moreover,rthedifffferences between the opening and closing 
balances along withnon-reconciliation of such balances with the UCsrender the entirefinancial
datasuspectand unusable.
n 1,13,723 instances in eight states depicted wrong calculation of amount of material 
purchased which could be worked out by applying the logic 'Amount = Rate x Quantity'.  
Details are given in Annex-12H.
n 19,11,102 instances in 12 states depicted wrong balance or wrong entry of closing 
balance in state, district, block and Panchayat accounts tables which could be worked out 
by applying the logic 'Closing Balance = Opening Balance + All Inflow – All Outflow'.  
Details are given in Annex-12I.

Chapter 12 - IT Audit of NREGASoft
Report No. 6 of 2013
124Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Theabsenceof such basicprogramming elementsnot only increases theburden on thepersons
making thedata entry,yybut also leaves scope for arbitrary decisions bythem leadingto avoidable
errors. The large number of errors, due to the absence of programming elements,adversely
affffectthe reliabilityof thedata.T he quantum of eacherrormay be small;however, rsuch alarge
number of errors in test checked datawould imply that when seen in totality, yysmall errorswould 
haveacompoundingeffffect. 
Training was necessaryto educate theusersof the software on itscriticality, yyrelevance and the 
scope of their work and to sensitise them about possible errors and the implication of such errors
ont hewhole system. Proper trainingto dataentryoperatorswas particularly essentialasitwould 
helpavoid several simple mistakes during theconversion of paper records to computerised
records. Audit noted thatdatawas entered by personsnot awareof theworking of the
programme and whowere not conscious of the impact of common entryerrors.
During theanalysisof thedata,it wasnoted that theunits measuring the work progressin respect
of rural connectivity, yywater conservation, floodcontrol and droughtproofing, etc.were often
misunderstood bythedataentryoperatorsand entries recorded wereinconsistent. For instance,
data entryin respectto t helengthof roads made undereachwork was,attimes,done 
considering theunits askilometres and atother timesconsidering itasmetres.The figures
recorded in table ranged from less thanone to more than 1,500. Thus, if theunit wasassumedto 
be kilometresthen it would mean thattheroads measuring morethan 1,500 kmsweremade
under asingle workunder MGNREGS.I ncidentally, yythiswould bemorethan the distance 
between Delhi and Mumbai. If the unit wasassumed to be metres then itwould imply roads
measuring less than ametrewerealso made.Boththe situations would be implausible. Similarly, yy
figuresin the financial managementmoduleappeared to be in lakhand on other occasions in 
thousands of rupees.The valuesin the total distanceof roadconstructed for ruralconnectivity, yyin 
nine states, is shown in thetable below:
12.4.4 Inadequate Training to Ground Level IT Personnel
Number of RecordsRecorded Total Distance
Less than One
1 to 5
5 to 10
10 to 15
15 to 50
50 to 100
100 to 1,000
1,000 to 1,500
More than 1,500
9,25,274
2,59,928
87,703
3,408
3,199
3,397
9,618
1,279
1,121
Table-18: Stratified distances of Road as recorded for Rural Connectivity.

125Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Chapter 12 - IT Audit of NREGASoft
the above table shows,if theunit of measurementwastaken askilometres, therewere 1,121
instances of roads more than 1,500kilometres being created under MGNREGS. Similar instances
of apparent ambiguity existed in measurements recorded for water conservation, flood control 
and droughtproofing work.  
Audit thus noted that the data in NREGASoftcould not be relied uponfor understanding the 
extent of theprogressof work and to ascertain thedetailsof assetscreated.
Inreplyto theAudit observation theMinistryfurnished details of training efffforts at various levels.
Ministry also intimated thata check had been effffected to limit units which were abovework 
parameters from being entered.
However, rthe factremains thatpersons actually making dataentryand authorising this datawere 
notawareof basicelementssuch asunits of measurementused in dataentrymodulewhich had
rendered thedataunsuitable for measuringvariousperformance parameters.
The Operational Guidelines specifythat"data entry rshould be done not above theblock level and 
documentsshould not betakenkk outside theblock".The reason forthis provisionwas thatall basic
records existed attheblock or lower level.Anydataentryor modification beyondtheblock level 
wouldbe without accessto theserecords.
It wasseen during audit thatthe Ministry passedon acopy of the MIS datasets to thestate 
governmentsfor their internal useafter theclosure of dataentryfor therelevantyear.rrDuring the 
course of audit, the MIS datasetswerealso obtained from the State Rural Development
Departments,in thecaseof Karnatakaand Odisha. Comparisonof thedataprovided by the
Ministry and thatavailablewiththestategovernmentsrevealed unauthorised i nstancesof 
deletion of dataand revision of values in certain cases. Some instancesareoutlined below:
Datarelated to total amounts paidformaterial purchase pertaining to Karnatakafor the
period 2008-2011 made available bytheMinistryappeared to havebeen changed in 3,562
cases.
Int hecase of Odisha, it wasseenthatt hemusterrolldataprovidedbytheMinistryshowed 
57,780 less people as having worked when compared to the data provided by the Odisha 
StateRural DevelopmentDepartment. This also led to areduction of 6,10,331 persondays
of employmentbeing generated. An analysis of the datashowed thattherecords were
deleted at one go. This would imply thatthe deletionwas not based on fieldrecords.
Itwas seen thatsome entriesin the musterrolls which showed people working atmultiple 
job-sites simultaneouslywere also deleted from the Central MIS.Interestingly, yyin such
casesthough the job card number wasblank, the paymentcolumnstill showed the 
paymentmadeto such beneficiaries.
12.4.5 Manipulation of Data without Reference to Source Documents
n
n
n

Chapter 12 - IT Audit of NREGASoft
Report No. 6 of 2013
126Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
n
12.4.6 Absence of Controls to Prevent Data Entry Errors
many cases of underage beneficiaries, appearingin State Rural Development
Department data of Karnataka,the age of these beneficiaries had been updated to1 8years
in the database supplied by the Ministry.
TheMinistryspokeof anumberof situations necessitating changein dataatthe backendand 
admitted its awareness about non-reliability of data of NREGASoft.  Efffforts of Ministry to share 
data with states and incidences of mismatch in recordsreported bystates had also been 
elaborated bythe Ministry. The Ministryalso stated that stateDatabase Base Administrators
(DBAs) also had the righttodelete or update recordsin shared backup and theycould alsorecall 
thed eleted records. The Ministryalso mentioned incidents of change/entryin datapertainingto 
2009-10and 2010-11 werecarriedout by the stategovernmentsor on requestreceived from 
them.
A request was forwarded to the Ministry for sharing specific communication from statesfor 
deletion/updation/entryof data in cases pointed out byAudit. In reply, yythe Ministry forwarded a
letter from Karnatakagovernmentseeking provisions for making entryof pendingbills pertaining
to 2009-11 period. In case of Odisha, the Ministrymentioned thatthestateDBA had control to
edit/enter theinformation for all financial yearseven if statedataentrywasclosed.
Theneed forsuch en-bloc changesattheCentral level raises doubts on theauthorisationof such
changes.T he lackof aproper audit trail in thesoftware makesit impossible for audit to verify who
made the actual changesi.e., theCentral DBA or thestateDBA.The reply of the Ministry also does 
notaddress the issue thathigher claims of thestate would be based on datawhich had been 
modifiedat alater datewithout anyconsequentaction. Moreover,ren-blocchangesin shared 
backupdatabymultiple authorities i.e.,state DBAsa swell as Ministryauthorities raise serious 
doubts about authenticity of the data. 
Theinstancesof erroneous dataentrymentioned in para12.4.5continued to remain unchecked 
duringtheyears2005-06to 2011-12. This indicatesthattherewasno system of monitoring.This 
would imply thateither NREGASoftdid not generatethe required alerts in anyof the cases
reported aboveor no action wastaken tocorrecttheerrors. In fact,Audit noted thattherate of 
errorscontinued to grow over theyears.For instance,increasing incidences of mismatchin 
opening/closing figuresof balancesof PanchayatAccountTable TT of Jharkhandshowsa cleartrend 
that simple mistakescontinued to grow overthe years. The trend wasprevalentin all the other 
parametersof Scheme implementation.

127Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Chapter 12 - IT Audit of NREGASoft
2007-08
4783
2008-09
8226
2009-10
9100
2010-11
21059
2011-12
26962
Number of Mismatched cases of opening/closing balances in Panchayat Table in
Jharkhand State (Closing balance = Opening Balance + All Inflow - All Outflow)
The Ministrystated that anumber of alertsweregenerated bythe NREGASoft application to 
verifyjobcards, ascertain minimum wage to workers,checkmaterial bills on 'RateX Quantity'
criteria, check per dayexpenditureof gram panchayats and unused job cards.  
However, rthecontinuingpresenceof clearcasesof ambiguity in datain aspectsrelated to user 
identity,yy accountbalances,paymentcalculation, work progress,etc.,indicate limited 
effffectiveness of mechanism for action taken on alertsgenerated bythesystem.
Recommendation:
The Ministry should examine and reconcile the deficiencies in software design as discussed 
above, and make necessary changes to the NREGASoft. There is a need to put in place stricter 
controls for data modification after authentication and closure of data entry.

129Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
13.1 Introduction
13.2 The questionnaire 
Sampled beneficiaries were in terviewed to assesstheir perception and experiences with the 
Scheme,during thecourse of audit.
Sampling planfor thesurveywas the same asthatadopted for the performance audit, i.e.,till the
gram panchayat(GP) l evel (para2.1.4 of Operational Guidelines) of the Report. Within each
selectedGP, P10beneficiaries wereselected bySystematicRandom Sampling procedurefrom the
consolidated list of beneficiaries of the selected villages in the selected gram panchayats. The 
beneficiaries were interviewed through astructured questionnaire in the local language.
38,376 beneficiaries (26,115 males and 12,261females) were interviewed from 3,837gram 
panchayats in 27 states and three Union TerritTT ories. The state/UT sample size varied from 50 in
Dadra & Nagar Haveli to 4,600 in UttarPradesh.
Thesurveyquestionnaire, apartfrom capturing basicinformation about thebeneficiary (age, 
education level, castegroup, etc.)and the household (main occupation, annual income, number
of adult members,type of dwelling unit and kindsof householdassets), sought to capture t he
following:
a)Awarenesslevelsof thebeneficiary
b)Issuesrelating to registration and job card 
c)Work- sitedistance,facilities, supervision, useof machines and musterrolls 
d)Wages- basis,timely paymentand mode of payment
e)Gram sabhameetings 
f)Transparency and monitoring
g)Impact analysis 
The surveywasconducted bythe members of the audit parties of the Indian Audit & Accounts
Departmentwhowere deployed for the performance audit of MGNREGS.In case a particular
beneficiarywasnot available, another member of thesamehouseholdwasinterviewed.
Findings of the 
Beneficiary Survey
Chapter
13

Chapter 13 - Findings of the Beneficiary Survey
130Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
13.3 Constraints
n
n
n
n
n
n
13.4 Beneficiary Profile
The auditteam facedanumber of constraintsin thisexercise which are outlined below:
The population from which the sample was selected comprised only beneficiaries. 
Potentialbeneficiaries or persons excluded from theSchemewerenotcoveredin the 
survey. 
The beneficiarydataof Sikkim and Lakshadweep could not be included inthis report.
Despite theintention to interview the beneficiaries independently, yyoften the interviews
were carried out in thepresenceof gram sarpanchor some panchayatofficial, ff which might
haveinduced certain bias in theresponsesof the beneficiaries. 
Certain selected areaswere not included in the exercise due to difficulties ff in physical access
and for securityreasons,and werereplaced.
Attimes,thesurveyteamsfound itdifficultff tointerview t hebeneficiaries alone. The 
beneficiaries wereunwillingto be separated from thegroup. Thisagain could induce the 
possibility of bias in theresponses of thebeneficiaries interviewed. 
Asn otedabove, if thebeneficiarywas not present,then some other member of the
household wasinterviewed.In such cases, the views of theactualbeneficiary mighthave 
been difffferentfromthoserecorded. 
The averageageof thebeneficiaries was41years.65per centof thehouses had aseparate 
electricity connection. 55per centof thebeneficiaries had aBPLcard. About one third (31.95per 
cent)of thebeneficiaries werewomen and 52per centbelonged to theS Cor ST categories. The 
detailed beneficiaryprofile isgiven in theboxbelow:
Beneficiary Profile
Average age: For 38,376 beneficiaries surveyed, the average age was 41 years (range: 36 
years for Jharkhand to 48 years for Odisha). 
Sex: At the all India level about one third of total beneficiaries were women. But this ratio 
was less than one fifth in Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Mizoram, Odisha, 
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal.
Literacy level: 43 per cent beneficiaries reported themselves to be illiterate.
SC/ST/OBC: At all India level 26 per cent of the beneficiaries belonged to SCs, 26 per cent to 
STs and 30 per cent reported that they belonged to OBCs. Thus, a significant percentage (81 
per cent) of beneficiaries interviewed belonged to weaker sections of the society. 

Chapter 13 - Findings of the Beneficiary Survey
131Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Household size: The average number of adult members in the household was three at the 
all India level, with highest of five in Nagaland and a low of two in Tamil Nadu, Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli and Puducherry. 
Annual household income: The average yearly household income as reported by the 
beneficiaries at the all India level was ` 20,047. The figures for Meghalaya, Manipur, 
Mizoram, Tripura and Andaman & Nicobar Islands were higher than average (all with more 
than  ` 30,000 as annual income), and in Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Odisha, and Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli, the yearly household income as reported was between ` 11,000 and `13,000.
Main occupation:  The reported main occupation were – self employment (agriculture)- 34 
per cent, self employment (non-agriculture)- six per cent, casual labourers- 55 per cent, 
others- two per cent. Thus, a significant proportion (About 90 per cent) of interviewed 
beneficiaries were either casual labourers or small and marginal farmers.
Ration cards: About 55 per cent of the beneficiaries had BPL card and 28 per cent had APL 
ration card.  The remaining beneficiaries either did not have ration cards or had other kinds 
of (Annapurna, Antyodaya, etc.) ration cards. The states/UTs with respondents having more 
than 80 per cent BPL ration cards were- Andhra Pradesh, Mizoram, Tamil Nadu, Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli and Puducherry. On the other hand states/ UTs with more than 50 per cent 
reported to be having APL ration cards were- Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Rajasthan, 
Tripura, Uttarakhand and Andaman & Nicobar Islands. On an average seven per cent of 
respondents across India reported not having any kind of ration card, but in Jharkhand, 
Manipur, Meghalaya and Odisha, more than 20 per cent of beneficiaries reported as not 
having any type of ration card.
Type of dwelling unit: About 55 per cent had kutcha or temporary mud-thatch type of 
dwelling units, 24 per cent had semi- kutcha units and 16 per cent had pucca   or permanent 
stone/brick type dwelling unit. In Jharkhand and Tripura more than 95 per cent beneficiaries 
lived in kutcha houses and in Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Tamil Nadu and Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands only 10 to 20 per cent beneficiaries lived in kutcha houses. For pucca or permanent 
dwelling units beneficiaries in Goa topped the list with more than 80 per cent having pucca 
houses. In Andhra Pradesh and Punjab about 40 per cent beneficiaries lived in pucca houses. 
Overall 79 per cent beneficiaries had temporary or semi-temporary dwelling units.
Other assets in household: 65 per cent had electricity connection, 27 per cent had TVs, 37 
per cent had toilets, 35 per cent had bicycles and six per cent had motor cycles in their 
households.

Chapter 13 - Findings of the Beneficiary Survey
Report No. 6 of 2013
132Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
13.5  Awareness Levels of Beneficiaries
n
n
n
n
Awarenesslevelsof theSchemeweretested bya sking four directquestions: 
On the number of daysamember of ahouseholdwas entitled to work in ayear, r
On theminimum wagerate,
On the  prescribed wagepayment schedule, and
On thequantum of work for securing minimum wages. 
Basedon theresponsesof thebeneficiaries theawarenesslevelswereindicated ashigh, medium
or low bytheinterviewer in thefield. In the analysis “High” and “Medium” level of awareness
weretreated asbeing aware in thereport.
It wasseenthat only 39per centof the beneficiaries were awareabout thefour major aspects of 
the Act.
Thelow degree of awareness amongstthe beneficiaries would diminish their abilityto fully
exercise their rights.
MGNREGS Beneficiary being surr veyed in TripuraTT

133Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Chapter 13 - Findings of the Beneficiary Survey
The resultsrelated to awarenesson individualaspectsof the Schemearegiven below: 
About72per centof the beneficiaries wereaware of the number of days of employmentto which
theywere entitled. In states of Bihar (52per cent), Gujarat (28per cent), Maharashtra (57per 
cent)and Odisha (43 per cent), the awareness levelswere low.However, rsmaller states/UT;T
Kerala, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Tripura and Puducherry,yyhad a high level of awareness (90per cent
or more).
About 70per centrespondentswereawareof thetimeliness within which thewageswere to be 
paid. Theawarenesslevel of the minimumwagewas77per cent.
Audit also noted that in thesamplesetof beneficiaries, thoseawareof the prescribedperiod for 
thepaymentof wages, werenearly identical (0.93correlation coefficienff t)to thoseawareof their 
entitlementto 100daysemployment.  
Only half of theinterviewed beneficiarieswereaware of theprescribedquantum of work which
entitled them to fullwagepayment.Similarly, yyonly about 56per centof beneficiaries were aware
of the manner of wage calculations.
It suggests a need for the states/UTsTT to step up Information,Education and Communication 
activities. As noted in para 4.7 of this Report, despite the passage of seven years, 12 states and 
two UTsTTwereyetto formulateIECplans and in five states andfour UTs TTthe funds received for this
activity wereunder-utilized.
ToTTevaluateissuesrelating to registration for theemployment, three questionsweredesigned: 
Whether oral requestfor registrationwasentertained,
Whether theregistrationprocess wasopenthroughout the year,rand, 
How much moneywaspaid for registration.
About30 per centof thebeneficiaries stated thatoralrequestswerenot entertained. 
Across India 43per centreplied that theyhad actually submitted awritten request. Only 37per 
centof these beneficiaries wereprovided areceiptagainstthe request.
Therewereisolated instancesof moneybeing paid for theregistration process.
13.5.1 100 Days of Work
13.5.2  Timely Payment of Wages and Minimum Wage Rate
13.5.3 Daily Work Load and Wage Calculation
13.6 Registration
n
n
n

Chapter 13 - Findings of the Beneficiary Survey
134Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
13.7  Job Card
n
n
n
n
n
n
13.8 Works and Employment
13.8.1  Number of Days of Employment
Job cards were checked to seewhether essential detailswere recorded. The details checked 
were:
Whether photograph of the beneficiary / joint photograph was attached;
Whethers ignature/thumb impression of thebeneficiarywaspresenton thejob card, and;
Whether employment and payment detailswereregularly updated.
In 55 per centof the cases, itwas seen that the job cardssuffffered from one or more shortcomings.
Photographs of adult memberswho wereapplicantswereto be attached to the jobcards.T he 
cost of jobcards along with thephotographs wastobe borne aspartof theprogramme cost.Only 
35per centof thepersons surveyedhad job cardswith jointphotographs attached and about 14
per centof thejob cards acrossthecountryhad no photographs.InJammu&Kashmir (64 per 
cent) andOdisha (63per cent) morethan60per centrespondent'sjobcards had no photograph. 
Similarly, yyin AndhraPradesh,Bihar, rMaharashtraand WestBengal about one third to one fourth
respondent's job cards had no photograph.
In morethan one third of the job cards checked itwasseenthatthe signature/thumb impression
wasmissing.Also 39per centof thej obcardsdid not haveupdated paymententries and 33per 
centdidnot haveupdatedwork entries.
Significantly, yyin Jammu &Kashmir,rthefollowing entriesweren ot up to date injob cards:
paymententriesin 99.87per centcases
work entries in about 80per centcases and 
thes i g naturecolumnwasblank in6 6per centcases.
All thesedeficiencies indicateabsenceof regular system of updating thejob cards.
According to Central Employment GuaranteeCouncil figures,theaverage number of daysof 
employment providedin 2011-12was43.Averagenumber of daysof employmentfor the year
2011-12atall India level was evaluated as 53daysonthe basisof theresponses of the sampled 
beneficiaries. 
InManipur, rMizoram and Tripura, beneficiaries responded to have received more than 80daysof 
employment per householdin the year2011-12.Otherstates/UTviz. Arunachal Pradesh (21 
days), Assam (28days), Chhattisgarh (33days), Odisha (32days), WestBengal (25days) and 
Puducherry(28days) could provide annual employmentonly to alimited extent.

Chapter 13 - Findings of the Beneficiary Survey
135Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
13.8.2  Waiting Time in Getting Work
13.8.3  Distance of Work Site
13.8.4  Usage of Machinery
13.8.5  Facilities at Work Site
n
n
n
n
13.8.6  Muster Rolls at Work Site
On an average, thework was providedto beneficiaries after nine daysof the job request.
However, r99per centof thebeneficiaries who werenot provided employmentwithin 15 days
werenot paid thestatutoryunemployment allowance. 
Thework sitewas at an averagedistanceof 2.6 kilometersfrom the habitation. Beneficiaries 
from Haryana,Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura and Andaman &Nicobar Islandsreported to have
travelled more than four km for work. In only 18per centcases didthe beneficiaryreceivethe 
mandatoryextrawagesfor travelling more than five kilometers forwork. 
Although usageof machinerywasnot permitted in MGNREGSworksbut beneficiaries in 14states
reported theuse of machinery.
As per theOperational Guidelines, certainbasicfacilitieshaveto be providedatthe work-site.
These include:
drinking water
shade 
first-aid, and 
crèche (if therearemorethan fivechildren below the ageof six years) 
About eightyper centof thebeneficiaries reportedthatone ormore of thesefacilitieswere not 
provided atworksites. Significantly, yyonly18per centof the beneficiaries saidthatcrèche facility 
wasprovided.Further, ronly about 50per centof the beneficiaries reported thatfacilitiesfor
first-aid and shade wereprovidedatwork sitesand one fourth reported that drinkingwater
facility wasnot provided att h ework site.
Muster rolls should be available and maintained atthe work site. Seventy eightper centof the
beneficiariesreported thatmuster rolls werekeptat thework siteand attendance wasmarked on 
them. However, rin the caseof Goa (43per cent), Jammu &Kashmir (31per cent), and Uttrakhand 
(40per cent) marking of attendance waslessthan 50per centindicating systemic lapses.

Chapter 13 - Findings of the Beneficiary Survey
Report No. 6 of 2013
136Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
13.9 Payment of Wages
13.9.1  Basis
13.9.2  Timely Receipt
13.9.3  Mode of Payment
13.10 Role of Gram Sabha
The directionsarefor thepaymentof wages on piece rate (on the basis of measurement of work) 
or dailyrate basis. Overall, 34per c e ntreported paymenton piecerate basis.Hence,the
quantum of work performed wasn ot the dominantcriteria for wage payment.Thestates/UT
where the paymentbasis was predominantly the'number of daysworked' (where more than 80
per cent of beneficiaries replied thatwageswere based on number of days only) were-Assam,
Goa, HimachalPradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka,Kerala, Manipur, rMeghalaya, Nagaland, Punjab, 
Tripura, UttarP radesh, Uttrakhand and Andaman&Nicobar Islands. On thecontrarythe 
states/UTsTTwherethepiece ratepayments were resorted to were AndhraPradesh, Chhattisgarh, 
Gujarat,H a ryana,Dadra&NagarHaveli and Puducherry.
Sixty fiveper cent benet ficiaries across the country reported that they received wages within 15 
days of work, 16 per centreported receipt of paymentswithin 30 days, 11 percentbetween 30 to 
60 days,four per centreported significantdelaysin receiptof wages(60 to 90days) and two per 
centreported verylargedelays(more than 90days) in receiptof their wages.
The efficiency ff of paymentsof wageswashigh (morethan 80 per centrespondentsreported to 
receivepaymentswithin 15days)in some of thestates/UTviz.Mizoram, Nagaland, Tamil TT Nadu, 
Tripuraand Andaman &Nicobar Islands. Apart from thesestates, timely payment (i.e.receipt of 
paymentwithin 15days)wasreported bymore than75per centof therespondentsin Goa, 
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab and UttarPradesh.Delayed paymentswere reported by
significantnumber of beneficiaries(morethan 50 per cent) from Chhattisgarh, Gujarat,Jammu &
Kashmir, rUttrakhand, WestBengal and Puducherry.
Significantnumberof cashpaymentswasreported from AndhraPradesh(19per cent), Arunachal 
Pradesh (73 per cent), Manipur (53per cent), Meghalaya(70 per cent), Mizoram (26 per cent), 
TamilTT Nadu(98per cent) and Puducherry(28percent).Overall 13per centof the beneficiaries 
replied thattheyhad received paymentsincash.
For otherchannels of payments- paymentthrough bankswerehighest(41per cent) followed by
post officesff (25per cent) a nd bank correspondents(seven per cent).In Bihar, rGujaratand 
Jharkhandmorethan 70per centof beneficiaries received paymentst hrough postoffice ff whereas
Tripura used bank correspondentfor their payments.
Gram panchayatprepares a shelf of possible worksto be taken up after considering 
recommendations of gram sabha. The gramsabhawasto also monitor the execution of works 

137Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
Chapter 13 - Findings of the Beneficiary Survey
and conduct regular social auditsof all theprojectsunder theScheme.For theseactivities, itwas
necessary that gram sabha meets regularly and therewas active participation of beneficiaries.
Interms of anational average, three gram sabha meetings were reported to be held annually.
Beneficiaries from Maharashtrareportedfive gramshabameetings, whereasthosefrom Jammu 
& Kashmir and West Bengal reported just one meeting on an average in ayear.rrPhysical
participation in anyof thegram sabha meetings was 63per centfor the countryas a whole.
The Annual Planfor MGNREGSworks and the shelf of worksfor the villagewasto be discussed in 
thegram sabhameetings.However,ronly 56per centof the participantsreplied thatthe 
MGNREGS works were discussedin thegram sabha meetings, indicating significantgapsin the 
villagelevel planning and participation. In AndhraPradesh,Assam, Gujarat, MadhyaPradesh, 
Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil TT Nadu, and West Bengal, lessthan 50per centof the participants
stated that the MGNREGSworkswerediscussed in the gramsabha meetings.
Mechanismsof transparencyaresought to be ensured byvarious meansviz.pasting of updated 
details on thewalls/ public places,regular visitsbydepartmentalofficials, ff mechanisms of social 
audit, existenceof regular grievanceredressalmechanisms.Theywere reviewed throughthe 
questionnaire.
Only4 6per centof the participants reported that detailsof MGNREGSworkswere painted or 
pastedon the public walls. This practicewasnearly absent in ArunachalPradesh, Jammu &
Kashmir, rOdisha, Tripura,Uttrakhand, Andaman&Nicobar Islands and Dadra & Nagar Haveli, but 
wassignificantlyhigh in Haryana, Meghalayaand Rajasthan.
TheOperationalGuidelinesrequire100per centmonitoringby VillageMonitoring Committees,
and bythe block level officerff s.In addition, there wasto be monitoring atthe district and state
level. Each work-sitewasto be visited byacombination of the BDO, Programme Officerff , rAssistant
Engineer, rExecutive Engineer, rVMC membersand district level functionaries. This would imply 
that each projectwouldbe visited bymultiple officerff s. This mechanism wasabsentasin the
interviews24per centbeneficiaries reported thatthework sitewas not inspected even byasingle 
functionary.This indicatessignificantgapsin themonitoring process.
Theconcept of social audit asenvisaged under the Schemewasyetto take shape. Only about 22
per centreported that social audit of MGNREGSwascarried out intheir village. Moresocial audits
werereportedbybeneficiaries from AndhraPradesh, Kerala,Manipur, rMeghalaya, Mizoram and 
Andaman &Nicobar Islands. In Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &Kashmir, rNagaland, Tripura and 
Dadra&N a garHaveli, the percentage of social audit carried out at the village level was nil.  
13.11 Transparency and Monitoring

Chapter 13 - Findings of the Beneficiary Survey
Report No. 6 of 2013
138Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
13.12 Impact of MGNREGS
Thisexercisealso sought to gaugetheimpactof MGNREGSon thelivesof thebeneficiaries.31per 
centof the beneficiaries felt thatMGNREGS did not bring asignificantchange in their lives.
However, rthere are largevariations in thesefigures across the states. In smaller states/UTlike
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh,Kerala, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura and Andaman &
Nicobar Islands, over 90per centof the beneficiaries felt that MGNREGS helped them in a
significantway. However,rin Assam, Gujarat,Karnataka, Maharashtraand WestBengal thefeeling 
of theSchemebeing beneficial was subdued asonly lessthanhalf of thebeneficiaries feltthat
MGNREGS had helped them significantly.
Sixty threeper centof the beneficiaries responded that MGNREGS had helped them avoid
migration in search of work. In addition,53per centof thebeneficiaries also felt thatMGNREGS
helped them avoid doing works which they did not wantto.  
Further, rabout 71per centof respondents felt thatuseful assetshad been created in their villages 
through MGNREGS. However, rin Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Gujarat,Keralaand TamilTT Nadu only 
lessthanhalf thebeneficiaries felt thatuseful assetshad been created undert hescheme.
Finally, yyon the question of improvementin family income- 75per centof beneficiaries feltthat
therewasno improvement in their family income or thatthe improvementwasonly marginal.

139Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
MGNREGA guarantees 100 days of wage employment to every rural household willing to take up 
manual labour.  Performance audit revealed that the intended beneficiaries had not been able to 
fully exercise their rights.
In the gram panchayats audited, several deficiencies regarding registration of workers and delays
or non-issue of job cards were noticed. Also, it was seen that obtaining a job card does not 
automatically translate into employment when demanded by the beneficiary. In the test checked 
gram panchayats, it was noticed that in over 47,687 cases, the beneficiaries were neither 
provided employment on demand nor received unemployment allowance.
Further, even after receiving employment, widespread instances of non-payment and delayed
payment of wages were observed in 23 states.  These cases demonstrate that considerable
efforts were needed to provide adequate livelihood security.  The scale of inadequacies in
providing livelihood security could not be fully ascertained in view of the pervasive and extensive 
deficiencies in record maintenance at all levels.   Non-maintenance or incorrect maintenance of 
basic records was noticed in 18 to 54 per cent of the test checked GPs. In such a situation the legalt
guarantee of 100 days of employment on demand and other aspects of the implementation of 
the Scheme were not fully verifiable.
Irregularities were also noticed in the works undertaken under MGNREGS. Instances of works 
abandoned midway or not completed for a significant period were noticed. Works of 
`2,252.43 crore, which were undertaken under the Scheme were not permissible.  It was seen 
that 7,69,575 works amounting to ` 4,070.76 crore were incomplete even after one to five years.
It was also noted that expenditure on works amounting `6,547.35 crore did not result in creation
of durable assets. Cases of diversion of funds for other uses were also seen in a large number of 
states.
The larger issue, in relation to the works, was the non-adherence to the statutory 60:40 wage-
material ratio. The Ministry, in contravention of the Act, which stipulates that this ratio has to be
maintained for each work, relaxed this provision. The Operational Guidelines issued by the 
Ministry stated that this ratio was to be maintained “Preferably at the gram panchayat, block and
district level” .  In a limited quantification exercise in 12 states and one UT , it was seen that the
non-adherence to this ratio led to short generation of 15.03 crore persondays during the audit 
period. 
Conclusion
Chapter
14

Chapter 14 - Conclusion
140Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
The Act makes the Ministry legally responsible for monitoring the Scheme and giving such
directions to the states as necessary for its proper implementation. In fact, the Act requires the 
Ministry to set-up a Central Employment Guarantee Council that was to be responsible itself for
monitoring the Scheme and suggesting improvements. The Council worked under the
chairmanship of the Minister of Rural Development and included other stakeholders. However, it 
was seen that the Council had done little in terms of monitoring of the Scheme. In the six years of 
its existence, a few Council members conducted just 13 field visits and the Council had not put in
place an effective system of monitoring and evaluation, as required under the Act.  
The monitoring mechanisms of the Ministry, as envisaged in the Operational Guidelines, also
included the system of National Quality Monitors, for verification and quality audits and an online
MIS–NREGASoft. It was seen that the Ministry was yet to operationalize the system of National 
Quality Monitors. Also, poor internal controls and lack of any cross-verification had seriously 
eroded the reliability and credibility of the data in the MIS. Instances of data manipulations which 
were  seemingly without any basis, were noted in audit.
The Act and the Operational Guidelines require the states and the Panchayati Raj Institutions to 
monitor the implementation of the Scheme in a variety of ways.   Gaps in the envisaged
monitoring mechanisms were noticed in a large number of states. There were significant 
shortages in verification of works by state officials. Quality Monitors and Vigilance and
Monitoring Committees had not been appointed in several states. Social audit remained 
ineffective to a large extent as social audit units had not been established.  Shortfalls in social 
audit were noted in a number of states.
There were deficiencies in the approval and release of funds by the Ministry. Numerous instances
were noticed in which the Ministry released grants in excess of demand and in breach of its own 
conditionalities. In fact, in 2010-11, the Ministry relaxed all conditionalities (except furnishing
utilisation certificate) associated with the release of funds. No basis for this decision was 
provided by the Ministry. As a result,` 1,960.45 crore were released in the month of March 2011
alone, without exercising proper financial controls.
The Ministry needs to take decisive steps to ensure proper implementation of the Scheme. It 
needs to focus on developing intensive monitoring and evaluation systems.
An analysis of the data provided by the Central Employment Guarantee Council disclosed some
adverse trends. The expenditure incurred under the Scheme had been stagnant for the last three
years and actually showed a marginal decline in 2011-12. We noted that the decline in 
expenditure would have an aggravated effect on employment generation in view of the
progressive increase in wages over the years. Employment generated declined from 283.59 crore 
persondays in 2009-10 to 216.34 crore persondays in 2011-12. The completion of works also saw
a significant decline in 2011-12.

Chapter 14 - Conclusion
141Performance Audit of 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
Report No. 6 of 2013
An analysis of releases made to states for the period under review and poverty data showed that 
three states – Bihar, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh had 46 per cent of the rural poor in India, butt
accounted for only about 20 per cent of the total funds released under the Scheme. This wouldt
indicate that the poorest of poor were not fully able to exercise their rights under MGNREGA.
Countersigned
(Roy Mathrani)
Director General of Audit
Central Expenditure
(Vinod Rai)
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
New Delhi
Dated: 19 /g68/g258/g396/g272/g346 2013
New Delhi
Dated:20/g68/g258/g396/g272/g346 2013


Annexes


Report No. 6 of 2013 
 145
Annex-1A 
State-wise details of employment, poverty status and release of funds 
(Refer to Paragraph 1.5) 
NNaammee  ooff  SSttaattee//UUTT  AAvveerraaggee  nnuummbbeerr  ooff  
hhoouusseehhoollddss  pprroovviiddeedd  
eemmppllooyymmeenntt**  
NNuummbbeerr  ooff  
ppoooorr##  
TToottaall  rreelleeaassee  ooff  ffuunnddss  
((``  iinn  ccrroorree))@@  
Andhra Pradesh 41,75,350 1,27,90,000 17,267.41 
Arunachal Pradesh 7,293 2,70,000 172.07 
Assam 14,39,779 1,05,30,000 3,295.50 
Bihar 19,27,579 4,98,70,000 6,292.44 
Chhattisgarh 24,84,636 1,08,30,000 6,959.36 
Goa 9,105 60,000 15.20 
Gujarat 11,36,895 91,60,000 2,219.80 
Haryana 2,23,447 30,40,000 715.10 
Himachal Pradesh 4,84,126 5,60,000 1,880.34 
Jammu & Kashmir 2,17,661 7,30,000 1,446.04 
Jharkhand 16,85,494 1,02,20,000 5,468.85 
Karnataka 24,70,768 97,40,000 5,662.81 
Kerala 11,86,135 21,60,000 2,390.88 
Madhya  Pradesh 37,95,298 2,16,90,000 15,717.43 
Maharashtra 8,07,898 1,79,80,000 1,711.60 
Manipur 1,64,736 8,80,000 1,832.02 
Meghalaya 2,74,920 3,50,000 843.37 
Mizoram 1,54,793 1,60,000 1,007.94 
Nagaland 3,23,848 2,80,000 2,060.01 
Odisha 15,54,758 1,35,50,000 4,401.29 
Punjab 2,60,448 25,10,000 483.75 
Rajasthan 53,42,937 1,33,80,000 17,928.73 
Sikkim 46,833 70,000 281.13 
Tamil Nadu 58,29,489 78,30,000 8,128.97 
Tripura 5,66,777 5,40,000 2,858.82 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 146
Uttar Pradesh 73,69,867 6,00,60,000 20,425.74 
Uttarakhand 4,20,241 10,30,000 1,154.13 
West Bengal 52,76,742 1,77,80,000 8,307.31 
Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands 
9,783 0 34.91 
Chandigarh 0 0 0.65 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli 0 1,00,000 2.77 
Daman & Diu 0 20,000 1.12 
Lakshadweep 2,287 0 7.76 
Puducherry 27,472 0 40.06 
 
* Average for the years 2009-10 to 2011-12, Source: NREGASoft MIS 
# 2009-10, Source: Planning Commission 
@ For the period 2007-12, Source: Ministry of Rural Development 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 147 
 
Annex-2A 
Summary of Sample Selection 
(Refer to paragraph 2.1.4) 
Sl. No. Name of State/UT Districts Blocks GPs 
1 Andhra Pradesh 5 15 150 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 4 9 43 
3 Assam 8 21 83 
4 Bihar 15 54 252 
5 Chhattisgarh 6 14 140 
6 Goa 2 4 14 
7 Gujarat 6 15 150 
8 Haryana 6 12 114 
9 Himachal Pradesh 4 9 90 
10 Jammu & Kashmir 6 12 113 
11 Jharkhand 6 17 167 
12 Karnataka 8 16 157 
13 Kerala 4 13 39 
14 Madhya Pradesh 13 29 290 
15 Maharashtra 9 24 240 
16 Manipur 4 9 90 
17 Meghalaya 4 8 90 
18 Mizoram 2 4 39 
19 Nagaland 3 7 54 
20 Odisha 8 20 200 
21 Punjab 6 13 118 
22 Rajasthan 8 18 180 
23 Sikkim 2 4 8 
24 Tamil Nadu 8 23 230 
25 Tripura 2 6 60 
26 Uttar Pradesh 18 46 460 
27 Uttarakhand 4 10 100 
28 West Bengal 5 15 120 
29 Andaman & Nicobar Islands 2 4 14 
30 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 1 1 10 
31 Lakshadweep 1 3 3 
32 Puducherry 2 3 30 
Total 182 458 3,848 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
148 
 
Annex-2B 
Details of Sample Selection 
(Refer to paragraph 2.1.4) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of State/ 
UT Name of Districts Name of Blocks Name of GPs 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
 Nalgonda,  Ranga 
Reddy, Kurnool, 
Visakhapatnam,  
Vizianagaram (five) 
Krishnagiri, Tuggali, 
Chagalmarri, Gantyada, Gurla, 
Kurupam, Kotauratla, 
Butchayyapeta, Sabbavaram, 
Pochampally, Neredcherla, 
Chintapalli, Yalal, Yacharam, 
Mominpet 
(15) 
Bheemanpally, Ghousekonda, Vankamamidi, Sivareddigudem, Dothiguda, Julur, Pochampally, Mukthapur, 
Jalalpur, Jiblakpalle, Bettatanda, Bothalapalem, Guduguntlapalem, Gundla Pahad, Komatikunta, Mukundapuram, 
Musivoddusingaram, Palakeedu, Ravi Pahad, Somavaram, Chintapalli, Kistarampalli, Gadya Gowraram, 
Kurmapalli, Madnapur, Mallareddipalli, Melvalapalli, Varkal, Vinjamoor, Teeded, Agnoor, Akkampalle, Bennur, 
Chennaram, Devanoor, Doulapur, Juntpalle, Nagasamundar, Rasnum, Sangamkurd, Chintapatla, Chowder Pally, 
Gaddamallaiahguda, Kothapally, Kurmidda, Mall, Nanaknagar, Nandiwana Parthy, Thatiparthy, Toole Khurd, 
Amradikalan, Deverampally, Izra Chittampally, Kesaram, Kolkonda, Mekavanampally, Mominpet, Velchal, 
Yenkathala, Yenkeypally, Alamkonda, Chityala, Kambalapadu, Katarikonda, Lakkasagaram, Pothugal, Sho 
Yerragudi, Talla Gokulapadu, Thogarchedu, Yerukalacheruvu, Chennampalle, Gooty Erragudi, Pendekallu, 
Rampalli, Ratana, Sabhashpuram, Tuggali, Kadamakuntla, Pagidiroy, Upparlapalli, Mallevemula, Godiganur, 
Peddavangali, Nelampadu, Settiveedu, D.Vanipenta, Mutyalapadu, Chagalamarri, Madduru, Gotlur, 
Budathanapalli, Gantayda, Gingeru, Kirthubarthi, Kondatamarapalli, Murapaka, Narava, Pentasreerampuram, 
Ramabhadrapuram, Ramavaram, Damarasingi, Gudem, Gurla, Jammu, Kella, Kondaganredu, Pedabantupalli, 
Tatipudi, Tettangi, Vallapuram, Biyyalavalasa, Gujjuvai, Kurupam, Marripalli, Neelakantapuram, Pedagottili, 
Thittiri, Valasaballeru, Voosakonda, Vudayapuram, Yendapalle, Thangedu, Ramachandrapalem, 
Pippallakothapalle, Panduru, Neeligunta, Chinnaboddepalle, Kodavatipudi, Bodapalem, Akasahebpet, 
Butchayapeta, Chittayyapalem, Gunnempudi, Kondapalem, Mallam, Pedapudi, Rajam, R.Sivaramapuram, 
Turakalapudi, Vijayaramarajupeta, Anthakapalli, Aripaka, Asakapalle, Bangarammapalem, Batajangalapalem, 
Gullepalle, Nallaregulapalem, Narapadu, Rayapura Agraharam, Tekkalipalem(150) 
2. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Papumpare, West 
Siang, Lower Dibang 
Valley , Anjaw (four) 
Doimukh, Sagalee, Aalo East, 
Basar, Liromoba, Roing-
Koronu, Hunli-Desali, 
Hayuliang, Hawai-Walong 
(nine) 
Banderdewa,Bat, Doimukh, Ganga, Bobia, Bokoriang-I, Kheel, Kigi, Langpung, Rach-Tabio, Doji Jelly, Kombo 
Pomte, Logum Jini Lower, Logum Jini Upper, Pakam-I, Tarsu Mobuk-I, Dali, Disi, Galu/Sibe, Gori-I, Jime/Zirdo, 
Padi-I, Pegi/Kamdak/Everest, Essi Group, Pokto/Ligo/Bopu, Rise/Dordi/Leggi/Bopu, Balek, Bloung-II, Bloung-III, 
Intaya, Jia-I, Jia-III, Mayu-II, Mika-I, Parbuk, Elope, Hunli, Amliang, Braigong, Suplang GPC, Lautul, Mechong, 
Walong (43) 
3. Assam Chirang, Karbi 
Anglong, Dibrugarh, 
Jorhat, Goalpara, 
Kamrup(Rural), 
Cachar, Hailakandi 
(eight) 
Borobazar, Sidli Chirang, 
Langsomepi, Howraghat, Nilip, 
Khowang, Tingkhong, North 
West Jorhat, Jorhat 
(Baghchung), Hajo, Chamaria, 
Kamalpur, Goroimari, Matia, 
Kushdhowa, Algapur, 
Hailakandi, Palonghat, Tapang, 
Rajabazar, Udhrbond (21) 
Amguri, Bagargaon, Barlawgaon, Barpathar, Hakua Serfang, Kumarsali Batabari, Malipara, Bamungaon-Dattapur, 
Besorbari-Nangalbanga, Khungring, Malivita, Ouguri, Patabari, Ranchaidham, Tukrajhar, Howraghat, Langhin, 
Phuloni, Howraghat, Langfer, Langhin, Deopani, Duar Bagori, Nilip, Bamunbari, Gazpuria, Haldhibari, Naharani, 
Dhaman, Konwari Gaon, Mahmora/Borpathar,  Salmari, 38 No. Baligaon, 31 No. Madhya Charigaon, 44 No. 
Madhya Sarusari, 45 No. Pachim Sarucharai, 37 No. Rajahouali, 54 No. Cinnamora, 60 No. Mariani Bagicha, 66 
No. Pachim Thangal, 64 No. Pub Thanghal, 57 No. Uttar Garmoor Bagicha, 48 No. Uttar Namoni Charibahi, Barni, 
Bongalpara, Dampur, Soniadi, Hekra Jogipara, Kismat Kathmi, Mahtoli, Pijupara, Borsil, Borka Satgaon, 
Kendukona, Achalpara, Jorsimulu, Majortop, Karipara, Sidhabari, Sri Suryagiri, Dudhnai, Daranggiri, Lela, 
Kalinagar, Panchgram, Sayedbond, Sudarshanpur/Bandakmana, Kanchanpur, Gangpar/Dhumkar/Lakhirbond, 
Nitainagar, Bhubandahar, Bhubanhill, Mohankhal/Rammanikpur, Indraghar, Kathal, Tapang, Harinagar, Joypur 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 149 
 
Kamranga, Laboc, Khaspur, Kashipur, Madhura, Salgonga (83)   
4. Bihar Munger, Jehanabad, 
Banka, Darbhanga, 
Madhubani, 
Begusarai, Bhabhua, 
Muzaffarpur, Bhojpur, 
Nalanda, Aurangabad, 
Araria, Sitamarhi, W. 
Champaran, Kisanganj 
(15) 
Asarganj, Dharhara, Hulasganj, 
Makhdumpur, Amarpur, 
Chandan, Shambhuganj, 
Baheri, Biraul, Hanuman 
Nagar, Tardih, Jale, Basopatti, 
Lakhnaur, Bisphi, Kaluahi, 
Jainagar, Balia, Navakothi, 
Dandari, Khodawandpur, 
Birpur, Kundra, Ramgarha, 
Rampur, Muraul, Mushahari, 
Sahebganj, Saraiya, Bihia, 
Odwantnagar, Sahpur, 
Sandesh, Chandi, Harnaut, 
Islampur, Noorsarai, rahui, 
Obra, Haspura, Rafiganj, Sikti, 
Jokihat, Bajpatti, Nanpur, 
Runnisaidpur, Sursand, Baria, 
Bhithan, Lauria, Majhaulia, 
Narkatiyaganj, Dighalbank, 
Pothia (54) 
Asarganj, Makwa, Chorgaon, Ajimganj, Amari, Matadih, Bouri, Dawdhu, Murgaon, Dakra, Jamanganj, Kalanaur, 
Manjhaus, Saren West, Sumera, Garibpur, Gorgama, Bhikhampur, Pawai, Salempur, Dhanuvsara, South Kasba 
Basiala, Kusumjori, Barfera Tetariya, Gulni, Jhakhara, Birnaudha, Maldih, Pakaria, Baghauni, Bhakshi, Dohat 
Narain, Habidah Centre, Harhaccha, Jorja, Mitunia, Afjala, Bairampur, Dekuli Jagarnathpur, Neuri, Patania, 
Pokhram South, Sonepur Pagari, Godaipatti, Panchobh, Rampurdih, Sinuara, Vishath Bathiya, Mahthaur, Raja 
Kharwar, Ahiyari North, Brahmpur East, Doghara, Kamtaul, Massa, Muraitha, Ratanpur, Basopatti West, Birpur, 
Kataiya, Mahinathpur, Balia, Kachua, Laufa, Tamuria, Balha, Chauhutta, Jagwan West, Nahas Rupauli North, 
Parsauni North, Rathaus, Sadullapur, Haripur North, Madhepur, Pursaulia, Debdha North, Debdha Centre, 
Dorbhar, Belhi East, Balia Lakhamaniya-I, Balia Lakhmaniya-III, Bhagatpur, Nurjamapur, Tajpur, Dafarpur, 
Maheshwara, Rajakpur, Katahari, Katarmala South, Bank, Bariyarpur West, Khodabandpur, Bara, Birpur West, 
Genharpur,  Bhavanandpur, Pachpokhara, Meura, Dervan, Chilbill, Ahivas, Baraura, Sahuka, Amanw, Belanw, 
Kurari, Harsinghpur Lautan, Mahmadpur, Vidhyajhpur, Manika Vishunchand Datt, Dumari, 
Abdulnagar/Madhopur, Sherpur, Prahaldpur, Bhagwanpur ,Patahi, Navanagar Nijamat, Halimpur, Madhopur 
Hazari, Jagdihpur, Saraiya, Parsauni Raeesi, Bahilwara Repanath North, Bahilwara Rupnath South, Chakana, 
Datapur Pachbhirwa, Madawa Pakar, Ramkrishna Duviyahi, Rampur Balli, Rewa Basantpur North, Ghagha, P. 
Chkwash Mahuav, Pipra Jagdishpur, Shivpur, Akauna, Bakari, Kusumbi, Sarthua, Khutahan, Sarana, Suhiya, 
Hariharpur, Jhanva Belvaniya, Ahpura, Jamuanw, Sandesh, Madhopur, Rukhai, Gangaur, Sartha, Basaniawan, 
Kolawan, Powari, Telmar, Weswak, Sanda, Ranipur, Sakri, Bhauridih, Andhanna, Jagdishpur Tiyari, Nirpur, 
Rasalpur, Pesaur, Rahui, Sosandi, Supasang, Bharub, Dihra, Kanchanpur, Obra, Rattanpur, Dindir, Tal, Ahiapur, 
Ghusari, Kajpa, Baliganj, Bhduki Kala, Toshila, Sihuli, Balar, Kuchhha, Muraripur, Rokantari, Bhidbhidi, Simaria, 
Sisuna, Kursail, Bhagwanpur, Chirah, Dubhra, Matiyari, Bajpattti, Bangaon South, Humayupur, Madhuban Basaha 
East, Ratwara, Bath Asali, Janipur, Nanpur South, Sirsi, Gurdah, Bagahi Ramnagar, Gidha Phulwaria, Athari, 
Barheta, Balua, Dewana Bujurg, Mehsha Pharakpur, Banauli, Diwari Malauna, Malahi, Patanpura, Virakh, Siswa 
Saraia, Bhithaha, Bagahi Rattanpur, Phulia Khand, Baria, Hathuahwa Machhahan, Semanwari, Baghi Baswaria, 
Lakar Sisre, Siswania, Lauria, Gobraraura, Raja Bhar, Lala Saria, Mahanawa Rampurwa, Mahnagni, 
Mohdipur,Ratanmala, Rulahi, Hardi Terha, Sikaarpur, Kesaria, Purania Hasri, Paroraha, Barwa Barauli, Gokula, 
Patharghati, Tarabari Padampur, Mangura, Singhimari, Koltha, Sarogora, Panasi, Chhattarghachh, Jahangirpur, 
Udgara, Sonpur Pagari (252) 
5. Chhattisgarh  Durg, Mahasamud, 
Jashpur, Koriya, 
Bastar, Kanker (six) 
 Balod, Durg, Saja 
Basna,Pithora, Kansabel, 
Pathalgaon, Baikunthpur, 
Manendragarh, 
Bastar,Bakawand, Makadi, 
Charama, Narharpur (14) 
B.Jamgaon, Bhoinapar, Dewarbhat, Jamruva, Jhungera, Latabore, Londi, Nevarikala, Parsoda, Tarod, Amati, 
Bhendsar, Bodegaon, Chirpoti, Gugsidih, Katro, Kolihapuri, Nagpura, Rasmara, Ravelidih, Bhatgaon, Danganiya, 
Gudva, Kanhera, Maatra, Odia, Sahashpur, Souri, Tiriyabhat, Umraonagar, Badetemari, Beltikari, Bichiya P, 
Birsinghpali, Chimarkel, Ganekera, Khemada, Lamber, Palsapali A, Sarkanda, Bade Loram, Bheekhapali, Bijemal, 
Dhanora, Gopalpur, Jandhora, Kodopali, Monhada, Pilvapali, Savitripur, Barjor, Chidora, Frsajudwain, Katangkhar, 
Khutera, Kusumtal, Patrapali, Pongro, Sajapani, Tangargaon, Bagbahar, Butrabahar, Gharjiyabathan , Kadro, 
Kudkel Khajiri, Madhuvan, Palidih, Raja Ama, Rokbahar, Tirsoth, Aamapara, Badgaon, Barpara, Budar, Chilka, 
Dakaipara, Gadbadi, Kadamnara, Khond, Salba, Bandeli, Charwahi, Dugla,  Harra, Kachoud, Lalpur, Mahai, 
Narayanpur, Parasgadhi, Rokda, Barda, Chindgoan, Chiuargoan , Farsigoan, Kinjoli, Mangnar, Matnar, Pandanar, 
Satosa, Tongkongera, Bakel, Bhond, Dubeumergaon, Karmari, Kesharpal, Kungarpal, Lamker, Mandlapal, 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
150 
 
Retavand, Turpura, Badeghordsoda, Bagbeda, Bhirgoan, Dharli, Jarandi, Kosaharduli, Makdi, Pathari, Tamrawand,  
Themgoan, Aanwri, Bhanpuri, Dedkohaka, Gitpahar, Jepra, Kilepar, Lilejhar, Pandripani, Saradhunavagaon , 
Amoda, Bhaismundi, Charbhatti, Devinawagaon, Dhanesara, Ghotiyawahi, Kurna, Marrampani, Risewada, 
Sarwandi, Saradhunavagaon (140) 
6. Goa  North Goa, South 
Goa (two) 
 Pernem, Sattari, Canacona, 
Sanguem (four) 
Casne-Amere-Poroscodem, Tamboxem-Mopa-Ugavem, Ozorim, Querim-Terekhol, Paliem, Cotorem, Morlem, 
Nagargao, Agonda, Cola, Poinguinim, Sancordem, Rivona, Mollem (14) 
7. Gujarat  Banaskantha, 
Dahood, 
Surendranagar, 
Valsad, 
Ahmedabad, and 
Patan (six) 
 Dharampur, Valsad, Barwala, 
Ranpur, Sandand, Patan, 
Halvad, Limbadi, Dantiwada, 
Deodar, Palanpur, Garbada, 
Fatepura, Sayla, Siddhpur (15) 
Bhadali(Zat), Bhilachal, Dantiwada, Gundari, Mahudi-Moti, Nandotra (Brahamanvas), Panthawada, Odhava, 
Satsar, Zat, Chalva, Dhunson, Kotarwada, Lavana, Odha, Raiya, Ravel, Sardarpura(Jaseli), Vadiya, Vatanjuna, 
Chitrasani, Dhandha, Gadh, Hathidra, Karjoda, Mota, Madana(Gadh), Ratanpur, Sundha, Vasna (Jagana), Abhlod, 
Ambli, Chharachhoda, Dadur, Gungardi, Matwa, Nelsure, Panthawada, Vadva, Zari-Bujarg, Bhichor, Dungar, 
Hindoliya, Karodiya, Lakhanpur, Moti-Dhadheli, Nani-Dhadheli, Sagdapada, Sarsawa (East), Vandariya (East), 
Charadva, Dhanala, Gnanshyampur, Kavadiya, Khetardi, Koyba, Manekwada, Nava Ghanshyamgadh, Shiroi, 
Vankiya, Ankewaliya, Bhagvanpar, Bhagamda, Bhathan, Bhojpara, Dhalwana, Jaliyala, Katariya, Nani Katachi, 
Parnala, Chhadiyali, Dhamrasala, Dhinkwali, Gosal, Khintla, Motasakhpar, Navagam, Samadhiyala, Shapar, 
Sudamada, Ambatalat, Bhensdara, Gundiya, Kangvi, Khanda, Manaichondi, Pandav-Khadak, Pendha, Ranveri, 
Tanachhiya, Anjlav, Bhagal, Dandi, Dhanori, Kalwada, Kaparia, Malvan, Panchalai, Saron, Valvach, Chanchariya, 
Dhadhodar, Hebatpur, Kapariyali, Pipariya, Rampura, Ranpari, Refda, Sangasar, Sanlapur, Alau, Bodiya, Charanki, 
Gunda, Gadhiya-Deradi, Nani-Vadvi, Rajpura, Ranpur, Sangalpur, Umarala, Aniyari, Andej, Charal, Garodiya,  
Ghodavi, Khoraj, Kundal Govinda, Makhiyav, Rupavati, Vanaliya, Ajimana, Balva, Dharpur, Hajipur, Khanpurda, 
Mahemadpur, Rakhav, Sagodiya, Vachhalva, Vasni, Chatavada, Geneshpura,Kakoshi, Kholvada, Lukhasan, Meloj, 
Nagvasan, Sandesari, Sujanpur, Umru (150) 
8. Haryana  Sirsa, Fatehabad, 
Mewat, Palwal, 
Ambala, Kurukshetra 
(six) 
 Ambala-I, Saha, Bhattu Kalan, 
Ratia, Babain, Thanesar, 
Firozpur Jhirka, Taoru, Palwal, 
Hasanpur, Baragudha,Odhan 
(12) 
Jansui, Baroula, Kaleran, Raulan, Amipur, Mohra, Sekhupura, Jagouli, Bhurangpur, Kesri, Samlehri, Khera, Sabga, 
Akbarpur, Nurd, Shergarh, Jharu Majra, Chudiali, Saha, Khabra Kalan, Sirdhan, Dhand, Mehuwala, Banmandori, 
Jandwala Bagar, Sarwarpur, Daiyar, Bhattu Kalan, Pilli Mandori, Sehnal, Aharwan, Badalgarh, Chimmo, Raipur, 
Jandwala Sotter, Rattakhera, Kamana, Alika, Bir Sujra, Berthla, Bint, Jhandola, Kasithal, Nakhrojpur, Falsanda 
Rangran, Bargat, Mahua Kheri, Barna, Bhansi Majra, Gamri Jattan, Khaspur, Ajrana Kalan, Jhiverheri, Tigri Khalsa, 
Untsal, Mirzapur, Daultpur, Jharpuri, Dungeja, Balkhera, Shabpur, Malhaka, Samir Bass, Chittora, Sulela,  
Shekhpur, Panchgaon, Nizampur, Hasanpur, Shikarpur, Bawla, Para, Uton, Dingerheri, Bhangoh, Silkhon, Ghori, 
Paroli, Kalwaka, Badha, Karna, Chirwari, Jodhpur, Alawalpur, Durgapur, Therki, Hasanpur, Maholi, Bata, Raidaska, 
Fatasko Nagar, Tikri Gujjar, Kawarka, Sehnoli, Kushak , Jhiri, Thiraj, Bhagsar, Buraj Karamgarh, Shekhupuria, 
Kurganawali, Sukhchain, Lehangewala, Alika, Malikpura, Odhan,  Chormar Khera, Ghukanwali, Rohiranwali, 
Khatrawan, Hassu, Salamkhera, Kheowali, Tigri (114) 
9. Himachal 
Pradesh 
 Shimla, Kangra, 
Lahaul & Spiti, Solan 
(four) 
 Bhawrna, Dehra, Indora, Kaja, 
Lahaul, Basantpur, Narkanda, 
Dharmpur, Kunihar (nine) 
Pharer, Banghiar, Bindraban, Chachian, Parour, Gopalpur, Bhattu Samula, Bagora, Ghuggar, Darati, Panayali, Rail, 
Sanahi, Jasai, Majiyar, Sareri, Saproh, Narial, Chouru, Badhrol, Bajrol, Charin Di Dhar, Tapre, Dimmi, Barara, 
Dharog, Darbiar, Utpur, Barian, Tikker Buhula, Kyartu, Dharkandru, Mundu, Dadas, Pargaya, Tikkar, Kuthar, Kot-
Shilaru, Dharech, Bharana, Thakurdwara, Gangath, Dah Kulara, Raja Khasa, Mohtali, Majra, Daikwan, Bhapu, 
Mand Miani, Ghodan, Kotla, Majhiwar, Chanawag, Neen, Okhru, Ghariyana, Ogli, Baldeyan, Juni, Khundiyan, 
Ghalour, Kopra, Hiraan, Jaklehad, Ghurkal, Aluha, Bangoli, Sihorpai, Dhanot, Barotiwala, Hurang, Jadla, Patta Nali, 
Narayani, Dhakriana, Bughar Kanaita, Anji Matla, Darwan, Roari, Sanan, Palog, Kunihar, Giyana, Banoh, Bairal, 
Kotli, Manju, Kothi, Danoghat, Darotibala  (90) 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 151 
 
10. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
 Pulwama, Shopian, 
Leh, Rajouri, Poonch, 
Udhampur (six) 
Keller (ACD Shopian),  
Shopian, Kharoo, Leh,  Saspol, 
Doongi, Rajouri, Sunderbani,  
Mendhar, Poonch, Chenani, 
Udhampur (12) 
Androla, Badhon A, Baljaran, Dangari, D Gorsian, F Khas, Kalal Kas, Kotedhar, M Gugjjran, Muradpur, A South, 
Bagla, Deharian, Dhanwan, D Brahmn, Dogani, Kallar, Lkote, Nadyala, S Kote, Bandipayen, Dudbugh, Waripora, 
Kakvathal, Chandosa, Kalantra, Nowpora, Wulraham, Khaitangan, Wagora B, Warpora A, Warpora B, Janwara, 
Zaloora A, Dangerpora, Malmapenpo, Shiva A, Dangerpora, Nathipora, Mundji, Chari, Gandala, Garnai, Tirshi, 
Kaller, Rehmbal, Mandeast, Mansar, Padnoo, Tikri, Batra, Ghantwal, Karlah, Kosar, Ladha, Lmadha, Matlowa, 
Panchote, R East, Satyalta, Ajote, Banwat Dhokri, Chaktroo, Chandak, Degwar, Islamabad, Khaneter Delera, 
Khaneter Duprian, Kuniyan, Noona Bandi, Bhatidhar, Chak Banola, Ghani Lower, Gohlad Mustfa Nagar, Gursai 
Harmutta, Gursai Moori, Gursai Phambanar, Kalaban, Sagra, Salwah Upper, Letpora A, Ladho B, Andursoo, 
Sempora A, Mandalpal, Hatiwara, Pahoo, Lerow, Kakpora A, Parigam A, Wagum, Gudoora, Marval, Gundipora, 
Ratnipora, Kakpora B, Basgo, Choglam A, Choglam B, Likeer, Ney, Nimoo, Phyang, Saboo, Spituk, Taru, Chemday, 
Egu, Martsaytang, Sakti, Sakti A, Shara, Gia (113) 
11. Jharkhand  West Singhbhum, 
Ranchi, Dumka, 
Pakur, Gumla, Palamu 
(six) 
Chibasa, Chakardharpur, 
Jhinkpani, Angara, Chanho, 
Kanke, Dumka, Jama, 
Jarmundi, Pakur, 
Hiranpur, Bharno, Gumla, 
Sisai, Chainpur, Daltonganj, 
Lesliganj (17) 
Diliamarcha, Harila, Karlajodi, Kursi, Lopungutu, Narsanda, Tonto, Tuibir, Baduri, Simbiya, Bharnia, Hathiya, 
Hoyahatu, Itore, Kenke, Kulitorang, Silphori, Surgura, Baipi, Gopinathpur, Asura, Choya, Jodapokhar, Kelende, 
Kudahatu, Nawagaon, Tutugutu, Chatra, Getelsud, Hesatu, Kuchhu, Nawagarh, Rajadera, Sursu, Tati, Angara, 
Bisa, Balsokra, Chama, Choreya, Lundri, Pandri, Raghunathpur, Roll, Tala, Tanger, Taranga, Badhu, Gagi, Kamde, 
Malsiring, Pithoria, Sukurhutu (South), Uperkonki, Uruguttu, Arsandey, Boreya, Baratali, Ghasipur, Haripur, 
Kerabani, Lakhikundi, Malbhandro, Parsimla, Rampur, Asansol, Bhurkunda, Asansol Kurua, Bhairawpur, 
Chhakilapathar, Chikaniya, Lagala, Nachangaria, Tapasi, Thanpur, Sikatiya, Simra, Barmasa, Chamra Bahiyar, 
Hathnama, Kharbila, Pahridih, Putli Dabur, Shinghni, Thekcha, Ghongha, Haripur Bazar, Sankarpur, Bhawanipur, 
Hiranadhpur, Jaikishtopur Urf Narayankhor, Kalidaspur, Kumarpur, Nashipur, Rahaspur, Sitapahari, Madan 
Mohanpur, Nawada, Babupur, Baratalla, Dangpara, Ghagharjaani, Hathkathi, Manjhaladih, Murgadanga, 
Vaghshisha, Kaindua,Sundarpur, Atakora, Dumbo, Duria, Karanj, Karaundajor, Marasilli, South Bharno, Supa, 
AmaliyaNorth Bharno, Armai, Brinda, Ghatgaon, Kaseera, Katri, Kotam, Kumharia, Silafari, Aanjan, Toto,Bargaon, 
Bhadauli, Bondo, Lakeya, Murgu, Nagar, Pandariya, Rerwa, Ghaghra, Shivnathpur, Awsane, Bansdih, Basariya 
Kalan, Chando, Huttar, Mahugawan, Ornar, Ramgarh, Chainpur, Purbdiha, Baralota North, Jhabar, Jonr, Kauria, 
Lahlahe, Polpolkala, Sarja, Singrakhurd, Chiyanki, Jamune, Chaura, Dabara, Haratua, Jamudih, Kundari, Naudiha, 
Purnadih, Sangbar, Kotkhas, Lesliganj (167) 
12. Karnataka  Chickballapur, 
Shimoga, Bijapur, 
Gadag, Bellary, 
Raichur, 
Chamarajanagar, 
Hassan (eight) 
 Bagepalli, Gudibande, 
Hosanagar, Sorab, 
Muddebihal, Sindagi, 
Naragund, Shirahatti, 
Hospete, Kudligi, Devadurga, 
Lingasugur, Chamarajnagar, 
Kollegal, Belur, Hassan (16) 
Devaragudipally, Gulur, Kottakote, Mittemari, Nallappareddy Palli, Naremaddepalli, Paragodu, Pathapalya, 
Rashcharavu, Somanathapura, Beechnaganahalli, Hampasandra, Somenahalli, Tirumani, Ullodu, Varlakonda, 
Yellodu, Amrutha, Baluru, Hosuru(Sampekatte), Humcha, Karimane, Melinabesige, Nitturu, Purappemane, 
Reppanpete, Yaduru, Bennur, Chitturu, Dyavanahalli, Guduvi, Heche, Jade, Samanavalli, Shigga, Talagaddi, 
Yennekoppa, Alur, Bavur, Bhantanur, Bidarakundi, Dhavalagi, Hirur, Kolur, Mukihal, Rakkasagi, Tumbagi, Bekinal, 
Bommanahalli, Chattaraki, Gabbasavalagi, Kondaguli, Mannur, Rampur Pa, Yalagod, Yankanchi, Yaragal BK, 
Banahatti, Bhiranahatti, Chikkanaragund, Hadli, Hirekoppa, Hunsikatti, Kanakikoppa, Konnur, Shirol, Surkod, 
Adarakatti, Balehosuru, Bannikoppa, Bellatti, Chebbi, Dodduru, Koganur, Magadi, Shigli, Vadavi, 114.Danapura, 
Bukkasagara, Byluvaddigeri, Gadiganur, Malapanagudi, Mariyammanahalli, Nagenahalli, No.10 Muddapura, 
Ramasagara, Seetharama Thanda, Banavikallu, Choudapur, Gudekote, Hirehegdal, Huralihal, Hyalya, 
K.Ayyanahalli, Kandagallu, Nimbalageri, Rampura, Arkera, B.Ganekal, Chinchodi, Ganadhal (Deodurga), 
Hirebudur, Hosur Siddapur, Jagirajadaladinni, Jalahalli, Maladakal, Ramadurga, Bannigol, Bayyapur, 
Devarabhupur, Hutti, Kachapur, Kalapur, Kannal, Nagaral, Narakaladinni, Rodalabanda (U.K.P.), Arakalavadi, 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
152 
 
Badanaguppe, Demahalli, Honnalli, Kagalavadi, Kothalavadi, Madapura, Maliyuru, Nanjedevanapura, Punajanuru, 
Doddinduvadi, Ellemala, Kowdalli, Kunthur, Kurattihosuru, Managalli, Martalli, Palya, Singanalluru, Suleripalya, 
Bikkodu, Cheekanahalli, Ghattadahalli, Hagare, Halebeedu, Malasavara, Narayanapura, Savasihalli, Tholalu, 
Yamasandi, Channangihalli, Doddagenigere, Gorur, Hanumanthapura, Honnavara, Kattaya, Koravangala, 
Mosalehosahalli, Shantigrama, Tejur(157) 
13. Kerala  Thiruvananthapuram, 
Kottayam, 
Malappuram, 
Palakkad (four) 
 Athiyannur, Vamanapuram, 
Varkala, Ettumanoor, 
Kanjirappally, Lalam, 
Areacode, Kondotty, 
Mankada, Perinthalmanna, 
Mannarkkad, Ottappalam, 
Thrithala (13) 
Kanjiramkulam, Karumkulam, Vengannur, Kallara, Peringamala, Pullampara, Edava, Elakamon, Ottoor, 
Arpookkara, Athirampuzha, Neendur, Erumeli, Manimala, Parathode, Barananganam, Karur, Meenachil, 
Kavannur, Oorngattiri, Pulpatta, Kondotty, Nediyiruppu, Vazhayur, Makkaraparamba, Mankada, Moorkanadu, 
Angadipuram, Elamkulam, Kizhattur, Karimba, Kottopadam, Thachampara, Ambalappara, Nellaya, Vallapuzha, 
Nagalassery, Pattithara, Thrithala (39) 
14. Madhya 
Pradesh 
 Balaghat, Shahdol, 
Khargone, Satna, 
Dhar, Ashok Nagar, 
Datia, Chhindwara, 
Indore, Sehore, 
Vidisha, Shajapur, 
Neemuch (13) 
 Balaghat , Khairlanji, Kirnapur, 
Sohagpur, Burhar, 
Bhikangaon, Gogawan, 
Ramnagar, Majhgawan, 
Umarban, Tirla, Gandhwani, 
Chanderi, Mungaoli, Bhander, 
Seondha, Harai, Pandhurna, 
Sausar, Indore, Depalpur, 
Sehore, Ichhawar, Vidisha, 
Kurwai, Shajapur, Badod, 
Manasa, Neemuch (29) 
Naitra, Naharwani, Bhalewada, Servi, Linga, Aamgaw, Dhansua, Paraswada, Katangi, Bharveli, Beni, Miragpur, 
Sawargaw, Panjara, Khairi, Khairlanji, Chatera, Temni, Selotpar, Ghoti, Mohgaonkhurd, Parade, Bakkar, Dahedi, 
Jamadimeta, Kasangi, Lavveri, Mundesara, Pipalgawn, Sarad, Chunia, Sarangpur, Arajhula, Bodri, Dhanoora, 
Jamui, Kelmaniya, Lalpur, Padmaniya Khurd, Sinduri Chuniya, Dhummadol, Raikoba, Bairiha, Bijuri, Chhatai, 
Godinbuda, Katkona, Kuddi, Navatola, Sakra, Kanjhar, Patthar Wada, Badia Go., Boruth, Egaria, Kedwa, Nargaon, 
Pipalia Bujurg, Rehgaon, Sundrel, Ghatti, Piparkheda, Balgaon, Bilkhed Bujurg, Devli, Jagnath Pura, Lakhi, Nagjhiri, 
Rajpura, Solna, Sohaila, Argat, Devari, Tigana, Jigana, Majhatolva, Narayanpur, Nado, Gorasari, Bharatpur, Telni, 
Piperitola, Hardi, Lalpur, Kelhaura, Banka, Nayagav, Bhatwa, Karaudikala, Birpur, Kharberdi, Jamli, Malhera, 
Dedli-B, Dholahanuman, Sironj, Jalokhya, Pura, Balvarikala, Chunpya, Dholibawdi, Padla, Bhuwada, Kalibawdi, 
Ralamandal, Ukhalda, Dhanora, Kuwad, Kothda, Badia, Ambapura, Bagadia, Gyanpura, Musapura, Chandwada, 
Kharmpur, Sindhkuwa, Mafipura, Mawadipura, Sadariyakuwa, Kenvara, Khoribari, Bamoritanka, Bhyana, 
Dhechari, Jhagar, Khoksi, Merkabad, Russala, Singhada  Dhondhiya, Arron, Navni, Aaket, Bari, Godhan, Khanpur, 
Laloitanka, Muradpur, Piprod, Singhpur Chalda, Barcholi, Kulariya, Ajitpura, Saletra, Bindawa, Bhalka, Mustra, 
Sunari, Maithanapauj, Godan, Bilaspur, Eguai, Jhuharpura, Kanjoli, Chiina, Ruhera, Karerua, Nehla, Atreta, 
Bercha, Elkapar, Khapa, Nandewani, Rangari, Dewli, Pangadi, Satnoor, Gangatwada, Mehrakhapa, Dukarjhela, 
Khamtara, Saldhana, Moharia, Andol, Sukhapura, Bhoipar, Sejwada, Surla, Chopna, Gaurpani, Dhavadikhapa, 
Pandoni, Bhajipani, Junewani, Lonadehi, Sillewani, Mordongri, Sawajpani, Chhawadi, Chimankhapa, Arniya, 
Bavliya Khurd, Asravad Bujurg, Buranakhedi, Gogakhedi, Khati Pipalya, Nainod, Pipalda, Shivni, Umrikheda, 
Pirnalwasa, Katkoda, Arodakot, Birgoda, Farkoda, Harnasa, Karadiya, Nevri, Ralayata, Semda, Nayapura, 
Balondiya, Amlanoabad, Bhaukhedi, Dhablamata, Fangiya, Khajuriyaghengi, Molga, Neelbad, Sohankheda, 
Seelkheda, Bansiya, Barkheda Hasan, Bilkisganj, Doraha, Jharkheda, Lelakhadi, Nipaniya, Sarkheda, Sonda, 
Neemkheda, Pipariya Ajit, Peepal Kheda, Tharr, Karariya  Ahemedpur, Shajakhedi, Barro, Chitoriya, Kabula, 
Harrokhedi, Parakhedi, Nehra, Talapar, Gudawal, Roshanpipariya, Ishakhedi, Simardhan, Karaibarkhedi, Sirawali, 
Kaachi Kumhariya, Bercha, Tanda Pindonia, Bamori, Birgod, Haran Gaon, Ladawad, Nichma, Piploda, Tilawad 
Govind, Satgaon, Uchwas, Jaisingh Pura, Bargadi, Saranga Khedi, Guradia Badod, Jhota, Khjuri Badod, Lodha 
Khedi, Pipalia Ghata, Umarpur, Amlikheda, Bisalwas Songra, Chhayan, Harnawada, Kanakheda, Pipaliyabag, 
Sawan, Semlimewad, Seerkheda, Soniyana, Bhadwas, Bakhtuni, Bhagori, Denthal, Hanspur, Khetpaliya, Mokadi, 
Palasiya, Talau, Tamoti (290) 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 153 
 
15. Maharashtra  Ahmednagar, 
Nandurbar, Nanded, 
Latur, Gondia, 
Yavatmal, Buldhana, 
Sindhudurg, Thane 
(nine) 
 
Akola, Sangamner, Kopargaon, 
Akkalkuva, Shahada, Kandhar, 
Mukhed, Nanded, Renapur, 
Shirur Anantpal, Deoni, 
Lakhani, Tumsar, Kelapur, 
Yavatmal, Zari-Jamni, Motala, 
Khamgaon, Mehkar, Jawhar, 
Wada, Murbad, Sawantwadi, 
Kankavali, (24) 
Bahirwadi, Dhamangaon Awari, Dhamangaon Pat, Garadni, Kalamb, Lavhali Otur, Palsunde, Pimpalgaon Nipani, 
Sherankhel, Unchkhadak Kh, Chincoli Gurav, Jawalebaleshwar, Lohare, Nandur Khandarmal, Paregaon Bk, 
Paregaon Kh., Pimpriloki Azampur, Sawarchol, Talegaon, Wadzari Kh., Apegaon, Bahadarpur, Dhondewadi (N.V.), 
Javalke, Madhi Bk., Ranjangaon Deshn, Shirasgaon, Takali, Ves, Yesgaon, Bhagadari, Bhangrapani, Ghantani, 
Kakadkhunt, Mogra, Ohava, Porambi, Sinduri, Vadfali, Veli, Aslod, Bhagapur, Dondwade, Kakarde Digar, Katharde 
Digar, Lambola, Langadi Bhavani, Nande, Shahane, Udhalod, Kawtha, Guntur, Mundewadi, Kotkalamb, Varvat, 
Pokharni, Nawargapura, Hipparga Shah, Dharmapuri Majre, Bahadurpura, Hangarga, Sangavi Bhadeo, Bennal, 
Umardari, Wasoor, Bawanwadi, Aural, Chinchgaon, Sawali, Khairka, Brahmanwada, Bhondar, Siddhanath, 
Dhanegaon, Vishnupuri, Limbgaon, Thugaon, Nila, Someshwar, Kalhal, Borol, Deoni(Bu), Helamb, Jawalga, 
Lasona, Nagral, Talegaon, Walandi, Dawanihapparg, Sayyatpur, Aari, Chamarga, Dighod, Kalamgaon, Shend, 
Thergaon, Ujed, Yerol, Ajni(B), Sakol, Arajkheda, Bhokarmbh, Gavhan, Koshtgaon, Motegaon, Niwada, Takalgaon, 
Talni, Darji Borgaon, Lakmapur, Bori, Dewhadi, Gonditol, Koshti, Mangali(K), Pathri, Sihor, Wahni, Sindhapuri, 
Yerali, Alesur, Dighori, Gondi, Kesalwada(Wag), Lohar, Morgaon, Pendri, Salebhat, Pimpalgaon(Sadak), Seloti, 
Bhisani, Daheli, Kharad, Moha, Manpur, Ratchandna, Savargad, Sakur, Waghda, Yavali, Dharna, Chikhaldara, 
Chankha, Bahattar, Khairgaon (D), Kopmandvi, Zuli, Kawtha, Wai, Arli, Mandvi, Durbha, Jamni, Adkoli, Bhendala, 
Lingoti, Zamkola, Mulgavhan, Adegaon, Matharjun, Chinchpur, Parda, Borkhedi, Kabarkhed, Kolhi Golar, 
Mahalungi Jahagiri, Takali, Takli Ghadekar, Ubbalkhed, Vadgaon Kh, Parkhed, Ambikapur, Chitoda, Garadgaon, 
Hiwarkhed, Kalegaon, Konti, Kumbephal, Pimpalgaon Raja, Wazar, Varud, Andhrud, Gajarkhed, Ganpur, Kalyana, 
Mohana Kd, Mundephal, Ratnapur Hiwara Sable, Vishwi, Warvand, Ayare, Dengachimet, Bhuritek, Gorthan, 
Borale, Zap, Valvanda, Vadoli, Dhivanda, Aine, Moj, Aabje, Pimplas, Kelthan, Nandani, Sange, Gorad, Chamble, 
Bilghar, Akhada, Shelgaon, Maniwali (Khu), Merdi, Khaniware, Nadhai, Mhasa, Fansoli, Tembhare (Bu), 
Dongarnhave, Balegaon, Amboli, Bhalaval, Kalambist, Kolgaon, Malgaon, Niravde, Satarda, Wafoli, Chartha, 
Chaukul, Aynal, Harkul Budruk, Kalsuli, Nagve, Osargaon, Pisekamate, Shirval, Vagde, Dariste, Karul (240) 
16. Manipur  Imphal East, Thoubal, 
Tamenglong, 
Churachandpur (four) 
Imphal East I, Imphal East II, 
Thoubal, Kakching, 
Tamenglong, Nungba, Lamka, 
Sangaikot, Vangai (nine) 
Heingang,  Khurai Chingangbam Leikai, Khurai Nandeibam Leikai, Luwangshangbam,  Nilakuthi, Pungdongbam, 
Takhel, Waiton, Laipham Khunou, Kairang, Bamonkampur, Chanam Sandrok, Keirao Makting, Keirao, Kiyamgei 
Muslim Arapti, Naharup, Thongju Pt-II, Top Naoria, Tumukhong Moirangpurel, Uchekon Nongpok,  Heirok Pt II,  
Kangyambem, Khangabok Pt III, Leishangthem , Oinam Sawombung,  Sangaiyumpham Pt II,  Turel Ahanbi, 
Wangkhem, Leirongthel Ningel,  Maibam Uchiwa, Chairel, Irengband,  Langmeidong,  Mayeng Lamjao, Sekmaijin,  
Serou, Waikhong,  Wangoo,  Pallel,  Hiyanglam, Chaengdai, Guigailong,  Happy Villa – A, Khangchiuluan,  Model 
Village,  Rigunlong,  Salem (New),  Taobam,  Tamenglong Village,  Makhuam,  Rongdai,  Thingou,  Taodaijang,  
Nungba HQ,  Khongsang,  Charoi,  Charoi II,  Rengpang,  Longmai(Noney), Puiluan(Kambiron),  Bungmual,  Dorcas 
Veng,  Gochinkhupveng,  Hiangtam Lamka,  HQ Veng,  Mata Mualtam, Simveng,  Vengnuam,  Zenhang Lamka,  
Rengkai,  Dongjang,  Hengken,  L.Gangpimual,  Makhao,  Mongnelphai,  Saiboh,  T.Lailoiphai,  Tuitum Vajang,  
Sangaikot, Tuining,  Hengchungpunjee, Kasurbali, Kangring, Nungsekpunjee,  Phailienthang Punjee, Tahtuihmuan, 
Thingpuikuol,  Tuisen,  Sibapurikhal (Ankhasuo), Kangrengdor (90) 
17. Meghalaya  East Khasi Hills, West 
Khasi Hills, West Garo 
Hills and South Garo 
Hills (four) 
Chokpot, Gasuapara, Mairang, 
Mawphlang, Mawthadraishan, 
Rongram, Shella-Bholaganj, 
Tikrikilla (eight) 
Madan Umsaw Pyllun, Rangshken, Urur, Phudmyrdong, Lumsohriew, Mawripih ‘A’, Marpna, Nongbsap, 
Mawpunneng, Mawponghong, Laitmawpen, Madanbitaw, Mawtap Pyllun, Tiehbah, Trawsaitkhlieh, Len 
Pdengshnong, Umsaw ‘A’, Madankor, Dongsurok Laitryngew, Laitduh, Lumskul Mawphu, Mawsmai, Mawmluh, 
Shyrwang, Pyndeng Nonglori, Pyndeng Dombah, Nongrang, Nongkhlaw, Lawkynter, Langkyrteng, Nongthyldep, 
Dongbir, Umthlong, Madan Bynther, Laitkseh, Marngor, Mawlangkhar, Mawlangsu, Mawkohlur, Lawbyrtun, 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
154 
 
Nonglait, Nongshillong, Markasa, Asanang, Jendragre, Allagre, Ringgigre, Chandigre, Chokagre, Gondenggre, 
Rombagre, Chikasingre, Anogre, Waribokgre, Galwanggre, Danakgre, Rongkhongre, Marakpara, Mongalgre, 
Lower Sabanggre, Jugirjhar, Naguapara, Lower Rembigre, Pedaladoba, Bundukmali, Photamati, Aitibi, Tikrikilla, 
Ghaguapara, Odalguri, Wankolagre, Seempara – A, Seempara – B, Jatrakona, Dimapara – A, Dimapara – B, 
Kapasipara – A, Tellekali, Ramchengga – A, Ramchengga – B, Bolkongpara, Chokpotgre, Dagal Wagebokgre, Daji 
Teksragre, Ganchikalak, Gonggangre, Mitapgre, Rongrakgre, Sangknigre, Warimagre (90) 
18. Mizoram Lunglei, Lawngtlai 
(two) 
Lungsen, Hnathial, Lawngtlai, 
Bungtlang 'S' (four) 
Vairawkai, Sihphirtlang, Upper Lungrang,  Lungrang ‘S’, Silgur,  Nunsury, Khawmawi, Bindasora,  Lungsen,  Zodin,  
Serhuan,  Tipperaghat, Chengkawllui, Chhumkhum,  Phairuangkai, South Vanlaiphai, Pangzawl,  Aithur, Rawpui, 
Hnathial ‘N’, Hnathial ‘S’,   Zochachhuah,  Electric Veng,  Bazar,  Diltlang,  AOC Veng, Chawngtelui, Chawngte-P,  
Sihtlangpui, Tuidangtlang,  College Veng,  Lawngtlai III, Chikhurlui, Vaseikai, Kawnkhua (Sekulhkai), 
Tuichawngtlang,  Hmunnuam,  Bungtlang ‘S’,  Karlui (39) 
19. Nagaland Mon, Tuensang, 
Dimapur (three) 
Chen, Tobu, Sangsangnyu, 
Noklak, Chessore, Dhansiripar, 
Medziphema (seven) 
Chaoha Chingnyu, Chenloiso, Choknyu, Jakphang, Ngangching, Wangti, Maneakshu, Pesao, Ukha, Yakshu, 
Hakchang, Helipong, Maksha, Momgching, Sangsangnyu, Saochu, Chessore Village, Kiutsukiur, Kuthur, Shiponger, 
Ekhao, Kengnyu, Nakyak, New Pangsha, Panso B, Taknyu, Yakhao, Yimpang, Disagaphu, Doyapur, Khekiho, 
Kiyeto, Razaphe, Razaphe Basa, Singrijan, Toshezu, Aoyimti, Bungsang, Darogapathar, Diphupar, Hekheshe, 
Industrial Village, Khopanalla, Khriezephe, Molvom, Naagarjan, Paglapahar, Phaiphijang, Samaguri, Seithekema 
A, Sodzulhou, Sovima, Thilixu, Toluvi (54) 
20. Odisha Kendrapara, Khordha, 
Angul, Bhadrak, 
Ganjam, Sambalpur, 
Bolangir, Gajapati 
(eight) 
Aul, Rajnagar, Balianta, 
Khordha, Tangi, Angul, Kaniha, 
Basudevpur, Chandbali, 
Ganjam, Aska, Digapahandi, 
Bamra, Kuchinda, Rengali, 
Agalpur, Muribahal, 
Patnagarh, Gosani, Nuadada 
(20) 
Atala, Chandia Gadi, Demal, Ketuapala, Mahu, Mendha Pur, Patra Pur, Sahira, Singiri, Tunga,  Brahmansahi, 
Dangamala, Dera, Iswarpur, Kandira, Koilipur, Mahulia, Ostia, Rajnagar, Rangani, Bainchua, Balianta, Bentapur, 
Jaganathpur, Kakarudrapur, Prataprudrapur, Puranpradhan, Umadeibrahmapur, Sarakana, Jhintisasan, Bajapur, 
Dhauli Muhan, Garh Haladia, Jankia, Kanpur, Malipur, Nalipada Arjunpur, Narangarh, Pallatotapada, Pubusahi, 
Achyutpur, Badapari, Badaokharia, Chhanagiri, Kuhudi, Lendo, Nuagarh, Olasingh, Rameswar, Sundarpur, 
Badakantakula, Balnga(New), Balasinga, Baluakata, Baragaunia, Khalari, Khinda, Kumursingha, Manikajodi, 
Saradhapur, Badagunduri, Balipasi, Bijigol, Biru, Deranga, Hanumanapur, Karnapal, Kulei, Kuluma, Parabil, 
Arandua, Aruhan, Barandua, Ertal, K.K. Pur, Kumarpur, Lunga, Sudarsanpur, Balimunda, Balimunda, Bansada, 
Bhatapada, Bhuinbruti, Madhapur, Mausudha, Nalgunda, Nandapur, Totopada, Joshipur, Nologohira, Ramagada, 
Huma, Rajapur, Malada, S.Ramachandrapur, Pallibandha, Subalaya, Palanga, Pairosi, Khandadeuli, Benapat, 
Gunthupada, Kalasandhapur, Kamagada, Kendupadar, Khandadeuli, Khaira, Munigadi, Nimina, Sidhanai, Bomkai, 
Ch.Nimakhandi, Ch.Tikarpada, Gadagobindapur, Gokarnapur, Khamarigaon, Kusapada, Nimakhandipentha, 
Phasiguda, S.Tikarapada, Babunikitimal, Jarabag, Kinabaga, Sagara, Garposh, Mahulpali, Turei, Pindapathar, 
Keseibahal, Kabribahal, Boxma, Telitileimal, Paruabhadi, Bauriguda, Gochhara, Kuntara, Tainsar, Kusumi, 
K.Jamankira, Salebhadi, Laida, Rengloi,Jangla, Tamparkela, Jhankarpali, Katarbaga, Lapanga, Rengali, Salad, 
Tabadabhal, Agalpur, Babufasad, Bendra, Bhrsuja, Budula, Duduka, Kutasingh, Rinbachan, Nuniapali, Jharanipali, 
Bankel, Chalki, Chanabahal, Goimund, Haldi, Lakhana, Lebda, Tupaudar, Ichhapada, Malisira, Deulgaon, Gerda, 
Khuntsamlei, Maruan, Sunamudi, Tamian, Tendapadar, Ulba, Kendumundi, Dangabahal, Badakaturu, Bhuskudi, 
Bomika, Garabandha, Ghorani, Katalakaitha, Kerandi, Labanyagada, Rampa, Uppalada, Attarsingi, Betarsingi, 
Keradang, Khajuripada, Nuagada, Paikantarada, Parimala, Putrupada, Sambalpur, Tabarada (200) 
21. Punjab  Hoshiarpur, Barnala, 
Fazilka, Amritsar, 
Mukatsar, Panthankot 
Bhunga, Tanda, Talwara, 
Sehna, Barnala, Abohar, 
Jalalabad, Ajnala, Verka, 
Tantpal, Gugial, Kahlwan, Chak Gujran, Kapahat, Durian, Gallowal, Jallowal, Dhoot Kalan, Bassi Babu Khan, Jhans, 
Kaloya, Bhagian, Hambran, Kotli Bodal, Kotli Jand, Jaura, Jhawan, Harsi Pind, Khudda, Chattarpur, Depur, 
Fatehpur, Goewal, Beh Bidiya, Changrwan, Chamuhi, Heer Beh, Gwalchak shingaroo, Bhadiaran, Channa Gulab 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 155 
 
(six) Gidderbaha, Malout, Bamial, 
Narot Jai Mal Singh (13) 
Singh Wala, Cheema, Draj, Dharampura, Pakhoke, Dhilwan Patiala, Sukhpura, Tajoke, Rurekekhurd, Gurm, 
Kotdunna, Pandher, Manal, Bhure, Badra, Thulewa, Thikriwal, Chak Kala Tiba, Shergarh, Ruhrian Wali, Sherewala, 
Jodhpur, Bhagu, Ghuriana, Malukpur, Dhaban Kokarian, Bhawal Bassi, Attu Wala, Chak Gariban Sandar, Dhab 
Khariyal, Hazara Ram Singh Wala, Kirian wala, Lamochar Kalan Uttar, Mohar Singh wala, Pacca Kala wala, Sukhera 
Bodla, Sarai, Kotli Amb, Jafarkot, Kamirpur, Issapur, Hashampura, Bhure Gill, Kotla Kazian, Kotli Shah Habib, Dial 
Bhatti, Meeran Kot Kalan, Nangli, Murad Pura, Abadi Dayanand Nagar, Loharka Khurd, Khapar Kheri, Abadi 
Sunder Nagar, Thande, Bal, Gaunsabad, Chhatiana, Chakgiljewal, Kot Bhai, Kotli ablu, Mallan, Sahib chand, Sotha, 
Bhangchari, Raniwala, Pakki Tibi, Ram Nagar, Khunnan Kalan, Karniwala, Katorewala, Danewala, Khaneki Dhab, 
Anial, Bamial, Bhakhri, Chak amir, Gohla, Khojki Chak, Muthi, Abadi  Phoolpur, Begowal, Fatehpur, Nakki, Nangal, 
Nangal Farida, Sahoda Kalan, Sharif Chak, Shekhopur Manjiri (118) 
22. Rajasthan Bhilwara, Bundi, 
Churu, Dholpur, 
Dungarpur, Jaisalmer, 
Jaipur, Jalore (eight) 
Banera, Suwana, Raipur, 
Nainwa, Talera, Sardarshahar, 
Taranagar, Dholpur, Raja 
Khera, Sagwara, Simalwara, 
Sam, Sankra, Chaksu, Phagi, 
Viratnagar, Sanchore, 
Raniwara (18) 
Babrana, Baran, Beran, Chamanpura, Dabla, Kundiya Kalan, Rakshi, Salriya Kalan, Sardarnagar, Upreda, Atoon, 
Bhopalgarh, Dariba, Gundli, Gurla, Mahuwa Kalan, Rampuriya, Sangwa, Suwana, Swaroopganj, Asaholi, Bagar, 
Binta, Boriyapura, Jharol, Khemana, Narayan Khera, Pitha, Raipur, Thala, Bachhola, Dei, Gurha Sadavartian, 
Jetpur, Karwar, Khanpura, Mani, Maran, Rajlawata, Talwas, Aktasa, Bajad, Budhpura, Dabi, Dora, Jakhmund, 
Ladpur, Laxmipura, Leeled Byasan, Rajpura, Ajeetsar, Bhojsar Upadhiiyan, Boghera, Jaitsisar, Kalyanpura 
Purohitan, Kikasar, Kheenwansar, Melusar, Phoga Bhardhari, Rooplisar, Alayla, Bain, Bhaleri, Dheerwas Bara, 
Gajoowas, Kalwas, Raitunda, Redi, Sahwa, Sarayan, Biparpur, Bothpura, Karimpur, Kookra Makra, Kurendha, 
Maloni Panwar, Nagla Kharapur, Nidhaira Kalan, Pachgaon, Saipau, Bajna, Basai Gheeyaram, Basai Kare, Jatoli, 
Kasimpur, Kherli, Mangrol, Nagar, Sadapur, Sikroda, Barboodaniya, Bheeloora, Dencha, Dibra Chhota, Hadmala, 
Kahela, Od, Parwa, Pipla Gunj, Vageri, Baba Ki Bar, Bansiya, Baori, Gundlara, Jorawar Pura, Mala Kholra, Nagariya 
Panchela, Seemalwara, Sendola, Sakodra, Bersiyala, Bida, Chhatangar, Fatehgarh, Habur, Kapuriya, Khoohri, 
Loonar, Sam, Sipala, Balad, Barath Ka Gaon, Bhaniyana, Dantal, Kelawa, Khetolai, Lathi, Neran, Panasar, 
Rajmathai, Arnai, Damana, Danta, Dhanta, Hariyali, Karola, Khara, Nainol, Pamana, Surawa, Aajodar, Akhrad, 
Jakhadi, Jalera Khurd, Jorwas, Korka, Kura, Ratanpur, Ropsi, Silasan, Garoodwasi, Jhapda Kalan, Kadera, 
Kathawala, Kumhariyawas, Mahadeopura, Mandaliya, Nimodiya, Roopaheri Khurd Bapugaon, Sawai 
Madhosinghpura, Chittora, Dabich, Didawata, Harsooliya, Kansel, Kishorpura, Ladana, Lasariya, Peepla, Phagi, 
Badodiya, Bagawas Ahiran, Bhamod, Bhankhari, Chheetoli, Jaje Kalan, Jodhpura, Poorawala, Rampura,Tulsipura  
(180) 
23. Sikkim East Sikkim, South 
Sikkim (two) 
Pakyong, Regu, Namchi, Temi 
Tarku (four) 
 Aho Yangtan, Kartok Namcheybong, Aritar, Dalapchan, Assangthang, Maniram,  Ben Namprik, Temi (8) 
24. Tamil Nadu  Coimbatore, Erode, 
Perambalur, 
Pudukottai, Tiruvallur, 
Vellore, Sivagangai, 
Virudhunagar (eight) 
Pollachi South, 
Kinathukadavu, Sultanpet, 
Alangayam, Thimiri, 
Thirapathur, Kadambathur, 
Vilivakkam, Poondi, 
Bhavanisagar, TN Palayam, 
Kodumudi, Alathur, Veppur, 
Manamadurai, S.Pudur, 
Kannangudi, Vembakottai, 
Kariapatti, Rajapalayam, 
Veeralpatti, Naickenpalayam, Gomangalam, Ambarampalayam, Gomangalampudur, Thenkumarapalayam, Nallur 
(S), Vakkampalayam, Zaminkottampatti, Thondamuthur, Panapatti, Kovilpalayam, Arasapalayam, Kakkadavu, 
Mettupalayam, Sirukalandai, Solavampalayam, Devarayapuram, Andipalayam, Sokkanur, Kumarapalayam, 
Varapatti, Sellackarichal, Vadavedampatti, Bogampatti, Sencheripudur, S.Ayyampalayam, Kamalapatti, 
Kallapalayam, Pachapalayam, Beemalulam, Pungampattunadu, Govindapuram, Girisamudiram, Neckanamalai, 
Elayanagaram, Madanancheri, Pudumadu, Pethaveppampattu, Vijilapuram, Pali, Pariyamangalam, 
Melnayakanpalayam, Senganavaram, Mambakkam, Soraiyur, Sennasamudram, Durgam, Mazhaiyur, Vembi, 
Aneri, Pudukottai, Kakamanpalayam, Annandapatti, Kurumbakeri, Mittur, Ak Mottur, Thathansvalasai, 
Kadhirampatti, Madapalli, Kondancheri, Polivakkam, Ramankoil, Kopur, Kadambathur, Vellerithangal, 
Pudumavilangai, Citrambakkam, Killacheri, Mappedu, Palavedu, Ayyapakkam, Pammadhukulam, Adayalampattu, 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
156 
 
Thirumayam, 
Ponnamaravathi, Viralimalai 
(23) 
Vellachery, Pondeshwaram, Arakkambakkam, Vanagaram, Karalapakkam, Alathur, Kalavai, Eraiyur, Tb Puram, 
Perunjeri, Meyyur, Ramalingapuram, Ellapanaidupetttai, Thiruper, Goonipalayam, Nampakkam, Desipalayam, 
Karapadi, Kavilipalayam, Mathampalayam, Nallur, Nochikkuttai, Periyakallippatti, Pungar, Kothamangalam, 
Panayampalli, Akkaraikodivery, Arakkankottai, Kanakkampalayam, Nanjaipulliampatti, Odayagoundenpalayam, 
Perumugai, Pullappanaickenpalayam, Punjaithurayam Palayam, Kondayampalayam, Kongarapalayam, Anjur, 
Ayyampalayam, Avudaiyarparai, Elunuthimangalam, Ichipalayam, Kollathupalayam, Kondalam, 
Kongudaiyampalayam, Nanjaikollanalli, Vallipuram, Elandapatti, Adhanur, Ayinapuram, Naranamangalam, 
Elandankuzhi, Mavilangai, Kolathur, Padaloopr, Irur, Kizhamathur, Perali, Aduthurai, Andhoor, Vadakkalur, 
Periammapalayam, Kizhumathoor, Varagoor, Kunnam, Asoor, Sirumathur, Keelappasalai, Kattikulam, Thanjakoor, 
Sannathipudhukulam, Perumpatcheri, M.Karisalkulam, Vagudi, Kalkurichi, Therukku Chanthanoor, Seikalathur, 
Kuluthupatti, Manaloor, Piranapatti, Puluthipatti, Kunnathur, K Pudupatti, Melavannariruppu, Urathupatti, 
Ulagampatti, Musundapatti, Hanumanthagudi, Koduvour, Thiruppakkottai, Puthurani, Kangani, Thathani, 
Vengalore, Kandiyur, Kannangudi, Siruvatchi, A.Lakshmiapuram, Alangulam, Guganparai, Jegaveeranpatti, 
Kundairrpu, Sevalpatti, Thulukankurichi, Vettrilaiyoorani, Subramaniapuram, Elayirampannai, Varalotti, 
Mustakuruchi, Pampatty, Kambikudi, Vakkanankundu, Melakallankulam, Alagianallur, V.Nangoor, Manthope, 
Chettikulam, Zamin Nallamangalam, Ayankollankondan, Sundaranatchiyapuram, Venganallur (S), Muhavoor, 
Meenachipuram, Ganapathy  Sundaranatchiyapuram, Chatrapati, Cholapuram, Sundarajapuram, Kannanoor, 
Pulivalam, Arasampatti, Kuzhipirai, Melur, Nachandupatti, Kuruvikondampatti, Rarapuram, Kottur, Thulaiyanoor, 
Maravamadurai, Olimangalam, Kopnapatti, Konnaipatti, Konnayampatti, Melamelnilai, Nagarapatti, Nallore, 
Vedampatti, Chirukalamboor, Letchumanampatti, Perambalur, Boodhakudi, Viralimalai, Meenaveli, Kesavanoor, 
Kumaramangalam, Vadudapatti, Theravoor, Pakudi (230) 
25. Tripura  West Tripura, South 
Tripura (two) 
Jirania, Hezamara, Teliamura, 
Kakraban, Killa, Matabari (six) 
 
Bridhanagar, Durganagar, Madhya Debendranagar, Paschim Jiraniakhala, Purba Debendranagar, Purba Noagaon, 
Radhakishore Nagar, Radhapur, Sachindranagar, Uttar Majlishpur, Surendanagar, Barkathatl, Paschim Chandpur, 
Paschim Tamakari, Balurbandh, Meghlibandh, Dumarakaridak, Purbanagaon, Ramshankar, Shankhola, Paschim 
Teliamura, Madhya Krishanpur, Dakshin Krishinpur, Howaibari, Hadrai, Sardukarkari, Moharchhar A, 
Chakmaghat, Uttarpulinpur, Paschim Howaibari, Dakshin Rani (Adc), Dhuptali (Adc), Hadra, Hurijala, Ichachhara, 
Jamjuri, Murapara, Purba Tulamura (Adc), Shilghati, Uttar Shilghati (Adc), Killa, Raiyabari, Kachigang, Choyghoria, 
East Khupilong, Kowaimura, South Baramura, Noabari, Uttar Brajendranagar, South Brajendranagar, Barabhaya, 
Dalshin Maharani, Gamaria, Khilpara, Maharani, Purba Gakulpur, Shalgara, Tepania, Uttar Kalaban, Uttar 
Maharani (60) 
26. Uttar Pradesh  Azamgarh, Kushi 
Nagar, Allahabad, 
Gonda, Balrampur, 
Sultanpur, Varansi, 
Bareilly, Moradabad, 
Rampur, Bulandshahr, 
Ghaziabad, Sitapur, 
Unnao, Lucknow, 
Jalaun, Banda, 
Chitrakoot (18) 
Ahiraula, Maharajganj, Koilsa, 
Ramkola, Padrauna, 
Captainganj, Soraon, Chaka, 
Urwa, Itiathok, Babhanjot, 
Katrabazar, Pachpedwa, 
Sridattganj, Dubeypur, 
Dostpur, Bhadaiya, 
Chiraigaon, Harahua, Mirganj, 
Bhadpura, Alampur Jafrabad, 
Bahjoi, Bilari, Moradabad, 
Kusamahara, Vilari, Gahzi, Pakdi, Kotavali Pur, Kori Ghatampur, Ishakpur, Sajani, Sahuwal Asilai, Shambhupur, 
Bhatauli, Mureelpur, Araji Jajman Jot, Mahaji Dewara Jadid, Baijuapur, Govardhanpur, Bhilam Pur, Captaingang, 
Chaurashi, Motipur, Kaudiya, Benghu Kishundev Patti, Deurpur Sarai, Usurkudewa, Bhawanipatti, Bhadaura  
Molnapur, Rampur Dasharajpatti, Ghazipur, Karamhadigur Pur, Keshavpur, Farna, Lala Chapra, Motipakad, 
Bhathahi Bujurg, Tarkulwa, Parorha, Kusumhi, Abdul Chak Islam, Pidari, Deoria Babu, Jungal Hanumanganj, 
Gangrani, Lamuha Kewal Chapra, Sukhpura, Nadah, Sarpatahi Bujurg, Sahuadih, Kalyan Chhapar, Jungal  
Naharchhapra, Sakhopar, Pemali, Pakadi, Kundur, Gangrai, Bauliya, Mundera, Captainganj, Balua, Sudhiyani, 
Padkhori, Gohari, Sarai Bahar, Sahaji Pur, Sarai Lal Khatoon Shiv Garh, Padraiya, Raja Pur Malhuva, Gaura, 
Jallupur, Malak Chaturi, Singar Pur, Dabhav, Nibi Khurd, Balapur, Bara Mar, Ghogha Pur, Champat Pur, Chak Pure 
Khurd, Bhadara, Newada Samogar, Lawayan Kala, Chilbila, Akodha, Lehadi, Kanjouli, Chauktha Tivariyan, Patti 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 157 
 
Bilaspur, Shahabad,  
Anupshahar, Agauta, Khurja, 
Muradnagar, Garh 
Mukteshwar, Machretha, 
Hargaon, Parsendi, Hilauli, 
Sikandarpur Karan, Auras, 
MohanLal Ganj, Kakori, Konch, 
Jalaun, Tindwari, Mahua, 
Karvi, Manikpur (46) 
 
Nath Rai, Upraura, Barva, Ram Nagar, Amiliya, Belwa Shukla, Karuapara, Sighawa Pur, Lakhani Pur, Ramwapur 
Nayak, Arjunpur, Verdeeha, Belwa Bahuta, Baher Kunwa, Gyanapur Khariha, Bhavpur, Mubarak Pur Grant, Itawa 
Khurd, Barhara, Bangawa, Dhodaupur, Pipra Ismail, Gaura Bujurg, Izadi Pur, Pipra Barakhna, Sehariya Kala, 
Sarainya, Nadanwa, Basbhariya, Pipari Manjha, Babupur, Nakha, Chaipurwa, Meharbana Bad, Teri, Dhubaulia, 
Bhathar, Gurchihwa, Bhushar Uchwa, Adamtara, Laukhwa, Mankapur, Chorsi, Gaurabhari, Bangarh Pipri, 
Mehmoodnagar, Kapauahsherpur, Dhowadabar, Belai Bujurg, Baibheet, Babhanpurwa, Dhamauli, Mujehna, 
Agaya Bujurg, Chandanpur, Baijapur, Ramapur, Bansi, Dehali Mubarakpur, Katkauli, Bibiganj, Lauhar Paschim, 
Jaitapur, Khainchila Kala, Lauhar Dakxin, Mustafa Badkala, Sukhaupur Asrafpatti, Bani, Sariya Mustafa Bad, Gorai, 
Imligawan, Pahar Pur Raipatti, Bamhrauli, Arjunaipur, Katara Chunghupur, Kenaora, Pithipur, Belasada, Karomi, 
Kuchmuch, Alipur, Abhiya Kala, Unchahara, Sarayachal, Mahesuwa, Allopur, Tilmapur, Sultanpur, Irasti, Barai, 
Dinapur, Sonavrasa, Mokalpur, Saraiya Bishunpura, Khalispur, Paramanand Pur, Ganesh Pur, Paliyashambhupur, 
Kaklpur, Lodan, Gahura, Ausan Pur, Gosaipur Mohavn, Kohasi, Haribllabhapur, Divna, Pipariyamustquil, 
Pahunchabuzurgmustquil, Simariya, Junhaimustquil, Balupura, Sirodhiangadpur, Tilmas, 
Mohammadaganjmustquil, Nagariyakalyanpur, Panvadiyaelakajalalpur, Margapurmargaiya, 
Pahrapururbhagwatipur, Surajpur Paroriya, Dhimri, Matkapur, Karuasahabganj, Dabri Dabra, Ambarpur, 
Gulariyalekhraj, Daruapur, Majnoopur, Kangaon, Chadpur Navadia, Sihuliya, Rasula, Nakatpur, Bhojpur, Bilauri, 
Digoi, Pagona, Fatehpur Sarif Nagar, Bisaroo, Mulheta, Baderia, Chopa, Beharoli Taharpur, Maithara Allpur, 
Kirari, Bhawan, Deora Khas, Dharam Pur Kuiyan, Lakhneta, Kurh Fateh Garh, Naglia Jat, Maleh Pur Sidhari, Atwa 
Checheri, Maleh Pur Bhawani, Dharam Pur Ratta, Ahlad Pur Khem Urf Raipur, Sonakpur, Umari, Vakainia Mafi, 
Uttam Pur Bahelal Pur, Barbar Mazra, Lodipur Rajpoot, Mangupura, Rasoolpur Sunwati, Bhensia, Theekri, 
Bhatpura Taran, Bedpur, Pipalia Mehto, Mundia Kalan, Tehri Khwaja, Chandayan, Ahro, Jithania Jagir, Dalki, 
Sitaura, Madyan Budepur, Dholsar, Lodhipur, Nababganj, Udaipur Jagir, Raipur, Doharia, Khandeli, Ravana, 
Mittarpur Ahreola, Kishankhera, Karanpur Kalan, Roopwas, Bagsra, Hasanpur Bangar, Salalmatpur, Khanoda, 
Bibiyana, Sunana, Paharpur, Tatarpur, Akhtayarpur, Meerpur, Agauta, Neemchana, Bagwala, Jasanawali Kalan, 
Kheri, Brari, Pawsara, Saneeta Safipur, Dharari, Khurja Dehat, Bichhat, Asgarpur, Dastura, Bhagvanpur, Sikari, 
Maina Kalandra Garhi, Akhtyarpur, Jalalpur Dindhal, Sarna Murad Nagar, Manauli, Sikhaida Hajari, Rewadi 
Rewda, Husainpur, Nekpur Sabitnagar, Firozpur, Painga, Badka Arifpur, Lahadara, Dhana, Chittauda 
Mahiuddinpur, Dholpur, Sadullapur Lodi, Chandener, Bagadpur, Karimpur, Salarpur, Dahra, Hans Khera, 
Gujrehta, Anogi, Sisendi, Bijubamau, Fateh Nagar, Gadhi, Barsandhiya, Mirzapur Uttari, Mirzapur Dakshini, Keuti 
Kalan, Katesar, Barkherwa, Wazirpur, Semari  Bhan, Richhin, Gurdhapa, Madnapur, Bariyadih, Nigohan, 
Udanapur Kalan, Meernagar, Narsohi, Misepur, Mohraiya Kala, Kaimahra Wazirpur, Khadaniya, Gauriya Kalan, 
Shahpur Dalawal, Chandpur, Mardan Pur, Bardha, Ahesa, Barwa Kalan, Bahwa, Gujauli, Khanpur, Nari Chak, 
Maharani Khera, Musandi, Karaundi, Anoop Pur, Badiyan Khera, Bhaisai Koyal, Ranipur, Vibhaura Chandan Pur, 
Tikari Ganesh, Rawat Pur, Mawaiya Mafi, Chhariha, Alipur Michloula, Lahru, Tikara Bao, Samad, Tikara Samad, 
Maini Bhawakheda, Kabroyee, Rampur Khanjhadi, Bahadurpur Khanjhadi, Seemau, Dayal Pur, Bindauwa, Garhi 
Mehdauli, Dahiyar, Paraspur Thattha, Balsingh Khera, Samesee, Salsamau Hilgi, Hasanpur Kaneri, Nigoha, 
Mahipatmau, Saifalpur, Jehta, Sarousa Bharousa, Amethya Salempur, Salempur Patoura, Sraiprem Raj, 
Kushmoura Haluwa Pur, Saitha, Pahiya Ajampur, Anda, Pahar Goan, Panyara, Bharsunda, Gumawli, Birgawan 
Bujurg, Sami, Kaithi, Kunda, Jamrehi Khurd, Makarand Pura, Dhanaura Kalan, Nagri, Kushmara, Mohan Pur 
Kudari, Sarang Pur, Gadhela, Harkauti, Ura Malloo, Alai Pura, Bhujrakh, Bambia, Loumar, Sindhouli, Atrahat, 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
158 
 
 
Bareri Kala, Chirhuta, Tarahi Mafi, Godhni, Ghokharhia, Rahusat, Nayee, Kharauch, Manipur, Bdeha Syodha, 
Baruwa Spotha, Prem Pur, Dhurgapur, Bachehi, Anadhuwa, Gadhighat, Ramayapur, Baihar, Hariharpur, Kadar 
Gunj, Itkhari, Khutahaa, Bhanbhayee, Baramafi, Bhaganpur, Bambhiya, Devakali, Baghaura, Nagar, Arvara, Kota 
Kandaila, Bagdari, Nihi, Raipura, Itwa Dudaila (460) 
27. Uttarakhand  Pauri, Dehradun, 
Pithoragarh, Almora 
(four) 
Pauri, Khirsu, Ekeshwar, 
Chakrata, Vikas Nagar, 
Munsiyari, Didihat, Bhikiasen, 
Dwarahat, Dhauladevi (10) 
Ayal, Dhanau Malla, B. Dhandari, Baunsari, Ujyadi, Nankot, Gumai, Garh Ka Margaon, Bada, Kyark, Kothgi, 
Markhoda, Gajeli, Sumadi, Jaletha, Sweet, Dharigaon, Badeshu, Mindangaon, Koltha, Dyuld, Vinjoli, Sanglakoti, 
Matchouri, Malethi, Naugaon, Mathana, Gorli, Pathar, Vatholi, Mashk, Rajanoo, Behmoo, Painva, Bulhad, 
Kharoda, Jaadi, Kunva, Atal, Mundhol, Dhakrani, Bawan Dhar, Fatehpur, Jaman Khata, Majri, Kata Pathar, Matogi, 
Babugarh, Baragiwala, Sabhawala, Bajeta, Dhamigaon, Quiri, Ringu, Khasiabara, Kotiyura, Manitundi, Ringonia, 
Chauna Bhadeli, Ruispata, Lakhtigaon, Dunakot, Sitauli, Durlekh, Jakhghaulet, Kandaman Singh, Leparthi, 
Nanpapo, Mala Jhula, Satyal Gaon, Peepal Gaon, Inda, Mayoli, Bajan, Singoli, Budhali, Palitholi, Ugalia, Naikana, 
Kharak, Sutar Gaon, Naulakot, Todara, Kui, Kulsivi, Rawadi, Ida Sera, Chhana, Bavan, Sakuni, Khola, Madam, Mani 
Agar, Kothuligunth, Gurdabaj, Dunarh, Naugaon, Chaun Dungari, Faltiya, Kunja Gunth(100) 
28. West Bengal  Bardhaman, 
Murshidabad, South 
24 Parganas, Bankura, 
Jalpaiguri (five) 
Sarenga, Simlapal, Hirabandh, 
Bhangore-I, Namkhana, 
Baruipur, Bardhaman-I, 
Jamuria, Katwa-II, Kalchini, 
Dhupguri, Nagrakata, Suti-I, 
Raghunathganj-II, Beldanga-I 
(15) 
Bikrampur, Dubrajpur, Lakshmisagar, Machatora, Mandalgram, Parsola, Simlapal, Bikrampur, Chiltor, Gargaria, 
Goalbari, Neturpur, Sarenga, Baharamuri, Gopalpur, Hirabandh, Maliyan, Moshiara, Baghar-I, Baghar-Ii, Bandul-I, 
Belkash, Kshetia, Kurmun-I, Rayan-I, Rayan-Ii, Saraitikar, Bahadurpur, Chinchuria, Churulia, Dobrana, Hijalgara, 
Kenda, Madantor, Parasia, Shyamla, Tapsi, Agradwip, Gazipur, Jagadanandapur, Karui, Palsona, Singi, Sreebati, 
Malangi, Kalchini, Chuapara, Dalsingpara, Garopara, Jaygaon I, Latabari, Mendabari, Rajbhatkhaowa, Satali, 
Banarhat I, Banarhat-Ii, Binnaguri, Chamurchi, Gadong I, Gadong Ii, Jharaltagram Ii, Magurmari Ii, Sakoajhora I, 
Salbari I, Angrabhasa – I, Angrabhasa – Ii, Champaguri, Luksan, Sulkapara, Ahiran, Bahutali, Bansabati, Harua, 
Nurpur, Sadikpur, Barasimul-Dayarampur, Giria, Jotkamal, Kasiadanga, Lakshmijola, Mitipur, Sammatinagar, 
Sekalipur, Sekendra, Teghari – I, Bhabta-I, Madda, Debkundu, Chaitanyapur I, Chaitanyapur Ii, Mirzapur I, 
Mirzapur Ii, Mohula I, Mohula Ii, Bodra, Chandaneshwar – I, Chandaneshwar – Ii, Durgapur, Jagulgachhi, 
Narayanpur, Pranganj, Shankshahar, Tardah, Budhakhali, Frezargunj, Haripur, Mousuni, Namkhana, Shibrampur, 
Narayanpur, Hardah, Shankarpur I, Belgachi, Champahati, Dhapdhapi Ii, Hariharpur, Mallickpur, Ramnagar I, 
Ramnagar Ii, Shikharbali Ii (120) 
29. Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
North & Middle 
Andaman, South 
Andaman (two) 
Little Andaman, Prothrapur, 
Rangat, Diglipur (four) 
Hut Bay, Netaji Nagar, Ram KrishnaPur, Shyam Nagar, Garacharma-I, Govind Nagar, Dasarathpur, Long Island, 
Parnasala, Kishorinagar, Kalighat, Diglipur, Nilambur , R.K. Gram (14)     
30. Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
 Dadar & Nagar Haveli 
(one) 
Dadar & Nagar Haveli (one) Kala, Chauda, Besada, Khedapa, Vansda, Naroli, Bonta, Samrvarni, Rakholi,Sayali (10) 
31. Lakshadweep  Lakshadweep (one) Kavaratti, Agatti, Amini (three) Kavaratti, Agatti, Amini (three) 
32. Puducherry  Puducherry, Karaikal 
(two) 
Ariankuppam, Villianur, 
Karaikal(three) 
Andiarpalayam, Ariyankuppam West, Bahour (East), Abishegapakkam, Karaiyamputhur Panayadikuppam, 
Manamedu, Nettapakkam, Kalmandapam Pandasozhanallur, Sembiapalayam  - I Nathamedu, Sooramangalam, 
Kalitherthal Kuppam, Katterikuppam, Madagadipet, Odiampet, Santhaipudukuppam, Santhamangalam, 
Sedrapet, Suthukeny, Thirukannur, Thiruvandarkoil, Ambagarathur, Keezhaiyur, Melakasakudy, Neravy(East), 
Pettai, Sellur, Thirunallar(North), Thirunallar(South), Ponbethy, Kurumbagaram (30) 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
159 
Annex-3A 
Annual Plan/Development Plan 
 (Refer to paragraph 3.2) 
 
Documented Annual 
Plan not prepared or 
was  incomplete 
Meeting at GS 
level not convened 
District Annual Plan 
not prepared 
Block-wise Shelf of 
Projects not prepared
Persondays to be 
generated not 
indicated 
Full cost of each 
project not 
indicated 
State/UT GPs State/UT GPs State/UT Districts State/UT Districts State/UT Districts State Districts
Andhra 
Pradesh 
150 Karnataka 128 Andhra 
Pradesh 
5 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
4 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
4 Assam 3 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
43 Punjab 17 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
4 Goa 2 Assam 3 Haryana 2 
Goa 14 West Bengal 83 Assam 1 Gujarat 6 Bihar 15 Nagaland 3 
Gujarat 150 Lakshadweep 3 Goa 2 Kerala 4 Haryana 2 Punjab 3 
Jharkhand 167  Gujarat 6 Punjab 1 Jharkhand 6 Tamil 
Nadu 
1 
Maharashtra 240  Sikkim 2 Tamil Nadu 2 Karnataka 3   
Meghalaya 89  Tamil 
Nadu 
7 Uttar 
Pradesh 
14 Madhya 
Pradesh 
9   
Nagaland 54  Uttar 
Pradesh 
18 West Bengal 5 Odisha 8   
Punjab 56  West 
Bengal 
3 Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli
1 Tamil Nadu 6   
Sikkim 8  Dadra & 
Nagar 
Haveli 
1 Puducherry 2 Puducherry 2   
Tamil Nadu 200          
Puducherry 30          
12 1201 4 231 10 49 10 41 10 58 5 12

Report No. 6 of 2013 
160 
Annex-3B 
Annual Plan/Development Plan 
 (Refer to paragraph 3.2) 
 
Enduring outcomes not 
given in District Plan 
Crop pattern data not 
used in plan 
District Plan did not 
ensure that 50 per cent 
works were to be 
executed by GP 
Unique work code not 
allotted to  works in 
plan 
State Districts State Districts State Districts State/UT Districts 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
4 Assam 6 Bihar 1 Assam 8 
Assam 3 Bihar 15 Haryana 6 Bihar 15 
Bihar 15 Jharkhand 6 Maharashtra 2 Jharkhand 5 
Haryana 6 Kerala 3 Punjab 1 Kerala 4 
Jharkhand 6 Maharashtra 9   Maharashtra 9 
Karnataka 8 Nagaland 3   Mizoram 2 
Kerala 2 Rajasthan 2   Nagaland 3 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
9 Uttar 
Pradesh 
18   Rajasthan 1 
Nagaland 3 West Bengal 5   Tamil Nadu 6 
Odisha 8     Uttarakhand 4 
Rajasthan 1     Lakshadweep 1 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
18       
Uttarakhand 4       
13  87 9  67 4  10 11  58 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
161 
Annex-3C(i) 
Delay in preparation of Annual Plan/Development Plan at GP level 
 (Refer to paragraph 3.2.8) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
State where delay in preparation 
of Annual Plan observed 
Number of 
GPs 
Delays with respect to due date 
of 15 October  (in months) 
1. Assam 14 2  to 6 
2. Bihar 250 Plans were without dates 
3. Chhattisgarh 140 Records were not produced 
4. Himachal Pradesh 90 Dates of preparation were not 
mentioned 
5. Jharkhand 167 Dates of preparation were not 
mentioned 
6. Karnataka 157 Dates of preparation were not 
furnished to audit 
7. Kerala 13 1.5 to 4 
8. Madhya Pradesh 56 1 to 21 
9. Maharashtra 240 Dates were not recorded in Plans 
10. Odisha 200 Dates were not recorded in Plans 
11. Tripura 60 1 to 10 
12. Uttar Pradesh 140 Undated submission of Plans 
54 4 to 12 
266 Data not available 
13. Uttarakhand 100 Dates were not recorded 
 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
162 
Annex-3C(ii) 
Delay in preparation of Annual Plan/Development Plan at Block level 
 (Refer to paragraph 3.2.8) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
State where delay in 
preparation of 
Annual Plan 
observed 
Blocks Delay with respect to due date 
of 30 November  (in months) 
1. Assam 4 2 to 8 
2. Bihar 54 Plan without date 
3. Chhattisgarh  Records were not produced 
4. Goa 4 No Plan only Labour Budget 
5. Himachal Pradesh 9 Records were not produced 
6. Jharkhand 1 5 to 12 
7. Karnataka 16 Records were not produced 
8. Kerala 13 Actual dates were not available 
9. Madhya Pradesh 10 1 to 11 
10. Maharashtra 24 Dates were not recorded 
11. Nagaland 7 2 to 4 months 
12. Odisha  Dates were not available 
13. Punjab 2 3 
14. Tripura 6 3 to 7 
15. Uttar Pradesh 10 Undated plan  
7 1 to 9 
29 Dates were not available 
16. Uttarakhand 10 1 to 4 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
163 
Annex-3C(iii) 
Delay in preparation of Annual Plan/Development Plan  
at District level 
 (Refer to paragraph 3.2.8) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
State where delay in 
preparation of 
Annual Plan 
observed 
Number of Districts Delay with respect to due date 
of 31 December  (in months) 
1. Assam 1 5 
2. Bihar 8 12 
3. Chhattisgarh  Records were not produced 
4. Himachal Pradesh 4 Dates were not furnished 
5. Jharkhand 2 4 to 9 
6. Karnataka 8 Dates were not furnished to 
audit 
7. Kerala 1 2.5 
8. Madhya Pradesh 7 1 to 11 
9. Nagaland 3 2 to 8 
10. Odisha  Date not available 
11. Rajasthan 8 0.3  to 5.5  
12. Tripura 2 3 to 5 
13. Uttarakhand 4 3 to 6 
 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
164 
Annex-3C(iv) 
Delay in preparation of Labour Budget 
 (Refer to paragraph 3.2.8) 
 
Sl. No. 
State/UT where delay in 
preparation of Labour 
Budget observed 
Delay with respect to due date of 31 
January  (in months) 
1.  Bihar 2 to 6 
2.  Goa 2 to 10 
3.  Gujarat Records were not produced to audit  
4.  Karnataka Dates were not furnished to audit 
5.  Kerala 1 to 2 
6.  Rajasthan 0.3 to 5.5 
7.  Tripura 2 to 4 
8.  Uttar Pradesh 0.7 to 2.5  
9.  Uttarakhand 1 to 2.8 
10.  Andaman & Nicobar Islands 3 to 9 
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
165 
Annex-3D 
  Execution of works outside Annual Plan 
 (Refer to paragraph 3.4) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
State where works 
were executed 
outside the Annual 
Plan 
Number of 
Districts 
Number of works Amount 
(` in lakh) 
1. Assam 2 97 401.81 
2. Bihar 6 144 376.25 
3. Chhattisgarh 2 34 443.00 
4. Himachal Pradesh 4 3,859 9,727.24 
5. Jharkhand 4 58 2,244.24 
6. Rajasthan 3 474 2,426.98 
7. Uttarakhand 3 94 89.94 
8. West Bengal 1 147 174.06 
Total 25 4,907 15,883.52 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
166 
Annex-3E 
Shortfall in Execution of Works in Annual Plans 
 (Refer to paragraph 3.5) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT Works approved in Annual 
Plan 
Works sanctioned Works completed 
No. Amount 
(` in crore) 
No. Amount 
(` in 
crore) 
No. Amount 
(`  in 
crore) 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
55,83,401 51,086.07 55,83,401 51,086.07 19,32,414 12,225.38 
2. Assam 2,32,535 10,516.17 89,345 3,451.47 65,945 2,914.11 
3. Chhattisgarh 4,75,521 7,732.28 4,25,136 4,799.07 2,34,289 2,404.51 
4. Goa 3,003 31.05 3,003 31.05 1,296 15.25 
5. Haryana 25,179 242.07 21,900 292.21 12,371 272.02 
6. Karnataka 17,42,186 650.94 Data not 
available 
Data not 
available 
4,71,633 332.84 
7. Kerala 6,38,152 3,681.70 5,60,954 3,647.59 4,03,076 2,188.18 
8. Maharashtra 9,24,305 12,176.89 99,634 1,915.12 39,294 396.72 
9. Meghalaya 46,024 922.66 46,024 922.66 27,756 553.32 
10. Rajasthan 19,06,786 24,235.51 1,56,859 10,805.96 53,908 1,464.17 
11. Tripura 34,929 344.40 11,584 100.72 11,511 98.56 
12. Uttar Pradesh 9,71,061 10,430.29 6,56,808 5,916.73 4,69,767 3,948.57 
13. Uttarakhand 1,79,904 1,766.79 1,52,292 825.14 1,00,631 438.01 
14. West Bengal 1,56,419 3,102.54 48,416 654.74 41,232 539.69 
15. Lakshadweep 2,562 41.75 253 16.40 11 0.80 
Total 1,29,21,967 1,26,961.11 78,55,609 84,464.93 38,65,134 
(30 per 
cent) 
27,792.13 
(22 per 
cent) 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
167 
Annex-3F 
Preparation of District Perspective Plan 
 (Refer to paragraph 3.6) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
State/UT where 
DPP not 
prepared 
Districts Amount 
Received 
(` in lakh) 
Expenditure 
incurred in 
preparation of 
DPP (` in lakh) 
Unspent 
balance  
(` in lakh) 
1. Assam 2 20 9.80 10.20 
2. Bihar  7 70 9.20 60.80 
3. Chhattisgarh 5 50 2.17 47.83 
4. Gujarat 1 10 5.26 4.74 
5. Haryana 2 20 5.39 14.61 
6. Himachal 
Pradesh 
4 40 0 40.00 
7. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
3 30 3 27.00 
8. Jharkhand 6 60 4.70 55.30 
9. Karnataka 8 80 Data not 
available 
Data not 
available 
10. Madhya Pradesh 5 40 22.06 17.94 
11. Maharashtra 8 50 13.79 36.21 
12. Manipur 1 10 0 10.00 
13. Meghalaya 1 10 0 10.00 
14. Punjab 3 30 8.21 21.79 
15. Rajasthan 6 60 0 60.00 
16. Tamil Nadu 7 70 0 70.00 
17. Uttar Pradesh 10 70 6.52 63.48 
18. Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
2 20 0 20.00 
19. Lakshadweep 1 10 4.49 5.51 
20. Puducherry 2 10 0 10.00 
Total 84 760 94.59 585.41 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
168 
Annex-3G 
 Preparation of District Perspective Plan 
 (Refer to paragraph 3.6) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
DPP prepared but 
not approved by 
SEGC 
Number 
of 
Districts 
Amount 
received 
(` in lakh) 
Expenditure incurred 
in preparation of DPP 
(` in lakh) 
Unspent 
balance 
(` in lakh) 
1. Assam  6 60 49.52 10.48 
2. Bihar 2 20 15.33 4.67 
3. Gujarat 3 30 24.48 5.52 
4. Haryana 4 20 7.47 12.53 
5. Kerala 3 30 26 4.00 
6. Madhya Pradesh 8 30 8.07 21.93 
7. Maharashtra 1 Data not 
available 
5.08 Data not 
available 
8. Manipur 3 30 32.45 -2.45 
9. Punjab 3 30 4.95 25.05 
10. Rajasthan 1 10 3.02 6.98 
11. Tripura 3 30 8.20 21.80 
12. Uttarakhand 4 40 22.19 17.81 
13. West Bengal 1 10 7.12 2.88 
Total 42 340 213.88 133.65 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
169 
 
Annex-4A 
Delay in notification of State Rules 
(Refer to paragraph 4.2) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of State Due date of 
formulation of 
State Rules 
Date of 
formulation of 
State Rules 
Delay in 
formulation of 
Rules 
1. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
February 2007 March 2011 More than four 
years 
2. Himachal 
Pradesh 
February 2007 December 2009 More than two 
year 
3. Kerala February 2007 July 2009 More than two 
years 
4. Mizoram February 2007 September 2007 Seven months 
5. Sikkim February 2007 November 2010 More than three 
years 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
170 
Annex-4B 
Deficiencies in Technical Support 
(Refer to paragraph 4.5) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State 
Audit observation (Status of Panels of accredited engineers at District 
and Block levels) 
1. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
State government did not constitute panel of accredited engineers. 
2. Assam In the test checked districts Cachar and Kamrup (rural), 58 and 124 
(Civil Engineering diploma holders) accredited engineers were 
engaged during July 2009 to October 2009 respectively and 
subsequently retrenched from service with effect from April 2010 as 
they did not possess the required technical knowledge for the 
assigned work which resulted in infructuous expenditure of ` 15.62 
lakh and ` 29.80 lakh respectively, towards their remuneration. 
3. Bihar State government did not constitute panel of accredited engineers.  
4. Gujarat State government did not constitute panel of accredited engineers.  
5. Haryana State government did not constitute panel of accredited engineers.  
6. Himachal 
Pradesh 
State government did not constitute panel of accredited engineers.  
7. Jharkhand State government did not constitute panel of accredited engineers.  
8. Karnataka  State government did not constitute panel of accredited engineers. 
However, 82 to 97 percent of the post of engineers created by the 
state governments had remained vacant as March 2012. 
9. Maharashtra State government did not constitute panel of accredited engineers. 
10. Manipur The panel of accredited engineers was not constituted. The services 
of DRDA engineers were utilized for MGNREGS works. The state 
government had deployed technical supportive staff on contract 
basis in all the four sampled districts, which were stated to be 
insufficient by the DPCs in Tamenglong and Thoubal districts.  
11. Meghalaya State government did not constitute panel of accredited engineers. 
12. Mizoram The state government did not constitute panel of accredited 
engineers in two test checked districts and in eight blocks under 
them for the purpose of assisting with preparation estimate and 
measurement of works. 
13. Nagaland The panel of accredited engineers was not constituted in the three 
test checked DPCs and blocks. Only the regular engineers appointed 
in DPC/block office were assigned for the preparation of estimate 
and measurement of works. 
14. Odisha State government did not constitute panel of accredited 
engineers. 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
171 
15. Rajasthan The panel of accredited engineers was not constituted in three test 
checked districts i.e., Bhilwara, Churu and Dholpur. 
16. Tripura The panel of accredited engineers at the district and block levels 
were not constituted. The services of engineers of Rural Department 
were utilised. 
17. West Bengal The state government did not empanel accredited engineers at the 
district and block levels.  
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
172 
Annex-4C 
Technical support for planning, designing, monitoring,  
evaluation and quality audit 
(Refer to paragraph 4.5) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State Observation 
1. Assam The Technical Resource Support System was not set up.  It was also seen that out 
of the funds of  ` 32.70 lakh received for the purpose, an amount of ` 12.28 lakh 
was utilised for purchase of stationery articles, hiring of vehicles, payment of 
transport allowances and printing of Assamese Wall Calendar, etc. by the 
Commissionerate  resulting in irregular and unauthorised expenditure. 
2. Bihar The state government did not set up a Technical Resources Support System at the 
state and district levels. 
3. Haryana The state government had not set up Technical Resource Support System at state
and district levels. 
4. Karnataka State government did not appoint Technical Resource Support System at the 
state and district levels. 
5. Maharashtra Technical Resource Support System did not exist in three districts i.e.,
Ahmednagar, Bhandara and Nanded. 
6. Meghalaya The state government did not set up Technical Resource Support System. 
7. Mizoram The state government did not set up Technical Resource Support System.  
8. Nagaland The state government did not set up Technical Resource Support System.  
9. Sikkim The Technical Resource Support System was not constituted. The State Quality 
Monitoring and Technical Resource Committee had also recorded (June 2011) the 
unsatisfactory quality of work for want of technical assistance and supervision 
10. Uttar 
Pradesh 
The state Government did not take initiatives for developing Technical Resource 
Support System. However, the state Government availed of the services of 
engineers of the Technical Audit Cell (TAC) under the Rural Development 
Department and paid ` 2.04 crore for their salary and allowances for the period 
from January 2011 to March 2012 from the administrative expenditure of 
MGNREGS, excluding expenditure on vehicles, etc. in contravention of the orders 
of GoI. Since, the engineers engaged were permanent employees of the state 
Government and were not the dedicated MGNREGS personnel their pay and 
allowances were not to be paid from MGNREGS funds. 
It was further noticed that the total strength of the engineers of TAC was only 20 
and they were posted at division and state level offices of Rural Development 
department. Out of these, five engineers had dual charges of the divisions. The 20 
engineers of TAC engaged for 72 districts were not sufficient. Audit noticed that 
GoI released (2008) ` 54.20 lakh as first tranche for developing Technical 
Resource Support System but this amount remained unspent in bank accounts at 
the state level. 
11. West Bengal Technical Resource Support System was not set up at the state and district levels.  
Technical persons from among existing staff at each level assisted for preparing 
estimate and measurement work. 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
173 
Annex-4D 
Technical Assistants 
 (Refer to paragraph 4.5) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of State Audit observation 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
There were shortages of 217 against requirement of 4,478 
technical assistants  
2. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
The DRDA staff was functioning as technical assistants. Full time 
regular technical assistants were not engaged.   
3. Bihar There was shortage of 925 (41 per cent) against requirement of 
2,218 technical assistants. 
4. Chhattisgarh There was shortage of 466 against requirement of 1,168 technical 
assistants. 
5. Gujarat There was shortage of technical assistant at state level (54 per 
cent). For districts, shortages ranged between eight per cent  
(Dahod) and 70 per cent (Ahmedabad).  
6. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
There was shortage of 69 percent of  technical assistants  
7. Madhya 
Pradesh 
Against 2,817 sanctioned posts of engineers in the state, only 
1,447 engineers (51 per cent ) were posted to provide technical 
assistance to 23,336 GPs of the state. Thus, on an average, every 
engineer had to supervise 16 GPs for execution of MGNREGS 
works.  
8. Maharashtra Additional charge was given to the Junior Engineer for technical 
supervision of select group of 10 to 15 GPs for 240 test checked 
Panchayats. There was shortage of four against requirement of 13 
technical assistants in Buldana district. 
9. Odisha There were four junior engineers and two technical assistants in 
Panchayat Samiti exclusively for MGNREGS works of GPs, but they 
were also allotted inspection of works  in other schemes in the 
GPs.  
10. Punjab Against the requirement of 2,555, only 74 technical assistants 
were deployed in the entire state (one for five GPs) leaving a 
shortage of 2,481 technical assistants (97 per cent ).  Shortage of 
technical assistants in test checked district ranged between 89 and 
98 per cent. 
11. Uttar Pradesh There was shortage of 2,533 against requirement of 7,931 
technical assistants.  
 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
174 
Annex-4E 
Shortage in Training 
(Refer to Paragraph 4.6) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State 
Total number of employees under 
MGNREGS 
Number of employee to whom training 
was imparted 
Expenditure 
incurred on 
training 
(``  in lakh) GP 
level 
Block 
level 
District 
level 
Total GP 
level 
Block 
level 
District 
level 
Total 
1. Goa 36 30 34 100 36 22 20 78 2.63
2. Haryana 650 65 11 726 650 53 9 726 24.13
3. Rajasthan 27,265 Data not 
available 
Data not 
available
27,265 21,190 Data not 
available
Data not 
available  
21,190 113.60
4. Uttar 
Pradesh 
85 122 45 252 Data not 
available
Data not 
available
Data    
not 
available
Data not 
available 
56.42
Total 28,036 217 90 28,343 21,876 75 29 21,994 196.78
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
175 
Annex 4F 
Information, Education and Communication (IEC) activities 
 (Refer to Paragraph 4.7) 
 
Sl. 
No. Name of State/UT Districts Funds received 
(` in lakh) 
Expenditure 
incurred on IEC 
(` in lakh) 
1. Goa 2 14.00 6.79 
2. Gujarat 2 14.00 11.00 
3. Haryana 6 84.5 38.78 
4. Kerala 3 17.30 17.40 
5. Punjab 6 40.39 28.69 
6. Rajasthan 5 45.00 23.87 
7. Tripura 2 18.00 18.00 
8. Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
2 5.00 1.88 
9. Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
1 5.00 4.05 
10. Lakshadweep 1 7.00 5.84 
11. Puducherry  2 7.00 2.89 
Total 32 257.19 159.19 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 176
 
Annex-5A 
 Excess release of funds by the Ministry without  
adjusting unspent balance 
(Refer to paragraph 5.5) 
(` in crore) 
SSll..  
NNoo..  
NNaammee  ooff  
SSttaattee  
  
UUnnssppeenntt  bbaallaannccee  
aass  oonn  3311..0033..22001100  
PPrroovviissiioonnaall  ffiigguurree    
UUnnssppeenntt  bbaallaannccee  
aass  oonn  3311..0033..22001100  
AAuuddiitteedd  ffiigguurree  
RReelleeaassee  mmaaddee  
wwiitthhoouutt  
ccoonnssiiddeerriinngg  
uunnssppeenntt  bbaallaannccee  
 
DDaattee  ooff  
rreelleeaassee  
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
874.36 1,169.51  1,012.43 15.04.2010 
2. Himachal 
Pradesh 
66.63 103.87 147.12 15.04.2010 
3. Karnataka 503.37 821.87 773.05 16.04.2010 
4. Madhya 
Pradesh 
2,539.98 2,664.92 995.80 15.04.2010 
5. Odisha 44.12 85.22 308.49 16.04.2010 
6. Punjab 90.06 90.99 34.28 28.04.2010 
7. Rajasthan 1,992.25 3,659.25 1,610.43 16.04.2010 
8. Uttar 
Pradesh 
1,275.55 1,196.55 1,419.40 16.04.2010 
9. West 
Bengal 
361.78 312.53 432.25 16.04.2010 
Total 7,748.10 10,104.71 6,733.25  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 177
 
Annex-5B 
Excess release of funds by the Ministry  
without adjusting unspent balance 
 (Refer to paragraph 5.5) 
(` in crore) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State 
Unspent balance 
as on 31.03.2011 
Provisional figure 
Unspent balance 
as on 31.03.2011 
Audited figure 
Release made 
without considering 
unspent balance  
Date of 
release 
1.  Karnataka 1,095.53 1,095.93 658.57  1.04.2011 
2. Madhya 
Pradesh 
1,895.17 1,894.25 434.34  1.04.2011 
3. Tamil 
Nadu 
509.14 502.79 509.84  1.04.2011 
4. West 
Bengal 
237.58 265.94 837.25  1.04.2011 
Total 3,737.42  3,758.91 2,440.00 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 178
Annex-5C 
 Excess release of funds by the Ministry 
(Refer to paragraph 5.6) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of State Year Observation 
1. Andhra Pradesh 2009-10 Excess release of ` 75.10 crore for second tranche 
during 2009-10 due to Central liability not being 
restricted to 96 per cent of total cost. 
2010-11 Excess release of ` 89.48 crore for second 
installment during 2010-11 due to Central liability 
not being restricted to 96 per cent of total cost. 
Further, ` 108.90 crore were released in excess due 
to understatement of opening balance as on 1 April 
2010.  This was accepted by the Ministry. 
2011-12 Excess release of ` 146.24 1  crore as Central 
liability was determined by  adjusting the less 
unspent balance. 
2. Gujarat 2010-11 Ministry released (February 2011) an amount of 
` 492.02 crore which included ` 184.64 crore as 
pending liability, which was already adjusted by the 
state in its demand projection for the year. 
2011-12 Similarly, in 2011-12, Ministry released (February 
2012) an amount of ` 87.43 crore which included 
` 43.2 crore (96 per cent of ` 45 crore) as pending 
liability, which was already adjusted by the state in 
its demand projection for the year. 
                                                 
1  
Sl. No. Particulars `  in crore
01. Amount of approved labour budget 8,272.00
02. Central Liability (96 per cen t of `
8,272 crore) 
7,941.12
03. First tranche i.e., 50 per cen t of 
Central liability 
3,970.56
04. Less available balance as on 1.4.2011 3,655.96
05. Funds to be released to State 314.60
06. Actual amount released by the 
Ministry 
460.84
07. Excess release 146.24
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 179
3. Himachal Pradesh 2009-10 Release of ` 228 crore without adjustment of 
unspent balance of ` 100.35 crore. 
4. Madhya Pradesh 2010-11 The Ministry released (February 2011) ` 303.18 
crore considering opening balance as on 1.04.2010 
` 2,435.45 crore, whereas, as per audited 
accounts opening balance was ` 2,664.92 crore. 
Thus, there was unjustified/excess release of 
` 229.47 crore. 
5. Rajasthan 2010-11 The Ministry released (June 2010) ` 1,178.39 crore 
considering opening balance as on 1 April 2010 as 
` 1,992.25 crore. However, as per audited 
accounts opening balance was ` 3,659.25 crore. 
Thus, there was unjustified/excess release of 
` 1,178.39 crore. 
6. West Bengal 2009-10 The Ministry released ` 439.27 crore in March 
2010 for requirement of last quarter of the 
financial year 2009-10 without adjusting release 
made in February 2010 of ` 219.09 crore for the 
same quarter. 
Total amount of excess releases ` 2,374.86 crore 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 180
Annex-5D 
 Short release of State share 
(Refer to paragraph 5.8) 
                                                                                                                 (` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of State State share due State share 
released 
Short 
release 
1. Assam (whole State) 336.87 307.52 29.35 
2. Manipur (whole State) 182.30 59.11 123.19 
3. Mizoram (whole State) 105.43 83.52  21.91 
4. Nagaland (whole State) 208.42 91.85 116.57 
5. Rajasthan (three districts) 88.96 78.84 10.12 
6. Sikkim (whole State) 30.79 8.47 22.32 
7. Tripura (whole State) 232.67 99.58 133.09 
Total 456.55 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 181
Annex-5E 
Delay in release of State share 
(Refer to paragraph 5.9) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SSll..  
NNoo..  
NNaammee  ooff  SSttaattee  DDeellaayy  iinn  ddaayyss  
1. Assam 47 to 354 
2. Bihar 9 to 313 
3. Chhattisgarh 5 to 139 
4. Jharkhand 5 to 293 
5. Himachal Pradesh 15 to 170 
6. Manipur 21 to 249 
7. Meghalaya 18 to 174 
8. Mizoram 9 to 317 
9. Punjab 3 to 527 
10. Rajasthan 17 to 331 
11. Sikkim 34 to 252 
12. Tripura 5 to 222 
13. Uttarakhand 8 to 211 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 182
Annex-5F 
Non/delay in transfer of funds from SGRY and NFFWP 
(Refer to paragraph 5.11) 
 
SSll..  
NNoo..  
NNaammee  ooff  
SSttaattee  
OObbsseerrvvaattiioonn  AAmmoouunntt  
((``  iinn  
ccrroorree))  
PPeerriioodd  ooff  
ddeellaayy  
1. Bihar In 11 test checked districts (Araria, Begusarai, 
Bhabhua, Bhojpur, Darbhanga, Jehanabad, 
Madhubani, Muzaffarpur, Nalanda, Sitamarhi 
and West Champran), ` 21.48 crore of SGRY and 
NFFWP were not transferred to MGNREGS. 
Cost of unutilized food grains of ` 77.36 crore 
under SGRY/NFFWP could not to be realized 
from defaulting PDS dealers and therefore could 
not be transferred to MGNREGS. 
21.48 
 
 
 
 
77.36 
 
 
Not yet 
transferred 
2. Chhattisgarh In Mahasamund ( ` one crore) and Kanker 
(` 0.22 crore) districts, funds were not 
transferred to MGNREGS account even after a 
delay of more than five years.  
1.22 Not 
transferred 
for more 
than five 
years 
3. Jharkhand In three test checked districts (Palamau, Ranchi, 
Gumla), ` 4.43 crore pertaining to SGRY fund 
(handling and transportation of food grains) and 
NFFWP funds were not transferred to MGNREGS. 
4.43 Not yet 
transferred 
4. Madhya 
Pradesh 
Audit observed that seven of 13 test checked 
districts transferred the balance amount ` 6.73 
crore of SGRY and NFFWP with delays. 
6.73 One to five 
years 
5. Odisha Unutilized funds of ` 2.91 crore (as of March 
2008) under SGRY and NFFWP, were not 
transferred to MGNREGS. 
2.91 Not yet 
transferred 
6. Rajasthan In test checked districts, blocks and GPs, unspent 
balance under SGRY and NFFWP amounting to 
` 2.33 crore were not transferred and ` 4.99 
crore were transferred with delay to MGNREGS. 
2.33 
 
4.99 
Not yet 
transferred 
Delay of 5 to 
40 months 
7. Uttar 
Pradesh 
In two test-checked Line departments of Sitapur 
district, the balance of NFFWP amounting to 
` 0.41 crore was not transferred to the 
MGNREGS.  
0.41 Not yet 
transferred 
 
8. West Bengal Unutilized balance of ` 0.08 crore under SGRY in 
Bhangar-I block of South 24 Parganas district was 
not transferred to MGNREGS. 
0.08 Not yet 
transferred 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 183
Annex-5G 
Non accountal or utilization of interest income on  
non permissible items 
(Refer to paragraph 5.12) 
 
SSll..  
NNoo..  
NNaammee  ooff  
SSttaattee  
SSaammpplleedd  
DDiissttrriiccttss//BBlloocckkss//GGPPss 
AAmmoouunntt  
((`` iinn ccrroorree)) 
OObbsseerrvvaattiioonn  
1. 
 
Assam 13 GPs and three 
Development blocks 
under Dibrugarh and 
Jorhat districts 
0.18  Utilised for procurement of office 
stationery, payment of bills, 
construction of boundary wall, 
earth filling at office campus, 
procurement of xerox machine, 
etc. 
2. 
 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Jammu 0.14  Out of interest income of ` 0.97 
crore earned up to February 2012, 
` 0.14 crore was spent by the 
department on the TA claims, POL, 
Stationery,  etc. 
Three BDOs and one 
Assistant Commissioner 
(Development)  
0.16  Amount was not accounted for in 
the books as interest on funds 
deposited in banks. 
3. Odisha Four (Bolangir, Bhadrak, 
Ganjam and Khurda)  
out of eight districts 
  0.38  Interest as of March 2012 was not 
accounted for in the Cash Book. 
4. Punjab Test checked districts of 
Hoshiarpur (Tanda 
block), Amritsar, Barnala 
(three GPs, Barnala 
block and district)  
-- 
 
 
0.02 
 
 
0.11 
In Hoshiarpur (Tanda block), no 
interest was given by the banks on 
the funds available in savings 
account under the Scheme.   
In Amritsar district, it was observed 
that interest of ` 0.02 crore earned 
by Line department on the 
MGNREGS funds was not returned 
by the Line department to ADC (D). 
 In Barnala district, interest earned 
on MGNREGS funds was not 
accounted for in Cash Book.  
5. Uttar 
Pradesh 
Line department (Public 
Works Department) of 
Allahabad district 
0.27 Amount of interest was not 
accounted for in DRDA’s account. 
TToottaall  iinntteerreesstt    11..2266  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 184
Annex-5H 
Excess Administrative Expenses 
(Refer to paragraph 5.13.1) 
 
NNaammee  ooff  
SSttaattee//  UUTT  
PPeerriioodd  NNuummbbeerr  
ooff  
DDiissttrriiccttss  
NNaammee  ooff  DDiissttrriiccttss  AAmmoouunntt  
((``  iinn  ccrroorree))  
Bihar 2007-12 7 Banka, Begusarai, Bhabhua, 
Bhojpur  Madhubani,Munger and 
Muzaffarpur 
10.40 
Jharkhand 2007-08 1 Dumka 0.82 
Kerala 2007-11 4 Thiruvananthapuram, Kottayam, 
Malappuram and Palakkad 
6.57 
Maharashtra 2007-11 1 Buldhana 0.30 
Nagaland 2007-09 2 Mon  0.26  
2008-09 Dimapur 0.70 
Odisha 2007-12 2 Kendrapada and Sambalpur 0.95 
Rajasthan 2010-12 4 Bundi, Dholpur, Jaisalmer and 
Jalore 
5.02 
Uttar Pradesh 2007-09 1 Gonda 6.09 
Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
2008-11  1 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 0.12 
Lakshadweep 2009-12 1 Lakshadweep 0.81 
Total 24          32.04 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 185
Annex-5I 
Expenditure on Inadmissible Items 
(Refer to paragraph 5.14) 
 
SSll..  
NNoo..  
NNaammee  ooff  
SSttaattee  
DDiivveerrssiioonn  ooff  ffuunnddss  AAmmoouunntt  
((``  iinn  ccrroorree))  
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
In Kotarautla block of Visakhapatnam district, Panchayati Raj 
Engineering Division purchased measurement books in excess 
which were utilized on other than MGNREGS works, purchase 
of agreement books, computers and furniture. 
0.14 
2. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Towards salary of staff by the Project Director, Lower Dibang 
Valley. 
0.08 
3. Assam Towards expenditure on visits of NLM, godown rent, 
Independence day expenditure, construction of office room 
and repairing of vehicles in district Karbi Anglong.  
Towards contingency expenditure like repairing of block 
godown, repairing of vehicles and polling expenses, etc. in 
district Hailakandi. 
0.45 
 
4. Bihar In Araria and Munger districts, expenditure was incurred for 
the purpose of BPL survey work and as contingent expenditure 
of DRDA and Zila Parishad. 
0.86 
5. Chhattisgarh Zila parishad, Bastar purchased 150 computers, which were 
not distributed to the gram panchayats. 
 0.46 
6. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Three ACDs, one BDO and Director(Rural Development), 
Jammu incurred expenditure on activities not related to 
MGNREGS, such as, election process, fixation of tiles in offices, 
purchase of DG set, POL, etc in districts of Jammu, Leh, Poonch 
and Rajouri. 
1.06 
7. Madhya 
Pradesh 
Expenditure of ` 22.15 lakh was incurred on printing of 1.96 
lakh pass books of 11 different banks through private printing 
press and were handed over to the concerned banks for issuing 
these  to the beneficiaries.  
0.22 
8. 
 
Punjab 
 
Towards purchase of laptops, sofa sets, photocopy machines, 
invertors, LCD TV,  stabilisers, etc. 
0.28 
 
9. Rajasthan Towards purchase of  furniture and fixture, air conditioner, etc.         0.02 
10. Sikkim Towards repair and maintenance of vehicles. 0.03 
11. Tamil Nadu Towards pay and allowances of deputy BDO whose services 
were not utilized for MGNREGS. 
0.49 
12. Tripura Construction of 6,035 rural shelter houses, steel foot bridges, 
RCC cantilever bridges, market stall, SHG skill upgradation 
centre, children shed, pump house, etc. 
21.87 
Total 25.96 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 186
Annex-5J 
Diversion of funds 
 (Refer paragraph 5.14) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SSll..  
NNoo..  
NNaammee  ooff  
SSttaattee  
AArreeaass//sscchheemmeess  ttoo  wwhhiicchh  ffuunnddss  wweerree  ddiivveerrtteedd    AAmmoouunntt  
((``  iinn  ccrroorree))  
1. Jharkhand To Indira Awas Yojana in Kanke block of Ranchi district.  
In Dumka district, towards payment of audit fee for 
MPLAD, DPAP and IAY schemes. 
0.76 
2. Karnataka Towards materials procured for service road and 
inspection paths of Narayanapur Right Bank Canal of 
Upper Krishna Project, construction of cement 
concrete roads, under another scheme. 
 
 
 
1.98 
3. Odisha Towards other schemes viz. Flood Relief, GP funds, IAY 
and Old Age Pension and PDS. 
2.07 
4. Rajasthan Towards purchase of books, pay fixation arrears of two 
Assistant Engineers, celebration of golden jubilee of 
Panchayati Raj and other schemes. 
Towards Keshav Badi Yojana for the period 2007-12 in 
the four test checked districts. 
 
Towards payment of increased honorarium and 
meeting allowances of Zila Pramukh, Pradhan and 
Sarpanch along with members of zila parishad and 
block. 
0.09 
 
 
85.17 
 
 
 
43.44 
5. Uttar 
Pradesh 
Towards miscellaneous administrative expenditure, 
contingent expenditure of other schemes, renovation 
and electrification of conference hall at Vikas Bhawan, 
construction of primary school and Harijan Awas, 
office expenses and Mid Day Meal scheme. 
1.51 
Total 135.02 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 187
Annex-5K 
Suspected/confirmed misappropriation of funds 
(Refer to paragraph 5.15) 
 
SSll..  
NNoo..  
NNaammee  ooff  
SSttaattee  
OObbsseerrvvaattiioonn AAmmoouunntt  
((``  iinn  
ccrroorree))  
RReemmaarrkkss 
1. Assam The Office of PD, DRDA Kamrup, paid an amount of ` 0.03 
crore to the BDO, Hajo development block.  Whereas the 
same amount was not found entered in the cash book of 
the BDO Hajo block, it was found drawn in cash in the bank 
pass book of PD, DRDA Kamrup.   
0.03 Case of suspected 
misappropriation 
because of non-
maintenance of 
records. 
The DC cum DPC, Cachar while submitting the UC, 
mentioned an embezzlement of ` 1.59 crore in Kalain 
development block.   
1.59 Confirmed case of 
misappropriation/ 
embezzlement. 
An amount of ` 0.049 crore was spent by the GP 
Tukrapara, Kamrup (rural) district for execution of the AP 
level work ‘land development of FA Ahmed college’ under 
MGNREGS. However, muster roll vouchers for ` 0.022 
crore were made available to Audit in support of the entire 
expenditure.  
0.03 Case of suspected 
misappropriation 
because of non-
maintenance of 
records. 
2. Bihar Working agencies were paid ` 0.64 crore for execution of 
different schemes. Audit observed ` 0.64 crore remained 
unutilized for a long period.  Out of this ` 0.41 crore was 
recovered at the instance of Audit and balance ` 0.23 
crore remained to be recovered.  
0.23 Executing agencies 
retained funds 
without purpose 
for long period.  
3. Gujarat Scrutiny of records at Fatepura and Dahod blocks of Dahod 
district revealed an unaccounted expenditure of ` 5.79 
crore (Fatepura) and ` 0.29 crore (Dahod) during 2009-11. 
These expenditures were neither recorded in cash book 
nor were vouchers in support of expenditure available with 
the PO.  
6.08  Case of suspected 
misappropriation 
because of non-
maintenance of 
records. 
4. Haryana During 2009-10, an amount of ` 0.12 crore was drawn 
from the bank account of the Scheme by Sarpanch, Arjana 
Kalan (district Kurukshetra). Out of which, ` 0.074 crore 
was incurred in July-August 2009 for material component, 
however expenditure was shown incurred in February 
2009 in MIS. Further, Audit on physical verification of the 
work noticed that material component could not be 
utilized. 
Similarly, Sarpanch, Malhaka (district Mewat) had drawn 
an amount of ` 40,000 from the Scheme account.  
Documents in support of the amount were not found on 
records. 
0.08 Case of suspected 
misappropriation 
because of non-
maintenance of 
records. 
5. Jharkhand In NREP-II Division Ranchi, difference of ` 2.12 crore was 
found in closing balance/opening balance in two instances 
i.e., 31 May 2011/1 June 2011 and 30 June 2011/1 July 
2011 even though there was no adjustment or return of 
2.12 Case of suspected 
misappropriation 
because of non-
maintenance of 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 188
advances.  Hence, there was a possibility of 
misappropriation of funds. 
records. 
Scrutiny of the records revealed that in Gumla and Ranchi 
a sum of  ` 11.63 crore was advanced during 2007-12 to 
the Range Officer of Forest (ROF) of five implementing 
agencies to execute works under MGNREGS, but neither 
were its entries made in cash book nor were any 
adjustment vouchers demanded while releasing 
subsequent advances. This resulted in accumulation of 
unadjusted temporary advance of ` 11.63 crore. 
Similarly, during the period 2009-10 in District Board, 
Khunti and Special Works Division, Khunti, successive 
advances were granted without demanding adjustment 
vouchers or refunds which indicated misappropriation of 
MGNREGS funds to the tune of ` 10.16 crore.  
21.79 Case of suspected 
misappropriation 
because of non-
maintenance of 
records. 
In Sisai block, ` 0.02 crore was drawn on self cheque by 
the BDO and in the names of two block personnel, 
between April 2008 and August 2009. Similarly, in Bharno 
block, Gumla district,  ` 0.27 crore was drawn through 45 
cheques in favour of beneficiaries, committees, bank, post 
office and LAMPS between November 2007 and October 
2011. However, no vouchers in support of payment made 
were available with the block. 
0.29 Case of suspected 
misappropriation 
because of non-
maintenance of 
records. 
In test checked Zila Parishad, West Singhbhum district, in 
the Cash Book a sum of ` 30.03 crore was shown adjusted 
against advance of ` 31.68 crore during the period 2007-
11. However, adjustment vouchers and concerned 
measurement books for ` 30.03 crore were not produced 
to Audit. Chartered Accountant also noted (24.10.2011) in 
Cash Book that no supporting vouchers and Measurement 
Books were furnished to him for verification. 
30.03 Case of suspected 
misappropriation 
because of non-
maintenance of 
records. 
6. Karnataka In test checked district of Bijapur , cheques aggregating 
` 0.13 crore had been issued to four individuals during 
May 2009 to March 2010 without supporting documents 
relating to payment.  Further, in test checked district of 
Chickballapur, as per the pass book of the bank account of 
GP, Thirumani, ` 0.09 crore were transferred in 18 cases, 
during 2010-12.  However, these transactions had not been 
entered in the cash book of GP.  As per statement of the 
Secretary of the GP (May 2012), no record relating to these 
transactions was available in the GP. 
0.22 Case of suspected 
misappropriation 
because of non-
maintenance of 
records. 
7. Manipur During 2007-10, the DPC, Tamenglong issued cheques for 
` 0.11 crore and ` 0.16 crore to the POs of Tamenglong 
and Nungba blocks, respectively. However, the amounts 
released were not reflected as received in the cash books 
of the respective POs. 
0.27 Case of suspected 
misappropriation 
because of non-
maintenance of 
records. 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 189
8. Nagaland An amount of ` 1.68 crore released towards the Scheme 
during 2011-12 by DPC, Dimapur, was not accounted for in 
the MGNREGS bank account operated with PO, 
Dhansiripar. However, verification and cross check of eight 
test checked GPs under the PO, Dhansiripar revealed that, 
no such amount was found recorded in the cash book by 
the PO, Dhansiripar. Hence, misappropriation of ` 1.68 
crore could not be ruled out. 
1.68 Case of suspected 
misappropriation 
because of non-
maintenance of 
records. 
Seven test checked POs in three sampled districts allocated 
` 114.52 crore to 54 GPs during 2007-12.  However, Audit 
noticed that the 54 GPs received only ` 49.14 crore.  Audit 
analysis of money trail revealed that as per the records of 
the POs, there were entries of amount released to each GP 
along with cheque number and date while the amounts 
stated by POs were not actually credited into GP accounts.  
Thus, financial leakage of ` 65.38 crore during the transfer 
of funds could not be ruled out.  
65.38 Case of suspected 
misappropriation 
because of non-
maintenance of 
records. 
9. Punjab As per records/complaint file and information furnished by 
office of the JDCC it was noticed that funds amounting to 
` 0.65 crore released under the Scheme were 
misappropriated at GPs in districts of Amritsar, Bathinda, 
Patiala and Muktsar. 
0.65 Confirmed case of 
misappropriation/ 
embezzlement. 
10. Rajasthan During review of reconciliation of records in block Dholpur 
(GP, Basai Neem), it was noticed that fake wage list was 
prepared and sent to post office for payment to workers.  
The Post Master made the payment of ` 0.21 crore which 
was bogus as the works were not executed.  
0.21 Confirmed case of 
misappropriation/ 
embezzlement. 
11. Uttar 
Pradesh 
Irregularities in 198 cases with recoverable amount of 
` 2.06 crore (pertaining to 2010-11) and ` 1.25 crore 
(pertaining to 2011-12) were detected during 2010-12, but 
recovery of only ` 0.71 crore was effected by the State 
authorities. Recovery of ` 2.60 crore could not be effected 
as of March 2012. 
2.60 Confirmed case of 
misappropriation/ 
embezzlement. 
 Total 
 Sl. No. Type of cases Number of States Amount (``  iinn  ccrroorree)) 
 1. Cases  of suspected misappropriation 8 128.23 
 2. Confirmed cases of misappropriation 4 5.05 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 190
Annex-6A 
Door-to-door survey not conducted 
(Refer to paragraph 6.2.1) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State 
No. of GPs/ 
Blocks/Districts Audit Comment 
1. Assam 7 GPs Door-to-door survey was not conducted. 
Orientation training not imparted to 
teams.  
2. Bihar 250 GPs No door-to-door survey was conducted 
to identify persons willing to register. 
3. Chhattisgarh 140 GPs  Door-to-door survey was not conducted. 
4. Haryana 38 GPs Door-to-door survey was not conducted. 
5. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
1 district No door-to-door survey was conducted 
in the villages. 
6. Jharkhand 6 districts No door-to-door survey was conducted 
in villages of any of the test checked 
districts. 
7. Karnataka 157 GPs  Details of door-to-door survey were not 
available. 
8. Kerala 39 GPs Door-to-door survey was not conducted. 
9. Mizoram 39 GPs Door-to-door survey was not conducted, 
the willing persons themselves came to 
the Village Councils for registration. 
10. Nagaland 33 GPs Door-to-door survey was not conducted. 
11. Odisha 199 GPs  Door-to-door survey was not undertaken 
for registering households to be covered 
under the Scheme. 
12. Punjab 79 GPs No door-to-door survey was conducted. 
13. Rajasthan 40 GPs  Door-to-door survey was not conducted. 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 191
14. Sikkim 8 GPs  Door-to-door survey to identify persons 
willing to register under the Scheme was 
not conducted. 
15. Tripura 30 GPs No door-to-door survey was conducted.   
16. Uttar 
Pradesh 
420 GPs  Door-to-door survey was not conducted. 
No orientation training was imparted to 
survey teams at block and district levels. 
 Total 1479 GPs and     
7 districts 
 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 192
Annex-6B 
Non-updation/display of Registration List 
 (Refer to paragraph 6.2.2) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State 
Details regarding non-
updation of list 
Details regarding non-display of 
list 
No. of 
GPs/ 
Blocks/ 
Districts 
Test 
Checked
Per 
cent
No. of 
GPs/ 
Blocks/ 
Districts 
Test 
Checked 
Per 
cent 
1. Assam -- -- -- 6 districts 8 districts 75.0
2. Nagaland 12 GPs 
 
54 GPs 22.2 34 GPs 54 GPs 63.0
3. Odisha -- -- -- 199 GPs 199 GPs 100.0
4. Tamil Nadu -- -- -- 3 blocks 23 blocks 13.0
5. Tripura -- -- -- 60 GPs 60 GPs 100.0
6. Uttar Pradesh 176 GPs 
 
460 GPs 38.3 436 GPs 460 GPs 94.8
7. West Bengal 31 GPs 
 
120 GPs 25.8 34 GPs 120 GPs 28.3
 Total 219 GPs 634 GPs  
763 GPs, 3 
blocks and 
6 districts 
893 GPs, 
23 blocks 
and 8 
districts 
 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 193
Annex-6C 
Irregular issue of multiple job cards 
 (Refer to paragraph 6.3.2) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State 
No. of 
GPs/ 
Blocks/ 
Districts 
No. of 
HHs 
No. of 
Job Card 
issued 
No. of 
Duplicate 
Job Cards 
Remarks 
1. Bihar 91 GPs 2,849 5,748 2,899 In some cases 3 or 4 job 
cards issued in the 
name of a single 
person. 
2. Jharkhand 1 district 
(Ranchi) 
2,73,904 2,88,668 14,764 Doubtful job cards 
were issued. 
10 GPs of 1 
block 
-- -- 620 Duplicate job cards 
were issued. 
3. Rajasthan 7 GP -- -- 40 Double job cards were 
issued. 
4. Uttar 
Pradesh 
1 GP 
(Dharampur 
Kuyan) 
-- -- 2 Work was allotted in 
both original and 
duplicate Job cards. 
 Total 109 GPs 
and  
1 district 
  18,325  
* As per MIS Data 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 194
Annex-6D 
Delay in issue of job cards 
 (Refer to paragraph 6.3.3) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State 
No. of GPs/Blocks/ 
Districts 
No. of Job 
Cards Delay 
1. Assam 1 block  (Tingkhong) 912 10 to 528 days 
1 district  39 2 to 523 days 
2. Jharkhand 1 GP  66 11 to 197 days 
3. Maharashtra 8 GPs 79  1 to 51 months 
4. Odisha 3 districts 232 112 to 1,460 days  
5. Punjab 4 GPs 126 14 to 17 days 
6. Rajasthan 8 GPs  
(Dholpur district) 
6,224 2 to 65 days 
5 GPs (Rajakhera 
block, Dholpur district) 
4,210 3 to 75 days  
7. Uttar Pradesh 2 GPs  (Bulandshahr 
district) 
120 25 to 45 days 
 Total 28 GPs, 1 block and    
4 districts 12,008  
 
 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 195
Annex-6E 
Other discrepancies in job cards 
 (Refer to paragraph 6.3.4) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State/UT 
No. of GPs/ 
Blocks/ 
Districts 
No. of cases in which photo not 
found (No. of GPs/Blocks/ Districts) No. of cases 
registration 
No./ Date of 
issue of job 
cards not 
found 
No. of cases on which 
signature not found 
(No. of GPs/Blocks/Districts) 
No. of cases 
in which 
entry of 
payment 
not tallied 
with entry 
made on 
job card 
No. of 
job card 
not in 
custody 
of HH 
Not 
having 
any 
photo 
Not 
having 
joint 
photo 
Photo 
not 
pasted 
on Regn. 
Register 
Signature of 
members of 
household 
Signature of 
competent 
authority 
1. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
4 districts 15 139 -- -- 33 
 
396 (378+18) -- -- 
2. Assam -- 536 
(15 GPs) 
232 
(1 Distt. -
Chirang} 
-- -- 274 
(2 GPs) 
-- -- 840 
(1 GP) 
3. Bihar  13 districts 731 -- 516 1,053 -- 335 523 -- 
4. Himachal 
Pradesh 
27 GPs 614 -- -- -- 1,097 1,621 -- -- 
5. 
 
Jharkhand  1 GP 
(Chiyanki) 
-- -- 247 599 90 -- -- -- 
6. Maharashtra 2 districts 
(Ahmednagar & 
Sindhudurg) 
3,83,021 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 
7. Manipur 1GP 80 20 -- -- -- -- -- -- 
8. Rajasthan -- 49,531 
(100 GPs) 
-- -- 37,707 
(58 GPs) 
17,754 
(50 GPs) 
-- -- -- 
9. Uttarakhand 100 GPs  -- -- 6,309 -- 2,444 2,013 -- -- 
10. Uttar Pradesh 14 GPs -- -- 960 -- -- -- -- -- 
11. Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
10 GPs -- -- 685 -- 610 637 -- -- 
 
Total 
 4,32,528 
( in 143 
GPs & 19 
districts) 
391 
( in 1 GP 
& 5 
districts) 
8,717
( in 125 
GPs & 13 
districts) 
39,359 ( in 59 
GPs & 13 
districts) 
22,302 ( in 
190 GPs & 4 
districts) 
5,002 ( in 137 
GPs & 17 
districts) 
523 ( in 13 
districts) 
840
( in 1 
GP) 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 196
Annex-6F 
Maintenance of records relating to job card and employment 
(Refer to paragraph 6.4) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Job Card Application Register Job Card Register List of 
Registration 
Not sent to 
PO in 
Not maintained 
in 
Not properly 
maintained in 
Not maintained 
in 
Not properly 
maintained in 
GPs Blocks GPs Blocks GPs Blocks GPs Blocks GPs 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 150 - - - 150 - - - - 
2.  Assam 28 7 - - - - - - - 
3.  Bihar 250 54 - - - - - - - 
4.  Gujarat 150 15 - - - - - - - 
5.  Haryana 13 - - - 18 - - - - 
6.  Himachal Pradesh - - 20 - - - - - - 
7.  Jammu & Kashmir 113 12 - - 113 12 - - - 
8.  Jharkhand 40 7 127 10 46 8 121 9 - 
9.  Karnataka 26 - 117 - - - 133 - - 
10.  Kerala 10 -   - - - - - 
11.  Madhya Pradesh 167 17 100 10 13 5 248 29 - 
12.  Manipur - - 90 9 - - 90 9 - 
13.  Meghalaya 89 8 - - - 8 -          - 
14.  Nagaland 23 - - - 12 - - - - 
15.  Odisha - - - - - - 199 -- 199 
16.  Punjab 53 6 - - 37 4 - - - 
17.  Sikkim - - 8 4 - - 8 4 - 
18.  Tripura - - - 6 - 6 - - - 
19.  Uttarakhand - - 100 -   - - - 
20.  Uttar Pradesh 7 39 - - 93 - - - 202 
21.  West Bengal 83 - - - - - 83 - 41 
22.  Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
3 - 2 - - - 10 - - 
Total 1,205 165 564 39 482 43 892 51 442 
Grand Total 1,769 GPs and 204 blocks 1,374 GPs and 94 blocks 442 GPs 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
 197
Annex-6G 
Employment Guarantee day not organized  
 (Refer to paragraph 6.5) 
 
Sl. No. Name of State/UT No. of GPs/ Blocks/Districts 
1.  Arunachal Pradesh 43 GPs 
2.  Maharashtra 7 districts 
3.  Nagaland 38 GPs 
4.  Odisha 199 GPs  
5.  Tamil Nadu 4 districts 
6.  Uttar Pradesh 446 GPs 
7.  West Bengal 69 GPs  
8.  Lakshadweep 3 GPs 
 Total 798 GPs and   11 
districts 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
198 
Annex-7A 
Non-payment of unemployment allowance 
 (Refer to paragraph 7.2.1) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State 
No. of 
GPs/ 
Blocks/ 
Districts 
No. of workers to 
whom 
unemployment 
allowance not paid 
Delay 
ranged 
between 
(Days) 
Amount of un-
employment 
allowance (` 
in lakh) 
1. Assam *  2 districts 37,229 -- -- 
2. Bihar 1 district 77 23 to 87 1.93  
3. Chhattisgarh 10 GPs 10,041 2 to 407 -- 
4. Jharkhand 3 districts 206 33 to 
1,218 
22.63  
5. Kerala 1 GP 46 30 0.52  
6. Maharashtra 1 block 77 9 to 201 0.82  
7. Punjab 1 GP 11 6 to 427 0.50 
 Total 12 GPs, 
 1 block 
and 
 6 districts 
47,687  26.40 
*   Figures as per Monthly Progress Report 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
199 
Annex-7B 
Non-maintenance/Poor maintenance of records 
 (Refer to paragraph 7.2.2) 
 
Sl. 
No. Name of State/UTs 
Dated receipts of 
application not 
issued/record not 
maintained in 
Maintenance of Employment Register 
Not maintained in 
Not maintained 
properly in 
GPs/Blocks GPs Blocks GPs Blocks 
1. Andhra Pradesh 150 GPs 150    
2. Assam - - - 83 - 
3. Bihar 250 GPs 250 54   
4. Goa - - - 14 - 
5. Gujarat 150 GPs 150 15 - - 
6. Haryana 6 GPs 6 - - - 
7. Himachal Pradesh - 32 - 38 - 
8. Jammu & Kashmir - - 12 - - 
9. Jharkhand - 50 8 117 9 
10. Karnataka - 75  72 - 
11. Kerala 21GPs 09 - - - 
12. Madhya Pradesh - 
 
10 4 220 23 
13. Maharashtra - 160 - - - 
14. Manipur -- - - 90 9 
15. Meghalaya 8 blocks 89 8 - - 
16. Mizoram 39 GPs - - - - 
17. Nagaland - 26 - - - 
18. Odisha - - - 199 - 
19. Punjab - 62 7 - - 
20. Tamil Nadu 230 GPs   - - 
21. Uttarakhand - - - 100 - 
22. Uttar Pradesh 443 GPs 7 - - - 
23. West Bengal 83 GPs 3 - 19 - 
24. Dadra & Nagar Haveli - 2 - 5 - 
25. Puducherry 30 GPs 30 - - - 
  1,402 GPs  and 
8 blocks 
1,111 GPs 108 
blocks 
957 GPs 41 
blocks 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
200 
Annex-7C 
Non-payment of wages 
 (Refer to paragraph 7.3.1) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the State 
No. of GPs/ 
Blocks/ Districts 
Amount of 
wages not 
paid  
(` In lakh) 
Period for 
which 
wages to be 
paid 
Reasons for  non-
payment/ Remarks 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
1 block 1.20  July to 
November 
2010 
Due to discrepancies in 
the software. 
2. Bihar 13 districts 117.85  2007-12 Non opening of Accounts, 
unavailability of funds and 
human error. 
3. Goa 1 GP 4.05  February to 
March 2012 
In respect of 173 
beneficiaries. 
4. Gujarat 2 blocks 0.43 2009-12 Not paid up to March 
2012. 
5. Haryana 1 district 207.47 2011-12 Due to shortage of funds. 
6. Jharkhand 16 GPs and 1 
block 
4.92 2007-12 Not paid up to May 2012. 
7. Punjab 4 blocks & 1 LD1 118.39 2009-12 Due to non-release of 
funds. 
8. Uttar 
Pradesh 
1 block 1.30 180 Days Not paid up to May 2012. 
9. West Bengal 1 district 6.80 -- Not paid up to May 2012. 
7 GPs 497.00 January to 
May 2012 
Not paid up to May 2012. 
 Total 24 GPs, 9 
blocks/ 
mandals,  
15 districts and   
1 LD  
959.41   
 
                                                            
1 Line Department 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
201 
Annex-7D 
Non-issue of wages slips 
 (Refer to paragraph 7.3.2) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State/UT 
No. of GPs/ 
Blocks/Districts 
Test 
checked 
Percentage 
of test 
checked 
Remarks 
1. Assam 83 GPs 83 GPs 100 Wage slips not issued 
2. Bihar 14 districts 15 districts 93.3 No wage slip issued 
3. Gujarat 15 blocks 15 blocks 100 No wage slip issued 
4. Himachal 
Pradesh 
90 GPs 90 GPs 100 No wage slip issued 
5. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
12 blocks 
 
12 blocks 100 Wage slips not issued, delays in 
payment of wages could not be 
verified. 
6. Jharkhand 167 GPs  
 
167 GPs 100 In absence of wage slip, 
payment of wages was fraught 
with the risk of payment to 
other person. 
7. Karnataka 157 GPs  157 GPs 100 No wage slip had been 
generated by these GPs for 
information of the workers. 
8. Kerala 37 GPs 
 
39 GPs 94.9 In absence of wage slips, the 
details of the amount of wages 
credited in bank accounts could 
not be ascertained. 
9. Madhya Pradesh 247 GPs 290 GPs 85.2 In absence of wage slips, the 
authenticity of the payment 
made couldn’t be ascertained. 
10. Maharashtra 9 districts 9 districts 100 Without issue of wage slips, 
there was no mechanism to 
intimate the labourers about 
the credit of wages into their 
accounts. 
11. Nagaland 54 GPs 54 GPs 100 Wages slips were neither 
generated nor recorded. 
12. Sikkim 2 districts 2 districts 100 Wage slips were not generated 
to enable the workers to know 
the exact wages earned by 
them. 
13. Uttarakhand 100 GPs 100 GPs 100 In the absence of wage slips, 
the authenticity of the payment 
made could not be ascertained.  
14. West Bengal 83 GPs 
 
120 GPs 69.2 Wage slips were not generated/ 
handed over to wage seekers.  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
202 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State/UT 
No. of GPs/ 
Blocks/Districts 
Test 
checked 
Percentage 
of test 
checked 
Remarks 
15. Lakshadweep 3 GPs 3 GPs 100 No wage slip issued 
 Total 1,021 GPs,          
27 blocks and  
26 districts 
   
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
203 
Annex-7E 
Short payment of wages 
 (Refer to paragraph 7.3.3) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the State 
No. of GPs / 
Blocks/Districts 
Minimum 
wage rate 
(`) 
Wages 
paid at 
the rate 
of (`) 
Short payment due 
to less rate (` in 
lakh) 
1. Assam# 2 districts 130 100 112.79 
(3,75,976 persondays x 
30) 
2. Bihar 8 GPs 104 to 
144 
75 to 
120 
-- 
3. Himachal 
Pradesh 
5 GPs  100 to 
120  
24 to 
105 
1.44 
(for 5,328 persondays) 
4. Jharkhand 16 GPs  92 to 120 90 to 
100 
1.25 
(for 10,178 persondays 
5. Karnataka* 8 districts -- -- 2,371.00 
6. Manipur 28 GPs 126 81.40 127.68 
7. Meghalaya 8 blocks   100 to 
117 
70 to 
100 
84.18 
8. Tripura 19 GPs 118 100 34.50 
9. Uttar 
Pradesh 
17GPs, 6 blocks ,    
2 districts and 1 
LD 
80 to 120 58 to 
100 
4.50 
10. West 
Bengal 
1 GP 195 130 1.10 
 Total 94 GPs, 14 
blocks 12 
districts and  
1 LD 
  2,738.44 
 
# Figures as per MPR 
* Figures as per MIS 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
204 
Annex-7F 
Non-payment of compensation for delay in payment of wages 
 (Refer to paragraph 7.3.4) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State/UT 
No. of GPs/ 
Blocks/ 
Districts 
No. of 
works 
Delay in 
payment 
of wages 
beyond 
15 days 
No. of 
job card 
holders 
Amount 
of wages 
(`in lakh) 
Amount of 
compensation 
not paid 
(` in lakh) 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
23 GPs -- 5 to 
1,100 
Days 
3,226 12.19 -- 
2. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
1 block 4 1 to 3 
month 
1,244 7.81 -- 
3. Assam 13 GPs 43 4 to 159 
days 
6,263 47.06 93.95 
(@ ` 1,500 per HH)
4. Bihar 172 GPs, 3 
blocks, 3 
districts and   
2 LDs  
657 1 to 700 
days 
-- 507.61 -- 
5. Chhattisgarh 8 blocks 83 1 to 376 
days 
12,426 
MRs 
959.87 -- 
6. Goa 1 block -- 15 to 310 
days 
3,355 80.93 -- 
7. Gujarat 12 blocks 923 1 to 685 
days 
11,527 
MRs 
1,681.54 -- 
8. Haryana 8 blocks 36 8 to 331 
days 
-- 54.24 -- 
9. Himachal 
Pradesh 
11 GPs 373 15 to 795 
days 
7,773 110.15 -- 
10. Jharkhand 79 GPs  324 1 to 468 
days 
-- 215.39 -- 
11. Kerala 13 GPs  50 23 to 138 
days 
28,738 39.44 -- 
12. Madhya 
Pradesh 
11 districts 152 2 to 292 
days 
2,027 
MRs 
472.88 -- 
13. Maharashtra 4 districts 175 15 to 345 
days 
-- 7,293.23 -- 
14. Nagaland 1 district -- 356 days 3,347 256.96 -- 
15. Odisha 17 blocks  1,567 3 to 270 
days 
315 166.72 -- 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
205 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State/UT 
No. of GPs/ 
Blocks/ 
Districts 
No. of 
works 
Delay in 
payment 
of wages 
beyond 
15 days 
No. of 
job card 
holders 
Amount 
of wages 
(`in lakh) 
Amount of 
compensation 
not paid 
(` in lakh) 
16. Punjab 48 GPs 107 2 to 790 
days 
13,117 98.95 -- 
17. Rajasthan 1 GP & 15 
blocks 
-- Up to 812 
days 
-- 11,813.10 -- 
18. Tamil Nadu 22 GPs -- 30 to 482 
days 
-- 88.78 -- 
19. Uttarakhand 100 GPs 500 1 to 669 
days 
13,278 382.86 199.17 
(@ ` 1,500 Per HH) 
20. Uttar Pradesh 91 GPs, 05 
blocks, 04 
districts, and 
04 LDs 
362 1 to 273 
days 
14,885 144.17 -- 
21. West Bengal 04 districts -- 11 to 810 
days 
-- 43,788.73  -- 
22. Dadra & 
Nagar Haveli 
05 GPs 5 1 to 123 
days 
251 MRs 23.34 -- 
23. Puducherry 02 blocks -- Up to 137 
days 
1,882 
MRs 
426.05 -- 
 Total 574 GPs, 
 72 blocks,   
27 districts   
and 6 line 
departments 
   68,672.00  
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
206 
Annex-7G 
Irregular cash payment of wages 
 (Refer to paragraph 7.3.5) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State 
No. of GPs/ 
Blocks/ 
Districts 
Amount of 
wages paid in 
cash 
(` In lakh) 
Period 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
2 GPs 0.09 2009-10 and 2011-12 
2. Bihar 2 GPs 0.67 January 2009 to 
December 2009 
3. Maharashtra 1 district 
(Thane) 
30.52  2009-10  
1 district 
(Buldhana) 
29.09  September 2008 to July 
2009 
4. Manipur 20 GPs 1,143.38 2009-10 to 2011-12 
5. Punjab 4 GPs 6.80 March 2011 to August 
2011 
6. Rajasthan 27 GPs 463.98  October 2008 to March 
2009 
 Total 55 GPs and  
2 districts 
1,674.53  
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
207 
Annex-7H 
Deployment of Mates 
 (Refer to paragraph 7.4) 
 
Sl. 
No. Name of  State No. of GPs/ 
Blocks/Districts Brief of irregularities 
01. Assam 38 GPs Mates had not been engaged during 
2007-12. 
02. Kerala 6 GPs Mates were not rotated during 2007-
12. 
1 GP Wages to mates were classified under 
unskilled wages. 
03. Maharashtra 9 districts Mates were not appointed in test 
checked districts.  
04. Mizoram 39 GPs Mates had not been engaged during 
2007-12. 
05. Rajasthan 11 blocks Expenditure of ` 4.26 crore on account 
of mates wages was misclassified under 
labour component. As a result accurate 
wage material ratio could not be 
ascertained and state shifted the 
liability to Central Government. 
06. Uttarakhand 100 GPs No mates were engaged in 899 test 
checked works. 
07. West Bengal 10 GPs  No training was given to mates during 
2007-12. 
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
208 
Annex-7I 
Tampering of Muster Rolls 
 (Refer to paragraph 7.5.1) 
 
Sl. 
No. Name of the State No. of GPs/ 
Blocks/Districts 
No. of Muster 
Rolls 
Amount 
(` in lakh) 
1. Andhra Pradesh 11 GPs 93 4.32 
2. Bihar 24 GPs 213 7.84 
3. Haryana 14 GPs 22 3.44 
4. Jharkhand 46 GPs 321 17.85 
5. Karnataka 29 GPs 127 7.94 
6. Kerala 9 GPs 26 1.95 
7. Manipur 1 GP 128 9.20 
8. Nagaland 5 GPs 6 10.31 
9. Odisha 4 blocks 78 23.73 
10. Uttar Pradesh 61 GPs and 
 1 block 
259 27.00 
 Total 200 GPs and 5 
blocks 1,273 113.58 
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
209 
Annex-7J 
Engagement of ghost workers in the Muster Rolls 
 (Refer to paragraph 7.5.3) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State 
No. of GPs/ 
Blocks/ 
Districts 
No. of 
MRs with 
ghost 
workers 
No of 
ghost 
workers 
verified 
Amount 
involved 
(` in 
lakh) 
1. Assam* 2 GPs 189 2,016 20.59 
2. Haryana 1 GP 1 1 0.02 
3. Jharkhand 2 GPs 50 61 2.28 
4. Karnataka* 8 districts 1,659 3,077 23.14 
5. Odisha 4 blocks 5 170 3.34 
6. Punjab 4 GPs 7 34 0.53 
7. Rajasthan 2 GPs 21 82  -- 
8. West Bengal 4 GPs -- 29 0.20 
 
Total 
15 GPs, 4 
blocks and 8 
districts 
1,932 5,470 50.10 
* Para as per MIS 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
210 
Annex-7K 
Engagement of workers under different Muster Rolls for the same period 
 (Refer to paragraph 7.5.4) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State/UT 
No. of 
GPs/ 
Blocks/ 
Districts 
No. of 
Muster 
Rolls 
No. of workers 
with double 
engagement 
(with over 
lapping entries) 
Amount 
involved 
(` in 
lakh) 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
24GPs 75 80 -- 
2. Assam 2 GPs  57  559 4.90 
3. Bihar 9 GPs and   1
district 
104 159 1.04 
4. Gujarat 7 blocks 
 
99 201 1.21 
5. Haryana 1 GP 3 3 0.03 
6. Jharkhand 11 GPs 55 238 2.11 
7. Karnataka* 8 GPs 1,154 3,081 54.05 
8. Kerala 3 GPs 7 48 0.81 
9. Odisha 2 blocks 4 170 1.22 
10. Punjab 1 block 2 7 0.22 
11. West Bengal 2 GP and 1 
district 
5 5 0.06 
12. Lakshadweep 1 GP 2 2 0.04 
Total 
61 GPs,  
10 blocks 
and  
2 districts 
1,567 4,553 65.69 
* Figures as per MIS 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
211 
Annex-7L 
Payment of wages without signatures 
 (Refer to paragraph 7.5.5) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the State 
No. of 
GPs/ 
Blocks/ 
Districts 
No. of 
Muster 
Rolls/ 
Works 
No of 
cases 
Payment 
made 
without 
signature  
Amount 
involved 
(` in 
lakh) 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
1 GP 1 MRs 4 Household’s 0.07 
2. Jharkhand 7 GPs 29 MRs 95 -do- 0.52 
3. Karnataka 7 GPs 123 MRs 1,627 -do- 21.24 
4. Manipur 1 GP 76 MRs 82 -do- 0.46 
5. Odisha 5 blocks  728 MRs 5,069 -do- 57.81 
6. Punjab 6 GPs 17 MRs 218 -do- 1.51 
7. Uttar 
Pradesh 
14 GPs 
and 1 
district 
153 MRs 2,837 
  
-do- 30.24 
Total 
36 GPs, 
5 blocks 
and  
1 district 
1,127 
MRs 
9,932  111.85 
8. Andhra 
Pradesh 
1 GP 1 MR 9 Competent 
Authority 
0.05 
9. Jharkhand 21 GPs 376 MRs -- -do- 22.08 
10. Tamil Nadu 21 GPs 35 Works -- -do- 64.10 
Total 
43 GPs 377 MRs 
and  
 35 works 
  86.23 
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
212 
Annex-7M 
Suspected Misappropriation of wages 
 (Refer to paragraph 7.5.6) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the State 
No. of GPs/ 
Blocks/ 
Districts 
No. of 
Muster 
Rolls/ 
Works 
Reasons for suspected 
misappropriation of  
payment 
Amount  
(` in lakh) 
1. Bihar 15GPs 64 MRs   
(20 Works) 
Engagement of workers 
after completion of 
work 
7.47 
2. Gujarat 2 blocks --  Payment made without 
any supporting 
document like, MRs, 
MBs and vouchers.  
607.39 
3. Himachal 
Pradesh 
2 GPs 13 MRs 
(127 Cases) 
Payment made on 
holidays 
0.14 
4. Karnataka * 8 districts 2,021 MRs Payment made before 
last date of engagement 
of workers. 
568.46 
1 block 24 MRs MRs issued by PO after 
completion of work 
24.48 
5. Punjab 
 
 
3 GPs 3 MRs Payment for 29 
February 2011 made on  
31 September 2011 
0.05 
2 GPs 2 MRs Payment made before 
execution of work 
0.51 
6. Uttar 
Pradesh 
1 GP 1 work Payment made before 
execution of work 
0.04 
11 GPs 250 MRs 
(43 Works) 
Payment made before/ 
without measurement 
of work 
22.29 
Total 
33 GPs, 
 3 blocks and 
8 districts 
  1,230.83 
* Figures as per MIS 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
213 
Annex-7N 
Requisite details not entered in MRs 
 (Refer to paragraph 7.5.7) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State/UT 
No. of GPs/ 
Blocks/ 
Districts 
No. of 
Muster 
Rolls 
Shortcomings in MRs 
Amount of 
payment   
 (` in lakh) 
1. Bihar 7 districts -- Unique Identification 
Number not given, only 
printed Sl. Nos.  mentioned 
on MRs  
-- 
2. Himachal 
Pradesh 
20 GPs 724 MRs did not have UID 
Number 
-- 
3. Jharkhand 1 GP 17 Names of labourers not 
recorded 
0.66 
12 GPs 85 Period of work not recorded 5.35 
4. Karnataka 5 GPs 21  Job card number not 
mentioned 
1.34 
5. Manipur 1 GP 322 Name of work, wages paid, 
and date, etc.  not 
mentioned. 
31.46 
6. Punjab 37 GPs -- Unique Identification 
Number not mentioned 
-- 
7. Sikkim 4 blocks and 
8 GPs 
-- Unique Identification 
Number not mentioned 
-- 
8. Tamil  Nadu 230 GPs --- Unique Identification 
Number not mentioned 
-- 
9. Lakshadweep 3 GPs 35 Unique Identification 
Number  not mentioned 
-- 
  317 GPs, 
 4 blocks and  
7 districts 
   
 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
214 
Annex-8A 
Works executed without restricting material component to 40 per cent of total costs of work 
(Refer to paragraph 8.2)  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State/UT District Block GP 
Amount
(` in 
crore) 
Remarks 
1. Andhra Pradesh Entire 
state 
- - 1,139.49 Expenditure of ` 1,935.49 crore and ` 54.51 crore were incurred on material and wages respectively.  
Thus, excess expenditure of  `  1,139.49 crore was incurred on material which could have resulted in 
generation of 10.63 crore persondays. 
2. Assam 7 - - 46.70 The excess expenditure on material of ` 46.70 crore led to less generation of 42.64 lakh persondays. 
3. Bihar 5 7 19 7.94 --
4. Gujarat - 1 - 0.54 Entire expenditure of ` 0.90 crore on 25 drainage works (February 2011) was only towards material 
component.  
5. Jharkhand 2 2 34 33.72 At block and GP levels, ` 50.06 lakh excess expenditure was incurred on material component.
At district level, excess expenditure of ` 33.22 crore on material resulted in short generation of 38.73 
lakh persondays. 
6. Punjab 1 1 30 2.98 --
7. Rajasthan 3 7 101 36.31 Excess expenditure on material component of ` 14.28 crore at district level,  ` 7.32 crore at block level 
and ` 14.71 crore at GP level was noted. 
8. Sikkim 1 - 2 1.11 Excess expenditure of ` 1.11 crore on material resulted in short generation of 1.56 lakh persondays in 
East Sikkim district. 
9. Tripura 2 - - 4.66 Excess expenditure of ` 4.66 crore on material resulted in short generation of 5.48 lakh persondays. 
10. Uttar Pradesh - - 460 10.95 --
11. Uttarakhand 4 - - 0.26 Excess expenditure of ` 0.26 crore on material resulted in short generation of 21,603 persondays. 
12. Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli  
- - 3 0.07 --
 Total 25 18 649 1,284.73

Report No. 6 of 2013 
215 
Annex-8B 
Execution of inadmissible works 
(Refer to paragraph 8.3)  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State/UT District Block GP 
No. of 
inadmissible 
works 
Nature of work executed 
Amount
(` in 
crore) 
Remarks 
1. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
4 - - 55 Cement concrete roads 2.96 --
1 - - 8 Earthen road 0.07 Eight road works were executed without gravel/stone 
support for stability. 
2. Assam - 3 - 10 Construction of raised 
platform for cattle and 
other animals 
0.58 --
- 4 - 10 Development work of 
Shamshaan Bhumi 
0.35 --
- 2 - 15 Earthen/Kutcha roads 1.22 --
3. Bihar 1 district and 
1 line 
department 
2 12 49 Generator shade, Pucca 
platform, right to public 
services centre, pucca 
cement concrete road. 
2.11 --
- 3 - 52 Plantation  work 0.45 Plantation work was executed at block level in violation 
of guidelines issued by government of Bihar. As per these 
guidelines plantation work was to be done only at GP 
level.  
4. Chhattisgarh  
1 
 6 Installation of entry gates 
and information board 
over the National/state 
Highways for welcoming 
the visitors. 
0.31
5. Goa - - 14 146 Kutcha roads, etc. 1.60 --

Report No. 6 of 2013 
216 
6. Gujarat 3 - 1 377 Earthen roads, cement 
concrete roads and  roads 
works 
6.68
 
Expenditure of ` 2.44 crore on earthen roads, ` 0.31 
crore on construction of 7 cement concrete roads and ` 
3.93 crore on other road works had been incurred. 
7. Haryana - - 25 31 Earthen roads 1.06 Works were executed without stabilization of top surface 
and adequate provisions for drainage. 
- - 16 27 Cement concrete/ 
interlocking paver blocks 
roads 
0.80 --
8. Himachal 
Pradesh 
- - 26 97 Kutcha roads 0.98 Works were executed without stabilization of top surface 
and adequate provision for drainage and culverts. 
3 - - 723 Repair and Maintenance of 
roads 
42.15 DPCs in three districts had sanctioned ` 42.15 crore to 
the Himachal Pradesh PWD for 723 repair and 
maintenance works of roads. 
9. Jharkhand 6 - - 1,176 Mitti murram works/ 
earthen roads 
21.43 --
10. Karnataka* Entire state - - 23,816 Earthen roads 77.30 --
11. Kerala 2 2 - 15 Foundation work of houses 
under EMS and IAY housing 
schemes, anti sea erosion 
work and rubber 
plantation. 
0.97 Expenditure of ` 0.40 crore on foundation work of 
houses, ` 0.56 crore on anti sea erosion work and ` 0.007 
crore on rubber plantations had been incurred. 
1 - - 559 Earthen roads 2.22 --
12. Madhya 
Pradesh 
- - 69 132 Mitti murram works/ 
earthen roads 
4.90 Mitti murram roads were constructed without proper 
compaction, side slopes, side drains, cross drainage and 
other required technical inputs. 
- - 10 10 Construction of bathing 
ghats/stairs  
0.34 --
- - 34 38 Cement Concrete Roads 0.66 --
- - 7 10 Construction of platform, 0.22 --

Report No. 6 of 2013 
217 
leveling and boundary 
walls of cremation grounds 
- - 8 11 Jatropha plantation 0.09 --
13. Maharashtra - 2 - 26 Earthen roads 0.85 In Lakhani block, 22 works of ` 0.73 crore and four works 
of ` 0.12 crore in Khamgaon were executed. 
6 - - 5,160 Rural connectivity 46.32 On joint physical verification, the roads constructed were 
not found to be all weather access roads. 
14. Manipur - - 52 119 Road works 10.73 On joint physical verification, 119 test checked works 
were not found to be all weather access roads. 
15. Mizoram 2 - - 43 Earthen roads 12.57 Expenditure of ` 12.57 crore were incurred on rural 
connectivity works without use of material (district 
Lunglei: ` 3.30 crore for 30 km of roads and ` 9.27 crore 
for Distirct Lawngtlai for 368 km of roads). Assets created 
were not of durable nature. 
16. Nagaland 3 - - 45 Reinforce cement concrete /
black topping of road 
10.01 --
3 - - 127 Earthen roads 17.09 --
17. Odisha - 10 - 568 Cement concrete-roads 
and Earthen roads 
13.18 Expenditure of ` 12.36 crore on construction of earthen 
roads and ` 0.82 crore on cement concrete roads were 
incurred. 
18. Punjab - - 52 67 Retaining walls, cement 
concrete roads, tubewell 
for Samiti, etc 
1.20 --
19. Rajasthan - - 48 66 Construction of cement 
concrete roads, rest house 
and repair of office 
building 
5.62 --

Report No. 6 of 2013 
218 
* Figures as per MIS 
  
- - 29 37 Gravel road without 
connectivity 
2.56 Audit observed that 37 road works were executed 
without providing connectivity to villages and  had no use 
for public. 
20. Tamil Nadu Entire states - - 62,588 Kutcha roads Rural 
connectivity 
1919.88 Audit observed that 62,588 road works were executed 
without use of material. 
21. Tripura - - 60 2,825 Kutcha roads without 
stabilization of top surface 
and Jungle cutting works 
5.79 Expenditure of ` 5.29 crore on construction of 2765 
kutcha road and ` 0.50 crore on 60 jungle cutting works 
had been incurred. 
22. Uttar 
Pradesh 
- - 393 2,265 Earthen road 15.60 --
2 districts 
and 1 line 
department 
12 84 272 Purchase of plants, 
Interlocking works, Mitti 
bharai, construction of 
model ponds and Ponds 
constructed without inlet/ 
outlet, lacking source of 
water 
10.26 --
23. Andaman &
Nicobar 
Islands 
 2 - - 259 Rural connectivity 8.66 Rural connectivity works were executed without any 
material component. 
24. Puducherry - 1 - 155 Jungle clearance works 0.64 --
 Total 40 districts 
and 2 line 
departments 
41 940 1,01,995 2,250.41

Report No. 6 of 2013 
219 
Annex-8C 
Work executed on ineligible individuals’ land 
 (Refer to paragraph 8.4) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State District Block GP Remarks 
1. Assam - - 2 Two works were executed at a cost of ` 1.53 lakh and ` 1.40 lakh respectively on the lands of the 
GP president’s father and the Anchlik Parishad Member (ineligible beneficiaries). Moreover, 
these works were not incorporated by DPC/GP in Annual Plan. 
2. Goa - - 6 Permissible works such as construction water tank was executed on land of ineligible individuals 
and non-permissible works such as protection wall, kutcha road, foot path, compound walls, etc. 
were executed on land owned by eligible individuals involving total financial implication of   
` 11.44 lakh. 
3. Kerala - - 1 Land development work was undertaken on the land, the owner of which had more than five 
acres of land. 
4. Uttar Pradesh - - 52 Works were executed on lands of individuals without identifying their status of belonging to 
weaker sections of society. 
 Total - - 61
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
220 
Annex-8D 
Details of abandoned works 
 (Refer to paragraph 8.5) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State/UT District Block GP 
No. of 
abandoned 
work 
Nature of work executed 
 
Amount of 
Expenditure 
(` in crore) 
 
Remarks 
1. Assam - - 1 1 Excavation of public fishery 0.04 Work was not completed due to inundation of the 
executed part. 
- - 1 1 Afforestation and 
horticulture farm at Pujali 
field near Pujali Beel 
0.08 Workers were reluctant to work since the land around 
the Beel was used by them as cattle grazing field. 
- - 1 1 Clearing of Katurajan 0.04 Work was not completed due to public obstruction. 
- - 3 3 Construction of road and 
Agri-bundh 
0.07 Work was not completed due to public obstruction. 
1 - - 40 Rural connectivity and 
minor irrigation canals, etc. 
3.24 -- 
 - 1 1 Major portion of flood 
protection bund 
0.31 Work was washed away by flood water due to non-
execution of initial precautionary protection work on the 
river bank. 
2. Chhattisgarh 6 - - 4,700 Different types of works 164.59 Audit observed that 4,700 works were cancelled after 
incurring infructous expenditure of ` 164.59 crore due to 
various problems. 
3. Goa 2 - - 13 Rural connectivity, 
flood control and 
renovation of traditional 
water bodies 
0.10 -- 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
221 
  
4. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
- 8 - 484 All type of works 2.92 Works had been abandoned midway due to non-
availability of labour in subsequent years, land disputes, 
forest clearance was awaited, etc. 
5. Jharkhand - - 244 2,472 Construction of irrigation 
well 
1.72 Reasons attributed to this were emergence of hard rock 
strata during the course of execution and delay in issue 
of work order. 
6. Kerala - - 1 5 Flood relief work in water 
logged areas. 
0.04 Works were abandoned half way to avoid purchase of 
material component originally included in the estimates. 
7. Maharashtra 2 - - 1,423 Nalla saralikaran works and 
farm ponds 
34.22 During the course of execution of 1,203  Nalla 
saralikaran works,  Nalla saralikaran   work was 
declassified of permissible work. Works had been 
abandoned midway after incurring   infructous 
expenditure of ` 33.72 crore.  
Labour problems and hard strata arose during the course 
of execution of 220 farm ponds works. Works had been 
abandoned midway after incurring infructous 
expenditure of ` 0.50 crore.  
- - 1 1 Public well for drinking 
water 
0.01 The work was abandoned due to submergence.
8. Odisha - 6 - 23 Rural connectivity 0.49 Intended purpose of the project could not be achieved, 
hence abandoned. 
9. Punjab - - 2 4 Clearance of jungle weed,
renovation of pond 
0.03 Works were abandoned due to rain.
10. Uttar Pradesh 2 - 1 47 Brick work, Kharanja work, 
culvert, approach road and 
earthwork 
1.65 Works were abandoned due to non-availability of funds. 
11. Lakshadweep - 1 - 1 0.02 Cost of material was very high 
 Total 13 15 25 6 9,220 209.57

Report No. 6 of 2013 
222 
Annex-8E 
Details of Infructuous expenditure on work 
 (Refer to paragraph 8.5)  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State District Block GP No. of work 
Infructuous Nature of work executed 
Amount 
(` in 
crore) 
Remarks 
1. Assam - - 1 1 Plugging the breach caused 
in the Puthimari ring bund 
embankment by engaging 
job card holders 
0.08  Work was left incomplete as the ring bund was washed away in 
flood. 
2. Bihar - - 1 20 Plantation work 0.13 Plantation was removed by flood control department for 
widening of river embankment. 
3. Chhattisgarh - - 1 7 Wells on the land of the 
10 beneficiaries 
0.03 The works executed had collapsed.
4. Gujarat - - 1 1 Deepening of pond 0.24 On joint physical verification it was observed that pond did not 
have inlet and outlet and therefore, deepening of pond did not 
add to storage capacity of pond. Hence, expenditure incurred 
was infructuous.  
5. Kerala - - 1 1 Construction of contour 
bund 
0.37 Work did not exist physically.
6. Punjab - - 1 1 Renovation of pond 0.02 Due to non maintenance of pond, jungle weed had grown up 
again and therefore expenditure incurred on renovation of pond 
was rendered infructuous. 
7. Rajasthan - - 3 4 Construction of canals 0.68 Canals were constructed without connecting them with source of 
water. 
- - 7 9 Construction of anicut 
check dam, kutcha dam, 
etc. 
0.81 Works were executed without ensuring sufficient catchment 
area and wrong selection of site, etc. 
 Total - - 16 44 2.36 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
223 
 
Annex-8F 
Incomplete works 
(Refer to paragraph 8.5)  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State/UT District Block GP 
No. of 
incomplete 
work 
Nature of work executed 
Amount 
(` in 
crore) 
Remarks 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh  
- - 86 188 All types  of works 4.73 - 
2. Assam - - 8 10 Land development, rural 
connectivity and canal 
system of Majrabari 
1.10 Work was not completed due to land dispute 
and non-receipt of funds. 
3. Bihar 3 districts and 3 
line 
departments 
10 41 754 Pucca works like brick 
soiling, pulia and culvert 
12.64 -- 
4. Chhattisgarh 6 - - 29,636 All types of works 902.37 Works given to the line departments i.e., 
PWD, WRD, RES, Forest, Agriculture and 
Sericulture Departments and GPs were 
incomplete. 
 2 - - 98 Construction of Water 
Bound Macadam (WBM) 
road 
4.47 -- 
 1 - - 399 Road works, up-gradation 
of Ponds/tanks, land 
development, etc. 
3.26 Works were incomplete due to non-
availability of sufficient government land and 
roller in time for compaction work.  
5. Gujarat - 4 - 392 Group well 5.25 -- 
6. Jharkhand 6 - - 2,949 Construction of wells, 
ponds, roads, etc. 
27.91 Works remained incomplete after the lapse of 
up to five years due to improper planning, 
slow progress of work, engagement of one 
Gram Rozgar Sahayak in multiple works, etc. 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
224 
7. Karnataka* Entire state - - 7,33,897 All types of works 3,057.11 -- 
8. Manipur - 2 - 5 Construction of public 
wells and rubber 
plantation 
0.17 -- 
9. Odisha - 8 - 266 Excavation of multipurpose 
farm ponds to provide 
irrigation facility, 
horticulture plantation and 
land development facility 
on land owned by 
SC/ST/BPL families and IAY 
Scheme beneficiaries  
0.53 -- 
10. Rajasthan - - 76 205 Gravel roads 7.04 -- 
 - - 174 664 All types of works 36.58 Works were incomplete since 2008-09. 
11. Tripura - 2 - 26 All types of works 1.87 Works were incomplete for one to four years 
due to site problem, delay in commencement, 
slow progress of work, non supply of bricks in 
time, etc. 
12. Uttar 
Pradesh 
2 1 8 23 Brick soiling work, 
kharanja work, culvert, 
approach road and 
earthwork 
0.29 -- 
13. Puducherry - - 10 63 Deepening and de-silting 
of ponds 
5.44 Works had remained incomplete for more 
than two years. 
 Total 20 districts and 
3 line 
departments  
27 403 7,69,575  4,070.76  
 
* Figures as per MIS 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
225 
Annex-8G 
Details of wasteful expenditure on plantation scheme 
 (Refer to paragraph 8.6)  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State District Block GP No. of wasteful 
plantation work 
Amount
(` in 
crore) 
Remarks 
1.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
- - 21 49 0.42 Saplings and mango plantation could not survive as work was executed in offseason and 
lack of water. 
2. Bihar - - 66 882 2.06 --
3. Gujarat - - 5 8 0.03 Plantation did not survive due to its non-maintenance. 
4.  Kerala - - 7 47 0.24 --
5. Manipur - - 3 4 0.11 --
- - 5 6 0.27 --
4 - - 124 4.35 --
6. Mizoram - 1 - 123 3.24 Plantation of 5.82 lakh of locally available seedlings of different varieties did not survive. 
7.  Rajasthan - - 49 329 1.15 Only 0 to 23 per cent of plantation works had survived.
8.  Uttar 
Pradesh 
- - 46 55,344 0.32 --
 Total 4 1 202 56,916 12.19

Report No. 6 of 2013 
226 
Annex-8H 
Non creation of Durable Assets 
(Refer to paragraph 8.7)  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State/UT District Block GP No. of 
work Nature of work 
Amount
(` in 
crore) 
Remarks 
1. Gujarat Entire 
state 
- - 2,64,652 Construction of 
1,000 boribandhs 
in each block 
101.25 Works did not exist physically. 
2. Kerala Entire 
state 
- - - 2,483.90 As per directions of state government, works were executed without 
material component.   
3. Mizoram - - 27 27 Construction of 
side drains for 
flood control 
0.62 Constructions of 27 side drains for flood control were undertaken without 
material.  
4. Tamil Nadu Entire 
state 
- - 1,24,598 Desilting of ponds, 
minor irrigation 
tanks, supply 
channels and 
irrigation wells 
3,921.87 Works were executed without material.
5. West Bengal - - 24 293 Earthen road 6.53 --
6. Puducherry - - 97 2,381 Deepening of 
ponds, desilting of 
channels, jungle 
clearance, etc. 
33.18 --
Total - - 148 3,91,951 6,547.35  
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
227 
Annex-8I 
Irregularities in purchase of material 
 (Refer to paragraph 8.8)  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State District Block GP No. of items 
purchased 
Nature of purchase of 
item 
Amount
(` in 
crore) 
Remarks 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
1 district 
and 1 line 
department 
- - - Supply of polythene 
bags, water storage 
tanks, teak stumps, 
watering with mobile 
tankers 
3.37 Bids were not invited for purchase of items/material.
- 1 - - Nursery and Rural 
Connectivity Project 
(RCP) works for supply 
of sign boards to RCP 
works 
0.07 Payments were made to firms other than suppliers/WEMs in 
respect of nursery and RCP works.  Instances of payments to 
unauthorized account holders were also noticed. 
1 - - - Procurement of plastic 
water containers 
0.30 Prescribed norms/procedure was not followed for 
procurement.  
2. Jammu & 
Kashmir  
- 6 - 1,32,681 Purchase of cement 
bag 
4.67 Prescribed norms/procedure was not followed for 
procurement. 
3. Jharkhand 1 - - - Furnishing of 
conference hall 
0.13 Supply of material, furnishing and electrification works were 
carried out by M/s Sunrise Roadlines Construction Division, 
Chaibasa prior to preparation of the estimate and 
administrative approval which was irregular.   Moreover, this 
was not a permissible work under the Scheme. 
- - 47 - Procurement of 
material 
11.93 Expenditure of ` 11.93 crore was incurred on procurement 
of materials such as boulders, metal, chips, murram, etc. 
from unregistered suppliers.   

Report No. 6 of 2013 
228 
4. Nagaland 1 - - - Procurement of tools 
and implements 
0.66 Prescribed norms/procedure was not followed for 
procurement. 
5. Uttar Pradesh 1 - - 954 Steel Almirahs at the 
rate of ` 2,350 
0.24 Almirahs were purchased without inviting tenders.
1 - 21 Purchase of Video-
cameras at the rate of  
` 13,990 
0.03 Video-cameras were purchased without inviting tenders. 
1 - 970 Purchase of digital 
cameras at the rate of  
` 5,300 
0.51 Digital Cameras were purchased without inviting tenders. 
- 3 - - Purchase of 
construction materials 
1.04 Construction material was purchased without inviting 
tenders. 
 Total 7 district 
and 1 line 
department  
10 47 22.95
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
229 
Annex-8J 
Non-Accounting of material at site 
(Refer to Para 8.9) 
 
Sl. 
No. Name of State District Block GP Nature of purchase of 
material 
Amount
(`  in crore) 
 
Remarks 
1. Andhra Pradesh 1 - - Procurement of 
seeds/saplings 
0.95 DFO, Hyderabad made payments to the suppliers 
without ensuring actual receipt of stock/prior to 
receipt of stock. 
2. Assam - - 14 Sand gravel, stone chips,  
cement, black wire, 
bamboo, wood planks, 
etc. 
6.12 No site Account was maintained in respect of 
material procured at GP levels and as a result the 
materials worth ` 6.12 crore remained unaccounted. 
- 2 11 Sand gravel, stone chips, 
cement, black wire, 
wood planks, etc. 
43.28 --
- - 11 27 schemes 0.53 Audit observed that ` 0.53 crore was incurred on 
procurement of material in 27 schemes without 
maintaining any stock book and site accounts. 
 Total 1 2 36 50.88
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
230 
Annex-8K 
Works executed without assigning unique identity number 
(Refer to paragraph 8.10) 
 
Sl. 
No Name of State/UT District Remarks 
1. Arunachal Pradesh 4 --
2. Bihar 15 The development plan did not contain the unique identity number however, the same was provided at the time of MIS entry. 
3. Gujarat 6 Unique identity numbers were generated by the system at the time of making MIS entries, however no unique identity number 
was provided either at the time of preparation of labour budget or at the time of technical and administrative sanction. 
4. Jammu & Kashmir 6 Unique identity numbers had neither been indicated in the Annual Action Plans nor in the progress reports.
5. Kerala 4 Unique identity numbers were not provided in the Annual Action Plan. However, unique identity numbers were provided in MIS 
for each work undertaken for execution. 
6. Maharashtra 2 Unique identity numbers were provided at the time of entering muster roll in MIS of MGNREGS. However, the developmen t 
plan did not contain the unique identity number. 
7. Manipur 4 --
8. Nagaland 3 Different unique identity numbers were given for the same work which was executed in phased manner during the year or in 
the subsequent year.  
9. Punjab 2 There was no system of mentioning the plot numbers of the sites where works were to be executed so each work did not have 
a unique location code.  
10. Rajasthan 1 Unique identity numbers were not generated for each work at the time of sanction in Jaisalmer district.
11. Tamil Nadu 6 --
12. Tripura 2 Unique identity numbers were not mentioned against each work included in the annual action plan and the asset register. 
However, while entering the data in MIS, these numbers were generated. 
13. Uttar Pradesh 10 --
14. Lakshadweep 1 --
 Total 66  
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
231 
Annex-8L 
Works executed without support of Line Department 
(Refer to paragraph 8.11) 
 
Sl. 
No Name of State District Remarks 
1. Kerala 4 --
2. Mizoram 2 State government notified the line department of the government as an implementing agency other than Village Council.  
However, it was noticed that all the works were executed by the Village Councils without involving any line department. 
3. Nagaland 3 --
4. Uttar Pradesh 18 --
 Total 27  
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
232 
Annex-8M 
Works executed by contractors 
 (Refer to paragraph 8.12) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State District Block GP Amount (` 
in crore) Remarks 
1. Assam 1 - - 0.21 Contractor was engaged by the Water Resource Department for construction of wooden 
bridge.  
2. Chhattisgarh 5 - - 3.96 A firm was contracted for making MIS data entry.
1 - - 0.22 A firm was contracted for making MIS data entry.
3. Kerala - 1 - 0.03 Contractor was engaged for construction of thatched sheds and toilets in district 
agriculture farm, Peringamala. 
4. Nagaland - - 1 0.39 Funds of ` 33.80 lakh for construction of sanitary drainage and ` 5.26 lakh for 
construction of irrigation canal were diverted for construction of Rest House and Primary 
Health Centre building.  Further, it was observed that contractor was engaged for 
construction of Rest House and PHC building. 
5. Uttar Pradesh - - 1 0.02 Contractor was engaged for 7,356 plantation work.
 Total 7 1 2 4.83
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
233 
Annex-8N 
Works executed with use of machinery 
 (Refer to paragraph 8.13) 
 
Sl. 
No. Name of State District Block GP Amount  
(` in crore) Remarks 
1. Bihar - - 33 0.23 Tractors were used for 50 works.
2. Karnataka Entire 
state 
- - 15.94 JCB machines were used on rural connectivity works.
3. Manipur 3 - - 1.56 Heavy machinery was used in nine works out of 600 test checked works.
4. Odisha - 1 1 0.06 JCB machine and tractors were used to construct a pond.  
5. Punjab - - 6 0.02 JCB machine and mixer machine were used in eight works.  
6. Tripura 1 - - 0.40 Machinery was used in three works.
 Total 4 1 40 18.21
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
234 
Annex-8O 
Works executed without administrative and technical sanction 
(Refer to paragraph 8.14)  
 
Sl. No Name of State District Block GP Number/Nature of works executed Amount     
(` in crore) 
1.  Arunachal Pradesh  - 1 - 14 2.18 
2.  Assam - - 1 (i) Construction of road from Nayapara to Bahati PWD road, and 
(ii) Construction of road from Nayapara High Madrassa to Dabarpur 
0.10 
- - 1 Erosion protection work at Jamuna river near Dandpur 0.28 
- - 6 11 0.32 
3.  Chhattisgarh - - 1 Plantation of one lakh plants in 40 hectare area 1.08 
4.  Mizoram - - 27 0 3.61 
5.  Odisha - 7 - 69 1.55 
6.  Uttar Pradesh 1 6 17 237 13.25 
 Total 1 14 53 334 22.37 
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
235 
Annex-8P 
Excess expenditure on projects over sanctioned estimate 
 (Refer to paragraph 8.14) 
 
Sl. 
No Name of State District Block GP No. of 
work 
Excess 
Amount 
Incurred 
(`  in crore) 
Remarks 
1. Haryana - - 1 1 0.02 An expenditure of ` 0.06 crore was incurred against the sanctioned estimate of 
` 0.04 crore on digging of pond.  
2. Jharkhand - - 3 4 0.04 An expenditure of ` 0.28 crore was incurred against the sanctioned estimate of 
` 0.24 crore. 
3. Meghalaya - 1 - 112 0.40 Final expenditure on 112 projects exceeded the sanctioned estimate by   
` 0.40 crore.   
4. Nagaland - - - 2 0.26 Two infrastructure projects were completed at the cost of ` 0.40 crore 
against the estimate of    ` 0.14 crore.  
5. West Bengal - - 4 5 0.06 --
 Total - 1 8 124 0.78
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
236 
Annex-8Q 
Works executed without display of work site boards 
(Refer to paragraph 8.15) 
 
Sl. 
No. Name of State District Remarks 
1. Gujarat 6 On physical verification of the projects it was noticed that works site board showing date of commencement of work, 
date of completion work and other technical details of work were not displayed. 
2. Maharashtra 9 Worksite boards were not displayed in 1,164 works. 
3. Manipur 4 Worksite boards did not display date of commencement of work, date of completion of work and other technical details 
of work   
4. Nagaland 3 On physical verification of the projects, it was noticed that worksite boards were not displayed.
5. Odisha 8 Worksite boards were not found in 573 test checked works.
6. Rajasthan 8 Worksite boards were not found in 1,190 test checked works.
7. Tripura 2 The worksite boards were not found in 234 cases.   
8. Uttar Pradesh 18 Worksite boards with complete details were not displayed in 3,599 test checked works.
9. West Bengal 1 Worksite boards were not found in all selected work sites in Jalpaiguri district.
Total 59 
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
237 
Annex-8R 
Non Preparation of State/District Schedule of Rates (SoR) 
(Refer to paragraph 8.16) 
 
Sl. 
No. Name of State District Observation 
1. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
4 No SoR for MGNREGS works was prepared for the state/districts. The estimates for works were prepared by blocks on PWD 
item rates. 
2. Bihar 15 The state government did not devise SoR for MGNREGS works. The SoR of Public Works Department had been followed by 
the implementing agencies. 
3. Kerala 4 Out of the four test checked districts, SoR for MGNREGS was prepared only in Kottayam.
4. Manipur 4 No separate SoR was prescribed (based on the comprehensive work, time and motion studies) for MGNREGS works.  
Manipur schedule of rates (MSR) prepared by the state public works department was utilised for preparing estimates of 
MGNREGS works.  
5. Punjab 6 No separate SoR for MGNREGS had been prepared by the state.
6. Sikkim 2 The Sikkim PWD works SoR 2006 had been followed by the implementing agencies.
Total 35 
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
238 
Annex-8S 
Payment without Measurement of Works 
(Refer to paragraph 8.17) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State District Block GP No. of 
work 
Amount 
(` in crore) Remarks 
1. Assam - - 1 4 0.07 Workers were paid wages without recording measurement of works by the JE/AE.
- - 6 21 0.70 Expenditure of ` 0.70 crore was incurred in 21 works without recording measurement in MBs. 
2. Bihar - 1 8 27 0.68 --
3. Jharkhand - - 20 587 9.16 Measurement of work had not been verified by qualified technical persons.
- 1 - 1 0.19 Measurement of a work was required to be finally approved by the Executive Engineer if the 
value of work exceeded ` 1.00 lakh. However, it was observed that in Bharno block ` 0.19 crore 
was paid to an executing agent without the approval of Executive Engineer.  
4. Kerala - - 1 45 0.13 Payment of ` 0.13 crore was made without taking measurement during the course of execution 
of work.  It was also seen that measurements were recorded in MBs without proper details of 
location of work site and hence works could not be verified physically. 
5. Tamil Nadu - - 4 7 0.29 Measurements were not recorded or not authenticated by the technical staff in respect of 
muster roll payments.  
- - 8 8 0.12 Muster rolls for value of ` 0.12 crore were passed and paid. It was noticed that pass orders for 
the muster roll payments were not signed by Programme Officers of the blocks in the MB of the 
works. 
6. Uttar 
Pradesh 
- - 5 9 0.09 Payment was made without measurement of works.
 Total - 2    53 709 11.43
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
239 
Annex-8T 
Absence of work-site facilities 
 (Refer to paragraph 8.18) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State/UT District Remarks 
1. Gujarat 5 Work site facilities were not provided.
2. Kerala 4 Work site facilities except crèche were provided.
3. Rajasthan 1 Audit observed that 100 medical kits of ` 0.36 lakh having expiry date of December 2010 were received on 19 June 2010 from Zila 
Parishad and these were distributed to MGNREGS workers between December 2010 to June 2011. 
4. Sikkim 2 Crèche for children below the age of six years was not provided. 
5. Tamil Nadu 3 Worksite facilities such as shades and crèche were not provided.
6. Uttar Pradesh 18 No worksite facility except drinking water was provided.
7. West Bengal 5 In none of the test checked GPs crèche for children was provided at worksites. 
8. Puducherry 2 Work site facilities i.e., drinking water, shade, first-aid and crèche were not provided at work sites.
Total 40  
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
240 
Annex-8U 
Work without three stages photographs 
(Refer to paragraph 8.19) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State/UT District Remarks 
1. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
4 Pre-mid-post project stages of works were not recorded with photographs.
2. Assam 2 No photographs of pre-mid-post stages of works were on record. 
3. Gujarat 6 Three stage photographs were not found attached in any test checked work.
4. Karnataka* Entire 
state 
Pre-mid-post stages photographs of works had not been uploaded in respect of 5.25 lakh works completed.  In respect of other 
10,490 works, photographs of only one or two stages had been uploaded. 
5. Kerala 4 Photographs of work sites were not taken in 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10.
6. Maharashtra 9 Pre-mid-post stages photographs were not taken except for works undertaken by the Forest Department in Buldhana.
7. Manipur 2 Pre-mid-post stages photographs were not taken In 40 GPs of Tamenglong and Thoubal districts.
8. Nagaland 3 Pre-mid-post stages photographs were not taken in 15 GPs out of the 54 test checked GPs.
9. Odisha 8 Pre-mid-post stages photographs were not available in 1,098 works out of 1,333 works physically inspected.
10. Tamil Nadu 2 Pre-mid-post stages photographs of works were not taken. 
11. Uttar Pradesh 12 During joint physical verification of works it was noticed that pre-mid-post stages photographs of 2,169 works were not taken and 
not found attached with the concerned works files. 
12. Lakshadweep 1 Pre-mid-post stages photographs of work had not been taken/maintained by the GPs and therefore were not produced to audit. 
13. Puducherry 2 Pre-mid-post stages photographs of works were not taken.  
Total 55  
* Figures as per MIS 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
241 
Annex-8V 
Non issue of Project Completion Reports (PCRs) 
(Refer to paragraph 8.19) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State/UT District No. of works 
executed Remarks 
1. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
4 - Project Completion Reports were not available in respect of completed works.
2. Assam 2 - PCRs were not prepared in Kamrup (R) and Karbi Anglong districts.
3. Bihar 15 - PCR was not found attached in any of the completed works.
4. Gujarat 6 923 PCRs were not found in the record of any of the test checked works.
5. Himachal 
Pradesh 
4 15,366 PCRs in respect of 15,366 works of ` 120.41 crore shown as completed, were not prepared and kept on 
record.  In the absence of any PCR duly verified by a responsible officer, the authenticity of completed works 
could not be verified in audit.   
6. Karnataka* Entire 
state 
5,69,000 PCRs in respect of 4.07 lakh works out of 5.69 lakh works shown as completed during 2008-12, had not been 
uploaded onto MIS.   
7. Kerala 2 - PCRs were not prepared.
8. Nagaland 3 145 PCRs in respect of 145 works in 13 GPs were not available.
9. Punjab 3 2,446 PCR was not prepared in respect of any of the works in selected GPs.  
10. Rajasthan 7 307 307 works were shown as completed but their PCRs were not issued.
11. Sikkim 2 80 PCRs were not placed on records. 
12. Tamil Nadu 2 322 PCRs were not prepared.
13. Tripura 2 600 Separate PCRs were not issued except making a record on the cover page of the muster roll.
14. Uttar Pradesh 16 3,091 PCRs in respect of 3,091 works of ` 38.22 crore were not placed in concerned file of the work.
15. West Bengal 5 - There was no system of obtaining PCRs. 
16. Puducherry 2 - There was no system of obtaining PCRs. 
Total 75 5,92,280
 
* Figures as per MIS 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
242 
Annex-8W 
Execution of Suspect/Duplicate Work/Doubtful Payments 
(Refer to paragraph 8.20)  
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State District Block GP No. and nature 
of works 
Amount
(` in crore) Remarks 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
- 8 - Conveyance 
charges for 
tractors, 
transportation 
of silt 
3.05 Large sums of money were credited to bank accounts of Sarpanches, Ward and Mandal Parishad 
Territorial Council Members purportedly for material payments after they had been nominated as 
Work Executing Members (WEMs) by GPs.  Such payments to the eight joint accounts of the 
sarpanch/technical assistant were ` 3.05 crore, purportedly for transportation of silt for which 
either no records were available or false/fictitious records were created.  
2. Assam - 1 - 2 0.13 During joint physical verification of two Anchlik Parishad level works, it was noticed that works did 
not exist physically. 
- 1 - 12 0.21 During joint physical verification, it was noticed that 12 horticulture works did not exist. The 
relevant estimates, MBs and vouchers were also not produced to audit.  
1 - - 10 0.22 During joint physical verification and beneficiary survey, it was noticed that 10 works (rural 
connectivity) of ` 0.22 crore shown executed by AP/ZP did not exist physically. 
- 1 - 3 0.16 Expenditure of ` 0.23 crore was incurred on construction of three roads, out of which ` 0.16 crore 
was incurred on procuring sand gravel. However, audit observed that there were no entries of use 
of sand gravel in muster rolls. During joint physical verification also it was noticed that sand 
gravels were not found sprayed on these roads.  
- - 1 - 0.02 Muster roll bills for ` 0.02 crore in respect of the work ‘protection of Udalguri villages and its 10 
adjoining villages from the erosion of river’ were passed for payment. It was noticed that 188 
names of beneficiaries were recorded in these MR bills without mentioning their identity number 
and bank/post office account number. 
- - 8 21 0.31 During joint physical verification of 18 completed works of field development and rural 
connectivity, it was noticed that the works were not executed as per the estimates. There were 
shortfalls in the length, width and height of works executed.  Thus, works were executed short by 
` 0.24 crore. Three works of land development also were short executed by ` 0.07 crore.   
- - 11 12 0.09 Material worth ` 0.09 crore was procured after completion of works.

Report No. 6 of 2013 
243 
3. Bihar - - 18 - 0.22 Material for the works was purchased after completion of works.
12 - - 548 2.00 Agencies were given advance of ` 2.00 crore for execution of works.  Despite works were not 
executed by agencies, advances were not recovered. 
- - 14 - 0.08 Labourers were engaged after the completion of work.
- - 4 - 0.06 A sum of ` 0.06 crore was withdrawn without any work. 
- - 5 - 0.03 --
- 1 - 1 0.01 Expenditure of only ` 0.01 crore was shown in measurement, out of claim of expenditure of ` 
0.02 crore.  
4. Haryana - - 1 1 0.04 WBM roads did not exist physically. Records relating to construction of roads as well as the cash 
book were not produced to audit.  
5. Jharkhand - 1 - 20 0.05 Advance of ` 0.05 crore given during 2007-08 for completion of 20 works within three months 
was treated as final expenditure in the cash book. These works were neither started nor any 
action taken by the competent authority to recover the advance.  
- 2 - 5 0.01 DPC had approved the model estimate of a well having specification of diameter 15 feet and 
depth 35 feet.  During joint physical verification of irrigation wells, it was noticed that the depth of 
the well was less than the prescribed depth by 2’6” to 6’3”. 
- - 5 - 0.09 Material was purchased after three to twelve months of completion of work.
6. Madhya 
Pradesh 
- - 1 3 0.07 During joint physical verification, it was noticed that three works of community gardening did not 
exist physically.  
1 - - 18 1.06 During valuation and physical verification of works (conducted by the Executive Engineer, WRD, 
Satna), it was noticed that works only of ` 1.94 crore were executed out of ` 3.00 crore shown as 
incurred.  
7. Manipur 3 - - 19 1.05 During joint physical verification, it was noticed that 19 works did not exist 
physically. 
1 - - 2 0.24 For execution of two works, ` 0.25 crore had been paid to the implementing agency. However, 
the implementing agency executed only earthwork items of ` 0.01 crore.  
8. Nagaland - - 54 83 7.65 During joint physical verification of the assets created at selected GPs, it was noticed that 60 
works of ` 4.22 crore in Dimapur district, seven works of ` 1.70 crore in Mon district and 16 works 
of ` 1.73 crore in Tuensang district did not exist physically. 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
244 
- - 54 23 4.73 During joint physical verification of works, it was noticed that there were shortfalls in works both 
in execution of units as well as material cost for ` 0.49 crore in Dimapur district, ` 2.00 crore in 
Mon district and ` 2.24 crore in Tuensang district against the allocations made for that purpose. 
9. Odisha - - 1 1 0.02 Audit observed that a work of “Excavation of GP tank” was executed twice in consecutive two 
years for ` 0.02 crore each.  
- - 1 1 0.02 Payment of ` 0.02 crore for execution of one work (Parvarti Sagar) was made without checking 
measurement.  
10. Rajasthan - - 6 9 0.16 On joint physical verification it was noticed that six works were executed only measuring 144.7 
meter against the record entry measuring 150.50 meter.  Part item of three works were not found 
in existence which was indicative of fake expenditure. 
 Total 18 15 184 794 21.78
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
245 
Annex-10A  
Position of Non – Maintenance of Records 
 (Refer to paragraph 10.2) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Job card application 
register not 
maintained in 
Job card
register not 
maintained in 
Employment 
register 
not maintained in 
Muster roll 
issue/receipt register 
not maintained in 
Work register not 
maintained in 
Assets register not 
maintained in 
Complaint register 
not maintained in 
Monthly allotment 
and UC  watch 
register not 
maintained in 
Dist Block GP Dist Block GP Dist Block GP Dist Block GP Dist Block GP Dist Block GP Dist Block GP Dist Block GP 
1.  Andhra 
Pradesh 
- - 150 - - 150 - - 150 - - - - 1 - - 14 - - - - - 1  
2.  Arunachal 
Pradesh 
- - - - - - - - - - 9 - - 9 - - - - 9 - - - 
3.  Assam 4 7 28 - - - - - - 3 3 3 - - - - - - 3 - 8 - - - 
4.  Bihar 15 54 250 - - - 15 54 250 15 - 250 15 54 250 15 39 196 1 9 250 - - - 
5.  Goa - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 4 14 2 - - - - 
6.  Gujarat 6 15 150   - - 6 15 150 - - 150 - 15 - 15 150 - - 150 - - - 
7.  H a r y a n a  - -1 3  -  - 1 8 - -6 - ---  -- - - -- -- - -  -  
8.  Himachal 
Pradesh 
- - - - - - - - 32 - - - - - 90 - - - - - - - - 
9.  Jammu & 
Kashmir 
- 12 113 - 12 113 - 12 - - 12 - - 12 - 12 - - 12 - - 12 - 
10.  Jharkhand 4 7 40 4 8 46 4 8 50 4 10 65 - 9 56 4 8 54 4 8 62 5 10 75 
11.  Karnataka - - 26 - - - - - 75 - 16 121 - - 126 - - 137 - - 118 - - - 
12.  Kerala - - 10 - - - - - 9 - - 1 - 13 11 - 13 6 - 13 6 - - - 
13.  Madhya 
Pradesh 
- 17 167 - 5 13 - 4 10 - 8 57 - 24 162 - 11 55 - 24 215 - 18 162 
14.  Maharashtra - - - - - - 6 - 160 - - - 2 6 60 - - - - - - - - 
15.  Meghalaya 4 8 89 - 8 - 4 8 89 - 8 89 - 8 89 - 8 89 4 8 89 4 8 89 
16.  Nagaland - - 23 - - 12 - - 26 - - 12 - - 38 - - 38 - - 24 - - 54 
17.  Odisha - - - - - - - - - 2 - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
18.  Punjab 4 6 53 - 4 37 - 7 62 - 7 62  7 62 - 7 62 - 7 62 - 7 62 
19.  Tamil Nadu - - - - - - - - - - - 8 23 230 8 23 230 - 11 140 - - - 
20.  Tripura - - - - 6 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
21.  Uttar Pradesh 18 39 7 - - 93 - - 7 18 1 73 18 16 377 18 10 - 18 7 143 - - - 
22.  West Bengal - - 83 - - - - - 3 - - - - - 83 - - 1 - - - - - - 
23.  Dadra & Nagar 
Haweli 
1 - 3  -  -- - -2- -21  -1 1 -1 1 -3 1 -  -  
24.  Puducherry - - - - - - 2 - 30 - - - 2 3 30 2 3 30 1 3 30 - - - 
Total 56 165 1205 4 43 482 37 108 1111 42 74 885 46 200 1665 48 167 1063 34 111 1300 10 56 442 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
246 
Annex-10B 
Position of incorrect maintenance of records 
(Refer to paragraph 10.3) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the State Job card 
application 
register 
Job card 
register 
Employment 
register Muster roll 
Issue/receipt 
register 
 
 
Works register Assets register Complaint register Monthly 
allotment and 
UC  watch 
register 
Block GP Block GP Block GP Block GP Dist. Block GP Dist Block GP Dist Block GP Block GP 
1.  Andhra Pradesh - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 - - 15 - - - 
2.  Arunachal Pradesh - - - - - - - - - - - - 9 - - - - - - 
3.  Assam - - - - - 83 - - - - - - 1 - - - - - - 
4.  Goa - - - - - 14 - - - 4 14 - - - - - - - - 
5.  Himachal Pradesh - 20 - - - 38 - - - - - - - 90 - 9 90 - 90 
6.  Jharkhand 10 127 9 121 9 117 7 102 - 8 111 - 9 113 - 9 105 7 92 
7.  Karnataka - 117 - 133 - 72 - 31 - - 20 - - 8 - - 39 - - 
8.  Madhya Pradesh 10 100 29 248 23 220 20 191 - 11 98 - 22 198 - 4 40 8 73 
9.  Manipur 9 90 9 90 9 90 9 90 2 - - 2 -  3 - - - - 
10.  Odisha - - - 199 - 199 - - 8 20 199 - - 199 8 20 199 - - 
11.  Sikkim 4 8 4 8 - - - 8 - - - - - 8 - - - - - 
12.  Tripura 6 - - -   
13.  Uttarakhand - 100  - - - 100 - - - - 100 - - 100 - - - - - 
14.  West Bengal - -  83 - 19 - - - - - - - 17 - - - - - 
15.  Dadra & Nagar Haveli - 2 - 10 - 5 - - - - 9 - - 3 - - - - - 
 Total 39 564 51 892 41 957 36 422 10 43 551 2 42 736 11 57 473 15 255 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
247 
Annex-10C 
Other inadequacies in records 
 (Refer to paragraph 10.4) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the State 
Nature of Objection 
1. Bihar Scrutiny of Monthly Progress Report (MPR) revealed following discrepancies: 
/g190 Expenditure shown in MPR was overstated by ` 34.19 crore in 
comparison to Chartered Accountant report in Munger district during 
2007-12. 
/g190 It was observed that MIS entry for ` 8.96 crore was not carried out by 
the line department and zila parishad in West Champaran district. 
2. Madhya 
Pradesh 
The fortnightly reports of employment generation data of the GPs as 
prescribed in Para 9.2.2 of Operational Guidelines were not consolidated at 
block level.  Hence, the actual data of employment generated under the 
Scheme was not available at any level of execution.   The various 
implementing agencies relied only upon the MIS data which was not being 
reconciled with the actual data of employment generation.  
3. Rajasthan Register of receipt and issue of muster rolls was maintained in all test 
checked blocks and GPs. However, 310 and 180 muster rolls were not 
recorded in receipt register of 12 GPs 1 of respective blocks of Chaksu and 
Phagi and the muster roll register of  GP Kathwala (block; Chaksu) was not 
produced to Audit. In absence of the non-receipt of muster rolls, possibility of 
misuse could not be ruled out. 
4. Tamil 
Nadu 
Data available in MIS for 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12 shows that 
unemployment allowance was due to be paid by the State for 324 days, 
1,65,284 days and 1,75,406 days respectively.  However, as per department’s 
reply, payment of unemployment allowance did not arise as the jobs were 
provided immediately on demand. Thus, there was serious discrepancy 
between the database and reply of the department.  The State government 
stated (June 2012) that the entries in the MIS data were due to errors made 
by the Data Entry Operators.  
                                                            
1.  District, Jaipur: block, Chaksu (six GPs: 310 MRs) and Phagi (six GPs: 180 MRs).  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
248 
Annex-10D 
Variation between data uploaded in the MIS and actual position  
in terms of job cards 
(Refer to paragraph 10.5) 
 
 
 
 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Nature of discrepancy As per Data 
made 
available to 
Audit 
(figures in 
lakh) 
As per Data 
uploaded in 
the MIS 
(figures in 
lakh) 
Discrepancy noticed in
districts Blocks GPs
1. Assam Number of job cards issued 0.84 0.90 1 
(Kamrup) 
4 51
2. Goa  Number of households job 
cards issued 
0.32 0.29 2  
3. Gujarat Number of households job 
cards  issued 
2.65 3.25 1 - -
Number of households 0.25 0.35 - 1 -
4. Jharkhand Number of job cards issued 13.37 13.25 6 - -
5. Nagaland  Number of job cards issued     0.006 0.007 - - Pansa B 
GP 
6. Punjab Number of job cards issued 23.93 25.10 - - -
7. Rajasthan Number of job cards 
(2009-12) 
27.69 28.07 8 8 -
8. Lakshadweep Households job card issued 0.09 
 
0.08
 
1  
Households demanded 
employment 
0.05
 
0.04
 
1 - -
Households provided 
Employment 
0.05
 
0.04
 
1 - -
Households completed 100 
days. 
0.003
 
0.001
 
1 - -
Persondays generated 1.71 
 
1.64 
 
1 - -

Report No. 6 of 2013 
249 
 
Annex-10E 
Variation between data uploaded in the MIS and actual position in terms of 
Opening/Closing Balances 
 (Refer to paragraph 10.5) 
 
 
 
 
  
Sl. 
No 
Name of the 
State 
Nature of discrepancy Figure as per Data made 
available to Audit 
(figures in crore) 
Figure as 
per Data 
uploaded in 
the MIS 
(figures in 
crore) 
Remarks
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
Opening balance in Scheme fund  
2009-10 at Director EGS office 
 
0.84  (as per audited 
accounts by Chartered 
Accountant) 
1,107.74 State level
Opening balance in Scheme fund  
2010-11 at Director EGS office 
973.03  (as per audited 
accounts by Chartered 
Accountant) 
1,169.51  
Closing balance in Scheme fund  
2009-10 at Director EGS office 
973.03  (as per audited 
accounts by Chartered 
Accountant) 
1,169.51  
Closing balance in Scheme fund  
2010-11 at Director EGS office 
3,519.24  (as per audited 
accounts by Chartered 
Accountant) 
3,645.75  
2. Goa Closing balance (fund) as on 
31.03.2012 (` in lakh) 
2.19  2.34 2 districts
3. Kerala Central release 1,084.26 951.05 State level
State share 25.10 25.00  
Miscellaneous receipt 8.75 7.78  
Expenditure 1,003.83 1,054.90  
4. Maharashtra Closing balance as per DPCs 10.51 31.16 Nanded
 
Yeotmal 
 
 
Bhandara 
Latur 
Buldhana 
Closing balance as per DPCs 3.83 20.68 
Closing balance as per DPCs 15.39 7.04 
Closing balance as per DPCs 5.23 1.34 
Closing balance as per DPCs 8.25 1.26 
5. Nagaland Mismatch between the bank pass book 
and MIS in respect of amount received 
during 2009-12 
49.14  92.86 3 districts 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
250 
Annex-10F 
Variation between data regarding employment generation uploaded in the MIS 
and actual position /actual data maintained 
 (Refer to paragraph 10.5) 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Nature of Discrepancy Figure as 
per data 
made 
available 
to Audit 
(figures in 
lakh) 
Figure as 
per data 
uploaded 
in MIS 
(figures in 
lakh) 
Discrepancy noticed in Remarks
district Block GP
1. Bihar 
 
Variation between MIS entry and 
MPR in terms of persondays 
(2009-12) 
830 555.11 14  - -
2. Goa Variation in cumulative households 
demanded employment as on 
31.03.2012 (in Nos.) 
0.28 0.31 2 - -
Variation in cumulative households 
provided employment as on 
31.03.2012 (in Nos.) 
0.28 0.32 2 - -
3. Gujarat Variation between MIS entry and 
MPR in terms of persondays (2009-
12) 
403.31 382.87 6 - -
Variation  in Cumulative  
households  issued job cards(2009-
12) 
13.16 13.26 6 - -
Households provided employment 
(2009-12) 
11.25 10.48 6 - -
4. Jharkhand Variation  in cumulative persondays 
generated during  
(2008-12) 
974.67 885.38 6 - -
Variation  in cumulative   
households  completed 100 days 
during 
(2008-12) 
1.51 1.59 6 - -
Variation in  households demanded 
employment(State level) 
69.61 63.83 - - -
Variation in   households demanded 
employment (district level) 
22.25 21.20 6 - -
Variation in   households provided 
employment(State level) 
69.56 63.53 - - -
Variation in   households provided 
employment (district level) 
22.22 21.09 6 - -
5. Kerala Households  registered 18.79 18.68 - - - State 
level Households issued job card 18.60 18.72 - - -
Households demanded 
employment 
14.18 14.19 - - -

Report No. 6 of 2013 
251 
Households  provided employment 14.16 14.17 - - -
Works completed during the year 1.49 1.48 - - -
Land development  0.51 0.52 - - -
Water conservation 0.24 0.23 - - -
Rural connectivity 0.11 0.04 - - -
Irrigation facility to SC/ST/BPL/IAY 0.06 0.05 - - -
6. Punjab Households  demanded 
employment  
8.09 7.85 - - - State 
level 
Households provided employment 8.08 7.81 - - -
Number  of persondays generated 216.65 205.22 - - -
Household completed 100 days 0.17 0.14 - - -
7. Rajasthan 
 
Households provided Employment
(2011-12) 
13.88 13.51 8 8 -
Number  of persondays generated 636.73 
 
665.16
 
8 8 -
Households completed 100 days of 
employment 
1.14 
 
1.19 
 
8 8 -
8. Tamil Nadu 
 
Cumulative   households registered
(2009-12) 
54.85 55.95 8 - -
Cumulative   households  issued job 
card 
54.85 58.42 8 - -
Cumulative   households demanded 
employment 
40.62 40.98 8 - -
Cumulative   households provided 
employment 
40.62 40.84 8 - -
Cumulative persondays generated 2,059.96 1,920.06 8 - -
Cumulative   households completed 
100 days 
7.76 3.88 8 - -
Social audit conducted 0.26 0.004 8 - -
9. Uttarakhand 
 
Cumulative   households demanded 
employment (2009-12) 
6.34
 
4.67
 
4 - -
Cumulative   households provided 
employment 
6.34
 
4.63
 
4 - -
Cumulative persondays generated 
 
201.07
 
159.29
 
4 - -
10. Puducherry Households provided with 100 days 
of employment 
(2008-12) 
0.006 0.004 2 - -

Report No. 6 of 2013 
252 
Annex-10G 
Variation between data uploaded in the MIS and 
actual position in terms of Expenditure 
 (Refer to paragraph 10.5) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Nature of 
discrepancy 
Figure as per 
Data made 
available to 
audit 
(figures in 
lakh) 
Figure as  
per Data 
uploaded 
in the MIS 
(figures in 
lakh) 
Discrepancies noticed in Remark
MPR MIS district Block GP 
1. Assam Variation in wages 
(2008-12) 
67.57 58.85  
 
1 1 4 As per offline 
report 
 
 
Variation in 
material 
(2008-12) 
38.46 38.18  
 
  
Variation in wages 
(2010-12) 
32.59
 
30.61
 
1 1 4 
Variation in 
material 
(2010-12)
18.74
 
24.29
 
1 1 4 
2. Bihar 
 
Variation in 
expenditure 
(2009-12) 
1,64,951.82 
 
1,40,974.21 14 - - -
3. Goa Variation in total 
expenditure 
during (2008-12) 
2,428.14 2,192.27 North and 
South Goa 
  
4. Gujarat Total Expenditure 63,754.5 59,396.51 6 - -  
5. Jharkhand Variation in wages 
(2008-12) 
97,421.43 89,244.23 6
 
- -  
Variation in 
expenditure over 
material (2008-12) 
61,132.19 64,491.90
 
6
 
- - 
Variation in 
expenditure 
(2008-12) 
22,548.14 21,523.92 Gumla - - 
Variation in 
expenditure  
(2008-12) 
20,061.93 17,276.64 Palamau - - 
Variation in 
expenditure 
(2008-12) 
31,190.82 29,506.17 West
Singhbhum 
- - 
Variation in 
expenditure 
(2008-12) 
1,63,769.54 1,59,401.29 6
sampled 
districts 
- - 
Variation in 
expenditure 
 (2008-12) 
5,14,533.61 4,91,360.10
 
24 - - 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
253 
 
  
6. Punjab Variation in total 
availability of 
funds 
63,477.65 66,023.85 - - - State level
Variation in total 
expenditure 
47,172.20 32,943.39 - - - 
Number of works 
completed (2011-
12) 
0.07 0.09 - - - 
Variation in  
expenditure on 
works completed 
(2011-12) 
5,648.95  8,697.34
 
- - - 
Variation in 
Number  of work 
ongoing/suspende
d  (2011-12)  
0.11 0.09 - - - 
Variation in  
expenditure of 
works ongoing/ 
suspended (2011-
12)  
9,293.91 6,517.34
 
- - - 
7. Uttar 
Pradesh Variation between MIS entry and MPR in terms of expenditure during 2009-2012 
Labour 18,196 13,291 Gonda . - - -
Skilled and semi-
skilled 
386 87 Gonda - - -
Material 9,822 7,814 Gonda - - -
Expenditure  
(2010-12) 
20,411 19,996  Jalaun - - -
Expenditure  
(2007-12) 
353.22 229.92 - - 6 GPs -
Expenditure  
(2009-11) 
17,122 16,918 Lucknow - - -
Total receipt 
during  
(2009-12) 
116.23 101.23 Moradabad - - Total Receipt as 
per Cash Book 
was ` 110.44 lakh 
Total expenditure 
during  
(2009-12) 
104.83 105.07 Moradabad - - Total Expenditure 
as per Cash Book 
was ` 110.27 lakh 
8. Lakshadweep Variation in total 
expenditure 
302.59 161.63 1 - - - 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
254 
Annex-10H 
State specific findings 
 (Refer to paragraph 10.5) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State 
Comments 
1. Assam • MGNREGS data were automated in MIS system during the year 2011-12, but 
reliability of data uploaded in the MIS Information sheet was found doubtful as the 
names and unique ID numbers of job card holders appearing in the muster roll (MR) 
bills did not tally either with the names or ID numbers that were uploaded in the MIS. 
Further, the period of works shown in the MR bills did not match the data uploaded 
in MIS indicating presence of ghost/fake job card holders of 2,016 cases.  
• MR number against which the payments were made did not tally with MIS 
information in four cases thereby raising concern about actual employment 
generation with probable misappropriation of Scheme funds. 
• The name and period of works shown in the MR Bills did not match with the data that 
were uploaded in MIS, thereby indicating presence of Ghost job card holders 
involving a total amount of expenditure ` 20.59 lakh. 
2. Jammu & 
Kashmir 
Against the amount of ` 77,671.91 lakh spent on MGNREGS works during 2011-12, data 
related to only ` 36,396.73 had been uploaded. The shortfall was attributed to dearth of 
staff, frequent power cuts, poor web connectivity, etc. 
3. Kerala There was no cross verification of MIS data with that of MPRs which rules out the 
probability of rectification of errors in data entry. Though the Programme Officer at block 
level has to verify the data forwarded by GPs, it was noted by Audit that such verification 
was not being carried out either at block level or district level due to non-forwarding of 
original records/MPRs to higher levels. Considerable number of discrepancies in the 
figures uploaded in MIS and various statements relating to job card issue, employment 
generation, fund expended, wage payments, etc. were observed when cross-checked 
with original figures. 
4. Madhya 
Pradesh 
In district Shahdol, the expenditure of ` 265.21 lakh for the year 2011-12 remained out of 
MIS as the MIS feeding for the year 2011-12 was closed (June 2012)  
5. Punjab In Amritsar district, issue of job cards to 93 beneficiaries (45 in Ajnala block and 48 in 
Verka block) were entered twice in MIS. 
6. Tripura • Closing balance of funds as per MIS did not tally with the opening balance of next 
year.  The amount carried forward in excess ranged from ` 0.30 lakh to ` 366.34 lakh, 
the shortfall in carried forward balance ranged from ` 32.32 lakh to ` 11,066.06 lakh. 
• There was understatement of expenditure by ` 1,633.96 lakh and overstatement of 
expenditure by ` 1,323.78 lakh in MIS when compared with the audited accounts 
during the period from 2007-08 to 2010-11. 
7. Puducherry Labour Budget uploaded in the MGNREGA site revealed that job cards were shown to 
have been issued to 20,773 households against the total rural households of 16,154 
existing in Karaikal district in 2010-11. 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
255 
Annex-11A 
Field visits undertaken by the CEGC members 
 (Refer to Paragraph 11.2.1) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Member 
Place visited Dates of visit Whether 
action taken 
report from 
States received 
1. Sanjay Dixit Bulandshahr, Uttar Pradesh 1 to 3.06.2010 No 
2. Sanjay Dixit Kanpur Dehat, Uttar 
Pradesh 
11 to 13.02.2010 No 
3. Madhusudan Mistry Porbandar, Gujarat October 2010 No 
4. Sanjay Dixit Sonbhadra, Uttar Pradesh 5 to 7.07.2010 No 
5. Ashwini Kumar Dhar, Madhya Pradesh 17 to 21.11.2009 No 
6. K S Gopal Bhubneshwar, 
Odisha 
8 to 11.12.2009 
8 to 10.01.2010 
21 to 24.01.2010 
No 
7. Ashwini Kumar Keonjhar, Bhubneshwar 
Odisha 
2 to 4.02.2010 No 
8. Sanjay Dixit Mahoba, Uttar Pradesh 25 to 26.09.2009 Yes 
9. Madhusudan Mistry Dahod, Gujarat 27 to 29.01.2010 Yes 
10. Madhusudan Mistry Rajgarh, Shivpuri and Guna,
Madhya Pradesh 
10 to 12.11.2009 No 
11. Madhusudan Mistry Kutch and Sabarkantha, 
Gujarat 
3 to 4.11.2009 No 
12. R Dhruvanarayana Mysore and 
Chamarajanagar, Karnataka 
16.10.2009 No 
13. R Dhruvanarayana Bhilwara, Rajasthan 23.10.2009 No 
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
256 
Annex-11B 
Coverage of NLMs 
 (Refer to Paragraph 11.2.2) 
 
Name of 
State/UT 
Total 
Districts 
under 
MGNREGS 
Districts 
visited by  
NLMs 
during 
2007-08 
Districts 
visited by  
NLMs 
during 
2008-09 
Districts 
visited by  
NLMs 
during 
2009-10 
Districts 
visited by  
NLMs 
during 
2010-11 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
22 9 8 13 16 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
16 3 1 4 8 
Assam 27 8 10 5 22 
Bihar 38 9 14 24 29 
Chhattisgarh 18 6 8 11 15 
 Goa 2 0 0 0 2 
Gujarat 26 7 9 6 25 
Haryana 21 4 13 4 16 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
12 2 4 3 10 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 
22 4 1 6 18 
Jharkhand 24 10 8 14 12 
Karnataka 30 9 14 8 21 
Kerala  14 4 7 6 12 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
50 13 24 26 40 
Maharashtra 33 10 10 15 30 
Manipur 9 3 2 2 5 
Meghalaya 7 2 2 2 6 
Mizoram 8 2 4 3 8 
Nagaland 11 1 3 4 11 
Odisha 30 7 14 13 24 
 Punjab 20 9 6 3 18 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
257 
Rajasthan 33 9 15 13 26 
Sikkim 4 1 1 2 4 
Tamil Nadu 31 8 14 13 19 
Tripura 4 2 2 1 4 
Uttar Pradesh 71 22 23 34 55 
Uttarakhand 13 4 3 6 12 
 West Bengal 19 3 5 10 10 
A & N Islands  3 - - - - 
D & N Haveli 1 - - - - 
Lakshadweep 1 - - - 1 
Puducherry 2 - - - - 
Total 622 171 225 251 479 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
258 
Annex-11C 
Districts not covered by NLMs even once during 2007-2011 
(Refer to Paragraph 11.2.2) 
 
Sl. No. Name of State Number of Districts 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 2 
2.  Arunachal Pradesh 6 
3.  Assam 4 
4.  Bihar 2 
5.  Chhattisgarh 2 
6.  Haryana 2 
7.  Himachal Pradesh 1 
8.  Jammu & Kashmir 3 
9.  Karnataka 1 
10.  Madhya Pradesh 3 
11.  Maharashtra 1 
12.  Manipur 2 
13.  Odisha 1 
14.  Punjab 1 
15.  Rajasthan 2 
16.  Tamil Nadu 1 
17.  Uttar Pradesh 3 
18.  West Bengal 2 
Total 39 
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
259 
Annex-11D 
State-wise details where no record maintained/produced for  
internal verification of work at field level 
 (Refer to Paragraph 11.4) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Remarks 
1. Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Physical Verification Reports of works (10 per cent at district level 
and 2 per cent at state level) were not available /monitored by the 
state government. 
2. Chhattisgarh There were no records in selected units to ensure that inspections 
were carried out in Bastar district. 
3. Goa No inspection reports were maintained/provided at DRDA (North 
Goa). 
4. Haryana It was observed that the records relating to inspection of works 
were not maintained/provided at the block level. 
5. Madhya 
Pradesh 
No permanent record of inspection of works carried out by the 
various levels was maintained at the GPs and no inspection report 
of the works inspected was found at any of the test checked GPs, 
blocks and districts. 
6. Odisha The PO, district level officers and state level officers had not verified 
100 per cent , 10 per cent  and 2 per cent  works physically as seen 
from the monthly progress reports during the period under review.  
7. Uttar Pradesh Nothing was available on record to show that the inspection and 
test checks were conducted to the extent prescribed.  
8. Puducherry No record of inspection was maintained or made available to Audit. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
260 
Annex-11E 
Shortfall in inspection at State, District and Block level 
 (Refer to Paragraph 11.4) 
 
Sl. No. Name of state State  (per cent) District  (per cent) Block  (per cent) 
1 Bihar1 NA 63 62 
2 Gujarat 2 NA 37 2 
3 Jharkhand NA NIL 42 
4 Karnataka 98 50 71 
5 Kerala  94 56 25 
6 Manipur 94 NIL 51 
7 Meghalaya 100 72 39 
8 Mizoram 100 NA NIL 
9 Nagaland 82 76 53 
10  Punjab 90 - _ 
11 Uttarakhand 94 NIL 48 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                                                
 
1 The data in respect of only 8 districts out of total selected 15 districts is available 
2 The shortfall refers to the year 2009-10. 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
261 
Annex-11F 
States where VMCs were not constituted 
 (Refer to Paragraph 11.6) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of State Total No. of test 
checked GPs 
No. of test 
checked GPs 
where VMC not 
appointed 
Percentage of 
GPs where VMC 
not constituted 
1. Andhra Pradesh 150 150 100 
2. Bihar 252 250 99 
3. Odisha 200 199 99 
4. Tamil Nadu 230 170 74 
5. Uttar Pradesh 460 57 12 
6. West Bengal 120 83 69 
 Total 1,412 909 -- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
262 
Annex-11G 
Status of Social Audit conducted 
 (Refer to Paragraph 11.8.2) 
 
Sl. No. Name of the State/UT Total audits in test 
checked GPs required 
to be done 
Total audits in test 
checked GPs actually 
done 
1.  Andhra Pradesh 1,500 610 
2.  Bihar 2,380 528 
3.  Himachal Pradesh 730 313 
4.  Jharkhand3 11,786 5,660 
5.  Karnataka 1,416 232 
6.  Nagaland 488 280 
7.  Odisha 1,890 938 
8.   Punjab 1,073 978 
9.  Rajasthan 1,560 1,360 
10.  Sikkim4 64 24 
11.  Uttar Pradesh 4,200 982 
12.  Puducherry 240   53 
 
 
  
                                                 
3 Data pertains to all GPs in selected districts 
4 No. of social audit conducted in 2008-09 was not made  available 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
263 
Annex-11H 
Internal Audit Cell not constituted 
 (Refer to Paragraph 11.8.5) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
State/UT 
Total test 
checked 
 Districts 
Districts where  
Internal Audit cell 
not constituted 
Percentage of test 
checked Districts 
where internal cell 
not constituted 
1. Bihar 15 15 100 
2. Gujarat 6 2 33 
3. Jharkhand 6 6 100 
4. Manipur 4 4 100 
5. Nagaland  3 1 33 
6. Odisha 8 8 100 
7. Punjab 6 3 50 
8. Rajasthan  8 1 13 
9. Uttar Pradesh 18 14 77 
10 Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
2 2 100 
11 Puducherry  2 2 100 
Total 78 58 -- 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
264 
Annex-11I 
Status of complaints received and disposed of  
during the period 2007-12 
 (Refer to Paragraph 11.9.1) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of State No. of 
complaints 
received 
No. of complaints 
disposed of 
1 Assam 180 110 
2 Bihar 2,419 1,835 
3 Chhattisgarh  475 51 
4. Karnataka 1,953 1,620 
5. Madhya Pradesh 6,537 5,428 
6 Punjab 612 548 
7. Uttar Pradesh 1,18,043 98,215 
Total 1,30,219 1,07,807 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
265 
Annex-12A 
Missing/Ambiguous User IDs for entries in Work Progress Tables 
(Refer to paragraph 12.4.1) 
 
Sl. No. Name of State No. of Records 
1. Assam 29,663 
2. Bihar  4,34,972 
3. Goa 3,414 
4. Gujarat  54,671 
5. Haryana 9,774 
6. Himachal  Pradesh 2,52,091 
7. Jharkhand 2,92,378 
8. Karnataka  11,53,017 
9. Kerala 79,091 
10. Manipur  1,463 
11. Madhya Pradesh 14,41,259 
12. Maharashtra  67,027 
13. Meghalya 25,232 
14. Nagaland  30,399 
15. Odisha 6,815 
16. Punjab  10,629 
17. Rajasthan 5,74,053 
18. Sikkim  1,002 
19. Tamil Nadu 90,787 
20. Uttar Pradesh  10,66,267 
Total 56,24,004 
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
266 
(Refer to paragraph 12.4.2) 
 
  
Annex-12B
Invalid Names of beneficiaries in Registration Table 
Sl. No. Name of State No. of records 
Names with Special 
characters 
Names containing one 
or two letters or special 
characters only 
1. Assam  84  - 
2. Bihar 352 228 
3. Gujarat  633 399 
4. Haryana 136 85 
5. Himachal  Pradesh 91  - 
6. Jharkhand 3,940 353 
7. Karnataka  626  - 
8. Kerala 1,01,463 6,112 
9. Madhya Pradesh  7,475  - 
10. Maharashtra 1,685 943 
11. Manipur  57 52 
12. Meghalaya 891 - 
13. Odisha  11  - 
14. Punjab 56 54 
15. Rajasthan  2,092  - 
16. Sikkim 40 1 
17. Tamil Nadu  3,441 2,670 
18. Uttar Pradesh 776  - 
Total 1,23,849 10,897 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
267 
Annex-12C 
Missing/Invalid House Numbers Registration Table 
(Refer to paragraph 12.4.2) 
 
Sl. No. Name of State No. of Records 
1. Assam 10,16,918 
2. Bihar  1,22,51,203 
3. Goa 531 
4. Gujarat  36,33,287 
5. Haryana 6,08,293 
6. Himachal 
Pradesh 
8,73,270 
7. Jharkhand 33,41,044 
8. Karnataka  55,86,655 
9. Kerala 2,857 
10. Maharashtra  58,82,400 
11. Manipur 70,127 
12. Meghalya  3,05,109 
13. Nagaland 46,736 
14. Odisha  1,47,385 
15. Punjab 7,75,004 
16. Rajasthan  91,27,735 
17. Sikkim 40 
18. Tamil Nadu  56,50,099 
19. Uttar Pradesh 1,48,96,143 
 Total 6,42,14,836 
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
268 
Annex-12D 
Missing Plot/Khata Number in Work Progress Tables 
(Refer to paragraph 12.4.2) 
 
Sl. No. Name of State No. of Records 
1. Assam 67,100 
2. Bihar  4,37,931 
3. Goa 3,342 
4. Gujarat  1,51,770 
5. Haryana 33,133 
6. Himachal 
Pradesh 
2,49,526 
7. Jharkhand 1,32,494 
8. Karnataka  3,47,500 
9. Kerala 1,95,072 
10. Madhya 
Pradesh 
9,83,944 
11. Maharashtra 2,30,017 
12. Manipur  9,984 
13. Meghalya 32,744 
14. Nagaland  30,224 
15. Odisha 8,010 
16. Punjab  19,902 
17. Rajasthan 6,01,627 
18. Sikkim  7,963 
19. Tamil Nadu 2,02,795 
20. Uttar Pradesh  15,63,071 
 Total 53,08,149 
 
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
269 
Annex-12E 
Missing/Duplicate Financial Sanction Number in Work Sanction Table 
 (Refer to paragraph 12.4.2) 
 
 
 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of State No. of Records 
Duplicate Financial 
Sanction 
Missing/Ambiguous 
(null/0/00/ one/two 
special characters) 
Financial Sanction 
1. Assam  1,908 - 
2. Bihar 2,40,949 6,115 
3. Goa  824 - 
4. Gujarat 66,979 324 
5. Haryana  3,714 18 
6. Himachal Pradesh 66,439 - 
7. Jharkhand  1,22,712 697 
8. Karnataka 2,53,566 - 
9. Kerala  1,04,338 314 
10. Madhya Pradesh 2,06,904 36,929 
11. Maharashtra  32,775 262 
12. Manipur 2,124 - 
13. Meghalaya  6,644 - 
14. Odisha 8,740 - 
15. Punjab  8,748 30 
16. Rajasthan 1,23,796 1,148 
17. Tamil Nadu  1,08,656 1,056 
 Total 13,59,816 46,893 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
270 
Annex-12F 
Missing Work Name in Works Sanctioned 
(Refer to paragraph 12.4.2) 
 
 
 
  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of State  No. of Records 
Without Work Name Without Work Code 
1. Assam  22,770 -  
2. Bihar 4,34,342 272 
3. Goa  2,821 0 
4. Gujarat 2,98,336 137 
5. Haryana  38,664 1 
6. Himachal Pradesh 95,425 7 
7. Jharkhand  1,63,694 47 
8. Karnataka 9,62,791 -  
9. Kerala  3,00,706 1,071 
10. Madhya Pradesh 14,00,673 18,648 
11. Maharashtra  3,64,548 168 
12. Manipur 11,164 6 
13. Meghalaya  31,690 - 
14. Nagaland 31,734 1 
15. Odisha  6,724 - 
16. Punjab 18,521 1 
17. Rajasthan  2,22,314 1 
18. Tamil Nadu 1,99,565 1 
 Total 46,06,482 20,361 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
271 
Annex-12G 
Wrong Wage Calculation 
(Refer to paragraph 12.4.3) 
 
Sl. No. Name of State Records 
1. Assam 12,031 
2. Bihar  4,967 
3. Gujarat 14,209 
4. Haryana  1,560 
5. Himachal Pradesh 99,481 
6. Jharkhand  2,74,045 
7. Karnataka 5,765 
8. Kerala  41,614 
9. Madhya Pradesh 34,16,879 
10. Maharashtra  5,39,309 
11. Manipur 304 
12. Meghalya  28,651 
13. Nagaland 90,940 
14. Odisha  58,610 
15. Punjab 1,787 
16. Rajasthan  48,03,463 
17. Tamil Nadu 10,610 
18. Uttar Pradesh  52,374 
 Total 94,56,599 
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
272 
Annex-12H 
Wrong Bill Amount Calculation in Material Purchased 
(Refer to paragraph 12.4.3) 
 
Sl. No. Name of State No of Records 
1. Bihar 52 
2. Goa  41 
3. Gujarat 2,013 
4. Himachal Pradesh  188 
5. Jharkhand 38,909 
6. Karnataka  3,562 
7. Odisha 645 
8. Uttar Pradesh  68,313 
Total 1,13,723 
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
273 
Annex-12I 
Instances of wrong working of Opening Balance/Closing Balances 
figures in State, District, Block or Panchayat accounts 
(Refer to paragraph 12.4.3) 
 
Sl. No. Name of State No. of Records 
1. Assam 1,37,729 
2. Bihar  6,836 
3. Goa 1,909 
4. Gujarat  29,762 
5. Himachal Pradesh 2,57,124 
6. Jharkhand  13,685 
7. Manipur 3,014 
8. Maharashtra  65,631 
9. Meghalaya 85,052 
10. Punjab  60,751 
11. Rajasthan 4,83,040 
12. Uttar Pradesh  7,66,569 
Total 19,11,102 
 
  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
274 
Annex-13 : State Highlights 
Andhra Pradesh 
/g190 Background 
The state has 23 districts, out of which only 22 districts were covered under 
MGNREGS.  Thirteen districts were covered under MGNREGS in the first phase i.e., 
from 2 February 2006.  Subsequently, six districts were covered from 1 April 2007 
onwards and the remaining three from 1 April 2008. For the period 2007-12, ` 
17,267.41 crore was released to the state under MGNREGS. The table below outlines 
some of the major implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population 
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population 
Cumulative 
expenditure
 (` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
8,46,65,533 5,63,11,788 66.51 18,506.08 1,24,00,996 14,604.34
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage 
of social 
audits 
completed 
1,30,07,471 17,64,042 13.56 10,850 4,779 44
/g190 Planning 
• The State Employment Guarantee Council (SEGC) was practically non-functional. 
• There were significant vacancies in different cadres at the block and GP level, 
especially in view of the huge volume of transactions and the time-bound nature of 
various activities. 
• The activities undertaken by the state government for Information, Education and 
Communication about MGNREGS and the development of training 
modules/material were largely adequate. 
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• Households were not properly segregated into nuclear families, thus, adversely 
affecting their statutory annual rights to at least 100 days employment per 
household.  
• A significant proportion of job cards did not have photographs affixed. 
• Instances of overlap in muster roll entries i.e, the same worker being reflected in 
two muster rolls on same dates for different works, were noticed. 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
275 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• There were a large number of works-in-progress in GPs, ranging from 80 to 100. 
Most of these works had sporadic bursts of persondays of employment, without 
continuity.  
/g190 Financial Management 
• Irregular opening of bank accounts and non-reconciliation of a discrepant amount 
of ` 34.82 lakh in August 2011 were noticed. 
• As of 31 March 2011, an amount of ` 262.32 crore advanced to different agencies 
was pending for adjustment. Advances reflected in the Auditor’s Report for the 
state fund did not include outstanding advances at the district/block level. 
• In Rangareddy district, opening balance of ` 2.54 lakh (July 2009) increased to 
more than ` 2.00 crore (June 2010) and ` 4.00 crore (March 2012). This clearly 
indicates that a substantial float of several crore of rupees was kept with business 
correspondent, representing undue benefit to the bank/business correspondent. 
• There were shortfalls and delays in release of the matching share of state to the 
funds released by Ministry. 
/g190 Monitoring and Evaluation 
• State had introduced a formal system of registering grievances/petitions and action 
thereon, but the status of grievance redressal was not uploaded onto the MIS 
website. 
/g190 Others 
• In the test-checked GPs, none of the registers stipulated in the Operational 
Guidelines were being maintained.   
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
276 
 
Arunachal Pradesh 
/g190 Background 
The state has 16 districts.   One district was covered under MGNREGS in the first phase 
i.e., from 2 February 2006.  Subsequently two districts were covered from 1 April 2007 
onwards and the remaining 13, from 1 April 2008.  For the period 2007-12, ` 172.07 
crore was released to the state under MGNREGS. The table below outlines some of the 
major implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population 
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage of 
rural 
population 
Cumulative 
expenditure (` 
in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
13,82,611 10,69,165 77.32 181.40 1,78,220 147.79
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage of 
works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
11,576 4,933 42.60 -- -- --
/g190 Planning 
• Against the target of 3,350 PRI functionaries, only 2,239 (66.84 per cent ) were 
imparted training. The target for traini ng of vigilance and monitoring stake holders 
was 1,777 against which achievement was 419 (23.58 per cent). 
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• Annual average employment generation was 15 to 18 persondays and percentage 
of households provided 100 days’ employment was 0.04 to 18.18. 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• Two works costing worth ` 6.21 lakh, which were completed earlier, had again 
been executed for ` 21.79 lakh and eight road works executed at the cost of ` 7.49 
lakh, were of doubtful durability. 
• An expenditure of ` 2.96 crore was incurred on 55 non-permissible works. 
• Fourteen works amounting ` 2.18 crore were executed without administrative 
approval or technical sanction. 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
277 
/g190  Monitoring and Evaluation 
• The GIS and GeoICT tools under MGNREGA, to link GIS with decentralized 
planning, preparation of labour budget, programme implementation, assets 
monitoring, and evaluation were not utilized by the state. 
• Physical verification reports of works (10 per cent at district level and two per cent 
at state level) were not available/undertaken by the state government. 
• Ministry had drawn up broad indicative terms of reference for use by the state for 
quality monitors, but the state government did not appoint State Quality Monitors 
and District Quality Monitors at district level. 
 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
278 
 
Assam 
/g190 Background 
The state has 27 districts.   Seven districts were covered under MGNREGS in the first 
phase i.e., from 2 February 2006, six districts from 1 April 2007 onwards and the 
remaining 14 districts from 1 April 2008. For the period 2007-12, ` 3,295.50 crore was 
released to the state under MGNREGS. The table below outlines some of the major 
implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12. 
Population Rural 
population 
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
3,11,69,272 2,67,80,516 85.92 4,060.40 39,20,558 1,895.55
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
1,15,691 65,945 57.00 15,870 (2007-
08 & 2008-09 
not provided)
14,391 (2007-
08 not 
provided) 
-
/g190 Planning 
• The Information, Education and Communication activities for awareness generation 
were not sufficient and the beneficiaries remained largely unaware of their 
entitlements.  
• Deficiencies were noticed in appointment of full-time Programme Officers and 
instances of delayed/non-engagement of gram rozgar sahayak/mates, etc. were 
also noticed. The engagement of unqualified personnel as Accredited Engineers 
and their subsequent retrenchment resulted in infructuous expenditure of `45.42 
lakh. 
• The objective of improving the quality and cost effectiveness of the Scheme 
through appropriate technical support remained largely unachieved though an 
amount of ` 32.70 lakh was spent by the state government. 
• There were deficiencies in the preparation of annual plan and district perspective 
plan (DPP). An amount of ` 59.32 lakh was spent by the districts for preparation of 
DPP, but the same were not approved by the SEGC.  
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• Out of 88.15 lakh households that demanded employment during 2007 to 2012, 
100 days’ employment was provided to only 3.54 lakh households. 
• There were irregularities in the issue of job cards, viz:  job cards issued to 
unidentified persons, PRI members and gram rozgar sahayak, non-opening of 
bank/post office accounts of job card holders and non-updating the registration 
list.  

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
279 
• In four districts, joint photographs of the families of the job card holders were not 
affixed either on the job card or on the job card register. In 536 cases in other 15 
GPs, even photographs of the head of the families were not affixed on the job 
cards.  
• In eight districts, the eligibility and quantum of unemployment allowance was not 
verifiable for want of details of applications and other records. In two districts, 
37,229 job card holders were not paid unemployment allowance. There were also 
6,263 cases of delayed payment of wages in two districts, for which due 
compensation of ` 93.95 lakh was not paid. 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• In nine blocks, works involving ` 2.15 crore were executed beyond the scope of the 
Scheme and NREGA Works Field Manual. 
• The norm of execution of a minimum of 50 per cent of the works in terms of costs 
through the gram panchayats were not adhered to in two districts which resulted 
in excess sanction of ` 1.82 crore to other implementing agencies.  
• Provisions of GFR relating to procurement of material were not adhered to in 25 
GPs and material amounting to ` 6.65 crore was procured without maintaining any 
site account. Material worth  ` 43.28 crore was not accounted for at work site in 11 
GPs and two blocks. 
• Fifteen earthen/kutcha roads were constructed at an expenditure of ` 1.22 crore 
during the period from 2008-09 to 2010-11 in two blocks of one district which were 
not permissible under the Scheme.  
•  Forty two works taken up in one district and seven GPs from 2007-08 to 2011-12 
were left abandoned after incurring expenditure of ` 3.78 crore due to inadequate 
technical facilities, land dispute, public obstruction and flood. 
• Twelve plantation works executed in one block after incurring expenditure of ` 
21.00 lakh were not found available. 
/g190 Financial Management 
• Unutilized balance of ` 31.07 lakh as of March 2007 under SGRY was irregularly 
utilized in two districts to avoid transfer of the fund to MGNREGS. 
•  There was non/short release of both the Central as well the state share. Instances 
of irregular administrative expenses, doubtful expenditures, under utilization of 
funds by executing agencies and non-reconciliation of post office accounts were 
noticed. 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
280 
/g190 Monitoring and Evaluation 
• The state government had not designated State Quality Monitors for quality 
inspection of works. The status of inspection of works/vigilance at the state, district 
and block levels was also poor which resulted in fraudulent payment of wages of 
` 4.88 lakh at PO’s level in one district. 
• There were deficiencies in conducting social audits although, in most cases, gram 
sabha meeting was held twice a year to conduct social audit. The state government 
also had neither set up Directorate of Social Audit nor appointed a Director and 
required staff. 
• The SEGC had neither framed any guidelines nor developed any evaluation system 
for evaluation studies.  

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
281 
 
Bihar 
/g190 Background 
The state has 38 districts of which 23 districts were covered under MGNREGS in the 
first phase i.e., from 2 February 2006 and the remaining 15 districts from 1 April 2007 
onwards. For the period 2007-12, ` 6,292.44 crore was released to the state under 
MGNREGS. The table below outlines some of the major implementation parameters in 
the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population 
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
10,38,04,637 9,20,75,028 88.70 8,110.84 1,33,81,535 * 5,296.74
*job card holders 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
7,44,309 3,05,783 41.08 84,630 71,467 
(except 2007-
08) 
-
/g190 Planning 
• The annual plan was prepared with delay and without labour projections. The 
district perspective plan was not prepared.   In six districts, 144 works involving 
expenditure of ` 3.76 crore were executed beyond annual plan. 
• Labour budget was not prepared in a realistic manner as shortfall (27 to 98 per 
cent) in generation of persondays was noticed. 
/g190  Employment Generation & Wages 
• During job card verification of 1,997 beneficiaries, photographs were not affixed in 
20 per cent job cards and in 26  per cent  cases payment of wages entered into the 
job cards   did not tally with the amount credited into their accounts. 
• In several cases of delayed and non- payment of wages, no compensation was paid 
to the labourers. There were also instances of employment not provided as per 
demand. In most of the cases, jobs were provided on verbal request of the job 
seekers and applications for job demands were not documented.  
• Liability on account of wages due and pending material bills of ` 79.54 crore were 
found and delay in payment of wages ranging from 1 to 4 years. 
• Average wages per household were ` 513 to ` 5,407 annually in districts and the 
corresponding figure for state were ` 1,717 to ` 3,788 during 2007-12. These were 
less in comparison to national wage average.  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
282 
• The state government as well as implementing agencies had experienced problems 
in payment of wages through post offices which caused delay in payment of wages. 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• Unspent amount of grant of ` 21.48 crore and cost of unutilized quantity of grain 
amounting to ` 77.36 crore of Sampooran Gramin Rojgar Yojna /National Food for 
Work Programme were not transferred to MGNREGS account. Effective steps were 
not taken for successful closure of 1,127 incomplete works.  
• In most of the cases, low priority works (as defined in Scheduled I to the Act), were 
given high priority and non-permissible works amounting to ` 2.11 crore were 
executed.  
/g190 Financial Management 
• Administrative expenditure exceeded permissible limits. 
• The state government failed to fully utilise the available grants and unspent 
balance ranging from 26 to 40 per cent during 2007-12 was noticed. 
/g190 Monitoring and Evaluation 
• Monitoring system was not effective at the state and district levels.  Quality 
monitors at the state and district levels were not appointed.    
/g190 Others 
• In the absence of proper care and wrong selection of site, plantations (1.76 lakh 
plants) involving expenditure of ` 3.12 crore did not survive.  
• There was wide variation between data (expenditure/persondays) reported to the 
government and the entries made in the Monitoring and Information System (MIS).   
 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
283 
 
Chhattisgarh 
/g190 Background 
The state has 18 districts. Eleven districts were covered under MGNREGS in the first 
phase i.e., from 2 February 2006. Subsequently, four districts were added from 1 April 
2007 onwards and the remaining three from 1 April 2008. For the period 2007-12,  
` 6,959.36 crore was released to the state under MGNREGS. The table below outlines 
some of the major implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population 
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage of 
rural 
population 
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
2,55,40,196 1,96,03,658 76.75 7,839.05 41,20,054 4,595.28
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
6,09,942 3,35,524 55.00 79,360 30,042 37.85
/g190 Planning 
• District perspective plan for the period 2007-08 to 2011-12 was not prepared in the 
test checked districts. 
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• In one district, beneficiaries were not issued bank/ post office passbooks despite 
having accounts in the bank/post office. 
/g131 In 10 GPs, 10,041 households were not provided employment within 15 days and 
unemployment allowance was also not paid to them. 
• In Jashpur district, employment for more than 100 days was provided and wages 
were paid by tampering with the wage-slips. 
• In eight out of 14 selected blocks, wages of ` 9.58 crore were paid with a delay 
ranging from 1 to 376 days. 
• Cheques amounting to ` 69.90 crore were irregularly issued in favour of Sarpanch 
for making payment directly to labourers instead of banks/post offices. 
 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
284 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• Inadmissible works (construction of boundary wall) for ` 1.69 crore and for ` 0.31 
crore were executed in two districts. 
• ` 4.18 crore was paid to contractors for MIS entry on contract basis instead of 
getting the work done through the existing staff. 
• In two districts, 29,636 works aggregating to ` 902.37 crore were lying incomplete 
with other implementing agencies. 
• In Bastar district, completion certificates amounting to ` 4.30 crore were issued for 
154 incomplete works.  
/g190 Monitoring and Evaluation 
• Works executed by other implementing agencies were not discussed in social audit. 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
285 
 
Goa 
/g190 Background 
The state has two districts. Both districts were covered from 1 April 2008. For the 
period 2007-12, ` 15.20 crore was released to the state under MGNREGS. The table 
below outlines some of the major implementation parameters in the state during 
2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage of 
rural 
population 
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
14,57,723 5,51,414 37.83 26.31 4,437 8.62
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage of 
works 
completed 
Number of 
social 
audits due
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
3,003 1,296 43.16 1,134 709 62.52 
/g190 Planning 
• The meetings of the State Employment Guarantee Council (SEGC) were sporadic 
and rendered the SEGC virtually non-functional. 
• The Scheme was implemented in the state from 2008-09, but annual plan and shelf 
of projects were not prepared for any of the years. 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• In 14 gram panchayats, 146 non-permissible works (including kutcha roads) 
amounting to `1.60 crore were executed. 
• Wage-material ratio was not followed in majority of the works executed under the 
Scheme in the 14 selected village panchayats. 
• Assets valued ` 11.44 lakh were created for the benefit of private individuals in 
some panchayats. 
/g190 Financial Management 
• The labour budget was not as per the prescribed format and the figures were not 
tallying with the Monthly Progress Report data uploaded in the MIS. 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
286 
/g190 Monitoring and Evaluation 
• The functioning of the local Vigilance and Monitoring Committee in Pernem block 
was doubtful.  There were instances of lack of public awareness, lack of continuous 
public vigilance and little monitoring of the implementation of the Scheme through 
social audit. 
 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
287 
 
Gujarat 
/g190 Background 
The state has 26 districts.  Six districts were covered under MGNREGS in the first phase 
i.e., from 2 February 2006, three districts from 1 April 2007 onwards and the 
remaining 17 districts from 1 April 2008. For the period 2007-12, ` 2,219.80 crore  
was released to the state under MGNREGS. The table below outlines some of the 
major implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population
Cumulative 
expenditure
(` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
6,03,83,628 3,46,70,817 57.41 2,105.17 40,76,332 1,691.15
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
6,38,692 3,81,021 59.65 57,128 70,379 100
/g190 Planning 
• There was delay of three years in constitution of State Employment Guarantee 
Council. 
• Districts did not prepare annual plan and shelf of project. 
• In phase II and III, districts which were given funds to prepare the district 
perspective plan for the period 2008-12, did not prepare it.  
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• There was shortfall in achievement of projected employment in labour budget 
ranging between 18 and 47 per cent. 
• Payments to 201 ghost workers were noticed in seven blocks. 
• There was incorrect maintenance of muster rolls. Muster rolls did not bear 
signature of labourers.  
• There was suspected misappropriation of ` 3.59 crore in Dahod taluka. Wage 
payment was made on muster rolls which were not issued to that Taluka.  
• There was inconsistency in the data showing registration of households under the 
Scheme.  Programme office did not have physical records of applications for 
registration. Online data was incorrect as many job cards shown online did not 
exist.  
• There were cases of duplicate job card numbers and duplicate account numbers in 
five districts.  
• Records were not available for employment demanded and provided. No entries on 
job cards were made. 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
288 
• There were delays in payment of wages ranging from 1 to 685 days and no 
compensation was paid for delay. 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• There was an expenditure of ` 90 lakh at Ahmedabad district for construction of 
underground drainage in which MGNREGS labourers were not involved. 
• There was an expenditure of ` 101.25 crore on construction of 2, 64,652 
boribandhs, a mud and sand structure for storage of water during Monsoon and its 
percolation underground so as to bring up the water table which were not durable.  
• 392 wells sanctioned at a cost of ` 5.25 crore at Dahod district were incomplete. 
• There was no provision for maintenance of assets created under the Scheme.  In 
Ahmedabad, district afforestation work done at a cost of ` 3.38 lakh did not survive 
due to non-maintenance. 
/g190 Financial Management 
• Financial management system was not efficient and figures of reports were 
inconsistent.  
• There was unaccounted expenditure of ` 6.07 crore at two talukas of Dahod 
district. 
/g190 Monitoring and Evaluation 
• Grievance redressal mechanism was not efficient as there was no report regarding 
disposal of complaints were available. 
• Monitoring and evaluation statistics data available with state government were not 
backed up by original records from districts and talukas. 
 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
289 
 
Haryana 
/g190 Background 
The state has 21 districts.  Two districts were covered under MGNREGS in the first 
phase i.e., from 2 February 2006.  Subsequently two districts were covered from  
1 April 2007 onwards and the remaining 17 from 1 April 2008.  For the period 2007-12, 
` 715.10 crore was released to the state under MGNREGS. The table below outlines 
some of the major implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population 
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
2,53,53,081 1,65,31,493 65.20 837.38 4,85,817 * 7,002.60
*households issued job cards  
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
46,779 26,818 57.32 24,160 NA NA
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• Dated receipt of applications for demand for work was not issued by six GPs. 
• Delay in payment of wages ranging from 8 to 331 days were noticed. 
• Twenty two cases of tampering with the muster rolls by way of cutting, 
overwriting, erasing, etc. were observed.  
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• Earthen roads, without all weathers access were constructed at a cost of ` 1.06 
crore. 
• Ponds were dug up under the Scheme at a cost of ` 55.90 lakh without ensuring 
availability of water. 
/g190 Financial Management 
• Unspent SGRY funds were not transferred to MGNREGS account. 
• State’s share was short released by ` 10.06 crore in January 2009 to March 2010. 
• No funds were spent for maintenance of assets. 
/g190 Monitoring and Evaluation 
• A vigilance enquiry was pending in the case of works amounting to ` 25.76 crore 
executed by forest department.  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
290 
 
Himachal Pradesh 
/g190 Background 
The state has 12 districts.  Two districts were covered under MGNREGS in the first 
phase i.e., from 2 February 2006.  Subsequently two districts were covered from 1 
April 2007 onwards and remaining eight from 1 April 2008.  For the period 2007-12, ` 
1,880.34 crore was released to the state under MGNREGS. The table below outlines 
some of the major implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population 
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
68,56,509 61,67,805 89.95 2,016.41 11,45,000 * 1,068.32
* households issued job cards  
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
NA 1,34,988 NA 29,432 11,005 (Fig. 
for 2007-08 
NA) 
-
/g190 Planning 
• The state government constituted (July 2006) the State Employment Guarantee 
Council under the Chairmanship of the Chief Minister. SEGC held only one meeting 
in January 2009 against the required 10 meetings which indicated that proper 
checks over planning process, execution of works, preparation of shelf of works, 
ensuring work priorities, etc. were not exercised. 
• In the test-checked districts, district perspective plan was not prepared. 
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• Wages of ` 1.10 crore were paid to workers with delay ranging from 15 to 795 
days. 
• In 25 GPs, 876 muster rolls did not bear unique identity numbers. 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• In test-checked districts, expenditure of ` 97.27 crore was incurred for execution of 
3,859 works through line departments. It was noticed that these works were 
neither included in the annual shelf of projects of the respective GP nor had the 
recommendations of gram sabha. 
• Works were not taken up as per the priority list.  Rural connectivity which was at 
the bottom in the priority list was given top priority. This resulted in non-execution 
of important works such as drought proofing, afforestation and soil conservation. 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
291 
/g190 Financial Management 
• The practice of monthly squaring of accounts was not introduced at any level to 
verify that  money released were accounted for under three heads viz. money held 
in bank accounts at various levels, advances to implementing or payment agencies 
and expenditure vouchers. 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
292 
 
Jammu & Kashmir 
/g190 Background 
The state has 22 districts.  Three districts were covered under MGNREGS in the first 
phase i.e., from 2 February 2006.  Subsequently two districts were covered from 1 
April 2007 onwards and the remaining 17 districts from 1 April 2008.  For the period 
2007-12, ` 1,446.04 crore was released to the state under MGNREGS. The table below 
outlines some of the major implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population
(as per 
2011 
census) 
Percentage of 
rural 
population 
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
1,25,48,926 91,34,820 72.79 1,501.58 10,05,904 * 851.15
* households issued job cards  
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage of 
works 
completed 
Number of 
social 
audits due
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
1,98,627 1,30,449 65.67 Not 
available 
Not available Not available
/g190 Planning 
• District perspective plan had not been formulated in the initial years of 
implementation of the Scheme and the labour budget was submitted to the 
Ministry with delays.  
• An overall shortfall of 76 per cent  (4,225 personnel) in engagement of staff of 
various posts under the Scheme was noticed.  The shortfall in imparting training of 
staff ranging between 28 and 100 per cent. 785 unapproved works were executed 
and 2,950 works amounting to ` 27.79 crore included in the annual plan were not 
taken up for execution.  
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• The delay in payment of wages to the workers ranging between 3 and 547 days 
were noticed in 245 test checked cases. 
• Records relating to registration of households and those demanding employment 
had not been maintained. Nine per cent  households were neither provided 
employment nor was unemployment allowance paid to them.  
 
 
 
 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
293 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• Seventy eight per cent of total works undertaken by the implementing agencies did 
not fall in the category of high priority works as per the Schedule I of the Act.  484 
works had been abandoned midway after spending ` 2.92 crore thereon. 
/g190 Financial Management 
• Unspent balances had increased from ` 7.07 crore (April 2007) to ` 127.66 crore 
(March 2012).  Cases of retention, delayed release and diversion of funds were 
noticed. 
• State Employment Guarantee Fund though established, had not been operated as 
intended as of February 2012.  There was undisbursed balance of ` 15.69 crore in 
the Fund, mainly representing arrears of difference in wages. 
/g190 Monitoring and Evaluation 
• District Quality Monitor and Ombudsman were not appointed in Poonch district. 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
294 
 
Jharkhand 
/g190 Background 
The state has 24 districts.  Twenty districts were covered under MGNREGS in the first 
phase i.e., from 2 February 2006.  Subsequently two districts were covered from 1 
April 2007 onwards and the remaining two districts from 1 April 2008.  For the period 
2007-12, ` 5,468.85 crore was released to the state under MGNREGS.  The table below 
outlines some of the major implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population 
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore)
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
3,29,66,238 2,50,36,946 75.94 5951.65 3,54,609 * 3,653.85
*figures for test checked districts only 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
9,84,080 2,69,251 27.36 43,670 13,226 30.28
/g190 Planning 
• The planning process under the Scheme in the state remained perfunctory and  
incomplete, without eliciting people’s participation.  
• Due to deficiencies in preparation of labour budget, the actual achievements in 
persondays generated did not conform to the projections of labour budget in the 
test checked districts. 
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• In six test-checked districts, no compensation was paid to the labourers despite 
delay in payment of wages ranging from 1 to 468 days. 
/g190 Financial Management 
• During 2009-12, only 40 to 59 per cent  persondays were generated against the 
projected persondays in labour budget.  
• In three districts, ` 4.43 crore pertaining to SGRY fund and NFFWP funds were not 
merged with MGNREGS. 
• Out of total available fund of ` 2,994.71 crore, expenditure of only ` 2,070.01 crore 
(69 per cent), were incurred by the six districts during 2007-12 resulting in unspent 
balances. 
 
 
 
 
 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
295 
Karnataka 
/g190 Background 
The state has 30 districts.  Five districts were covered under MGNREGS in the first 
phase i.e., from 2 February 2006.  Subsequently, six districts from 1 April 2007 
onwards and the remaining 19 districts from 1 April 2008 were covered.  For the 
period 2007-12, ` 5,662.81 crore was released to the state under MGNREGS. The table 
below outlines some of the major implementation parameters in the state during 
2007-12:   
Population Rural 
population 
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage of 
rural 
population 
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
6,11,30,704 3,75,52,529 61.43 6,271.82 55,83,423 4,100.93
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
17,42,186 4,71,633 27.07 23,130 18,592 80
/g190 Planning 
•  District perspective plan to facilitate advance planning was not prepared. 
• There were considerable delays in forwarding of labour budget to the Ministry 
during 2009-12. 
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• The job cards were required to be issued within 15 days from the date of receipt of 
application.  There was shortfall in issue of job cards ranged up to 10 per cent 
during 2007-12. 
• Total of 3.49 lakh records had been permanently deleted in the sampled districts 
on the ground of wrong entries.  However, wages aggregating ` 22.48 crore were 
disbursed in these cases till the date of deletion.  
• In respect of 19.67 lakh individuals tagged for deletion, wage payment of ` 156.10 
crore had been made during 2008-12.  
• Persons aged less than 18 years and more than or equal to 90 years had been 
engaged on works as per MIS data during 2009-12 and received wages of ` 3.26 
lakh and ` 3.65 lakh respectively. 
• No wage slips were generated in the test checked GPs. 
• Bank account/post office details were not available in respect of 98.58 lakh 
individuals employed on MGNREGS works during 2007-12. 
• Muster rolls used for works by seven  GPs of Gudibande taluk of Chikkaballapur 
district did not bear the signature of the Programme Officer and signature/thumb 
impression of the labourers. 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
296 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• Expenditure on material worth ` 1.12 crore was incurred from Scheme funds on 
Krishna Bhagya Jala Nigam Ltd (KBJNL) works in two districts which was contrary to 
the instruction of government as material component was to be borne from  KBJNL 
funds. 
• ` 213.05  lakh were debited to works towards material without any supporting 
vouchers. 
/g190 Financial Management 
• The state fund showed that huge amounts transferred to the bank accounts of PRIs 
had been credited back to the Fund due to various reasons, which had not been 
reconciled so far. 
• In Sindagi taluk, cheques aggregating to ` 12.61 lakh had been issued to four 
individuals during May 2009 to March 2010 for which no supporting documents 
were available.  Self cheques were drawn for ` 19.30 lakh by three GPs. An amount 
of ` 9.48 lakh was transferred to unknown accounts by one GP in Gudibande taluk 
without any supporting documents and entries in the cash book. 
/g190 Monitoring and Evaluation 
• Two hundred and thirty two social audits were conducted against the prescribed 
limit of 1,416 during 2007-12. No summary of data had been prepared and placed 
before the gram sabha in the meetings held for social audit. 
 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
297 
 
Kerala 
/g190 Background 
The state has 14 districts. Two districts were covered under MGNREGS in the first 
phase i.e., from 2 February 2006. Subsequently two districts from 1 April 2007 
onwards and the remaining 10 districts from 1 April 2008 were covered. For the period 
2007-12, ` 2,390.88 crore was released to the state under MGNREGS. The table below 
outlines some of the major implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population 
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
3,33,87,677 1,74,55,506 52.28 2,483.90 18,78,518 1,678.45
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
5,40,073 4,03,076 74.63 1,63,013 1,56,341 95.91
/g190 Planning 
• There were delays ranging from 4 to 6 years in framing rules. 
• In all GPs there were significant variati ons between estimated demand and actual 
employment generation. The projected costs of works and expenditure were very 
high compared to actual ones.  
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• Door- to- door survey, to identify persons willing to register under the Act, was not 
conducted in 39 GPs.  
• Unemployment allowance was not paid except in two cases. 
• Tampering with muster rolls was noticed in all GPs in Thiruvananthapuram. 
• In most of the GPs, wage payment was delayed from 23 to 138 days. 
• Payment of ` 12.86 lakh was made without measuring the works. 
• Wage slips were not generated in 37 GPs out of 39 GPs. 
• Details of wages paid were not recorded on the job card in most of the GPs. 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
298 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• The material component of works was less than 2.5 per cent  of the total cost of 
work. Consequently the extent of utility of the assets created after an expenditure 
of ` 299.48 crore became doubtful.  
• The state abandoned 87,280 works worth ` 349.59 crore during 2007-12. 
• Works undertaken on private land mainly consisting of uprooting of plants ( ` 32.37 
lakh) in one GP were classified under the prioritized work of water conservation 
and water harvesting.   
• Non-involvement of the anti-sea erosion wing of Irrigation Department resulted in 
non-realization of the objective of arresting sea erosion after incurring an 
expenditure of ` 55.82 lakh. 
/g190 Monitoring and Evaluation 
• The Social audit meetings were to be chaired by a person, not part of the 
panchayat and a person outside the panchayat, was to be the Secretary of the 
Social Audit Forum.  However in 34 GPs, the Chairman and the Secretary were from 
within the panchayat.  
• There were short fall in conducting physical verification of works at block, district 
and state level against the prescribed target of 100 per cent, 10 per cent and two 
per cent respectively. 
 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
299 
 
Madhya Pradesh 
/g190 Background 
The state has 50 districts.  Eighteen districts were covered under MGNREGS in the first 
phase i.e., from 2 February 2006.  Subsequently 13 districts were covered from 1 April 
2007 onwards and the remaining 19 districts from 1 April 2008. For the period 2007-
12, ` 15,717.43 crore was released to the state under MGNREGS. The table below 
outlines some of the major implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
7,25,97,565 5,25,37,899 72.36 17,193.12 1,18,60,150 11,719.52
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
30,94,945 8,42,629 27.22 1,92,666 86,459 45
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• The state government made it necessary to register all rural households under the 
Scheme and issue job cards due to which 13.35 lakh to 19.74 lakh ineligible 
beneficiaries were registered in the selected districts. 
• Wages of ` 472.88 lakh were disbursed by the line departments with a delay 
ranging from 2 to 292 days without paying any compensation. 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• Works executed by the line departments were not included in the shelf of projects 
of the GPs. Thus, information about employment generation by these works was 
not available. 
• Infructuous expenditure of ` 24.03 lakh was incurred on the preparation of District 
Project Report in one block. 
• Execution of non-permissible works was noticed under the Scheme. 
• Funds earmarked for plantation and preparation of bio compost works were 
diverted for the construction of toilets. 
• Non-existence of executed works was noticed during physical verification.  
/g190 Financial Management 
/g190 An expenditure of ` 22.15 lakh was incurred by the DPC (Shahdol) on printing of 
bank pass books of the beneficiaries. 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
300 
 
Maharashtra 
/g190 Background 
The state has 33 districts. Twelve districts were covered under MGNREGS in the first 
phase i.e., from 2 February 2006, six districts from 1 April 2007 onwards and the 
remaining 15 districts from 1 April 2008. For the period 2007-12, ` 1,711.60 crore was 
released to the state under MGNREGS. The table below outlines some of the major 
implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
11,23,72,972 6,15,45,441 54.76 2,820.81 67,35,119 1,595.02
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
1,21,977 39,294 32.21 480 370 77.08
/g190 Planning 
• Rules regarding grievance redressal mechanism, unemployment allowances, etc. 
were not framed.  State Employment Guarantee Council met only once and failed 
to submit annual reports to the legislature. 
• District perspective plans were not prepared in eight districts. Assessment of labour 
demands projected in the labour budget was unrealistic. 
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• Extra wage amounting to ` 3.27 lakh, payable due to work provided beyond five 
kilometers, was not paid. Further, unemployment allowance of ` 0.82 lakh was also 
not paid in one block. 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• Works taken up were abandoned due to lack of survey and also non-permissible 
works were taken up under the Scheme. There was shortfall in inspection of works. 
/g190 Monitoring and Evaluation 
• MGNREGA Commissionerate, designated in September 2011, was yet to function 
properly in view of the vacancies in the key posts. Absence of specific rules for 
grievance redressal, social audit, etc. were also noticed. 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
301 
 
Manipur 
/g190 Background 
The state has nine districts.  One district was covered under MGNREGS in the first 
phase i.e., from 13 April 2006, two districts from 1 April 2007 onwards and the 
remaining six districts from 1 April 2008. For the period 2007-12, ` 1,832.02 crore was 
released to the state under MGNREGS. The table below outlines some of the major 
implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
27,21,756 18,99,624 69.79 1,853.08 18,06,027 1,312.13
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
38,430 34,709 90.32 24,288 17,019 70.07
/g190 Planning 
• District perspective plan (DPP) was not prepared in any of the sampled districts.  
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• In three districts, payment of ` 1.05 crore was made without execution of 19 
works. 
• In 52 GPs, 119 road works executed for ` 10.73 crore did not provide easy access. 
/g190 Financial Management 
/g190 In three districts (Churachandpur, Imphal East and Tamenglong), ` 5.85 crore was 
incurred on works at Deputy Commissioner bungalow, construction of hall, etc. 
out of funds earmarked for administrative expenses. 
/g190 Monitoring and Evaluation  
• State government did not appoint full time dedicated Programme Officers. Gram 
rozgar sahayak was not appointed in Churachandpur and Tamenglong districts. 
Adequate Technical Assistants/ JEs were not appointed in the nine sampled blocks. 
Panel of accredited engineers was not constituted to assist in estimation and 
measurement of works. 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
302 
 
Meghalaya 
/g190 Background 
The state has seven districts. Two districts were covered under MGNREGS in the first 
phase i.e., from 2 February 2006, three districts from 1 April 2007 onwards and the 
remaining two districts from 1 April 2008. For the period 2007-12, ` 843.37 crore was 
released to the state under MGNREGS. The table below outlines some of the major 
implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12:                                                                                  
Population Rural 
population 
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore)
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
29,64,007 23,68,971 79.92 597.72 2,60,353 175.39
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
46,024 27,756 60 30,957 957  3
/g190 Planning 
• East Khasi Hills did not prepare the district perspective plan during 2006-2011. 
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• Job cards were not printed as per specifications.  
• Payment of wage, amounting to ` 84.18 lakh, was not made in eight selected 
blocks. 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• There was excess expenditure of  ` 39.94 lakh in respect of 112 projects in 
Rongram block. 
/g190 Financial Management 
• Delay in submission of labour budget by district programme coordinator to state 
government and state government to Ministry led to short release of funds by 
Ministry to the state which resulted in liabilities. 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
303 
 
Mizoram 
/g190 Background 
The state has eight districts. Two districts were covered under MGNREGS in the first 
phase i.e., from 2 February 2006, two districts from 1 April 2007 onwards and the 
remaining four districts from 1 April 2008. For the period 2007-12, ` 1,007.94 crore 
was released to the state under MGNREGS. The table below outlines some of the 
major implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population
Cumulative 
expenditure
 (` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
10,91,014 5,29,037 48.49 1,104.32 1,74,749 664
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
16,284 12,441 76 182 6,770 100
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• In the two districts (Lunglei and Lawngtlai), the process of convergence of 
MGNREGS  with other scheme was not  initiated.  
/g190 Financial Management 
• The state government released ` 83.52 crore against the matching share of 
` 105.43 crore. This resulted in short release of ` 21.91 crore to eight districts. 
• The state government released its share of ` 17.89 crore and ` 13.87 crore to 
Lunglei and Lawngtlai districts respectively with delays ranging from 9 to 317 days.  
/g190 Monitoring and Evaluation 
• The state government did not carry out inspection and physical verification of 
works as per prescribed target under the Operational Guidelines. 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
304 
 
Nagaland 
/g190 Background 
The state has 11 districts. One district was covered under MGNREGS in the first phase 
i.e., from 2 February 2006, four districts from 1 April 2007 onwards and the remaining 
six districts from 1 April 2008. For the period 2007-12, `2,060.01 crore was released to 
the state under MGNREGS. The table below outlines some of the major 
implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population 
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage of 
rural 
population 
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
19,80,602 14,06,861 71.03 2,098.32 3,74,925 518
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
32,878 28,000 85.16 9,874 4,432 44.89 
/g190 Planning 
• State Employment Guarantee Council was set up with a delay of two years.  
• Lack of training resulted in poor maintenance of records at all levels.  
• Delay in submission of labour budget from PO to DPC ranging from two to four 
months and from DPC to SEGC ranging from two to eight months. 
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• Tampering with muster rolls by way of cutting, over writing, erasing and pasting of 
papers was noticed in five GPs out of 54 GPs involving wage payment of ` 10.31 
lakh. 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• Three districts incurred an expenditure of ` 2.21 crore for procurement of 36 light 
vehicles in violation of Operational Guidelines. These districts further incurred an 
expenditure of  ` 58.90 lakh for construction of new buildings. Computers, for 
` 120.88 lakh procured by DPC Dimapur for feeding data in MIS, remained idle due 
to non-provision of computer training to the officials at GP level. 
• Against 273 rural connectivity works planned for ` 63.99 crore in the district 
perspective plan, 54 GPs had carried out 514 works for rural connectivity for  
` 87.82 crore. Further, these 54 GPs had completed 241 rural connectivity works 
amounting to ` 23.83 crore outside the district perspective plan. 
• Eighty three projects for ` 7.65 crore reported to be completed, did not exist 
indicating possible misappropriation of ` 7.65 crore in 54 GPs. Short execution by 
diverting the amount to non-permissible works in respect of 23 works valued at 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
305 
` 4.73 crore and execution of 45 non permissible works valued at ` 10.01 crore 
were also noticed during joint physical verification. 
• State level officials could verify only 25 works (18 per cent ) against the target of 
137 works during the last five years. District level officials had carried out 
inspection of 165 works (24 per cent) against the target of 684 works while block 
officials had carried out inspection of 3,217 works (47 per cent ) against the 
targeted 6,837 works. 
/g190 Financial Management 
• There was shortfall in release of matching share of ` 116.57 crore from 
government of Nagaland during 2007-08 to 2011-12 which affected 
implementation of the Scheme to that extent.  
• During 2007-08 and 2008-09, DPC Mon and Dimapur incurred excess expenditure 
of ` 96 lakh, over and above the admissible administrative expenditure fixed by the 
Ministry. 
• There was suspected misappropriation of funds amounting to ` 1.68 crore, 
released to Programme Officer (PO), Dhansiripar by DPC, Dimapur during 2011-12.  
The funds were not accounted for in the MGNREGS bank account operated with 
PO. 
• Suspected financial leakage of ` 65.39 crore was observed during the transmission 
of funds from seven test checked POs to 54 test checked GPs in three districts. 
/g190 Monitoring and Evaluation 
• Two hundred and eighty social audits (57 per cent ) were held against the 
requirement of 488 social audit meetings in the 54 GPs. In three districts and seven 
blocks, 46 and 44 per cent social audits were conducted respectively during 2007-
08 to 2011-12. 
/g190 Others 
• As gram rozgar sahayaks (GRS) were not appointed, the records were maintained 
by the panchayat secretary. Also Non/poor maintenance of records was noticed in 
the 28 GPs. 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
306 
 
Odisha 
/g190 Background 
The state has 30 districts. Nineteen districts were covered under MGNREGS in the first 
phase i.e., from 2 February 2006, five districts from 1 April 2007 onwards and the 
remaining six districts from 1 April 2008. For the period 2007-12, ` 4,401.29 crore 
was released to the state under MGNREGS. The table below outlines some of the 
major implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population
Cumulative 
expenditure 
 (` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
4,19,47,358 3,49,51,234 83.32 5,369.29 62,18,651 3,123.09
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
3,26,535 1,69,265 51.84 24,936 (figures 
for 2010-11 
and 2011-12)
23,452 (figures 
for 2010-11 
and 2011-12) 
--
/g190 Planning 
• Institutional arrangements were found weak due to inadequate staff for MGNREGS 
works. 
• Training imparted to key functionaries was inadequate which resulted in weak 
capacity building. 
• Preparation of annual action plan was done without involving GPs. 
• Revolving fund was not created for effective fund management. 
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• No door-to-door survey was conducted to identify the eligible households for 
registration. 
• There were delays in issue of job cards. Photographs were not affixed on job cards 
as well as in job card register which created scope for misuse of job cards. 
• There was delay in payment of wages. 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
307 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• Lack of control in use of muster rolls resulted in misappropriation/misutilisation of 
Scheme funds. 
• Low priority earthen works were taken up which resulted in creation of non-
durable assets.  
• Use of machine in execution of works was noticed on physical verification of assets. 
/g190 Financial Management 
• Interest accrued from bank deposits was not accounted for in cash book. 
• Funds under closed SGRY scheme were not transferred to MGNREGS.  
• Diversion of funds from MGNREGS was noticed which were not recouped as of 
March 2012. 
• Labour budget was found unrealistic as there were substantial variations between 
estimated figures and actual expenditure. 
/g190 Monitoring and Evaluation 
• Social audit was not conducted properly. 
• Inadequate monitoring by state/district/block level officers resulted in non-
completion of sizeable number of works/projects. 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
308 
 
Punjab 
/g190 Background 
The state has 22 districts.  One district was covered under MGNREGS in the first phase 
i.e., from 2 February 2006, three districts from 1 April 2007 onwards and the 
remaining 18 districts from 1 April 2008. For the period 2007-12, ` 483.75 crore was 
released to the state under MGNREGS. The table below outlines some of the major 
implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore)
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
2,77,04,236 1,73,16,800 62.51 569.30 8,65,656* 277.59
*households issued job cards 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
45,680 18,062 39.54 95,709 85,364 89.19
/g190 Planning 
•  Shortage of MGNREGS staff, ranging from 45 to 93 per cent.  
• In the three selected districts, annual plans were prepared without considering the 
labour budget and cost of works from gram panchayats. 
• Three, out of six districts, had not prepared the district perspective plan. 
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• No door-to-door survey was conducted for registration in 79 GPs of five districts. 
• Wages were paid to the beneficiaries with delays up to 790 days in 48 GPs. No 
compensation was given for delayed payments. 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• In 52 GPs, 67 non-permissible works amounting to ` 1.20 crore were executed. 
• Wage material ratio of 60:40 was not maintained which resulted in excess 
expenditure on material component.  
•  

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
309 
/g190 Monitoring and Evaluation 
• Disposal of complaints was not done within the prescribed time of 15 days.  In the 
selected districts, the delay in disposal of complaints ranged up to 673 days. 
• In three districts, internal cell was not constituted for examining the social audit 
reports and to take suitable action thereon. 
• There was shortfall in conducting social audit.  
• The State Employment Guarantee Council did not conduct district-wise evaluation 
studies. 
/g190 Others 
• Muster roll receipt register, job card application register, employment register, 
work register, complaint register, monthly allotment and UC watch register, job 
card register and assets register were not maintained by the selected GPs in four 
districts. 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
310 
 
Rajasthan 
/g190 Background 
The state has 33 districts. Six districts were covered under MGNREGS in the first phase 
i.e., from 2 February 2006, six districts from 1 April 2007 onwards and the remaining 
21 districts from 1 April 2008. For the period 2007-12, ` 17,928.73 crore was released 
to the state under MGNREGS. The table below outlines some of the major 
implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore)
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
6,86,21,012 5,15,40,236 75.11 19,841.04 1,01,55,775 16,140.36
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
6,76,105 3,16,156 46.76 45,885 45,532 (Fig. 
for 2007-09 
not given) 
-
/g190 Planning 
• Rules were not framed and number of SEGC meetings held was inadequate. 
Shortage of staff, deficiency in Information, Education and Communication 
activities and Training, were noticed. 
• Preparation of annual plans was delayed and unrealistic. 
• Variations in estimation and actual employment were seen. 
• District perspective plans were not prepared. 
• Works involving ` 24.27 crore which were not part of annual plans were 
sanctioned. 
• Unspent balances of SGRY and NFFWP were not transferred to the Scheme 
account. 
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• Irregularities in registration of households and issue of job cards were noticed. 
• Wages of ` 4.64 crore were paid to workers in cash. There was also delay in 
payment of wages.  
• Misclassification of funds of ` 118.13 crore was noticed. 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
311 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• Wage material ratio was not-maintained in execution of works. 
• Works amounting to ` 36.58 crore remained incomplete. 
• Expenditure of ` 1.49 crore was found infructuous. 
• Works worth ` 15.52 lakh were not in existence. 
• Plantation of ` 1.15 crore did not survive. 
/g190 Financial Management 
• Diversion of funds amounting to ` 128.7 crore was noticed. 
• Short release of ` 10.12 crore by the state was noticed in three districts. 
• Delay in transfer of funds was noticed. 
• Excess administrative expenditure of ` 5.02 crore was made. 
• Unrecovered/unadjusted funds worth ` 70.55 lakh in post office were noticed.  
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
312 
 
Sikkim 
/g190 Background 
The state has four districts. One district was covered under MGNREGS in the first 
phase i.e., from 02 February 2006, two districts from 1 April 2007 onwards and the 
remaining one district from 1 April 2008. For the period 2008-12, ` 281.12 crore was 
released to the state under MGNREGS. The table below outlines some of the major 
implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore)
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
6,07,688 4,55,962 75.03 291.09 3,46,971 81.41
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
10,181 5,029 49.40 1,202 (Fig. for 
2007-08 not 
given) 
601 (Fig. for 
2007-08 not 
given) 
50
/g190 Planning 
• District perspective plan was prepared without any inputs from GPs, blocks and 
districts. The annual plans were perfunctorily prepared by the gram sabhas without 
any reference to labour demand, income generating assets, priority to deprived 
groups and maintenance of assets created, etc.  
• The annual work plan and labour budget were defective and unrealistic as the 
persondays expected to be generated were never achieved. Expenditure was 
between 83 and 88 per cent of the annual work plan. 
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• Payment of wages was not made within a fortnight and delays ranging from 15 
days to three months were noticed.  
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• Prescribed wage material ratio of 60:40 was not adhered to by the DPCs.  
• Worksite facilities such as first- aid, drinking water, shade and crèche were not 
provided in many projects. 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
313 
/g190 Financial Management 
• The state share was neither released in full nor on time. The district programme 
coordinators not only retained funds of ` 5.14 crore to ` 38.64 crore at the year 
end but also released funds to the blocks belatedly, with delays ranging from 2 to 
131 days. 
/g190 Monitoring and Evaluation 
• Expenditure reported to Government of India through monthly progress reports 
was not in agreement with those in the audited report and actual expenditure.  
/g190 Others 
• Convergence of the Scheme with other social sector programmes was not initiated. 
The only convergence activity attempted was in case of CMRH scheme which was 
defective as the Scheme fund was utilized towards payment of cost of material. The 
convergence did not contribute towards additional employment generation.  
• Maintenance of records was poor. Application register, registration register, job 
card register, employment register, assets register, muster rolls, MR issue/receipt 
registers and complaint register were not maintained properly and hence were not 
reliable. 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
314 
 
Tamil Nadu 
/g190 Background 
The state has 31 districts. Six districts were covered under MGNREGS in the first phase 
i.e., from 2 February 2006, four districts from 1 April 2007 onwards and the remaining 
21 districts from 1 April 2008. For the period 2007-12, ` 8,128.96 crore was released 
to the state under MGNREGS. The table below outlines some of the major 
implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population 
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
7,21,38,958 3,71,89,229 51.55 8,510.44 76,48,556 10,130
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
2,57,002 1,11,727 43.47 93,252 1,84,845 100
/g190 Planning 
• Out of 76.49 lakh households registered under the Scheme in the state in 2011-12, 
jobs were provided only to 58.16 lakh households.  Of these, 100 days of 
employment was provided only to 14.08 lakh households (24 per cent). 
• Despite increase in the schedule of rates, the actual average daily wages earned by 
a beneficiary in the state was below the minimum guaranteed wages, as the wages 
were paid based on the quantity of work actually done. 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• 1.25 lakh works (48 per cent of the total works), which were executed during 2007-
12 by the gram panchayats at a cost of ` 3,921.87 crore were under the categories 
of desilting of ponds, minor irrigation tanks, supply channels and irrigation wells. As 
such works did not add to the creation of durable assets. 
• Instead of providing all weather roads under ‘road connectivity’, formation of 
earthen roads without compaction and improvements to side berms of existing 
Water Bound Macadam roads were executed.  62,588 road works (24 per cent of 
the total works) at a cost of ` 1,919.88 crore were executed under this category 
during 2007-12. 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
315 
/g190 Financial Management 
• The percentage of utilization of the funds ranging from 56 to 82 during 2007-12.   
` 718.27 crore out of ` 9,194.04 crore remained unutilized as of 31 March 2012.  As 
the entire Scheme cost in the state was towards payment of wages to unskilled 
labour, release of state share to the Scheme ( ` 878.11 crore) during the period 
2007-12 was unnecessary.   
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
316 
 
Tripura 
/g190 Background 
The state has four districts. One district was covered under MGNREGS in the first 
phase i.e., from 2 February 2006, two districts from 1 April 2007 onwards and the 
remaining one district from 1 April 2008. For the period 2007-12, ` 2,858.82 crore was 
released to the state under MGNREGS. The table below outlines some of the major 
implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population
Cumulative 
expenditure
 (` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
36,71,032 27,10,051 73.82 2,996.33 6,69,164 490.13
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
6,57,713 (Fig. 
for 2007-08 
not given) 
2,83,539
 
43.11 600 513 86
/g190 Planning 
• All the required structural mechanism for operation of the Scheme was put in 
place, except the State Employment Guarantee Fund, which was operationalised 
during 2012-13. 
• The works were executed on the basis of annual plans only as district perspective 
plans were not finalized. The documentation process of approval of annual plans 
was not satisfactory. 
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• The state reportedly provided employment to all those who demanded 
employment. However, this was unverifiable as the details were not documented.  
• 2.80 lakh households received employment beyond 100 days but the additional 
cost of ` 10.22 crore was met from the Central share instead of being borne by the 
state. There was short-payment of minimum wages by ` 34.50 lakh. 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
317 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• In 41 per cent works, labourers were not employed in letter and spirit of the Act in 
five blocks. 
• Funds of ` 16.60 crore was diverted for the works under Indira Awas Yojna (IAY) 
and ` 5.27 crore was spent for the purpose covered under other infrastructure 
development schemes. 
• Kutcha roads without all-weather access were constructed at a cost of ` 5.29 crore. 
•  Machinery were used in works costing ` 1.56 crore. 
• Five works costing ` 17 lakh remained incomplete for a period ranging from 1 to 4 
years.  
• Unique Identification Number of the works was not found in the work registers.  
/g190 Financial Management 
• Funds utilization under the Scheme was good and ranging from 93.74 to 98.85 per 
cent. 
• The state’s share was short by ` 133.09 crore due to adoption of incorrect formula 
which failed to take into account six per cent administrative cost. 
• The delay in release of state share ranging from 5 to 222 days in 20 out of 78 
instalments, whereas in some cases, it was provided in advance as well. 
/g190 Others 
• Maintenance of subsidiary records was deficient. 
• MIS contains material errors and hence it was not reliable 
• Various good practices such as banking correspondent model for payment of 
wages, use of software for preparation of estimates, payment after check by 
Vigilance Committee, good condition of assets created, etc. were also observed 
during audit. 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
318 
 
Uttar Pradesh 
/g190 Background 
The state has 72 districts. Twenty two districts were covered under MGNREGS in the 
first phase i.e., from 2 February 2006, 17 districts from 15 May 2007 onwards and the 
remaining 33 districts from 1 April 2008. For the period 2007-12, ` 20,425.74 crore 
was released to the state under MGNREGS. The table below outlines some of the 
major implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
19,95,81,477 15,51,11,022 77.72 22,174.35 1,42,81,748 13,342.64
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
36,15,602 15,55,093 43.01 4,200* 2,341* 55.74
*Figures for test checked districts only. 
/g190 Planning 
• State government failed to notify the rules, although approved (11 August 2008), 
for carrying out the provisions of the Act.  
• Non official members were included in the State Employment Guarantee Council 
(SEGC) after a delay of 19 months.  
• State government did not establish State Employment Guarantee Fund as a result 
of which funds from Ministry were released directly to the districts up to 18 
September 2009. 
• In 820 blocks of the state, full time dedicated programme officers were not 
appointed.  Twenty three per cent  assistant programme officers’ posts were also 
vacant.     
• In 18 districts, training to stake holders for preparing district annual plans was not 
imparted. Fourteen districts did not prepare shelf of projects.  
• There was delay in submission of labour budget from 23 to 74 days, consequently 
Central share was released in 5 to 25 tranches and state share in 2 to 10 tranches.  
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• Door- to- door survey was not carried out to identify persons for registration. 
• There was delay of 25 to 45 days in issue of job cards. 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
319 
• There were shortcomings in maintenance of job card application registers. In seven 
gram panchayats and 39 block panchayats, these were not maintained.  
• There were various irregularities in wage payment viz. delay in payment of wages, 
wages being paid at lower than minimum wage rates, payment made before 
execution of work, payment of wages to workers present on two sites on same day, 
etc. 
• Irregularities were noticed in muster rolls i.e., payments were made without 
obtaining signature or thumb impression as a token of receipt. Cutting and over 
writing were also not attested.  
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• Inadmissible 272 works amounting to ` 10.26 crore were executed by 84 GPs, 12 
blocks, two districts and one line agency during 2007-12. ` 15.60 crore were 
expended on construction of 2,265 earthen roads in 393 GPs of 18 districts, which 
were not all weather access roads.  
• Prescribed wage material ratio of 60:40 was not maintained in 460 GPs. Over 
estimation of ` 6.75 crore was noticed in 170 GPs. 
• In Unnao district, purchase orders for ` 78 lakh for almirah, handicam and digital 
camera were issued without inviting tenders and following the purchase 
procedure. In Sitapur district, construction material valuing ` 1.04 crore was 
purchased without calling tender/quotations. 
• In seven districts, 237 works for ` 13.25 crore were executed without 
administrative and technical sanction. 
• In 10 districts, unique identification numbers were not allotted to 1,199 works 
executed for ` 13.26 crore. 
• In one GP and two districts, 47 works amounting ` 1.65 crore were abandoned. 
Twenty three works amounting to ` 29 lakh remained incomplete in eight GPs, one 
block and two districts.  
• Completion Reports of 3,091 works in 16 GPs were not available.  
• In 444 GPs,  4,242 works were not handed over to user groups. 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
320 
/g190 Financial Management 
• State government did not design a robust financial management system for 
transfer and use of funds. No criterion was laid down for release of fund to GPs.  
• There was diversion of funds of ` 1.51 crore towards miscellaneous administrative 
expenditure, contingent expenditure of other schemes, renovation and 
electrification of conference hall at Vikas Bhawan, construction of primary school 
and Harijan Awas, office expenses and Mid day Meal Scheme. 
• Labour budget was forwarded to the Ministry without scrutiny at state level. There 
were variations between labour budget and actual expenditure reported in MPR 
and those between figures at state and district level. In two districts, labour budget 
was not prepared as per Operational Guidelines. 
• There were delays in release of funds at every level.  
• Two line departments of district Sitapur had not transferred unspent balances of 
` 41 lakh of National Food for Work Programme fund to MGNREGS. 
• In one district, administrative expenses were incurred in excess of prescribed limit 
of four per cent during 2007-09. 
/g190 Monitoring and Evaluation 
• Ombudsmen, for redressal of grievances in a time bound manner, were not 
appointed. 
• Village Monitoring Committees, responsible for monitoring the progress and 
quality of works undertaken under the Scheme, were not formed in 57 GPs. 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
321 
 
Uttarakhand 
/g190 Background 
• The state has 13 districts. Three districts were covered under MGNREGS in the first 
phase i.e., from 2 February 2006, two districts from 1 April 2007 onwards and the 
remaining eight districts from 1 April 2008. For the period 2007-12, ` 1,154.13 
crore was released to the state under MGNREGS. The table below outlines some of 
the major implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage of 
rural 
population 
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore)
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
1,01,16,752 70,25,583 69.45 1,312.88 10,10,169 813.09
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
1,52,292 1,00,631 66.07 65,092 28,557 44
/g190 Planning 
• The State Employment Guarantee Council was established but it did not meet at 
regular intervals which left the major policy decisions unaddressed.  
• The administrative pattern suggested by the Ministry was notified but the 
appointment of staff in various cadres was not made. Overall shortages ranging 
from 45 to 90 per cent.  
• District perspective plans were submitted by four districts only and were yet to be 
approved by SEGC. 
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• Significant variations between 23 and 61 per cent were noticed in persondays 
estimated and actually generated. 
• Timely payments to labourers were not made and delays ranging from 1 to 669 
days were noticed.  In 500 works, there was an average delay of 74 days. No 
compensation was paid to any worker for delay in the test checked GPs. 
/g190 Financial Management 
• The state share was not released in the stipulated time frame. Delays ranging from 
8 to 211 days were noticed in four districts.  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
322 
/g190 Monitoring and Evaluation 
• A shortfall of 94 per cent at state level and 48 per cent at programme officers level 
was noticed in inspection of works. 
/g190 Others 
• A liability of ` 1.73 crore was noticed in Dhauladevi and Dwarahat blocks of Almora 
and Chakrata block of Dehradun district which remained unliquidated as of March 
2012.  
• Non-existence of any mechanism to verify the authenticity of data uploaded to the 
MGNREGA website was noticed as there was variation ranging from 1 to 71 per 
cent between MIS and Monthly Progress Report data. 
 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
323 
 
West Bengal 
/g190 Background 
The state has 19 districts. Ten districts were covered under MGNREGS in the first 
phase i.e., from 2 February 2006, seven districts from 1 April 2007 onwards and the 
remaining two districts from 1 April 2008. For the period 2007-12, ` 8,307.31 crore 
was released to the state under MGNREGS. The table below outlines some of the 
major implementation parameters in the state during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population 
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
9,13,47,736 6,22,13,676 68.11 7,409.20 1,10,34,713 
* 
6,353.84
*job card issued 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
Not Provided 
by state. 
5,58,938 NA 1,43,404 73,700 51.39
/g190 Planning 
• No Information, Education and Communication plan was prepared for MGNREGS. 
• SEGC did not evaluate the performance  of the Scheme implementation of 
MGNREGS and its impact. 
• Door- to- door survey was not undertaken to identify persons willing to register 
under the Act. 
• Most of the districts did not prepare perspective plan and shelf of projects was not 
found in any of the 83 test checked GPs. 
• Gram sabha meetings, responsible for prioritizing and recommending works for 
incorporation in annual plan, were not organized on 2 October in any of the 
selected GPs.  
•  Labour budget was prepared in an unrealistic manner in five districts as actual 
generation of persondays was 35 to 125  per cent  of those projected in labour 
budget. 
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• In the selected GPs, registration register and register for applications for work were 
not maintained. Registration lists were not displayed on GP notice boards in 41 
GPs. 
• Photographs were not affixed in most of the job cards in five districts. 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
324 
• MIS indicated delayed payment of wages amounting to ` 437.89 crore during 2010-
12, but no compensation was paid. Delay in payment of wages ranging from 11 to 
810 days was noticed in four districts. 
• A sum of ` 83,007 as unemployment allowance was paid to only 218 workers 
whereas it was due for 1,10,161 households during 2007-12. 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• Road works (29 per cent of total works) were executed and accounted for 39 per 
cent of total expenditure. All selected GPs had constructed non-durable assets like 
earthen roads. Wage-material ratio was not maintained in 32 GPs.  
• Work Registers were not maintained in any of selected GPs. 
• In Bankura, South 24 Parganas and Murshidabad districts, plantation work valuing 
` 6.37 lakh did not survive. 
/g190 Financial Management 
• Unspent balance under SGRY amounting to ` 8.42 lakh was not transferred to 
MGNREGS till May 2012. 
/g190 Monitoring and Evaluation 
• In 48 GPs of Murshidabad, Bankura, Jalpaiguri and South 24 Pargana districts, 
accounts of GPs were not presented to social audit for scrutiny. 
/g190 Other 
• Convergence of MGNREGS with rural development programmes was not evident 
in any selected GP. 
 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
325 
 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
/g190 Background 
The Union Territory (UT) has three districts which were covered under MGNREGS from 
1 April 2008. For the period 2007-12, ` 34.91 crore was released to the UT under 
MGNREGS. The table below outlines some of the major implementation parameters in 
the UT during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
3,79,944 2,44,411 64.33 39.79 41,512 19.66
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
1,314 1,093 83.18 608 356 58.55
/g190 Planning 
• Employment Guarantee Council (EGC) for the UT was set up in February 2008. 
Council met only once in a financial year between 2008-09 and 2011-12. 
• No perspective plan was prepared by the districts though grants were released for 
preparation of district perspective plan. Only annual plans were prepared. 
• Preparation of shelf of projects was done on ad hoc basis. 
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• There were cases of employment not being provided within 15 days of application 
for work.  Unemployment allowance was also not paid.  
• Hundred days employment was provided only in 5.05 per cent cases. 
• Delayed payment of wages was noticed in all the GPs. 
• No beneficiary was covered under “Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana” (RSBY) 
though the UT had substantial beneficiaries who worked for more than 15 days in a 
year. 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• Only non-durable assets were created. 
 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
326 
/g190 Financial Management 
• Deficient system of financial management resulted in inflated UT share. 
• Factually incorrect utilisation certificates and non-release of 25 per cent of UT share 
for material and wages for skilled and  semi-skilled labour were noticed. 
/g190 Monitoring and Evaluation 
• Audit of “Employment Guarantee Fund” was not done and UT Administration did 
not prescribe any format of accounts for districts. 
• Independence of social audit was not ensured. Director/ RD,PRI & ULB, nodal 
person for coordinating the activities of Scheme, was appointed as the State Level 
Nodal Officer for social audit.  
/g190 Others 
• Convergence with other schemes had not taken place. 
• Record keeping (especially in South Andaman district) was poor. 
• Adequate mechanisms were not put in place to check and verify data uploaded in 
MIS.  Information available in the Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) did not match 
with the Monitoring and Information System (MIS) figures. 
• Shortcomings, highlighted in CAG's previous performance audit report continued. 
 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
327 
 
Dadra & Nagar Haveli 
/g190 Background 
The Union Territory (UT) has one district which was covered under MGNREGS from 1 
April 2008. For the period 2007-12, ` 2.77 crore was released to the UT under 
MGNREGS. The table below outlines some of the major implementation parameters in 
the UT during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
3,42,853 1,83,024 53.38 4.71 11,697 2.11 (fig. for 
2007-08 not 
provided ) 
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
127 30 23.62 44 30 68.18
/g190 Planning 
• Union Territory had not constituted Employment Guarantee Council (EGC)  
• Preparatory and IEC activities were not carried out. 
• Union Territory administration did not prepare annual plan and shelf of projects. 
• Union Territory administration had neither prepared perspective plan nor was this 
work entrusted to any agency for the period 2007-12.  
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• Job card application registers were not maintained/properly maintained in five GPs 
and job card registers were not maintained in 10 GPs. 
•  Job cards issued did not have photos of labourers and were issued without 
signature of authority and labourers. 
• Employment registers were not maintained in GPs. 
• There were delays in payment of wages ranging from 1 to 123 days and no 
compensation was paid for delay. 

Report No. 6 of 2013 
328 
/g190 Financial Management 
• Financial Management System was inefficient and figures of reports were 
inconsistent. UTEGF was not constituted. 
• Financial reporting was inefficient and there were variations between audited 
accounts and MPR data.  
• Unspent balance of ` 37.08 lakh given to GPs for material was treated as final 
expenditure. 
• There was excess administrative expenditure during 2008-11. 
/g190 Monitoring and Evaluation 
• Social audit records were not available with GPs. 
• Vigilance and Monitoring Committees were formed in GPs but records were not 
available in any GPs.  
• Grievance redressal mechanism was not efficient and no complaint register was 
maintained at any level. 
 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
329 
 
Lakshadweep 
/g190 Background 
The Union Territory (UT) has one district which was covered under MGNREGS from 1 
April 2008. For the period 2007-12, ` 7.76 crore was released to the UT under 
MGNREGS. The table below outlines some of the major implementation parameters in 
the UT during 2007-12: 
Population Rural 
population 
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
(in lakh) 
64,429 14,121 21.92 10.47 8,886 6.49
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
828 17 2.05 80 40 50
/g190 Planning 
• The UT Employment Guarantee Council met only twice till date, which adversely 
affected choice of preferred works, review of implementation of the Scheme, 
evaluation of process and outcomes, monitoring and ensuring accountability and 
transparency at all levels. 
• In the test checked GPs, no full time dedicated POs were appointed. No staff was 
appointed for Scheme implementation and no records related to the Scheme were 
maintained at block level. 
• Separate grama sabha meetings were not held for selection of works under 
MGNREGS.  
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• In the test checked GPs, application registers were neither maintained nor were 
dated receipt issued to households.  
• Scrutiny of the muster rolls and payment orders in the test checked GPs revealed 
that there were delays ranging from 15 to 65 days in payment of wages.  
• List of addition and deletion in the job card register was not intimated to POs.  

Report No. 6 of 2013 
330 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• The estimates were prepared adopting the wage material ratio of 92:08. A 
verification of the estimates for the test checked GPs revealed that the estimates 
were prepared with the view to provide wage employment only. Absence of skilled 
labourers and materials had resulted in non-creation of durable assets. 
• Photographs of pre-mid-post stages of work as stipulated in the Act were not 
taken/maintained by the GPs. 
/g190 Financial Management 
•  The administrative expenditure on MGNREGS was exceeded by ` 81.00 lakh 
during 2009-10 to 2011-12. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 Report No. 6 of 2013 
331 
Puducherry 
/g190 Background 
The Union Territory (UT) has two districts which were covered under MGNREGS from 1 
April 2008. For the period 2007-12, ` 40.06 crore was released to the UT under 
MGNREGS. The table below outlines some of the major implementation parameters in 
the UT during 2008-12: 
Population Rural 
population 
(as per 2011 
census) 
Percentage 
of rural 
population 
Cumulative 
expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Number of 
households 
registered 
Cumulative 
persondays 
generated 
 (in lakh) 
12,44,464 3,94,341 31.69 35.50 67,120  35.21 
 
Number of 
works 
undertaken 
Number of 
works 
completed 
Percentage 
of works 
completed 
Number of 
social audits 
due 
Number of 
social audits 
conducted 
Percentage of 
social audits 
completed 
3,478 2,383 68.52 776 159 20.49 
/g190 Planning 
• Gram panchayats had not prepared the shelf of projects and annual plan. DRDA 
and district programme coordinator, Karaikal did not prepare district perspective 
plan for long-term employment generation and sustainable development.  
• The UT Employment Guarantee Council constituted in December 2011 did not 
meet even once. 
/g190 Employment Generation & Wages 
• There was no formal system of receiving applications for employment, issue of 
dated receipts and maintenance of employment register. 
• There was no mechanism to report any delay in payment of wages. No 
compensation was paid, though delays upto 137 days were noticed in payment of 
wages. 
/g190 Works & Assets Creation 
• No expenditure was incurred by the UT towards material cost during 2008-12 
resulting in creation of non durable assets. 
•  Out of 2,502 works taken up during 2008-12, 63 works were in progress for the last 
two years. 
/g190 Financial Management 
• Accumulation of unspent balances as of March 2011, resulted in token release of  
` one crore for 2011-12 as grant against the requirement of ` 31.28 crore. 