There was inordinate delay in implementation of the Common Integrated Police 
Application project and all the envisaged modules were not being used in most of 
the police stations.  Four police district headquarters and 83 police stations were 
yet to be covered under POLNET. Suitable buildings were not provided for 
installation of the sophisticated and costly 'Interactive Firearms Training 
Simulators Systems'. Firing practice on modern weapons was not being provided 
to the trainees at Punjab Police Academy, Phillaur.  Funds allotted for Intelligence 
and Security were diverted for construction of houses and police posts.

The scheme of Modernisation of the State Police Force was revamped from 
2000-01 to enable them to meet the challenges of internal security, extremists 
activities and law and order situation in the States. To improve the efficiency in 
the Police department, 358 houses were built, modern weapons like Sniper, 
AK-47 and INSAS rifles and Glock Pistols were added to the Police armoury 
during 2003-06. To upgrade the training infrastructure, sophisticated gadget 
like Fire Arms Training Simulator has been introduced. In the case of 
communication, 71 per cent of the Police Stations (PSs) were brought under 
satellite based network for police telecommunication (POLNET).  However, 
the improvement was suboptimal as the system was yet to be installed in 83 PSs 
and four District offices and no arrangement for regular maintenance of the 
equipment was made. Similarly, information technology was inducted into the 
police functions under Common Integrated Police Application (CIPA) project 
but only 50 per cent of the PSs were covered.  Some of the important audit 
findings are highlighted below:
Implementation of Common Integrated Police Application project was
delayed as hardware was provided with a delay of 5 to 20 months.

Works of 84 non-
residential buildings 
at estimated cost 
of Rs 45.87 crore 
were not taken up 

Rs seven crore in 2005-06 & Rs 11 crore in 2006-07 at the rate of 7.25 per cent per annum and 
Rs seven  crore in 2007-08 at interest ranging between 7.25 and 12.85 per cent per annum.

Rule 2.30 of Punjab Financial Rules. Vol-I.