सत्यमेव जयते
Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General
of India

Administration of
Penalty and Prosecution

Union Government
Department of Revenue - Direct Taxes
No. 28 of 2013



Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General
of India

for the year ended March 2012

Performance Audit
on
Administration of

Penalty and Prosecution

UNION GOVERNMENT
Department of Revenue - DIRECT TAXES
No. 28 of 2013

Laid on the table of Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha ON ............ ००-५० --००-०००००००००


Table of Contents

Contents Pages
A. Preface i
B. Executive Summary iii-v
C. Summary of Recommendations vii-viii
D. Chapter 1: Introduction 1-6
D.1 Introduction 1
0.2 Organizational set up 1-2
D.3 Why we chose the topic 3-4
D.4 Objectives of the review 4-5
D.5 Scope and Methodology of audit 5
E. Chapter 2: Administration and Levy of Penalty 7-21
E.1 Administration of Penalty 7-16
E.2 Levy of Penalty 17-21
F. Chapter 3: Administration of Prosecution 23-73
F.1 Monitoring and Coordination 23-30
F.2 Initiation of Prosecution cases 30-34
5.3 Pursuance of Prosecution cases 34-42
F.4 Interface with Courts 42-50
F.5 Analysis of disposed cases 50-52
F.6 Prosecution Counsel 52-58
F.7 Current status of cases 58-60
F.8 Compounding of offences 60-64
F.9 National Litigation Policy 64-66
F.10 Selection of cases of Prosecution 66-70
F.11 Coordination among Enforcement agencies 70-71
G. Annex 75-79
H. Abbreviations 80



Preface

The Report for the year ended March 2012 containing the results of
the performance audit of Administration of Penalty and Prosecution has been
prepared for submission to the President under Article 151(1) of the
Constitution of India.

The audit of Revenue Receipts — Direct Taxes of the Union
Government is conducted under Section 16 of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971.

Our findings are based mainly on test audit conducted from August to
December 2012.


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Executive Summary

. The Income Tax Act, 1961 (Act) proposes imposition of penalty on an
assessee, if the Assessing Officer (AO)/Commissioner of Income Tax-
Appeals/Commissioner of Income Tax (CIT) is satisfied that there has been
non-compliance with or violation of law and there is no reasonable cause for
failure. Chapter XXII of the Act declares certain acts of omission and/or
commission as punishable offences. Offences and Prosecution under the Act
are read in conjunction with other laws such as Indian Penal Code (IPC), Code
of Criminal Procedure (Cr PC) and Indian Evidence Act (IEA).

. The Wanchoo Committee Report of 1975 recommended that Income
Tax Department (ITD) needs to evolve and pursue vigorous prosecution
policies and emphasized that monetary penalties may always not be enough.
The White Paper on Black Money of May 2012 by Ministry of Finance
(Ministry) described that taxpayers may be willing to take a calculated risk of
tax evasion and it may be more effectively deterred by effective prosecution.
A committee headed by the Chairman of Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT)
constituted in May 2011 recommended establishment of special judicial set
up within the existing framework as also amendments to various fiscal
statutes so that they become stronger. In response to these, ITD has also
taken several efforts to streamline and strengthen the deterrent mechanisms
against tax evasion in general and income tax in particular.

. As penalty and prosecution are important deterrent mechanisms, we
felt it necessary to examine the administration and implementation of
penalty and prosecution machinery, by the CBDT and its field formations for
combating tax evasion. We sought to achieve this by examining current
structures, its utilization and effectiveness. Our objective for examining
penalty provisions inter alia was to whether the mechanism for
administration and levy of penalties for various defaults existed and is
functional and had a deterrent effect on tax evasion. In respect of
prosecution, our focus was to examine the functional efficiency of the
prosecution mechanism at various levels in ITD.

Administration and Levy of Penalty

. We studied the initiation and levy of penalty across all the States in
audit during August 2012 and December 2012. We found that the ITD
delayed in completion of penalty proceedings which led to potential loss of
revenue (paragraph 2.3). ITD did not apply penalty as per provisions of the
Act in cases such as (a) non-complying with filing requirements covering
Income Tax Returns, Tax Audit Reports, Books of Accounts; (b) concealment


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

of income and (c) failure to provide return for TDS/TCS (paragraphs 2.12,
2.14 and 2.15). ITD did not apply penalty provisions for cash transaction
which led to tax effect of = 56.60 crore (paragraph 2.16). We also found that
the Act is silent on time-limit for initiation of penalties though it provides
time-limit for completion of penalty proceedings (paragraph 2.8).

Administration of Prosecution

. We attempted to study the mechanism of prosecution as measured
by the functional efficiency at various levels vis-a-vis roles and responsibilities
fixed at various levels. Since prosecution was enforceable at the instance
of the Court, the interplay with the judicial machinery was also part of
our study.

. Our study revealed mismatches at every stage of selection, initiation,
pursuance and disposal of cases as also at every level of monitoring and
coordination. To handle prosecution cases, CBDT has not ensured posting of
appropriate officers as Nodal Officers in its field formations (paragraph
3.2.1). There are discrepancies in figures of pending cases as reported by
Officer in-charge (Prosecution) to CBDT questioning the authenticity and
reliability of prosecution data (paragraph 3.2.3). ITD has not performed
physical verification of prosecution records since FY 08 streamlining the
record maintenance (paragraph 3.2.4). Nodal Officers have not maintained
the prosecution registers despite various instructions issued by CBDT
(paragraph 3.2.5). ITD has not given adequate priority in launching of
prosecution as indicated by delay in initiation of cases and by not launching
the prosecution even in approved cases (paragraph 3.3).

. Prosecution cases are being pursued on companies which have
already been liquidated or have been declared sick by BIFR (paragraphs 3.4.6
and 3.4.7). CBDT is wasting resources in pursuing cases under repealed
sections of the Act, dead assessees etc. (paragraph 3.4.3). CBDT did not
utilize the prosecution mechanism for ensuring tax compliance under section
276CC of the Act (paragraph 3.4.5).

न We found that ITD’s nominees are not attending regular hearing in
the Courts impacting disposal of cases (paragraph 3.5.2). ITD has poor
records maintenance and inadequate monitoring of prosecution cases
pending in the Courts (paragraph 3.5.3). Poor record maintenance and delay
in timely production of evidences has led to acquittal of assessees in
prosecution related offences (paragraph 3.6). The enforcement of CBDT’s
policy and procedures on Prosecution Counsels has not been effective and
has impacted the pursuance of cases (paragraph 3.7).


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

. ITD did not use the compounding of offences as alternate dispute
resolution mechanism effectively to reduce the litigation and realize the due
revenue (paragraph 3.9). ITD has acted not in consonance with the spirit of
National Litigation Policy by wasting prosecution machinery on technical
offences (paragraph 3.10). Prosecution machinery of ITD was used to handle
individual assessees and low money value cases, not against systematically
organized entities (paragraph 3.11). Central Economic Intelligence Bureau
established for gathering, collation and dissemination of information among
tax gathering agencies like CBDT, CBEC etc. has not worked in coordinated
manner to arrest tax evasion by prosecution (paragraph 3.12).

° Therefore, ITD did not apply penalty as per provisions of the Act
effectively. ITD has also not given adequate priority to the prosecution in
tackling tax evasion and prosecution mechanism is not working effectively
and efficiently.


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Summary of Recommendations

With reference to administration and levy of penalty

1.

The entire process of initiation, levy and order of penal proceedings to
be duly recorded so that proceedings do not suffer from procedural
infirmities.

The Ministry may ensure that concealment of income is penalized as
per the Act.

The Ministry may put in appropriate mechanisms to ensure that tax
demands are collected on time and defaults penalized.

The Ministry may ensure coordination between various wings within
ITD so that revenue efforts are synergized.

The Ministry may put in a mechanism for ensuring appropriate
penalties for cash transactions relating to loans and deposits beyond
prescribed limits.

With reference to administration of Prosecution

6.

10.

The Ministry needs to ensure instituting a more robust mechanism for
identifying cases for prosecution which takes into account timeliness;
quantum of tax evasion; and contemporary impact.

CBDT should ensure posting of a designated and experienced Nodal
officer to handle prosecution at the field level with independent
charge. CBDT is to ensure periodical interaction amongst authorities
(like quarterly) so that status of a case is ascertainable at any
point of time.

CBDT should take up work of cleaning of records and data bases to
ascertain actual pendency and status of prosecution cases at various
levels. CBDT should ensure maintenance of updated prosecution
records at all levels.

CBDT should ensure periodical physical verification of prosecution
related files.

Ministry needs to streamline the mechanism for appointment and
evaluation of departmental counsels representing the ITD before
judicial authorities. The remuneration rates also need a relook in
accordance with the tasks associated so as to avail and retain the
services of experienced counsels.

vii


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

11.The Ministry may ensure regular coordination with the judicial
machinery.

12.CBDT should perform one time exercise to identify the stage of
pendency of all cases in the various Courts and follow it actively
for resolution.

13. CBDT should consider compounding offences before launching the
prosecution proceedings so that revenues are collected.

14. CBDT should deploy prosecution machinery for high impact cases and
avoid focussing on low impact cases.

viii


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Chapter 1: Introduction

11 Introduction

The Income Tax Act, 1961 (Act) proposes imposition of penalty on an
assessee, if the Assessing Officer (AO)/Commissioner of Income Tax-
Appeals/Commissioner of Income Tax (CIT) is satisfied that there has been
non-compliance with or violation of law and there is no reasonable cause for
failure. The maximum penalty under the present laws is levying of penalty up
to three times the tax proposed to be evaded with or without prosecution of
the offender. The provisions also provide for AO or any other authority to
waive/drop any proceedings initiated subject to fulfillment of conditions.

The Prosecution provisions contained in Chapter XXII of the Act, declares
certain acts of omission and/or commission as punishable offences. Offences
and Prosecution under the Act are read in conjunction with other laws such
as Indian Penal Code (IPC), Code of Criminal Procedure (Cr PC) and Indian
Evidence Act (IEA).

1.2 Organizational set up

The Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) is the apex body in Department of
Revenue (DoR) under Ministry of Finance (Ministry) charged with the
administration of Direct Taxes. Member (Investigation) in the CBDT is
responsible for technical and administrative matters relating to prevention
and detection of tax evasion, including all matters falling under Chapter 2२1
of the Act and corresponding provisions of other Direct Tax Acts.

Income Tax Department (ITD) which functions under supervision and control
of CBDT is divided into regions, and each region is headed by a Chief
Commissioner of Income Tax (CCIT) or a Director General of Income Tax
(DGIT). Commissioners/Directors of Income Tax (CIT/DIT) head the
assessment functions which are carried out through the Additional CIT/DIT,
JCIT/JDIT and DDIT/DC/ADIT/AC/ITO. Officers carrying out assessment
functions and those other authorities specified in the Act can levy penalties
for acts of omission or commission by assessees. The organogram of ITD for
administration and levy of penalty is as follows:


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Chart 1.1 : Organogram of Penalty

CBDT Member (Investigation)

dt
| |
| |
L L

Member (Investigation) in the CBDT has the overall charge of prosecution
work in the ITD. He is assisted by CIT (Inv), Director (Inv) and DDIT
(Prosecution). This set up handles the MIS reports, monitoring and
functioning of the prosecution in the ITD.

The prosecution wing in the field functions under CCsIT with CIT (Judicial) as
the Controlling Authority. DCIT (Prosecution) under CIT (Judicial) assisted by
Inspectors and other staff is the Nodal Officer to attend to the day to day
functions. The organogram of the prosecution work in CBDT and field
formation of ITD is as follows:

Chart 1.2 : Organogram of Prosecution

Reporting Mechanism Initi

Launch of prosecution
Court
CIT (Inv.)
Approval by

CIT/DIT/CIT(A)
“~

cit

Member
(investigatio

proceeding

Assessing
Officer

tion of Prosecution Coordination & Monitoring

ng
Officer:


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

1.3 Why we chose this topic

The Wanchoo Committee report of 1975 recommended that ITD needs to
evolve vigorous prosecution policies and pursue it. It also stated that
monetary penalties may always not be enough. The White Paper on Black
Money of May 2012 published by Ministry of Finance described that
taxpayers may be willing to take a calculated risk of tax evasion and may even
justify it as a ‘commercial risk'. Such calculated risk taking may be more
effectively deterred by effective prosecution. A committee headed by the
Chairman of CBDT constituted in May 2011 for examining ways to strengthen
laws to curb the generation of black money in the country, its legal transfer
abroad and its recovery recommended inter alia establishment of special
judicial set up within the existing framework as also amendments to various
fiscal statutes so that they become stronger. ITD has also taken several
efforts to streamline and strengthen the deterrence mechanisms against tax
evasion in general and income tax in particular.

As penalty and prosecution are important deterrent mechanisms, we felt it
necessary to examine the administration and implementation of penalty and
prosecution machinery, by the CBDT and its field formations for combating
tax evasion. We sought to achieve this by examining current structures, its
utilization and effectiveness.

The status of penalty proceedings during the last five years is indicated
below:

Table 1.1: Status of penalty proceedings (in numbers)

Particulars FY 09 FY 10 FY 11 FY 12
1. Total scrutiny assessments done 5,38,505 4,29,585 4,55,212 3,69,320
2. Total penalty proceedings pending 2,28,696 2,49,071 2,34,795  2,56,414
3. Disposal of penalty proceedings 69,692 81,208 1,46,337 85,661
4. Balance of penalty proceedings 1,59,004 1,67,863 1,67,314 = 1,70,753

Source: Central Board of Direct Taxes

The table data indicates that penal provisions are being invoked almost in
fifty percent of the assessments carried out in scrutiny cases done every year.
Cases are selected for scrutiny assessments based on pre determined
parameters where there is a preponderance of escapement of income
from tax.


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

The status of prosecutions is as follows:

Table 1.2: Status of Prosecution cases

Financial Year Prosecution Cases Convictions Compounded Acquitted
launched decided

FY 08 263 280 11 13 256

FY 09 162 146 14 13 119

FY 10 312 599 32 291 276

FY11 244 356 51 83 222

FY 12 209 593 14 397 182
Total number of cases pending as of March 2013: 3,088
Total number of complaints as of March 2012: 10,538

Source: Central Board of Direct Taxes

The above table shows that acquittals in prosecution cases are high.

Timeliness and adequacy for disposal of prosecution cases are important.
Supreme Court underlining the need for timely disposal of cases has stated:

A suit often drags on for years and it is undesirable that a criminal
prosecution should wait till everybody concerned has forgotten all
about the crime. The public interests demand that criminal justice
should be swift and sure; that the guilty should be punished while
the events are still fresh in the public mind and that the innocent
should be absolved as early as is consistent with a fair and
impartial trial. Another reason is that it is undesirable to let things
slide till memories have grown too dim to trust’.

In this back ground, we felt that a performance study of the working of
deterrent mechanisms on tax manipulation and evasion seemed to be in
order.

1.4... Objectives of the Review
The objectives of our audit were as follows: -
A In respect of Penalty

a. Whether the mechanism for administration and implementation of
penalties for various defaults existed and are functional,

b. Whether penalty proceedings indeed have the deterrent effect on tax
evaders as measured by the incidence of penalty.

* Radheyshyam Kejriwal vs. State Of West Bengal (Criminal Appeal No. 1097 of 2003) 18.02.2011 Supreme Court.


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

B In respect of Prosecution

a. Whether the tool of prosecution has been used only in the rarest of
rare cases,

9. Whether functional efficiency of the prosecutions mechanism at
various levels exists,

c. Whether prosecutions have had the necessary impact in curbing tax
evasion.

1.5 Scope and methodology of audit

In this Performance Audit, we studied whether the provisions on the Penalty
and Prosecution have been appropriately deployed and judiciously operated
to effect tax deterrence. We audited all the 18 CCsIT (CCA) regions covering
all the States.

We examined prosecution procedures with focus on administrative and
implementation mechanisms and their effectiveness. The review envisaged
examination of assessments concluded during FY 10, FY 11 and FY 12 for
penalty proceedings. As regards prosecution, we examined all cases which
were decided by way of conviction, acquittal, compounding during FY 10, FY 11
and FY 12. In respect of live cases, we examined fifty per cent of the cases.

We examined the records available with the jurisdictional AOs and Offices
handling prosecution under the CCsIT (CCA). In a few cases, we also
correlated with the jurisdictional Courts where cases were purported to be
pending. Certain records and reports were also examined in the CBDT to
correlate the data being sent by jurisdictional officers, as per monitoring
mechanisms laid out.

1.6 Discretionary power

Unlike the levy of interest which is compensatory in nature, imposition of a
penalty does not follow ipso facto on the commission of a default. As per the
Act, competent authority has the discretion not to levy the penalty if the
assessee can show reasonable cause. It is implicit that when the statute
confers a power, it is to be exercised in a reasonable manner for the purpose
for which it was conferred. Penalty proceedings may be initiated by the
Assessing Officer (AO) only on his satisfaction which should be absolute and
based on definite information.


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

1.7 Legal provisions

Chapter XXI and XXII of the Act detail the powers of ITD for imposition of
penalty and institution of prosecution for a variety of defaults/offences
committed by the assessee. Various circulars issued by the CBDT from time to
time also prescribe modalities for prosecution. Sections 271 to 272BBB deal
with levy of penalty for different defaults committed, whereas Sections 275A
to 280 relate to offences and prosecution. (See Annex A for details).

1.8 Acknowledgement

We held an entry conference with the Member (Audit & Judicial) in
November 2012 in which we explained the audit objectives, scope,
methodology and thrust areas of audit examination. The Indian Audit and
Accounts Department acknowledges the cooperation of ITD in facilitating the
audit.

We held the Exit Conference in October 2013 with the Ministry/CBDT
wherein we discussed our findings and recommendations. We have
incorporated the views expressed by the Ministry/CBDT in the Report.


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Chapter 2: Administration and Levy of Penalty
A. Administration of Penalty

2.1 Introduction

The main object of penal provisions in the Act is to enforce compliance of law
and also act as deterrence against defaults. Penal provisions need to be
invoked judiciously wherever necessary, as prescribed in the Act. Penalty may
be imposed only if it is proved that the assessee has consciously made the
concealment or furnished inaccurate particulars of his income? and not
merely because it is lawful to do so as discretion is given to the authority’.

2.2. Record maintenance

The Manual of Procedures (Volume ॥) of the CBDT prescribes two separate
set of records, one for regular assessment charges’ and another for Tax
Deducted at Source (TDS) Wings. The registers provide for capturing details
of penalty proceedings including service of notices, initiation, imposition,
imitation date, completion, tax sought to be evaded, quantum of penalty
leviable and levied, passing of orders, results of appeals, revisions etc. The
discrepancies noticed in record maintenance are shown in Box 2.1.

Box 2.1: Discrepancies in records maintenance
a. Maintenance of Penalty registers

We observed that in 15 states® penalty registers were either not maintained in the
prescribed format or where maintained, were not updated. In the absence of
penalty registers, ITD is not in a position to ensure that penalty proceedings
initiated have been followed up and necessary action taken.

b. Utilization of IT Modules for record keeping

Assessment of Tax (AST) module of ITD Application provides an option for
maintenance of data online which would enable easy retrievability and follow up.
We noticed that in Delhi charge out of 36 units, in 10 assessment units, information
relating to penalty was not being recorded in the AST module.

2 Dillip N.Shroff Vs CIT (2007) 291 ITS 519(SC)

3 Hindustan Steel Ltd Vs. State of Orissa 83 ITR 26 (1972)

* Two registers-One for penalties u/s 271 and another for all other sections in ITNS 159A and ITNS 159 format.

* Bihar, Chattisgarh, Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Jammu &Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh,
Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, and Uttarakhand.


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

ITD delayed in completion of penalty proceedings which led to potential
loss of revenue.

2.3 Timely completion of proceedings

Section 275 of the Act has laid down that penalty proceedings shall be
completed normally within six months from the end of the year in which
proceedings were initiated. In case where the assessment is in appeal, then
the AO shall complete penalty proceedings within one year from the end of
the year in which the appellate decision is received by him.

We found that in 27 cases relating to the states of Andhra Pradesh, Assam,
Bihar, Gujarat, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, the proceedings had not been
completed on time resulting in a potential loss of revenue of % 4.38 crore (See
Box 2.2).

Box 2.2: Illustrative cases on delay in timely completion of penalty proceedings

a. In Tamil Nadu DIT (IT) Chennai, penalty proceedings initiated in the
assessment of M/s Bank of Ceylon in February 2010 was still pending as of
December 2012 involving a potential non levy of penalty of € 1.02 crore.

b. In CIT Central-! of Bihar Patna, in 56 cases where penalty proceedings had
been initiated between December 2006 to March 2009, the Penalty
Register indicated as ‘kept in abeyance till the disposal of appeal’. No
further status on these cases was available as of March 2013 in records of
ITD. Our examination of related records showed that in six cases, decision
was taken and in two cases additions had been set aside.

Thus, we found that the proceedings were not being completed within
prescribed time limit diluting the impact of the proceedings.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.
2.4 Issue of notices in wrong cases

Section 271 (1)(c) of the Act provides that AO or the CIT in the course of any
proceedings is satisfied that any person has concealed the particulars of his
income or furnished inaccurate particulars, then he shall be liable to pay
penalty ranging from 100 to 300 per cent of the tax sought to be evaded.
Penalty proceedings need to be initiated at the time of issuing the order of
assessment. Discrepancies in issuance of notices are shown in Box 2.3.


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Box 2.3: Notices issued in wrong cases

a. We noticed that in Gujarat, CIT-Il Vadodara charge in eight® cases, though
the assessment order contains no direction for initiation of penalty u/s
271(1)(c), notices were issued. When we pointed out this, ITD stated
(November 2012) that the notices were issued by mistake.

9. In CIT-TDS Patna/TDS Circle, Bihar, in three cases’ demand notices for
payment of taxes and penalty were issued to Banks and Government
bodies for non-payment of taxes though relevant amounts had already
been remitted into Government accounts. ITD replied (November 2012)

that these occurred due to technical mismatches.

Thus, due diligence was not being carried out while issuing notices for
penalty proceedings.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

2.5 Incorrect invocation of penalty proceedings

Under section 271AAA of the Act, undisclosed income unearthed during
searches conducted on or after 1 June, 2007, attract penalty at the rate of
ten per cent of the undisclosed income for the year when the action of search
took place. For undisclosed income of other years, penalty u/s 271(1)(c)
equal to tax sought to be evaded would be applicable (See Box 2.4).

Box 2.4: Illustrative case on incorrect invocation of penalty proceedings

In Maharashtra Mumbai charge (DCCC 46 under CIT Central-IV), Vivek Talwar
consequent to search offered undisclosed income of ¥ 22 crore and % 5.25 crore
pertaining to AY 10 and AY 11 to tax. However, penalty u/s 271AAA was initiated in
both AYs in contravention to the provisions cited supra, instead of restricting its
application to AY 11 only. Invoking wrong penal section for AY 10 resulted in short
levy of penalty of = 5.28 crore. The penalty should have been levied under section
271(1)(C) for AY 10.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

2.6 Collection of penalty demands

Section 220 of the Act provides that any amount of tax payable specified in a
notice of demand u/s 156 shall be paid within thirty days of the service of the
notice. We found that demands raised in penalty orders were not being
properly monitored in two states to ensure collection, details of which are
given in Table 2.1.

“1. Mew Electricals Pvt. Ltd., 2. Sun Petrochemicals Pvt. Ltd., 3. Prakash Financial Services Pvt. Ltd., 4. Samir Surgitek
Pvt. Ltd., 5. Universal Esters Ltd., 6. Prime Ceramic Pvt. Ltd., 7. Taskant Oil Pvt. Ltd. and 8. Shilchar Technologies Ltd.
71, SBI, Main Branch, Patna; 2. Bihar Rajya Pul Nirman Nigam Ltd., Patna; 3. Bankipur Head Post Office, Patna


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Table 2.1: Non monitoring of demands raised

State Period Demand pending collection % in crore
Bihar AY 95 to AY 12 64.22
Karnataka AY 04 to AY 12 6.37

2.7 Representation of assessees in penalty proceedings

As per section 274 of the Act, the competent authority for levy of penalty for
TDS defaults is the jurisdictional JCIT. Our examination of the administrative
set up revealed that the mechanisms devised to give a fair hearing to the
assessees were not available in the state of Bihar. Office of JCIT-TDS, Patna,
summoned 11 assessees located in far off places like Darbhanga under TDS-
ward, Muzaffarpur for hearings at Patna. The distance from Patna averaged
above 200 kilometers making representation in front of departmental
authorities impractical in terms of money and time. The entire exercise may
or may not yield any revenue to the ITD but would definitely result in
inconveniencing assessees rendering the entire process of interaction
ineffective.

Administrative arrangements may need to be reworked for rendering the
process more effective.

Act is silent on time-limit for initiation of penalties though it provides time-
limit for completion of penalty proceedings.

2.8 No time limit for initiation of penalty proceedings

Section 275 of the Act prescribes certain time limits for completion of penalty
proceedings to ensure that proceedings do not drag on indefinitely. However,
the Act is silent on any time-limit for initiation of penalties. Manual of
Procedure (Vol-Il) only prescribes that if the competent authority during the
course of a proceeding under the Act is satisfied that the person is guilty of
contravening the relevant statutory provisions, the penalty initiation should
be carried out along with the assessment order. The initiation of penalty
proceedings starts with issue of notice under section 274 of the Act.

In Delhi CIT (TDS) charge, we found that in 28 cases pertaining to AY 11 and
116 cases pertaining to AY 12, proceedings were yet to be initiated. ITD
stated that there is no time-limit for initiation of penalty under the Act. In
absence of clear provision for prescribed time limit to initiate penalty
proceedings, these cases remained pending.

10


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

2.9 Sustainability index of Penalties levied

2.9.1 TDS Units

Penalties to be effective have to be used sparingly and decisively so that the
required impact is achieved. Penalty proceedings have to be initiated only in
deserving cases after due investigation so that levy of penalty becomes
obvious. We sought to examine whether the initiation and levy of penalty
had been done in a routine manner or after due application of mind.

Table 2.2: Penalties in TDS units
Proceedings initiated in FY 12

Details States
Andhra Pradesh Uttar Pradesh Uttarakhand
1. Number of ITD units 54 64 a1
2. Number of penalties initiated 715 1,398 414
3. Number of penalties levied 119 371 6
4. Number of penalties dropped NA 547 158
5. Number of penalties pending NA 480 250

There was hardly any appreciation of the cases attracting penalty.
Proceedings were being initiated routinely in all cases where additions had
been made in scrutiny assessments. Interpretative issues where the Courts
have expressed divergent opinion, disallowances based on earlier precedents
etc seldom attract penalty. We found that these penalty proceedings had
been dropped in majority of the cases casting doubts on the very selection of
cases for levy.

2.9.2 Categories of penalties
Penalties are leviable for concealment of income as well as other shortfalls.

Details of the penalties levied are given in table below:

Table 2.3: Analysis of penalty proceedings (in numbers)

Particulars FY 09 FY 10 FY 11 FY 12
1. Total scrutiny assessments done 5,38,505 4,29,585 4,55,212 3,69,320
2. Total penalty proceedings pending 2,28,696 2,49,071 2,34,795 —2,56,414
3. Disposal of penalty proceedings 69,692 81,208 1,46,337 85,661
4. Balance of penalty proceedings 1,59,004 1,67,863 1,67,314 1,70,753

Source: Central Board of Direct Taxes

Thus more than fifty percent of the cases are not resulting in any penalties.
Scrutiny proceedings in themselves are a long drawn process. Penalty
proceedings which follow scrutiny are also tedious involving resubmission or
furnishing additional material. The following conclusions emerge:

11


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

a. Penalty proceedings are being initiated in every alternate scrutiny
proceedings. It is not clear whether the large number of penal
proceedings indicate real tax evasion cases or is a pointer towards
confusion in the interpretation of the Act by the assessees and the
ITD.

b. Even after considerable examination of the affairs of the assessee, the
ITD has failed to levy penalty in more than fifty percent of the cases
indicating wasteful expenditure and compliance cost to the assessee
as well as to the ITD.

Our analysis in ITD Karnataka of penalties imposed under penalties for
concealment and other penalties revealed the following:

Table 2.4: Analysis of Penalties during FY 12 in Karnataka

1. Penalty imposed a. Imposition for 3,402 3,807
concealment
b. Other penalties 405
2. Penalty dropped 2,548
3. Penalty pending a. Below 6 months 5,054 8,144
b. Above 6 months 3,090
4. Unreconclied cases 274

Out of 3,884 cases test checked in selected units, additions were made in
1,935 cases and penalty proceedings were initiated in 1,487 cases (77%).
Penalty was imposed in 89 cases (5%) amounting to = 108.69 crore. However,
penalties were collected only in 10 cases amounting to हैं 1.79 crore which
was less than 2% of the penalty demanded. As ITD could not sustain the
penalties proceedings initiated, 869 cases were dropped at AO level based on
the reply of the assessee as well as in appeal at various levels.

Thus we could not derive an assurance on the selection of cases for penalty
or sustenance of the levy in initiated/completed cases as they were either
being dropped or were being set aside in appeals.

2.10 Penalties under Wealth Tax Act

2.10.1 Non levy of penalty under Wealth Tax Act

The net wealth chargeable to tax comprises certain assets specified under
section 2(ea) of the Wealth Tax Act subject to adjustment of any debt owned
by the assessee in relation to any of the specified assets on the valuation
date. The charge of the wealth tax is on the assets net of liabilities. Defaults
in filing and compliance requirements attract interest and penalties.

We found that there were no instances of levy of penalty under the Wealth
Tax Act in the states of Delhi, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Madhya
Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand.

12


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

2.10.2 Penalty for failure to furnish wealth tax returns

Under the Wealth Tax Act, failure to furnish returns of wealth attracts
penalties ranging from हैं 1,000 to हैं 25,000. Concealment of wealth
chargeable to tax attracts penalty at the rate of 100 to 500 per cent of the
wealth tax sought to be evaded.

We found that in 39 cases in four states® that the assesses had not filed
wealth tax return despite having wealth beyond taxable limit involving a
short levy of = 67.67 lakh (See Box 2.5).

Box 2.5: Illustrative case on assessee not filing wealth tax return

Assessment of M/s Lalchand Jewellers (P) Ltd for AY 10 was completed in
scrutiny manner in December 2011, in Odisha, CIT Bhubaneshwar. The
assessment revealed that assessee held motor cars valuing हैं 1.21 crore. Neither
did the assessee file his wealth tax return nor did AO initiate proceedings. Failure
to do so resulted in short levy of € 3.10 lakh (Tax of % 1.55 lakh and penalty of
र₹ 1.55 lakh). ITD agreed to examine the issue (December 2012).

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

ITD did not have co-ordination between TDS and Assessment Wing which
led to non intimation of information on TDS to jurisdictional AO for
disallowing relatable expenditure in income tax assessment.

2.11 Dissemination of information
2.11.1 Co-ordination between TDS wing and Assessment wing

Under section 139 of the Act, every assessee is liable to file a return of
income which reveals the incomes earned by him and the taxes payable/paid
thereon. Where an assessee in the course of his activities (business or
profession) makes payments to others on which tax has been deducted at
source, assessee shall file a return of TDS indicating the payments made and
tax deducted from such payments.

Failure to
deduct tax

Disallowance of related expenditure
Coordination in income tax assessment by AO

Interest and penalty by
TDS Officer

* andhra Pradesh, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

2.11.2 Penalties by TDS Officers

Failure to deduct tax at source on taxable payments made by assessees or
failure to remit TDS would attract levy of penalty. This also attracts
disallowance u/s 40(a)(ia) of the Act. Hence any TDS officer passing penalty
orders for non deduction or short deduction of tax shall intimate the
jurisdictional AO to disallow the relatable expenditure in income tax
assessment.

We observed in nine states’ in 241 cases, TDS officers had detected instances
of non deduction of tax at source involving tax effect of हैं 109.69 crore
(See Box 2.6).

Box: 2.6: Illustrative cases on non levy of penalty by AO for non deduction of TDS

a. In Maharashtra, jurisdictional TDS Officer of CIT (TDS), Pune had completed
103 assessments during AY 09 to AY 12 of which there were TDS defaults in
78 cases. However, except for four cases involving TDS default of = two lakh,
other cases were not referred to the concerned AOs for disallowance
u/s 40(a)(ia).

b. In Kerala, CIT Il Kannur charge, the TDS wing under DCIT, Circle-1 on
verification of the accounts of the Academy of Medical Sciences, detected non
deduction of TDS of % 3.90 crore on lease rent amounting to हैं 6.50 crore paid to
the Kerala State Co-operative Hospital Complex Ltd. No penalty proceedings had
been initiated resulting in non levy of penalty of € 3.90 crore.

c. In Maharashtra, 79 surveys conducted by the TDS Wing yielded 58 cases of
TDS/TCS defaults involving short/non deduction of TDS/TCS of हैं 14.50 crore.
These were not referred to AO for disallowances in assessment.

d. In Gujarat, two cases” involving an expenditure of हैं 126.62 crore were
detected by jurisdictional TDS Wings under CIT (TDS), Ahmedabad, where tax
had not been deducted at source. Failure to disallow the expenditure resulted in
potential non levy of € 42.87 crore. Similarly in 14 other cases" under seven CIT
charges disallowances of % 6.35 crore had not been penalized by levy of
applicable penalties involving a potential levy of € 40 lakh.

Thus, the mechanism to share information between Assessment Wings and
the TDS wings was dysfunctional.

3 Assam, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Kerala, Odisha, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand

10 Vodafone West Limited (AY 10); Gujarat Ambuja Exports Limited (AY 10 to AY 13),

™ 1 Sudip A Patel, 2 P P Patel, 3. Vision Corporation Ltd. 4. Healthy Foods and Breverages, 5 Siemens Healthcare
Diagnostic Ltd6 Austin Engg. Co. Ltd., 7 Vinay Solvent Extuction Co.,8 Kalidas P Vanik, 9 Shantilal Nagardas & Co., 10
GMM Pfaulder Ltd.11 Chhatriya Dehydred Onion Exports, 12 Gujarat Telelink Ltd., 13 Shanti Construction Co., and
14 M/s Banyan & Berry Alloys Ltd.

14


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

2.11.3 Failure to comply with TDS and TCS provisions and disallowances by
AOs

Section 40 (a)(ia) of the Act provides that failure to deduct tax at source on
taxable payments made to others during the course of business or profession
results in disallowance of the related expenditure as also attracts pena
interest.

We observed 337 cases in 17 states” involving tax effect of हैं 65.97 crore
where the provisions relating to TDS/TCS were violated (See Box 2.7).

Box 2.7: Illustrative cases on violation of TCS/TDS provisions

a. In Delhi CIT(IT) Charge, no penalty proceeding had been initiated though
M/s Hewitt Associates (India) Pvt. Ltd had not deducted tax at source
amounting to हैं 1.40 crore as evidenced from assessment order for AY 08
completed in October 2011 at an income of हैं 42.17 crore under various
sections’®.

b. Similarly, in Karnataka, CIT (IT), Bangalore charge, penalty of % 1.40 crore
had not been levied on M/s Ansys Software Pvt. Ltd for AY 08 though the
assessee failed to deduct tax at source whilst making royalty payment of < 13.67
crore. The assessment was concluded after scrutiny in December 2010.

८ In Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad charge no penalty had been levied on
M/s. National Mineral Development Corporation Ltd for AY 09 though AO had
disallowed हैं 25.22 crore in scrutiny assessment order u/s 143(3) read with
section 147 on commission payments. The total tax effect worked out to हैं 7.23
crore. This included short TDS of % 2.85 crore, interest of हैं 1.51 crore and
penalty of € 2.85 crore.

d. In West Bengal CIT -॥, Kolkata charge, penalty of % 58.72 lakh had not
been levied on M/s Brittania Industries Ltd. though assessee had failed to
deduct tax from contractual payment of € 22.19 crore. This was evidenced from
scrutiny assessment order for AY 08 of October 2011.

e In Delhi CIT-VI charge, no penal proceedings had been initiated on
M/s Vangelz Technologies Pvt. Ltd., though assessee had deducted tax of
% 42.45 lakh during AY 10 but not remitted it into the Government account. This
was evidenced from 3CD report available in scrutiny assessment order of
December 2011. Non initiation of proceedings resulted in non levy of penalty of
% 42.45 lakh.

f. In Delhi CIT Central Ill charge, though expenditure relating to amounts on
which tax had not been deducted at source had been disallowed in the
assessment of M/s Paradise Infrastructure Pvt Ltd, no penalties had been levied
resulting in non levy of penalty of = 35.61 lakh. AY 10 was completed after
scrutiny at a loss of हैं 551.56 lakh in December 2011.

ए Andhra Pradesh; Bihar; Delhi; Haryana; Himachal Pradesh; Jammu & Kashmir; Jharkhand; Karnataka; Kerala;
Madhya Pradesh; Maharashtra; Odisha; Punjab;Tamil Nadu; Uttar Pradesh; Uttarakhand; and West Bengal.
* 194C, 1941, 1941 and 195

15


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Disallowances were not being properly followed up by levy of applicable
penalties. Ministry may ensure coordination between various wings within
ITD so that revenue efforts are synergized.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

16


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

B. Levy of penalty

ITD did not apply penalty as per provisions of the Act in cases such as (a)
non-complying with filing requirements covering Income Tax Returns, Tax
Audit Reports, Books of Accounts; (b) concealment of income and (c) failure
to provide return for TDS/TCS.

2.12 Failure to comply with filing requirements covering Income Tax
Returns, Tax Audit reports, books of accounts etc.

Section 271A of the Act provides that every assessee is required to maintain
books of accounts and related records failing which he will be liable to pay
penalty of = 25,000. Penalty at the rate of one and half percent of total sales
(or = 1 lakh, whichever is less) is leviable u/s 2718 where assessee fails to get
his accounts audited as provided u/s 44AB when turnover exceeds @ 60 lakh.
Failure to furnish return of income by due dates would attract penalty at rate
of = 5,000 under section 2717 of the Act. Entities specified u/s 139(4) are
required to file their return of income within specified dates. Failure to do so
attracts penalty at rate of = 100 per day u/s 272 (A)(2e) where the default
continues.

We found 344 cases where there was non-maintenance of books of accounts,
non filing of returns, failure to have books of accounts audited. However, AOs
did not levy applicable penalties amounting to = 85 lakh in 17 states™’.

2.13 Failure to comply with assessment procedures
Section 271(1)(b) of the Act provides that where an assessee fails to comply

with notices issued by ITD u/s 115WD or 115WE or 142(1) or 143(2), then
penalty of = 10,000 shall be leviable for each such failure.

We found that in 303 cases though assessees had not complied with the
notices of the ITD, penalties had not been levied. Penalty leviable on this
count in 11 states’? amounted to ₹ 68.80 lakh.

2.14 Failure to levy penalty for concealment of income

Section 271(1) (c) of the Act provides that if an assessee has concealed the
particulars of income or furnished inaccurate particulars of such income, then
he is liable for penalty ranging from 100 to 300 per cent of the tax sought to
be evaded.

™ Andhra Pradesh; Bihar; Delhi; Gujarat; Haryana; Himachal Pradesh; Karnataka; Kerala; Maharashtra; Madhya
Pradesh Odisha; Punjab; Rajasthan; Tamil Nadu; Uttar Pradesh; Uttarakhand and West Bengal.

2 Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and
Uttarakhand.

17


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

We observed that in 214 cases in 14 states” involving tax effect of = 73.20
crore where the provisions of above section were violated (See Box 2.8).

Box 2.8: Illustrative cases on failure to levy penalty for concealment of income

a. In Uttar Pradesh, Kanpur CIT ॥ charge, penalty proceedings initiated for
furnishing inaccurate particulars of expenditure amounting to € 117.21 crore by
M/s Uttar Pradesh Financial Corporation during scrutiny assessment (for AY 09
completed in December 2010) were neither dropped nor did the assessee
furnish any replies resulting in non-levy of minimum penalty of % 36.21 crore.

b. In Madhya Pradesh, CIT Il, Jabalpur charge, assessment (AY 10 completed
in November 2011) of M/s M.P. Power Trading Co. Ltd was completed allowing
expenditure incurred towards payment of income tax of हैं 53.78 crore and
liability towards Fringe Benefit Tax of fone crore. Neither did ITD disallow these
non-admissible amounts nor were applicable penalties levied. Minimum penalty
leviable in this case works out to हैं 18.62 crore.

८. In Tamil Nadu CIT Central, Chennai AO while performing scrutiny
assessment for AY 08 complete in December 2009, computed penalty leviable
on P.S. Rajeshwari for concealment of income and failed to take into account
the additions made in respect of capital gains (¥ 6.95 crore) resulting in non-
levy of penalty of 1.56 crore.

Thus no penalties had been levied though there was concealment of income.
The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

2.15 Failure to file returns for tax deducted at source

Section 272A(2k) of the Act provides that if any person fails to deliver or
cause to be delivered a copy of the TDS return or TCS return within the time
specified due date as per prescribed proforma, then he shall pay a penalty of
% 100 per day during which the failure continues.

We found that though assessees had failed to file their returns for TDS or TCS
affected by them, no applicable penalties had been levied. The mistake
in 2,175 cases across six states’’ resulted in short levy of penalty of
र₹ 5.13 crore.

ITD did not apply penalties provisions for cash transaction which led to tax
effect of ¥ 56.60 crore

2.16 Failure to levy penalty for cash transactions

Section 269SS of the Act provides that no person shall accept from any other
person any loan or deposit of ~ 20,000 or more otherwise than by an account
payee cheque or draft. Acceptance of such amounts would attract penalty
u/s 271D equal to the amount of loan/deposit. Section 269T provides that no

26 andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan,
Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal
7 Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand

18


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

person shall pay any other person any loan or deposit of ~ 20,000 or more
otherwise than by an account payee cheque or draft. Such payments would
attract penalty u/s 271E equal to the amount of loan/deposit.

We found that in 134 cases spanning 16 states’ involving tax effect of
₹ 88.10 crore these provisions were violated (See Box 2.9).

Box 2.9: Illustrative cases of non levy of penalty for cash transactions

a. In Madhya Pradesh CIT Bhopal charge, cash repayment of loans amounting
to हैं 1.55 crore by M/s RVR Technologies Ltd. during AY 10 had been indicated
in the Auditors Report. Scrutiny order was passed in October 2012. Neither
were reasons provided by the assessee for infringements nor were penalty
proceedings initiated. The omission resulted in non levy of penalty of
हैं 1.55 crore.

b. In Karnataka, CIT Ill Bengaluru charge, M/s BJN Hotels Ltd, had accepted
and repaid a loan of € 12.15 crore and हैं 6.15 crore respectively as per Auditors
Report during AY 08 and AY 10 respectively. Scrutiny order was passed in
November 2009 and September 2011 respectively. Neither were reasons
provided by the assessee for infringements nor were penalty proceedings
initiated. The omission resulted in non levy of penalty of हैं 18.30 crore
(₹ 12.15 crore u/s 271 0 and % 6.15 crore u/s 272 E).

८ In Odisha Bhubhaneshwar charge, Charanjit Singh Grewal, had accepted a
loan or deposit of = 18.28 crore as per Auditors Report during AY 10. Scrutiny
order was passed in November 2009. Neither were reasons provided by the
assessee for infringements nor were penalty proceedings initiated. The omission
resulted in non levy of penalty of € 18.28 crore.

d. In Uttar Pradesh CIT Central Kanpur charge, Ramji Mehrotra had accepted
a loan or deposit of € 1.02 crore as per Auditors Report during AY 09. Scrutiny
order was passed in April 2010. Neither were reasons provided by the assessee
for infringements nor were penalty proceedings initiated. The omission resulted
in non levy of penalty of % 1.02 crore.

Ministry may put in a mechanism for ensuring appropriate penalties for cash
transactions.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

2.17 Failure to pay applicable taxes

Section 221 provides that when an assessee is in default in making a payment
of tax, he shall be liable to pay penalty (in addition to the arrear tax) as AO
may direct not exceeding the amount of tax remaining unpaid (including
interest).

* andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya
Pradesh, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, and West Bengal.

19


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

We observed 586 cases in nine states”’ involving tax effect of = 116.78 crore
where the above provisions were violated (See Box 2.10).

Box 2.10: Illustrative cases on failure to pay applicable taxes

a. In Karnataka CIT ॥ Bengaluru charge, assessment (AY 10 concluded after
scrutiny in December 2011) of M/s. Trishul Buildtech Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd.,
revealed that self-assessment tax of ~ 23.06 crore had been left unpaid for
which no penalty proceedings were initiated. The omission resulted in non-levy
of penalty of € 23.06 crore.

b. In Uttar Pradesh CIT II Kanpur charge, verification of tax demands revealed
that M/s UPSIDC Ltd had not deposited taxes for AY 06 and AY 08 amounting to
% 1.13 crore and % 8.06 crore even after lapse of three to five years from the
date of issue of notice, but ITD did not invoke the penalty provisions. The
omission resulted in non-levy of maximum penalty amounting to ~ 9.19 crore
for both AYs.

Ministry may put in place appropriate mechanisms to ensure that tax
demands are collected on time and defaults penalized.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.
2.18 Recommendations
We recommend that

1. The entire process of initiation, levy and order of penal proceedings to
be duly recorded so that proceedings do not suffer from procedural
infirmities.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the system of monitoring
penalties exists in the ITD and accepted that there is a scope for
improvement. The Ministry further stated that with re-structuring of
ITD and introduction of the Income Tax Business Application (ITBA), it
would take care of the maintenance of proper record and facilitate
better MIS and monitoring.

The Ministry further stated (November 2013) that new ITBA
application envisages a separate module for administration and levy
of Penalty and have broadly five components viz (i) Identifying the
Penalty leviable cases, (ii) Initiation of Penalty, (iii) Processing of
Penalty cases, (iv) Disposal of Penalty and (v) Generation of MIS
reports and linking with the respective registers.

2. The Ministry may ensure that concealment of income is penalized as
per the Act.

2 andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Odisha, Punjab and Uttar
Pradesh

20


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

The Ministry while describing the existing law and procedure for
initiation and levy of penalties stated (October 2013) that additions
made in the assessment proceedings would not automatically justify
imposition of penalty and no penalty is leviable if the assessee proves
reasonable cause. However, the facts and circumstances of individual
cases pointed out by audit would be looked into.

The Ministry may put in appropriate mechanisms to ensure that tax
demands are collected on time and defaults penalized.

The Ministry while describing the existing procedure for monitoring
the recovery of tax demands stated (October 2013) that as per the
Central Action Plan of FY 2013-14, CBDT has devised strategies to
augment revenue. However, through the ITBA, a stricter monitoring of
defaults and penalising would be possible. Also, specific instances
pointed out by audit would be looked into for appropriate action.

The Ministry may ensure coordination between various wings within
ITD so that revenue efforts are synergized.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that Directorate of Income Tax
(TDS), New Delhi has been entrusted to coordinate between various
wings. The Ministry, while noting that the system of sharing of
information is dysfunctional, stated that guidelines to strengthen the
same would be issued.

The Ministry further stated (November 2013) that to improve
coordination between the TDS Wing and Assessment Wing, CBDT has
already issued instructions to the field offices for proper and
immediate exchange of information after the receipt of draft Audit
Report.

The Ministry may put in a mechanism for ensuring appropriate
penalties for cash transactions relating to loans and deposits beyond
prescribed limits.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the appropriate systems and
provisions are in place. However, with the introduction of ITBA, the
mechanism would be strengthened. Specific instances pointed out by
audit would be looked into for appropriate action.

21


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Chapter 3: Administration of Prosecution

3.1 Introduction

The prosecution provisions contained in Chapter XXII of the Act declaring
certain acts of omission/or commission as punishable offences are most
potent weapons in the armoury of the ITD to tackle tax evasion. The
objectives of these provisions is to punish the offences found guilty of tax
evasion and other tax related offences and to instill fear of law in minds of
those who may even contemplate evading payment of legitimate taxes.

3.2. Monitoring and co-ordination set up

CBDT has prescribed various registers and periodical returns to be compiled
by the incumbent jurisdictional officers and submit it through CCIT, Cadre
Controlling Authority (CCA). Member (Investigation) in the CBDT who is aided
by CIT (Investigation) and subordinate officers is responsible for monitoring
relating to prosecution policy administration and implementation.

CCIT (CCA) is the overall in-charge for all prosecution matters of the region.
Every CCIT (CCA) has a post of DCIT (Prosecution) under him who will be the
Nodal Officer for discharging prosecution related functions. For the purpose
of compilation of reports and maintenance of records the Zonal CIT (Judicial)
has functional control over the Nodal Officer.

DCIT (Prosecution) is responsible for co-ordination of prosecution cases
between AO and the Prosecution Counsel and monitors the disposal of all
petitions relating to compounding, details of all cases filed/pending under
each CIT in the region etc. DCIT (Prosecution) prepares Monthly Progress
Report (MPR) of prosecution work in prescribed Form A in respect of the CCA
Charge. All aspects relating to reports are monitored by CIT (Judicial).

CBDT has not ensured posting of appropriate officers as Nodal Officers to
handle prosecution cases.

3.2.1 Nodal Officer for handling prosecution

Posting of a senior officer of Deputy Commissioner rank as Nodal Officer to
handle prosecution related matters is to ensure a one point contact for all
round coordination within ITD and interface with relevant authorities in the
Economic Offences Court.

Our study revealed that due seriousness was not given for posting of a senior
and experienced officer to the post of Nodal Officer adversely affecting the
entire process of prosecution. This has serious implication on the entire
process of prosecution. We found that officers ranging from the rank of ITO
to the rank of JCIT were handling prosecution related matters and in many

23


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

cases were holding concurrent/additional charges to the detriment of
prosecution which is shown in Table 3.1.

Table 3.1: Nodal Officers handling prosecution

States Whether DCIT posted Nodal Officer handling
1. Andhra Pradesh v DCIT
2. Assam x ACIT(Tech)
3. Bihar x ITO (Tech/Hars)
4. Jharkhand x ITO (Statistics)
5. Delhi v OCIT
6. Gujarat v DDIT
7. Haryana v DCIT(Tech)
8. Himachal Pradesh x ITO (Hqrs)
9. Jammu & Kashmir x ITO (Has)
10. Karnataka v ITO (Prosecution)
11. Kerala x DCIT (Hars)
12. Madhya Pradesh x ACIT(Tech)
13. Maharashtra x DCIT (Coord.)/ ITO (Jud)/ ITO
(Hqrs)
14. Orissa x ITO (Tech)
15. Punjab x DCIT(Tech)
16. Rajasthan x DCIT(Tech)
17. Tamil Nadu x JCIT(Hqrs)
18. Uttar Pradesh x ITO (Tech)/ACIT(Jud)
19. Uttarakhand x ITO (Hqrs)
v

20. West Bengal DCIT(VJudicial & Prosecution)

We found that CIT (Judicial), Western Zone, Mumbai was not carrying out all
the functions envisaged in the administrative set up for prosecution. On an
audit query, the concerned office replied that its jurisdiction covered Mumbai
region only and not the entire Western Region. They stated that the work of
collection and compilation of data were being handled by the co-ordination
section of CCIT (CCA).

We also found that out of the three Cadre Controlling CCsIT in Maharashtra
viz. Mumbai, Pune and Nagpur, only CCIT (CCA), Mumbai was operating the
post of DCIT (Prosecution).

Absence of a Nodal Officer has affected reporting and thereby monitoring the
prosecution process in the ITD jurisdiction.

3.2.2 MIS reports to the CBDT

CCIT (CCA) is required to send a Monthly Progress Report (MPR) on the 10"
of the following month and a Quarterly Progress Report (QPR) on 15" of the
month following the quarter and an Annual Report within 45 days after the
end of the financial year”’, For easy collation and interpretation, formats for
reports have been prescribed. CBDT had reiterated the requirement for
adherence to the guidelines for effective monitoring”.

3० No,285/04/2009-IT(Inv.|)/127 dated 20” September 2011
27 No. F.No.285/04/2009-IT (Inv. |) dated 20 Nov 2011 by Member (Investigation), CBDT

24


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Table 3.2: Submission of various prescribed reports

States Timely submission Prescribed Correct
Monthly Quarterly Annual format Reporting
Return Return Return
1. Andhra Pradesh x x x v v
2. Assam v v v v v
3. Bihar x x x v x
4. Jharkhand x x x v x
5. Delhi v v v v v
6. Gujarat x v x v v
7. Haryana x x x v v
8. Himachal x x x x x
Pradesh
9. Jammu & x x x x x
Kashmir
10. Karnataka v v x x
11. Kerala x x x x v
12. Madhya x x x x x
Pradesh
13. Maharashtra x x x v x
14. Orissa x x x x x
15. Punjab x x x x x
16. Rajasthan v v v v v
17. Tamil Nadu x x x x v
18. Uttar Pradesh x x x x x
19. Uttarakhand x x x x x
20. West Bengal v v x v x

Our study revealed that most of charges were deficient in their reporting.
Reports were incomplete, incorrect, not updated or did not confirm to the
approved formats. One such example is of the State of Maharashtra where
the prosecution process is spread across three offices viz. CCIT (CCA) Pune,
CCIT (CCA) Mumbai and CCIT (CCA) Nagpur. CIT (Judicial) Western Zone
would coordinate for reporting purposes. We found that there has been
consistent erroneous reporting right since 2008 and the actual number of
cases is not ascertainable as of date which is detailed in Table 3.3.

Table 3.3 : Discrepancies in reporting by CCIT (CCA), Mumbai

FY Pendency of cases

FY 08 6,221

FY 09 6,229

FY 10 4,199

FY 11 4,043

FY 12 3,825

Submission to Public Accounts 4,148

Committee in FY 12

Figures given to Audit for FY 12 374
Reports of CBDT 425

25


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Absence of Nodal Officers has affected reporting and thereby monitoring the
prosecution process in the ITD as actual number of cases pending is
unascertainable.

There are discrepancies in figures of pending cases as reported by Officer in-
charge (Prosecution) to CBDT, questioning the authenticity and reliability of
prosecution data.

3.2.3. Reports by CCIT (CCA)

The DCIT (Prosecution) in the respective regions are required to provide
accurate and updated position on all cases proposed, pending and disposed
of to the CCIT (CCA) who in turn reports to the CBDT. We found flaws in the
reporting mechanism which is as follows:

Table 3.4: Discrepancies in figures of pending cases

FY 12 Total pending cases as Remarks of Officer in-charge
reported to (Prosecution)
cciT Audit®
(CCA)
1. CIT 18, Mumbai 90 12 Error in reporting
2. CCIT Nasik 33 54 Error in reporting
3. CIT 2 Nasik 21 21 11 cases not readily traceable.
4. CIT Aurangabad 19 19 16 cases are not readily traceable
5. CIT II Lucknow 3 21 Only 16 cases pending in Prosecution
register
6. CIT Ghaziabad 30 30 Only 5 case records available
7. CITI Agra 39 39 No case records available
8. CITI Kanpur 84 54 No case records available
9. (ला (CCA) Patna 307 113 13 cases already settled”
10. CIT | Jalandhar 55 20 No reply
11. CIT Ill Ludhiana 17 13 No reply

$ As per register/files maintained by the officer in-charge of prosecution in CCIT (CCA) office

Audit scrutiny revealed that in January 2013, CIT | Jalandhar, provided a list of
55 pending cases without complete/relevant details. We attempted to collect
the available information on these cases with the jurisdictional AOs which
revealed that there were only 20 cases pending. CIT | Jalandhar later
confirmed the same in April 2013. Further, CIT Ill Ludhiana, replied again in
April 2013, after physical verification that only 13 cases were pending with
them. Thus the reporting even at the basic stage was erroneous.

” Quashed or discharged or acquitted or withdrawn

26


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

ITD has not performed physical verification of prosecution records since
FY 08.

3.2.4 Physical verification of prosecution records

In order to safeguard the interests of revenue as also check the availability of
crucial records relating to pending cases, CBDT had directed physical
verification of prosecution records. This was necessary as a variety of
Officers/Offices are involved in handling records viz. AO, jurisdictional CCIT,
CCIT (CCA)/ DCIT (Prosecution), Prosecution Counsel, Courts and CIT
(Judicial). The last such exercise was carried out in FY 08. There is no data on
whether similar exercise has been carried out subsequently and results
thereof.

The above discrepancies in reporting as well as non-availability of records
reinforces the need for periodical physical verification of records.

Nodal Officers have not maintained the prosecution registers despite
various instructions issued by CBDT.

3.2.5 Non-Maintenance of prosecution Registers

As per ITD’s instructions”, details of cases where prosecution has been
initiated should be maintained in a separate Register’’. Cases pending over
long period because of non-availability of assessee, inability to serve notice
on the accused etc may be transferred to a separate register at the instance
of the Court called the ‘Long Pending Register’. Rules and regulations for
transferring cases are prescribed in the relevant rules and practice code of
the respective State Criminal Rules of Practice”.

We sought to examine whether registers were being maintained in
prescribed formats and data on cases transferred to ‘Long Pending Register’
was indeed available with the ITD and was being regularly followed up with
the Court. This data is to be maintained to ensure monitoring of ongoing
prosecution as also long pending cases. Nodal Officer is required to maintain
such registers/data. Audit findings are summarized in Table 3.5.

® Para 34.2.1 of Chapter 9 of Manual of Office Procedure Volume Il

2 Register of pending prosecution cases prescribed in Annexure IX

2 For example Karnataka - Chapter IV of The Karnataka Criminal Rules of Practice, 1968; Kerala - Rule 36 and 37 of
The Criminal Rules of Practice (Travancore- Cochin State)

27


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Table 3.5: Maintenance and monitoring of Registers/data

States Whether all Details of cases Regular
prescribed transferred to monitoring
registers Long pending (Submission to
maintained register higher authority)

1. Andhra Pradesh v v v
2. Assam x x x
3. Bihar x x x
4. Jharkhand x x x
5. Delhi x x x
6. Gujarat x x

7. Haryana x x x
8. Himachal Pradesh x x x
9. Jammu & Kashmir x x x
10. Karnataka v v v
11. Kerala v v v
12. Madhya Pradesh x x x
13. Maharashtra x x x
14. Orissa x x x
15. Punjab x x x
16. Rajasthan x x x
17. Tamil Nadu x x x
18. Uttar Pradesh x x x
19. Uttarakhand x x x
20. West Bengal x x x

When we sought to analyse the reasons for such unreconciled data on
pending cases, we found inadequacies in the maintenance of primary record
like the Prosecution Register. We found that adequate importance was not
given to maintain registers which was designed to ensure proper monitoring
and availability of up to date details in a centralized format. In the absence of
registers, we could not derive an assurance that the data being maintained
was complete and correct and depicted the current status. Long Pending
register which was meant to focus on old cases was also not maintained in
most of the charges impeding follow up action.

3.2.6 Database of pending cases

We sought data on pending prosecution cases from the ITD as well as CBDT
for detailed analysis which is as shown below:

28


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Table 3.6: Data on pending prosecution cases

States CCIT (CCA) Pending cases as on Case records Case Cases
March 12 requisitioned records produced
CBDT Field by Audit not and
Offices available audited
1. Andhra Pradesh Hyderabad 37 38 38 0 38
2. Assam Guwahati 21 15 15 14 1
3. Bihar Patna 347 113 59 34 25
4. Delhi Delhi 192 192 103 16 87
5. Gujarat Ahmedabad 351 351 178 0 178
6. Haryana North Western 308 74 50 8 42
7. Himachal Pradesh Region, 7 7 0 7
8. Jammu & Kashmir Chandigarh 18 18 0 18
9. Punjab 193 193 82 111
10. Jharkhand Patna 0 119 119 107 12
11. Karnataka Bengaluru 50 50 50 0 50
12. Kerala Kochi 28 24 24 0 24
13. Madhya Pradesh Bhopal 88 88 88 67 21
14. Maharashtra Mumbai 374 233 173 4 169
Nagpur 80 56 2 54
Pune 156 82 41 41
15. Orissa Bhubhaneshwar 55 53 48 33 15
16. Rajasthan Jaipur 108 108 23 0 23
17. Tamil Nadu Chennai 154 127 127 0 127
18. Uttar Pradesh Kanpur 328 202 197 140 57
Lucknow 57
19. Uttarakhand Kanpur 22 22 22 15 7
20. West Bengal Kolkata 307 293 152 0 152
Total 3,063 2,320 1,822 563 1,259

Perusal of the above data revealed the following:

a.

There are 18 CsIT handling assessment in Uttar Pradesh. Based on
original records/files available with them, they reported to audit that
there are 202 cases pending in Courts, whereas CBDT has stated that
there are 385 pending cases.

In Jharkhand, of the 119 pending cases, only 12 records relating to
cases launched in FY 12 were made available. CCIT Ranchi did not
make available any records relating to prosecution other than list of
pending cases. CIT Hazaribagh stated that records were not readily
available whereas CIT Jamshedpur stated that records may be
obtained from concerned AOs as no records were maintained in CIT’s
office. However, we found that 74 and nine cases were pending in CIT
Hazaribagh and CIT Jamshedpur respectively.

29


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

c. CCIT (CCA) Bhopal did not provide data and the relevant records
inspite of several reminders during the period November 2012 to
March 2013 though the CBDT had directed for enabling the audit
study. Finally, only during May 2013 some files were made available
to us by the CsIT. In fact the office had also not responded to the
directions of the CBDT for updated information. It is not clear whether
records are available and/ or are complete in all aspects.

d. ITD in Karnataka reported (September 2013) that the number of cases
pending as of 31 March 2012 was 59 as against 50 reported earlier.

e. ITD in Orissa reported (September 2013) that the number of cases
pending as of 31 March 2012 was 71 as against 53 reported earlier.

f. ITD in Maharashtra reported (September 2013) that the number of
cases pending as of 31 March 2012 was 404 as against 233 reported
earlier.

g. ITD in West Bengal reported (September 2013) that the number of
cases pending as of 31 March 2012 was 400 as against 293 reported
earlier.

Data provided at the field level and those provided by CBDT do not match.
We were unable to ascertain the actual number of cases or the sections
under which they were being proceeded against.

ITD has not given due priority in launching of prosecution as indicated by
delay in initiation of cases and by not launching the prosecution even in
approved cases.

3.3 Initiation of prosecution cases

The Act provides that where assessee is in default of fulfillment of
obligations, even after providing reasonable opportunities, then coercive
measures including prosecution could be resorted to bring the errant
assessees to order. Procedures for prosecution have been laid out in the Act
as also various instructions/circulars issued from time to time. We sought to
examine whether ITD had followed the procedures laid out in letter and spirit
of the Act. Our study revealed the following:

3.3.1 Delay in initiation of cases

CBDT guidelines of April 2008 provide that prosecution needs to be filed
within a reasonable period and preferably within 60 days of confirmation by
the Appellate Authorities. We collected and analysed data regarding the time
gap between the commitment of offence and the date of actual initiation of

30


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

prosecution proceedings in Court. The study revealed delays ranging from 5
to 48 years as detailed below:

Table 3.7: Delay in initiation of prosecution cases

States Within time Upto 5 5-10 10-15 15-48 Total
prescribed years years years years
1. Andhra Pradesh 37 1 0 0 0 38
2. Assam 0 0 14 1 0 15
3. Bihar 13 23 14 37 26 113
4. Jharkhand 14 46 19 11 29 119
5. Delhi 0 95 42 29 26 192
6. Gujarat 09 201 96 35 24 356
7. Haryana 0 32 13 3 2 50
8. Himachal Pradesh 1 4 2 0 0 7
9. Jammu & Kashmir 0 5 1 0 0 6
10. Karnataka 0 40 9 1 0 50
11. Kerala 2 12 8 0 28
12. Madhya Pradesh 0 14 28 31 15 88
13. Maharashtra 0 248 77 34 45 404
14. Orissa 6 15 5 6 21 53
15. Punjab 0 71 47 16 59 193
16. Rajasthan 27 27 29 14 11 108
17. Tamil Nadu 0 89 32 4 2 127
18. Uttar Pradesh 1 55 64 23 59 202
19. Uttarakhand 0 4 2 1 15 22
20. West Bengal 0 249 124 32 18 423
Total 101 1,231 624 286 352 2,594

In case of Punjab, Maharashtra and Jharkhand, figures for 15-48 years include cases where no details of date of
initiation are available. In Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand dates of initiation of proceedings were not available in 60
and 15 cases respectively and date has been taken as last of the AY to which complaint relates.

The above table shows that time taken to initiate prosecution has been too
long in many cases reducing their relevance and impact (See Box 3.1).

Box 3.1: Illustrative cases on delay in initiation of prosecution case

a. In Tamil Nadu CIT Chennai, in the case of J. Devarajulu, a complaint was filed
in March 1995 for AY 84 and AY 85 u/s 276 C for unexplained investment to the
extent of = 40.50 lakhs in shares. The first Non-Bailable Warrant (NBW) was issued
in September 2003 and a second one in June 2009. A formal requisition was also
sent to the Commissioner of Police, Chennai to take action in January 2012.
Delayed action has led to protracted litigation jeopardizing the interests of|
revenue.

31


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

b. In Maharashtra CIT | Pune charge, prosecution on Kolte Shridhar Bhaurao
for AY 96 was filed in March 2010, 15 years after the commitment of offence and
seven years from the confirmation of penalty by the ITAT.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

3.3.2 Non launching of prosecution even in approved cases

Prosecution cases need to be followed closely and cases filed expeditiously
immediately after approval by the competent authorities. Though the period
of limitation u/s 468 of the IPC is not applicable to the Act, still the Courts
have ruled” that prosecution is liable to be quashed on the ground of
unreasonable delay. Box 3.2 shows that prosecution was not launched in
approved cases.

Box 3.2: Illustrative cases of non launching of prosecution in approved cases

a. In CIT, Bhubaneswar we found that in 37 cases proposed for launching of
prosecution by different AOs during the period 1974 to 2000, no decisions were
conveyed by the competent authorities in 35 cases as evidenced from records
(October 2012). Of the remaining two cases where approvals were accorded to
launch prosecution, no cases were filed.

b. CCIT Bhubaneshwar had directed CIT (Cuttack) in January 2011 to launch
prosecution in 19 cases where penalties had been confirmed in first appeal [CIT
(Appeals)]. CIT (Cuttack) in turn addressed 805 to take action in February 2011.
We found that no further action to launch prosecution has been taken even as of
December 2012.

Cc In Orissa, CIT Bhubaneshwar, the High Court acquitted the assessee,
M/s Sabitri Art Printers charged u/s 276 and 277 of the Act. Proposal for an SLP in
the Supreme Court was approved by CBDT in February 1996 but no such petition
seems to have been filed even as of October 2012 when we last examined the
records.

d. In Orissa CIT Bhubaneshwar, prosecution against M/s Palo & Co was
approved in March 1992 u/s276C and 277 for the AY 89. In June 1992, CIT,
Bhubaneswar ordered ACIT, Berhampur to file the case with jurisdictional court.
We found that no case had been filed as of October 2012 when we last examined
the records.

e. In Karnataka, Bengaluru CIT TDS charge, no prosecution case has been filed
on M/s Perfectus Technology Solutions Pvt Ltd till date (December 2012) though
approval was granted in July 2009 by CIT (TDS).

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

°° KMA Ltd v. T Sundara Rajan ITO [(1996) Tax LR 248 (Bom)]; Srinivas Pal v. Union Territory of Arunachal Pradesh
[AIR (1988) SC 1729]; Smt. Vijayashanthi v ACIT dated 04.03.2011

32


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

3.3.3. Incorrect selection and pursuance of case

In Tamil Nadu CIT Chennai charge, the case of Jagdishlal Kanyalal, a
complaint was filed in February 1992 for not obtaining income tax clearance
certificate prior to sale/transfer of property. We found that the assessee had
been declared insolvent by the Madras High Court in December 1991 itself
and all his assets had been taken over by the receiver. The property was sold
by the official assignee in August 1998. Despite this, a Proclamation was filed
in July 2009, March 2010 and the hearing with case adjournments have been
conducted up to August 2010.

3.3.4 Assessment years to which prosecution relate

We sought to analyze the assessment years to which the offence related in
the pending cases. Table 3.8 shows that very old cases are still pending.

Table 3.8: AY to which pending cases relate

States Before 1971- 1981- 1991- 2001- Not Total
1970 80 90 00 10 available
1. Andhra Pradesh 0 0 0 9 29 0 38
2. Assam 0 0 15 0 0 0 15
3. Bihar 09 0 17 76 20 0 113
4. Jharkhand 0 0 12 74 13 20 119
5. Delhi 1 25 68 40 46 12 192
6. Gujarat 0 25 153 59 43 76 356
7. Haryana 0 5 26 6 8 5 50
8. Himachal 0 0 0 0 7 0 7
Pradesh
9. Jammu & 0 0 0 2 16 0 18
Kashmir

10. Karnataka 09 09 2 12 36 09 50
11. Kerala 0 0 9 7 8 0 24
12. Madhya Pradesh 12 6 9 8 13 0 48
13. Maharashtra 13 71 173 65 63 19 404
14. Orissa 0 6 25 6 15 1 53
15. Punjab 4 20 84 36 49 0 193
16. Rajasthan 0 16 40 44 0 108
17,191 Nadu 09 5 24 96 2 09 127
18. Uttar Pradesh 1 30 102 29 35 5 202
19. Uttarakhand 0 6 8 6 2 0 22
20. West Bengal 11 50 169 18 72 9 320
Total 42 257 912 589 521 138 2,459

Initiating and sustaining prosecution in cases relating to such old assessment
years becomes difficult due to a variety of reasons. Availability of evidence as
well as witnesses is compromised when such old cases come up for hearing in
courts. The expected socio-economic impact of deterrence is also reduced.
Revenue collectable if any may also be lost due to intervening events. Under
the circumstances, CBDT may like to evaluate the continuance of such cases.

33


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

CBDT pursues wasteful cases instead of deploying its resources on fruitful
tasks.

3.4 Pursuance of Prosecution cases

3.4.1 Cases under repealed sections

The Supreme Court in the case of General Finance Company Vs. CIT”” in 2002
had ruled that continuance of proceedings was not sustainable where
prosecution had been initiated under sections which had subsequently been
repealed from the Act. Law Ministry in their opinion to the CBDT (December
2008) on pursuance of cases launched under repealed sections had
counseled that ‘prosecutions cannot be continued by invoking the provisions
of section 6 of the General Clauses Act’. Table 3.9 shows cases under repealed
section of the Act.

Table 3.9: Number of cases under repealed sections

States 276E 276DD
1. Gujarat 0 3
2. Haryana 1 5
3. Maharashtra® 1 4
4. Madhya Pradesh 0 0
5. Punjab 0 1
6. Uttar Pradesh 12 38
7. West Bengal 1 13
Total 15 64

$ No details of section available in seven cases

We found that even after 11 years of the Supreme Court judgment and five
years of opinion from the Ministry of Law, 76 cases were still being pursued
frittering away valuable time and resources of ITD. Hence ITD should initiate
the process of withdrawing prosecution under section 321 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure.

3.4.2 Cases where penalty/additions had been dropped

AOs need to closely coordinate with the relevant prosecution authorities and
keep them updated on the latest happenings in the case especially those
involving appeals on additions and levy of penalty based on which
prosecution proceedings have been initiated. The Supreme Court has held
that the matter which has been adjudicated or settled by the Tribunal need
not be dragged into criminal courts, unless and until the act of the appellant
could have been described as culpable”®. CBDT had instructed”® that where
quantum additions or penalty had been deleted by the Departmental
Appellate authorities, then steps must be taken to withdraw prosecution.

77 257 ITR 338 (2002)
25 KC Builders 265 ITR 562
* Guidelines for withdrawal of prosecution F.No.285/16/90-IT(inv)/43 dated 14.05.1996

34


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

We found that in 19 cases covering six states*° the relevant additions/
disallowances based on which prosecutions had been launched had been
deleted by appellate authorities. No updation was available with the officers
handling prosecution. Thus, inadequate coordination resulted in frittering
away of valuable resources. Some of the illustrative cases are shown in
Box 3.3.

Box 3.3: Illustrative cases where penalty/additions dropped

a. In Maharashtra Mumbai charge the ITAT in the case of M/s Bombay
Mercantile Co-operative Bank Ltd deleted the additions made in April 2005 and
the same was upheld by the High Court in July 2008. No SLP was filed with the
Supreme Court as per the legal opinion (December 2008). However, ITD persisted
with the prosecution proceedings till the case was disposed of in favour of
assessee in April 2012. Records revealed that 26 hearings took place from the
date of decision of ITAT between August 2007 to April 2012.

b. In Maharashtra Mumbai charge, the ITAT in the case of M/s Vijay Sarvgod
deleted (Sep 2002) the additions made in the assessment proceedings on merits.
ITD did not prefer any appeal against this order for five years. Subsequently,
appeal filed in the High Court in November 2007 was rejected as time barred.
Even after a lapse of 10 years of the deletion of quantum addition by ITAT, ITD
persisted with the prosecution proceedings. As per records*’ 56 hearings took
place between September 2002 and June 2010.

c In Tamil Nadu, Chennai charge the ITAT in case of M. Nandagopal*
deleted the additions and penalties levied in the assessment. ITD’s appeal to the
High Court as well as SLP to the Supreme Court was rejected (July 2001) on
merits. Even after the dismissal of SLP, approximately 30 hearings were held upto
March 2013 with ACMM, Chennai without bringing the fact of rejection of
appeals to their notice. A non-bailable warrant (NBW) was also issued in August
2011 against the assessee. Even after dismissal of SLP in July 2001, the Senior
Special Public Prosecutor, in his opinion, stated that this is a fit case for pursuing
the Prosecution proceedings, in December 2001.

d. In Delhi CIT | charge, the case of K. P. Kumar, for AY 75, prosecution was
initiated u/s 276C(1)/277 on the basis of raid conducted by Custom Official in the
year 1994. However, the additions made in the assessments based on Customs
raid was set aside by the ITAT in October 1993 itself. ITD has not contested the
orders of the ITAT. The complaint was finally dismissed as withdrawn in January
2012 after about 18 years.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

3० Delhi-1, Gujarat-6, Haryana-1, Maharashtra-8, Tamil Nadu-1, Uttarakhand-1, West Bengal-1 Total 19 cases. In
Gujarat, of the six cases, in three cases even the Court had ordered discharge but still cases were shown as pending.
* Bill submitted by the Prosecution Counsel

37 PAN:AADPN2678L(EOCC No. 51/92 & 194/92)

35


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

3.4.3. Cases on dead assessees

Death of the assessee abates the prosecution proceedings though
proceedings for tax recovery may continue if there exists a tax demand and
assessee has left behind an estate (See Box 3.4).

Box 3.4: Prosecution proceedings against dead assessees

a. In Maharashtra CIT-13 Mumbai charge, the case of M/s Bombay Woven
Wire Netting Works and J. Gandhi prosecution proceedings have not abated even
though the only known director/partner died in 2002 resulting in infructuous
expenditure on legal fees and wastage of valuable resources of the department
and that of the Court.

b. In Madhya Pradesh, CIT Ujjain charge, the cases of M/s Ramgopal Bapulal
(Firm) was being pursued though working partner had died in May 2005. Similarly,
case of Ratanlal Hargundas was being pursued before CJM Indore though
assessee died in November 2000. Incidentally, ITAT had also deleted the additions
based on which prosecution was launched.

Cc In Rajasthan, CIT Jaipur charge, the prosecution against Dr. G.D.Tripathi
Pilani was launched in March 2006 for offences relating to AY 98 u/s 276C and
277. Though assessee was dead as of March 2013, prosecution case is still being
pursued before Economic Offences Court, Jaipur. Similarly, prosecution case of
Surendra Gadia launched in May 2010 for offences relating to AY 01 was being
pursued before Economic Offences Court, Jaipur though assessee was dead as of
March 2013. In CIT Central, Jaipur charge, prosecution against Shyam Sunder
Tantia, Sriganganagar, was launched in March 2011 for offences relating to AY 04
to AY 10 u/s 276CC. The case was being pursued though the assessee was dead 35
of October 2012.

d. In Gujarat CCIT (CCA) Ahmedabad charge, prosecution in the case of
Narainsingh G. Rajput launched for offences relating to AY 86 and AY 76 were
being pursued before Economic Offences Court though assessee was dead as of
October 2010.

e. In Tamil Nadu CCIT (CCA) Chennai charge, prosecution in the case of
Narayanaprasad Gupta launched u/s 276C(1) for offences relating to AY 80 were
being pursued before Economic Offences Court though assessee was dead as of
August 2012.

f. In Punjab CIT | Ludhiana charge, prosecution was launched in the cases of
Vijay Tangari, Gudmandi, Tek Chand, Ludhiana and Ram Murti Sood, Ludhiana in
March 2008, March 2005 and July 1987 respectively. The cases have been
indicated as pending as of January 2013 though the assessees were dead.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

36



Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

3.4.4 Transfer of cases between income tax jurisdictions though
prosecution case pending

Section 127 of the Act provides that the assessment jurisdiction of an
assessee can be changed after due process. However, such action when
prosecution has been launched would vitiate the proceedings as AO filing the
suit is a party to the prosecution. Moreover, all aspects of the investigation,
filing of case, attending to Courts etc would have to be done by the initiating
AO.

We found original income tax jurisdictions were being changed even though
prosecution cases had already been initiated in the Courts.

Table 3.10: Transfer of cases between different IT jurisdiction

Assessee Original IT Prosecution Transferred
jurisdiction pending to
1. Shaw Wallace & Co CITI Kolkata CMM & MM CIT Ill
Ltd Kolkata Bengaluru
2. Rajeev Chawla CIT Bhopal ACMM Bhopal CIT Indore
3. Vijay Kumar Patil CIT Bhopal ACMM Bhopal CIT | Pune
4, Salimar Housing CIT Bhopal ACMM Bhopal CIT | Mumbai
Finance Ltd

We found that the case of M/s Shaw Wallace & Co. Ltd. was not on the
pending list at CCIT (CCA), Bengaluru. We were unable to ascertain either
from CCIT (CCA) Kolkata or from CCIT (CCA), Bengaluru as to who was
pursuing the case and if so, what was its status.

Further, cases mentioned as transferred from CIT Bhopal (Sr No 3 & 4) were
not available in the list of pending cases from ITD Maharashtra (December
2012). Thus we were unable to ascertain as to who is actually handling or the
current status of the case.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

CBDT did not utilize the prosecution mechanism for ensuring tax
compliance under section 276CC.

3.4.5 Cases under section 276CC

The Act provides that where a person willfully fails to furnish a return of
income even though he has taxable income and relevant taxes have not been
paid, he is liable for prosecution. This is intended to ensure that assessees
voluntarily comply with the Act. We found that there were 316 pending cases
initiated u/s 276CC for failure to furnish income tax return (See table 3.11).

37


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Table 3.11: Pending cases for failure to furnish ITR

States Number of Subsequent Returns for AY 10 to 12
cases returns

1. Andhra Pradesh 2 v v

2. Bihar 10 x x

* Delhi? 24 x x

4. Gujarat 54 x x

5. Haryana 3 x x

6. Jammu & Kashmir 10 x x

7. Karnataka® 18

8. Madhya Pradesh 12 x x

9. Maharashtra* 31 x x

10. Orissa 2 x x

11. Punjab 10 x x

12. Rajasthan 36 v v

13. Tamil Nadu 10 v v

14. Uttar Pradesh 46 x x

15. Uttarakhand 5 x x

16. West Bengal 43 x x

5 Details of subsequent returns were available only in eight cases. In three cases returns were not

being filed.

@ Subsequent returns were filed in seven cases, not filed in eight cases and no information in three
cases.
* Subsequent returns was filed only in two cases.

As penal provisions are intended to not only punish wrong doings of the
doers but also instill in them the regimen of voluntary compliance, we
attempted to examine whether these assessees had filed their income tax
returns during subsequent years after initiation of prosecution. We also
checked whether these assessees had come into the mainstream of tax
payers in terms of filing returns during the latest three years (AY 10 to AY 12).

We could not succeed in our attempts as no such details were forthcoming
from the available records with officers handling prosecution in CCIT/CIT
offices. It is not clear to ITD as to where assessees are currently assessed to
tax or whether they have filed the relevant income tax returns during the last
three years. Thus, the very purpose of mainstreaming errant tax payers was
not achieved.

Prosecution cases are being pursued on companies which have already
been liquidated or have been declared sick by BIFR.

3.4.6 Cases against liquidated companies

The Companies Act, 1956 provides for winding up a company under various
circumstances. In special circumstances enumerated in the Companies Act,
the proceedings are monitored by the jurisdictional High Courts. A company

38


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

may be wound up for ‘commercial insolvency’®®. In a winding up certain
unsecured debts like revenues, taxes, cess, rates and duties get preferential
payments™ over other debts.

Section 178 provides that AO is required to notify the Official Liquidator
regarding the amounts sufficient to discharge tax obligations of the
liquidated company. The Liquidator is personally liable for the company’s tax
dues after intimation by AO subject to the priorities of any other dues.

We found that in cases where income tax prosecution is pending, the
jurisdictional High Courts have already passed orders for winding up of
companies. Details of a few cases are given in Table 3.12.

Table 3.12: Pending prosecutions cases in liquidated companies

Assessee Pending Liquidation particulars

1. Fit Tight Nut and Bolts Pvt. CCIT(CCA) Mumbai Vide CP No 519/1985 dated
Ltd 18.01.1987

2. Madhav Lal & Co Pvt. Ltd. CCIT (CCA) Mumbai Vide CP No 407/1985 dated
12.02.1986

3. Megaware Computers Ltd. CCIT(CCA)Mumbai Vide CP No 79/1991 dated
17.07.1998

4. Esskay Pharmaceuticals | CCIT (CCA) Vide Case No 289/1997 dated
Ltd. Ahmedabad 11.03.2004

Source: List of companies in liquidation as on 30.11.2008 www.companyliquidator.gov.in

The ITD is still following up these cases in Prosecution Courts without actual
updates on their status. In the absence of primary data with the ITD, there
was nothing on record to show that revenue claims®® had indeed been lodged
with the Official Liquidator during the winding up proceedings, thus
jeopardizing the interests of revenue.

3.4.7 Cases against companies under Board for Industrial and Financial
Reconstruction-BIFR

The Government, in order to tackle the problem of industrial sickness, set up

BIFR under the purview of Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act,

1985 (SICA). It is a quasi-judicial body under Ministry of Finance, for revival

and rehabilitation of potentially sick undertakings and for closure/liquidation

of non-viable and sick industrial companies.

We found that in the following cases where income tax prosecution is
pending, the BIFR has already passed orders for closure/liquidation. Details of
a few cases are given below:

3 Section 433(e) of Companies Act 1956
* Section 529A and 530 of Companies Act 1956
* Creditor petitions

39


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Table 3.13: Pending prosecution cases where closure/liquidation order
passed by BIFR

Assessee Pending Liquidation particulars

1. Eastern Paper Mills Ltd. CCIT(CCA) Kolkata Vide Case No 3/1989 dated
12.11.1991

2. Metal Box CCIT(CCA) Kolkata Vide Case No 34/1988 dated
07.09.2009

3. Electra (India) Ltd. CCIT(CCA) Kanpur Vide Case No 134/1998 dated
07.08.2000

4... J.K.Synthetics CCIT(CCA) Kanpur Vide Case No 22/1998 dated
23.05.2012

5. Hari Om Steel Pvt. Ltd. CCIT (CCA) Kanpur Vide CP No 234/2002 dated
25.02.2013

Declared sick in November 2006

6. Magnesite & Minerals CCIT (CCA) Lucknow Vide CP No 302/1987 dated
24.08.2000

7. Apex Electrical Pvt. Ltd. CCIT(CCA) Vide Case No 223/2002 dated
Ahmedabad 17.04.2013

8. Esskay Pharmaceuticals CCIT (CCA) Vide Case No 215/1998 dated
Ltd. Ahmedabad 09.04.2003

9. Hynoup Food & Oil CCIT (CCA) Vide Case No 130/2003 dated
Industries Ahmedabad 10.10.2006

10. Labh Construction & Ind. CCIT (CCA) Vide Case No 62/2007 dated
Ltd. Ahmedabad 05.05.2011

11. Sarabhai Machinery CCIT (CCA) Vide Case No 143/1998 dated
Baroda Ahmedabad 18.09.1990

12. Trisuns Chemicals Ind. CCIT (CCA) Vide Case No 85/2006 dated
Pvt. Ltd. Ahmedabad 23.12.2009

13. Dairy Den Ltd. CCIT (CCA) Vide Case No 169/2005 dated
Ahmedabad 20.09.2006

14. Incorporated Engineers CCIT (CCA) Vide Case No 221/2004 dated
Ltd. Ahmedabad 21.08.2006

15. Jyothi Chemicals & CCIT (CCA) Vide Case No 211/1988 dated
Industries Ltd. Ahmedabad 31.08.1994

Source: http://www. bifr.nic.in/asp/list.asp

The status of tax dues on these companies is unclear. The jurisdictional
officer in CCIT (CCA) Kolkata stated that no records in the case (SI No 1 & 2)
were available. The office stated (July 2013) that the matter had been taken
up with jurisdictional Commissioners for data.

Cases referred to the BIFR ought to have been appropriately dealt with in the
Prosecution Court. Failure to do so not only resulted in wastage of resources
for following up cases but also resulted clogging up of judiciary in lower
courts.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that no recovery proceedings can be
initiated in respect of such cases as they are under the purview of Sick
Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985. They further stated that
action would be taken to file miscellaneous application under the SICA
seeking to lift the embargo on recovery proceedings. In respect of the case
relating to Magnesite & Minerals, the relevant records are being traced.

40


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

3.4.8 Other cases

a. Cases on assessees who had left India

In Madhya Pradesh, CIT Ujjain charge, two cases of F.A. Noorie was being
pursued though, assessee had left the country for Muscat in 1997 itself.

b. Cases on incorrect persons

In Jharkhand, CIT Hazaribagh charge prosecution of Ram Kumar Ojha was
launched in the Economic Offences Court of Dhanbad u/s 277 for AY 90
during FY 91. Tax demands of हैं 46.15 lakh for four assessment years were
pending [रे 36.08 lakh being interest u/s 220(2)]. As per records in ITD, the
offender had also been raided by the State Government authorities but the
search party did not recover any valuable belongings. A perusal of the
records reveal that the jurisdictional ITO, based on visits and enquiries, had
reported to CBDT in July 2004 that the offender had become mentally
retarded and the family had no source of income. It was also suggested that
action may be taken to write off the demands on humanitarian grounds.
Inspite of protracted correspondence, the prosecution case is still pending
with no further action. As per the Prosecution Counsel (July 2009), the case
has been disposed of in May 2008.

The basis on which prosecution was launched is unclear as even on date of
launching prosecution, assessee had no ascertainable assets which otherwise
could have been attached for tax recovery.

c. Proposal for prosecution was sent twice in same case

Section 26 of the General Clauses Act®® provides that an offender shall not be
liable to be prosecuted or punished twice for the same offence. Supreme
Court reinforced the applicability of this provision to prosecution under the
Act 4507,

In Bihar CIT-Il, Patna, prosecution against Ramavtar Singh for AY 85 and AY
89 was initiated once again u/s 276C in June 2011 without taking into
cognizance the earlier case*’ filed in 1992. No reasons were forthcoming
either from the records or any specific reply provided to the audit query.

d. Launching prosecution though demand paid

The Act provides that prosecution for an offence shall be at the instance of
the jurisdictional Chief Commissioner or Commissioner after due process. It
should be discernible from the order sanctioning prosecution that the
concerned authority has applied his mind on the materials available to him in
a substantive, real and honest manner (See Box 3.5).

36 Applicable to all prosecution cases including those under Income Tax Act 1961
°” Ts Baliah V. TS Rangachari, ITO Madras 72 ITR787 (SC) 1968
38 Complaint case No. 424(C)92 and 423(C)92

41


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Box 3.5: Illustrative case on prosecution case though demand paid

In Bihar CIT-I] Patna prosecution against Raj Kumari Kataruka was launched in
March 2006 for non payment of tax of ~ 10.36 lakh u/s 276C. We found that
assessee had already paid all the demands as of February 2006 itself and the ITD
issued a ‘No demand Certificate’ in September 2006 at the instance of the
assessee, Departmental Standing Counsel had also pointed out the fact only in
February 2007 indicating that there was no application of mind at any stage viz.
either during approval by CCIT or before filing of the case by Standing Counsel.
Case is still ongoing.

e. Cases against persons not related to offence

As per section 278B(1) of the Act, prosecution on offences committed by
companies shall be launched against the person responsible for conduct of
business of the company. Details of the responsible person must be correctly
ascertained and proceeded against (See Box 3.6).

Box 3.6: Illustration on case against person not related to the offence

In Karnataka, CIT TDS, Bengaluru prosecution initiated against Shashi Nambiar,
Managing Director of M/s BST Limited for the period FY 01 was dismissed as
Shashi Nambiar was not the Managing Director (responsible officer) during the
relevant period.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

3.5 Interface with Courts

Box 3.7: The Supreme Court’s guidelines for expeditious disposal of cases - A. R.
Antulay's case”?

Fair, just and reasonable procedure implicit in Article 21 of the Constitution
creates a right in the accused to be tried speedily. It is in the interest of all
concerned that the guilt or innocence of the accused is determined as quickly as
possible. Right to speedy trial encompasses all stages, viz. investigation, inquiry,
trial, appeal, revision and retrial.

The accused’s concerns underlying speedy trial are:

worry, anxiety, expense and disturbance to his vocation and peace, resulting from
an unduly prolonged investigation, inquiry or trial should be minimal; and

undue delay may result in impairment of the ability to defend himself due to non
availability of witness.

Non-availability of witnesses, disappearance of evidence by lapse of time really
work against the interest of the prosecution. As is often pointed out, "delay is a
known defence tactic". Since the burden of proving the guilt of the accused lies
upon the prosecution, delay ordinarily prejudices the prosecution. Therefore, in
every case, where the Right to speedy trial is alleged to have been infringed, the
first question to be put and answered is who is responsible for the delay?

3 (1992) 1 SCC 225

42



Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Courts have ruled that speedy trial is the right of the accused and no efforts
should be spared to decide the guilt or otherwise of the accused. ITD’s
instructions provide that liaison should be maintained by the Nodal Officer
with the Complainant officer, AO and the Departmental witnesses so that
unnecessary adjournments from ITD’s side in the prosecution cases are
avoided. The Nodal Officer should keep track of stay granted by the higher
Courts and get them vacated on time.

Ministry in their submission to the Public Accounts Committee had stated
that slow disposal of cases was on account of overburdening of the Courts,
low priority to tax evasion cases, frequent adjournments taken etc.

In the light of the above, we sought to examine the interplay between the
jurisdictional Prosecution Officers on the following criteria:

Availability of data on the Court proceedings
Attendance to the Court proceedings
Appearance of Departmental witnesses
Interface with Prosecution Counsels

e. Follow up on the Court proceedings

poop

3.5.1 Pendency of cases at various courts

ITD has initiated prosecution proceedings in various courts, details of which
are as follows:

Table 3.14: Pendency of cases in various courts (as of March 2012)

States Upto 5 5-10 10-15 15-48 Total
years years years years

1. Andhra Pradesh 38 09 0 0 38
2. Assam 0 0 0 15 15
3. Bihar 10 11 6 86 113
4. Jharkhand 12 0 7 100 119
5. Delhi 56 62 13 61 192
6. Gujarat 83 42 14 217 356
7. Haryana® 9 4 1 36 50
8. Himachal Pradesh 5 2 09 0 7
9. Jammu & Kashmir 7 0 0 18
10. Karnataka 38 10 2 0 50
11. Kerala 16 1 0 6 23
12. Madhya Pradesh® 13 19 4 48 88
13, Maharashtra® 85 46 23 250 404
14. Orissa® 15 0 0 38 53
15. Punjab® 40 20 9 124 193
16. Rajasthan* 55 29 3 21 108
17. Tamil Nadu 2 6 71 48 127
18, Uttar Pradesh® 20 26 17 139 202
19. Uttarakhand? 3 2 2 15 22
20. West Bengal 13 60 30 322 425
Total 530 341 202 1,530 2,603

@ Information relating to 40 cases not provided by ITD Madhya Pradesh
$ Cases above 15 years include cases where no details of date of initiation are available

43


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

The data shows that majority of the cases are pending for more than 15 years
in the Courts and have no contemporary relevance. As cases are initiated
after a lapse of time, their further delay in the Courts due to various reasons
vitiates the entire process making it meaningless. Delay raises doubts on the
veracity and sustainability of cases apart from indicating the performance
efficiency of the prosecution process and machinery in the ITD. Ministry may
like to analyse the reasons for these delays.

Nodal Officers or ITD’s nominees are not attending regular hearing in the
Courts impacting disposal of cases.

3.5.2 Appearances in hearings

The Court may grant time to the parties, and may adjourn the hearing for
reason to be recorded in writing, if sufficient cause is shown; provided that
no such adjournment shall be granted more than three times to a party
during hearing of the suit”. We sought to examine whether the ITD had a
system in place to see that the Court proceedings do not prolong due to
Departmental inadequacies.

Table 3.15: Details of the Court’s proceedings of prosecution cases

States Ready availability of information regarding
Current status Hearings Hearings Hearings
of case with and attended by attended by
designated adjournmet Prosecution Nodal
officer Counsel Officer
1. Andhra Pradesh v v v v
2. Assam x x Not Available x
3. Bihar x x x x
4. Jharkhand x x x x
5. Delhi v v v v
6. Gujarat x x x x
7. Haryana x x x x
8. Himachal x x x x
Pradesh
9. Jammu & x x x x
Kashmir
10. Karnataka v x v x
11. Kerala v v v v
12. Madhya Pradesh x x x x
13. Maharashtra x x x x
14. Orissa x x x x
15. Punjab x x x x
16. Rajasthan® x x x x
17. Tamil Nadu v v v x
18. Uttar Pradesh x x x x
19. Uttarakhand x x x x
20. West Bengal x x x x

$ No details made available by the ITD

“ Rule 1 of Order XVIl of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (C.P.C.) - Adjournments

44


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Our examination revealed the followings:

a. In West Bengal charge, a crosscheck of 39 cases records revealed that
the last date of hearing was prior to FY 2000. What happened
thereafter is not on record. Though these cases have been shown as
pending by the ITD in West Bengal, in the absence of updated records
or follow up details, it is not possible to comment whether these
cases are ongoing, stayed, disposed of or withdrawn. Efforts by the
Nodal Officer for following up with the Court to expedite hearing is
also not available.

b. In Maharashtra, the ITD had maintained note sheet of court
proceedings in 18 charges. Table 3.16 reveals the test check by the

audit.
Table 3.16: Details of Prosecution cases in Maharashtra
Charge FY No. Court hearings, attendance and adjournments
of Total Prosecution Nodal Adjournment

cases Counsel officer 5
णशा। FY 10 11 36 4 4 NA
FY 11 10 40 2 2 NA
FY 12 11 47 10 10 NA

CCcIT II FY 10 20 129 124 4 95
FY11 21 115 112 2 82

FY 12 19 118 110 1 77

CCIT शा FY 10 39 137 135 19 2
FY 11 41 141 137 17 3

FY 12 41 153 149 21 2

CCIT XI FY 10 11 103 103 30 4
FY11 12 125 125 33 4

FY 12 14 220 171 44 3

CCIT XIII FY 10 8 101 93 09 3
Fy-11 10 115 107 0 3

FY 12 10 120 116 0 12

Adjournments due to non availability of witness/Prosecution counsel. NA - not available

Analysis of the above data indicates:

a. Nodal officers or their nominees are not attending the hearings on a
regular basis. Prosecution Counsels have not been attending all the
hearings.

b. Adjournments need to be analysed in detail for expediting the Court
process.

ITD has poor records maintenance and inadequate monitoring of
prosecution cases pending in the Courts.
3.5.3 Cases pending in the High Courts

As per records made available to audit by ITD, 167 cases are pending at the
various High Courts. We sought to examine the status of these cases.

45


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

We found that the status of these cases like last and next hearing, stage of
cases and other related information were not available with the ITD. In the
absence of updated information, we attempted checking with the website of
the respective High Courts and assessment records available with AO.

Table 3.17: Cases pending in High Courts

States Cases in High Court

Updated data readily available No of cases
1. Andhra Pradesh v No cases
2. Assam x Not available
3. Bihar x 62
* Delhi? x 21
5. Gujarat x Not available
6. Haryana v 11
7. Himachal Pradesh x 0
8. Jammu & Kashmir x Not available
9. Jharkhand x Not available
10. Karnataka x 2
11. Kerala x 8
2 Madhya Pradesh” x 18
13. Maharashtra x Not available
14. Orissa x 2
15. Punjab x 23
16. Rajasthan x Not available
17. Tamil Nadu v 2
18. Uttar Pradesh x Not available
19. Uttarakhand x Not available
20. West Bengal x 18

Total 167

$ Of the total 192 cases pending prosecution, details were received only in 90 cases of which 21 are
stayed by the High Courts

% Of the total 88 cases pending prosecution, details were received only in 47 cases of which 18 are
stayed by the High Courts

Important function of the Nodal Officer inter alia includes liaison with the
Complainant officer, AO and the Departmental witness to avoid unnecessary
delays and keeping track of stay granted by the Courts and get them vacated
in time. The CCIT (CCA) is also required to closely monitor the progress in
pending cases. We found that no such attention was being accorded to cases
that are purported to have been stayed by the jurisdictional High Courts. In
many states there was no data as to the stage at which the case has reached.
Some of the cases are illustrated in Box 3.8.

Box 3.8: Illustrative cases on inadequacies in monitoring

a. In Kerala charge, when ITD sought data from Prosecution Counsel on cases
stayed by the High Court. He in turn requested the ITD to provide details of the
same. Our independent examination in six cases purported to be pending in High
Court beyond ten years revealed that five cases had already been disposed of by
the High Court.

46


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

b. In Bihar, Patna, the orders of the Economic Offences Court (March 2006) on
M/s V. Kumar & Co. had been quashed by the High Court in December 2009. ITD
accepted the decision of the High Court and no SLP was filed. However, the case is
still shown as pending as of November 2012. Further, though 62 cases were
pending in the High Courts“, 19 cases had been shown as disposed of in reports
(October 2012) to CBDT.

c In Maharashtra CIT (TDS) Mumbai charge, in the case of M/s Pharmax India
Ltd. the Mumbai High Court had dismissed the case in April 2004. Prior to this, the
offence had been compounded in January 2003 itself. The jurisdictional AO had
also requested for withdrawing the case. Still the case is being shown as pending
and being pursued’.

d. In Delhi CIT ॥ charge, the case of M/s Citi Bank filed with Additional Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate (ACMM) Delhi in March 1990 for the AY 85 was kept
pending as stayed by the Delhi High Court. The case was pending in the lower
court for want of order of the High Court as of January 2013, despite a lapse of 22
years.

e. In Delhi CIT III charge, the case of M/s S.N. Bhatia & Co. Pvt. Ltd. filed with
ACMM Delhi in March 1990 for the AY 82. Trial Court ruled in favour of revenue in
March 1991. On appeal by the assessee, the Delhi High Court set aside the orders
of the Trial Court in November 2011. However, the case is still shown as pending in
lower Court as of January 2013.

f. In Delhi CIT Ill charge, the case of M/s R.N. Sahni & Others filed with
ACMM Delhi in March 1990 for the AY 90 for wrongful claim of depreciation in
income tax assessment. On appeal, the ITAT set aside the penalties (November
2001) imposed during the assessment. Further appeal by revenue was set aside by
the Delhi High Court in March 2009. Thus, penalties levied in the assessment
based on which prosecution had been launched were set aside. However, the
related prosecution proceedings are still shown pending in lower court as of
January 2013.

8. In Punjab CIT Bathinda charge, prosecution in the case of M/s G.S. Arora &
Sons for additions and penalties relating to AY 89 was launched u/s 276C/277 and
the case is shown as pending in the High Court of Punjab and Haryana. We found”?
that additions/penalties had already been set aside by the High Court in its
decision of August 2010“. As the additions/penalties have been set aside,
prosecution on the same would be unsustainable. Still no action has been taken to
settle the case.

h. In CIT | Ahmedabad, criminal prosecution in the case of M/s Ochhavlal &
Co and its partners was launched in March 1984 u/s 276C and 277 of the Act for
concealment of income. Pending proceedings in the Economic Offences Court, the

* As per letter of Prosecution Counsel

* As evidenced from file notings of July 2011 that case is adjourned.

“ Website of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana (http://lobis.nic.in/phhc/showfile.php?sno=0)
“ITA No 256 of 2003 dated 30.08.2010.

47


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

assessee filed an application offering the concealed income to tax under an
Amnesty Scheme announced in February 1986”° and paid the relevant taxes’®. The
application of the assessee was rejected by the ITD on the ground that the
concealed income was detected by the ITD and not a voluntary disclosure by the
assessee. On appeal by the assessee, the Gujarat High Court ruled that the
rejection was ultra vires of the Amnesty Scheme and directed the ITD to
reconsider the application of the assessee afresh vide order of December 1998.
We found that nothing is forthcoming from the records on action taken on the
directions of the High Court of Gujarat. Even as of November 2009, CCIT (CCA)
Ahmedabad was seeking clarity from the CBDT about action to be taken in the
case. The case is still pending (March 2013) inspite of actionable directions by the
High Court of Gujarat in December 1998 itself.

i. In Jharkhand CIT Jamshedpur, charge prosecution against M/s Tata Robins
Frazer complaint, was filed before the Special Court (Economic Offences) at
Jamshedpur [Case No. C/I 441 of 1992 June 20, 1992] based on additions and
disallowances made in the assessment for AY 84. On appeal by the assessee the
quantum additions were set aside and penalty modified. Based on this, assessee
filed an application with the High Court of Jharkhand for quashing the criminal
proceedings pending in the Economic Offences Court, Jamshedpur. The High Court
based on fact ruled in January 2005 that the original order of assessment having
been modified the criminal proceeding pending before the Court of Special Judge
(Economic Offence) at Jamshedpur is quashed. However, ITD Jharkhand has stated
(January 2013) that prosecution is still pending in Economic Offences Court.

j- In Jharkhand CIT Jamshedpur, charge prosecution against M/s Jamshedpur
Engineering and Machine Manufacturing Co Private Limited (JEMCO) was
launched vide Complaint Case No. 1 of 1994 u/s 276C and 277 of the Act based on
additions and disallowances made in assessment for AY 90. Patna High Court vide
its order of February 1995 set aside the case against the Directors of the Company,
as there is no averment that any of these Directors was in charge of, or
responsible for the conduct of the business of the company at the relevant time.
As such, on this ground, the prosecution of the Directors for the offence u/s 276९
and 277 of the Act is not permissible in law and, accordingly, the same is quashed.
JEMCO got merged with The Indian Steel & Wire Products Ltd (ISWP) and became
its division in 1990. In December 2003, ISWP along with JEMCO was taken over by
Tata Steel as its subsidiary. However, ITD Jharkhand has stated (January 2013) that
prosecution is still pending in Economic Offences Court.

k. In West Bengal CCIT IV Kolkata charge, prosecution launched on
M/s Hanuman Sugar Industries Limited in 1985 u/s 276B and 278B for offences
relating to AY 79 to AY 83 has been quashed by the jurisdictional High Court.
However, ITD West Bengal has stated (January 2013) that prosecution is still
pending in Economic Offences Court.

“ The scheme was notified on 14-2-1986 to be effective from 17-2-1986 vide Circular No.451 dt 17.02.1986
*° ITO Ward 2(2) Ahmedabad letter to CCIT | Anmedabad dated 14.10.2008

48



Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

1. In West Bengal CCIT II Kolkata charge, prosecution launched on M/s Iron Tea
Trading Co. Limited in March 1991 u/s 277 for offences relating to AY 87 has been
quashed by the jurisdictional High Court. However, ITD Jharkhand has stated
(January 2013) that prosecution is still pending in Economic Offences Court.

m. In Haryana CCIT NWR charge, the cases of M/s Shiv Kumar Ramesh Kumar,
Sirsa; M/s Chaudhary Cotton Ginning & Processing Mill, Dabwali and
M/s Dashmesh Ice Factory, Nilokheri were still being shown as pending even
though the High Court of Punjab and Haryana had disposed of these cases in April
2005, April 2005 and November 2001 respectively.

n. In Punjab CIT Jalandhar charge, prosecution launched u/s 276B and 277 in
the case of Ashwani Shoor and Avatar Chand have already been disposed by the
Punjab and Haryana High Court vide orders of March 20097 and June 2007
respectively. In the case of M/s Dua Karyana Store, the High Court has disposed
the case in July 20127 whereas the same is still being shown as pending as of Jan
2013.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

3.5.4 Disposed cases still being pursued

As no prosecution files were forthcoming from ITD Jharkhand and ITD
Haryana, we attempted to verify the status of cases with the jurisdictional
Economic Offences Court.

We found from the list of 119 live cases provided in January 2013 by CCIT
Ranchi that 42 cases relating to CIT Hazaribagh had already been disposed of
by the Economic Offences Court, Dhanbad as of 2005 itself. No such status is
available with ITD Jharkhand.

We found from the list of 50 live cases provided in January 2013 by CCIT
(NWR), Haryana that five ८5९५१ had already been disposed of by the
Economic Offences Court, Sirsa earlier to 2004 itself. However, these cases
are still been shown as pending.

3.5.5 Non production of evidence in Court

Section 101 of the Evidence Act, 1872-Burden of proof explains that
‘Whoever desires any Court to give judgment as to any liability dependent on
the existence of facts which he asserts must prove that those facts exist’.
Thus the burden of providing adequate and complete proof lies on the ITD
when it initiates proceedings to prosecute a person (See Box 3.9).

# Criminal revision 2403 of 2004/CRR 2404 of 2004.

“ 492 MA of 2000.

Criminal revision 155 of 2006.

°°CIT Rohtak - M/s Vasudev Chunnilal Rewari (Oct 2001); M/s Raj Metal, Rewari (Oct 2002); M/s Paras & Co,
Mahendragarh (June 2004); CIT Hissar — M/s Harinder Singh & Co. Bhiwani (Jan 2003); and CIT Karnal —
M/s Aggarwal Rice Mills Nising (March 2002)

49


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Box 3.9: Illustrative cases where ITD failed to provide evidence

a In Uttar Pradesh CIT | Agra charge, in the case of Goverdhan Lal Sachdeva,
prosecution was launched for AY 03 u/s 276C/277 in November 2006. ITD was
unable to produce the required evidence in the Court and hence evidence in the
case was stopped by May 2008 u/s 244 of the Code of Criminal procedure. No
further action is forthcoming.

b. In Karnataka, CIT Ill Bengaluru charge, the prosecution case of
M/s S.S.S. Projects Ltd filed in March 2009 has been adjourned ten times for
want of production of evidence by the ITD. Prosecution Counsel as late as
December 2012 was requesting the ITD to make available relevant documents for
production in Court.

The above cases not only depicted the inadequacy in monitoring but also the
poor coordination between the Counsels and ITD resulting in delay in
disposing the cases.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

3.5.6 Cases pending for want of updates

In Delhi CIT ॥ charge the case of Inder Singh Kohli, HUF for the AY 95 was
initiated in March 1998 for concealment of income wherein a penalty was
imposed. On appeal by the assessee, CIT (Appeals) in April 1999 deleted the
penalty based on which prosecution had been initiated. ITD challenged the
order before the ITAT in July 1999 and the ACMM (September 2000)
adjourned the proceedings till the decision of the ITAT. Till October 2009, the
outcome of the decision was not furnished to the Counsel. No further action
has been taken (January 2013). ITD stated that current status of appeal is
being updated (February 2013).

In Jharkhand CIT Ranchi charge, prosecution against Humanyu Ahmad, Gaya
was launched in January 1984 in the EOC, Patna. The EOC sought original
sanction order for prosecution issued u/s 279(1) which is still to be provided
as of May 2013.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.
Poor record maintenance and delay in timely production of evidences has
led to acquittal of assessees in prosecution related offences.

3.6 Analysis of disposed cases

A large number of cases have resulted in acquittal of assessees as in a
criminal petition the standard of evidence is very high and the offence has to
be proved beyond reasonable doubt. Therefore, robust record maintenance,
safeguarding and timely production of evidence, adequate education of

50


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

witnesses on the case and rigorous coordination of ITD with all concerned is
required. Our examination of few disposed cases revealed the following:

Table 3.18.: Illustration of disposed cases

Assessee Case details Audit Observation
Bihar
1. Yogendra AY 76 EOC No 133C/88 No record furnished to Prosecution
Prasad Counsel resulting in acquittal by the

Court.

Maharashtra

2. Dynacraft

CIT (TDS), Mumbai Case No

Neither was Prosecution Counsel

Machines Co 218 to 222/S/92 AY 81 to present nor could the ITD Officer make
AY 84 relevant submissions resulting in
dismissal (August 2007).
Delhi
3. Ajay Multi AY 85 to AY 87 u/s 276C (2) Dismissed the case (April 2012) as ITD
Project Pvt. was launched in 1993 failed to produce the records in
Ltd involving 30 complaints original even after several

4. Smt. Vimla
Devi Sethi

5. Sarit Kumar
Jain

6. M/s Steri
Mould (P) Ltd

7. M/sD.D.
Kochar & Sons

Accused apprehended with
unaccounted Indian and
Foreign currency (% 4.16
lakh). Prosecution u/s 276C
and 277 for the AY 90
launched in the year 1991.

Six complaints were filed in
March 1987 relating to
non-payment of tax,
interest and penalty. Three
complaints filed for non-

accountal of advance
payments for sale of
property.

AY 99 for the offences u/s
276C (1)/277 r.w.s 278B in
2004

AY 77 and AY 78 for
offences u/s 276C/277
launched in 1981 for

concealment of € 19,763.

opportunities.

Neither any of the witnesses in whose
presence the alleged recovery was
effected nor any documentary proof
were proved on record. Case dismissed
due to non availability of relevant
evidence in January 2010.

First six complaints dismissed as they
were filed under wrong provisions
which were not in force at the time of
commitment of the offence. Next
three complaints dismissed as no
evidence like sale receipt or other
documents were produced in Court.
Cases dismissed in August 2010.

ACMM, Delhi in March 2009 acquitted
the assessee as the ITD failed to levy
penalty u/s 271(1)(C) after initiation.
The Court ruled that there was no case
for framing any charge and ITD had to
forego the case.

ITAT on appeal by the assessee had
remanded the assessment back to AO
for reassessment in December 1991.
Even after 19 years, 10 fresh
assessment was made. ACMM
dismissed the case in January 2010 as
offenders to be prosecuted u/s
276/277, the concealment should be
more than % 25,000 and also no fresh
assessment was made.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

51


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

3.6.1 Age wise pendency of cases

Delays in the context of justice denotes the time consumed in the disposal of
case, in excess of the time within which a case can be reasonably expected to
be decided by the Court. A procedure which does not provide trial and
disposal within a reasonable period cannot be said to be just, fair and
reasonable’’. Our examination of delay/pendency at various stages revealed
the following:

Table 3.19: Age analysis of pending cases

Upto 5 5-10 years 10-15 Above 15 Total
years years years
Number of 530 341 202 1,530 2,603
Cases

State wise details are available in Table 3.14

A majority of the cases are pending for more than 15 years and relate to AYs
which are still older and thus have no contemporary relevance. As cases are
initiated after a lapse of time, their further delay in the Courts due to various
reasons vitiates the entire process making it meaningless. Delay raises doubts
on the veracity and sustainability of cases apart from indicating the
performance efficiency of the prosecution process and machinery in the ITD.

Ministry may like to analyse the reasons for these delays. It is necessary that
CBDT explore the principle of discretionary prosecution as against the
principle of obligatory prosecution unless public interest is involved.
Alternate Dispute Resolution in the form of Compounding and Settlement
Commission needs to be utilized to optimum potential to reduce the
pendency of cases.

The enforcement of CBDT’s policy and procedures on the Prosecution
Counsels has not been effective and has impacted the pursuance of cases.

3.7 Prosecution Counsel

The Supreme Court of India® defines the role and functions of a public
prosecutor as under:

a. The prosecution of an offender is the duty of the executive which is
carried out through the institution of the Public Prosecutor.

b. Discretion to withdraw from prosecution is that of the Public
Prosecutor and that of none else and he cannot surrender this
discretion to anyone. The Government may suggest to the Public
Prosecutor to withdraw a case, but it cannot compel him and
ultimately the discretion and the judgment of the Public would
prevail.

5* Hon'ble Shri Y.K, Sabharwal, Chief Justice Of India ; 25" July, 2006 Justice Sobhag Mal Jain Memorial Lecture
*? Sheonandan Paswan v State of Bihar (AIR 1983 SC 1994)

52


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

c. The Public Prosecutor may withdraw from prosecution on the ground
of paucity of evidence and also on the other relevant grounds in order
to further the broad ends of public justice, public order and peace.

d. The Public Prosecutor is an officer of the Court and responsible to it.

As per instruction® issued by CBDT, a Prosecution Counsel shall be appointed
after going through the process prescribed. Apart from the Court related
proceedings, the Prosecution Counsel also provide legal opinion regarding
sustainability of the case before initiating prosecution. Renewal of terms of
the Prosecution Counsels is based on their performance for which CBDT has
prescribed an evaluation report to be filed by CCIT (CCA).

The performance of the Prosecution Counsels shall be reviewed by
jurisdictional CsIT whose cases have been represented by the Prosecution
Counsels on a quarterly basis and report in Proforma-C shall be submitted to
CIT (Judicial)/ CCIT before 157 of the month following the end of each
quarter. On the basis of reports, the CCIT shall review the performance of the
Prosecution Counsels for every financial year and send an annual report to
CBDT in Proforma-D before 30" June of the following year.

3.7.1 Appointment of the Prosecution Counsel

We collected data on appointment of the Prosecution Counsels and their
work which is shown in Table 3.20.

Table 3.20: Appointment and work done by the Prosecution Counsels

States Existence of Appointment Submission Objective Timely
Prosecution approvedby ofMonthly evaluation submission
Counsel for CBDT reports by of of
all cases Counsels Prosecution evaluation
Counsels Reports by
CCIT (CCA)
to CBDT
1. Andhra v v v v v
Pradesh
2. Assam x v x x x
3. Bihar v x x x x
4. Jharkhand x x x x x
5. Delhi v v v v v
6. Gujarat v v x v v
7. Haryana v x x x x
8. Himachal v x x x x
Pradesh
9. Jammu & x v x x x
Kashmir

35 Annexure-lI of instruction No.8/2007 issued vide F.No.2791 Misc.145/2006-IT.

53


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

10. Karnataka v v x x x
11. Kerala v v v v v
12. Madhya x v x x x
Pradesh
13. Maharashtra v v x x x
14. Orissa x x x x x
15. Punjab x v x x x
16, Rajasthan x v x x x
17. Tamil Nadu v x x x x
18. Uttar Pradesh x x x x x
19. Uttarakhand x x x x x
20. West Bengal x x x x x

Our analysis across states revealed that the process of appointment of
experienced Prosecution Counsels to handle ITD cases was wanting on
several fronts.

CBDT instructions provide that the Prosecution Counsels need to furnish to
ITD monthly statement about the cases represented by him before the High
Court or any other authority. We found that such reports were wanting in
many ITD jurisdictions. There were no details of engagement of the
Prosecution Counsels or who would be handling which cases in the relevant
Court. This impacted the follow up and monitoring of cases leading to
wasteful litigation and expenditure.

3.7.2 Current status of appointment of the Prosecution Counsels

Every case for prosecution needs to be handled by a designated Prosecution
Counsel appointed for the purpose after due process. As per CBDT
Instructions™ , proposals for renewal of term of counsels were required to be
sent three months prior to the expiry of their term. Renewal of term was to
be done for a maximum period of three years. We found various shortfalls in
appointment of the Counsels. In several cases the Prosecution Counsels had
not been appointed for prolonged periods or were working without valid
appointments from the ITD, details of which is in Table 3.21.

** No.1986 dt.03/07/2000 and No.8/2007 dated 30.08.2007

54


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Table 3.21: Appointment of Prosecution Counsels

CCIT/CIT charge Appointment of prosecution counsels

1. Ahmedabad Proposal submitted in March 2010. Approval awaited from
CBDT.

2. Vadodara Proposal submitted in March 2010. Approval awaited from
CBDT.

3. Surat No prosecution counsel since April 2003. Renewal proposal sent
in January 2010, rejected in 2013.

4. Rajkot No Prosecution Counsel appointed between January 2007 and
November 2009. 52 cases were pending during the period.

5. Jaipur No Prosecution Counsel since July 1992. Approval awaited from
CBDT.

6. Chennai Prosecution Counsel functioning with provisional authority since
September 2005.

7. Shillong and No Prosecution Counsel since March 1999.

Guwahati

8. Patna Prosecution Counsel working without valid authorization
between the periods July 1994 — Jan 2008 and April 2006 - Jan
2013.

9. Rohtak and Karnal No Prosecution Counsel since 1996. Term of existing counsel not
renewed.

10. Moradabad No Prosecution Counsel appointed since April 2004.

11. Ghaziabad No Prosecution Counsel appointed since May 2009. Approval

awaited from CBDT.

Ministry may like to correct the situation urgently so that the interests of
revenue are not jeopardized.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

3.7.3. Appointment of the Prosecution Counsel at the Court’s instance

Appointment of a Prosecution Counsel was to be automatic to handle cases
as and when they come up for hearings in the Court.

In Maharashtra Pune CIT (TDS) charge, in the case of M/s Novion Ltd, it was
noticed that even though CCIT, Thane directed in January 2003 to launch
prosecution u/s 276B, proceedings were initiated only in March 2006. No
Prosecution Counsel was appointed for the case till March 2012. The
appointment was done in March 2012 only when the Court threatened to
dismiss the case on this ground. However, the newly appointed Counsel was
also not attending the case (December 2012).

3.7.4 Payments to the Prosecution Counsels

Payment of fees of Prosecution Counsel is made at predetermined rates for
various categories like effective and non effective hearings, similar cases,
settled cases etc®®. Since payment for services availed would also affect the
performance of the Prosecution Counsels, we sought to examine the

* Instruction No.1925 dt.31/03/1995

55


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

quantum and periodicity of payments. Our examination of expenditure
incurred in various charges revealed the following:

Table 3.22.: Details of payment to Prosecution Counsels

States Complete case details Payments Applicable
available made rates
1. Andhra Pradesh v v v
2. Assam x v x
3. Bihar v v v
4, Jharkhand x v v
5. Delhi v v v
6. Gujarat x v x
7. Haryana v x x
8. Himachal Pradesh v x x
9. Jammu & Kashmir x v x
10. Karnataka v v x
11. Kerala v v v
12. Madhya Pradesh x v x
13. Maharashtra x x x
14. Orissa x x x
15. Punjab x v x
16. Rajasthan x v x
17. Tamil Nadu v v x
18. Uttar Pradesh x x x
19. Uttarakhand x x x
20. West Bengal x x x

a. In Uttar Pradesh CIT — Central, Kanpur charge, though two cases were
pending and scheduled for hearing, no expenditure was incurred on
fees to the Counsels in the years 2007-12. In the absence of any
payment to Counsels, the pursuance of the cases could not be
ensured.

9. In Gujarat CCIT, Surat charge, fees to the Prosecution Counsel was
made in excess of the rates prescribed by CBDT.

c. In Tamil Nadu CCIT Chennai charge, K. Ramasamy, was appointed as
the Prosecution Counsel at higher rates*° of remuneration for specific
cases handled by him given their nature. A perusal of the payments
made upto December 2011 revealed that application of higher rate in
40 bills (other than applicable cases) alone resulted in excess payment
of % 49.23 lakh.

d. In West Bengal Kolkata, payments to the Prosecution Counsels for the

period 2004-2011 is still pending settlement as of December 2012.

°° 5,000 per effective hearing; हैं 1,000 per non effective hearing; reading perusal fee at rate of ¢ 1,000; Clerkage
and other miscellaneous charges at the rate 10 per cent of total expenses etc.

56


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

e. In Haryana CIT Rohtak and Karnal charge, payments to the
Prosecution Counsels for the period 2007-12 had been made, though
details of their appointment like approval from CBDT were missing.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

3.7.5 Infructuous expenditure on payment to prosecution counsels

CBDT has fixed higher rates of remuneration” for substantive hearing” given
the additional tasks discharged during the course of the same. Appeals,
revision or petition arising from one common judgment or order will be
considered together as one case if they are heard together. Where there are
two or more cases (but not more than 10 cases) involving substantially
identical questions of law or facts, one such case will be treated as main case
and the others as connected cases. Payments are regulated accordingly.

Audit scrutiny of payment of the Prosecution Counsels files revealed the
followings:

a. In Maharashtra Mumbai CIT 14 and CIT 18 charge, we found that
claims had been submitted with no differentiation noted between
substantive and non substantive hearings. Claims lodged at effective
hearings rate even when concerned judge was on leave or when the
Court had a holiday or witnesses were absent or case was not listed or
papers not traceable etc. With the ITD not attending to all the Court
hearings or without updated records, it was not clear as to how
payments to the Prosecution Counsels were being regulated.

9. In Maharashtra Mumbai CIT 13 charge, professional fees had been
paid at double the rates in the case of M/s. Rameshchand Nihalchand
& Co. and Naresh R. Chhada which resulted in excess payment to the
extent of € 1.26 lakh. There was no categorization between effective
and non effective hearings. On further scrutiny of the case record of
M/s. Rameshchand Nihalchand & Co., it was noticed that three bills
out of total of four bills against which payment was made, was made
to the Prosecution Counsel for the period between May 2009 and
November 2011. Hence, instead of treating one complaint as main
case and other two cases as connected cases involving identical
questions of law or facts pertaining to three different AYs, each case
was treated as different and payments were made.

°” Instruction No 8/2007, dated August 30, 2007.

38 Substantial and Effective hearing has been defined as a hearing in which either one or both the parties involved in
a case are heard by the Court. If the case is mentioned and adjourned or only directions are given or only judgment
is delivered by the Court, it would not constitute a substantial and effective hearing.

57


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

c. In Maharashtra, CIT 13 Mumbai charge, two Prosecution Counsels
(A.S. Inamdar and Ms. Aneesa A. Gulab) had been appointed for the
prosecution case of Naresh R. Chheda. Payment had been made to
the Counsels though service was rendered only by A.S. Inamdar. Two
different complaints were filed for the same fact and issue pertaining
to same AY. This resulted in a cascading effect in terms that the
Prosecution Counsels had been paid for four hearings even when
there were only two hearings.

d. In Maharashtra, CIT 12 Mumbai charge, claims submitted by A.S.
Inamdar (in the case of Krishnakant L. Dalal) for the period January
2001 and December 2011 involving seven complaints having identical
questions of law or facts pertaining to AYs from 71 to AY 76. Instead
of treating one case as main and other three as connected cases, they
had been billed separately. The Counsel had submitted the bill even
for periods handled by the other Counsels.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

ITD has not maintained complete and reliable MIS data on prosecution
cases.

3.8 Current Status of cases

It is necessary that CBDT should coordinate within and outside ITD in a timely
manner to ensure that tax evaders are prosecuted. We sought to examine
whether ITD had updated position on the cases shown as pending in the MIS
Reports sent to the CBDT. DCIT-Prosecution (or any other Officer in-charge)
was to be the custodian of all original records on prosecution proceedings.
Our examination was based on the following criteria:

a. Availability of guard files and relevant documents™ with officer in-

charge of prosecution.

b. Availability of information on hearings last hearing and next date
proposed.

Details of seized impounded material.
d. Existence of assessee as depicted by filing of income tax returns.

e. Pendency of cases.

Our examination of records and data revealed the following:

38 Relevant documents prescribed vide Instruction No 1618 dated 03 June 1985 include documents for proving guilt
of accused; list of names of witnesses and their statements u/s 131; list of relevant judgments, Circulars etc;
inventory of all information; copy of opinion of standing counsel etc

58


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Table 3.23: Maintenance of records with details

States Guard Previous& Existence Filingof Details of
files next of returns seized
hearings assessee material
1. Andhra v v v v v
Pradesh
2. Assam x x x x x
3. Bihar x x x x x
4. Jharkhand x x x x x
5. Delhi v v v v v
6. Gujarat x v v x x
7. Haryana v x x x x
8. Himachal x x x x x
Pradesh
9. Jammu & x x v x x
Kashmir
10. Karnataka v v v v
11. Kerala x x x x
12. Madhya x x x x x
Pradesh
13. Maharashtra® x v x x x
14. Orissa x x x x x
15. Punjab x x x x x
16. Rajasthan x v v v x
17. Tamil Nadu v v v v v
18. Uttar Pradesh x x x x x
19. Uttarakhand x x x x x
20. West Bengal x x x x x

$ Information only partially available.

Table 3.23 shows that necessary records with updated data were not

available in a majority of the cases. The ITD was not even clear as to who
would be maintaining the relevant records. We found the following:

a. On requisitioning the relevant files for examination, ClT-Dehradun

stated that only approval is accorded in the prosecution cases and
such case record were available with the concerned AO.

In Bihar, Patna charge, of the 59 pending cases requisitioned in audit
(April 2013) only 25 cases were produced to audit. Whereabouts of
other 34 cases is not known to the ITD.

In Delhi CIT | charge, the case of M/s Sangam Iron and Steel was
dismissed by EOC in December 2002 as ITD failed to produce witness
and original records. Revision petition filed in March 2003 is still
pending.

In Maharashtra CIT (TDS) Mumbai charge, in the case of M/s Bharat
Cables (P) LTD except for verification report no other documents were
available either with the ITD or with the Court.

© 21 at CIT | Patna and 38 in CIT ॥ Patna

59


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Thus, we could not derive an assurance that the relevant data and
documents crucial for achieving prosecution of offenders were available
completely with any officer in the ITD.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

ITD did not use the compounding of offences as alternate dispute resolution
mechanism effectively to reduce the litigation and realize the due revenue.

3.9 Compounding of offences

Compounding in the context of the Criminal Law means forbearance from the
prosecution as a result of an amicable settlement between the parties. The
victim is prepared to condone the offensive conduct of the accused who
became chastened and repentant. Law needs to be attuned to take note of
such situations and to provide a remedy to terminate the criminal
proceedings as also relieve the Courts of the burden of accumulated cases.
Primarily, what needs to be taken into account is the nature, magnitude and
consequences of the Crime®. By an amendment of 2005 in the CrPC, the
concept of plea bargaining has been introduced™. Plea-bargaining is available
only for offences that are penalised by imprisonment below seven years.
Thus, it is imperative that the ITD consider all requests for compounding
expeditiously.

3.9.1 Disposal of compounding petitions

As per the revised guidelines® for compounding offences issued by CBDT in
May 2008, the compounding petition should be disposed by the CCIT/DGIT,
as far as possible, within 180 days of its receipt. In cases where compounding
is accepted, the CCIT/DGIT will intimate the assessee the amount of
compounding charges to be deposited if any within 180 days. The assessee
should pay the requisite compounding charges within 60 days of receipt of
such intimation. Final orders shall be passed within 30 days of payment of
compounding charges. This circular was made applicable to both pending and
future cases.

Compounding of (IPC) Offences Report No. 237 Law Commission December 2011
© 55, 265 A- 265 L, Code of Criminal Procedure
© Instruction no. 285/90/2008-IT(Inv.)/12

60


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Table 3.24: Time taken for disposal of compounding application

States Upto 180 180-365 1 to 3 years More than
days days 3 years

1. Andhra Pradesh 0 0 0 0
2. Assam 0 0 0 0
3. Bihar 09 1 0 0
4. Chandigarh 0 0 0 0
5. Jharkhand NA NA NA 2
6. Delhi 4 5 7 2
7. Gujarat 0 0 2 2
8. Himachal Pradesh 0 0 0 0
9. Jharkhand 0 0 0 0
10. Karnataka 1 4 1 0
11. Kerala 09 09 4 0
12. Madhya Pradesh 0 0 0 0
13. Maharashtra 0 0 0 0
14. Odisha 0 0 0 0
15. Punjab 0 0 0 0
16. Rajasthan 0 0 53 42
17. Tamil Nadu 0 0 0 0
18. Uttarakhand 0 0 0
19, Uttar Pradesh 0 0 3
20. West Bengal 2 2 0

Total 7 11 70 48

NA Not available

Table 3.25 indicates that ITD took more time to dispose the compounding
application than prescribed by CBDT (See Box 3.10).

Box 3.10: Illustrative case on delay in taking action on compounding application

In Tamil Nadu Chennai charge, M/s Standard Fire Works Pvt.Ltd, Sivakasi had
entered into a sale agreement with M/s Cee Dee Yes Housing and Financing Ltd
without obtaining a No Objection certificate from ITD. Prosecution proceedings
were initiated in June 2002 u/s 269UC of the Act. In August 2002, assessees
opted for compounding of the offence and compounding fees was worked out at
= 70 lakh in November 2004 on each assessee being at rate of five per cent of the
value of transaction (valued at हैं 14 crore). No further action was taken to
implement the order.

We found that fresh compounding petitions were preferred by the assessees in
November 2008 and January 2010. By this time fresh guidelines for compounding

 EOCC No. 576/02

61



Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

had been issued™ wherein compounding fees were substantially reduced. ITD
finally decided to accept and compound the offence. Compounding fee realized
was & 11.60 lakh and हैं 12.70 lakh respectively. Failure to take timely action on the
petitions resulted in loss of revenue of € 1.16 crore.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

3.9.2. Compounding and stage of prosecution

CBDT has issued various guidelines for compounding of offences, the last
comprehensive one being in May 20087, The powers of compounding an
offence has been delegated to the jurisdictional CCIT/DGIT except a few
categories of assessees and offences. The compounding fees have been
substantially reduced. An offence may be compounded at any stage before or
after institution of proceedings subject to conditions prescribed. The clause
‘at any stage’ has been the subject matter of contention. Table 3.26 shows
cases that compounding is being done even where conviction has been
passed in lower courts or additions upheld.

Table 3.25: Compounding of prosecution after the Court’s decision

Assessee and
Charge

Prosecution particulars

Compounding details

Remarks

1. Dasari Narayan
Rao,
CCIT(CCA)
Chennai

Trial Court (Additional Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate EO
vide CC No 154/89) convicted the
assessee for offence u/s 276CC of
the Act. Assessee filed further
appeal in High Court of Chennai.

Application filed in December
2003. The High Court of
Chennai in its order on WP No
32734 of 2005 directed that
the compounding petition be
taken up on merits.

Compounding
petition
accepted in
December
2005.

2. M/s Dahadwala
Family Trust,
CCIT(CCA)
Chennai

Trial Court (Additional Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate EO II
vide EOCC No 133 to 161/1988
on 10.06.1998) convicted the
assessee for offence u/s 276B of
the Act. Principal Sessions Judge
confirmed the conviction vide
order in CA Nos 113 to 141/1988
vide order dated 17.04.2006).
Assessee filed further appeal in
High Court of Chennai.

Application filed in August
2012. The Senior Special
Public Prosecutor for the Gol
in his opinion of December
2012 quoting the precedence
of compo-unding after
conviction in the cases of Dr.
K. Jagadeeshan, Mrs Umayal
Ramanathan and __ Dasari
Naryana Rao has_ also
recommended for
compounding.

Compounding
petition
accepted in
February
2013.

3. Jyoti Laxman
Konkar
CCIT (CCA)
Bengaluru

Prosecution initiated for
concealment of income u/s 276
C. SLP filed in Supreme Court for
levy of penalty on concealment
of income dismissed vide SLP Civil
14810/2006 in September 2006.

Compounding petition filed in
April 2008.

Compounding
petition
accepted in
December
2010.

© Instruction No F No 285/90/2008 ~ IT (Inv)/12 dated 16.05.2008
° Instruction quoted above

62


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Ministry may like to ensure that every opportunity to settle disputes and
collect due revenues be explored in all cases if otherwise not prohibited
under law or against public interest so that resources of the ITD and of the
Judiciary are relieved for more important activities.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

3.9.3 Delays in passing compounding orders

We found that acceptance of compounding applications of assessees were
being unduly delayed without valid purpose or reasons. This resulted in
infructuous expenditure as well as wastage of valuable resources of ITD and
the Court. Details of a few cases are given in Table 3.26.

Table 3.26: Delay in acceptance of compounding applications

Assessee and Charge Compounding application particulars Acceptance
Tamil Nadu
KJ Joy, July 1997, October 2004 and February Accepted in
Chennai 2012. Arrears of tax cleared in November 2012.
November 2004. Non bailable warrant
issued in March 2006 was returned
undelivered due to ill health of the
assessee. Action on petition not
forthcoming between 2005-11.
M.S.Paul, Compounding petition and consent No action has been
Chennai letter filed in November 2000 and June taken on either

2010 for prosecution filed in January
1991. Non-bailable warrant issued on
the assessee in 1991, was not
executed.

application (March
2013).

Maharashtra

M/s Dravya Finance,
CIT TDS Mumbai

M/s Vileparle Sanjivani Co-
operative Housing Society
Ltd,

CIT TDS Mumbai

M/S Vikram Ahuja Exports
Pvt Ltd & Others,

CIT 5 Mumbai

Dharti J Shroff,
CIT 12 Mumbai,

Compounded in January 2010

Compounding petition in December
2001 and compounding fees were
remitted in August 2005.

34 hearings took place in the court of
law (hearings details incomplete).

August 2006 and October 2008. AO
and Range Officer had favourably
recommended the case in October
2008 and November 2008 respectively.

63

Shown as pending
as of March 2013

Even after 12 years
of submission of
petition and eight
years of payment of
applicable fees,
case is still pending.

Compounded after
six years and 11
months from the
date of receipt of
application.

Compounding _ still
pending.


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

7. M/s Abha Advertising Pvt. January 1997, January 2009 and Compounded in
Ltd., August 2009. February 2011 after
CIT 2 Mumbai 13 years of first

application.

8. M/s Winter Investments Co Compounding petition filed in August Compounding _ still
CIT TDS Mumbai 2007 pending.

Gujarat

9. M/s Somtex Yarns Pvt. Ltd., Filed in February 2011, approved in Compounding _ still

CIT Ahmedabad July 2011 and fees paid in September pending (December
2011. 2012).

10. Roopa 0. Shah & Lavanya D. Two petitions filed in April 2008 Compounding _ still
Shah pending (December
CIT Ahmedabad 2012).

11. Sushil K. Jalan Petitions filed in April 2008 Compounding _ still
CIT Ahmedabad pending (December

2012).
Uttarakhand

12. M/s Kailash Medical Hall, Compounding fees in respect of two Even after nine

CIT Dehradun cases were remitted in June 2004. years of payment of
applicable fees,
case is still pending.

Uttar Pradesh

13. Tilak Raj Sharma Compounding petitions filed in Compounding _ still
CCIT Kanpur October 2009 pending (March

2013).

14. Smt Smita Shrivastav Compounding petitions filed in March Compounding _ still

CCIT Kanpur 2010 pending (March
2013).

15. M/s Jain Collections Agra Compounding petitions filed in June Compounding - still

CCIT Kanpur 2010 pending (March
2013).

Thus, ITD is unwilling to settle even those cases which fulfill the criteria laid

down in CBDT’s circulars resulting in wasteful expenditure, infructuous work

as also clogging of the Court proceedings.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

ITD has not acted in consonance with National Litigation Policy

3.10 National Litigation Policy

The National Litigation Policy (June 2010) of Ministry of Law, is based on the
recognition that the Government and its various agencies are the pre-
dominant litigants in the Courts and the Tribunals in the country. Its aim is to

64


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

transform Government into an efficient and responsible litigant. This policy is
also based on the recognition that it is the responsibility of the Government
to protect the rights of citizens; to respect fundamental rights and those in
charge of the conduct of Government litigation should never forget this basic
principle.

Offences punishable under sections 275, 276B, 276BB, 276DD, 276E, 277 and
278 of the Act have been classified as technical offences. Table 3.27 shows
pending cases in the Courts under various punishable sections across the
state.

Table 3.27: Pending prosecution cases relating to technical offences

State 276B = 27600 276E Others 16

1. Andhra Pradesh 1 0 0 09 1
2. Assam 0 0 09 0 0
३. Bihar 4 2 0 0 6
4. Jharkhand 0 0 0 0 0
5. Delhi 25 0 0 0 25
6. Gujarat 14 0 0 0 14
7. Haryana 0 5 1 0 6
8. Himachal Pradesh 0 9 09 0 0
9. Jammu & Kashmir 0 9 09 0 0
10. Karnataka 2 0 0 43 45
11. Kerala 3 0 0 0 3
12. Madhya Pradesh 7 0 0 0 7
13. Maharashtra 83 3 4 1 91
14. Odisha 1 1 0 27 29
15. Punjab 80 1 09 0 81
16. Rajasthan 1 0 0 0 1
17. Tamil Nadu 12 0 0 0 12
18. Uttarakhand 0 0 0 0 0
19. Uttar Pradesh 29 38 12 0 79
20. West Bengal 43 13 1 0 57
Total 305 63 18 71 457

Jharkhand - No case records available; Maharashtra - Details of income tax section not available in 24
cases.

# Instruction No: 5206 dated 30.9.1994 and F. No 285/90/2008-IT (Inv)/12 dated 16.05.2008

65


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

A study of the cases pending across the states reveals that a large number of
cases of technical offences are pending litigation in the Courts. In terms of
NLP, the Government needs to be a responsible litigant. ‘Responsible Litigant’
implies that litigation will not be resorted to for the sake of litigating and that
technical points will not be taken and shall be discouraged. Under the
circumstances, it is not clear as to what action has been taken to
clear/dispose of these cases involving technical offences.

Prosecution machinery of ITD was used to handle individual assessees and
low money value cases, not against systematically organized entities.

3.11 Selection of cases for prosecution

As per Wanchoo Committee Report, ITD is to ensure that selected cases
represent a cross section of the society, different regions and all walks of life
viz. persons in employment, profession, trade, industry etc. The thrust of
prosecution by revenue administration is intended to have a demonstrative
impact across the society that tax evasion would be dealt with an iron hand.
Greater stress is laid on offences involving tax frauds, fabrication of evidence
and major defaults®. Accordingly, it is imperative for the field formations, in
particular the sanctioning authority, to implement prosecution provisions
keeping in view the overall compliance philosophy. We sought to examine
whether the above objective had been applied in letter and spirit whilst
initiating prosecution on the following parameters:

3.11.1 Value of tax evasion involved in pending cases

As revenue administration is primarily meant for mopping up due revenues
to the government, all its activities also are largely based upon the money
value involved. As prosecution is in a different league of operation, it is
imperative that such extreme steps are taken only in cases involving large tax
impact. Our study revealed the following:

° Instruction No 5051 dated 07 February 1991

66


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Table 3.28: Prosecution cases with money value involved

States Below 1-3 3-5 5-10 10-25 25-50 50-100 Above Not Total
1lakh lakh lakh बिता lakh lakh lakh crore quant
ified
1. Andhra Pradesh 2 2 1 3 0 3 21 0 38
2. Assam 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 12 15
3. Bihar 0 0 1 2 3 09 7 99 113
4. Jharkhand NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 119
5. Delhi 7 15 7 25 14 22 9 10 83 192
6. Gujarat 60 54 13 22 15 8 15 19 150 356
7. Haryana 14 4 5 0 2 0 0 25 50
8. Himachal 1 0 0 2 ie) 0 3 7
Pradesh
9. Jammu & 4 2 0 1 2 2 1 2 4 18
Kashmir
10. Karnataka 11 10 1 4 4 5 0 4 11 50
11. Kerala 5 0 2 1 1 2 1 11 24
12. Madhya Pradesh 6 4 6 3 0 0 09 21 48
13. Maharashtra 76 37 10 12 18 11 8 12 220 404
14. Orissa 4 10 5 5 1 0 0 0 28 53
15. Punjab 43 27 9 12 2 2 4 0 93 192
16. Rajasthan 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 106 108
17. Tamil Nadu 73 4 0 5 5 3 2 2 33 127
18. Uttar Pradesh 11 5 3 4 2 0 0 3 174 202
19, Uttarakhand 2 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 18 22
20. West Bengal 89 52 11 17 10 15 16 27 62 299

Jharkhand : No case records available

We found that a large number of cases related to tax evasions below = 10
lakh or those where no money value had been quantified. Details of revenue

involved were not available even in cases launched for suspected tax evasion.

Ministry may like to review the basis on which prosecution cases are being
launched and its actual impact on revenue.

3.11.2 Prosecution on low value cases

As per the Court’s judgment, the grant of sanction for prosecution is not an

idle formality or an acrimonious exercise but a solemn and sacrosanct act
which affords protection to the persons against frivolous prosecutions and

must therefore be strictly complied® (See Box 3.11 and Table 3.29).

© Mohd. Iqbal Ahmed v. State of Andhra Pradesh [AIR (1976) SC 677, 679] and Balram Swain v. State of Orissa

(1991) 1 SCC 510 (SC)}

67


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Box 3.11: Illustrative cases of prosecution of low value case.

In Tamil Nadu CIT TDS Chennai charge, prosecution was initiated on 70 assessees
(all Government servants), in February 2000 for an offence u/s 276 C(2) for
incorrect claim of deduction u/s 80DDB based on certificates issued by doctors as
a result of which tax was deducted at a lower sum. Tax sought to be evaded was
quantified at = 4,500 in each case. The complaint extrapolated and estimated the
loss of revenue at हैं 75 lakh.

The assessees, before receipt of the copy of the complaint paid the tax dues of
% 2,576 subsequent to which summons were issued from the Court in June, 2000.
The assessees also submitted applications for compounding. Compounding fees
was fixed at ~ 4,950 which was paid by the assessees. In January 2005, the
Prosecution Counsel supported a lenient view as applicable taxes and fees had
been paid. ITO (TDS) also supported the view (December 2004 and June 2005).

Audit scrutiny revealed that Prosecution had been launched on the assessees even
before due date of filing of return under the preconceived notion that assessees
intended to defraud revenue. Tax loss was comparatively too meager to be
proceeded with prosecution. Prosecution had been initiated enmass on a set of
people without going into the merits of individual cases. The reasoning was
blurred that there was mass tax evasion going on, whereas the provisions of the
Act are prescriptive to grave cases. What could have been achieved by a
rectification (u/s 154) or scrutiny [143 (2)] notice was needlessly escalated for
prosecution. The nature and number of cases have clogged the ITD machinery as
also the time of the Courts towards no purpose.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the cases are being examined.

3.11.3 Purpose of prosecution

The primary purpose of revenue statutes is to collect revenue legally due and
all other purposes become secondary or supportive to this primary cause.
Under the circumstances we sought to analyse the cases on the following
criteria:

a. Whether prosecution had been launched on habitual offenders or
were based on sporadic individual events.

b. Whether there were cases indicating a system or design to defraud
revenue on sustained basis with impact over a period of time

c. Cases detected new assessees or were initiated on existing assessees.
The basis or value on which prosecution has been initiated in a large number

of cases does not indicate systemic effort at defrauding revenue. A Ministry
Report of May 2012” highlights how black money is generated and the

”° White Paper on Black Money

68



Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

efforts to tackle the same. The report highlights the action taken’’ after a
High Powered Committee was constituted under orders from the Court. No
such cases involving systemic fraud were in the pending list of prosecution
prior to FY 09.

Supreme Court has ruled that the purpose of revenue statutes should be to
collect revenue and not to punish. Ruling in the case” of Central Excise and
Customs Act, the Supreme Court held that ‘the language of the Scheme of
Central Excise Act seems to suggest that the main object of the enactment of
the said Act was the recovery of excise duties and not really to punish for
infringement of its provisions’.

We collected data on assessees wise number of complaints across the state
which is shown in table below:

Table 3.29: Category wise cases

State Individuals Firms Corporate Others Total
1. Andhra Pradesh 12 1 25 0 38
2. Assam 7 1 0 7 15
3. Bihar® 41 18 5 49 113
4. Jharkhand 75 16 21 7 119
5. Delhi 56 15 49 43 163
6. Gujarat 181 67 88 20 356
7. Haryana 12 28 4 6 50
8. Himachal Pradesh 3 4 0 0 7
9. Jammu & Kashmir 16 1 1 0 18
10. Karnataka 40 5 5 0 50
11. Kerala 14 8 2 0 24
12. Madhya Pradesh 28 8 12 0 48
13. Maharashtra® 155 109 128 12 404
14. Orissa 6 3 1 43 53
15. Punjab 56 84 24 29 193
16. Rajasthan 56 16 36 09 108
17. Tamil Nadu 120 0 7 0 127
18. Uttar Pradesh 101 70 22 9 193
19. Uttarakhand 12 10 0 0 22
20. West Bengal 146 80 124 09 350
Total 1,137 544 554 216 2,451

$ Others includes cases where no details of status were available.

Due to the five pronged strategy and other efforts made by the government in last two financial years [FY 2009-
12], we have achieved substantial success both in getting information of illicit money parked outside the country
and in stopping transfer of illicit money outside the country.

” Om Prakash & Anr vs Union of India & Anr. on 30 September, 2011.

69


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

The above table indicates that the complaints are adversely biased against
individuals and not against corporate, or systematically organized entities
though the scope for large scale evasion is more endemic in the latter.

Audit is of the opinion that organised fraud and high impact cases need to be
focused upon such entities as the tax evasion quantified in frauds by
individuals is very meager.

On low value cases, the Ministry stated (November 2013) that these are part
of larger malaise and needs to be tackled to confront systematic
malpractices.

The Ministry has not ensured the coordination among various institutions
under Central Economic Intelligence Bureau to arrest tax evasion by
prosecution.

3.12. Coordination amongst Enforcement agencies

The Central Economic Intelligence Bureau (CEIB) was established to facilitate
coordination amongst the Enforcement Agencies dealing with economic
offences and ensure operational coordination amongst them. The agencies
were to formulate a coordinated strategy for action against tax evaders. As
prosecution is one of the major tools of revenue administration, we sought to
examine the interplay between the enforcement agencies implementing
Direct and Indirect tax regimes. We attempted to examine whether there
were cases involving coordinated efforts at least where prosecution had been
launched as the impact of tax evasion under one revenue statute would also
impact other revenue statutes.

Table 3.30: Prosecution under CBDT and CBEC

State Direct Indirect Taxes

Taxes Customs Central Service Total

Excise Tax

Delhi 192 141 43 NA 184
Gujarat 351 NA 423 NA 423
Karnataka 59 37 10 NA 47
Maharashtra 404 467 NA NA 467
Tamil Nadu 127 NA 53 NA 53

NA Not available

We were not able to find one single case which was common to enforcement
agencies under the ITD or the Central Excise and Customs Department.
Though technical offences covering reporting obligations under the revenue
Acts are different, those initiated for suspected tax evasion should have
attracted similar action under other revenue statutes which is absent. Thus,
the cases being initiated do not address systemic frauds against revenue but
individual and stray instances.

70


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

We were unable to derive an assurance that coordinated efforts were being
made at least in this important aspect of tax evasion which warranted
prosecution of an assessee.

3.13. Recommendations
We recommend that

1. The Ministry needs to ensure instituting a more robust mechanism for
identifying cases for prosecution which takes into account timeliness;
quantum of tax evasion; and contemporary impact.

The Ministry while describing the existing procedure, stated (October
2013) that Central Action Plan 2013-14 lays down targets in respect of
identification of appropriate cases. The level of review/monitoring in
some cases has been escalated upto level of zonal Members of CBDT.
They have constituted a committee in June 2013 to review the
Prosecution Manual 2009 and suggest ways and means to strengthen
the prosecution mechanism.

2. CBDT should ensure posting of a designated and experienced Nodal
officer to handle prosecution at the field level with independent charge.
CBDT is to ensure periodical interaction amongst authorities (like
quarterly) so that status of a case is ascertainable at any point of time.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) the ongoing re-structuring of the
ITD is expected to improve the situation.

3. CBDT should take up work of cleaning of records and data bases to
ascertain actual pendency and status of prosecution cases at various
levels. CBDT should ensure maintenance of updated prosecution
records at all levels.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the ongoing re-structuring of
the ITD and implementation of ITBA, would facilitate maintenance of
proper records and follow up action. They stated that ITBA would be
operational by April 2015.

The Ministry further stated (November 2013) that new ITBA is
developing functionalities for the Administration of Prosecution and
covers the provisions for Prosecution viz (i) Capability to record
evidence, (ii) Maintain escalation matrix, (iii) Ability to obtain approval
from the CCIT, (iv) Capacity to capture comments at each level of
organizational hierarchy, (v) Ability to issue show cause notice and

71


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

(vi) Ability for AO to make changes in accordance with the
jurisdictional session Court order.

4. CBDT should ensure periodical physical verification of prosecution
related files.

The Ministry stated that (October/November 2013) that instruction to
its field formation would be issued.

We feel that CBDT should ensure effective monitoring of these
instructions.

5. Ministry needs to streamline the mechanism for appointment and
evaluation of departmental counsels representing the ITD before
judicial authorities. The remuneration rates also need a relook in
accordance with the tasks associated so as to avail and retain the
services of experienced counsels.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the draft of detailed
instruction for appointment of Prosecution Counsels has been sent to
Ministry of Law and Justice for concurrence and matter is being
followed up.

6. The Ministry may ensure regular coordination with the administrative
authorities in the Courts so that cases are properly represented.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that CBDT has asked its field
formations to ensure regular coordination with the administrative
authorities in the Courts for expeditious disposal of prosecution cases.

We feel that CBDT may ensure that the coordination mechanism is
effective.

7. CBDT should perform one time exercise to identify the stage of
pendency of all cases in the various Courts and follow it actively for
resolution.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that CBDT has initiated such an
exercise in respect of pending cases.

8. CBDT should consider compounding offences before launching the
prosecution proceedings so that revenues are collected.

72


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)
The Ministry described (October 2013) the existing mechanism for
compounding of offences.

We feel that the existing mechanism should be implemented in letter
and spirit.

9. CBDT should deploy prosecution machinery for high impact cases and
avoid focussing on low impact cases.

The Ministry stated (October 2013) that the steps to streamline
prosecution machinery are being taken.

Norered

New Delhi (MANISH KUMAR)
Dated: 13 December 2013 Principal Director (Direct Taxes)

Countersigned

९९,४24
New Delhi (SHASHI KANT SHARMA)
Dated: 13 December 2013 Comptroller and Auditor General of India

73


Annex A

Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Penalty and Prosecution provisions under Income Tax Act

Penalty Provisions

Section

Brief of the provisions

Minimum Penalty

Maximum Penalty

140A(3)

221(1))

271(1)(b)

271(1)(c)/

(d)

271A

271AA

271AAA

2718

27188

271९

27100

2710

Failure to pay income tax and/or, interest in
accordance with Section 140A(1)

Default in making payment of tax within
prescribed time

Failure to comply with a notice under section
142(1) or 143(2) or with a direction issued
under section 142(2A)

Concealment of particular income 0
furnishing of inaccurate particulars of
income.

Failure to keep or maintain information or
documents etc. as required u/s 44AA

Failure to maintain information 0
documents etc. in respect of international

transactions.

Undisclosed income in the case of Search
(applicable from 01/06/2007).

Failure to get the accounts audited u/s 44AB
or furnish such information as required u/s
4488.

Failure to submit the report u/s 92E

Failure to deduct tax as required u/s 192 to
195 or, failure to pay the tax as required u/s

115-O(2) or second proviso to section 1948.

Failure to collect the tax at source.

Accepting loan or deposit in contravention to
the provision of section 26955.

75

Such amount as the
AO may impose.

Such amount as the
AO may impose.

हैं 10,000 for each
failure.

100 per cent of tax
sought to be evaded.

% 25,000

Two per cent of the
value of such
transaction.

10 per cent of the
undisclosed income
of the — specified
previous year.

Half per cent of the
total sales turn over
or gross sales.

%1,00,000

Amount of tax such
person failed to
deduct or pay.

100 per cent of tax
such person failed to
collect.

Amount of loan or
deposit accepted.

Tax in arrear

Tax in arrear

हैं 10,000 for each
failure

300 per cent of tax
sought to be evaded.

₹ 25,000

र₹ 1,00,000


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

271६

2717

27178

27178

2716

272A(1)(a)

272A(1)(b)

272A(1)(c)

272A(2)

Repayment of loan or deposit in
contravention to the provision of section
269T.

Failure to furnish return of income as
required by section 139(1) before the end of
relevant AY.

Failure to furnish Annual Information return
within prescribed time as required by section
285BA(1).

Failure to furnish the return of Fringe
Benefits.

Failure to furnish information or documents
u/s 92D.

Failure to answer any question put to any
person by an Income Tax Authority.

Failure to sign any statement made by a
person in course of income tax proceedings.

Failure to comply with summons issued u/s

131(1) to give evidence or produce
documents.
Failure to comply with a notice

e u/s 94; to give notice of
discontinuation of business/
profession u/ 176(3);

e to furnish return/ statements
mentioned in sections 133,206,206C,
or 285B;

e to allow inspection of registers

referred in section 134;

e to furnish return of income u/s
139(4C) or 139(4A) or to deliver in
due time a declaration mentioned in
section 197A or 206C(1A);

e to furnish certificate as required u/s
203 or 206C;

e to deduct and pay tax u/s 226; to
furnish statement as required u/s
192(2C);

e to deliver a copy of statement of
TDS/ TCS u/s 200(3)/ 206C(3);

e to deliver return u/s 206A.

76

Amount of loan or
deposit paid.

% 5,000

% 100 for every day
of failure

% 100 for every day
of failure

Two per cent of
value of such
transaction

% 10,000 for each
default.

% 10,000 for each
default.

% 10,000 for each
default.

₹ 100 for every day
during which
defaults continues.

₹ 10,000 for each
default.

% 10,000 for each
default.

₹ 10,000 for each
default.

₹ 100 for every day
during which defaults
continues.


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

272AA Failure to comply with section 133B. Any fine up to % 1,000
%1,000

272B Failure to comply with section 139A. = 10,000 -

272BB(1) Failure to comply with section 203A. Up to ₹ 10,000. = 10,000

272BB(1A) Failure to quote Tax Deduction or Tax %10,000 -
Collection Account Number. (From
1/6/2006).

272BBB Failure to comply with the provision of % 10,000 -
section 206CA (from 1/06/2002 but before
1/10/2004).

273A /AA These sections empower the CIT to grant immunity from penalty.

2738 Penalty not to be imposed in certain cases if assessee proves that there was reasonable
cause for the said failure.

274 Procedure for imposing Penalties

275 Bar of limitation for imposing Penalties

77


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Prosecution Provisions

Section Nature of offences Punishment
Rigorous imprisonment
275A Dealing with seized assets: contravention of prohibitory Up to two years & fine
/order for constructive seizure u/s 132(3)/ second
proviso u/s 132 (1).
2758 Failure to comply with the provisions of Section 132 (1) (iib), Upto two years & fine
in relation to affording facilities to inspect.
276 Fraudulent removal, concealment, transfer or delivery of Upto two years & fine
any property to thwart tax recovery.
276A Failure to comply with provisions of 278(1) & 278(3). Up to two years & fine
2768 Failure to pay tax to the credit of the Central Government Three Months & fine
(TDS) or failure to pay to the Government tax u/s 115-O
276BB Failure to pay the tax collected at source Three months & fine
276C(1) —- Willful attempt to evade tax, penalty or interest If tax evaded exceeds हैं One
lakh, six months to seven years
276C(2) Willful attempt to evade the payment of any tax, penalty or & fine, otherwise:
interest. Three months to three years &
fine
276CC Willful failure to furnish return of income u/s 139(1)/ Do
142/148 or 153A or 115WD(1)/115WH(FBT)
276D Willful failure to produce accounts and documents as Up to one year or fine @
directed by issue of notice under section 142(1) % four to 10 for each day of
default or both.
277 Making a false statement in verification or delivering a false If tax evaded exceeds = one
account or statement lakh six months, otherwise:
three
& fine

2770 Falsification of books of accounts or documents etc. Three months (and fine)

278 Abetment to make false statement or declaration If tax evaded exceeds हैं one
lakh, six months , otherwise:
three months & fine

278A Punishment 2क्‍ and subsequent offences in cases of certain Six months for every offence

defaults
2788 & Offences committed by companies, firm, HUF, criminal Same as in the case of the
278C liability of managing director, managing partner, kartha or company/firm/HUF
any such officer, who willfully committed the offences for
the company/firm/HUF.
280(1) Disclosure by a public servant in contravention of Any period of six months & fine

section 138(2)

78


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Penalty provisions under Wealth Tax Act

Section Brief of the provisions Minimum Penalty Maximum Penalty
15B(3) Failure to pay tax or interest payable on self- Not exceeding 100 per -
assessment. cent of tax in arrears.
18 (1)(ii) Failure to comply with the notice u/s 16(2) or हैं 1,000 % 25,000
(4) without reasonable cause
18(1)(iii) Concealment of wealth 100 per cent of tax 500 per cent of tax
sought to be evaded sought to be
evaded
18A(1)(a), Failure to answer question (i) legally bound, %500 foreach failure हैं 10,000 for each
(b) and(c) (ii) sign statement, (iii) comply with failure
summons
18A9(2) Failure to furnish statement ₹ 100 per day of हैं 200 per day of
failure failure
32 Default in payment of tax Not exceeding 100 per

cent of tax in arrears.

79


Report No. 28 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Abbreviations

AC Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax

ACMM Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate

AO Assessing Officer

AST Assessment Information System

AY Assessment Year

BIFR Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction

CBDT Central Board of Direct Tax

CCIT Chief Commissioner of Income Tax

CCIT (CCA) Chief Commissioner of Income Tax (Cadre Controlling
Authority)

CEIB Central Economic Intelligence Bureau

CIT Commissioner of Income Tax

Cr PC Criminal Procedure Code

DDIT Deputy Director of Income Tax

DGIT Director General of Income Tax

EOC Economic Offences Court

FY Financial Year

ITAT Income Tax Appellate Tribunal

ITD Income Tax Department

ITO Income Tax Officer

JCIT Joint Commissioner of Income Tax

JDIT Joint Director of Income Tax

MIS Management Information System

1४07 Manual of Procedures

MPR Monthly Progress Report

NLP National Litigation Policy

PA Performance Audit

PAN Permanent Account Number

QPR Quarterly Progress Report

TCS Tax Collected at Source

TDS Tax Deducted at Source

80