RRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRReeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooorrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrtttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttt   ooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooofffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff ttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttthhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhhheeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee
CCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooommmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmpppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppppttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrroooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooollllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllleeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeerrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr  aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaannnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnndddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddd
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttoooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooorrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr  GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeennnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeerrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrraaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaalllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll   ooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff IIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIIInnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa
ooooooooooooooooooooooonnnnnnnnnnnnnnn
UUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUUnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiioooooooooooooooooooooonnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn  GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooovvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvveeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeerrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeennnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttt (((((((((((((((((((((((((((((((((((CCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiivvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvviiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiillllllllllllll))))))))))))))))))))))
MMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMMiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiinnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiissssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr
yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy oooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff CCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuullllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttttuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuurrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrreeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee
RRRRRRRRRRRRRRRRReeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeppppppppppppppppppppppppppooooooooooooooorrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr
ttttttttttttttt NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNoooooooooooooo..... 11111111111111111111888888888888888888888888888888 oooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooofffffffffffffffffffffffff 22222222222222222222200000000000000000000000000000000000001111111111111111111111111333333333333333333
(((((((((((((((((((((PPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPPeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeerrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrr
ffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooorrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaannnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee  AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuuudddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddddiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiitttttttttttttttttttttttt))))))))))))))))))))))))))))))
nnnniiiiiiiiooooooonnnnnnGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGoooooooooooooooooovvvvvvvvvvvvvvvvveeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeerrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrrnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeennnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnttttttttttttttttttttttttt(((((((((((((((((((((((((((((((((((((CCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCCiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiivvvvvvvvvvv
Report of the
Comptroller and
Auditor General of India
on
PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF
PRESERVATION AND
CONSERVATION
OF MONUMENTS 
AND ANTIQUITIES
Union Government (Civil)
Ministry of Culture
Report No. 18 of 2013
(Performance Audit)


Report No. 18  of 2013 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities iii 
 
 
 
 
 Chapter Page no. 
 Preface v 
 Executive Summary and Recommendations vii-xiii 
Chapter – /g12 Introduction 1 
Chapter - /g12/g12 Identification and Protection of Monuments and their 
documentation 
9 
Chapter - /g12/g12/g12 Management of World Heritage Sites 35 
Chapter - /g12V Preservation and Conservation Works 63 
Chapter - V Excavation, Epigraphy and Survey 101 
Chapter - /g25/g12 Management of Antiquities 131 
Chapter - /g25/g12/g12 Financial Management  157 
Chapter - /g25/g12/g12/g12 Manpower Management 169 
Chapter - /g12/g27 Security of the Monument and Antiquities 177 
Chapter - /g27 Awareness, Interpretation and Amenities 195 
Chapter - /g27/g12 Governance and Insensitivity to Red Signals 205 
Chapter - /g27/g12/g12 Conclusion 221 
 Annex 227 
 Glossary 282 
 
Contents 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities v 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for 
the year ended March 2012 containing the results of the 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of 
Monuments and Antiquities has been prepared for submission 
to the President of India under Article 151 of the Constitution.  
The Performance Audit was conducted during April 2012 to 
February 2013. The report emanates from scrutiny of files and 
documents pertaining to Ministry of Culture, Archaeological 
Survey of India, National Monument Authority, National 
Culture Fund, National Museum, Delhi, Indian Museum 
Kolkata, Salar Jung Museum Hyderabad, Allahabad Museum, 
Allahabad, Victoria Memorial Hall, Kolkata, Asiatic Society, 
Kolkata, Asiatic Society, Mumbai and Chhatrapati Shivaji 
Maharaj Vastu Sangrahalaya, Mumbai. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities vii 
 
Executive Summary
 
 
 
Constitution of India stipulates that it shall be the duty of every citizen of India to 
value and preserve the rich heritage of composite culture. We thus, have a special 
responsibility for preservation of our heritage as one of our fundamental duties. 
The Ministry of Culture is responsible for the preservation and conservation and 
promotion of Indian heritage and culture. The Ministry through the Archaeological 
Survey of India and the Museums is engaged in the protection of all centrally 
protected monuments of national importance, excavation of historical sites and 
collection and showcasing the art objects of historical and cultural importance. 
Through this performance audit, we evaluated the efforts of the Ministry of Culture 
towards protection, conservation and preservation of country’s tangible heritage of 
monuments and antiquities. 
Why did we select this topic? 
Heritage structures, sites and antiquities are national assets. The work on heritage 
identification and preservation started in mid nineteenth century in India much 
before the independence. However, since independence, the progress made over 
the years had not been reviewed comprehensively. In the recent times, there has 
been an increased consciousness in the Indian community towards the heritage and 
its conservation. In 2012, ASI completed 150 years of existence. Many of its major 
excavation projects were, however, lying incomplete for years. The preservation 
projects being undertaken by the ASI too have been marred by several inadequacies 
and limitations. The organisation has serious funds and manpower shortages for the 
conservation related activities. There is also a rising trend of incidences of antiquity 
theft and smuggling of antiquities from the country. Country’s premier museums 
lack resources and planning for proper upkeep, security and display of collected art 
objects. 
Noting the above scenario, we planned this performance audit with the aim to assist 
the executive in identifying the reasons behind deficient performance of the 
organisations in the field of heritage preservation and conservation for enabling 
effective rectificatory steps. 
What has been covered in this audit? 
The performance audit included a joint physical inspection of 1655 monuments and 
sites out of the 3678 centrally protected monuments and sites spread nationwide 
Executive Summary 

 Report No. 18 of 2013 
viii Performance Audit on Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Executive Summary
 
over 24 ASI Circles. These Monuments and Sites were selected for site inspection on 
the basis of their historical importance and geographic spread. Seven museums 1 
were also included in this physical inspection. Records of the ASI and its offices, the 
Ministry of Culture, Museums and other associated organisations viz., the National 
Monument Authority and National Culture Fund for the period 2007-08 to 2011-12 
were test checked for this performance audit. 
How is the Report organised? 
Chapter I of this Report provides background information, audit approach, and 
details of sample selection. Chapters II to X provide overall audit findings on 
predefined audit objectives dealing with the themes of preservation and 
conservation of monuments and antiquities, management of excavation project, 
funding, functioning of the major museums and monitoring.  In Chapter XI we have 
attempted to examine the governance issues at level of the Ministry and its 
responsiveness to the recommendations given by various Committees, Court Rulings 
and earlier CAG Reports. Chapter XII presents the conclusions.  The Report contains 
61 recommendations. 
Highlights of audit findings 
• We noted that the Ministry through the ASI had not conducted a comprehensive 
survey or review to identify monuments which were of national importance for 
inclusion in the list of centrally protected monuments. Similarly, there were no 
efforts to identify those monuments which had lost the stature of national 
importance over a period of time. 
(Para 2.1) 
• The ASI did not have a reliable database of the exact number of protected 
monuments under its jurisdiction. In the absence of this primary information, we 
were unable to conclude if the ASI was able to fulfill its basic mandate effectively.  
(Para 2.2) 
• During joint physical inspections we found that out of the sample of 1655 
centrally protected monuments selected by us, 92 monuments (6 per cent) were 
not traceable. This was far higher than the number communicated to the 
Parliament by the ASI.  
(Para 2.5) 
 
                                                            
1 National Museum, Delhi; Indian Museum, Kolkata; Victoria Memorial Hall, Kolkata; Asiatic Society, 
Kolkata; Asiatic Society, Mumbai; Salar Jung Museum, Hyderabad and Allahabad Museum, 
Allahabad.  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities ix 
 
Executive Summary
• The World Heritage Sites did not receive appropriate care and protection.  There 
were numerous cases of encroachment and unauthorised construction in and 
around these sites.  We found that a comprehensive assessment of preservation 
works that were required had never been carried out. 
(Para 3.4) 
•  The ASI did not have an updated and approved Conservation Policy to address 
the conservation and preservation requirements. We noted the absence of any 
prescribed criteria for prioritisation of monuments which required conservation 
works. As a result, monuments were selected arbitrarily for carrying out 
conservation works. Further, many monuments were never considered for any 
kind of structural conservation despite need for the same. 
(Para 4.1.1) 
• Inspection notes on the condition of monuments were not being prepared by the 
ASI officials. There was poor documentation of the conservation works. Even 
basic records such as measurement books, log books and site registers were not 
being maintained properly.  As a result, we could not conclude if the monuments 
selected for conservation works were need based nor could we ascertain the 
propriety and genuineness of the expenditure incurred on conservation works. 
(Para 4.1.1 & 4.1.2) 
• One of the primary activities of the ASI was exploration and excavation of the 
remains in the country and their study. However, we observed that the ASI was 
spending less than one per cent of its total expenditure on such activities. 
(Para 5.3) 
• We observed poor documentation of the excavation works carried out by the 
ASI. The ASI HQ could not provide the status of 458 excavation proposals 
approved during the last five years.  Similarly, complete information was not 
available on the status of pending excavation reports. We also noted numerous 
cases of excavation proposals not being undertaken or left incomplete. 
(Para 5.4.1 & 5.8) 
 
• The ASI did not have a Comprehensive Policy guideline for the management of 
Antiquities owned by it. There were no standards for acquisition, preservation, 
documentation and custody of objects possessed by the ASI. During site 
inspections we noticed valuable antiquities found during excavations being 
stored in poor condition. 
(Para 6.1.1) 

 Report No. 18 of 2013 
x Performance Audit on Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Executive Summary
 
• We observed significant shortcomings in the functioning of Museums in relation 
to acquisition, documentation and conservation of acquired art objects.  Most 
Museums did not have a system in place for the evaluation of acquired objects to 
verify their genuineness. We were, therefore, unable to derive any assurance on 
the authenticity of the artifacts acquired. 
(Para 6.2.3) 
• Proper maintenance of the accession register was essential to correctly account 
for the Museum objects and also for their safety.  However, systematic 
maintenance of the accession register was largely absent in the museums. We 
observed significant discrepancies in the number of antiquities reportedly 
available in the Indian Museum, Kolkata, National Museum, Delhi and Asiatic 
Society, Kolkata and those available as per their database. 
(Para 6.5.1) 
• There was no laid down policy for systematic conservation and restoration of the 
artifacts which resulted in their deterioration.  
(Para 6.8) 
• The ASI, as the custodian of antiquities, did not even maintain a database of the 
total number of antiquities in its possession. In the absence of centralised 
information, there was a significant risk of theft or loss of these antiquities. 
During our inspections, we found that 131 antiquities were stolen from various 
monuments/sites and 37 antiquities from site museums.  However, the efforts of 
the ASI to retrieve these items were completely ineffective. 
(Para 6.10.2 & 6.11) 
• Museums did not evolve a rotation policy for displaying artifacts in galleries.  As a 
result, more than 95 per cent  of objects were lying in reserve, in some of the 
audited museums without ever having been put on display.  
(Para 6.14.1) 
• There were acute shortages of staff in all key positions in the ASI. This adversely 
affected the security and maintenance of monuments. Shortage of staff was also 
noticed in some of the museums and other organisations like NMA.  
(Para 8.1.1 & 8.6) 
• Governance from the Ministry of Culture was lax and was found deficient on 
aspects of adequacy of policy and legislation, financial management, monitoring 
of conservation projects and provision of human resources to these 
organisations. 
(Para 11.1) 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities xi 
 
Executive Summary
• Over the years, shortcomings related to the functioning of the ASI and museums 
had been highlighted by various expert/Parliamentary Committees.  However, 
Ministry failed to take note of these red signals for initiating corrective measures. 
(Para 11.1.4) 
Summary of Recommendations: 
• The lists of protected monuments should be updated and reconciled periodically 
so that there was no ambiguity with regard to the number of protected 
monuments under each Sub Circle, Circle and the ASI as a whole.  
• The ASI should make a provision for inspection of each protected monument by 
an officer of suitable level periodically. The ASI should publish the state of each 
monument being protected by it on the basis of detailed inspection note and 
photographic evidence collected during such inspection on a regular basis. 
• The ASI should have a laid down policy for notification of sites with contested 
ownership or occupants. These sites can be placed in the tentative list for 
nomination till all disputes are resolved. 
• There is an urgent need to come up with a written agreement with the 
management of the sites with restrictive entry, to enable access to these sites by 
common visitors. The ASI also needs to develop policy for maintaining such sites. 
• It is inevitable that changes would be carried out in the protected monuments if 
they are to be also used as offices and residences. For these exceptions, the ASI 
should prepare detailed guidelines and get the Act revised appropriately. 
• The notification is an important document which not only provides a legal status 
for centrally protected monument but also defines the area of the site. This 
document is crucial for establishing encroachment or unauthorised construction 
at the site. The ASI should maintain a centralised database of all notifications and 
records related to the sites which should be readily available with the ASI HQ. 
• There should be no room for ambiguity and difference in factual information 
related to the monuments. The ASI should collect the MIS data from its Circles on 
each of the protected monument and place it in public domain after reconciling 
the discrepancies. 
• The Ministry should come up with a strategy to ensure time bound completion of 
heritage by-laws for all protected monuments and their speedy approval. 
• The ASI should define objective criteria and requirements for selection of sites 
for the tentative list and from the tentative list for final inscription of World 
Heritage Site, as this will help in prioritising, planning and preparing the sites 
before nomination. 

 Report No. 18 of 2013 
xii Performance Audit on Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Executive Summary
 
• The ASI should adopt a systematic approach for the development of tentative 
world heritage sites through conservation and site management.  This alone can 
ensure final inscription of the site. 
• The Ministry should develop a separate project for maintenance and security of 
World Heritage Sites. There should be proper assessment of funds, security and 
conservation requirements. 
• The Ministry should develop a Comprehensive Conservation Policy and update its 
manuals and works code. The ASI should make it mandatory to maintain log 
books for each protected monument with detailed documentation of all 
conservation efforts. 
• To be effective, the ASI needs to prioritise its projects requiring funding through 
NCF.  For this, a comprehensive assessment of funds needs to be carried out in 
advance. 
• There should be detailed guidelines on management of ‘living’ monuments. 
• Documentation on ‘non-living’ monuments should be properly maintained to 
curb instances of unauthorised possession and use. 
• The Ministry should ensure finalisation of the National Policy on Archaeological 
Excavation and Exploration expeditiously. 
• The ASI may consider devising mechanisms for preparing a priority list for 
excavation projects based on importance of the site. The list may be updated 
annually. 
• A protocol is required for handing over and maintenance of antiquities with laid 
down responsibilities and accountability for loss. Proper arrangement needs to 
be made for storing these antiquities. 
• The ASI may prepare an inventory of the excavated antiquities and their 
locations and put it in public domain so as to facilitate its use for 
reference/research by scholars. 
• The ASI needs to enhance the use of modern scientific technology, build capacity 
of its officials and establish an upgraded dating laboratory of its own. 
• The provisions of AAT Act and the International Conventions should be reviewed 
in order to make the legislation more contemporary and effective and to 
facilitate restoration of stolen art objects from other countries. 
• The Ministry should expedite the work of registering antiquities and devise 
procedures for ensuring the genuineness of the registered antiquities in a time 
bound manner.  Electronic format may be considered for the purpose. 
• The ASI should develop a centralised and digitised data base of antiquities to 
document all details of antiquities stored at different locations. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities xiii 
 
Executive Summary
• There is a need for a more concerted approach for retrieval of Indian art objects 
stolen or illegally exported to other countries. The ASI, as the nodal agency for 
this purpose needs to be more proactive and vigilant in its efforts and the 
Ministry needs to develop an aggressive strategy for the same. 
• The Ministry should frame a comprehensive policy for Management of 
Antiquities owned by different central museums. 
• The ASI needs to develop detailed guidelines for the functioning and 
establishment of site museums. 
• The Museums should adopt a rotation policy for the display of artifacts.  It should 
device mechanism for proper and attractive display methods to attract visitors. 
• The reserve collection should also be properly maintained and preserved in 
suitable storing conditions. 
• The ASI should frame clear norms and guidelines for designating a particular 
monument as ticketed, with a view to enhance the revenue realisation from sale 
of entry tickets. 
• The ASI needs to revise the rates for film shooting and ticketing to make it a 
substantial source of revenue. 
• The Ministry needs to diversify and explore on the new modes of revenue 
generation from the Heritage Sites and Museums.  Options should be explored in 
view of best practices adopted globally. 
• The Ministry should take immediate steps to resolve manpower shortages 
especially in the crucial cadres engaged in Conservation related works. 
• The ASI should constitute a coordination body with representatives of respective 
State Governments at each Circle to check the incidents of encroachments with 
the cooperation of District and Police authorities. 
• There should be regular monitoring of existing encroachment cases by the 
Ministry at the highest level. Encroachment by State Government agencies or 
other Government of India agencies should be sorted out in a time bound 
manner by raising the matter at higher levels. 
• There should be a security plan for each monument, taking into account its 
location, area, structure, footfall and other vulnerabilities. This exercise should 
be performed in house by the ASI to ensure coverage of ground level realities. 
• The Museums should adopt appropriate security measures to provide protection 
against theft, damage and losses.  The Ministry should take initiative in 
development of a comprehensive security policy for museums with uniform 
standards for all museums under its control. 
• The ASI should have funds earmarked specifically for awareness, interpretation 
and related activities. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of Monuments and Antiquities 1
 
Chapter –/g12:Introduction
 
 
 
Our heritage is an indispensable part of our identity. World over, heritage 
conservation is viewed as a subject of utmost importance for national identity and 
also for preserving the knowledge and arts of the past. According to United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO), culture and development 
cannot be separated, either in terms of economic growth or as a means of access to 
a satisfactory intellectual, moral and spiritual existence. Development involves the 
capabilities that allow groups, communities and nations to plan their future in an 
integral and integrated way. Thus, heritage conservation can be seen as a cross-
cutting factor in economic, social and environmental development. 
The Ministry of Culture (Ministry) is responsible for preservation, conservation, 
promotion and dissemination of all forms of art and culture in the country. The 
Ministry, through the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) is engaged in protection of 
all the centrally protected monuments of national importance and excavations of 
historical sites. Through various museums it is ensuring collection, preservation and 
display of antiquities.  
The ASI, an attached office of the Ministry, was established in 1861 with the primary 
objective of conservation, preservation and maintenance of the centrally protected 
monuments. The ASI’s jurisdiction includes 3678 centrally protected monuments and 
archeological sites as varied as megalithic sites, burials, rock cut caves, stupas, 
temples, mosques, churches, forts, water systems, pillars, inscriptions, relics, 
monolithic statues, sculptures. Conservation of a monument or a site is a continuous 
process and yearly programs for this are drawn by the Circles and Branches of the 
ASI.   
The ASI has undertaken works for structural conservation, chemical preservation and 
horticultural operations based on the priorities, commitments and available 
manpower and financial resources. The ASI has 19 World Heritage Sites under its 
protection.  
In 2011, the ASI celebrated 150 years of its existence.  The work on heritage 
identification and preservation in India started in mid nineteenth century. However, 
there has been no comprehensive independent scrutiny of Government’s efforts and 
performance of the organisations engaged in the work of heritage conservation. 
Introduction 
CHAPTER – I 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
2 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g12:Introduction
Approximately 33 per cent1 of the total budget of the Ministry was utilised for the 
functioning of the ASI. Another six per cent was given to the seven major museums 
of the country. Together, these institutions are repository of our country’s invaluable 
heritage and treasures.  
1.1 Organisations Covered in this Audit   
The Ministry of Culture functions with a set up of various attached offices, sub-
ordinates offices and autonomous bodies under its administrative and financial 
control.  The Chart 1.1 shows the organisational structure of the Ministry depicting 
the organisations/ bodies covered under audit.  
 
Chart 1.1: Entities Covered in this Performance Audit 
The Archaeological Survey of India is the apex organisation engaged in the work of 
preservation of monuments and protected sites. For the maintenance of ancient 
monuments and archaeological sites and remains of national importance, the entire 
country is divided into 24 Circles and one mini Circle (Leh). The Circles represent the 
structural conservation Divisions. In addition, there are 10
2 Directorates for 
specialised activities.  
                                                       
1 As per Budget Estimates for the year 2011-12  
2 Directorate of Horticulture, Science, Epigraphy, Excavation, Museum, Publication, Monument, World Heritage 
Sites, Conservation and Antiquity 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of Monuments and Antiquities 3
 
Chapter –/g12:Introduction
The ASI is headed by a Director General who is supported by Additional and Joint 
Directors General.  Each Branch is headed by Directors. The Circles responsible for 
the maintenance of the monuments and structural conservationare headed by 
Superintending Archaeologists supported by Engineers and Conservators.  The 
Circles are further divided into the Sub Circles headed by Conservation Assistants 
who are directly responsible for the activities carried out at the monuments.  
Besides the Circles, there are six Excavation Branches, two Temple survey projects, a 
Building survey project and a Pre history Branch. Directorate of Epigraphy has branch 
offices at Nagpur, Lucknow and Mysore. Directorate of Horticulture has four 
Divisional offices at Agra, Delhi, Mysore and Bhubaneswar.  Directorate of Science 
has three divisional offices and 11 zonal offices. From April 2010, the ASI also 
established regional offices of Museum branch at Delhi, Sarnath, Goa and Chennai.  
We noted that in October 2012 a decision was taken to merge these with the Circles. 
The Ministry also functioned through other organisations under its control, 
constituting various central Museums, National Culture Fund (NCF) and National 
Monument Authority (NMA).  The details of these organisations are given in  
Annex-1.1. 
1.2 Legal Framework 
1.2.1 Constitutional Mandate 
As per Article 51 A (f) of the Constitution of India, ‘It shall be the duty of every 
citizen of India to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture.’ 
In Independent India, the Constitution divided the jurisdiction over these 
monuments and archaeological sites as follows:   
• Union : ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites and 
remains, declared by Parliament by law to be of national importance;    
• State: ancient and historical monuments other than those declared by 
Parliament to be of national importance.    
• Besides these, both the Union and the States would have concurrent 
jurisdiction over archaeological sites and remains other than those declared by 
Parliament by law to be of national importance.   
The important enactments promulgated to protect and preserve archaeological sites 
are as follows: 
• The Indian Treasure Trove Act, 1878 -First legislation post-establishment of the 
ASI enacted to protect and preserve treasure found accidentally but having 
archaeological and historical value. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
4 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g12:Introduction
• The Ancient Monuments Preservation Act, 1904 - Enacted to provide effective 
preservation and authority to the ASI over the monument particularly those, 
which were under the custody of individual or private ownership.  
• The Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains 
(Declaration of National Importance) Act, 1951. 
• The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (AMASR) Act, 
1958-Enacted on 28 August 1958, the Act provides for the preservation of 
ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites and remains of 
national importance, for the regulation of archaeological excavations and for the 
protection of sculptures, carvings and other like objects. The Act was followed by 
AMASR Rules 1959. 
• The Antiquities and Art Treasures (AAT) Act 1972 -Enacted in September 1972 for 
effective control over the moveable cultural property, consisting of antiquities 
and art treasures. The AAT Act was followed by AAT Rules 1973 which were 
enforceable with effect from 5 April 1976.  
• The AMASR (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010 - The Act prescribes the limits 
of regulated and prohibited area around a monument by amending section 20 of 
AMASR Act 1958.  It also provided for creation of National Monument Authority. 
The important provisions of the AMASR Act and the AAT Act are given in Annex-1.2. 
1.3 Audit Approach 
1.3.1 Audit Objectives 
The Performance Audit was conducted with the objectives to ascertain: 
• Adequacy of efforts to identify, document, protect, preserve and showcase 
monuments of national importance. 
• Proper management of excavation projects with due documentation, 
preservation and protection of antiquities and excavated sites. 
• Existence of proper institutional and monitoring mechanism to ensure heritage 
conservation and for exploring new avenues in this field. 
• Effective and efficient functioning of the major Museums of the country and the 
Site Museums of the ASI withdue acquisition, preservation, conservation and 
security of art objects being collected by them. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of Monuments and Antiquities 5
 
Chapter –/g12:Introduction
• Performance of the Museum movement with respect to its stated objectives of 
displaying the collection of antiquities and educating the people through it. 
• Proper financial management including adequacy of funds for conservation 
projects, utilisation of funds, revenue generation, remittance of revenue in 
Government account and accounting thereof. 
1.3.2 Sources of Audit Criteria 
The performance of the ASI was evaluated with reference to the criteria derived 
from the following sources of documents: 
• Acts, Rules and Regulations for Monuments and Antiquities; 
• Various guidelines in respect of maintenance and upkeep of Antiquities; 
• Manuals related to the conservation of Monuments and Antiquities like 
Archaeological Works Manual and John Marshalls Conservation Manual; 
• Archaeological Works Code and Central Public Works Department (CPWD) 
Manual; 
• International Charters, e.g., International Council on Monuments and Sites 
(ICOMOS) and International Centre for the study of Preservation and Restoration 
of Cultural Properly (ICCROM); and 
• Rules and regulations of the Central Government, as applicable. 
1.3.3 Scope of Audit 
The Performance Audit was restricted to the centrally protected monuments of 
national importance protected and preserved by the ASI 3.  For antiquities, we 
covered seven Museums 4 under the control of the Ministry and 44 Site Museums 
under the control of the ASI.  Functioning of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Vastu 
Sangrahalaya, Mumbai a private organisation 5 was also looked into to draw 
comparisons with other museums managed by the Ministry. The period covered 
under audit was from 2007-08 to 2011-12. The records of earlier period and till the 
date of audit were also scrutinised wherever required to draw conclusions. 
The performance audit also covered audit of National Culture Fund and National 
Monument Authority. 
                                                      
 
3 This audit did not cover the state protected monuments and the unprotected monuments.  
4 National Museum, Delhi, Indian Museum, Kolkata, Victoria Memorial Hall, Kolkata, Allahabad 
Museum, Allahabad, Salar Jung Museum, Hyderabad, Asiatic Society, Kolkata and Asiatic Society 
Mumbai 
5 The Museum received grants from the Ministry for its modernisation project  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
6 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g12:Introduction
1.3.4 Audit Methodology 
The entry conference with the Secretary to the Government of India (Ministry of 
Culture) was held on 16 May 2012 wherein the audit objectives, scope and 
methodology were explained.  Separate entry conferences were held with the DG 
ASI and Heads of all the seven Museums.   
The audit teams scrutinised the records of different sections/branches of the ASI as 
well as of the seven Museums.  The performance audit also encompassed joint 
physical inspection of the monuments and antiquities carried out by the audit teams 
along with the officials of the concerned departments. 
After completion of audit an Exit conference was held on 3 June 2013 with the 
Ministry of Culture, ASI and heads of other museums to discuss the audit findings.  
Responses received from the audited entities have been considered while preparing 
this Report and these have been included to the extent feasible. 
1.3.5 Audit Sampling 
A sample of monuments and sites for joint physical inspection with the ASI officials 
was selected in view of their historical importance and geographic spread.  Out of 
the 3678 monuments notified by the ASI, joint physical inspections of 1655 
monuments (45 per cent) were carried out. The circle wise details are given in 
Annex-1.3.   
1.3.6 Audit Constraints 
Despite our repeated requests, the following information and records were not 
provided to us: 
Name of the 
organisation 
Details of records/information not provided 
Archaeological 
Survey of India 
 
• Records related to details of the monuments along with 
notification numbers etc. for the Bengaluru, Bhopal, Chennai, 
Dharwad, Hyderabad, Lucknow, Patna and Srinagar Circles. 
• Files and records related to preparation of World Heritage Site: 
nomination dossier 6 for Rani-ki-vav, Gujarat and Qutb Shahi, 
Hyderabad. 
                                                       
6  A document containing information required by UNESCO for inscribing any monument/site as a WHS  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of Monuments and Antiquities 7
 
Chapter –/g12:Introduction
• Files and records related to preparation of Integrated 
Management Plan for Champaner Pavagarh, Gujarat. 
• Records related to selection of Consultants in 2002 and 2006 for 
World Heritage Site nomination for Majuli, Assam. 
• Report submitted by Shri Prakash Chand, Consultant for 
restructuring and reorganisation of the ASI in 2012 and action 
taken thereon. 
•  Recommendations of Wheeler committee of 1965 and action 
taken thereon by the ASI. 
• Report submitted by the committee constituted in 2012 to 
review the security arrangement and assess the performance of 
private security guards at ASI. 
• Information with regard to Kos Minars of Agra Circle. 
• Details of full time security guards deployed at monuments. 
National 
Monument 
Authority 
 
• Files and records related to the appointment and selection of 
consultants for technical and administrative works. 
• Files and records in respect of the cases where NMA 
recommended for rejection of NOCs. 
• Files and records in respect of the cases where the applications 
were returned seeking more information. 
National Museum • Information on the ‘AA’ category objects 
In the absence of these records, we were unable to provide assurance that due 
processes were followed and the applicable rules and regulations adhered to by the 
concerned departments in these cases.  Further, this constituted a limitation on the 
scope of audit. 
1.4 Acknowledgement 
We acknowledge the co-operation and assistance of the Ministry of Culture, 
Archaeological Survey of India and their field staff, National Monument Authority, 
National Culture Fund, National Museum, Indian Museum, Salarjung Museum, 
Allahabad Museum, Victoria Memorial Hall, Asiatic Society Kolkata, Asiatic Society 
Mumbai and Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Vastu Sanghralaya (CSMVS) for the 
completion of this audit.  The inputs provided by field level staff during joint physical 
inspection were specially found very useful in gaining an understanding of the 
conservation process. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 9
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
 
 
 
 
For appropriate protection and conservation of monuments and sites, the first step 
was their identification. The AMASR Act, 1958 authorised the Central Government to 
designate the “Monuments of National importance”.   
2.1 Monuments of National Importance 
According to section 3 of the AMASR Act, 1958, all ancient and historical monuments 
and all archaeological sites and remains which had been declared by the Ancient and 
Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains (Declaration of National 
Importance) Act, 1951 or by Section 126 of the State Re-organisations Act, 1956 to 
be of national importance shall be declared to be of national importance.The Act 
stated that protected monuments  should be the ancient monument and 
archaeological sites and remains which are of historical, archaeological or artistic 
interest and which have been in existence for not less than 100 years. However the 
Act did not define the term “national importance” in objective terms with a defined 
set of criteria. Even the Ministry so far had not specified any detailed criteria for 
declaring any monument to be of national importance. 
 
We also noted that the Ministry through ASI had not conducted any 
comprehensive survey or review for identifying monuments which were of 
national importance for inclusion in the list of Centrally Protected monuments.  
There were no standing instructions for the ASI Circles to look for and recommend 
such unprotected monumentsfor notificationon a regular basis.  
We found that a detailed review was also required to de-notify monuments which 
were brought to protection prior to independence and had lost importance over 
time. 
The Ministry (May 2013) agreed that there was an urgent need to review and survey 
all the ancient monuments and archaeological sites declared as of national 
importance whether they still continue to be of national importance.
 
2.2 Protected Monuments  
The AMASR Act authorised the ASI to declare a monument to be of national 
importance by issuing a notification in the Gazette of India.  Thereafter, activities 
Identification and Protection of 
Monuments and their documentation 
CHAPTER – II 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
10 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
relating to preservation and conservation of monuments were to be undertaken. We 
noted that the ASI did not maintain a reliable database regarding the number of 
protected monuments. 
Further, the information in respect of number of monuments provided by the ASI HQ 
was at variance with the information provided by Circle/Sub-Circle offices.  The 
variations are shown in Table 2.1.  
Table 2.1 Details of difference in number of protected monuments 
Name of the Circle Number of 
Monuments/Sites 
as per the ASI HQ 
Number of 
Monuments/Sites 
as per Circle/Sub 
Circle 
Discrepancy in 
number of 
Monuments 
Bengaluru 208 218 10 
Bhopal 292 290 2 
Chennai 410 411 1 
Dehradun 44 42 2 
Delhi 174 149 25 
Dharwad 299 300 1 
Jaipur 163 162 1 
Kolkata 136 137 1 
Lucknow 365 358 7 
Patna 182 183 1 
Raipur 47 45 2 
Ranchi 12 11 1 
Trissur 36 37 1 
Vadodara 214 213 1 
Total 56 
We observed further discrepancies in the figures of protected monuments provided 
by the ASI to the Ministry of Finance in 2006 and to the Parliament in June 2012.   
The ASI stated (July 2012) that the discrepancies in the number of monuments were 
mainly due to non updating of list of monuments immediately after bifurcation of a 
Circle and changes in the jurisdiction of Circles due to creation of new Circles. The 
reply underscores the need to exercise better coordination with the Circles as timely 
updation of this basic information is important for various stakeholders.   
Absence of details of the exact number of monuments under the control of the ASI 
would impinge on proper protection, preservation and conservation of these sites of 
national importance. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 11
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
Recommendation 2.1:  The lists of protected monuments should be updated and 
reconciled periodically so that there was no ambiguity with regard to the number of 
protected monuments under each Sub Circle, Circle and the ASI as a whole.  
2.3 Shortcomings in Notification and De-notification of 
Monuments  
In terms of section 4 of the Act, if the Central Government was of the opinion that 
any ancient monument or site and remains not included in Section 3 was of national 
importance, it may, by notification in the official gazette, give two months’ notice of 
its intention to declare such ancient monument or archaeological site and remains to 
be of national importance. A copy of each such notification shall be affixed in a 
conspicuous place near the monument or site and remains. On the expiry of the said 
period of two months and after considering the objections, if any, the ancient 
monument or the archaeological site and remains were declared to be of national 
importance. Thus, the notification gave the monuments or sites an official status of 
being “Protected”.  Examination of the system of notification and de-notification of 
monuments revealed the following deficiencies.  
2.3.1 Notification Cases 
No procedures were laid down for the Circles under the ASI, to send 
recommendations for the protection of monuments periodically. However, 
occasionally at the initiative of the Circle or based on a VIP reference, the ASI 
received detailed proposals from the Circles with an inspection note of 
Superintending Archaeologist (SA) (In-charge of the Circle). 
These proposals were required to be scrutinised by a Committee of Officers 
(appointed by DG, ASI in 2006) with Joint DG as the Chairman. On the basis of 
recommendations of the Committee, approval of the Minister was sought to issue a 
preliminary notification in the official gazette. We found that the committee had 
held only four meetings since 2006. Out of the 78 proposals submitted by various 
Circles since 1996 for the protection of monuments; only 53 were submitted to the 
Committee for consideration. The other proposals were rejected even before 
consideration of the Committee for which no reasons were available on record. The 
details of the proposals scrutinised and recommended by the Committee were as 
follows:- 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
12 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
Table 2.2 Details of notification proposals scrutinised and recommended 
Date of the meeting Proposals 
scrutinised 
Proposals 
recommended 
30 May 2007 6 2 
11 January 2008 14 6 
23 September 2008 31 24 
22 May 2012 2 2 
Total 53 34 
 
However, only 2 monuments out of the 34 recommended by the Committee since 
2007 were notified till date. We noted inordinate delays in processing of cases for 
notifications with some cases pending for more than 16 years, as proposals 
submitted by Circles/offices were pending since 1996. 
 In nine cases preliminary notification proposals were approved by the Prime 
Minister (then Minister of Culture) in 2009 but only one monument out of these nine 
was notified till 2012. 
The Ministry (May 2013) stated that the proposals received from the Circles were 
not taken on record as these were incomplete and had been sent without 
completing the formalities.  In many cases the justification given was unreasonable.  
The reply is not valid as we did not find any evidence in the records that the stated 
deficiencies had been communicated to the concerned Circles for taking corrective 
measures.  
2.3.2  De-notification cases 
According to Section 35 of the AMASR Act 1958, in case the Central Government was 
of the opinion that any ancient and historical monument or archaeological site and 
remains had ceased to be of national importance, it may declare so.  
We noted that over the past 46 years, Circles had submitted 26 proposals, which 
included General Nicholson statue, which was gifted away by Government of India in 
1960s to Government of Ireland, for de-notification of the monuments mainly on the 
grounds that these were missing or untraceable. However, these monuments had 
not been de-notified as of December 2012.  
We also observed substantial delays at the Circle level in sending proposals for de-
notification, despite being aware that monument was untraceable on ground. For 
example, the two ‘site of siege batteries with inscription’ in Qudsia Garden in Delhi 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 13
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
Circle were not traceable since 1971. Proposal for de-notification of these 
monuments was submitted only in July 2012. 
In another case, the Notification issued in 2003 for the monument ‘Sat Narain 
Bhawan’ in Delhi Circle was quashed by the Delhi High Court. However, the 
monument was not de-notified and was still featuring in the list of protected 
monuments.  Joint physical inspection of this monument revealed that the owners 
had demolished the building but the Circle office had no information on this matter. 
The monument, continued to be “protected” by the ASI in its records. 
2.4 Information on Location and Actual Condition of 
Protected Monuments  
During a joint physical inspection of selected monuments, we found that the ASI 
officials were often unaware about the exact location and actual condition/nature of 
the monuments they were assigned to protect as discussed below: 
• Rewa sub Circle in Bhopal Circle showed a rock painting at Rewa “ fresco 
paintings at Gahir, Rewa ”, a centrally protected monument. The Circle was not 
aware of the existence and exact location of this protected monument. 
• In Delhi Circle, the Kashmere Gate Sub Circle could not locate the exact site of 
the protected monument listed as “Enclosure containing the graves of Lt. 
Edwards and others, murdered in 1857’ during joint physical inspection with us. 
• A sculpture from the protected monument ‘ Sculptures in the Chummery 
Compound, Tezpur, Assam’ was shifted to the environment park by the Tezpur 
Municipal Board in 1995-96.  Guwahati Circle requested (1997) the DG, ASI to de-
notify the monument whereas, the Municipal Corporation in 1998 requested the 
DG, ASI to accord permission for shifting which had not been accorded by DG, ASI 
till date.  Guwahati Circle after inspection in July 2008 found that one school 
building was constructed at the protected area. 
The above instances indicate that the mechanism of inspection by the ASI was 
grossly inadequate.  Norms of regular inspection at Circle/Sub Circle level were 
absent, resulting in inadequate information about the location and status of 
protected sites. 
The Ministry (May 2013) replied that probably the information was collected from ill 
informed field staff of the sub Circle.  Such complicated matters should have been 
discussed with SA of the concerned Circle.  The reply is not tenable as it is the field 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
14 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
staff of sub Circles that looks after the monuments on day to day basis. Further, SAs 
were informed before and after the visits by us. 
2.5 Number of “Missing” Monuments  
The ASI informed (2006) the Ministry that 35 of the total centrally protected 
monuments were not traceable. This figure was also communicated to Parliament in 
the same year. The same information was also communicated again in June 2012. 
However, the joint physical inspection of the monuments along with the officials of 
the ASI revealed that in the sample of 1655 (45 per cent) monuments selected by us, 
92 monuments (6 per cent) (Detailed in Annex 2.1) were not traceable as detailed 
below: 
Table 2.3 Details of number of missing monuments  
Sl. No. State 
Number of ‘missing’ 
monuments as 
communicated to 
Parliament 
Number of missing 
monuments as per the 
joint physical verification 
1. Assam 1 
6 
2. Arunachal Pradesh 1 
3. Delhi 12 15 
4. Gujarat 2 2 
5. Haryana 2 2 
6. Jammu and Kashmir 3 3 
7. Karnataka 1 4 
8. Madhya Pradesh - 2 
9. Rajasthan 2 3 
10. Uttarakhand 3 2 
11. Uttar Pradesh 8 16 
12. Andhra Pradesh - 8 
13. West Bengal - 7 
14. Maharashtra - 8 
15. Tamil Nadu - 3 
16. Bihar - 11 
Total 35 92 
 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 15
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
We also found that one of the monuments in Dehradun Circle (Uttarakhand) 
‘Remains of ancient buildings locally identified with Vairatapattana, Dhikuli, 
Nainital’ was reported to the Parliament, as being untraceable by the DG, ASI. 
However, this monument was still being depicted in the records of the Circle office.  
The Circle office had also reportedly incurred expenditure on the maintenance of the 
monument during 2011-12. 
 
Recommendation 2.2: The ASI should make a provision for inspection of each 
protected monument by an officer of suitable level periodically. The ASI should 
publish the state of each monument being protected by it on the basis of detailed 
inspection note and photographic evidence collected during such inspection on a 
regular basis. 
 
The Ministry (May 2013) accepted the recommendation and stated that the number 
of missing monuments i.e. 35 reported to Parliament was based upon a survey done 
in 1998-99.  We noted that the Ministry did not possess the correct and updated 
status on the number of missing monuments. We are unable to verify the details of 
Ministry’s reply in the absence of any documentary evidence on record.  
The Ministry also intimated that based on inspections, nine out of 35 monuments 
were reported to be traced  but the final verification and confirmation was to be 
done.  However, no documentary evidence in respect of the survey carried out viz. 
the inspection report along with the photographs of the present condition of the 
monument could be shown to us in support of this claim.  
2.6 Discrepancies in Issue of Notification 
2.6.1 Criteria for Issue of Notifications 
A monument is declared to be of national importance only after publishing a 
notification in the Gazette of Government of India.  However, we noted that there 
were no specific criteria for notifying number of monuments in one complex either 
as a single monument or as an independent monument.  There were instances of 
more than one monument being notified by the ASI in a single complex as detailed 
below: 
 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
16 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
Table 2.4 Details of instances where more than one monument  
was notified in the same complex 
Circle Complex where more than one 
monument notified 
Number of monuments 
notified 
Delhi Roshanara Bagh complex 2 
Qudsia Garden complex 2 
Patna Barabar & Nagarjuni hills, Jehanabad 7 
Kurisarai, Gaya 5 
Ancient structures in Rajgir, Nalanda 3 
Maner, Patna 4 
Sharqui monuments at Jaunpur 4 
Dharwad Great Durga Temple Complex, 
Bijapur 
8 
Jyotirlinga Temple Complex, Bijapur 6 
Mallikarjuna Temple Complex, 
Bijapur 
4 
Galagantha Group of Temples, 
Bijapur 
6 
Kontigudi, Bijapur 2 
Huchchappayya Matha, Bijapur 2 
Trayambakesvara Temple, Bijapur 3 
Dehradun Jageshwar temple complex, Almora 6 
 
There were also cases wherein independent structures within a complex were 
notified as a single monument.  Afew examples of such categorisation were the Red 
Fort and Qutb complex in Delhi Circle, Bidar Fort, group of Bahmani tombs in 
Dharwad Circle and group of temples on Hemakunti hills in Bengaluru Circle.  
In the absence of a uniform standard to recognise a monument as an independent 
entity, we could not conclude that security concerns and budgeting needs of 
monuments were adequately assessed and addressed. 
Recommendation 2.3: There is a need to have clearly laid down guidelines for 
notifying number of monuments in one complex as a single monument or as 
independent monument. 
 
The Ministry (May 2013) intimated that now the ASI was following the criteria of 
issuing only one notification for the entire complex rather than having  separate 
notifications for each of the monument located therein.  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 17
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
We also found some cases where instead of notifying the whole structure of a 
monument, only certain portion of the monument was declared as centrally 
protected monument and the remaining part was left as unprotected.  The details 
are as given below: 
Table 2.5 Details where part of the monument was not declared protected 
Circle Name of the protected 
monument Area not defined as protected monument 
Delhi City wall of Shahajahanabad, 
Darya ganj 
Some portion of the wall across the road 
was left as unprotected 
Dharwad Basadis at Chandragiri Hills, 
Sravanabelagola 
Out of 14 basadis, 11 were not declared as 
protected and left as unprotected 
Dehradun Jageshwar group of temples Out of the 124 temples, 118 temples were 
not declared as protected 
Chandigarh 63 Kos Minars Kos minar in TaranTaran was not protected 
Trissur Rock cut cave, Vizhinjam Extended portion of the boulder outside 
the boundary wall not protected 
Trissur Burial site at Kudakkallu 
Parambu 
Unexcavated burial sites outside the 
protected area 
 
The Circles concerned could not provide any documented reasons for the 
categorisation adopted in such cases. 
The Ministry (May 2013) intimated that part of the city wall of Shahajahanabad, 
Darya Ganj was not declared protected as it was encroached.  The miniature temples 
were not protected in Dehradun Circle as they were votive in nature and only the 
important Kos Minars were protected in Chandigarh Circle. The Ministry did not 
provide any documentary evidence in support of its contention.  
2.6.2 Double Notifications 
We noted that the ASI did not maintain any centralised inventory of protected 
monuments with full details of the sites and structures. Similarly, the ASI also did not 
have information on monuments protected by various states. Hence any new 
proposal for notification could not be thoroughly verified by them. Resultantly, we 
found that some monuments were notified by the ASI twice. E.g. Hauz Shamsi
7 at 
                                                       
7 Notified as ‘Houz Shamsi with central red stone pavilion situated at Mehrauli in field No 157-81, 1586-97, 
1614 & 1624’ vide 7485 EDU dated 25.10.1918 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
18 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
Delhi was also notified as Shamsi talaab 8 and Iron Hindu Pillar 9  was also included 
while notifying the Qutb complex10 . 
Such instances call for comprehensive review of notifications.  
The Ministry (May 2013) replied that the cases of double notifications was a result of 
an error committed between 1908 to 1925.  It further stated that efforts would be 
made to rectify all such cases by the ASI on merit. 
2.6.3 Monuments included in the list though not Finally Notified 
As per section 4 of the AMASR Act, a monument was termed as centrally protected 
monument of national importance only after publication of final notification in the 
Gazette of India.  We, however, found instances where monuments were included in 
the list of centrally protected monuments even though the final notification had not 
been issued in the Gazette of India (February 2013).  The details are given in  
Annex-2.2. 
The Ministry (May 2013) stated that all such issues shall be taken care of at the time 
of physical verification of the protected monuments. 
2.6.4 Instances of Hasty Notification 
During our audit we also noticed cases where sites with encroachment or 
unauthorised occupants were notified.  In such cases, litigation followed the 
notification. As a result, the ASI was unable to carry out any preservation work on 
the sites. Some illustrative cases were as follows: 
i. In 2004 the ASI notified a building as Tamluk Rajbati in Kolkata Circle despite 
objection from the owner of the place.  The owner claimed that the dilapidated 
building was Jhulan Dalan (Imarat)  and not Tamluk Rajbati. As the monument 
was in a dilapidated condition, the Circle had a plan to shift the Tamluk Site 
Museum in the building after restoration.  Some of the owners in 2004 went to 
the court challenging the notification.  Consequently the matter became sub-
judice. Till December 2012, the ASI could not even place the protection notice 
board, despite passage of more than eight years after notification.  No 
                                                      
 
8 Notified as ‘Shamsid Tallab together with platform entrance gates at Mehrauli’ vide Punjab notification No 37 
dated 15.2.1908 
9 Notification No Punjab Gazette 849 dated 9.12.1909  
10 Notification No 387 EDU dated 16.1.1914 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 19
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
restoration work had been carried out by the Circle office pending the 
outcome of the case. 
ii. The ASI notified two monuments in Kolkata Circle viz ‘Clive’s House Dum Dum 
known as Barakothi’ in March 2004 and ‘Moti Jheel masjid’ in June 2011.  Clive 
house was occupied by 22 families, while Moti Jheel Masjid was occupied by an 
Islamic school ( Madarsa) and some families.  We noted that both these 
monuments were occupied before their notification as protected monument. 
As a result, the ASI was unable to take action against the occupants as 
encroachers of the monument. Further, the ASI was also unable to carry out 
any preservation and conservation activities on these monuments. 
In such situations, notification of sites did not carry any meaning. 
Recommendation 2.4: The ASI should have a laid down policy for notification of sites 
with contested ownership or occupants. These sites can be placed in the tentative list 
for nomination till all disputes are resolved. 
 
The Ministry (May 2013) stated that such actions had been taken on the assurance 
given by the occupants and also the State Governments.  However, the ASI had now 
taken a stand that a monument or site shall be notified as protected preferably when 
it is free from all encumbrances including the ownership rights.  
2.6.5 Monuments protected by both Centre and State 
We also found cases where one monument was notified and protected by both the 
ASI and the State government e.g.  Fort in ruins Dharanikota at Gumtur and 
Bhimeswara temple at Samalkot, East Godavari District.  They were notified by the 
ASI, Hyderabad Circle and State Department of Archaeology and Museums, Andhra 
Pradesh. The ASI had notified these monuments in 1967 and 1964 respectively. The 
ASI stated (September 2012) that the State Department of Archaeology and 
Museums would be requested to delete these monuments from the state list. 
Similarly a part (lion statue), of the ASI protected monument ‘Stone group of a 
gigantic lion standing on a small elephant’ of Patna Circle in Jaunpur, was also 
included in the protected list of State Archaeology Department, Uttar Pradesh. 
These cases indicate gaps in the notification process, coordination with State 
Archaeology Department and incomplete documentation at the time of notification. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
20 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
2.6.6 Repeated Notification and De-notification  
Some cases were noticed where sites were notified, de-notified and re-notified 
without any recorded reasons. E.g. Five monuments commemorating Anglo-Sikh 
battles fought in the 19 th century at Mudki, Subraon, Saragarhi, Ferozeshah and 
Misriwala in Ferozepur, Punjab were earlier in the list of protected monuments of 
national importance declared in November 1918.  Subsequently they were de-
protected by the ASI vide No.818 dated 13 April 1927 and No.1693 dated 22 May 
1962 for reasons not available on record. However in 2006, the ASI identified these 
five monuments once again for central protection but took no further action. 
Currently (December 2012), these monuments were still being protected by the 
State Government and were found to be in a dilapidated condition. 
2.6.7 Monument Protected before completion of 100 years 
As per the AMASR Act 1958 “Ancient Monument” is any structure, erection or 
monument, or any tumulus or place of internment, or any cave, rock-sculpture, 
inscription or monolith which is of historical, archaeological or artistic interest and 
which has been in existence for not less than 100 years.   
We found cases of some monuments declared protected by the ASI which did not 
fulfill the criteria of completing 100 years at the time of notification.  E.g. ‘Cooch 
Behar Palace’ in Kolkata Circle  was notified in 1982 before completing 100 years.  
The Kolkata Circle intimated that this was a special case. We could not appreciate 
this argument as no such exemption was available in the Act. A similar case was 
noticed in the Delhi Circle where a monument called ‘Sat Narain Bhawan’ was 
notified in 2003.  However, when the owners contested the claim, ASI could not 
prove in the court that the building was more than 100 years old. The court quashed 
the notification in 2007.  The monument was still pending de-notification. 
2.6.8 Antiquities protected as Monuments 
As per the AMASR Act, 1958 the definition of monument was as given below: 
“Ancient monument” means any structure, erection or monument, or any tumulus 
or place of internment, or any cave, rock, sculpture, inscription or monolith, which 
was of historical, archaeological or artistic interest and which had been in existence 
for not less than one hundred years, and included- 
(i) the remains of an ancient monument,  
(ii) the site of an ancient monument, 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 21
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
(iii) such portion of land adjoining the site of an ancient monument as may be 
required for fencing or covering in or otherwise preserving such monument, 
and  
(iv) the means of access to and convenient inspection of an ancient monument”; 
We observed that the ASI was protecting a number of ‘monuments’ which did not 
constitute a monument as per the Act.  A few examples are canons, guns, jhoolas, 
statues etc. which were being protected by the ASI as centrally protected 
monuments of national importance. No specific reasons were accorded as to why 
these were protected as monuments and not as antiquities.  A list of such 
monuments is placed at Annex 2.3.  
2.7 Categorisation of the Monuments 
As per Section 4A of the AMASR (Amendment & Validation) Act 2010, the Central 
Government shall, on the recommendation of the Authority, prescribed categories in 
respect of ancient monuments or archaeological sites and remains declared as of 
national importance.  The Central Government shall, on the recommendation of the 
National Monument Authority (NMA), classify all the ancient monuments or 
archaeological sites and remains declared as of national importance in accordance 
with the categories prescribed under sub section (1) and thereafter make the same 
available to the public and exhibit on its website and also in such other matter as it 
may deem fit.  
The ASI Headquarter notified in 2011 that all the monuments were to be categorised 
in following manner: 
Table 2.6 Details of different categories of monuments  
Category I World Heritage Sites 
Category II Tentative list of World Heritage Sites 
Category III Identified for inclusion in the World Heritage tentative list 
Category IV Ticketed monuments (other than mentioned above) 
Category V Identified for categorisation as ticketed monuments 
Category VI Living monuments which receive large number of 
visitors/pilgrims 
Category VII Other monuments located in the Urban/semi urban limits and 
in the remote villages 
Category VIII Other category as the Authority may deem fit 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
22 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
We noted that the categorisation was being followed only by the Guwahati Circle. 
No other Circle had carried out this categorisation so far. No detailed guidelines or 
any timelines were prescribed for the completion of this activity.  
Further, we also noted that no record was maintained on the number of visitors as 
required for Category VI.  There was no guidance how this information was to be 
collected for the purpose of categorisation.  
The Ministry stated (May 2013) that the categorisation of the protected 
Monuments/Sites was the responsibility of the NMA and not that of the ASI.  The 
fact remains that the Monuments/Sites were not categorised and no timelines were 
fixed for the same.  Moreover the ASI being the custodians of the protected 
monuments should only propose categories for each protected monument /Sites for 
NMA’s approval. 
2.8 Access to the Protected Monuments 
2.8.1 Unauthorised Activities at the monuments 
According to Para 26 of the John Marshall’s Manual of Conservation, the Living 
monuments were those structures that were still in use for the purpose for which 
they were originally designed at the time of notification of the monument.  This 
implied that any activity, such as worship, which was subsequently introduced in a 
monument, but was not being carried out at the time of notification, would be 
deemed as unauthorised.  
We found that in many monuments such unauthorised activities were being carried 
out. The ASI replied (May 2012) that presently 955 monuments were being used for 
worship and prayers.  However, the ASI did not have the details of monuments 
where prayers/worships were being held prior to issue of notification. During Joint 
Physical inspection, we found that in many monuments electrical points, 
loudspeakers, fans, etc. were also installed by unauthorised persons to facilitate 
these activities. Some examples were Ancient Mosque, Palam and The Mosque, 
Qudsia Garden in Delhi Circle.  
The ASI, thus, failed to protect the monuments of national importance by not 
restricting the unauthorised activities being held there. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 23
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
2.8.2 Closure of Monuments or its part without the Approval of DG, 
ASI 
As per the extant rules 11, DG, ASI may direct that a protected monument or any 
specified part thereof shall not be open, permanently or for a specified period to 
general public. 
Joint physical inspection of monuments revealed that in eight Circles, parts of the 23 
monuments were closed for visitors without the approval of the DG, ASI as detailed 
in Annex 2.4. There was neither any reporting requirement for such closures nor any 
mechanism to ensure that closure of parts of the monuments was approved in 
advance by the competent authority.  
Delhi Circle could not provide any information on monuments or its parts closed as 
per the approval of DG, ASI. Circle intimated that some parts were closed due to 
security reasons.  No security threats were however, found recorded or intimated to 
ASI HQ or the Ministry. 
The Ministry (May 2013) stated that the ASI would examine all such cases and would 
take remedial measures wherever necessary.  
2.8.3 Restricted access to the monuments 
Section 18 of AMASR Act 1958 provided a right of access to any protected 
monument to all visitors. However, it was noticed that there were many monuments 
access to which was not open for all visitors. Some of the protected monuments 
were situated in the premises of other organisations and were not in the control of 
the ASI as listed below: 
Table 2.7 Monuments in the premises of other agencies  
Sl. 
No. Circle Monument Area under which the 
monument exist 
1. Delhi Unknown tomb Jawahar Lal Nehru Stadium 
2. Shikargah Kushak II -327 Nehru Planetarium 
3. Lal Bangla Delhi Golf Course 
4. Kos Minar or Mughal Mile Stone Delhi  Zoo 
5. Gazuddin Tomb Anglo Arabic School 
6. Patna Buddhist site up to limit of Narokhsar Tank 
near Dhamesh Stupa, Sarnath 
Forest Department, Uttar 
Pradesh 
7. Lt Col Pogsons’ Tomb, Varanasi Cantonment Area, Military 
Wing 
                                                       
11 As per Rule 4 of the AMASR Rules 1959 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
24 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
The ASI did not enter into any agreement/MoU with the management of these 
organisations for allowing visitors to these centrally protected monuments.  Thus, 
practically these monuments were not open to general public, which was a violation 
to the Act.  
The Ministry (May 2013) replied that the ASI would pursue the matter of individual 
written agreement with owners wherever feasible.  
It was also noticed that at some centrally protected monuments, there were 
restrictions for people of some category/religion to enter into the monument.  Some 
of the illustrative examples are as follows:  
Table 2.8 Monuments where entry to visitors was restricted  
Sl. No. Circle Monument Reasons 
1.  Lucknow Sikandar Bagh Building 
Non Muslims were not 
allowed 
2.  Tahsin Ali Mosque 
3.  Dargah Hazrat Abbas 
4.  Tomb of Ghaziuddin Haider 
5.  Imambara Aminud-daula 
6.  Jama Mosque near Hussainabad, 
Lucknow 
7.  Masjid connect with Asaf-ud-daula, 
Lucknow 
8.  Hyderabad Khulla Mulla Mosque 
9.  Thumamala Mosque 
10.  Dharwad Asar Mahal Women were not allowed 
11.  Makka Masjid, Bijapur Men were not allowed 
Recommendation 2.5: There is an urgent need to come up with a written agreement 
with the management of the sites with restrictive entry, to enable access to these 
sites by common visitors. The ASI also needs to develop policy for maintaining such 
sites. 
The Ministry (May 2013) stated that these restrictions had to be imposed because of 
the age-long tradition and the ASI does not interfere with religious functions.   
2.8.4 Use of Monuments for other Purposes by the ASI 
No person shall, within a protected monument do any act which causes or is likely to 
cause damage or injury to any part of the monument. The AMASR (Amendment & 
Validation) Act 2010 also prohibited construction within 100 meters of the protected 
monument. However, we noted that the ASI itself was not complying with the 
provisions of the Act.  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 25
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
The Circle offices and the Sub Circle offices of the ASI were located in the centrally 
protected monuments. The divisional and zonal offices of Science Branch and 
divisions of Horticulture Branch were also situated in the protected monuments.  
They carried out changes to the structure of the monument viz fitting air 
conditioners, electrical fittings, water pipes etc. Toilets were laid with ceramic tiles in 
the monuments for these offices.  These changes were not consistent with the 
original character of these monuments. We also observed that offices of the Institute 
of Archaeology, National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities, Commandant of 
CISF, Zonal office of Chemical Branch and Office of Horticultural Branch and their 
stores were located inside the Red Fort, Delhi which is a World Heritage site.  
Some of the World Heritage Sites (Red Fort, Delhi and Fatehpur Sikri, Agra) had 
VIP/guest rooms equipped with modern facilities. Sensor fitted taps, hand drier, etc. 
were installed which were not in consonance with the aesthetic values of the 
monuments.  
The Ministry (May 2013) accepted the observation and stated that sometimes it 
becomes difficult to completely follow the principle considering the interest of the 
monument.  
We also noted that complexes as such as the Red Fort, Delhi included the residence 
of the DG, ASI, SA and Dy. SA of Delhi Circle and the Conservation Assistant (CA) of 
the concerned monuments.  In addition, security guards of the private security firm 
hired by the ASI were also residing in monuments such as the Red Fort, Delhi and 
Purana Qila, Delhi.  
The Ministry (May 2013) intimated that residences of the ASI officials and 
accommodation of the security guards were in the modern barracks and not in the 
protected monument.  The reply is not tenable as the ASI was incurring expenditure 
for the entire complex as a protected monument. 
Recommendation 2.6:   It is inevitable that changes would be carried out in the 
protected monuments if they are to be also used as offices and residences. For these 
exceptions, the ASI should prepare detailed guidelines and get the Act revised 
appropriately. 
The Ministry (May 2013) accepted the recommendation and intimated that 
guidelines to the Circles in this regard would be issued for strict compliance.  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
26 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
2.8.5 Cultural Events at the Monuments 
 In terms of Rule 7 of the AMASR Rules 1959, no protected monument shall be used 
for the purpose of holding any meeting, reception, party, conference or 
entertainment except under and in accordance with permission in writing granted by 
the Central Government.  DG, ASI in 2005, approved a list of 120 monuments in 
which cultural events/programs could be organised at prescribed fees ranging from 
` 25000/- to ` 50000/- per day and a refundable security deposit of ` 50000/. 
However this permission was subject to certain conditions such as: 
The organisers 
• will not sell  tickets for the event  
• will not  carry out  commercial activities during the event  
• will not cause any damage to the monument.  
A penalty could be imposed by the ASI in case of any damage to the monument or 
the violation of the guidelines in this regard.  The ASI earned revenue amounting to  
` 1.39 crore by organising cultural events in the centrally protected monuments. 
However, we noted that in a number of cases the stipulated conditions were not 
complied with. 
• There were monuments where festivals were organised without the approval of 
the Central Government e.g, the Dushehra festival in the Ruined Fort of Nurpur 
in Shimla Circle . This was allowed without the approval of the DG, ASI. The ASI 
did not receive any fees from the organisers of the festival.  
• In 2011 a cultural function was organised at Khusroobagh (Allahabad) in 
Lucknow Circle without the approval of DG, ASI. This monument did not form 
part of the list of 120 monuments notified by the DG, ASI where cultural events 
could be held. 
• Similarly, in the Red Fort in Delhi Circle, Ramlila was being organised every year. 
Delhi Circle office did not charge any fees from the organisers on the grounds 
that it was a religious function. We did not find any documented instruction or 
waiver specified in the guidelines issued by DG, ASI for a religious function.  It 
was also observed that the organisers were carrying out commercial activities in 
violation of the provision of the Act. 
Evidently, the ASI failed to effectively implement the conditions required for 
organising the cultural events in the centrally protected monuments. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 27
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
The Ministry (May 2013) intimated that the religious functions were allowed as per 
customary practices.  The reply is not tenable as the rules do not permit for waiver of 
prescribed fees for religious functions. 
2.9 Inspection of the Monuments  
According to Conservation Manual of John Marshall, regular and systematic 
inspections of monuments were to be carried out annually or even more frequently. 
The ASI has had a long tradition of inspection by senior officials of the ASI, including 
the Directors General.  In the archives of the ASI, detailed inspection notes, written 
by the inspecting officers were available. These notes highlighted the conservation 
and preservation requirements and also documented the state of a monument/site 
on a given date.  We found that the practice of inspection had been completely given 
up in recent years. There were no inspection notes available on records detailing the 
inspections done by the DG, ADG and Director (Conservation) and other officers 
during the period covered under Audit. Similarly at the Circle level there were no 
inspection notes available on the visits of Superintending Archaeologist (SA), Deputy 
Superintending Archaeologist (Dy. SA). The inspection notes by Sub Circle in-charge 
and sometimes by the SA were available on record only in relation to proposals of 
detailed estimates of conservation works. 
The ASI replied (August 2012) that there was no set mechanism/system for 
inspection of monuments by ASI HQ.   
In the absence of inspection records, it was not possible for us to ascertain the date 
on which a particular site was last visited. In the context of monuments becoming 
untraceable and being encroached upon, this documentation was of utmost 
importance.  
Recommendation 2.7: The ASI should prescribe detailed guidelines for inspection of 
monuments in a regular manner. There should be a written policy for submission of 
inspection notes after each inspection was carried out by any officer.   
The Ministry (May 2013) stated that guidelines on inspection of monuments already 
existed so as to ensure that these were inspected on regular basis.  The sub circle in-
charge should visit once in a month whereas SA should visit once in a year.  The reply 
is not tenable as no such specific records of inspections were found during audit in 
any Circle of the ASI.  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
28 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
2.10 Maintenance of the Information in respect of 
Monuments 
2.10.1 Compilation of Data related to Notifications 
Each monument of national importance was to be notified by the ASI in the official 
gazette.  Thus each centrally protected monument was assigned a unique 
notification number.  The notification provided legal authority for the ASI’s 
intervention at the site. It was found that the ASI did not maintain the records 
regarding the notification, number and date of notification of centrally protected 
monuments at its headquarters.  
The ASI stated (July 2012) that the list of monuments with date/ number of 
notification was not being maintained and hence was not available.  After gathering 
the information from the Circle offices, DG, ASI provided the list of 10 Circles in July 
2012 and further five Circles in August 2012.  The information in respect of the 
remaining nine Circles could not be collected till completion of Audit (December 
2012). This demonstrated the lack of Management Information Systems (MIS) at the 
DG, ASI’s level and also the dismal state of documentation in the organisation. 
Audit of the Circle offices revealed that the information in respect of the 
notifications was not fully available at the Circle level, as detailed below: 
Table 2.9 Monuments in respect of which information was not available  
at Circle offices  
Sl. No. Name of Circle Number of 
monuments 
Number of monuments 
for which details are 
available 
1.  Dharwad 299 110 
2.  Ranchi 12 10 
3.  Dehradun 42 41 
4.  Guwahati 69 59 
5.  Hyderabad 137 115 
6.  Shimla 40 0 
7.  Goa 21 5 
 
Recommendation 2.8: The notification is an important document which not only 
provides a legal status for centrally protected monument but also defines the area of 
the site. This document is crucial for establishing encroachment or unauthorised 
construction at the site. The ASI should maintain a centralised database of all 
notifications and records related to the sites which should be readily available with 
the ASI HQ. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 29
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
The Ministry (May 2013) accepted the fact that ASI did not have Management 
Information System (MIS).  They intimated that a fresh initiative has been taken by 
the Circles to collect the photo-copies of the original notifications in respect of 
protected monuments under their jurisdiction and compile them in a book form.  
2.10.2 Discrepancies in the Information on the Monuments 
It was noticed that the Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts (IGNCA), an 
autonomous organisation of the Ministry of Culture, was running a project named 
‘Kala Sampada’. Under this project, digitised documentation of the monuments and 
archaeological sites was being collected and maintained on their website.  Scrutiny 
of records revealed that the information provided by IGNCA on their website did not 
match with the information provided by the Circle office in respect of their 
monuments.  For instance in the following cases, discrepancies were noticed in the 
information provided by the IGNCA and the ASI for the same monuments: 
Table 2.10 Details of discrepancies in the geographical location 
Sl. 
No. Monument State ASI-
Latitude 
ASI-
Longitude 
IGNCA-
Latitude 
IGNCA-
Longitude 
Effects to be on 
present 
monument 
location12 
1. Gunavati group 
of temples 
Tripura 23.31 N 91.09 E 23.32 N 91.30 E 1.85 km more 
north & 38.85 
km more east 
2. Ranganathdol Assam 26.58 N 94.41 E 26.58 N 94.37 E 7.40 km less 
east 
3. Sivadol Assam 26.56 N 94.34 E 26.57 N 94.32 E 1.85 km more 
north & 3.70 km 
less east 
4. The Mound & 
ruins of the 
stone temple-
Dah Parbatia 
Assam 26.37 N 92.47 E 26.38 N 92.45 E 1.85 km more 
north & 3.70 km 
less east 
 
Thus, two organisations under the same Ministry maintained different set of 
coordinates for the monuments. There was no coordination and reconciliation of 
information between the two organisations before placing it in public domain. 
Similar cases of discrepancies were noticed in the Ranchi Circle, where the area 
defined in the notifications was different from that ofprovided by the Circle office: 
                                                      
 
12 One degree of latitude/longitude = 111 kilometres, 1 second = 111/60 = 1.85 km; N=North & E=East, 
Lat=Latitudes & Long=Longitudes; e.g. 91.30 E - 91.09 E = 21 seconds, 38.85 km = 21x1.85km 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
30 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
Table 2.11 Details of discrepancies in the areas defined in the notification 
Sl. No. Name of the monument/site Area as per 
Notification 
Area as per ASI 
Circle 
Difference in 
acres 
1.  Benisagar tank and remains of 
temple and sculpture in 
survey plot No 322 
76.73 49.02  (-) 27.71 
2.  Asura site and ancient stone 
temple with shiva lingam 
0.015  3.97 (+) 3.81 
3.  Baradari building with 
probable underground cell 
0.03  3.84  (+) 3.61 
4.  Asura site, Kunti 49.76 49.79 (+) 0.03 
Recommendation 2.9 :  There should be no room for ambiguity and  difference in 
factual information related to the monuments. The ASI should collect the MIS data 
from its Circles on each of the protected monument and place it in public domain 
after reconciling the discrepancies.  
The Ministry (May 2013) accepted the recommendation and intimated that efforts 
would be made to eliminate ambiguities. 
2.10.3 Inventory of the Monuments 
The ASI is required to maintain13 an updated inventory comprising the brief details of 
all the protected monuments. The inventory should have details about the 
monument such as notification number, site plan, brief history and the photographs.  
These inventories were to be updated from time to time so as to provide the latest 
and correct information.  
It was noticed that out of the 24 Circles, only Aurangabad Circle was maintaining and 
updating the inventory of the monuments properly. 
The ASI commenced (1997) a project to edit and publish the inventories of all Circles. 
After four years of the project, inventories of only five Circles were published. The 
project was wound up abruptly. Further, the published inventories were not 
updated. This led to non-availability of accurate data relating to inventories as 
tabulated below:  
Table 2.12 Details of non updation of inventory  
Sl. No. Name of the Circle Monuments as per 
current  list of ASI 
Monuments as per 
published inventory 
1.  Delhi 174 154 
2.  Chandigarh 123 118 
3.  Jaipur 163 156 
                                                       
13 As per note under Para 11.3.1 of A.W. Code 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 31
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
Further, Circle office level inventory details were not prepared properly nor updated 
regularly.  For example, Kolkata Circle was maintaining the inventory of 129 
monuments only out of the existing 136 monuments.  Chennai Circle was able to 
produce inventory of 351 monuments out of the total of 411.  Out of the 351 
produced to Audit, 215 were not certified by the Circle in-charge. Guwahati Circle 
inventory lists did not include details of four centrally protected monuments.  
Inventory of the Dharwad and Bengaluru Circle, prepared in 2000 and 1992 
respectively, were not submitted to the ASI HQ.   
Recommendation 2.10: In our opinion, publishing the inventory of monuments 
should be completed in a time bound manner. 
The Ministry while accepting the audit comment (May 2013) intimated that a few of 
the  inventories were almost ready for being published since 2006-07 but no further 
action to publish them could be taken owing to acute shortage of staff.  
2.10.4  Joint inspection with Revenue Department 
The Circle offices were required to carry out a joint physical inspection with the 
revenue department of the state government to ascertain the exact area of the 
notified monument.   We noted that out of the 3678 protected monuments with the 
ASI, the joint survey was carried out in only 409 monuments. There was no time-
frame to complete this work, nor was there any reporting by Circles or periodic 
monitoring of progress by the ASI HQ in this regard.  
2.11 National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities 
The archaeological sites and remains were managed both by Union and State 
Governments. However, there were thousands of monuments and sites which were 
unprotected, and were in a state of neglect.  As per records, there were about five 
lakh unprotected monuments and about 70 lakh antiquities available in India at 
different places.  Most of them were not even registered in the absence of any 
registering body.   
For the documentation and creation of a suitable database on built heritage and 
sites and antiquarian remains, the Prime Minister in August 2003 announced the 
setting up of a National Mission to prepare a national data base on India’s tangible 
heritage. 
The National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities (NMMA) was formally launched 
after much delay in 2007 with tenure of five years in the ASI. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
32 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
2.11.1 Performance of the Mission 
As per the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) memo, the Mission was to 
document the five lakh unprotected monuments and about 70 lakh antiquities by 
2010. However till 2012, NMMA was able to complete the documentation of only 
80000 Monuments and eight lakh antiquities.  Out of these eight lakh antiquities, 
three lakh were already registered with the ASI.  NMMA was able to upload only 
2823 entries on the website out of the 8.80 lakh entries.  
We noted that ` 34.03 crore out of the approved budget of ` 90 crore was released 
by the Ministry. Further, out of this sum only ` 14.12 crore (16 per cent) had been 
utilised by the NMMA indicating substantial under-utilisation of funds.  
NMMA was first established at Tilak Marg, New Delhi after incurring an expenditure 
of ` 53.28 lakh. However, in February 2010 NMMA was shifted to Red Fort. During 
the process  of shifting NMMA lost valuable  data. Further,  for dismantling and 
reinstalling etc. at Red Fort NMMA had to incur an expenditure of ` 30.52 lakh.  
2.11.2 Secondary Sources for Documentation   
The mission document of NMMA originally included a proposal for primary survey to 
collect information on the monuments with a budgetary requirement of ` 400.00 
crores.  In 2004, citing time and budgetary constraints, DG,ASI decided that data 
should be collected from secondary sources such as exploration /excavation reports, 
memoirs, catalogues, project works and other published references with a budget 
provision of ` 90.00 crore. Thus, the Mission adopted data without any independent 
verification.  
We noted that the data obtained through secondary sources was sketchy, not fully 
reliable or authentic.  We also found on record that experts in various workshops 
and meetings recommended for a primary survey to be undertaken to build a 
credible national level data base on built heritage, sites and antiquities. Finally in 
June 2010, after investing three years of effort in collecting data through secondary 
sources, NMMA requested  permission of the ASI to conduct a primary survey.  
However no decision had been taken to commence this work (November 2012). 
We noticed that the Ministry was also aware of the lack of credibility of the data 
collected so far. In December 2011, it instructed NMMA to indicate, while uploading 
on website, that the data was subject to validation. The Mission attempted to 
validate the data through experts; however, by then, the tenure of NMMA expired in 
2012.  Hence the mission failed to achieve its objective within the prescribed time. It 
had now submitted extension proposals for completing the work during the next five 
years i.e. till 2017 at a cost of ` 99.00 crore. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 33
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
2.11.3 Monitoring of the Mission 
There were only four meetings of the Monitoring committee and five of the Finance 
Committee since 2007. 
Out of the 33 State level Implementation Committee (SLIC), no committee was 
formed in seven states/UTs14.  Further, in 26 States, where the SLIC were formed, no 
meeting was convened in five States15.  
For a suitable monitoring mechanism, a MIS for monitoring the performance of 
various activities of the Mission at different levels was to be put in place. The 
Mission was also required to monitor the SLICs.  We, however, noted that the MIS 
had not been introduced till the end of Audit. Thus we found that the monitoring of 
the Ministry was inadequate. 
The setting up, functioning and performance of the National Mission for 
Monuments and Antiquities were marked by lack of planning and delays.  The ASI, 
unable to accomplish basic documentation of even its protected monuments, 
could not provide any impetus to this Mission. 
2.12 Heritage Bye-laws  
As per the AMASR (Amendment & Validation) Act 2010, the Central Government was 
required to prepare heritage bye-laws in respect of each protected monument and 
protected area. The heritage bye-laws shall also include use of building material, 
façade, roofing pattern, colour, height, built-up area, usage, stilt parking, 
underground construction, drainage systems, roads and service infrastructure like 
electric poles, water, sewerage, excavations and such other factors which may be 
necessary within the prohibited areas and regulated areas of the protected 
monuments and protected areas. These bye-laws were to be submitted to the 
National Monument Authority (NMA) for their approval and the Competent 
Authority was required to make them available in public domain through their 
website. 
AMASR (Framing of Heritage Bye-laws and other functions of the Competent 
Authority) Rules 2011 clearly stated that the Competent Authority shall formulate 
time bound programme  for preparation of heritage bye-laws for prohibited area or 
regulated area of each protected monument and protected area. 
                                                      
 
14 Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Sikkim, Nagaland, Pondicherry, Lakshdweep and Daman & Diu 
15 Delhi, Goa, Manipur, Mizoram and Tripura  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
34 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g3/g12/g12:Identification and 
Protection of Monuments and 
their documentation
NMA was required to intimate, to the Competent Authority, the impact of any 
construction/renovation (in regulated/prohibited area) having regard to the heritage 
bye-laws relating to the concerned protected monuments or protected area. 
Provided that, the Competent Authority may, in exceptional cases, with the approval 
of the NMA, grant permission to the applicant until the heritage bye-laws have been 
prepared.   
Heritage bye-laws for only two monuments had been prepared out of the 3678 
centrally protected monuments. These draft bye-laws were not yet approved. 
There was no timeline fixed for preparation and approval of heritage bye-laws 
(June 2013).  
As a result, all applications for NOCs for construction/renovation in such areas were 
treated as exceptional leaving scope for error in judgment in every case. 
Recommendation 2.11: The Ministry should come up with a strategy to ensure time 
bound completion of heritage by-laws for all protected monuments and their speedy 
approval.  
In the Exit Conference (June 2013) the ASI informed that the work for preparation of 
templates of bye laws had been taken up for selected monuments.  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 35
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
 
 
 
 
The General Conference of the UNESCO in 1972 adopted a Convention concerning 
Protection of World Cultural and Natural Heritage. The Convention sought to 
encourage the identification, protection and preservation of cultural and natural 
heritage around the world considered to be of outstanding value to humanity. 
India ratified this Convention in November 1977. 
The ASI functions as a nodal agency for nomination of World Heritage Sites (WHS) 
to the UNESCO.  The ASI also has 19 Cultural World Heritage Sites under its 
administrative control.  
The WHS can be a natural, cultural or a mixed site.  A total of 29 sites in India had 
been approved as WHS till February 2013.  Out of these, 19 sites (all cultural) are 
currently under the administrative control of the ASI. Two are with the Ministry of 
Railways, one with the State Government of Rajasthan, six with the Ministry of 
Environment and Forest and one with a temple Management committee Bodhgaya 
in Bihar. 
3.1 World Heritage Sites (WHS) 
The UNESCO Convention of 1972 was developed with the following objectives 
regarding world heritage sites -  
• To define World Heritage in both cultural and natural aspects,  
• To enlist Sites and Monuments from the member countries which were of 
exceptional interest and universal value the protection of which was the concern 
of all mankind; and 
• To promote cooperation among all nations and people to contribute for the 
protection of these universal treasures intact for future generation. 
World Heritage Sites are designated by UNESCO and procedures followed are as 
laid out in the Operational Guidelines of UNESCO prepared for this purpose. Even 
after nomination, for each site there is a provision for periodic monitoring and 
assessment by UNESCO.  
It is prestigious for a country to have a site listed on the World Heritage list. This 
citation gives boost to tourism and helps local economies to prosper.  The recorded 
sites on the World Heritage list now stands at 962, which includes 745 cultural 
properties, 188 natural properties and 29 mixed properties.  Despite active 
Management of World Heritage Sites 
CHAPTER – III 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
36 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
participation in this area, so far, India has only 29 sites (details are in Annex 3.1 ) 
included on the WHS list. Countries like Italy (47), Spain (44) and China (43) had 
comparatively higher number of sites.  
3.1.1 Procedure for inscription of a Site as a WHS 
 
Chart 3.1  Procedure for inscription of a site as a WHS  
• A site is first taken into a tentative list of UNESCO which is being maintained by the ASI 
in India. The sites that remain in the tentative list for a period of one year or more may 
be forwarded for final nomination. 
• For the final nomination, a proposal is sent with nomination dossiers containing details 
of the site and its conservation plan. Since 2008, Site Management Plan (SMP) was 
mandatory for the nomination dossier.  
• After approval from the Ministry, the dossier is sent to the World Heritage Centre 
(WHC), UNESCO Paris for further evaluation and approval.   
• This is followed by a site visit by UNESCO’s advisory bodies viz. International Council of 
Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS) or International Union for Conservation of Nature 
(IUCN)16, for evaluation.  
• Based on this site visit a recommendation for “rejection”, “deferral” (deferred), 
“referral” (requirement of additional information) or inscription is given. Then, UNESCO 
gives the final verdict.  The property is inscribed in the list, if the World Heritage Centre 
is satisfied about the criteria and justification of the Outstanding Universal value (OUV) 
given in the nomination dossier.  
 
                                                       
16  For Natural sites 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 37
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
3.2 Nodal Agency for World Heritage Sites 
The ASI informed us that the Ministry was the nodal Ministry and the ASI was the 
nodal agency on behalf of the Government of India for all World Heritage related 
matters. We found that there were no written orders to this effect available with the 
ASI.  In the absence of these basic orders, we were unable to derive full assurance 
regarding the ASI’s assigned role and performance. Our understanding of the ASI’s 
role was in accordance with practices as found in the records.    
3.2.1 Declining Performance of the ASI 
Till now, (2012), the Government of India had submitted 53 proposals to the 
UNESCO. Of these, 19 ASI protected monuments are inscribed. Till 1993, the ASI had 
16 inscribed WHS with reference to its own monuments. All 16 dossiers for these 
monuments were prepared in house by the ASI.  Subsequently, this work was mostly 
outsourced to external consultants. With the increased use of consultants, we also 
noticed a steady decline in acceptance of proposals.  We observed that during the 
last five years (2007-12), the ASI had submitted only three proposals, none of which 
was accepted. Out of these, two were outsourced to consultants at a cost of ` 79.84 
lakh. 
We noted that an Advisory Committee on World Heritage Matters was constituted 
(November 2011) in the Ministry for rendering advice and to bring about 
improvement in the matters relating to inscription of World Heritage Sites. The 
Committee had met seven times since its inception. However, there was no addition 
to the World Heritage list till November 2012.   
The Ministry replied (May 2013) that the Advisory Committee had defended and 
upgraded the previous nominations of Western Ghats and Hill Forts of Rajasthan. 
The Ministry also stated that there were factual errors in ICOMOS evaluation for Hill 
Fort Rajasthan which were later accepted by ICOMOS in the World Heritage session. 
However, no documentary proof was provided for this and the fact remained that no 
new site was added to the World Heritage Site list.  
3.2.2 Criteria for Selection of Sites for Tentative List  
A tentative list is an inventory of those properties which each State Party intended to 
consider for nomination.  It was a mandatory requirement before a site was finally 
considered for nomination.  In 2011-12 India had 34 sites on the UNESCO Tentative 
List (Details in  Annex 3.2)  out of which 14 monuments are protected by the ASI. 
Proposals for tentative list forwarded by State Government, NGO and trusts, etc. 
were processed by the ASI as per advice of the Advisory Committee on World 
Heritage Matters. After filling the requisite format for tentative list it was sent to the 
Ministry for approval and thereafter to Permanent Representative of India (PRI), 
UNESCO who then submitted it to WHC for further evaluation and approval. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
38 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
There were no defined criteria for selection of a monument/site for the tentative list. 
There was no standard procedure for follow up of each tentative site or prioritisation 
amongst the tentatively listed sites for final nomination. 
3.2.3 Non revision of Tentative List 
As per UNESCO guidelines it was envisaged that the tentative list were to be 
reviewed and updated every 10 years.  
As per the records of the ASI, attempts had been made to revise the tentative listing 
in 2002, 2004 and 2009-10.  But the ASI failed to update the list despite receiving 
inputs from various stakeholders. Even now, workshops were being held for revision 
of tentative lists, but no time frame had been fixed for completion of this exercise. In 
the absence of regular revision, we noticed inconsistencies and overlaps in the 
tentative list.  For example, ‘Golconda Fort of Hyderabad’ appeared twice in the 
tentative list.  Similarly nomination dossier for ‘Sri Harminder Sahib, Amritsar’ was 
withdrawn, however, it still features in the tentative list. 
The Ministry stated (May 2013) that the revision of Tentative List of India is 
underway since 2012. 
3.3 Preparation for Final Inscription  
From the tentative list, nomination dossiers were prepared. The nomination 
document was the primary basis on which the committee considered the inscription 
of the properties on the World Heritage List.   We observed that -  
• The ASI had not defined any specific criteria for the selection of sites to be 
nominated from the tentative list.  There were proposals in the tentative list 
from 1998 onwards but sites were being picked up randomly for preparation of 
dossiers for final nomination. Some nominations were picked from the tentative 
lists, while others, such as Jantar Mantar were picked up for final nomination 
without being on the tentative list.  
• After the site was selected, a nomination dossier was prepared. There were no 
guidelines for development of the sites selected in the tentative list to prepare 
them for final nomination. In the ASI, we found that the activities constituting 
preparation for final inscription included only selection of consultants for 
nomination dossiers and Site Management plans. There was no project or 
concerted effort to develop the site per se.  
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 39
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
Recommendation 3.1:  The ASI should define objective criteria and requirements  for 
selection of site for the tentative list and from the tentative list for final inscription of 
World Heritage Site, as this will help in prioritising, planning and preparing the sites 
before nomination.  
Recommendation 3.2:  The ASI should adopt a systematic approach for the 
development of tentative world heritage sites through conservation and site 
management.  This alone can ensure final inscription of the site.   
The Ministry stated (May 2013) that ACWHM was in the process of updating the 
tentative list and was also ensuring that management systems were in place before 
the dossiers were sent to WHC. Besides, the ASI was trying its best to maintain the 
prospective World Heritage Site in a good state of conservation.  The reply is not 
correct as the ASI did not distinguish and categorise any monument as prospective 
World Heritage Site at any stage of its planning or execution of works. 
3.3.1 Selection of Consultants for Nomination Dossiers   
We noticed that external consultants were appointed by the ASI for preparation of 
nomination dossiers of WHS and also for Site Management Plans. The selection 
process differed from case to case. In some cases, the ASI appointed the consultants 
and in others, the States did so. Our scrutiny revealed lack of transparency, 
tendering irregularities and undue favours to consultants.  In all the five
17 cases 
proposed by the ASI, the sites had not been enlisted on the World Heritage List till 
December 2012 despite several attempts and contractual liability of ` 1.76 crore
18 
towards the consultancies19 as  detailed below:  
Santiniketan, West Bengal (2009) : 
Work for Nomination Dossier - In May 2009, work was assigned jointly to Ms Abha Narain 
Lambah and Shri Manish Chakravorty at a cost of ` 35 lakh.  
Status of Proposal: Nomination submitted in January 2010  was withdrawn after assessment 
of ICOMOS and not taken up for resubmission. 
Irregularities noticed in Audit : 
• Site was picked up randomly. 
• Instead of open tendering, limited quotes were called from eight consultants. No criteria 
were on record for this short listing.  
• Despite being incomplete, the bid given by one of the bidder was not rejected and 
declared as L1. 
• Work was awarded jointly to L1 and L4 bidders in violation to CVC guidelines. 
                                                       
17
  Santiniketan, Majuli, Serial Nomination of Harappan sites, Extension to Pattadakal and Rani ki Vav. 
18
   Out of which payment of ` 1.05 crore had been released.  
19
   The nomination dossier of Rani ki Vav was prepared in house 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
40 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
Majuli, Assam ( 2004, 2008, 2012)  
Work for Nomination Dossier:   
1. In 2004, Ms Nalini Thakur and Shri Surojit Jaradhara were assigned the work. 
2. In 2008, Ms. Poonam Thakur and Shri Rohit Jigyasu were assigned the work at a cost of 
` 16.84 lakhs. 
3. In 2012, Shri Suryanarayan Murthy (M/s Kshetra) was assigned the work involving 
payment of  ` 28 lakhs. 
Status of Proposal:  
The three proposals were respectively referred for additional information, deferred and 
found technically incomplete by ICOMOS. The site could not get the inscription till now. 
Irregularities noticed in Audit:  
• The site was the largest river island of the world, yet it was presented as a Cultural site 
and not a Mixed or Natural site. 
• The ASI experimented with three different consultants. However, the work was not 
satisfactorily carried out by any of them.   
• In one of the three cases, the dossier was evaluated and approved by ACWHM, however, 
found technically incomplete.  This shows the improper vetting by ACWHM. 
• In all the three cases the consultants who had prepared the dossier, were not held 
responsible for rejection of the dossiers,  being incomplete. 
Serial nomination on Harappan Sites  (2008) 
Work for Nomination Dossier:   
Shri Ranesh Ray was assigned this work at a cost of `  65 Lakhs  in March 2009 
Status of proposal:  
Proposal was deferred by the ASI for 2010 even before completion of Dossier.  
Audit observed that:  
• Except Dholavira, none of the site was included in the tentative list.  
• Selection of consultant was non- transparent and was done on nomination basis without 
tendering.  
• Payment of ` 38 lakh was released in August 2009, on the basis of a performance 
report.   
• Condition for performance guarantee was waived  without justification.   
• Scope of work was decreased mid-way by removing two sites (Rakhigarhi and Bhirranna) 
without proportionate reduction in fees. 
• The ASI failed to provide excavation reports of the sites  due to which final nomination 
could not be prepared.  
• Contract was faulty as despite non-availability of excavation reports, the ASI accepted 
the responsibility of providing them. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 41
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
Extension proposal for Badami and Aihole to the Pattadakal Group of 
Monuments ( 2002-03, 2010-12)  
Work for Nomination Dossier:   
1. Work was assigned to Shri A. Ramanathan and Shri Ranesh Ray at a cost of ` 14 lakhs 
which was enhanced to ` 24 lakhs in 2003. 
2. M/s ADEI DRONAH was awarded the work at a total cost of ` 31.56 lakh (2011). 
Dossier was not  ready till November 2012.  
Irregularities noticed in Audit :  
• From  ` 14 lakhs in 2002 the estimate rose to ` 31.56 lakh in 2011 and yet the work 
could not be completed.  
• The consultants in 2003 were selected in a non transparent manner through 
nomination.  
• In 2010 Dharwad Circle issued Expression of Interest (EOI) for selection of consultants. 
The EOI had a restrictive clause as a result of which only consultants who had earlier 
worked on WHS projects were eligible. Given the few projects taken up in India, it 
restricted competition to only the consultants selected earlier. 
• In 2011, ADEI DRONAH was awarded work without approval of IFD and the Ministry. 
• ADEI DRONAH was selected as it was a Karnataka based consultant. However, such 
location criteria were not adopted in any earlier consultancy.  
• There was no clause for penalty in case of delay.  
 
3.3.2 Preparation and Implementation of Site Management Plans 
A site management plan is a document which gives a holistic perspective on 
conservation and management of the site.  Submission of Site Management Plan 20 
was mandatory as per UNESCO’s Operational Guidelines of 2008.  We found that 
these plans were not ready in the case of 15 out of 19 sites of the ASI.  Even where 
the plans were prepared, these were not implemented on the site.  
We observed that the ASI appointed four consultants for the preparation of 
Integrated Management Plan (IMP)/Comprehensive Conservation Management Plan 
(CCMP)/Site Management Plan (SMP) for four sites for an amount of ` 2.92 crore, 
out of which a payment of ` 2.59 crore had already been made to the consultants.  
However the work was still incomplete as the CCMP/IMP/SMP had not been 
finalised by the ASI.  
 
                                                      
 
20
  The Site Management plan can be in the form of Comprehensive Conservation Management Plan (CCMP), Site Management 
Plan (SMP) or Integrated Management Plan (IMP), depending upon the requirements of the site. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
42 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
Table 3.1 Status of SMPs/IMPs/CCMPs  
Site SMP 
consultant
Remuneration
(` in lakh) 
Commencement 
of work  
Finalisation  of 
SMP/IMP/CCMP 
Status of 
implementation 
Hampi, 
Karnataka  
Nalini 
Thakur 
 14.25  2004-05 Not yet finalized Not 
implemented21  
Red Fort, 
Delhi  
Gurmeet 
Rai 
91.46 2005 2007 Not 
implemented  
Ajanta  
Caves, 
Maharashtra  
Abha 
Narain 
Lambah 
92.13 2007 Not yet finalised Not 
implemented  
 Ellora 
Caves, 
Maharashtra  
Gurmeet 
Rai 
94.60   2007 Not yet finalised Not 
implemented  
 
IMP for Champaner Pavagadh was being prepared by in house team of the ASI.  
Process for preparation of IMP for the Taj Mahal, Agra Fort and Fatehpur Sikri had 
been initiated in 2012. However, the EOI was cancelled in 2012 itself and was yet to 
be taken up again.  
We found that the Site Management Plans were poorly prepared and hence could 
not be implemented. The plan provided no guidance to the Conservation Assistants 
and other field staff about the actual management of the site.  It was mostly an 
academic document discussing concepts and theoretical approaches for 
management of the site. 
The ASI was therefore unable to comply with the mandatory requirement of UNESCO 
for submission of SMPs.   
The Ministry stated (May 2013) that IMPs or SMPs were dynamic documents that 
require phased implementation over several years.  
3.4 Site Inspections at the World Heritage Sites  
The grant of World Heritage status did not translate into better availability of 
facilities, funding and staff for these sites. For all practical purposes of conservation, 
security and maintenance, the ASI did not differentiate between other sites and 
World Heritage Sites. On these WHS, the total revenue collected was ` 320.03 crores 
against which an expenditure of ` 243.96 crore was incurred during the period 2007-
12. The footfall of Indian and foreign visitors put together was 887.08 lakh.   
Considering the revenue generated from these WHS and the footfall, in our opinion 
the ASI should have made efforts in ensuring availability of better facilities for the 
                                                       
21
  The Ministry intimated (May 2013) that the IMP of Hampi is already under implementation through a special World 
Heritage Authority created for this purpose.  Several sub sectoral plans under IMP are in various stages of implementation 
and a formal inclusion of IMP in the Master Plan is under process.  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 43
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
visitors and ensured better conservation and security of these monuments.  The 
information in respect of the visitors, details of revenue and expenditure incurred on 
conservation is at Annex 3.3.  During the joint physical inspection, we noticed that 
different sites had varied issues that related to security, public amenities, 
encroachment and unauthorised construction, audio guide services etc. (Details in 
Annex 3.4). 
3.5 Status of Amenities at World Heritage Sites  
Some highlights of the status of Public Amenities, as noticed during joint physical 
inspections are as follows (Details in Annex 3.4). 
• At World Heritage Sites of Khajuraho, Madhya Pradesh, Fatehpur Sikri Uttar 
Pradesh and Champaner Gujarat 628 cases, 194 cases and 107 cases of 
unauthorised constructions respectively were noticed. 
• Encroachments were noticed at five of these sites namely Red Fort, Qutb 
Minar, Bhimbetka, Hampi and Champaner 
• It was noticed that out of 19 World Heritage Sites nine monuments were partly 
closed to the public.  These included Taj Mahal Agra, Red Fort Delhi and Qutb 
Minar Delhi. 
• At 14 out of 19 World Heritage Sites no audio guide service was available.  
These included sites like Ajanta, Ellora, Khajuraho and Red Fort22. 
• Security Equipments like hand held metal detectors, scanners etc were not 
available at 7 out of 19 World Heritage sites and CCTV was not installed in 16 
out of 19 sites. 
• Facilities for differently-abled visitors were not available at 6 out of 19 World 
Heritage sites viz Humayun’s Tomb, Bhimbetka etc 
Recommendation 3.3:  The Ministry should develop a separate project for 
maintenance and security of World Heritage Sites. There should be proper 
assessment of funds, security and conservation requirements.  
The Ministry (May 2013) accepted the recommendation. 
  
                                                       
22 Audio Guide facility in Red Fort, Delhi was started in July 2012. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
44 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
Case Study 1: The Taj Mahal, Agra 
 
The Taj Mahal Agra is a mausoleum of white marble built by the Mughal emperor, 
Shahjahan. It is famous for its unique layout, perfection in symmetry and inlay work.  
Construction of the Taj Mahal was completed within a period of 17 years from 1631 
to 1648 AD at a cost of about ` 4.0 crore. The Taj Mahal was declared a centrally 
protected monument of national importance in December 1920.  Considered as one 
of the Seven Wonders of the World, it was inscribed on the list of World Heritage 
Sites in 1983. 
During last five years:  
• 0.31 crore foreign and 1.73 crore Indian tourists visited the Taj Mahal, 
through which the ASI earned ` 84.90 crore as revenue.  
• The total expenditure incurred on the preservation and conservation of the 
Taj Mahal was ` 7.55 crore. 
• 128 employees of the ASI and 275 of CISF were deployed for the maintenance 
and security of the Taj Mahal. 
 
 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 45
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
However, despite generating maximum resources amongst all the ASI monuments, 
the maintenance of the site was inadequate as discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs. The Site Management plan was yet to be finalised and implemented.  
Status of Public Amenities 
Adequate public amenities like drinking water, toilets, ramps for physically 
challenged (upto a certain level) and wheel chairs were available at the Taj Mahal.  
However, signage in Braille was not available at the Taj Mahal.  The cloak room 
facility was not available at the western gate of the Taj Mahal though most of the 
Indian visitors entered from this gate. Parking facility was located about a kilometer 
away from the entry points.  
We found that though mentioned at the counter, audio guide facility was unavailable 
for Korean, Japanese, Chinese and Gujarati languages.  The ASI in January 2010, 
proposed before the Supreme Court to construct Visitors Centres at Eastern and 
Western gates of the Taj Mahal to accommodate entry ticket counter with a covered 
queuing area for security, luggage room, information area, waiting rooms and toilets 
etc.  There was also a proposal to set up site interpretation centre.  We noticed that 
the action plan for actual construction was yet to be submitted by the ASI.   
Encroachment and Unauthorised Construction in and around the Taj Mahal 
We noticed encroachment within the premises of the Taj Mahal near Khan-i-Alam’s 
Bagh.  Neither action was taken by the ASI to remove the encroachment nor was it 
mentioned in the list of 249 encroachments provided by the ASI HQ for all the 
centrally protected monuments.   
We also noticed that only 1 out of 24 unauthorised constructions around the Taj 
Mahal was demolished.  We further noticed that an old temple next to the outside 
boundary on the eastern gate was constructed without authorisation.  The ASI 
neither took any action nor lodged a complaint with the concerned authorities on 
these unauthorised constructions.  
Preservation and Conservation of the Taj Mahal 
We noticed that the Circle office failed to properly preserve the outer boundary of 
the Taj complex.  The left side boundary wall at the eastern gate was in poor 
condition.  No conservation work was carried out by the Circle office on this wall.  
Large nails were dug into the 400 year old wall and animals were routinely tethered 
to them.  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
46 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
 
We also noticed cracks in the outer walls, broken stones fixed in the wall, missing 
designs, use of cement in the wall, seepage, fixing of plastic pipes, and broken jalis.  
  
   Plastic pipe fixed in the wall Broken jalis of the outer wall 
 
Missing stone and plaster 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 47
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
 
 Inlay work    Stains on the stone  
 
Garden not maintained 
Conservation and preservation works inside the monument were also not 
satisfactory. The plaster was fading at the main entrance to the monument. There 
were instances of missing inlay designs and seepage.  Even the gardens were not 
maintained properly.  
  
 Garden not maintained  Missing design  


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
48 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
 
Seepage on the roof 
On the eastern and western side of the main mausoleum, there were Mosque and 
Mehman Khana respectively.  We noticed that not much attention was given to the 
maintenance of these parts which was reflected in missing plaster, missing designs 
and seepage. 
  
 Cement work on wall in the mosque Missing design in the mosque 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 49
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
  
 Broken flooring of the mosque Seepage and cracks in the Mehman Khana 
  
 Missing designs in the  Mehman Khana Fading of plaster of Paris in the Mehman Khana 
Main Mausoleum 
Main mausoleum of the Taj Mahal is the main attraction and heart of the 
monument. It is a pure white marble structure having inlay works of original semi 
precious stones. We noticed that certain efforts were made by the Circle office to 
preserve and conserve this area. However, there were some deficiencies.  The ASI 
stated that because of a large number of visitors at the Taj Mahal, they did not get 
adequate time for the conservation and preservation of the monument. Lack of 
coordination mainly among the chemical treatment/cleaning with Circle office works 
was also noticed.  There was a missing design from the main Iron Gate.  We found 
that stones were missing, white floral designs had turned black and cracks were also 
noticed in the design.  


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
50 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
Black stains at the marble designs 
 
Patch work on the marble design 
Broken floral design 
 
Patch work of the inlay work 
The Science Branch with the help of UNESCO established a stone conservation 
laboratory in Agra in November 2006. The lab was to check the quality of stone prior 
to use in works. We noticed that ` 1.35 crore was incurred on account of stone 
flooring in the campus during 2007-08 to 2011-12.  However the quality of the 
stones used was not checked in the stone conservation laboratory.  
  


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 51
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
Case Study 2: The Red Fort, Delhi 
 
Red Fort, Delhi 
Brief History  
The Red Fort was constructed by Mughal emperor Shah Jahan in 1648 at a cost of ` 
one crore. Red Fort a massive military fortification, also housed the administrative 
headquarters of the empire as well as royal palaces.  The art work in the Fort is a 
synthesis of Indian, Persian and European art.  It also represents the zenith of 
Mughal architecture. In 2007 the World Heritage Committee inscribed the Red Fort, 
Delhi as a World Heritage monument.  
 
 
During last five years,  
• Seven lakh foreign and 1.17 crore Indian visitors visited the Red Fort, through 
which ASI earned ` 25.59 crore as revenue.  
• The total expenditure incurred for the preservation and conservation of Red Fort 
was ` 15.77 crore. 
•  119 private security guards and 317 CISF personnel were deployed for the 
security of the Red Fort. 
 
 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
52 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
Notification 
The monument was notified in February 1913 and it includes some parts 23 of the 
Fort.  Later another notification was issued in July 2002 to cover some additional 
parts
24 of the Fort.  
As a result of notifications, the Red Fort was treated as two different monuments by 
ASI HQ and Circle office (as per the list of 174 monuments in Delhi Circle), whereas 
the inventory of Delhi Circle published by the ASI showed Red Fort as one monument 
and mentioned the second notification as supplementary to the first notification.   
Unauthorised Closure of monument or its parts 
Hamam, Moti masjid and Baoli in Red Fort were permanently closed for the visitors 
without the approval of the competent authority.  It was also noticed that there 
were restrictions to visit the Mumtaz Mahal, Khas Mahal, Diwan-e-Khas etc for the 
general public.  Even visitors were not allowed to closely see the takht at Diwan – e- 
Aam and Diwan – e- Khas. 
Encroachment and Unauthorised Construction 
It was noticed that parts of Red Fort were being used by officials of the ASI and 
security staff for residential purposes.  DG ASI, DSA and CA of Delhi Circle were 
staying inside the Fort.  Security guards both of CISF and private security agency 
were also staying inside the monument. There were many offices situated in the Red 
Fort complex viz the Institute of Archaeology, Hostel, Office of National Mission of 
Monuments and Antiquities, Office of Science Branch, Horticulture Branch, CA’s 
office and office of the Commandant, CISF. 
It was also noticed during the joint physical inspection that temples and mazar also 
existed in the Red Fort Complex and appeared to be used for regular prayers though 
not authorised. This was not communicated to the Circle/DG office and was not 
included in the list of monuments, where unauthorised prayers are being held.  
 
 
 
 
                                                      
 
23  Naubat Khana, Diwan – e- Aam, Mumtaz Mahal, Rang Mahal, Baithaka Musamam Burj, Diwan –e- Khas, Moti 
Masjid, Sawan and Bhadon pavilion, Shah burj, Hamam with all the surroundings including the gardens, paths, 
terraces and water courses (Lal Qila). 
24  Delhi fort of Lal Qila, Asad burj, water gate, Delhi gate, Lahori gate, fortification wall, Chhatta bazaar and Baoli. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 53
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
  
 Residence of DG, ASI at Red Fort  Accommodation provided to CISF 
   
 Mazar inside Red Fort   Temple inside Red Fort 
Public Facilities 
• Audio guide facility started in July 2012 only in two languages i.e. English and 
Hindi.   
• Visitors had to walk more than a kilometre to reach the ticket counter either 
from the nearest bus stop or from authorised parking lot.  
• No CCTV cameras were installed at Lahori Gate.  At Delhi Gate no CCTV camera 
and metal detectors were installed.  No system was in place for security check of 
the vehicles entering the premises of Red Fort. 
• No Braille facility was available at the monument for visually impaired people. 
Comprehensive Site Management Plan (CCMP) 
The ASI prepared the CCMP in 2007-08 through a consultant at a total cost of ` 91.46 
lakh.  However, the CA informed that CCMP was not practical and it was difficult to 
implement.  Important issue like overhead wiring was not mentioned in the CCMP.  
Thus the expenditure was rendered wasteful. 
 
 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
54 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
Non Receipt of Revenue 
The contract for managing the parking at the Red Fort was awarded to an ineligible 
contractor25 in September 2010. The contractor stopped depositing the money from 
July 2011 and the total dues against the contract as on 31 May 2012 were ` 1.14 
crore including electricity charges and penalty.  
Organising Cultural Events 
The terms and conditions of permission for organising cultural event in Red Fort 
garden were not adhered to by the organisers of the annual Ram Leela.
26  The ASI 
did not take any action against them.  The ASI also waived off the prescribed fee of  
` 50000/- per day stating that it was a religious function. (Refer Para 2.8.5).  
Physical Condition of the Monuments 
Joint physical inspection of the complex revealed that it required widespread 
preservation and conservation; further some parts were in a dilapidated condition 
and needed immediate attention.  The details are as follows: 
Improper conservation works on the walls, dilapidated conditions of the stones were 
noticed at Lahori Gate.  
   
 Main entrance at Lahori Gate    Closed shop near Chhatta bazaar  
Naubat Khana and Diwan – e-Aam 
Many stones at the entrance gate of the Naubat Khana were seriously damaged and 
signs of improper conservation work carried out at the gate were easily visible.  The 
floral design was replaced with different colours and the work done was also a patch 
work.   Cement work was also noticed on the monument.  The takht was covered 
with a net to protect it from pigeons and bats.  However, pigeons were able to enter 
                                                      
 
25   The firm did not have the requisite experience in the related field  
26   M/s Lavkush Ramlila Committee and M/s Nav Shree Dharmik Lila Committee 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 55
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
inside the net and the purpose was defeated.  The net was also spoiling the overall 
aesthetic appeal of the place. Widespread seepage was noticed on the ceiling of the 
Diwan-e-Aam. The rear wall had a number of cracks and required chemical 
treatment.  The brackets holding the structure were falling off and needed to be 
conserved immediately.   
 
Missing Plaster 
   
 Missing floral design  Rear of Diwan-e-Aam in need of 
  chemical cleaning 
 
 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
56 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
Diwan-e-Khas 
Efforts were made to restore the design of the walls to its original shape however, 
the work was abandoned midway.  This area also required proper chemical 
conservation. 
 
Missing design on the wall 
 
Test work carried out on one pillar 
 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 57
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
Sawan and Bhadon Pavillion 
 Chemical conservation work was not carried out uniformly in all the areas.  The Hyat 
Baksh garden between these two pavilions were found to be lacking maintenance.   
We noted that there was a lot of wild vegetation and the water channels were in a 
damaged state. The pathways also needed restoration. 
   
Inlay work carried out at Sawan Pavilion   Improper maintenance of Hyat Baksh garden 
Jafar Mahal and Baoli 
Jafar Mahal, a red sand stone structure used to be filled with water.  The jalis were 
found broken, a lot of vegetation, seepage and cement work were also noticed. 
There were areas where stones were missing; there was no plaster on the bricks and 
water logging was seen on the floor. The Baoli at the Fort needed immediate 
attention for preservation.  The stones and some portion of the wall of the Baoli was 
found broken and a lot of vegetation was noticed. The garden next to the Baoli was 
in a completely unkempt condition.   
    
Missing stones and water logging  Stagnant water in Baoli  
 in Jahaz Mahal 
 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
58 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
 
Improper maintenance of Baoli 
 
GE Building 
The British-era GE building was occupied by the Office of the National Mission on 
Monuments and Antiquities.  Several modern equipment and fixtures like ACs, 
electricity fittings, ceramic tiles etc. were installed there.  The pathways were 
covered with grass highlighting poor maintenance. 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 59
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites   
 British period building at Red Fort Improper maintenance of pathways 
  and gardens  
The above observations make it clear that this symbol of our national pride and a 
World Heritage Site, had not received the care and protection it required. The ASI 
officials highlighted the issue of shortage of funds and manpower. However, we 
found that a comprehensive assessment of preservation works and funds 
requirement had never been carried out. No concrete efforts were made to obtain 
funds through the NCF or any other alternative route. No proposal for 
comprehensive preservation of the Monument was put up to the Ministry for 
separate funds allotment.  The Ministry on its own failed to take any initiative in this 
direction. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
60 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
Case Study 3: Ajanta Caves, Aurangabad 
 
Brief History : The rock cut caves near Ajanta contain perfect specimens of Indian 
Rural Paintings.  These were discovered in 1819 by British Officers while hunting.  
They were excavated between second century BC and seventh century AD. They 
were excavated in a semi-circular scarp overlooking a narrow sinuous gorge.  The 
total area of painting at Ajanta Caves was approximately 2994 sq mts.  The caves 
were notified in November 1951 and inscribed as World heritage list in 1984.  
During last five years: 
1.17 lakh foreign and 15.4 lakh Indian tourist visited the Ajanta Caves through which 
ASI earned a revenue of ` 4.97 crore. 
The total expenditure incurred for the preservation and conservation of Ajanta Caves 
was ` 7.19 crore. 
The strength of private security guards deployed was increased from 22 to 42 in 
2011.  State police also did patrolling in the Ajanta Caves. 
Site Management Plan 
Site Management Plan was under preparation by an external consultant and an 
expenditure of ` 81.10 lakh had been incurred on it.   
 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 61
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
Security 
We noticed that private security guards were engaged in the sale of entry tickets 
also.  No scanners and CCTV were available at the site.  
Status of Public Amenities  
• No toilet facility was available for the physically challenged.   
• There was no audio guide facility at the site.  
• No cloak rooms were available for the visitors. 
Conservation  
The identification and execution of the projects of chemical conservation of the 
paintings and other monuments of the Ajanta caves was the responsibility of the 
“Field laboratory at Ajanta’ under Science Branch.   An analysis of the chemical 
conservation and preservation carried out on the paintings at Ajanta, revealed the 
following:  
1) There was no mechanism for monitoring and evaluating the results of cleaning 
and fixing responsibility against defective execution.   
2) There was no laid down documented policy for chemical cleaning/conservation 
of the paintings.  
3) Inventory of the paintings had not been prepared. 
Financial Assistance from Japan Bank for International Co operation (JBIC) 
The Government of India (GOI) signed an agreement with Japan Bank for 
International Cooperation (JBIC) in 1992 for phase I and in 2003 for phase II. An 
expenditure of ` 17.03 crore was incurred during both the phases. The objective of 
the project was “to conserve and preserve monuments and also natural resources 
around and improve the infrastructure and visitor management, carry out tourist 
development activities and training programmes for higher quality of the life of local 
population in Maharashtra, predominantly in Ajanta”. 
Present Condition: 
• The unstable micro climatic conditions in the caves affected the state of 
conservation of the mural paintings.  Due to the impact of variation in relative 
humidity, a portion of painted plaster along with mud had fallen from its stone 
carrier.  Falling of white pigments from the ceiling of cave No.2 was also noticed. 
• The thick coat of protective layer applied on the paintings by the earlier 
restorers, accumulated dust, soot, excreta of bats etc had created an obscuring 
haze over the murals. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
62 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g12/g12:Management of 
World Heritage Sites
• The solvents, chemicals, etc. used for cleaning were changed frequently and the 
indiscriminate use of solvents caused chalkiness on the paintings. 
 
Cave Number 17 East wall, Removal of chalkiness 
Impact of visitors 
The National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (NEERI) Nagpur was 
identified (July 2012) to carry out capacity study of the caves and the project was in 
progress.  Entry of visitors was to be restricted to 40 inside the caves but this was not 
enforced leading to a reported increase of six to seven per cent in relative humidity. 
 
Crowd of visitors in Cave Number 2 
The impact of visitors inside the cave also increased carbon dioxide concentration.  
This highlighted the need for controlling the number of visitors inside the caves at a 
time.  Also no emergency evacuation plan has been prepared till date. 
Keeping in view the high influx of visitors and fragile condition of the caves, 
Maharashtra Tourism Development Corporation (MTDC), in August 2012, initiated a 
project to create a replica of these caves with the aid of foreign technologies and 
financial assistance from JICA. 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 63
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
 
 
 
 
 
Preservation27 and Conservation 28 of ancient Monuments is a multi-disciplinary 
activity which requires support of researchers, technicians, architects and 
historians.  
The principles guiding the preservation and restoration of ancient buildings should 
be agreed and be laid down on an international basis, with each country being 
responsible for applying the plan within the framework of its own culture and 
traditions29.  
This calls for standards of planning and execution of preservation and conservation 
works. The ASI and the Ministry were found lacking in the areas of policy 
formulation, setting standards, monitoring and documentation of conservation 
works.  
The conservation and restoration of monuments must have recourse to all the 
sciences and techniques which can contribute to the study and safeguarding of the 
architectural heritage30.  
4.1 Adequacy of Policy, Guidelines and Monitoring  
4.1.1 Lack of Conservation Policy 
The ASI did not have an updated and approved Conservation Policy to meet its 
requirements of preservation and conservation. There were no compiled instructions 
for the Circles.  The ASI stated that it was following the conservation manual of Sir 
John Marshall, which was published in 1923.  Besides, ASI was also following the 
Manual of Archaeological Survey of India, published in 1984, and Archaeological 
Works Code which were more than 30 year old.  
In the absence of a comprehensive conservation policy, the performance evaluation 
of these agencies was found highly subjective.  The process of revising the Manual 
and Works Code which had started in August 2011 did not yield any result till 
December 2012.  
                                                      
 
27 Preservation: The activity of protecting a monument from loss or danger 
28 Conservation: The activity relating to maintenance of monument in its present shape 
29 International Charter for Conservation and Restoration of Monuments and Sites (the Venice Charter 
1964) 
30 The International charters for conservation and restoration of ICOMOS 
Preservation and Conservation Works 
CHAPTER – IV 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
64 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
4.1.2 Ineffective Monitoring by the ASI HQ   
As pointed out earlier, the Circle offices were responsible for carrying out the works 
for preservation and conservation of the monuments.  As per the ASI Works Code, 
the Superintending Archaeologist of the Circle was responsible for reporting any 
irregularity during the execution of the work and for maintenance of the documents. 
The DG ASI was overall responsible for monitoring the performance of the Circle in-
charge. 
We noted the following irregularities in carrying out conservation works: 
/g57 No mandatory requirements for inspection by Superintending Archaeologist 
were prescribed; 
/g57 Non preparation of inspection notes after site inspection, 
/g57 Absence of  complete documentation of the works estimates, 
/g57 Faulty budgeting of the conservation works resulting in inclusion of extra 
items, 
/g57 Delays in completion of works and 
/g57 Non preparation of completion reports along with photographs after 
conservation.    
4.1.3 Status of Monuments as per Joint Physical Inspection   
We carried out joint physical inspections of 1655 (45 per cent ) monuments along 
with the staff members of the Sub Circle offices of the concerned monument.  The 
inspection revealed many conservation issues and concerns, some of them were as 
follows:- 
/g57 In 63 monuments plaster were coming off.  
/g57 In 78 monuments vegetation was not properly cleaned by the Sub Circle 
offices. 
/g57 In 33 monuments, walls of the monument had developed big cracks requiring 
immediate repairs. 
/g57 64 monuments were in need of urgent chemical treatment/cleaning.  These 
included monuments like temples at Hampi in Bengaluru Circle, temple of 
Lakshmi Narayan in Aurangabad Circle, Bidar Fort in Dharwad Circle and 
Jantar Mantar in Delhi Circle. 
/g57 As per the accepted conservation principles, the ASI prohibited the use of 
cement on the monuments.  Even the John Marshall’s conservation manual 
instructed the same. However in 64 monuments, cement was used on the 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 65
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
main structure of the monument.  These included the Taj Mahal, Fatehpur 
Sikri and Jhansi Fort in Agra Circle; Gulara Mahal in Bhopal Circle and Baijnath 
Temple in Dehradun Circle. 
/g57 In 63 monuments, seepage was noticed. 
/g57 In 33 monuments either the design/structure of the monument was changed 
or decoration was obliterated. 
/g57 In three monuments modern tiles were used on the monuments which 
changed the original appearance of the monuments. 
/g57 In 40 monuments, some part of the wall or the domes of the monument was 
broken since long.  However, no action was taken by the ASI to repair these. 
/g57 In 16 monuments, original stones and tiles were missing from the monument. 
/g57 In 12 monuments garbage/malba was lying in the monument. 
/g57 There were three monuments where the roof of the monument was found 
damaged and big cracks were noticed. For e.g., vaulted roof of upper and 
lower basement in the Vice Regal Lodge in Shimla Circle. 
The cases highlighted above indicated the need for the ASI to implement the 
Conservation Policy in conformity with the laid down provisions. 
4.2 Conservation Documentation  
4.2.1 Maintenance of Log Books of Conservation Works 
“The recording of the cultural heritage is essential to permit informed 
management and control of construction works and of all changes to the cultural 
heritage and to ensure that the maintenance and conservation of the heritage is 
sensitive to its physical form, its materials, construction, and its historical and 
cultural significance31. 
For the appropriate conservation to take place at a site, it was essential to have 
adequate information on earlier conservation efforts including details of material 
used, changes made, architectural drawings etc. We noticed that earlier the ASI 
maintained Log Book for each monument which had all the information in respect of 
the works carried out at the monument. However, we found that this practice was 
not being followed any more.  
                                                      
 
31 Principles for the recording of Monuments, Groups of Buildings and Sites (1996) ratified by the 11th ICOMOS 
General Assembly in Sofia, October 1996. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
66 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
There were three separate branches of the ASI viz. the Circle (structural 
conservation), Horticulture (environmental) and Science (chemical cleaning and 
treatment) to take care of various aspects of conservation. Due to lack of 
coordination between these Branches and abysmal state of monitoring by ASI HQ, 
details of expenditure incurred and conservation efforts made on a particular 
monument were not available in a comprehensive manner.   
Incidence of poor documentation was also evident in the Horticulture Branch where 
we found that the Directorate of Horticulture did not have adequate information in 
respect of the total number of gardens and original heritage gardens.  The 
Directorate of Horticulture intimated that the total number of gardens was 504 
whereas the combined figure from its four divisions stood at 525.  Similarly as per 
the Directorate office, total number of gardens with original designs was 60. 
However, the figures did not tally with the response of their own divisional offices. 
In the absence of any authentic documentation, it was difficult to fix responsibility 
for a damaged portion, incomplete work of repair etc. For example, the use of 
cement was prohibited in the protected monuments.  We found many cases where 
cement had been used. However, in the absence of documentation, it was difficult to 
fix responsibility or determine any details of the irregularity. 
We found that in 1984, the Mirdha Committee had also emphasised the need for 
such documentation by stating that maintenance of the Log Book of the 
monument with complete details of the work carried out should be properly 
recorded for future references. However no action was taken by the ASI on this 
recommendation of the Mirdha Committee. 
4.2.2 Maintenance of Work Related Records 
The Archaeological Work Code prescribed maintenance of the following records for 
the documentation of any conservation work undertaken at a monument: 
1. Cash book ( form TR 4) 
2. Measurement book ( form CPWD -92) 
3. Tenders and contract documents like contractor’s ledger, tender sale and 
opening register, agreement and security deposit register 
4. Estimates including register of deposit works and sanctioned estimates 
5. Other works records like registers of tools and plants, unpaid wages and 
cement stock register etc 
In addition, documentation of the details of labour in the form of labour registers, 
daily labour report etc. were also required to be maintained. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 67
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
We observed that many Circles viz Delhi, Agra, Lucknow and Bhubaneswar did  not 
maintain the register of works and thus year wise details and item-wise expenditure 
incurred on various conservation works could not be ascertained. 
Recommendation 4.1: The Ministry should develop a Comprehensive Conservation 
Policy and update its Manuals and Works Code. The ASI should make it mandatory to 
maintain log books for each protected monument with detailed documentation of all 
conservation efforts.   
Recommendation 4.2:  Maintenance of work related documents should be a 
responsibility of the head of the Circle/Division, which should be monitored regularly 
by the ASI HQ on test check basis.  
The Ministry (May 2013) accepted the recommendation and intimated that 
necessary instructions were being issued. 
4.3 Irregularities in Planning of Conservation Works 
Table 4.1 Irregularities in planning of conservation works\ 
Sl. No. Irregularity Details 
1.  Criteria for selection of 
Monuments for conservation 
• ASI was not following the procedure 
prescribed in John Marshall Manual of 
Conservation. 
• There was no system of assigning 
priorities across various works in 
Circles/Branches. 
• Works were taken up mostly in ad-hoc 
manner as per the subjective 
assessment of the officials. 
2.  Monuments without special 
repair work/annual 
maintenance work 
• No prescribed criteria for planning and 
prioritisation of monuments taken up 
for conservation works. 
• ASI HQ could not provide monument 
wise information of special repairs and 
annual repair works. 
• In  765 monuments, no special repairs 
were taken up and in 691 monuments 
no annual conservation work was 
carried during the period of audit. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
68 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
3.  Delay in submission of 
Revised Conservation 
Program (RCP) 
• There was a delay of upto 69 days in 
submission of RCPs by the 
Circles/Branches to DG ASI which was 
required to be submitted by February 
of the year for the works which were 
to be carried out in the next financial 
year. 
• This delay in the first step of the 
conservation works had a cascading 
effect and led to further delays at all 
the succeeding stages. 
4.  Scrutiny of RCP at ASI HQ • ASI, HQ was not receiving the 
expenditure statements from all the 
Circles/Branches regularly. 
• There was no scrutiny of the 
expenditure statements that were 
actually received. 
• For Example, Special repairs of Hauz 
Khas Complex in Delhi Circle reflected 
the estimated expenditure as ` 14.63 
lakh in RCP of 2010-11 and further 
requirement for 2010-11 and 2011-12 
was ` 83.81 lakh and ` 10.00 lakh 
respectively. 
5.  Works approved but not 
carried out 
• In five Circles 32, 103 works worth 
` 5.37 crore approved by DG, ASI were 
not taken up during the year.   
• No reasons were found on record for 
not taking up the works approved by 
DG ASI. 
6.  Estimates without assessment • Approved budget and expenditure 
incurred on the works did not tally in 
Delhi, Srinagar and Jaipur Circles. 
• Difference in the approved budget and 
expenditure ranged up to 266 per cent. 
• DG, ASI did not ascertain the reasons 
                                                       
32  Shimla, Ranchi, Goa, Guwahati and Delhi 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 69
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
for the substantial variation between 
approved budget and actual 
expenditure. 
7.  Works carried out without 
inclusion in RCP 
• 30 works of ` 4.54 crore and 8 works 
of ` 23.29 lakh in Delhi and Goa Circle 
respectively were carried out without 
inclusion in RCP. These works were not 
planned while preparing the annual 
conservation programme. 
8.  Inclusion of non plan items in 
plan budget heads 
• In four Circles33, the RCP submitted for 
special repair works for ` 10.37 crore 
included works of recurring nature 
which should have been included in 
the list of annual repairs such as 
clearance of vegetation, grill fencing, 
works on pathways etc. 
• Expenditure on maintenance of the 
gardens related to the World Heritage 
Sites and the ticketed monuments was 
wrongly booked under the plan heads. 
• In Science Branch, during  2007-08, an 
amount of ` 17.97 lakh was incurred 
on the items such as purchase of 
laboratory equipment, running of 
science lab, annual maintenance 
contract of the equipment etc. by 
divisional/zonal offices. 
9.  Inclusion of plan items in non 
plan budget heads 
• Conservation work of Flag Staff Tower 
in the Delhi Circle was carried out 
during 2011-12 at a cost of ` 7.04 lakh.  
The items of work included dismantling 
of old decayed plaster, carrying out 
thick lime plaster on monument and 
laying of thick concrete on terrace. 
• It is worth mentioning that special 
repair works needed approval of 
Director General whereas the annual 
repair works were approved only by SA 
of the Circle. 
                                                       
33  Delhi, Bhopal, Ranchi and Srinagar 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
70 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
10.  Office expenditure through 
conservation budget heads 
• In the 176 Sub Circle offices, 
expenditure on purchase of 
computers, printers and cartridges, 
water coolers, travelling etc. was met 
from the budget head of Minor Works 
(Non Plan) which was specifically 
meant for the conservation and 
preservation of monuments as no 
budget was provided to these Sub 
Circle offices under the head office 
expenses. 
11.  Incomplete Works • Cases were noticed where the special 
repair works were left incomplete like 
the conservation work of Vittala 
temple in Bengaluru Circle, started in 
1999-2000 left in midway. 
12.  Unauthorised expenditure on 
unprotected monuments 
• several cases were noticed where 
Circles were incurring expenditure on 
the monuments which were not 
protected under AMASR Act. 
• Delhi Circle incurred ` 18.67 lakh on 
Jama Masjid, an unprotected 
monument.  Dehradun Circle incurred 
expenditure on unprotected temples. 
Ranchi Circle incurred ` 2.30 lakh in 
2008-09 on repair of Kolhan Rest 
House which belongs to Government 
of Jharkhand. Similarly Hyderabad, 
Bengaluru and Trissur Circles incurred 
expenditure on monuments which did 
not fall under centrally protected 
monuments. 
 
  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 71
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
Pillar lying in the mandapa at Hampi World Heritage Site, Karnataka 
Stones lying scattered inside the monument at Ananthashayana Temple, Hampi, Karnataka 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
72 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
The Mirdha committee strongly recommended that important monuments should 
be identified for thorough conservation including environmental conservation on an 
integrated development basis.  For this purpose, it was necessary that inter-
disciplinal teams should be asked to study all the problems at the monuments and 
lay down guidelines for their conservation. Only then, all the needs of the 
monuments in respect of their structural stability, chemical preservation of 
paintings/sculptures, development of environments, landscaping etc. be fully met. 
 
Recommendation 4.3: There should be standards for the prioritisation of special 
repair and maintenance of every protected monument. This should form part of the 
Comprehensive Conservation Policy.  
Recommendation 4.4: The scrutiny at the DG ASI’s office on the estimates received 
from various Circles needs improvement.  Detailed guidelines should be developed in 
this regard. 
The Ministry (May 2013) accepted the recommendation and intimated that the draft 
conservation policy will be modified accordingly. 
4.4 Improper Conservation Works  
A few neglected monuments requiring immediate conservation works are discussed 
below: 
1. Saraswathi Temple, Singanathanahalli, Bengaluru Circle 
This temple was situated in a remote area and had no proper access road. It was in 
dilapidated condition and was badly in need of conservation and proper access. 
 
Dilapidated condition of the Saraswathi Temple, Bengaluru Circle 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 73
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
2. Krishna complex, Hampi, Bengaluru Circle 
The Mahadwara (main entrance) and stone wall of the temple had developed cracks 
and needed immediate attention along with other structures inside the complex. The 
bazaar mantapa in front of the Krishna complex also required conservation.  
 
Cracks in Krishna Temple, Hampi, Bengaluru Circle 
3. Underground Shiva Temple, Hampi, Bengaluru Circle 
Water logging was noticed at the underground Shiva Temple at Hampi as water from 
the adjoining fields had entered the temple.  Thus, visitors were unable to access the 
temple. 
Water logging in Shiva Temple, Hampi, Bengaluru Circle 


Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
Report 
 
74 
 
4. Fort
In the 
pillared
door.  A
5. Fate
Agra C i
conserv
lakh. Co
was d e
unsatisf
Circle.  
No. 18 of 2
Performance
t at Vatakka
Vatakkotta
d mandapa s
ASI had bee
Man
ehpur Sikri,
ircle incurr
vation of a M
onservation
eclared su b
factory w o
No rectifica
2013 
e Audit of Pre
aottai, Che
i in Kanya k
s, one of t
n using it as
ndapa’s origi
, Agra Circle
ed an exp e
Mint House
n work was 
bstandard 
ork by Assi
atory action
servation and
nnai Circle
kumari, in 
he manda p
s a store ho
inal look and
e 
enditure o f
e at Fatehpu
not carried 
and was 
stant Sup e
n had been t
d Conservatio
the Chenn
pas was cl o
ouse, compl
d after conve
f ` 7.45 la k
ur Sikri agai
out in acco
stopped m
erintending 
taken since
on of  Monum
ai Circle, o
osed by co n
etely alterin
ersion to sto
kh up to 2
nst the san
ordance wit
midway fol l
Archaeolo
 then. 
ments and Ant
out of the f
nstructing w
ng its origin
ore house 
005-06 on 
ctioned cos
h the norm
lowing de c
ogical Engi n
iquities 
four simpl e
walls and a
nal look.  
 
account o
st of ` 15.72
ms. The work
claration o
neer of th e
e 
a 
f 
2 
k 
f 
e 
 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 75
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
 
Mint House, Fatehpur sikri, Agra 
6. Sangagiri Fort, Chennai Circle 
The reconstruction work of Bastion/Fort wall and reconstruction of revetment wall 
at Sangagiri Fort, Chinnakavaudanur, Salem Sub- Circle was taken up during the years 
2006-10.   The total expenditure incurred for the two items of works was ` 13.61 
lakh.  Joint physical inspection revealed that both the Bastion/Fort wall and the 
revetments wall of the temple tank were in a damaged condition even after 
execution of the work. 
  
 Chinnakavandanur, Sangagiri – Fort  Chinnakavandanur, Sangagiri - Damaged 
 bastion in a damaged condition side wall of the lower tank 
 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
76 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
7. Krishna Temple in a part of Donka with Gopuram, Kalyanamandapam and 
Masonry built Tank, Kalyanamandapa at Hyderabad Circle 
Visible signs of shrinkage and tilting of the Kalyanamandapa was reported by the ASI 
as early as 1977, suggesting complete repair and conservation. The work of 
dismantling (sanctioned in 2003-04 for ` 60.00 lakh) was completed in March 2006.  
The DG, ASI accorded (July 2006) sanction for reconstruction of the mandapa with an 
estimate of ` 3.48 crore.  The foundation work scheduled for completion by July 
2006, was actually completed in August 2009.  Subsequently the work was executed 
departmentally and an expenditure of ` 3.55 crore had been incurred as of March 
2012. 
Thus, lack of proper planning, change in foundation design led to huge increase in 
the cost of reconstruction and delay in completion of the work. 
 
 Before dismantling  After dismantling  
 
During reconstruction 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 77
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
8. Baisgazi Wall, Malda, Kolkata Circle 
The wall had recesses at regular intervals prior to the conservation work.  However, 
the ASI left no such recess in the inner wall, while restoring the northern part of the 
wall.  But recesses were made while restoring the western side of the wall. Thus the 
conservation work changed the original appearance of the monument. 
   
 Original recess in the wall  No  recess in the  Recess in certain portion 
  reconstructed wall  of the reconstructed wall  
9. Jor Bunglow, Bishnupur, Kolkata Circle 
The entire four side wall was built with ornamental bricks whereas the patch work as 
visible was completed with the plain bricks marring the appearance of the 
monument.  
 
Patch work carried out at Jor Bunglow, Bishnupur, Kolkata Circle 
 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
78 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
10. Yellow Mosque, Murshidabad, Kolkata Circle 
The name Yellow Mosque was derived from its colour; however, the improper 
conservation carried out by the ASI, completely changed its original appearance.  We 
found that the mosque now had been painted white.  
 
 
Old view Current view 
11. Ancient Palace of Raja Suchet Singh, Srinagar Circle 
The arcaded verandah of the right side of the ancient palace of Raja Suchet Singh in 
Ramnagar was converted into a lounge with bathrooms and kitchen and a portion 
was used as office. 
12. Great Stupa at Amaravati, Hyderabad Circle 
The great stupa or Mahachaitya at Amaravati was considered to be one of the 
biggest Buddhist stupas in India. During the excavation, brick built circular vedika or 
drum with projecting rectangular Ayaka platforms in four cardinal were excavated.  
We noted that the ASI built (2006) an additional circular Vedika or drum with bricks  
on the existing Vedika. This altered the original identity of the excavated site.  
 
 General view of Mahastupa  General view of Mahastupa with  
 without drum wall additional drum wall 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 79
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
13. St. Angelo Fort, Trissur Circle 
During the conservation work carried out in 2000-01, the horse stable originally 
made of lateritic roof in triangular shape was changed to cylindrical shape roof using 
cement concrete. The conventional air holes were replaced and its original shape 
and appearance was drastically changed. This was done despite the prohibition on 
use of cement concrete on the monuments.  
14. Tripolia Gate, Delhi Circle 
The work order for special repair work of Tripolia Gate was awarded to M/s AIC 
Building Solutions Ltd. in July 2010 for ` 21.97 lakh with the completion date of  
8 November 2010.     
In November 2011 during a site inspection, Deputy Superintending Archeological 
Engineer observed that the plaster work executed by the contractor did not match 
with the original plaster as the original had various block, moulded and ornamental 
designs besides floral motif above the arches of Gate.  The contractor executed plain 
plaster work instead of the ornamental designs thus defeating the basic purpose of 
conservation and restoration.   However, the ASI made the payment of ` 8.17 lakh. 
The Circle informed the contractor that the work executed by him had altered the 
very character of the monument and destroyed the aesthetic view of the monument, 
which would be difficult to restore at this stage.  The Circle asked the contractor to 
complete the work as per the terms of the Work Order followed by verification by 
the Deputy Superintending Archeologist.  This work had not been corrected till the 
completion of audit.  Thus lack of monitoring by the Circle resulted in improper 
conservation work by the contractor. The work had not been completed even after a 
delay of more than 32 months. 
 
Tripolia Gate before conservation 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
80 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
 
Tripolia Gate after conservation (missing  designs) 
4.5 Preservation and Conservation Works by External 
Agencies  
Conservation is a specialised technical work.  Except Delhi Circle, all other Circles of 
the ASI carried out conservation and preservation work departmentally.  No 
provision was found either in the ASI Works Code or the ASI Manual for executing 
conservation work through external agencies in the centrally protected monuments. 
The Works Code however allowed the ASI to receive funding for conservation work 
from the external organisations.  However, in recent years some external agencies 
like INTACH, Aga Khan Trust etc. were given monuments for conservation and 
preservation works.  Delhi Circle was getting all its works executed through external 
contractors.   
4.5.1 Monitoring of External Agencies 
The ASI had no guidelines regarding engagement of agencies to carry out the 
conservation works. No laid down criteria regarding the qualification and minimum 
experience in the related field were fixed by the ASI.  In the absence of any laid down 
criteria, the selection of the agency was done on case to case basis. The following 
instances with regard to lack of monitoring of the works carried out by external 
agencies were noticed.  
(i) The ASI entered into an agreement with Aga Khan Trust through NCF in April 
1999 for the conservation, research documentation, reinstating of water 
systems and illumination apart from restoration of gardens of Humayun’s 
Tomb, Delhi Circle.  Aga Khan Trust for Culture (AKTC) entered into another 
MoU in July 2007 with the ASI for the conservation of the protected 
monuments within the Humayun’s Tomb complex.  The AKTC was to arrange 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 81
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
for the funding through domestic or International donors with no financial 
obligations on the ASI.  The Sub Circle incharge of Humayun’s Tomb intimated 
(January 2013) that he was not aware of terms and conditions of the 
agreement or the time schedule of the work being carried out by AKTC and 
thus had no monitoring role.  This highlights how the ASI has given up its 
responsibilities as per the MoU. 
(ii) The conservation work of five monuments in Lodhi garden complex at Delhi 
Circle was carried out by Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage 
(INTACH) in 2006.  The work was given to INTACH as the ASI found itself over 
burdened with the works associated with the Commonwealth Games 2010.  
No formal agreement was signed with INTACH and no work order was issued 
to the firm.  The Delhi Circle was to supervise the work.  However, it was 
noticed only in October 2009 that INTACH had carried out faulty and inferior 
quality of conservation work. An expert committee appointed by the DG, ASI 
in July 2011 reviewed the work and found the work to be of poor quality and 
unacceptable.  The Committee mentioned that there was poor workmanship, 
use of inferior material, poor supervision and management of the work. The 
Committee also doubted whether the work ‘repairs to the flat roof’ was 
actually executed as mentioned in the utilisation certification.  No corrective 
action was taken by the INTACH till November 2012 and the ASI also took no 
action for blacklisting the agency or imposing penalty. 
(iii) We also noticed that the ASI entered into an MoU in November 2009 with 
Global Vaish Organisation for the maintenance of the ‘Ugrasen ki baoli’ a 
Centrally protected monument of national importance of Delhi Circle.  
  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
82 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
Case Study 4 : Ugrasen Ki Baoli 
 
The ASI signed an MoU in 2009 with Global Vaish Organisation (GVO) for the 
maintenance of Ugrasen Ki Baoli, Delhi.  The MoU was not legally vetted by Ministry 
of Law and Justice. We found that the proposal for MoU was originally from Delhi 
Pradeshik Agarwal Sammelan (DPAS) but the MoU was finally entered into with GVO. 
No reasons were found recorded for this change.  
The initial proposal was submitted under the National Culture Fund (NCF) scheme, 
yet the NCF was not made a party while entering into the agreement.  Permission of 
the Ministry was not sought at any stage. 
 
Non maintenance of the monument by the GVO 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 83
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
As per the MoU, Project Implementation Committee (PIC) was to be constituted to 
define the scope of work, set the target date and time schedule etc. The PIC was not 
constituted till 2012.   
No details were available in respect of the contributions given by GVO to the ASI for 
the monument as defined in the MoU.   
GVO was to print and distribute books, periodicals, leaflets, brochures etc, however, 
no such work was carried out.  GVO was not authorised to use the monument for 
any meeting, worship or religious activities. We noticed cases where meetings were 
held in the monument and no action was taken by the ASI. Without any assessment 
of GVO’s performance, the MoU was renewed for five more years in January 2011. 
 
 Monument in use as residence  Porta Cabin erected by GVO 
 by the chowkidar 
During the joint Physical inspection we found that GVO was running an office in the 
premises from the porta cabin erected to stock the literature, stationery, computers 
etc. The chowkidar was residing in the monument permanently. The monument was 
in a bad condition and there was no water in the Baoli any longer. 
Thus, ASI had not laid down any procedure for appointing, regulating or monitoring 
the work of external agencies deployed for the preservation and conservation of 
centrally protected monuments. 
 
 
 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
84 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
4.5.2 Unauthorised Conservation Works by External Organisations 
We found several cases where organisations other than the ASI carried out 
conservation works on monuments or its parts without the ASI’s approval. A few 
cases are given below: 
Table 4.2 Works carried out by other agencies 
Sl. No. Name of 
monument 
Nature of 
work done 
Work 
Executing 
Organisation 
Expenditure 
incurred Remarks 
1. Summer 
palace of 
Maharaja 
Ranjit Singh, 
Amritsar 
Restoration 
works 
Punjab 
Heritage and 
Tourism 
promotion 
Board 
` 2.17 crore No permission 
given by ASI 
2. Lakes of Kirat 
Sagar and Vijay 
Sagar and Tank 
at Barua Sagar, 
Jhansi 
Conservation 
works 
Uttar Pradesh 
State 
Government 
 
-- 
State 
Government 
Authorities 
unauthorisidely 
developed a 
picnic spot and 
utilised the 
water for 
irrigation and 
drinking 
purposes  
3. Jama Masjid, 
Imambara of 
Amin-ud-
daula, 
Lucknow Circle 
Wood and 
Glass work, 
Electrification 
and wooden 
frame work 
Hussainabad 
Trust, Uttar 
Pradesh 
-- Works 
undertaken to  
give a modern 
look to the 
monuments 
 
In all the above cases, the ASI took no cognizance of the unauthorised conservation 
activities carried out on the centrally protected monuments by other agencies. 
4.6 Registration of Contractors 
As per para 3 of the Manual of the ASI, the registration of contractors in the ASI 
would be done at the Circle/Branch office, if they intended to operate within the 
jurisdiction of a particular Circle/Branch.  In case, if any particular contractor/firm 
intended to operate in more than one Circle or Branches their names would have to 
be registered with the DG, ASI.  A half yearly statement giving details of registered 
contractors was to be submitted to the DG, ASI.  
The ASI, HQ intimated that they were not registering any contractor though there 
were contractors working for more than one circle office.  The ASI, HQ was also not 
receiving the half yearly reports in respect of the contractors registered with the 
Circles as required in the Manual of the ASI from any of the 24 circles.   

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 85
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
The registration of the contractors in the Delhi Circle was carried out without 
verifying the credentials of the contractors. 
4.6.1 Non-recovery of Worker Cess from Contractors 
As per the Delhi Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Services) Rules 2002, cess at the rate of one per cent 
of the cost of construction is to be collected and remitted to the Delhi Building and 
Other Construction Workers Welfare Board after deducting the cost of collection of 
cess.  Delhi Circle carried out the conservation and maintenance works through the 
contractors; however cess was neither collected nor remitted to the Board.  The 
total expenditure incurred on conservation of ancient monuments during 2007-12 
was ` 64.64 crore.  In response to the correspondence emanated from Deputy 
Labour Commissioner, Labour Department, Government of NCT Delhi, the Delhi 
Circle replied  (November 2012) that they were not aware of the provision regarding 
deduction  of the workers welfare cess.  Given that all the works had now been 
completed, it would be difficult to recover the cess.
 
4.7 Conservation Works carried out through National 
Culture Fund 
One of the most important objectives of the National Culture Fund (NCF) was to 
administer and utilise its funds for the conservation, maintenance, promotion, 
protection, preservation and upgradation of monuments protected or otherwise.   
The ASI supplied two lists of selected 36 and 100 centrally protected monuments in 
2000 and 2007 respectively for which funding from donors was requested through 
the NCF. NCF was required to select monuments from the list supplied by the ASI . 
We noted that there was no priority defined amongst these selected monuments.  
We also noticed that monuments other than those listed in the two lists were also 
selected by the NCF for donor projects. e.g. Jantar Mantar, Delhi  and the Taj Mahal, 
Agra. There were no recorded reasons for selecting monuments outside the lists 
given by the ASI.  
It was also noticed that the NCF failed to arrange donors for some of the most 
important monuments like the Red Fort, Delhi, Agra Fort, Safdarjung Tomb, 
Ranthambore Fort etc. No documentary evidence was found on record showing 
the efforts carried out by the NCF to promote these monuments amongst public 
and private organisations to seek potential donors for the conservation of these 
monuments. Meetings with prospective donors were not recorded and there were 
no systematic plans to cover all listed monuments (as suggested by the ASI) over a 
defined period of time.  
Since 1999, the NCF signed 19 MoUs with public and private sector organisations.  
We found these MoUs not well drafted and cases were noticed where the timeline 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
86 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
for completion of projects was not even mentioned in the MoUs.  There was no legal 
vetting of these MoUs by the Ministry of Law and Justice. 
The Ministry (May 2013) intimated that templates for MoUs had been prepared and 
were being finalised in consultation with Ministry of Law.  
Complete details of the item wise expenditure on each project were not being 
maintained in the NCF.  In the absence of this information, we could not ensure that 
the expenditure incurred on any project was actually for the purpose for which MoU 
was signed or for the administrative expenses/consultation services only.  There was 
no documentation to provide such assurance even to the donors. 
The Ministry (May 2013) intimated that details of scope of work, budget and time 
line are being included in the MoU for monitoring the progress.  
We noticed that out of the 19 projects taken up for the conservation of centrally 
protected monuments, only two had been completed till November 2012 despite 
availability of funds with NCF.  The details of the projects along with our comments 
are placed at Annex 4.1. 
Recommendation 4.5:  To be effective, the ASI needs to prioritise its projects 
requiring funding through NCF.  For this, a comprehensive assessment of funds needs 
to be carried out in advance. 
4.8 Role of the ASI in the Maintenance of Living Monuments  
As per para 26 of John Marshall’s Manual of Conservation, living monuments are 
monuments which were in use at the time of notification.  These included temples, 
mosques etc. As per section 6 of the AMASR Act 1958, the Central Government may 
enter into an agreement with the owner of the monument for its maintenance and 
custody and may restrict the owner from destroying, removing, altering or defacing 
the monument or to build on or near the site of the monument. However, we found 
that the ASI failed to enter into formal agreement with owners of all of such living 
monuments.   
As the owners were in the actual possession of the monument, they carried out 
repair and maintenance of the monument as per their understanding and 
requirement without always considering the historical and artistic value of the 
monument. In many cases this destroyed the aesthetic value and original look of the 
monument.  The ASI was not able to exercise full authority over these monuments 
and was unable to stop these activities. In a number of living religious sites like 
temples, gompas and mosques, it was noticed that alterations had been made by the 
management without any approval from the ASI. The ASI on its part had no 
guidelines on the changes that could be allowed considering these were living 
buildings with evolving needs for extension etc. The present rules placed a ban on 
any sort of additions/alterations that was practically un-implementable. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 87
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
Instances were noticed where the trusts/private persons managed these 
monuments and carried out works in the nature of painting of walls by modern 
enamel paints, fixing of ceramic tiles and electrical equipments etc. altering the 
aesthetic value of the monument. Some examples were the mosque in Qutb Minar, 
the ancient mosque in Palam in Delhi Circle, Shey monasteries, Hemis monastaries in 
Leh Mini Circle, Bara Imambara and Chhota Imambara in Lucknow Circle and the 
Churches in Goa Circles. 
Recommendation 4.6: There should be detailed guidelines on management of ‘living’ 
monuments. 
Recommendation 4.7: Documentation on ‘non living’ monuments should be properly 
maintained to curb instances of unauthorised possession and use.  
The Ministry (May 2013) accepted the recommendation and intimated that 
necessary guidelines in this regard are being incorporated in the draft conservation 
policy. 
4.9 Environmental Conservation 
The architectural composition of the historic garden included: 
• Its plan and its topography 
• Its vegetation, including its species, proportions, colour schemes, spacing and 
respective heights 
• Its structural and decoration features 
• Its water, running or still, reflecting the sky 
Continuous maintenance of historic gardens is of paramount importance.  The 
preservation of the garden in an unchanged condition requires both prompt 
replacements and a long-term programme of periodic renewal (clear felling and 
replanting with mature specimens)34. 
The Manual of the ASI stated that till Independence, the horticulture works at 
centrally protected monuments were looked after mainly by the Central Public 
Works Department.  However, to carry out the works strictly in accordance with the 
archaeological principles, a separate garden branch was extended in 1952-53. The 
‘horticulture works’ in the ASI included all topographical areas, landscapes, historical 
parks and gardens, setting up of new gardens, maintenance and renovation of 
existing gardens, which are of archaeological, historical or aesthetic values.  It 
included supply, repairs, acquisition and transport of machinery, tools, livestocks and 
other ancillary items essential for the execution of such works. 
                                                      
 
34 ICOMOS -The Florence Charter 1981 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
88 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
The main functions of the horticulture branch of the ASI were designing, laying out, 
renewal and maintenance of gardens and enclosing the areas proposed for 
development besides providing effective entrances and exit etc. 
The ASI’s Directorate of Horticulture was in Agra and there were four Horticulture 
Divisions which had different states under their jurisdiction, each maintaining a large 
number of gardens.  The details are as follows: 
Table 4.3 Details of divisions of Horticulture Branch 
Division Location of 
the Division 
Total number 
of gardens States covered by the Division 
I.  Agra 81 Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Uttarakhand 
and Maharashtra 
II.  Delhi 186 Delhi, Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, 
Gujarat, Haryana, Daman and Diu and Jammu & 
Kashmir 
III.  Mysore 126 Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Karnataka, Kerala and 
Tamil Nadu 
IV.  Bhubaneswar 132 Odisha, West Bengal, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, 
Assam, Sikkim, Tripura and Manipur 
 
We noticed that with the available manpower it was very difficult for the 
Horticulture Divisions to maintain the gardens and have regular inspection of the 
works being carried out on these gardens as the area to be covered was vast.  The 
Agra Division was headed by Chief Horticulturist of the rank of Superintending 
Archeologist but the other three Divisions were headed by Deputy Superintending 
Horticulturists (DSH).  Thus, one DSH was responsible for gardens spread over upto 
eight states.  It was practically impossible for a single officer to monitor all the 
gardens spread over such a large area.  
One particular incongruity noticed by us was that of the garden-in-charge in 
Hyderabad who had been made in charge of the Buddhist remains of Sankaram, in 
Vishakhapatnam, which was approximately 592 kms away.  Similarly the DSH of 
Division II was responsible for all gardens from Jammu & Kashmir to Daman & Diu. 
As a result, monitoring was ineffective, in most of the gardens.  The gardens were 
either not maintained at all or were left to gardeners/labourers without any 
supervision. 
4.9.1 Documentation of the Heritage Gardens  
Gardens were part of some of the protected monuments as per their original design. 
As an integral part of the monuments, these heritage gardens helped us to 
understand and interpret monuments in proper context.  The Horticulture Branch 
was responsible for the maintenance of such heritage gardens according to the style, 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 89
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
age and temperament of the concerned monument and used period specific flora to 
retain the original character of the site. 
We noted that the divisions were not consulted by the Circle offices to obtain 
information about monuments sites which included gardens according to the original 
designs. As a result the division failed to segregate the heritage gardens from other 
gardens around the protected monuments.  
There was no information available with the Horticulture Branch on the original 
structure, flora and fauna and other decorative features of the historic gardens. 
There were many gardens around Mughal monuments whose layout and other 
features were reasonably well documented.  However, we did not notice any such 
garden being maintained with due consideration of its original design.   
In many monuments the ASI was even unable to ensure flow of water in fountains 
and Neher – e- Bahist  (water channels) which was an important feature of Mughal 
gardens.  These included the Taj Mahal, Agra, Red Fort, Delhi and Itmatuddula, Agra 
etc.   
We did not find any evidence of the ASI’s efforts to document or develop heritage 
gardens through proper research. 
 
Blocked water channels at Humayun’s Tomb, Delhi 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
90 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
4.9.2 Non-Maintenance of Gardens 
Gardens require maintenance on a daily basis. This includes watering of plants and 
grass, pruning of plants and cleaning. The Horticulture Branch carried out annual 
maintenance and upkeep of gardens under the head Minor Works ‘Non Plan’.  As per 
the information furnished by Division II, there were 50 gardens in Delhi against 174 
centrally protected monuments (which included gardens at the offices of the DG ASI, 
NMA, NMMA and Children Museum etc.).  However during the last five years the 
number of gardens taken up for annual maintenance ranged from 25 to 37. 
Evidently the Horticulture Divisions failed to maintain even the existing gardens.   
In contrast, we found that the Branch was maintaining gardens which were actually 
not pertaining to their jurisdiction. For example, the Division III was maintaining a 
garden named Chandrashekara garden, Kamalapur, Hampi where there was not 
even a centrally protected monument.  
 
Chandrashekara Garden with no monument- Kamalapur, Hampi 
Joint physical inspection of gardens in and around the protected monuments 
revealed that the maintenance of gardens were not appropriate.  The condition of 
some of the gardens in the Delhi Circle is depicted in the photographs below: 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 91
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
 
 Indiscriminate Digging: Garden Debris lying in the garden at  
 at Safdarjung Tomb Humayun’s Tomb  
 
 Unkempt garden at Purana Qila  Unkempt garden at Red Fort Delhi 
Even at World Heritage Sites viz. the Red Fort and Humayun’s Tomb of Delhi Circle, 
gardens were not properly maintained by the Horticulture Branch.  The Branch 
attributed the poor maintenance to lack of human and financial resources. They also 
pointed out that the Director (Horticulture) requested the DG, ASI several times to 
increase the strength of the Branch but there were, however, no concrete efforts 
made by the ASI, HQ so far. 
Recommendation 4.8: The ASI, HQ should accord priority to the Horticulture Branch 
and provide budget and manpower commensurate with actual requirement.  
4.10 Chemical Conservation and Functioning of Science 
Branch 
The Science Branch of the ASI was established in 1917 with the principal function of 
chemical treatment and preservation of Museum-exhibits and other antiquities. The 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
92 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
preservation of monuments through chemical conservation had become an 
important function of the Science Branch.  The Science branch was headed by 
Director (Science) situated at Dehradun, Uttarakhand.  The Branch had three 
divisional offices situated at Bhubaneswar, Hyderabad and Indore and 11 zonal 
offices spread over the country, besides laboratories at Dehradun, Agra and Ajanta.   
4.10.1 Criteria for Chemical Treatment   
Similarly, the main criteria for selection of monuments for chemical treatment were 
on the basis of: 
• the observations made during the inspections of monuments by executing 
staff and senior officers,  
•  monuments which are not chemically treated for more than 5-6 years  
•  references from the VIP visits 
We found that there was no system in place for regular physical inspection of 
monuments to assess the requirement of chemical treatment. In the absence of any 
specific guidelines and criteria for selection of the monument to be taken up for 
chemical treatment, many monuments which required chemical treatment, were 
never taken up. Expenditure statement for 2009-10 revealed that only 149 
monuments were selected which accounted for four per cent of the total protected 
monuments.  There was no justification on record for selecting monuments for 
treatment.  Thus monuments were chosen for chemical cleaning without objective 
assessment, prioritisation and documentation.   
In Dharwad Circle, though 19 proposals were approved for carrying out chemical 
treatment during the period 2009-10 to 2011-12, only four works were taken up till 
31 March 2012.  No reasons were recorded for leaving the rest. 
4.10.2 Monitoring of Works and Expenditure   
As per para 4.1 of the Manual of the ASI, Director (Science) lays down policy for the 
execution of chemical preservation works and functioning of Science Regional, Zonal 
and Field Laboratories with the approval of the DG, ASI.  It was his responsibility as 
administrative head of the Chemical Branch to administer the financial grant and 
with this object in view, keep a close watch over the progress of expenditure. 
We noted that work wise details, including physical and financial progress was not 
being maintained and monitored by either the zonal/divisional office or by Director 
(Science) office.   

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 93
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
4.10.3 Coordination with Structural Conservation 
Structural conservation should always precede chemical conservation in the 
restoration of monuments.  However, we found instances where the structural 
conservation was carried out after the chemical treatment. This nullified the process 
of chemical treatment.  For example, the chemical treatment of Sawan Pavilion at 
the Red Fort in Delhi Circle was carried out by the zonal office in the year 2010-11 
involving an expenditure of ` 3.98 lakh whereas the structural conservation of the 
Sawan Pavilion by the Circle office was carried out in 2011-12 at the cost of ` 21.63 
lakh.   
Recommendation 4.9:  The ASI should devise a mechanism to have a proper 
coordination between these three branches before carrying out any conservation 
work on any monument. 
The Ministry (May 2013) while accepting the recommendation, intimated that 
necessary guidelines have been proposed in the draft conservation policy and 
instructions are also being issued to field offices. 
4.10.4 Functioning of Laboratories 
A stone conservation lab was established in November 2006 in Agra fort with the 
purpose of ensuring that the right qualities of stones are used in conservation works. 
Each stone was subjected to testing before use in order to assess the physical 
qualities including colour, water absorption, hardness, porosity and compressive 
strength. 
We found that in the Agra Circle stones used in 13 conservation works during 
period 2007-08 to 2011-12 costing ` 3.44 crore were never tested in the stone 
conservation laboratory. There were no reasons on record for this violation.  
Para 8.3.2 of Archaeological Works Code emphasised that a separate register for the 
chemical and other consumable stores required for use in the Chemical Laboratory 
was to be maintained.  However, the Head of each office was to ensure proper and 
judicious use of all Chemicals.  
We noticed that chemicals were purchased for the works of Mural Paintings in Shri 
Guru Ram Rai Darbar, Dehradun and work of preservation of Trident at Gopeshwar, 
Dehradun. However about 45 per cent  of chemicals in the case of mural paintings 
and above 94 per cent of chemicals for work on the Trident remained unutilised and 
were kept in damp store rooms. 
In the Bhopal Circle, chemicals worth ` 3.66 lakh were purchased during 2005 to 
2009 but could not be utilised in time resulting in the expiry of the shelf life.  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
94 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
Besides following deficiencies were also noticed: 
• Four35 out of the nine laboratories (lab) in Dehradun were non- functional for 
the last ten years. 
• Stock registers for scientific equipment and chemicals in the labs were not 
maintained. 
• Detailed accounts of analytical or chemical treatment work carried out in 
these labs were not maintained as prescribed in the Manual of the ASI. 
• The equipment in these labs which were more than two decades old had not 
been changed inspite of the proposal submitted to DG ASI in April 2008. 
• Director (Science) was responsible to finalise the firms and their rates for 
supply of chemicals to all their field offices. However, this system was 
terminated after April 2011 without citing any reasons.  
• Director (Science) did not take any action against the firms which failed to 
supply chemicals inspite of the rate contract with them. 
 4.10.5 Cases of Bad Conservation of Chemical Treatment 
The temple of Lepakshi in the Hyderabad Circle was most celebrated for its mural 
paintings. The paintings revealed the history of the monument and also added 
aesthetic beauty to it. We noted that despite the chemical treatment carried out on 
the paintings of Sri Veerabhadra Swamy temple, the same were not visible as there 
was seepage from the roof and soot formation due to burning of camphor, oil and 
incense sticks.  
 
Damaged Mural paintings of Lepakshi Temple, Hyderabad 
                                                       
35The four laboratories not functional are 1. Geo-Chronological Laboratory, 2.Surface probe laboratory (Electron 
Microscope), 3. Radiographic Laboratory and 4. Laboratory for study of environmental pollution and 
application of preventives 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 95
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
Similar instances were noticed in Sri Ramappa Temple, Hyderabad Circle and 
Ghiyasuddin Tomb in Delhi Circle. 
 
 
Water seepages in Ramappa Temple after chemical conservation 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
96 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
 
Stains at the Ghiyasuddin Tomb, Delhi 
Chemical conservation work of the ancient Trident cum axe (Parashu) in the 
compound of the Gopinath temple in Uttarakhand Circle was sanctioned for `0.79 
lakhs.  Joint physical inspection revealed that the work was not properly carried out 
and rusting was visible as evident from the following pictures.  
 
 Rusting on Trident Rusting on part of a monument 
 
 
   


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 97
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
Case Study 5 : Kos Minars 
 
The Kos Minars or Mile Pillars are medieval milestones that were constructed by the 
Afgan ruler Sher Shah Suri and subsequently by the Mughal emperors.  These Minars 
were erected on the main highways across the mughal empire to mark the distance 
(at a distance of 3.2 kilometers i.e. one kos). A Kos Minar was typically a solid round 
pillar, around 30 feet in height that stood on a masonry platform built with bricks 
and plastered over with lime. These were an important part of communication and 
travel in the Mughal period. The ASI protected 110 Kos Minars located at five Circles 
i.e. 63 in Chandigarh, eight in Jaipur, 15 in Agra, 23 in Lucknow and one in Delhi 
Circle.  Our scrutiny showed that Kos Minars as a specific category of monuments 
were never researched and analysed by the ASI. In our joint physical inspections, we 
covered 40 Kos Minars (36 per cent of the total kos minars) and found many of them 
encroached, missing and were in urgent need of preservation. ( Details are in Annex 
4.2). 
i. We found no system in the selection of Kos Minars to be protected by the ASI. 
Many Kos Minars were identified by a particular number like Kos Minar no 13, 
Kos Minar no 16, 17, 24 and so on. However, there was no information available 
with the ASI on the missing numbers. In some cases multiple Kos Minars were 
notified as a single Protected monument viz. ‘Two Kos Minar’ at Taraf Unsar, 
Panipat in Chandigarh Circle were notified as a single monument. The ASI was 
protecting one Kos Minar in Delhi whereas three Kos Minars in Delhi were also 
protected by the State Archaeology Department of Delhi Government.  
ii. Kos Minar No 13, Mujessar, Ballabhgarh in Haryana and Kos Minar in Shahabad, 
Kurukshetra of Chandigarh Circle were found missing.  The ASI was informed by 
the district authorities (January 1984) that the land of Kos Minar no 13 had been 
allotted to a private company and the Kos Minar was demolished by the 
company.  No legal action against the company had been taken. 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
98 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
In 2004-05 the land of Kos Minar, Shahabad, Kurukshetra was acquired by the 
Haryana Urban Development Authority and plots were sold to private parties. At 
present, several buildings had been constructed there. There was no trace of the 
protected monument of national importance.  The ASI had no information on when 
and how the monument disappeared.   
iii. Out of 40 Kos Minars physically inspected, it was noticed that 20 Kos Minars 
were without any Protection Notice Board and 36 were without any Cultural 
Notice Boards explaining their significance and history.   
iv. 17 Kos Minars had no access roads. The Kos Minar in Delhi Circle was situated 
inside the Delhi Zoo and was inaccessible without permission of the Zoo 
authorities. 
Delhi, Lucknow and Agra Circles did not incur any expenditure on the Kos Minar for their 
preservation and conservation during 2007-12.  The Chandigarh Circle incurred an amount of 
` 36.20 lakh for the conservation of these Kos Minars.  51 per cent of the total monuments 
of Chandigarh Circle were Kos Minars. However, the expenditure incurred on these 51 per 
cent monuments was 0.65 per cent of the total expenditure incurred during last five years. 
Jaipur Circle incurred expenditure amounting ` 0.41 lakh on one Kos Minar and ` 0.17 lakh 
on five Kos Minars. Two Kos Minars were never taken up for any conservation work. 
v. Joint physical inspection revealed that Kos Minar No. 24 at Banchari, district 
Palwal in Haryana Circle was in a dilapidated condition.  The Kos Minar was 
situated in a field encroached by nearby farmers.  There was no access to the site 
and the grill fencing had been removed.   
 
Dilapidated condition of Kos Minar No. 24, Banchari 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 99
 
Chapter – /g12/g25:Preservation and 
Conservation Works
vi. Unauthorised constructions in prohibited/regulated area had been noticed 
around 21 Kos Minars.  Seven Kos Minars had been encroached by farmers and 
local residents.   
Instances of encroachment were noticed in Kos Minars of Jaipur and Chandigarh 
Circles. The Kos Minar situated at Jaipur- Ajmer road, Ajmer was covered by the 
residence of the Superintendant of Police (SP), Ajmer and the Kos Minar No. 26 at 
Hodal, in Chandigarh Circle was situated inside a private house where a wall had 
been constructed around the Kos Minar, thus covering almost half of it.  
 
 Kos Minar No. 26, Hodal encroached Kos Minar at Jaipur – Ajmer Road, Ajmer  
 by a house  encroached by  the residence of SP, Ajmer 
There was no deployment of monument attendant and security staff at these Kos 
Minars for their proper maintenance and conservation.  
In our opinion, Kos Minars need to be protected uniformly as a single project. The 
Mirdha Committee also recommended such action. However, no such project was 
initiated by the ASI for conserving these monuments. 
 
 
 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 101
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
 
 
 
 “Archeological excavation is any research aimed at the discovery of objects of 
archeological character, whether such research involved digging of the ground or 
systematic exploration of its surface or was carried out on the bed or on the sub 
soil of inland or territorial waters of a Member State.”36 
Excavation includes functions such as excavation, exploration, scientific clearance, 
building survey, temple survey, pre history, underwater archeology and village to 
village survey. Excavation of archaeological remains has been one of the primary 
responsibilities of the ASI.  As per Sections 21 to 24 of the AMASR Act, 1958 an 
Archaeological Officer or an officer authorised by him on this behalf or any person 
holding a license granted in this behalf under the Act, may make excavation in any 
protected or unprotected area.  
The ASI granted excavation licenses, based on the proposals received from different 
agencies like the ASI Circles, Branches, Universities and Research Institutions every 
year
. The proposals were examined and recommendations made by a Central 
Advisory Board of Archeology (CABA) 37 chaired by the Minister of Culture and 
assisted by a standing committee of experts. We noticed the following deficiencies in 
the ASI’s discharge of excavation function:  
5.1 Inadequate Documentation and MIS  
No centralised information system was maintained at the ASI HQ regarding the 
functioning of CABA, grant of licenses, reasons for rejection of proposals and status 
of accepted proposals. Only limited records of meetings held by CABA were 
available.    
5.2 National Policy on Archaeological Excavation and 
Explorations  
The Prime Minister (December 2009) referred to the need for formulating a 
‘National Policy on Archaeological Excavation and Explorations’.  Five Sub 
                                                       
36  UNESCO, Delhi Declaration 1956 
37 The CABA advises and makes suggestions on matters relating to Archaeology in India 
Excavation, Epigraphy and Survey 
CHAPTER – V 

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
102 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
Committees of the CABA were formed to examine specific issues relating to 
functioning of the ASI and developing policy in those areas.  
The Sub Committee on Archaeological Excavation and Exploration finalised the draft 
on National Policy on Archaeological Excavation and Explorations  and submitted it 
to DG ASI on 23 December 2009 for approval. 
We noticed that these guidelines were still in the draft stage (November 2012) and 
the file received with Ministry’s queries on it was untraceable at ASI HQ.  In the 
absence of any laid down policy, the work of excavation, was being conducted 
without setting up measurable performance parameters and guidelines. There was 
no timeframe set for the finalisation of this policy.  
5.2.1 Provision for Mandatory Archaeological Impact Assessment  
We noticed that the ASI was unable to effectively stop unauthorised excavations. 
Many sites with rich deposits of archaeological remains were destroyed by 
developmental activities.  There was no provision to conduct a Cultural Resource 
Management or Archaeological Impact assessment before developmental projects 
were taken up on the site. We noted that even after five years of rendering 
assurance to the Parliament in 2007 there was no progress in this matter. 
Recommendation 5.1: The Ministry should ensure finalisation of the National Policy 
on Archaeological Excavation and Exploration expeditiously.  
The Ministry (May 2013) accepted the recommendation and replied that a National 
Policy would be formulated.   
5.3 Expenditure on Exploration and Excavation Activities 
Exploration and Excavation was one of the primary functions of the ASI. We 
however noted that the ASI was spending less than one per cent  of its total 
expenditure on these activities. The option of obtaining funds through the National 
Culture Fund was not explored despite deliberations on this issue by CABA in 2009.  
5.4 Planning and Conduct of Excavation 
5.4.1 Selection of Sites and Grant of Excavation Licenses  
The ASI did not have any laid down policy or guidelines for selection of sites for 
excavation.  There was no priority list or perspective plan for completion of projects 
within a given period. We found that excavation licenses were not being given in a 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 103
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
systematic manner to solve cultural or historical debates or questions pertaining to 
different parts of the country. In the ASI, officers of the rank of Deputy 
Superintending Archaeologist (Dy. SA)/Superintending Archaeologist (SA) or above 
were eligible to apply for licenses for excavation.  We found that the ASI’s own 
proposals depended on the individual initiative of the SA/ Deputy SA of the Circle 
rather than any overall departmental perspective.  
The table below shows the details of excavation proposals received and accepted 
during the period of audit. 
Table 5.1 Details of excavation proposals received 
Field session No. of excavation 
proposals received
No. of proposals accepted 
Proposed by ASI 
officers 
Proposed by 
others 
(universities,State 
Archeology 
Department etc.) 
2007-08 141 22 85 
2008-09 142 21 93 
2009-10 159 40 92 
2010-11 149 23 88 
2011-12 137 24 100 
 728 130 458 
We found that the ASI did not have information regarding initiation/completion of 
the 458 excavation works proposed by others.  This indicated poor monitoring of 
excavation works by the ASI. 
We also noticed instances of non-transparency in grant of excavation licenses and 
recommendations made by CABA to DG ASI. As an example, in 32 38 proposals, 
reasons for rejecting them had not been recorded.  The ASI accepted (November 
2012) the Audit observation. 
 
 
 
                                                       
38  17 of ASI and 15 of other agencies , details in Annex 5.1 

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
104 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
We also found that some sites were taken up for further re-excavation without 
availability of the reports of earlier excavations. Reasons for such repeated 
excavations were also not clear from the records.  
During 2011-12, the ASI proposed a program for Ropar which was earlier excavated 
in 1950s. Similarly, the site for Patne and Raja Vishal Ka Garh at Vaisali were earlier 
excavated and no reason was found on record for re-excavations proposed by the 
ASI.  
Chandraketugarh archeological site in West Bengal had been excavated six times in 
the past, four times by Calcutta University and twice by State Archeological 
Department. However, no report on these six excavations was available.  We 
found that the site had been taken up again for excavation during 2010-11, but 
was left midway.  Further, the whereabouts and inventory of antiquities recovered 
during previous excavations were not documented, involving risk of smuggling and 
loss.  
5.4.2 Sites Notified but Excavation not Undertaken  
We found sites which were notified by the ASI for central protection after discovery 
of some archeological evidence were not excavated till the end of our Audit 
(February 2013). In the list of protected monuments, the ASI had many ancient 
mounds and sites, most of which had never been excavated.  A few instances are 
given below:  
/g57 In Kolkata Circle, the ASI had notified four sites 39 between 1920 to 1963  after 
discovery of archaeological evidence in  them, but these were  never taken up for 
excavation.  Bangarh site was taken up for excavation in 2008-09, 70 years after 
its notification in 1938.  
/g57 In Patna Circle, no excavation work was carried out in the protected sites of 
Chankigarh in West Champaran district. 
/g57 In Trissur Circle, the biggest site of burial urns in the State was found in 
Elanthikkara High School ground near North Parur, Ernakulam district. The ASI 
was aware of this site since 2002 yet no action was taken till 2012. We found that 
school children were playing amidst scattered pieces of ancient burial urns, the 
site was neither protected nor fenced. 
We also found proposals being taken up for excavation/scientific clearance due to 
VIP references without any prior archaeological evidence. For example, scientific 
                                                       
39  i) Devil’s Mound and Raja Karna’s Palace,  ii)Ancient mound known as Barah Mihirer Dhipi,  
iii) Nadhia, Burdwan, iv) two mounds in Birbhum and Barkuna  Deul Mound  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 105
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
clearance conducted at Jyothi, Cuddapah, Hyderabad Circle was without any proper 
justification of archaeological evidence found there.  
Recommendation 5.2:  The Ministry should formulate a transparent procedure for 
conducting archaeological excavation and document detailed findings of the 
excavation work in all cases. 
Recommendation 5.3: The ASI may consider devising mechanisms for preparing a 
priority list for excavation projects based on importance of the site. The list may be 
updated annually.  
The Ministry stated (May 2013) that for undertaking excavations there is an 
established mechanism and the findings of the excavations were recorded as per the 
due process.  However the fact remained that there were many protected sites 
which despite identification of archaeological evidence decades back , were yet to be 
taken up for excavation. The Ministry further stated (May 2013) that the ASI would 
make efforts to prepare a culture-wise list of ancient sites as a part of the overall 
programme finalised for the NMMA.    However, no time frame was indicated. 
5.4.3 Approved Excavations Proposals not Undertaken or Left 
Incomplete 
We noted cases where excavation proposals approved by the ASI were not 
undertaken at all or were left incomplete. The reasons were usually lack of technical 
staff, labour and shortage of funds. However, there were no attempts in subsequent 
years to sort out these problems and complete the approved projects.  
5.4.3.1 Excavation not Taken up  
i. In Chandigarh Circle, during 2007-08, a proposal for excavation work 40 was 
approved but could not be commenced due to non availability of labour. We 
found that even though no excavation was undertaken, an expenditure of 
` 14.98 lakh was incurred on acquiring computer camera, photo-material, 
stationery and kitchen articles etc. from the funds allotted for excavation.  
ii. Excavation license at Modikuppam, Chennai Circle, was granted during 2009-10. 
However, work could not be taken up due to non availability of technical staff.  
There was no evidence of any attempt to arrange for technical staff to take up 
the work. 
                                                       
40  Buddhist Stupa , Asand, Haryana 

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
106 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
5.4.3.2 Incomplete Excavation   
i. In Guwahati Circle, Ambari site was excavated many times during 1970 to 2003.  
In 2009, eight steps of staircase were unearthed from the site but this excavation 
was left incomplete due to lack of proper plan for water drainage.  The ASI did 
not make any efforts to solve the problem and complete the excavation work.  
ii. In 2008, the excavation at Garhgaon in Ahom Raja’s Palace, Guwahati Circle was 
conducted for 17 days and was left after security threats. However, no efforts 
were made to resume the same after improvement in law and order situation in 
the state.  
iii. In Ranchi Circle, excavation work taken up in Saridkel during 2003-05 was 
abandoned due to local protest. It was not resumed subsequently. 
iv. Scientific clearance was attempted in Benisagar, Ranchi Circle during 2006-07 
and 2007-08 but we found during the joint physical inspection that this too was 
left incomplete. No reasons were found on the record for non completion of 
work.  
Incomplete excavation at Dholavira 
 
The excavation at Dholavira, a 
major site for Harappan 
civilisation, was started in 1990. 
The Officer-in-charge of the 
excavation retired in 2002 and did 
not submit any report on the 
status of excavation so far. In the 
absence of his report, further 
excavation was not resumed.  
 
5.5 Protection of Ancient Mounds 
The ASI had declared 221 ancient mounds as centrally protected monuments. 
However, there was no specific policy on the maintenance and excavation of these 
mounds. The mounds were looked after by the Circles (which conducted structural 
conservation) and were not supported by the excavation Division. During joint 
physical inspections, we found that many of these mounds were not fenced and 
were taken up for cultivation. No action plan had been drawn up by the ASI with 
regard to protection and maintenance of these sites. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 107
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
Soil erosion on Nilkuthi Mound 
In Nilkuthi mound, Barkona 
Deul site at Malda, Bangarh 
site in Kolkata Circle we 
noticed that the protected 
sites were not fenced, 
demarcated and preserved. 
Consequently unauthorised 
cultivation work had been 
going on at the site of 
Barkona Deul Site and 
Bangarh Site.  
 
The Ancient Mound, Buxar, another protected site in the Patna Circle had been 
reduced to just a strip of land due to unauthorised construction.  At four Vedic Burial 
Mounds in West Champaran, Patna Circle  we found soil digging, resulting in damage 
to the excavated area. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Photos depicting soil digging in four Vedic Burial Mounds in West Champaran 


Report No.18 of 2013 
 
108 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
The ASI stated (November 2012) that post excavation, maintenance of the site was 
decided on case to case basis and an unprotected site after excavation, if considered 
for protection, was usually fenced. We, however, found that even the protected sites 
were not fenced and maintained properly. 
5.6 Status of Excavated Sites   
Conservation Manual by John Marshall provided that all excavations were required 
to be protected from inclement weather. Protection of excavated sites was carried 
out in several countries including Spain and China.  Even the Archeology Department 
of Gujarat Government installed a protective shed (Iron/PVC/Acrylic) over the 
excavated site. We did not find any such practice in the excavated sites of the ASI. 
Good practices (International and National) 
adopted for maintenance of excavated sites 
Gran Dolina , Atapuerca 
Mountain, Spain 
Terracotta Army, China Budhist Monastry, 
Vadnagar, Gujarat. 
 
However, the excavated sites of the ASI were not being maintained and properly 
preserved leading to some sites going “missing” and becoming untraceable. Few 
instances of improper maintenance and preservations of excavations site were as 
follows: 
i. Excavations were conducted at group of four Maidams, Nazira, Sivasagar district, 
Assam during 2001-2003 and restoration work for  ` 23.85 lakh was undertaken 
during 2007-08 to 2011-12. This restoration was not completed and the site lay 
exposed to vagaries of nature.   

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 109
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
 
  
 Excavated Maidam at Charaideo, Current view of Excavated Maidam 
 Sivasagar, Assam as on 05/05/2010  at Charaideo, Sivasagar, Assam as on 
  10/06/2012 
 
ii. In Lucknow Circle, protected site called Sandi-Khera, Pali, Shahbad, was not 
traceable. 
iii. In Dharwad Circle, the excavated site of Kanaganahalli, Sannati was not 
maintained and preserved properly despite many site visits by senior officers and 
VIP references. We also noticed cases of defective conservation on the site.  
(Refer Case Study 6) 
iv. Seven excavated sites41 in the Vadodara Circle, which were declared as protected 
between 1951 and 1954 had been completely destroyed/encroached as they 
were not properly preserved. The mound at Venivadar was submerged and 
remaining six sites were under cultivation and residential units had come up 
there. 
                                                      
 
41  i) Ancient mound site,  Venivadar, ii) Ancient (mound) site at Sejakpur, iii)Historic site, Akota, 
Vadodara iv) Ancient site, Gohilwad Timbo, District Amreli, v) Microlithic Site in Amrapura vi) 
Ancient site in Sihor and vii) Ancient site in  Kamrej 

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
110 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
 
Ancient Site at Amreli, Gujarat with houses built on it 
v. In Aurangabad Circle, five sites42 were not traceable.  
vi. The most glaring mismanagement of protected excavation sites was 
however, noticed with respect to world renowned sites of Harappan 
Civilisations for which the ASI was also seeking World Heritage Sites status. 
(Details in the Case Study 7) 
vii. In Halebidu, Karnataka a huge temple complex was excavated during 1984-
87. We noticed that excavated sculptures and antiquities were lying around 
and the complex was fenced only in 2008-09 after a gap of more than 20 
years. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                       
42  viz Jarasangh Nagri at Jorve, Ahmednagar ii)Stone Circle at Arsoda, Gadchiroli iii) Group of twenty  
Cromlechs at Gadchiroli iv) Stone Circle, Nildho v)Stone Circle, Takalghat, Nagpur 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 111
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
Case Study 6 : Excavation at Kanaganahalli, Sannati   
 (Dharwad Circle)  
 
 
Excavated site Kanaganahali 
In 1993-94, Government of Karnataka approached Bengaluru Circle of the ASI for 
archaeological clearance for construction of a dam at Bhima river at Sannati. During 
exploration for this purpose, several pre-historic artifacts, structural remains and 
ancient vestiges were noticed in the area. After extensive excavations by the ASI 
during 1996-2002 the remains of a unique Mahastupa (Great Stupa) were discovered 
at Sannati, near Kanaganahalli. The Site was acclaimed as a rare Buddhist site by the 
experts.  Among other panels, there is a unique panel with a labeled sculptural frieze 
of King Ashoka, the only one of its type in the world.  The 23 acre site was notified in 
2003 as a  protected site.   
Condition of the Site: 
 
  
 Moisture on panels covered with plastic          Scattered panels at the site 
Despite incurring an expenditure of   ` 1.42 crore  for the  site, during joint physical 
inspection we found  that the excavated parts of the Stupa and the panels were lying 
scattered in the open, subject to the vagaries of the nature . Water had accumulated 

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
112 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
in many parts and black patches had appeared on the Panels. Some Panels were 
covered with plastic sheets to prevent rain water. However, moisture had 
accumulated and was damaging these Panels. 
DG, ASI in June 2012 had instructed that  temporary shelters be provided for the 
Ashoka Panel and other excavated parts of the Stupa. But this was not done 
(December 2012). Only a cloth shed was provided for the Ashoka Panel after the visit 
of Union Minister Shri Jairam Ramesh (August 2012). 
 
Ashoka Panel under cloth shed 
We also found that the activities on the site were not being carried out with due 
care. An unsuccessful mending work was carried out on the Panels by using non-
magnetic steel rod and epoxy resins, without proper testing. The Ashoka Panel was 
repaired by the ASI leaving it damaged. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 113
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
 
 
Faulty Repair works at the site 
The inventory of the parts was unavailable at the site. We also found that  while 
making replicas of some panels in 2012, the ASI had used fiber glass as mould 
instead of softer alternatives like latex. The mould left some glass pieces stuck in 
the curves of the friezes. The ASI officials then used chemicals followed by oil to 
remove them, leaving the limestone panels discolored and damaged. 
 Despite assurances from the Minister of Culture (May 2012) in response to a 
reference from Shri Jairam Ramesh, Minister of Rural Development, the site 
remained uncovered and neglected. 
 

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
114 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
5.7 Monitoring of Excavations 
Excavations are to be carried out under close supervision and monitoring. Absence 
of proper technique could result in destruction of valuable material. The ASI HQ 
informed us (May 2012) that Director (Excavations) as and when visited the 
excavation sites, gave direction on the site for proper excavation. However, there 
were no inspection reports on record at ASI HQ. At the excavation sites too, no 
instructions from the Director or any other higher official from the ASI were found 
recorded. The ASI accepted (November 2012) that no such records were present as 
the Director was unable to visit the sites due to his commitments in Headquarters.   
Recommendation 5.4: The ASI should put in place an effective monitoring 
mechanism by making inspections documented at ongoing excavation sites, 
mandatory by Director (Excavation). 
The Ministry stated (May 2013) that informal inspections of the ancient sites are a 
normal practice by various level of officers.  The reply underscores the need for the 
ASI to undertake inspections in a formal manner and document the results of such 
inspection.  
5.8 Report Writing Work  
Writing of the report on excavation is an integral part of any archaeological 
excavation. An excavation or exploration without proper documentation and 
reporting of findings becomes a futile exercise because it would not provide inputs 
for further research and analysis of findings. The UNESCO recommendations also 
enjoined upon the Member States/excavator to publish results of the excavation 
work within the period stipulated in the Deed, or, in cases lacking such stipulations, 
within a reasonable period. 
5.8.1 Delays in Report Writing 
We noted marked delay in report writing for completed excavations. In 2005, a 
decision was taken to complete the pending excavation reports within a period of 24 
months. Accordingly, the ASI identified pending 56 excavation reports pertaining to 
the period prior to 2007-08 for completion by 2007 but only 25 reports were 
submitted as of September 2012. (Annex 5.2). 
 We found reports pending for 57 years in some cases.  For some of the major 
excavations, like Mathura, Sravasti and Ropar  the report writing work for the 
excavations carried out in 1954-55, 1958-59 and 1953-54 respectively, were yet to 
be completed.  It was unlikely that accurate reports could be written at such a 
belated stage without re-excavation. Given the state of documentation and controls 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 115
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
at the ASI even the preliminary records of the site were also incomplete/ 
untraceable.  
The ASI informed the Ministry (April 2010) that it would not be possible to write 
reports in respect of two excavations viz. Kunnattur (Tamil Nadu) and Nalanda 
(Bihar) as the excavated materials were in non living form and unidentifiable.  
Moreover the excavators were dead.  This raised serious doubts over the protocol 
being followed for safekeeping of records and material from the excavated sites. 
Latest consolidated position of pending reports was not available on record. Besides 
56 cases discussed in para 5.8.1 , for the 113 excavations/exploration works that 
were undertaken by the ASI during 2007-08 to 2011-12, report had been submitted 
in only 12 cases; out of which only one report had been published in the Indian 
Archeology-A Review (IAR). Details are given in Annex-5.3. 
We also noticed that in the absence of the detailed excavation report of Rakhigarhi, 
the site was dropped from inclusion in the work of the nomination dossier for the 
inscription of World Heritage List for UNESCO. 
The ASI stated (November 2012) that periodic monitoring of the report writing work 
had been done by the ASI continuously since 2005 and all possible logistic support 
was given to the report writers to facilitate early completion of reports. The position 
of pending reports, however, did not support the reply of the ASI.  
 Some of the major cases of pending reports included: 
Table 5.2 Cases of pending report of excavation 
Site Year (s) of excavation done 
Ropar 1953-54, 54-55 
Mathura 1954-55, 1973-74 to 76-77 
Hulas 1978-79 to 1982-83 
Dholavira  1989-93, 1994 -95, 1996 to 2004 
Sanghol 1986-87 to 90-91 
Rakhigarhi 1997-98 to 99-2000 
Chichali 1998-99, 1999-2000 
Hampi 1975-76,1976-77,1978-79 to 2001-02 
Sravasti  1958-59, 1986-87, 1998-99, 2000-01, 2001-02 
Ramapuram 1980-81 to 83-84 
Banawali 1983-84 to  86-87 
Harsh-ka-Tila 1987-88 to 89-90 

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
116 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
5.8.2 Reasons for Delayed Report Writing  
We noticed that no time was given to the officers of the ASI doing excavation, 
exclusively for Report writing work and as such there was no specified timeframe. 
The report writing work was undertaken much after the excavations and for the ASI’s 
own excavations, sometimes after the retirement of the main excavators. This 
resulted in pending report writing work and also extra expenditure on remuneration 
of retired officers. We found that expenditure of  ` 63.75 lakh had been incurred as 
expenditure for such delayed report writing works.   
We also found that 10 excavators, from whom reports were pending, were no 
more/incapacitated due to ill health and old age and one excavator had left the ASI 
to join some other organisation.  The ASI failed to take effective measures against 
unusual delays in report writing by its own officers. 
The ASI replied (May 2012) that taking stringent measures against unusual delays of 
report writing by the ASI on officers could not be justified as the officers were 
overburdened by other administrative activities and untimely transfers which 
resulted in delay. The reply of the ASI is not convincing as the primary responsibility 
of report writing by excavators cannot be compromised. 
Recommendation 5.5:  While approving proposals for excavation, the time frame 
should be fixed for submitting and publishing the report and it should be strictly 
adhered to.  The ASI should take adequate steps to address the reasons affecting the 
report writing work. 
The Ministry stated (May 2013) that despite fixing deadline and timeframe, 30 
excavation reports were yet to be submitted for publication. The Ministry also stated 
that the ASI would explore the possibility of putting in place a system wherein the 
report writing on excavation can be taken up in a project mode so as to provide 
assistance to directors of the excavations and achieve the target within a reasonable 
period of time.   
5.9 Status of Excavated Material 
 Delayed report writing also affected the condition and counting of antiquities found 
during excavation. Till the final report was published many of the items remained in 
the custody of the excavator without proper records made available to the ASI.  
In some cases, when excavators were relocated, they had been allowed to carry 
these antiquities from one place to another. e.g. Excavation work at  site of 
Dholavira, Vadodara Circle and Sirpur, Raipur Circle.  In Dholavira, the excavated 
material was not handed over even after a lapse of upto 12 years. In such a situation 
damage and loss of antiquities lying with the excavators without proper insurance 
and security, could not be ruled out.  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 117
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
We noticed that no inventory had been maintained centrally, on an All India basis, in 
the ASI for recording all the artifacts, antiquities and sculptures found and collected 
during excavations, explorations or village to village survey. In many cases, as 
discussed in detail in Chapter 6, the excavated antiquities were not accessioned and 
found dumped in the ASI Circle offices, monuments and store rooms.   
Recommendation 5.6:  A protocol is required for handing over and maintenance of 
antiquities with laid down responsibilities and accountability for loss. Proper 
arrangement needs to be made for storing these antiquities. 
Recommendation 5.7: The ASI may prepare an inventory of the excavated antiquities  
and their locations and put it in public domain so  as to facilitate its use for 
reference/research by scholars.   
The Ministry (May 2013) welcomed the recommendations and stated that ASI would 
formulate a policy that the excavator would prepare a catalogue of antiquities 
unearthed within three months of the excavation and put up the same for public 
information through the website of the organisation. 
5.10 Other Activities related to Excavation and Exploration 
The details of the other activities are as follows:-   
Sl. No. Activities of the ASI Remarks 
1 Village to Village 
Survey 
• Another method for exploration of 
archaeological evidence.  
• It is nowadays not undertaken due to shortage 
of manpower. 
2 Under Water 
Archaeology 
• Established a specialist Branch for Underwater 
Archaeology in 2001.  
• There was no perspective plan or policy for 
Underwater Archaeology.   
• 17 projects had been undertaken till May 
2011. 
• In 2011, the only trained superintending 
Archaeologist in this field was allowed to 
proceed on deputation to Assam University. 
• Another trained ASA and a photographer were 
posted in Archaeological Museum and 
Chemical Branch, Jaipur respectively.  
• The Branch virtually became defunct due to 
lack of specialised manpower. 

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
118 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
3 Building Survey 
Project 
• Established in 1977 with the aim to select 
domestic and secular buildings pertaining to 
the 16th to 19th century and document their 
details. 
• After documentation, the report if deemed fit, 
was to be published in the Indian Archaeology 
- A Review (IAR). The building survey project 
was located at New Delhi.  
• During the last five years, only two projects 
had been undertaken and sent two reports of 
its earlier projects to Director (Excavation). 
None of them was published in the IAR.  
• No recorded reasons for not finding the 
reports suitable for publication. We could not 
therefore ascertain the reasons for executing 
this project without any tangible outcome.  
• No system of regular monitoring of the project 
by Director (Excavation).  
• No criterion on the basis of which the buildings 
were selected for the projects. 
4 Temple Survey 
Projects, Bhopal 
and Chennai 
• The purpose was to document the invaluable 
ancient temple art and architectural treasure 
of our country.  
• Huge delays in the publication of the Temple 
Survey reports.   
• Submitted five project reports relating to the 
period 1984 to 2011 to DG ASI for publication. 
However, none of them were published till 
date. 
5 Pre History Branch, 
Nagpur 
• Carried out research in the field of Pre History. 
• Areas were explored to know the prehistoric 
remains of the particular area or to reconstruct 
the entire settlement pattern of the prehistoric 
culture.   
• During 2007-08 to 2011-12, 14 reports on 
prehistory were submitted for publication in 
the IAR, out of which nine were recommended 
by CABA but none of them had been 
published. 
• There was a huge backlog and works relating 
upto the year 2003-04 had only been printed 
in the year 2011. 
   

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 119
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
5.10.1 Archaeological Investigations Using Modern Scientific Methods  
The application of modern scientific technology in various fields of archeology is ever 
growing.  Several recent technologies such as Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR), 
Magnetic and Resistivity Survey, Global Information System (GIS) and Global 
Positioning System (GPS) were available for excavation. The ASI did not have 
infrastructure/equipment of its own and the excavations were carried by using 
traditional methods.  For capacity building of the ASI officials, an MOU was signed 
between the ASI and IIT Kanpur in 2007 regarding application of scientific techniques 
in archaeology.  Two training programmes were organised for plain surveying and 
GPS, GIS in Kanpur at a cost of ` 11.60 lakh and 30 officials were trained.  
We observed that only two of the trained officials were actually involved in the ASI 
excavations that were conducted after 2007-08 using the above technology. 
5.11 Epigraphical Studies 
Epigraphy is the Branch of study in Archaeology dealing with the deciphering and 
interpreting inscriptions found in clay, stone or metal tablets and rocks.  These 
Inscriptions were mostly written in ancient languages/scripts, some of which may be 
lost now. The main function of the Epigraphy Branch was to undertake an 
epigraphical survey of several states in India and to copy the inscriptions on stone, 
copper-plate and other materials written in Sanskrit, Dravidian and other languages. 
After deciphering and transcribing, the inscriptions were listed out in the Annual 
Report on Indian Epigraphy. However, there were no Acts/Rules/guidelines 
pertaining to the Epigraphy Branch. 
5.11.1 Status of Work and Human Resource for Epigraphical Studies  
The Directorate of Epigraphy, which managed the epigraphy work of the ASI, was 
headquartered at Mysore and had three zonal offices at Chennai, Nagpur and 
Lucknow. We noted the following: 
i. No Director had been appointed since October 2006.  
ii. There were two posts of Superintending Archaeologist which were lying 
vacant since 1998 and 2004 respectively. Men in position were 25 as against 
the sanctioned strength of 45.   
iii. We found that 1725 epigraphic items were collected during 2007-08 to 2011-
12. However, the Annual report on Indian Epigraphy had been compiled and 
published only upto 1997-98.  Due to improper assessment and lack of 
publicity, there were unsold publications to the extent of 43464 volumes of 
this report, valued at ` 53.17 lakh as at the end of March 2012. 

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
120 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
iv. South Indian Inscription volumes in Tamil, Telugu and Kannada were 
published on the inscriptions collected up to 1955. Remaining inscriptions 
were yet to be published. Works assigned to six departmental scholars during 
1995 to 2011 and to three external scholars during 2009 were pending.  It 
informed that no work on North Indian Inscriptions (Sanskrit) had been 
carried out due to paucity of staff.  
v. Only seven volumes of Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum 43 on inscriptions of 
various period/dynasties written by different authors were published. No 
specific targets or planning was done for these volumes.  
vi. In the Epigraphy Branch, Chennai Zone, 5440 epigraphic items were collected 
during 1991-92 to 2011-12. However only 2383 inscriptions collected upto 
1998-99 were transcribed and the remaining 3057 (57 per cent) were yet to 
be transcribed.  
Transcription and publishing of Telegu inscriptions collected during the year 1936-38 
and editing of Telegu inscriptions for the year 1939-45 was yet to be done. South 
Indian inscriptions collected during the years 1916 and 1905 were yet to be 
transcribed and published.   
Epigraphy Branch, Nagpur which was responsible for copying, accessioning, 
deciphering and publishing Arabic and Persian inscriptions had deciphered 297 
(80 per cent) inscriptions out of 367 numbers of inscriptions collected during 2007-08 
to 2011-12.  
In the zonal office, Lucknow, though an expenditure of ` 1.04 crore was incurred 
during 2007-08 to 2011-12,  no  inscription was copied, deciphered, interpreted 
and printed in the Annual Report on Indian Epigraphy.  
5.11.2 Non Publication of Inscriptions 
During the period 1997-98 to 2011-12, total 644 transcribed inscriptions from 
Chennai Branch and 31 inscriptions from Epigraphy Branch, Nagpur were forwarded 
to Director General, ASI, New Delhi for publishing in the Annual Report on 
Epigraphy. However, no report had been published till now.  There was an 
inordinate delay extending upto 12 years in the publication of Annual report on 
Indian Epigraphy. Works relating to 1997-98 had been published in the Annual 
Report of Epigraphy in 2011.    
                                                       
43  Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum is a specialized volume containing detailed description and critical 
notes on inscriptions belonging to a particular dynasty or a particular period of history. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 121
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
5.11.2.1 Preservation of Impressions/Estampages  
Estampages are paper impression of stone or copper plate inscription. Estampages 
are preserved in a controlled environment to stop deterioration. There were 72000 
estampages with the Directorate of Epigraphy out of which   3105 estampages were 
under the custody of the epigraphy Branch, Chennai. These estampages in Chennai 
Branch were stored in normal environment in closed almirahs/boxes/racks. Due to 
absence of temperature and humidity control, most of them were reduced to a very 
brittle condition. We did not find on record any proposal sent by Chennai Branch to 
the ASI for requisite funds to stop further deterioration of estampages. Ten 
inscriptions and letters of ten estampages had been obliterated/damaged in 
Epigraphy Branch, Nagpur. We could not ascertain the cause of damage and the 
period during which this occurred. 
5.12 Capacity Building and Research in the ASI  
The ASI has laboratory facilities in the Science Branch, Dehradun and other field 
offices of Science Branch. Scientific analysis of excavated material was being carried 
out with the assistance of the Science Branch and various external institutions.  
We observed cases of inordinate delay in getting the results of the dating samples 
taken from Banawali and Dholavira which were sent to Birbal Sahni Institute and 
Physical Research Laboratory and copper samples sent to IIT Kanpur.  In Vadodara 
Circle, six samples from Junikaran excavation were sent for testing to Institute of 
Physics, Bhubaneswar in June 2005, and July 2006 but results were still awaited. 
Results of samples of Bones sent during August 2004, to Deccan College, Pune had 
not yet received.  
Failure on the part of the ASI to acquire and use modern equipment and to develop a 
laboratory of its own for dating and analysis of the archeo-materials had adversely 
affected the capacity building and research activities of the ASI.  
Recommendations 5.8: The ASI needs to enhance the use of modern scientific 
technology, build capacity of its officials and establish an upgraded dating laboratory 
of its own.  
The Ministry agreed (May 2013) with the recommendation. 
Thus the working of the ASI in executing its function of excavation was marked by 
the absence of policy and criteria for excavation. Further, delays in report writing 
and publishing of excavation works led to non achievement of the desired progress 
in exploration and excavation activities.   

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
122 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
Case Study 7 : Harappan Sites 
In 1947, the most important Harappan sites viz Harappa and Mohanjodaro which were the 
showpieces of the ASI’s efforts in the previous two decades, were left behind in Pakistan. In 
first two decades after independence, the ASI concentrated its efforts in finding new 
Harappan sites leading to significant discoveries viz Lothal, Kalibangan and Ropar. 
Subsequent discoveries like Dholavira and Rakhigarhi helped further to appreciate the 
geographical spread of the civilisation and to bring to light its important facets. These sites 
are thus some of the most significant signposts of Indian history and archaeology.  
During this audit we visited these sites of Harappan civilisation and found that almost all 
sites were improperly maintained for want of post-excavation maintenance protocol.  
Table 5.3 Status of Excavation Reports 
Site Excavation Status Status of excavation 
report 
Dholavira, Gujarat 1989-93, 1994-95, 1996-
2004 
Incomplete 
Incomplete 
Rangpur, Gujarat 1935,1947, 1953-56 
Incomplete 
Completed for excavations 
done so far 
Rakhigarhi, Haryana 1997-98 to 1999-2000 
Incomplete 
Incomplete 
Ropar, Haryana 1953-54, 1954-55  2011-
12 
Incomplete 
Incomplete 
Sanghol,Punjab 1986-87 to 1990-91 
Incomplete 
Incomplete 
Lothal, Gujarat 1955-62 
Incomplete 
Completed for excavation 
done so far 
Kalibangan, Rajasthan 1961-69 
Incomplete 
 
Completed for excavation 
done so far 
 
   
Apart from the incomplete excavation work, we found that the work done so far 
was also not conserved and displayed properly. For want of regular inspection, 
these sites were in a state of encroachment and decay. 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 123
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
Table 5.4  Status of Harappan sites and the antiquities found 
Site Status of the site Status of 
antiquities found 
Dholavira, Gujarat 
 
Dholavira excavated site 
/g131 Site was not fully 
fenced.  
/g131 Pottery pieces, 
beads, earthen 
bangles, circular 
buttons, precious 
stones were lying on 
the site and were 
progressively 
destroyed with 
visitors walking over 
it.  
/g131 A Copper factory and 
a bead factory found 
near the excavated 
site were both under 
unauthorised 
cultivation by local 
farmers. 
/g131 There were no guide 
facilities.  
 A Site Museum 
with an 
“Interpretation 
Cum Information 
Centre” with 61 
photographs of 
antiquities and 295 
objects had been 
kept. The 
remaining 
antiquities were 
stated to be with 
the excavation 
team in Delhi  for 
Report writing 
work  
Rangpur, Gujarat 
 
Site covered with vegetation 
 
Buildings on the Site 
 
Archaeological remains on the Site 
 
The site was not 
surveyed, measured, 
demarcated and fenced.  
Though it was a protected 
site, the protection notice 
board, culture notice 
board were not found.  
Houses had been 
constructed on the site. 
 
The site was covered 
under vegetation.   
Local people were using a 
portion of the site for 
taking out soil to make 
pots and dig ditches. 
 
 
 
  
 
Artifacts were not 
collected and kept 
under safe 
custody. There was 
no information 
available on the 
antiquities 
collected at the 
time of excavation 

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
124 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
Site Status of the site Status of 
antiquities found 
Rakhigarhi, Haryana 
 
Heaps of Cowdung and broken fence 
on the Site 
Cremation ground on the protected site 
The fencing on the site 
was broken at several 
places. 
There were heaps of cow 
dung cakes on the site. 
The mound was used as a 
cremation ground and as 
public toilet. 
There were unauthorised 
constructions on the site   
The excavated 
collections were 
kept with the ASI. 
Ropar, Haryana 
Ropar excavated site 
Constructions around the Site 
There were unauthorised 
constructions on the site 
and three sides of the 
mound were densely 
populated.  
There was no Cultural 
Notice Board explaining 
importance of the site. 
Part of Nalagarh Kothi on 
the mound was converted 
to be used as office, guest 
house and store by the 
ASI.  
In 1992, a Site 
Museum was built 
to store 
antiquities. It was 
opened to public in 
1998.  
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 125
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
Site Status of the site Status of 
antiquities found 
   Sanghol, Punjab 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unkempt excavated site at Sanghol 
There was no proper 
fencing on the site and 
the site was used as a 
cremation ground and 
defecation by the 
villagers.  
There were unauthorised 
constructions on the site. 
Excavated 
collections were 
kept with the ASI 
and the State 
Government 
Lothal, Gujarat 
 
Excavated site, Lothal 
The site was lying without 
any fencing or protection. 
Some stones from the 
walls had disintegrated.  
Brick walls were found 
damaged.  
Excavated 
collections were 
kept at the Site 
Museum 
 
 
 
Kalibangan, Rajasthan 
 
           Excavated site, Kalibangan 
 
The site had not been 
fully fenced. 
There were unauthorised 
constructions on the site. 
The Site was not 
developed and 
maintained properly.  
Only 267 
excavated 
collections were 
kept at the Site 
Museum. Rest of 
the Antiquities 
were taken to ASI, 
Delhi 
 
 
 
 
 


Report No.18 of 2013 
 
126 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
Case Study 8 : Ashokan Rock Edicts 
 
  
 Ashokan Rock Edict at Udaegolam  Ashokan Rock Edict in Delhi 
 in  Dharwad circle 
Brief History 
King Ashoka was one of the greatest rulers in human history. After winning the Kalinga war 
in 261 BC, he underwent a complete change.  For the rest of his life he decided to dedicate 
all his resources to propagate the message of Buddha throughout the world. Ashoka issued 
religious edicts carved on stones. Ashokan Edicts were significant for the message related to 
the teachings of Buddhism and also as some of the earliest known stone inscriptions in India. 
These were written in several languages and scripts, but most of those found in India were 
written in Prakrit language using the Brahmi script.  The edicts were of two types, i.e. in-situ 
rock edicts and the pillar edicts. The rock edicts were further subdivided into two categories, 
the "major rock edicts" and the "minor rock edicts", based on their age. Minor rock edits 
were the earliest, followed by major rock edicts. Minor rock edicts were further divided in 
into rock edict I and rock edict II.  Major rock edicts were discovered across India with 14 
personal declarations by Ashoka. These rock and pillar edicts were put up at prominent 
places along the royal highways, trade routes and pilgrimage centres across the 
subcontinent to spread the message of peace and non violence.  
Present Status 
The ASI was protecting 12 Ashokan Rock Edicts through their different circles like Dharwad, 
Vadodara, Delhi, Dehradun etc.  These rock edicts required special attention and care 
because these have to be retained in-situ and being large rocks exposed to weather needed 
proper conservation and cleaning. We noticed that ASI did not prepare and implement any 
policy specially designed for these more than 2000 years old rock edicts. A joint physical 
inspection of five
44 of these rock edicts revealed the following irregularities: 
                                                       
44  Ashokan Rock Edict in Delhi circle, in Vadodara circle at Junagarh, Gujarat, in Dehradun circle at 
Kalsi and in Dharwad circle at Nittur and Udaegolam. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 127
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
Missing Monument 
As per the information furnished by the ASI HQ, Ranchi circle had 12 monuments including 
one Ashokan Rock Edict.  However, the circle office intimated that there were only 11 
monuments and there was no Ashokan Rock Edict. Neither the ASI HQ nor the Ranchi circle 
sorted out this discrepancy in the list of monuments.   
Categorisation 
Though it was clear that the Ashokan Rock Edicts were categorized into Major and Minor 
Rock Edicts, the ASI did not categorise the centrally protected Ashokan Rock Edicts into 
Major and Minor Rock Edicts.  No information was available in the details of the rock edicts 
placed at the site on whether that was a major or minor rock edict.  
Conservation 
Joint physical inspection revealed that the ASI was not properly protecting and conserving 
these Ashokan Rock Edicts.  One of the worst case of poor conservation was found at the 
Rock Edict at Udaegolam in Dharwad circle where to protect the rock, the big pillars were 
erected on the rock itself thus damaging the Rock Edict.   
Similarly to save the rock edict from the adverse weather conditions, a big hall was 
constructed around the Rock Edict in Junagarh, Gujarat and a shelter of stone slab was 
constructed at Nittur in Dharwad Circle.  However, it was noticed that rain water was coming 
on both the Rock Edicts and causing damage to these precious stones.  
 
 Stains due to water seepage at  Stains on the inscription at 
 Ashokan Rock Edict at Nittur, Dharwad Ashoka Rock Edict at Junagarh, Gujarat 
In Delhi 45, Rock Edict was covered with grill fencing.  However it was noticed that visitors 
were not only touching the Edict but also performing rituals at the rock edict. It was also 
                                                       
45  East of Kailash in Hauz Khas I sub circle 

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
128 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
noticed that the garden surrounding the place was badly maintained and encroachment was 
noticed at the site.  The signage installed in 2010 were found missing at the site.  
 
  
 Covered Ashokan Rock Edict in Delhi circle  Performance of rituals over the Rock Edict 
 
  
 Translation of the inscriptions at the Site Missing signage at Ashokan Rock Edict 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 129
 
Chapter –/g25:Excavation, 
Epigraphy and Survey
Ashokan Rock Edict at Delhi 
In contrast, we noticed that Ashokan Rock Edict at Kalsi, Dehradun was properly maintained.  
It was covered with a gumbad which protected the rock edict and no visitors were allowed 
to touch the Rock Edict.  
 
  
Ashokan Rock Edict at Kalsi, Dehradun 
Translation of the Inscriptions  
As these inscriptions were written in Prakrit language with Brahmi script, the ASI was 
expected to provide proper signages at the sites translating what was written on these Rock 
Edicts.  Though all Ashokan Edicts had been deciphered and translated, no translation was 
provided at the site for the benefit of the visitors at these sites except in Delhi. 
 

Report No.  18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 131
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
 
 
 
Antiquity includes any coin, sculpture, painting, epigraph or other work of art or 
craftsmanship; any article, object or thing detached from a building or cave which 
is of historical interest, or declared by the Central Government to be an antiquity 
which has been in existence for not less than one hundred years. This also includes 
any manuscript, record or other document which was of scientific, historical, 
literary or aesthetic value and which had not less than 75 years of existence46.  
The ASI is one of the largest repositories of antiquities in India. Besides, antiquities 
are acquired and maintained by various museums across the country. The ASI is 
responsible for the management, security and display of antiquities found during 
excavations. These are often displayed at the Site Museums. The ASI is also 
responsible for registration of antiquities possessed by private individuals and 
organisations. This includes efforts for restoration of stolen art objects.  
6.1 Inadequacy of Policy and Legislation  
6.1.1 Absence of Standards and Policy Guidance 
The Ministry did not have a comprehensive policy for the management of 
antiquities. There were no standards for acquisition, preservation, documentation 
and custody of objects.  
  
 Trunks of Antiquities kept at  Antiquities kept at Safdarjung Tomb 
 Ghiyasuddin Tuglaq’s Tomb , Delhi  
                                                       
46  Antiquities and Art Treasures (AAT) Act, 1972 
Management of Antiquities 
CHAPTER – VI 

Report No. 18  of 2013 
 
132 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
There are several international standards available for managing antiquities in a 
museum issued by International Council of Museums (ICOM) and UNESCO.  These 
standards and guidelines clearly define the methods of running a Museum, 
application of accession numbers, guidelines for disaster preparedness in museums 
etc. However, international best practices or standards were not adopted. In the 
absence of any standards, the decisions taken often lacked objectivity, uniformity 
and transparency as detailed in the succeeding paragraphs.  
AAT Act provided registration of antiquities with individuals and private collections; 
however, the registration had not been made mandatory. This resulted in 
incomplete documentation and was also an impediment in retrieving stolen and lost 
antiquities.    
6.1.2 Review of the AAT Act, 1972  
We noticed that the ASI and the Ministry were conscious of the need for amendment 
in the AAT Act, 1972 since 1987. The Ministry started an exercise in 1997 to amend 
the Act.  A draft cabinet note was also approved by the Cabinet in 2003. However, 
the amendment was still under process at the Ministry. Thus, the limitation of the 
legislation to curb illegal export and smuggling of art objects persists.  The Ministry 
accorded no priority for this work and no timeframe was fixed for this purpose.  
Recommendation 6.1: The provisions of AAT Act and the International Conventions 
should be reviewed in order to make the legislation more contemporary and effective 
and to facilitate restoration of stolen art objects from other countries.  
The Ministry stated (May 2013) that the proposed amendments to the AAT Act, 1972 
were under active consideration by the Ministry.  
 6.2 Acquisition, Registration and Documentation of 
Antiquities 
6.2.1 Acquisition  
Acquisition of antiquities is effected by the ASI and other museums through 
following modes: 
(i) Collection of antiquities during survey, exploration and excavation of 
architectural sites; 
(ii) Direct purchase; 
(iii) By way of gifts; 
(iv) By way of loan; and 
(v) Compulsory acquisition of antiquities 

Report No.  18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 133
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
The ASI acquired antiquities mostly through survey, exploration and archaeological 
excavations. The ASI established the Central Antiquity Collection (CAC) in 1960 for 
storing antiquities collected during surveys, explorations and excavations of 
archeological sites. Presently housed in Purana Qila, Delhi, CAC is a rich repository of 
explored and excavated pottery and antiquities collected from various parts of the 
country. We noted that the acquisition, documentation, storage conditions, physical 
verification and security of antiquities of CAC was grossly inadequate. 
The artifacts of CAC were scattered and spread over four different locations. In the 
absence of appropriate documentation it was not possible to ascertain the location 
of specific artifacts.   
The storage condition of antiquities kept at CAC, Purana Qila and Safdarjung Tomb 
were found deplorable as dipicted in photographs below: 
   
Antiquities at Purana Qila in an improper condition 
 


Report No. 18  of 2013 
 
134 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
   
Antiquities at Safdarjung Tomb in an improper condition 
 
 
6.2.2 Compulsory Acquisition of Antiquities 
The ASI was empowered to compulsorily acquire antiquities but no antiquity had 
been compulsorily acquired till date. There were also no schemes of incentive for 
voluntary disclosure of antiquities. 
6.2.3 Acquisition of Art Objects by Museums  
The Museums acquired art objects mainly by way of purchase and gifts. No 
benchmarks or standards were followed for acquisition and valuation of artifacts . 
The Museums had not evolved a consistent policy for the acquisition and valuation 
of artifacts. As a result, decisions relating to acquisition were often arbitrary. We 
noticed that the Victoria Memorial Hall (VMH), Salar Jung Museum and National 
Museum did not purchase any artefact during the period covered under audit.   
The acquisitions made by the Museums during the last five years were as follows: 
Table 6.1: Acquisitions during last five years 
Museum Objects  acquired Remarks 
National Museum (NM) Nil Art Purchase/Acquisition Committee 
was defunct  since 1997 
Asiatic Society, Kolkata 
(ASK) 
29 Purchases were made through Art 
Purchase Committee which was formed 
every two years 
Allahabad Museum (AM) 394 Absence of policy for acquisition  
Salar Jung Museum 
(SJM) 
Nil Museum did not assess the 
requirement of art objects 
Victoria Memorial Hall 
(VMH) 
Nil Non finalisation of Art Purchase 
Committee 
Indian Museum (IM) 166 No standard system for purchases.  
 


Report No.  18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 135
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
Recommendations 6.2:  The Institutions should evolve a coherent acquisition policy 
for the acquisition of artifacts. 
The Ministry accepted (May 2013) the audit observation. 
6.2.4 Paintings Received from VMH on Loan 
Victoria Memorial Hall entered (December 2007) into an agreement with Rabindra 
Bharti Society (RBS), a registered society in West Bengal, for the acquisition of about 
5000 painting.    
We noted that out of 5000 paintings the status report of only 878 paintings had been 
completed till date (November 2012) and no conservation work was taken up so far.  
As a result, the intended objective of proper conservation of these paintings could 
not materialise. 
6.2.5 Acquisition of Antiquities by Way of Gifts 
The Museums accepted gifts and items for safe custody.  We noticed that several 
Museums (namely NM, IM and ASK) did not have any policy for the acceptance or 
valuation of gifts. Even in the Site Museums there was no clear policy whether Site 
Museums could acquire antiquities and there was no benchmark for selection of 
items offered as gifts.  
During the period of audit, National Museum, Delhi acquired 906 artifacts as gifts.  
Some instances of receipt of gifts by the National Museum are detailed below: 
(i) The Indian Museum, Kolkata acquired the ‘Kachhoa Sitar’, ‘tassar saree with 
maroon border decorated with floral design’, and Dorakha red sujni or quilt 
embroidered with white thread with floral design’ as gifts in 2010 and 2011 
respectively. However, no records related to their authenticity were 
produced to us.   
(ii) During scrutiny of records, we found that 10 Site Museums had acquired 
7203 artifacts by way of gift/purchase/loan etc. without chemical/scientific 
verification.   
The ASI stated (December 2012) that acquisition/ gifts did not cause any 
harm/irregularity. Even if the object did not happen to be an antiquity, it 
helped in site interpretation.  It was not clear how such items without 
establishing that they were antiquities could be collected and displayed. 
(iii) The collections of CAC included 3979 antiquities confiscated and seized by 
CBI, Custom and Directorate of Revenue Intelligence.  No action was taken to 
return these antiquities to their original places or to place them in 
appropriate Museums.   

Report No. 18  of 2013 
 
136 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
Recommendations 6.3: The Museums should develop a mechanism for safekeeping 
of gifted artifacts and devise a policy for the acceptance of gifts after establishing 
their antiquity status and their display at appropriate sites or museums. 
The Ministry accepted (May 2013) the audit observation for compliance. 
6.3 Registration of Antiquities 
The AAT Act, 1972 provided that the Central Government may, specify those 
antiquities which should be registered under the Act. As per the extant provisions, 
registration of the artifacts was not mandatory. The Act further provided that the 
Central Government may appoint Registering Officers for the purpose of the Act.  
As per the National Mission for Monument and Antiquities, the country had 
approximately 70 lakh antiquities.  
There were no targets and no timeframe for completion of this work. There was no 
monitoring of progress of work by either the ASI or the Ministry. Further, the 
registration process was not based on scientific testing but relied on the naked eye. 
Hence, its accuracy could be contested.  
Recommendation 6.4:  The Ministry should expedite the work of registering 
antiquities and devise procedures for ensuring the genuineness of the registered 
antiquities in a time bound manner.  Electronic format may be considered for the 
purpose. 
The Ministry stated (May 2013) that till date 4.8 lakh antiquities had been registered  
and no targets and time frame to complete the registration process could be fixed, 
as every year more objects fall in the category of antiquity.  The reply is not 
acceptable as targets and time frame can be fixed based on the estimation or in 
absolute numbers of antiquities to be registered every year.  
6.4 Evaluation of Acquired Objects  
We observed that the IM, NM and ASK did not have a system in place for evaluation 
of acquired objects to verify the genuineness of the artifacts acquired/possessed by 
the Museums.  We could not therefore derive any assurance on the authenticity of 
the artifacts in the Museums.  Indian Museum acquired a silver coin which after 
evaluation was found to be a copper coin. 

Report No.  18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 137
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
 
  Before treatment (silver)                   After treatment (copper) 
Best Practice: 
Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Vastu Sangrahalaya (CSMVS) was in receipt of 
objects/artifacts as gift. The Museum had a process for verifying the genuineness 
of the objects/ artifacts.  The objects were initially examined by a Curator and 
thereafter placed before exhibit evaluation committee consisting of experts in the 
field and finally approved by a board of Trustees. 
 
Recommendations 6.5 : The Museums should evolve a policy for evaluation of the 
genuineness of the art objects.   
The Ministry accepted (May 2013) the audit observation. 
6.5 Inventory and Grading of Art Objects 
6.5.1 Accession of Art Objects 
All antiquities in Museums should be properly accounted for as soon as received. 
Each antiquity has a separate unique accession number which also indicates the year 
of accession. Proper and regular maintenance of the accession register is essential 
for the safety and security of the Museum objects.  
We, however, noted that there was no prescribed procedure in respect of the 
maintenance of accession registers.   As a result, Museums were adopting different 
methods for accessioning of artifacts as can be seen in the Annex- 6.1 
6.6 Discrepancies in Number of Antiquities 
We observed significant discrepancies in the number of antiquities possessed by the 
Indian Museum and National Museum, which are detailed below: 


Report No. 18  of 2013 
 
138 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
Table 6.2 Discrepancies in the number of artifacts in Indian Museum 
 
Table 6.3 Discrepancy in the number of artifacts in National Museum 
Information 
provided in April 
1999 to Expert 
committee 
Information 
provided in 
September 2003 
to Expert 
Committee 
As per physical 
report of 
Expert 
committee in 
2004 
Information 
furnished to 
Audit in  July 
2011 
Information 
furnished to 
Audit in 
September 
2012 
205375 206121 206713 206212 205981 
Similar discrepancy was noticed in the case of Asiatic Society, Kolkata with regard to 
the gold coins possessed by it.  
6.7 Physical Verification of the Artifacts 
Periodical Physical verification of artifacts was essential to ensure the existence and 
also to assess the condition of the antiquities.  The status of physical verification of 
artifacts in various Museums was poor as detailed in Annex-6.2. 
6.8 Conservation of Antiquities 
Preservation and conservation of artifacts was one of the primary objectives of 
Museums. There were many shortcomings in this activity, as noted from the 
following cases: 
In the Indian Museum, Kolkata the Gandhara Stupa had been deteriorating for many 
years but was noticed by the Archaeology section only in 2008.  However, no action 
was taken to conserve the Stupa.  Absence of a policy for conservation and 
restoration resulted in the deterioration of the artifacts.  
 A mobile conservation laboratory acquired by the Museum in 1998-99 at a cost of  
` 7.37 lakh largely remained unutilised.  
The National Museum, Delhi  had a conservation laboratory having qualified 
chemists. The Museum also conserved the items of several small Museums such as 
in the Rashtrapati Bhawan and Parliament House. After the setting up of the 
National Research Laboratory for conservation at Lucknow, the laboratory at the 
Museum stopped activities of conservation research.  We noted that the laboratory 
was conserving only about 0.25 per cent  of the total antiquities of the Museum 
annually.  During 2007-12, only 2272 objects out of 2.06 lakh objects were treated 
and conserved by the laboratory.   
Artifacts as per Museum’s 
reply 
Artifacts as per database 
of Museum 
Artifacts as per accession 
registers 
107308 114271 94462 

Report No.  18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 139
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
  
Objects from the Aurel Stein collection lying in the conservation lab for the last 45 years 
We noted that in the Asiatic Society, Kolkata  nearly 40 per cent of the manuscripts 
were in poor condition and needed immediate conservation.  In most cases, the 
objects received for conservation were already damaged beyond restoration.   
Restoration of oil paintings at Asiatic Society, Kolkata 
The Conservation laboratory in Asiatic Society was engaged in the restoration of 
mainly rare books and manuscripts. The Asiatic Society, Kolkata had 78 oil 
paintings.  In 2005-06 the work of restoration of these paintings was awarded to a 
NOIDA based agency.  The agency which was selected arbitrarily proposed to 
restore 60 paintings in ten phases (6 in each phase). However, only 26 paintings 
were restored till June 2012. 
At the Allahabad Museum, Allahabad conservation work ranging from 1.80 per cent 
to 23.54 per cent was undertaken in respect of items received for conservation  
At the Salar Jung Museum, Hyderabad  136 Indian Modern paintings retained in the 
store room since September 2008 and were not properly preserved, the dust had 
accumulated over them exposing them to possible damage. 
The Museum in its reply stated (August 2012) that the paintings were kept in this 
condition as the space was insufficient and overcrowding would destabilise the 
compactors.  The fact remains that the paintings required immediate coverage and 
hanging in convenient compactors to ensure their proper preservation. 
 
 
 
 


Report No. 18  of 2013 
 
140 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
Best Practice: 
The Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Vastu Sangrahalaya conducts regular surveys for 
carrying out conservation work in respect of all the objects in possession of the 
Museum.  These surveys were repeated by rotation. The artifacts were categorised 
as per their condition and prioritised for treatment.  The conservation centre 
object register chronologically laid out the sequence of receipt and return of 
objects for treatment.  
The Site Museums  did not have a conservation wing for the restoration and 
conservation of antiquities. The Museums had not prepared any plan to periodically 
ascertain the condition of the artifacts kept in the galleries and reserves.  
Out of the 179 paintings displayed in the gallery of Hazarduari Palace Museum 
(HDPM), Kolkata Circle, 55 paintings were in a damaged condition. 302 paintings out 
of 318 kept in reserve were also damaged and 30 paintings needed immediate 
conservation/restoration.  In HDPM out of 77 Arabic manuscripts, 36 were severely 
damaged and 760 Persian manuscripts were also in poor condition. Binding work 
done by HDMP on manuscripts had caused further deterioration.  
   
Condition of Manuscripts at Hazarduari Palace Museum 
Recommendations 6.6 : The Museums should develop appropriate mechanisms to 
identify art objects requiring restoration/conservation and draw up a time schedule 
for their restoration.  
6.9 Research and Development 
Research is one of the major functions of the Museums, through which useful 
information about materials and objects in the Museum collection can be generated 
for various stake holders. 
 


Report No.  18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 141
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
Best Practices abroad: Victoria and Albert Museum, London 
The Museum shares its experience with colleagues around the world and has also 
benefitted from many collaborations with external institutions.  It also provides 
training and development within conservation and conservation science through 
internships and work placements.  International and National collaboration projects 
are also undertaken on a regular basis. 
The British Museum 
The Museum carries out conservation research, scientific research over extended 
periods and in collaboration both with colleagues from other Museum departments 
and with other institutions.  Interdisciplinary study involving the collaborative efforts 
of curators, conservators and scientists is taken up to take on new challenges and to 
find solutions. 
The Indian Museum, National Museum and Asiatic Society did not undertake any 
research work.  Further, VMH did only conservation research 47 and did not 
undertake scientific research.48 
We observed that the Indian Museum, VMH and Asiatic Society did not have 
sophisticated instrument and technologies to carry-out research and development 
for scientific conservation. No training on the current techniques/process in the field 
of conservation/restoration was imparted in the Museums. 
6.10 Digitisation and Documentation of Art Objects 
6.10.1 Status of Documentation in the ASI 
In the ASI, there was no documentation of antiquities taken away from the country 
before 1947 and hence, such antiquities could not be retrieved. Further, we noted 
several cases of art objects taken out of the country before implementation of the 
AAT Act, 1972 which could not be retrieved due to the absence of documentation. 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
 
47  Conservation Research includes the study of the deterioration of artifacts or the materials they are 
made from. 
48  Scientific Research focuses on manufacturing technologies and the different types of materials 
used to make the objects in the collection 

Report No. 18  of 2013 
 
142 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
Loaned Antiquities of Stein Collection in V&A Museum, UK  
The collection of Aurel Stein is perhaps the biggest collection of Central Asian art  
including Chinese, Tibetan and Tangut manuscripts, paintings, textile fragments, 
ceramic, Buddhist art objects, Prakrit wooden tablets, thousands of other art objects 
and documents.  Presently this collection was located at the National Museum, New 
Delhi, Indian Museum, Kolkata and Srinagar Museum in India. A part of this 
collection consisting of 700 objects was loaned to V&A Museum, UK by the ASI 
between 1923 and 1933. As per records, these antiquities were still “owned by 
Archaeological Survey of India” and were on loan. However, we did not find evidence 
of any efforts by the ASI to retrieve them. 
Nazrana Gold Coins 
After the merger of Hyderabad State, the Nizam of Hyderabad was allowed to retain 
some jewellery and such other items for his personal use under an agreement signed 
between him and the Union of India in 1950. Two giant “Nazrana gold mohur coins” 
pertaining to the erstwhile Nizam of Hyderabad were illegally taken away by his heir 
and pledged as security in 1988 with the Indo Suez Bank of Geneva for a loan of USD 
60 lakh. These did not figure in the list of items allowed to be retained with the 
Nizam, nor were they declared by Shri Mukaram Jah on his succession as heir. In the 
absence of proper documentation on ownership of the coins, the ASI could not get 
the coins restituted.  The coins are presently under the custody of Indo Suez bank 
Geneva.  
The ASI stated (October 2012) that the restitution of the objects which were taken 
out of the country prior to enforcement of the Act were not within its control. Hence 
they had to depend on the goodwill of other countries for their restitution.  
6.10.2 Lack of Database on Antiquities 
The ASI collected and stored antiquities in Sculpture Sheds, Circles, stores, 
Excavation Branches and 44 Site Museums.  
We noticed that as in the case of protected monuments, the ASI was not aware of 
the total number of antiquities in its possession as no database or inventory of 
antiquities had been prepared by the ASI. Branch wise lists were also not available 
with the antiquity Branch at the ASI HQ.  In the absence of any centralised 
information, there was a high risk of loss of antiquities. 
The Ministry stated (May 2013) that the centralised data of antiquities would follow 
only after the completion of digitisation process which is underway.  
Recommendation 6.7:  The ASI should develop a centralised and digitised data base 
of antiquities to document all details of antiquities stored at different locations.   

Report No.  18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 143
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
6.10.3 Status of Documentation in the Museums 
We observed poor documentation and digitisation of art objects in the Museums 
rendering them vulnerable to loss/theft. 
We noted that the photography unit of the National Museum  was to maintain 
photograph of each art object.  However, the Museum had 175409 photographs out 
of 205981 documented as art objects.   
Out of 205981 artifacts, the Museum had digitised only 2769 manuscripts and 2089 
(AA category
49) objects.  
The ASK had several rare ancient and contemporary manuscripts but out of 50543 
manuscripts, only 2467 manuscripts were digitised till March 2012.   
6.10.4 Constraints Reported by the Museums in the Process of 
Digitisation  
/g190 The ASK stopped the digitisation work of rare books in 2009 stating that 
the books were damaged in the process of digitisation. 
/g190 The Salar Jung Museum stated that it was able to digitise only 4.15 per 
cent art objects, 59 per cent library books and 5 per cent manuscripts till 
August 2012 due to non-availability of colour scanners.  
/g190 The Indian Museum did not adopt any policy/procedure for digitisation 
of art objects. The Museum had no action plan to complete this activity.  
/g190 At VMH out of 28394 objects, 23415 in-house photo-documentation 
and digitisation was completed.  Electronic database software Virtual 
Museum Builder JATAN, which was installed to exhibit details of the 
objects online with photographs, was unable to capture photograph in 
the database.  Till January 2013 entry of 11368 objects had been done 
without the photographs. 
Audit noted that except for Museums at Nalanda (Patna Circle), Bodhgaya (Patna 
Circle), Lothal (Vadodara Circle), Halebidu (Bengaluru Circle), Hampi (Bengaluru 
Circle) and Khajuraho (Bhopal Circle) this work was not completed.   
In Fort Museum (Chennai Circle), as per the accession register 4111 antiquities were 
registered; against the 3661 actual available antiquities. 
                                                      
 
49  Rarest of the rare master pieces of artifacts, one of its kind, not fit for transportation owing to 
fragility etc and digitised on CD format. 

Report No. 18  of 2013 
 
144 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
In reply (December 2012), the ASI agreed stating that detailed documentation was 
lacking for which necessary steps had been taken. 
6.11 Stolen and Seized Antiquities 
During joint physical inspections, we found that 131 antiquities were stolen from 
monuments/sites and 37 antiquities from Site Museums  from 1981 to 2012. We also 
found that two Buddha statues and one Garuda statue from Patna Circle were lying 
with Araria Police Station since 2005. Similarly  four antiquities  of the Indian War 
Memorial Musuem,Red Fort Delhi were with the Daryaganj Police Station since 1989. 
The ASI informed that FIRs had been lodged for all missing antiquities.  Immediately 
after report of theft of an antiquity, look out notices were also issued to all the 
enforcing agencies, custom exit channels and CBI-Interpol. However, we observed 
that in similar situations, worldwide, organisations took many more effective steps 
including checking of catalogues of international auction house, posting  news of 
such theft on  websites, posting information about theft in the  International Art Loss 
Registry, sending photographs of stolen objects electronically  to dealers and auction 
houses and intimate  scholars in the field.    
We found that the  ASI had never participated or collected information on Indian 
antiquities put on sale at well known international auction houses viz. Sotheby’s, 
Christie’s, etc. as there was no explicit  provision in the AAT Act, 1972 for doing so. 
We noticed several examples of antiquities of national importance being sold and 
displayed abroad. (Idol of Saraswati pertaining to King Bhoj is in British Museum, 
London).  
Many countries had started aggressive campaigns to recover their treasures.  Italy, 
Greece, China etc. had made initiatives in this regard. The Ministry did not have 
strategy for such proactive action.   
As part of its responsibilities, the ASI was also a nodal agency to retrieve stolen or 
illegally exported art objects. From 1976 to 2001, 19 antiquities had been retrieved 
by the ASI from foreign countries either through legal means, indemnity agreement, 
voluntary action or through out of case settlement. But after 2001, the ASI had not 
been able to achieve any success. 
 
Recommendation 6.8:  There is a need for a more concerted approach for retrieval  
of Indian art objects stolen or illegally exported to other countries. The ASI, as the  
nodal agency for this purpose needs to be more proactive and vigilant in its efforts  
and the Ministry needs to develop an aggressive strategy for the same.  
The Ministry stated (May 2013) that whenever any antiquity surfaces abroad ASI 
makes efforts for its retrieval.   

Report No.  18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 145
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
6.11.1 Seized Antiquities and Court Cases  
The ASI was empowered to give an opinion as to whether the seized antiquity was 
authentic.  We noted that this function was characterised by delays and 
inefficiencies. 
i. In June 1994, Dr. VJA Flynn, an Australian citizen, was intercepted by Customs 
authorities at Delhi with antique coins. Due to inordinate delay in photography 
by the ASI, even after a lapse of 18 years the case was still sub-judice. The ASI 
was also facing a defamation suit from Dr. Flynn claiming damages of US $ 
11,00,000. The ASI stated (October 2012) that the delay was “procedural”.  
ii.   Delhi Circle of the ASI, made a surprise check (November 2010) of an auction  
held at ITC Sheraton Hotel, New Delhi and declared  four paintings of Raja Ravi 
Varma, brought for auction, as antiquities.    These paintings had been declared 
as Art Treasure
50 under the AAT Act, 1972 by a gazette notification in 1979. The 
matter went to Court through a descendant of Raja Ravi Varma. The Court, 
sought information on the registration of the paintings, which the ASI failed to 
provide to the court.  
In December 2012, the ASI was yet to decide whether these were original works of 
Raja Ravi Varma and to declare the Art treasure as an Antiquity.    
6.12 Export of Antiquities and their shifting for Exhibitions 
Abroad  
6.12.1 Grant of Non Antiquity Certificate  
Every Circle through an Expert Advisory Committee 51 headed by Superintending 
Archaeologist issued Non Antiquity Certificate (NAC) to objects meant for export.  
The Appellate Committee headed by the DG ASI decides on applications that 
disputed the action of the Expert Advisory Committee.  
We noted that in the ASI circles, this certificate was given without any fee after 
mere inspection of the object without stamping to avoid tampering before export.  
Besides, the ASI did not maintain any centralised information on grant of these 
certificates.  
In the absence of these controls, the entire procedure for the grant of the non-
antiquity certificate was completely open to the risk of malpractice. 
                                                       
50  An Art Treasure means any human work of art, not being antiquity, declared by Central 
Government by notification in the official gazette, to be an art treasure for the purpose of the Act 
having regard to its artistic or aesthetic value, provided no such declaration can be made in respect 
of any such work or art so long as the author was alive. 
51  With outside experts  

Report No. 18  of 2013 
 
146 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
In 2003 two art objects were declared as antiquity by the “expert committee”.   
When challenged in court, the objects were re-examined by another expert 
committee, which concluded that only one out of two objects was an antiquity. This 
case highlighted the need for undertaking detailed tests before grant of non 
antiquity certificates.   
6.12.2  Exposition of Buddhist Relics to Bhutan  
Without permission from the Ministry of Culture, the ASI issued Temporary Export 
Permit for exhibition of antiquities abroad. We noticed that in violation of the 
guidelines the ASI sent three Buddhist relics to Bhutan in 2011.  
In their reply the ASI stated (October 2012) that the proposal was not placed before 
the Inter Ministerial Committee as its meeting was held before receiving the 
proposal. 
6.12.3  Non- signing of Conventions 
We found that in 1977, India had ratified the Convention on the means of Prohibiting 
and Preventing Illicit Export, Import and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, 
Paris, 1970.  Subsequently, no other multilateral or bilateral instrument had been 
signed or ratified to facilitate restoration of stolen art objects. 
Recommendation 6.9: The Ministry should frame a comprehensive policy for 
Management of Antiquities owned by the Organisation. 
The Ministry stated (May 2013) that ASI would work towards achieving 
comprehensive policy on Antiquities. 
6.13 Site Museums of the ASI  
According to the International Council of Museums, a Museum is a non-profit making 
permanent institution in the service of society and of its development, open to the 
public, which acquired, conserved, researched, communicated and exhibited, for 
purposes of study, education and enjoyment, the tangible and intangible evidence of 
people and their environment. 
The Sarnath Museum, established in 1904, was the first museum in India. 
In Site Museums archeological/historical material specific to the region were 
displayed in close proximity to the site. These were mostly located inside 
monument or adjacent to the excavated sites while other Museums were separate 
entities.  

Report No.  18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 147
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
As on March 2012, the ASI had 44 Site Museums. We found following deficiencies in 
the establishment, maintenance and development of the Site Museums.  
6.13.1 Criteria for Establishing Site Museums 
The Site Museums were managed by a Director (Museum) at DG ASI. We noted that 
the re-organisation of Site Museums had been made five times; in 1960, 1977, 1998, 
2010, 2012 for achieving growth and development. The ASI Site Museums were set 
up as per approval of the competent authority through inspection by an 
Archaeological Officer (ASA or above). No other guideline was available.  Accepting 
the factual position, the Ministry stated that the ASI would need to frame a 
perspective plan and policy in regard to the functioning and establishment of its Site 
Museums over the next few years. 
Recommendation 6.10: The ASI needs to develop detailed guidelines for the 
functioning and establishment of site museums.    
6.13.2 Opening New Site Museum 
i. No new Site Museum had been opened after 2006, and there was no 
action plan /target for opening new Site Museums. Shortage of funds 
and human resource (December 2012) was attributed for not opening 
new Site Museums. Archaeological Museum, Dholavira, Gujarat was 
the last Site Museum opened in 2006 after a Parliamentary assurance. 
However, excavated antiquities had not been handed over to this 
Museum so far (December 2012) defeating the very purpose of 
establishing the Museum. The ASI stated (December 2012) that report 
writing on Dholavira excavation was in progress and the selected 
antiquities could be shifted to the Museum only after completion of 
the report. However, no time frame was indicated in the reply.  
ii. The Sub Committee of the Central Advisory Board of Archaeology 
(CABA) for Antiquities and Museums recommended for opening of 
Site Museum in places having valuable collection of archaeological 
material like Patan (Gujarat), Deoghar (MP), Banawali (Haryana) 
Rakhigarhi (Haryana) Chandraketugarh (West Bengal). However, no 
progress was reported till December 2012.  
iii.  Proposals for opening Site Museum at Piprawaha (UP) and Shivpuri 
(MP) were under process since 2009 but the Site Museums had not 
yet been opened. The ASI stated (December 2012) that the State 
Governments had constructed the buildings in low lying water 
stagnated area and this was a major hindrance to shift the valuable 
antiquities in the buildings. The matter had been taken up with the 
State Governments for remedial action.   

Report No. 18  of 2013 
 
148 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
iv.  Lalitgiri, Odisha was the only site in Odisha in which the Buddhist 
relics were found in a fourfold casket, in the excavations conducted 
from 1985 to 1992. The ASI had proposed to set up a Site Museum at 
Lalitgiri to house the Buddhist relics in 2007. However, the Site 
Museum was yet (December 2012) to come up and the building plan 
was still under finalisation . 
v. The Speaker, Assam Legislative Assembly during his visit to the site of 
Masonry Remains on the Bamuni Hills in 1998 suggested setting up a 
Site Museum in an unfinished building close to the site. We noticed 
that ` 33.11 lakh were paid towards the cost of the acquisition of the 
land and building during February 2001 to 2003 and further ` 29.13 
lakh was incurred for the development of the building during 2007-08 
to 2011-12. However, the Site Museum had not yet been established. 
vi. In July 2000, it was decided to establish a Site Museum at Fatehpur 
Sikri.  The Site Museum had not been opened (December 2012) 
despite incurring an expenditure of ` 63.24 lakh. 
vii. In Lucknow Circle, a large room was constructed in 2002-03 for ` 4.91 
lakh for locating a Site Museum but it was not established till date 
(November 2012).  
6.13.3  Failure to Convert Sculpture Sheds as Site Museums  
The Site Museums are purposely created, to place antiquities in juxtaposition to the 
excavated site so as to retain the archeological context. 
In 2009, the Sub Committee of the Central Advisory Board of Archeology, 
recommended to convert more than 35 sculpture sheds 52 and 38 other sites with 
valuable antiquities in Site Museums.   We could not find any progress in this regard.  
During site visits, we also noticed cases of under-utilisation of Sculpture Sheds as 
antiquities were not stored in them thus defeating the very purpose of construction 
of Sculpture Sheds.  We found that antiquities were scattered at 
Site/Circles/Sculpture Sheds and the ASI had failed to develop site museums as 
detailed below: 
i) In the Kolkata Circle, a Sculpture Shed was constructed at Rabdentse Site in Sikkim 
in the year 2003-04 with a view to display the objects found at the Rabdentse Site. 
The Circle also incurred an expenditure of ` 8.31 lakh in 2009-10 for strengthening 
and enlarging the display area of the Sculpture Shed. However, during site visits, we 
                                                      
 
52   Sculpture Shed is a place where the archeological remains belonging to the site and the adjoining 
area are kept in safe custody, under a shed   
 

Report No.  18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 149
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
noticed that 12 glass boxes fixed to the wall in the Sculpture Shed were empty and 
only 69 sculptures and 48 other items were displayed in the shed without any 
accession number. Some antiquities found in Rabdentse Site were kept in plastic bag 
inside the office of the ASI, Sikkim Sub Circle, Geyzing without accessioning. 
Empty Sculpture Shed at Bangarh, West Bengal 
A sculpture shed was constructed at Bangarh Site in 2009-10 at a cost of ` 5.71  
lakh . However, this was lying unused, as only one stone sculpture found from a 
nearby village, two wooden pieces and some terracotta tiles found from Bangarh 
excavation were kept in the sculpture shed, without accessioning 53.  The remaining 
items, out of total 1246 antiquities found from Bangarh excavation, were kept in 
Circle Office, Kolkata. 
Recommendation 6.11: The ASI should take early action to utilise the above 
Sculpture Sheds and develop Museums at Sites.  
6.13.4 Status of Antiquities  
The ASI was required to preserve, protect and disseminate all forms of art, culture 
and objects of historical importance for identification of a particular culture, socio 
economic history. However, we found that the antiquities were kept in Circle Offices, 
Excavation Branches, Monuments/Sites as below. These antiquities were not 
displayed properly:  
 
                                                      
 
53  Documentation of antiquities in the prescribed format 
Sculpture Shed at  Rabdentse Site, Kolkata Circle  with  empty glass boxes and 
antiquities kept below  


Report No. 18  of 2013 
 
150 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
Table 6.4 Status of the Antiquities 
Sl. No. Place where kept Number of antiquities 
1. Chennai Circle  Office  395 antiquities recovered from the excavation conducted 
in Adhichanallur, Siruthavur and Malaiyadipatti. 
2. Store Room of Bhopal 
Circle  
3486 sculptures of 6 sub circles of Bhopal Circle 
(Burhanpur, Jabalpur, Raisen, Rewa, Sagar and Sanchi) 
were lying in store.  
3. Store Room of Jaipur 
Circle and Monument 
Sites  
10265 antiquities of monument site and 2881 antiquities 
of excavated sites were dumped in store rooms. 
4. Excavation Branch, 
Nagpur 
2949 antiquities from excavations done during 2007-09 
to 2011-12 were stored.  
5. Vadodara Circle Over 2000 uninventoried  antiquities were dumped in 
four cupboards.  
228 iron cannon balls had been dumped in the store of 
Diu Fort, Diu. 
2160 cannon balls(left by Portuguese while leaving the 
Fort) were lying scattered in the compound/garden area, 
these were not inventoried even 
Over 100 sculptures were kept in a store room in Sub 
Circle Office(Patan) of Vadodara Circle 
300 sculptures were kept in a shed near sub circle, Patan 
6. Bhubaneswar Circle  5915 antiquities had been stored in the store room by 
Excavation Branch 
7. Srinagar Circle  2724 artifacts were dumped in the office premises for 
last one to 42 years. There was no Site Museum in the 
Circle. An unearthed sculpture belonging to the ancient 
temple, Fatehgarh was stored in a private rented room. 
8. Chandigarh Circle  1028 antiquities and 70 silver coins were dumped in the 
office premises 
9. Patna Circle  973 antiquities found from excavation of 1978 and 1989 
were dumped in Patna Circle Office 
10. Jaipur Circle In 16 monuments,  (Details in Annex 6.3 ) antiquities like 
old carving stones, pillars, statues, sculptures were lying  
scattered 
11. Hyderabad Circle Undocumented loose sculptures were found lying in the 
monuments 
12. Bengaluru Circle Excavated sculptures and antiquities were found 
scattered in the excavated site opposite the 
Hoysaleshwara temple, Halebedu, and also in the 
Hoysaleshwara temple compound. These were not 
inventoried.  

Report No.  18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 151
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
The ASI thus failed to develop Sculpture sheds and Site Museums in several cases. 
This was fraught with the risk of loss/deterioration of the priceless antiquities.  
Recommendation 6.12: The ASI needs to carry out physical verification of antiquities 
lying at different sites/stores/circles/sub circles to ensure that each one of them is 
properly documented, numbered, and recorded.  They need to be placed in sculpture 
sheds, site museum or may other suitable location. 
The Ministry stated (May 2013) that physical verification was being done based on 
existing accession register.  
6.13.5 Fourteen Points Reform and Upgradation of Site Museums 
The Ministry of Culture issued 14 points museum reforms/guidelines in October 
2009 for Upgradation of security, public awareness, visitor facility and modernisation 
of all the Site Museums. However, these had not been fully implemented in all the 
44 Site Museums.  
The Ministry stated (May 2013) that the Ministry was monitoring the 
implementation of these reforms and had issued instructions to all officers in charge 
of various Museums to implement the museum reforms in their true letter and spirit. 
The fact remains that the work has not been completed till now.  
6.14 Display and Maintenance of Art Objects  
6.14.1 Rotation Policy  
Art objects displayed in the Museum depict rich and diverse heritage of our nation.  
Given the space constraints, all Museums in the world devise policy for periodic 
rotation of display items. We noted that the Museums selected for audit did not 
evolve a rotation policy for displaying artifacts.  The display details of the Museums 
are given below.  
Table 6.5 Details of the display and reserve of artifacts 
Name of the 
section 
No. of objects 
possessed till date
No. of objects 
displayed 
No of objects 
in reserve 
Percentage of the 
total objects in 
reserve 
National 
Museum 
205981 7333 198252 96.24 
Indian 
Museum 
107308 1862 105446 98.26  
Victoria 
Memorial Hall 
33493 1625 31768 95.13  
ASK 54655 79 54576 99.85  

Report No. 18  of 2013 
 
152 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
It would be evident that more than 95 per cent of objects were lying in reserve in the 
above Museums. This resulted in the non- display of large number of art objects and 
the museums were not able to showcase their valuable antiquities.  
6.14.2  Site Museums 
 We noticed that none of the Site Museums had any rotation policy for displaying the 
objects to facilitate the public viewing of reserve antiquities. In 11 Site Museums
54, 
more than 90 per cent  of the antiquities were kept in reserve. The ASI stated 
(December 2012) that there was no unified policy document in Site Museums.  
6.14.3 Status of Galleries of Various Museums  
We noted that all the galleries were not open for public due to some reason or the 
other like refurbishment of gallery, seepage etc.  The galleries closed for public were 
as follows: 
Table 6.6 Status of closed galleries 
Name of Museum 
Total 
number of 
galleries 
Number of 
galleries 
closed 
Remarks 
National Museum, 
Delhi 
26 7 Period ranging from one to 
nine years 
Indian Museum, 
Kolkata 
29 8 Out of the 21 open galleries, 
rotation was not done during 
the period ranging 2 to 23 
years in eight galleries 
Victoria Memorial 
Hall, Kolkata 
12 2 In seven galleries, artifacts 
were not changed since 
inception. 
 
 
 
 
                                                       
54 Kondapur and Nagarjunakonda, (Hyderabad Circle), Nalanda and Sarnath (Patna Circle), Red Fort 
(Delhi Circle), Sheikh Chilli’s Tomb (Chandigarh Circle), Tipu Sultan Museum (Bengaluru Circle), 
Khajuraho and Sanchi (Bhopal Circle), Ratnagiri (Bhubaneswar Circle) and Kalibangan (Jaipur Circle) 

Report No.  18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 153
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
6.14.4 Status of Storage of Art Objects in Different Museums is shown 
in the following Photographs: 
  
Objects lying in the basement of the National Museum along with other  items 
 
Dust gathering over priceless statues in the basement of National Museum 
 


Report No. 18  of 2013 
 
154 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
  
Store Rooms of Victoria Memorial Hall 
At Benisagar site, Ranchi we found that antiquities were kept in the staff quarters. 
 
Antiquities found in staff quarters at Benisagar 
6.14.5 Storage of Antiquities/conditions of Reserve Items in Site 
Museums, CAC and Data Bank of the ASI 
Proper storage facilities with effective air conditioning and adequate air circulation 
are essential in order to avoid deterioration of artifacts.  We noticed that the reserve 
collection of Ropar Museum (Punjab Circle) and Fort Museum (Chennai Circle) was 
not stored in proper condition. Sculptures were lying on the backyard of Aihole 
Musuem (Dharwad Circle) Chanderi Musuem (Bhopal Circle), Sarnath (Patna Circle) 
and Nalanda Museum (Patna Circle). 


Report No.  18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 155
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
In the Central Antiquity Collection (CAC), there was no facility of maintaining air 
conditioned environment for the antiquities.  We noticed problems of peeling 
plasters, dampness and seepage aggravating the deterioration of artifacts stored in 
various cells of Purana Qila, Delhi. 
During physical inspection of the Data Bank by audit in June 2012, we noticed that 
while shifting from Purana Qila to Red Fort, 60 cabinets out of 120, containing 
valuable records (original registration certificates) of the Data Bank were severely 
damaged. In the absence of proper space, another 66 cabinets were kept open in the 
gallery, exposed to heat, air and dust which deteriorated the records beyond 
recovery.  The data bank was estimated to have 4.5 lakh records but during the 
digitisation work of the National Mission and Monument Authority, only 3.5 lakh 
records were produced as the rest were damaged by rodents.  
6.15 Exhibitions and Insurance Claims 
One of the most important functions of a museum was to exhibit its collection.  
‘Show less but show well’ was an accepted slogan by most of the Museums so that 
the best pieces were exhibited.   
Indian Museum  organised Coins’ exhibition in December 2009 in which 101 coins 
having historical value were displayed in the exhibition.  We noted that these 
included two coins having pictures of  Emperor Akbar which were declared as fake by 
the physical verification committee (February 2009).   The action of the Indian 
Museum to display these fake coins was, therefore, inappropriate. 
 
Pictures of Fake Coins 
6.15.1 Exhibitions Organised Abroad  
The Ministry decided to organise exhibitions in China and Korea during 2011 which 
were subsequently cancelled due to some reason or the other.  The Ministry had not 
entered into any agreement with the respective governments. 


Report No. 18  of 2013 
 
156 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12:
Management of Antiquities
For the exhibitions held abroad, the National Museum appointed a ‘Fine Art 
Handling Agent’ (FAHA) to handle the transportation, packing, handling, and 
fabrication of boxes etc.  The objects sent abroad were covered by insurance.  The 
following artifacts were found damaged/lost during the exhibitions held abroad:  
• Loss of semi precious stone from the hands of Buddha in the Tierra  sent to 
Korea (Buddhist Art Exhibition) in 2006 (insurance value of ` 50 lakhs),   
• Abrasion on the right fingers and loss of nail tip of stone Sculpture, 
• Huntress (insurance value of ` 12 crore)  in the exhibition to Brussels (Passage 
to India) in 2010 
We noted that the Museum failed to take adequate steps to recover compensation 
from FAHA in the light of agreement.   We also noted that the same agency was 
being awarded the contract of future exhibition indicating undue favour to the firm. 
The National Museum stated (September 2012) that due care would be taken in all 
future exhibitions.  
Recommendation 6.13: The Museums should adopt a rotation policy for the display 
of artifacts.  It should devise mechanism for proper and attractive display methods to 
attract visitors. 
Recommendation 6.14: The reserve collection should also be properly maintained 
and preserved in suitable storing condition. 
The Ministry accepted (May 2013) the recommendation. 
6.16 Modernisation of Metro Museums 
In 2004-05, the Ministry started a scheme for modernisation of metro musuems in 
four metro cities.  The scheme also covered National Museum, Indian Museum and 
CSMVS.  An outlay of ` 100.00 crore was earmarked for National Museum and Indian 
Museum for the 11
th Five Year Plan. The museums were required to submit detailed 
project report with the help of well reputed consultants.  However even after a lapse 
of more than eight years, National Museum and Indian Museum failed to submit the 
same.  
The Ministry released ` 15.43 crore to CSMVS, Mumbai between September 2008 to 
January 2013. However, it was noticed that the Ministry did not properly monitor 
the works carried out by the CSMVS. Irregularities like delay in completion of the 
project, multiple revisions in the estimates, absence of information in respect of the 
actual expenditure incurred on the project etc. were noticed.  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 157
 
Chapter –/g25/g12/g12:
Financial Management
 
 
 
 
 
Funding is crucial for the conservation activities of different organisations.  The 
Ministry allocated funds under Plan and Non-plan component to the ASI.  The funds 
were also released to the two subordinate offices i.e. the National Museum and 
NRLC
55 by the Ministry.  The other Museums received grant-in-aid from the Ministry.  
The National Culture Fund, a trust of the Ministry, had been provided a corpus fund 
by the Ministry with the objective of encouraging participation of the corporate 
sector, NGOs, State Government, Private/public sector etc.  The funding made by the 
Ministry to different institutions is discussed below. 
7.1 Attached office-Archeological Survey of India 
7.1.1 Budget Estimates and Expenditure  
The financial position of the ASI depicting the budgetary estimates and expenditure 
incurred during the period of audit are given below in the table: 
Table 7.1: Budget estimates and expenditure figures of the ASI 
(` in crore) 
Year 
Budget estimates Actual Expenditure 
Plan Non-plan Plan Non-plan 
2007-08 98.00 185.50 90.88 185.87 
2008-09 111.00 201.00 106.93 232.89 
2009-10 111.00 268.70 126.31 286.39 
2010-11 121.00 260.00 154.24 267.71 
2011-12 152.00 287.00 171.58 275.26 
Source: Outcome budget documents of the Ministry of Culture 
 
 
 
                                                      
 
55 National Research Laboratory for Conservation of Cultural Property 
Financial Management 
CHAPTER – VII 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
158 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12/g12:
Financial Management
 
The chart below depicts the activity-wise components of expenditure incurred by the 
ASI during the period 2007-12. 
 
7.1.2 Inadequate Funding  
The Ministry made budgetary allotments to the ASI without assessing their funds 
requirement and absorptive capacity.  The requirement of funds should 
commensurate with the number of centrally protected monuments and the need for 
preservation and conservation of these monuments. The consequences of 
inadequate funding have been discussed in Case Study No 2, Para 4.9.2 and also in 
Para 5.4.3. 
We noted that the Ministry had made significant reductions in the funds 
requirement projected by the ASI, as detailed in the table below. 
 
 
 
 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 159
 
Chapter –/g25/g12/g12:
Financial Management
Table 7.2: Plan budget proposed by the ASI and allotted by the Ministry 
(` in crore) 
Year Projected 
requirement 
Original Budget 
Allotted  
Expenditure 
incurred 
2007-08 174.05 98.00 90.88 
2008-09 177.90 111.00 106.93 
2009-10 176.41 111.00 126.31 
2010-11 163.16 121.00 154.24 
2011-12 268.94 152.00 171.58 
 
Thus, the reduction in funds projected by the ASI ranged from 26 to 44 per cent. The 
Ministry did not provide the reasons for reducing the budget as proposed by the ASI. 
The excess of expenditure with reference to the original allotment ranged from 13 to 
27 per cent especially during the last three years (2009-10 to 2011-12). 
7.1.3 Budgeting and Funds Arrangement for Conservation 
7.1.3.1  Preparation of Revised Conservation Programme (RCP)  
Based on the inspection and assessment made by the officer in-charge of a 
monument, the annual funds requirement is submitted to the concerned Circle 
office.  The consolidated funds requirement proposed to be used by a Circle office on 
conservation work is termed as Revised Conservation Programme (RCP).  Thus, RCP 
is a tool to project Circle/Branch wise annual funds requirement for undertaking 
conservation works.  Thereafter, the RCPs are required to be submitted to the ASI 
HQ for assessing the overall funds requirement for conservation works. 
We, however, noticed that budgeting process in the ASI was inappropriate.  The ASI, 
rather than receiving proposals in the form of RCPs from the Circles/ Branches, 
sought proposals based on the budgetary allocation figures circulated to the Circles/ 
Branches. 
We also noticed that the Circles/ Branches did not exercise due diligence while 
assessing the funds requirements, as only in a few cases estimates were prepared to 
work out the funds requirement. 
As a result, the ASI ignored the conservation needs of several valuable monuments 
due to paucity of funds.  For example, in case of 110 Kos Minars the expenditure 
incurred during the last five years was only `
 38.33 lakh.  On many other 
sites/monuments no money was spent despite dire need of conservation.  Joint 
physical inspection revealed that many Kos Minars were in a dilapidated condition.  
(Refer Case Study No 5). 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
160 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12/g12:
Financial Management
Besides, this also led to funds meant for conservation works being utilised on petty 
non-conservation works like raising of boundary walls, public amenities etc. in 
majority of cases. For example, Delhi Circle incurred `
 47.51 crore during the year 
2010-11 and 2011-12 on special repair works. Out of this, works amounting to ` 7.66 
crore were not directly related to conservation works. 
Blocking of Funds- Badami, Bangalore Circle 
In order to preserve the historical monuments and improve tourism, Revenue 
Department of Government of Karnataka approached (February 2003) the DG ASI 
with a proposal to acquire the unauthorised buildings around Badami, Bengaluru 
Circle. Accordingly, the ASI released (February 2006) ` 2.72 crore against the State 
Government’s request for ` 3.32 crore.  Further in November 2009, the State 
Government again requested the ASI to deposit an additional amount of ` 6.36 crore 
which was further enhanced (July 2012) to ` 12.53 crore.  The State Government 
also stated that in case of non receipt of funds, the land acquisition proceedings 
would be dropped.  Thereafter no follow-up was evident in the records of the ASI 
leading to blocking of fund of ` 2.72 crore for over six years. 
7.1.4 Receipts of the ASI  
Revenue generation is important for an organisation engaged in Conservation work. 
The world over organisations managing heritage conservation are engaged in 
enhancing revenue by way of sale of souvenirs at site, charges for guide services, 
special charges for special tours and sale of publications.  
The main sources of revenue of the ASI were ticketing, sale of publication, 
organisation of cultural events and permission for film shooting etc.  However, we 
noted deficiencies in efforts made by the ASI for augmenting revenue generation. 
The ASI generated a total revenue of `
 422.46 crore during the period from 2007-08 
to 2011-12.  However, the PAOs intimated the receipt as ` 431.78 crore. The ASI 
neither explored the reasons for the discrepancy nor reconciled the figures with the 
PAOs. Further, we also noticed variation in revenue figures maintained at the Circles/ 
Sub-Circles with respect to that maintained at the ASI, HQ and PAO, ASI. 
7.1.4.1 Ticketed Monuments of the ASI  
As per the AMASR Rules 1959 (Rule 6), the ASI charged a prescribed entrance fee 
from visitors above the age of 15 years on visit to certain set of monuments.  The 
details of entrance fee chargeable on various category of visitor are given below in 
the table. 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 161
 
Chapter –/g25/g12/g12:
Financial Management
Table 7.3 Rates of entry fees for citizens of different countries 
(Amount in `) 
 For Indian citizens and citizens 
of SAARC and BIMSTEC For other foreign visitors 
World Heritage Sites 10 250 
Other protected 
monuments 
5 100 
 
We noted that out of the 3677 protected monuments under the control of the ASI, 
only 124 monuments were designated as ticketed as on February 2006.  The number 
of ticketed monuments was further reduced to 116. The rates were last revised in 
the year 2001 and the last monument declared as ticketed was in the year 1998.  The 
ASI is presently in the process of increasing the ticketing rates. 
The ASI could not furnish justification or 
grounds on which the authority of ticketing 
on visitors was withdrawn from the eight 
protected monuments.  However, the ASI 
without referring to specific cases pointed 
out by us informed (September 2012) that 
entry fees was withdrawn due to 
unavoidable circumstances such as 
customary religious practice in vogue etc.  
We noticed that there were no specific 
criteria or guidelines for categorisation of a 
particular protected monument as ticketed, thus rendering the process of 
designating or withdrawing the status as arbitrary and ad-hoc.   
There were some ticketed monuments like the S ultan Garhi in Delhi  Circle and the 
Baba Pyara caves in Vadodara Circle from where the annual revenue received during 
the period of audit ranged between ` 1550 to ` 3161 and ` 855 to ` 7531 
respectively.  This indicated low visitor turnout.  On the other hand, two centrally 
protected monuments in Srinagar Circle i.e., group of Arched Terraces/structural 
complex Parimahal Srinagar and Mughal Arcade were not declared ticketed by the 
ASI despite high visitor turnout, which was evident from the fact that the State 
Government had levied the entry ticket and parking charges and earned an amount 
of more than ` 42 lakhs during the year 2011-12.  Similarly there were monuments 
like Bara Imambara in Lucknow Circle and Thiksey, Shey and Alchi monasteries in Leh 
mini Circle  where the managing trusts levied entry tickets and collected money, 
though the ASI did not designate them as ticketed monuments.   
* Taj Mahal,  Agra Fort, Fatehpur Sikri, Agra, Red Fort, Qutb Minar, Humayun Tomb, Delhi, Group of Monuments, 
Mallapuram, Western Group of Temple, Khajuraho, Sun Temple, Konark and Excavated remains, Sarnath. 
Sale of tickets 
Revenue realised through sale of 
tickets in 116 protected 
monuments ranged from ` 66.25 
crore to ` 95.64 crore during the 
period 2007-12.  Analysis of the 
revenue figures revealed that more 
than 75 percent of the total 
revenue pertained to only 10 
monuments*. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
162 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12/g12:
Financial Management
The ASI requested (2010) the Circle offices to submit their suggestions for inclusion 
of more monuments as ticketed.  We noted that due to incomplete information 
submitted by the Circles, the ASI was not able to include more monuments in the 
‘ticketed’ category. 
“Buddhist rock-cut stupas, Dagabas and caves and the ruins of a structural Chaitya with its 
outbuilding and other Ancient remains on two adjoining hills known as Bojjanna Konda , 
Sankaram, Visakhapatnam District”, a centrally protected monument in Hyderabad Circle, 
was not declared ticketed by the ASI, HQ.  However, the Circle office printed the tickets in 
the year 2005 in anticipation of the approval from the HQ office. The monument was not 
declared as ticketed and the printed tickets could not be used by the Circle.  DG, ASI took no 
action on the lapse on the part of Hyderabad authorities. 
 
Recommendation 7.1: The ASI should frame clear norms and guidelines for 
designating a particular monument as ticketed, with a view to enhance the revenue 
realisation from sale of entry tickets. 
The Ministry (May 2013) intimated that the existing norm for introduction of 
entrance fee at the monument was the number of visitors the monument received 
every day.  The ticket is not introduced at a monument, which does not have a 
considerable number of daily visitors/tourists, because the ASI is required to put in 
place complete infrastructure for ticketing irrespective of the number of visitors. The 
total expenditure on the creation of infrastructure and the entrance fee collected are 
given due consideration while introducing ticket at the monument. 
The reply is not valid as the ASI did not have a reliable mechanism to assess the 
number of visitors to the monumentswhich are not ticketed.  
7.1.4.2 Non Revision of Rates for Film Shooting  
Rule 42 of the AMASR Rules, 1959 provided that each person intending to undertake 
any filming operation at a protected monument shall apply to DG, ASI for licence at 
least three months before the proposed date of the commencement of such 
operation.  The DG may grant a license for film shooting on payment of a fee of 
`
 5000 in case of professional and other agencies.  We noticed that agencies like 
Indian Railway charged ` 0.30 lakh to ` 1.0 lakh per day, Delhi Metro Rail 
Corporation charged ` 1.0 lakh per hour and Delhi International Airport Limited 
charged ` 5.0 lakh per four hours for film shooting in their premises.  Even the 
agencies like CPWD and NDMC charged upto ` 0.50 lakh per day for film shootings in 
their areas.  Thus the rates of the ASI were abysmally low in comparison to 
comparative rates. 
We noted that these rates had not been revised since 1991.  In Delhi Circle alone 
during the period of audit, 87 film shooting permissions were given and a revenue of 
`
 2.64 crore was realised.   

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 163
 
Chapter –/g25/g12/g12:
Financial Management
The Ministry stated (May 2013) that the ASI had mooted the proposal for revision of 
the licence fee for filming at the monuments twice in the past, but the same was not 
approved.No reasons were accorded for non approval of proposed revisions.  
Recommendation 7.2: The ASI needs to revise the rates for film shooting and 
ticketing to make these a substantial source of revenue. 
7.1.4.3 Delay in Remittances of Government Money  
As per Archaeological Works Code, all money received at monuments and sites as 
Departmental receipts was to be credited into the nearest local treasury or Bank on 
the next working day regularly through Treasury challans. The counter foils duly 
receipted by the Treasury Officer had to be submitted to the Head of the Office 
concerned at the close of each month.  The amount was to be posted in the revenue 
register and passed through the Cash Book of the head of the Office concerned.   
The money received by sale of tickets etc. were deposited by the counter clerk to the 
Sub Circle incharge who deposited the same to the Circle office through which it 
went to the government account in the accredited bank.   
We noted that there were delays by every Circle in depositing the money into the 
Government account.  Such delays ranged between two to four years. 
Out of 44 Site Museums, entry fee by way of tickets was charged in 31 Museums. We 
noticed that in 14 Site Museums there were delays in depositing the money 
collected by 15 to 180 days. 
In Hyderabad Circle, Demand Drafts amounting to ` seven lakh collected as security 
deposit for film shooting in monuments during 2005-12 were not credited into 
Government account till the end of audit.  
7.2 Subordinate Offices 
The Ministry had two subordinate offices i.e. National Museum and National 
Research Laboratory for Conservation of Cultural Property which are involved in 
preservation and conservation of monuments and antiquities. 
7.2.1 Budget Estimates and Expenditure  
The table below shows the budget estimates and expenditure incurred there against 
by the two subordinate offices during the period covered under Audit.   
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
164 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12/g12:
Financial Management
Table 7.4: Budget estimates and expenditure figures of Subordinate Offices 
(` in crore) 
Year 
National Museum NRLC 
Budget 
estimates 
Actual 
expenditure 
Budget 
estimates 
Actual 
expenditure 
2007-08 18.04 11.02 3.05 2.91 
2008-09 18.04 12.80 5.11 4.71 
2009-10 18.92 13.75 5.90 5.25 
2010-11 17.75 17.48 5.34 5.07 
2011-12 18.45 15.23 5.65 5.72 
Source: Outcome budget documents of the Ministry of Culture 
From the above table it is revealed that NM and NRLC failed to utilise their allotted 
budget. 
7.3 Other Museums and Societies 
Grants-in-aid are released to the Museums/ Societies functioning as Autonomous 
bodies and Grant in aid institutions under the Ministry of Culture.  The trend of 
grants-in-aid released to the five Museums and two Asiatic societies funded by the 
Ministry is shown in the table below. 
Table 7.5: Grants in aid released 
(
` in crore) 
Sl. No. Organisation 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
1.  Allahabad 
Museum, 
Allahabad (AM) 
2.25 2.92 2.29 3.15 2.15 
2.  Asiatic Society 
Kolkata (ASK) 
8.01 10.40 17.23 14.35 13.70 
3.  Asiatic Society 
Mumbai (ASM) 
0.35 0.50 1.00 1.00 0.78 
4.  Indian 
Museum, 
Kolkata (IM) 
6.46 9.69 14.48 16.14 10.96 
5.  Salarjung 
Museum (SMH) 
11.70 16.25 22.14 20.89 17.12 
6.  Victoria 
Memorial Hall 
Kolkata (VMH) 
7.20 7.64 7.69 9.15 10.63 
 TOTAL 35.97 47.40 64.83 64.68 55.34 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 165
 
Chapter –/g25/g12/g12:
Financial Management
7.3.1 Diversion of Funds from Plan Head to Non Plan Head 
We noticed that the Indian Museum diverted the plan grant of ` 161.09 lakh and 
` 0.32 lakh during the years 2007-08 and 2008-09 respectively to non plan heads to 
meet the excess expenditure. Similarly, Asiatic Society, Kolkata also diverted 
`
 221.03 lakh in 2011-12 from plan heads to non plan heads. 
7.3.2 Irregular Excess Expenditure 
We also noticed that irregular excess expenditure was incurred in the Indian 
Museum, 
Asiatic Society Kolkata (ASK) and Victoria Memorial Hall (VHM)  as given 
below: 
Indian 
Museum 
• Against the plan grant of ` 477.31 lakh received in 2011-12, 
the expenditure incurred was ` 1055.86 lakh.  However no 
prior approval was obtained. 
• ` 109.41 lakh was incurred on heads like campus 
development, shifting of library, purchase of car during the 
period 2007-08 to 2011-12 for which no budget provision 
was planned.   
• ` 764.59 lakh was incurred in excess of the allotted budget 
on security, galleries, education etc. However reasons for 
excess expenditure were not recorded. 
Victoria 
Memorial Hall 
(VHM) 
• Against the revised expenditure of ` 873 lakh, the 
expenditure incurred was ` 1155 lakh without assigning any 
reasons. 
Asiatic 
Society 
Kolkata (ASK) 
• Excess expenditure of ` 628.95 lakh was incurred but 
reasons for the excess were not recorded. 
• ` 59.12 lakh was incurred on heads for which no provisions 
existed. 
 
7.3.3 Unrealistic Budget Preparation  
We also noticed that the budget estimates prepared by the Victoria Memorial Hall 
(VHM)and Asiatic Society Kolkata (ASK) during 2007-08 to 2011-12 were unrealistic 
and the Museums failed to utiliseeven the budget allotted as shown below: 
 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
166 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12/g12:
Financial Management
Table 7.6: Unrealistic budget of Museums 
(` in crore) 
Sl.  No. Name of the 
Museum Budget provision Budget allotted Budgetutlised 
1. VMH 45.35 24.79 24.28 
2. ASK 44.13 25.78 23.44 
 
7.4 Other Areas of Concern 
7.4.1 Automation in Ticketing 
The ASI introduced (2009) a system of bar coded Common Entry tickets.  The tickets 
were to be printed by Government of India Security Press, Nasik.  However, we 
noticed that no monument site of the ASI was provided with bar code reader 
machines.  Infact, the ASI had not even initiated the procurement process of bar 
code reader machines. Hence, this automated ticketing system could not be 
introduced.  
We further noted, that in 2005-06 the Delhi Circle had procured automated ticketing 
system for three monuments i.e., Qutb Minar, Purana Qila and Jantar Mantar by 
incurring an expenditure of `
 8.10 lakh, ` 8.45 lakh and ` 11.93 lakh respectively.  
However, the automated system was operational only at Jantar Mantar and that too 
for nine months only (from October 2006 to June 2007). The matter was under 
investigation by the vigilance/CBI for alleged irregularities in purchase of these 
machines. Thus, due to non-functioning of the automated system the expenditure 
incurred was rendered unfruitful. 
In Agra Circle, the ASI had incorrectly made payment to ISP Nasik, for printing 
25.50 lakh tickets of ` 20 denomination at the rate of ` 4 per ticket instead of ` 2 
per ticket.  This resulted in excess payment of ` 51 lakh. No action was taken by 
the department to refund/adjust the excess amount. 
7.4.2 Other Irregularities in Tickets Stock  
We noticed that at many ticketed monuments, due to high vacancies in permanent 
cadres, temporary staff was being used at ticket counters. e.g. in Delhi Circle, out of 
the 10 ticketed monuments, in two cases i.e. Safdarjung Tomb and Jantar Mantar, 
temporary staff was deployed at the ticket counter and in Sultan Garhi a monument 
attendant was deployed. Similarly in Srinagar Circle also, out of the four ticketed 
monuments, temporary staff was deployed at the ticket counters in two 
monuments. Handling of public fund by temporary staff lends itself to a high risk of 
misappropriation. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 167
 
Chapter –/g25/g12/g12:
Financial Management
We noted that out of eight lakh tickets received by the Taj store from the CA Taj 
Mahal office, only 6.5 lakh tickets were issued to the counters for sale. However, 
the stock register showed NIL balance.  Further, revenue realised on sale of 31784 
tickets amounting ` 6.36 lakh was not deposited into the Government account. On 
it being pointed out, the Circle stated that the discrepancy had been reconciled.  
The reply was not verifiable as the relevant records had been tampered through 
overwriting and cuttings. 
Till 2009, the ASI wasusing bell punched tickets at its ticketed monuments. DG, ASI 
imposed (December 2009) a ban on the use of these tickets and directed to 
commence sale of bar coded tickets ( Refer Para 7.4.1 ).   We noted that in many 
monuments, the bell punched tickets were being used in violation to DG’s specific 
directions. Further, the ASI did not carry out the stock verification of old tickets lying 
at the Circle / monuments before introducing the system of issuing bar coded 
tickets. The absence of information regarding the stock of the tickets is fraught with 
the risk of unauthorised use of banned tickets. 
7.4.3 Non Maintenance of Counter Foils of the Used Tickets 
The Archaeological Works Code provided that the counter foil of the used tickets 
should be maintained at least for three years and then it should be weeded out by 
following the proper procedure.  However, it was noticed that Sub Circle/Circle office 
were not maintaining the counter foils of the used tickets.  In Delhi Circle, the Sub 
Circle offices were destroying the counterfoil on the same day in violation of the 
procedure prescribed in the AWC.  
Recommendation 7.3: The ASI needs to streamline the procedures for ticketing and 
collection of entrance fee at ticketed monuments. 
The Ministry stated (May 2013) that consultants had been appointed by the ASI to 
firm up the mechanism keeping in view the complexities at the monuments and the 
type of visitors. 
7.4.4 No Efforts to Diversify Revenue Generation 
The Ministry did not take any initiative to introduce new modes of revenue 
generation from the monuments and the museums.  In most of the Sites, no 
souvenir shops, customised tours or specialised facilities on charge basis were 
available, unlike the global best practices. 
Recommendation 7.4: The Ministry needs to diversify and explore on the new modes 
of revenue generation from the Heritage Sites and Museums.  Options should be 
explored in view of best practices adopted globally. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
168 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12/g12:
Financial Management
7.4.5 Irregular Retention of Government Money in Personal Account 
by National Museum 
As per Rule 6 of the Receipt and Payment Rules, all moneys received by or tendered 
to Government officers on account of revenue or receipt or dues of the Government 
shall, without undue delay, be paid in full into the accredited bank for inclusion in 
Government account. 
National Museum entered into an agreement with a private firm
56 in August 2003 for 
providing audio guide services.  The fees charged from the visitors for providing the 
audio guide service was to be shared between the firm and the museum as per the 
agreement.  We noticed that the money received on account of audio guide services 
was deposited in a separate saving bank account opened in the name of two officials 
of the National Museum in October 2005.  The amount was deposited in this account 
till August 2007 when National Museum closed this account in the name of 
individual officers and opened another account in the name of National Museum.  
Keeping the government money in the personal account of the officials from October 
2005 to August 2007 was highly irregular.  
The National Museum accepted the audit observation and stated (December 2011) 
that the separate bank account was opened with the permission of the Director 
General, National Museum. 
7.4.6 Non Recovery of Licence Fees  
National Museum provided the office space to three organisations viz. National 
Museum Institute, The Handicraft and Handlooms Export Corporation of India 
Limited and M/s Khatirdari Catering Services.  We noticed that the National Museum 
did not charge the prescribed market rate of licence fees from these organisations as 
per the terms and conditions of the Ministry of Urban Development. 
 
                                                      
 
56 M/s Narrowcasters India Private Limited 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 169
 
Chapter –/g25/g12/g12/g12:
Manpower Management
 
 
 
 
 
Adequately trained, experienced and sufficient manpower is a pre requisite for the 
functioning of any agency involved in Heritage Conservation. We found that the 
organisations engaged in heritage conservation in India were facing an acute 
shortage of technical manpower.  
8.1 Manpower Management in the ASI 
8.1.1 Shortage of Manpower 
The overall position of sanctioned strength vis-à-vis men in position in different 
cadres revealed an acute shortage of staff.  With the passage of time, the work 
profile and scope of work had undergone sea change in the ASI.  This adversely 
affected the performance and output of the organisation.  The shortage ranged 
between 21.4 per cent to 41.7 per cent as given in the table below: 
Table 8.1 Position of manpower of the ASI 
Sl. 
No. 
Classification 
of posts 
Sanctioned 
Strength Filled Vacant Percentage of 
Vacancy 
1. Group A   235 137 98 41.7 
2. Group B  459 328 131 28.5 
3. Group  C 1599 1257 342 21.4 
4. Group D 6152 4275 1877 30.5 
Total 8445 5997 2448 28.9 
We noticed that four posts of ADG Archaeology and 18 posts of Joint Directors 
General, which were newly created in 2011, were lying vacant since their creation.   
8.1.2 Capacity Building for Conservation 
Capacity building of staff through proper training and deployment is crucial for the 
proper execution of conservation works. Heritage Conservation required adequate 
specialisation, technical knowledge and close supervision.  
Manpower Management 
CHAPTER – VIII 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
170 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12/g12/g12:
Manpower Management
We found that the ASI had a full fledged cadre for conservation work. This ranged 
from the Director (Conservation) to the Foreman (Works) in addition to various 
technical posts of engineers and conservators. The Sub Circle offices were headed by 
Conservation Assistants, responsible for carrying out the conservation works on the 
monuments, with the help of Foreman under the guidance of the Assistant/Deputy 
Superintending Engineers. The Horticulture and Science Branches had technically 
qualified staff to carry out environmental and chemical conservation works 
respectively. 
8.1.3 Vacancies and Shortfalls in Technical Cadre 
The sanctioned strength of the three main conservation Branches mainly included 
the technical posts of archaeologists, engineers, horticulturists and chemists.  Even 
at the group ‘D’ level, the monument and garden attendants played a significant role 
in the preservation and conservation of monuments.  The staff position of these 
Branches was as follows: 
Table 8.2 Details of vacancies in conservation Branches 
 Sanctioned posts Filled posts Vacant Posts 
Conservation Branch 503 369 134 
Horticulture Branch 114 106 8 
Science Branch 140 123 17 
Total 757 598 159 
 
Thus, out of the 757 sanctioned posts for conservation works, 159 posts (21 per cent) 
were vacant.  Besides this, out of the 1267 posts of Garden Attendants, in the 
Horticulture Branch, 246 posts (19 per cent) were vacant. 
The Parliamentary Standing Committee in its report of 2005 had also expressed 
concern on the vacancies in crucial technical cadres.  
8.1.4 Shortage of Monument Attendants 
Monument Attendants of the ASI were responsible for day to day maintenance of 
the monuments including vegetation clearance, cleaning, dusting, sweeping, 
regulating the visitors, rendering assistance in the sale of entry tickets, etc. besides 
security. The ASI had 3678 existing monuments. Out of 3458 sanctioned posts, 1279 
(37 per cent) posts of Monument Attendants were vacant.  Consequently most of the 
monuments had no full time guards.  The cases of theft, encroachment, 
unauthorised constructions etc in the monuments which have been discussed in 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 171
 
Chapter –/g25/g12/g12/g12:
Manpower Management
chapter 9 could be attributed to shortages in staff strength of monuments 
attendants. 
8.1.5 Distribution of Work 
The distribution of work was also uneven and in some cases Conservation Assistants 
had as many as 50 monuments, spread out geographically, under their control. This 
made the task of regular supervision and close monitoring practically impossible. For 
instance, in the Agra Circle, monuments under the control of a Conservation 
Assistant were more than 30 kilometers away from the Circle office and spread over 
various districts.         
8.1.6 Use of Technical Staff for Administrative Works 
The cadre of Conservation Assistant (CAs) is the crucial cadre for maintenance, 
security and upkeep of a monument. We found that the CAs were overloaded with 
administrative works, viz. daily receipts and deposit of revenue, monitoring of 
security,  handling of legal cases, issue of notices to unauthorised constructions and 
other routine  work.  These additional responsibilities significantly reduced the time 
available with them for their prime responsibility of documentation, execution and 
supervision of ongoing conservation works.  
8.1.7 Unclear Reporting: Hierarchy 
The ScienceBranch had three divisional offices (each headed by a Superintending 
Archaeological Chemist (SAC)) and 11 zonal offices (headed by Deputy 
Superintending Archaeological Chemist (DSAC). There was no specified criterion 
distinguishing between divisional and zonal offices.  Some of the zonal offices (e.g. 
Zonal Office Delhi) were directly reporting to the Director (Science) whereas others 
(e.g. Zonal office Patna) were reporting to the concerned divisional office.  Similarly 
the extent of jurisdiction also differed from one zonal office to another. Some were 
exclusively looking after the monuments in one Circle, whereas in other cases, the 
jurisdiction extended to several Circles.  
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
172 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12/g12/g12:
Manpower Management
8.2 Efforts to Fill the Vacant Posts 
8.2.1 Recommendations of Committees 
The manpower management of the ASI was reviewed from time to time in the past 
by various committees as given in the table below:   
Table 8.3 Recommendations of the committees on manpower 
Sl. No. Committee Year Action taken on the 
recommendations 
1. Wheeler Committee 1965 Not provided to audit. 
2. Estimates Committee of 
Lok Sabha 
1973-74 The recommendations of these 
committees were taken up when 
they were already outdated. 
3. Expert Group on 
Archaeology, Mirdha 
Committee  
1983-84 No action was taken on the report 
of the Committee. 
4. Vth Central Pay 
Commission 
1997 Recommended constitution of a 
Central Archaeological Service 
comprising cadres of 
Archaeologists, Scientist, 
Epigraphists and conservationists in 
the ASI.  The recommendations 
were not implemented. 
5. Review Committee under 
Prof. B.B. Lal 
2001 Recommendations were broadly 
accepted by the Government of 
India but none of the 
recommendations had been 
implemented so far. 
6. Moily Committee February 
2010 
Recommendation had not been 
implemented so far. 
 
We could not ascertain the reasons for non-implementation of these 
recommendations. This adversely affected the functioning of the ASI.  
8.2.2 Recruitment through Staff Selection Commission (SSC) 
We noted that recruitment through SSC was yet to materialise (November 2012) as 
the ASI and the SSC could not reach an agreement relating to the percentage of 
marks criteria for SC, ST and OBC candidates. As a result, there were 80 vacancies in 
various cadres against the sanctioned strength of 178.  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 173 
Chapter –/g25/g12/g12/g12:
Manpower Management
8.2.3 Appointment of Consultants  
In order to meet specific requirements, the ASI had also engaged  21 Consultants in 
various fields, viz  conservation, legal, human resource, etc. from time to time  after 
taking approval of competent authority i.e. IFD. The ASI had also outsourced 31 data 
entry operators, stenographers, cooks etc. during 2009-10 to 2011-12.  
We found that all these contractual appointments in Circles were for routine office 
work and not for undertaking the core activities of the ASI. Hence, the shortages in 
the crucial cadres were not bridged by even appointment of consultants.  
8.2.4 Non formulation of Recruitment Rules 
We noted that the newly created four posts (2011) of ADG archaeology, and 
eighteen posts of Joint Director General were vacant as the Recruitment Rules (RRs) 
had not been framed till date.  Further 14 posts of Deputy Superintending 
Archaeological Engineer, one Deputy Superintending Epigraphist (Sanskrit 
inscriptions), two senior artists, four Modeller Grade II, two mechanics and many 
Group ‘D’ posts were vacant as Recruitment Rules were under revision.  
The Institute of Archaeology was founded in 1958-59.  As a part of its upgradation, 
the Ministry of Finance approved the creation of 45 posts in different categories 
w.e.f. April 1985.  These posts were also not filled up for want of Recruitment Rules.  
No priority was accorded to this work and as a result, the posts continued to remain 
vacant. 
8.3 Failure to Obtain Status of a Scientific Department  
In accordance with the recommendation of a group set up by the Department of 
Science and Technology, the Secretary, Department of Science and Technology had 
approved the ASI as a Science and Technological institution with effect from May 
1989.  The ASI was designated as “Science and Technology department” vide 
notification of October 1989 by the Ministry of Human Resource Development. We 
noticed that for this purpose information on the scientific and technical 
achievements, functions, activities, research of the Directors and Chief Horticulturist 
was to be submitted to the Ministry in the prescribed proforma. However, the ASI 
was unable to collect the data as of November 2012. As a result, the department 
could not be included within the framework of a Science and Technology Institution.  
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
174 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12/g12/g12:
Manpower Management
8.4 Functioning of Regional Directorates  
Five Regional Director’s (RD) were formed (April 2009) with a view to serve as an 
interface between the Directorate General (DG) and the field offices.  The function of 
the RD office was to guide, supervise and control the field offices.  We noted that the 
Regional Directorates were functioning without supporting staff and in most cases 
the Superintending Archaeologists were holding the additional charge of Regional 
Directors.   
The ASI’s efforts to fill in the vacancies were thus found inadequate. The Ministry 
also failed to provide the required oversight to address this pressing issue. 
8.5 Manpower Management of Museums  
Similarly it was noticed that the museums were all also under staffed.  The details of 
sanctioned and vacant posts in museums were as follows: 
Table 8.4 Position of vacant posts  
Sl. No. Name of the Museum Sanctioned 
strength 
Vacant 
posts 
Period of vacancy 
1. National Museum 276 122 Some of the posts were 
vacant since 1983 
2. Allahabad Museum 86 15 Not available 
3. Salar Jung Museum 166 39 One year seven months 
to 16 years 
4. Indian Museum 209 60 Not available 
5. Victoria Memorial Hall 176 53 Four months to 25 years  
and one month 
6. Asiatic Society, Kolkata 257 45 Four months to two 
years and three months 
 
The National Museum functioned without a full time Director General during 
September 2007 to 2011. 
Recommendation 8.1:  The Ministry should take immediate steps to resolve 
manpower shortages especially in the crucial cadres engaged in Conservation related 
works. 
The Ministry intimated (May 2013) that the restructuring proposal of the ASI is being 
worked out to address the shortage of manpower on long term basis.   

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 175
 
Chapter –/g25/g12/g12/g12:
Manpower Management
8.6 Manpower Management in NMA  
8.6.1 Irregularities in Selection of Members  
A selection committee chaired by Cabinet Secretary was constituted to appoint the 
whole time and part time members of the NMA.  The committee included three 
experts viz. Prof A.G.K. Menon (conservation expert), Prof B.N. Goswamy (eminent 
art historian) and Shri Balkrishna Doshi (eminent architect).  No records were 
submitted to audit by the ASI, in respect of the basis of selection of these three 
experts.   
Department of Personnel & Training (Ministry of Public Grievances & Pensions) vide 
their letter dated 22nd June 2010 instructed that the maximum age at the time of 
selection of members of the authority should not be more than 59 years and the 
minimum age should be 55 years for such appointment.  
 However, in the advertisement released by DG ASI, seeking the application for 
appointment as a member, with no minimum age mentioned and the maximum age 
mentioned was 67 years.  Though the ‘errors’ in the advertisement were noticed 
before processing the applications and proposal was submitted to issue a fresh 
advertisement after incorporating the instructions of Department of Personnel & 
Training , DG ASI decided to go with the applications received through erroneous 
advertisement .  
Reasons for not following the instructions of Government of India, (Department of 
P&T) were not recorded at any stage. 
Interestingly, for members of NMA, applications were invited from the eminent 
professionals with proven experience and expertise in the fields of  
• archaeology,  
• country and town planning,  
• architecture heritage,  
• conservation architecture or 
• law.   
There was nothing on record to elucidate this selection of subjects. No details of 
minimum experience were mentioned in the advertisement.  We could not 
appreciate the reasons for including “law” as one of the field of expertise as the 
work does not include complex legal issues.  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
176 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g25/g12/g12/g12:
Manpower Management
In response to an advertisement released in 10 newspapers in October 2010, 163 
applications were received which were shortlisted by these three experts and then 
interviews were called for the 15 shortlisted candidates by the selection committee.  
15 shortlisted candidates were those candidates who were selected either by three 
of the experts or by two of the experts.  We found only two lists of shortlisted 
candidates in record - one mentioning the number as 13 and the other as 15. 
However the list of shortlisted candidates by Prof. BN Goswami was not found in 
record.  In the absence of this, the authenticity of shortlisted candidates by three 
experts cannot be ensured.  It was also not recorded, on what basis this short listing 
was done by these three experts.  
The list of 163 candidates also was not full proof as the name of one of the candidate 
Dr VN Paranjape was mentioned thrice in the list. Reasons for the same were not 
submitted to audit. The committee headed by Cabinet Secretary interviewed the 
shortlisted candidate and finally selected only one whole time member and two part 
time members. 
8.6.2 Non Filling Up of Posts  
Thirteen posts were sanctioned for NMA, however, it was noticed that out of the 13 
sanctioned posts, only three posts viz Member Secretary, Administrative Officer and 
Photo Officer57 were filled up and the balance 10 posts were vacant. In the absence 
of full time employees, NMA hired 19 consultants with a monthly remuneration 
ranging from ` 15000/- to ` 50,000/- besides hiring the clerical and class IV staff 
through a recruitment agency.  One of the reasons for not filling up some of the 
posts was non-receipt of applications for the suitable candidates as the pay scales in 
ASI for the similar posts
58 are higher than in NMA.  The NMA never took up the issue 
with the ASI or Ministry for fixing the pay scales at par with ASI.   
Thus, while the ASI attributed almost all shortcomings in performance to lack of 
proper manpower, the Ministry showed no urgency to rectify the situation.  This 
indicated that the Ministry failed to exercise adequate oversight over this critical 
issued.  
 
                                                       
57 Member Secretary assumes additional charge of NMA in November 2010 and resumes the full 
fledged charge in March 2011.  Both other officers are on deputation from ASI since June-July 
2011. 
58 Posts of Architectural Drawing Officer and Survey Officer having grade pay of ` 4600 in ASI and  
` 4200 in NMA. 

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 177
 
Chapter – /g12/g27:Security of the 
Monuments and Antiquities
 
 
 
Security of a site or a monument is integral to its protection. The ASI is also 
assigned the responsibility of security of the centrally protected monuments from 
the risk of encroachments, unauthorised access, damage of the site and theft of 
parts. Many of these protected sites are symbols of our nation and are therefore 
vulnerable to attacks and damage by miscreants. These monuments have varying 
security needs. The ASI made rules and issued several notifications to avoid any 
unauthorised construction in and around the monuments.   
9.1 Encroachment and Unauthorised Construction in and 
around Monuments 
9.1.1 Encroachments 
 
 Two Cemeteries, Lucknow Cuttack Club at Barabati Fort, Cuttack 
Security of the Monuments and 
Antiquities 
CHAPTER – IX 

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
178 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g27:Security of the 
Monuments and Antiquities
The AMASR Rules, 1959 provided that within a protected monument, no person 
could indulge in any act which causes or is likely to cause damage or injury to any 
part of the monument.  The Act further provided that no person, including the 
owner or occupier of a protected area, shall construct any building, within the 
protected area or carry on any mining, quarrying, excavating, blasting or any 
operation of a likely nature in such area, or utilise such area or any part thereof in 
any other manner without the permission of the Central Government.  Thus the 
occupation/any other unauthorised activity in the protected area was to be treated 
as an encroachment.  
We noted that many centrally protected monuments were under encroachment by 
individuals, private organisations and even Government departments.  The ASI 
informed (April 2012) that there were 249 monuments encroached by 
individual/organisations.  However, this information was not correct as explained 
below: 
Scrutiny of records of Circles and joint physical inspection of selected 1655 (45 per 
cent) of the 3678 centrally protected monuments revealed that there were 
encroachments in around 546 monuments as against 249 intimated by the ASI HQ.  
Circle wise details of the encroached monuments are given in Annex 9.1 .  Out of 
these 546 encroachments, Government departments/agencies were responsible for 
encroachments in 46 monuments. 
Evidently, the Sub Circles did not inform the concerned Circle office about the 
existence of encroachment in the monuments. This indicated that either the 
monuments were not inspected by the Sub Circle officials periodically or 
encroachments were made with the connivance of the Sub Circle officials. There was 
no report/procedure to gather information about encroachment from Sub Circle to 
Circle office for the ASI HQ office periodically. 
Some of the most obvious instances of encroachment as observed in Audit are the 
following: 
Table 9.1 Cases of encroachment 
Sl. No. Name of the Circle Name of the 
monument Area of concern 
1. Bhubaneswar Sisupalgarh 
Fort(Dist: 
Odisha) 
 
The notified area was 562.681 acre out 
of which only 0.775 acre was with the 
ASI and the rest was with the State 
government and private owners. The 
State Government had converted the 
agriculture land to residential and 
allowed construction of several 
buildings.  The ASI failed to take any 
concrete action against the 
encroachment.  

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 179
 
Chapter – /g12/g27:Security of the 
Monuments and Antiquities
Sl. No. Name of the Circle Name of the 
monument Area of concern 
The ASI also failed to take up the matter 
at the Ministry level to stop these 
activities, in coordination with the State 
Government.  
2. Hyderabad Golconda Fort The Naya Qila, Qutub Shahi Mahal was 
included in the Golconda Fort through 
an amendment in the original 
notification of 1951 issued in 1988.  
However, the same was not 
communicated to the State Government 
of Andhra Pradesh. The State 
government allowed the land within the 
monument to be used as dumping yard 
in the Naya Qila, which was 
subsequently licensed to the Hyderabad 
Golf Club for laying a golf course.   
3. Jaipur Moat  
surrounding the 
Fort wall, 
Bharatpur 
Municipal Council, Bharatpur 
encroached and constructed a drain for 
rain and waste water of city areas near 
the moat wall through  the Rajasthan 
State Road Development Corporation 
(RSRDC) without permission of the ASI. 
The drain constructed by RSRDC was 
faulty in design and was left incomplete 
with the result that it 
collapsed,damaging the moat wall. 
4. Kolkata Moti Jheel 
Masjid 
The monument was notified in 2011 
despite widespread encroachments and 
functioning of a Madarsa within the 
monuments. The Madrasa was still 
functional and some people were 
residing inside the campus of the 
mosque.  This restricted the ASI’s 
control over the site.  
5. Kolkata Clive House The monument was notified in 2004 
without evacuating 22 families residing 
in the House. These families were still 
residing illegally in parts of the building 
(May 2012) where the Circle office did 
not have any access.  
6. Trissur Bekal Fort The rest house in the Bekal Fort was 
constructed by the State Government 
on the protected area.  In 2001 the 
State Government of Kerala handed 
over the rest house building to the 

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
180 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g27:Security of the 
Monuments and Antiquities
Sl. No. Name of the Circle Name of the 
monument Area of concern 
Tourism Department for upgrading and 
managing it through M/s Bekal Resorts 
Development Corporation (BRDC). Later 
on, State PWD, transferred the Rest-
house building to the BRDC on lease.  
Thus this encroached building continues 
to function inside a protected 
monument. 
7. Raipur Chitturgarh Fort, 
Bilaspur 
Forest Department, Katghora Division 
constructed a rest house and ECO 
building within the protected area.  A 
Shani Temple and a Hanuman Temple 
were constructed by villagers and Jyoti 
Bhawan and Bhog Shala were 
constructed by the Temple Trust Samiti. 
All these constructions were made 
without prior permission of the ASI. 
8. Raipur Danteshwari 
Temple, Bastar 
A meeting hall and house for the priests 
were constructed by the temple trust 
and a solar system panel room was 
constructed by Chhattisgarh State 
Renewable Energy Development Agency 
(CREDA) within the protected area. 
9. Delhi Tuglaqabad Fort During site inspection in 2006, the 
security officer of the ASI in his report 
mentioned that the local MLAs had 
encroached the area of the Tughlaqabad 
Fort.  Despite orders of High court of 
Delhi in 2002 59, the ASI failed to get the 
encroachment vacated from the Fort 
due to lack of cooperation from the 
police and district administration. We 
did not find any evidence to the effect 
that the matter was taken up with the 
Ministry for pursuance at higher levels 
with the State Government. 
 
The ASI attributed reasons for encroachment to non-availability of staff and lack of 
cooperation from the State Governments.  
                                                       
59  SLP No. 4821/2002  

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 181
 
Chapter – /g12/g27:Security of the 
Monuments and Antiquities
Recommendation 9.1: The ASI should constitute a coordination body with 
representatives of respective State Governments at each Circle to check the incidents 
of encroachments with the cooperation of District and police authorities.  
Recommendation 9.2: There should be regular monitoring of existing encroachment 
cases by the Ministry at the highest level. Encroachment by State Government 
agencies or other Government of India agencies should be sorted out in a time bound 
manner by raising the matter at higher levels. 
 
The Ministry (May 2013) accepted the recommendation for constitution of 
coordination committee at State and District levels.   
9.1.2 Unauthorised Construction in the Prohibited and Regulated 
Areas 
The AMASR Rules, 1959 provided that before declaring an area near or adjoining a 
protected monument to be a prohibited area or a regulated area for the purpose of 
mining operation or construction or both, the Central Government was to give one 
month’s notice.  A copy of such notification was to be affixed in a conspicuous place 
near the site.  After the expiry of one month from the date of the notification after 
considering the objections, the Central Government was to declare the area 
specified in the notification or any part of such area, to be a prohibited area, or as 
the case may be, a regulated area for the purposes of mining operation or 
construction or both. 
The ASI declared (June 1992) areas up to 100 meters from the protected limits and 
further beyond it 200 meters near or adjoining protected monuments to be 
prohibited and regulated areas respectively for purposes of both mining operation 
and construction. 
At the time of issue of this amendment, the ASI was required to identify all constructions 
made on and after 16 June 1992, in all prohibited areas and regulated areas and submit the 
report to the Central Government.  However, the ASI failed to collect this information. As a 
result the ASI (December 2012) had no information in respect of the buildings constructed 
till 1992 and the buildings constructed after 1992 within the prohibited and regulated areas 
of the monument. In the absence of this vital information, the implementation of the 
amendment was doubtful.  
We noted that there were 9122 cases of unauthorised construction as shown in 
Annex 9.2 in the prohibited and regulated areas of the protected monuments.  As 
per the information available with the ASI, in 98 cases, unauthorised construction 
was carried out by the Government departments/agencies.  
We also noted severe coordination problems with the State departments like Police 
and Municipal Corporations which led to non-clearance of unauthorised 

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
182 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g27:Security of the 
Monuments and Antiquities
construction. It was also noticed that in many cases despite best efforts of the ASI 
officials, District Authorities and Police were not cooperating. 
Construction Carried Out Around Jantar Mantar, Delhi 
One of the glaring examples of the 
adverse consequences of 
unauthorised construction could be 
found at the Jantar Mantar, Delhi 
which is a centrally protected 
monument.  Jantar Mantar was 
constructed during 1724-1734 to 
measure the accurate time, 
movement of star and sun and the 
altitude and azimuth of celestial 
objects by studying the shadows 
created by the sunlight on the 
different yantras (instruments) 
installed at  the monument. 
However, due to the construction of 
high rise buildings near Jantar 
Mantar, the sunlight had been 
blocked and the instruments had 
become defunct. 
 
In 2002, the High Court of Delhi opined that prohibition of construction must not be 
left to an inflexible rule of thumb but must be arrived at after a conscious and 
objective application of mind. The Court directed the Central Government to review 
its notification dated 16 June 1992 within a period of six months from the date of the 
judgment.  However, no such review was carried out as of December 2012. 
Baradari Site, Arzimukhimpur, Santhal 
 
Water logging in and around Baradari Site 


Report No.18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 183
 
Chapter – /g12/g27:Security of the 
Monuments and Antiquities
Another instance of unauthorised construction related to Baradari Site, 
Arzimukhimpur, Santhal at Ranchi Circle.  During a site inspection we found that due 
to prolonged mining activity of China clay, a deep ditch 60 filled with water had been 
created around the monument.  An underground cell of the monument had 
completely vanished and two-third of the monument was damaged by water logging. 
Further, while as per records the area of the monument was 3.84 acres, the site visit 
revealed that the area under possession (fenced) was not more than 2 acres 
approximately. 
Some other instances of the unauthorised construction where no action was taken 
by the ASI were as follows: 
Table 9.2 Cases of unauthorised construction 
Sl.No. Name of 
the Circle 
Name of the 
monument 
Area of concern 
1.  Kolkata Madan Gopal 
Temple, Cooch 
Behar 
FIR against the unauthorised construction was 
lodged only after the joint physical inspection 
by the Audit team along with the staff of Sub 
Circles. 
2.  Kolkata Rashmanch, 
Bishnupur 
FIR against the unauthorised construction was 
lodged only after the joint physical inspection 
by the Audit team along with the staff of Sub 
Circles. 
3.  Leh Mini 
Circle 
Hemis Monastery Local associations of the Hemis monastery 
carried out modern construction by building a 
modern museum in the prohibited and 
regulated areas. However,  no FIR was lodged 
by the ASI 
4.  Hyderabad Sri Kodandarama 
temple, 
Paddamudiyam, 
Cuddapah 
No objection Certificates (NOCs) were issued 
by the Circle office for erecting mobile phone 
towers in the prohibited and regulated area 
against the provisions of AMASR Act, 1958 
and the notification of 1992. 
5.  Charminar, 
Hyderabad  
Mobile phone towers and hoardings were 
erected near the monument. No show cause 
notice was issued by the circles. 
6.  Bhimeswaraswamy 
temple, Pushpagiri, 
Cuddapah 
Circles issued NOC for construction of Tourism 
Information Centre at a distance of 88 meters 
from the protected area of the monument 
against the provisions of AMASR Act. 
                                                       
60 About 20-30 ft. deep 

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
184 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g27:Security of the 
Monuments and Antiquities
7.   Uma Maheswara 
Swamy temple, 
Yaganti, Kurnool 
State endowments department without the 
permission of the ASI constructed a foot over 
bridge connecting the temple and cave 
temple, both protected monuments and no 
action was taken by the ASI. 
 
9.2 Implementation of the AMASR (Amendment & 
Validation) Act, 2010 
To resolve the issues of unauthorised construction and to ensure strict 
implementation of the Act, the new AMASR (Amendment & Validation) Act 2010 was 
introduced. AMASR (Amendment & Validation) Act 2010 authorised the Central 
Government to constitute National Monument Authority (NMA) and Competent 
Authority for dealing with the permission required for repair/renovation in the 
prohibited area and construction/re-construction in the regulated area of the 
centrally protected monument. 
We observed several shortcomings in the system as discussed in the succeeding 
paragraphs. 
9.2.1 Establishment of National Monument Authority and 
Competent Authority 
The AMASR (Amendment & Validation) Act, 2010 stated that Central Government 
was to constitute the National Monument Authority. However, it was noticed that 
the notification was issued only in December 2011 i.e. 20 months after the passing of 
the Validation Act, 2010 in March 2010 that too with only one whole time member 
and two part time members instead of five each as per the Validation Act.  
The Chairperson was appointed in August 2012 i.e. more than two years after 
passing of the Act. The Government failed to appoint four whole time members and 
three part time members till date (September 2012).  The delay in appointment of 
members of NMA adversely affected the functioning of the NMA.  
As per the Validation Act 2010, the Competent Authority means an officer not below 
the rank of Director of Archaeology or Commissioner of Archaeology of the Central 
or State Government or equivalent rank, specified by notification in the Official 
Gazette, as the Competent Authority by the Central Government. 
9.2.2 Delay in Setting up of NMA  
It was noticed that the Chairperson was appointed in August 2012 only i.e. 28 
months after passing of Act. The Government failed to appoint four whole time 
members and three part time members till date (September 2012).  The delay in 
appointment of members of NMA definitely hampers the efficiency of the authority.
 

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 185
 
Chapter – /g12/g27:Security of the 
Monuments and Antiquities
9.2.3 Processing of Applications for NOC 
Section 20 C to E of the Validation Act 2010, defined the procedure of issuing No 
Objection Certificate (NOC) for repair/construction in the prohibited/regulated area 
of the monument which is as follows: 
 
Chart 9.1 Process of issue of NOC 
Till 31 March 2012, NMA had received 781 applications duly recommended by the 
Competent Authorities. Of these, only 259 applications (33 per cent) were submitted 
to the Authority in their meetings. There was nothing on record to suggest how 
these 259 cases were selected out of 781. In absence of any documentation we were 
unable to verify the manner in which these applications were selected for 
processing.  The main reason attributed to processing of fewer applications was 
delay in selection of members of the NMA.  
The Act defined the timelines for processing the applications received from the 
applicants for issuing/rejecting the NOCs.  As per the prescribed timelines, the 
applicant should get the response within a maximum period of three and a half 
month from submission of the application. 
We test checked 71 cases out of the 162 cases (44 per cent) recommended by NMA 
for issue of NOC till 31 March 2012 and noticed delays in processing the cases as 
given in the following table: 


Report No.18 of 2013 
 
186 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g27:Security of the 
Monuments and Antiquities
Table 9.3 Delay in processing of applications by NMA 
Processing of applications by Competent 
Authority 
Processing of applications by National 
Monument Authority 
Cases of 
delay  
Time 
required as 
per Act 
Delay in 
processing 
the 
application by 
Competent 
Authority 
Cases of 
delay 
Time 
required as 
per Act 
Range of 
delay  
61 15 days 7day to 316 
days 
29 2 months 1 month to 
12 months 
 
We also noticed that despite such delays, proper scrutiny of the applications 
received from the owners for renovation/construction was not carried out by the 
Competent Authority and by NMA officials.  Some of the significant shortcomings 
were as follows:  
• As per records submitted, the site inspections were carried out even before 
submission of the application by the applicant,  
• Applications were not submitted/not properly submitted in prescribed form I,  
• Files were submitted to NMA without the prescribed form II by Competent 
Authority,  
• Cases were submitted by Competent Authority  without enclosing the site plans 
and 
• The proposals were approved for the purpose other than those requested by the 
applicants.   
All the applications received from the Competent Authority were required to be 
presented before the NMA.  The Member Secretary was required to scrutinise the 
proposals and approve them for onward submission to the NMA for their 
recommendations.  However, this requirement was not followed before submission 
of the application to the NMA members. 
We further noted that no information system was in place in NMA to monitor the 
delays, if any, and the reasons for the delays in processing the applications.  The 
NMA did not maintain the required information such as: date of applications 
received, date of inspections carried out by competent authorities, date of receipt of 
application in NMA, date of presenting the case in the meeting of the members and 
the date of issue of recommendations. 

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 187
 
Chapter – /g12/g27:Security of the 
Monuments and Antiquities
In view of the systemic lapses brought out above we could not conclude that the 
NMA and Competent Authorities were able to discharge their functions efficiently 
and effectively. 
9.3 Provision of Adequate Security Measures 
Besides threats from persons who had carried out the unauthorised construction, 
the ASI was also required to safeguard from risks arising from visitors to the 
monuments. These sites were also vulnerable to terrorist attacks and such other 
destructive activities.  
To fulfill this objective, the ASI provided security to the monuments through  
(i) The ASI’s own staff viz monument attendants, watch and ward staff;  
(ii) Government security agencies e.g.CISF; 
(iii) State police forces; and  
(iv) Private security guards appointed by the ASI. 
We noted that the ASI was unable to undertake adequate security measures for the 
protection of monuments due to lack of sufficient manpower.  As per the 
information provided to the Moily Committee in 2010, approximately 2500 
protected monuments did not have full time security personnel.  Due to the poor 
state of records and documentation, the ASI could not provide exact number of such 
monuments to us. 
The findings relating to manpower management are discussed separately in  
Chapter 8. 
9.3.1 Assessment of the Security Requirements  
The monuments and sites protected by the ASI varied significantly in area, terrain, 
structure etc.  The ASI did not carry out any assessment of the total number of 
security personnel required to protect each of these monuments and sites.  We 
noted that the activities related to the security of the monuments were being largely 
carried out through private security guards hired by the ASI from M/s SIS. Security 
assessment was made by the Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) for only two 
monuments i.e. the Taj Mahal, Agra and the Red Fort, Delhi. 
We noted that while private security guards were deployed, the site plan and maps 
of the monuments were not considered at all in the security assessment for a site. 
Further, the area, structure, location and importance of the other protected 
monuments were also not considered. The requirement for Private security 
personnel was enhanced in August 2011, from 800 to 1500 without any 
comprehensive assessment.  At the same time, no security guards were found 

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
188 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g27:Security of the 
Monuments and Antiquities
deployed at 1468 centrally protected monuments by our teams (Details in  
Annex 9.3). 
The ASI informed that a committee had been constituted in 2012 to review the 
security arrangement and assess the performance of private security guards. 
However, the details of the committee along with the report submitted by them, if 
any, were not provided to us despite our requisition.  
9.3.2 Security Equipment at the Monuments  
We noticed during the joint physical inspection of the monuments that adequate 
security equipment was not installed at the monuments. The ASI informed that no 
security equipment was procured during last three years, nor was any assessment 
made by the ASI of the total requirement of such equipments.  
Joint physical inspection revealed that no CCTV cameras were installed at most of 
the monuments. This included the World Heritage Sites which are frequented by a 
large numbers of foreign visitors.  In all the ticketed monuments including some of 
the World Heritage Sites, there were no metal detectors and baggage scanners 
(except the Taj Mahal, Agra and the Red Fort, Delhi where the CISF was deployed).  
9.3.3 Damage/Theft Cases at the Monuments 
In terms of an agreement entered into by the ASI with the security firm, the latter 
was fully responsible for the damages at the site attributable to negligence, 
collusion, dereliction of duty etc. of guards deployed at the site. 
The ASI informed (August 2012) that they had no information regarding cases of 
theft, negligence, collusion, dereliction of duty etc. 
We however, noted cases of theft at the monuments under the control of 
nine
61Circles.  We also noted that the ASI HQ made payments to the firm in a routine 
manner without collecting information in respect of the cases of theft, damages, 
negligence etc. at the monuments.  Thus the ASI made the payments without 
ensuring compliance with the terms of the agreement. 
It was also noticed that Sub Circles submitted the monthly performance report for 
the private security guards to the Circle office which was forwarded to the ASI HQ.  
The ASI HQ was to make payment to M/s SIS after scrutinising all these reports.  
We noted that the system of scrutinising the reports was completely absent in the 
ASI HQ and payments were made in full despite report of unsatisfactory 
performance by the concerned Circle. 
                                                       
61  Bengaluru, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Jaipur, Lucknow, Raipur, Ranchi, Shimla and Trissur  

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 189
 
Chapter – /g12/g27:Security of the 
Monuments and Antiquities
Recommendation 9.3:  There should be a security plan for each monument, taking 
into account its location, area, structure, footfall and other vulnerabilities. This 
exercise should be performed in house by the ASI to ensure coverage of ground level 
realities.  
Recommendation 9.4:  The ASI should improve its monitoring of the private security 
firm. 
Recommendation 9.5:  The Ministry should ensure availability of funds and staff for 
adequate security of the monuments 
The Ministry (May 2013) accepted the recommendations. 
9.3.4 Security Arrangement at the Museums and Site Museum 
Safety and security of art objects was one of the most important functions of the 
museums.  However, the security concerns had not been addressed adequately as 
discussed below: 
9.3.4.1 Deployment of Security Forces 
The CISF was not been deployed at the Indian Museum, Kolkata despite specific 
recommendations of High Power Committee and allocation of total budget of 
` 120.50 lakh for 2010-11 and 2011-12.   
As per the agreement between the Indian Museum and Kolkata Police, 27 armed 
police guards and three officers were to be deployed and the Indian Museum was to 
provide accommodation to the deployed contingent.  However, the Indian Museum 
could provide only temporary accommodation to 12 personnel of the contingent.  As 
such, the sanctioned force was not deployed at the museum.  This also resulted in 
excess payment of ` 3.27 crore to the Kolkata Police during 2007-12, that was based 
on the sanctioned strength without reckoning the actual deployment.  
The Ministry intimated (May 2013) that the matter of deployment of CISF at Indian 
Museum had been taken up with the Ministry of Home Affairs. 
9.3.4.2 CCTV Cameras and Other Security Equipment 
We noticed that the security equipment were not installed or utilised in the 
museums as detailed below: 
 
 
 

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
190 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g12/g27:Security of the 
Monuments and Antiquities
Table 9.4 Security equipment not installed or utilised 
National Museum CCTV cameras were not installed in the numismatic 
gallery II.  No CCTV cameras were installed in a 
room where priceless antiquities from the collection 
of Aurel Stein were lying in reserve. 
Indian Museum 
 
Out of 29 galleries, 14 nos. were not covered under 
CCTV surveillance. Even the installed cameras were 
operational only during working hours.  Thus there 
was no surveillance during night. 
Other security equipment including Fire alarm, 
Smoke detector, electronic magnetic locks for all 
doors of the galleries, reserve/vault and Automatic 
visitors’ Biometric Photography system for keeping 
track of the visitors etc. were also not installed.  
Victoria Memorial Hall 
 
Out of 19 CCTV cameras, nine were not working.  
The rest were operational only during working 
hours. 
Out of 12 galleries only four galleries were covered 
under the CCTV surveillance 
Asiatic Society Kolkata 
 
Out of 11 CCTV cameras installed, none had any 
recording facilities. The CCTV cameras were 
operational only during the working hours of the 
museum.  Thus there was no surveillance during 
night. 
One baggage scanner and one access control system 
was procured.  However, these machines had not 
been installed till December 2012. 
Allahabad Museum 
 
Out of 32 cameras installed, 16 were non-
functional.  
Nagarjunakonda Site 
Museum (Hyderabad Circle) 
CCTV Cameras were not installed. 

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 191
 
Chapter – /g12/g27:Security of the 
Monuments and Antiquities
Taj Museum, Agra Circle Two hooter boxes, four fire extinguishers were 
found not working. 
A Panasonic Plasma TV bought in December 2010 
for ` 41000 was not installed. This resulted in non 
restoration of monitoring and backup of CCTV 
camera. 
Sarnath Museum, Patna 
Circle 
Out of 13 CCTV cameras, six were non functional. 
Kangra Fort Museum, Shimla 
Circle  
There was no security equipment at the site 
museum at Kangra Fort, Himachal Pradesh. 
Central Antiquity Collection, 
Delhi 
There were no CCTV cameras or any other security 
equipment installed. 
 
 
 
In the Taj Museum while the replicas were displayed and covered by CCTV, the original 
coins were kept in safes in a very bad condition without CCTV coverage 
 
The cases above highlighted the need for operating these machines in an optimum 
manner so as to ensure that the security system is adequately equipped to safeguard 
the valuable assets. 


Chapter – /g12/g27:Security of the 
Monuments and Antiquities
Report 
 
192 
 
9.3.4.3
The Ind
situatio
building
use to m
In the c
with the
9.3.4.4
Security
131 an
objects 
beside
s
objects
stolen 
i
auction
In the 
wrappe
Re
No.18 of 20
Performance 
3 Fire S a
dian Museum
ons. 193 fi r
g had not b
meet any em
case of VM
e security s
4 Cases 
y lapses led
tiquities fr o
in the Na
s lodging a n
.The optio n
items on w
n houses. 
Indian Mu
ed in a towe
lics/artifacts
013 
 Audit of Pres
afety 
m did not h
re extingui s
been replace
mergency. 
H, the fire 
taff during 
of Theft a
d to theft/lo
om monu m
tional mus
n FIR, was 
ns availabl e
ebsites, ale
seum, Mu s
el from the 
s recovered 
servation and
have any co
shers insta
ed/refilled 
fighting dr
the last five
nd Loss o
oss of 37 ar t
ments/sites 
eum durin g
initiated b y
e in this r e
erting majo
seum offic i
locked almi
from the loc
d Conservation
ntingency r
lled at dif f
beyond the
ill was car r
e years. 
f Objects
t objects  f r
(Refer Pa r
g the last 
y National 
egard inclu
r art deale r
ials recove
irah of the r
cked almirah
 
 
 
 
n of  Monume
response pl
ferent loca
eir expiry re
ied out on l
 
rom the Sit
ra 6.11 )  a
50 years. 
Museum t o
ded displa y
rs and info r
red 45 inv
retired Dep
h of the retir
ents and Anti
an to meet
tions of t h
endering the
ly on a sin g
e Museums
and  156 c
 No proa c
o locate th
ying pictur e
rming inter
aluable rel
uty Directo
red Deputy D
iquities 
 emergency
he Museu m
em unfit fo
gle occasion
s of the ASI
cases of ar t
ctive action
ese lost ar t
es of thes e
national art
ics/artifacts
r (2007). 
 
Director 
y 
m 
r 
n 
, 
t 
, 
t 
e 
t 
s 

Report No.18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 193
 
Chapter – /g12/g27:Security of the 
Monuments and Antiquities
Antique coins lying in the almirahs of the curator 
Similarly in the National Museum also, after the death of a Curator (Numismatic) in 2008, 
her almirahs were opened leading to recovery of 15 antique coins. However, it could not be 
verified whether these were from the collection of the National Museum as no physical 
verification of the coins was carried out earlier. Even four years after her death, these coins 
were found lying with the present in-charge of the numismatic collection and not placed in 
the strong room with all other coins. These have not been accessioned in the museum 
records till date. 
Best Practice  
The Chatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Vastu Sangrahalaya, Mumbai had a two layer security system 
viz. internal and external. Only authorised persons had access to the collection and daily 
checking of artifacts on display was done. Each day, before closure, all galleries were 
checked in the presence of the officer and security guard. 72 Cameras were installed in the 
entire Museum and the campus. Entry and exit of all galleries had been covered under CCTV. 
Further, a special control room had been established for 24 hour monitoring. More than 80 
fire extinguishers were installed and the Fire extinguisher system was in place. 
 
Recommendation 9.6: The Museums should adopt appropriate security measures to 
provide protection against theft, damage and losses.  The Ministry should take 
initiative in development of a comprehensive Security Policy for Museums with 
uniform standards for all museums under its control. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 195
 
Chapter –/g27:Awareness, 
Interpretation and Amenities
 
 
 
The primary objective of managing heritage is to communicate its significance and 
need for its conservation to the host community and to the visitors. Reasonable and 
well managed physical, intellectual and emotive access to heritage and cultural 
development was both a right and a privilege. It would bring with it a duty of respect 
for the heritage values, interests and equity of the present-day host community, 
indigenous custodians or owners of historic property and for the landscapes and 
cultures from which that heritage evolved62. 
A protected monument or site would carry little meaning to common people, if there 
were not enough resources to interpret and explain the cultural and historical 
significance.  Thus, as custodian of centrally protected monuments and sites, it was 
also important for the ASI to provide adequate interpretation, public amenities and 
awareness to the visitors. 
10.1 Funds Arrangements for Awareness, Interpretation and 
Amenities 
There was no specific budgetary provision for activities related to awareness, 
interpretation and creating public amenities in the ASI. As a result, expenditure on 
this account was incurred from the funds allotted for conservation activities. The ASI 
did not prepare comprehensive plans for providing basic amenities at the 
monuments. As a result, most of the monuments were found lacking in these 
facilities, as highlighted in Para 10.5. 
Recommendation 10.1: The ASI should have funds earmarked specifically for 
awareness, interpretation and related activities.  
There should be laid down standards for amenities and interpretation services 
applicable uniformly for all protected monuments. 
  
                                                       
62 International Cultural Tourism Charter Managing Tourism at Places of Heritage Significance Adopted by 
ICOMOS in 1999 
Awareness, Interpretation and Amenities
CHAPTER – X 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
196 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g27:Awareness, 
Interpretation and Amenities
10.2 Interpretation of the Sites  
Heritage conservation required that conservation, interpretation and tourism 
development programmes were based on a comprehensive understanding of the 
specific but often complex or conflicting aspects of heritage significance of the 
particular place.  
For interpreting the site, the ASI’s efforts were mostly limited to providing signages 
and notice boards. The ASI provided three types of signage and notice boards on its 
monuments: 
i. Name of the Monument  
ii. Protection Notice Board: Declaring the site as “Protected Monument” and  the 
rules regarding the prohibited and regulated area and the fines for carrying 
unauthorized activities in and around the monument; and  
iii. Cultural Notice Board:  Describing the history of the Monument in Hindi and 
English. In some places these cultural notice boards also mentioned folklore and 
traditions associated with the sites.  
Though only third type of signage provided interpretation of the site, the first two 
categories were equally important to make visitors familiar with the site. We noticed 
glaring deficiencies in all these three types of signage. 
a) At many monuments, the name of the monument was not mentioned.  Some 
examples in the Delhi Circle included the Nicholson cemetery, D’Mero cemetery, 
Nai-ka-kot, Unknown tomb at Jawahar Lal Nehru Stadium, ancient mosque at 
Palam. In the absence of the name of the monument, most visitors would find it 
difficult to recognise it. 
b) Similarly it was noticed that the protection sign boards, were not drafted 
properly at many places. At some places these was not even available. Thus, 
absence of the signboard increased the risk of encroachment and damage, as 
most of these protected sites were unguarded.  
Our scrutiny of 2461
63  monuments revealed that sign boards of only 1198 
monuments were found to be in order as detailed in Annex 10.1. 
Our observation on cultural notice boards is given in Para 10.3.1. 
 
                                                       
63 It included total number of monuments in the  12 Circles and the number of physically inspected monuments 
at the remaining circles as mentioned in Annex 10.1 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 197
 
Chapter –/g27:Awareness, 
Interpretation and Amenities
10.3 Signage Not Installed 
We found that most of the Circles were incurring expenditure on the purchase of 
signage for installing at the monuments under their control. However in many places 
these were not being put to use. Some illustrative examples are given below: 
Table 10.1 Signage not installed 
Name of the 
Circle 
Expenditure 
incurred 
(` in lakhs) 
Remarks 
Agra 8.11 Signage were found lying in the residence of the 
chowkidar at Kannuaj, Sub Circle 
Agra 12.68 Signage were lying in the store room of the monument 
at Mathura, Sub Circle 
Shimla 19.67 Signage were not installed and were lying with  the 
Circle office 
Chennai 73.12 411 protection notice boards had not been installed 
and were lying with  the Circle office 
 
 
 
 
Notice boards lying at Kankalitila, Mathura & Notice boards lying at Old Fort, Kannauj 
Joint physical inspection of the monuments also revealed that in Delhi Circle, due 
care was not exercised while installing the signage at the monuments.  It was noticed 
that the signage of the ‘Chhoti Gumti’ was placed at another monument named 
‘Sakri Gumti’ and the signage of ‘Sakri Gumti’ was placed at ‘Chhoti Gumti’. Even 
after the discrepancy was pointed out by our team, it was not corrected.   


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
198 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g27:Awareness, 
Interpretation and Amenities
10.3.1 Interpretation of the Monument through Cultural Notice 
Boards 
The interpretation of the monuments through the cultural notice boards was very 
important for the visitors as in most sites; no other source of information about the 
site was available. Joint physical inspection of the monuments revealed that the 
cultural notice boards were found installed by the ASI in only 1153 protected 
monuments out of 2461 monuments inspected by us. (Details are given in  
Annex 10.1).   
We observed spelling and other factual mistakes in the cultural notice boards at 
Safdarjung Tomb at Delhi Circle. On being pointed out by us in June 2012, the Circle 
removed it for replacement. The notice board had not been re-installed as of 
November 2012. 
Similar discrepancy was noticed in the case of Sunehri Masjid near Red fort in Delhi 
Circle where Hindi and English signboards gave conflicting information about builder 
of the Mosque. 
 
Signage showing that the 
mosque was built by 
Nawab Qudasia Begum, 
mother of Ahmed Shah 
Inventory showing that the 
mosque was built by 
Nawab Qudasia Begum, 
wife of Ahmed Shah 
The Hindi sign board was 
removed after the discrepancy 
was pointed out  
Recommendation 10.2:  It is recommended that signage installa tion should be thoroughly 
reviewed.  In our opinion, there should also be cultural notice boards in the local 
languages. At important sites, including World Heritage Sites, notice boards should 
be placed in major world languages. Similarly for Buddhist sites, notice boards should 
be displayed in relevant languages depending upon the visitors of the sites. 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 199
 
Chapter –/g27:Awareness, 
Interpretation and Amenities
10.3.2 Site Interpreter (Guide) Facilities at the Monuments 
The sign boards at the monuments provided brief description of the monument. 
However, to understand the significant features and importance of the site, services 
of site interpreter (Guide) were required.  It was even more important to have 
adequate guide facilities at complex sites that were spread out viz. Taj Mahal, Red 
Fort, Hampi, Ajanta Ellora caves. We noted that the ASI had no role in providing or 
monitoring guide facilities on these sites.  The tourism departments of Centre and 
State Governments were providing guide licenses to the persons after analysing their 
knowledge of history and monuments.  The AMASR Rules 1959 had provision for 
providing licence to guides by the ASI, however, no such licences were issued by the 
ASI. No documented reasons for this inaction were available. 
The ASI decided (2006) to provide audio guide facility at the world heritage sites in 
different languages viz. Hindi, English, French, Spanish, German, etc.   However, 
during the last six years, the ASI provided audio guide facility only in five world 
heritage sites viz. Agra Fort, Khajuraho, Sanchi, Qutb Minar and Red Fort that too in 
limited languages.  
Recommendation 10.3:   The ASI in collaboration with the Tourism Ministry should 
devise a special program for training people from the local community as guides. 
Circle offices should provide an authentic version of narration of the sites which can 
be adapted and translated in various languages.  
Recommendation 10.4: The ASI should assess the feasibility of designing specialised 
guided tour for specific/ group of monuments to cater to special needs of visitors.  
10.3.3 Availability of Publications on Sites 
Authoritative maps, guidebooks and other publications provide a useful resource for 
enhancing understanding and interpretation of the monuments. To be useful for 
visitors, these should be available near the site. The publication Division of the ASI 
has been publishing various types of brochures, pamphlets, guide books on the 
various monuments and these were distributed to Circle offices for sale at the 
publication counters available at the monuments. The ASI earned ` 2.24 crore during 
the period 2007-08 to 2011-12 from sales at the publication counters.  
We noted that there was no publication counter in any of the 12 ticketed 
monuments at the Bengaluru Circle.  Even in the Delhi Circle, five ticketed 
monuments did not have any publication counter.  The ASI HQ did not have 
complete information in respect of the total number of publication counters 
available. However, as per the information provided for eight Circles, there were 
only 37 publication counters. Absence of publication counters at each site led not 
only to loss of revenue but more importantly deprived the visitors of useful 
references about the monuments.  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
200 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g27:Awareness, 
Interpretation and Amenities
10.3.3.1 Inadequate Distribution of Publication Material  
The ASI HQ did not have any mechanism for proper distribution of Publication 
material to the Circle offices. Record management was also poor.   
We noticed that some publications were being sent to unrelated Circles without any 
justification. For instance at Agra Circle, instead of providing the literature material 
on the World Heritage sites in and around Agra Circle, the ASI HQ supplied the 
material on Mahabalipuram.  As a result the material could not be used and was 
relegated to the store room. Similarly, in the Kolkata Circle, some publications were 
sent by ASI-HQ without any requisition from the circle. The excess books issued to 
Guwahati Circle were also found lying unutilised and damaged. 
The ASI HQ did not ascertain the specific requirement of the Circle offices for 
distribution of the material.  As a result, sale of the ASI publication remained low and 
in the absence of need assessment 308128 books were lying unused at the various 
publication counters. Details are given in Annex 10.2.  
The ASI attributed the reasons for ad-hoc practices of distribution of publications to 
the shortage of staff.  We find this reason unconvincing as there were no laid down 
procedures and instructions for distribution of publications. 
10.3.3.2 Availability of Maps of the Sites 
The ASI had sites which were spread over many acres. These included groups of 
monuments, forts and caves. At most of such sites including some World Heritage 
Sites, the ASI did not provide for any site maps to the visitors. 
10.4 Involvement of Local Community   
Heritage interpretation and education programmes among the people of the host 
community should encourage the involvement of local site interpreters. The 
programmes should promote a knowledge and respect for their heritage, 
encouraging the local people to take a direct interest in its care and conservation. 
Tourism and conservation activities should benefit the host community.64 
We found that there were negligible efforts from the Ministry and the ASI to devise 
any special programmes to create public awareness and support.  We found that due 
to the failure of the ASI to involve the local community in protection and 
conservation of these sites, in many places, the local community opposed the efforts 
of the ASI to maintain these sites. There was no formal forum of interaction with the 
local community and the Circle offices. 
                                                      
 
64 International Cultural Tourism Charter of ICOMOS 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 201
 
Chapter –/g27:Awareness, 
Interpretation and Amenities
10.5 Visitors Facilities at the Monuments 
ICOMOS charter provided that conservation and tourism planning for Heritage Places 
need to ensure that the Visitor’s experience would be worthwhile, satisfying and 
enjoyable. 
To make the monuments visitor friendly, the ASI was expected to provide basic 
amenities viz. drinking water, toilets, ramps for physically challenged, notice boards 
in Braille language, etc. at the monuments.  Further, the Persons with Disability 
(Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 provided 
for the provision of ramps in public buildings and adaptation of toilets for wheel 
chair users. 
10.5.1 Status of Public Amenities 
Joint physical inspection and available information at the Circles for 2461 
monuments revealed that the ASI failed to provide the basic public amenities at its 
protected monuments as can be seen from the following table:  
Table 10.2 Public Amenities at the monuments 
Amenities No of monuments in which 
facilities were not available 
Percentage of non 
availability 
Drinking water 1781 72 
Toilets 2030 82 
Wheel chairs 2247 91 
Ramps 2293 93 
Braille Sign Boards 2448 96 
Complaint register 2268 92 
 
Lack of these basic amenities, adversely affected the footfall at these sites and also 
reduced the quality of experience of the visitors. In addition, lack of facilities for 
differently able visitors constitutes a violation of the Persons with Disability Act 
1995. Lack of ramps and wheel chairs at these monuments would also restrict access 
of these sites to such visitors. During our inspections we found very few sites which 
were “barrier free“ for such special category of visitors.  
10.5.2 Efforts of the ASI for Public Amenities 
The ASI entered (January 2009) into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with a 
non profit organisation ‘ Svayam’ and appointed them as their Access Consultant 
initially for three years.  The NGO was to provide consultancy to the ASI (free of cost) 
for making all the monuments/sites accessible to people with reduced mobility in 
accordance with law and international standards and guidelines and specific 
indigenous factors.   

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
202 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g27:Awareness, 
Interpretation and Amenities
In the first phase, the NGO was to carry out access audit in the heritage sites of New 
Delhi, Agra (Uttar Pradesh) and Goa and identify barriers to accessibility and 
recommend appropriate suggestions and strategies. Subsequently, the ASI was to 
draw a Joint Action Plan for each site to execute the recommendations of the NGO. 
The NGO submitted the access audit reports of five monuments
65 in July/August 
2010 to the ASI along with various suggestions. 
We found that till December 2012, the ASI had not initiated any action on the 
recommendations of the NGO.   
10.5.3 Lack of Approach Road to the Monuments 
Joint physical inspection revealed that there were many protected monuments 
which were not easily accessible due to the lack of an approach road.  The ASI did 
not initiate any remedial measures in co-ordination with the municipal authorities 
concerned to address this important issue. 
In fact, in some monuments due to absence of regular physical inspection of the 
monument by the officials of the ASI information was unavailable at the Circle/ Sub 
Circle level.   Some instances of the absence of approach roads are mentioned 
below:  
Table 10.3 Monuments without approach roads 
Sl. No. Circle Name of the monument 
1.  Agra Mound of Kachhwa, Mamirpur 
2.  Baniyaki Barat, Lalitpur 
3.  Temple Flat roofed, Urwara, Mahoba 
4.  Ghuguwa Ka Math, Barua Sagar, Jhansi 
5.  Kos Minar, Mathura 
6.  Buddhist Vihar, Pakhnabihar, Farrukhabad 
7.  Ancient site, Katarikhera, Farrukhabad 
8.  Mound Sahegarh Khera, Aligarh 
9.  Delhi Nai Ka Kot 
10.  Srinagar Monolithic Shrine Khrew 
11.  StupaTisseru (Leh) 
12.  Ranchi Jami Mosque, Hadaf 
13.  Benisagar tank 
                                                       
65 Etmad-ud-daulah, Agra, Mariam’s Tomb, Agra, Agra Fort, Deeg Palace, Rajasthan and Purana Qila, 
Delhi 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 203
 
Chapter –/g27:Awareness, 
Interpretation and Amenities
14.  Patna Rock Temple at Kahalgaon 
15.  Rohtas Garh Fort in Sasaram 
16.  Pakka Masonary Fort in Bijaigarh, Sonbhadra 
17.  Kolkata Barkona  Deul site at Malda 
18.  Residency Cemetery, Babul Bona 
19.  Guwahati Grave of Mr BJ Stow 
20.  Tomb of Lt. Cresswell 
 
 
  
The Mirdha Committee in 1984 had stated that it is a sad fact that many important 
monuments remained inaccessible during the rainy season for lack of all weather 
roads.  The ASI should make all its efforts to persuade the State Government to lay 
pucca road to monuments to facilitate their regular inspection all the year round.   
However, even after a lapse of 28 years of this recommendation the position 
remained the same. There was no initiative from the Ministry to assess the need for 
a approach road and to take necessary measures with the State Governments at 
appropriate levels. 
10.5.4 Facility of Online and Advance Tickets 
Worldwide, the facility of advance online booking of tickets for sites frequented by 
international tourists is adopted as a best practice. Many countries have also 
introduced joint tickets at reduced price for a group of sites in a city/ across a region, 
to facilitate visitors.  
The ASI earned revenue of about ` 400 crores during the last five years from the sale 
of tickets. A total number of about 1.65 crore foreign tourist visited the monuments 
during the period 2007-08 to 2011-12.  However, the ASI did not explore the 
possibility of introducing the facility of online booking of tickets to encourage more 
visitors to the sites. This would also help in timely remittance of revenue in the 
government account. Even on the ticket counters, there was no facility of purchasing 
the tickets through the credit/debit cards.   
Recommendation 10.5:  The Ministry and the ASI should introduce the online ticket 
facility for all ticketed sites across the country with necessary security controls at the 
earliest.  
10.6 Interpretation Facilities in the Museums 
We noticed that the interpretation facilities in the museums were also inadequate as 
given below: 

Chapter –/g27:Awareness, 
Interpretation and Amenities
Report 
 
204 
 
10.6.1
The Ind
of Scien
at a c o
charged
conditio
advance
comple
content
We not
was lyi
Missio
n
stated t
they ha
Moreov
Museum
engage
 
Thus, f a
photog
of publi
 
No. 18 of 2
Performance 
 Non-in s
dian Museu
nce Museum
ost of ` 1.8
d by NSC M
ons the en t
e in favo u
tion of th e
t and photo
ticed that e
ng in cust o
n (BITM). T h
that despite
ad not furnis
ver, Directo
m it would 
d by the NC
ailure on t h
raphs resul
ic awarenes
2013 
 Audit of Pres
stallation o
m entered 
m (NCSM) f
81 crore. T
M for dev e
tire contra c
ur of Scien
e project w
ographs to b
equipment w
ody of the 
he warranty
e several re
shed any da
or Science C
not be poss
CSM had alr
Equi
he part of 
ted in non 
ss. 
servation and
of Kiosks
(March 201
for the sup
his amoun t
eloping m u
ct amount o
ce City o n
was Dece m
be displayed
worth ` 22
Science Ci t
y period of 
minders an
ata and pho
City stated t
sible for the
ready been 
ipment lying
the Indian 
installation
d Conservation
10) into an 
ply of displ
t included 
ulti media 
of ` 1.81 c
n 31 Marc h
mber 2010,
d in the kios
2.18 lakh (e x
ty, NCSM a
some of t h
nd meetings
otographs re
that due t o
em to comp
served term
g in Indian M
Museum t
n of the Ki o
n of  Monume
agreement
ay equipme
` 30.32 la
kiosks.  A
rore was p
h 2010. T h
 including 
sks by the m
xcluding th
and Birla I n
he equipme
s with the In
equired for 
o absence o
plete the pro
mination let
Museum 
o provide t
osks leading
ents and Anti
t with Nati o
ent includin
kh as con s
s per the 
aid by the 
he schedul
timely su b
museum. 
e software 
nstitute of 
ent had exp
ndian Muse
developing
of data fro m
oject since t
tters. 
the requisi t
g to non e n
iquities 
onal Counci
ng 18 kiosk s
sultancy fe e
terms an d
museum i n
ed date o
bmission o
purchased
Technology
pired. NCSM
eum officials
g the Kiosks
m the India n
the vendors
te data an d
nhancement
il 
s 
e 
d 
n 
f 
f 
) 
y 
M 
s 
s. 
n 
s 
 
d 
t 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 205
 
Chapter – /g27/g12:Governance and 
Insensitivity to Red Signals
 
 
 
The functioning of the Ministry and its subordinate organisations were reviewed by 
external groups and authorities on multiple occasions.  Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture also commented on the poor 
performance of the ASI and the National Museum and issues related to heritage 
conservation, several times. 
Other authorities including the C&AG, Supreme Court and High Courts of India also 
took cognisance of the various issues in their reports/orders. 
We noted that the Ministry and its associated organisations exhibited insensitivity 
towards these red signals. No major corrective actions or change in approach was 
noticed to rectify the deficiencies. Even where some action was initiated, it lacked 
the organisational will to be completed in a time bound manner. We analysed some 
of the recommendations made by these Committees/Groups and the action taken by 
the Ministry as of January 2013.  
11.1 Ineffective Governance and Stewardship of Ministry 
The mandate of the Ministry of Culture is to preserve and promote all forms of art 
and culture. In order to achieve this mandate, the Ministry undertakes maintenance 
and conservation of heritage, historic sites and ancient monuments through the ASI. 
Similarly, the Ministry also controlled some of the museums which had valuable 
collections.   On the following issues, we found that the role of the Ministry was 
deficient: 
11.1.1 Inadequacy of Policy Making 
As pointed out in proceeding chapters, several organisations were working without 
adequate policy, legislation or standard practices. The inadequacy of policy affected 
the efficient functioning of these organisations for years. Yet we found no efforts 
from the Ministry to ensure timely updating of policies and due monitoring for the 
same as can be seen in the Chart 11.1 below:- 
 
 
 
Governance and Insensitivity to  
Red Signals 
CHAPTER – XI 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
206 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g27/g12:Governance and 
Insensitivity to Red Signals
 
Chart 11.1 Absence of proactive approach for finalisation of the Policies 
 
However, the Ministry failed to monitor and take suitable action to accelerate the 
policies/legislation. Several agencies including the courts pointed out severe 
shortcomings in the functioning of ASI and museums and yet, the ministry took no 
note to improve the Governance at its level.  
11.1.2 Improper Financial Management 
The Ministry made budgetary allotments to the ASI without assessing the fund 
requirements of the ASI. No instructions were given to assess the requirements for 
conservation works and no proactive attempts were made to seek funding from 
sources other than Consolidated Fund of India. 
The revenue generation efforts of ASI remained limited largely to ticketing and fees 
for shooting at the sites. No efforts or guidance was provided by the Ministry to 
adopt international best practices of revenue generation through monuments by 
way of souvenir shops, customised tours and provision of other tourist facilities. In 
fact, even within the existing modes, attempts for modernisation through online 
ticketing or regular revision in fees for shooting were not found.  
The Ministry provided no leadership in any of these areas.  The monuments 
constituted national assets but their revenue potential had not been recognised or 
realised.  


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 207
 
Chapter – /g27/g12:Governance and 
Insensitivity to Red Signals
11.1.3 Inadequate MIS and Monitoring 
The Ministry did not have any information or MIS at its own level and all questions 
and issues related to the organisations were simply forwarded to these organisations 
to handle. In effect the organisations functioned as long arms of the Ministry. We did 
not notice any monitoring of organisations like National Mission of Monuments and 
Antiquities for the timely progress of work. Many of the initiatives and projects taken 
up by agencies covered under this audit were lying incomplete for decades and the 
Ministry was not monitoring the same on periodic basis.  Interestingly, whenever 
issues of neglect of a particular site or monument were raised through a 
Parliamentary Question, VIP reference or experts, the Ministry’s efforts remained 
limited to that very site rather than looking for more systemic and process based 
changes for all such sites. 
Even in case of individual sites, Ministry’s interventions and assurances were found 
largely ineffective as is evident in the case of Kanaganahalli (Refer Case Study 6). 
A list of incomplete projects requiring monitoring by the Ministry is as follows: 
Chart 11.2: Incomplete Projects/ works lacking monitoring of the Ministry  
 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
208 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g27/g12:Governance and 
Insensitivity to Red Signals
11.1.4 Insensitivity to Red Signals 
There was no monitoring by the Ministry for action taken on the recommendations 
of various expert committees, audit reports and court rulings. Despite serious 
concern being raised on some issues from all forums, no concrete action was visible 
from the Ministry to rectify the shortcomings. Most of the concerns remained alive 
even after multiple red signals over the years. The details are given in succeeding 
paragraphs. 
We found the guidance and instructions coming from the Ministry to these attached, 
subordinate and autonomous organisations random and conflicting. The 
documentation of instructions was incomplete and on many crucial aspects of 
functioning, there was no guidance from the Ministry. This had a trickledown effect 
on the efficiency and effectiveness of these organisations. 
The Ministry replied (June 2013) that Central Advisory Board on Archaeology, 
headed by the Minister of Culture makes recommendations on conservation and 
maintenance of centrally protected monument.  The Ministry provides guidance on 
all policy matters which are implemented by the ASI and the Ministry also monitors 
the activities of the ASI on all important matters on regular basis. However, the 
position of incomplete projects pointed towards ineffectiveness in the Ministry’s 
monitoring.  There is no system of regular reporting on pending issues/projects from 
various organisations to the Ministry.  Further, the absence of a conservation policy 
and a national policy on excavation and exploration does not support the Ministry’s 
reply. 
11.2 Action on Recommendations of Various Reports 
Table 11.1 Details of the various committees for evaluation of the ASI 
Name of the 
committee Reason of formation Chairman 
Report/ 
recommendation 
given in 
The Expert Group 
on Archaeology 
To carry out a 
professional study of 
the steps need to be 
taken and to prepare 
an overall plan of 
action in the matter of 
preserving India’s 
historical monuments 
in the light of multi-
dimensional factors 
responsible for their 
damage, especially 
environmental 
pollution and vandalism
Shri Ram Niwas 
Mirdha, Member of 
Parliament 
1984 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 209
 
Chapter – /g27/g12:Governance and 
Insensitivity to Red Signals
Name of the 
committee Reason of formation Chairman 
Report/ 
recommendation 
given in 
Parliamentary 
Standing 
Committee on 
Transport, Tourism 
& Culture’s report 
on Functioning of 
the ASI 
 Shri Nilotpal Basu, 
Member of Parliament 
2005 
Committee 
appointed by 
Ministry of Culture 
To analyse the impact 
of amendment to the 
AMASR Act 1958 
including the impact of 
the AMASR 
(Amendment & 
Validation) Ordinance 
2010. 
Shri M. Veerappa 
Moily, Union Minister 
of Law and Justice 
2010 
It was noticed that the ASI/the Ministry failed to implement, on most issues, the 
recommendations of the Mirdha Committee in 1984.  Similar matters were raised 
again by the Parliamentary Standing Committee in 2005 i.e. after a gap of more than 
20 years. Most of these issues still remain unresolved: 
Table 11.2 Details of the recommendations of various committees 
Topic Mirdha 
Committee(1984)
Parliamentary Standing 
Committee 
( 2005) 
Moily Committee 
(2010) 
Changes in 
organisation 
of the ASI 
and the  
Legislation  
The ASI should 
not be 
considered as a 
branch of public 
administration 
but should be 
treated as an 
academic 
institution with 
highly specialised 
duties and be 
accorded the 
status of 
scientific and 
technical 
institution 
enjoying 
The Committee was 
constrained to note that 
no concrete action was 
taken by the Ministry and 
the ASI which amply 
indicated the 
administrative apathy 
towards the whole issue of 
implementation of the 
notification declaring the 
ASI as a scientific and 
technical institution.   
The Committee regretted 
that no internal exercise 
was undertaken by the 
Ministry and the ASI for 
availing the benefits and 
The Act has not 
been able to 
adequately 
respond to the 
rapid growth in 
population and 
the attendant 
urbanisation 
across India.  It has 
been ineffective in 
preserving our 
ancient 
monuments.  
 
 An ineffective law 
has been 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
210 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g27/g12:Governance and 
Insensitivity to Red Signals
Topic Mirdha 
Committee(1984) 
Parliamentary Standing 
Committee 
( 2005) 
Moily Committee 
(2010) 
autonomy in its 
functioning.   
Though the 
notification for 
the ASI declaring 
a Scientific and 
Technical 
Institution was 
issued in 1990, it 
was never 
implemented 
privileges as a Science and 
Technology Department.  
compounded with 
the lack of 
manpower and 
resources of the 
ASI. 
 
In 2012 we found that the ASI continued to function as a regular attached office of 
the Ministry. There was no move to confer the status of a Scientific Department to 
the ASI. 
Excavation 
and 
Exploration 
• Lack of strategy 
for Exploration 
& Excavation 
• Not much has 
been done for 
historical period 
and pre history 
of India 
• Multi 
disciplinary 
work is needed 
for 
understanding 
the parameters 
of Stone Age. 
• At least 
25percent of the 
ASI’s budget 
should be 
utilised for 
Excavation and 
Exploration 
activities. 
• Publication of 
reports should 
be expedited. 
• The ASI should strictly 
adhere to the criterion 
fixed for selection of 
Excavation of sites.  
Further, decisions for 
Excavations should be 
made on the basis of 
proper scientific and 
technical appraisal and 
no extraneous factors 
should go into the 
decision making.  
 
• The ASI should ensure 
that officials engaged 
in a particular 
Excavation work were 
not transferred till such 
time that they 
complete the 
Excavations and submit 
their reports. 
 
• The reservation 
of a certain 
percentage of 
the estimated 
cost of large 
projects could 
be mandatory 
requirement so 
that 
archaeological 
documentation 
is done on a 
contract basis.  
This is the 
practice 
followed by 
several 
countries and 
results in the 
rapid execution 
and publication 
of focused 
archaeological 
works. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 211
 
Chapter – /g27/g12:Governance and 
Insensitivity to Red Signals
Topic Mirdha 
Committee(1984)
Parliamentary Standing 
Committee 
( 2005) 
Moily Committee 
(2010) 
In 2012, we found that expenditure on Excavation activities was just about one per 
cent of the ASI’s budget. There were significant delays in report writing and 
publication. Officers were being transferred before completion of Excavation 
report and there was no specific planning or direction for the Excavations being 
taken up by the ASI ( Details in Chapter 5)  
Conservation 
of 
Monuments 
• Annual 
conservation 
programme 
should be 
specific purpose 
wise like a plan 
for the Kos 
Minars etc. 
• Important 
monuments 
should be 
identified for 
thorough 
conservation 
including 
environmental 
conservation on 
an integrated 
development 
basis.   
• There should be 
a new manual 
for 
conservation 
works and ASI 
should have its 
own schedule 
of rates. 
• Maintenance of 
Log Book of the 
monument with 
complete 
details of the 
work carried 
• The ASI informed the 
Committee that a 
comprehensive 
conservation manual 
would be compiled 
during the 10 th Five 
Year Plan. 
• More amounts should 
be spent on 
conservation/preservat
ion of the sites in 
comparison to site 
development/ 
beautification etc.   
• The ASI should treat 
both ticketed and non 
ticketed monuments 
equally and efforts 
should be made for 
integrated 
infrastructure 
development and 
conservation/ 
preservation of all 
monuments/sites with 
encompassing facilities 
for tourists. 
• The large 
amount of 
conservation 
work confined 
to WHS and 
ticketed 
monuments. 
• There are 
several 
hundred 
monuments 
which have not 
received a 
single rupee 
towards 
conservation in 
the last 20 to 
30 years.  
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
212 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g27/g12:Governance and 
Insensitivity to Red Signals
Topic Mirdha 
Committee(1984) 
Parliamentary Standing 
Committee 
( 2005) 
Moily Committee 
(2010) 
out should be 
properly 
recorded for 
future 
references. 
• Need for a 
special cell for 
research in 
archaeological 
conservation 
In 2012, we found that there were no integrated/ category wise conservation 
programs for monuments. No logbooks were being maintained by the Circles on 
works taken up on each monument. The Conservation Manual was not updated 
and the ASI had not developed its own Schedule of Rates. The ASI continues to rely 
on the Manual published by Sir John Marshall.There was no special cell for 
research and Archaeological Conservation. The position of visitor amenities was far 
from satisfactory even on World Heritage Sites. (Details in Chapter 3 and Chapter 
10). 
Security of 
Monument 
The ASI should 
have at least 
9000 monument 
attendants and 
they should have 
a security force 
of its own 
• 10000 posts of 
monument attendants.  
• Expenditure on Security 
i.e. CISF and SIS should 
be borne by the Ministry 
of Home Affairs and 
suitable proposal should 
be submitted  
• While 
expressing 
concern on the 
encroachment 
and destruction 
of monuments, 
the Committee 
mentioned that 
the numbers of 
disappeared 
monuments 
were larger than 
mentioned by 
the ASI i.e. 35.  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 213
 
Chapter – /g27/g12:Governance and 
Insensitivity to Red Signals
Topic Mirdha 
Committee(1984)
Parliamentary Standing 
Committee 
( 2005) 
Moily Committee 
(2010) 
In 2012, we found that majority of the ASI monuments were still without a fulltime 
guard. Monuments were increasingly falling prey to encroachments for want of 
adequate security arrangements. (Details in  Chapter 9)  
Human 
Resource 
Management 
• Upgrade the 
present post of 
Directors to 
JDGs and the 
post of SAs be 
changed to 
Directors 
• Staff at Circles 
should be 
suitably 
increased 
which includes 
the technical 
as well as 
administrative 
staff 
• HQ should 
have a Public 
Relation 
Officer 
• More posts 
were 
recommended 
in the 
engineering 
cadre to 
properly 
handle the 
conservation 
and 
preservation of 
monuments 
The ASI still felt shortage of 
manpower in the 
Conservation cadre and 
also in the Horticulture 
cadre to cope up with the 
requirement 
The Committee 
mentioned that in 
several cases, 
threats to the 
monuments have 
been ignored by 
their institutional 
guardian, the 
understaffed and 
underfunded the 
ASI.   
• There are 
situations where 
the CAs are 
managing up to 80 
monuments and 
hence they cannot 
be expected to 
visit /inspect such 
a large number of 
monuments at any 
reasonable 
frequency. 
 
In 2012, we found that the ASI was facing acute shortage of staff. There were 
alarming shortages of technically competent staff for taking up conservation work. 
Some specialised conservation units like Underwater Archaeology were defunct for 
want of manpower. (Details in Chapter 4). 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
214 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g27/g12:Governance and 
Insensitivity to Red Signals
Besides the above points, there were other issues that were pointed out by these 
Committees as detailed below:- 
Topics Recommendations of Ram Niwas Mirdha Committee 
Inspection of the 
Monuments 
Each monument should be inspected by one of the officers 
of the Circle and the Directorate must enjoin the Directors to 
inspect at least 50 monuments in a year. Inspection and 
Conservation notes should be prepared for each monument 
and be separately filed in a guard file.   
Availability of Site 
Plans 
Attendant should have a Site Plan in his possession so that 
he can report any threat to the ASI’s land by way of 
encroachment. 
Documentation 
Centres 
There should be 2-3 documentation centres having all the 
details of the monuments including relevant photographs, 
drawings etc for the interested scholars. 
Public Amenities More monuments should be ticketed and the price should 
be increased.  Public amenities, flood lighting etc should be 
done and maintained by tourist departments in consultation 
with the ASI 
We found that none of these recommendations were carried out or even 
considered at higher level. Lack of inspection of monuments and documentation 
continued to be areas of concern. The basic documentation like site maps/ plans 
was not available at Sub-Circle level in most cases. ( Details in Chapter 2 and 10)  
Neither the ASI nor the Ministry could provide us documentation and assurance that 
these issues were considered and some changes were brought about on the basis of 
these recommendations. Our audit at the field level confirmed that most of the 
issues remained relevant and unchanged even now.  
11.2.2 Recommendations of the Committees on the National Museum 
We also noticed that even the National Museum showed insensitivity to the red 
signals.  An Expert Committee for the purpose of “Comprehensive Scientific and 
Physical Verification of Art Objects of National Museum  was appointed under the 
chairmanship of Shri Varadarajan in 1999.  The report was prepared by the 
Committee and submitted in the year 2004.  Further in 2011, a Parliamentary 
Standing Committee chaired by Shri Sitaram Yechury, also pointed out the lapses in 
the functioning of National Museum. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 215
 
Chapter – /g27/g12:Governance and 
Insensitivity to Red Signals
Both reports submitted in 2004 and 2011 were having common issues which were 
not resolved till the completion of the Audit (November 2012).  Some of them are as 
follows: 
Topics Recommendations of Varadarajan 
Committee in 2004 
Recommendations of 
Yechury Committee in 2011 
Documentation Entire holding should be digitised and 
computerised by December 2005  
There is a minimal use of IT.  
Digitisation must be 
considered for expeditious 
implementation 
Physical 
verification 
20 per cent  of the objects of each 
section must be verified each year so 
that all objects were completely verified 
in a five year cycle.  
Finds it hard to believe that 
no verification of artifacts 
had been done since 2003.  
The Committee fears that 
when the verification process 
is taken up some of objects 
may be reported missing 
The physical verification was not carried out after 2003 
Security Security must be under one umbrella 
and managed by one agency 
Make use of the best 
technology to safeguard the 
museum 
Display Display of the galleries needs to be 
changed periodically 
Yearlong display schedule 
may be drawn up and 
publicised widely 
No specified display schedule was drawn up (Details in Chapter 6) 
Manpower Critical vacancies must be filled without 
any further delay  
Make the post of DG more 
attractive. Lack of 
commitment of the Ministry 
in filling up posts. Create 
posts of ADG and JDG.  
No posts of ADG and JDG were sanctioned and filled up.  The manpower crunch was 
noticed during the audit also. (Details in Chapter 8) 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
216 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g27/g12:Governance and 
Insensitivity to Red Signals
Topics Recommendations of Varadarajan 
Committee in 2004 
Recommendations of 
Yechury Committee in 2011 
Acquisition Art Purchase Committee be 
reconstituted and should start 
functioning from April 2004 
Reasons for the defunct 
acquisition committee may 
be looked into and steps be 
taken to constitute the 
committee at the earliest 
 
The Art Purchase Committee was still defunct and no concrete efforts were made to 
reconstitute the same. (Details in Chapter 6) 
Closure of 
galleries 
 Out of 26, 7 galleries were 
closed and the reasons were 
not convincing. No laid down 
guidelines for renovation of 
galleries 
Maintenance of 
building 
 Performance of CPWD may 
be closely monitored and if 
required, the maintenance 
may be awarded to some 
other specialised agency 
Signage  Signage and labels were 
unattractive and too small in 
size and find errors in 
translation 
Central Asian 
Objects (CAA) 
Suitable decision for 700 CAA objects 
lying in V&A Museum, London should be 
taken and digital catalogue be obtained 
from them 
 
No efforts were made by the National Museum to contact V&A Museum, London to 
search for the details of the 700 CAA objects. 
Gift shop It must be plentifully stocked with 
attractive replicas 
 
Non antiquity 
objects 
Non antiquity objects could be transfer 
to NGMA or crafts museum 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 217
 
Chapter – /g27/g12:Governance and 
Insensitivity to Red Signals
11.3 Court Rulings for Monuments 
Various courts across the country had also taken note of the issues related to 
heritage conservation and functioning of these organisations. We noted that there 
were instances where no action was taken by the ASI even after the directives of the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India and the High Courts of the States.  Some of the 
illustrative cases were as follows: 
11.3.1 No action on Supreme Court Judgments 
a) On the appeal of the ASI, the Supreme Court in 2004 passed a 
judgement66 through which the notifications issued by Government of 
Karnataka in 1976, declaring 43 centrally protected monuments as 
Karnataka Wakf Board properties, were annulled.  However, instead of 
taking steps to cancel the notifications, the ASI requested the 
Government of Karnataka for a joint survey of these monuments to 
determine the status of monuments from 2008. The joint survey had 
not been conducted till January 2013.  The Government of Karnataka 
had further notified another six monuments at Bidar, Belgaum and 
Gulbarga as Wakf properties in August 2005, i.e. after the Supreme 
Court judgement of 2004.  No action was taken by the Ministry or the 
ASI in this regard. 
b) For the celebration of local festivals near the Tenkailasanatha Temple, a 
centrally protected monument in Trissur circle, people used to burst fire 
crackers which were destroying the mural paintings of the temple. In 
2005, the Supreme Court directed that the chemical composition for 
each fire crackers should not result in noise levels exceeding the limit of 
125 decibels at the rituals during festival season. However, the ASI did 
not put any system in place to coordinate the issue with District 
Authorities. The ASI had no mechanism of its own to ensure that the 
Supreme Court directions were adhered to. We found that fire crackers 
being used in the function were still damaging the roof of the protected 
monument. 
11.3.2 No Action on the Judgments of High Courts of States 
The ASI was unable to remove encroachments from its protected sites despite court 
judgments. Absence of cooperation from District and State Authorities was cited as a 
reason by the ASI. However, we noted that it had not taken up this matter at the 
Ministry’s level for a long term solution. Some illustrative cases are as follows: 
                                                      
 
66 CA No 16899/96 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
218 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter – /g27/g12:Governance and 
Insensitivity to Red Signals
a) 66 cases of unauthorised construction in the protected area of Jaisalmer Fort, 
Rajasthan could not be removed despite the judgment of the Rajasthan High 
Court in February 2004. 
b) The High court of Ahmedabad orders, for removal of encroachment at the 
Ancient site, Gohilwad Timbo, Amrali, Vadodara Circle, could not be 
implemented. 
c) In 2002, the High Court of Delhi directed the Central Government to review its 
notification dated 16 June 1992 relating to its definition of prohibited and 
regulated areas and the requirement of permission from the ASI for construction 
in the regulated area.  The High Court also opined that prohibition of 
construction must not be left to an inflexible rule of thumb but must be arrived 
at after a conscious and objective application of mind. However no such review 
has been carried out or even started as of January 2013. 
11.4 Insensitivity to Audit 
The ASI received its budget from the Consolidated Fund of India and therefore, we 
conducted regular transaction audit of the Headquarters of the ASI and the Circles 
and Branches. We noted the persistence of irregularities. 
We had also conducted a review of  the “Preservation and restoration of Art 
Objects” related to Indian Museum, Victoria Memorial Hall and Asiatic Society 
Kolkata, published in C&AG’s report No 4 of 2005 (Civil). However during this 
Performance Audit we were constrained to note that most of the irregularities and 
shortcomings were persisting. 
11.5 References from People  
Cases were also noticed where people’s representatives, conservationists and 
eminent persons pointed out towards serious lapses in the functioning of the ASI. 
The ASI did not take any action in most of the cases even to ascertain the facts. Some 
such illustrative cases were noticed during the test check of records: 
a) The ASI carried out a joint survey with the State authorities to develop 
Chandramouleshwra temple, Unkal in Dharwad Circle as a tourist place.  A 
rehabilitation plan amounting to ` 14.75 crore was made after conducting the 
survey. This would be shared in the ratio of 37:63 between the Government of 
Karnataka and Government of India. It was revised to 50:50 in August 2010. As 
no progress was made in this regard, Shri Prahlad Joshi, Member of Parliament 
requested the Prime Minister’s office to take appropriate action in this regard in 
September 2011.  No further action was taken on this issue till completion of 
Audit (December 2012). 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 219
 
Chapter – /g27/g12:Governance and 
Insensitivity to Red Signals
b) Minister for Rural Development, Government of India informed (April 2012) the 
Minister of Culture regarding the conditions of the Buddhist site ‘Kanaganahalli’.  
He mentioned that the “protection of the monument was only on paper and the 
lump of the head of the woman was vandalism masquerading as archaeological 
conservation”. He stressed for the establishment of the Site Museum, 
documentation of each and every piece of stone and for carrying out the repair 
work in the most sensitive and scientific way. No action was taken despite his 
intervention and subsequent visit. We found the site lying neglected. (Refer Case 
Study No 6). 
c) Similar observations were made by the Minister for Rural Development, 
Government of India regarding the poor condition of the Tomb of Hasan Shah 
Suri and Sher Shah Suri at Sasaram, Rohtas in Patna Circle.  He pointed out the 
poor condition of the baoli, garbage and defaced walls and mentioned that the 
maintenance was ‘atrocious’.   
The ASI failed to ensure proper compliance with the recommendations of Expert 
Groups and Parliamentary Committees. As a result, the ASI continued to function 
ineffectively, without adequate financial and human resources to carry out its 
mandate. The deficiencies in the ASI can largely be contributed to the Ministry’s 
insensitivity towards these red signals.  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 221 
 
Chapter –/g27/g12/g12:Conclusion
 
 
 
 
 
This Performance Audit was taken up on the occasion of ASI’s  
150th anniversary.  Several aspects of ASI’s objectives, processes and results have 
been reviewed.  The most significant failure of ASI related to its core function of field 
archaeology that included excavation, survey and publication of excavation reports.  
Presently, ASI’s expenditure on excavation is less than one per cent of its total 
budget.  We noted that ASI has no policy governing the selection of excavation sites, 
timeframes for the completion of excavations and the publication of its findings.  As 
a result, even decades after the commencement of major excavations, viz. Dholavira, 
Sanghol, Rakhigarhi, Sravasti, Mathura, the excavation reports have not been 
published.  In several cases, the selected archaeologists leading these excavations 
are no longer with the ASI.  In some cases, the archaeologists had died.  As a result, 
excavated antiquities have not been accounted for and in some cases even the 
excavation sites had gone untraceable. 
We noted that the planning function was largely neglected.  Exploration and 
preservation were crucial functions of the ASI; however, a comprehensive policy for 
these areas had not been formulated.  As a result, conservations efforts were grossly 
inadequate.  We noted that the ASI still depended on a manual published in 1923 for 
most of its field activities.  This document was not updated.  Most of ASI’s important 
publications, for instance, ‘Indian Archaeology a Review’ were pending for years.  
To ensure effective protection of monuments and sites it was imperative to update 
policies, publish inventories and fully document monument details.  However, these 
activities had not completed by the concerned entities.  The National Mission of 
Monuments and Antiquities had also failed to fulfil its purposes in a time-bound 
manner.  This Mission lacked direction, vision and appropriate strategy. 
In the context of these weaknesses, encroachment of monuments and unauthorised 
constructions were widespread.  Further, in the absence of comprehensive planning 
and organisational weakness, there was no coordination among the three major 
wings of ASI, responsible for structural, chemical and environmental conservation.  
Conclusion 
CHAPTER – XII 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
222 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Chapter –/g27/g12/g12:Conclusion
Success of conservation works was left largely to individual initiatives and an overall 
departmental perspective was completely missing. 
Regarding the financial management of ASI, we noted that the funds allocated to ASI 
for its mandated activities were grossly inadequate; however, there was little 
initiative on its part or the Ministry of Culture to enhance the budget allocations or 
explore revenue opportunities.  The manpower management was marked by critical 
shortages leading to negligible supervision of works and inadequate security.   
The ASI was unable to implement the provisions of the Antiquities and Art Treasure 
Act effectively and the incidence of an illegal export of antiquities was rampant.  The 
proposed legislation amendments to this Act were pending for years. 
We observed significant shortcomings in the functioning of the museums.  The 
museums did not have any benchmarks or standards for acquisition, conservation or 
documentation of the art objects possessed by them. The mechanism for evaluation 
of acquired objects to verify their genuineness was absent in all the museums 
audited by us.  There was no mechanism to assess the genuineness of artifacts. Poor 
documentation of the acquired artifacts and the failure to introduce the digital 
technology for documentation coupled with the absence of physical verification 
made the artifacts vulnerable to loss.  The security system at the museums provided 
a grim picture in the absence of effective surveillance systems at the sites.
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 223 
 
Chapter –/g27/g12/g12:Conclusion
We also noted that many shortcomings relating to the functioning of the ASI had 
been highlighted through the recommendation of various expert/Parliamentary 
committees.  However, we also noted with distress that these red flags were largely 
ignored by the Ministry of Culture.  In our opinion urgent measures were required to 
completely overhaul the ASI in light of its mandate and to restore this organisation 
to its distant former glory. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi (ROY  MATHRANI) 
Dated : 2 August 2013 Director General of Audit, 
Central Expenditure 
 
 
 
Countersigned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi                        (SHASHI KANT SHARMA) 
Dated : /g1009 August 2013 Comptroller and Auditor General of India 


Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 227 
 
Annex 1.1 
(Refer Para 1.1) 
Details of Units Audited and their Functions 
Sl. 
no. Name of the Museum Functions 
1. Archaeological Survey 
of India (ASI) 
The objectives of the ASI included: 
• Survey of archaeological remains and excavations; 
• Maintenance and conservation of Centrally Protected 
Monuments and Sites; 
• Development of epigraphically and numismatic 
structure; 
• Setting up and re-organisation of Site Museums; 
• Conducting expeditions abroad; and 
• Training in Archaeological and publication of technical 
study reports and research works. 
2. National Museum, 
Delhi (NM) 
The National Museum, a subordinate office of the Ministry, 
was set up in 1949 and is the largest museum in the South 
Asian Region. There were more than 2.06 lakh works of 
exquisite art and antiquity beginning from the prehistoric 
stage of human existence, covering more than 5,000 years of 
Indian civilisation and cultural heritage. The Museum was  
involved in important work of acquisition and  conservation of 
art objects, organising exhibition and educational activities, 
production of replicas of masterpieces of India sculptures, 
audio visual and other educational programmes, to train the 
museum staff of National Museum and other Museum 
/institutions in the latest technology of conservation, bringing 
out publications of art and culture.  There were 11 collection 
departments related to different fields of antiquities like 
Archaeology, Arms and armour, Decorative Art, Central Asia, 
Painting, Pre Columbian and Western Art, Manuscript, 
Jewellery, Anthropology, Numismatic and Epigraphy which 
were displayed in 26 galleries. 
3. Indian Museum, 
Kolkata (IM) 
The IM was founded in 1814 and is the largest and the oldest 
institution of its kind in the Asia Pacific Region. The Museum 
was a repository of both Indian and trans-Indian objects. It had 
six sections comprising of 35 galleries of cultural and scientific 
artifacts 
4. Victoria Memorial Hall, 
Kolkata (VMH) 
The VMH was established under the Victoria Memorial Act, 
1903 and was declared as of national importance in 1935. 
VMH had a collection of sketches and drawing, coins and 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
228 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
 medals, arms and armour, books and manuscripts, etc. that 
represented and drew our attention visually to the history of 
pre-camera days. 
5. Asiatic Society, Kolkata 
(ASK) 
 
The ASK was founded in 1784 by Sir William Jones and was 
declared as an institution of national importance in 1984.  ASK 
has large collections of paintings, manuscripts, coins etc. and 
served the readers, researchers and visitors of different parts 
of India and abroad. 
6. Salar Jung Museum, 
Hyderabad (SJM) 
 
SJM was established in 1951 and was declared as an 
institution of national importance in 1961. It has a collection 
of about 48000 objects, 40528 books and 8556 manuscripts. 
14607 objects and all the books and manuscripts are on 
display through 38 galleries and a Library. The major portion 
of the collections of the Museum was acquired by Nawab Mir 
Yousuf Ali Khan, popularly known as Salar Jung III, the then 
Prime Minister of the Rulers of Hyderabad State and hence the 
Museum was named after him. 
7. Allahabad Museum, 
Allahabad (AM) 
 
The AM came into being in 1931 and was declared as of 
national importance in 1985. The museum has collection of 
70121 objects and 18 galleries to display their collection.  The 
Museum has impressive collection of the Gupta period, early 
medieval period, of sculptural master pieces and organised 
seminars, exhibitions and other educational activities. 
8. Asiatic Society, Mumbai 
(ASM) 
 
Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society was founded in 
1826 merging the Literary Society of Bombay founded in 1804 
with the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland with 
the objective of encouraging the study of and research in the 
languages, philosophy, arts and natural and social sciences. 
The Sopara (Buddhist) Relics and a large stone coffer 
containing eight unique Buddhist Bronzes, Relic casket of 
copper, silver, stone crystal and gold along with some gold 
flowers, fragments of a begging bowl and 11830 antique coins 
were in the possession of the ASM. 
9. Chhatrapati Shivaji 
Maharaj Vastu 
Sangrahalaya, Mumbai 
(CSMVS) 
 
Earlier known as Prince of Wales Museum, it was set up in the 
beginning of 20 th century to honour the visit of King George V 
to India. The Museum has 50000 exhibits of ancient history as 
well as objects from foreign lands. It has some of the finest 
collections featuring ancient Indus Valley artifacts and also 
relics from Gupta period. This Museum is a private 
organisation but receives one time grant under the scheme 
‘Strengthening of museums in Metro Cities’ from the Ministry.  
10. National Culture Fund, 
Delhi (NCF) 
The Government of India in 1996 set up ‘National Culture Fund 
(NCF)’ with a view to enable  the participation and 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 229 
 
involvement of the Corporate Sector, NGO’s, State 
Governments, Public Sectors and individuals in the task of 
promoting, protecting and preserving India’s natural, cultural 
and intangible heritage. NCF was given an initial corpus of ` 
19.50 crore.  NCF was to generate and utilise funds for 
conservation, maintenance, promotion, protection, 
preservation and upgradation of monuments protected or 
otherwise. Besides financing heritage conservation projects, 
other objectives of NCF included imparting training to staff 
and specialists at all levels in the field of conservation of both 
tangible and intangible heritage.  It was noticed that due to 
the lack of coordination between the Donors, the NCF and the 
implementing agency (ASI), projects were invariably delayed. 
11. National Mission on 
Monuments and 
Antiquities, Delhi 
(NMMA) 
In 2003, the Prime Minister announced setting up of a Mission 
to prepare comprehensive documentation and create a 
database. Subsequently in 2007, National Mission for 
Monuments and Antiquities was launched. The Mission was 
established for five years to document and prepare suitable 
database of unprotected built heritage, sites and antiquities 
through published and unpublished resources and antiquities.   
12. National Monument 
Authority (NMA), Delhi 
and Competent 
Authorities 
 
By amending the AMASR Act of 1958, a new AMASR 
(Amendment & Validation) Act 2010 was enacted. This Act 
authorised Government of India to constitute National 
Monument Authority (NMA) and Competent Authority to 
scrutinise the proposals for issue of ‘No Objection Certificate’ 
for carrying out the repair and renovation in the prohibited 
area (100 meters from the protected area) and for 
construction and re-construction in the regulated area (200 
meters from the prohibited area).  Earlier this work was 
carried out by the Circle Offices.  NMA was also required to 
prepare and approve the heritage bye-laws for all the centrally 
protected monuments and to present them in Parliament 
which would help in assessing the impact of any construction, 
specially the large scale projects on the protected monuments 
which were of national importance. 
13. National Research 
Laboratory for 
Conservation (NRLC) 
The National Research Laboratory for Conservation of Cultural 
Property (NRLC), established in 1976, was a scientific 
institution dedicated to the Conservation of Cultural Heritage. 
NRLC carried out research in materials and methods of 
conservation, disseminated knowledge in conservation, 
imparted training in curative conservation, developed, and 
implemented programs in the field of preventive conservation. 
NRLC developed and standardised methods for the 
conservation of different types of objects and for the 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
230 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
analytical study of cultural property. The aims and objectives 
of the laboratory were as follows: 
• Research for the development of better methods of 
Conservation. 
• Technical studies of Art and Archaeological Materials. 
• Technical Assistance to Museums, Archaeological 
Departments and other Institutions. 
• Training, Documentation, Publications, International 
Liaison, etc. 
In 1986, a Regional Centre of NRLC for the Southern region, 
named Regional Conservation Laboratory (RCL) was 
established in Mysore, Karnataka.  Plans to establish regional 
centers in the North East, West, East and Central India was 
also underway. 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 231 
 
Annex 1.2 
(Refer Para 1.2.1) 
Details of Provisions of the AMASR Act and the AAT Act 
The Ancient Monuments, Sites & Remains Act 1958 and the AMASR 
(Amendments & Validation) Act 2010 
Notification for protection of Monument 
• The Central Government by issue of a gazette notification may declare a monument 
to be of national importance.  It should be in existence for not less than hundred 
years.  
• The Central Government shall maintain every monument which has been acquired.  
Construction in and around the Protected monument 
• No person, including the owner or occupier of a protected area, shall construct any 
building within the protected area or carry out any mining, quarrying, excavating, 
blasting or any operation of a like nature without the permission of the Central 
Government. 
• No person shall carry out any construction in the prohibited area (100 meters from 
the protected area) and can carry out repair/renovation only after the permission 
from the Competent Authority on the recommendations of the National Monument 
Authority. 
• Permission from the Competent Authority on the recommendations of National 
Monument Authority is required to carry out construction/reconstruction in the 
regulated area (200 meters from the prohibited area). 
• Central Government on the recommendations of NMA can increase the 
prohibited/regulated area. 
• Construction without the permission of the competent authority shall be punishable 
with imprisonment not exceeding two years or with fine up to Rupees one lakh or 
both. 
• The Central Government may declare by notification that, if it is of the opinion, the 
monument or archaeological site or remains, has ceased to be of national 
importance.  
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
232 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Excavation in protected and unprotected area 
• Only authorised person with licence from the DG, ASI, can undertake excavation 
work at the protected area. 
• The excavation work shall be conducted under the supervision of the Director named 
in the licence, who shall be present at the site at least three fourth of the period of 
operations. 
• The licensee shall submit a summary report after completion of the excavation work 
to DG and if the period is more than three months then a quarterly report has to be 
submitted.  DG may publish these reports in the reviews etc. The licensee shall 
submit a report in the prescribed form as soon as practicable. 
• Excavation in unprotected area cannot be done without the permission of the 
Central Government.  
• For moving any antiquity, permission from DG ASI should be sought three months 
before the proposed date of the moving. 
• After the issue of notification, no person other than archaeological officer shall 
undertake any mining or construction in a prohibited area and in a regulated area 
except with the terms & conditions of the licence for such work. 
The Antiquities and Art Treasures Act, 1972 
The Central Government, by notification, can specify the antiquities that are required to 
be registered. Every person who owns controls or possesses such antiquity should 
register the antiquities and obtain a certificate. Transfer of ownership of such antiquities 
should also be intimated to the ASI.  
The Central Government can also compulsorily acquire any antiquity or art treasure 
after paying due compensation to the owner.  
The Central Government can enter and search any place and seize any antiquity or art 
treasure in respect of which provisions of the Act have not been complied with 
ASI is the final authority to declare whether any object is an antiquity or not. 
No person, other than the Central Government or agency/authority authorised by the 
Central Government, can export any antiquity or art treasure.  
No person can carry on business of selling or offering to sell antiquity without a licence 
issued for the purpose under Section 7 of the Act. 
  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 233 
 
Annex 1.3 
(Refer Para 1.3.5) 
Details of Monuments Physically Inspected 
Sl. No. Name of the circle No of monument physically inspected 
1. Agra 61 
2. Aurangabad 39 
3. Bengaluru 116 
4. Bhopal 111 
5. Bhubaneswar 20 
6. Chandigarh 60 
7. Chennai 105 
8. Dehradun 32 
9. Delhi 121 
10. Dharwad 121 
11. Goa 21 
12. Guwahati 38 
13. Hyderabad 44 
14. Jaipur 122 
15. Kolkata 83 
16. Lucknow 90 
17. Mumbai 27 
18. Patna 125 
19. Raipur 24 
20. Ranchi 11 
21. Shimla 14 
22. Srinagar 41 
23. Trissur 16 
24. Vadodara 213 
Total 1655 
 

Report No.  18 of 2013 
 
234 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Annex 2.1 
(Refer Para 2.5) 
Details of Missing Monuments  
Name of 
the circle 
Name of the 
state 
Number of 
monuments Name of the monuments 
Agra Uttar Pradesh 7 (i) Site of Aonla railway station, Bareilly (ii) 
Tomb of Lt. Col. John Guthrie, in mud fort, 
Farrukhabad (iii) Ancient sculpture, carving, 
images, basrelics, inscriptions, stones and like 
objects, Mathura (iv) Portion of Katra Mound 
which are not in the possession of Nazul 
Tenants on which formerly stood a temple of 
Keshav Dev which was dismantled and the 
site utilised for the mosque of Aurangazeb, 
Mathura (v) Monument of Kila Chandpur Fort, 
Bijnor (vi) Monument near Kila railway 
station, Hathras (vii) Old British cemertery, 
Bijnor 
Aurangabad Maharashtra 5 (i) Jarasangh Nagri at Jorve , Ahmednagar (ii) 
Stone Circle at Arsoda , Gadchiroli (iii) Group 
of twenty Cromlechs or Kistvaens at 
Chamorshi , Gadchiroli (iv) Stone Circle at 
Nildho (v) Stone Circle at Takalghat, Nagpur 
Bangaluru Karnataka 3 (i) Pre-Historic Site, Kittur, (ii) Pre-Historic Site 
Chikkajala and (iii) Pre-Historic Site Hejjala 
Bhopal Madhya Pradesh 2 (i) Rock Inscription (ii) Fresco Bachhaun 
Paintings, Gahira, Rewa 
Chandigarh Haryana 2 (i)Kos Minars at Shahbad and (ii) Kos Minar at 
Mujessar 
Chennai Tamil Nadu 3 (i) One Jaina statue, (ii) old town wall and (iii) 
David Yale & Joseph Hynmer’s tomb  
Dehradun Uttarakhand 2 (i) Kheraki Bandi, Roorkee and (ii) Kutumbari 
temple, Dwaraahat, Almora 
Delhi Delhi 15 (i) The Moti Gate of Sher Shah’s Delhi, Mauza 
Babarpur Bazidpur, (ii) Pool Chadar, Mauza 
Chaukri Mubarakabad, (iii) Alipur Cemetery, 
Alipur encamping ground, (iv) Bara Khamba 
Cemetery, Imperial city, (v) Tomb of Capt. Mc. 
Barnett & others who falls in an attack on 
Kishanganj, Kishanganj, (vi) Tomb with three 
domes near railway station, Nizamuddin, (vii) 
Site of Siege Battery bearing the inscription:- “ 
Right Attack, Lieutenant F.R. Mansell, R.E., 

Report No.  18  of 2013 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 235 
 
Directing Engineer, No.1 Battery-Right, Major 
James Brind, R.A., Commanding, Armament 
five 18-pounders: one 18-inch howitzer. To 
silence Mori Bastion.”, East of the hospital in 
police line, (viii) Site of Siege Battery with 
following inscription:- “No. II Battery-Right, 
Major Edward Kaye, R.A., Commanding 
Armament two 18-pounders; seven 8-inch 
howitzers, To breach Kashmir bastion.”, 
Compound of Curzon House, (ix) Inchla Wali 
Gumti, village Mubarak pur Kotla,  (x) Mound 
known as Joga Bai comprised in part of Survey 
plot no. 167 as Jamia Nagar, (xi) Shamsi Tallab 
together with both the platform entrance 
gates, Mehrauli, (xii) Nicholson Statue, its 
platform, its surrounding gardens, paths and 
enclosure wall, Outside of Kashmiri Gate, (xiii) 
Site siege battery at Quadsia Mosque garden, 
(xiv) Site siege battery at Quadsia Mosque 
garden,  (xv) Sat Narain Bhawan 
Dharwad Karnataka 1 (i) Nandikesvara Inscription at Bijapur 
Guwahati Assam 6 (i) Ruins of Copper Temple (ii) Guns of 
Emperor Sher Shah (iii)Tomb of Lt. Cresswell, 
Goalpara (iv) Sculpture of Bhairavi, Kamkhya 
Hill (v) Sculptures in Chummery Compound, 
Tezpur (vi) Stone Memorial of U-Mawthoh-
Dur, Shillong 
Hyderabad Andhra Pradesh 8 (i) Ancient Buddhist remains and Brahmi 
inscriptions on the mound, (ii) Sculptures, 
carvings, images or other like objects (iii) Hills 
of Nagarjunakonda with the ancient remains 
(iv) Sculptures, carvings, images on the 
ancient mound (v) Sculptures, carvings, 
images other like objects found in the vicinity 
of the mosque (vi) Large Dolmen (vii) 
Mounds-Dibba no. 1 to 5 (viii) Mound, 
Nagulavaram 
Jaipur Rajasthan 3 (i)Temple Baran, Inscription Nagar Tonk (ii) 
Archeological site (iii) Remains at Jeora, 
Nilodh 
Kolkata West Bengal 7 (i) A Mound and a statue of surya (ii) A Mound 
with a Jain statue (iii) Image of Durga slaying 
Mahishasura under a tree (iv) Temple site 
now represented only by a mound (v) A 
mound with an image of Nandi on it (vi) A 
mound with statues of Ganesh and Nandi on it 
(vii) Ruins of fort Nadia, West Bengal 

Report No.  18 of 2013 
 
236 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Lucknow Uttar Pradesh 9 (i) Remains of large temple, Ram Nagar, 
Chitrakoot (ii) Closed Cemetery, Katra Naka,  
Banda (iii) Large ruined site called Sandi 
Khera, Pali, Shahabad, Hardoi (iv) Cemetery, 
Jalaun (Bus Stand), Jalaun (v) Gunner Burkill’s 
Tomb, Rangaon, Mehroni, Lalitpur (vi)  
Imambara Amin-ud-Daula, Lucknow,  (vii) 
Three Tombs, Lucknow-Faizabad Road at 
miles 3, 4 & 5, Lucknow (viii) Cemeteries at 
miles 6 & 7, Jahraila Road,  Lucknow (ix) 
Cemetery at Gaughat, Lucknow 
Mumbai Maharashtra 3 (i) Old European Tomb at Pune (ii) One burj at 
Agarkot (iii) Portuguese Monastery over the 
cave large watch Tower on the adjoining hill 
at Mandapeshwar, Borivali 
Srinagar J&K 3 (i) Rock carving of Sitala, Narada, Brahma and 
Radha Krishna (Basohli) (ii) Visvesvara cave 
temple and other cave temples (Basohli) (iii) 
Rock carving of Devi riding a lion 
Vadodara Gujarat 2 (i) Ancient Site, Sejakpur , Surendranagar (ii)  
Historic Site .No. 431 to 435, Vadodara 
 
Patna Bihar 11 (i) Ruins of three small linga temple circle 
1000 AD, Ahugi Mirzapur, (ii) Three sites with 
megaliths on the western and north eastern 
toes of the hill, Chandauli, (iii) Tablet on 
treasury building, Varanasi, (iv) Telia Nala 
Buddhist ruins, Varanasi, (v) A Banyan grove 
containing traces of ancient building, Amavey, 
Ballia, (vi) Dih or mound of ruins called Suri-
ka-Raj, Ghazipur, (vii) Mound of brick ruins, 
Sahiya Kushinagar, (viii) A series of enormous 
mound, Gorakhpur, (ix) Remains of ramparts 
and the mound commonly known as ‘Queen’s 
Palace’ in the old fort known as Killa, Bihar 
sharif, Nalanda, (x) Large Dih or mound at 
Chetion, Kasia,Kushinagar (xi) Mound of ruins 
called Sareya, Kishinagar 
  92  
 

Report No.  18  of 2013 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 237 
 
Annex 2.2 
(Refer Para 2.6.3) 
Details of Cases where Final Notification was not Issued 
Circle Name of the monument 
Hyderabad Ancient Site at Pusalapadu, District Prakasam 
Patna Long mound, Distt,Chandausi, Uttar Pradesh 
Large rectangular shape mound, Distt Chandausi, Uttar Pradesh 
Small conical mound of ruins called Devi-ka-Sthan, Distt Chandausi, Uttar Pradesh 
Ancient Buddhist site known as Chaukhandi Stupa, Distt Chanduasi, Uttar Pradesh 
Kolkata  St Johns’ Church 
Bhopal Kamlapati Mahal and adjoining areas, Bhopal 
The statue of a boar (Vishnu Varah), an image of Mahadeo and figures of other 
Hindu and Jain Gods, scattered over four tumuli and under a bargat tree, Katni 
Shiva temple on a carved stone chabutra and 8 stone jain images, Katni 
Ladaki-ka-Tila, Katni 
Painted rock shelters, two Buddhist stupas and other other remains, Sehore, MP 
The  site of Kankalidevi temple including the Devi temple and ruined temple close 
to them, Katni, MP 
Guwahati Ancient mound called Shyam Sunder Till 
Pujakhola, Tripura 
Trissur Tenkailasanatha Temple 
Shiva temple, Thiruvanchikulam 
 
  

Report No.  18 of 2013 
 
238 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Annex 2.3 
(Refer Para 2.6.8) 
Antiquities Protected as Monuments 
S No Circle office District Name of the monument 
1.  Guwahati 
Sib sagar Eight Cannons of the Ahom period on the bank of 
the Sibsagar tank, Sibsagar 
Sib sagar Siva idol, Joysagar 
Tin Sukhia Gun of the Emperor Sher Shah, Sadia 
Tin Sukhia Two Swivel guns belonging to the Mughal 
Nawwara, Sadia 
2.  Patna Patna Tank 
3.  Raipur Bastar Ganesh statue 
4.  Vadodara Diu Bangli 
5.  Dharwad Bijapur All old guns on ramparts and in trophy 
6.  Mumbai 
Sholapur Mahadev Stones 
Thane Carved Stones 
7.  Jaipur 
Bharatpur Looted gun 
Bharatpur Marble Jholla 
Bharatpur Kaccha Bag 
8.  Chennai 
Thanjavur Big Cannon (Rajagopaol Cannon) in the first 
Rampart and the Bastions in Ts No. 608 of Ward 
iii 
Vellore The Cannon 
9.  Lucknow 
Mahoba Five life sized elephant statues 
Jaunpur Stone group of a gigantic lion standing on a small 
elephant.  It is lying on Akbar’s bridge 
10.  Kolkata 
Bankura Dalmadal Gun and the platform on which it is 
mounted 
Murshidabad Jahan Kosa Gun 
 
  

Report No.  18  of 2013 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 239 
 
 
Annex 2.4 
(Refer Para 2.8.2) 
Unauthorised Closure of Monument or its Parts  
Sl.  no. Name of the Circle Name of the monument 
1.  
Bhopal 
Man Mandir Palace, Gwalior 
2.  Cave no. 20 at Udaigiri 
3.  Bhimbetka, WHS 
4.  Some part of Hammam, Burhanpur 
5.  
Delhi 
Safdarjung tomb 
6.  Najaf Khan Tomb 
7.  Jantar Mantar 
8.  Qutb Minar 
9.  Lal Qila 
10.  Munda Gumbad 
11.  Sakri Gumti 
12.  Lal Gumbad 
13.  Kale Khan Tomb 
14.  Lal Gumbad, Chirag Delhi 
15.  Sunder Burj 
16.  
Dharwad 
Bidar Fort  
17.  Vittala Complex, Hampi 
18.  Goa Convent of St. Francis of Assisi 
19.  
Hyderabad 
Buddhist remains at Manchikallu 
20.  One portion of Charminar 
21.  Lucknow Flat roofed temple, Mahoba and Lakhanpur Mound at 
Hamirpur 
22.  Raipur Sabhamantapa of Vittala complex 
23.  Shimla Ruined Fort, Kangra 
 
 
 

Report No. 18  of 2013 
 
240 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Annex 3.1 
(Refer Para 3.1) 
List of World Heritage Sites 
Sl. no. Name of the Site Year of 
inclusion State 
I Cultural Sites (Under protection of ASI) 
1.  Ajanta Caves  1983 Maharashtra 
2.  Ellora Caves  1983 Maharashtra 
3.  Agra Fort  1983 Uttar Pradesh 
4.  Taj Mahal  1983 Uttar Pradesh 
5.  Sun Temple, Konark  1984 Orissa 
6.  Group of monuments at Mahabalipuram  1984 Tamil Nadu 
7.  Churches and Convents of Goa  1986 Goa 
8.  Group of temples, Khajuraho  1986 Madhya Pradesh 
9.  Group of monuments at Hampi  1986 Karnataka 
10.  Group of monuments, Fatehpur Sikri  1986 Uttar Pradesh 
11.  Group of temples, Pattadakal  1987 Karnataka 
12.  Elephanta Caves  1987 Maharashtra 
13.  Great Living Chola temples at Thanjavur 
Gangaikondacholapuram and Darasuram  
1987 & 
2004 
Tamil Nadu 
14.  Buddhist monuments at Sanchi 1989 Madhya Pradesh 
15.  Humayun Tomb, Delhi  1993 Delhi 
16.  Qutb Minar Complex, Delhi  1993 Delhi 
17.  Prehistoric Rock Shelters of Bhimbetka  2003 Madhya Pradesh 
18.  Champaner Pavagarh Archaeological Park  2004 Gujarat 
19.  Red Fort Complex, Delhi  2007 Delhi 
II Under Protection of Ministry of Railways 
20.  Mountain Railway of India (Darjeeling , 
Nilgiri , Kalka Shimla) 
1999, 
2005, 2008 
West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, 
Himachal Pradesh 
21.  Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus (formerly 
Victoria Terminus)  
2004 Maharashtra 
III (Under protection of Bodhgaya Temple Management Committee) 
22.  Mahabodhi Temple Bodhgaya  2002 Bihar 
IV  (Under protection of Rajasthan State Archaeology and Museums Department) 
23.  Jantar Mantar Jaipur  2010 Rajasthan 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 241 
 
Sl. no. Name of the Site Year of 
inclusion State 
V  Natural Sites (Under protection of Ministry of Environment and Forest) 
24.  Kaziranga National Park  1985 Assam 
25.  Manas Wild life sanctuary  1985 Assam 
26.  Keoladeo National Park  1987 Rajasthan 
27.  Sunderban National Park  1987 West Bengal 
28.  Nanda Devi and Valley of Flowers National 
Parks  
1988, 2005 Uttarakhand 
29.  Western Ghats  2012 Kerala, Tamil Nadu,  
Andhra Pradesh 

Report No. 18  of 2013 
 
242 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Annex 3.2 
(Refer Para 3.2.2) 
Monuments in the Tentative List for World Heritage Sites 
 
Sl. no. Name of the Monument/Site Month and Year of 
inclusion in the Tentative 
list 
1. 67 Ancient Buddhist Site, Sarnath, Varanasi, Uttar 
Pradesh 
July 1998 
2.  Bhitarkanika Conservation Area May 2009 
3.  Buddhist Monastery Complex, Alchi, Leh, known 
as Alchi Chos-kor 
July 1998 
4.  Churchgate - Extension to Mumbai CST January 2009 
5.  Delhi - A Heritage City May 2012 
6.  Desert National Park May 2009 
7.  Dholavira: a Harappan City, Gujarat, Disstt, 
Kachchh 
July 1998 
8.  Excavated Remains at Nalanda January 2009 
9.  Golconda Fort, Hyderbad, Andhra Pradesh July 1998 
10.  Great Himalayan National Park May 2009 
11.  Group of Monuments at Mandu, Madhya Pradesh July 1998 
12.  Hemis Gompa July 1998 
13.  Hill Forts of Rajasthan December 2010 
14.  Historic city of Ahmadabad March 2011 
15.  Kangchendzonga National Park March 2006 
16.  Mattanchery Palace, Ernakulam, Kerala July 1998 
17.  Mughal Gardens in Kashmir December 2010 
18.  Namdapha National Park March 2006 
19.  Neora Valley National Park May 2009 
20.  Oak Grove School January 2009 
21.  Rani-ki-Vav (The Queen's Stepwell) at Patan, 
Gujarat 
July 1998 
                                                            
67 Brown Colour entries depict ASI protected Monuments/Sites 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 243 
 
Sl. no. Name of the Monument/Site Month and Year of 
inclusion in the Tentative 
list 
22.  River Island of Majuli in midstream of 
Brahmaputra River in Assam 
March 2004 
23.  Santiniketan January 2010 
24.  Silk Road Sites in India January 2010 
25.  Sri Harimandir Sahib, Amritsar, Punjab January 2004 
26.  Temples at Bishnupur, West Bengal July 1998 
27.  The Kangra Valley Railway - Extension to the 
Mountain Railways of India 
January 2009 
28.  The Maharaja Railways of India January 2009 
29.  The Matheran Light Railway (extension to the 
Mountain Railways of India) 
November 2005 
30.  The Qutb Shahi Monuments of Hyderabad 
Golconda Fort, Qutb Shahi Tombs, Charminar 
September 2010 
31.  The Victorian & Art Deco Ensemble of Mumbai May 2012 
32.  Tomb of Sher Shah Suri, Sasaram, Bihar July 1998 
33.  Urban and Architectural Work of Le Corbusier in 
Chandigarh 
October 2006 
34.  Wild Ass Sanctuary, Little Rann of Kutch March 2006 
 
 
 
  

Report No. 18  of 2013 
 
244 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Annex 3.3 
(Refer Para 3.4) 
General Information of World Heritage Sites  
for the period 2007-08 to 2011-12 
  
Name of the site  Expenditure 
on 
conservation 
(` in crores) 
Indian 
Visitors 
(number in 
lakh) 
Foreign 
Visitors 
(number 
in lakh) 
Revenue 
(` in 
crore) 
Number 
of 
Security 
Guards 
Number of 
Encroachmen
t cases 
Number of cases of 
Unauthorised 
construction 
Sun temple, Odisha 2.82 93.07 0.44 9.91 52 Nil Nil 
Khajuraho, Madhya 
Pradesh 
3.19 11.26 4.35 9.43 9 Nil 628 
Bhimbetka, Madhya 
Pradesh 
0.29 Non ticketed Monument 20 1 Nil 
Buddhist Monument 
Sanchi, Madhya Pradesh 
0.73 8.49 0.47 1.85 2 Nil 49 
Taj Mahal, Uttar Pradesh 72.71 172.94 30.55 84.9 275 Nil 33 
Fatehpur Sikri, Uttar 
Pradesh 
53.94 16.29 10.18 24.87 46 Nil 194 
Agra Fort, Uttar Pradesh 46.3 70.55 17.52 47.94 45 Nil 7 
Hampi, Karnataka 14.87 22.35 1.65 6.26 79 2 41 
Ajanta Caves, 
Maharashtra 
7.19 15.4 1.17 4.97 42 Nil Nil 
Ellora Caves, 
Maharashtra 
4.67 37.78 1.02 7.15 42 Nil Nil 
Elephanta Caves, 
Maharashtra 
0.59 12.98 0.93 4.05 29 Nil Nil 
Mahabalipuram, Tamil 
Nadu 
2.5 47.27 3.42 12.94 14 Nil 39 
Chola temples, Thanjavur 3.19 Non ticketed Monument 18 Nil 64 
Champaner, Pavagadh, 
Gujarat 
3.48 4.62 0.08 0.48 66 1 107 
Pattadakal, Karnataka 0.78 13.22 0.28 1.83 22 Nil Nil 
Churches of Goa 3.71 Non ticketed Monument 7 Nil Nil 
Red Fort, Delhi 14.51 117.16 7.45 25.59 436 2 13 
Qutb Minar, Delhi 5.72 121.21 14.24 47.73 57 1 Nil 
Humayun's Tomb, Delhi 2.77 17.51 11.23 30.13 67 Nil  Nil 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 245 
 
Annex 3.4 
(Refer Para 3.4 and 3.5) 
Details of Deficiencies at the World Heritage Sites 
Irregularity/Non 
Availability of  
Number of 
Monuments/ 
Sites 
Name of the Monument/Site 
Site Plan and 
notification with 
Sub Circle 
5 Qutb Minar, Humayun’s Tomb, Hampi, Great Living Chola 
temples Thanjavur and Mahabalipuram 
Long Term Plan 14 Hampi, Sanchi, Bhimbetka, Khajuraho, Mahabalipuram, 
Chola Temples, Elephanta Caves, Ellora, Qutb Minar, Red 
fort, Humayun’s Tomb, Agra Fort, Fatehpur Sikri and Taj 
Mahal 
Drinking Water 1 Churches of Goa 
Lockers 11 Ajanta, Ellora, Elephanta, Fatehpur Sikri, Mahabalipuram, 
Bhimbetka and Pattadakal, Churches of Goa, Hampi, 
Konark Sun Temple,  Champaner 
Facility for 
differently abled 
6 Red Fort, Humayun’s Tomb, Chola Temples Thanjavur, 
Mahabalipuram, Bhimbetka and Hampi 
Publication 4 Hampi, Churches of Goa, Chola Temple and Pattadakal 
Inspection and 
Maintenance 
6 Agra Fort, Pattadakal, Churches of Goa, Red Fort, Qutb 
Minar and Humayun’s Tomb 
Security Equipment 
(Hand Held Metal 
detectors, scanners) 
7 Pattadakal, Champaner and Churches of Goa, Bhimbetka, 
Chola Temples Thanjavur, Mahabalipuram, Elephanta 
CCTV 16 Konark Sun Temple, Hampi, Pattadakal, Churches of Goa, 
Champaner, Bhimbetka, Chola Temples, Mahabalipuram, 
Elephanta, Ellora and Ajanta, Red Fort, Qutb Minar, 
Humayun’s Tomb, Fatehpur Sikri and Agra Fort. 
Lightening 
Detectors 
8 Humayun’s Tomb, Agra Fort, Ajanta, Elephanta, 
Mahabalipuram, Bhimbetka, Sanchi and Hampi 
Guide Service 19 Red Fort, Humayun’s Tomb, Qutb Minar, Ajanta, Ellora, 
Elephanta, Chola Temples Thanjavur, Mahabalipuram, 
Khajuraho, Bhimbetka, Sanchi, Churches of Goa, Hampi, 
Pattadakal, Sun Temple, Champaner, Taj Mahal, Agra 
Fort, Fatehpur Sikri 

Report No. 18  of 2013 
 
246 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Audio Guide Service 14 Red Fort, Humayun’s Tomb, Fatehpur Sikri, Bhimbetka, 
Hampi, Pattadakal, Ajanta, Ellora, Elephanta, 
Mahabalipuram, Chola temples Thanjavur, Churches of 
Goa, Sun temple, Champaner 
Encroachments 5 Hampi, Champaner, Bhimbetka, Red Fort, Qutb Minar, 
Unauthorised 
Constructions 
10 Khajuraho, Sanchi, Fatehpur, Taj Mahal, Agra Fort, 
Hampi, Chola Temples Thanjavur, Mahabalipuram, 
Champaner and Red Fort 
Monument Partly 
closed 
9 Agra Fort, Red Fort, Qutb Minar, Taj Mahal, Ajanta, 
Bhimbetka, Churches of Goa, Hampi and Sun Temple. 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
   
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 247 
 
Annex 4.1 
(Refer Para no. 4.7) 
Details of ASI and NCF Projects  
 
S 
No. 
Name of the 
Project 
Date of 
Signing of 
MoU 
Purpose of MoU Project Sponsor 
Total 
Committed 
Amount 
(` in lakhs) 
Contribution 
by Sponsor 
till 31.3.12 
(` In lakh) 
Balance in 
Project 
Account as on 
31.3.12 
(` In lakh) 
 
Project Status 
1. Humayun’s 
Tomb, New 
Delhi  
16.4.1999 Conservation, 
research 
documentation, 
reinstating of water 
systems and 
illumination apart 
from restoration of 
gardens  
 Aga Khan Trust, 
Geneva and M/s. 
Oberoi Group of 
Hotels, New 
Delhi.  
30.46 30.46 0.16 Completed 
 
 
2. Shaniwarwada 
Palace, Pune  
22.1.2001 To enliven the 
environs and 
recreate the 
splendor of 
Shaniwarwada 
Palace, Pune.  
 Pune Municipal 
Corporation  
96.03 96.03 27.94 Completed 
 
 
3. Jantar Mantar, 
New Delhi 
 
11.10.2000 
 
Conservation and 
enhancement of 
Jantar Mantar, New 
Delhi. 
M/s. Apeejay 
Surendra Hotels 
Ltd. 
10.00 
 
16.50 6.37 Even after 12 years the 
project could not be 
completed.  The Project 
Implementation 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
   
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 248 
 
S 
No. 
Name of the 
Project 
Date of 
Signing of 
MoU 
Purpose of MoU Project Sponsor 
Total 
Committed 
Amount 
(` in lakhs) 
Contribution 
by Sponsor 
till 31.3.12 
(` In lakh) 
Balance in 
Project 
Account as on 
31.3.12 
(` In lakh) 
 
Project Status 
 Committee (PIC) was not 
aware of items like 
selection of project 
consultant firms for 
carrying out the lighting 
and signage etc as  
these were managed 
only by the donor. The 
MoU though valid for 5 
years had not been 
revised. 
4. Taj Mahal, Agra  
 
21.6.2001 Preservation, 
upgradation Taj 
Mahal, Agra. 
M/s. Indian 
Hotels Company 
Ltd., ASI 
187.00 104.00 0.03 The validity of MoU was 
25 years. The donor 
intimated that they had 
spent entire committed 
amount and were not in 
a position to 
commit/contribute any 
further funds and intend 
to close the project.  DG 
ASI was asked to report 
on current status in 
December 2010 which 
was still pending. 
(February 2013) 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
   
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 249 
 
S 
No. 
Name of the 
Project 
Date of 
Signing of 
MoU 
Purpose of MoU Project Sponsor 
Total 
Committed 
Amount 
(` in lakhs) 
Contribution 
by Sponsor 
till 31.3.12 
(` In lakh) 
Balance in 
Project 
Account as on 
31.3.12 
(` In lakh) 
 
Project Status 
5. Development 
of: 
1. Qutb Minar, 
Delhi  
2. Sun Temple, 
Konark, 
Orissa   
3. Kanheri, 
Maharashtra 
4. Hampi, 
Karnataka  
5. Khajuraho, 
MP  
30.3.2001 Development and 
conservation 
Indian Oil 
Corporation 
(IOC) 
4000.00 2700.00 110.83 
 
An amount ` 26.00 
crore, received from IOC 
was transferred to Indian 
Oil Federation (IOF) 
against which tax 
exemption certificate 
was issued to IOC. No 
site work had started as 
yet. Monument had also 
been changed both by 
ASI and IOF.  NCF was 
not interested in 
renewing the MoU with 
IOC.  
6. Jaisalmer Fort, 
Rajasthan  
 
13.8.2003 Conservation, 
restoration of 
Jaisalmer Fort.  
World 
Monuments 
Fund (1.96 
crore), 
ASI (4.00 crore) 
596.00 600.00 515.27 The MoU though signed 
with an international 
organisation was 
however not vetted by 
any legal expert, had not 
any timelines etc.  
Though a joint account 
was opened, payments 
were made without 
signatures of 
representatives of WMF.  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
   
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 250 
 
S 
No. 
Name of the 
Project 
Date of 
Signing of 
MoU 
Purpose of MoU Project Sponsor 
Total 
Committed 
Amount 
(` in lakhs) 
Contribution 
by Sponsor 
till 31.3.12 
(` In lakh) 
Balance in 
Project 
Account as on 
31.3.12 
(` In lakh) 
 
Project Status 
Some studies like soil 
testing, geological 
studies etc. were carried 
out but field work had 
not started even after 
nine years of signing of 
MoU. 
7. Lodhi Tomb, 
New Delhi  
 
10.1.2006 Lodhi Garden 
Monuments   
(i) Sikandar Lodi 
Tomb  
(ii) Sheesh Gumbad
(iii) BadaGumbad, 
Mosque  
(iv) Mohammad 
Shah Tomb an  
(v) Athpula (Old 
Lodi Bridge)  
M/s. SAIL, New 
Delhi. 
100.00 + 
50.00 (for 
maintenance 
for five years 
after 
completion 
of 
conservation)
50.00 27.33 
 
Being overburdened, ASI 
refused to take up the 
work and it was awarded 
to INTACH. No formal 
work order/agreement 
was signed with INTACH.  
The work carried out by 
INTACH, when reviewed 
by ASI was found to be 
of poor quality.  INTACH 
agreed to carry out the 
corrections and asked to 
release the second 
instalment. However, ASI 
asked to carry out the 
corrections before 
release of any more 
funds. No further 
progress was noticed.  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
   
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 251 
 
S 
No. 
Name of the 
Project 
Date of 
Signing of 
MoU 
Purpose of MoU Project Sponsor 
Total 
Committed 
Amount 
(` in lakhs) 
Contribution 
by Sponsor 
till 31.3.12 
(` In lakh) 
Balance in 
Project 
Account as on 
31.3.12 
(` In lakh) 
 
Project Status 
8. Lauriya Nandan 
Garh Project 
 
18.12.2007 Development of 
tourist amenities at 
Lauriya Nandan 
Garh, Chanki Garh 
and Rampurwa, 
West Champaran 
Bihar.  
M/s. Bokaro 
Steel Plan 
 
 
50.00 25.00 25.04 No field work had 
started as yet even after 
five years of signing of 
MoU.  The validity of 
MoU was till Dec 
2012.No efforts had 
been made to revise the 
MoU. NCF informed that 
ASI had suggested 
changing the monument 
due to inaccessibility and 
working conditions. 
9. Gol Gumbaz, 
Bijapur 
 
22.2.2008 
 
Restoration of Gol 
Gumbaz, Bijapur 
M/s. State 
Trading Corp Ltd. 
50.00 10.00 11.40 The consultant was to be 
selected for the project. 
No field work had 
started as yet. 
10. Wazirpur-Ka-
Gumbad, New 
Delhi  
 
28.3.2008 Restoration of 
Wazirpur-Ka-
Gumbad , Munirka, 
New Delhi  
M/s. PEC Ltd. 
 
25.00 16.00 1.48 MoU was signed but 
after more than three 
years, ASI asked the 
project sponsor to 
change the monument. 
NCF never objected and 
took up ‘Yusuf Qattal’ by 
issuing an addendum in 
Aug 2011. Work was still 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
   
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 252 
 
S 
No. 
Name of the 
Project 
Date of 
Signing of 
MoU 
Purpose of MoU Project Sponsor 
Total 
Committed 
Amount 
(` in lakhs) 
Contribution 
by Sponsor 
till 31.3.12 
(` In lakh) 
Balance in 
Project 
Account as on 
31.3.12 
(` In lakh) 
 
Project Status 
under progress.  MoU 
which was valid only for 
three years  had not 
been revised. 
11. Krishna 
Temple, Hampi 
 
12.6.2008 Conservation of 
Krishna Temple, 
Hampi 
Hampi 
Foundation, 
Karnataka 
400.00 40.00 34.68 No concrete work 
hadstarted; the scope of 
work of consultant was 
yet  to be defined. 
12. Hidimba Devi 
Project  
 
15.7.2008 Restoration of 
Hidimba Devi 
Temple, Manali.  
UCO Bank, 
Chandigarh 
 
20.00 20.00 22.27 The actual work at site 
had not yet started.  The 
addendum to the MoU 
was to be issued. 
13. Tughlaqabad 
Fort Project  
 
 
13.4.2009 Adoption of 
Tughlaqabad Fort, 
New Delhi.  
M/s. GAIL India 
Ltd. 
 
30.00 30.00 32.95 After two years of 
signing of MoU, ASI 
changed the monument 
citing security problems.  
NCF neither raised any 
objection nor issued an 
addendum to this effect. 
14. Ibrahim Rauza 
Project  
11.12..2009 Development of 
Gardens of Ibrahim 
Rauza and 
GolGumbaz, Bijapur 
Naurus Trust, 
Karnataka 
 
30.00 15.00 15.40 The work was to be 
carried out in three 
phases in four years. So 
far only the first phase 
had been completed. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
   
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 253 
 
S 
No. 
Name of the 
Project 
Date of 
Signing of 
MoU 
Purpose of MoU Project Sponsor 
Total 
Committed 
Amount 
(` in lakhs) 
Contribution 
by Sponsor 
till 31.3.12 
(` In lakh) 
Balance in 
Project 
Account as on 
31.3.12 
(` In lakh) 
 
Project Status 
15. Mandu, 
Vikramshila 
and 
Lalitgiri/Dhauli 
22.12.2009 Conservation M/s. NTPC Ltd. 
 
 
500.00 50.00 55.67 Two years after signing 
of MoU, ASI requested 
NTPC to shift the 
monument from 
Jageshwari to 
Vikramshila. The work 
was under progress 
16. Shiv Temple, 
Ambernath 
25.2.2010 Conservation of 
ancient Shiv 
Temple, 
Ambernath.  
M/s. Nagarik 
Seva Mandal, 
Ambernath 
22.31 22.31 22.31 The actual work at the 
site had not yet started. 
17. Ahom 
Monument 
29.6.2010 Renovation and 
maintenance of 
four Ahom 
monuments:-  
 
ONGC 238.00 30.00 15.59 PIC meeting in Aug 2011 
decided that: 
The project should be 
implemented by 
Regional Director, East 
and his team.  SA, 
Guwahati Circle would 
call for EOI for employing 
the required personnel 
on contract basis for 
implementation of the 
project. 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
   
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 254 
 
S 
No. 
Name of the 
Project 
Date of 
Signing of 
MoU 
Purpose of MoU Project Sponsor 
Total 
Committed 
Amount 
(` in lakhs) 
Contribution 
by Sponsor 
till 31.3.12 
(` In lakh) 
Balance in 
Project 
Account as on 
31.3.12 
(` In lakh) 
 
Project Status 
18. Hazarduari 
Palace 
13.7.2010 
 
Adoption of 
Hazarduari Palace, 
West Bengal.   
State Bank of 
India, Kolkata 
Branch 
75.00 20.00 21.03 The actual work at the 
site had not yet started. 
19. Shore Temple, 
Mahabalipuram
19.4.2011 Construction of 
toilets at Shore 
Temple, 
Mahabalipuram 
Shipping 
Corporation of 
India 
40.00 6.00 0.25 NCF stated that the work 
was going to be 
completed very soon. 
 
  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
   
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 255 
 
Annex 4.2 
(Refer case study no. 5) 
Conditions of Kos Minars Noticed During Joint Physical Inspection 
S No Name of Kos 
Minar 
Location 
(Sub-Circle/ 
Circle) 
Copy of 
notification 
available at 
sub circle 
Site plan 
available 
at  
sub 
circle 
Protection
 Notice 
Board 
Cultural 
Notice 
Board 
Access 
Road 
Encroach-
ment 
Construction
 in 
 prohibited/ 
regulated 
 area 
Annual 
 Repair/ 
 Special 
 Repair 
 during 
2007-08 
to 
2011-12 
Expenditure 
Incurred 
on 
Annual Repair/ 
Special Repair 
during 
2007-08 to 
2011-12 
(`) 
Need 
 chemical 
treatment 
1. Kos Minar, 
CheemaKalan 
(Distt. 
Jalandhar) 
Nakodar/ 
Chandigarh 
No No Yes No Yes No No No Nil Yes 
2. Kos Minar, 
BirPind (Distt. 
Jalandhar) 
 
Nakodar/ 
Chandigarh 
No No Yes No No No No No Nil Yes 
3. Kos Minar, 
Nakodar (Distt. 
Jalandhar) 
 
Nakodar/ 
Chandigarh 
No No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes No Nil Yes 
4. Kos Minar, 
DakhniJahangir 
(Distt. 
Jalandhar) 
Nakodar/ 
Chandigarh 
No No Yes No No No No No Nil Yes 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
   
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 256 
 
S No Name of Kos 
Minar 
Location 
(Sub-Circle/ 
Circle) 
Copy of 
notification 
available at 
sub circle 
Site plan 
available 
at  
sub 
circle 
Protection
 Notice 
Board 
Cultural 
Notice 
Board 
Access 
Road 
Encroach-
ment 
Construction
 in 
 prohibited/ 
regulated 
 area 
Annual 
 Repair/ 
 Special 
 Repair 
 during 
2007-08 
to 
2011-12 
Expenditure 
Incurred 
on 
Annual Repair/ 
Special Repair 
during 
2007-08 to 
2011-12 
(`) 
Need 
 chemical 
treatment 
5. Kos Minar, 
Dakhni Dhada 
Khanpur (Distt. 
Jalandhar) 
Nakodar/ 
Chandigarh 
No No Yes No No No No No Nil Yes 
6. Kos Minar 
Kohand (Distt. 
Karnal) 
Thanesar/ 
Chandigarh 
No No No No Yes No Yes No Nil No 
7. Kos Minar 
Gharaunda 
south (Distt. 
Karnal) 
Thanesar/ 
Chandigarh 
No No No No Yes Yes Yes No Nil No 
8. Kos Minar 
Gharaunda 
north (Distt. 
Karnal) 
Thanesar/ 
Chandigarh 
No No No No No No Yes No Nil Yes 
9. Kos Minar 
Kutail (Distt. 
Karnal) 
Thanesar/ 
Chandigarh 
No No No No No Yes Yes No Nil Yes 
10. Kos Minar 
Tirawari north 
(Distt. Karnal) 
Thanesar/ 
Chandigarh 
No No Yes No Yes No No No Nil Yes 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
   
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 257 
 
S No Name of Kos 
Minar 
Location 
(Sub-Circle/ 
Circle) 
Copy of 
notification 
available at 
sub circle 
Site plan 
available 
at  
sub 
circle 
Protection
 Notice 
Board 
Cultural 
Notice 
Board 
Access 
Road 
Encroach-
ment 
Construction
 in 
 prohibited/ 
regulated 
 area 
Annual 
 Repair/ 
 Special 
 Repair 
 during 
2007-08 
to 
2011-12 
Expenditure 
Incurred 
on 
Annual Repair/ 
Special Repair 
during 
2007-08 to 
2011-12 
(`) 
Need 
 chemical 
treatment 
11. Kos Minar 
Bheni Kalan 
(Distt. Karnal) 
Thanesar/ 
Chandigarh 
No No Yes No No No No Yes 3,36,507 No 
12. Kos Minar 
Daha (Distt. 
Karnal) 
Thanesar/ 
Chandigarh 
No No No No Yes No Yes No Nil Yes 
13. Kos Minar 
Namastay  
Chowk, Karnal 
Thanesar/ 
Chandigarh 
No No Yes No No No No Yes 2,37,008 No 
14. Kos 
MinarKarnal 
city 
Thanesar/ 
Chandigarh 
No No Yes No Yes No Yes Yes 2,12,990 No 
15. Kos Minar 
Tirawari south 
(Distt. Karnal) 
Thanesar/ 
Chandigarh 
No No No No Yes No Yes No Nil Yes 
16. Kos Minar 
No.11, Mawai 
(Faridabad) 
Narnaul/ 
Chandigarh 
No No No No Yes No Yes Yes 30,736 No 
17. Kos Minar 
Khiwaza Sarai 
(Faridabad) 
Narnaul/ 
Chandigarh 
No No Yes No Yes No Yes Yes 81,212 No 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
   
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 258 
 
S No Name of Kos 
Minar 
Location 
(Sub-Circle/ 
Circle) 
Copy of 
notification 
available at 
sub circle 
Site plan 
available 
at  
sub 
circle 
Protection
 Notice 
Board 
Cultural 
Notice 
Board 
Access 
Road 
Encroach-
ment 
Construction
 in 
 prohibited/ 
regulated 
 area 
Annual 
 Repair/ 
 Special 
 Repair 
 during 
2007-08 
to 
2011-12 
Expenditure 
Incurred 
on 
Annual Repair/ 
Special Repair 
during 
2007-08 to 
2011-12 
(`) 
Need 
 chemical 
treatment 
18. Kos Minar No. 
18, Alapur 
(Distt. Palwal) 
Narnaul/ 
Chandigarh 
No No Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes 97,513 No 
19. Kos Minar No. 
15, Sikri (Distt. 
Palwal) 
Narnaul/ 
Chandigarh 
No No No No Yes No Yes Yes 3,63,925 No 
20. Kos Minar No. 
17, Gudhpuri 
(Distt. Palwal) 
Narnaul/ 
Chandigarh 
No No No No No No Yes Yes 4,02,308 No 
21. Kos Minar No. 
19  (Distt 
Palwal) 
Narnaul/ 
Chandigarh 
No No Yes No Yes Yes Yes Yes 3,23,106 No 
22. Kos Minar No. 
20, Khusropur 
(Distt. Palwal) 
Narnaul/ 
Chandigarh 
No No Yes No Yes No Yes Yes 3,62,265 No 
23. Kos Minar No. 
21, Khera Sarai 
(Distt. Palwal) 
Narnaul/ 
Chandigarh 
No No Yes No No No No Yes 3,35,517 No 
24. Kos Minar No. 
22, 
Aurangabad 
Narnaul/ 
Chandigarh 
No No Yes No Yes No Yes No Nil No 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
   
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 259 
 
S No Name of Kos 
Minar 
Location 
(Sub-Circle/ 
Circle) 
Copy of 
notification 
available at 
sub circle 
Site plan 
available 
at  
sub 
circle 
Protection
 Notice 
Board 
Cultural 
Notice 
Board 
Access 
Road 
Encroach-
ment 
Construction
 in 
 prohibited/ 
regulated 
 area 
Annual 
 Repair/ 
 Special 
 Repair 
 during 
2007-08 
to 
2011-12 
Expenditure 
Incurred 
on 
Annual Repair/ 
Special Repair 
during 
2007-08 to 
2011-12 
(`) 
Need 
 chemical 
treatment 
(Distt. Palwal) 
25. Kos Minar No. 
25, Banchari 
(Distt. Palwal) 
Narnaul/ 
Chandigarh 
No No Yes No No No Yes Yes 3,95,272 No 
26. Kos Minar No. 
24, Banchari 
(Distt. Palwal) 
Narnaul/ 
Chandigarh 
No No Yes No No Yes No No Nil No 
27. Kos Minar No. 
23, Khatela 
(Distt. Palwal) 
Narnaul/ 
Chandigarh 
No No No No Yes No Yes No Nil No 
28. Kos Minar No. 
16, Gudhpuri 
(Distt. Palwal) 
Narnaul/ 
Chandigarh 
No No No No No No Yes Yes 4,41,454 No 
29. Kos Minar No. 
27 Bhulwana 
(Distt. Palwal) 
Narnaul/ 
Chandigarh 
No No Yes Yes Yes No No No Nil No 
30. Kos Minar No. 
26, Hodal 
(Distt. Palwal) 
Narnaul/ 
Chandigarh 
No No No No No Yes Yes No Nil No 
31. Kos Minar, 
Mile 3, Furlong 
Mathura 
Delhi road 
No No Yes Yes No No No No Nil Yes 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
   
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 260 
 
S No Name of Kos 
Minar 
Location 
(Sub-Circle/ 
Circle) 
Copy of 
notification 
available at 
sub circle 
Site plan 
available 
at  
sub 
circle 
Protection
 Notice 
Board 
Cultural 
Notice 
Board 
Access 
Road 
Encroach-
ment 
Construction
 in 
 prohibited/ 
regulated 
 area 
Annual 
 Repair/ 
 Special 
 Repair 
 during 
2007-08 
to 
2011-12 
Expenditure 
Incurred 
on 
Annual Repair/ 
Special Repair 
during 
2007-08 to 
2011-12 
(`) 
Need 
 chemical 
treatment 
5.175 from the 
boundary, 
Mathura-Delhi 
Road, Mathura 
32. Kos Minar or 
Mughal 
milestone, 
Delhi 
Delhi Zoo No No No No Yes No Yes NO Nil Yes 
33. Kos Minar 
erected by 
Emperor Akbar 
Ajmer 
Jaipur 
Road 
No No No No Yes Yes No No nil Yes 
34. Kos Minar 
erected by 
Emperor Akbar 
Ajmer 
Jaipur 
Road 
No No Yes Yes Yes No No Yes 41786 Yes 
35. Kos Minar 
erected by 
Emperor Akbar 
Chugra, 
Ajmer 
No No No No No No Yes No nil Yes 
36. Kos Minar 
erected by 
Emperor Akbar 
Kair, Ajmer No No No No No No No Yes 17567 Yes 
37. Kos Minar Chhatri, No No No No No No No Yes Nil Yes 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
   
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 261 
 
S No Name of Kos 
Minar 
Location 
(Sub-Circle/ 
Circle) 
Copy of 
notification 
available at 
sub circle 
Site plan 
available 
at  
sub 
circle 
Protection
 Notice 
Board 
Cultural 
Notice 
Board 
Access 
Road 
Encroach-
ment 
Construction
 in 
 prohibited/ 
regulated 
 area 
Annual 
 Repair/ 
 Special 
 Repair 
 during 
2007-08 
to 
2011-12 
Expenditure 
Incurred 
on 
Annual Repair/ 
Special Repair 
during 
2007-08 to 
2011-12 
(`) 
Need 
 chemical 
treatment 
erected by 
Emperor Akbar 
Ajmer 
38. Kos Minar 
erected by 
Emperor Akbar 
Khanpur, 
Ajmer 
No No No No Yes No Yes Yes Nil Yes 
39. Kos Minar 
erected by 
Emperor Akbar 
Hoshiara, 
Ajmer 
No No No No Yes No No Yes Nil Yes 
40. Kos Minar 
erected by 
Emperor Akbar 
Hoshiara, 
Ajmer 
No No No No Yes No No Yes Nil Yes 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
262 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Annex 5.1 
(Refer Para 5.4.1) 
List of Excavation Proposals for which no Reasons were Assigned 
for not Recommending them 
 
S.No. Name of the site Office Director Nature of work 
1. Bhimbetka  Rock Paintings, 
District Raisen, Madhya Pradesh 
Prehistory Br. 
Nagpur 
D. Bhengra Exploration 
2. Melghat Region, Distt. 
Amaravati, Maharashtra 
Prehistory Br. 
Nagpur 
D. Bhengra Exploration 
3. Vaisya Tekri, Distt. Ujjain, M.P. Bhopal Circle K.K. Muhammed Excavation 
4. Exploration in District Bhiwani, 
Haryana 
Chandigarh 
Circle 
K.P.S. Bhadoria Exploration 
5. Exploration of the Mewat area 
in Ferozepur Jhirka Tehsil Distt. 
Gurgaon 
Chandigarh 
Circle 
K.P.S. Bhadoria Exploration 
6. Excavation of Stupa at Asandh, 
Distt. Karnal, 
Haryana(1/10/2/2007-EE) 
Chandigarh 
Circle 
K.P.S. Bhadoria Excavation 
7. Preliminary joint exploration 
and trial trenches at  
Gopakapattanam, North Goa 
Goa Circle N. Taher Exploration/ 
excavation 
8. Excavation at Kayavarohan,  
Distt. Vadodara,Gujarat 
Vadodara Circle Shivananda V. Excavation 
9. Excavation in front of Khan 
Masjid, Dholka ,Ahmedabad 
Vadodara Circle Shivananda V. Excavation 
10. Bidyadharpur, Tahsil Cuttack 
Sadar,  Distt. Cuttack, Orissa 
Orissa State 
Museum, 
Bhubaneswar, 
Orissa 
C.B. Patel Excavation 
11. Narasinghpur and its adjoining 
area, Distt. Cuttack, Orissa 
Orissa State 
Museum, 
Bhubaneswar, 
Orissa 
C.B. Patel Excavation 
12. Panchagaon, Old Town, 
Bhubaneswar, Distt. Khurda, 
Orissa 
Orissa State 
Museum, 
Bhubaneswar, 
Orissa 
C.B. Patel Excavation 
13. Doilopar at Dhaka – Bichkandi, 
Mouza Bichkandi, J.L. No.125, 
G.P. Sabalpur, Block Gramsalika 
P.S. Burwan in Murshidabad, 
West Bengal 
Director,
Directorate of 
Archaeology & 
Museums, West 
Bengal 
Amal Roy Excavation 
14. Kharihat, Belan Valley, Mirzapur 
District, Murzapur, U.P. 
Allahabad Uni. Prakash Sinha Excavation 
15. Chaturbhujnath Nala in 
Gandhisagar Game Sanctuary 
Bhanpura, Mandsaur, Madhya 
Pradesh 
Rock Art Society 
of India, Agra 
Giriraj Kumar Excavation 
16. Sabarmati River Valley, Distt. Excavation S.N. Kesarwani Exploration 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 263 
 
S.No. Name of the site Office Director Nature of work
Anand, Kheda, Ahmedabad, 
Gandhinagar, Mahesana & 
Sabar Kantha in Gujarat  
Branch-V., 
Vadodara 
17. Excavation of the area in front 
of Bibi-ka-Maqbara, Aurangabad 
-do- K. Veerabhadra 
Rao 
Excavation 
18. Bhita District Allahabad, U.P. Lucknow Circle, 
Lucknow 
I.D. Dwivedi Excavation 
19. Erich District Jhansi, U.P. -do- I.D. Dwivedi Excavation 
20. Exploration in the trans Ghaghra 
plains with trial trenching and 
section scrapping in U.P. 
-do- I.D. Dwivedi Exploration/excavation
21. Ruam,Distt. East Singhbhum, 
Jharkhand 
-do- T.J. Baidya Excavation 
22. Kabrakala, Distt. Palamu, 
Jharkhand 
-do- T.J. Baidya Excavation 
23. Kunnattur, District Tirunelveli, 
Tamil Nadu 
Thrissur Circle M. Nambirajan Excavation 
24. Phanigiri (V)Tirumalagiri (M) 
Nalgonda District 
Deptt. of 
Archaeology & 
Museums, 
Hyderabad 
G.V. 
Ramakrishna 
Rao 
Excavation 
25. Jagathipadu (V), Polaki (M) 
Srikakulam District 
-do- G.V. 
Ramakrishna 
Rao 
Excavation 
26. Manikeswaram (V), Addaki (M), 
Prakasham District 
-do- G.V. 
Ramakrishna 
Rao 
Excavation 
27. Village Udaipur,Vidhuna District 
– Auraya 
Deptt. of 
Archaeology, 
U.P. 
R.K. Srivastava Excavation 
28. Exploration of Mau District 
Banda, U.P. 
-do- Ram Naresh Pal Exploration 
29. Balam Baghada, District 
Allahabad, U.P. 
-do- J.N. Pandey Excavation 
30. Hetapatti, District Allahabad, 
U.P. 
-do- J.N. Pal Excavation 
31. Exploration of adjacent area of 
Turki Bruz Villalge Kori, Pojha 
and Murgiya District Vaishali, 
Bihar 
Bihar Puravid 
Parishad, Patna 
 
C.P. Sinha Exploration 
32. Exploration and excavation of all 
the nine Buddhist sites (Neuli-
Deulipal, Kayama, Tarapur, 
Kantigadia, Vajragiri, Neulpur & 
Kanki (Radhanagar Fort) 
Orissan Institute 
of Maritime and 
South-East-Asian 
Studies, 
Bhubaneswar, 
Orissa 
D.R. Pradhan Exploration and 
Excavation 
 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
264 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Annex 5.2 
(Refer Para 5.8.1) 
List of Pending Excavation Reports 
Large scale Excavations by serving officers 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Site, Period/s 
of excavation 
Director of 
Excavation 
Reporting 
Archeologist 
Month/Year in 
which work was 
originally 
assigned  
Work Re 
Assigned 
On 
1. Chichali,  
District West 
Nimar 
1998-99, 1999-
2000 
S.K. Mitra, SA 
 
S.K.Mitra, SA, 
Excavation 
Branch-I, Nagpur 
April 2005 August 
2010 
2. Hampi, District 
Bellary, 
Karnataka,  
1975-76,76-
77,1978-79 to 
2000-01 
S. R. Rao KP Poonacha, 
Joint Director 
General (Retd) 
April 2005 December 
2009 
3. Mathura, 
District 
Mathura, Uttar  
Pradesh 
1954-55, 73-74 
to 1976-77 
M 
Venkataramayya 
A.K. Sinha, 
Director(NCF) 
March 2006 August 
2010 
4. Sravasti, 
District 
Bahraich, Uttar 
Pradesh 
1958-59,1986-
97,1998-
99,2000-
01,2001-02 
 
KK Sinha Neeraj Kumar 
Sinha, AA, Ranchi 
Circle 
 
April 2005  
 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 265 
 
Small scale Excavations by serving officers 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Site,  Date of completion 
of excavation & Period of 
excavation 
Director of 
Excavation 
Reporting 
Archeologist 
Work 
Assigned 
Date  
Assigned 
Date  
1. Barabati Fort, District 
Cuttack, Orissa 
1989-90 to 96-97 
B.K Sinha K.V.Rao, SA, 
Hyderabad Circle 
June 
2005 
December 
2010 
2 Daulatabad, District 
Aurangabad, Maharashtra 
1984-85, 85-86,87-88,88-
89,2004-05,05-06 
CL Suri S.K. Mitra, SA, 
Excavation 
Branch-I, Nagpur 
June 
2005 
March 2011 
3 Fatehpur Sikri, District 
Agra, Uttar Pradesh 
1976-77 to 79-80,82-83 to 
88-89 
JP Srivastava KP Poonacha, 
Joint Director 
General(Retd.) 
(Reassigned to 
Shri JP 
Srivastava, 
Superintending 
Archeologist 
(Retd.)) 
June 
2005 
April 2010 
4 Kashipur,  
District Udhamsingh 
Nagar, Uttranchal 
1965-66,1970-71,2001-03 
 
YD Sharma DV Sharma, 
Regional 
Director, Kolkata 
June 
2005 
February 
2010 
5 Kesaria,District East 
Champaran, Bihar 
1997-98 to 2000-01 
KK 
Mohammad 
KK Mohammad, 
SA, Delhi Circle  
October 
2005 
February 
2010 
6 Kolhua, 
District Muzaffarpur, Bihar 
1976-77, 89-90 to 93-
94,95-96 to 98-99 
Vijaykant 
Mishra 
KK Mohammad, 
SA, Delhi Circle 
(Reassigned to 
Arvind Manjul, 
DY SA, Patna 
Excavation 
Branch) 
October 
2005 
May 2011 
7 Kunnattur, 
District Kanchipuram, 
Tamil Nadu 
1956-57,57-58 
VD 
Krishnaswamy 
Satyabhama 
Badhreenath, 
SA, Chennai 
Circle. 
 Action 
initiated in 
2010 for 
fresh 
excavation 
by 
Excavation 
Branch-VI, 
Mysore  
8 Madarpur, 
District Moradabad, Uttar 
Pradesh 2000-01 
DV Sharma DV Sharma, 
Regional 
Director, Kolkata 
 January 
2010 
9 Nalanda 
District Biharsharif, Bihar, 
Vijaykant 
Mishra 
KK Mohammad, 
SA, Delhi Circle 
October 
2005 
Action 
initiated in 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
266 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Site,  Date of completion 
of excavation & Period of 
excavation 
Director of 
Excavation 
Reporting 
Archeologist 
Work 
Assigned 
Date  
Assigned 
Date  
1975-76 to 1979-80, 1981-
83 
2010 for 
fresh 
excavation 
by 
Excavation 
10 Paithan, 
District 
Aurangabad,Maharashtra 
1997-98,98-99 
JVP Rao JVP Rao (Now 
expired, hence 
report to be 
submitted by Dr. 
Derek Kenet) 
January 
2005 
Jan 2007 
Reassigned 
date March 
2010 
11 Rajgir, District Biharshariff, 
Bihar 
1953-54,54-55,57-58,58-
59,61-62,62-63,74-75,99-
00,00-01 
DR Patil KK Mohammad, 
SA, Delhi Circle 
Oct 2005 March 2010 
12 Rajpat Khalsa, 
District Cooch Behar, West 
Bengal 
1998-99 to 1999-2000 
SB Ota  SB Ota, Regional 
Director,Bhopal 
June 
2006 
December 
2009 
13 Sankissa, 
District Farukhabad, 
UttarPradesh 
1995-96,96-97 
B R Mani  B R Mani, Jt. 
Director General 
January 
2005 
March 2010 
14 Semathan, 
District Anantnag, 
Jammu & Kashmir  
1977-78,78-79,80-81 
HK Narain GS Gaur, ASA, 
Jammu Circle  
April 
2005 
December 
2009 
15 Siswania, 
District Basti,Uttar 
Pradesh 
1995-96,96-97 
BR Mani BR Mani, Jt 
Director General 
January 
2005 
 
 
Large scale Excavations by retired officers 
Sl. 
No. 
Site, Period/s of 
excavation 
Director of 
Excavation 
Director of 
Excavation/Reporting 
Archeologist 
Assigned/Reassigned 
date  
1 Ramapuram, 
District Kurnool, 
Andhra Pradesh  
1980-81 to 1983-
84 
B 
Narasimhaiah 
Late Dr. B Naraasimhaiah 
(Reassigned to Dr. K Ismail) 
Reassigned date Jan 
2011 
2 Dholavira 
District Kuchchh, 
Gujarat 
RS Bisht RS Bisht(retired) Reassigned date 
December 2009 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 267 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Site, Period/s of 
excavation 
Director of 
Excavation 
Director of 
Excavation/Reporting 
Archeologist 
Assigned/Reassigned 
date  
3 Banawali, 
District 
Fatehabad, 
Haryana 
1983-84 to 86-87 
RS Bisht RS Bisht(retired) August 2011 
4 Harsh-ka-Tila, 
Thanesar, District 
Kurukshetra, 
Haryana 
1987-88, 89-90 
BM Pande  BM Pande (retired) January 2010 
5 Burzahom, 
District Srinagar, 
Jammu & Kashmir 
1960-61 t6o 68-
69, 71-72,73-74 
T N Khazanchi The work has been 
reassigned to Dr. RS Fonia, 
Director, National Mission 
on Monuments and 
Antiquities  
June 2009 
6 Banahalli, District 
Kolar, Karnataka 
1973-74,83-
84,85-86,86-87 
S V 
Soundararajan 
Late Dr. B Naraasimhaiah 
(Reassigned to Mr PS 
Sriraman, ASA, Fort 
Museum, Chennai Circle ) 
May 2010 
7 Sanghol 
District Ludhiana, 
Punjab 
1986-87 to 1990-
91 
C 
Margabandhu 
C Margabhandhu(retired) September 2010 
8 Ayodhya, District 
Faizabad & 
Bhardwaj Ashram, 
District Allahabad, 
U.P 
B B Lal B.B Lal(retired) The Report Writing 
Work is in progress.  
9 Hulas, 
District 
Saharanpur, Uttar 
Pradesh  
1978-79 to 1982-
83 
K N Dikshit K N Dikshit(retired) September 2009 
Reassigned date May 
2010 
10 Rakhigarhi, 
district Hissar, 
Haryana 
1997-98 to 1999-
2000 
Amarendra 
Nath 
Amarendra Nath (retired) April 2008 
Reassigned  date 
:December 2010 
  
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
268 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
 
Small scale Excavations by retired officers 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Site, Period/s of 
excavation 
Director of 
Excavation 
Director of 
Excavation/Reporting 
Archeologist 
Assigned date 
1 Rupar, 
District 
Ambala,Punjab 
1953-54 & 54-55 
Y D Sharma K N Dikshit(retired) May 2010 
2 Mansar 
District Nagpur, 
Maharashtra 
1994-95,95-96 
Amarendra 
Nath 
Amarendra Nath(retired) April 2008  
Reassigned date 
September 2010 
 
Cases of submitted reports 
Large scale Excavations 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Site, Date of completion 
of excavation & Period 
of excavation 
Reporting archaeologist Work 
assigned 
date 
Status  
1 Satdhara, District Raisen 
1993-94,95-96 to 97-
98,99-00 
Narayana Vyas, SA, 
Temple Survey Project 
(North) 
 
June 2005 Report submitted 
in March 2008 
2 Udayagiri, District Jajpur, 
Orissa 
1985-86,86-87,87-88,88-
89,97-98 to 2001-02 
B. Bandyopadhyay, SA, 
Kolkata Circle 
 
April 2005 
 
Report submitted 
and published in 
2007 
3 Lalitgiri, District Cuttack, 
Orissa 
1985-86 to 1990-91 
JK Patnaik, ASA, Konark 
Musuem 
April 2005 Report submitted 
in February 2010 
 
List of cases of submitted reports 
Small scale Excavations 
Sl. 
No. 
Site, Date of 
completion of 
excavation & Period 
of excavation 
Reporting 
archaeologist 
Work 
assigned 
date 
Reasons why pending 
1. Shri Suryapahar,  
District Goalpara, 
Assam 
1992-93,93-94,95-96 
to 2000-01 
Jitendra Das,  
SA, Hyderabad Circle 
April 2005 Report has been 
submitted in March 2009 
2. Lal Kot & Qila Rai 
Pithora, Delhi 
1957-58, 58-59,59-
B.R. Mani, Jt. 
Director General  
January 
2005 
Report has been 
submitted in May 2007 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 269 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Site, Date of 
completion of 
excavation & Period 
of excavation 
Reporting 
archaeologist 
Work 
assigned 
date 
Reasons why pending 
60,64-65,91-92  to 94-
95 
3. Chandore,  
District South Goa, 
Goa 
1999-91, 2000-01,01-
02 
J.V.P. Rao (now 
expired) 
June 2004 Report has been 
submitted 
 
4. Hathab,  
District Bhavanagar 
2001-02,02-03 
Shubhra Pramanik,  
SA, NMMA. 
 
April 2005    Report has been 
submitted in May 2007 
5. Lachhura  
Distt. Bhilwara, 
Rajasthan 
1997-98, 98-99 
B.R. Meena, SA 
(BSP), Delhi 
 
       - Report has been 
submitted in May 2007 
 
6. Kanaganahalli,  
District Gulbarga 
1993-94,96-97,97-
98,99-00,00-01,01-02 
K.P. Poonacha, 
Director (Museum & 
Antiquity) 
June 2005 
 
Report has been 
submitted in May 2010 
 
 
7. Bekal Fort,  
District Kasargode 
1997-98 to 2001-02 
Nambirajan, Thrissur 
Circle 
 
October 
2006 
Report has been 
submitted  and published 
in 2009 
8. Besnagar,  
District Vidisha 
Madhya Pradesh 
1963-64 to 1965-66, 
1975-76, 76-77 
Narayan Vyas, SA, 
Temple Survey 
Project (North)  
June 2005 Report has been 
submitted in March 2009 
 
9. Khajuraho,  
District Chhatarpur 
1980-81, 81-82,82-
83,85-86 to 88-89 
P.K. Mishra, SA, 
Patna Circle 
 
June 2005 Report has been 
submitted in May 2010 
10 Mamallapuram,  
Distt. 
Kanchipuram,Tamil 
Nadu 
1990-2000 to 2000-01 
K.T. Narasimhan, SA 
(now retired) 
 
-  Report has been submitted  
in January 2006 
11. Sanchi,  
District Raisen, 
Madhya Pradesh 
1993-94, 95-96 to 97-
98, 99-00 
A.K. Sinha, SA, 
Monument and Shri 
S.B. Ota, SA, National 
Mission 
April 2005 The work has been 
reassigned to Shri 
Narayana Vyas, SA, 
Temple Survey Project, 
North and report 
submitted in September 
2008  
12 Golbai Sasan,  
Golbai, District Puri, 
Orissa 
1990-91 to 91-92 
A.K. Patel, Dy.SA, 
Raipur Circle 
September 
2006 
Report has been 
submitted in December 
2007 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
270 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Site, Date of 
completion of 
excavation & Period 
of excavation 
Reporting 
archaeologist 
Work 
assigned 
date 
Reasons why pending 
13 Dhalewan,  
District Mansa, Punjab 
1999-2000, 01-02 
Madhubala, SA, 
Excavation Branch-II 
 
April 2005 Report has been 
submitted in March 2011 
14 Ojiyana,  
District Bilwara, 
Rajasthan 
1999-2000 to 2000-01 
B.R. Meena, SA and 
Dr. Alok Tripathi 
 
January 
2005 
Report has been 
submitted 
 
15 Gudiyam,  
District Tiruvallore 
1962-63, 63-64 
S.B. Ota, Director, 
National Mission 
 
August 
2006 
Report has been 
submitted in August 2008 
16 Boxanagar,  
District West Tripura 
2001-02 
Jamal Hassan,  
SA, Dehradun Circle 
 
June 2005 Report has been 
submitted in May 2008 
17 Bhita,  
District Allahabad, 
Uttar Pradesh 
1995-96, 1996-97, 97-
98 
Shri Induprakash, 
ASA and A.A. 
Hashmi, AA, 
Lucknow Circle, in 
February 2007. 
June 2005 Report has been 
submitted in July 2009 
18 Birchabilli Tila,  
District Agra, Uttar 
Pradesh 
1999-2000 
D.V. Sharma, SA, 
Delhi Circle 
 
January 
2005 
Report has been 
submitted in May 2008 
19 Tamluk,  
District Midnapur, 
West Bengal 
1954-55,73-74 
S.B. Ota, Director, 
National Mission 
 
August 
2006 
Report has been 
submitted in June 2008 
20 Shyamsundar Tila, 
Distt. South Tripura 
1984-85,98-99 to 
2000-01 
G.C. Chauley, 
(retired) 
 
       - Report has been submitted 
in December 2005 
21 Thakurani Tila,  
Paschim Pilak,  
Distt. South Tripura 
G.C. Chauley, 
(retired) 
 
       - Report has been submitted  
in 2005 
22 Gufkral, 
District Pulwama, J&K 
1981-82 
A K Sharma(Retd)        - Report Submitted in 
October 2008 
 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 271 
 
Annex 5.3 
(Refer Para  5.8.1) 
List of Cases where Excavation/Exploration  
Reports have been Submitted 
Field season 2007-08 
 
S. 
No 
Name of the site Office Director Nature of 
work 
Status of Report 
1.  Barabati Fort, District 
Cuttack, Orissa 
Excavation 
Br.IV, 
Bhubaneswar 
P.K. Trivedi Excavation Report 
submitted 
2.  Exploration from 
Kaushambi to 
Kapilvastu with trial 
trenching and section 
scrapping. 
Lucknow Circle I.D. Dwivedi Exploration Report 
submitted 
 
Field season 2008-09 
 
Field season 2009-10 
S.l 
No. 
Proposals Office Director Nature of 
work 
Remarks 
1.  Excavation at Bangarh, 
Gangarampur, District South 
Dinajpur, West Bengal. 
Kolkata Circle T.J. Baidya Excavation Report 
submitted 
2.  Excavation at Lathiya, Near 
Jamania, District Gajipur, U.P. 
Ex. Br. III, 
Patna 
B.R. Mani Excavation Report 
published 
in IAR 
3.  Sengallur & Vadakipatti, 
Manapparari, Tiruchirappalli, 
Tamil Nadu 
TSP (SR), 
Chennai 
D. Dayalan Excavation Report 
submitted 
4 Exploration to establish the 
Pilgrimage Route from 
Lucknow 
Circle 
I.D. Dwivedi Exploration Report 
submitted 
1. Exploration at Sairang Lul, tributary of 
Tlawng / Dhaleswari river District 
Lushai Hills, Mizoram 
(1/14/2008-EE) 
Prehistory 
Br. Nagpur 
D. 
Bhengra 
Exploration Report 
submitted 
Archaeological exploration to establish 
the Pilgrimage Route from Kaushambi 
to Kapilvastu  Districts Kaushambi, 
Allahabad, Pratapgarh, Sultanpur, 
Faizabad, Ambedkar Nagar, Gonda, 
Basti, Santkabir Nagar, Balrampur, 
Sravasti, Siddharth Nagar, U.P. 
Lucknow 
Circle 
I.D. 
Dwivedi 
Exploration Report 
submitted 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
272 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
S.l 
No. 
Proposals Office Director Nature of 
work 
Remarks 
Kaushambi to Kapilvastu with 
trial section scrapping / 
trenching in Districts 
Kaushambi, Allahabad, 
Pratapgarh, Sultanpur, 
Faizabad, Ambedkar Nagar, 
Gonda, Basti, Sant Kabir 
Nagar, Balrampur, Sravasti, 
Sidhharth Nagar in (U.P.) 
5 Exploration in the right bank 
of Middle Mahanadi Valley 
from Banki to Sonepur, 
Orissa 
Ex. Br.IV, 
Bhubaneswar 
G. 
Maheswari 
Exploration Report 
Submitted 
6 Exploration of Kadwaha, 
District Ashok Nagar, Madhya 
Pradesh 
TSP, Bhopal K. 
Lourdusamy 
Exploration Report 
Submitted 
7 Survey of cave temples of 
early Pandyas, Muttarayars, 
Irrukkuvels, other 
Feudatories & Chieftains 
under the Pandyas. 
TSP, Chennai D. Dayalan Architectural 
Survey 
Report 
Submitted  
 
Field season 2010-11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sl 
No 
Proposals Office Director Nature of 
work 
Remarks 
1.  Excavation at Bangarh, 
Gangarampur, District 
South Dinajpur, West 
Bengal. 
(1/45/2/2005-EE) 
Kolkata Circle T.J. Baidya Excavation Report 
submitted 
2.  Exploration in the right 
bank of Middle Mahanadi 
Valley from Banki to 
Sonepur, Orissa 
Ex. Br.IV, 
Bhubaneswar
G. Maheswari Exploration Report 
submitted 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 273 
 
 
Annex 6.1 
(Refer Para 6.5.1) 
Methods of Maintaining Accession Registers 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
Museum System of managing the accession register 
1. National 
Museum 
Maintaining the centralised accession register as well as separate registers 
for different wings/items. Accession registers were not properly 
maintained.  Discrepancies were noticed in the accession register of 
manuscript section due to which the charge of this section was not taken 
over by the present incumbent from the then curator though he retired in 
March 2008. 
2. Indian 
Museum 
Maintaining the items wise/wing wise accession registers and not the 
centralised accession registers. Accession registers were not complete. In 
many cases the details of age and location of the objects and their 
conditions were not recorded. Sometimes there were no running numbers 
in the accession registers making it difficult to ascertain the total holdings 
of objects by the Museum. Unique numbers were not assigned to any of 
the objects. Different sections have their own accession numbers which 
has resulted in repetitions in accession numbers inter-se. 
3. Victoria 
Memorial 
Hall 
Maintaining the centralised accession register as well as separate registers 
for different wings/items. 5000 objects acquired from Rabindra Bharati 
Society as enduring loan during 2011 had not yet been accessioned 
although the same was to be completed by 31 March 2011. 
4. Asiatic 
Society, 
Kolkata 
Maintaining the items wise/wing wise accession registers and not the 
centralised accession registers. Many objects were pending to be 
accessioned in the respective registers or database long after its acquisition 
e.g., 55 objects, out of which 19 manuscripts, were found in the stock 
register which were still pending to be accessioned. These objects were 
found from the cupboard of the Society during 2009 which were not 
recorded anywhere. Out of the total art objects of 54655, 15205 (28 per 
cent) were not accessioned. 
5. Allahabad 
Museum 
34000 objects (48 per cent ) out of the total of 70121 objects were not 
accessioned. 
 
  
  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
274 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Annex 6.2 
(Refer Para 6.7) 
Details of the Physical Verification of Artifacts 
 
Indian Museum 
 
Physical verification in Museum was started in 2005. The time 
limit was extended several times and presently extended till 
October 2013. However it was noticed that only 38 per cent of 
the art objects were verified till March 2012.  
National Museum 
 
The last physical verification of art objects of National Museum 
was carried out by a Committee of experts from 1998-2003 and 
submitted their report in 2004 on the directions of court orders. 
Many discrepancies were pointed in the expert committee 
report.   No physical verification was carried out after 2003. 
Asiatic Society, Kolkata 
 
All the objects were verified except the rare silver and copper 
coins. Numbers of such coins were not known to the Society as 
those coins had never been counted and physically verified. 
Victoria Memorial Hall 
 
The experts Committee for verification generally formed to 
confirm authenticity, genuineness and other aspects 
attributable to the objects. But out of 28394 art objects, 18979 
remained unverified in respect to its antique and intrinsic value. 
National Museum 
 
The manuscripts section had a collection of 14143 manuscripts 
(8718 of Arabic & Persian and 5425 of Sanskrit). We physically 
verified manuscripts, selected randomly and found many 
shortcomings/missing in number of manuscripts entered in 
accession register and that actually existed. 
Site Museum However, during audit we ascertained that many Site Museums 
like Hazarduari Palace Museum (Kolkata Circle), Tamluk Museum 
(Kolkata Circle), Ropar Museum (Chandigarh Circle), Cooch 
Behar Palace Museum (Kolkata Circle), Nagarjunakonda 
Museum (Hyderabad Circle), Hampi Museum (Bengaluru Circle), 
Nalanda Museum (Patna Circle) had not conducted physical 
verification in last 5 years. In fact, in Nagarjunakonda Museum 
the physical verification was last conducted in 1997, in Nalanda 
in 1999 and in Hampi Museum in 2004.  The risk of loss of theft 
of antiquities from these museums cannot be ruled out by us. 
There was no system of physical verification in CAC. 
 
  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 275 
 
Annex 6.3 
 (Refer Para 6.13.4) 
List of Monuments in Jaipur Circle where Antiquities were 
Scattered 
S No Monuments Place District 
1.  Fort of Chittaurgarh  Chittaurgarh Chittaurgarh 
2.  Fort of Kumbhalgarh   Kumbhalgarh Rajasamand 
3.  Yupa Pillars Badwa Baran 
4.  Jogni-Jogna Temple Dholpur / Sone- ka – Gurja Dholpur 
5.  Ancient Ruins Dalsanagar (Gangadhar) Jhalawar 
6.  Old Temples, Statues and 
Inscriptions 
Shargarh Baran 
7.  Ancient Ruins and Structural 
Remains 
Krishnavilas Baran 
8.  Old Temples near the 
Chandrabhaga 
Jhalrapatan Jhalawar 
9.  Temple, Fort Wall and Statues Dara or Mukandara Kota 
10.  Temple of Shiv and Kund Badoli Chittaurgarh 
11.  Sas Bahu Temples Nagda Udaipur 
12.  Siva temple and ruins Arthuna Banswara 
13.  Fort, Mandor Mandore Jodhpur 
14.  Ancient Site Lodruva Patan Jaisalmer 
15.  Kala Pahar Temple Todarai Singh Tonk 
16.  Pipa ji's Temple Todarai Singh Tonk 
 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
276 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Annex 9.1 
(Refer Para 9.1.1) 
Details of Encroachment at Monument 
Name of the Circle 
States where 
Monuments are 
located 
Number of the 
Monument 
which is 
encroached 
Cases of Encroachment by 
Government Department 
Agra Uttar Pradesh 13 2  
Aurangabad Maharashtra 17 1  
Bengaluru Karnataka 10 Nil 
Bhopal Madhya Pradesh 4 Nil 
Bhubaneswar Odisha 15 1 
Chandigarh Punjab 15 5 
Chennai Tamil Nadu 30 Nil 
Dehradun Uttarakhand 1 1 
Delhi Delhi 21 2 
Dharwad Karnataka 13  
Guwahati Assam 5 3 
Hyderabad Andhra Pradesh 27 Nil 
Jaipur Rajasthan 237 6 
Kolkata West Bengal 6 Nil 
Lucknow Uttar Pradesh 66 7 
Mumbai Maharashtra 14 4 
Patna Bihar/Uttar Pradesh 17 1 
Raipur Chhattisgarh 5 Nil 
Srinagar J&K 18 11 
Trissur Kerala/Tamil Nadu 2 1 
Vadodara Gujarat 20 1 
  546 46 
 
  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 277 
 
Annex 9.2 
Details of Unauthorised Construction at Monument 
(Refer Para 9.1.2) 
Name of the circle States where 
Monuments are located 
No. of unauthorised 
construction 
Government agency 
(out of figures 
indicated in Col No 3) 
Aurangabad Maharashtra 633 36
Bengaluru Karnataka 1343 -
Bhopal Madhya Pradesh 1550 -
Chandigarh Punjab 612 -
Dehradun Uttarakhand 377 -
Delhi Delhi 723 23
Dharwad Karnataka 358 -
Goa Maharashtra 43 -
Hyderabad Andhra Pradesh 1123 11
Jaipur Rajasthan 239 -
Kolkata West Bengal 76 -
Lucknow Uttar Pradesh 1290 -
Mumbai Maharashtra 200 14
Patna Bihar/Uttar Pradesh 343 -
Raipur Chhattisgarh 54 -
Ranchi Jharkhand 3 -
Shimla Himachal Pradesh 155 14
  9122 98
 
  

Report No. 18 of 2013 
278 Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
Annex 9.3 
(Refer Para 9.3.1) 
Details of Monuments where no Security Personnel were 
Deployed 
Sl. No. Name of Circle States where 
Monuments are located
Number of Monuments 
where Security personnel 
was not deployed 
1.  Agra Uttar Pradesh 55 
2.  Aurangabad Maharashtra 3 
3.  Bengaluru Karnataka 30 
4.  Bhopal Madhya Pradesh 284 
5.  Bhubaneswar Odisha 4 
6.  Chandigarh Punjab 123 
7.  Chennai Chennai 158 
8.  Dehradun Uttarakhand 1 
9.  Delhi Delhi 106 
10.  Dharwad Karnataka 153 
11.  Goa Maharashtra 7 
12.  Guwahati Assam 47 
13.  Hyderabad Andhra Pradesh 118 
14.  Jaipur Rajasthan 3 
15.  Kolkata West Bengal 35 
16.  Lucknow Uttar Pradesh 80 
17.  Mumbai Maharashtra 6 
18.  Patna Bihar/Uttar Pradesh 180 
19.  Ranchi Jharkhand 7 
20.  Raipur Chhattisgarh 16 
21.  Srinagar J&K 39 
22.  Trissur Kerala/Tamil Nadu 13 
Total 1468 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
   
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 279 
 
Annex 10.1 
(Refer Para 10.2 and 10.3.1) 
Details of Public Amenities Available at the Monuments 
Sl. no. Name of the 
circle 
Name of the 
state 
Number of 
monuments
Drinking 
water 
available 
Toilet 
available 
Wheel chair 
available 
Ramp 
available 
Proper 
signboard 
available 
Cultural 
Notice 
Board 
displayed 
at 
monument
Availability 
of 
Compliant 
register 
1. Agra Uttar Pradesh 60 22 11 7 9 40 12 8 
2. Aurangabad Maharashtra 168 79 3 1 1 5 13 6 
3. Bengaluru Karnataka 208 78 20 10 3 209 181 Nil 
4. Bhopal Madhya 
Pradesh 
292 141 136 88 88 108 124 Nil 
5. Bhubaneswar Odisha 78 5 5 3 1 78 78 5 
6. Chandigarh Punjab 58 12 18 8 Nil 15 17 Nil 
7. Chennai Chennai 104 12 18 11 1 26 14 2 
8. Dehradun Uttarakhand 30 15 22 3 3 3 No Nil 
9. Delhi Delhi 106 7 7 4 4 43 48 3 
10. Dharwad Karnataka 299 43 35 20 20 192 60 142 
11. Goa Maharashtra 21 7 6 3 4 21 21 Nil 
12. Guwahati Assam 79 21 22 2 Nil 65 44 4 
13. Hyderabad Andhra 
Pradesh 
37 8 7 3 3 35 2 NA 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
   
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 280 
 
Sl. no. Name of the 
circle 
Name of the 
state 
Number of 
monuments
Drinking 
water 
available 
Toilet 
available 
Wheel chair 
available 
Ramp 
available 
Proper 
signboard 
available 
Cultural 
Notice 
Board 
displayed 
at 
monument
Availability 
of 
Compliant 
register 
14. Jaipur Rajasthan 122      80  
15. Kolkata West Bengal 136 77 36 10 2 115 106 No 
16. Lucknow Uttar Pradesh 83 28 14    32  
17. Mumbai Maharashtra 24 27 11 1 1 11 11 6 
18. Patna Bihar 182 13 18 5 Nil 148 65 Nil 
19. Raipur Chhattisgarh 47 25 8 4 1 40 2 8 
20. Shimla Himachal 
Pradesh 
40 23 5 1 Nil Nil 35 Nil 
21. Srinagar J&K 38 15 16 1 2 8 28 NIL 
22. Trissur Chennai 36 19 10 14 10 36 32 9 
23. Vadodara Gujarat 213 3 3 15 15  148  
  2461 680 431 214 168 1198 1153 193 
 
 
 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
   
Performance Audit of Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 281 
 
Annex 10.2 
(refer Para 10.3.3.1) 
Publication Material lying Unused  
Sl. No. Circle Number of books lying unsold 
1. Rajasthan 45543 
2. Thaneswar, Chandigarh 10676 
3. Odisha 54774 
4. Hyderabad 87771 
5. Bengaluru 21883 
6. Dharwad 26963 
7. Kolkata  50215  
8. Guwahati 10303 
 TOTAL 308128 
 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
282 Performance Audit on Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
GLOSSARY
 
ASI Archaeological Survey of India 
AAT Act  Antiquities and Art Treasure Act 
AAT Rules Antiquities and Art Treasure Rules 
ACWHM Advisory Committee on World Heritage Matters 
ADG Additional Director General 
AKTC Aga Khan Trust for Culture 
AM Allahabad Museum 
AMASR 
(Amendment 
and Valediction 
Act) 
The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 
(Amendment and valediction Act) 2010  
AMASR Act The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act,1958 
AMASR Rules Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958 
ASA Assistant Superintending Archaeologist 
ASI, HQ Archaeological Survey of India Headquarters 
ASK  Asiatic Society, Kolkata 
ASM Asiatic Society, Mumbai 
AWC Accounts Work  Code 
BIMSTEC 
Countries  
Bangladesh Nepal Bhutan Sri Lanka Thailand India and Myanmar 
BRDC Bekal Resorts Development Corporation 
CA Conservation Assistant 
CAA Central Asian Antiquities 
CABA Central Advisory Board of Archaeology 
CAC Central Antiquity Collection 
CBI Central Bureau of Investigation 
CCMP Comprehensive Conservation Management Plan 
CCTV Closed Circuit Television 
C-DAC Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
CISF Central Industrial Security Force 
CPWD Central Public Works Department 
CREDA Chhattisgarh State Renewal Energy Development Agency  
CSMVS Chattrapati Shivaji Maharaj Vastu Sanghralya 
CVC Central Vigilance Commission 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
Performance Audit on Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 283 
 
DG Director General 
DPAS Delhi Pradeshik Aggarwal Sammelan 
DSA Deputy Superintending Archaeologist 
DSAC Deputy Superintending Archaeological Chemist 
DSH Deputy Superintending Horticulturist 
Dy. SA Deputy Superintending Archaeologist 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
EOI Expression of Interest 
FIR First Information Report 
GIS Global Information System 
GOI Government of India 
GPR Ground Penetrating Radar 
GPS  Global Positioning System 
GVO Global Vaish Organisation 
HDPM Hazarduari Palace Museum 
IAR Indian Archaeology a Review 
ICCROM International Centre for the study of Preservation and Restoration of 
Cultural Property 
ICOMOS International Council of Monuments and Sites 
IFD Integrated Finance Division 
IGNCA Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts 
IM Indian Museum 
IMP Integrated Management Plan 
INTACH Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage 
ISP Indian Security Press 
IUCN International Union for Conservation of Natural and Natural resources 
JBIC Japan Bank for International Cooperation 
JDG  Joint Director General 
JICA Japan International Cooperation Agency 
MIS Management Information System 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MTDC Maharashtra Tourism Development Corporation 
NAC Non antiquity Certificate 
NCF National Cultural Fund 
NCSM National Council of Science Museums 

Report No. 18 of 2013 
 
284 Performance Audit on Preservation and Conservation of  Monuments and Antiquities 
 
 
NCT National Capital Territory 
NEERI National Environmental Engineering Research Institute 
NGMA National Gallery of Modern Art 
NGO Non Government Organisation 
NM National Museum 
NMA National Monument Authority 
NMMA National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities 
NOC No Objection Certificate 
NRLC National Research Laboratory for Conservation of Cultural Property 
OUV Outstanding Universal Value 
PAO Pay and Accounts office 
PIC Project Implementation Committee 
PRI Permanent Representative of India 
RBS Rabindra Bharati Society 
RCP Revised Conservation Programme 
RD Regional Director 
RSRDC Rajasthan State Road Development Corporation 
SA Superintending Archaeologist 
SAARC South Asian Association for Regional Co operation (Bangladesh, Nepal, 
Bhutan, Sri Lanka, Pakistan, Maldives, Afghanistan and India 
SAC Superintending Archaeologist Chemist 
SAE Superintending Archaeological Engineer 
SJM Salar Jung Museum 
SLIC State Level Implementation Committee 
SMP Site Management Plan 
SR Special Repair 
SSC Staff Selection Commission 
UNESCO United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organisation  
V&A Victoria and Albert Museum 
VIP Very Important Person 
VMH Victoria Memorial Hall 
WHC World Heritage Centre 
WHS World Heritage Site 