i 
 
REPORT OF THE  
COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL  
OF INDIA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF NAGALAND 
 
Report No. 1 of 2013  
http://www.saiindia.gov.in  
 
 
 

i 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Reference to 
 Paragraph (s) Page (s) 
Preface  v 
Executive Summary  vii 
CHAPTER I – SOCIAL SECTOR  
Introduction 1.1 1 
Planning and Conduct of Audit 1.2 2 
RURAL DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
Performance Audit on Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MNREGS) in Nagaland 
1.3 3 
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE DEPARTMENT  
Fraudulent Drawal 1.4 54 
Excess Expenditure 1.5 54 
Suspected Fraudulent Drawal 1.6 56 
Extra Avoidable Expenditure 1.7 57 
SCHOOL EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
Fraudulent Drawal 1.8 58 
CHAPTER II – ECONOMIC SECTOR  
Introduction 2.1 61 
Planning and Conduct of Audit 2.2 62 
VETERINARY AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY DEPARTMENT  
Integrated Audit of Veterinary and Animal Husbandry 
Department 
2.3 62 
AGRICULTURE, LAND RESOURCES, SOIL & WATER CONSERVAT ION 
AND NEPED  
Implementation of Watershed Development Programmes 
in Nagaland 
2.4 101 
PUBLIC HEALTH ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT  
Suspected misappropriation of stores 2.5 122 
CHAPTER III – ECONOMIC SECTOR (PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS)  
Introduction 3.1 125 
Audit Mandate 3.2 125 
Investment in State PSUs 3.3 126 
Budgetary outgo, grants/subsidies, guarantees and loans 3.4 127 
Reconciliation with Finance Accounts 3.5 128 
Performance of PSUs 3.6 129 
Arrears in finalisation of Accounts 3.7 130 
Accounts Comments and Internal Audit 3.8 131 
INDUSTRIES AND COMMERCE DEPARTMENT  
Loss due to non filing of execution petition 3.9 131 
CHAPTER IV – REVENUE SECTOR  
Trend of revenue receipts 4.1.1 133 
Variation between the budget estimates and actuals 4.1.4 135 

ii 
 
Cost of collection 4.1.5 135 
Analysis of arrears of revenue 4.1.6 136 
Arrears in assessment 4.1.7 136 
Evasion of Taxes 4.1.8 137 
Response of the Departments/Government towards audit 4.1.9 137 
Failure of the senior officials to enforce accounta bility and 
protect the interest of the State Government 
4.1.10 137 
Departmental Audit Committee Meetings 4.1.11 138 
Response of the Departments to the draft audit paragraphs 4.1.12 139 
Follow up on Audit Reports – summarised position 4.1.13 139 
Compliance with the earlier Audit Reports 4.1.14 139 
Analysis of mechanism for dealing with the issues r aised 
by Audit 
4.1.15 140 
Position of Inspection Reports 4.1.16 140 
Assurances given by the Departments/Government on t he 
issues highlighted in the Audit Reports 
4.1.17 141 
Action taken on the recommendations accepted by the  
Departments/Government 
4.1.18 141 
Results of Audit 4.1.19 142 
TAXATION DEPARTMENT  
Evasion of Tax 4.2 142 
CHAPTER V – GENERAL SECTOR  
Introduction 5.1 145 
Planning and Conduct of Audit  5.2 146 
HOME (GENERAL ADMINISTRATION) DEPARTMENT  
Excess Payment 5.3 146 
HOME (FIRE AND EMERGENCY SERVICES) DEPARTMENT 
Diversion of Funds 5.4 148 
HOME DEPARTMENT  
Fraudulent Drawal 5.5 149 
CHAPTER VI – FOLLOW UP OF AUDIT OBSERVATIONS  
Response of the departments to the recommendations of 
the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) 
6.1 151 
Monitoring 6.2 151 
Oustanding Inspection Reports 6.3 151 
Departmental Audit Committee Meetings 6.4 153 
  

iii 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 Appendix No. Page 
Fund flow statement in respect of DPC, Dimapur 1.1 (a) 155 
Fund flow statement in respect of DPC, Mon 1.1  (b) 155 
Fund flow statement in respect of DPC, Tuensang 1.1(c) 156 
Fund flow statement in respect of DPC, Peren 1.1(d) 156 
Statement showing the release of funds and expendit ure in 
respect of 71 VDBs under 9 Blocks in four test chec ked DPCs 
during -2007-12 
1.2 157 
Statement showing unexecuted works under four DPCs 1.3 (i) 160 
Statement showing excess expenditure/short in execu tion/no 
use of material in the units of Projects under 4 DPCs 
1.3 (ii) 164 
Statement showing the diversion of projects under n on-
permissible category of works under 4 DPCs 
1.3 (iii) 168 
Statement showing the details of fraudulent drawal of Pay & 
Allowances in respect of Chief Medical Officer, Zunheboto 
1.4 173 
Comparison of rates and calculation of excess amoun t paid by 
Health & Family Welfare Department 
1.5 174 
Statement showing the details of fraudulent drawal of pay and 
allowances in respect of DIS, Niuland 
1.6 175 
Statement showing DDOs/projects/institutions taken up for 
Joint Physical Verification 
2.3.1 177 
Statement showing activities proposed in 11 th  five year plan, 
total agreed outlay in the annual plans, budget pro vision made 
and actual expenditure during 2007-12. 
2.3.2 180 
Statement showing cattle delivered to beneficiaries  of 
Community Dairy Projects and Model Dairy Projects b y 
suppliers and production of the projects 
2.3.3 181 
Statement of works (under NABARD) stated to have ca rried 
out by the EE, V&AH Division which were actually no t 
carried out as confirmed by the Joint Verification Team during 
spot verification. 
2.3.4 183 
Results of joint physical verification of beneficia ries under 
Entrepreneur Development 
2.3.5 185 
Results of joint physical verification of State Far ms, Disease 
Diagnostic Laboratories, Hospitals, Dispensaries an d 
Stockman Centres/Veterinary Outposts/Veterinary Hea lth 
Centres. 
2.3.6 186 
Statement showing details of Fully Vouched Continge nt Bills 
drawn in March 2012 
2.3.7 189 
Analysis of Completion certificates issued, work or ders 2.3.8 192 

iv 
 
attached with FVC, date of issue of NIT and date of  actual 
completion as per MBs. 
Statement showing delay in release of fund at vario us levels 
under WDPSCA implemented by DSWC 
2.4.1 193 
Statement showing details of payment made without e xecution 
of work under NWDPRA 
2.4.2 194 
Statement showing unexecuted items of works under IWMP 2.4.3 196 
Statement showing particulars of up to date paid-up  capital, 
loans outstanding and Manpower as on 31 st  March 2012 in 
respect of Government Companies 
3.1 197 
Statement showing grants and subsidy received/recei vables, 
guarantees received, waiver of dues, loans written off and 
loans converted into equity during the year and gua rantee 
commitment at the end of March, 2012 
3.2 199 
Summarised financial results of Government Companie s for 
the latest year for which accounts are finalised 
3.3 201 
Details of work sanctioned under SPA during 2010-11  for 
construction of fire stations, etc. 
5.1 203 
Statement showing the details of fraudulent drawal of ration 
allowance 
5.2 204 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1.  This Report has been prepared for submission to the  Governor of Nagaland 
under Article 151 of the Constitution. 
2.  The Report deals with the findings of performance r eviews and audit of 
transactions in various departments. 
3.  The Report also contains the observations arising o ut of audit of Statutory 
Corporations and Government Companies and revenue receipts. 
4.  The cases mentioned in the Report are among those w hich came to notice in the 
course of test audit of accounts during the year 20 11-12, as well as those which 
had come to notice in earlier years, but could not be dealt with in previous Audit 
Reports. Matters relating to the period subsequent to 2011-12 have also been 
included, wherever necessary. 
5.  Audit observations on matters arising from the exam ination of Finance 
Accounts and Appropriation Accounts of the State Go vernment for the year 
ended 31 March 2012 are included in a separate report on State Finances. 
6.  The Audits have been conducted in conformity with t he Auditing Standards 
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preface 

 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
This Report contains 11 audit paragraphs, two Perfo rmance Audits – Implementation 
of ‘Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) in 
Nagaland and ‘Implementation of Watershed Developme nt Programmes in Nagaland’ 
and Integrated Audit of Veterinary and Animal Husbandry Department. According to 
the existing arrangements, copies of the draft audi t paragraphs and draft performance 
audits were sent to the Secretary of the Department  concerned by the Accountant 
General (Audit) with a request to furnish replies w ithin six weeks. Replies were not 
received from the Departments concerned in respect of three audit paragraphs. 
Chapter-I Social Sector 
 
Performance Audit 
 
Performance Audit on Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) in Nagaland 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme aimed to enhance 
livelihood security of rural households by providin g at least 100 days of guaranteed 
wage employment in every financial year to every ho usehold whose adult members 
volunteer to do unskilled manual work. However, per formance of the MGNREGA in 
the State for the last five years could not achieve  guaranteed wage employment due to 
improper planning made in the perspective plan. The  Department also randomly 
issued job cards and as a result job cards were mis used. Several instances of un-
executed projects, execution of non-permissible pro jects and diversion of projects 
outside the Perspective plan had defeated the purpo se for which the scheme was 
designed. Implementation of convergence programmes in the State was not 
encouraging as the public was not aware of the sche mes and were not executed 
according to the approved action plan. Absence of m onitoring mechanism in the State 
also adversely affected the implementation of schem e. Mandatory inspections by 
State level, district level and block level were no t carried out. Auxiliary objectives 
were not achieved due to the execution of low prioritised works. 
(Paragraph 1.3) 
Transaction Audit Paragraphs 
Failure of the Drawing & Disbursing Officer and Treasury Officer to exercise statutory 
checks envisaged in Receipts and Payments Rules res ulted in fraudulent drawal of  
` 30.65  lakh. 
(Paragraph 1.4) 
The Executive Engineer, Medical Engineering Divisio n, Kohima incurred an excess 
expenditure of ` 1.32 crore due to non-acceptance of the lowest bid . The delay in 
handing over the site to the contractor is fraught with the risk of further cost escalation . 
(Paragraph 1.5) 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
viii 
 
Principal Director of Health & Family Welfare fraud ulently drew ` 86.24 lakh for 
procurement of Computer Hardware items, Hospital li nen, etc on the basis of fictitious 
bills.  
(Paragraph 1.6) 
Principal Director, Health & Family Welfare Departm ent incurred an avoidable 
expenditure of ` 101.56 lakh on procurement of Machinery & Equipment s, Hospital 
linen, etc by allowing inconsistent rates to different suppliers. 
(Paragraph 1.7) 
Failure to exercise statutory checks envisaged in R eceipts and Payments Rules on the 
part of the Treasury Officer and Drawing and Disbur sing Officer resulted in fraudulent 
drawal of ` 25.99 lakh. 
(Paragraph 1.8) 
Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
Performance Audits 
 
Integrated Audit of Veterinary and Animal Husbandry Department 
Planning was unrealistic and formulated without pro per study or analysis as was 
evident from the major variations in the activities  envisaged in the 11 th  Plan with the 
Annual Plans and the activities actually taken up. Targets set for production of meat, 
milk and eggs in the 11 th  Plan with projected expenditure of ` 64 crore could not be 
achieved despite plan expenditure of ` 149.99 crore during the period. Monthly 
balances in the bank account operated by the Direct orate and Executive Engineer, 
V&AH Division were lower than the monthly closing b alance recorded in their Cash 
Books pointing to misappropriation/misuse of Govern ment money. Targets set for the 
Schemes/Projects could not be achieved due to defic iencies in actual implementation 
and payments were made against fictitious works. The process of awarding works was 
not transparent and works were awarded to a few sel ect contractors. Further, works 
were not executed as per estimates/entries in the M Bs resulting in excess payments 
and undue favour to contractors. The investment of ` 22.25 crore for setting up the 
Veterinary College at Jalukie and the Nagaland Comp osite Pig Project proved to be 
idle as these projects had not taken off even after  four years after it was initiated. The 
institutions under the Department were in very poor  condition and several of them 
were non-functional. 
(Paragraph 2.3) 
Implementation of Watershed Development Programmes in Nagaland 
Watershed management programmes implemented by all the four agencies were 
implemented in an isolated manner. Selection of pro ject villages was not done in 
consultation with other departments executing water shed management programmes. 
Funds were not released in time and were not suffic ient. Even though there was no 
land left out in the State for undertaking Watershe d Development, the Departments 
continued approving projects on land which had alre ady been taken up earlier instead 

Executive Summary 
 
ix 
 
of concentrating on continued operation and mainten ance of assets created. This not 
only resulted in created assets becoming defunct ov er the years due to lack of 
maintenance but also resulted in release of payment s for works which were not 
executed. Monitoring mechanism under the programmes  was also inadequate. There 
was no system to carry out any impact analysis of the Programmes. 
(Paragraph 2.4) 
Transaction Audit Paragraph 
Improper inventory control and non-observance of th e provisions of NPWD code 
resulted in stores valuing ` 198.07 lakh remaining out of Government Account. Th e 
possibility of misappropriation of the materials ca nnot be ruled out. This matter 
therefore, needs further investigation. 
(Paragraph 2.5) 
Chapter-III Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings) 
 
Investment in State PSUs 
As on 31 March 2012, the investment of State and Ce ntral Government (Capital and 
long term loans) in six PSUs was ` 82.67 crore. The investment has grown by 17.84 
per cent  from ` 70.15 crore in 2007-08 to ` 82.67 crore in 2011-12. The Government 
contributed ` 26.61 crore towards Equity, Loans and Grants/Subsid ies during  
2011-12. 
(Paragraph 3.3.& 3.4) 
Performance of State PSUs 
The working PSUs incurred an overall loss of ` 2.50 crore in 2011-12 and had an 
accumulated losses amounting to ` 33.83 crore. Besides, the only one non-working 
PSU had the accumulated loss of ` 14.70 crore as per its latest finalised accounts 
which pertains to the year 1977-78. 
(Paragraph 3.6.2) 
Arrears in finalisation of Accounts 
All the working PSUs had arrears of 46 accounts as of September 2012. The 
Government needs to monitor and ensure timely final isation of Accounts with special 
focus on liquidation of arrears. Accounts of one no n-working company were in 
arrears for 34 years. As no purpose was served by keeping this non-working Company 
in existence, Government needs to expeditiously review its functioning and viability. 
(Paragraph 3.7) 
Transaction Audit Paragraph 
Failure on the part of Nagaland Industrial Raw Mate rials & Supply Corporation 
Limited, Dimapur to pursue the decree of court verd ict resulted in non-recovery of 
` 30.72 lakh. 
(Paragraph 3.9) 
  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
x 
 
Chapter-IV Revenue Sector 
 
Assessing Authority did not take into account recor ds of utilisation of Form ‘C’ while 
passing Assessment Order which resulted in probable  evasion of tax to the tune of 
` 10.90 lakh and non-levy of interest on tax amounting to ` 9.32 lakh 
(Paragraph 4.2) 
Chapter-V General Sector 
 
Transaction Audit Paragraphs 
Executive Engineer, Civil Administration Works Divi sion made excess payment of 
` 128.24 lakh by allowing enhanced rate on the items of work already executed and 
paid  for earlier in respect of two works. 
(Paragraph 5.3) 
An amount of `1 crore sanctioned by GOI for construction of Fire Station at State 
Capital Complex  under Special Plan Assistance was diverted by the Directorate of Fire 
and Emergency Services for execution of seven other  works not covered by the 
sanction. 
(Paragraph 5.4) 
The Deputy Commandant Village Guard, Kiphire fraudu lently drew ` 39.96 lakh being 
ration allowance twice for the same period in respect of 2049 Village Guards. 
(Paragraph 5.5) 
 

CHAPTER - I 
 
SOCIAL  SECTOR 
 
1.1 Introduction 
This Chapter of the Audit Report for the year ended  31 March 2012 deals with the 
findings on audit of the State Government units under Social Sector. 
The names of the State Government departments and t he total budget allocation and 
expenditure of the State Government under Social Se ctor during 2011-12 are given 
below: 
Table No. 1.1.1 
(` (` (` (` in crore)     
Name of the departments Total Budget 
allocation 
Expenditure 
School Education 630.53 589.36 
Technical Education  13.40  13.46  
Higher Education  108.01  84.54  
SCERT  30.43  18.30  
Youth Resources and Sports 90.35 87.42 
Art and Culture 19.79 16.28 
Health and Family Welfare 284.74 281.33 
Water Supply & Sanitation 89.39 77.64 
Urban Development 128.43 75.58 
Rural Development 120.81 122.19 
Municipal Affairs 19.25 4.67 
Information and Public Relations 22.18 22.05 
Labour 9.23 9.23 
Employment and Training 18.11 17.61 
Social Security and Welfare 167.09 116.76 
Women Welfare 12.38 12.38 
Rajya Sainik Board 1.68 1.68 
Total Number of Departments = 17 1765.80 1550.48 
Besides the above, the Central Government has been transferring a sizeable amount of 
funds directly to the Implementing agencies under S ocial sector to different 
departments of the State Government. The major tran sfers for implementation of 
flagship programmes of the Central Government are detailed below: 
 
  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
2 
 
Table No. 1.1.2 
(` (` (` (` in crore )) ))    
Name of the 
Department 
Name of the 
Scheme/Programme 
Implementing Agency Amount of 
funds 
transferred 
during the year 
Rural 
Development 
Mahatma Gandhi National 
Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme 
(MNREGA) 
District Rural 
Development Agencies 
(DRDAs) 673.47 
Indira Awas Yojana (IAY) District Rural 
Development Agencies 
(DRDAs) 
34.48 
School 
Education 
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan 
(SSA)  
State Mission Authority 97.98 
Rashtriya Madyamik 
Shksha Abhiyan (RMSA) 
Nagaland Education 
Mission Society 28.26 
Health & 
Family 
Welfare 
National Rural Health 
Mission (NRHM) 
State Health Society 94.75 
State Blindness Control 
Society 1.22 
State TB Control Society  2.07  
National Aids Control Nagaland Aids Control 
Society 17.04 
Water Supply 
and Sanitation  
National Rural Drinking 
Water Programme  
Public Health 
Engineering Department  80.91 
Forest National Aforestation and 
Eco Development 
State Forest Development 
Agency 13.10 
(Source: Central Plan Scheme Monitoring System) 
1.2 Planning and Conduct of Audit 
Audit process starts with the assessment of risks f aced by various departments of 
Government based on expenditure incurred, criticali ty/complexity of activities, level 
of delegated financial powers, assessment of overal l internal controls and concerns of 
stake holders.  
After completion of audit of each unit on a test ch eck basis, Inspection Reports 
containing audit findings are issued to the heads o f the departments. The departments 
are to furnish replies to the audit findings within  one month of receipt of the 
Inspection Reports. Whenever replies are received, audit findings are either settled 
based on reply/action taken or further action is required by the auditee for compliance. 
Some of the important audit observations arising ou t of these Inspection Reports are 
processed for inclusion in the Audit reports, which  are submitted to the Governor of 
State under Article 151 of the constitution of Indi a for laying on the table of the 
Legislature. 
During the year, test check of audits involving exp enditure of ` 1922.05 crore 
(including funds pertaining to previous years audit ed during the year) of the State 
Government under Social sector were conducted. The Chapter contains one 
Performance Audit and five transaction audit paragr aphs as discussed in succeeding 
paragraphs: 

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
3 
 
RURAL DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
1.3 Performance Audit on Mahatma Gandhi National Ru ral Employment 
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) in Nagaland 
The National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA)  guarantees employment 
for more than three lakh rural poor of Nagaland for  100 days in a year. Under the Act, 
Gram Sabha is the body to assist in identification of beneficiaries, recommend 
development plans and social audit of all the proje cts within the Gram Panchayat 
jurisdiction. 
The Performance audit on “Mahatma Gandhi National R ural Employment Guarantee 
Scheme (MGNREGS)” in Nagaland was attempted to revi ew the systems adopted by 
the Departments and the efforts of the State Govern ment to ascertain whether 
objectives of the scheme were met in economical, efficient and effective manner.  
Highlights 
 
There was short fall in release in matching share o f `` ``    113.17 crore by Government 
of Nagaland (GoN) during 2007-08 to 2011-12 which a ffected implementation of 
the scheme to that extent. 
(Paragraph-1.3.10.2) 
During the transmission of scheme funds from nine t est-checked POs to 71 test-
checked VDBs in four districts suspected financial leakage of `` ``    84.35 crore was 
observed. 
(Paragraph-1.3.10.8) 
Tampering of muster rolls by way of cutting, over w riting, erasing and pasting of 
papers were noticed in five VDBs out of the test-ch ecked 71 VDBs having wage 
payment of `` ``    10.31 lakh. 
(Paragraph-1.3.12.3) 
100 projects amounting to ` 10.84 crore stated to have been completed did not e xist 
physically indicating possible misappropriation of ` 10.84 crore in 71 test-checked 
VDBs alone. Short execution by diverting the amount  to non-permissible works in 
respect of 57 works valued at ` 10.32 crore and execution of 49 non-permissible 
works valued at ` 11.12 crore were also noticed during joint physical verification. 
(Paragraph-1.3.13.6) 
State level official functionaries could verify only 50 works (30 per cent) against the 
target of 168 works during the last five years. The  district level officials carried out 
inspection of 273 works (33 per cent) against the t arget of 839 works whereas, the 
block functionaries carried out inspection of 3657 works (44 percent) against the 
targeted 8384 works . 
(Paragraph-1.3.17.4) 
  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
4 
 
297 social audits (57 per cent) at VDB level were conducted against the requirement 
of 522 social audit meetings in the 71 test-checked VDBs. 
(Paragraph-1.3.17.5) 
 
1.3.1 Introduction 
The National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA) , 2005 enacted in 
September 2005 and brought into force with effect f rom February 2006 aimed to 
cover one of the most backward district (Mon) of Na galand during 2006-07 to 2010-
11 in order to enhance livelihood security of rural  households by providing at least 
100 days of guaranteed wage employment in every fin ancial year to every household 
whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work. 
The NREGA, 2005 was extended to additional four dis tricts (Kohima, Mokokchung, 
Wokha and Tuensang) in the financial year 2007-2008 . The remaining six districts 
(Dimapur, Peren, Zunheboto, Phek, Kiphire, and Long leng) have also been notified 
under the NREGA, 2005 with effect from 1 
st April 2008. 
The rationale of the NREGA, 2005 is based on combin ing the productive capacity of 
villagers to build and nurture assets and thereby a lleviating the problems of chronic 
unemployment and poverty. The NREGA, 2005 provides opportunities to develop 
rural infrastructure through watershed development,  restoration of water bodies, 
activities aimed at forestry, land development, soi l erosion and flood control and 
construction of roads and institutional facilities. 
The name of the Act was changed to Mahatma Gandhi N ational Rural Employment 
Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) in October 2009. 
1.3.2 Organisational Setup 
 
1.3.2.1 Institutional Arrangements for Implementati on of Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) 
At the State level, the Department of Rural Develop ment is the nodal agency for the 
implementation of the scheme. A State Employment Gu arantee Council (SEGC) to 
advise the State Government on the implementation o f the scheme was set up in the 
year 2007. At the district level the Project Direct or (PD), District Rural Development 
Agency (DRDA) is designated as District Programme C oordinator (DPC) for the 
scheme implementation. The Programme Officer (PO) i s also designated at Districts 
to assist DPC and is responsible for administering the scheme. At the block level, the 
Block Development Officer (BDO) is designated Progr amme Officer (PO) for 
overseeing the scheme. The scheme was further exten ded with a Block Assistant 
Programme Officer (BAPO) at the block level to assi st PO who is exclusively 
responsible for the implementation of the scheme within the block. Finally the Village 
Development Board, the designated authority to impl ement the scheme at villages 
headed by Secretary is the pivotal body of the sche me. The MGNREGS 
implementation structure in the State is as shown in the following chart: 

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.3.3 Scope of Audit 
The instant Performance Audit covered the period fr om 2007-2012 through test check 
of records of the Commissioner, SEGC, Additional Co mmissioner attached to Rural 
Development Department, 4 DPCs out of 11, nine POs out of 54 and 71VDBs out of 
1129 in the four selected/sampled districts during April 2012 to August 2012. 
Additionally audit also checked the remedial action taken by the State Government on 
the audit observations made by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India in the 
Union Report 2007-08. The details of coverage are indicated in the map below: 
State Employment Guarantee Council 
BLOCK  DISTRICT STATE LEVEL  
Commissioner and secretary, Rural Development 
(Commissioner, MGNREGA) 
Director, Rural Development  
(Addl. Commissioner/State Programme  coordinator) 
Project Director, DRDA  
(District Programme Coordinator) 
Block Development Officer 
(Programme Officer) 
Programme Officer 
Secretary, Village Development Board 
OFFICER  
VILLAGE 
DISTRI 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
6 
 
 
Source: National sample survey of India. 
 
1.3.4 Audit Objectives 
The broad objectives of the Performance Audit of MGNREGS were to assess:- 
/triangle45right Whether structural mechanisms were in place and ade quate capacity building 
measures taken by State Government for implementation of the Act? 
/triangle45right Whether procedures for preparing perspective plan and annual plan at different 
levels for estimating the likely demand for work, a nd preparing shelf of 
projects were adequate and effective? 
/triangle45right Whether funds were released, accounted for and util ised by the state 
Government in compliance with the provisions of Act? 
/triangle45right Whether there was an effective process of registrat ion of households, 
allotment of job cards and allocation of employment  in compliance with the 
Act? 
/triangle45right Whether primary objective of ensuring the livelihoo d security by providing 
100 days of annual employment to the targeted rural  community at the 
specified wage rates was effectively achieved and w hether the unemployment 
allowance for inability to provide job-on-demand pa id in accordance with the 
Act? 
/triangle45right Whether MGNREGS works properly planned and economic ally, efficiently 
and effectively executed in timely manner and in co mpliance with the Act and 
whether durable assets were created, maintained and properly accounted for? 
DPCs/POs  
1.Dimapur  
(a)Dhansiripar  
(b)Medziphema  
2. Mon 
(a) Chen 
(b) Tobu 
3. Tuensang 
(a) Noklak 
(b) Sangsangnyu 
(c)  Chessore  
4 Peren 
(a) Tenning  
(b) Jalukie  

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
7 
 
/triangle45right Whether the auxiliary objectives of protecting the environment, empowering 
rural women, reducing rural-urban migration, foster ing social equity etc were 
effectively achieved in accordance with the Act? 
/triangle45right Whether the convergence of the scheme with other ru ral Development 
programmes as envisaged was effectively achieved in  ensuing sustainable 
livelihood to the targeted rural community and impr oving the overall rural 
economy? 
/triangle45right Whether all requisite records and data maintained a t various levels and 
whether the MGNREGS data automated completely and p rovides reliable and 
timely MIS? 
/triangle45right Whether complete transparency was maintained in imp lementation of the Act 
by involving all stakeholders in various stages of its implementation from 
planning to monitoring and evaluation? 
/triangle45right Whether there was effective mechanism at central an d state level to assess the 
impact of MGNREGS on individual households, local l abour market, 
migration cycle and efficacy of the assets created? 
1.3.5 Audit Criteria 
The audit criteria for the purpose of this Performa nce Audit were derived from the 
following sources: 
/triangle45right NREG Act-2005 and amendments thereto. 
/triangle45right Guidelines-Operational Guidelines 2006 and 2008 iss ued by the Ministry of 
Rural Development (MoRD), GoI, regarding MGNREGA an d the circulars 
issued by MoRD. 
/triangle45right Fund Rules 2006, Financial Rules 2009 and Audit of Scheme Rules 2011. 
/triangle45right Reports of the State/District by National Level Mon itors, available with 
MoRD and respective States' NREGS Commissioners. 
/triangle45right Muster Roll Watch Guidelines. 
/triangle45right Guidelines/Checklist for internal monitoring by states. 
1.3.6 Audit Methodology 
Audit methodology was based on:  
(i) Audit sampling 
Statistical sampling method was adopted for selecti on of districts, Blocks and VDBs. 
By applying Simple Random Sampling Without Replacement (SRSWOR), four out of 
11 districts were selected. Under each district, a minimum of two blocks and 25 per 
cent  of the total blocks were selected for detailed che ck. A total of nine blocks under 
these four districts were audited. Under each Block , a minimum of 25 per cent  of 
VDBs were selected. A total of 71 VDBs under the ni ne blocks were selected for 
audit.  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
8 
 
(ii) Examination/verification of records 
Scrutiny of records in audit took place at State Go vernment (State Employment 
Guarantee Council and Directorate of Rural Developm ent), District Programme 
Coordinators (DPCs), Programme Officers, Village De velopment Boards including 
individual works and Social Audit Meetings. 
(iii) Physical verification of projects 
All 1007 works executed in selected 71 VDBs were physically verified in audit. 
(iv) Beneficiary survey  
Audit conducted a beneficiary survey in the 71 VDBs  and 16 beneficiaries on an 
average were surveyed in each VDB. A total of 1140 beneficiaries were interviewed. 
(v) Entry/exit conference  
An entry conference was held to discuss the objecti ves of the Performance Audit on 
26 March 2012 with the officers of State Government . Audit findings were 
communicated to the management and a presentation m ade on the findings which 
were also discussed in an exit conference held on 1 9 September 2012. The replies of 
the Department furnished in October 2012 have duly been incorporated in the Report 
at appropriate places. 
1.3.7 Acknowledgment 
The office of the Accountant General (Audit), Nagal and places on record our sincere 
appreciation for the co-operation of the Commission er, NREGA, Nagaland, Rural 
Development Department and designated Officers unde r Rural Development 
Department at district and Block levels. 
AUDIT FINDINGS 
 
Audit Objective - 1 
 
1.3.8 Structural Mechanism and Capacity Building 
 
1.3.8.1 State Employment Guarantee Council (SEGC) 
Under Section 4 of the Act, State Government has to  formulate Rules for 
implementation of the Scheme. The Rules inter alia  have to determine the grievance 
redressal mechanism at the block and the district l evel and procedure to be followed 
in such matters to lay down terms and conditions to  determine the eligibility for 
unemployment allowance and to provide for the manne r of maintaining books of 
account of employment of labourers. 
GoI fixed a time frame upto August 2006 for framing  of Rules for implementation of 
the scheme in the State. The Rules were framed by G oN only in August 2008, after a 
delay of two years. However, it was observed that t he Rules were framed without 
incorporating procedure on financial management sys tem and redressal mechanism to 

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
9 
 
be followed at blocks and districts for smooth func tioning of the scheme. The lapses 
in this regard are discussed in Paragraph 1.3.17.1.  
The Act, further, stipulates that every State Gover nment should set up a State 
Employment Guarantee Council (SEGC) under Section 1 2 of MGNREGA, which is 
responsible for advising the State Government on th e implementation, evaluation and 
monitoring of the scheme, deciding on the “ preferred works ” to be implemented 
under MGNREGA, recommending proposals of work to GoI by the State Government 
and preparing Annual Report on MGNREGA to be presen ted to the State Legislature. 
The State Government had set up SEGC headed by Stat e Rural Employment 
Guarantee Commissioner only in August 2008. As per the Rules framed by the 
SEGC, the general body shall meet once in six month s. Though the Committee met 
thrice after the setting up of the Council, the SEG C did not prepare any annual report 
on MGNREGA for presentation to State Legislature. 
SEGC constituted (March 2009) an Executive Committe e consisting of eight 
members to assist in discharge of its duties. As per the norms fixed in the rules framed 
by the SEGC, the Executive Committee should meet at  least once in every two 
months. However, it was noticed in audit that the C ommittee did not meet since the 
date of constitution. The SEGC/Executive Committee did not appoint any expert 
group to obtain technical support and advice to imp rove the quality of scheme 
implementation, as envisaged. Instead, Commissioner ate was entrusted for technical 
support and advice. 
Thus, the fact remains that not only the SEGC was s et up belatedly they also did not 
hold any meetings since the date of constitution. H ence, the work proposals were 
recommended to the Central Government without evalu ation and proper monitoring 
of preferred works proposed by the DPCs.  
The Department while accepting the audit observatio n stated (October 2012) that the 
Executive Committee under the Chairmanship of Commi ssioner, MGNREGA was 
constituted in August, 2008. However, no formal mee tings were convened but 
informal meetings and interactions were held at reg ular intervals or whenever a need 
arose. Department also stated that strengthening of  the State level mechanism 
especially technical personnel is on the anvil. Inf ormal meetings as stated, however, 
could not be verified in audit due to absence of any records in this regard. 
1.3.8.2 District Level Structural Mechanism 
District : The State designated Project Directors, DRDA as D PCs and provided 
support staff in the field of Works, IT, accounts e tc, to assist the DPCs in overseeing 
implementation of the scheme. 
Block : As per the Operational Guidelines, 2008, the Stat e Government was required 
to appoint a full time dedicated Programme Officer not below the rank of Block 
Development Officer (BDO). Instead the regular BDOs  were made responsible for 
implementation of MGNREGA in addition to their norm al duties and were supported 
by Block Assistant Programme Officer (BAPO), regula r engineers, data entry 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
10 
 
operators and accountants. In the absence of full t ime dedicated Programme Officer 
and Technical Assistants to supervise the works at Block level, monitoring and 
reporting of MGNREGA works suffered to that extent. 
Village : Although VDBs 1 were authorised for scheme implementation right fr om 
planning to convening meeting for social audit and also monitoring the 
implementation of the scheme at village level, the State Government did not create 
any posts of full time Village Development Officers  and Junior Engineers at village 
level for scheme implementation. The State Governme nt did not deploy any support 
staff. In two test-checked districts 2 there were Gram Rozgar Sahayaks (GRS) posted 
to assist VDBs at village level. In other two test- checked districts (Mon and 
Tuensang) the Village Level Workers (VLW) under Bac kward Region Grant Fund 
(BRGF) scheme were assisting the VDBs for implement ation of MGNREGA scheme 
also. In the test-checked VDBs, there were no engin eers, data entry operators and 
accountants for effective implementation of the sch eme. The planning processes such 
as assessment of labour, identification of works to  meet the estimated labour demand, 
estimated cost of works etc. were not worked out at  grass root level by the VDBs. 
This could be largely attributed to the absence of support staff with the VDBs. 
The Department stated (October 2012) that due to re moteness and difficult terrain of 
the State and numerous schemes being implemented in all the villages, it is difficult to 
inspect and monitor all the works as envisaged in t he guidelines. They further stated 
that the VLWs were appointed in five BRGF Districts  and were assigned to work as 
GRS to assist the VDBs in the implementation of MGN REGA. Hence, the GRS were 
not appointed in BRGF Districts. 
The reply of the Department is not tenable as the 2 8 test-checked VDBs in the two 
test-checked BRGF districts stated that appointed V LWs in the villages did not 
perform the duties as GRS to assist the VDBs in the  implementation of the 
MGNREGA scheme. 
1.3.8.3 Gram Rozgar Sahayak (GRS) 
Operational Guidelines, 2008 suggested the appointm ent of GRS in each VDB to 
ensure the effective implementation of scheme with responsibility to maintain 
MGNREGA accounts, overseeing the process of registration, distribution of job cards, 
ensuring the requisite VDB meetings and social audi t. Further the SEGC should 
determine the job description, minimum qualificatio n and the process through which 
GRS should be appointed and evaluated. It was observed in audit that: 
• The State Government or SEGC did not frame any job description, minimum 
qualification, etc. for selection of GRSs. Scrutiny  of records revealed that the 
DPC, Dimapur appointed 199 GRSs in 197 villages und er Dimapur district on 
honorarium ( ` 1000 per month) basis since May 2009. Out of 199 GR Ss 
appointed, 163 GRSs were appointed as per the recom mendations made by the 
                                                 
1A statutory body under Village Council 
2Dimapur and Peren  

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
11 
 
Secretaries of VDBs in their respective villages an d remaining 36 GRSs were 
appointed as per the recommendation made by the VIPs. 
• Out of a total of 79 VDBs in Peren district, DPC, P eren appointed 48 GRSs in 
48 villages under Tenning and Peren Block on honorarium ( ` 1000 per month) 
basis since September 2009 only and 31GRSs in 31 vi llages under Jalukie 
Block were appointed only in September 2010. 
• Though the 278 GRSs were appointed after a delay ra nging from 13 to 18 
months from the date of implementation of the schem e, none of the GRS in 
two districts was provided any kind of training to discharge their duties 
effectively. 
• Scrutiny of records (May 2012) revealed that DPC, Mon and Tuensang did not 
appoint GRSs in 205 3 villages since the implementation of the scheme. Instead 
Village Level Workers (VLW) appointed under Backwar d Region Grant Fund 
(BRGF) was assigned for assisting VDBs for the impl ementation of the 
Scheme but the VDBs were not aware of such an arran gement. The fact 
further emerged from the beneficiary survey that su ch assistance was not 
provided to VDBs by the VLWs. Thus, VDBs only imple mented the scheme 
related matters in all 28 test-checked VDBs. Due to  the non-appointment of 
GRSs, records were maintained by the VDB Secretary/ VCs and the non/poor 
maintenance of records were also noticed in the ver ification of all selected 
VDBs in sampled districts as discussed in the Paragraph 1.3.16.2 . National 
Level Monitors (NLM) (June 2010) while reviewing RD  schemes in Mon and 
Tuensang districts also reported that VDB Secretari es were functioning as 
GRS. 
Due to the absence of GRSs in two districts and del ay in appointment in the other two 
test-checked districts the accounts as well as othe r records were not maintained 
properly. 
While accepting the facts and figures, the Departme nt stated (October 2012) that the 
Government did not frame a separate job description  for GRS and the delay in 
extension/fresh appointment was mainly due to non-r eceipt of proposal from the 
VDBs/Blocks as well as non-availability of qualified candidates for appointment. 
1.3.8.4 Information, Education and Communication (IEC) Plan 
For effective communication of information about th e Act and Scheme is essential for 
awareness generation, State has to undertake intens ive IEC exercise to publicise the 
key provision and procedures to be followed under t he scheme to help the public 
articulate the demand and claim their entitlements.  These activities should be widely 
disseminated especially in remote areas through vis ual and print media, pamphlets 
and brochures. 
                                                 
3Mon – 98, Tuensang - 107  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
12 
 
MoRD (March 2007) released funds ( ` 19 lakh) to three districts (second and third 
phase of implementation) for undertaking special me dia campaign which was 
essential for informing beneficiaries, implementing  agencies and general public about 
the rights and obligations of the NREG Act. Wall painting, hoardings, banners were to 
be put up at prominent places like post offices, bu s terminals, important buildings 
displaying the basic provisions for the knowledge o f targeted group in local language. 
An action plan of the special media campaign approv ed by the Governing body of the 
DRDA were to be intimated to the MoRD to establish the utilisation of the funds 
according to the approved action plan. 
Scrutiny (April-August 2012) revealed that DPC Dima pur, Mon Tuensang and Peren 
undertook awareness generation at the beginning of the scheme implementation and 
continued only once after a gap of two years through flex advertisement and posters in 
the district and did not observe the intensive comm unity mobilisation recommended 
by the MoRD. 
The awareness indicator (flux) displayed by the DPC /PO, Dimapur at Chumukedima 
(National highway- Paglapahar) indicated that the u nskilled wages was displayed for 
` 100 per day although there was a revision in wages to ` 118 per day since January 
2011. Due to poor IEC activities undertaken by the DPC/PO Dimapur, beneficiaries in 
the Paglapahar Village remained unaware of the changes in the scheme. 
The awareness indicator (metallic board) in Sangsan gnyu Village, Sangsangnyu 
Block, Tuensang district placed ( Photograph No. 1.3.1 ) at road side marketing shed 
was in dilapidated condition which indicated 
the poor IEC activities under taken by the 
DPC/PO Tuensang. 
The Department incurred an amount of ` 16.42 
lakh 
4 towards IEC activities out of the allocated 
` 19 lakh. It was observed that 56 test-checked 
out of 71 VDBs were not aware of any IEC 
plan. The above fact was confirmed from the 
beneficiary survey that the public were 
unaware about the provisions and procedures to 
be followed for registration, demand for employment  and unemployment allowances, 
grievance redressal and social audit under the scheme. 
Out of 1140 beneficiaries interviewed during the pe rformance audit, 126 beneficiaries 
were not aware about the general scheme activities and benefits. 
Thus, the Department failed to create awareness abo ut the scheme through the IEC 
plan even after incurring ` 16.42 lakh for the purpose which resulted in the pu blic 
remaining unaware about their entitlements. 
                                                 
4 DPC, Dimapur -` 7.12 lakh, DPC, Tuensang ` 2.80 lakh and DPC Peren ` 6.50 lakh  
Photograph No. 1.3.1  

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
13 
 
While accepting the facts the Department assured (O ctober 2012) that more IEC 
activities would be taken up by way of displaying h oarding, wall painting etc. at 
appropriate places in future. The directions were a lso given to the programme 
Officers to update the information especially the w age rates on the 
signboard/hoarding etc. 
1.3.8.5 Training 
VDBs, District and State level Departmental personn el involved in implementation of 
MGNREGA were required to be trained in discharging their responsibilities under the 
Act. State Institute for Rural Development (SIRD) w as assigned the task of imparting 
training to all personnel involved in the scheme im plementation. However, it was 
noticed in audit that the training programmes were not conducted at regular intervals 
to train the supporting staff and stake holders.  
Scrutiny of records of State Institute for Rural Development (SIRD), Kohima revealed 
that the Institute planned 34 training programmes ( nine programmes exclusively for 
officers, five computer based programmes for depart mental staff and 13 for VDBs 
and seven programmes common to officers and VDBs) a s per the calendar of training 
programmes (2008-12)out of which 13 programmes (thr ee programmes exclusively 
for officers, one computer based programme for depa rtmental staff and one for VDBs 
and eight programmes common to officers and VDBs) w ere conducted during 2008-
12, thus achieving only 38 per cent  of the target. 
• SIRD proposed for organising 11 training programmes  to the officers and 
stakeholders during 2008-09 (at estimated cost of ` 32.42 lakh) to train 318 
officials and 3242 non-officials. Accordingly, GoI released (March 2009) 
` 29.10 lakh based on the proposal sent by the SIRD. It was observed that the 
SIRD had conducted 12 training programmes. However,  the total number of 
persons trained was only 159 officials (50 per cent ) and 1157 non-officials (36 
per cent ). 
• The training was limited to only 2008-09. No initia tives were taken to conduct 
training as planned in their calendar of training p rogramme in the years 2009-
10 to 2011-12, except one programme. 
• The shortfall in organising training programme unde r MGNREGA ranged 
from 100 per cent  to 87 per cent  during 2009-10 to 2011-12.The fact was 
verified in audit and it was noticed that 24 VDBs ( 33 per cent ) out of 71 test 
checked VDBs provided training for MGNREGA activities at the Block level.  
• DPC, Dimapur, Mon and Peren released (May 2008) ` 4.50 lakh to SIRD for 
conducting social audit training to VDBs as verifie d from the DPC records. 
However, ` 4.50 lakh was not accounted as seen from the annual  accounts of 
SIRD. 
• Neither SIRD proposed nor the SEGC allocated funds for conducting training 
programmes for the flagship scheme MGNREGA, during 2009-10 to 2011-12. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
14 
 
The Extension Training Centre (ETC) at Tuensang was  meant for imparting training 
for the RD programmes under the umbrella of SIRD. H owever, SIRD faculty 
imparted four training programmes (10  per cent ) against the 41 training programmes 
planned during 2010-12. The DPC stated that faculti es from SIRD used to conduct 
training as per the calendar of training programme prepared by SIRD. Despite 
presence of ETC it was observed in audit that there  existed deficiencies in training at 
the level of Blocks and VDBs in Tuensang district w hich was evident during scrutiny 
of records of three blocks and 18 VDBs. Lack of pro per training on scheme 
implementation activities not only disadvantaged po or maintenance of records but 
also affected planning and preparation of development plans at VDB level. 
Despite recommendation by the Nagaland University a fter carrying out impact 
appraisal of MGNREGA in Nagaland (March 2009), for providing more training to 
the human resources section for effective implement ation of the programme, the 
Council had not initiated any concrete action. 
The scheme guidelines provide that training program mes should give priority to the 
competencies required for effective planning, work measurement, public disclosure, 
social audits and use of the Right to Information A ct, 2005. However, the Department 
failed to train the human resources hindering effec tive implementation of the 
programme. 
While accepting the facts, the Department stated (O ctober 2012) that frequent change 
of VDB Secretaries had affected the effective imple mentation of the programme to a 
great extent and also stated that trainings had been arranged for newly appointed VDB 
Secretaries from time to time along with other stak eholders and functionaries 
especially on MIS. 
Audit Objective - 2 
 
1.3.9 Preparation of Perspective and Development pl an 
 
1.3.9.1 District Perspective Plan 
The District Perspective Plan was intended to facil itate advance planning and to 
provide a development perspective for the District and was aimed to identify the types 
of MGNREGS works encouraged in the districts for lo ng term employment 
generation and sustained development as per paragra ph 4.5 of the NREGA 
Operational Guidelines, 2008. The Annual developmen t plan is the working plan that 
identifies the activities to be taken up on annual basis from the Perspective Plan. The 
expert agency selected for preparation of Perspecti ve plan should survey each village 
to identify the local needs for generating long term employment. 
The plan should confer the details of the funds all ocation available with different 
development departments which implement various Cen trally/State sponsored 
programmes and the year-wise allocation for the nex t five years along with the 
comprehensive plan for the development activities t o be taken up in different villages 
and blocks during the coming five years. During the  preparation of Perspective plan, 

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
15 
 
the District Planning Committee should be involved. The plan preparation should take 
care of closure of schemes like Sampoorna Grameen R ozgar Yojana (SGRY), 
National Food for Work Programme (NFFWP) and transf er of resources to 
MGNREGA outlays. 
It was noticed in audit that the District Perspective Plans were prepared in all the three 
test-checked districts and Agricultural Finance Cor poration, Guwahati and National 
Institute of Rural Development (NIRD), Guwahati was  involved in preparation of 
District Perspective plan at a total cost of ` 22.63 lakh 
5. Further, perspective plan for 
Mon district for second phase (2011-16) prepared at  a cost of `    23.02 lakh by the 
expert agency was approved only in May 2012 by the SEGC after a delay of one year 
and two months. 
Though the Council (June 2012) stated that the Dist rict Perspective Plans were 
prepared by these agencies after conducting survey of the villages to identify the local 
needs, 67 VDBs (94 per cent ) out of 71 test-checked VDBs have stated that the 
agency did not conduct any survey of their villages  to identify the local needs. Test-
check of 26 VDBs as well as beneficiary survey in t wo blocks (Medziphema and 
Dhansiripar) in Dimapur district revealed that the selected expert agency collected 
relevant data from the Circuit house, Dimapur in or der to complete the survey of the 
26 villages. Similarly, 41 VDBs test-checked out of  45 VDBs in three districts 
(Tuensang, Mon and Peren) also featured similar dat a collection methodology for 
preparation of perspective plan.  
Further, the plan prepared did not include details of the funds to be allocated year-
wise to different development departments which imp lement various centrally/state 
sponsored programmes along with the comprehensive p lan for the development 
activities to be taken up in different villages and blocks during the coming five years.  
The entire procedure of plan preparation and approv al was made without involvement 
of the District Planning Committee in contravention to the roles and responsibilities of 
the District Planning Committee as envisaged in the  Article 243ZD of the 
Constitution of India due to not constituting Distr ict Planning Committees in nine 
districts and non-functioning though constituted in  two districts. The plan prepared 
had not taken care of closure of schemes like SGRY,  NFFWP and transfer of 
resources to MGNREGA outlays. 
In short, the perspective plan prepared by the expe rt agency failed to feature socio-
economic aspects of development, fundamental causes  of poverty and outcome based 
strategies in the Perspective plan. Although the pl an covered all aspects of natural 
resource management along with socio-economic devel opment in the rural areas, due 
to absence of district Planning Committees/any other similar body, there was no value 
input in the preparation of district perspective plan as envisaged. 
                                                 
5Dimapur -` 8.42 lakh , Tuensang-` 10lakhand Peren -` 4.21 lakh  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
16 
 
It was also noticed in audit that the agency comple ted the process of perspective plan 
by March 2009 for Dimapur and Peren though the programme commenced from April 
2008. Hence, entire works executed during 2008-09 w as outside the approved 
Perspective plan in Dimapur and Peren districts. 
This was confirmed during the scrutiny of works rec ords of 71 test-checked VDBs, 
1116 works were planned with a project cost of ` 159.68 crore in perspective Plan for 
71 VDBs under nine blocks in four districts during 2007-2012, whereas, 71 VDBs 
executed 1007 works with a project cost of ` 161.05 crore during 2007-08 to 2011-12. 
Out of the executed projects, 406 works (40 per cent ) with project cost of ` 57.49 
crore was outside the Perspective Plan in the test-checked 71 VDBs. 
Even after incurring ` 45.65 lakh 
6, due to the poor identification of projects by the  
expert group the Perspective plan failed to yield a ny result thereby hindering the 
socio-economic development in the test-checked districts. 
While accepting the facts the Department (October 2 012) stated that in some cases 
works were taken up through the resolutions made by  Village Councils and remained 
outside the District Perspective Plan. 
1.3.9.2 Development Plan 
Section 16(4) of the Act states that every VDB shou ld prepare a working plan called 
Development Plan selected out of Perspective plan and to be forwarded to Programme 
Officer for scrutiny and primary approval before th e commencement of the year in 
which it was proposed. The plan should comprise of projects for each village to 
include (i) Assessment of labour demand (ii) estima ted labour demand (iii) estimated 
cost of works and wages and (iv) benefits expected in terms of employment and 
physical improvements out of the estimated works. T he selected projects for inclusion 
in the Development Plan should be supported with pl ot number of each site and 
unique location code in the plan.  
It was observed in audit that no Development Plans were prepared in any of the 71 
test-checked VDBs. Instead simple list of projects were forwarded to PO wherein 
neither the assessment of labour data nor the estim ated costs of the projects were 
incorporated. 
Thus, the Development Plans (list of projects) prep ared at the level of VDBs were 
unrealistic and not based on facts and figures. The  PO at Block converts the list of 
projects into the Development Plan. 
During the scrutiny of records of 71 VDBs, 44 VDBs (62 per cent ) stated that meeting 
on 2nd October every year was not conducted to identify and recommend the works to 
be approved as Development Plan. 27 VDBs (38 per cent ) reported that they had 
conducted their meetings to identify and recommend the works to be approved as 
Development Plan. 
                                                 
6(` ` ` ` 22.63 lakh  + ` ` ` ` 23.02 lakh ) 

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
17 
 
In sum, the list of projects prepared by the VDBs w ithout any assessment of labour 
demand, identification of works to meet the labour demand, estimated cost of works 
and wages and benefits expected in terms of employm ent generation and physical 
improvements failed to generate the guaranteed empl oyment and this further assisted 
the VDBs to divert the projects outside the Perspec tive plan as discussed in 
Paragraph 1.3.13.2. 
While accepting the facts, the Department stated (O ctober 2012) that Labour 
Budgets/Annual Action Plans of all the Districts fo r each year were prepared as per 
the list of schemes taken from the District Perspective Plans.  
1.3.9.3 Delay in finalisation of Development Plan 
As per paragraph 4.4 of MGNREGA Operational Guideli nes 2008, process of 
preparation of development plan should be completed  by 15 
th  October, 30 th  
November, 31 st  December and 31 st  January every year at the level of VDB, PO, DPC 
and SEGC for the works to be executed in the ensuin g financial year. As per the time 
frame for Development plans, final approval of the shelf of projects should be 
completed by December of the year preceding the fin ancial year in which the shelf of 
works were to be executed.  
Scrutiny of records of four test-checked DPCs revea led that there was a delay in 
submission of Development plans from POs to DPCs wh ich ranged from two to four 
months. Subsequently, delay in submission of Development plans from DPC to SEGC 
also ranged from two to eight months. The Council a lso admitted that the delay by 
some DPCs had hampered the consolidation of the proposals. 
Thus, there was a delay in finalisation of shelf of  projects as well as delay in release 
of funds from GoI ranging from one to four months a gainst first tranche and this was 
due to delay in submission of Development plan to GoI. 
While accepting the facts, the Department stated (O ctober 2012) that the delays in the 
finalisation of Development plans were due to late submission of list of projects by 
the respective VDBs which subsequently caused delay  in finalisation of shelf of 
Schemes and assured that necessary action and compliance would be done henceforth.  
Audit Objective - 3 
 
1.3.10 Release of Funds, Accountability and Utilisa tion 
 
 
1.3.10.1 Funds Flow 
As per Operational Guidelines of MGNREGA, 2008 a St ate Employment Guarantee 
Fund (SEGF) is to be established as a revolving fun d for receipt of Central and State 
funds for implementation of the Scheme. It was obse rved that the SEGF was 
established by Government of Nagaland in August 200 8, by notification. However, 
the SEGF could not be made operational till March 2 009 due to delay in setting up of 
State Employment Guarantee Council (SEGC). As a res ult, GoI released the scheme 
funds to the bank accounts of DPCs (DRDAs) directly  for implementing the scheme 
as depicted in the organisational structure below: 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
18 
 
Organisational Structure and Fund flow mechanisms 
             
             
            
            
 
 
The following was noticed in management of funds: 
• The total fund availability was never brought into a single umbrella in the 
State in order to analyse the required matching sha re (10 per cent ) of the State 
for programme implementation. 
• The financial management system at State level fail ed to monitor payment of 
wages and unemployment allowances to track transfer  of funds from DPC to 
the implementing agencies and to monitor and reconc ile expenditure incurred 
by the districts as the funds had been directly tra nsferred to the bank accounts 
of individual DPCs. 
• Unspent balances were reported by the DPCs through Annual approved 
accounts duly certified by the Chartered Accountant s. However, unspent 
balances with nine test-checked POs and 71 test-che cked VDBs remained 
undisclosed. 
Department stated (October 2012) that from the very  inception of the programme in 
Mon District (Ist Phase) during 2007-08, the State Employment Guarantee Council 
(SEGC) was duly constituted in July 2006, with the approval of the State Cabinet, 
amongst others, including setting up of Nagaland St ate Rural Employment Guarantee 
Fund, Nagaland NREGA Scheme, approval of Shelf of S cheme etc for the effective 
implementation of the programme in Mon District. Wi th the inclusion of new 
Districts, i.e., Phase 2 and Phase 3 Districts, the purview of the SEGC was 
subsequently extended to the entire State. However, the fact remained that the Council 
was functioning from March 2009 only.  
Contingency Material  Wages  
Secretary (VDB)  Village Fund (VDB)  
Block PO/BDO  Block Fund (BDO)  
District Program me Coordinator/ 
Project Director (DRDA)  
District Fund (DRDA)  
State Government (10%)  
Government of India (MoRD) 
(90%)  

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
19 
 
1.3.10.2 Financial Outlay and Expenditure 
As per financing pattern prescribed, GoI bear the c ost of wages for unskilled manual 
labours and also 75 per cent  of the cost of material, wages for skilled and sem i skilled 
workers. In addition to that GoI also bears adminis trative expenses including the 
salary and allowances of Programme Officers and sup porting staff and works site 
facilities. The State Government has to bear 25 per cent  of the cost of materials, 
wages for skilled and semiskilled labours. Unemploy ment allowances and 
administrative expenses of the SEGC also have to be  borne by Government of 
Nagaland (GoN).  
During 2007-08 to 2011-12, GoI directly transferred  scheme funds ( ` 2050.21 crore) 
to the implementing agencies (DPCs) in the State. G oN released their matching share 
(` 91.85 crore) to the DPCs through the Department of Rural Development. 
The year-wise receipt and expenditure of funds for the period from 2007-08 to 2011-
12 for implementation of the programmes are detailed below: 
Table No.1.3.1 
(` In lakh) 
Year Fund proposed 
to GoI 
Fund released 
by GoI 
Funds proposed 
as matching share 
of GoN 
Fund 
released by 
GoN 
Fund released  to 
11 DPCs (after 
deducting 
administrative 
expenses)  
Short fall in 
state share 
(Col 4-5) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
2007-08 NA 4801.86 480.02 256.00 246.00 224.02 
2008-09 NA 24779.18 2477.92 1600.00 1538.51 877.92 
2009-10 31993.54 48950.30 4895.03 1704.00 1531.84 3191.03 
2010-11 55830.04 60696.07 6069.61 1950.00 1791.35 4119.61 
2011-12 71945.12 65793.57 6579.36 3674.63 3886.05* 2904.73 
Total 159768.70 205020.98 20501.94 9184.63 8993.75 11317.31 
• Including the previous year’s funds.  Source:- Depa rtmental figures 
It is observed from the above table that: 
• Though the State had proposed funds of ` 878.24 crore for implementation of 
the scheme in 2009-10 and 2010-11, the GoI had rele ased ` 1096.46 crore 
(excess release of ` 218.22 crore).  
• While the GoN had to release a matching share of ` 205.02crore being 10  per 
cent of the total releases (90  per cent from central releases made by the GoI), 
the actual transfer of funds by the State Governmen t was only ` 91.85 crore 
(45 per cent ). Thus, there was a short fall in release in match ing share for 
` 113.17crore from GoN during 2007-08 to 2011-12. 
• Short release of ` 113.17 crore by the Government of Nagaland affected  the 
implementation of scheme mainly in the material com ponent of the works 
projected in the labour budget during 2007-08 to 20 11-12. Non-release of 
matching share affected in assets creation due to s hortage of materials 
observed during physical verification of the projec ts as discussed in 
Paragraph 1.3.13.6. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
20 
 
The Department stated (October 2012) that there was  substantial amount of shortfall 
in the mandatory State Matching Share towards the i mplementation of MGNREGA 
programme in the State. The accumulated shortfall s tands at ` 1.37 crore due to 
perennial funds constraint since the inception of t he programme. Department also 
added that due to meager State Plan funds, the Stat e Government which had to 
allocate funds to different sectors and other flags hip programmes also had not been 
able to match the Government of India releases. 
1.3.10.3 Establishment of Revolving Fund and operat ion of Bank Accounts 
The State Government established (August 2008) the State Employment Guarantee 
Fund (SEGF) by way of a notification. However, the State Government did not 
establish Revolving Funds under MGNREGS at District, Block and VDB level.  
Four test-checked DPCs utilised ` 0.93 crore 7 for programme implementation, out of 
the interest accrued ( ` 1.33 crore 8) in the bank accounts operated for scheme due to 
the non-establishment of revolving fund with DPCs. 
It was noticed that separate bank accounts were ope ned in public sector banks for 
fund management under the scheme at the State, Dist rict, Block and 33 VDB levels to 
observe financial management system. However, 38 VDBs 
9 opened the bank accounts 
with Nagaland State Co-operative Bank (NSCB) which is under the State Co-
operative Sector in violation to the notification issued by the MoRD. 
44 VDBs out of 71 test-checked operated joint accou nts for MGNREGS fund as per 
the provisions under the guidelines. However, 27 10  test-checked VDBs in Mon and 
Peren operated joint accounts by VDB secretary and PO in place of VDB secretary 
and Village Chairman by violating the provisions of scheme guidelines. 
While accepting the facts, the Department stated (O ctober 2012) that the State 
Government was yet to notify the establishment of R evolving Fund and stated that the 
accrued interest of MGNREGA funds has been utilised  for the implementation of the 
programme. The Department assured that the State Go vernment had taken up the 
matter for compliance on priority. 
1.3.10.4 Delay in submission of Labour Budget 
Section 14(6) of the Act prescribes preparation of a Labour Budget by the end of 
December for the next financial year. The Labour Budget should contain details of the 
anticipated demand for unskilled manual works in th e district and the plan for 
engagement of labours in the MGNREGS works. The DPC  should forward the same 
to the State Government which would in turn, forwar d it with its recommendation to 
MoRD by 31 
st  January to enable it to release the central share of funds for 
implementing the Scheme. 
                                                 
7DPC, Dimapur (` 0.43 crore), DPC, Mon (` 0.03 crore) and DPC, Tuensang (` 0.46 crore) and DPC, Peren ( ` 
0.01 crore)  
8 DPC, Dimapur ( ` 0.51 crore), DPC, Mon (` 0.07 crore) and DPC, Tuensang  (` 0.59 crore) and DPC, Peren ( ` 
0.16 crore)  
9 18 VDBs in Tuensang and 20 in Dimapur 
10  10 VDBs in Mon and 17 VDBs in Peren 

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
21 
 
It was noticed in audit that there were delays in s ubmission of Labour Budget at all 
levels against the stipulated dates for submission in the four test-checked districts. It 
was also noticed that there were inordinate delays in processing and submission of 
Labour Budget at all levels and delays ranged from one to eight months.  
•  There were delays ranging from two to four months at the level of PO to 
DPC. 
•  There were delays ranging from one to eight months  at the level of DPC to 
SEGC. 
•  There were delays ranging from two to seven months  at the level of SEGC to 
MoRD. 
The delay in submission of labour budget had result ed in delay in release of funds 
from GoI as discussed in Paragraphs 1.3.10.6. 
1.3.10.5 Fund Management at four DPCs  
During 2007-08 to 2011-12, four test-checked DPCs p roposed for ` 848.67 crore 
11  
and GoI allocated ` 764.35 crore which was 90 percent  of the proposed Labour 
Budget for the five year period. However, the alloc ation was irregular during 2009-10 
and 2010-11 as shown in the graph below: 
Graph No. 1.3.2 
(` in crore) 
 
The Department stated (October 2012) that irregular  allocation of funds was due to 
the increase in the number of Job Card Holders in t he course of implementation of the 
programme and the subsequent enhancement of wage ra te to ` 118 by Government of 
India w.e.f 1 st  January 2010. This necessitated the Districts to s ubmit the funds 
requirement over and above the amounts indicated in  Labour Budget as well as in the 
Perspective Plans.  
                                                 
11 2007-08 (` 64.65 crore ), 2008-09 (` 154.27crore ), 2009-10 (` 169.60 crore), 2010-11 (` 207.82 
crore) and 2011-12 (` 252.33 crore) 
0
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
300 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
64.65 
154.27 
169.6 
207.82 
252.33 
18 
84.45 
196.19 
236.85 
228.86 
Labour budget 
allocation by GoI 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
22 
 
However, the labour budget prepared did not hold an y substantial data analysis to 
match the release of funds by GoI. 
1.3.10.6 Delay in release of funds by GoI due to la te submission of Labour 
Budget by GoN 
As per the provision under 8.4 of the MGNREGA Opera tional Guidelines, State 
labour budget received in the Ministry would be exa mined and communicated to the 
State for review. The Empowered Committee under the  Ministry of Rural 
Development would take a decision on the amount to be sanctioned according to the 
review made by the State. However, in principle, fi rst tranche would be proportional 
to the percentage of mandays projected for the firs t six months for the year (upto 
September) in the district labour budget subject to  condition that it would not exceed 
50 per cent  of the total amount approved in the labour budget. 
It was found in audit there were delays in processi ng and submission of Labour 
Budget ranging from one to eight months at the leve l of DPC to SEGC and 
subsequent delays in submission of Labour Budget to  MoRD from SEGC ranging 
from two to seven months as discussed in Paragraph 1.3.10.4 . 
It was noticed during the scrutiny of records of fo ur DPCs that the release of funds in 
first tranche was delayed between one and five mont hs which ranged from 3 to 49 per 
cent  instead of 50 per cent . The details are given below : 
Table No. 1.3.2 (a) 
(a)  Dimapur 
(` in lakh) 
Year Labour Budget Released by GoI Total released 
by GoI 
Released by GoN 
First tranche 
(April to 
September) 
Second tranche 
(October to 
March)  
GoI GoN Month Amount 
2007-08 - 0  54.50 54.5 0 0 
2008-09 5139.02 519.5 240.15 3182 3422.15 Mar 111 
2009-10 5650.3 194.40 1400.51 2667.56 4068.07 Jan 134 
2010-11 7118.12 790.89 5674.25 2354.82 8029.07 Mar 140.98 
2011-12 8488.85 943.21 4498.13 2421.97 6920.10 Mar 550.66 
Total 26396.29 2448 11813.04 10680.85 22493.89  936.64 
(Source: Departmental figures) 
 
As per the funding structure, 50 per cent  of the approved Labour budget should be 
released by September every year. As per the funds released during 2007-08 to 2011-
12, the release of 50 per cent  (first installment/tranche) was delayed by one to four 
months. Release of grant (first installment/tranche ) was only 7 per cent  as of 
September against the total funds during 2008-09. S imilarly, during 2009-10, the 
release of grant (first installment/tranche) was 34 per cent  only.  
 
 
 
 

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
23 
 
Table No. 1.3.2 (b) 
(b)  Mon 
(` in lakh) 
Year Labour Budget Released by GoI Total 
released by 
GoI 
Released by GoN 
First tranche 
(April to 
September) 
Second tranche 
(October to 
March) 
GoI GoN Month  Amount  
2007-08 3274.87 0 355.08 500 855.08 January 32 
2008-09 4295.90 0 100 300 400 Dec/ Mar 174 
2009-10 4730.48 0 4700.59 3392.01 8092.60 January 174 
2010-11 5009.82 0 922.47 4580.96 5503.43 - 0 
2011-12 6054.24 0 1808.33 3370.43 5178.76 April/ Se pt/ 
March 
605.46 
Total  23365.31  0 7886.47  12143.4 0 20029.87   985.46  
(Source: Departmental figures) 
In the case of Mon district, against the proposed l abour budget ( ` 32.75 crore) during 
2007-08, only 26 per cent  (` 8.55crore) was received by the DPC Mon out of which  
first tranche was 42 per cent  (` 3.55 crore). During the period from 2008-09, 2010-1 1 
and 2011-12 release of first tranche was delayed fr om 3 months to 5 months and was 
ranged from 17 to 35 per cent  only. 
Table No. 1.3.2 (c) 
(c)  Tuensang 
(` in lakh) 
Year Labour Budget Released by GoI Total 
released by 
GoI 
Released by GoN  
First tranche 
(April to September) 
Second tranche 
(October to March) GoI GoN Month Amount 
2007-08 3190.80 354.53 890.12 0 890.12 March 82 
2008-09 3046.90 338.55 0 2273 2273 Dec/Mar 147.46 
2009-10 3294.35 366.04 958.64 3457.61 4416.25 Jan 139 
2010-11 4522.90 502.55 3277.44 3021.98 6299.42 March 281.97 
2011-12 6366.70 707.41 3228.14 2725.5 5953.64 July/Feb 427.31 
Total 20421.65 2269.08 8354.34 11478.09 19832.43  1077.74 
(Source: Departmental figures) 
In Tuensang district, scheme fund for first tranche  was not released during 2008-09. 
During 2009-10 and 2010-11 the first tranche releas e was ranged from 22 to 32 per 
cent  against the 50 per cent  as stipulated in the Operational Guidelines of 
MGNREGA. 
Table No. 1.3.2 (d) 
(d)  Peren 
(` in lakh) 
Year Labour Budget Released by GoI Total 
released by 
GoI 
Released by GoN 
First tranche 
(April to 
September) 
Second tranche 
(October to 
March) 
GoI GoN Month Amount 
2008-09 2946.91 327.43 235.19 2115 2350.19 Dec/March 89 
2009-10 3285.10 365.01 1253.19 2758 4011.19 Dec 124 
2010-11 4131.77 459.09 1628.39 2224.51 3852.90 March 105.73 
2011-12 4323.70 480.41 2098.19 2735.62 4833.81 July 212.00 
Total  14687.48  1631.94  5214.96  9833.13  15048.09   530.73  
(Source: Departmental figures) 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
24 
 
In Peren district, scheme fund for first tranche wa s only 10  per cent  released during 
2008-09. During 2009-10 and 2011-12 the first tranc he release was ranged from 31 to 
43 per cent  against the 50 per cent  as stipulated in the operational guidelines of 
MGNREGA. 
Thus, the delay in submission of Labour budget to M oRD resulted in subsequent 
delay in release of funds in first tranche ranging from 7 per cent  to 43 per cent  instead 
of targeted 50 per cent  resulting in non-achievement of guaranteed employm ent for 
100 days inspite of demand for jobs. 
The Department accepted (October 2012) the facts an d stated that there was delay in 
submission of Labour budget to the Ministry of Rura l Development, GoI in the initial 
years as duly pointed out by audit and noted for timely submission and compliance. 
1.3.10.7 Non-permissible expenditure out of Adminis trative contingency 
fund  
As per the Operational Guidelines (March 2007) MoRD  categorised the permissible 
and non- permissible expenditure under administrati ve expenses to include, inter alia 
the IEC activities, Training, MIS maintenance, qual ity supervision setting up 
grievances redressal system, engaging professional services, operational expenses, 
salary and allowance of additional staff dedicated to MGNREGA under permissible 
category. Items of expenditure such as purchase of new vehicle and repair of old 
vehicle and civil works were not permitted through funding of MGNREGA. Funds 
received and utilised for scheme and administrative  expenditure at four DPCs for 
` 42.86 crore 12  is shown in the Appendix-1.1 (a) to 1.1 (d) . However, it was observed 
in audit that in all the four test-checked DPCs, th e expenditure charged to 
Administrative Expenses had been diverted for sever al non-permissible items such as 
purchase of vehicles, civil works and procurement o f computers for VDBs. Though 
the items such as purchase of vehicles and transfer  of funds to SEGC were distinctly 
shown in annual approved accounts, under the Schedu le-A: Administrative Expenses, 
the Government of Nagaland had not taken any correc tive action to avoid diversion of 
scheme funds. The details are given below: 
(a) 
 Procurement of vehicles 
The four test-checked DPCs incurred expenditure of ` 2.88 crore for procurement of 
47 light vehicles in violation of the provisions of  the Operational Guidelines of the 
MGNREGA. The details are given below: 
(a)  DPC Dimapur utilised ` 0.66 crore out of the scheme fund for purchase of 1 0 
vehicles during 2008-12. 
(b)  DPC Mon utilised ` 0.67 crore out of the scheme funds for purchase of 11 
vehicles during 2007-12. 
                                                 
12  DPC Dimapur (` 12.40 crore), Mon (` 10.28 crore), Tuensang (` 11.22 crore) and Peren (` 8.96 
crore)  

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
25 
 
(c)  DPC Tuensang utilised ` 0.88 crore out of the scheme funds for purchase of 
15 vehicles during 2007-12. 
(d)  DPC Peren utilised ` 0.67 crore out of the scheme funds for purchase of 11 
vehicles during 2008-12. 
(b)  Civil works 
The three test-checked DPCs incurred an expenditure  of ` 0.59 crore for construction 
of new buildings as detailed below: 
(a)  DPC, Dimapur utilised ` 0.27 crore 13  for civil works which were outside the 
purview of Operational Scheme Guidelines. 
(c)  DPC, Mon and Tuensang utilised ` 0.13 crore and ` 0.19crore respectively 
(March 2012) for construction of building for Ombud sman out of scheme 
administrative funds whereas the physical verificat ion revealed that the office 
was accommodated within the building of DRDA (DPC), Mon and Tuensang. 
(d)  Procurement of Computers for VDBs 
DPC, Dimapur and Peren incurred (January 2012) an e xpenditure for ` 1.21 crore and 
` 0.49 crore respectively for purchase of computer an d supporting accessories 14  to 
274 VDBs (195 VDBs in Dimapur and 79 VDBs in Peren district) for MIS reporting 
and generating wages slip. DPCs did not observe any  procurement procedures while 
procuring the accessories from M/s Apex Business resources, Dimapur. 
Out of 195 sets of computers procured at DPC, Dimap ur, Programme Officer, 
Dhansiripar and Medziphema received 29 and 67 sets of computers respectively and 
issued to 96 VDBs. Similarly, 54 sets of computer p rocured by DPC, Peren were also 
issued to 54 VDBs (31 in Jalukie block and 23 in Te nning block). Test-check of 43 
VDBs 15  in four blocks revealed that 43 sets of computers were received (January 
2011) for feeding of MIS data. In all test-checked VDBs under four blocks in 
Dimapur and Peren districts, the Secretaries stated  that the computers could not be 
used for the purpose for which they were spared due  to non-availability of computer 
assistants and also stated that the computers becam e idle due to not imparting training 
to GRS/VDBs. Thus, the expenditure of ` 1.70 crore incurred towards procurement of 
computers became unfruitful. Further, the MIS feedi ng data at the level of 
implementing agencies could not be commenced even a fter investing ` 1.70 crore for 
the MIS functionaries. 
Thus, due to diversion of administrative funds of ` 5.17 crore towards non-
permissible items, the permissible activities such as IEC activities, training, quality 
supervision, setting up of redressal system and eng aging professional services 
                                                 
13 Construction of building for Ombudsman ` 0.17 crore, extension of one room of RD Guest House  - 
` 0.03 crore, providing Cement concrete topping on terrace at Office building ` 0.01 crore and Cement 
concrete flooring at office compound ` 0.06 crore  
14  Computer with UPS (1), Printer (1), Computer table (1) and computer chair(1) 
15  26 in Dimapur and 17 in Peren  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
26 
 
mandated in the Act were neither targeted nor attai ned during the scheme 
implementation thus effecting the successful implem entation of the scheme in the 
State.  
The Department accepted (October 2012) the facts an d stated that due to hilly terrain 
of the State, the transportation was a big problem and hence, vehicles were purchased 
for field functionaries purely out of necessity to ensure smooth and unhampered 
monitoring, inspection and supervision of the Schem e. Alongside some civil works 
were also carried out like extension of office room s for accommodation of 
MGNREGA functionaries and computers provided to the m for effective 
implementation of the programme. 
1.3.10.8 Disbursement at Blocks 
Nine test-checked POs in four sampled districts all ocated ` 161.05 crore to 71 VDBs 
during 2007-12 out of the block’s total allocation of ` 445 crore 
16  for generating 
95.24 lakh mandays in 71 villages through 1007 projects/works. 
However, during the test-check, it was seen that 71  VDBs under nine blocks in four 
test-checked districts received only ` 76.70 crore against the allocated funds of 
` 161.05 crore as detailed below: 
Table No. 1.3.3 
(` in lakh) 
District  Sampled 
Blocks 
No of 
VDBs 
Number 
of test 
checked 
VDBs 
Fund s Released  Total  Actual 
Receipt 
(both wages 
and 
material) 
Interest 
accrued 
with 
VDBs 
Total 
funds 
available 
Expen 
diture 
on 
wages 
Wages  Material  
Dimapur Medziphema 67 18 2208.53 1441.92 3650.45 1055.46 6.02 1061.48 1054.52 
Dhansiripar 29 8 513.75 335.42 849.17 197.49 0.27 197.76 196.44 
Mon  Chen 21 6 1118.51 591.37 1709.88 981.68 0.39 982.07 981.61 
Tobu 16 4 962.23 459.54 1421.77 802.3 1.36 803.66 802.23 
Tuensang Sangsangnyu 20 6 571.07 306.62 877.69 422.93 0 422.93 363.52 
Noklak 25 8 868.35 568.00 1436.35 691.96 0 691.96 664.12 
Chessore 12 4 936.94 570.23 1507.17 761.98 0 761.98 727.75 
Peren Tenning 23 7 1164.56 779.93 1944.49 1132.52 1.14 1133.66 1119.34 
Jalukie 31 10 1632.09 1075.75 2707.84 1623.44 1.52 1624.96 1579.68 
TOTAL 244 71 9976.03 6128.78 16104.81 7669.76 10.7 7680.46 7489.21 
(Source: Departmental/VDB figures) 
Audit attempted to track the funds flow from PO to VDBs. It was noticed that as per 
the POs records, ` 161.05 crore (Wage component- ` 99.76 crore and material -
` 61.29 crore) was released to 71 test-checked VDBs f or implementation of 1007 
projects. However, 71 VDBs received ` 76.70 crore for implementation of the 
projects ( Appendix-1.2 ). The funds available with the 71 VDBs were not ad equate to 
                                                 
16 PO, Dhansiripar  (` 33.05 crore), Medziphema (` 113.64 crore) under Dimapur district, PO, Chen (` 53.05 
crore), Tobu (` 41.46 crore) under  DPC, Mon, PO, Sangsangnyu  (` 33.48 crore), Noklak (` 46.84 crore), Chessore 
(` 30.90 crore) under Tuensang district and Tenning (` 47.49crore), Jalukie (` 45.1 crore) under Peren district.  

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
27 
 
meet the wage component of ` 23.06 crore. The material cost of ` 61.29 crore was 
neither routed through the accounts of VDBs nor acc ounted by them. Instead the 
accountability in terms of releases was limited upt o the level of PO. Thus, an overall 
short receipt of funds of ` 84.35 crore was observed in the accounts of 71 VDB s 
leading to a possibility of misappropriation of suc h funds and therefore, needs further 
investigation. As per the records of the POs, there  were entries of releases to each 
VDB and also the amounts released. The Cheque Numbe r and dates were also 
recorded in several POs. However, the amounts state d by POs were not actually 
credited to VDB accounts.  
Thus, the short availability of funds affected proj ect implementation severely as there 
were 100 non-executed and 57 short executed works n oticed during physical 
verification of various projects in 71 villages und er nine Blocks in four districts as 
detailed in Paragraph 1.3.13.6 . 
1.3.10.9 Complaints reported by Village executives  
Three members belonging to three villages lodged a complaint to the District 
Administration, Tuensang district regarding non-rec eipt of wages and material 
components under MGNREGA programme under Thonoknyu block. The district 
administration, Tuensang forwarded the copy of the complaint to audit during the 
audit coverage of sample district (Tuensang). Thoug h the Block was not selected as 
per the sample selection method adopted in audit, a s per the suggestion of district 
administration, audit called for all the records fr om PO, Thonoknyu Block and cross 
verified the records with the three VDBs 17 . 
Scrutiny of payment registers and Actual Payment Re ceipt furnished by PO, 
Thonoknyu revealed that ` 46.57 lakh was allocated to VDB, Chilliso as wage 
component during 2008-09 to 2011-12 for implementat ion of various projects in 
Chilliso village under the MGNREGA. However, the VD B accounts operated with 
NSCB Tuensang showed that only ` 24.67 lakh was credited in the account of VDB, 
Chilliso during the period mentioned above.  
Similarly, VDB Pang received ` 28.44 lakh only against the allocation of ` 62.84 
lakh made by PO Thonoknyu during the period from 20 08-09 to 2011-12 as per the 
bank passbook operated with NSCB Tuensang. 
VDB Thonoknyu received ` 45.36 lakh against the allocation of ` 82.73 lakh made 
by PO Thonoknyu during the period from 2008-09 to 2 011-12 as per the bank 
passbook operated with NSCB Tuensang. 
Thus, financial misappropriation of ` 93.67 lakh (` 21.90 lakh-VDB Chiliso, ` 34.40 
lakh VDB Pang and ` 37.37 lakh-VDB, Thonoknyu) between the actual payme nt 
register and credit into the respective accounts of aforementioned three VDBs towards 
the wage component for the period of five years could not be ruled out. 
                                                 
17 Chilliso, Pang and Thonoknyu 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
28 
 
Thus, the management failed to observe financial tr ansparency during the scheme 
implementation which needs further investigation. 
The Department accepted (October 2012) the facts an d stated that the complaint 
lodged to District Administration on non-receipt of  wages and material components 
under MGNREGA by Chilliso, Pang and Thonoknyu villa ges was under investigation 
and once the final report is received, the same shall be furnished to audit. 
Audit Objective - 4 
 
1.3.11 Registration of households, allotment of job  cards and allocation of 
employment in compliance with the Operational Guidelines 
 
1.3.11.1 Registration and Employment 
As per the provisions under chapter 5 of the Operat ional Guidelines of MGNREGA 
2008, before demanding employment under MGNREGA, ev ery rural household had 
to register themselves to get a job card. A door to  door survey also had to be 
undertaken to identify the persons willing to regis ter under the Act. Households could 
submit an application for registration or submit an oral request.  
The application for registration containing name, a ge, sex and SC/ST status should be 
included in the application for registration to obt ain job card. In addition to that a 
photograph of the adult member willing to work was also required to be affixed on the 
application form for registration. Every registered  household should be assigned a 
unique registration number after the verification b y VDB and the copies of the 
registration should be sent to the PO for further t racking and recording so that PO 
could consolidate record for likely demand and also  to organise resources 
accordingly. Job card application register should b e maintained at the level of 
VDB/PO for tracking and recording. The process was further extended to issue of 
well designed job card within a fortnight of   appl ication for registration. The job card 
issued would be valid for five years and would be i n the custody of household to 
whom it was issued. A register containing name of t he applicant, photograph, 
registration number and date of registration etc. w as required to be maintained to 
monitor the issue of the job card at VDB/PO level. A door to door survey should be 
undertaken by the team headed by Secretary of VDB t o identify the person who is 
willing to work under the Act. The willing persons should register to avail the 
entitlement of 100 days employment in a financial year.  
Scrutiny in the 71 test-checked VDBs in nine blocks  in four districts revealed the 
following: 
•
 Door to door survey : Only 22 VDBs (31 per cent ) conducted the required 
door to door survey out of the 71 test-checked VDBs . 48 VDBs (68 per cent ) 
did not conduct any door to door survey at the time  of implementation of the 
scheme and one VDB was silent on the survey. Instea d of door to door survey, 
38 VDBs out of 48 VDBs conducted survey through ann ouncements and 
conducting meeting in church and Village hall. 10 V DBs stated that no 

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
29 
 
training was provided for the purpose of door to do or survey and hence it was 
not conducted. The survey was carried out during th e subsequent years by the 
11 VDBs only out of 22 VDBs who initially conducted  door to door survey 
out of the 71 test checked VDBs. Village Chairman a nd VDB Secretaries 
conducted survey in 19 villages instead of formulat ing team for survey out of 
22 VDBs who conducted door to door survey. Non-cond ucting the door to 
door survey was reflected in the beneficiary survey  also and 68 beneficiaries 
(6 per cent ) were not aware of the scheme benefits. Only seven  VDB 
secretaries got orientation training at district an d block level out of the two 
team members who conducted the door to door survey in 22 villages.   
• Application form for registration as prescribed by Government of India was 
adopted as per the guidelines in the four test-chec ked districts. However, the 
form for registration printed by the DPCs remained without any space for 
affixing photographs of the beneficiaries.  
• The printed registration form for application also did not reach 28 VDBs (39 
per cent ) out of 71 test-checked VDBs, for issue to the beneficiaries.  
• Application register for job cards registration : Out of 71 test-checked VDBs, 
31 VDBs (44 per cent ) maintained application register for job card registration 
and remaining 40 VDBs did not maintain any such reg ister to ascertain the 
name of applicant, date of receipt/request and date of issue of job cards.  
• The registrations were opened throughout the year i n 48 VDBs (68 per cent ) 
out of 71 VDBs. However, VDBs month wise breakup of  the registration vis-
à-vis the applications received for registration wi th respect to BPL families 
could not be ascertained in any of the test-checked  71 VDBs including the 48 
VDBs due to irregular updation of the register. 
• Verification of the application was not completed w ithin 15 days of 
application and all particulars were not entered in  the register in three VDBs. 
Out of the remaining 68 VDBs, the registration list  was not regularly updated 
in 12 VDBs to add eligible workers and delete the i neligible workers due to 
death, migration, getting Government job, etc. The registration list was not 
displayed in the 68 VDB notice boards. The meeting of registered workers 
was not conducted in 32 test-checked VDBs. 
Non adherence to the provisions under registration and employment resulted in delay 
in issue of job cards and existence of duplicate jo b cards with the VDBs as discussed 
in Paragraph 1.3.11.2 . 
The Department accepted (October 2012) the facts an d stated that during the initial 
years of launching of the programme, mass general a wareness about the 
implementation of the MGNREGA programme was carried  out and people came 
forward for registration and  employment under the programme. People in rural are as 
have now become much aware and enlightened about the programme. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
30 
 
1.3.11.2 Job Cards 
The VDB/PO should be responsible for providing wage  employment to the applicants 
within 15 days from the date of receipt of applicat ion otherwise unemployment 
allowances would be payable to the applicant as per  the provisions of the Act. 
Scrutiny of job cards in audit revealed the following: 
•
 Job cards were issued within 15 days of application  to every registered 
household in only 30 VDBs. The remaining 24 VDBs ha d not issued the same 
within the stipulated period of 15 days from the da te of application. Although 
the application for job card was requested by the applicants (410) in Old Tesen 
village, Tenning Block between 18.6.2008 and 20.6.2 008, the VDB, Old 
Tesen issued the job cards only on 29.7.2008; i.e.  after a delay of 22 to 25 
days. Beneficiary survey also highlighted the facts  wherein 181 beneficiaries 
(16 per cent ) reported the delay in issue of job card which ran ged from 16 
days to 60 days. 
• Though 42 test-checked VDBs maintained the job card  issue register, only 37 
VDBs updated the register regularly. 29 VDBs (41 per cent ) did not maintain 
job card register. List of addition and deletion in  the Job Card Register was 
read out in the meeting of VDB and intimated to PO only by 41 VDBs 
regularly. 
• Only 5 VDBs out of 71 test-checked earmarked a day of the week as an 
employment guarantee day to disclose the informatio n regarding registration 
of employment followed by issue of job card. 
• Thus, the authenticity of the application for regis tration, issue of job card and 
employment awarded to the wage seekers could not be  ascertained in audit in 
34VDBs 18 . 17 test-checked VDBs stated that non-maintenance of records was 
due to non-awareness of the provisions under the Ac t as there was no training 
in this regard provided to them.   
• DPC, Dimapur issued 8842 job cards only to PO, Kuhu boto during 2007-12 
whereas PO, Kuhuboto reported the issue and demand of 9000 job cards to 
audit as of March 2012. This indicates the utlisati on of scheme funds against 
158 ghost job card holders under Kuhuboto block . 
Scrutiny of records of job card register maintained  with VDB, Pessao, Tobu, Mon 
revealed that two job cards were issued to the same  persons with same particulars but 
with different photographs as shown in Photographs  No. 1.3.2 & 1.3.3. 
 
                                                 
 
18 29 VDBs did not maintain the register and 5 VDBs did not upd ate the register  

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
31 
 
Similarly, scrutiny of 
VDB, Shiponger, 
Chessore, Tuensang 
revealed that duplicate 
job cards were in 
existence for same 
person. A Photograph  
No. 1.3.4 on this issue 
is placed alongside.  
Due to non adherence to the procedures laid down 
in the Act for registration and employment, the 
VDBs provided undue advantage to persons through 
issue of duplicate job cards. 
The Department stated (October 2012) that in 
Dimapur, the actual job card issued to PO Kuhuboto 
was 9000 as on 31.03.12 as per the records. The 
figure of 8842 job cards to Kuhuboto was wrongly re ported to DPC through oversight 
which is regretted. In case of Mon and Tuensang Dis tricts, the POs concerned were 
directed to verify the case/fact and if found corre ct, to cancel the Job Cards 
immediately. 
Audit Objective - 5 
 
1.3.12 Ensuring livelihood security by providing 10 0 days annual employment to 
the targeted rural community 
 
1.3.12.1 Generation of Employment 
The VDB/PO should be responsible for providing wage  employment to the applicants 
from the date employment had been sought, or within  15 days of the date of 
application, whichever is applicable.  
41 VDBs out of test-checked 71 on enquiry stated to  Audit that 100 days of 
employment sought for by the applicants were provid ed. 30 VDBs did not provide 
100 days employment to the applicants. The entitlem ent of employment was shared 
between different adult members of the same household in 60 VDBs. 
Paragraph 5.5.9 of MGNREGA Operational Guidelines p rioritised at least one-third 
of the beneficiaries should be women for registrati on and employment under the 
scheme. 
Eight test-checked VDBs under Noklak reported that 30 per cent  of the employment 
was provided to women. However, PO, Noklak stated t hat only 22 per cent  
employment could be provided to women out of 9197 j ob card holders  in Noklak 
Block in violation of MGNREGS guidelines to provide  30 per cent  employment to 
women. 
Photograph No.1.3.2 Photograph No.1.3.3 
Photograph No.1.3.4 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
32 
 
An average of 67 days employment was generated duri ng 2007-08 to 2011-12 for 
287168 (average) registered households in the State . The State average wages for the 
unskilled workers ranged from ` 66 to ` 100 against which the average of wages 
under the scheme ranged from ` 20 to ` 98 during 2007-08 to 2011-12. 
Though Social equity was fostered by the way of pro viding employment to 98 per 
cent  ST population in the 71 test-checked VDBs, neither  genders equity nor could the 
guaranteed employment be achieved in the sampled VDBs. 
The Department accepted (October 2012) that only 22  per cent  employment was 
actually provided against the reported 30 per cent  employment to Women. 
1.3.12.2 Muster Rolls 
Payment of wages should be recorded initially in th e numbered muster rolls 
maintained at the work site. Muster rolls should indicate job card number, name of the 
worker, number of days worked, attendance and the w ages paid against each worker 
with signature or LTI. MoRD (October 2006) issued a  muster roll watch guidelines 
for verification of MGNREGA muster rolls pertaining  to each work by the State, 
District and Block level at 2 per cent , 10 per cent  and 100 per cent  of works 
respectively. 
Paragraph 6.4.4 of MGNREGA Operational Guidelines 2 008 provided that Mate 
should be selected in a fair and transparent manner  to supervise work and record 
attendance in muster rolls at work site in the rati o of 1:50 of mates to labourers. Mate 
should measure the works on daily basis in coordina tion with technically qualified 
persons in order to assess the quality of work exec uted. In addition to this, provision 
of work site facilities also should be ensured by Mate. 
However, it was noticed in audit that the State Gov ernment did not appoint mates for 
recording attendance and supervision of work.  
Due to non appointment of Mate, tampering of muster  rolls, poor quality of works 
executed in terms of unexecuted/short executed proj ects and shortage in work site 
facilities were noticed in audit and those deficien cies which are discussed in 
Paragraphs 1.3.12.3, 1.3.13.5 & 1.3.13.6. 
1.3.12.3 Deficiencies in Muster Rolls 
Scrutiny (July 2012) of muster rolls of wage paymen t maintained with VDB, Ntu, 
Tenning block, Peren district revealed that  the wa ge payments were made to the job 
card holders without recording number of days of employment provided as well as the 
actual wages paid against the engagement in the muster rolls. 
Scrutiny of muster rolls in audit revealed the followings: 
•
 Scrutiny of muster rolls of  Construction of check dam  ( ` 19.04 lakh) 
constructed during 2011-12 revealed that all 433 jo b card holders registered in 
Ntu village, Tenning Block were engaged for executi ng the construction work 
from 7.4.2011 to 13.6.2011. Scrutiny of muster rolls revealed that 200 workers 

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
33 
 
out of 433 registered job card holders in the village received wages for 12 days 
(4.4.2011 to 16.4.2011). However, the attendance av ailable in the muster rolls 
only for four working days. Thus, the PO, Tenning B lock released  ` 1.89 lakh 
to 200 job card holders for eight working days @  ` 118 per day without 
performing the job. 
• Tampering of muster rolls by way of cutting, over w riting, erasing and pasting 
of papers were noticed in five out of the test-chec ked 71 VDBs. Six muster 
rolls 19  having wage payment of ` 10.31 lakh were tempered by using 
correction fluid and other means. This could result  in unauthorised payment of 
wages to ineligible beneficiaries. Possibility of g host workers in those cases 
also could not be ruled out. 
• Muster rolls contained job card numbers against the  name of card holder. 
Piece rate system was not adopted in the test-check ed four DPCs and 
measurement was made after the completion of work ( ranging from 5 days to 
15 days) as per the releases made for the work concerned. 
• A Committee comprising of five members for verifica tion of muster rolls was 
set up (August 2007) at State level. However, no su ch verification was carried 
out in test-checked 71 VDBs during 2007-12.  
• Scrutiny of records of 26 VDBs in Dimapur district revealed that the printed 
muster rolls did not contain any column for wages p aid against each worker. 
This fact was pointed out (June 2010) by the Nation al Level Monitors (NLM), 
MoRD while reviewing the scheme in Dimapur district. However, this was not 
rectified in the muster rolls maintained at Dimapur district . 
Thus, due to non appointment of Mates and failure of the Committee set up for muster 
roll verification at State level to monitor the mus ter roll maintenance as per the 
Operational Guidelines resulted in unauthorised pay ment of wages to the ineligible 
beneficiaries for ` 12.2 lakh. 
The Department accepted (October 2012) and assured that proper verification would 
be carried out for corrective measures in the Block s and VDBs to avoid such 
deficiencies in future. 
Audit Objective - 6 
 
1.3.13 Proper planning and economic, efficient, eff ective and timely execution of 
the works in compliance with the Act 
 
1.3.13.1 Permissible works 
The intention of MGNREGA is to provide basic employ ment guarantee in the rural 
areas and as per the schedule I of the Act the focu s of MGNREGA should be on the 
                                                 
19 Kiyeto (893) construction of link road (` 0.90 lakh), Sethikema A (225 & 226) construction & up-
gradation of agri link road with H/P culvert ( ` 2.80 lakh), Thilixu (17854) construction of ring well 
(` 0.48 lakh), Maneakshu (1022) Afforestation (` 6.02 lakh), Chessore (3908) construction of approach 
road (` 0.11 lakh)  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
34 
 
works relating to (i) water conservation and water harvesting (ii) drought proofing 
including afforestation and tree plantation (iii) i rrigation canal including micro and 
minor irrigation canal (iv) provision of irrigation  facility, plantation, horticulture, land 
development on the land owned by the SC/ST (v) reno vation of traditional water 
bodies including desilting tanks (vi) land developm ent, (vii) flood control and 
protection works including drainage in water logged  areas (viii) rural connectivity to 
provide all weather access and other works notified  by the GoI in consultation with 
the GoN. 
Scrutiny of records of planning and execution of wo rks in compliance with the Act 
revealed that permissible as well as non-permissibl e works as indicated in Schedule I 
of the Act were taken up for execution in the four test-checked DPCs. Low priority 
permissible works (road works) were given higher pr eferences for execution in the 
four test-checked DPCs. Detail analysis are given following paragraphs: 
1.3.13.2 Deviation from Plan made in Perspective Pl an 
Scrutiny of perspective plan approved in respect of  71 VDBs under nine test-checked 
blocks in four test-checked districts revealed that 1116 number of works were planned 
for five years to cover six sectors at a total esti mated cost of ` 159.68 crore wherein 
382 projects (34 per cent ) were planned for Rural Connectivity at an estimat ed cost of 
` 79.66 crore (50 per cent ). This indicates that maximum priority was accorde d to the 
lowest sector among the prioritised category against the prescribed scheme guidelines. 
Details are shown below: 
Table No. 1.3.4 
 (` in lakh) 
Name of 
sample 
Blocks 
Afforestation 
and plantation 
Flood control & 
Soil 
conservation 
Infrastructu 
re 
Land 
Development 
Rural 
Connectivity 
Water 
Conservation 
and Water 
Harvesting 
Total 
No. cost No. cost No cost No. cost No. cost No. cost No. Cost 
Dhansiripar 14 95.33 9 54.81 1 5.61 4 35.50 38 460.76 26 76.65 92 728.7 
Medziphema 29 306.18 56 3017.79 1 8.36 6 106.19 130 3710.42 69 390.21 291 7539 
Tobu 20  16 208.73 5 22.60 0 0 32 490 9 61.87 8 18.50 70 801.7 
Chen 21  21 176 7 66.00 0 0 45 433.50 15 161.00 17 24.00 105 860.5 
Chessore 0 0 10 107.81 0 0 5 247.94 18 954.92 10 97.80 43 1408 
Sangsangnyu 10 7.01 8 46.69 0 0 0 0 39 640.18 6 5.57 63 699.5 
Noklak 9 23.91 16 103.91 0 0 27 256.80 24 410.22 32 227.41 108 1022 
Jalukie 30 98.55 29 239.50 14 72.17 19 242.50 50 761.66 72 321.77 214 1736.15 
Tenning 29 107.91 0 0 6 29.36 2 26.50 59 805.09 34 203.20 130 1172.06 
Total 158 1023.62 140 3659.11 22 115.5 140 1838.93 382 7966.12 274 1365.11 1116 15967.61 
(Source: Departmental figures) 
Against the works taken up in 71 test-checked VDBs under nine blocks in four test-
checked districts mentioned above, 1007 works amounting to ` 161.05 crore had been 
completed during 2007-12 as per the utilisation rep orts, MIS reporting and 
measurement books, as shown in the following table: 
                                                 
20  for the period 2007-08 to 2010-11 
21  for the period 2007-08 to 2010-11 

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
35 
 
Table No. 1.3.5 
 (` in lakh) 
Name of 
sample 
Blocks 
Afforestation 
and plantation 
Flood control 
& Soil 
conservation 
Infrastructure Land 
Development 
Rural 
Connectivity 
Water 
Conservation 
and Water 
Harvesting 
Total 
No. cost No. cost No. cost No 
. 
cost No. cost No. cost No Cost 
Dhansiripar 08 66.76 05 39 0 0 1 9.00 56 641.02 21 93.39 91 849.17 
Medziphema 08 28.60 99 507.83 0 0 10 63.50 291 2675.50 82 375.02 490 3650.45 
Tobu 22  08 74.67 0 0 02 39.69 0 0 22 1307.41 0 0 32 1421.77 
Chen 23  07 559.74 03 38.68 0 0 05 94.47 55 883.38 04 133.61 74 1709.88 
Chessore 01 35.00 01 7.17 0 0 08 162.00 29 1098.61 11 204.39 50 1507.17 
Sangsangnyu 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 30 877.69 0 0 30 877.69 
Noklak 0 0 04 88.06 0 0 01 16.24 31 1295.47 07 36.58 43 1436.35 
Jalukie 11 115.45 07 136.13 8 144.73 8 211.42 47 1553.12 30 546.99 111 2707.84 
Tenning 16 133.69 0 0 03 75.07 0 0 49 1519.90 18 215.83 86 1944.49 
Total 59 1013.91 119 816.87 13 259.49 33 556.63 610 11852.10 173 1605.81 1007 16104.81 
(Source: Departmental figures) 
It can be seen from the tables above that there wer e deviations from the planning 
made in each sector of the Perspective Plan and the  prioritised projects remained 
unexecuted as given below: 
• 1007 numbers of works ( ` 161.05 crore) were reported as completed against 
1116 projects planned ( ` 159.68 crore) in the Perspective Plan. However, none 
of the test-checked blocks executed the works plann ed as per the Perspective 
plan. This indicates faulty preparation of Perspect ive plan by the expert 
agency. This further point towards the deficiency in preparation of estimates at 
inflated rates in the Perspective plans as discussed in Paragraph 1.3.9.1. 
• 158 Afforestation and plantation works were planned  at an estimated cost of 
` 10.24 crore during 2007-12. However, only 59 works (37 per cent ) could be 
completed for ` 10.14 crore in the 71 test-checked VDBs. This shows  that 
afforestation and plantation works were executed at  unidentified areas outside 
the perspective plan engaging more labourers for av ailing wage/material 
components out of the scheme funds which resulted i n non-achievement of 99 
planned projects.  
• 119 (85 per cent ) of Flood Control and Soil Conservation projects w ere 
completed in the 71 test-checked VDBs for ` 8.17 crore against the planned 
140 projects costing ` 36.59 crore. 119 projects were completed at lower c ost 
for ` 8.17 crore on actual execution which was one-fifth of the projection 
made in the Perspective plan. This also shows the f ailure in preparation of 
proper estimates in the Perspective plan. 
• 13 infrastructure projects were completed ( ` 2.59 crore) against the planned 
22 projects for ` 1.15 crore. This indicates not only the deviation i n execution 
                                                 
22  for the period 2007-08 to 2010-11 
23  for the period 2007-08 to 2010-11 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
36 
 
of projects from the estimates prepared but also th e failure in execution of the 
projects in accordance with the estimates prepared in the Perspective plan. 
• Although 140 projects were planned for land develop ment in the Perspective 
plans for ` 18.39 crore, only 33 projects (24 per cent ) were executed for 
` 5.57 crore (30 per cent ) which points towards the diversion of project fun ds 
for completion of low priority works. 
• Although 274 projects were planned for Water Conser vation and Water 
Harvesting in the Perspective plan for ` 13.65 crore, only 173 projects (63 per 
cent ) could be executed for ` 16.06 crore (18 per cent  above estimate) which 
points towards the variation in execution of projec ts above the estimated costs 
projected in the perspective plan. 
• Against the 382 rural connectivity planned for ` 79.66 crore in the Perspective 
plan, 71 VDBs carried out 610 lowest prioritised wo rks for ` 118.52 crore. 
VDBs completed 228 rural connectivity programmes ou tside the Perspective 
plan. This further confirms that aforementioned pri oritised planned 
programmes remained unexecuted due to the diversion  of ` 38.86 crore to 
unplanned rural connectivity programme in the Persp ective plan in respect of 
71 villages. 
Although there was deviation from high preference t o low preference works which 
were executed outside the purview of the Perspectiv e plan, the development plan also 
got approved by appropriate levels for concluding labour budget for these low priority 
works. However, GoN did not take any action for eli minating execution of such 
works. 
NLM (June 2010) while reviewing RD projects in Mon and Tuensang district stated 
that emphasis had been awarded for strengthening in frastructure for communication 
(construction of roads). However, it is pertinent t o mention that the Perspective plans 
were prepared for strengthening all the identified priority sectors but preference given 
to low priority works defeated the planned vision. 
The Department accepted (October 2012) and stated t hat deviations from the 
Perspective plan had occurred due the Villages unde rtaking some prioritised works 
through the resolutions passed by the Village Counc ils while carrying out specific 
works, especially in remote and far flung areas. 
1.3.13.3 Works and Execution 
It was observed during the test-check of the works that the stipulated guidelines and 
norms were not adhered to in the State of Nagaland as detailed below; 
•
 As per clause 6.1.1(ix) and 6.1.2 of the operationa l guidelines of MGNREGA, 
2008, the State Government was required to notify o ther works in consultation 
with GoI as per Section I (ix) of Schedule-I. Howev er, State Government did 
not notify the permissible works to be executed and  other work categories 
were also not included in the Perspective plan and Development plan.  

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
37 
 
• Deploying machinery is strictly prohibited under MG NREGA. However, it 
was observed that heavy machinery was used for exec ution of MGNREGA 
works. 28 out of 71 test-checked VDBs stated that m achinery was used for 
execution of woks. This was further confirmed throu gh the beneficiary survey 
wherein 30 per cent of the beneficiaries surveyed had stated that machi nery 
was used for executing MGNREGA works. 
• All the works were executed only as per the adminis trative sanction and no 
technical sanctions were available at VDB or PO level.  
• As per guidelines unique identification number had to be given for each work. 
However, it was observed in audit that different id entity numbers were given 
for the same work which was executed in phased mann er during the year or in 
the subsequent year. 
Thus, as seen from the above the execution of works  under MGNREGA in the State 
was carried out without adhering to the norms and p rocedures laid down in the 
guidelines resulting in execution of non-permissibl e works, works outside the 
Perspective Plan and engagement of machinery instead of labour. 
The Department accepted (October 2012) and stated t hat deviations from the 
Perspective plan had occurred due the Villages unde rtaking some prioritised works 
through the resolutions passed by the Village Counc ils while carrying out specific 
works, especially in remote and far flung areas. 
1.3.13.4 Involvement of contractor in execution of work  
As per the operational guidelines, use of contracto rs was prohibited and as far as 
possible tasks should be performed by using manual labourers and not machines. 
Physical verification of projects in Panso-B under Noklak Block, Tuensang district 
revealed that construction of sanitary drainage ( ` 13.54 lakh) and irrigation canal 
(` 5.26 lakh) planned during 2011-12 was diverted for construction of Rest House 
(Photograph No. 1.3.5 ) and PHC building ( Photograph No. 1.3.6 ) in the village. 
During the physical verification it was also found that the construction of Rest house 
building was under progress and the labour stated t hat the work was allotted to an 
Assam based contractor which was also authenticated by the VDB. 
Department stated (October 2012) that there was no involvement of any Contractor 
for execution of work at Panso B under MGNREGA and works were taken up by the 
VDB through the village Council Resolution. 
An ongoing construction of Rest house at Panso-B Ongoing construction of PHC in Panso – B 
Photograph No.1.3.5 Photograph No1.3.6 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
38 
 
Reply is not tenable as the PO and the VDB Secretar y accepted the facts during joint 
physical verification of the projects.  
1.3.13.5 Worksite facilities 
Work site facilities should be ensured by the imple menting agencies as per the 
provision 6.8 of the operational guidelines of MGNR EGA, 2008. Medical aid, 
drinking water, shade and crèche were to be provide d (Schedule II Section 27 & 28 of 
MGNREGA). 
Scrutiny revealed that work site facilities like 
shade and first aid were provided. However, 
drinking water and crèche were not provided. 
Cost of tools were not provided to the workers 
instead tools procured by the DPC were issued to 
VDBs for work execution. 
SEGC approved ` 4.46 crore for the procurement 
of 22306 medicine kits @ ` 2000 ( photograph 
No.1.3.7) from different agencies to cover 223102 household s in the State at the ratio 
of one medical kit each to every 10 households in a  village. Scrutiny of records of 
four test-checked DPCs revealed that ` 1.87 crore 
24  was spent for purchase of 9341 
medicine kits to cover 93411 households in the four  districts. However, the list of 
medicines, quantity, rates etc. were not available in the orders issued by the SEGC. 
Scrutiny of records of 71 test-checked VDBs reveale d that 959 medicine kits were 
only received against the 3490 medical kits procure d for 34905 households in the 71 
villages. Thus, there was a short receipt of 2531 m edicine kits valued at ` 0.51 crore 
with the 71 VDBs.  
The Department accepted (October 2012) the facts and stated that this was due to poor 
maintenance of records at the VDB level and Departm ent assured record upkeep at all 
levels particularly at VDB level for future guidance and necessary action. 
1.3.13.6 Physical verification of projects 
Creation of durable assets and strengthening the li velihood resource base of the rural 
poor is an important objective of the Scheme. The c ost of material component of 
projects including the wages of the skilled and sem i-skilled workers taken up under 
the scheme should not exceed 40 per cent  of the total project costs. As far as 
practicable, a task funded under the scheme should be performed by using manual 
labourer and not machines. Provision of regular ins pection and supervision of works 
to be taken up under the scheme shall be made to en sure proper quality of work as 
well as to ensure that the total wages paid for the  completion of the work 
commensurate with the quality and quantity of work done. 
                                                 
24  Dimapur (` 6 1.06 lakh), Mon (` 53.12 lakh),Tuensang  (` 44.38) and Peren (` 28.26 lakh)  
Photograph No.1.3.7 

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
39 
 
1007 works were executed during 2007-12 in 71 test- checked VDBs under nine 
blocks in four DPCs for ` 161.05 crore. Joint physical verification of the pr ojects 
revealed that 100 projects sanctioned and allocated  remained unexecuted though 
payments were made and reported as completed amount ing to ` 10.84 crore. The 
VDBs had not executed 57 projects valued at ` 10.32 crore due to diversion of the 
amount to non-permissible works. The VDBs had executed 49 non- permissible works 
valued at ` 11.12 crore which were outside the purview of the g uidelines. Details are 
stated in the Appendix-1.3 (i) to 1.3 (iii)  and the analysis is shown below:  
Table No. 1.3.6 
(` in lakh) 
Name of 
the test 
checked 
DPC 
Name of 
Block 
No. 
of 
VDBs 
No. of 
projects 
selected 
during 
2008-09 
to  
2011-12 
Physical 
verification 
conducted 
No. of 
un-
executed 
projects 
Cost of 
unexecute 
d projects 
No. of 
projects 
noticed 
as short 
in 
execution 
Cost of 
short in 
executed 
projects 
No. of non-
permissible 
projects 
Cost of non-
permissible 
project 
Dimapur Medziphema 18 490 490 26 154.05 3 14.71 14 206.76 
Dhansiripar 8 91 91 34 268.18 3 33.61 7 35.03 
Mon Tobu 4 32 32 2 88.87 2 73.19 7 246.15 
Chen  6 74 74 5 81.18 7 126.64 2 62.92 
Tuensang 
Chessore 4 50 50 1 37.06 1 50.63 4 165.34 
Sangsangyu 6 30 30 9 62.77 2 12.42 5 55.25 
Noklak 8 43 43 6 72.68 5 161.24 6 229.83 
Peren Jalukie 10 111 111 11 187.86 11 208.07 3 102.30 
Tening 7 86 86 6 131.05 23 351.38 1 8.52 
Total  71 1007 1007 100 1083.70 57 1031.89 49 1112.10 
(Source: Departmental figures) 
It can be seen from the above table that: 
• Out of 1007 projects, 100 projects (10 per cent ) valued ` 10.84 crore were 
found un-executed in 71 villages under the four test-checked DPCs. 
• In 57 projects implemented by the VDBs there was sh ort execution in 
approved items of work valued ` 10.32 crore . 
• Implementing agencies were permitted to execute 49 non-permissible projects 
valued ` 11.12 crore outside the approved perspective plan a s well as 
development plan. 
To summarise, 100 projects amounting to ` 10.84 crore stated to be completed did not 
exist physically indicating possibility of misappro priation of ` 10.84 crore in 71 test-
checked VDBs alone. Short execution by diverting th e amount to non-permissible 
works in respect of 57 works valued at ` 10.32 crore and execution of 49 non-
permissible works valued at ` 11.12 crore were also noticed duing joint physical  
verification. The above observations were authentic ated by the VDBs during joint 
physical verification. 
Thus, the non-execution as well as short execution of projects was due to non-
availability of funds at VDB level, though it was r eported as released to the VDBs for 
implementation of the projects by the PO as discuss ed in Paragraph 1.3.10.8 . Non-

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
40 
 
execution as well as short execution of projects ha mpered the creation of durable 
assets and also defeated the basic objective of the  scheme to provide employment for 
100 days. 
The Department accepted (October 2012) the facts and stated that this was due to land 
dispute, local problem etc. as all projects under MGNREGA were land based projects. 
Non permissible works were taken up which were abso lutely necessary for the village 
through Village Council resolution. 
1.3.13.7 Interesting cases noticed during joint phy sical verification  
Interesting cases noticed during the joint physical  verification of the projects 
supported with photographs are given below: 
1.3.13.8 Short execution of Projects 
(a) During the physical verification of 
projects under Tenning block, Peren 
district it was noticed that a check dam 
was constructed by the VDB, Ntu 
during 2011-12 for ` 9.52 lakh. The check 
dam ( Photograph No. 1.3.8 ) was in the 
shape of fishery pond  and an embankment 
in cement concrete structure was made to 
store water. This embankment/check dam 
was not connected with any channel to utilise the w ater for irrigation purpose. Thus, 
the check dam constructed under the scheme did not serve the desired objectives. 
(b) During the joint physical verification, it was seen that ` 125.16 lakh was released 
(2008-12) to VDB, Basimpuikam for constructing irri gational channel for 41.70 km 
@ ` 3 lakh per km. However, 30 km channel was construct ed at a total cost of ` 90 
lakh resulting in short execution of 11.7 km irriga tion channel costing  ` 35.16 lakh 
(Photograph No. 1.3.9). 
1.3.13.9 Non permissible Projects 
During 2010-12, PO, Noklak released 
` 118.34 lakh to VDB, New Pangsha for 
construction of road from New Pangsha to 
Lang river (9.63 km). The VDB constructed 
the road for 5 km in terms of earth cutting for 
` 35.67 lakh and the remaining ` 85.67 lakh 
was diverted for construction of bridge across 
the river Lang. A photograph  showing the 
Photograph No.1.3.8 
A bridge under construction on Lang river by  
 the VDB new Pangsha under PO, Noklak, 
Tuensang  
Photograph No.1.3.10 
Photograph No.1.3.9 

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
41 
 
ongoing construction of bridge is placed alongside. 
PO, Tobu released ` 95.35 lakh to VDB, 
Maneakshu for construction of a circular 
road (6.35 km) during 2009-10. The VDB 
diverted ` 21 lakh out of the released 
funds for constructing an office building 
for Village Guard. A photograph  showing 
the Office constructed for Village Guard is 
placed alongside. 
The VDB, Maneakshu further diverted 
` 36.96 lakh for construction of Guest 
House in the village which is not 
permissible as per the provisions of 
MGNREGA Operational Guidelines. 
Thus, the proposed circular road could be 
constructed for a distance of only 2.5 km 
with the remaining funds of ` 37.39 lakh. 
A photograph  showing the Guest House is placed alongside. 
Audit Objective - 7 
 
1.3.14 Protecting the environment, empowering rural  women, reducing rural-
urban migration and fostering social equity. 
 
1.3.14.1 Empowerment of Rural Women  
Women were included for execution of work as labour ers only and they were not 
included in higher capacities like mates, Gram Rozg ar Sahayak, etc. in the 69 out of 
71 test-checked VDBs. Two lady GRSs were engaged in  two villages (Old Jalukie 
and Inbung under Peren district). Bank/Post office accounts were not opened either in 
the name of women in a household or as a joint acco unt as the wages were paid in 
cash to all the job card holders. There was empower ment of women socially and 
economically as the earning of the women enhanced t he status of their family. 
Women were also politically empowered due to their participation in the decision 
making process under the scheme as per the benefici ary survey conducted in 71 
villages covering 22 per cent  women participants. 
1.3.14.2 Fostering Social Equity  
Scheduled Tribe (ST) only were included for executi on of work as labourers in the 71 
test- checked VDBs as 92 per cent  of the population in the State belong to ST. STs 
were included in higher capacities of GRS in Dimapu r District alone. No atrocities on 
STs were reported in the 71test-checked VDBs as per  the beneficiary survey 
conducted in 71 villages covering 98 per cent ST participants. 
 
Photograph No.1.3.11 
Office of the village Guard at Maneakshu  
Guest house constructed by VDB Maneakshu  
Photograph No.1.3.12 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
42 
 
1.3.14.3 Protecting the Environment  
One of the scheme objectives was to protect the 
environment along with creation of assets by 
generating rural employment to the poor. 
During physical verification of projects executed in 
Samzuram 
village under 
Jalukie block in 
Peren district, it 
was noticed that 
VDB, Samzuram constructed play ground ( ` 47.02 
lakh) across the Mangleu River-let during 2011-12 a nd blocked the water flow into 
river Mangleu. It would be seen from the Photograph Nos.1.3.13 to 1.3.15 that 
instead of preserving the environment the VDB, Samz uram devastated the Mangleu 
River by constructing playground across it. The con struction of play ground without 
proper assessment and feasibility not only defeated  the purpose of play ground but 
also may destroy the ecological balance of village area. 
VDB, Samzuram replied (September 2012) that the pre servation of the river would be 
made at the earliest. 
Audit Objective - 8 
 
1.3.15 Convergence of the Scheme with other Rural D evelopment Programmes 
as envisaged was effectively achieved in ensuring sustainable livelihood to 
the targeted rural community and improving the overall rural economy. 
 
1.3.15.1 Convergence programme 
Convergence of MGNREGA funds with the funds from ot her sources for creation of 
durable assets is permissible which was intended to  create additional employment as 
per provision 14.1 of the operational guidelines 20 08 of the MGNREGA. 
Convergence of the Scheme with other Rural Developm ent Programmes was required 
to be planned effectively to achieve and ensure sus tainable livelihood to the targeted 
rural community and improve the overall rural economy. 
Guidelines were prepared by GoI in respect of (1) I ntegrated Watershed Management 
Programme, (2) Programmes of Ministry of Agricultur e, (3) Indian Council for 
Agricultural Research (KVK), (4) Swarnajayanti Gram  Swarojgar Yojana (SGSY), 
(5) Ministry of Environment, (6) Ministry of Water Resources, (7) Prime Minister 
Gramin Sadak Yojana (PMGSY) and (8) Afforestation a nd other schemes. However, 
the effort for convergence was not made in the State of Nagaland as detailed below; 
•
 The Guidelines for other RD schemes were neither di scussed at a State level 
meeting of the departments concerned nor in the mee ting of the District level 
Photograph No.1.3.13 
Photograph No.1.3.14  Photograph No.1.3.15 

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
43 
 
officers involved in implementation of MGNREGS defe ating the stated 
objective.  
• District Resource Groups were neither formed at the  district level nor trained 
for execution of the Convergence schemes. 
• Perspective plan was prepared for the district and availability of resources 
under various Rural Development Programmes 25  for convergence was 
estimated, along with MGNREGS works. However, in fo ur test-checked 
districts the same were confined to the Perspective  plan and no efforts were 
made for convergence. No checklist was prepared for  the convergence 
schemes to be taken up by Department of Rural Development. 
• DPRs prepared in respect of convergence works were not prepared by any of 
the 71 test- checked VDBs. Thus, VDBs were neither aware nor maintained 
the wage material ratio in the works to be taken up  under convergence 
programmes.  
• Job cards holders were employed in the convergence programmes as verified 
physically in three VDBs 26  where the convergence programmes were 
executed. Separate social audit was not carried out  for three convergence 
programmes executed with the Department of Horticulture. The wage payment 
was made in cash. The executed works under converge nce programme were 
not monitored as per the MGNREGA guidelines. 
Government of Nagaland sanctioned ` 15 
crore for MGNREGA convergence 
activities with Horticulture Department 
during 2009-10 in eleven districts in the 
State. Out of the total allocation, ` 1.5 
crore (10 per cent ) was stipulated for State 
share and remaining ` 13.50 crore (90 per 
cent ) was to be made out of MGNREGA 
scheme. Implementation/monitoring of 
above convergence schemes in four test-checked districts are discussed below: 
Dimapur 
Scrutiny of records of DPC, Dimapur revealed that ` 223.20 lakh was sanctioned for 
convergence programme with Department of Horticultu re in the ratio of 90:10 for 
Dimapur district during 2010-11. Department of Hort iculture released (May 2010) 
` 22.32 lakh for horticulture activities under the co nvergent programme. DPC, 
Dimapur released (March 2010) matching Share of ` 100 lakh to two blocks for 
construction of horti-link road against the stipula ted share of ` 200.88 lakh. DPC, 
                                                 
25 LADP, Agri, Horti, R&B, School Education and Forest  
26Diphupar B (Medziphema), Maksha (Sangsangnyu) & Panso B (N oklak)  
Photograph No.1.3.16 
A black toped road connecting to Floriculture unit, Diphupar, 
Medziphema, Dimapur 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
44 
 
Dimapur released ` 26 lakh ( ` 20 lakh out of GoI share and ` 6 lakh out of horti 
share) to the Medziphema block. 
During the test-check of records of PO, Medziphema,  it was noticed that the fund of 
` 20.00 lakh was utilised for black topping of road t o connect it with Floriculture unit 
at Diphupar (Photograph No.1.3.16 ). It was also noticed that ` 6 lakh out of ` 22.32 
lakh released to PO, Medziphema, however, was not u tilised for any horticulture 
activities. The utilisation of convergent programme fund ( ` 20 lakh) for black topping 
was picturised during the physical verification and  this remained without any sign 
board ( Photograph 1.3.16 ). 
Mon 
Scrutiny of records of DPC, Mon revealed that ` 164.70 lakh was sanctioned for 
convergence programme with Department of Horticultu re in the ratio of 90:10 for 
Mon district during 2010-11. Department of Horticul ture released (May 2010) 
` 16.47 lakh for horticulture activities under the convergent programme.  
DPC, Mon utilised ` 16.47 lakh against the normal MGNREGA programme as the 
release was in the form of State share defeating th e purpose for which the funds need 
to be utilised. 
Tuensang 
Scrutiny of records of DPC, Tuensang revealed that ` 80 lakh was sanctioned for 
convergence programme with Department of Horticultu re in the ratio of 90:10 for 
Tuensang district during 2010-11. Department of Hor ticulture released (May 2010) 
matching share of ` 8.00 lakh for horticulture activities under the con vergent 
programme. 
The DPC, Tuensang appropriated ` 8.00 lakh for three blocks 
27 for construction of 
horti-link road. The allocated amount was further a ppropriated to 60:40 as wage 
material ratio instead of appropriating the share t o 10 per cent  of the share of 
horticulture towards material cost. Thus, share of ` 72 lakh (90 per cent ) was not 
provisioned in this convergence scheme. 
Joint Physical verification (June 2012) of the proj ects pertaining to convergent 
activities under Sangsangnyu and Noklak block revea led that no such convergent 
activities (construction of horti-link road) were t aken up under the convergence 
programmes with Horticulture Department, which indi cate possible misappropriation 
of ` 6.00 lakh. 
Peren 
Scrutiny of records of DPC, Peren revealed that ` 110 lakh was sanctioned for 
convergence programme with Department of Horticultu re in the ratio of 90:10 for 
Peren district during 2010-11. Department of Hortic ulture released (May 2010) 
                                                 
27 Noklak ` 4.00 lakh , Sangsangnyu ` 2.00 lakh , Noksen ` 2.00 lakh  

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
45 
 
matching share of ` 11.00 lakh for horticulture activities under the co nvergent 
programme. 
DPC, Peren appropriated ` 11.00 lakh for two blocks 
28  for construction of horti-link 
road. The allocated amount was further appropriated  to 60:40 as wage material ratio 
instead of appropriating the share to 10 per cent  of the share of horticulture towards 
material cost. Thus, share of ` 99 lakh (90 per cent ) was not provisioned in this 
convergence scheme. 
Joint Physical verification (June 2012) of the proj ects under Tenning and Jalukie 
block revealed that  no such convergent activities (construction of horti-link road) 
were taken up under the convergence programmes with  Horticulture Department, 
which indicate possible misappropriation of ` 11.00 lakh.  
Thus, convergence with other Rural Development Prog rammes planned could not be 
effectively achieved to ensure sustainable liveliho od to the targeted rural community 
and improve the overall rural economy. 
The State Government did not launch an afforestatio n drive along National Highways 
in the State to increase the green cover in violati on of the circular (February 2011) 
issued by MoRD. 
The Department accepted (October 2012) the facts an d stated though sanction was 
made for construction of Horti link road under conv ergence programme with 
Horticulture Department, the villages utilised the amount for black topping of road to 
Horticulture (floriculture) Unit. In respect of Mon  and Peren District, the Department 
accepted the facts. 
The Department added that two projects were taken u p under Convergence viz. Horti 
link road in Topunyu area leading to orange farm co nnecting Agri link road in 
Sangsangnyu and horti link road in Nokyan village l eading to Asheki area in 
Tuensang District. 
Reply in the case of two projects reported as execu ted by the Department under 
Convergent programme was not tenable as the project s sanctioned were not found as 
executed during the joint physical verification. 
Audit Objective - 9 
 
1.3.16 Record maintainance at various levels, MGNRE GA data automation and 
provision of reliable and timely MIS data 
 
1.3.16.1 Printing of MGNREGA documents 
As per the provision 9.1 of the Operational Guideli nes 2008, records as prescribed 
were to be maintained at different levels for keepi ng information on critical inputs, 
processes, outputs and outcomes.  
                                                 
28 Tenning ` 7.47 lakh , Jalukie ` 3.53 lakh  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
46 
 
DPC, Peren printed various records like registers, job cards, muster rolls, MBs, 
Demand form, application forms, slip pads, Cash Boo ks, stock registers, social audit 
reports forms etc. valued at ` 53.65 lakh. Scrutiny of records revealed that the D PC 
did not observe any procurement procedures while pu rchasing the printed records 
from different firms, instead DPC procured all the above mentioned records without 
analysing the requirement from the field offices/VDBs. 
Scrutiny of records of 17 VDBs out of 71 test check ed VDBs revealed that Cash 
Book, stock register, job card application register , job card register, asset register, 
social audit report forms, application forms, deman d forms, receipt book were not 
available with them to record critical inputs, proc esses and outcomes. Although the 
DPC, Peren incurred ` 14.61 lakh 29  for printing of aforementioned records out of the 
total printing cost of ` 53.65 lakh, the intended purpose of printed records  failed to 
achieve any results due to the non-delivery of item s to the VDBs. Thus, the VDBs in 
Peren district could not maintain Cash Book, stock register of the items received and 
issued, receipt of wages paid to the labourers and other MGNREGA related 
documents. 
1.3.16.2 Maintenance of records  
Status of maintenance of prescribed records at diff erent levels (9 test-checked blocks 
and 71 VDBs) and the reasons as well as impacts are tabulated below: 
Table No. 1.3.7 
Name of record  To be 
maintained 
with 
Status of 
maintenance 
status of  non 
maintenance 
PO VDB PO VDB PO VDB 
Muster roll issue register 9 0 9 0 0 0 
Muster roll receipt register 0 71  0 42  0 29  
Job card application register 9 71  0 30  9 41  
Job card register 9 71  9 42 0 29  
Employment Register  9 71  0 45  9 26  
Works register  9 71  0 0 9 71  
Asset register  9 71  5 37  4 34  
Compliant register 9 71  3 48  6 23  
Monthly allotment and 
utilisation watch register 
9 71  0 0 9 71  
(Source: Departmental figures) 
Scrutiny of records of 71 test-checked VDBs, reveal ed that 45 VDBs maintained 
employment registers properly and entered the job c ard and employment in the 
respective registers. However, process of timely em ployment application could not be 
verified due to the absence of date of application in the registers maintained by VDBs. 
                                                 
29  Cash book (` 0.68lakh), Stock register ( ` 2.26 lakh), Job card application register ( ` 2.92 lakh), Job 
card register ( ` 3.97 lakh), Asset register ( ` 1.57 lakh), Social audit form ( ` 0.71 lakh), Application 
forms (` 0.97 lakh) and Receipt book (` 1.53 lakh) 

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
47 
 
Wages were correctly entered in the job cards furni shed by 99 per cent of 
beneficiaries during the beneficiary survey. 
Wages paid were available in the job cards verified  during beneficiary survey of 1130 
beneficiaries out of 1140 beneficiaries. Audit coul d not ascertain the proper link 
between work register and asset register because no ne of the 71 test-checked VDBs 
maintained work register. Complaint registers were available in the 48 test-checked 
VDBs which however, remained without any complaints . 23 VDBs did not maintain 
any compliant register. 
POs collected data on households registered, job ca rd issued, employment generated 
etc. at the time of issue of job card and data on e mployment was collected during the 
measurement of work in order to enter the date in t he MGNREGA website once in a 
year. Fund allocations towards the VDBs were posted  offline by PO at the time of 
sanction/release to VDBs. The expenditure was treat ed as the muster roll payments 
but were neither collected nor posted in the State website. There was no mechanism at 
PO level to verify the authenticity of data receive d and uploaded in the MGNREGA 
website due to the lack of internet facilities. 
Similarly, mechanism was not available at districts  as well as State to verify the 
authenticity of data as the data entered by the PO offline was transferred to State cell 
for online entry though CDs. Thus, the progress of work could not be assessed on the 
basis of MPRs which were required to be sent through the computer based MIS by the 
9 test-checked POs. 
In sum proper prescribed records were not maintaine d to correlate the input and 
output process for the successful implementation of the scheme.  
The Department accepted (October 2012) the poor mai ntenance of records at VDB 
level and noted the observation for compliance in future. 
Audit Objective - 10 
 
1.3.17 Transparency in implementation of the Act by  involving all stakeholders 
in various stages of its implementation from planni ng to monitoring and 
evaluation. 
 
1.3.17.1 Grievance Redressal at various levels  
PO at block level and DPC at the district level wer e designated as the grievances 
redressal officers to deal with the grievances. The  name and address of the petitioner 
has to be uploaded in the MGNREGS website on a week ly basis. The person 
registering the grievance should also be given a re ceipt with number and date so that 
follow up status of disposal of grievances could be  traced from a counter in the office 
of the PO/DPC. 
However, the system of acknowledgement of grievance  petitions at 
VDB/Block/District level was in the form of complai nt registers only. Level of 
timeliness and transparency in settlement of the co mplaints were not determined in 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
48 
 
the redressal mechanism. Oral complaints were not r ecorded in the test-checked 
districts/block/VDB. Helpline facility though set up was not functional in the State. 
Scrutiny of the complaint register maintained at di fferent levels revealed the status as 
‘Nil’ and the timely disposal of oral complaints co uld not be assessed due to the poor 
maintenance of complaint register at all levels of grievance redressal forum. 
In the absence of grievance redressal mechanism, a tool for identifying areas that 
require attention of senior management at various l evels, the Department failed to 
address the issue for mitigation of the grievances. 
1.3.17.2 Ombudsman  
As per the operational guidelines of MGNREGS, an Om budsman was to be appointed 
in each district. Ombudsman for MGNREGA were appointed (May 2011) in four test-
checked DPCs in order to address the complaints aga inst the Village Councils/VDBs 
elected members and staff. Eminent civil society pe rsons were nominated and 
selection of Ombudsmen was made by the selection Co mmittee in exercise of powers 
conferred under Section 27(1) of MGNREG Act. Althou gh Offices of the 
Ombudsman were attached to the DPCs office, the app ointed Ombudsmen in the four 
test-checked districts were not available in their office during the audit. Thus, the 
general timeliness and transparency in disposing of  the complaints by the 
Ombudsman could not be ascertained. 
Though Ombudsmen were appointed in all eleven distr icts since June 2011, sitting 
allowances and other remunerations were not fixed by the SEGC as of June 2012. 
1.3.17.3 Vigilance and Monitoring Committees  
The operational guidelines of MGNREGS provides that  a local Vigilance and 
Monitoring Committee (VMC) should be constituted fo r every work sanctioned to 
monitor the progress and quality of work. It would comprise of seven members 
elected by the Village Councils/VDBs. Out of that a t least 50 per cent  of members 
should be from among MGNREGA workers and also consi st of ST women members. 
The report of the Committee on the completion of th e work should be placed in the 
VDB meetings and subsequently be forwarded to the P O/DPC. The VMC should also 
facilitate the social audit. 
Scrutiny of the 71 test-checked VDBs revealed that 11 VDBs did not constitute VMC 
since the date of implementation of the scheme. Out  of 60 VDBs which constituted 
VMCs, only 4 VDBs had 9 or more members and remaini ng 56 VDBs consisted of 2 
to 8 members. Out of 56 VMCs, only 13 VMCs consiste d of women members in the 
Committee. 
VMC was appointed by the Village Council/VDB and go t approved by the DPC in 60 
VDBs. However, neither the VC/VDB nor the DPC appri sed VMC about the work, 
time frame and quality parameters. Thus, the Commit tee did not furnish any 
completion report on the monitoring of the projects  verified by the VMC in 39 test-
checked VDBs out of 71 VDBs. 

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
49 
 
State Government did not ensure the constitution of  the Committee before releasing 
the funds to VDBs under MGNREGA. 
Thus, the main aspects envisaged in the programme v iz. effective registration, 
allocation of employment, quality of works executed  and timely payment of wages 
without monitoring by a Committee in violation of t he provisions of the scheme 
guidelines. 
1.3.17.4 Monitoring and Evaluation  
For internal verification of works at field level b y the official functionaries, targets 
were fixed which were to be achieved within a quart er. Accordingly, the block level 
official functionaries had target to complete the internal verification of 100 per cent  of 
works and district level had to complete 10 per cent  and State level targeted to 
complete 2 per cent of works executed during a quarter. Status of inter nal 
verifications made at different levels in the four test-checked districts are given 
below: 
Table No.1.3.8 
Name of 
the sample 
district 
Total 
number of 
works 
executed  
No. of verification 
targeted for 
No. of verification carried 
out 
shortfall in No. of 
verification 
State District Block State District Block State District Block 
Dimapur 4936 99 494 4936 0 22 1497 99 472 3439 
Tuensang 704 14 70 704 1 40 535 13 30 169 
Mon 1197 24 120 1197 24 103 1185 0 17 12 
Peren 1547 31 155 1547 25 108 1510 06 47 37 
Total 8384 168 839 8384 50 273 4727 118 566 3657 
(Source: Departmental figures) 
It can be seen from the table that State level official functionaries could verify only 50 
works (30 per cent ) against the target of 168 works during the last f ive years. The 
district level officials carried out inspection of 273 works (33 per cent ) against the 
target of 839 works while the Block functionaries c arried out inspection of 3657 
works (44 per cent ) against the target of 8384 works. 
The State Government appointed State Quality Monito rs (SQM) for reviewing the 
implementation of the scheme. However, districts di d not identify the District Quality 
Monitors (DQM) at district level.  
Scrutiny of 71 test-checked VDBs in the four distri cts revealed that the SQM 
conducted only one quality inspection in Kuthur Vil lage, Chessore Block, Tuensang 
district during the last five years. However, repor ts on the quality inspection were 
recorded in the Village Inspection Register and a separate report in this regard was not 
made available to audit. 
In sum, comprehensive and continuous assessment of the scheme by way of 
inspections, field visits and sample checks remaine d un-asessed. Therefore, the 
Central Government was unable to draw up broad indi cative measures for the quality 
monitors at various levels. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
50 
 
The Department accepted (October 2012) the facts an d stated that it was making all 
efforts to ensure that the works are verified by al l levels and State Level Core Team 
was already under consideration for undertaking the monitoring and supervisory visits 
of works. 
1.3.17.5 Social Audit  
MGNREGA Operational Guidelines, 2008 featured an in novative role to social audit 
as a means of continuous public vigilance (NREGA, S ection 17). The basic objective 
of the social audit was to ensure public accountabi lity in the implementation of the 
projects, laws and policies. The social audits were  intended to promote transparency, 
participation, consultation and consent, accountability and redressal mechanism of the 
scheme. 
It was noticed in audit that the State Government d id not constitute any independent 
organisation/directorate/society at State level for facilitation for social audit. The State 
Government did not undertake any social audit on pi lot basis in few blocks as decided 
(November 2011) in the national workshop on social audit. The State Government 
neither identified nor appointed Director of Social Audit as of June 2012. 
Overall performance of social audit in four test-ch ecked districts are tabulated as 
under: 
Table No.1.3.9 
Name of the 
sample 
District 
No. of social 
audits required 
to be conducted 
as per norms 
No. of social 
audits 
conducted 
Name of the test 
checked blocks 
No. of social 
audits required to 
be conducted as 
per norms 
No. of 
social 
audits 
conducted 
No. of test 
checked 
VDBs 
under the 
Blocks 
No. of social 
audits 
required to 
be conducted 
as per norms 
No. of 
social 
audits 
conducted 
Dimapur 1570 785 
Dhansiripar 230 27 8 64 8 
Medziphema  536  203  18  144  107  
Mon 980 680 
Chen 210 210 6 60 58 
Tobu  160  160  4 40  34  
Tuensang 1070 214 
Chessore 120 51 4 40 26 
Noklak 250 44 8 80 22 
Sangsangnyu 200 60 6 60 25 
Peren 632 316 
Tenning 184 92 7 14 7 
Jalukie 248 124 10 20 10 
Total 4252 1995  2138 971 71 522 297 
(Source: Departmental figures) 
Thus, only 297 social audits (57 per cent ) at VDB level were held against the 
requirement of 522 social audit meetings in the 71 test-checked VDBs. Social audits 
conducted during 2007-08 to 2011-12 in four test-ch ecked districts and nine test-
checked blocks were only 47 per cent  and 45 per cent of the norms respectively. The 
date, time and agenda about the social audit were w idely publicised. The required 
quorum in the meeting of Village Councils/VDBs was available in the social audits 
conducted. However, the social audit meetings were not chaired by a person outside 
the Village Councils/VDBs. Similarly, Secretary of the social audit forum was also 
not an official outside the Village Councils/VDBs i n the 71 test-checked VDBs. 

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
51 
 
Decisions/resolutions were adopted on the basis of votes and all important aspects 
were discussed in the social audit meetings. 
Adequate preparatory work including scrutiny of rec ord and interaction with the 
beneficiaries were not undertaken by the social audit team before the public hearing at 
the Gramsabha/Village Council 
meeting. MGNREGA officials were 
not present in full strength. Full 
records were not made available 
before the public hearing so as to 
enable villagers to be ready to pose 
relevant questions to the social 
audit team officials. Internal cells 
were not constituted under the DPC 
in the four test-checked districts so as to take suitable action thereon.  
Audit attended three (Diphupar, Dimapur dist. (16/5/12), Chaoha Chingnyu, Mon dist. 
(29/5/12), and Kuthur ( photograph No.1.3.17 ), Tuensang dist. dated (9/6/2012) social 
audit meetings as observers and following deficiencies were noticed in the social audit 
conducted in the abovementioned villages. 
•
 Evidence for advance notice to the date of social a udit forum was not 
available. 
• Use of publicity modes was also not available. 
• Summaries of the effective participation, informati on were not prepared 
in advance. 
• Summaries of muster rolls and bills were neither pr epared in advance nor 
presented in the meeting. 
• Original files/documents were not available on the day of forum for cross- 
verification. 
• Quorum of the social audit forums was inadequate an d there were no 
women representatives. 
• Secretary of the forum was not from outside the village. 
• Instead of village Committee members, VDB announced  the information 
as per the required format in Diphupar village. 
• Although decisions and resolutions were by votes, it was not recorded. 
• Minutes of the meeting were recorded by members of the VMC instead of 
a person outside the implementing agencies. 
• The action taken report on the previous social audi t report was not read 
out at the beginning of forums conducted at aforementioned dates. 
• Technical expertise was neither invited nor present  in the forum for detail 
enquiries. 
• Check list on mandatory agenda was not prepared to review whether the 
norms and provisions of the Act were being observed. 
Photograph No.1.3.17 
Social Audit meeting at Kuthur Village dated 9 th  June 2012, Chessore  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
52 
 
NLM (June 2010) while reviewing RD projects in Dima pur district reported that no 
social audit was conducted in the villages. 
In sum, continuous process of public vigilance thro ugh social audit to ensure the 
public accountability in the implementation of the projects, laws and policies were 
absent throughout the period of implementation of the scheme. 
The Department stated (October 2012) that advance i nformation indicating the date, 
venue and time to all concerned in the Villages for  conduct of Social Audit were 
being made through notifications. Villagers do not want to let anybody outside the 
villages to be the Secretary of the VDB. Women were  also engaged in the Social 
Audit. However, in many villages the attendance of women was still very poor. All 
the decisions and resolutions passed during the mee tings were recorded by the 
concerned Secretaries. 
The reply is not tenable as the provisions of socia l audit under MGNREGA were not 
followed and this was verified in the three social audit meetings attended by the Audit 
team. 
Audit Objective - 11 
 
1.3.18  Effective mechanism at State level to assess the im pact of MGNREGS on 
individual households, local labour market, migrati on cycle and efficacy 
of assets created. 
 
1.3.18.1 Evaluation Studies  
The literature on MGNREGA comprising scholarly revi ews in the form of research 
articles as well as media reports give much importa nce to different themes and 
analyse performance of MGNREGS differently. The Sch ool of Agricultural Science 
and Rural Development, Nagaland University conducte d (February 2009) study on 
MGNREGA in four districts (Mon, Wokha, Kohima and M okokchung). The study 
revealed that; 
• 88 per cent  beneficiaries expressed their opinion that registration and job cards 
were provided free of cost. 20 per cent  of the respondents reported that the 
works were allotted to them within 15 days of the d ate of demand. All the 
works were selected on the basis of village meeting  reported by 97 per cent  
respondents 
• MPRs were prepared in accordance with the guideline s but not furnished 
within the time frame fixed by the MoRD. Thus, ther e was delay in release of 
funds from MoRD. Wage material ratio was a standard  for all works at 60:40 
without considering the actual requirement as per model SOR. 
It was noticed in audit that the State did not take  any action on the study conducted 
and reported (March 2009) by Nagaland University to the Department of RD. 
 
 

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
53 
 
1.3.19 Conclusion  
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme aimed to enhance 
livelihood security of rural households by providin g at least 100 days of guaranteed 
wage employment in every financial year to every ho usehold whose adult members 
volunteer to do unskilled manual work. However, per formance of the MGNREGA in 
the State for the last five years could not achieve  guaranteed wage employment due to 
improper planning made in the perspective plan. The  Department also randomly 
issued job cards and as a result job cards were mis used. Several instances of un-
executed projects, execution of non-permissible pro jects and diversion of projects 
outside the Perspective plan had defeated the purpo se for which the scheme was 
designed. Implementation of convergence programmes in the State was not 
encouraging as the public was not aware of the sche mes and were not executed 
according to the approved action plan. Absence of m onitoring mechanism in the State 
also adversely affected the implementation of schem e. Mandatory inspections by 
State level, district level and block level were no t carried out. Auxiliary objectives 
were not achieved due to the execution of low prioritised works. 
1.3.20 Recommendations  
/triangle45right Record maintenance at VDB level needs to be streaml ined. Maintenance of 
important documents such as job card register, must er rolls, employments 
register and asset register to achieve transparency  and accountability and also 
to provide a basis for verification should be ensured at VDB level. 
/triangle45right State Government should review the existing adminis trative and technical set 
up for the implementation of the MGNREGA and to tak e suitable measures to 
address the gaps. State should review the position of Gram Rozgar Sahayaks 
and take suitable remedial measures. 
/triangle45right For ensuing long term shelf of projects, preparatio n of district Perspective 
plan should be ensured. 
/triangle45right State Government should set up a proper mechanism t o ensure that projects 
reported as complete exist at the field level and a lso ensure that projects are 
completed timely and no diversion of projects is al lowed towards non-
permissible works. 
/triangle45right State Government should plan convergence programmes  effectively to ensure 
sustainable livelihood to the targeted rural community. 
/triangle45right State Government should ensure monthly reconciliati on of accounts regularly 
and steps should be taken to ensure that MGNREGS fu nds are not diverted or 
mis-utilised. 
/triangle45right State Government should ensure the inspection of wo rks by different level 
officers. Vigilance Monitoring Committee should be strengthened wherever 
formed and impact analysis of the scheme should be undertaken.  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
54 
 
/triangle45right State Government should ensure conducting of social audits in all VDBs twice 
in a year. 
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE DEPARTMENT 
1.4 Fraudulent drawal 
Failure of the Drawing & Disbursing Officer and Tre asury Officer to exercise 
statutory checks envisaged in Receipts & Payments R ules resulted in fraudulent 
drawal of     `` ``    30.65     lakh.     
Sub-clause 3 of Rule 66 of the Receipts and Payment s Rules, 1983 stipulates that 
entries in all money columns of the pay bills are t o be totalled separately under each 
section and part to arrive at the total entitlement s as well as net payable after the 
statutory deductions in red ink. Section wise totalling of the pay bills must be checked 
by the Drawing Officer himself or by some responsib le official other than the person 
preparing the bill. Treasury Rules further prescrib e various checks to be exercised by 
the Treasury Officer before accepting the claim and  to record the omission or 
correction and to limit the payment admissible in r espect of each bill presented by the 
Drawing and Disbursing officers of the establishments.  
Scrutiny (April 2012) of paid vouchers in respect o f the Chief Medical Officer, 
Zunheboto for the period from November 2010 to Octo ber-2011 revealed that the 
establishment drew ` 509.56 lakh in 40 pay bills against the admissible net salary of 
` 478.91 lakh by inflating the total of the pay bills  resulting in fraudulent drawal of 
` 30.65 lakh ( Appendix – 1.4). 
Thus, failure of the Drawing Officer in checking th e pay bill and the Treasury Officer 
in exercising the prescribed checks resulted in fraudulent drawal of ` 30.65 lakh. 
While accepting the facts (July 2012), the Governme nt stated that the excess amount 
drawn would be recovered in installments from the c oncerned officials. The 
Department also recovered/deposited (June/July 2012 ) ` 8 lakh in two installments 30  
and the balance amount of ` 22.65 lakh had not been recovered (October 2012). 
1.5  Excess Expenditure  
The Executive Engineer, Medical Engineering Divisio n, Kohima incurred an 
excess expenditure of `` ``1.32 crore due to non-acceptance of the lowest bid.  The 
delay in handing over the site to the contractor is  fraught with the risk of further 
cost escalation . 
Nagaland Public Works Department (NPWD) Code in its  Clause 291 states that 
sealed tenders should invariably be invited in the most open and public manner 
possible, by advertisement in the Government Gazette or the press, or by public notice 
and clause 293 stipulates that usually the lowest t ender should be accepted, unless 
there is some objection to the capability of the co ntractor, the security offered by him 
                                                 
30  ` 5 lakh- vide Challan No1 dtd 11/06/2012 &  ` 3 lakh vide Challan No 1 dtd 13/07/2012 

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
55 
 
or his execution of former work. When lowest tender  is not accepted, the reasons may 
be furnished in the Comparative Statement duly attested for the audit purpose.  
The Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) observed tha t post tender negotiations are 
the main source of corruption. Hence, it directed ( November 1998) that no 
negotiations should be resorted to with any tenderer other than the lowest tenderer. 
Executive Engineer (EE), Medical Engineering Divisi on, Kohima displayed (January 
2007) Notice Inviting Tender for the work “Construc tion of 100 bedded New District 
Hospital at Kohima” in their notice board at an est imated cost of ` 7.31 crore as per 
NPWD (Housing) SOR 2004. Five bidders participated in the bidding though NIT 
was not published in any National/Local News Papers  or the Government Gazette. 
Amongst four qualified bidders who submitted (Febru ary 2007) their bids, one 
bidder 31  quoted at par with SOR 2004 and others had quoted 12 per cent 32 , 22.5 per 
cent 33  and 40 per cent 34  respectively above SOR 2004. 
Scrutiny of records (May 2012) revealed that the Di vision forwarded (February 2007) 
the Comparative Statement to the Chief Engineer (Ho using) without giving any 
recommendation. The Chief Engineer, in violation of  the above rules, negotiated with 
third bidder (L3) who quoted at 18 per cent above S OR 2004 and recommended (July 
2007) to the Engineer in Chief (EIC) to award the w ork to L3 bidder. The EIC 
approved (July 2007) the recommendation and the EE awarded (July 2007) the work 
to the L3 bidder at the negotiated rate of 18 per cent  above SOR 2004, i.e at ` 8.63 
crore . There was nothing on record as to why L3 bi dder was awarded the work and 
why the bids of other bidders (L1 and L2) were reje cted, even though L1 and L2 were 
financially sound and technically capable of taking  up the work. However, it was 
observed that a VVIP recommended (November 2005) to the Department to award the 
work to the third contractor 35  as he was financially sound and capable of taking up 
such works as and when the allotment of work was de cided even though L1 and L2 
were financially sound and capable of undertaking t he works. By awarding the work 
to the 3 rd  lowest bidder, the Division incurred an excess exp enditure of ` 1.32 crore 
(` 8.63 crore - ` 7.31 crore). 
Further scrutiny revealed that the contractor comme nced the work in May 2009, after 
a gap of 22 months after the award of work and he w as paid ` 5.15 crore (May 2012) 
up to 5 th  Running Account Bill. The contractor also requeste d (October 2010) the 
Department to enhance the rate from 18 per cent  to 80 per cent  above SOR 2004 as 
there was a delay of 22 months in handing over the site from the date of issue of the 
work order, citing that there was a steep hike in t he value of materials during this 
period, though no escalation was allowed till the d ate of audit. The work was still 
incomplete (February 2013). 
                                                 
31  M/s Zeliezhu 
32 M/s Hexad Syndicate 
33 M/s Peter Kuotsu & Company 
34 M/s Fulutsu & Co 
35  M/s Peter Kuotsu & Company 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
56 
 
Thus, the Department not only violated the principl es of transparency in floating the 
tender but also incurred an excess expenditure of ` 1.32 crore by not selecting the 
eligible lowest bidder, in violation to the provisi ons of NPWD code and CVC 
guidelines. Further, the action of the Department t o issue work order before 
finalisation of the site was fraught with the risk of cost escalation. 
The matter was reported to the Government (May 2012 ). The reply had not been 
received (February 2013)  
 
1.6 Suspected fraudulent drawal 
 
Principal Director of Health & Family Welfare drew `` ``    86.24 lakh for 
procurement of Computer Hardware items, Hospital li nen, etc on the basis of 
fictitious bills.  
The Department of Health and Family Welfare (HFW) d rew (March 2011) ` 86.24 
lakh for purchase of various equipment and material s on three Fully Vouched 
Contingent Bills as shown below:- 
Table No.1.6.1  
Bill No & Date Items procured Amount 
drawn (in `` ``) 
Name of the 
Firm/Supplier 
838 of 31.03.11  Computers & Accessories  4075000  M/s Kuotsu Enterprises, 
Kohima 
825 of 31.03.11 Hospital Linen 4399959 
790 of 24.03.11 Cameras & Printers 148950 
Total  8623909 
Scrutiny of these vouchers in Audit (August 2012) r evealed that the supplier charged 
12.5 per cent  of Value Added Tax (VAT) on Computers & Computer A ccessories 
against the admissible rate of 4 per cent in respect of Bill No 838 above. Audit also 
observed certain deficiencies in the supplier’s bil ls such as lack of supply order 
reference, serial no of the bill, date, etc., altho ugh certificate of receipt of all the 
materials in full and in good condition were record ed by the Principal Director/DDO 
on the body of all the sub-vouchers. 
On enquiry from the Assistant Commissioner of Taxes  (ACT), Kohima Zone (August 
2012), where the above firm is registered 
36  it was learnt that the above firm is a retail 
dealer dealing in detergents, cosmetics and toiletr ies only and not with computers and 
accessories, mattress, etc. Scrutiny of VAT return obtained from the ACT, Kohima in 
respect of the above firm also revealed that the fi rm filed a ‘NIL’ return for the period 
from 01-04-2010 to 31-12-11. Audit also observed th at the above firm was not an 
empanelled firm authorised to supply computer perip herals by the Department of 
Information Technology and Communication (IT&C), Government of Nagaland. 
Thus, it is suspected that the Principal Director, HFW fraudulently drew ` 86.24 lakh 
on the basis of fictitious bills. 
                                                 
36  Tax Payer’s Identification Number (TIN) No.13070059074 

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
57 
 
The Government in reply stated that (October 2012) the Department issued supply 
orders to M/s Kuotsu Enterprises against the above bills and had received the goods in 
full. The tax deducted was also deposited in the tr easury. They also stated that the 
above firm was solely responsible for filing the NI L return under VAT and the 
Department is not responsible for that. The Departm ent also furnished copy of Stock 
Register against Computers and Accessories and mate rial verification reports against 
other items. 
The reply is not tenable because the above firm was  not an empanelled firm 
authorised to supply computers and accessories by t he IT&C Department and not 
dealing in the above materials purchased by the Dep artment. Further, as per the Stock 
Register and the verification report the materials were received during May to August 
2011 whereas as per the certificate of receipt of m aterials recorded on the body of the 
supplier’s bills, the materials were received in March 2011 itself. 
1.7  Extra avoidable expenditure 
Principal Director, Health & Family Welfare Departm ent incurred an avoidable 
expenditure of `` ``    101.56 lakh on procurement of Machinery & Equipment s, 
Hospital linen, etc by allowing inconsistent rates to different suppliers. 
According to Rule 160 of the GFR, all government pu rchases should be made in a 
transparent, competitive and fair manner, to secure  best value for money and to 
eliminate arbitrariness in the procurement process.  Sub-rule (xiv) of Rule 160 further 
envisages that contract should ordinarily be awarde d to the lowest valuated bidder 
whose bid has been found to be responsive and who i s eligible and qualified to 
perform the contract satisfactorily as per the term s and conditions incorporated in the 
corresponding bidding document. 
(i)  Principal Director, Health & Family Welfare Departm ent procured Machinery and 
Equipment worth ` 874.97 lakh in two bills 
37  from three suppliers in August 2009 
and January 2010 without calling for tenders in vio lation of established principles 
of procurement. A scrutiny (May 2012) of vouchers revealed the following  
(a)  the rates allowed to one supplier (August 2009) against five items were 
much higher as compared to the rates allowed to ano ther supplier 
(difference in rate ranged from ` 2250 to ` 190480) for supplying the 
same items in January 2010, which resulted in avoid able excess 
expenditure of ` 17.75 lakh ( Appendix-1.5 ); 
(b)   In case of five items supplied in August 2009, dif ferent rates 
(difference ranging from ` 80 to ` 300) were allowed to two different 
suppliers, which resulted in excess expenditure of ` 3.79 lakh 
(Appendix-1.5 ); and 
                                                 
37  Bill No 273 dtd 27/8/09  -` 375 lakh – for setting up of Regional Diagnostic Centres at Wok ha, 
Zunheboto, Phek, Mon & Geriatric Centre, Kohima and Bill No.536 dtd 19/01/10 - ` 499.97 lakh for 
distribution to District Hospitals 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
58 
 
(c)  in case of four items, the difference of rate paid to two different firms 
in August 2009 and January 2010 ranged from `10 to ` 4100, leading 
to an excess expenditure of ` 17.47 lakh (Appendix-1.5 ); 
(ii)  Similarly, the Department also procured Hospital Li nen, Nursing sundries, etc 
valued at ` 433.67 lakh in March 2011 and March 2012 from two s uppliers 38  
without calling for any tenders. Cross verification  of these bills revealed that 
there was abnormal variation in rates in respect of  two items ranging from 
` 1110 to ` 4550 within one year, resulting in avoidable expend iture of ` 62.55 
lakh ( Appendix-1.5 ). 
On enquiry regarding the selection of suppliers and  the rates accepted without any 
competitive bidding, the Department stated (May 201 2) that the purchases were made 
from the reputed firms and the rates were allowed o n the recommendation of the 
Purchase Board, though no tender were invited. Howe ver, no records to substantiate 
their reply were made available to audit. 
Further, the Department stated (June 2012) that the  difference in rate were allowed to 
different suppliers because the items supplied by t hem were of different specifications 
and furnished the specification of various items. T he Government also endorsed the 
replies of the Department (October 2012). However, audit observed that bills 
submitted by the suppliers on the basis of which pa yment was made did not contain 
the specifications as stated by the department, in the absence of which it is difficult to 
conclude that there were indeed any differences in specifications. 
Thus, the Department incurred an avoidable expendit ure of ` 101.56 
39  lakh due to 
arbitrary procurement in contravention of the proce dures laid down for public 
procurement and by allowing inconsistent rates to different suppliers for same items.  
SCHOOL EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
 
1.8  Fraudulent drawal  
Failure to exercise statutory checks envisaged in R eceipts & Payments Rules on 
the part of the Treasury Officer and Drawing & Disb ursing Officer resulted in 
fraudulent drawal of `` ``    25.99 lakh. 
Sub-clause 3 of Rule 66 of the Receipts and Payment s Rules, 1983 stipulates that 
entries in all money columns of the pay bills are t o be totalled separately under each 
section and part to arrive at the total entitlement s as well as net payable after the 
statutory deductions in red ink. Section wise totalling of the pay bills must be checked 
by the Drawing Officer himself or by some responsib le official other than the person 
preparing the bill. Treasury Rules further prescrib e various checks to be exercised by 
the Treasury Officer before accepting the claim and  to record the omission or 
                                                 
38  M/s Kuotsu Enterprises, Kohima and M/s North East Marketin g Company, Dimapur 
39  ` 17.75 lakh+ ` 3.79 lakh+ ` 17.47 lakh  ` 62.55 lakh= ` 101.56 lakh  

Chapter -1 –Social Sector 
 
59 
 
correction and to limit the payment admissible in r espect of each bill presented by the 
Drawing and Disbursing officers of the establishments.  
Scrutiny (November 2011 and April 2012) of the pay bill vouchers of the Deputy 
Inspector of Schools (DIS), Niuland for the period from 03/2010 to 06/2011 revealed 
that the DIS drew ` 764.83 lakh in 60 pay bills against the admissible net salary of ` 
738.84 lakh by inflating the totals of the pay bill s. This resulted in fraudulent drawal 
of ` 25.99 lakh. ( Appendix- 1.6) 
Thus, failure of the Drawing Officer in checking th e pay bill and the Treasury Officer 
in exercising the prescribed checks resulted in fraudulent drawal of ` 25.99 lakh. 
The matter was reported to the Government (May 2012 ). Reply had not been received 
(February 2013). 

 
 
CHAPTER - II  
 
ECONOMIC SECTOR  
 
2.1 Introduction  
This Chapter of the Audit Report for the year ended  31 March 2012 deals with the 
findings on audit of the State Government units under Economic Sector. 
The names of the State Government departments and t he total budget allocation and 
expenditure of the State Government under Economic Sector during 2011-12 are 
given below: 
Table No. 2.1.1 
(`` `` in crore)  
Name of Departments Total Budget 
Provision 
Expenditure 
Agriculture 154.56 145.29 
Horticulture  31.66  24.60  
Soil and Water Conservation  45.39  44.90  
Veterinary and Animal Husbandry  86.00  89.99  
Fisheries  27.27  28.87  
Land Resources 22.46 14.15 
Cooperation 28.86 23.69 
Civil Supplies 15.02 14.87 
SIRD 8.68 6.82 
Sericulture 16.11 13.29 
Land Records and Survey 18.25 17.59 
Irrigation and Flood Control 189.73 135.02 
Power 396.36 376.69 
New and Renewable Energy 14.10 5.83 
Industries and Commerce 91.30 69.86 
Geology and Mining 29.06 29.42 
Roads and Bridges 519.63 546.18 
Science & Technology 3.39 2.39 
Tourism 28.32 28.25 
Economics and Statistics 27.31 25.10 
Legal Metrology and Consumer Protection 13.12 12.87  
Planning and Coordination Department  449.24  180.58  
Evaluation  6.53  6.06  
Department of Under Developed Areas  72.98  41.53  
Information Technology & Communication  32.38  6.45  
Forest, Ecology, Environment and Wildlife 91.72 76. 85 
Road Transport 70.37 63.86 
Total number of departments=27 2489.80 2031.00 
Besides the above, the Central Government has been transferring a sizeable amount of 
funds directly to the Implementing agencies under S ocial Sector to different 
departments of the State Government. The major tran sfers for implementation of 
flagship programmes of the Central Government are detailed in the following table: 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
62 
Table No. 2.1.2 
(` (` (` (` in crore )) ))    
Name of the 
Department 
Name of the 
Scheme/Programme 
Implementing Agency Amount of funds 
transferred during 
the year 
Roads and Bridges Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak 
Yojana (PMGSY) 
Nagaland Rural Roads 
Development Agency  11.00 
Power 
Rajiv Gandhi Grameen 
Vidyuteekaran Yojana 
(RGGVY) 
Department of Power  
28.14 
Land Resources 
National Bamboo Mission  Nagaland Bamboo 
Development Agency 
(NBDA) 
17.00 
(Source: Central Plan Scheme Monitoring System) 
2.2 Planning and Conduct of Audit 
Audit process starts with the assessment of risks f aced by various departments of 
Government based on expenditure incurred, criticali ty/complexity of activities, level 
of delegated financial powers, assessment of overal l internal controls and concerns of 
stake holders.  
After completion of audit of each unit on a test ch eck basis, Inspection Reports 
containing audit findings are issued to the heads o f the departments. The departments 
are to furnish replies to the audit findings within  one month of receipt of the 
Inspection Reports. Whenever replies are received, audit findings are either settled 
based on reply/action taken or further action is required by the auditee for compliance. 
Some of the important audit observations arising ou t of these Inspection Reports are 
processed for inclusion in the Audit reports, which  are submitted to the Governor of 
State under Article 151 of the constitution of Indi a for laying on the table of the 
Legislature. 
During the year, test check of audits involving exp enditure of ` 1192.02  crore 
(including funds pertaining to previous years audit ed during the year) of the State 
Government under Economic Sector were conducted. Th e chapter contains one 
Performance Audit, one Chief Controlling Officer ce ntric Audit and one transaction 
audit paragraph as given below: 
VETERINARY AND ANIMAL HUSBANDRY DEPARTMENT 
 
2.3 I ntegrated Audit of Veterinary and Animal Husbandry Department 
The Department of Veterinary and Animal Husbandry functions with the objectives of 
developing livestock and poultry, dairy, feed and f odder, conservation of indigenous 
breeds, animal health and veterinary services and c reation of employment 
opportunities in the State. To achieve these object ives, various schemes/projects, 
centrally sponsored as well as under State Plan, ar e implemented by the Department. 
Chief Controlling Officer based audit of the Depart ment revealed several weaknesses 
in the planning process, financial management, proj ect/scheme management and 
internal controls including vulnerabilities to frau d and corruption. The important audit 
findings are highlighted below. 

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
63 
 
Highlights 
Planning was unrealistic and formulated without pro per study or analysis of 
ground realities. Targets set for production of mea t, milk and eggs in the 11 
th  Plan 
with projected expenditure of `` ``    64 crore could not be achieved despite expenditure 
of `` ``    149.99 crore under Plan during the period. 
(Paragraph 2.3.7) 
Balances in the bank account operated by the Direct orate were lower by amounts 
ranging from `` ``    5.56 crore to `` ``    8.79 crore than the monthly closing balance 
recorded in the Cash Book indicating misappropriati on/misuse of Government 
money. 
(Paragraph 2.3.9.1) 
An amount of ` ` ` ` 1.56 crore was paid to a contractor against fictiti ous works on the 
basis of fabricated records.  
(Paragraph 2.3.10.1 (iii)) 
Targets set for the Integrated Livestock Developmen t and White Revolution Project 
could not be achieved due to improper selection of beneficiaries and supply of 
inferior quality cattle to them. 
(Paragraph 2.3.10.2) 
`` ``    3.45 crore sanctioned for implementation of ‘Assist ance to States for Control of 
Animal Diseases’ could not be availed by the Depart ment due to delays in 
submission of action plans, release of funds by the  State Government and 
submission of Utilisation Certificates. 
(Paragraph 2.3.10.5) 
Actual execution of works was not consistent with the estimates and entries made in 
the MBs resulting in excess payments to contractors  and there was idle investment 
of `` ``    22.25 crore on creation of infrastructure for two p rojects which had not taken 
off. 
(Paragraph 2.3.10.8) 
Joint physical verification of institutions run by the Department viz., State Farms, 
Veterinary Hospitals, Veterinary Dispensaries, Dise ase Diagnostic Laboratories, 
Stockman Centres, Veterinary Outposts, Veterinary Health Centres and Quarantine 
Check Posts revealed that several of them were non-functional. 
(Paragraph 2.3.11) 
2.3.1 Introduction 
The Department of Veterinary & Animal Husbandry was  bifurcated from Department 
of Agriculture in 1965. The Department is responsib le for developing livestock and 
poultry, dairy, feed and fodder, conservation of in digenous breeds, animal health and 
veterinary services. The Department implements vari ous schemes/projects with the 
objectives of achieving self sufficiency in animal husbandry products viz., milk, meat 
and eggs through enhancing production. 
  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
64 
2.3.2 Organisational set up 
The Department is headed by Secretary (Veterinary a nd Animal Husbandry) at the 
administrative level. At the executive level, the D epartment is headed by the Director 
assisted by one Addl. Director and 14 Deputy Direct ors in the Directorate. There are 
eleven district offices headed by District Veterina ry and Animal Husbandry Officers 
and two sub-divisions (Tseminyu and Mangkolemba) he aded by Sub-divisional 
District Veterinary Officers. The other subordinate  offices under the Department are 
Bacteriologist, Disease Investigation Unit, Dimapur ; Manager, Regional Swiss Breed 
Cattle Breeding Farm (RSBCBF), Jalukie; Principal, Veterinary Field Assistants 
Training Institute (VFATI), Medziphema; Executive E ngineer (EE), Veterinary & 
Animal Husbandry Division, Kohima and two Veterinar y Asstt. Surgeons (Pfutsero & 
Chozuba). The Department also runs 10 State Cattle Breeding Farms 
(SCBFs)/upgrading centres, 13 State Poultry Farms ( SPFs)/hatcheries, 9 Pig Breeding 
Farms (PBCs), 11 Veterinary Hospitals, 17 Veterinar y Dispensaries, 14 Disease 
Diagnostic Laboratories, 62 Stockman Centres (SMCs) , 59 Veterinary Outposts 
(VOPs) and 16 Quarantine Check Posts (QCPs). 
2.3.3 Scope of Audit 
The integrated audit of the Department was conducte d during May to October 2012 
covering the period 2007-12. Out of 20 Drawing and Disbursing Officers (DDOs) 
under the Department, 8 DDOs (in four 
1 selected districts) including the Directorate 
and the Executive Engineer (EE), Veterinary & Anima l Husbandry Division was 
covered in audit. Out of 20 major schemes/projects implemented by the Department, 9 
major projects/schemes executed in the selected dis tricts were taken up for detailed 
analysis and joint physical verification along with  the departmental officers. 
Institutions under the Department viz ., 16 out of 32 State Farms, 3 out of 11 
Veterinary Hospitals, 5 out of 17 Dispensaries, 5 o ut of 14 Disease Diagnostic 
Laboratories, 13 out of 121 Stockman Centres/Veteri nary Outposts and 5 out of 16 
Quarantine Check Posts in the selected districts we re also taken up for joint physical 
verification. The list of DDOs/projects/institution s selected for test check and joint 
physical verification are shown in Appendix  2.3.1 . 
2.3.4 Audit objectives 
The objectives of the integrated audit were to assess whether 
 
/head2right The Department had a proper system for planning;  
/head2right The budget estimates were reliable and financial ma nagement was 
adequate and effective;  
/head2right The process of tendering, contract, and project man agement were carried 
out efficiently and effectively in an economical manner; 
/head2right Proper monitoring and internal control mechanisms e xisted in the 
Department; and 
                                                 
1  Kohima, Dimapur, Peren and Mokokchung 

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
65 
 
/head2right The control systems in the Department were vulnerab le to Fraud and 
Corruption. 
2.3.5 Audit criteria 
The major criteria applied were drawn from the following sources: 
/head2right Plan documents 
/head2right Guidelines of schemes/projects covered in audit 
/head2right Detailed Project Reports of schemes/projects covered in audit 
/head2right General Financial Rules/Central Treasury Rules 
/head2right Departmental Codes and Manuals, Policies, Rules and Regulations 
2.3.6 Audit methodology 
An ‘Entry Conference’ was held (14 June 2012) with the Secretary and Director to 
convey the audit objectives and the audit criteria.  Records pertaining to the period 
from April 2007 to March 2012 were examined in the Directorate and units in the four 
selected districts. The audit findings were discuss ed with the Secretary (Veterinary & 
Animal Husbandry Department) in an exit conference (21 
st  November 2012) and the 
views of the Department along with their replies ha ve been incorporated in the report 
at appropriate places. 
Audit findings 
 
2.3.7 Planning 
The Department did not have any long term perspecti ve plan other than the Five Year 
Plan prepared for the 11 
th  Plan period (2007-12). As per the plan, the Depart ment had 
envisioned achievement of 25 per cent  annual growth in State Domestic Product 
during the 11 th  Plan period by increasing productivity and product ion of livestock and 
poultry. The Department had also formulated vision,  approaches and objectives 
including strategies in the light of objectives, po licies and programme thrust indicated 
in the Eleventh Plan Approach by the Planning Commi ssion, Government of India. 
The vision of the Department included (i) self suff iciency in Animal Husbandry 
products-milk, meat and eggs; (ii) mass production through peoples participation; (iii) 
focus on white revolution in the State; (iv) creati on of employment avenues through 
livestock and poultry farming; (v) creating marketi ng network for the rural producers; 
(vi) provision of intensive health care services at  the farmers doorstep; (vii) genetic 
improvement of livestock and poultry breeds through  selective breeding; (viii) 
enhanced feed and fodder production and (ix) conser vation and propagation of 
indigenous breeds of the State. In order to achieve  the above vision, the Department 
had formulated approach, objectives and strategies.  Targets were also set in respect of 
production of milk, meat and eggs. 
Annual Plans were also prepared during the period. Scrutiny, however, revealed that 
the annual plans were not consistent with the five year plan and were not aimed at 
achieving the targets set. While some activities in  the five year plan were abandoned, 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
66 
new activities were included in the annual plans. I t was further seen that budget 
provisions were also not made with a view to take u p activities outlined in the five 
year plan or the annual plans. The sector-wise acti vities proposed to be taken up as 
per five year plan, annual plans, budget provision made and actual expenditure was as 
shown in Appendix 2.3.2 . 
It can be seen from the Appendix that while the pro posed outlay for the 11 th  Plan was 
` 64 crore, the total agreed outlay during the period  as per the annual plans was 
` 114.90 crore, total budget provision made during th e period was ` 140.83 crore and 
the actual expenditure was ` 149.99 crore. 
Thus, it is evident that the activities of the Depa rtment were not consistent with the 
five year plan or the annual plans indicating that the plans were unrealistic and 
formulated without proper study/analysis of ground realities. 
2.3.7.1 Non-achievement of targets 
The Department had outlined the targets to be achie ved in production of meat, milk 
and eggs during the 11 
th  Five Year Plan with a view to achieve self suffici ency and 
decrease the import burden. Scrutiny of records rev ealed that the targets remained 
unachieved as shown in the table below: 
Table 2.3.1: Targets and achievements 
Sl 
No. 
Particulars 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
  
Targets 
Achievement 
Targets 
Achievement 
Targets 
Achievement 
Targets 
Achievement 
Targets 
Achievement 
1. Milk (‘000 tonne) 79 70 90 74.67 115 77.80 115 77.84 129 81 
2. Meat (‘000 tonne) 65 55.21 76 63.26 87 65.58 95 65.67 101 72.80 
3. Eggs (in lakh) 840 802 880 832.02 920 833 960 800 1000 832 
(Source: Departmental records) 
Though the Department had taken up several schemes/ projects to achieve the targets, 
the targets were not achieved and the production of  milk, meat and eggs remained 
almost constant throughout the 11 th  Plan despite incurring an expenditure of ` 149.99 
crore against the projected outlay of ` 64 crore. 
2.3.8 Financial Management 
The budget allocation for Veterinary & Animal Husba ndry Department is made under 
‘Grant No.50-Animal Husbandry and Dairy Development ’. Budget allocation, 
expenditure there against and savings/excess during  the period from 2007-08 to 2011-12 
are given in the following table:  
  

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
67 
 
Table 2.3.2: Details of revenue and capital expenditure 
(`` `` in crore) 
Year 
Revenue Capital Total 
Budget 
Provision Expenditure Budget 
Provision Expenditure Budget 
Provision Expenditure Savings (-)/ 
Excess (+) 
2007-08 
Plan 13.11 13.11 3.53 3.79 16.64 16.90 0.26 
Non-plan 23.03 23.03 0.00 0.00 23.03 23.03 0.00 
Total 36.14 36.14 3.53 3.79 39.67 39.93 0.26 
2008-09 
Plan 13.51 13.51 5.00 4.77 18.51 18.28 (-) 0.23 
Non-plan 25.14 25.12 0.00 0.00 25.14 25.12 (-) 0.02 
Total  38.65  38.63  5.00  4.77  43.65  43.40  (-) 0.25  
2009-10 
Plan 32.62 32.62 1.27 0.70 33.89 33.32 (-) 0.57 
Non-plan 27.61 28.02 0.00 0.00 27.61 28.02 0.41 
Total 60.23 60.64 1.27 0.70 61.50 61.34 (-) 0.16 
2010-11 
Plan  30.21  30.10  4.07  4.62  34.28  34.72  0.44  
Non-plan 40.61 40.61 0.00 0.00 40.61 40.61 0.00 
Total 70.82 70.71 4.07 4.62 74.89 75.33 0.44 
2011-12 
Plan 20.22 20.22 17.29 26.55 37.51 46.77 9.26 
Non-plan 44.49 43.22 0.00 0.00 44.49 43.22 (-) 1.27 
Total 64.71 63.44 17.29 26.55 82.00 89.99 7.99 
Total Plan 109.67 109.56 31.16 40.43 140.83 149.99 9.16 
Non-plan 160.88 160.00 0.00 0.00 160.88 160.00 (-) 0.88 
Grand total 270.55 269.56 31.16 40.43 301.71 309.99 8.28 
(Source: Detailed Appropriation Accounts) 
Scrutiny of records revealed that there was an exce ss expenditure of ` 9.26 crore 
under Plan/Capital during 2011-12. This was due to the fact that though the amount 
had already been shown as expenditure in previous y ears, it was once again shown as 
expenditure in the Divisional Monthly Accounts of E E, V&AH Division as the 
Directorate released the funds to the EE only durin g 2011-12. The other important 
findings on review of budget provision and expendit ure during the period are 
discussed in the following paragraphs. 
2.3.9 Financial irregularities:  
The financial irregularities noticed in audit are discussed in the following paragraphs :  
2.3.9.1 Discrepancy between Cash Book and Bank Account 
The Directorate is maintaining a current bank accou nt (A/c No.10277120294 at SBI, 
Lerie Branch, Kohima). Despite requisition and seve ral reminders, the Department 
furnished (October 2012) only the Bank Account Stat ement for the year 2011-12. On 
test-check, only a few transactions in the Cash Boo k could be traced back to the Bank 
Account. It was further seen that the balance in th e bank account was lower by 
amounts ranging from ` 5.56 crore to ` 8.79 crore than the monthly closing balance 
recorded in the Cash Book as shown in the following table: 
  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
68 
 
Table 2.3.3: Difference between Cash Book and Bank Accoun t of Directorate 
(`` `` in crore) 
Month Closing balance as per 
Cash Book  
(Main & Subsidiary) 
Closing balance as per 
Bank Account 
Difference 
April 2011 27.59 20.68 6.91 
May 2011 23.35 16.97 6.38 
June 2011 18.07 9.88 8.19 
July 2011 11.45 5.02 6.43 
August 2011  11.34  4.64  6.70  
September 2011 9.16 2.56 6.60 
October 2011 9.04 2.42 6.62 
November 2011 10.41 3.25 7.16 
December 2011 10.25 2.76 7.49 
January 2012 10.75 2.66 8.09 
February 2012 11.64 2.85 8.79 
March 2012 26.10 20.54 5.56 
Further, cross check of Cash Book maintained by the  EE, V&AH Division with Bank 
Account Statement (A/c No.10277120589 at SBI, Lerie , Kohima) revealed that the 
payments shown in the Cash Book did not match with the debits in the Bank Account 
and cheque Nos. were not recorded in the Cash Book during the period. Further, there 
were wide variations in the closing balance recorde d in the Cash Book and balance in 
Bank Account during 2007-12. Instances of major var iations noticed are shown in the 
table below. 
Table 2.3.4: Difference between Cash Book and Bank Accoun t of EE, V&AH Division 
 (`` `` in crore) 
Month Closing balance as per 
Cash Book  
Closing balance as per 
Bank Account 
Difference 
March 2009 1.82 0.79 1.03 
April 2009 1.85 0.65 1.20 
May 2009 2.08 0.62 1.46 
June 2009 1.52 0.67 0.85 
August 2009 2.22 0.55 1.67 
July 2010 0.91 0.25 0.66 
August 2010 0.81 0.20 0.61 
September 2010 0.68 0.07 0.61 
June 2011 3.93 3.28 0.65 
February 2012 1.44 0.78 0.66 
March 2012 4.45 3.68 0.77 
The following discrepancies were also noticed durin g test-check of Cash Book and 
Bank Accounts of the EE, V&AH Division. 
• During August 2009, the total payments made as per the Cash Book was ` 0.78 
lakh while the total debits during the month in the  Bank Account was ` 2.17 crore 
which indicates that payments were made without rec ording them in the Cash 
Book. 
• An amount of ` 1.63 crore was recorded as received on 16.05.2009 f rom the 
Directorate against strengthening of Pig Breeding F arms under NABARD. 
However, the amount was not seen credited in the Ba nk Account of the EE. On 
further scrutiny, it was seen that the EE had not a ctually received the amount but 
had only given an Actual Payee Receipt (APR) for the amount. 

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
69 
 
• An amount of ` 0.20 crore was recorded as received on 26.10.2009 f rom the 
Directorate against construction of Security Fencing at Veterinary College, Jalukie. 
However, the amount was not seen credited in the Ba nk Account of the EE. 
Further, APRs or cheque received from the Directora te could not be furnished to 
audit. 
Thus, it is evident that actual payments were not r eflected in the Cash Book of the 
Directorate and the EE. Further, the huge deficit i n the Bank Account points to 
probable misappropriation/misuse of Government mone y and needs further 
investigation. 
The Department stated (November 2012) that the disc repancy was due to inevitable 
advances for programmes/schemes etc. and that all t he advances will be 
recovered/adjusted at the time of final payments. But the fact remains that the relevant 
records in respect of advances made could not be fu rnished to audit and therefore, 
misappropriation/misuse of the funds cannot be ruled out.  
2.3.10 Scheme/project Management 
The Department is implementing various Schemes/Prog rammes/Projects, Centrally 
Sponsored as well as under State Plan. Of these, Mi thun Project, Integrated Livestock 
Development and White Revolution, Setting up of Vet erinary College and Setting up 
of Nagaland Composite Pig Project all under Special  Plan Assistance (SPA), 
Assistance to States for Control of Animal Diseases  (CSS), Strengthening of State 
Farms (Pig and Cattle) under NABARD (negotiated loa n), Strengthening of State Pig 
Breeding Farms sponsored by North Eastern Council, Procurement of livestock and 
poultry feeds under State Plan and Non-Plan and Ent repreneur Development under 
State Plan implemented during the period 2007-12 we re taken up for detailed analysis 
and joint physical verification. The important audi t findings are discussed in the 
following paragraphs. 
2.3.10.1 Mithun Project 
Mithun ( Bos frontalis ), the domesticated free-range bovine species, is a n important 
component of the livestock production system of Nor th-Eastern hilly region of India. 
Mithun, the State Animal of Nagaland, is used as a ceremonial animal and plays an 
important role in the economical, social and cultural life of the people of the State. 
The Mithun Project was implemented during the perio d from 2009-10 to 2011-12 for 
conservation, propagation and development of the Mi thun. The main objectives of the 
project were to conserve, develop and propagate in-situ mithuns in a particular area by 
providing fencing and trenches in strategic locatio ns, to provide them shelter, to 
develop good salt feeding areas, to enable proper m edical care, to prevent inbreeding, 
to discourage jhum cultivation and to uplift the rural economy.  
The Project was approved (February 2010) by the Pla nning Commission and an 
amount of ` 7 crore was earmarked for implementation of the sch eme under one time 
SPA during 2009-10. The Project was continued in th e subsequent years as well with 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
70 
funding under SPA. The funds released by GOI and th e State Government and 
expenditure are detailed in the table below: 
 
Table 2.3.5: Funds released and expenditure 
(`` ``     in crore) 
Year Gross amount 
released by 
GOI/GON 
Net amount 
drawn by 
Department 
Expenditure 
as per Cash 
Book 
Balance as 
on 
31.03.2012 
2009-10 7.00 6.92 6.27 0.65 
2010-11 2.00 1.98 1.98 0.00 
2011-12 4.00 2 1.97 0.00 1.97 
Total: 13.00 10.87 8.25 2.62 
Out of 25 3 projects implemented in the four selected district s during 2009-12, 12 4 
projects were taken up for detailed analysis and jo int physical verification. The major 
findings of audit are discussed in the following paragraphs. 
(i)  Selection of villages: 
As per DPRs, the beneficiary villages were selected  by a Committee including the 
respective District Veterinary Officers after verif ying the total Mithun population and 
availability of forest land. The project was to be implemented through the village 
councils of the selected villages with the Department being the implementing agency. 
A total of 89 5 villages were selected for implementation of the p roject during the 
period from 2009-12. However, reports of the Select ion Committee or any other 
records relating to selection of the villages were not furnished to audit. It was further 
seen that the list of beneficiary villages were for warded to the Department by the 
Government during 2010-11 and 2011-12 indicating th at selection of villages were 
carried out at the Government level. 
Thus, the possibility of selection of beneficiary v illages at the Government level 
without proper feasibility studies and survey cannot be ruled out. 
The Department stated (November 2012) that the proj ect villages were selected after 
proper feasibility studies. However, no records wer e furnished to substantiate their 
claim. 
(ii)  Irregularities in disbursement of assistance to beneficiary villages 
During 2009-10, a total amount of ` 4.64 crore 
6 was shown as paid to the village 
councils of the 24 project villages against bills s ubmitted by them for construction of 
bio-fencing, purchase of elite mithuns, general mee ting and training, capacity 
                                                 
2  ` 2 crore transfer credited to Civil Deposit and drawn in A ugust 2012. 
3  11 in Kohima, 12 in Peren and 2 in Dimapur. 
4  Kohima : (i) Jotsoma, (ii) Tuophema, (iii) Khonoma, (iv) Tuopheph ezu, (v) Gariphema, (vi) 
Chedema and (vii) Zhadima; Peren : (i) Mbaupunchi (including Mbaupungwa, Nkiailwa and 
Azailong), (ii) Punglwa and (iii) Gaili and Dimapur : (i) Tsuuma and (ii) Tsiepama. 
5  24 villages (1 major project, 3 medium projects and 20 mino r projects) in 2009-10, 25 villages 
in 2010-11 and 40 in 2011-12 
6  One major project: ` 1.17 crore, three medium projects: ` 0.62 crore and 20 minor projects: 
` 2.85 crore. 

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
71 
 
building, construction of grilled iron foot trap an d incentive for supervision and 
stationeries. Physical verification and interaction  with the members of the Village 
Council/Mithun Committee, however, revealed that ac tual implementation was not as 
per departmental records viz ., Detailed Project Reports, Fully Vouched Continge nt 
bills drawn and Actual Payee Receipts. 
• As per departmental records, an amount of ` 1.17 crore 
7 was shown as paid to the 
Village Councils of the four villages 8 in Peren district where the major project was 
implemented. However, interaction with the Chairmen /members 9 of the village 
councils during joint physical verification revealed that they had received only five 
mithuns (valued at ` 5.50 lakh) and two calves under the project. 
• Interaction with the beneficiaries of one medium pr oject 10  revealed that they had 
received cash amounting to only ` 1.50 lakh against ` 20.77 lakh 11  shown as paid 
to them. 
Thus, it is evident that vouchers/APRs attached wit h the FVC bills were fictitious and 
used for the sole purpose of drawing funds from Government Account. 
The Department stated (November 2012) that the repo rts and figures stated by the 
villages during joint physical verification were no t fully correct due to frequent 
change of guard in the Village Councils and Mithun Committees and clarification 
obtained from the Village Councils of the five vill ages were also enclosed. The 
Jotsoma Village Council stated that they had receiv ed ` 15 lakh along with other 
items such as medicine, salt, etc. The Village Coun cils of the four villages in Peren 
District stated that they had mis-informed the join t physical verification team due to 
grievances on not getting anticipated assistance fr om the Department. However, the 
fact remains that the projects were not implemented  as per records and disbursement 
of assistance to beneficiary villages needs further investigation. 
(iii)  Payment made for fictitious works 
During 2009-10, an amount of ` 1.56 crore was drawn by the Directorate against civil 
works 12  certified to have been completed (March 2010) thro ugh a contractor 13  in the 
24 project villages. Scrutiny of records of the EE,  V&AH Division revealed that 
technical estimates for the 69 works was prepared a nd approved by the EE after 
                                                 
7  Bio-fencing: ` 20 lakh; 160 Elite heifers (3 year old) @ ` 50,000 each: ` 80 lakh; 25 Elite Bulls 
@ ` 50,000 each: ` 12.50 lakh; General meeting and training: ` 0.90 lakh; Capacity Building: 
` 0.13 lakh; Grilled iron foot trap: ` 2.00 lakh; Incentive for supervision works: ` 1.50 lakh and 
Stationeries: ` 0.24 lakh. 
8  Mbaupungchi, Mbaupungwa, Nkialwa and Azailong. 
9  Village Council Chairmen of Mbaupungchi, Mbaupungwa, Nkialwa an d Azailong villages 
10   Jotsoma Village 
11   Bio-fencing: ` 4.50 lakh; 20 Elite heifers (3 year old) @ ` 50,000 each: ` 10 lakh; 4 Elite Bulls 
@ ` 50,000 each: ` 2 lakh; General meeting and training: ` 0.90 lakh; Capacity Building: 
` 0.13 lakh; Grilled iron foot trap: ` 1.50 lakh; Incentive for supervision works: ` 1.50 lakh and 
Stationeries: ` 0.24 lakh. 
12   Construction of trenches and stone pitching, construction of  water reservoir and trough, 
construction of shelter house for Mithun boys and constructi on of salt feeding area. 
13   M/s Multi Builders 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
72 
splitting one item of work 14  to avoid sanction of higher authority. Thereafter,  all the 
works were allotted (June 2010) to a different cont ractor 15  without giving wide 
publicity to the Notice Inviting Tender (June 2010) as required under Rules.  
Further scrutiny of tender papers and comparative s tatements furnished to audit 
revealed that for all the 69 works, only three cont ractors viz ., M/s Hi-tech 
Constructions, Adam Zeliang and R. Angami had submi tted bids. The first bidder 
quoted at par with SOR 2008, the second at 20  per cent  and the third at 30 per cent  
above SOR. The third bid was rejected on the ground s that earnest money was not 
deposited and all the works were allotted to M/s Hi -tech Constructions being the 
lowest bidder. MBs/Bills were prepared showing the works to have been executed as 
per the approved estimates and payments amounting t o ` 1.51 crore were made 
(October 2010) to the contractor. 
Joint physical verification of projects implemented  in 2009-10 and interaction with 
the beneficiaries revealed that civil works were ne ver taken up or executed by 
contractors. 
Thus, it is evident that records were fabricated to  draw funds from Government 
Account, to favour a specific contractor and to mak e payments for works not actually 
executed. 
The Department stated (November 2012) that a major portion of the civil works was 
taken up and implemented successfully in line with the Village Council/Mithun 
Committee’s input and payment made to the contracto r. But the fact remains that the 
beneficiaries have specifically stated during physical verification that works had never 
been taken up or executed which substantiates the f act that records were fabricated to 
facilitate drawal and disbursement of funds from Government account. 
2.3.10.2 Integrated Livestock Development and White  Revolution project 
The Scheme, funded under SPA, was implemented joint ly by the Department and 
Nagaland State Dairy Co-operative Federation Ltd. ( NSDF) during the three years 
from 2007-10. The main objectives of the project we re to promote increased milk 
production through induction of milch cattle to ach ieve White Revolution and to 
create sustainable productive rural employment to a good number of households. 
Funds under the scheme were drawn by the Directorat e and transferred to the NSDF. 
The funds released by GOI/GON and utilised by the D epartment during the period are 
shown in the following table: 
  
                                                 
14   Construction of Trenches and Stone Pitching at Mithun  Project, Mbaupungchi (0-10,000 m) 
with approximate cost of ` 70 lakh—Split into 14 works of 714.28 m with estimated cost of ` 5 
lakh each. 
15   M/s Hi-tech Constructions 

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
73 
 
Table 2.3.6: Funds released and transferred to NSDF 
(`` `` in crore) 
Year Gross amount 
released by 
GOI/GON 
Net amount drawn by 
Department and 
transferred to the NSDF 
Expenditure as 
per Cash Book of 
NSDF 
2007-08 1.00 1.00 1.00 
2008-09 2.00 2.00 2.00 
2009-10 3.00 2.97 2.97 
Total: 6.00 5.97 5.97 
To achieve the objectives of the Scheme, activities  such as induction of cattle (dairy 
units), setting up of Community Dairy Projects (CDP s), setting up of Model Dairy 
Projects (MDPs), feed and fodder development and tr aining & capacity building were 
taken up. 
The records relating to implementation of the Schem e in the Department and the 
NSDF were scrutinized in audit. Joint physical veri fication of 14 CDPs and 4 MDPs 
(Appendix 2.3.1 (d) ) were also conducted. The major audit findings are discussed in 
the following paragraphs. 
(i)  Shortfall in achievement of targets 
As per DPR, 620 dairy units, 30 CDPs and 4 MDPs wer e targeted to be taken up for 
implementation during 2007-10 and ` 4.28 crore was earmarked for procurement of 
1400 
16  milch cows/pregnant heifers to be supplied to thes e projects. However, only 
1208 cows could be procured at a cost of ` 4.34 crore due to the arbitrary increase in 
the quoted price by Government at the time of appro val of tender as mentioned in 
Paragraph 2.10 of the Report of the Comptroller and  Auditor General of India-2010-
11. As a result, the Department could take up only 524 dairy units instead of the 
targeted 620 units. 
The Department while accepting (November 2012) the fact stated that the matter 
reported in the Report of the Comptroller and Audit or General of India for the year 
ended 31 March 2011 stands referred to the Public Accounts Committee. 
(ii) Induction of cattle (Dairy Units) 
As per DPR, 300 diary units (DUs) at a cost of ` 1 crore 
17  was to be taken up during 
the first year (2007-08) and another 320 DUs 18  at a cost of ` 2.40 crore 19  was to be 
                                                 
16   Dairy Units: 940 cows {300 cows (1 each for 300 units) during 2007-08, 320 cows (2 each for 
160 units) during 2008-09 and 320 cows (2 each for 160 units)} during 2009- 10 ; CDPs: 300 
cows {10 each for 30 units}  and MDPs: 160 cows {40 each for 4 units} =1400 cows (1320 @ 
` 30,000 each and 80 @ ` 40,000 each)= ` 4.28 crore. 
17   One cow @ `30,000 inclusive of transportation, Training and capacity bu ilding @ `2,000 per 
unit along with 50 per cent  basic insurance premium for 3 years amounting to ` 1000 (Unit 
cost: ` 33,000 x 300 units= ` 99 lakh + Training and capacity building= ` 1 lakh)= ` 1 crore. 
18   160 units each during 2008-09 and 2009-10. 
19   Two milch cows/heifers @ ` 25,000 per cow and transportation upto destination @ ` 5,000 per 
animal= ` 60,000 per unit. ` 15,000 per unit for insurance premium, training and capac ity 
building, supervision and monitoring expenses, utensils, feed and fodder development. Total 
cost= ` 240 lakh ( `75,000 x 320 units) 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
74 
taken up during the subsequent two years (2008-10).  However, only 524 units 20  could 
be taken up as a result of the arbitrary increase b y the Government in the price of 
milch cows/pregnant heifers, as mentioned above, re sulting in shortfall of 96 units 21 . 
Scrutiny of records further revealed that: 
• As per the criteria set in the DPR, beneficiaries f or DUs were to be selected from 
districts where milk processing/chilling facilities  were created and they should 
preferably be a member of Dairy Co-operative Societ ies/Self Help Groups in the 
operational area of District Milk Co-operative Unio ns/Milk Chilling Units. The 
Department also stated that selection of beneficiaries was done in consultation with 
the District Officers and the Milk Unions. Scrutiny of records revealed that the 300 
beneficiaries selected during 2007-08 were based on  the recommendation of the 
milk unions/chilling plants of the respective distr icts 
22 . However, out of 224 DUs 
selected during 2008-09 and 2009-10, 120 units were  selected by the respective 
milk unions, 74 were recommended by VIPs, 25 were n ot in any of the lists and 5 
were recommended by other officials. Thus, norms fo r selection of beneficiaries 
were not followed. 
The Department stated (November 2012) that there we re deviations in selection of 
beneficiaries due to unavoidable reasons despite their best efforts. 
(iii) Community Dairy Projects (CDPs) 
As per DPR, the CDPs were conceptualised to promote  increased milk production 
through setting up of organised dairy farms at the village level with the main focus 
being to produce quality and clean milk to feed the  dairy processing plants. Each 
beneficiary community was to be provided with 10 mi lch cows, housing, godown, 
furniture, equipment and working capital etc., amounting to ` 4 lakh per beneficiary. 
30 CDPs at a cost of ` 1.20 crore 
23  were to be set up during 2008-09 and 2009-10. 
Detailed analysis and joint physical verification o f 14 CDPs in the selected district 
revealed that: 
• As per DPR, 300 milch cows (10 each) of specified 
24  quality were to be delivered 
to the beneficiaries of the 30 CDPs through two sup pliers 25 . Joint physical 
verification revealed that none of the 14 CDPs had received the cows as specified 
in the supply order resulting in most of the projec ts being abandoned as detailed in 
Appendix-2.3.3 (a) . The failure of the projects can be attributed to t he lapse of the 
Department in not enforcing the terms and condition s contained in the supply 
                                                 
20   300 units in 2007-08, 117 units in 2008-09 and 107 units in 2009-10. 
21   Major shortfall being 21 units in Mokokchung, 22 units in Phek , 21 units in Wokha, 13 units in 
Mon, 7 units in Dimapur, 6 units in Zunheboto and 5 units in Tuensa ng. 
22   Kohima, Dimapur, Mokokchung, Wokha and Phek. 
23   10 milch cows at ` 3 lakh ( ` 30,000 per cow), housing, godown, furniture, MTEs, equipments, 
working capital at ` 1 lakh= ` 4 lakh per unit x 30 units= ` 1.20 crore. 
24   Milch Breed:  Holstein Friesian/Jersey cross; Pregnant Heifers:  2 to 3 years; Status of 
pregnancy:  Minimum 5 months; Milch cows:  1 st  and 2 nd  Lactation and Dam’s milk yield for 
Holstein-Friesian/Jersey : 4000 to 5000 litres. 
25   M/s Ngulie Solo, Kohima and Evergreen Trading Co., Dimapur . 

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
75 
 
order. It was further seen that no action was taken  against suppliers and payments 
in full were made despite receiving several complaints from the beneficiaries. 
The Department stated (November 2012) that there we re no complaints when the 
supply was made and payments were released on recom mendations by the delivery 
board. 
• The main objective of setting up CDPs was to produc e milk to feed the dairy 
processing plants of the Department. One of the cri teria for selection of the 
beneficiaries was that they should be willing to po ur all the milk produced to the 
processing plants of the Department. It was, howeve r, seen that the total milk 
produced by the 14 CDPs was only 120 litres per day  (average daily production at 
present) and most of these were being sold by the b eneficiaries in the local market 
(Appendix-2.3.3 (a) ). Thus, the objective of increasing production and feeding the 
milk processing plants could not be achieved. 
The Department stated (November 2012) that it is ex pected that the production of 
the CDPs would improve in due course of time. 
(iv) Model Dairy Projects (MDPs) 
The project for setting up Model Dairy Farms of 40 cows per unit, one each under 
Kohima, Peren, Mokokchung and Dimapur Districts dur ing 2009-10 was 
conceptualised with a view to increase the milk pro duction in the State by 6.40 lakh 
litres per year as well as create substantial econo mic venture under PPP mode. The 
scheme was to be implemented on 50:50 cost sharing basis amounting to ` 40 lakh 
(Government: ` 20 lakh and Beneficiary: ` 20 lakh) per unit.
 
As per departmental records, four MDPs at a cost of  ` 0.80 crore 26  was set up during 
2009-10. Detailed analysis and joint physical verif ication of four MDPs 27  in the 
selected districts revealed that actual implementat ion was totally at variance with the 
departmental records. The main points noticed in audit are detailed below:  
• As per DPR, 160 milch cows (40 each) of the same sp ecification as for the CDPs 
were to be delivered to the beneficiaries of the MD Ps through the same two 
suppliers. Joint physical verification revealed that none of the projects had received 
the cows as specified in the supply order as detailed in Appendix-2.3.3 (b) . Further, 
it was stated by the beneficiary of MDP, Dimapur th at he had received cash ( ` 13 
lakh) from the Department for procurement of cows. Thus, it is evident that the 
bills and other records showing procurement and sup ply of cows to all the projects 
were fictitious. 
The Department stated (November 2012) that the bene ficiary may have negotiated 
with the supplier and received cash which was witho ut the knowledge of the 
Department. This substantiates the fact that the De partment paid the bills to the 
                                                 
26   40 cows each in Kohima, Dimapur, Peren and Mokokchung @ ` 40 lakh (to be equally shared 
between the Department and the entrepreneur)-- ` 20 lakh x 4 units= ` 0.80 crore. 
27   The MDP stated to be set up in Peren District could not be phy sically verified as it could not be 
traced by the departmental officers. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
76 
supplier without ensuring supply of the cows thereb y frustrating the whole 
objective of the project. 
• The main objective of setting up of MDPs was to pro duce milk to feed the dairy 
processing plants of the Department. One of the cri teria for selection of the 
beneficiaries was that they should be willing to fo llow all clean milk production 
protocols and pour all the milk produced into the d airy processing plants of the 
Department. Annual average lactation yield per cow was also worked out as 4000 
litres in the DPR i.e., 438 litres 28  per day per MDP. It was, however, seen that the 
total milk produced by the three MDPs was only 330 litres per day (average daily 
production at present) with the MDP in Dimapur acco unting for 250 litres per day. 
It was also seen that only the MDP at Dimapur was s elling all the milk produced to 
the dairy processing plant of the Department. While  the MDP at Mokokchung was 
selling only half of their production to the dairy processing plant, the milk 
produced by the MDP at Kohima was being sold locall y (Appendix-2.3.3 (b) ). 
Further, it was seen that the beneficiary of MDP at  Dimapur was an experienced 
dairy farmer who had been running the farm on a com mercial basis for the last 15 
years. 
In view of the above, the objectives of setting up the CDPs and MDPs could not be 
achieved due to lack of proper monitoring by the De partment and supply of inferior 
quality cattle to the beneficiaries. 
The Department stated (November 2012) that despite numerous constraints and 
compulsions the CDPs and MDPs were implemented to t he extent possible and that 
though deviations took place in the selection and s upply aspects, the overall spirit and 
objective of the project was not completely sacrificed. 
2.3.10.3 Setting up of Veterinary College 
The Department had initiated (2008) the process of setting up a Veterinary College in 
the State with a view to develop sufficient manpower in Veterinary practices. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that an MOU was drawn up (15.12.2008) between the 
Government of Nagaland and M/s Aegis International & Associates (a building 
Consultant) for rendering Project Management Consul tancy Services for setting up 
the Veterinary College at Jalukie, Peren. The proce dure followed for appointment of 
the Consultant could not be verified as records were not furnished. It was stated by the 
Department that the appointment was done in the Sec retariat. It was further seen that 
an amount of ` 22.12 lakh was paid to the consultant against Pre-f easibility Report 
submitted (May 2010) by them. However, the project had not taken off even after a 
lapse of more than two years. It was seen that the Department had sought 
(13.05.2010) approval from the Government to termin ate the MOU with the 
Consultant. However, the MOU was not terminated till October 2012.  
                                                 
28   4000 litres x 40 cows=1.60 lakh litres per year i.e., 438 li tres per day per MDP (1.60 lakh 
litres÷365 days). 

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
77 
 
It was also seen that the Department has gone ahead with creation of infrastructure for 
setting up the College and had obtained funding under Special Plan Assistance. 
The funds released, drawn by the Directorate and tr ansferred to the EE, V&AH 
Division for execution of works in respect of the V eterinary College as shown in the 
Directorate Cash Book was as follows: 
Table 2.3.7: Funds released and transferred to EE, V&AH  Division 
(`` `` in crore) 
Year Gross 
amount 
released by 
GOI/GON 
Net 
amount 
drawn by 
Directorate  
Expenditure 
incurred in 
Directorate  
Amount 
transferred 
to EE 
Balance as 
on 
31.03.2012 
2008-09 1.25 1.18 0.31 0.78 0.09 
2009-10 5.00 4.83 29  0.00 4.83 0.00 
2010-11 5.00 4.25 0.00 4.25 0.00 
2011-12 1.00 0.93 0.00 0.00 0.93 
Total: 12.25 11.19 0.31 9.86 1.02 
It was seen that a major portion of the funds was u tilised for Civil Works viz ., 
construction of security fencing, rest house, appro ach road, internal roads etc., at the 
proposed site of the Veterinary College executed by  EE, V&AH Division through 
contractors. The important findings on scrutiny of records related to execution of the 
major works under the project are discussed in Paragraph 2.3.10.8 . Thus, the 
expenditure of ` 22.12 lakh paid to the Consultant had become unfruitful.  
The Department stated (November 2012) that payment to the Consultant was made 
against the pre-feasibility report submitted by the m. It was further stated that the 
Central Agricultural University had been approached  for implementing the project 
and the MOU with the Consultant was under process of termination. 
2.3.10.4 Setting up of Nagaland Composite Pig Proje ct (NCPP) 
The State Government, with a view to increase pig p roduction decided to set up a 
Composite Pig Project with two main components viz. , Pig Breeding Unit and 
Slaughter House. Approval was obtained (June 2008) from the Government to appoint 
a Consultant (M/s Management Solutions, Business Pl anning Consultants, Kolkata) 
for preparation of the Concept Notes. The original proposal or the manner in which 
the Consultant was appointed was not on record. An MOU was signed (27.08.2008) 
and the firm was appointed (28.08.2008) as Consulta nt for the preparation of 
Feasibility Report and DPR for setting up the Pig B reeding Farm and Pork Processing 
Plant in Nagaland. Thereafter, based on proposal su bmitted (29.08.2008) by the 
Department, the Government gave expenditure sanctio n (05.11.2008) and drawal 
authority (05.11.2008) for an amount of ` 99.75 lakh against consultant fee for 
preparation of the DPR. The amount was drawn (17.11 .2008) and transferred to a 
separate Subsidiary Cash Book. Scrutiny of the Subsidiary Cash Book revealed that: 
                                                 
29   Out of this, ` 0.80 crore drawn by EE. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
78 
• A total amount of ` 75.51 lakh was spent on payment of consultation fee s, 
accommodation of consultant and included ` 1.90 lakh for the Consultant’s trip 
to Europe. It was also seen that a payment of ` 6.50 lakh was made to the 
Consultant on 18.11.08 against their bill dated 01. 10.2007 (before appointment-
being cost and expenses for initial development activities). 
• An amount of ` 15.75 lakh was recorded as spent for visit outside country 
without details such as the purpose or to whom the payment was made. No other 
records in respect of the expenditure were also furnished.  
The Department stated (November 2012) that the expe nditure was incurred for 
trip to Germany undertaken by the Hon’ble Minister accompanied by the 
Consultant and two officers for physical verificati on of the equipment which 
were proposed to be imported from Germany. 
Though the final DPRs with project cost of ` 157.31 crore was submitted by the 
Consultant in October 2010, no further progress tow ards establishing the NCPP or 
identifying the source of funding for the project a fter a lapse of almost two years was 
seen on record.  
Scrutiny of records further revealed that the Department had submitted (01.10.2010) a 
concept note to the Government for establishment of  Pig Breeding Farm and 
Slaughter House (Nagaland Composite Pig Project) un der SPA amounting to ` 10 
crore during 2010. Expenditure Sanction and Drawal Authority for ` 10 crore (gross) 
and ` 8.85 crore (net after deduction of 11.50 per cent  departmental charges) was 
received from the Government and Finance Department  on 31 March 2011. Out of 
this, ` 4.43 crore was to be drawn in cash and ` 4.43 crore was to be deposited in CD. 
As per expenditure sanction, ` 9.50 crore was earmarked for civil works and ` 0.50 
crore for power supply. The funds drawn by the Dire ctorate and released to the EE, 
V&AH Division was as shown in the table below: 
Table 2.3.8: Funds drawn and transferred to EE, V&AH Div ision 
(`` `` in crore) 
Date Net amount 
drawn by 
Directorate 
Date of 
release to EE 
Amount 
transferred to 
EE 
Balance as on 
31.03.2012 
31.03.2011  4.25 13.06.2011 2.00 - 
19.07.2011 2.25 - 
23.11.2011  4.31 23.11.2011 2.00 - 
22.02.2012 0.15 - 
01.03.2012 1.00 1.16 
Total: 8.56  7.40 1.16 
It was seen that a major portion of the funds were utilized for Civil Works viz ., 
provision of security fencing, rest house, internal  roads, godown etc., at the proposed 
site of Slaughter House, Khopanala, Dimapur and con struction of security fencing, 
rest house, approach road, overhead water tanks, go down etc., at the proposed site of 
Pig Breeding Farm, Jalukie executed by the EE, V&AH  Division through contractors. 

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
79 
 
The important findings on scrutiny of records relat ed to execution of the major works 
under the project are discussed in Paragraph 2.3.10.8.  Thus, the possibility of the 
expenditure of ` 99.75 lakh becoming infructuous cannot be ruled out. 
2.3.10.5 Assistance to States for Control of Animal  Diseases 
“Assistance to States for Control of Animal Disease s” (ASCAD) - a component of 
Centrally Sponsored Macro-Management Scheme “Livest ock Health and Disease 
Control (LH & DC)” is being implemented in the State since 2003-04 of the 10 th  Plan. 
The Scheme was continued in the 11 th  Plan as well. The funding pattern was 75:25 
between GOI and the State. 
The main objectives of the Scheme was to provide pr ophylactic vaccination against 
major animal diseases prevalent in the State viz.,  Swine Fever, Foot and Mouth 
Disease, Ranikhet disease, HS, BQ, Enterotoxaemia and Fowl Pox. 
As per the scheme, Annual Action Plans (AAPs), show ing component-wise 
requirement of funds during the year, are to be sub mitted by the State before the 
beginning of each financial year. The AAPs are exam ined and approved by GOI and 
funds sanctioned in one to three installments as pe r the utilisation. The position of 
funds approved by GOI as per AAPs and funds actuall y received and available for 
implementation of the Scheme (GOI and State share) during the 11 
th  Plan period 
(2007-12) was as follows: 
Table 2.3.9: Short release of funds from GOI/State 
(`` `` in lakh) 
Year Amount to be released as per 
approved AAP 
Amount actually 
released 
Short release 
GOI (75%) State (25%) GOI State GOI State 
2007-08   150.00 --   
  50.00 --   
  110.00 100.00   
Total: 30  325.81 103.87 310.00 100.00 15.81 3.87 
2008-09   150.00 45.27   
  123.00 41.00   
Total: 273.55 86.45 273.00 86.27 0.55 0.18 
2009-10   150.00 45.29   
Total: 259.22 81.67 150.00 45.29 109.22 36.38 
2010-11   100.00 33.33   
  -- 24.67   
Total: 219.43 68.40 100.00 58.00 119.43 10.40 
2011-12   175.00 54.93   
Total: 212.53 66.12 175.00 54.93 37.53 11.19 
Grand 
total: 
1290.54 406.51 1008.00 344.49 282.54 62.02 
It can be seen from the table above that the Depart ment could not avail a total amount 
of ` 3.45 crore sanctioned ( ` 2.83 crore from the GOI and ` 0.62 crore from the State 
Government) during the 11 th  Plan. This was due to delays in submission of AAPs , 
delays in release of funds by the State Government to the Department and delays in 
submission of Utilisation Certificates by the Department to GOI. 
                                                 
30   Proposed by the State Government. Approved AAP not on r ecord. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
80 
(i) Procurement and distribution of vaccines 
Scrutiny of records revealed that a large quantity of vaccines valued at ` 5.82 crore 
were procured under the scheme during 2007-12. The quantity and cost of the major 
vaccines procured was as shown in the table below: 
Table 2.3.10: Quantity and cost of vaccines procured 
Sl 
No.  
Name of vaccine Quantity procured Amount 
(`` `` in crore) 
1.  Swine Fever Vaccine  17,85,633 doses  3.43  
2.  Foot and Mouth Disease 
Vaccine 
11,76,317 vials of 15 
doses each 
1.44  
3. BQ Vaccine 10,90,998 doses 0.26 
4. Enterotoxaemia Vaccine 8,15,205 doses 0.14 
5. Fowl Pox Vaccine 85,66,999 doses 0.18 
Total 5.45 
The animals to be vaccinated each year and vaccines  required were worked out on the 
basis of animal population as per the 18 th  Livestock Census conducted in 2007 and 
procured in bulk from local suppliers without requi rement or indents from the 
districts. All the vaccines thus procured were show n as received and issued to the 
District Veterinary Officers (DVOs) in the records of the Directorate. Test-check of 
records in the selected districts revealed that the  vaccines were shown as fully 
received and then issued to the various hospitals, dispensaries, stockman 
centres/Veterinary Outposts/Veterinary Health Centr es under the DVOs. It was, 
however, seen during joint physical verification th at most of those Institutions were 
defunct and were not in a position to either receiv e or store the vaccines as discussed 
in Paragraph 2.3.11 . As such, procurement and distribution of such a h uge quantity 
of vaccines to those Institutions was doubtful and needs further investigation. 
(ii) Purchase of refrigerators without requirement 
Scrutiny of records revealed that 132 refrigerators  valued at ` 0.28 crore were 
procured under the scheme during 2007-12 as shown in the following table: 
Table 2.3.11: Details of refrigerators procured 
Year Particulars No. and rate Amount ( `` ``) 
2007-08 Refrigerators from Nagaland General Stores 15 Nos. @ `19400 each 291000 
Refrigerator 263 ltrs from Nagaland General stores 25 Nos @ `19400 each 485000 
2008-09 Refrigerator 263 ltrs from Nagaland General  Store 18 Nos. @ `19400 each 349200 
Refrigerator (240 ltrs) from Nagaland General 
Stores 
12 Nos. @ 
`18640 each 223680 
Refrigerator from Kuotsu Enterprises 18 Nos @ `19400 each 349200 
2010-11 Refrigerator from Kuotsu Enterprises 56 Nos @ `20000 each 1120000 
Total: 132 Nos 2818080 
However, it was seen from records that the 56 refri gerators procured in 2010-11 
(received in February 2011) had not been utilised a nd were kept (July 2012) in the 
store of the Directorate. Thus, refrigerators were procured without actual requirement. 
The Department stated (November 2012) that the refr igerators would be issued to 
Institutions with proper infrastructure and power supply. 

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
81 
 
2.3.10.6 Strengthening of State Farms (Pig and Catt le) under NABARD 
Scrutiny of records revealed that NABARD had sancti oned loan of ` 11.75 crore 
during 2007-10 for strengthening of State Pig Breed ing Farms and ` 8 crore during 
2010-12 for strengthening of State Cattle Breeding Farms as shown in the table 
below: 
Table 2.3.12: Funds released by NABARD and expenditure 
(` in crore) 
Year Loan 
sanctioned and 
released 
State 
share 
In eligible cost 
(to be borne by 
State) 
Expenditure  
2007 -08  3.00  - - 3.00  
2008-09 4.50 - - 4.50 
2009-10 4.25 0.62 2.20 4.25 
Total 11.75 0.62 2.20 11.75 
2010-11 3.00 - - 3.00 
2011 -12  5.00  0.64  1.26  5.00 31  
Total 8.00 0.64 1.26 8.00 
Grand total: 19.75 1.26 3.46 19.75 
The amount of ` 19.75 crore released by NABARD for strengthening of  State Pig 
Breeding Farms and State Cattle Breeding Farms was on loan basis @ 6.50 % per 
annum. The State Share amounting to ` 1.26 crore and ineligible cost (to be borne by 
State) of ` 3.46 crore was not released by the State Government. 
Thus, ` 4.72 crore (State Share plus  ineligible cost) was not available for carrying ou t 
the planned activities under the scheme. 
The important findings on scrutiny of records relat ed to execution of the major works 
under the project are discussed in Paragraph 2.3.10.8 (e) . 
2.3.10.7 Strengthening of State Pig Breeding Farms under NEC 
Strengthening of State Pig Breeding Farms in Nagala nd was taken up during 2009-10 
with funding from the North Eastern Council (NEC) a nd the State Government 
(90:10) at a total cost of ` 3.98 crore (NEC contribution: ` 3.59 crore and State share: 
` 0.40 crore). The Scheme was implemented with the ob jectives of producing 
sufficient quality seed stock for farmers at an aff ordable price, to assist them in 
raising/fattening pigs and to promote and develop p iggery in a cluster approach so as 
to reduce the import cost. The project was to be ta ken up in Medziphema and Jalukie 
with the target of producing 3600 no. of quality weaners with a turnover of 360 tonnes 
of pork worth ` 3.96 crore per year. The funds received from NEC an d State 
Government for implementation of the Scheme was as shown in the following table: 
  
                                                 
31   Drawn and parked in current bank account 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
82 
Table 2.3.13: Funds released by NEC/State and expendit ure 
 (` in crore) 
Year NEC share State share Total Expenditure 
2009 -10  1.27  0.00  1.27  1.27  
2010-11 1.10 0.12 1.22 1.22 
Total: 2.37 0.12 2.49 2.49 
The major audit findings after scrutiny of records and joint physical verification of the 
State Pig Breeding Farms (Medziphema and Jalukie) a re discussed in the following 
paragraphs. 
(i) Non-release of State Share and third installmen t from NEC 
NECs share in the Scheme was 90 per cent  of the total approved project cost of ` 3.98 
crore i.e., ` 3.59 crore which was to be released by NEC in three  installments (two 
installment of 40 per cent  each and the third installment of 20 per cent ) on receipt of 
Utilisation Certificate (UC) from the Department. T hough the Scheme was to be 
completed by 31 March 2012, the third installment o f ` 1.22 crore was not released 
by NEC as the Utilisation Certificate for the 2 
nd  installment was not submitted by the 
Department. 
The State mandatory contribution of 10 per cent  i.e., ` 0.40 crore was to be borne by 
the State Government through mobilisation of its ow n resources. Out of this, only 
0.12 crore was released by the State Government. Th ough NEC had released the 1 
st  
installment of ` 1.27 crore in March 2010, the State Government had not released its 
share of ` 0.16 crore till July 2012. 
Thus, due to non-availability of ` 1.50 crore, the implementation of the Scheme was 
adversely impacted. 
The Department stated (November 2012) that Utilisat ion Certificate could not be 
submitted to NEC due to non-release of State share.  It was also stated that the third 
installment of ` 1.22 crore could not be availed as it was mandatory  that the State 
share of ` 0.12 crore had to be released in advance. 
The important findings on scrutiny of records relat ed to execution of the major works 
under the project are discussed in Paragraph 2.3.10.8 (f) . 
2.3.10.8 Infrastructure support for different proje cts 
Creation and maintenance of infrastructure for the Department is the responsibility of 
the Executive Engineer, Veterinary and Animal Husba ndry Division (EE, V&AH), 
Kohima. The important audit findings on execution o f civil works for the major 
projects viz., setting up of Veterinary College, setting up of Na galand Composite Pig 
Project and strengthening of State Farms under NABA RD and NEC during 2007-12 
are discussed in the following paragraphs. 
(a) Construction of security fencing 
A major portion of the funds ( ` 8.75 crore) under setting up of Veterinary College and 
Nagaland Composite Pig Project were utilised for co nstruction of security fencing at 
the project sites (Jalukie and Khopanala). Scrutiny of records and physical verification 

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
83 
 
revealed that the process of awarding the works was  not transparent and that the 
works actually executed were not consistent with th e estimates and entries in the MBs 
as detailed in the following paragraphs. 
(i) Security fencing for Veterinary College at Jalu kie 
The amount sanctioned for construction of Security Fencing at the proposed site of 
Veterinary College and payments made to the contractor were as follows: 
Table 2.3.14: Funds sanctioned and payment made to contra ctor 
(`` `` in crore) 
Sl 
No.  
Particulars Amount 
sanctioned  
Net amount paid 
to contractor  
1. Construction of security fencing- 630.50 m (in 1 0 groups of 62 m @ 
` 4.93 lakh and one group of 10.50 m @ `88,000) during 2008-09 
0.50 0.40 
2. Construction of security fencing-460 m (in 4 gro ups of 115 m @ 
` 4.24 lakh) during 2008-09 
0.00 0.16 
3. Construction of chain link fencing-86 m during 2 008-09 0.00 0.03 
4. Construction of security fencing—4482 m (in 54 g roups of 83 m @ 
` 5 lakh each) during 2009-10 
2.70 2.18 
5. Construction of security fencing—4407 m during 2 010-11 2.23 1.67 
 Total: 5.43 4.44 
The more important points noticed in audit are detailed in the following paragraphs: 
• Scrutiny revealed that works of security fencing we re split up into 69 groups with 
estimated cost of ` 5 lakh or less during 2008-09 and 2009-10. During 2 008-09, 
work with approximate cost of ` 50.18 lakh was split into 11 groups 32  and work 
with approximate cost of ` 16.95 lakh was split into 4 groups 33 . Again, during 
2009-10, work with approximate cost of ` 2.29 crore was split into 54 groups 34 . 
Technical estimates were framed for each group sepa rately and approved by the 
Executive Engineer, V&AH Division. Bids were also i nvited separately for all the 
groups. Further, it was seen that all the works wer e allotted to one particular 
contractor as discussed in the next paragraph. Thus , it is evident that works were 
split up to avoid sanction of higher authority (CE,  Housing). Splitting up of works 
also prevented the Department from obtaining more c ompetitive offers and 
exercising better quality control of the works executed. 
The Department stated (November 2012) that works we re split up to avoid 
procedural delays and complete the work in time. Ho wever, the fact remains that 
this practice is a clear violation of the Financial  and Cognate powers delegated to 
officers at different levels under Nagaland PWD. 
• NITs were not published or given wide coverage as r equired under Rules. Bids for 
all the works (total of 69 groups) were received from the same contractors 35  (3 bids 
for each work) and all the works were awarded to M/ s Hi-tech Constructions 
except for the 4 groups during 2008-09, which were awarded to M/s N.R. Zeliang. 
                                                 
32   @ ` 4.93 lakh for 10 groups and ` 88,000 for one. 
33   @ ` 4.24 lakh for each group. 
34   @ ` 4.24 lakh for 44 groups and ` 4.23 lakh for 10 groups 
35   M/s Hi-tech Constructions, M/s N.R. Zeliang, Gaubeu Rangka u, Dennis Zeliang, Adam Zeliang, 
Platinum Enterprises Pvt Ltd, and Jordan Constructions. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
84 
Further, it was seen that M/s N.R. Zeliang and M/s Hi-tech Constructions had the 
same registration numbers and were in fact one and the same firm 36 . Thus, it is 
evident that NITs, tender papers, bids etc., were f abricated to favour a particular 
contractor. 
The Department stated (November 2012) that the lowe st bidder was selected as per 
prevailing SOR. It was further stated that the part ners of the firms had separated 
and registered in separate names in March 2011. However, the fact remains that the 
firm was one and the same when they had bid for the work. 
• As per estimates and entries made in the MBs, the t otal length of security fencing 
constructed during 2008-11 was 9980 m with pillars at a distance of 2.96 m at a 
total cost of ` 4.81 crore. During joint physical verification (07. 09.2012), it was 
seen that the actual execution of work was not as p er the estimate and the entries in 
the MB resulting in excess payment to the contractor. The difference in the work as 
per estimates and entries in the MB and actual exec ution was as shown in the table 
below: 
Table 2.3.15: Difference between measurements in MB and a ctual execution 
Sl 
No. 
Component Measurements as per 
estimates and entries in 
MBs 
Actual execution Difference  
1.  Height of wall  2.43 m  6 ft (1.83 m)  0.60 m  
2. Height of pillar 2.13 m 6 ft (1.83 m) 0.30 m 
3.  No of pillars  3372 Nos  2495 Nos.  877 Nos.  
4. Breadth of wall 0.25 m 5.5 inch (0.13 m) 0.12 m 
5. No. of barbed 
wire (lines) 
8 lines (6 horizontal and 
two diagonal) 
4 lines (all 
horizontal) 
4 lines 
6. Plastering on 
walls 
Both sides One side (outside 
wall) 
One side 
Thus, it is evident that the measurements entered i n the MBs, on the basis of which 
payments were made to the contractor, were fictitious. 
The Department stated (November 2012) that the meas urements for the walls and 
pillars recorded in the MBs include wall constructe d below ground level. However, 
the facts remains that the measurements recorded in  the MB were not consistent with 
the actual work executed and needs further investigation. 
(ii) Provision of security fencing for Slaughter Ho use at Khopanala 
Though ` 2.90 crore was earmarked in the expenditure sanctio n for provision of 
security fencing along the boundary at Slaughter Ho use, Khopanala, technical 
estimates for only an amount of ` 1.00 crore (1600 m) was prepared by the EE and 
approved by the CE (Housing). Thereafter, NIT, on i tem rate basis, was issued 
(29.06.11) for the work with approximate cost of ` 0.84 crore with the date for 
opening of bids being 07.07.2011. NIT was not adver tised or given wide publicity as 
required under Rules and no time was given for subm ission of bids as per CVC 
                                                 
36   Name changed from M/s N.R. Zeliang to M/s Hi-tech Const ruction with the same registration 
number (NPW/Class I/220) vide Government Notification PWD /E-in-C/Accts-1/Pt (1) dated 
25.06.2008. 

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
85 
 
guidelines (4 to 6 weeks) to ensure fair and adequa te competition. Bids were received 
from three firms and work was awarded (17.08.2011) to M/s Ruokuo Angami on the 
basis of recommendation by a VVIP. The work was cer tified to have been completed 
and payment of ` 0.74 crore was made to the contractor on the basis of entries made 
in the MB which was exactly as per the estimates. 
Joint physical verification (21.08.2012) revealed t hat the actual execution of work 
was not as per the estimates/measurement recorded i n the MB as can be seen from the 
table below: 
Table 2.3.16: Difference between measurements in MB and a ctual execution 
Sl 
No. 
Component Measurements as 
per estimates and 
entries in MBs 
Actual execution  Difference 
1. Height of wall 2.43 m (7.97 ft) 1.98 m (6.50 ft)  0.45 m 
2.  Angle post (45x45x6mm)  472 Nos  Nil  472  
3. No. of barbed wire (lines) 6 lines Nil 6 lines 
Thus, it is evident that the measurements entered in the MB were fictitious. 
The Department stated (November 2012) that measurem ent of walls recorded in the 
MB include the portion below ground level and that angle posts were replaced by 
placing brick on top with mortar U Neal. However, t he fact remains that 
measurements in the MB were not consistent with the  actual work executed and needs 
further investigation. 
(b) Construction of Guest/Rest Houses 
A total amount of ` 2.16 crore was spent for construction of three gues t/rest houses at 
the proposed sites for Veterinary College at Jaluki e and Nagaland Composite Pig 
Project (Khopanala and Jalukie). Scrutiny of record s and joint physical verification 
revealed that the process of awarding the works was  not transparent and actual 
execution was not consistent with the estimates and  entries in the MBs as discussed in 
the following paragraphs. 
(i) Construction of Guest House for Veterinary Coll ege at Jalukie  
The Government had given administrative approval of  ` 3 crore for construction of 
Guest House-cum-office during 2010-11. However, it was seen that technical 
estimates were approved by CE (Housing) for an esti mated amount of ` 1.60 crore 
including centage charges 
37  of ` 60.85 lakh. Thereafter, NIT was issued for the work  
with approximate cost of ` 99.15 lakh. As in all cases, it was seen that NIT w as not 
advertised or given wide coverage. Bids were receiv ed from three firms 38  and work 
was allotted (April 2011) to M/s Jordan Constructio n. The work was certified to have 
been completed (January 2012) and payment of ` 0.95 crore was made to the 
                                                 
37   Site leveling, water supply, electrification, consult ation fee, contingency, departmental charges 
etc. 
38   M/s Platinum Enterprise Pvt. Ltd. (15% above SOR 2010); M/s Jordan Construction (at par with 
SOR) and M/s Kedou Enterprise (10% above SOR). 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
86 
contractor on the basis of measurements entered in the MB which was exactly as per 
the estimates. 
Joint physical verification (07 September 2012) rev ealed that the actual execution of 
work was not as per estimates or measurements recor ded in the MB. Though payment 
in full was made, keys were stated to be in the cus tody of the contractor and number 
of rooms and their size could not be verified. As p er the drawings, two rooms, a 
dormitory and two toilets at either ends of a close d corridor were to be constructed in 
the basement floor. It was, however, seen that only  two rooms and two toilets at one 
end with an open verandah was constructed. Further,  the front elevation of the 
building was also not as per the drawings enclosed with the estimates as can be seen 
from the photographs below. 
Photograph 2.3.1 
 
 
Thus, measurements recorded in the MBs, on the basi s of which payments were made 
to the contractor, were fictitious. 
The Department stated (November 2012) that deviatio ns/ rearrangements were done 
on instruction of VIP for better utility. However, the fact remains that measurements 
entered in the MB were not consistent with the actual work executed. 
(ii) Construction of Rest House for Slaughter House  at Khopanala 
Although, only ` 0.50 crore was earmarked for the work in the expend iture sanction, 
technical estimate for an amount of ` 1.43 crore was prepared by the EE, V&AH and 
approved by the CE (Housing) during May 2011. There after, NIT, on item rate basis, 
was issued (29.06.11) for the work with approximate  cost of ` 0.89 crore with the 
date for opening of bids being 07.07.2011. NIT was not advertised or given wide 
publicity as required under rules and no time was g iven for submission of bids as per 
Elevation of Guest House as per estimates  
Basement of Guest House as per estimate  
Guest House at Veterinary College, Jalukie  
Basement of Guest House actually constructed  
Dormitory  

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
87 
 
CVC guidelines (4 to 6 weeks) to ensure fair and ad equate competition. Three bids 39  
were received and work was awarded (17.08.2011) to M/s Solo Engineering on the 
basis of recommendation of a VVIP. All measurements  were entered in the MB as per 
the estimates, work was certified as completed and an amount of ` 0.79 crore was 
paid to the contractor in two Running Account Bills  in November 2011 and May 
2012. 
Joint physical verification (21.08.2012) revealed t hat the actual execution of work 
was not as per estimates/measurements recorded in t he MB. Though payment in full 
was made, the rooms were locked and the keys were s tated to be in the custody of the 
contractor. Therefore, the number of rooms and thei r size could not be verified. It 
was, however, seen that the actual construction was  not as per the drawings enclosed 
with the estimates as can be seen from the photographs below: 
Photograph 2.3.2 
  
Thus, measurements recorded in the MBs, on the basi s of which payment was made, 
were fictitious. 
The Department stated (November 2012) that the devi ation occurred as the contractor 
was requested to construct RCC slab to keep water t ank instead of CGI sheet roofing. 
However, the fact remains that measurements recorde d in the MBs were not 
consistent with the actual work executed. 
(c) Construction of overhead water tanks 
A total amount of ` 25.16 lakh was spent for construction of rolled ste el unequal 
angle overhead tanks for the guest/rest houses for Veterinary College at Jalukie and 
the Nagaland Composite Pig Project (Jalukie and Kho panala). Scrutiny of records and 
physical verification revealed that the works were not actually executed and payments 
were made to the contractors on the basis of fictit ious entries made in the MBs as 
detailed in the following paragraphs. 
(i) Construction of overhead water tanks for Guest House for Veterinary 
College at Jalukie. 
NIT was issued (March 2011) for construction of two  separate rolled steel unequal 
angle overhead water tanks for the Guest House at a n estimated cost of ` 8.40 lakh 
and work was awarded (April 2011) to M/s H. Ikishe Sukhalu. As per entries made in 
                                                 
39   (i) M/s Hi-tech Constructions (10% above item rate), (i i) M/s I. Lima Ao (15% above item rate) 
and (iii) M/s Solo Engineering (at par with item rate). 
Elevation of Rest House of Slaughter House, Khopana la, Rest House at of Slaughter House at Khopanala, Dima pur  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
88 
the MB, the work was certified to have been complet ed in May 2011 and payment of 
` 8.04 lakh was made to the contractor in July 2011. It was, however, seen during 
joint physical verification (07 September 2012) tha t the work was not executed and 
only one water tank (Sintex-1000 litres) was fitted  on the roof of the Guest House 
building. Thus, payment of ` 8.04 lakh was made to the contractor on the basis o f 
fictitious entries made in the MB. 
(ii) Construction of overhead water tanks for Slaug hter House at Khopanala 
NIT was issued (28.03.11) for construction of two r olled steel unequal angle overhead 
water tanks with estimated cost of ` 8.38 lakh after splitting up the work into two 
equal groups and work was awarded (April 2011) sepa rately to M/s H.B. Enterprises. 
As per entries made in the MB, the work was certifi ed to have been completed in 
August 2011 and payment of ` 8.03 lakh was made to the contractor in August 2011 . 
It was, however, seen during joint physical verific ation (21.08.12) that the work was 
not executed and two water tanks (2 Sintex tanks of  2000 litres each) were fitted on 
the roof of the Rest House building. 
Thus, payment of ` 8.03 lakh was made to the contractor on the basis o f fictitious 
entries made in the MB. 
(iii) Construction of overhead water tanks for Rest  House for NCPP at Jalukie 
NIT was issued (07.03.11) for construction of two r olled steel unequal angle overhead 
water tanks with estimated cost of ` 8.38 lakh after splitting up the work into two 
equal groups and work was awarded (April 2011) sepa rately to M/s H. Ikishe 
Sukhalu. As per entries made in the MB, the work wa s certified to have been 
completed in June 2011 and payment of ` 8.04 lakh was made to the contractor in 
July 2011. It was, however, seen during joint physi cal verification (07.09.12) that the 
work was not executed and two water tanks were fitt ed on the roof of the Rest House 
building as can be seen from the photograph below. 
Photograph 2.3.3 
  
Thus, payment of ` 8.03 lakh was made to the contractor on the basis o f fictitious 
entries made in the MB. 
The Department stated (November 2012) that it was d ecided to place water tanks on 
top of the buildings as it was felt that steel stru cture will be less durable due to heavy 
iron content in the water available at the site. Ho wever, the fact remains that 
Elevation of Overhead water tank at Pig Farm, Jaluk ie  Water tanks on the roof of Rest House at Jalukie  

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
89 
 
measurements for work not executed were recorded in  the MBs and payment made to 
the contractor on that basis. 
(d) Construction of godown for Slaughter House at K hopanala 
Though an amount of ` 0.30 crore was earmarked for construction of godown , 
technical estimates for only an amount of ` 0.26 crore was prepared by the EE and 
approved by the CE (Housing). Thereafter, NIT was i ssued (24.05.11) with 
approximate cost of ` 0.17 crore. NIT was not advertised or given wide pu blicity as 
required under Rules. Bids were received from 3 con tractors and work was awarded 
(17.08.11) to M/s Ruokuo Angami on the basis of rec ommendation of a VVIP. The 
work was certified to have been completed and payme nt of ` 0.15 crore was made 
(25.11.11) to the contractor on the basis of entrie s made in the MB which was exactly 
as per the estimates. 
Joint physical verification (21.08.12) revealed tha t the actual execution was not as per 
the estimates or the measurements recorded in the M B. Though two doors and 7 
windows were shown as executed, it was seen that on ly one door with shutter on one 
side was made without any windows as shown in the photograph below: 
Photograph 2.3.4 
  
Thus, entries made in the MB, on the basis of which  payments were made to the 
contractor, were fictitious. 
The Department stated (November 2012) that the two small doors were replaced by 
one big door with shutter for the sake of convenien ce and that windows were avoided 
for safety reasons and proper ventilation had been provided. The fact, however, 
remains that measurements recorded in the MB were n ot consistent with the work 
actually executed. 
(e) Payments made against works not executed under NABARD 
The major component of the scheme was strengthening  of infrastructure of the farms 
i.e., renovation of existing sheds and construction  of new ones. Scrutiny of records 
relating to works executed under the scheme and joi nt physical verification in 7 State 
farms (4 Pig Farms 
40  and 3 Cattle Farms 41 ) revealed that works valued at ` 3.71 crore 
shown as executed as per entries in the MBs were no t actually taken up as detailed in 
                                                 
40   Merangkong, Lerie, Jalukie and Medziphema 
41   Lerie, Medziphema and Jalukie 
Godown at Slaughter House, Khopanala, Dimapur  Plan of Godown at Slaughter House, Khopanala  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
90 
Appendix-2.3.4 . Payments were also released to the contractors ba sed on fictitious 
entries in the MBs for works not executed. 
Further, it was seen that estimates were framed for  construction of four separate sheds 
at an estimated cost of ` 0.78 crore during 2010-11 at Cattle Breeding Farm, 
Medziphema. Entries were also made in the MBs as pe r the estimates and payments 
released to the contractor. Joint physical verifica tion, however, revealed that only one 
combined shed was constructed instead of four separ ate sheds as can be seen from the 
photograph below: 
Photograph 2.3.5 
  
  
 
Thus, actual execution was not commensurate with th e expenditure incurred and 
inconsistent with the records maintained by the EE. 
The Department stated (November 2012) that the shed s were combined to avoid 
wastage of land and that there was no deviation in the area and specifications. The 
fact, however, remains that the measurements entere d in the MB were not consistent 
with the actual work executed. 
(f) Fictitious expenditure under NEC 
During 2009-10, ` 0.18 crore was shown as spent for construction of p en caging in 
two pig sheds (1 & 2) at Pig Breeding Farm, Jalukie . However, the same work had 
already been completed during 2009-10 under NABARD at a cost of ` 0.52 lakh. 
Thus, payment of ` 0.18 crore was made on the basis of fictitious entr ies recorded in 
the MBs and needs further investigation. 
Calving shed as per estimates  
Heifer shed as per estimates  
Two cow sheds as per es timates  
Calve shed as per estimate  
Actual Work executed  

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
91 
 
Thus, the process of award of works was not transpa rent and consistent with the 
estimates/entries in the MBs resulting in excess pa yments to the contractors. Further, 
the possibility of the investment of ` 22.25 crore 42  for setting up the Veterinary 
College at Jalukie and the Nagaland Composite Pig F arm (Khopanala and Jalukie) 
becoming infructuous and idle cannot be ruled out a s the projects have not taken off 
even after a lapse of four years after it was initiated. The expenditure incurred towards 
creation of infrastructure for the projects had only benefitted the contractors. 
2.3.10.9 Procurement of livestock and poultry feeds 
Scrutiny of records in the Directorate revealed tha t an amount of ` 5.92 crore was 
spent on procurement of livestock and poultry feed during 2008-12. The funds 
received and expenditure incurred for procurement o f livestock and poultry feed 
during 2008-12 was as shown in the table below: 
Table 2.3.17: Funds released and expenditure 
 (` in crore) 
Year State plan Non-plan Total Expenditure 
2008-09 0.65 0.35 1.00 1.00 
2009-10 0.80 0.35 1.15 1.15 
2010-11 1.57 0.35 1.92 1.92 
2011-12 1.50 0.35 1.85 1.85 
Total: 4.52 1.40 5.92 5.92 
The major findings of audit regarding procurement o f livestock and poultry feeds are 
discussed in the following paragraphs: 
(i) Avoidable excess expenditure and undue favour t o supplier 
Scrutiny of records revealed that a VVIP had direct ed (March 2010) the Department 
to award supply order to a firm 
43  for supply of various items of feeds. It was also seen 
that the Department had approached (June 2010) the Government with a proposal to 
procure the feeds directly from the market at preva iling market rates with the 
justification that cost would be reduced by almost 40 to 50 per cent with better quality 
of feeds. However, the Government rejected (July 20 10) the proposal of the 
Department and issued Administrative Approval reite rating that supply order be 
issued to the firm recommended by the VVIP. Accordi ngly, the Department issued 
(03 August 2010) supply order to the firm with the terms and conditions that the feed 
should be delivered to the respective farms and transportation of the feeds to the farms 
shall be the sole responsibility of the supplier. F urther, it was also stated that the 
approved rates of the feeds shall remain effective till March 2011 and no 
enhancement of rate will be entertained under any c ircumstances. These terms and 
conditions were also accepted by the supplier (03 August 2010). 
However, it was seen that the supplier had approach ed (August 2010) the Department 
to incorporate transportation cost for delivery of feeds to the farms and that ` 0.31 
crore was subsequently paid to the firm against transportation cost. 
                                                 
42   Veterinary College: ` 12.25 crore and Nagaland Composite Pig Project: ` 10 crore. 
43   M/s Vikiye Sema, Dimapur 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
92 
Though the supplier had applied (23 August 2010) fo r enhancement of rate by 15 per 
cent, it was rejected (October 2010) by the Department. It was, however, seen that the 
Department had subsequently allowed (December 2010)  enhancement of rate by 30 
per cent  with the approval of a VVIP and had made an excess  payment (February 
2011) of ` 0.27 crore to the supplier. 
Thus, there was undue favour in selection of the su pplier and an excess payment of 
` 0.58 crore was also made to the supplier due to all owance of transportation cost and 
enhancement of rates. 
The Department stated (November 2012) that enhancem ent of rate could not be 
avoided due to the abrupt increase in the price of feed items and fuel. 
2.3.10.10 Entrepreneur Development  
The project ‘Integrated Livestock Development for P iggery and Poultry Production 
through peoples’ participation’ was implemented at a cost of ` 2 crore during 2008-09 
with the objective of enhancing production of pork and chicken, providing direct and 
indirect employment and preventing rural migration to urban areas. The beneficiaries 
of the project were to be progressive piggery and p oultry farmers, educated 
unemployed youth and self help groups. 
Records relating to the implementation of the proje ct under ‘Poultry Development’ 
were scrutinised in audit. 16 beneficiaries 
(Appendix-2.3.1 (h) ) under the project in 
the four selected districts were also taken up for joint physical verification. 
As per the proposal, a total of 800 Low Input Techn ology birds, 40-50 days old, were 
to be given to 50 beneficiaries in the State for pr oduction of chicken. The total 
expenditure for the poultry project was ` 0.53 crore as shown in the table below: 
Table 2.3.18: Component-wise expenditure 
Sl 
No. 
Particulars Amount  
(`` `` in lakh) 
1. Cash component (poultry shed, equipments & feeds) @  `27,587 per 
beneficiary 
13.79 
2. Low input technology growers (Kurioler) 40-50 da ys old including 
transportation 
34.80 
3. Transit cost (feeds & feed supplements, medicine s etc.) 4.17 
Total: 52.76 
The important audit findings in respect of implemen tation of the Scheme are 
discussed in the paragraphs that follow: 
(i) Selection of beneficiaries 
The beneficiaries for the project were to be select ed through conducting interviews 
from amongst 143 applicants. However, it was seen t hat 38 out of the 50 beneficiaries 
were selected on the basis of recommendations recei ved from VVIPs/VIPs. Thus, the 
selection of beneficiaries was not on the basis of feasibility or capability of the 
candidates. 

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
93 
 
(ii) Non-achievement of targets 
The Department intended to produce 2160 chickens in  3 production cycles per annum 
at 750 chicks per cycle through implementation of t he Scheme. The target set was to 
produce 90 tonnes of chicken meat worth ` 0.99 crore per annum. Joint physical 
verification, however, revealed that most of the beneficiaries had either abandoned the 
project altogether or had shifted over to piggery as detailed in Appendix 2.3.5 . 
Thus, the objectives of implementing the Scheme or the targets set by the Department 
could not be achieved. 
The Department stated (November 2012) that the poultry farms could not succeed due 
to increase in feed prices and most of the beneficiaries had shifted to piggery. 
2.3.11 Joint Physical Verification of institutions under the Department 
Results of joint physical verification of selected major projects/schemes executed 
under Mithun Project, White Revolution, Establishme nt of Veterinary College, 
Nagaland Composite Piggery Farm, Entrepreneur Devel opment, NABARD and NEC 
have been incorporated in the respective paragraphs . Joint physical verification of the 
State Farms, Veterinary Hospitals, Dispensaries, Di sease Diagnostic Laboratories, 
Quarantine Check Posts and Stockman Centres/Veterin ary Outposts/Veterinary 
Health Centres in the selected districts was also c arried out along with the 
departmental officers. It was found that many of th ese units were either defunct or 
functioning from very old and dilapidated buildings  as discussed in the following 
paragraphs. 
2.3.11.1 State Cattle Breeding Farms 
There were 10 State run Cattle Breeding/Dairy Farms  in Nagaland. The farms were 
functioning with the objective of disseminating sup erior germplasm of high yielding 
breeds of cattle to dairy farmers through artificia l insemination and also to produce 
quality heifers. Joint physical verification of six
44  farms in the selected districts, 
however, revealed that they were in very poor condi tion despite an amount of ` 8 
crore being spent for strengthening during 2010-12 under NABARD. 
Information could not be collected from SCBF, Medzi phema as only an attendant was 
present during physical verification and it was sta ted that the post of Farm Manager 
was lying vacant since 2010. 
Further, it was seen during joint physical verifica tion that the farms, with the 
exception of SCBF, Lerie was not involved in any br eeding activity but were 
functioning as dairy farms with very negligible pro duction/revenue generation as 
detailed in Appendix-2.3.3 (a) . 
  
                                                 
44   (i) SCBF, Lerie; (ii) SCBF, Medziphema, Dimapur; (i ii) SCBF, Aliba, Mokokchung; (iv) Dairy 
Upgradation Centre, Peren; (v) Regional Brown Swiss Cattle  Breeding Farm, Jalukie, Peren; 
(vi) Surti Buffalo Farm, Jalukie, Peren. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
94 
2.3.11.2 State Poultry Farms/Hatchery Units 
There were 13 State run poultry farms/hatchery unit s/chick rearing centres in 
Nagaland. The farms were to play a major role in pr oviding quality chicks to poultry 
entrepreneurs and also upgrade the local birds thro ugh crossing. Joint physical 
verification of six 
45  farms in the selected districts, however, revealed  that the 
infrastructure of these farms were very old and dil apidated as can be seen from the 
photographs below. 
Photograph 2.3.6 
  
  
All the farms physically verified were found to be functioning independently on self 
sustaining basis with negligible output/revenue gen eration as detailed in Appendix-
2.3.6 (b) . Thus, the objectives of the Department in running  the farms were not 
achieved. 
Further, the Poultry Farm shown as functioning at J alukie, Peren in the records of the 
Department could not be physically verified as it was non-existent. 
2.3.11.3 State Pig Breeding Farms 
There were 9 State Pig Breeding Farms in Nagaland. The main aim of these farms 
was to produce and supply quality breeding stock fo r the rural farmers with a view to 
enhance pork production. These farms were to supply  piglets to farmers under various 
piggery development schemes. Joint physical verific ation of four 
46  farms in the 
selected districts, however, revealed that they wer e functioning from very old and 
dilapidated buildings, especially Merangkong, despi te an amount of ` 11.75 crore 
                                                 
45   (i) Poultry farm, Kohima; (ii) Poultry farm, Dimapur;  (iii) Chick Rearing Centre, Medziphema, 
Dimapur; (iv) Poultry farm, Mokokchung; (v) Poultry Upgra ding Centre, Peren; (vi) Poultry 
farm, Jalukie, Peren 
46   (i) PBF, Lerie, Kohima; (ii) PBF, Medziphema, Dimapur;  (iii) PBF, Jalukie, Peren; and (iv) 
PBF, Merangkong, Mokokchung. 
Poultry Farm, Kohima  Poultry Farm, Dimapur  
Poultry Upgradation Centre, Peren  Poultry Farm, Mokokchung  

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
95 
 
being spent for strengthening under NABARD and ` 2.49 crore under NEC 
(Medziphema and Jalukie). 
It was also noticed that the infrastructure of thes e farms, especially in Merangkong, 
were very old and dilapidated as can be seen from the following photographs. 
Photograph 2.3.7 
  
It was seen that the total number of pigs at presen t was only 33 and the revenue 
generated during 2007-11 was only ` 5.91 lakh and ‘nil’ during 2011-12. Further, it 
was seen that 15 staff were posted against the farm. 
2.3.11.4 Veterinary Hospitals 
There were 11 Veterinary Hospitals in the State as per departmental records. Joint 
physical verification of three (Appendix-2.3.1 (i) ) hospitals in the selected districts 
revealed that all, except Kohima, were poorly equipped with number of cases attended 
being very low as detailed in Appendix-2.3.6 (c) . 
The Veterinary Hospital shown as functioning at Per en in the records of the 
Department was found to be only a Dispensary and it  was stated by the Doctor in-
charge that it was yet to be upgraded. 
2.3.11.5 Veterinary Dispensaries 
Out of 17 Veterinary Dispensaries in the State, six  (Appendix-2.3.1 (j) ) were selected 
for joint physical verification. Joint physical ver ification of the five dispensaries 
revealed that all of them were poorly equipped. It was further seen that the Dispensary 
in Changtongya, Mokokchung was in very poor conditi on and abandoned as can be 
seen from the photographs below. 
Photograph 2.3.8 
  
Feed Godown, Pig Breeding Farm, Pig Breeding Farm, Merangkong  
Veterinary Dispensary, Peren  Veterinary Dispensary, Jalukie  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
96 
  
The Dispensary shown as functioning at Khuzama in K ohima District in the records 
of the Department could not be traced by the depart mental officers during physical 
verification and its existence is doubtful. Further , most of the dispensaries were 
without medicines/equipment and number of cases att ended was also very low as 
detailed in Appendix-2.3.6 (d) . 
2.3.11.6 Disease Diagnostic Laboratories 
Out of 14 DDLs in the State, five (Appendix-2.3.1 (k) ) were selected for joint 
physical verification. It was found that all of the m, except DDL, Peren, were located 
in new buildings and had few laboratory equipment a s seen from the photographs 
below. 
Photograph 2.3.9 
  
  
It was, however, seen that these labs were non-func tional despite an amount of ` 0.45 
crore spent on their maintenance during 2007-12 und er ASCAD due to absence of 
staff as detailed in Appendix-2.3.6 (e) . 
The Department stated (November 2012) that the DDLs  were not fully functional due 
to lack of manpower and assured that efforts would be made to deploy trained 
personnel in all the DDLs. 
  
DDL, Dimapur  
DDL, Mangkolemba, Mokokchung  
DDL, Mokokchung  
DDL, Peren  
Veterinary Dispensary, Niuland, Dimapur  Veterinary Dispensary, Changtongya, Mokokchung  

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
97 
 
2.3.11.7 Quarantine Check Posts 
Quarantine Check Posts in the State were establishe d under provisions of the 
Nagaland Contagious Disease Act, 1980 to provide fo r the prevention and spread of 
contagious diseases of livestock including poultry birds. The duties and function of 
the QCPs include detention of animals at quarantine  for the purpose of inspection, 
vaccination and marking, issue of vaccination certi ficate and reporting any contagious 
disease detected to the authority. For this purpose , facilities for feeding and caring for 
the animals in quarantine have to be in place. 
 
Out of 16 QCPs in the State, five (Appendix-2.3.1 (m) ) were selected for joint 
physical verification. It was seen that three of th em were functioning from temporary 
thatched accommodation on the roadside and a new bu ilding constructed for QCP, 
Kedima was abandoned and covered with vegetation as  can be seen from the 
photographs below. 
Photograph 2.3.10 
  
  
It was also seen that the only activity carried out  in the QCPs were collection of 
entry/token fees and facilities for quarantining th e animals or conducting tests etc. 
were non-existent as detailed in Appendix-2.3.6 (f) . Thus, the purpose of establishing 
the QCPs i.e., prevention of spread of contagious d iseases of livestock in the State 
was not achieved. 
Further, it was seen that there was no system for p roper monitoring of the working of 
the QCPs and the revenue collected by them. Receipt  books were collected from the 
Directorate by the officers in-charge of the QCPs. However, stock register of receipt 
books or other records showing receipt and utilizat ion of the receipts books were not 
maintained by them. There was also no mention of re ceipt and utilisation of receipt 
books in the monthly/yearly progress reports submit ted to the Directorate through the 
DVOs (District Veterinary Officers). 
QCP, New Golaghat Road, Dimapur  
QCP, Tuli, Mokokchung  
QCP. Old Golaghat Road, 
Condition of building constructed for QCP, Kedima  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
98 
Further, receipt book No.451 was shown as not issue d and 472 shown as issued to 
Dimapur as per records furnished by the Directorate . However, it was seen both these 
receipt books were used in Tuli QCP during Septembe r 2009 and April 2010 
respectively. 
Thus, in the absence of proper monitoring of the QC Ps by the DVOs and the 
Directorate, the possibility of pilferage of Government revenue cannot be ruled out. 
2.3.11.8 Stockman Centres/Veterinary Outposts/Veterinary Health Centres 
Out of 121 SMCs/VOPs/VHCs in the State, 13 (Appendix-2.3.1 (l) ) in the selected 
districts were taken up for joint physical verifica tion. It was found that most of the 
centres/posts were defunct with very old and dilapi dated buildings as can be seen 
from the photographs below. 
Photograph 2.3.11 
  
  
  
It was further seen that the centres were non-funct ional despite staff being posted 
against them as detailed in Appendix-2.3.6 (g) . 
  
VOP, Athibung, Peren  VHC, Mhainamtsi, Peren  
VOP, Merangkong, Mokokchung  SMC, Sabangya, Mokokchung  
SMC, Longnak, Mokokchung  VOP, Kigwema, Kohima  

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
99 
 
2.3.12 Monitoring 
The Department could not furnish information regard ing system in place to monitor 
the effective implementation of schemes/projects de spite requisition (April 2012) and 
several reminders. Thus, audit was not able to stud y the effectiveness of the 
monitoring mechanism in the Department. 
The NABARD Consultancy Services (NABCONS) had been appointed by the 
Planning Commission as a Third Party Monitoring Age ncy to assess effective 
implementation of projects funded under Special Pla n Assistance (SPA) in the State. 
However, except of asking for some reports from the  Department, the Agency had not 
conducted any monitoring of the projects implemente d by the Department under SPA 
viz., Mithun Project, Integrated Livestock Developm ent and White Revolution, 
Setting up of Veterinary College and Setting up of Nagaland Composite Pig Project. 
No system also existed in the Department for monito ring the activities of the 
veterinary institutions. 
Thus, lack of proper monitoring, both by NABCONS an d the Department, opened the 
system to several gaps in implementation of the sch emes which ultimately culminated 
in frauds and mis-appropriation as detailed in the paragraphs above. Therefore, the 
objectives of the schemes could not be fully achieved. 
2.3.13 Internal control 
Internal controls in a Department are intended to g ive reasonable assurance that its 
operations are carried out according to laid down r ules and regulations in an 
economic, efficient and effective manner. A built-i n internal control system and 
adherence to codes and manuals minimise the risk of  errors and irregularities and help 
the Department to achieve its objects with optimum use of its resources. 
The Department could not furnish any information on  internal control system despite 
requisition (April 2012) and several reminders. Thu s, audit could not study the 
effectiveness of internal control system in the Department. 
However, it was seen that no Departmental Manual ha d been prepared indicating lack 
of accountability at various levels. Further, no in ternal audit either by the Department 
or the Directorate of Treasuries and Accounts had b een carried out in the Directorate 
or in any of the districts during the period covered by Audit. 
2.3.14 Human Resource Management 
The Department could not furnish information on dem arcation of functional 
responsibilities of various categories of staff, th e procedure followed for their 
deployment and training conducted despite requisiti on (April 2012) and several 
reminders. Thus, audit could not study the effectiv eness of human resource 
management in the Department. 
It was, however, seen that 36 staff were deployed i n SMCs/VOPs/VHCs which were 
non-functional. 
  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
100 
2.3.15 Vulnerability to fraud and corruption 
2.3.15.1 Drawal of funds from Government Account 
According to Rule 290 of the Central Treasury Rules  (CTRs) Vol-I, no money shall 
be drawn unless required for immediate disbursement . Also, as per the said Rule, no 
money should be drawn at the fag end of the financi al year to avoid lapse of budget 
grants. 
It was, however, seen that the Department had been drawing most of the funds at the 
fag end of the year and parking it in Bank Account or Civil Deposit and utilising it 
during the subsequent year or in some cases, after several years. Further, all the funds 
were drawn through Fully Vouched Contingent (FVC) b ills enclosing fictitious 
bills/actual payee receipts. Test-check of the bill s amounting to ` 10.64 crore drawn 
by the Department during March 2012 revealed that m ost of the vouchers enclosed 
were fictitious and were used with the sole intenti on of drawing funds from 
Government Account as detailed in Appendix 2.3.7 . 
It was further seen that works were not actually ex ecuted as per the work orders and 
bills (First & Final and Running Account Bills) enc losed along with the FVC bills 
through which the amount were drawn. Scrutiny revea led that NITs were issued at a 
later date, work orders with different value of wor k were awarded to different 
contractors and work was actually completed at a la ter date as detailed in Appendix  
2.3.8 . Thus, it is evident that work orders and bills ce rtifying that the works were 
completed were fabricated and enclosed with the FVC  bills with the sole intention of 
drawing funds from Government Account. 
2.3.15.2 Suspected misappropriation of Government R evenue 
Scrutiny of records maintained by the EE, V&AH Division revealed that an amount of 
` 18.51 lakh was shown as collected (16.05.2009) from  contractors against Sales Tax, 
Forest Royalty and Work Contract Tax in the receipt  side of the Cash Book without 
including the amount in the total. The same amount was shown as deposited into 
treasury on the payment side but was seen to be era sed using correction fluid. The 
amount was also reflected in the Monthly Accounts ( June 2009) as revenue deposited 
into treasury.  
Scrutiny also revealed that the closing cash balanc e as per Monthly Accounts of April 
2009 was ` 1,96,99,300 but the opening cash balance was shown as ` 1,95,47,080 in 
the Monthly Accounts of May 2009 resulting in short fall of ` 1.52 lakh. Further, as 
per Schedule of Deposits attached with the Monthly Accounts of August 2009, the 
closing balance of revenue was ` 7,28,441 whereas the opening balance in the 
Monthly Accounts of September 2009 was shown as ` 72,841 resulting in shortfall of 
` 6.56 lakh. Thus, Government revenue amounting to ` 26.59 lakh is suspected to 
have been misappropriated and needs further investigation. 
2.3.16 Conclusion 
Planning was unrealistic and formulated without pro per study or analysis as was 
evident from the major variations in the activities  envisaged in the 11 
th  Plan with the 

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
101 
 
Annual Plans and the activities actually taken up. Targets set for production of meat, 
milk and eggs in the 11 th  Plan with projected expenditure of ` 64 crore could not be 
achieved despite plan expenditure of ` 149.99 crore during the period. Monthly 
balances in the bank account operated by the Direct orate and Executive Engineer, 
V&AH Division were lower than the monthly closing b alance recorded in their Cash 
Books pointing to misappropriation/misuse of Govern ment money. Targets set for the 
Schemes/Projects could not be achieved due to defic iencies in actual implementation 
and payments were made against fictitious works. The process of awarding works was 
not transparent and works were awarded to a few sel ect contractors. Further, works 
were not executed as per estimates/entries in the M Bs resulting in excess payments 
and undue favour to contractors. The investment of ` 22.25 crore for setting up the 
Veterinary College at Jalukie and the Nagaland Comp osite Pig Project proved to be 
idle as these projects had not taken off even after  four years after it was initiated. The 
institutions under the Department were in very poor  condition and several of them 
were non-functional. 
2.3.17 Recommendations 
/head2right The activities of the Department should be planned after proper 
study/analysis of ground realities and should also be consistent with the 
overall five year plans of the Department; 
/head2right The discrepancies between Cash Books and bank accou nts should be 
reconciled forthwith in order to avoid the possibility of frauds taking place; 
/head2right The probable instances of fraud and mis-appropriati on mentioned in the 
Report should be investigated at the earliest and responsibility fixed ; 
/head2right Monitoring mechanisms and internal controls prevale nt in the Department 
should be reviewed and strengthened; and 
/head2right Proper control systems should be introduced in the Department to reduce 
vulnerability to fraud and corruption. 
DEPARTMENTS OF AGRICULTURE/LAND RESOURCES/SOIL AND 
WATER CONSERVATION AND NAGALAND EMPOWERMENT OF 
PEOPLE THROUGH ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (NEPED) 
2.4  Implementation of Watershed Development Progra mmes in Nagaland 
Watershed 47  Development programmes aimed to achieve sustained growth in 
agriculture productivity through prevention of drou ght and soil degradation and by 
bringing about improvement in soil fertility. Reduc tion in shifting cultivation practice 
was also an objective of the programme. The success  in these initiatives was expected 
to improve living conditions of people dependent on agriculture and allied activities.  
A Performance Audit of the Watershed Development Sc hemes in the State revealed 
that the stated objectives could not be achieved du e to lack of effective planning, 
                                                 
47  Watershed is a geo-hydrological unit or an area that drains at common point 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
102 
paucity of funds and absence of infrastructure to e nsure proper maintenance and 
operation of the assets created. Impact of the acti vities under the programmes was not 
assessed to determine the extent of change in socio -economic environment and need 
for mid-course correction. The major audit findings  noticed in implementing the 
programmes are as follows: 
Highlights 
Expenditure to the tune of 
    ` ` ` ` 9020.20 lakh was incurred on account of treating la nd 
already treated under other programmes .  
(Paragraph 2.4.7.1.1) 
An amount of ` ` ` ` 259.43 lakh claimed to have been disbursed by the P rogramme 
Implementing Agencies to the Watershed Committees w ere not actually received by 
the WCs. 
(Paragraph 2.4.7.2.4) 
Payments of ` ` ` ` 133.42 lakh were released against works not executed. 
(Paragraph 2.4.7.3.4) 
2.4.1 Introduction 
The State of Nagaland has an area of 16,579 sq. km. with a total population of 20 lakh 
(2011 census) and more than 60 per cent of population is engaged in agriculture. In 
view of the hilly terrain, terrace farming and shif ting cultivation (jhum) is widely 
practiced. 
Implementation of Watershed Development Programmes was to improve rural 
livelihood through participatory watershed developm ent with focus on integrated 
farming systems for enhancing income, productivity and livelihood security in a 
sustainable manner. In order to overcome the proble ms of drought, land degradation 
and to improve the socio-economic condition of econ omically weaker sections, 
following Watershed Development Projects were taken  up in the State: (i) Watershed 
Development Projects in Shifting Cultivation Areas (WDPSCA) implemented by 
Department of Soil and Water Conservation (DSWC) an d Nagaland Empowerment of 
People through Economic Development (NEPED), (ii) N ational Watershed 
Development Programme for Rainfed Areas (NWDPRA) im plemented by 
Department of Agriculture (DA), (iii) Integrated Wa tershed Development Programme 
(IWDP) and (iv) Integrated Watershed Management Pro gramme (IWMP) 
implemented by Department of Land Resources (DLR). The primary objectives of the 
programmes inter-alia  included conservation of soil, water and other nat ural 
resources through watershed approach with the help of low cost and locally accessible 
technologies such as insitu soil and moisture conservation, afforestation, past ure 
development etc. 
2.4.2  Organisational setup 
In the State, no Department was created for impleme ntation or coordination of 
Watershed Management Programmes. All the three Depa rtments mentioned at 

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
103 
 
paragraph 1 above were functioning independently fr om each other and were having 
separate Administrative Heads of Department (AHoD).  A diagram depicting the 
organisational set up of each of the Department is given below: 
 
At the Government level, each of the Departments we re headed by Principal 
Secretary/ Commissioner and Secretary/ Secretary to  the Government of Nagaland 
(GoN). The NEPED is headed by Team Leader (TL) who is also a serving 
Commissioner and Secretary to the Government of Nagaland. 
The Director of Department of Agriculture (DoA) is the Head of the Department 
(HoD) of DA and is assisted by 8 48  District Agriculture Officers (DAO) and 21 Sub-
Divisional Agriculture Officers (SDAO). At the proj ect level, Agriculture Officers 
(AO) were in-charge of individual projects.  
The Director of Department of Soil and Water Conser vation (DoSWC) is the HoD of 
DSWC and is assisted by 11 District Soil and Water Conservation Officers (DSCO) 
and 21 Sub Divisional Soil and Water Conservation O fficers (SDO). At the project 
level, Soil Conservation Assistants (SCA) were entr usted with the responsibility of 
individual projects. 
The Director of Land Resources (DoLR) is the HoD of  DLR and is assisted by 11 
District Project Officers (DPO) who were dischargin g the functions of Project 
Implementing Agency (PIA) in their respective distr icts. DPO was assisted by 
Watershed Development Team (WDT) in each of the project. 
The Team Leader, NEPED is assisted by one Programme  Coordinator & 
Administrator in Headquarter and a 10 member Progra mme Operator Unit (POU). 
NEPED projects were implemented in 10 Districts of Nagaland except Dimapur. 
Members of the POU were entrusted with the responsi bility of implementation of the 
Projects in a District. 
District level officers of the Departments discharg ed the functions of Programme 
Implementing Agency (PIA) in respect of projects in the district. 
                                                 
48  Three Districts viz. Peren, Longleng and Kiphire did not  have sanctioned posts of DAOs 
Principal Secretary 
Agriulture 
Director, 
Agriculture 
District 
Agriculture Officer 
Sub-Divisional 
Agriculture Officer 
Agriculture Officer 
Commissioner and 
Secretary/ Secretary,  
Land Resources 
Director, Land 
Resources 
District Project 
Officer 
Watershed 
Development Team 
Secretary, Soil and 
Water Conservation 
Director, Soil and 
Water Conservation 
District   Soil and 
Water Conservation 
Officer 
Sub-Divisional 
Officer (Soil and 
Water Conservation) 
Soil Conservation 
Assistant 
Team Leader , 
NEPED 
Programme 
Coordinator 
Programme 
Operator Unit 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
104 
2.4.3 Scope of Audit 
The implementation of the Watershed Development Pro grammes (Programmes) 
during 2007-12 was reviewed through a test-check (M ay- September 2012) of the 
records maintained by the DoLR, DoSWC, DoA and TL, NEPED and four 
49  out of 11 
District level functionaries of the three Departmen ts. A total of 323 projects 50  with a 
total expenditure of ` 272.76 crore were implemented in the State during t he period 
covered by audit.  
Records of four out of 11 Districts covering 139 pr ojects in the State involving an 
expenditure of ` 117.03 crore (42.90 per cent ) were covered in the Performance 
Audit. Out of 139 projects in the test checked dist ricts, 40 projects (6 IWDP 
51 , 8 
IWMP 52 , 13 WDPSCA 53  and 13 NWDPRA 54  ) were taken up for physical 
verification.  
2.4.4 Audit objectives 
The performance audit was carried out to assess whether: 
/head2right The project formulation and process of selection of  watershed projects were 
done in accordance with the laid down guidelines an d after carrying out 
required studies and analysis. 
/head2right Adequate funds were released in time and were properly utilised. 
/head2right The projects were implemented in an economic, effic ient and effective 
manner.  
/head2right Post project operations were properly organised for  continued operation and 
maintenance of assets created. 
/head2right Adequate and effective mechanisms at different leve ls were available for 
monitoring the project implementation and evaluation of the outcomes  
2.4.5 Audit Criteria  
Audit conclusions were benchmarked against criteria  derived from the following 
sources: 
/head2right Receipt and Payment Rules and General Financial Rules 
/head2right Guidelines issued by the Government of India (GoI) for implementation of 
various watershed projects. 
/head2right Circulars and orders issued by GoN 
/head2right Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) prepared for implementation of the projects 
/head2right Perspective Plan and Annual Action Plans of the implementing Departments 
/head2right Prescribed monitoring and evaluation mechanism 
                                                 
49  Kohima, Mokokchung, Tuensang and Dimapur 
50  35 IWDP, 61 IWMP, 107 WDPSCA and 120 NWDPRA  
51  Kohima VII & VIII, Dimapur III, Tuensang IV & VI, Mokokchung III (projects ended during 2009-10) 
52  Kohima I & II, Dimapur I &II, Tuensang II & III, Mokokchung. II & III (projects started in 2009-10)  
53  Muliangza, Aomao, Narolengdeng, Atashinu, Azukediwa , and Chanhie under DSWC; Dzuleke, Nadichieva, 
Nyenshwenru, Makutongzong,Mutungwong, Arimen and Ompamg under NEPED  
54  Tsulalu, Teyongko, Thangpang, Dzuvaru, Pughubo, Hek haru, Kechetang, Sangro, Boktowong, Mezaru, Baru, 
Dzonzon and Sanuoru  

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
105 
 
2.4.6 Audit methodology 
An entry conference was held on 19 May 2012 with th e AHoDs, HoDs and senior 
officers of DLR, DA, DSWC and NEPED, wherein the au dit objectives, criteria, 
scope of audit and methodology were explained. The performance audit was carried 
out by collecting information through questionnaire s, examination of records and 
conducting joint physical verification of selected projects. An exit conference was 
held with the Departments concerned on 26 November 2012 wherein audit findings 
were discussed. The report was finalised after inco rporating the replies and views of 
the Departments. 
2.4.7. Audit findings 
 
2.4.7.1 Project formulation 
Guidelines stipulated that the watershed area of th e projects should not overlap with 
any other developed/ongoing watershed projects fund ed by any Government agency. 
Further, areas irrigated under various Irrigation s chemes were not eligible for 
selection under watershed projects.  
The District Planning and Development Boards (DPDB)  were the apex bodies in the 
Districts for preparation of developmental plans in  the district. The DPDBs were not 
consulted in planning and selection of watershed ar eas. District Perspective Plans 
were not prepared for implementation of watershed projects. Apart from strategic plan 
the DPR did not contain details of works to be exec uted with location, beneficiary 
details etc. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that none of the three Depa rtments test-checked had complete 
data or information about developmental activities undertaken by other Departments 
in the same area. This resulted in the Programmes b eing implemented in ineligible 
villages and duplication of works. 
A few illustrative cases in this regard are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
2.4.7.1.1 Duplication of works 
(i) Watershed Development Programmes were to be imp lemented on land 
available for cultivation only. Major components 
55  were same in all the Programmes.  
Details of land already treated under Watershed Dev elopment Programmes or were 
command areas of earlier irrigation projects as of 2009-10 were as follows: 
  
                                                 
55  (i) Construction of contour bunds, bench terraces, water har vesting and irrigation structures, (ii) 
Afforestation, (iii) Plantation, (iv) Livelihood activities such as piggery, poultry, goat rearing, bee 
keeping, carpentry etc., (v) Horticulture  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
106 
Table No. 2.4.1: Net area available for cultivation  and gross area developed/ 
being taken up for development in the State of Nagaland as of 2009-10 
Sl. 
No. 
Particulars Area (ha) 
1.  Geographical area of the State 1657900 
2.  Forest area 862930 
3.  Area not available for cultivation (including land put on non-
agriculture uses and barren and uncultivable land 
89470 
4.  Net area available for cultivation (Sl. No. 1-(2+3)) 705500 (A)  
5.  Developed under NWDPRA Upto X th  Plan  90308  
6.  Developed under WDPSCA Upto X th  Plan 88300 
7.  Developed under IWDP 380430 
8.  Total area developed (Sl No. 5+6+7) 559038 (B)  
9.  Taken up for development under NWDPRA (XI th  Plan) 56378 
10.  Taken up for development under WDPSCA (DSWC) (XI th  
Plan) 
35000 
11.  Taken up for development under WDPSCA (NEPED) 18112  
12.  Total area being developed (Sl. No. 9+10+11)  109490 (C)  
13.  Under schemes implemented by Department of Irrigation and 
Flood Control 
127379 ( D) 
14.  Gross area developed/ being developed/ command area of 
irrigation schemes (B+C+D) 
795907 (E)  
15.  Net area available for development (A-E) (-) 90407 
(Source: Statistical hand book of Nagaland and Departmental data) 
As could be seen from the table above, only 7,05,50 0 ha of cultivable land was 
available for treatment under Watershed Development  Programmes in the State of 
Nagaland. Against this, 7,95,907 ha of land were tr eated or being treated under 
various watershed development programs or under com mand areas of earlier 
irrigation projects as of 2009-10. Thus, as of 2009 -10, 90,407 ha (7,95,907-7,05,500) 
of land was treated in excess of total land availab le for cultivation. Thus, there was a 
likelihood of programmes being implemented in ineli gible areas and duplication of 
works. 
(ii) The Scheme IWMP was first introduced in Nagala nd during 2008-09. The 
project activities and preparation of DPRs in the S tate were started during 2009-10. 
As per the DPRs for the implementation of IWMP, Gro ss area targeted for 
development was 2,74,810 ha. 
As could be seen from the table No. 2.4.1 above, as  of 2009-10 there were no 
cultivable land left in the State for development u nder new watershed development 
projects. However, DLR prepared DPRs which were app roved by State Level Nodal 
Agency (SLNA), for development of 2,74,810 ha under  61 projects at a cost of 
` 41221.60 lakh. During 2009-12 DLR had incurred an expenditure of ` 9020.20 lakh 
on account of implementation of IWMP.  
Works taken up under IWMP were similar to works exe cuted under other watershed 
development programmes. There was no scope of imple menting the Scheme without 

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
107 
 
overlapping with the already developed land. Thus, due to defective planning, projects 
were taken up on land which was already developed r esulting in expenditure of 
` 9020.20 lakh on duplication of work. 
The DLR in its reply (January 2012) stated that IWM P could be implemented in all 
areas except permanent plantation areas and structures. However, the fact remains that 
as of 2009-10, all available land in the State had already been treated under various 
watershed development programmes or under irrigation schemes.  
2.4.7.1.2 Selection of project villages 
(i) As per instruction contained in Ministry of Agr iculture, GoI, letter dated 13 
 
December 2005, villages falling under NEPED project s should not be covered under 
any other similar programmes.  
Audit scrutiny revealed that 14 villages selected f or implementing NWDPRA and 
WDPSCA projects (2007-12) were already selected for  implementing WDPSCA 
implemented by NEPED during 2006-12 as detailed below: 
Table No. 2.4.2: List of villages where expenditure was incurred by both NEPED 
and under NWDPRA 
 (` in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
District  Name of 
village 
Programme under 
which the village was 
selected  
Expenditure 
incurred  
1 Kohima Sendenyu (N) NWDPRA 42.70 
2 Kohima Tuophema NWDPRA 42.73 
3 Kohima Touphema WDPSCA 74.44 
4 Mokokchung  Chungliyimsen  NWDPRA 42.97 
5 Mokokchung  Merankong NWDPRA 43.66 
6 Mokokchung  Mangmetong WDPSCA 68.27 
7 Tuensang Kuthur NWDPRA 43.92 
8 Tuensang  Chimonger  WDPSCA 41.27 
9 Phek  Thetsümi  NWDPRA  43.66  
10 Phek Wuzu NWDPRA 43.70 
11 Mon Wangti NWDPRA 43.91 
12 Wokha Okotso WDPSCA 63.08 
13  Zunheboto  Khukiye  WDPSCA  66.75  
14 Longleng Kanching WDPACA 67.62 
 Total   728.68 
Since these villages were already selected for impl ementation of WDPSCA projects 
under NEPED, these were not eligible for implementa tion of WDPSCA implemented 
by DSWC and NWDPRA. Expenditure to the tune of ` 728.68 lakh was incurred by 
DSWC and DA for implementation of NWDPRA and WDPSCA  in these villages. 
Thus, lack of coordination between the implementing  Departments resulted in faulty 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
108 
selection of project villages resulting in expendit ure to the tune of ` 728.68 lakh for 
implementation of NWDPRA in ineligible villages.  
ii)  Remote areas where no department had ever take n up similar projects, was 
adopted as one of the norms for selection of villag es for implementation of WDPSCA 
by NEPED.  
Audit scrutiny of the similar projects implemented by the GoN, DLR, under the 
scheme IWDP revealed that 19 villages were selected  by NEPED for implementation 
of the Projects though they were already covered un der IWDP (2002-10) as detailed 
below: 
Table No.2.4.3: Projects implemented by NEPED already covered by IWDP 
(` in lakh) 
 
Sl. No. District Name of 
village 
Reference to 
IWDP Project 
number  
Expenditure 
incurred by 
NEPED 
1.   Kohima  Meriema IV 35.44 
2.   Kohima Tuophema IV 36.96 
3.   Mokokchung Mangmetong II 37.35 
4.   Wokha Hanku V 24.72 
5.   Wokha  Yimpang I 35.36 
6.   Wokha Okotso II 38.20 
7.   Mon Phuktong I 26.75 
8.   Mon Yuching I 26.05 
9.   Mon Chen Wetnyu I 38.14 
10.   Phek Thetsumi II 36.74 
11.   Zunheboto Lukikhe I 21.51 
12.   Tuensang Sangsomong I 24.60 
13.   Tuensang Litem I 25.84 
14.   Tuensang Yemrup VI 21.23 
15.   Tuensang Kuthur I 34.99 
16.   Tuensang Chimonger I 35.22 
17.   Tuensang Yakhao II 20.24 
18.   Tuensang  Chessore I 35.41 
19.   Longleng Kanching I 39.03 
Total 593.78 
As could be seen from the table above, 19 Project V illages selected by NEPED, 
involving an expenditure of ` 593.78 lakh, were already watershed development 
works undertaken under IWDP. Thus, these 19 village s were not eligible to be 
selected for implementation of WDPSCA.  
Thus, due to lack of coordination between various D epartments, 33 ineligible villages 
were selected for implementation of the schemes res ulting in incurring an expenditure 
of ` 1322.46 lakh on the same villages where schemes und er other programmes had 
already been taken up which was in violation of ext ant orders of the Government of 

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
109 
 
India. Besides, the possibility of incurring expend iture twice on the same scheme 
cannot be ruled out. 
2.4.7.2 Financial Management 
Watershed Development Project in Shifting Cultivati on Areas (WDPSCA) and 
National Watershed Development Programme for Rainfe d Areas (NWDPRA) were 
hundred per cent  funded by Government of India (GoI) through Additi onal Central 
Assistance to the State Budget. Expenditure for Int egrated Watershed Development 
Programme (IWDP) and Integrated Watershed Managemen t Programme (IWMP) was 
shared between GoI and GoN on a 90:10 basis. Positi on of 
 expenditure incurred on 
implementation of watershed projects for the period covered by audit is given below: 
Table No. 2.4.4: Position of expenditure incurred on implementation of 
watershed projects during 2007-12 
(` in lakh) 
Year WDPSCA 
(NEPED) 
WDPSCA (DSWC) NWDPRA IWDP IWMP Total 
2007-08 300.00 500.00 881.72 3827.85 0 5509.57 
2008-09 250.00 550.00 900.00 2731.21 0 4431.21 
2009-10 240.00 480.00 950.00 996.17 858.69 3524.86 
2010 -11  275.00  575.00  1460.00  60.15  2997.64  5367.79 
2011 -12  350.00  800.00  1030.00  0.00  6262.26  8442.26 
Total 1415.00 2905.00 5221.72 7615.38 10118.59 27275.69 
(Source: Departmental figures) 
Proper financial management through budgetary contr ols and adherence to financial 
rules are essential for optimal utilisation of reso urces. Audit findings related to 
availability of funds, timely release etc are discussed in the following paragraphs.  
2.4.7.2.1 Delay in release of funds by GoN resultin g in short receipt of funds 
from GoI 
(i)  For implementation of WDPSCA, the GoI releases  the funds to the GoN 
which releases it to the DoSWC. The DoSWC releases the funds to the DSCOs. The 
DSCOs in turn releases it to the Watershed Committees (WC) at the project level. 
As per para 5.1 of the Operational Guidelines for W DPSCA issued by GoI, funds 
would be released to States from GoI, preferably in  two installments (April and 
October). The State Government should release funds  to the implementing agency 
within two weeks from the date of release by GoI.  
Position of requirement of funds as per DPRs and fu nds received by DSWC under 
WDPSCA during 2007-12 is given in the following table: 
 
 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
110 
Table No. 2.4.5: Position of requirement and receipt of funds under WDPSCA 
during 2007-12 
(` in lakh) 
Year Funds required as 
per DPR 
Funds 
received 
Short (-)/ excess (+) receipt compared 
to requirement for the year 
2007-08 500.00 500.00 00.00 
2008-09 800.00 550.00 (-) 250.00 
2009-10 800.00 480.00 (-) 320.00 
2010-11 700.00 575.00 (-) 125.00 
2011-12 700.00 800.00 (+) 100.00 
Total 3500.00 2905.00 (-) 595.00 
(Source : DSWC figures) 
As could be seen from the table above, against the requirement of ` 3500.00 lakh only 
an amount of ` 2905.00 lakh was released to DSWC for implementation of WDPSCA 
during 2007-12. There was a shortfall to the tune o f ` 595.00 lakh in the WDPSCA 
Projects implemented by the DSWC.  
Audit scrutiny revealed that there were delays rang ing from 1 month to 8 months 
(Appendix –2.4.1 ) in releasing the fund by the GoN to the DSWC. Besi des, delay in 
release of funds affected the timely submission of UCs to the GoI resulting in short 
receipt of funds to the tune of ` 595.00 lakh by the DSWC.  
In reply (December 2012) the DSWC stated that short fall of funds was due to non-
release of fund by the GoI. The fact, however remai ns that the non-release of fund by 
GoI was due to failure of the DSWC to furnish UCs for the funds released by the GoI. 
(ii) After receipt of funds from the Finance Depart ment there was also delay in 
release of funds by the DoSWC to DSCOs ranging from  1 month to 3 months  
(Appendix -2.4.1 ). 
While accepting the facts (December 2012) the DSWC stated that delay in submission 
of completion certificates by the DSCOs resulted in  delay in release of funds to the 
DSCOs. The fact however, remains that GoI had set c lear time schedules for release 
of fund to the implementing agencies and these schedules were not adhered to.  
2.4.7.2.2  Short release of State share 
GoI had during 2007-12 released ` 16610.02 as its share for IWDP and IWMP. The 
share of GoN due to be released and amount actually  released is given in the 
following table:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
111 
 
Table No. 2.4.6 Short release of state share under IWDP ad IWMP 
(`` ``     in lakh) 
Schemes  Year Funds 
released 
by GoI 
Share of 
GoN due to 
be released  
Funds 
released by 
GoN 
Less 
released(-)/ 
excess 
released (+)  
IWDP 2007-08 3527.85  391.98  300.00  (-) 91.98  
2008-09 2616.21  290.69  115.00  (-) 175.69  
2009 -10  952.02  105.78  44.15  (-) 61.63  
2010 -11  44.00  4.89  16.15  (+) 11.26  
Total 7140.08  793.34  475.3  (-) 318.04  
IWMP  2009 -10  856.41  95.16  0.00  (-)95.16  
2010 -11  2671.24  296.80  325.46  (+) 28.66  
2011-12 5942.29  660.25  317.71  (-) 342.54  
Total  9469.94  1052.21  643.17  (-) 409.04  
Grant Total 16610.02  1845.55  1118.47  (-) 727.08  
As could be seen from the table, against a total am ount of ` 1845.55 lakh, GoN 
released only ` 1118.47 lakh during 2007-12. Thus, there was a shor t release of State 
share to the tune of ` 727.08 lakh which is likely to adversely affect the  
implementation of the Programmes to that extent. 
2.4.7.2.3 Suspected misappropriation  
DoA was disbursing funds partially in cash and partially though bank drafts. Similarly 
DAOs were disbursing funds to the WCs partially in cash and partially through Bank. 
DoA had incurred an expenditure of ` 112.80 lakh towards honorarium to Secretary 
of WC against 120 projects during the 11th five yea r plan (2007-12) in the State. Out 
of this, an amount of ` 9.36 lakh was shown as paid to the 13 NWDPRA projec ts. 
However, scrutiny of records of the projects reveal ed that no honorarium was 
received by the WC.  
Since payments made to the DAOs by DoA and subseque ntly by DAOs to the WC in 
selected Districts were released partially in cash, chances of the amount of ` 9.36 lakh 
being misappropriated could not be ruled out. Besid es, genuineness of the payment of 
` 103.44 lakh towards honorarium to the WC secretarie s, in the remaining 107 
projects 
 in the State also remains doubtful and requires further investigation. 
In reply the DA stated that due to improper mainten ance of records at WC level, the 
Secretary of the WC could not reply to audit about the  receipt of honorarium. 
2.4.7.2.4 Short receipt of funds by WCs 
Under IWMP payments to the WCs were released in cas h in all test checked projects. 
An amount of ` 200.34 lakh was released by PIAs to 12
56  WCs whose accounts were 
                                                 
56  (i) Chingmilen, (ii) Chare, (iii) Yajang, (iv) Molong yimsen/Loyong, (v) Changtongyayimsen,  
(vi) Longkong, (vii) Singrijan, (viii) Sochunuma, (ix) Pher ima, (x) Medziphema, (xi) Kidima and  
(xii) Kezoma. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
112 
test checked. Position of funds received by the WCs  whose accounts were test 
checked, in each of the four districts are given below: 
Table No. 2.4. 7: Short receipt of funds under IWMP 
(` in lakh) 
District Funds disbursed 
as per PIA records  
Funds received as 
per WC records 
Difference  
Tuensang 26.81 2.00 24.81 
Mokokchung  80.26 9.56 70.70 
Dimapur 63.48 15.99 47.49 
Kohima 29.79 4.10 25.69 
Total 200.34 31.65 168.69 
As could be seen from the table No.8 above, against  ` 200.34 lakh released to WCs, 
only ` 31.65 lakh (15.80 per cent ) was received by them. Thus, there was a short 
receipt of funds to the tune of ` 168.69 lakh  by  the WCs. Since the funds were 
disbursed in cash, chances of the same being misapp ropriated/diverted could not be 
ruled out.  
In response to audit query the DoLR stated that the  WCs had declared or showed in 
their records only the cash received by them wherea s the balance amount which was 
utilised for purchase of planting materials had not  been indicated. The DoLR added 
that in fact the planting material was to be raised  by the beneficiaries themselves, but 
since most of them did not have nurseries, they ent rusted the field staff to arrange 
material at negotiated rate/ market rate from the a vailable nurseries. In the absence of 
vital information such as quantity and rate of proc urement of planting material, audit 
could  not assess the expenditure involved in procurement of planting material.  
2.4.7.3 Project implementation 
As per guidelines, the targeted areas were to be tr eated on a watershed basis with 
various measures to protect and develop the hill sl opes of jhum areas and to reduce 
further land degradation process, within a period o f five years. The activities include 
measures to reduce soil erosion, irrigation and ground water re-charging.  
Position of watershed projects implemented during t he period covered by Audit is 
given below: 
Table No. 2.4.8: Position of projects implemented during 2007-12. 
Name of 
Scheme 
Ongoing as 
of April 
2007 
New projects 
taken up during 
2007-12 
Total Completed 
projects as 
of March 
2012 
Incomplete 
projects 
NWDPRA  0 120 120 120 0 
WDPSCA 63 44 107 107 0 
IWDP 35 0 35 35 0 
IWMP 0 61 61 0 61 
Total 98 225 323 262 61 

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
113 
 
Out of 323 projects taken up during 2007-12, 262 pr ojects were completed as of 
March 2012. The incomplete projects were under IWMP  and were started during 
2009-12 with a stipulated completion period of five years from the date of starting. 
Audit findings on implementation of various watersh ed development projects are 
discussed in the following paragraphs. 
2.4.7.3.1 Achievement of targets 
(a) Out of 35000 hectares (ha) targeted for treatme nt by DSWC under WDPSCA, 
at a cost of ` 3500 lakh, only 25590 ha involving an expenditure o f ` 2905 lakh, 
could be treated during 2007-12. Thus, the area tre ated was 26.89 per cent  less than 
targeted. Short receipt of funds from the GoI as di scussed in Paragraph  2.4.7.2.1 , and 
change of cost ceiling from ` 10000 to ` 12000 during 2009-10 were the reasons for 
underachievement. The DSWC also did not take any ef fective steps to ensure 
availability of additional funds to achieve the target within the project period. As there 
was no assurance of additional funds, achievement of the targets remained doubtful.  
(b) Out of 60,700 hectares (ha) targeted for treatm ent under NWDPRA, at a cost 
of ` 5,260.50 lakh, 56,378 ha incurring an expenditure o f ` 5,221.72 lakh, could be 
treated during 2007-12. Thus, not only was the area  treated less than what was 
targeted by 7.12 per cent but the treatment cost also increased to ` 9,262 per ha. from 
` 8,666 per ha projected in the strategic plan. The D A did not take any effective steps 
to ensure availability of additional funds to achieve the target.  
2.4.7.3.2 Adoption of ridge to valley strategy 
Watershed projects were to be implemented over a pe riod of five years by adopting 
 
ridge to valley strategy . In the first year soil and water conservation activ ities were to 
be carried out in the upper reaches of the watershe ds. In the second and third year 
water conservation works and other activities were to be carried out in lower reaches. 
Activities carried out in the first year in the low er reaches, would have limited 
effectiveness as these would be susceptible to damage and choking due to soil flowing 
downwards with rain water from the top as soil cons ervation works on upper reaches 
had not been carried out earlier.  
The sequence of activities was neither properly pro vided in the project plans nor were 
there any evidence to establish that this was being  followed. Hence, the projects 
implemented without following the adopted strategy resulted in non-achievement of 
the desired objectives. Illustrative examples (i) W HS constructed at lower reaches in 
the Atashinu (WDPSCA) Project, Mokokchung District choked with soil. and (ii) 
WHS near Chathe river, in the lower reaches of the watershed constructed under 
IWDP Domukhiya Village noticed during a joint physi cal verification (August 2012) 
are given in the following photographs: 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
114 
  
WHS constructed in the lower reaches choked with so il. 
Atashinu (WDPSCA) Project, Mokokchung District. 
Photograph taken during August 2012 
WHS near Chathe river, in the lower reaches of the 
watershed constructed under IWDP Domukhiya 
Village. Photograph taken during August 2012 
2.4.7.3.3 Idle expenditure due to abandoned project  area 
One of the main objectives of the watershed develop ment programes was 
enhancement of both agriculture productivity and pr oduction in a sustainable manner 
and also to provide sustainable livelihood to benef iciary farmers. The DA incurred an 
expenditure of ` 29.12 lakh (2007-12) under NWDPRA in Boktowong Proj ect under 
Tuensang District.  
 
Photographs showing land developed under NWDPRA (Bokotwang proj ect) in Tuensang District 
abandoned due to shifting cultivation. (Photograph taken dur ing August 2012) 
As could be seen from the photographs above, during  a joint physical verification 
(August 2012) by audit and the DA officials it was observed that the project nursery 
and farm land where land development activities wer e carried out were abandoned 
and the farming activities were shifted to a new lo cation due to Jhum practice. 
Expenditure of ` 29.19 lakh remained idle due to shifting of cultiva tion from the 
project area. 
2.4.7.3.4 Payment made without actual execution  
Beneficiaries under Watershed Development Programmes were provided with subsidy 
for works executed by them. Under WDPSCA 
 and NWDPRA, funds were drawn by  
DDOs of DSWC and DA respectively on the basis of certified bills submitted by PIAs 
Photograph No.2.4.1 Photograph No.2.4.2 
Photograph No.2.4.3 

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
115 
 
against completed works. Under IWMP, funds were rel eased to PIAs as per allocation 
and the PIA’s in turn release the funds to the WCs on the basis of spot verification 
and work completion certificate issued by the WDT Member in-charge of the WC. 
(a) Records maintained by DoSWC showed payment of ` 36.29 lakh under 
Development Component pertaining to six test-checke d projects. However, joint 
physical verification (July –August 2012) of the pr oject by audit and the DSWC 
officials revealed discrepancies between bill drawn  and actual work executed in six 
components as detailed below:  
Table No.2.4.9: Payment released on unexecuted works - WDPSCA 
(` ` ` ` In lakh ) 
Name of 
component 
Bill drawn by DoSWC Actually executed Difference between 
bill drawn and actual 
execution  
Quantity Money 
value (MV)  
Quantity MV Quantity MV 
Piggery  255 unit  10.20  42 unit  1.68  213 unit  8.52  
Poultry 11 unit 0.77 7 unit 0.49 4 unit 0.28 
GBS 262 unit 3.93 14 unit 0.21 248 unit 3.72 
Homestead 
garden 
105 unit 4.20 5 unit 0.20 100 unit 4.00 
Water harvesting 
structure 
44 unit 6.60 29 unit 4.35 15 unit 2.25 
Drainage 105930 
metres 
10.59 19300 
metres 
1.93 86630 
metres 
8.66 
Grand total   36.29  8.86  27.43 
As could be seen from the table above, against work s valuing ` 36.29 lakh claimed to 
have been executed only works valuing ` 8.86 lakh were actually executed and works 
valuing ` 27.43 lakh remained unexecuted. Thus, it is eviden t that the amount was 
drawn from the Government account on the basis of f alse completion certificates. 
Since the payments were made in cash, audit could n ot ascertain the recipients of 
` 27.43 lakh paid against the unexecuted works. As su ch, the chances of the amount 
being misappropriated cannot be ruled out.  
(b) Similarly, scrutiny of bills and vouchers of th e DoA showed that payment of 
` 100.43 lakh was made to 12 projects in the four dis tricts test-checked, against five 
sub-components under development component. Results  of cross check of the records 
maintained at the project level while conducting jo int physical verification in the 12 
projects are as shown in the following table: 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
116 
Table No 2.4.10: Payments released on unexecuted works - NWDPRA 
(` in lakh) 
Name of component As per Bill draw by 
DoA 
Actually 
Implemented 
Difference 
Physical 
(in Units) 
Money 
Value 
Physical 
(In units) 
Money 
Value 
Physical 
(In units) 
Money 
Value 
Water Harvesting 
Structure (WHS) 
184 20.64 43 4.92 141 15.72 
Dug out pond  1085  19.53  0 0 1085  19.53  
Dug out ponds for 
fish culture 
143 42.90 41 11.70 102 31.20 
Small livestock 61 3.66 50 3.00 11 0.66 
Total 1473 86.73 134 19.62 1339 67.11 
As could be seen from the table No. 10 above, out o f payment against 1473 units 
under 4 sub-components 1339 units involving an amou nt ` 67.11 lakh were not 
actually executed (Appendix 2.4.2 ). Thus, the bills prepared and drawn for payment at 
the Directorate level were not commensurate with actual execution of works at project 
level and 77.38 per cent of funds drawn against those works were actually no t utlised 
for execution of work. As the amounts were transfer red partially through bank and 
partially in cash, chances of the amount being misappropriated cannot be ruled out.  
The DA in reply stated that situation and circumsta nces compelled the Department to 
alter the components and sub-components and hence a ll the works were not executed 
as per bills. The fact however, remains that the bi lls were prepared certifying the 
works as completed and therefore there was no scope for any variation.  
(c) Joint physical verification conducted by audit and the PIA officials (July-
September 2012) of 221 works under IWMP certified a s completed as per records 
maintained by the PIAs, valuing ` 50.34 lakh showed that only 57 works valuing 
` 11.46 lakh were actually executed. A total of 164 w orks valuing ` 38.88 lakh,  were 
actually not executed (Appendix 2.4.3 ).  
Thus, it is evident that the funds were released on  the basis of incorrect verification 
reports. Since the payments were made in cash, audi t could not ascertain the 
recipients of ` 38.88 lakh against unexecuted works and the chances  of the funds 
being misappropriated cannot be ruled out. 
The DLR in its reply (January 2013) stated that the  Self Help Groups (SHGs) were 
under the process of registration and same were com pleted now. However, no 
documentary evidence in support of the claim was ma de available to Audit. 
Regarding other items of works, the DLR stated that  the names used by the 
beneficiaries for various works such as Water Harve sting Structure (WHS), Bench 
Terracing etc. were different from the names used i n the records of DLR and 
therefore, all items of works could not be shown to  Audit. However, the fact remains 
that the officials of the PIA who had verified the works earlier, were also present at 
the time of joint physical verification and could n ot identify the work at the time of 
joint physical verification.  

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
117 
 
2.4.7.4 Post Implementation Measures 
 
2.4.7.4.1 Non-preparation of project completion rep orts 
Guidelines require that during Consolidation and Wi thdrawal Phase, project 
completion reports were to be prepared and the asse ts created handed over to the 
WCs/ Village Councils. However, under WDPSCA, NWDPR A and IWDP after 
completion of the project period, no project comple tion reports were prepared in any 
of the projects test-checked. 
2.4.7.4.2 Lack of institutional arrangements for po st project operations 
(a)  SHGs and User Groups were essential for contin uous maintenance of the 
assets created. The members would be those who deri ve direct benefits from the 
watershed work and activity. The WC with the help o f the WDT was to facilitate 
resource use agreements among the User Groups. Thos e agreements were to be 
worked out before the concerned work was undertaken  and the User Groups would be 
responsible for the operation and maintenance of al l the assets created. However, no 
User Groups were formed in any of the projects test -checked under WDPSCA, 
NWDPRA and IWDP.  
 (b) Audit enquiries revealed that no arrangements had been made to create 
revolving fund or watershed development fund under WDPSCA, NWDPRA and 
IWDP. Arrangements for credit and technical support  from external institutions were 
also not made in respect of already completed projects.  
Further, Watershed Development Fund which was manda tory under guidelines, was 
also not constituted under WDPSCA, NWDPRA and IWDP.  The guidelines also 
provide for levying of user charges against Common Property Resources (CPR) 
developed under WDPSCA, NWDPRA and IWDP. The user c harges thus, collected 
were to be credited to the watershed development fu nd. However, there was no 
evidence to suggest that any efforts were made to i dentify and document the CPR for 
levying user charges.  
Further it was observed that no arrangements were m ade to provide credit and 
technical support from external institutions. In th e absence of minimum required 
infrastructure for sustainable and self sufficient post project operation mechanism, 
continued maintenance of the assets created remains  doubtful under WDPSCA, 
NWDPRA and IWDP projects. Some illustrative cases i n this regard are detailed 
below: 
2.4.7.4.3 Abandoned projects  
(a) DSWC had incurred an expenditure of ` 3.60 lakh (2007-12) on development 
of project nursery-cum-demonstration plot at Atashi nu Project. The project period 
was over in March 2012. During a joint physical ver ification of the project during 
August 2012 by audit and DSWC officials, the nurser y-cum-demonstration plot was 
found abandoned as can be seen from the following photographs:  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
118 
 
 
 
 
As could be seen from the photographs above, the pr oject nursery was functional 
during the project period (photograph-I). However, due to lack of sufficient 
institutional mechanism for post project operations , the nursery-cum-demonstration 
plot was abandoned (photographs II, III &IV). The D SWC in its reply (December 
2012) admitted the fact. 
(b)  During physical verification of projects under  IWDP by audit and the PIA 
officials, the following works were found to have been abandoned. 
 
 
 
It could be seen from the photographs above, that t he assets were not in use. No 
reasons were on record for the abandonment of the a ssets. As per records made 
Photograph No.2.4.4 
Photograph of WDPSCA Atashinu project 
nursery during 2010-11 (photograph 
provided by DSWC)
 
Photograph of WDPSCA Atashinu project 
nursery during August 2012  
Photograph of WDPSCA Atashinu project nursery during August 2012  
Photograph No.2.4.5 Photograph No.2.4.6 
Mokokchung IWDP – III Areca plate unit at 
Chungtiyayimsen (not functional) : Photograph 
taken on 9 th  August 2012  
Mokokchung IWDP- III Lemon grass distillation unit (not 
functional) at Longphayimsen: Photograph taken on 9 th  
August 2012  
Photograph No.2.4.8 Photograph No.2.4.7 

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
119 
 
available to audit by the PIAs, the works 
executed were different from the 
photographs shown above. 
In reply (January 2013) the DLR stated 
that the projects were abandoned as the 
same were not profitable. The fact 
however, remains that the DLR before 
sanctioning the projects could have 
analysed the profitability and 
sustainability of the same 
2.4.7.4.4 Impact analysis of the programme 
Apart from physical targets to be achieved, no targ ets were fixed against growth in 
agriculture productivity, improvement in soil ferti lity, reduction in jhum practice and 
other socio-economic parameters, under any of the w atershed development 
programmes.  
No impact analysis studies were conducted by any ex ternal agency to assess the 
impact of the projects implemented on the lives of the beneficiaries in the test-
checked projects under NWDPRA and WDPSCA. Under IWD P, evaluation by 
external evaluators was carried out in all projects
 during 2010-12. However, the 
evaluation reports were yet to be compiled and ther efore, could not be verified in 
audit. 
Information such as pre and post observation of gro und water level, change in 
cropping pattern, change in productivity, increase in area of irrigation and reduction in 
area of wasteland etc. in the project area had not been maintained at any level. 
Internal study conducted by NEPED on jhum practicin g villages revealed that out of a 
sample size of 119 villages, 27 per cent  of villages had no perceptible change in their 
practice and 10 per cent villages showed increase in area under Jhum.  
Thus, the programme WDPSCA which was focused on reducing jhum practice had no 
impact on 37 per cent of the villages surveyed by NEPED.  
2.4.7.5 Monitoring and evaluation  
Guidelines require that regular monitoring of the p rojects were to be carried out at 
each stage and the PIA was to submit quarterly prog ress reports duly countersigned 
by the Watershed Committee president for further su bmission to the SLNA . Further, 
the SLNA  was to ensure that the system of internal monitorin g by project teams, 
progress monitoring, self monitoring by communities  and social audit were followed 
at the appropriate levels. 
None of the 40 projects test-checked could furnish any records to show that the self 
monitoring and social audit were conducted. However , WC of Chingmilen village 
under IWMP Tuensang- III, had nominated a team for social audit and the team was 
auditing the accounts of the WC and SHGs under the WC. Except this village no other 
Dimapur IWDP: Abandoned lemon grass distillation 
unit at Seithekima: Photographed on 21 
st  August 2012 
Photograph No.2.4.9 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
120 
WCs test-checked could furnish any records to show that self monitoring and social 
audits were conducted. No quarterly progress report s countersigned by the WCs were 
submitted to the PIAs. Similarly, no such reports w ere submitted to the State level 
nodal officers/SLNA/SLSC by the PIAs. 
DoSWC was supplying planting materials to the benef iciaries. However, there was no 
mechanism to ascertain quality of the planting mate rials supplied. There were no 
records regarding mortality and replacement of plan ting materials supplied by the 
DoSWC. 
Further, bills were passed and payments were releas ed without actually verifying the 
works. In response to an audit query, the DSWC stat ed that only 30 to 40 per cent  of 
the works were verified by the DSWC. No evaluation of the programme 
implementation was done at any point of time.  
Thus, there was a deficiency in monitoring mechanis m. A few illustrative cases are 
discussed below: 
2.4.7.5.1 Verification of works 
(a) Under NWDPRA a strategic plan indicating cost c eilings against each item of 
work, was prepared. However, detailed specification s of the works were not recorded 
in the strategic plan. As per instructions, all wor ks executed should be measured and 
details of measurement should be recorded in the Me asurement Book (MB) which 
would form the basis for payments.  
However, none of the WCs or DAOs test-checked follo wed the system of measuring 
the works nor maintained any MBs. In the absence of  recorded measurements of 
works, actual execution or works as per requirement  and specification as well as 
correctness of payment in respect of works amountin g to ` 314.32 lakh spent on 
works relating to (i) arable land, (ii) non-arable land and (iii) drainage lines, under 
development component could not be ascertained in audit. 
In reply the DA accepted (December 2012) the fact a nd stated that the MBs and 
detailed estimates would be maintained in future. 
(b) Under IWMP Audit scrutiny of the records and a joint physical verification by 
audit and the PIA officials in test-checked WCs rev ealed that the Entry Point 
Activities (EPA) as envisaged in the DPR were actua lly not taken up in the following 
cases.  
Table No. 2.4.11 Discrepancies between works certified in the verification report and 
actually executed  
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Village 
EPA as per Amount 
paid ( ` in 
lakh) 
Verification report/ 
payment register of 
the PIA 
DPR Joint physical 
verification by audit 
and PIA officials 
1 Razaphe/ 
Khiamnok 
Water Harvesting 
Structure (WHS) 
Water 
Harvesting Pond 
Culvert 2.10 
2 Sochunuma  WHP WHP Water pipe line 2.40 
3 Pherima  Waiting shed  Water reservoir 
tank 
Water reservoir tank  2.20  

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
121 
 
As could be seen from the table above, EPAs execute d were different from DPR. The 
DPR did not indicate the same though they were prep ared at a later date than the date 
of execution of EPA. Photographs of the EPAs in res pect of three test-checked WCs 
are given below: 
 
 
As could be seen from the 
photographs the EPAs executed in 
Razaphe and Sochunuma were 
different from both verification 
report/payment register and DPR. In 
the case of Pherima, EPA executed 
was different from verification report/ 
payment register 
The above discrepancy is an indicator 
of deficiencies in the monitoring 
mechanism. In the absence of detailed estimate for the EPA executed, audit could not 
assess the financial implication due to the change in the scope of work. In its reply, 
the DLR admitted (January 2013) the facts. 
Thus, the monitoring mechanism was insufficient to ensure proper implementation of 
the Progrrammes. 
2.4.7.6  Conclusion 
Watershed management programmes implemented by all the four agencies were 
implemented in an isolated manner. Selection of pro ject villages was not done in 
consultation with other departments executing water shed management programmes. 
Funds were not released in time and were not suffic ient. Even though there was no 
land left out in the State for undertaking Watershe d Development, the Departments 
continued approving projects on land which had alre ady been taken up earlier instead 
of concentrating on continued operation and mainten ance of assets created. This not 
only resulted in created assets becoming defunct ov er the years due to lack of 
Culvert constructed under EPA Razaphe village Water Reservoir constructed under EPA- 
Pherima village 
Water pipeline constructed under EPA Sochunuma 
village  
Photograph No.2.4.10 Photograph No.2.4.11 
Photograph No.2.4.12 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
122 
maintenance but also resulted in release of payment s for works which were not 
executed. Monitoring mechanism under the programmes  was also inadequate. There 
was no system to carry out any impact analysis of the Programmes. 
Recommendations 
/head2right A nodal Department/ Agency which shall maintain com plete data on 
watershed activities carried out in the State, may be entrusted the work of 
coordination of watershed development activities in order to avoid overlapping 
of activities and to ensure only eligible areas are  selected for implementation 
of the Programmes;  
/head2right Before taking up projects, timely and adequate avai lability of funds should be 
ensured so that the projects once started would be completed in time and 
reduce chances of cost escalation;  
/head2right Assets created under the programmes may be document ed and their proper 
maintenance and utilisation ensured by handing over  the completed projects to 
WCs and channelising funds for operation and maintenance; 
/head2right There should be an institutional mechanism to ensur e collection and 
maintenance of pre and post- project data/ informat ion of various parameters 
relevant for impact analysis of the programme and for future planning; 
/head2right Monitoring mechanism may be strengthened at grass r oot level, by 
encouraging the practice of social audit adopted by  Chingmilen village in all 
other similar projects for better monitoring and tr ansparency in 
implementation of the programmes. 
PUBLIC HEALTH ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT 
 
2.5 Suspected misappropriation of Stores 
Improper inventory control and non-observance of th e provisions of NPWD code 
resulted in stores valuing `` ``    198.07 lakh remaining out of Government Account. 
The possibility of misappropriation of the material s cannot be ruled out. This 
matter therefore, needs further investigation. 
The Nagaland Public Works Department Code (NPWD Cod e) lays down the 
procedures to be followed in respect of inventory c ontrol in the departments, which 
inter-alia provides that as soon as any discrepancy  is noticed in stock during annual 
physical verification, the same should be set right in the books of accounts. 
Test-check (February 2010) of the Annual Stock Retu rn for the period ending 
September, 2009 in the Public Health Engineering Department (PHED), Rural 
  

Chapter-II Economic Sector 
 
123 
 
Division, Kohima showed that there was closing bala nce of four items of G.I. pipes 57  
valued at ` 198.07 lakh which were brought forward from the pr evious year without 
any issue. Audit therefore, conducted a Joint Physi cal verification of the Stores to 
ascertain the actual existence of those items. Duri ng joint physical verification 
(February 2010) by audit along with the Executive E ngineer (EE) and the Sub 
Divisional Officer in-charge of Store at Kohima, it  was noticed that those four items 
were not physically available in the store, though there was no issue of those items till 
February 2010. 
The EE in reply stated (July 2012) that pipes of tw o different sizes valued at ` 38.37 
lakh were utilised for emergency works, pipes value d at ` 46.30 lakh were given as 
loan and the remaining G.I pipes valued at ` 113.39 lakh were not received from the 
PHED Central Store, Dimapur. The EE also forwarded the Annual Stock Returns for 
the period ended September 2010 and 2011 wherein th e stock of the said pipes were 
brought forward as it is without any change. 
The reply of the Department is not acceptable as the materials were shown as received 
by the Division from Central Store, Dimapur and acc ounted for in the stock and 
therefore, the contention that the pipes were not r eceived from the Central Store does 
not hold good. Further, issue of some of the pipes for emergency works and on loan 
 
could neither be substantiated with records nor were entered in the stock register. 
Thus, improper inventory control and non-observance  of the provisions of NPWD 
code resulted in stores valuing `198.07 lakh remaining out of Government Account. 
The possibility of misappropriation of the material s cannot be ruled out. This matter 
therefore, needs further investigation. 
The matter was reported to the Government (August 2 012), reply had not been 
received (February 2013). 
                                                 
57  
 
Sl No. Particulars Per Unit/ 
Per Mtrs 
Closing 
Balance 
Issue Rate 
(in Rs.) 
Total Value 
(in Rs.) 
1 15 mm G.I Pipe (H) Per Unit 17806.80 149.26 26578 43 
2 25 mm G.I Pipe (H) Per Unit 18180 241.94 4398469 
3 40 mm G.I Pipe (H) Per Unit 24491.56 283.40 69409 08 
4 65 mm G.I Pipe (H) Per Unit 10973.53 529.45 58099 35 
TOTAL 1,98,07,155 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
ECONOMIC SECTOR (PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS) 
 
3.1 Introduction 
3.1.1 The State Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) consist  of State Government 
Companies and Statutory Corporations. The state PSU s are established to carry out 
activities of commercial nature keeping in view the  welfare of people. In Nagaland there 
were six State PSUs (all Government companies) of w hich, one Government company 
was non-working 1. The state working PSUs registered a turnover of ` 5.36 crore as per 
their latest annual accounts finalised as on 31 Oct ober 2012. The turnover was 0.04 per 
cent  of State Gross Domestic Product.  The state workin g PSUs incurred an overall loss 
of ` 2.50 crore in the aggregate for 2011-12 as per their latest finalized accounts. The five 
working PSUs had 618 employees as on 31 March 2012.  During 2011-12, neither any 
new PSU was established nor was any existing PSUs closed down. 
3.2 Audit Mandate 
3.2.1  Audit of Government Companies is governed by Secti on 619 of Companies Act, 
1956.  As per Section 617 of the Companies Act 1956 , a Government company is one in 
which not less than 51 per cent of paid up capital is held by Government.  A Govern ment 
company includes a subsidiary of a Government compa ny.  Further, a company in which 
51 per cent  of the paid up capital is held in any combination by Government(s), 
Government Companies and Corporations controlled by  Government(s) is treated as if it 
were a Government company (deemed Government compan y) as per Section 619-B of 
the  Companies Act.  However, there was no 619-B company in Nagaland. 
3.2.2 The accounts of the State Government companies (as  defined in Section 617 of 
Companies Act, 1956) are audited by Statutory Auditor, who is appointed by Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India (CAG) as per provision s of Section 619 (2) of the 
Companies Act, 1956.  These accounts are also subje ct to supplementary audit conducted 
by CAG as per the provisions of Section 619 of the Companies Act, 1956. 
  
                                                 
1 The accounts of non-working Company viz., Nagaland Sugar Mills Company Limited are in arrears for 
the last 34 years. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
126 
 
3.3 Investment in State PSUs 
3.3.1 As on 31 March 2012, the investment of State and Ce ntral Government (Capital 
and long term loans) in six PSUs was ` 82.67 crore as per details given below:  
Table No. 3.1 
(` ` ` ` in crore) 
Type of PSUs Government Companies 
Capital Long term loans  Total 
Working PSUs 30.02  47.69  77.71  
Non-working PSUs 4.96  0 4.96  
Total  34.98  47.69  82.67  
A summarised position of Government investment in S tate PSUs is detailed, in Appendix 
3.1. 
3.3.2  As on 31 March, 2012 of the total investment in St ate PSUs, 94 per cent was in 
five working PSUs and remaining 6 per cent  was in one non-working PSU.  The total 
investment consisted of 42 per  cent  towards capital and 58 per  cent  in long term loans.   
The investment has grown by 17.84 per cent from 
` 70.15 crore in 2007-08 to ` 82.67 
crore in 2011-12 as shown in graph below:- 
 
  
70.15 73.36 
70.01 
78.01 
82.67 
62 
64 
66 
68 
70 
72 
74 
76 
78 
80 
82 
84 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
In In In In vestment ` ` ` ` in crore 
Chart 3.1 
Investment (Capital and Long term loans) 

Chapter-III Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings) 
 
127 
 
3.3.3 The investments in various sectors at the end of 31 st  March 2008 and 31 st  March 
2012 are indicated below in the bar chart. 
 
3.4 Budgetary outgo, grants/subsidies, guarantees a nd loans 
3.4.1  The details regarding budgetary outgo towards equi ty, loans grants/subsidies, 
guarantees issued, loans written off, loans convert ed into equity and interest waived in 
respect of State PSUs are given in Appendix -3.2 . The summarised details for three years 
ended 2011-12 are given below: 
Table No. 3.2 
( `` ``    in crore) 
Sl. 
No  Particulars 
2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
No. of 
PSUs Amount No. of 
PSUs Amount  No. of 
PSUs Amount  
1 Equity capital outgo 
from budget 
02 1.75  03 1.45  02 1.60  
2 Loans outgo from 
Budget 
-- --  -- --  01 7.81  
3 Grants/subsidy outgo 04 12.99  04 17.25  05 17.20  
4 Total outgo (1+2+3)  14.74   18.70   26.61  
5 Loans written off -- --  -- --  -- --  
6 Total waiver (5 
above) 
-- -- 
 -- --  -- --  
7 Guarantees issued -- --  2 46.24  01 7.81  
3.4.2  The details regarding budgetary outgo towards equi ty, loans and grants/subsidies 
for past five years are given in the following graph: 
42.36 
55.41 
27.79 27.26 
0
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
2007-08 2011-12 
` ` ` ` in crore 
Chart 3.2 
Finance Sector Other Sector 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
128 
 
 
3.5 Reconciliation with Finance Accounts  
3.5.1 The figures in respect of equity, loans and guaran tees outstanding as per records of 
State PSUs should agree with that of figures appear ing in the Finance Accounts of the 
State. In case, the figures do not agree, the conce rned PSUs and the Finance department 
should carry out reconciliation and adjust the differences.  
The position in this regard as at 31 st  March 2012 is stated below: 
Table No.3.3 
(`` `` in crore) 
Investment in respect of 
Government of 
Nagaland 
Amount as per 
Finance Accounts  
Amount as per 
records of PSUs 
Difference 
Share Capital & 
debentures 
160.19 
 33.84  (+) 126.35 
Outstanding Loans &  
Guarantees 
Not Available 47.69  (-) 47.69 
Total  160.19  81.53  78.66 
3.5.2  Since the accounts of the working companies are in  arrears for the period ranging 
between one to thirteen years, actual amount invest ed by the State Government is taken on 
the basis of information provided by the PSUs. 
The difference seen above is pending reconciliation  for many years. Efforts are needed to 
be taken to clear the arrears in accounts and ensur e reconciliation between Finance 
Accounts and the accounts/record of PSUs as there i s a huge difference in figures of 
Finance Accounts and records of PSUs. 
17.42 
20.42 
14.74 
18.70 
26.61 
0.00 
5.00 
10.00 
15.00 
20.00 
25.00 
30.00 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
```` in crore 
Chart 3.3 
Budgetary outgo towards Equity, Loans and Grants/Subsidy 

Chapter-III Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings) 
 
129 
 
3.6 Performance of PSUs 
3.6.1  The financial results of PSUs, financial position and the working results of PSUs 
are detailed in Appendix-3.3 . A ratio of PSUs turnover to State GDP shows the e xtent of 
PSUs activities in the State economy.  Table below provides the details of working PSUs 
turnover and State GDP for the period 2007-08 to 2011-12 
Table No. 3.4 
(`` `` in crore) 
Particulars 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Turnover 3.70 3.51 4.06 18.06 5.36 
State GDP 8075.27 9436.07 10272.88  
(P) 2 
11121.00 
(Q) 3 
12064.53 
(A) 4 
Percentage of turnover to 
State GDP  
0.05 0.04 0.04 0.16 0.04 
(Source: Information furnished by the Directorate o f Economics and Statistics and statements 
furnished by the companies ) 
3.6.2  Losses incurred by State working PSUs during 2007- 08 to 2011-12 are given 
below in a bar chart. 
 
3.6.3  Some key parameters pertaining to State PSUs are g iven in the following table: 
  
                                                 
2 P = Provisional Estimate 
3 Q= Quick Estimate 
4 A = Advance Estimate 
0.00 
0.50 
1.00 
1.50 
2.00 
2.50 
3.00 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
1.33 1.36 
2.57 
2.07 
2.50 
```` in crore 
Chart 3.4 
Overall losses incurred during the year by five working PSUs 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
130 
 
Table No. 3.5 
(`` ``    in crore) 
Particulars 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Return on capital employed 
(per cent ) 
3.65 - - -- - 
Debt 40.29 44.11 39.09 45.64 47.69 
Turnover 3.70 3.51 4.06 18.06 5.36 
Debt/Turnover ratio 10.89:1 12.57:1 9.63:1 2.53:1 8 .90:1 
Accumulated losses 26.95 28.63 34.02 33.62 48.53 
From the above it is clear that the accumulated los ses are increasing every year. The 
Government is not getting any return on capital emp loyed. The losses of PSUs are 
generally attributable to deficiencies in managemen t, planning, running their operations 
and monitoring. 
Thus, steps are needed to be taken for better manag ement, operation and monitoring of 
the activities of the working State PSUs to arrest the gradual deterioration of their 
financial results. 
3.7 Arrears in finalisation of Accounts  
3.7.1 The accounts of the companies for every financial year are required to be 
finalized within six months from the close of the r elevant financial year under section 
166, 210, 240, 619 and 619-B of Companies Act, 1956 . The table below provides details 
of progress made by working PSUs in finalisation of accounts by September, 2012. 
Table No.3.6 
Sl. 
No. Particulars 2008-09  2009-10  2010-11  2011-12  
1 No. of working PSUs 5 5 5 5 
2 No. of accounts finalized  3 12 15 30 
3 No. of accounts in arrears 92 85 75 46 
4 Average arrear per PSU (3/1) 18.4 17.0 15 9.4 
5 No. of working PSUs with arrears in 
accounts 
5 5 5 5 
6 Extent of arrears (in years) 9 to 26 6 to 26 5 to  21 1 to 13 
3.7.1 The average number of accounts in arrears per work ing PSU has decreased from 
15 in 2010-11 to 9.4 in 2011-12 which shows a margi nal increase in finalisation of 
accounts but the progress is still at slow pace . All the PSUs need to take effective 
measures for early finalisation of backlog accounts  and make the accounts up-to-date.  
The PSUs should ensure that the accounts of each ye ar are finalised by 30 th  September so 
as to restrict further accumulation of arrears. In the absence of finalisation of accounts 
and their subsequent audit, it cannot be ensured wh ether the investment and expenditure 
incurred have been properly accounted for and the p urpose for which the amount was 

Chapter-III Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings) 
 
131 
 
invested has been achieved or not and the Governmen t investment in state PSUs remain 
outside the scrutiny of the state Legislature.  
3.7.2  In addition to above, the accounts of the only non -working PSU in the state were 
also in arrears for 34 years. As no purpose is serv ed by keeping this non-working 
company in existence, Government needs to expedite closing down of this company. 
3.7.3  The Administrative departments have responsibility  to oversee the activities of 
these entities and to ensure that the accounts are finalised and adopted by these PSUs 
within the prescribed period. During the year 2011- 12 the audit office convened meeting 
with the concerned administrative departments and o fficials of the Government regarding 
arrears in finalisation of accounts. However, adequ ate measures had not been taken by 
the Government and as a result the present net wort h of these PSUs could not be assessed 
in audit. 
3.8 Accounts Comments and Internal Audit  
3.8.1 Five working companies forwarded their 41 audited accounts to the Accountant 
General as on 31 st  October 2012. Of these 30 accounts were finalized as on 31 October, 
remaining 11 accounts are pending for selection for  supplementary audit/ issue of Non-
Review certificate. 
3.8.2  Out of 41 accounts received during the year, the S tatutory Auditor had given 
qualified certificates to 8 accounts and 33 accounts received unqualified certificates. 
INDUSTRIES AND COMMERCE DEPARTMENT 
 
NAGALAND INDUSTRIAL RAW MATERIALS & SUPPLY CORPORATION 
LIMITED 
 
3.9 Loss due to non filing of execution petition 
 
Failure on the part of Nagaland Industrial Raw Mate rials & Supply Corporation 
Limited, Dimapur to pursue the decree of court verd ict resulted in non-recovery and 
possible loss of `` `` 30.72 lakh.  
Nagaland Industrial Raw Materials and Supply Corpor ation Limited, (NIRMSC-
Company engaged (May 1985) M/S ICB and Company (ICB C), Kolkata as agent for 
supply mining timber (material) to Eastern Coalfiel ds  Limited (ECL) and Bharat 
Cocking Coal Limited (BCCL). As per the agreement b etween the Company and ICBC, 
ICBC was to sell material on behalf of the Company to the purchaser (ECL/BCCL).The 
agreement also provided that in case of rejection o f any material by the purchaser, the 
cost of rejected materials shall be borne by ICBC. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
132 
 
During the period from 1985-86 to 1995-96, the comp any,on the basis of details of sale 
furnished to it by ICBC, had made a payment of ` 296.25 lakh (including sales tax) to 
ICBC on account of material sold to ECL. However, after reconciliation (August 1996), it 
was found that the actual value of sale of material  to the purchaser amounted to ` 277.99 
lakh only (net value of rejected matrial amounting to ` 33.83 lakh). Thus, the Company 
had made an excess payment of ` 18.26 lakh to the ICBC which was not refunded by 
ICBC. ICBC had also not refunded an amount of ` 6.76 lakh on account of material 
rejected by the purchaser viz ECL. 
Similarly, the Company had made advance payments to  ICBC for supplying mining 
timber to BCCL during 1985-86 to 1988-89. However, while closing the business with 
BCCL in 1989, an amount of 
` 5.70 lakh, being advance payment made to ICBC, 
remained un-adjusted. 
Thus, the amount of 
` 30.72  lakh remained outstanding against ICBC on account o f 
excess advance payments and material(s) rejected by the purchasers . 
The Company requested (July –August 1996), ICBC to settle the outstanding dues but 
ICBC did not repay the outstanding amount. 
For recovery of the outstanding dues, the Company f iled suits No28/1997 and 29/1997 
against ICBC, in the Court of the Additional Deputy  Commissioner (Judicial), Dimapur. 
The court while disposing of the two money petions,  decreed (4.12.2007) that an amount 
of 
` 30.72 lakh be paid by ICBC to the Company within 60  days from the date of the 
order . 
During audit (April 2012), it was observed that the  Company had not pursued the Court 
order to ensure recovery of its dues from the defau lting party, as it had neither recovered 
outstanding amount within 60 days of the date of th e Court order nor had filed execution 
petition in the Court of Additional Deputy Commissi oner (Judicial) so far (January 
2013). The reasons for not filing execution petitio n for recovery of outstandingdues were 
neither found on record nor explained by the manage ment. The Management confirmed 
(October 2012) that no petition was made for execution of the decree. 
Moreover, inaction by the management in pursuing it s outstanding claim, despite court 
verdict in its favour, tantamounted to giving undue  favour to the defaulting party. Further 
delay in taking appropriate action may lead to the claim becoming time barred resulting 
in the loss of the claim. 
The Management confirmed (October 2012) that no pet ition been made for execution of 
the decree. 
Thus, failure of the Company to pursue the decree o f Court verdict has resulted in no-
recovery and possible loss of 
` 30.72 lakh.  

CHAPTER - IV  
 
REVENUE SECTOR 
 
4.1 General 
 
4.1.1 Trend of revenue receipts 
The tax and non-tax revenue raised by the Governmen t of Nagaland during the year 2011-12, 
the State’s share of net proceeds of divisible Unio n taxes and grant-in-aid received from the 
Government of India during the year and the corresp onding figures for the preceding four years 
are mentioned below: 
Table No.4.1.1 
(`` `` in crore) 
Sl. 
No.  Particulars 2007-08  2008-09  2009-10 2010-11  2011-12 
I Revenue raised by the State Government 
• Tax revenue 131.37 156.02 180.51 227.32 303.88 
• Non-tax revenue 119.48 180.55 126.35 183.14 232.95 
Total I 250.85 336.57 306.86 410.46 536.83 
II  Receipt from the Government of India  
• States share óf net 
proceeds of divisible 
Union taxes 
399.77 421.84 434.03 689.46 803.20 
• Grants-in-aid 2345.40 2642.48 2978.87 3900.07 4246.35 
Total II 2745.17 3064.32 3412.90 4589.53 5049.55 
III Total receipts of the State 
Government (I+II) 2996.02 3400.89 3719.76 4999.99 5586.38 
 Percentage of I to III 8 10 8 8 10 
The above table indicates that during the year 2011 -12, the revenue raised by the State 
Government ( ` 536.83 crore) was ten per cent of the total revenue  receipts against eight per 
cent in the preceding year.  The balance ninety per  cent of receipts during 2011-12 was from 
the Government of India. 
4.1.2 The following table presents the details of tax rev enue raised during the period 2007-
08 to 2011-12.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
134 
 
Table No.4.1.2 
(`` `` in crore)  
Sl 
No. Head of revenue 2007-08 2008-09  2009-10 2010-11  2011-12  
Percentage of 
increase (+) or 
decrease (-) in 
2011-12 over 
2010-11 
1 Sales Tax/VAT 94.79 114.70 132.22 167.22 231.12 ( +)38 
2 State Excise 2.83 3.34 3.13 3.00 3.36 (+)12 
3 Stamps and Registration 
Fees 
1.02 1.01 1.19 1.35 1.85 (+)37 
4 Taxes and duties on 
Electricity 
0.02  0.03  0.11  0.05  0.04  (-)20 
5 Taxes on vehicle 12.30 14.14 16.73 23.92 34.58 (+ )45 
6 Taxes on Goods and 
Passengers 
2.19 2.34 3.96 6.62 4.85 (-)27 
7 Other taxes on Income and 
expenditure 
17.72 19.86 22.54 24.57 27.03 (+)10 
8 Other taxes and duties on 
Commodities and Services 
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.37 (+) 100 
9 Land Revenue  0.50  0.60  0.63  0.59  0.68  (+)15  
 Total 131.37  156.02  180.51  227.32  303.88  (+)34  
The following reasons for variations were reported by the concerned two departments: 
Taxes on Vehicles: Mainly due to increase under other receipts. 
Taxes on Goods and Passengers: Due to less collection under other receipts. 
4.1.3 The following table presents the details of Non-tax  revenue raised during the 
period from 2007-08 to 2011-12.   
Table No.4.1.3 
(`` `` in crore)  
Sl, 
No. Head of revenue 2007-08 2008-09  2009-10 2010-11  2011-12 
Percentage of 
increase (+) or  
decrease (-) in 
2011-12 over 
2010-11 
1 Interest Receipts 5.66 11.57 10.02 14.35 9.62 (-) 33 
2 Housing 2.11 2.97 3.43 3.63 4.38 (+) 21 
3 Water Supply & 
Sanitation 1.07 0.98 0.94 1.29 1.62 (+) 26 
4 Forestry and Wildlife  4.81  4.78  7.70  10.18  8.87  (-) 13  
5 Education, Sports Art and 
Culture 0.48 0.55 0.43 8.74 12.16 (+)39 
6 Miscellaneous General 
Services 19.44 28.05 7.04 12.43 29.01 (+) 133 
7 Power 69.47 111.49 75.17 74.01 94.28 (+) 27 
8 Medical & Public Health 0.16 0.17 0.09 0.09 0.21 (+)133 
9 Co-operation 0.17 0.79 3.15 0.34 3.54 (+) 941 
10 Public Works 0.10 0.10 0.54 0.72 0.69 (-) 4 
11 Police 2.73 0.61 0.44 34.21 30.65 (-) 10 
12 Other Administrative 
Services 1.93 1.21 1.42 2.90 2.38 (-) 18 
13  Crop Husbandry  0.12  0.11  0.13  0.16  0.20  (+) 25  
14  Others  11.23  17.17  15.85  20.09  35.34  (+) 76  
 Total 119.48  180.55  126.35  183.14  232.95   

Chapter-IV Revenue Sector 
 
135 
 
The reasons for variation were not stated by the Departments. 
4.1.4  Variation between the budget estimates and a ctuals 
The variation between the budget estimates and actu als of revenue receipts under the 
principal heads of Tax and Non-Tax revenue for the year 2011-12 are mentioned in 
the following table: 
Table No.4.1.4 
Sl. 
No.  Head of revenue 
Budget 
Estimates 
(`` `` in crore)  
Actuals 
Receipts  
(`` `` in 
crore)  
Variation 
Increase (+)  
Decrease (-) 
Percentage  
Of 
variation 
 Tax Revenue 
1 Sales Tax/VAT  185.50  231.12  (+) 45.62  25  
2 State Excise 3.91 3.36 (-) 0.55 (-)14 
3 Stamps and 
Registration fees 
1.26 1.85 (+) 0.59 47 
4 Taxes on vehicles 27.86 34.58 (+) 6.72 24 
5 Taxes on Goods and 
Passengers 
2.74 4.85 (+) 2.11 77 
6 Land revenue 0.87 0.68 (-)0.19 (-)22 
 Non-Tax Revenue 
7 Interest Receipts  12.02  9.62  (-) 2.40  (-)20  
8 Other Administrative 
Service 
4.43  2.38  (-) 2.05  (-)46  
9 Medical & Public 
Health 
0.22  0.21  (-) 0.01  (-)5 
10 Public Works 0.68 0.69 (+) 0.01 1 
11 Forestry & Wildlife 10.80 8.87 (-) 1.93 (-)18 
12 Education, sports, art 
and culture 
0.35 12.16 (+) 11.81 3374 
13 Power 110.00 94.28 (-) 15.72 (-)14 
Source: Receipt Budget and Finance Account for the year 2011-12. 
4.1.5  Cost of Collection 
The gross collection in respect of major revenue re ceipts, expenditure incurred on 
collection and the percentage of such expenditure to gross collection during the period 
from 2009-10 to 2011-12 along with the relevant all  India average percentage of 
expenditure on collection to gross collection for t he year 2009-10 are as mentioned in 
the following table. 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
136 
 
Table No.4.1.5 
Sl. 
No Head of revenue Year 
Collection 
(`` `` in 
crore)  
Expenditure 
on collection 
of revenue 
(`` `` in crore)  
Percentage of 
Expenditure on 
collection of 
revenue 
All India 
average 
percentage 
for the 
previous year 
1 Sales Tax/VAT 2009 -10  132.22  4.18  3.16  0.88  
2010-11 167.22 5.59 3.34 0.96 
2011-12 231.12 6.10 2.64 0.75 
2 Taxes on Vehicles  2009-10 16.73 2.24 13.39 2.93 
2010-11 23.92 3.20 13.38 3.07 
2011-12 34.58 3.70 10.70 3.71 
3 Stamps and 
Registration Fees 
2009-10 1.19 0.16 13.45 2.77 
2010-11 1.35 0.25 18.52 2.47 
2011-12 1.85 0.25 13.51 1.60 
Source: Finance Accounts 
4.1.6 Analysis of arrears of revenue 
The arrears of revenue as on 31 March 2012 in respe ct of principal Heads of Revenue 
as reported by the Departments was ` 21.72  crore of which `7.47 crore (34.39 per 
cent) were outstanding for more than five years as per details mentioned in the 
following table:  
Table No.4.1.6 
(`` `` in crore)  
Sl. 
No 
Head of Revenue Amount 
outstanding as 
on 
31 March 2012 
Amount 
outstanding for 
more than for 
five years 
Remarks 
1 Taxes/ VAT on Sales, 
Trades etc. 21.72 7.47 - 
2 Taxes on vehicle   
Information awaited 3 Taxes on Goods and 
Passengers 
4 Other Taxes on 
income and 
Expenditure 
NIL NIL NIL 
4.1.7  Arrears in assessment 
The details of Sales tax/ VAT assessment cases pend ing at the beginning of the year 
2011-12, cases which were due for assessment during  the year, cases disposed of 
during the year and number of cases pending at the end of the year 2011-12 as 
furnished by Deputy Commissioner of Taxes are mentioned in the following table: 
 
 
 
 

Chapter-IV Revenue Sector 
 
137 
 
Table No.4.1.7  
Head of 
Revenue 
Opening 
Balance as 
on 
31 st  March 
2011 
New cases 
due for 
assessment  
during 2011-
12 
Total 
assessment 
due 
Cases 
disposed 
of during 
2011-12  
Balance 
at the end 
of the 31 st  
March 
2012 
Percentage 
of disposed 
to the total 
assessment 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 (5 to 4)  
Taxes 
/VAT on 
Sales, 
Trades 
etc . 
1206 2086 3292 2611 681 79.31 
 
4.1.8 Evasion of Taxes  
The details of cases of evasion of tax detected, ca ses finalised and demands for 
additional tax raised in 2011-12 in respect of Taxa tion Department was reported as 
nil. However, the information in respect of taxes o n Vehicles and taxes on Goods and 
Passengers was not furnished by the Transport and Communication Department.  
4.1.9 Response of the Departments/Government toward s audit 
Transactions and maintenance of important accounts and other records of the 
departments are test checked and Inspection Report containing audit findings is issued 
to the Head of the Office so audited for comments a nd/or compliance. Audit findings 
of serious nature are processed into draft paragrap h and forwarded to the 
Administrative Head of the concerned Department thr ough demi-official letter 
drawing their attention to the audit findings with a request to furnish their response 
within six weeks. The response of the Departments / Government towards audit is 
discussed in succeeding paragraphs. 
4.1.10 Failure of senior officials to enforce accou ntability and protect the 
interest of the State Government  
The Accountant General (Audit), Nagaland (AG) condu cts periodical inspection of 
the Government Departments to test check the transa ctions and verify the 
maintenance of important accounts and other records  as prescribed in the rules and 
procedures. These inspections are followed up with the Inspection Reports (IRs) 
incorporating irregularities detected during the in spection and not settled on the spot, 
which are issued to the Heads of the Offices inspec ted with copies to the next higher 
authorities for taking prompt corrective action. Th e Heads of the Offices/Government 
are required to promptly comply with the observatio ns contained in the IRs, rectify 
the defects and omissions and report compliance thr ough initial reply to the AG 
within one month from the date of issue of the IRs.  Serious financial irregularities are 
reported to the Heads of the Departments and the Government. 
Inspection Reports issued upto December 2011 disclo sed that 300 paragraphs 
involving `` ``    51.78 crore relating to 85 IRs  remained outstandin g at the end of  June 
2012 as mentioned in the following table along with  the corresponding figures for the 
preceding two years. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
138 
 
Table No.4.1.8 
 June 
2010 
June 2011 June 2012 
Number of outstanding IRs 82 80 81 
Number  of outstanding audit 
observations 317 306 295 
Amount involved ( ` in crore) 52.18 51.93 51.78 
The Department-wise details of the IRs and audit ob servations outstanding as on 30 
June 2012 and the amount involved are mentioned in the following table: 
 
Table No.4.1.9 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of 
Department 
Name of 
Receipts 
No. of 
outstanding 
IRs 
No. of 
Outstanding 
Audit 
Observations  
Money 
Value 
Indicated 
(` ` ` ` in 
crore)     
1 Finance  Taxes / VAT on 
Sales, Trade etc 
23  125  32.25  
2 Finance  Miscellaneous 
General 
Services/Lottery 
2 9 0.34  
3 Transport  Taxes on 
Vehicles /Taxes 
on Goods & 
Passengers 
26  73  13.04  
4 Forest & 
Environment 
Forest & 
Wildlife 
30 88 6.15 
Total 81 295 51.78 
Even the first replies required to be received from  the Heads of Offices within one 
month from the date of issue of the IRs were not re ceived for four IRs issued upto 
December 2011.  This large pendency of IRs due to non-receipt of replies is indicative 
of the fact that the heads of Offices and heads of Departments failed to initiate action 
to rectify the defects, omissions and irregularities pointed out by us in the IRs. 
It is recommended that the Government takes suitabl e steps to install an effective 
procedure for prompt and appropriate response to au dit observations as well as takes 
action against officials / officers who fail to sen d replies to IRs /paragraphs as per 
prescribed time schedules and also fail to take act ion to recover loss / outstanding 
demand in a time bound manner. 
4.1.11 Departmental Audit Committee Meetings 
In order to expedite settlement of the outstanding audit observations contained in the 
IRs, Departmental Audit Committees are constituted by the Government.  These 
Committees are chaired by the Secretaries of the co ncerned Administrative 
Department and attended by the concerned officers o f the State Government and 

Chapter-IV Revenue Sector 
 
139 
 
officers of the Accountant General (AG). The audit committees need to meet 
regularly in order to expedite clearance of the out standing audit observations. During 
2011-12, no audit committee meeting was convened to  clear the outstanding audit 
observations. 
The Government may ensure holding of frequent meeti ngs of these committees for 
ensuring effective action on the audit observations leading to their settlement. 
4.1.12 Response of the Departments to the draft aud it paragraphs 
One draft paragraph proposed for inclusion in the A udit Report of the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India for the year ending March 2012 was forwarded (October 
2012) to the Secretary/Commissioner of the Departme nt through demi-official letter. 
The Administrative Secretary/Commissioner furnished  replies (November 2012) in 
respect of the draft paragraph.  
4.1.13 Follow up on Audit reports – summarised posi tion 
As per the recommendations made by the High Powered  Committee (HPC) which 
were also accepted by the State Government in Octob er 1993 , suo moto explanatory  
notes  on corrective remedial measures taken on all paragr aphs included in Audit 
Reports are required to be submitted by the Departm ents duly vetted by Accountant 
General to PAC in three months from the date of pla cing of Audit Reports in the 
Legislature. 
However, suo moto explanatory notes were not received either from the  Departments 
or through the Nagaland Legislative Assembly Secret ariat in respect of 
paragraphs/reviews appeared in the Audit Reports. 
4.1.14 Compliance with the earlier Audit Reports 
In the Audit Reports 2001-02 to 2010-11, cases of u nder assessments, evasion / 
non/short levy of taxes / penalty, loss of revenue,  failure to raise demands etc., 
involving `` ``    17.23 crore were reported. As of March 2012, the De partments concerned 
have accepted observations of ` ` ` ` 6.26 crore and recovered `` `` 0.66 crore. Audit Report 
wise details of cases accepted and recovered are given in the following table: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
140 
 
Table No.4.1.10 
(( ((` ` ` ` in crore )) )) 
Year of Audit 
Report 
Total Money Value Accepted money 
value 
Recovery made 
2010-11 0.43 0.43 No intimation on 
recovery received from 
the Department. 
2009 -10  0.97  0.16  0.16  
2008 -09  0.22  0 0 
2007 -08  3.59  0 0 
2006 -07  1.56  0.81  0.37  
2005 -06  0.47  0.47  0.12  
2004 -05  1.47  1.10  0 
2003 -04  2.78  0.43  0.01  
2002 -03  1.12  1.12  0 
2001 -02  4.62  1.74  0 
Total 17.23 6.26 0.66 
4.1.15  Analysis of mechanism for dealing with the issues raised by Audit 
In order to analyse the system of addressing the is sues highlighted in the Inspection 
Reports/Audit Reports by the Department/Government the action taken on the 
paragraphs and Performance Audits included in the A udit Reports of the last 10 years 
in respect of one Department is evaluated and included in each Audit Report. 
The succeeding paragraphs 4.3.1 to 4.3.2.2 discuss the performance of Taxation 
Department in dealing with the cases detected in th e course of local audit conducted 
during the last 10 years and also the cases include d in the Audit Reports for the years 
2001-02 to 2010-11. 
4.1.16 Position of Inspection Reports 
A summarised position of Inspection Reports issued during the last 10 years, 
paragraphs included in these Reports and their status as on 30 
th  June 2012 are given in 
the following table.  
Table No.4.1 .11  
Year Opening Balance Addition during the year Clearance during the 
year 
Closing Balance during 
the year 
IRs  Paras Money 
Value 
(` ` ` ` in 
crore) 
I Rs  Paras Money 
Value (` ` ` ` 
in 
crore) 
IRs Paras Money 
Value 
(` ` ` ` in 
crore) 
IRs Paras Money 
Value 
(` ` ` ` in 
crore) 
2003-04 10 25 10.66 6 20 1.75 - - - 16 45 12.41 
2004-05 16 45 12.41 6 27 2.37 - - - 22 72 14.78 
2005 -06  22  72  14.7 8 3 33  8.02  1 10  0.09  24  95  22.71  
2006-07 24 95 22.71 4 31 1.65 0 3 0 28 123 24.36 
2007-08 28 123 24.36 5 43 0.25 0 0 0 33 166 24.61 
2008 -09  33  166  24.61  2 27  13.73  0 4 0.03  35  189  38.31  
2009-10 35 189 38.31 0 0 0 1 2 0.06 34 187 38.25 
2010-11 34 187 38.25 1 2 0 3 14 0.62 32 175 37.63 
2011 -12  32  175  37.63  1 1 0 0 0 0 33  176  37.63  
Upto  
June 2012 
33  176  37.63  1 2 0.03  0 10  0.22  34  168  37.44  

Chapter-IV Revenue Sector 
 
141 
 
We reminded the Department periodically to furnish the replies to the outstanding 
audit observations. 
4.1.17 Assurances given by the Departments/Governme nt on the issues 
highlighted in the Audit Reports 
 
4.1.17.1 Recovery of accepted cases 
The position of paragraphs included in the Audit Re ports of the last 10 years and 
those accepted by the Departments and the amount re covered are mentioned in the 
following table: 
Table No.4.1.12 
Year of 
Audit 
Report 
No. of 
paragraphs 
included 
Money 
value of the 
paragraphs 
(` ` ` ` in crore) 
No. of 
paragraphs 
accepted 
Money 
value of 
accepted 
paragraphs 
(` ` ` ` in crore) 
Amount 
recovered 
during the 
year (` ` ` ` in 
crore) 
Cumulative 
position of 
recovery of 
accepted 
cases  
2001-02 0  0 0 0 0 0 
2002-03 0  0 0 0 0 0 
2003-04 0  0 0 0 0 0 
2004-05 2  0.28  2 0.28  0 0 
2005 -06  0 0 0 0 0 0 
2006-07 1  0.59  0 0 0 0 
2007-08 2  0.44  0 0 0 0 
2008-09 1  0.03  0 0 0 0 
2009-10 0  0 0 0 0 0 
2010-11 0  0 0 0 0 0 
Total 6 1.34  2 0.28  0 0 
From the above table it is seen that during the las t ten years out of the accepted 
amount of `` ``    0.28 crore, zero per cent  has been recovered by the Department by the 
end of this year. 
The Department needs to evolve a strong mechanism t o monitor and ensure recovery 
of accepted cases . 
4.1.18 Action taken on the recommendations accepted  by the 
Departments/Government 
The draft Performance Audit (PAs) conducted by the AG are forwarded to the 
concerned Departments/Government for their informat ion with a request to furnish 
their replies. These PAs are also discussed in the Exit Conference and the 
Department’s/Government’s views are included while finalising the PAs for the Audit 
Reports. 
The following table shows the number of recommendat ions in the review on the 
Taxation Department featured in the last 10 Audit R eports and action taken by the 
department on the recommendations accepted by it as well as the Government. 
 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
142 
 
Table No.4.1.13 
Year of 
Audit 
Report 
Name of the review No. of 
recommenda 
tions 
Details of the 
recommendat 
ions accepted 
2001-02 - - - 
2002-03 - - - 
2003-04 - - - 
2004-05 - - - 
2005-06 - - - 
2006 -07  - - - 
2007 -08  - - - 
2008-09 Transition from Sales Tax to 
Value Added Tax 7 - 
2009-10 - - - 
2010-11 
Performance Audit on ‘Utilisation 
of declaration forms in interstate 
trade’ 
5 - 
 
4.1.19 Results of audit 
 
4.1.19.1 Position of local audit conducted during the year 
Test check of the records of 17 units of Transport,  Forest and Finance (Taxes) 
Departments conducted during the year 2011-12 revea led underassessment/short 
levy/loss of revenue/non-realisation of outstanding  revenue aggregating ` 37.54 crore 
in 129 cases. Of these the Departments recovered ` 0.08 crore in one case. 
4.1.19.2 This Report 
This Report contains one paragraph (selected from t he audit detections made during 
the local audit referred to above and during earlie r years which could not be included 
in earlier reports) involving financial effect of ` 0.28 crore. The 
Departments/Government have accepted audit observat ion, out of which ` 0.08 crore 
has been recovered.  
TAXATION DEPARTMENT 
 
4.2 Evasion of Tax 
 
Assessing Authority did not take into account recor ds of utilisation of Form ‘C’ 
while passing Assessment Order which resulted in pr obable evasion of tax to the 
tune of `` ``    10.90 lakh and non-levy of interest on tax amounting to `` ``    9.32 lakh 
As per subsection (1) of Section 9 of Nagaland Valu e Added Tax (NVAT) Act, 2005 
tax shall be levied on a dealer based on his taxabl e turnover of sales. Further as per 
Section 29 of the Act ibid, interest at 2 per cent  per month is payable from the date 
the tax payable had become due to the date of its p ayment or to the date of order of 
assessment, whichever is earlier. 

Chapter-IV Revenue Sector 
 
143 
 
During audit (March 2011) of utilisation of Form ‘C ’ by dealers as maintained by 
Assistant Commissioner of Taxes (ACT), Dimapur it w as seen that dealer A 1 
purchased goods amounting to ` 17608243 during 2005-08. Against this, only 
` 4914761 was shown as total purchases for the same p eriod in the Trading Account 
of the dealer based on which the Assessing Authorit y (AA) passed Assessment Order 
(AO) which resulted in concealment of Taxable Turn Over (TTO) amounting to 
` 12693482 and resultant evasion of tax to the tune o f ` 1586685. Further, an amount 
of ` 1220510 was also leviable as interest @ 2 per cent  of the tax amount payable, per 
month from the last date for filing the return 2, till the date of the passing the AO, as 
per provisions contained in section 29 of the NVAT Act as indicated in the table 
below:  
 
Table No.4.2.1  
(Amount in `` ``) 
Year Date of 
assessment 
Purchases 
as per 
utilization 
of Form ‘C’ 
Purchases 
as per 
Trading 
Account 
TTO 
escaped 
assessment 
Tax leviable 
on TTO 
escaped 
assessment 
(@12.5 %) 
Number of 
months for 
which interest 
is payable 
Interest 
leviable on 
the tax 
amount @ 2 
% per month 
2005-06 30/11/2010 4345179 1047554 3297625 412203 5 5 (05/06 to 
11/2010) 
453423 
2006 -07  30/11/2010  2544516  1247554  1296962  162120  43  (05/07 to 
11/2010) 
139423  
2007-08 30/11/2010 10718548 2619653 8098895 1012362  43 (05/07 to 
11/2010) 
627664 
Total  17608243 4914761 12693482 1586685  1220510 
On being pointed out (October 2012) that the dealer  had evaded payment of tax to the 
tune of ` 15.87 lakh and interest of ` 12.21 lakh due to inaction of the AA to consider 
all material information available about the transa ctions of the dealer, the Department 
stated (October 2012) that the AA conducted further  verification of the relevant 
documents and found that goods valued at ` 87.75 lakh were purchased by the dealer 
by utilising four ‘C’ forms during 2003-04 and 2004 -05 and 10 ‘C’ forms were 
utilised during 2005-06 to 2007-08 for purchase of goods valued at ` 88.34 lakh . For 
the years 2005-06 and 2006-07, the dealer was reass essed (October 2012) by the AA 
and additional amount of ` 3.41 lakh and ` 4.45 lakh respectively was levied and 
deposited to Government account in the same month. However, the claim of the 
department that the dealer had purchased goods valu ed at ` 87.75 lakh by utilising 
four ‘C’ forms during 2003-04 and 2004-05 were not supported by documentary 
evidence. 
To ascertain the veracity of the claim that four ‘C’ forms were utilised during 2003-04 
and 2004-05, records such as Trading Account, Asses sment order for 2003-04 and 
2004-05, Re-assessment order for the year 2005-06 to 2007-08, copy of the “C” forms 
and relevant records were called for (February 2013).  
                                                
1 M/s Dimapur Diesels, Dimapur. 
2 30 th  April of the succeeding year 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
144 
 
The Department while furnishing the Re-assessment o rders for the years 2005-06 and 
2006-07 stated (February 2013) that assessment orde rs and trading account for the 
years 2003-04 and 2004-05 had been misplaced during  shifting of the office in 2007 
and therefore could not be traced. 
The reply of the Department that the records were m isplaced and could not be traced 
is not acceptable and devoid of truth as the Depart ment in their earlier reply (October 
2012) had stated that further verification of docum ents relating to utilisation of four 
‘C’ forms were conducted by the AA in October 2012.  
The fact however, remains that the Department faile d to provide documentary proof 
in respect of four ‘C’ forms worth ` 87.75 lakh stated to have been utilised during the 
years 2003-04 and 2004-05 , which resulted in probable evasion of tax to the tu ne of 
` 10.90
3 lakh and interest of ` 9.32 4 lakh. 
                                                
3 Amount of tax leviable on escaped turnover ` 15.87 lakh-Tax amount recovered by AA ` 4.97 lakh 
4 Interest ` 12.21 lakh-2.89 lakh (charged during reassessment) = ` 9.32 lakh 

CHAPTER - V 
 
GENERAL SECTOR 
 
5.1 Introduction 
This Chapter of the Audit report for the year ended  31 March 2012 deals with the 
findings on audit of the State Government units under General Sector. 
The names of the State Government departments and t he total budget allocation and 
expenditure of the State Government under General S ector during 2011-12 are given 
below: 
Table No.5.1.1  
(` (` (` (` in crore)     
Name of the departments Total Budget 
allocation 
Expenditure 
State Legislature 40.18 40.18 
Head of State 3.86 3.70 
Council of Ministers 8.15 8.10 
Law & Justice 48.30 37.30 
Election 11.64 11.24 
Public Service Commission  3.59  3.59  
Civil Secretariat  110.05  107.83  
District Administration 167.28 102.02 
Treasuries and Accounts 28.84 28.17 
Police 796.23 791.37 
Police Engineering Project 84.58 72.16 
Village Guards  37.00  36.91  
Jails  24.31  24.32  
Stationery & Printing  14.55  14.26  
Public Works(Housing)  107.96 76.61 
CAWD 74.75 55.29 
Mechanical Engineering 29.88 29.87 
Home Guards 15.93 15.77 
Vigilance Commission  4.22  4.15  
Administrative Training Institute  4.33  3.41  
Fire and Emergency Services 19.54 18.95 
State Guest Houses 10.73 10.16 
State Information Commission 1.70 1.68 
Finance Department 1867.08 1831.97 
Land Revenue 0.69 0.58 
State Excise  14.66  14.57  
Sales Tax  13.77  13.32  
Taxes on Vehicles 38.71 34.44 
State Lotteries and Small savings 1.83 1.80 
Total number of departments=29 3584.34 3393.72 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
146 
 
5.2 Planning and Conduct of Audit 
Audit process starts with the assessment of risks f aced by various departments of 
Government based on expenditure incurred, criticali ty/complexity of activities, level 
of delegated financial powers, assessment of overal l internal controls and concerns of 
stake holders.  
After completion of audit of each unit on a test ch eck basis, Inspection Reports 
containing audit findings are issued to the heads o f the departments. The departments 
are to furnish replies to the audit findings within  one month of receipt of the 
Inspection Reports. Whenever replies are received, audit findings are either settled 
based on reply/action taken or further action is required by the auditee for compliance. 
Some of the important audit observations arising ou t of these Inspection Reports are 
processed for inclusion in the Audit reports, which  are submitted to the Governor of 
State under Article 151 of the constitution of Indi a for laying on the table of the 
Legislature. 
During the year, test-check of audits involving exp enditure of ` 1192.75 crore 
(including funds pertaining to previous years audit ed during the year) of the State 
Government under General sector were conducted. The  chapter contains three 
transaction audit paragraphs as given below: 
HOME (GENERAL ADMINISTRATION) DEPARTMENT 
 
5.3 Excess Payment 
Executive Engineer, Civil Administration Works Divi sion made excess payment 
of `` ``    128.24 lakh by allowing enhanced rate on the items of work already executed 
and paid  for earlier in respect of two works. 
Scrutiny of records of the Executive Engineer (EE),  Civil Administration Works 
Division (CAWD) in December 2010 revealed the following:- 
A.   The EE, CAWD issued (March 2007) Notice Inviting Tender (NIT) at an 
estimated cost of ` 6.57 crore (SOR 2004) for construction of Deputy 
Commissioner’s Office Complex at Dimapur and the wo rk was awarded (September 
2007) to the lowest bidder 1 for ` 7.75 crore who quoted 18 per cent  above SOR 
2004.The work was scheduled for completion in Septe mber 2008 i.e. within 12 
months from the date of issue of work order.  
Though the contractor commenced the work in Septemb er 2007, the work was not 
completed within the stipulated period. However, th e contractor sought (October 
2008) enhancement of rate from 18 per cent  to 60 per cent  above SOR 2004 stating 
escalation of market rate of construction material during the period. Government 
approved (February 2009) the revised estimates and enhanced the rate to 48 per cent  
above SOR 2004, increasing the cost from ` 7.75 crore to ` 9.72 crore.  
                                                
1 M/s Guolhoulie Rio & Sons, Kohima 

Chapter-V General Sector 
 
147 
 
Scrutiny of records (December 2010) revealed that t he revised estimate was prepared 
by the EE, CAWD including the work valued at ` 2.09 crore which had already been 
executed and payment made (May 2008) to the contrac tor through first Running 
Account (RA) bill. Subsequently, the EE paid ` 4.96 crore to the contractor through 
second and third RA bills (in April 2009 and June 2 010) at the enhanced rate of 48 
per cent for the entire work.  
Irregular application of enhanced rate for the enti re work including portions of works 
which were already executed and paid for resulted i n excess payment of ` 53.23 
lakh 2. 
The EE in reply stated (August 2012) that the revised estimate was prepared including 
the items of work already executed and regularised in Running Bills, as the market 
rate of all building materials, labour charges and transportation charges had 
substantially increased between the period of issue  of work order and the execution of 
the work. 
The reply is not tenable as the contractor commence d the work immediately after 
issue of work order and executed works valued at ` 2.09 crore by April 2008 (within 
7 months) and the enhancement of rate was sought only on the basis of the market rate 
of October 2008. 
B.  Commissioner & Secretary, Law and Justice Departme nt entered into an 
Agreement (December 2003) with a contractor for construction of nine staff quarter’s 
3 
for Department of Law and Justice Department which inter alia provided that the 
contractor 4 shall not demand for enhancement of rates beyond w hat is specified in the 
work order.  
Subsequently, the EE, CAWD issued (March 2004) Noti ce Inviting Tender (NIT) and 
the work was awarded (June 2004) to the above contr actor who lowest bidder 
5 who 
quoted 147 per cent  above SOR 1995 at the cost of `` ``    238.50 lakh for civil works with 
a stipulation to complete the work by June 2006 i.e. within 24 months from the date of 
issue of work order. 
The rate for civil works was enhanced (May 2006) to  7.50 per cent  above SOR 2004 
by switching over from SOR 1995 increasing the cost  of civil works from `` ``    238.50 
lakh to `` ``    336.38 lakh in line with the contractor’s represent ation. Further, based on 
the contractor’s second representation (April 2008)  the rate for civil works was 
enhanced from 7.50 per cent  to 35 per cent  above SOR 2004 (February 2009) 
increasing the cost of civil works from `` ``    336.38 lakh to `` ``    422.42 lakh. The work was 
completed (November 2009) at a cost of `` ``    422.46 lakh.  
                                                
2 18 per cent  above SOR 2004: ` 209.36 lakh; 30 per cent  (48 per cent  - 18 per cent ) above SOR 2004 
paid in excess for the work which was already execu ted in second RA bill ( ` 209.36 lakh/1.18) *1.48 - 
` 209.36 lakh = ` 53.23 lakh.  
3 Type IV-3 Units; Type III-3 Units and Type I-3 Units 
4 Shri Tsukjem Jamir 
5Shri Tsukjem Jamir  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
148 
 
Scrutiny of records (December 2010) revealed that r evised estimate inter alia  
included the part of civil works amounting to `` ``    293.21 lakh at the enhanced rate of 
7.50 per cent  above SOR 2004 which was already executed and paid  in three Running 
Account (RA) bills 6. The contractor was paid ` 121.39 lakh 7 (March 2009 and 
January 2010) after completion of the work at the e nhanced rate of 35 per cent above 
SOR 2004 including the work which had already been executed and paid for in 
second, third and fourth RA bills resulting in excess payment of `` ``    75.01 8 lakh.  
Thus, irregular application of enhanced rate for th e entire work including the portion 
of works which were already executed and paid for b efore the approval of enhanced 
rate resulted in excess payment of `` ``    75.01 lakh. Besides, the action of the EE by 
allowing enhanced rate violated the terms of agreement. 
The EE in reply stated (August 2012) that the revised estimate was prepared including 
the items of work already executed and regularised in Running Bills, as the market 
rate of all building materials, labour charges and transportation charges were 
substantially increased between the period of issue  of work order and the execution of 
the work. 
The reply is not acceptable as the work already exe cuted, measured and paid should 
be deducted while determining the revised estimates for enhancement. 
In sum, the EE CAWD made excess payment of ` 128.24 lakh ( ` 53.23 + ` 75.01 
lakh) on the two works by allowing enhanced rate on  the items of works already 
executed and paid for earlier. 
The matter was reported to the Government (July 201 2) but their reply had not been 
received (January 2013).  
HOME (FIRE AND EMERGENCY SERVICES) DEPARTMENT 
 
5.4 Diversion of Funds 
 
An amount of `` ``    1 crore sanctioned by GOI for construction of Fire Station at 
State Capital Complex  under Special Plan Assistance was diverted by the 
Directorate of Fire and Emergency Services for exec ution of seven other works 
not covered by the sanction . 
According to sub-clause (i) of clause 3 of the term s and condition of sanction, the 
Special Plan Assistance (SPA) shall be utilised by the Government of Nagaland only 
for the purpose for which it was approved and it stands earmarked for the same. 
                                                
6 2nd  RA bill  ` 84.73 lakh (paid in April 2007) , 3rd  RA Bill  ` 107.55 lakh (paid in December 2007) and 
4th  RA Bill ` 100.93 lakh (paid in December 2008) 
7 ` 79.46 lakh in 5 th  RA bill and ` 41.93 lakh in 6 th  and final RA bill  
8 Amount paid in 2nd , 3 rd  and 4 th  RA bills @ 7.5 per cent  above SOR 2004: ` 293.21 lakh; 27.5 per cent  
(35 per cent  - 7.5  per cent ) above SOR 2004 paid in excess for the work which was already executed 
and paid in 2nd , 3 rd  and 4 th  RA bills (` 293.21 lakh/1.075) * 1.35 - ` 293.21  lakh = ` 75.01 lakh.  

Chapter-V General Sector 
 
149 
 
Government of India (GOI) sanctioned ` 3 crore for construction of fire station 
buildings, security fencing, water reservoir, etc i n four District Headquarters and 
construction of Fire Station building at State Capi tal Complex, Kohima under SPA 
during 2010-11 as shown in the Appendix – 5.1 . 
Scrutiny of records (February 2012) of the Director ate of Fire & Emergency Services 
revealed that the Department executed 7(seven) item s of works involving ` 2 crore 
through the Project Engineer (PE), Police Engineeri ng Project (PEP), Kohima. The 
remaining funds of ` 1 crore meant for construction of Fire Station at S tate Capital 
Complex was diverted for execution of 7 (seven) 9 other works without prior approval 
of the GOI. However, the Department submitted (Augu st 2011) Utilisation Certificate 
(UC) to GOI, certifying that the full amount of ` 3 crore was utilised for the purpose 
for which it was sanctioned. 
Thus, the Department diverted SPA funds amounting t o ` 1 crore for works not 
covered in the sanction. Besides, the Department al so submitted false UC indicating 
utilisation of ` 3 crore. This had also resulted in non-execution of  construction of Fire 
Station Building at Capital Complex defeating the o bjective for which the funds were 
sanctioned by GOI. 
The matter was reported to the Government (Septembe r 2012) but their reply had not 
been received (January 2013). 
HOME DEPARTMENT  
 
5.5 Fraudulent drawal  
 
The Deputy Commandant Village Guard, Kiphire fraudu lently drew `` ``    39.96 lakh 
being ration allowance twice for the same period in respect of 2049 Village Guards 
Rule 34 of Receipts and Payments Rules provides tha t a Bill Register should be 
maintained by all Heads of Offices who are authoris ed to draw money on bills signed 
by them. To prevent presentation of fraudulent bill s to the Treasury, a Bill Transit 
Register is to be maintained by the DDO and cross c hecked with the Bill Register. 
Further, the aforesaid registers should be reviewed  by a Gazetted Officer and the 
result of the review recorded thereon. Treasury Rul es, in addition to prescribing 
various checks to be exercised by the Treasury Offi cer, also require that he shall 
obtain sufficient information as to the nature of e very payment he is making and shall 
not accept a claim which does not formally present that information unless there are 
valid reasons which he shall record in writing for omitting to enquire it. 
The Deputy Commandant Village Guard, Kiphire drew ` 43.32 lakh as ration 
allowances in five bills between October 2010 and D ecember 2010 in respect of 2051 
                                                
9 Statff Quarters Barrack), Dimapur ` 17.50 lakh, Security Fencing at FS Dimapur- ` 5.00 
lakh, Water reservoir tank Dimapur- ` 15 lakh, Staff quarters and toilet at Chemukedima-
` 17.50 lakh, Water reservoir at Chemukedima FS- ` 15 lakh, Staff Qtrs at Kohima-
` 15 lakh,  Water reservoir tank Chemukedima-` 15 lakh   

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
150 
 
Village Guards for 83 days 10 .for the period May 2010 and August 2010 to October  
2010. 
Again in March 2011, the Deputy Commandant drew ` 62.50 lakh as ration 
allowance for 122 days in respect of 2049 Village G uards for the period from May 
2010 to October 2010 in two bills. 
Cross verification (April 2012) of these vouchers r evealed that out of ` 62.50 lakh 
drawn in March 2011, ration allowance for 78 days i n respect of 2049 Village Guards 
amounting to ` 39.96 lakh had already been drawn between October 2 010 and 
December 2010 (Appendix -5.2) 
Thus, the Deputy Commandant, Village Guard, Kiphire  fraudulently drew ` 39.96 
lakh in March 2011 as ration allowance for 78 days in respect of 2049 Village Guards. 
Failure of the Treasury Officers to exercise the pr escribed checks as envisaged in 
rules and procedures allowed the Deputy Commandant Village Guard to fraudulently 
draw ration allowance of ` 39.96 lakh. 
The matter was reported to the Government (May 2012 ). Reply had not been received 
(February 2013). 
                                                
10  May 2010 from 13-05- 2010 to 28-05-2010= 16 days; August 2010 from 02-08-2010 to 26-08-
2010=25 days; September 2010 from 03-09-2010 to 12 09-2010=10 days; September 2010 from 13-09-
2010 to 24-09-2010=12 days and October 2010 from 09 -10-2010 to 28-10-2010= 20 days. 

 
 
CHAPTER – VI 
 
FOLLOW UP OF AUDIT OBSERVATIONS 
 
6.1 Response of the departments to the recommendati ons of the Public 
Accounts Committee (PAC) 
Finance Department issued instructions to all depar tments to submit Action Taken 
Notes (ATNs) on various suggestions, observations a nd recommendations made by 
PAC for their consideration within 15 days of prese ntation of the PAC Reports to the 
Legislature. The PAC Reports/recommendations are th e principal medium by which 
the Legislature enforces financial accountability o f the Executives to the Legislature 
and it is appropriate that they elicit timely respo nse from the departments in the form 
of ATNs. 
As of December 2012, out of 1323 recommendations of  the PAC, made between 
1990-91 and 2011-12, 1280 ATNs in respect of the re commendations had been 
submitted to the PAC and discussed.  
6.2 Monitoring 
The following Committees had been formed at the Gov ernment level to monitor the 
follow up action on Audit related matters: 
State Level Audit and Accounts Committee : State Audit and Accounts Committee 
(SLAAC) had been formed (June 2008) at the State le vel under the Chairmanship of 
the Chief Secretary to monitor the response and cor rective action on the findings 
reported by audit, to review and oversee the workin g of Departmental Audit and 
Accounts Committee and also to hold meetings once in six months.  
As of December 2012, only one meeting was held (May  2010) by the SLAAC 
wherein the necessity of formation of Departmental Audit and Accounts Committees, 
training of departmental officers and issues relati ng to the accumulation of pending 
Inspection Reports and the ways to reduce pendency were discussed. 
6.3 Outstanding Inspection Reports 
The Accountant General (Audit), Nagaland conducts p eriodical inspection of the 
Government departments to test-check the transactio ns and verify the maintenance of 
important accounts and other records as prescribed in the rules and procedures. These 
inspections are followed up with the Inspection Rep orts (IRs) incorporating 
irregularities detected during the inspection and n ot settled on the spot, which are 
issued to the Heads of the Offices inspected with copies to the higher authorities for  
  

Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
152 
 
taking prompt corrective action. The Heads of the O ffices/Government are required to 
promptly comply with the observations contained in the IRs, rectify the defects and 
omissions and report compliance through initial reply to the Accountant General (AG) 
within one month form the date of the issue of the IRs. Serious irregularities are 
reported to the Heads of the departments and the Government. 
The position of outstanding IRs pertaining to Civil  (Expenditure audit including that 
of Works and Autonomous Bodies), Revenue (Audit of Revenue departments) and 
Commercial (Audit of Public Sector Undertakings) au dit as of December 2012 is 
shown below: 
Table 6.1 
Year 
Civil  
(including works, 
Forest and  
autonomous bodies ) 
Revenue Commercial 
No. of 
IRs Paragraphs  No. of 
IRs Paragraphs  No. of 
IRs Paragraphs  
Upto 2007-08 1406 8584 65 223 11 101 
2008-09 148 1014 08 43 02 18 
2009-10 109 783 07 14 02 14 
2010-11 58 504 02 13 0 0 
2001-12 107 751 08 07 04 40 
Total 1828 11636 90 300 19 173 
This large pendency of IRs is indicative of absence  of adequate action to rectify the 
defects, omissions and irregularities pointed out t hrough IRs by the Heads of offices 
and Heads of the departments. 
It is recommended that the Government look into the  matter and streamline the 
system to ensure proper response to audit observati ons. Action may be taken against 
the officials who fail to send replies to IRs/parag raphs as per prescribed time schedule 
and the lossess/outstanding advances/overpayments may be recovered in a time bound 
manner. 
  

Chapter-VI follow up of Audit Observations 
 
153 
 
6.4 Departmental Audit Committee Meetings 
In order to expedite the settlement of the outstand ing audit observations contained in 
the IRs, departmental audit Committees have been co nstituted by the Government. 
These Committees are chaired by the Secretaries of the concerned administrative 
departments and their meetings are attended by the concerned officers of the State 
Government and officers from the office of the AG. 
During 2011-12, no audit committee meeting was conv ened to clear the outstanding 
audit observations. 
 
Kohima  
the 
(R. Naresh) 
Accountant General (Audit), Nagaland 
 
 
Countersigned  
 
New Delhi  
the 
(Vinod Rai) 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
 

Appendices  
155  
 
Appendix-1.1 (a) 
(Reference to Paragraph.1.3.10.7; page 24) 
FUND FLOW STATEMENT IN RESPECT OF DPC, DIMAPUR. 
(` in Lakh)  
year  Openi 
ng 
balan 
ce 
Release of fund  Interes 
t 
Others  Total (col 
2+5 +6+7) 
Expenditure  Total  Closi 
ng 
balan 
ce  
 
Man 
days 
achieved 
in lakh 
 
GOI  GON  Total  
Programme Expenditure  Administrative 
expenditure Dhansiri 
par 
Mdziphe 
ma 
Other 2 
blocks 
1 2 3  5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
2007-08 0 54.5 0 54.5 0 0 54.5 0 0 0 19.10 19.1 35.4 0 
2008-09 35.4 3422.15 111 3533.15 1.06 0 3569.61 532.64 1662.61 1194.05 147.31 3536.61 33 20.34 
2009-10 33 4068.07 134 4202.07 10.49 33.2 4278.76 546.95 2128.78 1244.49 290.46 4210.68 68.08 23.75 
2010-11 68.08 8029.07 140.98 8170.05 40.97 22.32 8301.42 1181.10 3947.32 2635.58 437.12 8201.12 100.3 37.36 
2011-12 100.3 6920.10 550.66 7470.76 22.21 30 7623.27 1063.04 3627.69 2508.27 346.0 7545.00 78.27 41.57 
TOTAL 22493.89 936.64 23430.53 74.73 85.52 23827.56 3323.73 11366.4 7582.39 1239.99 23512.51  123.02 
Appendix-1.1 (b) 
(Reference to Paragraph 1.3.10.7; page 24) 
FUND FLOW STATEMENT IN RESPECT OF DPC, MON  
(` in Lakh ) 
Year Opening 
balance 
Release of fund Interest Others Total  
(2+5+6+7) 
Expenditure Total Closing 
balance 
 
Man 
days 
achieved 
in lakh 
 
GOI GON Total 
Programme Expenditure Administrative 
expenditure 
Transfer 
to other 
units 
Chen  Tobu  Others  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 14 15 16 17 
2007-08 143.13 855.08 32.00 887.08 6.24 1.00 1037.45 237.58 220.78 499.18 43.83 1.00 1002.37 35.08 55.75 
2008-09 35.08 400.00 174.00 574.00 0.53 0 609.62 149.11 114.61 289.05 42.65 10.10 605.52 4.1 3.32 
2009-10 4.1 8092.60 174.00 8266.60 6.97 0 8277.67 2040.98 1579.54 4155.41 318.60 1.00 8095.55 182.12 46.66 
2010-11 182.12 5503.43 0 5503.43 5.57 16.47* 5707.59 1435.45 1086.24 2855.32 308.82 0 5685.83 21.76 32.26 
2011-12 21.76 5178.76 605.47 5784.23 8.13 10.69 5824.81 1442.24 1144.73 2863.00 313.78 0 5772.77 52.04 27.71 
TOTAL   20029.87 985.47 21015.34 27.44 18.82 21457.14 5305.36 4145.9 10661.96 1027.68 12.1 21162.04  165.70 
*Convergence with Horticulture Department, GON 
 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012   
 
156  
 
Appendix 1.1 (c) 
(Reference to Paragraph 1.3.10.7; page 24) 
FUND FLOW STATEMENT IN RESPECT OF DPC, TUENSANG. 
(` in Lakh)  
Year Opening 
balance 
Release of fund Intere 
st 
Others Total (2+5 
+6+7) 
Expenditure Total Closing 
balance 
 
Man 
days 
achieved 
in lakh 
 
GOI GON Total 
Programme Expenditure Adminis 
trative 
expendit 
ure 
Trans 
fer to 
other 
units 
Sangsang 
yu 
Noklak  Chessore  Others 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 
2007-08 0 890.12 82.0 972.12 14.66 35.90* 1022.68 135.97 107.78 123.91 441.22 33.08 34.27 876.23 146.45 8.09 
2008-09 146.45 2273.00 147.46 2420.46 5.07 0 2571.98 442.55 572.45 343.49 1101.43 88.11 0 2548.03 23.95 24.60 
2009-10 23.95 4416.25 139.00 4555.25 4.88 0 4584.08 676.00 1040.00 699.87 1857.24 261.60 0 4534.71 49.37 42.73 
2010-11 49.37 6299.42 281.97 6581.39 23.29 8 6662.05 1022.75 1541.22 1014.00 2711.35 362.56 0 6651.88 10.17 62.89 
2011-12 10.17 5953.64 427.32 6380.96 11.01 0 6402.14 1071.05 1422.5 908.27 2611.27 376.46 0 6389.55 12.59 50.96 
TOTAL  19832.43  1077.75  20910.18  58.91  43.90  21242.93  3348.32  4683.95  3089.54  8722.51  1121.81  34.27  21000.4  12.59  189.27  
*Rs 34.53lakh (SGRY) and Rs 1.37 lakh Misc Receipt  
 
Appendix 1.1 (d) 
(Reference to Paragraph 1.3.10.7; page 24) 
FUND FLOW STATEMENT IN RESPECT OF DPC, PEREN 
(` in Lakh)  
Year Opening 
balance 
Release of fund Interest Others Total (col 
2+5 +6+7) 
Expenditure Total Closing 
balance  
 
Man days 
achieved 
in lakh 
 
GOI GON Total 
Programme Expenditure Administrative 
expenditure Peren  Tening  Jalukie 
1 2 3  5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
2007-08 0 0.54  0 0.54  0 0 0.54  0 0 0 0.07  0.07  0.47  0 
2008 -09  0.47  23.50  0.89  24.39  0.01  0 24.87  8.66  7.63  7.09  1.49  24.87  0.00  18.53  
2009 -10  0.00  40.11  1.24  41.35  0.02  0 41.37  13.73  12.78  12.44  2.40  41.35  0.02  20.66  
2010 -11  0.02  38.53  1.06  39.59  0.05  0.11  39.77  13.08  12.07  11.56  2.33  39.04  0.73  22.02  
2011 -12  0.73  48.33  2.12  50.45  0.08  0 51.26  16.30  15.01  14.01  2.67  47.99  3.27  23.05  
TOTAL  151.01 5.31 156.32 0.16 0.11 157.81 51.77 47.49 45.1 8.96 153.32  84.26 
 
 

Appendices  
157  
 
Appendix 1.2 
(Reference to Paragraph 1.3.10.8; page 26) 
Statement showing the release of funds and expenditure in respect of  71 VDBs  under nine blocks  in four test checked DPCs during 2007-2012  
(` in lakh)  
Name of 
the 
sample 
district 
Name of 
sample 
Block 
Name of the 
selected Village 
Average 
no. of 
job card 
Fund Allocated during 
2007-08 to 2011-12 
Total Mandays 
generated 
Actual receipt during 2007-08 to 2011-12 Expenditureduring 
2007-08 to 2011-12 
Total CB 
Wages Material Wages Material Interest 
receipts 
Total 
(4+9+10+11) 
Wages Material 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 14 15 16 17 
Dimapur 
Dhansiripar 
Keyeto 230 79.95 56.51 136.46 0.76 30.9 0 0.01 30.91 30.88 0 30.88 0.03 
Razaphe 165 69.35 45.48 114.83 0.65 22.18 0 0.02 22.2 22.17 0 22.17 0.03 
Disagaphu 119 36.48 24.93 61.41 0.35 11.66 0 0.02 11.68 10.7 0 10.7 0.98 
Khekiho 234 96.71 63.42 160.13 0.90 42.71 0 0 42.71 42.69 0 42.69 0.02 
Toshezu 158 64.98 38.48 103.46 0.62 19.42 0 0.01 19.43 19.41 0 19.41 0.02 
Singrijan 256 62.76 43.65 106.41 0.61 26.77 0 0.15 26.92 26.77 0 26.77 0.15 
Doyapur 329 77.78 45.42 123.2 0.75 35.37 0 0.05 35.42 35.36 0 35.36 0.06 
RazapheBasa 74 25.74 17.53 43.27 0.24 8.48 0 0.01 8.49 8.46 0 8.46 0.03 
Total 1565 513.75 335.42 849.17 4.88 197.49 0 0.27 197.76 196.44 0 196.44 1.32 
Medziphema 
Aoyimti 439 141.66 94.6 236.26 1.33 55.76 0 0.2 55.96 55.79 0 55.79 0.17 
Diphupar 1984 562.77 368.55 931.32 5.3 256.59 0 1.37 257.96 257.83 0 257.83 0.13 
Darogapathar 381 79.66 51.4 131.06 0.77 50.8 0 0.38 51.18 50.9 0 50.9 0.28 
Thilixu 911 324.34 210.92 535.26 3.02 113.16 0 0.33 113.49 113.41 0 113.41 0.08 
Phaipijang 154 40.77 22.59 63.36 0.38 22.76 0 0.1 22.86 22.76 0 22.76 0.1 
Nagarjan 1663 247.28 159.66 406.94 2.35 194.96 0 1.66 196.62 194.97 0 194.97 1.65 
Paglapahar 180 81.44 52.16 133.6 0.79 31.48   0.11 31.59 31.58 0 31.58 0.01 
Sodzholhou 147 25.28 17.82 43.1 0.25 16.51 0 0.06 16.57 16.57 0 16.57 0 
Samaguri 98 29.36 19.57 48.93 0.35 15.04 0 0.1 15.14 15.08 0 15.08 0.06 
Toluvi 272 45.9 29.68 75.58 0.44 37.25 0 0.14 37.39 37.26 0 37.26 0.13 
Bungsang 141 44.43 24.25 68.68 0.42 26.37 0 0.03 26.4 24.97 0 24.97 1.43 
Molvom 179 65.9 43.73 109.63 0.62 28.04 0 0.03 28.07 28.07 0 28.07 0 
Hekeshe 119 30.31 19.87 50.18 0.29 16.38 0 0.09 16.47 16.46 0 16.46 0.01 
Sovima 552 155.84 101.97 257.81 1.49 57.87 0 0.44 58.31 58.07 0 58.07 0.24 
Khriezephe 190 57.65 39.28 96.93 0.53 22.75   0.11 22.86 22.75 0 22.75 0.11 
Khopanala 80 23.5 14.69 38.19 0.23 13.83 0 0.08 13.91 13.83 0 13.83 0.08 
Industrial Village 513 179.4 117.29 296.69 1.7 74.4   0.67 75.07 72.63   72.63 2.44 
Seithekiema A 248 73.04 53.89 126.93 0.71 21.51 0 0.12 21.63 21.59 0 21.59 0.04 
Total 8251 2208.53 1441.92 3650.45 20.97 1055.46 0 6.02 1061.48 1054.52 0 1054.52 6.96 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012   
 
158  
 
Appendix 1.2 (Contd.) 
Name of 
the 
sample 
district 
Name of 
sample 
Block 
Name of the 
selected Village 
Average 
no. of 
job card 
Fund Allocated during 
2007-08 to 2011-12 
Total Mandays 
generated 
Actual receipt during 2007-08 to 2011-12 Expenditureduring 
2007-08 to 2011-12 
Total CB 
Wages Material Wages Material Interest 
receipts 
Total 
(4+9+10+11) 
Wages Material 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 13 14 15 16 17 
Mon 
Chen 
Chenloisho  669  276.97  146.69  423.66  2.64  264.41  0 0.07  264.48  264.4  0 264.4  0.08  
Choknyu 253 90.14 45.78 135.92 0.88 82.46 0 0.04 82.5 82.46 0 82.46 0.04 
Wangti 393 193.92 104.14 298.06 1.83 137.37 0 0.05 137.42 137.33 0 137.33 0.09 
ChaohaChingnyu 440 165.45 89.32 254.77 1.58 111.19 0 0.06 111.25 111.18 0 111.18 0.07 
Jakphang 642 250.98 123.77 374.75 2.41 248.17 0 0.11 248.28 248.16 0 248.16 0.12 
Ngangching 313 141.05 81.67 222.72 1.35 138.08 0 0.06 138.14 138.08 0 138.08  0.06  
Total 2710 1118.51 591.37 1709.88 10.69 981.68 0 0.39 982.07 981.61 0 981.61 0.46 
Tobu 
Monyakshu  672  301.65  144.75  446.4  2.9  252.65  0 0.42  253.07  252.64  0 252.64  0.43  
Pessao 633 279.74 127.98 407.72 2.72 234.17 0 0.39 234.56 234.16 0 234.16 0.4 
Yakshu 463 204.31 99.73 304.04 1.98 176.19 0 0.29 176.48 176.16 0 176.16 0.32 
Ukha 381 176.53 87.08 263.61 1.71 139.29 0 0.26 139.55 139.27 0 139.27 0.28 
Total  2149  962.23  459.54  1421.77  9.31  802.3  0 1.36  803.66  802.23  0 802.23  1.43  
Tuensang 
Sangsangnyu 
Hakchang 435 182.21 110.11 292.32 1.74 143.88 0 0 143.88 122.69 0 122.69 21.19 
Saoshou 113 47.05 29.54 76.59 0.45 44.24 0 0 44.24 40.36 0 40.36 3.88 
Momching 123 47.45 29.87 77.32 0.45 41.11 0 0 41.11 35.17 0 35.17 5.94 
Sangsangnyu 250 156.72 56.03 212.75 1.12 84.32 0 0 84.32 73.27 0 73.27 11.05 
Maksha 174 80.77 46.56 127.33 0.77 63.39 0 0 63.39 52.43 0 52.43 10.96 
Helipong 140 56.87 34.51 91.38 0.51 45.99 0 0 45.99 39.6 0 39.6 6.39 
Total 1235 571.07 306.62 877.69 5.04 422.93 0 0 422.93 363.52 0 363.52 59.41 
Noklak 
Ekhao 112 42.96 32.42 75.38 0.41 29.97 0 0 29.97 29.24 0 29.24 0.73 
Yakhao 190 72.26 46.33 118.59 0.69 54.17 0 0 54.17 52.88 0 52.88 1.29 
Kengnyu 224 83.17 55.31 138.48 0.79 60.16 0 0 60.16 59.87 0 59.87 0.29 
Nokyan 375 138.15 91.06 229.21 1.31 107.61 0 0 107.61 105.36 0 105.36 2.25 
Taknyu 115  44.14 26.46 70.6 0.43 31.74 0 0 31.74 29.35 0 29.35 2.39 
Pangsha 666  223.59 147.16 370.75 2.11 181.69 0 0 181.69 172.465 0 172.465 9.22 
Panso B  516  225.89  144.24  370.13  2.17  195.44  0 0 195.44  185.96  0 185.96  9.48  
Yimpang 112 38.19 25.02 63.21 0.36 31.18 0 0 31.18 28.99 0 28.99 2.19 
Total   2310 868.35 568 1436.35 8.27 691.96 0 0 691.96 664.115 0 664.115 27.84 
 

Appendices  
159  
 
Appendix 1.2 (Concld.) 
Name of 
the 
sample 
district 
Name of 
sample 
Block 
Name of the 
selected Village 
Average 
no. of 
job card 
Fund Allocated during 
2007-08 to 2011-12 
Total Mandays 
generated 
Actual receipt during 2007-08 to 2011-12 Expenditureduring 
2007-08 to 2011-12 
Total CB 
Wages Material Wages Material Interest 
receipts 
Total 
(4+9+10+11) 
Wages Material 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
Tuensang 
`Chessore 
Chessore  914  364.36  218.86  583.22  3.48  286.68  0 0 286.68  254.52  0 254.52  32.16  
Kiutsukiur 181 91.38 57.09 148.47 0.88 78.13 0 0 78.13 76.3 0 76.3 1.83 
Kuthur 779 326.63 201.76 528.39 3.09 266.89 0 0 266.89 266.89 0 266.89 0 
Shiponger 363 154.57 92.52 247.09 1.49 130.28 0 0 130.28 130.04 0 130.04 0.24 
Total   2237 936.94 570.23 1507.17 8.94 761.98 0 0 761.98 727.75 0 727.75 34.23 
Peren 
Tenning 
Old Tesen 410 161.60 108.18 269.78 1.64 156.71 0 0.17 156.88 154.1 0 154.1 2.78 
Nkialwa 346 168.65 112.91 281.56 1.69 163.01 0 0.19 163.2 160.35 0 160.35 2.85 
Azilong 398 171.26 114.70 285.96 1.71 166.04 0 0.21 166.25 166.04 0 166.04 0.21 
Tenning  649  273.52  183.21  456.73  2.73  264.64  0 0.2  264.84  260.03  0 260.03  4.81  
Mbaupungchi 272 114.10 76.45 190.55 1.14 110.36 0 0.12 110.48 108.73 0 108.73 1.75 
Ntu 423 177.82 119.12 296.94 1.77 166.59 0 0.14 166.73 166.59 0 166.59 0.14 
NzauNamsan 241 97.61 65.36 162.97 0.98 105.17 0 0.11 105.28 103.5 0 103.5 1.78 
Total 2739 1164.56 779.93 1944.49 11.66 1132.52 0 1.14 1133.66 1119.34 0 1119.34 14.32 
Jalukie 
Samzuiram 797 321.91 214.61 536.52 3.08 348.98 0 0.29 349.27 338.07 0 338.07 11.20 
Old Jalukie 575 242.83 161.89 404.72  2.32 235.35 0 0.27 235.62 231.23 0 231.23  4.39  
New Jalukie 582 258.80 172.53 431.33 2.47 251 0 0.26 251.26 241.78 0 241.78 9.48 
Inbung 150 61.01 40.66 101.67 0.58 62.69 0 0.05 62.74 60.40 0 60.40 2.34 
Jalukie B 516 213.47 142.31 355.78 2.04 206.88 0 0.21 207.09 203.23 0 203.23 3.86 
New Besuimpui 216 91.29 60.86 152.15  0.87 88.22 0 0.08 88.30 86.66 0 86.66  1.64  
Besumpuikam 523 222.77 142.55 365.32 2.12 217.46 0 0.18 217.64 213.57 0 213.57 4.07 
Phanjang 101 42.96 28.64 71.6 0.41 41.56 0 0.04 41.60 39.93 0 39.93 1.67 
Bongkolong 238 100.49 60.66 161.15 0.86 97.12 0 0.08 97.20 93.55 0 93.55 3.65 
Lilen 186 76.56 51.04 127.6  0.73 74.18 0 0.06 74.24 71.26 0 71.26  2.98  
Total 3884 1632.09 1075.75 2707.84 15.48 1623.44 0 1.52 1624.96 1579.68 0 1579.68 45.28 
Grand Total 27080 9976.03 6128.78 16104.81 95.24 7669.76 0 10.7 7680.46 7489.21 0 7489.21 191.25 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012   
 
160  
 
Appendix 1.3 (i) 
(Reference to Paragraph 1.3.13.6; page 39) 
STATEMENT SHOWING UN EXECUTED WORKS UNDER 4 DPCs 
Sl. No Name of 
the 
sample 
district 
Name of 
sample Block 
Name of the 
selected 
Village 
Year  of 
allocation 
Name of the work Unit Estimated 
cost 
(`` ``in lakh) 
Amount 
released for 
works 
execution 
(`` ``in lakh) 
1.   
Dimapur Medzipheme 
Aoyimti  2011 -12  Constrn. of terrace at village  10 Ha c 5.0  5.0  
2.   Aoyimty  2011 -12  Up -gradation of  village road   1 KM  20.00  20.00  
3.   Hekeshe  2010 -11  Constrn. irrigation channel  2KM  2.00  2.00  
4.   Pagalapahar  2008 -09  Con. Of village road – GB Khel to T Khel  0.02 Km  0.46  0.46  
5.   Pagalapahar  2008 -09  Con. Of village road – GB Khel to T Khel  0.17 K m 3.00  3.00  
6.   Pagalapahar  2009 -10  Con. Of village road – GB Khel to T Khel  0.115 K m 2.00  2.00  
7.   Pagalapahar  2010 -11  Con. Of village road – GB Khel to T Khel  0.27Km  4.74  4.74  
8.   Kuda (Nagarjan)  2010 -11  Nallah treatment  for regulating water flow  1.272 K m 3.00  3.00  
9.   Kuda 
(Nagarjan) 
2010 -11  Repair  of village road  0.162 km  2.00  2.00  
10.   samaguri 2009-10 Con. Hume pipe culvert 1 No 1.00 1.00 
11.   samaguri 2008-09 Con. Village approach road to community 
hall  
0.562Km 0.45 0.45 
12.   Khriezephe 2008-09 Con. Village A/road- singrijan-khrizephe 1 Km 8.00 8.00 
13.   Khriezephe 2008-09 Con. Village A/road- singrijan-khrizephe& 
1 H/P culvert 
0.625 Km 5.00 5.00 
14.   Khriezephe  2008 -09  Extn. Of a/ road  0.27 K m 2.00  2.00  
15.   Khriezephe  2011 -12  Renovation of village road  0.684 Km 5.00  5.00  
16.   Khriezephe  2011 -12  Land development  12.5 Hac  10.00  10.00  
17.   Bhumsang  2011 -12  Agri foot path  2.336K m 5.00  5.00  
18.   Bhumsan g  2011 -12  Agri foot path  1.121 Km  2.40  2.40  
19.   Bhumsang  2011 -12  Con. Terrace  4 Hac 2.00  2.00  
20.   Diphupar  2009 -10  Jungle clearance – Referel hospital  10 Hac 2.00  2.00  
21.   Diphupar  2010 -11  Con. Village A/road  -metalling  & soiling  0.81 Km  10.00  10.00  
22.   Diphupar  2010 -11  Conillage A/road.  Metalling & soiling   0.41 Km 5.00  5.00  
23.   Diphupar  2011 -12  Renovation of Village road  0.487 Km 6.00  6.00  
24.   Diphupar  2011 -12  Con. o f terrace  50 Hac 25.00  25.00  
25.   Diphupar  2011 -12  Con. Village road  0.171 Km  3.00  3.00  
26.   Diphupar  2011 -12  Con. Drainage  C & D khel  0.363  Km  20.00  20.00  
TOTAL (A) 154.05 154.05 

Appendices  
161  
 
Appendix 1.3 (i) (contd.) 
Sl. No  Name of the 
sample 
district  
Name of 
sample Block  
Name of the 
selected Village  
Year  of 
allocation  
Name of the work  Unit  Estimated 
cost 
(`` ``in lakh)  
Amount released 
for works 
execution 
(`` ``in lakh)  
27.   
Dimapur Dhanisripar 
Kiyeto 2010-12 Village road  0.7 Km 7.53 7.53 
28.   Kiyeto 2008-09 Improvement of road 4.74 Km 8.40 8.40  
29.   Kiyeto 2011-12 Nallah treatment  6.5 Km 20.00 20.00 
30.   Kiyeto  2010 -11  Repairing of Irrigation cannal  9.0 Km  8.00  8.00  
31.   Doyapur 2009-10 Repair of irrigation channel  2Km 2. 00 2.00 
32.   Doyapur  2010 -11  Construction of drainage  8Km  15.00  15.00  
33.   Doyapur 2010-11 Construction of drainage  5.4 Km 8.0 0 8.00 
34.   Doyapur 2011-12 Construction  of ring wells  1 unit  0.50 0.50 
35.   Toshezu 2009-10 Pineapple plantation  2Hac 5.00 5.00  
36.   Toshezu 2010-11 Social forestry 7 Hac 5.00 5.00 
37.   Toshezu  2011 -12  Constrn. Agri link road  2Hac  10.00  10.00  
38.   Toshezu 2011-12 Constrn. Agri link road 2Km 2.95 2.95  
39.   Toshezu 2011-12 Constrn. Agri link road 2Km 5.00 5.00  
40.   singrijan 2010-11 Village road – primary School to D. Khel 1.7 Km 34.06 34.06 
41.   Singrijan 2011-12 Village road – primary School to D. Khel 1.7 Km 2.65 2.65 
42.   Singrijan 2008-09 Constrn, of Agri link road  2.55 Km  15.00 15.00 
43.   singrijan 2009-10 Improvement of village approach r oad  1Km 10.00 10.00 
44.   Singrijan  2011 -12  Constrn. Village approach Road  2.5 Km  20.71  20.71  
45.   singrijan 2009-10 Constrn of ring well  2nos 0.50 0. 50 
46.   Singrijan 2010-11 Constrn of irrigation cannal 9Km 1 6.00 16.00 
47.   Singrijan 2011-12 Constrn of irrigation cannal 2 Km  3.00 3.00 
48.   Singrijan 2011-12 Constrn of Agri Link rtoad 0.5 Km 3 .00 3.00 
49.   disagaphu 2009-12 Plantations/horticulture plantati ons  37 Hac 11.51 11.51 
50.   Disagaphu 2011-12 Constrn  of agri link road  0.5 Km  4.00 4.00 
51.   Disagaphu  2011 -12  Village approach road - ph - III  1.50 Km  5.00  5.00  
52.   Disagaphu 2011-12 Const. of Agri link road   0.50Km 4 .00 4.00 
53.   Razaphe 2010-11 Constrn. Of Agri link road 3Km 10.00 10.00 
54.   Razaphe 2010-11 Digging of pond  10 nos 4.00 4.00 
55.   Razaphe 2011-12 Village road  1.34 Km 2.37 2.37 
56.   Razaphe 2011-12 Renovation / widening of Village app roach road  1.876Km 10.00 10.00 
57.   Razaphe 2011-12 Village road- Viilage to Agri filed 0.20 Km 1.00 1.00 
58.   Razaphe  2011 -12  Village road - Village to agri field  0.5Km  3.00  3.00  
59.   Razaphe 2011-12 Renovation /widening of the Agri lin k road  
Village to Agri field. 
1.876Km 10.00 10.00 
60.   Razaphe  2011 -12  Constrn of drainage - village area  1Km  1.00  1.00  
TOTAL (B) 268.18 268.18 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012   
 
162  
 
 
Appendix 1.3 (i) (contd.) 
Sl. No  Name of the 
sample 
district  
Name of 
sample Block  
Name of the 
selected Village  
Year  of 
allocation  
Name of the work  Unit  Estimated 
cost 
(`` ``in lakh)  
Amount released 
for works 
execution 
(`` ``in lakh)  
61.   
Mon Tobu 
Yakshu  2011 -12  Soiling and Metaling of Village Circular 
Road 
4.72 K m 72.59  
 
72.59  
 
62.   Pessao  2011 -12  Construction of Drainage at Approach Road  0.814 K m 16.28  16.28  
TOTAL (C ) 88.87 88.87 
63.   
Mon Chen 
Chenloisho  2010 -11  Cardamom Cultivation  41.42 Hac  20.70  20.70  
64.   Chenloisho  2009 -10  Construction of Village Road(WBM)  0.47 K m 11.94  11.94  
65.   Chenloisho  2009 -10  Construction of Village Road Soiling  2.54 K m 35.10  35.10  
66.   Choknyu  2008 -09  Construction of Agri -link Road  0.07 K m 0.66  0.66  
67.   ChaohaChingn 
yu 
2010 -11  Construction of Village Road  0.85 K m 12.78  12.78  
TOTAL (D) 81.18 81.18 
68.   
Tuensnag 
Chessore Kuthur 2011-12 Con. Of irrigation canal   8.00 KM 37.06  37.06 
69.   
Sangsangnyu  
Maksha  2009 -10  Cons. Village A/road  2.29K m 11.56  11.56  
70.   Helipong  2010 -11  Cons. Concrete foot steps  0.056 K m 5.36  5.36  
71.   Momching  2010 -11  Cons. Village A/road  0.46 K m 7.25  7.25  
72.   Momching  2009 -10  Land slide protection wall  6.033K m 4.96  4.96  
73.   Saochu  2009 -10  Nullah treatment  0.18 K m 4.96  4.96  
74.   Saochu  2009 -10  Afforestation / tree plantation  5 Hac  2.77  2.77  
75.   Hakchang  2009 -11  Cons. Horti link road to yachung  4.3 K m 4.73  4.73  
76.   Hakchang  2009 -11  Widening of A/road at wangkhu  4 K m 7.96  7.96  
77.   Hakchang  2011 -12  Improvement of A/ road  0.49 K m 13.22  13.22  
78.   
Noklak 
Nokyan  2010 -11  Cons. Horti link road  - 2.00  2.00  
79.   Nokyan  2099 -10  Cons. Horti link road  - 7.83  7.83  
80.   Yimpang  2008 -09  Cons. Approach Road  - 7.27  7.27  
81.   Yimpang  2010 -11  Cons. Agri link road  6  K m    23.79  23.79  
82.   Toknyu  2010 -11  Cons. Agri link road  3.61 K m 28.80  28.80  
83.   Ekhao  2011 -12  Cons. Foot step  - 2.99  2.99  
TOTAL (E) 172.51 172.51  

Appendices  
163  
 
Appendix 1.3 (i) (concld.)  
Sl. No  Name of the 
sample 
district  
Name of 
sample Block  
Name of the 
selected Village  
Year  of 
allocation  
Name of the work  Unit  Estimated 
cost 
(`` ``in lakh)  
Amount released 
for works 
execution 
(`` ``in lakh)  
84.   
Peren 
Jalukie 
Inbung 2008-09 Pine apple Cultivation 14.21 Hac 4.55 4.55 
85.   Beisimpui 2011-12 Cons. of terrace  22.69 Hac 11.34 11.34 
86.   Beisumpuikam  2011-12 Repairing of irrigation Channel 18.912 Km 2 2.69 22.69 
87.   Beisumpuikam  2011-12 Terrace construction  22.69  cum 11.35 11.3 5 
88.   Lilen 2011-12 Land slide protection wall 110.4 mtr 12.15 12.15 
89.   Old Jalukie 2008-09 Teak plantation 7.78 Ha 2.49 2.49 
90.   Old Jalukie 2010-11 Social forestry 101.5Ha 10.15 10.15 
91.   Jalukie B 2011-12 Community latrine 67 nos 41.54 41.54 
92.   Samjuiram 2011-12 Horticulture plantation 24.49 Ha 7.84 7.84 
93.   Samjuiram  2010-11 Check dam 50.12 cum 26.57 26.57 
94.   Samjuiram  2010-11 Construction of terrace 74.38 cum 37.19 37. 19 
95.   
Tening 
Nkialwa 2009-10 Soiling of agri link  road  3.927 K m 21.44 21.44 
96.   Mbaupungchi 2009-10 Widening of Village approach r oad  1.963 Km 20.47 20.47 
97.   Ntu 2011-12 Check dam 2 no  19.04 19.04 
98.   Ntu 2009-10 Digging  of pond  9.416 Km 5.51 5.51 
99.   Ntu 2008-10 Horti Plantation  42.07 Ha 13.46 13.46  
100.   NzauNamzan 2011-12 Village Road & widening of Vill age 
Approach Road  
4.09 Km 51.13 51.13 
TOTAL (F) 318.91 318.91 
GRAND TOTAL (A toF) 1083.70 1083.70 
 
  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012   
 
164  
 
Appendix 1.3 (ii) 
(Reference to Paragraph 1.3.13.6; page 39) 
Statement showing excess expenditure/short in execution/no use of material in the units of Projects under 4 DPCs  
Sl. 
No 
Name of 
the 
sample 
district 
Name of 
sample 
Block 
Name of 
the 
selected 
Village 
Year  of 
allocation 
Name of the work Unit Amount 
released 
(`in 
lakh) 
Execute 
d in 
units 
Amount 
required 
(`in 
lakh) 
Excess 
release 
(`in 
lakh) 
Remarks 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
1 
Dimapur 
Medziph 
ema 
Aoyimty 2009-10 Constrn. of drainage  2.98Km 9.0 0.510 
Km 
1.20 7.80 Calculated @ ` 2.36 lakh/ Km as per 
model estimate – nallah treatment  
2 Hekishe 2010-11 Soiling & metalling  0.49 Km 6.00 0.49Kkm 3.60 2.40 Work done was only soiling  hence 
material cost   released was excess  
3 samaguri  2008 -09  Con. Village approach 
road to community hall  
0.562 Km  5.09  0.045K m 0.58  4.51  Calculated @ ` 12.87 lakh /Km as per 
model estimate  for Dimapur 
Total(A)  20.09  5.38 14.71  
4 
Dimapur 
Dhnasiri 
par 
Doyapur  2010 -12  Cons. of irrigation 
channel 
10 Km  26.55  10 Km 15.93  10.62  No material was used  in this work and 
hence release of material cost  (40 per 
cent  of col. 6 ) proved excess  
5 Khekiho 2011-12 Agri link road 2.5Km 20.00 0.11Km 0.98 19.02  Calculated @ ` 8.91 lakh /Km as per 
model estimate for Dimapur 
6 khekiho 2011-12 Cons. Link road  5.5Km 29.71 2 Km 25.74 3.97 Calculated @ ` 12.87 lakh /Km as per 
model estimate. 
Total (B) 76.26  42.65 33.61  
7 
Mon Tobu 
Ukha 2009-10 Soiling and Metalling 
of Approach Road 
3.87 Km 
 
57.99 1 Km 14.98 43.01 The total length of road in the village is 
only 1 Km 
8 Ukha  2010 -11  Construction of Village 
Circular Road/Soiling 
& Metalling 
3.01  Km  
 
45.18  1 Km  15.00  30.18  The total length of road in the village is 
only 1 Km 
Total ( C) 103.17  29.98 73.19  

Appendices  
165  
 
Appendix 1.3 (ii) (contd.) 
Sl. 
No 
Name of 
the 
sample 
district 
Name of 
sample 
Block 
Name of 
the 
selected 
Village 
Year  of 
allocation 
Name of the work Unit Amount 
released 
(`in lakh) 
Executed 
in units 
Amount 
required  
(`in 
lakh) 
Excess 
release 
(`in 
lakh) 
Remarks 
9 
Mon Chen 
Chenloisho  2010 -11  Cardamom Cultivation  41.42 Hac  20.70  12 Hac  5.99  14.71  Short in execution. Excess amount 
calculated on proportionate basis. 
10 Wangti 2009-10 Construction of Agri-
link Road 
3.48 Km 38.83 3.48 Km 24.66 14.17 No material was used  in this work and 
hence release of `14.17 lakh being material 
cost  conformed  excess 
11 Wangti 2010-11 Construction of Agri-
link Road 
1.76 Km 21.09 1.76 Km 13.72 7.37 No material was used  in this work and 
hence release of ` 7.37 lakh being material 
cost  found excess 
12  Nganching  2011 -12  Construction of Water 
Tank 
198.3 Cu 
m 
18.52  62.58 Cum  5.76  12.76  Both the tanks constructed during 2011 -12 
are of the same size. 
13 ChaohaChi 
ngnyu 
2011-12 Renovation of 
Approach Road 
3.94 Km 52.49 0.12 Km 0.62 51.87 Calculated at the rate of ` 5.12 lakh /Km 
14 Jakphang 2011-12 Construction of Agri-
foot Path 
3.4 Km 28.16 1 Km 8.28 19.88 Short in execution. Excess amount 
calculated on proportionate basis. 
15 Jakphang 2007-08 Construction of Agri-
link Road 
3.88 Km 19.44 3.88 Km 13.56 5.88 No materials was used  in this work and 
hence release of `5.88 lakh being material 
cost  found  excess 
Total (D) 199.23  72.59 126.64  
16  
Tuensang 
Chessore 
Kiutsukiur  2007 -12  Agri link road from  
PMGSY road to 
Tongite 
9.805Km  86.47  7 Km  35.84  50.63   Calculated @ ` 5.12 lakh /Km as per the 
model SOR of NREGS for Tuensang. 
17 
Sangsang 
nyu 
Saochu 2010-11 Cons. of Agri link road  1.8 Km 7.36 I Km 2.41 4.95 ` 2.24 lakh due to short execution and ` 
2.71 lakh due to non use of materials on 
constructed road. 
18 Hakchang 2009-10 Cons. Agri link road - 
longpa 
5.57 Km 19.92 4 Km 12.45 7.47 ` 7.47 lakh were released as material 
component to the VDB. However as per the 
verification no material or works requiring 
material was executed on the Agri link 
roadconstructed. 
19 
Noklak 
Kengnyu 2008-12 Cons. A/ road to Panso 6.50Km 128.55 7 Km 60.36 68.19 Excess release of ` 16.55 lakh in net release 
and ` 51.64 lakh due to non-use of materials 
in the work. 
 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012   
 
166  
 
Appendix 1.3 (ii) (contd.) 
Sl. 
No 
Name of 
the 
sample 
district 
Name of 
sample 
Block 
Name of 
the 
selected 
Village 
Year  of 
allocation 
Name of the work Unit Amount 
released 
(`in lakh) 
Executed 
in units 
Amount 
required  
(`in 
lakh) 
Excess 
release 
(`in 
lakh) 
Remarks 
20  
Tuensang 
Noklak 
Yokhao  2009 -12  Cons. Road to Tsuwao  5.905 Km  111.73  6.3 Km  56.11  55.62  ` 10.93 lakh due to excess release and 
` 44.69 lakh being the material cost as no 
material was involved in the work. 
21  Nokyan  2011 -12  Cons. of Sanitary 
drainage  
0.22Km  17.75  0.450 Km  1.3 9 16.36  Calculated @ ` 3.08 lakh per KM 
22  Ekhao  2007 -10  Cons. A/road  1.18 Km  25.63  2 Km  19.20  6.43  Requirement Calculated at 60 per cent  of ` 
16. lakh cost of Cons. Approach road  per 
Km. 
23 Ekhao 2010-11 Reno/widening of 
A/road 
2.09Km 23.54 1.5Km 8.90 14.64 As no material was used , cost for 
reno/widening is calculated @ 70 per cent  of 
` 8.47 lakh- cost for renovation/widening of 
village road at Ekhao 
Total (E)  420.95  196.66 224.29  
24  
Peren 
jalukie 
New 
Beisumpui 
2009 -10  Agri link Road  3.493 Km  19.07  2 Km  10.92  8.15  Due to short execution and calculated @ ` 
5.46 lakh / Km 
25 New 
Beisumpui 
2010-11 Agri link Road  7.04 Km  38.50  4 Km 21.84 16.66 Due to short in execution and calculated @ ` 
5.46  lakh/ Km 
26  Inbung 2009 -11   Irrigation channel  6.41 Km  19.25  5 Km  15.00  4.25  @` 3 lakh/ Km 
27  Inbung 2011 -12  Village approach road.  2.07 K m 31.86  1.50 K m 17.13  14.73  Calculated @ `11.42 lakh / Km as the work 
done was widening of existing Village 
Approach road. 
28  Beisumpikam 2008 -12  Cons. Irrigation canal  41.70 Km 125.16  30 K m 90.00  35.16  Due to short in execution and calculated @ ` 
3 lakh/ Km 
29 Lilen 2009-12 Cons. Irrigation canal 9.55 Km 28.81 9.55 Km 17.29 11.52 Due to non use of material 
30 Old jalukie 2008-09 Cons. Agri link road  10.52Km 57.49 10.52 Km 34.49 23.00 Due to non use of material 
31 Jalukie B 2008-09 & 
2010-11 
Cons. Of irrigation 
channel 
24.82Km 74.46 21.72 Km 65.16 9.30 Due to short  in execution 
32 New jalukie 2008-09 Cons. Of Village road  3.93 Km 60.37 3.93 Km 40.02 20.35 Due to non- use of materials in part of the 
road (900 metres) & renovation/widening 
only was executed in remaining part of road 
constructed. 
33 Samzuiram 2008-09 Cons. Of Agri link road 13.62Km 74.40 9.400 Km 51.32 23.08 Due to short  in execution 
34 Samzuiram 2011-12 Cons. Of play ground  1 no 47.02 1no 5.15 41.87 As per the model SOR 
Total (F)  576.39  368.32 208.07  

Appendices  
167  
 
Appendix 1.3 (ii) (concld.) 
Sl. 
No 
Name of 
the sample 
district 
Name of 
sample 
Block 
Name of the 
selected 
Village 
Year  of 
allocation 
Name of the work Unit Amount 
released 
(`in lakh) 
Executed in 
units 
Amount 
required 
(`in lakh) 
Excess 
release 
(`in 
lakh) 
Remarks 
35 
Peren 
Tening 
Nkialwa 2009-11 Foot Steps 3.79 Km 23.25 2.050  Km 12.55 10.70 @ ` 6.12 lakh/ Km 
36 Nkialwa 2009-10 Soil o A/ road  7.769Km 32.16 2.4 Km 9.94 22.22 @ ` 4.14 lakh / Km 
37 Nkialwa 2011-12 Widening of Vill A/ road 4.054Km 42.28  2.2 Km 22.95 19.33 @ ` 10.43 lakh/ Km 
38 Nkialwa 2010-11 Agri foot path  3.363Km 16.88 2.200 Km 11.04 5.84 @ ` 5.02 lakh / Km 
39 Azailong 2008-09 Vill. Approach Road 3.630Km 55.67 3.630 Km 33.40 22.27 Due to non.use materials, material 
component released became excess 
40 Azailong 2009-10 Vill. Approach Road 3.660Km 56.14 2 Km 31.32 24.82 @ ` 15.66 lakh/ Km 
41 Azailong 2011-12 Open ring well 10 nos 8.46 4 nos 3.39 5.07 @ ` 8.46 lakh /Km 
42 Azailong 2009-10 Cons. Of village A/ Road  3.660Km 56.14 2 Km 31.20 24.94 Due to short in execution. 
43 Azailong 2010-11 Widening of Village 
Approach road  
2.474Km 25.80 1 Km 10.43 15.37 @ `10.43 lakh/ Km 
44 Azailong 2011-12 Foot step 3 Km 18.60 0.500 Km 3.06 15.54 @ ` 6.12 lakh / Km 
45 Mbaupungc 
hi 
2010-11 Cons. Of agri Link road  4.27 Km 23.33 3.500 Km 11.47 11.86 @ `5.46 lakh/ Km 
46 Mbaupungc 
hi 
2010-11 Cons. Of irrigation 
Channel  
4.822Km 14.47 1.450 Km 2.62 11.85 Due to non use of material and short 
execution. @ ` 3 lakh/ Km 
47 Ntu 2008-09 Agri link Road  11.26Km 61.45 8.100 Km 44.23 17.22  Due to short execution  
48  Ntu  2011 -12  Vill. Approach Road  1.69Km  35.96  1 Km  9.36  26.60  Due to non use of material and  short 
execution 
49 Ntu 2010-11 Agri foot  path  5.18 Km 25.98 3 Km 15.06 10.92 Due to short in execution  
50 Ntu 2009-10 Foot Step 3.375Km 20.65 1 Km 6.12 14.53 Due to short in execution  
51 Ntu 2010-11 Vill. Approach Road  1.08 Km 16.60 1 Km 9.20 7.40 Due to short in execution  
52 Ntu 2010-11  Irrigation Canal 14.43Km 17.32 1 Km 1.20 16.12 Due to non use of material and short in 
execution. 
53 NzauNamza 
n 
2010-11 Widening of Vill. Road  1.920Km 20.0 1.920 Km 12.00 8.00 Due non-use of materials 
54 NzauNamza 
n 
2010-11 Cons. Agri foot path  3.980Km 20.00 3.98 Km 12.00 8.00 Due non-use of materials 
55 Tening 2009-10  Cons. Village A/ Road  3.110Km 48.53 2.000 Km 18.72 29.81 Due to non use of material and short in 
execution. 
56 Tening 2009-11 Cons. Of foot steps 3.670Km 22.46 1.300 Km 7.96 14.50 Due to non use of material and short in 
execution. 
57 Tening 2011-12 Cons. Of open well  26 nos 13.77 10 nos 5.30 8.47 Due short in execution  
Total(G) 675.9  324.52 351.38  
Grand total (A to G) 2071.99  1040.10 1031.89  
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012   
 
168  
 
Appendix 1.3 (iii) 
(Reference to Paragraph 1.3.13.6; page 39) 
STATEMENT SHOWING THE DIVERSION OF PROJECTS UNDER NON-PERMISSIBLE CATEGORY OF WORKS UNDER 4 DPCs 
Sl. 
No 
Name of 
the 
sample 
district 
Name of 
sample 
Block 
Name of the 
selected Village 
Year  of 
allocation 
Name of the work Unit Amount 
released 
(`in 
lakh) 
Diverted 
amount   
(`in 
lakh) 
Audit comments 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
1 Dimapur 
Medziphema 
Aoyimty 2008-09 Cons. Village road  1.626 Km 12.05 12.05 Black topping of the vill. road 
2 Aoyimty  2011 -12  Improvement of village road  2.431 Km 30.00  30.00  Black topping of the vill. road  
3 Darogapathar  2010 -11  Nallah treatment for regulating water  2.79 Km 6.58  6.58  Black topping of the village road  
4 Kuda (nagarjan)  2011 -12  Con. Village roads , protection wall  9.95 Km  80.10  80.10  Black topping of different village roads 
C khel 
5 Sovima 2011-12 Improvement of a/road  (soiling & 
metal ling) 
0.234 Km 3.00 3.00 Black topping of village approac h road  
C khel 
6 Sovima  2011 -12  Drainage - nalla treatment  4.24 Km  10.00  10.00  Black topping of village approach road  
in c khel 
7 Sovima 2011-12 Irrigation channel 0.5 Km 2.00 2.0 0 Black topping of village approach road  
in C khel 
8 Diphupar 2011-12 Con. Village A/road 2.281 Km 2.2 8 2.28 black topping of village approach road  
9 Diphupar 2011-12 Con. Ring well 20 nos 10.00 10.0 0 Black topping of village road  
10  Sovima  2008 -09  Improvement of play ground  I No  2.50  2.50  Improvement of play ground  
11 Sovima 2010-11 Black topping of A/road  1.2 Km 3 0.00 30.00 Black topping of approach road  
12 Molvum 2009-10 Con. Community hall  1 no 7.00 7. 00 Constuction of Community hall  
13  sodzulhou  2009 -10  Renovation of Village road  0.44 Km 3.75  3.75  Cement concrete of the road  
14 Industrial village  2009-10 Improvement of A/roa d 0.820 Km 7.50 7.50 Black topping of the road  
Total (A)  206.76 206.76  
 

Appendices  
169  
 
Appendix 1.3 (iii) (Contd.) 
Sl. 
No 
Name of 
the 
sample 
district 
Name of 
sample 
Block 
Name of the 
selected Village 
Year  of 
allocation 
Name of the work Unit Amount 
released 
(`in 
lakh) 
Diverted 
amount   
(`in 
lakh) 
Audit comments 
15  
Dimapur 
Dhansiripar 
Disagaphu  2011 -12  Horticulture plantation  8Hac  1.22  1.22  Utili sed for cons truction of . Council 
Hall 
16  Disagaphu  2011 -12  Const. of Agri link road  0.5  Km 4.0  4.0  Utili sed for cons truction of . Council 
Hall  
17 Disagaphu 2011-12  Village approach road ph-III 1.5 Km 3.22 3.22 Utilised for construction of Counc il 
Hall  
18 Disagaphu 2011-12 Const. of v/app road  ph-III 1 .5 Km 5.0 5.0 Utilised for construction of Council 
Hall  
19  Disagaphu  2011 -12  Const. of v/app road  ph -III  1.5  Km 1.59  1.59  Utili sed for cons truction of  Council 
Hall  
20  Disagaphu  2011 -12  Const. of Agri link road   1.5  Km 5.0  5.0  Utili sed for cons truction of  Council 
Hall  
21 Khekhiho 2011-12 Cons. Irrigation canal  10 Km 1 5.00 15.00 RCC drainage  with high pillars  
Total (B)  35.03 35.03  
22 
Mon 
Tobu 
Pessao 2009-10 Construction of Approach Road from 
Monyakshu to Pessao 
3.96 Km 61.13 61.13 Fund was diverted for widening the 
existing PWD road in the same 
location 
23 Pessao 2009-10 Construction of Village Circular Road 2.25 Km 32.22 32.22 Fund was diverted for cons truction of 
Protection wall/retaining wall below 
Village Community Hall cum Guest 
House. 
24 Pessao 2008-09 Construction of Circular Road 3.5 4 Km 52.84 
 
52.84 
 
Fund was diverted for widening the 
existing road  
25  Monyakshu  2009 -10  Construction of Village Circular Road  6.35  Km 
 
95.35  
 
21.00  ` 30 lakh were spent for construction 
of Village Guard Barrack at 
Yangthoang Morung. Out of the total 
amount,  ` 9 lakh was meant from 
BRGF and the remaining ` 21 lakh was 
diverted from NREGA. 
26  Monyakshu  2009 -10  Construction of Village Circular Road  6.35  Km 95.35  
 
36.96  Material cost amounting to ` 36.96 
lakh was diverted for construction of 
Rest House in the Village. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012   
 
170  
 
Appendix 1.3 (iii) (Contd.) 
Sl. 
No 
Name of 
the 
sample 
district 
Name of 
sample 
Block 
Name of the 
selected Village 
Year  of 
allocation 
Name of the work Unit Amount 
released 
(`in 
lakh) 
Diverted 
amount   
(`in 
lakh) 
Audit comments 
27  
Mon 
Tobu 
Monyakshu  2011 -12  Soiling and Metal ling of Village 
Circular Road 
6.87 Km 107.13  
 
32.00  Fund amounting to  ` 32.lakh was 
diverted for construction of cemented 
plastering retention wall on both sides 
of PWD road towards Pessao village. 
28 yakshu 2011-12 Soiling and Metal ling of Village  
Circular Road 
4.72 Km 72.60 10.00 ` 10 lakh was utilised for renovation of 
EAC quarter by VDB Yakshu during 
2011-12. This work was not in the 
approved work plan for the year 2011-
12. 
Total (C)  516.62 246.15  
29 
Mon 
Chen 
Wangti 2009-10 Construction of Approach Road 1.07 K m 16.04 16.04 Fund (Material cost) diverted for 
construction of Gallery at Church end 
of play ground. 
30 Chenloisho 2011-12 Cons.  of water tank at Lemho  803.50 
Cum 
46.88 46.88 Diverted for single multipurpose water 
tank 
Total (D)  62.92 62.92  
31  
Tuensang 
Chessore 
Kuthur  2009 -12  Construction of CC slab for approach 
road  at Langake 
1 No  132.93  45.73  Out  of total Material component  of ` 
`132.93 lakh of  for  6 projects,  ` 
45.73 lakh  diverted for  CC Sllab 
32  Chessore  2009 -10  R/R of Approach Road at Alotsuye& 
widening of A/Road  to chessore 
4.33 Km 61.52  24.04  Material component amounting to 
` 24.04 lakh was diverted for 
construction of Retention wall  
33 Chessore 2009-10 Widening of A/Road  to Chessore   
town 
3.2 Km 45.52 27.88 Widening of A/road executed on 
existing PWD road  
34 Chessore 2011-12 Construction of Bridge on the r iver 
Muksuhke 
1 No 67.69 67.69 Material cost of ` 67.69 lakh out of 
total allocation of material cost of  
` 67.69 lakh pertaining to the year 
2011-12 diverted for construction of 
bridge on PWD road. 
 
 

Appendices  
171  
 
Appendix 1.3 (iii) (Contd.) 
Sl. 
No 
Name of 
the 
sample 
district 
Name of 
sample 
Block 
Name of the 
selected Village 
Year  of 
allocation 
Name of the work Unit Amount 
released 
(`in 
lakh) 
Diverted 
amount   
(`in 
lakh) 
Audit comments 
35  
Tuensang 
Sangsangnyu 
Maksha  2009 -10  Widening of A/road  0.50 Km 1.69  1.69  Utilised  for const uction . of community 
Hall  
36  Helipong  2011 -12  Widening of A/ road  0.26 Km 5.58  5.58  Utilised  for CC steps in front of  
37 Momching  2011-12 Widening of 
A /Road 
2.64Km 22.79 22.79 Utilised for construction of water tank  
and one retaining wall costing  
` 0.40 lakh  
38  Saochu  2011 -12  Widening of Agri link road  0.99 KM  
& A/road  0.24 KM 
1.23 Km 10.19  10.19  Utilised  for cons truction . of water tank 
in the village  
39  Hakchang  2008 -09  Constrn of Agri link road  2.9 Km  15.00  15.00  Utilised  for RCC culvert  &   retaining 
wall within the village  
40 
Noklak 
Yimpang 2011-12 Cons. of Sanitary drainage - 17.76 17.76 Amount intended for sanitary drainage 
diverted for construction of ground. 
41  New pangsha  2010 -12  Cons. Road to Lang  9.63  Km 118.34  85.67  The length of the road constructed is in  
5 Km and the requirement was  ` 80.00 
lakh. Culvert/ hume pipe culvert, 
retention wall, nallah side drain etc 
were not made on the road. Thus, no 
material component was was utilised in 
this work. Entire material utilized for 
construction of. bridge  
42 Pansho- B 2011-12 Cons. Road to Zinki 1 Km 59.06  59.06 Amount utilized for purchase of pipes 
to connect to the main source of water. 
43 Pansho. B 2011-12 Cons. Sanitary drain & irrigat ion 
channel  
- 39.06 39.06 Utilised for construction of PHC & 
Rest house in the village. 
44 Toknyu 2011-12 Cons. Road to ITC - 20.51 20.51 U tilised for the maintenance of 
PMGSY road to the village  
45  Ekhao  2011 -12  Cons. Sanitary drain  - 7.77  7.77  Utilised  for cons truction of  football 
ground  
Total (E)   625.41 450.42  
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012   
 
172  
 
Appendix 1.3 (iii) (Concld.) 
Sl. 
No 
Name of 
the 
sample 
district 
Name of 
sample 
Block 
Name of the 
selected Village 
Year  of 
allocation 
Name of the work Unit Amount 
released 
(`in 
lakh) 
Diverted 
amount   
(`in 
lakh) 
Audit comments 
46  
 
 
Phangjang  2011 -12  Village Guest house  1 no  13.57  13.57  Guest house is a non -permissible work 
due to involvement of higher material 
cost. 
47 Jalukie New  2008-10 Pine apple & Horticulture p lantation  69.82 Hac 22.34 22.34 This amount had be en utilised for 
construction of two marketing sheds in 
the village. 
48  Jalukie New  2011 -12  Renovation  & widening of Village 
Road 
7.36 Km  76.82  66.39  Renovation & widening of village road 
executed in 1 Km ( ` 10.43 lakh) only 
the remaining amount ( ` 66.39 lakh) 
utilised for construction of community 
hall at district HQ New Peren. 
Total (F)  112.73 102.30  
49 
Peren 
Tenin 
g 
Old Tesen 2011-12 Horticulture  Plantation  26 Hac 8.52 8.52 Diverted for Village approach road – 
Kiealsia to church. However, this work 
was not found executed as per MB. 
Total (G)  8.52 8.52  
Grand Total (A to G)  1567.99 1112.10  
 

Appendices  
173  
 
Appendix – 1.4 
(Reference to paragraph 1.4; page 54) 
Statement showing the details of fraudulent drawal of pay and allowances in respect of Chief Medical 
Officer, Zunheboto 
 (in  `) `) `) `)    
Sl 
No. 
Month Bill No& Date TV No. & Date Gross 
amount 
drawn 
Actual Gross 
amount to be 
drawn 
Excess 
Amount  
1 Nov-10 154 of 21/12/10 10 of 31/01/11 151044 1010 42 50002 
2 Dec-10 128 of 21/12/10 2 of 18/01/11 1003356 9234 02 79954 
3 Dec -10  138 of 21/12/10  11 of 31/01/11  198497  158190  40307  
4 Jan-11 176 of 25/01/11 113 of 11/03/11 341478 280 288 61190 
5 Jan -11  175 of 25/01/11  7 of 11/03/11  941456  861827  79629  
6 Jan-11 168 of 25/01/11 106 of 11/03/11 1726898 16 41617 85281 
7 Jan-11 170 of 25/01/11 108 of 11/03/11 703580 644 673 58907 
8 Jan-11 167 of 25/01/11 105 of 11/03/11 695120 648 611 46509 
9 Jan-11 172 of 25/01/11 110 of 11/03/11 1975981 18 20050 155931 
10  Jan -11  171 of 25/01/11  109 of 11/03/11  1480960  1409014  71946  
11 Feb-11 188 of 21/02/11 98 of 11/03/11 711226 664 717 46509 
12  Feb -11  189 of 21/02/11  99 of 11/03/2011  1726898  1641617  85281  
13 Feb-11 191 of 21/02/11 101 of 11/03/11 703580 64 1573 62007 
14 Feb-11 192 of 21/02/11 102 of 11/03/2011 1496325  1419729 76596 
15 Feb-11 193 of 21/02/11 103 of 11/03/11 1976029 1 818845 157184 
16 Feb-11 197 of 21/02/11 104 of 11/03/11 348236 28 3589 64647 
17  Feb -11  196 of 21/02/11  6 of 11/03/11  965228  850631  114593  
18 Mar-11 46 of 23/03/11 53 of 08/04/11 690671 6295 71 61100 
19  Mar -11  47 of 23/03/11  54 of 08/04/11  1500289  1410187  90102  
20 Mar-11 48 of 23/03/11 55 of 08/04/11 1976657 188 6696 89961 
21 Mar-11 51 of 23/03/11 56 of 08/04/11 280308 2161 98 64110 
22 Apr-11 95 of 25/04/11 74 of 6/5/11 2137548 20135 24 124024 
23 Apr-11 93 of 25/04/11 76 of 6/5/11 707349 660840  46509 
24  Apr -11  94 of 25/04/11  75 of 6/5/11  1613058  1510637  102421  
25 May-11 175 of 23/05/11 45 of 3/6/11 1609261 1547 261 62000 
26  May -11  177 of 23/05/11  46 of 3/6/11  2030445  1904445  126000  
27 May-11 174 of 23/05/11 44 of 3/6/11 673249 62674 9 46500 
28 Jun-11 200 of 21/06/11 43 of 4/7/11 2031445 1905 445 126000 
29 Jun-11 199 of 21/06/11 44 of 4/7/11 1612089 1532 295 79794 
30 Jun-11 198 of 21/06/11 45 of 4/7/11 673249 62674 9 46500 
31  Jul -11  286 of 21/7/11  23 of 9/8/11  1650969  1586569  64400  
32 Jul-11 287 of 21/7/11 24 of 9/8/11 2082396 19994 96 82900 
33 Aug-11 333 of 24/8/11 60 of 8/9/11 1606578 15582 78 48300 
34 Aug-11 332 of 24/8/11 59 of 8/9/11 696632 648332  48300 
35 Aug-11 334 of 24/8/11 61 of 8/9/11 2048714 20004 14 48300 
36 Sept.-2011 392 of 21/09/11 20 of 4/10/11 2090566  2010065 80501 
37 Sept.-2011 391 of 21/09/11 19 of 4/10/11 1654594  1590374 64220 
38  Oct -11  415 of 21/10/11  47 of 4/11/11  1655066  1569141  85925  
39 Oct-11 416 of 21/10/11 48 of 4/11/11 2090566 201 0387 80179 
40 Oct-11 414 of 21/10/11 46 of 4/11/11 698741 6374 33 61308 
Total 50956332 47890501 3065831 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012   
 
174  
 
Appendix – 1.5 
(Reference to paragraph 1.7; page 57 & 58) 
Comparison of rates and calculation of excess amount paid by Health & Family Welfare 
Department 
 
Sl. 
No.  
Item Rate Comparison of different 
firms in `. 
Excess rate 
allowed to  
Quantity purchased from Excess 
Amount paid 
in `` `` 
(col 5X6) . 
M/s Neile 
Enterprises as per 
Bill No.273 dated 
27-08-09  
M/s Nienu Drugs 
House as per Bill 
No.536 dated  
19-01-10  
M/s Neile Enterprises  M/s Neile Enterprises as per Bill No.273 
dated 27-08-09  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
1 I.V. Stand  3500  1250  2250  212  477000  
2 Examination table  58870  24000  34870  8 278960  
3 Dressing trolley  15000  4800  10200  9 91800  
4 Instrument trolley  15000  4250  10750  9 96750  
5 Centrifuge 
Machine 200000 9520 190480 4 761920 
TOTAL 1706430 
Add  4%  N.S.T 68257 
Excess amount paid to M/s Neile Enterprises  due allowing of higher rate (A) 1774687 
 
  M/s Neile 
Enterprises as per 
Bill No.273 dated 
27 -08 -09  
M/S North East 
Marketing Company 
as per Bill No.273 
dated 27 -08 -09  
M/S North East 
Marketing Company  
M/S North East Marketing Company 
as per Bill No.273 dated 27-08-09   
1 Glass slide 60 200 140 250 35000 
2 Cover slip  55 200 145 250 36250 
3 Slide marker 18 200 182 250 45500 
4 Sterile test Tube 700 1000 300 800 240000 
5 Methylated Spirit  120 200 80 100 8000 
TOTAL 364750 
Add  4%  N.S.T  14590 
Excess amount paid to M/S North East Marketing Company due allowing of higher rate  (B)  379340 
 
  M/s Neile 
Enterprises as per 
Bill No.273 dated 
27-08-09 
M/s Nienu Drugs 
House as per Bill 
No.536 dated  
19-01-10  
M/s Nienu Drugs 
House  
Quantity purchased from M/s Nienu 
Drugs House as per Bill No.536 dated  
19-01-10  
 
1 Glass slide 60 70 10 500 5000 
2 Cover slip  55 70 15 500 7500 
3 Bed side Locker 4000 8100 4100 400 1640000 
4 Cylinder  trolley 1450 2350 900 30 27000 
TOTAL 1679500 
Add  4%  N.S.T  67180  
Excess amount paid to M/s Nieinu Drugs House  due allowing of higher rate (C)  1746680 
 
 
 
M/s Kuotsu 
Enterprises as per 
Bill No.822 dated 
30-03-11 
M/S North East 
Marketing Company 
as per Bill No.939 
dated 28-03-12 
M/S North East 
Marketing Company  
M/S North East Marketing Company as 
per Bill No.939 dated 28-03-12  
1 Mattress, Coir 
Rubberised 3441 7991 4550 419 1906450 
2 Green Blanket 880 1990 1110 3701 4108110 
TOTAL 6014560 
Add  4%  N.S.T  240582 
Excess amount paid to M/S North East Marketing Comp any due allowing of higher rate (D) 6255142 
GRAND  TOTAL (A to D)    10156049 
 

Appendices  
175  
 
Appendix 1.6 
(Reference to paragraph 1.8; page 59) 
Statement showing the details of fraudulent drawal of pay and allowances in respect of DIS, 
Niuland 
(in  `` ``)    
Sl 
No. 
Month Bill No& Date TV No. & Date Gross 
amount 
drawn 
Actual 
Gross 
amount to 
be drawn 
Excess 
Amount  
1 March'10 09 of 28/04/10 250 of 30/4/10 1031449  1011449  20000 
2 March'10  1 of 28/04/10  242 of 30/4/10  888978  868978  20000  
3 March'10 10 of 28/04/10 251 of 30/4/10 472399  452399  20000 
4 April'10  13 of 14/5/10  252 of 14/5/10  740789  720535  20254  
5 April'10 20 of 14/5/10 245 of 14/5/10 938130  923454  14676 
6 April'10 21 of 14/5/10 243 of 14/5/10 1193116  1163116  30000 
7 May'10 28 of 31/5/10 102 of 4/6/10 1017186  987186  30000 
8 May'10 22 of 31/5/10 101 of 4/6/10 1126252  1096252  30000 
9 May'10  25 of 31/5/10  99 of 4/6/10  506766  486512  20254  
10 May'10 24 of 31/5/10 98 of 4/6/10 448089  437962  10127 
11  May'10  23 of 31/5/10  Nil of 4/6/10  814094  783713  30381  
12 June'10 55 of 05/7/10 122 of Nil 891924  861543  30381 
13 June'10 56 of 05/7/10 123 of Nil 792413  762032  30381 
14 June'10 54 of 05/7/10 121 of Nil 1230052  1199080  30972 
15 June'10 53 of 05/7/10 120 of Nil 1249789  1219197  30592 
16  July'10  68 of 30/7/10  70 of 03/8/10  892819  862438  30381  
17 July'10 71 of 03/8/10 72 of 03/8/10 1270926  1240926  30000 
18  July'10  67 of 30/7/10  68 of 03/8/10  861281  830900  30381  
19 July'10 70 of 30/7/10 71 of 03/8/10 1338931  1328831  10100 
20 Aug'10 97 of 03/9/10 110 of 03/9/10 1275330  1248030  27300 
21 Aug'10 98 of 02/9/10 111 of 03/9/10 1299711  1267911  31800 
22 Aug'10 100 of 02/9/10 113 of 03/9/10 877176  846795  30381 
23  Aug'10  99 of 02/9/10  112 of 03/9/10  890085  859704  30381  
24 Sept'10 139 of 12/10/10 340 of 14/10/10 870578  820931  49647 
25  Sept'10  140 of 12/10/10  341 of 14/10/10  841269  791622  49647  
26 Oct'10 144 of Nil 258 of 08/11/10 1674779  1625336  49443 
27 Oct'10 145 of 1/11/10 259 of 08/11/10 838162  823023  15139 
28  Oct'10  151 of 1/11/10  265 of 08/11/10  805128  769651  35477  
29 Oct'10 150 of 1/11/10 264 of 08/11/10 844378  806770  37608 
30  Oct'10  147 of 1/11/10  261 of 08/11/10  553707  537419  16288  
31 Nov'10 165 of 2/12/10 150 of 3/12/10 944263  894496  49947 
32 Nov'10 166 of 2/12/10 149 of 3/12/10 967393  917446  49767 
33 Nov'10 160 of Nil 144 of 3/12/10 1476357  1435808  40549 
34 Nov'10 162 of 2/12/10 146 of 3/12/10 914001  883423  30578 
35  Nov'10  159 of 2/11/10  143 of 3/12/10  1379629  1339081  40548  
36 Dec'10 190 of 3/1/11 6 of 4/1/11 1478737  1437413  41324 
37  Dec'10  192 of 3/1/11  5 of 4/1/11  935992  897304  38688  
38 Dec'10 194 of 03/1/11 4 of 4/1/11 960753  918173  42580 
39 Dec'10 193 of 03/1/11 2 of 4/1/11 956916  914296  42620 
40 Dec'10 189 of 03/01/11 1 of 4/1/11 1380667  1339343  41324 
41 Jan'11 239 of 2/3/11 17 of 3/2/11 3004521  2923919  80602 
42  Jan'11  240 of 2/1/11  18 of 3/2/11  965395  934817  30578  
43 Jan'11 244 of 02/01/11 22 of 3/2/11 1003869  961239  42630 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012   
 
176  
 
44 Jan'11 245 of 02/01/11 23 of 3/2/11 1253386  1196746  56640 
45 Feb'11 254 of 01/03/11 79 of 03/03/11 1022349  979749  42600 
46 Feb'11 255 of 01/03/11 80 03/03/11 1244328  1187528  56800 
47 Feb'11 252 of 1/3/2011 77 of 03/03/11 925900  894700  31200 
48 Feb'11 251 of 02/03/11 76 of 03/03/11 3018661  2922497  96164 
49 11-Mar 163 of 8/4/11 289 of 04/7/11 1007967  958020  49947 
50 11-Mar 162 of 8/4/11 288 of 4/7/11 1275315  1208719  66596 
51 11-Mar 158 of 8/4/11 284 of 7/4/11 3535040  3434290  100750 
52 11-Apr 85 of 3/5/11 298 of 2/5/11 1011023  963596  47427 
53 11-Apr 86 of 3/5/11 299 of 2/5/11 1262633  1200656  61977 
54 11-Apr 82 of 3/5/11 295 of 2/5/11 3838761  3738011  100750 
55 11-May 103 of 2/7/11 04 of 31/5/11 1368304  1305068  63236 
56 11-May 104 of 2/7/11 05 of 31/05/11 894039  852384  41655 
57 11-May 100 of 2/7/11 01 of 31/5/11 3696128  3567479  128649 
58 11-Jun 1 of 1/7/11 15 of 1/7/11 3909155  3784140  125015 
59 11-Jun 4 of 1/7/11 18 of 1/7/11 1451840  1385620  66220 
60 11-Jun 5 of 1/7/11 19 of 1/7/11 924199  874537  49665 
Total 76483207  73884193  2599017 
 
 
 

Appendices 
 
177  
 
APPENDIX 2.3.1 
(Reference to Paragraph.  2.3.3 ; 2.3.10.2, 2.3.10.2(iii), 2.3.10.2(iv), 2.3.10.10,2.3.11.4, 2.3.11.6, 2.3.11.7 & 
2.3.11.8 pages 70, 73, 74, 75, 76, 92, 95, 96, 97 and 98) 
Statement showing DDOs/projects/institutions taken up for Joint Physical Verification 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of DDO/Farm/Institution/Scheme/Project 
 (a) Selected Drawing and Disbursing Officers 
1. Director, Veterinary and Animal Husbandry Depart ment, Kohima 
2. Executive Engineer, Veterinary & Animal Husbandr y Division, Kohima 
3. District Veterinary Officer, Dimapur 
4. Bacteriologist, Disease Investigation Unit, Dima pur 
5. District Veterinary Officer, Peren 
6. Regional Swiss Breed Cattle Breeding Farm, Peren  
7. District Veterinary Officer, Mokokchung 
8. Sub-Divisional Veterinary Officer, Mangkolemba 
(b) State Farms 
1. State Cattle Breeding Farm, Lerie, Kohima 
2. State Cattle Breeding Farm, Medziphema, Dimapur 
3. State Cattle Breeding Farm, Aliba, Mokokchung 
4. Regional Brown Swiss Cattle Breeding Farm, Jaluk ie, Peren 
5. Dairy Upgrading Centre, Peren 
6. Surti Buffalo Farm, Jalukie, Peren 
7. Pig Breeding Farm, Lerie, Kohima 
8. Pig Breeding Farm, Medziphema, Dimapur 
9. Pig Breeding Farm, Jalukie, Peren 
10. Pig Breeding Farm, Merankong, Mokokchung 
11. Poultry Farm, Kohima 
12. Poultry Farm, Dimapur 
13. Chick Rearing Centre, Medziphema 
14. Poultry Upgrading Centre, Peren 
15. State Poultry Farm, Jalukie, Peren 
16. Poultry Farm/Hatchery Unit, Mokokchung 
(c) Villages under Mithun Project 
1. Jotsoma, Kohima 
2. Khonoma, Kohima 
3. Touphema, Kohima 
4. Tuophephezu, Kohima 
5. Gariphema, Kohima 
6. Chedema, Kohima 
7. Zhadima, Kohima 
8. Tsuuma, Dimapur 
9. Tsiepama, Dimapur 
10. Mbaupungchi (including Mbaupungwa, Nkiailwa and  Azailong), Peren 
11. Punglwa, Peren 
12. Gaili, Peren 
(d) Projects under White Revolution 
1. Model Dairy Project, Kohima  
2. Model Dairy Project, Dimapur 
3. Model Dairy Project, Peren (not located) 
4. Model Dairy Project, Mokokchung (Shilutemsu-Eart h Farming Society) 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
178  
 
APPENDIX 2.3.1 (Contd.) 
Sl 
No. 
Name of DDO/Farm/Institution/Scheme/Project 
5. Jameo SHG, Phesema (Community Dairy Project) , Kohima  
6. Jotsoma Baptist Church (Community Dairy Project) , Kohima 
7. Chiecha Baptist Church (Community Dairy Project) , Kohima 
8. NCRC, Kohima Village (Community Dairy Project), Kohima 
9. NCRC, Chedema (Community Dairy Project), Kohima 
10. Lotha Baptist Church (Community Dairy Project),  Diphupar, Dimapur 
11. Hope Dairy Farm (Community Dairy Project), New Socunoma, Dimapur 
12 . Visa SHG  (Community Dairy Project), Dimapur  
13. Razhaphe Baptist Church (Community Dairy Projec t), Dimapur 
14. Selie SHG (Community Dairy Project), Medziphema , Dimapur 
15. Baptist Church, Gaili (Community Dairy Project) , Peren 
16. Baptist Church, Punglwa (Community Dairy Projec t), Peren 
17 . Ngalwa Baptist Church ( Community Dairy Project ), Peren  
18. Chubayong SHG, Tuli (Community Dairy Project), Mokokchung 
(e) Slaughter House, Dimapur  
1. Civil works for establishment of Slaughter House , Khopanalla, Dimapur 
(f) Composite Pig Breeding Farm, Jalukie, Peren 
1. Civil works for establishment of Composite Pig B reeding Farm, Jalukie, Peren 
(g) Proposed Veterinary College, Jalukie, Peren 
1.  Civil works for establishment of Veterinary College, Jalukie, Peren  
(h) Beneficiaries under Entrepreneur Development 
1.  Makenla Changkija, Dimapur  
2. Rampaukugwangle, Railway Bazar, Dimapur 
3. Akangbe Rim, Peren 
4. Alui, Old Peren town, Peren 
5. Jangtmaungam, Mhainamtsi, Peren 
6.  Keheidwa, Peren town  
7. Saheigwangbe, New Jalukie, Peren 
8. Opangreba, Chuchuyimpang Village, Mokokchung 
9. Dr. Vizotuolie Belho Tsakou, Kohima 
10. Jacob Singson, Minister Hill, Kohima 
11. Keneinguzo Solo, T. Khel, Kohima Village 
12. Mavil Kraho, Viswema, Kohima 
13. Mezhusenyu Suokhrie, L. Khel, Kohima Village 
14. Shetoba Yimchunger, Keziekie, Kohima 
15. Thephuhulie Belho, T Khel, Kohima Village 
16. Vibol Tsukru, Viswema Village, Kohima 
(i) Veterinary Hospitals 
1. Veterinary Hospital, Dimapur 
2. Veterinary Hospital, Mokokchung 
3.  Veterinary Hospital, Kohima  
(j) Veterinary Dispensaries 
1. Veterinary Dispensary, Niuland, Dimapur 
2. Veterinary Dispensary, Peren 
3. Veterinary Dispensary, Jalukie, Peren 
4. Veterinary Dispensary, Changtongya, Mokokchung 
5. Veterinary Dispensary, Jakhama, Kohima 
6.  Veterinary Dispensary, Khuzama, Kohima (not found)  

Appendices 
 
179  
 
APPENDIX 2.3.1 (Concld.) 
Sl 
No. 
Name of DDO/Farm/Institution/Scheme/Project 
(k) Disease Diagnostic Laboratories 
1. DDL, Dimapur 
2. DDL, Peren  
3. DDL, Mokokchung 
4. DDL, Mangkolemba  
5. DDL. Kohima 
(l) Stockman Centres/Veterinary Outposts/Veterinary Health Centres 
1. SMC, Medziphema, Dimapur 
2. SMC, Diphupar, Dimapur 
3. Athibung Veterinary Health Centre, Peren  
4. Mhanamtsi Veterinary Health Centre, Peren 
5. SMC, Merangkong, Mokokchung  
6. SMC, Sabangya, Mokokchung 
7. SMC, Longnak, Mokokchung 
8. SMC, Chuchu Town, Mokokchung 
9. SMC, Viswema, Kohima 
10 . SMC, Kigwema, Kohima  
11. VOP, Kohima Village, Kohima 
12 . VOP, Rusoma, Kohima  
13. VOP, Kedima, Kohima 
(m) Quarantine Check Posts 
1.  QCP, New Golaghat Road, Dimapur  
2. QCP, Old Golaghat Road, Dimapur 
3. QCP, Tuli , Mokokchung  
4. QCP, Khuzama, Kohima 
5.  QCP, Kedima, Kohima  
 
  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
180  
 
APPENDIX 2.3.2 
(Reference to Paragraph 2.3.7, Page 66) 
Statement showing activities proposed in 11 th  five year plan, total agreed outlay in the 
annual plans, budget provision made and actual expenditure during 2007-12. 
(`` `` in crore) 
Sl 
No.  
Activities (Minor head wise) Outlay in 
11 th  Five 
Year Plan 
Total agreed 
outlay in 
Annual Plans 
Budget provision 
made during the 
period 
Actual 
expenditure 
incurred 
1. Direction and Administration 3.36 1.99 3.98 3.88  
2. Animal Health 9.20 3.04 14.93 15.03 
3. Cattle and Buffalo 
Development 
2.50 13.24 13.22 13.22 
4.  Poultry Development  2.40  0.39  3.44  3.44  
5. Sheep & Wool Development 0.28 0.20 0.93 0.93 
6.  Piggery Development  3.50  1.43  15.80  15.69  
7. Other livestock development 0.28 0.11 0.11 0.11 
8. Fodder & feed development 4.13 5.74 7.62 7.42 
9. Administrative investigation 
and statistics 
1.00 0.38 2.48 2.48 
10. Other expenditure 28.04 30.31 24.78 24.78 
11. Dairy development 1.30 0.07 6.57 6.57 
12. Agri-research & education 3.84 13.58 13.43 13.6 3 
13. Animal husbandry (Capital) 4.17 7.87 24.16 40.4 3 
14. Activities not included in Five 
year Plan 
-- 36.55 9.38 2.38 
 Total: 64.00 114.90 140.83 149.99 
(Source: Departmental records and Detailed Appropriation Accounts) 
  

Appendices 
 
181  
 
APPENDIX 2.3.3  
(Reference to Paragraph 2.3.10.2 and 2.3.11.1, Pages 74, 75, 76 and 93) 
Statement showing cattle delivered to beneficiaries of Community Dairy Projects and 
Model Dairy Projects by suppliers and production of the projects 
 
Sl 
No. 
Name of Project Details of cattle received by beneficiaries and production 
A. Community Dairy Projects 
1. Jameo SHG, Phesema, 
Kohima 
10 cows (3 milch cows without calves and 7 non-preg nant heifers). It was 
stated that 7 cows died within one year. Three heif ers of inferior quality 
were seen. 
Milk production: 12 litres/day (average) poured to collection van.  
2. Jotsoma Baptist Church, 
Kohima 
Details of actual cows received could not be stated . 5 pregnant heifers and 
one milch cows were seen. 
Milk production:4 litres/day (average) poured daily to collection van.  
3. Chiecha Baptist Church, 
Kohima 
10 non-pregnant heifers were received. It was state d two died shortly after 
delivery. 5 cows, 1 heifer and 5 calves were seen. 
Milk production: 45 litres/day (average) sold locally.  
4. NCRC, Kohima Village, 
Kohima 
9 heifers (some pregnant) and 1 milch cow with calf  was received. More 
than 10 cows were seen. 
Milk production: 25 litres/day (average) sold locally.  
5. NCRC, Chedema, 
Kohima 
8 non-pregnant heifers and 2 calves were received. 1 milch cow, one 
pregnant heifer and 2 calves were seen. 
Milk production: 5 litres/day (average) poured to collection van.  
6. Lotha Baptist Church, 
Diphupar, Dimapur 
10 cows (6 milch cows with 2 cows, 1 pregnant heife r, 2 dry cows and 1 
barren cow) were received. The project was stated t o be abandoned as it 
was not viable due to the poor quality of cows supplied. 
Milk production: Nil.  
7. Hope Dairy Farm, New 
Socunoma, Dimapur 
10 cows (milch cow with calves) were stated to be l ifted from Dimapur by 
the beneficiaries themselves. However, it was state d by the beneficiaries 
that the project was winded up in early part of 201 1 due to non-availability 
of fodder. 
Milk production: Nil.  
8. Visa SHG, Dimapur The project could not be trace d by the department and hence could not be 
verified. 
Milk production: Nil.  
9. Razhaphe Baptist Church, 
Dimapur 
10 cows (4 milch cows with 3 calves, 1 pregnant hei fer, 3 non-pregnant 
heifers and two very old inferior quality cows) were received. However, one 
died within one month and the rest died within one year of delivery. 
Therefore, the project is no longer in existence. 
Milk production: Nil.  
10. Selie SHG, Medziphema, 
Dimapur 
10 cows (4 pregnant heifers and 6 dry cows) were st ated to have been lifted 
from Dimapur by the beneficiaries themselves. One was stated to have been 
slaughtered due to injury, another died and the oth er 8 died of FMD within 
one year of delivery. Therefore, the project is no longer in existence. 
Milk production: Nil.  
11. Baptist Church, Gaili, 
Peren 
The departmental representative was not aware of th e location of the 
project. The Church Pastor stated that the benefici aries had received cash 
for purchase of 9 cows-amount not known. He also st ated the location was 
shifted to an area which was inaccessible. Therefor e, the project could not 
be physically verified. 
Milk production: Nil  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
182  
 
APPENDIX 2.3.3 (Concld.) 
Sl 
No. 
Name of Project Details of cattle received by beneficiaries and production 
12. Baptist Church, Punglwa, 
Peren 
10 cows (6 pregnant and 4 non-pregnant heifers) sta ted to have been lifted 
from Dimapur by the beneficiaries themselves. Four cows died and the rest 
were stated to have been disposed off as they were weak and of inferior 
quality. The project is no longer in existence but 3 cows (local breed) were 
seen. 
Milk production: Nil.  
13. Ngalwa Baptist Church, 
Peren 
8 cows (2 milch cows with calves, 2 pregnant heifer s and 4 old non-
pregnant heifers) were stated to have been lifted f rom Assam by the 
beneficiaries as arranged by the supplier. 12 cows were seen--only 2 cows 
supplied by the department and the rest (local bree d) stated to have been 
bought by the beneficiaries themselves. 
Milk production: Nil.  
14. Chubayong SHG, Tuli, 
Mokokchung 
It was stated that the beneficiaries procured 10 co ws with cash of `2 lakh 
given by the department. However, only 4 milch cows  and 4 calves were 
seen. 
Milk production: 30 litres/day (average) sold locally.  
B. Model Dairy Projects 
1. Model Dairy Project, 
Ciesema Village, Kohima 
(Kelhousithe Mere) 
40 cows (2 pregnant heifers, 18 non-pregnant heifer s and 20 milch cows 
without calves) were stated to have been received. However, only 10 cows 
and 4 bull calves were seen. It was stated that 26 cows were sold due to low 
yield and ill health and is to be replaced. 
Milk production: 10 -15 litres/day (average) sold locally  
2. Model Dairy Project, Urra 
Village, Dimapur (Aru 
Khate) 
It was stated by the beneficiary that he had receiv ed `13 lakh from the 
department with which cows were procured from Megha laya. 30 milch 
cows and 20 bulls/calves were seen. 
Milk production: 250 litres/day (average) poured to collection van.  
3. Model Dairy Project, 
Peren (Selie, 
Keriekangmaa Society) 
The project could not be physically verified as the  departmental officer 
accompanying the Audit Party could not trace the sa me. On enquiry at 
NSDF, Kohima, it was stated that the project is not functional. 
Milk production: Nil  
4. Model Dairy Project, 
Mokokchung 
(Shilutemsu, Earth 
Farming Society) 
The number of cows received could not be stated by the Manager/Member 
of the farm and the actual beneficiary was not pres ent. 24 cows (9 milch 
cows, 7 pregnant heifers, 1 bull and 7 calves were seen. 
Milk production: 65 litres/day (average), 30 litres  poured to collection van 
and 35 litres sold locally.  
 

Appendices 
 
183  
 
APPENDIX 2.3.4 
(Reference to Paragraph 2.3.10.8 (e), Page 90) 
Statement of works (under NABARD) stated to have carried out by the EE, V&AH Division which were actually not carried out as 
confirmed by the Joint Verification Team during spot verification. 
 
Sl. 
No 
 
Name of Farm 
Year Name of works stated to have carried out 
by the EE 
Total 
expenditure 
incurred 
Construction works not  carried 
out as seen  by the Joint 
Verification Team 
Fictitious 
payment 
made by the 
EE. 
Name of contractor 
1 Pig Breeding 
Farm, 
Merangkong 
2007-08 1.Renovation of    farrowing house-1 
2. Renovation of Feed Godown 
620000.00 
73200.00 
1.Renovation of farrowing house-1 
2. Renovation of Feed Godown 
693200.00 M/s Hi-tech Constructions 
 
2 
 
Pig Breeding 
Farm, 
Merangkong 
 
 
2009-10 
1.Construction of Pig Shed No.3 
2.Construction of Pig Shed No.6 
3.Construction of Pig Shed No.8 
4.R/renovation of FM quarter 
5.Renovation of FM Office 
1826000.00 
1826000.00 
1826000.00 
235000.00 
234000.00 
1.Construction of Pig Shed   No.3 
2.Construction of Pig Shed No.6 
3.Construction of Pig Shed No.8 
4.R/renovation of FM quarter 
5.Renovation of FM Office 
 
 
5947000.00 
1. Hi-tech Construction 
2. P.Meren Jamir 
3. T. Mar Pongener 
4. Global Enterprises 
5, K.M Keyhuo & M/s Associate 
Constructions 
3 Pig Breeding 
Farm, Lerie 
 
2008-09 
1.Construction of Farrowing House 
2. Construction of Attendant Barrack 
6843000.00 
1114000.00 
1.Construction of Farrowing House 
2. Construction of Attendant Barrack 
 
7957000.00 
1. M/s Hi-tech Construction 
2. M/s H.P. Enterprises 
4 Cattle Breeding 
Farm, Lerie 
 
2010-11 
1.Construction of Paddock 
2.Development for fodder 
396000.00 
635000.00 
1.Construction of Paddock 
2.Development for fodder 
1031000.00 M/s H.P Enterprises 
 
 
5 
 
 
Pig Breeding 
Farm, Jalukie 
 
 
2007-08 
1.Construction of VFA quarter 
2.Construction of Weaner House 
3.Construction of Feed Godown 
4.Copnstruction of Type-III quarter 
5.Construction of Attendant Barrack 
6.Construction of FM quarter 
7.Renovation of Pig Shed No.1 
993000.00 
320000.00 
2400000.00 
1085700.00 
1138000.00 
1150000.00 
890300.00 
1.Construction of VFA quarter 
2.Construction of Weaner House 
3.Construction of Feed Godown 
4.Copnstruction of Type-III quarter 
5.Construction of Attendant Barrack 
6.Construction of FM quarter 
7.Renovation of Pig Shed No.1 
 
 
 
 
7977000.00 
M/s Hi-tech Constructions 
 
6 
 
Pig Breeding 
Farm, Jalukie 
 
2009-10 
1.Construction of Pig Breeding Shed No.1 
2. Construction of Pig Breeding Shed No.2 
3500000.00 
1600000.00 
 
12.5% Internal Water Supply and 
sanitation 
 
415236.00 
1. N.R. Zeliang 
2. M/s Hi-tech Constructions 
3. K. Mark Gurung 
7 Cattle Breeding  
 
Farm,Jalukie 
 
 
2010-11 
1.Construction of Milch Cow Shed 
2.Construction of Heifer Shed 
3.Construction of Manager Quarter 
4.Construction of Bull Shed 
5.Construction of water reservoir 
4289000.00 
2420000.00 
1658000.00 
  333000.00 
  300000.00 
1.Construction of Milch Cow Shed 
2.Construction of Heifer Shed 
3.Construction of Manager Quarter 
4.Construction of Bull Shed 
5.Construction of water reservoir 
 
 
9000000.00 
 
1. M. Ikeshe Sukhalu 
2. M/s North East Enterprise 
3. Dennis Zeliang 
4. M/s Associate Construction 
5. Seheizhu Angami 
6. M. Solo Engineering  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
184  
 
APPENDIX 2.3.4 (Concld.) 
Sl. 
No 
 
Name of Farm 
Year Name of works stated to have carried out 
by the EE 
Total 
expenditure 
incurred 
Construction works not  carried 
out as seen  by the Joint 
Verification Team 
Fictitious 
payment 
made by the 
EE. 
Name of contractor 
8 Cattle Breeding 
Farm, 
Medziphema 
 
2010-11 
 
1.Construction of Bull Shed 
 
268800.00 
 
1.Construction of Bull Shed 
 
268800.00 
Zehezhu Angami 
 
9 
 
Pig Breeding 
Farm, 
Medziphema 
 
2009-10 
 
1.Minor repair of Pig Shed No.1 
2.Minor repair of Pig Shed No.2 
 
 
1299000.00 
  519000.00 
1.Addl.10% for side levelling 
2.Addl.7.5% internal electrification 
3.Addl.12.5% for internal water 
supply and sanitation installation 
4.Addl.13% departmental charges 
181824.83 
136368.59 
 
227281.05 
322648.16 
N.R. Zeliang 
10 Pig Breeding 
Farm, 
Medziphema  
2008-09 Internal re-wiring to piggery sheds 1000000. 00 Pig Breeding Farm, Medziphema 1000000.00 M/s Hi-t ech Constructions 
11 Pig Breeding 
Farm, 
Medziphema 
2008-09 Construction of  feed godown 1981000.00 Con struction of  feed godown 1981000.00 M/s Hi-tech Con structions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
 
185  
 
APPENDIX 2.3.5 
Results of joint physical verification of beneficiaries under Entrepreneur Development 
(Reference to Paragraph 2.3.10.10 (ii), Page 93) 
Sl 
No.  
Name of the beneficiary 
and location 
Present status 
1. Makenla Chankija, 
Dimapur 
The beneficiary could not be located. It was stated that the 
project was shifted to Tsurang Valley in Mokokchung. 
2. Rampaukugwangle, 
Railway Bazar, Dimapur 
The project is not longer in existence. It was stated that some 
chicks died and the rest were sold off to buy piglets in 2009. 
3. Akangbe Rim, Ngwalwa, 
Peren 
Around 80 chicks (2 to 3 month old) were seen. 
4. Jangtmaungam, 
Mhainamtsi, Peren 
The project is no longer in existence. 
5. Keheidwa, Peren Town A commercial poultry farm i n Peren town was shown with 
around 1300 chicks and 20 chickens. 
6. Saheigwangbe, New 
Jalukie, Peren 
The project is no longer in existence. 
7. Opangreba, 
Chuchuyimpang Village, 
Mokokchung 
Around 40 chicks (broiler) were seen. 
8. Dr.Vizotuolie Belho, 
Kohima 
The project is no longer in existence. It was stated that the 
beneficiary had shifted to piggery. 
9. Jacob Singson, Ministers 
Hill, Kohima 
The project is no longer in existence. It was stated that the 
beneficiary had left Kohima. 
10. Mezhusenyu Suokhrie, 
Kohima Village 
The project is no longer in existence. It was stated that the 
beneficiary had shifted to piggery. 
11. Shetoba Yimchunger, 
Keziekie, Kohima 
The project is no longer in existence. It was stated that the 
beneficiary had shifted to Shamator, Tuensang. 
12. Thephuhulie Belho, 
Kohima Village 
The project is no longer in existence. It was stated that the 
beneficiary had shifter to piggery. 
13. Keneinguzo Solo, Kohima 
Village 
Around 30 chicks were seen. 
14. Mavil Kraho, Viswema 
Village, Kohima 
A commercial farm with around 5000 chicks was shown. It was 
stated by the beneficiary that the farm has been running for the 
past 10 years. 
15. Vibol Tsukru, Viswema 
Village, Kohima  
The project was stated to have been abandoned and around 10 
chicks were seen.  
16. Alui, Old Peren Town, 
Peren  
The beneficiary could not be located by the departmental 
officers and its existence is doubtful.  
 
  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
186  
 
APPENDIX 2.3.6 
(Reference to Paragraph 2.3.11, Pages 94, 95, 96, 97 and 98) 
Results of joint physical verification of State Farms, Disease Diagnostic Laboratories, Hospitals, 
Dispensaries and Stockman Centres/Veterinary Outposts/Veterinary Health Centres. 
 (a) State Cattle Breeding Farms 
Sl 
No. 
Name of Farm  
(Date of verification) 
No. of 
cattle 
Production 
(litres) 
Revenue generated  Staff deployed  
1. SCBF, Lerie (02.08.12) 70 163 NA NA 
2.  SCBF, Medziphema 
(21.08.12) 
NA  NA  NA  NA  
3. SCBF, Aliba (13.09.12) 39 45 3.20 lakh during 20 11-12 26 (1 Manager, 4 grade 
III and 21 grade IV) 
4. RSCBF, Jalukie (07.09.12) 28 36 NA NA 
5. Dairy Upgradation Centre, 
Peren (03.09.12) 
7 NA `1.24 lakh during April 
2007 to August 2012  
4 (1 VAS, 1 VFA, 1 
contingency paid) 
6. Surti Buffalo Farm, Jalukie 
(07.09.12) 
30 7 NA 9 (1 attendant and 8 
contingency paid) 
(b) State Poultry Farms/Hatchery Units  
Sl 
No. 
Name of farm 
(date of verification) 
Number of 
chicks 
Revenue generated Staff deployed 
1. State Poultry Farm, Kohima 
(03.08.12) 
4000 NA 15 (including 3 doctors) 
2. State Poultry Farm, Dimapur 
(17.08.12) 
NA Average of `7.20 lakh per year 
which is used for running the 
farm 
17 (including 2 doctors) 
3. Chick Rearing Centre, Medziphema 
(21.08.12) 
NA Average of `1.50 lakh per year 
which is used for running the 
farm 
14 (including 1 doctor) 
4. Poultry Upgrading Centre , Peren 
(03.09.12) 
91 `1.36 lakh during November 
2010 to August 2012. `50,000 
deposited into Government 
Account and the rest used for 
running the farm. 
3 
5. State Hatchery Unit, Mokokchung 3700 `10.76 lakh during 2011-12. 
`67,000 deposited into 
Government Account and the 
rest used for running the farm. 
21 (including 1 doctor) 
(c) Veterinary Hospitals 
Sl 
No.  
Name of Hospital 
(date of verification)  
No. of cases 
attended  
Staff 
deployed  
Remarks 
1. Veterinary Hospital, 
Dimapur (17.08.12) 
Average of 300 
cases monthly 
during 2011-12 
26 (including 
5 doctors) 
X-Ray machine installed during 2006-07 still not 
functional. No funds given by Department for 
running the hospital and is managed from registrati on 
fees collected. 
2. Veterinary Hospital, 
Mokokchung 
(11.09.12) 
Average of 350 
cases monthly 
during 2010-11 
28 (including 
1 doctor) 
It was stated that treatment is also carried out in  
various villages from time to time. 
3.  Veterinary Hospital, 
Kohima (21.09.12) 
10800 cases 
during 2011-12 
31 (including 
6 doctors) 
No funds given by the Department for running the 
hospital and is managed from registration fees 
collected. 

Appendices 
 
187  
 
APPENDIX 2.3.6 (Contd.) 
(d) Veterinary Dispensaries 
Sl 
No. 
Name of Dispensary 
(date of verification) 
No. of cases 
attended 
Staff 
deployed 
Remarks 
1. Veterinary Dispensary, 
Niuland, Dimapur 
(27.08.12) 
NA 5 (including 
1 doctor) 
No equipments/medicines seen in the dispensary and 
rooms are vacant. Treatment registers/stock registe rs of 
medicines or vaccines could not be furnished. Thoug h 
the building is new, it appears to be defunct. 
2. Veterinary Dispensary, 
Peren (03.09.12) 
Average of 
150 cases 
attended per 
year 
7 (including 
1 doctor) 
Very few equipment/medicines seen and all the rooms  
were vacant and appear to be defunct. 
3. Veterinary Dispensary, 
Jalukie (05.09.12) 
Average of 9 
to 10 cases 
every month. 
5 (including 
1 doctor) 
The doctor in-charge was not present. Other staff p resent 
stated that small quantities of medicines/vaccines are 
given by the Department every year but no records c ould 
be furnished. Very poorly equipped and appears to b e 
defunct. 
4. Veterinary Dispensary, 
Changtongya (12.09.12) 
Average of 
1500 cases 
attended 
every year 
3 (including 
one doctor) 
The building is in very poor condition with no 
doors/windows. It was stated that it was reported t o the 
Directorate five years back with no result. The doc tor in-
charge stated that she works from her residence. 
5. Veterinary Dispensary, 
Jakhama (20.09.12) 
Average of 15 
cases every 
month. 
5 (including 
1 doctor) 
No equipment/medicines were seen. Medicines/vaccine s 
to be received from the Directorate stated to be fu lly 
utilized. Appears to be non-functional. 
(e) Disease Diagnostic Laboratories  
Sl 
No. 
Name of DDL  
(date of verification) 
Staff 
deployed 
Remarks  
1. DDL, Dimapur 
(17.08.12) 
1 lab 
assistant 
(absent) 
New building inaugurated in December 2007. A few eq uipments were also 
seen. Though a lab assistant is posted in the DDL, he was absent. Stated that 
the lab is not functioning and the Hospital is usin g the facilities from time to 
time. 
2.  DDL, Peren (03.0912)  Nil  Located in the same building as the dispensary. Few equipment seen and 
stated to be non-functional. 
3. DDL, Mokokchung 
(11.09.12) 
2 (including 
1 doctor) 
A few equipments/medicines/chemicals were seen. Sta ted that only minor 
tests are done in the lab. Serum and blood samples stated to be collected and 
sent to Kohima for tests. The building is new and w ell maintained but 
appears to be non-functional. 
4. DDL, Mangkolemba 
(13.09.12) 
Nil New building inaugurated in July 2011. It was s een that the building is also 
used as the office of Dy. Director, Mangkolemba who  is also in-charge of 
the DDL. A few lab equipments were seen. It was sta ted that tests are done 
in Mokokchung due to non-availability of technical staff. Appears to be non-
functional. 
5. DDL, Kohima 
(21.09.12) 
3 (including 
1 doctor) 
Functioning from the 2 
nd  floor of Veterinary Hospital Building. Stated that  
tests of serum and blood samples received from vari ous DVOs/units are 
conducted. Also screening of herd for brucellosis a nd FMD are conducted 
from time to time. However, it was seen from record s that only 102 samples 
were tested during August 2007 to August 2012. 
(f) Quarantine Check Posts 
Sl 
No. 
Name of QCP 
(date of verification) 
Staff 
deployed 
Remarks 
1. QCP, New Golaghat 
Road, Dimapur 
(27.08.12) 
3 (including 
doctor in-
charge) 
The QCP is functioning from a rented thatched room on the roadside at 
` 1,200 per month. Average revenue collection (Entry/ Token fees) was 
` 50,000 per month. No facilities for conducting tests etc. were seen. 
2. QCP, Old Golaghat 
Road, Dimapur 
(27.08.12) 
3 (including 
in-charge) 
The QCP is functioning from a rented thatched room on the road side at 
` 700 per month. Average revenue collection (Entry/To ken fees) was 
` 20,000 per month. 
3. QCP, Tuli, 
Mokokchung 
(12.09.12) 
5 (including 
1 doctor) 
The QCP is functioning from a thatched room on the roadside. Revenue 
collection for the period from 2007-08 to 2011-12 w as ` 9.30 lakh. Test 
check of two receipt books revealed that they had n ot been entered in the 
Livestock/Poultry movement register. 
4. QCP, Khuzama, 
Kohima (20.09.12) 
NA The QCP is functioning from a very old building above the National 
Highway. No information on its function, staff depl oyed revenue collection 
etc. could be collected as the doctor in-charge and  staff were absent despite 
intimation. 
5. QCP, Kedima, 
Kohima (20.09.12) 
No staff 
posted. 
The building constructed for the QCP was found to be new. However, it was 
abandoned and covered on all sides with vegetation.  It was stated by the 
departmental officers that no staff are posted and it is non-functional. 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
188  
 
APPENDIX 2.3.6 (Concld.) 
(g) Stockman Centres/Veterinary Outposts/Veterinary Health Centres 
Sl 
No. 
Name of centre 
(date of verification) 
Staff 
deployed 
Remarks 
1. SMC, Medziphema, 
Dimapur (21.08.12) 
4 It was seen that the office and staff quarter wer e attached in a very old, 
dilapidated building. It was stated by the VFA pres ent that they attend 
emergencies in the village from time to time and ta ke part in vaccination 
drives. However, no records could be furnished to p rove the claim. It was 
further stated that they do not receive medicines/v accines from the 
Department. The Centre appears to be non-functional  and no Bulls were 
kept. 
2. SMC, Diphupar, 
Dimapur (21.08.12) 
5 It was seen that the office and staff quarter wer e attached in a very old, 
dilapidated building. The Inspector in-charge was n ot present. It was stated 
by the VFA that functions include treatment in the area and conducting 
artificial insemination. Some medicines/vaccines we re stated to be received. 
However, no records could be furnished. The Centre appears to be non-
functional. 
3. VHC, Athibung, 
Peren (05.09.12) 
3 The Centre is located in a very old, dilapidated building. It was seen that out 
of 4 rooms, 2 were being used by private individual s to store CGI sheets and 
grain. It was stated by the VFA that no medicines/v accines are issued to the 
Centre by the Department. The Centre appears to be abandoned and defunct. 
4. VHC, Mhainamtsi, 
Peren (05.09.12) 
2 The Centre is located in a rundown building in ve ry poor condition and was 
being used as a cow shed by private individuals. The VFA present stated that 
he makes house to house treatment on need basis. Ho wever, no records to 
prove the claim could be furnished. He further stat ed that a small quantity of 
medicines is issued by the Department once in 3 to 4 years and vaccines are 
taken from DVO, Peren on need basis. The Centre appears to be defunct.  
5. VOP, Merangkong, 
Mokokchung 
(12.09.12) 
3 The Centre is abandoned as it was in very poor co ndition. It was stated by 
the VFA that they were doing treatment on requireme nt basis in the village. 
No records were maintained for receipt or utilizati on of medicines/vaccines. 
The Centre appears to be non -functional  
6. SMC, Sabangya, 
Mokokchung 
(13.04.12) 
3 The Centre is located in two very old buildings i n also being used as staff 
quarters. It was stated that medicines/vaccines are  collected from the 
hospital in Mokokchung on need basis and treatment done included in the 
treatment register of the hospital. The Centre appears to be defunct. 
7. SMC, Longnak, 
Mokokchung 
(13.09.12) 
3 The Centre is located in a very old building in p oor condition. The VFA 
stated that medicines/vaccines are collected from D y. Director, 
Mangkolemba on need basis. The Centre appears to be defunct. 
8.  SMC, Chuchu Town, 
Mokokchung 
(12.09.12) 
2 No separate building was seen and it was stated by the VFA that the Centre 
is functioning from her quarters. She also stated t hat she goes for treatment 
as and when required but no records could be furnis hed. The Centre appears 
to be defunct. 
9.  SMC, Viswema, 
Kohima (20.09.12) 
3 The Centre is located in a very old, decrepit build ing. It was stated by the 
VFA that no medicines are received and a small quan tity of vaccines are 
received from DVO, Kohima but no records could be f urnished. The Centre 
appears to be non-functional. 
10. VOP, Kigwema, 
Kohima (20.09.12) 
NA A completely dilapidated structure was shown to be the SMC. No staff was 
also present. The Centre is defunct. 
11. VHC, Kohima Village 
(21.09.12) 
2 The Centre is located in a very old building. The  lone VFA was attending to 
an average of 200 cases every month as seen from th e Treatment Register 
furnished. Total vaccines administered during Janua ry 2011 to September 
2012 was seen to be 2309 as per register maintained . It was stated that 
medicines/vaccines are collected from DVO, Kohima o n need basis. The 
Centre appears to be functioning well. 
12. VOP, Rusoma, 
Kohima (21.09.12) 
3 The Centre is located in a three room building us ed as staff quarters. The 
VFA stated that they work from the Dispensary at Ch iphobozou and 
medicines/vaccines are collected on need basis from  DVO, Kohima. The 
Centre appears to be defunct. 
13. VOP, Kedima, 
Kohima (20.09.12) 
3 The Centre is located in a good building. However , all the rooms were seen 
to be vacant. It was seen from the Treatment Regist er that 218 cases were 
attended in 2010-11 and 65 cases in 2011-12 upto Se ptember. It was also 
seen from the vaccination register that a small qua ntity of vaccines have 
been received. The Centre appears to be non-functional. 

Appendices 
 
189  
 
APPENDIX 2.3.7 
(Reference to Paragraph 2.3.15.1; Page 100) 
Statement showing details of Fully Vouched Contingent Bills drawn in March 2012 
 
Sl No. Bill No. & 
date 
Net 
Amount Scheme/Programme Details of vouchers enclosed Amount Remarks 
1. 417 dt 20.03.12 2500000 For purchase of 3(three) nos. 
of vehicles (Bolero). 
Apex Motor Enterprise, Dimapur - Proforma Invoice- 
Cost of Bolero 2(two) nos.  1439104 
Expenditure sanction and drawal authority was obtai ned for purchase of three 
Boleros. However, the bill was drawn enclosing proforma invoice for 2 Boleros 
and 1 Scorpio. The delivery challans, mode nos., en gine nos., registration nos. 
of the vehicles procured, if any, could not be furn ished despite requisition 
(13.07.12).  
Apex Motor Enterprise, Dimapur - Proforma Invoice- 
Cost of Scorpio 1 (one) no. & Accessories. 1060896 
2. 436 dt 27.03.12 1500000 
For procurement of Dairy 
Cattle (Bovine) for seven 
State run Farms 
M/S. Eco-Farms and Hatcheries Enterprise, Assam- 
Dairy cattle & Transportation charges 1485500 Expenditure sanction and drawal authority were obta ined for purchase of cattle 
for the 7 State Run Farms. As per bill enclosed wit hout date, 23 nos of high 
yeilding dairy cows, 5 cow yaks and 1 bull yak were  certified to be received in 
full and good condition. However, no details on whe re these cows were 
delivered could be furnished. No cows were also see n delivered in the 6 Farms 
physically verified during August-September 2012. 
Contingency expdr like feeds and other equipment 
during transportation and station halt. 14500 
3. 444 dt 27.03.12 2395391 Procurement of Vety. 
Medicnes and Appliances 
Kuotsu Enterprises, Kohima- Medicines & equipments 1432000 It is certified in the bills enclosed that the mate rials have been received. 
However, these materials were not taken into stock till July 2012. Kuotsu Enterprises, Kohima- Appliances & equipments 963400 
4. 448 dt 27.03.12 9775000 
Implementation of Rural 
Backyard Poultry 
Development 
Guru Balaji Hatchery, West Bengal- supply of chicks 6142500 
The amount was not utilised till August 2012. It was also seen that beneficiaries 
were also not yet selected/finalised for implementation of the programme during 
the 2011-12. 
NLDB- Construction of shed, cages, drinker etc. 341 2500 
NLDB- Cost of construction materials for two mother 
units   20000 
NLDB- Renovation of poultry shed No.3 at Kohima 100 000 
NLDB- Renovation of poultry shed No.6 at 
Medziphema. 100000 
5. 458 dt 31.03.12 22993000 ASCAD 
Kuotsu Enterprises, Kohima- Vaccine 4658346 
Payments not made till October 2012. Though it was stated that materials have 
been received partially, no entries were made in th e stock register. Recorded on 
all the bills dated 05.03.2012 that materials have been received in full and 
entered in stock register. But no stock register fu rnished. Therefore no issues 
made. 
Kuotsu Enterprises, Kohima- Vaccine 4225000 
Kuotsu Enterprises, Kohima- Vaccine 500000 
Kuotsu Enterprises, Kohima- Vaccine 1000000 
Kuotsu Enterprises, Kohima- Vaccine 420000 
Kuotsu Enterprises, Kohima- Vaccine 960000 
Vaccination of Animals 5441992 
Maintenance for diagnostic lab. 1400000 
Training Programme 1020000 
Surveillance, Monitoring & Forcasting 907662 
Information &Communication Campaign & 
Community Participation 1860000 
Control of Emergent & Exotic Disease 600000 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
190  
 
APPENDIX 2.3.7 (contd.)  
6. 463 dt 30.03.12 19702071 Implementation of Mithun 
Development Project 
Mithun Rearing Committee, Punglwa 534205 
Out of ` 4 crore drawn vide the Bill, ` 2 crore was transfer credited to CD and 
has not been drawn till July 2012. Physical verific ation of Punglwa Mithun 
Project (30.08.12) revealed that they had received only ` 2 lakh in cash. Though 
the amount was in CD, it was stated by the Committe e Members of of 
Touphephezu, Chedema, Gariphema, Tsuuma, Tsiepama and Gaili that amounts 
ranging from ` 2 lakh to ` 2.50 lakh was received by them. Certificates were 
recorded on all the bills that the payments were ac tually made to the concerned 
including for the bills in CD. Thus the bills enclo sed with the FVC bills are 
suspected to be made for the sole purpose of drawin g funds from Government 
Account. 
Mithun Rearing Committee, Puilwa 534205 
Mithun Rearing Committee, Mpai 534205 
Mithun Rearing Committee, Sakshi 534205 
Mithun Rearing Committee, Alayong 534205 
Mithun Rearing Committee, Akuk 534205 
Igha Flex Printing, Dimapur 1067025 
Computech Infosys, Dimapur 190500 
Shiv Pharma, Dimapur 571500 
M/s Tirupati Motors, Dimapur 260250 
Voto Lodging and Catering Agent, Kohima 250000 
K.P.Printing Press, Dimapur 260250 
Computech Infosy, Dimapur 80582 
M/S HK Decora, Dimapur 49360 
KK Angami Stationeries, Kohima 7374 
Pre-operational expenses 800000 
Managerial grant 250000 
Supervisory incentives 6150000 
Grants-in-aid for Mithun boys shelter construction 1025000 
Grant-in-aid towards construction of enclosure with 
vacc/ramp 1230000 
Grant-in-aid towards drinking water facilities 6150 00 
Grant-in-aid towards Grilled foot trap 2050000 
Grant-in-aid towards Establishment of salt feeding yard 820000 
Mithun festival Grant 820000 
7. 464 dt 31.03.12 47574283 
Infrustructure Development 
for cattle breeding 
(NABARD) 
Keduo Enterprises, Kohima- Equipment & machine 6684 600 
It was seen that the signatures on all the bills of  the three firms were the same. 
Though all the materials were certified to have bee n received, stock register 
could not be furnished. Further the amount was not spent till July 2012. 
Keduo Enterprises, Kohima- Charges for operating 
machines. 200000 
Asiatic Techmology, Kohima- Materials 257175 
Keduo Enterprises, Kohima- Pipe line fitting charges 876200 
Keduo Enterprises, Kohima- Materials 956450 
Kuotsu Enterprises, Kohima- Vaccines 401000 
Kuotsu Enterprises, Kohima- Vaccines 977598 
Akho Angami- Constn of Farm Manager Qtr. & 
Attendant Barrack at CBF Lerie 2880000 It was seen during physical verification that work had not been started as yet 
which was stated to be due to land dispute. It was stated by the engineer 
(October 2012) that the dispute had been settled an d work is in progress. 
However, it was seen that the contractors were different (Z.K. Angami for Farm 
Manager quarters and M/s Kedou Enterprises for Attendant barrack) 
Priemer Enterprises-Constn of Attendant Barrack at 
CBF Lerie 2112000 
Keduo Enterprises- Constn of Attendant Barrack at 
CBF Lerie 473280 

Appendices 
 
191  
 
APPENDIX 2.3.7 (concld.) 
-do- --do-- --do-- --do-- 
Medokolie Zashumo- Constn of Dispy & Milking Parloor at 
CBF, Lerie 476160 
The work has not commenced. Medokolie Zashumo- Constn of water reservoir at CBF, Lerie 921600 
Medokolie Zashumo- Constn of Bio Gas Plant at CBF, Lerie 142080 
M/S K.Meden Ao & Son- Constn of Milking Shed (Tail to 
Tail) at CBF Aliba 4086720 It was seen during physical verification (1 3.09.12) that the work is in progress. 
I.Panger Ao- Constn of Manager Qtr. (type-IV) at CBF Aliba 1484160 It was seen during physical verific ation (13.09.12) that the work is in progress. 
Keduo Enterprises, Constn of Calving Pen at CBF Aliba 776160 It was seen that the work was completed. 
M/S K.Meden Ao & Son- Constn of Attendants Barrack at 
CBF Aliba 1999680 During physical verification (13.09.12), it was seen that the work has not 
commenced. 
M/S K.Meden Ao & Son- Constn of reservior Tank at CBF 
Aliba 216288 Not seen during physical verification. 
M/S K.Meden Ao & Son- Constn of Dung pit at CBF Aliba 36288 Not seen during physical verification. 
M/S K.Meden Ao & Son- Constn of Sillo pit (2 nos) at CBF 
Aliba 40704 Not seen during physical verification. 
C.N.Yanchu- Constn of Milking Shed at CBF Tuensang 4780800 -- 
L.T.Sangtam- Constn of Manaager Qtr (type-IV) at CBF 
Tuensang 1841280 -- 
M/S Bendang Kejong- Constn of Calving Pen at CBF 
Tuensang 902400 -- 
    
M/S Bendang Kejong- Constn of Godown at CBF Tuensang 819840 -- 
M/S Z.Peter Chingmak- Constn of Water Reservior Tank at 
CBF Tuensang 264960 -- 
M/S Z.Peter Chingmak- Constn of Silo pit at CBF Tuensang 30720 -- 
T.Selie- Constn of Approach Road at CBF Medziphema 1933440 It was seen during physical verification (2 1.08.12) that work is in progress. 
Mrs.Yachubi-u Kuotsu- Constn of Type-I Qtr  at CBF 
Medziphema 642240 During physical verification(21.08.12) it was seen that the works were not yet 
started.. 
Kengim- Constn of Manager Qtr Type-V at CBF Medziphema 1721280 
M/S.Eastern Enterprises- Constn of Milch Cow Shed at CBF 
Jalukie 4117440 
During physical verification (07.09.12), no new construction or activity was 
seen. 
Aribo- Constn of Heifer Shed at CBF Jalukie 2323200  
C.P.Zeliang- Constn of Manager Qtr at CBF Jalukie 1 591680 
Benjamen- Constn of Bull Shed at CBF Jalukie 319680  
Paudam- Constn of Water Reservoir at CBF Jalukie 28 8000 
  Total: 106439745         
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
192  
 
 
APPENDIX 2.3.8 
(Reference to Paragraph 2.3.15.1; Page 100) 
Analysis of Completion certificates issued, work orders attached with FVC, date of issue of NIT and date of actual completion as per MBs. 
 
Sl No.  Bill No./Amount/Date  Particulars  Date of 
completion 
certificate  
Work order 
attached with 
FVC/date 
RA bill attached with FVC  Date of issue 
of NIT 
Date of actual 
completion as per 
MB 
Remarks  
1. 362/ `.1,60,88,000/ 
19.12.09/ 
Construction of approach road and security 
fencing at Veterinary College, Jalukie 
1.  Approach road (214 m/20 Nos): 
`.1 crore 
2.  Drainage (13 Nos): `15 lakh 
3.  RCC slab culvert (7 Nos): `35 lakh 
4.  Security fencing (249 m/3 Nos): `10.88 
lakh 
18.12.09 Issued to Hi-Tech/ 
30.10.2009 
1st  RA Bill of Hi-tech 
Constructions/ 
Commencement: 3.11.09/ 
Completion: 16.12.09 
20.10.09 
NIT not seen 
issued for 
Security 
fencing 
03.03.10  
2. 434/ `2,59,12,000/ 
03.03.10 
Security fencing (2670.11 to 4301 m) : 
`259.12 lakh 
Certified on RA 
bill that work 
has been 
completed as 
per 
specification 
Single work order for 
the whole work issued 
to Hi-tech/ 2010, no 
date 
2
nd  RA Bill of Hi-tech 
constructions/ Commencement: 
09.06.09/ Completion: 18.02.10 
20.10.09 03.03.10 Work split into 54 groups and 
work orders issued separately 
to Hi-tech Constructions 
3. 523/ `4,42,48,000/ 
31.03.11 
(
`1,76,99,000 in CD) 
Construction of security fencing (0 to 6993 
m): 
`2.24 crore. 
Certified on 
F&F Bill that 
work has been 
completed as 
per 
specification 
Hi-tech dated 
24.11.2010 for work 
valued 2.24 crore 
(6993 m) 
F&F Bill of Hi-tech 
constructions/no details of work 
done. Completion date and 
commencement date not 
mentioned 
17.03.11 28.10.11 Work order issued to M/s Hi-
tech on 04.04.11 for work 
valued `1.88 crore 
4. 522/`442.56 lakh/ 
31.03.2011 
(i) Construction of Security fencing at 
Pig Breeding Farm, Jalukie 
(ii) Construction of Rest House at 
Slaughter House, Khopanala 
(iii) Construction of Slaughter House at 
Khopanallah 
(i) without 
date 
(ii) without 
date 
(iii) without 
date 
(i) M/s Hi-tech 
Constructions dt 
24.11.2010 
(ii) M/s Solo 
Engineering dt 
28.11.2010 
(iii) M/s Chabou & 
Co. dt 25.11.2010 
(i)M/s Hi-tech 
Constructions/ 
`2.21 
crore/without date 
(ii) M/s Solo 
Engineering/ 
`1.50 
crore/F&F bill/without date 
(iii) M/s Chabou & 
Co./ 
`71.28 lakh/1 st  RA 
Bill/Without date 
30.06.2011 (i) not sen 
(ii)17.08.11 
(iii)No records of 
this work, 
(i) Work order issued  to 
M/s Hi-tech constructions 
on 04.04.11 with value of 
work being 2.98 crore 
(ii) Work Order issued to 
M/s Solo Engineering on 
17.08.11 with value of work 
being 89.06 lakh 
(iii) No work order or other 
records in r/o this work. 
 
  

Appendices 
 
193  
 
Appendix 2.4.1 
(Reference to Paragraph 2.4.7.2.1(i) and (ii); page 110) 
Statement showing delay in release of fund at various levels under WDPSCA 
implemented by DSWC 
 
Year Instalment 
No. 
Date of 
release by 
GOI 
Date of 
release by 
GON 
Delay 
in 
months 
(Col. 3-
4) 
Date of release by 
DSWC 
Delay in 
months 
(Col. 4-6) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
2007-08 1 st   06.06.07 23.11.07 5 10.12.07 - 03.04.08 0 
2007-08 3 rd   31.12.07 28.03.08 2 31.3.08 - 14.09.10 0 
2007-08 4 th   31.01.08 30.03.08 1 31.03.08 - 20.08.08 0 
2008-09 1 st   06.06.08 06.03.09 8 17.04.09 - 23.09.09 1 
2008-09 2 nd   14.08.08 11.02.09 5 17.04.09 - 21.09.10 2 
2008-09 3 rd   19.12.08 29.03.09 2 17.04.09 -15.09.10 0 
2008-09 4 th   19.03.09 31.03.09 0 17.04.09 - 29.10.09 0 
2009-10 1 st   24.06.09 30.10.09 3 16.02.10- 17.09.10 3 
2009-10 2 nd   17.08.09 03.03.10 5 10.05.10- 24.04.12 2 
2010-11 1 st   13.07.10 20.12.10 4 08.02.11 - 03.08.11 1 
2010-11 2 nd   10.12.10 24.03.11 3 13.04.11 - 19.11.11 0 
2011-12 1 st   28.06.11 28.09.11  14.11.11 - 17.5.12 1 
2011-12 2 nd   14.11.11 29.12.12  Not Paid as on 31.03.12 NA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
194  
 
Appendix 2.4.2 
(Reference to Paragraph 2.4.7.3.4(b); page 116) 
Statement showing details of payment made without execution of work under NWDPRA 
(In  `` ``) 
Name of the project/Component Directorate Bill Actually 
Implemented 
Difference 
Number 
of unit 
Money 
Value 
Number 
of unit 
Money 
Value 
Number 
of unit 
Money 
Value 
Thangpang  
Water Harvesting  Structure  20  222000  0 0 20  222000  
Dug out pond 90  162000  0 0 90  162000  
Dug out ponds for fish culture 11  330000  2 60000  9 270000  
Total 121  714000  2 60000  119  654000  
Teyongko  
Water Harvesting  Structure  20  222000  0 0 20  222000  
Dug out pond 90  162000  0 0 90  162000  
Dug out ponds for fish culture 11  330000  2 60000  9 270000  
 Total  121  714000  2 60000  119  654000  
Tsulalu  
WHS 18  216000  8 96000  10  120000  
Dug out pond 90  162000  0 0 90  162000  
Dug out ponds for fish culture 13  390000  2 60000  11  330000  
 Total  121  768000  10  156000  111  612000  
Sangro  
WHS 16  156000 1  9750  15  146250 
Dug out pond 91  163800 0  0 91  163800 
Dug out ponds for fish culture 15  450000 3  90000  12  360000 
Total 122  769800 4  99750  118  670050 
Kechetang  
WHS 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Dug out pond 91 163800 0 0 91 163800 
Dug out ponds for fish culture 15 450000 8 180000 7 270000 
Piggery , Poultry, Goat rearing, bee 
keeping, etc 
0 0 0 0 0 0 
Total  106 613800 8 180000 98 433800 
Boktowong  
WHS 18 162000 6 54000 12 108000 
Dug out pond 91 163800 0 0 91 163800 
Dug out ponds for fish culture 15 450000 5 150000 10 300000 
Piggery , Poultry, Goat rearing, bee 
keeping, etc 
21 126000 20 120000 1 6000 
Total 145 901800 31 324000 114 577800 
Mezuru  
WHS  18 216000 2 24000 16 192000 
Dug out pond 90 162000 0 0 90 162000 

Appendices 
 
195  
 
Dug out ponds for fish culture 13 390000 1 30000 12 360000 
Piggery , Poultry, Goat rearing, bee 
keeping, etc 
20 120000 18 108000 2 12000 
Total 141 888000 21 162000 120 726000 
Sanuoru 
WHS  0 0 0 0 0 0 
Dug out pond 90 162000 0 0 90 162000 
Dug out ponds for fish culture 13 390000 8 240000 5 150000 
Total 103 552000 8 240000 95 312000 
Baru  
WHS 18 216000 15 180000 3 36000 
Dug out pond 90 162000 0 0 90 162000 
Dug out ponds for fish culture 13 390000 1 30000 12  360000 
Piggery , Poultry, Goat rearing, bee 
keeping, etc 20 120000 12 72000 8 48000 
Total 141 888000 28 282000 113 606000 
Dzonzon   
WHS Unit 20 222000 4 44400 16 177600 
Dug out pond Unit 90 162000 0 0 90 162000 
Dug out ponds for fish culture Unit 11 330000 4 120000 7 210000 
Piggery , Poultry, Goat rearing, bee 
keeping, etc  0 0 0 0 0 0 
Total  121 714000 8 164400 113 549600 
Pughobo 
WHS 18 216000 5 60000 13 156000 
Dug out pond 91 163800 0 0 91 163800 
Dug out ponds for fish culture 13 390000 5 150000 8 240000 
Piggery , Poultry, Goat rearing, bee 
keeping, etc 
 0  0    0  0  0 
Total 122 769800 10 210000 112 559800 
Dzuvaru 
WHS Unit 18 216000 2 24000 16 192000 
Dug out pond Unit 91 163800 0 0 91 163800 
Total 109 379800 2 24000 107 355800 
Grand total  1473  8673000  134  1962150  1339  6710850  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 st  March 2012 
 
196  
 
Appendix – 2.4.3 
(Reference: Paragraph No. 2.4.7.3.4(c); page 116) 
Statement showing unexecuted items of works under IWMP 
 
Particulars As per PIA 
records 
As per joint physical 
verification by audit 
and PIA officials 
Difference between 
PIA records and actual 
execution 
Unit Money 
value 
Unit Money 
value 
Unit Money value 
SHGS 69 1866000 19 330000 50 1536000 
WHS 24 1066500 8 315000 16 751500 
Contour budding 11 321600 4 105000 7 216600 
Bench Terracing 9 240000 2 40000 7 200000 
Plantation 31 734062 6.5 159062 24.5 575000 
Livelihood 26 400000 7 100000 19 300000  
Horticulture 8.8 163000 2.5 47000 6.3 116000 
Afforestation 6.2 62500 2 20000 4.2 42500 
Natural 
Regeneration 
36 180000 6 30000 30 150000 
Total  221 5033662 57 1146062 164 3887600 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendices 
 
197 
 
Appendix-3.1 
(Reference to paragraph 3.3.1; page 126)  
Statement showing particulars of up to date paid-up capital, loans outstanding and Manpower as on 31 st  March 2012 in respect of 
Government Companies  
(Figures in column 5(a) to 6(d) are 
`` `` in crore) 
Sl. 
No. 
Sector & name of the 
Company 
Name of  the  
Department 
Month 
and year 
of 
incorpor 
ation 
*Paid up Capital Loans outstanding at the close of 
2011-12** 
Debt 
equity 
ratio  
Manpower  
(No. of 
Employees 
as on 
(31.03.2012) 
State 
Government  
Central 
Govern 
ment 
Others Total State 
Gover 
nment  
Central 
Governm 
ent  
Others Total 
1 2 3 4 5(a) 5(b) 5(c) 5(d) 6(a) 6(b) 6(c) 6(d) 7 8 
A. Working Government Companies  
FINANCE  
1. Nagaland Industrial 
Development Corporation 
Ltd, Dimapur 
Industries 
& 
Commerce 
26.03.70 12.22 -- 4.73 16.95 -- -- 38.46 38.46 2.27 :1 84 
 Sector wise total   12.22 -- 4.73 16.95 -- -- 38.46 38.46 2.27:1 84 
MANUFACTURING 
2 Nagaland State Mineral 
Development Corporation 
Ltd., Kohima 
Geology & 
Mining 
21.05.81 2.40 -- -- 2.40 -- -- -- -- -- 212 
 Sector wise total   2.40 -- -- 2.40  -- -- -- -- -- 212 
SERVICES 
3 Nagaland Hotels Ltd, 
Dimapur 
Industries 
& 
Commerce 
17.03.82 1.53 -- 0.40 1.93 -- -- 8.46 8.46 4.38:1 1 66 
 Sector wise total   1.53 -- 0.40 1.93 -- -- 8.46 8.46 4.38:1 166 
 
 
  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012  
 
198 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Sector & name of the 
Company 
Name of  the  
Department 
Month and 
year of 
incorporation 
*Paid up Capital Loans outstanding at the close of 
2011-12** 
Debt 
equity 
ratio 
Manpower 
(No. of 
Employees 
as on 
31.03.2012) 
State 
Govern 
ment 
Central 
Govern 
ment 
Others  Total State 
Govern 
ment 
Central 
Governm 
ent 
Others  Total  
1 2 3 4 5(a) 5(b) 5(c) 5(d) 6(a) 6(b) 6(c) 6(d) 7 8 
 MISCELLANEOUS  
4 Nagaland Handloom & 
Handicrafts Development 
Corporation., Ltd 
Industries 
& 
Commerce 
27.02.79 6.37 
 1.14  --  7.51  0.73  --  --  0.73  0.1:1  124 
5 Nagaland Industrial Raw 
Materials Supply 
Corporation Ltd., Dimapur 
Industries 
& 
Commerce 
28.03.73 1.23 
 --  --  1.23  --  --  0.04  0.04  0.03:1  32 
 Sector wise total   7.60  1.14   8.74  0.73   0.04  0.77  0.09:1  156 
 
 
 
Total A (All sector wise 
working Government 
Companies) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23.75 
 1.14  5.13  30.02  0.73  --  46.96  47.69  1.59:1  618 
B.. Non-working Companies 
MANUFACTURING  
6 **Nagaland Sugar Mills 
Company Ltd., Dimapur 
Industries 
& 
Commerce 
22.03.73 4.96 
 - - 4.96  --  --  --  --  --  -- 
 Sectorwise total   4.96  - - 4.96  --  --  --  --  --  -- 
 Total B (All sector wise 
non-working Government 
Companies 
  4.96 
 - - 4.96  --  --  --  --  --  -- 
Grand Total (A+B)   28.71  1.14  5.13  34.98  0.73  --  46.96  47.69  1.36:1  618 
* paid up capital includes share application money. 
*loan outstanding at the close of 2011-12 represent long-term loans only. 
** Figures of 1995-96 have been incorporated as the Company has not furnished information since 1996-97 
  

Appendices 
 
199 
 
Appendix-3.2 
(Reference to paragraph 3.4.1; page 127) 
Statement showing grants and subsidy received/receivables, guarantees received, waiver of dues, loans written off 
and loans converted into equity during the year and guarantee commitment at the end of March, 2012. 
 (Figures in column 3(a) to 6(d) are `` `` in crore) 
Sl. 
No 
Sector & Name of 
the Company 
Equity/loans 
received out of 
budget during 
the year 
Grants and Subsidy received 
during the year 
Guarantees 
received during 
the year and 
commitment at the 
end of the year 
Waiver of dues during the year 
Equity Loans Central 
Govern-
ment 
State  
Govern 
ment 
others Total Received  Commit 
ment $ 
Loans 
payment 
Written 
off 
Loans 
converted 
into 
Equity 
Interest/ 
Penal 
interest 
waived 
Total 
1 2 3(a) 3(b) 4(a) 4(b) 4(c) 4(d) 5(a) 5(b) 6(a) 6(b) 6(c) 6(d) 
A. Working Government Companies  
FINANCE 
1 Nagaland Industrial 
Development 
Corporation  ltd, 
Dimappur 
1.35 7.81 3.63 -- -- 3.63 7.81 -- -- -- -- -- 
Sector wise Total 1.35 7.81 3.63 -- -- 3.63 7.81 --  -- -- -- -- 
MANUFACTURING 
2 Nagaland State 
Mineral 
Development 
Corporation Ltd., 
Kohima 
-- -- -- 4.64 -- 4.64 -- -- -- -- -- -- 
Sector wise Total  -- -- -- 4.64 -- 4.64 -- -- -- -- - -- 
SERVICES             
3 Nagaland Hotels 
Limited 
-- -- -- 0.97 -- 0.97 -- -- -- -- -- -- 
Sector wise Total -- -- -- 0.97 -- 0.97 -- -- -- --  -- -- 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012  
 
200 
 
Sl. 
No  
Sector & Name of 
the Company 
Equity/loans 
received out of 
budget during 
the year 
Grants and Subsidy received 
during the year  
Guarantees 
received during the 
year and 
commitment at the 
end of the year  
Waiver of dues during the year  
Equity Loans Central 
Govern-
ment 
State  
Govern 
ment 
others Total Received  Commit 
ment $ 
Loans 
payment 
Written 
off 
Loans 
converted 
into 
Equity 
Interest/ 
Penal 
interest 
waived  
Total 
1 2 3(a) 3(b) 4(a) 4(b) 4(c) 4(d) 5(a) 5(b) 6(a) 6(b) 6(c) 6(d) 
MISCELLANEOUS 
4 Nagaland Handloom 
& Handicrafts 
development 
Corporation. Ltd 
0.25 -- 1.15 6.36 -- 7.51 -- -- -- -- -- -- 
5 Nagaland Industrial 
Raw material supply 
corporation 
-- -- -- 0.45 -- 0.45 -- -- -- -- -- -- 
Sector wise Total  0.25 -- 1.15 6.81 -- 7.96 -- -- -- -- -- -- 
Total (A) All Sector wise 
working Government 
Companies 
1.60 7.81 4.78 12.42 -- 17.20 7.81 -- -- -- -- -- 
B. Non-working Companies  
MANUFACTURING             
Nagaland Sugar Mills 
Company Ltd 
-- -- -- -- -- -- ---- -- -- --- -- -- 
Total 1.60 7.81 4.78 12.42 -- 17.20 7.81 -- -- -- -- -- 
$ Figures indicate guarantees outstanding at the end of the year. 
 
 
  

Appendices 
 
201 
 
Appendix-3.3 
(Reference to paragraph 3.6.1; page 129) 
Summarised financial results of Government Companies for the latest year for which accounts are finalised. 
 (Figures in column 5(a) to (6) and (8) to (10) are `` ``in crore)
Sl 
No 
Sector & Name of 
the Company 
Period of 
accounts 
Year in 
which 
finalized 
Net Profit (+)/Loss (-) Turn 
over 
Impact 
 of Acco 
unts 
Comm 
ents 
Paid up 
Capital 
Accum 
ulated 
Profit(+) 
Loss(-) 
Capital  
Employed  
@ 
Return on 
Capital 
Employed 
# 
Percentage 
of return on 
Capital 
Employed 
Net Profit/ 
Loss before 
interest & 
depreciation 
Interest Depre- 
ciation 
Net 
Profit/ 
Loss 
1 2 3 4 5(a) 5(b) 5(c) 5(d) 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
A. Working Government Companies  
FINANCE  
1 Nagaland 
Industrial 
Development 
Corporation  Ltd 
2010-11 2012-13 (+) 0.42 0.94 0.75 
(-) 1.27 3.62 - 15.60 (-)17.63 53.62 (-) 0.33 -- 
Sector wise Total   0.42 0.94 0.75 (-) 1.27 3.62 - 15.60 (-)17.63 53.62 (-) 0.33 -- 
MANUFACTURING  
2 Nagaland State 
Mineral 
Development 
Corporation Ltd., 
Kohima 
2000-01 2012-13 (+) 0.13 0.00 0.65 
(-) 0.52 0.68 - 0.80 (-)2.52 6.90 (-) 0.52 -- 
Sector wise Total    0.13 0.00 0.65 (-) 0.52 0.68 - 0.80 (-)2.52 6.90 (-) 0.52 -- 
SERVICES  
3 Nagaland 
Hotels Limited 
1998-99 2012-13 (+) 0.09 0.56 0.19 (-)0.65 0.60 -- 0.40 (-)8.27 6.23 (-)0.10 -- 
Sector wise Total    (+) 0.09 0.56 0.19 (-)0.65 0.60 -- 0.40 (-)8.27 6.23 (-)0.10 -- 
MISCELLENEOUS  
4. Nagaland 
Handloom & 
Handicrafts 
Development 
Corporation. Ltd 
., 
2002-03 2012-13 0.03 0.00 0.04 (-)0.01 0.35 -- 0.83 (-)4.44 3.37 (-)0.01 -- 
  

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012  
 
202 
 
Sl  
No 
Sector & Name of 
the Company 
Period of 
accounts 
Year in 
which 
finalized 
Net Profit (+)/Loss (-) Turn 
over 
Impact 
of 
Acco 
unts 
Comm 
ents 
Paid up 
Capital 
Accum 
ulated 
Profit(+) 
Loss(-) 
Capital 
Employed  
Return on 
Capital 
Employed 
Percentage 
of return on 
Capital 
Employed 
Net profi/Loss 
before interest 
& 
depreciation 
Interest Depreciati 
on 
Net 
Profit/ 
Loss 
1 2 3 4 5(a) 5(b) 5(c) 5(d) 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
5 Nagaland 
Industrial Raw 
Materials Supply 
Corporation Ltd., 
 
Dimapur 
1999-2000 2012-13 (+) 0.003 0.03 0.02 (-)0.05 0.11 -- 0.10 (-)0.97 0.15 (-)0.02 -- 
Sector wise Total    (+) 0.033 0.03 0.06 (-)0.06 0.46 -- 0.93 (-)5.41 3.52 (-)0.03 -- 
Total (A) All Sector 
wise working 
Government 
Companies 
  (+) 0.67 1.52 1.65 (-)2.50 5.36  17.73 
(-)33.83 70.27 (-)0.95 -- 
B. Non-working Government Companies,  
MANUFACTURING  
1 Nagaland Sugar 
Mills Company 
Ltd., Dimapur 
1977-78 1992-93 -- -- -- -- -- -- 4.96 
(-)14.70 (-)0.69 --  
Sector wise Total         4.96 (-)14.70 (-)0.69 --  
Total (B) All Sector 
wise working 
Government 
Companies 
  -- -- -- -- -- -- 4.96 
(-)14.70 (-)0.69 ---  
Grand Total (A+B)   (+) 0.70 1.53 1.65 (-)2.50 5.36 -- 22.69 (-)48.53 69.58 (-)0.98 -- 
 
#Return on Capital Employed has been worked out by adding profit and interest charged to Profit and Loss account. 
@ Capital employed represents net Fixed Assets (inc luding capital Work-in-progress) plus working capit al except in case of finance 
companies/corporations where the capital Employed is worked out as a mean of aggregate of the opening and closing balances of paid up 
capital, free reserves, Bonds, Deposits and Borrowings. 

Appendices  
 
203 
 
Appendix – 5.1 
(Reference to paragraph 5.4;page 149) 
Details of work sanctioned under SPA during 2010-11 for construction of  
Fire stations, etc. 
Sl No Name of the project/Scheme Amount  
(`` `` in lakh) 
1     (a) Construction of Fire Station building at Capital complex 
Kohima (Construction of Fire Station building cum G arage to 
accommodate 4 Nos Fire tenders and O.C room) 
70.00  
       (b) Security fencing 20.00  
       (c) Water Reservoir  10.00  
2 Construction of Fire Station building at Peren Di strict 
headquarter 
100.00  
3 Construction of accommodation for emergency duty personnel 
in Fire Station Kohima 
20.00  
4 Construction of retaining wall of land slide port ion of Kohima 
Fire Station compound. 
20.00  
5 Construction of retaining wall of land slide port ion of Fire 
Station building at Zunheboto 
10.00  
6      (a) Construction of Fire Station Building at  Mokokchung 20.00  
        (b) Construction of Fire Station building a t Mokokchung 
(Construction of water reservoir) 
10.00  
7 Construction of water reservoir at Fire Station K ohima 10.00  
8 Expansion of Garage for parking of fFire Tenders at Kohima 
Fire Station 
10.00  
Total 300.00  
 
 
 

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2012 
 
204 
 
Appendix – 5.2 
(Reference to paragraph 5.5; page 150) 
Statement showing the details of fraudulent drawal of ration allowance (in `) `) `) `)    
TV No & Date Details of bills drawn in October, November 
and December 2010@ `25 `25 `25 `25 /day 
Details of bills drawn in March 2011@ `25 `25 `25 `25 /day Details of double drawal 
No of 
VGs 
Period of 
arrear drawn 
No of 
days 
Amount TV No & 
Date 
No of 
VGs 
Period of 
arrear drawn 
Amount 
drawn 
Period  of 
double 
drawal 
No of days 
overlapped 
Amount of double 
drawal @ `25 `25 `25 `25 /day 
23 of Oct 2010 2051 02/08/2010 to 
26/08/2010 
25 1345875 
28 of 
March 
2011 
1039 
04/08/2010 to 
26/08/2010 
3168950 
04/08/2010 to 
26/08/2010 
23 1039x23x25=597425 
24 of Oct 2010 2051 03/09/2010 to 
12/09/2010 
10 512500 05/09/2010 to 
24/09/2010 
05/09/2010 to 
24/09/2010 
20 1039x20x25=519500 
14 of Oct 2010 2051 13/09/2010 to 
24/09/2010 
12 615000 
 
04/07/2010to 
26/07/2010 
-- -- -- 
-- 
7 of Dec 2010 2051 09/10/2010 to 
28/10/2010 
20 1036750 03/10/2010 to 
28/10/2010 
09/10/2010 to 
28/10/2010 
20 1039x20x25=519500 
01 of Dec 2010 2051 13/05/2010 to 
28/05/2010 
16 822000 08/05/2010 to 
27/05/2010 
13/05/2010 to 
26/05/2010 
15 1039x15x25=389625 
Total 83 4332125 16/06/2010 to 
25/06/2010 
-- -- -- 
 Total(A) 78 1039x78x25=2026050 
29 of 
March 
2011 
1010 
04/08/2010 to 
26/08/2010 
3080500 
04/08/2010 to 
26/08/2010 
23 1010x23x25=580750 
05/09/2010 to 
24/09/2010 
05/09/2010 to 
24/09/2010 
20 1010x20x25=505000 
04/07/2010to 
26/07/2010 
-- -- -- 
03/10/2010 to 
28/10/2010 
09/10/2010 to 
28/10/2010 
20 1010x20x25=505000 
08/05/2010 to 
27/05/2010 
13/05/2010 to 
26/05/2010 
15 1010x15x25=378750 
16/06/2010 to 
25/06/2010 
-- -- -- 
 6249450 Total(B) 78 1010x78x25=1969500 
Total (A+B) `` ``2026050+ `` ``1969500= `` ``3995550 
 