 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
General and Social Sector 
Volume 2 
for the year ended March 2013 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
Government of Odisha 
Report No. 5 of the year 2014  

 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
General and Social Sector 
Volume 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the year ended March 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Odisha 
Report No. 5 of the year 2014 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Reference 
Para Page 
Preface  iii 
Chapter 1 : Introduction 
Introduction 1 1-5 
Chapter 2 : Performance Audit 
Revenue & Disaster Management Department 
Disaster Management in the State 2 7-39 
Chapter 3 : Compliance Audit  
Higher Education Department 
Administration of Self Financing Courses in the State 3.1 41-60 
Health & Family Welfare Department 
Compliance to the provisions of Pre-conception & Pr e-natal 
Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act 1994 3.2 61-73 
Higher Education Department  
e-Governance projects in three Universities of the State 3.3 74-80 
ST & SC Development, Minorities & Backward Classes Welfare Department 
Income Generation of Scheduled Tribes in Scheduled Areas 3.4 81-86 
Finance Department 
Lack of response to Audit 3.5 87-93 
Appendices  
Appendix 
Number  
Description  Reference 
Para Page 
2.1.1 Details of major disasters during 2007-2013 2.1.2 95 
2.1.2 Expenditure incurred from CRF/ SDRF  on repair/ 
restoration works not of immediate nature 2.5.1 96 
2.1.3 Execution of works not related to damage by d isaster 2.5.2 97 
2.1.4 Statement of sanction for inadmissible expenditure on 
disaster preparedness met out of CRF/ SDRF 2.6.1.1 98 
3.1.1 Statement showing data on student enrolment in 
affiliated colleges 3.1.2.2 99 
3.1.2 Statement containing colleges collecting higher cou rse 
fee than that fixed by the Higher Education Department  3.1.3.3 100 
3.2.1 District wise Child Sex Ratio (Odisha) as per Censu s 
2001 and Census 2011 3.2.2 101 

 ii  
 Reference 
Para Page 
3.5.1 
Statement showing the year-wise break up of 
outstanding 
Inspection Reports/Paragraphs issued up to 
March 2013 but not settled by June 2013  
3.5 102 
3.5.2 
Statement showing Inspection Reports/ Paragraphs 
issued up to 31 March 2013 but not settled by 30 Ju ne 
2013 
3.5 103 
3.5.3 Statement showing serious irregularities noticed an d 
reported in the Inspection Reports 3.5 104 
3.5.4 
Department wise analysis of non-submission of 
explanatory notes in respect of paragraphs includin g 
performance audit/ reviews included in the Audit 
Reports as on 30 September 2013 
3.5.1 
and 
3.5.3.3 
105-106 
3.5.5 
Department wise position of Action Taken Notes 
(ATNs) on Recommendations of PAC (10 
th  Assembly 
to 14 th  Assembly) including pending for discussion as 
on 30 September 2013 
3.5.2 
and 
3.5.3.3 
107-108 
3.5.6 Statement showing number of IRs/ Paragraphs settled 
during TC meeting  3.5.3.2 109 
3.5.7 Statement showing departments which not conducted 
TC meetings and IRs/ Paragraphs remaining unsettled  3.5.3.2 110 
Glossary of Abbreviations   111-113 
 

 iii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preface 
This Report for the year ended March 2013 has been prepared for 
submission to the Governor of Odisha under Article 151 of the 
Constitution of India. 
The Report contains significant results of the Perf ormance Audit 
and compliance audit of the Departments of the Gove rnment of 
Odisha under the General & Social Services includin g Departments 
of Revenue & Disaster Management, Higher Education,  Health & 
Family Welfare, ST & SC Development, Minorities & B ackward 
Classes Welfare and Finance Department. However, De partments 
of Food Supplies & Consumer Welfare, Housing & Urba n 
Development, School & Mass Education, Public Grieva nces & 
Pension Administration, Rural Development, Sports &  Youth 
Services, Culture, Home, Information & Public Relat ion, Law, 
Parliamentary Affairs and Science & Technology, Gen eral 
Administration, Information Technology, Labour & Em ployees’ 
State Insurance, Panchayati Raj, Planning & Co-ordi nation, Public 
Enterprises and Women & Child Development are not c overed in 
this Report on General & Social Services. 
The instances mentioned in this Report are those, w hich came to 
notice in the course of test audit for the period 2 012-13 as well as 
those which came to notice in earlier years, but co uld not be 
reported in the previous Audit Reports; instances r elating to the 
period subsequent to 2012-13 have also been include d, wherever 
necessary. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the  Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
. 

  
  
  
CChhaapptteerr  11  
 
IInnttrroodduuccttiioonn  
 

Chapter 1 Introduction 
Chapter 1  
Introduction 
 
1.1 About this Report  
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) on 
Government of Odisha relates to matters arising fro m Performance Audit of 
selected programmes and activities and Compliance A udit of Government 
departments. This is the second volume of the Repor t of the C&AG of India 
on the Government of Odisha for the year ended 31 M arch 2013 relating to 
General and Social Sector. 
The primary purpose of the Report is to bring to th e notice of the State 
Legislature, important results of audit. Auditing s tandards require that the 
materiality level for reporting should be commensur ate with the nature, 
volume and magnitude of transactions. The audit fin dings are expected to 
enable the executive to take corrective action as a lso to frame policies and 
directives that will lead to improved financial man agement of the 
organisations, thus contributing to better governance.  
Compliance Audit refers to examination of the trans actions relating to 
expenditure, receipts, assets and liabilities of th e audited entities to ascertain 
whether the provisions of the Constitution of India , applicable Rules, Laws, 
Regulations and various orders and instructions iss ued by the competent 
authorities are being complied with.  
Performance Audit examines the extent to which the objectives of an 
organisation, programme or scheme have been achieve d economically, 
efficiently and effectively with due regard to ethics and equity.  
This chapter provides a synopsis of the significant  audit observations and 
follow-up on Audit Reports. Chapter 2 of this Repor t deals with the findings 
of one Performance Audit and Chapter 3 deals with C ompliance Audit of 
various departments.
 
The cases mentioned in the Report are among those w hich came to notice in 
the course of test audit of accounts during the yea r 2012-13 as well as those 
which had come to light in earlier years but could not be dealt with in previous 
Reports. Matters relating to the period subsequent to 2012-13 have also been 
included, wherever necessary.  
1.2 Significant observations of Performance Audit 
This Report contains one Performance Audit. The foc us has been auditing the 
specific programmes/ schemes and offering suitable recommendations, with 
the intention to assist the Executive in taking cor rective action and improving  
 
 
 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
2 
 
service delivery to the citizens. Significant audit  observations are discussed 
below: 
1.2.1  Disaster Management in the State 
The SDMA constituted in October 2010 after a delay of five years of 
enactment of Disaster Management Act 2005 under the  Chairmanship of the 
Chief Minister for overseeing activities relating t o disaster prevention, 
mitigation, preparedness, relief and reconstruction, did not meet till July 2013. 
The State Government also failed to incorporate dis aster management into the 
development planning process due to non-preparation  of SDMP till July 2013 
as envisaged in the Disaster Management Act 2005. S DMP was, however, 
prepared in August 2013.  
Though early warning mechanism and communication sy stems for disaster 
preparedness were in place, the system was not effe ctive due to inadequate 
staff and non-functioning of machinery. Relief, reh abilitation and 
reconstruction measures had gaps as payments of ` 49.59 lakh were made for 
rice without actual distribution, relief materials valuing ` 10.26 crore were 
issued without acquittance roll and beneficiary lis ts, rice got damaged due to 
improper storing etc. There was delay of six to nin e months in providing relief 
to affected people and dal being basic food, was no t distributed in relief 
operation.  
During Phailin (cyclone struck the State in October 2013), though the State 
Government could save human life through early warn ing system and 
administration of evacuation to safer place, more could have been done to save 
the livestock which is main livelihood of the affec ted population. Further, the 
post disaster relief measure and restoration/ recon struction measures 
undertaken by the Government were not comprehensive . There were cases of 
inequitable distribution of relief and short distri bution of relief material. 
Restoration was not adequate due to delay in restor ation of power 
infrastructure, piped water supply system, roads, i rrigation canals and Lift 
Irrigation Projects affecting rabi crops/ agricultu re in the affected districts. 
Besides, input subsidy for loss of crop was not pai d and artisans were not 
adequately compensated for loss of livelihood. 
There was improper financial management as ` 29.46 crore was sanctioned 
from CRF/ SDRF towards disaster preparedness in vio lation of GoI norms. 
UCs for ` 1456.42 crore were pending from executing agencies and Collectors 
against the release of fund of ` 3455.80 crore during 2007-13. Despite 
retaining the SDRF in interest bearing public accou nts during 2011-13, 
interest thereon was not paid by State Government. 
Monitoring of preparedness, rescue and relief opera tions by SEC was largely 
absent as its meetings were limited to approval of projects of various 
departments and sanction of fund out of SDRF. 

Chapter 1 Introduction 
3 
 
1.3  Significant audit observations of Compliance A udits 
1.3.1  Administration of Self Financing Courses in the State 
Assessment of requirement was not done before SFCs were introduced. 
Fixation of course fee by the Universities was arbi trary and large surplus of 
fund were retained by the Universities. Universitie s conducted SFCs without 
having adequate infrastructure. Affiliated professional colleges did not possess 
basic infrastructure facilities like land, building , student’s common room, 
library, toilets etc. Quality of education was comp romised due to non- 
engagement of full time teaching staff, inadequate student-teacher ratio and 
teachers engaged without requisite qualification. Q uality education under SFC 
further suffered due to inadequate coverage of cour se curriculum. Objective to 
provide scope for employment to SFC passed out stud ents was only partially 
met as placement cells were not even constituted in  two Universities out of 
three test checked in audit. UU while introducing S FCs in PPP mode selected 
private partners without open advertisement. Thus, implementation of 
objective to provide job oriented and market linked  quality study through 
introduction of SFCs needed several area of improvement in these Universities 
and colleges. 
(Paragraph 3.1) 
1.3.2 Compliance to the provisions of Pre-conceptio n & Pre-natal 
Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act 1994 
Child sex ratio declined in 21 out of 30 districts of the State by one to 49 
points with highest decline in Nayagarh followed by  Dhenkanal and Angul 
during 2001-11.  Registration and renewal of ultrasound clinics were not made 
timely giving scope to clinics to run under deemed registration without 
necessary scrutiny by the AAs. USGs were conducted by unauthorised persons 
and portable USG machines were used without permiss ion. Inspection 
mechanism in place was largely inadequate as no act ion against unauthorised 
centres was taken. AAs did not conduct enquiry agai nst complaints of sex 
determination. Enforcement of compliance to the pro visions of the PNDT Act 
in the State needed to be strengthened. 
(Paragraph 3.2) 
1.3.3 e-Governance projects in three Universities o f the State 
Due to non availing of service facility of hardware  and software during 
warranty period, non-handing over of software proto type by firm for 
customisation, non-involvement of technically compe tent personnel in 
evaluation and testing process, non-imparting of ad equate training to end 
users, non-assessment of need based requirement and  shortage of human 
resources, the objective of introducing e-Governanc e projects largely 
remained unachieved. Besides, out of ` 7.53 crore, an amount of ` 4.69 crore 
(UU: ` 1.80 crore, BU: ` 2.33 crore and SU: ` 0.56 crore) was rendered 
wasteful as the warranty period of the software and  hardware had already 
expired (March 2011) and the projects remained defunct.  
(Paragraph 3.3) 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
4 
 
1.3.4  Income Generation of Scheduled Tribes in Sch eduled Areas 
Despite expenditure of ` 139.06 crore on IG activities, cases of unfruitful and 
idle expenditure of ` 13.06  crore were noticed and fund to the tune of ` 36.31 
crore left  unutilised. Besides, various short comings in implementation such as 
lack of monitoring leading to non-utilisation of ba nk loan and subsidy for the 
approved activities, irregular identification of be neficiaries and ineffective 
capacity building activities to ensure employment t o tribal youths etc. were 
noticed. Hence, the  objective to uplift the socio-economic condition of  tribals 
through implementation of different programmes/ sch emes remained largely 
unfulfilled. 
(Paragraph 3.4) 
1.3.5 Response to Audit 
• Inspection Reports on audited entities 
Response to the Inspection Reports (IRs) of Audit w as poor. As of March 
2013, 45660 paragraphs relating to 10790 IRs pertai ning to 24 departments 
under the audit jurisdiction of the office of the A ccountant General (General 
and Social Sector Audit), Odisha remained outstandi ng at the end of June 
2013. Of these, 3275 IRs containing 10484 paragraphs had not been settled for 
more than 10 years. Even the first reply from the H eads of Offices which was 
to be furnished within four weeks was not received in respect of 1930 IRs 
issued up to March 2013. 
• Follow up action on earlier Audit Reports 
It was noticed that 13 out of 24 departments did no t submit explanatory notes 
as of September 2013 to 34 paragraphs (21 individua l and 13 PAs/Review 
paragraphs) featured in the C&AG’s Audit Reports in respect of Audit Reports 
from the year 2000-01 to 2011-12. The departments l argely responsible for 
non-submission of explanatory notes were Housing & Urban Development, 
Revenue & Disaster Management, Planning & Coordinat ion and Higher 
Education Departments.  
• Response of the departments to the recommendations of the Public 
Accounts Committee 
Out of 626 recommendations made by the Public Accou nts Committee (PAC) 
from the first Report of Tenth Assembly (1990-95) t o fifth Report of 
Fourteenth Assembly (2009-14) final action on 51 1 recommendations from 
seven departments were awaited (September 2013). Th e departments largely 
responsible for non submission of Action Taken Note s were Rural 
Development Department, Health & Family Welfare Dep artment, Law 
Department and Panchayati Raj Department.  
(Paragraph 3.5) 
                                                 
1 Higher Education (1), Health & Family Welfare (9),  Revenue & Disaster 
Management (1), Law (6), Housing & Urban Developmen t (1), Rural Development 
(29) and Panchayati Raj (4) 

Chapter 1 Introduction 
5 
 
1.4 Recommendations 
This Report contains specific recommendations on a number of issues 
involving non-observance of the prescribed internal  procedure and systems, 
compliance with which would help in promoting good governance and better 
oversight on implementation of departmental program mes and objectives at 
large. 

  
  
CChhaapptteerr  22  
 
PPeerrffoorrmmaannccee  AAuuddiitt  
  
Para 
Number 
Topic Page 
2 Disaster Management in the State 7-39 
 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit 
7 
Chapter 2 
Performance Audit 
This chapter contains the findings of Performance A udit on Disaster 
Management in the State. 
 
REVENUE AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
Disaster Management in the State 
 
Executive Summary 
Performance Audit of Disaster Management in the Sta te covering the period 
2007-13 revealed several areas of improvement requi red by the State 
Government to implement disaster prevention, mitigation, preparedness, relief 
and reconstruction as envisaged in the National Dis aster Management 
Framework and the Disaster Management Act. Prior to  the enactment of the 
Act, the State Government established (December 1999) Odisha State Disaster 
Management Authority (OSDMA), an autonomous body he aded by the Chief 
Secretary for disaster preparedness, mitigation and  management. The State 
Disaster Management Authority (SDMA) constituted in  October 2010 after a 
delay of five years of enactment of Disaster Manage ment Act 2005 under the 
Chairmanship of the Chief Minister for overseeing a ctivities relating to 
disaster prevention, mitigation, preparedness, reli ef and reconstruction, did 
not meet till July 2013. The State Government faile d to incorporate disaster 
management into the development planning process du e to non-preparation of 
State Disaster Management Plan (SDMP) till July 201 3 as envisaged in the 
Disaster Management Act 2005. SDMP was, however, pr epared in August 
2013.  
Though early warning mechanism and communication sy stems for disaster 
preparedness were in place, the system was not effe ctive due to inadequate 
staff and non-functioning of machinery. Relief, reh abilitation and 
reconstruction measures had gaps as payments of ` 49.59  lakh were made for 
rice without actual distribution, relief materials valuing ` 10.26 crore were 
issued without acquittance roll and beneficiary lis ts, rice got damaged due to 
improper storing etc. There was delay of six to nin e months in providing relief 
to affected people and dal being basic food, was no t distributed in relief 
operation.  
During Phailin (Cyclone in October 2013), though, t he State Government 
could save human life through early warning system and administration of 
evacuation to safer place, more could have been don e to save the livestock 
which is main livelihood of the affected population . Further, the post disaster 
relief measure and restoration/ reconstruction meas ures undertaken by the 
Government were not comprehensive. There were cases  of inequitable 
distribution of relief and short distribution of re lief material. Restoration was 
not adequate due to delay in restoration of power i nfrastructure, piped water 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
8 
 
supply system, roads, irrigation canals and Lift Ir rigation Projects affecting 
rabi crops/ agriculture in the affected districts. Besides, input subsidy for loss 
of crop was not paid and artisans were not adequately compensated for loss of 
livelihood. 
There was improper financial management as ` 29.46 crore was sanctioned 
from Calamity Relief Fund (CRF)/ State Disaster Res ponse Fund (SDRF) 
towards disaster preparedness in violation of GoI n orms. Utilisation 
Certificates for ` 1456.42 crore were pending from executing agencies  and 
Collectors against the release of fund of ` 3455.80 crore during 2007-13. 
Despite retaining the SDRF in interest bearing publ ic accounts during 2011-
13, interest thereon was not paid by the State Government. 
Monitoring of preparedness, rescue and relief opera tions by the State 
Executive Committee (SEC) was largely absent as its  meetings were limited to 
approval of projects of various departments and sanction of fund out of SDRF.  
2.1  Introduction 
Disaster is a catastrophe, mishap, calamity or grav e occurrence in any area 
which results in substantial loss of life or human sufferings or damage to and 
destruction of properties or degradation of environ ment, and is of such a 
nature or magnitude as to be beyond the coping capa city of the community of 
the affected area. So, for effective disaster manag ement, Government of India 
(GoI) enacted “The Disaster Management (DM) Act” in  December 2005. 
Disaster Management (DM) is a continuous and integrated process of  
• planning, organizing, coordinating and implementing  measures which are 
necessary or expedient for prevention of danger or threat of any disaster;  
• mitigation or reduction of risk of any disaster or its severity or 
consequences;  
• capacity building to deal with any disaster;  
• prompt response to any threatening disaster situation or disaster;  
• assessing the severity or magnitude of effects of any disaster;  
• evacuation, rescue, relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction. 
2.1.1 State’s vulnerability to various disasters  
Odisha is situated on the East Coast of India betwe en 17 
0 49’ N to 22 0 36’ N 
Latitude and 81 0 36’ E to 87 0 18’ E Longitude. The State comprising 1.56 lakh 
sq km area is divided into 30 districts, 58 sub div isions, 314 blocks,103 urban 
local bodies and 51,349 villages under 6234 Gram Pa nchayats (GPs). It has a 
total population of 4.19 crore as per 2011 census.  
Geographically, the State has a 482 km long coastline along the Bay of Bengal 
and is intercepted by seven peninsular flood prone river systems like 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit 
9 
 
Baitarani, Brahmani, Budhabalang, Mahanadi, Rushiku lya, Subarnarekha 
and Vansadhara  with 129 tributaries.  
Odisha is vulnerable to multiple disasters. Due to its sub-tropical littoral 
location, the State is prone to tropical cyclones, storm surges and tsunamis. 
The rivers in these areas with heavy load of silt h ave very little carrying 
capacity, resulting in frequent floods. Besides, 26 6 villages of different 
districts of the State are vulnerable to tsunami an d 43 out of 103 Urban Local 
Bodies (ULBs) with a population of about 27 lakh co me under earthquake risk 
zone II and III (Low and Medium damage risk zone), as assessed by OSDMA. 
Such vulnerability is indicated in the maps below:  
Map 1: Vulnerability profile for cyclone zone 
  Map 2: Vulnerability profile for flood zone  
2.1.2 Impact of disasters in State  
During the last decade, the State has faced one or other forms of disasters like 
flood, cyclone, tornado or drought every year. The impact of major disasters 
was as under: 
• The State was struck by a super cyclone in October 1999 in which 1.26 
crore people were affected in 12 districts causing loss of 8962 human 
lives and damage to 20 lakh houses and crops over 1 8.40 lakh Ha of 
land.  

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
10 
 
• During 2007-13, the State encountered 15 major disa sters like flood/ 
heavy rains, drought including Phailin  cyclone in which 2.97 crore 
people were affected, 405 people died and property worth 
approximately ` 16430.71 crore was damaged as detailed in Appendix 
2.1.1 .  
2.1.3 Organisational set up  
After super cyclone of 1999, the State Government e stablished (December 
1999) OSDMA, an autonomous body headed by the Chief  Secretary for 
disaster preparedness, mitigation and management. B ut, with enactment of 
DM Act 2005 by the GoI, the State constituted SDMA in October 2010 with 
the Chief Minister as the Chairperson for laying do wn policies and plans for 
DM in the State. To assist SDMA, the State Executiv e Committee (SEC) 
under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary with four  other Secretaries as 
determined by the Government, was constituted in De cember 2010, who was 
responsible for implementing National and State Dis aster Management Plan 
and to co-ordinate and monitor disaster management in the State. 
At the district level, District Disaster Management Authorities (DDMAs) were 
constituted in November 2010 under the Chairmanship  by the Collectors of 
the Districts to act as the district planning, coor dinating and implementing 
bodies and to take measures for the purpose of disa ster management in the 
district.  
The office of the Special Relief Commissioner (SRC)  functions as Secretariat 
to SDMA. The SRC-cum-Special Secretary, Revenue and  Disaster 
Management (RDM) Department, being additional Chief  Executive Officer 
(CEO) to SDMA is the functional head of disaster ma nagement activities in 
the State.  
2.1.4 Scope of Audit 
Performance Audit was conducted during May-October 2012 and April- May 
2013 covering the period 2007-13. Eight 
2 sample districts were selected on the 
basis of Stratified Random Sampling without Replace ment. Besides, as the 
State was hit by ‘ Phailin ’ in October 2013 followed by heavy flood, the 
records relating to pre and post disaster managemen t was examined during 
December 2013 and May 2014 in six 3 Phailin  hit districts including four 
districts covered earlier, thus covering 10 districts in all during audit. 
2.1.5 Audit objectives 
The Performance Audit was conducted with the objective to assess whether: 
• a robust institutional framework existed to address  issues of disaster 
management; 
                                                
 
2  Angul, Balasore, Bhadrak, Dhenkanal, Jagatsinghpu r, Jajpur, Keonjhar and 
Subarnapur 
3  Ganjam and Puri and earlier four districts: Balas ore, Bhadrak, Jagatsinghpur and 
Jajpur 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit 
11 
 
• measures for preparedness, prevention and mitigatio n to reduce impact 
of disasters were adequate, efficient and effective; 
• response, relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction  activities were 
undertaken in an efficient and effective manner;  
• funds were available timely and were utilised econo mically, efficiently 
and effectively for the intended purpose; and 
• monitoring mechanism functioned efficiently and eff ectively to 
address the issues of disaster management.  
2.1.6 Audit criteria 
Criteria for Performance Audit were drawn from the following documents: 
• Disaster Management Act 2005; 
• National Policy on Disaster Management 2009; 
• National/ State Disaster Plan, guidelines and other  instructions issued 
by GoI, State Government and National Disaster Mana gement 
Authority; 
• Orissa Relief Code (ORC);  
• Orissa Treasury Code (OTC) and Orissa General Finan cial Rules 
(OGFR). 
2.1.7 Audit methodology 
Performance Audit commenced with an Entry Conferenc e held on 21 May 
2012 with the SRC-cum-Special Secretary, RDM Depart ment and Managing 
Director, OSDMA wherein the audit objectives, crite ria, scope and 
methodology were discussed and agreed to. Audit was  conducted through test 
check of records in RDM Department, OSDMA, SRC, six
4 Departments of 
State Government, Directorate of Town Planning, Eng ineer-in-Chief (Water 
Resources) and DDMAs of 10 sample districts. Beside s, records of 95 5 
executing agencies in sample districts were also te st checked. Joint physical 
inspection of assets created was also conducted in presence of representatives 
of audited entities and response of 112 persons of five districts affected by 
flood in 2011 and 815 persons of six Phailin  affected districts were recorded 
by Audit. Photographs were taken, wherever consider ed necessary. Replies of 
the Government, wherever received have been incorpo rated at appropriate 
places (June 2014). Exit Conference could not be he ld despite repeated 
requests made to State Government (June 2014). 
                                                
 
4  Finance, Agriculture, Health & Family Welfare, Labour & Employees’ State Insurance, 
Water Resources and Housing & Urban Development  
5  Tahsildars: 14, Urban Local Bodies: 6, Block Deve lopment Officers: 13, Deputy 
Directors of Agriculture: 6 and Executive Engineers : 37, Chief District Veterinary 
Officers: 5, Chief District Medical Officers: 5, Ad ditional Director of Fisheries/ 
District Fisheries Officers: 4, Deputy Directors of  Horticulture: 3, Assistant Director of 
Textiles: 1 and General Manager District Industries Centre: 1 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
12 
 
AUDIT FINDINGS 
 
2.2  Institutional Framework and Planning  
The Act provides for formulation of rules to carry out its provisions, 
constitution of SDMA at State level and DDMA at dis trict level for overall 
disaster management, formation of SEC and State Adv isory Committee to 
assist the SDMA, preparation of SDMP including meas ures to be taken for 
prevention, mitigation and response to any disaster . However, Institutional 
Framework to address the issues of disaster managem ent was deficient in 
many ways as discussed in paragraphs below: 
2.2.1 Delay in formulation of State Rule  
Section 78 of Disaster Management (DM) Act empowers  the State 
Government to make rules to carry out provisions of said Act. Such rules were 
to provide for composition and number of members of  the State and District 
Authorities, term of their office and conditions of  service, powers and 
functions to be exercised by them including the Cha irperson of the SEC and 
any other matter in respect of which provisions are to be made in the Rules.  
Audit noticed that before enactment of the DM Act 2 005 by the GoI, the State 
Government had formulated the State Disaster Manage ment Policy in March 
2005. However, Odisha Disaster Management (ODM) Rules were framed only 
in July 2010, after five years of enactment of the Act. This resulted in delay in 
constitution of SDMA, DDMAs and SEC as these were c onstituted during 
October and December 2010 i.e.,  only after formulation of State Rule.  
Government stated (August 2012) that delay was  due  to certain issues 
concerning implementation of DM Act for which the G oI had constituted a 
task force to review the provisions of the Act. Sta te Government further stated 
(June 2014) that prior to formulation of State Rule s, disaster management 
issues were addressed as per the Calamity Relief Fund (CRF) scheme. 
But implementation of disaster management, being a continuous process, rules 
and procedures as stipulated under DM Act were required to have been framed 
in time. CRF scheme, however, basically dealt with post disaster relief and 
administration of funds. 
2.2.2 Preparation of State Disaster Management Plan   
Section 23 of DM Act requires preparation of SDMP i ncluding vulnerability 
of different parts of the State to different forms of disasters, measures to be 
adopted for prevention and mitigation of disaster, the manner in which 
mitigation measures would be integrated with develo pmental plans and 
projects, capacity building and preparedness measur es to be taken, defining 
the roles and responsibilities of different departm ents to different disasters. 
Appropriate provisions shall be made by the State G overnment for financing 
measures to be carried under the State Plan. Beside s, Section 30 and 31 of the 
Act stipulate that developmental plans should include the areas in the districts  

Chapter 2 Performance Audit 
13 
 
vulnerable to disasters, forms of disasters and the  measures to be taken for 
prevention and mitigation of disaster by the Govern ment at the district level 
and local authorities in the district.   
Audit noticed that SDMP was not prepared, even afte r seven years of 
enactment of DM Act as a result of which the depart ments could not integrate 
SDMP in their respective Development Plans. Further , there was no scope for 
the State Government to make provisions for financi ng the measures to be 
taken for disaster management.  
Government stated (June 2014) that SDMP was prepare d in August 2013 and 
all departments were instructed to include disaster  management component in 
their plan sector.  
2.2.3 Constitution of SDMA 
As per Section 18(1) and (3) of DM Act, SDMA would have the responsibility 
of laying down the State Disaster Management Policy , guidelines for different 
departments  for integration of measures for preven tion of disasters and 
mitigation in their development plans and projects and provide necessary 
technical assistance, coordinate implementation of the State Plan, approve the 
SDMP in accordance with the guidelines laid down by  the National Authority 
and review the measures being taken for mitigation,  capacity building and 
preparedness etc. Further, in terms of Section 15(1 ) of DM Act, the SDMA 
may meet as and when necessary and at such time and  place as the 
Chairperson may think fit. 
Audit noticed that though the State encountered maj or disasters during  
2007-10, SDMA was constituted only in October 2010 and remained non-
functional as it did not meet after its constitutio n till July 2013 to discuss 
different issues of disaster management. Thus, depa rtments and field 
functionaries were deprived of leadership and direction from SDMA. 
Government stated (June 2014) that during 2007-12, disaster related issues 
were taken care of in meetings held under the Chair manship of Chief Minister 
where representatives of different departments met though these meetings 
were not given statutory status of SDMA.  
However, the meetings were merely need based intera ctions and the fact 
remains that regular formal meetings would have gon e a long way in 
institutionalising responses to disaster related issues. 
2.2.4 Instituting DDMAs 
Similarly, as per Section 25 of DM Act, DDMA is to be constituted in each 
district to act as a district planning, coordinatin g and implementing body for 
disaster management. Further, Section 27 of the Act stipulates that they should 
meet as and when necessary.  
Audit noticed that the DDMAs were constituted as la te as in November 2010 
and even after their constitution did not meet till  March 2012 though major 
disasters occurred almost every year in the State. In absence of DDMA, 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
14 
 
systemic approach to disaster management as envisag ed under the Act was 
absent. 
2.2.5 Incorporation of provisions of DM Act in Stat e DM policy  
Provision of Para 3.2.21 in State DM Policy states that the policy should be 
updated and revised as and when required. Audit not iced that though the State 
DM Policy was formulated in March 2005 prior to ena ctment of National DM 
Act (December 2005), and promulgation of National P olicy on DM (October 
2009), the State DM Policy was not revised and upda ted so far. Due to non 
revision of State DM policy, it was not consistent with the National DM 
Policy/ Act and lacked aspects like (i) non inclusion of manmade disasters like 
chemical, biological and radiological disasters, (i i) adoption of safe 
construction practices, (iii) retrofitting of life line buildings, (iv) owner driven 
reconstruction practices and (v) provision to gener ate temporary livelihood 
option for the affected community. 
Government stated (June 2014) that steps were being  taken to prepare revised 
Disaster Management Policy keeping in view the deve lopment in disaster 
management sector. 
2.2.6 Formation of Advisory Committee  
As per Section 17 (1) of the DM Act, State Authorit y may, as and when it 
considers necessary, constitute an Advisory Committ ee, consisting of experts 
in the field of disaster management and having prac tical experience of disaster 
management to make recommendations on different asp ects of disaster 
management. However, no such Committee was constitu ted in the State (June 
2013).  
Department stated (June 2013) that Advisory Committ ee was not mandatory 
and would be constituted when considered necessary.  However, the fact 
remains that due to non-formation of the committee,  the State is deprived of 
expert opinions and recommendations for effective m anagement of disasters 
on a continuous and sustained basis. 
2.2.7   Restricted powers and authorities of SEC and DDMAs 
Section 24 of the DM Act provides that for the purp ose of assistance in 
protecting the community affected by disaster or pr oviding relief to such 
community or preventing or combating disruption or dealing with the effect of 
any threatening disaster, the SEC is required to be  empowered to control and 
restrict vehicular traffics, restrict entry, moveme nt and departure of persons, 
remove debris, conduct search and carry out rescue operations in the affected 
areas. 
 
• Audit noticed that, no such powers were bestowed on  SEC thus 
making it virtually a fund allotting body, as it la rgely approved 
proposals for funds submitted by various department s and allocated 
funds out of State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF). M onitoring of 
preparedness, rescue and relief operations by SEC r emained almost 
absent due to want of above powers. 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit 
15 
 
• Similarly, authority and power are given to DDMAs u nder section 30 
(2), 33 & 34 of DM Act. Though as per ORC (para 12 and 15), the 
SRC/ Board of Revenue at the State level and Distri ct Collector at the 
district level are responsible for overall manageme nt of relief 
operation, with powers to transfer personnel, make requisition of 
services of any personnel of a department, requisit ion vehicles, 
DDMAs have not been vested with any such power. 
Government stated (August 2012) that by virtue of t he provisions of the DM 
Act, the power specified under the sections automat ically devolve upon the 
SEC and DDMA for which no further delegation was re quired. But Audit 
noticed that since no specific rule or instruction or guidelines was framed by 
the Government to enable SEC and the DDMAs to exerc ise such authority 
under DM Act, the DDMAs followed the provisions of ORC to deal with 
disaster management. 
2.3 Disaster preparedness, prevention and mitigatio n  
Natural disasters like flood, cyclone and earthquak e cannot be avoided as they 
are dependent on external factors like weather cond itions, earth pressure etc. 
However, impact of these disasters could be minimis ed by taking preventive 
and mitigation measures. National Policy on DM 2009  emphasised 
preparedness, prevention and mitigation of disasters.  
After super cyclone 1999, the Government took diffe rent measures like 
construction of cyclone and flood centres, equippin g these centres with 
various instruments, setting up of Emergency Operat ion Centres at State and 
District level and creation of disaster response fo rce towards preparedness, 
prevention and mitigation of disaster. Audit examin ed Government’s response 
towards preparedness and mitigations of disaster in cluding Phailin  that 
occurred during period of audit. The observations o f Audit are discussed 
below: 
2.3.1 Deployment of staff in SDMA and DDMA  
Section 16 and 29 of DM Act provide that the State Government shall provide 
such officers, consultants and other employees as i t considers necessary for 
carrying of the functions of SDMA and DDMAs.   
Audit noticed that DDMAs were established in each d istrict in November 
2010 with Collector as the Chairperson but no dedic ated staff was provided to 
these Authorities. Additional District Magistrate w as designated as the ex-
officio Chief Executive Officer of DDMA while one D eputy Collector was 
designated as District Emergency Officer. Both also  remained in charge of 
other non-disaster management related functions lik e election, revenue 
collection, establishment, planning, etc. leaving l ittle scope to attend to issues 
on disaster management.  
Audit further noticed that State Emergency Operatio n Centre (SEOC) at the 
State level functioning under SDMA and District Eme rgency Operation 
Centres (DEOCs) functioning under DDMAs for management of disaster related 
operations were run without required staff. Staff o f SRC managed the SEOC 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
16 
 
in addition to their regular assignment till May 20 11. Further, in absence of 
required staff for DEOC, various staff of other off ices in the district like Land 
Acquisition Office, District Planning Office, Sub R egistrar, District/ Circle 
Inspector of Schools etc. were posted on rotation b asis in the DEOC to man 
the control room.  
Government created (March 2011) 14 posts of support  staff for SEOC who 
were posted during June - September 2011 but, no su ch post for support staff 
were created for DEOC except one Data Entry Operator. 
Government stated (June 2014) that though Deputy Co llectors remained in 
charge of other functions, they looked after emergency work on priority during 
any disaster. However, the fact remains that due to  such adhoc arrangement, 
committed staff was not made available though Sections 16 and 29 of DM Act 
stipulated appointment of officers and other employ ees to carry out the 
function of SDMA and DDMAs.   
2.3.2 Creation of State Disaster Response Force 
Para 3.4.5 of the National Policy on DM 2009 provid es that the State would 
create State Disaster Response Force equipping and training police forces for 
the purpose of specialised response to disasters. B esides, as per decision (June 
2004) of National Disaster Management Division of G oI, the State Disaster 
Response Force should be composite with State Armed  Police specialised in 
search and rescue, one mobile engineering unit with  necessary equipment and 
one medical assistance team. The force would also include women member for 
looking after the needs of women and children. Audi t, however, noticed that 
though Odisha Disaster Rapid Action Force (ODRAF) w as created in 2001 
and was increased to 10 units 
6 in 2009, the same was not made a composite 
unit of police, engineering and medical staff as it  consisted of personnel from 
State Armed Force only. Further, the ODRAF team did  not comprise of 
women.  
Government, while accepting the observation stated (June 2014) that ODRAF 
personnel were mostly trained to operate in disaste r situation to carry out 
search and rescue operation. 
2.3.3 Creation of State and District Disaster Mitig ation Fund  
Section 48 of DM Act prescribes establishing State Disaster Mitigation Fund 
(SDMF) and District Disaster Mitigation Fund (DDMF)  by the States to meet 
the expenses on disaster mitigation. However, Audit  noticed that the 
Government has not created SDMF at the State level and DDMF at the 
District level. Expenditure thus for mitigation activities was met from SDRF. 
Government stated (June 2014) that the said provisi ons have not yet been 
given effect by the GoI as the 13 
th  Finance Commission did not approve 
allocation of funds. The reply is not tenable as in curring expenditure related to 
                                                 
6 Balasore, Baripada, Bhubaneswar, Bolangir, Chhatra pur, Cuttack, Jharsuguda, 
Koraput, Paradeep and Rourkela 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit 
17 
 
disaster mitigation out of SDRF was contrary to the  provisions of GoI 
Guidelines. 
2.3.4 Early warning mechanism and communication sys tems  
Section 22(2) and 30(2) of DM Act read with Nationa l Policy on  DM 2009 
required SEC and DDMAs to ensure that communication  systems are in order 
for early dissemination of disaster related informa tion to public and to 
establish, upgrade and modernise forecasting and early warning systems. 
2.3.4.1  Working of VHF network 
 
State Government provided Civil VHF network systems  in 414 locations 
covering DDMAs, block headquarters, disaster prone tahasils and GPs. 
However, Audit noticed that six 7 out of 10 VHF sets under test checked 
DDMAs were not in working condition. This would neg atively affect 
transmission of messages in absence of telephone network.  
Government stated (June 2014) that VHF sets had bec ome outdated and that 
Department had decided to discard the same and repl ace them with satellite 
phones.  
2.3.4.2  Functioning of HAM radio, Satellite phones  
HAM radio stations used to establish link between districts/ State headquarters 
and remote areas during natural calamities were out  of order in Jajpur and 
Jagatsinghpur district. Government stated (June 201 4) that agreement would 
be signed with the National Institute of Amateur Ra dio, Hyderabad to assign 
the maintenance of HAM radios. The fact remains tha t belated steps are now 
being taken to repair the HAM radios. 
Similarly, Annual Maintenance Contract (AMC) for 35  satellite phones 
provided to DEOCs and other offices expired between  October 2010 and 
December 2011 which were not renewed (March 2013). Of the above, two 
such phones at DEOC Jagatsinghpur and Cuttack remai ned out of order since 
October 2011 and were not repaired (June 2013).  
Government stated (June 2014) that decision has been taken to discontinue the 
use of these satellite phones and go for latest mod el of satellite phones for 
disaster management. The fact however, remains that  no steps were taken 
either to renew AMC or replace the systems during the intermittent period.  
2.3.4.3  Status of equipment at Flood/ cyclone centres 
 
Out of 195 Flood and Cyclone centres available in t he State as of March 2013, 
equipment availability in 114 such centres of six d istricts were examined from 
records available in OSDMA and Audit noticed that r escue items like 27 
Generator sets, 28 tower lights, 39 power saws, 41 mega phones, 37 search 
lights, five sirens and 35 solar lanterns in these centres remained defective 
since October 2011. Besides, all the life buoys, li fe jackets and fibre ropes 
                                                 
7  Angul, Dhenkanal, Jagatsinghpur, Jajpur, Keonjhar  and Subarnapur 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
18 
 
available with cyclone/ flood centres had crossed t heir expiry date since June 
2012. 
Further, joint physical inspection in nine cyclone centres and eight DEOCs 
revealed (June 2012) that, three tower lights, one power saw, six mega phones, 
five search lights, one siren and two solar lanterns were in defective condition. 
Government stated (June 2014) that the equipment ha ve now made workable 
and steps are being taken to improve their conditions.   
2.3.4.4  Basic infrastructure for cyclone centres 
 
In another 12 cyclone centres, physical inspection revealed that none of the 
cyclone centres had arrangement for permanent elect ricity connection and 
regular water supply. In one such cyclone centre in  Balasore Sadar block, 
there were unhygienic conditions and water supply s ystem was damaged. 
Similarly, in Jajpur Block, a cyclone centre was co nstructed in shallow area 
and there was no road to that centre. Local people complained that during 
rainy season, the area was flooded with water.  
Government stated (June 2014) that the cyclone cent res were fully electrified 
during construction and steps had been taken to sup ply electricity to all the 
shelter buildings and construct approach roads in a  phased manner to connect 
them to avoid problem during emergency.  
2.3.4.5  Availability of boats 
 
During the years 2009-12, it was seen in Balasore d istrict that out of total 14 
power boats available during 2009-10 for stationing  in various vulnerable 
places of the district, six boats were out of order . Similarly, four boats in 
2010-11 and three in 2011-12 out of 17 boats availa ble were also not in 
running condition.  
Government stated (June 2013) that all these boats had been repaired and were 
now in running condition.  
2.3.5   M easures to make urban areas disaster resilient  
Paragraph 6.1.1 of National Policy on DM  2009 requ ires that relevant Acts, 
Rules and Regulations warranting amendments need to  be identified and 
brought in conformity with the DM Act in a phased m anner by both the 
Central and State Governments and other agencies co ncerned. Audit noticed 
that Government failed to take adequate measures in  making urban areas 
disaster resilient as discussed under:  
2.3.5.1  Amendment of ‘Building bye-laws/ regulation’  
As per paragraph 6.2.1 and 6.4.1 of National policy  on DM 2009, Building 
bye-laws and structural safety features are to be r eviewed periodically to 
identify safety gaps from seismic, flood, landslide  and other disasters and 
suitable modifications are to be made to align them  to the revised building 
codes of the Bureau of Indian Standards. National B uilding Code is to be 
made mandatory in all building bye-laws. 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit 
19 
 
Audit, however, noticed 
from records of 
Directorate of Town 
Planning that standards 
of safety for natural 
hazards based on 
National Building Code 
were incorporated in the 
‘Planning and Building 
Standard Regulation’ 
(PBSR) of only two 
local development 
authorities (Bhubaneswar and Rourkela) out of nine such development 
authorities. One hundred and three local bodies als o did not comply even 
though 43 urban centres of the State are under earthquake Zone III.  
Government stated (June 2014) that PBSR of other de velopment authorities 
and ULBs would be finalised and implemented soon. H owever, the fact 
remains that delay in finalisation of PBSR would en hance the risk due to 
upcoming construction of buildings under 43 ULBs lo cated in earthquake 
zones. 
2.3.5.2  Provision for reinforcement and reconstruction in urban planning  
Para 3.2.16 of State Disaster Management Policy 200 5 provided for 
strengthening public and community buildings to make them disaster resistant. 
Audit noticed that OSDMA issued (23 March 2007) nec essary instruction to 
Housing and Urban Development Department to include  reinforcement and 
reconstruction (retrofitting of old building) in ur ban planning. Test check of 
records at eight sample districts revealed that ret rofitting of old buildings have 
not been done in any of the districts. As a result,  structural safety of old 
lifeline buildings was left unassessed.  
Government stated (June 2014) that under the projec t ‘Seismic Vulnerability 
Assessment of building types in India’, field surve y of the buildings of 
Bhubaneswar and Cuttack had been undertaken by a pr oject team of Indian 
Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. Necessary steps  were being taken for 
incorporating provisions as per findings of the sur vey. The reply is, however, 
silent regarding delay by the Department in includi ng the reinforcement and 
restructuring in urban planning despite instruction from OSDMA since 2007. 
2.3.6 Emergency training for staff  
As per Para 5.2.10 of National Policy on DM 2009, S tate and District 
authorities would encourage a culture of preparedne ss and quick response 
through training, seminars and mock drills.  
Audit test checked the training and emergency exerc ises conducted in the 
State for disaster mitigation and found the following:  
Under National Programme for Capacity Building of E ngineers in Earthquake 
Risk Management (NPCBEERM) and National Programme f or Capacity 
Building of Architects in Earthquake Risk Managemen t (NPCBAERM), GoI 
trained 17 master trainers during 2004-05 under NPC BEERM and four master 
Earthquake zones of Odisha 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
20 
 
trainers under NPCBAERM in the State as State Resou rce Persons. However, 
against a target fixed by the National Institute of  Disaster Management for 
training 320 engineers (Government: 192 and private : 128), only 80 
Government engineers were provided with training as of March 2013.  
Government replied (August 2012) that due to dearth  of privately practicing 
structural engineers, training programme was conduc ted for sufficient number 
of Government engineers. But it is evident that tra ining programme for 
Government engineers also fell short by 112 and not  a single private engineer 
was trained. 
2.3.7 Building community resilience 
Section 22 (2) (i) and 30 (xiii) of DM Act required  that SDMA and DDMAs 
facilitate community training and awareness program mes to sensitise local 
community to respond to any threatening disaster si tuation. Periodical mock 
drills should be conducted in which personnel from medical, home guard, civil 
defence etc. were to be included to prevent, mitiga te and respond to any 
disaster. Audit noticed: 
• Though local mock drills were conducted periodicall y at District level 
and cyclone shelter level in the presence of ODRAF team, personnel 
from medical, home guards, fire service etc. who we re required to be 
involved in rescue and relief operations in case of  disaster, were not 
involved (June 2012). However, Government stated (J une 2014) that 
other government functionaries like District and Bl ock functionaries, 
Medical officers, Non-Governmental Organisations (N GO) and other 
stakeholders of disaster management were being invo lved in the mock 
drills and planned to conduct such mock drills in 2 34 cyclone/ flood 
shelters of flood/ cyclone prone districts very soon. 
• Though OSDMA imparted training to 10212 
8 local people through 
four types of trainings in 111 flood/ cyclone shelt ers of six coastal 
districts during 2008-09, no such training was impa rted thereafter. 
Government stated (June 2014) that OSDMA had impart ed training in 
2013-14 in 128 flood/ cyclone centres and training at flood/ cyclone 
centre level would be imparted regularly.  
2.3.8  Emergency Action Plan (EAP) for Dam safety 
The Central Water Commission issued (May 2006) guid elines for 
development and implementation of EAP to preplan th e coordination of 
necessary action by the dam owner and the responsible local and state officials 
to provide for timely notification, warning and eva cuation in the event of an 
emergency to reduce the risk of loss of life and damage to property.  
Audit noticed that though there are 205 large dams in the State, there was no 
EAP for any of the large dams except two (Balimela and Jalaput). Thus in 
absence of EAP, safety of life and property of loca l people could be 
compromised. 
                                                
 
8  4440: Orientation training; 2775: Search and resc ue; 2775: First aid; 222: Operation 
and maintenance of equipment  

Chapter 2 Performance Audit 
21 
 
2.3.9  Establishment of standby SEOC 
SEC sanctioned (March 2011) ` 15 lakh from Capacity building component 
for Disaster Response (13th Finance Commission gran t) for setting up of a 
standby SEOC in the SRC office at Cuttack. However, the same was not set up 
till June 2014.  
Government stated (June 2014) that the building in which the standby SEOC 
was proposed to be set up, was demolished for exten sion of an office building. 
But Government could have arranged an alternative building. 
2.3.10 Evacuation of people/ animal before occurren ce of disasters 
As per DM Policy (Paragraph 3.2.5) of the State, a mechanism is required to 
be put in place for evacuation of people to safer places before disaster.  
Audit noticed that test checked districts had ident ified cyclone/ flood shelters, 
school/ college buildings for accommodating evacuat ed people before any 
imminent disaster. During Phailin  Government reportedly evacuated 11.55 
lakh people and 31,062 cattle to safe places in 15 affected districts.  
Scrutiny of records in respect of evacuation during  Phailin  revealed that the 
number of people evacuated contained discrepancies as below:  
• As per records of six test checked districts, 15.17  lakh population were 
evacuated. However Government reported evacuation o f only 11.55 
lakh in the 15 cyclone/ flood affected districts. 
• DDMA, Balasore initially reported (25 November 2013 ) to SRC 
evacuating 5.62 lakh people and later intimated (28  November 2013) 
evacuating only 3.54 lakh people.  
• DDMA, Puri intimated (16 and 27 October 2013) SRC a bout 
evacuation of 2.11 lakh people but, later it inform ed (10 December 
2013) Odisha Legislative Assembly that 1.83 lakh pe ople were 
evacuated. 
• Though data was consolidated at the district level from feedback of the 
blocks, audit noticed that while the Block Developm ent Officer (BDO), 
Delanga of Puri reported (5 December 2013) to the C ollector about 
evacuation of 18970 people but the Collector report ed (10 December 
2013) evacuation of 3500 people to SRC.  
• Government instructed (October 2013) Chief District  Veterinary 
Officers (CDVOs) to evacuate animals to the nearest  upland areas 
before striking of Phailin . Audit noticed that CDVOs of Ganjam, Puri 
and Balasore instead of evacuating the animals, sim ply made people 
aware of this. Thus, 21,305 animals lost their live s in the cyclone as 
people came to cyclone centres leaving their animals in their village.   
Government stated (June 2014) that as the impact of  cyclonic storm was 
wide spread, large number of people were evacuated which was a 
herculean task for district administration and acce pted the shortcoming of 
over/ under reporting which they stated should be i gnored due to massive 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
22 
 
scale of evacuation work. Though, the State Governm ent could save 
human life through early warning system and adminis tration of evacuation 
to safer place, more could have been done to save t he livestock which is 
main livelihood of the affected population. 
2.4 Distribution of Relief  
As per Para 66 and 165 of ORC read with RDM Departm ent resolution 
(October 2008), immediate relief was required to be  provided to people in 
distress with emergency assistance like rice, wheat, chuda 9, gur 10 , biscuits etc.  
During 2007-11, immediate relief materials (rice: 3 1357.15 MT, chuda : 
3966.48 MT, gur : 323.49 MT) were distributed to 1.65 crore benefic iaries as 
detailed in table below: 
Table 2.1: Year wise distribution of relief material 
Year Rice (MT) Chuda  (MT) Gur  (MT) Beneficiary covered 
(number in lakh) 
2007 8318.52 800.96 78.31 35.79  
2008 NA NA NA 60.18  
2009 170.71 77.27 10.35 6.61  
2010 374.72 23.64  2.26 0.90  
2011 22493.20 3064.61 232.57 61.24  
Total 31357.15 3966.48 323.49 164.72 
(Source: Records of SRC) 
Audit scrutiny revealed that relief and rehabilitat ion measures left some gaps. 
There were cases of payment made to the Civil Suppl y Officer (CSO) by the 
Collector for rice without distribution in relief o peration, distribution of relief 
materials without acquittance rolls, damage of rice , delay and short 
distribution of relief materials etc. as discussed in succeeding paragraphs: 
2.4.1 Payment for relief rice without actual utilis ation in relief operation  
As per Paragraph 176 and 180 of ORC, the Food Suppl ies and Consumer 
Welfare (FS&CW) Department has to provide food stuf f for two months 
requirement for implementation of the relief which are to be stocked at places 
ordered by the Collector. In case, the stock is utilised for relief distribution, the 
cost will be made out of SDRF.   
Audit noticed that, Collector, Jagatsinghpur allott ed (June 2009) ` 49.59 lakh 
to CSO, Jagatsinghpur to store 7292 qtl of rice at 93 GP godowns for 
providing food assistance to people likely to be af fected by flood in 2009. 
Subsequently, Collector withdrew the said allotment  in July 2009. Despite 
withdrawal of sanction, the CSO submitted Utilisati on Certificate (UC) for  
` 49.20 lakh towards utilisation of rice though there  was no relief distribution 
during 2009-10 as ascertained from the Annual Repor t of the SRC. Thus, 
SDRF was misutilised.  
Government stated (June 2014) that the matter was r eviewed in a meeting 
wherein it was advised that the UC for the said amo unt should not be accepted 
and the amount involved would be refunded by the CSO, Jagatsinghpur. 
                                                
 
9 Chuda : Parched rice 
10  Gur : Molasses  

Chapter 2 Performance Audit 
23 
 
Damaged rice stored in one GP of Dhamnagar block 
2.4.2 Distribution of relief materials in absence o f acquittance rolls- cum- 
beneficiary lists 
As per instruction issued (April 2012) by SRC, bene ficiary list in support of 
distribution of emergent food assistance/ relief sh ould be prepared with a 
column for signature of the person receiving it whi ch would serve as 
acquittance roll before distribution of emergent re lief including cooked food 
services. After distribution of relief, Government official in-charge of the 
relief operation has to submit acquittance rolls-cu m-beneficiary lists to the 
BDO within three days of the distribution which was  to be compiled by BDO 
and Collector and sent to SRC. Audit observed that: 
• Acquittance rolls-cum-beneficiary lists in support of distribution of 
emergent relief materials valuing ` 10.08 11 crore reported as distributed 
to 14.91 lakh people and cooked food at a cost of ` 18.06 12  lakh to 
0.19 lakh people of three districts (Bhadrak, Jagat singhpur and Angul) 
affected by flood in 2007, 2008 and 2011 were not m aintained at the 
district level. The said acquittance rolls were not  available in test 
checked blocks (Dhamnagar, Tirtol and Athamalik). T his indicated  
that acquittance roll were not made after distribut ion of relief due to 
which actual distribution could not be ascertained. 
• BDO, Delanga submitted report to Collector, Puri ab out providing 
food at free kitchen centre to 263 people in Sujanp ur GP at Mahatab 
High School cyclone centre during Phailin  2013. No acquittance roll in 
support of providing food at free kitchen was avail able. However, 
during interview of the beneficiaries, all 20 beneficiaries of that village 
stated that no cooked food was provided in the temp orary cyclone 
centre at Mahatab High School. In absence of detail ed acquittance roll, 
genuineness of the distribution of cooked food coul d not be verified in 
audit. In reply, the BDO stated that no payment was  made on account 
of free kitchen and payment would be made only afte r submission of 
acquittance rolls. 
Government stated (June 2014) that Additional Distr ict Magistrates were 
instructed to place beneficiary list of all village s on the website of the district 
for public access. 
2.4.3 Damage of relief rice 
due to improper 
storage 
Paragraph 177 of ORC 
assigned the responsibility to 
Collector for ensuring 
distribution of standard 
quality of food for relief and 
to store it at damp-proof and 
                                                
 
11   Bhadrak: rice-5035.66 MT, chuda - 405.66 MT, gur -28.50 MT costing ` 7.48 crore; 
Angul: rice-154.98 MT, chuda -11.20 MT, gur -1.21 MT, Dal- 5.38 MT costing ` 0.34 
crore; Jagatsinghpur: rice-1411.66 MT, chuda - 463.34 MT, gur- 43.96 MT costing  
` 2.26 crore  
12   Bhadrak: ` 12.85 lakh; Angul: ` 1.52 lakh and Jagatsinghpur: ` 3.69 lakh 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
24 
 
leak-proof places to prevent damage.  
Audit noticed that as per the instructions (May 201 1) of the Collector, 
Bhadrak, the CSO, Bhadrak, supplied (June 2011) 204 7.59 MT of rice which 
were stocked in various GP godowns. Out of these 11 5.45 
13  MT of rice 
valuing ` 23.16 lakh was damaged (September 2011) due to sto rage in 14 
godowns located in low lying areas of Dhamnagar and  Bhadaripokhari Block. 
Physical inspection of one such godown revealed that the relief rice stored was 
damaged and rotten.  
Thus, due to incorrect sites selection of GP godown s in low lying areas 
without considering the past incidence of floods, G overnment sustained a loss 
of ` 23.16 lakh.  
Government stated (June 2014) that instruction was given to all the Collectors 
to store relief materials in GP godowns lying in hi gher places which are not 
susceptible to floods to avoid damage of food grains. 
2.4.4 Delay in distribution of relief 
As per Paragraph 57 of ORC, reserve stock of relief  materials was to be 
maintained to provide timely relief to the disaster victims. 
During flood in 2011, Government decided (October 2 011) to give additional 
10 days relief to Below Poverty Line (BPL) families  to mitigate hardship. On 
the basis of the decision, FS&CW Department allotted 22403 MT of rice to 19 
districts in March 2012 i.e.,  after six months of the flood in September 2011.  
Physical Inspection of one godown in Balasore sadar  block revealed that 
226.80 MT of rice received (April 2012) for distrib ution of relief to BPL 
families were not issued (10 July 2012) and rice wa s found to be infected by 
insects. On this being pointed out in Audit (10 Jul y 2012), the BDO 
immediately issued (11 and 12 July 2012) the rice t o GPs for distribution to 
BPL families. This indicated that the rice was bein g distributed to the affected 
people after nine months of occurrence of flood and  was unfit for human 
consumption. Delay in distribution of rice could ha ve been avoided, had the 
FS&CW Department allotted rice immediately after th e decision of the 
Government. 
Government stated (June 2014) that supply of relief  rice was delayed due to 
restriction/code of conduct on account of election to Panchayati Raj 
Institutions. In respect of infected rice, Collecto r Balasore was intimated to 
cause an enquiry and take action against erring officials. 
2.4.5  Distribution of relief below the prescribed norm 
As per Paragraph 165 of revised ORC, one kg of rice  per adult and half kg of 
rice per child per day should be given as relief.  
In Subarnapur District, 181.57 qtl of rice was dist ributed to 21302 persons of 
4262 affected BPL families for 10 days’ relief agai nst requirement of 2130 qtl 
                                                
 
13   Dhamnagar: (10 GPs) 103.60 MT and Bhandaripokhari : (4 GPs) 11.85 MT. 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit 
25 
 
as per ORC norm. The amount of rice distributed wor ks out to about 850 
grams per person for 10 days which is not even suff icient for a family with 
one member who is entitled to receive 10 kg rice. T his indicated that relief 
was given below the norm.  
Government stated (June 2014) that the Collector, S ubarnapur was instructed 
to review and suggest suitable action. 
2.4.6 Non distribution of dal as emergency food ass istance 
As per para 165 of ORC, rice at the rate of one kg and required quantity of dal 
limited to ` 20 per adult and 500 gram of rice and dal limited to ` 15 per child 
is to be distributed as food assistance.  
Audit, however, noticed from records of districts a ffected by flood in 2011 
(Jagatsinghpur, Bhadrak and Angul) that though reli ef in shape of rice was 
distributed to 4.39 lakh flood victims, dal was not  distributed. During 
beneficiary survey, 30 beneficiaries of three villa ges in these districts also 
confirmed non-distribution of dal. 
Government, while admitting the fact, stated (June 2014) that though dal was 
not distributed as emergent food assistance with ri ce during flood in 2011, the 
same was provided with rice during Phailin . However, the reply is silent 
regarding non distribution of dal during flood in 2011. 
2.4.7  Short distribution of dry food 
As per norms of ORC, chuda  of one kg per adult and 500 grams per child is to 
be distributed as dry food. 
It was observed in Balasore Sadar Block that during  Phailin , only 345.50 qtl 
of chuda  was distributed to 135735 affected people (Adult: 81441, Child: 
54294). However, as per norms of assistance 3257.64  qtl of chuda  was 
required to be distributed.  Thus, there was short distribution of 2912.14 qtl of 
chuda . During beneficiary interview, all the 100 benefic iaries of that block 
confirmed distribution of lesser quantity of chuda .  
Government stated (June 2014) that Collector, Balas ore was instructed to 
review the fact and take suitable action against erring official. 
2.4.8  Inequitable distribution of relief materials
 
Para 165 of ORC stipulates quantities of rice and d al to be distributed as food 
assistance. Some irregularities noticed on distribu tion of relief during Phailin 
are discussed below.   
• Government in lieu of adopting the ORC norm to prov ide relief on the 
basis of person affected, declared (15 October 2013 ) that food 
assistance of 50 kg of rice and ` 500 for 14 days relief and 25 kg rice 
and ` 300 for 7 days relief should be provided to every House Hold 
(HH).  

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
26 
 
Test check of acquittance rolls of 1101 HHs for dis tribution of relief in 
Ganjam revealed that two per cent of HH  (20)  had one member, eight 
per cent ( 83) had two members, 23 per cent (249) had three members, 
37 per cent (415 ) had four members, and 30 per cent (334) had five or 
more than five members. This implied inequitable distribution of relief.  
Government stated (June 2014) that this was done to ensure convenient 
and speedy distribution of relief. However, the fac t remains that there 
was inequitable distribution thereby depriving some  and giving 
superfluous relief to some others.  
• Further, to distribute relief on the basis of HH, B DO, Balasore sadar 
prepared HH list on the basis of census 2011. As af ter two years of 
census in 2013, new HHs came to existence, some were not included in 
the list prepared by the BDO. This caused resentmen t among people 
and 772 qtl (3088 HHs X 25 Kg.) of rice was not dis tributed to 3088 
HHs of nine GPs.  
Government stated (June 2014) that Collector, Balas ore was instructed 
to review the fact and take suitable action against erring officials. 
2.4.9  Non distribution of polythene sheets 
RDM Department instructed (22 October 2013) distric t Collectors to provide, 
on priority basis, polythene sheets to victims whos e houses were `fully 
damaged and to others on the basis of availability.  As per the report of 
Tahasildar, Balasore Sadar, in eight GPs, 2960 hous es were damaged in 
Phailin and subsequent flood out of which, 380 houses were fully damaged 
and concerned HH were eligible for polythene sheets  as per norms. However, 
Audit observed that these were not supplied though 1151 pieces of polythene 
sheets were available in stock as per stock registe r of the Tahasildar 
concerned.  
Government stated (June 2014) that all beneficiarie s were provided with 
polythene subsequently by the Tahasildar, Balasore.  However, the fact 
remains that the polythene sheets were not distributed during necessity. 
2.5 Restoration/ reconstruction after disasters 
As per items and norms of assistance from the CRF/S DRF issued by the GoI, 
damages related to infrastructure like roads and bridges, drinking water supply 
system, irrigation, power are identified as activit y of repair and restoration of 
immediate nature. 
Audit noticed that Government took up reconstructio n and restoration works 
which were not of immediate nature and works which were not damaged by 
disasters. After Phailin  also, Government failed to manage repair and 
restoration activities effectively though 132.35 la kh people in 171 Blocks, 44 
Urban Local Bodies in 18 Districts were affected, 4 4 lost their lives and 
standing crops in 5.56 lakh Ha were reportedly dama ged. Scrutiny of records 
in respect of action taken by Government towards re storation/ reconstruction 
revealed the followings:  

Chapter 2 Performance Audit 
27 
 
Renovation of Town Hall, Subarn apur  
LAC building at Mahadevpali 
2.5.1 Execution of repair and restoration of works not of immediate nature  
Paragraph 3 of GoI guidelines provides that the fund under CRF/ SDRF was to 
be utilised only for meeting the expenditure for pr oviding immediate relief to 
the victims of cyclone, flood, drought, earthquake,  fire etc. Audit noticed that, 
fund amounting to  ` 3.37 crore (Appendix 2.1.2) was utilised during 2007-12 
for construction and restoration of 100 works like repair of buildings of Home 
Guards, Town Hall, Regional Transport Office buildi ng, renovation of tanks 
etc. which were not of immediate nature.  
2.5.2  Execution of work not related to disaster 
Audit also noticed that ` 2.70 crore was 
utilised on 148 works (Appendix 2.1.3) like 
repair and renovation of Government office 
buildings and staff quarters etc. by eight 
executing agencies which were not damaged 
in flood or any other disaster.  
2.5.3  Construction of new works  
As per the guidelines, works of repair and restorat ion of immediate nature 
should be taken up out of CRF/SDRF. Audit found in three (Subarnapur, 
Balasore and Jajpur) out of eight test checked dist ricts that ` 3.20 crore was 
released (February to June 2012) by Fisheries and A nimal Resources 
Development Department to four executing agencies f or construction of 42 
new Livestock Aid Centres (LAC)/ Veterinary Dispens aries (VD) as indicated 
in table below. 
Table 2.2: Construction of new works          (`` `` in lakh) 
Sl No Name of the EE Nature of projects No of works Fund released 
1 RWD, Subarnapur Construction of VD/ LAC 7 53.00 
2 RWD-I, Balasore Construction of VD/ LAC 8 61.50 
3 RWD-II, Balasore Construction of VD/ LAC 6 45.00 
4 RWD, Jajpur Construction of VD/ LAC 21 160.00 
 Total  42 319.50 
(Source: Records of test checked RW Divisions) 
Joint physical inspection of nine 14  
such works conducted in presence of 
representatives of the Department 
revealed that, in all cases 
construction of new buildings were 
under progress. In reply, the 
Executive Engineers (EEs) of Rural 
Works Division (RWD), Subarnapur, 
Balasore and Jajpur stated that the 
works were taken up as per the requirement of Fishe ries and Animal 
Resources Development Department.  
                                                
 
14  Binika, Mahadevpali, Sindhol, Sindhpur of Subarnap ur District, Basta of Balasore 
District, Pritipur, Sujanpur, Paramanandapur and Rampa of Jajpur District 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
28 
 
Bipulingi to Gangapur road fully washed and not restored 
People in Puri working in water logged 
area to restore power supply 
Government stated (June 2014) that all the projects  had been duly sanctioned 
by the State Level Committee for Administration of CRF/ SEC that has the 
mandate of deciding all matters connected with fina ncing of relief expenditure 
from CRF/ SDRF. But sanctions for works contravene the provisions as 
outlined in CRF/SDRF guidelines. 
2.5.4  Restoration and reconstruction after Phailin  
2.5.4.1 Restoration of roads 
As per guidelines issued by GoI, repair restoration  of immediate nature of the 
damaged infrastructure is to be completed within ma ximum period of 45 days 
in plain areas and 60 days for hilly areas from the  date of occurrence of 
disaster. As reported by Government, 11429 GP/ vill age roads under 
Panchayati Raj were damaged in Phailin and subsequent floods of which only 
11321 roads were taken for restoration and 9926 roa ds were completed. The 
repair and restoration of remaining 1503 roads of w ere not completed (March 
2013) even after lapse of five months. 
Further, Audit noticed in 
Ganjam, Puri and Balasore 
districts that against assessed 
damage of ` 103.20 crore to 
1060 roads under nine Roads 
& Building Divisions and 
Rural Works Divisions, only  
` 44.41 crore was provided and 
903 (85 per cent ) roads were 
restored (April 2014).  
Joint physical inspection of one road (“Bipulingi t o Gangapur” under RW 
Division, Ganjam-II) revealed that the road, which also served the purpose of 
an embankment of a serving irrigation canal, was fu lly washed away and not 
restored, thereby creating inconveniences to local people and also disrupting 
supply of water in the canal thereby affecting rabi  crop in the lower reaches of 
the canal. Locals present there also stated to the joint inspection party that 
immediate repair of the road was urgently required for smooth communication 
and also for providing irrigation to around 10 Ha w here rabi crop had already 
been affected in that season. 
Government stated (June 2014) that all the roads ha ve been completed by 
April 2014. But Audit saw that local roads were fou nd to be in damaged 
condition as verified during May 2014. 
2.5.4.2 Energy Infrastructure 
Energy infrastructure was worst 
affected among all public properties. 
There was damage to 33/ 11 KV Lines, 
Distribution Transformers and Low 
level transmission networks ultimately 
resulting in non-supply of power to 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit 
29 
 
Embankment in Subarnarekha River not restored 
domestic consumers and institutions of public utilities.  
Scrutiny of records revealed that power distributio n companies took 10 weeks 
in Ganjam to complete restoration works and supply power to all the affected 
consumers.  
Restoration of power supply to piped water supply ( PWS) systems took eight 
weeks in Ganjam.  
Distribution companies attributed such delay in res toration to huge nature of 
damage, non availability of adequate stock of diffe rent electrical material to 
meet such huge requirement, lack of adequate man po wer to tackle the 
situation and water logging in the affected area.  
2.5.4.3 Drinking Water 
On account of power breakdown, PWS systems did not function. Government 
made arrangements for supply of drinking water in t he cyclone & flood 
affected areas through water tankers and generator in the PWS systems. Audit, 
however noticed that: 
EE Public Health Division, Ganjam could not supply required quantity of 
water after Phailin  in the areas under ULBs, where PWS was the only 
alternative for the inhabitants. Percentage of requ irement of water supplied to 
the resident in Digapahandi, Chikiti and Gopalpur N otified Area Councils was 
six, eight, and 39 respectively.  
Government stated (June 2014) that before restorati on of power supply to 
water supply system, water was supplied by hiring g enerator sets. However, 
the required quantity of water could not be provided as noticed in audit. 
2.5.4.4 Health & Sanitation 
Chief District Medical Officers of Balasore, Ganjam  and Puri intimated 
(November 2013) SRC that they distributed 94.95 lak h halogen tablets and 
5.92 lakh Oral Rehydration Salt packets to affected  people and disinfected 
5.11 lakh water sources. Audit noticed that in Bala sore, Ganjam and Puri, 
despite above intervention, there was report of wat er borne diseases like 
simple diarrhoea (13290), severe diarrhoea (9457) a nd Bacillary Dysentery 
(4694).  
Government stated (June 2014) that there was no cas e of epidemic and no 
report of loss of life due to health and sanitation  problem. However, the fact 
remains that water borne diseases were reported des pite disinfection of water 
sources. 
2.5.4.5 Restoration of Irrigation 
Canals/ MIPs/ LIPs 
• Test check of seven 
Irrigation Divisions 
revealed that against the 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
30 
 
LIP at Agasti Nuagaon-1 village under Chhatrapur 
Bl ock not restored  
Ranki Ghai Bhagabanpur MIP under MI Division-II, 
Ganjam not taken up for restoration  
 
assessed damage of 1060 river embankment, saline embankment, canal 
breaches etc. involving ` 139.08 crore, only ` 30.85 crore was 
provided by Government for restoring 442 breaches. Thus, 618 works 
could not be taken up for restoration even after fi ve months of the 
cyclone flood thereby affecting flow of water in th e canal. Moreover, 
possibility of further damage to the embankment in monsoons cannot 
be ruled out. Joint physical inspection of one rive r embankment in 
Subarnarekha River revealed that the embankment was  not restored 
and local people stated that their villages would b e in danger if 
embankments are not restored before rainy season. 
• Test check of three 
Minor Irrigation 
Divisions (Ganjam-I & 
II and Puri) revealed 
that against the 
assessed damage of 457 
canal breaches 
affecting water supply 
to 73180 Ha which 
required ` 23.23 crore for repair, only ` 6.80 crore was provided by 
Government for restoring 436 breaches. Thus, 21 wor ks could not be 
taken up for restoration even after five months of the cyclone/ flood 
thereby affecting flow of water in canal.  
• As per the instructions 
issued (November 
2013) by Managing 
Director, Odisha Lift 
Irrigation Corporation, 
all repair works should 
be completed by 
December 2013 so as to 
enable Lift Irrigation 
Projects (LIPs) to run in 
Rabi 2013 -14. 
Test check of two Lift Irrigation Divisions (Balaso re and Ganjam) 
revealed that against assessed damage of 1311 LIPs (only civil work) 
of ` 15.63 crore affecting water supply to 22911 Ha, on ly ` 8.11 crore 
was provided by Government. Thus, 389 LIPs could no t be restored 
affecting water supply during Rabi season. 
Government stated (June 2014) that taking into acco unt the availability of 
fund in SDRF, amount had been allocated to differen t departments for 
restoration work after prioritising the projects. 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit 
31 
 
2.5.4.6 Livelihood restoration 
As per norms of assistance from the CRF/SDRF issued  (June 2013) by GoI, 
loss to houses, agricultural crop, perennial crop, animal husbandry, boat and 
net, raw material and equipment of artisans are eligible for assistance.  
• Input subsidy for damage of crop: As reported by Government, 5.56 lakh 
Ha of cropped area sustained crop loss of more than  50 per cent  in Phailin  
and subsequent flood. SRC instructed (13 December 2 013) Collectors for 
completion of assessment of crop loss and enumerati on of farmers by 15 
January 2014 and disbursement of input subsidy by 31 January 2014.  
Audit noticed that Collectors of affected districts assessed damage to crops 
and requested (16 January 2014) for placement of funds. SRC returned (20 
January 2014) the enumeration report submitted by the Collectors as report 
appeared to be exaggerated keeping in view the posi tion of paddy 
procurement in the district and directed the Collec tors for resubmission of 
the proposal after re-examination/ enquiry. However, the final enumeration 
was not completed (April 2014). Thus, even after la pse of six months of 
Phailin  and subsequent floods during October 2013, no assistance could be 
provided to the affected farmers for loss of crops over 5.56 lakh Ha of land 
due to non completion of such enumeration.   
Affected beneficiaries and farmers’ society also re presented to Collectors 
for early and adequate payment of compensation to s trengthen their 
economic backbone.  
• Assistance to farmers for loss of horticulture crop : As per norms of 
assistance from the SDRF, if the loss of perennial horticulture crops is 50 
per cent  and above, input subsidy of ` 12000 per Ha is to be paid subject 
to a minimum of ` 1500 and restricted to sown area. 
Audit noticed that in Ganjam, Puri and Balasore districts, Deputy Directors 
of Horticulture assessed the loss to perennial crop s (Mango, Cashew, 
Kewda and others) of 95976 farmers in 33571 Ha of l and requiring  
` 64.20 crore for payment of input subsidy. However, audit noticed that 
only, in Puri, ` 21 lakh was paid as assistance and in Ganjam and B alasore 
no assistance was given even after five months of t he cyclone/ flood as no 
fund was received for that purpose. Affected person s represented to the 
Deputy Directors of Horticulture and District Colle ctors for prompt 
payment of input subsidy. 
• Assistance to Fishermen: As per norms of assistance from the SDRF, 
assistance to fishermen for loss of boats was to be  given at a flat rate 
ranging from ` 1500 to ` 7000.  
As reported by Government, 6209 boats and 9622 nets  were fully 
damaged and 1899 boats and 21436 nets were partiall y damaged due to 
cyclone. In Ganjam, Balasore, and Puri, 8907 fisher men were provided 
assistance of ` 2.60 crore toward their loss of boats and nets. 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
32 
 
Damaged loom of a Weaver Cooperative Society Baliapal 
Balasore  
Audit noticed that norms of assistance stipulated b y GoI was at a flat rate 
for damage to all variety of boats like country boat, FPR boat, mechanised 
boat etc. Distribution of assistance at flat rate f or loss of all type of boats 
was inadequate in comparison to actual damage. Inad equacy of assistance 
was also confirmed from the representation of a Fis hermen Society who 
requested for payment of adequate compensation cons idering the repair 
cost of boats ranging from ` 1 lakh to ` 1.50 lakh and for cost of nets at  
` 80,000.  
Further, it was noticed in two districts (Balasore and Puri) that there was 
damage of ` 1.96 crore to tanks, storage godowns, water pumps, boundary 
walls of Government fish farms where fish seedlings  are produced. But, 
fish farms were not repaired as no fund was provide d. Non restoration of 
these farms would affect production of seedling of fish and ultimately 
reduce fish production of the district.  
• Assistance to rural artisans: As per norms of assistance from SDRF, 
assistance to artisans 
for repair and 
replacement of 
equipment and raw 
material is to be given 
at a rate of ` 3000 for 
equipment and the 
same for raw material 
and finished products. 
Government reported that 3455 traditional craftsmen  and 767 handloom 
weavers of 19 districts were affected.  
Audit noticed that in Balasore and Puri districts, 701 rural artisans were 
paid assistance of ` 28.88 lakh. However, though their loss was assesse d 
up to ` 70000, they were paid only ` 1500 to ` 6000.  
Further, audit noticed that there was no provision of assistance for loss of 
livelihood to small businessman like pan shop, stre et vendors. 36 such 
affected businessmen represented to the Collector, Puri for providing 
assistance. But no assistance could be provided to them, as norms of 
assistance of SDRF did not provide for such assistance.  
Government stated (June 2014) that as small amount was received from 
NDRF, there were inadequacies in livelihood restora tion like distribution of 
input subsidy, assistance for loss of horticulture etc. State Government was 
making budget provision for livelihood restoration.  However, the fact remains 
that appropriate financial assistance was yet to be  paid to affected population 
even after seven months of Phailin  (June 2014). 
2.5.4.7  Animal Care 
As reported by Government to GoI, 31,062 animals we re shifted to safer 
places. 283  veterinary teams were deployed in the cyclone and f lood affected 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit 
33 
 
areas. 89,840  livestock were given medical treatment and 2.30 lakh cattle were 
vaccinated.  
Audit noticed the following: 
• Supply of fodder : As per instruction (13 October 2013) of 
Commissioner-cum-Secretary to Government, Fisheries  and Animal 
Resources Department, evacuated animals are to be p rovided with 
cattle feed at 1 kg per large animal and 200 gm for  small animal, 
maximum for three days depending on the situation. Audit noticed that 
CDVOs Ganjam, Puri and Balasore neither evacuated a ny animal nor 
distributed any cattle feed to the animals evacuate d by the farmers 
themselves. But later, CDVOs distributed 2696.05 MT  of fodder 
during the period 14 October 2013 to 10 December 20 13 with a 
maximum delay of 58 days after Phailin . 
• Short distribution of cattle feed: In Bhadrak and Puri only 824 MT 
of cattle feed was received and distributed against  requirement of 
1901.5 MT cattle feed.  
2.5.4.8 Construction of damaged houses  
As per norms of assistance from SDRF revised (21 Ju ne 2013) by GoI, 
assistance to affected people is to be given for damage to their houses. Further, 
clothing assistance at ` 1300 per family and utensil assistance of ` 1400 per 
family are to be given whose houses were fully dama ged. As per report of 
Collectors, in Phailin  and subsequent flood, 4.24 lakh houses were damaged in 
six test checked districts for which ` 117.69 crore was sanctioned and  
` 101.30 crore was distributed as of February 2014.  
Audit noticed that though GoI revised norms of assi stance from SDRF for the 
period 2010-15 from ` 1900 to ` 70000, the Collector, Jajpur sanctioned and 
distributed house building assistance (HBA) at pre- revised lower rate of  
` 1500 to ` 35000. Thus, in two test checked tahasils (Dasarathpur and Jajpur) 
2547 beneficiaries received ` 10.24 lakh less due to distribution of HBA at 
lower rate.  
Further, in Puri, 907 HHs, whose houses were fully damaged, were not paid 
clothing and utensil assistance of ` 24.49 lakh. In reply, the Collector, Puri 
stated that no fund was received towards clothing and utensil assistance.  
Government stated (June 2014) that disbursement of HBA was completed by 
May 2014, and all Collectors were strictly instruct ed to provide assistance at 
revised norm. 
2.5.4.9 Assistance for poultry loss   
As per norms, assistance at the rate of ` 37 per poultry bird subject to a ceiling 
of ` 400 per beneficiary is to be compensated to owners  of poultry in case of 
death on account of natural calamity. Audit noticed  that though 6.36 lakh 
poultry bird died in cyclone/ flood in October 2013  in Balasore, Ganjam and 
Puri, no compensation was so far been paid to the o wners of poultry birds 
even after grievances submitted by them in Ganjam and Puri.  

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
34 
 
Government stated (June 2014) that the Collectors w ere instructed to review 
and take necessary action.  
2.6 Financial Management 
As per guidelines, SDRF is to be used only for meet ing expenditure for 
providing immediate relief to victims of cyclone, d rought, earthquake, fire, 
flood, tsunami, hailstorm, landslide, avalanche, cloud burst and pest attack.  
Audit noticed that out of ` 3640.28 crore (CRF: ` 1150.30 crore and SDRF: 
` 2489.98 crore) available during 2007-13, ` 3455.96 crore was utilised as of 
March 2013, leaving ` 184.32 crore unutilised. Besides, external assistan ce of 
` 38.98 15  crore was received from United Nations Development  Programme 
(UNDP) and World Bank during 2007-12 of which ` 25.47 crore 16  was 
utilised during this period on disaster preparednes s, infrastructure 
development, reconstruction and capacity building. 
Audit noticed cases of irregular expenditure on ina dmissible works, non-
submission of UCs, non-crediting of interest to SDR F etc. as discussed in the 
succeeding paragraphs: 
2.6.1 Inadmissible expenditure out of SDRF  
Paragraph 3 of GoI guidelines on SDRF provided that  SDRF should be used 
only for meeting the expenditure for providing imme diate relief to the victims 
of any disaster and Paragraph 17 provided that expe nditure on disaster 
preparedness, restoration, reconstruction and mitig ation was not to be made 
out of SDRF but be borne by State Government under State Plan funds. 
However, Government had not made any provision of f unds for disaster 
preparedness, mitigation, repair and restoration in  the State Plan except its 
share of contribution to SDRF and the expenditure r elated to above were met 
from CRF/ SDRF as discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.  
2.6.1.1 Inadmissible sanction of fund on disaster p reparedness  
Audit noticed that ` 29.46 crore (Appendix 2.1.4) was sanctioned out of CRF/ 
SDRF for disaster preparedness in violation to the above norms, despite 
utilisation of ` 25.47 crore from UNDP and World Bank for disaster 
preparedness. 
Government stated (June 2014) that all the projects  had been duly sanctioned 
by State Level Committee and SEC. But these sanctio ns for works contravene 
provisions as outlined in CRF/ SDRF guidelines. 
2.6.1.2 Ex-gratia to the victims of lightning 
As per guidelines, the fund from SDRF shall be used  only for meeting the 
expenditure for providing immediate relief to the v ictims of cyclone, drought, 
earthquake, fire, flood, tsunami, hail storm, land slide, avalanche, cloud burst 
and pest attack.  
                                                
 
15   DRM: ` 4.34 crore, DRR: ` 1.08 crore and NCRMP: ` 32.81 crore/ ICZMP: ` 0.75 
crore 
16   DRM: ` 6.28 crore, DRR: ` 1.20 crore, NCRMP: ` 17.81 crore, ICZMP: ` 0.18 crore 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit 
35 
 
Audit noticed that Collectors of eight Districts in curred expenditure of  
` 5.17 crore towards ex-gratia payment to victims of  lightning out of CRF/ 
SDRF during 2007-12 in violation of guidelines. Bes ides, 13 th  Finance 
Commission did not recognise lightning as a calamit y/ disaster though State 
Government considered lightning as a disaster as per ORC.  
Government stated (June 2014) that it was decided ( August 2012) to meet the 
expenditure on ex-gratia  assistance for the lightning victims out of Chief 
Minister Relief Fund. However, the fact remains tha t, inadmissible payment 
were made from the SDRF. 
2.6.2 Submission of Utilization Certificate  
As per provisions of OGFR, UCs were to be submitted  to the Government 
latest by 30 June of the year succeeding the year of release of funds.  
Audit noticed that during the period 2007-2013, ` 3455.80 crore was released 
out of CRF/ SDRF by SRC to 30 Collectors and 33 dep artments of the State 
Government against which UCs of ` 1999.38 crore were received. Remaining 
UCs for ` 1456.42 
17  crore were awaited. 
Government stated (June 2014) that steps would be t aken to collect UCs or 
deduct the balance amount of subsequent release of fund in favour of 
executing agencies. 
2.6.3 Interest not credited to SDRF  
As per Para 4 of SDRF guidelines, SDRF would be ret ained in the Public 
Account under the Reserve Fund bearing interest and  would be invested in 
Central Government dated securities, auctioned treasury bills etc. and the State 
Government would pay interest to SDRF at the rate a pplicable to overdrafts 
under Overdraft Regulation Guideline of Reserve Ban k of India. Such interest 
is to be credited to the SDRF on half yearly basis.  
Audit, however, noticed that though State Governmen t retained SDRF under 
‘interest bearing public accounts’ from 2011-12, no  interest was credited 
(October 2013) to SDRF and reason thereof could not be stated to Audit. 
In reply, the Government stated (June 2014) that ` 9.78 crore had accrued as 
interest out of investment in treasury bills during  2013-14 which will be 
credited to SDRF in 2014-15. However, reply was sil ent on non crediting of 
interest since 2011. 
2.6.4 Idling of fund due to unrealistic assessment  
Rule 242 of OTC Vol-I provided that no money shall be drawn from the 
treasury unless it is required for immediate disbursement. 
                                                
 
17  2007-08: ` 36.80 crore , 2008-09: ` 165.41crore , 2009-10: ` 57.16 crore, 2010-11: 
` 140.22 crore , 2011-12: ` 579.34 crore and  2012-13: ` 477.49 crore 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
36 
 
During 2008-11, SRC  released ` 33.42 crore to Collector, Keonjhar for input 
subsidy, ex-gratia, gratuitous relief (GR), assista nce for house building etc. 
and for repair/ revival of public utilities affecte d by natural disaster during the 
period. Audit noticed that though amount was releas ed on the basis of 
requisitions from Collector Keonjhar, ` 10.11 crore remained unutilised with 
the Collector for one to four years as of September  2012 as detailed in the 
table below.  
Table 2.3: Unutilised fund with district authorities                                     (`` `` in lakh) 
Year Type of 
disaster 
Purpose of Assistance Amount 
released 
Amount retained as of 
September 2012 
2008 Flood GR and HBA 12.20 11.70 
2010 Unseasonal 
rain 
Subsidy, ex-gratia and 
others, GR in kind 
2297.54 551.48 
Draught Subsidy e x-gratia  and 
others  
423.50 179.27 
2011 Flood Subsidy, ex-gratia  and 
others 
608.65 268.67 
Total   3341.89 1011.12 
(Source: Records of DDMA Keonjhar) 
Retention of balance indicates that requisition for  funds were made by 
Collector without proper assessment of requirement.  
Government stated (June 2014) that Collectors were strictly instructed to 
submit their requirement after assessing crop loss in the field and funds would 
be placed with them as per requirement. 
2.6.5 Surrender of input subsidy 
As per Paragraph 6 of the ORC, gratuitous relief in  terms of assistance was to 
be provided to cultivators to retrieve losses. Audi t scrutiny revealed that, SRC 
released (March 2011) ` 3.85 crore towards input subsidy (Drought 2010) for  
disbursement amongst affected farmers of Subarnapur  district on basis of 
report of Collector, Subarnapur. Tahsildar disburse d ` 2.62 crore and 
surrendered (November 2011) remaining ` 1.23 crore to DDMA as subsidy 
was not disbursed, suggesting that assessment was on higher side.  
Government stated (June 2014) that Collectors were strictly instructed to 
submit their requirement after assessing crop loss in the field and funds would 
be placed with them as per requirement. 
2.6.6 Donation received for Phailin in Chief Minist er Relief Fund 
(CMRF) 
After striking of Phailin  (12 October 2013), general citizens, Central and State 
Public Sector Undertakings, Corporate, Business and  Industrial houses, banks 
and other institutions contributed ` 238.71 crore to CMRF as of 11 March 
2014.  
Audit noticed that out of these ` 64.08 crore was released to Women and 
Child Development Department for additional pension  to old, handicapped 
and widows and ` 5.96 crore to School and Mass Education Department for 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit 
37 
 
reconstruction of fully damaged elementary schools in 13 Phailin  affected 
districts. Balance ` 168.67 crore was retained without utilisation, though many 
breaches in river embankment and canals were yet to  be repaired and many 
farmers, fishermen and artisans were either not pai d any assistance or paid  
less assistance as mentioned in paragraphs 2.5.4.1, 2.5.4.5, 2.5.4.6, 2.5.4.8  
and 2.5.4.9 . Thus, non utilisation of fund for calamity purpos es defeated the 
very objective of its collection.  
Government stated (June 2014) that balance fund wou ld be utilised for 
providing relief and restoration activities. 
2.7 Monitoring by the State, District Apex bodies  
As envisaged in DM Act, SEC and SDMA have been cons tituted to oversee 
and monitor enforcement and progress of disaster re lated policies and 
practices.  
Audit examined adequacy of monitoring and noticed t he following 
deficiencies: 
2.7.1 Monitoring by SEC  
Section 22 (1) of the DM Act  required SEC to act as a coordinating and 
monitoring body for management of disaster in the S tate. The Odisha Disaster 
Management Rules 2010 required SEC to meet at least once in three months.  
Audit noticed that against the required 10 meetings  to be held since its 
formation (December 2010) till June 2013, the Commi ttee met only five 
18  
times for approval of projects without monitoring d isaster preparedness, 
mitigation etc. in the meetings. 
In reply, the Government stated (June 2014) that SE C met four times during 
2013-14 and discussed various issues on disaster management. 
2.7.2 Supervision of Flood Damage Repair work  
Government decided (October 2011) to constitute State level and District level 
squads to inspect repair and restoration work of da maged infrastructure of 
Flood in 2011. They were to report to Collector and  SRC, who in turn were 
required to communicate adverse findings with recom mendation of squad to 
executing agencies concerned for prompt rectification.  
Audit observed that: 
• In Jajpur, the squad inspected (04 May and 25 May 2 012) seven works 
executed by six executing agencies 
19 and reported adversely on poor soil 
quality, poor compaction etc. on six works and reco mmended corrective 
measures to ensure quality, standard and design. Bu t, Collector Jajpur 
neither instructed executive agencies for taking co rrective action nor 
                                                 
18   11 March 2011, 7 October 2011, 7 January 2012, 29  August 2012 and 23 May 2013 
19   Jajpur Irrigation Division, Jaraka Irrigation Div ision, OLIC Division, Jajpur, Minor 
Irrigation Division, Cuttack, RW Division-II, Jajpur, R&B Division, Panikoili 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
38 
 
ensured their rectification. Executing agencies had  also not submitted any 
action taken report in compliance to the comments.  
• In five out of eight test checked districts, Distri ct squads were formed 
during October and November 2011, but neither was a ny report received 
by Collectors nor was any such report discussed in the review meeting of 
respective district DLNCC 20  meeting.  
Government stated (June 2014) that Collectors were instructed to review the 
matter and take necessary action. 
2.7.3  Redressal of grievances petitions and complaints  
Audit observed that Complaint registers were mainta ined by District 
Emergency Officers only after Flood in 2011 in all eight test checked districts. 
During 2011-12, grievances petitions received from flood affected people, 
NGOs etc. complaining about favoritism in providing  house damage 
assistance, distribution of relief materials, false  inclusion of area as flood 
affected to get assistance, were routinely forwarde d by Collectors to 
Tahsildars, BDOs, DRDAs and other executing agencie s. But, compliance of 
the executing agencies to these grievances was not monitored.  
In Jajpur district, four NGOs submitted (21 October  2011) complaint with 
documentary proof on inclusion of GPs not affected in the flood in the list of 
affected GPs. No action was taken by the Collector to verify the complaint.  
Government stated (June 2014) that Collectors were instructed to review and 
suggest remedial action. 
2.8  Conclusion 
The SDMA constituted in October 2010 after a delay of five years of 
enactment of Disaster Management Act 2005 under the  Chairmanship of the 
Chief Minister for overseeing activities relating t o disaster prevention, 
mitigation, preparedness, relief and reconstruction, did not meet till July 2013. 
The State Government also failed to incorporate dis aster management into the 
development planning process due to non-preparation  of SDMP till July 2013 
as envisaged in the Disaster Management Act 2005. S DMP was, however, 
prepared in August 2013.  
Though early warning mechanism and communication sy stems for disaster 
preparedness were in place, the system was not effe ctive due to inadequate 
staff and non-functioning of machinery. Relief, reh abilitation and 
reconstruction measures had gaps as payments of ` 49.59 lakh were made for 
rice without actual distribution, relief materials valuing ` 10.26 crore were 
issued without acquittance roll and beneficiary lis ts, rice got damaged due to 
improper storing etc. There was delay of six to nin e months in providing relief 
to affected people and dal being basic food, was no t distributed in relief 
operation.  
                                                
 
20   District Level Natural Calamity Committee Meeting  

Chapter 2 Performance Audit 
39 
 
During Phailin , though, the State Government could save human lif e through 
early warning system and administration of evacuati on to safer place, more 
could have been done to save the livestock which is  main livelihood of the 
affected population. Further,  the post disaster relief measure and restoration/ 
reconstruction measures undertaken by the Governmen t were not 
comprehensive. There were cases of inequitable distribution of relief and short 
distribution of relief material. Restoration was no t adequate due to delay in 
restoration of power infrastructure, piped water su pply system, roads, 
irrigation canals and Lift Irrigation Projects affe cting rabi crops/ agriculture in 
the Phailin  affected districts. Besides, input subsidy for los s of crop was not 
paid and artisans were not adequately compensated for loss of livelihood. 
There was improper financial management as ` 29.46 crore was sanctioned 
from CRF/ SDRF towards disaster preparedness in vio lation of GoI norms. 
UCs for ` 1456.42 crore were pending from executing agencies and Collectors 
against the release of fund of ` 3455.80 crore during 2007-13. Despite 
retaining the SDRF in interest bearing public accou nts during 2011-13, 
interest thereon was not paid by State Government. 
Monitoring of preparedness, rescue and relief opera tions by SEC was largely 
absent as its meetings were limited to approval of projects of various 
departments and sanction of fund out of SDRF.  
2.9 Recommendations 
Government may consider: 
• incorporating the provisions of DM Act in the State  DM Policy and 
formation of Advisory Committee;  
• strengthening institutional mechanism with adequate  manpower for 
SDMA and DDMAs for effective disaster management; 
• providing infrastructural support like permanent el ectricity, roads and 
improve the conditions of equipment in cyclone centres; 
• ensuring adequate and timely distribution of relief materials;  
• ensuring speedy restoration of the damaged infrastr ucture and provide 
immediate and sufficient support for livelihood res toration as per 
norms; 
• creating Disaster Mitigation Fund as envisaged in t he DM Act and 
ensuring utilisation of SDRF for immediate relief a nd restoration as 
envisaged; and 
• strengthening monitoring system for relief and reconstruction. 

  
  
CChhaapptteerr  33  
  
CCoommpplliiaannccee  AAuuddiitt  
  
Para 
Number 
Topics Page 
3.1 Administration of Self Financing Courses 
in the State 
41-60 
3.2 Compliance to the provisions of Pre-
conception & Pre-natal Diagnostic 
Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) 
 
Act 1994 
61-73 
3.3 e-Governance projects in three Universities 
of the State 
 
74-80 
3.4 Income Generation of Scheduled Tribes in 
Scheduled Areas 
81-86 
3.5 Lack of response to Audit 87-93 
 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
41 
CHAPTER 3 
Compliance Audit 
 
HIGHER EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
 
3.1 Administration of Self Financing Courses in the State 
3.1.1 Introduction 
The concept of Self Financing Courses (SFCs) was st rengthened during Ninth 
Five Year Plan (1997-2002) which emphasised reorientation of teaching in higher 
educational institutions towards applied fields so as to establish relevance, need-
based specialisation and market-driven skill generation. 
Twelfth Five Year Plan laid emphasis on quality tea ching and marketability of 
courses in higher education. Students opted more fo r job oriented courses like 
management, information technology, bio-technology,  bio-informatics, financial 
control, social work, etc.  
Three Universities i.e., Utkal University (UU), Berhampur University (BU) an d 
Sambalpur University (SU) by virtue of the powers v ested under the Act and 
Statute 
21  had introduced SFCs since 1994. Subsequently, on t he advice of the 
Finance Department to raise internal resources by t he Universities, Higher 
Education Department intimated (June 2005) Vice-Chancellors of six Universities 
of the State to introduce full payment Self Financi ng Courses (SFCs). As of 
March 2013, six Universities introduced 105 SFCs in  their Post Graduate (PG) 
departments including three Universities who had in troduced 49 SFCs. Similarly, 
six Universities granted affiliation to 159 professional/technical colleges of which 
137 professional/ technical colleges pertained to t hree test checked Universities 
who run 232 SFC courses on payment of prescribed af filiation fees. Besides, 11 
Government autonomous colleges of the State also ad ministered 31 SFCs under 
them. 
SFCs were run in two modes, one directly by the Uni versities through contractual 
staff/ guest faculty and the other through Public P rivate Partnership (PPP) mode 
on revenue sharing basis, where infrastructure is p rovided by the Universities/ 
autonomous colleges leaving academic activity to be  conducted by the private 
partners. Out of 49 SFC courses run in three test c hecked Universities, two 
22  
SFCs were in PPP mode.  
3.1.1.1 Audit Objectives 
Audit was conducted with the objective to assess whether: 
                                                
 
21  Section 3 (5) (a), 12 (2) (d) of the Orissa Univer sities Act 1989 and Statute 252 (4) (g) of 
the Orissa Universities First Statutes 1990. 
22   MBA (Agri-Business) and M Tech in Information Tec hnology 
 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
42 
• Self Financing Courses (SFCs) were adequately asses sed before 
introduction by the Universities/ Autonomous colleg es with due regard to 
their financial and operational impact; 
• quality education was imparted with adequate infras tructure and qualified 
staff with opportunities for placement of passed out students; and 
• private partners for SFCs under Public Private Part nership (PPP) mode 
were selected in a fair and transparent manner and the revenue sharing 
model with them was balanced, fair and equitable.  
3.1.1.2 Audit scope and methodology  
Audit was conducted between July 2012 and December 2013 covering the period 
2007-13. Out of six State run Universities impartin g general courses, three major 
Universities (UU, BU and SU) were selected as they operated SFCs in their 
campus and also in affiliated colleges to run professional/technical SFCs. 
Audit test checked records at three Universities in respect of 11 
23  out of 49 24  SFCs 
run by them based on high course fees which include d two SFCs run under PPP 
mode by Utkal University. Records of the Higher Edu cation (HE) Department 
relating to SFCs run by 11 autonomous colleges were  also examined. Besides, 
records relating to affiliation of 48 out of 137 af filiated professional/technical 
colleges (35 per cent ) offering SFCs were checked in Audit. Audit also i nteracted 
with students and teachers through structured quest ionnaire to assess quality 
aspects in the SFCs. The draft report was discussed  on 9 May 2014 in an Exit 
Conference with Additional Secretary of HE Departme nt and Vice Chancellors/ 
Registrars of the Universities concerned and replie s of the audited entities/ 
Department, wherever received, were duly considered  and appropriately 
incorporated in this report. 
Audit findings 
3.1.2 Need assessment for running SFC 
3.1.2.1 Absence of uniform guideline for administration of SFCs 
A Committee of Vice Chancellors 
25  (VCs)  constituted (September 2005) by the 
Chancellor 26 , prepared (June 2006) model SFC guidelines for Uni versities and 
                                                 
23  Utkal University(UU) : Integrated Master in Computer Application (IMCA),  Integrated 
Master in Business Administration (IMBA), Master in  Pharmacy (M Pharma), Master of 
Business Administration (Agri-Business) and Master of Technology in Information 
Technology; Berhampur University (BU) : Master of Technology in Computer Science 
(M Tech CS), Master in Pharmacy (M Pharma) and Mast er of Technology in Electronics 
Information Science (M Tech EIS); Sambalpur University (SU):  Master of Technology 
(Computer Science), Master in Computer Application (MCA) and Master of Science in 
Biotechnology (M Sc BT) 
24   UU-19, BU-10, SU-20 
25  Headed by Vice-Chancellor of Sambalpur University 
26  Governor of the State 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
43 
Autonomous Colleges and sent (July 2006) them to th e Higher Education (HE) 
Department for their examination and views to which  there was no response as of 
December 2013. VC of a technical University prepare d (November 2006) other 
guidelines for administration of SFC which the Industries Department approved in 
May 2008 with stipulations for its application in c ase of constituent and affiliated 
colleges under that University. HE Department also prepared (November 2008) 
draft SFC Guideline for Autonomous and Government Colleges, which was yet to 
be approved by the Government (December 2013). 
Audit scrutiny revealed that, Chancellor in the VCs ’ Conference (October 2006) 
instructed the Universities to adopt the model Guid eline prepared by the 
committee of VCs or by the technical University as per the suitability of the 
concerned Universities. But it was seen in test checked Universities that while UU 
and SU adopted guidelines of their own, BU had not framed any guidelines and 
introduced SFCs with general rules specifying admission procedures only. 
Further, it was revealed that guidelines of UU and SU did not contain important 
aspects like manner of selection of the courses, sh aring of infrastructure, selection 
of faculty, reservation of seats, structuring of co urse fee, rationale of revenue 
sharing and employability of students etc. Provisio n for reservation of seats for 
ST/ SC and economic weaker sections as required und er the policy of the 
Government and concession in course fee for a perce ntage of students on poor/ 
meritorious criteria were not included in any of th e guidelines of sample 
Universities. 
Government assured (May 2014) that a broad based guideline would be issued for 
introducing and maintaining SFCs in Universities an d affiliated colleges as was 
done by the Industries Department for the technical  University and its affiliated 
colleges.  
3.1.2.2  Non-assessment of demand prior to introduction of SFCs 
VCs’ Conference (April 2006) emphasised that SFC co urses should be selected 
on basis of commercial viability/ utility and geogr aphical and regional factors. 
Besides, as per SFC guidelines (November 2006) as a pproved by Government in 
Industries Department (May 2008), no recurring/ non-recurring liability should be 
created for the State Government in any manner and the course should be self-
sustained and managed out of the course fees to be collected from students.  
Audit scrutiny revealed that neither the Higher Edu cation Department nor the test 
checked Universities prescribed any criteria for id entification of SFC on the basis 
of market need and employability of the students pa ssing out from such courses. 
Eleven test checked SFCs were introduced based on r ecommendation of Teachers 
Council of concerned PG Teaching Department/ Academ ic Councils  without any 
demand survey and requirement analysis that were required to  determine viability 
of the SFCs as well as demand in job market. In 11 Autonomous and Government 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
44 
Colleges 27 , Audit noticed that 31 SFCs were introduced based on proposal and 
request of the concerned private partner without an y demand survey and 
requirement analysis, but were approved for commenc ement by the HE 
Department. Audit further noticed that: 
• In three SFCs 28  launched by BU, applications for not even 10 stude nts 
were received though as per prospectus this was minimum requirement.  
• Master in Pharmacy course introduced by UU as SFC l ost its appeal as 
student enrolment reduced from 87 per cent (2007-08) to 23.33 per cent 
(2012-13) of total seats. 
• Despite bringing (2010-11) all eight Information an d Technology (IT) 
related SFCs in one place 29  under SU to pursue quality IT education, 
enrolment of students in IT courses was on an avera ge below 51 per cent 
of the  intake capacity of the courses during 2010-13 in the SU. 
• In 10 30  out of 48 test checked affiliated colleges, where 93 SFCs were run 
on proposals of the respective Managing Committees with recognition and 
affiliation by the Government and Universities, enr olment of students was 
less than 50 per cent  of the intake capacity continuously for three year s 
(2009-10 to 2011-12) in 14 courses (Appendix 3.1.1) . Such enrolment was 
consecutively ‘Nil’ for three years (two courses), two years (two courses) 
and low (below 30 per cent ) in six courses .  
In the Exit Conference, Additional Secretary stated  (May 2014) that SFCs 
being demand driven and employability factor being important demand for 
a particular course mainly remains for seven to eig ht years and then 
decreases resulting in low enrolment and discontinu ance of some of these 
courses. 
Thus, demand survey was not properly and consistent ly done and SFCs were 
introduced without assessment of their requirement.  
Vice-Chancellor, SU stated (May 2014) that SFCs wer e introduced considering 
the employability prospect, infrastructure as well as faculty availability in the 
University including availability of guest faculty.  However, in the Exit 
Conference, representatives of all the Universities  emphasised the need for more 
                                                 
27  Government Autonomous College, Bhawanipatna; MPC A utonomous College, Baripada; 
Government Autonomous College, Angul; NC Autonomous College, Jajpur; Vikram Dev 
College, Jeypore; DD Autonomous College, Keonjhar; Dhenkanal Autonomous College, 
Dhenkanal; Khallikote Autonomous College, Berhampur ; SB Rath Government 
Autonomous College, Berhampur; GM Autonomous Colleg e, Sambalpur; Buxi 
Jagabandhu Bidyadhar Autonomous College, Bhubaneswar 
28  Master of Science (Biotechnology): 20 seats; Maste r of Science in Geo-Physics: 16 seats; 
PG Diploma in Banking and Insurance Management: 40 seats 
29  Sambalpur University Institute of Information Tech nology (SUIIT) 
30  UU:6 and BU:4 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
45 
control over SFCs of affiliated colleges as they do  not have requisite 
infrastructure and human resources. The Government assured (May 2014) to look 
into the matter. 
3.1.3 Financial issues 
3.1.3.1 Lack of uniformity in course fee  
As per SFC Guidelines for Universities prepared by VCs committee, fee structure 
of SFCs was to be decided by the Universities and A utonomous Colleges 
depending upon the nature of the course. SFC Guidel ines of Industries 
Department for technical University and Section 6(1 ) of the Orissa Professional 
Educational Institutions (Regulation of Admission a nd Fixation of fee) Act 2007 
provided that course fee should be fixed by the Gov ernment in consultation with 
the Fee Structure Committee (FSC) to be set up.  
Audit noticed that though fee structure for private  professional/ technical colleges 
was recommended by committee, test checked Universi ties neither applied/ 
consulted the committee nor formed a uniform fee st ructure for different courses 
administered by them. This led to charging of fee a t different rates for the same 
type of courses by different Universities or fee di fferent to that fixed by the 
Government for affiliated private professional colleges as indicated in table 3.1.1. 
Table 3.1.1: Collection of fees at different rates by Universities for similar courses 
(Amount in `) 
Sl 
No 
Name of the course Course fee 
fixed by 
University 
Course fee 
fixed by the 
Government  
Course fee fixed for 
similar SFC in other 
Universities 
1 BCA (UU) Three years  90,000 45,000 NA 
2 BBA (UU) 90,000 45,000 NA 
3 MBA Agri-Business (UU) 2,53,000 NA 1,39,000 (OUAT 31 ) 
4 M Tech(IT) (UU) 1,50,000 NA 70,000 (M Tech CS-UU)  
5 M Pharma(UU 2,00,000 NA 70,000 (M Pharma-BU) 
6 M Tech (CS)  (BU) 1,00,000 NA 70,000 (M Tech CS-U U) 
(Source: Information as provided by respective University) NA: Not available 
The Government assured (May 2014) to look into the matter.  
3.1.3.2 Unscientific adoption of course fees  
As per the SFC Guidelines of Industries Department for technical University, 
introduction of SFC should be self sustaining. The Guidelines of the Fee Structure 
Committee also required fixing of course fee based upon the administrative cost, 
depreciation on fixed assets and interest on borrowed capital. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that Universities adop ted course fee as proposed by 
Teachers Councils of the Department concerned witho ut cost analysis. Periodic 
                                                
 
31  Orissa University of Agriculture & Technology 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
46 
enhancement was also without any basis as seen in s ome of the cases described 
below:  
• course fee of M Tech CS of BU fixed at ` 64,000 up to 2009-10 was 
raised to ` one lakh from 2010-11 without any basis on record. 
• course fee of M Tech EIS fixed at ` 70,000 up to 2010-11 was also 
increased to ` 1.20 lakh from 2011-12 by BU without any recorded basis.  
• In SU, the course fee for M Sc BT which was propose d at ` 1.20 lakh was 
reduced to ` 1 lakh when the Vice Chancellor (VC), SU opined tha t the 
course fee was very high in comparison to course fe e of ` 40,000 charged 
by another University.  
Thus, fixation of such course fees by the Universit ies was unscientific and 
resulted in surplus as could be seen from table 3.1.2. 
Table 3.1.2: Surplus SFC fund lying with the Universities 
(`` ``    in lakh)  
Sl. 
No. 
Course Course 
fee 
collected 
Expenditure 
incurred by 
concerned PG 
department 
University 
share  
SFC Funds lying 
surplus 32  (Percentage  
to collection) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
Utkal University   
1 IMCA 538.86 176.16 179.62  183.08 (34)  
2 IMBA 369.03 152.12 123.01  93.90 (25)  
3 M Pharma 407.66 113.41 135.88  158.37 (39)  
Berhampur University  
4 M Tech CS 95.07 8.63 28.52  57.92 (61)  
5 M Tech EIS 64.10 19.97 19.23  24.90 (39)  
6 M Pharma 356.16 69.13 106.85  180.18 (51)  
Sambalpur University   
7 M Tech CS 11.96 10.43 1.00  0.53 (4)  
8 MCA 193.57 108.29 25.24  60.04 (31)  
9 IT courses in 
SUIIT 
644.68 429.87 Nil  214.81 (33)  
  Total  2681.09  108 8.01  619.35  973. 73 (36)  
(Source: Information as produced by course heads) 
Audit scrutiny further revealed that fees were larg ely utilised on wages to 
temporary/guest  teaching and non-teaching staff, maintenance of lab oratory, day 
to day running expenses, etc. at department level. There was no expenditure on 
infrastructure as the courses were run in existing set up of respective departments. 
Besides, the departments did not incur any expendit ure on deployment of fulltime 
teaching staff to meet quality of education despite  vacancies of teaching staff 
                                                 
32   Course fees collected less expenditure by PG depa rtment and University share 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
47 
ranging between four and 100 per cent in SFCs as discussed in Paragraph 
3.1.5.1 .  
Registrar SU stated (September 2013) that the Unive rsity was empowered to 
decide the course fee depending upon the nature of the course and its demand. But 
the fact remains that Universities maintained large  savings out of collection from 
SFCs. The Additional Secretary, however, assured (M ay 2014) to look into the 
matter. 
3.1.3.3 Collection of excess course fee than that prescribed by affiliated colleges  
As per para 2(d) of Orissa Universities First Statu te (OUFS) 1990, tuition fee 
disproportionate to the normal tuition fee charged by similar institution of the 
University, or any other fee, by whatever name call ed, charged from a student or 
his guardian at the time of admission or at any oth er time for the purpose of 
securing admission to the degree or post-graduate d egree or diploma course or for 
any other purpose, shall be treated as capitation f ee. Affiliated colleges were 
prohibited from collecting capitation fee or donati on under Statute 172(viii). In 
case of violation, the colleges were to be deprived of full privileges (affiliation) as 
per Statute 200 (iv) of OUFS.  
Scrutiny of records revealed that though Government (HE Department) prescribed 
the fee structure ( ` 45,000 per student) for admission into BCA/ BBA cou rse run 
in affiliated colleges, 14 out of 48 test checked a ffiliated colleges collected course 
fees under 23 courses (BCA:13, BBA:10) higher by ` 6,000 to ` 90,000 per 
course than that fixed by the Government. This was indicative of collection of 
capitation fees as detailed in Appendix 3.1.2. 
Local Enquiry Committees (LECs) 
33  of the Universities responsible to ensure 
non-collection of capitation fee or donation under Statute 181(viii) during 
inspection for renewal/ grant of affiliation to col leges did not also point out such 
excess collection of course fees. 
While Registrar of SU stated (September 2013) that concerned colleges were 
advised to refund the excess amount and refrain fro m collecting any such fee in 
future, the Registrar of BU and UU stated (October 2013) that necessary 
clarifications would be sought from the institution s. With regard to LEC’s role, 
Registrars of SU and UU intimated that the LECs wou ld be instructed to be more 
careful in their observations in future. In the Exi t Conference, representatives of 
all test checked Universities opined (May 2014) tha t these are clear cases of 
collection of capitation fees. The Additional Secre tary assured (May 2014) that 
the matter would be examined by the Department. 
However, the fact remained that the Universities di d not take any action against 
the defaulting colleges as required under the Statute as of December 2013.  
                                                
 
33   LECs comprised of members nominated by the Colleg e Development Council amongst the 
university faculties and executives and not the same people every time. 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
48 
3.1.3.4 Revenue sharing between University and conc erned PG teaching 
department 
Model SFC Guidelines for Universities provided for revenue sharing between the 
University and PG teaching department running the S FC. Different Universities 
share their SFC revenue collected as per sharing pa ttern approved by their 
respective Syndicates. Percentage of sharing was th erefore different among the 
Universities. PG department out of its own share, u tilised the fund for 
examination expenses, remuneration of staff and mee ting infrastructural 
requirements like books, consumables and contingencies etc.  
Scrutiny of records revealed that the Universities did not follow own approved 
revenue sharing pattern. This resulted in excess re tention of ` 6.64 crore by 
Universities/ PG departments as discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
• The sharing ratio in UU was 33.33: 66.67 between Un iversity and PG 
department. During 2007-13, UU collected ` 13.16 crore towards running 
of three SFCs (IMCA, IMBA, M Pharma) of which ` 5.93 crore ( 45 per 
cent ) was released against ` 8.77 crore required to be released as per 
approved sharing ratio. This resulted in excess retention of ` 2.84 crore by 
the University for its own use without release of t he same to the PG 
department.  
• In BU, the sharing ratio was 30:70 (University: PG department). The 
University retained the entire SFC revenue of ` 5.15 crore collected from 
three SFCs (M Tech CS, M Tech EIS and M Pharma) dur ing 2007-13 in 
its General Accounts instead of 30 per cent  ( ` 1.55 crore) of the total 
collection, as stipulated. 
• As per SFC guidelines of SU, the University was to get 11 per cent  share 
for initial two years and 22 per cent  in subsequent years from respective 
PG department within 15 days of collection of cours e fees from the 
students. Though three PG departments collected fees of ` 2.04 crore from 
the courses like MCA, M Tech CS and M Sc BT, only. ` 23.89 lakh (54 
per cent ) was deposited with University as against ` 43.87 lakh.  
This indicated that neither Universities nor the PG  departments implemented 
approved revenue sharing pattern with the result th at ` 6.64 crore of revenue was 
retained by different stakeholders disproportionately during 2007-13. 
In the Exit Conference, the representatives of test  checked Universities stated 
(May 2014) that the revenue sharing between the Uni versity and post-graduate 
teaching department concerned should be one-third a nd two-thirds respectively. 
However, the fact remains that the funds were retai ned without utilisation despite 
large deficiencies in infrastructure affecting SFCs , though such surplus can be 
utilised for infrastructure development. 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
49 
3.1.3.5 Engagement of University regular faculty in SFCs 
As per OUFS Statute 263, an employee’s duty time shall be wholly at the disposal 
of the University which can be utilised in any mann er required without payment 
of any additional remuneration. Clause 16 of UU SFC  guidelines (2005-06) also 
stated that remuneration to University teachers ass igned for any SFC work shall 
be made, if the work is done beyond the normal office hours (10 AM to 5 PM).  
Scrutiny of records revealed that the Universities (UU and SU) incurred 
expenditure of ` 15.47 lakh towards payment of remuneration to 69 34  regular 
teachers of its PG teaching departments for teachin g in SFCs during their normal 
duty hours in violation of the Statute and SFC guidelines as detailed in table 3.1.3.  
Table 3.1.3: Payments to regular teachers of Univer sity for SFC classes taken during 
normal duty hours   
Sl. 
No. 
Course Number of regular 
teachers of 
University engaged  
Period of payment Amount 
paid (in `) 
1. IMCA, UU 14 17 February 2006 to 
31 January 2013 
4,12,600 
2. IMBA, UU 14 2007-12 3,13,250 
3. M Pharma, UU 2 2007-12 5,750 
4. M Tech IT, UU (PPP) 1 2011-12 3,000 
5. MCA, SU 2 2007-12 83,550 
6. M Sc BT, SU 29 2007-12 4,87,350 
7. IT courses in SUIIT, SU 7 2010-12 2,41,800 
 Total 69  15,47,300 
(Source: Compiled by Audit from records of SFCs) 
VC of SU and UU stated (May 2014) that generally re gular faculty were engaged 
in imparting teaching in SFC courses beyond the reg ular class hours i.e.,  during 
morning and evening hours. They also stated that du e to such engagement, SFC 
students are generally benefited from their experti se and regular courses were not 
affected in any way. But, in all the above cases detected in Audit, regular faculties 
were paid for engagement in SFCs during their normal office hours.  
3.1.3.6 Arbitrary and lack of uniformity in collection of affiliation fee 
As per Statutes 172 (2) (iv), 174 and 177 as amende d in 2000, before granting 
affiliation, Universities charge and collect six ty pes of fees (pledging money, 
academic, subject affiliation, processing, inspecti on and late fee) from 
institutions. Fees formed a part of revenue of the Universities except pledging 
money which is to be refunded upon discontinuance o f the institute affiliation. 
Affiliation charges were the only revenue received by the Universities from such 
colleges.  
Scrutiny of records revealed that the quantum of co llection of affiliation fees by 
the Universities in case of 23 colleges out of 48 t est checked in audit, was below 
                                                
 
34   UU: 31 and SU: 38 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
50 
the rates prescribed in Statutes resulting in loss of revenue of ` 54.05 lakh. 
Besides, the Universities did not collect pledging amount of ` 55.75 lakh required 
to be received from the affiliated colleges as of M arch 2012 as given in the table 
3.1.4. 
Table 3.1.4: Statement showing short collection of affiliation fees as of March 2012 
(` (` (` (`  in lakh) 
University Short collection of Total 
Pledging Processing Academic 
Utkal University 54.25 3.60 37.20 95.05 
Berhampur University Nil 4.00 7.00 11.00 
Sambalpur University 1.50 0.25 2.00 3.75 
Total 55.75 7.85 46.20 109.80 
(Source: Compiled by Audit from University records) 
On pointing out by Audit, the Universities intimate d defaulting colleges and 
received ` 4.05 lakh (pledging amount of ` 2.50 lakh by two colleges of BU, 
academic fees of ` 1.50 lakh by three colleges of SU and processing fe e of ` 0.05 
lakh by one college of SU).  
The Additional Secretary stated (May 2014) that Uni versities have been asked to 
take appropriate action to recover the short collection. 
3.1.4 Availability of infrastructure  
Statute 172 (2) provided that buildings, adequate a ccommodation for class rooms, 
well-equipped library, laboratory, separate common rooms for men and women 
students and common room for teaching staff are som e of the necessities for 
running of courses in Universities/ colleges. Scrut iny of records revealed that the 
Universities conducted SFC courses with existing in frastructure available in the 
University for its regular courses, which in itself  was inadequate as discussed 
under:  
3.1.4.1 Universities  
• In case of M Pharma course run in BU, the classroom s, laboratory, 
furniture etc. were not adequate to run the course as stated (August 2012) 
by the Course Coordinator (CC). There were three 
35 specialisations taught 
under two years M Pharma course with intake capacit y of 20 students for 
each specialisation. As per time table, at a time a t least three class rooms  
were required  to be provisioned  for the first yea r students of the three 
specialisations  against which only two class rooms  were available. The 
Course Coordinator confirmed (December 2013) inadeq uacies in the class 
rooms, laboratory, furniture and internet facilities. 
• There were 300 students reading in different semest ers of five year IMCA 
course under UU with only one 50 capacity computer laboratory. The CC, 
                                                 
35  Pharmaceutical Technology (PCT), Pharmaceutics (PC S) and Pharmaceutical Analysis & 
Quality Assurance (AQA) 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
51 
finding the laboratory insufficient for conducting practical classes, 
intimated (December 2006) the University for instal lation of second 
computer laboratory. The same had not materialised as of December 2013. 
Five out of 11 students interviewed (October 2012) in Audit through 
questionnaires also stated that the existing laboratory was inadequate.  
• Department of Business Administration of UU runs fo ur courses namely, 
Regular MBA, MBA (Agri-Business), Executive MBA and  IMBA. Under 
IMBA, only one 20 seated computer laboratory was av ailable to 
accommodate 300 IMBA students (Semester one to five ) along with other 
courses running in the Department. CC of IMBA state d (March 2013) that 
the existing laboratory was insufficient for the st udents of IMBA which 
was also confirmed by the students. 
• The SU allotted two rooms only, i.e., one for class room and the other for 
laboratory purpose for running two years M Sc BT co urse with four 
semesters in School of Life Science (SLS). Though, head of the SLS 
intimated (February 2005) VC of severe space proble m, as of December 
2013, the SLS however, functioned with the same one class room. 
Registrars, BU and SU stated (September 2013) that the programmes had the 
required infrastructure. However, audit had found that the Course Coordinator and 
students reported deficiencies in infrastructure. 
3.1.4.2  Affiliated colleges  
The University Act and Statute 
36  provided that each college to be eligible for 
recognition and affiliation to run courses, must po ssess required land with clear 
title (rural areas: five acre, urban area: two acre  and metropolis: 0.5 acre), own 
building, adequate class rooms, library, play groun d, hostel etc. As per Statute 
199 (iii), part disaffiliation will be imposed on c olleges for inadequacy in 
facilities like library, laboratory, class rooms, g ames facilities, residential 
arrangements for students, etc. 
Audit examined infrastructure availability in 48 af filiated professional colleges 
running 93 SFCs and noticed that 39 such colleges d id not possess basic required 
infrastructure facilities as indicated in the table below.  
Table 3.1.5: Infrastructure availability in affiliated professional colleges  
Sl.No . Nature of deficiencies  No.  of colleges where deficienc ies  noticed  
UU (25) BU(15) SU(08) Total (48) 
1 Not having prescribed area of  land  12 06 05 23 
2 Not having own building 06 08 03 17 
3 Inadequate class rooms 02 02 02 06 
4 No library facility 02 10 04 16 
5 No playground  12 07 02 21 
                                                 
36  Section 18 (1) (d) of Act and 172 (2) of OUFS 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
52 
Sl.No. Nature of deficiencies  No. of colleges where deficiencies noticed 
UU (25) BU(15) SU(08) Total (48) 
6 No hostel facility for students 00 02 03 05 
7 Inadequate laboratory facilities 01 01 01 03 
8 Inadequate laboratory equipment 01 02 00 03 
9 Students  common room 09 03 05 17 
10 No toilet 01 00 02 03 
(Source: Affiliation files at the Universities and Joint physical inspection in Audit)  
Further scrutiny revealed as under: 
• Out of 23 colleges not having required areas of lan d, 13 colleges (UU:05, 
BU: 04 and SU: 04) had no land at all. These colleges functioned in rented 
buildings though were required to be affiliated onl y after possession of 
land as prescribed in the Statute. 
• In the case of colleges having co-education, separa te reading rooms, tiffin 
rooms and other necessary conveniences were to be p rovided for the 
women students as stipulated in Statute 193. Twelve out of 48 test checked 
colleges, however, did not have any common room for women students.  
• Similarly, in two colleges, no toilet was available for students  
• These are indicative of running of SFCs without ade quate infrastructure in 
BU, UU and SU and affiliated colleges thereunder. D espite such non-
availability, part disaffiliation of the colleges a s per Statute 199  was not 
made by the Universities.  
Clause 3 of University Grants Commission (UGC) (Aff iliation of Colleges by 
Universities) Regulations, 2009 also required undis puted ownership of land 37 , 
sufficient buildings for administrative and academi c activities, library with 
required number of books, laboratory with equipment  and civic facilities like 
water, electricity, toilets, sewerage etc. as pre-r equisites for grant of temporary 
affiliation. But, all such colleges deficient in in frastructure were allowed to run 
with provisional affiliation by the University extended every year.  
The representatives of test checked Universities wh ile claiming that PG teaching 
departments had adequate infrastructure for running  SFCs, however, stated (May 
2014)  that these were deficient in most of the affiliated  colleges and apprised the 
Additional Secretary of need for joint inspection b y the Higher Education 
Department and Universities concerned before giving  recognition and affiliation 
to any non-Government college imparting general or SFC courses. The Additional 
Secretary assured (May 2014) that appropriate actio n in the matter would be 
taken. 
                                                
 
37  Two acre in urban areas and five acre in rural are as 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
53 
3.1.5 Adequacy and quality of teaching  
3.1.5.1 Poor student-teacher ratio 
To ensure quality education in technical and profes sional studies, the UGC/(All 
India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) presc ribed student-teacher ratio 
for different courses.  
Audit, however, noticed that test checked Universities and affiliated colleges there 
under conducting professional and technical courses through SFC, ran the courses 
with teachers less than required norm. 
• Out of 11 test checked SFCs run by Universities, no  full time/contractual 
teacher was deployed for six courses where only gue st faculty were 
engaged and five courses were run with shortage of teachers ranging 
between 31 and 75 per cent  as per requirement of teachers on the basis of 
students strength during 2007-13, as indicated in the table below. 
Table 3.1.6: Availability of regular/ contractual t eaching staff in test checked SFCs 
running within Universities (excluding guest faculties)  
Sl. 
No 
Course, University Teacher 
student ratio 
Requirement Availability  Shortage 
(per cent ) 
1 IMCA, UU 1:15 20 6   14 (70) 
2 IMBA, UU 1:15 20 5  15(75) 
3 M Pharma, UU 1:12 13 9  4(31) 
4 M Tech IT, UU  1:15 5 0  5(100) 
5 M Tech CS, BU 1:12 4 0  4(100) 
6 M Tech EIS, BU 1:12 3 0  3(100) 
7 M Pharma, BU 1:12 10 4 6(60) 
8 M Tech CS, SU 1:12 2 0  2(100) 
9 MCA, SU 1:15 7 0  7(100) 
10 M Sc BT, SU 1:15 2 0  2(100) 
11 IT courses in SUIIT 1:15 25 8 17(68) 
(Source: Prepared by Audit from information collected from Universities) 
• In case of affiliated colleges, Statute 172(2) of O UFS stipulated that   
colleges should appoint qualified teachers as per n orm and yardsticks 
prescribed. The HE Department identified norm of th ree teachers for 30 
students undergoing BBA and BCA courses. Audit noti ced in 13 out 48 
affiliated colleges, 71 teachers were available aga inst the requirement of 
119 teachers at the prescribed norm, resulting in s hortage of 48 (40 per 
cent ) teachers as of March 2012. Out of above 13 colleg es, one affiliated 
college under UU had 67 per cent shortage of teacher as it had only four 
teachers against the requirement of 12 teachers. 
Universities did not take action against defaulting  colleges for non-compliance to 
the above provisions thus compromising requirements  for delivery of quality 
education in colleges. Shortage of full time teaching staff  led to short covering of 
courses, taking of combined classes of different co urses, taking of classes on 
holidays, almost non-existence of study related act ivities like study tour, seminar 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
54 
etc. required to give exposure to students as discu ssed in Paragraph 3.1.5.6 and 
3.1.5.7.   
 In Exit Conference, representatives of test checke d Universities opined that as 
there was no provision for appointment of regular f aculty for SFC courses; 
teaching was imparted mainly through contractual teachers and guest faculty. 
3.1.5.2 Appointment of non-NET qualified candidates as contractual teachers 
Clause 23 of UU SFC Guidelines permitted engagement  of adjunct Lecturers/ 
Readers/ Professors on contractual basis 38  for a period of one year consistent with 
qualifications laid down by the UGC/ AICTE for similar positions. These teachers 
were to be selected through open advertisement foll owed by the recommendation 
of a Selection Committee. 
As per UGC norm, clearing National Eligibility Test  (NET) was compulsory for 
engagement as Assistant Professor/ Lecturer. Exempt ion was available only for 
candidates having Ph D qualification. UU published 
39 advertisements for selection 
of 13 contractual lecturers for IMCA course where N ET/ Ph D qualification was 
indicated only as a preferred qualification, though  it was compulsory for 
appointment of lecturers. In response to advertisem ent, 121 candidates who were 
not NET/Ph D qualified applied, of which 13 candida tes were selected as 
lecturers. They served for 12 to 61 months (Februar y 2013). As per proceedings 
of the meeting (15 February 2008) on IMCA, performa nce of some of these 
lecturers was not found up to the standard and inst ructions were issued to the 
teachers to improve their performance. A total amou nt of ` 52.07 lakh was 
incurred towards remuneration of such lecturers as of January 2013 by the 
department concerned from the SFC fund. 
3.1.5.3 Engagement of teachers without minimum qualification 
Irregularities noticed in engagement of teachers in  SFCs without adequate 
qualification are discussed as under: 
• As per AICTE norm, minimum qualification and experi ence for the post 
of Professor in Pharmacy is Master degree and Ph D or its equivalent in 
appropriate discipline with minimum of 10 years tea ching/ research/ 
industrial experience of which at least five years should be at the level of 
Associate Professor.   
Audit noticed that BU engaged (November 2008) one P rofessor in 
Pharmacy on contractual basis though the candidate had only nine years of 
teaching experience and had no experience as Associate Professor.  
                                                
 
38  Remuneration per month: ` 10,000 for Lecturer,  ` 15,000 for Reader and  ` 20,000 for 
Professor 
39  6 December 2005, 14 November 2007 and 22 November 2010.  

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
55 
The Additional Secretary instructed (May 2014) the University concerned 
to take appropriate action in the matter.  
• Further, as per UGC/ AICTE norm, person having good  academic record 
with at least 55 per cent  marks at the Master degree level are eligible for 
the post of Assistant Professor.  
Audit, however noticed that three persons were enga ged (July 2011) as 
Assistant Professor, one of whom had completed (Aug ust 2012) Masters 
degree examination after 13 months of his engagement.  
Registrar, SU stated (September 2013) 
 that acquired qualification (BE) of 
said candidate has satisfied AICTE requirement of minimum qualification. 
But, AICTE specified the qualification for the post  of Assistant Professor 
as ME/ M Tech in addition to BE/ B Tech. The Additi onal Secretary, 
however, instructed (May 2014) University concerned  to take appropriate 
action in the matter. 
3.1.5.4 Engagement of faculty beyond the prescribed period  
As per paragraph 23 of UU SFC Guidelines issued in August 2005, engagement 
of Lecturers/ Readers/ Professors on contractual basis can be made for a period of 
one year. This issue was further resolved (Septembe r 2010) by the Syndicate of 
the University that extension of contractual teache rs shall be granted for a further 
period of one year and fresh selection process be r esorted to before expiry of such 
term. 
Audit noticed that UU appointed (October 2007 and M ay 2008) five lecturers on 
contractual basis for IMBA course who continued to remain for more than four 
years as on date (September 2013) by granting exten sions every year without 
fresh selection process being resorted to. 
Additional Secretary instructed (May 2014) the Univ ersity concerned to take 
appropriate action in the matter. 
3.1.5.5 Selection of faculties  without required specialisation  
The Health and Family Welfare (H&FW) Department iss ued (August 2009) 
orders for opening of M Pharma course in BU from th e session 2008-09. BU 
started the course with two specialisations, viz.  Pharmaceutical Technology (PCT) 
and Pharmaceutical Analysis & Quality Assurance (AQ A) from 2008-09 and 
another specialisation namely, Pharmaceutics (PCS) from 2009-10.  
Audit, however, noticed that faculty were not selec ted as per required 
specialisation and the courses were run with facult y of different specialisations as 
discussed below: 
• In 2008-09, against requirement of faculty
 for specialisation course PCT 
the advertisement was made (November 2008) for PCS.  Hence faculty  for 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
56 
PCT specialisation was engaged (November 2008) for which no 
advertisement had been made. 
• One teacher with specialisation under Industrial Ph armacy was engaged 
(November 2008) for which there was neither any adv ertisement nor was 
the University offering such course.  
With opening of PCS specialisation from 2009-10, ad vertisement was 
made (September 2010) for AQA and PCS against which  three staff were 
engaged. 
• Though advertisements for AQA were made, no faculty  with relevant 
specialisation was posted for which there was no re corded reason. It was 
noticed that, there was decline in enrolment of stu dents in AQA 
specialisation ranging from 20 in 2008-09 to only one student in 2011-12.  
Course Coordinator (CC) reported (June 2009) that t hree staff engaged, were not 
competent to take classes in the specialisation ava ilable and pressed for 
arrangement of guest faculties for the purpose. 
The Additional Secretary instructed (May 2014) the University concerned to take 
appropriate action in the matter. 
3.1.5.6 Inadequate coverage of curriculum 
As per SFC guidelines, Academic Committee of each PG department with the CC 
as the convener of the committee, frame the course curriculum, academic calendar 
etc. for the course. Different PG departments condu cting SFC courses under the 
Universities fixed the number of classes to be unde rtaken for different courses. 
Accordingly, 40 classes were required to be taken t o cover each paper under all 
courses except M Sc BT (SU) where 32 classes were to be taken.  
Audit noticed that there was an average shortfall o f 24 per cent in holding theory 
classes in 346 papers in seven 
40 out of 11 test checked courses during 2007-12. In 
M Tech (CS) course of BU, classes taken were short (23 per cent ) in all 15 papers 
in all the years during 2007-12. Similar situation prevailed in M Pharma of BU, 
where inadequate number of classes were taken in al l 24 papers. 2344 classes 
were taken against requirement of 2880 classes duri ng 2008-12. This shortage 
remained despite holding 981 classes on national and other holidays. 
Out of above seven courses, four courses did not ha ve full time faculty and 
courses were conducted with guest faculties and reg ular faculty from PG 
departments. In other three courses, there was also  shortage of faculty ranging 
from 31 to 75 per cent  as discussed earlier in paragraph 3.1.5.1 . 
                                                 
40  UU: IMCA, IMBA; BU: M Pharma, M Tech CS; SU: MCA, M Tech CS and M Sc BT 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
57 
Representatives of all three test checked Universit ies stated that in all these cases, 
full curriculum was covered even within fewer teaching hours through conducting 
classes on Sundays/ holidays and working for extra time beyond the normal 
period. They also stated that students have already passed and some students have 
got jobs which could not have been possible without  coverage of full curriculum. 
The fact however remained that despite conducting e xtra classes, there were 
shortages in number of classes.  
3.1.5.7 Holding combined classes of different courses  
It was further observed that students of different courses (SFC with general, PG 
with UG SFCs) under SU were taught together (common  classes) in one class 
room. Total 2662 common classes relating to 29 pape rs (subjects) were taken to 
manage the teaching during 2007-13. 
• In SUIIT of SU, common classes were taken for Gradu ate and Post 
Graduate (PG) students. During 2011-13, 432 common classes of 13 
papers of PG courses like MCA, M Sc CS were taken t ogether with B 
Tech (Electronics & Communication Engineering and C omputer Science 
& Engineering) students. 
• Similarly, 302 common classes were taken on eight p apers relating to two 
post graduate SFCs (M Sc, Computer Science and M Te ch, Computer 
Science) in SUIIT during 2008-13. 
• In case of M Sc BT SFC, 2087 classes of 12 papers w ere combined with 
regular M Sc Life Science, a non SFC under SU during 2007-13.  
Thus, non engagement of required number of teachers , dependence on guest 
faculty, holding of combined classes etc. indicated  gaps in quality of education 
imparted to students.  
The representatives of all the three Universities w hile confirming the fact stated 
(May 2014) that this was done in respect of common curriculum with the 
objective to complete the curriculum in time.  
3.1.5.8 Inadequate placement opportunities 
The objective of running SFCs is to help successful  students to get proper 
employment.  In VCs’ Conference held in September 2 005, it was emphasised 
that placement of SFC pass outs was not only a moral obligation but also a market 
imperative.   
Audit noticed that, only UU had a placement cell to  assist students in getting jobs 
but percentage of placement was low. Out of 780 pas s out students of IMCA,  
M Pharma and IMBA, only around 26 per cent  (171 out of 286 in IMCA, Nil out 
of 265 M Pharma and 28 out of 229 in IMBA) got empl oyment through the 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
58 
placement cell during 2007-13. In other two Univers ities (BU and SU) there were 
no placement cells.  
3.1.6 SFCs run through Public Private Partnership ( PPP) mode 
Utkal University decided (July 2005) to run SFCs th rough private collaborators in 
PPP mode. The Government, however, decided (May 200 9) to introduce SFC 
courses in Autonomous colleges though service provi ders to be selected by open 
advertisement on the basis of their experience, fac ulty position and placement 
credentials and accordingly amended (October 2012) the Statute 21 (24) of OUFS 
to permit Universities to establish new institution s in collaboration with industrial 
houses/ trusts/ corporate houses and other national  and international institutions/ 
organisations in PPP mode for academic activities o nly. As on date (December 
2013), two SFCs under UU and 31 SFCs under 11 Auton omous colleges are run 
in PPP mode. During August 2006 to August 2010, UU entered in to MoU for 
two PPP. 
Audit scrutiny of process of selection of private partners revealed as follows; 
• UGC intimated (August 2001) UU not to enter into co llaboration with any 
private institution for franchising the University education without prior 
approval of UGC. But this was not done and MoU with  two private 
partners was signed and SFC introduced in MBA (Agri -Bussiness) from 
2006-07 with one private partner and M Tech (IT) wi th another since 
2009-10. 
• 11 autonomous colleges introduced 31 SFCs through p rivate collaborators 
in PPP Mode wherein neither any ‘Request for Proposal (RFP)’ was called 
for nor any advertisement issued. Private promoters  were allowed to run 
SFCs basing on their suo-motu  offers.  
The Additional Secretary stated (May 2014) 
 that UU should adopt the model 
MoU format prescribed by the Department. He also stated that selection of private 
partner on competitive bidding process, as per the instructions of Secretary has 
been started in one college. He, however, stated that as there were limited players, 
suo-motu offers are also accepted based on the recommendati on of concerned 
Principal/ Managing Committee. The fact remains tha t the selection of the most 
suitable partner was not ensured in absence of competitive bidding. 
3.1.6.1 Revenue sharing model under PPP 
The model MoU for PPP mode SFCs prescribed (Novembe r 2008) provisions for 
sharing of revenue (course fee) earned on SFC betwe en the private partner and 
College/ University. Accordingly, the private partn er would be responsible for 
physical conduct of the courses, develop and mainta in laboratories at its own cost 
and resources, provide required faculty members to conduct theory and practical 
classes and assist for field study or in-house industrial training etc.  

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
59 
Audit noticed that though UU in respect of MBA (Agr i-Business) signed MoU 
with provision of course fee sharing ratio at 60: 4 0 and in case of  M Tech (IT) at 
62:38 between University and private partners, yet they were paid 100 per cent 
other fees such as student development fees includi ng  that for personality 
development and communication skill, workshop/ semi nar and IT services, 
Placement assistance, training, industrial tour, fi eld exposure, library etc, being 
the parts of course fees. Due to payment of other f ees at 100 per cent , virtually 
private partners received their share at 75-76 per cent of the total revenue 
collected from the students. 
The Additional Secretary advised (May 2014) the Uni versities to use the MoU 
format prescribed by the Department at the time of extension of MoU or signing 
new MoUs in future. 
3.1.6.2 Non adherence to stipulated conditions in MoUs 
Audit further noticed that conditions of MoUs of th e MBA (Agri-Business) and  
M Tech (IT) SFCs were not adhered 
 to  as detailed below; 
• As per clause 2 of the MoUs of MBA (Agri-Business) and M Tech (IT), 
review of the agreement was to be made after every two years. But no 
such review of the MoUs was made after expiry of in itial two years of 
administration of the courses as of October 2013.  
• As per clause 3 of the MoUs of MBA (Agri-Business) and M Tech (IT), 
from the third year onwards, the private partners w ere to contribute 10 per 
cent  of their course fee with equal contribution as mat ching share by the 
department concerned towards infrastructure develop ment for the 
programme. But requirement of infrastructure was no t assessed and the 
arrangement was not made since inception (August 20 06 and August 
2010)  of the courses as of October 2013. 
• As per MoU, the Advisory Committee headed by Chairm an, PG Council 
of the UU was to chalk out policy and determine the  broad guidelines for 
operation of the course. But no such policy and gui delines were 
determined by the UU. 
• As per clause 9 of MoU of one private partner, a fi ve member Advisory 
Committee (three from University and two from priva te partner) headed 
by Chairman, PG Council was to be convened by the C ourse Head at least 
once in a quarter for review of the programme. Audi t noticed that the 
Advisory Committee of MBA (Agri-Business) met only five times (May 
2008 to September 2010) against 28 times required during 2006-2013. 
• Similarly, as per clause 13 of MoU of other partner , one eight member 
Advisory Committee (Five from University and three from other partner) 
was to meet once in three months for review of the programme. But the 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
60 
Advisory committee of M Tech (IT) met only thrice ( September 2010, 
May 2011 and November 2012) against 16 times required during 2009-13.  
3.1.7 Conclusion 
Assessment of requirement was not done before SFCs were introduced. Fixation 
of course fee by the Universities was unscientific and large surplus of fund were 
retained by the Universities. Universities conducte d SFCs without having 
adequate infrastructure. Affiliated professional co lleges did not possess basic 
infrastructure facilities like land, building, student’s common room, library, toilets 
etc. Quality of education was compromised due to no n-engagement of full time 
teaching staff, inadequate student-teacher ratio an d teachers engaged without 
requisite qualification. Quality education under SF C further suffered due to 
inadequate coverage of course curriculum. Objective  to provide scope for 
employment to SFC passed out students was only part ially met as placement cells 
were not even constituted in two Universities out o f three test checked in audit. 
UU while introducing SFCs in PPP mode selected priv ate partners without open 
advertisement and violated revenue sharing norms. T hus, implementation of the 
objective to provide job oriented and market linked  quality education through 
introduction of SFCs needed several areas of improv ement in these Universities 
and colleges. 
3.1.8 Recommendations 
The Government may consider: 
• framing uniform guideline for running and monitorin g of courses for 
University and Autonomous/ affiliated colleges;  
• structuring course fee through input cost analysis and other rationalisation 
procedures in conformity with Government fee structure;  
• ensuring deployment of adequate number of qualified  faculty in 
accordance with norms prescribed by UGC/ AICTE; 
• ensuring creation of conducive study environment th rough availability of 
requisite infrastructure and amenities as per Unive rsity Act and Statute; 
and  
• bringing transparency in selection of private partn ers under PPP mode as 
per prescribed procedure. 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
61 
HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE DEPARTMENT  
 
3.2   Compliance to the provisions of Pre-conception & Pr e-natal Diagnostic 
Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act 1994 
3.2.1  Introduction  
With the objective of prohibiting pre-natal diagnos tic techniques for 
determination of sex of the foetus which led to fem ale foeticide and to stop abuse 
of such technique which is discriminatory and affec ts the dignity and status of 
women, ‘The Pre-conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of 
Sex Selection (PoSS) Act 1994’ (PNDT Act) was enact ed by Government of 
India (GoI) in September 1994.  
The Act required constitution of Appropriate Author ities for the State as a whole 
and a part thereof, State Supervisory Board (SSB) a s well as State Advisory 
Committee (SAC) to discharge prescribed functions. Accordingly, State 
Appropriate Authority (SAA) was constituted as a mu lti-member body with 
Director of Family Welfare as the Chairman.  
District Magistrate is appointed as District Approp riate Authority (DAA). State 
Government, however, declared (August 2013) 
 Additional District Medical 
Officer (Family Welfare) (ADMO FW) as the district nodal officer for 
registration, inspection and monitoring of compliance to provisions of PNDT Act. 
During 2010-14, 220 Ultrasound Clinics 41  were registered in the State and the 
State had 752 Ultrasound (US) Clinics as of March 2014.   
3.2.1.1  Audit objectives  
Audit of compliance to the provisions of PNDT Act a nd rules framed thereunder 
was conducted with the objectives to assess whether: 
• there existed an efficient and effective system of registration of all 
ultrasound/ genetic clinics; 
• system of inspection was adequate, regular and effective; and  
• enforcement mechanism to detect and deal with viola tions including 
penalties and legal action was adequate and effective. 
Criteria were drawn from PNDT Act and Rules issued thereunder as well as 
instructions issued by GoI and State Governments on  the matter from time to 
time. 
3.2.1.2 Audit scope and methodology 
Audit objectives, criteria, scope and methodology o f this audit was discussed in 
Entry Conference (September 2013) with the Principa l Secretary, Health and 
Family Welfare (H&FW) Department. Audit was conduct ed during September to 
December 2013 covering 2010-13 with test check of r ecords of H&FW 
                                                
 
41  2010-11: 68; 2011-12: 28; 2012-13: 62;2013-14: 62 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
62 
Department, DAAs of four districts (Bhadrak, Cuttac k, Ganjam and Nayagarh) 
selected on the basis of Stratified Random Sampling  Without Replacement 
method. Joint inspections of 22 out of 23 test chec ked Ultrasound  Clinics 
functioning in these four districts 42  were also conducted and photographs were 
taken, wherever considered necessary. The draft rep ort was discussed (28 April 
2014) with Special Secretary, Health & Family Welfare Department and Director, 
Family Welfare-cum-SAA/ PNDT and the views of Gover nment were considered 
and incorporated appropriately.  
Audit findings 
3.2.2 Child sex ratio in the State and Districts  
Sex ratio refers to the number of females per 1000 males. Declining sex ratio 
indicates fewer women to men.  
Audit noted that female population in the State inc reased from 1.81 crore in 
(2001) to 2.07 crore (2011) and the overall sex rat io in the State increased from 
972 in 2001 to 979 in 2011. However, sex ratio in a ge group 0-6 years (child sex 
ratio - CSR) in the State declined from 1001 (1961) to 953 (2001) and then further 
declined to 941 (2011). As per Census 2011, CSR in urban areas (913) remained 
much below that in rural areas (946). During 2001-1 1, CSR declined in 21 out of 
30 districts of the State by one to 49 points with highest decline in Nayagarh (904 
to 855) followed by Dhenkanal (925 to 877) and Angul (937 to 889). District wise 
child sex ratio in 2001 and 2011 is indicated in Appendix 3.2.1.  
Director of Family Welfare-cum-SAA attributed decli ne to sex selection with 
misuse of modern diagnostic techniques like invasiv e method of amniocentesis 
and non-invasive method like ultra-sonography at pr e-conception and prenatal 
level. SAA further stated that due to such decline,  Government is seriously 
concerned about proper implementation of PNDT Act. Audit findings on 
compliance to the provisions of the Act are as follows:  
3.2.3 Registration and Renewal of Ultrasound clinic s 
As per Section 18 (1) of PNDT Act, no person shall open any Genetic 
Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic C linic after the 
commencement of this Act unless such Centre, Labora tory or Clinic is duly 
registered under the Act. 
As of March 2013, in the State  664 Ultrasound/ Genetic 
Clinics were registered with the DAAs of which 167 functioned in four selected  
districts. Audit examined the system of registratio n and renewal of such clinics 
and findings are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.  
3.2.3.1 Unauthorised functioning of Ultrasound Clinics 
As  per Rule 8 (1) of the PNDT Rules 1996,  an application for renewal of 
certificate of registration shall be made by the Ul trasonography (USG) Clinic in 
duplicate in Form A, to the Appropriate Authority a t least thirty days before the 
                                                 
42   Bhadrak (6), Cuttack (6), Ganjam (6), Nayagarh (4 ) 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
63 
expiry of the certificate of registration. Besides,  Rule 11(2), inter-alia, required 
seal, seizure and confiscation of any ultrasound ma chine whenever found to be in 
occupation of any unregistered clinic.  
Audit noticed that in one (Cuttack) 
out of four selected districts , two Ultrasound 
Clinics i.e.,  one in Government sector and the other private ran without 
registration since January/ February 2012 and both had not even applied for 
renewal of registration as of December 2013.  
In case of private clinic, it had applied (January 2012) for its closure from 
December 2012, though validity of registration of t he clinic expired in January 
2012. Audit however noticed that instead of taking immediate action to surrender 
the certificate and issue instructions to not use, shift or sell the machine without 
permission, the instructions were issued belatedly during September 2013. 
Further, the inspection to ensure non-use of machin e was also not carried out 
during the period.  
DAA, Cuttack stated (March 2014) that reminder was issued to the Government 
hospital on 15 March 2014 regarding expiry of regis tration. However, audit noted 
that machines of such unregistered clinics remained  in the possession of 
unregistered bodies/ clinics though their use was n ot permitted as per law. 
Director of Family Welfare-cum-SAA while confirming  (April 2014) that clinics 
which had not applied for renewal were to be treate d as unregistered, assured to 
take appropriate action. 
3.2.3.2  Registration and renewal without inspection  
Section 19(1) of the Act as well as Rule 6(1) and ( 2) of the PNDT Rules 1996 
required that on receipt of application for registr ation/ renewal, the Appropriate 
Authority (AA) after making such enquiry and after satisfying itself that the 
applicant has complied with all requirements of the  Act, would place the 
application before the Advisory Committee for its a dvice and then having regard 
to such advice shall issue a certificate of registr ation in Form B. Such enquiry/ 
inspections were required to be conducted by the DA A or his representative. In 
case of expiry of the period of registration, appli cation for renewal was to be 
made by the clinic to the AA, 30 days before the da te of expiry of such 
registration. Applications were also to be acknowle dged on same/ next working 
day as required under Rule 4(2). Every genetic clinic has to maintain the details of 
pre-natal diagnostic tests conducted in Form F {Rul e 9 (4)}.  Further, Secretary, 
Health & Family Welfare Department instructed (June 2010) that inspection of all 
the clinical establishment may be carried out in su ch a way that 20 per cent of 
such clinics are inspected by Chief District Medica l Officer (CDMO)  and 
remaining by ADMO/ Sub Divisional Medical Officer (SDMO) every year. 
Audit, however, noticed that: 
• In case of one sample ultrasound clinic, registrati on certificate under the 
Act was issued on 16 May 2006, without any enquiry/  inspection by DAA 
concerned. Advice of Advisory Committee was also no t obtained in this 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
64 
case. Further, in case of another clinic, DAA issue d the registration 
certificate based on an unsigned affidavit submitte d by the owner of the 
clinic. Thus, registration certificates were issued  without conducting 
required enquiry and inspection. 
• Though Rule 13 provided for each clinic to intimate  every change of 
employee, place, address and equipment installed to  DAA at least 30 days 
in advance from expected date of change and seek re -issuance of 
registration certificate incorporating the changes,  yet a private hospital 
was permitted (April 2013) by the AA for installati on of a new ultrasound 
machine in place of defective machine without chang ing the unique serial 
number of machine in the registration certificate. Thereafter, DAA/ 
CDMO/ ADMO/ SDMO neither conducted inspection of th e clinic as 
required under Rule 11(1) nor sealed the old machin e to ensure prevention 
of unauthorised use of such machine.  
Director of Family Welfare-cum-SAA assured (April 2 014) to initiate appropriate 
action in the matter. 
3.2.3.3  Non finalisation of applications for renew al within the prescribed 
timeline 
As per Section 18 of the Act read with Rule 6(5) of  the PNDT Rules 1996, 
 grant 
of certificate of registration or rejection of appl ication for registration shall be 
communicated to the applicant as specified in Form B or Form C, as the case may 
be within a period of ninety days from the date of receipt of application for 
registration. Similarly, Rule 8 (6) provided that, grant of certificate of renewal or 
rejection of application for renewal of registratio n shall be communicated to the 
applicant as specified in the Form B or Form C, as the case may be, within a 
period of ninety days from the date of receipt of a pplication for renewal failing 
which , the certificate of registration shall be deemed to have been renewed. 
Audit, however, noticed delays in registration/ ren ewal of clinics as indicated in 
the table 3.2.1. 
Table 3.2.1: Delay in Registration/ Renewal 
Name of the 
sample districts 
No. of 
applications 
received  
No. of application s disposed 
with delay beyond 90 days 
Range of delay  
(number of days 
beyond 90 days) 
Registration 
Ganjam 10 7 9 to 281 
Bhadrak 4 1 23 
Cuttack 29 8 4 to 278 
Nayagarh 3 3 31 to 177 
Total 46 19  
Renewal 
Bhadrak 8 1 51 
Ganjam 23 15 12 to 392 
Cuttack 19 14 7 to 558 
Total 50 30  
(Source: Compiled by Audit from records of AAs) 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
65 
As seen from above, 19 out of 46 applications for r egistration were disposed off 
with delay ranging between 4 and 281 days beyond pr escribed period of 90 days. 
In case of renewal of registration, 30 out 50 appli cations were disposed off with 
delays ranging between 7 and 558 days. No applicati on was received in Nayagarh 
district for renewal. Thus, the clinics functioned as deemed registered during the 
intervening period without any scrutiny by AAs.  
SAA while accepting (April 2014) the fact, attribut ed the delay to busy schedule 
of the Collector-cum-District Magistrate who is also the DAA. It was also assured 
that registration/ renewal certificates would be issued within the prescribed period 
in future.  
3.2.3.4 USG conducted by unauthorised person 
  
Rule 3 (3) (1) of the PNDT Rules 1996 requires that any person having ade quate 
space and being or employing a Gynaecologist having  experience of performing 
at least 20 procedures or a Sonologist, Imaging Spe cialist, Radiologist or 
registered medical practitioner having Post Graduat e Degree or diploma or six 
month training or one year experience in sonography  or image scanning or a 
medical genecist may set up a genetic clinic/ ultrasound clinic/ imaging centre.  
Audit, however, noticed that in one test checked di strict (Bhadrak), an 
Ophthalmologist conducted ultrasound/ imaging and signed and sent Form F  
though not authorised by DAA for the same. No action was initiated against the 
clinic/doctor for such violation even after reporting (November 2013) by Audit.  
CDMO, Bhadrak after enquiry stated (November 2013) that the concerned doctor 
did not do USG but was going through physical findings of the report made by the 
authorised doctor. But as per Form F the USG had be en conducted. The Special 
Secretary, however, assured (April 2014) to take appropriate action in the matter.  
3.2.3.5 Tracking portable ultra sonography machines and its use   
Rule 13  of  the PNDT Rules 1996 amended in 2012, required every  Genetic 
Clinic, Ultrasound Clinic and Imaging Centre to int imate change of employee, 
place, address and equipment etc. to the DAA at lea st 30 days in advance of such 
expected change and obtain re-issued registration c ertificate incorporating any 
such change.  Besides, Rule 3 B(1) 43  also, inter-alia, provided that the use of 
portable ultrasound  machines shall be permitted only when the same is used 
within the registered premises for providing service to indoor patients.  
Audit noticed that no mechanism was in place to tra ck portable USG machines. 
Besides, Department had no information regarding nu mber of portable USG 
machines permitted by AAs in the State. In four tes t checked districts, all DAAs, 
however, stated that no permission was given for us e of any portable ultrasound 
machine in these districts.  
                                                
 
43  Amended in February 2012  

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
66 
Portable Ultrasound machine used at a clinic at Manjuri Road,Bhadrak 
Audit further noticed that: 
• In Cuttack, 10 Ultrasound Clinics  who did  not have in-patient facility used 
portable ultrasound machines, which were not regist ered with DAA 
Cuttack. On detection of use of such machines in fi ve clinics, DAA, 
Cuttack instructed (March 2013) the Tahasildar conc erned to seal and 
seize the same. However, status of remaining five p ortable machines was 
not ascertained by DAA (April 2014).  
One such clinic which used a portable ultrasound ma chine with its unique 
serial number indicated in the registration certificate issued by the DAA in 
May 2011, though DAA Cuttack detected the machine a s portable only  in 
October 2011. This is indicative of issue of regist ration certificate without 
conducting any inspection of the machine/ clinic by  DAA as envisaged in 
Section 19(1) of PNDT Act. 
• Similarly, it was noticed during joint inspection (November 2013) with the 
Additional District Medical Officer (FW) that in Bh adrak district, one 
USG clinic was found using portable ultrasound mach ine without 
obtaining permission from DAA. 
Audit further noticed that the clinic used the same  since October 2008 as 
the unique serial number of this portable machine w as also mentioned in 
the registration certificate issued (January 2009) by the DAA. The same 
unique serial number was also mentioned in the application for registration 
by the owner as well as in the Inspection Report of CDMO (October 2008) 
without any indication that it was portable.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
SAA, while admitting, stated 
 (April 2014) that only mechanism available to track  
such portable machines was to conduct more and more  inspections to catch the 
violators and assured to take penal action. The Spe cial Secretary also assured 
(April 2014) to issue appropriate instructions to the DAAs in this regard.   
3.2.3.6  Public Information under PNDT Act  
Rule 17 of the PNDT Rules 1996, inter-alia , required  every Genetic Clinic, 
Ultrasound Clinic and Imaging Centre to prominently  display on its premises a 
notice in English and in the local language or lang uages for the information of the 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
67 
public, to the effect that disclosure of the sex of the foetus is prohibited under law. 
Besides, at least one copy each of the Act and rule s were to be available in their 
premises and should be made available to the client on demand for perusal. 
During joint inspection of 22 sample Ultrasound Cli nics in four sample districts 
Audit noticed that five clinics (23 per cent ) did not exhibit in display boards that 
‘sex determination of the foetus is prohibited under  law’  while in eight clinics (36 
per cent ) one copy each of the PNDT Act and Rule was not av ailable.  No such 
information was available in the office of the DAA and nodal officer regarding 
compliance with the above provision by the clinics.  
3.2.3.7 Non-maintenance of prescribed records 
As per Rule 9(5) of the PNDT Rules 1996, AA has to maintain records of 
application for grant or renewal of certificate of registration as specified in    
Form-H which should be treated as permanent record.  Letters of intimation of 
every change of employee, place, address and equipm ent installed are also to be 
preserved as permanent records. 
DAA Bhadrak maintained the register but entries wer e not authenticated, while in 
two districts (Cuttack and Ganjam), the registers w ere not maintained. In such 
absence of validity of registration, change of plac e and personnel in registered 
clinics  were not monitored which resulted in sever al irregularities like 
unauthorised persons operating ultrasound machines,  use of mobile machines etc. 
remaining undetected as pointed out in Paragraph 3.2.3.4  and 3.2.3.5 . 
Director, Family Welfare-cum-SAA assured (April 201 4) that Form H would be 
maintained properly at district level duly authenticated by the DAA.  
Inspection of Ultrasound Clinics  
3.2.3.8 Absence of regular inspection of Ultrasound Clinics 
For strict compliance of the provisions of the PNDT Act, inspection of Ultrasound 
Clinics, Imaging Centres, Nursing Homes and Hospita ls where any of the 
machineries/equipment capable of performing any pro cedure, technique or pre-
natal determination of sex or selection of sex befo re or after conception is used, 
has to be conducted under Rule 11(1) and the clinic s should  afford all reasonable 
facilities for inspection of the place, equipment a nd records to the AA or any 
person authorised for the same. AA or officer autho rised by it may seal or seize 
any ultrasound machine, scanner or any other equipm ent capable of detecting the 
sex of foetus, used by any organisation, if the org anisation has not got itself 
registered under the Act.  
Besides, instructions issued (June 2010) by Secreta ry of the Health & Family 
Welfare Department required annual inspection of al l clinical establishments viz. 
inspection of 20 per cent  of such clinics by the CDMO and remaining by the 
ADMOs/ SDMOs every year. Further, the Secretary ins tructed (July 2012) the 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
68 
DAAs to form an inspection team for periodic inspec tion of the ultrasound clinics 
of the district. 
During scrutiny of records of test checked districts, audit noticed that:  
• Though during 2010-11 to 2013-14, the State Cell re ported (December 
2013) in the quarterly progress reports to GoI that  1336 inspections were 
conducted during 2010-14, neither district wise bre akup nor name of units 
and date of inspections was furnished to Audit. 
 Also, cases were filed in 
only 39 violations 44  detected during the said period. 
• As per orders of CDMO, Ganjam, the District Program me Officer 
conducted inspection of 12 out of 42 ultrasound cli nics of the district 
during August 2012 to January 2013. Although the Di strict Programme 
Officer reported serious irregularities like posses sion of portable USG 
machines without registration (3), purchase of USG machine without 
intimation (1), non- submission of form F for years  together (3) etc. in all 
these cases to DAA, neither was any action taken ag ainst the erring clinics 
nor was the same reported to the SAA. 
CDMO, Bhadrak stated (November 2013) that inspectio n of 20 per cent  of 
ultrasound clinics were conducted by him during 201 3-14 and that annual 
inspections though conducted were not documented. C DMO, Ganjam while 
admitting (January 2014) the fact stated that verba l instruction was issued from 
time to time to the clinics to rectify the deficien cies. However, since inspections 
were not followed up through issue of advisory memo s to the clinics, the entire 
exercise was rendered unfruitful. SAA, however, sta ted (April 2014) that 
complaint based inspections were carried out at dis trict level as there is no 
provision in the PNDT Act and Rules to conduct annu al inspections. However, 
the executive instructions (June 2010) of the Secre tary, H&FW Department on 
conducting annual inspection of each clinic for better enforcement of the Act were 
also not carried out.  
3.2.3.9 Surprise Inspection and raids by State/ District Level Task Force  
H&FW Department constituted (July 2007) District Le vel Task Force Committee 
(DLTFC) in each District to monitor implementation of the PNDT Act 1994. The 
committee included Collector and District Magistrat e as Chairman, 
Superintendent of Police and CDMO/ CMO as member an d District Social 
Welfare Officer as co-opted member. The committee w as to constitute squads 
comprising magistrates, police and medical officers . The DLTFC has to decide 
the modus operandi  for inspection of Nursing Homes, Diagnostic Centre s and 
Ultrasound Clinics and to take penal action as deem ed fit for violation of above 
Act and Rules.  
                                                
 
44   National Inspection and Monitoring Committee: 5, State Team and District Team 
together: 20, District team alone: 14 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
69 
Audit, however, noticed that: 
• In Nayagarh district, DLTFC conducted (August 2012)  only one 
inspection despite repeated instructions by the con cerned DAC while 
DAA, Bhadrak could not produce (November 2013) any evidence to audit 
in support of conducting inspection of clinics by t he DLTFC concerned 
and stated (November 2013) that such record was not maintained.  
• In Ganjam district, no inspection by DLTFC was cond ucted during 2010-
13 though existence of unfair sex detection was sus pected in some clinics, 
as admitted (December 2013) by the concerned DAA. T hus, due to 
absence of regular inspections, violations remained unnoticed.  
Director, Family Welfare-cum-SAA while noting the a bove facts for future 
guidance, stated (April 2014) that District Collect ors had prime responsibility to 
implement the provisions of this Act and special sq uads were formed whenever 
required. But, as SAA also expressed need for more inspections and for 
restraining the offenders, more could have been done in this regard. 
3.2.4 Monitoring of compliance with the provisions of the Act 
3.2.4.1 Filing Form-F by Ultrasound Clinics and tracking of pregnant mothers  
Rule 9(8) of the PNDT Rules 1996 makes it mandatory to file “Form F” by clinics 
indicating name of the pregnant woman undergoing ob stetric scan, husband's 
name, address, contact number and various other det ails. Central Supervisory 
Board under the PNDT Act recommended (May 2011) tra cking of each pregnant 
woman right from conception to delivery and to inve stigate the instances of 
missed pregnancy. 
State Government launched (March 2013) ‘Form F’ software to capture history of 
a pregnant woman who underwent obstetric scan to be  uploaded daily. Objective 
of such online filing was to help appropriate autho rities to analyse data and track 
discrepancies and defaulters. 
 
Scrutiny of records of test checked districts revealed that: 
• Out of 194 clinics registered as of March 2014, onl y 101 clinics complied 
with the norm of online filing of Form F on website. Remaining clinics did 
not submit such forms online.  
• Form F were not filed by clinics regularly in all t he four test checked 
districts and in case of 43 out of 59 test checked clinics, the same were 
filed after a delay of one to 144 days against pres cribed timeline of 5 th  of 
the succeeding month. 
• Software for monitoring ‘Form F’ has not been devel oped due to which 
analysis of data as well as tracking discrepancies and defaulters were 
found to be almost absent (May 2014).  

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
70 
• Audit of Form F has not been introduced (May 2014) though a format for 
the same was prescribed (February 2013) by the Department.  
• Tracking of pregnant women from undergoing ultrasou nd test for the first 
time confirming the pregnancy to child birth was ab sent though tracking 
of some pregnant women through health workers was i ntroduced, Special 
Secretary while admitting (April 2014) the fact sta ted that it would take 
some time to make the system foolproof.  
Director, Family Welfare-cum-SAA stated (April 2014 ) that Government had 
decided to conduct third party audit/ evaluation of  Form F filed online. He also 
agreed to take appropriate action in this regard. 
3.2.5 Enforcement mechanism including penalty and l egal action 
3.2.5.1 Decoy Customer Operation or Sting Operation 
The State Advisory Committee in its meeting held in  August 2012 decided to 
adopt decoy/sting operation at least one in each di strict using some pregnant 
women and providing them suitable incentives. The s ame was reiterated in the 
meeting of the State Advisory Committee (January 20 13) which decided to invite 
resource persons from another State to impart train ing in the State. Budget 
provision of ` 40,000 (at ` 10,000 per quarter) was made in the year 2012-13 fo r 
the purpose, in Project Implementation Plan (PIP) o f National Rural Health 
Mission (NRHM). 
However, only one such decoy customer operation was  conducted (September 
2012) in Angul district. In four test checked distr icts no such operation was 
conducted as of January 2014. 
The Special Secretary, H&FW Department, while empha sising the need for more 
decoy operations, stated (April 2014) that official s for the same has already been 
trained and Government has already approved purchase of spy camera etc.  
3.2.5.2 Follow up of action for detected violation  
Though State Inspecting Team along with the distric t teams during their 
inspection (September 2012 and August 2013) detecte d serious irregularities like 
unauthorised conducting of MTP, non-submission of F orm F etc. by two clinics 
and reported the same to the SAA, yet no case was f iled against these clinics 
(April 2014) despite repeated instructions of the SAA.  
The Director, Family Welfare-cum-SAA assured (April  2014) that appropriate 
action would be initiated against the doctors. He a lso stated that filing of cases 
against two ultrasound clinics by concerned DAAs was under process.  

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
71 
3.2.5.3 Not conducting enquiry in case of specific complaints of violations and 
sex determination 
Under Section 23 of the Act, sex determination as w ell as use of USG machine 
without registration with DAA is punishable. Furthe r, as per Section 17 (4c) of 
the Act, AA shall have to investigate complaint for  breach of provisions of the 
Act or Rules and take immediate action in this rega rd. Audit, however, noticed 
that no mechanism existed at the SAA and DAA level to enquire into public 
complaints regarding specific cases of sex selections and violators. 
It was further noticed that though SAA invites onli ne registration of complaints 
on misuse of PNDT Act, no record was maintained in support of its receipt and 
disposal. Some complaints from the public regarding  specific cases of sex 
selections and violators were made available from t he clinic files maintained at 
the DAA level. In absence of any complaint mechanis m followed by the SAA/ 
DAA, public complaints regarding sex selection and unauthorised use of portable 
USG machines by government doctors for private purp ose were not investigated. 
Some of the cases discussed are as under: 
• Public compliant (August 2012) to DAA regarding sex  selection by a 
doctor of Basudevpur CHC was not investigated (December 2013).  
• Two complaints were lodged (September and October 2 012) before the 
Collector-cum-Chairman, PNDT Committee Bhadrak agai nst a 
Government doctor of Dhamnagar Community Health Cen tre (CHC). No 
investigation was conducted by the CDMO.  
CDMO assured (November 2013) to get the matter inve stigated through 
an enquiry committee soon.   
Special Secretary opined (April 2014) that such com plaints should have been 
confirmed through surprise inspections. The fact re mained that such violations as 
alleged were not looked into by the DAA and SAA.  
3.2.5.4 Non-implementation of recommendations of th e State Supervisory 
Board 
Section 16 A of the PNDT Act provided for constitut ion of State Supervisory 
Board (SSB) at State level with the responsibility to, inter-alia, create public 
awareness against the practice of pre-conception se x selection and pre-natal 
determination of sex of foetus leading to female fo eticide in the State, review the 
activities of the State and District Appropriate Au thorities, monitor the 
implementation of provisions of the Act and the Rul es and make suitable 
recommendations required, if any, to the Central Supervisory Board (CSB).  
• SSB recommended (March 2010) issue of instructions to clinics to purchase 
ultrasound machines having memory chips and to stor e scan relating to 
obstetric care for at least two months, providing i ncentives to informers for 
providing information on violations and tracking of  mother and child 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
72 
through Accredited Social Health Activist/ Auxiliar y Nurse (Male)/ 
Anganwadi Workers. However, none of these recommend ations were 
implemented by the Director of Family Welfare, the Chairperson of the 
State Appropriate Authority. 
• SSB also decided (June 2011) that SAA may recommend  to Central 
Supervisory Board for permission to involve Police for enforcement of the 
Act and make State specific Rule thereof. However, no such 
recommendation was made by SAA (February 2014). 
The Director, Family Welfare-cum-SAA stated (April 2014) that the State 
Advisory Committee had already decided (March 2014)  to involve local police 
intelligence for detection of such violations.  
3.2.5.5 Ineffective State and District Advisory 
Committees  
Section 17(5) of the Act required each State Govern ment to constitute an 
Advisory Committee for each Appropriate Authority t o aid and advise the 
Appropriate Authority in the discharge of its funct ions, and to appoint one of the 
members of the Advisory Committee as its Chairman.  Section 17(8) and Rule 15 
prescribed that the period intervening between two meetings of SAC should not 
exceed sixty days.  
Audit noticed that State Advisory Committee met only six times 45  during 2010-13 
against prescribed 18 meetings. Similarly, in four sample districts, District 
Advisory Committees (DAC) met 29 times i.e.,  Bhadrak (seven), Cuttack (seven), 
Ganjam (five) and Nayagarh(10) against requirement of 72 meetings.  
The SAC, inter-alia, recommended (December 2011, August 2012, January 2013) 
setting up of PNDT Cell at each district from 2012- 13, to conduct at least one 
decoy operation in each district and impart trainin g for the same and online filing 
of Form F from March 2013. Further examination of r ecords at the State Cell 
revealed that PNDT Cell was established in only eig ht districts 46  including one 
test checked district Bhadrak and online filing of Form F was also introduced as 
of April 2014.  
The Director, Family Welfare-cum-SAA assured (April  2014) that the State and 
District Advisory Committee meetings would be held as mandated under the 
PNDT Act. The SAA also opined establishing such cel ls in remaining districts as 
essential as both CDMO and ADMOs had multiple roles to perform.  
                                                
 
45   8 February 2010, 29 July 2010, 24 May 2011, 23 De cember 2011, 2 August 2012 and  28 
January 2013 
46   Bhadrak, Dhenkanal, Jagatsinghpur, Kendrapara, Na yagarh, Puri, Sambalpur and 
Sundargarh   

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
73 
3.2.5.6 Non submission of quarterly sales list by d ealers and affidavit by the 
purchasers 
As per Rule 3 A (2) of the PC & PNDT (PoSS) Rule 19 96, the provider/seller of 
ultrasound machine/ equipment to any person/ body r egistered under the Act has 
to send to the concerned State Appropriate Authorit y, once in three months a list 
of those to whom such machine/equipment were sold/provided.  
Audit noticed that during 2010-13, the manufacturer s/suppliers/dealers who 
supplied USG machines in the State did not submit t he quarterly sales list to the 
SAA. When such list was called (January 2013) by the State PNDT Cell, only five 
out of 11 manufacturers furnished sales list to SAA , but did not furnish affidavits 
received from the purchasers. The SAA also did not insist for the same. Audit 
further noticed that the sales list furnished by th e suppliers did not contain the 
registration numbers in case of machines supplied t o four clinics/ persons/ 
organisations. In absence of detailed information o n the ownership of the 
ultrasound machines with the SAA, there was scope f or misutilisation of 
machines by unregistered clinics and their use for determination of sex could not 
be ruled out.  
The Director, Family Welfare-cum-SAA while acknowle dging the fact, assured 
(April 2014) to take care of this aspect in future.  
3.2.6 Conclusion 
Child sex ratio declined in 21 out of 30 districts of the State by one to 49 points 
with highest decline in Nayagarh followed by Dhenka nal and Angul during 
2001-11. Registration and renewal of ultrasound cli nics were not made timely 
giving scope to clinics to run under deemed registr ation without necessary 
scrutiny by the AAs. USGs were conducted by unautho rised persons and portable 
USG machines were used without permission. Inspection mechanism in place was 
largely inadequate as no actions against unauthoris ed centres was taken. AAs did 
not conduct enquiry against complaints of sex deter mination. Enforcement of 
compliance to the provisions of the PNDT Act in the  State needed to be 
strengthened.  
3.2.7 Recommendations  
Government may consider: 
• ensuring efficient and effective system of registra tion of all ultrasound/ 
genetic clinics so as to ensure compliance to the provisions of the Act; 
• ensuring regular and effective inspection of the ul trasound/ genetic clinics 
for curbing the violation of Act & Rule; and 
• ensuring proper enforcement mechanism and taking ap propriate action for 
violations of the provisions of Act. 
 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
74 
HIGHER EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
 
3.3  e-Governance projects in three Universities of  the State 
Department of Administrative Reforms & Public Griev ances under Government 
of India (GoI) invited (January 2003) plan from the  State Government to 
accelerate e-governance at all levels for improving  efficiency, transparency and 
accountability at Government and citizen interface.  Accordingly,  the State 
Government in Higher Education Department instructe d (November 2003) the 
Registrars of Universities to prepare plans with th e objective of bringing 
transparency and accountability through information  and communications 
technologies (ICT) in their  various activities. Plans were submitted by three 
Universities (Berhampur, Sambalpur and Utkal) who i mplemented 47  (2007-08) e-
Governance projects at a cost of ` 7.53 crore 48  through four service providers 
selected through open tender process. While Utkal U niversity (UU) met the entire 
expenses ( ` 1.80 crore) out of the savings under Self Financing  Courses, 
Berhampur University (BU) and Sambalpur University (SU) met the same ( ` 5.73 
crore) from Twelfth Finance Commission Grants relea sed 49  by the State 
Government.  
As per GoI guidelines, the strategy for e-Governanc e should, inter-alia, indicate 
the objective, impact, timeframe for implementation , organisational 
responsibilities and requirement of funds. It also required commitment to 
implementation of strategy, assessment of pre-requi sites for e-Governance, 
identification and fixing monitorable indicators fo r measuring the outcome of 
implementation of e-Governance as well as setting the vision and objectives, areas 
of action, priorities and challenges to e-Governanc e and transforming the same to 
real action. 
Scrutiny of records revealed the following:  
3.3.1 Utkal University 
University entered into an agreement (October 2004)  with a service provider for 
commissioning of project in eight areas (zones) 
50  at a cost of ` 1.80 crore 51 . As  
per agreement, the project was to be completed within six months from the date of 
acceptance (22 December 2004) of Detailed Project R eport (DPR). Besides, the 
firm was to provide support for a period of five ye ars for the entire project after 
                                                 
47   Utkal University: April 2007, Berhampur Universit y: March 2008 and Sambalpur 
University: January 2008 
48   Utkal University: ` 1.80 crore, Berhampur University: ` 2.33 crore, Sambalpur 
University : ` 3.40 crore 
49   BU: May-June 2007, SU: April 2006, May, June and December 2007 
50   Office Administration, Students File, Examination , Development Projects & Plan, 
Library, Directorate of Distance & Continuing Educa tion, College Development Council 
and Department Profile 
51   Hardware ( ` 0.99 crore), Software ( ` 0.57 crore), Networking ( ` 0.22 crore) and 
Training ( ` 0.02 crore) 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
75 
completion of its warranty period 52  of software, hardware and networking 
components on Government approved cost basis. Servi ce provider was to provide 
software prototype i.e.,  a replica of software, for customisation purpose w ithin 
one month of acceptance of the DPR and final custom isation requirement would 
have to be intimated by the University within two m onths of providing the 
prototype. Service provider was to provide and inst all required hardware, 
networking and software components and impart train ing to University personnel 
for successful running and management of the network.  
Audit, however, noticed that the project was made o nline for users on 21 March 
2006 and completion certificate was issued during A pril 2007 as well as payment 
of ` 1.80 crore was made to the service provider during  December 2004-
September 2009. But, it was seen that during March 2006 to August 2007 the 
system was not optimally utilised by the users due to non-handing over prototype 
of software by the firm, detection of several techn ical flaws etc. as discussed in 
succeeding paragraphs due to which the project was ultimately remained non-
functional since August 2007. Audit further noticed that: 
• Award of work to second lowest bidder and avoidable  expenditure of  
` 0.21 crore  
 As per Rules 97 and 18 (vi) of Orissa General Fina ncial Rules, purchase must 
be made in most economic manner in accordance with the definite 
requirements of public service. Contract should be placed only after tenders 
have been openly invited and in case where lowest t ender is not accepted, 
reasons thereof should be recorded. 
 Comptroller of Finance, UU floated (May 2004) tend er notice (TN) for 
development of e-Governance systems in eight different zones/ modules of the 
University on a turnkey basis without indicating th e specifications as well as 
outcomes required. Six out of 17 bidders were quali fied in the technical bid 
and their financial bids were opened on 2 August 20 04. The Programme 
Officer, Computer Centre, UU while preparing compar ative statement of the 
financial bids, took the bid amount of two componen ts to be ` 5.09 crore 
instead of ` 25.37 lakh mentioned in the financial bid in respec t of a bidder. 
Due to this, the rate quoted by the firm worked out  to ` 6.22 crore as against 
the actual  quoted rate of ` 1.38 crore. Thus, though as per quoted rates, the 
bidder was L1, their quote became highest and the bid was awarded to another 
party whose quoted rate was ` 1.59 crore. Though the firm brought the 
mistake to the notice, UU did not initiate any acti on on the same. Thus, 
incorrect preparation of a basic document such as c omparative statement not 
only led to award of work to the second lowest bidd er but also resulted in 
avoidable expenditure of ` 0.21 crore. 
 The Additional Secretary assured (May 2014) to loo k into the matter. 
                                                 
52   Net-working: 1 year (2 March 2005 – 2 March 2006) ; Hardware: 3 years (2 March 2005 
– 2 March 2008); Software: 2 years (3 April 2007 – 3 April 2009)  

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
76 
• Specification of requirement not provided in tender notice  
Tender notice (15 May 2004) of UU did not contain d etails of technical 
specification/ requirements and volume of work to b e done. Instead, the firms 
were asked to contact personnel of different zones to ascertain the nature of 
the works to be covered under e-Governance in respe ctive zones and quote 
their rate for installation of the System and accessories required for each zone.  
Further, instead of assessing technical specificati on by the technical expert 
from National Informatics Centre (NIC) or Odisha Co mputer Application 
Centre (OCAC) etc, bidders were allowed to submit the tenders on the basis of 
their understanding with zonal heads (Director, Registrar, Professor etc.), who 
were not technical experts. Professor in charge, Co mputer Centre stated (May 
2012) that the firm was supposed to present a blue print/ prototype to the 
customer after a preliminary investigation. 
• Non-handing over prototype for customisation: As per clause 11(t) of the 
agreement, a prototype of the application software was to be provided by the 
service provider within one month of acceptance of DPR. However, no such 
prototype was handed over to the University for cus tomisation. Thereby, the 
involvement of users remained absent during the course of the development of 
software, which ultimately became non-functional.  
• Issue of completion certificate without testing the  software by technically 
competent officers : Vice-Chancellor instructed (January 2007) the Reg istrar 
that all functionality of software should be thorou ghly checked before issuing 
completion certificate. Registrar, however, issued (April 2007) completion 
certificate to the service provider, relying on the certificates issued (January to 
March 2007) by the concerned zonal heads in a pre-p rinted format indicating 
satisfactory installation of hardware and running o f software. When the 
System Manager later detected (June 2007) several technical flaws and logical 
errors, the firm was instructed to demonstrate the software details to the 
Technical Committee 53  constituted (August 2008) for the purpose. But the  
firm declined (December 2008) to do this in the fou rth year of the project as it 
was not a part of the agreement. On being asked in Audit to produce testing 
report on the basis of which completion certificate s were issued, zonal heads 
could not produce the same. Thus, satisfactory perf ormance certificates were 
issued by zonal heads without proper testing and later the system was found to 
be defective.  
• Non activation of the system: Without the system being tested by either the 
System Manager or Professor of the Computer Centre,  completion certificate 
was issued (April 2007) by the Registrar. As a resu lt, when the system was 
found to be non-functional/ defective (June 2007) a nd the University after 
withholding further release of payment asked the ve ndor to demonstrate the 
software details etc, the firm served (April 2008) a legal notice insisting on 
full payment and the same was released (September 2 009). Before releasing 
                                                 
53   Representatives from Odisha Computer Application Centre, Indian Institute of 
Information Technology, Bhubaneswar and National Informatics Centre. 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
77 
the final payment, a committee, comprising other me mbers along with 
representatives of the firm and chaired by the Vice -Chancellor (VC), resolved 
(September 2009) that University would bear the cos t of hardware 
replacement and the firm would activate the system during Annual 
Maintenance Contract (AMC). However, neither was th e hardware replaced 
by the University nor was the AMC executed with the  firm to activate the 
system (December 2013). Audit also noticed (Decembe r 2013) that both 
database and application servers remained unused and idle since August 2007. 
Thus, the University failed to avail the facility o f operationalising the system 
during warranty period (hardware: March 2008 and software: April 2009)  
• Non-functional equipment:  Joint inspection of 50 of 215 desktops with UPS 
and Printer conducted by Audit along with System Ma nager of the University 
revealed that 42 of them were lying defunct and eig ht computers were being 
used for other than intended purpose like word proc essing etc. With 
advancement of technology, these desktops became ou tdated after nine years 
of their supply. Software was not checked as both t he Application and 
Database server remained non-functional in turn-off condition.   
Registrar admitted (May 2014) that there was no own ership and there was 
communication gap;  existing staff did not run the programme, computer literate 
staff were not available and three-four  days train ing was not sufficient for 
existing staff. He also stated that non maintenance  of the project further 
aggravated the matter and the project remained non-functional (May 2014).  
3.3.2 Berhampur University 
Berhampur University (BU) entered (January 2008) in to a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) and agreement with a service pr ovider to provide Office 
Automation package comprising 29 modules, e-Library , e-Classroom, hardware, 
networking etc. at a cost of ` 2.33 crore. Service provider was to provide and 
install required hardware, networking and software components and impart 
adequate training to University personnel for succe ssful running and management 
of the network. Entire payment was released in Marc h and July 2008. Audit 
noticed the following: 
• Excess payment towards cost of software : As per MoU, scope of project 
included supply of software for complete office automation with 29 modules 
54  
                                                 
54   (1) Admission management, (2) Student management; (3 ) Examination management 
system; (4) Financial accounting; (5) General admin istration; (6) Human resources and 
pay roll; (7) Academics management; (8) PG Council office management; (9) Inventory 
management; (10) Asset and estate management; (11) Diary and Issue; (12) Digital 
library system; (13) E-class room and course manage ment; (14) Messaging system and 
network; (15) University web portal; (16) Hostel ma nagement; (17) College development 
council automation; (18) Distance education cell au tomation; (19) Health centre 
management; (20) Transport fleet management; (21) H ousing management, (22) Canteen 
management; (23) Management with recognised unions/  bodies; (24)  Interfacings with 
banks; (25) Interfacing with the Government departm ents/ agencies; (26) Student union 
election management, (27) Guest house management an d (28) Right to information 
management cell and (29) Certificate printing 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
78 
at a cost of ` 42.29 lakh. It was seen that though software for o nly five 
modules 55  were delivered by the firm, ` 64 lakh 56  was paid (March 2008) by 
the University to the firm against ` 7.29 lakh due on pro-rata basis as per 
clause 10.2 of the agreement. This resulted in exce ss payment of ` 56.71 lakh 
towards cost of office automation software. Though University decided 
(December 2008) to implement only five modules in f irst phase, but the 
reason for release of payment towards cost of all 2 9 modules in March 2008 
was not furnished to audit.  
• Low turnout for training:  As the turnout of employees for training was poor, 
VC formed (2 December 2008) a core implementation g roup to devise the 
plan for effective implementation of the project. D espite this firm repeatedly 
complained (October 2009) about lack of interest sh own by the University 
personnel in the e-Governance projects for on-site training. 
• Non finalisation of customisation:  Though the University constituted 
(November 2009) five committees to prepare requirem ents of first five 
modules in consultation with user, this was not fin alised (February 2010 due 
to non-identification/ availability of the end users to spell out requirement and 
customisation needs.  
• Shortage of technical manpower:  Professors and Coordinators of  
e-Governance project, recommended (March 2010) enga gement of 20 
Technical Assistants to assist in implementation of  e-Governance areas for 
different sections in view of non-availability of t echnical staff in the 
University, but the issue was not addressed (Decemb er 2013). As a result, the 
infrastructure remained unutilised. 
• Non-functional equipment:  Joint inspection of the hardware including 
servers revealed (December 2013) that all four serv ers including the database 
and application servers and desktops remained idle except few desktops, 
which were used for other purposes.  
Comptroller of Finance, BU while admitting the fact  stated (May 2014) that the 
project would be fully functional only after it is customised and the employees get 
acquainted with the project. The Additional Secreta ry of HE Department, did not 
agree (May 2014) with such reply as about six years  have passed after the project 
was implemented.  
3.3.3 Sambalpur University 
In first phase, the University executed (March 2007 ) an agreement with a service 
provider for implementation of e-Governance project in the University at a cost of 
                                                
 
55   Accounts, certificate printing, document manageme nt, admission and library 
56   ` 42 lakh for office automation and extra ` 8 lakh for e-library and ` 14 lakh for e-class 
room despite these being part of office automation  modules 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
79 
` 2.29 crore 57  with stipulation for completion within six months.  The service 
provider was to provide hardware, software, network ing including adequate 
training to staff of the University for successful running of eight areas 58  integrated 
under University Management System (UMS). The hardw are and software were 
installed (January 2008) with warranty period of th ree years from the date of 
installation. In the second phase, the University a warded (March 2009) the work 
to another party for maintenance and extension of e -Governance project at ` 1.11 
crore (only networking: ` 0.36 crore and supply of hardware: ` 0.75 crore). 
Payments of  `  3.40 crore were made (October 2007–February 2012) to both 
service providers after execution of work.  
Audit, noticed the following:  
• Part implementation:  Only two areas/modules (Pay Rolls and Human 
Resources) functioned in the University against eig ht areas developed by the 
service provider. On this being pointed out (Octobe r 2013) in Audit, 
University in a meeting (November 2013) headed by Vice-Chancellor decided 
to implement the remaining six areas  after imparti ng areas-wise training to 
admission-in-charge and dealing assistants of diffe rent departments. Action 
for implementation of another four modules 
59  was, though, initiated (May 
2014) but remained incomplete.  
• Non assessment of need based requirement:  Joint inspection revealed 
(December 2013, May 2014) that two servers, 140 des ktops, 198 UPSs, 500 
smart cards and 200 smart card readers and nine sca nners procured at ` 56.43 
lakh were found lying idle and outdated with passag e of time. This indicates 
that procurements were made without requirements. 
In the Exit Conference (9 May 2014), the Registrar stated that out of eight 
modules developed by the developer, the University has started using six modules 
and stated that shortage of trained and computer li terate staff delayed the 
implementation of the project. He further stated th at with recruitment of 26 new 
computer literate staff, use of e-governance modules have taken momentum. 
Though the Higher Education Department reviewed the  utilisation of the fund 
placed with the Universities, no effective monitori ng on the functioning of the  
e-Governance projects was made at the Department le vel leading to suboptimal 
use of the projects. 
                                                
 
57   Hardware ( ` 0.91 crore), Software ( ` 0.47 crore), Networking ( ` 0.72 crore) and AMC  
(` 0.19 crore) 
58   Academic, Human Resource Management (HRM), Librar y, Fixed Assets Management, 
Financial  Accounting System (FAS), Pay Roll, Hoste l and File Tracking System 
integrated in University Management System 
59   Academic (importing data base of applicants from web portal and integrating in  
e-Governance model done in 2013-14), Hostel (hostel  admission in one hostel Narmada 
out of five hostels done in 2013-14); Fixed Assets Management (data entry on purchase 
order and fixed assets data under progress); Financ ial Accounting System (sale of forms 
data entry started) 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
80 
In the Exit Conference held on 9 May 2014 with Addi tional Secretary, Higher 
Education Department, representatives of Universiti es stated that no University 
was ready to take up the project as it was thrust u pon them. But the fact remains 
that Universities themselves had submitted plan for  implementation of  
e-Governance in University. 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
81 
 
ST & SC DEVELOPMENT, MINORITIES & BACKWARD 
CLASSES WELFARE DEPARTMENT  
 
3.4 Income Generation of Scheduled Tribes in Schedu led Areas 
With the objective to narrow down the gap of socio- economic development 
between tribal and others, the Tribal Sub-Plan (TSP ) strategy was adopted since 
the beginning of the Fifth Five Year Plan (1974-75)  for developing activities in 
the scheduled areas. Government of India (GoI) issu ed guidelines (May 2003) of 
release of Special Central Assistance (SCA) to the TSP with the objective of 
filling up critical gaps in the family based income  generation activities and 
covering employment-cum-income generation activitie s and infrastructure 
incidental thereto for Self Help Groups (SHGs)/comm unity.  Besides, different 
Income Generation (IG) schemes 60  were implemented to boost demand based 
income generation programmes in order to raise econ omic and social status of 
Tribals.  
ST & SC Development, Minorities and Backward Classe s Welfare Department 
(ST&SC Development Department) at the State level a nd Project Administrators 
(PAs) of Integrated Tribal Development Agencies (ITDAs) and Special Officers 
of Micro Projects at field level, are responsible for implementation of IG activities 
in the State.  
Audit in order to assess whether different income g enerating schemes were 
implemented efficiently and effectively for socio-e conomic development of the 
tribal population, test checked records of the Depa rtment and seven 61  
implementing agencies and observations made thereon are as under: 
3.4.1 Low utilisation of fund  
During 2010-13, test checked implementing agencies could utilise only ` 139.06 
crore (79 per cent ) against the availability of ` 175.37 crore. Utilisation of funds 
in test checked implementing agencies varied between 39 per cent  and 95 per cent 
during the above period.  Despite availability of fund, 329 projects remained  
incomplete as of March 2013 even after incurring ex penditure of 
` 5.06 62  crore 
thereby adversely affecting the scope for income generation in the locality.  
                                                 
60   Special Central Assistance to Tribal Sub-Plan (SC A to TSP), Grants under Article 275 
(1) of the Constitution of India, Conservation-cum- Development (CCD) Plan, 
Swarnajayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY), Mahatma  Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), Rastriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY), 
programmes under National Horticulture Mission (NHM) etc. 
61    (1) ITDA, Gunupur, (2) ITDA, Kaptipada, (3) ITDA , Karanjia, (4) ITDA, Rairangpur, (5) 
Hill Kharia and Mankadia Development Agency, Jaship ur, (6) Dangaria Kandha 
Development Agency, Chatikona and (7) Horticulturist, Baripada   
62   2009-10 (5 works; ` 38.71 lakh), 2010-11 (10 works; ` 34.26 lakh), 2011-12 (124 works;  
` 2.73 crore), 2012-13 (190 works; ` 1.60 crore) 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
82 
Further it was also observed that utilisation certi ficates for ` 56.27 crore against 
the amount issued to test checked implementing agen cies during 2010-13 were 
not furnished to Government. Audit also observed th at DDOs did not maintain 
details of submission of UCs as per sanction orders  due to which age-wise 
analysis of pending UCs could not be ascertained. 
The Department while admitting the fact stated (April 2014) that entire fund could 
not be utilised due to scarce availability of contr actors and threat of Left Wing 
Extremists (LWEs). However, it should have suitably planned execution of works 
keeping in view the ground situation. For utilisati on certificates, the Department 
stated that since most of the TSP areas are located  in LWE affected pockets, the 
progress of majority works in these area is slow an d takes more than that 
prescribed, due to which UCs for full amount were not submitted. 
3.4.2 Misutilisation of IGS funds 
Special Central Assistance (SCA) funds were primari ly meant for family oriented 
IGS and not more than 30 per cent  of it is permitted for development of 
infrastructure incidental to such IG schemes. Furth er, fund provided under Article 
275 (1) of the Constitution of India were to be uti lized for creation and 
upgradation of critical infrastructure to enhance t he capacity of economy in tribal 
areas like health, education and income generation etc. State Government had 
clarified (December 2006) that expenditure incurred  in contravention of these 
guidelines was to be treated as mis-utilisation of funds even if the same were 
approved by Project Level Committees (PLCs). Audit,  however, noticed that 
funds provided for income generating activities und er SCA to TSP and assistance 
under Article 275(1) was utilised for other purposes as discussed under: 
Out of ` 112.11 crore utilised by Project Administrators (PA s) of ITDA, 
Kaptipada, Rairangpur and Gunupur during 2010-13, ` 109.84 lakh (SCA:  
` 75.40 lakh and Article 275(1):  ` 34.44 lakh) were utilised on various activities 
like construction and repair of staff quarters ( ` 57.55 lakh), electrification and 
water supply works ( ` 14.22 lakh), construction/ renovation of office bui ldings, 
boundary walls etc. ( ` 38.07 lakh) which were not core activities for econ omic 
development of tribals and hence are in contravention of guidelines.  
Department stated (April 2014) that sufficient fund s are available under the unit 
“Administrative cost” of Article 275(1) of the Cons titution of India out of which 
construction, repair, renovation etc. have been spe nt within the permissible 
limitation. But, the activities for which fund was utilised were other than those 
specified in the guidelines. 
3.4.3 Non utilisation of fund  
Guidelines on SCA to TSP provided that all income g eneration schemes (May 
2003) were to be market linked and only those activ ities producing goods and 
services were to be encouraged for which a ready/ developing market existed. 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
83 
During 2011-12, Department accorded sanction for co nstruction of eight rural 
haats  (market platforms) under ITDA, Kaptipada at an est imated cost of ` 1.01 
crore under ‘Creation of Capital Assets’ with stipu lation to utilise the fund by 
March 2012. But, ITDA did not take immediate action for its utilisation and it was 
kept in Personal Ledger (PL) Account as of June 201 3.  In the absence of market 
platform, the local ST community lost the opportuni ty to sell their produce at 
established market centers at assured prices.  
Department stated (April 2014) that construction of  two haats  was completed and 
three were under construction. However, the fact re mained that the work was not 
taken up in time bound manner.  
3.4.4 Irregular utilisation of fund  
As per SCA to TSP guidelines, credit facilities wer e to be provided to eligible 
Self Help Groups (SHGs)/ beneficiaries through inst itutional mechanism like 
public sector banks and other financial institution s to undertake feasible and 
sustainable income generating activities. Guideline s further prescribed that, 
subsidy 
63  provided was required to be adjusted/ utilised aga inst repayment of last 
installments of loan. All loans were to be treated as medium term loans with a 
minimum repayment period of five years and no subsi dy was allowed for 
repayment of loan before the lock-in period of three years. 
Test check of records revealed that all selected IT DAs and Micro Projects 
released subsidies of ` 5.44 crore to the banks for providing loans to 511  SHGs 
during 2010-13. Audit examined records of 87 SHGs a nd noticed that bank loan 
of ` 2.34 crore including Government subsidy of ` 0.89 crore was sanctioned in 
favour of these SHGs for taking up different IG act ivities. Out of sanctioned 
amount, the banks credited ` two crore to accounts of SHGs of which ` 1.66 crore 
was utilised for other than approved activities. So me of such instances are 
discussed below: 
• Against the total sanctioned amount of ` 68.40 lakh including subsidy 
amount of ` 25.85 lakh, the banks credited ` 29.13 lakh to the accounts of 
24 SHGs for taking up different IG activities. The banks did not credit the 
balance loan amount to the accounts of the SHGs (Ju ne 2013).  Reasons 
for non-release of loan amount were not on record. Responsibilities of 
ITDA and Block Authorities ended with sanction of s ubsidy amount, and 
they did not oversee the release of the entire sanc tioned amount to the 
SHGs. 
• Eleven SHGs withdrew ` 15.12 lakh out of sanctioned bank loan of  
` 32.25 lakh which included subsidy amount of ` 11.90 lakh and 
                                                 
63   50 per cent  of the unit cost subject to the ceiling of ` 10,000 to individual ST family and 
50 per cent  of the cost of scheme subject to the ceiling of ` 1.25 lakh for the whole group 
whichever is less. 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
84 
The field showing non-survival of mango grafts 
under NHM  
distributed them among members without pursuing activities. Of the above 
amount, seven SHGs invested ` 8.60 lakh in fixed deposit with banks for 
periods, ranging between one to three years. 
While admitting the above fact, the Department stated (April 2014) that all 
project authorities of ITDAs and Micro Projects wou ld be asked to ensure 
adequate monitoring and supervision for proper util isation of funds by 
SHGs for purposes for which the subsidy was sanctioned. 
3.4.5 Unfruitful/ idle expenditure on IG programmes/ activities 
Audit noticed various instances of infructuous expe nditure of ` 42.10 lakh on IG 
activities  which were due to non-use of market complex ( ` 4.50 lakh), non-use of 
refrigerated van (` 24 lakh), non-availability of water in pisciculture  tank ( ` 3.50 
lakh) and failure of mango plantation ( ` 6.28 lakh), non-use of rice hullers  
(` 2.07 lakh), non-functioning of irrigation canal ( ` 1.75 lakh). Some of such 
instances are discussed below: 
• In order to develop marketing linkages and to avoid  distress sale of fruits, 
vegetables and flowers etc by BPL ST farmers, PA, I TDA, Karanjia 
procured (January 2013) a refrigerated van with AC unit carrier (Six MT) 
at a cost of ` 24 lakh under SCA to TSP in convergence with Natio nal 
Horticulture Mission (NHM) scheme which was handed over to a Co-
operative Society under Jashipur Block which was lying idle. 
PA, ITDA, Karanjia stated (May 2014) that the van w ould be used 
regularly from 2014-15 onwards after harvesting of fruits/ vegetables 
under different plantations undertaken in the locality.  
• Test check of records of the 
Horticulturist, Baripada 
revealed that 5520 mango grafts 
were provided (2009-13) to 50 
ST farmers for plantation in 
their own land for which ` 6.28 
lakh was utilised. Out of the 
grafts provided, 3985 (72 per 
cent ) plants died within the 
maintenance period due to lack 
of water. 
The concerned Government representatives admitted the cases. 
3.4.6 Skill up-gradation of unemployed tribal youth  
Government instructed (July 2011) ITDAs to select u nemployed ST youth 
candidates from their respective jurisdictions and sponsor their names to the 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
85 
nearest Industrial Training Centre (ITC)/ Industria l Training Institute (ITI) for 
skill up-gradation training in different trades.  
Scrutiny of records of four selected ITDAs 
64  revealed that the ITDAs incurred an 
expenditure of ` 3.76 crore during 2010-13 for imparting training t o 3146 
unemployed tribal youths in multi-disciplinary acti vities like mobile repairing, 
data entry, house wiring, driving-cum-mechanic, tai loring etc. at recognised 
training institutes. But, ITDAs neither maintained any database of the trainees nor 
took any steps for periodical review to ascertain w hether the trained youths took 
up any income generating activities. However, Audit noticed that out of 194 tribal 
youths trained during 2010-13 by the ITDA, Kaptipad a on various activities, only 
37 youths trained under plastic processing got employment.  
The Department stated (April 2014) that as per repo rts of the ITDAs, database 
was maintained and 257 youths had been employed in different trades. But ITDAs 
could not furnish any such data during the course o f Audit and failed to analyse 
the impact of the training for taking further corrective action in imparting training. 
3.4.7 Excess/ inadmissible payment of subsidy 
Audit noticed cases of excess/ inadmissible payment  of subsidies/ loans of ` 4.75  
lakh  by PA, ITDA, Gunupur ( ` 0.65 lakh), three SHGs under DKDA, Chatikona 
(` 1.20 lakh) and one SHG which withdrew  `  2.90 lakh from the bank and 
distributed the amount among 16 members of which si x did not belong to ST 
category.  
The Department stated (April 2014) that the non-ST members had not been 
assisted. But assistance was distributed among all the members including non-ST 
members. 
3.4.8 Impact evaluation on income generation of ST people  
As per the guidelines (August 2001) issued by ST & SC Development 
Department, ITDAs were required to monitor post-dis bursement of funds to the 
beneficiaries under IG schemes. Similarly, the Plan ning & Coordination 
Department issued (September 2006) resolution where in the State Level 
Monitoring Committee may order conducting of evalua tion studies on IG 
activities in order to provide appropriate feedback  to improve the programme 
design and implementation strategies. 
Audit noticed that ITDAs did not conduct such post- disbursement monitoring and 
evaluation of IG schemes. The Department stated (Ap ril 2014) that PAs, ITDAs 
had been instructed to do adequate and timely monit oring and also do annual 
evaluation of the schemes to assess impact of the p rojects through an independent 
agency. 
                                                
 
64   Gunupur, Kaptipada, Karanjia, Rairangpur 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
86 
There was no system in vogue or performance indicat ors set to measure the 
income generated by the STs after intervention of v arious IG activities. However, 
the Department made an evaluation study through an Agency which submitted a 
report in January 2014 that showed there was no significant difference in the level 
of income of BPL families engaged in IG activities and identified various gaps in 
implementation of IG activities.  
3.4.9 Conclusion 
Despite expenditure of `
 139.06 crore on IG activities, cases of unfruitful and idle 
expenditure of ` 13.06  crore were noticed and fund to the tune of ` 36.31 crore 
left  unutilised. Besides, various short comings in imple mentation such as lack of 
monitoring leading to non-utilisation of bank loan and subsidy for the approved 
activities, irregular identification of beneficiaries and ineffective capacity building 
activities to ensure employment to tribal youths et c. were noticed. Hence, the  
objective to uplift the socio-economic condition of tribals through implementation 
of different programmes/ schemes remained largely unfulfilled. 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
87 
 
FINANCE DEPARTMENT  
 
3.5 Lack of response to Audit 
Timely response to audit findings is one of the ess entials of good governance as it 
provides assurance that the Government takes its stewardship role seriously. 
Section 13 of the Comptroller and Auditor General’s  (Duties, Powers and 
Conditions of Service) Act 1971 mandates the Comptr oller and Auditor General 
(C&AG) to audit all expenditure incurred by the Sta te Government. Section 18 of 
the said Act mandates the C&AG to inspect various o ffices of the State 
Government responsible for keeping of initial or su bsidiary accounts. Regulations 
on Audit and Accounts 2007, issued by the C&AG unde r Section 23 of the Act, 
serve to operationalise the provisions of the Act i n so far as the scope, extent and 
procedure of audit is concerned. Audit conduct peri odical inspection of 
Government departments and their field offices acco rding to the procedure laid 
down in the Regulations on Audit and Accounts 2007 (Chapter 13 and 14) to test 
check a few transactions on sample basis. During th ese inspections, the quality 
and timeliness of maintenance of important accounti ng and other records as per 
prescribed rules and procedures is verified and opi nion not only on the 
truthfulness and fairness of the accounts so mainta ined but also on the economy, 
efficiency and effectiveness aspects of the transac tions connected with such 
accounts is expressed. Such comments and opinion ar e incorporated in Inspection 
Reports (IRs) which are sent to the Heads of Offices and next higher authorities. 
Regulations on Audit and Accounts 2007 require each  audited entity to maintain 
proper record relating to receipt of IRs and progre ss of their settlement and also 
initiate action for settlement of audit observation s with reference to audit memos 
issued during audit without waiting for formal rece ipt of IRs from the Audit 
Office. Regulation 197 requires that the officer-in -charge of the audited entity  
send the reply to IR paragraphs to the respective A udit Office within four weeks 
of its receipt. Even if it is not feasible to furni sh the final replies to some of the 
observations in the audit note or IR within the afo resaid time limit, the first reply 
should not be delayed on that account and an interi m reply may be given 
indicating the likely date by which the final reply  would be furnished. Thus, all 
defects and acts of omissions and commission are ex pected to be attended to 
promptly and compliance reported to the Accountant General (G&SSA) after 
taking due executive/ administrative action to set right/ remedy such defects/ acts.  
A review of IRs issued upto March 2013 pertaining t o 24 departments showed 
that 45660 paragraphs relating to 10790 IRs were ou tstanding at the end of June 
2013. Year wise position of outstanding IRs and par agraphs are detailed in 
Appendix 3.5.1. Of these, 3275 IRs containing 10484 paragraphs were  

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
88 
outstanding for more than 10 years (Appendix 3.5.2) . Of the above outstanding 
IRs, even the first reply from the Heads of offices  was not received in respect of 
1930 IRs. The departments from whom major replies w ere awaited were Women 
& Child Development, Housing & Urban Development, Health & Family Welfare 
and Panchayati Raj. 
Serious irregularities commented in these IRs like non compliances with rules and 
regulations, improper expenditure and expenditure w ithout justification, 
persistent/ pervasive irregularities and failure of  oversight/ governance have not 
been settled as of June 2013. Details are in Appendix 3.5.3. 
3.5.1 Follow up action on earlier Audit Reports 
Serious irregularities noticed in audit are include d in the Audit Reports of the 
C&AG that are presented to the State Legislature. A ccording to the instructions 
(December 1993) of the Finance Department (FD), the  Administrative 
Departments (ADs) are required to furnish the expla natory notes on the 
transaction paragraphs, Performance Audits (PA) etc . included in the Audit 
Reports within three months of their presentation t o the State Legislature. 
Regulations on Audit and Accounts 2007 (Regulation 212) issued by the C&AG 
outlines the manner in which the Departments should  furnish replies to the Public 
Accounts Committee (PAC). The explanatory notes to paragraphs/ Performance 
Audits featured in the C&AG’s Audit Reports should carry the approval of the 
Secretaries and state:  
• whether a written reply on the draft audit paragrap h was sent to the 
Accountant General and if not, the reasons for not doing so;  
• whether the facts and figures stated in the audit p aragraph are acceptable 
and if not, the reasons for not pointing this out w hen the draft paragraph 
was received by the Secretary; 
• the current status of recovery of any amount due to Government as pointed 
out in the audit paragraph;  
• the action taken or proposed to be taken on the sug gestions and 
recommendations made in the audit paragraph;  
• the result of review of similar other cases, and the action taken; and  
• remedial action taken or proposed to be taken to av oid occurrence of 
similar cases in future, to streamline the systems and to remove system 
deficiencies, if any. 
In seventh Apex Committee meeting (11 April 2012) a  work plan for submission 
of outstanding compliance notes to the recommendati ons of PAC and paragraphs 
featured in the C&AG’s Audit Reports was prescribed . The PAC-2012-13 in its 
24 
th  meeting (20 November 2012) expressed serious conce rn over inadequate 
response from some departments. The Chief Secretary  instructed (January 2013) 
all the departments to ensure submission of outstan ding compliance notes to the 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
89 
C&AG’s Reports as well as Action Taken Notes (ATNs)  on recommendations of 
PAC by March 2013. He further directed that: 
• Departments should avoid furnishing compliance to t he PAC on the date 
of PAC meeting or a day before the meeting as such last minute 
compliances do not give sufficient time for the AG to brief the PAC; 
• Secretaries of departments have to pay adequate att ention to the 
compliances furnished by the departments instead of  routinely forwarding 
the replies of subordinate officers to PAC/ AG; and 
• Secretaries should take proactive action in address ing issues raised by the 
AG at the draft para stage so that submission of co mpliance can be made 
much before the prescribed time limit. 
The above measures have been reiterated by the Apex  Committee in the eighth 
meeting (09 April 2013). The Committee decided that  the FD would monitor the 
position on submission of compliances by the depart ments to AG, Odisha and 
Odisha Legislative Assembly (OLA) Secretariat. 
However, it was noticed that 13 out of 24 departmen ts did not submit explanatory 
notes as of September 2013 to 34 paragraphs (21 ind ividual and 13 PAs/Review 
paragraphs) featured in the C&AG’s Audit Reports in  respect of Audit Reports 
from the year 2000-01 to 2011-12 (Appendix 3.5.4) . The 21 individual transaction 
audit paragraphs to which compliance was not furnis hed by 13 departments can 
be categorised under (i) Non compliance with rules and regulations (10), (ii) 
Audit against propriety/ expenditure (7), (iii) Per sistent/ Pervasive irregularities 
(1) and (iv) failure of oversight and governance (3 ). The departments largely 
responsible for non-submission of explanatory notes  were Housing & Urban 
Development, Revenue & Disaster Management, Plannin g & Coordination and 
Higher Education Departments.  
The above pendency position was intimated (November  2013) demi-officially to 
the Addl. Chief Secretary, Finance Department by th e AG (G&SSA) Odisha. In 
November 2013, the Finance Department instructed al l the Departmental 
Secretaries to submit compliance on the outstanding paragraphs of C&AG’s Audit 
Report without further delay and report compliance to Finance Department every 
month. The Department Secretaries were requested to  look into the matter 
personally and to submit the compliances at the ear liest preferably before the next 
Apex Committee Meeting. Despite this, the above pen ding position persisted till 
December 2013. 
3.5.2 Response of the departments to the recommenda tions of the Public 
Accounts Committee 
The OLA constitutes a Committee on Public Accounts (PAC) every year to 
examine the Reports of C&AG and the Reports of such examination are presented 
to the Assembly. The Reports/ recommendations of PA C are the principal 
medium by which the Legislature enforces financial accountability of the 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
90 
executive to the legislature and it is appropriate that they elicit timely response 
from the departments in the form of ATNs. According  to the instructions 
(December 1993) of the Finance Department (FD), the  ATNs on the 
recommendations of the PAC/ COPU are required to be  submitted within six 
months after presentation of the reports by PAC/ CO PU to the Legislature. The 
time limit for submission of ATNs had since been re duced to four months by 
OLA (April 2005) 65 . As per the work plan of the seventh meeting of Ap ex 
Committee (April 2012), all the departments should ensure disposal of 
outstanding ATNs on Recommendations of PAC and C&AG ’s paragraphs 
between July 2012 and September 2012. The Chief Sec retary, Odisha instructed 
all the departments (January 2013) to submit the ATNs on PAC recommendations 
by 31 March 2013 without fail.  
It was noticed that out of 626 recommendations (Appendix 3.5.5)  made by the 
PAC from the first Report of Tenth assembly (1990-9 5) to fifth Report of 
Fourteenth Assembly (2009-14) final action on 51 66  recommendations from seven 
departments were awaited (September 2013). The departments largely responsible 
for non-submission of ATNs were Rural Development, Health & Family Welfare, 
Law and Panchayati Raj.  
3.5.3 Monitoring 
The following Committees were formed at Government level to monitor the 
follow up action on C&AG’s Audit Reports and PAC Reports. 
3.5.3.1 Departmental Monitoring Committee  
Departmental Monitoring Committees (DMCs) have been  formed (between May 
2000 and February 2002) in all departments of the G overnment headed by the 
Departmental Secretaries with Financial Advisor (FA ) as convener to monitor the 
follow up action on submission of compliances/ repl ies to AG’s Inspection 
Reports, Draft Audit Notes/ Draft Paragraphs, C&AG’ s Audit Reports and 
recommendations made in PAC Reports. The Apex Commi ttee decided (April 
2012) in its seventh meeting that the DMC meetings should be convened each 
month on a fixed date and the proceedings should be sent to AG, Odisha.  
It was observed that, eight 
67  out of 25 departments including OLA did not send 
any proceeding for the year 2012-13 as of September  2013. There was also 
shortfall in submitting the proceedings which range d between five and 11 in 
respect of remaining departments.  
                                                
 
65   Rule 213-B(1) of Rules of procedure and Conduct o f Business in the Odisha Legislative 
Assembly 
66  Higher Education (1), Health & Family Welfare (9),  Revenue & Disaster Management 
(1), Law (6), Housing & Urban Development (1), Rura l Development (29) and 
Panchayati Raj (4) 
67   Culture, Higher Education, IT, Parliamentary Affa irs, P&C, PG&PA, Science and 
Technology and S&YS 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
91 
3.5.3.2  Review Committee 
A Review Committee had been formed (December 1992) comprising Principal 
Secretary, Finance Department, erstwhile Accountant  General (Audit-I), 
Accountant General (Audit-II) and concerned Departm ental Secretaries to review 
the progress as well as the adequacy of action take n on C&AG’s Audit Reports 
and Report of PAC in order to facilitate the examin ation of such Reports by the 
State PAC. 
The Chief Secretary suggested in the PAC meeting held on 20.11.2012 to conduct 
more Triangular Committe (TC) meetings in order to remove large number of IR/ 
paragraphs on which compliance notes have already b een furnished. The Review 
Committee meeting chaired by the Additional Chief S ecretary, Finance 
Department was convened on 24 January 2013 in which  five Departments having 
heavy pendency of outstanding paragraphs agreed to have an advance annual 
calendar to hold TC meetings. It was decided in the meeting, inter-alia, that: 
(i)  the calendar would come into action from the month of February 2013;  
(ii)  the Department would choose the area for TC meeting  giving priority to 
adequacy of compliances available;  
(iii)  Departments of Government should monitor the conven ing of TC 
meetings as an agenda item in the DMC meeting every month;  
(iv)  any doubt arising on quality of reply/ settlement o f para may be solved 
with the help of Video/ Online Conference with AG, Odisha; and  
(v)  submission of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) to the outs tanding PAC 
Recommendations/ CAG paragraphs and replies to the Draft Notes/ Draft 
paragraphs should be discussed in the DMC meeting every month.  
Only 22 TC meetings were held by six departments du ring 2012-13 and the 
review of proceedings of Meetings revealed that onl y 805 paragraphs and 149 
Inspection Reports were settled as detailed in the Appendix 3.5.6. However, 18 
Departments did not conduct any T.C. meeting even t hough 3880 IRs containing 
15209 paragraphs were pending against them (Appendix 3.5.7) 
3.5.3.3 Apex Committee 
An Apex committee comprising eight members was form ed (December 2000) at 
the State level under the Chairmanship of the Chief  Secretary with the Secretary, 
Finance Department as permanent member and Secretar ies of five other 
departments (Water Resources, Home, Panchayati Raj,  Agriculture and Revenue) 
as members and Additional Secretary, Finance (Audit  & Accounts) as member 
convener. The committee was to (i) review functioni ng of the DMC, ensure 
timely submission of compliance to Accountants Gene ral, Odisha and to the 
Public Accounts Committee, (ii) review periodically  the action taken on C&AG’s  
 
 
 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2013 
92 
Reports by the departments and (iii) sort out bottl enecks for prompt action to be 
taken by all the departments of the Government on a udit observations. The 
Committee would sit half-yearly. 
While reviewing the work plan for disposal of pendency position relating to ATN, 
C&AG paragraphs, AGIRs and paragraphs in the eighth meeting (April 2013), the 
Committee expressed its displeasure over poor respo nse of the departments. 
Besides, the following decisions were taken in the said meeting:
 
• Departmental Monitoring Committee (DMC) meeting sho uld be convened 
every month on a specific date and the proceedings of the meetings should 
be sent to A.G, Odisha with a copy to Finance Department without fail; 
• First replies to the AGIRs should be attempted and sent to AG, Odisha 
within one month and should be monitored in DMC meetings; 
• A Calendar has been prepared for convening Triangul ar Committee (TC) 
Meetings for the year 2013 in respect of five 68  Departments. Besides, 
other Departments should also take up the matter wi th AG, Odisha for 
holding of TCM for settlement of outstanding AGIRs and paragraphs; 
• Departments should take care of submitting the comp liance notes on the 
outstanding Audit Paragraphs of C&AG Report and ATN s on PAC 
recommendations without further delay and report co mpliance to Finance 
Department every month; 
• The up-to-date pending position should be reconcile d with AG on regular 
basis. 
• Finance Department should monitor the position on s ubmission of 
compliance notes to AG, Odisha and OLA Secretariat by the Departments. 
Regulation on Audit and Accounts issued by C&AG of India (Regulation 197) 
provides that the auditable entity should send the reply to an audit note or IR 
within four weeks of its receipt. Even if it is not  feasible to furnish the final 
replies to some of the observations in the audit no te or IR within the aforesaid 
time limit, the first reply should not be delayed o n that account and an interim 
reply may be given indicating the likely date by wh ich the final reply shall be 
furnished.  
It was observed that explanatory notes in respect o f 34 paragraphs including 13 
reviews/ PAs of C&AG’s Audit Reports relating to 20 00-01 to 2011-12 and 51  
 
 
 
                                                
 
68   Panchayati Raj, Health & Family Welfare, School a nd Mass Education, Water Resources 
and Women and Child Development Departments. 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit  
93 
ATNs on PAC recommendations (Tenth to Fourteenth As sembly) were pending 
with the departments as indicated in Appendix 3.5.4 and Appendix 3.5.5 
(September 2013). 
Further, despite decision of Apex Committee to take  stringent action against non-
production of records, 101 records and 297 complian ces to preliminary 
observation memos were not furnished by 14 departme nts as on 31 December 
2013 for which the Chief Secretary was intimated (J anuary 2014) demi-officially. 
The position did not improve since 117 records and 488 compliances to 
preliminary observation memos were still to be furnished by 11 departments as on 
31 March 2014. 
Bhubaneswar   (Amar Patnaik) 
The  Accountant General (G&SSA) 
                                      Odisha 
 Countersigned 
New Delhi     (Shashi Kant Sharma) 
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 

  
  
  
  
AAppppeennddiicceess  
 

Appendices 
95 
Appendix 2.1.1  
(Reference Paragraph 2.1.2 at page 10) 
Details of major disasters during 2007-2013 
Year  Month Name of 
Calamity 
Number  Population 
affected by 
flood (in 
lakh) 
Loss of 
life 
(in No.)  
Estimated 
loss ( `` `` in 
crore) 
2007 June-July Flood/ 
Heavy 
rain 
1
 13.32  32  306.70  
2007 August/ 
September 
Floods 3  22.47  59  1093.53  
2008 July-
September 
Floods 2  60.18  110  2687.83  
2009 August and 
September 
Flood 1  6.61  59  2257.03  
2009 August and 
September 
Drought 1  - 0 
2010 August Flood/ 
Heavy 
rain 
1
 0.90  14  34.09  
2010 October Drought 1  - 0 1516.74  
2010 December Heavy 
rain 
1 - 0 1027.00  
2011 June-
September 
Flood/ 
Heavy 
rain 
2
 61.24  87  3265.38  
2012 Annual 
Report not 
prepared 
- -  - -  
2013 October Cyclone 
and flood 
2 132.25  44  4242.41  
Total 15  296.97  405  16430.71  
(Source: Annual Reports of Special Relief Commissioner, Odisha)  
 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
96 
Appendix 2.1.2 
(Refer paragraph 2.5.1 at page 27) 
 
Expenditure incurred from CRF/ SDRF on repair/ restoration works not of 
immediate nature 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of works Department Date / 
Year of 
Sanction  
No. of 
works 
Amount 
(`` ``     in 
lakh)  
1 Repair of Vyasakabi Fakirmohan 
Building 
Tourism and 
Culture 
Department 
5.2.2008 1 7.50 
2 Repair of quarters allotted to 
Home guards Organisation  
Home 
Department 
5.2.2008 1 32.22 
3 Repair of RTO office building at 
Cuttack 
Collector, 
Cuttack 
5.2.2008 1 20.00 
4 Renovation of Parsurampur 
Madadev Tank of Kalapathar GP 
under Banki Block 
Collector, 
Cuttack 
5.2.2008 1 10.00 
5 Renovation of Ramprusti tank 
under Soro NAC 
Collector, 
Balasore 
5.2.2008 1 10.00 
6 Renovation of Mahapokhari of 
Nandigoda village under Kanas 
Block in Puri District 
Collector, Puri 5.2.2008 1 10.00 
7 Repair of office buildings, staff 
quarters, etc.  
EO, Angul 
Municipality 
Angul 
2009-10 1 31.67 
8 Repair of office buildings, staff 
quarters, etc. 
EE, RWD-1, 
Bhadrak 
2008-09 04 7.55 
9 Repair of office buildings, staff 
quarters, etc. 
EE, RWD-1I, 
Bhadrak 
2008-09 10 43.77 
10 Repair of office buildings, staff 
quarters, etc. 
EE, RWD, 
Dhenkanal 
2007-08 16 36.50 
11 Repair of office buildings , staff 
quarters, etc. 
EE, Irrigation, 
Jagatsinghpur 
2010-11 10 7.45 
12 Repair of office buildings , staff 
quarters, etc. 
EE, Irrigation 
Division,Jajpur 
2009-10  46 77.45 
13 Repair of office buildings , staff 
quarters, etc. 
EE, RWD, 
Keonjhar 
2009-10 7 43.22 
Total  100 337.33 
(Source: Compiled by Audit from the records of SRC and test checked units) 

Appendices 
97 
Appendix 2.1.3 
(Refer paragraph 2.5.2 at page 27) 
Execution of works not related to damage by disaster 
(`` `` in lakh) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
unit 
Nature of projects No. of 
works 
Estimated 
cost 
Expenditure 
incurred 
1 EE, RWD, 
Angul 
Repair of LA Centres, 
office buildings etc. 
35 43.10 
 43.10  
2 BDO, 
Athamalik 
New CC roads  10 50.00  44.40  
3 EO, NAC, 
Athamalik 
NAC Building, CC roads 
and drains 
27 106.00  33.92  
4 EE, RWD-1, 
Bhadrak 
RI Office, Sevashram, 
High School Building, etc. 
26 33.00 
 33.00  
5 EE, RWD-1I, 
Bhadrak 
 Office buildings, School 
Buildings, Compound 
walls, etc 
28 51.00 
 51.00  
6 EE, RWD-1, 
Dhenkanal 
Dispensary building, RW 
Sub-Division office and 
Tahasil Office 
3 2.85 
 2.85  
7 EE, RWD, 
Jagatsinghpur  
Staff Quarters, Dispensary, 
School Buildings, etc. 
12 71.06 
 40.00  
8 EE, RWD, 
Sonepur 
Government Offices and 
Buildings 
6 15.20 
 15.20  
9 EO, Sonepur 
Municipality 
Renovation of Town hall  1 9.00  6.99  
Total 148 381.21  270.46    
(Source: Compiled by Audit from the records of test checked units) 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
98 
Appendix 2.1.4 
(Refer paragraph 2.6.1.1 at page 34) 
Statement of sanction for inadmissible expenditure on disaster preparedness met out 
of CRF/ SDRF 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Purpose Department Date of 
Sanction by 
SEC  
Amount 
(`` `` in 
lakh) 
1 Completion of rain protection 
wall of Jayadev Pitha 
Water Resources 
(WR) Department 
7.1.2012 24.93 
2 Restoration of Old and retard 
embankment of Rajnagar 
Gopalpur Saline embankment 
WR Department 7.1.2012 227.81 
3 Bank protection work in Devi 
Right at Kantisala 
WR Department 11.6.2009 256.41 
4 Construction  of retard 
embankment of Rajnagar 
Gopalpur Saline embankment 
near village Pentha 
WR Department 11.6.2009 184.49 
5 Flood proofing measure for River 
Baitarani 
WR Department 21.11.2008 122.00 
6 Protection of scoured bank on 
Devi Left Embankment 
WR Department 21.11.2008 362.75 
7 Flood protection embankment in 
the Baitarani Right 
WR Department 21.11.2008 70.00 
8 Construction of two numbers of 
spurs on Jharling-Belang saline 
embankment 
WR Department 7.3.2008 493.22 
9 Bank protection work in village 
Rasulpur 
WR Department 30.4.2007 201.60 
10 Protection of scoured bank on 
Devi Left Embankment 
WR Department 30.4.2007 332.84 
11 Construction of 3 high level spur 
in Devi Right embankment 
WR Department 30.4.2007 670.13 
Total 2946.18 
(Source: Special Relief Commissioner, Odisha) 

Appendices 
99 
Appendix 3.1.1 
(Refer Paragraph 3.1.2.2 at page 44) 
Statement showing data on student enrolment in affiliated colleges 
Sl. 
No. Name of the college 
Courses 
(sanctioned 
intake strength) 
Enrolment ( per cent ) 
2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
1 Pentagon Computer Academy, 
Bhubaneswar  
BCA (60)   16 (27) 11 (18) 11 (18) 
BBA (60) 25 (42) 5 (8) 10 (17) 
2 P.J.College of Management & 
Technology, Bhubaneswar 
BCA (60) 16 (27) 13 (22) 11 (18) 
3 Ganesh Institute of Engineering 
& Technology, Khordha 
BCA (60) 30 (50) Nil Nil 
4 
Regional College of 
Engineering & Management, 
Bhubaneswar      
BCA (60) Nil Nil Nil 
5 
Satyananda Institute .of 
Management & IT, 
Bhubaneswar 
BCA (60)  Nil 12 (20) Nil 
6 Inter Science Degree College, 
Kantabada, Janla, Khordha  
BCA (30) 7 (23) Nil Nil 
7 College of Advance 
Computing, Berhampur 
PGDCA (40) 10 (25) 3 (7) 6 (15) 
MFC (30) Nil 6 (20) 7 (23) 
8 Great India institute of 
Technology,Berhampur 
BBA (30) 8 (27) 9 (30) Nil 
BCA (30) 8 (27) 14 (47) Nil 
9 SVIITM, Berhampur BCA (40) 17 (43) 16 (40) Nil 
10 Gayatri Institute of Science & 
Technology, Berhampur 
BSc-BIOTECH (30) 14 (47) 14 (47) 11(37) 
BSc-Bioinformatics 
(30) 
Nil Nil Nil 
(Source: Compiled by Audit from University records and information from affiliated 
colleges) 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
100 
Appendix 3.1.2 
(Refer Paragraph 3.1.3.3 at page 47) 
Statement containing colleges collecting higher course fee than that fixed by the 
Higher Education Department  
(Amount in `` ``) 
Sl. 
No. Name of the college Course Course fee 
charged  
Course fee 
prescribed by 
Government  
Excess 
course fee 
charged  
1 Pentagon Computer 
Academy, Bhubaneswar 
BCA 65000 45000 20000 
BBA 65000 45000 20000 
2 
Biju Patnaik Institute of IT 
& Management,  
Bhubaneswar 
BCA 75000 45000 30000 
BBA 75000 45000 30000 
3 MITS School of Bio-
technology, Bhubaneswar BCA 60000 45000 15000 
4 
Capital Academy of 
Professional Studies, 
Bhubaneswar 
BCA 55500 45000 10500 
BBA 55500 45000 10500 
5 Affinity Business School, 
Jatni, Khordha 
BBA 135000 45000 90000 
BCA 135000 45000 90000 
6 
Arya School of 
Management and IT, 
Bhubaneswar 
BBA 75000 45000 30000 
BCA 75000 45000 30000 
7 
Ganesh Institute of 
Engineering and 
Technology, Bhubaneswar 
BCA 60110 45000 15110 
8 DAV School of Business, 
Bhubaneswar BBA 130000 45000 85000 
9 
Inter Science Degree 
College, Kantabada, 
Bhubaneswar 
BBA 75000 45000 30000 
BCA 75000 45000 30000 
10 College of Advanced 
Computing, Berhampur 
BCA 60000 45000 15000 
BBA 60000 45000 15000 
11 
Advance Institute of 
Management Studies, 
Berhampur 
BBA 65000 45000 20000 
BCA 65000 45000 20000 
12 
DISHA College of 
Management and 
Technology, Berhampur 
BCA 51000 45000 6000 
BBA 51000 45000 6000 
13 
Presidency College 
(College of Business 
Administration), 
Berhampur 
BCA 60000 45000 15000 
14 Charles Babbage College, 
Sambalpur BCA 60000 45000 15000 
(Source: Information furnished by colleges) 

Appendices 
101 
Appendix 3.2.1 
(Refer paragraph 3.2.2 at page 62) 
District wise Child Sex Ratio (Odisha) as per Census 2001 and Census 2011 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the District Child Sex Ratio 
2001 2011 (Increase/Decrease ) 
1 Nayagarh 904 855 -49 
2 Dhenkanal 925 877 -48 
3 Angul 937 889 -48 
4 Ganjam 939 908 -31 
5 Deogarh 956 927 -29 
6 Kalahandi 984 957 -27 
7 Cuttack  939 914 -25 
8 Sundergarh 970 946 -24 
9 Sambalpur 959 940 -19 
10 Rayagada 981 965 -16 
11 Subarnapur 967 952 -15 
12 Kendrapara 940 926 -14 
13 Bolangir 967 955 -12 
14 Jajpur 937 926 -11 
15 Khurda 926 916 -10 
16 Kandhamal 970 962 -08 
17 Jharsuguda 949 943 -06 
18 Koraput 983 979 -04 
19 Bhadrak 943 942 -01 
20 Balasore 944 943 -01 
21 Nabarangapur 999 998 -01 
22 Baragarh 957 957 00 
23 Puri 931 932 1 
24 Gajapati 964 967 3 
25 Jagatsinghpur 926 929 3 
26 Mayurbhanja 956 960 4 
27 Keonjhar 962 967 5 
28 Malkanagiri 982 992 10 
29 Nuapada 969 981 12 
30 Boudh 966 978 12 
(Source:  Information furnished by the SAA) 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
102 
Appendix 3.5.1 
(Refer paragraph 3.5 at page 87) 
Statement showing the year-wise break up of outstanding Inspection 
Reports/ Paragraphs issued up to March 2013 but not settled by June 2013  
Year Inspection Reports Paragraphs  
Total Total 
1980-81 4 7 
1981-82 3 11 
1982-83 4 7 
1983-84 6 18 
1984-85 6 25 
1985-86 10 28 
1986-87 24 74 
1987-88 25 60 
1988-89 35 59 
1989-90 35 85 
1990-91 58 132 
1991-92 111 273 
1992-93 114 300 
1993-94 109 311 
1994-95 177 552 
1995-96 221 642 
1996-97 232 715 
1997-98 267 844 
1998-99 339 1055 
1999-00 359 1223 
2000-01 357 1230 
2001-02 375 1309 
2002-03 405 1525 
2003-04 552 2176 
2004-05 514 2113 
2005-06 494 1676 
2006-07 726 2949 
2007-08 1014 4202 
2008-09 1116 4939 
2009-10 1212 5998 
2010-11 1350 7873 
2011-12 464 2509 
2012-13 72 740 
Total 10790 45660 
 

Appendices 
103 
 
Appendix 3.5.2 
(Refer paragraph 3.5 at page 88) 
Statement showing Inspection Reports/ Paragraphs issued up to March 2013 but not 
settled by June 2013  
 
 
Sl. No. Name of the Department Reports awaiting 
settlement (up to June 
2013) 
Reports awaiting 
settlement for more 
than 10 years 
Reports to 
which first reply  
not received 
No. of 
Reports  
No. of 
paragraphs 
No. of 
Reports  
No. of 
paragraphs 
No. of Reports  
1 Culture 29  98  9 24  0 
2 Finance 22  51  4 4 2 
3 Food Supplies & Consumer Welfare 154  423  6 6 47  
4 General Administration 11  29  3 11  0 
5 Health & Family Welfare 1372  4251  538  1527  413  
6 Higher Education 291  1171  68  147  99  
7 Home 122  305  18  31  7 
8 Housing & Urban Development 323  3883  38  470  190  
9 Information & Public Relations 69  206  18  34  20  
10 Information Technology 10  84  2 9 1 
11 Labour and Employees' State 
Insurance 
33  132  0 0 0 
12 Law 108  289  23  72  39  
13 Panchayati Raj 3758  20179  1080  4542  48  
14 Parliamentary Affairs 15  40  4 8 1 
15 Planning & Co-ordination 62  225  6 25  26  
16 Public Enterprises 2  6 0 0 0 
17 Public Grievances & Pension 
Administration 
2 3 0 0 2 
18 Revenue & Disaster Management 1821  4681  553  1196  355  
19 Rural Development 432  1572  94  134  62  
20 School & Mass Education 935  2973  262  652  249  
21 Science & Technology 14  85  6 19  6 
22 ST & SC Development, Minorities & 
Backward Classes Welfare 
372  1756  106  203  54  
23 Sports & Youth Services 36  119  16  50  36  
24 Women & Child Development 797  3099  421  1320  273  
 Total 10790  45660  3275  10484  1930  

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
104 
Appendix 3.5.3  
(Refer paragraph 3.5 at page 88) 
Statement showing serious irregularities noticed and reported in the 
Inspection Reports 
 
Sl.  
No. Name of the objection Number of 
paragraphs  
Amount  
(` in crore)  
 A. Non-compliance with rules and regulations 
1. Infructuous/Unfruitful/Avoidable expenditure/extra liability/ excess expenditure 658 621.13 
2. Inadmissible/irregular payment 191 163.40 
3. Advance payment/less recovery of advance 185 190 8.96 
 Su b total (A ) 1034  2693.49  
 B. Aud it against proprie ty/exp end iture wi thout justi fica ti on 
4. Excess payment to firms/contractors 71 33.24 
5. Loss, misappropriation and shortage of stores  127 138.07 
6. Unauthorised expenditure 75 160.76 
7. Undue financial aid to contractors/firms 67 95.7 1 
 Sub total (B) 340 427.78 
 C. Persistent and pervasive irregularities 
8. Idle store/ surplus/ unserviceable store/
blockage of Government money 181 209.63 
9. Non submission of Utilisation Certificates 19 27 2.20 
10. Amount kept in Civil Deposits 14 5.40 
11. Retention of un-disbursed amount 186 67.01 
12. Demurrage/penalty 29 16.06 
13. Miscellaneous/doubtful expenditure/ non-
submission of vouchers/ overdrawals etc. 70 330.75 
14. Stamped receipt/acknowledgement wanting 2 0.05 
15. Loans/advances not recovered 20 105.84 
16. Short/non realisation of Government dues 450 734.59  
 Sub total (C) 971 1741.53 
 D. Failure of oversight/governance 
17. Irregular purchase/Non-accountal of stock / 
Non- adjustment of cost of materials 27 1.56 
18. Non recovery of dues from firms/contractor s 
and others 63 362.67 
19. Under utilisation of departmental machinery 151 11. 40 
 Sub total (D) 241 375.63 
 Grand total (A+B+C+D) 2586 5238.43 

Appendices 
105 
Appendix 3.5.4 
(Refer paragraphs 3.5.1 and 3.5.3.3 at pages 89 and 93) 
Department wise analysis of non-submission of explanatory notes in respect of paragraphs including Performance Audit/ Reviews 
included in the Audit Reports as on 30 September 2013 
Sl. 
No. Department 
2000-01  
2001-02  
2002-03  
2003-04  
2004-05  
2005-06  
2006-07  
2007-08  
2008-09  
2009-10  
2010-11  
2011-12  
Total (in 
numbers) 
1 Higher Education 3.16 3.8 - - - - - - - 3.4.2.1 
2.4 
(R) 
- - 03 
R-01 
2 Health & Family 
Welfare 
- -  3.3 (R)  
- 
- - - -  
- 
- 3.2 
3.3 
02 
 
3 Housing & Urban 
Development 
- - - - - - - 3.3 (R) 3.1.3 
3.2.2 
8.8 RR 
3.2.2 
3.2.4 
2.3 
(R) 
3.8 
- 06 
R-02 
4 ST& SC 
Development, 
Minorities & 
Backward Classes 
Welfare 
- - - - - - - - - - 3.11 3.4 02 
5 Planning & 
Coordination 
- - - 3.3 (R) - - KBK 
(R) 
(SA) 
- - - - 2.2 (R) 
Boudh (SA) 
R-04  
6 Rural 
Development 
- - - 3.3 (R) - - - - - - 3.2 - 01 
7 Culture - - - - - - - -  - 3.13 - 01 
8 Finance - - - - - -  - - - 8.2 
(R) 
RR 
 R-01 
9 Food Supply & 
Consumer Welfare 
- - - - 3.1 (R) - - .- - - - 3.5 01 
R-01 
10 General 
Administration 
- - - - -  - - - - - 2.1(R) R-01 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
106 
Sl. 
No. Department 
2000-01  
2001-02  
2002-03  
2003-04  
2004-05  
2005-06  
2006-07  
2007-08  
2008-09  
2009-10  
2010-11  
2011-12  
Total (in 
numbers) 
11 Panchayati Raj - - - 3.3 (R) - - - - - - - 2.2(R) 
2.3(R) 
2.4(R) 
R-03 
12 Revenue & 
Disaster 
Management 
- - - - - - - - - -  4.3.1.1 (RR) 
4.3.1.2 (RR) 
4.3.2(RR) 
4.3.3(RR) 
4.3.4(RR) 
05 
13 School & Mass 
Education 
- - - 3.3(R) - - - - - - - - - 
Total 01 01  R-01 R-01  R-01 R-01 03 03 
R-01 
04 
R-02 
09 
R-06 
21 
R-13 
R –Performance Reviews; RR-Revenue Receipt; Coml.- Commercial; SA-Stand Alone 
The Department of P&C, being nodal Department, is r esponsible to furnish compliance to paragraph 3.3 f eatured in C&AG’s Report (Civil) for the year 
2003-04 which related to five departments viz. H&FW, P&C, RD, PR and S&ME. 

Appendices 
107 
 
Appendix 3.5.5 
(Refer paragraphs 3.5.2 and 3.5.3.3 at pages 90 and 93) 
Department wise position of Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on Recommendations of PAC (10 th  Assembly to 14 th  Assembly) including 
pending for discussion as on 30 September 2013 
(Recommendations and ATNs: in number ) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Department 
10 th Assembly 
(1990-1995) 
11 th  Assembly 
(1995-2000) 
12 th  Assembly 
(2000-2004) 
13 th  Assembly 
(2004-2009) 
14 th  Assembly 
(2009-2014) 
Total 
Total 
recom-
mendations 
ATNs not 
received 
Total 
recom-
mendations 
ATNs not 
received 
Total 
recom-
mendations 
ATNs not 
received 
Total 
recom-
menddatio 
ns  
ATNs not 
received 
Total 
recom-
mendations 
ATNs not 
received 
Total 
recom-
mendations 
ATNs not 
received 
ATNs 
received 
pending for 
discussion 
1 Finance Nil Nil 4 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 4 N il 4 
2 Food, Civil 
Supplies & 
Consumer 
Welfare 
Nil Nil Nil Nil 23 Nil 17 Nil Nil Nil 40 Nil 40 
3 General 
Administra 
-tion 
13 Nil 5 Nil Nil Nil 7 Nil Nil Nil 25 Nil 25 
4 Health & 
Family 
Welfare 
23 Nil 35 9 11 Nil 17 Nil Nil Nil 86 9 77 
5 Higher 
Education 
20 1 5 Nil 11 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 36 1 35 
6 Home 8 Nil 23 Nil 13 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 44 Nil 4 4 
7 Housing & 
Urban 
Develop-
ment 
30 1 28 Nil 5 Nil 18 Nil Nil Nil 81 1 80 
8 Information 
& Public 
Relations 
2 Nil 7 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 9
 Nil 9 
9 Labour & 
ESI 
Nil Nil Nil Nil 15 Nil 1 Nil Nil Nil 16 Nil 16 
10 Law 5 Nil 6 1 Nil Nil 18 5 Nil Nil 29 6 23 
11 Panchayati 
Raj 
4 Nil 1 Nil 2 Nil 2 Nil 4 4 13 4 9 
12 Planning &  
Coordina-
tion 
 
9 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 9
 Nil 9 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
108 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Department 
10 th Assembly 
(1990-1995) 
11 th  Assembly 
(1995-2000) 
12 th  Assembly 
(2000-2004) 
13 th  Assembly 
(2004-2009) 
14 th  Assembly 
(2009-2014) 
Total 
Total 
recom-
mendations 
ATNs not 
received 
Total 
recom-
mendations 
ATNs not 
received 
Total 
recom-
mendations 
ATNs not 
received 
Total 
recom-
menddatio 
ns  
ATNs not 
received 
Total 
recom-
mendations 
ATNs not 
received 
Total 
recom-
mendations 
ATNs not 
received 
ATNs 
received 
pending for 
discussion 
13 Public 
Enterprises 
Nil Nil Nil Nil 3 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 3 Nil 3 
14 Revenue & 
Disaster 
Manage-
ment 
10 Nil 18 1 Nil Nil 11 Nil Nil Nil 39 1 38 
15 Rural 
Develop-
ment 
58 17 19 5 Nil Nil 16 7 Nil Nil 93 29 64 
16 ST & SC 
Develop-
ment and 
Minorities  
& 
Backward 
Welfare 
Nil Nil 8
 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 8  Nil 8 
17 School & 
Mass 
Education 
25 Nil 4 Nil 16 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 45 Nil 45 
18 Science & 
Technology 
Nil Nil 7 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 7 Nil 7 
19 Sports & 
Culture 
Nil Nil 5 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 5  Nil 5 
20 Women & 
Child 
Develop-
ment 
33 Nil 1 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 34 Nil 34 
Total 240 19 176 16 99 0 107 12 4 4 626 51 575 
(Source: As per the records of the office of the Accountant General (G&SSA) Odisha) 

Appendices 
 
109 
Appendix 3.5.6  
(Refer paragraph 3.5.3.2 at page 91) 
Statement showing number of IRs/ Paragraphs settled during TC meeting  
 
Sl.No. Name of 
the Department  
No. of TC meetings 
held during 2012-13  
No. of IRs 
settled in TC 
meeting  
No. of 
Paragraphs settled  
in TC meeting  
1 Health & Family 
Welfare 
2 51  178  
2 Higher Education 3 3 14 
3 Home 10 50 172 
4 Panchayati Raj 3 32 354 
5 Rural Development 2 1 4 
6 School & Mass 
Education 
2 12  83  
Total 22 149 805 
 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2013 
 
110 
Appendix  3.5.7  
(Refer paragraph 3.5.3.2 at page 91) 
Statement showing departments which not conducted T C meetings and IRs/ Paragraphs 
remaining unsettled  
 
 
Sl.No. Name of the Department Reports awaiting settlement  
(up to June 2013) 
No. of 
Reports 
No. of paragraphs 
1 Culture 29 98 
2 Finance 22 51 
3 Food Supplies & Consumer Welfare 154 423 
4 General Administration 11 29 
5 Housing & Urban Development 323 3883 
6 Information & Public Relations 69 206 
7 Information Technology 10 84 
8 Labour & Employees' State Insurance 33 132 
9 Law 108 289 
10 Parliamentary Affairs 15 40 
11 Planning & Co-ordination 62 225 
12 Public Enterprises 2 6 
13 Public Grievances & Pension 
Administration 
2 3 
14 Revenue & Disaster Management 1821 4681 
15 Science & Technology 14 85 
16 ST & SC Development, Minorities 
& Backward Classes Welfare 
372 1756 
17 Sports & Youth Services 36 119 
18 Women & Child Development 797 3099 
Total 3880 15209 

Glossary 
 
111 
 
Glossary of Abbreviations 
AA Appropriate Authority 
AD Administrative Department 
ADMO-FW Additional District Medical Officer (Family  Welfare) 
AMC Annual Maintenance Contract 
AICTE All India Council for Technical Education 
ATNs Action Taken Notes 
AQA Analysis and Quality Assurance 
BDO Block Development Officer  
BPL Below Poverty Line 
BU Berhampur University 
CC Course Coordinator 
CCD Conservation-cum-Development Plan 
CDMO Chief District Medical Officer 
CDVOs Chief District Veterinary Officers 
CEO Chief Executive Officer 
CHC Community Health Centre 
CMRF Chief Minister’s Relief Fund 
COPU Committee on Public Undertakings 
CRF Calamity Relief Fund 
CSB Central Supervisory Board 
CSR Child Sex Ratio 
CSO Civil Supply Officer 
DAAs District Appropriate Authorities 
DACs District Advisory Committees 
DDMAs District Disaster Management Authorities 
DDMF District Disaster Mitigation Fund 
DEOC District Emergency Operation Centre 
DLTFC District Level Task Force Committee 
DM Disaster Management 
DMCs Departmental Monitoring Committees 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
Dr. AH&VS Director, Animal Husbandry & Veterinary S ervices 
EAP Emergency Action Plan 
EE Executive Engineer 
FA Financial Advisor 
FD Finance Department 
FSC Fee Structure Committee 
FS & CW Food Supplies & Consumer Welfare   
GB Governing Body 
GoI Government of India 
GoO Government of Odisha 
GPs Gram Panchayats 
GR Gratuitous Relief 
H&FW Health & Family Welfare 
HBA House Building Assistance 
HE Higher Education 
HH Households 

Glossary 
 
112 
 
IG Income Generation 
IMD Indian Meteorological Department 
IRs Inspection Reports 
IT Information & Technology 
ITC Industrial Training Centre 
ITDA Integrated Tribal Development Agency 
ITI Industrial Training Institute 
LAC Livestock Aid Centre 
LEC Local Enquiry Committee 
LIPs Lift Irrigation Projects 
LWE Left Wing Extreme 
MIS Management Information System 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
NAC Notified Area Council 
NPDM National Policy on Disaster Management  
NET National Eligibility Test 
NGO Non-Governmental Organisation 
NHM National Horticulture Mission 
NIC National Informatics Centre 
NPCBAERM National Programme for Capacity Building o f Architects 
in Earthquake Risk Management 
NPCBEERM National Programme for Capacity Building o f Engineers 
in Earthquake Risk Management 
OCAC Odisha Computer Application Centre 
ODM Odisha Disaster Management 
ODRAF Odisha Disaster Rapid Action Force 
OGFR Orissa General Financial Rules 
OLA Odisha Legislative Assembly 
ORC Orissa Relief Code 
OSDMA Odisha State Disaster Management Authority 
OTC Orissa Treasury Code 
OUFS Odisha Universities First Statute 
PAC Public Accounts Committee 
PA Project Administrator 
PBSR Planning and Building Standard Regulation 
PNDT Pre-Conception & Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniqu es 
PG Post Graduate 
PL Personal Ledger 
PLC Project Level Committee 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
PRI Panchayati Raj Institution 
PWS Piped Water Supply 
RDM Revenue & Disaster Management 
RFP Request for Proposal 
RSBY Rastriya Swasthya Bima Yojana 
RWD Rural Works Division 
SAA State Appropriate Authority 
SAC State Advisory Committee 

Glossary 
 
113 
 
SCA to TSP Special Central Assistance to Tribal Sub -Plan 
SDMA State Disaster Management Authority 
SDMP State Disaster Management Plan 
SDRF State Disaster Response Fund 
SDMF State Disaster Mitigation Fund 
SEC State Executive Committee 
SEOC State Emergency Operation Centre 
SET State Eligibility Test 
SFCs Self Financing  Courses 
SHGs Self Help Groups 
SLMC State Level Monitoring Committee 
SLS School of Life Science 
SRC Special Relief Commissioner 
SSB State Supervisory Board 
SU Sambalpur University 
SUIIT Sambalpur University Institute of Information  Technology  
TC Triangular Committee  
TN Tender Notice 
TOR Terms of Reference 
TSP Tribal Sub-Plan 
UC Utilisation Certificate 
UGC University Grants Commission 
ULBs Urban Local Bodies 
UMS University Management System 
UNDP United Nations Development Programme 
US Ultrasound 
USG Ultrasonography 
UU Utkal University 
VCs Vice Chancellors 
VD Veterinary Dispensary 
 