 
 
Report of the 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
General and Social Sector 
for the year ended March 2014 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
Government of Odisha 
Report No.7 of the year 2014  
 
 

 
 
 
 
Report of the  
Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 
General and Social Sector 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for the year ended March 2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Government of Odisha 
Report No.7 of the year 2014 

 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 Reference 
Para Page 
Preface  iii 
Chapter 1 : Introduction 
Introduction 1.1 to 1.4 1-5 
Chapter 2 : Performance Audit 
Revenue & Disaster Management Department 
Resettlement and Rehabilitation of people affected by 
Industrial Projects in Odisha 
2.1 7-32 
Chapter 3 : Compliance Audit 
Higher Education Department 
Higher Education in the State 3.1 33-73 
Rural Development Department 
Transparency in inviting tender, award of work and contract 
management 3.2 74-86 
Labour & Employees’ State Insurance Department 
Implementation of Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana in Odisha 3.3 86-103 
Panchayati Raj Department 
Working of District Rural Development Agencies in the State 3.4 104-115 
Women and Child Development Department 
Implementation of MAMATA scheme in Odisha 3.5 116-1 20 
School and Mass Education Department 
IT audit of e-Sishu maintained by Odisha Primary Ed ucation 
Programme Authority (OPEPA) 
3.6 121-141 
Appendices 
2.1 Statement showing details of area acquired, cost of  land, 
PDFs and PAFs 2.1.1 143-144 
2.2 Statement showing acquisition of land for industria l 
purposes without payment of compensation 2.1.12 145-146 
2.3 Statement showing non-payment of cash in lieu of 
employment 2.1.12.3 147 
2.4 Statement showing non-payment of resettlement grants 
2.1.12.4 
to 
2.1.12.7 
148 
2.5 Statement showing less payment of rehabilitation 
assistance due to non-indexation/ change of category 2.1.12.9 149-151 

 
 ii 
 Reference 
Para Page 
2.6 Statement showing project wise allotment of plot an d issue 
of RoR 2.1.12.12 152-153 
2.7 Statement showing provision of basic facilities in the 
rehabilitation colonies 2.1.13.2 154 
3.1.1 Statement showing list of sampled units cover ed in audit 3.1.5 155-157 
3.2.1 Statement showing delay in approval of tender  3.2.2.1 158 
3.2.2 Statement showing extra liability due to retender a fter 
lapse of validity of tender 3.2.2.1 159 
3.2.3 Statement showing short recovery/ withholding of pe nalty 
after rescission of agreement 3.2.3.8 160 
3.6.1 
Statement showing district wise records where the t ime 
portion of the created date of records of 2009 is s ame as 
that of 2008 
3.6.3.4 161 
3.6.2 Statement showing district wise new codes allotted during 
2007-09 3.6.3.4 162 
3.6.3 
Statement showing district wise number of child rec ords 
with time showing 00.00.00.000 hours in created dat e 
fields of child databases during 2007-09 
3.6.3.4 163 
3.6.4 Statement showing inconsistent reports on the websi te of 
OPEPA 3.6.3.5 164 
Glossary of abbreviations   165-170 
 

 
 
iii
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preface 
This Report for the year ended March 2014 has been prepared for 
submission to the Governor of Odisha under Article 151 of the 
Constitution of India. 
The Report contains significant results of the performance audit and 
compliance audit of the Departments of the Governme nt of Odisha 
under the General and Social Services including Dep artments of 
Revenue & Disaster Management, Higher Education, Ru ral 
Development, Labour & Employees’ State Insurance, 
 Panchayati 
Raj, Women & Child Development and School & Mass Educati on  
Department. However, Departments of Food Supplies &  Consumer 
Welfare, Housing & Urban Development, Public Grieva nces & 
Pension Administration, Sports & Youth Services, Cu lture, Home, 
Information & Public Relation, Law, Parliamentary A ffairs, Health 
& Family Welfare, ST & SC Development, Minorities &  Backward 
Classes Welfare, General Administration, Informatio n Technology, 
Planning & Co-ordination, Public Enterprises, Finan ce  and Science 
& Technology are not covered in this Report on Gene ral and Social 
Services. 
The instances mentioned in this Report are those, w hich came to 
notice in the course of test audit for the period 2 013-14 as well as 
those which came to notice in earlier years, but co uld not be 
reported in the previous Audit Reports; instances r elating to the 
period subsequent to 2013-14 have also been include d, wherever 
necessary. 
The audit has been conducted in conformity with the  Auditing 
Standards issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
. 

  
  
  
CChhaapptteerr  11  
 
 
IInnttrroodduuccttiioonn  
 

Chapter 1 Introduction 
1 
Chapter 1 
 
Introduction 
 
1.1 About this Report  
This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) on 
Government of Odisha relates to matters arising fro m Performance Audit of 
selected programmes and activities and Compliance A udits of Government 
Departments. 
The primary purpose of the Report is to bring to th e notice of the State 
Legislature, important results of audit. Auditing s tandards require that the 
materiality level for reporting should be commensur ate with the nature, 
volume and magnitude of transactions. The audit fin dings are expected to 
enable the executive to take corrective action as a lso to frame policies and 
directives that will lead to improved financial man agement of the 
organisations, thus contributing to better governance.  
Compliance Audit refers to examination of the trans actions relating to 
expenditure, receipts, assets and liabilities of th e audited entities to ascertain 
whether the provisions of the Constitution of India , applicable Rules, Laws, 
Regulations and various orders and instructions iss ued by the competent 
authorities are being complied with.  
Performance Audit examines the extent to which the objectives of an 
organisation, programme or scheme have been achieve d economically, 
efficiently and effectively with due regard to ethics and equity.  
This Chapter 1 provides a synopsis of the significa nt audit observations. 
Chapter 2 of this Report deals with the findings of  one Performance Audit and 
Chapter 3 deals with Compliance Audit of various departments. 
The cases mentioned in the Report are among those w hich came to notice in 
the course of test audit of accounts during the yea r 2013-14 as well as those 
which had come to light in earlier years but could not be dealt with in previous 
Reports. Matters relating to the period subsequent to 2013-14 have also been 
included, wherever necessary.  
1.2 Significant observations of Performance Audit 
This Report contains one Performance Audit. The foc us has been on auditing 
the specific programmes/ schemes and offering suita ble recommendations, 
with the intention to assist the Executive in takin g corrective action and 
improving service delivery to the citizens. Signifi cant audit observations are 
discussed below: 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 
2 
 
1.2.1  Resettlement and Rehabilitation of people af fected by Industrial 
 Projects in Odisha 
Performance Audit on Resettlement and Rehabilitatio n (R&R) of people 
affected by industrial Projects in Odisha revealed instances of benefits not 
reaching the affected people for a host of reasons ranging from absence of 
proper planning to  inadequate survey and ineffective  monitoring of R&R 
activities at district and department level. As a r esult, 798 project displaced 
families in respect of 13 industrial projects displ aced during 1992-2013 were 
not properly rehabilitated and full benefits due to  them were not extended. 
Complete database in respect of number of people af fected/ displaced, 
employment provided, etc., were not available eithe r at Department or at 
district level.  
Socio-economic surveys intended as guides and basis  for preparation of R&R 
plans were not conducted in respect of 14 industria l projects on subsequent 
acquisition of land. Creation of awareness among the affected families through 
well defined comprehensive communication plans, was lacking. Rehabilitation 
and Periphery Development Advisory Committees (RPDA C) constituted for 
respective projects to approve R&R planning and its  implementation for 
affected people left gaps in their functioning. RPDAC did not review decisions 
leaving large number of issues unaddressed.  
Employment or one-time cash compensation in lieu th ereof was not provided 
to 588 project displaced families by industries. Th ere were cases of non-
payment of rehabilitation assistance like compensat ion for double 
displacement, missing land, self relocation allowan ce, house building 
assistance, etc. Record of Rights to 1304 families were not given depriving 
them of ownership of their land despite its occupation.  
There were cases of inadequate health facility, abs ence of piped water supply, 
absence of street light, road facility, non-provisi on of pond, etc. Periphery 
development fund was lying unutilised with Collecto rs of three districts. 
Project authorities did not conduct environmental impact assessment including 
adequate arrangements for management of factory effluents. 
Required numbers of RPDAC meetings were not held in  sampled districts. 
Review meetings conducted by the Revenue Divisional  Commissioner and 
Collectors were inadequate and no follow up actions  were taken. Grievance 
redressal mechanism was inadequate as several petit ions were lying 
unattended. Department conducted review meetings wi thout adequate 
attention to R&R issues.  
(Paragraph 2.1) 
1.3  Significant audit observations of Compliance A udits 
1.3.1  Higher Education in the State  
Long term planning was lacking. Perspective plan fo r regulating growth of 
non-Government educational institutions (EIs), impr oving access of students 
to higher education in backward areas of the State and enforcing quality 
standards therein was not prepared. Higher educatio n was not separated from 
higher secondary education even after 25 years of G overnment decision. 

Chapter 1 Introduction 
3 
 
Institutional arrangement remained weak as regular post of Principal was not 
created in any of the aided colleges and College De velopment Council of 
Universities remained defunct for over a decade. Co mpliance to Laws, Rules 
and Regulations by the Drawing and Disbursing Offic ers was poor. 
Permission and recognition of EIs by Government and  affiliation by 
Universities/ Council of Higher Secondary Education  were granted without 
fully assessing the educational need in the area an d availability of prescribed 
infrastructure. Most of the test checked EIs were f ound to run without 
prescribed infrastructure like land with title, bui ldings with adequate number 
of classrooms, examination hall, library, laboratory, etc. Large scale vacancies 
in teaching posts continued and were not rationalis ed through effective 
deployment. Departures from procedures in recruitme nt as well as promotion 
of teaching staff of both test checked Universities  and aided EIs were also 
noticed. Skill development opportunities for teachi ng staff of junior colleges 
were lacking. Academic Regulations, standards and r eforms prescribed by 
UGC were not adopted and enforced. Instructions (Ju ne 1999 and November 
2011) of the Department for maintenance of academic  calendar, lesson plan, 
lesson diary, etc. remained un-complied with by man y test checked EIs. 
Though accreditation of National Assessment and Acc reditation Council is a 
parameter of quality education, few degree colleges  obtained such 
accreditation. Sanction of grants-in-aid (GIA) was not made in a fair and 
equitable manner and was marred with payment of GIA  to ineligible teaching 
staff and teaching staff appointed without adherenc e to stipulations. Internal 
control mechanism was weak and internal audit was inadequate. 
(Paragraph 3.1) 
1.3.2  Transparency in inviting tender, award of wo rk and contract 
management  
There was delay in approval of tender ranging betwe en 16 to 220 days and 
delay in execution of agreements for a period rangi ng from 11 to 273 days 
leading to cost and time overrun in completion of works. Tenders were split on 
101 works valuing ` 14.64 crore obviating sanction of higher authoritie s and 
wide publicity. Works were awarded to contractors w ith inadequate work  
experience and technical know-how which led to aban donment of work and 
delay in completion of work. The works valuing ` 16.55 crore  were not 
completed within the stipulated period due to non p rovision of dispute free 
land before commencement of work. Tender was invite d and work awarded 
for ` 1.38 crore without existence of work site. There w as case of unfruitful 
expenditure of ` 2.17  crore  on  road works due to non setting up of level 
crossing on the railway line and avoidable expendit ure of ` 4.38 crore due to 
execution of works on State highway. Extension of t ime was granted to the 
contractors much after occurrence of hindrance. The re was short recovery of  
` 2.07 crore to the contractors after rescission of contract due to fault of 
contractors. No action was taken against the contra ctors despite departure to 
maintain Pradhanmantri Gram Sadak Yojana roads. The re were instances of 
no insurance coverage during the extension period o f the contract to safeguard 
the interest of Government. Non-recovery of mobilis ation advances from 
contractors was also noticed in some cases. Monitor ing of work was not 
effective as works were not completed in time.  
(Paragraph 3.2) 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 
4 
 
1.3.3 Implementation of ‘Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yo jana’ in Odisha 
Database maintained for Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yoj ana  (RSBY) was not 
foolproof. Some eligible BPL households were left o ut while some ineligible 
beneficiaries were covered under the scheme and 18. 36 lakh eligible 
beneficiaries under the scheme could not be covered . Before issue of work 
orders, no tender was floated and also no agreement s were executed between 
Government and the firm for smooth operation and ti mely execution of the 
allotted work with specified norms. RSBY database p repared by the Insurer 
based on 2002 BPL survey could not be utilised and expenditure of ` 64.23 
lakh was rendered unfruitful. Inadequacy of empanel led hospitals defeated 
objective of the scheme to provide treatment to ben eficiaries in nearby 
hospitals. Though smart cards were required to be r eturned to beneficiaries 
after treatment, they were retained by hospitals. T he quality of health services 
was not up to the mark due to various deficiencies such as shortage of doctors 
and staff, non-availability of adequate number of e quipment in Operation 
Theatres, etc. 
(Paragraph 3.3) 
1.3.4 Working of District Rural Development Agencie s in the State  
Due to ineffective and inefficient fund management,  GoI curtailed Central 
Assistance of ` 208.66 crore under different schemes. There were a lso 
instances of avoidable expenditure, diversion of scheme funds and outstanding 
advances lying unadjusted for over 15 years. Defici ent planning and 
implementation led to unfruitful expenditure of ` 13.81 crore towards 
incomplete hostel buildings for ST/ SC students. Du e to ineffective 
functioning of DVMCs, 84 per cent  of grievances/ allegations could not be 
addressed. Monitoring and Evaluation Wings were not set up. Shortfall in field 
visits of DRDA Authorities led to ineffective monit oring of schemes. 
Vacancies of technical posts also affected implemen tation of different 
programmes. 
(Paragraph 3.4) 
1.3.5  Implementation of ‘MAMATA’ scheme in Odisha 
Due to delayed payment, objective of the scheme to improve health and 
nutritional status of mother and infant by providin g financial assistance at 
particular stages of pregnancy/ child rearing was d efeated. Absence of 
exclusive staff under MAMATA scheme and failure of CDPOs to ensure 
correctness of data led to excess payment. Cases of  non-payment and delay in 
payment of benefits were also noticed. There was no  dedicated grievance 
helpline for registering grievance/ suggestions rel ating to implementation of 
the scheme. 
(Paragraph 3.5) 

Chapter 1 Introduction 
5 
 
1.3.6 IT audit of e-Sishu maintained by Odisha Prim ary Education 
Programme Authority (OPEPA) 
The recommendations made in the Paragraph 3.4 of CA G’s Report (Civil) for 
the year ended March 2007 was accepted by the Odish a Primary Education 
Programme Authority (OPEPA). We found, on a follow- up, measures 
suggested in recommendations were not carried out. Three sub-systems 
Education Personnel Information System, Geographica l Information System 
and Child Tracking System under the e-Sishu project  were reviewed. The 
scope of implementation of EPIS got severely curtai led and its primary 
objectives like vacancy tracking of teachers remain  unfulfilled. The GIS 
software contained errors like wrong depiction of l ocation, missing 
photographs, etc. which inhibited habitation based analysis and rendered the 
GIS unfit for use by the top management of OPEPA. I n case of the CTS, the 
unique child was not addressed and not even adopted  in the application 
upgrade that was not done in 2009. Thus, objective of CTS to track each child 
for educational and economic status could not be ac hieved. Further, we found 
a gross deviation from laid down process of annual data updation for which 
funds were allotted and spent. Significant proporti on of 62 per cent  of child 
records were updated running backend script thereby  vitiating the process and 
rendering the total information unreliable and with out use. There were also 
deficiencies noted in the security and backup proce dure. Thus, the key 
objectives of e-Sishu system to track each child, m inimise duplicate/ fake 
enrolments and formulation of plans to provide qual ity education remained 
largely unfulfilled. 
(Paragraph 3.6) 
1.4 Recommendations 
This Report contains specific recommendations on a number of issues 
involving non-observance of the prescribed internal  procedure and systems, 
compliance with which would help in promoting good governance and better 
oversight on implementation of departmental program mes and objectives at 
large. 

  
  
CChhaapptteerr  22  
 
PPeerrffoorrmmaannccee  AAuuddiitt  
  
Para 
Number 
Topic Page 
2.1 Resettlement and Rehabilitation of people 
affected by Industrial Projects in Odisha  
7-32 
 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit  
 7
 
 
This chapter contains the findings of Performance A udit on Resettlement and 
Rehabilitation of people affected by Industrial Projects in Odisha. 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary 
To address issues of resettlement and rehabilitatio n for displaced and affected 
families due to establishment of industrial project s, Revenue & Disaster 
Management (R&DM) Department of Government of Odish a (GoO) framed a 
comprehensive Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R&R) Policy, 2006.  
Audit noticed that due to inadequate institutional mechanism and absence of 
proper planning, 798 Project Displaced Families (PD Fs) displaced during 
1992-2013 in respect of 13 out of 32 test checked i ndustrial projects were not 
properly rehabilitated and full benefits due to the m were not extended. 
Complete database in respect of number of people af fected/ displaced, 
employment provided, etc., was not available either  at department or at 
district level.  
Socio-economic surveys (SESs), though primarily intended as guides and basis 
for preparation of R&R plans and implementation of programmes effectively, 
were deficient in many ways. Creation of awareness among the affected 
families through well defined comprehensive communi cation plans, was 
lacking. SES was not published in public in all cases to invite objections due to 
which scope for hearings was diminished. Seven indu strial projects made 
direct purchase of 726.974 acre of land in 19 villa ges from private land 
owners without conducting SES  due to which identif ication of affected people 
and their entitlement under R&R policy could not be  evaluated and proper 
planning for them was not  made though Government was responsible to cover 
them under R&R policy. 
Rehabilitation and Periphery Development Advisory C ommittee (RPDAC) 
constituted for respective projects being the princ ipal body to approve 
planning for R&R affected people and overall respon sible for its 
implementation, left gaps in their functioning. In respect of 15 out of 32 
industrial projects, SES report was not approved by  RPDACs and R&R plan 
for affected families was not prepared. RPDAC did n ot review implementation 
of its own decisions leaving large number of issues unaddressed. 
REVENUE AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT  
Chapter 2 
Performance Audit 
2.1 Resettlement and Rehabilitation of people affec ted by 
Industrial Projects in Odisha  

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 8
There were instances where adequate employment was neither provided by 
industries nor the scope of self employment created  in project areas. Five 
industries, though targeted in consultation with RP DACs to sponsor 2085 
members for ITI training, could sponsor only 233.  
Employment or one-time cash compensation in lieu of  employment was not 
provided to 588 project displaced families by 10 ou t of 32 test checked 
industries for ` 31.92 crore. Rehabilitation assistance for  ` 22.08 crore such 
as compensation for double displacement, compensati on for missing land, 
cash in lieu of employment, self relocation allowan ce, house building 
assistance, assistance for temporary shed, maintena nce allowance, etc. w as 
lying un-disbursed as of March 2013 even after pass ing of award ranging 
between 1 and 15 years . A lthough Government revised the rehabilitation 
assistance on the basis of Wholesale Price Index, p roject authorities made 
payment at pre-revised rate which resulted in short  payment of ` 6.66 crore . 
Collectors of the respective districts did not dist ribute Record of Rights to 
1304 out of 3996 families as preparation of RoRs wa s stated to be under 
process and Collector and RPDAC had not taken follow up action.  
Cost of public property within the acquired area wa s neither assessed nor 
realised by the district authorities, which resulte d in retention of public 
property with the concerned industry. Benefits provided by the company in the 
resettlement habitat were deficient on many counts.  Cases of inadequate 
health facility , absence of piped water suppl y, non-provision of pond, absence 
of street light, road facility, poor road maintenan ce, absence of place of 
worship and required educational institutes, etc. were noticed.  
Periphery development fund of ` 36.48 crore was lying unutilised with 
Collectors of three districts. Environmental sustai nability through adequate 
arrangements for management of factory effluents was not ensured. 
Required numbers of RPDAC meetings were not held in  any of the 13 sampled 
districts. Review meetings conducted by the RDC and  Collectors were also 
inadequate and no follow up actions were taken. Gri evance redressal 
mechanism was inadequate as several petitions were lying unattended by the 
district authorities as well as project authorities. 
 
2.1.1  Introduction 
The Revenue & Disaster Management (R&DM) Department , Government of 
Odisha is the nodal authority to address the issues  on resettlement and 
rehabilitation of affected families displaced due t o establishment of industrial 
projects. In order to ensure sustained development through a participatory and 
transparent process, Government framed Odisha Reset tlement and 
Rehabilitation Policy (ORRP), 2006. Prior to framin g of 2006 Policy, the 
issues on resettlement & rehabilitation, were addressed through various project 
specific R&R policy and plan. 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit  
 9
ORRP 2006 covers affected families whose homestead land was acquired as 
PDF and also those who lose their private agricultu ral land but not their 
homestead land as PAFs. Under both the categories, employment and other 
R&R benefits are payable against the loss of their private homestead and 
agricultural land. This policy is also extended to families who are in 
encroachment of Government land and in possession o f encroached land for a 
period of at least 10 years prior to notification declaring acquisition of land but 
such families are entitled for only land compensation without R&R benefits. 
R&DM Department through its Directorate (R&R) is to  coordinate with 
various functionaries, oversee implementation of R& R activities and ensure 
that displaced persons get their due benefit smoothly and timely.   
Complete database in respect of number of people af fected/ displaced, 
employment provided, etc. were not available either at department or at district 
level due to which comprehensive picture about resettlement and rehabilitation 
(R&R) activities of the State could not be assessed. Records of 32 test checked 
industrial projects (13 districts) disclosed that 6 533 families were displaced 
and 35632 families were affected during 1992-2013 b y industrial projects 
acquiring 36555.180 acre land (Appendix 2.1 ).  
2.1.2 Process of Resettlement and Rehabilitation includin g selection of 
PDFs/ PAFs for R&R benefits  
After acquisition of land for setting up of industr ies and payment of 
compensation to land losers, process of R&R starts for PDFs under ORRP 
2006. Within two months of the issue of notificatio n for land acquisition, SES 
for identifying PDFs/ PAFs and large number of info rmation concerning them 
is required to be conducted by an organisation selected by the project authority 
through bidding process. Such SES should be complet ed within a period of 90 
days from its commencement. The preliminary SES rep ort is required to be 
given wide publicity and people are allowed 15 days  to file objections. 
Hearing of objections and verification of claims ar e to be done jointly by the 
survey agency, project authority and Resettlement a nd Rehabilitation Officer 
(RRO) from Government side on the basis of which th e SES report is 
corrected, finalised and then published, which form s the basis of 
implementation of R&R plan. The SES was to be appro ved by Rehabilitation 
and Periphery Development Advisory Committee (RPDAC ), a principal body 
responsible for approval and implementation of R&R Plan containing benefits 
extendable to PDFs/ PAFs.  
2.1.3 Audit objectives 
Audit was conducted to assess whether: 
• policy/ plan existed to address R&R issues and surv ey and 
identification of affected people were made properly and efficiently for 
effective R&R planning and its implementation;   
• process of computation of R&R benefits and their di stribution was 
efficient and effective; 
• assets/ infrastructure were created and maintained in the project 
resettlement area and utilised effectively; 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 10  
• environmental sustainability through participatory and transparent 
process was ensured; and 
• mechanism existed for effective monitoring, conflic t resolution and 
grievance redressal. 
 
2.1.4 Audit criteria 
Criteria for audit were drawn from the following documents: 
• ORRP 2006 and other project specific policies prior  to 2006 policy, 
National Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy 200 7, Industrial 
Policy Resolution 2001 and 2007; 
• Guidelines on functions of RPDAC and SES, Provision s of Orissa 
Treasury Code (OTC), Orissa General Financial Rules  (OGFR) and 
other State Acts/ Rules;  
• Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) signed by Govern ment with 
Industries; and 
• Receipt/ expenditure and assessment reports for R&R  activities and 
instructions issued by Government from time to time. 
2.1.5 Scope and Methodology of audit 
Audit objectives, scope and methodology were discus sed with the Additional 
Chief Secretary R&DM Department at an entry confere nce held on 11 July 
2013. The period of audit covered implementation of R&R programmes for 32 
industrial projects taken up during 2006-13 includi ng eight industrial projects 
taken up prior to 2006-07 for which delivery of R&R benefits was done  during 
2006-2013. 
Audit methodology included collection and analysis of data through 
examination of records, beneficiary interview in pr esence of representative of 
Collector and photographs wherever considered neces sary. Findings of Audit 
were discussed in an exit conference on 26 Septembe r 2014 with the 
Additional Chief Secretary R&DM Department and repl ies of Government 
were suitably incorporated. 
Audit findings  
2.1.6 Inadequate and improper planning 
Audit noticed that planning was deficient due to in adequate SES, non- 
preparation of R&R plan, non-creation of awareness among affected families 
through communication plans, ineffective functioning of RPDACs in approval 
of R&R plan, etc. as discussed under: 
As stipulated in Para 7 of  ORRP 2006, R&R  plan shall be prepared based on 
the available options and after due consultation wi th displaced communities 
and such plan was required to be placed before RPDAC for approval.  
Audit noticed that out of total 6533 PDFs in 32 sel ected projects including 
eight projects commenced prior to issue of 2006 pol icy, 798 PDFs displaced 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit  
 11  
during 1992-2013 were not given R&R benefits due to  absence of proper 
planning. 
• In one 1 case, the project after 
acquiring (April 2008) 540.705 
acre of land in three villages for 
establishing iron and  steel 
industry , constructed only 
compound wall. Audit further 
noticed that industry was not able 
to construct pipeline and approach 
road due to non-acquiring of 
40.867 acre of land by the 
Collector for the above purpose. Besides, 36.110 ac re of community 
land 
2 and 7.800 acre of forest land though under the pos session of 
industry, were not alienated in favour of industry.  
Land Acquisition Officer (LAO), Dhenkanal stated (A ugust 2013) that 
no employment could be provided due to non-commissioning of plant for 
which industry was paying ` 3000 per month to 54 PDFs in lieu of 
employment. 
In respect of another two 
3 projects, 312 PDFs were identified but not 
given R&R benefits due to non-setting up of industr ies though PDFs 
were to get R&R assistance under ORRP 2006. Government did not plan 
for them. 
Department stated (October 2014) that since physica l displacement of 
PDFs were not effected, industries did not provide resettlement grants. 
But, the PDFs lost perennial source of income from land ranging 
between 6 and 17 years and their issues were not so rted out by 
Department. 
2.1.7 Absence of communication plan 
Para 4 (f) of ORRP 2006 stipulates that Government should formulate and 
execute a comprehensive communication plan for crea tion of awareness 
among the people in project affected area involving  civil society through a 
notification. The cost of implementation of communi cation plan should be 
borne by the projects.  
Audit noticed that Government did not formulate com munication plan for any 
of the projects to create awareness in affected are as. Thus, affected families 
remained unaware of the various rehabilitation bene fits provided in Policy. In 
absence of adequate awareness, the affected familie s simply aspired for job 
without seeking any other admissible benefits in li eu of loss of their 
agricultural or homestead land. Interview conducted  by audit in presence of 
representative of Collector with 597 persons affect ed under 12 industrial 
                                                
 
1 Rungta Mines Limited, Dhenkanal 
2 Land meant for common use of public like cremation  ground, grazing field for cattle, etc.  
3 Aditya Aluminum Project, Rayagada and Kalinga Naga r Industrial Infrastructure 
Complex, Jajpur 
Acquired land of Rungta Mines Limited, Dhenkanal  

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 12  
projects in four 4 districts revealed that 53 per cent (315) of people wanted 
permanent employment to be assured with a perennial source of income.  
Department stated (October 2014) that audit observa tion was noted for future 
guidance.  
2.1.8 Inadequate institutional mechanism  
To address issues on R&R, a Directorate of R&R unde r R&DM department 
was constituted (April 2007). Duties of the Directorate were to coordinate with 
various functionaries, oversee the implementation o f R&R activities and 
ensure that the displaced persons get their due ben efits smoothly and timely. 
Nine posts of Project Director, R&R were created (A pril 2008) by the 
Department to oversee implementation of R&R activities. 
Audit found that such posts could not be filled up till October 2014. The 
Collectors concerned entrusted additional responsib ility locally to Land 
Acquisition Officers (LAOs). This arrangement led t o reduced emphasis on 
R&R activities.   
Government stated (October 2014) that steps were be ing taken to fill up these 
posts. 
2.1.9 Non-availability of database on R&R activitie s  
Complete database on R&R projects containing number  of families displaced/ 
affected/ resettled, benefits due and provided, etc ., was not available at 
department level despite Directorate being constituted. Such database was also 
not maintained at district level where programmes were actually implemented.  
Department during  2009,  launched an application software named ‘PROJECT 
PUNARBAS’ with objective to automate the land acqui sition and R&R 
process, develop database, survey methodologies, se t up responsive grievance 
redressal system, etc. for the entire State. But, t he project failed during its 
implementation stage despite expenditure of ` 1.40 crore. 
• Audit found in case  of Dhenkanal Collectorate that 1865  families were 
affected by one 
5 industry  as per Minutes  of  Rehabilitation Advisory 
Committee (RAC) meeting (November 2004), whereas th is was 
exhibited as 1663 as per survey report  and 1296  as per monthly 
progress report (MPR).  
• Similarly, in  case of another industry 6 under Angul Collectorate, MPR 
of October 2013 indicated numbers of  PDF and PAF as 261 and 2073 
respectively whereas in a report (August 2013) to State Legislature, the  
said numbers were  communicated as  583 and 5029 respectively. 
                                                 
4 Angul (JITPL, MPCL, JSPL); Bhadrak (DPCL); Dhenkan al (GMR, BSL, BRG, Rungta 
Mines Limited, MGM Steels); Sambalpur (AAP, BPSL, SMEL) 
5 Bhushan Steels Limited 
6 Jindal Steel & Power Limited  

Chapter 2 Performance Audit  
 13  
Department stated (October 2014) that guidelines we re issued (December 
2011 & August 2013) to Collectors for maintenance a nd preservation of R&R 
data and steps were being taken to equip district C ollectors with logistic and 
manpower support.  
2.1.10  Socio-Economic Survey (SES) 
2.1.10.1 Non-conducting of SES 
As per Para 4 (a) of ORRP 2006, SES was to be condu cted within two months 
of publication of notification for acquisition of l and under Section 4 (1) of 
Land Acquisition Act 1894.  
Land was acquired through IDCO for industries in ph ases as per requirement. 
Though SESs were conducted during initial phases, s uch SESs were not 
conducted on subsequent occasions due to which PAFs / PDFs were not 
correctly identified and other related information was not gathered for 
formulation of R&R plan. 
Audit noticed that 14 industries acquired 5505.64 acre of land under LA Act in 
65 villages of eight districts in different phases. SES was not conducted for the 
above land in absence of which correct data about a ffected people and 
extension of benefit under R&R policy could not be ensured. 
Government stated (October 2014) that necessary dir ection was issued to the 
project authority for payment of maintenance allowance.  
2.1.10.2 Delay in commencement and completion of SE S 
Out of 32 test checked projects, in respect of 18 p rojects SES was commenced 
with delay of three months to nine years in place o f two months after issue of 
notification for acquisition of land under Section 4 (1) of LA Act. In one case 
no SES was conducted and in respect of 12 industrie s, date of commencement 
was not on record. However, in case of one industry  only, SES was 
commenced in time. Delay in SES affected R&R plan a nd denied timely 
extension of benefits to affected population despite loss of their land. 
SES undertaken should be completed within a period not exceeding 90 days 
from the date of commencement as required under SES  guidelines and 
instruction of R&DM Department (October 2010). Audi t scrutiny of 32 
projects revealed that in respect of five 
7 industries, the SES was not completed 
within the stipulated timeframe and was delayed for  a period ranging between 
2 and 28 months. In one case, SES was not conducted  and in respect of the 
balance 26 industries the period of completion of t he SES was not on record 
due to absence of database in concerned Collectorates.  
Department attributed (October 2014) delay mainly t o inadequacy of survey 
by survey agency, report  submitted not conforming to guidelines needing 
revision, more time required to create awareness, r eceiving objections, 
suggestions, etc. 
                                                
 
7 BRG Iron and Steel Limited, Dhenkanal; JSPL, Angul ; AAP, Sambalpur; VAL, 
Lanjigarh; BPSL, Sundargarh 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 14  
2.1.10.3 Direct purchase of private land by industr ies without SES 
Para 6 read with Para 1(iii) of ORRP 2006 stipulate s that industry may opt for 
direct purchase of land on the basis of negotiated price after issue of 
notification requiring acquisition of land for whic h R&R policy was 
applicable.  Thus, SES was to be conducted as required under the policy  ibid . 
As per State Level Council on Resettlement and Reha bilitation (SLCRR) 
meeting (June 2008) held under the Chairmanship of Chief Minister, it was 
decided that a clear mechanism should be in place t o regulate direct purchase 
of land by project proponents and ensure R&R benefi ts being made to land 
sellers. Audit noticed that  though seven industries made direct purchase of 
726.974 acre of land in 19 villages from private la nd owners, SES was not 
conducted due to which R&R benefits payable to PDFs / PAFs could not be 
ensured. LAOs also could not furnish any informatio n about the number of 
persons affected due to sale of land and R&R benefits paid to them.   
Government stated (October 2014) that direct purchase by some industries was 
made on the basis of bilateral negotiations between  willing sellers and 
industries and these cases were scrutinised under section 73 (c) of  Orissa Land 
Reforms (OLR) Act. Government further stated that w henever purchases have 
been made by industries under 73 (c), it was instru cted to implement the 
provisions of ORRP 2006 also. But the fact remains that no SES was 
conducted though required under ORRP 2006.   
2.1.10.4 Inadequate and improper survey 
The prime objective of SES was to identify PDFs/ PA Fs and ensure that no 
PDFs/PAFs is left out or no vulnerable group is ignored.  
• Audit noticed that, in respect of one 
8 industry, Tahasildar, Kujanga  
conducted (June 1997) a survey prior to issue of 4 (1) Notification and 
identified 72 families to be displaced for the proj ect. But with the 
introduction of R&R Policy of 1998 for major indust ries, a joint team 
conducted fresh survey as per decision (February 19 99) of 2 nd  
Rehabilitation Advisory Committee (RAC 9) meeting which identified 
124 families under 17 villages as PDFs during enume ration. In the 6 th  
RAC meeting (July 2002), Collector, Jagatsinghpur i nformed that 19 
additional families were genuinely displaced and we re left out during 
previous enumeration. Finally, 143 (124+19) familie s were identified 
as displaced. This indicates inadequacy and lack of  quality of survey 
on land losers and affected families.  
Department stated (September 2014) that additional list of 19 PDFs 
were approved in the 6 th  RAC meeting. The fact remains that number 
of PDF changed frequently. 
                                                 
8  Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOCL), Paradip 
9  RPDAC previously known as RAC and PDC 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit  
 15  
• Scrutiny revealed that in respect of another indust ry 10 , SES was 
conducted in June 2006 with identification of 405 P DFs,  against which  
a list of 309 PDFs was approved in  3rd  RPDAC  meeting (June 2008). 
In the said meeting, RDC instructed Collector, Bhad rak  to include 
divorcees and major sons excluded in earlier approv ed list and prepare  
a fresh list for consideration. In 4 th  RPDAC  meeting (September 2012) 
again it was decided that since large number of petitions  were received, 
Deputy Collectors would enquire into the matter. Th ey recommended 
inclusion of 22 more persons in the list.  But the said list was found to 
be not in compliance with ORRP 2006. Further enquir y was instructed 
by LAO and Sub Collector. By the process,  111 families earlier 
included in the SES list were left out and did not get  any  R&R benefits. 
Though Government selected the survey agencies, it failed to evaluate 
their performance due to which irregularities were noticed in survey 
reports. 
Department stated (October 2014) that SES report wa s finalised in 
2008 on the basis of which, factual list  of displaced families was 
prepared and approved in the RPDAC. But even with f urther enquiry 
ordered in last and 4 
th  RPDAC held in September 2012, preparation of 
lists was still not correct.  
2.1.10.5 Non-conducting of hearings on SES 
As per guidelines, after wide publicity of SES repo rt, hearing of objections 
from affected persons should be made and verificati on of their claims must be 
done together by the survey agency, the project aut hority and RRO from 
Government side.  
Audit observed that in seven 
11  out of 32 sampled industries, Collectors did not 
make wide publication of the SES reports. Two such cases are discussed 
below:  
• In case of one 12  industry, survey agency submitted (July 2008) SES 
report to Collector identifying 315 affected famili es which was not put 
for wide publicity to invite objection, if any, on the report. Audit 
noticed from  correspondence (March 2012)  of Special LAO  that 14 
bona fide families were left out in SES report. Report was yet (October 
2014) to be approved and R&R benefits were not exte nded to affected 
families. 
Department stated (October 2014) that SES report  was approved by 
RPDAC in September 2009 with advice to IFFCO for wi de publicity 
and inviting objections.  
                                                
 
10   Dhamara Port Company Limited (DPCL) 
11  BSL, BRG, MGM and Rungta of Dhenkanal; BPSL of Sam balpur; MPCL of Angul; 
IFFCO of Jagatsinghpur  
12   Indian Farmers Fertiliser Cooperative Limited (IF FCO) 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 16  
• In case of another industry 13  109 objections were stated to be received 
(as per 3 rd  RAC held in May 2005) and no joint hearing consist ing of 
the project proponent and the authorised officer of  the Collector was 
held to look into the objections. No recorded reason was available as to 
why hearing was not held. Besides, reasons for reje ction of 88 
applications were not available with District Collector.  
Department stated (September 2014) that objections were being heard 
by District Administration as per Government guidel ines. Concerned 
R&R functionaries would be further sensitised for p ublication of SES 
reports.  
2.1.10.6 Non-examination of SES report by expert gr oup 
As per Para IV of the SES guidelines, SES report wa s to be examined by an 
independent multi-disciplinary expert group constit uted by RPDAC/ 
Government with a panel consisting of (i) two non-o fficial social science and 
rehabilitation experts, (ii) the Secretary of ST an d SC Development 
Department or his/ her representative and (iii) a r epresentative of the land 
requiring body nominated by the Government/ RPDAC w ith the objective to 
ensure correctness of the data/ report and decision s of recommendations in 
respect of extension of R&R benefits, etc. Audit fo und that no such group was 
ever constituted by RPDAC/ Government for any industry.  
Department admitting the observation of Audit stated (October 2014) that SES 
report is examined and approved by RPDAC which is a higher level body with 
people’s representatives.  
2.1.11  Functioning of Rehabilitation and Periphery Develop ment 
Advisory Committee (RPDAC) 
In order to encourage participation of displaced pe ople and their elected 
representatives in implementation and monitoring of R&R benefits, to oversee 
and monitor periphery developments, Government cons titutes RPDAC for 
each project or for a group of projects falling und er one district as per 
stipulation (Para 16) of ORRP 2006. As per Governme nt order (July 2006), 
such Committee should be constituted under Chairman ship of Revenue 
Divisional Commissioner (RDC) with district Collect or as member convener 
and other members 14 , who are responsible for taking decisions conformi ng to  
approved policy of State and such decisions should be final and binding on all 
concerned.   
As per policy, the list of displaced families ident ified in SES report shall be 
placed before and approved by RPDAC. Collector shal l prepare R&R plan 
based on the list approved and option of displaced families and place the plan 
                                                
 
13   Bhushan Steel Limited (BSL), Dhenkanal 
14   All MPs of the concerned district, President, Zil la Parishad, Chairpersons of the affected 
Panchayat Samitis, Representatives of two Local Sel f Help Groups, two persons 
nominated by the Chairman from among the displaced and affected families, Project 
Director, District Rural Development Agency, Sub-Co llector(s) concerned, Land 
Acquisition Officers (LAOs)/ Special LAOs, Represen tatives of Project concerned having 
decision making power on behalf of the project as members 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit  
 17  
before RPDAC for approval. Accordingly, project aut horities are to provide 
rehabilitation assistance to the affected families. 
Audit noticed that functioning of RPDACs left sever al gaps as SES reports 
were not insisted upon and discussed in their meeti ngs, R&R plans were not 
submitted for approval, decisions taken were not ca rried out by project 
authorities, adequate number of meeting were not he ld to discuss R&R issues, 
etc. as discussed below:   
2.1.11.1 SES report not approved by RPDAC 
Para 4 (b) of ORRP 2006 read with Para IV (Part 1) of SES guidelines 
stipulates that final report of SES shall be placed before RPDAC for approval.  
Scrutiny of minutes of RPDAC meetings revealed that  in case of 16 out of 32 
projects, SES reports were discussed and approved; in 15 other cases, reports 
were not discussed.  In one case, SES was not conducted. RPDACs did not  
insist on submission of SES report for their approv al, due to which, R&R plan 
for affected families were not prepared. 
2.1.11.2 Non-preparation of R&R plan  
As  envisaged in Para (7) of ORRP 2006, based on the approved list and option 
of displaced families, R&R plan should be prepared by Collector for R&R 
after due consultation with displaced communities i n the manner as 
determined by Government. Such plan should address specific needs of 
women, vulnerable groups, etc. and would be placed before RPDAC for 
approval. 
Audit noticed that in 25 out of 32 Industries, R&R plans were not prepared by 
Collectors of concerned districts. RPDACs did not i nsist on the same due to 
which option of affected families could not be considered.  
Department stated (September 2014) that R&R plannin g was done by the 
concerned Collectors with the approval of the RPDAC. But, there was no such 
evidence of discussion in the RPDACs of 25 industrial projects.  
2.1.11.3 Ineffective role of RPDAC 
As per Para 7 (vi) of ORRP 2006, project authoritie s shall abide by the 
provisions laid down in the policy and decisions ta ken by RPDAC from time 
to time. As per the guidelines, RPDAC is to supervi se the progress of R&R 
activities including periphery development programm es undertaken by project 
authorities. 
• As per the decisions of RPDAC in its second meeting  (September 
2012), an industry was required to take up activiti es to increase 
household income of project affected persons for im parting training by 
establishing industrial training centre (ITC) and c onstruct old age 
home/ home for destitute mental patients. But, no s uch works were 
done by the project authority. 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 18  
• Similarly, RPDAC in its first meeting (September 20 12) decided that a 
project should set up one dispensary at Kandarei GP , give matching 
amount of old age pension/ disabled pension to 200 existing 
beneficiaries and drinking water through piped wate r supply (PWS) to 
affected villages against which no actions were taken. 
• First RPDAC meeting (September 2009) in respect of a Thermal 
Power Company decided to provide livelihood support to the people of 
the affected villages through establishment of coop erative for training 
of ladies by providing sewing machine, aquaculture pond for 
pisciculture, micro enterprises (phenyl production)  for women SHGs 
and PAFs, etc. But, no such projects were taken up by the company till 
date (November 2013). Collector, Angul stated (Dece mber 2013) that 
direction would be given to them to take up self-employment project.  
• In the 2 nd RPDAC (21 August 2009) meeting of an industry, Rev enue 
Divisional Commissioner (Northern Division), Sambal pur directed the 
Labour Officer to visit the Company and take the op inion of the 
labourers regarding discrimination of wages among t hose engaged 
from Odisha and those from outside the State and su bmit a detailed 
report to the Collector within a fortnight. But, neither did he submit the 
report nor was matter discussed in the subsequent RPDAC meetings.  
Government failed to review the decisions of RPDAC in case of above four 15  
industries due to which issues remained unaddressed.  
2.1.11.4 Inadequate intervention on issues of emplo yment/self 
employment   
As stipulated in Para 8 (1) (a) in ORRP 2006 Policy , employment should be 
ensured to PDFs and project authority should make s pecial efforts to facilitate 
skill upgradation/ training to nominated members of  each displaced/ other 
family.  
It was observed that though five industries in cons ultation with RPDAC 
targeted to sponsor 2085 members for ITI training, only 233 members were 
sponsored. Another five did not set any target but sponsored 720 members.  
• One 
16  industry was to establish an Industrial Training I nstitute at 
Naktideula as per decision in the RPDAC meeting. No  work has 
commenced (January 2014). 
Department stated (September 2014) that Collector, Sambalpur had 
directed the industry to set up ITI for skill up-gr adation of affected 
persons.  
                                                
 
15  Tata Power, Cuttack; KVK Nilachal Power Limited, C uttack; JITPL, Angul; SMEL, 
Sambalpur 
16  Shyam Metallics, Sambalpur 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit  
 19  
• Similarly, another industry 17  was also to set up an ITI at Rengali. This 
has not materialised yet. 
• So also in case of another industry 18 , decision was taken to locate 250 
acre of land for construction of Biju Patnaik Farmers Training Institute. 
In the 2 nd  RPDAC (September 2010), it was decided to complete  the 
location process by November 2010. Scrutiny reveale d that the 
institute was not established (January 2014) and no  further RPDAC 
was convened to follow up the issue.  
Department stated (October 2014) that RDC (CD), Cut tack shall hold 
meeting of RPDAC within short time to discuss the m atter of 
establishment of Institute.  
2.1.12 Resettlement and Rehabilitation benefits 
Private land acquired under Land Acquisition Act 18 94 is compensated as per 
award passed by the concerned Collector of the dist rict. Audit  noticed that 
` 187.09 crore of compensation including interest wa s kept undisbursed with 
Collectors as of March 2013 in case of 32 industrie s of 13 districts even after 
passing of award against acquisition of land for a period ranging between 1 
and 17 years as detailed in Appendix 2.2.  
In addition to land compensation, PDFs were entitle d to get employment/ cash 
in lieu of employment and other R&R assistance as given in the table below: 
Table 2.1: Showing details of R&R benefit 
R&R assistance Amount of assistance 
Provision of homestead land/ Self 
relocation assistance 
One-tenth of an acre of land/ self-
relocation assistance of 
 ` 50000  
House building assistance ` 1.50 lakh  
Maintenance allowance ` 2000 per month  
Assistance for temporary shed ` 10000  
Transport allowance ` 2000 or free transportation  
(Source: ORRP 2006) 
Scrutiny of records revealed that R&R benefits exte ndable to PDFs like 
compensation for multiple displacements, employment / cash in lieu of 
employment, etc. were not extended as discussed below: 
2.1.12.1 Payment of compensation money for multiple  displacements  
As per objectives of ORRP 2006, displacement should  be minimum, if not 
avoidable and as per paragraph 7 (iv) of ORRP, 2006 , where there is multiple 
displacement, additional compensation amounting to 50 per cent  of normal 
compensation payable, was to be paid to each displaced family over and above 
the normal compensation in the form of ex-gratia .  
                                                 
17   Bhushan Power and Steel (BPSL) 
18   IFFCO, Paradip  

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 20  
• Audit observed that 43 PDFs who were earlier displa ced due to 
Hirakud Dam project and settled in Lapang area unde r Sambalpur 
district were again displaced due to setting up of Aditya Aluminium 
Project (AAP). So also, 130 PDFs who were displaced  earlier due to 
Derjang project at Angul and settled in Basudevpur under Angul 
district were again displaced due to setting up of Jindal Steel and 
Power Limited (JSPL) at Nisha, Angul. But, addition al compensation 
of ` 2.38 crore and ` 5.88 crore due to 43 and 130 twice displaced 
families under AAP and JSPL respectively were not paid.  
Department stated (September 2014) that AAP Sambalp ur deposited ` 2.38 
crore with the Collector for the purpose, while in respect of JSPL Angul, RDC 
was looking into the matter.  
2.1.12.2 Non-payment of compensation  
As per Para 8 of ORRP 2003 for one industry 
19 , if some patch of land remains 
with a family/ person which is either economically unviable for further use or 
becomes inaccessible as a result of acquisition of surrounding land, then such 
portion of land shall be acquired for the project.  
• Audit scrutiny revealed that 14.27 acre of land in 14 villages of 
Kalahandi district became economically unviable due  to acquisition of 
surrounding land by VAL, Lanjigarh during 2002-08 o ut of which 
compensation was paid for 3.67 acre land. Remaining  land was not 
acquired.   
Department stated (October 2014) that notice under Section 9 (1) and  
9 (2) of LA Act 1894 was issued (January 2014). Due  to introduction 
of new Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettl ement Act, 2013 
revised estimates also were sent (August 2014) to I DCO for approval 
after which compensation would be disbursed.  
• Similarly during acquisition of land by Collector S ambalpur for AAP 
Sambalpur, 10.020 acre land of four persons remaine d within the 
acquired area. In the 5 th  RPDAC meeting (July 2011), it was decided 
that the company would purchase the missing land 20  directly from the 
land owners after obtaining permission under Sectio n 73(c) of Odisha 
Land Reforms Act. 
After audit pointed it out, Collector, Sambalpur st ated (January 2014) that 
after verification, direction would be given to the  company to pay the 
compensation amount.  
                                                
 
19  Vedanta Aluminium Limited (VAL ), Lanjigarh 
20  The land which could not be used by the owner due to acquisition of surrounding land 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit  
 21  
2.1.12.3 Non-extension of employment or cash in lie u of employment 
of ` 31.92 crore for PDFs 
As per Para 8 (I) (a) of ORRP 2006, families affect ed by displacement or loss 
of agricultural land shall be eligible for employme nt by the project authorities. 
For the purpose of employment, each original family  will nominate one 
member of such family. The project authority will g ive employment to 
nominated members of the displaced/ other families in prescribed order of 
preference 21 .Where employment cannot be provided because of rea son to be 
explained in writing, cash compensation in lieu of employment at the 
prescribed rate shall be provided to the displaced/ other families.  
Audit scrutiny revealed that 10 out of 32 test chec ked industries did not 
provide employment or one-time cash compensation of ` 31.92 crore in lieu of 
employment as of September 2014 to 588 project disp laced families as 
indicated in Appendix 2.3.  
2.1.12.4 Non-payment of self-relocation assistance of `` ``    3.38 crore 
As per para 8 (I) (d) and (e) of ORRP 2006, each di splaced family will be 
given at least one-tenth of an acre of land free of  cost in a resettlement habitat 
for homestead purpose or ` 50000 in lieu of homestead land.  
Audit found that though 490 families were displaced due to acquisition of land 
by nine industries in seven districts, neither the district authorities nor the 
company authorities took any initiative for payment  of self-relocation 
assistance of ` 3.38 crore as detailed in Appendix 2.4.  
Department stated (October 2014) that three project s like TISCO, Gopalpur, 
BSL, Dhenkanal and MPCL, Angul have provided self-r elocation assistance 
amounting ` 0.30 lakh per family to 102 families, ` 50.24 lakh to nine families 
and ` 11.95 lakh per family to four families respectivel y. In respect of OPGC, 
Government stated that 77 families were not actuall y displaced and not 
entitled for self-relocation assistance but fact re mained that out of 219 
identified as PDFs, 142 were provided with assistance leaving 77 families who 
are yet to get assistance.  
2.1.12.5 Non-payment of house building assistance  
As per Para 8 (I) (f) of ORRP 2006, Project Authority shall construct house for 
each PDF in the resettlement habitat or provide hou se building assistance of  
` 1.50 lakh to each of the displaced families settling in the resettlement habitat 
or opting for self-relocation elsewhere. 
• Audit noticed from list of PDFs and the Progress Re port, that 408 
PDFs in eight industries under six districts were not provided houses or 
house building assistance of ` 8.06 crore as detailed in Appendix 2.4.  
                                                
 
21   (1) Losing all land including homestead land, (2)  losing more than two-thirds of 
agricultural land and homestead land, (3) losing mo re than one-third of agricultural land 
and homestead land, (4) losing only homestead land but not agricultural land, (5) losing 
all agricultural land but not homestead land  

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 22  
• As per provisions contained in Para 2 (c) of ORRP 2 006, the list of 
displaced families was to be updated as on 1st day of January of the 
year in which physical displacement is scheduled to  take place.  Audit 
found that due to non-updation, 20 families (Dkorol  village: 17 and 
Kendukhunti village: 3) could not be included in th e PDF list and were 
debarred from house building assistance of ` 38.16 lakh in Utkal 
Aluminium International, Rayagada . Special LAO of Rayagada 
confirmed (January 2014) the fact and agreed to ini tiate necessary 
action in the matter . 
• Audit further found that though several families we re displaced for 
Kalinga Nagar Industrial Infrastructure Complex (KN IIC) after 2006 
by the district administration (Jajpur), non-updati on of list of affected 
families after 2006 resulted in exclusion of 52 fam ilies in the PDF list, 
who were debarred from the house building assistance of ` 1.07 crore.  
Department stated (October 2014) that efforts are b eing made for 
making payment at different rates of R&R benefits t o the families 
based on their date of displacement.  
2.1.12.6 Non-payment of allowance for temporary she d of ` 70.21 
lakh 
As per Para 10 (b) of ORRP 2006, assistance for tem porary shed for ` 10000 
shall be provided to each displaced family by the P roject Authority. Audit 
noticed that allowance for temporary shed of ` 70.21 lakh was not paid to 510 
PDFs in nine industries under seven districts as detailed in Appendix 2.4. 
Department stated (October 2014) that TISCO, Gopalp ur had disbursed 
allowance for temporary shed to 1457 PDFs and BSL, Dhenkanal to nine 
PDFs but TISCO did not provide the benefits to bala nce 102 PDFs. Besides 
408 PDFs under eight industries are yet to get the benefit.  
2.1.12.7 Non-payment of maintenance allowance of ` 1.68 crore 
As per Para 10 (a) of ORRP 2006, to ensure timely v acation, maintenance 
allowance of ` 2000 per month per displaced family shall be provid ed to each 
family for a period of one year from the date of vacation. 
Audit noticed that maintenance allowance of ` 1.68 crore was not paid to 508 
PDFs in nine industries under seven districts as detailed in Appendix 2.4. 
Department stated (October 2014) that the Company a uthorities were 
instructed in July 2014 to pay the amount in case o f AAP, Sambalpur and 
SMEL, Sambalpur.  There was undue delay in issuing instruction.  

Chapter 2 Performance Audit  
 23  
2.1.12.8 Non-extension of benefit to homestead-less  persons 
Scrutiny of proceedings of RPDAC on OPGC, Jharsugud a revealed that a 
decision was taken in meeting (November 2011) to id entify all persons 
occupying the Government land and displaced due to establishment of the 
project who would be issued with RoR to get benefit  of R&R. But, no steps 
were taken by the district Collector to identify affected families through SES.  
Department stated (October 2014) that instructions were being issued to all 
concerned to comply with the aforesaid provision. 
2.1.12.9 Short payment of Rehabilitation assistance  of 
`` ``    6.66 crore 
due to non-revision of assistance as per indexation  
As per paragraph 13 of ORRP 2006, Rehabilitation Gr ant is indexed once in 
every two years to the Wholesale Price Index (WPI) with 1st April 2006 as the 
reference date and is revised by the Government onc e in two years thereafter 
on the basis of WPI. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that although Governme nt revised the 
rehabilitation assistance on the basis of WPI, the project authorities made 
payment at pre-revised rate which resulted in short  payment of ` 6.66 crore as 
detailed in Appendix 2.5. However, district Collectors did not take up the 
matter with the project authorities for payment of differential amount to PDFs.  
Collector Jajpur stated that project authorities were making payment as per the 
R&R Guidelines 2005 and intimated (September 2014) that the industrial units 
were instructed to deposit the differential amount which would be disbursed 
on receipt to the concerned beneficiaries.  
2.1.12.10 Traditional occupation  
As per Para 8 I (b) of ORRP 2006, Project Authority  under guidance of the 
Collector concerned will make adequate arrangement to provide vocational 
training to at least one member of each displaced/ other family so as to equip 
him/ her to start his/ her own small enterprise and  refine his/ her skills to take 
advantage of new job opportunities.  For those engaged in traditional 
occupations/ handicrafts/ handlooms, suitable training shall be organised at the 
cost of the project authority to upgrade their existing skills.  
Audit scrutiny found that JSPL, Angul provided live lihood support through a 
project named as Jeeban Jibika , in which women from the PAFs/ PDFs were 
employed in production of household articles like s oap, fruit juice, etc. which 
were marketed by JSPL. However, Audit found from re cords of other 
industries that no such facilities were provided. O ne such case is discussed 
below: 
• It was observed from the proceedings of RAC (Februa ry 1999) that 
mostly people of villages of Manssurkota, Basonaput i, Kalipalli, 
Sindhigaon and Paikapada, depended upon Kewra plant s (bushes) to 
earn their livelihood by making scent (perfume) fro m Kewra flowers. 
Due to acquiring of land by TISCO, people of those areas lost their 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 24  
livelihood. As per clause 11 of the Guidelines for TISCO Project 
Gopalpur, it was to carry out compensatory plantati on of Kewra in the 
vicinity to provide livelihood support to the PDFs/  PAFs. During field 
visit (December 2013) by the audit team jointly wit h staff of 
Collectorate (LAO), audit did not find any evidence  of plantation of 
Kewra plants by TISCO Project, Gopalpur either in t he rehabilitation 
colony or its periphery. As a result, the dependant  families lost their 
regular source of income.   
Department stated (October 2014) that 40 Kewra plan tations were 
taken up during 1996-99 in rehabilitation colonies.  But, no plant was 
noticed during joint physical verification. 
2.1.12.11 Non-provision of shops/ service units  
As per Para 8 I (g) of ORRP 2006, Project authority  will construct shops and 
service units at feasible locations at their own co st for allotment to project 
displaced families opting for self employment and p referably to physically 
challenged and members of displaced SC & ST communities.  
Audit observed that in 27 out of 32 test checked in dustrial projects in 12 
districts, project authorities did not construct sh op/ service units for affected 
people. Though these issues were discussed in RPDAC  meets, no action was 
taken except in one case of JSPL, Angul, where mark et complex was 
constructed and allotted to the affected people. Go vernment in R&DM 
Department stated (September 2014) that the issue w as to be looked into and 
intervention would be made to sort it out. 
2.1.12.12 Non-issue of RoR to Project displaced fam ilies 
Para 7 (viii) of R&R policy stipulates that Record of Rights (RoRs) of the land 
and houses allotted to the displaced persons should  be handed over to them by 
Collector while resettling them in the resettlement habitat.  
Audit scrutiny revealed that 3996 plots were allott ed in nine out of 13 districts 
covering 14 out of 32 industries to the displaced f amilies and Collectors of the 
respective districts distributed RoRs to only 2692 families (67 per cent ) and 
for the balance 1304 families, ownership of the lan d was not established 
despite their occupation of land. The industry wise  details are indicated in the  
Appendix  2.6.  
Confirming the facts in the exit conference held on  26 September 2014, 
Additional Chief Secretary, R&DM Department remarke d that since mutation 
was not a legal process, time constraint was not fe lt. Thus, RoR was not given 
to PDFs for two to nine years. 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit  
 25  
2.1.12.13 Non-extension of additional rehabilitatio n support to PDFs/ 
PAFs of Gopalpur 
As per MoU signed between one 22  industry and Government of Odisha, 
3790.107 acre of land was acquired during 1995 in C hhatrapur and Konishi 
Tahasil of Ganjam district.  Due to acquisition of such land, 1559 families were 
displaced (PDFs) and 2220 families were affected (P AFs). State Government 
issued (March 1996) a separate guideline for govern ing the resettlement and 
rehabilitation issue for the displaced and affected  people.  However, the 
industry could not come up. Subsequently, Governmen t decided (2007) that 
the land acquired for steel plant would be utilised  for development of 
multiproduct Special Economic Zone (SEZ).  But, no development could be 
made in the acquired land even after lapse of 18 ye ars.  Government decided 
(July 2013) that the additional package to PDFs/ PA Fs  be provided by the 
industry, which was not agreed to by the company. D ue to non-receipt of 
additional assistance, PDFs and PAFs submitted (Dec ember 2013) a 
memorandum to Government and the decision was pending till date.   
2.1.13 Assets & Infrastructure 
2.1.13.1 Non-assessment of value of structures of a cquired public 
 properties  
As per Para 6 of the ORRP 2006, if the public prope rty like school building, 
club house, hospital, panchayat ghar , electric installation and places of 
worship is affected due to acquisition of land, the n the value of such property 
shall be deposited with the Collector. Either proje ct authority or district 
administration shall take up construction at the pl ace as would be determined 
in consultation with the representatives of the displaced persons. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that 13 public properties w ere acquired during the 
course of acquisition of land by four companies. Th e cost of these structures 
was not assessed by LAO and realised by the district authorities. 
Department stated (October 2014) that assessment co st of ` 10.52 lakh was 
made in respect of five structures and in respect o f balance, Executive 
Engineer (R&B) was requested to assess the cost.  
2.1.13.2 Non-provision of benefits for resettlement  habitat 
As communicated (June 2011) by R&DM Department, a c ommittee under 
Chairmanship of Project Director, R&R with Tahasild ar and representative of 
project authority as members would oversee the cons truction and maintenance 
of the common facilities of the rehabilitation colo ny. As per guidelines on 
“utilisation of periphery development fund of Gover nment”, the project 
proponent must look into the interest of the displaced/ affected persons. 
Audit noticed that the benefits provided by the com pany were deficient on 
many counts such as inadequate health facility incl uding absence of piped 
                                                
 
22  TISCO, Gopalpur 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 26  
water supply in 10 colonies, non-availability of cr emation ground including 
provision of pond in 12 colonies, absence of street  light and road facility in 
five colonies, poor road maintenance in six colonie s, absence of place of 
worship in six colonies and absence of required edu cational institutes in 10 
colonies, the details of which are indicated in Appendix 2.7. Some such cases 
are discussed as follows: 
• Though it was decided in the 4 th  RPDAC of Dhenkanal district for BSL 
to excavate a community pond in the resettlement ha bitat, no such 
pond was constructed due to which inhabitants were compelled to use 
polluted water of Kisinda nullah  flowing near the colony.  
• In another case, decision was taken in the 2 nd  RPDAC meeting (August 
2007) that Tata Project should establish an English  medium School 
with provision of classes from KG to +2 standard in project area for the 
children of displaced families. But, the school was not established.  
2.1.14 Periphery Development work 
As per ORRP 2006, project authorities shall be resp onsible for periphery 
development as decided by RPDAC within the guidelin es of the State 
Government. Guidelines on utilisation of periphery development fund provide 
that industrial projects shall provide fund for per iphery development and 
minimum 70 per cent  of the periphery development fund shall be utilise d in 
the affected villages.  
Audit found shortcomings in periphery development work as discussed below: 
2.1.14.1 Non-execution of integrated water supply p roject 
As per the requirement of the people of the adjoini ng areas of major industries 
in Sambalpur district, RDC (Northern Division) and Collector Sambalpur 
proposed a water supply scheme (Integrated Water Supply Project) to cover 22 
villages to be executed by the Executive Engineer, RWSS Division, 
Sambalpur. Accordingly, two project authorities 
23  deposited ` 8.67 crore 
towards periphery development for execution of the project. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that Collector released (De cember 2011 and March 
2012) ` 33 lakh out of deposit amount of ` 8.67 crore to EE RWSS, 
Sambalpur for preliminary work, i.e ., levelling of site, purchase of levelling 
equipment, etc. 
Department stated (October 2014) that district admi nistration took steps for 
review of the project work timely and the work was under process. However, 
the fact remains that after lapse of two and half y ears, only preliminary work 
has been initiated.  
                                                
 
23   BPSL Sambalpur ( ` 3.50 crore) and VAL Jharsuguda ( ` 5.17 crore) 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit 
 27 
2.1.14.2 Non-maintenance of periphery development w orks 
As per guidelines, maintenance of assets is to be d one by project proponent. 
During joint inspection along with the district aut horities, it was seen that due 
to non-maintenance by BSL, the approach road to Nar endrapur village of 
Dhenkanal district was waterlogged frequently preve nting the general public 
from smooth conveyance. 
2.1.14.3 Non-utilisation of periphery development f und 
Audit found that ` 36.48 crore towards periphery development fund lay 
unutilised with the Collectors of three districts as indicated below: 
Table 2.2: Statement on accumulated balances of unutilised periphery fund 
(` in crore) 
Name of 
industry 
Authority with 
whom funds 
deposited  
Amount 
deposited 
 
Accumulated 
balance with 
Authority 
Remarks 
BSL Collector, 
Dhenkanal 
1.80 2.50 No decision to utilise the fund in 
RPDAC as of March 2014 
INDAL and 
BPSL 
EE, RWSS 
Division, 
Sambalpur 
1.58 1.58 Piped water supply project was 
not taken up.  
BPSL, 
Sambalpur 
Project 
Director, 
ATMA 
0.39 0.39 No information on utilisation of 
fund with Collector in respect of 
fund placed by him with Director 
for agricultural development.  
BRPL, 
Keonjhar & 
others 
Collector, 
Keonjhar 
153.29 32.01 Fund lying with the Collector 
without any plan/ programme. 
Total 157.06 36.48  
(Source: Compiled by Audit from the records of Collectors) 
Audit noticed that in major cases contribution to p eriphery development fund 
had not been made as the project proponents were un dertaking development 
works by themselves and thus no control was exercis ed by the District 
Collectors. The table given above is only indicativ e of the fund deposited by 
the Industries with District Collector or Project D irector, ATMA or Executive 
Engineer lying unutilised. Special LAO, Sambalpur s tated that the funds 
released to ATMA would be approved post-facto in RPDAC meeting and 
direction would be given for utilising the fund for  the purpose of agricultural 
extension work in the vicinity of the project area.  
During beneficiary interview conducted by audit in presence of representative 
of Collector with the displaced persons in rehabili tation colony, audit noticed 
that the fund was not provided to ailing members ou t of the corpus fund 
created for the welfare of the colony thereby defea ting the purpose of creation 
of such fund.  
2.1.14.4 Inadmissible expenditure out of Periphery Development Fund 
on sectors which were not approved in the guideline 
As per provisions contained in periphery developmen t guidelines, funds could 
be utilised under certain heads like health, educat ion, livelihood support, 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 28  
pre-school education, irrigation, drinking water pr ovision, individual benefit, 
sanitation and sewerage, etc. As per instruction (J uly 2006) of R&DM 
Department, where the RPDAC makes any deviation fro m the approved  
guidelines issued by Government, such decisions rec ommended for deviation  
shall be subject to approval of Government. 
Audit Scrutiny revealed that Collector, Sambalpur i ncurred expenditure of 
` 11.93 lakh on different heads not admissible under  the guidelines viz . 
electricity bill of Collectorate ( ` 4.16 lakh), salary, wages and other 
administrative expenses ( ` 1.45 lakh) and construction work at different police 
station ( ` 6.32 lakh). Collector, Sambalpur stated that admini strative 
expenditure was incurred out of interest money and construction work of 
police stations was taken up with the approval of R PDAC. In the exit 
conference (September 2014), Additional Chief Secretary, R&DM Department 
expressed his concern over the issue and instructed  concerned officers to be 
careful in future in observing scheme provisions to  recoup the inadmissible 
expenditure incurred, which was yet to be done as of November 2014. 
2.1.15 Environmental issues 
2.1.15.1 Environmental pollution by the industrial projects 
As per Para 3 of ORRP 2006, one of the objectives o f the policy of the 
Government is to ensure environmental sustainabilit y through participatory 
and transparent process. Industrial pollution by wa y of forest loss, discharging 
of industrial effluents into water bodies and emiss ion of toxic substances into 
the atmosphere is a matter of concern for the people of the affected area.  
Audit observed from the proceedings of the RPDAC me etings, inspection 
report of Pollution Control Board and review procee dings on plantation that 
project authority and District Collector did not ta ke sufficient steps to combat 
pollution as the problem continued to persist in ca se of seven industrial 
projects in Dhenkanal, Ganjam, Jagatsinghpur, Jajpu r, Kalahandi and 
Sambalpur. Collector, RPDAC and project authorities  did not take any step to 
conduct environment impact assessment in the projec t affected area. Some 
cases of environmental pollution are given below:  
• In case of Bhushan Steels Limited in the district o f Dhenkanal, the 
industry was releasing toxic effluents to Kisinda and Lingara nullah  round 
the year violating the instruction of the Governmen t and State Pollution 
Control Board (SPCB).  
Department stated (October 2014) that thermal power plant of the industry 
and blast furnace-II were sealed (August 2013 and N ovember 2013). 
Report on reducing pollution due to sealing was awaited. 
• In respect of VAL, Lanjigarh in Kalahandi district,  audit noticed from the 
observations of Inspection report made by SPCB, Odi sha (10 April 2013) 
that the lining in the dirty water pond was not per iodically checked, the 
observation well at the ash pond was in defunct sta te and rehabilitation of 
red mud in the filled up/ abandoned waste cell of r ed mud pond was not 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit  
 29  
done by VAL, for prevention of groundwater contamin ation. The 
Collector did not furnish the compliance report to the above objections 
raised by SPCB, Odisha. 
• Collector & District Magistrate, Jajpur in an inter im compliance report on 
proceedings of 5 th  RPDAC meetings (September 2012) intimated that a 
Committee had been constituted to examine pollution  status at JSL and 
collected (January 2013) sample from Gandanal nullah , which was sent 
for laboratory test. The report was still not received (September 2014). 
• In case of BPSL, Sambalpur,  from the proceedings of 1 st  RPDAC meeting 
(August 2007) it was observed that BPSL had not con structed the ash 
pond for the power plant, though plant was commissi oned in 2003 and 
ash was dumped at different places.  
Government stated (October 2014) that thermal power  plant and blast 
furnace of BSL, Dhenkanal discharging industrial ef fluents, were closed 
from August 2013 and November 2013 respectively for  violating Water 
and Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Acts and necessary 
instructions were issued for other industries for early action. 
2.1.15.2  Non-achievement of  plantation target   
As per the decisions taken in the RPDACs and review  meeting, plantation 
should be made on large scale by way of creating green belt in the factory area 
and in the periphery through avenue plantation to c ombat pollution. But, audit 
observed that, there was shortfall in achievement o f the RPDAC approved 
target in 10 out of 32 industrial projects in four districts. The district 
administration did not take any effective step to a chieve the targets. In rest of 
22 industrial projects, Collector or RPDAC did not fix any target for plantation 
in the periphery due to non-holding of meeting time ly or non-raising of 
requisite issues in the meeting.  
The contention of audit was agreed upon by Governme nt in its reply (October 
2014) with the remark that necessary remedial steps  would be taken to review 
the status of plantation by formation of a committe e and all out efforts would 
be made to fulfil the shortfall. 
 
2.1.16 Monitoring and Grievance Redressal  
2.1.16.1 Inadequate RPDAC meeting 
As per Para 16 of ORRP 2006, a RPDAC was to be cons tituted for each 
project undertaken in the State and meeting was to be held for discussing and 
taking decisions on implementation of R&R Policy once in every quarter. 
Audit observed that required numbers of RPDAC meeti ngs were not held in 
respect of 32 sampled industrial projects as only 1 35 meetings were held 
against 786 meetings required. Due to non-conductin g of meetings at regular 
intervals, decisions taken in previous meetings cou ld not be followed up and 
ultimately decisions remained unaddressed.  

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 30  
2.1.16.2 Review and monitoring of implementation  
As per Para 17 of ORRP 2006, there will be a counci l headed by the Chief 
Minister to advise, review and monitor implementati on of R&R policy. 
Government of Odisha in R&DM Department instructed (August 2012) that 
review meetings should be held at least once in a m onth by the respective 
Collector and District Magistrate and once in two m onths by the respective 
RDCs.  
Scrutiny revealed that State Level Council on Reset tlement & Rehabilitation 
(SLCRR) met only once on 18 June 2008 in which seve ral decisions such as 
issues on land compensation, mining, plantation, pollution, etc., were taken up. 
But, no second meeting had since been convened.  
Further, the Collectors/ RDCs of the sampled distri cts did not conduct any 
meeting after August 2012. No action was taken on d ecision taken in various 
review meetings during January 2006 to September 2009 in case of Dhenkanal 
District. Data in respect of other districts could not be made available to audit.  
There was no comprehensive database available with Department as 
mentioned earlier ( Paragraph 2.1.9 ) regarding PDF and PAFs of the State for 
effective monitoring of R&R assistance, inter-alia , due to which 798 PDFs  
were not properly rehabilitated. Government, after empanelling the agencies 
for conducting SES survey did not monitor their per formance despite 
irregularities noticed in their survey reports affe cting R&R activities. 
Department conducted review meetings mainly on land  acquisition issues. 
During nine departmental meetings held during April  2012 to June 2013, 
while 294 issues were discussed on acquisition of l and, only 42 R&R related 
issues were discussed in meetings. This led to inad equate attention on R&R 
issues which ultimately remained unaddressed.  
Department stated (October 2014) that steps were be ing taken to conduct 
periodical review with instruction to all concerned to act suitably.  
2.1.16.3 Absence of efficient grievance redressal m echanism 
Para 20 of ORRP 2006 provides for setting up of an effective grievance 
redressal mechanism at district level to deal with grievance of the project 
affected people relating to resettlement and rehabi litation with intimation to 
the project authorities to set up such forum at their individual level.  
But, audit observed that no specific mechanism was followed at the 
Collectorate level to receive grievance petitions u nder R&R issues except 
under the general grievance cell. Those relating to R&R issues were forwarded 
by district administration to the project authoriti es for consideration. But, no 
follow up action was taken.   
Test check of records of two industries showed that  out of 2222 grievances 
received, only 880 were settled. 

Chapter 2 Performance Audit  
 31  
LAOs stated that necessary instruction would be iss ued to project authorities 
to set up grievance redressal cell for early settlement.  
2.1.17 Conclusion  
Performance Audit on Resettlement and Rehabilitatio n of people affected by 
industrial Projects in Odisha revealed instances of  benefits not reaching the 
affected people for a host of reasons ranging from absence of proper planning 
to inadequate survey and ineffective monitoring of R&R activities at district 
and department level. As a result, 798 PDFs in resp ect of 13 out 32 industrial 
projects displaced during 1992-2013 were not proper ly rehabilitated and 
benefits due to them were not extended. Complete da tabase in respect of 
number of people affected/ displaced, employment pr ovided, etc., was not 
available either at department or at district level.  
Socio-economic surveys (SESs) intended as guides an d basis for preparation 
of R&R plans were not conducted in respect of 14 in dustrial projects on 
subsequent acquisition of land. Creation of awarene ss among the affected 
families through well defined comprehensive communi cation plans, was 
lacking. RPDACs constituted for respective project to approve R&R planning 
and its implementation for affected people left gap s in their functioning. 
RPDAC did not review decisions leaving large number of issues unaddressed.  
Employment or one-time cash compensation in lieu of  employment was not 
provided to 588 project displaced families by indus tries. There were cases of 
non-payment of rehabilitation assistance like compe nsation for double 
displacement, missing land, self-relocation allowan ce, house building 
assistance, etc . RoRs to 1304 families were not given depriving the m of 
ownership of their land despite its occupation.  
There were cases of inadequate health facility , absence of piped water suppl y, 
absence of street light, road facility, non-provisi on of pond, etc. Periphery 
development fund was lying unutilised with Collecto rs of three districts. 
Project authorities did not conduct environmental impact assessment including 
adequate arrangements for management of factory effluents. 
Required numbers of RPDAC meetings were not held in  sampled districts. 
Review meetings conducted by the RDC and Collectors  were inadequate and 
no follow up actions were taken. Grievance redressa l mechanism was 
inadequate as several petitions were lying unattend ed. Department conducted 
review meetings without adequate attention to R&R issues.  

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 32  
2.1.18 Recommendation  
Government may consider: 
• ensuring regular review meetings with follow up act ion at district and 
government level in time bound manner;  
• maintaining a comprehensive database at Government and district level 
containing project wise families displaced, affecte d, resettled, benefits due 
and provided including  grievances received and settled; and 
• instituting a separate grievance redressal mechanism for R&R issues. 

  
  
CChhaapptteerr  33  
  
CCoommpplliiaannccee  AAuuddiitt  
  
Para 
Number 
Topics Page 
3.1 Higher Education in the State 33-73 
3.2 Transparency in inviting tender, award of work 
and contract management  
74-86 
3.3 Implementation of Rashtriya Swasthya Bima 
Yojana in Odisha  
86-103 
3.4 Working of District Rural Development Agencies 
in the State 104-115 
3.5 Implementation of MAMATA scheme in Odisha 116-120 
3.6 IT audit of e-Sishu maintained by Odisha Primary 
Education Programme Authority (OPEPA) 
121-141 
 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
33 
CHAPTER 3 
 
Compliance Audit 
HIGHER EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
3.1  Higher Education in the State 
 
Executive Summary 
The primary function of the Higher Education Depart ment was to establish, 
maintain and regulate educational institutions impa rting higher secondary, 
degree and post-graduate education in the State and  to ensure academic 
excellence at all these levels. To improve access t o higher education throughout 
the State, it supports non-Government educational institutions through payment of 
grants-in-aid towards full/ part salary cost of eligible staff employed therein.  
Audit of ‘Higher Education in the State’ revealed t hat the Department did not 
prepare perspective plan for regulating growth of e ducational institutions (EIs), 
improving access of students to higher education in  backward areas of the State 
and enforcing quality standards in EIs. Despite requirement of National Policy on 
Education (NPE) 1968 and Government resolution (Jul y 1989), higher secondary 
education was not separated from higher education.  
Compliance to Laws, Rules and Regulations by the Dr awing and Disbursing 
Officers was poor. Budgetary control was deficient as ` 36.89 crore out of total 
savings of ` 413.67 crore during 2008-14 was not even surrender ed. The State 
was deprived of central assistance of ` 21.36 crore for setting up of eight degree 
colleges in low Gross Enrolment Ratio districts, ma inly due to delay in decision 
making.  
Permission and recognition to EIs by Government and  affiliation by Universities/ 
Council of Higher Secondary Education (CHSE) were g ranted without assessing 
the educational need, existing facilities and avail ability of prescribed 
infrastructure. There was undue delay by 2 to 39 ye ars in grant of permanent 
affiliation by Universities to 24 test checked degr ee colleges even after 
completion of temporary affiliation of two years. M ost of the test checked EIs 
were running without infrastructure like land with title, buildings with adequate 
number of classrooms, examination hall, library, la boratory and other 
infrastructure.  
About 42.58 per cent of teaching posts in Governmen t EIs, 35.41 per cent in 
Universities and 15.10 per cent in aided EIs remain ed vacant as of March 2014. 
Vacancies were not rationalised. In 13 test checked  Government EIs while no 
teacher was available in 17 subjects, 12 surplus te achers in these subjects were 
found to be continuing in five other EIs. Transfer and postings were not made in a 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
34 
rational manner. Lack of transparency and fairness in recruitment and promotion 
of teaching staff were also noticed. 
Academic Regulations, standards and reforms prescri bed by UGC were not 
adopted and enforced. Academic Performance Indicato rs (APIs) prescribed 
(2010) by UGC for teachers of degree and post-gradu ate courses were not 
introduced. There was delay in declaration of resul ts and issue of certificates. 
Only 108 (22 per cent) out of 495 affiliated  aided  degree colleges of four test 
checked Universities received accreditation from Na tional Assessment and 
Accreditation Council as of June 2014.  
Sanction of grants-in-aid (GIA) was not made in a f air and equitable manner and 
inadmissible payment of GIA of ` 201.50 crore during 2008-14 to ineligible 
teaching staff (461), teaching staff appointed in d eparture of procedure (242) as 
well as to those based on misrepresentation of cont inuity of posts (15) was 
noticed. Management of court cases relating to GIA was poor. Internal control 
mechanism was weak and internal audit was inadequate. 
3.1.1 Introduction 
The mandate of the Higher Education Department as per The Orissa Education 
Act 1969 (OE Act) was to establish, maintain and regulate educational institutions 
(EIs) imparting higher secondary (HS), degree and post graduate (PG) education 
in the State through grant of permission as well as recognition for their opening, 
continuance and to extend financial support as per its economic capacity.  
As of March 2014, seven Universities1 were functioning under the Department of 
which six regulated affiliation, academic and examination matters of 659 degree 
(+3) colleges under their control. Similarly, Council of Higher Secondary 
Education (CHSE) regulated the above aspects of 1493 junior colleges2. Besides, 
168 Sanskrit colleges were also functioning in the State under Sri Jagannath 
Sanskrit Vishvavidyalaya. Out of 2320 EIs, 99 were in Government sector while 
remaining 2221 were in nonvGovernment sector, out of which in 1400 EIs, grantsv
invaid towards full/ part salary cost was paid to eligible teaching/ nonvteaching 
staff by the Department (March 2014).  
3.1.2 Organisational structure 
The Principal Secretary is the Chief Controlling Officer (CCO) of the Department 
and exercises administrative control over all educational institutions functioning 
under the Department. The Principal Secretary is assisted by Director of Higher 
Education (DHE), Director of Vocational Education (DVE) and three Regional 
                                                 
1 Utkal University at Bhubaneswar; Sambalpur University at Burla; Berhampur University at 
Berhampur; Fakir Mohan University at Balasore; North Odisha University at Baripada; 
Ravenshaw University at Cuttack (unitary University) and Sri Jagannath Sanskrit 
Vishvavidyalaya at Puri 
2  EIs imparting higher secondary education 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
35 
Directors of Education (RDsE) stationed at Bhubaneswar, Berhampur and 
Sambalpur. Responsibility of conducting and monitoring academic activities of 
degree and higher courses are entrusted to Universities which are headed by Vice 
Chancellor (VC) as the executive head and in respect of higher secondary courses 
by the Chairman of CHSE. 
3.1.3 Audit objectives 
Audit was conducted with the objectives to assess whether: 
• Required planning and institutional arrangements were in place to fulfil the 
objective of promoting, maintaining and regulating Higher Educational 
Institutions; 
• Laws, rules and regulations (LRR) relating to management of cash/ funds as 
well as other matters were duly complied with by the Department, Drawing 
and Disbursing Officers and Educational Institutions; 
• Prescribed physical infrastructure including human resources were available 
and recruitment of teaching staff was fair, transparent and their services 
were utilised effectively; 
• Academic activities at both Government and nonvGovernment colleges 
were carried out in an efficient and effective manner;  
• Grantsvinvaid to nonvGovernment EIs were provided timely and adequately 
in a fair, equitable and transparent manner; and 
• Internal control mechanism including internal audit was in place and was 
adequate. 
3.1.4 Audit criteria 
The criteria for audit were drawn from the following documents: 
• The Orissa Education (OE) Act 1969 as amended from time to time and 
rules made thereunder; 
• National Policy on Education 1968 and 1986; 
• The Orissa Universities Act 1989 (OUA 1989); 
• The Orissa Universities (First Statute) 1990 (OUFS 1990); 
• Orissa (NonvGovernment Colleges, Junior Colleges and Higher Secondary 
Schools) Grantsvinvaid Orders of 1994, 2004, 2008 and 2009 (with 
amendments) ; 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
36 
• Orissa Treasury Code, Orissa General Financial Rules, Orissa Public Works 
Department Code, etc. and other Department specific Acts and Rules; 
• Regulations issued by University Grants Commission (UGC) from time to 
time; 
• Instructions/ guidelines/ orders issued by the Government/ UGC from time 
to time. 
3.1.5 Scope of Audit 
Audit was conducted during January to August 2013 and February to March 2014 
covering the period 2008v143 with test check of records of Higher Education 
Department, DHE, DVE, three RDsE, CHSE, State Education Tribunal (SET), 
State Selection Board (SSB), four4 (4) out of seven Universities, four (4) out of 23 
National Cadet Corps (NCC) offices, 905 out of 2320 EIs selected through 
statistical sampling method as detailed in Appendix 3.1.1 . Technical education 
not being dealt by the Department, was excluded from the scope of this Audit. 
3.1.6 Audit Methodology 
The Audit objectives, criteria, scope and methodology were discussed with the 
Principal Secretary of the Department on 02 August 2012 in an Entry Conference. 
Apart from test check of records of sampled units, joint physical inspection of 
assets created and facilities available in EIs, interviews of students and teachers 
were also conducted to ascertain availability of required infrastructure and quality 
of education, based on suggestions of a group of eminent academicians consulted 
(February 2013) in Audit for the purpose. Audit findings were discussed with the 
Department in an exit conference held on 3 June 2014 and with the Vice 
Chancellors of test checked Universities on 13 November 2014. Replies of the 
Principal Secretary, wherever received, were suitably incorporated in this report at 
appropriate places.  
AUDIT FINDINGS 
3.1.7.  Planning and institutional arrangements 
3.1.7.1  Absence of long term perspective planning 
Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007v12) emphasised reducing regional, social and 
gender gaps in education sector, increasing access to higher education as well as 
Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) in educationally backward areas. Besides, as per 
                                                
 
3  Academic activities for academic years 2008v09 to 2012v13 
4 Berhampur University, Berhampur; Fakir Mohan University, Balasore; Ravenshaw 
University, Cuttack and Utkal University, Bhubaneswar 
5 23 Government EIs, 51 nonvGovernment aided EIs and 16 unaided EIs  

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
37 
codal6 provisions, the Director was to prepare Master Plan for establishment of 
junior colleges and Universities for degree colleges. 
Audit noticed that despite instructions (June 2009) of the Chief Secretary to 
Departments to prepare five year perspective plan indicating key action areas and 
stipulation in the codal provisions, the Department did not do so. There was one 
degree college available for population ranging from 1,01,082 (Nuapada) to 
6,09,381 (Nabarangpur) in nine7 backward districts against the State average of 
64,384. Similarly, one junior college was available for population ranging from 
60,122 (Rayagada) to 1,74,109 (Nabarangpur) in five backward districts8 against 
State average of 32,317. 
Despite inadequate number of colleges, the Government of India (GoI) grant of  
` 21.36 crore for setting up of eight degree colleges in low GER districts, could 
not be availed due to nonvidentifying locations within stipulated time frame as 
discussed at Paragraph 3.1.8.1. 
Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that the Department had decided not to 
grant permission for opening of new colleges but on expanding the existing ones. 
The fact remained that regional imbalance still persisted and long term planning 
that could have rationalised the spread of institutions was not done. 
3.1.7.2  Non-separation of junior colleges from deg ree colleges 
On the backdrop of National Policy on Education 1968, Government set up 
(1982) CHSE to affiliate and regulate academic and examination activities in 
junior (+2) colleges and introduced 10+2+3 structure from the academic session 
1983v84 with an aim to separate junior colleges from degree colleges. To achieve 
the same, the Government resolved (July 1989) that Director would prepare a list 
of +2 colleges for their tagging with high schools within six months (December 
1989) and separation of physical infrastructure and human resources of colleges 
within next three years (from 1989v90).  
Audit noticed that process of such tagging was not started even after 25 years 
(August 2014) of Government’s resolution. A decision taken (October 2011) for 
transfer of Government junior colleges to the control of School and Mass 
Education Department from the academic year 2012v13, had also not been acted 
upon (August 2014) due to which junior and degree colleges were functioning 
with common staff and infrastructure. This did not allow the lecturers of degree 
                                                 
6 Rule 3 of ‘The Orissa Education (Establishment, Recognition and Management of Private 
Junior Colleges/ Higher Secondary Schools) Rules 1991’ and Statute 253 (3)(d) of OUFS, 
1990 
7 Boudh (1,09,979), Gajapati (1,43,970), Ganjam (1,03,534). Kandhamal (1,04,565), Koraput 
(1,52,993), Malkangiri (1,22,545), Nabarangapur (6,09,381), Nuapada (1,01,082) and 
Rayagada (2,40,490) 
8 Kandhamal (66,541), Koraput (65,568), Malkangiri (1,02,121), Nabarangpur (1,74,109), 
Rayagada (60,122) 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
38 
colleges to specialise in their respective subjects, which run counter to achieving 
excellence in their respective specialised fields. 
While admitting the fact, Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that 
Government agreed for such separation in principle and some more time would be 
required to achieve full separation. Such separation has not been achieved yet and 
is indicative of lack of commitment to such reform. 
3.1.7.3  Defunct College Development Council 
Statute 252 of the OUFS 1990 envisaged constitution of College Development 
Council (CDC) in each University which, inter-alia, is responsible for facilitating 
affiliated colleges in getting recognition of UGC, efficiency in receipt and 
utilisation of grant from UGC, etc. 
Audit noticed that the post of Director of CDC was abolished (February 2000) by 
the Department after which none of the four test checked Universities constituted 
any such Committee as of June 2014. In absence of CDC, the activities of 
colleges were not properly monitored due to which, 283 degree colleges (57 per 
cent) out of 495 affiliated degree colleges9 under three test checked Universities 
could not obtain recognition from UGC making them ineligible for UGC grant for 
their development. 
Besides, 148 affiliated colleges of five Universities could not utilise ` 27.59 crore 
up to 31 August 2012 out of ` 67.71 crore received from UGC under 11th Five 
Year Plan. 
Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that Universities had already been 
instructed in December 2013 to make CDC vibrant and Utkal University (UU) has 
already constituted CDC which would monitor academic activities and other 
matters in affiliated colleges. 
3.1.7.4 Constitution and frequent dissolution of Go verning Bodies (GBs) 
As per Section 7 (2) and 7 (A) of OE Act, Government was responsible for 
constitution of GBs of all aided colleges for ensuring proper conduct of academic 
activities, making availability of infrastructure facilities, etc. for quality 
education. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that the EIs in the nonvGovernment sector are set up by 
individuals/ trusts/ societies who are responsible under Section 6 and 6 (A) of OE 
Act for ensuring availability of resources for smooth function of EI. Further, as 
per Section 7 (1) of the Act, every EI would have a Governing Body (GB) which 
would be responsible for proper management of the EI. Audit noticed the 
following:  
                                                 
9 Excluding technical and professional colleges as those colleges did not come under 
administrative purview of Higher Education Department 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
39 
• There were no evidence of membership register, meetings, etc. pertaining to 
promoters of sample EIs. However, there was no enabling provision in the 
OE Act or Rules framed thereunder for ensuring their continued 
involvement to make available required resources for creating 
infrastructure, etc. 
• Department frequently dissolved (June 2004 and August 2009) and 
reconstituted (September/ December 2005 and June 2010) GBs of aided 
colleges thereby affecting quality education as academic activities in these 
colleges remained unmonitored. On dissolution of GBs, Department 
designated concerned Additional District Magistrate/ SubvDivisional 
Magistrate as President and the Principal of the college as Secretary of 
concerned GB. However, other members were not inducted in the GBs. As 
per codal provision, GB should meet at least four times in a year to monitor 
the activities of the college. As against this, in seven10 out of 51 sample 
aided colleges, the GB did not meet at all during 2008v14 while in 18 
colleges the GB met 1 to 16 times against the requirement of 24 meetings. 
Thus, due to absence of promoter as well as GB, nonvGovernment EIs suffered 
from infrastructural deficiencies as discussed at Paragraph 3.1.10. 
Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that due to lack of seriousness by GBs 
for better management of colleges, at times Department was forced to dissolve the 
GBs as a deterrent measure. 
3.1.7.5  Absence of academic head in non-Government  aided colleges 
Principals of colleges are required to supervise the work of other teaching and 
nonvteaching staff and were also responsible for administration of the college. 
Audit noticed that the post of Principal was not created in any of the aided EIs. 
Department was routinely declaring the senior most teaching faculty of the EI 
concerned as the Principalvinvcharge on the basis of seniority. As a result, 
effective administration and academic management were lacking for ensuring 
quality education as discussed at Paragraph 3.1.14. 
Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that Government was aware of such 
situation and creation of a separate cadre for Principals of 488 aided colleges was 
under active consideration of the Government and a decision in this regard would 
be taken soon. 
                                                 
10 Jamankira Degree College; NAC College, Burla; Srinivas Junior College, Mangalpur; 
Panchayat Junior College, Palsagora; Deogarh College; Attabira College; Athamalik College 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
40 
3.1.8 Compliance with Laws, Rules and Regulations 
Principal Secretary has to oversee the activities of the field functionaries as well 
as DDOs to ensure that the provisions of budget manual, financial rules, treasury 
code and other Department specific laws, rules and regulations, executive 
instructions were duly complied with so as to fulfil the mandate of the 
Department. Funds for the Department were allocated under Grant 38 in State 
budget.  
During 2008v14, the Department received ` 7088.92 crore through budgetary 
allocation, of which ` 6675.25 crore were utilised during the same period as 
indicated in table below: 
Table 3.1: Budgetary provision and drawal of funds during 2008-14 
(`` `` in crore) 
Year Original 
provision 
Supplement-
ary provision 
Total 
provision 
Expenditure Savings Surrender 
2008v09 569.20 97.18 666.38  602.84 63.54 58.87 
2009v10 973.00 14.98 987.98  925.92 62.06 51.42 
2010v11 1018.03 350.51 1368.54  1325.03 43.51 43.69 
2011v12 1126.05 90.80 1216.85  1181.11 35.74 36.89 
2012v13 1292.78 30.26 1323.04  1181.04 142.00 121.26 
2013v14 1453.00 73.13 1526.13  1459.31 66.82 64.65 
Total 6432.06 656.86 7088.92 6675.25 413.67 376.78 
(Source: Appropriation Accounts for the years 2008-09 to 2013-14) 
Audit noticed that out of total saving of ` 413.67 crore, department did not 
surrender ` 36.89 crore and no reasons were found on record. Further there were 
instances of nonvcompliance with financial rules as well as department specific 
Acts and Rules, as discussed under: 
3.1.8.1 Surrender of provision of ` 16.20 crore due to non-establishment 
of degree colleges in backward districts 
Average Gross Enrolment Ratio11 (GER) of the State was 9.1 against the national 
average of 13.1 as of September 2007 as per the survey conducted (September 
2007) by GoI and 18 districts of the State were found to be low GER districts. In 
order to increase GER of these districts, UGC requested the State Government
                                                 
11 The ratio of actual college going students to actual number of population in the age group of 
18v23 years 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
41 
(December 2008 and March 2011) to submit project proposals for setting up of 
degree colleges at a projected cost of ` 8 crore per college with cost sharing of 1:2 
between the GoI (` 2.67 crore) and the State Government (` 5.33 crore) 
respectively. In February 2011 and March 2011, State Government took up the 
matter with GoI for 100 per cent  central assistance. Ultimately, Department 
submitted proposal for eight colleges only on 27 March 2012 i.e., just prior to 
completion of 11th plan period and the same was not considered by GoI. Prior to 
submission of proposal, the provision of ` 16.20 crore made in the budget towards 
State share was also surrendered (15 March 2012). Thus, nonvsubmission of 
proposals not only deprived the State from availing central assistance of ` 21.36 
crore12, but also students of these eight districts failed to get benefit of better 
access to higher education.  
Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that Government, in view of fund 
constraints, emphasised and pursued with Central Government for release of 100 
per cent central assistance, which could not materialise. He also assured to set up 
more degree colleges under Rastriya Uchhatar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA) in these 
low GER districts through Government funding/ Public Private Partnership (PPP) 
mode. 
3.1.8.2  Belated surrender of savings by DDOs 
As per Rule 144 (2) of Orissa Budget Manual (OBM) 1963, the DDOs should 
surrender anticipated savings out of budgetary allocation on or before 10th March 
of the concerned financial year. In 46 out of 74 test checked DDOs13, savings of  
` 37.94 crore were surrendered after the prescribed date i.e., 11 March to 31 
March during 2007v08 to 2012v13 and ` 14.73 crore was surrendered by 17 
DDOs after expiry of the financial year i.e., after 31st March of respective years. 
Principal Secretary assured (October 2014) that all the DDOs would be instructed 
to strictly comply with the provisions of OBM. 
3.1.8.3  Non-compliance with Treasury Code/ Financial rules 
Each head of the Department is responsible for enforcing financial discipline and 
strict economy at every step. He is also responsible for observance of all relevant 
financial rules and regulations in his Department. 
Audit noticed that provisions of Orissa Treasury Code (OTC) and Orissa General 
Financial Rules (OGFR) were not complied with by many DDOs which indicated 
that monitoring by the CCO was ineffective as detailed in table below:  
                                                 
12 At the rate of ` 2.67 crore for eight colleges 
13 109 sampled units were under 74 DDOs 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
42 
Table 3.2: Non-compliance with provisions of financial Rules, Treasury Code 
Rule position  Nature of non-compliance in brief  Number 
of DDOs 
involved 
Supplementary 
Rule (SR) 509 
of OTC 
Mismanagement of advance : Advance of  
` 36.05 lakh advanced to employees, executing agencies for 
different purposes like examination, purchase of stationery, 
execution of repair works etc. remained unadjusted/ 
unrealised for period ranging from more than one month to 
29 years14 while advance of ` 70.09 lakh remained 
unadjusted as of March 2014 for which agevwise and partyv
wise analysis was not done. 
 
 
14 
An amount of ` 39.70 crore15 paid to different staff/ 
suppliers/ executants for purposes like examination, 
excursion, academic activities etc. during August 1971 to 
March 2014 by four test checked Universities remained 
unadjusted/ unrecovered as on 31 March 2014 which 
included ` 11.22 crore paid by Utkal University (UU) to 207 
teaching and nonvteaching staff of the University during 
March 1973 to March 2013. Besides, ` 6.63 lakh advanced 
by Berhampur University (BU) to 81 teaching and nonv
teaching staff during August 1971 to November 2006 who 
were no longer there due to superannuation (64)/ death (17) 
remained unadjusted/ unvrecovered (June 2014). 
 
 
4 
Rule 20 (i) of 
ChaptervIII of 
Orissa 
Universities 
Accounts 
Manual 1987 
Non-reconciliation of bank account despite huge 
discrepancy: Difference of ` 3.81 crore (Fakir Mohan 
University (FMU): ` 1.32 crore and BU: ` 2.49 crore) 
between bank balance as per cash book and bank statement 
in two test checked Universities as on 31 March 2014 was 
not reconciled (June 2014) for which the possibility of 
misappropriation cannot be ruled out. 
 
2 
SubvRulev6 (1) 
of Orissa 
Treasury Code 
VolumevI 
Non-deposit/ delay in depositing fees and fines int o 
Government account : Against the codal provision of 
depositing revenue receipts collected on behalf of the 
Government into Government account within three working 
days where the bank is situated in the same station or seven 
days from the date of receipt where no bank is situated in the 
same location, tuition fees of ` 11.96 lakh collected during 
2008v13 was not deposited into Government Account as of 
March 2014 by one test checked nonvGovernment aided 
college and two Universities16. In 10 nonvGovernment aided 
colleges17, tuition fees of ` 8.20 lakh collected from students 
was remitted to the treasury after delay of 13 days to 19 
months.  
 
 
14 
                                                 
14  One month to less than six months: `15.60 lakh; above 6 months to less than one year: ` 3.41 
lakh; 1 year and above to less than three years: ` 8.18 lakh; 3 years to less than 5 years: 
 ` 5.19 lakh; 5 year and above to less than 10 years: ` 2.61 lakh and 10 years and above:  
` 1.06 lakh 
15 UU: ` 31.37 crore; BU: ` 1.18 crore, FMU: ` 4.07 crore and RU: ` 3.08 crore 
16 Agarpada College, BU and RU 
17 Panchayat Samiti College, Belpada; Deogarh College; Attabira College; Sahaspur College; 
Pipili College; Charampa Mahavidyalaya, Charampa; Nimapara College; Anchalika 
Panchayat College, Sujanpur; Anandpur College; Baruneswar Mahavidyalaya, Arei, Jajpur 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
43 
Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that all the DDOs would be instructed 
to strictly comply to the provisions of OTC and OGFR. 
3.1.8.4  Non-collection and deposit of EPF contribu tion 
As per Section 1 (3) of Employees’ Provident Fund (EPF) and Miscellaneous 
Provision Act 1952, the scheme is applicable to industrial establishments and 
other establishments employing twenty or more employees. The scheme was 
optional for employees drawing total emoluments of ` 6500 and above. However, 
in cases where benefit of EPF scheme was extended earlier, the same cannot be 
withdrawn at a later stage. Audit noticed that: 
• In three EIs18, with 46 eligible employees who were covered under the 
scheme, EPF contribution of ` 21.96 lakh was not recovered after extension 
of GIA in shape of block grant (BG) from February 2009 up to March 2014. 
• In 13 EIs, no deduction towards EPF was made in respect of 396 eligible 
employees under the scheme. 
Thus, the provision of EPF Act was not complied with by the EIs and the 
Department did not monitor its implementation. As a result, concerned employees 
were deprived of the intended benefit of this welfare scheme.  
Principal Secretary assured (October 2014) that necessary instructions to 
Principals of all the aided colleges to recover EPF dues from the concerned 
employees and deposit the same with EPF authorities every month would be 
issued which would also be examined by District Level Consultants (DLCs) and 
RDEs during their inspection to these EIs. 
3.1.8.5 Irregular payment of medical allowance and reimbursement of 
medical claims by UU 
Mention was made in C&AG’s Audit Report19 (Civil) for the year ended 31 
March 2003 regarding extra expenditure of ` 1.82 crore incurred by UU during 
1995v2003 on payment of medical allowance at a higher rate than that prescribed 
by the Department in June 1994 and June 2002. In response, the Department 
instructed (October 2009 and February 2010) the University authorities to 
discontinue the same forthwith with the warning that in case of nonvcompliance to 
said instruction the functionaries concerned would be held responsible. 
Audit noticed (January 2012 and December 2013) that despite this, the University 
continued to pay medical allowance at enhanced rate20 up to 2012v13 incurring 
further excess payment of ` 2.24 crore during 2003v04 to 2012v13. The 
                                                 
18 Jamankira Degree College, Sohela Degree College, Sohela and Somnath Junior 
Mahavidyalaya, Mundamari 
19 Para 3.1.4: Irregular payments to staff 
20 At ` 3000 per annum against ` 1000 per annum prescribed by the Department 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
44 
University, however, stopped payment at enhanced rate during 2013v14.  
Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that UU had not complied with its 
directives. Recovery of excess payment is awaited (October 2014).  
Compliance to Department specific Laws, Rules and Regulations 
3.1.9 Regulation of non-Government EIs through gran t of permission and 
recognition  
OE Act 1969 empowers the Department to grant permission (Section 4 and 5) and 
recognition (Section 6 and 6vA) to EIs and prescribed the detailed procedure 
thereof. Principal Secretary as the head of High Power Committee21 (HPC) is 
vested with powers to grant permission and recognition. After grant of recognition 
and before admitting students, each EI has to apply and obtain affiliation of CHSE 
in case of higher secondary schools and junior colleges and of University 
concerned in case of degree colleges for which detailed procedures were 
prescribed in concerned Act and Rules22 . 
Audit noticed following:  
3.1.9.1  Grant of permission  
Section 4 and 5 of OE Act 1969, inter-alia, prescribed that any promoter 
intending to establish new EI, new stream or open additional subjects or increase 
in students’ strength, etc. has to apply to Prescribed Authority23 for permission. 
The applicant has to furnish undertaking and affidavit to the effect that required 
resources and infrastructural arrangement would be made and continued in the 
event of permission being granted. HPC headed by the Principal Secretary has to 
grant permission based on inspection and recommendation of concerned RDsE. 
Audit noticed that the Department did not follow uniform criteria for grant of 
permission as discussed below:  
• There was no uniform view on creating new EIs, improving the standard of 
existing EIs and bringing qualitative improvement in higher education 
sector. 
• In HPC meetings (22 February 2007 and 14 March 2007), 17 applications 
for junior science colleges for permission for Bhubaneswar Municipality 
area were considered of which four were approved and the remaining 13 
                                                 
21 Headed by the Secretary of Department and comprised of Director, representatives of Law 
and Finance Department, etc. 
22  Section 11 (1) of the Orissa Higher Secondary Education Act 1982 read with Regulation 89 of 
the Orissa Higher Secondary Education Regulations 1982 for higher secondary schools/ junior 
colleges and Universities under Section 12 (e) of the Orissa Universities Act 1989 read with 
Statute 172 of the Universities First Statutes 1990 
23 Regional Director of Education concerned 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
45 
applications were ordered for joint inspection of the Department and CHSE 
although there was no such provision in the OE Act. Subsequently, 
permission was granted to two24 colleges while applications of five colleges 
were rejected (28 March 2007) by HPC on the grounds that there was no 
educational need in the locality whereas two new colleges were permitted 
(Koustuv Institute of Science and MITS School of BiovTechnology) to be 
opened in the same area at Bhubaneswar on ground that the proposed 
colleges would function in the existing engineering college campus to feed 
the engineering colleges. 
Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that to increase GER and access to 
higher education, Government was liberal in granting permission and recognition 
to promoters to open new colleges. 
3.1.9.2  Grant of recognition  
Section 6 of the OE Act 1969, inter-alia, prescribed that on receipt of permission, 
the promoter of EI has to apply to the prescribed authority for grant of recognition 
on or before 30 November of the academic year in which the institution starts 
functioning. The application along with the recommendation of the prescribed 
authority is to be then scrutinised by the HPC, who after inspection or causing 
inspection of EI to ensure availability of required infrastructure and human 
resources, as prescribed at section 6vA, shall make order either granting 
recognition or temporary recognition25 with or without conditions or reject 
application with recorded reasons.  
Section 6 (9) of the Act provided that in the event the EI has not fulfilled the 
conditions of recognition with regard to land, building and furniture and the HPC 
is satisfied that it has made reasonably adequate provision for accommodation, it 
may grant temporary recognition for period not exceeding one year at a time and 
not exceeding seven years. Extension of temporary recognition was to be made 
adopting the same procedure. 
Audit scrutiny revealed the following: 
• During 2007v12, HPC granted recognition to EIs in 3018 cases and in all 
such cases recognitions were granted after commencement/ lapse of 
educational session.  
• In 118 cases26, there was delay in disposal of application for grant/ rejection 
of recognition ranging from one to five years for which the concerned EIs 
could not obtain affiliation. In all such cases, Department granted ‘Special 
Permission’ to the EIs for enabling students to appear in the examination 
                                                 
24 HivTech Science College and Vivekananda Residential College 
25  On year to year basis subject to maximum seven years 
26  One to three years: 117, five years: one 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
46 
though there was no statutory provision for grant of ‘Special Permission’ in 
lieu of recognition and affiliation. 
• Though 11 private residential junior colleges failed to furnish title over the 
land as well as site plan and sketch plan, as required under Rule 5 (c) and 
Rule 11 (3) (c) of Orissa Education (Establishment, Recognition and 
Management of Private Junior Colleges/ Higher Secondary Schools) Rules, 
1991, HPC granted temporary recognition to these EIs. 
• Similarly, though nine private residential junior colleges received temporary 
recognition in first year of their establishment, they continued to function 
without recognition thereafter for period ranging from two to six years as of 
March 2014.  
• Though temporary recognition was not to be granted beyond seven years of 
first temporary recognition, in case of 39 streams27, (Arts, science and 
commerce) of 26 test checked junior colleges, HPC granted permanent 
recognition after eight to 37 years while two test checked Junior colleges 
continued without permanent recognition for more than 10 years due to 
nonvfulfilment of conditions of temporary recognition as of March 2014.  
• In case of 27 streams28 (Arts, science and commerce) of 22 degree colleges, 
the time gap between the year of establishment and grant of permanent 
recognition ranged from eight to 41 years.  
Thus, failure of the Department to grant recognition as per the statutory provision 
is indicative of ineffective internal control system in the Department. 
Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that in the interest of students who were 
enrolled, temporary recognition was continued beyond seven years and permanent 
recognition was granted only after fulfilment of conditions prescribed during 
temporary recognition. The fact, however, remained that most of the EIs were 
deficient in requisite infrastructure even after grant of permanent recognition as 
discussed at Paragraph 3.1.10. 
3.1.9.3  Non-linking permanent recognition with rel ease of grants 
The Government amended (July 1994) OE Act 1969 and inserted a provision vide 
Section 7 (c) creating a statutory regime for payment of GIA. The statement of 
reasons for such amendment was for formulation of consolidated rules/ orders 
laying down conditions of eligibility and criteria for payment of GIA in 
accordance with the policies of Government so as to make expenditure from 
public funds more purposeful. 
                                                 
27 8 to less than 10 years: 7; 10 to less than 20 years: 27; 20 to less than 30 years: 4 and 37 years: 
one 
28 8 to less than 10 years: 5; 10 to less than 20 years: 19; 30 to less than 40 years: 2 and 41 years: 
one 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
47 
Audit noticed that: 
• The Department did not link payment of GIA to Permanent Recognition 
(PR). As a result, an EI before being assured of its permanent existence 
could receive GIA. Test check of records revealed that Department had 
granted GIA29  to 14 test checked colleges although these colleges were 
granted PR much later. 
• In absence of such enabling provision, the EIs did not fulfil their 
infrastructural deficiencies as evident from the fact that one test checked EI, 
i.e., Balasore Mahila College which received GIA with effect from 1 June 
1994 received PR in October 2003 before having its own land and building. 
As a result, the EI was still functioning in building of a charitable 
organisation (September 2014). 
Principal Secretary admitted (October 2014) that permanent recognition was not 
treated as a prevcondition for grant of GIA/ BG to EIs with a view to expand 
higher education in the State. But, payment of GIA to EIs having no permanent 
recognition violated statutory provisions.  
3.1.9.4 Non-initiation of action despite failure in  fulfilling conditions of 
recognition 
During scrutiny of recognition files of 30 EIs under RDE, Berhampur, Audit 
noticed that 21 EIs failed to fulfil basic requirements of land, building, laboratory, 
library and qualified faculty within the stipulated period but were running 
thereafter without recognition. On this being pointed out in Audit, admission 
restriction was imposed by the HPC (October 2013) on 18 of them from the 
academic year 2014v15. RDE, Berhampur also intimated (December 2013) 
Department regarding deletion of the name of these colleges from the central 
admission process. However, despite such restriction, the Department again 
allowed (May 2014) these colleges to enrol students during 2014v15 without 
rectifying the deficiencies.  
Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that Government had rolled out a road 
map for colleges not fulfilling the conditions of recognition and affiliation and 
would take steps for their closure, if they failed to fulfil the infrastructure and 
other requirements by that time limit. 
3.1.9.5  Grant of affiliation  
Universities under Section 12 (e) of the OUA 1989 read with Rule 172 of the 
OUFS 1990 grant affiliation to PG and degree colleges. CHSE under Section 11 
(1) of the Orissa Higher Secondary Education Act 1982 read with Regulation 89 
                                                 
29   Grantsvinvaid being the full/ part salary cost was paid to teaching and nonvteaching staff of 
nonvGovernment EIs which were declared as aided based on criteria prescribed by 
Government from time to time 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
48 
of the Orissa Higher Secondary Education Regulations 1982, grant affiliation to 
junior colleges. These affiliations are given after the EIs received recognition 
from the Department. Objective of grant of such affiliation was to assure that the 
EIs adopt the prescribed syllabus, employ adequate and qualified manpower and 
related resources for smooth conduct of academic activities.  
For grant of affiliation, a Local Enquiry Committee (LEC) 30 was to conduct an 
enquiry to ascertain availability of accommodation for classrooms, equipment, 
students’ strength, qualification of the teachers, library facilities as well as 
financial conditions of the college, etc. No college should be allowed to admit 
students without affiliation with CHSE or Universities, as the case may be. The 
following deficiencies in grant of affiliation were noticed in audit: 
• Four out of 65 junior colleges and four out of 64 degree colleges31 test 
checked, continued to function without any affiliation for 9 to 27 years after 
lapse of temporary affiliation and were conducting examination in absence 
of affiliation. 
• Though Section 18 of OUA 1989 did not permit temporary affiliation of 
any college by University concerned for a period exceeding two years, yet 
the Universities granted affiliation to 24 test checked degree colleges after 2 
to 39 years of completion of temporary affiliation of two years.  
• In 52 out of 67 nonvGovernment EIs test checked, affiliation was granted by 
CHSE/ Universities despite nonvfulfilment of infrastructure criteria by the 
EIs as discussed at Paragraph 3.1.10.  
Principal Secretary assured (October 2014) issue of necessary instructions to the 
Universities/ CHSE to strictly follow codal provision for affiliation of EIs.  
3.1.9.6  Non-maintenance of service book and leave account  
As per Rule 17 (2) of the Orissa Education (Recruitment and Conditions of 
Service of Teachers and members of the staff of Aided Educational Institutions) 
Rules 1974 and Rule 22 (1) of the Orissa Education (Leave of Teachers and other 
Members of staff of Aided Educational Institutions) Rules 1977, the service books 
and leave accounts of staff of nonvGovernment aided EIs are required to be 
maintained. 
Audit noticed that despite such codal provision and instruction (November 2011) 
of Director to all aided EIs, service books in respect of 367 teaching and nonv
                                                 
30 A multivmember committee of University vested with the power for inspection, enquiry and 
pointing out the deficiencies 
31 Junior Colleges: Belabhumi Junior Mahavidyalaya, Avana; Balasore Mahila Junior College; 
Konark Bhagabati Junior Mahavidyalaya, Konark; Maidalpur Junior College. 
Degree Colleges: Korua Women’s Degree College; Bahugram Degree College; BN Sanskrit 
College, Tukuna and Konark Bhagabati Degree Mahavidyalaya, Konark 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
49 
teaching staff receiving GIA in shape of BG were not maintained by Principals of 
30 out of 51 test checked aided EIs. Further leave accounts in respect of 520 staff 
of 36 test checked aided EIs had also not been maintained. 
Principal Secretary assured (October 2014) issue of necessary instruction to RDsE 
and District Level Consultants (DLCs) to examine compliance to such 
requirement during their inspection/ visit to aided colleges and report any cases of 
deviation to Director for initiating action against concerned Principal. 
3.1.10  Availability of physical infrastructure  
Section 6A of the OE Act 1969 required an EI to fulfil the infrastructure 
requirements, as would be prescribed. Requirement of building and other 
infrastructure for junior and degree colleges were prescribed at Appendix I of 
Regulation 90 of The Orissa Higher Secondary Education (Amendment) 
Regulation 1982 as well as The Orissa Education (Establishment, Recognition 
and Management of Private Colleges) Rules 1991. 
3.1.10.1 EIs running without prescribed infrastruct ure  
Audit examined infrastructure availability in 180 EIs32 and four test checked 
Universities and noticed that EIs were running without land and building of their 
own, inadequate classrooms, libraries, reading room, laboratories with equipment, 
etc. as indicated in table below: 
Table 3.3 : Non-availability of prescribed infrastructure in test checked EIs 
Item Norm for junior 
colleges 
Norm for degree  
colleges 
Number of test 
checked EIs having 
deficient 
infrastructure 
Land with clear 
title 
Rural areas: 5 acre, 
Urban area: 3 acre 
Land with clear title 
(Rural areas: 3 acre, 
Urban area: 2 acre) 
37 (Less land) 
22 (No land) 
44 (No title over land) 
Classrooms  Five  
Gallery (for science 
stream)  
 
(i) 12 for student 
strength of 128 in Arts 
only 
(ii) 14 where there is 
three honours subjects 
(iii) 16 for Science 
stream of 128 strength 
in addition to (ii) above 
52 (Shortfall by one to 
20) 
Examination hall One  At least one  47 
Common rooms Separate Girl’s and 
Boy’s common room  
Separate teachers, Girl’s 
and boy’s common 
rooms  
10 (No teacher’s 
common room) 
18 (No girl’s common 
room) 
27 (No boy’s common 
room) 
                                                 
32 90 test checked EIs (Government: 23, aided: 51 and unaided: 16) and 90 other EIs for land 
availability (30 colleges per RDE) 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
50 
Toilets  Separate for boys and 
girls 
Separate for boys and 
girls 
7 (No toilet for girls) 
8 (No toilet for boys) 
Library room and 
attached reading 
room 
One each One each and one 
additional reading room 
for teachers 
9 ( No library) 
37 (No reading room) 
Laboratories Three for science 
stream 
One each for each 
science subject 
16 (shortfall one to 7) 
Practical room  One for each practical 
bearing subject 
One for each practical 
bearing subject 
Play ground with 
Physical 
Education 
Teacher (PET) 
Adequate provision for 
physical education 
Adequate provision for 
physical education 
15 (No playground and 
no PET) 
14 (No PET but 
playground available) 
11 (No playground but 
PET available) 
Hostel  Adequate number Adequate number 59 (No girl's hostel) 
56 (No boy's hostel) 
 
(Source: Joint physical inspection by the Principal  in presence of Audit and information 
furnished by the Principals)  
Besides, Audit also noticed that: 
• 27 EIs encroached 247.64 acre of Government land. Of this, 14 EIs33had 
built infrastructure entirely on encroached Government land. In response to 
questionnaire issued by Audit, the views expressed by teaching staff and 
students were following: 
/square4 278 (54 per cent) out of 515 teaching staff and 232 (31 per cent) 
out of 741 students interviewed expressed their dissatisfaction over 
deficient infrastructure like inadequate classrooms, poor condition 
of building and inadequate equipment. 
/square4 239 students (32 per cent) stated that sanitary conditions of their 
colleges were poor and unhygienic. 
/square4 126 students (17 per cent) stated that adequate laboratory facilities 
including equipment were not available in their colleges. 
Though these colleges did not fulfil the required norms regarding availability of 
prescribed infrastructure, they received approval/ recognition from the 
Department and continued affiliation from respective Universities/ CHSE and 
even GIA/ BG was released to these EIs. 
Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that considering the findings of Audit, 
the HPC resolved in October 2013 to issue show cause notice to colleges having 
inadequate infrastructure including land and instructed these colleges to acquire 
                                                 
33 Simulia College; Malkangiri College; DCC College, Tangi; Science College, Hinjilikatu; 
NAC College, Burla; Anandpur College; Dharmasala Mahila Mahavidyalaya; Kapilas 
Mahavidyalaya, Gandia; Anchalik Junior Mahavidyalaya, Birasal; Polasara Science College; 
Kotapad College; Pendrani Mahavidyalaya, Umerkote; Sabitri Women’s College; 
Mahamayee Mahila Mahavidyalaya, Berhampur 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
51 
basic minimum infrastructure at the earliest. He assured appropriate action for 
stopping GIA/BG and putting admission restriction after giving reasonable time to 
these EIs. 
3.1.10.2 Unfruitful expenditure on idle assets 
Though many test checked EIs were running with deficient infrastructure as 
discussed in preceding paragraph, yet in following cases infrastructure created at a 
cost of ` 2.40 crore remained unused/ idle thereby rendering the entire 
expenditure unfruitful as discussed under: 
• Without assessing the ground water level and making any survey regarding 
the depth at which water is likely to 
be available, one underground sump 
(UGS) was constructed (August 
2008) by BU through Central Public 
Works Department at a cost of  
` 48.57 lakh out of Twelfth Finance 
Commission grant with the objective 
to supply potable water to staff 
quarters and hostels. As three 
production wells, which were to 
supply water to the sump, when dug 
later, were found to be dry, the UGS was abandoned after completion in 
September 2012, rendering the entire expenditure of ` 48.57 lakh incurred 
unfruitful. This was also confirmed during joint inspection (December 
2013) of the UGS by the concerned engineer in the presence of Audit. 
• The Department without making plan for opening of +2 Science stream at 
Government Women’s College, Balangir, sanctioned (January 2010)  
` 1.21 crore and allotted ` 70.31 lakh for construction of one lecture theatre 
and four laboratory buildings through Roads and Building (R&B) Division, 
Balangir. The work was completed (February 2012) at a cost of ` 70.31 
lakh and was left idle. Further examination revealed that to utilise the 
buildings, the Principal requested (February 2012 and February 2013) the 
Department to open +2 science stream in the college, which was not 
accorded. Thus, construction of buildings far ahead of requirement, left the 
assets idle and rendered entire expenditure of ` 70.31 lakh incurred thereon 
unfruitful (March 2014).  
• Department accorded (October 2008 and January 2010) administrative 
approval for construction of buildings for 30 seated ladies hostel (` 50 lakh) 
and 10 staff quarters (` 71.48 lakh) for Sanjay Memorial Government 
Women’s College, Phulbani for execution through R&B Division, Phulbani 
and allotted funds for the purpose. Though buildings were completed in 
December 2011 at a cost of ` 1.21 crore, they remained unused (March 
2014) due to nonvexecution of external electrification as well as external 
Abandoned UGS of Berhampur 
University 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
52 
water supply works for which no provision was made in the estimate. As a 
result, completed buildings remained idle since December 2011 rendering 
entire expenditure of ` 1.21 crore unfruitful apart from not fulfilling the 
objective of providing better accommodation to staff and students of the 
college.  
Principal Secretary assured (October 2014) that University and college authorities 
concerned were instructed to complete the works and put the assets to use 
immediately and to fix responsibility for the unfruitful/ wasteful expenditure 
incurred. 
3.1.10.3 Belated execution 
State Government as well as UGC extend financial assistance to EIs for 
construction of ladies hostels. 
Audit noticed that: 
• UGC sanctioned ` 12.09 crore to 21 out of 90 test checked EIs during 10th 
and 11th Five Year Plans for construction of women’s hostel and released 
(August 2006 to December 2012) ` 6.19 crore. As of March 2014, two 
colleges (Ekamra College and Attabira College) completed ladies hostel at a 
total cost of ` 73.63 lakh while two colleges34 refunded (March and May 
2012) ` 17.50 lakh to UGC due to nonvavailability of land for construction 
of hostels. Two other colleges35, retained ` 20 lakh in savings bank 
accounts without utilisation while hostel buildings in remaining colleges 
were at various stages of construction/ left incomplete for over two to eight 
years as of March 2014 even after utilising ` 4.71 crore thereon.  
• In three colleges (Ekamra College, Panchayat Samiti College, Belpada and 
Deogarh College) ladies/ ST/ SC hostels were used as office, teacher’s 
common room, classroom, Principal’s room, etc. In one college 
(Kankadahad Junior College), ST/ SC hostel was rented to an Nonv
Government Organisation since 2008v09. 
Principal Secretary assured (October 2014) that he would enquire about delay in 
completion of hostel buildings and take action for their early completion. 
3.1.11  Human Resource Management 
Eleventh Five Year Plan emphasised recruitment of adequate number of qualified 
teaching staff for expansion as well as increase of the standard of higher 
education. 
                                                 
34 Balasore Mahila Degree College and Athamalik College 
35 Belabhoomi Mahavidyalaya, Avana and People’s College, Buguda 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
53 
3.1.11.1 Large scale vacancies leading to high stud ent teacher ratio 
Audit reviewed the sanctioned strength vis-à-vis personvinvposition in the 
Department including field offices, Government as well as nonvGovernment aided 
EIs and Universities of the State as of March 2014 and noticed large scale 
vacancies ranging from 7.97 to 61.78 per cent as indicated in the following table: 
Table 3.4: Vacancy position in the Department and EIs as of March 2014 
Unit Sanctioned 
strength 
Person-in-
Position 
Vacancy Percentage of 
vacancy 
Department, Directorate and 
other field offices 
565 343 222 39.29 
Government EIs 
Teaching 2842 1632 1210 42.58 
Nonvteaching 934 357 577 61.78 
Non-Government aided EIs 
Teaching 15817 13428 2389 15.10 
Nonvteaching 13819 12718 1101 7.97 
Universities 
Teaching 836 540 296 35.41 
Nonvteaching 2032 1284 748 36.81 
(Source: Information furnished by the Department and Universities) 
As may be seen from the table above, vacancies of teaching staff in Government 
colleges (42.58 per cent) and Universities (35.41 per cent) had become high. It 
was only in October 2013 that the Department initiated the process to recruit 624 
lecturers36on ad hoc  basis for Government EIs. Though overall shortage of 
teaching staff in nonvGovernment aided EIs were on lower side (15.10 per cent) 
the same was 23 per cent  in 30 such sample aided EIs. In 23 test checked 
Government (23) EIs, the vacancies were 45.44 per cent against the State average 
of 42.58 per cent.  
Further examination in Audit revealed that:  
• Though Rule 7 of the UGC (Fitness of Certain Universities for Grants) 
Rules 1974, inter-alia, required each PG teaching department in the 
University to have at least one Professor and one Reader, State Government 
had not created post of Professor in 11 PG teaching departments37 and 
Readers in five such departments38 of three out of four test checked 
Universities.  
• As against total sanctioned strength of 610 teaching staff in four test 
checked Universities, the actual personsvinvposition as on 31 March 2014 
                                                 
36 Junior lecturers for junior colleges: 272 and lecturers for degree colleges: 352 
37 Law in UU; Botany, Home Science, Linguistic and Women Studies and Resource Centre 
(WSRC) in BU; and Statistics, Philosophy, Sanskrit, Computer Science, Urdu and Persian and 
Bengali in RU 
38 Ancient Indian History, Culture and Archaeology (AIHCA) in UU, Women Studies and 
Resource Centre (WSRC) in BU and Computer Science, Urdu and Persian and Bengali in RU 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
54 
was 372 (61 per cent) with 23839 teaching posts (39 per cent) remaining 
vacant with vacancy of 49.21 per cent in UU followed by 31.37 per cent in 
RU, 32.90 per cent in BU and 29.16 per cent in FMU. Besides, in RU, no 
teaching staff were available in three PG teaching departments of Computer 
Science, Urdu and Persian Studies and Bengali. While teaching in 
Computer Science was imparted to 181 students enrolled during 2008v13 
entirely through guest faculty, there was none in remaining three subjects 
due to nonvavailability of teachers.  
• Despite shortage of teaching staff, UU had not completed (August 2014) the 
recruitment process initiated in February 2011 for 13 posts of Professors 
and 20 posts of Readers.  
• Against the UGC norm of student teacher ratio of 10:1 (Science) and 15:1 
(Humanities and Commerce) at PG level, same was found to be much in 
excess of the said norm in PG teaching departments of three test checked 
Universities i.e., 52:1 in RU, 34:1 in UU and 20:1 in FMU (2013v14). 
• In 13 out of 23 test checked Government colleges, no teacher was available 
in 17 subjects, against the requirement of 51. Moreover, 12 surplus teachers 
in the same subjects in five Government colleges were also continuing 
(August 2014). 
• In two subjects (English and Philosophy), 63 teaching staff found surplus 
were not posted to colleges with shortage of teaching staff though there was 
shortage of 95 teaching posts in these two subjects in the State. Similarly, in 
four40 out of 30 test checked aided colleges, no teacher was available in five 
subjects against requirement of seven (7) teachers. However, 9533 students 
were enrolled for these subjects in these colleges during academic years 
2007v13. 
• Against the UGC norm of student teacher ratio of 25:1 (Science) and 30:1 
(Humanities and Commerce) at degree level, same was found in Audit to be 
in excess of the said norm in affiliated degree colleges of two test checked 
Universities i.e., 59:1 in 78 degree colleges under FMU and 33:1 in 325 
degree colleges under UU (2013v14). 
Audit observed that although there was shortage of teaching staff, the Department 
had not effectively deployed the existing staff based on the requirement thereby 
affecting teaching in EIs. 
                                                 
39 Professorv50, Readerv64 and Lecturersv124 
40 Christ College, Cuttack (Psychology); Agarpada College, Agarpada (Logic, IT); Deogarh 
College, Deogarh (Mathematics); Anandpur College, Anadpur (Electronics, IT) 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
55 
3.1.11.2 Need for rationalisation of deployment 
The General Administration Department framed (July 1991) transfer guidelines 
which, inter-alia, required that no Class II and above officers should be allowed 
to remain in the same station for more than six years. Similarly, guidelines (July 
1991) for transfer of teaching staff of nonvGovernment aided EI, also provided for 
transfer after five years and permission to remain for additional two years on the 
grounds of administrative or academic exigencies. 
Audit noticed the following: 
• Transfers were effected by the Director/ Principal Secretary mainly on the 
basis of representations of teachers without linking to workload resulting in 
vacancies in some colleges and surplus in others. Largest concentration of 
surplus staff was noticed in the aided colleges in and around Bhubaneswar 
in six41 colleges involving 32 surplus teaching staff in 26 subjects. 
• 50 Lecturers and 39 Readers were continuing in 10 sampled colleges 
located at Cuttack, Bhubaneswar, Khordha and Puri for five to more than 20 
years.42 
• Besides, scrutiny of records relating to 1773 lecturers at Directorate level 
revealed that no transfer was effected during 2007v14 in 1014 cases.  
Principal Secretary while assuring introduction of transfer in all aided EIs soon, 
stated (October 2014) that the Department had already issued guidelines for 
transfer and was collecting information for rationalisation of vacancies on which 
appropriate action would be taken.  
3.1.12  Recruitment and promotion  
3.1.12.1 Lack of oversight in process of recruitmen t of faculty 
As per extant provisions, recruitment and promotion of teaching staff of State 
sponsored Universities were made by Selection Committee which were to include 
representative of the Department to ensure a fair process.  
The eligibility criteria for appointment of Lecturers, Readers and Professors in 
Universities were prescribed by UGC from time to time (1998 and 2010), the 
latest being in UGC Regulation 2010. While qualifying in the National Eligibility 
Test (NET) or acquiring Ph. D degree as per UGC Regulation 2009 was a 
mandatory condition for recruitment to the post of Lecturer, eight years of 
                                                 
41 Sri Sri Satyasai College for Women, Bhubaneswar (6); Kunja Bihari College, Barang (2); 
Ekamra College, Bhubaneswar (6); Pratap Sasan Junior College, Balakati (5); Prana Nath 
College, Khordha (5); Kamala Nehru Women’s College, Bhubaneswar (2) 
42 More than 5 years to less than 10 years: Government: 23, aided: 20; more than 10 years to less 
15 years: Government: 5, aided: 7; more than 15 years to less than 20 years: Government: 1, 
aided:4; more than 20 years: Government: 2, aided: 27 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
56 
teaching experience43 or equivalent to that of Assistant Professor excluding the 
period spent for Ph. D, minimum five publications as books or research policy 
papers and minimum Academic Performance Indicator score of 300 were prev
requisite for recruitment as Reader. Similarly, Ph. D in relevant discipline, 
minimum 10 publications, 10 years of teaching/ research experience were 
mandatory requirements for appointment of Professors.  
Audit noticed that during 2008v14, four test checked Universities recruited 221 
teaching staff comprising of Lecturers (12344), Readers (7045) and Professors 
(2846). In this regard, following emerged: 
• Out of 123 Lecturers recruited by four test checked Universities during 
2008v14, in one case in FMU a candidate neither having NET qualification 
nor Ph. D degree under UGC Regulation 2009 was appointed in deviation 
from the regulation of UGC as well as terms of advertisement made for the 
post. 
• Two Professors and four Readers were directly recruited in BU, though 
their research publications were not published in any referred journal 
having ISBN47/ ISSN48 number but were published in local magazines and 
University journal. In case of one Reader, two articles certified as accepted 
by the publisher were also accepted by the selection committee without 
actually having been published. 
• Utkal University appointed (January 2010) one candidate as Reader in 
Applied and Analytical Economics though said candidate did not possess 
required teaching experience and instead had only two years and three 
months teaching experience (excluding three years from 2004 to 2007 spent 
on research for Ph. D degree).  
• In another case in FMU, a candidate was selected for the post of Reader in 
Economics on the basis of his testimonial that he served as Assistant 
Professor from July 2003 to November 2012 in four institutions. Audit, 
however, noticed that the candidate was serving as Lecturer in one of the 
sampled EI during this period and was even granted (February 2010) block 
grant by the Department and continued there up to November 2012. Thus, 
the testimonials submitted by the candidate were inaccurate. 
Audit further noticed that in the above cases, the Departmental representatives 
were not present in the meeting of the Selection Committee. Thus, the oversight 
mechanism available to the Government was not availed to curb adhocism. 
                                                 
43 Five years under UGC Regulation 1998 
44 UU: 17, BU: 30, FMU: 17 and RU: 59 
45 UU: 20, BU: 7, FMU: 5 and RU: 38 
46 UU: 15, BU: 3, FMU: 2 and RU: 8 
47  International Standard Book Number 
48  International Standard Serial Number 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
57 
Principal Secretary assured (October 2014) to direct the VCs of concerned 
Universities to strictly follow the UGC Regulation on recruitment and fix 
responsibility in case of any deficiency. 
3.1.12.2 Departures in procedure of promotion of Un iversity teachers 
under CAS 
UGC vide its Regulation 1998 on Career Advancement Scheme (CAS) for 
promotion of Lecturers of affiliated colleges and Universities to Senior Lecturers, 
Readers and Professors, prescribed parameters and prevconditions thereof. The 
regulation, inter-alia, required completion of minimum period of five years, eight 
years and 10 years (eight years in case of promotion) in the grade of Lecturer, 
Senior Lecturer and Reader respectively. This was also revised in 2006 on making 
Academic Performance Indicators mandatory. Audit, however, noticed the 
following departures in promotion of teaching staff of test checked Universities 
under CAS: 
• In UU, one Lecturer (Senior Scale) was promoted (July 2007) to Reader 
retrospectively with effect from 31 December 2004 before completion of 
required five years (i.e., 31 May 2005) while one Reader in Commerce was 
promoted (September 2011) to Professor retrospectively with effect from 23 
February 2008 i.e., the date of award of Ph. D degree though concerned 
teaching staff had not acquired required eight years of experience as Reader 
on the date of promotion. 
• In FMU, one Reader of Business Management was promoted (March 2011) 
to Professor with effect from 12 November 2004 though teacher concerned 
published his research work only in 2009. Further, another Reader of 
Political Science in FMU was promoted (December 2012) retrospectively 
from July 2009, though the State Government had not implemented CAS 
from 1 January 2009 in the State. 
Principal Secretary assured (October 2014) of directing the VCs of concerned 
Universities to strictly follow the UGC Regulation on promotion under CAS and 
fix responsibility in case of any deficiency. 
3.1.12.3 Irregular recruitment of teachers in non-G overnment EIs 
Kothari Commission recommended (1972) that every post in affiliated colleges 
should be filled up after adequate advertisement and interviews through a 
selection committee duly constituted by the managing committee and having one 
or more experts, depending upon the importance of the post. It also recommended 
that unless a teacher was appointed through this procedure, no GIA should be paid 
for his salary, and there should be no hesitation in withholding such approval. It 
further recommended that those EIs which would fail to maintain standards or 
leave room for malpractice should be controlled more rigorously. 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
58 
Audit examined the appointment of teaching staff in 21 sampled nonvGovernment 
EIs who were granted block grant with effect from January/ February 2009 and 
noticed deficiencies in appointment in respect of 183 teaching staff as discussed 
below: 
• Non-compliance with statutory provisions: Institutions making recruitment 
have to comply with the provisions of Employment Exchange (Compulsory 
Notification of Vacancies) (CNV) Act 1959 as well as ‘The Orissa 
Reservation of Vacancies (ORV) in posts and services (for Scheduled Caste 
and Scheduled Tribe) Act 1975. It was, however, noticed that such 
provision was not complied with by any of the nonvGovernment EIs, where 
posts were filled up by the GBs.  
• Non-transparent appointment without giving wide pub licity to the 
vacancies: In eight test checked EIs, 82 teaching staff were recruited and 
appointed by the Governing Body without advertising the vacancies in 
newspapers. 
• Absence of Selection Committee: In 17 cases in seven test checked EIs, the 
teachers were appointed by the GBs without even constituting Selection 
Committees. 
• No subject Expert in the Selection Committee : In case of appointment of 
six lecturers in three EIs, there were no subject experts in the Selection 
Committee. 
• Appointments were made prior to conducting intervie ws: In two cases, the 
candidates were appointed prior to the date of interview. 
• Appointment of teaching staff not ranked first in t he list recommended by 
the Selection Committee: In 10 test checked EIs, 16 candidates were 
appointed by the concerned college despite the candidate having failed to 
rank first in the list recommended by the Selection Committee. However, 
the reasons for not appointing the candidate ranked first were not on record. 
• Selection of teaching staff by the Selection Commit tee before publication 
of result in Post Graduate: Though the percentage of marks scored in PG 
examination (54/ 55 per cent) was one of the important criteria prescribed 
by the Department for judging the eligibility of the candidates, in case of 
five lecturers in two colleges, Audit noticed that the candidates were 
selected and even appointed prior to publication of PG level results. 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
59 
Out of these 183 teaching staff, 50 were provided with BG amounting to ` 2.34 
crore under GIA order 2008 and remaining 133 teaching staff were provided with 
BG amounting to ` 10.67 crore under GIA order 2009 during 20 January 2009/ 1 
February 2009 to 30 September 2014. 
Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that to make appointment of teaching 
and nonvteaching staff by GBs during unaided period more fair and transparent 
the Department is considering issue of a guideline detailing the procedure to be 
adopted in line with that recommended by Kothari Commission. He also assured 
that the Department would not provide any GIA to any staff appointed irregularly 
henceforth and would ask GBs of recognised colleges to send their GB resolution 
to Director. 
3.1.13  Other human resources management issues 
3.1.13.1 Skill development opportunities for teachi ng staff 
Though National Policy on Education (NPE) 1986 emphasised the need for 
improving quality of teaching through enhancing motivation skills and knowledge 
of teachers through conduct of orientation courses (OC) and refresher courses 
(RC) for teaching staff of degree colleges and Universities, the same for teaching 
staff of junior colleges remained almost absent. Examination of service books and 
personal files of 1032 teaching staff of 40 test checked EIs revealed that 406 
teaching staff (40 per cent) had not undergone any such training during their 
entire career of 20 to 25 years. However, DHE nominated 27 teachers for RC/ OC 
more than once during a year. 
Principal Secretary assured (October 2014) introducing of a system of making inv
service training compulsory for each lecturer of junior colleges.  
3.1.13.2 Lack of uniformity in salary of lecturers of aided EIs 
The State Government in line with recommendations of Kothari Commission 
prescribed through Rule 9 of Orissa Education (Recruitment and Conditions of 
Services of Teachers and members of Staff of Aided Educational Institutions) 
Rule 1974 for payment of salary to the teachers of nonvGovernment EIs at par 
with their counter parts in Government EIs. Audit noticed that in sampled aided 
EIs, there was wide variation in salary structure for teachers doing same work i.e., 
drawing UGC scale (above ` 1 lakh per month), in receipt of GIA in State scale 
of pay (` 45,000 to ` 50,000 per month), receiving BG of ` 16114 and ` 500 to  
` 5000 per month for those engaged against management post. This led to nonv
compliance of above rule. 
Principal Secretary accepted (October 2014) the fact. 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
60 
3.1.13.3 Non-deployment of staff for gainful utilis ation of services  
Audit noticed following: 
• Though State Selection Board (SSB) remained defunct since 1997 due to 
imposition (20 April 1998) of ban on recruitment in aided EIs, the 
Department had not deployed eight out of 31 staff of SSB elsewhere for 
gainful utilisation of their services resulting in idle expenditure of ` 1.85 
crore incurred on their pay and allowances during 2008v14.  
• Similarly, though Department abolished Secretarial Practice and Shorthand 
Typing (SPST) and Tailoring from the syllabus of +2 from the academic 
year 1990v91, yet three instructors of three aided EIs receiving GIA were 
not redeployed elsewhere for gainful utilisation of their services for which 
GIA of ` 58.04 lakh paid to these idle staff during 2007v14 was rendered 
unfruitful.  
Principal Secretary assured (October 2014) revdeployment of the idle staff 
elsewhere. 
3.1.14 Academic activities  
CHSE, set up under the Orissa Higher Secondary Education Act 1982, regulated 
academic activities of higher secondary schools/ junior colleges of the State under 
the provisions of the Orissa Higher Secondary Regulation 1982 (OHSR) while 
Universities regulated the academic activities for PG and degree courses under the 
provisions of the OUA 1989 as well as the OUFS 1990.  
Deficiencies noticed in conduct of academic activities are discussed in succeeding 
paragraphs. 
3.1.14.1 Non-adoption of Regulations of UGC  
The academic activities of the higher educational institutions (degree and above) 
are subject to regulations of Union Government as per Article 246 read with Entry 
66 of ListvI (Union List) of Seventh Schedule. Thus, all Universities are bound to 
adhere to the regulations49 issued by UGC from time to time.  
Audit noticed that these regulations, inter-alia, envisaged that every University 
should ensure that the numbers of actual teaching days are not less than 180 in an 
academic year; evolve standards for manner of implementation of syllabus, 
namely, through lectures, tutorials, laboratory sessions, seminars, field work, 
projects and such other activities, etc. UGC impressed (January 2008) upon all the 
                                                 
49 UGC (Minimum Standards of Instruction for the Grant of First Degree  through Formal 
Education) Regulations, 2003; UGC (Minimum Standards of Instruction for the Grant of 
Masters Degree through Formal Education) Regulations, 2003; UGC (Maintenance of 
Standards in Colleges and Universities) Regulations 1986, 1998 and 2010 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
61 
Universities are to initiate academic reforms in post graduate, degree and diploma 
courses run in the Universities and affiliated colleges like (i) introduction of 
semester system in place of academic session, (ii) choice based credit system, (iii) 
curricular development, (iv) admission on merit basis and (v) examination 
reforms which included conducting interim evaluation of students. 
Department had also issued (June 1999 and November 2011) instructions to all 
colleges for preparation of academic calendar with provision of minimum 180 
teaching days in a year, indicating list of holidays, commencement of academic 
session, etc. and maintenance of lesson diary, lesson plan and ensuring 
punctuality in conducting classes. The Principals concerned were required to 
submit the consolidated report half yearly to the next higher authority and the 
annual report to the Director stating performance of each teacher. Audit noticed 
that: 
• None of the four test checked Universities adopted these Regulations and 
did not chalk out any plan of action for implementing the same. The 
academic calendar prepared by the Universities/ affiliated colleges did not 
assure availability of minimum 180 teaching days during 2008v09 to 2012v
13, as it contained only the list of holidays. Further CHSE/ Universities/ 
Department had not ensured conduct of teaching activity for at least 180 
days in a year. Test check of sample EIs revealed that the teaching activity 
was largely conducted during July to December only which fell short of 180 
days after excluding holidays, examinations, elections, seminars, etc. 
• Principals of 77 out of 90 test checked colleges did not prepare their reports 
up to 2012v13 in adherence to the instructions of June 1999/ November 
2011. The Department had also not insisted upon this. As a result, the 
standard of teaching remained unvassessed and unmonitored by the 
Department. 
• Though the Department issued instructions (June 1999 and November 
2011) for adherence to academic calendar, lesson plan, lesson diary by 
Government/ Aided EIs, similar instructions were not issued to unaided EIs 
though they received recognition and affiliation. 
• None of the four test checked Universities had implemented these academic 
reforms (July 2014). Further, grading system (July 2014) though required to 
be introduced since 2008v09 through abolition of mark system, was also not 
introduced by the Universities in affiliated EIs. System for periodic internal 
evaluation was also not implemented, thereby depriving the students from 
periodic evaluation of their performance. 
• None of the sampled EIs had been inspected during 2008v14 by Universities 
and CHSE. 
Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that Department is serious about 
introduction of academic reforms and standards in all degree colleges and 
Universities and assured to introduce these reforms/ standards in phases.  

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
62 
3.1.14.2 Maintenance of standards of EIs and evalua tion of teaching 
In order to assess standards of a higher educational institution, GoI set up (1994) 
the National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC50) for evaluation and 
accreditation of educational institutions. It evaluates educational institutions and 
award ratings which remained valid for a period of five years. The Department 
through notification (July 2002) required affiliated degree colleges/ Universities 
to mandatorily obtain NAAC accreditation by December 2003.  
Audit noticed the following: 
• Accreditation of few colleges with NAAC : None of the four test checked 
Universities had NAAC accreditation as of September 2014. Similarly, out 
of 495 affiliated degree colleges under the test checked Universities, only 
10851 (22 per cent) had NAAC accreditation as of September 2014. 
• Non-introduction of Performance Based Appraisal Sys tem: UGC, in its 
Regulation 2010 introduced revised scale of pay as well as Academic 
Performance Indicator (API) matrix for assessing the competence of the 
teachers and evaluating competence and performance of each teaching staff 
on the basis of which benefit of CAS would be awarded. The API included 
teaching, learning and evaluation related activities, covcurricular, extension 
and professional development activities, research and academic 
contributions. Though the Department adopted (14 December 2009) the 
revised pay scale as devised by UGC and CAS thereunder, but it neither 
introduced API nor ensured its implementation in Universities and EIs. As a 
result, teaching, learning, professional development, research as well as 
academic contributions of teachers remained unvassessed (August 2014). 
Principal Secretary assured (October 2014) that CDCs would monitor 
accreditation issue vigorously and Academic Performance Indicator as prescribed 
by UGC would be introduced soon.  
3.1.14.3 Conduct of research and academic activitie s 
The 11th Five Year Plan (2007v12) emphasised the need for augmenting research 
activities at University level. Further, Section 3 (5) (3) and proviso 4 (9) of Orissa 
University Act and Orissa Universities First Statute required Universities to 
promote original research and maintain individual data on research publications of 
each teaching staff. Audit noticed the following deficiencies: 
• Negligible research projects undertaken: None of the sampled Universities 
had prepared any plan to involve its teaching personnel in research activities 
nor set any department wise individual target. The Universities also did not 
maintain any database on research publications of individual teaching staff 
though 540 teachers were deployed in Universities as of March 2014. Four 
                                                 
50 An autonomous body established by the University Grants Commission (UGC) to assess and 
accredit institutions of higher education in the country 
51 UU: 85, BU:2 and FMU: 21 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
63 
test checked Universities received 9152 sponsored research projects from 
Central/ State Government of which only 2553 (27 per cent) were completed 
as of March 2014. Of 66 incomplete projects, two projects of 2009v10 and 
all 17 projects of 2010v12 relating to UU remained incomplete (March 
2014). Though UGC Scale of pay was given to promote research activities, 
no plan of action was formulated by the Universities to complete the 
projects in time. Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that Universities 
would be persuaded to increase their research activities and set targets for 
each and every faculty for being involved in research activities/ projects. 
• Registration and award of Ph. D degree: In FMU, records on registration, 
submission of thesis, evaluation and award of Ph. D during the period 
covered under Audit was not maintained. However, from examination of 
Ph. D degree notifications and proceedings of Subject Research Committee 
of the University, Audit noticed that 104 theses submitted by the scholars 
during September 2009 to May 2014 were pending for evaluation as of May 
2014. Though the Subject Research Committees (SRC) approved 38 
synopses during January 2009 to December 2010, registration numbers had 
not been issued till March 2014. Further, 229 applications received between 
February 2012 and February 2013 had not been examined by SRC for 
approval till June 2014. In UU, 951 Ph. D degrees were awarded during 
2008v14 with time lag of 66 to 2308 days in evaluation and award of 
degrees after submission of theses, beyond the prescribed period of six 
months. 
Principal Secretary assured (October 2014) that all Universities would be 
impressed upon to comply with the UGC (Minimum Standard and Procedure for 
award of M.Phil/ Ph. D degree) Regulation 2009. 
3.1.14.4 Enrolment 
Audit cross checked Higher Secondary results vis-a-vis seat availability at +2 
level in the State during the academic years 2007v08 to 2012v13 and noticed that 
at the beginning of academic session 2013v14 (June 2013), the State had 3.53 lakh 
seats at +2 level and 1.56 lakh seats at +3 level. However, about 88 per cent 
(2008v09) to 90 per cent (2012v13) of the enrolment at +2 level was done by nonv
Government EIs during the academic years 2008v09 to 2012v13 as indicated in the 
following table: 
                                                 
52  UU: 42, BU: 11, FMU: 6 and RU: 32 
53  UU: 10, BU:5, FMU:2 and RU:8 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
64 
Table 3.5: Enrolment of students in junior colleges 
Type of 
colleges 
Enrolment 
at +2 in 
2008-09 
Percentage 
to total 
enrolment 
Enrolment 
at +2 in 
2012-13 
Percentage 
to total 
enrolment 
Overall 
percentage of 
increase/ 
decrease 
Government 
Colleges  
25804 12 24149 10 (v) 6.41 
Aided colleges 
(488 category 
and 662 
category)  
111798 51 114192 50 2.14 
Total 
Government 
and Aided 
137602 
 
63 138341 60 0.53 
Unaided 
colleges 
78955 37 91161 40 15.45 
Total  216557 100 229502 100 5.98 
Source: Records/ Database of CHSE and HED 
Audit noticed that: 
• Availability of seats (3.53 lakh) at +2 level was adequate during 2008v09 to 
2011v12 academic years, considering the High School Certificate (HSC) 
pass out rate54, but the same was inadequate in academic year 2012v13 and 
2013v14 when the HSC passed students increased to 3.87 lakh during 2012v
13 for which the Department allowed the colleges to enrol 10 to 20 per cent 
more than their sanctioned seats.  
• Department did not monitor the trend of increasing number of students 
passed in HSC for taking capacity expansion measures accordingly, 
resulting in enrolment of students more than sanctioned strength. 
• In respect of degree courses, in 15 aided degree colleges (11 in nonvTribal 
Sub Plan (TSP) and four in TSP area) out of 64 test checked degree EIs, the 
percentage of enrolment ranged between 9.37 and 40 during 2008v13 of 
which low enrolment below 20 per cent was registered in six colleges (four 
in nonvTSP and two in TSP area) during 2007v10.  
Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that as major enrolment load was taken 
by 488 category aided colleges and 662 category BG colleges, the Department 
would try to strengthen these aided colleges. 
3.1.14.5 Delay in declaration of result and issue o f certificates 
As per the instructions (June 1999) of Department, examination results were 
required to be declared within 60 days of the completion of examination. After 
declaration of results, certificates are required to be issued as early as possible to 
                                                 
54 2008v09: 2.12 lakh, 2009v10: 2.57 lakh, 2010v11:2.74 lakh, 2011v12:3.11 lakh 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
65 
enable the students to proceed to higher studies and apply for employment. Audit 
noticed the following: 
3.1.14.6 Delay in declaration of examination result s 
RU took 146 days to declare the PG result during 2010. In respect of results of 
second year degree examination, while UU declared the same after 121 to 199 
days, BU and FMU declared the results after 71 to 127 days and 136 to 157 days 
respectively of completion of examinations during 2008v13.  
3.1.14.7 Delay in issue of certificates 
Though certificates are to be issued as early as possible, FMU had not printed 
certificates of 19,580 degree/ PG students belonging to its teaching departments 
and affiliated colleges passed during 2011, 2012 and 2013 as of May 2014. 
Similarly, UU had also not printed certificates for 1,50,455 PG/ degree students 
(May 2014), belonging to its own departments and affiliated colleges passed 
during 2008 to 2013. Though RU prepared certificates up to 2012, however, did 
not prepare certificates of 1792 PG/ degree students passed in 2013 (May 2014). 
Principal Secretary assured (October 2014) to address this issue on priority and 
ensure early issue of certificates. 
3.1.14.8 Dropout of students 
As per GER Survey of GoI (2008), 18 districts (60 per cent ) of the State 
registered low GER. The GoI had also fixed a target of attaining at least 15 per 
cent GER by the end of 11th Plan period. Dropout rate at junior level contributed 
to low GER. 
Audit noticed that in 63 out of 65 test checked junior EIs, the percentage of 
dropouts at +2 level ranged from 9.02 to 15.6355 during 2007v13. The 
Department, however, had not taken remedial measures. 
Principal Secretary assured (October 2014) to take steps to reduce dropout of 
students. 
3.1.15  Student welfare activities 
3.1.15.1 National Social Service 
The National Social Service (NSS) programme is implemented in the State with 
joint funding by GoI and State Government with basic objective of creating sense 
of social responsibility among students and solution of community problems. 
During six years ended 31 March 2014, the GoI released ` 10.42 crore and the 
State Government contributed ` 6.80 crore for NSS activities.  
                                                 
55 Dropout percentage: 2007v08: 14.13; 2008v09: 12.43; 2009v10: 9.02; 2010v11: 10.01; 
2011v12: 12.48; 2012v13: 15.63 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
66 
Audit noticed that: 
• After receipt of sanction of GoI, there was delay in sanction of funds by the 
Department up to 455 days. Similarly, the Director also delayed sanction 
and release of funds to the EIs and Universities by 218 days and 196 days 
respectively. 
• Two test checked Universities (UU and FMU) had not spent fund 
amounting to ` 77.78 lakh as on 31 March 2014 due to delay in release of 
fund by the Department. 
Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that delay in sanction and utilisation of 
fund under NSS had been reduced. 
3.1.16  Payment of Grants-in-aid to non-Government EIs 
To ensure availability of quality education in a continuous manner, the 
Government supports educational institutions (EIs) in nonvGovernment sector and 
released grantsvinvaid (GIA) to EIs on the basis of prescribed parameters to meet 
full/ part salary cost of both teaching and nonvteaching staff of 1400 EIs56 notified 
as ‘aided’ EIs. As of March 2014, Department extended GIA to 1400 nonv
Government aided EIs57 covering 13103 teaching staff58 and 12617 nonvteaching 
staff59. Out of these EIs, 610 received GIA in shape of full salary cost while 790 
EIs received GIA in shape of block grant60. During 2008v14, GIA amounting to  
` 3687.59 crore was released by the Government to these teaching and nonv
teaching staff. 
Audit noticed the following deficiencies in administration of GIA to nonv
Government EIs.  
3.1.16.1 Sanction of GIA on issue of executive inst ructions without a 
procedure 
Government introduced GIA system for nonvGovernment EIs in the year 1974 
and continued to release GIA to staff on completion of five years. However, there 
was neither any enabling provision in OE Act nor Rules made thereunder for 
continuance of GIA. The Government amended (July 1994) the OE Act and vide 
Section 7vC envisaged that the Government would set aside a fixed sum every 
year based on its economic capacity for release of GIA to nonvGovernment EIs. 
                                                 
56 Junior and Degree EIs: 1332, Sanskrit EIs: 68  
57 GIA: 610 EIs (General : 584, Sanskrit: 26), block grant : 790 (General: 748 and Sanskrit: 42) 
58 UGC: 1438, State scale: 5317 and block grant: 6348 
59 State scale: 5238 and block grant: 7379 
60 A fixed sum being the emolument due as on 1 January 2004/ 40 per cent thereof without any 
increase up to 31 January 2013, initial pay in pay band plus grade pay in revised scales of pay 
without any dearness allowance from 1 February 2013 to December 2013, initial pay in pay 
band plus grade pay in revised scales of pay increased by one/ five increments without any 
dearness allowance from 1 January 2014 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
67 
Audit noticed the following: 
• After amendment of OE Act, the Department issued (November 1994) a 
GIA order which envisaged GIA in shape of full salary cost to EIs/ staff 
who had completed five years of functioning/ employment as on 1 June 
1994. 
• The Department again issued (January 2009) another GIA order envisaging 
payment of GIA in shape of BG amounting to 40 per cent of salary cost to 
new EIs/ staff completing five years as on 1 June 2003. 
• Further, it issued (June 2009) another GIA order stipulating payment of 
GIA in shape of BG amounting to 100 per cent of salary cost to the staff of 
aided EIs completing five years as on 1 June 2003. 
Audit observed that there was no uniformity in timing and eligibility criteria in 
aforesaid GIA orders. Under GIA Order 1994, an EI established in 1989 received 
GIA in 1994 after five years of functioning, whereas EIs established/ staff 
appointed in 1990 had to wait up to 2009 i.e., 19 years for GIA. 
Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that GIA was paid to the staff of some 
nonvGovernment EIs directly to increase access to higher education in the State 
and Section 7vC of the Education Act became effective from July 1994 
empowering the State to support these EIs through GIA within the economic 
capability of the State. But, issue required to be looked into by Government. 
3.1.16.2 Irregularity in promotion of teaching staf f receiving GIA 
In line with UGC Regulation (June 1987), State Government notified (March 
1990) CAS for teaching staff of nonvGovernment EIs already in receipt of GIA at 
UGC scale as on 1 April 1989. The terms of promotion, inter-alia, stipulated that 
for promotion to the Lecturer (Senior Scale) and thereafter to Reader, the teaching 
staff should have completed two Refresher Course (RC) at each level. Further, for 
promotion to Reader, Ph. D degree was mandatory. Besides research publications 
would be evaluated by Referees for assessing quality of research. 
Audit test checked promotion of 2037 lecturers of nonvGovernment aided colleges 
to Senior Lecturer (664) and Reader (1373) made during 2008v14 and noticed the 
following: 
• In case of 98 teaching staff, promotion was made during April 2008 to 
March 2012 before they completed the second RC. In five cases concerned 
teaching staff had undergone only one RC and one did not undergo any RC. 
• Mandatory provision of Ph. D degree for promotion to Reader as prescribed 
by UGC was relaxed and 355 Senior lecturers of 44 test checked EIs were 
promoted to Readers without any such degree.  

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
68 
• For promotion to Reader, in none of the cases were research publications 
called for from the concerned teaching staff. Departmental Scrutiny 
Committee of the Department did not have any subject expert representative 
as required under UGC guidelines. 
• Similarly, 461 lecturers were primarily appointed in EIs having no aided 
degree wing and were as such ineligible for UGC scale of pay. However, 
they were also promoted (2008v14) as Lecturer (Senior Scale)/ Reader 
contrary to Government Resolution of October 1989 and November 1990. 
Payment of ` 184.66 crore during 2008v14 was incurred. 
• In case of 28 lecturers, the effective date of promotion was made from an 
advance date ranging from one year six months to 13 years 10 months from 
their actual eligible date of promotion.  
Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that Department would consider the 
UGC Regulation for promotion and eligibility of the teaching staff for UGC scale 
of pay would be revverified. 
3.1.16.3 Non-withdrawal of UGC scale of pay  
State Government while adopting (October 1989 and November 1990) the UGC 
Regulation (June 1987) regarding revision of pay scale, stipulated that teaching 
staff having less than 54 per cent of marks at PG level would not be granted UGC 
scale of pay. Later, State Government decided (February 1996) that teaching staff 
having less than 54 per cent of marks would be granted UGC scale of pay from 
the date of acquiring higher qualification viz. M.Phil/ Ph. D. 
Audit noticed that: 
• Although the Department revised (December 2013 and January 2014) UGC 
scale of pay of two teaching staff having less than 54 per cent mark at PG 
level to State Scale after the same was pointed out (July 2013) in audit, it 
did not review other eight cases who had not acquired any higher 
qualification but granted UGC scale of pay since April 1986.  
• Out of two cases where the Department revised UGC scale of pay, in one 
case, Department ordered (January 2014) revision of UGC scale of pay and 
recovery of excess payment, in the other, this was not done. In this case 
relating to Ekamra College, Bhubaneswar, despite the fact that the matter 
was under adjudication in the Apex Court, the Department promoted (May 
2008) the concerned teaching staff to Lecturer Senior Scale and to Reader 
(February 2009) with effect from 21 November 1992 and 2 November 2000 
respectively. Besides, after delivery of judgement on 9 February 2011, the 
Department also released (March 2012) arrears from 21 November 1992 to 
30 September 2011 amounting to ` 30.43 lakh. 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
69 
Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that the matter was under examination 
and assured to take appropriate action.  
3.1.16.4 Irregular payment of block grant under GIA O 2009 to teaching 
staff of aided EIs irregularly appointed by GB 
As per Rule 10 to 13 of Orissa Education (Selection Board for the State) Rules as 
well as ‘The Orissa Education (Recruitment and Conditions of Service of teachers 
and members of staff of Aided Educational Institutions) Rules 1974’, aided EIs 
should appoint lecturers from the list prepared by State Selection Board (SSB).  
Audit noticed that the Department granted GIA in shape of block grant from 1 
February 2009 under GIAO 2009 to the left over teaching and nonvteaching staff 
of aided EIs. Test check revealed that GBs of 48 aided EIs appointed (January 
1993 to April 1998) 192 lecturers of their own without recruiting through SSB, as 
required under Rule ibid. Thus, the appointments made by GBs being not covered 
under rules, concerned lecturers were not eligible to receive GIA. However, GIA 
in shape of block grant was paid to these lecturers from 1 February 2009 under 
GIAO 2009, which led to extension of undue payment of ` 11.69 crore to these 
lecturers up to 31 March 2014.  
Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that as block grants were not full salary 
cost but very small in comparison to emoluments as per State scale of pay, 
validation of their irregular appointment was not insisted upon. But, statutory 
provisions do not permit sanction of GIA of any form to teaching staff appointed 
in violation of orders.  
3.1.16.5 Inadmissible expenditure on GIA on misrepr esentation of 
continuity of post  
As per Paragraph 9 (2) B (iii) e (iv) of GIA Order 1994, a lecturer appointed 
against a post admissible as per workload prescribed in GIA Order 1994 and filled 
up at all the times by a person duly qualified to hold such a post during the 
qualifying period of five years (three years in educationally backward districts) as 
on 1 June 1994, was eligible to receive GIA.  
Audit, on test check, noticed that the Department sanctioned GIA to 15 lecturers 
of nine EIs61 and such sanction was accorded on the ground that their respective 
posts remained filled up during the qualifying period by duly qualified lecturers. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that the predecessors shown to have worked in these posts 
                                                 
61  Mandari College (English, Economics and Political Science); Anchalik Baladev Jew 
Women’s College, Alakund (Botany, English, Physics, Zoology); Akhandalamani College, 
Palasahi (English); Jaleswar Women’s College (Home Science); Indira Gandhi Junior Mahila 
Mahavidyalaya, Nimapara (Odia); Anchalika Mahavidyalaya, Nathasahi (English); Rural 
Institute of Higher Studies, Bhograi (Sanskrit); Surendranath Institute of Higher Technical 
Studies, Kamarda (English); and Meghasan College, Nudadiha (Economics and English) 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
70 
were working in other 15 EIs during same/ overlapping period. This led to 
inadmissible expenditure of ` 2.81 crore during period 2008v14. 
Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that the Department being committed to 
take stringent action in such cases, had already instructed the Director, Higher 
Education on 28 May 2014 to investigate into the matter, stop GIA till the 
investigation was completed.  
3.1.16.6 Other irregularities relating to grant of GIA 
Audit noticed deficiencies in implementation of GIA/ BG order 1994 and 2009, 
which were persisting as of March 2014, as discussed below: 
• Eight lecturers of eight EIs who secured less than 54 per cent mark in PG 
level were provided BG from February 2009 whereas 10 lecturers who also 
secured less than 54 per cent mark had been allowed GIA in shape of full 
salary cost. 
• Nonvteaching staff of aided EIs appointed up to 31 December 1992 were 
provided BG from 1 February 2009 whereas lecturers appointed during the 
same period in same EIs were granted GIA in shape of full salary cost. 
• Under GIA Order 2009, 11 Demonstrators of seven aided EIs, appointed 
during May 1989 to March 1995, were granted BG from February 2009 
whereas in six nonvGovernment aided EIs, 12 Demonstrators appointed 
during the same period were granted full GIA. 
Principal Secretary assured (October 2014) to ensure review of all these cases and 
take appropriate action as deemed necessary.  
3.1.16.7 Deficient management of court cases by the  legal cell of the 
Department relating to GIA leading to extra expenditure 
Under the provisions of OE Act 1969 and ‘The Orissa Education (Tribunal) Rules 
1977’, the Government set up State Education Tribunal for redressal of grievances 
of employees of nonvGovernment aided colleges relating to GIA and other service 
matters. 
There was no comprehensive upvtovdate database regarding pending court cases 
relating to Department. One such exercise started during July 2012 was also left 
midvway (August 2012). As per information made (July 2014) available to the 
Odisha Legislative Assembly by the Department, there were 10,712 cases relating 
to GIA pending in different courts. Audit examined 243 court cases and observed 
as under: 
• Counter affidavits were not filed at all in 239 out of 243 test checked cases, 
where ex parte judgements were delivered against the Department.  

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
71 
• In 51 cases, paravwise compliance/ required information though called for 
by the Department were not received from the Director, while in five cases, 
submission of counter affidavits were pending at the Department level 
despite receipt of required information from the Director.  
Principal Secretary stated (October 2014) that due to huge number of court cases 
and limited staff, proper monitoring of each and every court case could not be 
made possible and assured that the Department had taken all out step to review all 
the pending cases and streamline the system/ GIA process so that such court cases 
would be reduced. 
3.1.17  Internal Control System 
3.1.17.1 Weak Internal Control mechanism  
Internal control is an integral component of organisation’s management process 
which is designed to provide a reasonable assurance to the management that the 
operations are carried out in an effective and efficient manner so as to achieve the 
organisational goals and objectives.  
Audit examined the internal control system in the Department and noticed that the 
same remained weak as discussed below:  
• Operational controls: The Department created InfrastructurevcumvQuality 
Monitoring Cell (IQMC) at the State level (January 2011) and District 
levels (March 2011) for inspection of the colleges to assess and monitor 
the sufficiency of the infrastructure availability as well as performance 
monitoring
62 in the EIs and engaged  (March 2011) 17 District Level 
Consultants (DLCs) during March 2011 to June 2013, which was 
discontinued from July 2013 and then  restored from February 2014 
through engagement of 30 DLCs.  Audit noticed that DLCs neither 
reported their findings to the Department nor to concerned EIs. Such 
reports were also found to be deficient on academic activities.  Besides, a 
Performance Tracking Cell (PTC) created in July 2012 at State Level for 
monitoring and implementing “Common Minimum Standards63” (CMS), 
grievances redressal, report generation and organising capacity building 
programme for all academic administrators and nonvteaching staff also 
remained nonvfunctional and has been entrusted with preparation of 
                                                 
62 Infrastructure including land, building laboratory, library, etc., affiliation strength and 
enrolment, opening of subjects and admission, smart classroom and NMEvICT activities, 12 
(b) statusv The date of recognition of the Institution by UGC and shortfalls/ deficiencies for 
seeking the same, receipt and utilisation of UGC/ Government grants by colleges, faculty and 
staff position, academic status and overall performance, etc. 
63 Common Academic Calendar, Time Table, duration of classes, etc., lesson plan and progress 
registers, student attendance, college examination and question bank, seminars, library and 
laboratory facilities, time schedule for work of ministerial staff, financial management and 
extracurricular activities 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
72 
gradation list, which also remained incomplete. No academic inspection/ 
audit was also carried out by Universities/ CHSE during 2008v14 in 
sampled EIs, though required. Thus, internal controls in the Department 
remained weak. 
The Principal Secretary assured (October 2014) that they would be further 
strengthened. 
3.1.17.2 Internal Audit 
An Internal Audit wing was functioning in the Department under the control of 
Financial Advisor (FA) with sanctioned strength of 19 Internal Audit staff 
comprising of one Audit Officer, four Assistant Audit Officers and 14 Auditors. 
Besides, Audit of the nonvGovernment aided EIs and Universities was entrusted 
to the Local Fund Audit (LFA) of the State Government. 
Audit noticed the following:  
• The post of Audit Officer and six (6) out of 14 posts of Auditors (43 per 
cent) remained vacant as on 31 March 2014, of which four posts of 
Auditors remained vacant since 2011; two posts since March 2012. The 
post of Audit Officer remained vacant since March 2013, as vacancies were 
not filled up by Finance Department. 
• Internal Audit Manual was not prepared and prescribed for guidance of 
Internal Auditors. Out of 108 units planned for coverage during 2008v09 to 
2013v14, only 70 units were covered during the period. Internal Audit 
Reports relating to 30 EIs (37 per cent) were issued to the EIs after six 
months to four years64 from the date of receipt of the report in the 
Department. In two65 out of 23 test checked Government EIs, internal audit 
was not conducted even once during 2008v14.  
• No LFA Audit was conducted in UU during 2007v08 to 2010v11. In respect 
of four test checked Universities, 292 paragraphs66 relating to the period up 
to 2011v12 remained unsettled and compliance to 222 paragraphs67 were not 
even furnished (June 2014).  
• In 23 out of 51 sampled nonvGovernment aided colleges, LFA audit had not 
conducted audit even once during 2008v14 and the Department had not 
raised this issue with the Finance Department/ LFA. 
                                                 
64 Six months to one year: 20; more than one year to less than two years: 8; more than two years 
to less than three years: 1; more than three years: 1 
65 Sashi Bhushan Rath Government Women’s College, Berhampur and Government Junior 
College, Phulbani 
66 UU: 20, BU: 13, FMU: 166, RU: 93 
67 UU:20, BU:13, FMU: 110 and RU: 79 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
73 
Principal Secretary assured (October 2014) to fill up the vacancies in internal 
audit cell and to strengthen the internal audit. 
3.1.18  Conclusion 
Long term planning was lacking. Perspective plan for regulating growth of nonv
Government EIs, improving access of students to higher education in backward 
areas of the State and enforcing quality standards therein was not prepared. 
Higher education was not separated from higher secondary education even after 
25 years of Government decision. Institutional arrangement remained weak as 
regular post of Principal was not created in any of the aided colleges and College 
Development Council of Universities remained defunct for over a decade. 
Compliance to Laws, Rules and Regulations by the DDOs was poor. Permission 
and recognition of EIs by Government and affiliation by Universities/ CHSE were 
granted without fully assessing the educational need in the area and availability of 
prescribed infrastructure. Most of the test checked EIs were found to run without 
prescribed infrastructure like land with title, buildings with adequate number of 
classrooms, examination hall, library, laboratory, etc. Large scale vacancies in 
teaching posts continued and were not rationalised through effective deployment. 
Departures from procedures in recruitment as well as promotion of teaching staff 
of both test checked Universities and aided EIs were also noticed. Skill 
development opportunities for teaching staff of junior colleges were lacking. 
Academic Regulations, standards and reforms prescribed by UGC were not 
adopted and enforced. Instructions (June 1999 and November 2011) of the 
Department for maintenance of academic calendar, lesson plan, lesson diary, etc. 
remained unvcomplied with by many test checked EIs. Though NAAC 
accreditation is a parameter of quality education, few degree colleges obtained 
such accreditation. Sanction of grantsvinvaid (GIA) was not made in a fair and 
equitable manner and was marred with payment of GIA to ineligible teaching 
staff and teaching staff appointed without adherence to stipulations. Internal 
control mechanism was weak and internal audit was inadequate. 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
74 
RURAL DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
3.2 Transparency in inviting tender, award of work and contract 
management 
3.2.1 Introduction 
Rural Works (RW) organisation under Rural Development (RD) Department of 
the State implements rural connectivity programme by receiving funds under 
various programmes/ schemes such as the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana 
(PMGSY), Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF), Special Central 
Assistance (SCA) under Revised Long Term Action Plan (RLTAP) for KBK 
districts68 and ConstituencyvWise Allotment (CWA). The RW organisation also 
looks after construction and maintenance of public buildings in rural areas. 
Engineer in Chief (EIC) and Chief Engineers (CEs) of RW organisation are 
responsible for covordinating all activities relating to implementation of schemes 
and programmes under RD Department headed by the Principal Secretary. The 
CE is assisted by Superintending Engineers (SEs) at circle level and Executive 
Engineers (EEs) at Division level. Audit was conducted between Aprilv 
November 2013 and AprilvAugust 2014 covering the period 2010v14 by test 
check of records of EIC, Rural Works and 1269 out of 50 RW Divisions to assess 
transparency and fairness in inviting tender and award of works, contract 
management, effectiveness of quality control mechanism and monitoring.  
Audit examined records relating to tender process, award of work and efficacy of 
contract management and noticed following irregularities: 
3.2.2  Transparency in invitation of tender and awa rd of work 
3.2.2.1  Delay in approval of tender and execution of agreements 
As per Appendix IX of the OPWD Code Volume II, time for processing and 
approval of tender shall be 15 days at EE level, 10 days at SE level, 10 days at CE 
level and 15 days at Contract Committee level. In case where prolonged 
negotiations are necessary, an additional period of 15 days is allowed at the level at 
which negotiations are to be carried out. As per instruction (July 2010) of RD 
Department, the Executive Engineer is required to execute agreement within 15 
days of finalisation of tender. 
Scrutiny of records of test checked Divisions revealed that there was delay 
ranging between 16 and 220 days in approval of tender in 84 works at 
Government, CE, SE and EE level as detailed in Appendix 3.2.1.  
                                                 
68  Undivided Koraput, Balangir and Kalahandi districts 
69 Balangir, Baripada, CuttackvI, Deogarh, GanjamvI, GanjamvII, JajpurvI, Jajpur II (Jaraka), 
KeonjharvI, Koraput, Nabarangpur and Sambalpur 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
75 
Further, after acceptance of tender, EEs also delayed execution of agreements in 
81 cases for a period ranging from 11 to 273 days beyond the scheduled period of 
15 days. In three70 cases, as the tenders were approved after the validity period, the 
tenders were cancelled due to refusal of the contractors to sign the agreement. This 
led to retender and there was extra liability of ` 5.06 crore as detailed in Appendix 
3.2.2.  
The EEs stated that delay in approval of tender was due to delay in negotiation 
with the contractor and delay in signing of agreement was due to delayed response 
of the lowest bidder.  
3.2.2.2 Splitting up of estimates 
As per AppendixvIX of the OPWD Code Volume II, tender should be invited in 
most open and public manner either by advertisement in news papers or by notice 
in English/ Odia posted in public places. AppendixvVII provides that in case of 
urgency, works can be awarded on short tender notice displaying in the office 
notice board and allowing at least 48 hours for receipt of tender. As provided in 
para 6.3.2 of OPWD Code Volume I, the Divisional Officer is empowered to 
accord technical sanction to detailed estimate for works up to ` 50 lakh. 
Audit noticed that EEs of the test checked Divisions split 101 works valued  
` 14.64 crore with estimated cost ranging between ` 7.15 lakh and ` 36.25 lakh 
into 16 to 74 reaches by which estimate of each reach fell below  
` 50,000 and invited quotations/ tenders at Assistant Engineer level without wide 
publicity. Similarly, EEs of four RW Divisions71 split seven works of ` 7.24 crore 
with estimated cost ranging from ` 0.50 crore to ` 1.85 crore into three to six 
reaches with estimated cost less than ` 50 lakh each resulting in them being 
within the sanctioning power of EEs.  
EEs stated that as fund was received from different sources under different heads 
in phased manner, they invited tenders of the works separately. However, Audit 
noticed that in one case, EE, RW Division, JajpurvI split one work with estimated 
cost of ` 1.85 crore into four estimates and invited  tender for these four works on 
the same date.  
3.2.2.3 Irregular invitation of tenders on percentage basis 
The Chief Engineer, Rural WorksvI instructed (December 2009) all the SEs under 
RW circles to invite tender on item rate basis for major bridge works as 
percentage rate tenders are not suitable for bridge works due to subsequent 
variation as per requirement of sites. 
                                                 
70 (1) Construction of High Level (HL) bridge over Rusikulya: EE, GanjamvI, (2) Improvement 
of road from Sikri MDR 64 to P Ramachandrapur  road: EE, GanjamvII and (3) Construction 
of HL bridge over River Baitarani: EE, KeonjharvI 
71 Balangir, Deogarh, GanjamvI and JajpurvI 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
76 
Check of records of RW DivisionvI, Ganjam revealed that the department invited 
tenders for nine bridge works with an estimated cost of ` 11.34 crore during 
2010v13 on percentage rate basis and executed agreements for ` 10.89 crore for 
their construction. Invitation of tender on percentage rate basis in violation of 
orders of CE was thus irregular.  
The EE stated (July 2013) that tenders for major bridge works were invited by the 
higher authorities and stated that this would be avoided in future.  
3.2.2.4  Award of work to inexperienced contractors   
As per para 2.1 of the standard Detailed Tender Call Notice (DTCN) for inviting 
tender for bridge work, the intending bidder should have executed similar nature 
of work during any three financial years taken together of the last five years.  
It was, however, noticed that SE, Rural Works Circle, Balangir awarded (July 
2009) the construction work of a HL bridge over Jabdajor nullah to a contractor 
with contract value of ` 1.47 crore to complete the work by 30 January 2011. The 
contractor had submitted an experience certificate from EE, R&B Division, 
Kantabanji for having executed four works (total value: ` 1.50 crore) which were 
in the nature of repair and improvement of roads with construction of box cell 
culverts.  
During the course of construction, as the design of the bridge was changed from 
open foundation to well foundation, the contractor did not turn up to draw 
supplementary agreement and requested (June 2012) for closure of the contract 
due to lack of technical knowhow and insufficient machineries in construction of 
bridge with well foundation. The contract was rescinded (July 2012) and the work 
was awarded (January 2013) to another contractor at an agreed value of ` 1.70 
crore and was completed in March 2014. 
Thus, failure on the part of the tender approving authority to disqualify the 
agency with inadequate work experience and technical knowhow led to 
abandonment of the work and ultimately the work was delayed by 38 months. 
Similarly, SE RW Circle, Balangir awarded (April 2012) construction work of a 
bridge72 with contract value of ` 1.37 crore who had submitted work experience 
certificate relating to construction of road and cross drainage work. The SE 
accepted the tender although the nature of work executed by the contractor was 
not similar to that of construction of bridge. The work was completed by the 
contractor in time. 
SE stated (August 2014) that experience submitted by the contractors was 
considered to be sufficient for execution of bridges and the second bridge was 
completed in time. However, the work was awarded in violations of provisions of 
bid document. 
                                                 
72  Bridge over Ambaghat nullah on RamachandrapurvGhatuldinguri road 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
77 
3.2.2.5  Irregular award of works to L 2/ L3 bidders  
The Memorandum issued (November 2005) by Works Department provides that 
if the 1st lowest (L1) bidder does not accept the offer, the work may be awarded to 
2 nd lowest (L2) bidder after approval of next higher authority only if the bidder 
agrees to execute the work at the rate offered by the lowest bidder. In case of 
extreme urgency and other valid reasons, the deviation from the lowest rate may 
be considered. In such cases, prior detailed investigation of the circumstance and 
the reasons thereof should be recorded in writing for accepting such tender at 
higher rates than that of the first lowest bidder. 
Audit, however, noticed that in two RW Divisions (JajpurvI and JajpurvII), tenders 
for three works73 with an estimated cost of ` 2.36 crore were invited and the 
lowest (L1) bidders quoted ` 2.30 crore for these works. As the L1 bidders did not 
turn up to execute the agreements, the tenders of the L2 and L3 bidders were 
approved at their quoted price of ` 2.46 crore since they did not agree to execute 
the work at the rates offered by L1 bidders. All these cases were approved by the 
higher authorities at higher rates without recording the reasons. Thus, approval of 
tender at higher rate was irregular which resulted in extra financial liability of  
` 15.43 lakh. 
EEs stated that all three tenders were approved by the higher authority.  
3.2.2.6  Award of PMGSY works to ineligible contrac tors  
As per clause 32.2.1 of Standard Bid Document (SBD), the contractor shall do 
routine maintenance of PMGSY roads during the maintenance period of five 
years. The Chief Engineer, RW instructed (April 2012) that the agencies who 
failed to maintain PMGSY roads would be debarred from future tendering for a 
minimum period of three years under clause 4.7 (ii) of Section 2 of the SBD. 
Scrutiny of records of the test checked Divisions revealed that 16 agencies74 in 
seven RW Divisions did not maintain 36 PMGSY works previously executed by 
them during the five year maintenance period despite issue of instructions by the 
EEs. However, they were allowed to participate in the tender and 34 new works75 
valued ` 74.94 crore were awarded to them.  
Award of works to these contractors despite their failure to maintain roads was 
thus irregular and resulted in extension of undue favour to them. 
EEs stated that the works were awarded after acceptance of tender by the SE/ CE. 
But, award of work was against the instruction of Government.  
                                                 
73  JajpurvI: Improvement to Jokadia to Nelibadi road; JajpurvII: Construction of multipurpose 
cyclone centrevcumvgodown at Dharmasala; and S/R to NuahatavKhadianga road  
74  Cuttack I:2, Deogarh:3, GanjamvI:1, Baripada:3, KeonjharvI:1, Koraput: 4, Nabarangpur:2 
75  Baripada:8, CuttackvI:2, Deogarh:8, GanjamvI:1, KeonjharvI:4, Koraput:7, Nabarangpur:4 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
78 
3.2.3 Contract Management 
Management of contract was found deficient in many ways. Instances of 
execution of works without acquisition of land, awarding contract without 
physical existence of worksite, improper survey and investigation resulting in 
time and cost overrun, delay in completion of works, unfruitful/ avoidable 
expenditure on executed works, nonvimposition/ short recovery of penalty, delay 
in payment to contractors, etc. were noticed as discussed below: 
3.2.3.1  Execution of work without prior acquisitio n of land 
Para 3.7.4 of OPWD Code Volume I stipulates that no work should be 
commenced on land which has not been duly made over by a responsible civil 
officer. Further, as per Para 16 of AppendixvXI – Procedure for acquisition of 
land for public works, the Divisional Officer is prohibited from starting any work 
on the land unless physical possession has been made over by the Land 
Acquisition Officer at the site.  
However, test check of records of four EEs (Baripada, GanjamvII, JajpurvI and 
Jajpur II, Jaraka) revealed that agreement for construction of five works76 were 
executed between July 2007 and October 2011 for ` 16.55 crore without 
acquisition of land. As a result, the works could not be completed within the 
stipulated period. While three works were completed with an additional cost of  
` 1.62 crore77, other two works remained incomplete even after incurring 
expenditure of ` 1.59 crore. 
EEs stated that in anticipation of acquisition of land, the works were put to tender. 
However, commencement of work without availability of land violates the codal 
provisions and this resulted in time and cost overrun.  
3.2.3.2 Award of work without proper survey and inv estigation 
As per para 3.4.17 of OPWD Code, preliminary investigations are to be carried 
out before estimates are prepared. Projects submitted for sanctions should be 
accompanied with a report detailing design, scope, plans, drawings, etc. 
Test check of records of EE, RW Division, Jajpur II, Jaraka revealed that based 
on the preliminary survey and investigation, General Alignment Drawing (GAD) 
having a length of 336.93 metre with 11 spans was approved (October 2011) and 
technical sanction for construction of “HL bridge over Kelua on Udayanagarv
Kadampal Road” was accorded (December 2011) by CE at a cost of ` 13.65 
crore. The work was awarded (November 2012) with an agreement value of  
                                                 
76 Baripada: HL bridge over river Budhabalanga and HL bridge over Sono River at Kaptipadav 
Mankadapada, JajpurvI: PMGSY Package No. ORv13v44, JajpurvII: PMGSY Package No. ORv
13v117, GanjamvII: PMGSY Package No. ORv11v150 
77 Payment of escalation charge in one case: ` 1.09 crore, Award of balance work in two cases: 
` 0.53 crore 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
79 
` 13.45 crore for completion by March 2015. However, the estimate was revised 
twice, once on the basis of revised hydraulic particulars (November 2012) and 
later for nonvavailability of land (March 2014) to ` 14.09 crore and the GAD was 
changed to a reduced length of 293.60 metre with 10 spans. The work was in 
progress with completion of 51 per cent work (May 2014). 
EE stated that GAD was prepared tentatively and final drawing was made only 
after actual execution and the cost of the bridge increased due to increase in depth 
of the wells. But, the fact remains that codal provision was not followed to 
prepare the estimate after conducting proper survey and investigation. 
3.2.3.3 Invitation of tender and award of work with out physical 
existence of work site 
As per provisions of OPWD Code, tender of any work should be invited after 
selecting the proper site for the work. Further, bridge works are to be constructed 
after proper survey and investigation like hydraulic particulars, soil exploration, 
etc. 
Check of records revealed that for construction of a bridge over “Local nullah at 2 
Km on MangalapurvBhimakunda road”, the EE, RW Division, KeonjharvI 
prepared hydraulic particulars and submitted (May 2011) to SE, Keonjhar for 
approval of estimate. The SE approved the estimate for ` 1.40 crore. Accordingly, 
tender was invited (December 2011) and the work was awarded (April 2012) at  
` 1.38 crore for completion by 17 March 
2013. However, the SE who had 
approved the estimate subsequently 
intimated (June 2012) to CE that no such 
nullah at 2
nd Km of the Mangalpurv
Bhimakunda road was physically 
available. Thus, no work could be started 
for such bridge. Physical inspection of the 
site by Audit in the presence of 
representative of EE also revealed that no 
nullah existed at the 2nd Km of the road.  
EE stated (August 2014) that the nullah 
actually existed and the work would be executed. Fact remains that no work 
started despite execution of agreement since two years. Further, physical 
verification of the site by Audit along with the Assistant Engineer of the Division 
also revealed nonvexistence of any nullah at the site. 
3.2.3.4 Unfruitful expenditure due to execution of work without 
coordination with Railways 
Paragraph 3.4.9 of OPWD Code Volume I stipulates that when a public works 
officer prepares plan and estimates for a work, the execution of which is likely to 
Two km chainage on Mangalapur-Bhimakunda 
road where there is no nullah 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
80 
affect or interfere with the works of other departments/ Railways/ Post and 
Telegraph, etc., the latter should be consulted well in advance with necessary 
plans and drawings so that their views are obtained before proceeding with the 
execution of work. 
Test check of records of RW Division, JajpurvII revealed that the EE awarded 
(May 2006) the work ‘Improvement of the road Salapada to Enderpada extended 
to NHv5’ with an agreed cost of ` 2.65 crore which passed through a railway line. 
The road on both sides of the railway line was completed in June 2009 with an 
expenditure of ` 2.17 crore. But, the road could not be made open to traffic due to 
nonvprovision of a level crossing on the railway line. Though the Department had 
taken up with the railway authority several times since the award of work, the 
same was not sorted out even after five years of completion of the road.  
Thus, commencement of work without permission of railway authority resulted in 
unfruitful expenditure of ` 2.17 crore besides denial of the benefit of the road to 
the people. 
EE of RW Division, JajpurvII stated (June 2014) that due to unacceptable 
conditions from the Railway Authority, the level crossing could not be set up.  
3.2.3.5  Non-retention of valid performance securit y from the contractors  
Clause 46 of General Conditions of Contract (GCC) of PMGSY stipulates that the 
successful bidder shall provide a performance security of five per cent of the 
contract price which shall be valid for a period of 45 days from the date of 
completion of construction and maintenance work. If the performance security is 
in the form of bank guarantee, which has one year validity initially, the validity 
period is required to be extended for the required period otherwise the employer 
would recover the same from any dues payable to the contractor. As per para 
32.2.1 of the SBD, the contractor shall do routine maintenance of roads and keep 
the entire road surface and structure in defect free condition during the entire 
maintenance period which begins at completion and ends after five years. Further, 
Government instructed (March 2007) that contractors furnishing false document 
for consideration of tenders are to be blacklisted by the Chief Engineer with the 
approval of concerned Administrative Department. 
Test check of records in 10 RW Divisions78 revealed that contractors did not turn 
up for maintenance of roads during the five year maintenance period in 118 works 
completed with expenditure of ` 240.58 crore. But, the EEs did not take any 
action to forfeit the performance security or get the repair works done charging 
the expenditure against the performance security of the contractors.   
                                                 
78  Baripada, CuttackvI, Deogarh, GanjamvI, JajpurvI, JajpurvII (Jaraka), KeonhjarvI, Koraput, 
Nabarangpur and Sambalpur 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
81 
Audit scrutiny further revealed that in eight RW Divisions79, the validity period of 
bank guarantees worth ` 5.23 crore deposited towards performance security for 61 
works expired since one to 35 months. As the works were not complete and defect 
liability period was not over, the validity of the bank guarantee was to be 
extended for keeping the currency valid. But, neither did the contractors extend 
the validity period nor did the EEs take any action to get the BGs revalidated to 
safeguard the interest of Government.  
Further, in two RW Divisions80, four works81 were awarded to three agencies with 
contract value of ` 16.63 crore. It was noticed that one contractor under CuttackvI 
Division had submitted a Fixed Deposit of ` 6.44 lakh in support of earnest 
money deposit (EMD) which was found to be fake. Similarly, three bank 
guarantees of ` 52.3482 lakh submitted by two agencies to the EE, RW Division 
GanjamvI were not genuine as reported by the concerned bank. However, instead 
of blacklisting these contractors, they were awarded/ allowed to continue 
execution of works83, though the concerned authorities were aware about 
submission of fake documents by the contractors.  
The EIC, Rural Works stated (December 2013) that concerned EEs were to take 
appropriate action for blacklisting the contractors.  
3.2.3.6  Grant of extension of time to the contract ors  
Para 3.5.30 of OPWD Code and instructions of the Chief Engineer (December 
2010) provide that application for grant of extension of time (EOT) for 
completion of a work shall be submitted by the contractor within 30 days of 
occurrence of hindrances and the Divisional Officer shall grant or recommend 
such EOT within 15 days of receipt of such application. Where the period of 
extension goes beyond the time specified in the agreement, sanction of higher 
authority for grant of EOT is necessary and the Divisional Officer should send his 
recommendation as expeditiously as possible.  
Check of records in 11 Divisions84 revealed that in 12 cases, contractors applied 
for EOT after one to 16 months of completion of work and in 42 cases after one 
to 48 months of actual occurrence of hindrances. In four cases, though application 
for EOT was submitted within the prescribed period, the same was forwarded for 
sanction after four to six months of receipt of application.  
                                                 
79  Baripada, Balangir, CuttackvI, Deogarh, JajpurvI, KeonjharvI, Nabarangpur and Sambalpur 
80  CuttackvI and GanjamvI 
81  CuttackvI Package No. ORv07v75; GanjamvI: OR 11v47, OR 11v62 and ORv11v71 
82  Two bank guarantees valued ` 44.62 lakh and one bank guarantee amounting ` 7.72 lakh 
83  CuttackvI: PMGSY Package No. ORv07v75 and GanjamvI: PMGSY Package No. ORv11v47, 
62 , 71 
84  Baripada, Balangir, CuttackvI, Deogarh, GanjamvI, GanjamvII, JajpurvI, JajpurvII, KeonjharvI, 
Koraput and Sambalpur 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
82 
Audit also analysed 371 works in 12 test checked Divisions  with contract value 
of ` 1128.31 crore during 2010v13. Out of these, only 27 works (seven per cent) 
were completed in time, 164 works (44 per cent) were completed after due date of 
completion and 109 works (29 per cent) were incomplete even after expiry of the 
due date of completion. The EEs took lenient view and allowed them EOT 
without levying of penalty. 
While attributing the delay to land/ forest clearance, heat wave, standing crops, 
nonvavailability of construction materials in hilly areas, etc., EE stated that the 
contractors would be asked to apply for EOT in time.  
3.2.3.7 Non-withholding of amount towards different ial cost of estimated 
cost and quoted amount  
Test check of records revealed that the work of “Construction of HL bridge over 
river Kukarkata nullah on GhatagaonvChinamaliposi road” was put to tender by 
EE RW Division, Keonjhar I. While accepting the tender of the lowest bidder for  
` 4.31 crore, the CE instructed (July 2011) EE to draw the agreement and to 
withhold ` 48.00 lakh from the running bills till satisfactory completion of one 
item (earth work in all kinds of soil in approved borrow areas including leads and 
lifts and carriage with manual means) as the rate quoted for that item by the 
contractor was abnormally less (94.85 per cent ) than the estimated cost. 
Accordingly, EE executed (November 2011) the agreement to complete the work 
by February 2013. Further scrutiny revealed that the contractor did not execute 
that item of work. But, the EE did not take any step to withhold the amount 
although ` 3.62 crore was already paid in 13 running account bills by February 
2014. As such, undue favour was extended by the EE to the contractor by not 
withholding the amount as instructed by the CE.  
On this being pointed out in audit, the EE, RW Division, KeonjharvI stated that 
after ascertaining the actual requirement of that item as per deviation statement  
` 10.75 lakh would be withheld from the bills of the contractor.  
3.2.3.8  Short recovery of penalty after rescission  of agreement  
As per clause 53.1 of SBD, on termination of contract due to fundamental breach 
of contract by the contractor, liquidated damages up to 10 per cent of the initial 
contract price and 20 per cent of the value of the work not completed shall be 
recovered from the contractor. 
Test check of records of selected divisions revealed that in four85 Divisions, 
contracts for four works of ` 11.88 crore were rescinded due to slow progress of 
works and nonvcompletion of works within the stipulated period. However, 
against the recoverable amount of ` 2.57 crore, EE recovered/ withheld only  
                                                 
85  Cuttackv1, GanjamvI, GanjamvII and JajpurvI  

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
83 
` 0.50 crore. This led to short recovery and extension of undue benefit of ` 2.07 
crore to the contractor as detailed in Appendix 3.2.3.  
While the EE, GanjamvI stated that the contractor had been issued notice for 
deposit of the penalty amount, other EEs stated they would take steps for recovery 
of the amount from the contactors.  
3.2.3.9  Non-renewal of insurance coverage for PMGS Y roads  
Clause 13 of General Condition of Contract (GCC) for PMGSY works stipulates 
that the contractor, at his cost, is required to provide insurance cover from the date 
of commencement to the date of completion of the works, plant, materials and 
other loss or damage to the property, personal injury or death and the currency of 
the insurance should be kept valid till actual completion of work. As per clause 52 
of GCC, it is a fundamental breach of the contract if the contractor fails to provide 
insurance coverage.  
Check of records revealed that 106 PMGSY works with contract value of 
` 267.64 crore under execution during 2010v13 in respect of 10 RW Divisions86 
continued beyond the stipulated date of completion for a period ranging from one 
month to five years. The contractor neither furnished the requisite insurance cover 
for the extended period nor did the EEs insist on the same.  
The EEs while noting the audit observation stated that contractors would be 
instructed to extend the insurance coverage for the extended period.   
3.2.3.10 Avoidable expenditure on State Highways  
Works Department declared (June 2005) three roads87 as State Highways and took 
over these roads under its control. Accordingly, as per the instruction of RD 
Department (July 2005), EE, RW Division, Deogarh intimated (January 2011) 
EE, R&B Division, Sambalpur to take possession of the portion of roads.  
However, test check of records revealed that EE, RW Division Deogarh awarded 
(between November 2011 and June 2012) construction work of three roads88  for 
execution with an agreed cost of ` 10.46 crore though the same EE had written to 
the EE, R&B Division, Sambalpur to take possession of these roads as per the 
decision of Works Department. EE, Deogarh instructed (July 2012) stopping of 
the works of these three packages after an expenditure of ` 4.38 crore on this 
being pointed out to him in July 2012.  
Thus, execution of these works under PMGSY despite the fact that these roads 
                                                 
86  Balangir, Baripada, CuttackvI, Deogarh, JajpurvI, JajpurvII (Jaraka), KeonjharvI, Koraput, 
Nabarangpur, Sambalpur, 
87  NaktideolvBatagaonvNuapada up to Aunli River (46 km), Aunli Riverv Chandipada (12.50 km) 
and Taktaposhi Chhakv Deogarh (57.50 km) 
88  Package No. ORv08v37, 44, 60, Agreement cost :No.37: ` 3.31 crore, No.44: ` 5.81 crore, 
No.60: ` 1.34 crore 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
84 
were under State Highways  was not in conformity with the instruction issued by 
the department and this led to avoidable expenditure of ` 4.38 crore.   
EE, RW Division, Deogarh stated (June 2013) that as the Works Department had 
not started the work, the road constructed by the Division was utilised by the 
public and hence the expenditure incurred was not wasteful. However, this is 
indicative of improper planning. 
3.2.3.11 Delay in payment of final bills after comp letion of works 
Clause 50.1 of the Contract Agreement of PMGSY provides that the Contractor 
shall submit detailed account of the total amount payable within 21 days of the 
issue of certificate on completion of work. The Engineer shall certify any 
payment due to the contractor within 42 days of receiving the detailed account. 
The payment of final bill for execution of works will be made within 14 days 
thereafter. The Department also instructed (November 2010) that in no case the 
bills of the executants should be kept pending beyond three months. 
Check of records of 12 RW Divisions showed that in 161 cases there was 
inordinate delay in making final payment to the contractors. In 80 cases the delay 
ranged up to 200 days, in 63 cases the delay was between 200 and 500 days, in 16 
cases between 501 and 1000 days and in two cases beyond 1000 days. This was 
indicative of poor management of contract as the dues of the contractors were 
paid much after the stipulated period of 90 days. 
The EEs attributed the delay in payment to contractors to delay in sanction of 
EOT and deviation in work. The reply is not tenable since as per CEs instruction 
(October 2009) deviation was to be got approved before taking up the same by the 
contractor. 
3.2.3.12 Non-recovery of mobilisation advance  
Clause 45 of the GCC stipulates that employer will provide mobilisation advance 
to the contractor for new equipment brought to the site against submission of 
unconditional bank guarantee for the amount equal to the advance payment which 
shall remain effective till recovery of such advance. The advance payment shall 
be repaid by deducting proportionate amounts from payment to the contractor 
following the schedule of completed percentage of works.   
Check of records revealed that EE, RW Division, CuttackvI paid (January 2012) 
mobilisation advance of ` 50 lakh to a contractor for a work (Package 
ORv07v100) against submission of bank guarantee for ` 50 lakh which was valid 
up to 31 March 2012. The EE recovered ` 39 lakh from the contractor as of April 
2013 and the balance amount of ` 11 lakh was yet to be recovered and the validity 
of the bank guarantee against which advance was given had expired since March 
2012. 
Similarly, mobilisation advance of ` 6.80 lakh paid (August 2012) by the EE, RW 
Division, Deogarh to a contractor against a work (Package No.ORv08v57) was not 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
85 
recovered, though he had already been paid (May 2013) an amount of ` 54.80 
lakh.   
Executive Engineers stated (AprilvJune 2013) that balance advance would be 
recovered from the contractors.  
3.2.3.13 Sub-standard execution of road work 
Clause 52.2 of SBD of PMGSY provided that failure to complete the works as per 
the specifications and failure on the part of the contractor to rectify the defects 
within a reasonable period of time as determined by the engineer, is a 
fundamental breach of contract and the agreements was to be terminated with 
imposition of penalty of 20 per cent of the value of the leftover works as provided 
in the contract data.  
Test check of records of EE, RW Division, JajpurvI revealed that the work 
(PMGSY Package No.ORv13v136/VIII) was awarded (July 2009) to a contractor 
at ` 3.72 crore for completion by July 2010. As reported by the State level Quality 
Monitor (SQM) and Divisional Officer, the work executed by the contractor was 
substandard due to defects like inappropriate compaction, low cement content in 
cross drainage work, nonvmaintenance of proper slopes, etc. The Agency was 
issued (February 2010 to August 2013) show cause notices to rectify the defects. 
But, the Agency did not rectify them and left the work incomplete. The EE neither 
rescinded the agreement imposing penalty nor got the balance works executed 
through other agency as of June 2014. 
In reply, EE stated that ` 29.59 lakh was kept withheld from the contractor for 
rectification of the defect. No final payment has been made to the contractor and 
the road is made all weather communicable.  
However, the fact remains that the road was not constructed as per specification 
and no action was taken against the contractor for executing substandard work as 
per the provisions of SBD.  
3.2.4 Monitoring and Supervision  
Para 2.2.55 of  OPWD Code, Volume I provides that EE should inspect every 
important work under his jurisdiction at least once a year and furnish a report on its 
condition to the SE with suggestions for improvement, repair or otherwise as 
specified in the statutory or executive instructions issued by the Department. 
However, test check of records of 12 Divisions revealed the following: 
• No Registers of inspection were maintained at Division level as required under 
AppendixvII of OPWD Code VolumevII. In absence of these, the number of 
roads inspected by the EE and remarks/ recommendation made, if any, could not 
be ascertained in Audit. 
• Quality Control test of PMGSY works and major bridge works were conducted 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
86 
at Government approved laboratory. But, quality control test was not conducted 
for construction of building and maintenance and repair works of roads either at 
divisional level or at Government approved laboratories.  
LABOUR AND EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE DEPARTMENT 
 
3.3  Implementation of ‘Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yoj ana’ in Odisha 
3.3.1 Introduction  
Government of India (GoI) introduced ‘Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana 
(RSBY)’ from 2008v09 for providing health insurance cover to Below Poverty 
Line (BPL) workers in the unorganised sector and their family members. The 
scheme was to be implemented by the State Government in a phased manner 
during 2008v13.  
To provide health insurance coverage, State Government is required to select one 
or more health insurers on a periodical basis89 through tender process taking into 
account both cost of insurance package and technical merit90 of the proposal. The 
Insurer in consultation with the Government is required to empanel enough 
number of Government and private health providers/ hospitals so that 
beneficiaries need not travel very far for health care services. The empanelled 
hospitals after rendering service to the patient are to prefer the claim through 
electronic report to the Insurer/ Third Party Administrators (TPA)91 and the 
Insurer will settle the claim and make payment to the hospital within 21 days from 
the date of such electronic claim bill. The total insured sum was ` 30,000 per BPL 
family per annum on a family floater basis92 . 
In Odisha, 52.22 lakh BPL households were identified (November 2010) as 
beneficiaries under RSBY. To implement the scheme, Government divided all 30 
districts of the State into seven clusters and selected five Insurance Companies to 
provide health insurance service to beneficiaries. The scheme was launched in six 
districts93 of the State during 2009v10 and all other districts were covered during 
2011v13.  
Labour and Employees’ State Insurance (L&ESI) Department is the implementing 
agency on behalf of Government and the Labour Commissioner (LC), Odisha is 
                                                
 
89 The tenure of tender/contract is for three years subject to renewal on yearly basis depending 
upon the performance of the insurer based on parameters fixed by the State Government/ SNA 
90 Having Insurance Regulatory Development Authority (IRDA) standard relevant to Health 
Insurance; no outstanding legal suit; possession of doctors; having its own claim settlement 
cell; past service in health insurance covering 50000 families in a single year; and dedicated 
project office at State capital 
91 A third-party administrator (TPA) is an organisation that processes insurance claims or certain 
aspects of employee benefit plans for a separate entity 
92  The total benefit amount of ` 30,000 can be used by one person or jointly with other members 
of the family 
93  Deogarh, Jharsuguda, Kalahandi, Nayagarh, Nuapada and Puri 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
87 
the State Nodal Officer (SNO) for implementation of RSBY in the State. State 
Labour Welfare Society for RSBY was formed and registered under the Societies 
Registration Act 1860 for implementation of the scheme in the State. The State 
Nodal Officer is assisted by District Labour Officers (DLOs) designated as 
District Key Managers (DKMs) for registration/ renewal and issue of smart cards. 
At Gram Panchayat/ village level, the Gram Panchayat Extension Officers 
(GPEOs)/ Tax Collectors/ Anganwadi Workers/ Asha Karmis are nominated as 
Field Key Officers (FKOs) for visiting each enrolment station jointly with 
Insurance Company representatives for identification and enrolment of 
beneficiaries and issue of smart cards. 
Audit was conducted during August–December 2013 covering the period 2009v13 
through test check of records of L&ESI Department, Labour Commissioner, 
Odisha and five District Labour Officers (DLOs)94, seven Government hospitals95 
and three private hospitals whose records were checked in the Department to 
assess whether the system to identify and enroll eligible beneficiaries was 
adequate, selection of insurers was transparent; monitoring and grievance 
redressal mechanism was effective to provide effective health benefit to 
beneficiaries. 
Audit findings   
3.3.2 Identification of beneficiaries for enrolment  under RSBY 
As per the scheme guidelines, the State Government was to verify eligibility of 
specific BPL workers and their family members who would be beneficiaries of 
the scheme and share such information with the Insurance Service Providers 
(Insurers). State Government was to prepare an authenticated BPL list/ database 
showing details96 of BPL family in an electronic format, provide correct data to 
the Insurer and put in place a foolproof mechanism for supervision and 
authentication of data. 
To prepare database of RSBY beneficiaries, State Government decided (August 
2010) to use 1997 BPL data for enrolment of beneficiaries under the scheme. As 
this data did not contain all the details/ fields required for RSBY database, 2002 
household survey data was used for the missing data/ fields and if any balance 
data remained unavailable, field staff of Panchayati Raj (PR) Department were 
required to collect the same. But this was not done and dummy field97 was 
prepared for these missing data and placed in RSBY database. The work of 
                                                 
94  DLOs of Dhenkanal, Ganjam, Nuapada, Rourkela (Sundargarh) and Subarnapur 
95  District Headquarters Hospitals (DHH): Dhenkanal, Ganjam, Nuapada, Sundargarh, 
Subarnapur, Sub Divisional Hospital (SDH): Kamakhyanagar and Community Health Centre 
(CHC): Khariar 
96  Father or husband’s name, name of family members, age, gender and relationship with head 
of the household 
97 In absence of data, names and available particulars of the family was prepared with dummy 
data like member A, member B, member C, etc. 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
88 
collecting unavailable data was left to the enrolment teams of Insurance 
Companies at the time of enrolment of beneficiaries. Enrolment teams also did 
not collect all the missing information for the dummy fields at the time of 
enrolment. Audit noticed that out of 558 eligible beneficiaries in the RSBY 
database of four villages98, enrolment was done for 402 beneficiaries which 
included 111 cases with dummy fields. Out of these 111 cases, required 
information against the dummy field was collected in 90 cases and in remaining 
21 cases, beneficiaries were issued smart cards having dummy field.  
Department stated (October 2014) that dummy fields were placed in RSBY 
database to cover more family members to increase family size of the enrolled 
beneficiary both during and after enrolment. This indicates that database 
maintained was not foolproof.  
3.3.3 Preparation and uploading of RSBY data 
L&ESI Department decided (January 2009) to use 2002 BPL survey data for 
preparation of database and accordingly entrusted the work to M/s Extrapolix 
Systems Private Limited in three99  phases for preparing and uploading RSBY data 
in the prescribed format for 19 districts at the rate of ` 0.57 for one line entry 
(both in English and vernacular language) covering all fields of the format. Audit 
however noticed following deficiencies: 
• Award of work without tender : Before issue of work orders, no tender 
was floated as required under Orissa General Financial Rules (OGFR), 
though a list of 12 firms was provided by the Department for selection. No 
agreements were executed between Government and the firm for smooth 
operation and timely execution of the allotted work with specified norms. 
The firm after preparing data for 19 districts claimed ` 65.95 lakh for its 
work against which final payment of ` 64.23 lakh was made by 
Government in two phases (` 34.99 lakh + ` 29.24 lakh).  
• Delay in completion of work: As per the conditions of work order issued 
to M/s Extrapolix System Private Limited, the complete assignments such 
as data processing, reducing data to the appropriate format, validating data 
against the given software and uploading the data in the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment (MoLE) site were to be completed within seven 
days from the date of issue of work order. But, the firm completed the 
work with delays ranging from 34 to 289 days.  
• Unfruitful expenditure: The State Government decided (August 2010) to 
prepare RSBY database based on 1997 BPL survey and the work of 
preparation and uploading of RSBY data was again awarded (November 
2010) to IDCOL Software Limited (ISL), a Government of Odisha 
                                                 
98  (1) Digapada (Ganjam), (2) Ganiari (Nuapada), (3) Khuntagaon (Sundargarh), and (4) Meghala 
(Subarnapur) 
99   6 February 2009: one district, 26 February 2009: 11 districts and 22 July 2009: seven districts 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
89 
Undertaking at a cost of ` 99.96 lakh. ISL completed the work by 22 July 
2011. As a result, RSBY database prepared basing on 2002 BPL survey 
could not be utilised and this rendered the expenditure of ` 64.23 lakh 
unfruitful.  
• Non verification of data: Labour Commissioner instructed (April 
2011) field functionaries of L&ESI Department under the district 
administration to check RSBY data prepared by ISL before uploading on 
the RSBY website of GoI for doing away with any error, omission, 
duplication or mismatch, etc. no such verification was done by DLOs. 
Labour Commissioner also did not obtain any verification certificates 
from District Collectors over the veracity of BPL data supplied by ISL, 
though Government had instructed (July 2012) him to do so. As a result, 
data uploaded on the website of the MoLE for enrolment under RSBY was 
not error free. It was seen that 228 BPL households of eight villages100 in 
five districts were not included in the RSBY database although they 
appeared in the 1997 BPL list. Further, RSBY database included 170 
households of eight villages101 in five test checked districts though their 
names were not found in the 1997 BPL list. It was also found during 
beneficiary survey of 48 households of four villages102 that 38 households 
were not issued smart cards although their names appeared in 1997 BPL 
list and 10 households were issued smart cards although their names did 
not appear in 1997 BPL list.  
• Absence of beneficiaries in database : There were omission, mismatch, 
and repetition of data in the RSBY database as was evident from 
complaints of Insurers at the time of enrolment of beneficiaries. In 
Bhadrak district, 250 out of 1506 villages including wards of ULBs had 
nil data and in Bhandari pokhari block there was duplication of data. In 
seven blocks and two Notified Area Councils (NACs) of Cuttack district, 
4177 households were omitted from the RSBY database prepared by ISL. 
In Narasinghpur Block, RSBY database had only 5484 families against 
14402 families in 1997 BPL list. In Jagatsinghpur Block, as against 14381 
BPL households, RSBY database showed only 7204 families. In Tirtol 
Block, against 14226 BPL household, RSBY database had only 6271 
households. Twenty seven out of 28 families of Kuarmunda Block were 
not found in the RSBY data. There was 627 times repetition of one name. 
In seven blocks of Kalahandi district, 29933 families were not found in 
RSBY database. 
                                                 
100  Dhenkanal: Podapada (27) and Odapada (14); Ganjam: Beguniapada (4), Nupada:Ganiari (8), 
Thagpali (44), Sundargarh: Khutagaon (38), Subarnapur: Meghala (33), Bhandar (60) 
101  Dhenkanal: Podapada (15) and Odapada (2); Ganjam: Beguniapada (3); Nuapada: Ganiar (2) 
and Thagpali (17); Sundargarh: Khuntagaon (43); and Subarnapur: Meghala (27) and Bhandar 
(61) 
102  Podapoda and Odapada of Denkanl district and Meghala and Bhandar of Subarnapur district 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
90 
Due to nonvconfirmation of correctness of RSBY BPL data, and nonvrectification 
of errors by the ISL, eligible beneficiaries were thus left out while ineligible 
beneficiaries were covered. 
Department stated (October 2014) that the expenditure of ` 64.23 lakh was not 
unfruitful as the data prepared by M/s Extrapolix Systems Private Limited was 
used in six districts in the first phase. Due care had been taken to remove 
repetition of data and DLOs had been instructed to submit the information on left 
out families duly authenticated by district administration for inclusion in the 
RSBY database.  
3.3.4 Coverage of beneficiaries. 
Main objective of RSBY is to provide health insurance cover to BPL households 
and their family members (up to five members) from major health shocks that 
involve hospitalisation. The scheme provides for meeting expenses of 
hospitalisation for medical and/ or surgical procedures including maternity benefit 
to the enrolled BPL families up to ` 30,000 per family per annum on a family 
floater basis. As per RSBY database prepared (2010v11) by the State, there were 
52.22 lakh BPL households to be covered under RSBY scheme. On check of 
records, Audit observed the following:  
• out of 52.22 lakh eligible BPL households, only 33.86 lakh families (64.84 
per cent) were enrolled under the scheme as of March 2013, leaving out 
18.36 lakh eligible beneficiaries. Department attributed shortfall in 
enrolment to nonvexistence of family as the data was 15 years old, absence 
of head of family or spouse, migration of family members, etc. 
• enrolment coverage in districts ranged from 39.95 per cent in Nuapada to 
79.84 per cent in Angul district. Four GPs103 of Nuapada and nine 
villages104 of Subarnapur districts were not covered at all leaving 2449 
beneficiaries of the locality uncovered under the scheme.  
• smart cards issued to beneficiaries of four districts105 during 2009v10 
expired during JanuaryvMarch 2011. As required under scheme guidelines, 
fresh tender was to be invited during August 2010, i.e, six months before 
expiry of the policy period. But the Government invited fresh tender in 
October 2010 which was finalised in December 2010 and agreement was 
entered (25 February 2011) with ICICI Lombard (lowest bidder) which 
issued new smart cards during JunevJuly 2011. Thus, due to delay in the 
process of renewal/ selection through fresh tenders by the State Nodal 
Agency (SNA), there was a gap of three to four months between the 
                                                 
103  Soseng (154), Sunabeda (542), Ghatmal (637) and Nangalbod (978) 
104 Brahmanipali (41), Budhijharan (9), Melipali (2), Daltnagar (2) of Jauanbhaunra GP; 
Bairagipali (13) and Umadeipali (3) of Podadar GP; Dangajore (47) and Saidul (3) of 
Charbhata GP; Katapali (18) of Dubula GP. 
105  Deogarh, Jharsuguda, Nuapada and Puri 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
91 
expiry date of earlier policy and date of commencement of new policy due 
to which smart card holders of these districts could not avail the benefit 
during FebruaryvMay 2011.  
Department stated (October 2014) that remaining families could not be covered 
due to nonvwillingness of beneficiaries to be covered under the scheme, enrolment 
software did not allow coverage of dependents in the absence of the head of 
family or spouse, etc. for which GoO proposed some modification in the 
enrolment software which was approved by GoI. Adequate steps were taken to 
create awareness among the people and the enrolment trend was increased in the 
next round. But, the fact remained that department did not take adequate steps to 
inform all eligible beneficiaries to be present in the enrolment centre. During joint 
beneficiary interview with 253 households, 63 beneficiaries stated that they had 
no knowledge about enrolment.  
3.3.5 Empanelment of hospitals and premium manageme nt 
3.3.5.1 Empanelment of hospitals 
Para 8 of RSBY guidelines and MoU signed between Insurance Companies and 
SNA envisage that the Insurer shall empanel enough hospitals, both private and 
public (including ESI Hospitals) in the district so that beneficiaries need not travel 
very far to get health care service under the scheme. Empanelment of hospitals is 
to be done based on prescribed criteria106. Both public (including ESI) and private 
health providers which provide hospitalisation and/ or day care services were 
eligible for inclusion under the insurance scheme, subject to such requirements for 
empanelment as agreed between the State Government and the Insurers. LC 
instructed (August 2011) insurance companies to empanel at least 50 per cent of 
the available private hospitals. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that:  
• out of 335 private hospitals having 10 beds or more, only 92 hospitals 
(27.46 per cent) were empanelled as of October 2013. In four districts 
(Angul, Kandhamal, Nuapada and Rayagada), not a single private hospital 
was empanelled.  
• out of 1688 Government hospitals including 1226 PHCs functioning in the 
State, only 420 hospitals (25 per cent ) including three PHCs were 
empanelled. No ESI hospitals were empanelled.  
This indicated that adequate number of hospitals were not empanelled as required 
under RSBY and thus defeated the objective of the scheme to provide treatment to 
the beneficiaries in nearby hospitals.  
                                                 
106 Government hospitals including PHCs and ESI hospitals: possessing facility to read and 
manage smart cards and Private hospitals having at least 10 inpatient medical beds, other 
surgical and pathological facilities along with telephone/ fax and internet facilities and 
machine(s) to read and manage smart card transactions 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
92 
Department stated (October 2014) that as many as 141 private hospitals had been 
empanelled and steps had been taken to empanel more number of private hospitals 
under the scheme. Private hospitals could not be empanelled in Nuapada, 
Rayagada and Boudh districts due to unwillingness and nonvavailability of 
hospitals. As regards empanelment of Government hospitals, it was stated that all 
the health institutions did not meet minimum criteria.  
3.3.5.2 Selection of Insurer despite poor performance  
Tender was invited (February 2010) for implementation of RSBY in 18 districts 
in which NIACL was the lowest bidder. Government decided (December 2010) 
not to award work to NIACL on account of its past performance in 
implementation of RSBY in other six districts107.  
Government subsequently divided 18 districts into four clusters and work was 
awarded to other insurance companies at the rate quoted by NIACL. NIACL 
challenged this decision in a writ petition in the Hon’ble High Court of Odisha 
which was subsequently dismissed. Oriental Insurance Company which was 
awarded the work of one cluster containing five districts108, refused to accept the 
work due to delay in award of work. When the same was offered to 
Cholamandalam MS GIC Limited, it also expressed its inability to undertake the 
work as they were working with full capacity in other States. Finally, the work of 
the cluster was awarded to NIACL although Government had decided not to 
award any work to NIACL earlier. Audit observed the following: 
• despite decision (October 2011) of Government, fresh tenders were not 
floated after refusal by the Insurer i.e., Oriental Insurance Company and 
Cholamandalam MS GIC Limited to implement the scheme. Thus, 
implementation of the scheme was delayed for six months (October 2011v
March 2012) for which beneficiaries could not avail the benefit.  
• After revaward of work, the performance of NIACL was also not 
encouraging as was observed (April 2013) by the High Power Committee 
(HPC) 109. Out of 18804 claims raised as of 15 May 2013, 2152 claims 
were settled beyond 30 days and 1234 claims were rejected, though the 
claims were to be settled within 21 days. Cluster of five districts contained 
one test checked district Dhenkanal, in which 27 claims amounting to  
` 0.67 lakh out of total 38 claims (` 1.23 lakh) were rejected without 
assigning any reason which was a loss to the hospital. 
• In Jagatsinghpur district, there was delay in distribution of smart cards to 
beneficiaries which deprived the benefit of health service to them. The 
district Kiosk was also not functioning properly and prevenrolment IEC 
activities were also not adequate.  
                                                 
107 Cuttack, Ganjam, Khordha, Rayagada, Sambalpur and Sundargarh 
108  Angul, Dhenkanal, Jagatsinghpur, Keonjhar and Nabarangapur 
109  High power committee constituted under the chairmanship of Chief Secretary of the State for 
scrutinising technical and financial bids 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
93 
Department stated (October 2014) that work was awarded to NIACL to avoid 
delay in retender due to absence of other companies to whom work could have 
been entrusted. However, the award was delayed for about six months since the 
date of dismissal (September 2011) of petition.  
3.3.5.3 Irregular extension of policy periods  
As per RSBY guidelines and MoU signed between the SNA and Insurer, the 
period of insurance contract would be for three years from the effective date 
subject to renewal on yearly basis/ extension of contract annually, based on 
parameters fixed by the State Government/ Nodal Agency. In case of renewal, all 
the smart cards in the districts in which the Insurer implemented the scheme need 
to be renewed/ issued by the date the earlier policy is getting expired and the 
process of renewal is to commence six months ahead of the expiry of current year 
policy period.  
Audit noticed that instead of renewing the smart cards of the districts by the date 
by which the earlier policy expired, Department allowed extension of policy 
periods in favour of the Insurers repeatedly for the period ranging from three to 15 
months on pro-rata premium basis up to January 2014 in different phases with 
switching over from 32 KB smart card to 64 KB smart card.  
• Performance of the Insurers was not evaluated based on parameters fixed 
by the Government before extending their policy period.  
• Extension of policy periods were allowed on pro rata premium basis for 
continuation of policy period, although orders sanctioning such extension 
of policy periods did not contain anything about pro rata provision of 
health benefit package of ` 30,000 (insured amount per family per annum) 
for the extended period of policy.  
• The fact of extension of policy periods and extended health benefit 
package to be provided to the smart card holders of the concerned districts 
was not found to have been informed to them by conducting IEC 
activities. During beneficiary interview, 205 out of 253 beneficiaries in 10 
villages of the test checked districts stated that they were not aware of the 
validity period of smart cards. Further, due to delay in intimation of 
extension of policy period, the help desks to read and manage smart card 
machine remained nonvoperational for 55 days in DHH, Nuapada during 
which the possibility of nonvavailing of health benefit by beneficiaries 
visiting the hospital cannot be ruled out.  
• Instead of going for fresh tender, policy period was extended for 14 
months in Jharsuguda and Deogarh districts, for 15 months in Nuapada 
and 12 months in Puri districts in favour of ICICI Lombard despite there 
being some reservations. 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
94 
3.3.6 Receipt and utilisation of RSBY fund 
As per the scheme guidelines, GoI is to provide 75 per cent of the estimated 
annual premium of ` 750 subject to a maximum of ` 565 per annum apart from 
the cost of smart cards of ` 60 per card. The State Government is to contribute 25 
per cent of the annual premium and any additional premium in case the total 
premium exceeds ` 750 and also the administrative and other related costs for 
administering the scheme in the State. The beneficiary would pay ` 30 per annum 
towards registration/ renewal of smart card. The proposal for release of central 
share shall be sent to GoI only after release of State share by the State Nodal 
Agency to the Insurers. Transfer of the central share of the premium to the 
Insurers will be made within seven days of the receipt of the amount from GoI.  
During 2008v13, SNA received ` 143.78 crore towards central and state share out 
of which it could utilise ` 105.97 crore (74 per cent) only leaving an unspent 
balance of ` 37.81 crore as of March 2013 as indicated in the table given below.  
Table: 3.6 : Table showing receipt and expenditure of funds under RSBY (`` `` in crore) 
Year Receipt Expenditure Closing 
balance State 
share 
Central 
share 
Total State 
share  
Central 
share 
Total 
2008v09 0.50 vNilv 0.50 vNilv vNilv vNilv 0.50 
2009v10 10.00 vNilv 10.00 1.64 vNilv 1.64 8.86 
2010v11 10.00 20.44 30.44 3.88 20.44 24.32 14.98 
2011v12 10.00 14.41 24.41 2.36 14.41 16.77 22.62 
2012v13 20.00 58.43 78.43 14.22 49.02 63.24 37.81 
Total 50.50 93.28 143.78 22.10 83.87 105.97  
(Source: Data furnished by the Labour Commissioner’s office) 
Audit scrutiny revealed the following: 
3.3.6.1 Delay in release of State share 
As per the scheme guidelines, premium towards State share is to be released 
within 30 days from date of receipt of necessary documents in the prescribed 
format and invoice from the insurers. However, State share was released with 
delay ranging between 38 to 180 days.  
3.3.6.2 Delay in release of Central share 
As per scheme guidelines, transfer of the central share of the premium to the 
Insurers will be made within seven days of the receipt of the amount from GoI. 
However, Central share was released and paid to the insurance companies with 
delays ranging from 19 to 86 days. 
3.3.6.3 Non-maintenance of separate account 
As per GoI instructions (October 2012), registration/ renewal fees collected from 
the beneficiaries under RSBY should be kept in a separate account and interest 
earned on this account should be part of the funds. But, no such separate account 
was maintained for watching the transactions relating to registration/ renewal fees 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
95 
by the SNA/ State Labour Welfare Society and the amount was kept along with 
scheme fund in Savings Bank Account. As a result, the exact amount of funds 
received towards registration/ renewal fees, interest earned and expenses made 
out of this fund could not be ascertained. Labour Commissioner stated (November 
2013) that State Bank of India and Government Treasury Branch had been moved 
to open a new account.  
Delay in payment of premium to the insurance providers would lead to delay in 
settlement of claims at hospitals, hampering progress in implementation of the 
scheme.  
Department stated (October 2014) that State share is released to Insurance 
Companies after comparing the bills with the reports of District Key Management 
Authority, biovmetric certificate of the companies, etc. due to which delay 
occurred. As regards delay in release of central share, it was stated that there was 
a gap between the issue of letter by GoI and transfer of the central share through 
Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS).  
3.3.7 Extension of health benefit package to benefi ciaries 
3.3.7.1  Settlement of claims 
As provided in the RSBY guidelines, the empanelled hospitals after rendering 
service to the patient are to prefer claim through electronic report to the Insurer/ 
Third Party Administrators (TPA) and the Insurer will settle the claim and make 
payment to the hospitals within 21 days from the date of such electronic claim 
bill.  
Check of records and data furnished to Audit revealed that a total of 184305 
claims amounting to ` 59.77 crore were raised by the empanelled hospitals in the 
State, of which 165019 claims for ` 52.01 crore (87.02 per cent) were settled by 
March 2013. The Insurers rejected 2959 claims for an amount of ` 1.60 crore. The 
remaining 16327 claims involving ` 6.16 crore were lying unsettled as of March 
2013. 
The details of claims raised, settled and pending in respect of test checked 
hospitals are given in the table below. 
Table 3.7: Table showing details of claims raised and settled by the hospitals         (`` ``    in lakh) 
Name of the 
hospital 
Claims raised Claims settled Claims rejected  Claims pending 
Number  Amount Number  Amount Number  Amount Number  Amount 
SDMO, 
Kamakhyanagar 
369 8.13 369 8.13 0 0 0 0 
DHH, 
Dhenkanal 
1111 25.13 1043 22.83 38 1.23  30 1.07 
DHH, 
Berhampur 
215 8.11 190 6.61 0 0 25 1.50 
Amit Hospital, 
Berhampur 
1221 67.06 1215 66.64 6 0.42 0 0 
DHH, Nuapada 1764 37.53 1527 31.88 173 3.25 64 2.40  

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
96 
Name of the 
hospital 
Claims raised Claims settled Claims rejected  Claims pending 
Number  Amount Number  Amount Number  Amount Number  Amount 
CHC, Khariar 381 6.70 340 5.73 1 0.03 40 0.94 
DHH, 
Sundargarh 
3489 96.03 3424 93.35 5 0.28 60 2.40 
DHH, 
Subarnapur 
895 23.44 865 22.14 9 0.12 21 1.18 
Lepra 
Mahanadi Eye 
Hospital, 
Biramaharajpur 
1769 65.18 1689 61.93 2 0.07 78 3.18 
Total 11214 337.31 10662 319.24 234 5.40 318 12.67 
(Source: MIS data provided by the hospitals and insurance providers) 
As could be seen from the table, 11,214 claims involving ` 3.37 crore were raised 
by the hospitals out of which the Insurers settled 10,662 claims for an amount of  
` 3.19 crore and rejected 234 claims involving ` 5.40 lakh. Three hundred 
eighteen cases involving ` 12.67 lakh remained unsettled as of 31 March 2013. 
Audit further observed that:  
• 4208 claims involving an amount of ` 1.07 crore were settled beyond the 
prescribed period of 21 days with a delay ranging up to 255 days. 
• While settling claims, insurers reduced the claimed amount by ` 4.80 lakh 
in 348 cases without assigning any reason.  
• Claims in respect of 233 cases were rejected of which reasons for rejection 
were not mentioned in 30 cases involving an amount ` 0.78 lakh. In 
remaining 203 cases where reasons were mentioned, Audit found that in 
174 cases involving ` 3.75 lakh, reasons mentioned were not valid. 
Hospital authorities also did not take tangible steps to ascertain the 
grounds of rejection/ reduction of claimed amounts and pursue with 
Insurers to settle the cases. 
Thus, management of claims was not effective and delay in settlement of claims 
occurred due to nonvlodging of grievance by concerned hospitals for nonv
settlement and rejection of cases to the insurer or appellate authorities at different 
levels by entering the issues in the grievance portal for effective and transparent 
settlement of claims. 
Department stated (October 2014) that SNA has taken effective steps to settle the 
legitimate claims of the hospitals although some claims are settled after due date 
on intervention of the SNA.  
3.3.7.2  Non-payment of travelling allowance 
Paragraph 6.1 (g) of RSBY guidelines provides that smart card holder or his 
family members who visit hospital for treatment shall be paid transport allowance 
(TA) of ` 100 for each visit subject to an annual ceiling of ` 1000 by the hospital 
where the beneficiary gets treatment under RSBY scheme.  

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
97 
Check of records of seven hospitals showed that travelling allowance was not 
paid to 945 beneficiaries110 who had visited the hospitals for treatment under the 
scheme. The authorities of the hospitals attributed the reasons for such nonv
payment to nonvavailability of information about the discharge of patients at the 
RSBY help desk, lack of awareness and offline transactions. During joint 
beneficiary interview with 253 beneficiaries, 16 beneficiaries stated that they 
were not paid the travelling allowance of ` 100 for their visit to hospitals. 
Department stated (October 2014) that beneficiaries had been made aware of the 
provisions for payment of TA through advertisements and 16 beneficiaries who 
denied payment of TA might be the cases of LAMA (Left Against Medical 
Advice).  
3.3.7.3  Delay in installation/ activation of trans action software 
As stipulated in the agreement executed between the Insurer and the SNA, the 
insurance coverage under the scheme shall be in force for a period of one year 
from the date of commencement of the policy. The policy will commence from 
the first day of the succeeding month in which the smart card is issued to the 
beneficiaries. Insurers were to install hospital kit (approved transaction software, 
card readers and thumb scanner) in empanelled hospitals (help desk) for 
identification of beneficiaries and settlement of claims. 
Audit scrutiny revealed that in seven hospitals111, hospital kit including 
transaction software were installed with delays ranging from 30 to 229 days from 
the date of issue of smart cards/ commencement of policy period. Due to such 
delay in installation of software, about 90,260 beneficiaries of concerned Blocks/ 
Urban Local Bodies could not avail intended health service112 under the scheme. 
Insurance companies were also benefited to the extent of ` 1.16 crore as they did 
not provide any service during period of delay, though they were paid premium 
for the whole year.  
Further, it was noticed that Point of Service (POS) machine113 remained nonv
operational for 317 days in four of the test checked hospitals114 during which 
beneficiaries could not avail benefits under RSBY.  
During the above period, manual process was also not adopted to provide health 
services to BPL families and the insurers gained at the cost of beneficiaries.  
                                                 
110 Amit Hospital:35, DHH  Berhampur: 35, DHH Dhenkanal:126, DHH Nuapada: 68, CHC Raj 
Khariar: 23, DHH Sundargarh: 24 and DHH Subarnapur: 634  
111  DHHs of Dhenkanal, Ganjam, Nuapada, Subarnapur and Sundargarh; SDH: Kamakhyanagar 
and CHC: Khariar 
112  Diagnosis, pathological test, fooding facility, medicine, nursing and travelling allowance 
113  By swiping the smart card on the POS machine, helpdesk verifies the patient’s details and 
registers him. 
114  (1) SDH, Kamakhyanagar (16 days); (2) DHH, Dhenkanal (6 days); (3) DHH, Nuapada (55 
days) and (4) CHC, Khariar (240 days) 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
98 
Department stated (October 2014) that if the software of any hospital gets corrupt/ 
nonvfunctional, there is a provision of manual transaction so that beneficiaries 
avail the benefit under the scheme.  
3.3.7.4  Smart cards retained by hospitals 
As per RSBY Hospital Manual, if a RSBY patient visits the hospital, the Help 
Desk of the hospital verifies the patient’s details and registers him by swiping the 
smart card on the POS machine. If advised for admission, second transaction is 
conducted by swiping the card, verifying the beneficiary through fingerprint 
authentication. Once treatment concludes or the beneficiary is discharged from 
the hospital, the claim transaction is conducted by swiping the card again and 
authenticating the fingerprint of the patient. After final amount is blocked, the 
smart card is returned to the beneficiary. 
Audit noticed that five out of 10 test checked hospitals retained 197 smart cards 
with them without returning them to beneficiaries. After discharge from hospitals, 
beneficiaries did not come to the Help Desks to collect their smart cards due to 
their ignorance about the discharge procedure under RSBY. The details of smart 
cards retained by the test checked hospitals and the claimed amount not processed 
are given in the table below.  
Table 3.8: Table showing the details of amounts blocked due to non-return of smart cards 
Sl 
No 
Name of the hospital Number of  
cards retained  
Amount blocked against 
the smart cards  (in `` ``) 
Period of retention 
of smart cards  
1 DHH, Dhenkanal 21 67500 8v13 months 
2 SDH, Kamakhyanagar 7 19500 6v11 months 
3 DHH , Nuapada 83 210000 10v27 months 
4 CHC, Rajkhariar 25 51500 2v20 months 
5 DHH , Sundargarh 61 164000 2–17 months 
 Total 197 512500 2-27 months 
(Source: Records of hospitals) 
As could be seen from the above table, smart cards were retained with hospitals 
for a period ranging from two to 27 months as on date of Audit (Septemberv
November 2013). As RSBY beneficiaries did not come to Help Desk after their 
treatment, claims for ` 5.13 lakh could not be processed by the hospitals. 
Moreover, there was no scope for beneficiaries to claim their health benefit, in 
case they require further treatment.  
Hospital authorities attributed reasons for retention of these cards to nonv
completion of transaction due to software problem, nonvproduction of discharge 
certificate by the patients after treatment, ignorance of beneficiaries to collect the 
smart cards after treatment, etc. 
Department stated (October 2014) that the ward attendants and wardvinvcharge 
were sensitised to hand over the smart cards to beneficiaries at the time of 
discharge.  

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
99 
Unused OT table in DHH, Subarnapur  
3.3.7.5  Quality of Health services 
The RSBY guidelines provide that empanelled hospitals should have the 
following facilities for delivery of health services to beneficiaries. 
• Fully equipped and engaged in providing medical and surgical facilities 
including diagnostic facilities i.e., pathology testing and Xvray, ECG etc; 
• Qualified doctors and nursing staff under its employment round the clock; 
and 
• Telephone/ Fax and Internet facilities and machines to read and manage 
smart card transactions. 
For maintaining continuous quality management system, hospital should be 
reassessed under the revised empanelmentvcumvgrading criteria. 
Audit noticed following deficiencies: 
• Fax facilities have not been provided with the help desk functioning in 
DHHs of Ganjam and Nuapada and CHC, Khariar. 
• Adequate staff was not deployed to the help desk to provide service on 
24X7 basis in five hospitals115.  
• In test checked hospitals, posts of 23 specialists, 15 Assistant Surgeons and 
four nurses/ health workers  were lying vacant which also affects health 
service delivery to patients including RSBY beneficiaries. Due to absence 
of specialists, major surgery cases were referred to other hospitals. 
• The anesthetic induction room in the Operation Theatre (OT) was not 
equipped with monitoring equipment like ECG, ETCO2, Pulse oximeter 
and blood pressure, ventilators etc in SDH, Kamakhyanagar; DHH, 
Nuapada and Subarnapur, and CHC, Khariar. 
• During joint physical 
verification it was noticed that 
in DHH Subarnapur, the 
operating tables in the OT are 
very old and incapable of 
height adjustment. No shadow 
less lights exist in the OT as 
required under guidelines 
issued by MoLE, GoI.  
• As required under criteria for empanelment of hospitals under RSBY, there 
should be at least one toilet for each 12 inpatients in the hospitals. But, the 
DHH Nuapada and DHH Subarnapur have only seven and six toilets 
against the requirement 12 and 10 toilets respectively.  
                                                
 
115 DHHs: Ganjam, Sundaragarh and Subarnapur; SDH: Kamakhyanagar and CHC: Khariar 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
100 
• All the 10 test checked hospitals in five districts had not been reassessed 
under empanelmentvcumvgrading criteria116 for continuous quality 
management system as prescribed by Ministry of Labour and Employment 
GoI. 
Thus, due to absence of specialists, staff, equipment, etc. the patients were 
deprived of quality health services.  
Department stated (October 2014) that Health and Family Welfare Department 
have taken steps for strengthening public hospitals to ensure 24 X 7 quality health 
services. 
3.3.8 Monitoring 
3.3.8.1 Inadequate monitoring of implementation of RSBY scheme 
As per GoI guidelines, periodic review meetings with the Insurance Company 
should be organised by the State Nodal Agency to review implementation of the 
scheme in the State. Accordingly, State level covordination committee and district 
level covordination committees were formed (May 2010) for smooth 
implementation, monitoring and review of RSBY programme. The committees 
were to meet and review implementation and progress of the scheme in every 15 
days. On check of records, Audit however, noticed that:  
• though RSBY scheme was launched in the State during 2009v10, the State 
level covordination committee was formed only in May 2010. No review 
meeting was conducted during the year 2009v11. Only two review 
meetings were held during 2011v12 and eight meetings in 2012v13 against 
the requirement of 24 meetings each year. Issues like progress of 
enrolment, empanelment of hospital, activation of help desk at hospital, 
IEC activities, etc. were discussed in the meeting. 
The DLOs have a vital role at district level in implementation of the 
scheme. But, the functioning of DLOs was never discussed in review 
meetings except once in January 2013. Scrutiny of records and data 
furnished to Audit showed that monitoring at district level was inadequate. 
The number of monitoring and review meetings held at district level in the 
test checked districts117 varied from zero to 22 per cent in the selected 
districts.  
                                                 
116  Access and physical facilities, management, availability of staff, evaluation and care of 
inpatients, operating department, laboratory services, infection control practices, hospital 
waste management, support services, access to blood bank, patient rights, health and safety, 
medical records 
117  Dhenkanal: 3 meetings against 22; Ganjam: 5 meetings against 32; Nuapada: Nil against 44 
meetings; Subarnapur: 1 meeting against 30 and Sundargarh: 7 meetings against 32 meetings 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
101 
• As envisaged in RSBY guidelines, a State level server should be set up to 
store the enrolment and hospitalisation data from all the districts. These 
data are to be analysed by the State Government with the technical team of 
the insurers for improving implementation of the scheme. It was, however, 
noticed that no such State level server was set up (September 2013).  
Department stated (October 2014) that fortnightly review meetings are now 
conducted by the LC on fixed dates in each month involving H&FW Department 
and insurance companies  
3.3.8.2 Inadequate IEC activities 
As decided (February 2012) by the State Labour Welfare Society, all the 30 
Collectors were provided (JulyvAugust 2012) ` 50,000 each for generating 
awareness among the people about the benefits of RSBY by undertaking IEC 
(Information, Education and Communication) activities through staging street 
play, folk dance, health camps, microphone announcement, etc. District 
Collectors were also requested to furnish Utilisation Certificates (UCs) soon after 
the amount is utilised. Audit, however, noticed that UCs were not submitted by 
the districts except DLO, Nuapada who had submitted UC for ` 50,000 as of 
September 2013. In test checked districts, the district authorities of Ganjam, 
Dhenkanal and Subarnapur did not spend any amount on IEC activities. ADMO 
(Medical), Sundargarh spent only an amount of ` 23,100 which indicated that IEC 
activities conducted for creating awareness among beneficiaries after enrolment 
were poor. In order to assess the effectiveness of implementation of the scheme, 
Audit conducted interview of 253 beneficiaries in ten villages118 through a 
questionnaire and the views of the beneficiaries were obtained in presence of 
auditee, which are discussed as under: 
• Out of 253 beneficiaries interviewed, 136 beneficiaries stated that they did 
not know about the system/ procedure of the scheme and 175 beneficiaries 
stated that health camps were not conducted in their villages. 
• One hundred and fifty three beneficiaries stated that no list of RSBY 
beneficiaries was displayed in their villages and 163 beneficiaries stated 
that they were not provided with the list of empanelled hospitals along 
with the smart card as required under the scheme. 
• Two hundred five beneficiaries stated that they did not know about the 
validity period of the smart cards issued to them and 150 beneficiaries 
stated that smart cards were not issued on the date of enrolment. 
                                                 
118  Digapada and Beguniapada in Ganjam district; Odapada and Podapada (Ratnaprava) in 
Dhenkanal district; Ganiari and Thagpali in Nuapada district; Khutgaon and Joketa in 
Sundargarh district and Maghala and Bhandara in Subarnapur district 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
102 
• One hundred and sixteen beneficiaries stated that they were not aware of 
the benefit package of ` 30,000 and eligibility up to five members for 
availing the health service. 
• One hundred and eighteen beneficiaries stated that they had not visited the 
hospitals due to lack of awareness and 92 told that they did not visit the 
hospital as it was not required on their part. Out of the remaining 43 
beneficiaries who visited hospitals, 18 beneficiaries stated that hospital 
refused them for treatment and six stated that medicine cost was not 
reimbursed by the hospital. 
• Twenty one beneficiaries stated that that they did not know about the 
balance amount left with smart card after their discharge from hospital. 
3.3.8.3 Non-deployment of staff in the State Labour Welfare Society 
As per the scheme guidelines, the State Government should set up an independent 
State Nodal Agency (SNA) to implement the scheme in the State. The Nodal 
agency should be appropriately staffed to carry out its functions effectively in 
implementing the scheme.  It should be a separate entity under the control of the 
State Government. 
Audit noticed that the State Labour Welfare Society (SLWS) was established 
(October 2010) for implementation of RSBY scheme. The Commissionervcumv
Secretary of L&ESI Department was the Chairman and the Labour Commissioner 
was the Chief Executive Officer of the Society. But, no staff is deployed in the 
Society at any level till date (September 2013) for effective implementation of the 
scheme. The implementation of RSBY was managed by the existing staff of the 
Labour Directorate. As a result, maintenance of records relating to details of 
payment of premium, issue of smart cards/ enrolment of beneficiaries, grievances 
of beneficiaries, tracking the progress of implementation and monitoring of the 
scheme could not be ensured. Thus, nonvdeployment of appropriate staff to the 
Society affected implementation of the scheme adversely. 
Department stated (October 2014) that recruitment of manpower was under 
process.  
3.3.8.4 Grievance redressal mechanism 
For efficient and transparent settlement of different issues between different 
stakeholders of RSBY in the State and to monitor the disposal of complaints and 
grievances in an effective and time bound manner, a web window namely Central 
Committee/ Grievance Redressal System was designed by the GoI during 2012v
13. Grievance Redressal Committees at District level (DGRC), State level 
(SGRC) and National level (NGRC) are to be set up to attend the grievances of 
various stakeholders under the mechanism which would meet every third 
Wednesday for addressing the grievances in their respective committees. The 
concerned committees where the grievance is received will hear the parties and 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
103 
take a decision within 30 days. If at any point, the decision of DGRC/ SGRC/ 
NGRC is contested by the complainant, an appeal is made to the next level of 
Grievance Redressal Committees. The appeal by the Appellate Body shall be 
disposed of within the next 30 days. 
Scrutiny of records revealed that though the SGRCs and DGRCs were constituted 
(July 2012) by the State Government, the following deficiencies in the grievance 
redressal mechanism were noticed.   
• Complaints received from different stake holders were not found entered 
in the grievance portal by the designated officers for accelerating the 
Central Grievance Redressal Management.  
• No registers for watching the receipt and disposal of the complaints/ 
grievances (except complaints of call center at Labour Directorate) were 
maintained at the SNA level. 
• Though GRC meetings were to be held on every third Wednesday, the 
said meetings were not conducted regularly. It was seen that only five 
State level GRC meetings were held against the requirement of nine 
meetings as of March 2013. Records of five test checked DLOs showed 
that only two DGRC meetings in Ganjam district and one in Subarnapur 
district were held. No meeting of DGRC were held in other three districts 
(Dhenkanal, Nuapada and Sundargarh).   
• Moreover, complaints regarding nonvsettlement of claims relating to interv
insurance claims though discussed in the GRC meetings, no follow up 
action was taken to watch their settlement. For instance, it was instructed 
in the GRC meeting held on 28 August 2012 to settle 4,772 pending 
claims of ` 84 lakh relating to four Insurers. But, the fact of settlement of 
claims was neither watched at the SNA level nor any follow up action 
taken by the authorities against the defaulters.  
During joint beneficiary interview conducted in ten villages, 240 out of 253 
beneficiaries stated that no district/ State level officers had visited their villages to 
address their complaints and also to ensure coverage of left out beneficiaries. 
Thus, Grievance Redressal Mechanism put in place was not effective and 
adequate for efficient and transparent settlement of different issues. 
Department stated (November 2013) that apart from the SGRC and DGRC, a 
technical committee comprising representatives from L&ESI, H&FW 
Departments and NRHM was constituted to resolve disputes pertaining to 
empanelment and devempanelment of hospitals. Technical committee 
recommended revempanelment of four hospitals and devempanelment of two 
hospitals. But, the department did not furnish specific reasons for other issues as 
pointed out above. 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
104 
PANCHAYATI RAJ DEPARTMENT 
 
3.4 Working of District Rural Development Agencies in the State 
3.4.1 Introduction 
District Rural Development Agencies (DRDAs) implement various antivpoverty 
programmes of Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) at district level in the 
State.  
Audit was conducted during JulyvNovember 2013 and July 2014 with test check 
of records of Panchayati Raj Department and seven119 out of 30 DRDAs 
covering the period 2009v14 to assess whether different poverty alleviation 
programmes120 were implemented efficiently and effectively. Deficiencies in 
management of funds received under different programmes, implementation and 
monitoring of schemes as observed are discussed in following paragraphs. 
3.4.2 Fund management 
DRDAs receive funds from both Central and State Government and release them 
to Implementing Agencies (Block Development Officers and other line 
departments) for implementation of different schemes121. As envisaged in 
guidelines, DRDAs are to ensure effective utilisation of funds intended for antiv
poverty programmes. Audit noticed that funds received under different 
programmes/ schemes from Government of India (GoI) and State Government 
were not managed effectively which led to curtailment/ loss of central assistance, 
avoidable loss, diversion of scheme funds, parking of fund in Personal Ledger 
(PL) Account, etc. as discussed below. 
3.4.2.1 Curtailment of Central Assistance of ` ` ` ` 208.66 crore     
• Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY), National Rural Livelihood 
Mission (NRLM) and DRDA Administration are Centrally Sponsored Plan 
Schemes implemented by DRDAs with a cost sharing ratio of 75:25 between GoI 
and State Government. Central assistance is released every year directly to 
                                                 
119 Balasore, Balangir, Ganjam, Malkangiri, Mayurbhanj, Phulbani and Rayagada 
120  Indira Awas Yojana (IAY); Swarna Jayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY); Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Gurantee Scheme (MGNREGS); National Rural 
Livelihood Mission (NRLM), etc. 
121 Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), Backward 
Region Grant Fund (BRGF), Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana (SGSY), National Rural 
Livelihood Mission (NRLM), Indira Awas Yojana (IAY), MO KUDIA , MLALAD, Biju 
Gramya Jyoti Yojana (BGJY), etc. 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
105 
DRDAs in two installments. Second installment was to be released on fulfilment 
of conditions122 prescribed in scheme guidelines. 
Check of records of seven DRDAs and PR Department revealed that while 
releasing second installment, GoI deducted Central Assistance of ` 77.38 crore 
(SGSY: ` 41.74 crore, NRLM: ` 28.05 crore and DRDA Administration:  
` 7.59 crore) during 2009v14 which included ` 10.93 crore for test checked 
districts. This deduction was due to excess carryover of unspent funds, short 
release of state share, nonvrelease of second installment, purchase of vehicle, 
excess contingency, late submission of proposals, etc. Against the above 
curtailment amount, records of the department showed that an amount of ` 2.71 
crore was received as additional amount. Thus, failure of Project Director (PD), 
DRDAs to ensure timely and effective utilisation of funds and fulfilment of other 
conditions led to deprival of central assistance of ` 74.67 crore thereby affecting 
implementation of SGSY and DRDA Administration schemes. 
While admitting the fact, Department stated (October 2014) that due to receipt of 
funds at fag end of financial year, funds could not be utilised and carried over to 
next financial year which was shown as excess opening balance. As regards 
deduction of assistance towards purchase of vehicle, the department stated that 
GoI permitted replacement of vehicles. But, fact remains that GoI deducted 
central assistance due to nonvfulfilment of conditions of scheme guidelines by the 
State. Department had permitted DRDAs to replace vehicles without ensuring 
fulfilment of conditions123. 
• Backward Region Grant Fund (BRGF) Programme was launched by GoI 
in 2006v07 to redress regional imbalances in development of 19 districts in the 
State (20 districts from 2012v13). BRGF assistance was to be released by GoI 
considering spending efficiency, timely submission of claim proposal, utilisation 
certificates, etc. 
Check of records of seven DRDAs and Panchayati Raj (PR) Department revealed 
that GoI curtailed central assistance of ` 116.34 crore during 2012v13 from 
development grant of 17 districts including ` 43.02 crore of test checked districts 
out of total entitlement of ` 340.03 crore pertaining to period from inception 
(2006v07) to 2012v13 due to non/ delayed submission of claim proposals. Other 
three districts, however, got their full entitlement.  
                                                 
122 (1) Utilisation of at least 60 per cent of the available funds including the opening balance as 
prescribed under NRLM and DRDA administration; (2) In case of shortfall in release of State 
contribution, the central share will be reduced proportionately; (3) Opening balance should 
not exceed 15 per cent of the allocation for the same year; (4) Audit Reports, UCs for the 
previous year should have been furnished, etc. 
123 (i) Expenditure for procurement of vehicle was to be met from within 30 per cent of salary 
costs allotted towards contingencies, (ii) proposal for purchase was to be approved by GB 
meetings, (iii) proposal to be accompanied by condemnation certificate and (iv) consultation 
with State Finance Department was to be obtained wherever required 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
106 
Similarly, GoI was to release ` 1.00 crore per district under capacity building for 
strengthening participatory planning, implementation and monitoring of 
programmes at panchayat and municipality level. But, it was noticed that GoI 
curtailed capacity building grant of ` 17.65 crore during 2011v13 due to nonv
utilisation of earlier grants and delay in release of funds to implementing 
agencies. Above curtailment was in addition to nonvrelease of funds due to low 
spending capacity of State as pointed out in Paragraphs 2.1.9.1 and 3.3.2  of 
Audit Report (Civil) on Government of Odisha for years ended 31 March 2010 
and 31 March 2011 respectively.  
Thus, due to delay in submission of claim proposal and low spending efficiency 
by DRDAs, State Government could not avail GoI assistance of  
` 133.99 crore during 2011v13. 
Department stated (October 2014) that due to unavoidable circumstances like 
general elections, ULB elections, the proposals for 2012v13 were sent at fag end 
of year due to which there was curtailment of fund by GoI and that MoRD 
released capacity building grant of ` 11.61 crore during 2014v15 relating to the 
period 2007v13. However, GoI deducted central assistance towards development 
grant due to nonvfulfilment of conditions of grants. Besides, release of capacity 
building grant of ` 11.61 crore released by GoI related to 2014v15 and not for 
previous years.  
3.4.2.2 Diversion of scheme funds  
Accounting Procedure of DRDAs prohibited diversion of funds from one scheme 
to another without prior approval of MoRD, GoI. Scheme guidelines like 
MGNREGS and MO KUDIA also stipulated that under no circumstances should 
funds released be utilised for purposes other than those specified.  
Check of records revealed that seven test checked DRDAs diverted ` 12.76 crore 
from different schemes like MGNREGS, MO KUDIA, Biju Gram Jyoti Yojana, 
etc. for payment towards salaries and other office expenses under DRDA 
Administration during 2009v14. Out of the above diverted amount, ` 8.44 crore124 
was not recouped as of March 2014. Department attributed the reasons for such 
diversion to insufficiency of funds under the schemes on account of 
implementation of sixth Pay Commission recommendations. GoI did not release 
additional fund as requested by GoO (February and September 2014). Short 
release of central share worsened the situation and arrear salary of DRDAs 
accumulated further. Specific instances of diversion are discussed below:  
• DRDA, Rayagada diverted ` 75 lakh (March 2010: ` 25 lakh and November 
2010: ` 50 lakh) from MGNREGS scheme fund to DRDA Administration 
towards payment of salaries to staff which was not recouped as of November 
                                                 
124 Balangir: ` 1.20 crore; Balasore: 0.19 crore; Ganjam: ` 0.73 crore; Mayurbhanj: ` 1.31 crore; 
Phulbani: ` 2.44 crore; Malkangiri: ` 0.10 crore and Rayagada: ` 2.47 crore 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
107 
2013. Such diversion of scheme fund resulted in deprival of wage 
employment125 by 33571 manvdays (at ` 126 per manvday).  
• DRDA, Phulbani diverted ` 1.49 crore from MO KUDIA scheme fund to 
DRDA Administration during 2009v11 on regular basis for payment of 
salaries to staff of which ` 1.02 crore was recouped subsequently. The balance 
amount of ` 0.47 crore remained unvrecouped as of March 2014 which 
deprived 97 beneficiaries of availing rural houses at ` 48,500 per house under 
the scheme.  
While admitting facts, Department stated (October 2014) that DRDAs had been 
directed not to divert funds failing which action would be taken against the erring 
officers.  
3.4.2.3 Inordinate delay in adjustment of outstanding advance  
As per codal provisions126 read with GoO, Finance Department Circular 
(December 1985) and Accounting Procedure of DRDA, advances granted for 
Departmental and allied purposes are required to be adjusted promptly, within one 
month of disbursement. Officials are required to submit detailed accounts along 
with vouchers for adjustment of advances granted to them and refund the unspent 
amount. DDOs are to maintain a register with details of advances and review it 
frequently to ensure timely adjustment of advances.  Further, Finance Department 
in its Circular (March 2002) directed that advances remaining unadjusted for 
more than one year be treated as loss to audited organisation and Government and 
to take action deemed fit against defaulters. 
Scrutiny of advance register and sanction files,  however, revealed that seven test 
checked DRDAs gave advances of ` 50.86 lakh127 to officers/ staff during 1997v
2014 for travel expenses, repair of vehicles, purchase of POL, purchase of 
stationery articles, training, etc. which were lying unadjusted as of July 2014. Out 
of the above amount, ` 15.01 lakh was pending for adjustment for more than five 
years. It was further noticed that 14 of the employees who were given advance 
had retired/ left Government service, six died and 34 transferred to other offices. 
But, no timely and effective action was taken by DRDAs to recover/ adjust the 
outstanding advances from retired employees. The fact of nonvrecovery was also 
not mentioned in the Last Pay Certificate (LPC) of employees transferred to other 
offices.  
                                                 
125 MGNREGS has two components: (i) wage and (ii) material. After deducting six per cent of 
funds (to be kept as administrative expenses), 60 per cent was to be utilised as wages. 
Therefore, (` 75 lakh – 6 per cent of ` 75 lakh) X 60 per cent/ ` 126 per day= 33,571 manv
days) 
126  SRv509 of Orissa Treasury Code Volume I 
127  Balangir (` 1.68 lakh), Balasore (` 22.73 lakh), Ganjam (` 12.93), Malkangiri (` 1.90 lakh), 
Mayurbhanj (` 6.58 lakh), Phulbani (` 0.36 lakh) and Rayagada (` 4.68 lakh) 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
108 
Department stated (October 2014) that DRDAs of Balangir and Ganjam had taken 
steps to adjust advances and notices were issued to transferred/ retired officials for 
immediate submission of vouchers for adjustment.  
3.4.2.4 Parking of scheme funds in Personal Ledger (PL) Account  
As per Accounting Procedure for DRDAs prescribed by GoI, funds received both 
for Central and State share under different schemes should be kept in Savings 
Bank (SB) Account maintained in a Nationalised/ Covoperative/ Regional Rural 
Bank. In no case, should funds be kept in treasuries/ Personal Ledger (PL) 
Account. 
Audit, however, noticed that DRDAs of test checked districts kept ` 110.57 
crore128 relating to 25 different schemes in PL Accounts maintained in treasuries 
as of March 2014. Retention of scheme funds in PL Account not only violated the 
provisions of scheme guidelines and Accounting Procedure but also resulted in 
loss of interest.   
Department stated (October 2014) that DRDAs of Balangir and Ganjam kept 
State funds in PL account.  
3.4.2.5 Avoidable expenditure of ` 1.54 crore  
As per Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provision (EPF & MP) 
Act 1952, Employees’ Pension Scheme 1995, and Employees’ Deposit Linked 
Insurance Scheme 1976, employer is required to deposit employees’ and 
employer’s share of contribution together with administrative and/or inspection 
charges within 15 days of closure of month with Employees Provident Fund 
Commissioner (EPFC).  
Check of records revealed that EPF contribution in respect of 115 staff engaged in 
different schemes between 1981 and 2011 under six129 out of seven test checked 
DRDAs was not deposited within the prescribed time. EPFC issued (May 2007 to 
August 2012) demand notices for deposit of contribution. But, DRDAs did not 
deposit the amount despite clarifications (August and December 2011) received 
from Government to deposit the same to EPFC. As a result, EPFC levied penal 
charges and interest of ` 1.54 crore130 which was recovered from DRDA 
Administration and other scheme funds between February 2006 and November 
2012. This resulted in shortfall of funds under DRDA Administration to meet 
salary and office expenses as noticed in two DRDAs131. These DRDAs met salary 
requirements diverting from other schemes as pointed out in Paragraph 3.4.2.2 
above. 
                                                 
128 Balasore: ` 10.10 crore; Balangir: ` 0.45 crore; Ganjam: ` 45.72 crore; Malkangiri: ` 3.03 
crore; Mayurbhanj: ` 19.39 crore; Phulbani: ` 22.93 crore; Rayagada: ` 8.95 crore 
129  Balasore, Ganjam, Malkangiri, Mayurbhanj, Phulbani and Rayagada  
130 Balasore (` 13.71 lakh), Mayurbhanj (` 17.76 lakh), Phulbani (` 24.54 lakh), Rayagada  
(` 25.28 lakh), Ganjam (` 10.53 lakh) and Malkangiri (` 62.13 lakh) 
131 Mayurbhanj and Rayagada 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
109 
Thus, due to failure to adhere to the Act and instructions of Government, DRDAs 
had to sustain a loss of ` 1.54 crore which could have been avoided. Though, PR 
Department instructed (August 2011) the DRDAs to cause an enquiry into the 
matter as to reason for such nonvpayment/ deposit and how to make good the loss, 
no such enquiry was made. 
Department stated (October 2014) that DRDAs, Mayurbhanj and Ganjam had 
taken steps to find out staff responsible for such lapses and initiated action as 
deemed proper while PD, DRDA, Phulbani stated (July 2014) that out of  
` 24.54 lakh damages and interest imposed by EPFC, ` 6.85 lakh was recovered 
from arrear salaries of JEs. 
3.4.3 Programme implementation 
3.4.3.1 Construction of IAY houses 
Indira Awaas Yojana (IAY) is implemented to help the members of Scheduled 
Castes/ Scheduled Tribes, freed bonded labourers, minorities under BPL category 
and other BPL nonvSC/ST rural households for construction of their dwelling 
units by providing lump sum financial assistance. As per GoI norms, financial 
assistance of ` 35,000 was to be given to the beneficiaries during 2009v10 and  
` 45,000 during 2010v13 under IAY. For satisfactory implementation of the 
programme, officers dealing with IAY at State, District and Block level should 
closely monitor all aspects of the scheme through field visits.  
Check of records revealed that in seven test checked DRDAs, out of 298062 
houses sanctioned under IAY during 2009v14, DRDAs could complete 193255 
houses (64.84 per cent) as of March 2014. Remaining 104807 IAY houses132 
remained incomplete despite availability of ` 75.35 crore with DRDAs as of 
March 2014. Year wise break up of houses taken up, completed and incomplete is 
given in the table below: 
Table 3.9: Status of IAY houses taken up, completed and remained incomplete during 2009-14 
Year No. of houses 
sanctioned/ taken 
up 
No. of houses 
completed  
(percentage) 
No. of houses remained 
incomplete/ not taken up 
(percentage) 
2009v10 64092 43614 (68.04) 20478 (31.96) 
2010v11 61935 45701 (73.79) 16234 (26.21) 
2011v12 52506 41450 (78.94) 11056 (21.06) 
2012v13 55412 32574 (58.79) 22838 (41.21) 
2013v14 64117 29916 (46.66) 34201 (53.34) 
Total 298062 193255 (64.84) 104807 (35.16) 
(Source: Data furnished by the DRDAs) 
Audit test checked 22 case records of incomplete IAY houses and found that 
houses were lying incomplete at different stages133after expenditure of ` 6.21 
                                                 
132 Balasore (32,685); Balangir (3,411); Ganjam (8,570); Mayurbhanj (25,206); Phulbani (8,495); 
Malkangiri (8,908) and Rayagada (17,532) 
133 Plinth level: 9; lintel level: 4; roof level: 7 and window level: 2 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
110 
lakh. This indicated inadequate monitoring and inaction by Project Directors and 
APDs of DRDAs to ensure completion of IAY houses in time.  
Department stated (October 2014) that each year proposals for construction of 
new houses were added with carried over cases. However, DRDAs failed to 
complete more than 20 per cent  of the houses each year due to inadequate 
monitoring.  
3.4.3.2  Implementation of works under MGNREGS   
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) 
aims to enhance livelihood security in rural areas by providing at least 100 days of 
guaranteed wage employment in a financial year to any rural household, whose 
adult members volunteered to do unskilled manual works.  Works executed under 
the programme, in addition to providing employment to the rural households also 
has to fulfil the purpose for which the same was executed. PD and APD of 
DRDAs were required to monitor timely completion of works taken up under 
MGNREGS. 
Audit noticed the following irregularities: 
• Incomplete works:  In seven test checked DRDAs, 311080 works (75 per 
cent) out of 416502 taken up during 2009v14 under the programme remained 
incomplete despite availability of ` 20.08 crore with DRDAs as of March 2014. 
The year wise position of incomplete works is given in the table below: 
Table 3.10:  Status of works taken up under MGNREGS  
Year Number of works 
sanctioned/taken up 
Number of works 
completed  
Number of works 
remained incomplete  
2009v10 73085 9198  63887 
2010v11 79723 18509  61214 
2011v12 88674 25996  62678 
2012v13 82980 22219  60761 
2013v14 92040 29500  62540 
Total 416502 105422 311080 (75 per cent) 
(Source: Data furnished by DRDAs) 
As seen from the above, about 82 per cent of works taken up during 2009v11 were 
not completed even after lapse of three years of sanction.  
Test check of records of 15 works undertaken during 2009v14 with an estimated 
cost of ` 199.37 lakh by six DRDAs revealed that 14 works remained incomplete 
as of November 2013 after incurring expenditure of ` 61.17 lakh even after lapse 
of one to five years from the stipulated date of completion. The works remained 
incomplete due to unwillingness of workers to work for less wages, nonv
completion of electrification works, etc. 
Department stated (October 2014) that DRDA, Mayurbhanj initiated steps for 
completion of incomplete projects.  

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
111 
• Loss of man-days due to low expenditure in labour component 
MGNREGS guidelines stipulate that ratio of wage cost to material cost should not 
be less than the minimum norm of 60:40 for works taken up under the scheme. 
DRDAs were to monitor that wage to material ratio was maintained in respect of 
works taken up under the scheme. DRDAs send annual financial performance 
report to GoI showing total wage cost and administrative expenses incurred. 
But, DRDA, Rayagada incurred expenditure of ` 69.02 crore towards unskilled 
wages during 2009v13 against the required amount of ` 77.57 crore (60 per cent 
of total works expenditure) under MGNREGS resulting in less expenditure of  
` 8.55 crore134.  
Due to low expenditure towards unskilled wage component, DRDA, Rayagada 
failed to provide 6.79 lakh manvdays135 of employment to the rural poor. 
Department did not give any specific reply. However, PD, DRDA, Rayagada 
stated (August 2013) that necessary instructions would be issued to implementing 
agencies to maintain the ratio of 60:40 on labour and material component.  
• Loss of man-days due to excess administrative expen ses: As per 
prescribed norms, six per cent (four per cent up to March 2009) of both Central 
and State share funds under MGNREGS was to be kept at DRDA level as 
contingency fund for meeting administrative expenses. Out of this, 10 per cent is 
earmarked for State NREGS Cell and balance amount to be utilised by DRDA 
and Implementing Agencies (IAs).   
Audit noticed that four DRDAs136 incurred an expenditure of ` 29.45 crore during 
2009v14 towards contingent expenses and to meet remuneration of staff engaged 
under NREGS137 against admissible amount of ` 22.36 crore138 leading to excess 
expenditure of ` 7.09 crore under MGNREGS in violation of Government 
instructions. DRDAs instead of asking Government for providing adequate 
amount for administrative expenses, utilised scheme funds which was meant to 
create employment opportunities for the rural poor. Due to this excess expenditure 
from scheme funds, 3.37 lakh manvdays139 could not be generated under the 
MGNREGS and the beneficiaries were deprived of the intended benefit to that 
extent. 
Department stated (October 2014) that during 2009v10 and 2011v12, 
administrative expenses were less than six per cent of total expenditure. However, 
Audit noticed such excess expenditure incurred by DRDAs during the above 
period.  
                                                 
134 2009v10: ` 0.49 crore; 2011v12: ` 1.31 crore and 2012v13: ` 6.75 crore 
135 ` 8.55 crore/ ` 126 per manvday 
136 Balasore, Balangir, Malkangiri and Mayurbhanj 
137 GRS, GPTA, NREGS Asst., NREGS Coordinator, etc. 
138 Balasore:` 4.44 crore, Balangir: ` 7.67 crore; Malkangiri: ` 0.95 crore and Mayurbhanj:  
` 9.30 crore 
139 ` 4.25 crore (60 per cent of ` 7.09 crore)/ ` 126 per manvday 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
112 
• Inadmissible expenditure: MGNREGS guidelines aim at providing basic 
employment guarantee in rural areas and indicate kinds of work to be taken up 
under the scheme. But, DRDA, Rayagada included 73 projects (estimated cost:  
` 3.08 crore) like construction of rest sheds, boundary walls, water supply 
projects, puja mandaps, GP office/ school buildings, etc. in Annual Action Plans 
(AAPs) of 2008v13 though these works were not permissible as per scheme 
guidelines. Out of these works, three140 were completed (May 2012 to August 
2013) with an expenditure of ` 5.00 lakh.  
3.4.3.3 Construction of hostel buildings for SC and ST students  
To encourage higher enrolment, retention and reduction of dropout rate in 
educational institutions, Scheduled Tribe and Scheduled Caste Development 
(SSD) Department decided (September 2010) to construct hostels for ST boys and 
girls in Block headquarter/ other localities in the State. The hostel buildings were 
to be constructed through DRDAs in nonvTribal Sub Plan (TSP) areas. 
Audit noticed that out of 100 hostel buildings approved for construction by SSD 
Department at an estimated cost of ` 42.85 crore during 2009v12 in three test 
checked districts, only 10 buildings were completed as of July 2014. Construction 
work of four hostels could not be commenced due to land disputes. Eightyvsix 
buildings remained incomplete with delays ranging up to four years from the 
stipulated date of completion and the expenditure of ` 13.81 crore on these 
buildings rendered unfruitful. Despite instructions (May 2011) of Chief Secretary 
of Odisha to make hostels functional from academic year 2012v13, construction of 
hostels could not be completed even after lapse of two to four years of sanction. 
The buildings remained incomplete due to delay in acquisition of land, contractors 
leaving the works incomplete, etc. Due to nonvcompletion of buildings, objective 
of providing hostel accommodation to ST students to check their dropout from 
schools was defeated as the rate of dropout ST students (4.70) remained higher 
than the overall rate (3.07) of the State at upper primary level.  
Department, instead of giving any specific reply stated (October 2014) that 
DRDA, Ganjam had taken all corrective steps for completion of hostel buildings. 
3.4.4 Monitoring and Supervision 
DRDAs are to closely monitor implementation of programmes to ensure that 
intended beneficiaries are receiving the benefits under different programmes. 
Audit noticed that motoring at DRDA was deficient as discussed below: 
                                                 
140 (1) Construction of school building at Jagamunda in Padampur GP, (2) Repair of GP office at 
Sanahuma and (3) Construction of boundary wall of M.K. Rai GP Office  

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
113 
• District Vigilance and Monitoring Committees: As per Guidelines for 
Vigilance and Monitoring Committees141 issued by GoI, District Vigilance and 
Monitoring committees (DVMC) were to meet at least once in every quarter to 
monitor execution of schemes of MoRD and GoI. State Government also clarified 
(November 2011) that Member Secretary (Collector) of DVMC was to be made 
personally responsible for convening meetings in districts.  
Audit noticed that in seven test checked DRDAs, DVMCs met only 46 times (41 
per cent) during 2009v13 against requirement of 112 meetings showing a shortfall 
of 66 meetings (59 per cent). Proceedings of meetings were issued with delay 
ranging from 20 days to five months nine days by DRDAs and no follow up 
action was taken. 
• Grievance redressal mechanism : As per guidelines, DVMC is to look 
into complaints/ alleged irregularities and recommend follow up action. The 
committee may suggest the PD for suitable remedial action which shall be acted 
upon within 30 days. Audit noticed that out of 2068 complaints/ grievances 
relating to misappropriations of cash, corruption by Junior Engineers, subv
standard work, payment of bill without executing work, delays in payment of 
wages and wrong selection of IAY beneficiaries etc. received during 2009v13, 
only 328 cases (16 per cent) were disposed off by November 2013. Remaining 
1740 complaints (84 per cent) were pending without taking action though these 
were to be disposed off within 30 days. Though PD, DRDA, Phulbani formed 
(April 2011) five vigilance squads to enquire into 35 specific allegations on 
execution of works, not a single case was enquired by squad as revealed from the 
proceedings of the meeting held by DRDA.  
• Governing Bodies : As per guidelines of DRDA Administration, 
Governing Bodies (GB)142 constituted in DRDAs were to provide policy 
direction, review and monitor implementation of different programmes. GBs were 
to meet once in a quarter. But, in test checked DRDAs, sufficient meetings were 
not organised by DRDAs resultantly GBs met only 41 times (30 per cent) against 
the requirement of 136 meetings during 2009v14. DRDA, Rayagada, did not 
conduct any such meeting during 2009v14. As a result, progress of 
implementation of different programmes could not be assessed. 
• Monitoring and Evaluation Wing:  As per guidelines of DRDA 
Administration, Monitoring and Evaluation Wing (MEW) headed by a Project 
Economist functioning under supervision of PD was to carry out evaluation/ 
impact studies of various programmes regularly through independent institutions/ 
                                                 
141  DVMC functions under the chairmanship of the Local MP, Collector being the Member 
Secretary and other members include remaining local MPs/ MLAs, one person each to be 
nominated by GoI and State Government, etc. 
142 GB is constituted under the chairmanship of ZP Chairman and all MPs/ MLAs of the district, 
Chairpersons of Panchayat Samitis, District Collectors, representative of banks, DWO/ 
DSWO, etc. as members. 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
114 
experts including NGOs. But, no MEW functioned in test checked DRDAs during 
2009v13. As a result, evaluation/ impact studies on implementation of various 
antivpoverty schemes could not be made.  
• DRDA Authorities:  For regular monitoring of schemes/ programmes 
under implementation, PR Department prescribed (July 2005) quantum of tours to 
be undertaken by the DRDA Authorities. Audit noticed that authorities did not 
conduct field visits as per norms fixed as detailed in the table given below: 
Table 3.11: Prescribed tours vis-à-vis actual visits 
Name of the 
functionary 
Quantum of tours prescribed per month Actual visits made per 
month 
Project Director 15 days tour to blocks, 5 GPs and 10 SHGs 
per month 
Nil to 26 days 
APD (Admn) 10 days tour to 5 blocks, 10 GPS and 15 SHGs One to nine days visit 
APD (Tech) 15 days/ month for ongoing and completed 
projects 
Records not made available 
APD (Credit) 15 days/ months to 30 SHGs Records not made available 
APD (Scheme) 15 days/ month, 30 SHGs 3v15 days, 26v 30 SHGs 
covered 
APD (Panchayat) 15 days/ months, 30 GPs Five to 27 GPs 
(Source: Data furnished by DRDAs) 
PDs of DRDAs stated that tour targets could not be achieved due to vacancies of 
posts, Officers having dual charge and busy schedule in office as well as heavy 
work load of DRDA. Due to inadequate monitoring and supervision, works under 
MGNREGS, houses under IAY remained incomplete, wages to material ratios 
was not ensured, hostel buildings remained incomplete, etc. 
Department stated (October 2014) that: (i) DVMC meetings could not be held due 
to Parliament/ Assembly sessions debarring fixing of dates, nonvsuitability of 
dates of Chairpersons, severe natural calamities, etc. Regarding GB meetings, 
Department stated that said meetings were not held due to natural calamities, nonv
availability of elected members, etc. Regarding nonvestablishment of MEW, 
Department agreed to take steps to formulate a MEW headed by a Project 
Economist. No specific reply was furnished with regard to shortfall in field visits 
by DRDA authorities.  
• Inadequate human resources: As per Guidelines of DRDAs 
Administration issued by GoI, the staffing structure of DRDA must include 
positions for planning for poverty alleviation, project formulation, social 
organisation and capacity building, gender concerns, engineering supervision and 
quality control; project monitoring, accountancy and audit functions as well as 
evaluation and impact studies.  
Audit noticed that out of sanctioned strength of 320 posts in test checked DRDAs, 
84 posts were lying vacant as of March 2014. Out of these vacant posts, 39 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
115 
vacancies (46 per cent) related to technical posts. As many as 12 JEs/ GPTAs143 
(Schemes) (29 per cent) out of sanctioned strength of 42 were lying vacant in 
DRDA, Malkangiri and post of Additional PD (Tech) was vacant in four 
DRDAs 144. The vacancies in technical cadres thus affected implementation of 
different programmes and their supervision and monitoring. Though DRDAs 
moved (November 2012vApril 2014) Government for filling up these posts, no 
action was, however, taken by the Government in this regard till the date of audit.  
3.4.5  Conclusion   
The State Government was deprived of Central Assistance of ` 208.66 crore 
under different schemes due to delay in submission of claim proposals and low 
spending efficiency of DRDAs. There were also instances of avoidable 
expenditure, diversion of scheme funds and outstanding advances lying 
unadjusted for over 15 years. Deficient planning and implementation led to 
unfruitful expenditure of ` 13.81 crore towards incomplete hostel buildings for 
ST/SC students. Due to ineffective functioning of DVMCs, 84 per cent  of 
grievances/ allegations could not be addressed. Monitoring and Evaluation Wings 
were not set up. Shortfall in field visits of DRDA and vacancies of technical posts 
had affected implementation of different programmes. 
                                                 
143  Gram Panchayat Technical Assistant 
144  Balangir, Balasore, Malkangiri  and Phulbani  

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
116 
WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT 
 
3.5 Implementation of ‘MAMATA’ scheme in Odisha 
3.5.1  Introduction  
Government of Odisha launched (September 2011) ‘MAMATA’, a cash transfer 
maternity benefit scheme to enable pregnant and lactating mothers to compensate 
for some wage loss and get adequate rest and nutrition, and also to incentivise 
positive health seeking behaviours like immunisation, appropriate child feeding 
practices, etc. To avail benefit under this scheme, a pregnant woman has to 
register herself at the Anganwadi Centre (AWC)/ Mini AWC to which she 
belongs. Pregnant and lactating women were to get monetary support of ` 5000 in 
four installments145. The payment was to be made by evtransfer from the CDPO to 
the beneficiary account. The scheme was implemented in all 338 CDPOs of the 
State for which Government released ` 476.12 crore 146 during 2011v14. 
Check of records of 15 Child Development Project Officers (CDPOs) under 
four147 District Social Welfare Officers (DSWOs) revealed various deficiencies in 
implementation like delay in registration, delay in payment of incentive, 
inadequate monitoring, etc. as discussed below: 
3.5.2 Implementation 
3.5.2.1 Delay in registration of beneficiaries  
As per guidelines of MAMATA scheme, a pregnant woman has to register herself 
at the AWC/ mini AWC to which she belongs within four months of conception 
for availing the benefit under the scheme.  However, for claiming the first 
instalment under MAMATA scheme, she may be allowed to register within six 
months of conception. Anganwadi Worker should ensure that every pregnant 
woman registers her pregnancy at the AWC in whose service area she resides.  
It was noticed that registration of 29 pregnant women was done beyond six 
months148 of pregnancy in two CDPOs149. In two of these cases, registration was 
done after delivery. Due to delay in registration, payment of incentive was 
subsequently delayed.  
                                                 
145 First instalment: ` 1500 after completion of six months pregnancy; second instalment: ` 1500 
after three months of delivery; third instalment: ` 1000 after the infant completes six months 
of age and fourth instalment:` 1000 after the infant completes nine months of age subject to 
fulfilment of certain conditions like registration of pregnancy, number of check up, 
immunisation, etc. in case of both mother and child 
146 2011v12:` 68.14 crore; 2012v13:` 200.34 crore; and 2013v14:` 207.64 crore 
147 Boudh, Ganjam, Nabarangpur and Sambalpur 
148  After six months: 6; seven months: 13; eight months: 7; nine months: 1; 10 months: 2 
149  CDPO, Berhampur city: 13 and CDPO Nabarangpur: 16 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
117 
3.5.2.2 Non-payment/ delay/ over payment of incentive 
Paragraph 2.3 of the scheme guidelines provides that beneficiaries are to get 
financial incentive every three months after the second trimester of pregnancy up 
to nine months after delivery. Department also instructed (August 2011) 
Collectors to ensure timely evtransfer of benefit to accounts of eligible 
beneficiaries as delay in payment defeats the very purpose of the scheme in 
improving health and nutritional status of the mother and infants. Analysis of 
Management Information System (MIS) data in respect of 57,388 beneficiaries 
and check of records revealed that there was delay/ nonvpayment of incentive to 
2,248 beneficiaries in 15 test checked CDPOs as discussed below. There were 
also cases of over payment.  
• Non-payment of incentive : No payment was made to 105 out of 2,248 
beneficiaries even after delivery for which the pregnant and lactating 
women were deprived of the benefit under the scheme. 
• Delay in payment of first instalment : Despite stipulation in the 
guidelines to make payment of first instalment after six months of 
pregnancy, 314 beneficiaries were paid first instalment of incentive after 
delivery. Out of these, 74 beneficiaries were paid first instalment after 
three months of delivery, by which time second instalment should have 
been paid.  
• Non-payment of benefit after first instalment : In case of 475 
beneficiaries, subsequent instalments were not given after payment of 
first instalment, though one to three years from the date of payment of 
first instalment was over. 
• Delay in payment of second and subsequent instalmen t: After 
completion of three months of delivery, subsequent instalments150 were to 
be paid every three months so as to enable the beneficiaries to avail 
maternal and child health services. But, in 1,354 out of 2,248 cases, 
payment was made with delay ranging from 2 months to 18 months. 
• Over payment: Excess payment of ` 31.44 lakh was made to 2,392 
beneficiaries during 2011v14 out of which department has recovered/ 
adjusted ` 18.88 lakh leaving balance of ` 12.56 lakh unrecovered.  
Department stated (September 2014) that delay in payment and nonvpayment of 
benefit to beneficiaries was mainly due to nonvopening of bank accounts by 
beneficiaries, delay in compliance to conditionalities, change in bank codes, late 
submission of reports by AWCs, etc. However, these issues could have been 
addressed by motivating beneficiaries and proper monitoring of the schemes by 
the department as prescribed under guidelines.  
                                                 
150  Second, third and fourth instalments 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
118 
3.5.2.3 Payment of incentive not within prescribed gaps  
As per guidelines, first three instalments and amounts are worked out in such a 
manner that beneficiary gets a reasonable amount every three months up to nine 
months after delivery. 
It was noticed that more than one instalment were paid within a short gap of three 
months to 404 out of 18,469 beneficiaries in four CDPOs 151. In respect of other 11 
CDPOs, analysis could not be done due to improper maintenance of data. For 
instance, one beneficiary in AWC (Chipilima) was paid the second instalment on 
11 May 2012 whereas the third was paid on 16 June 2012. In another cases under 
the same AWC, the second instalment was paid on 15 January 2013, while third 
was paid on 13 February 2013. Thus, the objective of providing continued 
nutritional and wage compensation support to pregnant and lactating mothers was 
not achieved. 
3.5.2.4 Lack of coordination with banks  
As per guidelines, in case of nonvpayment of instalments by the bank, Programme 
Manager is to review the list immediately and furnish a report to CDPO by 15th of 
the month identifying reasons for nonvpayment so that CDPO can take corrective 
action. But, records of CDPO, Boudh revealed that incentive amount of ` 80,000 
was received back during January 2012 to March 2014 due to invalid account of 
beneficiaries and no concrete steps were taken to coordinate with banks to rectify 
errors and to pass on the benefits to the beneficiaries in time. Department stated 
(September 2014) that steps were being taken to rectify the errors. 
3.5.2.5 Vacancy in the post of supervisors  
Anganwadi Workers are the base level field functionaries under the scheme who 
are to ensure early registration, maintenance of records and fulfilment of 
conditions of each beneficiary in close coordination with health workers for 
successful implementation of the programme. Supervisor should randomly check 
cases of all those reported by AWWs under her jurisdiction so as to cover 
maximum number of beneficiaries during her visit and interact with beneficiaries 
to see that payments due were received by them.  
Audit noticed that there was vacancy of 41 Supervisors against the sanctioned 
strength of 114 under 13 CDPOs due to which proper supervisions were not 
conducted.  
3.5.3 Monitoring and supervision 
As per paragraph 9 of the scheme guidelines, monitoring and supervision 
mechanism set up under the Integrated Child Development Scheme (ICDS) at all 
levels would be used for MAMATA Scheme. As per scheme guidelines, the 
DSWO/ CDPO/ Supervisors/ Programme Assistants were to undertake field visits 
for effective monitoring of the programme.  
                                                 
151  Dabugaon, Khalikote, Nabarangapur and Umerkote 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
119 
Audit noticed that monitoring was not effective due to vacancies in Supervisor 
cadre and Programme Assistants etc., conducting of routine visit of AWCs etc. as 
discussed below: 
3.5.3.1  Ineffective field visits 
As per the guidelines (Para 9), field visits should be undertaken by the DSWOs, 
Programme Managers, CDPOs and Supervisors as per prescribed schedule. Audit 
noticed that though CDPOs/ Supervisor conducted field visits, their visit notes 
were routine in nature. There were no findings/ comments on maintenance of 
records in AWCs, nonvfulfilment of conditions by beneficiaries and interaction 
with beneficiaries to ascertain their problems in their visit notes. 
Field visit reports of CDPOs/ Supervisors were required to be submitted to 
Collector/ DSWO by 7th of every month as per guidelines (Para 2.12.5). But, no 
such reports were made available in test checked DSWO offices due to which 
higher authorities had no scope to know implementation status of the programme 
at field level.   
Department stated (September 2014) that though regular monitoring was done at 
field levels, it is not being documented properly and they are being insisted upon 
to do so.   
3.5.3.2 Non-conduct of periodic audit by Programme Manager 
As per guidelines, Programme Manager should undertake periodic audit of 
MAMATA accounts. Further, the Collector should initiate regular audit to prevent 
possibilities of leakages, with the assistance of the PMU at the district level. 
Check of records of four test checked DSWOs revealed that neither did the 
Programme Managers conduct audit nor did Collectors of test checked districts 
initiate audit of MAMATA, as required under guidelines.  
3.5.4 Non-availability of toll free number for regi stering grievances 
As per scheme guidelines, every district should have a toll free number for 
registering grievances. Department also instructed (August 2011) all Collectors to 
open a dedicated grievance helpline in DSWO office for receiving complaints/ 
suggestions under the scheme. This number shall be widely publicised and 
displayed at every AWC, Block and GP office. Programme Assistant at the 
district level should maintain grievance helpline for the scheme.  
Scrutiny revealed that there was no dedicated grievance helpline for registering 
grievance/ suggestions relating to implementation of the scheme. Department has 
not provided any funds for this purpose. In absence of grievance helpline, 
complaints/ suggestion on implementation of the scheme were not received. 
However, from the general grievance register maintained in test checked district 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
120 
Collectorates, Audit could find only four grievances received in Nabarangpur and 
Boudh districts relating to the scheme. 
Admitting the fact, Department stated (September 2014) that the same would be 
taken care of in near future. 
3.5.5 Non-submission of Utilisation Certificate  
CDPOs were to submit Utilisation Certificates (UCs) to the DSWOs with a copy 
to the Department at the earliest and the DSWOs were to submit consolidated 
UCs to the Department. Audit, however, noticed that ten152 CDPOs received  
` 15.33 crore for payment of MAMATA benefit during 2011v14, of which they 
utilised ` 14.59 crore as of March 2014 but did not furnish UCs either to the 
DSWO or to the Department. DSWOs also did not take steps to obtain UCs from 
the CDPOs for onward transmission to Department. This indicated inadequate 
monitoring of utilisation of funds under the scheme.  
Department stated (September 2014) that the scheme deals with direct cash 
transfer to the beneficiary account which is reflected in the online bank account 
statement which is maintained at project level.  
                                                 
152  CDPOs of Berhampur City, Digapahandi, Harabhanga, Jujomura, Kantamal, Khalikote, 
Papadahandi, Rairakhol, Nabarangpur and Umerkote  

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
121 
SCHOOL AND MASS EDUCATION DEPARTMENT 
 
3.6 IT audit of e-Sishu maintained by Odisha Primar y Education 
Programme Authority (OPEPA) 
Highlights 
• The development of EPIS and GIS without adequate re quirement 
analysis led to its discontinuance and non-use. 
{Paragraph 3.2, 3.3} 
• Annual updation of child records in CTS database by  unauthorised 
backend query and by-passing the laid down procedur e led to 
unreliability of data for planning purposes. 
{Paragraph 3.4} 
3.6.1  Introduction  
Odisha Primary Education Programme Authority (OPEPA) functioning under the 
School and Mass Education Department (SMED) is the State Implementing 
Society (SIS) for overseeing the successful implementation of Sarva Shiksha 
Abhiyan (SSA), a national flagship programme in the State to achieve the goals of 
Universal Elementary Education (UEE). For implementation of programme, 
various data were to be collected, computerised and compiled in a systematic 
process for effective planning and progress monitoring.  
OPEPA implemented IT system of evSishu Project consisting of subvsystems viz. 
Child Tracking Systems (CTS), Geographical Information System (GIS) and 
Education Personnel Information System (EPIS) during 2005v06 to track each 
child, minimise/ eliminate duplicate and fake enrolments, formulation of plans for 
future entrants to the education system with infrastructure, development of each 
child based on his/ her achievements to ensure quality education.  
3.6.1.1 Need for conducting follow up Audit  
Implementation of IT system of evSishu Project of OPEPA was audited for the 
period 2001v07 and mention was made in Paragraph 3.4 of CAG’s Report (Civil) 
for the year ended March 2007 on Government of Odisha that CTS failed due to 
defective software and absence of supervision and monitoring in implementation 
of project and EPIS and GIS remained incomplete due to faulty planning.  
This Audit, in the nature of follow up, was conducted with the objective to assess 
whether recommendations in earlier Audit Report on development and 
maintenance of IT systems (EPIS, GIS and CTS) including information security 
were adopted adequately and effectively during 2007v13 to ensure achievement of 
universal elementary education under SSA. Audit was conducted with test check 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
122 
of records of OPEPA, eight District Project Coordinators (DPCs), eight Block 
Education Officers (BEOs), 16 Block Resource Center Coordinators (BRCCs) 
and 32 Schools covering the period from 2007v13. The integrity, authenticity and 
reliability of data in respect of IT systems were analysed using structured query 
language (SQL)/ Interactive Data Extraction and Analysis (IDEA). The findings 
were discussed with CommissionervcumvSecretary of the Department who is also 
the State Project Director of OPEPA in August 2014 and responses of the 
Department were considered and suitably incorporated in the Report. Audit 
tracked the developments on following recommendations: 
• Ad hoc approach in the planning of computerisation efforts should be 
avoided.   
● Unique Child ID should be allotted for each child for their identification. 
● Input and validation controls should be built in to ensure completeness and 
correctness of the data. 
● Initiatives should be taken at district level for prompt, periodic and regular 
updation of database. 
Audit findings 
3.6.2 Implementation of EPIS/ GIS subsystems 
Despite recommendation made in the earlier Audit Re port, ad hoc approach 
in planning of computerisation continued which resu lted in failure and 
discontinuance of web-based EPIS and development of  incomplete and 
unreliable GIS.  
During 2006, OPEPA redesigned an earlier application i.e., District Inspector of 
School Software (DISS) to a webvbased centralised EPIS software to address 
deficiencies in the DISS and additional functional requirements of District Project 
Offices (DPOs), OPEPA and the Directorate of Elementary Education (DEE) for 
monitoring and supervision at each such levels. Besides, OPEPA planned 
implementation of a GPS based GIS software for mapping of all educational 
institutions of the State and creation of infrastructure database to be used as a 
decision support system tool for top management in ensuring quality education.  
3.6.2.1 Implementation of EPIS 
OPEPA implemented EPIS in 2006 with the objectives of computerisation of 
personnel information, pension and gratuity, pay roll, treasury transaction and 
legal matters in respect of all employees, teachers and Shiksha Sahayaks (SSs) 
under DEE and OPEPA. The database from each District Inspector (DI) of School 
and BDO was to be cumulated at respective DPO through CDs/ DVDs, which 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
123 
would be further synchronised to State server at OPEPA through VvSAT153 
connectivity for onvline centralised monitoring and reporting.  
IDCOL Software Limited (ISL), a Government agency was assigned (July 2006) 
the responsibility for successful implementation of EPIS at project cost of ` 98.94 
lakh154 with the stipulation for completion within six months. 
  
Project Governance 
As per established best practices, for implementation of any IT project that 
addresses core business processes of an entity there should be an IT steering 
committee with representation of top stakeholders to oversee its overall direction 
                                                 
153 A very small aperture terminal (VSAT) used in wide area network as a communication 
medium 
154  Customisation of existing software: ` 2.11 lakh, Development of web based application and 
integration with existing OPEPA portal: ` 27.54 lakh, Implementation for individual site: 
` 28.08 lakh, Backlog data entry: ` 9. 24 lakh, Skilled manpower at DI Offices: ` 23.76 lakh 
and maintenance for one year: ` 8.21 lakh 


Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
124 
of the IT initiatives. Clause 48 of the Memorandum of Association of OPEPA 
also stipulated that, State Project Director (SPD) shall constitute a Steering Group 
for development and implementation of the projects.  
Audit noticed that SPD did not form a Steering Group prior to the development 
and implementation of EPIS in 2006. During implementation of EPIS, when 
problems like errors in the software, nonvinstallation of EPIS in different field 
offices, etc. were noticed, a Steering Committee155 was formed in November 
2007. This committee met only once and was chaired by Deputy General 
Manager (DGM) (Systems) of IDCOL Software Limited (ISL), the vendor for the 
project instead of being chaired by administrative authority from OPEPA. The 
low level of involvement of OPEPA management in project implementation 
clearly indicated lack of project ownership by the entity rendering the project 
development directionless. 
During discussion (August 2014), CommissionervcumvSecretary agreed that head 
of administrative entity should head the committee to monitor the development 
and implementation of EPIS which would be taken into account in future.  
Inadequate requirement analysis 
A software named ‘BETAN’156 was in use from 2004 in 314 Blocks of the State 
for generation of pay bills of the employees and teachers. The State Government 
in General Administration (GA) Department had also initiated the process of 
development (May 2006) of Human Resource Management System (HRMS) with 
the objective to enable all establishments of all departments to carry out personnel 
management transactions like recruitment, promotions, transfers, leave, trainings/ 
deputations, court cases, pension, payroll processing, etc. through a web based 
system.  
Without considering the usability of HRMS and BETAN, the OPEPA awarded 
(July 2006) the work of development of yet another similar software EPIS to 
address similar HR functionalities like payroll, pension, court cases. The objective 
of EPIS also included tracking of schoolvlevel vacancies, teacher rationalisation 
and management of transfer and postings. The EPIS aimed to cover 432157 
locations which included 314 blocks by redesigning earlier abandoned DISS.  
We noted that during implementation stages, there was inadequate involvement or 
direction by OPEPA management. As a result, out of the 432 targeted locations, 
EPIS could not be implemented in 314 blocks as BETAN was successfully 
                                                 
155  Assistant Director (MIS), OPEPA; Programmer, SPO; Programmer, Angul; District Inspector 
of Schools, Khordha; Data Entry Operator, K.Nagar; Establishment Officer; DEE; and 
Manager Executive (TQM) 
156  A software developed by Odisha Computer Application Centre relating to payroll 
management system of Panchayati Raj Department, Government of Odisha 
157  DIs:75, Blocks: 314, ULBs:11, DPOs:30, DEE:1 and SPO:1 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
125 
running there and OPEPA had to reduce (November 2007) the coverage from 432  
to 107 locations excluding 325 locations (314 blocks and 11 ULBs).  
Check of records of sampled districts revealed that all DPOs were not using EPIS. 
The DPOs were mainly running with contractual employees and their payroll 
records were being generated and maintained through Excel sheets. After using 
EPIS up to March 2014, DI of schools also discontinued the same and adopted the 
HRMS which was made mandatory for all DDOs from April 2014. This also 
indicated inadequate requirement analysis before taking up the project which 
resulted in reduction of scope midway during implementation and discontinuance 
of EPIS in DPOs and DIs.  
During discussion (August 2014), CommissionervcumvSecretary admitted lapse of 
planning on the part of OPEPA and stated (August 2014) that EPIS was being 
used in State Project Office (SPO) and DEE. But the fact remained that the basic 
objective of EPIS viz. tracking of schoolvlevel vacancies, court cases, teacher 
rationalisation, transfer and posting could not be met. 
Project monitoring - Payment to vendor without deve lopment of contracted 
module 
Webvbased EPIS was to serve as an effective online Human Resource Information 
System (HRIS) for centralised monitoring and reporting tool for the decision 
support system in tracking vacancies and capacity mapping at various locations. 
One of the objectives of EPIS was to help in transfer and deputation related 
decisions. 
We noticed that data was transmitted in CDs by the Districts to OPEPA instead of 
synchronisation through the web application.  To an audit query to furnish the 
web application of EPIS for verification, OPEPA produced a DVD containing 
some report files and data pertaining to Khordha District which did not contain 
the intended web application as envisaged in the project proposal. This indicated 
that the module was not developed. 
But, OPEPA paid (August 2006 – May 2010) ` 71.35 lakh which included webv
based application cost for ` 27.54 lakh without verifying the deliverables.   
Thus, due to nonvdevelopment of the web module, OPEPA could not achieve the 
envisaged objectives of EPIS i.e., supervision and monitoring through centralised 
reporting system for decision support.  
During discussion, CommissionervcumvSecretary stated that OPEPA should share 
evidence of existence of module to Audit, if available. However, the same was not 
shown to Audit (September 2014). 
Thus, due to poor project planning, ownership and monitoring of OPEPA, webv
based EPIS software could not be developed and implementation of the 
customised version of EPIS failed in spite of expenditure of ` 71.35 lakh.  

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
126 
3.6.2.2 Implementation of Geographical Information System (GIS)   
OPEPA decided (2006) to develop a statewide Global Positioning System (GPS) 
based Geographical Information System (GIS) software with all the educational 
infrastructure details with photographs to act as a decision support system tool for 
the top management of OPEPA for speedy and accurate decision on providing 
infrastructure (i.e., schools, buildings, toilets, drinking water facilities, etc.) to 
ensure quality education. Despite spending ` 2.71 crore on the project, OPEPA 
failed to achieve the objectives for reasons detailed under: 
Data quality 
A key element of the project was to create a database having locational 
information and available amenities in schools in Odisha. The work was awarded 
to OCCL, the vendor in April 2006 to create the infrastructural database within 
three months. OCCL submitted it in December 2006 to OPEPA. Several errors in 
the database related to school type, class range of schools, mismatch or nonv
availability of photographs, etc. were noticed by SPD, OPEPA. OCCL 
resubmitted the data (March 2007) but with similar errors. The entire data on GIS 
submitted by OCCL was to be scrutinised and payment was to be released against 
the quality of work done. A project evaluation committee evaluated the claim of 
OCCL in March 2008. It was revealed that the committee only verified the total 
number of schools vis-à-vis the actual number of schools surveyed against which 
both photographs as well as GPS readings were present without examining other 
errors. The final payment was released (April 2009) to the vendor based on the 
verification report submitted by the committee. The committee, however, left a 
gap in ensuring the quality of data as submitted by OCCL during final 
verification.  
Analysis of data by Audit pertaining to phase I work revealed the following 
errors: 
• Out of 76,477 records of schools critical errors like schools having duplicate 
longitude and latitude, missing photographs, duplicate photographs, etc. 
were noticed in 19,372 schools (25 per cent). Such kind of errors would lead 
to misleading information to the top management in taking decisions on 
provision of new schools, infrastructure facilities to the required schools. As 
an instance, some of the errors are illustrated below. 
Illustration 3.6.1:  Different schools having same longitude and latitude 
Name of the District School Name Latitude Longitude 
Ganjam Koinphulia P.S. 19.04161 84.47497 
Ganjam Kutumbari P.S. 19.04161 84.47497 
Ganjam Sialsingi P.S. 19.04814 84.46667 
Ganjam Tabudia P.S. 19.04814 84.46667 
 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
127 
Illustration 3.6.2: Schools having missing photographs 
Name 
of the 
District 
School Name Photograph 1 Missing 
Photograph 2 
Missing 
Photograph 3 
Angul Saraswati Shishu 
Mandir IMG_0410. Null Null 
Angul D.A.V. Public School IMG_0403. Null Null 
Angul Nigamananda Institute 
of Education IMG_0436. Null Null 
Illustration 3.6.3: Schools where the photographs were duplicated against different 
schools 
Name of 
the 
District 
School Name Photograph 1 Photograph 2 Photograph 3 
Angul Dalabeherasahi SS P1IMG_010 P1IMG_0103 P1IMG_ 0104 
Angul Bruti PS P1IMG_010 P1IMG_0103 P1IMG_0104 
Angul Tentoloi SS IMG_0197. IMG_0198.g IMG_0199.g 
Angul Nuasahi PS IMG_0197. IMG_0198.g IMG_0199.g 
• OCCL had to supply three photographs from each school. This meant 
submission of 2,27,766 photographs in respect of 75,922 schools across 
Odisha. But, audit noted that only 86 per cent photographs were uploaded.  
This resulted in short supply of 14 per cent photographs by OCCL. The 
absence of photographs would lead to nonvidentification of the school and the 
actual condition of the school building, rooms, toilets and its surroundings for 
further provision of amenities. 
• The school photographs were saved in the disks in folders named as 
corresponding block code. The names of the files are stored in the database 
field. Through this link (i.e., file name of the image) the system could 
retrieve the image of the school. We noticed that there were incorrect image 
file names in the database which would not fetch the linked image files, 
16179631330
36640
Chart: 3.6.1 : Details of photographs required visvavvis 
photographs supplied by OCCL
Photographs uploaded and usablePhotographs short supplied
Photographs uploaded and unusable

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
128 
thereby only 1,61,796 photographs were tagged to schools rendering 34,640 
photographs without use.  
Thus, the development of error prone and incomplete GIS software which could 
not be put to use for planning and decision purposes because of the unreliability 
of the data, rendered expenditure of ` 2.15 crore infructuous.  
During discussion (August 2014), CommissionervcumvSecretary stated that the 
payment was released to OPEPA on the basis of recommendations of technical 
committee.  
But, committee had representation from OPEPA and it should have 
recommended for release of payment after addressing accuracy and completeness 
of the deliverables provided by OCCL.  
Revival of phase-II proposal despite erroneous database  
In the circumstances of problems of data reliability and usability of GIS, it was 
decided in 2008 not to go ahead with phasevII of the project. However, on the 
basis of communication received from M/s Geo Infotech Limited (December 
2009) the earlier proposal of phasevII work for development of webvbased GIS 
system was arbitrarily revived (January 2010). While OPEPA engaged in 
identifying the appropriate vendor for designing webvbased GIS, the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, GoI identified 12 proprietors who dealt 
in GIS software. OPEPA, however, awarded the work of project implementation 
to Geo Infotech in March 2012 which was one of the vendors of OCCL during 
phasevI work. The work was split into five works158 and awarded to Geo Infotech 
for ` 49.50 lakh without inviting open tender/ evtender on the ground of single 
source procurement and without exploring possibility of other eligible vendors.  
The GIS application was to be developed with existing database with OPEPA 
developed by OCCL during phase I work which contained errors in longitude, 
latitude, infrastructure photographs, etc. which has been discussed in the 
foregoing paragraph. Geo Infotech was to complete the works within six months 
from the date of work order. The application software on GIS was installed in the 
server at OPEPA and tested in August 2012. The phase II work stated to have 
been completed by Geo Infotech was deficient as the locational data of schools 
(longitude and latitude) was incorrect and the developed webvbased GIS system 
lacked provision of habitation based analysis which was a basic requirement of 
GIS to get the information on habitations which was needed for planning further 
schooling facilities. 
During discussion (August 2014), CommissionervcumvSecretary asked OPEPA to 
furnish justification that this webvbased GIS software acquired by OPEPA was 
                                                 
158  ArcGIS Server standard Edition: ` 11.70 lakh; ArcGIS ArcEditor: ` 11.21 lakh; Application 
development with dual language portal:` 11.00 lakh; Data migration and installation, testing, 
etc.` 14.14 lakh; Printing of maps and placement of technical experts:` 1.45 lakh 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
129 
the only software available in the market. OPEPA, however, could not furnish the 
justification as of September 2014.  
3.6.3 Implementation of Child Tracking System (CTS)  
A database of all children of 0v14 years with their name, age, sex, caste, 
educational status, reasons for not attending school and other indicators was 
developed on the basis of data collected through household survey during Orissa 
Child Census 2005. This database was loaded in the State database server and 
district servers. The objective was to develop an online CTS wherein the current 
status of each child would be available in the web. The CTS validation and 
updating process was adopted to update changes of the class, education progress 
indicators (percentage of marks secured in the annual examination), school, 
dropouts of schools and new admissions of the children for the years 2006, 2007, 
2008 and 2009. Thereafter, another child survey was conducted during 2011 and 
the child data was subsequently updated for the years 2012 and 2013. 
Audit noticed the following deficiencies: 
3.6.3.1 Non-allotment of Unique Child ID  
Due to non-allotment of Unique Child ID to each child for their identification 
as recommended in earlier Audit Report, objective o f continuous tracking of 
each child for educational and economic status could not be achieved  
OPEPA developed a child database (CTS) containing child information like child 
name, guardian, village, school, class, date of birth, annual attendance, marks 
secured, etc. after conducting a door to door survey during 2005. Under CTS, 
each child was to be provided with unique child code to track his/ her educational 
and socioeconomic status. The database was updated every year up to 2009 until 
introduction of Right to Education Act 2009. Tracking the status of a child is 
possible only through adoption of unique child ID.  OPEPA claimed that it had 
adopted the recommendation made in this regard in the Audit Report of 
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 
The child database was built during 2005 and this was again validated in 2006. 
Accordingly, 1.48 crore child IDs were allotted to all the children of 0 to 14 years 
of age. In subsequent years 2007v2009 CTS updation was done for the children of 
5+ to 14 years age group. Hence, during the years 2007 to 2009 the chances of 
identification of new children would be meagre against whom new child IDs were 
allotted. But, it was observed that 24 lakh new child IDs were allotted during 
2007v2009. There were 1.72 crore codes in respect of all districts found allotted 
during 2005v2009 as depicted in the chart below:  

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
130 
 
The creation of new IDs was sizeable from 2007 to 2 009. This is because, instead 
of using unique ID during updation children transfe rred from one school to 
another were allotted IDs afresh. In this process, the same child was allotted 
different IDs in different years when he is transfe rred to new school. Database 
analysis revealed that in the year 2009 the number of child records was 88.04 lakh 
out of which only 41.62 lakh children have consiste nt code across previous years. 
Therefore, the performance tracking across previous  years was not possible 
against 46.42 lakh children which is more than 50 per cent  of the child 
population. 
OPEPA did not update the child database during 2010  due to delayed software 
modification process in tune with RTE Act 2009. It created another software 
based on RTE requirement during 2011 at a cost of ` 45.00 lakh. In the new 
software, new functionalities in tune to RTE Act we re added and the 
functionalities like provision of unique child ID, information on appearance in 
annual examination, marks secured, etc. were remove d. The coding pattern in 
respect of villages, schools and children were chan ged and the new database lost 
the link to the earlier databases of 2005 to 2009.  
We further noticed that due to improper relational integrity constraints imposed 
into the database designs, there were multiple chil d names mapped to single child 
ID. There were 68289 such cases in 2007-09 and 1437  cases in 2011-13 
databases. 
Thus, without a unique child ID, OPEPA failed to track each child for educational 
status on an annual basis, thereby defeating the objective of implementation of the 
software. Despite the recommendations made in the e arlier Audit Report, such 
irregularities not only persisted but the matter wa s not looked into while making 
modification to the CTS in 2011. 
Chart 3.6.2: Creation of New Child IDs 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
131 
During discussion (August 2014), CommissionervcumvSecretary consented to the 
proposal of OPEPA for mapping the child data of 2009 and 2011 manually. The 
fact remained that unique child ID has not been adopted since 2011. 
3.6.3.2 Weak application controls affecting data quality 
Despite recommendations made in earlier Audit Repor t to build input and 
validation controls to ensure complete and correctn ess of data, the same 
irregularities continued due to which data remained  unreliable, inaccurate 
and failed very purpose of tracking each child’s education  
Analysis of database revealed that there were inconsistent data in the database as 
below: 
(i) Absence of range check: We found that there was no agevlevel validation 
in the field capturing the data i.e., the class attended by the child. This 
resulted in erroneous data capture, across the years checked in Audit. 
These errors were noted to the extent from 1,74,357 cases of 2007v09 to 
2,64,931 cases in 2011v13. 
Similar validation controls were lacking for filling child category (SC, ST, 
OBC, Others) or mother tongue (based on language spoken in the State), 
religion, reason for school dropout, etc. leading to unreliable data and 
wrong management information for planning.  
(ii) Erroneous data type definition of certain important  fields:  The name 
of the child and parent in the database should not contain numbers, special 
characters, etc. as presence of such would lead to misinformation. There 
were 52,887 records of 2007v09 database and 30435 records of 2011v13 
database where the names of child and parent contained numbers thereby 
compromising the integrity of the data available in the software. 
(iii) No referential integrity check : Audit noticed that the data entry screen 
accepted child’s village codes which was not validated by the village 
master data. This rendered 343 child records of 2007v09 and 166 records 
of 2011v13 without any village. Thus, the child population report against 
such villages would mislead the planning for infrastructure. Instances of 
such cases are as follows: 
Illustration 3.6.4: 
Child ID Village Code* Remarks 
D09B04C105721 D09B04G23V171 Not available in village 
D09804C105768 D09B0 4G23V092  vdov 
D09B04C105769  D09B04G23V092  vdov 
D09B04C105783 D09B04G23V092  vdov 
D09B04C105783 D09B04G23V092  vdov 
* All these codes did not exist in village master table 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
132 
Similar design problem was also noticed in case of school codes. There 
were 2,03,731 and 99,258 child records in the 2007v09 and 2011v13 
databases respectively where school codes did not match with the school 
master table. These children were not considered in the school wise child 
enrolment reports. 
During discussion (August 2014), the OPEPA stated that the database is to be 
rechecked again. They added that the validation for religion code was giving 
problem in different browsers. The fact remained that the CTS still contained 
errors. 
3.6.3.3 Duplicate child records in CTS database  
As per GoI instructions, system of village education registers (VERs) was 
introduced at village level to track all children from 0v14 years since 2001. The 
VERs were to be maintained by the Village Education Committees (VECs).  One 
of the purposes of such survey was to eliminate ghost children whose names 
appear in more than one school. But, Head Masters/ VECs who were responsible 
for updating VERs did not make regular updation for which OPEPA introduced  
evVER system after conducting a fresh household survey in Child Census 2005 at 
a cost of ` 5.05 crore. This database was validated in 2006 at a cost of ` 2.76 
crore. It was updated in subsequent years up to 2013 except for the year 2010.  
Analysis of above child databases revealed that in case of 5.21 lakh children, key 
identifiers like name, date of birth, guardian name and village code was exactly 
the same indicating data redundancy. This also indicated possibility of ghost 
children in schools. The presence of ghost instances had direct implication on 
Government exchequer in so far as midvday meal/ free textbook/ uniform etc. are 
concerned besides wrong reporting of total figures impacting the planning. 
 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
133 
These duplicates were due to presence of a child record in more than one school/ 
class, data entry errors and software problems like absence of validation. This led 
to incorrect CTS report on gross enrolment ratio and net enrolment ratio which 
are used as vital parameters for scheme planning.  
During discussion (August 2014), CommissionervcumvSecretary agreed and stated 
that this would be taken care of by flagging duplicate child records based on name 
of the child, parent name, date of birth and village in the software from 2012. 
3.6.3.4 Irregular updation of CTS data 
Despite recommendation made in earlier Audit Report  to take initiatives at 
district level for prompt, periodic and regular upd ation of databases, such 
irregular updation continued leading to database be coming unreliable and 
incorrect  
Data updation to CTS was an annual process. The child records of the earlier year 
were printed by the DPOs in specified formats159 village wise/ school wise from 
the system and distributed to the VEC of each village along with blank formats160 
through the respective Block Resource Center Coordinator (BRCC)/ Cluster 
Resource Center Coordinator (CRCC). These printed records were validated by 
enumerators (Headmasters/ teachers) from manual attendance records, admission 
registers for invschool children and from house survey in case of children who 
were out of school/ transferred to other schools. In case where a child was in the 
list but was not in the school attendance register, the enumerator marked the child 
record as deleted, transferred to other school, out of school, etc. as the case may 
be and against existing children updated the class of the child, percentage of 
marks secured, number of attendances, etc. in the formats. The validation process 
was reviewed by the CRCCs/ BRCCs. These validated manual records were sent 
to the DPO where data from these records were entered into the CTS. The 
districts then sent this data to state for consolidation. The network administrator 
and programmer of the State Project Office used to consolidate the data in the 
State server. For this job the OPEPA paid ` 0.40 per child to enumerators for data 
collection and ` 0.25 per child for data entry for the years 2008 and 2009. 
                                                 
159 Form 1 (a) – In School Children and Form 1 (b) – New children in school (blank form) 
160  Form 2 (a) – Out of School Children, Form 2 (b) – New out of school children (blank form) 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
134 
 
Audit observed that this entire data updation process was compromised during 
2009 which resulted in unreliable information in the CTS database  
• Data updation using backend script based on existin g data: The 
CTS application was designed in a manner that every data entry/ 
updation by user would trigger the capture of exact time of creation/ 
updation of record up to millisecond level into the database. 
A comparison between date of creation of child data of 2008 and that 
of 2009 revealed that time of creation of a child record of 2009 was 
exactly same in the corresponding record of 2008 while year portion of 
creation date of 2009 was increased by one from that of 2008 in 
respect of 15 districts and by two in case of one district (Ganjam) in 
45,30,764 (83 per cent) cases out of 54,58,812 records as detailed in 
Appendix 3.6.1. An illustration of such cases is as below: 
 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
135 
Illustration 3.6.5  Sample 10 cases of Bhadrak District where time portion 
of the date of creation of records were same along with 
marks and attendance of a child during the years 2008 
and 2009 respectively 
Child ID 
Data of 2008 Data of 2009 
Date/time of 
Creation of 
record 
Class  Mark 
secured 
Attendance  Date /time of 
creation of 
record 
Class Mark 
secured 
Attendance 
D04B01C10003 2009v06v13 
12:05:37.013 
3 58 199 2010v05v13 
12:05:37.013 
4 58 199 
D04B01C10006 2009v06v12  
14:35:32.373 
6 44 203 2010v05v12 
14:35:32.373 
7 44 203 
D04B01C10010 2009v06v12 
14:15:03.483 
7 44 200 2010v05v12 
14:15:03.483 
8 44 200 
D04B01C10012 2009v06v12  
14:19:47.530 
3 44 199 2010v05v12 
14:19:47.530 
4 44 199 
D04B01C10020 2009v06v12  
14:04:39.763 
8 44 199 2010v05v12 
14:04:39.763 
9 44 199 
D04B01C10023 2009v06v12  
14:19:47.293 
6 40 199 2010v05v12 
14:19:47.293 
7 40 199 
D04B01C10024 2009v06v12  
14:19:47.340 
6 53 198 2010v05v12 
14:19:47.340 
7 53 198 
D04B01C10030 2009v06v12 
14:19:47.233 
7 56 199 2010v05v12 
14:19:47.233 
8 56 199 
D04B01C10032 2009v06v12  
14:07:12.357 
8 44 202 2010v05v12 
14:07:12.357 
9 44 202 
D04B01C10041 2009v06v12  
09:28:10.467 
8 0 0 2010v05v12 
09:28:10.467 
9 0 0 
D04B01C10047 2009v06v12  
14:09:18.250 
8 44 200 2010v05v12 
14:09:18.250 
9 44 200 
As illustrated above, it is evident that the data updation process was 
done by running backend procedures on the existing data. Class of 
each child during 2008 was increased by one in 2009 whereas marks 
secured and total attendances against each child remained same in both 
the years. Thus, 45,30,764 (62 per cent) child records were copied 
from 2008 to 2009 databases without updating the same through the 
defined data entry process at district level.  
• No new child codes generated: The enumerators required to collect 
the children data from schools and villages regarding children 
admitted for first time in school and newly identified out of school in 
form 1 (b) and form 2 (b) respectively. While entering these data into 
the database, new child IDs are generated by the system. For the years 
2007 and 2008, 15,03,773 and 13,25,854 new child IDs were found 
created respectively. 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
136 
 
But, during 2009, no new IDs were generated in 12 d istricts for which 
previous year’s (2008) data was updated through bac kend procedures 
whereas generation of new IDs ranged from 11758 to 166278 in 2008 
indicating copying of previous year’s data. In rema ining four districts 
(Bargarh, Balangir, Jajpur and Khordha) generation of new IDs in 
2009 ranged from 183 to 44,778 whereas same was 51,491 to 1,66,278 
in 2008 indicating maximum copying of previous year ’s data. District 
wise allotment of new codes during 2007-09 are deta iled in Appendix 
3.6.2.  
We also noticed that the data updation by using bac kend script had occurred in 
earlier years as well. 
• Time of creation of child record was “00:00:000”: There were 
13,37,283 (13.87 per cent) child records of 2007, 13,48,315 (13.82 per 
cent) child records of 2008 and 13,72,852 (15.59 per cent child records 
of 2009 where time of validation (created date) was  ‘00:00:00:000’ 
(zero hours, zero minutes, zero seconds, zero milliseconds i.e., sharp at 
12.00 midnight) in all districts as given in Appendix 3.6.3. It was 
unlikely that 13 to 16 per cent of entries were made at that one time. 
This indicates possibility that database was tamper ed by way of 
copying of child records from database of previous years.  
• Copy of child records from 2006 database: Analysis also revealed  
4,78,140 records of 2007, 7,18,422 records of 2008 and 44,298 records 
of 2009 were simply copied from the 2006 database a s date of creation 
3.6.4 
Chart 3.6.4: Comparison of creation of new child codes 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
137 
of records of 2006 against each such child was exactly the same in the 
target tables (i.e., 2007, 2008 and 2009 tables respectively).  
Evidence of such copying of records i.e., record creation date was also tampered 
with. 
To an audit query to furnish the annual CTS data DVDs submitted by the districts 
during 2007v2009 to State for consolidation, the SPD stated that all these DVDs got 
damaged and could not be furnished to audit. 
From the above it can be noticed that byvpassing the updating process, data were 
entered into the database by manipulating data from 2007 to 2009. This 
unauthorised updation can be ascertainable in 2009 when maximum copying of 
records was observed in 16 districts and payment of ` 18.41 lakh was made 
towards data entry and data collection. This included payment of ` 11.33 lakh161 
to the extent of data updated through backend query.  
Such irregular updation made the databases unreliable and incorrect which 
indicated that there was no supervision on the quality of data in the CTS database. 
This had also affected the real outcome of the project i.e., planning rendering the 
database unusable.  
During discussion (August 2014), CommissionervcumvSecretary expressed deep 
concern over such activities which damaged reputation of the project and 
enquired from OPEPA, the basis on which payment on data entry was made. 
Reply from Government has not been received (August 2014).  
3.6.3.5  Inaccurate information to stakeholders 
As per Para 5.2.1 of Guidelines162 for Indian Government Websites, each and 
every bit of content published on a Government website should be verified and 
checked thoroughly as the public expects nothing less than authentic and accurate 
information from a credible source such as an official Government website. 
Incorrect reports will not only mislead the stakeholders but will affect the use of 
information for decision making processes.  
Analysis of the citizen centric reports revealed inconsistencies/ discrepancies in 
total figure among district, blocks and gram panchayat level reports regarding 
child population, child enrolment, out of school children, dropouts, teachers’ 
strength, etc. For example the following ‘Report on Total Child Population’ 
showed the child population of Angul block as 30053 in the district report 
                                                 
161  45,30,764 child records at the rate of ` 0.25  
162  Prepared by the Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances in association 
with Department of Information Technology and National Informatics Centre (NIC)  

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
138 
whereas the total child population of all the GPs in Angul block showed 30,344 in 
the block report as depicted below: 
Illustration 3.6.6 
 
Similar discrepancies in other reports are detailed in Appendix 3.6.4.  Due to 
errors in data and software of evSishu coupled with incoherent consolidation of 
district data in State server, reporting system generated inconsistent and 
unreliable reports which could not be used for planning. Guidelines for managing 
government website were not followed as the content of site had become 
unreliable due to presence of inconsistent information. At the instance of audit the 
errors in the reports were rectified by OPEPA (August 2014). 
During discussion (August 2014), the OPEPA agreed that errors was due to delay 
in consolidation of information. 
3.6.3.6 Backup and security controls 
Information backup and security policy should state management’s commitment 
and set out organisation’s approach to managing information security in order to 
achieve goals of the organisation. Information security policy may be documented 
and communicated throughout the organisation to users in a form that is 
accessible and understandable to the intended reader. 
30344 
30053 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
139 
OPEPA, however, had failed in framing security and backup policy and to 
document it properly which had made the IT systems and assets vulnerable to 
security risk as discussed below. 
● In OPEPA no information security policy document existed to protect 
valuable IT assets. Data and backup policy were not documented and 
maintained at OPEPA. Databases were manually backed up to a different 
folder in the same server weekly, and then copied to external hard disk 
which should have been avoided as backups kept in the same server could 
lead to nonvrestoration in case of disaster. System inspection also revealed 
that the scheduler for backup was not activated. Network administrator 
explained that due to lack of space in the server, scheduler could not be 
activated as it would create large number of backup files and thus backups 
were manually made and copied to an external hard disk weekly. 
Documented backup testing procedures and the backup hard disk however 
was not shown to Audit. Backups had not been kept in a geographical 
distant place and were not regularly tested and monitored. 
● Servers were connected to internet through a firewall, but default setting 
of the server and firewall were not changed after installation of live 
systems, making the systems vulnerable to external attacks as these were 
in Demilitarised Zone (DMZ). Default user i.e., “administrator” was not 
disabled in all the servers and there were continuous attempts from an 
external IP using ‘administrator’ as username to log into the servers 
(application and database) which were an attempt to hack the systems. 
Firewall logs were not monitored.  
●  At application level, the access audit logs of the server intended for 
accountability of authorised transactions were not monitored. CTS/ CMS 
application did not capture access audit logs as the table to capture such 
logs contained no records for monitoring purpose. This indicated that the 
application had no provision to save access logs.  

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
140 
● There was a proxy server, but Audit noticed that its location over the LAN 
was inappropriate as systems over LAN accessed the internet through the 
DHCP server and bypassed the proxy server. This made systems 
vulnerable to malware and Trojan attacks as no content filtering could be 
enforced in proxy server. Traffic could not be monitored as internet was 
available to users directly through DHCP. 
● OPEPA had designed network and server architecture to maintain various 
application systems. The servers were housed in an enclosed room without 
fire extinguisher. 
Due to absence of appropriate backup and security policies, IT system and assets 
were prone to security risk.  
During discussion (August 2014), the CommissionervcumvSecretary accepted the 
facts.  
3.6.4 Conclusion  
The recommendations made in the Paragraph 3.4 of CAG’s Report (Civil) for the 
year ended March 2007 were accepted by the Odisha Primary Education 
Programme Authority (OPEPA). On a follow up audit, we found that these 
recommendations which were still pertinent were not carried out. Three subv
systems EPIS, GIS and CTS under the evSishu project were reviewed. We found 
that the scope of implementation of EPIS got severely curtailed and its primary 
objectives like vacancy tracking of teachers remain unfulfilled. The GIS software 
contained errors like wrong depiction of location, missing photographs etc. which 
inhibited habitation based analysis and rendered the GIS unfit for use by the top 
management of OPEPA. In case of the CTS, we found that the unique child was 
not addressed and not even adopted in the application upgrade during 2011. Thus, 
objective of CTS to track each child for educational and economic status could 

Chapter 3 Compliance Audit 
141 
not be achieved. Further, we found a gross deviation from laid down process of 
annual data updation for which funds were allotted and spent. Significant 
proportion of 62 per cent of child records was updated running backend script 
thereby vitiating the process and rendering the total information unreliable and 
infructuous. There were also deficiencies noted in the security and backup 
procedure. Thus, the key objectives of evSishu system to track each child, 
minimise duplicate/ fake enrolments and formulation of plans to provide quality 
education remained largely unfulfilled. 
 
 
 
 
Bhubaneswar     (Amar Patnaik) 
The  Accountant General (G&SSA) 
                                      Odisha 
 Countersigned 
New Delhi     (Shashi Kant Sharma) 
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
 

  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDICES 

Appendices 
143 
 
Appendix 2.1 
(Refer Paragraph 2.1.1 at page 9) 
Statement showing details of area acquired, cost of land, PDFs and PAFs 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of the project Cost of 
project (` i` i ` i` in 
crore) 
Land acquired 
(In acre) 
Cost of land 
(` i` i ` i` in crore) 
No. of PDF No. of PAF 
1 Aditya Almunium Project, 
Sambalpur  
11000.00 2041.470 92.95 430 1450 
2 Bhushan Power Steel 
Limited, Sambalpur 
2029.00 1256.630 140.36 165 301 
3 Shyam Metallics Energy 
Limited, Sambalpur 
224.71 166.320 13.75 0 136 
4 Jindal India Thermal 
Power Limited, Angul  
4525.00 829.300 63.0 0 1993 
5 Monnet Power Company 
Limited, Angul 
2852.00 278.045 12.05 176 0 
6 Jindal Steel Power 
Limited, Angul 
13135.00 3417.555 144.49 261 5029 
7 GMR Energy Limited, 
Dhenkanal 
4200.00 1016.570 60.75 0 1322 
8 Bhushan Steel Limited, 
Dhenkanal 
5828.15 1225.110 25.05 41 1296 
9 BRG Iron and Steel 
Limited, Dhenkanal 
228.05 132.540 5.19 90 647 
10 Rungta Mines Limited, 
Dhenkanal 
2275.00 540.705 16.39 54 581 
11 MGM Steels Limited, 
Dhenkanal  
208.90 54.290 2.63 0 523 
-do- NA 102.505 NA 0 0 
12 Dhamara Port Company 
Limited, Bhadrak 
NA 2094.000 54.04 405 3741 
13 TATA Power, Cuttack  NA 985.130 74.10 1 2438 
14 VISA Power, Cuttack NA 335.080 NA 36 247 
15 KVK Nilachal, Cuttack NA 280.380 NA 45 332 
16 Crackers India Limited, 
Keonjhar 
NA 126.230 4.86 0 278 
17 Brahmani River Pellet 
Limited (BRPL), Keonjhar 
1485.00 106.910 18.95 0 70 
18 Indian Oil Corporation 
Limited (IOCL), Paradip 
NA 2876.600 NA 143 1682 
19 ESSAR Steel Limited, 
Paradip 
10,721 1267.000 NA 460 4263 
20 Indian Farmers Fertiliser 
Cooperative Limited 
(IFFCO), Paradip 
NA 545.670 NA 0 315 
21 Tata Iron and Steel 
Company Limited 
(TISCO), Gopalpur  
NA 2908.140 60.52 1559 2220 
22 Vedanta Alumina Limited, 
Lanjigarh 
8400 1514.360 NA 121 1532 
23 TATA Steel Limited, 
Jajpur 
15400 2468.500 NA 1234 0 
24 Brahmani River Pellet 
Limited (BRPL), Jajpur 
1485 40.210 NA 30 0 
25 Jindal Steel Limited, 
Jajpur 
6628 953.000 NA 253 0 
26 VISA Steel Limited, 
Jajpur 
345.78 488.190 NA 39 0 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 
 
144 
 
Sl. 
No.  
Name of the project Cost of 
project (` i` i ` i` in 
crore) 
Land acquired 
(In acre) 
Cost of land 
(` i` i ` i` in crore) 
No. of PDF No. of PAF 
27 Odisha Power Generation 
Corporation, Jharsuguda 
NA 464.200 NA 219 0 
28 Eastern Steel and Power 
Limited, Jharsuguda 
254 63.100 NA SES not done 0 
29 Vedanta Alumina and 
Sterlite Limited, 
Jharsuguda  
8400 3035.260 NA 145 1413 
30 Bhushan Power and Steel 
Limited, Sundargarh 
NA 1451.270 NA 302 1142 
31 Utkal Alumina 
International Limited, 
Rayagada 
NA  2155.460 NA 183 2055 
32 Aditya Alumina Project, 
Rayagada 
Included in Sl. 
No.1 
1335.450 NA 141 626 
 Total  99624.59 36555.180  6533 35632 
(Source: Records of Department, IDCO and Collectorate)                 NA: Not available 

Appendices 
145 
 
Appendix 2.2 
(Refer Paragraph 2.1.12 at page 19) 
Statement showing acquisition of land for industrial purposes without payment of 
compensation 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the unit Name of the 
district 
Year of 
passing of 
award 
No. of 
awards 
No. of 
village 
Area ( In 
acres) 
Total 
compensation 
due (in `` ``) 
1 Aditya Aluminium 
project 
Sambalpur 2004-08 187 10 NA 85207412 
2 Bhushan Power & 
Steel Limited  
Sambalpur 2003-12 217 5 NA  419890988 
3 Shyam Metallics 
Energy Limited   
Sambalpur 2005-09 27 2 NA  4136392 
4 Monnet Power 
Company Limited   
Angul 2005-10 89 2 11.88351 13856036 
5 Jindal  India Thermal 
Power Limited  
Angul 2008-12 404 9 128.14 111835894 
6 Jindal Steel Power 
Limited  
Angul 2008-12 1068 29 261.735 278396385 
7 Rungta Mines Limited  Dhenkanal 2007 22 3 15.28 4781245 
8 MGM Steels Limited  Dhenkanal 2009 3 2 2.08 80531 7 
9 BRG Iron & Steel 
Limited  
Dhenkanal 2008 133 3 108.11 43761279 
10 Bhushan Steel Limited  Dhenkanal 2004-12 78 10 28.821 5356474 
11 GMR Energy Limited  Dhenkanal 2009-12 257 5 82.541 57042433 
12 Dhamara Port 
Company Limited  
Bhadrak  2003-09 257 67 101.84 26816353 
13 Indian Oil Corporation 
Limited , Paradip 
Jagatsinghpur 1999 31 10 22.97 
 
4042835 
14 ESSAR Private 
Limited, Paradip 
Jagatsinghpur 2008 & 2009 450 3 55.95686 107259882 
15 IFFCO, Paradip Jagatsinghpur 2009 221 2 31.8798 65512286 
16 Tata Iron and Steel 
Company Limited 
(TISCO), Gopalpur 
Ganjam 1996 to 2013 49 5 12.89 3035467 
17 Vedanta Alumina 
Limited, Lanjigargh 
Kalahandi 2005 to 2010 9 9 8.96 1014634 
18 Bhushan Power & 
Steel Limited (BPSL)  
Sundargarh 2007-2011 223 6 374.35 371557872 
19 Utkal Alumina 
International Limited  
Rayagada 1996-1998 44 5 198.64 3461087 
20 Aditya Alumina 
Project 
Rayagada  2008 29 2 51.99 3521130 
21 Vedanta Alumina 
Limited 
Jharsuguda 2006-2008 49 9 227.86 38999347 
22 Odisha Power 
Generation 
Corporation (OPGC) 
Jharsuguda 2006-2013 18 7 38.44 6510152 
23 Eastern Steel & Power 
Limited  
Jharsuguda 2006 12 1 2.93 636870 
24 Jindal Steel Limited Jajpur  NA 66 5 124.00 5421 219 
25 VISA Steel Limited 
26 Brahmani River Pellet 
Limited  
Jajpur  NA 83 7 279.12 9909532 
27 TATA Steel Limited 
 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 
 
146 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the unit Name of the 
district 
Year of 
passing of 
award 
No. of 
awards 
No. of 
village 
Area ( In 
acres) 
Total 
compensation 
due (in `` ``) 
28 Cracker India Alloys 
Limited 
Keonjhar  NA 66 3 126.250 938964 
29 Brahmani River Pellet 
Limited  
Keonjhar  NA 70 2 106.812 295000 
30 TATA Power Cuttack NA 1939 4 787.310 141175289 
31 KVK Nilachal Cuttack NA 332 4 280.700 12302842 
32 VISA Power Cuttack NA 700 5 NA 43409075 
 Total       1870889691 
(Source: Compiled by Audit from records of units)   NA: Not available 

Appendices 
147 
 
Appendix 2.3 
(Refer Paragraph 2.1.12.3 at page 21) 
Statement showing non-payment of cash in lieu of employment 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
district 
Name of the 
industry 
No. of PDFs 
without cash in 
lieu of 
employment 
Cash in lieu of 
employment per 
PDF (in `` ``) 
Amount 
due (in `` ``) 
1 Sambalpur 
Aditya 
Aluminium 
Project 
222 747000 165834000 
Aditya 
Aluminium 
Project 
78 747000
 58266000 
Shyam Metallics 
Energy Limited 2 150000  300000 
2 Jharsuguda  
Odisha Power 
Generation 
Corporation 
3 747000
 2241000 
3 Keonjhar 
Crackers India 
(Alloys) Limited 14 150000 2100000 
Brahmani River 
Pellet Limited 14 150000
 2100000 
4 Angul  Jindal Steel 
Power Limited 20 552000
 11040000 
5 Jagasinghpur  
Indian Oil 
Corporation 
Limited  
18 150000
 2700000 
6 Bhadrak Dhamara Port 
Company Limited 
23 150000 3450000 
1 299000  299000 
7 448000  3136000 
3 747000  2241000 
111 150000 16650000 
7 Jajpur Tata Steel 
Limited 52 At  different rate 35814000 
8 Rayagada 
Utkal Alumina 
International 
Limited 
20 621000
 13041000 
  Total    588   319212000 
(Source: Compiled by Audit from records of units) 
 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 
 
148 
 
Appendix 2.4 
(Refer paragraphs 2.1.12.4 to 2.1.12.7 at pages 21 and 22)  
Statement showing non-payment of resettlement grants 
(Source: Compiled by Audit from records of units) 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the 
Collecto-
rate 
Name of the industries Self Relocation Allowance House Building Assistance Temporary Shed Maintenance Allowance 
No. of 
PDFs 
Amount 
per 
family (in 
`` ``) 
Total 
Amount 
(in `` ``) 
No. 
of 
PDFs 
Amount 
per 
family 
(in `` ``) 
Total 
Amount 
(in `` ``) 
No. of 
PDFs 
Amount 
per 
family 
(in `` ``) 
Total 
Amount 
(in `` ``) 
No. of 
PDFs 
Amount 
per 
family 
(in `` ``) 
Total 
Amount 
(in `` ``) 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
1 Dhenkanal MGM Steel Limited 12 50000 600000 7 150000 105000 7  10000 70000 7 24000 168000 
GMR Energy Limited 19 75000 1425000 19 224000 42560 00 19 15000 285000 19 36000 684000 
2 Jajpur Tata Steel Limited 52 
At 
different 
rate 
3698000 52 
At 
different 
rate 
10745000 52 
At 
different 
rate 
726100 52 
At 
different 
rate 
1767600 
3 Bhadrak Dhamara Port Company  
Limited  121 50000 6050000 121 150000 18150000 121 10000 121 0000 121 24000 2904000 
4 Ganjam 
Tata Iron and Steel 
Company Limited 
(TISCO), Gopalpur 
0 0 0 0 0 0 102 15000 1530000 102 36000 3672000 
5   Sambalpur   
Aditya Aluminium 
Project 98 75000 7350000 98 224000 21952000 98 15000 147000 0 98 36000 3528000 
Aditya Aluminium 
Project 78 75000 5850000 78 224000 17472000 78 15000 117000 0 78 36000 2808000 
Shyam Metallics Energy 
Limited 2 75000 150000 2 224000 448000 2 15000 30000 2 3600 0 72000 
6 Jharsuguda Odisha Power 
Generation Corporation 77 75000 5775000 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
7  Angul  Jindal Steel Power 
Limited 11 150000 1650000 11 329965 3629615 11 25000 275000  9 60000 540000 
8 Rayagada Utkal Alumina 
International Limited 20 
At 
different 
rate 
1284000 20 
At 
different 
rate 
3816000 20 
At 
different 
rate 
255000 20 
At 
different 
rate 
612000 
    Total 490   33832000 408   80573615 510   7021100 508   16755600 

Appendices 
149 
 
Appendix 2.5 
(Refer paragraph 2.1.12.9 at page 23) 
Statement showing less payment of rehabilitation assistance due to non-indexation/ change of category 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
district Name of the industries Purpose 
No. 
of 
PDFs 
Rate as per 
revised 
indexation/ 
change of 
category (in 
`` ``) 
Amount 
due (in `` ``) 
Pre-revised 
rate (in `` ``) 
Amount paid 
(in `` ``) 
Less amount 
paid (in `` ``) 
1 Jharsuguda 
Vedanta Alumina 
Limited & Sterlite 
Energy Limited 
Cash in lieu 
of 
employment 
70 552000 38640000 500000 35000000 3640000 
1 621000 621000 500000 500000 121000 
2 Sundargarh Bhushan Power Steel 
Limited 
Cash in lieu 
of 
employment 
158 747000 118026000 621000 98118000 19908000 
2 299000 598000 249000 498000 100000 
203 150000 30450000 125000 25375000 5075000 
3 Jagatsinghpur Indian Oil Corporation 
Limited 
Cash in lieu 
of 
employment 
1 100000 100000 59350 59350 40650 
1 552000 552000 118700 118700 433300 
4 Sambalpur Aditya Aluminium 
Project 
Cash in lieu 
of 
employment 
14 747000 10458000 621000 8694000 1764000 
5 Jajpur 
1. Brahmani River 
Pellet Limited 
2. Jindal Steel 
Limited 
3. Visa Steel 
Limited 
 
Cash in lieu 
of 
employment 
51 Different rates 
applicable 18065000 
Different 
rates 
applicable 
12310000 5755000 
6 Sundargarh Bhushan Power Steel 
Limited 
Self-
relocation 181 
Different  
rates 
applicable 
9150000 
Different 
rates 
applicable 
 
7686000 1464000 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 
 
150 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
district Name of the industries Purpose 
No. 
of 
PDFs 
Rate as per 
revised 
indexation/ 
change of 
category (in 
`` ``) 
Amount 
due (in `` ``) 
Pre-revised 
rate (in `` ``) 
Amount paid 
(in `` ``) 
Less amount 
paid (in `` ``) 
7 Jajpur  Jindal Steel Limited HBA 62 Different rates 
applicable 11594000 
Different 
rates 
applicable 
10292000 1302000 
8 Jajpur  TATA Steel Limited HBA 178 Different rates 
applicable 31825000 
Different 
rates 
applicable 
17073500 14751500 
9 Jajpur  Brahmani River Pellet 
Limited HBA 16 Different rates 
applicable 3473000 
Different 
rates 
applicable 
2545333 927667 
10 Sundargarh Bhushan Power Steel 
Limited HBA 181 Different rates 
applicable 27328000 
Different 
rates 
applicable 
22814000 4514000 
11 Jajpur  Jindal Steel Limited Temporary 
shed 62 Different rates 
applicable 775000 
Different 
rates 
applicable 
688200 86800 
12 Jajpur  TATA Steel Limited Temporary 
shed 178 Different rates 
applicable 2094800 
Different 
rates 
applicable 
1340500 754300 
13 Jajpur  Brahmani River Pellet 
Limited 
Temporary 
shed 16 Different rates 
applicable 205000 
Different 
rates 
applicable 
155400 49600 
14 Sundargarh Bhushan Power Steel 
Limited 
Temporary 
shed 181 Different rates 
applicable 1800000 
Different 
rates 
applicable 
1500000 300000 
15 Jajpur Jindal Steel Limited Transport 62 Different rates 
applicable 155000 
Different 
rates 
applicable 
142600 12400 
16 Jajpur Brahmani River Pellet 
Limited Transport 16 Different rates 
applicable 41000 
Different 
rates 
applicable 
32200 8800 

Appendices 
151 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
district Name of the industries Purpose 
No. 
of 
PDFs 
Rate as per 
revised 
indexation/ 
change of 
category (in 
`` ``) 
Amount 
due (in `` ``) 
Pre-revised 
rate (in `` ``) 
Amount paid 
(in `` ``) 
Less amount 
paid (in `` ``) 
17 Sundargarh Bhushan Power Steel 
Limited Transport 181 Different rates 
applicable 534000 
Different 
rates 
applicable 
445000 89000 
18 Jajpur Jindal Steel Limited Maintenance 62 Different rates 
applicable 1860000 
Different 
rates 
applicable 
1711200 148800 
19 Jajpur TATA Steel Limited Maintenance 178 Different rates 
applicable 10123200 
Different 
rates 
applicable 
6410400 3712800 
20 Sundargarh Bhushan Power Steel 
Limited Maintenance 181 Different rates 
applicable 6408000 
Different 
rates 
applicable 
5340000 1068000 
21 Jajpur Brahmani River Pellet 
Limited Maintenance 16 Different rates 
applicable 564000 
Different 
rates 
applicable 
384000 180000 
22 Jharsuguda Vendant Alumina 
Limited Maintenance 145 Different rates 
applicable 4541600 
Different 
rates 
applicable 
4166000 375600 
 Total     329981600 
Different 
rates 
applicable 
263399383 66582217 
(Source: Compiled by Audit from records of test checked units) 

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 
 
152 
 
Appendix 2.6 
(Refer Paragraph 2.1.12.12 at page 24) 
Statement showing project wise allotment of plot and issue of RoR 
Sl.
No. 
District Name of the Project No. of 
plots 
allotted to 
displaced 
persons 
No. of 
RoR/ Patta 
issued 
thereof 
Pattas not 
issued 
Status/ pending at 
which level 
Reason for non-issuance of 
pattas 
Remarks 
1 Sambalpur Aditya Aluminium 
Project  
313 0 313 R&R officer in charge 
of the project 
District Administration has not 
taken any steps to issue pattas 
- 
Bhushan Power and 
Steel Limited 
165 165 0 - - Issued to all 
2 Angul Monnet Power 
Company  Limited  
144 110 34 R&R officer in charge 
of the project 
District administration has not 
taken any steps to issue pattas 
- 
Jindal Steel Power 
Limited 
158 154 4 R&R officer in charge 
of the project 
District administration has not 
taken any steps to issue pattas 
- 
3 Dhenkanal Bhushan Steel Limited  40 40 0 - - Issued to all 
4 Jagatsinghpur Indian Oil Corporation  
Limited  
65 0 65 RoRs lying with 
Tahasildar, Kujanga 
PDFs are demanding higher 
benefit 
Though RoRs have 
been prepared, they 
are not taking the 
RoRs and demanding 
higher prices 
5 Ganjam Tata Iron and Steel 
Company Limited 
(TISCO), Gopalpur 
1457 1413 44 With Special LAO, 
TISCO 
Due to mismatch of sketch plan - 
6 Kalahandi Vendant Alumina 
Limited  
116 116 0 - - Issued to all 
7 Jajpur Tata Steel Limited 974 241 733 ADM, Kaling anagar In reply, ADM, Kalinganagar 
stated that the balance pattas are 
under process and would be 
distributed immediately.    
- 
Brahmani River Pellet 
Limited  
20 20 0 ADM, Kalinganagar  - Issued to all 
Jindal Steel Limited 213 210 3 ADM, Kalinganagar  In reply, ADM, Kalinganagar 
stated that the balance pattas are 
- 
 

Appendices 
153 
 
 
 (Source: Compiled by Audit from records of test checked units) 
under process and would be 
distributed immediately.    
 
VISA Steel Limited 3 0 3 ADM, Kalinganagar  In reply, ADM, Kalinganagar 
stated that the balance pattas are 
under process and would be 
distributed immediately.  
- 
8 Jharsuguda Vendant Alumina 
Limited 
145 127 18 Project Director, 
R&R, Jharsuguda 
stated that steps would 
be taken to issue RoR 
to 18 displaced 
families shortly. 
District administration has not 
taken any steps to issue pattas 
- 
9 Rayagada Utkal Alumina 
International Limited 
183 96 87 Rehabilitation Colony 
1 (Kendukhunti & 
Ramibeda): 96 pattas 
issued. 
Rehabilitation Colony 
2 (Dkorol): The land 
has not been 
surrendered by IDCO 
to district. 
administration 
District administration has not 
taken any steps to issue pattas 
- 
Total  3996 2692 1304    

Audit Report (G & SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 
 
154 
 
Appendix 2.7 
Statement showing provision of basic facilities in the rehabilitation colonies 
(Refer Paragraph 2.1.13.2 at page 26)  
(Source: Compiled by Audit from records of test checked units)                    Blank space (-) indicates availability of provisions 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
the colony 
Name of the industry Health Water supply Street light Road Drain Road and 
maintenance 
School Temple Commu-
nity 
centre 
Pond Cremation 
ground 
1 Asanbani Bhushan Steel Limited, 
Dhenkanal 
Very poor No water 
supply to house.  
Insufficient - - Not 
maintained 
Constructed 
by Govern-
ment 
No worship 
takes place 
No No - 
2 Pandoloi Aditya Alumina Project, 
Sambalpur 
No health 
centre 
Inadequate Inadequate No 
blacktop or 
concrete 
road 
- Not 
maintained 
No No No No No 
3 Ludhapoli No health 
centre 
Inadequate Inadequate No 
blacktop or 
concrete 
road 
- Not 
maintained 
No No No  No 
4 Triganga-2 TATA Steel Limited, 
Jajpur 
- - - - - - No - No No No 
5 Sansailo No health 
centre 
- - - - - No - No No - 
6 Triganga-1 Brahmani River Pellet 
Limited, Jajpur 
- No - - - Not 
maintained 
No - No - No 
7 Triganga Jindal Stee; Limited 
Jajpur 
- - - - - - No No - No No 
8 Kantipur No - - - - - No No - No No 
9 Triganga VISA Steel Limited 
Jajpur 
- - No  - - No No - No No 
10  New 
Phasala 
Munda 
Odisha Power Generation 
Corporation, Jharsuguda 
No No No No 
blacktop or 
concrete 
road 
No Not 
maintained 
No - No No - 
11 Banaharpali No No No No 
blacktop or 
concrete 
road 
No Not 
maintained 
No - No No - 
12 TISCO 
Colony 
Tata Iron and Steel 
Company Limited, , 
Gopalpur 
- No - - - - - - - - - 
13 Dkorol 
(Two 
colonies) 
Utkal Alumina 
International Limited, 
Rayagada 
No - - - - - - - No No - 

Appendices 
155 
 
Appendix 3.1.1 
(Refer Paragraph 3.1.5 at page 36) 
Statement showing list of sampled units covered in audit 
Sl. No. Name of sampled unit (Colleges/Universities/Offices) 
 A. Government Colleges 
1 Government Junior College, Phulbani 
2 Sashi Bhushan Rath Government Women's College, Be rhampur 
3 Balabhadra Narayan Sanskrit College, Tukuna, Keon jhar 
4 Government Women’s Junior College, Balangir 
5 Bhadrak College, Bhadrak 
6 Samanta Chandrasekhar Junior College, Puri 
7 Government Women's College, Bhawanipatna 
8 Sanjaya Memorial Government Women’s College, Phulbani 
9 Fakir Mohan College, Balasore 
10 Maharaja Purna Chandra (Autonomous) College, Baripada 
11 Gangadhar Meher (Autonomous) College, Sambalpur 
12 Jatiya Kabi Bira Kishore College, Cuttack 
13 Chakra Bisoi Mahavidyalaya (renamed as  Government College), 
Phulbani 
14 Netaji Subash Chandra Bose College, Sambalpur 
15 Government College, Angul 
16 Government Women's College, Sambalpur 
17 Government Sanskrit College, Baripada 
18 Samanta Chandrasekhar (Autonomous) College, Puri 
19 Saila Bala Women’s College, Cuttack 
20 Narayana Chandra College, Jajpur 
21 Buxi Jagabandhu Bidyadhar (Autonomous) College, Bhubaneswar 
22 Rama Devi Women’s College, Bhubaneswar 
23 Government College, Rourkela 
 B. Non-Government Aided Colleges 
24 Khariar College, Khariar, Nuapada 
25 Deogarh College, Deogarh 
26 Agarpada College, Agarpada, Bhadrak 
27 Srinibas College, Mangalpur, Soro, Balasore 
28 NAC College, Burla 
29 Panchayat Samiti  College, Belpada, Balangir 
30 Attabira College, Attabira, Bargarh 
31 Athamalik College, Athamalik 
32 Charampa Mahavidyalay, Charampa, Bhadrak 
33 Sahaspur College, Balichandrapur 
34 Baripada College, Baripada 
35 Rural Institute of Higher Studies, Bhograi 
36 Nimapara College, Nimapara 
37 Biraja Women's College, Jajpur 
38 Belabhumi Mahavidyalaya, Avana, Bahanaga, Balasore 
39 Sonepur College, Sonepur 

Appendices 
 
156 
 
Sl. No. Name of sampled unit (Colleges/Universities/Offices) 
40 Simulia College, Markona, Simulia, Balasore 
41 Ekamra College, Bhubaneswar 
42 Baruneswar Mahavidyalaya, Arei, Binjharpur, Jajpur 
43 Suvarnarekha Mahavidyalaya, Baliapal, Balasore 
44 Stewart Science College, Cuttack 
45 People’s College, Buguda, Ganjam 
46 Maharshi College of Natural Law, Bhubaneswar 
47 Balasore Mahila Junior College, Balasore 
48 Balasore Mahila Degree College, Balasore 
49 Durga Charan Chilka College, Tangi, Khordha 
50 Anchalika Panchayat College, Sujanpur, Jajpur 
51 Christ College, Cuttack 
52 Anandapur College, Anadpur, Kenjhar 
53 Salipur College, Salipur, Cuttack 
 C. Non-Government Block Grant Colleges 
54 Pipili Degree College, Pipili 
55 Konark Bhagabati Degree College, Konark 
56 Panchyat Samiti Junior College, Palsagora, Kantamal, Boudh 
57 Sri Jayadev Degree College of Education & Technology, Naraharkanta, 
Bhubaneswar 
58 Malkangiri Degree College, Malkangiri 
59 Kankadahad Junior College, Kankadahad 
60 Pratap Sasan Degree College, Balakati 
61 Jamankira Degree College, Jamankira, Sambalpur 
62 Banishree Junior Mahvidyalaya, Kuanarpur, Nimapara, Puri 
63 Sridhar Swami Junior College of Education and Technology, Sadangi, 
Gondia, Dhenkanal 
64 Women's Degree College, Kamakshyanagar 
65 Women's Degree College, Kantabanji 
66 Shree Jaganath Dev Junior Mahavidyalaya, Mandal, Belpara, Balangir 
67 Jagabandhu Das Women's Junior College, Kadalipali, Barpali, Bargarh 
68 Biju Patnaik Junior College, Singada, Sukurli, Mayurbhanj 
69 Kali Charan Panchagarh Anaga Narendra Degree College, Bankoi, 
Bolgarh, Khordha 
70 Bellaguntha Science Degree College, Bellaguntha, Ganjam 
71 Sohela Degree College, Sohela, Bargarh 
72 Odakhanda Junior College, Odakhanda, Balipatna, Khordha 
73 Somanath Science Junior College, Mundamari, Dharakote, Ganjam 
74 Raghunath Junior Mahavidyalaya, Kadadiha, Karanjia, Mayurbhanj 
 D. Non-Government Unaided Colleges 
75 Korua Women's Degree College, Korua, Kendrapara 
76 Bibekananda Meher Junior College, Bhulia Sikuan, Khariar, Nuapada 
77 Saheed Memorial Junior College, Eram, Basudevpur, Bhadrak 
78 Indira Gandhi Memorial Degree College of Science & Technology, Rajib 

Appendices 
157 
 
Sl. No. Name of sampled unit (Colleges/Universities/Offices) 
Nagar, Dhamnagar, Bhadrak 
79 Anchalik Bastarani Degree Mahavidyalaya, Sanchergaon, Golamunda, 
Kalahandi 
80 Sidha Baranga Degree College of Education & Technology, Punanga, 
Jagatsinghpur 
81 Shri Radharaman Sanskrit College, Kendrapara 
82 Baba Saheb Ambedkar Junior College, Khajuripada, Kandhamal 
83 Maidalpur Junior College, Maidalpur, Papadahandi, Nabarangapur 
84 Maa Manikeswari Panchyat Samiti Junior Mahavidyala, Thuamul 
Rampur, Kalahandi 
85 Harachandi Mahila Junior Mahavidyalaya, Rebana, Bramhagiri, Puri 
86 Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Degree College of Education & Technology, 
Pubasasan, Pipili, Puri 
87 Sukra Behera Degree College, Kendudhipi, Nayagarh 
88 Bahugraam Degree College, Bahugram, Cuttack 
89 Maa  Netramani Sanskrit College, Jajpur 
90 Anchalik Junior Science College, Mahaling, Kalahandi 
 E. Universities 
91 Utkal University, Bhubaneswar 
92 Berhampur University, Berhampur 
93 Fakir Mohan University, Balasore 
94 Ravenshaw University, Cuttack 
 F. NCC Offices 
95 Commandant, 3 (Odisha), Medical Company, NCC, Be rhampur 
96 Commandant, NCC Group (Headquarter), Cuttack 
97 Commandant, 4 (Odisha) Medical Company, NCC, Sam balpur 
98 Commandant, NCC Group Headquarter, Sambalpur 
 G. Administrative Offices (Drawing and Disbursement Officers) 
99 Under Secretary, Higher Education Department (HE D), Bhubaneswar 
100 Under Secretary, HED (Loan Stipend), Bhubaneswa r 
101 Assistant Director (Direct Payment), Directorate of Higher Education 
(HE), Bhubaneswar 
102 Directorate of Higher Education, Bhubaneswar 
103 Assistant Director (Scholarship), Directorate o f HE, Bhubaneswar 
104 Regional Directorate of Education, Bhubaneswar 
105 Regional Directorate of Education, Berhampur 
106 Regional Directorate of Education, Sambalpur 
107 Directorate of Vocational Education, Bhubaneswa r 
108 State Education Tribunal, Bhubaneswar 
109 State Selection Board, Bhubaneswar 
 

Appendices 
 
158 
 
Appendix 3.2.1 
(Refer Paragraph 3.2.2.1 at page 74) 
Statement showing delay in approval of tender 
 
Delay at the level of Number of works Range of delay 
Government  02 100 to 109 days 
Chief Engineer 29 22 to 220 days 
Superintending Engineer 30 16 to 135 days 
Executive Engineer 23 25 to 184 days 
Total 84 16 to 220 days 
 
(Source: Compiled by Audit from records of the test  checked divisions)

Appendices 
159 
 
Appendix 3.2.2 
(Refer Paragraph 3.2.2.1 at page 75) 
Statement showing extra liability due to retender after lapse of validity of 
tender 
 
(`` `` in crore) 
Name of the Unit Original Cost Enhanced cost Extra liability 
EE, RWD, Ganjam-I 9.62 11.11 1.49 
EE, RWD, Ganjam-II 3.08 3.77 0.69 
EE, RWD, Keonjhar-I 6.57 9.45 2.88 
Total 19.27 24.33 5.06 
(Source: Compiled by Audit from records of the test  checked divisions)

Appendices 
 
160 
 
Appendix 3.2.3 
(Refer Paragraph 3.2.3.8 at page 83) 
Statement showing short recovery /withholding of penalty after rescission of 
agreement 
(`` `` in lakh) 
Name of the 
Unit 
No. of 
works 
Agreement 
cost 
Amount of 
penalty to be 
recovered 
Amount of 
penalty 
recovered 
Short 
recovery 
of 
penalty 
Cuttack-I 1 310.91  65.55 27.34 38.21 
Ganjam-I 1 160.13  33.54 1.12 32.42 
Ganjam-II 1 427.67  99.06 3.60 95.46 
Jajpur-I 1 289.72  58.47 17.65 40.82 
 4 1188.43 256.62 49.71 206.91 
(Source: Compiled by Audit from records of the test  checked divisions)

Appendices 
 
161 
 
Appendix 3.6.1 
(Please refer Paragraph 3.6.3.4 at page 134) 
 
Statement showing district-wise records where the time portion of the created date of 
records of 2009 is same as that of 2008 
Sl. No. District 
Code 
District Name Number of records where the 
time part of the created date 
of records of 2009 is same as 
that of 2008 
Total Child Records of 2009 
1 D03 BARAGARH 76217 239538 
2 D04 BHADRAK 369415 369415 
3 D05 BALANGIR 275383 320901 
4 D07 CUTTACK 448762 452304 
5 D08 DEOGARH 76908 76908 
6 D11 GANJAM 813516 813516 
7 D13 JAJPUR 144561 370387 
8 D15 KALAHANDI 220275 306400 
9 D19 KHORDHA 382266 423948 
10 D20 KORAPUT 315308 315308 
11 D21 MALKANGIRI 176260 196772 
12 D22 MAYURBHANJ 674161 674161 
13 D23 NABARANGPUR 284559 352357 
14 D25 NUAPADA 152621 155567 
15 D26 PURI 57579 265208 
16 D28 SAMBALPUR 62973 126122 
  Total 4530764 5458812 
 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 
162 
 
Appendix 3.6.2 
(Please refer Paragraph 3.6.3.4 at page 136) 
Statement showing district wise new codes allotted during 2007-09 
    2007 2008 2009 
District 
Code 
District Name New 
Codes 
allotted 
Total 
Child 
Records 
New 
Codes 
allotted 
Total 
Child 
Records 
New 
Codes 
allotted 
Total 
Child 
Records 
1 ANGUL 46634 297854 36723 248790 36719 251385 
2 BALASORE 73856 572783 108519 616324 60037 532773 
3 BARAGARH 40002 301130 51491 252263 17068 239538 
4 BHADRAK 56519 385630 86790 400907 0 369415 
5 BALANGIR 66496 402612 66725 362444 18958 320901 
6 BOUDH 13109 78125 27067 91655 11950 66748 
7 CUTTACK 87561 518553 112076 489335 0 452304 
8 DEOGARH 9720 72741 16615 78783 0 76908 
9 DHENKANAL 42173 278713 44953 289727 22998 237303 
10 GAJAPATI 28994 163396 45633 201916 22178 205519 
11 GANJAM 148398 870700 11758 813516 0 813516 
12 JAGATSINGHPUR 35416 245971 37187 241296 20678 26 1910 
13 JAJPUR 64259 471882 28148 371067 44778 370387 
14 JHARSUGUDA 11624 114555 14775 97172 12065 89103 
15 KALAHANDI 10359 161500 159680 306405 0 306400 
16 KANDHAMAL 52698 230951 47329 270478 30052 226900  
17 KENDRAPARA 62822 338850 31125 326675 38168 27135 7 
18 KEONJHAR 59877 435997 61003 447777 46380 412218 
19 KHORDHA 69842 432081 166278 418929 183 423948 
20 KORAPUT 40688 325436 45886 351305 0 315308 
21 MALKANGIRI 44938 181102 54434 196794 0 196772 
22 MAYURBHANJ 156878 687366 87801 713379 0 674161 
23 NABARANGPUR 20934 308901 105820 352357 0 352357 
24 NAYAGARH 31072 221937 75824 257556 23623 171317 
25 NUAPADA 35794 171197 99263 196528 0 155567 
26 PURI 51749 347480 147454 380504 0 265208 
27 RAYAGADA 58842 299124 87941 365725 29815 251605 
28 SAMBALPUR 23911 125615 97631 200169 0 126122 
29 SUBARNAPUR 17674 146081 20196 106219 12287 76455  
30 SUNDARGARH 37209 452825 65707 310750 67008 29151 8 
Total 1500048 9641088 2041832 9756745 514945 8804923 
 

Appendices 
 
163 
 
Appendix 3.6.3 
(Please refer Paragraph 3.6.3.4 at page 136) 
Statement showing district wise number of child records with time showing 
00:00:00:000 hours in created date fields of child databases during 2007-09   
    2007 2008 2009 
District 
Code District Name 
Number 
of 
records 
with no 
time  in 
created 
date 
Total 
Child 
Records 
Number 
of 
records 
with no 
time  in 
created 
date 
Total 
Child 
Records 
Number 
of 
records 
with no 
time  in 
created 
date 
Total 
Child 
Records 
1 ANGUL 43950 297854 14804 248790 36844 251385 
2 BALASORE 65373 572783 73264 616324 60185 532773 
3 BARAGARH 37555 301130 122421 252263 63932 239538 
4 BHADRAK 53065 385630 53712 400907 53709 369415 
5 BALANGIR 58366 402612 40970 362444 24577 320901 
6 BOUDH 8643 78125 21822 91655 11547 66748 
7 CUTTACK 85296 518553 71949 489335 71945 452304 
8 DEOGARH 8730 72741 9644 78783 9643 76908 
9 DHENKANAL 40883 278713 21534 289727 22997 237303 
10 GAJAPATI 20290 163396 28482 201916 22178 205519 
11 GANJAM 140235 870700 140227 813516 140227 813516 
12 JAGATSINGHPUR 35253 245971 22422 241296 42781 261910 
13 JAJPUR 60861 471882 27417 371067 45806 370387 
14 JHARSUGUDA 9516 114555 6479 97172 12065 89103 
15 KALAHANDI 9973 161500 95351 306405 95351 306400 
16 KANDHAMAL 48852 230951 32625 270478 30050 226900 
17 KENDRAPARA 52539 338850 38438 326675 38227 271357 
18 KEONJHAR 47685 435997 31085 447777 46563 412218 
19 KHORDHA 67950 432081 143910 418929 144093 423948 
20 KORAPUT 34674 325436 10268 351305 10265 315308 
21 MALKANGIRI 38612 181102 34904 196794 34904 196772 
22 MAYURBHANJ 138487 687366 79321 713379 79321 674161 
23 NABARANGPUR 13883 308901 41994 352357 41994 352357 
24 NAYAGARH 27059 221937 19672 257556 23623 171317 
25 NUAPADA 30004 171197 43413 196528 43409 155567 
26 PURI 51277 347480 32205 380504 32162 265208 
27 RAYAGADA 44159 299124 26900 365725 30417 251605 
28 SAMBALPUR 19243 125615 24729 200169 24721 126122 
29 SUBARNAPUR 15070 146081 9888 106219 12287 76455 
30 SUNDARGARH 29800 452825 28465 310750 67029 291518 
Total 1337283 9641088 1348315 9756745 1372852 8804923 
 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 
164 
 
Appendix 3.6.4 
(Please refer Paragraph 3.6.3.5 at page 138) 
Statement showing inconsistent reports in the website of OPEPA 
In the district report against Angul Block 
the figure. was 30053 whereas the Block 
report indicated 30344 
Report on Total 
Child Population
 
The GP level option does not generate any report as  there 
is deficiency in design of the reporting system. 
The total figure in district level report did not t ally with 
that of the block level report. 
The total enrolment of  Angarabadha GP 
in the block level report was 904 
Class-wise 
Enrolment Report
 
The class wise enrolment report had the drill down option 
up to village level from state level. In the Block Level 
report the total enrolment against a GP does not ta lly with 
that of GP Level report.  The school report (by cli cking 
on the school hyperlink) generated a blank format i nstead 
of information on school details. 
In the district report the total figure was 
796 but Block report depicted 752 
Reports on Out of 
School
 
The out of school report had the option to drill do wn to 
village level. Analysis of reports revealed that th e total 
figures of a block in district report did not tally  with total 
figures of the block in the Block report. 
The total child population of age 6-11 was 
3846486 and that of Angul district was 
108466 but in another report the same 
was 4676317 and 141483 during 2007-08 
Child Population This is a static report on child population of the state for 
the year 2007-08.  A similar report was also availa ble in 
the website as ‘Report on Total Child Population’ a t point 
A above. Comparison of the figures of both the repo rts 
revealed that there was large variation of figures of both 
the reports. 
In the consolidated figure of village 
Badadandasahi of Angul Block was 222 
whereas the detailed report showed 213 
In-school Children The report had the provision to show the child popu lation 
from 2011-12 till 2013-14. However, the report itse lf 
showed inconsistency as the total boys figure in th e 
district report did not tally with the detailed rep ort. This 
report on child with special needs (CWSN) showed 
2943793 number of CWSN during 2011-12. For the year s 
2012-13 and 2013-14, the report showed there were n o 
CWSN. 
The out of school children as per District 
report was 796 but the Block report 
depicted 752 out of school children 
Out of school 
Children 
The number of dropouts is inflated as same name is 
reported multiple times. 
In Angul Block of Angul district the total 
schools were shown as 137 but the Block 
report depicted 159 schools 
School/ 
Infrastructure 
District report showed different figure as compared  to the 
block level report. 
The number of teachers of Angul Block in 
one report showed 7588 teaching staff 
and in another report it showed 8017 
teachers 
Teacher Total number of teachers reported in this report do es not 
tally with that of Report on Types of Teacher and o ther 
reports. 

Appendices 
 
165 
 
Glossary of Abbreviations  
AAPs Annual Action Plans 
API Academic Performance Indicator 
ASC Academic Staff College 
AWC Anganwadi Centre 
AWWs Anganwadi Workers 
BEO Block Education Officers 
BFC Basic Foundation Course 
BG Block Grant 
BGJY Biju Gramya Jyoti Yojana 
BPL Below Poverty Line 
BRCC Block Resource Centre Coordinator 
BRGF Backward Region Grant Fund 
BSL Bhushan Steel Limited 
CAS Career Advancement Scheme 
CD Cross Drainage  
CDC College Development Council 
CDMO Chief District Medical Officer 
CDPOs Child Development Project Officers 
CEs Chief Engineers 
CHC Community Health Centre 
CNV Compulsory Notification of Vacancy 
CPWD Central Public Works Department 
CRCC Cluster Resource Centre Coordinator 
CSP Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
CTS Child Tracking System 
CWA Constituency-Wise Allotment 
DDO Drawing & Disbursing Officer 
DGM Deputy General Manager 
DGRC District Grievance Redressal Committee 
DHE Director of Higher Education 
DHH District Headquarters Hospital 
DISS District Inspection School System 
DKMs District Key Managers 
DLCs District Level Consultants 
DLOs District Labour Officers 
DLSWCA District Level Single Window Clearance Autho rity 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 
166 
 
DMZ Demilitarised Zone 
DPCL Dhamra Port Company Limited 
DPCs District Project Coordinators 
DRDAs District Rural Development Agencies 
DSWOs District Social Welfare Officers 
DTCN Detailed Tender Call Notice 
DVMC District Vigilance & Monitoring Committee 
EEs Executive Engineers 
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment  
EIC Engineer-in-Chief 
EIs Educational Institutions 
EMD Earnest Money Deposit 
EOT Extension of Time 
EPF Employees Provident Fund 
EPF&MP Employees’ Provident Fund & Miscellaneous Pr ovision 
EPFC Employees Provident Fund Commissioner  
EPIS Education Personnel Information System 
FKOs Field Key Officers 
FMU Fakir Mohan University 
GAD General Alignment Drawing 
GB Governing Body 
GCC General Conditions of Contract 
GER Gross Enrolment Ratio 
GIA Grants-in-aid 
GIS Geographical Information System 
GoI Government of India 
GoO Government of Odisha 
GPEO Gram Panchayat Extension Officer 
GPS Global Positioning System 
HED Higher Education Department 
HLCA High Level Clearance Authority 
HPC High Power Committee 
IARs Internal Audit Reports 
IAs Implementing Agencies 
IAY Indira Awaas Yojana 
ICDS Integrated Child Development Scheme 
IDEA Interactive Data Extraction and Analysis  

Appendices 
 
167 
 
IEC Information, Education and Communication 
IFFCO Indian Farmers Fertiliser Company 
IOCL Indian Oil Corporation Limited 
IPICOL Industrial Promotion and Investment Corporat ion of Odisha 
Limited 
IPR Industrial Policy Resolution 
IRDA Insurance Regulatory Development Authority 
ISBN International Standard Book Number 
ISL IDCOL Software Limited 
ISSN International Standard Serial Number 
IT Information Technology 
JITPL Jindal India Thermal Power Limited 
KNIC Kalinga Nagar Industrial Complex 
L&ESI Labour & Employees’ State Insurance 
LA Land Acquisition 
LAC Land Allotment Committee 
LAO Land Acquisition Officer 
LC Labour Commissioner 
LEC Local Enquiry Committee 
LFA Local Fund Audit 
LPC Last Pay Certificate 
LRR Laws, Rules and Regulation 
M Phil Master in Philosophy 
MEW Monitoring and Evaluation Wing 
MGMSL MGM Steel Limited 
MGNREGS Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Gu arantee 
Scheme 
MIS Management Information System 
MoLE Ministry of Labour & Employment  
MoRD Ministry of Rural Development 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MPR Monthly Progress Report 
NAAC National Assessment and Accreditation Council 
NACs Notified Area Councils 
NET National Eligibility Test 
NGO Non-Government Organisation 
NGRC National Grievance Redressal Committee 
NIACL New India Assurance Company Limited 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 
168 
 
NPE National Policy on Education 
NQM National level Quality Monitor 
NRHM National Rural Health Mission 
NRLM National Rural Livelihood Mission 
NSAP National Social Assistance Programme 
NSS National Social Service 
OC Orientation Course 
OCAC Odisha Computer Application Centre 
OCCL Odisha Construction Corporation Limited 
OE Orissa Education 
OGFR Orissa General Financial Rules 
OGLS Orissa Government Land Settlement 
OLR Odisha Land Reform 
OLSF Odisha Loan Stipend Fund 
OPEPA Odisha Primary Education Programme Authority  
OPSC Odisha Public Service Commission 
OPWD Odisha Public Works Department 
ORPS Odisha Revised Pay Scale 
ORRP  Odisha Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy  
ORV Odisha Reservation of Vacancy 
OSICL Odisha Small Scale Industries Corporation Lim ited 
OT Operation Theatre 
OUA Orissa University Act 
OUFS Orissa University First Statute 
PAs Programme Assistants 
PDC Periphery Development Committee 
PDF Project Displaced Family 
PET Physical Education Teacher 
PG Post Graduate 
PGPA Public Grievances and Pension Administration 
Ph. D Doctor of Philosophy 
PL Personal Ledger 
PM Project Manager 
PMGSY Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana 
PMTR Project Monthly Transaction Report 
POS Point of Service 
PR Panchayati Raj 
PSU Public Sector Undertaking 

Appendices 
 
169 
 
PTC Performance Tracking Cell 
RAC Rehabilitation Advisory Committee 
R & B Roads & Buildings 
R&DM Revenue and Disaster Management 
R&R Resettlement and Rehabilitation 
RC Refresher Course 
RD Rural Development 
RDE Regional Director of Education 
RIDF Rural Infrastructure Development Fund 
RLTAP Revised Long Term Action Plan 
RoR Record of Rights 
RPDAC Rehabilitation and Periphery Development Advi sory 
Committee 
RRO Resettlement and Rehabilitation Officer 
RSBY Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana 
RTGS Real Time Government Settlement 
RU Ravenshaw University 
RW Rural Works 
SB Savings Bank 
SBD Standard Bid Document 
SC Scheduled Caste 
SCA Special Central Assistance 
SDH Sub-divisional Hospital 
SEs Superintending Engineers 
SES Socio-economic survey 
SGRC State Grievance Redressal Committee 
SGSY Swarnjayanti Gram Swarozgar Yojana  
SIS State Implementing Society 
SLCRR State Level Council on Resettlement and Rehab ilitation 
SLSWCS State Level Single Window Clearance Authorit y 
SLWS  State Labour Welfare Society 
SMED School and Mass Education Department 
SMEL Shyam Metalics & Energy Limited 
SNA State Nodal Agency 
SNO State Nodal Officer 
SPCB State Pollution Control Board 
SPD State Project Director 
SPO State Project Office 

Audit Report (G&SS) for the year ended March 2014 
 
170 
 
SPST Secretarial Practice and Shorthand Typing 
SQL Structured Query Language 
SQM State level Quality Monitor 
SSA Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan 
SSB State Selection Board 
SSD Schedule Tribes and Schedule Caste Development 
SSs Shiksha Sahayaks 
ST Scheduled Tribes 
TOR Terms of Reference 
TPA Third Party Administrator 
TSP Tribal Sub Plan 
UCs Utilisation Certificates 
UEE Universal Elementary Education 
UGC University Grants Commission 
UU Utkal University 
VAL Vedanta Aluminum Limited 
VC Vice Chancellor 
VECs Village Education Committees 
VERs Village Education Registers 
VJC Vocational Junior Colleges 
WPI Wholesale Price Index 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© COMPTROLLER AND 
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA 
www.cag.gov.in  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.agodisha.gov.in 
 
 