Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General
of India

©)
a> a

Allowance of Depreciation
and
Amortisation

Union Government
Department of Revenue - Direct Taxes
Report No. 20 of 2014



Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General
of India

for the year ended March 2013

Performance Audit
on
Allowance of Depreciation
and Amortisation

Union Government
Department of Revenue - (Direct Taxes)
Report No. 20 of 2014

Laid on the table of Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha on


Table of Contents

Contents Pages
A. Preface i
B. Executive Summary iii-v
C. Summary of Recommendations vii
D. Chapter I: Introduction 1-5
D.1 Introduction 1
D.2 Organizational set up 1-2
D.3 Revenue forgone on account of accelerated depreciation 2-3
D.3 Why we chose the topic 3
D.4 Audit Objectives 3
D.5 Audit scope and sample size 4
E. Chapter Il: Systemic issues in Allowance of Depreciation 7-14
E.1 Harmonization of rates of depreciation 7-8
E.2 Unintended benefit of depreciation for the period when asset is 8-9
not used
E.3 Inconsistencies in allowance of depreciation on assets owned 9-10
by Charitable /Religious Trusts and Association of Persons
६.4 Incorrect set-off of unabsorbed depreciation 11
F. Chapter Ill: Allowance of Depreciation 15-34
F.1 Discrepancies relating to allowance of depreciation 16-31
#.2 Discrepancies relating to allowance of additional depreciation 31-33
G. Chapter IV: Allowance of Amortisation 35-38
G.1 Mistake in claim of amortisation expenses u/s 35D 35-36
G.2 Mistake in claim of amortisation expenses u/s 35DDA 36-37
G.3 Other interesting cases 37-38
H. Chapter V: Internal Control Mechanism 39-45
H.1 Non-availability of data relating to additions to fixed assets 39-41
made during the relevant previous year
H.2 Non linking/availability of records relating to unabsorbed 41-43
depreciation of earlier years
H.3 Need for verification of Written Down Value 43
|. Appendices 47-57
J. Abbreviations 59



Preface

This Report for the year ended March 2013 has been prepared for submission to
the President under Article 151 of the Constitution of India.

The Report contains significant results of the performance audit of Allowance of
Depreciation and Amortisation of the Department of Revenue — Direct Taxes of
the Union Government in 2010 to 2013.

The instances mentioned in this Report are those, which came to notice in the
course of test audit for the period 2010 to 2013 conducted during July to
September 2013.

The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards issued
by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

Audit wishes to acknowledge the cooperation received from the Department of
Revenue - Central Board of Direct Taxes at each stage of the audit process.


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

Executive Summary

. Income Tax Act, 1961, (Act) lays down diverse provisions on
depreciation and/or amortisation for tax purposes as deduction to an
assessee/ a company in the course of its business with the intention for
promoting economic growth within the Country. It is important to ensure
that these provisions are properly utilised as per the existing tax laws to avoid
any major revenue loss. The objective of this study was to focus on whether
the systems and procedures are sufficient and in place to ensure compliance
with the provisions of the Act/Rules and instructions issued by Central Board
Direct Taxes (CBDT) in this regard. The study also seeks assurance that
adequate internal control mechanism exists within the Income Tax
Department (ITD) for monitoring the allowance of depreciation in general
and under special circumstances viz., amalgamation, demerger,
reconstruction etc.

. We audited assessments completed during the period FY 10 to FY 13
and all cases of scrutiny assessments, appeal and rectification cases etc,
within the selected units. We covered all circles/wards taken up for regular
audit during the period from July to September 2013. We checked 87,023
records of the assessees. This report contains 725 cases of deficiencies in the
implementation of provisions of the Act with tax effect of < 2,464.06 crore.

. Rates of depreciation on different assets/ block of assets as provided
in the Act differ from those prescribed under the Companies Act 1956 for the
same assets. We found that depreciation as per the Act was higher in 6,267
cases and lower in 5,926 cases by a difference aggregating ¥ 57,665.41 crore
and % 11,754.80 crore respectively. We suggested harmonising these rates as
assessees and ITD make additional efforts in computation of taxable income.
The intended purpose for allowing depreciation in the Act has also not been
evaluated (paragraph 2.2). Due to non-existence of proportionate allowance
of depreciation depending upon the use of assets, assessees have claimed
unintended benefits. We observed that 986 assessees made additions of
various assets worth < 1,41,725.45 crore in the month of March and claimed
depreciation of हैं 15,617.86 crore instead of allowable depreciation of
2,602.61 crore on pro rata basis for the month of March only, the assets
being purchased in the month of March itself (paragraph 2.3). Besides this,
there are inconsistencies in allowance of depreciation on assets owned by
Charitable / Religious Trusts and Association of Persons (paragraph 2.4).


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

A number of mistakes were noticed in compliance with the provisions

of the Act dealing with allowance of depreciation and amortisation and the
relevant circulars/instructions issued by CBDT/ Judicial decisions delivered by
the Apex court and jurisdictional High Courts.

>

Vv

Vv

20 assessees claimed and were allowed depreciation on assets which
were not owned by them at all and resulted in under assessment of
income to that extent involving tax effect of हैं 92.79 crore
(paragraph 3.2).

Assessing Officers (AOs) allowed depreciation to 35 assessees on
assets which were not used in the business which resulted in under
assessment of income to that extent involving tax effect of
र₹ 43.96 crore (paragraph 3.3).

We noticed mistakes in determination of actual cost or written down
value of assets in 29 cases, which resulted in excess allowance of
depreciation involving tax effect of € 85.47 crore (paragraph 3.4).

In 18 cases while calculating depreciation, AOs did not deduct capital
investment subsidies received from the cost of the assets which
resulted in under assessment of income to that extent involving tax
effect of ¥ 35.65 crore (paragraph 3.6).

44 assessees committed mistakes in adoption of correct figure of
depreciation in computation of income involving tax effect of
& 212.97 crore (paragraph 3.8).

In 142 cases, AOs allowed depreciation at the rates which were higher
than the rates provided in Appendix | to Income Tax Rules 1962. The
mistake resulted in excess allowance of depreciation involving tax
effect of € 107.85 crore (paragraph 3.9).

In carrying forward/setting off of depreciation which resulted in under
assessment of income to that extent, we found that in 87 cases, tax
effect was = 694.65 crore (paragraph 3.11).

26 assessees irregularly claimed and was allowed capital expenditure
as revenue expenditure which resulted in under assessment of
income to that extent involving tax effect of %344.97 crore
(paragraph 3.13).

The Act also provides for additional depreciation to assessees and

here also we found mistakes in assessments done by AOs. We found that AOs

committed mistakes in grant of additional depreciation in 99 cases resulting
in under assessment of income to that extent involving tax effect of
% 656.19 crore (paragraph 3.19). In case of 13 assessees, AOs did not allow
additional depreciation during tax holiday which resulted in over assessment

of income to that extent involving tax effect of 3.33 crore (paragraph 3.20).


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

. Regarding allowance of amortisation to assessees, we found that in
case of 12 assessees, 805 irregularly allowed amortisation expenses under
section 35D which resulted in under assessment of income to that extent
involving tax effect of ¥ 6.70 crore (paragraph 4.2). We also found that four
assessees irregularly claimed and were allowed expenses towards
amortisation under section 35DDA which resulted in under assessment of
income to that extent involving revenue impact of %5.38 crore
(paragraph 4.3).

. We have also highlighted the control issues of the ITD relating to
allowance of depreciation and amortisation (paragraphs 5.2 to 5.4).

. The allowance of depreciation and amortisation under the Act is
intended to promote economic growth within the country but in absence of
any monitoring mechanism within ITD, the purpose remained to be achieved.
Besides, AOs committed mistakes in applying provisions relating to
depreciation and amortisation correctly which resulted in under assessments.
CBDT needs to improve the quality of assessments and explore the possibility
of capacity building for AOs for reducing the incidence of mistakes.


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

Summary of Recommendations
Regarding systemic issues of allowance of depreciation

1. The Ministry may consider providing the rates of depreciation under
the Act in conformity with the rates of depreciation applicable as per
the Companies Act.

(Paragraph 2.2)

2. The Ministry may consider providing for depreciation on pro-rata
basis in the Act depending upon usage of the assets during the
relevant previous year subject to the condition that depreciation at
50 per cent of the normal depreciation may be allowed only when
asset is put to use at least for a certain fixed period.

(Paragraph 2.3)

3. The Ministry may clarify whether the depreciation is to be allowed in
addition to capital expenditure on assets towards application of
income thereon in the case of Charitable/ Religious Trusts.

(Paragraph 2.4)

4. CBDT may clarify the applicability of Section 32 (2) of the Act relating
to carry forward and set-off of unabsorbed depreciation allowance
pertaining to the period AY 98 to 02.

(Paragraph 2.5)

Regarding assessment of allowance of depreciation and
amortisation

5. CBDT may devise a mechanism to improve the quality of assessments
and explore the possibility of capacity building for Assessing Officers
for reducing the incidence of mistakes.

(Paragraphs 3.2 to 3.20 and Paragraphs 4.2 to 4.4.)
Regarding internal control mechanism

6. CBDT may consider modifying the e-filing of returns so that
information relating to additions to fixed assets made during the
relevant previous year is available with AOs at the time of assessment.

(Paragraph 5.2)

7. CBDT may make it mandatory for all AOs to obtain a statement of
unabsorbed depreciation assessment year-wise as per latest
assessment order and make it a part of the assessment order after
due verification at the time of finalizing the assessment.

(Paragraph 5.3)

vii


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

8. CBDT may evolve an effective mechanism to verify and ensure the
correctness of written down value of the block of assets carried over.

(Paragraph 5.4)

viii


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

Chapter I: Introduction
11 Introduction

Depreciation is a method of allocating cost of a tangible asset over its useful
life. In every business, apart from current costs, the cost of capital assets
employed in the business has to be recouped over the period of productive
use of the assets. Therefore, most of the businesses depreciate long term
assets for both accounting and tax purposes. Amortisation is paying off debt
in regular installments over a period of time. This method measures the
consumption of value of intangible asset such as a patent or a copyright. The
amortisation and depreciation are often used interchangeably and are similar
accounting concepts which are technically not a correct practice because
amortisation refers to intangible assets and depreciation refers to tangible
assets.

The Income Tax Act, 1961 (Act) provides for depreciation on the assets viz
buildings, machinery, plant or furniture, being tangible assets and know-how,
patents, copyrights, trademarks, licenses, franchises or any other business or
commercial rights of similar nature, being intangible assets acquired on or
after the 01 April, 1998.

Paying off of a debt in regular installments or allowance of deduction of
capital expenses over a specific period of time (usually over the asset's life) is
recorded as amortisation in the financial statements of an entity as a
reduction in the carrying value of the intangible asset in the balance sheet
and as an expense in the income statement.

The entities like individuals, Firms, Association of Persons, Trusts etc maintain
their accounts and claim depreciation as per the Act. However, Companies
maintain their accounts as per the Companies Act 1956 but for purpose of
Income Tax, they compute and claim the depreciation as per the Act.

The Act lays down diverse provisions on depreciation and/or amortisation for
tax purposes as deduction to an assessee/a company in the course of its
business with the intention for promoting economic growth within the
country.

1.2 Organizational set up

Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT), as a part of Department of Revenue,
Ministry of Finance (Ministry), is the apex body charged with administration
of Direct Taxes. CBDT is headed by the Chairperson and comprises of six


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

Members. In addition to their functions and responsibilities, the Chairperson
and Members are responsible for exercising supervisory control over field
offices of the CBDT, known as Zones. Chief Commissioner of Income Tax
(CCIT) heads the field office whose jurisdiction is generally co-terminus with
the state. Each CCIT is assisted by CsIT, Additional/Joint CsIT, Deputy CsIT,
Assistant CsIT and ITOs.

Graph 1.1: Organogram of CBDT

CBDT Chairperson

Members

Chief Commissioners of Income Tax

Commissioners of IT/CIT (A)

Addl./Joint CsIT

DCsIT/ACSIT/ITOs

1.3. Revenue forgone on account of accelerated depreciation

The Receipt Budget of Government of India includes a separate Budget
document titled “Statement of Revenue Forgone”, which seeks to enlist the
revenue impact of tax incentives or tax subsidies being a part of the tax
system. The rates of depreciation under the Act differ from those provided
under Companies Act. The revenue forgone, inter alia, on account of
accelerated depreciation! where rate under Act is more than Companies Act,
is worked out by first determining the difference between the
depreciation/deduction debited to the profits and loss account by the

1 The word ‘accelerated depreciation’ has been used in the Receipt Budget of Government of India.


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

Companies and then allowing depreciation/deduction admissible thereon
under the Act and applying tax rates on the sum so worked out.

Revenue forgone figures on account of accelerated depreciation in the
Receipt Budget for the years starting from FY 09 to FY 13 are shown in Table
1.1.

Table 1.1: Revenue forgone on account of accelerated depreciation

(® in crore)
Financial Total Revenue Revenue Forgoneon % of Revenue Forgone
Year Forgone account of on account of
Accelerated Accelerated
depreciation depreciation to total
Revenue Forgone
FY 09 1,04,471 21,175 20.27
FY 10 1,18,023 29,308 24.83
FY 11 94,738 33,243 35.09
FY 12 1,01,140 34,320 33.93
FY 13 1,13,466 37,831 33.34

Note: The revenue forgone figures are as per Receipts Budget. For FY 13, figures
of revenue forgone are projected.

The above table indicates that percentage of revenue forgone on account of
accelerated depreciation to total revenue forgone ranged between 20.27 to
35.09 per cent during FY 09 and FY 13.

1.4 Why we chose the topic

Depreciation/amortisation play a significant role in determining and
presenting the financial position and results of operation of an enterprise. In
capital intensive sectors, the taxable income becomes negative particularly in
the initial period due to sizeable amount of depreciation. Since the revenue
forgone on account of accelerated depreciation is more than 30 per cent of
total revenue forgone during FY 11 to FY 13, we decided to evaluate the
system of allowance of depreciation and amortisation as provided in the
Income Tax Act, 1961.

Previously, we had reviewed the Scheme of Depreciation Allowance in the
year 1991?. We had also examined the applicability of provisions relating to
depreciation in the year 20043. Therefore, we decided to review the system
of allowance of depreciation and amortisation to see whether the
deficiencies pointed out earlier still exist.

® CRAG Audit Report No. 5 of 1993 (Para No. 2.01 on the Scheme of Depreciation Allowance)
3 CRAG Audit Report No. 13 of 2005 (Chapter 2 - Efficiency and effectiveness of administration and
implementation of Selected Deductions and Allowances under Income Tax Act)


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

1.5 Audit objectives

The Performance Audit is intended to focus on whether:

a. the systems and procedures are sufficient and in place to ensure
compliance with the provisions of the Act/Rules and instructions
issued by CBDT in this regard;

9. adequate internal control mechanism exists for monitoring the
allowance of depreciation in general and under special circumstances
viz., amalgamation, demerger, reconstruction etc;

c, there are lacunae or ambiguities in the provisions of the Act, if any, in
the administration or policy relating to depreciation and amortisation.

1.6 Legal framework

Provisions relating to allowance of depreciation and amortisation are
available in Sections 2(11), 32, 43(1), 43(6), 43A, 35D, 35DD, 35DDA and 72A
of the Act and are briefly described in Appendix 1. Besides, the allowances
are also governed by latest judicial pronouncements as well as
Circulars/Instructions issued by the CBDT. Appendix | & IA to the Income Tax
Rules, 1962, provide for rates of depreciation on different assets, owned and
used by the assessee in the course of business.

1.7 Audit scope

The Performance Audit covered assessments completed during the period
FY 10 to FY 13 and upto the date of audit. In case of major audit observations,
assessment records of previous assessment years (AYs) were also linked
wherever found necessary.

1.8 Sample selection

All cases of scrutiny assessments, appeal and rectification cases, except cases
where salary was the only source of income and there was no impact of
depreciation on income, within the selected units were examined in audit. All
circles/wards taken up for regular audit during the period from July to
September 2013 were treated as selected units.

1.9 Audit findings

We have checked 87,023 records of the assessees pertaining to the period
FY 10 to FY 13 including the period up to the date of audit. Audit findings
have been discussed in subsequent Chapters viz; Systemic issues, Allowances
of Depreciation and Amortisation and Internal Controls. While making
comments on any specific irregularity/ mistake/ lacunae in the Act etc in this
Report, relevant Codal provision/ Judicial pronouncement/ Circular/


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

Instruction have been appropriately mentioned in the beginning of the
paragraph.

1.10 Constraints

ITD did not produce all the records requisitioned in audit. Appendix 2 depicts
the status of the non-production of records in different states all over India.
Another hindrance in identifying the assessees for examination in audit was
the non-maintenance of records of the assessees in company circles availing
benefit of depreciation and amortisation as well.

1.11 Acknowledgement

We held an entry conference with CBDT on 04 September 2013 wherein we
explained the audit objectives, scope and the main focus of audit
examination. The Indian Audit and Accounts Department acknowledges the
co-operation of ITD in facilitating the audit by providing the necessary
records and information in connection with the conduct of this Performance
Audit.

We issued draft Performance Report to the Ministry in April 2014 for their
comments. After receipt of Ministry’s reply in May 2014, we held exit
conference on 29 May 2014 to discuss our findings and recommendations
vis-a-vis Ministry’s comments. We again issued draft Performance Report in
June 2014 containing Ministry’s views and audit stand thereon for their
further comments. We received further comments from the Ministry in June
2014 which have also been appropriately incorporated in the report together
with audit comments thereon.


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

Chapter II: Systemic issues on Depreciation
2.1 Introduction

Income Tax Act, 1961 (Act) deals with various provisions relating to allowance
of depreciation. We have come across cases where unintended benefits were
given to the assessees due to certain provisions of the Act being deficient,
unclear and ambiguous. This has also led to contradictory judicial
pronouncements. The present chapter deals with systemic issues relating to
allowance of depreciation.

Rates of depreciation on different assets/ block of assets as provided in the
Income Tax Rules 1962, differ from those prescribed under the Companies
Act 1956 for the same assets. While computing the taxable income,
additional efforts are made by disallowing depreciation as per Companies
Act and then allowing depreciation as per the Act. Accelerated depreciation
under Income Tax Act does not guarantee conservation of funds to replace
plant and machinery as intended, in the absence of any monitoring
mechanism.

2.2 Harmonisation of rates of depreciation

The rates of depreciation prescribed under the Income Tax Rules, 1962 for
various assets/block of assets are different from those prescribed under the
Companies Act, 19561, The depreciation worked out at the rates prescribed
under the Companies Act, 1956 is debited to the Profit and Loss account of a
company to determine the true profit or loss of the business or the true cost
of production etc. and ultimately is available for replacement of capital
assets.

It has been judicially held® that depreciation is allowed to replace the value of
an asset to the extent it has depreciated during the relevant period of
accounting and as the value has, to that extent, been lost, the corresponding
allowance for depreciation takes place. CBDT has also clarified® that the
depreciation is provided to enable the industry to conserve sufficient funds
to replace plant and machinery at the expiry of its useful life.

The Kelkar Task Force’, in its Report (December 2002), inter alia,
recommended that depreciation claims under the Act be restricted to those
charged to the Profit and Loss account in accordance with the provisions of

The Companies Act 1956 was repealed by the Companied Act 2013 but during course of audit, the Companies
Act, 1956 was effective.

P.K, Badiani Vs. Commissioner of Income Tax, Bomb (1976) 4SCCS62,

CBDT Circular No. 14/2001

Constituted by Government of India for the study of ‘Direct Taxes Reforms including rationalization of tax
structure’.


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

the Companies Act. This was intended to minimize the divergence between
the depreciation amounts charged to the Profit and Loss account and those
claimed for tax purposes. Though the recommendation was partly
implemented by way of revision of the rates of depreciation under the Act,
effective from AY 07, the disparity between the two Acts continued.

We compared the data compiled from various charges on the depreciation
debited to Profit and Loss accounts as per the Companies Act vis-a-vis the
depreciation allowed by ITD. The comparison revealed that depreciation as
per the Income Tax Act was higher in 6,267 cases and was lower in 5,926
cases by a difference aggregating 57,665.41 crore and % 11,754.80 crore
respectively. The depreciation allowed was at par in 10,441 cases in both as
per Companies Act and the Income Tax Act. The details of depreciation
allowed as per both the Acts vis-a-vis difference between them are shown at
Appendix 3A, Appendix 3B and Appendix 3C.

While computing the taxable income, additional efforts are made by
disallowing depreciation as per Companies Act and then allowing
depreciation as per the Act. There is a need to synchronize the rates
prescribed under the Income Tax Rules with the objectives of providing
depreciation with a condition that it is restricted to the corresponding
amount debited in the Profit & Loss account available for replacement of a
specific asset.

CBDT may consider providing the rates of depreciation under the Act in
conformity with the rates of depreciation applicable as per the Companies
Act. If any incentive is intended by way of depreciation, it may be expressly
given by way of incentive instead of depreciation. ITD may carry out a cost
benefit analysis on the issue to ascertain the effectiveness of this incentive
mechanism and decide on harmonizing the depreciation rates with those
under the Companies Act.

Income Tax Act, 1961, does not provide for allowance of depreciation on
pro rata basis depending on the usage of assets. This led to unintended
benefits of deduction to the assessees for the period for which asset was
not used.

2.3 Unintended benefit of depreciation for the period when asset is not
used

Section 32 of the Act provides for depreciation on actual value or written
down value (WDV) of assets at the rates prescribed in Appendix | of Income
Tax Rules, 1962, if the asset is used for 180 days or more and at 50 per cent of


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

the normal rate if the asset is used for one day or more but less than 180
days during the relevant previous year.

We observed from compilation of 986 cases from various charges as shown in
Appendix 4 that assessee made additions of various assets worth
%1,41,725.45 crore in the month of March in different FYs and claimed
depreciation of हैं 15,617.86 crore instead of allowable depreciation of
% 2,602.61 crore on pro rata basis for the month of March only, the assets
being purchased in the month of March itself.

Similarly, additions worth % 31,621.10 crore were made in 450 cases as
shown in Appendix 4A, in the month of September in different FYs, on which
depreciation was allowed for the whole year.

Thus, the assessee got unintended benefit of deduction even for the period
for which asset was not used.

While there is no concept of allowance of depreciation on pro rata basis in
proportion to actual period of usage (as prescribed under Companies Act) in
the Act, the provisions of the Act allow assessees to claim depreciation even
for those periods during which the assets were neither acquired/kept ready
for use nor put to actual use. Consequently, the purpose of amending the Act
to reduce the allowance of depreciation and increase the taxable profits
remained largely unachieved, as the anomaly continued to exist with the
allowance of depreciation at 50 per cent even if the asset is purchased on the
last day of the relevant previous year and put to use only for a day.

CBDT may consider providing for depreciation on pro-rata basis in the Act
depending upon usage of the assets during the relevant previous year subject
to the condition that depreciation at 50 per cent of the normal depreciation
may be allowed only when asset is put to use at least for a certain fixed
period.

There were inconsistencies in allowance of depreciation on assets owned
by Charitable/Religious Trust and Association of Persons due to ambiguity
in law and conflicting judicial decisions which had adverse impact on tax
revenues

2.4 Inconsistencies in allowance of depreciation on assets owned by
Charitable/ Religious Trusts and Association of Persons

Section 11 of the Act provides for exemption to a Charitable or Religious
Trust, subject to certain conditions, in respect of income from property held
thereunder, to the extent such income is applied or accumulated for


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

charitable or religious purposes. CBDT has clarified® that for the purpose of
such exemption, the income of a trust is to be taken in the commercial sense,
and not as computed under the provisions of the Act. In other words, the
income that is eligible for exemption is the one that has been determined as
per the books of account.

While the Bombay’, Punjab and Haryana’® and Delhi! High Courts held that
depreciation would be allowable as a deduction even in such cases where the
capital expenditure had been allowed as an application of income for
charitable purposes, Kerala High ९०५४ had taken a contrary view holding
that such depreciation should be added back to the income of the trust as
disclosed in its books of account in view of Apex court’s decision’? that under
general principles of taxation, double deduction was not intended, unless
clearly expressed.

In Karnataka charge, the application of law/court rulings was not uniformly
followed during assessments of Trusts/AOPs. While some AOs disallowed the
depreciation claims on the cost of assets already allowed as application of
income, others allowed the depreciation claims of the assessees, on the
strength of varied judicial decisions (including Appellate/Tribunal orders).
Para 3.15 on ‘Irregular claim of depreciation against income fully exempt
from tax’ of this report also describes such cases of double deductions.

Absence of enabling provisions and often conflicting judicial decisions on
similar issues had adverse impact on tax revenues as noticed in allowance of
depreciation in addition to capital expenditure on assets towards application
of income in the case of Charitable / Religious Trusts.

Ambiguities in law and contradictory stand taken by judicial authorities on
the application of significant provisions relating to assessment of the
Charitable Trusts need to be resolved so as to clarify whether depreciation to
Trusts is to be allowed or not. This issue having already been highlighted vide
para 5.2 on ‘Inconsistencies in allowance of depreciation’ of Report No.20 of
2013 of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India on ‘Exemptions to
Charitable Trusts and Institutions’ still requires clarification from the Ministry.

® CBDT Circular dated 19 June 1968

3 CIT vs Institute of Banking Personnel Selection (264 ITR 110)
3० CIT vs Market Committee, Pipli (330 ITR 16)

2 DIT vs. Vishwa Jagriti Mission (73 DTR (Del) 195)

® Lissie Medical Institutions vs. CIT (76 DTR (Ker) 372)

28 Escorts Ltd vs. Union of India (199 ITR 43)

10


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

Carry forward and set-off of unabsorbed depreciation for the AY 98 to
AY 02 as per the Act and amendment made in the Act for AY 03 onwards led
to conflicting judicial decisions. The issue has not yet been settled.

2.5 Incorrect set off of unabsorbed depreciation

According to section 32(2) as applicable for the AY 98 to AY 02, unabsorbed
depreciation could be carried forward and set off against business income for
a period of eight years only. The brought forward unabsorbed depreciation
relating to the period prior to AY 98, if any, was to be aggregated with the
unabsorbed depreciation of AY 98 and was required to be treated as
unabsorbed depreciation of AY 98. With effect from AY 03, Section 32(2) was
amended to allow the carry forward and set off of the unabsorbed
depreciation for an indefinite period.

In the case of DCIT vs. Times Guaranty, the ITAT, Mumbai Special Bench held
that unabsorbed depreciation of AY 98 to AY 02 is not eligible for relief
granted by amendment to Section 32(2) in AY 03 and the same could be set
off only against the business income and for eight years only. However, the
Gujarat High Court in the case of General Motors India Pvt. Ltd. Vs DCIT 2010
Taxman 20 (Gujarat) has given ruling that any unabsorbed depreciation
available to an assessee on 01 April 2002 will be dealt with in accordance
with the provisions of Section 32(2) as amended by the Finance Act, 2001.

The ruling of Gujarat High Court has made the statute that existed during the
period AY 98 to AY 02 regarding carry forward and set off of unabsorbed
depreciation, redundant and non-existent. However, the decision rendered
by the Gujarat High Court in the above case was not accepted by the ITD who
filed Special Leave Petition (SLP) with the Supreme Court. Supreme Court has
dismissed the SLP on 11 March 2013 stating that question of law is kept
open.

The issue has not been settled yet. The stand taken by ITAT, Mumbai Special
Bench in the case of DCIT vs. Times Guaranty and by Gujarat High Court in the
case of General Motors India Pvt. Ltd will still continue to apply.

CBDT may clarify the applicability of Section 32 (2) of the Act relating to carry
forward and set-off of unabsorbed depreciation allowance pertaining to the
period AY 98 to AY 02 whether depreciation is to be carried forward for set-
off beyond 8 years or not.

11


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

2.6

Recommendations

We recommend that

The Ministry may consider providing the rates of depreciation under
the Act in conformity with the rates of depreciation applicable as per
the Companies Act.

The Ministry stated (May 2014) that the Companies Act generally
provides depreciation on straight line method based on the estimated
life and residual value of the assets. However, the Income Tax Act
provides depreciation normally on written down value method to
certain specified assets for achieving certain economic and social
objectives. Vide IT (Sixth Amendment) Rules, 2005, the rates of
depreciation for eligible assets have been rationalised after taking into
account estimated life and gradual reduction in rates of income tax
over the years. Further, the rates of depreciation specified under the
Companies Act are for the purpose of ascertaining the correct amount
of commercial profit earned by a company whereas the Income Tax
Act prescribes rates of accelerated depreciation which is more than
the commercial depreciation for encouraging investment in certain
sectors/areas like manufacturing, clean energy, pollution control
equipment’s etc. As the policy objectives are different, the proposal for
aligning the rate of depreciation under the Income Tax Act on the lines
of Companies Act is not feasible.

Audit is of the opinion that though the policy objectives are different,
there is a need to examine depreciation norms in totality and align
the rates under the two Acts wherever possible, as the existing
practice involves preparing different sets of accounts and it also
deprives the exchequer of its legitimate tax revenue.

The Ministry further replied (June 2014) that if the rates of
depreciation are aligned with the Companies Act, the requirement of
preparing separate statement of depreciation for income-tax purposes
will not be eliminated because of the provisions under the Act.

Audit is of the opinion that the more the alignment of depreciation
rates is made, the less will be the chances of errors in calculation of
depreciation.

The Ministry may consider providing for depreciation on pro-rata
basis in the Act depending upon usage of the assets during the
relevant previous year subject to the condition that depreciation at
50 per cent of the normal depreciation may be allowed only when the
asset is put to use at least for a certain fixed period.

12


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

The Ministry stated (May 2014) that the Act provides 50 per cent of
allowable depreciation when the asset is not put to use for not more
than 180 days. The existing provision is simple and easy to monitor
administratively. Further, the provision for allowing 50 per cent of
depreciation on the assets purchased at the fag end of the previous
year encourages the tax payer to invest its income in productive asset
instead of distributing the same to the owners.

Audit is of the view that the Ministry may make provision for
allowance of 50 per cent of allowable depreciation only when asset is
put to use at least for three months with a view to minimise the loss
to Government exchequer. Further, for easy monitoring the provision
on depreciation, the Ministry may use existing IT tools.

The Ministry further stated (June 2014) that in case condition of three
months is imposed for claiming depreciation, it is likely that in the last
quarter of the year, the assessees would postpone the investment in
assets to the next year and this may not be desirable for the growth
and development of the country

Audit is of the opinion that the comments of the Ministry are based
on presumptions only.

The Ministry may clarify whether the depreciation is to be allowed in
addition to capital expenditure on assets towards application of
income thereon in the case of Charitable/ Religious Trusts.

The Ministry stated (May 2014) that in the scheme of Trust taxation,
first the income has to be computed after deduction of expenses and
thereafter, exemption is granted to the extent the income is applied.
There are, therefore, two aspects involved:- one of deduction and the
other of condition of application. Capital expenditure of the Trust is
application of income, and to the extent that it is so applied, the
amount applied is excluded from the income. This may, therefore, not
be a case of double deduction. Further, the judicial decisions on
interpretation of current law relating to taxation of the Trusts has
been of varying nature, the claim of depreciation in the case of Trusts
in respect of assets for which relief by way of application of income is
claimed, can only be denied if the law is specifically amended.

Audit is of the opinion that Ministry may initiate action to make
requisite amendment in the Act with a view to avoid the concept of
double deduction and contradictory decisions of the Judiciary on the
same issue.

13


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

The Ministry stated (June 2014) that the matter will be examined by
CBDT.

d. CBDT may clarify the applicability of Section 32(2) of the Act relating
to carry forward and set-off of unabsorbed depreciation allowance
pertaining to the period AY 98 to 02.

The Ministry stated (May and June 2014) that the matter has been
referred to Central Technical Committee for forming Departmental
View and taking further necessary action, if required.

The Ministry’s final stand is awaited.

14


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

Chapter III: Allowance of Depreciation

3.1 Introduction

Section 32 of the Act provides for allowance of depreciation on assets for tax
purposes as deduction to an assessee. Appendix | & IA to the Income Tax
Rules, 1962 (Rule), provides for rates of depreciation on different assets,
owned and used by the assessee during the course of business. The present
chapter deals with audit issues relating to deficiencies in applying the
provisions of the Act and relevant Rules/Judicial pronouncements by the
Assessing Officers (AOs) during assessments. Category wise details of
mistakes in assessment are shown in Table 3.1.

Table 3.1: Nature of mistakes with its tax effect

Nature of Mistakes and Para Number of the Report Cases Tax effect
(@ in crore)

1. Depreciation claimed and allowed on assets not 20 92.79
owned/leased out by the assessee (Para 3.2)

2. Depreciation claimed on assets not used in business 35 43.96
(Para 3.3)

3. Mistakes in determination of actual cost or written 29 85.47
down value of assets (Para 3.4)

4, Depreciation allowed on assets disposed off (Para 3.5) 9 1.99

5. Capital investment subsidies not deducted from cost 18 35.65
(Para 3.6)

6. Mistakes in carrying over the written down value of 6 7.15
assets (Para 3.7)

7. Mistakes in adoption of correct figure and errors in 44 212.97
computation (Para 3.8)

8. Adoption of incorrect rate of depreciation (Para 3.9) 142 107.85

9. Excess allowance of depreciation on assets used for 29 25.03
less than 180 days (Para 3.10)

10. Mistakes in carry forward/set off of depreciation 87 694.65
(Para 3.11)

11. Mistake in carry forward and set off of unabsorbed 5 35.45
depreciation relating to amalgamating companies
(Para 3.21)

12. Irregular claim of capital expenditure as revenue 26 344.97
expenditure (Para 3.13)

13. Depreciation allowed on ineligible items (Para 3.14) 27 34.29

14. Irregular Claim of depreciation against income fully 48 27.28
exempt from tax (Para 3.15)

15. Mistakes in grant of additional depreciation (Para 3.19) 99 656.19

16. Other mistakes (Para 3.16 — 3.18, 3.20) 84 30.82

Total 708 2436.51

15


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

3.2 Depreciation claimed and allowed on assets not owned/lease out by
the assessee

Section 32 of the Act provides for depreciation at prescribed rate on Written
Down Value (WDV) of tangible or intangible assets including business or
commercial right of similar nature subject to fulfillment of certain conditions.
Primary condition is that the asset must be owned, wholly or partly, by the
assessee. In case of co-ownership of the asset, co-owners are entitled to
claim depreciation to the extent of value of the asset owned by each
co-owner. In case of the Partnership firm, only the firm is entitled to claim
depreciation on immovable assets brought by the Partners as their capital
contribution. As regards ownership in case of finance lease, it has been
judicially held** that only the lessee can be treated as owner of the asset in
case of a finance lease. It is he who is entitled to claim depreciation as per
law. No depreciation can be allowed to the lessor in such a case of a genuine
finance lease. Where a building is taken on lease, depreciation is allowable
only on the capital expenditure incurred on the building by the assessee.

In Chandigarh UT, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra,
Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu charges, we found that 20 assessees claimed and
were allowed depreciation on assets which were not owned by them at all.
Irregular allowance of deprecation on assets not owned by the assessees,
resulted in under assessment of income to that extent involving tax effect of
% 92.79 crore (See Box 3.1).

Box 3.1: Illustrative cases on assets not owned/leased out by assessees

a. In Gujarat, CIT Il Anmedabad charge, M/s Mundra International Container
Terminal Ltd., for AY 08 and AY 09, claimed and was allowed depreciation of
& 74.72 crore on ‘infrastructure usage facility’ @ 25 per cent on WDV treating the
same as ‘intangible asset’ which was not in order on the ground that the ‘right to
use infrastructure facility’ was not similar to ‘intangible assets’ as stated in section
32 of the Act. Instead, it was deemed right to use a tangible asset i.e.
infrastructure. Further, the owner of the infrastructure (Mundra Port & SEZ Ltd.)
also claimed depreciation on the same asset like marine structure and dredging CT
for the same AY as seen from their Balance Sheet and as such depreciation
claimed by the assessee should have been disallowed. Omission to do so resulted
in excess allowance of depreciation of ¥ 74.72 crore involving short levy of tax of
25.25 crore.

ITD did not accept (February 2013) the audit observation stating that the assessee
claimed and was allowed depreciation on the license to use the infrastructure

M/s indusind Bank Ltd vs Addl CIT Special Bench of ITAT Mumbai, read with Supreme Court decision in the case of
M/s ABB Ltd, The decision was re-affirmed by ITAT Bench Pune in the case of M/s Bajaj Auto finance Ltd vs ACIT.

16


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

re ee ee eel ae कण शोर जिद लवण | and not as the owner of the infrastructure. Further, the licenses,
franchisees etc. are categorized as intangible assets under the block of assets. The
reply is not tenable as the assessee had claimed the depreciation on Infrastructure
Usage facility as an intangible asset, which is not in the nature of a business or
commercial rights as mentioned under the provisions of section 32(1) (ii) of the
Act.

9. In Maharashtra, CIT-7, Mumbai charge, M/s Vizag Seaport Pvt. Ltd., for the
AY 08, claimed and was allowed depreciation of = 17.53 crore on ‘Project berth’ at
the rate of ten per cent treating the same as building which was not in order. The
‘Project berth’ belonged to Vishakhapatnam Port Trust and as such the assessee
was not the owner of the berth and therefore not entitled for depreciation.
Omission to disallow the depreciation on asset not owned by the assessee
resulted in under assessment of income of % 17.53 crore involving potential short
levy of tax of 5.90 crore. ITD accepted the observation and took remedial action
(January 2013) under Section 147.

८ In Maharashtra, CIT-3, Mumbai charge, M/s Reliance Corporate IT Park
Ltd. for the AY 11, received total lease rent of 37.14 crore comprising of principal
amount of % 15.69 crore and finance charge of हैं 21.45 crore during relevant
previous year. The assessee had offered entire lease rent for taxation and had
claimed depreciation of हैं 34.75 crore on Plant and Machinery given on finance
lease. As per provisions ibid, the assessee, being lessor, was not entitled for
depreciation and as a corollary to this, the principal amount of % 15.69 crore was
not taxable. Omission to disallow the depreciation on assets not owned by the
assessee resulted in under assessment of income of 19.06 crore with consequent
potential short levy of tax of 5.89 crore.

d. In Karnataka, CIT-| Bangalore charge, M/s Cisco Systems Capital (India) Pvt.
Ltd. for AY 09, claimed depreciation of % 68.32 crore on networking equipment
given on ‘Finance Lease’ by categorising them under ‘computers including
a AO while finalizing the assessments disallowed excess claim of
depreciation of हैं 51.24 crore categorising the same as Plant and Machinery.
However, no depreciation was allowable on the ‘Finance Lease’ assets since the
assessee being lessor would not be considered as owner in view of the decision
cited above. Omission to disallow the depreciation resulted in excess allowance of

2 17.08 crore involving short levy of tax of = 9 crore.

The audit observations indicate that certain AOs are allowing depreciation on
assets without examining the element of ownership of the assets, as per one
of the requirements for claiming the depreciation.

3.3 Depreciation claimed on assets not used in business

Where the asset is not used for the purpose of business, depreciation under
section 32 of the Act shall not be allowed. Further, where the asset is not

v7


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

used exclusively for the purpose of business, depreciation shall be allowed
proportionately with regard to such usage of the asset.

In Andhra Pradesh, Chandigarh UT, Delhi, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West
Bengal charges, 35 assessees claimed and were allowed depreciation on
assets which were not used in the business. Irregular allowance of
deprecation on assets not used in the business resulted in under assessment
of income to that extent involving tax effect of ¥ 43.96 crore (See Box 3.2).

Box 3.2: Illustrative cases on depreciation claimed on assets not used in business

a. In Maharashtra, CIT-5, Mumbai charge, M/s Maharashtra State Road
Development Corp. Ltd. for AY 08, was allowed depreciation of € 333.93 crore
which included depreciation of % 46.31 crore on three incomplete projects viz = 9.15
crore on Bandra Worli Sealink Project, ¥ 35.23 crore on Nagpur Ahmedabad Sinnar
Ghoti Mumbai Project, and हैं 1.93 crore on Kalyan Bhiwandi Shilphata. Since these
projects were not completed by the end of FY 07, allowance of depreciation on
these projects was irregular. Irregular allowance of depreciation aggregating हैं 46.31
crore involved potential short levy of tax of हैं 15.59 crore. ITD accepted (July 2013)
the observation and took remedial action under Section 147 of the Act.

b. In West Bengal region, CIT-IV charge, Kolkata, in respect of M/s Durgapur
Chemicals Ltd. for AY 10, depreciation of %12.83 crore was allowed during
assessment (December 2011) on new assets which were installed but not put to use
for production. This resulted in excess allowance of depreciation of identical amount

involving potential tax effect of = 4.36 crore.

Illustrations above indicate that ITD is allowing depreciation on assets
without examining of the fact whether the asset was used by the assessee
during the course of business on which depreciation was claimed.

3.4 Mistakes in determination of actual cost or written down value of
assets

Under section 43(1) of the Act, “Actual Cost” of an asset means its actual cost
to the assessee including the expenses on installation etc, if the part of the
cost is met directly or indirectly by the third person, the cost to the assessee
will be reduced by such amount borne by that person.

We noticed mistakes in 29 cases in determination of actual cost or written
down value of assets in Andhra Pradesh, Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Delhi,
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttarakhand and West Bengal charges, which resulted in excess allowance of
depreciation involving tax effect of ¥ 85.47 crore (See Box 3.3).

18


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

== 3.3; Illustrative case on Mistakes in determination of actual cost
or written down value of assets

a. In Madhya Pradesh, CIT Bhopal charge, M/s Madhya Kshetra Vidyut
Vitaran Co. Ltd. added twice the assets available at the beginning of the year to
the new assets added during the previous year relevant to AY 11. Thus excess
claim of depreciation amounting to ¥ 121.48 crore after setting off the current
year’s losses resulted in short levy of tax of 38.82 crore.

9. In Karnataka, CIT Mysore charge, AO finalized the assessment of
M/s Chamundeshwari Electricity Supply Company Ltd., for AY 10, at loss of
% 239.39 crore after disallowing depreciation of € 12.49 crore claimed on capital
subsidy / grant received on account of fixed assets. The assessee filed revised
depreciation statements for AY 09, showing closing WDV at % 231.33 crore and
See | the depreciation claim pertaining to AY 10 worked out to % 35.97 crore
against which depreciation of हैं 56.64 crore was allowed in assessment. The
omission resulted in over assessment of loss by हैं 20.66 crore involving potential
tax effect of € 7.02 crore.

From the above, it is evident that AOs while finalizing the assessment
committed mistakes in determining the actual cost of WDV of assets which
resulted in excess allowance of depreciation.

3.5 Depreciation allowed on assets disposed of

As per Section 43(6) of the Act, WDV of any block of assets in respect of any
previous year means aggregate of the WDV of all the assets falling within that
block of assets at the beginning of the previous year and adjusted by increase
in the actual cost of any asset falling within that block, acquired during the
previous year and by the reduction of the moneys payable in respect of any
asset falling within that block which is sold or discarded or demolished or
destroyed during that previous year together with the amount of scrap value,
so that amount of such reduction does not exceed the WDV as so increased.
Further, as per explanation below Sub-Section 4 of Section 41, moneys
payable in respect of any building, machinery, plant or furniture include any
insurance, salvage or compensation moneys payable or the price for which
such assets are sold.

In Bihar, Chandigarh UT, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Kerala, Tamil
Nadu and Uttar Pradesh charges, nine assessees claimed and were allowed
depreciation on assets disposed of. Irregular allowance of depreciation on
assets disposed of resulted in under assessment of income to that extent
involving tax effect of € 1.99 crore (See Box 3.4).

19


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

Box 3.4: Illustrative cases on depreciation allowed on assets disposed of

a. In Tamil Nadu, CIT-IIl, Chennai charge, M/s Indowind Energy Ltd, for AY 11,
had sold energy saving devices for a consideration of हैं 3.13 crore during the
relevant previous year and irregularly claimed and was allowed depreciation of
%1.25 crore thereon. Irregular allowance of depreciation involved potential tax
effect of € 1.06 crore.

b. In Maharashtra, CIT-1, Mumbai charge, in the case of a company M/s Spenta
International Ltd., for AY 07, a fire broke out at company premises at Palghar in
December 2004 damaging 38 knitting machines and stock in hand. The company
filed a claim of % 4.39 crore with insurance company. Initially the company got
%1 crore as advance in FY 06 and thereafter the block of ‘Plant and machinery’ was
credited by %3.19 crore in the books of account. However, while calculating
depreciation, no reduction was made from the WDV of Plant and Machinery
destroyed by fire. Irregular allowance of depreciation of हैं 87.23 lakh in FY 06 and
र₹ 44.35 lakh in FY 07 resulted in short levy of tax of € 55.31 lakh including interest.

The cases mentioned above indicate that the AOs allowed depreciation on
the assets which were already disposed of and the assessees were no longer
in possession thereof.

3.6 Capital investment subsidies not deducted from cost

As per Explanation 10 to Section 43(1) of the Act, where a portion of the cost
of an asset acquired by the assessee has been met directly or indirectly by
the Central Government or a State Government or any authority established
under any law or by any other person, in the form of a subsidy or grant or
reimbursement (by whatever name called), then, so much of the cost as is
relatable to such subsidy or grant or reimbursement shall not be included in
the actual cost of the asset to the assessee.

In Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu,
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal charges, we noticed that 18 assessees while
calculating the depreciation did not deduct capital investment subsidies
received from the cost of the assets. Non deduction of capital investment
subsidies from the cost of the asset resulted in under assessment of income
to that extent involving tax effect of € 35.65 crore (See Box 3.5).

Box 3.5: Illustrative cases on Capital investment subsidies not deducted from cost

a. In Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow charge, AO for AY 11, wrongly allowed
depreciation of हैं 86.57 crore to M/s Madhyanchal Vidyut Vitran Nigam Ltd., as
against हैं 938 crore admissible under the Act. We noticed that the depreciation

allowed of % 86.57 crore included depreciation on the cost of assets, which was

20



Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

कल te tat] met out of the grants received from the Government/APDRP and Public
contributions. The omission to disallow such claim resulted in excess computation of
loss of 77.19 crore involving potential tax effect of ¥ 23.85 crore.

विलय In Maharashtra, CIT-10 Mumbai charge, M/s Maharashtra State Electricity
Transmission Company Ltd., for AY 08, received capital subsidy of ~ 101.03 crore
towards cost of fixed assets comprising of % 32.45 crore as outright contribution and
grant of % 68.58 crore. However, the AO did not reduce capital subsidy so received
from the cost of asset and allowed depreciation on full value. The omission resulted
in excess allowance of depreciation of € 15.15 crore involving short levy of potential
tax of € 5.15 crore. ITD took remedial action (March 2013) under Section 143(3) read
with Section 263 of the Act.

In above cases, capital subsidy/grants/contributions received by the assessee
from different sources reduced the actual cost/WDV of the assets, even then
the AOs allowed depreciation on full value of the assets.

3.7 Mistakes in carrying over the written down value of assets

Written Down Value of an asset or block of assets as worked out as per
provision of Section 43(6) of the Act is required to be carried over correctly to
the next year as opening WDV to give a true and fair view of the accounts.

We observed in Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu charges
that six assessees committed mistakes in carrying over the WDV of assets to
the next year as opening WDV which resulted in excess allowance of
depreciation involving tax effect of € 7.15 crore (See Box 3.6).

Sean eee 3.6: Illustrative case on mistakes in carrying over the WDV of assets

In Andhra Pradesh, CIT-IIl| Hyderabad charge, M/s Salivahana Green Energy Ltd.,
for AY 11, adopted opening WDV of the block of assets at हैं 69.70 crore in the
depreciation schedule for AY 11 as against closing WDV of हैं 53.39 crore of the
[foovotmottseseee ened as on 31 March 2009. Excess carry over of WDV of % 16.31 crore involved
short levy of tax of ¥ 5.95 crore.

AOs omitted to check the correctness of the written down value of assets
carried over to the next year by the assessees in above cases.

3.8 Mistakes in adoption of correct figure and errors in computation

Section 143(3) of the Act provides that in a scrutiny assessment, the AO is
required to make a correct assessment of the total income or loss of the
assessee and determine the correct sum payable by him or refundable to him
on the basis of such assessment.

21



Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

We found in Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Delhi, Chandigarh, Kerala,
Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, West Bengal and Tamil Nadu
charges that 44 assessees committed mistakes in adoption of correct figure
of depreciation in computation of income involving tax effect of = 212.97
crore (See Box 3.7).

Box 3.7: Illustrative cases on mistakes in adoption of correct figure
and errors in computation

a. In Madhya Pradesh, CIT Bhopal charge, in the case of M/s MPMKVVNL, AO
adopted depreciation for the AY 10 at ¥ 613.81 crore instead of correct amount of
हैं 99.07 crore as per the Act. The mistake resulted in excess allowance of
depreciation of = 514.74 crore involving tax effect of हैं 154.42 crore.

b. In Delhi, CIT- IV Delhi charge, M/s Idea Cellular Towers Infrastructure Ltd.
for AY 11 claimed depreciation @15 per cent on passive infrastructure assets
treating them as “Plant and Machinery”. AO considered Plant and Machinery as
building and allowed depreciation @10 per cent and added back % 11.21 crore only
in the income which was correctly worked out to हैं 74.72 crore towards 5 per cent
excess claimed. The mistake resulted in excess allowance of depreciation of
% 63.51 crore involving potential tax effect of 21.59 crore.

८. In Tamil Nadu, CIT-| Chennai charge, while finalising the assessment of
M/s Dhanus Technologies Ltd., for the AY 11, AO disallowed interest payment of
%2.85 crore instead of depreciation of हैं 28.10 crore which was required to be
disallowed. The mistake resulted in excess allowance of depreciation to the extent
of % 25.25 crore, involving short levy of tax of % 11.58 crore including interest
under section 234B.

Therefore, AOs committed mistakes in adoption of correct figure of
depreciation in computation of income which resulted in under assessments.

3.9 Adoption of incorrect rate of depreciation

Depreciation on any block of assets shall be calculated at the rates specified
in Appendix | and in respect of any class of assets relating to power
generation undertakings at the rates indicated in Appendix | A to the Income
Tax Rules, 1962.

We observed in Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chandigarh, Delhi, Gujarat,
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa,
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West Bengal charges
that 142 assessees claimed and were allowed depreciation at rates which
were higher than the rates admissible under the Act. The mistake resulted in
excess allowance of depreciation involving tax effect of 107.85 crore (See
Box 3.8).

22


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

eee ee errant | 3.8: Illustrative cases on adoption of incorrect rate of depreciation

a. In Andhra Pradesh, CIT-IV Hyderabad charge, M/s Ushodaya Enterprises,
for the AY 08 and AY 09, claimed and was allowed depreciation on
Cinematographic films/TV serials at 25 per cent treating them as intangible assets.
Since the film library is not in the form of technical knowhow or copyrights but
= TV programs contained in CDs/storage media which were being used as
tools in the business activity and hence the same should have been treated as
Plant and Machinery, attracting depreciation at 15 per cent. The mistake resulted
in short computation of income aggregating ~ 116.78 crore involving tax effect of
52.79 crore. ITD took remedial action (May 2011) under section 263 of the Act
for the AY 08.

b. In Kerala, CIT-Trivandrum charge, in the case of M/s Asianet Satcom Ltd.
for AY 09, AO allowed depreciation on set top boxes and modems supplied to
Cable TV/Internet subscribers at the rate of 60 per cent applicable to computers
instead of 15 per cent treating them as Plant and Machinery. Omission resulted in
excess allowance of depreciation of % 6.16 crore involving potential tax effect of
%.2.09 crore. ITD accepted and rectified (August 2013) the mistake under section
263 of the Act.

The above cases indicate that AOs allowed depreciation at rates which were
higher than the rates admissible under the Act. This resulted in excess
allowance of depreciation.

3.10 Excess allowance of depreciation on assets used for less than 180
days

Proviso to section 32(1) of the Act provides for depreciation @ 50 per cent of
the normal rate on asset which is acquired and put to use during the relevant
previous year for the purposes of business or profession for a period of less
than 180 days.

In Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chandigarh, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Rajasthan,
Tamil Nadu and West Bengal charges, we observed that 29 assessees while
calculating business income claimed depreciation at normal rate of
depreciation though the assets were used less than 180 days. Excess
allowance of depreciation resulted in under assessment of income to that
extent involving tax effect of = 25.03 crore (See Box 3.9).

Box 3.9: Illustrative cases on excess allowance of depreciation on assets
used for less than 180 days

a. In Andhra Pradesh, CIT-IIl Hyderabad charge, AO, in the case of M/s Sagar
Cements Pvt. Ltd., for AY 10, allowed depreciation on Plant and Machinery at
normal rate though the same were put to use for less than 180 days for the

23



Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

purpose of business. The mistake resulted in excess allowance of depreciation of
& 37.64 crore involving potential tax effect of € 12.79 crore.

b. In Karnataka, CIT LTU Bengaluru charge, AO, in the case of M/s IBM India
(P) Ltd., for the AY 07, disallowed software expenses of % 99.36 crore treating the
same as capital asset, and thereafter allowed depreciation of ~ 59.62 crore
thereon at full rate of 60 per cent. We observed that the amount on which AO
allowed depreciation was required to be bifurcated depending upon the use of
assets for more than 180 days and the lesser period. Consequently, the allowable
depreciation worked out to % 47.40 crore, as against हैं 59.62 crore allowed by AO.
The mistake resulted in excess allowance of depreciation of हैं 12.22 crore,
involving short levy of tax of % 6.38 crore.

The above cases indicate that AOs allowed normal rate of depreciation
though the assets were used less than 180 days.

३.11 Mistakes in carry forward/set off of depreciation

As per provisions of the Act, where for any AY, depreciation/unabsorbed
depreciation cannot be set off against business income or any other income
in the relevant previous year, it shall be carried forward indefinitely and set
off against any income taxable in the succeeding assessment years. Further,
section 72A(4)(b) of the Act provides that in the case of a demerger where
the loss and unabsorbed depreciation is not directly relatable to the
undertakings transferred, the accumulated loss and unabsorbed depreciation
shall be apportioned between the demerged company and the resulting
company in the same proportion in which the assets of the undertakings are
retained by the demerged company and resulting company and be allowed to
be carried forward and set off in the hands of the demerged company or the
resulting company as the case may be.

In Andhra Pradesh, Chandigarh, Delhi, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala,
Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal charges, we observed
mistakes in carry forward/set off of depreciation in 87 cases which resulted in
under assessment of income to that extent involving tax effect of 694.65
crore (See Box 3.10).

Box 3.10: Illustrative cases on mistakes in carry forward/set off of depreciation

a. In Maharashtra, CIT-3 Mumbai charge, in the case of M/s Idea Cellular Ltd.
for the AY 10, the AO allowed set off of brought forward unabsorbed depreciation of
% 740.51 crore as against available brought forward unabsorbed depreciation of
137.24 crore. During the year, demerger of the company took place and 13.98 per
cent of the total asset was transferred to Idea Cellular Tower Infrastructure Ltd.
(01 i.e. resulting company. Therefore, हैं 19.19 crore (being 13.98 per cent of
% 137.24 crore) was required to be transferred to the resulting company and as such

24


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

या 86.02 per cent of unabsorbed depreciation was available for set off. Excess set
off of unabsorbed depreciation of ~ 622.46 crore resulted in under assessment of
income to that extent involving short levy of tax of 266.08 crore including interest.

9. In Rajasthan, CIT-2 Jaipur charge, while finalising the assessment of
M/s Rajasthan Rajya Vidyut Utpadan Nigam Ltd., for AY 11, AO set off brought
forward unabsorbed depreciation of < 101.57 crore out of = 958.06 crore pertaining
to the period up to AY 03 and the balance of ~ 856.49 crore was allowed to carry
forward to subsequent years. We observed that the unabsorbed depreciation of
% 958.06 crore was reduced to % 733.08 crore during scrutiny assessment for AY 10.
Thus, there was excess carry forward of unabsorbed depreciation of हैं 224.98 crore
pertaining to earlier periods. Further, while completing scrutiny assessment for the
AY 11, the unabsorbed depreciation of हैं 134.81 crore pertaining to AY 10 was
allowed to be carried forward to subsequent years which was not available at all.
Excess carry forward of ~ 359.80 crore involved potential tax effect of $122.29
crore. ITD accepted the observation and issued notice under Section 154 on 24
September 2013.

(om In Tamil Nadu CIT-III Chennai charge, in the case of M/s Thiru Arooran
Sugars Ltd, for AY 11, AO set off entire income of % 97.78 crore towards brought
forward business loss and unabsorbed depreciation pertaining to earlier years as
against the available amount of % 7.04 crore relating to unabsorbed business loss
and % 34.24 crore pertaining to unabsorbed depreciation. The mistake resulted in
excess set off of unabsorbed depreciation of % 56.50 crore involving a tax effect of
& 26.42 crore.

d. In West Bengal, CIT-I Kolkata charge, in the case of M/s West Bengal State
Sao eee Transmission Company Ltd., for AY 10 and AY 11, AO allowed carry
forward of unabsorbed depreciation of ¥ 155.37 crore pertaining to AY 08 whereas
the actual amount of unabsorbed depreciation was % 79.00 crore. The mistake
resulted in excess allowance of carry forward of unabsorbed depreciation of
% 76.37 crore involving potential tax effect of ¥ 25.96 crore

The above cases indicate that AOs committed mistakes in carry forward/set
off of depreciation which resulted in under assessment of income.

3.12 Mistake in carry forward and set off of unabsorbed depreciation
relating to amalgamating companies

As per the provisions of section 72A, the brought forward losses of
amalgamated company will be eligible for set off against the income of the
amalgamating company subject to fulfillment of certain conditions.

We found mistakes in carry forward/set off of unabsorbed depreciation
relating to amalgamating companies in five cases in Andhra Pradesh, Kerala,
Orissa and Tamil Nadu charges which resulted in under assessment of income
to that extent involving tax effect of ¥ 35.45 crore (See Box 3.11).

25



Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

Box 3.11; Illustrative case on mistake in carry forward and set off of unabsorbed
depreciation relating to amalgamating companies

In Andhra Pradesh, CIT-III Hyderabad charge, in the case of M/s SHV Energy Pvt. Ltd,
for AY 10, AO allowed carry forward and set off of unabsorbed depreciation of
% 49.51 crore relating to amalgamated company (M/s SHB Energy LPG Infrastructure
Pvt. Ltd.) instead of correct amount of % 17.64 crore. Besides, brought forward
business loss of % 14.18 crore (pertaining to AY 01) was also set off though no such
loss was available for set off. Excess set off of रैं 46.05 crore of unabsorbed
depreciation/ brought forward business loss resulted in understatement of income
to that extent involving potential tax effect of ¥ 15.65 crore.

The above cases indicate that AOs committed mistakes in carry forward/set
off of depreciation relating to amalgamating companies which resulted in
under assessment of income.

3.13 Irregular claim of capital expenditure as revenue expenditure

Capital expenditure is not allowable while computing taxable income, unless
the law expressly so provides. It has been judicially held’> that payment of
non-compete fees falls within the capital field and therefore deduction
cannot be allowed as a revenue expenditure. Instead, depreciation is allowed
on Know-how, Patents, Copyrights, Trade marks, Licences, franchise or
Commercial rights of similar nature.

During test check in Andhra Pradesh, Chandigarh, Delhi, Gujarat, Karnataka,
Kerala, Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu charges, we found
that 26 assessees irregularly claimed and were allowed capital expenditure as
revenue expenditure which resulted in under assessment of income to that
extent involving tax effect of € 344.97 crore (See Box 3.12).

as revenue expenditure

a. In Maharashtra, CIT-3 Mumbai charge, in the case of M/s Idea Cellular Ltd.
for the AY 10, AO allowed deduction of = 543.98 crore on account of non-compete
fee which was not allowable as revenue expenditure in terms of judicial
pronouncement. Omission to disallow non-compete fee as revenue expenditure
resulted in under assessment of income of हैं 543.98 crore involving tax effect of
रू 245.91 crore including interest. Further, during the year under consideration, the
assessee had received fixed assets under finance lease. The assessee in his books of
accounts had capitalized ~ 147.62 crore being principal component paid to the

5 Sharp Business System vs Commissioner OF Income Tax (Special Bench | of Delhi High Court - 05
November 2012)

26



Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

ee cee पोल पथ या ted nth ne area lessor under finance lease and claimed as revenue expenditure which was reduced

to हैं 142.76 crore in the revised return and allowed accordingly. The assessee was
entitled for depreciation on this amount and was not entitled for deduction of the
amount as revenue expenditure. This omission resulted in under assessment of
income of हैं 121.35 crore with consequent short levy of tax of हैं 54.86 crore
including interest. Total short levy of tax worked out to ~ 300.77 crore including
interest.

9. In Tamil Nadu, CIT Salem charge, AO allowed M/s Rasi Seeds (P) Ltd., for
AY 10, ₹ 76.16 crore as sub-license fee debited to the Profit and Loss account.
Audit observed that the assessee had incurred expenditure of = 76.16 crore for
entering into sub-licence agreement with M/s Mahyco Monsanto Biotech (I) Ltd.
for employing the technology for BT Genes and for transfer of technology and use
of trademark, which was in the nature of capital expenditure qualifying for
depreciation @ 25 per cent only. Omission to treat the same as capital
expenditure and restricting the deduction to the extent of eligible depreciation
resulted in excess allowance of deduction of ~ 57.12 crore involving tax effect of
% 19.41 crore. The ITD did not accept (August 2013) the audit observation stating
that it was allowable as revenue expenditure. The reply is not tenable in view of
codal provisions of the Act.

om In Karnataka, CIT-LTU, Bangalore charge, in the case of M/s Canara Bank, for
AY 09, AO allowed expenditure of = 15.89 crore, charged to its Profit and Loss
account, towards creation of new logo under brand building initiative undertaken
with the objective of increasing the customer base. As the expenditure incurred
‘enn mh Om enduring benefit to the assessee, it should have been treated as capital
attracting depreciation admissible to an intangible asset. Omission resulted in under
assessment of income of € 11.91 crore involving short levy of tax of € 5.35 crore.

The above cases indicate that AOs irregularly allowed claim of capital
expenditure as revenue expenditure which resulted in under assessment of
income.

3.14 Depreciation claimed and allowed on ineligible items

Depreciation is allowable on capital assets used for the purpose of business.
However, no depreciation is allowable on land though it is a capital asset.
Likewise, goodwill is not an intangible asset and hence will not qualify for
depreciation allowance, as held by the Supreme Court?®.

We observed in Andhra Pradesh, Chandigarh, Delhi, Gujarat, Karnataka,
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West
Bengal charges that 27 assessees claimed and were allowed depreciation on
items which were not eligible for depreciation. Irregular allowance of

26 M/s B.C. Srinivas Setty vs CIT (128 ITR 294)

27


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

depreciation resulted in under assessment of income to that extent involving
tax effect of ¥ 34.29 crore (See Box 3.13).

Box 3.13: Illustrative cases on depreciation claimed and allowed on ineligible items

a. In West Bengal region, CIT-I Kolkata charge, M/s Infinity InfoTech Parks Ltd.,
for AYs 08, AY 10 and AY 11, engaged in the business of ‘development of IT Park and
providing services relating thereto’ was allowed depreciation on the unsold buildings
built by them leading to allowance of depreciation on ‘trading stock’ and not on
‘capital asset’ used for the purpose of business. This resulted in total excess
allowance of depreciation हैं 16.19 crore involving tax effect of 5.50 crore. ITD did
not accept (October 2013) the observation on the ground that the business of the
assessee was to provide services and the said assets were being used for that
purpose. This is not tenable as the business of the assessee was ‘development of IT
Park and providing services relating thereto’ which included developing,
constructing and selling of building ‘unit wise’ and ‘floor space basis’. Hence, the
assessee was not eligible for depreciation as the constructed building had no use for
the purpose of the business of the assessee.

b. In Karnataka, CIT-I, Bangalore charge, in the case of M/s Fibres and Fabrics
International Pvt. Ltd., for AY 07 and AY 08, revealed that the assessee was allowed
depreciation aggregating to ~ 8.61 crore, claimed on goodwill, though it did not
qualify as an intangible asset. The mistake resulted in under assessment of
% 8.61 crore, involving a total tax effect of ¥ 4.06 crore.

The above cases indicate that AOs allowed depreciation on ineligible items
which resulted in under assessment of income.

३.15. Irregular claim of depreciation against income fully exempt from tax

No deduction is allowable against the income which is exempt from tax.
Further, in the case of trust/ society whose income is claimed as exempt by
application of income under Section 10 or 11, no depreciation is admissible
as it will amount to allowance of double deduction.

We observed in Bihar, Haryana, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and
Uttarakhand charges that 48 assessees claimed and were allowed
depreciation against income fully exempt from tax which resulted in under
assessment of income to that extent involving tax effect of ¥ 27.28 crore (See
Box 3.14).

Box 3.14: Illustrative cases on Irregular claim of depreciation against
income fully exempt from tax

a. In Uttarakhand, CIT Dehradun charge, M/s Institute of Management
Studies was registered under the Societies Registration Act 1960 and availed
exemption for AY 11 under Section 12AA of the Act wherein the income of the
assessee was exempt. However, AO while finalising the assessment irregularly

28



Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

ee आओ depreciation of % 10.67 crore which resulted in double deduction to that
extent involving tax effect of € 3.30 crore.

b. In Tamil Nadu, CIT-Il Madurai charge, in the case of M/s Govel Trust, for
AY 11, AO allowed depreciation of = 6.75 crore on assets whose cost was already
claimed as application of income which resulted in allowance of double deduction
involving tax effect of हैं 2.07 crore. ITD did not accept (August 2013) the
observation stating that the scheme of taxation of Charitable Trust was different
from taxation of other taxable entities. The deduction of depreciation did not
amount to double benefit/ double deduction. The reply is not tenable as the case
law reported in 328 ITR 421 (P&H) mainly dealt with granting of exemption for the
Profits and Gains from business incidental to the objectives of the Trust u/s 11(1),
|rectouteslonngsflepedatonetteTeats nn nave an and (3) when the exemption contemplated u/s 11(4A) was not applicable, and
not about the allowing of depreciation to the Trust.

Thus, AOs irregularly allowed depreciation against income fully exempt from
tax which resulted in under assessment of income.

3.16 Allowance of depreciation on non-commercial vehicle

In case of new commercial vehicles, acquired on or after the 01 January, 2009
but before the 01 October 2009 and put to use before the 01 October 2009
for the purposes of business or profession, depreciation is allowable at the
rate of 50 per cent.

We observed in Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu charges that 29
assessees was allowed depreciation on non-commercial vehicle at higher rate
applicable to commercial vehicles which resulted in under assessment of
income to that extent involving tax effect of ¥ 10.91 crore (See Box 3.15).

[ee ean aso ee Sareea ene 3.15: Illustrative case on Allowance of depreciation on non-commercial vehicle

In Tamil Nadu, CIT-LTU Chennai charge, M/s Sundaram Finance Ltd., a leasing and
finance company having income from lease, rent, bills discounting and service
charges, leased out motor vehicles either on operating lease or finance lease only to
its customers. For AY 11, the assessee availed depreciation of हैं 25.72 crore on
motor cars at the rate of 50 per cent as against हैं 7.72 crore at the normal rate of
15 per cent. Since the company was not using these vehicles in the business and was.
not running them on hire, the allowance of depreciation thereon at higher rate was
not in order. This resulted in excess allowance of depreciation of ~ 18.01 crore
involving short levy of tax of € 8.26 crore.

य्य्प्प्प्प्स्ख्ख्ख्ल्ख्< replied (August 2013) that depreciation at 50% is allowable on new commercial
vehicle as per SI. No.3 (via) of depreciation schedule. The reply is not tenable as the
motor cars were not used for the purpose of running them on hire, they are not
required to be treated as commercial vehicles for the purpose of allowance at higher
rate of depreciation.

29


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

Thus, AOs allowed depreciation on non-commercial vehicle at higher rate
applicable to commercial vehicles which resulted in under assessment of
income.

३.17. Depreciation claimed against let out property

The Act allows 30 per cent standard deduction and interest paid on borrowed
capital to cover all expenditure related to the income under the head
“Income from House Property”. Hence, no depreciation is admissible
thereon.

In Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Bihar, Uttarakhand charges, we found that six
assessees irregularly claimed depreciation against let out property which
resulted in under assessment of income to that extent involving tax effect of
% 1.85 crore (See Box 3.16).

Box 3.16: Illustrative case on Depreciation claimed against let out property

In Karnataka, CIT-III Bangalore charge, in the case of M/s Renaissance Holdings
and Developers Pvt. Ltd. for AY 10, AO allowed depreciation of हैं 2.02 crore on
buildings let out, though its rental income was assessed under the head ‘Income
from House Property’. Omission resulted in under assessment of income to that
extent, involving tax effect of 85.81 lakh.

3.18 Other mistakes relating to depreciation

While computing tonnage income of a tonnage tax company under section
115VL, provisions of Section 30 to 43B shall apply as if every loss, allowance
or deduction had been given full effect to for that previous year itself.
Assesses/AOs are also required to comply with certain other provisions
relating to depreciation in their claims for depreciation.

In Andhra Pradesh, Chandigarh (UT), Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Orissa, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal, we noticed that 36
assessees had not complied with certain other provisions relating to
depreciation in their claims for depreciation which involved tax effect
aggregating % 14.73 crore (See Box 3.17).

Box 3.17: Illustrative case relating to Tonnage Tax Scheme

In Andhra Pradesh, CIT-I Vishakhapatnam charge, M/s Eversun Sparkle Maritime
Services Pvt. Ltd. opted out of Tonnage Tax scheme from AY 11. However,
unabsorbed depreciation pertaining to the period of tonnage tax scheme i.e., from
AY 06 to AY 10 was allowed to be carried forward which is in contravention to the
aforesaid provisions. The mistake resulted in understatement of income of
%5.44 crore involving tax effect of ¥ 1.85 crore. ITD accepted (October 2013) the
audit observation and took remedial action.

30


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

3.19 Mistakes in grant of additional depreciation

Under the Act?”, an assessee engaged in the business of manufacture or
production of any article or thing is entitled to additional depreciation equal
to twenty per cent of the actual cost of any new machinery or plant (other
than ships, land, aircraft etc.), which has been acquired and installed after 31
March 2005 subject to certain conditions prescribed under Section 32(1)(iia)
of the Act. From AY 2013-14, assessees engaged in the business of generation
or generation and distribution of power are also eligible for additional
depreciation.

It was noticed in Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Delhi,
Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand
and West Bengal charges that while computing additional depreciation, AOs
committed mistakes in grant of additional depreciation in 99 cases resulting
in under assessment of income to that extent involving tax effect of हैं 656.19
crore (See Box 3.18).

= 3.18: Illustrative cases on mistakes in granting additional depreciation

a. In West Bengal, CIT-I Kolkata charge, in the case of M/s West Bengal State
Electricity Distribution Co Ltd., for AY 09 and AY 10, AO allowed additional
depreciation of ¥ 362.47 crore and हैं 46.40 crore respectively on new plant and
machinery. The assessee was engaged in the business of ‘generation and
distribution of electricity’ which did not fall in the category of manufacturing of any
article and things and as such was not eligible for additional depreciation. Irregular
allowance of additional depreciation of = 408.87 crore resulted in under assessment
of income to that extent involving short levy of tax aggregating हैं 138.97 crore.

b. In Tamil Nadu, CIT-LTU Chennai charge, in the case of M/s Neyveli Lignite
Corporation, for AY 10 and AY 11, AO allowed additional depreciation of हैं 162.30
crore and % 109.35 crore respectively on dumper, crane, dozer, crawler and pick &
carry mobile crane, etc. We noticed that the assessee was engaged in coal mining
and power generation which were not manufacturing activity. Thus, the assessee
was not eligible for additional depreciation. Omission resulted in short levy of tax
aggregating हैं 92.34 crore for both the AYs.

On this being pointed out, ITD replied (August 2013) that Supreme Court held*® that
the process of extraction of coal would amount to ‘production’. The reply is not
tenable as new sub-section (29BA) to Section 2, inserted with effect from 01 April
2009, defined ‘Manufacture’ to mean a change in non-living physical object or article
| Sane cet ride ur tng horns are rames crc and aes thing, resulting in transformation of the object or article or thing into a new and
distinct object or article or thing having a different name, character and use; or

मर As per provision below Section 32(1){iia) of the Income Tax Act.
28 CIT vs SESA Goa Ltd., (271 ITR 331)

31


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

bringing into existence of a new and distinct object or article or thing with a
different chemical composition or integral structure. Since the trade name of coal or
physical or chemical properties are not changed in coal mining, the assessee was not
entitled to claim additional depreciation on these equipments.

om In Gujarat, CIT-| Vadodara charge, M/s Gujarat State Electricity
Corporation Ltd engaged in generation of power, for AY 11, was allowed
depreciation of % 642.14 crore which included additional depreciation of = 203.43
crore on new plant and machinery purchased and installed for generation of
power by the assessee during the relevant previous year. Since plant and
machinery used for generation of power was not covered under clause (ii) of
Section 32(1) of the Act, the assessee was not eligible for additional depreciation.
The incorrect allowance of additional depreciation of ¥ 203.43 crore resulted in
excess allowance of MAT credit of € 69.14 crore.

The AO did not accept (August 2013) the observation stating that by virtue of
second proviso to the Rule 5(1A) of the Income Tax Rules, 1962, the company had
an option to claim depreciation as if the provision of clause (ii) of section 32(1) of
the Act were applicable subject to the conditions that the same rates of
depreciation are to be applied for all the subsequent years. Since the assessee has
been claiming depreciation as per clause (ii), the assessee had claimed additional
depreciation u/s 32(1)(iia) correctly. The reply is not tenable as the Act specifically
excluded assets under ‘generation of electricity’ covered under clause (i) of section
32(1) from availing additional depreciation. Option given under Rule 5(1A) of the
Income Tax Rules for units generating electricity is meant for depreciation under
section 32(1) and not for additional depreciation covered under section 32(1)(iia)
which is a separate provision for promoting manufacturing units. Rules framed
under the Act cannot over rule the provisions of the same Act. Further, AO
disallowed additional depreciation claimed on power generating equipments by
Gujarat Alkalies & Chemicals Limited assessed in the same Circle for AY 11.

d. In Delhi, CIT-V Delhi charge, M/s NTPC Sail Power Company Pvt. Ltd.,
engaged in the business of power generation, for AY 11, was allowed additional
depreciation of = 853.89 crore on plant and machinery partly at 20 per cent and
partly at 10 per cent, though no additional depreciation was allowable. Omission
resulted in excess allowance of depreciation of हैं 203.17 crore involving potential
tax effect of ¥ 69.06 crore.

Thus, AOs committed mistakes in grant of additional depreciation resulting in
under assessment of income.

32


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

3.20 Non claim of additional depreciation during tax holiday

From 2002-03 onwards, depreciation is mandatory and shall be allowed or
deemed to have been allowed irrespective of claim made in the Profit & Loss
Account or not. In respect of newly established undertakings in Free Trade
Zones, units established in Special Economic Zones, newly established
100 per cent export-oriented undertakings etc., the Written Down Value
(WDV) of the assets used for the purpose of the business of the undertaking
shall be computed as if the assessee had claimed and been actually allowed
the depreciation for the tax holiday period.

We found in Andhra Pradesh, Chandigarh, Maharashtra and West Bengal
charges that in case of 13 assessees, AO did not allow additional depreciation
during tax holiday which resulted in over assessment of income to that extent
involving tax effect of € 3.33 crore (See Box 3.19).

स््स्स्स््ल्््ल्प््ः 3.19: Illustrative case on non claim of additional depreciation during tax
holiday

In Maharashtra, ClT-Central Circle 3 Mumbai charge, M/s Elder Pharmaceuticals
Ltd., for AY 09 and AY 10, engaged in manufacturing of pharmaceutical products
having units at Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh being in tax holiday, was
exempt from tax under section 80IC of the Act. The assessee made additions of
% 16.94 crore and % 9.96 crore to the block of asset ‘Plant and Machinery’ during
the relevant previous years on which depreciation admissible was allowed but
additional depreciation of ~ 3.27 crore in AY 09 and % 1.89 crore in AY 10 was not
[inuntetoetostertasoeare nn mame © te nen mete Omission resulted in overstatement of income to that extent involving
potential tax effect of ¥ 1.59 crore.

3.21 Recommendation

We recommend that CBDT may devise a mechanism to improve the quality of
assessments and explore the possibility of capacity building for Assessing
Officers for reducing the incidence of mistakes.

The Ministry stated (May 2014) that CBDT has taken various administrative
steps to improve upon the quality of assessments till now which are as
follows:

e CBDT has laid emphasis on improving the quality of assessments by
incorporating the strategy for ensuring quality in scrutiny assessment
cases in the Central Action Plan (CAP) document. Post-assessment,
practice of review and inspection has been standardized therein. Each
CCsIT/DGsIT is required to forward analysis of 50 quality assessments
of his charge along with suggestions for improvement to the
concerned Zonal Member. Further, quality cases are being compiled
and published annually which provides valuable guidance to AOs to

33


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

strive upon to improve quality of orders being framed. These steps
have been initiated from FY 2011-12 onwards.

¢ To discourage 405 from making high-pitched assessments, Member
(IT) issued a communiqué to all CCsIT/DGsIT wherein it was
emphasized upon that in cases of deliberate omission or commission
on part of AO in making frivolous additions, the supervisory officer
may bring the matter to the notice of Competent Authority for
administrative action. Supervisory officers were also advised to play
effective role in this regard.

e Range heads are required to effectively monitor cases during the
progress of scrutiny assessment and in appropriate cases, they may
invoke provisions of section 144A of the IT Act to issue suitable
directions to the AO to enable him to frame a judicious order.

e System of Review and Inspection by the supervisory officers, post-
assessment, is also used as an effective tool to monitor the quality of
scrutiny-assessments, being framed.

Further regarding initiatives to be taken to enhance capacity building of AOs
so as to equip them to handle assessment work, the Ministry (May 2014) also
stated that specific inputs may kindly be taken from Director General of
Income Tax (HRD) as this issue is being specifically being dealt by that
Directorate.

Audit is of the view that the Ministry should pursue the matter regarding
enhancement of capacity building with Director General of Income Tax (HRD)
so that mistakes in assessments are minimised.

The Ministry while describing the role of Director General of Income Tax
(HRD) in imparting various training at all levels, emphasized (June 2014) the
implementation of National Judicial Reference System for enhancement on
knowledge.

34


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

Chapter IV: Allowance of Amortisation

41 Introduction

Sections 35D, 35DD and 35DDA of the Act provides for amortisation on
preliminary expenses, expenditure in case of amalgamation or demerger and
expenditure incurred under voluntary retirement scheme respectively.
Present chapter deals with cases relating to amortisation where AOs did not
apply relevant provisions correctly. Category wise details of mistakes in
assessment are shown in Table 4.1.

Table 4.1: Nature of mistakes with its tax effect

Tax effect

Nature of Mistakes and Para Number of the Report (95९५5 (% in crore)
1, Claim of amortisation expenses u/s 35D (Para 4.2) 12 6.70
2. Claim of amortisation expenses u/s 35DDA (Para 4.3) 4 5.38
3. Claim of amortisation expense u/s 35ABB (Para 4.4) 1 15.47
Total 17 27.55

4.2 Mistake in claim of amortisation expenses under section 35D

Section 35D of the Act provides that where an assessee, being an Indian
company or a person (other than a company) who is resident in India, incurs,
after the 31 March 1970, any expenditure specified in sub-section
(2) thereunder, before the commencement of his business, or after the
commencement of his business, in connection with the extension of his
‘industrial undertaking’ or in connection with his setting up a new unit, shall
be allowed a deduction of an amount equal to one fifth of such expenditure
for each of the five successive previous years beginning with the previous
year in which the business commences or the extension is completed or the
new unit commenced production. The word ‘industrial’ was omitted by the
Finance Act, 2008, from 01 April 2009 thus making the normal ‘undertaking’
like service providers eligible for deduction under section 35D for the
expenses incurred from AY 10 onwards.

Further, the said expenditure is, inter alia, allowed at five per cent of the
“capital employed” for the purpose of extension/new business, being the
aggregate of share capital and long term borrowings (including debentures)
having a tenure of minimum seven years.

Test check of assessment records in Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat,
Karnataka, and Tamil Nadu charges revealed that 12 assessees irregularly
claimed and were allowed amortisation expenses under section 35D which
resulted in under assessment of income to that extent involving tax effect of
₹ 6.70 crore (See Box 4.1)

35


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

Box 4.1: Illustrative cases on mistakes in claim of amortisation

a. In Karnataka, CIT-IIl Bangalore charge, M/s Subex Ltd., for AY 09, had
acquired two foreign subsidiaries at an investment of % 1,420.66 crore, by raising
capital through issue of Global Depository Receipts (GDRs)*° and Foreign Currency
Convertible Bonds (FCCBs), having a tenure of only five years. The assessee
incurred %~57.79 crore as expenditure thereon and claimed deductions. AO
allowed deduction of = 11.37 crore” as amortisation. For the purpose of reckoning
capital employed, only the value of GDRs was eligible, since FCCBs had lesser
tenure than prescribed in the Act. Hence, the expenditure eligible for amortisation
worked out to % 58.64 lakh, being five per cent of ¥ 11.73 crore, the value of GDRs
and thereby allowable deduction would be % 11.73 lakh (being 20 per cent of
% 58.64 lakh) instead of ¥ 11.37 crore. Excess allowance of deduction resulted in
over assessment of loss of %11.25 crore, involving potential tax effect of
% 3.82 crore.

b. In Gujarat, CIT-| Ahmedabad charge, M/s Bhagwati Banquets & Hotels,
engaged in Hotel business (service sector), for AY 09 to AY11, claimed and was
allowed deduction aggregating हैं 3.51 crore, being one fifth of total of IPO
expenses written off of ¥ 5.85 crore, the proceeds of which was used for putting
up a new project at Surat. Since the assessee’s business was in the nature of
providing service (hospitality) and was not engaged in any ‘industrial’ activity as
envisaged in section 35D(1)(ii) of the Act and the expenses claimed were relating
to the period prior to AY 10, assessee was not eligible for the deduction. The
mistake resulted in incorrect allowance of deduction of % 3.51 crore involving tax
effect of € 1.62 crore including interest. AO did not accept (September 2012) audit
observation stating that no definition of industrial undertaking was given in the
provisions of 35D. The reply was not tenable as the word “industrial”
from the provision with effect from 01 April 2009 permitting assessees engaged in
the business of any sector to avail the benefit u/s 35D.

was removed

Thus, AOs allowed irregular amortisation expenses under section 35D which
resulted in under assessment of income.

4.3 Mistakes in claim of amortisation expenses u/s 35DDA

Section 35DDA of the Act provides that where an assessee incurs any
expenditure by way of payment to an employee under any voluntary
retirement scheme, he shall be allowed deduction equal to one fifth of such
expenditure for a period of five years beginning with the year in which such
expenditure is incurred. While computing tonnage income of a tonnage tax
company under section 115VG, provisions of section 30 to 43B shall apply as
if every loss, allowance or deduction had been given full effect to for that
previous year itself.

2 Raising capital in international markets by issuing shares in foreign countries
2° As against one-fifth deduction of 11.56 crore

36



Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

During test check in Orissa, Rajasthan and West Bengal charges, we found
that four assessees irregularly claimed and were allowed expenses towards
amortisation under section 35DDA which resulted in under assessment of
income to that extent involving revenue impact of हैं 5.38 crore (See Box 4.2).

aan 4.2: Illustrative case on mistakes in claim of amortisation u/s 35DDA

In Rajasthan, CIT Kota charge, M/s Chambal Fertilizers and Chemicals Ltd. claimed
and was allowed deduction of % 60.42 lakh every year from AY 08 to AY 10, being
one-fifth of = 3.02 crore of the expenditure incurred on VRS expenses related to
ISCL, India Steamship Ltd (shipping division) which was merged (amalgamated)
with the assessee company from 01 September 2004 and the expenditure of
3.02 crore pertained to the period prior to merger of ISCL (shipping division)
under the scheme of voluntary retirement. We observed that assessee company
(resultant company) opted for tonnage tax scheme under Chapter XII G of the Act
in respect of its shipping division from 01 April 2005 and as such the assessee was
not entitled for amortisation of any expenses incurred on VRS being the income of
its shipping division computed in the manner laid down under the section of
115VG. Irregular allowance of amortisation of VRS expenses resulted in under
‘regent ce of income of % 1.81 crore (% 60.42 lakh per year from AY 08 to AY 10)
involving tax effect of € 68.38 lakh including interest. ITD accepted the observation

and stated that remedial action u/s 148 was being taken.

Thus, AOs allowed irregular amortisation expenses under section 35DDA
which resulted in under assessment of income.

44 Other interesting case

Under section 35ABB of the Act, amortisation is allowed in respect of any
expenditure of a capital nature, incurred for acquiring any right to operate
telecommunication services either before the commencement of the
business or thereafter in equal installments for each of the relevant previous
years. For this purpose, in a case where the license fee is actually paid before
the commencement of the business to operate telecommunication services,
“relevant previous years” means the previous years beginning with the
previous year in which such business commenced; in any other case, the
previous years beginning with the previous year in which the licence fee is
actually paid, and the subsequent year or years during which the licence for
which the fee is paid, shall be in force (See Box 4.3).

Box 4.3: Illustrative case on incorrect allowance of amortisation

In CIT-3, Mumbai charge, scrutiny assessment of a company, M/s Idea Cellular Ltd.
for the AY 10, had claimed and was allowed deduction of % 144.45 crore on
account of amortisation cost under Section 35ABB in respect of fixed licence fees.

37



Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

This included amortised cost of % 34.23 crore in respect of licence fee of ¥ 684.59
crore paid for circles which had not yet commenced operations. In view of the
provision ibid, deduction of हैं 34.23 crore on account of amortisation of licence
fees was not an allowable deduction. Omission to disallow the deduction resulted
in under assessment of income of % 34.23 crore with consequent short levy of tax
of % 15.47 crore including interest of = 3.84 crore under Section 2348.

4.5 Recommendation

We recommend that CBDT may devise a mechanism to improve the quality of
assessments and explore the possibility of capacity building for Assessing
Officers for reducing the incidence of mistakes.

The Ministry reiterated (May 2014) its comments to the recommendations
made in Para 3.21 of this Report.

38


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

Chapter V: Internal Control Mechanism

5.1 Introduction

Internal control is necessary to improve policy formulation and
implementation. An effective system of internal controls serves as a means to
obtain reasonable assurance that the steps and action undertaken by the ITD
meet their established goals and objectives. We have tried to highlight the
control issues of the ITD relating to allowance of depreciation and
amortisation in this Chapter.

There is no mechanism available in the ITD to verify the veracity of claim of
the assessees for depreciation in respect of additions made to the block of
assets in previous year.

5.2 Non-availability of data relating to additions made to fixed assets
during the relevant previous year

Section 44 AB of the Act requires the assessee to furnish Tax Audit Report
(TAR) in Form No 3CD vide Rule 6G(2) of Income Tax Rules, 1962 by an
accountant along with the return of income. Further, Clause 14(d) of TAR
requires the assessee to furnish the details of additions to/deletions from the
fixed assets during the previous year viz., the date of purchase, the date
when it was put to use, subsidy/ grant/ reimbursement received thereon,
change in rate of exchange of currency, etc. Verification of ownership and
usage of assets are important aspects to be examined before allowing
depreciation.

The requirement of furnishing details of ownership and usage of assets under
Section 32(1) of the Act, along with the return of income, was removed with
effect from 01 April 1988, with the introduction of the concept of block of
assets. Further, in the present system of mandatory e-filing of returns, there
is no provision for furnishing the details of ownership and usage of assets,
except in respect of those cases which are selected for scrutiny assessments.
Even in such cases, only the basic details of assets are required to be
furnished in the TAR without attaching documentary evidence thereto.

We observed in Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal
charges, that 165 assessees made additions of हैं 1,038.92 crore to fixed
assets during the relevant previous year but did not disclose in Form 3CD,
Clause 14(d), inter alia, the relevant details such as the dates on which
additions were made and the assets put to use for more / less than 180 days
etc, which put a question mark on the correctness of the claim of the

39


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

assessee with regard to admissibility of depreciation at full/half rate, on
the assets acquired, classification thereof under the correct block and
determination of the cost thereof actually borne by the assessee
(See Box 5.1).

Box 5.1; Illustrative cases on non-availability of data relating to additions to
fixed assets made during the relevant previous year

a. In Madhya Pradesh, Indore charge, M/s Sharda Solvent Ltd, for AY 11,
made additions of हैं 26.12 crore and irregularly claimed and was allowed
depreciation of < 3.58 crore on new plant and machinery, the details thereof were
not furnished at the time of assessment stating that it was under preparation.

b. In Chhattisgarh, Bilaspur charge, M/s Mangal Sponge & Steel Pvt Ltd, for
AY 10, claimed and was allowed depreciation of 1.05 crore @ 100 per cent on
electrostatic precipitator as per computation whereas in Annexure III forming part
of 3CD report and Schedule ‘E’ of balance sheet, the depreciation worked out to
%52.53 lakh @ 50 per cent and % 40.44 lakh @ 15 per cent respectively. We
observed that no evidence regarding purchase of the asset and putting the same
to use was available in the assessment records. In the light of inconsistent claim of
depreciation and in the absence of any evidence, the AO should have disallowed
the entire depreciation.

In respect of cases pertaining to Karnataka charge, ITD stated that the
required details were thoroughly verified during assessments. In one case,
AO pointed out that the books of accounts, bills and vouchers maintained by
the assessees often ran into large volume of data which was not practically
possible to check and retain all the available data and as such the books of
accounts/vouchers were returned to the assessees after a test check. The
reply is not tenable for the reason that nothing was forthcoming from Form
3CD or available in the assessment records to indicate that the claims of
depreciation had been regulated correctly after test check of the requisite
details.

The majority of the cases are summarily processed and not selected for
scrutiny by ITD. The TAR did not always provide or keep on record to indicate
that the requisite details were called for at the time of assessment by AOs for
verification of additions made to the block of assets during the relevant
previous year. There is no mechanism available in ITD to verify the veracity of
claim of the assessees for depreciation in respect of additions made to the
block of assets irrespective of the fact that the case was selected for scrutiny

or not.

In all assessment cases including those where the books of accounts, bills and
vouchers maintained by the assessees are voluminous, AO should ensure that

40


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

the TAR in the prescribed format contains the requisite details and is brought
on record. CBDT may consider modifying the e-filing of returns so that
requisite information/records are available with ITD.

ITD does not have any mechanism/database or maintain register/records
for keeping a watch over the correct status of unabsorbed depreciation
carried forward for future set off despite CBDT’s specific instruction issued
in September 2007 in this regard.

5.3 Non-linking/availability of records relating to unabsorbed
depreciation of earlier years

The Act provides for carry forward of unabsorbed depreciation for set off
against the income of the following AYs. AST Module, being used by the ITD
to fulfill the requirement of summary processing of cases, does not provide
for automatically picking up data from earlier years to ensure the correctness
of the claims for set off of unabsorbed depreciation. As regards scrutiny
assessments, AOs verify the claim made by the assessees from the records
available with them or accept the same without any verification.

CBDT has also issued instruction?! in this regard for the AOs to carry out
necessary verifications at the time of scrutiny assessments with reference to
physical records and link past assessment records so as to ensure the
correctness of the claims of brought forward losses and depreciation. Audit
has been regularly pointing out mistakes in allowing set-off of brought
forward unabsorbed depreciation even then such mistakes persist.

We observed in Gujarat and West Bengal charges that the AOs allowed set
off of unabsorbed depreciation in 8 cases without examining the genuineness
of the assessees claim for which assessees were not eligible at all or were
eligible for comparatively more or less amount of unabsorbed depreciation
(See Box 5.2). In this regard, paragraph 3.11 of this report may also be
referred to.

niet 5.2: Illustrative cases on Non-linking/availability of records relating to
unabsorbed depreciation of earlier years

a In West Bengal, CIT-I Kolkata charge, M/s West Bengal State Electricity
eee ee Co. Ltd, for AY 10 and AY11, was allowed carry forward of
depreciation aggregating ~ 817.74 crore pertaining to AY 08 for future set off as
per relevant TARs as against the actual amount of % 222 crore available for carry
forward from the AY 08 as per notification”? issued after restructuring of

2 Instruction.9/2007 dated 11 September 2007
2 Govt of West Bengal Notification 327-PO/O/II|/3R-29/2006 dated 13 Oct 2008

41


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

West Bengal State Electricity Board into transmission and distribution companies.
Thus, there was lack of internal control to verify the figures provided by the
Chartered Accountants in respect of carry forward of unabsorbed depreciation of
% 595.74 crore involving potential tax effect of ¥ 202.49 crore.

b. In Gujarat, CIT | Vadodara charge, AO disallowed the claim of
M/s Chemstar Organics India Ltd for depreciation of 1.66 crore for AY 11 stating
that the company’s operation had been suspended for the last 7 years due to bank
and GIIC having taken adverse possession of the units and hence there was no
business or manufacturing activities by the company. In doing so, the AO did not
take any action in respect of the immediate previous six years. This resulted in
excess allowance of carry forward of unabsorbed depreciation of ~ 6.94 crore
involving short levy of tax of = 2.36 crore.

On the issue of availability of any mechanism/ register/ record regarding
unabsorbed depreciation within the ITD, 35 AOs in respect of Delhi charge
confirmed the fact that no mechanism/ register/ record was available in ITD
to verify the genuineness of the claim of unabsorbed depreciation by the
assessees in their return of income.

ITD does not have any mechanism/ database or maintain register/ records for
keeping a watch over the correct status of unabsorbed depreciation carried
forward for future set off despite CBDT’s specific instruction issued in
September 2007 in this regard. AO either rely on the information provided in
the return of income or the past records, made available by the assessee
itself. Similar is the situation in respect of unabsorbed depreciation in the
case of amalgamation and demerger of a Company. ITD has no mechanism to
validate the data on unabsorbed depreciation relating to earlier years,
furnished by the assessee in its e-return or AST Module.

ITD may maintain the records of carry forward of unabsorbed depreciation
for future set off in respect of each assessee including the amalgamation and
demerger cases of companies, which would help in assessing and reviewing
their impacts, from time to time to minimize mistakes in carry forward and
set off of unabsorbed depreciation pertaining to earlier years at AO’s level.
This can be achieved if ITD introduces a section in Individual Running Ledger
Account (IRLA) or in profile of assessees in ITD System to keep and maintain
the data regarding unabsorbed depreciation or loss available to assessee
which may be linked with the loss determined in the current AY so that the
data is updated on real time basis and unabsorbed depreciation allowed set
off correctly.

ITD may make it mandatory to all AOs to obtain a statement of unabsorbed
depreciation assessment year-wise as per latest assessment order and make

42


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

it part of the assessment order after due verification at the time of finalizing
the assessment.

ITD does not have any effective mechanism to ensure the correctness of
WDV carried over for the purpose of allowance of depreciation or set off of
unabsorbed depreciation thereon. In absence of this, AOs committed
mistakes in carrying over the WDV.

5.4 Need for verification of Written Down Value

In the case of any block of assets, depreciation at prescribed rate is
admissible on the closing written down value (WDV). Closing WDV, in the
case of assets acquired before the previous year, means the actual cost to the
assessee less all depreciation actually allowed to him under the Act which
would naturally be the opening WDV of that block of asset for the
next/current year and so on. The depreciation statement given in the TAR in
Form 3CD does not take cognizance of change in WDV due to revision or
appeal effect etc. Further, it is not mandatory for AOs to obtain the
depreciation statement of earlier years and verify the WDV considering
allowance and disallowance of depreciation in earlier years.

We noticed mistakes in carrying over the WDV in six cases in Andhra Pradesh,
Bihar, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu. In this regard, paragraph 3.7 of this
report may also be referred to.

ITD does not have any effective mechanism to ensure the correctness of
WDV carried over for the purpose of allowance of depreciation or set off of
unabsorbed depreciation thereon.

An effective mechanism may be evolved to verify and ensure the correctness
of written down value of the block of assets carried over.

Recommendations
We recommend that

a. CBDT may consider modifying the e-filing of returns so that
information relating to additions to fixed assets made during the
relevant previous year is available with AOs at the time of assessment.

The Ministry stated (May 2014) that in the return of income of
assessees having business income (ITR - 4, 5 and 6) the income from
business is computed in Schedule BP of such returns. Item no. 12 of
schedule BP allows for deduction on account of depreciation u/s 32 of
the Act. The computation of such depreciation as per the Act is
provided in separate schedules DPM (Depreciation on Plant and
Machinery), DOA (Depreciation on other Assets) and DEP (Summary of

43


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

Depreciation on Assets) of the return. Schedule DPM and schedule
DOA under block of assets has separate columns for addition of fixed
assets for a period of 180 days or more (column 4 in both the
schedules) and for addition of fixed assets for a period of less than 180
days (column 7 in both the schedules) for the purpose of computation
of depreciation. Thus, the information relating to addition to fixed
assets made during the previous year is duly captured in the returns of
income for each block of asset separately. In addition, for auditable
cases, the audit report furnished by the Chartered Accountant has a
detailed schedule of assets including additions if any, at an individual
asset level. These audit reports are also e-filed and are available to AO.

Audit is of the view that despite capturing details of unabsorbed
depreciation in e-filing, mistakes in assessments still persists. The
Ministry may make efforts to minimize the mistakes in future.

The Ministry while reiterating its earlier stand, stated (June 2014) that
the steps taken in annual Central Plan documents for error free
assessment would reduce/minimize mistakes committed by AOs

b. CBDT may make it mandatory for all AOs to obtain a statement of
unabsorbed depreciation assessment year-wise as per latest
assessment order and make it a part of the assessment order after
due verification at the time of finalizing the assessment.

c. CBDT may evolve an effective mechanism to verify and ensure the
correctness of written down value of the block of assets carried over.

In respect of recommendations b and c above, the Ministry stated
(May 2014) that in cases subjected to detailed scrutiny, AOs are
required to do in-depth examination of all relevant issues which have
a bearing on the assessment being framed. Allowing proper set-off of
unabsorbed depreciation, being brought forward from earlier
assessment years or arriving at correct value of Written-down value
are amongst the important issues which an AO is required to examine.
In this regard, AO is expected to refer to documents of the taxpayer
and more importantly, the records being maintained in the
Department to arrive at correct figures. Further, the assessments
being framed are subject to Review and Inspection (though not in all
cases) by the supervisory authorities. In cases, where any loss of
revenue due to lapses on part of AO is observed, remedial measures as
per provisions of the Act are taken to safeguard the interest of
revenue. Also, CBDT has been repeatedly laying emphasis on passing
of ‘zero error assessments’ from audit point of view. Therefore, as the

44


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

existing mechanism is largely satisfactory, no specific intervention is
needed.

Audit is of the view that the instructions issued by the CBDT so far are
not serving the purpose as mistakes in allowance of depreciation still
continue to occur. Audit reiterates its stand for making a statement of
unabsorbed depreciation and written down value of the block of
assets carried over mandatory as part of latest assessment order after
due verification. This may also be included in check list of Internal
Audit Wing of ITD for effective monitoring.

New Delhi (MANISH KUMAR)
Dated: 30 July 2014 Principal Director (Direct Taxes)

Countersigned

New Delhi (SHASHI KANT SHARMA)
Dated: 30 July 2014 Comptroller and Auditor General of India

45


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

Appendix-1

(Refer para 1.6)

Legal Framework

Section

Brief of the provisions

32(1)

Depreciation is allowed on fixed assets viz buildings, machinery,
plant or furniture, being tangible assets and know-how, patents,
copyrights, trademarks, licences, franchises or any other business or
commercial rights of similar nature, being intangible assets acquired
on or after the 1st day of April, 1998, subject to fulfillment of
following condition;

1. The assets must be owned, wholly or partly, by the assessee,

2. The asset should be actually used for the purpose of
business or profession of the assessee,

3. Asset should be used during the relevant previous year

Depreciation is to be computed at the prescribed percentage
provided in Appendix-| r.w.r. 5(1) of ITR on the Written Down Value
(WDV) of the asset, except for power sector, which in turn is
calculated with reference to actual cost of the assets.

In case of undertaking engaged in generation or generation and
distributors of power, the depreciation will be allowed on actual cost
(i.e., on straight line method) at the rates provided in Appendix IA
read with Rule 5(IA). However assessee can exercise option before
due date of filing of return u/s 139(1) to claim depreciation on
Written Down Value Method at the rates provided in Appendix |.

43(6)
(४४०५)

‘Written Down Value’ means

1. In the case of assets acquired in the previous year, the
actual cost to the assessee.

2. In the case of assets acquired before the previous year, the
actual cost to the assessee less all depreciation actually
allowed to him under this Act.

3. In the case of any block of assets, the WDV shall be
computed in the following manner:

(i) The aggregate of all the assets falling within a block
at the beginning of the year shall be calculated.
(ii) The aggregate of written down value of the assets

shall be increased by the actual cost of assets falling
within that block which was acquired during the
previous year.

(iii) The sum so arrived shall be reduced by the money
payable in regard to any asset which is sold,
discarded or destroyed during the previous year,

(iv) In case, the written down value, of any block is
reduced to ‘Nil’, then no depreciation will be
allowed.

47


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

2(11)
(Block of
assets)

Act defines the term “Block of assets” as a group of assets falling
within a class of assets comprising tangible assets like being
buildings, machinery, plant or furniture and intangible assets like
being know-how, patents, copyrights, trade-marks, licences,
franchises or any other business or commercial rights of similar
nature in respect of which the same percentage of depreciation is
prescribed.

43(1)
(Actual Cost)

“Actual Cost” of an asset means its actual cost to the assessee
including the expenses on installation, etc. If the part of the cost is
met directly or indirectly by the third person, the cost to the
assessee will be reduced by such amount born by that person.
Besides,

(i) If An asset is acquired by way of gift or inheritance, its actual cost
to the assessee shall be its actual cost to the previous owner as
reduced by the depreciation actually allowed in respect of this asset
for any assessment year up to the assessment year 1988-89. The
depreciation that would be allowable as if that asset was the only
asset in the relevant block of assets.

(ii) If any amount if paid or payable as interest in connection with
the acquisition of any asset, the amount of interest related to the
period after the asset has been first put to use, shall not be included
in the cost of the assets.

Proviso 1 to
Section 32(1)

Where an asset acquired during the previous year is put to use for
the purpose of business or profession for a period of less than 180
days in that previous year, depreciation allowance shall be restricted
to 50% of the amount calculated at prescribed rates.

Proviso 4 to
Section 32(1)

Aggregate deduction in respect of depreciation of tangible or
intangible assets allowable to predecessor and the successor in the
case of succession or to the amalgamating company and the
amalgamated company in the case of amalgamation, or to the
demerged company and the resulting company in the case of
demerger shall not exceed the depreciation for the year calculated
at the prescribed rate and such deduction shall be apportioned
between the predecessor and successor, or the amalgamating
company and the amalgamated company or the demerged company
and the resulting company in the ratio of the number of days for
which the assets were used by them.

Explanation
1 to Section
32(1)

Where the business or profession is carried on in a building not
owned by assessee and any capital expenditure is incurred for
construction of any structure or for renovation, improvement or
extension of the building, then depreciation will be allowed in
respect of such capital expenditure at the rates prescribed for
"building".

48


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

Explanation
5 to Section
32(1)

The allowance of deprecation u/s 32 (1)(i) & 32 (1)(ii) is mandatory
irrespective of fact whether or not the assessee has claimed the
depreciation in computing the total income.

32(1)(iia)

In case of any new machinery or plant (excluding ships and aircrafts)
acquired and installed after March 31, 2005 by an assessee engaged
in the business of manufacture or production of any article or thing
additional depreciation of 20% of actual cost shall be allowed.

No such additional deduction will be allowed in respect of machinery
or plant if it is used earlier by any other person or where the whole
of actual cost of which is allowed as deduction in computing income
chargeable under the head profit and gain of business or profession
of any one previous year.

32(1)(iii)

When such asset on which depreciation is allowed is sold discarded
or demolished in a previous year, and if the insurance, salvage,
compensation or sale value, as the case may be, receivable in
respect of such asset falls short of the written down value, such
difference would be allowed as deduction [Terminal Depreciation].
The condition for allowing such deduction is that such deficiency is
actually written off in the books of account.

32(2)

In case of inadequate profit or loss any depreciation which could not
be fully allowed for want of profit, the amount which could not be
given full effect of shall be carried forward in the subsequent year
and shall form part of the depreciation of such subsequent previous
year. (This condition is subjected to Sec. 72(2) & Sec. 73(3).

35D

Where an assessee incurs any expenditure specified under
subsection (2) of section 35D either before the commencement of
his business or after the commencement of business in connection
with the extension of industrial undertaking or setting up of new
industrial unit, deduction shall be allowed equal to one-fifth of such
expenditure for a period of five years beginning with the year in
which the business commences or extension of the undertaking is
completed or the new industrial unit commences production or
operation as the case maybe.

35D(3)

The deduction is restricted to 5% of the cost of the project or where
the assessee is an Indian company, at the option of the company, of
the capital employed in the business of the company.

35D(4)

In case of non-corporate assessee or a co-operative society, the
deduction would not be allowed unless the accounts of the assessee
are audited for the year/s in which such expenditures are incurred
and a report in prescribed form is furnished along with the return of
income for the first year in which such deduction is claimed.

49


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

35D(5) & (5A)

In case of amalgamation or demerger of the company the deduction
would be allowed to amalgamated or resulting company and in such
case no further deduction would be allowed to amalgamating or
demerged company.

3500

Where an Indian company incurs any expenditure wholly and
exclusively for the purpose of amalgamation or demerger of an
undertaking, deduction equal to one-fifth of such expenditure for a
period of five successive years beginning with the previous year in
which such amalgamation or demerger takes place shall be allowed.

35DDA (1)

Where an assessee incurs any expenditure by way of payment to an
employee under any scheme in connection with his voluntary
retirement deduction shall be allowed equal to one fifth of such
expenditure for a period of five years beginning with the year in
which such expenditure is incurred.

35DDA (2) &
(3)

In case of amalgamation or demerger of the company, the deduction
would be allowed to the amalgamated or resulting company as if the
deduction were allowed to amalgamating or demerged company as
the case may be.

35DDA (4)

In case of partnership firm or proprietary concern is succeeded by
the company in reorganization of business, the deduction would be
allowed to such succeeded company provided conditions laid down
in provisions of Section 47(xiii) or Section 47(xiv) as applicable are
adhered to and no further deduction would be allowed to the
partnership firm or proprietary concerns the case may be.

in case of a private limited company or unlisted public company
under reorganization of business is succeeded by a limited liability
partnership fulfilling the conditions laid down in proviso to clause
(xiiib) of Section 47, then the deduction shall be allowed to the
successor limited liability partnership and no further deduction
would be allowed to private limited company or unlisted public
company as the case may be. (applicable from A.Y. 2011-12)

72A(1)

In case of an amalgamation of a company with another company,
then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of
this Act, and subject to fulfillment of condition laid down in
subsection 2 of Section 72A of the Income Tax Act, the accumulated
loss and the unabsorbed depreciation of the amalgamating company
shall be deemed to be the loss, allowance for depreciation of the
amalgamated company for the previous year in which the
amalgamation was effected, and other provisions of this Act relating
to set off and carry forward of loss and allowance for depreciation
shall apply accordingly.

72A(4)

In the case of a demerger, where the loss and unabsorbed
depreciation is directly relatable to the undertaking transferred, the
accumulated loss and the allowance for unabsorbed depreciation of

50


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

the undertakings transferred shall be allowed to resulting company,
and, where the loss and unabsorbed depreciation is not directly
relatable to the undertaking transferred, the loss and unabsorbed
depreciation shall be apportioned between the demerged company
and the resulting company in the same proportion in which the
assets of the undertakings have been retained by the demerged
company and transferred to the resulting company and be allowed
to be carried forward and set off in the hands of the demerged
company or the resulting company, as the case may be.

72A(6)

In case of reorganization of business, whereby, a firm is succeeded
by a company fulfilling the conditions laid down in clause (xiii) of
Section 47 or a proprietary concern is succeeded by a company
fulfilling the conditions laid down in clause (xiv) of Section 47, then,
the accumulated loss and the unabsorbed depreciation of the
predecessor firm or the proprietary concern, as the case may be,
shall be deemed to be the loss or allowance for depreciation of the
successor company for the purpose of previous year in which
business reorganization was effected and other provisions of this Act
relating to set off and carry forward of loss and allowance for
depreciation shall apply accordingly.

43A

In case where any asset acquired from a country outside India for
the purpose of business or profession, then any change in the rate of
exchange during any previous year after the acquisition of such asset
at the time of making payment shall be adjusted against the cost of
that asset. The amount so arrived after the adjustment shall be
taken as actual cost of the asset.

51


Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

Appendix 2

(Refer Para:1.10)
Non production of records

Sl. State Cases Cases Cases not % of non
No. requisitioned produced produced production
1. Andhra Pradesh 6,342 5,423 917 14.46
2 Assam 4,298 4,286 12 0.28
3 Bihar 2,347 2,193 154 6.56
4 Chhattisgarh 1107 1,098 9 0.81
5 Delhi 14,666 9,912 4,754 32.41
6 Gujarat 2,966 2,911 55 1.85
7. Sharkhand 589 558 31 5.26
8 Karnataka 2,294 2,092 132 5.93
9 Kerala 2,208 2,023 185 8.38
10 Madhya Pradesh 1,405 1,405 0 0
11 + Maharashtra 13,119 12,268 851 6.49
12 Orissa 1,307 1,119 188 14.38
13. Punjab, Haryana & HP 9,100 8,210 890 9.78
14. Rajasthan 4,287 4,010 277 6.46
15 Tamil Nadu 6,760 6,414 346 5.12
16 Uttarakhand 1,759 1,660 99 5.63
17 Uttar Pradesh 8,120 6,658 1,462 18
18 West Bengal 16,135 14,783 1,352 8.38
Total 98,809 87,023 11,714 11.86

52


६5

0८"77999८5 €6°6S9°07 ETT @eEvT Zy'v0'e ट८शा75 ५5 ६929 [exo
19°206LST 85° TS609E GECCESL 16$#0802 LES jeBuag3som — BT
6 95S VET 7999 ट६६ 7999 ८६६ 79°609'L6'T 98b ysepeig Jevin LT
0T'069'99'¢ प८टठ 7717 प्रटगापप 9 ट2%##7५ lv pueyyesenn — OT
56982 7269५ £8°LOL'V8‘S 6L'SLS'60'E tes pen wel — ST
प्रादफटट 66'99ट5 ६989 ट५ 88'65/62 ra ueyseley #.
8ट18910 67'६91995 9६16#995 पद द#79६ ost dH 8 eueAseH ‘qefund छा
60:/92 9£'920'96 6L'V8T‘90'T 98°STE'69 6e1 55710 दा.
६695%ट८८ 76'८2/६(80६(५ 76'2८६(80'६५ 7 €08'E8'S7 हटा enyseseyeW TT
80°681‘0L 595706 18'786'8E 7 L96'6T 92 ysaperd eAype = OT
€6'088'79 €TL78‘6L'T ६६ ८६५181 6971: TIE eyes
LL टह7929 2012206‘ Z0'T7Z'05'8 54: /%744 905 ९०9 ९ श्शथष्पश्भ्र.. 8
S6'0€6'8T OL ERL'ZE OES ‘Ze Teese'eL 85 puewyseyr 6
16°72S'Eb'b 19.868/856 59'5ट2/६8/86 ५44/६५7६ ols yeeing og
469'६६८४५८ 0८/'05606#7 0&६5६17८6% €0°L12'9€'7 SOL ५००७. 5५
५5८09 1424 44 प्च्ण्दा 95५65 z yaessieyys v
66°E6L‘L 6€°919'8T 82'69S‘6T #ट580: SL weylgd€
६8 ट259% 9६५४४ 8५५00/ 67'008'7 06 wessy = Z
19८9६ ६602/8% ६ट19576# 6998८ 9६9 ysapesg ४४५०० iT

(7-9) (9) (s) (v) (e) (2) (t)

asOW
py xeL awoouy py xe, awosuy quno22e sso| २9 sl py xe ३५०3७]
dad se pamoyyje dad se pawie|> qyjoid 9 paziqap 494 se uonenaidap

390347)110 u jaidaq uonelaidag uoneiaidaq asayM 5०5४७ 31e1S
(फाथ ण 3) (ट'ट :eaed 4०1०४)

(upny ३०५९७७१०)4०३) pTOZ 1० 02 ‘ON ३०7०४

100५ SI 320 Xe २५५००७| Jad se ५०11९[००1७०७० ०4०५/४ ५०५४०

'ए६१७०५७३००७


vs

86°080‘SZ'TT L8°STS‘TT‘'9% ६8 2६65662 98°966'98'LE 9276'S [e301
IZ'6lp'ST €T'Ovd'6b 19#20'05 7६651 89 505 jeBuag sam OT
6S°€06'0Z S89OLT'TS S89OLT'T8 vv'080'70'T 979 ysepesd बसी = ST
Cy 787 ey y9z't 56097 #8%५1 6६ pueyyesenn = pT
Ov'206‘ES O€SE6‘6Z'T 09°680'08'T 0८८६8६६८ 8ZT Mpen wel दा.
00°6S8‘ST 00°T79'97 00'Tz9'97 000#काः 8T ueyisefey दा
8६८6/9६ 5605206 S6°0S7'06 €€°80'L7'T 1244 ४५940 TT
78 LEG'EL'S 67 V66'T TOT 67'P66'TL‘OL TL'266'S8'TZ w8r'T eqqyseieyeil OT
1:10 44 8616५ 8616५ 979901: ५5६ ५५००९०३ ९४५०० 6
9L°L6S‘78 ev T8s‘el'T Os TEv‘eL'T 61 6LT‘96'T 96६४7 श्ष्णग्भ्र 8
67°780°E6 7S'8Lb'6r'T ट980#671 18097 कट 8६9 bod pue eyeyeusey =f
99°0SS‘ST 08°88T‘0S 08°88T‘0S 976६/59 6 pueuyeur 9
LO'92T ‘vb ES ETV'89'T T7'€S9'88'y 066६5 टा८ bly yeueing ५5
96'008‘T9 7579८ ट8 धाक्रा ८8 1५.595%#1 ट्ध्8 1५॥० v
TV6E 99°L90'7 960८ 9८1+#ट ६9 जध्पाव ६
L9'V8L'T vEoOT'e vS'8v0'E TO'TS6'y set wessy 7
LT'80S‘SS'‘T ६86८2 vv 9eT 00°882‘SST ete ysepeig ९०५००ए..

(गे (9) (s) (v) (e) (2) (1)

ज्तत्प्प
py xe! >पप्०901 py xe] awosu| 51370 sajuedWioD
dad se pamoye dad se pawiej> junoa2e ssoj ' 11074 dad se uoneiaidap ‘ON

०11 5111 | uonenaidag uo}jeaudaq 0} payqap uojenesdag 949५/४ ५०५४७ ९5५ 1s
(uel ण 2) (ट'द :e4ed 4०128)

जा०प्प्र 9379 saluUedwo? Jad se ५०11९०9०4099 94०५/४ 5०५९७

8६ Xipuaddy

(pny a2uewuoyied) छ.02 Jo 02 ‘ON #०५०४


SS

LU EST‘EO'E 09°S89‘TO‘E vO'E8T‘E0'E Trv‘oT e301
80°ZZ6T 80°7Z6T 80८66: 096६ |९8५०४ sam घ
56565: 56565 S6S‘6S'T 8581: ysapeig Jen rai
€9°S99'T €9°S99'T €9°S99'T ev pueyyesenn 144
5661807 (0 44:1.24 56 6:80: BL 17९॥॥ ॥५४४॥ OL
185८58 18°S/S'8 18°SLs‘8 65ट ९५510 6
6S0‘Ev 6S0'Ev 6S0'Ev 7927'S eujyseseyew 8
0€°679'0Z 78% टट 0€°679‘0Z 09८ ejesayy L
v86‘0L v86‘0T v86‘0T 929 BOO pue ९42९५. ४) 9
19886 ट६ 19886ट६ TS'886'7E श्ट yese[n5 S
67700'0 घ्टाक्छ0५ tv0'L €v0'L “st Yyled v
L3°78 L878 L878 9 deylg €
€6°6€8'7 €6°6€8'7 €6°6€8'7 Ove wessy z
96°676'7 96626 96626 Bev ysapeld eaypuy T
(7-9) (9) (s) (p) (e) (2) (1)
jenba
py py yuno2e 55०] *g 5132 sajuedwo) pue
dad se pamoyje dad se pawie|> 39०70 ० payigap = = 329 Jad se uoNelaidap
>2५947)॥10 घ०३९|०२५०७०० u eidaq uonenaidag >49७/॥४ ५०५४७ गथ5 ‘ON ‘IS
(फाथ ut 2) (2°2 ४०९३ 3०12४)

(upny ३०५९७७१०)4०३) pTOZ 1० 02 ‘ON ३०7०४

SWS ५] Dy Xe] >४००७|
pue 39 saluedwios sad se uolelasdap asaym ५०५४७

DE xIpuaddy


9S

S6'bZS‘TO'ET LE'T92‘09'% 7E'98Z'T9'ST 80°StS‘2Z'Tr'T 586 ॥रण1
8980टटट6 Te Orr'vs'T 66°879'90'TT 6S 9VT ‘SPILT हद jeSuag isan, 8T
TSEZE'Z 56% ६६16८८ 76'६090: 97 ysapeig sewn = LT
296६ ze wSly v0"S89 oz pueyyesenn भा
LS°€09'E 5861८ दश्घ्टघ्छ 6८87 वा. LE npen jiwe, ST
TLSTS घ्ण्घ्णा #8 819 00 ८981: vr ueyjseley VT
86°S6L'Z sT'6Ev €T'SE9‘Z ELST L'8Z 6 dH 7g eueAiey ‘qefund ET
70 टा६ फ़ाट9 577८६ ६५५9४ oT 25510  7T
@S'LS6'8E'E TL8LL'L9 ET9EL‘90'V TO'Sv6'8S‘97 €9T euqyseseyey| TT
56८ 6शग 5662 ख्च्ष्चः 69056 8 प१५००४०३ eAypew OT
vOLLy EO'LTT LO v6L ६6979 छः श्एय०) 6
St v6E'Z 58806 07६८8 60°99S'TE 00z ९०9 pue eye}eWey g
Oe TLO'T 80°07 8E°S87'T 89६८८ ve pueyyeyr ZL
0टटाट५ 16190: प्र#पट9 60°968'SL 66 qeseing 9
87६८9 OL vET 87808 09६99 शर्ट eq 5
929 vet 0५6८ ट000: ५ ७०४१५॥1९०५५० 7
घ्टापट TT0S ve TOE 8/६09६ 6T deyig ६
9700६ 59.09 7809६ 9६656 v wessy Z
ST‘ZE9‘0Z es ell'y 86'StL've OT'ZTS‘SS‘T (405 ysapeig erypuy T
(9-5) (9) (9) 0] (छे (2) (1)
uonepaidap — (५२०९४ 404) yyuoWw pamoye apew
jo aouemoyje —-auo ३०] siseq e3eJ-01d (uoie!aidap jeuonippe suonippe ‘ON
559>03 uo प०प९२३१०५०० _१९४४०ए १:11, | ० | u aidaq [BIOL saassassy गथ$ 1s

(yye] ० >) (€°Z ४०४३ 4०1०४)
प2३९॥७ JO प५००५ ay} 39117 paseysind 519558 jo ५|॥|९३००

b Xipuaddy

(pny a2uewuoyied) pTOZ Jo 02 ‘ON #०५०४


८5

7६&9698801: EEOIT‘ZO'TE  OSh ॥शण
८7671 69'099'T 9v'7S8'7 ve'e9S'6 8 ysapeid Jenn OT
65८6६ 79 ट5 €7'06 ८687 9 pueyyeseynn 6
7८80] ष्ट्य्डः 90192 14:8:1// 41 ट्ट ९|४५३) 8
OO'TZT'T aiqeyleae JON >|१९॥९७४ JON 00°200‘7S‘Ez T eueAseH Z
69°2OD LLE9S 97996 ६7८५9 eT eyeyeuley 9
60छ&# ६६०१9 व्ण्घ्णा 57६५7 8 48५॥8 9
ट?555 6५८८८ TO'EEE'T €0°L90'8 vez 1५1०० v
575 ६9८ 80°ET €v'STIL T wessy ६
02.06: टटा592८ cr'ssp ६98/8८ पट jeBuad sam ८
6€ OVZSOT Ly 9€e‘Ly'T T8'9LS‘7S'7 €7'088'6L‘L €vT eayyseseyey| T

(9-s) (9) (s) (e) (2) (t)

uo! aidap (youve) 404) yzuow pamoye

jOaouemoyje = aud ०) siseq eye1-O1d (uonenasdap jeuolippe ‘ON

55923 Uo ५०]३९|२०4००7० >1१४/४४०॥ए 80]19॥|2५]] uojelaidaq 1थण1 saassassy 3३४३५ Is

(फाथ ० 3) (६८ ९०९३ 4०1०४)

[जाए ३०५९७४३०)३०३) छ02 1० 0Z ‘ON Hoday

Jaquiaydas jo yyuow ay} 3प[॥7 paseypind sjasse jo ५९३००

Vv Xipuaddy


ACIT
ACT
AO
807
AST
AY
BOT
CBDT
(छा
CIT
DIT
FY
ITAT
ITD
ITO
JCIT
TDS
UT
WDV

Report No. 20 of 2014 (Performance Audit)

Abbreviations

Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax
Income Tax Act, 1961

Assessing Officer

Association of Persons
Assessment module of IT system
Assessment Year

Built, Operate and Transfer
Central Board of Direct Taxes
Chief Commissioner of Income Tax
Commissioner of Income Tax
Directorate of Income Tax
Financial Year

Income Tax Appellate Tribunal
Income Tax Department

Income Tax Officer

Joint Commissioner of Income Tax
Tax Deducted at Source

Union Territory

Written Down Value

59