Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India

for the year ended March 2013

Government of the Union Territory of Puducherry
Report No. 1 of 2014


TABLE OF CONTENTS

PREFACE (vii)

About this Report pou | al 1
Profile of Audited entity 1.2 2
Authority for Audit 13 3
Planning and conduct of audit pou | 4
Significant audit observations 1.5 5
Response to audit | 16 | 8
Follow up on the Audit Reports 17 7

LOCAL ADMINISTRATION AND PUBLIC WORKS
DEPARTMENTS

Performance Audit on ‘Rural Water Supply Schemes’ 21 11



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

WASTEFUL EXPENDITURE/OVER PAYMENT 3.1

REVENUE AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT DEPARTMENT

PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION AGENCY

‘Wasteful expenditure due to non-construction of houses 3.1.1 23

INFORMATION AND PUBLICITY DEPARTMEN'

Wasteful expenditure on advertisement 3.1.2 24

PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT

Over payment to contractors 3.1.3 26

AVOIDABLE EXPENDITURE 3.2

PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT

Avoidable extra expenditure 3.2.1 27

PUBLIC WORKS AND HINDU RELIGIOUS
INSTITUTIONS DEPARTMENTS

Avoidable additional liability 3.2.2 29

IDLE INVESTMENT/BLOCKING OF FUNDS 3.3

PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT

Idle investment on construction of distribution grid 3.3.1 30



Table of contents

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEPARTMENT

Blocking of funds due to non-availability of land 3.3.2 31
JAIL DEPARTMENT
Tdle investment on construction of staff quarters 3.3.3 33

PORT DEPARTMENT

Public Private Partnership of development of
Karaikal port

3.4 34

Trend of revenue receipts Poa | 47
Variation between the budget estimates and actuals 42 49
Analysis of collection 43 49
Arrears of revenue 44 50
Fraud and evasion of tax 4.5 51

Failure to enforce accountability and protect the interest of the

Government 46 52

Status of recovery against audit observations accepted by the

Government 47 3

Results of Audit 48 53

iii


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

COMMERCIAL TAXES DEPARTMENT

Value Added Tax

Performance Audit on ‘Implementation of Value Added Tax in
Union Territory of Puducherry’

49

54

REVENUE DEPARTMENT

Stamp Duty and Registration Fees

Misclassification of instruments of Conveyance as Cancellation
Deeds

4.10

70

HEALTH DEPARTMENT

State Excise

Short collection of excise duty and additional excise duty

Overview of Union Territory of Puducherry Public Sector
Undertakings

4.11

5.1

71

73

PUDUCHERRY ROAD TRANSPORT CORPORATION
LIMITED

Idling of buses

5.2

82



Table of contents

Details of IRs issued upto December 2012 and paragraphs pending

as on June 2013 1.1 85
Details of OHTs constructed with excess capacity due to wrong

हि पे 2.1 87
adoption of design period
Calculation of price variation for cement and steel 3.1 88
Phase-wise development of Karaikal port and cost incurred 3.2 |» |

Statement showing particulars of up-to-date paid-up capital, loans
outstanding and manpower as on 31 March 2013 in respect of 5.1 91
Government companies

Summarised financial results of Government companies for the

latest year for which accounts were finalised 52 93
Statement showing grants and subsidy received/receivable,

guarantees received, waiver of dues, loans written off and loans 53 95
converted into equity during the year and guarantee commitment at °

the end of March 2013

Statement showing investments made by the Government of the 54 97
Union Territory of Puducherry in PSUs whose accounts are in arrear °

Glossary of abbreviations 99



PREFACE

This Report has been prepared for submission to the Lieutenant
Governor under Section 49 of the Government of Union Territories
Act, 1963. Audit observations on the Annual Accounts of the Union
Territory Government would form part of a Report on Union
Territory Finances which is being presented separately.

The Report starts with an introductory chapter outlining the Audit
scope, mandate and the important Audit findings which emerged
during the year long audit exercise. Chapter-II deals with the
findings of Performance Audit, while Chapter-III discusses material
findings emerging from Compliance Audit.

The observations arising out of audit of revenue receipts of the
Union Territory are included in Chapter-IV of this Report.

The observations arising out of audit of commercial and trading
activities of the Union Territory are included in Chapter-V of this
Report.

The cases mentioned in this Report are among those which came to
notice in the course of test audit of accounts during the year 2012-13
as well as those which had come to notice in earlier years but could
not be included in the previous Reports. Matters relating to the
period subsequent to 2012-13 have also been included, wherever
possible.

vii



> I
INTRODUCTION



CHAPTER I

This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) on
Government of the Union Territory of Puducherry relates to matters arising
from Performance Audit of selected programmes and activities and
Compliance Audit of Government departments, Government companies
and autonomous bodies.

The primary purpose of the Report is to bring to the notice of the Union
Territory Legislature, important results of audit. Auditing Standards require
that the materiality level for reporting should be commensurate with the
nature, volume and magnitude of transactions. The audit findings are
expected to enable the Executive to take corrective actions as also to frame
policies and directives that will lead to improved financial management of
the organisations, thus, contributing to better governance.

Compliance Audit refers to examination of the transactions relating to
expenditure, receipt, assets and liabilities of the audited entities to ascertain
whether the provisions of the Constitution of India, applicable laws, rules,
regulations and various orders and instructions issued by the competent
authorities are being complied with.

Performance Audit examines whether the objectives of an organization,
programme or scheme have been achieved economically, efficiently and
effectively.

This chapter, in addition to explaining the planning and extent of audit,
provides a synopsis of the significant deficiencies and achievements in
implementation of selected schemes, significant audit observations made
during the audit of transactions and follow-up on the previous Audit
Reports. Chapter-II of this Report contains findings arising out of
Performance Audit of selected programmes/activities/departments.
Chapter-III contains observations on Compliance Audit in Government
departments and autonomous bodies. Chapter-IV contains findings arising
out of audit of revenue receipts of the Union Territory and Chapter-V
contains findings arising out of audit of commercial and trading activities
of the Union Territory (UT).

The cases mentioned in this Report are among those which came to notice

in the course of test audit of accounts during the year 2012-13 as well as
those which had come to notice in earlier years but could not be included in

Abbreviations used in this report are listed in the Glossary at Page 99



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

the previous Reports. Matters relating to the period subsequent to 2012-13
have also been included, wherever possible.

There are 30 departments in the UT at the Secretariat level, headed by
Development Commissioners/Secretaries, who are assisted by Directors
and subordinate officers under them. There are 13 Government companies
and 81 autonomous bodies. These entities are audited by the Principal
Accountant General (General and Social Sector Audit), Tamil Nadu and
Puducherry and the Principal Accountant General (Economic and Revenue
Sector Audit), Tamil Nadu.

The comparative position of receipts of the UT Government and
expenditure incurred by the Government during the year 2012-13 and in the
preceding two years is given in Tables 1 and 2 below:

Table 1: Comparative position of receipts

@ in crore)
Revenue receipts 2771
Tax revenue | 104 | 1,329 1,917
Non-tax revenue 743 153 | us|
Grants-in-aid and contributions 1,383 | 12७ | 1,111

(Source: Finance Accounts of UT of Puducherry)



Chapter I - Introduction

Table 2: Comparative position of expenditure

@ in crore)
General 833 32 | 865 933 35 968 | 1,100 39 | 1139
services
Social 578 | 801 | 1379 | ७७» | 849 | 1,498 S71 681 | 1252
services
Economic [204 | 388 | 1292 | 369 383 | 752 | 391 264 | 655
services
Grants-in-aid
and 4 | -| 4 4 | -| 4 5 | -| 5
contributions
Capital 2 | 369 | 371 (6 381 | 375 | «| 309 315
expenditure
Loans and
advances 2 | -| 2 2 | -| 2 | | | -| 1
disbursed
Repayment of | *| +
public debt 148 | 1७ | 51 | 157 126 62 188
Contingency | -| | - | [=] | -| | -| | -| | -| [=| [=|
fund
Public account * ol w | * | | | 795 | *| | *| बा7
disbursements °

(Source: Finance Accounts of UT of Puducherry)
* — Bifurcation of Non-Plan and Plan not available.

The authority for audit by the C&AG is derived from Article 149 of the
Constitution of India and the Comptroller and Auditor General's (Duties,
Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971. The C&AG conducts audit
of expenditure and receipts of the departments of Government of Union
Territory of Puducherry under Sections 13! and 16? of the C&AG's (DPC)
Act. He is the sole auditor in respect of 17 autonomous bodies which are
audited under sections 19(2)° and 20(1)* of the C&AG's (DPC) Act. In

Audit of (a) all expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of UT having a
legislative assembly, (b) all transactions relating to the Contingency Fund and
Public Accounts and (c) all trading, manufacturing, profit & loss accounts,
balance sheets and other subsidiary accounts kept in Government departments
Audit of all receipts which are payable into the Consolidated Fund of UT having
legislative assembly

Audit of accounts of corporations established by or under law made by
Parliament

Audit of accounts of a body or authority at the request of the President or the
Administrator of UT having a legislative assembly



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

addition, the C&AG conducts audit of 64 other autonomous bodies, under
Section 145 of the C&AG's (DPC) Act, which are substantially funded by
the Government. The accounts of the Government companies (as defined
in Section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956) are audited by Statutory
Auditors, who are appointed by the C&AG as per the provisions of Section
619(2) of the Companies Act, 1956. These accounts are also subject to
supplementary audit conducted by the C&AG as per provisions of Section
619 of the Companies Act, 1956. Principles and methodologies for various
audits are prescribed in the Auditing Standards and the Regulations on
Audit and Accounts, 2007 issued by the C&AG.

Audit process starts with the assessment of risks faced by various
departments and corporations/companies of Government based on
expenditure incurred, revenue collected, criticality, complexity of activities,
level of delegated financial powers, assessment of overall internal controls
and concerns of stakeholders. Previous audit findings are also considered
in this exercise. Based on this risk assessment, the frequency and extent of
audit are decided.

After completion of audit of each unit, Inspection Reports containing audit
findings are issued to the heads of the departments/corporations/companies.
The departments/corporations/companies are requested to furnish replies to
the audit findings within one month of receipt of the Inspection Reports.
Whenever replies are received, audit findings are either settled or further
action for compliance is advised. Important audit observations arising out
of these Inspection Reports are processed for inclusion in the Audit Report,
which is submitted to the Lieutenant Governor of the Union Territory under
Article 149 of the Constitution of India and Section 49 of the Union
Territories Act, 1963.

During 2012-13, 168 units of various departments/organisations/
companies/corporations were audited for Compliance Audits and
Performance Audits.

Audit of all receipts and expenditure of a body/authority substantially financed by
grants or loans from the Consolidated Fund of UT having legislative assembly



Chapter I - Introduction
In the last few years, Audit has reported on several significant deficiencies
in implementation of various programmes/activities through Performance
Audits as well as on the quality of internal controls in selected departments
which impact the success of programmes and functioning of the

departments. Similarly, deficiencies noticed during Compliance Audit of
the Government departments/organizations are also reported upon.

1.5.1 Performance Audit of programmes/activities

The present Report contains two Performance Audits. The highlights of
audit findings are given in the following paragraphs:

1.5.1.1 Performance Audit on ‘Rural Water Supply Schemes’

The Union Territory Government of Puducherry implemented Rural Water
Supply (RWS) schemes to provide safe and clean drinking water to rural
population. Performance Audit of RWS schemes was taken to assess
whether utilization of ground water, creation of required infrastructure for
supply, operation and maintenance of RWS schemes was economical,
effective and that the water supplied met with quality requirements.
Performance Audit revealed following significant audit observations:

Implementation of RWS schemes suffered due to unregulated extraction of
ground water and non-adoption of supply norms, which would adversely
affect sustainability of limited ground water source.

Designing of schemes deviating from the norms prescribed by Central
Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organisation resulted in
avoidable extra expenditure.

Water charges levied were not sufficient to meet the Operation and

Maintenance expenses as envisaged in the National Water Policy and there

was also huge arrear in collection of water charges.

The quality of water supplied was not as per the prescribed standards.
(Paragraph 2.1)

1.5.1.2 Performance audit on Implementation of Value Added Tax in
Union Territory of Puducherry

The returns prescribed under the Puducherry Value Added Tax did not
facilitate cross verification of the claim of input tax credit by dealers.

The Department did not ensure adherence by the dealers to the provisions
of the Act/Rules regarding filing of certificate in Form ‘CC’.



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

There was delay in finalisation of assessments which were selected for
detailed scrutiny of accounts.

Absence of validation checks in the software rendered the information
captured in the system unreliable.

(Paragraph 4.9)
1.5.2 Compliance Audit

Audit of financial transactions test-checked in various departments of the
Government, their field offices and Government companies revealed instances
of loss of revenue, wasteful/avoidable expenditure, blocking of funds and other
irregularities. Some of the important audit findings are given below:

Failure of Revenue department to verify title deeds and action of the
Project Implementation Agency in releasing cash assistance to beneficiaries
without any binding conditions for recovery in case of default resulted in
wasteful expenditure of % 52.92 lakh.

(Paragraph 3.1.1)

Calling for tenders for procurement and supply of Colour Television to
households free of cost, without finalizing scheme guidelines resulted in
non-implementation of scheme leading to wasteful expenditure of
% 40.13 lakh towards advertisement of tenders.

(Paragraph 3.1.2)

Adoption of wrong price indices while calculating the price variation for
steel and cement led to overpayment of % 27.36 lakh and undue benefit to
contractors.

(Paragraph 3.1.3)

Delay in granting expenditure sanction for a road work under Revamped
Central Road Fund resulted in avoidable extra expenditure of € 1.76 crore.

(Paragraph 3.2.1)

Failure of the Public Works Department to ensure availability of clear site
before inviting tenders and failure of Hindu Religious Institutions to evict
encroachments resulted in foreclosure of contract and award of work to the
same contractor in second call with an additional liability of € 0.59 crore

(Paragraph 3.2.2)
Imprudent action of the Public Works Department in commencing the work
of laying distribution grid without ensuring availability of land for
construction of OHT resulted in idle expenditure of 782 crore spent
on distribution grid.

(Paragraph 3.3.1)



Chapter I - Introduction

Failure of the Department to ensure availability of land before release of
funds resulted in blocking of funds of % 1.86 crore outside Government
account for more than two years.

(Paragraph 3.3.2)

Non-provision of separate entrance for staff quarters constructed within the
Jail complex resulted in idle expenditure of हैं 84.15 lakh.

(Paragraph 3.3.3)
Public Private Partnership of development of Karaikal port

The UT Government issued EOI for port development without specifying
pre-qualification criteria for selection of concessionaire. Selection
procedure was not proper as it was done on the basis of unstructured
presentation without specifying criteria for evaluation or adopting
pre-determined quantitative and qualitative parameters. The revenue share
of 2.60 per cent was fixed after award of the contract, defeating the very
purpose of competitive bidding.

The CA contained various deficiencies such as failure to safeguard the
financial interest of UT Government in the event of termination of CA,
irregular provision for engagement of the Concessionaire’s own staff as
Expert, etc. Financial and operational Audits were not conducted and the
concessionaire was allowed to develop subsequent phases of the Port
without submission of revised DPR.

The monitoring system was weak due to failures of UT Government in
appointing a director to the Board of Directors of the Port, non-engagement
of an independent engineer, non-constitution of separate bodies for
monitoring of the Project, irregularity in operation of escrow account,
non-conducting of annual physical verification of assets of the Project etc.

(Paragraph 3.4)
1.5.3 Commercial and trading activities

Audit of Government companies is governed by Section 619 of the
Companies Act, 1956. The accounts of the Government companies are
audited by Statutory Auditors appointed by C&AG. These accounts are also
subject to supplementary audit conducted by C&AG. As on 31 March 2013,
the Union Territory of Puducherry had 13 working PSUs, which employed
5,829 employees. These PSUs registered a turnover of % 373.92 crore as
per the latest finalised accounts. This turnover was equal to 2.18 per cent of
State GDP for the year 2012-13. The PSUs incurred an overall loss of
र₹ 31.68 crore and had accumulated losses of हैं 496.38 crore as per their
latest finalised accounts.

As on 31 March 2013, the investment (capital and long term loans) in all
13 PSUs was & 711.15 crore. It grew by 8.06 per cent from % 658.10 crore



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

in 2008-09 to % 711.15 crore in 2012-13. Financing and Manufacturing
sectors accounted for 19 per cent and 56.26 per cent respectively of total
investment in 2012-13. The Government contributed हैं 107.22 crore
towards equity, loans and grants during 2012-13.

As per the latest finalised accounts, three PSUs earned a profit of 14.79
crore and nine PSUs incurred loss of € 46.47 crore. The losses of PSUs are
mainly attributable to deficiencies in financial management, planning,
implementation of project, running their operations and monitoring. The
PSUs can discharge their role efficiently if they are financially prudent.
There is a need for professionalism and accountability in functioning of
PSUs.

Twelve PSUs had arrears of 24 accounts as of September 2013. Arrears
need to be cleared by setting targets for PSUs and expediting the work
relating to preparation of accounts.

(Paragraph 5.1)

Buses and additional fitments worth हैं 3.48 crore procured out of Central
assistance were kept idle for more than two years.

(Paragraph 5.2)

Twelve Draft Paragraphs (DPs) and two draft Performance Audits (PAs) were
forwarded demi-officially to the Development Commissioners/Secretaries of
the departments concerned between June 2013 and January 2014 with the
request to send their responses within six weeks. Government replies have
been received in respect of only three DPs and two PAs. The replies, wherever
received, have been suitably incorporated in the Report.

A review of the Inspection Reports (IRs) issued upto 31 December 2012
revealed that 3,158 paras relating to 837 IRs remained outstanding at the end
of June 2013 (Appendix 1.1).

The Committee on Public Accounts (PAC) prescribed a time limit of three
months for the departments for furnishing replies to the audit observations
included in the Audit Reports indicating the corrective/remedial action
taken or proposed to be taken by them and for submission of Action Taken



Chapter I - Introduction

Notes on the recommendations of the PAC by the departments. The
pendency of paragraphs/recommendations for which replies/Action Taken
Notes had not been received is as follows:

(a) Out of 49 paragraphs included in the Audit Reports relating to the
years from 2009-10 to 2011-2012, departmental replies were not received
for 41 paragraphs as of February 2014.

(b) Government departments had not furnished Action Taken Notes as
of February 2014 on 318 recommendations made by the PAC in respect of
Audit Reports pertaining to the period 1988-89 to 2008-09.



CHAPTER II
PERFORMANCE AUDIT



CHAPTER II

This chapter contains Performance Audit on ‘Rural Water Supply
Schemes’.

LOCAL ADMINISTRATION AND PUBIC WORKS
DEPARTM. Ss

Executive Summary

The Union Territory Government of Puducherry implemented Rural Water
Supply (RWS) schemes to provide safe and clean drinking water to rural
population. Performance Audit of RWS schemes was conducted to assess
whether utilization of ground water, creation of required infrastructure for
supply, operation and maintenance of RWS schemes was economical,
effective and that the water supplied met with quality requirements.
Performance Audit revealed following significant audit findings:

Implementation of RWS schemes suffered due to unregulated extraction of
ground water and non-adoption of supply norms, which would adversely
affect sustainability of limited ground water source.

Designing of schemes deviating from the norms prescribed by Central
Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organisation resulted in
avoidable extra expenditure.

Water charges levied were not sufficient to meet the Operation and
Maintenance expenses as envisaged in the National Water Policy and there
was also huge arrear in collection of water charges.

The quality of water supplied was not as per the prescribed standards.

2.1.1 Introduction

The Union Territory of Puducherry comprises four geographically isolated
regions viz., Puducherry, Karaikal, Mahe and Yanam. Mahe and Yanam are
urban areas and only Puducherry and Karaikal have rural population

1


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

of 4.86 lakh’ spread over 10 Commune Panchayats” (CP). The Union
Territory Government of Puducherry (UT Government) is implementing
Rural Water Supply (RWS) schemes as part of its policy to provide
potable, protected and permanent drinking water supply facilities to rural
population. The Eleventh Five Year Plan document (2007-12) of UT
Government proposed to give thrust for qualitative improvement of water,
augmentation/rehabilitation of supply systems and sustained availability of
water on long-term basis by improving performance and cost effectiveness.
Drinking water supply in Puducherry region relies totally on ground water
resources while Karaikal region depends both on surface and ground water.
The Public Works Department (PWD) is responsible for creation of
infrastructure facilities such as sinking of borewells, erection of pump
sets, construction of overhead tanks/underground sumps, laying of
distribution lines and commissioning of the Water Supply System. During
2008-13 an amount of हैं 110.69 crore has been spent towards
implementation of various RWS schemes.

2.1.2 Organisational set up

The Secretaries to the Government of Puducherry, Public Works and Local
Administration (LAD) are administrative heads for planning RWS
schemes. The Chief Engineer, PWD, is responsible for formulation and
execution of RWS schemes. The Director, LAD is responsible for
Operation and Maintenance of RWS Systems handed over by the PWD
with the stance of Commissioners of CPs.

2.1.3 Audit objectives

The audit objectives were to assess whether

> Proper policies/plans in line with National Water Policy were
formulated, based on assessment of requirement and availability of
water to provide safe and adequate quantity of drinking water to
tural population as per norms

> Adequate attention was accorded to ensure sustainability of water
sources and environmental issues were suitably addressed

vy

Financial Management was effective and funds were provided in a
timely fashion and schemes were executed and implemented within
the stipulated time and cost

Vv

Repairs and maintenance of the existing water supply assets were
effective for ensuring uninterrupted water supply

Includes population of Ariyankuppam, Manavely, T.R pattinam and Villianur
census towns as they fall under their respective CPs.

Ariyankuppam, Bahour, Manadipet, Nettapakkam and Villianur in Puducherry
region; Kottucherry, Nedungadu, Neravy, T.R. Pattinam and Thirunallar in
Karaikal region



Chapter I - Performance Audit

> Mechanism for monitoring of quality of water supply and
surveillance was adequate and effective.

2.1.4 Audit Criteria

The performance audit was benchmarked against criteria derived from the
following sources:

> National Water Policy 2002

> Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organisation
manual on water supply (CPHEEO)

> Guidelines, instructions issued by GOI and the UT Government
from time to time

> Plan Documents of UT Government
> Vision 2020 document of UT Government.
2.1.5 Audit Scope and Methodology

Performance Audit was conducted during April-August 2013 and records
relating to the period 2008-13 were test-checked at Government
Secretariat, Directorate of Local Administration, the Chief Engineer office,
PWD, Public Health Division - PWD (Puducherry and Karaikal) and five
CPs* (out of 10 CPs) selected on simple random sampling method. Prior to
commencement of audit, entry conferences were held (April 2013) with the
Secretaries of PWD and LAD wherein the audit objectives, audit criteria
and methodology of audit were discussed. Audit findings were discussed
with the Secretaries of PWD and LAD in exit conferences held during
December 2013 and their replies have been incorporated.

Audit Findings
2.1.6 Planning
2.1.6.1 State Water Policy is yet to be notified

The National Water Policy, 2002 formulated (April 2002) by Government
of India, inter alia, prescribes that

Bahour, Villianur, Kottucherry, Neravy and T.R.Pattinam

13


Over extraction of
ground water
resource

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

¢ exploitation of ground water resources should be regulated and
over exploitation of ground water should be avoided especially near
the coast to prevent ingress of seawater

¢ efficiency of utilization in all diverse uses of water should be
optimized and an awareness of water as a scarce resource should be
fostered

e besides creating additional resources, adequate emphasis needs to
be given to physical sustainability of existing resources by levying
water charges for various uses in such a way that they cover at least
the operation and maintenance charges.

Towards achieving these objectives, National Water Policy stipulated that
State Water Policy should be formulated within two years for effective
management of water resources. However, the Department of Science and
Technology, Puducherry, formulated a State Draft Water Policy (SDWP)
only in November 2012 containing a section on Drinking water regarding
periodical monitoring of quality of water, water pricing for ensuring
physical and financial sustainability of the systems, etc., and called for
comments from all stake holders. As such SDWP is yet to be notified
(December 2013) even after lapse of nine years.

The UT Government replied (January 2014) that State Water Policy is
being finalized. However, in absence of such policy, the available ground
water resources were over-exploited, slackness in periodical monitoring of
water quality was noticed and demand charges raised were not sufficient to
meet the operation and maintenance cost as discussed in succeeding
paragraphs.

2.1.6.2 Failure in regulation of ground water extraction

With a view to regulate extraction of ground water, the UT Government
declared (February 2005) Puducherry and Karaikal regions as notified area
and any user who proposes to use ground water has to get permit from
State Ground Water Authority (SGWA) for sinking borewell and fix Bulk
meters at strategic points to measure the water supplied as mandated by
CPHEEO. Though ground water level continued to deplete at the rate of
one to 1.5 metre per year as per the report (2008-09) of State Ground
Water unit, SGWA permitted PWD and CPs to drill 259 borewells under
RWS during 2008-13. An analysis of number of borewells, population and
quantity of water extracted in sample CPs as on March 2013 against the
requirement of maximum of 70 Litres Per Capita per Day (Ipcd), indicated
excess extraction as given in Table 1 below:

14


Chapter II - Performance Audit

Table 1 - Over extraction of water in sample CPs

Bahour 50 68757 5.53 22.01 16.48 320
Villianur ll 126798 10.21 42.44 | 32.23 335
Kottucherry 19 23186 1.87 1.06 - 0.81 46
Neravy | 6 | 12841 1.03 1.96 0.93 152
T.RPattinam | 6 | 21335 1.72 4.03 2.31 189
Total 192 252917 20.36 71.50 51.14

(Source: Details furnished by CPs and information in col. 4 to 7 worked out by audit based on

norms; MLD - Million litres per day)

Against requirement of 20.36 MLD of water, 71.50 MLD was extracted
resulting in excess extraction of 51.14 MLD except in one CP
(Kottucherry). The UT Government replied (January 2014) that CPs would
be directed to effect metered water supply in rural areas to avoid wastages
and to follow CPHEEO norm for piped water supply. It further stated that
action would be initiated to provide bulk water meter at borewell points in
future.

2.1.6.3 Formulation of water supply schemes without conducting
habitation survey

Planning and Research department obtains plan proposals every year in
terms of habitations/villages/population from PWD to be covered in the
ensuing year and fund requirement for implementation of RWS schemes.
It was noticed that PWD proposed water supply schemes without
conducting any habitation survey to identify the status of existing drinking
water supply and quantity/quality of water. The UT Government claimed
in the Draft Annual Plan 2007-08 that all the villages were fully covered
under RWS. However, in absence of habitation survey, the department lost
the opportunity to identify the habitations which had slipped back from
fully covered to partially/not covered and to plan suitably.

The Government replied (January 2014) that water supply schemes were
formulated based on the census report as per CPHEEO norms and the
habitation survey was conducted to assess the exact population. The
Puducherry region had to cater to the needs of migrating population from
Tamilnadu and hence additional borewells were required beyond the

Includes 15 per cent on 70 Iped towards unaccounted transmission loss as per
CPHEEO norms

15


Over Head Tanks
were constructed
with capacity more
than the required
norms leading to
excess expenditure

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

replacement borewells in lieu of defunct borewells. However requirement
of water should have been provided based on the habitation survey.

2.1.7 Scheme Implementation
2.1.7.1 Construction of OHTs with capacity more than required

As per CPHEEO guidelines, designing of schemes should be based on
projected population for design period and respective daily water supply
requirement. CPHEEO further prescribes that design period of Over Head
Tank (OHT) should be for 15 years. However, it was noticed that in
respect of four schemes, PWD had projected the population for 30 years
instead of 15 years as prescribed by CPHEEO. As a result the respective
four OHTs under these schemes were constructed with excess capacities
than required at a cost of 3.54 crore (Appendix 2.1).

Had PWD correctly adopted population projection for 15 years, the cost of
construction of OHTs could have been limited to हैं 2.18 crore
(approximate). Further construction of OHTs with higher capacity than
required would only lead to over exploitation of ground water and excess
supply as discussed earlier as water is being supplied to the present
population from these OHTs, which were filled twice a day. Thus, wrong
adoption of population figures by PWD resulted in construction of OHTs
with excess capacity than actually required leading to an excess
expenditure of € 1.36 crore.

Though the Government justified (January 2014) the design period taken
as 30 years, they accepted audit observation and stated that future design
would be made for 15 years.

2.1.7.2 Objective of preventing seawater ingression not achieved

Vision 2020 document suggested (March 2003) that due to sea water
intrusion upto five to seven kilometers in coastal areas, any extraction of
ground water has to be done only beyond this distance. Considering sea
water intrusion in coastal villages of Bahour CP having a projected
population of 13718, the work of “Augmentation of water supply system to
coastal villages in Bahour Commune (South Zone)” was taken up by PWD
during 2003-04 with an aim of providing water from two new borewells to
be sunk at villages located at a distance of more than six kilometers from
shoreline.

Though the work of construction of OHT was completed (March 2006) at a
cost of = 77.74 lakh, the work of sinking two new borewells was not taken
up due to paucity of fund. Works of laying distribution lines and other sub
works were completed at a cost of हैं 249.65 lakh and the scheme was
handed over to the CP in August 2012 after connecting OHT with existing
four old borewells located within three kilometers from shoreline in the
villages of Bahour CP itself. Thus the objective of preventing extraction of

16


Chapter I - Performance Audit

ground water in coastal area to avoid ingress of seawater was defeated
despite an investment of हैं 327.39 lakh.

When pointed out, the UT Government replied (January 2014), that only
existing four borewells were connected without going for new borewells.
Drawing more water from existing borewells in the coastal area would
only result in ingress of seawater.

2.1.7.3 Excess expenditure due to non-consideration of DI pipes

Ductile Iron (DI) pipes are more flexible and elastic and less brittle than
Cast Iron (CI) pipes. DI pipes are strong and stand up better to hydraulic
pressure tests as required by service regulations and are approximately
30 per cent lighter than conventional CI pipes with same life period as that
of CI pipes. Moreover, cost of DI pipes was less than that of CI pipes. In
view of above, UT Government directed (October 2006) PWD to adopt DI
pipes to the extent possible for water supply lines. Despite this, in respect
of 5 OHTs° constructed during 2008-13, PWD utilized CI pipes for inlet,
outlet, overflow and washout lines, thus leading to an excess expenditure
of & 12.32 lakh.

UT Government accepted audit observation and stated (January 2014) that
in future DI pipes would be utilized in RWS schemes.

2.1.7.4 Creation of unnecessary infrastructure

(i) UT Government accorded (March 2011) expenditure sanction for
₹ 18.20 crore towards implementing the scheme of “providing water
supply scheme for Manavely, Thattanchavadi, G.N. Palayampet,
Odiyampet and adjoining areas in Villianur Commune Panchayat” and
water was proposed to be extracted from seven borewells. When
construction of OHT was in progress, PWD proposed (August 2011) to
provide pumping main from another existing borewell located in
Athuvaikalpet, in addition to seven borewells to improve source to OHT
by utilizing savings available in the estimate of above work. After
obtaining necessary approvals, this work was completed at a cost of
% 23.71 lakh. Scrutiny of project report revealed that yield from the seven
borewells originally proposed was sufficient to supply water to OHT for
the designed population under the scheme. As such executing this work in
addition to the seven borewells was unnecessary resulting in avoidable
expenditure of हैं 23.71 lakh.

UT Government replied (January 2014) that as the command area of OHT
is designed including Athuvaikalpet, it is essential to utilize the existing
borewell in Athuvaikalpet. But, the entire command area could be
adequately covered with yield from seven borewells originally proposed

° Chinna Arachikuppam, Sendhanatham, Moorthikuppam, Pathakudy and
Melakasakudi

17


Domestic Water
charges levied were
not sufficient to meet
the O & M expenses

Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

and work of connecting this borewell was actually taken up probably to
utilize the savings which was not in order. Further, this borewell had
become defunct as it was damaged by local miscreants even before
commencement of scheme, and thus expenditure on this account remained
unfruitful.

(ii) | To augment water supply source in coastal areas, UT Government
sanctioned (December 2003) the work of ‘Augmentation of Water supply
to the Coastal village of Bahour CP (North zone)’. Work was designed to
supply 1.40 MLD of water to the projected population of 20065 in the year
2033 spread over eight villages. Scheme was commissioned in November
2010. Meanwhile, PWD proposed (August 2010) sinking of another bore
well at Kirumampakkam village along with pumping main for a cost of
% 25.89 lakh and completed the work in January 2012. Scrutiny of records
revealed that the OHT was connected to five other borewells having yield
of 2.43 MLD which was more than sufficient to meet the demand as
proposed in the project report. As such the additional infrastructure created
at a cost of = 25.89 lakh was unnecessary.

During exit conference, the Department replied (December 2013) that
considering the excess yield all the sources would be operated with
reduced pumping hours.

2.1.8 Operation and Maintenance of water supply system

Infrastructure facilities created by PWD in rural areas for RWS are handed
over to respective CPs except those created in Headquarters area of five
CPs in Puducherry region, which are operated and maintained by the
Public Health (PH) Division, PWD on behalf of CPs.

21.8.1 Non-revision of domestic water charges

National Water Policy stipulates that water charges shall be fixed so that
revenue derived from water supply should meet at least the Operation and
Maintenance (O & M) charges. Besides, the Vision 2020 document
indicated that cost of supply of water being % five per cu.m, under-pricing
of water at the rate 0.50 per cu.m for domestic consumers is a major
cause for over extraction and suggested that the initial hike of water
charges should not be less than % two per cu.m and ultimately the domestic
consumer should pay the full cost of domestic water supply. A review of
the water charges levied by CPs and PWD revealed the following:

@ In respect of systems maintained by CPs, water charge was levied
at the rate of ¥ 10 per month per water connection (हैं 20 in Manadipet CP)
since 1984. Table 2 gives the details of demand charges raised and the
corresponding O & M expenses of CPs in Puducherry and Karaikal region.



Chapter II - Performance Audit

Table 2 - Shortfall in meeting O & M expenditure

Puducherry 1.75 13.35 13

Karaikal 0.63 4.67 13

* calculated at = 10 per connection per month

No tariff revision for domestic consumers was considered for nearly three
decades and as a result demand charges levied during 2008-13 could meet
only 13 per cent of the O & M charges as shown in Table 2 above.

(ii) In respect of systems maintained by PWD, water charges were
levied for domestic consumers at a rate of % 0.50 per 1000 litres or हैं 45 per
quarter on a flat rate basis in the event of defective meters. Mention was
made in Audit Report 2006-07 (paragraph 3.1.8.2) that existing water tariff
does not meet even the O & M charges as stipulated by CPHEEO.

Though in reply to above para UT Government stated (November 2007)
that Audit views would be considered as and when the water tariff is
revised, tariff revision was done for commercial supply alone during
January 2010 and tariff for domestic supply was not revised to meet the
O & M expenses. Further, as of September 2013, there was an arrear of
₹ 10.66 crore on account of water charges yet to be collected from the
consumers, indicating slackness in collection.

The UT Government replied (January 2014) that proposal for revision of
tariff is under consideration and action is being taken to collect arrears.

2.1.8.2 Non-functioning of water meters

Demand charges for water supplied were collected on quarterly basis. In
the sample CPs of Bahour and Villianur, 4585 out of 5706 meters,
available under the control of PWD, were in a state of disrepair
(80 per cent) as of December 2012. Scrutiny of water charges collected
revealed the following:

e Though non-functioning water meters accounted for 80 per cent, no
action was taken to rectify them.

e 4,585 consumers had not paid flat rate charges for a period ranging
from three months to 39 months amounting to हैं 26.81 lakh.

e 110 commercial consumers were levied water tariff at domestic
rate.



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

e Though rules provided for disconnection of water service in case of
defaulters, no concrete action was taken by PWD except publishing
notification in newspapers.

The UT Government replied (January 2014) that action is being taken to
levy commercial tariff for commercial consumers.

2.1.8.3 Non-collection of water charges

Maintenance of 1,110 water connections pertaining to five villages® which
were earlier maintained by Villianur CP were handed over to PWD during
the year 2006. Audit scrutiny revealed that since their transfer neither
PWD nor CP levied water charges on these water connections due to
communication gap regarding number of connections handed over by CP,
resulting in loss of revenue amounting to हैं 9.99 lakh’ to PWD during the
last five years.

The UT Government replied (January 2014) that action would be taken to
collect the water consumption charges from the consumers.

2.1.8.4 Unauthorised connections not regularized

Bahour and Villianur CPs had a total of 16427 water connections as of
October 2013. However a survey conducted by Health Department through
Primary Health Centres revealed that 21929 houses had water connections
in Bahour and Villianur CPs. This indicates poor implementation/
monitoring leading to loss of revenue at the rate of € 6.60 lakh® per annum.

When pointed out, UT Government replied (January 2014) action would be
taken to identify unauthorized connections.

2.1.9 Quality of water supplied

Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) and CPHEEO prescribed biological,
chemical and physical norms for ensuring quality of drinking water
supplied. If quality of water is not satisfactory necessary remedial
measures have to be taken to ensure safe and clean drinking water. In UT,
water samples are collected and forwarded to Laboratories for quality
check. Following deficiencies were noticed in quality of water supplied.

Agaram, Koodapakkam, Olavaikal, Poraiyur and Senthanatham
7 45 x 1110 x 20 quarters (five years :2008-13)
8 5,502 x & 10 (minimum levied by CPs) x 12 months

20


Quality of water
supplied could not be
ensured due to delay
in communicating the
test results of water
samples

Chapter II - Performance Audit

21.9.1 Deficiencies in quality of water supplied

Indian Standard 10500:1991 stipulated that if bacteriological test results
showed presence of coliform organism, repeat sampling had to be done
immediately to confirm the result for taking remedial measures. Water
samples were collected by staff of Primary Health Centres of the respective
CPs and submitted in the labs for water quality monitoring. Though test
results of samples delivered were available the next day, results were
collected only when staff made their next visit to the Lab for submission of
next batch of samples.

Out of 2,412 samples, 704 (29 per cent) were found to be not fit for
drinking/not satisfactory in respect of bacteriological testing. However, the
test results were collected only after a delay of nearly 7 to 28 days. As a
result, repeat sampling in respect of quality affected water could not be
done immediately defeating the very objective of sample testing. Apart
from this, water from 22 borewells was found to be unfit due to high iron
content while water from 16 other borewells was found to be with high
sodium content indicating possible sea water intrusion.

During exit conference the Secretary to Government replied (December
2013) that necessary instructions would be issued to get the results on the
day of test itself and that all sources would be tested and orders would be
issued to close the quality affected borewells.

21.9.2 Non-availability of equipment for testing the presence of
heavy metals

Indian Standard 10500:1991 stipulates that drinking water should be tested
for 43 physical and chemical parameters to ascertain its quality other than
bacteriological, pesticide residues, virological, biological and radioactive
tests. However, water samples were tested only for 21-22 parameters. The
presence of heavy metals/toxic elements such as Copper, Aluminium,
Chromium, Cadmium, Mercury etc., could not be analysed, as necessary
equipment was not available. Hence, PH Division proposed (March 2010)
to purchase an Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (AAS) to analyse
them. However no action was taken in this regard and water is supplied
without testing for presence of heavy metals in violation of stipulated
norms.

When pointed out, the UT Government replied (January 2014) that action
would be initiated at the earliest to procure Atomic Absorption
Spectrophotometer.

2.1.9.3 Non supply of Field Test Kits

Under ‘National Rural drinking water quality monitoring and surveillance
Programme’ 100 per cent of Rural Drinking water sources must be initially

21


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

screened for water quality by nine easily detectable parameters such as pH,
salinity, hardness, alkalinity, nitrate, fluoride and bacteriological testing
etc., GOT also instructed all State Governments (August 2010) to procure
Field Test Kits (FTKs) and distribute them to all Gram Panchayats.
Though UT had 98 village panchayats, only 33 FTKs were available and
the same were retained by PH laboratory on the ground that village
panchayats lacked proper institutional setup. As such, none of the village
panchayats were provided with FTKs and the objective of initial screening,
which could be easily done as envisaged through supply of FTKs, stands
defeated.

The UT Government replied (January 2014) that FTKs could not be issued
to Gram Panchayats as there was no proper institutional setup viz., CCDU
which is required for the continuous water quality monitoring and
surveillance activities and hence the procured FTKs were utilized in
laboratory for testing purpose and also for demonstration during training
session. However, reply goes against the instructions of GOI.

2.1.10 Conclusion

Implementation of RWS schemes suffered due to unregulated extraction of
ground water and non-adoption of supply norms, which would adversely
affect sustainability of limited ground water source. Designing of schemes
deviating from the norms prescribed by CPHEEO resulted in avoidable
extra expenditure. Water charges levied were not sufficient to meet the
Operation and Maintenance expenses as envisaged in the National Water
Policy and there was also huge arrear in collection of water charges. The
quality of water supplied was not as per the prescribed standards.

2.1.11 Recommendations

« Steps may be taken to regulate over exploitation of ground
water to ensure sustainability of the scarce resource.

e Necessary norms may be complied with for implementing the
RWS schemes effectively and economically to avoid creation
of idle assets.

« Due care may be taken to ensure safe and clean drinking water
as per prescribed standards.

22


CHAPTER III
COMPLIANCE AUDIT



CHAPTER IT

COMPLIANCE AUDIT

This chapter presents the results of Compliance Audit of various
departments of the Government, their field formations, local and
autonomous bodies. Instances of lapses in the management of resources
and failures in observance of the norms of regularity, propriety and
economy have been presented in the succeeding paragraphs:

REVENUE AND DISASTER MANAGEME:

PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION AGENCY

3.1.1 Wasteful expenditure due to non-construction of houses

Failure of Revenue department to verify title deeds and action of the
Project Implementation Agency in releasing cash assistance to
beneficiaries without any binding conditions for recovery in case of
default resulted in wasteful expenditure of = 52.92 lakh.

UT Government established (April 2005) the Project Implementation
Agency (PIA) for implementing various relief works under ‘Tsunami
Reconstruction and Rehabilitation projects’ and released an amount of
र₹ 75 crore to it during 2005-06 under World Bank assistance. The main
objective of PIA was to carry out repair and reconstruction of houses which
have been damaged or destroyed by Tsunami (December 2004) by providing
financial assistance to beneficiaries. Under this programme, on receipt of
application from beneficiary, Revenue department would conduct field
inspection to ensure that land is available/in possession of beneficiary to
reconstruct house and would forward eligible applications to PIA.

PIA would enter into an agreement with beneficiary for construction of
house and release financial assistance of रैं 2.80 lakh in four’ installments.
The beneficiary has to complete construction within 12 months from the
date of signing agreement. If the beneficiary fails to complete atleast
50 per cent of construction within six months, the agreement provided that
construction of house would be executed by PIA and three per cent of the
cost of construction executed would be recovered from beneficiary.
1 % 84,000 (30 per cent on signing of agreement), हैं. 84,000 (30 per cent on
completion upto roof level), ₹ 70,000 (25 per cent on completion of roof) and
% 42,000 (15 per cent on completion of construction)

23


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

However, the agreement did not provide any penalty clause for recovering
the amount released, from the defaulting beneficiaries, who fail to take up
the work.

Scrutiny of records (2012) revealed that during 2010-11, PIA issued
expenditure sanction for हैं 32.84 crore in respect of 1,148 beneficiaries in
Puducherry region for reconstruction of houses. However, it was noticed that
as of September 2013, 63 beneficiaries who received first installment of
% 84,000 as early as in April 2010 did not take up construction work so far.
PIA had not taken any action in respect of these beneficiaries except sending
one memorandum during April-August 2011. It was noticed that out of
63 beneficiaries, eight beneficiaries did not possess valid documents for their
respective sites while in respect of five other beneficiaries their respective
sites could not be identified.

When pointed out, PIA replied that expenditure sanctions were issued based
on the list provided by Revenue department without verifying the title deeds
and hence work could not be taken up as certain litigations regarding title
deed of the property and possession crept in while commencing
construction. It further stated that construction work in respect of defaulters
could not be taken up by PIA as provided in the agreement due to dearth of
technical staff. However PIA should have included penalty clause in the
agreement for recovery of amount from beneficiary in case of default.

Thus failure of the Revenue Department to ensure availability of land with
proper title deeds and failure of PIA in releasing financial assistance without
any binding conditions resulted in wasteful expenditure of % 52.92. lakh’.

The matter was referred to Government in October 2013; reply has not been
received (January 2014).

INFORMATION AND PUBLICITY DEPARTMENT

3.1.2 Wasteful expenditure on advertisement

Calling for tenders for procurement and supply of Colour Television
to households free of cost, without finalizing scheme guidelines
resulted in non-implementation of scheme leading to wasteful
expenditure of 40.13 lakh towards advertisement of tenders.

The Government of Union Territory of Puducherry proposed (October
2009) to purchase and distribute Colour Television (CTV) sets free of cost
to households living Below Poverty Line (BPL) through Information and

> 63 x& 84,000

24



Chapter Il = Compliance Audit

Publicity Department (Department). A High Level Committee (HLC) was
constituted (November 2009) to monitor activities relating to formulation
and implementation of the scheme. HLC meeting was held during
November 2009 to formulate the scheme guidelines. However no decision
was reached on the basic parameters such as the target beneficiaries of
scheme, number of households to be covered and size of CTVs to be
purchased. HLC did not meet again to finalise these issues for successful
implementation of scheme. An amount of ~ 40 crore was provided in
the budget 2009-10 for implementing it, which was surrendered in
March 2010.

An amount of % 60 crore was again provided in the budget 2010-11 for the
scheme. The Department floated (13 April 2010) a tender for value of
% 60 crore for supply of 1.5 lakh CTVs in two sizes (14” and 21”) without
finalizing the basic parameters of the scheme. However, opening of
tenders was postponed (May 2010) as tender schedule did not contain
technical specification of the CTVs to be purchased. Meanwhile the scope
of scheme was widened to cover all ration card holders (3.26 lakh) instead
of BPL families (1.48 lakh) as initially proposed in August 2009. Tender
was cancelled (September 2010) as the financial powers of the competent
authority was only ~ 25 crore and a second tender for value of € 25 crore
for supply of 60,000 CTVs was floated on 8 September 2010 for purchase
of either 14” or 21” CTV, still without framing guidelines. However,
opening of tenders received during second call too was postponed
(8 October 2010) as no concrete decision was taken regarding the size of
CTV. Further, it was also decided (October 2010) to explore possibility of
supplying Direct to Home (DTH) antennas to the households which do not
opt for CTVs resulting in further delay in implementation of the scheme.

Meanwhile, the Finance Department instructed (December 2010) not to
incur any expenditure under the CTV scheme in order to meet expenditure
of emergent nature towards flood relief measures and the budget provision
made during 2010-11 was surrendered/diverted. The scheme was not
pursued any further. In the meanwhile हैं 40.13 lakh was spent towards cost
of advertisement calling for global tenders twice for procurement of CTVs
and their subsequent postponement/cancellation.

Failure of the Government to implement the scheme without firming up
the guidelines such as target beneficiaries to be covered under scheme,
kind of free supply item (i.e. CTV or DTH) to be given and size of CTVs
to be purchased etc., resulted in wasteful expenditure of € 40.13 lakh on
account of advertisement charges on publication of tenders.

When pointed out, Government accepted the delay in finalising the size
and number of CTV. However, it contended that planning was not poor
and stated that scheme could not be implemented only due to requirement
of funds to meet the expenses of emergent nature on account of natural
calamity, and therefore, the expenditure on advertisement was justified.

25


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

However, funds were provided in the budgets of 2009-10 and 2010-11 and
were available between April 2009 and December 2010. The surrender on
account of natural calamity was only in December 2010. Audit contention
is that the expenditure on calling for tenders without finalizing the basic
parameters, which led to the tenders not being fruitful, pointed to faulty
planning. Therefore action of initiating premature procurement led to
wasteful expenditure of = 40.13 lakh on account of tender advertisement
charges.

PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT

3.1.3 Overpayment to contractors

Adoption of wrong price indices while calculating the price variation
for steel and cement led to an overpayment of हैं 27.36 lakh to
contractors.

The clause 10 CA introduced (September 2004) by Central Public Works
Department provided for price variation for steel/eement during the
stipulated period of contract. Price variation under this clause was to be
calculated based on the price indices for steel/cement as valid on the last
stipulated date of receipt of tender including extensions, if any, and price
indices during the period under consideration (Cl). Further in respect of
works which were allowed justified Extension of Time (EOT), price
variation would be limited to price indices prevailing at the time of
stipulated date of completion or as prevailing for the period under
consideration, whichever is less. The price indices for steel/cement were
revised on quarterly basis and communicated to all the divisions/circles of
Public Works Department (PWD) for adoption while calculating price
variation in respect of dates falling in the respective quarterly period.

The Executive Engineer, PWD, Yanam executed two sub works viz.,
construction of compound wall and construction of ancillary building
under the main work ‘Landscaping and tourist amenities around the Yanam
Obelisk’. The works put to tender on 10 December 2010 were awarded to
two contractors during January 2011 at a cost of हैं 1.86 crore and
% 1.85 crore respectively with 3 May 2011 as stipulated date of completion.
The work of construction of ancillary building was completed in
March 2012 (treated as justified EOT) and the work of construction of
compound wall was completed in June 2012.

Scrutiny of records revealed that the EE allowed (December 2011) price
variation of = 16.71 lakh for 54.79 Metric Tonnes (MT) of steel and 222.20
MT of cement brought to site within stipulated period of completion of
both the works by adopting the price indices of steel and cement as on

26


Chapter Il - Compliance Audit

1 April 2010 (as instructed by the Chief Engineer while approving the
tender), instead of adopting price indices of steel/cement as on
10 December 2010 which was the stipulated last date of tender as per the
provisions of clause 10 CA.

Further, in respect of the sub work ‘construction of ancillary building’, the
EE allowed (September 2012) price variation of रैं 25.27 lakh in respect of
77.50 MT of steel and 250.52 MT of cement brought to site during
justified EOT by adopting the price indices of steel/cement as on date of
running account bills instead of price indices as on stipulated date of
completion which was lesser than the period of consideration as per the
provisions of clause 10 CA.

Had the correct price indices been adopted as per the provisions of clause
10 CA, price variation would have been limited to हैं 14.62 lakh instead of
% 41.98 lakh. Thus, the action of the EE/CE in allowing price variation

based on wrong price indices resulted in overpayment of ~ 27.36 lakh
(Appendix 3.1).

The matter was referred to Government in October 2013; reply has not
been received (January 2014).

PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT

3.2.1 Avoidable extra expenditure

Delay in granting expenditure sanction for a road work under
Revamped Central Road Fund resulted in avoidable extra expenditure
of % 1.76 crore.

The Revamped Central Road Fund (CRF) was established (December
2000) by Government of India (GOI) for development and maintenance of
highways by collecting cess, as a duty of excise/customs, on diesel and
petrol. While CRF accrued in respect of each State/Union Territory would
be retained by GOI, one third of the allocation would be kept at the
disposal of the Union Territory (UT) Government to be utilised for
sanctioned projects and reimbursement sought for thereafter. During
2007-08, an amount of हैं 12.32 crore accrued under CRF was lying
unutilized with GOI in respect of UT of Puducherry.

The Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways (MOSRTH),
GOI accorded administrative approval for ¥ 359.80 lakh (January 2008) for
the work ‘Improvements to Nedungadu road from Karaikal-Thirunallar

27


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

Road branching from NH 45A at Km 174/900’ at Karaikal. As per the
CRF (State Roads) Rules, 2007, the project is to be technically approved,
financially sanctioned by the UT Government and awarded within four
months from the date of Administrative Sanction (AS) i.e. within May
2008, failing which the work shall be deemed to have been de-sanctioned.

The Public Works Department (PWD) submitted (January 2008) proposal
for expenditure sanction for the work to UT Government and in
anticipation of expenditure sanction invited tenders (February 2008) and
the lowest tender, quoted for हैं 2.60 crore, was forwarded to CE for
approval. The Development Commissioner (DC), however, instructed
(April 2008) to submit the proposal for expenditure sanction after release
of funds by GOI. PWD approached (May 2008) MOSRTH for release of
funds under CRF and requested extension of validity for AS upto August
2008. In the meantime, tender was cancelled in August 2008 as the
lowest tenderer refused to extend the tender validity date.

PWD prepared (January 2009) a revised estimate for 4.69 crore and
sought revised administrative approval from MOSRTH with the assurance
that UT Government would bear the additional cost beyond 10 per cent of
the sanctioned amount. MOSRTH revalidated the AS and issued financial
sanction (February 2010) upto 31 March 2010. The UT Government
accorded (March 2010) expenditure sanction for हैं 4.65 crore and the work
was completed (December 2010) at a total cost of € 4.36 crore.

Scrutiny of records revealed that after inception of revamped CRF in
December 2000, PWD had executed 11 works (cost - हैं 35.94 crore)
sanctioned under CRF and got reimbursement (% 26.06 crore) from GOI.
In all these cases expenditure was initially met from UT fund and got
reimbursed subsequently.

Thus, action of DC in insisting for release of funds by GOI before issuing
expenditure sanction led to avoidable extra expenditure of हैं 1.76 crore
(₹ 4.36 crore - हैं 2.60 crore) on account of delayed execution of work, of
which हैं 0.40 crore would not be reimbursed by GOI as it was more than
10 per cent of sanctioned amount resulting in an additional burden to UT
Government.

The matter was referred to Government in June 2013, reply has not been
received (January 2014).

28


Chapter Hl - Compliance Audit

PUBLIC WORKS AND HINDU RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS
DEPARTMENTS

3.2.2. Avoidable additional liability

Failure of the Public Works Department to ensure availability of clear
site before inviting tenders and failure of Hindu Religious Institutions
Department to evict encroachments resulted in foreclosure of contract
and award the work to the same contractor in second call with an
additional liability of = 0.59 crore.

Central Public Works Department (CPWD) works manual stipulates that
availability of clear site is a desirable prerequisite before approval of
Notice Inviting Tenders.

UT Government accorded (March 2009) administrative approval for the
component ‘Revitalisation of Nalankulam’ under Thirunallar Temple
Town Development Project (TTTDP) by availing Housing and Urban
Development Corporation (HUDCO) loan. TTTDP was monitored by the
District Collector, Karaikal who is the chairman of the District level
implementing and monitoring committee, which shall meet as often as
required, but the duration between two meetings should not exceed one
month.

Scrutiny of records revealed that based on the assurance given by the
Thirunallar Temple Authorities (TTA) functioning under the control of
Hindu Religious Institutions Department (HRID), Public Works
Department (PWD) invited (October 2009) tender for the sub work
‘Construction of toilet blocks, change rooms, shops and cloak rooms in
Nalankulam area’ and issued (March 2010) work order to the lowest
tenderer for हैं 2.77 crore with a completion period of 12 months
(April 2011). However, PWD could not hand over the site even after
stipulated date of completion as TTA did not evict the encroachers residing
(36 residences) around Nalankulam.

Though Superintending Engineer, Karaikal, suggested (June 2010) work be
foreclosed as it was not possible to handover the site immediately, no
action was taken by the Chief Engineer till May 2011. After repeated
requests to handover the clear site, the contractor requested (April 2011) to
increase the rate by 25 per cent with a revised target date. The Department
turned down the request and foreclosed (June 2011) the contract. The
contractor sought for arbitration and an arbitrator was appointed
(December 2011) who passed an award (July 2012) of हैं 20.79 lakh in
favour of contractor on account of loss of profit, against which, the
Department’s appeal is still pending in the court (May 2013).

Meanwhile, the work was retendered in September 2011 and was awarded
to the same contractor being the lowest tenderer in the second call for

29


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

% 3.36 crore. The work scheduled to be completed in March 2013 was in
progress (October 2013).

Thus, failure to clear encroachments and make the site available during the
first tender call resulted in re-awarding the work to the same contractor in
second call with an additional liability of हैं 0.59 crore (हैं 3.36 crore —
हैं 2.77 crore).

When pointed out by Audit, the CE, though accepted that calling of tenders
should be made only after ensuring availability of clear site, contended that
the first call was made only as an attempt to explore the feasibility. This
contention is not acceptable, as it only resulted in adverse arbitration award
and consequent additional liability.

The matter was referred to Government in July 2013; reply has not been
received (January 2014).

PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT

3.3.1 Idle investment on construction of distribution grid

Imprudent action of the Public Works Department in commencing the
work of laying distribution grid without ensuring availability of land
for construction of OHT resulted in idle expenditure of हैं 7.82 crore
spent on distribution grid.

UT Government accorded (January 2005) expenditure sanction for
% 10.90 crore under Comprehensive Urban Water Supply Scheme for Zone
VIII — Moolakulam, subdivided into Zone VIII A - Moolakulam and Zone
VIII B - Thanthai Periyar Nagar. The work under Zone VIII B included,
among other things, construction of overhead tank (OHT) and laying of
related distribution grid. The identified land for construction of OHT was
approved (March 2007) by the site selection committee and requisition was
sent (May 2007) to Land Acquisition Officer (LAO). However, as the
Department failed to furnish the Fund Availability Certificate (FAC) as
requested (January 2008), the LAO returned (April 2008) the acquisition
proposal.

Scrutiny of the records revealed (February 2013) that though land for
construction of OHT was not available, the Department went ahead with
the work of laying of distribution grid for OHT by obtaining (March 2009)
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) loan
for % seven crore. After obtaining administrative approval

30



Chapter Il - Compliance Audit

(September 2009), the department awarded the work (January 2010) to the
lowest tenderer and the work of laying distribution grid was completed in
July 2011 at a cost of हैं 7.82 crore.

Meanwhile the Department initiated the land acquisition proposal by
issuing (September 2009) FAC to the LAO and approached (December
2009) NABARD for sanction of loan for construction of OHT. The
required land was acquired and handed over to the Department in February
2011. As no reply was received from NABARD regarding sanction of
loan, the Department decided (February 2011) to execute the work under
UT Government’s own fund and awarded (August 2011) the work of
construction of OHT at a cost of = 6.97 crore. As of December 2013, the
expenditure incurred on this work was % 5.75 crore and work is nearing
completion. As such, the distribution grid completed in July 2011 could
not be put to use and remained idle (December 2013).

Thus, Department failed to execute the work in proper sequence. It should
have ensured availability of land, which is a prerequisite (availability of
clear site) as prescribed in CPWD manual, for construction of OHT and
should have commenced both the works, (i.e) construction of OHT and
distribution grid simultaneously in order to synchronise the completion
period of both the works. Had this been done properly, both the works
would have been completed at the same time and water supply scheme
could have been implemented.

Failure of the Department to do so resulted in the distribution grid laid at a
cost of हैं 7.82 crore remaining idle for more than two years.

The matter was referred to Government in October 2013, reply has not
been received (January 2014).

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DEPARTMENT

3.3.2 Blocking of funds due to non-availability of land

Failure of the Department to ensure availability of land before release
of funds resulted in blocking of funds of = 1.86 crore outside
Government account for more than two years.

Government proposed (January 2008) to construct administrative block for
Directorate, State Data Centre and Networking Operating Centre for
effective implementation and functioning of e-Governance projects. State
Data Centre was to be constructed as per specifications like high ceiling
with appropriate physical security so as to ensure security of the data.

31



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

Land measured 00-49-74 ha’, of which a portion of private land of
00-14-00 ha belonging to Karumuthu Mariamman Devasthanam,
Karuvadikupam, Puducherry, was identified (October 2008) by site
selection committee for this purpose. Department of Information
Technology (Department), however, did not obtain No Objection
Certificate (NOC) for the site from Hindu Religious Institutions (HRI),
which controls the temples.

When proposal for fund allocation was sent (October 2009) to Planning
and Research Department (PRD), it was returned (November 2009) with
instruction to submit it during finalisation of revised estimates of 2009-10.
The Department, however, resubmitted the proposal only in January 2011
and an amount of हैं 1.86 crore was allocated by PRD. Department
submitted a proposal (January 2011) for acquisition of land to Land
Acquisition Officer (LAO) based on this allocation. Meanwhile the
amount was released (March 2011) to e-Governance society, the
implementing agency, which kept the amount in savings bank account.

The Directorate approached the Hindu Religious Institutions (HRI) only in
September 2011, three years after site identification, to issue No Objection
Certificate (NOC) to acquire the land. In response, Commissioner, HRI,
expressed their inability (May 2012) to allot the said land and suggested an
alternate land. The decision on suitability of the alternate site was yet to be
taken by the Directorate (August 2013) and the amount released for this
purpose continued to be kept outside Government account.

Thus, failure of the Department to effectively pursue acquisition of land
resulted in blocking of funds of % 1.86 crore outside Government account
for more than two years. Besides, State Data Centre continues to function
in a rented building with an annual rental liability of € 2.91 lakh.

When pointed out, Government replied (October 2013) that a proposal for
alternate land was already under consideration and on approval the fund
would be transferred to the implementing Agency for construction of
building. It was further stated that if suitable site could not be identified,
the fund would be returned to Government account.

8 Private land - 00-17-38 ha; PWD land - 00-09-00 ha and Government poromboke
land : 00-23-36 ha

32


Chapter Il - Compliance Audit

JAIL DEPARTMENT

3.3.3 Idle investment on construction of staff quarters

Non-provision of separate entrance for staff quarters constructed
within the Jail complex resulted in idle expenditure of % 84.15 lakh.

Pondicherry Prison Rules, 1969 stipulate that every subordinate officer of a
Jail for whom residential rent free quarters are provided should reside
therein. UT Government sanctioned (January 2004) % 8.39 crore towards
first phase of construction of new central jail complex at Kalapet interalia
included 16 units of staff quarters (type I-12, type II-2 and one each in type
वा and IV). On completion, the Jail started functioning at Kalapet from
October 2008. However, staff quarters constructed at a cost of
% 97.29 lakh are yet to be allotted (December 2013) to eligible staff except
for one type IV quarters allotted (April 2011) to the Superintendent of Jail.

When pointed out, the Chief Superintendent of Jail stated (March 2013)
that the Group C officials did not occupy type I quarters since they were
eligible for type II quarters. Further all officials were reluctant to occupy
the quarters as their family members have to undergo frisking at the main
entrance since there was no separate entrance for staff quarters.

Scrutiny of the records revealed the following:

(i) The prescribed living area for type II quarters was 26.5 sq.m to
50 sq.m and the type I quarters constructed had a living area of 36 sq.m.,
which is on par with type II quarters and department is free to carry out
any non-structural changes, if necessary, to facilitate the allotment of type I
quarters to eligible staff.

(ii) As per approved drawing, there was a separate entrance for quarters.
However during execution separate entrance was not provided on security
grounds and was postponed for second phase of development.

Thus, quarters constructed at a cost of हैं 84.15 lakh* are idle for more than
two years defeating the objective for which they are provided and eligible
staff continued to stay outside in violation of the provisions of Pondicherry
Prison Rules 1969. They were allowed House Rent Allowance and
compensation in lieu of rent free accommodation.

When pointed out, Government replied (October 2013) that the quarters
would be occupied from 1 December 2013. However, it was noticed that
the quarters are yet to be occupied (January 2014).

* Excluding the cost of type IV quarters (& 13.14 lakh)

33



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

PORT DEPARTMENT

3.4.1 Introduction

Karaikal, a minor port in Union Territory of Puducherry, is situated in the
east coast of India between two major ports namely Chennai (260 kms in
north) and Tuticorin (400 kms in south). The Union Territory Government
of Puducherry (UT Government) proposed (May 2005) to develop this
minor port into an all weather deep water port through public private
partnership and entered into a Concession Agreement? (CA) with
Concessionaire in January 2006 for development of Karaikal Port in a
phased® manner on Built, Operate and Transfer (BOT) basis for a
concession period of 30 years’.

The Concessionaire formed (November 2006) a Special Purpose Vehicle
(SPV) and completed Phase I of port development with two berths in
April 2009 at a cost of ¥ 417.83 crore. The commercial operation of the
Port commenced in June 2009. While additional three berths have been
constructed under Phase 2A, mechanization of these berths under phase 2A
Extension is currently under progress. Currently, the Port is operating with
five berths having a cargo handling capacity of 21 Million Tonnes Per
Annum (MTPA). The Secretary to the Government (Ports) is overall in-
charge for functioning of Port Department. The Director of Ports is the
administrative head of the Port Department and is assisted by one
Executive Engineer.

An audit was conducted covering various stages of port development
including selection of the Concessionaire, execution of the project and the
port operation during the period from April 2009 to March 2013 to check
whether selection of Concessionaire was fair and transparent, port
development was undertaken as per the terms of CA and required
monitoring mechanism was in place to safe guard the interests of UT
Government.

A supplementary concession agreement was signed in November 2010

In three phases with two cargo handling berths in each phase

Extendable by mutual consent for a further period of 20 years (two 10 year
periods), with a concession fee of 10 per cent during first ten year period and
11 per cent with one per cent increase every year during second ten year period

34


Chapter Il = Compliance Audit

Audit findings
3.4.2 Improper selection of Concessionaire

General Financial Rules, 20057 prescribed that bid documents should
comprise Expression of Interests (EOI), Request for qualification and
Request for proposals (RFP). EOI should be published atleast in one
National Daily and in Ministry’s website to promote wider participation
and transparency in the process. EOI should contain broad scope of work,
eligibility and pre-qualification criteria to be met by the Service provider
and his past experience in similar work. It also stipulates that adequate
time should be given for their responses.

After analysing the responses to EOI, RFP should be issued to short listed
service providers calling for technical and financial proposals and the bid
which is technically sound and financially advantageous should be
selected.

Though, UT Government invited (May 2005) EOI for development of
Karaikal Port in national dailies, the same was not published in the
website. Further, EOI did not prescribe any pre-qualification criteria and
technical/financial parameters. Nineteen firms responded to EOI and they
were asked (13 July 2005) to make a presentation on 19 and 20 July 2005
regarding details of their company, port development plan, experience in
the field of port development and other related works, giving them seven
days time.

Only four firms came forward to submit presentation in this short notice.
Six firms requested for postponement due to short notice/administrative
reasons and remaining nine firms did not respond. However, the UT
Government went ahead with the presentation made by four firms on the
scheduled date and selected the Concessionaire for execution of the Project
on the recommendation made by the Port Privatization Committee’ based
on the presentation submitted by the firm. Accordingly a Letter of Intent
(LOI) was placed (21 September 2005) on the firm. The presentation did
not contain any information of revenue share or any other consideration
payable by the concessionaire, which was also the case with other vendors
making the presentation.

Therefore, selection process was done without following two stage process
as prescribed in the GFR. Further, the concessionaire was selected by the

‘ Rules 168 to 175

Committee constituted by UT Government consisting of Secretary to
Government (Port) as Chairman, Collector-Karaikal, Director of Ports, Director
of Science, Technology and Environment, Deputy Secretary to Government
(Law), Under Secretary to Government (Finance) and Under Secretary to
Government (Port) as members and Executive Engineer (Port) as the Member
Secretary,



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

UT Government without analysing any financial and technical parameters
and ascertaining its own share of revenue expected to be generated out of
the project, which is a pre-requisite for awarding any contract on
competitive basis.

3.4.3 Fixation of concession fee after award of work

As per the LOI, the Concessionaire submitted (November 2005) a Detailed
Project Report (DPR) for phase 1 alone with a royalty 2.50 per cent on
revenue from port operations payable to the UT Government. However,
while entering into Concession Agreement (CA) in January 2006, the
concession fee (revenue share payable to the UT Government) was fixed as
2.60 per cent of the gross income'’, which was accepted by the UT
Government.

Thus, the revenue share of the UT Government was only known after
selection of Concessionaire, which was against the principles of equity and
fairness required to be exhibited in the selection process wherein the
revenue share receivable from the bidders should have been considered as
one of the most important parameters for the purpose of evaluation and
selection.

The physical and financial performance of the port during 2009-13 was
given below:

Table - 1 : Financial and Physical Performance of Port

@ in crore)

2009-10 48 1352132 48.62 | -9.09 | 09 1.26
2010-11 122 4788641 169.66 | 23.99 441 |
2011-12 191 6010421 221.25 23.36 5.75 |
2012-13 181 6611220 277.02 | -28.86 7.20 |
Total 542 18762414 716.55 18.62 |

Apart from concession fee, an amount of हैं 77.90 lakh had been received
from the Concessionaire towards lease charges’.

The revenue share of 2.60 per cent payable to the UT Government was
based on the revenue projections in the DPR for 30 years for Phase I alone.
As per the DPR, it was projected that the revenue would be ¥ 207.50 crore
at the end of 30" year of the Project. It could be seen from Table-1 that
during the 4” year (2012-13) of the Project itself, the Port had earned gross

10
पा

Revised as gross revenue on intervention of GOI in November 2010
Land measuring 598 acres was allocated to the Concessionaire at a lease charge
of हैं 1000 per acre per annum as per the provisions of CA

36


Chapter Il - Compliance Audit

revenue of ~ 277 crore, which was in excess of the initial projection by
33.49 per cent.

The UT Government did not take into account the quantum of revenue to
be generated on account of additional cargo handling capacity to be
installed under subsequent phases.

3.4.4 Development of Port
Status of the Project

The Detailed Project Report (DPR) envisaged the development of port in a
phased manner as follows:

Phase-1: Development of two berths viz. one coal berth and one general
cargo berth, together would handle 4 million tons of cargo per annum.

Phase-2: Development of two berths viz. one liquid cargo berth and one
container Terminal in the event of achieving 70 per cent capacity
utilization of Phase 1. The handling capacity of Phase 1 and 2 will be 6.6
million tons of cargo per annum.

Phase-3: Development of two berths viz. one coal berth and one container
Terminal on achieving 70 per cent capacity utilization of Phase 2. The
combined capacity of all the three phases shall be 9.7 million tons of cargo
per annum with six berths.

While Phase 1 was completed in April 2009 at a cost of हैं 417.83 crore,
Phase 2 of project had been taken up in two stages, Phase 2A (construction
of 3 berths) and 2A Extension (Mechanisation of berths constructed under
Phase - 2A), which is under progress (September 2013) and an amount of
% 1818.71 crore has been incurred so far towards Phase 2, without any
specific time line for completion (Appendix 3.2).

3.4.4.1 Development of Phase-2A of the Project without
submission of revised DPR

The CA stipulated that port should be developed strictly in line with
Master development plan and as per the major milestones stipulated in the
agreement, the project was to be implemented in a phased manner viz.,
only on achievement of 70 per cent capacity utilisation of the port facilities
created in Phase-1, plan for execution of Phase-2 should be prepared.
Further, the development of port has to be scrutinized by an Independent
Engineer to ensure compliance with all approved plans and designs.

The Concessionaire, even before the completion of Phase-1, requested
(September 2008) the UT Government to approve fused development”? of

" Combined development of port across all the phases instead of phase-wise

development as proposed in the DPR

37


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

port by scaling up the cargo handling capacity from 10 MTPA to
45 MTPA to face the upcoming competition. Though the UT Government
gave only in principle approval (December 2008), the Concessionaire
planning to have a total of nine berths capable of handling 47 MTPA
(including the two berths already developed in phase 1), went ahead with
developing three berths in Phase 2A and mechanization of these berths
under Phase 2A extension without submission of revised DPR, though
DPR already submitted contained revenue projections for Phase 1 alone.

When UT Government instructed (December 2012) the concessionaire to
submit revised DPR, they stated (January 2013) that all these issues were
broadly covered in the original DPR itself based on which CA was signed.
This contention was not correct as the original DPR contained financial
and traffic projections for phase-1 only and did not cover Phase 2 and 3.
However, UT Government did not take any further action and
Concessionaire went ahead with his plans without its approval. The UT
Government even failed to insist upon performance guarantee towards
development of phase 2A as contained in CA for Phase 1 (® one crore
valid through the period of development under Phase 1).

Thus, entire construction activities of Phase 2A and 2A Extension was
without submission of DPR, expenditure approval and concurrence of the
UT Government. During exit conference the department replied
(December 2013) that though it had insisted upon the Concessionaire to
furnish a DPR for Phase 2, it was in receipt of periodical reports from the
Concessionaire including drawings, designs etc.

However, drawings and designs should have been received in advance and
subject to scrutiny by Independent Engineer. Though in principle approval
was given by UT Government, it failed to follow it up by obtaining revised
DPR and thereby lost the opportunity to ensure that port was strictly
developed in line with Master Development Plan of the DPR.

3.4.4.2 Failure in obtaining Pollution Control clearance

The Puducherry Pollution Control Committee (PPCC) advised the
Concessionaire to install mechanized conveyer system to handle coal as it
received complaints from the public regarding pollution due to coal
handling. Though the concessionaire installed mechanized conveyor
system as a part of Phase 2A extension, it could not be operated due to
non-availability of required power supply (10.8 MVA). It was observed
from the records that the Electricity Department stated (May 2013) that it
would take at least two years for effecting the power supply to this system.
The effort of Concessionaire to get temporary power supply from other
captive power projects did not materialise. Thus the plan of Concessionaire
to complete Phase 2A extension in October 2012 did not materialise and
was deferred till October 2015 which led to locking of capital and related
financial implications as discussed in succeeding paragraphs.

38


Chapter HI - Compliance Audit

3.4.4.3 No financial safeguards in case of termination of
agreement

According to the CA, the UT Government had to bear the outstanding debt
as on end date, both in case of termination by the Concessionaire or by the
UT Government or on account of Force de majeure. The UT Government
was only aware of the development cost of phase 1 (% 351 crore), since the
concessionaire did not submit the revised DPR for fused development
of port. Thus without informing the UT Government about further
cost of development, the Concessionaire incurred an expenditure of
% 2,236.54 crore (Appendix 3.2) till date towards development of port, of
which loan amounted to ¥ 1678.65 crore and had repaid only हैं 101.08
crore against scheduled payment of € 130.04 crore.

As PPCC did not give pollution clearance for Phase 2A extension as
discussed in the preceding paragraph, operation of it was postponed until
October 2015. Due to this delay, the Karaikal port, which was operated on
profit until March 2012, sustained a loss of % 28.86 crore during the year
2012-13 and the Concessionaire requested (March 2013) the lenders for
debt restructuring and accordingly the entire loan amount pending as of
December 2012 was reworked to = 1886.49'° crore which shall be
repayable in 44 quarterly instalments commencing from June 2014 to June
2025. The debt restructuring also included a Funded Interest Term Loan'*
(FITL) for = 100.80 crore, which was created for repayment interest on
term loans for the period 30 December 2012 - 30 June 2013, leading to
additional cost escalation.

Had proper DPR, financial closure and expansion requirements been
obtained and monitored by UT Government in time, either delay in
commissioning or wasteful creation of infrastructure out of borrowings
could have been avoided. Failure of concessionaire to do so and the failure
of UT Government in allowing the port expansion programme without
obtaining the revised DPR led to the UT Government assuming additional
risks without sufficient considerations in the event of termination of CA.

The UT Government, though being the Public partner with the liability to
bear the outstanding debt in the event of default by concessionaire, was not
consulted in this regard during the entire process. It was further noticed
that no amendments were made in the CA regarding the above
developments, as it was entered upon based on the DPR, which contained
financial projections for phase 1 alone. When pointed out, Government
replied (December 2013) that the issue would be referred to Law
department to gets its opinion for suitable revision.

a Includes all the loans availed for Phase 1, 2A, 2A extension, construction of
warehouse and OSV/PSV along with FITL
Fresh loan to repay the interest component if the project financed by the bank is not

in a position to generate income even to pay interest on the overdue loan

39


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

3.4.5 Deficiencies in CA and its implementation

3.4.5.1 Irregular provision for engagement of Concessionaire’s
own staff as Expert

The CA provided for appointment of an Expert by engaging one of the
persons out of the panel of members suggested by Concessionaire. The
expert shall review the progress of construction on a quarterly basis and
defects pointed by him should be rectified at the cost of Concessionaire.
Though CA was entered in January 2006, the Department requested to
appoint the Expert only in May 2008 and the Concessionaire responded
(June 2008) with a panel of two names. The UT Government approved one
among them as expert who happened to be then advisor of concessionaire
and currently one of the Board of Directors of Karaikal Port. Thus, the
action of UT Government in appointing an Expert, who is already an
advisor to Concessionaire defeated the very purpose of such an
arrangement, because of possible conflict of interest.

It was noticed that though Concessionaire sent monthly progress reports to
UT Government, none of them was attested/certified by the Expert. Further
UT Government neither issued any instructions to the Expert nor received
any appraisal reports from him, except completion report for phase 1 of the
Project.

When pointed out, the EE replied (January 2013) that Expert is the person
deployed on behalf of UT Government to supervise/conduct inspections
during development of port and officials of the department visited the port
before accepting the completion certificate furnished by the Expert.
However, visit was carried out as procedural necessity and the fact remains
that the UT Government did not supervise the port development activities
through the Expert during the entire period of Phase 1.

3.4.5.2 Non-conduct of Financial and Operational Audits

Under clause 16 of CA, the UT Government shall have the right to conduct
financial/operational audit of the Port to ensure the accuracy of the income
to Concessionaire from which it gets a share and to check upon compliance
with approved and agreed plans for development and operation of the port
and maintenance of port facilities and assets. However UT Government did
not conduct any financial/operational audits so far, thus failing to exercise
legitimate power vested with it under the agreement to ensure the accuracy
of the income reported by the firm and to ensure that works were carried
out as per agreed plans.

When pointed out, the EE replied (January 2013) that the department had
no expertise to conduct financial audit. However department could have
engaged a suitable agency for this purpose, as the revenue share of the UT
Government would depend upon the accuracy of the income reported and
operational performance of the port. The UT Government accepted

40


Chapter Il - Compliance Audit

(December 2013) the fact and directed the department to initiate suitable
proposal for appointment of an agency for conduct of financial/operational
audit.

3.4.5.3 Non-notification of port dues

The CA gave full rights to the Concessionaire to fix the port dues in
respect of vessels visiting the port. However, such port dues have to be
notified by the UT Government as per the provisions of the Indian Ports
Act, 1908. Any concession in port dues allowed by concessionaire in
respect of any vessel should be ignored and all port dues have to be
calculated only as per the notified port dues for revenue sharing.

It was noticed that even after lapse of four years since the commencement
of commercial operation, the port dues were yet to be notified. When
details of fees levied were called for (June 2009) by the Department, the
concessionaire did not furnish them and hence the department was not in a
position to verify the correctness of the revenue declared. Failure to notify
the port dues would also lead to monopolistic situation/restrictive trade
practices and would defeat the terms of CA, which stipulated that the
Concessionaire should be fair to all users in levying the port tariff.

When pointed out, the Department replied (January 2013) that action
would be taken to notify the port dues after collecting the same from the
Concessionaire.

3.4.5.4 Irregularity in operation of Escrow Account

As per the supplementary agreement entered into with the Concessionaire
in line with the Model Concession Agreement released by the Government
of India in September 2006, the Concessionaire should deposit or cause to
deposit all fee and any other revenues from or in respect of the Port
Terminal in an Escrow account for eventual assessment and transfer of
revenue share payable to the Government. An Escrow account towards this
purpose was maintained by the Concessionaire at Indian Bank, Harbour
Branch, Chennai.

During test check of invoices it was noticed that port dues collected in
respect of two ships'> amounting to % 2.74 crore were credited to another
account (Andhra bank) instead of the designated Escrow Account. When
this was pointed out, it was stated that the revenue of % 213.86 crore was
credited by the Concessionaire with the Andhra Bank from the year
2011-12 with the permission of lenders, because of the overdraft
arrangements (% 20 crore) made with them. It was further stated that no
payments were made from that account and the amount so credited was
later on transferred to Escrow Account. However, the fact remains that
there was violation of the agreement condition and in absence of financial

8 MV Hind and MV Bagwan

41


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

audit, Audit could not provide assurance, as to whether the revenues were
accounted and shared as per CA.

3.4.6 Monitoring and Evaluation

According to Planning Commission guidelines on monitoring, PPP
projects are based on long-term Concession Agreement specifying quality
of service and quantifiable performance standards that have a direct
bearing on users of such projects. The concessionaire is empowered to use
public assets for building infrastructure projects and to levy and collect
user charges for the use of public assets. Projects require close monitoring
by the Government with a view to ensure that the provisions of the
respective concession agreements and the applicable laws are enforced.

The following are the deficiencies in the monitoring and evaluation system
in the Project:

3.4.6.1 Failure of UT Government to nominate one director to
the Board of Directors

As per the Model Concession Agreement circulated (September 2006) by
the Government of India, one Director on the Board of directors of
Concessionaire has to be a nominee of the Government to safeguard the
interest of Government in the Project. However, no action was taken in this
regard by the UT Government until November 2011. When the UT
Government approached (December 2011) the concessionaire in this
regard, he called for (June 2012) the name and designation of the official to
be nominated along with Director Identification Number. Though a
proposal was mooted out by the Department in July 2012 to appoint
Secretary to Government (Ports) as Board of Director, no action was taken
thereafter by UT Government as the incumbent Secretary retired in
October 2012.

When pointed out, the UT Government directed (December 2013) the
department to speed up the proposal to appoint the incumbent Secretary to
Government (Ports) as one of the Board of Directors.

3.4.6.2 Non-engagement of Independent Engineer

In order to have an independent agency to monitor and inspect the project,
the clause relating to the appointment of Expert was revised
(November 2010) in the supplementary agreement by substituting the word
‘Expert’ as “Independent Engineer” in line with the terms of Model
Concession Agreement (MCA) formulated by the Planning Commission.
The Independent Engineer should be selected from a panel of
experts/consulting firms prepared by the UT Government based on mutual
acceptance, who shall have the right of Inspection during the construction
and operation of the Port to ensure compliance with all approved plans and
designs.

42


Chapter Ill - Compliance Audit

It was noticed that the UT Government did not appoint any such
Independent Engineer till date and the entire development of the Port at a
cost of = 2,236.54 crore was being carried out without any supervision on
the part of UT Government. When pointed out the Department replied that
the Expert already appointed continued to function as Independent
Engineer and clauses of MCA would not be applicable to Karaikal Port
Project as UT Government had its own CA with the Concessionaire.

The supplementary agreement specifically contained provision for
engagement of Independent Engineer and the intended purpose was not
served by just renaming the Expert as Independent Engineer since the
Expert engaged was as an advisor to the Concessionaire, who could not be
called independent.

When pointed out, the Department replied (December 2013) that an
Independent Engineer would be appointed to monitor and evaluate the
project.

3.4.6.3 Non-constitution of separate bodies for monitoring the Project

The ‘Guidelines for monitoring of PPP projects’ issued by the Planning
Commission in May 2009 recommended a two-tier PPP monitoring and
reporting structure, i.e. establishment of PPP Project Monitoring Unit
(PMU) at the project level with an officer at least of the rank of the
Director/Deputy Secretary/Superintending Engineer as the head of the
PMU and a Performance Review Unit (PRU) at Government level headed
by an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary. PMU has to submit
monthly reports at regular intervals to PRU on the key project parameters
such as compliance of the conditions precedent, adherence to time lines,
assessment of performance, remedial measures for curing defaults,
imposition of penalty, levy and collection of user charges and compliance
with the instructions of Independent Engineer etc.

The PRU should go through the monthly report and should initiate action
for rectifying any defaults or lapses and should prepare quarterly reports
for submission to competent authority on the status of such PPP Project
focusing on any non-compliance relating to the provisions of the relevant
contract, especially in terms of the standards of performance or loss to the
public exchequer and the users.

It was, however, observed that the UT Government neither formed PMU
nor PRU. The only effort made by the Department in this aspect was to
contact National Institute of Port Management (NIPM) (July 2007)
requesting it to monitor the port development activities, which was turned
down (July 2007) by NIPM expressing its inability due to shortage of
manpower.

When pointed out, the Department replied (April 2013) that the Director of
Port, Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat Maritime Board (GMB) was approached

43


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

(August 2011) for setting up of necessary structure for monitoring the Port
activities. While no reply was received from Director of Ports, Andhra
Pradesh, GMB had requested (July 2012) the Director of Ports, Puducherry
to depute an officer for discussion in this regard and no further action was
taken. The Department stated (December 2013) that action would be
initiated to set up the Monitoring committees at the earliest.

3.4.6.4 Non-conducting of Annual Physical verification

All the assets created for the Project by the concessionaire would be
transferred to the UT Government at the end of the concession period on
terms and conditions including price determined two years prior to the end
date. To facilitate this, the CA empowered the UT Government to conduct
an annual physical inventory of plant, equipment and accessories in
pursuance of the Operational Audit. Further, the assets could not be
removed by the firm without prior written approval of UT Government.

Karaikal port owned plants, machinery and equipment valuing
हूँ 66.68 crore as per balance sheet of SPV as of 31 March 2013. The UT
Government, however, did not conduct any inspection/annual physical
inventory of plant to take stock of the assets acquired by the
Concessionaire for the Project. When pointed out, the EE stated (December
2013) action would be initiated to conduct annual physical verification.

3.4.7. Conclusion

The UT Government issued EOI for port development without specifying
pre-qualification criteria for selection of concessionaire. Selection
procedure was not proper as it was done on the basis of unstructured
presentation without specifying criteria for evaluation or adopting
pre-determined quantitative and qualitative parameters. The revenue share
of 2.60 per cent was fixed after award of the contract, defeating the very
purpose of the competitive bidding.

The CA contained various deficiencies such as failure to safeguard the
financial interest of UT Government in the event of termination of CA,
irregular provision for engagement of the Concessionaire’s own staff as
Expert, etc. Financial and operational Audits were not conducted and the
concessionaire was allowed to develop subsequent phases of the Port
without submission of revised DPR.

The monitoring system was weak due to failures of UT Government in
appointing a director to the Board of Directors of the Port, non-engagement
of an independent engineer, non-constitution of separate bodies for
monitoring of the Project, irregularity in operation of escrow account,
non-conducting of annual physical verification of assets of the Project etc.

44


Chapter Ill = Compliance Audit

Recommendations

> Selection of the Concessionaire may be made in a transparent,
fair and equitable manner, based on GOT guidelines

> While entering into such long-term agreements, care should be
exercised to incorporate suitable clauses to safeguard the
financial interests of the Government

> Financial and Operational Audits may be conducted in the
present PPP to ensure the accuracy of the revenue realized,
operation of the escrow Account and to evaluate the operational
efficiency of the Port

> Government may consider appointing Independent Engineer and
Director to the Board of Directors in line with the Model
Concession Agreement to monitor the project.

The matter was referred to Government in December 2013; reply has not
been received (January 2014).



CHAPTER IV
REVENUE RECEIPTS



CHAPTER IV

REVENUE RECEIPTS

The tax and non-tax revenue raised by the Government of the Union
Territory of Puducherry and the grants-in-aid received from the
Government of India during the year 2012-13 and the corresponding
figures for the preceding four years are given in the following table:

@ in crore)

I Revenue raised by the Government

(a) Tax revenue 725.35 867.74 | 1,074.47 | 1,329.43 | 1,917.22
(b) Non-tax revenue 628.64 642.93 742.78 153.31 118.15
Total () 1,353.99 | 1,510.67 | 1,817.25 | 1,482.74 | 2,035.37

a Receipts from the
Government of India —
Grants-in-aid 1,104.51 | 1,330.66 | 1,382.78 | 1,288.68 | 1,110.77
|| Total receipts of the
Government (I + II) 2,458.50 | 2,841.33 | 3,200.03 | 2,771.42 | 3,146.14

(Source: Finance Accounts of the respective years)

The above table indicates that during the year 2012-13, the revenue raised
(₹ 2,035.37 crore) by the Union Territory Government was 65 per cent of
the total revenue receipts (% 3,146.14 crore) as against 54 per cent in the
preceding year. The balance (% 1,110.77 crore) 35 per cent of the receipts
during 2012-13 was obtained from the Government of India.

4.1.1 The details of tax revenue raised during the year 2012-13 along
with the figures for the preceding four years are given in the following

table:
(in crore)

[| Taxes on sales,

Taxes on 381.86 | 453.11 | 595.00 | 750.15 | 1,287.10 | 4) 7158
ठ State excise 279.60 | 329.06 | 37855 | 44727 | 50398 कह
8 02:07 % कै 30.80 | 50.5. | 51.93 | 7743 | 72.67 (6.15
registration fees
4 [Taxes on vehicles | 3246 | 3475 | 4827 | 5355 | S264 0170

5 | Land revenue 0.54 0.62 0.80 0.55 (©) 31.25
Others 0.13 | 0.10 [0.23 0.28 (+) 21.74

[किया |

(Source : Finance Accounts of the respective years)

47


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

Reasons for variation in receipts in 2012-13 over 2011-12 as furnished by
the Departments concerned are mentioned below:

Taxes on sales, trade, etc.: The increase (71.58 per cent) was due to
revision of rate of tax and buoyancy in trade.

State excise: Increase (12.68 per cent) was due to upward revision of
Excise Duty and Licence fee.

Other Departments did not furnish (December 2013) the reasons for
variation despite being requested (July 2013).

4.1.2 The details of the non-tax revenue raised during the year 2012-13
along with the figures for the preceding four years are given in the
following table:

(₹ in crore)

1_| Power 545.90 ©)49.63
2 | Interest

receipts,
dividends
and profits

47.60 56.98 42.15 38.72 35.64 () 7.95

3 | Medical
and public 6.55 6.58 10.77 8.46 13.94 (+) 64.78
health

4 | Education,
sports, art 0.46 0.45 oot 61 0.84 0.73 (-) 13.10
and culture

5 | Crop

husband 0.29 | 039 0.41 0.48 051 (+) 6.25

(| Other
receipts

27.84 29.14 26.13 46.08 37.75 (-) 18.08

(Source : Finance Accounts of respective years)
Reasons for variation in receipts in 2012-13 over 2011-12 as furnished by
the departments concerned are mentioned below:

Power: The decrease (49.63 per cent) was due to utilising the receipts
from sale of power for purchase of power.

Medical and public health: The increase (64.78 per cent) was due to
more collection in hospital stoppages and licence fee.

Other Departments did not furnish (December 2013) reasons for variation
despite being requested (July 2013).



Chapter IV — Revenue Receipts

The variation between the budget estimates and actual revenue receipts for
the year 2012-13 in respect of the principal heads of tax and non-tax
revenue is given in the following table:

in crore)
1 | Taxes on sales, 1 39561 | 1,287.10] — (-) 108.51 (07.78
trade, etc. aad pAb >
State excise 688.50 | 503.98 | (2 184.52 ©2680
Stamp duty १७0 191.29 72.67 (48.62 (40.09
registration fees
| + | Taxes on
ae 87.67 | 52.64 (35.03 (39.96
Land revenue 136 055 0०.81 (05956
Interest receipts,
dividends and] 39.87 | 35.64 0423 (1061
profits
7 | Medical and
vedic lth 1643 | 13.94 (02.49 (15.16
| Education,
sports, art and 0.30 073 0.43 (4) 143.33
culture
9 | crop husbandry 052 051 0०01 01.92

(Source : Annual Finance Statement and Finance Accounts of respective years)

The Departments did not furnish (December 2013) reasons for variation
despite being requested (July 2013).

The break-up of total collection at the pre-assessment stage and after
regular assessment under the Pondicherry General Sales Tax Act (PGST)
and Puducherry Value Added Tax Act (PVAT) for the year 2012-13 and
the corresponding figures for the preceding two years as furnished by the
Department are given in the following table:



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

@ in crore)

2010-11
ST 4.72 Ee 0.43 | 5.11 92.37
VAT 288.64 oo 0.66 a 289.30 99.77
Non-VAT 300.14 oo 0.44 न 300.58 99.85

2011-12
ST 2.73 0.37 0.19 0.03 3.26 83.78
VAT 383.03 0.01 1.35 = 384.39 99.65
Non-VAT 360.93 0.54 1.02 = 362.50 99.57

2012-13
ST नर 1.40 0.10 0.01 1.49 0.00
VAT 571.31 0. 1.29 0.00 572.95 99.71
Non-VAT. 394.34 0.00 1.66 0.00 396.00 99.58

The above table shows that the collection of revenue at pre-assessment
stage in respect of VAT was in the range of 99 per cent during 2010-11 to

2012-13.

The arrears of revenue pending for collection as on 31 March 2013 under
the principal heads of revenue, as reported by various Departments was
% 455.49 crore as indicated below:

@ in crore)

Commercial Taxes | 218.77

46.75

Arrears related to collection of tax under
PGST/CST and VAT Acts and major portion
was covered under court cases.

Electricity

198.47

67.87

Reasons for pending arrears on account of
sale of power to consumers were not
furnished by the Department.

State Excise

Arrears were mainly due to non payment of
kist by the lessces of arrack and toddy shops.



Chapter IV ~ Revenue Receipts

Publicity

+ | Public Works 11.16 3.75 The arrears related to water charges due from
consumers.

5. | Government 3.66 | | Arrears were due from Government
Automobile departments towards sale of petrol, oil and
Workshop lubricants.

6. | Port 0.59 0.57 Arrears were mainly due from M/s Container

Corporation of India Limited, Government of
India Undertaking, towards land rent.

य. Stationery and 0.26 0.02 Arrears related to amount due from
Printing Government departments.

|* | Town and Country 0.13 0.13 Arrears related to final cost of plots due from
Planning the allottees of various housing schemes.

a Tourism 0.08 0.05 Arrears were mainly due from
guests/Government Officials/MLAs and
Ministers towards room rent.

| Co-operation 0.08 0.01 Arrears related to audit fees and other
receipts due.

11. | Judicial 0.04 0.03 In some cases, the accused were undergoing
imprisonment and in some cases, appeals
were pending in courts, etc.

12. | Industries and 0.11 0.11 Arrears related to rent due from defunct

Commerce industrial units and to be recovered under the
Revenue Recovery Act.

13. | Transport 0.41 0.33. | Arrears were due to non-recovery of motor
vehicles tax.

14 | Agriculture 0.32 0.15 Arrears due from PASIC and local bodies
towards rent and cost of seeds.

15 | Information and 0.09 कि Arrears of rent to be collected from PRTC.

Other Departments did not furnish (December 2013) the details of arrears

of revenue, if any.

Details of cases of fraud and evasion of sales tax detected, cases finalised
and demands for additional tax and penalty levied as reported by the
Commercial Taxes Department are mentioned below:



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

130* 92 222 54 1.46 168

* The opening balance furnished by the Department does not tally with the closing
balance of 134 given last year.

Principal Accountant General (Economic and Revenue Sector Audit),
Tamil Nadu arranges periodical inspection of the Government Departments
to test check the transactions and verify the maintenance of important
accounts and other records as per the prescribed rules and procedures.
These inspections are followed up with Inspection Reports (IRs).
Important irregularities are included in the IRs issued to the heads of
offices inspected with copies to the next higher authorities for taking
corrective action. The heads of offices/Government are required to comply
with the observations contained in the IRs, rectify the defects and
omissions promptly and report compliance to the office of the Principal
Accountant General within one month from the dates of issue of the IRs.
Serious irregularities are also brought to the notice of the heads of
Departments by the office of the Principal Accountant General.

A review of IRs issued upto December 2012 disclosed that 576 paragraphs
involving ~ 209.63 crore relating to 173 IRs remained outstanding at the
end of June 2013. The Department-wise breakup of the IRs and audit
observations outstanding as on 30 June 2013 are as given in the following
table:

in crore)

[1 | Sales tax 50 253 66.62
2__| Stamp duty and registration fees | 66 [| 136 2.60
3__| Taxes on vehicles 32 138 4.22
4 | State excise 25 49 136.19

(Source : as per data maintained in the office of the PAG)



Chapter IV — Revenue Receipts

A review of the replies of the Government to the paragraphs of the Audit
Reports for the last five years from 2007-08 to 2011-12 shows that against
the revenue effect of € 93.44 crore pointed out by audit, the Department
accepted observations of % 77.82 crore but the actual recovery was only
र₹ 0.32 crore. The year-wise breakup of the recovery of revenue till
October 2013 is given in the following table:

in crore)

2007-08 9.49 1.80 0.20
2008-09 73.28 73.28 0.01
2009-10 0.34 | 0७6 [ | 0००७५. |
2010-11 9.54 2.63 0.04
2011-12 0.79 0.05 0.03

It is recommended that the Government may revamp the recovery
mechanism to ensure that the amount involved in accepted cases is
promptly recovered.

Test check of the records of sales tax, state excise, stamp duty and
registration fees and taxes on vehicles conducted during the year 2012-13
revealed under assessment/short levy/loss of revenue amounting to
र 18.85 crore in 102 audit observations. During the course of the year, the
Commercial Taxes Department and Revenue Department accepted
& 12.21 lakh in 11 audit observations of which हैं 4.45 lakh pertaining to six
cases were pointed out during the year and the rest in earlier years. An
amount of हैं 5.43 lakh was recovered by the Commercial Taxes
Department.

This Chapter contains a Performance Audit on “Implementation of Value
Added Tax in Union Territory of Puducherry” and two paragraphs on
“Stamp Duty and Registration Fees” and “State Excise” involving money
value of % 1.09 crore.

53



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

COMMERCIAL TAXES DEPARTMENT
Value Added Tax

Highlights

The returns prescribed under the Puducherry Value Added Tax did
not facilitate cross verification of the claim of input tax credit by
dealers.

(Paragraph 4.9.6.3)

The Department did not ensure adherence by the dealers to the
provisions of the Act/Rules regarding filing of certificate in Form
cc’.

(Paragraph 4.9.6.4)

There was delay in finalisation of assessments which were selected for
detailed scrutiny of accounts.

(Paragraph 4.9.6.5)

Absence of validation checks in the software rendered the information
captured in the system unreliable.

(Paragraph 4.9.6.6)
4.9.1 Introduction

The Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers constituted by the
Union Government, in its meeting held in January 2002, unanimously
decided to introduce Value Added Tax (VAT) system in all the States and
Union Territories and issued a White Paper (January 2005) defining the
basic designs of the State level VAT. VAT is a multi-stage destination/
consumption based tax system with tax being levied on every stage of
value addition and has provision for granting setoff or credit for the tax
paid on the purchases against tax payable on sales. In the Union Territory
of Puducherry, VAT was introduced with effect from 1 July 2007.

4.9.2 Organisational set up

The Commissioner of Commercial Taxes (CCT) is the head of Commercial
Taxes Department (CTD) and exercises administrative control. He is
assisted by a Deputy Commissioner and two Assistant Commissioners.
The Commercial Tax Officers, Deputy Commercial Tax Officers and
Assistant Commercial Tax Officers are the Assessing Authorities (AAs)



Chapter IV — Revenue Receipts

responsible for the levy and collection of tax and arrears thereof in the
respective assessment divisions. Besides, there is a ‘Mobile Wing’ formed
for the purpose of conducting surprise inspections and unearthing sales
suppressions and evasion of taxes. Monitoring and control at the
Government level is done by the Secretary, Finance Department.

4.9.3 Audit objectives
Performance Audit (PA) was conducted with a view to ascertain:

. compliance to the provisions of the Puducherry Value Added Tax
Act, 2007 (PVAT Act) and the Rules made thereunder in
safeguarding the revenue of the Union Territory;

. adequacy and effectiveness of the system and procedure in place to
ensure the correctness of input tax credit and the use and
effectiveness of computer application in implementation of the
value added scheme of levy and

. adequacy and effectiveness of internal control mechanism in
preventing any leakage of revenue.

4.9.4 Scope and methodology

There are seven assessment divisions in CTD viz., four assessment
divisions in Puducherry region and one each in the outlying regions of
Karaikal, Mahe and Yanam. Out of seven divisions, five divisions! were
selected for detailed study taking into consideration number of dealers and
revenue mobilisation. Details regarding selection of cases for scrutiny,
completion of assessments, filing of Form ‘CC’ etc. pertaining to the
period from July 2007 to March 2013 were gathered from assessment
divisions and Co-ordination Section of CTD and used for analysis. Data
pertaining to registration of dealers, cancellation of Registration
Certificates (RCs), filing of returns, payment of taxes, etc. were also
analysed from the database maintained in CTD. Besides data analysis,
physical verification of records was also undertaken during PA.
Compliance of provisions of the Act/Rules in registration of dealers,
cancellation of RCs, filing of returns by dealers, claim of Input Tax Credit
(ITC), payment of taxes were some of the areas covered during analysis.
Out of 2,375 assessments made during 2009-10 to 2011-12 in five
assessment divisions, 2,023 cases involving turnover of more than
% 20 lakh were selected for scrutiny. Audit observations included in local
audit reports were also considered.

Karaikal, Puducherry I, II, IAC and IW



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

4.9.5 Acknowledgment

An Entry Conference was held with Deputy Commissioner (Commercial
Taxes) in September 2012 wherein audit objectives, scope and
methodology were explained to the Department. The statements of facts
were forwarded to the Government in November 2012, June and July
2013. Exit Conference was held with the Secretary to Government,
Finance Department in August 2013, wherein audit findings were
discussed. Views expressed by the Government and CTD during the Exit
Conference and replies received at other points of time have been
considered and suitably incorporated in the Performance Audit Report.
Audit acknowledges the cooperation extended by the CTD in providing
necessary records and information.

4.9.6 Audit Findings
4.9.6.1 Registration

Section 4 of the PVAT Act, provides that every dealer, other than those
dealing with goods mentioned in the First Schedule, whose total turnover is
not less than ® five lakh and casual traders irrespective of their turnover are
liable for registration under this Act. As per proviso under Section 4 of the
Act, dealers exclusively dealing in exempted goods shall not be liable for
registration. According to Section 4A of the PVAT Act, the threshold limit
for registration in respect of dealers who purchase and sell goods
exclusively within the Union Territory is = 10 lakh.

Number of registered dealers pertaining to five assessment divisions
covered in PA, though in upward trend till 2011-12, declined by eight
per cent during 2012-13 as compared to the previous year as may be seen
from the data provided by the Department.

2007-08 9,480
2008-09 10,996
2009-10 11,221
2010-11 11,640
2011-12 12,550
2012-13 11,555

The Department attributed the reason for decline in the number of
registered dealers in 2012-13 to cancellation of RCs of large number of
dealers who stopped their business or did not renew their registration, after
verification of their places of business.

56


Chapter IV — Revenue Receipts

. Widening of tax base
> Street surveys

A Survey Cell with two Assistant Commercial Tax Officers was formed
(December 2006) for conducting street surveys to identify potential
unregistered dealers and to bring them into tax net. Audit, however,
noticed that the Department failed to undertake street survey on a regular
basis. Street surveys were conducted in 2007-08 and 2008-09 identifying
221 unregistered dealers. However, none was conducted during the period
from 2009-10 to 2011-12.

The Department stated (August 2013) that street surveys were not
conducted during 2009-10 to 2011-12 due to shortage of staff. However,
surveys were conducted during the period between April 2012 and July
2013 and 120 unregistered dealers were identified.

It is suggested that necessary framework prescribing the periodicity,
methods of survey and monitoring of the result of such surveys may be
evolved.

> Cross verification of data/information obtained from
other Departments/agencies

As per Section 50) of the PVAT Act, every dealer importing goods in the
course of business from outside territory of India shall be liable for
registration irrespective of their quantum of total turnover.

Audit cross verified the registration status of importers who were issued
Import Export Code (IEC) by Joint Director General of Foreign Trade
(JDGFT), Puducherry, with database of CTD and could not identify
registration status of 63 importers who were doing business in Puducherry.
After Audit pointed this out, Department replied (August 2013) that 12
dealers were unregistered and remaining dealers were registered.

Department further stated that customs data was forwarded to the Mobile
Wing for cross verification and JOGFT, Puducherry was requested to send
details of importers along with IEC on a monthly basis.

Further, Audit independently cross verified the details of 81 industries
selected randomly from Yellow Pages of Telephone directory (2012-2013)
and 80 traders to whom trade licences were issued by Puducherry
Municipality, with database of the CTD. Out of these 161 cases,
registration status of 74 dealers could not be ascertained.

After Audit pointed this out, Department replied (August 2013) that
inspections of the place of business of the dealers pointed out by audit
were carried out and it was found that 15 dealers were not available in the

57


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

place of business and in respect of nine dealers, notices were issued to get
themselves registered under the PVAT Act.

It is suggested that the Department may consider evolving a system for
obtaining data periodically from other agencies and making use of the
same in widening tax base.

. Renewal / Cancellation of registration

Rule 8 of PVAT Rules stipulates that within 30 days of commencement of
every year, except the year of commencement of these rules, every
registered dealer, other than a casual trader, shall, until his registration is
cancelled, submit his RC to registering authority and pay the fee as
required under Section 8(2) of the PVAT Act for renewal of registration
for the year subsequent to that in which the registration is obtained. The
registering authority shall have to immediately return the RC with due
endorsement of renewal unless there is any reason to withhold such
registration.

Audit noticed from analysis of data obtained from CTD that RCs in respect
of 210 dealers were not cancelled even though they did not renew their
registration, as shown in the following table:

2009-10 3 3 years and 11 months
2010-11 23 2 years and 11 months
2011-12 74 1 year and 11 months

2012-13 110 11 months

Department replied (August 2013) that out of 210 dealers, 43 dealers had
since renewed their registration, notices were issued to 38 dealers to renew
their registration, registration of 105 dealers has since been cancelled and
cancellation of registration of 24 dealers was in progress.

Further, Audit noticed from an analysis of data in the system that
cancellation of RCs of 807 dealers who did not renew their registration
were stated to be ‘in progress’.

The Department added that out of 807 dealers in respect of whom the
process of cancellation of RCs was in progress, 66 dealers renewed their
registration, RCs of 173 dealers were since cancelled and in respect of the
remaining 568 dealers, the process of cancellation was in progress.

Delay on the part of Department in cancelling the registration of dealers
who did not renew their RCs may pave way for misuse of RC.

58


Chapter IV — Revenue Receipts

4.9.6.2 Analysis of Staff requirement vis-a-vis clearance
of legacy issues

The sanctioned strength in the cadre of assessing officers was 45 during the
period covered by PA, whereas the actual strength had reduced from 37 in
2008-09 to 31 as on March 2013. Though recommendation was made in
the ‘Review on Transition from Sales Tax to Value Added Tax’ (Para 4.9
of the Report of the Comptroller an Auditor General of India for the year
ended 31 March 2010) to consider filling up of vacancies of assessing
officers to tide over the legacy issues of the earlier PGST regime, the staff
strength has not increased.

2008-09 45 37 | 8 | 23,202 2,644 20,558
2009-10 45 उ4 ll 20,558 520 20,038
2010-11 45 32 13 20,038 1,332 18,706
2011-12 45 31 14 18,706 2,204 16,502
2012-13 45 31 14 16,502 1,496 15,006

(Source: Information furnished by the department)

The above table indicates that though five years had elapsed since the
introduction of VAT system of levy, only 35 per cent of the assessments
relating to PGST which were outstanding as on 1 April 2008 had been
finalised. Out of 15,006 cases pending finalisation as on 31 March 2013,
Audit noticed that 625 cases were pending for more than 10 years and
14,381 cases were pending for five to ten years. Since any delay in
finalisation of assessments would result in delay in raising additional
demand, if any, filling up of vacancies in the posts of assessing officers
requires immediate attention of the Department.

Department replied (August 2013) that proposal for filling up of vacancies
was sent to the Government in February 2011 after the audit comment in
this regard, made in the ‘Review on transition from sales tax to VAT’. As
regards the pending assessments, the Department replied that instructions
were issued to all the assessing officers to complete the same on priority
basis.

Though instructions were stated to have been issued, 65 per cent of the
assessments relating to PGST are yet to be finalised. Delay in finalisation
would result in postponement of additional revenue that may arise on
finalisation of assessments.

4.9.6.3 Absence of details in the returns to verify the
claim of ITC

As per section 24(1) of the PVAT Act read with Rule 19(1) PVAT Rules,
every registered dealer shall file a tax return in Form-I within 15 days after

59


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

end of the month to which the tax relates. | The monthly return provides
details of tax period, name and TIN of dealer, turnover of purchase and
sales, output tax liability, claim of ITC etc. Details of adjustments in
output tax and ITC, sales turnover and purchase turnover are required to be
furnished in Annexure I, II and III respectively to the monthly return.
However, name and TIN of dealers from whom goods were purchased or
to whom goods were sold were not required to be furnished; in the absence
of which, ensuring the correctness of claim of ITC was rendered
impossible.

In five divisions covered in PA, dealers claimed ITC of % 897.04 crore
during the period from 2007-08 to 2012-13. Verification of correctness of
claim of ITC without calling for books of accounts is possible only if
invoice-wise details of purchase and sales (invoice number, date of
invoice, name and TIN of selling dealers/purchasing dealers, value of
goods and tax paid/collected) are provided by both selling and purchasing
dealers in their monthly tax returns. As these details were not available in
the tax returns filed by purchasing/selling dealers, the Department was
unable to ensure the correctness of claim of ITC.

After Audit pointed out this, the Department replied (August 2013) that to
overcome the deficiencies, PVAT Rules were amended (June 2013)
requiring the dealers to furnish invoice wise details of local sales and local
purchases. The Department further stated that a module was also
developed for capturing details in the returns from August 2013 onwards.

4.9.6.4 Filing of certificate in Form ‘CC’

According to Section 54 of the PVAT Act, every dealer whose total
turnover in a year exceeds rupees fifty lakh shall get his accounts audited
by Chartered Accountant or Cost Accountant and shall submit a copy of
the audited statement of accounts and certificate in Form ‘CC’. Rule 52 of
the PVAT Rules provides that such certificate shall be furnished to the
assessing authority on or before thirtieth September of the year succeeding
to which it relates. The penal provisions which could be initiated against
dealers who willfully act in contravention of any of the provisions of the
Act or who commit a breach of the Rules are provided in Section 59(2)(d)
of the PVAT Act and Rule 57 of the PVAT Rules respectively.

The dealers are required to furnish details of local purchases in Annexure I
of the Certificate. The receipt of Form ‘CC’ along with Annexure I would
enable the Department to ensure correctness of ITC claimed by the dealer.

Details of non filers of Form ‘CC’ certificates, furnished by five divisions
covered in PA, are given in the following table:

60


Chapter IV — Revenue Receipts

2007-08 1,543 613 930 60.27
2008-09 1,852 691 1,161 62.69
2009-10 2,187 683 1,504 68.77
2010-11 2,817 768 2,049 72.74
2011-12 2,368 484 1,884 79.56

Though the percentage of non-filers of Form ‘CC’ increased from 60.27 to
79.56 per cent during the period from 2007-08 to 2011-12, the Department
did not invoke the penal provision of the Act/Rules against the dealers who
failed to file the certificates to act as effective deterrent against such non
filing of certificates.

The Department replied (August 2013) that 480 Form ‘CC’ certificates
were since collected from the dealers and action was being taken in respect
of other cases.

4.9.6.5 Selection of cases for detailed scrutiny under
PVAT Act

Section 24(2) of the PVAT Act provides that the returns submitted by the
dealer along with tax due thereon shall be accepted as self-assessed and the
assessing authority may select, either at his discretion or as directed by the
Commissioner, any dealer for detailed assessment.

In terms of Section 24(5) of the Act, no assessment shall be made after a
period of three years from the end of the year to which the return relates.
Delay in selection of cases for scrutiny / completion of assessments would
result in cases getting time barred and the cases escaping from being
subjected to scrutiny. The CCT adopted ‘Business Intelligent Software’
for selection of cases for scrutiny on the basis of quantum of tax paid and
ITC availed.

Audit noticed from the details furnished by the Department that out of
6,546 cases selected for detailed assessment by scrutiny of accounts during
October 2009 and November 2012, scrutiny was completed only in respect
of 689 cases (10.5 per cent) at the end March 2013, as detailed in the
following table:

61


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

On selection of cases for scrutiny of accounts, the AAs issue summons to
these dealers to produce the documents required for such scrutiny.
However, Audit noticed that out of 4,663 cases selected for scrutiny in
October 2009, summons calling for accounts were not issued in respect of
774 cases till March 2013, which rendered the cases getting time barred
for scrutiny. Further scrutiny of accounts was not completed in respect of
88.4 per cent and 92.1 per cent of cases selected in 2009-10 and 2011-12
respectively. This is indicative of absence of proper monitoring by higher
authorities of the progress in completion of assessments.

4.9.6.6 Computerisation

Department computerised its functions with a software developed by
National Informatics Centre namely ‘PVAT Soft’ which has a centralised
database. The software was utilised for capturing and processing data
through offline mode from July 2007 and from April 2010 onwards
through online mode. The software contains modules / functions for
utilisation by departmental officers and dealers. The modules / functions
‘PVAT’, ‘COMVAT’, ‘PGSTVAT’ are being used by departmental
officers for tax administration, MIS and tax collection for prior VAT
period respectively and module/ functions viz. ‘e-Registration’, ‘e-
Renewal of Registration’ , ‘e-Filing of monthly returns’ and ‘e-Payment of
Taxes’ for the use of dealers. Besides, another module viz. ‘Form
Verification’ is used by both dealers and departmental officers. Data
entered into system was verified and authorised by the AAs.

Analysis of the data base of the entire period July 2007 to March 2012
revealed following deficiencies:

. Though e-filing of returns was made mandatory with effect from
April 2010, there is no provision for on line submission of audit certificates
in Form ‘CC’ by the dealers.

. Details of dealers like name, address, date of commencement of
business, PAN etc. were stored in the ‘dealer master’ table. The value of
term deposit receipts received from the dealers as security’ was stored in
‘dealer master’ table. All other details of the term deposits like number
and date of issue, value, validity period and expiry date were stored in
‘security deposit’ table.

> Analysis of ‘dealer master’ table indicated collection of security
deposits valuing ~ 9.57 crore from 7,706 dealers. Audit, however,
noticed that in the ‘security deposit’ table, details of securities
valuing ~ 74.31 lakh received from 862 dealers alone were
captured. Audit further noticed that term deposits for हैं. 2.82 lakh

As per Rule 11 of the PVAT Rules, Security Deposits shall be either in the
form of immovable property or Post Office Savings Bank Deposit or National
Savings Certificates or term deposits from Schedules banks/nationalised banks

62


Chapter IV — Revenue Receipts

received as security from 39 dealers had matured. Thus, the
Department had no system to monitor the validity period of the
instruments.

After Audit pointed this out, the Department stated that a suitable module
would be developed to capture the submission of security deposit at the
time of obtaining TIN and the same would be put to use within six months.

Lack of validation controls

Analysis of ‘dealer master table’ and ‘Form-I table’ revealed lack of
validation controls, which led to following deficiencies.

. While applying for registration under the PVAT Act, the dealers are
required to provide Permanent Account Number (PAN) in the application
for registration in Form-A. Analysis of the ‘dealer master table’, however,
indicated that PAN had not been captured in the system in respect of 274
dealers. Further analysis revealed that PAN captured in the system in
respect of 63 dealers was found to be invalid as they were not in
prescribed/standard format of CBDT. Analysis also revealed that Import
Export Code (IEC) in respect of 10 dealers was incorrect and they were not
in prescribed/standard format of Director General of Foreign Trade
(DGFT).

. Section 24(1) of the PVAT Act provides that every registered
dealer shall file a tax return for each tax period within 15 days after end of
the period. Rule 19 of the PVAT Rules provides that the tax return shall be
in Form-I. In Form-I, dealers are required to provide their total tax liability
for a particular month along with rate of tax wise break up details of their
sales in the appropriate columns. Similarly, their total claim of ITC and
rate of tax wise break up details of corresponding purchases are provided
in the appropriate columns. Instances were noticed by Audit, where total
tax liability, declared in tax returns, did not tally with break up details of
tax due on sale of various goods. Similarly total claim of ITC made in tax
returns was at variance with rate of tax wise break up details of eligible
purchases. The deficiencies, in details of output tax and ITC claim
provided by the dealers in their tax returns, occurred due to absence of
validation control in the software. The same are discussed in following
two paragraphs:

> In 424 monthly returns filed by 299 dealers of seven divisions
during the period from July 2007 to March 2010, aggregate of
output tax payable on sales turnover of goods taxable at different
rates and adjustments made thereon was at variance with total tax
liability mentioned in ‘total output tax’ column of the Form-I (sum
of tax due mentioned R.3(B) to R.10(B) was % 2.83 crore whereas
total tax liability mentioned was % 2.23 crore (R.11(B) of Form-I
return). Similarly, Audit noticed such differences in respect of five
returns, filed after April 2010 when e-filing of returns were made

63


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

mandatory, by five dealers pertaining to four assessment circle®
(aggregate tax due in respect of each category of goods worked out
to % 2.86 lakh whereas total tax liability mentioned was
0.22 lakh).

> In 291 monthly returns filed by 217 dealers of seven divisions
during the period from July 2007 to March 2010, aggregate of ITC
credits claimed in respect of purchase goods taxable at different
rates and adjustments made thereon was at variance with total ITC
claimed in Form-I (sum of ITC as mentioned in R.14(B) was
हैँ 1.20 crore; whereas total claim of ITC in R.16(B) was
% 3.19 crore). Similarly, Audit noticed such variance, in respect of
206 returns filed by 183 dealers of seven divisions during the
period from April 2010 to March 2013 when the tax returns
were filed on line (sum of ITC as mentioned in R.14(B) was
& 2.15 crore; whereas total claim of ITC in R.16(B) was
% 2.39 crore).

After Audit pointed this out, the Department replied that in the returns
relating to January 2012, ITC relating to purchase of goods taxable at one
per cent was not exhibited in the system at column R.14.1(B) of Form-I
return but the total tax credit at R.16(B) was correctly computed taking into
account the credit relating to purchase of goods taxable at one per cent.
Therefore, there was no short levy of tax. The Department further stated
that in respect of returns filed prior to April 2010, the discrepancy was due
to data entry errors and there was no short levy as the tax liability of the
dealer was correctly computed and collected. | However, Audit noticed
that similar discrepancies were in existence even after e-filing of tax
returns was made mandatory from April 2010, which warrants introduction
of validation controls in e-filing modules.

. The amount of tax credit available in excess in a month (R26 of
Form-I return) is carried forward to the next month and is exhibited in
Annexure I-C of the succeeding month. The amount shown under item 1
of Annexure I-C to the Form-I of a month as “Tax credit carried forward
from previous period” and the amount shown in R.26 of Form-I of the
previous month as “tax credit carried forward to next tax period” should be
identical. Audit noticed that in 240 returns filed by 174 dealers, tax credit
carried forward from previous month (% 1.87 crore as per Annexure.I of
Form-I) was more than the closing balance of the previous month
(₹ 0.82 crore as per R.26 of Form.I for previous month). Similarly, even
after April 2010 when e-filing of tax returns were made mandatory, Audit
noticed such discrepancy in 445 tax returns filed by 343 dealers
( 6.42 crore as per Annexure-I where it was हैं 2.73 crore as per R.26 of
Form-I).

5 Karaikal, Mahe, Puducherry-II and Yanam

64


Chapter IV — Revenue Receipts

After Audit pointed this out, the Department replied that the discrepancy
occurs mostly in cases where revised returns were filed by the dealers and
there is no short levy of output tax. The Department, however, agreed to
verify all the cases pointed out in Audit and furnish a report after
verification.

However, on further scrutiny of the data in the system, Audit noticed that
such discrepancies exist even in cases where revised returns were filed for
both previous and succeeding months.

4.9.6.7 Subsequent acceptance of cheques from dealers
whose earlier cheques got dishonoured

. As per Rule 67 of the PVAT Rules, one of the modes for remitting
tax due is by means of a crossed cheque in favour of AA. The Rules,
however, provide that the method of payment by means of cheque shall not
be applicable to casual dealers and dealers whose cheque got dishonoured
by the banks for want of funds on more than one occasion.

Analysis of dump data revealed that out of 4,190 cheques dishonoured by
the banks during the period from July 2007 to March 2013, for various
reasons like insufficiency of funds, amount in words and figures being
different, variation in signature of drawer, etc. 3608 cheques were
dishonoured for want of funds. Further, it was noticed that out of these
3608 cheques, 2,205 cheques tendered by 324 dealers for payment of
% 82.91 crore were dishonoured for more than one occasion. Audit
noticed that these 324 dealers were, however, allowed to make subsequent
payments by way of cheques.

Audit further noticed that cheques tendered by 11 dealers were
dishonoured for not less than 25 times; the maximum being 87 times in the
case of one dealer. The provision of payment by cheques to the dealers
whose cheques were earlier dishonoured also resulted in providing
unintended financial accommodation of tax amounting to हैं 3.36 crore
during the period from July 2007 to September 2009, when there was no
provision to levy interest for belated payment of monthly tax.

The Department replied (August 2013) that in order to realise tax dues
without further delay, subsequent cheques were also accepted. The
Department further stated that at present the system has a control by which
dealers whose cheques were dishonoured are blocked from applying for
declaration forms until they make payment.

However, control mechanism evolved would not be applicable to all
dealers but only to those dealers who engage in inter-State transactions
requiring declaration forms.

. Verification of remittance of tax against the cheques dishonoured
by banks revealed that in respect of 79 cheques received from 41 dealers,

65


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

subsequent payment was found to be lesser by = 1.03 crore. Similarly, in
respect of 177 cheques tendered by 127 dealers, final payment of
% 2.15 crore is yet to be received.

The Department replied (August 2013) that short payment/final payment in
respect of cases pointed out by audit, will be verified and report submitted
to Audit. The Department added that, as observed by audit, a special MIS
is developed to show details of amount due to be collected against the
bounced cheques.

It is suggested that there should be an effective system in place to monitor
the collection of arrears in respect of those cases.

4.9.6.8 Non-reversal of ITC

As per Rule 17(3)(v) of the PVAT Rules, ITC shall be allowed for
purchase of goods made within the Union Territory from a registered
dealer and when they are sold, against declarations in Form ‘C’, in the
course of inter-State trade or commerce falling under Section 8(1) of the
Central Sales Tax Act.

During scrutiny of assessment records, Audit noticed in Puducherry-I
division and Industrial Assessment Circle that five dealers made inter-State
sale of goods, not covered by declarations in Form ‘C’, लि रे 31.49 crore
during the period from 2007-08 to 2011-12. Though the transactions
warrant reversal of ITC already claimed by the dealer, proportionate ITC
was not reversed either by the dealers in the monthly returns or by the
AAs. The amount of ITC reversible works out to हैं 38.37 lakh.

After Audit pointed this out, the Department replied in August 2013 that
notices proposing reversal of ITC were issued. Further report is awaited
(November 2013).

4.9.6.9 Non / Short levy of penalty

According to Section 24 of the PVAT Act, every registered dealer shall file
a tax return within 15 days after end of the month. Section 24A of the
PVAT Act, introduced with effect from 29 September 2009, provides that
if a dealer fails to pay the tax within the prescribed due date, the dealer
shall pay, in addition to the tax, penalty at two per cent of such amount for
each month or part thereof for the entire period of default.

. Analysis of ‘tax collection table’ of database revealed that 5939
dealers paid tax of ¥ 263.89 crore belatedly, with delay which ranged from
five days to 1,226 days, during the period from 2009-10 to 2012-13.
Penalty leviable worked out to हैं. 6.08 crore in respect of 2973 dealers who
paid tax of ~ 256.20 crore belatedly, excluding the cases where the penalty
leviable was less than ~ 100. However, Penalty on belated payment of tax
was either not levied or was short levied by the Department.

66


Chapter IV — Revenue Receipts

Further, Audit cross checked monthly returns filed by the dealers in three*
divisions and found that nine dealers paid tax during the period between
October 2009 and March 2013 belatedly with delay ranging from five days
to 583 days. Penalty leviable in these cases worked out to हैं 38.67 lakh.

Department replied (August 2013) that automatic demand of penalty in
cases of belated payment was introduced in the system with effect from
April 2013. However, report regarding levy of penalty in respect of the
cases pointed out in Audit is awaited.

4.9.6.10 Other point of interest
Application of reduced rate of tax to industrial inputs

Section 75 of the PVAT Act empowers the Government to alter, add or
cancel any of the schedules by issue of Notification. As per Section 31 of
the Act, the Government is empowered to notify reduction of tax in respect
of any goods. Such delegated powers shall not be used where a
Notification seeks to amend the Schedules of the Act.

As per entry 68 of Part-A of Third Schedule, industrial inputs and packing
materials as specified in the Appendix were taxable at the rate of four
per cent and 166 goods were treated as industrial inputs and packing
materials and included in the Appendix.

Government subsequently issued a Notification (July 2007) under Section
31 of the Act reducing rate of tax from four per cent to one per cent on all
kinds of industrial inputs and packing materials sold to industries. By
issue of another Notification in September 2007, the Government deleted
the words “from four per cent” included in earlier Notification and thereby
extended reduced rate to all goods if they are sold as industrial inputs to
industries. The rate was increased to three per cent with effect from
1 January 2012 by issue of another Notification in December 2011.

Audit noticed that based on the Notifications issued by the Government,
goods which are not mentioned in the Appendix were also treated as
industrial inputs and assessed to tax at one/three per cent. During PA,
Audit noticed from assessment records of 12 dealers pertaining to four
divisions’ that reduced rate of tax was allowed on the sale turnover of
& 203.48 crore relating to the commodities®, other than those 166 items
specified in Appendix to PVAT Act.

TAC, Mahe and Puducherry I

TAC, Karaikal, Puducherry-I and IT

Iron and Steel, aluminium rods, computer monitors, injection moulded parts,
diesel driven compressor parts, silica manganese, electrical goods, sheet metal
parts etc.

67


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

After Audit pointed this out, the Department replied (August 2013) that
intention of Government was to provide incentive to all industries and
therefore issued Notification allowing reduced rate of tax in respect of all
industrial inputs. Department further stated that it was decided to amend
entry 68, under Section 75 of the PVAT Act.

4.9.7 Internal Control Mechanism

Internal control mechanism enables the Head of Department to have better
co-ordination among different wings of the Department by monitoring
various functions executed by them and to ensure that they are carried out
in proper manner and in accordance with the rules and regulations.
Internal controls are intended to provide reasonable assurance of proper
enforcement of laws, rules and Departmental instructions. Monitoring is a
key component of internal control system. The existence of continuous
and effective monitoring system is essential to secure the success of
internal control system.

Following deficiencies in internal control were noticed:

e Fortnightly Report is furnished by each assessing officer to the
CCT. A scrutiny of the fortnightly reports revealed that the
position regarding finalisation of assessments selected for detailed
scrutiny by CCT is not being indicated therein. Thus, the
finalisation of such cases by the AAs is not being monitored by CT.

e Internal audit is an integral part of internal control to enable an
organisation to assure itself that the prescribed systems are
functioning reasonably well. Audit observed that internal audit was
not undertaken in any of the divisions from 2009-10 to 2012-13.

After Audit pointed this out, the Department stated (August 2013) that a
module would be developed in the system to monitor finalisation of
pending assessments. The Department attributed non conduct of internal
audit to shortage of staff but stated that internal audit would be taken up in
all divisions during the year 2013-14.

4.9.8 Conclusion

Performance Audit of implementation of VAT system in Union Territory
of Puducherry revealed that effective measures need to be taken by the
Department to widen the tax base and to bring into the tax net the dealers
who carry on business without registration under the PVAT Act. The PA
also revealed that there is need for improvement in the areas of
computerisation and internal control. Absence of validation controls in the
e-filing module resulted in incorrect data being fed into the system. The
large number of assessments in respect of which scrutiny was pending and
non filing of certificate in Form ‘CC’ by majority of dealers was indicative

68


Chapter IV — Revenue Receipts

of absence of effective monitoring system. Assess

es, whose cheques

were dishonoured by banks on more than one occasion, were allowed to
make payment by way of cheques, in contravention of provisions of the
PVAT Rules.

4.9.9 Recommendations

Government may

evolve a system to monitor conducting of periodical surveys and
for gathering information/details from other Departments/agencies
to ensure that dealers liable for VAT registration are promptly
detected and registered.

ensure that the time schedule prescribed in the Act / Rules for
renewal / cancellation of the registration may be adhered to strictly
to guard against the misuse of the TIN already allotted.

issue suitable instructions for timely finalisation of assessments of
the cases selected for scrutiny and due adherence to the same may
be ensured through proper monitoring at higher level.

introduce a module in the system to monitor filing of certificate in
Form ‘CC’ and non filing of Form ‘CC’ may be prescribed as one
of the norms for selection of cases for detailed scrutiny.

incorporate appropriate validation controls in the system to curb
data entry errors and also to facilitate optimum usage of
computerisation.

institute a system control to restrict acceptance of payment by
cheques from the dealers whose cheques were dishonoured by the
banks for more than one occasion.

69


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

Revenue Department

Stamp Duty and Registration Fees

It was judicially held”
According to Section 2(10) of the Indian that there can be no

Stamp Act, 1899 conveyance includes a such thing ~— 38
conveyance on sale and every instrument by cancellation of a
which property whether movable or conveyance under
immovable, is transferred inter vivos and which right रण
which is not otherwise specifically provided property has already
for by Schedule I. been passed.

Property can be
retransferred only
एज. re-conveyance.
Further, it was held®
by the Hon’ble
Madras High Court

As per Article 23, in the case of conveyance
of an immovable property, stamp duty is
leviable at the rate of 10 per cent including
transfer duty surcharge on the market value
of the property. As per Article 17 of
Schedule I of the IS Act, for Instrument of .

८ . . that cancellation of
‘ancellation, if attested and not otherwise a Sale Deed by a
provided for, stamp duty of % 50 is to be Deed of

levied on the same. Cancellation can be

Government of Puducherry issued a effected only when
notification in December 2004 whereby a condition that title
remission of 50 per cent of stamp duty was will pass on
granted to women who acquire property payment of
through conveyance. The Government of consideration, was
Puducherry restricted the concession to included in the
women permanently residing in the Union original Sale Deed.
Territory of Puducherry with effect from

23 August 2007. Audit noticed, during

scrutiny of records in
Sub-Registry Oulgaret
(October 2012) that conveyance of properties effected (between August
2003 and April 2010) through three Sale Deeds on receipt of consideration
was cancelled through instruments registered subsequently (between
December 2010 and June 2011) on the ground that consideration was not
received and possession not handed over. These instruments were treated
as Cancellation Deeds. Since the vendors had re-acquired right and
interest over the properties from the original purchasers through these
deeds, the same were to be treated as Conveyance Deeds. Accordingly,

cf Emperror Vs Rameshardoss 32 All 171 SIC 697
W.A.Nos.592 & 938 of 2009, in Latif Estate Line India Ltd., Vs. Registration
Department



Chapter IV _ Revenue Receipts

stamp duty and registration fees of € 6.21 lakh was required to be levied on
the market value of the property of हैं 94.80 lakh as against
% 310 collected by the Department. Thus, there was a short collection of
stamp duty and registration fees of & 6.20 lakh due to misclassification of
Conveyance Deeds as Cancellation Deeds.

Audit pointed this out to the Department in November 2012 and to the
Government in July 2013. Their reply is awaited (January 2014).

Health Department

State Excise

Audit noticed (December
2012/January 2013) from
scrutiny of import permit
files of the licensees,

According to Section 21 of the
Pondicherry Excise Act, 1970, the

Government may levy duty on any
excisable article manufactured or
produced elsewhere in India and
imported into the Union Territory
under a license or permit granted

register of import permits
and import liquor received
register in the offices of the
Deputy Commissioner

(Excise), Puducherry and
Karaikal that seven licensees
imported IMFL and Beer
after the dates of revision of
ED and AED under permits
issued prior to such revision.
Levy of ED and AED was,
however, made at old rates. Similarly, Audit noticed from Beer transport
permit register of two licensees that ED and AED were collected at old
rates in respect of Beer received on 02 January 2012 instead of at new
rates. This resulted in short collection of ED and AED of % 26.12 lakh.

under this Act. Government of
Puducherry has revised’ the Excise
duty (ED) and Additional Excise duty
(AED) payable on IMFL and Beer
with effect from 2.1.2012.

After Audit pointed this out to the Department (January 2013), the Deputy
Collector (Excise), Puducherry replied (August 2013) that = 6.70 lakh was
collected and for the balance, report on collection would be furnished. The
Deputy Collector (Excise), Karaikal replied (July 2013) that demand
notices were served and the collection particulars will be furnished.
Further report is awaited (September 2013).

Audit reported the matter to the Government (July 2013). Their reply is
awaited (January 2014).

° Notification No. 4764/DCE/S1/201 (1) dt. 02.01.2012, issued by the Department
of Revenue and Disaster Management, Government of Puducherry

71


CHAPTER V

GOVERNMENT COMMERCIAL
AND
TRADING ACTIVITIES



CHAPTER V

COMMERCIAL AND TRADING
ACTIVITIES

Introduction

5.1.1 The Union Territory Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) were
established to carry out commercial activities keeping in view the welfare
of people. As on 31 March 2013, there were 13 Government companies
(all working) and none of them was listed on the stock exchange(s). These
PSUs registered a turnover of & 373.92 crore’ as per their latest finalised
accounts (September 2013). This turnover was equal to 2.18 per cent of
Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP) of = 17,191.67 crore for 2012-13.
Major activities of PSUs are concentrated in the manufacturing and
financing sectors. The PSUs incurred an aggregate loss of = 31.68 crore as
per their latest finalised accounts (September 2013).They had employed
5,829 employees as on 31 March 2013.

5.1.2 No PSU was either established or closed during 2012-13.

5.1.3 Audit of Government companies is governed by Section 619 of the
Companies Act, 1956. According to Section 617, a Government Company
is one in which not less than 51 per cent of the paid up capital is held by
Government(s). A Government Company includes a subsidiary of a
Government Company.

5.1.4 The accounts of the Government companies (as defined in Section
617 of the Companies Act, 1956) are audited by Statutory Auditors who are
appointed by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG) as per
the provisions of Section 619(2) of the Companies Act, 1956. These
accounts are also subject to supplementary audit conducted by the CAG as
per provisions of Section 619 of the Companies Act, 1956.

Investments in Union Territory PSUs

5.1.5 As on 31 March 2013, investment (capital and long-term loans) in
13 PSUs was % 711.15 crore as per details given below:

Nine companies finalised their accounts for the years other than 2012-13

73



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

@ in crore)

Working PSUs TULAS | oo | - TULAS

(Source: Details furnished by the companies)

A summarised position of Government investment in PSUs of UT of
Puducherry is detailed in Appendix 5.1.

5.1.6 As on 31 March 2013, total investment in 13 PSUs was towards
capital. Investment has grown by 8.06 per cent from % 658.10 crore in
2008-09 to हैं 711.15 crore in 2012-13.

1000.00
900.00

a 726.25
800.00 699.02 TULAS

700.00 oO ed

600.00

500.00

in crore)

400.00

300.00

200.00

2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13,

—e— Investment (Capital and long term loans)

5.1.7 Investments in various important sectors and percentage thereof at
the end of 31 March 2009 and 31 March 2013 are indicated below:

74


@ in crore)

Chapter V - Government Commercial and Trading Activities

450

(56.26)

400

(49.23)

200
(20.67) (20.22) (19.00)
(14.03)

150

(40.71)

100 (9.88)

50

76.13

65.04

2008-09 2012-13

GFinancing OManufacture OPower O Others

(Figures in brackets show the sector percentage to total investment)

Budgetary outgo, grants/subsidies, guarantees and loans

5.1.8 Details regarding budgetary outgo towards equity, loans,
grants/subsidies, guarantees issued, loans written off, loans converted into
equity and interest waived in respect of PSUs are given in Appendix 5.3.
Summarised details of budgetary support from Government of UT of
Puducherry are given below for three years ended 31 March 2013.

(Amount - 2 in crore)

1 Baty Capital outgo from| 9 1७% sl cp all ass
2 | Loans given from budget 1 0.32 = = = =
3 | Grants/Subsidy received | 6 [11914 | 6| 7551] 9 | 106.97
4 | Total Outgo (1+2+3) 8 | 137.18 82 ||. 82.24 97 | 107.22
5 | Loan converted into equity 2 4.01 [=] L =] L =] L =|
[6 | Guarantee Commitment 1 497] 1 [3.64 1| 3.61

(Source : Details furnished by the Companies)

2 ‘These are the actual number of companies which have received budgetary support

in the form of equity, loans and grants/subsidies from the UT Government during
the respective years



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

5.1.9 Details regarding budgetary outgo towards equity, loans and
grants/subsidies for the past five years are given in the graph below:

160
140
120

100

80

@ in crore)

60

40

20

2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13

—?— Budgetary outgo towards Equity, Loans and Grants/subsidies

5.1.10 As regards guarantee commitment, only Puducherry Adi Dravidar
Development Corporation Limited availed the Government of India
guarantee against which हैं 3.61 crore was outstanding as on 31 March
2013. No guarantee commission was payable to the UT Government by the
Company.

Absence of accurate figure for investment in PSUs

5.1.11 Figures in respect of equity and loans outstanding as per records of
UT PSUs should agree with that of the figures appearing in the Finance
Accounts of the Government of UT of Puducherry. In case the figures do
not agree, the concerned PSUs and the Finance Department should
reconcile the differences. The position in this regard as at 31 March 2013
is stated below:

@ in crore)
Equity 700.48 700.78 0.30
Loans 0.94 NIL 0.94
Guarantees 3.61 3.61 NIL

(Source: Finance Accounts for 2012-13 and details furnished by the companies)

76


apter V - Government Commercial and Trading Activities

5.1.12 Audit observed that the differences occurred in two PSUs and were
pending reconciliation for over six years up to 2012-13. The UT
Government and PSUs may take concrete steps to reconcile the differences
in a time bound manner.

Performance of PSUs

5.1.13 Financial results of PSUs are detailed in Appendix 5.2. The ratio
of PSUs’ turnover to State GDP shows the extent of PSUs activities in the
State economy. The table below provides details of PSUs turnover vis-a-
vis UT GSDP for the period 2008-09 to 2012-13.

@ in crore)

Turnover 399.89 308.53 338.35 336.68 373.92°
GSDP 11,773.57 | 11,255.23 | 11,255.23 | 14,081.06 17,191.67
Percentage of 3.40 2.74 3.01 2.39 2.18
Tumover to State

GDP

(Source : Details furnished by the Companies and GSDP furnished by UT Government)

Compared to 2008-09, the turnover and percentage of turnover to GSDP
showed a decreasing trend indicating that the contribution of PSUs of UT
to GSDP was not substantial.

5.1.14 Losses incurred by UT PSUs during the period 2008-13 are given
below:

in crore)
0)
60 1111
50 |
40
30 |
20
10
o
2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13

GOverall loss incurred during the year by working PSUs

Turnover as per latest finalised accounts as on 30 September 2013.

77


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

During the year 2012-13, out of 13 PSUs, three PSUs earned profit of
= 14.79 crore while nine PSUs incurred loss of हैं 46.47 crore leading to
overall loss. One PSU, viz., Puducherry Backward Classes and Minorities
Development Company prepared its accounts on ‘no profit no loss’ basis.
The contributors to profit were Puducherry Power Corporation Limited
(® 7.95 crore), Puducherry Distilleries Limited ( 4.63 crore) and
Pondicherry Industrial Promotion, Development and Investment
Corporation Limited (₹ 2.21 crore). Heavy losses were incurred by
Pondicherry Textiles Corporation Limited (% 16.85 crore) and Swadeshee-
Bharathee Textile Mills Limited (= 11.36 crore).

5.1.15 Losses of PSUs were mainly attributable to deficiencies in financial
management, planning, implementation of projects, operational
management and monitoring. The Audit Reports of the CAG for the three
years ending March 2013 reflect avoidable expenditure/loss of revenue to
the extent of = 3.82 crore and idle investment of % 3.48 crore. This could
have been controlled with better management. Year wise details from
Audit Reports are stated below:

@ in crore)
Net Profit (loss) (58.80) (55.81) (31.68) (146.29)

Controllable losses as per 1.83 1.99 = 3.82
C&AG’s Audit Report

Idle investment = = 3.48 3.48
(Source: Latest finalised accounts of companies and CAG’s Audit Report)

5.1.16 The above losses pointed out by Audit Reports of the CAG were
based on test check of records of PSUs. Therefore, the actual controllable
losses could be much more than this. The PSUs can discharge their role
efficiently only if they are financially prudent. The above financial
situation points towards a need for greater professionalism and
accountability in the functioning of PSUs.

5.1.17 Some other key parameters pertaining to UT PSUs are given below:
(& in crore)

pe a Capital Employed NIL NIL NIL
Debt 11.48 16.46 19.59 15.35 NIL
Turnover 399.89 308.53 338.35 336.68 373.92
Debt/Turnover Ratio 0.03:1 0.05:1 0.06:1 0.05:1 | |
Interest Payments UPS 10.49 10.56 15.15 12.88
Accumulated Losses 263.76 | 268.60 | 378.51 | 449.45 | 496.38

(Source: Details furnished by the companies and latest finalised accounts of companies)

78


Chapter V rnment Commercial and Trading Activities

5.1.18 As per the latest finalised accounts of PSUs as on 30 September
2013, the capital employed worked out to हैं 641.58 crore in comparison to
capital employed of % 581.28 crore in 2008-09. During the last five years,
overall return on capital employed remained “NIL”.

5.1.19 The State Government had not formulated any policy for payment
of minimum dividend on the share capital contributed by it. As per the
latest finalised accounts, three PSUs earned an aggregate profit of हैं 14.79
crore and two PSU* declared a dividend of & 3.62 crore.

Arrears in finalisation of accounts

5.1.20 Annual accounts of companies are required to be finalised within
six months from the end of the relevant financial year under Sections 166,
210, 230 and 619 of the Companies Act, 1956. The table below provides
details of progress made by PSUs in finalisation of accounts by
September 2013.

[1 | Number of PSUs 13 13 13 13 13

2. | Number of accounts
finalised during the 13 13 ba 17 |» |
year.

3. Number of accounts 20 20 25 21 24
in arrears

| Number of PSUs

with arrears in 13 13 13 12 12
accounts
5. | Extent of arrears 1103 1103 1103 1103 1104
years years years years years

(Source: Details compiled by audit)

5.1.21 It could be seen from the table that 12 companies are having arrears
in finalisation of accounts ranging from one to four years as on 30
September 2013. The companies should take efforts to reduce the arrears
in finalisation of accounts.

5.1.22 As of September 2013, the UT Government invested हैं 185.28 crore
(Equity: हैं 5.86 crore, Grants/Subsidies: = 179.42 crore) in eight PSUs
during the years for which accounts have not been finalised as detailed in
Appendix 5.4. In the absence of accounts and their audit, investments and
expenditure incurred cannot be vouchsafed.

5.1.23 Administrative departments overseeing the activities of these
entities have also to ensure that the accounts are finalised and adopted by

4 Pondicherry Industrial Promotion Development and Investment Corporation

Limited and Puducherry Power Corporation Limited.

79


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

these PSUs within the prescribed period. Though the concerned
administrative departments and officials of the Government were informed
periodically by Audit, of the arrears in finalisation of accounts, no remedial
measures were taken. As a result of this, the net worth of these PSUs could
not be assessed in audit. The matter of arrears in accounts was also taken
up (October 2013) with the Secretary to UT Government, Finance
Department to expedite the finalisation of accounts in arrears.

5.1.24 It is therefore, recommended that the UT Government should
monitor and ensure timely finalisation of accounts with special focus on
arrears and comply with the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956.

Adverse Comments on the Accounts and Internal Audit of PSUs

5.1.25 The audit reports of statutory auditors and the supplementary audit
of CAG indicate that the quality of maintenance of accounts needs to be
improved substantially. The details of aggregate money value of comments
of statutory auditors and CAG are given below:

(Amount - हैं गो crore)

1. Increase in loss 2 5.79 2. 10.23 3 33.22

2. Decrease in loss | -_ | | | [ - | | | [oa | 17.78

3. Errors of || | "७ | | | | ~ | | 7 | | = |
classification

(Source: Annual accounts of the companies)

5.1.26 During the year, the statutory auditors had given unqualified
certificates for eight accounts and qualified certificates for two accounts.

5.1.27 Some of the important comments in respect of accounts of
companies are stated below:

Pondicherry Textiles Corporation Limited (2011-12)
e There was understatement of loss due to:

(i) accounting of compensation towards Voluntary Retirement Scheme
as receivable from Government of Puducherry without its orders —
र₹ 1.04 crore.

(ii) non-provision for contribution payable to Employees State
Insurance Corporation on the interim relief granted to workers and contract
labourers - हैं 1.79 crore.



Chapter V - Government Commercial and Trading Activities

(iii) | Valuation of closing stock of cloth at cost which had realisable
value lower than the cost - % 5.04 crore.

Pondicherry Corporation for Development of Women and Differently
Abled Persons Limited (2011-12)

e Non-accountal of 25.84 crore of grants received from the Government
as revenue as per the provisions of Accounting Standard (AS)-12 has
resulted in overstatement of loss by हैं 25.84 crore.

¢ The Company recognised deferred tax assets in contravention of the
provisions of AS-22, which resulted in overstatement of loss by
% 8.06 crore.

Puducherry Road Transport Corporation Limited (2010-11)

© The Sixth Pay Commission arrears payable amounting to & 1.05 crore
were not provided in the accounts which resulted in understatement of
current liabilities and loss.

Swadeshee Bharathee Textile Mills Limited (2009-10)

e Interest of हैं 23.62 crore payable on the purchase was not provided in
its accounts which resulted in understatement of accumulated losses.

5.1.28 Statutory Auditors (Chartered Accountants) are required to furnish a
detailed report upon various aspects including internal control/internal audit
systems in the companies audited in accordance with the directions issued
by the CAG to them under Section 619(3)(a) of the Companies Act, 1956
and to identify areas which needed improvement. An illustrative resume of
major comments made by the Statutory Auditors on possible improvement
in the internal audit/internal control system during the year 2012-13 is
given below:

| | There was no system of preparing
short term/long term business plans 2 12 & 13
and reviewing the same with actuals

2. | Internal audit requires strengthening 2 2 & 13

3. Internal audit manual not prescribed 4 9,11, 12 & 13

4. Delineated fraud policy not 5 2, 9, 10, 11 & 13
available

5. _ | Non-formation/non-convening of

Audit Committee in compliance
with Section 292-A of the
companies Act, 1956

81


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

| * | Non-maintenance of proper register 1 5
for fixed assets .
There was no approved IT strategy 7 2, 3, 4, 5, 10,
or plan 12 & 13

(Source: Reports furnished by Statutory Auditors under Section 6198) (a) of the
Companies Act, 1956)

The companies concerned should address the issues commented upon by
the statutory auditors and take effective remedial action.

PUDUCHERRY ROAD TRANSPORT CORPORATION LIMITED

‘Buses and additional fitments worth हैं 3.48 crore procured out of
Central assistance were kept idle for more than two years.

Puducherry Road Transport Corporation Limited (Company) formed in
1986 is engaged in road transport services in the Union Territory of
Puducherry (UT) with a fleet strength of 85 buses at the end of
March 2009.

The Government of India (GOI) formulated (2006) a Central assistance
scheme viz “Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission”
(InNURM). The objectives of JNNURM, inter alia aimed at development
of infrastructure including public transport in urban areas. The Company,
to take advantage of scheme of GOI conducted (March 2009) a study and
found that there was scope for increasing its fleet strength upto 128 buses
by the year 2010.

Accordingly, the Government of UT, on behalf of the Company
approached (March 2009) the GOI for sanction of हैं 49.79 crore under
JnNURM for augmentation of the company’s fleet strength and other
facilities such as construction of bus shelters, depots, etc. GOI sanctioned
(May 2009) ₹ 16.15 crore for purchase of 50 buses in which 12.92 crore
would be the share of Central assistance and balance of हैं 3.23 crore would
be the share of UT. The first instalment of GOI’s assistance (€ 3.23 crore)
and the share of UT (% 3.23 crore) amounting to % 6.46 crore was received
by the Company during January and March 2010. The second instalment
of GOI’s assistance of हैं 4.73 crore was received in November 2012.

82


Chapter V - Government Commercial and Trading Activities

In the meantime, the Company placed (November 2009) purchase orders
with private company for supply of 40 fully built buses at a cost of % eight
crore and additional fitments such as single integrated controller for
Information Technology System (ITS), Global Positioning System (GPS)
based Telematic onboard units at a total cost of हैं 0.45 crore. This
company delivered 26 buses in May/June 2010 and remaining 14 buses in
January 2013.

Based on review of the operations of 40 buses purchased through Central
assistance during the period June 2010 to March 2013, Audit observed that:

© During the above period, the overall fleet utilisation factor’ of these 40
buses was only 59 per cent. This was far below the all India average
fleet utilisation of 92 per cent. The low fleet utilisation was mainly due
to idling of five buses continuously from December 2011 to date
(December 2013) for want of crew. Further, nine more buses which
were received in January 2013 were not registered with the Transport
Department up to July/August 2013. Even after registration of these
buses, they were not operated till date (December 2013) due to non-
availability of crew. Consequently, these 14 buses purchased at a cost
of = 3.03 crore were kept idle for majority of the period (80.58 per cent
of the available days) from September 2011 to till date (December
2013). The idling of these buses resulted in non-achievement of the
objective of providing quality transport services within the urban areas
under JnNURM, besides loss of revenue of % 2.89 crore to the
Company (based on the average revenue earned per day by a bus
operated by the Company).

e As per the objectives of JNNURM, the Central assistance was to be
utilised as an additional resource to the existing resource of the utilising
organisation. Moreover, as per the projections of the Company, the
Central assistance of JNNURM was to be utilised for augmentation of
its fleet strength. However, out of 40 buses purchased, 26 buses
(excluding 14 buses mentioned above) were utilised as replacement of
the existing over aged vehicles. Thus, expenditure of % 5.63 crore
incurred out of the Central assistance of ¥ 7.96 crore did not fulfill the
scheme’s objectives of augmentation of the infrastructure facilities.

e Though the Company purchased single integrated controller for ITS and
GPS based Telematic onboard units at a total cost of = 0.45 crore, these
equipments were not utilised till date (December 2013) as the Company
had not developed required software for their operation which rendered
the above purchase wasteful.

The Company while admitting (October 2013) the facts stated that the poor
operation of buses procured through Central assistance was mainly due to
want of crew. However, non-availability of the required manpower for
operation of the buses and lack of control over crew absenteeism was an

7 This indicates the ratio of buses available vis-a-vis the buses put on road.

83


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

issue unresolved by the Company since 2005-06, which was commented
upon in the Report of the CAG for the year ended 31 March 2009,
Government of UT. However, the Company obtained Central assistance
and purchased the buses without an action plan for increasing the man
power and reducing crew absenteeism resulting in idling of buses.

Chennai (K. SRINIVASAN)
The Principal Accountant General
(General and Social Sector Audit)
Tamil Nadu and Puducherry

Countersigned
Y ५
०
New Delhi (SHASHI KANT SHARMA)
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India

84


Appendices



Appendix 1.1
(Reference: Paragraph 1.6; Page 8)

Details of IRs issued upto December 2012 and paragraphs pending as on June 2013

1 Accounts and Treasuries 13 48
2 Adi-Dravidar Welfare 11 42
3 Agriculture 41 151
4 Animal Husbandry and Animal
Welfare |_£ | 43
5 Arts and Culture | 8 | 36
|] Civil Supplies and Consumer
Affairs Lg 35
7 Collegiate and Technical
Education 38 152
| 38 | Commercial Taxes 2 5
Cooperation 12 59
10 Economics and Statistics 2 4
11 Election 3 16
12 Electricity 30 111
13 Fire Service 1 1
14 Fisheries and Fishermen Welfare 18 76
15 Forest and Wild Life 2 | 9 [|
16 Heads of State | 8 | 24
17 Health and Family Welfare 53 129
18 Hindu Religious Institution 3 ee
| 19 | Industries and Commerce 43 148
20 Information and Publicity 2, |__ 6 ||
21 Information Technology 3 7
22 Jails 4 26
23 Labour and Employment 17 62
24 Law/Judicial | 10 | 0 20
25 Local Administration 62 332
26 Planning and Research 2 2
27 Police 4 12

85


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

a
28

ee 9 ।'
22

Port | 6 |
29 Public Works 64 323
30 Revenue and Disaster Management 24 55
31 Rural Development 20 89
32 Sainik Welfare 1 5
33 Sales tax 50 253
34 School Education 62 233
35 Science, Technology and.

Environment 3 7
36 Social Welfare 21 63
37 Stamp duty and registration fees | 66 | 136
38 State excise 25 49
39 Stationery and Printing 1 2
40 Taxes on vehicles 32 138
41 Tourism 13 56
42 Town and Country Planning 20 112
43 Transport flo 19
44 Women and Child Development 11 30

86


Appendices

Appendix 2.1
(Reference: Paragraph 2.1.7.1; Page 16)

Details of OHTs constructed with excess capacity due to wrong adoption of design period

Construction of OHTs by adopting population for 30 years

1. | Moorthikuppam 13,718 135 18.52 10.00 107.17
2 | Pillaiyarkuppam 20,065 70 14.05 10.00 106.71
3 | Pinnatchikuppam 4,421 70 4.08 2.00 66.90
4. | Chinnaaratchikuppam 3,354 70 2.35 1.50 73.08

Actual requirement with correct projection of population for 15 years

1. | Moorthikuppam 10,611 80.5* 8.54 5.00
2 | Pillaiyarkuppam 15,467 80.5* 12.45 7.00
3 | Pinnatchikuppam 3,044 80.5* 2.45 1.50
4 | Chinnaaratchikuppam 2,359 80.5* 1.89 | 1.00 |

* including transmission loss at 15 per cent on the requirement of 70 Iped for rural area

87


88

(Buypting Areqoue jo "mst109 10} LW Le'phl + eM punoduroD Jo "msuoD 10} LW €8°LL)

(Supping Areyproue Jo “uyst09 उणु LW ५६४६ + [eM punoduro. Jo “wsUOD उण LW 6°81) :

890एव [एप्पा)०0 ०७1 01 JJO popunol ५

(a) 26011#79 रण,
10६961 LTO L998T 00°09T OCCT 00६5६ १)१८5॥॥॥5७ |
16/1## 810 ST 187 OS LET 670५ 0900द# PAs
V9 OF asnepp sod se ए2#णाए aq 0) woHEETeA ब्गूगत

(४) 670८9 ToL
88759 9५0 ८998] 00°0ZT OT TCT 00६५ वप्०प०)
192८9101 wo ST 187 v6 L61 160 LS 000क PAS

Jopus) Jo \diasar Jo ayep poyepndyys ysv] oy} Uo prea sv xoput oud st पूछ
OMS 1४ 1YSnorg [eLO}euT Jo Ayub st O

0107 Tdy se गष्ए >फण्ग YIM CAdd Aq 7२७णाए se UoHELTeA 911g

(jovu09
Jo porod
payepndys
uri)
1107 Hore,
— Arenuer

O07 CTO

(Syt0a प्रग्व जग)

उम्ष्युप०० Jo एणू-०्प एगयणावाप ण॒प्राक्ष गुड ण 1प्माण्यव्‌ 1ए०ए्स्‍7२०/०ग5 जणु SadTpUT >जूबत 8०1७ Jo परण]व0फष oy गए 5ण०्प॒ (0

uolesiopisuos Japun एण190 Joy xoput aid st [3

[eyoyeur ग्प Jo coud ur uonenea st A UA, (ग0/१0-0) 5 OXd =A
[9938 pue 1ए०प्रा>> जणु UoeLIeA >जूयव Jo uoyRNIeD

(LZ a8eq Se"T'¢ Ydeasereg :a0uas9Jay)

7६ xipuaddy

(J991g एप 17०0०3) [शप्रगष्पा Jo sori aseq SI व्‌

४ BMULIOy UOHeTNo[eo UOTeLIeA >्ग्ग्व्‌

E10 १2४०7 1६ Papua 40०0 ay) 40f LOoday ॥एशए


68

saovd euttoap ०७३ ० JJo popunol |.

(तर) 206078 रण,

0वषार्टट LVO 29981 00091 TS OST 00६5 उप०्प्प०)
28५66 ५ 810 ध्टाहट OS LET Lov LL 000°¢r Pas
VO OF asneps sod se pamoye aq 0) uoWELIeA >ज्‌ज्त

(@ ZsP‘L7'sz राणा,

1/08/% 190 €e'€61 00°01 190 ५
बाग = 00६५ 1००७9
६981६ 9५0 00061 00°01 16८01 (ठप
6ST‘0E ‘01 ५90 ST'9TE 6° L61 88 LE | noch _ paynsnt
6SO'10'L ew ST'187 6'L61 6596६ Bunmp) टाएट
यशा+0०पय 0

जाप gunosae Surauns | _ oz ew | 0टटाएण
uo se saaiput aa1id Sundope Aq pue 010: [Ady | se गण उकण्ग पा# त/७व Aq ए२७णाए se uoNeLeA >ज्‌जव्‌

(Supping #णाए एफ Jo uoyon.ysu0))
LO एगाप्रशा। surmp ays ० पशाण्यव्‌ 1एरण7००/०थ5 10J $०णएप  ग्जूयत Su01M Jo UoTdope 0} जाए sso’y (11)

Sooipuaddy


06

ज्याएप्रण559०00० oY) Aq ए०प्पाशु? 5४ ५

sore है है हि dn woyey
| 98°87 199 8e TTL €1-C10T 99 019K 61 v घट
Vz oseyd

9E ET 109 $80क_ | TI-IL0Z £7 9ET ut padojanap wal - Lo ‘4 Tl

squeg samp We

Jo uonesTueyooyAy

| 667 6Ly ६89८६ | 100८ | क#ट8५1 Lew Vo ” Lg t IL
6067 set 6५608 | OT-6007 eS Lip as 4 I 1५६ v 4 I

(पत्रण UT 2)

एग्गयाजा[ 1507 pur j.10d [ए्श्राण्यए श्र Jo yuourdoyaaap astm-aseyg

(6६ pue (६ saseg ‘p'p'¢ Ydesseieg :2909.1252y)
v¢ xipuoddy

६106 4200 1६ Papua 4070 ay) 40] odDy 109.


16

Aauour uoreordde oreys sopnypour yeydes dn-preg

(avaMdod)
paMWr] suosiog parqy वाण्यगात
£661 pire toto x4 Jo ytroudoyanac
कटा = = = = = zee = = zee WOR 1६ गयणाग 8, ap 10y uoneiodio; Ausyprpuog |“
9861 (opavd)
soquiadag porwr] uonerodio; yuoudojasoqy
_ _ न = = over | ~ 891 शाह 9 ORT septacap tpy Aaroyonpng | के
(Qldata) pamury wonerodie5
(हाट) (हाट) Lor quounsaauy pue wowdojoaaq,
yer = = = = = sszt joss | — #0%01 qedy 21 somnsnpuy uonowory jemnsnpuy <azoyotpuog | ६
SONVNIA
0661 आाष्प्त (opsava)
soquindsg | soumsuoy pue | pany uoneiodrog sanddng [tarp
६0६ = = = = = £66 ५00 = 886 iG somddng rary | pur poog ‘sionporg ory Auroyonpng | 2
भा (>ाइएवो
ele _ _ ना _ _ ध्श्धा _ _ ध्श्ध्ा गराय॒ागगपरए pom] uonesodio3 somsnpuy
UOTE 9८
pur sorarog oxy Auroyonpng | |
GarTTV ¥ TANLTAOTADV

saqueduto, JuOUMHIDAOS BUP|IOA,

(३०1० UT 3 218 (9) 9 ० (B) ५ एप्णा[०३ UT saanBty)

saTueduiod JUAUIUIIA05)
Jo podsat Ul ६10८ YAR] [E UO se saModueW pure SuIpueysjno suo] ‘[eyIded dn-pred ajep-0j-dn Jo saepnsyaed Surmoys JUIUII}e}S

(pL e8eqg ४६.५ Ydeaseaeg :a0ua1IJoy)
I's xipuoddy

Sooipuaddy


6

9861 (O14) एथाप्पापु wonesodio3,

= = ~ | — = ४४४ | [7 sure | saemagoa 61 rodsueay eee | ai
OaLa) एगाणाय woneiodi0>

कद 7 | ७८. 500८ av om muitccimanees | a

caus

81°66

8८66

£661
WIE 0६

Anomnsorg

(134d) एथाप्पातु
uonerod1o; 2०७०३ Auioyonpng

[DIANAS

i

CINLAS) parmry

NaAMOd

zs = = = = toe | ~ = पट0६ 00८ Atm + somsmpst | cay amnxoy sommmutgoreapeng | OF
S861
6ण'ट = = न _ 5६19६ | = न ५६19६ उश्पृष्प३४०ए somnsnpuy omes0ds05 aN 5
st
_ का _ _ _ खा छा WosaTad Oraarase कषफ़फ़कछ |,
6 ore ore aqutiooaqq ६. somnsnpu एथाण्पाप sotuonsaysq AurayorpUOg, 8
86 = = = = ses | न spe roauieag somnsnpuy | (Ta) perry souermsiq Auroyonpng |... ६

(69

Lee

Lge

6661
WRN TE

argon,

NTA."

|

(ाउवारउच्चरी Para]
uonerodio3 17976००५०6 sonuouyy

pute sasse7 preanjoeg, Auroyonpng,

INVIN

६05 Younyy TE papua 4024 ays sof woday iipny



£6

-(goueuyjox Sutpnpout)
s8utmonog एफ syisodap ‘spuog ‘soasasar aay ‘Tendo dn pred jo saouryeq Sursoja एप Suruado पृ] Jo aeSorTse Jo ueaur ¥ sv no pyro st peXopduro pendes
ay) गरग्पृ+ ‘soruedutos soueury Jo 9४४० ut ydeoxe [शाव९४० Suryiom $9 Td (sserZord- ut -y10M Jeydes Zurpnjour) syasse pox jou syuosoidar poAoydure ended +

vel 10 6ror = 9 = Stl = 400 +10 a घात्दाएद | 05600८ ‘oanodd | 9
_ c00) tL 6z00) ze तु vy9t 1130 0॥ 00 तु 1700) ei-cloe | दाया0ट dvamdod | 5
~ oro) 8५02 88400 98का जा 179 Loo) rr0 Lv0 #00 vI-E107 11004 oodvd | #

ist wz os'0rT 19°82 rag तु 99TT a4 ovo तु 197 pi-etoz | et-c107 Olddid | ६

SNIONVNIG
- 16%) Le oI) £66 - 11621 Irs) wo ozo 69%.) pi-eloz | 11-0107 oosdvd | 7
_ srl) 9६6 Lis) घ्छ्णा तु ८86६ STL Leo 00 9६900 दाना0ट | 60-8007 oisvd | 1
GaITIV ¥ AAALTINOLISV

sortedutog 1ए.एए००७०७ हज

(a40429 प्‌ 2 AE OT OF 8४ एपए 9 ण (®)g suumyoo ur saan3iq)
paslfeury a10a syunodov YOIYA जणु 1ead 15गण IY) 10J sofuedurOd yUsMIUIAAOD Jo s}[Nset [शुजएपा[ paslieuUINg
(1g pue LL saseg ‘gz‘T's pue ¢TT’s ydeaseseg :a0u01ajay)
7's xipueddy

Saoipuaddy


6

~ 910 OT PLE) 80% जा 1123 ore) 050 जा 99८00 £1-C107 TL-010z O1Nd | छा
= 807) v6T orLIO | veut = seo 607) a) 100 66100 vr-etoz | दानाएट oad | दा
ब>14#श््त

Tore SOL 996 #90# 8८66 PLL SOL one SoTT tr-etoz | दानाएट Wd | था
स्व

7 6560) 6r or 6L er) 13.24 7 Tso 9E TIC) 1s0 LT 8060) घत्टाएट| 01-6007 INLES | OT

7 090) 14841 Trsir | Seige 7 spor ५8910) WT ss or 6५00 घत्टाए्ट | दानाएट XHINOd | 6

- ae) 00 99000 oro, - Lr0 sto - 100 #ट0(0 घत्टाएट | 100८ NooaTad | 8

ri vr कराता ६91६ srs - 96°87 iso 100 Ivs er-c1oz | 11-0107 Tad} ४
SNRINLOVAONVIN

E10 YOY [§ Papua 4020 ay) 40] Woday HIpnY


(8) ६५6६ (8) ६५6६
_ - - (D) ELT _ (D) ELT 7 oosdvd | ८
oD = oD = _ ता (9) 008 _ (9) 00°8 _ _ _ oisvd | |
GaITTy ¥ TUALINONIDV

(e40.39 UT 2 31४ (9) 9 ० (७) ६ एण्णा[०० UT 5भ्याश पर)

saqueduio, JuaUTUIaAOD हैणज7०/॥

€10Z प०णुष््‌ JO pus oY) ye JUIUTWTUTUIOD 99j}UIENS pue उए०४ ay) SuLINp AyInba our एग्यर4बप02
SUO] PUL JyO एग्गानक# SURO] (भगाए Jo 3२40७ ‘padteoa. SaajuRrENs ‘a[qealese./paataza. ApIsqns pue syuess SUIMOYs JUITIA}LIS

(Sz 28eq ‘g'T’s Ydeaseaeg :a0ua10Jay)

Sooipuaddy

६४ xIpuoddy



96

<Apisqng, syuasoada. (8)
<sjueag, syuasaadas (9)

- ~ 7 (®)ore ना (9) 0V'L - - ना ord] 6
= = = _ = ~ (9) 007% 7 (9) 007 नल = SzO Saale
AOIANAS
= = = ~ ~ ~ (9) 00°01 a (©) 00°01 = _ _ कक 7
SONRIDLOVANNVN

= = = — =~ ~ ५9581 7 (©) S81 _ = _ “pannaa|  3

— = = = ~ ~ (9) s98z 7 (©) $987 _ — _ qwanana

= = = ~ 19६ 7 (9) 007 ना (©) 007% _ _ — aval 7
(9)

~ (©) se91 7 @)1rs L711 — न नम है

(lee छत le लत कक [लक le le le lel ele)

६06 420० 1६ Papua avaK ay) 40f wodoy npny



(€1-7100)
581
(टदाना02 (दानाएट2
907 0६0
(0020 (10020
7 907 7 1६0 भ्टघ 01-6007 TOCNOdd 9
(€1-Z102)
7 ५982८ 7 7 TE TL-1107 dVdMdod है.
(€1-Z102)
7 007 7 7 98%] 1010८ oodvd ४

= = = = raat जा olddId £

(€1-Z102)
६५56६
घध्ध्ट
(दाना02
7 9८9 7 7 ६66 1010८ OOSdVd 7@
(€1-Z10) (OT-6002)

7 008 7 00६ e801 60-8007 OIsvd T
GaITIV ? AAALTINONOV
satuedui0d 1ए०प्रापज74०:5) BUTYIO MA,

(210.49 Ul 3)
PLSD ALS
पा a1z sJUNOIIE asoy SS_ Ul ALIaysNpNg Jo A10}L119], एणए[] ayy JO JUaWAUABAOD ay} Aq गए SyUAWASIAUT SUIMOYS JUIUIAILIS
(6L 98¥g “८८1५ Ydeasereg :०००० गुम)
p's xIpuoddy

Sooipuaddy


(€1-Z107)
Ore
(ZI-110@)
7 896 7 7 8८7६ 1010८ जचिव या
(€T-Z107) (€T-Z107)
7 00८ 7 a) bell TI-1L07 OdLd ६4
1५७) // ९: (५.1
7 7 7 7 8L'66 TI-1L0 Todd IL
wAMOd
(€1-2102)
0001
(दाना0०0 (दाना0०2
00दा 170
(11-0107) (11-0102)
7 00८ 7 6८1 IT 87 01-6007 TALES “OL
7 7 7 7 ५६19६ दाजा0८ XHLNOd 6
7 7 7 7 00 1010८ 102प15 8
7 = = = ५78 1170102८ ‘dd iL

ONRIA.LOVAONVIAL

E107 Y24D 1६ papua 4026 ay) sof jsoday pny



AA
AAS
AED
AS
BOT
BPL
C&AG
CA
CBDT
CCT
CCDU
cI

cP
CPHEEO

CPWD
CRF
CTD
CTV
DC
DI
DPR
DTH
ED
EOI
EOT
FAC
FITL
FTIK
GMB
GOI
GPS

Appendices

Glossary of abbreviations

Assessing Authorities

Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer
Additional Excise Duty

Administrative Sanction

Built, Operate and Transfer

Below Poverty Line

Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Concession Agreement

Central Board of Direct Taxes
Commissioner of Commercial Taxes
Communication and Capacity Development Unit
Cast Iron

Commune Panchayat

Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering
Organisation

Central Public Works Department
Central Reserve Fund
Commercial Taxes Department
Colour Television
Development Commissioner
Ductile Iron

Details Project Report

Direct to Home

Excise Duty

Expression of Interest
Extension of Time

Fund Availability Certificate
Funded Interest Term Loan
Field Test Kit

Gujarat Maritime Board
Government of India

Global Positioning System

99


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2013

GSDP
HLC
HRI
TEC
IRs
ITC
ITS
JDGFT
JnNURM
SPV
LAD
LAO
LOI
Lpced
MCA
MLD
MOSRTH
MT
MTPA
MVA
NABARD
NIPM
NOC
O&M
OHT
PA
PAC
PAG
PAN
PGST
PH
PIA
PMU

Gross State Domestic Product

High Level Committee

Hindu Religious Institutions

Import Export Code

Inspection Reports

Input Tax Credit

Information Technology System

Joint Director General of Foreign Trade
Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission
Special Purpose Vehicle

Local Administration Department

Land Acquisition Officer

Letter of Intent

Litres per capita per day

Model Concession Agreement

Million Litres per day

Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways
Metric Tonne

Million Tonnes Per Annum

Mega Volt Ampere

National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
National Institute of Port Management
No Objection Certificate

Operation and Maintenance

Over Head Tank

Performance Audit

Public Accounts Committee

Principal Accountant General
Permanent Account Number
Pondicherry General Sales Tax

Public Health

Project Implementation Agency

Project Monitoring Unit

100


Appendices

PPCC : Puducherry Pollution Control Committee
PRD : Planning and Research Department

PRU : Progress Review Unit

PSU : Public Sector Undertaking

PVAT : Puducherry Value Added Tax

PWD पु Public Works Department

RCs : Registration Certificates

RFP : Request for Proposal

RWS : Rural Water Supply

SDWP : State Draft Water Policy

SGWA : State Ground Water Authority

TIN : Taxpayer’s Identification Number

TTA : Thirunallar Temple Authority

TTTDP : Thirunallar Temple Town Development Project
UC : Utilisation Certificate

UT : Union Territory

VAT : Value Added Tax

101