सत्यमेव जयते
Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on
Social, Economic, Revenue and General Sectors

for the year ended March 2014

a + 7७७,
Wy

cand ‘ay

% SARA

GOVERNMENT OF SIKKIM
Report No. 1 of 2015



Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on

Social, Economic, Revenue and General,
Sectors

for the year ended March 2014

Government of Sikkim
Report No.1 of 2015


Preface
v

12 Planning and conduct of Audit

‘Audit on Implementation of Information and Communication Technology in
Schools in Sikkim
‘Human Resource Development Department)

Introduction
Planning and conduct of Audit

Tourism Development in Sikkim
(Tourism and Civil Aviation Department)

19

5

Loss of Government revenue 5
(Roads and Bridges Department

Injudicious expenditure 33
Roads and Bridges Department)

Overview of State Public Sector Undertakings

Performance Audit on Functioning of State Trading Corporation of Sikkim
४ Corpo ‘Sikkim

Management of Cash Credit/Overdraft Accounts

(‘State Bank of Sikkim

(‘State Bank of Sikkim
(‘Sikkim Poultry Development Corporation Limited)
(‘Sikkim Power Development Corporation Limitec

S

||

wa
a

॥

2
a

8:

&

Analysis of arrears of revenue

101

9:
9!
9
| 99 |
il
102
Pendency of Refund Cases il
Response of the departments/ Government towards Audit 102

Analysis of the mechanism for dealing with issues raised by Audit 105

Action taken on the recommendations accepted by the Departments/ 106
Government

4 1
4.10 107
4.11 Coverage of this Report 10’
Non-realisation of revenue

(Excise (Abkari) Department)

Non-realisation of gaming fees and penalty

[Finance, Revenue and Expenditure Department (Directorate of Sikkim

T ॥
HEE BEBE 5

की
be

43
44
45
4.6
47

9

4
5
7
19
01
02
07
7

Loss of revenue
[Finance, Revenue and Expenditure Department (Directorate of Sikkim
State Lotteries)]

के
rs



Planning and conduct of Audit

Water supply projects funded under NUCPR and NEC

(Development Planning, Economic Reforms and North Eastern Council Affairs
Department)

Non-recovery of forfeited travelling allowance advances
Finance, Revenue and Expenditure Department)

Follow up action on earlier Audit Reports Bs |
6 Response of the departments to the recommendations of the Public Accounts 5
Committee

Outstanding Inspection Reports
Departmental Audit Committee Meetings

List of Appendices

1 Audit conducted during 2013-14 under Social Sector 139
1.3.1 The details of ICT scheme (Phase 1)

9
Details of computer instructors 139
Analysis of Short payment to Computer Instructors up-to April 2009
140

141
pow |

4७) | Details working of penalty to be imposed on supply of substandard computer
supplied by the firm

‘Analysis of cost of computer that could have been provided if 29 Schools were
not included in the scheme

Audit conducted during 2013-14 under Economic Sector
2 Statement showing the details of pendency of Utilisation Certificate to be 142
furnished by various NGOs and Agencies to Department
2. Statement showing the short realisation of Interest on Mobilisation Advance 3
given to the various Contractors
Statement showing particulars of up to date paid-up capital, loans outstanding
3 and Manpower as on 31 March 2014 in respect of Government Companies and 1
Statutory Corporations
5 Summarised financial results of Government companies and Statutory
Corporations for the latest year for which accounts were finalised
3.

13
4
4

14

142

14:
4
A

4
6
Statement showing grants and subsidy received/receivable, guarantee: | * |
received, waiver of dues, loans written off and loans converted into equity
during the year and guarantee commitment at the end of March 2014
15

3.2
LA
13
1.5



1. This Report for the year ended March 2014 has been prepared for submission
to the Governor of Sikkim under Article 151 of the Constitution of India.

2. The Report contains significant results of the performance audit and
compliance audit of the Departments of the Government of Sikkim under the
Social, Economic, Revenue and General Services including the Departments
of Human Resource Development, Roads and Bridges, Tourism and Civil
Aviation, Excise (Abkari), Finance, Revenue and Expenditure, Development
Planning, Economic Reforms and North Eastern Council Affairs and public
sector undertakings, viz. State Trading Corporation of Sikkim, State Bank of
Sikkim, Sikkim Poultry Development Corporation Limited and Sikkim Power
Development Corporation Limited.

3. The instances mentioned in this Report are those, which came to notice in the
course of test audit for the period 2013-14 as well as those which came to
notice in earlier years, but could not be reported in the previous Audit Reports;
instances relating to the period subsequent to 2013-14 have also been
included, wherever necessary.

4. The audit has been conducted in conformity with the Auditing Standards
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

) iii (


Executive Summary

This Audit Report has been prepared in six chapters. Chapters I to V deal with Social,
Economic, Public Sector Undertakings, Revenue and General Sectors and Chapter VI
deals with Follow up of Audit observations.

This Report contains 24 audit paragraphs (including 13 general paragraphs) and three
Performance Audits. According to the existing arrangements, copies of the draft
compliance audit paragraphs and draft performance audits were sent to the Secretary of
the Department concerned by the Accountant General (Audit) with a request to furnish
replies within six weeks. Replies were received from the departments concerned except in
respect of two paragraphs (2.5 and 5.4).

The Audit on Implementation of Information and Communication Technology in Schools
in Sikkim revealed that despite incurring a total expenditure of € 7.95 crore, the intended
objective was not fully achieved. The Department could not develop an environment
conducive to widespread use of ICT in Schools even after incurring an expenditure of
% 3.76 crore on infrastructure alone. Most of the equipment purchased were lying non-
functional. The implementation of ICT in Schools Scheme were characterised by various
irregularities such as lack of survey and planning, delay in tendering the project,
unjustified re-tendering, appointment of under qualified computer instructors, supply of
sub-standard equipment. In order to implement the Scheme with the objective to create
environment for widespread use of ICT, procurement of infrastructure was essential and
there was also a need for either dedicated teachers to be in place or to get the in-house
teachers fully trained.

(Paragraph 1.3)

Performance Audit of tourism development revealed that the Department had taken a
number of steps for construction of infrastructure such as provision of way side amenities,
yatri niwas and parks to provide better facilities to tourists. As a result, number of tourists
visiting Sikkim showed consistent increase except for 2011 due to earthquake.
Recognising the effort of the Department and overall tourism development in Sikkim, the
Government of India (GOI) and other agencies had conferred a number of awards to the
State. The awards included Best Performing State in North East (1998-2006), Best Eco-
tourism Destination (2005), Emerging Tourist State (2008), Best State in Tourism Related

a


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Programmes and Development of Infrastructure (2010 and 2011), Best State for
Adventure Tourism (2010), Best Performing State (2010), Best State for campaign Clean
India (2012), Best Rural Tourism Project (2012-13). Recently, Sikkim has been named
the best region to visit in 2014 by Lonely Planet, a leading global travel guide.

The Department however, needed to further strengthen its efforts in the areas of policy
implementation, project preparation and implementation, advertisement and publicity.
While the Master Plan had not been formulated, Sikkim Tourism Policy, formulated in
2010 was not revisited and updated thereafter. Sikkim Tourism Advisory Council
(STAC)-highest body to advise on policy implementation and its impacts on tourism was
not constituted to strengthen coordination between various departments of the State
Government (especially Forest) and other agencies (especially Border Roads
Organisation). Data on number of persons/households engaged in tourism sector was not
available with the Department to indicate that tourism had been accepted as a significant
livelihood option by the people. Similarly, analysis of financial management disclosed
deficiencies such as instances of unnecessary supplementary provision, non-release of
State share in full, pending Utilisation Certificates and increase in committed liabilities.
While the project preparation process needed further strengthening to avoid time
overruns, project management and execution was characterised by delay in completion of
projects, idling of assets for want of takers to run and manage the facilities and also poor
repair and maintenance, utilisation of tourism infrastructures for non-tourism purposes.
The advertisement and publicity activities for attracting more and more tourists,
especially high end tourists were not initiated adequately due to paucity of fund. Various
types of tourism such as eco-tourism, village-tourism and adventure-tourism though
exploited have room for further expansion. The monitoring mechanism needed further
strengthening as evident from the fact that number of projects were delayed beyond
targeted date and internal audit was not taken up even once in the review period.
(Paragraph 2.3)

The Roads and Bridges Department had not realised the revenue of = 0.76 crore by
selling valuable standing properties and had also not intimated the Forest, Environment
and Wildlife Management Department for disposal of the properties. Physical verification
revealed that the properties were not available at the work sites resulting in loss of
revenue amounting to € 0.76 crore.

(Paragraph 2.4)

The construction of motorable road by Roads and Bridges Department without any
provision for a motorable bridge resulted in an injudicious expenditure of = 1.98 crore.
(Paragraph 2.5)



Executive Summary

The State Trading Corporation of Sikkim (Corporation) functioned as a canalising agency
for all procurement of the various Departments of the Government of Sikkim, besides
rendering agency services to Indian Oil Corporation Limited for retail distribution of
Liquefied Petroleum Gas. The Corporation was required to procure standard/branded
material of specified items directly from the manufacturers and maintain sufficient stocks
so as to make the stock available to various Departments in minimum delivery time. The
Corporation performed direct trading activities as well as commission business wherein
goods were procured for and on behalf of the Departments against their respective
indents.

Performance Audit on the functioning of the Corporation for the period 2009-10 to
2013-14 showed that the Corporation was not effectively discharging its role as canalising
agency as the Corporation largely resorted to commission business wherein procurements
were made based on the indents received from the Departments and hence, the benefits of
bulk purchases could not be availed. The Corporation did not follow tender procedures in
procurement of major items of materials. Due to inadequate follow-up with suppliers, the
Corporation failed to minimise the delivery time of materials. It incurred avoidable
expenditure on procurements mainly due to failure to avail full supply of material within
the validity of supply orders and improper tender evaluation. The Corporation lacked an
effective financial policy and dues to the Corporation were not realised timely. It was
deficient in complying with the provisions of Acts/Rules which led to short/non collection
of VAT, Cess and Service tax, etc. The Human Resource Management was not effective
in absence of any efforts for imparting of trainings to the employees for their skill
development. The internal control system with regard to holding/accounting of inventory
and control over cash collection/remittance was weak causing instances of shortages in
stocks as well as unauthorised retention/defalcation of cash by its employees.

(Paragraph 3.2)

Analysis of reasons for accumulation of Non-Performing Assets against cash credit/
overdraft loan accounts of SBS revealed deficiencies in obtaining adequate collateral
security for CC/OD facilities, verification and evaluation of mortgaged properties, and
monitoring of recovery of dues

(Paragraph 3.3)

SBS extended undue favour to contractors to the extent of = 5.97 crore due to short
collection of BG commission (= 2.08 crore) and margin money (% 3.89 crore) in violation
of its laid down policy

(Paragraph 3.4)



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Infructuous expenditure of = 28.16 lakh incurred towards salary and perquisites.
(Paragraph.3.5)

Procurement of bulldozers without approval of Board of Directors and without market
analysis resulted in loss of = 0.77 crore to the Company.
(Paragraph.3.6)

Despite non-receipt of requisite Excise Verification Certificate from the exporter, the
Excise (Abkari) Department had not levied and realised excise duty and fees amounting
to 68.09 lakh on the consignments.

(Paragraph 4.12)

Department failed to realise ¥ 2.43 crore from M/s Mayfair Hotels and Resorts (Sikkim),
Ranipool as mandatory gaming fee for casino games.
(Paragraph 4.13)

Disregarding of clause in the agreement relating to applicable percentage rate of
Minimum Assured Revenue on pro-rata basis resulted in a loss of € 1.69 crore.
(Paragraph 4.14)

The Performance Audit of the Water Supply Projects funded under NLCPR and NEC for
the period 2009-14 was carried out during April-July 2014. Results of Performance Audit
disclosed that during 2009-14, the State had executed 23 projects (13 NLCPR and 10
NEC), of which 6 were completed and remaining 17 projects were in progress as of
March 2014. Analysis revealed that due emphasis was not accorded to appropriate
formulation of projects. Perspective plan had not been prepared. The concept papers in
most cases were not submitted or were incomplete. Further, many DPRs were prepared
without proper survey and investigation and without ensuring the availability of land for
the projects leading to revision of estimates and time and cost overrun in some cases.

Analysis of financial management disclosed short release of matching share by the State
Government owing to fund constraint in the State plan outlay; non utilisation of funds in
time by the implementing departments; unrealistic preparation of budget estimates;
unauthorised diversion of funds and excess expenditure. Similarly, analysis of project
implementation revealed that in many cases, the Departments (WSPHED and RMDD)

viii


Executive Summary

had not initiated the tender procedure on time leading to delay in commencement of
work; cost escalations of the projects; avoidable expenditure and extension of undue
benefit to the contractors. The Nodal Department had neither attached due importance to
quality control nor initiated suitable measures to streamline the monitoring and evaluation
system to ensure timely accrual of intended benefits from the projects.

(Paragraph 5.3)

Non-adherence to codal provisions by Drawing and Disbursing Officers resulted in non-
recovery of forfeited travelling allowance advances of € 1.25 crore.

(Paragraph 5.4)



Chapter

This Chapter of the Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014 deals with the
findings on audit of the State Government units under Social Sector.

The names of the State Government departments and the total budget allocation and
expenditure of the State Government under Social Sector during the year 2013-14 are
given in the table below:

Table 1.1.1

(€in crore)

Human Resource Development 410.67 398.85
Health Care, Human Services and Family Welfare 271.30 162.89

[6 |
L |

Besides the above, the Central Government has been transferring a sizeable amount of
funds directly to the implementing agencies under the Social Sector to different
departments of the State Government. The major transfers for implementation of flagship
programmes of the Central Government are detailed below:

Table 1.1.2

State Mission Authority,

Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha . हि
‘Abhiyan (RMSA) Rashtriya Madhyamik Siksha
Abhiyan

Sarva Siksha Abhiyan State Mission Authority (SSA), 4,195.08
Gangtok.

National Medicinal Plants Board _[ Sikkim University

Research and Development
Development | Top Class Education Scheme for | National Institute of Technology
° ‘as
Adult Education Skill | Sikkim State Literacy Mission 66.80
Development Scheme Authority, Sikkim,
Development Programme (DIT) | Technology
P|

1


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Health
Human
Services and
Family Welfare

Care,

ational Rural Health Mission 7
ional Health Mission Centrally

Sponsored
Assistance to Voluntary
Organisation for providing Social
Defence
National Programme for Control
of Blindness
National AIDS
Programme STD Control

Control

State Health Society

2,552.82

Association for Social Health in
India

528.41

Sikkim
Society

State AIDS Control

Dechhen
Committee
Sikkim Namgyal Institute of
Tibetology, Gangtok

Ngor Chotshog Centre

Holistic Medicinal Promotion
and Allied Education

Kachoed Pema Woeling Trust 10

Choiling  Gumpa

Ecclesiastical
Affairs

63.35

IS
0
5
5
0
0

Buddhist and Tibetan Studies

Sikkim Scheduled — Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and Other
Backward classes Development
Corporation Ltd.

Support to National State
Scheduled Tribes Finance and
Development

Grant-in-aid to NGOs for STs
including coaching and_ allied
scheme and award for exemplary
service

9.9.
1
2.
1
25
Social Justice,
Empowerment
and Welfare

Mayal Liang Trust (MLT)

28.29

8,653.5

‘Source: Central Plan Scheme Monitoring System of GOL.

Audit process starts with the assessment of risks faced by various departments of
Government based on expenditure incurred, criticality/complexity of activities, level of
delegated financial powers, assessment of overall internal controls, etc.

After completion of audit of each unit on a test check basis, Inspection Reports containing
audit findings are issued to the heads of the departments. The departments are to furnish
replies to the audit findings within one month of receipt of the Inspection Reports.
Whenever replies are received, audit findings are either settled based on reply/action
taken or further action is required by the audited entities for compliance. Some of the
important audit observations arising out of the Inspection Reports are processed for
inclusion in the Audit Reports, which are submitted to the Governor of the State under
Article 151 of the Constitution of India for laying on the table of the Legislature.

The test audits were conducted involving expenditure of = 1,474.86 crore (including
expenditure of % 887.19 crore of previous years) (details of year-wise break-up is given in
Appendix 1.2.1) of the State Government under Social Sector. This Chapter contains one
paragraph on audit of Implementation of Information and Communication Technology in
Schools in Sikkim as given below:



Chapter I: Social Sector

The ‘Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in Schools Scheme’ was
launched in December 2004 to provide opportunities to secondary stage students to build
their capacity on ICT skills and make them learn through computer aided learning
process. The Scheme was a comprehensive initiative to open new vistas of learning and
to provide a level playing field to school students, whether in rural areas or in the
metropolitan cities. One of the main objectives of the Scheme was to provide
infrastructure to enable the Schools to have an environment for widespread use of
ICT. With this vision, the Centrally Sponsored Scheme ICT in Schools was launched in
Sikkim in 105 Secondary and Senior Secondary Schools during 2005-06 on a 90:10 fund
sharing basis. Directorate of Technical Education, Human Resource Development
Department (HRDD), Government of Sikkim was entrusted with the responsibility of
implementing the Scheme.

Computer Education Plan (CEP) prepared by the Department for implementing ICT in
103 Schools was approved by Project Monitoring and Evaluation Group (PMEG),
Government of India (GOI) in August 2005 and two more Schools were approved during
2007-08. Thus, a total of 105 Schools were to be covered under Phase I. Another CEP for
implementation of ICT Scheme in 46 Schools (Phase II) was approved by GOI during
October 2010. GOI had accorded sanction for implementation of ICT in 105 Schools.
However, without obtaining approval, 29 more Schools were included and the Scheme
was implemented in 134 Schools (105+29), the details of implementation of Phase I ICT
Scheme are given in Appendix 1.3.1. The scheme was implemented through a private
agency'at a tendered value of € 939.53 lakh for a period of 40 months from September
2008 to December 2011. The three major responsibilities of the firm were as under:

(i) Introduction of computer education in 105 new Schools (13 Senior Secondary and 92
Secondary Schools) by providing computer and its accessories including software;

(ii) Continuation of computer education in 29 Senior Secondary Schools, repair and
maintenance of computers and its accessories and to keep them functional throughout the
contract period of 40 months; and

1 Ms Computel Systems and Services, New Delhi.

3


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

(iii) Appointment of computer instructors and arrange for internet connectivity to both 29
Senior Secondary Schools and 105 new Schools”.

Audit on ‘Implementation of ICT in Schools Scheme’ was taken up with an Entry
Conference with the Human Resource Development Department, Government of Sikkim
in July 2013, to assess the efficiency and effectiveness of the Scheme, and to assess
whether economy was observed in its implementation. Out of a population of 134
(105+29) Schools, 34 Schools* were selected through Stratified Random Sampling for
physical verification. The updation of Audit findings was conducted during June to
August 2014 through test check of records maintained at the HRDD headquarters office,
Gangtok and Schools in the districts. Performance was benchmarked against the criteria
stipulated in NIT, bid agreement documents, Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) guidelines and Sikkim Financial Rules. The audit findings were
discussed in the Exit Conference held on 31 October 2014.

One of the main objectives of the Scheme was to provide infrastructure to enable the
Schools to have an environment for widespread use of ICT. Two of the main anticipated
outcomes of the Scheme were widespread use of ICT in Schools leading to enrichment of
existing pedagogy and enabling the students to acquire necessary skill needed for both
higher education and for gainful employment. Planning of the Scheme should have been
done keeping in view the said objective and anticipated outcomes with full involvement
of School authorities concerned. For effective implementation of the scheme, the
Department should have conducted preliminary survey of Schools to ensure availability
of suitable room for computer laboratory, possibility of landline connection for internet,
separate electrical connection, etc. Further, the Headmasters/Principals of the Schools
should have been fully explained or communicated the modus operandi and the objective
of the Scheme. However, no such communication and preliminary survey was done.

A total of 6.08 crore was released by GOI and an amount of = 2.00 crore was released
as the State share. The details of Funds under ICT in Schools Scheme (Phase I) are given
in the table below:

? ‘Category I’ Schools with enrolment of 150 plus students were to be provided with two computer instructors (senior

and junior) and ‘Category IT’ Schools with enrolment of below 150 students were to be provided with one computer
instructor.

26 out of 105 Schools, where computer and its accessories were supplied and 8 out of 29 Schools where computer
and its accessories were not supplied.

3



Chapter I: Social Sector

Table 1.3.1

(@ in lakh)

po

1] 2008-09 [403.48 [|

2 | 2009-10 | 166 fT - 6 ८“ 6

| - |
a ee |

es ee घ््ऑ|
a ee ee ऑ4३2उस्‍उ-् हे

| |]

* ₹ 270 lakh was released as first instalment by GOI on October 2005.

# 2200 lakh released as State share in March 2008.

@ # 338.01 lakh for ICT 2005-06 (Phase 1).

Poor Fund Management of the Department is illustrated by the following observations:
> Total fund requirement for covering 105 Schools for three years, as per Scheme
guidelines, was € 9.85 crore as detailed in the table below:
Table 1.3.2
(#in lakh)

Recurring Expenditure of 2" year
Recurring Expenditure of 3० year
| 8.45 | 9.38 | 887.25 | 97.65 | 984.90

Against the fund requirement of हैं 8.87 crore as GOI share, the total fund released for
covering 105 Schools was % 6.08 crore (% 2.70 crore released in October 2005 and
% 338.01 lakh released in March 2011) indicating short release of f 2.79 crore from GOI.

> The non-recurring and recurring expenditure approved by GOI for 105 Schools
were as detailed in Table 1.3.2 above. The total State share requirement for
implementation of ICT Scheme for the three years was = 97.65 lakh (₹ 70.35 lakh in the
first year and हैं 13.65 lakh each, in the second year and the third year). However, by
including 29 0101 Schools, the total number of Schools to be covered was 134 (29+105)
and the Department worked out (September 2005) State share as हैं 3.41 crore for three
years, and the same was later (April 2006) enhanced to हैं 5.00 crore®. Scrutiny revealed
that delay in implementation was due to non-availability of funds under State share by the
State Government due to unauthorised inclusion of additional 29 old Schools. The excess
projection of State share was corroborated by the fact that during implementation as
against the projected requirement of = 5.00 crore, actual State share released was only

4 The Schools were covered under CLASS (Computer Literacy and Studies in School) Scheme implemented from

2002-05.
The Department decided to change minimum qualification of teachers from one year Diploma to 3 years Diploma
and estimated additional funds requirement for the salary of teachers by % 150.00 lakh for three years.

5



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

₹ 2.00 crore. This indicated unrealistic financial planning which did not commensurate
with the requirement.

In reply the Department stated (November 2014) that there was no excess projection of
the State share, the funding pattern was in the scale of 75:25, as Sikkim was not
considered a part of the NEC for project funding during that time. The reply was not
acceptable as Sikkim was included for NEC funding in NER from 2003-04, and the
funding pattern, as per the minutes of the Programme Monitoring and Evaluation Group
(PMEG) meeting held on 11 July 2007 and also as per the sanction letter dated 13
October 2005, was 90:10 and not 75:25.

> The terms and conditions of the release order inter alia stated that the funds were
to be utilised for the purpose for which it was sanctioned. Scrutiny revealed that till
December 2005, a balance amounting to = 26.55 lakh was to be paid to M/s Computel
Systems and Services (CSS) as a committed liability for their services under the CLASS
(Computer Literacy and Studies in School) Scheme during academic year 2005.
However, the Department unauthorisedly diverted and paid (March 2007) to the firm
₹ 66.52 lakh for meeting the committed liability of CLASS Scheme out of the funds of
₹ 2.70 crore released by GOI (October 2005). This resulted in extra payment of % 39.97
lakh (₹ 66.52 lakh - ₹ 26.55 lakh) to the firm. Later, the GOI had categorically stated (July
2007) that the said expenditure of € 66.52 lakh towards CLASS Scheme was irregular and
had instructed the Department to re-appropriate the funds to ICT Scheme. But the
Department had not re-appropriated the said funds to ICT Scheme as of August 2014.

While accepting the fact the Department stated (November 2014) that the justification for
payment of % 66.52 lakh could not be located in the records and efforts would be made to
verify the details.

> As per terms and condition of the sanction, the funds should be utilised for the
purpose for which it was sanctioned. Scrutiny of records revealed that in addition to
procurement of computer from the firm, the Department unauthorisedly incurred an
expenditure of % 38.61 lakh on purchase of 105 HP make computers for distribution to
the 105 Schools (one each). Besides, the Department spent = 3.63 lakh for purchase of
computers, projector, laser printer, laptop, etc. for use in the IT Section of the Department
from the fund under ICT Scheme, earmarked for computer education in Schools. Since
there was already a paucity of fund under the scheme, unauthorised use of fund put a
further burden on the scheme.

In reply the Department stated (November 2014) that it was the decision of the Head of
the Department to purchase 105 HP branded computer during 2012 to be installed in the
computer labs, to supplement the non-functional computers. This was done as there was
criticism on implementation of the ICT in 105 Schools. Regarding purchase of computers,
projectors, etc. for use in IT Section, the Department stated that efforts are being made to
verify the details.

Let


Chapter I: Social Sector

The tendering process for implementation of ICT was initiated during December 2007
and lowest bidder was M/s Educomp Solutions Limited (ESL), Gurgaon, Haryana at
% 7.28 crore. The firm was rejected on grounds that salary of = 4,800 and % 6,000 per
month was not attractive to get qualified instructors which in turn would jeopardise the

objective of providing quality education. The bid was re-tendered without any negotiation
with the firm. However, rejection of the lowest bidder and re-tendering of bid was not
justified on the following grounds:

> The lowest bidder assured that supply of hardware, software, and other equipment,
etc. would be made strictly in accordance with the bid requirement and also that teachers
hired by them would be adequately paid. The Tender Committee was convinced on the
statement of the lowest bidder ESL. But, this was ignored by the Department and without
any negotiation with the firm, the work was re-tendered.

> As per agreement, the firm was to appoint Sr. Instructor, Instructor and Junior
Instructor as per the category of the Schools, detailed in Appendix 1.3.2. Department
found that out of 176 instructors appointed by the firm, 154 teachers (85.5 per cent) were
under-qualified. In complete violation of agreement, all the under qualified teachers were
allowed to remain engaged. Hence, compromise on qualification of teachers contradicted
the very reason for re-tendering. Further, the agreement did not spell out any penalty
clause for recruitment of under qualified teachers.

> As per the agreement, monthly salary to Sr. Instructor: हैं 8,500, Instructor: € 7,500
and Junior Instructor: हैं 6,500 were to be paid. It was noticed that the teachers were being
paid the monthly salary of % 6,605; ₹ 5,800 and ₹ 5,020 respectively and from May 2009,
it was reduced to fixed amount of = 5,000 for all categories of teachers. The matter was
represented (February 2010) to the Hon’ble Chief Minister (HCM) by the computer
teachers. Scrutiny further revealed that while the firm (employer) was receiving full
amount of average salary (% 7,500 per teacher) from the Department, it was not paying the
same to teachers. It may be mentioned that the employer who engages 20 or more persons
in any industry or class of business is required to make a statutory rate of Employees
Provident Fund (EPF) contribution of 12 per cent and the matching amount is to be
deducted from the emoluments of the employees. Even if EPF of 12 per cent was
deducted from the said three categories of teachers, they were entitled to net pay of € 7,480;
₹ 6,600 and ₹ 5,720. The firm was retaining with itself a part of teachers’ salary which
was on an average 1.40 lakh per month for 176 teachers till April 2009 and thereafter
₹ 2.82 lakh per month from May 2009 onwards, as detailed in Appendix 1.3.3(a) and
1.3.3(b).

Further, audit worked out that Sr. Instructors, Instructors and Junior Instructors after three
years of service would be entitled to the accumulated EPF of = 67,964; हैं 60,545; and
% 52,472 respectively. Audit team interviewed five’ ICT teachers and could know that

5 Two belonging to 77,500 category and three belonging to € 6,500 category (one teacher was deployed for 2 years).

7


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

teachers had to send their representatives to Delhi to get their money and with much
bargain, the firm agreed to transfer funds to their bank accounts. However, only a meager
amount between % 10,300 to ₹ 21,000 was transferred to their respective savings
accounts.

> During the first tender when ESL quoted rate of € 7.28 crore, CSS had quoted an
exorbitant rate of = 12.35 crore. Rejection of lowest tender in the first round gave full
scope to CSS to reduce its rate by हैं 2.95 crore (from = 12.35 crore to हैं 9.40 crore). The
detailed bids of all the firms, though called for, were not produced to audit.

Thus, as a result of injudicious re-tendering, the Department had to commit to an extra
liability of = 2.12 crore.

In reply the Department remained silent on the re-tendering issue and added that the
matter of salaries of computer teachers came up only after the contract period was over. It
was further stated that all the computer teachers have received the Provident Fund
amount. At no point have the teachers said that they were underpaid except in unofficial
forums.

To see actual implementation of the Scheme at the ground level, audit selected 34
Schools (26 Schools where computers was supplied and 8 Schools where computers were
not supplied) for physical verification and beneficiary survey. The results of these are as
follows:

Computer Lab: One of the objectives for procurement of equipment was to build an
environment conducive of widespread use of ICT in Schools. Therefore, availability of
proper computer lab was a prerequisite for implementation of ICT in Schools Scheme,
particularly after the completion of the Scheme. Hence, preliminary survey of Schools
ensuring availability of room for computer lab was vital for creation of environment
conducive for use of ICT in Schools. The Department had not conducted any such survey.
Physical verification by audit in presence of departmental officials revealed that the
rooms used as computer labs did not have the requisite ambience and all the equipment
(monitors, CPU, dot matrix printer, UPS, etc.) were lying in dilapidated condition as
illustrated by photographs of computer labs and equipment taken during physical
verification below:



Chapter I: Social Sector

In reply the Department stated (November 2014) that a well furnished computer lab was
not made as it was not part of the scheme during initial implementation and that the
Tender document was silent on this aspect. The reply is not tenable as the main objective
of the scheme was creation of environment for widespread use of ICT in Schools for
which a proper computer lab is vital. Further the guidelines had provided flexibility in
incurring expenditure for items like preparation of labs for computers including civil
repairs.

Internet connection: As per the guidelines, connectivity to internet was one of the critical
factors to promote the use of ICT in Schools. Though the provision for internet to Schools
was stipulated in the agreement, the Department had not conducted any survey prior to
implementation of the Scheme to ensure possibility of obtaining landline connection for
internet. Physical verification revealed that internet connectivity was not provided to any
of the Schools.

In reply the Department stated (November 2014) that internet connectivity in the entire
State is not good, Hence, they are forced to procure internet connection through private
mobile network operators. Had the Department conducted prior survey, provisioning of
internet connection through private mobile network operators could have been foreseen
prior to implementation. However, it was contemplated during the end of the scheme.
Moreover, the scheme was completed without providing any internet connection.

Syllabus coverage in 29 old Schools: As per the agreement, students of 29 Senior
Secondary Schools’ having already learnt the basics of software packages and elementary
programming, the syllabus prescribed for the students of 29 Schools were front end, back
end programming and report generation. Survey of selected Schools revealed that the
particular batch of students, who were supposed to have been taught front end and back
end programming knew nothing about front end and back end programming.

In reply the Department stated (November 2014) that since front end and back end
programming was quite advanced, only basics were taught. The reply was not reasonable
as the students of 29 Schools had already learnt basics. Hence, repeating the basics was
not justified.

Supply of computer equipment: The Department adopted two-bid system for tendering,
where each firm was to submit technical bid and financial bid. Financial bid would be
considered only if firm was technically qualified. The details of the technical bid inter-
alia included the firms’ associated hardware suppliers. In the case of CSS, its associated
hardware suppliers were Chirag and HCL. Scrutiny of records made available to audit
revealed that after award of contract, despite being aware that the firm would provide
Esys and Adcom computers (the brand hardly known in the market), which were not
consistent with those stipulated in the technical bid, the Department accepted it.

Physical verification of 26 Schools (where computers were supplied) revealed that out of
252 computers supplied, 222 (88.09 per cent) computers were lying non-functional as
shown in the photographs given below. It was also noticed that 105 computers (41.67 per

? East: 14, West: 6, North: 2 and South: 7.



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

cent) remained non- functional during implementation of the Scheme for the period
ranging from 9 to 24 months.

Although penalty clause was stipulated in the agreement @ & 100 per day for each day
after the equipment remains out of order for more than five days, no such penalty was
imposed for non-functionality of 105 computers during the implementation of the
Scheme.

In reply the Department stated (November 2014) that in no part of the tender document
the make and model of the computers were mentioned. The firm had supplied computers
as per what was thought to be competitive and economical. The reply of the Department
is not tenable as the technical bid submitted by the firm stated that its associated hardware
suppliers were Chirag and HCL.

1.3.8.1 Recruitment of Teachers vis-a-vis actual requirement and coverage of Syllabus:
As per the agreement, the contract period was for 40 months (i.e. from 1 September 2008
to 31 December 2011). However, the actual academic period available for students within
the period of 40 months was around 33.5 months. To cover the given syllabus, each
teacher was supposed to conduct classes for 33.5 months. Test check of attendance
register of 35 teachers revealed that against the requirement of 33.5 months to be taught,
none of the teachers conducted classes for 33.5 months. The absence of teachers ranged
from four months to 26 months. The average absenteeism of teachers was 29.76 per cent
(i.e. around 10 months). However, no penalty was imposed on the firm @ ₹ 500 per day
for each day of absence of teachers beyond 15 days as stipulated in the agreement. This
resulted in undue benefit to the firm as well as deprivation of full benefits to the students.

1.3.8.2. Non-deduction of payment from the contract amount for the delayed period: As
per agreement, the actual commencement of contract would be reckoned from the date
when all the equipment (hardware and software) and teachers were in place. However, the
date of termination of contract was already fixed as 31 December 2011. General
conditions of contract further stated that the firm was to ensure that all equipment and
teachers were in position in all the Schools by 1 September 2008. The rate quoted by the


Chapter I: Social Sector

firm was on per month per school basis for 40 months from 1 September 2008 to 31
December 2011. Scrutiny of records revealed that all the equipment and teachers were in
position (in 105 Schools) only from February 2009. Hence, while making payments, the
contract period should have been reckoned from February 2009 for 105 Schools. Thus,
non-deduction of amount for five months’ delay resulted in undue favour to the firm
amounting to हैं 89.15 lakh®. The Department had not spelt out any penalty clause in the
agreement to prevent delay in supply of equipment and placement of computer teachers.

In reply the Department stated (November 2014) that the computer equipment and
teachers were in place in 105 schools from 1 September 2008. However, their actual use
was made from February 2009. The payment was made from the date of appointment of
teachers and installation of hardware and not from the date of its actual use. The reply of
the Department is not tenable as evident from the Challan-cum-Receipt which clearly
states that the equipment were received by the Schools only after February 2009 and the
teachers were in place from February 2009. Payment to the firm for the period, from
September 2008 to January 2009, when no classes were taken was not justified.

1.3.8.3 Unreasonable leniency towards firm’s irregularities: After six months of
implementation of the Scheme, the Department noticed the firm’s irregularities, viz. delay
in implementation of the Scheme, recruitment of under qualified teachers, supply of sub-
standard equipment, etc. and asked the firm to rectify the same. However, even after 18
months of implementation, it was noticed that those irregularities were not rectified by the
firm and in addition, some more irregularities were detected. The Department should have
ensured strict compliance with the terms of agreement by the firm. Instead only a soft and
ineffective penalty of २ 44.19° lakh was imposed. The penalty of & 44.19 lakh included
penalty for supply of sub-standard computers of = 14.14 lakh @ ₹ 1,500 for 943
computers. Audit analysis revealed that the amount of penalty for computers should have
been हैं 85.82 lakh, as detailed in Appendix 1.3.4 and 1.3.4(b).

In reply the Department stated (November 2014) that the penalty was imposed by the
Committee for non-performing computer hardware of 105 Schools and that the
Committee had also said that the hardware was as per the specifications. The reply was
not tenable as the Committee had stated that the firm had tried to deceive the Department
by providing inferior quality hardware and were not as per the specification stipulated in
the Bid documents. However, the Department remained silent on the short imposition of
penalty.

1.3.8.4 Implementation of the Scheme twice in 29 schools: GOI had approved
implementation of the ICT Scheme in 105 Schools. However, without obtaining approval
from GOI, the Department unauthorisedly included 29 old Schools for implementing the
Scheme. A total of 134 (105+29) Schools were covered under the Scheme, i.e.
introduction of computer education in 105 Schools and continuation of computer

3. Rate per month for 105 Schools was ₹ 17.83 lakh (@ 3,29,680+@ 6,81,915~2 7,71,150 ) Therefore, for five months
(September 2008 to January 2009), it amounts to हैं 89.14 lakh.

9 Penalty amount % 84,54,200 included amount for software also. In November 2012, an amount of ® 40,35,065 was
paid for software. Hence, net penalty imposed was @ 44.19 lakh.



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

education programme in 29 Schools. The Department again submitted (February 2010)
Computer Education Plan (CEP) for 2009-10 stating that out of a total 151 Secondary and
Senior Secondary Schools, 134 Schools have been covered under the Scheme and 17
Schools were to be covered during 2010-11. The CEP 2009-10 having been submitted
late by the Department could not be approved by GOI. Therefore, uncovered Schools
were incorporated in CEP 2010-11. However, the Department while submitting CEP
2010-11, inflated the data of uncovered Schools from 17 to 46 (by including the 29 old
Schools which were already covered along with 105 Schools). This CEP 2010-11
containing the inflated data of uncovered Schools was approved by GOI during October
2010.

To receive maximum resource, the Department misled GOI by enhancing the uncovered
Schools from 17 to 46. The first instalment of € 80.96 lakh for implementing ICT Scheme
in 46 Schools (Phase II) had been released by GOI in March 2011. The work of
implementing ICT Scheme Phase II was awarded to Sibin Group, Gangtok and the work
was initiated from the academic session 2014.

1.3.8.5 Reduction of funds earmarked for purchase of computers: The GOI had
accorded approval for 105 Schools during Phase I. The Department without obtaining
approval from GOI had included 29 old Schools. As per the guidelines, for meeting the
non-recurring (in the first year) and recurring (in the second and third year) expenses, an
amount of = 9.38 lakh per School was earmarked for three years, out of which हैं 4.05
lakh was for procurement of ten computers and its accessories!’. Accordingly, for 105
Schools, the total amount for procurement of computer and its accessories was हैं 4.25
crore, under which computer worth हैं 34,223 (detailed in Appendix 1.3.5) could have
been provided. By unauthorisedly including the additional 29 old Schools in the Scheme,
the total amount of € 4.25 crore (as per scheme guidelines) earmarked for computer and
its accessories got reduced to = 3.08 crore (as per tendered amount for 105 Schools) only
as detailed in Appendix 1.3.4 (a). Scrutiny of bills claimed by the firm revealed that
actual amount spent on computers and its accessories was only हैं 2.47 crore under which
average cost of computers was only = 14,816".

In reply the Department stated (November 2014) that there was no reduction of funds for
the purchase of computers and during the time of contract the firm was asked to include
maintenance of the computers supplied under CLASS scheme from its own resources as a
goodwill gesture for winning the contract and also because they were the suppliers of
computers under CLASS scheme. The reply of the Department is not tenable as the
accepted tendered value of = 939.53 lakh included = 226.43 lakh for maintenance and
repair of computers, providing of internet connection and deployment of computer
teachers of 29 schools for 40 months. Hence it was not a goodwill gesture.

1.3.8.6 Unrealistic time frame for coverage of Syllabus: The Scheme was implemented
in 105 Schools to introduce computer education. The Department had asked (July 2008)

10. Printer, scanner, web cameras and modem but excluding operating, application and educational software,
1 105 server computers @ % 18,100 = % 19,00,500 and 943 client computers @ % 14,450 = % 1,36,26,350. Therefore,
average cost = (€ 19,00,500+ 1,36,26,350)(105+ 943) = 14,816.


Chapter I: Social Sector

the firm to follow CBSE syllabus. The class-wise syllabus for introduction of computer
education itself was not logical as the Scheme was only for three years, and the major
portion of class XII syllabus was introduction to open source software and programming.
Without imparting preliminary knowledge on the basics of computer systems and its uses,
imparting of knowledge on open source software and programming appeared impractical.
Further, the Department worked out period of 40 months for implementation of the
Scheme from 1 September 2008 to 31 December 2011, under which in the first year of
implementation of the Scheme, the then class XII would get the benefit of only around
3.5 months!” classes. Similarly, the then Classes XI and X would have got the benefit of
only around 13.5 months and 23.5 months classes respectively. This fact was completely
ignored by the Department in the planning stage.

In reply the Department stated (November 2014) that the course material was as per the
syllabus prescribed and the books supplied by the vendor were good standard. The reply
of the Department was not relevant to the observation made by audit. Audit’s contention
was that during the planning stage the Department had not considered the scheme
duration of the then (2008) Class XII, XI and X students before structuring the syllabus.

As per the guidelines, the monitoring of the Scheme was to be done through independent
agency like IIT, NIT, etc. Scrutiny of records revealed that this was stressed by GOI time
and again. Accordingly, evaluation task was entrusted (December 2010) to National
Institute of Technology, Ravangla after two years of implementation of the project. The
evaluation report submitted by NIT, Ravangla though called for, was not produced to
audit. During September 2009, the Department conducted inspection of seven!? Schools,
wherein several irregularities were detected in supply of equipment and the firm was
asked to rectify the defects. An Inspection Committee comprising of members from
HRDD, FRED, IT Department, NIC, etc. again inspected 26 Schools (February and
March 2010) and found that while the irregularities detected earlier were not rectified,
additional irregularities also crept in. The Committee also reported that the firm had
deceived the Department by providing inferior quality hardware. These irregularities were
detected after 18 months of implementation of the Scheme. Had the monitoring system
been in place right from the commencement of the project, said irregularities could have
been avoided. It may be mentioned that the fund released by GOI included an amount of
₹ 24,000 per School for monitoring, which amounted to a total of = 25.20 lakh for 105
Schools.

The inspection so conducted by the Committee was limited to finding discrepancies in
infrastructure procurement only, neglecting its impact on the beneficiaries of the Scheme.
The Department had not conducted the much needed evaluation of whether the objective

"2 Each academic year is around 10 months. Since the Scheme was from 1 September 2008 total academic period was
33.5 months (3.5 months in 2008, 10 months each from 2009 to 2011).
23. Three Schools were from the 105 (new) and four from the 29 (old).



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

of the Scheme was achieved, particularly when it was implementing Phase II of the
Scheme.

Physical verification and survey of 34 Schools conducted by audit along with
departmental officials revealed that the electricity payments were made by the Schools
themselves; Licensed software were not supplied; teachers absenteeism was very high
(29.76 per cent); maintenance and repair was not prompt. In one!* school, only theory
classes were taken throughout the course period as the machines remained non-functional
throughout the contract period. The main objective of the ICT Scheme, ie. the
widespread use of ICT in Schools or computer aided learning was completely lacking and
the infrastructures procured were mostly non-functional and lying in dilapidated
condition. Most of the Schools were of the opinion that the implementation of the Scheme
could have been better if the School authorities were fully involved and made aware of
the details of the Scheme. 80 per cent of the Schools commented that implementation of
the Scheme was not satisfactory.

In reply the Department stated (November 2014) that they did not receive any complaint
from head of the institute regarding supply and installation of computers and added that
Department was not aware of monitoring funds through which scheme could have been
properly monitored. The Department further stated that genuine licensed Windows and
Office software was provided. This reply is not justified as the inspection Committee had
already found various irregularities and the question of whether complaint was received
does not arise. Moreover, during physical verification of Schools it was seen that only MS
Office was provided but audit could not vouchsafe whether same was licensed as there
was no activation key or registration done. Besides without internet connection the
software even if it was licensed cannot be updated.

The guidelines stipulate that the Scheme would provide infrastructure for developing
environment for widespread use of ICT in Schools. Despite incurring a total expenditure
of = 7.95 crore, the intended objective was not fully achieved. The Department could not
develop the environment conducive to widespread use of ICT in Schools even after
incurring an expenditure of = 3.76! crore on infrastructure alone. Most of the equipment
purchased were lying non-functional. The implementation of ICT in Schools Scheme
were characterised by various irregularities such as lack of survey and planning, delay in
tendering the project, unjustified re-tendering, appointment of under qualified computer
instructors, supply of sub-standard equipment. In order to implement the Scheme with
the objective to create environment for widespread use of ICT, procurement of
infrastructure was essential and there was also a need for either dedicated teachers to be
in place or to get the in-house teachers fully trained.

14 Chujachen Sr. Secondary School (one of the 29 old Schools).

8 Total expenditure = % 794.97 lakh, out of which हैं. 66.52 lakh was for CLASS scheme, हैं 42.24 lakh was the
unauthorised expenditure, & 0.76 lakh was for tour and % 309.2 lakh for teachers salary. Therefore, the net
expenditure on infrastructure: 794.97 lakh - €418.72 lakh = €376.25 lakh.

“4


Chapter I: Social Sector

While accepting the points raised by Audit, the Department stated (November 2014) that
proposals have been made for providing regular computer teacher in every School.
Efforts were also there to make the computers functional by way of AMC or system
upgradation. It was assured that ICT in Schools scheme in remaining Schools would be
implemented well. It was also stated that under ICT Phase II, computer hall with proper
site preparation would be made, adequate survey before site selection would be ensured,
quality furniture and best of computers would be procured.

The following recommendations are made to enable the students deriving the desired
benefit of computer education through implementation of the ICT in Schools Scheme
Phase II:

> Planning: The planning of the Scheme should be carried out after preliminary
survey to ensure availability of room for computer lab and possibility of internet
connectivity, involvement of School authorities and proper structuring of syllabus;

> Implementation: Implementation of the scheme should entail procurement of
quality equipment and its proper maintenance and deployment of qualified
teachers; and.

> Monitoring and Evaluation: Implementation of project should be effectively
monitored through independent agency such as NIT, IIT, etc. with prompt
corrective action against shortcomings noticed in implementation. Impact
assessments also need to be conducted through independent agencies.



Chapter 1: Economic Sector

This Chapter of the Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014 deals with the findings
on audit of the State Government units under Economic Sector.

The names of the State Government departments and the total budget allocation and
expenditure of the State Government under Economic Sector during the year 2013-14 are
given in the table below:

Table 2.1.1

| 1. | Food Security and Agriculture Development
3
[6 |

हु हु

=

[ 9. |
Total

Besides the above, the Central Government has been transferring a sizeable amount of
funds directly to the implementing agencies under the Economic Sector to different
departments of the State Government. The major transfers for implementation of flagship
programmes of the Central Government are detailed below:

Table 2.1.2

State Agriculture Management &
National Food Security Mission | Extension Training Institute 211.93
Food Security and (SAMET

Agriculture

Development Support to Sate Extension | ciate Agricultural “Management
Programme for Extension feultural | 189.8
Reforms and Extension Training Institute



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Animal Husbandry, | Buffalo Breeding

and Veterinary | Development EPI Development Corporation Ltd.

Services po North District Milk Producers Co-
LEEPER ete operative Union Ltd.

Afforestation and Forest | State Forest Development
Management Agency, Sikkim

Forest ए Scheme for Quality Assurance, |<. हर
Forest, Environment | (010 standards 1०५४० Silviculture and Research
an गवाह [North East Council State Forest Development Agency

Management -
Environment Information | «iste Environment Agen
Education and Awareness Boney

Commerce and Nayuma Women’s Cooperative
Industries Upgradation Scheme Society
Development Depart
Small Farmer's Agribusiness
5 Plants Consortium (SFAC), Sikkim

ational Research Centre for | Horticulture Mission for North
Orchids East and Himalayan States

jational
Irrigation

Capacity building for
providers

Tourism and Civil [Capacity building for
Aviation roviders

North Eastern Council Sikkim Tourism Development
Corporation Ltd.
Grid Interactive Renewable | Sikkim Power Development

Power MNRE Corporation Limited

Renewal Energy for Rural | Sikkim Renewable Energy
Applications for all Villages Development Agenc’

Energy and Power [of rmation Publicity and | Sikkim Renewal Eneray
Extension Development
Sikkim Renewable Energy
Development Agenc}
Urban Development | Swarna Jayanti Sahari Rojgar
and Housing Yojana Department
Handicrafts Corporation Ltd.
Development Scheme Corporation Ltd.
Design and Technical
Upgradation Scheme Corporation Ltd,

Marketing Support and Service | Sikkim Handloom and Handicrafts
and Export Promotion Scheme __| Development Corporation Ltd.
Baba Saheb Ambedkar | Handloom and Handicraft
Hasatshipa Vikash Yojana Development Corporation Ltd.

Human Resource Development | Nayuma Women’s Cooperative
Handicrafts Society

N Sikkim Handloom and Handicrafts
NER-Textile Promotion Scheme | “iG yment Corporation Ltd.

District Rural — Development
DRDA Administration Agency, East, Gangtok P
MG-NREGA.
Sikkim Rural Road Development
Agency

Handicraft and
Handloom
Directorate

Rural Management
and Development | PMGSY

497.39

67

280.32

34.91

13.29

10,684.17
197

Integrated Watershed | District Rural Development
Management Program Agency, East

53.6



Chapter II: Economic Sector

Integrated Rural Development
Management Program Agency, West

AAJEEVIKA — Swarna Jayanti | Sikkim Rural Development
G 145.01
ram Swarojgar Yojana Agence)

Central Rural Sanitation | State Water and Sanitation
ae कल 825.06
Programme Mission Sikkim

Rural Housing — [AY SRDA, Sikkim 877.03

National Rural Drinking Water T इच्छा, sixkim, Gangtok ७5522
Programme

Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat कि

Sashiktikaran Abhiyan SRDA, Sikkim 382.46

Water Security and

Public Health 4 P 4 Water Security and Public Health
a National River conservation Plan बे

Engineering Engineering Department

Department

1,500

22,304.56

Source: Central Plan Scheme Monitoring System of the GOI.

Audit process starts with the assessment of risks faced by various departments of
Government based on expenditure incurred, criticality/complexity of activities, level of
delegated financial powers, assessment of overall internal controls, etc.

After completion of audit of each unit on a test check basis, Inspection Reports containing
audit findings are issued to the heads of the departments. The departments are to furnish
replies to the audit findings within one month of receipt of the Inspection Reports.
Whenever replies are received, audit findings are either settled based on reply/action taken
or further action is required by the audited entities for compliance. Some of the important
audit observations arising out of these Inspection Reports are processed for inclusion in the
Audit Reports, which are submitted to the Governor of the State under Article 151 of the
Constitution of India for laying on the table of the Legislature.

The test audits were conducted involving expenditure of हैं 2,174.87 crore (including
expenditure of = 1,477.04 crore of previous years) (details of year-wise break-up is given
in Appendix 2.2.1) of the State Government under Economic Sector. This Chapter contains
a Performance Audit on ‘Tourism Development in Sikkim’ and two Compliance Audit
Paragraphs as given below:

The State of Sikkim is endowed by nature with a variety of destinations, circuits, flora,
fauna, glaciers, lakes, mountains, etc. suitable for development of tourism. The State
Government of Sikkim has also initiated measures to make tourism the main livelihood of



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

the people of Sikkim by encouraging people to preserve old monuments and heritage sites,
take up village tourism and religion based tourism. Though, immense natural potential of
the State had not been exploited fully for tourism development, the State had earned the
distinction of being a sought after tourist destination both within and outside the country.

Performance Audit of tourism development revealed that the Department had taken a
number of steps for construction of infrastructure such as provision of way side amenities,
yatri niwas and parks to provide better facilities to tourists. As a result, number of tourists
visiting Sikkim showed consistent increase except for 2011 due to earthquake. Recognising
the effort of the Department and overall tourism development in Sikkim, the Government
of India (GOI) and other agencies had conferred a number of awards to the State. The
awards included Best Performing State in North East (1998-2006), Best Ecotourism
Destination (2005), Emerging Tourist State (2008), Best State in Tourism Related
Programmes and Development of Infrastructure (2010 and 2011), Best State for Adventure
Tourism (2010), Best Performing State (2010), Best State for campaign Clean India (2012),
Best Rural Tourism Project (2012-13). Recently, Sikkim has been named the best region to
visit in 2014 by Lonely Planet, a leading global travel guide.

The Department however, needed further strengthening in the areas of policy
implementation, project preparation and implementation, advertisement and publicity.
While the Master Plan had not been formulated, Sikkim Tourism Policy, formulated in 2010
was not revisited and updated thereafter. Sikkim Tourism Advisory Council (STAC)-highest
body to advise on policy implementation and its impacts on tourism was not constituted to
strengthen coordination between various departments of the State Government (especially
Forest) and other agencies (especially Border Roads Organisation). Data on number of
persons/households engaged in tourism sector was not available with the Department to
indicate that tourism had been accepted as a significant livelihood option by the people.
Similarly, analysis of financial management disclosed deficiencies such as instances of

unnecessary supplementary provision, non-release of State share in full, pending

Utilisation Certificates and increase in committed liabilities. While the project preparation
process needed further strengthening to avoid time overruns, project management and
execution was characterised by delay in completion of projects, idling of assets for want of
takers to run and manage the facilities and also owing to repair and maintenance,
utilisation of tourism infrastructures for non-tourism purposes. The advertisement and
publicity activities for attracting more and more tourists, especially high end tourists were
not initiated adequately due to paucity of fund. Various types of tourism such as eco-
tourism, village-tourism and adventure-tourism though exploited have room for further
expansion. The monitoring mechanism needed further strengthening as evident from the
fact that number of projects were delayed beyond targeted date and internal audit was not
taken up even once in the review period.


Chapter 1: Economic Sector

The Master Plan prepared (June 2011) at a cost of = 65 lakh was not put to any
effective use as of March 2014. The Sikkim Tourism Policy was not revisited and
updated thereafter to effect necessary changes. Ineffective planning led to non-
utilisation of two assets of € 83 lakh.

Paragraph- 2.3.7.2

Inadequacy in project preparation process led to stalling of nine projects despite
incurring = 33.70 crore towards land acquisition owing to land dispute, non-
availability of stock materials, fund constraint and slow pace of work by the
contractors.

.03 crore were lying idle for seven months to fiv
want of takers to run and manage the facilities indicating inadequate feasibility study
of the project prior to finalisation.

Paragraph- 2.3.9.2

The Department after availing the Central grant however, प्र

ised four assets

constructed at a cost of € 3.35 crore for non-tourist purpose of accommodating various
government offices.

Paragraph- 2.3.9.3

Analysis of financial management disclosed instances of supplementary provision of|
₹ 55.60 crore which were not utilised, non-release of State share in full amounting (0
= 8.87 crore, pending Utilisation Certificates of f 5.39 crore and increase in committed
liability to हैं 32.94 crore as of March 2014.

Paragraph- 2.3.10

The advertisement and publicity activities to exploit various types of tourism such as
eco-tourism, village-tourism, adventure-tourism, etc. needed further strengthening
for attracting more and more tourists especially high end tourists.

The monitoring mechanism needed further strengthening as evident from the fact

that a number of projects were delayed beyond targeted date and internal audit was
not taken up even once during the review period.

Paragraph- 2.3.16

Sikkim has a comparative advantage in tourism with its beautiful landscape, diverse flora
and fauna, culture and traditions, peaceful environment and warm hospitable people. The
location of Sikkim in the country’s map (Map-2.3.1) as well as major tourist destinations
of Sikkim is shown in the map (Map-2.3.2).


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Map 2.3.1 Map 2.3.2

end WEST BENGAL ४9170

Source: Web portal of Tourism and Civil Aviation Department, Government of Sikkim.

The State Government of Sikkim has initiated measures to make tourism the main
livelihood of the people of Sikkim by encouraging people to preserve old monuments and
heritage sites, take up village tourism and religion based tourism. Though, immense natural
potential of the State had not been exploited fully for tourism development, the State had
earned the distinction of being a sought after tourist destination both within and outside the
country.

The State had been receiving awards and accolades from Government of India and national
and international agencies since 1998-99. The awards included Best Performing State in
North East (1998-2006), Best Ecotourism Destination (2005), Emerging Tourist State
(2008), Best State in Tourism Related Programmes and Development of Infrastructure
(2010 and 2011), Best State for Adventure Tourism (2010), Best Performing State (2010),
Best State for campaign Clean India (2012), Best Rural Tourism Project (2012-13).

Recently, Sikkim has been named the best region to visit in 2014 by Lonely Planet, a
leading global travel guide. Sikkim’s Tourism Mission 2015 seeks to make tourism the
main livelihood of the people of Sikkim, every household and each individual a skilled
force for the tourism industry. The mission accorded importance to domestic tourism
focusing on pilgrimage, culture, tradition, heritage, adventure, eco-tourism and wellness.
The tourism sector is expected to provide employment to 75,000 people, with a trained
manpower of about 17,000. Although no annual target was fixed, mission Statement on
Tourism had set an annual target of 10 lakh domestic and 40,000 foreign tourists by 2015.
Against this, the State attracted a record 7.20 lakh tourists in 2010, year that was declared
as ‘the year of tourism’ as indicated below:



Chapter II: Economic Sector

Chart-2.3.1

800000

700000

600000

500000

400000

300000

200000
100000

0
2010 2011 2012

a Domestic tourists = Foreign tourists

Source: Departmental figure.

The number of tourists decreased during 2011 as compared to previous years owing to
earthquake of 18 September 2011 but showed improvement over the years. However, it
was behind the targets set in Mission Statement.

The Tourism and Civil Aviation Department (TCAD) is headed by the Secretary, who is
assisted by the Chief Engineer, Addl. Chief Engineer, Chief Executive Officer, Sikkim
Tourism Development Corporation (STDC), Additional Secretary, Superintendent Engineer
(SE), Joint Director (JD), Divisional Engineer (DE), Deputy Director (DD), Chief Accounts
Officer (CAO) and Assistant Engineer (AE), Senior Accounts Officer, etc. as shown in the
chart below:

Chart-2.3.2

JHCAE = Institute of Himalayan Centre for Adventure and Eco-tourism; HS — Home Stay



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Performance Audit of Tourism Development in Sikkim, covering a period of five years
(2009-14), was conducted during April-June 2014 through test check of records in the Head
Office of the Department, all four district offices (North, South, East and West) and six out
of twelve Tourist Information Centres (TICs), covering 30 per cent of the expenditure
(® 96.82 crore out of 322.73 crore) and 40 projects (out of 99). The Public Accounts
Committee’s recommendations (91 Report presented in March 2011) on the Performance
Audit on Comptroller and Auditor General’s Audit Report 2007-08 and the action taken
thereon by the Department has also been looked into during the course of the Performance
Audit.

The Performance Audit was conducted with the objectives of assessing whether:
> State Tourism Policy was formulated in line with the National Tourism Policy;

> Project preparation process and approval of the Ministry/State Government was
adequate and effective;

> Project management and execution of schemes/projects for tourism development in
the State was economical, efficient and effective;

> Financial management was adequate and effective;

> Advertisement and publicity activities for various types of tourism, i.e. eco-tourism,
village-tourism, adventure-tourism and pilgrimage-tourism, etc. were appropriate
and adequate; and

> Monitoring, evaluation and internal control mechanisms were adequate and

effective.

Audit findings were benchmarked against the criteria obtained from the following
documents:

National Tourism Policy 2002 and State Tourism Policy 2010;

Sikkim Tourism Master Plan;

Sikkim Financial Rules;
Schedule of Rates, Sikkim Public Works Code and Manual; and

>
>
> Guidelines issued by the Ministry of Tourism, GOI/State Government;
>
>
> Prescribed monitoring mechanism.

The Performance Audit commenced with an entry conference (April 2014) with the


Chapter II: Economic Sector

Secretary, TCAD wherein audit objectives, scope, methodology and criteria were explained
and their agreement obtained. Projects for audit scrutiny were selected by applying
sampling techniques on simple random sampling without replacement with a view to ensure
coverage of minimum 40 per cent of the projects from various districts.

The Performance Audit covering a period of five years (2009-14) was carried out through
test check of records at Head Office, four district offices and six TICs. Impact assessment
of various developmental schemes/projects was attempted through joint physical
verification of assets along with departmental officers. A beneficiary survey of 65 tourists
was also conducted in and around Gangtok to obtain their feedback on the tourist facilities
in the State and their overall satisfaction level. The results of Performance Audit were
discussed in an Exit Conference (29 September 2014) with the Secretary, TCAD and his
officers. The draft report was prepared duly taking into consideration the replies furnished
by the TCAD and other implementing agency, i.e. Forest, Environment and Wildlife
Management Department.

Audit findings relating to the development of tourism in the State are discussed in the
succeeding paragraphs:

Audit objective-1
Formulation and implementation of the State Tourism Policy and Plan in line with the
National Tourism Policy.

2.3.7.1 Tourism Policy

The Union Ministry of Tourism formulated the National Tourism Policy-2002 with the
objective of positioning tourism as a major engine of economic growth in the country. The
State of Sikkim formulated the Sikkim Tourism Policy (STP) in 2010 after eight years of
formulation of National Tourism Policy. The STP aimed to enhance employment potential,
foster economic integration through developing linkages with other sectors.

Scrutiny of STP revealed the following:

> The Sikkim Tourism Policy was neither revisited subsequently nor updated every

two years in the light of developments as prescribed in the STP. This was despite
tourism being a major economic activity of the State.

The Department stated (September 2014) that task of updating STP in consultation
with various tourism stakeholders had been started. However, as of September
2014, the STP remained to be updated.

> The Department had not constituted Sikkim Tourism Advisory Committee (STAC),
highest body to advise the Government on all matters related to tourism for Sikkim
as envisaged in STP, to review the Policy implementation and its impacts on annual
basis. In absence of STAC, the objectives and goals relating to development of


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

tourism in Sikkim, extent of policy implementation and its impact remained to be
assessed.

The Department stated (September 2014) that in view of existence of numerous
committees at regional and State level; necessity of constituting STAC would be
debated while forming new policy priorities. The reply is not acceptable as these
committees were constituted primarily to address local issues, whereas, STAC was
apex level committee to review policy implementation and its impacts at the State
level.

The Department did not possess any data regarding number of persons/households
engaged in the tourism sector in the State, despite this being one of the most
important objectives of both the STP and the Tourism Mission-2015.

The Department while accepting the non-availability of the precise database stated
(September 2014) that it would be one of the priority item in the new policy which
was under process.

The STP envisaged better coordination between various departments of the State
Government like Forest, Environment and Wildlife Management Department;
Roads and Bridges Department; and other agencies such as Border Roads
Organisation. This was with a view to obtain their opinion before finalising Detailed
Project Reports (DPRs) for tourist infrastructures to ensure uninterrupted execution
and proper use of created assets. TCAD however, had not initiated adequate
measures to ensure co-ordination with the above agencies. One such instance is
given below:

The way-side amenity-cum-cafeteria constructed (May 2005) at a cost of € 11.22
lakh near Seven Sister Falls, North
Sikkim Highway was dismantled (May
2009) by the Department as the site had
been proposed for construction of
alternative bridge on National
Highway. This indicated that before
preparing DPR and estimates, the
Department had not — ensured
coordination with BRO resulting in
wasteful expenditure of = 11.22 lakh.

The Department stated (September 2014) that the coordination meetings were being
held at requisite intervals to address any communication gap and avoid overlapping
of the programme. The Department added that clear picture of the likely alignment
of road widening programme at Seven Sister Falls at North Sikkim Highway was
not communicated to the Department by the BRO till the time of completion of the
cafeteria. The reply indicated inadequate coordination between the Department and
the BRO. Further the coordination issues could have been addressed adequately if
apex body like STAC was constituted as envisaged in STP.



Chapter Il: Economic Sector

2.3.7.2 Tourism Planning

The Sikkim Tourism Master Plan (STMP) was prepared (June 2011) through a Singapore
based firm at a cost off 65 lakh which highlighted transport and access, tourism marketing,
environment leadership, community involvement, development and upgrading, legislation
and protection and Hotels and Eateries, Attractions, Retail, Travel Agents/Taxi operators
sector as important parameters for tourism development in Sikkim. The STMP was not put
to any effective use as of March 2014. The Ministry of Tourism, Government of India
(001) appointed another agency (M/s Tata Consultancy Service) to prepare Master Plan
for North-East States including Sikkim. Considering the fact that the Master Plan prepared
by the agency did not cover the issues in its entirety and was not likely to serve intended
objective, TCAD proposed for exclusive Master Plan for Sikkim duly engaging local
consultants. The same however, had not commenced as of July 2014. Thus, the State was
devoid of Tourism Master Plan as of July 2014.

The Department stated (September 2014) that the STMP prepared by Singapore based firm
was under study for its effective implementation based on the strategic requirements of the
State to the extent of availability of resources. However, as of September 2014, neither the
STMP was implemented nor State specific Master Plan was prepared.

Following are the instances of lack of proper planning by the Department leading to
ineffective use of created infrastructure.

> Wayside Amenity at Gnathang

The Department had constructed (February
2014) Wayside Amenity at Gnathang, East
Sikkim at a cost of 65 lakh. However, during
physical verification it was seen that the asset
was not put to use in the absence of water and
electricity connections, as seen in the
photograph. The Department stated (September
2014) that left over component of work such as
water supply and electricity would be
completed during the end of 2014-15. Thus,
absence of integrated planning for all components led to non-utilisation of assets as of
September 2014.

> Namsing Waterfall

The Department constructed (September 2013)
Namsing Waterfall for हैं 18 lakh on North
Sikkim Highway (NH-10). Physical
verification (June 2014) disclosed that the asset
was not utilised by the tourists in the absence of
parking facility indicating lack of foresight in
planning.

2


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

The Department stated (September 2014) that parking at Namsing waterfall could not be
developed due to space constraints as well as fund constraint which would be subsequently
developed subject to availability of requisite funds.

Audit objective-2
Adequacy and effectiveness of project preparation and approval process by the
Ministry/State Government.

The projects for Tourism Development in the State are taken up after adhering to the
following process:
Chart 2.3.3

As would be noticed from the chart above, one of the important steps in project formulation
was preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR). Sikkim Public Works (SPW) Code
(Section IV of Para 4.3) envisaged that no work should commence unless a properly
designed estimate is framed after detailed survey, investigation and technical sanction. The
preparation of estimates for projects should be comprehensive, supported by complete
details and based on design, drawings and calculations.

Audit noticed that the Department had not complied with this prescription in eight cases
(out of 40) leading to stalling of projects owing to land dispute, non-obtaining of forest
clearances, soil investigation, etc. as detailed below:

e Forest clearance

Four projects! of € 9.02 crore were stalled due to failure to obtain forest clearance and land
owners unwillingness to part with the land in respect of the work ‘Wayside Amenity-cum-
Car Park at Phongla Junction, South Sikkim’ (project cost 0.72 crore) as of July 2014.

The Department while accepting the audit observation stated (September 2014) that the
compensation for land would be settled soon to resume the work.

1 (i) Tourist Infrastructure at Melli, South Sikkim, (@ 3.80 crore) (ii) WSA-cum-Car Park at Rolu, South Sikkim (९0.91
crore), (iii) WSA at Rammom, West Sikkim (0.85 crore) and (iv) WSA at Zoom-Phatak, West Sikkim (# 2.74 crore).



Chapter Il: Economic Sector

e Soil investigation

In two projects” involving estimated cost of = 4.55 crore, the Department approached the
Mines and Geology Department for soil investigation during August 2011 and December
2012 respectively, after the award of work (August 2009 and November 2010) to the
contractors to ascertain the stability of the proposed sites. Both the works were stipulated
for completion within twelve months (July 2010 and October 2011). However, for want of
report on soil stability, both the works had to be stopped midway after incurring = 30.93
lakh towards Heliport at Hilley and हैं 68.48 lakh towards WSA at Tiffindara as of July
2014.

The Department stated (September 2014) that WSA at Tiffindara was earlier kept in
abeyance owing to apprehension of the soil stability which has since been received and
work resumed. Similarly, Heliport at Hilley had already achieved 50 per cent physical
progress involving an expenditure of = 30.93 lakh upto 2™ RA bill.

Thus, due to delayed initiation of the soil stability report, the projects were delayed for
more than three years beyond the stipulated date of completion resulting in postponement
of accrual of intended benefits from the projects.

© Title of the land

In two cases*, the Department constructed the project without clear title of the land. While
in one case (Mayalu Cafeteria at Martam, East Sikkim), the land owner was using the
property since completion of the project without remitting any revenue to the Government;
in another case (Wayside Amenity, Thanka), the Department was unaware of the date of
creation of the asset, its cost and status of land. Joint physical verification alongwith
departmental officers disclosed that the asset was lying idle since completion for
approximately ten years.

The Department stated (September 2014) that these amenities were created based on the
NOC and promissory land donation note obtained from the landholders which have since
been misplaced. The Department was pursuing the matter to purchase the land as per norms
and take the possession.

2 6) Construction of Heliport at Hilley, West Sikkim (ह 0.75 crore) and (ti) Way side amenities at Tiffindara, South
Sikkim (3.80 crore)
3 (i) Mayalu Cafeteria at Martam, East Sikkim and (ii) Wayside amenity, Thanka, East Sikkim.


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

e Irregular purchase of land and avoidable liability

With a view to develop tourist spot at Tingda, North Sikkim, the Department acquired
(March 2009) a plot of land of 5.2220 hectare valuing हैं 1.65 crore. Physical verification
by Audit alongwith departmental officers revealed (June 2014) that almost 70 per cent of
the land was in a slope and thus not suitable for any construction. The acquired land was
covered with standing properties mostly trees and was devoid of connectivity and there was
also a tract of private land in between the acquired land and the nearest road.

The Department stated (September 2014) that
the (i) land was purchased to initiate Rural
Tourism and associated activities considering
the proximity of the place to an important
historic place of Sikkim; (ii) in hilly regions
like Sikkim, the actual available area suitable
for construction purposes normally ranged
between 40 and 50 per cent; (iii) purchase of
land in advance was a necessity for any tourism.

related projects; and (iv) purchase of land in
advance always yield better results in view of the rapid escalation of cost of land in the
State.

The Department however, had not conceived any project for the land so acquired as of
September 2014 even after expiry of five years of acquisition of land.

Audit objective-4
Economy, efficiency and effectiveness in implementation of projects/schemes for tourism
development in the State.

Proper project management is considered necessary for implementation of the projects
economically, efficiently and effectively.

The position of projects sanctioned and executed during 2009-14 is given below:

Teatea [To [+ [x [>
(Prior to 2009-10)
तिातिाजाज हु

2009-10 to 2013-14

a जज हज ता हु

completed

Projects/works

progress as of | 37 71.43 | 24.29 | 28.12 | 119.21 | 243.05

March 2014

Source: Monthly Progress Report of Projects.

Table 2.3.1



Chapter Il: Economic Sector

As would be seen in the Table 2.3.1 above, 56 projects (out of 157) had been completed
and 86 were under implementation as shown in the chart below:

Chart 2.3.4

@East
OWest
ONorth

@South
Sanctioned upto Projects/works Projects/works in om

2013-14 completed progress OTotal

The physical progress of ongoing projects ranged between zero and 90 per cent as of March
2014. 56 projects were completed after recording a delay between four and eight months
beyond the stipulated date of completion owing to a variety of reasons such as slow
progress of work by the contractor, delay in supply/shortage of stock materials, poor road
connectivity, delay in acquisition of land and change in scope of work. Even out of the
projects under implementation, 50 projects had exceeded the stipulated date of completion
by six to twenty months as of March 2014. The results of audit of implementation of
projects are indicated below:

2.3.9.1 Delay in completion of projects

Completion of projects in a timely manner was necessary to provide intended benefits to
beneficiaries. It was however, noticed that nine (out of 40 checked) projects remained
incomplete as of March 2014 beyond the stipulated date of completion as detailed below:



Image 2.3.12

‘Name of work :
Sanctioned cost:
‘Name of contractor:

Date of commencement:
Due date of completion:
Expenditure incurred:

Reasons for delay:

Name of work:

Sanctioned cost:
‘Name of contractor:

Date of commencement:

Due date of completion:
Expenditure incurred:

Reasons for delay:

‘Name of work:
Sanctioned cost:
Name of contractor:

Date of commencement:
Due date of completion:
Expenditure incurred:

Reasons for delay:

‘Name of work:

Sanctioned cost:
‘Name of contractor:
Date of commencement:
Due date of completion:
Expenditure incurred:

Reasons for delay:

Name of work:
Sanctioned cost:
Name of contractor:

Date of commencement

Due date of completion:

Expenditure incurred:

Reasons for delay:

32

Rural Tourism Project at Village Pandam
Gadi Budang, East Sikkim

47.50 lakh

M/s Central Pandam Contractors Co-
operative Society Lid.

10.05.2011

10.02.2012

223 lakh

Due to bad road condition, delay in
supply of stock materials and lack of
water at work site.

Way Side Amenity at Tashiding, West
Sikkim

78.15 lakh

Shri Zigme Bhutia

07.05.2011

06.05.2012

21.73 lakh

Poor road connectivity and delay in
acquisition of land.

Tourist Information Centre at Soreng,
West Sikkim

740.67 lakh

‘M/s Soreng Contractors’ Co-operative
Society Lid.

12.10.2010

31.03.2011

2 29.45 lakh

Work stopped since August 2013 by the
Society due to non-supply of stock
‘materials by State Trading Corporation
of Sikkim.

Development of tourist infrastructure at
Perbing, South Sikkim

194 lakh

Shri Mahendra Gurung

10.08.2009

09.11.2010

743.78 lakh

Land acquisition problem and Non-
availability of stock materials.

Construction of Yatri Niwas at
Assangthang, South Sikkim

652 lakh
Shri Roshan Agarwal

10.08.2009
09.02.2011

% 433 lakh

Non-availability of stock materials.


Chapter Il: Economic Sector

Image 2.3.13

Construction of boundary fencing for
Flower Pavillion Complex, South Sikkim

Sanctioned cost: 49 lakh

Name of work:

‘Name of contractor: Shri Santa Bahadur Rai
Date of commencement: | 05.02.2008
Due date of completion: | 30.09.2010

Expenditure incurred: ₹20 lakh

Stopped since October 2013 by the

Reasons for delay: conte ton

Image 2.3.14

Construction of Cafeteria-cum-

Name of work: Trekkers Resting Place at Namchi
Helipad

Sanctioned cost: 90 lakh

Name of contractor: ‘Shri Dilu Thapa

Date of commencement: | 03.07.2010

Due date of completion: | 02.07.2017

Expenditure incurred: 28 lakh

Stopped since October 2013 by the

Reasons for delay: |

Image 2.3.15

The construction monocable detachable
gondola system from i) PWD Children
Park to Rock Garden and ii) Rock
Garden to Samdruptse

‘Name of work:

Sanctioned cost: 2742 lakh
‘M/s Damodar Ropeways Construction

Name of contractor: Company (Pvt) Ltd.

Date of commencement: | March 2007

Due date of completion: | December 2010

Expenditure incurred: ©2742 lakh

Change in scope of work and delay in
land acquisition, revision of DPR.

Reasons for delay:

The Department had not ensured to complete the projects within the stipulated time frame
and had also not initiated any action to recover = 3.98 crore from nine contractors in
compliance with contract agreement (Clause 2) for recovery of compensation at the rate of
one per cent per week subject to a maximum of 10 per cent of the tender value of work on
failing to maintain the required progress of the work.

The Department while accepting delays in completion of projects attributed (September
2014) the reasons to blockage of arterial road and the district roads owing to
landslide/landslip, delayed availability of stock materials from State Trading Corporation
of Sikkim and Sikkim Co-operative Marketing Federation Limited, delay in receipt of
forest clearance, limited working season and fund constraints. The Department further
added (September 2014) that action had been initiated to ensure completion of these
projects within the financial year (2014-15) to reap the intended benefits from those
projects.

2.3.9.2 Asian Development Bank (ADB) assisted projects

The State Government proposed to avail (November 2009) of financial assistance of = 165
crore from Asian Development Bank which was later revised (September 2013) to ₹ 96.44

33


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

crore (ADB share = 74.85 crore and State share हैं 21.61 crore) towards South Asia Tourism
Infrastructural Development Project (STIDP). The project envisaged strengthening and
upgradation of roads (3); infrastructural development at IHCAE, Chemchey, South Sikkim;
development of village tourism; consultancy and training for commencement and
completion during April 2012 to March 2014 and October 2014 to March 2016
respectively. As of March 2014, ₹ 7.87 crore were spent from the funds released by ADB
of % 5.86 crore (Grant: = 5.27 crore and Loan: हैं 0.59 crore) and State funding of
% 2.01 crore.

Audit analysis of indicative package-wise annual target set by ADB vis-a-vis physical
progress achieved by Department as of 31 October 2014 revealed that in respect of 2 works*
scheduled for completion on 9 October 2014 and 29 October 2014, the physical progress
of only 25 per cent and 45 per cent was achieved. In other two works, the physical progress
ranged between | and 2 per cent. State Level Steering Committee (SLSC) headed by Chief
Secretary was constituted (May 2010) by the State Government to oversee the
implementation of the ADB projects. As of March 2014, four meetings were held which
inter alia discussed (i) selection of projects; (ii) delay in implementation of the projects due
to non-release of State share; (iii) lack of availability of land and (iv) forest clearance. Thus,
due to lack of preparedness before taking up the ADB assisted STIDP in the State, the
infrastructural development in the tourism sector could not be achieved till October 2014.

2.3.9.3 Idling of assets

Proper utilisation of the available asset was a pre-requisite to ensure providing better
facilities to the tourists and also for the better upkeep of the assets. The Department after
completion of projects either utilises the assets departmentally or leases out to private

parties for running and maintenance of assets. It was however, observed that in eight (out
of 40 test checked) cases, neither the Department had utilised the assets themselves nor
could ensure identification of suitable parties, who could run and manage the assets. This
was despite PAC’s recommendation to explore possibilities to maintain/run the created
infrastructure to ensure utilisation of assets to the fullest possible extent. The details are
shown below:

4 (i) Widening and strengthening of road section in West Sikkim Including wayside amenities and (ii)
Strengthening and upgrading road from Damthang to IHCAE, Chemchey, South Sikkim.

4


Chapter Il: Economic Sector

Image 2.3.17

Name of asset: Guest House at Sang in East
Sikkim

Year of establishment: | March 2010

Expenditure: 50.46 lakh

Period of idling

(As of July 2014): 4 years and 4 months

Name of asset: Car Park with Toilet facilities
at Seven Sister Falls in North
Sikkim

Year of establishment: | June 2011

Expenditure: 56.38 lakh

Period of idling

(As of July 2014): 3 years and 2 months

Image 2.3.19

Name of asset: Car Park with Toilet facilities

at Mangan in North Sikkim

Year of establishment: | August 2011

Expenditure: 42.75 lakh

Period of idling

(As of July 2014): 2 years and 11 months

Name of asset: Café-cum-Wash room at
Rawtey Rumtek in East
Sikkim

Year of establishment: | February 2013

Expenditure: 212.75 lakh

Period of idling

(As of July 2014): 1 year and 6 months

Image 2.3.21

Name of asset: ‘Jurrasic Park at Samdong in
East Sikkim

Year of establishment: | 2009

Expenditure: 487 lakh

<—
aa Period of idling तर्क
(As of July 2014): year

35


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Image 2.3.22

Name of asset: Lepcha Heritage House at
Satam in South Sikkim

Year of establishment: | July 2009

Expenditure: © 247 lakh
Period of idling 5 ;
(As of July 2014): years
Image 2.3.23
Name of asset: Café-cum-View Point at

Ratey Chu in East Sikkim
Year of establishment: | December 2013

Expenditure: 28.85 lakh

Period of idling

(As of July 2014): Paioities

Name of asset: TIC at Melli in South Sikkim

Year of establishment: | December 2012

Expenditure: 115 lakh

Period of idling

(As of July 2014): I Year है months

The Department while accepting that some of the assets created were lying idle stated
(September 2014) that in most cases action had already been initiated to ensure utilisation
of assets through leasing. However, as of September 2014, concrete results were not
achieved by the Department in leasing out/operationalising the assets indicated above.

2.3.9.4 Tourism infrastructures utilised for non-tourism purposes

Based on the DPRs and proposals submitted by State Government, GOI sanctioned the
projects for tourism development in Sikkim to provide various facilities to tourists such as
Way Side Amenities, Tourist Facilitation Centres, Tourist Information Centres, etc. The
Department after availing the Central grant however, allowed utilisation of five assets
constructed at a cost of = 16.43 crore (excluding WSA at Kabi) for accommodating various
government offices (as shown below) instead of for tourism purposes, thus depriving the
tourists of various benefits provided by such infrastructure.

36


Chapter II: Economic Sector

Image 2.3.25
Name of asset: WSA at Kabi, North Sikkim
Cost of completion: Not available
Date of completion Not available
Utilised by: Sub Divisional Office, Kabi
Name of asset: WSA at Lingtam, East Sikkim
Cost of completion: 275 lakh
Date of completion February 2012

“s Tr दर Utilised by: Police Department
eros —- 334
Image 2.3.27

Tourist Facilitation Centre,

NETO CREESE 3” Mile, East Sikkim

Cost of completion: & 2.18 crore

Date of completion October 2012

Utilised by: Police Department

Image 2.3.28

Name of asset: TIC at Yangang, South Sikkim

Cost of completion: 242 lakh

Date of completion October 2013

Uiilised by: Sub Divisional Office,
Yangang

Image 2.3.29

Development of — Tourist

Name of asset: Complex at Gangtok

Cost of completion: 213.08 crore
Date of completion December 2013
Tourism and Civil Aviation
Utilised by: Department as Secretariat of
the Department

The Department stated (September 2014) that some of the tourism assets were being used
for running the government offices as per the decision of the State Government due to acute
shortage of alternate space for rendering important functions for the public as well as the
tourists visiting the area. The Tourist Facilitation Centre at 3 Mile was being used by the

37


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Police Department for checking the Tourist Permit vehicles and regulations apart from
policing activities. Similarly, the tourism assets at Kabi, Yangang and Lingtam which
accommodates SDO’s office and Police Check Posts are also imparting services for the
tourists besides imparting normal administration.

However, the use of tourist facilities for non-tourism purposes was against the terms of
sanction of GOI.

2.3.9.5 Maintenance of assets

The Department is responsible for repair and maintenance of assets created by it. Even the
terms of sanction of GOI (MOT) for various projects envisaged upon the State Government
to undertake responsibility for maintenance and management of facilities for which the
funds were released by GOI. However, it was observed during audit that the Department
had not attached due importance to proper upkeep of assets. The Department had neither
proposed for maintenance grant nor any allocation was given in the State Plan budget
during the period under review. Physical verification by Audit alongwith departmental
officers revealed that some of the assets had remained idle owing to repair and maintenance
(as shown in photographs). This was despite emphasis by GOI (18 February 2011) to
determine pricing and user charges policy to generate adequate funds for maintenance of
assets.

> The Tourist cafeteria at Sajong, East Sikkim constructed (March 2002) was leased
out on monthly rent of = 450/- per month. During the physical verification it was seen that
the asset needs repair.

> The Wayside amenity at 18" Mile, East Sikkim constructed during November 2010
at a cost of = 34.86 lakh remained unutilised since completion. The asset required major
renovation due to non-appointment of caretaker and proper maintenance.

> This View tower at Pelling, West Sikkim was constructed at a cost of = 36 lakh
during April 2009. Due to non-leasing out to interested party, the asset was in dilapidated
condition which needs immediate attention of the Department.

The Department while accepting the requirement of repairs/maintenance of the various
tourism assets informed (September 2014) that requisite maintenance could not be carried
out in the absence of maintenance funds in the State Plan budget. The Department however,
had processed for repair and maintenance grants in the Supplementary Demands for Grants



Chapter II: Economic Sector

2014-15 and necessary maintenance would be carried out on availability of funds. Fact
remained that effective initiative was not taken for obtaining provision for maintenance of
assets created till 2013-14.

The budgetary allocation and expenditure there against of the Department during 2009-14
was as under:

Table 2.3.2

(@in crore)

oe]
a
Source: Appropriation Accounts, O= Original and

Figure in brackets indicate percentage of total excess/savings.

It would be noticed that year wise expenditure was always lower than the allocation leading
to savings, especially in capital head, from 33 to 69 per cent, primarily owing to non-
completion of works in time.

The Department stated (September 2014) that provision were made to disburse all claims
in anticipation of work to be done by the third parties. However, the funds could not be
utilised in full due to non-completion of works as anticipated.

2.3.10.1 Non-release of State share

The major infrastructural projects were mostly funded under Centrally Sponsored Schemes
(CSS) to be shared between GOI (90 per cent) and the State Government (10 per cent). The
State Government had not released & 8.87 crore during 2012-14 towards its share for CSS
despite clear stipulation in Scheme Guidelines and sanction orders.

The Department stated (September 2014) that the allocation of funds for State share is
prerogative of the State Government and as such beyond control of the Department and
added that efforts were on to request the State Government to provide the State Share in
the Supplementary Grants.


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Non-release of State share was in contravention of the terms of sanction of projects by GOI.

2.3.10.2 Committed liabilities

In terms of Rule 140 of Sikkim Financial Rules, no work should commence or liability
incurred until funds to cover the charge during the year were provided. The Department
had not complied with this provision and accorded sanction towards various expenditure
(land compensation, publicity, helicopter operation and other expenses) aggregating to
= 33.17 crore without having funds to cover these expenditure. As a result, these remained
unpaid as of March 2014. Audit also noticed that the cumulative committed liabilities®
increased from & 3.19 crore (2009-10) to ₹ 33.17 crore (2013-14) as shown below. This
amounts to executive action bypassing legislative sanction.

Table 2.3.3
(#in lakh)

_ [0 of too To
[8 | 623

2011-12 10.72 [of 595.72
a 5 6|
[1250]

The Department stated (September 2014) that increase in cumulative committed liability
was in consonance with general trend of growth in the tourism sector in the State and
assured that the Department shall undertake to ensure strict compliance with the Sikkim
Financial Rules.

2.3.10.3 Irregular expenditure on land acquisition from CSS fund

Centrally Sponsored Scheme guidelines stipulate that the programme funds should not be
used for land acquisition. The Department however, incurred = 28.62 lakh towards land

acquisition in one ०४४९९ from CSS in violation of the scheme guidelines. Incurring of above
expenditure was irregular as this was not permissible in the scheme guidelines.

2.3.10.4 Utilisation Certificate

According to SFR (Rule 116(i), Utilisation Certificate (UC) should be submitted
expeditiously. It was noticed that 15 (out of 38) UCs’ involving हैं 5.39 crore were pending
as of March 2014 from various NGOs and agencies of Sikkim who were released grants
for celebration of various fair and festivals to promote tourism. The UCs were pending
from 2009-10 onwards. Similarly, the TCAD was required to submit UCs (22) involving
₹ 4.82 crore to GOI (MOT) which were pending in respect of works sanctioned by GOI
during 2009-10 as of March 2014. The details are shown in Appendix 2.3.1.

5 Liabilities created without adequate funds which remain undischarged.
4 Development of Assam Lingzey to Khedi Trek Route including other tourist infrastructure in East Sikkim.
Total amount of UCs granted : ¥ 26.70 crore.

‘0


Chapter II: Economic Sector

The Department stated (September 2014) that all the pending UCs had been submitted
during second week of September 2014. The Department however, had not forwarded the
copies of UCs in the absence of which audit could not vouch the submission of the UCs.

2.3.10.5 Arrears of revenue

The Department generated revenue on account of leasing out of hotels, cafeteria, sale of
tender forms, hotel registration fee, fines, etc. The target for revenue is set by Finance,
Revenue and Expenditure Department based on information furnished by the Department.
The position of target vis-a-vis actual revenue earned during 2009-14 was as under:

Table 2.3.4

(Zin crore)

Source: Estimate of Receipts and Finance Accounts.

As seen in the Table 2.3.5 above, there were persistent shortfalls in achieving the targets,
reasons for which were not on record. Audit analysis revealed that the major portion of
revenue was realised from environmental fee for visiting Nathula (70 per cent) followed
by lease amount (20 per cent) and sale of tender form (10 per cent). The revenue realisation
dipped down from 3 crore in 2010-11 to 1.84 crore in 2011-12 and improved marginally
in subsequent years.

Audit observed that the Department had neither realised = 34 lakh from various lessee
despite lapse of five years nor initiated concrete steps to lease out the assets (detailed in
paragraph 2.3.9.3) to augment the revenue base.

The Department while accepting the observation stated (September 2014) that revenue
target (except in 2009-10) could not be met as the basis of estimation of revenue target was
rudimentary and the sources of revenue of the Department were variable in nature.

2.3.10.6 Short recovery of interest on mobilisation advance

Examination of the Mobilisation Advance register revealed that = 16.59 lakh had been
realised against हैं 44.06 lakh as interest on mobilisation advances given to the contractors,
resulting in short realisation of interest amounting to = 27.48 lakh as detailed in Appendix
2.3.2.

The Department stated (September 2014) that the differences in calculation of the interest
on mobilisation advances were due to multiplicity of instructions on rate of interest and
method of charging interest (simple or compound) and added that the instructions of the
Government was complied with. The reply is not acceptable as the calculation of Audit was
also based on Government notifications issued from time to time which stipulated charging
simple interest.

a


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Audit objecti
Adequacy and

Sikkim Tourist Policy envisaged promotion, publicity and marketing of tourism products
in a well planned manner at national and international level. Further, adequate
advertisement and publicity is required to attract more number of tourists to meet target of
10 lakh (domestic) and 40,000 (foreign) tourists by 2015 set in Mission Statement on
tourism in which Department is behind as shown in Chart 2.3.1.

The Department had initiated advertisement and publicity of Sikkim Tourism through
official web portal of the Department. The web portal carried details of important places to
visit in the State, pilgrimage tourism, heritage tourism, village tourism, trekking and wild
life sanctuaries. Useful information such as entry formalities, foreigner registration, TICs
was also available on web portal. Online hotel booking facility was also provided by STDC
through web portal of the Department.

The Department however, had not initiated adequate steps to promote tourism to attract
more and more tourists as disclosed by meagre expenditure of हैं 2.27 crore towards
advertisement and publicity during 2009-14 as given below:

Chart-2.3.5

Expenditure

(Rupees in lakh)

2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14

Audit observed that there was no consistency in advertisement and publicity as displayed
by the pattern of expenditure. The expenditure kept on reducing from 1.05 crore to % 0.06
crore except in 2012-13 (₹ 0.68 crore) indicating low priority. Out of € 2.57 crore, = 1 crore
was incurred towards preparation of a film ‘And Once Again’ based on Sikkim by Shri
Amol Palekar and हैं 1.57 crore towards printing of brochures, etc. While no assessment
was ever carried out to assess the impact of the film, brochures/pamphlets lacked detailed
information like mileage, timing and facilities available in between the tourist spots.

The Department stated (September 2014) that more details as suggested by Audit would be
incorporated while making new brochures and pamphlet.

Besides following were also observed:

2


Chapter II: Economic Sector

2.3.1.1 Tourist information Centre

TIC played an important role in publicity and providing information to prospective tourists.
Six (out of 12) TICs were ill equipped in terms of infrastructure such as proper sitting

arrangement for tourists (4 TICs), kiosks (6 TICs), and telephone connections (2 TICs) for
facilitating information on Sikkim tourism. Two TICs (Deorali and Vajra) were not opened
for tourists since establishment (2012) as seen in the photographs.

The Department informed (September 2014) that all the TICs would be upgraded with latest
information technology system including telephone, furniture/fixtures, etc. once the
proposal for strengthening of the TICs submitted for funding under NEC was sanctioned.
Regarding TICs at Deorali and Vajra, the Department stated (September 2014) that these
TICs were initially opened after completion. However, due to inadequate manpower, these
TICs were temporarily closed.

2.3.11.2 Inadequate advertisement and publicity for four new assets

Four assets® constructed at a cost of € 13.08 crore between 2009 and 2012 were idle and
not yielding any value for money. Audit scrutiny revealed that the Department did not have
any plans about how they propose to attract tourists to these newly created tourist spots. In
the absence of the same, there was no way of popularising new facilities.

The Department while accepting shortfall in advertisement stated (September 2014) that
publicity for tourism marketing on national media (print media or TV) could not be
aggressively initiated owing to fund constraints. The Department added that despite limited
availability of funds, there had been consistent efforts to market Sikkim Tourism by free
distribution of brochures/ pamphlets at various TICs located within and outside the State,
participation in various tourism marts, fair and festivals, international flori-show in 2008
and 2013 to showcase the tourism image of Sikkim at national and international forum.

5 (i) Chochenpheri lake (₹ 142 lakh), (ii) Sribadam lake (#161 lakh); (iii) Jurrasic Park (# 487 lakh) and
(iv) Tourist Reception Centre (516 lakh)

#8


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Audit objective-6
Harnessing of various types of tourism potential, i.e. eco-tourism, village-tourism,
adventure-tourism and pilgrimage-tourism.

The Tourism Mission-2015 accorded importance to domestic tourism focusing on
pilgrimage, culture, tradition, heritage, adventure, ecotourism and wellness with a view to
provide employment to maximum number of people.

The State had been receiving awards and accolades from Government of India and national
and international agencies in various types of tourism such as Best Performing State in
North East (1998 -2006), Best Ecotourism Destination (2005), Best State for Adventure
Tourism (2010), Best Rural Tourism Project (2012-13), etc. Various types of tourism such
as eco-tourism, village-tourism and adventure-tourism though harnessed in Sikkim have
room for further expansion as seen from the following facts:

2.3.12.1 Development of village tourism under DoONER

The Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region (DONER), GOI approved (July
2007) a project ‘Development of Village Tourism at (i) Chirbirey, South Sikkim (₹ 3.90
crore — picnic spot), (ii) Majhigaon, South Sikkim (® 7.13 crore - picnic spot) 90:10 ratio
basis. The State Cabinet had also sanctioned and approved (July 2007) the projects for
implementation. The works were awarded (December 2007) to the contractor with the
scheduled date of completion within 12 months. Scrutiny of records revealed that even after
lapse of more than 4 years the works were not completed as of March 2014. The projects
were revised to % 19.69 crore and reasons for delay in completion of works were as detailed
in the Table 2.3.5:

Table-2.3.5

Development of Village Tourism at

Chicbiray, South Sikkira Due to change in scope of work.

Development of Village Tourism at | 5. sdentiticat

Majhigaon, South Sikkim on-identification of land.

Development of Village Tourism at | Non-payment of land compensation to the land
Zoom, West Sikkim owners.

Thus, the above works scheduled to be completed by August 2009 remained incomplete
and resulted in deprival of intended objectives of promoting village tourism in the State to
generate revenue and employment to local people.

2.3.12.2 Rural tourism at Darap, West Sikkim

The construction of Rural Tourism Project at Darap, West Sikkim was sanctioned (May
2010) at a cost of = 48.81 lakh by the GOI, envisaging construction of eight Home Stays
(HS) at Darap village. The work was awarded (March 2011) to M/s Darap Nambu Educated
Unemployed Women’s Co-operative Society Ltd, West Sikkim with the scheduled date of
completion by March 2012. Physical verification disclosed that construction of two HS had



Chapter II: Economic Sector

not been started, physical progress of another
two were only 10 per cent and remaining four
were 70 per cent complete. The Co-operative
Society had stopped the work for last one year.
Apart from issuing notices and reminders, the
Department had not initiated any action on the
Society as envisaged in the contract
agreement.

The Department while accepting that the work

of Rural tourism at Darap was inordinately
delayed stated (September 2014) that this was due to negligence of the contractor. The
Department added that the work had since been resumed and 5 (out of 8) HSs were
completed while the remaining three were under progress.

However, in the absence of adequate supervision and action on the part of the Department,
implementation of HSs was delayed for more than two years.

2.3.12.3 Home Stay
Considering the success of Home Stays (HS) in Mayalyang in North Sikkim and Darap in
West Sikkim and other places in the State, the Department initiated establishment of HS

for further improving the tourism prospects in Sikkim. According to notification (2010)
issued by the Department, the HS should have the following:

6) enable the tourist to experience the local family touch;

(ii) to conform to traditional and ethnic architecture preferably using local materials
like wood, bamboo and stone;

(iii) to provide reasonably furnished accommodation (100-150 sft.) with attached toilet,
standard size double/single bed, mattress of sufficient thickness and comfort, clean
soft pillows, clean blankets/quilts, clean bed sheets and towels, etc.

(iv) 10 ensure adequate provision for storage of guest luggage, hanging clothes and
sitting arrangements with reading/writing facility;

(v) at least one member of the family should be able to communicate in English and or
Hindi;

(vi) every home stay establishment was required to be registered with the Department.

(vii) The monitoring and evaluation committee will grade the home stays in terms of
quality of services and also on the basis of feedback received from guests and
suggest ways for improvement.

The Department identified 718 beneficiaries for establishment of HS at हैं 9 lakh per

beneficiary aggregating to = 65 crore from the Thirteenth Finance Commission grant. The
status of construction of HS is shown in the table below:



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Table 2.3.6

Non availability
of stock materials
from STCS

As of May 2014, only 19 (out of 718) HSs were completed. Rest 699 HS remained
incomplete primarily owing to shortage of stock materials and non-availability of site. An
amount of & 36.40 lakh? was incurred towards training on operating HS and exposure tour
to the beneficiaries. Besides in 12 cases (out of 46), construction had not commenced
despite release of mobilisation advance (= 10.82 lakh) to the Agency (Co-operative Society)
in the absence of clearance from Forest Department. Inspite of availability of TFC funds
(since 2011-12), delayed initiation (2013-14) of projects displayed a laid back approach of
the Department.

The Department while accepting that initial delay in implementation of HSs was due to
non-supply of stock material by the State agency informed (September 2014) that overall
physical progress of 65 per cent had been achieved as of September 2014 and all HSs
(except cases requiring forest clearance) would be completed within the financial year
(2014-15).

The State being a hill station, has vast potential for adventure-tourism, viz. river rafting,
boating, angling, mountain biking and Paragliding, etc. The Department had created
(December 2009) Indian Himalayan Centre of Adventure and Eco-Tourism (IHCAE) - a
separate wing headed by Director in the Department to look after adventure tourism. Beside
the Director, there are four other staff in the Institute. The annual expenditure is met out of
grant of € 40 lakh released by TCAD towards running and maintenance of the Institute. The
Institute was created to provide high standard Adventure and Ecotourism related training
with special emphasis on instilling the concept of adventure tourism without causing
environmental degradation. The Institute has conducted courses on adventure and high
altitude trekking (11) involving 416 trainees, special adventure camp for school children
(1), basic mountaineering course (1) with 33 trainees.

% 229.48 lakh for training on operation of home stay to 378 beneficiaries and ₹6.92 lakh for exposure tour to 352
beneficiaries.

46


Chapter II: Economic Sector

The adventure sports of late has become one of the most happening activities in the State
on regular basis and the Department is further promoting various adventure related
infrastructure as per suitability of the place. Ranka near Gangtok has been identified as
one of the most feasible places for promotion of adventure activities and accordingly
requisite infrastructure were being developed at this spot (known as Thami-dara) by the
Department.

However, following instances showed lack of adequate efforts on the part of the
Department towards the promotion of adventure tourism in the State.

> The Ministry of Tourism, GOI sanctioned (August 2009) construction of 6 km. long
summer biking trek at Singhik to Kaley at a
cost of € 41.68 lakh at North Sikkim. The work
was started in two Phases and completed
during June 2011 and August 2011
respectively by using stone soling only.
Physical verification by Audit along with
departmental officers revealed (June 2014) that
site was 4-5 hours away from the main road and
was devoid of approach road. Not a single
event was organised even after more than three
years of construction of the biking trek. This vitiated the harnessing of adventure tourism
potential of the State.

The Department stated (September 2014) that the trek was completed in July 2011 and few
events of mountain biking was organised on this trek by Mangan Tourism Development
Committee. They further added that normally mountain biking is done in the rugged hills
preferably away from the human habitation and the traffic.

> Similarly, another trekking trail from Assam Lingzey to Khedi Trek route including
Base Camp completed (2012) at a cost of
₹ 1.98 crore and = 9.98 lakh incurred towards
furnishing and furniture was not utilised as no
trekking event was organised leading to idling
of assets.

The Department stated (September 2014) that
the asset would be handed over to Khedi
Ecotourism and Eco-development Programme
society on nominal lease as a promotional
venture. However as of September 2014, the
asset was lying idle.

In terms of Sikkim Ecotourism Policy, the State Government was supposed to constitute

Sikkim Ecotourism Council having an executing arm which was the Ecotourism

a


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Directorate (ED) working under the Forest, Environment and Wildlife Management
Department (FEWMD). The Council would have a local village level operational system.
However, the Nodal Department, i.e. Department of Forest, Environment and Wildlife
Management Department (FEWMD) responsible for executing Ecotourism in the State had
not constituted Sikkim Ecotourism Council. The FEWMD had identified 11 ecotourism
zones'’. However, no micro-plan for the zones was prepared as of March 2014. The
ecotourism project taken (November 2010) at Namli, East District at a cost of = 4.44 crore
had not taken off till March 2012 in the absence of forest clearance for the site. Revised
Technical Sanction was accorded in March 2014 and 30 per cent physical progress was
achieved as of September 2014.

Sikkim Himalayas have excellent scope for value added wellness tourism. To make Sikkim
a mega destination of Wellness Tourism, the State Government decided to construct Yoga
centre at Aho, East Sikkim and % 48.01 lakh was sanctioned (2010-11) by the GOI for
construction of Yoga centre and fencing. As per the sanction order, the State Government
would contribute land for the project free of cost. However, the project was not initiated as
of June 2014 due to non-availability of suitable land for the project. Thus, initiation of the
project was delayed for more than three years.

The Department while accepting the audit observation stated (September 2014) that Yoga
Centre at Aho could not be established at Aho as the land owners who had earlier issued
NOC refused to part with the land. The Department added that Yoga Centre within the
Namli tourism complex, 1.5 km from the originally earmarked site was being considered
for development.

of monitoring and evaluation mechani.

2.3.16.1 Compliance with Sikkim Registration of Tourist Trade Rules 2008

The Sikkim Registration of Tourist Trade Rules 2008 envisaged identification, registration,
cancellation and inspection of dealers, viz., hotels, restaurants, travel agents and tour
operators, collection of registration fees based on the category.

Audit scrutiny revealed that there was a vast discrepancy in number of dealers provided by
Department vis-a-vis figures of the Municipal Corporation and Nagar Panchayat as detailed
in Table 2.3.7:

19 1) Nampong Lingdok 2) Pandam-Karthok 3) Kecheopalri 4) Uttarey 5) Hee-Bermoik, 6) Okhray 7) Dzongu 8)
Lachung 9) Lachen 10) Lingee and 11) Kitam.



Chapter II: Economic Sector

Table 2.3.7

Hotel
staurant/
feteria

Agent/Tour

Outdoor
Photographer

This showed that the Department was neither having full database regarding exact number
of hotels, restaurants/cafeteria, travel agents and photographers nor had reconciled the
figure with the Urban Local Bodies. In absence of this basic data, ensuring compliance with
provision of Sikkim Registration of Tourist Trade Rules 2008 was not feasible. This was
further corroborated by the fact that no inspection was ever made by the Department to
check the overcharging of hotel rents from the tourists. This had also led to loss of revenue
of € 10.74 lakh on account of registration fee from the dealers.

The Department while appreciating audit observation stated (September 2014) that the
discrepancy of data would be cross checked with Municipal Corporation by deputing a
team for the purpose. On overcharging by the hotels, the Department informed that severe
action was taken whenever complaints were received and amount refunded to the tourists.

2.3.16.2 Quality control

SPW Manual 2009 incorporated (September 2009) broad guidelines for quality control
checks and quality assurance in works execution. Audit scrutiny revealed that these
prescriptions were not adhered to by the Department as indicated below:

. Detailed procedures to ensure quality control for observance by the construction
team had not been laid down by the Department as enshrined in PWD Code. No
central quality testing laboratory existed in the Department.

The Department stated (September 2014) that it was not possible to open laboratory
everywhere or anywhere. Based on the project volume and technical complexity,
the sample specimens are sent to the lab for tests within or outside the State as and
when needed.

. No notification had been issued for constitution of the quality assessment (QA)
team. Details of quality tests carried out at the worksites by QA team were not
available. No portable equipment had been purchased for quality checks to be
carried out in the worksites by the QA team.

The Department stated (September 2014) that the engineers entrusted with the
project implementation and construction work were themselves responsible for

*


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

quality control in all practical sense and hence, there was no requirement of separate
quality control team. The reply is not acceptable as independent QA team was
necessary for ensuring quality control in works execution as per PWD Code.

2.3.16.3 Internal Audit

No internal audit was conducted by the Directorate of Internal Audit under Finance,
Revenue and Expenditure Department for ensuring efficient functioning of the Department,
during the period covered under audit.

2.3.16.4 Public grievances redressal mechanism

TCAD was required to deal with public for various purposes relating to tourism
development. For effective Public Grievances Redressal, mechanism for registration of
complaints, acknowledgement as a token of receipt of complaints, diarising of complaints,
disposal of complaints on first-come-first served basis, and periodic monitoring of
disposals of complaints by a superior authority had not been introduced in the Department.

The Department informed (September 2014) that as of date (September 2014) grievances
and complaints were handled directly by the concerned officers. A separate Grievance Cell
had been established recently and the single window system would also be made
operational soon.

2.3.16.5 Geographic Information System

A geographic information system (GIS) is a computer system for capturing, storing,
checking and displaying data relating to earth's surface position. GIS shows different types
of data on one map and enables people to see, analyse and understand patterns and
relationships.

TCAD incurred = 73 lakh (100 per cent CSS) for GIS mapping during 2002-03 and
submitted the UC to GOI. It was however, seen that GIS system did not exist in the
Department resulting in non-fulfilment of intended objectives of providing tourist
information through GIS mapping.

A beneficiary survey of tourists visiting Sikkim was carried out during the peak season
(November 2014) by office of the Accountant General (Audit), Sikkim, Gangtok to
ascertain the response of tourists about (i) how they came to know about tourist destinations
in Sikkim; (ii) were they satisfied with the conduct and behaviour of drivers, travel agents;
(iii) were they charged appropriate tariff in hotels; (iv) were they satisfied with the
information and assistance provided by Tourism and Civil Aviation Department, etc.

Out of 65 tourists interviewed, the overall ranking of Sikkim tourism as per their perception
was excellent (11 per cent); outstanding (29 per cent); very good (28 per cent); good
(28 per cent) and not satisfactory (4 per cent). 94 and 77 per cent were satisfied with
conduct and behaviour of drivers and tour operators respectively. 83 and 87 per cent were
satisfied with the taxi fare and hotel tariff charged from the tourists. 69 per cent and
68 per cent were satisfied with information and assistance provided by the Department and

30


Chapter II: Economic Sector

infrastructure relating to way side amenities respectively. While 39 per cent did not face
any problem relating to landslide and thus did not require any assistance; 43 per cent were
satisfied with the assistance provided by the Department during the time of need.

The survey conducted in November 2014 has to be viewed in the light that it was conducted
during a period congenial to the tourists. It is to be mentioned that the tourists surveyed had
visited all the four districts (East, West, North and South) of the State.

Tourism is one of the important industries for Sikkim. The State had earned a number of
awards and accolades in tourism from GOI and other national and international bodies.
The Lonely planet had also declared Sikkim as a sought after destination. Performance
Audit however, disclosed that the State had to strengthen its project preparation process,
execution, financial management, monitoring, etc. in order to fully harness the tourism
potential of the State.

The projects were prepared defectively without ensuring land availability, forest clearance
and soil testing. There was lack of effective coordination with other departments. Financial
management disclosed lack of capacity of the Department to use allocated fund, consequent
surrender of funds, partial release of state share, diversion of funds and short recovery of
interest on mobilisation advances. Projects were delayed, many completed infrastructure
were lying idle and some were used for non-tourist purpose. Due to inadequate
advertisement and marketing activities and slow pace of execution of projects relating to
various types of tourism such as eco-tourism, village-tourism, adventure-tourism, etc.,
tourism potential had not been exploited fully. The monitoring mechanism needed further
strengthening to avoid delayed completion of projects and ensure implementation of quality
control mechanism.

> Project preparation process should be strengthened by carrying out survey and
investigation, suitability of land, etc. before embarking on projects.

> Financial management may be strengthened to ensure utilisation of allocated funds,
utilisation of funds for the specified purpose and special efforts may be taken to
spend TFC grant for Home Stay.

> Promotional activities should be strengthened to attract more tourists, especially
high end tourists and to further exploit tourism to its fullest potential in various
forms of tourism such as eco-tourism and village-tourism.

i


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

The Department had not realised the revenue of हैं 0.76 crore by selling valuable
standing properties and had also not intimated the Forest, Environment and
Wildlife Management Department for disposal of the properties. Physical
verification revealed that the properties were not available in the work sites
resulting in loss of revenue amounting to हैं 0.76 crore.

For acquisition of land required by Government departments and _ other
organisations/bodies, etc., compensation for land alongwith the cost of standing properties
is assessed by the concerned District Collectors functioning under the administrative
control of the Land Revenue and Disaster Management Department, on the basis of
prevailing market rate of land surrounding the area to be acquired.

The Roads and Bridges Department (RBD) acquires land along with the standing properties
(trees!!, bamboos, broom grass bush [amliso], cowshed, fodder, etc.) for construction of
new roads on payment of land compensation and compensation for the standing properties
to the land owners. On payment, land alongwith the standing properties becomes the
property of the Government and the sale proceeds on account of sale of the standing
properties are to be deposited into the Government account.

Examination of the land acquisition records for construction of nine new roads by the RBD
during September 2008 to March 2012 revealed that in addition to land compensation,
% 2.51 crore was paid towards the cost of standing properties to the land owners. However,
it was observed that no sale proceeds against the disposal of the standing properties was
realised by the Department. Even excluding the properties having meagre or no sale value
like broom grass bush (amliso), fodder, etc., the other properties having value such as trees
and bamboos, acquired along with the land acquisition valued at = 0.76 crore had not been
disposed off and their sale proceeds realised.

In response to the audit observation, the Department stated (May 2014) that the removal,
sales and realisation of revenue in respect of standing properties rested with the Forest,
Environment and Wildlife Management Department (FEWMD) and that they had
forwarded (May 2014) a letter regarding the audit observation to the FEWMD for detailed
information to enable it to furnish reply to the audit observation. On further pursuance of
the matter (July 2014) by Audit, the FEWMD stated (July 2014) that their utilisation
division had not received any correspondence from the RBD for removal, sale and
realisation of revenue in respect of standing properties relating to any of the nine works test
checked in Audit. The FEWMD stated that it would take action to extract the standing

‘| Chap, tooni, katues, etc.



Chapter II: Economic Sector

properties and realise the sale proceeds only after the receipt of information from the land
acquiring department.

Physical verification (April 2014 and October 2014) of four'? out of the nine works, in the
presence of departmental officers revealed that there was no standing property left for
extraction in the work sites. A photograph depicting one of the sites is given below:

Further, all the nine road construction works having already been taken up for execution,
the possibility of existence of standing properties at any of the work sites for realisation of
sale proceeds by the FEWMD was remote. Thus, inadequate action taken by the
Department to safeguard the financial interest of Government resulted in a loss of € 0.76
crore.

n for a motorable bridge

The State Government proposed (June 2004) to construct a motorable road from Bey to
Pentong (Km 1* to 4") at a cost of = 1.87 crore (23 per cent above SOR 2002 plus
contingencies, quality control, etc.), out of which, Government of India sanctioned
(December 2004) ₹ 1.50 crore under Rashtriya Sam Vikas Yojana (RSVY) and the balance
of 37.45 lakh was to be met from State Plan Budget. The estimated cost was revised (June
2008) to € 2.57 crore which included an additional provision of % 69.86 lakh for land
compensation to be met from the Tribal Sub Plan (TSP).

The Department awarded the work (September 2005) to the lowest bidder, Shri Bernard
Lepcha at & 1.79 crore (including 23 per cent above the civil estimated cost off 1.46 crore
based on SOR 2002) for the completion of the entire work by September 2006. However,
owing to belated payment in land compensation to the land owners and delay in obtaining
forest clearance coupled with delay in execution by the contractor, the work could not be

2) Construction of roads from Farresay via Timberay Gaon, South Sikkim, ii) Mamlay to Nangdang Village, South
Sikkim, iti) Deythang to Samruk, South Sikkim and iv) Sonamati Sr. Secondary School to Kokolay, East Sikkim.


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

completed (February 2011) even after a lapse of 5 years from the scheduled date of
completion.

Audit analysis (March 2014) revealed that the clearance from the Ministry of Environment
and Forest was accorded only in August 2007 and the possession of the land could be
obtained during September 2008. Thus, it was observed that the Department had issued the
work order to the contractor even before obtaining forest clearance and ensuring
availability of land. Later on, the contractor after executing work valuing = 1.20 crore,
surrendered (February 2011) the remaining work valuing = 0.59 crore citing health
problems and the work was taken over departmentally (March 2011) for completion.

A joint physical verification with the departmental officers conducted (April 2014) at the
work site revealed that the construction of the road was completed (March 2014) without
making motorable bridge over the Tholungchu River. In the absence of any motorable
bridge, the very purpose of the construction of motorable road to establish the road
connectivity from either side got defeated. The existing suspension foot bridge did not serve
the purpose of motorable connectivity as would be evident from the following photographs:

Analysis of technical sanctioned estimate for the work revealed that the initial estimate as
well as the revised estimate was prepared without any provision for motorable bridge. As
of July 2014, the Department had not finalised any proposal for construction of a motorable
bridge over the Tholungchu river even though more than nine years had elapsed since the
sanction of the work (December 2004). It was further noticed that no alternative motorable
road existed for public transportation.

Thus, due to inadequate planning in constructing a road without a connecting motorable

bridge resulted not only in deprival of the intended benefits of establishing connectivity for

transportation of people and goods, but also led to an injudicious expenditure of हैं 1.98
13

crore’.

The Matter was reported to the Department/Government; their reply had not been received
(October 2014).

#8 & 1.20 crore to the contractor, #8 lakh towards contingency/work charge establishment and हैं 70 lakh towards land
compensation.


Chapter III: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings)

3.1.1 The State Public Sector Undertakings (SPSUs) consist of State Government
Companies and Statutory Corporations. The SPSUs are established to carry out activities
of commercial nature while keeping in view the welfare of people. In Sikkim, the SPSUs
occupy an insignificant place in the State economy. The working SPSUs registered a
turnover of 147.55 crore as per their latest finalised accounts as of September 2014.

This turnover of SPSUs was equal to 1.19 per cent of State Gross Domestic Product
(SGDP) for 2013-14!. Major activities of Sikkim SPSUs are concentrated in infrastructure
and power sectors. The working SPSUs incurred an overall loss of = 12.99 crore? in the
aggregate for 2013-14 as per their latest finalised accounts as on 30 September 2014. The
SPSUs had employed total 645 employees (including 12 employees of non-working
SPSUs) as on 31 March 2014. The SPSUs do not include two* Departmental Undertakings
(DUs) and one* Co-operative Bank, which carry out commercial operations but are a part
of Government departments. Audit findings of these Organisations are incorporated in
other chapters of this Report along with the findings relating to the Government
Departments.

3.1.2 As on 31 March 2014, there were 15 SPSUs as per the details given below. None
of these companies was listed on the stock exchange(s).

Table 3.1.1

Government Companies,

a ऊऑऋ€ 0 $ ।|
Po
ee eC

3.1.3. The Companies Act 1956 as well as the new Companies Act, 2013 which was
recently notified (September 2013) by the Government of India and applicable in rest of
the Country have not been extended to the State of Sikkim. The Government Companies in

The State GDP for 2013-14 is ₹ 12,376.69 crore (Quick estimate).

Refer Appendix 3.1.2.

Government Fruit Preservation Factory and Temi Tea Estate.

Sikkim State Co-operative Bank Ltd.

Non-working SPSUs are those which have ceased to carry on their operations.


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Sikkim are registered under the ‘Registration of Companies Act, Sikkim 1961’. The
accounts of these companies are audited by Statutory Auditors (Chartered Accountants)
who are directly appointed by the Board of Directors (BoDs) of the respective companies.
In addition to the statutory audit conducted by the Statutory Auditors, supplementary audit
of these companies had also been taken up by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
(CAG) on the request of the Governor of the State under Section 20(1) of the Comptroller
and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971.

3.1.4 There are three Statutory Corporations in the State, viz. State Bank of Sikkim
(SBS), State Trading Corporation of Sikkim (STCS) and Sikkim Mining Corporation®
(SMC) established under the proclamations of the erstwhile Chogyal (King) of Sikkim. The
accounts of these Corporations are audited by the Chartered Accountants directly appointed
by the BoDs of the respective Corporations. Supplementary Audit of these Corporations
was taken up by CAG under Section 19(3) of the CAG’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions
of Service) Act 1971.

3.1.5 As on 31 March 2014, the investment (capital and long-term loans) in 15SPSUs
was % 399.13 crore as per details given below.

Table 3.1.2
(@in crore)

63.99 273.88 | 40.06
Non-working SPSUs
[14.69 |

‘Source: Data collected from SPSUs.

A summarised position of Government investment in SPSUs is detailed in Appendix 3.1.1.

3.1.6 As on 31 March 2014, 85.20 per cent of the total investment in SPSUs, was in
working SPSUs and the remaining 14.80 per cent in non-working SPSUs. This total
investment consisted of 31.38 per cent towards capital and 68.62 per cent in long-term
loans. The investment had grown by 93.14 per cent from हैं 290,32 crore in 2008-09 to
% 560.72 crore in 2009-10. The total investment had decreased by 33.14 per cent from
% 560.72 crore (2009-10) to = 374.90 crore (2011-12) due to constant decrease in the long
term loans of the SPSUs after 2009-10.The total investment in SPSUs, however, marginally
increased by 6.46 per cent to हैं 399.13 crore (2013-14)mainly due to increase (€ 5.61 crore)
in the paid up capital of two SPSU (namely, Sikkim Schedule Castes, Scheduled Tribes
and other Backward Classes Development Corporation Ltd and Sikkim Poultry
Development Corporation) during the year 2013-14 as shown in the graph below:

8. 4 non-working Corporation as on 30 September 2014.


Chapter III: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings)

Chart 3.1.1

600
500
400

300

200
100
0 a

2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14

—Year

Investment (capital and long term loans)

3.1.7 The total investments in various sectors and percentage thereof at the end of 31
March 2009 and 31 March 2014 are indicated below in the bar chart.

Chart 3.1.2

(54.17) (41.53)

(30.34)

(®in crore)

(13.94)

0

2008-09
@Power OFinance @ Manufacturing OInfrastructure DOthers

Figures in brackets show the percentage of total investment

3.1.8 The investment made in SPSUs during 2008-09 to 2013-14 was mainly
concentrated in power and infrastructure sectors. The investment in infrastructure sector
had grown by 735.53 per cent from & 19.84 crore in 2008-09 to = 165.77 crore in 2013-14.
The increase of investment under infrastructure sector was mainly due to availing of long
term borrowings of = 128 crore by Sikkim Industrial Development and Investment
Corporation Limited (SIDICO) during 2012-13. On the other hand, there was significant
reduction during five years period in the investments under power sector mainly on the
account of decrease of = 53.06 crore in the long term borrowings of Sikkim Power


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Development Corporation Limited from हैं 153.86 crore (2009-10) to = 100.80 crore
(2013-14)

3.1.9 The details regarding budgetary outgo towards equity, grants/subsidies, guarantees
issued and interest waived in respect of SPSUs are given in Appendix 3.1.3. The
summarised details are given below for three years ended 31 March 2014.

Table 3.1.3

Equity Capital outgo from
budget

Grants/Subsidy received |

| 1 23 ee ee ऊऋ|
क्ध्प्ण्ण्ण्ण्ण्य् Os |
! [|
ED ट 21 -|
|
| 8 [Guarantee Commitment [2 [163.72] 2 |

‘Source: Data collected from SPSUs.

131.76

120.96

[0.18 |
[|
[|
[|

3.1.10 The details regarding budgetary outgo towards equity and grants/subsidies for past
six years are given in the graph below:

Chart 3.1.3

=
&

2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13

Budgetary outgo towards equity and Grants/Subidies

3.1.11 It may be observed that during the period of six years from 2008-09 to 2013-14,
the budgetary outgo was at the highest (% 5.32 crore) in 2009-10 and had shown decreasing
trend thereafter upto 2012-13, when there was no budgetary outgo to any of the SPSUs.
During 2013-14, however, there was a total budgetary outgo of € 0.18 crore by way of
grants to one SPSU, namely, Sikkim Poultry Development Corporation Limited. The

7. Inrespect of one SPSU (SIDICO) loan as well as interest/ penal interest were written off.


Chapter III: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings)

guarantee commitment has shown a decreasing trend during three years and same has
decreased from हैं 163.72 crore (2011-12) to = 120.96 crore (2013-14). As on 31 March
2014, guarantee commitments of € 120.96 crore were outstanding against two SPSUs,
namely, Sikkim Industrial Development and Investment Corporation Limited and Sikkim
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes Development
Corporation Limited.

On any guarantee given to a public body, a guarantee commission at the rate of one per
cent is charged by the State Government on the loans availed against Government
guarantee. During 2013-14 SABCCO had availed loans of हैं 24.39 crore against
Government guarantee. Though a guarantee commission of € 0.24 crore was payable to the
State Government against the said loans, the Company did not pay the same.

3.1.12 The figures in respect of equity, loans and guarantees outstanding as per records
of SPSUs should agree with the figures appearing in the Finance Accounts of the State
Government. In case the figures do not agree, the concerned SPSUs and the Finance
Department of the State Government should carry out reconciliation of differences. The
position in this regard as at 31 March 2014 is stated below.

Table 3.1.4
Zin crore)

11.28
2157 [120.96 | 0.6 |

+ SPSU-wise figures of loan/ guarantee were not available in the Finance Accounts of the State.

3.1.13 Audit observed that the differences in equity investment pertained to 12 PSUs and
some of the differences were persisting since 2004-05. It was further observed that the un-
reconciled differences in respect of equity of SPSUs increased by = 2.75 crore during
current year from हैं 8.53 crore (2012-13) to % 11.28 crore (2013-14). The Principal
Accountant General (PAG) had also taken up (December 2013) the issue with the Principal
Secretary (Finance) to the Government of Sikkim (GoS) and the concerned SPSUs for early
reconciliation of long pending differences. The Government and the SPSUs should take
concrete steps to reconcile the differences in a time-bound manner.

3.1.14 The financial results of SPSUs, financial position and working results of working
Statutory Corporations as per their latest finalised accounts as on 30 September 2014are
detailed in Appendices 3.1.2, 3.1.4 and 3.1.5 respectively. A ratio of SPSUs turnover to
State GDP shows the extent of SPSU contribution in the State economy. Table below
provides the details of working SPSUs turnover and State GDP for the period 2008-09 to
2013-14.


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Table 3.1.5

3134] 41981 42.81] 86.43] 143.91

State GDP 3,229.08 | 6,132.76 | 7,411.57 | 8,906.64 | 10,472.60? | 12,376.69"

Percentage of Turnover to 0.68 | oss | 1.37 9

State GDP
Source: Data collected from SPSUs and Department of Economics, Statistics, Monitoring and Evaluation.

The State GDP as well as the SPSUs turnover showed continuous growth during the years
from 2008-09 to 2013-14. It may be noticed that during 2008-14, the State GDP had grown
by 283 per cent while the increase in turnover of SPSUs during the corresponding period
was to the extent of 371 per cent. Thus, there was appreciable growth in SPSUs turnover
during the period of six years from 2008-09 to 2013-14 as compared to the growth in the
State GDP during the corresponding period. As a result, the percentage of SPSUs turnover
to State GDP has increased from 0.97 (2008-09) to 1.19 (2013-14) in six years period.

3.1.15 Profit earned/Losses'! incurred by the working SPSUs during 2008-09 to
2013-14 are given below in the bar chart:

Chart 3.1.4
2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14
2 “TH 99
ot} ee il
? an ° L
a2)
4 “3.24
aly

(@ in crore)

(12) (8)

(8)

BOverall profit carned/ losses incurred during the year by working PSUs

(Figures in brackets show the number of working SPSUs in respective years)

As per the latest finalised accounts of 8 working SPSUs as on 30 September 2014, 5
SPSUs!? incurred an aggregate loss of € 16.68 crore whereas remaining 3 PSUs! earned a
profit of = 3.69 crore. The major losses was reported by State Bank of Sikkim (₹ 7.05 crore)
and State Power Development Corporation Limited (₹ 6.05 crore) while Sikkim Industrial
Development and Investment Corporation Limited earned the highest profits (¥ 2.80 crore).

Turnover of working SPSUs as per their latest finalised accounts as on 30 September of respective year.
Provisional Estimates.

10 Quick Estimates.

Figures are as per the latest finalised accounts of working SPSUs as on 30 September of the respective year.
2 §INo.A-I, 4-2, 4-3, 4-5 and A-7 of Appendix 3.1.2.

3 SI. No.A-4, 4-6 and B-8 of Appendix 3.1.2.


Chapter III: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings)

It may be observed that the working SPSUs incurred overall losses during the preceding
six years ending 2013-14 excepting 2009-10 when the working SPSUs earned overall
profits of = 0.99 crore. During three out of six years (viz. 2010-11, 2012-13 and 2013-14),
the losses of working SPSUs were highest ranging between 10.85 crore and& 12.99 crore.
During 2011-12, however, the losses of the working SPSUs reduced considerably to
% 3.24 crore mainly due to profits (₹ 11.84 crore) earned by one working SPSU (State Bank
of Sikkim) and transfer of three loss making working Governments companies to ‘non-
working’ category.

3.1.16 A review of latest Audit Reports of CAG shows that the working SPSUs incurred
losses to the tune of 11.56 crore, which were controllable with better management. Year
wise details from Audit Reports are stated below:

Table 3.1.6

(@in crore)

(10.85 27.08

Controllable losses as per CAG’s Audit Report | 0.51| 11.0: | 11.56 |

Source: Data collected from SPSUs and CAG Audit Reports.

The losses of SPSUs are mainly attributable to deficiencies in planning, implementation of
projects, running their operations, financial management and monitoring.

3.1.17 The above losses pointed out by Audit Reports of CAG are based on test check
of records of SPSUs. The actual controllable losses could be much more. The above table
shows that with better management, the losses can be minimised substantially. The SPSUs
can discharge their role efficiently only if they are financially self-reliant. The above
situation points towards a need for improving professionalism and accountability in the
functioning of SPSUs.

3.1.18 Some other key parameters pertaining to SPSUs are given below:

Table 3.1.7
(Zin crore)

Return on Capital Employed (per cent)
Turnover! 147.55

11.02:1
| 20.5 |

(Above figures pertain to all SPSUs except for ‘Turnover’ which is for working SPSUs)
Source: Data collected from SPSUs.

3.1.19 There was constant improvement in Debt Turnover Ratio after 2009-10. The debt-
turnover ratio improved from 11.02:1 (2009-10) to 1.86:1 (2013-14) due to constant growth
in the turnover figures and reduction of = 188.87 crore in the debts of SPSUs from & 462.76
crore (2009-10) to ¥ 273.89 crore (2012-13). The decrease in the debts was mainly due to

14 Turnover of working SPSUs as per the latest finalised accounts as on 30 September of respective year.


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

repayment of loans (€ 182.21 crore) by three SPSUs!> during 2010-11 to 2012-13. The
percentage of return on capital employed had increased from 3.38 per cent (2009-10) to
5.24 per cent (2011-12) but decreased to 4.30 per cent in 2012-13 due to significant losses
(₹ 7.05 crore) incurred by State Bank of Sikkim. It, however, remained around the same
(4.36 per cent) during the year 2013-14.

3.1.20 The State Government had not formulated (September 2014) any dividend policy
regarding payment of minimum dividend by SPSUs. As per their latest finalised accounts
as on 30 September 2014, three!® SPSUs earned an aggregate profit of € 3.69 crore but only
one SPSU! declared dividend of € 0.51 crore.

3.1.21. The Companies Act 1956/Companies Act, 2013 is not extended to the State of
Sikkim. The Government Companies in Sikkim are registered under the Registration of
Companies Act, 1961 and the Statutory Corporations are governed under the proclamation
of the erstwhile Chogyal (King) of Sikkim. The table below provides the details of progress
made by working SPSUs in finalisation of accounts by September 2014.

fou | os |
28
> है
i 11

Table 3.1.8

Number of Working SPSUs.

1. 1
Number of accounts finalised during
the year

Average arrears per SPSU (3/1) 2.50
Number of Working SPSUs with
arrears in accounts

6.

Extent of arrears (in years | 100०4 |

3.1.22 The table above indicates that the SPSUs were able to finalise only five accounts
during 2013-14. During the period from October 2013 to September 2014, out of eight
working SPSUs, one SPSUs!” finalised total three accounts, two SPSUs”? finalised only
one year account each and remaining five SPSUs”! did not finalise any of the accounts.

It may be observed that as of September 2014, out of total 21 arrear accounts relating to 8
SPSUs, 10 arrear accounts pertain to 2 SPSUs (namely, Sikkim Poultry Development
Corporation Limited and Sikkim Hatcheries Limited) functioning under Animal Husbandry

35 Sikkim Industrial Development and Investment Corporation Limited, Sikkim Power Development Corporation Ltd.

and Sikkim Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes Development Corporation Ltd.)
16S). No.A-4, 4-6 and B-8 of Appendix 3.1.2.

17 SIDICO for the year 2012-13.

28 Including three accounts of one company (SI. No. C-14 of Appendix-3.1.2) which became non-working during

2011-12 with other two companies (SI, No.C-12 & C-13 of Appendix-3.1.2).

Sikkim Tourism Development Corporation Lid.

20 Sikkim Power Development Corporation .Sikkim Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes
Development Corporation Ltd.

21 Sikkim Poultry Development Corporation Limited and Sikkim Hatcheries Limited, Sikkim Industrial Development
and Investment Corporation, State Bank of Sikkim, State Trading Corporation of Sikkim.


Chapter III: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings)

and Veterinary Services Department each having arrears of five accounts. The delay in
finalisation of accounts of the working SPSUs was due to delay in compilation/adoption of
accounts by the Board of Directors of respective SPSUs.

3.1.23 The State Government had invested = 0.18 crore”? (Grants) in one working
SPSU* during the year for which their accounts had not been finalised. Delay in
finalisation of accounts might result in risk of fraud and leakage of public money.

3.1.24 The administrative departments have the responsibility to oversee the activities of
these entities and to ensure that the accounts are finalised and adopted by these SPSUs
within the prescribed period. Though the concerned administrative departments of the State
Government were informed every quarter by the audit about the arrears in finalisation of
accounts, no remedial measures were taken to clear the backlog of accounts in a time bound
manner.

In view of the arrear position discussed above, it is recommended that the
Government may impress upon respective SPSUs to expedite the process of
finalisation of accounts and bring them upto date.

3.1.25 There were seven non-working SPSUs (six Government Companies and one
Statutory Corporation) as on 31 March 2014. None of these non-working SPSUs have
commenced liquidation process. The numbers of non-working SPSUs at the end of each of
the previous five years are given below.

Table 3.1.9

No. of non-working Companies मा छा एकता

| आई ee es हऋ|

The stages of closure in respect of non-working SPSUs are given below.
Table 3.1.10

Total No. of non-working SPSUs 1 6 6 री ऊऋ खऊझऊझऋऊछऊऊऊ7

2... Closure, i.e. closing orders/instructions issued | 24
but liquidation process not yet started.

No Company/Corporation was, however, wound up during 2013-14. The Government may
consider either winding up or revival of these seven non-working SPSUs.

Sikkim Poultry Development Corporation Limited.

Sikkim Poultry Development Corporation Limited.

Sikkim Jewels Limited, Sikkim Time Corporation Limited and Sikkim Precision Industries Limited, Sikkim Flour
Mills Limited. And Chandmari Workshop and Automobiles Limited.

Sikkim Mining Corporation.


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

3.1.26 Three working Companies”® forwarded their five audited accounts relating to
earlier years to the Principal Accountant General during the year 2013-147’. Out of these,
four accounts were selected for supplementary audit and in respect of one year’s accounts
of SABCCO, non-review certificates had been issued. The audit reports of statutory
auditors and the supplementary audit of CAG indicate that the quality of maintenance of
accounts needs to be improved substantially. The details of aggregate money value of
comments of statutory auditors and CAG are given below.

Table 3.1.11

|_1. | Increase in loss 2
2. | Increase in profit
| 1! |

Decrease in loss
—
Non-disclosure of material
facts
——— | या पण

4 4.04 37 84
LT tse - | 58041 - |

3.1.27 During the year, out of total five accounts finalised by three SPSUs, the statutory
auditors had given unqualified certificates for three accounts and qualified certificates for
two accounts. Additionally, CAG also qualified four accounts during the supplementary
audit.

3.1.28 Some of the important comments in respect of accounts of the SPSUs audited
during 2013-14 are stated below.

Sikkim Power Development Corporation Limited (2012-13)

> The Company has shown assets held for disposal at its book value instead of at
realisable value. Due to this value of assets was overstated by % 0.06 crore with
corresponding understatement of Net Loss for the year.

> Due to inclusion of the value of land under Capital Work in Progress, Land account
was understated by हैं 0.52 crore and Capital Work-in-progress was overstated to the
same extent.

> The company has not made provision towards unrecovered mobilisation advance of
₹ 1.21 crore due since the year 2008 from a contractor who failed to execute the
work. Due to non-provision for doubtful debts, Advances Account was overstated
and Net loss for the year was understated to the extent of f 1.21 crore each.

© Sikkim Tourism and Development Corporation Limited, Sikkim Power Development Corporation Limited and Sikkim
Industrial Development and Investment Corporation Limited (SIDICO).
27 During the period October 2013 to September 2014.

a


Chapter III: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings)

Sikkim Tourism Development Corporation Limited (2012-13)

> Non provision for doubtful loans and advances has resulted in overstatement of
current assets, loans and advances with corresponding overstatement of profit for
the year by = 0.04 crore.

> The consolidated accounts for the year 2012-13 did not include the accounts of Heli-

service, which had incurred loss of % 0.33 crore during the financial year and had
accumulated loss of = 1.34 crore. The account of Heli-service has been maintained
separately and audited by the same auditor. The above facts have also not been
mentioned in the notes on accounts of the consolidated accounts.

3.1.29 During the course of audit in 2013-14, recoveries of € 14.15 crore were pointed out
to the Management of various PSUs. As against this, however, no recovery was made by
the PSUs during 2013-14.

3.1.30 The following table shows the status of placement of various Separate Audit
Reports (SARs) issued by the CAG on the accounts of Statutory Corporations in the
Legislature by the Government.

Table 3.1.12

2008-09 to

Concerned administrative

कर department delayed forwarding
of SARs for placement in
jon of | 2007-08 | 22011) | May 2014 Legislature.

Delay in placement of SARs weakens the legislative control over Statutory Corporations
and dilutes the latter’s financial accountability. The Government should ensure prompt
placement of SARs in the legislature.

3.1.31 During the year 2013-14, Government of Sikkim had not disinvested its equity
shareholding in any of the SPSUs.



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

The State Trading Corporation of Sikkim (Corporation) functioned as a canalising agency

for all procurement of the various Departments of the Government of Sikkim, besides
rendering agency services to Indian Oil Corporation Limited for retail distribution of
Liquefied Petroleum Gas. The Corporation was exclusively authorised to procure
standard/branded material of certain specified items directly from the manufacturers and
maintain sufficient stocks so as to make the stock available to various Departments in
minimum delivery time. The Corporation, however, largely resorted to the commission
business wherein goods were procured based on the indents of the Departments and
involved direct delivery of goods by supplier to the Departments concerned. Performance
Audit on the functioning of the Corporation for the period 2009-10 to 2013-14 showed that
the Corporation was not efficiently discharging its role as canalising agency. The following
are the main highlights of the Audit:

The Corporation largely resorted to commission business wherein procurements
were made based on the indents received from the Departments and hence, the
benefits of bulk purchases could not be availed.

(Paragraph 3.2.7.1)

The Corporation failed to minimise the delivery time in absence of effective follow-
up for timely supply of material and non-imposition of penalty on the suppliers for
delayed supplies.

(Paragraph 3.2.7.4.1)

The Corporation did not follow tender procedures in procurement of major items
of materials in violation of the provisions of Sikkim Financial Rules. It incurred
avoidable expenditure (€ 2.51 crore) on procurements due to reasons like, failure to
avail full supply of material within the validity of supply order, improper tender
evaluation for fixation of annual supply rate, non-availing of the benefits of Excise
Duty exemption and failure to restrict the price against delayed supplies to the lower
of the contracted price and prevailing market prices.

(Paragraphs 3.2.7.2; 3.2.7.2.1; 3.2.7.2.2; 3.2.7.3.1 and 3.2.7.3.3)

The Corporation did not prepare annual budgets of the projections on the estimated
receipts and expenditure in absence of which, the Management could not effectively
monitor the actual financial performance of the Corporation. There was also no
effective system for timely realisation of dues.

(Paragraphs 3.2.7.5.1 to 3.2.7.5.3)


Chapter IIT: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings)

The Corporation failed in complying with the provisions of Acts/Rules which led to
short/non collection of VAT, Cess and Service tax (₹ 2.04 crore) and avoidable
payment of income tax (¥ 0.30 crore).

The internal control system of the Corporation with regard to holding/accounting
of inventory and control over cash collection/remittance was weak causing instances
of shortages (% 2.49 crore) in stocks as well as unauthorised retention/defalcation of
cash by its employees.

(Paragraph 3.2.7.8.3)

3.2.1. The State Trading Corporation of Sikkim (Corporation) was established (1972)
under the Proclamation”® of the erstwhile Chogyal of Sikkim with the main objective of
promoting external and internal trade in Sikkim. To attain the objectives, the Corporation
was to carry out various activities including purchasing, holding, stocking, sale, export,
import and transportation of any kind of materials within the State. Subsequently, the
Government of Sikkim (GoS) had exclusively authorised (February 2010) the Corporation
to deal with certain specified items of materials (viz. Iron & Steel materials, Cement, Office
Furniture, G.I. Pipes, GCI Sheets, Vehicles, Tyres, Battery, GI/ Barbed wires, Medical and
office equipment, etc.) required from time-to-time by various Departments of GoS. The
Corporation was accordingly required to procure the standard/branded material of specified
items directly from the manufacturers and maintain sufficient stocks so as to make the stock
available to various Departments in minimum delivery time.

The Corporation was functioning under the administrative control of the Commerce and
Industries Department of GoS. The Corporation is managed by a Board of Directors
consisting of the Chairman, one Managing Director (MD) and five directors nominated by
GoS. As on 31 March 2014, all the five directors, MD and the Chairman were in position.
Apart from the above, an Advisor had also been appointed by the GoS since 1996. The MD
has been delegated with full administrative powers and is assisted by four Senior General
Managers in carrying out day to day affairs of the Corporation. The organisational structure
of the Corporation is given in Appendix 3.2.1.

3.2.2 At present the main activities of the Corporation are to act as a canalising agency
for all purchases made by various Departments of the State Government besides rendering
agency services to Indian Oil Corporation Limited (IOC) for retail distribution of Liquefied

28 State Trading Corporation of Sikkim Proclamation of 1972.


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Petroleum Gas (LPG). The Corporation performed trading activities involving direct
purchase and sales of goods (direct trading) as well as commission sales (indirect trading)
wherein goods were procured for and on behalf of the Departments against their respective
indents. The trading activities are performed mainly by the Head Office at Gangtok.
Corporation’s main source of operational revenue is income generated from direct trading
activities as well as the commission earned against indirect”? trading business. The
Corporation has two unit offices respectively at Jorethang and Kolkata. While Jorethang
unit was engaged in trading activities (including LPG distribution), Kolkata unit looked
after liaison work, protocol and welfare activities on behalf of the GoS. Details of the
procurement of major items made at these units during the five years from 2009-10 to 2013-
14 have been summarised in Appendix 3.2.2.

3.2.3. The performance of the Corporation was last reviewed and included in the Report
of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended 31 March 2006. The
PAC discussed the audit findings and made two recommendations. The details of PAC’s
recommendations and compliance of the Corporation there against have been brought out
under paragraph 3.2.8.

The present Performance Audit (PA) covered the activities of the Corporation for the period
from 2009-10 to 2013-14. For the purpose of PA, the detailed examination of records of
the two units as well as Head office of the Corporation was carried out. A sample size of
30 per cent of the total value of six*® major items under both direct and commission
business activities were selected for detailed examination based on the value of
procurement orders by using random sampling*!.

3.2.4 The audit objectives of the PA were to assess whether:

> the Corporation regulated the trading activities in an efficient and effective manner
by drawing advantage of bulk purchase and minimising delivery time;

> fund management was efficient and effective;

> the Corporation complied with provisions of applicable Laws/Rules/Regulations;
> human resource management was efficient and effective; and

> monitoring, evaluation and internal control mechanism including internal audit

were effective.

29
30

Commission business.
Iron & Steel, Cement, Bitumen, Vehicles, Office Equipment & Furniture and LPG and accessories.
31 Application of Random numbers



Chapter IIT: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings)

3.2.5 The audit criteria used for assessing the performance of the Corporation against the
above audit objectives were derived from the following:

> Sikkim Financial Rules (SFR)

> Government orders authorising the Corporation to deal in specific items

> Established practices of Fund management
>

Provisions of Proclamation of erstwhile Chogyal of Sikkim, Income Tax Act,
Service tax, Sikkim Value Added Tax Act and other applicable
Laws/Rules/Regulations

Vv

Sikkim Government Services Rules

> Established practices and procedures for monitoring, evaluation and internal control
mechanism

3.2.6 The methodology adopted for attaining the audit objective consisted of explaining
audit objectives to top management in the Entry Conference (01 March 2014), analysis of
data/records with reference to audit criteria, examination of annual accounts, etc., of the
Corporation as well as Agenda/Minutes of the BoD, interaction with the Corporation
officials, raising of audit queries, issuing (August 2014) of draft audit report to the
Management/GoS for comments. The draft audit report was also discussed (16 October
2014) with the representatives of the Corporation/GoS in the Exit conference. The formal
replies of the Corporation to the draft report as well as the views expressed by the
representatives of the Corporation/GoS in the Exit conference have been taken into
consideration while finalising the Report. Formal replies of GoS, however, had not been
received (October 2014).

3.2.7 The Audit findings relating to the PA are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.

Audit obj

Regulation of the trading activities for efficient and economic functioning.

3.2.7.1 The Corporation was the canalising agency for all procurements of materials on
behalf of various Departments of the GoS. For discharging the role of canalising agency,
the Corporation was required to maintain sufficient stock of standard/ branded materials
procured directly from manufacturers. Government Departments while submitting their
indents were required to make advance payments for enabling the Corporation to initiate
the procurement process. During the scrutiny of records audit observed that the Corporation
largely resorted to commission business, wherein procurements were made based on the
indents of the Departments and involved direct delivery of goods by the suppliers to the



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Departments concerned and hence, the benefits of bulk purchases could not be availed.
Under commission business, the turnover of four items* test checked in Audit constituted
53.55 to 89.34 per cent of the total turnover of the Corporation recorded during the period
2009-10 to 2013-14.

Procurement based on quotations/rate enquiry

3.2.7.2 As per SFR, all purchases valuing more than = 10 lakh are to be made through
tendering after giving wide publicity in leading newspapers. The Government departments
and public sector undertakings also adopt the contract rates prescribed by the Director
General (Supply & Disposal) (DGS&D) from time to time as parameters for procurement
of goods and material. It was, however, observed that the Corporation did not follow the
tendering procedure prescribed under SFR in any of the test checked 56 Supply Orders
(SOs) (valued at € 80.74 crore) each valuing above = 10 lakh placed during the PA period.
On the contrary, the Corporation procured Cement, GCI sheets, TMT bars, etc., based on
quotations/rate enquiry instead of competitive bidding. Further, during the period under
review, the Corporation had not made any procurement under DGS&D route. Examination
of records revealed instances of incurring avoidable/additional expenditure on
procurements which were mainly due to failure to take price advantage, delay in placing
SOs, etc. as discussed below.

Avoidable extra burden in procurement of cement

3.2.7.2.1 (i) The Corporation placed (September 2010) a SO for procurement of 5,000 MT
cement valuing = 2.70 crore on ACC Cements Ltd (ACC) at their offered rates*? with
validity up to 31 December 2010. The Corporation was to make advance payment to ACC
before the expiry of validity of the offer for availing supply at the agreed rate. It was
observed that, despite having a fund off 3.49 crore advanced by the indenting Departments,
the Corporation could procure 500 MT only within the validity of the offer. The remaining
quantity of cement (4,500 MT) was procured by the Corporation at higher price after the
validity (December 2010) of the offer leading to additional expenditure of = 22.32 lakh in
procurement of cement.

(ii) In other two instances*, the Corporation incurred avoidable additional expenditure of
= 10.16 lakh in procurement of cement due to placing of SOs at higher rate by ignoring the
lowest rate obtained in the rate enquiry. The reason for ignoring the lowest rate was,
however, not on record.

Further, it was noticed that, in 22 out of 50 cases test checked by Audit, the Corporation
had allowed upward revision in cement prices to local suppliers on account of hike in excise
duty/ transportation charges. Audit, however, observed that the actual supplies in all 22
cases were delayed by the suppliers by 16 to 279 days of the scheduled dates of delivery.
As the upward revision in duty/transportation had occurred after the scheduled period of
delivery, the suppliers were not entitled to claim price hike on this account. The

Cement, Iron and Steel, vehicles and office equipment & furniture.
33 F265, F255 and रैं 258 respectively for Gangtok, Jorethang and Chisopani.

34 $0 (dated 26.02.2011) for 44,000 bags placed with Birla Cement and SO dated 20.02.2011 for 50,000 bags of
Lafarge Cements.



Chapter IIT: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings)

Corporation, however, allowed price revision of € 9.85 lakh in respect of SOs issued during
the period August 2009 to March 2010.

The Management in reply stated that even though bulk order was placed, lifting of cement
was restricted to then requirement and storage space available with the Department.

The plea of storage constraints is not acceptable in view of the fact that the Corporation
had been simultaneously placing (August 2009 to January 2010) SOs with different
suppliers to ensure the flow and timely supply of cement to the Departments. In the instant
case, however, huge indent quantities remained pending for supply.

Additional burden in procurement of TMT steel

3.2.7.2.2 (i) The Corporation, against the indents of Human Resource Development
Department (HRDD), placed (05 May 2010) four SOs*> on M/s Dinesh Enterprises (DE)
for procurement of 871.67 MT of TMT bars at average rate of  44,003/MT to be delivered
at various destinations* within 60 days (4 July 2014) of placing the SOs. The supplier
however, failed to commence the supply within the stipulated delivery period and
consequently the delivery period was extended till December 2010. The firm supplied a
total quantity of 678.67 MT during the period from August 2010 to February 2011 and
balance quantity of 193 MT remained undelivered despite persuasion by the Corporation.

During extension of delivery time allowed to the supplier, the Corporation placed (22 and
23 August 2010) three 5097 for procurement of the similar items of materials with other
firms at = 37,048/MT which was much lower than the rate paid to DE during extended
period of SOs. Since identical material items were available with other suppliers at lower
rates, the Corporation should have either cancelled the SOs with DE and included the
quantity in the newly placed SOs or revised the original SO price to the lower price while
allowing extension of delivery time to DE. Thus, failure of the Corporation to exercise
either of the prudent options resulted in extending of unjustified benefit to the supplier
causing avoidable burden on the exchequer to the extent of € 22.59 lakh** for the supply of
357.894 MT*? made during the period August-November 2010.

The Management replied (October 2014) that there may be rare case when market rate was
lower but most of the time the market rate was higher than the approved rate.

The reply is not acceptable in view of the fact that the Management should have taken note
of the lower market prices prevailing at the time of allowing extension of delivery period
and acted appropriately to protect the interest of the Corporation.

35 453.18 MT TMT bars @ ₹ 44,486 per MT; 318.49 MT @ % 43,361; 60047 @ % 44,313 and 40MT @ @ 43,188.

Gangtok Jorethang and Chisopani.

2” With M/s Adhunik Industries, M/s Anmol Enterprises and United Traders for 330 MT, 336.10 MT and 309.9MT of
TMT bars @ % 37,221; % 37,221 and @ 37,048 respectively.

38 The excess amount paid over and above the then prevailing price for 357.894 MT worked out to 357.894MT*® 6,313.

2° The money value of para restricted for 357.894 MT of material procured during August - November 2010 as the SOs
placed after November 2010 were at higher price than that paid to DE.



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Procurement of GCI sheets at higher price

3.2.7.2.3. The Corporation placed (19 June 2013) SO for procurement of 192000 pieces of
GCI Sheets at the rate of ¥ 754.62 per piece with M/s Vinod Enterprises (VE), Gangtok. It
was observed that at the time of placement of SO on VE, the Corporation had a valid offered
rate of = 734 per piece obtained against an already initiated (April 2013) tender enquiry
which was lower than the rate allowed to VE. The Corporation, however, did not place any
fresh SO against the tender enquiry.

After commencement of supply, the Corporation asked the supplier to revise the price to =
734 per piece. But, the supplier refused the request of the Corporation and on completion
of supply claimed the price as per the SO rate.

After being pointed out by Audit, however, the Management had restricted (May 2014) the
payment to the supplier based on the lower rate (¥ 734 per piece). Hence, at the instance
of Audit, additional burden to the extent off 39.59 lakh on the indenting Departments could
be avoided in the purchase transaction.

Additional financial burden to Department due to levy of handling charges

3.2.7.2.4. The Corporation, apart from its profit margin of three per cent, included € 3 per
bag in selling price of cement towards charges for unloading and loading (handling)
operations carried out in its godowns. It was, however, observed that the Corporation had
irregularly claimed handling charges in respect of cements directly delivered by the
suppliers to the site/stock point of the indenting Departments even though the delivery did
not involve any handling operations. Thus, collecting additional charges in respect of sales
made during the period 2010-12, without doing any handling operations resulted in undue
gain to the Corporation with resultant additional financial burden to the indenting
Departments to the tune of € 10.12 lakh.

Management while accepting the facts stated (October 2014) that the practice of charging
handling charges on direct delivery to Departments by suppliers has been discontinued.

Procurement by fixing annual rates

3.2.7.3. The Corporation was to follow purchase procedures prescribed in the SFR for
procurement of goods. According to Rules 127 and 130 of the SFR, all purchases above
₹ 10 lakh are to be made through tendering only after giving wide publicity in leading
newspapers. With a view to establish annual contract rates for procurement of DI and GI
pipes, steel bridge materials, etc., for further supply to various Departments, the
Corporation periodically invites open tenders from suppliers/manufacturers. Lowest rates
obtained in such tenders were approved as the procurement price which remained valid for
procurement to be made from all the participated tenderers for a period of one/two year/s,
as the case may be. During examination of records Audit observed instances of non-
compliance with SFR as well as deficiencies in tender evaluation/approval of prices, etc.,
as discussed below.

n


Chapter IIT: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings)

Avoidable loss due to improper scrutiny of tender documents

3.2.7.3.1 The Corporation invited (March 2011) open tenders for supply of DI pressure
pipes of various diameters. In response, 23 bids were received. It was observed that all the
bidders had quoted their prices inclusive of Central Sales Tax (CST) component at 2 per
cent excepting one bidder [M/s Jindal Saw Limited (JSL)] who had quoted their prices
inclusive of CST at the rate of 5 per cent. Thus, it was necessary to bring down the CST
component included in the bid of JSL to 2 per cent so as to make the offers of all bidders
comparable. It was, however, observed that while evaluating the bids, the Corporation did
not adjust the bids of JSL for the higher CST component. As a result, the L1 rates as
approved by the Corporation for many items were higher than the rates offered by JST if
considered at CST of 2 per cent. Thus, due to improper evaluation of tender documents,
the Corporation lost the opportunity of getting a better rate for procurement of the above
items and resulted in avoidable extra expenditure of = 67.72 lakh.

The Management stated (October 2014) that even after computation of CST at two per cent,
the rates of JSL were on higher side for all items excepting one.

The reply is not acceptable as the rates of JSL as worked out after making adjustments for
higher CST were lower than L1 rates approved by the Corporation.

Fixation of low price of tender form

3.2.7.3.2 As per Rule 127 of SFR, price of tender forms was to be fixed based on the
estimated value of supply order with reference to the slab rates prescribed thereunder. The
Corporation, however, had not been fixing the price of tender forms as per the aforesaid
rules. In many cases, price of tender forms was fixed and collected at lower rates than the
prescribed. Due to this, there was short collection of an aggregate amount of € 32.90 lakh*®
against price of tender forms.

The Management stated (October 2014) that the tenders invited were for establishment of
procurement prices on annual basis and not specifically against any indent quantity. As the
annual procurement value could not be estimated in advance, price of tender forms was
tentatively fixed.

The reply is not acceptable as the Corporation should have made an analysis of the past
trends to arrive at the probable value of procurement and fixed the price of tender form
accordingly.

Failure to avail of eligible excise duty exemption

3.2.7.3.3 The Government of India (Gol) had extended excise duty exemption’! to pipes
and pipe fittings’? needed in water projects for delivery of water from its source to the plant
and from the plant to the first storage point. For claiming the exemption, a certificate from
the district authorities to the effect that such goods are cleared for the intended use of the

Worked out based on the value of purchases made during the corresponding previous period with applicable slab
rates of cost of tender.

4! Vide Sr. No.7 of the notification No. 6/2006 - C.E dated 1.3.2006; as amended from time to time.

Pipes of outer diameter 20 cm and above from 01 March 2007 and to pipes of outer diameter 10cm and above from
04 December 2009.

B


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

concerned project was to be produced to the Central Excise Department. During 2009-12,
the Corporation had procured DI and GI pipes valuing € 19.33 crore for implementation of
various water supply projects of GoS, which were eligible for excise duty exemption by
Gol. It was, however, observed that the Corporation could not avail the benefits of duty
exemption amounting to हैं 1.18 crore on the said procurements due to non-submission of
required documents to the Central Excise Department.

The Management stated (October 2014) that materials procured in respect of all drinking
water projects were under exempted category.

The reply was not to the point and it does not address the issue of Corporation’s failure in
availing the benefits of duty exemption in respect of these cases.

Monitoring/Procedural lapses

3.2.7.4 As the canalising agency for all procurements of the Departments, the
Corporation was to arrange the supply at the economic rates by fully meeting the indent
specifications, quantity, time, etc. For procuring items other than those for which annual
approved rates were available, the Corporation placed SOs with suppliers after making rate
enquiries. Since in most of the cases materials were directly despatched by the suppliers to
the consignee Departments, the Corporation was required to ensure that the suppliers
delivered the materials within delivery schedule and as per indented quality/specification,
etc. Audit, however, noticed deficiencies/lapses on the part of the Management in
monitoring of supply and following of the prescribed procedures as discussed in
succeeding paragraphs.

Delay in supply of materials

3.2.7.4.1_ The Corporation was to supply the materials indented by the Government
Departments within the stipulated time frame. The terms of the SOs provide for levy
of penalty on suppliers for delayed delivery of material, as deemed fit by the
Corporation. Thus, the SOs did not contain any specific/definite penalty to be imposed
on suppliers for delayed delivery. In the test check of procurement transactions Audit
noticed delays ranging between 122 days and 910 days in executing indents/SOs by the
Corporation/ suppliers in 7 items under 21 SOs. This delays in supply of materials in turn
resulted in delay in execution of respective projects of the indenting Departments. The
delays in supply, as observed, were mainly due to inadequate follow up on part of the
Corporation for prompt execution of orders by the suppliers. The Management never
invoked the penalty clause as per the agreed terms of SOs for non-supply or delayed supply
of materials by the suppliers.

The Management accepted the audit observation and stated (October 2014) that on few
occasions, the delivery of material is deferred based on the request of the indenting
Departments.

The reply is not acceptable as the Corporation needs to take appropriate penal action against
the suppliers wherever the delays in supplies were on their part. Failure of the Corporation
in imposing penalty for delayed supplies in any of the 21 test checked cases raised doubts
on the action of the Corporation.



Chapter IIT: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings)

Procurement of materials disregarding Rules/Government order

3.2.7.4.2. As authorised by the GoS, all procurements required for the Departments were
to be made through the Corporation. In the case of procurement and installation of CCTV
and Sensor Embedded Door System in its Assembly Complex, however, the Sikkim
Legislative Assembly Secretariat (SLAS) overlooked the mandate of the Corporation. The
SLAS, through its own arrangement for quotations, finalised rate as well as Supplier by
itself and finally entrusted (September 2010) the Corporation for effecting the physical
transaction. The Corporation carried out the procurement accordingly without ascertaining
the reasonableness of the rate and genuineness of the selection of the supplier. The
Committee of SLAS which scrutinised quotations also did not have a nominee member
from the Corporation which was against Rule 127 of SFR.

By relying and placing SO at the rate and with the supplier as fixed by SLSA, the
Corporation could not ensure the reasonableness of the rate and genuineness of the supplier.
Being the authorised and specialised agency for Government procurements, the selection
of supplier and finalisation of rate should have been done by the Corporation.

Audit objective-2

To assess efficiency and effectiveness of Corporation's financial management.

3.2.7.5 Prudent financial management requires that all funds due for receipt are
expeditiously realised, available funds are effectively deployed for day-to-day operations
and the surplus funds, if any, are invested judiciously to earn maximum interest income.
Examination of records of the Corporation revealed that the Management had neither
devised any policy for efficient fund management nor ensured expeditious realisation of
dues or investment of short term surplus funds in a prudent manner. The deficiencies
noticed in the financial management of the Corporation have been discussed in succeeding
paragraphs.

Budget not prepared

3.2.7.5.1 Preparing a budget is an essential component of responsible fund management.
It serves as a tool for financial management control. Further, as per clause 16 of the
Proclamation, the Board of Directors of the Corporation was required to prepare budget on
annual basis for the next financial year showing the projections made on estimated receipts
and expenditure of that year. The Corporation however, did not prepare any budget
outlining annual activities for any of the years covered in Audit (2009-14). Hence, in
absence of proper budgeting system, it was difficult for the Management to effectively
monitor the actual financial performance of the Corporation with reference to the targets
fixed.

The Management assured (October 2014) to initiate process for preparation of budgets to
establish a good financial management system in the Corporation.

35


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Non-realisation of outstanding dues from various Departments

3.2.7.5.2 As per the generally agreed payment terms indenting Departments were required
to pay 90 per cent of the value of the goods indented as advance to the Corporation and
balance 10 per cent immediately on receipt of full quantity of the indented goods. It was
however, observed that the indenting Departments were depositing the advances to the
extent of 50 per cent or less of the value of goods indented contrary to the agreed terms of
payment and balance amounts were also being paid belatedly.

Examination of records of the Corporation revealed that, as on 317 March 2014, an amount
of = 33.00 crore were recoverable from various departments/parties against supply/
procurement orders already executed by the Corporation. Of this, हैं 31.55 crore constituting
95.61 per cent of the total receivable amount was receivable from 15 departments. The
Management, however, did not conduct any age-wise analysis of the long outstanding dues
and hence the period of pendency of the amount was not available for analysis.

During examination of records of the Corporation, it was further noticed that there were
unconfirmed receivable and payable balances to the extent of हैं 1.66 crore*? and
₹ 2.65 crore respectively in the books of Kolkata unit in respect of transactions carried out
prior to 1999-2000. Although, these balances remained in the books for the last 15 years,
the Management did not take any action to realise/settle the accounts. The failure of the
Management in closing/settling the long pending account balances has resulted in depiction
of unrealistic financial position of the Corporation to that extent.

The statutory auditors in their reports for previous two years ending 2010-11 had, inter alia,
reported that sundry debtors’ balances are subject to confirmation/reconciliation. For the
past five years the Management did not confirm/reconcile yearly closing book balances of
the debtors.

The Management replied (October 2014) that allout efforts are being taken to recover the
dues and carry out age wise analysis of dues with the help of statutory auditors.
Unrecovered dues against employees/former officials

3.2.7.5.3, As on 31 March 2014, an amount of 16.96 lakh was pending for recovery from
employees (® 12.19 lakh) and former Chairpersons/officials (¥ 4.77 lakh) of the Corporation.
These dues include advances of € 9.25 lakh pending for recovery for more than five years.
Audit observed that the Management did not effectively follow-up the issue with the
concerned officials/former Chairpersons and had also not initiated any legal action for
recovery of long pending advances.

The Management stated (October 2014) that, as there is no chance of recovery of due from
former Chairpersons/officials, the amount would be written off after approval of the BoD.
It further stated that action has been initiated for recovery of the balance amount.

The reply is not acceptable in view of the fact that the Management did not act to avail the
opportunity of recovering the dues (र 4.77 lakh) pertaining to outgoing Chairpersons/
officials at the time of final settlement of their claims.

43 From more than 20 parties.

%6


Chapter IIT: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings)

Inefficient fund management

3.2.7.5.4 The funds received from indenting Departments and not immediately required
for payment were being parked in short term fixed deposits so as to derive some interest
income for the Corporation. The Management however, failed to exercise desirable vigil to
make fruitful investment of said funds throughout the period. Examination of the records
of the Corporation revealed that fund ranging between % 0.20 crore and & 1.05 crore
remained idle in the current accounts of Jorethang branch for periods ranging from 14 to
370 days causing a potential interest loss of = 3.86 lakh. Similarly, test check of balances
of three months (April to June) during each of the five year period (2009 to 2014) relating
to six bank accounts maintained by Head Office (HO) revealed idling of balances ranging
between & 0.21 crore and 1.66 crore for 17 to 69 days which caused potential interest loss
of 4.59 lakh.

Test check of bank remittance details further revealed delays of 3 to 59 days on part of the
banks in crediting/collection of cheques/drafts deposited by the Corporation causing
interest loss on this account amounting to हैं 3.27 lakh. The delays in realisation of
cheques/drafts were mainly due to failure on the part of Management in following up the
issue with banks. The Management also failed in claiming of interest from banks for the
delayed periods in any of the cases.

Thus, due to inefficient fund Management and lack of effective follow up with the banks
for prompt realisation of cheques there was interest loss to the tune of = 11.72 lakh.

The Management while accepting the audit observations in respect of Jorethang branch
stated (October 2014) that delay in collection of cheques was due to non-availability of
core-banking facility with Corporation’s banker (State Bank of Sikkim).

The reply is not acceptable as Corporation needs to monitor and pursue the issue with the
bank for avoiding delays in realisation of cheques and also claim for interest loss on this
account wherever necessary.

Compliance isions of applicable Laws/Rules/Regulations.

3.2.7.6 The Corporation, being a State Public Sector Undertaking is required to comply
with the provisions of various State acts and rules [including Sikkim Value Added Tax Act,
2005 (SVAT), Sikkim Ecology Fund and Environment Cess Act 2008 (SEFE Cess Act),
State Trading Corporation of Sikkim Employees Provident Fund Rules (Rules), etc.] in the
normal course of its operations. The applicability of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (IT Act)
was also extended to the State of Sikkim with effect from 1 April 2008 and hence, the
Corporation was required to abide with the provisions of the IT Act from the said date.
Audit noticed instances of non-compliance with the provisions of various laws, rules and
regulation by the Corporation causing significant financial losses as discussed in the
following paragraphs.

n


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Short levy of VAT and Cess due to adoption of incorrect sales value

3.2.7.6.1_ The Corporation performed its activities under direct trading and commission
business. The Corporation levied Value Added Tax (VAT) and Cess against commission
sales as per the applicable rates prescribed under SVAT. As per definition of sale given in
SVAT 2005 and SEFE Cess Act, sales value for the purpose of levying VAT and Cess
included the excise duty and CST components as well as value addition on the purchase
price. As such when the Corporation effected commission sales to the indenting
Departments it had to levy VAT and Cess on the total value of sales, including the excise
duty/CST and Corporation’s margin.

Test check of 80 sales transactions, however, revealed that the Corporation levied
(February 2011 to December 2013) VAT and Cess on the base purchase price alone
(excluding excise duty, CST and its margin) due to which there was short levy of VAT and
Cess amounting to हैं 57.14 lakh and & 14.07 lakh respectively in respect of sale of goods
procured from three suppliers“ alone.

The Management stated (October 2014) that VAT/Cess is applicable on the landing cost
(basic amount plus excise duty plus CST).

The reply was, however, silent on the short levy of VAT and Cess by the Corporation
against the commission sales as pointed out by Audit.

Avoidable payment of income tax due to non-setting off of business loss

3.2.7.6.2 As per the provisions (section 72) of the Income Tax Act, 1961, an assessee is
entitled to carry forward business loss to the following assessment year(s) and set off the
same against the income of that assessment year(s) provided the assessee had filed the loss
return within the prescribed date. The Corporation filed (within due dates) loss returns for
the assessment years 2009-10 and 2010-11 showing business loss of € 91.17 lakh and
₹ 0.60 lakh respectively. For the assessment year 2011-12 the Corporation earned taxable
profit of = 1.28 crore and paid (14 January 2013) a tax of F 42.52 lakh.

It was noticed that the Corporation did not claim for setting off of the business loss of
₹ 91.77 lakh incurred in earlier assessment years against the taxable profit of € 1.28 crore
in the assessment year 2011-12. As a result, the Corporation could not avail the
benefits/savings of = 30.49 lakh against the total tax liability of 42.52 lakh (income tax,
surcharge, etc.) for the assessment year 2011-12.

The Management while accepting the facts stated (October 2014) that the business loss
would be set off and refund claimed.

The reply is not acceptable as the Corporation could have reduced the actual cash outflow
by 30.49 lakh by availing benefits of setting off of previous losses and utilised the said
amount for meeting its working capital requirements.

“4 M/s Dhariwal steel (P) Ltd, Kolkata, Indus Tubes Limited and Vishal Pipes.

7


Chapter IIT: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings)

Non-collection/payment of service tax on business auxiliary services

3.2.7.6.3 The Corporation was mainly engaged in agency business of purchase and sale
of various materials on behalf of Government Departments. This service is covered under
the definition of ‘business auxiliary services’ as given under section 65(105)(zzb) of the
Finance Act, 1994 and the commission earned by the Corporation against such services
was subject to service tax as per the applicable rates. It was, however, observed that the
Corporation did not collect and remit any service tax on commission income earned against
said services during the period covered in the PA. During the period 2009-10 to 2013-14,
the Corporation had provided services valuing = 11.97 crore on which the Corporation was
required to collect and remit the service tax of = 1.33 crore. Non-collection of service tax
by the Corporation on the commission earned during 2009-14 has resulted in loss of € 1.33
crore to the public exchequer.

The Management did not offer any comments on the observation.
Non-compliance with Corporation’s Contributory Provident Fund Rules

3.2.7.6.4 As per Rule 7(2) of the State Trading Corporation of Sikkim Employees
Provident Fund Rules (Rules), the Corporation was required to deduct employees’
contribution to the Contributory Provident Fund (CPF) from their salary and remit the same
along with Corporation’s matching contribution to the respective bank accounts of the
employees maintained and operated by the Corporation for the purpose. During
examination of records, it was noticed that the Corporation was not regular in remitting the
amount of CPF deductions along with its matching contribution to the respective bank
accounts. The delays ranging from | to 15 months were noticed on part of the Corporation
in depositing the CPF contribution in specified bank accounts during the period covered in
PA. As per clause 8(4) of the Rules, all the subscriptions to the fund entailed the interest
earning with effect from the first day of the month of transaction. Thus, non-deposit of CPF
contribution in time by the Corporation resulted in the employees being deprived of interest
amounting to हैं 2.80 lakh.

The Management, while accepting the lapses, replied (October 2014) that the delay in
remittance was due to the financial crunch and was not deliberate.

Reply confirms that the Corporation needs to prioritise the payments towards CPF dues as
it is a statutory obligation.

Non-deduction of income tax from salary of officials

3.2.7.6.5 As per section 192 of the Income Tax Act, 1961, the Corporation was liable to
deduct income tax (TDS) from salary of its employees and remit the same to Income Tax
Authorities. The Central Government, however, had exempted the Sikkimese individuals,
from payment of income tax vide section 10 (26AAA) of the Act. It was observed that even
though none of the employees at the Kolkata Unit was covered under the scope of the above
provisions of the Act, the unit office failed to deduct income tax from the salary of its
employees for the years from 2011-12 to 2013-14. In the absence of complete details,
however, the amount of TDS on this account could not be quantified.

45 Transactions for the year 2013-14 were not complete in the accounts.

७


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Management accepted the observation and stated (October 2014) that action has been
initiated for deduction and remittance of income tax.

Audit objective-4

To assess the efficiency and effectiveness of Human Resource Management.

3.2.7.7 Effective Human Resource Management (HRM) enables the employees to
contribute effectively and productively towards achieving of the overall organisational
objectives and goals. An efficient HRM also emphasises on effective utilisation of available
manpower through proper orientation/training of employees and efficient management of
their salaries/wages. During examination of records Audit observed instances of short
payment of employee benefits and absence of imparting training to the employees as
discussed below.

Short payment of retirement gratuity

3.2.7.7.1 As per the provision of Sikkim Government Services (Revised Pension) Rules
2010*°, emolument for the purpose of gratuity included dearness allowance also. The
Corporation, however, calculated retirement gratuity taking into account Basic Pay and
Grade Pay only. Due to this, there was short payment of gratuity in nine cases amounting
to = 13.46 lakh.

Management accepted the observation and stated (October 2014) that the differential
amount would be paid to the concerned employees.

Need for imparting training to employees

3.2.7.7.2 Training to employees is essential for overall success of any organisation as it
helps to address the problems relating to lack of skill and experience of staff as well as up-
dation of their knowledge so as to keep the staff abreast of the technological advancement.
Further, as the eligibility of employee for promotion in the Corporation is purely counted
on seniority basis, effective training is necessary to enable them to wield higher
responsibility.

The Corporation, however, did not have any system/programme in place for the continuous
development of skill and morale of its employees. The Management had not imparted any
training to its employees during the period under review or in the past. A general review of
the working of the personnel, especially of the lower strata, suggested the need to train
them. Many deficiencies, lapses, etc., noticed in Audit were the outcome of lack of proper
knowledge/awareness of procedures, rules, etc., on the part of employees in the subordinate
posts.

The Management accepted the facts and had assured (October 2014) to initiate necessary
steps to train the employees.

48 Which was made effective from I January2006.


Chapter IIT: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings)

To assess the effectiveness of the Monitoring, evaluation and internal control
mechanism.

3.2.7.8 Internal control provides the managements with reasonable assurance that the
Management objectives are being achieved in an efficient, effective and orderly manner. A
good system of internal control includes proper allocation of functional responsibilities and
existence of proper operating and accounting procedures so as to ensure timely recording
of accurate and reliable accounting data, safeguarding of assets, internal check in the flow
of transactions, internal audit, supervision and monitoring by the Management, ete., Audit
observed instances of grave lapses and weakness in internal control system as well as lack
of proper monitoring by the Management, etc., in performance of day-to-day operations of
the Corporation which are discussed in the followings paragraphs.

Delay in finalisation of annual accounts

3.2.7.8.1 For ensuring good corporate governance and accountability of the Management,
timely preparation of the annual financial statements and their certification is essential. As
per clause 18 of the Proclamation, the Corporation should furnish its annual audited
financial statements to the GoS within six months of closure of the respective financial
year. It was, however, observed that the Corporation had finalised (May 2013) its annual
financial statements for the years 2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11 after a delay of 44 months,
32 months and 20 months respectively from the due dates. The annual accounts for the
years 2011-12 and 2012-13 are yet (September 2014) to be finalised even though the same
were due for 24 months and 12 months respectively. Due to delay in finalisation of annual
accounts, authenticity and correctness of opening balances brought forward in the books of
accounts for the years 2012-13 and 2013-14 was not ascertainable.

The Management accepted the audit observation and had assured (October 2014) for taking
all efforts to make the accounts up to date.

Failure in follow-up for renewing Bank Guarantees (BG)

3.2.7.8.2 As a part of implementation of Accelerated Power Development and Reform
Programme in the State, the Energy and Power Department (EPD), GoS, awarded
(September 2004) work order*” for drawing of electric lines and allied works to M/s Sanjay
Kumar Agarwal (SKA), Singtam and another work order** to M/s Kaushalya Infrastructure
Development Corporation Limited Kolkata (KIDC) at their lowest quoted amount of & 4.55
crore and % 2.15 crore respectively. The terms and conditions of the work orders stipulated
for supply of materials for the works*® to be routed through the Corporation.

*” For drawing 66 KV SC line from Khamdong to Phodong and extension of additional 66 KV bay at Khamdong and
drawing of 11 KV 3 phase heavy duty line on ACSR Dog Conductor at 66/11 KV Substation at Khamdong.
48 For construction of 11 kV Heavy Duty line on DOG conductor from Rothak to Chakung and 11 kV lines associated
with new 66/11 KV Sub-station
Supply, Transportation and delivery of materials required for the execution of the project.

a


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

As per clause 2 of the agreements entered into with the contractors for supply of electrical
items worth हैं 2.57 crore, the Corporation released (June and November 2004) ₹ 1.14 crore
received from EPD to the contractors as Mobilisation Advance (MA)* against the BGs
furnished by the contractors to EPD.

During examination of records of the Corporation it was observed that none of the
contractors has supplied any material to EPD till date (September 2014) even after a lapse
of almost ten years from the release of MA. It was, however, observed that the agreement
entered into with the contractors did not stipulate delivery period and penalty to be imposed
in case of delay or non-supply of materials. The Corporation also failed to make necessary
follow-up with the EPD for timely renewal of BGs by the contractors. As a result, the BGs
furnished by contractors against MA were not renewed by them before their expiry (June
2005 and November 2005). The Corporation, however, failed to initiate any legal action
against the contractors for non-supply of materials and recovery of MA till date (September
2014). Thus, € 1.14 crore remained blocked up with potential loss of interest of = 1.01
crore™!.

In the exit conference (16 October 2014), the Management stated that the matter has been
taken up with the EPD. It also stated that the work was already completed and only
adjustment of bill was pending.

The Management, however, had not provided any documentary evidence in support of the
reply.
3.2.7.8.3 The internal control system of the Corporation with regard to holding and

accounting of inventory, control over cash collection/remittance by staff, internal
monitoring, etc., was very weak as evident from the following cases.

Table 3.2.1

The Audit witnessed physical stock
taking conducted by the Management on

‘Shortages of LPG stocks occurred despite
reporting the matter in earlier Report and

Shortage of LPG
refill cylinders at
HO and Jorethang
godowns

31 March 2014 at HO and Tadong
godowns. Audit observed __ stock
shortages of LPG cylinders. After
adjusting® the shortages pointed out in
2005-06, stock shortages occurring
thereafter works out to 18,439 Nos. of
domestic (14.2 Kg) and 1,829 Nos. of
commercial cylinders (19 Kg) at HO Gas
Section and 7,259 Nos. of domestic and

‘of commercial cylinders at

recommendation of PAC for strengthening
of internal control system with regard to
inventories. The value of the stock
shortages works out to & 1.52 crore. The
shortage in LPG cylinder stock is
primarily linked with circulation of LPG
cylinders against unauthorised/illegal
connections. The Management had not
furnished details of recovery, if any, made
against the shortages noticed.

Management replied (October 2014) that the shortage reflected is the carried forward backlog. The reply

not correct
ted eat

the shortage of LPG pointed out in the paragraph was arrived after deducting the shortage

50. %64.24 lakh to KIDC and # 49.67 lakh to SKA.

@ 9 per cent simple interest up to September 2014.

Shortages detected in 2005-06 so far was not removed from Stock Registers.
Audit did not witness physical stock verification at Jorethang.

छः


Chapter IIT: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings)

of
(other

Shortage
materials
than LPG)

Delayed
recovery/non-
recovery of value
of stock shortages
and persistent
deficiency in the
intemal — control
system

Non-maintenance
of up-to-date
stock register and
Delay it
accounting
purchase
transactions

The management did not cross verify the

book stock and physical stock at the time
of year end physical verification of
stock. Audit observed shortage of
materials to the value of = 97.39 lakh
(Appendix 3.2.3) in Tadong and HO
odowns
‘Wherever shortages of materials were
occurred, the Management was to fix
responsibility on the erring officials and
recover the value of shortages from
them, Audit, however, observed
instances of inordinate delay on the part
of the Management in fixing of
responsibility for the —_ shortages/
discrepancies of stock noticed. Even
after fixation of responsibility, there was
further delay, ranging from two to more
than five years, in recovery of the value
of shortages from the employees
responsible.

During audit (May 2014) it was noticed
that manual stock register for Cement at
Tadong was updated up to January 2012
and Stock Register at Jorethang branch
was up-dated till 2012-13. Stock register
maintained in Tally was also not
properly maintained. Many Purchase
transactions that had taken place at the
first or second quarter of the years were
accounted late or at the fag end of the

Book stock was not ascertained at the time

of physical verification in absence of
updated stock register. Due to this stock
shortages were not brought in to light
during physical verification.

Th one instance audit noticed that the
discrepancy/shortage of materials that
occurred during the tenure of an employee
was brought into notice after a lapse of
more than one and a half year from his
retirement.

Two employees™ incurred expenditure
(€ 4.85 lakh) for LPG distribution, out of
LPG sales proceeds without any
authorisation, Despite the discrepancy
being noticed in the year 2011-12, the
Management failed to fix responsibility on
the official till now (May 2014) and hence,
an amount ( 2.03 lakh) remained
unrecovered and also the expenditure
claimed to have been incurred by the
official remained unaccounted in the
books.

Audit observed negative stock balances in
Cement, TMT bars and LPG accessories
stock accounts due to failure in timely
accounting of purchase transactions.
Further, account balances of suppliers did
not reflect correct position during the
period and negative stock balances also
appeared in Tally accounts.

The Management while accepting the audit observation, stated (October 2014) that the delay were due to

delay in receipt of bills from the suppliers. 1
cases of abnormal delay of more than six months in accounting the purch:

reply is not acceptable in view of the fact that there were

ff such delay was due to non-

receipt of bills, the same indicates that there was no effective follow up with suppliers for obtaining the

bills.

Delay in
remittances of,
sales proceeds of
LPG distribution
at Jorethan;
Defalcation
Corporation’s
money

officials

Retention of
Corporation’s
money

officials

Issue of pre-

signed cheques

54 At Jorethang Branch.

Audit observed unauthorised retention
of sales proceeds by LPG distribution
staff ranging between & 0.11 lakh to
₹ 1.27 lakh for 4 to 30 days.

Cash 6.8 lakh) defalcated by officials,
prior to the year 2007 shown as cash
balance in the books of Gas Section HO

Differential LPG security amount हैं 1.54
lakh collected (during January 2013 to
June 2013) from consumers was
unauthorisedly retained by official for
more than six months.

Management issued pre-signed cheques
to Jorethang Branch to effect timely
payment to Indian Oil Corporation Ltd
(IOCL) towards supply of LPG. Some of
the cheques were not crossed,

Sales proceeds were not remitted promptly
after the distribution vehicle reported back
to the Unit. Supervising officers failed to
insist the remittance before issue of fresh
load of LPGs.

‘The amount was not recovered even after
lapse of eight years.

Despite noticing the case in August 2013,
the amount was recouped from the official
in December 2013

The Corporation should have adopted
other appropriate method for making
payment to IOCL instead of this risky
practice.


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

The Government of India notified
(September 2012) the number of
subsidised LPG cylinders to domestic
consumers as six per year (which was
later revised to 12). Since the fixing of
the subsidy cap was notified in
September 2012, the number of
subsidised cylinders to be issued in the
remaining period of the year 2012-13
should be restricted accordingly.
The Management stated (October 2014) that there was shortcoming on the part of the Corporation/IOC in
educating the Indane consumers to comply with the KYC norms which resulted in payment of the penalty.
The reply is not acceptable as it is the responsibility of the Corporation to obtain KYC details from all

Due to delay in KYC data entry, the
Corporation failed to monitor the issue as
above. As a result, Corporation issued
excess subsidised cylinders to consumers.
IOCL recovered an amount of & 15.12
lakh®® from the Corporation towards the
differential cost of excess subsidised
cylinders issued during the period from
October 2012 to December 2012.

Avoidable extra
payments due to
failure in
monitoring of
subsidised LPG

consumers and keep monitoring of subsidised cylinders issued to consumers to avoid payment of penalty of
enalty on this account.

Non-holding of Board of Directors Meeting at prescribed time intervals

3.2.7.8.4 In terms of the Proclamation of the erstwhile Chogyal of Sikkim, the Corporation
was required to convene at least four meetings of BoD a year so as to ensure effective
monitoring of Corporation’s day to day operations and timely corrective actions on
deficiencies noticed by the Management. It was however, observed that during the five year
period from April 2009 to March 2014, the BoD of the Corporation met only once (in May
2013) against the requirement of holding minimum 20 meetings. Further, on three
occasions (27 July 2009, 27 September 2010 and 07 May 2012) the BoD took decision on
specific matters through resolution by circulation, The BoD’s last meeting was held (May
2013) after a time gap of more than four years of holding of the previous meeting (March
2009). Due to non-holding of BoD meetings at prescribed time intervals, the BoD could
not effectively monitor the day to day affairs of the Corporation.

While accepting the observation, the Management stated (October 2014) that the matter
would be placed before the forthcoming BoD meeting.

Absence/necessity of internal audit system

3.2.7.8.5 Most of the deficiencies discussed above were attributable to lack of appropriate
internal checks in the flow of transactions and absence of proper supervision and
monitoring of the affairs of the Corporation. The internal control system prevailing in
respect of stock transactions was very weak and was indicative of its ineffectiveness in
controlling physical stock especially in the case of LPG refill cylinders stocks. An effective
internal audit system in the Corporation would be an aid to detect omissions/mistakes and
probable fraudulent acts on the part of employees and thus enabling the Management to
take prompt corrective and preventive actions on such incidences.

The statutory auditors in their report on the accounts for the year 2010-11°° had also
commented upon absence of an internal audit system in the Corporation commensurate
with its size and nature of activities. Considering the above, in conjunction with volume of
business and recurring irregularities being noticed in stock transactions, the Management

डे. Jorethang - ® 5,79,264 and Head Office -® 9,32,983.
56. Latest audited accounts

घर


Chapter IIT: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings)

needs to put in place a suitable internal audit system to safeguard the assets and financial
interest of the Corporation.

While accepting the audit observation, the Management stated (October 2014) that proposal
would be moved for the engagement of competent personnel in the relevant task.

Absence of effective Management Information System

3.2.7.8.6 The role of Management Information System (MIS) in an organisation is vital
as it provides support for decision making in the organisation. The system ensures
appropriate data collection from various sources and processing/providing of valuable
information to the Management. It plays a vital role in the management, administration and
operations of an organisation. On a general review of the affairs of the Corporation it was
observed that the Corporation did not have an effective MIS in place.

Periodical Performance/progress report showing the item wise/Department wise position
of indents received, SOs placed/sales made against such indents, targets and achievement
of execution of orders, indent/SO pending execution/supply, etc., were not prepared and
submitted to the top management for their appraisal.

Absence of a system for providing timely, correct and meaningful information had adverse
impact on the monitoring processes and decision making ability of the Management
causing adverse impact on the performance of the Corporation.

The Corporation had made an attempt to bring out an indent control management system
through installation of computer software. Even though the software was developed and
installed in (2009-10) with the 8:
the same was not implemented so far. Thus, the information needs of the Management were
not duly taken care of.

istance of a local software firm at a cost of = 2.24 lakh,

The Management accepted (October 2014) the facts.

3.2.8 The PAC made three recommendations® in respect of observations made on the
Corporation in the Audit Reports for the year 2001-02 and 2005-06. The recommendations
were with regard to closure of Kolkata Unit, appointment of Advisor and Inventory
management. The Corporation, however, failed to comply with the recommendations made
by PAC as discussed below.

57 Including two recommendations on the PA appeared in State Audit Report, 2005-06 and one recommendation relating
to State Audit Report 2001-02.


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

1. Loss due to delay in closure of Kolkata
unit

The Kolkata unit of the Corporation mainly
looked after liaison work, protocol and welfare
activities on behalf of the State Government.
No regular business of the Corporation was
carried out in the Unit since the year 2000. The
loss to the Corporation due to continued
operation of the Kolkata unit was brought out
in the CAG’s Audit Report for the year 2001-
02. The PAC while accepting Department’s
replies for closure of the unit had
recommended for handing over of the unit to
the Home Department.

Table 3.2.2

Despite this assurance, the Corporation continued to operate
the Kolkata unit which resulted in:

© Incurring idle expenditure on salary of six® employees
amounting to हैं 1.46 crore for the period from 2009-10 to
2013-14 despite having no regular business transactions

Unit office incurred recurring expenditure on office
maintenance, stationeries, electricity charges, etc.

Management had not taken any measures for productive
utilisation of the above idle manpower

Unit office housed in 1258 sq.ft space owned by the
Corporation in an apartment building while it owned
another building (guest house) consisting six rooms®, at
Kolkata. Since the Unit required space only to house the
staff as there were no business activities, the office could
have been shifted to one of the rooms of the Guest House
so that the office space could be leased out to earn some
income besides a sizeable curtailment in recurring
expenditure.

In reply, the Management stated (October 2014) that the loss owing to payment of salary to the employees at
the Unit is unavoidable till such time employees proceed on retirement.

The reply is not acceptable as the idle workforce in Kolkata unit could have been better utilised in Gangtok or
Jorethang unit where the operation is at a large scale. Hence, the unit in Kolkata should have been closed as per

the recommendation of the PAC.
2. Expenditure on engaging of Advisor

A reference is invited to Paragraph 7.12.8.1 of
the Audit Report for the year 2005-06, with
regard to the appointment of Advisor to the
Corporation by 008 without any enabling
provision in the Proclamation for it.

The PAC recommended that regular advice
rendered by the Advisor to the Corporation on
specific matters should be recorded and well
maintained for future guidance,

3. Shortages of materials

A reference is invited to Paragraph 7.12.6.3 of
the Audit Report for the year 2005-06, which
pointed out shortage of LPG stock valued at
1.64 crore detected in Physical verification.
PAC had recommended to gear up an efficient
and effective internal control mechanism and
to complete the reconciliation of LPG and other
related accounts for fixing accountability on
the errant officials.

* The Corporation failed to comply with the PAC
recommendation as it did not maintain any records for
services rendered by the Advisor. During the period
2009-14, the expenditure incurred on account of
‘Advisor's Expenses’ towards discretionary grant, HRA,
vehicle charges, etc., amounted to ₹ै 31.65 lakh,

In absence of records of Advisor’s service, it could
not be established whether the services of the
Advisor were meaningfully utilised by the Corporation.

* Audit observed that no accountability had been fixed or
recovery made against LPG shortage even after lapse of
eight years, since the reporting of the shortage.

The Management failed to strengthen the internal control
system with regard to inventories, due to which stock
shortages were occurred in the current review period also,
as mentioned in paragraph 3.2.7.8.3 ibid.

The Management stated (October 2014) that the matter is under vigilance enquiry and outcome is

awaited.

58 Seven till October 2013.
Measuring around 300 sq.ft each.

60 39,540 Nos. of filled up LPG cylinders (14.2 kg 38,086 Nos. and 19kg 1454 Nos.) valued at © 99.67 lakh at Gas
Section at Head Office and 29,210 Nos. of cylinders (14.2 kg 28,829 Nos. and 19kg 381 Nos) valued at® 64.21 lakh

at Jorethang branch.

w


Chapter IIT: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings)

We acknowledge the co-operation and assistance extended by the officers and staff of the
Corporation at various stages of conducting the performance audit.

The Corporation was to act as a canalising agency for various Departments of the State
Government to meet their material requirements. The Corporation failed to discharge its
obligations effectively as it largely resorted to commission business wherein procurements
were made based on the indents received from the Departments and hence, the benefits of
bulk purchases could not be availed. The Corporation also failed to minimise the delivery
time in absence of effective follow-up for timely supply of material and non-imposition of
penalty on the suppliers for delayed supplies.

The Corporation did not follow tender procedures in procurement of major items of
materials (viz. cement, GCI sheet, HDPE pipes, etc.) in violation of the provisions of Sikkim
Financial Rules. There were instances of incurring avoidable expenditure (€ 2.51 crore)
on procurements due to reasons like, failure to avail full supply of material within the
validity of supply order, improper tender evaluation for fixation of annual supply rate, non-
availing of the benefits of Excise Duty exemption and failure to restrict the price against
delayed supplies to the lower of the contracted price and prevailing market prices, etc.
There was no budgeting system prevailing in the Corporation in absence of which the
Management could not effectively monitor the actual financial performance of the
Corporation. The Corporation did not lay down any financial policy for efficient
management of funds. As a result, the fund management of the Corporation was ineffective
leading to idling of surplus funds.

The Corporation was deficient in complying with the provisions of the State and Union
laws/rules. There were instances of violations of the provisions of Sikkim Value Added Tax
Act 2005, Sikkim Ecology Fund and Environment Cess Act 2008, Finance Act, 1994 and
Income Tax Act, 1961 by the Corporation leading to short/non collection of VAT/Cess and
service tax (2.04 crore) and avoidable payment of income tax (€ 0.30 crore).

The Human Resource Management of the Corporation was not effective as no efforts were
made to impart trainings to the employees for their skill development.

The internal control system of the Corporation with regard to holding/accounting of
inventory and control over cash collection/remittance was weak causing instances of
shortages (2.49 crore) in stocks as well as unauthorised retention/defalcation of cash by
its employees.



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

> The Corporation needs to optimise the bulk procurements to avail the price benefits
in purchase of material. The Corporation should develop an appropriate system for
regular follow up of supply orders and appropriate action should be taken against
defaulting suppliers as per contract terms.

> Procurement procedures prescribed in SFR may invariably be followed in all cases
of purchases to safeguard the financial interest of the Corporation. The Corporation
may consider introducing a proper budgeting system and formulation of appropriate
financial policy for improving its financial management.

> Internal control system with regard to inventory and cash transactions may be
reviewed thoroughly for its strengthening by introducing the internal audit system
in the Corporation.

Analysis of reasons for accumulation of Non-Performing Assets against cash
credit/overdraft loan accounts of SBS revealed deficiencies in obtaining adequate
collateral security for CC/OD facilities, verification and evaluation of mortgaged
properties, and monitoring of recovery of dues.

State Bank of Sikkim (SBS) was established under a Proclamation of the erstwhile Chogyal
(King) of Sikkim with the main objective to act as a banker to the Government of Sikkim
(GoS) as well as to carry on the business of banking in the State. SBS, besides acting as the
banker of the GoS also provides various kinds of loans like construction loan, smart loan,
cash credit (CC), overdraft (OD) facilities, etc.

CC and OD facilities are extended to customers (loanees) for short term periods of up to
one year against the work orders awarded by various Government Departments for
execution by the applicant loanees.CC/ODs are sanctioned after obtaining undertaking
from the concerned Department for release of payments against works executed by the
contractor/loanees routing through their CC account maintained in SBS. SBS also obtains
mortgage of landed properties valuing twice the CC limit from the loanees against
providing of the CC facility.

As of March 2013, SBS disbursed CC/OD aggregating = 168.64 crore to 448 loanees. Out
of the above, 372 cases (83 per cent) of CC loan involving an amount of = 128.09 crore had
become Non-Performing Assets (NPAs) as of March 2014.

। |


Chapter IIT: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings)

Reasons for huge accumulation of NPA in the CC/OD segment of SBS were analysed by
Audit by taking a sample of 25 out of 372 NPA cases involving CC/OD loans amounting
to Z 38.01 crore (30 per cent) against the total NPA of € 128.09 crore. Results of Audit have
been brought out in the following paragraphs:

3.3.1 Inadequate collateral security against OD facility

OD facilities are extended to the customers against departmental work Orders after
obtaining collateral security of landed properties valued at double the OD limit. The OD
limits sanctioned are enhanced subsequently subject to commensurate enhancement in the
value of the collateral securities so obtained. During the examination of records, it was
revealed that, in respect of the following five NPA cases, OD limits were enhanced
irregularly without proportionate increase in collateral security:

Table 3.3.1

| 1 | Chandra Khalin; March 04
Kishan Kr, Agarwal April 2004
B.

C.B. Subba June 2005
Sailesh Shreshtha December 2008

5 | Balaji Water and
| | Power Pvt, Ltd. December 2008
[tot ऋह |

From the table above, it may be observed that there were deficiencies in obtaining of
collateral securities to the extent of = 7.57 crore against the OD limits (₹ 10.20 crore)
extended by SBS in contravention of the norms consistently followed by SBS. Examination
of records further revealed that as of June 2014, total outstanding receivable against above
five OD accounts stood at® 14.21 crore and the securities available with SBS were deficient
to cover these outstanding dues by ₹ 1.38 crore (9.71 per cent).

Management stated (July 2014) that there was no guidelines/policy to obtain securities
valuing double the amount of CC/OD. Mortgages obtained for CC/OD are additional
security and the hypothecation of bills receivable of the contractors are the primary
security.

The reply is not acceptable in view of the fact that the SBS has been consistently following
the norms of collection of securities equivalent to double the CC limit. Further, recovery
of CC/OD dues out of contractors’ unpaid bills is also subjective depending upon timely
and successful execution of works by the contractors. The case study of loanee at serial
number 4 above as discussed under paragraph 3.3.8 infra also established this fact. In the
instant case, the SBS had failed to recover its dues as the work order of the loanee stood
cancelled by Government due to poor progress of the work.

3.3.2 Deficiencies in the mechanism of obtaining collateral securities

SBS did not have a mechanism for pre and post inspection of the property mortgaged in its

8


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

favour against CC/OD facility provided. As a result there were instances of cross-mortgage,
mortgage of non-existent property, etc. by the loanees causing inadequacy of the collateral
security to cover the CC/OD dues recoverable from these loanees. These cases have been
discussed in the following paragraphs.

3.3.3. Defective Collateral Securities

The Roads and Bridges Department (Department) of GoS awarded (February 2005) work
orders in favour of Shri. C.B. Subba (loanee) at an estimated value of 4.34 crore. An OD
of% 1.40 crore was sanctioned (June 2005) by SBS in favour of the loanee against mortgage
of a nine storied building (valued at = 1.20 crore) and lands (valued at = 1.22 crore).
Examination of records revealed that the Blue Print (BP) Plan of the building obtained by
SBS as mortgage was not approved by the competent authority (UDHD") since the
building was constructed beyond the permissible limit. Accordingly, SBS had advised (July
2006) the loanee to get the BP plan of the building revised from the UDHD. This had not
been complied with by the loanee (May 2014). In the meantime, it was observed that the
loanee could not execute the work order awarded by the Department within the schedule
date. Therefore, the loanee was allowed time extension of upto December 2008 by the
Department for completing the work. SBS, despite failure of the loanee to comply with the
scheduled targets for completion of work, did not monitor the actual progress of the work
executed by the loanee and the schedule of payments to be released by the Department with
reference to milestones prescribed in the Work Order. On the contrary, the SBS had allowe

(2009) the loanee to draw an additional amount of 25.63 lakh after the lapse of scheduled
completion period. Thus, the OD provided by the SBS proved to be unsecured in absence
of proper verification of BP Plan of the building mortgaged by loanee and also effective
monitoring of work progress of the loanee.

Management stated (July 2014) that part of the building (5 and १४ floors out of constructed
9 floors) had the approval of the competent authority and the value of 5 and १४ storey
building itself would be huge. Further, additional 4 landed property had also been
mortgaged.

Reply is not acceptable in view of the fact that the building involving unauthorised
construction in parts should be considered as illegal and recovery of dues through disposal
of such building remains in doubts. Further, the value of other securities (¥ 1.22 crore) held
by SBS covers less than 50 per cent of the outstanding dues (र 2.49 crore) of the loanee
exposing the SBS against the risk of non-recovery of the balance dues.

3.3.4 Cross-mortgage of property

As per the policy of SBS, the CC/OD facility is provided to the customers only against the
work orders awarded by different Government departments. The recoveries of dues against
such CC/OD are thus, secured through payments to be released by the concerned
Government Departments enrouting through the CC/OD accounts of the loanee. In the
instant case, however, SBS sanctioned (July 2009) an OD limit of = 50 lakh in favour of
Shri Bijay Kr. Rai (loanee) without any work order having issued by any Government

“1 Urban Development and Housing Department.


Chapter IIT: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings)

Department to the loanee. The OD limit was sanctioned against the mortgage of two landed
properties having aggregate value of = 1.67 crore. After four years of sanction of OD, the
SBS realised (March 2009) that the loanee had already mortgaged (July 2005) one of the
properties (value of = 0.44 crore) against a housing loan availed from United Bank of India
(UBI). Since the loanee had defaulted in repayment of the said housing loan, UBI had
published advertisement in the local daily for disposal of the above property for recovery
of their dues. As of June 2014, the loanee had an outstanding balance of % 82.75 lakh and
loanee had not repaid any amount towards said dues outstanding against the OD loan
availed from SBS.

Management stated (July 2014) that a suit had already been filed under Sikkim Public
Demands Recovery Act, 1988 (SPDR, Act) for recovery of dues of SBS.

The fact, however, remained that releasing of OD limit by SBS without integrating with a
valid work order from a Government Department coupled with negligence in verification
of genuineness of mortgaged property resulted in blocking up of funds besides the
uncertainty involved in recovery of dues.

3.3.5 Loan against non-existing Security

An OD amount of = 1 crore was sanctioned (May 2007) by SBS in favour of Shri Ram
Gopal Rai, a Government contractor (loanee) against mortgage of properties belonging to
four individuals (aggregate value हैं crore). The properties mortgaged against the OD
included one four storied building (valued at = 0.49 crore) belonging to one Shri Ongchu
Lepcha. There were however, no documents on record to establish the fact that SBS had
conducted any inspection of the mortgaged properties before or after sanction of OD facility
so as to verify physical existence of these assets. On default in repayment of dues by the
loanee, SBS conducted (March 2008) for verification of the property. On verification of
the property SBS noticed that the property belonging to Shri Ongchu Lepcha was not
traceable and instead of four storied RCC building, a wooden structure was existing on the
said site. The loanee had an outstanding balance of € 2.10 crore as of June 2014.

Management stated (July 2014) that legal action under SPDR Act would soon be initiated
for recovery of dues.

Fact however, remains that due to failure of SBS in proper verification of the mortgaged
properties prior to release of OD facility, dues of € 2.10 crore became doubtful of recovery.

3.3.6 Non-safeguarding of interest of Bank

SBS sanctioned (December 2008) CC facility of € 3.30 crore to a loanee™ against a work
order valuing & 11.50 crore from Public Health Engineering Department (Department). The
loan was secured, inter alia, against mortgage of Land and Building (value % 4.15 crore)
situated outside the State. The properties were duly supported by equitable mortgage.

© 166 Shree Balaji Water and Power Engineer Pvt. Ltd.

® Depositing of property documents by the loanee with SBS.


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

The time period for repayment of CC was up to 31st December 2011. The CC loan,
however, became NPA as repayments were irregular. As on June 2014, the overdue CC
amount along with interest stood at = 4.74 crore.

Examination of records revealed that the mortgaged properties were not registered in favour
of SBS. It was further noticed that as the properties were situated outside the State, recovery
proceedings under SPDR Act could also not be initiated.

The SBS had neither registered the Equity Deed nor incorporated any terms & conditions
for insurance of mortgaged properties against risks of damages by natural calamities. Thus,
due to negligence in ensuring proper securities at the time of sanction of OD facilities, the
financial interest of the Bank could not be safeguarded causing recovery of entire dues of
₹ 4.74 crore doubtful.

Management stated (July 2014) that since the properties are situated outside Sikkim and
mortgaged under equitable mortgage, recovery suit has been filed in Debt Recovery
Tribunal, Guwahati for recovery of outstanding dues.

The fact, however, remained that SBS had deviated from its normal practice of accepting
registered mortgage and consequently, exposed the CC loan against risk of its becoming
doubtful/bad debts.

3.3.7. OD against private works

As per the policy of SBS, CC/OD facilities are to be extended against departmental work
orders only. As per the sanction order, as and when the payment from the Government
Department are routed through the OD account, the sanctioned OD limit should be operated
at reducing balance system. Contrary to this, SBS had sanctioned (September 2010) OD
loan to Shri Urgen Bhutia (रै 2.50 crore) and Shri Man Bahadur Thapa (र 0.60 crore)
respectively against the work orders issued by a private company for setting up of a petrol
pump. Since the works were not in the nature of departmental works, routing of release of
payments against these private works through OD account of loanees operated in SBS
could not be ensured. As a result, these two ODs had become NPA with outstanding dues
of % 3.67 crore and हैं 1.3] crore respectively as on June 2014.

Management replied (July 2014) that in the case of Shri M.B. Thapa, recovery suit under
SPDR Act had already been filed and in the case of Shri Urgen Bhutia it was under process.

The reply is not acceptable as the SBS could not ensure timely recovery of OD dues due to
extension of OD facility against private work order and its failure to insist upon release of
payments to loanees enrouting their OD accounts maintained in SBS.

3.3.8 Non regulation of OD limits linking with progress of work

As per the policy of SBS for grant of CC/OD limit, the payment against departmental work
order was to be routed through the CC/OD account. Thus, proper monitoring of actual
progress of work and linking of the release of payment with the actual work executed by
the loanee was essential to minimise the NPAs of the SBS. Following cases of lapses on
the part of SBS were, however, noticed in monitoring of work progress and release of
payments to loanees which contributed towards accumulation of NPAs:



Chapter IIT: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings)

3.3.8.1 Shri Sailesh Shreshtha (loanee) was sanctioned OD (® 2.50 crore) based on three
work orders valuing हैं 8.97 crore issued by two Government Departments. One of the work
orders (valuing हैं 6.19 crore) related to centrally sponsored scheme [Pradhan Mantri Gram
Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)] and the payments against this work order were to be routed
through a Nationalised Bank. As a result, SBS could not adjust/recover unpaid dues of
loanee in CC account out of the payments release against said work order. The Bank had
not taken up the matter with the loanee/Nationalised Bank/Department for channelising the
payments through SBS. It was further observed that one of the work orders valuing हैं 1.29
crore issued to Shri Sailesh Shreshtha was cancelled (February 2013) by the Department
due to slow progress of work and the contractor was also blacklisted. As against the OD
limit of € 2.50 crore, the loanee had an outstanding balance of € 3.61 crore as of June 2014.

3.3.8.2. The Bank had sanctioned OD limits in favour of three loanees™ against the work
orders issued during the year 2004-05. Even after lapse of more than nine years, SBS
neither ascertained the status of the work progress against three work order nor has pursued
with the concerned Department to find out whether the work have been
completed/abandoned by the contractors.

Management stated (July 2014) that in case of one loanee (Shri C B Subba), withdrawals
from OD accounts till 2009 were allowed to enable him to complete the work and the
Department had also confirmed that payments against outstanding bill of the loanee were
pending. It was also stated that recovery suits has already been file against this loanee while
the same would be filed against other two loanees.

The fact, however, remained that lapses on the part of Management in monitoring the
progress of work led to blocking up of funds coupled with uncertainty in recovery of the
entire outstanding dues.

3.3.9 Delay in initiation of recovery proceedings

As per the SPDR Act, an application was to be filed by SBS before the Certificate Officer
for recovery of its dues. SBS had not, however, filed application before the Certificate
Officer for recovery of its dues in any of the 25 cases test-checked in Audit.

Management stated (July 2014) that SBS was making all-out effort for recovery and notices
in the local media were also being issued to urge the defaulters to pay up their dues.

The reply is not acceptable as the SBS failed to adopt the legal course of action against any
of the defaulters under SPDR Act and for disposing of the mortgaged property to recover
its dues.

Thus, deficiencies in the system of appraisal of securities, lapses in monitoring the works

and non-initiation of legal course of action of recovery of dues, etc. led to accumulation of
NPAs against CC/OD loans.

4 Shri Chandra Khaling, Shri K K Agrawal and Shri C B Subba.


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Management appreciated (July 2014) the Audit observations for highlighting the weak area
management of CC/OD accounts and stated that these observations would help the SBS in
taking future course of corrective action.

The matter was reported (July 2014) to the Government; their reply had not been received
(September 2014).

SBS extended undue favour to contractors to the extent of = 5.97 crore due to short
collection of BG commission @ 2.08 crore) and margin money @& 3.89 crore) in
violation of its laid down policy.

State Bank of Sikkim (SBS) was established (June 1968) under a Proclamation by the
erstwhile Chogyal (King) of Sikkim for providing banking facilities, mobilising capital for
economic development and to stimulate trade and industry in the State. As part of its prime
banking activities, SBS extends Bank Guarantee °°(BG) to various contractors against
performance and quality of equipment. As per extant policy of SBS, BGs issued should be
backed by margin money (deposit) of 30 per cent and the balance amount should be secured
through registered mortgage. Commission at the rate of three per cent per annum plus
service tax is also payable by the customer on the BG amount.

Audit conducted an analysis of the performance of SBS with regard to the issuance and
management of BGs. The findings of the Audit have been discussed below.

Loss of revenue due to short levy of commission

SBS was extending BG facilities to contractors at the prescribed rate of three per cent
commission plus service tax. SBS issued (February 2013 to December 2013) BGs to 29
individuals/enterprises. It was, however, observed that in respect of 26 out of 29 BGs issued
to contractors, the SBS levied commission at lower rates ranging from 0.53 per cent to 2.10
per cent as against the prescribed rate of 3 per cent. Charging of lower commission by SBS
than applicable has resulted in extension of undue favour to the contractors to the extent of
₹ 2.08 crore.

Short realisation of margin money

Against the policy of SBS for collection of 30 per cent margin money for issue of BGs, in
four BGs issued to RSK Construction margin money collected was only 15 per cent of the
value of BGs issued. SBS could have utilised the short collected margin money on high
interest earning activities (viz. overdraft/cash credit) and earned additional potential
revenue of & 0.46 crore as detailed below:

6° Bank Guarantee (BG) is an instrument issued by banks in which they agree to stand guarantee against non-
performance of a party. As per the stipulated conditions of the BGs, the issuing bank shall compensate the
beneficiary to the extent of the guaranteed amount of BGs upon its invocation.



Chapter III: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings)

Table 3.4.1

=
[6 |
Lf Tota 25.93 7.77 | 389 | 38588 | 046 |

Thus, undue favour was extended to RSK Construction through collection of margin
money at a lower rate (15 per cent) than the prescribed rate. The action of the Management
of the Bank was irregular as the same had no approval of the BoD.

Thus, SBS extended undue favour to contractors to the extent of 5.97 crore due to short
collection of BG commission and margin money in violation of its laid down policy.

The Management stated (March 2014) that the SBS had formulated a new guideline for
issue of BGs at reduced rates which were made effective for BGs issued after 1 February
2013. The reply is not acceptable as the new guidelines referred to by the Management
were required to be approved by the BoD of SBS before implementation as per the
provisions of the Proclamation. The said new guidelines have been approved (25
September 2014) by the BoD after furnishing of reply by the Management and as per
BoD’s approval, the new guidelines shall be effective only from the date of approval (viz.
25 September 2014).

The matter was reported (July 2014) to the Government; their reply had not been received
(September 2014).

Infructuous expenditure of = 28.16 lakh incurred towards salary and perqui

Under the Sikkim State Public Services Act 2006, the State Government shall employ
Members of Legislative Assembly (MLA)/Non-MLA to render advisory services in
connection with the affairs of the State/Public Sector Undertakings. Non-MLAs so

% Difference between interest payable to the contractors and potential interest income that could be earned on

Overdrafi/Cash credit activities.
97 ₹129.49 lakh X 3 per cent (12 per cent - 9 per cent) X 6 yrs.= €23.30 lakh.
5. % 259.20 lakh X 3 per cent (12 per cent - 9 per cent) X 3 yrs,= 23.33 lakh.


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

appointed shall be eligible for house rent allowance, telephone allowance and travelling
allowance. They shall further be eligible to have three staff on co-terminus basis.

Sikkim Poultry Development Corporation Limited (Company) was incorporated
(December 1991) under the Registration of Sikkim Companies Act 1961 with the main
objective to promote and establish the business of poultry and poultry products in the State.
Government of Sikkim (GoS) appointed (May 2009) a non-MLA as Chairman of the
Company. As per Articles of Association of the Company, the Chairman shall preside over
meetings of the Board of Directors (BoD) which shall mandatorily meet at least once every
quarter for supervision and management of day-to-day business operations of the Company
and also for approval of its annual accounts.

Examination of records revealed that the Company had not been carrying out any business
operations since 2008-09. The only source of income for the Company was grants received
from GoS. During the last four years ended 2012-13, the Company received & 36.25 lakh
as Government grants. The Company incurred an expenditure of = 28.16 lakh towards the
salary and other perks of the Chairman during 2009-10 to 2012-13.

It was further observed that no meeting of BoD of the Company was held during 2009-10
to 2012-13® as per the Articles of Association (AoA) of the Company although the BoD
was required to hold minimum 16 such meetings mandatorily during the said period. Thus,
the Chairman and the BoD of the defunct Company, which was surviving on Government
grants, failed to fulfill their statutory obligation of holding minimum number of meetings
as prescribed under the AoA of the Company. Due to non-holding of any of the meeting
of the BoD in preceding four years, the audited annual accounts of the Company for the
period 2009-10 to 2012-13 were pending for approval by the BoD (September 2014).

The Management while accepting the facts stated (July 2014) that the suggestions of
Chairman were taken from time to time and the Chairman was provided perquisites
according to his eligibility as per the notification of GoS. The reply, however, did not
provide the details and nature of advice given by the Chairman particularly when the
Company was non-operational since 2008-09.

Thus, due to not holding of any meeting of BoD of the Company during 2009-13, the
Chairman failed to discharge his obligations and the expenditure of = 28.16 lakh incurred
towards salary and perquisites of Chairman proved to be infructuous.

Keeping in view the above facts, it is recommended that the Government may explore
possibilities to either revive the Company through appropriate revival package or consider
closure of the Company to avoid similar wasteful expenditure in future.

The matter was reported to the Government (July 2014); their reply had not been received
(September 2014).

© One meeting of BoD was held (June 2013) during 2013-14.


Chapter IIT: Economic Sector (Public Sector Undertakings)

rocurement julldozers without approval of Board of Directors and without

market analysis resulted in loss of ¥ 0.77 crore to the Company

The Sikkim Power Development Corporation Limited (Company) is mainly engaged in the
business of generation, transmission, distribution and sale of power in Sikkim. The
Company purchased (March 2008) four bulldozers at a total price of € 2.34 crore” from
Bharat Earth Movers Limited (BEML). These bulldozers were procured with the intention
to lease them out to Independent Power Producers and Private Contractors engaged in
construction of roads, etc. so as to generate additional revenue for the Company. The
bulldozers had an expected life of six years. The total projected revenue per month from
these bulldozers was = 5.36 lakh with a payback period of four years.

The Company made a down payment of € 0.47 crore to M/s BEML and made (July 2008 -
September 2009) subsequent payments to the tune of € 1.37 crore sourcing mainly from the
revenue realised through operations of the bulldozers. Balance amount of € 0.50 crore,
however, remained unpaid (May 2014).

Examination of records of the Company revealed that the demand for bulldozers was very
poor and Company could sparingly lease out the bulldozer for short durations during 2008-
09 to 2012-13. In absence of adequate demand, the Company had to reduce (June 2011)
the monthly rent of bulldozer from 2 lakh to = 1.50 lakh. As a result, against the projected
revenue of € 3.22 crore during the five year period (2008-13), the Company could earn net
revenue of only = 1.28 crore. Due to poor utilisation of the bulldozers, the Management
had to ultimately dispose of (June 2014) all four bulldozers at negligible price of = 7.30
lakh per bulldozer.

During examination of records it was further revealed that the Company had adopted a
hurried approach in procurement of the bulldozers and the purchase decision was not
preceded by any market analysis of the actual demand for the machines. Further, no
advance planning was made by the Company for financing the cost of the bulldozers before
placing (April 2007) the procurement orders. As a result, the Company had to request
(October 2007) BEML to cancel delivery of three bulldozers when these were ready for
delivery. Thereafter, on mutual consideration the Company took delivery (March 2008) of
three machines on deferred payment basis. The above facts also indicate that the purchase
of four bulldozers was not based on sound financial considerations. The Company also
failed to obtain prior approval of the BoD before placing (April 2007) of the purchase

0% 58,57,265 x 4.


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

orders for four bulldozers. Subsequently, the Management submitted (August 2007) the
proposal for purchase of only two bulldozers to the BoD against which approval for
purchase of only one bulldozer was given (August 2007).

Thus, procurement of bulldozers without proper market analysis and without prior approval
of the competent authority resulted in loss of € 0.77 crore against investment of = 2.34 crore
after netting off the lease revenue earned (€ 1.28 crore) and sales value realised (₹ 0.29
crore) on disposal of the bulldozers.

Management stated (July 2014) that the decision to purchase four bulldozers was aimed at
lifting the financial condition of the Company by supplementing its revenue source under
the assumption that the machines would be having significant market demand towards
catering to the needs of Independent Power Producers and other Private contractors in the
State. The reply is not acceptable as no document on record was available to establish the
fact of conducting any market analysis or feasibility study and preparing of any business
plan by the Company before procurement of bulldozers. Further, procurement of the
bulldozers had no prior approval of the competent authority (BoD), which was indicative
of the hurried approach of the Management in purchase of the bulldozers.

The matter was reported (July 2014) to the Government; their reply had not been received
(September 2014).

1 3 |


Chapter IV: Revenue Sector

4.1.1 The tax and non-tax revenue raised by the Government of Sikkim during the year
2013-14, the State's share of net proceeds of divisible Union taxes and duties assigned to
States and Grants-in-aid received from the Government of India during the year and the

corresponding figures for the preceding four years are mentioned in Table 4.1.1:

Table 4.1.1
Trend of revenue receipts

(Zin crore)

Re jue rai by the State Governm:
I

Receipts from the Government of India

* State’s share of net proceeds of divisible 374.68 524,99 611.65 698.48 162.62
Union taxes

[2,244.41 |
[49]

Note: Tax and Non-tax revenue during 2008-09 was € 1,404.50 crore.

The above table indicates that during the year 2013-14, the revenue raised by the State
Government (₹ 1,319.41 crore) was 31 per cent of the total revenue receipts. The balance
69 per cent of the receipts during 2013-14 was from Government of India. Non-tax revenue
and total receipts of the State shown in the table above include gross receipts under State
Lotteries.

4.1.2 The details of the tax revenue raised during the period from 2009-10 to 2013-14

are given in Table 4.1.2:

Table 4.1.2
Details of Tax Revenue raised

‘Taxes on Income other than|
Corporation Tax

Other Taxes and Duties onf 7 19.
Commodities and Services

The respective departments reported the following reasons for variations:


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Increase:

Sales Tax/VAT: The increase was due to increase in business activity and volume,
increase in monitoring activity, computerisation and online tax administration.

State Excise: The increase was due to extensive inspection and touring and opening of
Kanchanjunga Distillery Ltd. during 2013-14.

Taxes on Vehicles: The increase was due to increase in number of vehicles in 2013-14.
Other taxes and duties on commodities and services: The increase was due to (i)
Extensive inspection and touring and opening of Kanchanjunga Distillery Ltd. during
2013-14 (State Excise); and (ii) Collection of arrears, increased collection from sale of
tender (UDHD).

Decrease:

Land Revenue: The decrease was due to less collection under the sub-head Other Receipts
under the head Land Revenue.

The other departments despite being requested (May 2014 and August 2014) did not
furnish the reasons for variations in receipts from that of the previous year (October 2014).

4.1.3 The details of the non-tax revenue raised during the period 2009-10 to 2013-14 are
indicated in Table 4.1.3:
Table 4.1.3

Details of Non-tax Revenue raised
(#in crore)

285.83 | 190.00 50.00

=
=

[10 [rourism
13 [Stationery and Printin
15

T
State Lotteries

‘Source: Finance Accounts and Estimates of Receipts

The respective Departments reported the following reasons for variation:
Increase:

Road Transport: The increase was due to revision of rates of carriage charges.

! Figures in brackets represent net receipts.

100


Chapter IV: Revenue Sector

Tourism: The increase was due to leasing out of new properties.

Medical and Public Health: The increase was due to increase in user charges collection and
fee hike under Prevention of Food Adulteration Act.

Crop Husbandry: The increase was due to more receipts under Agricultural farms.
Decrease:

Police: The decrease was due to renewal of Arms Licence below the anticipated number

and also due to non-receipt of reimbursements of expenditure on Police Check Posts for
2011-12 and 2012-13 from Government of India.

The other Departments despite being requested (May 2014 and August 2014) did not
intimate the reasons for the variation in receipts from that of the previous year (September
2014).

The arrears of revenue as on 31 March 2014 in respect of some Heads of Revenue as
reported by the departments amounted to % 48.18 crore of which हैं 1.93 crore was

outstanding for more than five years, as detailed in the Table 4.2.
Table 4.2.1
Arrears of Revenue

(@in crore)

Dues from Delhi Government and
others, etc.

Reimbursement of expenditure incurred
during the year 2011-14 is to be
received.

Tourism 0.34 Legal notice issued to deposit the rent.

Animal x

Water Supply Cases with disturbed water supply are
and Sanitation = है remaining without up-to-date payment.

Food storage and House rent of FCI, Jorethang is yet to be
warehousing received.

L_] Total 48.18 493 TT

Source: Information received from departments

It would be seen from the table that recovery of = 1.93 crore was pending for more than five
years and no sincere efforts were being made to recover them. Arrears of € 48.18 crore were
pending with the departmental authorities.

The details of cases pending at the beginning of the year, cases becoming due for assessment,
cases disposed of during the year and number of cases pending for finalisation at the end of
the year as furnished by the Commercial Taxes Division (Finance, Revenue and Expenditure
Department) in respect of Sales Tax (including VAT) was as below in Table 4.3.1.



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Table 4.3.1
Arrears in assessments

Regarding ‘Nil’ disposal during the year, the Commercial Taxes Division, Finance, Revenue
and Expenditure Department stated that under the provisions of the SVAT Act 2005, it is not
mandatory to assess all the dealers. However, all the returns filed by the dealers were
scrutinised.

The fact remained that despite the addition of new cases during the year, the Commercial
Taxes Division did not dispose off any case.

No Department reported any case of evasion of tax.

As per information received in respect of Commercial tax/VAT, there was no refund case
during the year. No information about refund cases was intimated by any other department.

The Accountant General (Audit), Sikkim conducts periodical inspection of the
Government Departments to test check the transactions and verify the maintenance of the
important accounts and other records as prescribed in the rules and procedures. These
inspections are followed up with the inspection reports (IRs) incorporating irregularities
detected during the inspection and not settled on the spot, which are issued to the heads
of the offices inspected with the copies to the next higher authorities for prompt
corrective actions. The heads of the Offices/Government are required to promptly
comply with the observations contained in the IRs, rectify the defects and omissions and
report compliance through initial reply to the Accountant General within one month from
the date of issue of the IRs. Serious financial irregularities are reported to the heads of
the Department and the Government.

IRs issued upto December 2013 disclosed that 292 paragraphs involving % 598.29 crore
relating to 97 IRs remained outstanding at the end of June 2014. The details along with
the corresponding figures for the preceding two years are mentioned in the following
table:

Table 4.6.1
Details of pending Inspection Reports

Number of outstanding audit observations 292
Amount involved (in crore) 814.27 710.16 3598.29

102


Chapter IV: Revenue Sector

4.6.1 The Department-wise details of the IRs and audit observations outstanding as on
30 June 2014 and the amounts involved are mentioned in the Table 4.6.2:

Table 4.6.2

Department-wise details of IRs

fie, Reve था0 | ए/1/[क्रल an Bela

Expenditure (Commercial 13 4
Trade, ete.

Taxes Division)

Finance, Revenue and

Expenditure (Income Tax | Income Tax 14 60

Division,

Excise (Abkari) 17.20

5 x
a नि
Geology Metallurgical Industries
eer 3
Finance, and
Sikkim State Lotteries)

= 347.49

Housin;

Total [292 598.29

Audit did not receive even the first replies from the heads of offices within one month
from the date of issue of the IRs for 5 IRs (issued during 2013-14) upto June 2014. This
large pendency of the IRs due to non-receipt of the replies is indicative of the fact that
heads of offices and heads of the Departments did not initiate adequate action to rectify
the defects, omissions and irregularities pointed out by the AG through IRs.

Management

The Government may consider to have an effective system for prompt and appropriate
response to audit observations.

4.6.2 Departmental Audit Committee Meetings

The Government set up audit committees to monitor and expedite the progress of the
settlement of the IRs and paragraphs in the IRs. The details of the audit committee meetings
held during the year 2013-14 and the paragraphs settled are mentioned in Table 4.6.3.
Table 4.6.3
Details of Departmental audit committee meetings

(in crore)

43.39
| 43 85 449? |

The overall progress of settlement of paragraphs needs to be improved in view of the
huge pendency of the IRs and paragraphs.

i


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

4.6.3 Non-production of records to audit for scrutiny

The programme of local audit of Tax revenue/non- tax revenue offices is drawn up
sufficiently in advance and intimation are issued, usually one month before the
commencement of audit, to the departments to enable them to keep the relevant records
ready for audit scrutiny.

During the year 2011-12 as many as 48 assessment files, returns, refunds, registers and
other relevant records were not made available to audit involving tax effects of unknown
amount. Break-ups of these cases are given in Table 4.6.4.

Table 4.6.4
Details of non-production of records

Commercial Taxes Division (Finance,
Revenue and Expenditure Department) cub

4.6.4 Response of the departments to the draft audit paragraphs

The draft Audit paragraphs proposed for inclusion in the Report of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India are forwarded by the Accountant General to the Principal
Secretaries/Secretaries of the concerned Department, drawing their attention to audit
findings and requesting them to send their response within six weeks. The fact of non-
receipt of replies from the Departments/Government is invariably indicated at the end of
such paragraphs included in the Audit Report.

Four draft paragraphs proposed for inclusion in the Audit Report of the Comptroller and.
Auditor General of India for the year ended March 2014 were forwarded (July 2014) to
the Secretaries/Commissioners of the respective departments through demi-official
letters. The administrative Secretaries/Commissioners furnished replies in respect of all
draft paragraphs.

4.6.5 Follow up on Audit Reports — summarised position

The Rules of Procedures of the Committee on Public Accounts of the Sikkim Legislative
Assembly (internal working) laid down that after the presentation of the Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India in the Legislative Assembly, the Departments
shall initiate action on the audit paragraphs and the action taken explanatory notes
thereon should be submitted by the Government within three months of tabling the
Report for consideration of the Committee. In spite of these provisions, the explanatory
notes on the audit paragraphs of the Reports were being delayed inordinately. 20
paragraphs (including Performance Audits) included in the Reports of the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India on the Revenue Sector of the Government of Sikkim for the
years ended 31 March 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013 were placed before the State
Legislative Assembly between March 2011 to June 2014. Action taken explanatory notes
in respect of 13 paragraphs form 4 departments (Finance, Revenue and Expenditure
Department, State Excise, Transport and Labour) had not been received for Audit
Reports for the years ending 31 March 2010, 2011 and 2012.

During 2013-14, the PAC discussed Audit Report for the year 2008-09 and its
recommendations were incorporated in their 96" Report (2014). However, ATNs have

104


Chapter IV: Revenue Sector

not been received by the PAC in respect of one performance review and two paragraphs
discussed pertaining to Commercial Taxes Division of Finance, Revenue and
Expenditure Department.

To analyse the system of addressing the issues highlighted in the IRs/Audit Reports by
the departments/Government, the action taken on the paragraphs and Performance Audits
included in the Audit Reports of the last 10 years in respect of Transport Department is
evaluated and included in this Report.

The succeeding paragraphs 4.7.1 to 4.7.2 discuss the performance of the Transport
Department in dealing with the cases detected in course of local audit conducted during
the last ten years and also the cases included in the Audit Reports for the years 2004-05
to 2013-14.
4.7.1 Position of Inspection Reports
The summarised position of IRs issued during the last ten years, paragraphs included in
these Reports and their status as on 30 June 2014 are given in the following table:

Table 4.7.1

Position of Inspection Reports

(Zin crore)

Except once, the Government did not arrange Audit Committee meetings between the
Department and AG’s office to settle the old paragraphs during 2013-14.
4.7.2 Recovery of accepted cases

The position of paragraphs included in the Audit Reports of the last 10 years accepted by
the Department and the amounts recovered thereagainst are mentioned in the following
table:

Table 4.7.2

1

It is evident from the preceding table that the progress of recovery even in accepted cases
was very slow during the entire period of last ten years. The recovery of accepted cases

105


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

was to be pursued as arrears recoverable from the concerned parties. No mechanism for
pursuance of the accepted cases had been put in place by the Department/Government.
Further, the arrear cases including accepted audit observations were not available with
the Transport Department. In the absence of a suitable mechanism, the Department could
not monitor the recovery of accepted cases.

The Department may take immediate action to pursue and monitor prompt recovery of
the dues involved in accepted cases.

The draft performance reviews conducted by the AG are forwarded to the concerned.
Department/Government for their information with a request to furnish their replies.
These reviews are also discussed in the exit conferences and the
Department’ s/Government’s views are included while finalising the reviews of the Audit
Reports.

The following reviews on the Commercial Taxes Division (Finance, Revenue and.
Expenditure Department) had featured in the last five year’s Audit Report. The details of
recommendations and their status is given in the following table:

Table 4.8.1

Implement computerisation of VAT | Computerisation of | VAT
system completely and effectively in all | implemented under MMPCT.
areas.
Establish effective mechanism to review | Such mechanism has been
database at periodic interval and to prepare | established under the eSEVA?.
database of dubious/tisky dealers.
Establish effective mechanism to ensure | Retums have to be submitted
submission of regular and timely returns | on time, else the TIN of the
by the dealers. dealer gets blocked by the
system. Hence _efieetive
mechanism established.
Establish effective mechanism for serutiny | Scrutiny of returns is
of every returns submitted by the dealers, | mandatory and is being done
Performance Audit assessment of dealers and VAT audit of | before acceptance.
2008-09 | on transition from selected dealers.
Sales tax to VAT Fix responsibility at various levels im the | All the penal provisions are
Department for strict compliance of codal | implemented before and after

provisions to avoid tax evasion by any | assessment.
dealer.

Ensure fixing the quantum of minimum | Minimum penalty is provided
penalty for each kind of offences and to | in the SVAT Act/Rules.
continue VAT Fraud Task Force

Strengthen internal control mechanism | Intemal Audit section

including intemal audit. established with the Joint
Commissioner/Audit as Head
of the Section.

Review and __rectily farious | SVAT ActRules have been

loopholes/deficiencies of SVAT Act and | amended to rectify various

Rules. loopholes.

Maintain data bank of dealer involved in | Such provision exists in the
Inter State Trade and Commerce. eSEVA.

Print Declaration form assessing its | All the declaration forms are
requirements taking into account pace of | issued online.

issue of declaration forms.

Maintain proper records of declaration | Such records are maintained in
forms printed, issued and closing stock. | the system since the Forms are
issued online.

Performance Audit
on Utilisation

2010-11 | Declaration Forms
in Inter State Trade
and Commerce

2. Commercial Taxes Division's tax administration system for online payment, e-return filing, waybill endorsement,

ete.
106


Chapter IV: Revenue Sector

dealers only after receipt of details of | done after verification and
utilisation of declaration forms issued | acceptance of the request.
earlier.

छाए declaration forms chronologically | Declaration forms are being
and not randomly to have a track of | issued online and records are
declaration forms. available in the system.
Tastall a system of verification of eachand | Such system has been
every declaration form submitted by the | established and is under
dealers with the database available in the | effective use.

TINXSYS website before _ allowing
exemption/concession of tax.

Tastall a system picking up a sample of
declaration forms and taking them up for

further verification with the concemed

States and also a system of uploading the

details of utilisation of declaration forms

in the TINXSYS website,

Ensure submission of CST retums by | CST returns to be filed online.
every dealer and assess all dealers | Assessment of the dealers are
involved in Inter State trade and | on the basis of the assignment
commerce. by the Commissioner.

NB: Status as in the table is based on departmental replies.

The unit offices under various Departments are categorised into high, medium and low
risk units according to their revenue position, past trends of the audit observations and
other parameters. The annual audit plan is prepared on the basis of risk analysis which
inter-alia include critical issues in Government revenues and tax administration, i.e.
budget speech, white paper on state finances, Reports of the Finance Commission (State
and Central), recommendations of the taxation Reforms Committee, statistical analysis
of the revenue earnings during the past five years, factors of the tax administration, audit

coverage and its impact during five years, etc.

During the year 2013-14, there were 18 auditable units, of which six units were planned
and audited which is 33 per cent of the total auditable units.

4.10.1 Position of local audit conducted during the year

Test-check of the records of seven units under Revenue departments (Finance Revenue
and Expenditure (Commercial Taxes Division and State Lotteries), Urban Development
and Housing, Excise, Transport, Forest, Environment and Wildlife Management and
Energy and Power) conducted during the year 2013-14 revealed irregularities involving
revenue aggregating = 142.06 crore in 59 cases. During the course of the year, the
departments concerned accepted all these cases which were pointed out in audit during
2013-14.

This Report contains three paragraphs (selected from the audit detections made during
the local audit referred to above) involving financial effect of = 4.80 crore. The
Departments have accepted audit observations involving & 3.11 crore but no amount has
been recovered. These are discussed in succeeding paragraphs.

107


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Despite non-receipt of requisite Excise Verification Certificate from the exporter,
the Department had not levied and realised excise duty and fees amounting to
= 68.09 lakh on the consignments.

According to Rule 17 of Sikkim Foreign Liquor (Import, Export and Transport) Rules
1993, the exporter is bound to deliver the consignment at the importing place and obtain
the Excise Verification Certificate (EVC) from the Excise Officer of the importing place
against the export pass within three months from the date of issue of export pass, failing
which the excise officer may levy on such consignment the full rates of excise duty and
fees at the rates in force in the States at the time export pass was issued.

Audit of records (September 2013) of Excise (Abkari) Department for the year 2011-13
on export of alcoholic beverages revealed that two Distilleries/Breweries namely M/s
Himalayan Distilleries Ltd, Mazitar and M/s Denzong Albrew Ltd, Mulukey, Rhenock
exported alcoholic beverages to various destinations outside the State. Against the
requirement of obtaining EVCs by the exporter form the Excise offices of the importing
place, the requisite EVCs on export of 36,400° cases of alcoholic beverages involving
duties of f 1.16 crore were not obtained.

On being pointed out by audit, the Department submitted (July 2014) the EVC of 20500
cases* of alcoholic beverages. However, the Department had not raised demand for
duties on consignment at full rates of excise duty and fees on balance of 15900 cases* as
envisaged under the rule mentioned above. This resulted in non-realisation of duty
amounting to % 68.09 lakh from the exporting unit.

(Sikkim), Ranipool as mandatory gaming fee for casino games.

As per Finance, Revenue and Expenditure Department notification dated 30 March 2011,
the licensee shall pay for gaming fees to the State Government at the rate 10 (ten) per

3. Mls Himalayan Distilleries Ltd, Mazitar for 18,700 cases including % 91.25 lakh and M/s Denzong Albrew Ltd,
Mulukey, Rhenock for 17,700 cases including €24.79 lakh.

4 Ms Himalayan Distilleries Ltd, Mazitar for 4,600 cases and M/s Denzong Albrew Ltd, Mulukey, Rhenock for
15,900 cases.

5 Ms Himalayan Distilleries Ltd, Mazitar for 14,100 cases and M/s Denzong Albrew Ltd, Mulukey, Rhenock for

1,800 cases.
108


Chapter IV: Revenue Sector

cent of the gross gaming yield or one crore, whichever is higher for the first year and
thereafter with incremental increase of 15 per cent per year on Minimum Assured.
Revenue (MAR) for each of the remaining four years. As per gazette notification dated
20 June 2012, the monthly gaming fees shall be payable on the 10" of the succeeding
month, failing which a penal interest at the rate 12 per cent per annum shall be imposed.

Audit of records (January-February 2014) of Directorate of Sikkim State Lotteries
(DSSL) revealed that M/s Mayfair Hotels and Resorts (Sikkim), Ranipool, which was
granted license for operation of casino games for five year period from 1 June 2011, was
operating games without payment of prescribed gaming fees to the Government.

In response to DSSL’s direction (25 February 2012) to deposit the prescribed gaming
fee, the Director, Trio Ventures (P) Ltd. on behalf of licensee requested the Government
to reduce the minimum annual payment of € one crore to = 30 lakh and the rate of tax
exceeding MAR to three per cent against the existing ten per cent till the company can
stand on its own feet. A Committee, constituted to examine the tenders/bids, examined
the said request and observed that it was beyond its purview to dwell upon the matter as
the Sikkim Casino Games (Control & Tax) Act 2002 and the Sikkim Casino Games
(Control & Tax) Rules 2007 do not have any provision for relaxation/reduction of the
gaming fees. Committee’s decision was approved (10 January 2013) by the Chief
Minister and the licensee was accordingly intimated (19 January 2013).

However, despite the lapse of more than three years, the DSSL neither realised the
prescribed gaming fee nor cancelled the licence as per provisions of the Casino (Control
& Tax) Act and Rules. The dues towards non-realisation of penalty alongwith
outstanding dues amounted to हैं 2.43 crore for the period from 2011 to August 2014 as
detailed in the Appendix 4.13.1.

Thus, inadequate action of the Department resulted in non-realisation of fees and leviable
penalty to the tune of % 2.43 crore over a period of one to three years (August 2014).

In reply the DSSL stated (August 2014) that it is in the process of realisation of
outstanding gaming fee and as a result of their persuasion, the said company has
deposited a total of = 1.40 crore including penalty for the period from June 2011 during
December 2012 to July 2014. Fact remained that = 2.43 crore excluding the amount
deposited by the Company remained to be realised till August 2014.

egarding of clause in the agreement relating to applicable percentage rate of

Minimum Assured Revenue on pro-rata basis resulte a loss of = 1.69 crore.

An agreement was drawn (August 2001) between Government of Sikkim and Tashi
Delek Gaming Solutions Pvt. Ltd (TDGSPL), a Marketing Agent (MA), for maintenance
and marketing of the State’s online lottery. The contract was for seven years from
August 2001 with provision that the agreement could be revised and further extended as
mutually agreed upon by both the parties from time to time.

According to the revised agreement (December 2003), the sale proceeds were to be
deposited by the MA in the Government account within 15 days from the date of the
draw. Subsequently, an interim agreement was signed (18 November 2005). Clause 1 of

109


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

the interim agreement specified that the MA was required to pay at the rate of 5 per cent
(for the existing games) and 1 per cent (for the additional games) of the sale proceeds,
subject to a Minimum Assured Revenue (MAR) of % 10 crore per annum including
₹ 4.50 crore (approx.) payable to Government for the existing 4 games (one daily and
three weekly games). The extended agreement entered into (27 September 2010) further
clarified that failure to comply with the terms of agreement would attract a penal interest
at the rate of 12 per cent from 1 October 2010. The additional clause was acknowledged,
accepted and confirmed (29 September 2010) by the MA. The agreement continued to be
extended till 15 December 2012. A new MA (M/s Pan India Network Ltd.) was
appointed on 16 December 2012.

Audit (February 2014) of records of the Directorate of Sikkim State Lotteries (DSSL)
revealed that DSSL asked (8 November 2012) the MA (M/s TDGSPL) to deposit the part
MAR at the rate of € 10 crore per annum for the period from 1 October 2012 to 15
December 2012. The MAR was charged on pro-rata basis from the earlier MA
disregarding the clause of interim agreement (18 November 2005) being 5 per cent and 1
per cent of the sale proceeds which resulted in a loss of revenue of = 1.69 crore to the
Government as detailed in Appendix 4.14.1.

In their reply the DSSL stated (March 2014) that the agreement dated 18 November 2005
could not be executed as the MA repeatedly represented to the Government for
exemption of clause 1 of the said agreement on the plea that sale of Sikkim lottery tickets
were stopped by some States within their respective jurisdictions.

The reply of the DSSL is not tenable as the sale of Sikkim State Lotteries was stopped in
States between 1 January 2000 (Andhra Pradesh) and 1 September 2010 (Kerala). It was
only after the stoppage that the MA acknowledged, accepted and confirmed (29
September 2010) the extended agreement of DSSL (27 September 2010). Further, the
sale proceeds during the period 2009-10 to 2011-12 and for the 1* three quarters of
2012-13 up to 15 December 2012° showed an increasing trend, indicating no impact of
stoppage of sales of lottery tickets in some of the States. Therefore, the injudicious
decision exhibited vis-a-vis the existing applicable percentage rate on MAR of 10 crore
per annum, resulted in a loss of revenue to the Government amounting to = 1.69 crore.

Sale of lottery tickets: 2009-10: % 517.26 crore, 2010-11: ₹ 607.60 crore, 2011-12: ₹ 758.75 crore and 2012-13
(up to 15 December 2012 and excluding Super Triplex/Science Online lottery): है 726.46 crore.

110


Chapter V: General Sector

This Chapter of the Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014 deals with the
findings on audit of the State Government units under General Sector.

The names of the State Government departments and the total budget allocation and
expenditure of the State Government under General Sector during the year 2013-14 are
given in the table below:

Table 5.1.1

(@in crore)

39.59
Judicia 10.11
Election 3.26
Information and Public Relation 14.25
Sports and Youth Affairs 15.82
Printing and Statione1 [68 | 7.02

Public Service Commission 2.70 2.61

Information Technolog 7.07
Police 265.14 246.16
Vigilance 5.38

Development Planning, Economic Reforms and North Eastern
८ है है 33.0 25.18
‘ouncil Affairs

Personnel, Administrative Reforms and Training, Public
Grievances, Career Options and Employment, Skill 1.55
Development and Chief Minister's Self Employment Schemes

Governor 575 575
Legislature 14.29
Science, Technology and Climate Change 1.99
Land Revenue and Disaster Management

19. | Finance, Revenue and Expenditure 1,08
20_| Parliamentary Affairs 1.09] 1.08 |

Besides the above, the Central Government has been transferring a sizeable amount of

funds directly to the implementing agencies under the General Sector to different
departments of the State Government. The major transfers for implementation of flagship
programmes of the Central Government are detailed below:



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Table 5.1.2

Information aaa Directorate of Inform:
North Eastern Council and Public २६
Public Relation
Sikkim

Sports and Youth | National” Programme for

Youth and Adolescent
Affairs Department | Development General

Information ८ Centre for Research &
3. Technology North Eastern Council Training in Informatics

rime and — Criminal tion of Polic P|
Tracking Network — and
a | pot System (CCTNS)
eee Crime and Criminal
Tracking Network and 206
System (CCTNS)
Education through ICT. Science & Technology
4

Youth Development
State Science & Technology | Sikkim State Council of =
Programme Science & Technolo;
Cn Technology Development | Sikkim State Council of
Science,
a Programme Science & Technology
| Bioinformaree Sikkim State Council oF
Science & Technol
it Information. ikkim Stat ink of 30.52
ducation and Awareness nice & Technology
| «| Land Revenue and | wyp1 Ap scheme District Collector East 1000.00
Disaster Management
Sikkim Information Propagation of RTI Act — im Information
Q Improving Transparency
‘ommission ‘ommission
and Accountabilit
1,429.36

Central Plan Scheme Monitoring System of the GOL.

Audit process starts with the assessment of risks faced by various departments of
Government based on expenditure incurred, criticality/complexity of activities, level of

delegated financial powers, assessment of overall internal controls, etc.

After completion of audit of each unit on a test-check basis, Inspection Reports
containing audit findings are issued to the heads of the departments. The departments are
to furnish replies to the audit findings within one month of receipt of the Inspection
Reports. Whenever replies are received, audit findings are either settled based on
reply/action taken or further action is required by the audited entities for compliance.
Some of the important audit observations arising out of these Inspection Reports are
processed for inclusion in the Audit Reports, which are submitted to the Governor of the
State under Article 151 of the Constitution of India for laying on the table of the
Legislature.

The test audits were conducted involving expenditure of हैं 333.16 crore (including
expenditure of € 303.42 crore of previous years) (details of year-wise break-up is given in
Appendix 5.2.1) of the State Government under General Sector. This Chapter contains



Chapter V: General Sector

one Performance Audit on Water supply schemes funded under NLCPR and NEC and
one Compliance Audit paragraph as given below:

Sikkim was recognised as part of North-Eastern Region (NER) from April 1998 and got
formally integrated in the NER during 2002. Accordingly, it started availing of the benefit
of funding from Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR) from 1998-99 and
North Eastern Council (NEC) from 2003-04. A number of infrastructural projects were
constructed out of these funds in various sectors such as Roads and Bridges, Irrigation &
Flood Control, Energy & Power, Human Resource Development, etc. The overall
responsibility of managing NLCPR and NEC funds was vested with the Development
Planning, Economic Reforms and North Eastern Council Affairs Department
(DPERNECAD). The Projects relating to Water Supply Schemes were implemented by
Water Security and Public Health Engineering Department (WSPHED) and Rural
Management and Development Department (RMDD) for urban and rural areas
respectively.

The Performance Audit of the Water Supply Projects funded under NLCPR and NEC for
the period 2009-14 was carried out during April-July 2014. Results of Performance Audit
disclosed that during 2009-14, the State had executed 23 projects (13 NLCPR and 10
NEC), of which 6 were completed and remaining 17 projects were in progress as of
March 2014. Analysis revealed that due emphasis was not accorded to appropriate
formulation of projects. Perspective plan had not been prepared. The concept papers in
most cases were not submitted or were incomplete. Further, many DPRs were prepared
without proper survey and investigation and without ensuring the availability of land for
the projects leading to revision of estimates and time and cost overrun in some cases.

Analysis of financial management disclosed short release of matching share by the State
Government owing to fund constraint in the State plan outlay; non utilisation of funds in
time by the implementing departments; unrealistic preparation of budget estimates;
unauthorised diversion of funds and excess expenditure. Similarly, analysis of project
implementation revealed that in many cases, the Departments (WSPHED and RMDD)
had not initiated the tender procedure on time leading to delay in commencement of
work; cost escalations of the projects; avoidable expenditure and extension of undue
benefit to the contractors. The Nodal Department had neither attached due importance
to quality control nor initiated suitable measures to streamline the monitoring and
evaluation system to ensure timely accrual of intended benefits from the projects.

113


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

The Implementing Departments (WSPHED and RMDD) as well as the Nodal
Department (DPERNECAD) had not accorded due emphasis in formulation of|
projects based on critical assessment of infrastructural gaps in basic minimum
services.

(Paragraph 5.3.7)

There were short releases of matching share of हैं 6.27 crore by the State
Government.

(Paragraphs 5.3.9.1)

There was unauthorised diversion of fund of = 0.77 crore.
(Paragraphs 5.3.8 and 5.3.10.4)

A total of 17 projects were under implementation out of which14 projects were
behind schedule ranging between 1 and 72 months. The delay in completion of 6 (out
of 23) projects ranged from 33 months to 52 months.

(Paragraph 5.3.10.2)

Quality control was not attached due importance by the Nodal as well as
implementing departments.

(Paragraph 5.3.11)

Suitable measures to streamline the monitoring mechanism were not initiated by
Nodal Department leading to change in scope of works, delayed completion of
works, cost overruns, etc.

(Paragraph 5.3.12)

The ‘Non-Lapsable Central Pool of Resources’ (NLCPR) was constituted (December
1997) by GOI for facilitating speedy development of infrastructure in the North Eastern
States by increasing the flow of budgetary financing for specific viable infrastructure
projects/schemes in various sectors and to reduce critical gaps in the basic minimum
services such as irrigation, power, roads and bridges, education, health, water supply and
sanitation, ete. NEC funded projects were started later on with the objectives of balanced
socio-economic development of the region. Sikkim was recognised as part of the North
Eastern Region since April 1998 and formally integrated in the North Eastern Region
during 2002. Accordingly, the benefit of funding from NLCPR and NEC was availed of
by the State from 1998-99 and 2003-04 respectively.

114


Chapter V: General Sector

At the State level, the responsibility for implementation of NLCPR/NEC scheme was
primarily vested with the Development, Planning, Economic Reforms and North Eastern
Council Affairs Department (DPERNECAD) headed by the Development Commissioner
who was assisted by a Special Secretary, Additional Secretary, Joint Secretary and
Deputy Secretaries.

Projects relating to Water Supply were primarily implemented by Principal Chief
Engineer-cum-Secretary, Water Security and Public Health Engineering Department
(WSPHED) and Secretary, Rural Management and Development Department (RMDD).
The responsibility for execution of individual projects within the departments rested with
concerned Superintending Engineers who were assisted by Divisional Engineers and
Assistant Engineers.

The organisational structure is depicted below:

Chart 5.3.1

The Performance Audit was carried out to ascertain whether the funding availed from
NLCPR and NEC for Water Supply projects helped in ensuring availability of potable
water to the targeted population in a timely manner.

In addition, the objectives of the PA were to assess whether:

> The mechanism in place for approval of the projects was strictly adhered to and
appropriate checks applied at each stage, prior to approval and after release of
funds;

us


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

> Adequate funds were released in a timely manner and utilised for specific
purpose;

> Projects were executed efficiently and economically to achieve intended
objectives;

> Impact of the scheme was analysed at various levels; and

> There was a mechanism for adequate and effective monitoring and evaluation of

projects.

The findings were benchmarked against the criteria obtained from the following

documents:
> Scheme guidelines issued by Government of India;
> Instructions and circulars issued by DoNER, NEC and the State Government from

time to time;

Conditions and norms for release of funds;
Detailed Project Reports;

Sikkim Public Works Code and Manual;
Sikkim Financial Rules; and

Prescribed monitoring mechanism.

VVVVV

The process of Performance Audit commenced with the preparation of guidelines for
conduct of PA. Field audit began with letter of engagement (March 2014) to the
Development Commissioner, DPERNECAD, followed by entry conference (April 2014)
with the officers of the Nodal Department (DPERNECAD) and implementing
departments (WSPHED and RMDD). Audit objectives, methodology, scope of audit and
criteria were explained to the departments and their agreement obtained. This was
followed by issue of requisition for records/data and questionnaire. Records/documents
were examined and data analysis carried out. Physical verification of assets was
conducted (June-July 2014) jointly by Audit and departmental officers to corroborate
audit observations. Audit observations were issued to DPERNECAD, WSPHED and
RMDD for their response. For generating executable recommendations, the exit
conference was held (18 September 2014) with DPERNECAD, WSPHED and RMDD
wherein the findings were discussed and report finalised after taking into account the
views of the departments, duly incorporating the replies, wherever appropriate.

The PA was carried out (April-July 2014) through test check of records in DPERNECAD,
WSPHED and RMDD covering a period of five years (2009-14) for Water Supply
projects financed under NLCPR and NEC. The projects for audit scrutiny were selected
on the basis of two stage sampling. The sanctioned projects were segregated into two
strata (NLCPR and NEC) in the first stage. In the second stage, projects were selected

116


Chapter V: General Sector

through simple random sampling without replacement, applying random table. Out of 23
projects sanctioned, 16 projects were selected indicating 70 per cent of the total projects.
Besides, follow up of the recommendations incorporated in Comptroller and Auditor
General’s (CAG’s) Audit Report on Government of Sikkim for the year ended 31 March
2008 and 31 March 2010 relating to NLCPR (1999-2008) and NEC (2003-10)
respectively were also examined during the course of PA.

The results of Audit are enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.

Audit objective-1
Mechanism in place for approval of the projects and application of appropriate checks
at each stage, prior to approval and after release of funds.

NLCPR guidelines (Para 4.1) envisaged submission of a perspective plan along with
concept paper for drawing up of a priority list for the next financial year by the State
Government, latest by 30 November, for availing funding under the scheme.

Audit examination revealed that:

> The implementing Department as well as Nodal Department had not initiated any
action to prepare Perspective Plan during the period covered under the review
(2009-14). Therefore, selection of projects for drawing priority lists from the
perspective plan could not be done. The priority list, however, was forwarded by
Nodal Department based on list of projects prepared sector-wise by implementing
Department.

> The priority lists submitted by the State Government to the DoNER were
forwarded belatedly in 15 (out of 23) cases test checked in Audit during the year
2009-14. The delay ranged between 23 days and 8 months. The priority lists were
also devoid of detailed gap analysis of the proposed sector and justification for the
list of projects for filling the gaps.

> According to the NLCPR guidelines (Para 4.1) concept papers for each of the
projects incorporating the problem to be addressed through the projects,
development objectives proposed to be achieved, benefits likely to accrue
quantified in terms of population, environmental impact assessment and other
parameters, issues relating to sustainability, operation and maintenance of assets
after completion of projects. The other related issues were also required to be
submitted to DoNER/NEC by State Government latest by 30 November every
year.
Audit observed that concept papers were prepared project-wise for each sector and
submitted annually to DoNER. The Concept papers were prepared perfunctorily in

17


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

15 cases as the important parameters such as problems to be addressed through the
project, development objectives, sustainability, operation and maintenance were
not incorporated therein.

The Department while accepting that the concept papers in earlier years were not as per
the formats issued by DoNER, stated (August 2014) that the process had been improved
in the recent year (2013-14).

5.3.7.1 Defective preparation of DPRs

NLCPR guidelines (Para-4.1(v)) envisaged upon the State Government for submission of
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for all the projects. The DPRs should be accompanied
by a socio-economic feasibility report, economic and technical viability, detailed
technical specifications, project implementation and monitoring schedule through Critical
Path Method (CPM) and Programme Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) chart.

The DPRs submitted by the State Government were not accompanied by socio-economic
feasibility reports, project implementation and monitoring schedule in 22 (including one
DPR not furnished to audit) out of 23 works under execution by the departments. This led
to delay in commencement of projects, unauthorised revision of projects and delay in
completion of projects as detailed below:

The 22 DPRs (including one DPR not furnished to audit) out of 23 works under execution
by the departments were not accompanied by socio-economic feasibility reports, project
implementation and monitoring schedule and were also devoid of proper survey and
investigation. As a result, six projects could be completed after delay of 33 to 52 months
and 17 projects were in progress, of which 14 were behind the date of completion by 3 to
72 months. Out of 14 works in progress behind schedule, one project had not commenced
(WSS Central Pandam) and one project was stalled (Water supply project to Makha
Bazar). The details are shown in Appendix 5.3.1.

A few instances of such cases are given below:

न

> Water supply projects at Central Pandam

The RMDD initiated a project ‘Augmentation of Central Pandam Water Supply scheme’
in 2005 for ensuring regular and sustainable supply of potable drinking water for Central
Pandam and its adjoining habitations. The Department invited tender (March 2005) for
preparation of DPR of the project and awarded (November 2005) the work to M/s
Archtech Consultant Pvt. Ltd., a Kolkata based consultancy firm for हैं 96.50 lakh with
stipulation to complete the DPR within nine months (August 2006). The consultant
submitted (October 2008) the DPR of the project estimated at € 21 crore and was paid
₹ 30 lakh!.

The State Government proposed (2008-09) to include the project under NLCPR and
submitted (November 2008) the DPR for the project estimation at ¥ 21 crore to DoNER.

1 Mobilisation advance (₹ 10 lakh in March 2006 and % 20 lakh in October 2012).

Jus [


Chapter V: General Sector

The project envisaged drawing up water from Ritchu Khola situated along Pakyong
Machong road for catering to the requirement of population of 5,434 persons in Central
Pandam and its adjoining areas. The DoNER conveyed the financial approval (June 2009)
for = 20.50 crore (90:10 Central State sharing basis) with stipulation to complete the
project by June 2012 and also released हैं 6.33 crore for the project.

The RMDD invited (August 2009) tender for the work with estimated cost of = 20.50
crore and awarded (April 2010) the work to the lowest bidder at & 23.13 crore? with
stipulation to complete within 24 months (March 2012). The revised estimated cost
(₹ 23.13 crore) was approved (April 2010) by the State Cabinet. The Department incurred
(December 2009) ₹ 3.62 crore towards procurement of GI pipes (7,628 metres) for the
project.

Audit observed that the contractor had not commenced the work till January 2011
primarily owing to non-availability of clear site for laying pipelines. In the same month,
the Department anticipated drying up of the water source, which was likely to affect
adequate availability of water, especially during the lean period, and would not be
sufficient to cater to the requirement of the targeted population. This was because of the
fact that the WSPHED drew water from same source for another project ‘Pakyong Water
Supply’ in 2010.

To obviate the situation, the Department carried out another survey (January 2011)
incurring 3.90 lakh. Based on the survey, the Department was contemplating to modify
the DPR. While the approval to the modified DPR was awaited, the project had not
commenced as of June 2014. As a result, residents of Central Pandam and the adjoining
areas were deprived of regular and sustainable supply of potable water.

> Unauthorised revision of Rhenock Water supply project

The Scheme ‘Augmentation of Rhenock Water supply Scheme’ was sanctioned (February
2008) by DoNER under NLCPR at an estimated cost of = 16.27 crore with stipulation to
complete the work by January 2010. The terms of sanction of DoNER stipulated strict
implementation of the project through PERT and CPM. Changes in the scope of work, if
any, were to be intimated to Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering
Organisation (CPHEEO). The State Cabinet approved (July 2008) the proposal for
execution of the project at an estimated cost of 16.27 crore.

Audit of records revealed that, the project was not completed within the stipulated date
(January 2010) owing to failure of the Department to make available suitable land for
laying pipelines due to objection from the land owners. The scope of work was revised
(January 2010), after two years of sanction of the project, entailing substantial changes.
The use of ductile iron pipes and galvanised iron pipes were changed into steel pipes,
changes were brought about in the water treatment plant (WTP), reservoir, etc. Though
the revised cost was kept within the original sanctioned cost through internal re-
adjustment of the items of the work, intimation to CPHEEO and the funding agency

2. Civil work (₹ 1,194.86 lakh+22 per cent above & 1,457.73 lakh)+materials (@ 768.41 lakh)+Miscellaneous
expenditure (® 46.29 lakh)+Contingency (40.79 lakh) = €2,312.62 lakh

) 19 [


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

(DoNER) was not sent and their approval was not obtained. CPM and PERT chart was
not followed for ensuring effective and efficient project management.

Thus, there was delay in commencement of the project leading to delay in completion of
project beyond the scheduled date of completion (January 2010) by four years. Besides
the change of scope of work was unauthorised as approval from CPHEEO and DoNER
was not obtained. Further, an amount of = 25.72 lakh from the project was diverted and
utilised towards overhauling and annual maintenance contract of Selep WTP at Gangtok.
This was in contravention to NLCPR guidelines.

The Department informed (August 2014) that the work has since been completed and that
the delay was not intentional but was beyond the control of the Department as the land
owners were not willing to part with their land for laying of pipelines. The reply was
indicative of the fact that availability of land was not ensured before taking up the project.
Besides, change in the scope of work was not intimated to funding agency and CPHEEO.

> Change of Water Source for Dentam Water supply project

The project ‘Augmentation of Dentam Water supply Scheme’ in West Sikkim was
approved by NEC (January 2010) for = 4.50 crore. The Department could not implement
the project due to cost escalation between project conceptualisation (2008) and date of
sanction (January 2010) by NEC. To supplement the project, NEC was approached and
additional sanction of = 2.13 crore was obtained (March 2011) as Phase —II.

The work was awarded (December 2011) to two agencies (M/s Dentam Women Labour
Co-operative Society and M/s Dentam Educated Unemployed Co-operative Society)
without inviting any tender on the recommendation of the Dentam Gram Panchayat at an
estimated cost of = 15.84 lakh and हैं 1.30 crore respectively with the stipulation to
complete by June 2013.

Audit of records revealed that due to land dispute with private land owners during
execution of the project, intake source had to be shifted from Tindobaney khola
(originally envisaged in the DPR) to Upper Mangmoo khola, indicating defective survey
and deviation from the approved project. The work stipulated to be completed by June
2011 had not been completed till July 2014. As a result, benefits envisaged from the
project were not forthcoming.

The Department accepted (August 2014) that the project was delayed due to land dispute
and assured that delay would be minimised in future.

> Water Distribution network at Singtam

Based on the proposal submitted by the State Government, GOI sanctioned (July 2010) a
project ‘Water Distribution network at Singtam’ at an estimated cost of = 21.05 crore
under NLCPR. The Cabinet approved (November 2011) implementation of the project.

According to the approved project four zonal tanks had to be constructed for water
reservoir. The Department had to forgo one reservoir tank due to land dispute with
Human Resource Development Department, which led to a saving of = 1.43 crore. The
entire saving (र 1.43 crore) was proposed to be diverted and utilised for repair of water

120


Chapter V: General Sector

treatment plant (old Central Water Reservoir (CWR), which was beyond scope of the
project.

The Department stated (August 2014) that zonal tank could not be constructed in the
absence of availability of suitable land and instead size of other zonal tanks were
increased. Besides, there was a proposal for repairing of the old CWR to enhance its
storage capacity.

Failure of the Department to arrange for suitable land, as envisaged in the DPR, indicated
inadequate survey and investigation and consequent defective preparation of DPR.

> Less importance to capacity building

Recognising the problems faced by the State Government in preparation of DPRs, the
Ministry of DoNER organised capacity building training courses from time to time for
imparting training to officers from various States.

Audit observed that DPERNECAD had not kept details of training programmes
conducted by the Ministry, number of officers imparted training during 2009-14,
utilisation of services of trained officers in project preparation works, etc. This indicated
that adequate importance was not attached to training although this was important in view
of deficient preparation of DPRs and to avail full benefits of project funded by
DoNER/NEC.

Audit objective
Adequate funds were released in a timely manner and ॥।

The NLCPR/NEC funded water supply projects were executed by WSPHED and RMDD
for catering to the need of potable water to urban and rural population respectively. The
funds released and expenditure thereagainst for the period 2009-14 are given below:
Table 5.3.1
(@in lakh

[
का

| 0०1 0०० |
[00 |
Source: Information furnished by departments and Detailed Appropriation Accounts. The figures in the
brackets represent percentage.
* Reasons for the adverse balances could not be explained by the Department.



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Analysis revealed the following:

5.3.9.1 Short release of funds by State Government

Guidelines and terms of sanction of NEC/NLCPR projects stipulated release of State
share (10 per cent) by the State Government simultaneously with the release by DoNER.
This was however, not complied with by the State Government as seen from the
following table:

Table 5.3.2
Zin lakh)

7,059.96 784.43 258.64 (-) 525.79

2009-10 623.95 69.33 73.32 (+) 3.99
ee
ee
[216.66 |

Source: Departmental figure.

It would be noticed from the above table that against the requirement of matching share
of = 10.01 crore for the years 2009-10 to 2013-14 (₹ 7.84 crore - NLCPR and हैं 2.17 crore
- NEC), only ₹ 3.74 crore (र₹ 2.59 crore - NLCPR and 1.15 crore NEC) were released by
the State Government resulting in short release of = 6.27 crore (% 5.25 crore - NLCPR and
= 1.02 - NEC) by the State Government due to fund constraint in the State plan fund. This
was not only in contravention to the guidelines, but also hampered the progress of the
works.

5.3.9.2 Absence of supervision over release of funds to implementing Department

According to the NLCPR guidelines (Para 8.6), funds released from the Pool must be
transmitted to implementing departments by the State Government within 15 days from
the date of release of funds by GOI. A certificate to this effect was also to be sent to the
DoNER by the State Planning Department (DPERNECAD).

The funds released by the DoNER/NEC are received by the Finance Department, which
in turn, released the funds to implementing Department based on requisition received
from the implementing departments and recommendations by DPNERCAD. It was
observed that DPERNECAD had neither kept proper records indicating actual date of
transfer of funds to the implementing departments (WSPHED and RMDD) nor furnished
certificate to the DoNER that the funds had been transmitted to the implementing
departments within 15 days of receipt of funds as required under the guidelines. This
indicated absence of proper supervision over release of funds by the Nodal Department
(DPERNECAD).



Chapter V: General Sector

Examination of records relating to WSPHED revealed that against the GOI release of
= 13.76 crore as of March 2014, Finance Revenue, Expenditure Department (FRED)
released only = 3 crore, leaving a balance of = 10.76 crore. The Nodal Department and
implementing departments had not followed up vigorously with the Finance Department
to obtain full funds released by GOI from FRED.

Audit objective:

Projects were executed efficiently and economically to achieve intended objectives.

Project implementation is one of the most important activities for realising the benefits
envisaged from the projects in a timely manner. The terms of sanction also stipulate
expeditious completion of projects (usually ranging from 1 year to 3 years), effective
monitoring of the execution so as to avoid time and cost overruns, etc. Audit noticed that
the implementing departments and the Nodal Department had not ensured effective
project implementation leading to delay in tendering process, non-completion of projects,
abandonment of work by the contractors, deviation in the scope of works and excess
procurement of pipes as indicated below.

The defects such as cost escalation and delay in completion of works, although
highlighted in CAG’s Audit Report, Government of Sikkim for the year ended 31 March
2008 and 31 March 2010 relating to NLCPR (1999-2008) and NEC (2003-10), continued
unabated despite PAC’s recommendations (March 2011).

5.3.10.1 Tendering and award of work

NLCPR guidelines (Para 7.1) require the implementing departments to award the works
to the contractors within three months of sanction of the projects by the Ministry (even
without waiting for the release of funds from the State Governments to implementing
agency), after following appropriate tendering process through wide publicity in print
media and websites.

Audit of records revealed that the WSPHED and RMDD failed to initiate the tender
procedure on time leading to delay in award of works to the contractors. 17 (out of 23)
projects were awarded belatedly recording a delay of one to 31 months. Audit of records
revealed that the Department was submitting proposals to State Government through
DPNERCAD and FRED for according approval to take up the execution of projects and
financial sanctions. This was time consuming and led to delayed initiation of projects,
which in turn also led to delayed completion of projects and cost escalation due to time
overrun reflected in subsequent paragraphs.

5.3.10.2 Delay in execution of works

The status of projects as of April 2009, new projects sanctioned and completed during
2009-14 and projects remaining incomplete as of March 2014 are given below:

123


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Table 5.3.3

Source: Monthly & Quarterly Progress Reports furnished by the departments.

‘Water supply projects (23) funded under NEC (10 projects = 38.79 crore) and NLCPR
(13 projects हैं 177.80 crore) involving = 216.60 crore were under implementation by
RMDD (NLCPR 4 ₹ 44.64 crore) and WSPHED (NLCPR 9 ₹ 133.16 crore and NEC 10
₹ 38.79 crore) during 2009-14.

Six projects (out of 23) were completed recording a delay of 33 to 52 months. Out of
remaining 17 projects under implementation as of March 2014, 14 projects were behind
schedule from stipulated date of completion for 1 to 72 months. The physical progress of
projects under implementation ranged between 13 and 98 per cent as of March 2014 as
detailed in Appendix 5.3.1.

Audit noticed that reasons for delays in completion of the projects were non-finalisation
of land, non-obtaining of forest clearance and fault on the part of contractors. The
implementing departments indicated availability of land in the Detailed Project Reports,
but in majority of the cases, land was not available for commencement of the works for
the projects. In 6 cases (out of 16) test checked in Audit, land free from encumbrances
was not available and disputes affected the progress of the work. Similarly, forest
clearance in 8 (out of 16), were not obtained in advance despite the fact that 47.69 per
cent of geographical area in Sikkim was under forest cover and accordingly, the majority
of the water supply projects run through forest areas. In most cases (8 out of 16), the
process of obtaining forest clearances was initiated only after the issue of work orders for
execution, let alone prior to sanction and approval of the projects from the Ministry. In
two cases, delay in execution was exclusively due to fault on the part of contractors.

Both the implementing departments as well as Nodal Department (DPERNECAD) had
not initiated suitable steps to complete the projects within scheduled time. Nodal
Department neither carried out mid-term review of the projects nor monitored the
progress from time to time for ensuring expeditious completion. Non-completion /
delayed completion of projects led to postponement of accrual of intended benefits from
the projects even after spending हैं 72.78 crore on those projects.

The Department stated (August 2014) that the matter regarding land acquisition was
pursued vigorously at the grass root level and with the appropriate authorities. However,
unintentional delays, could not be avoided. The reply was not acceptable as it was
incumbent upon the Department to ensure availability of land beforehand for
implementation of the projects (SPWD Manual Para-4.5).

5.3.10.3 Water Supply Scheme to Jorethang Nagar Panchayat

Government of Sikkim, through WSPHED submitted (August 2009) DPR to DoNER for
the project ‘Augmentation of Water Supply Scheme to Newly Created Jorethang Nagar

124


Chapter V: General Sector

Panchayat’ in South Sikkim under NLCPR to cater to a population of 2,967. The DoNER
accorded (March 2011) administrative approval for = 9.53 crore for the project with cost
sharing of 90 (GOT) and 10 (State Government) per cent. Till March 2014, DoNER
released = 2.46 crore towards the project. The project constituted nine components, of
which civil work component with estimated cost of = 2.92 crore was awarded (July 2013)
to the contractor at 25 per cent above the estimated cost i.e. = 3.65 crore.

Examination of records revealed that against the GOI’s sanction of € 2.58 crore towards
‘laying of pipelines’, the Department executed work of % 1.45 crore, without any
information to the funding agency (DoNER). The action of the Department was against
the GOI’s guidelines (Para 4.1) which expressly prohibited diversion of funds.

Physical verification by Audit alongwith departmental officers confirmed (July 2014) that
the sedimentation tank II and zonal tank had not been constructed; Chowkidar’s quarter
and filter house, although required, to be constructed separately, were clubbed together;
the execution of sedimentation tank I (₹ 8.65 lakh) was enhanced to = 32.41 lakh by
internal readjustment without obtaining approval of DoNER.

The Department stated (August 2014) that many things changed at ground level during
the execution phase which brought about changes in the estimate. The Department always
endeavoured to complete the project successfully within the sanctioned cost. The fact
however, remained that the changes were not intimated to funding agency in GOI.

5.3.10.4 Augmentation of Kaluk-Rinchepong Water Supply Scheme

The DoNER sanctioned (February 2004) ‘Augmentation of the Kaluk-Rinchepong Water
supply project’ for हैं 3.50 crore for catering to the requirement of drinking water to
13,330 people of Kaluk-Rinchenpong for a period of 25 years from the date of
completion of the project.

The civil works portion of the project was awarded (March 2005) to three contractors
with stipulation to complete within 12 months (February 2006). The project was
completed belatedly (January 2010) at an expenditure of = 3.46 crore due to slow pace of
work by contractors.

Physical verification of the project by Audit in presence of departmental officers revealed
(June 2014) that the project was non-functional in absence of rectification of defects
caused due to frequent bursting of pipes in the difficult terrain. The project was not
yielding any benefit to the public of Kaluk-Rinchenpong, who were in need of potable
water, even after incurring = 3.46 crore towards execution of the project. Besides, project
funds of हैं 50.96 lakh was diverted towards implementation of “Geyzing Water Supply
Project’ which had not been recovered as of June 2014.

The Department stated (August 2014) that bursting of pipes occurred due to natural
phenomenon in hilly states with young mountain and it was being resolved to make it
operational.

The project however was not operational as of September 2014.

125


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

5.3.10.5 Makha Bazar Water Supply Scheme.

Map 5.3.1

The work ‘Augmentation of Water Supply
Project for Makha Bazar’, East Sikkim was
sanctioned (December 2011) by DoNER for
₹ 4.92 crore. = 3.27 crore was released by
DoNER as first (₹ 1.50 crore in December
2011) and second (₹ 1.77 crore’ in
September 2013) instalments. The State
Cabinet approved (April 2012) the project
for implementation. The Project envisaged
providing of 135 litre per capita per day of
safe drinking water to 1,796 people of
Makha bazar and surrounding areas drawing
water from Rangsang khola, a perennial
source situated at a distance of 9.10 km.

On the recommendation of Singbel Gram
Panchayat, the civil work portion of the
project with an estimated cost of = 1.61 crore was awarded (September 2012) to Patuk-
Singbel Civil Contractors Co-operative Society, Makha without inviting quotations with
stipulation to complete within 24 months (August 2014). Mobilisation advance of = 16.10
lakh was also released to the Co-operative Society. The contractor, after laying 4.5 km of
pipelines (out of 9.10 km), between December 2012 and October 2013, stopped the
execution of the project. The contractor represented to the Chief Minister (October 2013)
and also to the Secretary, WSPHED (February 2014) requesting for cost escalation on the
plea that the estimated cost was based on SOR-2006, which was not workable. The
revision was not accepted (February 2014) by the Department.

Joint Physical verification of the project alongwith the departmental officers confirmed
(June 2014) that the contractor had not carried out any work as of June 2014 except for
laying of 4.5 km of pipelines.

126


Chapter V: General Sector

Thus, slackness on the part of the contractor, coupled with the failure of the Department
to ensure strict supervision and monitoring of the execution of the project led to stalling
of the project and idling of fund of = 3.27 crore released by the DoNER for almost two
years, blocking of fund of = 16.10 lakh released to contractor as interest free mobilisation
advance and postponement of intended benefits from the project.

The Department stated (August 2014) that the work was monitored on monthly basis
through monthly progress report. The contractor executed work wherever land was
available. For the remaining stretches, the Department was pursuing with the District
Collectorate for finalisation of assessment and acquisition of land to complete the work
expeditiously within the sanctioned cost.

The reply is not acceptable as it was the responsibility of the Department to ensure
availability of land beforehand for expeditious implementation of the project (SPWD
Manual Para-4.5). Besides, the work was stopped by the contractor since October 2013
owing to demand for cost escalation.

5.3.10.6 Water supply Project at Rapdentse, West Sikkim

With a view to augment the supply of water to the rural populace of eight villages* of
West Sikkim having total population of 12,661 (census 2001), the State Government
approved (2003) the project for ‘Construction of Water harvesting structure at Rabdentse’
at an estimated cost of = 3.26 crore. The work constituted civil works (¥ 2.63 crore),
supply of materials and contingency (₹ 63.12 lakh). The Civil work was awarded
(February 2004) to the contractor at 15 per cent above the estimated cost (% 2.63 crore)
based on SOR-2002 with stipulation to complete by February 2005. The contractor was
paid & 30.25 lakh as mobilisation advance (₹ 14.75 lakh in March 2004 and हैं 15.50 lakh
in September 2004).

The contractor had not commenced the work as of March 2007, primarily owing to non-
obtaining of forest clearance. The Department later submitted the project to DoNER for
funding under NLCPR and obtained the sanction (July 2007) of the DoNER for हैं 4.62
crore. The work was awarded (January 2008) to the same contractor without inviting
fresh tender at enhanced estimated cost of हैं 3.70 crore with stipulation to complete by
July 2008. The project was physically completed in December 2013 after recording a
delay of more than five years from the date of sanction of DoNER.

Audit observed that (i) the project was not entitled for funding under DoNER according
to the scheme guidelines (Para-2.3) as it was initially approved for funding under the
State Plan;

(ii) The work was awarded to the contractor without quotation in contravention of the
SPW Code and the terms of sanction of the DoNER;

(iii) The Department had also released the TDR (₹ 8.50 lakh) before the financial closure
of the project and recovered MA of & 15 lakh as against = 30.50 lakh as of June 2014,
leading to extension of undue advantage to the contractor.

3 Gyalshing, Singyang, Bhaluthang, Onglop, Omchung, Yangtey, Kyongsha, and Yangthang.

127


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

The RMDD stated (October 2014) that work which was primarily delayed owing to non-
receipt of forest clearance, monsoon and construction of bird sanctuary in the same area
by Forest Department, had since been physically completed (December 2013). The
remaining MA of = 15.50 lakh would be recovered from the contractor while releasing
the final bill (₹ 24 lakh) which would be paid after the availability of fund.

5.3.10.7  Injudicious liability towards consultancy fees

WSPHED engaged (December 2009) a consultant (M/s Empire High Tech Solution Pvt.
Ltd., Ranipool, East Sikkim) for developing comprehensive Drinking Water Supply
System for Namchi and its surrounding areas at 6 per cent of the estimated cost of the
proposed project. The terms and conditions setting forth upper limit for estimated cost of
the proposed DPR, its viability, etc. were not incorporated in the work order.

The consultancy firm submitted (November 2011) the DPR with an estimated cost of
₹ 94.67 crore for the project after carrying out survey and investigation and also
submitted a bill for = 5.68 crore of which = 1.75 crore was released (March 2013) and
payment for the remaining amount (® 3.93 crore) was under process for release. Audit
noticed that DoNER approved the project only for हैं 38.22 crore (out of हैं 94.67 crore).
Thus, payment to the consultant for हैं 94.67 crore was unwarranted. Had the Department
inserted appropriate clause in the work order, it would have saved & 3.39 crore.

5.3.10.8 Abandonment of work by contractor

Augmentation of Gyalshing Water Supply Scheme, estimated at ¥ 7.52 crore, was
approved (February 2004) by DoNER. Civil work estimated at = 1.08 crore, was put to
tender (October 2004) and awarded (January 2005) to the contractor at 25 per cent above
the estimated cost with stipulation to complete by August 2006.

Audit noticed that the contractor, after execution of 67 per cent of the work between
January 2005 and December 2007, did not make any progress in the work. Time
extension upto March 2008 also was allowed to the contractor. The contractor did neither
resume the work despite several reminders, nor intimate reason for non-execution of
work. Finally (December 2008), the contract was rescinded and the remaining work
(₹ 35.93 lakh) executed departmentally.

Audit scrutiny revealed (June 2014) that the Department had not initiated any penal
action against the contractor despite his negligence in completing the project within the
stipulated time frame. The penalty for delay in completion amounting to = 10.08 lakh was
neither levied nor was the contractor blacklisted.

The Department stated (August 2014) that project complexities are sometimes beyond
control and penal action on the contractor would have further delayed the project. The
Department therefore, thought it to be prudent to complete the work with available
resources and assured that such incidents would be avoided in future.

5.3.10.9 Realignment and strengthening of existing pipelines at Pakyong

The Project ‘Construction of Water Supply Scheme in Pakyong, East Sikkim’ was
sanctioned at an estimated cost of = 9.83 crore by DoNER under NLCPR in December

128


Chapter V: General Sector

2010. The Civil portion of work was awarded (March 2012) to the contractor for = 5.62
crore with stipulation to complete by February 2014. As of March 2014, physical
progress of the work stood at 66 per cent incurring = 6.41 core. According to the
sanctioned approval by DoNER, the execution of project inter alia constituted
realignment and strengthening of existing pipelines (र 62.45 lakh). During joint physical
verification (June 2014) of project with Departmental officers, it was found that this
particular item of work had not been carried out.

The Department stated (August 2014) that the realignment work would be taken up as per
the requirement while laying the new pipelines at the stretches wherever required.

5.3.10.10 Metering system at Melli Water Supply Scheme

The work ‘Augmentation of Melli Water Supply Scheme in South Sikkim’ with an
estimated cost of = 8.72 crore was sanctioned (July 2011) by DoNER under NLCPR. The
project inter alia envisaged installation of metering system at = 66.68 lakh.

Scrutiny revealed that civil work (₹ 2.44 crore) was awarded (June 2012) to the contractor
with stipulation to complete by December 2013 and a portion of civil work (₹ 71.33 lakh)
was executed departmentally. As of June 2014, the Department had not initiated any
action towards installation of metering system despite the fact that entire available fund
was spent towards other components of the same work.

The Department stated (August 2014) that the metering would be done after completion
of the project. However, the fact remains that available fund was spent on other works
indicating that metering was not accorded due importance.

5.3.10.11 Excess procurement of pipes

The work ‘Water Supply Scheme from Chakmakey and Ringyang’ in West Sikkim was
approved and sanctioned by the State Government (June 2003) at an estimated cost of
₹ 6.64 crore. The work was put to tender (November 2003) and awarded (March 2004) to
a contractor at 30 per cent above the estimated cost with stipulation to complete by
August 2005.

The contractor however, did not complete the work within the stipulated time primarily in
the absence of forest clearance and the project was later converted (April 2008) for
funding under NLCPR with revised estimated cost of = 12.41 crore after incorporation of
additional quantities, such as, new distribution lines, reservoirs, sedimentation and
filtering tanks and allied works. The work was completed in August 2009 at an
expenditure of = 12.25 crore.

Audit of records revealed that against the total procurement of 19,860 mtr of 150 mm GI
pipes (र₹ 2.04 crore) for the project, 15,843 mtr GI pipes was utilised, leaving 4,026 mtr
GI pipes (₹ 0.59 crore) unutilised, which indicated procurement of pipes without proper
assessment.

129


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Quality control of potable water as well as the project execution was important to ensure
reaping of timely and appropriate benefits from the projects. The position is reflected
below:

5.3.11.1 Quality control in the supply of portable water

Drinking water regardless of its origin must be treated and tested to ensure its safety.
World Health Organisation guidelines issued for drinking water quality also stressed upon
supply of safe and quality water to the communities for protection of human health and
well-being.

The implementing departments (WSPHED and RMDD) had not attached due importance
to the quality aspect of the drinking water except one at Selep Water Treatment Plant,
Gangtok, manned by only one Chemist Officer for assessing the quality of water. Non-
testing of water and non- installation of water treatment plant is fraught with the risk of
exposing the public of the area to health hazards.

5.3.11.2 Quality control in execution of civil works

In response to the CAG’s Audit Report on Government of Sikkim for the year ended
March 2008, the WSPHED had assured the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) for
establishment of material testing laboratory at Adampool during 11" Plan period. The
PAC, in turn, recommended (757 Report of February 2009) for establishment of material
testing laboratory at the earliest. Audit noticed that the material testing laboratory was not
established as of July 2014 despite PAC’s recommendation and Department’s assurance.

The Department stated (August 2014) that establishment of material testing laboratory
was the priority of the Department and would be taken up once adequate budgetary
support was available.

Mechanism for adequate and effective monitoring and evaluation of projects.

The Nodal Department (DPERNECAD) and implementing departments had not
initiated suitable measures to streamline the monitoring and evaluation system as would
be evident from the following:

> Release of funds

The DPERNECAD, despite being the nodal authority, for implementation of the
programme, did not possess information about the release of funds by DoNER and NEC
through FRED to the project implementing departments and expenditure incurred
against it.

130


Chapter V: General Sector

> Submission of returns

The NLCPR guidelines (Para 8.1) stipulated submission of project-wise progress of
implementation on a quarterly basis so as to reach DoNER within three weeks of the end
of the quarter under report. In case of NEC projects, quarterly progress reports (QPR) and
utilisation certificates (UC) were to reach NEC Secretariat, Shillong by 15" of next
month following the end of quarter. However, it was seen in audit that implementing
departments failed to submit the QPRs and UCs in time to the Nodal Department
(DPERNECAD). The Nodal Department also consequently failed to submit the same to
the Ministry of DoNER and NEC in time. The delay in forwarding of the QPR by the
DPERNECAD in case of NLCPR projects ranged between 3 and 39 days and in case of
NEC projects, delay ranged between 6 and 80 days.

> Field inspection

The NLCPR guidelines (Para 8.6) stipulated that the monitoring and evaluation of
implementation of the project shall also be undertaken through field inspections by
officers of the Ministry of DoNER, as well as through impact studies, social audits and
evaluations conducted by the Government or through independent agencies at the request
of DoNER. However, only one inspection was conducted during the entire period of
2009-14.

> Lax periodical inspection by Nodal Department

The State Government (Nodal Department) was required to carry out periodical
inspection of projects and indicate the findings through separate and distinct sections in
the quarterly review report. No such finding was found included in the quarterly review
report indicating that no periodical inspection was ever carried out by the Nodal
Department during 2009-14. Thus, the monitoring by Nodal Department was lax.

NLCPR guidelines (Para-10) require the implementing departments to ensure that the
information about developmental schemes reaches the targeted beneficiaries. To ensure
greater transparency and publicity of information, it was imperative to give wide publicity
about the scheme in local media, display a sign board at project site and disseminate
information through appropriate means to the public. Audit noticed that adequate steps
were not initiated by WSPHED, RMDD and DPERNECAD as evidenced from the
following:

> Wide publication not done

Sikkim Financial Rules and SPW Code and Manual stipulated for wide publication
through advertisement in local and national newspapers, at least one month before the
date for submission of bids.

Test check revealed that the departments had not given wide publicity through
advertisement in national newspapers in respect of any of the projects checked by audit.
The advertisements were restricted to one or two local newspapers. Non-publication of

131


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

notice inviting tender (NIT) in national newspapers deprived the Government from
availing the benefit of fair and competitive bids.

> Display board at project site

Display board at project site, immediately after sanction of the project, indicating the date
of sanction of the project, likely date of completion, estimated cost of the project, source
of funding, physical target, name of the contractor, etc. was not erected by the
implementing departments in any of the projects except at ‘Water Treatment Plant at
Singtam’.

Similarly, permanent display at the site indicating funding agency, date of
commencement/completion, cost involved and name of the contractor for identification
of the projects were not seen in any of the 7 cases* physically verified (June 2014) by
Audit alongwith departmental Officers.

No impact study about the status of implementation had been carried out by any
agency. The deficiency regarding convening of meetings at Chief Secretary level was
pointed out in Audit Report (2008). However, no improvement was brought about.
During 2009-14, quarterly meetings headed by the Chief Secretary, as stipulated in the
scheme guidelines (Para 8.2) were not convened even once.

The Ministry on its part had also never deputed a representative from the Ministry for
attending the quarterly review meetings of the State during 2009-14 despite stipulation in
the guidelines. Thus, the spirit of the quarterly meetings to review the progress of
implementation was not achieved. Timely review of the implementation status would
have helped the implementing departments to improve the execution lacunae as pointed
out in the preceding paragraphs.

The funding from NLCPR and NEC for water supply projects had helped in construction
of a number of infrastructural projects in the State for making available potable water to
the public. Performance Audit of implementation of projects over a five year period
(2009-14) revealed that out of a total of 23 projects, only 6 (26 per cent) projects were
completed and 17 (74 per cent) were under construction. The physical progress of
incomplete projects ranged between 13 and 98 per cent till March 2014. The completed
projects (6) also recorded a delay in completion ranging between 33 and 52 beyond the
scheduled date of completion. Similarly, out of total funds of € 86.64 crore released
during 2009-14, ₹ 72.78 crore was incurred during the period as of March 2014. Out of

4 (i) Namchi WSS; (ii) Jorethang WSS; (iti) Melli WSS; (iv) Pakyong WSS;(v) Rhenock WSS; (vi) Singtam WSS; (vii) Feeder Selep.



Chapter V: General Sector

% 72.78 crore spent, irregular diversion of €0.77 crore and undue benefits to contractors
amounting to रैं 0.38 crore were noticed in Audit. The closing balances, coupled with
irregular excess expenditure and slow pace of implementation of projects indicated that
the speedy development of infrastructure projects was not achieved to the desired extent.

The following recommendations are made:

> The land should invariably be arranged by the departments before finalisation of
DPRs.

> Quality control mechanism should be strengthened to ensure availability of
potable water and proper execution of works.

> Schedule of inspections should be drawn up and carried out.

Non adherence to codal provi g Officers resulted
in non-recovery of forfeited travelling allowance advances of € 1.25 crore.

According to Rule 216 of Sikkim Financial Rules (SFR), the travelling allowance
advances granted shall be adjusted immediately on the completion of the tour or by 318
March, whichever is earlier and the right of the Government servant to travelling
allowance and daily allowances shall be forfeited or deemed to have been relinquished if
the claim is not preferred within one year from the date on which the journey is
completed. The advance so granted shall be recovered from his pay or any other dues in
one instalment by the authority competent to sanction such advance.

Scrutiny of advance register(s) and other related records of 29 Departments revealed
(June 2014) that travelling allowance advances aggregating हैं 1.25 crore drawn and
disbursed to various officers/officials during 1980-81 to 2012-13 remained to be
adjusted/recovered as detailed at Appendix 5.4.1. It can be seen from the Appendix that
Sikkim Legislative Assembly (₹ 73.92 lakh), Home Department (® 10.57 lakh) and Health
Care, Human Service and Family Welfare Department (© 7.72 lakh) had the highest
incidence of non-adjustment/non-recovery. As per extant rules, these amounts should
have been forfeited and recovered as these amounts pertain to periods over one year. The
age-wise analysis of pendency was as under:

133


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Table 5.3.1

More than one year and up to two years (2011-12 to 2012-13) 48,94,896
|B | More than two years and up to five years (2009-10 to 2010-2011 23,85,890

More than five years and up to ten years (2004-05 to 2008-09) 24,22,603
More than ten years (upto 2003-2004 27,70,291
Grand total 1,24,73,680

The reason for non-adjustment/non-recovery after the due dates was not on record. Thus,
non-discharging of the responsibility on the part of Drawing and Disbursing Officers led
to non-adjustment/non-recovery of advances pending as far back as 1980-81. Further, the
tight of the Government servant to travelling advances and daily allowances stood
forfeited in the above cases as the claims were not preferred within the stipulated period.
While the advances so granted should have been recovered from their pay or any other
dues in one instalment by the authority competent to sanction such advances, the same
had not been effected as of July 2014.

The matter was referred to the concerned Departments (May 2014); their reply had not
been received (October 2014).



Chapter VI: Follow up of Audit Observations

Audit observations on financial irregularities and deficiencies in maintenance of initial
accounts noticed during local audit and not settled on the spot are communicated to the
audited departments and to the higher authorities through Inspection Reports (IRs).

Serious irregularities noticed in audit are included in the Report of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India (Audit Reports) and presented to the State Legislature.
According to the instructions issued by the Finance, Revenue and Expenditure
Department (FRED), Government of Sikkim, all the concerned administrative
departments were required to furnish explanatory notes on the paragraphs/reviews
included in the Audit Reports within one month from the date of issue of the Audit
Reports.

It was however, noticed that as of October 2014, in more than 90 per cent cases, the
concerned administrative departments had not submitted the explanatory notes on the
paragraphs/reviews included in the Audit Report pertaining to the year 2011-12. In
respect of Audit Report for the year 2012-13, explanatory notes had not been submitted
by concerned departments in 62 per cent case.

Finance Revenue and Expenditure Department issued instructions to all departments to
submit Action Taken Notes (ATNs) on various suggestions, observations and
recommendations made by PAC for their consideration within 15 days of presentation of
the PAC Reports to the Legislature. The PAC Reports/recommendations are the principal
medium by which the Legislature enforces financial accountability of the Executives to
the Legislature and it is appropriate that they elicit timely response from the departments
in the form of ATNs.

As of October 2014, out of 598 recommendations of the PAC, made between 1990-91
and 2008-09, ATNs in respect of 21 recommendations had not been submitted by 5!
departments pertaining to Audit Report 2008-09.

The following Committees had been formed at the Government level to monitor the
follow up action on Audit related matters:

1 Energy and Power; Roads and Bridges; Food Security and Agriculture Development; Finance, Revenue and

Expenditure and Horticulture and Cash Crop Development.



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Departmental Audit and Accounts Committee: Departmental Audit and Accounts
Committee (DAAC) had been formed (November 2010) by all departments of the
Government under the Chairmanship of the Departmental Secretary/Head of Department
to monitor the follow up action on Audit related matters. The DAAC’s function was to
monitor the response and corrective action on findings reported in the Inspection Reports
issued by the Accountant General (Audit). It was to hold meetings once in three months
and send quarterly action taken report on the issues to the State Audit and Accounts
Committee.

State Audit and Accounts Committee: State Audit and Accounts Committee (SAAC)
had been formed (June 2010) at the State level under the Chairmanship of the Chief
Secretary to monitor the response and corrective action on the findings reported by audit,
to review and oversee the working of DAAC and also to hold meetings once in three
months.

After formation of DAAC and SAAC by the State Government, Human Resource
Development Department approached the Office of the Accountant General (Audit) to
settle outstanding paragraphs and IRs during 2011-12. However, during 2012-13 and
2013-14, not a single Department approached to settle outstanding paragraphs and IRs.

The Accountant General (Audit), Sikkim (AG) conducts periodical inspection of the
Government departments to test check the transactions and verify the maintenance of
important accounts and other records as prescribed in the rules and procedures. These
inspections are followed up with the IRs incorporating irregularities detected during the
inspection and not settled on the spot, which are issued to the Heads of the Offices
inspected with copies to the higher authorities for taking prompt corrective action. The
Heads of the Offices/Government are required to promptly comply with the observations
contained in the IRs, rectify the defects and omissions and report compliance through
initial reply to the AG within one month from the date of the issue of the IRs. Serious
irregularities are reported to the Heads of the departments and the Government.

The position of outstanding IRs pertaining to Civil (Expenditure audit including that of
Works, Forest and Autonomous Bodies), Revenue (Audit of Revenue departments) and
Commercial (Audit of Public Sector Undertakings) audit as of March 2014 is shown
below:

Table 6.1

ss3_ Jost [og ts6 Pt 37

338 [es Tes
2 Te ट6
Ts |
| 25 [2479 | 279 | 24 sa 146 |

136


Chapter VI: Follow up of Audit Observations

This large pendency of IRs was indicative of inadequate action by the Heads of offices
and departments towards the remedial measures that should have been taken on the
irregularities pointed out by Audit through the IRs.

During 2013-14, 15 Audit Committee Meetings were held, wherein 162 IRs and 555
paragraphs were discussed out of which 113 IRs and 388 paragraphs were settled as
detailed below:

Table 6.2

Commercial
Total

Civil
(including Works, Forest and Autonomous Bodies)

Gangtok (Vanlal Chhuanga)

The Accountant General (Audit), Sikkim
Countersigned

New Delhi (Shashi Kant Sharma)

The Comptroller and Auditor General of India



Appendices

Appendix 1.2.1
Audit conducted during 2013-14 under Social Sector
(Reference: Paragraph 1.2; Page 2)

Human Resource Development Department
Food, Civil Supplies and Consumers’ Affairs

Department

Social Justice, Empowerment
Department

Cultural Affairs and Heritage Department
Ecclesiastical Affairs Department [ - |

Appendix 1.3.1
The details of ICT scheme (Phase I)
(Reference: Paragraph 1.3.2; Page 3)

The schools covered under CLASS (Computer Literacy and Studies in School) scheme implemented from
2002-05. (Referred as 29 old Schools in the subsequent paras).

Category I Schools with enrolment of 150 and above, was to be provided with 12 computers.

Category वा Schools with enrolment below 150 was to be provided with 8 computers.

Appendix 1.3.2
Details of computer instructors
(Reference: Paragraph 1.3.6; Page 7)

Senior BE (Computer Science/IT) or B.Sc with
Instructor one year PG Diploma/Certificate in 42
Secondary Computer application or BCA.

School Tunior Graduate with one year Diploma/ 6.500 42
Instructor Certificate in Computer application. हे
92

Senior

BE (Computer Science/IT) or B.Sc with
Instructor one year PG Diploma/Certificate in
Computer application or BCA.
Senior Secondary Schools was to be provided with two teachers and Secondary Schools was to be provided
with one teacher. Total number of Senior Secondary Schools were 42 and Total number of Secondary
Schools were 92. Therefore, total teachers = 42+42+ 92 = 176.

Secondary
School



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Appendix 1.3.3 (a)
Analysis of Short payment to Computer Instructors up-to April 2009

(Reference: Paragraph 1.3.6; Page 7)

Gateonryirt of Salary (०0) Salary after Amount paid Short amount | Total of short
Teacher (a) teacher Gi 5 deducting 12 | by the firm (९) | per teacher(f) | amount. (g)
(b) हा EPF (d) (in 3 in & (ind (b) x 0). (in J

7500 505 36,150
7.500 3.800 73,600
29.400

1,39,750

Appendix 1.3.3 (b)
Analysis of Short payment to Computer Instructors from May 2009
(Reference: Paragraph 1.3.6; Page 7)

car ॥ | Not | salary | Salaryatter [ Amount paid | Short amount | Total of short
a ney ° teacher y deducting 12 | by the firm (e) | per teacher (f) | amount. (g) =
cacher(@) | 0) | @9_| epr@ ting 5 600 | 0) x1 in)

7480 1,04,160
Instructor 92 500 600 000 1,600 1,47,200
Jr, Instructor 421_ 6500 3,720 3,000 720 40
Total

Total 2,82,600

Appendix 1.3.4 (a)
Details of the Bids quoted by the firm for 105 Schools
(Reference: Paragraph 1.3.8.3 and 1.3.8.5; Page 77 and 12)

New SS.Schools. 3,29,680 1,31,87,200
New S.School

New S.Schools

(Category व) 4250) 7,71,150

| 105 | 7,13,09,800

For purchase of computer and its accessories the percentage of amount worked out by GOI was 43.17 per cent of
the total cost approved (for each schools & 9.38 lakh was provided out of which & 4.05 lakh was for computer
and its accessories). Therefore for हैं 7,13,09,800 the proportionate amount for computers and its accessories
would be © 3,07,84,441 (€ 3.08 crore)



Appendices

Appendix 1.3.4 (b)

Details working of penalty to be imposed on supply of substandard computer
supplied by the firm

(Reference: Paragraph 1.3.8.3; Page 11)

‘The reduced amount for equipment after including 29 schools was: (a)
Overall average cost of equipment per schools: (9) = (a)/105 2,93,185

‘Overall average cost of equipment per schools actually provided: (©) 211,292

@ — Refer Appendix 1.3.4 (a).
# As per the Bill submitted by the firm.
Keeping the price of other equipment constant (considering that the same other accessories supplied by
the firm was to be purchased).
Total of 1,048 computers were supplied therefore total amount of penalty @ 8,189 = %85,82,072.

Appendix 1.3.5

Analysis of cost of computer that could have been provided if 29 Schools were not
included in the scheme

(Reference: Paragraph 1.3.8.5; Page 12)

Total cost of computer and other equipment per schools for 105 schools @ & 4,00,500 | 4 59 55 500
jer schools (as per guidelines): os

Total cost of computers and other equipment actually provided: 2,21,85,700
Total cost of 1,048 computers provided: 1,55,26,85
8.

0
Total cost of equipment other than computers: 66,58,850

If the quality and price of other equipment is kept same, the total cost of 1048
3 6,150
computers that would have been:

Average cost of computer that could have been provided: 34,223.43



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Appendix 2.2.1
Audit conducted during 2013-14 under Economic Sector

(Reference: Paragraph 2.2; Page 19)
Zin crore

Co-operation Department

Animal husbandry, Livestock, Fisheries and
Veterinary services Department

Forest, Environment and Wildlife Management
Department

Commerce and Industries Department

Horticulture and Cash Crop Development
Department

Water Security and Public Health Engineering
Department

Urban Development & Housing Department
Energy and Power Department

Rural Management and Development
Department

Appendix 2.3.1

Statement showing the details of pendency of Utilisation Certificate (UC) to be furnished by
various NGOs and Agencies to Department

(Reference: Paragraph 2.3.10.4; Page 40)

2009-10 a ऋ घ98क्‍उ् |
2010-11 Pot
2012-13 ft 305.80
2013-14 225.15
RS 1  झ#ऋ इ ऋ्ूुूचथ+ 538.95

Pendency of UCs to be furnished to GOI by Department

(@in lakh)

pi |
a ee  र०9०0े/ |
| ऊऔऋ_ऋ re  फझऊफऊ[उटै| 482.08



Appendices

Appendix 2.3.2

Statement showing the short realisation of Interest on Mobilisation Advance given to the
various Contractors

(Reference: Paragraph 2.3.10.6; Page 41)

3,07,40,800 | 26.07.11 46,11,120 2

Craft
13.9.12 to 30.8.13 =
352 days विश

Institute, South *
893 | 11.10.12 48, 34 11.10.12 to 25.3.1 1,09,979 29,169 80,
166 days

पु 0
[|

Construction of | i. 8 Sot eS 101 551,375} 31,250} 5,20,125
tourist spot at Ration 3,60,71,000 | 30.09.11 | 54,10,000 PT > Sen
‘Namehi River 12 fo 9-10.13 = 4,79,676 | 4,79,676

365 days

12.10.10 to 15.9.12—
185 days (105-520) 381,549 | 2,93,347 |. 1,28,202
169.12 10 23.3.13 =
192 days 2,57,992 | 1,28,996 |. 1,28,996
EN COTES 24,864 10,189 14,675

<= 179 days

नए ० 233.11 to 143.12 =
water Garden at 67,61,739 | 13.08.11 | 10,14,000 | 179 8008 (358-179) 2,072 12,603

Lower Martam उठता to 15.6.12 = 93
3.11 to 15.6.12= 93
ae 241 10,870 -8629

PT 40607 | 16.58606 | 27.47.503

1।
12.10.10 to 113.2012 5,16,524 71,907 4,44,617
= 151 days
12.10.10 to 30.9.11 =
Development of | Shri B « 12.10.10 to 14.3.12 = <
Gangtok ‘Agarwal 8,32,36,763 | 12.10.10 1,24,85,515 166 days (520-354) 2,96,729 1,40,359

143


rl

SuOpeIOdIOD AIOMENS SUDOM “A

हक oe 0" ne 5 = Teaqueduro)
88°ELT 581८८ घट 669. | वश evee juawusoA0e SuppL0M asta 401998 ITV) ४ [eI0L

a CZ Cc “/फ “है क$| (ERE

‘OIAWAS

SS [हा ता A a | €$6 668८] TEUESUEUI
५) [:/6+ है a 4 (Oaas)
SS LT [झा 0 छः शा BP [_ ३ ७छऊ ३

— — ० — — 7 Tee TOOICIS) PoHWUT] UoHeI0dI0,) JUSUSOAUT

aUALOMULSVAANT
Lorre

OODAVS) एगाप्पा' WoHesodio}
ह्ध्क्ट ard 1e81 106 £6 96ady AMVATAM, quourdojaaag sasse[g premyoeg 1910,
pute saquiy aNpayss ‘sayseD anpayas
SS 6 1 PS A [_/71[फय_ |]

GONVNIA
SS KS ०7 0 0 0 | SAHV =x CIHIS) PIRUTT SOHOUSIEL WEDS

vOaITIV ¥ AAALTAOIOV
SoTUUMUIO.) JUOMUIDAOD SUPLON

7PA0AD Ul 24D (2)9 OF (DJG UUUNJOD छठ

(9६ a8q ६1 ६ ydosSpang :aoussafoy)

suoyesodi0Z9 A10)n}e}g pue satuedui0D
JUIUIUI9AO4 Jo Joadsai Ul PIOZ YIALIA [६ UO sv JaModueyA] pue Surpuejsyno suvoy ‘fezIdes dn-pred ajep 07 dn jo srvpnoy.ased Surmoys 17.9रगररए19

T'T'¢ xipueddy

PLOT YO4eIW 18 papue svad ayy 10} 11079 प pny


एज

कल

Ore
ee

क्र

SASd ay 44 paysiusnf sy २2_क०ए
dunduos ay) Aq TOAdS १४०४ THS 4G pantera spar 24019 pp’. fo A2UOUL UONALIOSGNS sx
(४० 5४00] utaj-Buo] juasaadad pI-¢ [QZ JO ०४०7 ayy jo Suipuvjsino suvoT

Leone [ore Porm [wo we [rs fora far fiers Td (EER ES CITIES)

हा Guopesodi0,)
SS CS SS या SS जी | EDESESY
[60 | CC ता आय TC OE OST SE |]

DNRAAIOVANNVIN
SuoHELOdI0.) Atoynyeyg SUpyAOM-UON “Cl

si हि का हि (Sorueduro >) juDTTUTOAOD,
osor so reo हक Bupy4om-wou ३४७ 103998 IV) 3 1६३०).

1 _/+: 0 0 0 0 TS किए ६0 लक 08छउ हे सय रुप यम
po oo st 0 0 oct 6 फ्प | व्यायाम wns TT rt]
[_ 0 0 0 0 किट हक 0 कट ono | वात | 1 peru wonerodioy sunt wppts [et]

Po 0 7०0 0 पट 0 0 टी cin sanitsaant | Cis PUTT बाण | टा 1

DNRIDLOVANNVIA

SS KO 0 |? |?! 0 0 ० OS ऊन | क्र 103998
६ - S (TVAXO) pam,
SaOIAWAS
SS CL CS OS CC OO ८८ 1३ _ घ घ७छछउ TEI} 951M 103995
eS 8771 10 LS OS Oe ४०0 Oe BS 1

7 हर Todd Is) wonerodio,) quauidojaacq
daITTV ¥ TAALTIAONOV

eS TA SA A कण  / |] THs WOT PUFA
Guopesods0)
SS CS CS CL या हईढ 6 ह८& ०  अछछछल| गण परम
oe he he या गा enon | ST |
aOLANaS:
[0 0 6 SS SS |] नर

(Sas) छाजाइ joyued aes TL]
TONVNTA

sootpueddy


orl

[कण SS A है EUESCEDEY
a@OLAdas
लि न ला आय ला ला लय ला लय नल आया लाला लय
SS  जिआा जिया का किक स्का EUESCEUE
AONVNIA
Se

Goueduro >
८059६ epee iris L8'Sz 6L'9- sos OL'6r quaUTUAACS —_ BUP|LOM
28७ 10105 TTY) V 1४३०.

[200 ७ 0 शशि या टि लिए 0 दा ली ७" Toto} 2616 10/928
[०00 6४ ०0 A 0 ee A CS a [(टएट dais [9]
अत
[62 A [नि गए कि का OS SS के ४६४  ७छउ | (ESE
SS लिए मिट ST SO A ते A TA a SS |
WaAMOd
[6 ST a [00 A A टाश कण ७? लिन 251m 10/928
SST लि A Ce िट 0 टाप खिल ७ साध टएट ooiais T+
AMALOOALSVAANT
CS TS CL Ce OT 0 0 लि ७ _ ७ | [एफ
a CC ee a A oooavs | हज
AONVNIA
Peco sro Pore Povo oP sc econ sro Povo ro Teo) ost —_s
800_ 7110 ६८०. 80'0- 100 000 L0'0- 01-6007 60-8007 ‘Todds :
GaITTV ¥ AAALTAOIADV
TormETuTO;) JUOUTITOAOT BUBOM V

4049 ॥ 3 2० (077 ० (8) pun (9) ० (0९ UUNJOD UT SAANSI.1)

(09 pun 66 a3ng (117 ६ puy #7 7 ६ ydvaspang saouasafay)
«PASTTEULY 2.49M SJUNIIE YDTYAA OJ Awad ३5ग ्रणु ay} जग suOeA0d105 A10jNWeIg puL sayuRduIOD JUaUIUIAAOD Jo शा [ePULUY pastreuUINg

TT€ xipueddy

PLOT YO4eIW 18 papue svad ayy 10} 11079 प pny


as

uoyvsado

Buinuyuoosiq, fo sajdiouid ay} aapun pasndasd uaag aavy sjuauajnjs poroupurf ay) sayfoasays 200६ Mavnung aouls panuljuorsip uaaq advy suoynsado Suiuiut a4] xx

280242% (-) Sasso] ul aspaszap /pfoad ut asvasout (+) 44 pajouap 2 puv HYD puv ssonpny Aonjnjg fo sjuauuos fo Jovduit 720 ay) apnjoul sjuauiuod sjunosov fo yooduy

[per

[oer

junosa0

soy pun ifoad ० pasanyo jsasaquy pun jYfoad Suippo Aq ino paysom uaaq spy pacojdwa [एव uo uanjay
“‘sSuimouuog way, uoT snjd pun, s,4opjoyasys sjuasaada pakordua poudoy ®)
‘sasso] ut aspasouy jyfoad ut

#

[wre [sero ioe acon Porro for [ero [srs ford (ESTEVE
(Suopesodi05

ssl OszL Asoynjeyg = Supjsom-uou

2७७ 10}998 TV) 6 1३०1,

[foes का oe तय या __ _ | TEESE
[est Pose oo ro fo reir ons | st |

DNIUNLOVANNVIN
SUoHELOdL0,) ALOjNIEIG SUP[LOM-UON “

Gameduoy
7” जा ५) (00 sor juauuierey Supjsom-uoU
81M 10198 TV) > 1६३०1.

a a a A “शणिपतपप्किझण ्पितिताय 1 77
| | 0 (सं 6४ ०? 0 0 07 0 0 फ 0 BTC
SE A OE किट 0 0 पट 0 0 पट ऑए७उऊ पट | टा0ट

ONTINLOVANNVIN

[oro feo 0 oo ron ooo oro THO} asTM 10}99S

[0 [eo 00 0 0 To ro Too To Toro ८56 |: ४66 >

SADAWAS

[07 कर कि व 0 0 एए [0 गे eC | Teo) astm 109g

(0 लि ero 00 oo ooo To 6 server Was काला

[00 लए cot ooo soo oo ooo coo rete etzto7 Saas | 6 ||

GaITIy ¥ MAL IANIOV

ToyuTTUTO,) JUOUITTDADT) AUPLTOM-UON

e0°EL 08°F99T ZO'be- [9६5 [ori- 1 ssurr ootl- 159 190 [छत- | | (a+ V) Oo] paws,

SuoyeAOdIO-)
8६६9 8८66टा 699- 1184 SOIT 080 1969. | घटक जि
>शु& 101295 ITV) प्व ७३०।.

sootpueddy


srl

SuopELod10,) ALoynyeyy SUBLAOAA EL

TeoruedUroy
juaurusercy Zuppi0M
000 000 9८1६ 5८0 354 409998 19) ४ [६३०1

SS NS झट झा झ टय###ऊछहझ ऋ  अ ७6७ ञ “७ [ |
LS CO | UES
छाए
LS 677 7 य ए 7 6_ ] गाय
[0 एम 0 0 |“ 07 उतर ८7]
सं 0वत
[एएण-[एएण- a AS A A A पग्यप्णफय्प्ण TUESCEDESS
जता।1, 81118 ४ तथा
a a a छत A A A ठण_ [एक बछ् -ग THO) 9m TORI
AONVNIA
[एएण--[एणए-[एएण-[छण- | Tan aHIM एज
LS |“ CS 7
[0 ० 0 तह eS

[एाएएफक्राएऋ एएएशएश
‘SoquEdUIO,) UOMIUTOADD) SUBLION\ “V

(24049 U2 24D (P)9 OF (O)§ UUUN]OD UI SaAnSI-f)

(96 a80g 617६ ydouBning :aouasafoy)

PLOZ पणणुश्‌ JO pus >प 1९४ ३एएरगुप्राप्रा०3 dajURAENS pu ज३४ dy) SULAINp
Aymbo oyuy paj.19Au0d suvoy pur Jo ए्ग्रान७ SULOT (जाए Jo AOATWAL (024२०. S9ojURAUNS 9[qeAII901/p9A[oI01 ApIsqns एप sjuL1d SuIMOYs 1ए०एरयर1 ७

ee xipueddy

PLOT YO4eIW 18 papue svad ayy 10} 11079 प pny


[ooo

000

[000

0070

000

lil

il

0
0

00°0

0

i

| 6rl

‘upad ay) fo pua ay} 10 Suipuvjsjno saajupdvns [गण aywoipul saansyy

CL TA seiet [sro 0 शत 00 Ts'o [797 Ce)

(suoyes0d.10.)
Aaoynyejg — Bupjsom-uou
ASEM 109998 TTY) 1810.

®

LS तय या 7 _  7_ | गण वय पगा
[0 प य# SSH हा

DNTANLOVANNVIN,
TwOEIOdIO.) ALOIMPEIG BUDLOM-WON “CL
Gomeduroy

juatUAaA0s Supjroa-wou

ast 10}998 1४) 3 1४३०॥,

Teo} प्र एमए

10 60 0 ०0  ल 0 6 0 6 ४०0 ४ ०७ 00 A #८£
10 60 0 0 0 0 ४०0 ४ ०७ लए ovo ois Tet
[0 ४270 6४0 0 0 ४0०0 0 KOA  टा
७/७एछकशाएआग

[0 7 (०0 ४27 ०0 ४ 7०7 27 7 ४ ०0 1 27 | T2101 95164 101928
[oo oT TT vn Jt
SaOIANAS

[0 7 ०0 7 0 | (EE ATES
foo oT ns Tot

‘GaNTTVY ONV AMAL TAI
TaTUEMUIO,) JUSUIUADAGD TUION-UON

[000 7070 A TB sro [ovo 50 Tose (CERO)

(Suopesods0)
Axoynyesg Supy10M
981M 109998 1४) पल [६३०],

[0 __ 0 0 A AC छत आप उबर
दढाएएटप

[0006 0 6 1] THOT Te 5

[0 ० | || || || या “या /ञढ CC आओ ४]
AONVNIA

sootpueddy


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Appendix 3.1.4
Statement showing financial position of Statutory Corporations

(Reference: Paragraph 3.1.14; Page 59)

A. Liabilities
_ शक ee
| 000 0.00|
48.06 77.16
0.00 [0.00 |
86.14

Other liabilities and provisions 66.29 73.15 86.14

TOTAL—A 1,086.44 1,627.89 1,389.90

1,267.78
41.05
280.88
3.19

725.80
44.16
264.54
3.38
48.56

28.73 51.44
10.43

8 27
0.00
1,096.87 1,627.90
1,009.72 1,548.47

6.88 6.87
67.57 61.64

TOTAL - 4 76.06 70.12 87.48

B. Assets

“ 057

75.55 69.55

[0.00 |
70.12
8.48

TOTAL - 8 76.06
C. Capital Employed*
Source: As per the approved accounts of the PSUs.

J
wv

* Capital employed represents sharcholders’ fund plus long term borrowings.



Appendices

Appendix 3.1.5
Statement showing working results of Statutory Corporations

(Referred to in paragraph 3.1.14; Page 59)
ee C )

1. State Bank of Sikkim

2

b) Operating expenses, Provisions and 10.32 12.10 18.37
Contingencies

[__[eyOtherexpenses oo
=
3
[4 |
S| Provisionfortax oo
[_6 | Profit (H/Loss () after tax
[|
[8 |
|_9 [Dividend paid/payable 00 T0000
[11 |
भा

2. State Trading Corporation of Sikkim

=
| 2 |

|| Income
a) Sale of trading goods 11.42 14.28 44.72
b) Commission
=
=
Expenses
=
b) Trade Expenses
=
5) Other Expenses
=
Prior period adjustments
| 6 Other appropriation ॑-र-र-्््््््््््््उ_1 ३ घक्‍खक्‍ईऊई्उरञ८<_€1 ऊझञऊञऋ्स्स् 49ृउृ 9७? -।
La)
|_8 | Dividend forthe year भू एए
9 [Total return on Capital employed . .॒“ ऋह6र #झ |
[ 10 | Percentage of return on Capital employed
Source: As per the accounts of the PSUs.
** Negative figures



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Appendix 3.2.1

Organisational set-up of State Trading Corporation of Sikkim
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.1; Page 67)

fet of Directors

_————

[ Advisor |

[Chairman |

Managing Director

Sr. General Manager General Manager III
(F&A) (Cement &

!

Sr. General Manager
(LPG, Iron & Steel)

Y
Sr. General Manager (II)
(Tire & Tube, Furniture, REDRH)

Administration)

| |
[00५ (Fea) ] { Manager (ा) ]

(Account & LPG)
Asst. Manager

Manager
(Iron & Steel)

Asst. Managers

Appendix 3.2.2

Details of procurement of major items

(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.2; Page 68)

| | Head 0]
; 4 |
5

Vehicle 33 1.97 15 | 0.46 | 6 20
Total (A) 80.10 75.83 96.08 91.09 69.66

[| B._Jorethang Branch

[9.00096 J 0.21
2 | _|
po Tota (By 3.50 16.56 |
Ld

Figures for the years 201 I-12 to 2013-14 are unaudited provisional figures.



Appendices

Appendix 3.2.3
Shortage of materials
(Reference: Paragraph 3.2.7.8.3; Page 83)

Cement and TMT n 31 March 20132

Cement (ACC STCS Godown) (Bags)

Cement (Birla STCS Godown) (Bags)

Head
Office

Head
Office

8,263
31,050
3,192
4,725
1,853,
7,923
8.214
732,815
Jorethang | Green Level Double Bumer

Gas Lighter 87
13,202
1,786
3,206
Ey 3 29,654
2.416
j |] 11,88,407
Grand Total 97,39,327

The value of shortages worked out excludes the shortages already pointed out in earlier Audit Report 2005-
06 for TMT bars and LPG equipment.

2 Since Stock Register (in Tally) was updated up to 31 March 2013.



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Appendix 4.13.1
Statement showing outstanding gaming fees and penalty till August 2014
(Reference: Paragraph 4.13; Page 109)

01/06/2012 | 29/12/2012 | | 10000000 | 01/06/2012 | 3000000 | 29/12/2012 | _7000000 6312:

30/12/2012 | 23/05/20 7000000 1000000 | 23/05/201 4000000 | 145 [333699
24/05/2013 [31/05/2013 | 4000000 | 8 | 10521

1763178
SS RS ES ३ झ#झ 78082
448249)
बा शा शक 265734
[3530696
[_ 6 ७ |

NB: ₹ 2.43 crore comprised of gaming fee not paid till May 2014 and penal interest calculated on
outstanding amount till August 2014. The statements/accounts of monthly gaming fees as on 10" of
succeeding months, were neither furnished by M/s Mayfair Hotel and Resorts (Sikkim), nor obtained by
DSSL as a result of which, the penal interest was calculated on the outstanding MAR taken at the minimum
of Zone crore at the rate of 12 per cent per annum.

Appendix 4.14.1

Loss of Revenue

(Reference: Paragraph 4.14; Page 110)

October 2012 90 57,01,255 | 84,40,542 | 81,39,050 | 157,64,95,234

November 2012 55,86,248 161,85,72,658

December 01-12-12 to 15-12-12 1,06,44,159 28,16,998 | 41,02,483 | 69,17,558 |... Not available
41, 65,960

5,49,15,482 1,41,04,501 | 2,26,65,960 | 2,34,67,643 | 319,50,67,892
MAR  27,45,774 %7,05,225 | & 11,33,298 | © 11,73,382 | © 3,19,50,679
5% (5%) 5%) 5%) 1%

Total MAR of col. (2) to (6) = %3,77,08,358 as per clause 1 of interim agreement dated 18 November 2005
calculated by audit.

MAR realised by the DSSL at the rate of € 10 crore per annum for 76 days = € 2,08,21,918 (6.०.
= 10,00,00,000/365 x 76 days).

Therefore, loss of revenue = € 1,68,86,440 (€ 3,77,08,358 - ₹2,08, 21, 916).



Appendices

Appendix 5.2.1
Audit conducted during 2013-14 under General Sector
(Reference: Paragraph 5.2; Page 112)

— a
Administration of Justice

eS Ss 0 -|
| 0.66 | ०0०6 ह#ई 0४2 -|
| 025 0221 01० 024|
a es न$४6$ eX #-|
eS eS टाई |
| नी _ऋखऋ #* 401 188
| 1108 | 2697 2820 [60.327
| आय 424 का 40 #-|
Development Planning, Economic Reforms and NEC

Affairs Department

Personnel, Administrative Reforms and Training

Department

Raj Bhawan

Science and Technolo,

Rural Management and Development Department (BDO
Offices)

Law Department
Land Revenue and Disaster Management Department

Excise (Abkari) Department
Finance, Revenue and Expenditure Department
Sikkim Legislative Assembly



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

“Augmentation
of Gyalsing
Water Supply
Scheme
‘Augmentation
of Water
Supply for
Greater
Rangpo
‘Augmentation
of Sang Water
Supply
Scheme
‘Augmentation
of Rhenock
Water Supply
‘Augmentation
of Pakyong
WSs

Water
Distribution
for Singtam
Town in East
Sikkim
Water Supply
for Mell
Bazar in
South Sikkim
Augmentation
of WSS in
newly created
Jorethang
‘Nagar
Panchayat
Water Supply
to Namehi
Town — from
Bermelli
Source
Water Supply
Scheme in
Chakmakey
Ringyang
Water supply
Scheme in
Central
Pandam, East
Sikkim

Water Supply
Scheme at
Rapdentse,

West Sikkim
Water Supply
Scheme at
Amba Taza,

December
2006

732008 | 12092008 } 3092010 | Under
progress
23.12.2010 | 07.03.2012 | 282.2014 tate
progress

177.2011

17.2011

173.2011

119.2011

June 2003

June 2009

July 2007

Status of progress of work under NLCPR and NEC
(Reference: Paragraph 5.3.8 and 5.3.10.2; Page 118 and 124)

31.01.2005

25.04.2007

5.2.2008

02.01.2012

22.06.2012

07.05.2012

22.02.2014

1.03.2004

April 2010

January 2008

30.09.2013

Appendix 5.3.1

Contractor's

10.08.2006 fa

19.07.2010 | 33

30.04.2008 | 31.08.2012 | 52

4.102008 | 30.09.2011 35

Ea

Under
progress

Land
clearance

Under
progress

Land

21.12.2013 clearance

Under
progress

Under Not Not
30.11.2016 applicable | applicable
31.08.2005 | 30.08.2009 |. 47 band
problem

Work not
executed due
to Land
clearance
and drying
up of water
source

Land

31.12.2013
clearance

Project not
executed

Under
progress

Forest

3.7.2008 Clarence

available

Not

19205 applicable

progress | completi | available

on time

156

Land x
7 dispute ° No
66 Lead No | «|
problem

| |

डा

डः

Zz

Zz

Zz

Zz

Zz

Ed

Ed

DPR not made available

Bn



Appendices

Providing

distribution

reservoir &

distribution ins

cet yn [|| ema || esac | sac
line for Water

Supply to

Namehi

Water Suppl

Kaluk

Rinchepong sand

Water supply | 10.02.2004 | 28.03.2005 | 27.03.2006 | 20.01.2010 | 46 cleanance
Project, West ran
Sikkim

Providing

now

distribution

network for | 19.11.2008 | 11.03.2009 | 10.09.2010 | Under 42
Water Supply progress

Scheme to

‘Namchi Town

Phase IL

Water Supply
Project for
Ranipool 22.07.2007 | 30.09.2008
Bazar in East
Sikkim

Uperadation

&

Modemisation

of feeder एबं
approach road | 16.7.2008 | 17.05.2011 | 305.2012

including Progress
Development

of WIP at

Gangtok

‘Augmentation
of  Dentam
Water 283.2011 17.12.2011 16.6.2013
Scheme Phase
1
‘Augmentation
of — Dentam
Water 233.2011 17.12.2011 16.6.2013
Scheme Phase
1]
Construction
of WSS at} Under
Makha Bazar | 23102011 | 01.10.2012 prowress

Ed Es

z

Under
progress

Not
recorded

Delay by
contractor

Zz

Under Land
progress dispute

Zz

Under
progress

Land
dispute

z

Workin
abeyance due
to
contractor's
fault

z

a “|
हि

TD system for
Water Supply | 993.2012 | 22032012 | 305.2015 Wake
Management progress
in Sikkim
Strengthing of
Distribution Under Not Forrest &
System of | 318.2005 | 10.08.2006 | 122.2007 aonb | land
Pakyong WSS Progress clearance

s

| * |



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Appendix 5.4.1
Outstanding Travelling Allowance Advances

(Reference: Paragraph 5.4; Page 133)

a
—
a
—
a
[Posra2812.9 _]]
[-—Ti2s79.12.09 [5000 |]
—
Home Department —
a
—
a
[या न
[J s0629.12.12 [3000 [| J
—
eS Es

Finance, Revenue and Expenditure 2012-13 1866/16.2.13 10000 10000
Department SE |

|

Governors Secretariat a

रा करा जन्म

[__ _ es es |

549/7.6.85 P|

| वाह 5 आझ# छत |

| 7 2500 [TT

pT

4 | Department of PAR and Training
5

2008-09 3464/23.3.09 26000 26000
—
Lao

2010-11 316/3.7.10 1000. 30000
हज लग लि

2008-09 113/1.8.08 8000

—
Cultural Affairs and Heritage Department
ST _ _ 70 _+ ै|
Irrigation and Flood Control Department
es Es |
a
—
Sports and Youth Affairs _ या [aso | ै |
लि हर पर 53650 [
[Fess काका 1 शा
 —Tasra.12.08 a
[हक ae
158



Appendices

6500
| लि 5500 TT
a |
| लि 0 Se |
[
as
PP 2963910 30000 Td
[
eS Es

1998-99 6 1473/15.9.98 PT
pT 727/9.11 98 12700 T |
[| 1239/22.3.99 25000 44100

1999-00 _[ 608/6.9.99 16500, _ |
pT 2.8.99 soo00 TT
| __ | 215723999 30000 96500

PT
T791728.11.01 9075,

—
न जिओ हारा [he
2006-07_[ 283/17.5.06 25296

a न ऋण

3278/18/12.06 8270 79566

a
[Psoiis.10.07 [sss |
लि SA नहर

Health Care and Family Welfare Department CO
a ee  _]_]
[Fs tos 00 |
[sono 9s
[ताक r0000- | _ |
—
a
[Porsenis3.10 [400 |
[ —Feaos3.10 [#00 |
—
a
Psat x10 2000-[ _]]
a A कक __]]
sensor कक _ ||
—
7 फानश

Ecclesiastical Affairs Department
es Es हट
Ta000

Labour Department 75000
es 7०]

2005-06 | 705/8.11.05
706/8.11.05 177750
2011-12 | 4040/27.2.12

pT
pT
| Br

Total

Tourism and Civil Aviation Department

146000
Total [OT
$900
Sikkim Public Service Commission 10000
PT
DESME
(Planning and Development Department) a

A. 1988-89 292/2.7.88 500 500

159



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

Information and Technology Department

Energy and Power Department

Cooperation Department

Urban Development and_—_-Housing

Department

Sikkim Nationalised Transport Division

(Transport Department)

1298/20.11.90

fp  उउऋझ।
1595/26.4.10

6500
1200
40000
2300
8800
15001
15001
15001
2500
2000
6001
600i
469
12001
12001
130690
740:

12500
12000
40000,
23000,

1998-99
2006-07
2010-11
Total
2009-10

45000
2010-11

2012-13

1038/9.1.13
1039/10.1.13

PT
330-552/45.07

530-532/4.5.07
276/13.9.07

Total
2007-08

20000

50000
164291
5001
104
700

164298
Total
1991-9;

1992-93
1995-96
1997-98
1999-00
2003-04
2006-07
Total
2006-07

4122/17. 10.07
Pp फ ऊऋ_ऋ*
3/

2
3 12750
5 3475

4054726.3.98

Pa EN
1-1 133

0
2240
4141

6000
600
70000
25000
20000
12800
12801
2500
600
15001
138601
1645
200
500
500

2
2
es
47000

1992/17.11.06

2008-09.
2009-10

2446718.11.09

Total
2002-03
2003-04

Pp  ऊ ऊ#ऋ
2004-05 2
2102

x 2102
20000

rf}
SIs!
815151515151/81/5151815151515151515[5८

91/13.9.04
7 124/9.8.06
120
120
120
0
8501
7001
7001

2007-08

41/30.8.07,
5
5

- Se —
a 8 iS
2 3 8
Se eeeeeee

2008-09

6/6.9.08 8000
35/19.3.09 10000

; |
[1998-99 |
[_ 2006-07 |
[2010-11
| Total__|
| 2009-10]
pT
[
[2010-11 |
pT
pT
[
|
pT
[ |
[Total |
—
i
[
[1992-93 |
[1995-96 |
[1997-98 |
| 19990 |
[_ 2003-04 |
[2006-07 |
| 10» |
| 200७० 1
[|
[|
[
[2008-09]
pT
pT
[
[20००7 1
[
| Total__|
| 20201]
| 2003-04 |
pT
[
[2004-05 |
pT
—
pT
pT
pT
[
| 20070 |
pT
[
| 2008-09 |
pT
pT
Yd

160

3


Appendices

Information and Public Relations Department

2009-10] 19/17.8.09

—— 7

_49/11.5. 12 2500

A |
A |
PP s23.6i2 7500 TT
a
eS ES |  ३३1_1_
नम धर णणणए |

161


Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

‘ood, CS & CA Department 2012-13 | 1131/12.7.12 20000
a
a
AHVS Department
SS TT) 1[___ |
a
Horticulture and Cash Crops Deparment. —§ “तौाफिफ oT
CT
a
es a 1 ै1791__ |
Food Security and Agriculae Development |
B
SS [79 ___ |
a
a इ668207_ __ 520|__ |
PCCE, Territorial —
SS 28901 ___ |
1989-90 1/20.4.89 ZZ
pans ——| पका ——
—
1187/21.7 89
—
88/2.5.90 24000
POCE, Wildlife a
__ दि कर _____ 30001__ |
[तक [9000 | |
____ किक [9500 [| |
____ ताक [3500 [| |
—
a
a
ता न कहा राज लता
2008-09 30500 30500
2012-13 600
00
330
330
350
4300
450

52.13
5.2.13 4500

PCCF, LU&E

195/521

4500
4500
Total _ | 4720
2012-13 892
$400
4860
Total [0592
2012-13 366
5
1320

Total 2053

PT
2012-13 1156/17.10.12 11006
20128 24000

2004-05 _[ 63/11.2.05 29550

95):
47200

SP/South 70530

11000
240000
29550

sP/East
SP/Reserve Lines
State Election Commission.

डे

27

&
g

27,

162

a


Appendices

Sikkim Legislative Assembly

2005-06] 61/18.7.05, 22000 22000
RE | ||
138/6.9.95 PT
| 3479.95 200000 TT
pT
PT
| 6 eS ७8छउ #_
| 8 #ऋ#ई£ 0 |
pT
PT
| वि छ ऊझऋ£ 0 ७ ||
| 833.697 S000 TT
pT 3859797 320 TT
pT
Po
pT
Po
Lao
2000-01 | 695/22.4.00 5

लि का

1093/12.5.00 20000

pT
PT
| LC आझई 2221 |
| 540  उऊऋझऋ| 561 |
| 26080 ऊऑऋ$ 27001 ||
| 3523601 26000 TT
A 76001
| 329.807 4900 TT
| 3ari9.9.0) 39000 TT
| 0 आझऋ|£ 0 |
| 0 आई 0 TT
| P0624 0 आझऋ 001
| 7 आझऋ|$ 0 |
| 0 7 |
| लि 02 आ#झऋ|£ 0 |
pT
Co
pT
PT
| 06 TZ |
pT
Po
pT
PT
| कण 25280 TT
| 879.07 29960 TT

168/27.12.07 32480
—
somerset
2009-10 80/25.1.10 10000

| Ee _ऋ_ 0000 ७8ऊ॒|
| Ee 0  झ|
| 0 T3000 TT
व 87777 शा फशन्णा
| सा आझय अत 8 हझई|
[
नम
| नि आय 0 ९क्‍ृ ऊझ|
| खिला आय 0 ७ |
Ss EA आई 0 8छऊ _#||
PP 29610 शक TT



Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2014

20500
456510
136/64.11

01791 22560
न
187/25.4.11 22750

16/7.7.11
28/15 7. [1 42550

4
10
10
1770624

2178125

4000

Human Resource Development Department

lH

164