(a3
सत्यमेव जयते
Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General
of India

at ate a

Ya
\ g N
——

| हे
Ow
See

Sao

Levy and collection of service tax
on import of services

Union Government
Department of Revenue
Indirect Taxes — Service Tax
No. 9 of 2013
(Performance Audit)



Table of Contents

Contents Pages
Preface i
. Executive summary iii
. Chapter 1: Introduction 1-4
B.1 Organisational set up 1
B.2 Audit Objectives 2
B.3 Audit scope and methodology 3
B.4 Legal Provisions 4
Chapter 2 : Adequacy of existing systems and 5-16
procedures
C.1 Importance of information gathering 5
C.2 Availability of information 6
C.3 Comparison with other systems 8
C.4 Compliance verification Mechanism 12
C.5 Role of Directorate 14
C.6 Recommendations 14
. Chapter 3 : Issues relating to fulfilment of tax 17-30
liability
D.1 Requirement of Registration 17
D.2 Tax liability of registered manufacturers 19
D.3 Valuation of taxable services 20
D.4 Coordinating with other sources 24
D.5 Exemptions, interest liability and other cases 26
D.6 Recommendations 29
Appendix | 31

Abbreviations

33



Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General
of India

for the year ended March 2012

Levy and collection of service tax
on import of services

Union Government
Department of Revenue
Indirect Taxes — Service Tax
No. 9 of 2013
(Performance Audit)

Laid on the table of Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha


Preface

The Report for the year ended March 2012 on the performance audit of levy and
collection of service tax on import of services has been prepared for submission to the
President of India under Article 151(1) of the Constitution of India.

The audit of Revenue Receipts — Indirect Taxes of the Union Government is
conducted under Section 16 of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (Duties,
Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971. The observations included in this Report
include findings in audit covering the period upto March 2012. The Report presents the
results of our audit along with recommendations.


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Executive Summary

. The department does not have a mechanism to arrive at a reliable estimate of
value of taxable services imported. The department has however, initiated steps (since
November 2011) to utilise primary data available with authorised dealers; the process is
ongoing. (Paras 2.7 and 2.8)

° The department did not have any prescribed specific accounting codes or any
alternative mechanism to arrive at reliable figures of the taxes collected relating to
import of services. (Para 2.7)

e The system was not robust enough to provide information on the gap between the
collectible tax and the tax actually collected. (Para 2.7)

° The department did not have a system to utilise data available with the Income
Tax department relating to remittances to NRIs. (Para 2.12)

° RBI permits remittances towards import of services irrespective of non-fulfilment
of corresponding service tax liability by the service recipient, in the absence of any
requirement for submission of an undertaking by remitter/certificate from Accountant
on the lines of the prescription in Income Tax.(Para 2.13)

° There was no system of calling for an Annual Information Return from identified
parties such as authorised dealers. (Para 2.22)

e Non-fulfilment of liability by export oriented units and associated enterprises
indicated the need for strengthening of monitoring on this front. (Paras 3.7 and 3.11)

e The department did not have in place a system to utilise data on high value
transactions of specific nature available with certain Central Ministries/RBI to check
possible cases of evasion of tax. (Para 3.16)

iii


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Chapter 1: Introduction

1.1 The essence of indirect (service) taxation is that a service should be taxed in the
jurisdiction of its consumption. This principle is more or less universally applied. In terms
of this principle, exports are not charged to tax, as the consumption is elsewhere, and
services are taxed on their importation into the taxable territory.’

1.2 Import of services is one of the specified categories in the Finance Act/Service
Tax Rules where liability to pay Service Tax (ST) falls on the service recipient based on
the reverse charge mechanism. Under reverse charge method, a legal fiction is created
as if the recipient had himself provided the services domestically and accordingly, the
recipient of service is treated as deemed service provider.” ST liability in respect of
import of services is now recognised as effective from 18 April 2006, the date of
enactment of section 66A of the Finance Act, 1994.

Organisational set up

1.3 Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC) administers the levy, assessment and
collection of ST through the field formations under its control. 77 Commissionerates
which include 7 exclusive ST Commissionerates, 66 integrated Central excise and ST
Commissionerates and 4 Large Taxpayer Unit Commissionerates assess and collect ST
across the country. Besides, the Government constituted an office of the Director
General (ST) as a subordinate office in 1997 to coordinate ST work. The functions and
powers of Director General (ST) include suggesting measures to increase revenue
collection, streamlining procedures, study of law and procedures regarding ST to simplify
the ST collection and assessment, and monitoring ST collections.

1.4. The following chart depicts the organisational structure under CBEC including
subordinate formations, concerned directly or indirectly with the collection of ST
revenues and the monitoring of the same.

CBEC |

Chief Commissioners DG (ST) DG

(CX & ST) - 23 (since 1997) | | __(Audit)
(Since 2000)

Commissioners

Commissioners Commissioners

(ST)-7 (CX & ST) - 66 (CX & LTU) - 31
Divisions - 24 Divisions - 326 Divisions- 127
Ranges - 248 Ranges - 1798 Ranges - 646

' CBEC’s Taxation of Services —An Education Guide.
2 JS(TRU)’s letter dated 19 April 2006 ( F. No. 81 / 4 / 2006-70) to CBEC Members and Commissioners


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

1.5 At the base of the hierarchy, the ranges headed by the Superintendents (Range
Officers) are responsible for a variety of tasks including scrutiny of assessments,
recovery of arrears of revenue and audit compliance. As part of the compliance
verification mechanism, audit parties under the Internal Audit Wing of the
Commissionerate conduct audit at assessee premises. The Director General of Audit,
who is responsible for institutionalization of a credible audit system, provides functional
direction in planning, co-ordination, supervision and conduct of audits by officers at field
formations.

1.6 The department carries out most of its functions relating to ST by diverting staff
from central excise and customs. The Union Cabinet had sanctioned 2094 posts for ST
related functions in 2007. Cadre restructuring proposal (2010) updated in 2012 to seek
inter alia, 14990 posts exclusively for ST, has been forwarded to the Department of
Personnel and Training.

Why we chose the topic

1.7 Significant rise in volume of imported services consequent upon liberalization
and global integration would imply that collections of consumption based ST should also
rise. During a preliminary study, Audit identified 37 out of 99 purpose codes prescribed
by RBI for reporting foreign exchange remittances as being prima facie likely to relate to
transactions on which ST liability under section 66A would arise. The list of such purpose
codes is annexed (Appendix 1). As per the information reported by authorised dealers
to RBI, remittances exceeding % 8 lakh crore categorised under the 37 purpose codes
have gone out of the country during the four years 2007-08 to 2010-11. Keeping in view
the volume of remittances, we decided to examine the adequacy of statutory provisions,
effectiveness of information gathering in the department as well as the adequacy of
systems and procedures to minimise tax gap relating to ST liability on import of services.

Audit objectives

1.8 We conducted the performance audit based on the following audit objectives,

a. to evaluate effectiveness of systems in place, if any, to obtain and analyse data on
foreign remittances from authorities such as Reserve Bank of India/authorised
dealers/income tax department which could facilitate increase in tax collections as well
as broadening of the ST base;

b. to evaluate effectiveness of systems and procedures to monitor and update status
of taxpayer - as service provider/service recipient/both which would facilitate
maintenance of database and monitoring of tax collections relating to import of services;

on to evaluate adequacy of checks prescribed for scrutiny of returns in relation to
import of services and compliance thereof; and


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

6... 10 ascertain whether liability to pay ST under reverse charge is taken as a risk
parameter for selection of units while conducting audit checks by internal audit and
whether the data of foreign remittances is/could be utilised as a key input for selection
of units for audit.

Audit scope

1.9 We reviewed ST compliance in respect of cross-border transactions; and,
restricted the scope of the review to the ST liability in respect of outward remittances
through commercial banks as authorised dealers (among the authorised persons under
section 10 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999). We limited the period of
coverage to 2009-12. However, depending on the issues involved, we did look into data
up to 2007-08 in some cases.

Audit Methodology

1.10 We carried out examination of records at selected Commissionerates as well as
at premises of manufacturers and service providers, selected from the data of
remittances through authorised dealers for which we approached RBI as well as the
authorised dealers. There were 3 (out of 4) Large Taxpayer Unit (LTU) Commissionerates
in 14° selected Commissionerates (out of 104) taken up by Audit for its review.

1.11 We also carried out visits to selected premises of service recipients as well as
based on samples (registered service providers/manufacturers) selected through
stratified sampling from their remittance details (under 37 identified purpose codes)
obtained from Authorised Dealers. Fifty three authorised dealers, out of over a hundred
approached by Audit furnished data pertaining to the period 2007-11. The data
indicated over 11 lakh transactions totaling remittances worth हैं 3.77 lakh crore over the
period 2007-11. We selected fifty five registered manufacturers and 286 registered
service providers for audit at their premises. In respect of multi-locational assessees, we
scrutinised records at selected premises given our limitation of resources. We also
selected 947 remitters possessing ST registration whom we approached through
detailed questionnaires. We have also included audit observations from the pilot study.
In certain cases where we wanted to lay emphasis on the system issues, we have
retained some audit observations raised by CERA as well as by Internal Audit (as
informed by the Ministry in its detailed reply dated 22 March 2013).

3 Ahmedabad ST, Bengaluru ST & LTU, Chennai ST & LTU, Delhi ST, Hyderabad II & IV, Kolkata ST, Mumbai
ST-I, ST-II & LTU, Noida & Panchkula


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Legal provisions

1.12 An amendment incorporating an explanation (effective from 16 June 2005) to
Section 65(105) of Finance Act, 1994 gave statutory recognition to the concept of
consumption-based levy on imported services. Section 66A replaced the explanation
wef 18 April 2006.The Apex Court later dismissed appeals by the department seeking to
give effect to the levy effective from a prior date. The Taxation of Services (Provided
from Outside India and Received in India) Rules, 2006 also came into effect almost
simultaneously. The Central Government notified that with effect from 1 July 2012,
section 66A would be limited in its applicability to things done or omitted to be done
prior to this date. Recently introduced provisions sections 66B and 68 of the Finance Act
are to be read along with Rule 2(m) of the Place of Provision of Services Rules, 2012 and
Notification no. 30/2012 dated 20 June 2012. The person liable to pay the tax under rule
2(1)(d) of the ST Rules, 1994 in respect of any taxable services provided or agreed to be
provided by any person who is located in a non-taxable territory and received by any
person located in the taxable territory is the service recipient who shall bear 100 per
cent of the ST liability.

Acknowledgement

1.13. We acknowledge the cooperation extended by the Department of Revenue and
the subordinate formations in providing the necessary records during the conduct of this
audit. We discussed the audit objectives and scope of the performance audit in an entry
conference with CBEC officers on 10 May 2012. We conducted the exit conference with
CBEC on 11 March 2013.


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Chapter 2 : Adequacy of existing systems and procedures

2.1 An ideal tax administration system would be one in which all the tax due reaches
the Government through voluntary compliance. Tax gap captures the gap between the
collectible tax and the tax collected by the Government. Minimising the tax gap would
be a goal a good tax administration would strive for.

2.2 Until 1 July 2012, the department collected ST based on placement of activities
under various service categories. Only if taxable value in the hands of a person liable to
pay tax exceeded the threshold value, would tax liability generally arise. But in respect
of import of services, the law does not recognise such a threshold value. We examined
the robustness of the systems and procedures in maximising tax collections relating to
import of services.

Importance of information gathering
2.3 Departmental statistics indicate that during the period FYO5 to FY11, annual
growth rate of assessees
Growth in registered Assessee numbers showed a declining trend from
Number of assessees (in thousands) <== ST-GDP ratio FYO9. The annual growth rates
(as percentages) were 9.18,
11.17, 14.08, 12.25, 8.53 and
4.97 during the period 7४05 to
FY11. The ST to GDP ratio also
declined from 7४05 to FY11. As
the relative slowdown in

wane
0.44

wn wo a
कि t+ +
~ ०0 a

growth in assessee numbers as
well as the declining tax-GDP

00 uw ~~ N
ind oO fo} 5

N 00 00
od ao Sal ao

7४05 FY06 FYO7 FYO8 FYO09 FY10 FY11 ratio could be indicative of poor
information gathering

Source: (i) CBEC (for number of assessees) (ii) CSO (for GDP at .
current market prices) (iii) Finance Accounts (for ST) techniques adopted, we

decided to look into the aspect of availability of information relating to potential
assessees and the sources of information relied upon, limiting our focus to the area of
import of services.

2.4 Persons liable to pay ST on import of services would include, besides those
already registered with the Central Excise and ST Department on the basis of their being
service providers/manufacturers, others liable only under the service recipient category.
Even in respect of persons already registered as service providers or manufacturers, the
requirement that registration as service recipients should be taken has to be complied
with. Reliable information relating to cross-border transactions entered into is crucial for
ensuring broadening of the tax base.


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Tax Gap Analysis

The department could not arrive at reliable figures of tax gap relating to import of
services in the absence of sufficient data on value of taxable services and mechanism
to analyse tax collected data.

2.5 Information concerning the remittances made as consideration in respect of
taxable services from abroad would be vital for arriving at the taxable value and in turn
tax collectible figures. Data available with the authorised dealers licensed by the RBI
would be a major source for this. Secondly, for the tax collected, we could refer to the
Principal Chief Controller of Accounts’ accounts figures, provided the accounts depict
service tax collected in respect of import of services under a distinct head.

2.6 We observed that out of the 14 Commissionerates selected for audit coverage,
only Chennai ST Commissionerate had initiated action by addressing RBI in connection
with remittances to service providers outside India. ST Il Commissionerate in Mumbai
stated that efforts were being made to collect data from RBI. DGST Mumbai had also
not collected data from RBI/authorised dealers until July 2012.

2.7 We also observed that in respect of the 119 service categories listed under
section 65(105) of the Finance Act, the Central Government has prescribed accounting
heads under which any remittances were to be accounted. We noted that even under
the new negative list based comprehensive approach to taxation of services, CBEC vide
TRU Circular 165/16/2012-ST dated 20 November 2012 has taken care to restore such
service specific accounting codes. So far, however TRU has not prescribed separate
accounting heads relating to tax collections in respect of import of services. Hence the
authorities would depict ST collected in respect of import of services under the same
accounting heads based on the nature of service provided by the foreign service
provider. Thus, the department could not utilise data available with the Principal Chief
Controller of Accounts to determine actual tax collections. Audit recommended that
feasibility of prescribing accounting codes (or other mechanism) specific to payment of
ST relating to import of services be considered. Thus Audit observed that as in 2012, the
department did not have adequate information on value of taxable services relating to
import of services, neither did it have a system in place whereby quantum of tax
collections relating to import of services could be determined. In the absence of reliable
data with the department on value of services and mechanism to utilize data on
revenues collected, the department could not determine the tax gap in respect of ST
collections relating to import of services.

2.8 Though the Ministry did not address the concern that data available with the
department was insufficient for reliable determination of tax gap in respect of import of
services, it stated (March 2013) that the Directorate General of Audit had undertaken an
exercise from November 2011 to collect and utilise information available with
authorised dealers; 60 out of 101 authorised dealers had so far responded. The


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

department has forwarded details of 575 cases identified so far as likely to involve ST
liability to respective Chief Commissionerates for verification. Besides, DGST had
directed the Zonal Chief Commissionerates vide its letter dated 30 July 2012, to
approach authorised dealers/banks to identify remitters of foreign exchange and to
recover ST on import of services.

2.9 As regards the issue of prescribing accounting codes (or other mechanism)
specific to payment of ST relating to import of services in order to facilitate tax gap
analysis, the Ministry informed (March 2013) that though creation of additional
accounting codes specific to import of services may not be feasible (in order to avoid
duplication of accounting codes), the return format has been recently revised vide
notification no.1/2013 - ST dated 22 February 2013 to include details relating to this
information. The Ministry also stated that the Ministry/department was advising the
Commissionerates to factor in analysis of the aspect of import of services while
considering any specific service. The Ministry’s reply substantiates the Audit
observations raised.

Information from other sources

The department did not have a system in place to utilize information on remittances
to non-residents available with the Income Tax department.

2.10 We noted that the Income Tax department is another source for information
relating to remittances to non-residents. Section 5 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 provides
that income which accrues or arises (or is deemed to accrue or arise) in India and
income received (or deemed to be received in India) is liable to be taxed in India. The
law also provides for deduction of tax at source in respect of such remittances. We
observed that payments to non-residents would include cases of provision of service
from outside India. ST liability would exist in such cases.

2.11 The Income Tax Rules require that Income tax assessees who deduct tax on
payments to non-residents file quarterly TDS returns in Form 270 . The Department
also receives from the authorised dealers, a copy of Form 15CA and Form 15CB
(certificate by Chartered Accountant and undertaking by remitter furnished to the
authorised dealer as a prerequisite for remittance abroad) in respect of each remitter
which include details about nature/purpose of remittance (brokerage fees, engineering
services, fees for technical services etc). Remitters are to upload details of foreign
remittances in Form 15CA accessing www.tin-nsdl.com.

* Delhi ST, Bengaluru ST, Chennai ST, Bangalore LTU, Hyderabad ॥ & IV, Kolkata ST, Noida, Ahmedabad ST
and Panchkula


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

2.12 We enquired from the selected 14 Commissionerates whether the department
accesses information available with Income Tax authorities regarding remittance to
foreign service providers. Ten* Commissionerates informed in the negative. Mumbai ST-
॥ Commissionerate stated that efforts were on to collect data from the Income Tax
department. Mumbai LTU indicated that it would collect such data henceforth. Barring
Hyderabad-ll which indicated conducting surveys for the purpose of identifying potential
assessees, no other Commissionerate indicated any other specific procedures having
been resorted to identify unregistered service recipients. DGST is yet to provide
information relating to accessing of information from sources such as the Income Tax
Department.The Ministry informed (March 2013) Audit about the constitution of a
committee consisting of representatives of both departments to work out modalities for
sharing of information. Further, the department was examining the possibility of a
system in which the Income Tax server can be linked to CBEC’s server for secure data
transfer.

Comparison with systems in Income Tax Department

RBI permits remittances towards import of services irrespective of non-fulfilment of
corresponding service tax liability by the service recipient, in the absence of any
requirement for submission of an undertaking by remitter/certificate from Accountant
on the lines of the prescription in Income Tax.

2.13. Section 195 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 mandates deduction of income tax from
payments made or credit given to non-residents at the rates in force. The RBI
requirement that no remittance be made to a non-resident unless a no objection
certificate has been obtained from the Income Tax Department, was modified in 2002 to
allow such remittances without insisting on such no objection certificate, if the person
making the remittance furnishes (in form 15CA) an undertaking (addressed to the
Assessing Officer) accompanied by a certificate (in form 15CB) from an Accountant. The
certificate and undertaking are to be submitted (in duplicate) to the RBI/authorised
dealers who in turn are required to forward a copy to the Assessing Officer concerned.
The purpose of the undertaking and the certificate is to collect taxes at the stage when
the remittance is made as it may not be possible to recover the tax at a later stage from
non-residents. Audit observed that no such control has been introduced as yet in
respect of fulfillment of liability of ST before release of remittance by the authorised
dealer. We have sought to illustrate the risk of tax evasion through the following cases.


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Box 2.1: Illustrations depicting risk of tax evasion

A. M/s Zoom Developers Ltd in Mumbai 5-1 Commissionerate (with registrations in
four other Commissionerates of India) remitted foreign currency equivalent at least to
513.15 crore during 2007-08 to 2010-11, under the purpose codes which can primarily
be considered as towards import of services, to persons located outside India as per the
PAN wise data received from various Authorised Dealers during the years 2007-08 to
2010-11. The assessee could not be located at its registered premises. The
Commissionerate could not provide its ST Returns for the above period or any prior
period. The Ministry informed (March 2013) that the Anti-Evasion wing had initiated
action for non-payment of ST through show cause notices dated 24 October 2011 and 9
April 2012 for over = 900 crore covering the period 1.4.2006 to 31.3.2011. Show cause
notices were issued by pasting at the known address of the assessee, by registered post
acknowledgment due and by delivery at the registered office. The Commissionerate has
also written to other field formations to take further action to safeguard Government
revenue. The Commissionerate has also addressed the RBI Foreign Exchange
Department in December 2012 requesting the Reserve Bank to monitor the remittances
by the said party and to inform their whereabouts.

8. M/s Tulsiyat Tek Pvt Ltd., in Mumbai 5-॥ Commissionerate also remitted foreign
currency amounting to हैं 64.87 crore during 2010-11, under the purpose codes which
could primarily be considered as towards import of services, to persons located outside
India as per the PAN wise data received from various Authorised Dealers. This assessee
could also not be located at its registered premises. The Commissionerate also could not
provide their ST Returns for the above period. The copies of returns for any prior period
are also awaited from the Commissionerate. The assessee had no other registration in
any of the Commissionerates of India as per ACES data on registrations. The Ministry
informed (March 2013) that though the assessee took registration on 15 March 2011, it
did not file ST-3 returns. The assessee did not respond to the Commissionerate’s request
to pay ST dues as well as to summons subsequently issued. Governmental authorities
have sealed the premises. The Ministry added that Show cause notice has been issued
for non-filing of ST-3 returns.

2.14 Had there been a provision for coverage of ST liability at the time of remittance,
at par with the Income Tax Rules, the revenue authorities possibly could have recovered
the ST dues, at that stage itself.

2.15 The Ministry replied (March 2013) that confirmation of payment of ST by
authorised dealers at the point of remittance is not feasible since the service recipient
under reverse charge pays ST in a lump sum at the end of the month/quarter and not
with respect to each transaction, unlike Income Tax. Further, unlike deduction of tax at
source which is a simple computation at flat rates, there would be interpretational
issues involved in ST, which would be beyond the scope of the authorised dealer to
verify. It would be difficult for authorised dealers to assess legal issues such as relating
to exemption, whether the activity conforms to the definition of service, taxable service
etc. The assessee making a self-assessment by way of payment of tax and filing of return



Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

has to consider all these aspects before paying tax. This task cannot be performed by the
bank facilitating the remittance and legal liability remains with the recipient of service.
The Ministry however added that the objective can be achieved alternatively by getting
the required data (Forms 15CA and 15 CB) from the Income Tax authorities as detailed in
para 2.12 above.

2.16 On examination, Audit opines that getting the required 15CA and 15CB
documents from the Income Tax department though a positive initiative, would not be
adequate to ensure revenue is protected particularly, if obtained after the remittance
has been permitted. (Prescribed norm for detailed scrutiny of ST returns is only 5
percent of filed returns and departmental figures for coverage of assessees (A and B
categories) by internal audit indicates a shortfall of approximately 50 percent). The
Ministry may consider the possibility of reinforcing the proposed initiative by expanding
the scope of Form 15 CA (undertaking by remitter)/ Form 15 CB (certificate by
Accountant) to ensure coverage of ST liability also. Establishing such a mechanism would
not result in additional responsibilities to authorised dealers concerning possible issues
of interpretation in law since the undertaking concerned would be from the remitter
and the certificate is of the Accountant. Besides, the ST Rules which provide that ST is to
be paid by the prescribed dates are enabling Rules and the same could be amended, if
found necessary, to provide for the payment with respect to each transaction in the
specific situation of import of services. Further, even in Income Tax, tax deducted at
source is to be remitted to Government account only by the dates prescribed for the
purpose. The other point to be noted is that import of services is probably one of the
few situations where it may be possible to ensure almost total coverage by the
department on account of a) data being available at a single source category (i.e. with
the authorised dealers) and b) the compulsory reliance by the remitters on the
prescribed channels for remittance.

2.17 DGCEI’s issuing show cause notices for over ~ 900 crore in the single case
illustrated above only reiterates the urgent requirement to cover this gap in the
prescribed Rules/ procedures.

2.18 The information available on the net also indicates that some countries have
incorporated such controls in their taxation systems. For instance, an imported service
paid through a regular bank transfer from a Brazilian bank account requires the Brazilian
party to demonstrate a taxation document named DARF (Documento de Arrecadagado
de Receitas Federais or Document for Receipt of Collection of Federal Income) and a tax
payment confirmation before release of money out of the country. If the Brazilian party
chooses to pay for the service using a credit card or other payment method not directly
controlled by Banco Central, the DARF document and tax payment are still required in
order to document trace of the money.


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

2.19 We also observed that the department does not have a structured system of
following up on potential information sources unlike Direct Taxes-possibly attributable
to the fact that the ST wing is the one most recently introduced among major Central tax
wings. Besides, there is the felt need for posts commensurate to the volume of work.

2.20 When we pointed this out, the Ministry stated (March 2013) that a Committee
has been set up to work out the modalities of sharing data with CBDT. As of now, CBEC is
accessing information available with the Ministry of Corporate Affairs. Independent of
this, Commissionerates conduct surveys based on information about potential
assessees, available in the public domain. The Ministry informed (March 2013) that the
cadre restructuring proposal of the department envisages enhanced strength for ST
functioning.

2.21 Audit recommends that the Ministry may pursue the matter of extending the
access to data on Ministry of Corporate Affairs portal to more officers of the
department. The Ministry has informed that access in field formations is currently
restricted to Chief Commissioner level.

Need for systematic information gathering mechanisms
The department lacked a mechanism for systematic collection of information such as
provision requiring filing of Annual Information Return by identified parties.

2.22 The systems in the Income Tax Department include collection and collation of
information by the Central Information Branch (CIB) functioning under the investigation
wing. Based on the recommendation of the Task Force on Direct Taxes, the Income Tax
department has also set up a Tax Information Network which is the gateway hosted by
NSDL for electronic information coming to the department from other agencies. It serves
as a repository for important tax related information such as information on tax
deduction at source. There is also a system of submission by certain identified persons
of Annual Information Return (AIR) capturing high value transactions which could be a
useful source of information as evidenced by the continuance of the system in Income
Tax wing since its inception in 2004. For instance, an authorised officer of the RBI is to
file this return giving details in respect of receipts exceeding ~ 5 lakh on RBI bonds.
Besides, tax authorities may source information from different agencies such as banks,
mutual funds and credit card companies if they need it for any inquiry or proceedings.
This source of gathering information (mandatory and optional source codes have been
determined) is independent of the details collected through the annual information
returns (AIR). The CIB has a separate code for each transaction - there are around 36 CIB
codes and value limits have been set for many transactions. Audit observed that no such
mechanism for collection of information on regular basis exists in the ST sector. Being
the fastest growing revenue sector, it is imperative that efforts to collect information are
systematised and given adequate recognition in law.


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

2.23 The Ministry replied (March 2013) that the feasibility of the same would be
examined. During the Exit Conference, CBEC members also expressed their
apprehension that introduction of an Annual Information Return system would result in
burdening of taxpayers and other stakeholders with excessive reporting. However
recognizing the need for controls to be in place without burdening the assessee, CBEC
mooted the possibility of authorised dealers/assessees enclosing with the return, an
attachment providing number of cases and details of foreign remittances.

2.24 Audit examined the apprehensions raised during the exit conference and
reiterates the felt need for putting in place a robust system of information gathering
without which the department may be able to discharge only to a limited extent its
envisaged role as authority responsible for collection of ST revenues due to the
Government. CBEC’s stated Mission inter alia, is to achieve excellence in the
implementation of ST laws and procedures aimed at realizing the revenues in a fair,
equitable, transparent and efficient manner, ensuring control on cross border
movement of goods, services, intellectual property etc. During the exit conference, DG
(Audit) informed that despite efforts since November 2011 to collect data from 101
authorised dealers in the country, they have been able to collect data only from 60
dealers. Such feedback strengthens the case for introduction of a system of furnishing of
Annual Information Return inter alia, by authorised dealers, all of whom would be ST
assessees (under banking and financial services category).

Compliance verification Mechanism

2.25 Audit considered the utilisation of import of services related information by two
important prongs of the compliance verification system viz returns scrutiny and audit.
We looked into the adequacy of provisions prescribed as also the actual position of
implementation in field.

Scrutiny of returns

The department had not identified data on remittances relating to import of services
as a parameter for selection of returns for scrutiny.

2.26 Audit observed that there are two occasions where data on value of remittances
towards import of services could come in handy during the scrutiny process at ranges;
firstly, during selection of returns for scrutiny. Departmental officers carry out selection
of returns based on prescribed risk norms. Audit observed that these risk parameters
prescribed(Annexure 2.2) in respect of both Central Excise and ST Scrutiny Manuals do
not include consideration of data on import of services. We further observed that the
details furnished in the return filed by the assessee form the basis of the risk
parameters for scrutiny prescribed. However, we also noted that there is scope for
consideration of external parameters given the fact that one of the local factors
suggested (apart from the five prescribed parameters) is - units not audited in the last
five years. We however, observed that in the absence of data relating to value of


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

remittances relating to import of services, at the selected Commissionerates, this was
not a factor considered during selection of returns for scrutiny. The Ministry informed
(March 2013) that the department would consider this aspect along with others during
the development of risk parameters.

Box 2.2 : Illustrative cases of exemptions taken incorrectly

A. ST on Business Auxiliary Services (BAS) is leviable wef July 2003. Notification No.
18/2009-ST dated 7 July 2009 read with Circular No.118 /12/2009-ST dated 23
November 2009ST permits exemption of ST on commission paid to the agent located
outside India upto one per cent of the FOB value of export goods for which the service
has been used subject to the fulfilment of conditions. These conditions include
registration under section 69 of the Finance Act as ST assessees, intimation to the
Assistant Commissioner in form EXPI form and submission of six -monthly returns in
form EXP2.

Seven assessee” exporters in Mumbai | ST, Mumbai II ST and Thane | Commissionerates
remitted हैं 12.57 crore towards export commission depicting charges under BAS. The
assessees could not produce evidence concerning fulfilment of the conditions
prescribed. Six PAN holders did not fulfil even the basic requirement of registration
under section 69 of the Finance Act. Non-fulfilment of the conditions implies liability to
pay ST amounting to % 1.29 crore on such services received from outside India. The
Ministry reported (March 2013) that in respect of four of these assessees, the cases are
under investigation of the Anti-Evasion wing and further progress will be informed. One
assessee exporter has subsequently taken registration under section 69 and another
has taken ST registration in June 2012.

2.27 Secondly, during the actual scrutiny process, the departmental auditors are to
follow the checks as prescribed in the Scrutiny Manual. These checks include checks
relating to fulfilment of liability as ST recipient under section 66A. Though we sought
information from the selected Commissionerates about undertaking of scrutiny of
returns for units falling under their respective jurisdictions from Audit’s selected sample,
response received in respect of the Commissionerates has only been in the negative so
far. This could be owing to the fact that the prescribed norm for detailed scrutiny of ST
returns is only 2 percent of the returns filed.

Internal Audit

2.28 The recently revised (2011) ST Audit Manual lists among the local risk parameters
for selection of units for audit, a newly introduced parameter based on liability under
section 66A. Effectiveness of selection based on such parameter among others would be
dependent on regular updating of assessee master files maintained by the
Commissionerates. Audit observed non-updating/irregular updating of assessee
master files (including information concerning registration status of assessee as

5 Sequent Scientific Ltd., Rainbow Silks, Ramka Silks, Annet Technologies, Vora Exports, Goyal Garb and
Firestar International Pvt. Ltd


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

recipient) in 10° Commissionerates. Some of the Commissionerates (Hyderabad IV and
Noida) have since responded as indicated in the Ministry’s reply (March 2013) that they
are maintaining assessee master files and updating the same with data relating to
reverse charge. Audit recommends that among other parameters for examination at
Commissionerates, DG (Audit) may check the satisfactory maintenance and updating of
assessee master files. We further noted that in audits conducted at premises of ST
assessees, one of the checks departmental auditors carry out at ST assessee premises
related to section 66A liability. This was in compliance with the prescriptions listed in the
ST Audit Manual provisions.

Role of the Directorate

2.29 85 the premier body responsible for looking after the implementation of ST
administration in the country, the Directorate of ST should assume a proactive role in
ensuring availability of data in respect of key area such as import of services. Audit
sought information from DGST relating to action taken if any, in utilising data on
remittances made in respect of import of services available with sources such as the
RBl/authorised dealers and Income Tax department. We also sought details(November
2012) of steps initiated regarding streamlining of procedures and improving tax
collections, recommendations for changes in the law if any, suggestions made to
Director General(Systems) concerning requirements for improvements in the ACES
system, other suggestions made to CBEC/TRU etc.

We are awaiting DGST’s reply(March 2013). Audit suggested that the department might
review and if required, consider strengthening of the DGST setup so that the office may
fulfil the pivotal role expected of it in ST related matters. The Ministry stated (March
2013) that strengthening of the Directorate of ST is under examination by a Committee;
the first step is to ensure better coordination, if need be, by relocating the office.

Recommendations.
We recommended that

a. the department may explore the feasibility of setting in place a mechanism to
utilise data available with authorised dealers, in order to assess the extent of voluntary
compliance in respect of ST liability relating to import of services.

Agreeing with the recommendation, the Ministry stated that Special Cells have been set
up in DGST and DG (Audit) to collect the information from authorised dealers for import
of services. DG (Audit) had initiated an exercise in November 2011 for collecting and
utilising information available with Authorised dealers relating to foreign exchange
remittances; so far it has collected data from 60 authorised dealers.

Audit reiterates the need for a reliable system (with inter se roles of DGST, DG (Audit)
etc clearly defined) of data collection from authorised dealers and its utilization in order

5 Mumbai ST-III, LTU, Hyderabad ॥ & IV, Kolkata ST, Noida, Ahmedabad ST, Panchkula and Delhi ST.

14


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

to ensure adequacy of data to evaluate extent of voluntary compliance and to facilitate
tax gap analysis.

b. | CBEC may consider the feasibility of prescribing accounting codes (or other
mechanism) specific to payment of ST relating to import of services in order to facilitate
tax gap /statistical analysis. Accepting the recommendation for prescription of a suitable
mechanism, the Ministry stated that format of ST-3 return has been revised to provide
field for data on import of services.

८. the Ministry may consider initiating steps to enable access by officers of the
Central Excise and ST department to electronic data available with the Income Tax
department in order to maximise revenue collections through optimal use of available
resources.

Agreeing with the recommendation, the Ministry stated, that a committee has been set
up to work out the modalities for sharing information with CBDT and the work had been
started in this regard.

d. the rapid growth in import of services points to the necessity of having a control
requiring evidence of fulfilment of liability of ST by remitter as a prerequisite before
release of remittance by the authorised dealer.

The Ministry stated that it is not feasible to introduce TDS for ST or even confirmation of
payment of ST by Authorised Dealer due to complexities involved in computation and
interpretation issues involved in ST. The Ministry further informed that the desired
objective could be achieved alternatively by getting data from income tax authorities.

Audit reiterates that getting the required 15CA and 15CB documents from the Income
Tax department though a positive initiative, may not be adequate to ensure adequate
protection of revenue without adequate strengthening of the department’s compliance
verification mechanisms. The Ministry may consider the feasibility of a) expanding the
scope of Form 15 CA (undertaking by remitter) / Form 15 CB (certificate by Accountant)
to cover ST liability also and b) amending the ST Rules, if necessary, to provide for
transaction based payment of ST in the specific contingency of import of services.

e. the department may consider the need for introduction of an AIR system with
authorised dealers as one of the categories of persons obliged to submit such return; the
department may also explore possibility of empowering tax administrators to call for
information based on specific identified source codes.

The Ministry expressed apprehensions concerning excessive burdening of the taxpayer.
It however informed that the department would examine the feasibility of
implementation.

f. the department may consider the possibility of inclusion of a risk parameter based
on remittances in respect of import of services for the purpose of returns’ selection for
scrutiny.

The Ministry accepted the recommendation stating that the department would consider
the feasibility of inclusion of a risk parameter based on remittance in respect of import
of services while fixing the risk parameters for scrutiny of ST-3 return.

15


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

g. the Commissionerates may ensure that Internal Audit cells maintain updated
assessee master files containing all relevant information relating to import of services so
as to enable consideration of this parameter while selecting units for audit.

Agreeing with the recommendation, the Ministry stated that the existing ST Audit
Manual already envisages the same. However, Audit recommendation is concerning the
strengthening of implementation of the existing mechanism so that data on import of
services may be useful as a parameter for selection of units for audit. The selected
Commissionerates did not have a mechanism in place to collect data on import of
services. Audit recommends that among other parameters for examination at
Commissionerates, DG (Audit) may check the satisfactory maintenance and updating of
assessee master files.

h. the department may review and if required, consider strengthening of the DGST
setup so that the office may fulfil the pivotal role expected of it in ST related matters.

Agreeing with the recommendation, the Ministry stated that issue of strengthening of
the DGST is already under examination by a Committee.

i. the department should initiate action to establish a mechanism for accessing
information such as accounts of companies available with the Registrar of Companies in
order to systematically minimize possibility of evasion in international transactions.

The Ministry stated that the system exists as the Ministry of Corporate Affairs had
provided access to Chief Commissioners and DG (Audit) for accessing the MCA-21 Portal.
Audit recommends that the Ministry may pursue the matter of extending the access to
data on Ministry of Corporate Affairs portal to more officers in the field.


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Chapter 3: Issues relating to fulfilment of tax liability
3.1 The Finance Act, 1994 requires that where a person or business from a country
other than India provides a service specified in clause (105) of section 65, the recipient
has to pay ST on the service provided. A crucial requirement is that the recipient must
receive the taxable service in India.

3.2 During the course of audit, we came across several instances where the assessee
had not fulfilled its ST liability by the time of audit. While in some instances we observed
that the assessee had not registered itself as service recipient which it was supposed to
under Rule 4 of the Taxation of Services (Provided from Outside India and received in
India) Rules, 2006, in others either the tax/ interest/both had not been paid. We also
observed that there were possibilities of collecting information from other sources such
as Central Ministries, which the Department could have harnessed. We also observed
instances of incorrect determination of value of taxable service under the ST
(Determination of Value) Rules, 2006. We have also brought out certain issues where we
felt the need for a consistent stand on the part of the department while issuing
notifications.

Requirement of registration

In the absence of any mechanism in the field formations to systematically track the
non-registered import of service recipients, several assessees were yet to take
registration (as per data available in ACES) under Rule 4 of Taxation of
Services(Provided from outside India and received in India) Rules 2006 .

3.3 Rule 4 of the Taxation of Services (Provided from outside India and received in
India) Rules, 2006 requires that the recipient of taxable services provided from outside
India and received in India shall make an application for registration. However, from the
ACES data as furnished by DG (Systems), we observed that among the samples
scrutinised in audit, 132 assessees were yet to take registration under Rule 4 though
they were liable to pay ST under section 66A of the Finance Act. Further, there was no
system in the field offices of ensuring compliance with registration related provisions.
Existence of such a system would depend on the availability of information relating to
the outward flow of remittances in respect of taxable services. Though the Ministry
replied (March 2013) that seminars are being held from time to time in
Commissionerates to educate the trade on this aspect and the website updated, Audit
observed that as of July 2012, there was no mechanism in the field formations to
systematically track the non-registered service recipients of import of services. Though
DG (Audit) stated during the exit conference (March 2013) that his office had obtained
data on remittances from 60 out of 101 authorised dealers since November 2011
(efforts included a demi-official letter from Secretary (Revenue) to Secretary (Banking) in
2012), such a one-time effort though very positive does not imply existence of a system.
That 41 authorised dealers including bigger ones were yet to respond highlights the


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

need for introduction of a mandatory system (such as through Annual Information
Return) for flow of information.

ACES did not flag such cases where data in ACES returns revealed need for updation of
category of ST remitter in database.

3.4 We also observed from the returns filed that some assessees remitted ST relating
to import of services though they had no registration in their capacity as service
recipients. ACES system does not flag such cases or provide for automatic updation of
the database. DG (Systems) confirmed that the ACES system does not provide for
generation of exception reports in such cases. During the exit conference, Director
General (Systems) stated that the assessee has to initiate any modification in the ST-1
Registration form. He added that while it may not be possible to adopt the suggestion
for auto-populating registration form based on entries in the ACES return, the best
approach would be to make it mandatory for assessees to amend the data in their
registration forms by making it a mandatory process before filing returns. The Ministry
may examine the same for incorporation in the system.

Need to analyse data relating to remittances by unregistered persons

3.5 In the samples selected by Audit, we covered units registered either as service
providers or as manufacturers with the department. However from the data obtained
from the RBI/authorised dealers, we observed that there could be several such instances
where tax payable on account of the party being a recipient of services from abroad had
not been remitted. Data for the years 2007-11 from over 50 authorised dealers indicated
over 20000 service recipients who made remittances under the 37 purpose codes
identified but did not possess registration under ACES. The selected Commissionerates
did not collect/analyse data available with the authorised dealers. Audit noted that this
could be a source of information for departmental officers including Directorate General
of Central Excise Intelligence to check evasion of tax in respect of import of services. The
Ministry informed Audit about forwarding of the data to DGCEI. The Ministry also
informed during the exit conference that Director General (Audit) had come across
approximately 450 unregistered service recipients in a similar exercise. In many cases,
remitters had indicated wrong purpose codes, or remittance had been for purchase of
goods or authorized dealers had wrongly captured data. Audit recommends that the
department may seek to impress upon RBI the need for enhancement in quality of data
capture by authorized dealers. Audit further recommends that the department may
consider the allocation of responsibilities among different offices such as DGST, DG
(Audit) and DGCEI in connection with collection of data from authorised dealers, its
analysis and subsequent follow-up. For instance, follow-up in respect of non-registered
service recipients may not be termed the responsibility of the Director General (Audit).


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Non-fulfilment of liability by registered manufacturers

Certain manufacturers who were liable to pay tax under import of services category,
failed to pay ST.

3.6 During scrutiny of records of selected central excise assessees (manufacturers
registered with the department), we found non/short levy of ST in 19 cases involving ST
of % 2.52 crore excluding interest and penalty. We have illustrated a few cases below.

Box 3.1: Illustrative cases of non-fulfilment of ST liability by manufacturers

A. M/s Hydro Building Systems Pvt. Ltd., in Bengaluru ST Commissionerate,
registered with Central Excise as a dealer of excisable goods such as aluminum
extrusions, profiles and accessories did not take registration either as a recipient or as
a provider of service. The assessee had entered into an agreement with its parent
company M/s. Hydro Aluminum SA having head office in Switzerland for the provision
of Information Technology Software Services, Technical Assistance, Management
Services etc and paid € 3.51 crore during the period 2009-10 to 2011-12 for the above
services. We observed that the assessee had not paid the applicable ST of ¥ 36.23 lakh
(excluding interest).The Ministry intimated (March 2013) issue of show cause notice
dated 6 December 2012 by the Commissionerate on the basis of the Audit
observation.

B. M/s Ashimori India Pvt. Ltd. in Jaipur | Commissionerate, paid ST of = 76.79 lakh
on technical testing, inspection and certification services as against the ST of ¥ 91.15
lakh payable. This resulted in short payment of ST 19.82 lakh including interest. The
Ministry intimated (March 2013) that the assessee deposited the amount of ~ 19.82
lakh including interest on this being pointed out.

ST liability of Export oriented units

The department did not have a system to utilize information available with
Development Commissioners relating to import of services by EOUs.

3.7 There is no exemption from ST liability in respect of Export Oriented units
importing services. Under the Foreign Trade Policy, it is obligatory on the part of every
EOU to furnish an Annual Performance Report to the concerned Development
Commissioner’s office. The Annual Performance Report system requires the EOUs inter
alia, to provide details of foreign exchange outflow on import of services (royalty,
technological, commission etc). Response from the Division at Bengaluru dealing
exclusively with EOUs on whether it had a system in place to utilise the information
available with the Development Commissioner’s office in the form of Annual
Performance Reports furnished by ६005 as an aid to assess the liability of EOUs in
respect of import of services is awaited.


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Audit observed that in the following case, the EOU had not fulfilled the ST liability.

Box 3.2 : Illustrative case of non-fulfilment of liability by EOU

M/s. Katra Phytochem (India) Pvt. Ltd., in Bangalore ST Commissionerate, a 100 per cent
export oriented unit, had entered into an agreement with Mabriba GMBH, a company
registered in Switzerland for services relating to improvement of the business and paid

& 2.22 crore between 2009-10 and 11-12. Mabriba, a tax resident of Switzerland exporting
its services was not subject to Swiss VAT under the Agreement. We observed that the
company did not have ST registration either as a recipient or as a provider of service. The
manufacturing company did not pay the applicable ST of ¥ 22.85 lakh excluding interest
and the same was not pointed out by the department either through scrutiny or audit
processes. The Ministry intimated (March 2013) recovery of € 34.57 lakh (including
interest).

3.8 Audit recommended that the department might consider tapping data relating to
Export Oriented Units available with the Development Commissioner’s office as a lead
‘or assessing ST liability. The Ministry stated (March 2013) that this would be examined.

3.9 In our audit scrutiny in respect of assessees registered as service
providers/recipients) we found non/short levy of tax in 236 cases involving ST of
194.11 crore (excluding interest).

Valuation of taxable services

3.10 Section 67(1) of the Finance Act envisages that ST chargeable on any taxable
service with reference to its value shall be the gross amount charged by the service
provider for such service provided. Audit observed non-compliance in certain cases; we
have discussed one such instance below.

Box 3.3: Illustrative case of incorrect valuation of taxable services

The amount paid by M/s. Dhamra Port Company Ltd., in Bhubaneswar | Commissionerate,
towards dredging services provided by a foreign service provider included an amount of

% 24.85 crore for bunkering charges during 2011-12 on which the applicable ST of € 2.56
crore was not paid. The contract entered into by the company with Chellchart (UK) Ltd was
for carrying out dredging works in specified areas, using a specific Trailing suction hopper
dredger (TSHD). The contract envisaged that the owner would supply fuel at the owner’s
cost. The charterer would pay a fixed amount of USD 18000 prorata per day for the supply
of fuel subject to fuel price adjustment. As value of taxable services would be the gross
amount charged, Audit pointed out the ST liability on payments for bunkering included in
the dredging contract. The Ministry accepted the audit objection.

3.11 We observed that remittances to associated companies as royalty though
common, ST liability in several cases remained either unfulfilled or partially fulfilled
owing to non-inclusion of a portion of the consideration. Explanation to section 67 of
Finance Act clarifies that gross amount charged in respect of transactions involving
associated enterprises would include any amount credited or debited, as the case may
be, to any account, whether called “suspense account” or by any other name, in the

20



Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

books of account of a person liable to pay ST. Explanation to Rule 6(1) of ST Rules,
further clarifies that any payment received towards the value of taxable service, in such
case shall include any amount credited or debited, as the case may be, to any account,
whether called ‘Suspense account’ or by any other name, in the books of account of a
person liable to pay ST. Even the Point of Taxation Rules include a proviso to the effect
that where the person providing the service is located outside India, the point of
taxation in respect of associated enterprises shall be the date of debit in the books of
account of the person receiving the service or date of making the payment whichever is
earlier

3.12. We pointed out certain instances of non-compliance. We have discussed below,
two such cases. In respect of the second illustration, we observed that though no actual
payment had taken place, the service recipient’s books of account depicted amount
debited through creation of provision.

Box 3.4: Illustrative cases where ST liability not fulfilled by associated enterprises in respect
of royalty payments

A. M/s Otis Elevators (India) Pvt. Ltd., in Mumbai ST-II Commissionerate, paid royalty of
₹ 19.76 crore to M/s Otis Elevator Company, New Jersey in foreign currency during 2008-09
and 2009-10. The assessee was liable to pay ST of € 2.09 crore. The Ministry replied (March
2013) that the assessee has since made payment of tax liability. We are awaiting details of
the same.

B. M/s Hindustan Unilever Ltd in Mumbai | Commissionerate remitted € 514.63 crore
towards royalty payments during the period 2008-09 to 2010-11 to its holding company,
Unilever PLC and other associated concerns located abroad. The transaction being with
associated enterprises, the taxable value of ST payments as indicated in ST3 returns would
include amounts included in the books of account of the person liable to pay ST.
Reconciliation of royalty payments with ST returns revealed that the assessee had not paid
ST on amount of € 282.23 crore. Resultant short payment of ST was हैं 30.41 crore. The
Ministry informed (March 2013) inter alia that the assessee calculates royalty on quarterly
basis and accordingly raises credit note against the foreign entity. Further, for the last
quarter of the year, they make a provision, as actual figures would not be available. The
assessee discharges tax liability for the same on actualization of royalty. The Ministry stated
that this appeared to be acceptable. However this goes against the explanation to Rule 6(1)
of the ST Rules introduced vide Notification No. 19/2008 dated 10 May 2008.

Non-inclusion of Tax deduction at source in arriving at taxable value
Assessees determined the value of taxable services for service tax purposes incorrectly
by excluding tax deducted at source under the Income Tax laws.

3.13 The value of taxable services received under the provisions of Section 66A is inter
alia, equal to the actual consideration charged for the services provided. This means that
the assessee would have to take into consideration the amount deducted under the
Income Tax law as tax deducted at source under section 195 while arriving at the taxable
value of service for ST calculation.

21



Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Box 3.5: Illustrative case where the assessee excluded TDS in computing taxable value

A. M/s. Cochin Shipyard Ltd. in Kochi Commissionerate, paid an amount of € 179.23
crore during the period 2009-10 to 2011-12 to various foreign service providers; it also paid
ST for the same. However, the unit excluded income tax deducted at source in arriving at
the value of taxable service, which resulted in short payment of ST amounting to € 2.43
crore. Accepting the audit observation, the Ministry informed (March 2013) that the
Commissionerate had issued a show cause notice dated 19 October 2012 to the assessee.

Reimbursement of charges

3.14 Section 67 of the Finance Act provides for application of ST (Determination of
Value) Rules, 2006 for the purpose of enabling determination of value of taxable services
in cases where the value of consideration is not ascertainable. Rule 5 of the ST
(Determination of Value) Rules, 2006 envisages that costs incurred by the service
provider in the course of providing taxable service are to be treated as consideration for
the taxable service provided and hence are to be included in the value of taxable service.
But this was not applicable in respect of import of services as the Rules (prior to July
2012) provided that the value of taxable service received under the provisions of
section 66A, shall be such amount as is equal to the actual consideration charged for the
services provided.

3.15 In cases where an associated enterprise has borne the expenses for the other
party, Audit observed that generally there would not be a specific contract or invoice
indicating the provision of service by the other party located outside the country.
However, Audit considers that in order to facilitate consistent treatment by field
formations and audit parties, there may be need for a clarification covering
contingencies such as incurring of project expenditure by Indian party as shown in
related party disclosures -whether such incurring of expenditure could be considered as
evidencing provision of service by the other party, and secondly whether in such cases
this could be treated as covered under the explanation to section 67 relating to gross
amount charged.

During the Exit Conference, the Ministry acknowledged that this could be a trigger for
detailed investigation. We discuss below two cases, Audit came across.

A. M/s Exchanging Solutions Ltd., in Bangalore ST Commissionerate (subsidiaries in
USA, UK and Singapore) undertook business process outsourcing (BPO) and Information
technology services. Expenditure in foreign currency included project work expenditure
amounting to 58.83 crore between 2008 and 2010 on which ST liability if applicable,
would amount to & 6.06 crore. The overseas subsidiary entered into contracts with third
parties or customers. The assessee was primarily responsible for development for
software and the subsidiaries were front entities involved in finalisation of contracts
with independent third parties. The overseas subsidiary performs the entire marketing
functions for the assessee. The responsibility for execution of all technical coding and

22



Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

documentation of software developed offshore was with Exchanging Solutions Ltd and
the overseas subsidiary was responsible for timely delivery of services to the third
parties onsite. Periodically the overseas subsidiary cross-charged both onsite revenue
(got from third party clients) and onsite cost to Exchanging India as per transfer pricing
model. The assessee maintained that it only exported services to the subsidiaries and
there was no import of services. While the assessee had issued invoices to the
subsidiary, the overseas subsidiary did not issue any invoice on the holding company.

Audit observed that the assessee by its own admission was the party responsible for
overall project management. The assessee incurred project expenses in foreign
remittances as shown by the related party disclosures. By invoicing only the services
rendered by the Indian holding company and cross charging the onsite costs to the
Indian assessee, the assessee could bypass the requirements of ST liability under section
66A of the Finance Act. CERA issued an audit observation to the department on 2 July
2012. The department while admitting the objection (December 2012) intimated that a
show cause notice was issued for % 23.59 crore for the period during 2007-12 and the
case had been investigated by Anti Evasion Wing.

The Ministry subsequently intimated (March 2013) that the department had already
noticed the issue and that the Anti-Evasion wing of the Commissionerate on
investigation found short payment of ST on the transfer pricing model — IT services and
other services during the period 2007-08 to 2011-12. Audit noted that the Anti Evasion
Wing had visited the assessee's premises on 17 August 2012 for verification of facts and
issued a Show cause notice for हैं 23.59 crore on 19 October 2012.

Audit observed that in respect of transactions between associated enterprises, one of
which was outside the taxable territory, there was always the possibility that services
even where provided by the party outside the taxable territory to the other for
consideration, were likely to suffer from lack of evidence (absence of invoice etc). Hence
in order to facilitate consistency of interpretation between various field formations and
audit parties, it may be desirable for CBEC to issue instructions/clarify whether
contingencies such as incurring of project expenditure by Indian party as shown in
related party disclosures could be treated as evidencing provision of service by the other
party. CBEC may also consider clarifying whether explanation to section 67 on “gross
amount charged” covers such expenditure. While acknowledging that this could be a
trigger for detailed investigation, the Ministry stated that in the light of the new law and
Place of Provision of Services Rules, 2012, there is no requirement for a clarification.
Audit reiterates that even after the newly introduced definition of service under section
65(44) as an activity involving consideration and the framing of the Place of Provision
Rules 2012, there is likelihood of differing treatments of similar situations because the
basic issue of determining existence of ‘service’ is to be resolved before the Place of
Provision of Service Rules could be considered.

23


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

B. M/s Jet Airways (India) Limited in Mumbai | Commissionerate reimbursed staff
costs, communication costs, rentals and other administrative costs to its associated
concerns. The agreement between M/s Jet Airways (India) Ltd and M/s Jet Airways of
India Inc. in USA dated 13 June, 2005 provided that M/s Jet Airways of India Inc. would
recruit on its rolls such personnel for the purpose of carrying out operations of M/s Jet
Airways (India) Ltd at New Jersey Branch office. The assessee during the period 2009-10
to 2011-12 had paid an amount of € 154.09 crore towards reimbursement of expenses
out of which it is yet to furnish details relating to ¥ 57.09 crore, the ST liability, if
applicable, of which would work out to हैं 5.88 crore.

The Ministry stated (March 2013) that administrative expenses such as office rent,
catering, repairs to office equipment, cargo charges, insurance to office etc incurred at
various locations outside India pertaining to M/s Jet Airways (India) Ltd’s airlines
operations are made by their Associate concerns on their behalf and are reimbursed on
actual basis upon receipt of debit notes raised by the Associate Concerns. Since the
foreign locations are treated as separate establishments, under section 66A (2), the
liability of ST does not arise.

The reply of the Ministry is not acceptable since the services rendered by the separate
establishment outside India would be in the nature of business support
services/business auxiliary services vis-a-vis the Indian company and would be covered
under rule 3(iii) of the Taxation of Services (Provided from Outside India and Received in
India) Rules, 2006. The benefit of services provided by enterprise outside India accrues
on the associated enterprise located in India and, therefore, the latter as recipient of
services was liable under reverse charge mechanism.

Utilisation of data available with Central Ministries and RBI

The department did not have a system of periodically accessing information available
with certain other Ministries and the RBI.

3.16 Audit observed that in respect of remittances for transactions of certain nature
such as hiring of transponder space in foreign satellite, lease rentals paid towards
aircraft leasing and payments for consultancy services exceeding prescribed limit, prior
approval/intimation of the Central Ministry concerned /RBI is required. The department
may consider the possibility of utilising such information through an Annual Information
Return or other similar mechanism. Audit observed non-fulfilment of ST liability in the
following instances, two of which Internal Audit had earlier pointed out. Audit observes
that there is a pressing need for building up a mechanism to obtain and utilise data on
such high value transactions of specific nature, from concerned monitoring
Ministries/RBI etc to ensure that no high value transaction of such nature is left
uncovered by the department. The Ministry replied (March 2013) that the feasibility of
the same would be examined.

24


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Box 3.6: Illustrative cases of transactions where prior approval of /intimation to Central
Ministries/RBI was mandated

A. M/s Zoom Entertainment Network Ltd in Mumbai ST-I Commissionerate paid % 5.21
crore in foreign exchange towards transponder charges and website charges for the years
2007-08 to 2009-10 on which he was liable to pay ST of € 85.65 lakh along with interest.
Such hiring by Television channels or Internet Service Providers involving remittance abroad
is required to be with the approval of the Ministries concerned’ as per the RBI’s Master
Circular on remittances from India. The Ministry replied that Internal Audit had raised the
issue in August 2011.

B. M/s. Deccan Charters Pvt., Ltd., in Bangalore ST Commissionerate, paid an amount
of % 25.17 crore as lease rental for aircraft to the foreign service provider which falls under
the category of Banking and other Financial Services but did not pay ST of = 2.59 crore. All
persons hiring aircrafts are obliged to get the approval of the Directorate General of Civil
Aviation. The Ministry replied that the department had raised the issue earlier; it was
initiating periodical notice for the period 2010-11.

८. M/s. Suven Life Sciences, in Hyderabad Commissionerate, paid an amount एरिं 11.29
crore to foreign service providers for patent filing and other related works towards legal and
attorney charges under Legal Consultancy Services, on which the applicable ST of ¥ 1.16
crore was not paid. As per RBI’s Foreign Exchange Management (Current Account
Transactions) Rules, 2000, remittances exceeding USS 10,000,000 per project for any
consultancy services in respect of infrastructure projects and USS 1,000,000 per project, for
other consultancy services procured from outside India require the prior approval of the RBI.
The Ministry intimated (March 2013) that the assessee paid the amount of € 1.42 crore
including interest.

Absence of instructions from RBI to authorised dealers

3.17. Audit observed that while RBI had issued instructions to authorised dealers to
ensure compliance with the provisions relating to R and D Cess Act and Income Tax
related requirements before allowing the remittances, there was no such instruction
from RBI to authorised dealers concerning monitoring fulfilment of ST liability as a
prerequisite for allowing foreign remittances. The department was yet to initiate action
and coordinate with RBI in this regard.

Box 3.7 : Illustrative case where remittance took place without fulfilling ST liability owing to
absence of instruction

M/s. China First Metallurgical Construction India Pvt. Ltd., in Ranchi Commissionerate, paid
an amount of € 44.44 crore for detailed engineering drawing for project of Electro Steel
Integrated Limited, to M/s. China First Metallurgical Construction Corporation Ltd., Republic
of China which falls under the category of design service. However, the assessee did not
remit the applicable ST of % 4.58 crore in the absence of any such requirement on the
authorised dealer. CERA pointed out this issue in April 2012. The Ministry informed that
Internal Audit raised the issue in August 2012 and that show cause notice demanding ST of
हैं 5.63 crore is under process.

7 Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Ministry of Communication and Information Technology

25



Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

The Ministry stated (March 2013) that the department would examine the matter and
consider whether RBI should be approached to issue an advisory to authorised dealers
for ensuring fulfilment of ST liability by the remitter.

Absence of system in LTU Commissionerate to utilise available information

3.18 Large Taxpayers Unit (LTU) setup was introduced with the intention of providing
single window facility to taxpayers who pay direct and indirect taxes above a threshold
limit and possess a single PAN. It also envisages the provision of certain advantages such
as duty free movement of goods across the different units/ premises of a PAN holder,
transfer of credit amount from one such premises to other, time bound disposal of
refund claims and dispute settlements and single set of procedures for all units.
However while ensuring better services to the tax payer, Audit observed that the
department could also utilise available information to ensure fulfilment of the tax
liability under law. Since the requirement under the Income Tax provisions requires the
need for submission of Form 15CA and 15CB as a condition precedent for making foreign
remittances, these Forms would be available with the Commissionerates and could be
availed by the ST counterpart in the LTU Commissionerate to ensure fulfilment of ST
liability. Audit however came across the following case of non-fulfilment of ST liability in
respect of LTU assessee replying to which the Ministry informed that Mumbai LTU
Commissionerate stated that Form 15CA and 15CB would be obtained from the Income
Tax Authority henceforth so as to ensure proper discharge of ST liability by assessees.
The Ministry may ensure that all [10 Commissionerates establish such system of utilizing
information available with the Income Tax Authority.

Box 3.8 : Illustration of non-compliance by LTU unit

M/s Rashtriya Chemicals and Fertilizers Ltd in Mumbai LTU Commissionerate received
design engineering consultancy services for modification of its Ammonia plant from M/s
Haldor Topsoe, Denmark. While discharging ST liability, the assessee undervalued services
(TDS element) to the extent of € 1.45 crore resulting in short payment of ST of = 14.99 lakh.
The assessee made good the short payment based on the audit observation.

Incorrect application of exemption

3.19 In order to provide for levy and collection of a cess on all payments made for the
import of technology, the Research and Development Cess Act, 1986 provided for levy of
a cess at a rate not exceeding 5 percent on all payments made towards import of
technology. Notification 17/2004 ST dated 10-9-2004 exempted the taxable service in
relation to intellectual property rights (IPR) service from so much of the ST leviable
thereon under section 66 of the said Act, as is equivalent to the amount of cess paid
towards the import of technology. The cess is paid under the provisions of the Research
and Development Cess Act, 1986 (32 of 1986) in relation to intellectual property service.

26



Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

3.20 We observed that eight assessees® in various Commissionerates availed the
benefit of this exemption in respect of ST liability under section 66A as against Section
66 referred to in the cited notification. The total taxable value in respect of units
selected by Audit worked out to = 84.18 crore. The Commissionerates(Chennai LTU,
Chennai ST, Puducherry, and Madurai ) contested the observation stating that that
Section 66A is not an independent charging section. Section 66 continued to be the
charging section for import of services also. However Audit observed that though the
department had earlier taken this stand in another context(cenvat related) vide its
Circular letter F.No.354/148/2009-TRU dated 16 July 2009, it had later amended Rule
3(1) of Cenvat Credit Rules, 2004 in 2011 introducing reference to “ST leviable under
section 66A of the Finance Act”. It had also issued other notifications such as
Notifications 18/2009- ST dated 01 July 2009 and 17/2011-ST dated 01 March 2011,
which refer to both Sections 66 and section 66A as sections under which ST, was
leviable. The implication is that section 66A is a distinct charging section. Even Joint
Secretary (TRU)’s letter dated 19 April 2006 addressed to Members (CBEC) and to all
Commissioners seems to indicate the same position.

3.21 Audit however noted that the inconsistency in the departmental stand
concerning the charging section (relating to period prior to 1 July 2012) may have been
however taken care of with the enactment of section 66B (wef 1 July 2012) in Finance
Act as the sole charging section. Notification 14/2012-ST dated 17 March 2012 refers to
section 66B of said Act. However, as regards the prior period, the earlier notifications
would still be effective. Though the Ministry forwarded the replies from the
Commissionerates concerned, Audit is yet to receive Ministry’s views on the
inconsistency pointed out. If ST is not leviable under section 66A, the department may
consider amending notifications 18/2009- ST dated 01 July 2009 and 17/2011-ST dated
01 March 2011.

3.22. We further observed that though according to notification No.17/2004 dated
10.9.2004, taxable service provided by the Intellectual Property Rights holder is
exempted from payment of ST equivalent to the amount of R and D cess paid, M/s ABB
availed the benefit of exemption before the actual payment of R and D cess. The
Commissionerate reported that the assessee had paid ST on IPR services before
payment of R and D cess as it had taken into consideration the due date for payment of
ST. Hence, the assessee had paid interest on the R and D cess amount corresponding to
the period between the payment of ST and the payment of R and D cess. Audit observes
that the cited notification does not provide any scope for such liberal interpretation.

॥५/५ Hyundai Motor India Limited, in Chennai LTU M/s. Borgwarner Cooling Systems Limited, in Chennai
ST, M/s Nagarjuna Oil Corporation Limited in Puducherry,M/s Fenner Conveyer Belting Limited, in
Madurai, M/s. ABB Limited, in LTU Bangalore and M/s HSI Automotives Limited, M/s. Mobis India Ltd., and
M/s PHA India Ltd., in Chennai ST Commissionerate,

27


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Other instances of unfulfilled ST liability

3.23 Apart from the issues mentioned above, some of the other instances of ST liability
remaining unfulfilled at the time of audit of service recipients’ records are as shown in
the table below. Scrutiny of records indicated unfulfilled ST liability on services such as
consulting engineer’s service, architect's services, legal consultancy services,
management, maintenance or repair service and business support services received
from outside the country.

Table 3.1: Instances of ST liability pointed out by Audit

crore®
sl Name of assessee Name of Commissionerate Amount of ST Amount
no pointed out paid
in audit
1. Vedanta Aluminum Ltd Bhubaneswar II 1.74 0.40
2 BGR Energy Systems. Chennai ST 0.95 -
3 South India Corporation Ltd Chennai ST 2.22 -
4. Hindustan Zink Ltd Jaipur Il 2.05 -
5. Intec Infonet Pvt Ltd Delhi ST 1.08 1.10
6. Verizon Communications Pvt Ltd Delhi ST 1.67 1.67
7. Otis Elevators (India) Pvt. Ltd. Mumbai II ST 1.04 -
8. Sistema Shyam Teleservices Ltd. Delhi ST 5.39 5.98
9. Zee Entertainment Enterprises Ltd. Mumbai | ST 1.85 2.18

3.24 Besides, we observed one instance in which the department had issued show
cause notice without considering all similar transactions upto the period of issue.

A. The department issued a show cause notice in November 2011 to M/s. Sterlite
Industries (India) Ltd in Tirunelveli Commissionerate, for the non-payment of ST for
18.64 crore under section 66A in respect of the commission paid towards underwriters
service for the period 2007-08. The assessee had further paid, an amount of & 66.51
crore as commission for underwriter services in 2009-10; the department did not
however include the corresponding liability of ST amounting to % 6.85 crore in the show
cause notice issued in November 2011. The Ministry informed (March 2013) that the
assessee has gone on record that it had incurred no expenses towards underwriter’s
commission during the year 2009-10 and that the matter was under examination.

Non/Short levy of interest

3.25. Rule 6(1) of the ST Rules, 1994 requires an ST assessee to pay his ST liability by
the 6” day of the month, immediately following the calendar month in which the
payments are received. Further, section 75 of the Finance Act, 1994 provides that every
person, liable to pay the tax in accordance with the provisions of section 68 or rules
made thereunder, who fails to credit the tax or any part thereof to the account of the
Central Government within the period prescribed, shall pay simple interest at the rate
prescribed. We observed delayed payment of ST in 16 cases involving interest liability
amount of & 5.33 crore. Such instances indicate the non-adherence by the department

28


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

with the prescribed norm of 100 percent for preliminary scrutiny of returns. We have
tabulated a few of the instances below:-

Table 3.2: Instances of interest liability pointed out

lakh हैं

sl Name of assessee Name of Amount of Amount paid by
no Commissionerate interest liability the assessee

1. Tata Motors Ltd. Mumbai ST- II 71.76 71.76

2. BASF Ltd. Mumbai ST — II 73.26 -

3. Jaisu Shipping Company Pvt Ltd. — Rajkot 40.32 -

4... Jetlite (India) Ltd. Delhi ST 172.85 172.85

5. Punj Lloyd Ltd. Delhi ST 76.32 76.32
Recommendations
We recommended that
a. DG (Systems) consider the inclusion of facility in ACES to automatically update

category of registrant assessee to include service recipient or to flag such cases where
category of remitter in database needs updation , going by the data in returns filed.

DG(System)’s view was that any modification in the ST-1 Registration form may be
initiated by the assessee only and that the best approach would be to make it
mandatory for assessees to amend the data in their registration forms by making it a
mandatory process before filing returns. Accepting the same, Audit recommends that
the Ministry may examine the same for incorporation in the system.

b. the department take steps to encourage importers of service to get themselves
registered as lack of awareness concerning liability on service recipient under reverse
charge mechanism could be a factor for non-registration.

The Ministry accepted the recommendation to utilise the medium of advertisements to
improve public awareness concerning ST liability relating to import of services.

८. the department utilise data from authorised dealers for broadening of ST base by
identifying non registered importers of service by linking with ACES data.

Agreeing with the recommendation, the Ministry informed that Director General (Audit)
had come across approximately 450 unregistered service recipients in a similar exercise
undertaken. Audit recommends that the department may consider the allocation of
responsibilities among different offices such as DGST, DG(Audit) and DGCEI in
connection with collection of data from authorised dealers, its analysis and subsequent
follow-up. For instance, follow-up in respect of non-registered service recipients may not
be termed the responsibility of the Director General (Audit). Audit further recommends
that the department may seek to impress upon RBI the need for enhancement in quality
of data captured by authorized dealers.

6. the department consider tapping data relating to Export Oriented Units available
with the Development Commissioner’s office as a lead for the purpose of assessing ST
liability.

29


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

The Ministry stated that it would examine the possibility.

e. priority be given to scrutiny and audit of units having transactions involving
associated enterprises/holding company-subsidiary company transactions etc.

Agreeing with the recommendation, the Ministry stated that this could be included
during scheduling, and while determining audit criteria. It added that the process of
revision of audit criteria is underway. During such revision, the department would keep
in mind the recommendation.

f. the department may consider issuing a clarification on whether incurring of
expenses on behalf of an associated enterprise registered abroad would amount to
evidence of import of service from the foreign company.

While acknowledging that this could be a trigger for detailed investigation, the Ministry
stated in the light of the new law and Place of Provision of Services Rules, 2012 there is
no requirement for a clarification. Audit reiterates that even after the newly introduced
definition of ‘service’ under section 65(44) of the Finance Act as an activity involving
consideration and notwithstanding the framing of the Place of Provision of Service Rules
2012, there is likelihood of differing treatments of similar situations because the basic
issue of determining existence of ‘service’ and existence of ‘consideration’ is to be
resolved before the Place of Provision of Service Rules could be applied.

g. the department may take up with RBI the need for issue of suitable instructions
to Authorised dealers concerning precautions to be taken for ensuring fulfilment of ST
liability by remitter.

The Ministry stated that the department would examine the matter and consider
whether RBI should be approached to issue an advisory to authorised dealers for

ensuring fulfilment of ST liability by the remitter.
C. Ned mt hin

New Delhi (C. NEDUNCHEZHIAN)
Dated: 29 April 2013 Principal Director (Service Tax)

Countersigned

a
New Delhi (VINOD RAI)
Dated: 29 April 2013 Comptroller and Auditor General of India

30


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Abbreviations

ACES

AIR

BAS

BPO

BSS

CBDT

CBEC

९18

DGCEI

DGST

EOU

FY

FEMA

ITD

LTU

NSDL

PAN

RBI

SCN

TDS

TIN

Automation of Central Excise and ST
Annual Information Return

Business Auxiliary Services

Business Process Outsourcing
Business Support Services

Central Board of Direct Taxes

Central Board of Excise and Customs
Central Information Branch
Directorate General of Central Excise Intelligence
Director General of ST

Export Oriented Unit

Financial Year

Foreign Exchange Management Act
Income Tax Department

Large Taxpayer Unit

National Securities Depository Limited
Permanent Account Number

Reserve Bank of India

Show Cause Notice

Tax Deducted at Source

Tax Information Network

33


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Appendix |
Purpose Description

Code

50017 Purchase of intangible assets like patents, copyrights, trademarks etc.

$0202 Payment for operating expenses of Indian shipping companies operating
abroad.

$0205 _— Operational leasing (with crew) — Shipping companies

$0402 Courier services

$0403 Telecommunication services

$0404 Satellite services

50501 Construction of projects abroad by Indian companies including
import of goods at project site

50502 Payments for cost of construction etc. of projects executed by foreign
companies in India.

50601 Payments for Life insurance premium

50602 Freight insurance — relating to import & export of goods

50603 Other general insurance premium

50604 Reinsurance premium

50605 Auxiliary services (commission on insurance)

50701 Financial intermediation except investment banking - Bank charges,
collection charges, LC charges, cancellation of forward contracts,
commission on financial leasing etc.

50702 Investment banking — brokerage, underwriting commission etc.

$0703 Auxiliary services — charges on operation & regulatory fees, custodial
services, depository services etc.

$0801 Hardware consultancy/implementation

50802 Software consultancy / implementation

50803 Data base, data processing charges

50804 Repair and maintenance of computer and software

50805 News agency services

50901 Franchisee services — patents, copyrights, trademarks, industrial processes,

franchises etc.

31


Report No. 9 of 2013 (Performance Audit)

Purpose Description

Code

$0902 Payment for use, through licensing arrangements, of produced originals or
prototypes (such as manuscripts and films)

$1002 Trade related services — commission on exports / imports

$1003 Operational leasing services (other than financial leasing) without operating
crew, including charter hire

$1004 Legal services

$1005 Accounting, auditing, bookkeeping and tax consulting services

$1006 Business and management consultancy and public relations services

$1007 Advertising, trade fair, market research and public opinion polling service

$1008 Research and Development services

51009 Architectural, engineering and other technical services

$1010 Agricultural, mining and on-site processing services — protection against
insects and disease, increasing of harvest yields, forestry services, mining
services like analysis of ores etc.

$1011 Payments for maintenance of offices abroad

$1012 Distribution Services

$1013 Environmental Services

$1019 Other services not included elsewhere

$1101 Audio-visual and related services — services and associated fees related to

production of motion pictures, rentals, fees received by actors, directors,
producers and fees for distribution rights.

32