This Audit Report for the year ended 31 March 2010 has been prepared for
submission to the Governor under Article 151 (2) of the Constitution.

The audit of revenue receipts of the State Government is conducted under
Section 16 of the Comptroller and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and
Conditions of Service) Act, 1971. This Report presents the results of audit of
“Collection of Motor Vehicles Taxes, Fees and Fines” of the Transport
Department, Government of West Bengal.

The cases mentioned in this Report are among those which came to notice in
the course of test audit of records during September 2009 and June 2010 as
well as those noticed in earlier years but could not be included in previous
year’s reports.

iii



This Report contains five chapters which include 33 paragraphs relating to
deficiencies in the system of monitoring the registration of vehicles, issue and
renewal of licences, permits, collection of taxes, fees and fines and internal
controls of the Transport Department of the state involving = 14.41 crore.
Some of the major findings are mentioned in the following paragraphs:

As on 30 June 2010, 100 inspection reports issued upto December 2009
containing 267 audit observations involving € 9.44 crore were outstanding for
want of response or final action by the Transport Department.

(Paragraph 1.9)
As 0131 March 2010, the Transport Department had not furnished explanatory
notes in respect of seven selected and 202 unselected paragraphs including
four sub paragraphs of Audit Reports from 1981-82 to 2007-08.

(Paragraph 1.10.2)

stem Implemen
We noticed that the system was implemented in a phased manner and as on 31

March 2009 VAHAN was operational in only 19 RAs out of the 27 units (26
RAs and STA) while SARATHI was operational in nine.

(Paragraphs 2.2)

We observed that a security policy had not been formulated by the
Department. No guidelines had been issued to the RAs for protection of
hardware and software of the system.

(Paragraphs 2.3.1)

We noted that due to lack of a business continuity plan, data could not be
restored in the office of the RA, South 24 Parganas after a system crash which
occurred on 4 September 2008 following which the data was irretrievably lost
as the RAs had discontinued the maintenance of any manual register relating
to collection of taxes and fees after computerisation of their activities.

(Paragraphs 2.5)
3.

7ahan and Sarathij

In the VAHAN software we found that in the ‘owners’ table the same engine
number was found to have been entered against two different registration
numbers in 462 vehicles in 11 RAs. We cross checked the ‘owner’ table
and ‘Motor vehicle check’ table and found that in case of 2,635 vehicles
though the registration numbers were the same, the chassis number or the
engine numbers differed in the two tables in the 11 RAs.

(Paragraph 3.2.1)



We found that the data was not accurate and was unreliable. In case of 68
vehicles registered in the RA, Howrah, the date of registration was earlier than
the date of purchase of the vehicles by 1 to 25 days. We also found that 2,141
vehicles were registered either on a Saturday or a Sunday.

(Paragraph 3.2.2)
We analysed the database and found that 2,90,641 vehicles had not paid tax of
% 645.17 crore. Of these, 40,585 vehicles were more than thirty years old,
some of which are dating back to 1930’s.

(Paragraph 3.13)

We found that out of 33 fields prescribed for registration of motor vehicle in
‘Form 20’ under the CMV Rules 1989, five fields were not mapped in the
system.

(Paragraph 3.15)

We found from the SARATHI database of the eight RAs selected for review
that input validation controls were not inbuilt in the system. Hence, the system
was unable to restrict input of invalid data. In the database of six RAs, we
noticed that in 788 cases DL for transport vehicles were issued though the
applicants did not have the requisite minimum educational qualification of
eighth standard under Rule 8 of CMVR, 1989.

(Paragraph 3.16.1)

4. Other observati

We found no record/register was maintained to watch revalidation and return
of the lapsed dralis. This resulted in blocking of revenue of & 2.22 crore as
revalidation of the BDs is still pending.

(Paragraphs 4.4.1)

We found that defaulting owners of seized vehicles neither paid the assessed
dues nor was any action taken by the RAs to dispose of the seized vehicles
through auction though a considerable period of time had lapsed since their
seizure. This resulted in non-realisation of revenue of € 25.07 lakh in 33 cases.

(Paragraph 4.6)

We found in the offices of the STA, WB and nine RAs that inability of the
Department to issue saleable forms to the applicants for licence, registration
and permits resulted in loss of revenue of € 1.07 crore.

(Paragraph 4.7)

vi


CHAPTER-I
GENERAL

3 Introd

ion}

Road transport is considered to be one of the most cost effective and preferred
modes of transport for both freight and passengers. Easy availability,
adaptability to individual needs and cost savings are some of the factors
working in favour of road transport. Road transport also acts as a feeder
service to railway, shipping and air traffic.

The Transport Department, Government of West Bengal administers road
transport activities through the State Transport Authority (STA) and 26
registering authorities (RAs) comprising of 19 Regional Transport Offices at
the district level and seven Additional Regional Transport Offices at the sub-
divisional level. The Department is concerned with the formulation of broad
policies relating to regulation of road transport, arrangements for movement of
vehicular traffic within the State and collection of motor vehicles taxes, fees
and fines.

The Transport Department, Government of West Bengal planned the
computerisation of the system of registration and taxation of vehicles to
streamline the process of realisation of taxes in collaboration with the National
Informatics Centre (NIC) in 1991. Accordingly five RAs were computerised
in 2000 using a software called the Transport Information System (TIS).

Tn 2002, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Government of India
entered into a Memorandum of Understanding with NIC to develop core
software for vehicle registration and driving licence workflow process
computerisation. The VAHAN software for vehicle registration and tax
collection and SARATHLI software for issue and renewal of driving licences
(DL) were developed centrally for the whole country. Accordingly, TIS was
teplaced by VAHAN. The details of various taxes, fees and fines levied on
motor vehicles and for driving licence are contained in Annexure — I.

The VAHAN and SARATHI softwares were customised by the NIC, West
Bengal state unit and implemented in the Public Vehicles Department (PVD),
Kolkata in July 2004, These softwares were made operational in the offices of
the RAs on different dates in a phased manner. During the period between
2004-05 and 2008-09, SARATHI was in operation in nine RAs! and VAHAN
in 19 RAs’.

1 RAs: Asansol, Barasat, Barrackpore, Burdwan, Durgapur, Hooghly, Howrah, PVD Kolkata
and South 24 Parganas

? RAs: Alipurdwar, Asansol. Barasat, Barrackpore, Birbhum, Burdwan, Durgapur, Hooghly,
Howrah, Malda, Murshidabad, Nadia, Paschim Medinipur, Purulia, Purva Medinipur,
PVD Kolkata, Raigunj, Siliguri and South 24 Parganas.



Audit Report on Collection of motor vehicles taxes, fees and fines

The Additional Chief Secretary to the Government of West Bengal is the
administrative head of the Transport Department. He is assisted by one Special
Secretary, five Joint Secretaries, two Assistant Secretaries, one Registrar and
one Statistical Officer at the headquarters. The Secretary, State Transport
Authority (STA), West Bengal, Director, Public Vehicles Department (PVD)
Kolkata, 18 Regional Transport Officers (RAs) and seven Additional Regional
Transport Officers (RAs) administer the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Acts
and Rules. The Joint Secretary, Transport Department is responsible for all
computerisation-related activities in the Department.

We reviewed the system of collection of motor vehicle taxes, fees and fines
for issue and renewal of different types of licences, permits, trade
certificates and compounding of offences and realisation of revenue
thereof. The review revealed a number of deficiencies which are
mentioned in the succeeding chapters of this Report.

Audit o

es|

We conducted the review to ascertain whether:

. the provisions of the Acts and Rules made thereunder and the
instructions/orders issued from time to time by the Department/
Government for monitoring the collection of the motor vehicles taxes,
fees and fines were adequate and complied with;

e the security of the IT system, completeness and integrity of the data
and supervision of the system was adequate, efficient and effective;
and

. an internal control system existed and was adequate to help the

organisation achieve its objectives with optimum use of its resources.

LE Audit crite

The review was conducted with reference to the provisions made under the
laws governing transport management in the State. These are:

Central Laws
e Motor Vehicles (MV) Act, 1988;
° The Central Motor Vehicles (CMV) Rules, 1989;

State Laws

. The West Bengal Motor Vehicles Tax (WBMVT) Act, 1979;

e The West Bengal Motor Vehicles (WBMV) Rules, 1989; and

° The West Bengal Additional Tax and One-time Tax on Motor Vehicles

(WBAT) Act, 1989.

Scope and method: of au

We conducted the review between September 2009 and June 2010 covering
the period between 2004-05 and 2008-09. The review covered the STA and 12



Chapter-I: General

RAs’ out of 26 RAs selected on the basis of stratified random sampling
method. We divided the 27 units (26 RAs and STA) in three strata on the basis
of collection of revenue and selected 100 per cent i.e. two units from the first
stratum having average collection of = 38 crore and above, 50 per cent i.e. 10
out of 19 units from the second stratum with average revenue collection
between & four and % 38 crore and 10 per cent i.e. one out of six units from the
third stratum with average revenue collection below & four crore.

IT audit in respect of VAHAN was conducted in 11 RAs* while SARATHI
was conducted in eight RAs*. The total number of records in VAHAN and
SARATHI database was 20,97,965 (including tax exempted vehicles) and
13,52,189 respectively. Out of these 15,28,638 and 4,66,749 cases were
related to pre-online period and 5,69,327 and 8,85,440 cases were related to
post-online period in respect of VAHAN and SARATHI respectively

The findings on system were derived from analysis of post-online data only
where as findings on transaction were related to the period after the date of
inception of VAHAN and SARATHI in the RAs though the registration dates
of the vehicles were related to both pre-online and post-online periods. The
CAATs® were applied using the same criteria in respect of each finding for all
the 11 RAs and deficiencies noticed in respect of RAs were incorporated in
the paragraphs. Besides, we test checked the records of one check post
(Rampur Motor Vehicle check post) out of three’ check posts. The results of
data analysis were cross verified with the front end of the system of the RAs
on test check basis and were found to be in conformity with the results. We
also attempted verification of the audit findings with reference to the manual
records. We further reviewed the physical records in respect of
units‘/functional areas’ yet to be computerised.

1.6 Acknowledgemen

The Indian Audit and Accounts Department acknowledges the co-operation of
the Transport Department in providing necessary information and records for
audit. An entry conference was held in September 2009 with the Additional
Chief Secretary, Transport Department in which the objectives, scope and
methodology of audit were explained. It was also attended by the Technical
Director, National Informatics Centre (NIC). In course of review the audit
observations were issued to the RAs along with a soft copy of the details of
the cases. The draft review report was forwarded to the Government in June
2010 along with a compact disc (CD) containing detailed information of the
cases for their response. The exit conference was held in August 2010 with the
Additional Chief Secretary, Transport Department in which the results of audit

3 RAs: Asansol (including check post at Rampur), Bankura, Barasat, Barrackpore, Burdwan,
Hooghly, Howrah, Nadia, Paschim Medinipur, PVD Kolkata, Siliguri, South 24
Parganas and STA.

“RAs: Asansol, Barasat, Barrackpore, Burdwan, Hooghly, Howrah, Nadia, Paschim

Medinipur, PVD Kolkata, Siliguri and South 24 Parganas.

5 RAs: Asansol, Barasat, Barrackpore, Burdwan, Hooghly, Howrah, PVD Kolkata, South 24
Parganas.

6 Computer Assisted Auditing Techniques.

7 Beltala (Paschim Medinipur), Barobisha (Jalpaiguri) and Rampur (Asansol).

STA and RA, Bankura.

Enforcement, Licence to sub-dealers, Permits and Trade certificates.

8
°



Audit Report on Collection of motor vehicles taxes, fees and fines

and the recommendations were discussed. The replies of the
Department/Government received during the exit conference and at other
points of time have been appropriately incorporated in this report.

ation and the trend of revenue collections

As per the Budget Manual, the responsibility for the preparation of the Annual
statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the State and its
presentation to the Legislature lies with the Finance Department. The
materials on which the budget estimates (BEs) are based should be obtained
by the Finance Department from the local budgeting officers. The actuals of
the previous years and revised estimates of the current year ordinarily afford
the best guide in framing the BEs of the ensuing year.

The salient factors which have led to the adoption of figures proposed for the
BEs should be clearly and briefly explained. For the fluctuating items neither
the actuals of the previous year nor the progress of actuals of the current year
should be used as the only guide but due consideration should be given to
exceptional circumstances of the previous years and special features of the
current year.

We observed that BEs and revised estimates (REs) in respect of Taxes on
motor vehicles were prepared by the Finance (Budget) Department.

The BEs, actual receipts and variation in receipts over BEs and percentage of
variation for the years 2004-05 to 2008-09 are shown in the following table:

(Rupees in crore)

Budget ion between _| Percentage of

estimates BEs and Actuals variation

(BEs) excess (+) or

shortfall (-)
2004-05 548.75 527.66 -21.09 “3.84
2005-06 700.00 537.56 -162.44 -23.21
2006-07 759.84 508.97 -250.87 -33.02
2007-08 645.88 532.07 -113.81 -17.62
2008-09 673.11 608.01 ~65.10 -9.67

DBudget Estimates (8६) GActuals
800

700
600
500
400
300
200
100

0

2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09



Chapter-I: General

Percentage of variation

2005-06 2006-07 2007-08

Thus, it would be seen from the figures given above that the collection of
revenue had always been lower than the BEs. The variation between BEs and
actual receipts between 2005-06 and 2007-08 ranged between (-) 9.67 and (-)
33.02 per cent, indicating that the BEs were not prepared on a realistic basis.

The Department stated that collection of revenue increased in 2007-08 and
2008-09 due to introduction of revised rate of one-time tax and life-time tax
(September 2010). However, we did not receive the reasons for variation
between BEs and the actuals despite our request (June 2010).

We recommend that the Government may issue directions to the
Department to streamline the budgeting process and ensure that BEs are
prepared in a scientific manner and are as close to the actuals as possible.

1.8 (:05( of collection|

The gross collection from motor vehicles taxes, fees and fines, the expenditure
incurred on collection and the percentage of such expenditure to gross
collection for the years 2006-07 to 2008-09 are given in the following table:

Rupees in crore)

Year Gross Gross Percentage of All India average of
collection | expenditure | expenditure to gross expenditure on collection for
collection the preceding year
2006-07 | 508.97 9.89 1.94 2.47
2007-08 532.07 10.86 [20a 2.58
2008-09 608.01 11.92 1.96 2.93

The above table shows that the collection from motor vehicles tax increased to
608.01 crore in 2008-09 from % 508.97 crore in 2006-07, registering an
increase of 19.46 per cent. The percentage of expenditure to gross collection
which increased in 2007-08 was brought down in 2008-09. We noted that the
percentage was also always lower than the all India average. The Department
should continue with its efforts to maintain this positive trend.

ction reports and audit observatio

The Accountant General (Receipt, Works & Local Bodies Audit), West
Bengal (AG) conducts periodic inspection of the Government Departments to
test check the transactions and verify the maintenance of the important
accounts and other records as prescribed in the rules and procedures. These
inspections are followed up with the Department through inspection reports
(IRs). These IRs incorporating irregularities detected during the inspection



Audit Report on Collection of motor vehicles taxes, fees and fines

and not settled on the spot, are issued to the heads of the offices inspected with
copies to the next higher authorities for taking prompt corrective action. The
heads of the offices/Government are required to promptly comply with the
observations contained in the IRs, rectify the defects and omissions and report
compliance through initial reply to the AG within two months from the date of
issue of the IRs. Serious financial irregularities are reported to the head of the
Departments and the Government.

A review of IRs issued to the Transport Department upto December 2009
disclosed that 267 paragraphs involving ~ 9.44 crore relating to 100 IRs
remained outstanding at the end of June 2010 as mentioned in the following
table along with the corresponding figures for the preceding two years.

June 2008 Sune 209

Number of outstanding IRs

Number | of outstanding audit 347 349 267
observations

Amount involved (Rupees in crore) 12.52 22.24 9.44

The year-wise details of the IRs and audit observations outstanding as on 30
June 2010 and the amounts involved are mentioned in the following table:

Number of Number of Money value involv
outstanding standing (Rupees in lakh)
IRs

1998-99 2 1.92
1999-2000 5 | 8 [ 13.88
2000-01 [9 | 6 [ 130.81
2001-02 il 24 165.07
2002-03 13 37 130.54
2003-04 14 49 121.70
2004-05 16 4 51.52
2005-06 [io 47 196.71
2006-07 [os [ 19 20.42
2007-08 (SS |
2008-09 5 | 9  [ 98.04
2009-10 2 | 65 [ 2.58
Total | 10" | 267 944.10

This large pendency of IRs due to non-receipt of replies is indicative of the
fact that the Department did not initiate timely action to rectify the defects,
omissions and irregularities pointed out by us in the IRs.

‘We recommend that the Government may take suitable steps to install an
effective mechanism for prompt and appropriate response to audit
observations and initiate action against officers who do not send replies to
the IRs/paragraphs within the prescribed time schedule. A system needs
to be developed for prompt recovery of the revenue at least in respect of
the audit observations that have been accepted by the
Department/Government.

6


Chapter-I: General

1.10 Follow up of Audit Reports

1.10.1 Summarised position|

As per the Rules of Procedure of the Committee on Public Accounts (PAC) of
the West Bengal Legislative Assembly (Internal Working) framed in 1997, the
concerned Department was required to send action taken notes (ATNs) on the
recommendations contained in the Report of the PAC within six months from
the date of its presentation to the House. The position of outstanding ATNs
due from the Transport Department is mentioned in the following table:

22704 Report of 1990-91 26 March 1991
1980-81 1
250 Report of 1994-96 1 August 1995 1983-84 1
23" Report of 2008-09 24 March 2009 2006-07 2
Total | 5 |

The Committee on Public Accounts discusses the Receipt Audit Reports and
presents its reports and recommendations for compliance by the Government.
Normally 20 per cent of the total number of paragraphs of the Audit Report is
selected every year for discussion. The remaining paragraphs are disposed of
on the basis of replies of the Government.

As of 31 March 2010, the Transport Department had not furnished explanatory
notes in respect of seven selected and 202 unselected paragraphs including
four sub paragraphs of Audit Reports from 1981-82 to 2007-08 as detailed in
Annexure-II.

A meeting of the high level audit committee chaired by the Chief Secretary
and consisting of heads of various departments was held on 4 February 2010
to discuss the selected outstanding paragraphs and ATNs on_ the
recommendations of PAC. The Transport department was represented by the
Joint Secretary. The Chief Secretary instructed the departments to furnish
replies to the outstanding paragraphs and ATNs at an early date. However, no
reply has been received from the Transport department (September 2010).

1.11 Results of audit]

The findings of the review in the STA and 12 RAs along with the test check of
records in two RAs!” conducted during 2009-10 revealed underassessment of
tax and other irregularities of € 14.41 crore in four cases as mentioned in the
following table:

RAs: Malda and Purba Medinipur.



Audit Report on Collection of motor vehicles taxes, fees and fines

Categoi
1. Collection of Motor Vehicle taxes, fees and fines
(A review)
2. Non-realisation of revenue due to non-disposal of 3 0.25
seized vehicles
Total [a4 | 14.41

ssment and other deficiencies of

The Department accepted under:
% 4.75 crore during the year 2009-10.

A few illustrative cases and the findings of the review on “Collection of
Motor Vehicle taxes, fees and fines” involving a financial impact of
14.41 crore are discussed in the following chapters.



CHAPTER-II
DEFICIENCIES IN SYSTEM IMPLEMENTA

2.1 Introductio

In an IT system, formulation and documentation of needs of the users, security
of the system, completeness and integrity of the data, defined supervision,
change control mechanism and a business continuity plan are essential
prerequisites for successful implementation of the system.

We noticed a number of system implementation deficiencies in VAHAN and
SARATHL as discussed in this chapter.

General IT Controls}

General controls create the environment in which the application systems and
application controls operate. They include IT policies, standards and
guidelines pertaining to [T security and information protection. The following
deficiencies in general controls were noticed by us:

2.2 Documentation of IT Strategy}

The Department did not
furnish any = document
bringing out the stages of
implementation of VAHAN
and SARATHI to us. We
noticed that the system was

In order to achieve the desired
objectives, there should be a proper IT
strategy and a well devised plan for
addressing issues relating to
customising, implementing and

maintaining the information system. The
Department needed to set up a steering
committee consisting of representatives
of the Department and NIC for
providing necessary direction and
guidance to the computerisation efforts
as well as to monitor the progress of
implementations.

implemented in a phased
manner and as on 31 March
2009 VAHAN was
operational in only 19 RAs
out of the 27 units (26 RAs
and STA) while SARATHI
was operational in nine.
Even in these units, only

certain features available in
the software were utilised while other functions were discharged through
manual operations. We did not find any documentation indicating the
involvement of the top management at the planning and implementation stage
of the project. This resulted in development of a non-integrated application
and partial utilisation of its features as mentioned in the following paragraphs.



Audit Report on Collection of motor vehicles taxes, fees and fines

५5 wee We noticed that in none of
Provisions exist in the VAHAN software the RAs the provisions of

for permits, enforcement, temporary VAHAN for issue/renewal
registrations, issuing of trade certificates

: of permits to transport
to dealers, surrender of vehicles, and

. ¢ dail Llecti . vehicles, enforcement
mainienance of daily ° ction aa activities relating to
and licence register of sub-dealers. In offending vehicles,

SARATHI there are provisions for
issue/renewal of conductor licences and
licenses to motor training schools.

temporary registration of
vehicles, issue/renewal of
trade certificates to dealers,
surrender of vehicles,
maintenance of daily collection register and sub-dealer’s licence register
utilised by the Department. Similarly, the provisions relating to issue and
renewal of conductor’s licences and licences to the motor training schools
available in SARATHI were not utilised by the Department. These activities
were being done manually thereby defeating the purpose of providing these
provisions in the system. This also led to non-generation of computerised
receipts on this account for which a locally developed parallel software called
“Regional Vahan Sarathi’” (RVS) was being utilised by the Department.

The original software i.e. VAHAN had the facility of generation of receipts
and as such it had better controls and would have added assurance in the
accounting system. Thus, the development of the parallel software RVS served
little purpose and was not required at all had the provisions of VAHAN been
fully utilised.

Although we called for (May 2010) the reasons for partial utilisation of
VAHAN and SARATHI softwares, the Department did not intimate the same.
However, it stated (September 2010) that the provisions of the software would
be utilised in the near future.

We recommend that the Government should use the processing
capabilities in the VAHAN and SARATHI software in their entirety, and
discontinue using the parallel software.

2.2.2_Non-existence of central State server system
Our test — check

Sections 63 and 26 of the MV Act and Rules 75 revealed that the
and 23 of the CMV Rules prescribe the Department had not
maintenance of a State Register of motor vehicles taken any steps to
in Form 41 and a State Register of driving set up a central State
licences in Form 10 respectively. The objective server system into
of computerisation was that data of the vehicles which the
should flow from the RAs to the central State information — from
server system for monitoring the activities of the the RAs could flow
vehicles within the State and for supplying the and be stored. As a
information to the Central Government. result even the 19
computerised = RAs

could not be linked to share the information available in the system. Thus, no

10


Chapter-I: Deficiencies in system implementation

state register could be prepared. Besides, due to non-linking of the system, the
RAs could not cross check the data available with them resulting in a number
of deficiencies as mentioned in para 2.2.3.

3 V

more than one RAs|
2.2.3.1 We cross verified

For transfer of a vehicle to another RA,a the data of RA Barrackpore
‘No Objection Certificate’ (NOC) is शांत the data of 10° other
required to be issued by the RA under RAs and found 3,526
whose jurisdiction the vehicle is kept. Vehicles were available in
Information about NOCs issued by an RA the “owner”” table of the
would feature only in the ‘NOC’ table of database of =the RA
that RA’s database. Registration code  Barrackpore as well as in
*WB23’ was allotted for transport vehicles _the database of the other 10

registered in RA, Barrackpore. RAs. These vehicles were
not found in the ‘NOC’

issued table of the RA
Barrackpore and ‘NOC’ received table of the other 10 RAs. This indicates that
either the validation controls in these cases were bypassed or data pertaining to
NOCs in respect of these vehicles were deleted. The reasons for the same were
not found on record and the matter needs to be looked into.

2.2.3.2. We found from the database of 10 RAs that in case of 894 vehicles,
the registration code was ‘WB23’ indicating that these were originally
registered in RA, Barrackpore; however, information about these vehicles was
not found in the database of the RA Barrackpore although in case of transfer
of these vehicles it should have been found in the ‘NOC’ table of the RA,
Barrackpore. The reasons for their non-existence, though called for, were not
furnished to us.

found re;

2.2.3.3 In respect of goods vehicles tax is based on Gross Vehicle Weight
(GVW). We found that 10 goods vehicles, which were originally registered in
RA, Barrackpore were transferred to six’ other RAs and registered there with
lesser GVW. Thus due to data input error there was short realisation of tax and
additional tax of € 1.18 lakh.

The above facts indicate that non-existence of a central State server system
had resulted in non detection of the errors committed in the transfer of the
vehicles from one RA to another RA. This underlines the need for linking all
the database within the State by setting up a central State server system. Till
then, the primary objective of computerisation to monitor the activities of
vehicles within the State and provide information for creation of a National
Register of Vehicles, would remain elusive.

After we pointed this out, the Department stated that the central server system
was established in June 2010 and connectivity of 24 RAs out of 26 RAs was
established with the central State server in respect of VAHAN till April 2011.
RA, Darjeeling and RA, Kalimpong were yet to connect with the central State

, Barasat, Burdwan, Hooghly, Howrah, Nadia, Paschim Medinipur, PVD
ala, Siliguri and South 24 Parganas.

> “Owner” table contains information regarding vehicles and their owners

3 RAs: Asansol, Barasat, Burdwan, Howrah, Nadia and PVD Kolkata.

ll


Audit Report on Collection of motor vehicles taxes, fees and fines

server. In respect of SARATHI, no RA was connected with the central State
server. Thus, in absence of connectivity of all the RAs with the central State
server the objective of computerisation to monitor the activities of vehicles
within the State could not be achieved.

2

Environment controls are aimed at ensuring that the assets of the project are
not put to risk. This requires that risk assessment should be done and
preventive measures put in place prior to implementing the project. We
noticed that the Department had neither undertaken any risk assessment nor
devised any preventive measures like a security policy and business continuity
plan, before putting the system in use.

ment contr

|$|

of security

Information security policy through We observed that no security
physical and logical controls restricts Policy had been formulated

access to the system only to authorised by the Department. No
individuals. guidelines had been issued to

the RAs for protection of
hardware and software of the system. Preventive and detective measures like
installing and updating antivirus software and framing a password policy was
not done. We found expired/not updated antivirus software in five’ RAs.
Creating of user’s id and passwords were lefi to the discretion of the RAs.
Passwords of less than eight characters were found in most of the RAs.
Absence of a provision to record failed ‘login attempts’ is fraught with the risk
of unauthorised access and consequent data tampering. We also observed that
fire fighting devices were not installed in five’ RAs.

ement contri

Documentation regarding

Once a system is implemented, change the request, approval,
management controls should be put in place testing and authorisation

to ensure that the changes to the system are of changes like updating
authorised, tested and documented and to tax rates in accordance
see that there is adequate audit trail. The with notifications issued
requests for changes (RFC) should be by the Government,
signed by the designated authorities of the providing additional input
Department and all the changes should be validation controls like
tested before they are put to use in the live mandatory capturing of
environment. Permanent Account
Number (PAN) or General

Index Number except in case of RA Siliguri was not made available to us. The
absence of documentation not only resulted in absence of a trail as to whether
the changes sought for had been carried out but was also fraught with the risk
of non-detection of any unauthorised change made in the system. For example,
the rate of tax was changed vide a notification effective from 08.09.2008 and had

* RAs: Asansol, Burdwan, Howrah, Paschim Medinipur and South 24 Parganas.
5 RAs: Asansol, Howrah, Nadia, Paschim Medinipur and South 24 Parganas.

12


Chapter-I: Deficiencies in system implementation

been incorporated in the system but the date of incorporation and the authority
who authorised, it could not be verified. Documentation of the changes would
ensure transparency and effective internal controls.

After we pointed this out, the Department accepted (September 2010) the
observation for corrective action.

We found that the
Department had not evolved
a backup policy. Though
periodical backups had been
taken in the RAs, there was
no provision for testing of

Business continuity planning is essential to
ensure that the organisation can prevent
disruption of business and resume
processing in the event of a total or partial
interruption. The objective is to reduce
downtime and minimise loss to business. such backup for successful
Regular backup of data is the backbone of ~~ ckup 8 8
alhnstiness ढक्ागिगारिफ ila, installation if needed. The
RAs had no records to

indicate the date(s) on which
the backup was taken and had no provision for off-site storage of backup.
Mock trial of data recovery was not done regularly to ensure prompt
restoration in the event of a system crash.

We noted that due to lack of a business continuity plan, data could not be
restored in the office of the RA, South 24 Parganas after a system crash which
occurred on 4 September 2008 following which the data was irretrievably lost
as the RAs had discontinued the maintenance of any manual register relating
to collection of taxes and fees after computerisation of their activities. The
Department could not retrieve the lost data. Thus, they would have to depend
upon the documents furnished by the vehicle owners/licence holders in respect
of tax receipts/ payments in the event of a system crash.

After we pointed this out, the Department admitted the audit observation and
stated that the data could not be retrieved because of technical failure
(September 2010). RA, South 24 Parganas intimated (May 2011) that live
backup was being taken from April 2010. RA, PVD intimated (May 2011)
that backup was being taken after working hours on a daily basis. The other
RAs did not furnish the current status of backups . Thus, taking backups was
left to the discretion of the concerned RAs as no directions on this matter was
issued by the Department.

The Government may consider evolving a well documented IT security
policy, change management policy and suitable business continuity plan
including live backup or backup after a short interval of time to ensure
safety, transparency and prompt recovery of data/system.



CHAPTER-IUL

VAHAN AND SARATHI
3.1 Introduction|

An IT system must have in-built controls to ensure that all the key information
has been entered before the transaction is recorded in the database. The system
should be complete by incorporating all the main processes mentioned in the
business rules.

We noticed a number of deficiencies in respect of operations transacted
through VAHAN and SARATHI as discussed in this Chapter. As already
stated in Paragraph 1.5 pertaining to Scope and Methodology, the findings on
system were derived from analysis of post-online data only whereas the
findings on transactions were related to the period after the date of inception
of VAHAN and SARATHL in the RAs though the registration dates of the
vehicles were related to both pre-online and post-online periods. The (4515
were applied using the same criteria in respect of each finding for all the 11
RAs and deficiencies noticed in respect of RAs were incorporated in the
paragraphs.

iVAHAN

The VAHAN database which contained a total number of 20,97,965 records
out of which number of records pertaining to the pre-online system was
15,28,638 and the remaining 5,69,327 cases related to the post-online system.

A, The audit findings included in the following paragraphs are based on
the analysis of the records relating to post-online system as these
pertain to the input controls, validation controls etc. in the system:

Input controls and validation controls over input are vital for ensuring
correctness and completeness of the data. These controls also ensure that data
is entered correctly without duplication. The system lacks such controls as our
analysis of the data in the selected RAs revealed. The following deficiencies
were noticed in VAHAN software due to absence of input controls and
validation controls.

3.2 _ Input control weaknesses of VAHAN|

3.2.1. Input control weaknesse:

© The engine number is the unique identification mark of a vehicle. The
engine numbers cannot be identical for any two vehicles. However, we found
that in the ‘owners’ table the same engine number was found to have been
entered against two different registration numbers in 462 vehicles in 11 RAs.

' RAs; Asansol, Barasat, Barrackpore, Burdwan, Hooghly, Howrah, Nadia, Paschim
Medinipur, PVD Kolkata, Siliguri and South 24 Parganas.

15


Audit Report on Collection of motor vehicles taxes, fees and fines

The existence of duplicate engine numbers indicate lack of inbuilt data
validation controls at data entry stage to restrict entry of duplicate engine
numbers. Cases of fraud also cannot be ruled out.

© We cross checked the ‘owner’ table and ‘Motor vehicle check’ table and
found that in case of 2,635 vehicles though the registration numbers were the
same, the chassis number or the engine numbers differed in the two tables in
the 11 RAs.

*® Separate code numbers from ‘1’ to ‘12’ have been incorporated in the
system to identify the allotment of vehicles to different categories like
individual, company, Government etc. The code number 5 was specified for
State Government. We found that in case of 985 Government vehicles
registered under four’ RAs, the owner code was not allotted as 5. Thus, the
vehicles, which were Government vehicles, could not be identified from the
system code as ‘Government vehicles’.

3.

Validation controls}

Unusual and improbable data makes the data integrity doubtful and suggests
unreliability of data or indicates existence of other irregularities. To check
such deviations, validation controls should be inbuilt within the system.

* In case of 68 vehicles registered in the RA, Howrah, the date of
registration was earlier than the date of purchase of the vehicles by 1 to 25
days.

© Registration of vehicles is done only on working days. We however found
that in case of 2,141 vehicles, registered in 10° RAs, the date of registration
was found to be either a Saturday or a Sunday and in case of 333 vehicles
registered under two’ RAs, the cash receipt was found to have been issued on
a Saturday or a Sunday.

The applications for registration submitted at the time of initial registration of
the vehicles, which are the main source of input data, were not made available
to us and hence we were not in a position to cross check the data with
reference to the original records.

The above facts indicate that the data was not accurate and was unreliable. The
Department should take necessary steps to build in appropriate input controls
and validation controls to prevent entry of incorrect data.

Incomplete dat:

As per Rule 47 of the CMV Rules, Incomplete database means missing
1989 Form-20 has been prescribed some information. We analysed the
for registration of vehicles which VAHAN database in 11 RAs and
Gantintng प्रतिशत 1 33 oh, found that data capture was partial
even in crucial fields like engine

number (433 cases), insurance cover note number (65,225 cases), insurance
date (17,933 cases), seating capacity (51 cases), cubic capacity (52 cases),

2? RAs: Hooghly, Howrah, PVD Kolkata and South 24 Parganas.
3. RAs: Asansol, Barasat, Barrackpore, Burdwan, Howrah, Nadia, Paschim Medinipur, PVD
Kolkata Siliguri and South 24 Parganas

+ RAs: PVD Kolkarta and South 24 Parganas.

16


Chapter-IIl: VAHAN and SARATHI

laden weight (36 cases), address of owner (453 cases), purchase date of the
vehicles (732 cases) and PAN (10,619 cases). This indicates that at the time of
data entry input, these essential information fields were not made mandatory
and consequently the database remained incomplete. In the absence of vital
information like owner's name, PAN and engine number, registration of
stolen/damaged vehicles and use of the same registration number by more than
one vehicle cannot be ruled out. Absence of insurance cover note number does
not ensure the coverage of third party risk. As per Central Government
notification of May 2002, it is mandatory for the vehicle owner to disclose
PAN but this was not captured in the database.

We could not verify the accuracy of the data from manual records as these
were not made available to us. The incompleteness in the database made it
unreliable and application of the business rules could not be assured. Any
analysis and generation of MIS reports based on incomplete and unvalidated
database was likely to produce incomplete and unreliable information. This
pointed to weakness in the internal control mechanism which was further
accentuated by absence of data validation and needs to be immediately
rectified.

3.3 __ Partial mapping of adi

We found from the

Rule 57(6) of the WBMV Rules, 1989 prescribes
that the owner of a vehicle shall apply for
renewal of C.F before one month of the expiry
of fitness certificate. In case, the owner fails to
make application before the prescribed date, he
shall be liable to pay additional amount of 150
per cent of the application fee and testing fee.
Further, if the owner fails to produce the vehicle
on the date prescribed for inspection of the
vehicle he shall be liable to pay additional
amount of 150 per cent of fees, in addition to the
amount mentioned in the schedule E-14 which is
different for different categories of vehicles.

additional

database of 11 RAs°
that in case of
1,45,406 vehicles, the
owners did not
produce the vehicles
on the date prescribed
for inspection of the
vehicle. Though the
additional amount of
fee for late application
was levied at the rate
of 150 per cent of the
application fee, the
amount of.

testing fee for delay in production of vehicles was not levied. Thus, absence of
provision in the system resulted in short realisation of additional amount of fee
of € 2.53 crore.

After we pointed this out, the Department stated that the rate of additional
amount of fee for submission of application was mapped in the system. The
reply is not relevant as our observation relates to fee for delay in production of
vehicles for testing and not for fee for late submission of application. We had
found the deficiency in all the cases of 1,45,406 vehicles.

+ RAs: Asansol, Barasat, Barrackpore, Burdwan, Hooghly, Howrah, Nadia, Paschim

Medinipur, PVD Kolkata, Siliguri and South 24 Parganas.

17


Audit Report on Collection of motor vehicles taxes, fees and fines

We noticed from the
“6
Rule 61(4) of the WBMV Rules provides for database of six” RAs

allotment of fancy registration number to that 14 out of the 29
motor vehicles at the rate of ten times of the fancy numbers were
difference of current number and number allotted to हज vehicles.
requested. The Government had reserved 29 Though the fee for these
numbers i.e. from 0001 to 0020 and all four fancy numbers — was
digit numbers of the same digit (e.g. 1111 higher than the normal
etc.). The fee for these 29 numbers was kept fancy number, the
higher than the normal fancy numbers. These Department collected
were released for allotment w.e.f. 22.11.2007 the fee at the lesser rates
but the rates were not mapped in the system. ie. at normal fancy

number rates. We found

that the rate of fee of
these 29 fancy numbers released for allotment from 22.11.2007 was not
mapped in the system. Thus, non-mapping of the additional rates in the system
resulted in short realisation of revenue of 28.90 lakh.

After we pointed this out, the RA, Asansol in three cases involving हैं 5.92 lakh
stated that demand notices would be issued to realise the balance amount. In
the remaining cases the RAs did not furnish any specific reply.

B. The audit findings included in the following paragraphs are based on
the analysis of the transactions related to the period after the date of
inception of VAHAN in the RAs though the registration dates of the
vehicles were related to both pre-online and post-online periods:

Short realisation of one-time tax]

We found from the
Section 9B of the WBAT Act, prescribes one- \ database of 10’ RAs
time tax for a period of five years on motor cars व 654 vehicles
and ommibuses registered as non-transport were less than 10
vehicles being less than 10 years old. Rate of tax years old as such
for motor cars is based on engine capacity and _— they were liable to
category (individual/society and others) of pay one-time tax but
owners. The system provides options for payment the RAs incorrectly
of annual tax and one-time tax. In case of transfer exercised the option
of ownership from individual to others the of annual tax
difference of tax is to be realised. available in the
system. Further, we
noticed that category of the vehicles was changed from ‘individual/society’ to
‘others’ on sale of some of these vehicles. The difference of one-time tax
applicable for ‘others’ and for ‘individuals/society’ was payable by the
owners of the vehicles.

This resulted in short realisation of one time tax of f 24.32 lakh in 654 cases.
8 RAs: Asansol, Barasat, Burdwan, Hooghly, PVD Kolkata and South 24 Parganas

7 RAs: Asansol, Barasat, Barrackpore, Burdwan, Howrah, Nadia, Paschim Medinipur, PVD
Kolkata, Siliguri and South 24 Parganas.

18


Chapter-IIl: VAHAN and SARATHI

The above fact indicates that the system was not customised to prevent
acceptance of annual tax instead of one-time tax and transfer of ownership of
vehicles without realising the due differential tax.

We found from the
database of nine RAs” that
special tax in respect of
4,265 air conditioned
vehicles amounting to
₹ 2.93 crore was not paid by
the owners during the period
from April 2004 to March 2009, The vehicles were neither surrendered nor
was NOC issued in any case. The concerned RAs had not maintained any Tax
Demand Register in the system to monitor the realisation of the tax from the
defaulters. This resulted in non-realisation of revenue of € 2.93 crore.

Under the provisions of the WBMVT Act,
and WBAT Act, special tax is realisable at
the prescribed rates for air conditioned
vehicles based on their use, seating capacity,
engine capacity and category of the vehicle.

After we pointed out the cases, RA, Burdwan and RA, Asansol stated that
demand notices would be issued in case of 35 vehicles involving हैं 4.79 lakh.
The other RAs did not furnish replies in the remaining cases.

in six!”
Rule 218(7) of the WBMV Rules prescribes | W¢ found in six” RAs
an audio fee for installation of any audio set that in 6,238 vehicles

with or without loudspeaker in the motor audio sets were installed;
vehicle. however, audio fees were

not realised from the
owners of these vehicles though the vehicles were paying taxes. The system
was not customised to make the field “audio fee” mandatory for the vehicles at
the time of tax payment to prevent escapement of the fee in these cases. This
resulted in non-realisation of audio fee of = 33.32 lakh.

on-realisation of dealer’s tax

We analysed the
‘owner’ table and
‘additional tax’ table
and found that in
seven'' RAs in
5,298 cases, dealer’s
tax amounting to
1.08 crorewas not realised from 708 dealers during the registration of new
vehicles during the period from April 2004 to March 2009. We also noticed
that the dealer’s tax field was not made mandatory in the system at the time of

Section 3 of the WBMV Tax Act prescribes that
every dealer or manufacturer who keeps any
motor vehicle in his possession or control shall
pay dealer’s tax on such motor vehicle at the
prescribed rate at the time of its first registration.

§ [118 a one-time tax for five years in respect of non-transport vehicles, payable by all types

of air conditioned vehicles.
RAs: Asansol, Barasat, Barrackpore, Burdwan, Hooghly, Howrah, Nadia, PVD Kolkata
and South 24 Parganas
kpore, Hooghly, Howrah, Siliguri and South 24 Parganas.
"| RAs: Barasat Barrackpore, Hooghly, Howrah, PVD Kolkata, Siliguri and South 24
Parganas.

0



Audit Report on Collection of motor vehicles taxes, fees and fines

registration of the new vehicles. Thus, these dealers were registered without
realisation of the dealer’s tax.

After we pointed this out, the Department stated (September 2010) that the
matter has been referred to NIC for carrying out necessary rectification in the
system. However, the reply was silent about the realisation of the amount.

Non

॥1 of showroom i

We found from the
database of six!” RAs that
1,68,939 vehicles had
been sold through
showrooms or premises of 708 dealers/sub-dealers. There was nothing on
record to indicate that inspection was conducted by the RAs. We noticed that
the showroom inspection fee field was not made mandatory in the system at
the time of registration of the new vehicles and registration of a vehicle was
possible without payment of the showroom inspection fee. This resulted in
non-realisation of inspection fee of 1.46 crore from the dealers.

Rule 60A of the WBMV Rules prescribes a
showroom inspection fee for motor vehicles at
the time of first registration.

After we pointed this out, the Department stated (September 2010) that the
matter has been referred to NIC for carrying out necessary rectification in the
tion of the amount.

system. However, the reply was silent about the re:

. है We found from the
Section 56 of the MV Act prescribes that a database of two!

transport vehicle shall not be deemed to be validly 4. s that 5,500
registered unless it carries a certificate of fitness. vehicles had paid
Rule 62 of the CMV Rules and Rule 57(6) of taxes but their
WBMYV Rules prescribes the validity of certificate fitness certificate
of fitness renewed for transport vehicles. was not renewed.

The system did not
ensure the renewal of fitness of the vehicles at the time of payment of tax.
Thus, the vehicles were plying without certification of their fitness which
could compromise public safety. The Department should ensure the renewal
of Certificate of fitness at the time of payment of tax.

3.11 _Non-assignment of new registration mark to other

f fi th
Section 47 of the MV Act, 1988 prescribes हनन किक tax का

that when a motor vehicle registered in one records) of PVD, Kolkata
state is kept in another state for a period that 128 vehicles of other
exceeding twelve months, the owner will
apply for new registration mark. If the owner
fails to make an application within the
period as prescribed, penalty may be
imposed under the provisions of the Act.

states were paying tax in
West Bengal for more
than twelve — months
indicating that these had
been plying in this state
for more than 12 months

7 RAs: Barasat, Barrackpore, Hooghly, Howrah, PVD Kolkata and South 24 Parganas.
7 RAs: Hooghly and Howrah.

20


Chapter-IIl: VAHAN and SARATHI

without being assigned new registration mark. The RA had not generated any
report from the system in respect of these vehicles that were paying taxes for
more than twelve months so that action in this regard could be taken.

After we pointed this out, the Department stated (September 2010) that
changes in the system to ensure allotment of new registration mark to the
vehicles of other states at the time of payment of tax after 12 months will be
ensured.

ignment of registration number

We noticed from the
Section 41(6) of the MV Act, 1988 and the | database of 11 RAs that
notification issued thereunder stipulates that a two to three series were
RA shall assign a unique mark to every taken up simultaneously
vehicle at the time of registration. Provision for —allotment रण
exists for distinction in the allotment of mark _registration number for
to transport and non-transport vehicles. In a transport vehicles. Thus,
single series, 9,999 vehicles ie. upto four a subsequent series was
digits can be awarded registration numbers. started even before the
These numbers should be awarded in a ongoing series was
sequence to monitor the year of registration exhausted.
of the vehicle. The series for

registration numbers was
allotted by the RAs manually. Thereafter, the numbers were generated by the
system for allotment. This resulted in allotment of more than one series
simultaneously. This indicates the possibility of misuse of the facility for
blocking choice numbers and improper management of registration of
vehicles.

There were also gaps between the registration numbers of a series. The
missing registration numbers of vehicles were not found anywhere in the
database. Due to gaps in the chronological order of registration number, the
total number of vehicles registered at a particular period of time could not be
ascertained. The missing registration numbers are also vulnerable to misuse.

In two'* RAs, no separate series was maintained in the allotment of
registration mark to non-transport and transport vehicles.

After we pointed this out, the Department stated (September 2010) that
suitable change in the system to ensure that before completion of one series of
registration number no other series would be started, to maintain separate
series for registration of transport and non-transport vehicles and to issue
registration numbers serially would be made.

RAs: Asansol and Burdwan.

21


Audit Report on Collection of motor vehicles taxes, fees and fines

intenance of electron ter and 10

monitoring of tax collecti

3.13.1 Out of the
As per Rule 26 of the WBMVT Rules, 1957, the 117 RAs selected
taxing officer shall maintain a tax demand register for review the
(TDR) in form ‘J’ showing registration number, Department had
name and address of the owner, tax due etc. and transferred the
shall review the register in order to see whether the data from TIS to
tax is regularly paid and shall take prompt action VAHAN in five
against the person concerned who did not pay tax. RAs!® and in the
Further, one of the main objectives of remaining six RAs
computerisation of the motor vehicles offices was it was directly fed
maintenance of updated electronic TDR. in the system from
the vehicle registers.
Thereafter though information required for tax demand register was available
in the system, it was not maintained in Form ‘J’ for monitoring tax collection.
We analysed the database and found that 2,90,641 vehicles out of 19,30,266
vehicles had not paid tax of € 645.17 crore. This may not be the actual
position of non-realisation of tax but the computerised data showed such large
extent of non-realisation. The age-wise analysis of these vehicles is mentioned
in the table below:

(Rupees in crore)

Category of Vehicles Age of the vehicles

Upto 15 years Between 15 and More than 30
30 years years

| Amount Cases Amount Cases Amount
Transport Vehicles 1,15,001 | 269.72 | 28,608 | 54.24 | 27,215 | 130.90
Non-Transport Vehicles 71,843 136.40 | 34,604 34.55 | 13,370 19.36
Total 1,86,844 | 406.12 | 63,212 [| 88.79 | 40,585 | _150.26 |

Thus, it would be seen from the above table that there are 40,585 vehicles
which were more than thirty years old, some of which are dating back to
1930’s. The possibility of any of these old vehicles being on the road is
remote. The presence of such improbable data in VAHAN indicates that the
legacy data in TIS was not eliminated before importing it into VAHAN and
further, that the aforesaid mistakes in the VATIAN database were not rectified
by proper data validation before commencing on-line transactions. Hence,
information generated out of the system may not be authentic and reliable.
3.13.2, We noticed that out of the
Rule 121 of the WBMV Rules above —2,90,641 vehicles, 5,999
read with GOs circulated from
time to time prescribe the rates
of special fees per annum on

vehicles were also liable to pay special
fees of रैं 4.42 crore that was also not
हर . recovered by the RAs as the vehicle
heavy goods vehicles having जार did not tum up for payment of
gross vehicle weight (GVW) tax and no system for monitoring the
above 22,542 Kg. collection of tax existed .

1s

RAs: Asansol, Barasat, Barrackpore, Burdwan, Hooghly, Howrah, Nadia, Paschim
Medinipur, PVD Kolkata, Siliguri and South 24 Paraganas.

‘© RAs: Barasat, Barrackpore, Hooghly, Howrah and Paschim Medinipur.

22


Chapter-IIl: VAHAN and SARATHI

3.13.3. The Department had not set up any mechanism to review the VAHAN
database to ascertain the actual number of vehicles that were on road and
liable to pay tax. The RAs did not attempt to ascertain the amount of arrears
pending collection and could not furnish any reason for non-realisation of tax
from the defaulting vehicles. We found that though the RAs sent monthly
reports to the Assistant Secretary, Transport Department indicating revenue
realised during the reported month, the report did not contain any information
regarding revenue recoverable from the vehicle owners.

After we pointed this out five!’ RAs in 50,709 cases involving ~ 100.89 crore
stated that demand notices for realisation of the due taxes were being issued.
The remaining अं RAs did not furnish any reply/specific reply.

The Department admitted the audit observation and stated that some vehicles
might have been plying in the State without paying tax. After preparation of
the state register of motor vehicles the problem would be sorted out
(September 2010).

.14 _Non-realisation ot fee for renewal ot c

We found that system was
not customised to
generate reports In respect
of the vehicles that

Section 41(7) of the MV Act prescribes that
the certificate of registration of a non-
transport vehicle shall be renewed after a
period of fifteen years from the date of issue

. ८ required renewal of
of such certificate. Rule 81 of the CMV quire
है registration after the
Rules, 1989 prescribes a fee for renewal of हु 5
completion of fifteen

certificate of registration. years. Thus, the RAs were

not able to monitor the
registration of vehicles that were paying tax even after the completion of
fifteen years. We found from the database of six’? RAs that out of 1,97,171
cases, in 33,237 cases the registration certificates had not been renewed
though the owners of the vehicles were paying tax even after the expiry of
validity of registration certificates ic. 15 years. This resulted in non-
realisation of renewal fees of € 66.47 lakh.

After we pointed this out, the Department stated (September 2010) that
necessary action to register these cases would be taken.

Cc Other instances

-15 _Non/partial mapping of business rules}

We found that out of 33 fields prescribed for registration of motor vehicle in
‘Form 20’ under the CMV Rules 1989, five fields were not mapped in the
system. These are mentioned as follows:

ansol, Burdwan,Howrah, Nadia and Paschim Medinipur.
: Barasat, Barrackpore, Hooghly, PVD Kolkata, Siliguri and South 24 Parganas.
19 RAs: Barasat, Barrackpore, Hooghly, Howrah, PVD Kolkata and South 24 Parganas.

23


Audit Report on Collection of motor vehicles taxes, fees and fines

Name of the field

‘Age of the person to be registered as Registered owner

Duration of stay at the present address

Place of birth

If place of birth is outside India, when migrated to India

Declaration of citizenship by status

Since, the data is meant to be utilised at the State and Central level in future
for cross verification at various ends, its non-mapping renders the data

incomplete to that extent.
ISARATHI|

The audit findings included in the following paragraphs are based on the
analysis of the records relating to post-online system as these pertain to the
input controls, validation controls etc. in the system:

16 Input control weakness}

3.16.1 Lack of dat:

ut validation controls

We found from the SARATHI database of the eight RAs selected for review
that input validation controls were not inbuilt in the system. Hence, the system
was unable to restrict input of invalid data. The following deficiencies were
observed due to lack of input validation controls in the system:

. According to Section 4 of the MV Act, 1988, no person under the age
of 18 years shall drive a motor vehicle in any public place except in case of
motor cycle having engine capacity below 50 cubic capacity (cc) which may
be driven by a person above 16 years. Further, only a person above the age of
20 years can drive a transport vehicle. The input validation controls of age of
16/20 was however not made mandatory in the system.

We found in the database of PVD, Kolkata and RA, South 24 Parganas that in
seven cases the DLs were issued/renewed to persons below the age of 16
years.

e We found in the database of six”? RAs that in 788 cases DL for
transport vehicles were issued though the applicants did not have the requisite
minimum educational qualification of eighth standard under Rule 8 of CMVR,
1989,

As the application/documents submitted by the applicants were not made
available to audit, we could not verify the data entered in the system.

e Though passing of driving test is compulsory for issue of driving
licenses (DLs), we noticed from the ‘DD licence’ table and ‘DL test result’
table available in the database that in seven’! LAs, 4,458 applicants failed in
the driving test and six applicants were absent but DLs were shown to have
been issued to the applicants. This indicated that system was not customised to
make passing of driving test compulsory for issue of DLs. Thus, the issue of

* RAs: Bal
2 LAs:

, Barrackpore, Burdwan, Hooghly, Howrah and PVD Kolkata.
ansol, Barasat, Barrackpore, Burdwan, Hooghly, PVD Kolkata and South 24
arganas,

24


Chapter-IIl: VAHAN and SARATHI

DLs to ineligible persons cannot be ruled out and this could seriously
compromise public safety.

‘ In 208 cases of six” RAs, while the registration number of the vehicle
on which the driving test was conducted was found to be the same, the class
and category of the vehicle was different. In these cases the licensees of four
wheelers were shown to have taken the test on two wheelers and vice versa.
The input validation control of class of vehicle for driving test was not made
mandatory in the system to avoid the lapse.

° We found from the ‘DD licence’ table and ‘Learner Licence’ table
available in the database that in 82 cases under four”’ LAs the learner’s licence
for transport vehicles was shown to be issued but DL for light motor vehicles
was not shown to have been issued in the ‘DD licence’ table. The input
validation control of issue of learner’s licence for transport vehicle only afier
issue of DL for non-transport vehicle was not made mandatory in the system
to avoid such lapses.

e According to Section 14(2)(a) of the MV Act, 1988, licence to drive
transport vehicle shall be effective for three years except DL issued to persons
driving vehicles carrying dangerous or hazardous goods, which will be
effective for one year.

We found in the database of three™* RAs that in 45 cases DL for transport
vehicles were issued with validity of more than three years and in seven” RAs
we noticed that in 3,669 cases licences were issued with validity of less than
three years in contravention of the rules. As the applications/documents
submitted by the applicants were not made available to audit, the data entered
in the system could not be verified by us.

. According to Section 14(2)(b) of the MV Act, 1988, a licence to drive
non-transport vehicle shall be effective for twenty years or until the date on
which the licence holder attains the age of fifty years, whichever is earlier.

We found in the database of five”® RAs that in 761 cases DL for non-transport
vehicles were issued with validity of more than twenty years and in eight”
RAs we noticed 8,652 cases where it was issued with validity of less than
twenty years in contravention of the rules.

e In 138 cases under four” RAs ‘challan’ numbers of money receipts in
token of DL fee generated by SARATHI were found duplicate.

° We found in the database of seven”? offices that 8,892 transactions had
been conducted on Saturdays or Sundays though the offices of the RAs remain
closed on those days.

2 RAs: Asansol, Burasat, Barrackpore, Hooghly, Howrah and PVD Kolkata.

23 [ 85: Barasat, Burdwan, PVD Kolkata and South 24 Parganas.

* RAs: Barrackpore, PVD Kolkata and South 24 Parganas.

* RAs; Asansol, Barasat, Battackpore, Burdwan, Hooghly, Howrah and PVD Kolkata.

: Barasat, Bartackpore, Burdwan, PVD Kolkata and South 24 Parganas.

: Asansol, Barasat, Barrackpore, Burdwan, Hooghly, Howrah, PVD Kolkata and South
24 Parganas.

*SRAs: Asansol, Burdwan, PVD Kolkata and South 24 Parganas.

»” LAs: Barasat, Barrackpore, Burdwan, Hooghly, Howrah, PVD Kolkata and South 24

Parganas.

Fol
ट्रे हे

25


Audit Report on Collection of motor vehicles taxes, fees and fines

We also found that the data entered in the respective tables was not checked
by any other person/supervising authority to ensure its correctness/credibility.

Since incorrect issue of driving licenses is fraught with the risk to public
safety, it is desirable that the Department ensure that the important fields
mentioned above are made mandatory so that the system cannot proceed
further in the event of any violation of business rules being detected.

After we pointed this out, the Department referred the matter to NIC for input
validation controls (September 2010).

3.16.2 Incomplete databas

We found that important fields were not made mandatory for data input.
Consequently, the following fields were not captured in the system as detailed
in the following table:

Sl. No. Name of the table Name of the field Number of
and total number of records foun:
records blank
1. DL issuing authori 3,02,408
2. Testing authorit 8,83,441
3. Pin code 86,800
4. CENC! Qualification of DL holders. 714,066
5. शक Inward number 14,862
6. ~~ 1* Identification Mark 2,95,970
7 2™ Identification Mark 3,37,799
| * | Vehicle registration number for 2,28,266
conducting driving test
| 9. | Challan details (रैं 4.19 lakh ) 1,802
10. TEST RESULT Challan number 1,51,766
11. (2,66,321) Test result 23,400

In the absence of mandatory details of driving test such as “testing authority”
and “registration number” of the vehicle on which driving test was conducted
we could not derive reasonable assurance that driving tests were actually being
conducted before issue of driving licences. We recommend that the
Government may issue directions for capturing data in such important fields.

After we pointed this out, the Department stated that the matter would be
checked and it would be referred to NIC for necessary action (September
2010).

The Government may ensure the completeness of the IT system by
incorporating the business rules and putting in place proper validation
controls which would ensure generation of complete and _ reliable
information.

26


CHAPTER-IV

TIONS

HER OBSERV/

.1___Introduction|

The activities of Transport Department relating to issue/renewal of permits,
trade certificates, licence to sub-dealers, maintenance of cash book, activities
of the enforcement wing like receipts from compounding of fines and seizure
of documents/vehicles were being performed manually. All these provisions
except for issue/renewal of trade certificate were available in VAHAN but
were not being utilised by the Department. We conducted the audit of these
non-computerised activities and found certain deficiencies which are
mentioned in this chapter.

We also observed that no Manual detailing the working of and the process of
collection of motor vehicle taxes, fees and fines was prepared by the Transport
Department.

4.2 S|

ort realisation of permit fees}

Permit is an important means to regulate the plying of transport vehicles
within and outside the State. Every owner of a transport vehicle requires a
permit to be granted or countersigned by the RAs or State Transport Authority
(STA). The Transport Department issues and renews permits to contract
carriages, stage carriages and goods carriages on realisation of requisite fees.

We found from scrutiny of
Rule 126 and 127 of the WBMV Rules, 1989 the permit registers in the
read with Notification No. 5305 WT dated _ offices of 10' RAs that the
12.12.2003 prescribe the rates of fees for RAs granted/renewed
grant and renewal of permit for stage 2,732 permanent — stage
carriage, contract carriage, goods carriage, carriage permits, contract
ete. in schedule ‘A’ of the rules ibid. The carriage permits and goods
permit fees were subsequently enhanced with carriage permits valid for
effect from 20.10.2005 vide Notification No. various periods between
4026-WT/ 6M-13/2005 dated 05.10.2005. April 2004 and October
2014. However, the
Department realised permit
fees at rates lower than the revised rates. This resulted in short realisation of
permit fees of € 37.85 lakh.

After this was pointed out, the Department accepted (September 2010) the
audit observation. However, the action taken to recover the amount has not
been received.

RAs: Asansol, Bankura, Barasat, Burdwan, Howrah, Nadia, Paschim Medinipur, Purba
Medinipur, PVD Kolkata and South 24 Parganas.

27


Audit Report on Collection of motor vehicles taxes, fees and fines

Short ri ci ate Transport Auth

4.3.1 We found that
As per Rule 87 of the CMV Rules the Transport the STAs of 14

Authorities of different states grant National states’ and Union
Permit (NP) to goods carriages and collect Territory of
composite fee in the form of bank draft (BD) Chandigarh sent 915
from the holders of such permits and dispatch BDs for composite

these to the State Transport Authority (STA) of fees in respect of
the concerned state for permitting those 10,546 NPs to the
vehicles to ply in that state. Further, Rule STA, West Bengal
128(4) of the WBMV Rules, 1989 provides that between February

the annual rate of composite fee for goods 2006 and = March
carriages of other states in West Bengal shall be 2009. However, the
the same as fixed by those states from time to composite fee was
time for permitting the vehicles of West Bengal collected by those
to ply in those states. The rate of composite fee states at rates lower
ranged between & 3,000 and ¥ 5,000 during the than the prescribed
period under review. rates. The states

were liable to send
the composite fee of
%4.64 crore instead of 2.29 crore through BDs. The STA, WB did not take up
the matter with the authorities concerned for realisation of the balance amount
resulting in short realisation of composite fee of € 2.35 crore.

After we pointed this out, the Department accepted the audit observation and
assured that the cases would be looked into (September 2010).

4.3.2 Our scrutiny further revealed that the Government of Tamil Nadu
enhanced the rate of composite fee from हैं 3,000 to % 5,000 from 12.12.2008
through Notification dated 12.12.2008 circulated to all the States. Since the
composite fee was required to be collected on reciprocal basis, the
Government of West Bengal was required to issue orders for realisation of the
tax at the rate of € 5,000 per annum/per vehicle from the said date. However,
the Government neither issued any order for collection of the tax nor did it
request the Government of Tamil Nadu for collection of the difference of the
composite tax from 1,663 permit holders of Tamil Nadu received between
26.12.2008 and 14.8.2009. This resulted in non-realisation of revenue of
= 33.26 lakh in the shape of composite fee.

Afier we pointed this out, the Department admitted the audit observation.
However, specific action taken on this issue has not been intimated to the audit
(September 2010).

> Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar. Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Nagaland, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and Uttar
Pradesh

28


Chapter-IV: Other observations

Deficiencies in monitoring, remittance and reconciliation of bank
drafts

Absence of provisions for maintenance of register for recording}
defective/lapsed drafts

We found that the WBMV

Bank Drafts (BDs) are remitted to Rules did not provide for

Reserve Bank of India (RBI) for credit maintenance of any register

into the Government account. Defective for monitoring the receipts

or lapsed BDs are returned by RBI to the of lapsed/defective BDs

STA, from time to time. returned from the RBI.

Consequently the STA, WB

did not maintain any separate record/register to monitor receipt of defective or

lapsed BDs returned by RBI, Kolkata. Therefore, the actual number of BDs

lapsed, subsequently revalidated and remitted to the Government account
could not be ascertained.

We also found that the RBI, Kolkata returned 10,207 BDs valued at हैं 2.22
crore to STA, WB as the validity of those drafts had expired. The STA, WB
sent back the BDs to the issuing banks between July 2005 and March 2009 for
revalidation. However, no record/register was maintained to watch
revalidation and return of the lapsed drafis. This resulted in blocking of
revenue of € 2.22 crore as revalidation of the BDs is still pending.

After we pointed this out, the Department admitted the audit observation and
stated that the problems would be solved with the introduction of the new
system of receiving composite fees online.

4.2 _Non-recon ion_of bank draft

The West Bengal Financial Rules provide that the departmental controlling
officers should see that all sums due to Government are regularly received and
checked against demands and that they are paid into the treasury.

We cross verified remittance of 70 challans of BDs with the records of the
RBI, Kolkata and noticed that BDs amounting to 2.08 crore were remitted to
RBI, Kolkata between June 2006 and March 2008 but we traced the credits
aggregating to € 2.01 crore only in the Government account during that period.
Non-reconciliation by the Department with the RBI resulted in non-detection
of the variation of T seven lakh.

After we pointed this out, the Department stated that reconciliation was started
only from December 2009.

.4.3__Non-authentication of entries made in Bank Draft Regi:

The WBMV Rules, 1989 do not prescribe maintenance of a bank draft register
to monitor the receipt and remittance of bank drafts.

We noticed that the STA, WB received a large number of bank drafts for
composite fee for National Permit (NP) from different states. Though the
details of the BDs were recorded in a register, the entries made in the register
were neither authenticated nor periodically reviewed by any responsible

29


Audit Report on Collection of motor vehicles taxes, fees and fines

officer of the STA to ascertain the correctness of remittance of revenue to the
Government account.

After we pointed this out, the Department admitted the audit observation and
stated that the receipts and remittances of bank drafis could not be adequately
monitored due to involvement of the officers of STA in court cases most of the
time.

Improper maintenance of cash boo!

As per the West Bengal Treasury Rules and
Subsidiary Rules, a cash book is required to
be maintained in order to monitor receipts
and remittance of revenue. All transactions
should be entered in the cash book as soon
as they occur and attested by the head of
office in token of check. The head of the
office should verify the totaling of the cash
book or have this done by some responsible
officer sub-ordinate to him other than the
writer of the cash book and initial it as
correct. At the end of each month the head
of the office should verify the cash balance
in the cash book and record a signed and
dated certificate to that effect. Entries made
in the cash book regarding remittances of
receipt to the accredited bank for credit into
Government account should be attested by
the head of office after verifying them with
reference to the bank receipt recorded in the
pay-in-slips or challans.

We found that the
receipts in token of
money received were
generated through RVS
but cash book was being
maintained manually in
all the RAs test
checked. The following
irregularities were
found in the cash book
of three® RAs:

() In PVD, Kolkata, we
found that the cash book
was neither signed by
the cashier-in-charge
nor was it verified by
any officer during the
period between August
2008 and February
2009. The collection on
17 October 2008 was
shown in the cash book

as © 2.19 lakh. However, a
sum of © 1.84 lakh only was remitted on 20 October 2008. Cross verification
of the treasury records also confirmed that the actual deposit was = 1.84 lakh.
This resulted in short remittance of हैं 0.35 lakh. The local office admitted that
it was a bonafide mistake and stated that actual cash collection on 17 October
2008 was & 1.84 lakh instead of F 2.19 lakh which was wrongly entered on the
receipt side of the cash book. Further, the local office stated that signature and
authentication of the cash book had since been completed. However, the cash
book was not shown to audit to enable us to verify this.

(ii) In RA, South 24 Parganas, during October 2005 and March 2009, a
computer printout of daily receipts on account of receipt of taxes, fees & fines
etc. was affixed on the ‘Receipt’ side of the cash book without any attestation/
authentication by any officer.

(iii) The blank ‘payment’ side was signed by the RA, South 24 Parganas upto
30 June 2008.

3 RAs: Asansol, PVD Kolkata and South 24 Parganas.

30


Chapter-IV: Other observations

(iv) No cash collection was reflected on the receipt side of the cash book on 4
September 2008 and 5 September 2008, though those days were weekdays on
which the office remained open.

(v) No cash collection on account of taxes, registration and permit was shown
on 13 March 2009 except the collection of licence fees.

(vi) Neither was the monthly cash balance verified nor was any signed and
dated certificate to that effect recorded by the head of the office.

The RA, South 24 Parganas, inter alia stated that due to failure of the
computer system on 4 September 2008, no transaction was done on 5
September 2008. However, action would be taken to reflect the collection of 4
September 2008 in the cash book. The matter regarding maintenance of the
Cash Book was noted for future guidance. However, the probability of
gathering the details of the collections made on 4 September 2008 appears
remote in view of our findings reported in para 2.5 of Chapter II.

In RA, Asansol no cash book was maintained during the period January 2008
and March 2009. Daily collection of revenue report extracted from computer
was kept and that was produced to audit for verification.

In reply RA, Asansol stated that they had noted the audit observation for
future guidance.

We recommend that the Government may consider issuing directions to
the Department for maintenance of the cash book in accordance with the
Treasury Rules and ensure that the prescribed checks are exercised by
the head of the offices to safeguard Government revenues.

है पु We found from
Section 16 of the WBMVT Act and Section 12 of the the records of

WBAT Act provide that a motor vehicle may be seized vehicles.
detained and seized by the enforcement authority due case registers
to non-payment of tax and additional tax and may be and seizure lists
released on realisation of dues within 30 days of in PVD, Kolkata
seizure. The owner is liable to pay double the amount and twot RAs
of tax and penalty within a further period of 15 days that 47 vehicles
after expiry of the said 30 days. In case no one tums up were seized
claiming the ownership of the motor vehicle within 30 between January
days from the date of seizure, the Taxing Officer shall 2006 and
auction the vehicle to recover the Government dues. September 2009

for plying on road
without payment of tax and additional tax. In 33 cases, tax dues were assessed
at & 25.07 lakh and demand notices were issued between April 2007 and
November 2009 by the RAs. The defaulting owners of the seized vehicles
neither paid the assessed dues nor were any action taken by the RAs to dispose
of the seized vehicles through auction. In the remaining 14 cases tax was not
assessed by the RAs. The details like engine capacity, type of vehicles, etc.

+ RAs: Howrah and South 24 Parganas.

31


Audit Report on Collection of motor vehicles taxes, fees and fines

were not found on record. As such the amount recoverable from these vehicles
could not be ascertained.

After we pointed this out, the Department accepted the audit observation and
stated that reminders had recently been issued to the concerned RAs for
necessary action.

4.7___No

suance of saleable forms|

We noticed that the
Rule 123 of the WBMV Rules provides that | Department was not
all kinds of forms prescribed under the supplying the forms for
CMV Rules, 1989 and the WBMV Rules, issue of registration
1989, such as application form for issue of certificates and driving

registration certificates, driving licences, licences. We found in the
permits etc. shall be saleable and priced at offices of the STA, WB
the rate of € 5 per page (including both sides and nine? RAs
of each form). that 13,02,084 licences,

registration certificates,

permits etc. were issued

during the period under review. However, no statutory forms were issued by

the RAs and the applicants procured the forms from private agents. The
Department could have earned revenue of € 1.07 crore by sale of the forms.

After we pointed this out, the Department accepted the audit observation and
stated that in place of the present system, computerised system of application
was to be introduced (September 2010).

4.8  Non-realisation of differential tax and penalty from the owners of

two wheelers

We found in the
Section 9A of the WBAT Act as amended in August | offices of four"
2003, provides that the owner of a motor cycle RAs that the
tegistered after 25 November 1991 has to pay the owners of 2,345

difference of the life time tax payable as specified in two wheelers
schedule Ill and one-time tax (OTT) already paid registered
within the appointed date. Notification issued by the between July
State Government in December 2004, stipulated 16 2002 and

March 2005 as the appointed date for payment of the February 2004
difference of tax. In case of non-payment of १10 not pay the
differential tax within the prescribed date, penalty differential tax
depending upon the category of the vehicle and the of हैं 46.82 lakh
delay is leviable at the prescribed rates. even 22 to 58
months afler
lapse of the stipulated date. No action was taken by the Department to realise
the same by issue of demand notices. This resulted in non-realisation of tax of
₹ 93.64 lakh including penalty of F 46.82 lakh.

3 RAs: Asansol, Bankura, Barasat, Barrackpore, Jalpaiguri, Malda, Nadia, Purba Medinipur
and Siliguri.

© RAs: Asansol, Bankura, Malda and Siliguri.

32


Chapter-IV: Other observations

After we pointed this out, the RAs stated that demand notices would be issued

to realise the dues as soon as possible.

4.9 Application of incorrect rate of special tax

Section 9B of the WBAT Act, as amended
from time to time, provides for realisation
of one time tax for five years from the
owners of non-transport vehicles at the
prescribed rate based on their use, engine
capacity and seating capacity in lieu of
annual tax payable under the WBMVT
Act. Further, the schedule to the Act
provides for levy of special tax if such
motor vehicle is air conditioned. In case of
non-payment of one-time tax and special
tax beyond 15 days after the due date,
penalty ranging between 5 and 100 per
cent of the unpaid tax is leviable.

We found in the offices of
six’ RAs that the owners of
252 light motor vehicles
either paid annual tax
instead of one time tax for
five years or RAs applied
incorrect rates. The RAs
did not take any action to
realise the tax dues. This
resulted in non-realisation
of one time tax of % 15.46
lakh. Besides penalty of
15.46 lakh could have been
levied.

After we pointed this out,
the Department accepted the

audit observation and assured to look into the cases (September 2010).

of Motor

Rule 24 of the CMV Rules prescribes that no person
shall establish or maintain any driving school or
establishment for imparting instructions for driving
motor vehicles without a licence granted by the
licensing authority. Moreover, the vehicles owned by
motor training schools are liable to be taxed at the

rates prescribed in the Schedules.

We found from
the motor training
school register
maintained in the
offices of PVD,
Kolkata RA,
Howrah and RA,
Barasat that in
case of 139

vehicles owned by 83 motor training schools, the RAs either did not realise
tax and additional tax or realised such taxes at lower rates. The application of
lower rate was due to the fact that the RAs were treating these vehicles as
owned by individuals and charging the tax at a lower rate. This resulted in
non/short realisation of tax and additional tax of € 21.42 lakh. Besides penalty
of % 21.42 lakh could have been levied.

After we pointed this out,the Department accepted the audit observation and
assured (0 look into the cases (September 2010).

7 RAs: Bankura, Burdwan, Malda, Nadia, Purba Medinipur and Siliguri.

33


Audit Report on Collection of motor vehicles taxes, fees and fines

Non-monitoring of renewal of trade certificates}

Rule 33 of the CMV Rules provides
that a motor vehicle in the possession
of a dealer shall be exempted from the
necessity of registration subject to the
condition that the dealer obtains a trade
certificate (TC) from the concerned
RA. No holder of a TC shall deliver a
motor vehicle to a purchaser without
registration of the vehicle, whether
temporary or permanent. Further, Rule
35 of the CMV Rules, 1989 prescribes
that a TC granted to a dealer shall be
valid for twelve months from the date
of issue and shall be renewable on
realisation of prescribed fees.
Presentation of vehicle for registration
by the dealer before the RA with
invalid TC attracts penalty u/s 192 of

4.11.1 We noticed that the RAs
did not monitor the vehicles
presented for registration with
invalid TCs. No survey was
also conducted to identify the
dealers using invalid TCs for
presentation of vehicles. No
penalty was imposed on the
dealers who presented the
vehicles for registration with
invalid TCs. We found in
five’ RAs that the validity of
183 TCs issued to 50 dealers
had expired between July
2000 and July 2009. No
record was maintained in
respect of presentation of
vehicles by the defaulting
dealers before the RAs for

the MV Act, 1988. registration with invalid TCs.
This resulted in non-realisation

of TC renewal fees of € 1.08 lakh.

Further, the following two RAs renewed 13 TCs of three dealers in an
irregular manner as mentioned below:

4.11.2 We noticed in PVD, Kolkata that a dealer applied for renewal of TC
on 29 June 2007 and deposited fees on 5 September 2007. However, renewal
was granted retrospectively from 26 May 2007. The dealer presented four auto
rickshaws for registration between 31 May 2007 and 27 June 2007 with
invalid TCs. However, no penalty was imposed.

We noticed in RA, Asansol that in case of one dealer, renewal of TC was
granted for three years at a time with retrospective effect and in another case
renewal was granted after expiry of the provisional appointment for
dealership.

After we pointed this out, the RA, Asansol agreed to conduct survey to
identify the dealers operating within his jurisdiction with invalid TCs. The
RA, South 24 Parganas stated that attempts would be made to take up the
matter with NIC for on-line link-up so that the system would not allow
registration of vehicles presented for registration on the basis of invalid TCs.
The remaining RAs did not furnish any specilic reply.

* RAs: Asansol, Burdwan, Nadia, PVD Kolkata and South 24 Parganas.

34


Chapter-IV: Other observations

We noticed that the licence
Rule 75(4) of the WBMV Rules register to watch over the grant
prescribes that the RA should grant or renewal of sub-dealer’s

licence to sub-dealers to sell or deal licence and the fees was not
or keep in possession any motor maintained in the four’ RAs. In
vehicle. A licence so issued is valid the absence of this control
for a period of one year only and mechanism, we could not
shall be renewable on payment of ascertain the number of sub-
prescribed fees. District Magistrate dealer’s licences issued, date of
is the administrative head of all the expiry of the licences, date of
State Government offices in the renewal and fees realised etc.

district. The RAs work under the We further found from the
administrative control of the District licence register maintained in
Magistrate/Additional District five! RAs that the validity of

Magistrate. licences of 135 sub-dealers had

expired between 2005 and 2009.

The District Magistrate, Howrah issued suspension notices to 47 sub-dealers

in March 2009 without conducting enquiry whether the sub-dealers continued

with their business during the intervening period. The other RAs did not take

any action to realise the sub-dealer’s licence fee. This resulted in non-
realisation of revenue of € 23.80 lakh.

After we pointed this out, the RA, Bankura and RA, Paschim Medinipur stated
that demand notices for realisation of the fee would be issued. The RAs,
Howrah, Barasat and Siliguri did not furnish any specific reply.

We reported the above observations to the Department/Government in June
2010. They assured (September 2010) that necessary action would be initiated.
A report on further action has not been intimated (February 2011).

Lack of proper infrastructure i

ost

The Rampur MV check post is situated on National Highway-2 at a distance
of 14 kilometers from Asansol town. The check post had no check gate or any
barrier to stop vehicles. As a result, the enforcement activities were conducted
by the motor vehicles inspectors near the check gate of Garui Toll Plaza under
the jurisdiction of National Highway Authority of India. The lighting
arrangements at the check post was indequate and hindered enforcement
activities at night.

The check post was located in an isolated place. Though the average daily
collection of revenue at the check post was around® three lakh which was
required to be deposited into the State Bank of India, Asansol Branch, there
Was no atrangement for permanent posting of police personnel.

After being pointed out by us, the Department accepted the audit observation
and assured to look into the case (September 2010).

9

RAs: Burdwan, Nadia, PVD Kolkata and South 24 Parganas.
' RAs: Bankura, Barasat, Howrah, Paschim Medinipur and Siliguri

35


Audit Report on Collection of motor vehicles taxes, fees and fines

In order to augment the collection of revenue, the Additional Chief Secretary,
Transport Department instructed the District Magistrate, Burdwan in July
2007 to shift the Rampur MV check post near the Commercial Tax Check
Post at Duburdihi for combined checkingof vehicles with the commercial tax
inspectors. Moreover, the Ministry of Surface Transport, Government of India
also advised the State Government to set up integrated check posts. Though
the matter was discussed in the revenue meeting held in February 2009, no
further action had been taken for integration of the check post.

The Government may consider integration of the check posts to augment
collection of revenue.

15 Internal Audi

Internal audit is a vital tool available to the management to monitor the
functioning of an organisation. It helps the management to take corrective
action wherever necessary to ensure that the systems are functioning
reasonably well and the stated objectives are achieved.

The Internal Audit Branch set up in November 1998 under the Finance
Department conducts internal audit in various Departments.

We observed that the Transport Department had no internal audit wing. The
Finance (Internal Audit) Department also did not conduct audit of the
Department during the period under review.

The Government may ensure that internal audit of the Department is
conducted periodically.

36


The irregularilies noticed during the review of the Transport Department have
been discussed in the preceding chapters. The conclusions arrived at and
summary of recommendations are mentioned in the succeeding paragraphs.

5.1 Conclusion}

Despite instructions of GOT in 2002 to implement the standard software
applications ‘VAHAN’ and‘ SARATHTI’, little progress could be achieved by
the State Government. By March 2009, only 19 RAs out of 26 RAs were using
the ‘ VAHAN’ package while only nine RAs were using ‘SARATHI’ for
issuing driving licenses. Thus, the IT system had restricted geographical
coverage. The RAs were not linked up and thus, no progress could be made in
implementing a state wide area network to ensure that the entire state wide
data of motor vehicles was available at a central server. Consequently, the
State register of Motor Vehicles could not be prepared which in turn impacted
on the preparation of a National Register of Vehicles. Even after a lapse of six
years from the date of commencement of computerisation, all the modules are
not yet operational and some of the applications are still being done manually.
A locally developed software was being used in a few RAs for accounting
purposes and such an application carried risks from the control point of view.
Thus, the objectives of computerising the system of registration and taxation
of vehicles and issuing of driving licenses could not be fully achieved.

The Department did not have an IT strategy or an IT plan leading to absence
of direction in the IT implementation. The system was further compromised
when complete information was not captured in the database and deficient
input controls and validation checks, non-mapping of business rules and
probability of manual interventions made the data unreliable. Lack of adequate
supervision resulted in erroneous data capture thereby resulling in data
redundancy. The IT procedures and management of changes were not
satisfactory and records and relevant documentation describing the impact and
testing of IT changes did not address all recent changes to the business rules.
Legacy data was not weeded out from the database rendering it unreliable. The
Department had not formulated and documented any security policy and had
not issued any guidelines for protection of hardware and software of the
system. Preventive and detective measures like installing and updating
antivirus software, user’s id and passwords were left to the discretion of the
RAs, thus putting the assets at risk.

The Department was not able to extract useful information from the system
regarding defaulters and has thus failed to exploit the full potential of the IT
system. The system as a management information system (MIS) was
inadequate.

37


Audit Report on Collection of motor vehicles taxes, fees and fines

No Manual detailing the working of and the process of collection of motor
vehicle taxes, fees and fines was prepared by the Transport Department. The
Department did not have an Internal Audit Wing and no internal audit was
ever conducted, as a result of which the weaknesses in the functioning of the
Department remained undetected.

recommend.

mma

The Government may consider taking the following steps to enhance the
efficiency and effectiveness of the Transport Department:

> developing an IT strategy and an IT plan to avoid ad-hoc
implementation of the computerisation efforts;

> setting a time frame for early completion of all functions and in all
RAs;

> establishing a State wide area network with interconnectivity of all
offices to integrate the database so that the data being captured at RA
level can be integrated at the state level in order to establish the State
Register of vehicles;

> incorporating stringent input and validation controls into the system to
ensure that unauthorised, invalid and non-existing data is not fed into
the system to enhance data reliability and completely eliminate manual
intervention;

> maintaining a well documented change management procedure for
ensuring transparency and effective internal controls;

> drawing up an IT security policy with adequate documentation with a
credible threat assessment mechanism and disaster recovery and
business continuity plan for harnessing optimum output from the
system;

(5;

Vv

generating periodical reports from the system as a tool of management
information system to aid the management to monitor the revenue
collection and take suitable corrective measures; and

38


Chapter-V: Conclusion and recommendations

> establishing an internal audit wing for conducting periodical audit of
the Department and preparing a manual detailing the internal control
mechanism in the Department.

pr. al

Kolkata (M. RAY BHATTACHARYYA)
The Accountant General (R,W & LBA)
West Bengal
Countersigned

FR, -

New Delhi (VINOD RAI)
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India

39


2.

3.

ANNE

1 ॥

Types of Taxes, Fees and Fines levied on Motor Vehicles and for Driving

Licences by Transport Department

VAHAN

Registration of Vehicles: a) “Registration fee” is paid by the owner of the

vehicle.

b) “Fancy registration marks fee” is paid by the
owner of the vehicle for assignment of a registration
mark for which he has a fancy for, if any.

c) “Showroom Inspection fee” shall be realised from
the dealer or sub-dealer for inspection of vehicles by
the transport authority.

d) “Dealer’s tax” shall be paid by the dealer as
specified in tax schedule in respect of the motor
vehicles in his possession or control, whether or not
such motor vehicles are driven in any public place.

Certificate of fitness of vehicle: Fitness fee is paid by the owners of vehicles
for inspection of their vehicles by the transport authority.

Tax: (I) Road tax

a) “Life time tax” means the tax imposed on motor cycle or motor cycle
combination under the Act and leviable for the entire life-time of such
motor cycle or motor cycle combination, as the case may be.

b) “One-time tax” means the tax imposed on motor car and omnibus as
specified for a period of five years from the date of its registration and
being less than 10 years old and not being transport vehicles.

c) “Quarterly tax” means transport vehicle shall pay tax quarterly in
advance, but a rebate of five per cent shall be allowed if the tax is paid
for the whole year in advance.

(1) “Special tax” is realisable at the prescribed rates for air conditioned
vehicles based on their use, seating capacity, engine capacity and
category of the vehicles.

(II) “Special fee” is realisable from the owners of heavy goods vehicle
having gross vehicle weight (GVW) above 22,542 Kg.

(IV) “Audio fees” is realisable from the owners of vehicle in which any
audio set with or without loudspeaker is installed.

Renewal of Certificate of registration: In case of non-transport vehicles
certificate of registration is valid only for a period of fifteen years from the
date of issue of such certificate and shall be renewable on payment of required

41


we

Audit Report on Collection of motor vehicles taxes, fees and fines

SARATHI

Application for learner’s licence is made by the applicant with proof of
residence, age and citizenship.

Preliminary test is taken for learner’s licence by the licensing authority for its
satisfaction so that the applicant possesses adequate knowledge and
understanding of the traffic signs, signals, rules of the road and duties of a
driver.

Application for driving licence shall be accompanied by an effective learner’s
licence and appropriate fees.

Driving test shall be conducted by the licensing authority in a vehicle of the
type to which the application relates.

Issue of driving licence by a licensing authority.
Addition to driving licence shall be accompanied by an effective learner’s
licence and driving licence held by the applicant with appropriate fees.

Renewal of driving licence shall be accompanied by driving licence and
appropriate fee.

42


Annexure

ANNEXURE-II

ear of No. of हे फ्ाह्ा 5

Selected paragraphs

1994-95 [1 [5.2 (Review)

1997-98 [15.08

2001-02 [1 5.02 (Review)

2003-04 [16

2004-05 |1 [5.2

2005-06 1 7 तिफिििििो)फश।

2007-08 L 5.4

Total 7

Unselected paragraphs

1981-82 2 3.2, 3.3

1982-83 7+3* 4.2.2(a), 4.2.3, 4.2.4, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 4.8, 4.9

1983-84 | 8 | 3.6, 3.7, 3.8, 3.9, 3.10

1984-85 5 5.5, 5.6

1985-86 | 9 | 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, 5.9, 5.10

1986-87 [9 [6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5, 6.6, 6.7, 6.8, 6.9, 6.10

1987-88 15 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, 5.10, 5.11, 5.12, 5.13,
5.14, 5.15, 5.16, 5.17

1988-89 [8 [4.2, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 4.8, 4.9, 4.10

1989-90 7 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 4.8

1990-91 9 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 4.8, 4.9, 4.10

1991-92 11 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, 5.9, 5.10, 5.11, 5.12

1992-93 13 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, 5.9, 5.10, 5.11, 5.12, 5.13, 5.14,
5.15

1993-94 [8 [5.2, 5.3, 5.7, 5.8, 5.9, 5.10, 5.11, 5.12

1994-95 [6 [15.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8

1995-96 12 5.02, 5.03, 5.04, 5.05, 5.06, 5.07, 5.08, 5.09, 5.10, 5.11, |
5.12, 5.13

1996-97 14 5.02, 5.03, 5.04, 5.05, 5.06, 5.07, 5.08, 5.09, 5.10,
5.11, 5.12, 5.13, 5.14, 5.15

1997-98 [6 _[5.03, 5.04, 5.05, 5.06, 5.07, 5.09

1998-99 7 5.02, 5.03, 5.04, 5.05, 5.06, 5.07, 5.08

1999-00 5 6.03, 6.04, 6.05, 6.07, 6.08

2000-01 7 5.02, 5.04, 5.05, 5.06, 5.07, 5.08, 5.09

2001-02 3 5.03, 5.04, 5.05

2002-03 [6 | 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7

2003-04 [4 [5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5

2004-05 5 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7

2005-06 | _ 4 [4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5

2006-07 5+1*® 5.2.1, 5.2.2, 5.2.3, 5.2.4, 5.2.5, 5.2.6.1, 5.2.8, 5.2.9, 5.2.10,
5.2.11, 5.2.12, 5.2.13, 5.2.14, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7

2007-08 3 5.2, 5.3, 5.5

Total 198+4

* sub-paragraph ® Review.