Ea जयते

Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on

Implementation of Public Private Partnership project at
Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport, Mumbai

for the year ended March 2013

Union Government
Ministry of Civil Aviation
No. 15 of 2014
(Performance Audit)



= of the

Comptroller and Auditor General of India
on

Implementation of Public Private Partnership project
at

Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport, Mumbai

for the year ended March 2013

Union Government
Ministry of Civil Aviation
No. 15 of 2014
(Performance Audit)



Table of Contents

Contents Page No.
शर्शव८७...............५---"5>०>_बञनञन नल नल नल न न नल नननननन «५ iii
EX@Cutive SUMIMATLY............:.:csccecececeeseseseensscseeesseeeceeeceeceesesseeesacseeenasseereeseeeeee Vv
Chapter 1: (Tah icele [les Ce) | eee ee nee 1
Chapter 2: We TS lek (0) (ol) eee 8
०11 हैं. Project वा5560शाशा# .................sececesseseseesessecescssecceceseccesescseeseacsceareceeeeseseee 10
Chapter 4: 1016८ M+ te 1: reas 21

टावकएांश 5: Revenue

Chapter 6: 10.1 मे

1०111 कै Passenger Service Fee (Security Component)

SIESCLOWIAC COU prssssersssrsssrseatsestererertstateretstsnenterttesrsrsteneterertetetetete sears trerers 53
०1०1० हैं: CONCIUSION ANd RECOMMENAATIONS............ssccssccerseseeesssssseeensssetscssseeseesee! 57
GIOSSATY .........ssscsesecscsesesescsescsescscscscscsesescscsnsnecseseseaeseseseeeeseeeeeeseseeeseseseseeeees 61



PREFACE

This Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India contains the results of the Performance Audit of
Implementation of Public Private Partnership (PPP)
Project by Airports Authority of India (AAI) at
Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport, Mumbai. The
Audit covered the period from 2006 to 2012. The
Reportis based on scrutiny of documents pertaining to
the Ministry of Civil Aviation (MOCA), AAI, Airports
Economic Regulatory Authority of India (AERA),
Operation, Management and Development
Agreement of 2006, Passenger Service Fee (Security
Component) Escrow Account, etc.

The Report has been prepared for submission to the
President of India under Article 151 of the Constitution
and is in continuation of the Report No. 5 of 2012-13
which covered the performance audit of similar PPP
project by AAI at Indira Gandhi International Airport,
Delhi.

Audit wishes to acknowledge the co-operation and
assistance extended by the senior officers and staff
of MOCA, AERA and AAI at all levels during the
Performance Audit.



ecutive Summary

Background

Airports Authority of India (AAI) had been the sole air traffic service provider in
the country. Unprecedented increase in passenger and cargo traffic led to
congestion in airports, particularly airports in metropolitan cities. Governmen
decided to adopt the Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode in modernisation
of existing airports as well as development of new airports.

It was decided with the approval of Cabinet (September 2003) tha
restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai airports would be undertaken through the
JV route by formation of two separate companies between AAI and selected
JV partners. Following competitive bidding, the JV partners for Mumbai airpor
were selected in February 2006. Airports Authority of India (AAI), in the
capacity of the State promoter, signed an Operation, Managemen
Development Agreement (OMDA) with Mumbai International Airport Private
Limited (MIAL), a Joint Venture Company (JVC), for development and
modernisation of Chattrapati Shivaji International (CSI) Airport, Mumbai on 04
April 2006. As per this agreement, AAI handed over CS! Airport, Mumbai to
MIAL on 03 May 2006 on ‘as is where is basis’.

Results of Performance audit of implementation of PPP by AAI in Indira Gandhi
International Airport, Delhi were reported in Audit Report No.5 of 2012-13
which was presented in Parliament in August 2012. The present report
examines the implementation of PPP project at CS| Airport, Mumbai.

ant findings in the implementation of PPP at CSI Airport,

Mumbai

Design constraint to capacity

The two runways in CSI Airport, Mumbai (runways 09/27 and 14/32) intersect
approximately at their mid points because of which simultaneous operation of
both runways is not possible. This places a ‘design constraint’ on the handling
capacity of the runways. In the Initial Development Plan submitted by GVK
led consortium (JV Partner) at the time of bidding, an additional parallel
runway situated south of runway 09/27 was envisaged to increase the runway
capacity of the airport. The proposal for the parallel runway was later shelved
as it involved large scale relocation of facilities and acquisition of privately
owned land rendering such development and its schedule uncertain. With this
constraint, the maximum capacity that can be handled at CS! Airport,
Mumbai is 40 million passengers per annum (mppa). In contrast, the demand

----+-फफफफकफकफका्म र :)


Report No. 15 of 2014 —— |

at the airport is expected to reach 40 mppa by 2015 rising to 80 mppa by
2026. Thus, even after modernisation and up-gradation of CS! Airport,
Mumbai, the airport would be unable to meet the demand of passengers.
The problem is expected to be compounded with the delay in development
of the second airport at Navi Mumbai.
(Para 3.2)

Right of First Refusal

The State Support Agreement (SSA) allows Right of First Refusal (ROFR) to MIAL
for a second airport planned within a 150 km radius of the CSI! Airport,
Mumbai. A competitive bidding process was to be followed in which MIAL
could also participate if it so chose. In the event of being unsuccessful in the
bidding, MIAL would be allowed to match the most competitive bid (if its bid
was within the range of 10 per cent of the most competitive bid) provided
MIAL performed satisfactorily without any material default under any projec
agreement at the time of exercising ROFR. MOCA assured the Public
Accounts Committee (PAC) during the examination of Audit Report No. 5 o
2012-13 that the second airport in Mumbai may not be needed till the traffic
reaches the saturation point of 40 mppa. Adequate safeguards would need
0 be provided and ensured so that interests of competitiveness and
ransparency are not sacrificed especially as the traffic is expected to reach
40 mppa in 2015 itself. This provision should not be allowed to thwar
competition and provide MIAL an advantage on the second airport. MIAL has
incorporated a subsidiary company, M/s. Navi Mumbai Airport Developers
Limited, in 2007.

(Para 3.4)

Concession Period

he proposal for restructuring of Mumbai and Delhi airports seeking adoption
of JV route envisaged an initial concession period of 30 years which could be
extended by another 30 years subject to mutual agreement and negotiation
of terms. However, as per OMDA, MIAL enjoys unilateral right to extend the 30
years’ concession period for another 30 years, provided no default had taken
place during the 20! to 24!h year of the first concession period. Absence of
review clause and re-negotiation before extension of concession period
appears to virtually allow MIAL the right to operate the airport for a period of
60 years with the terms and conditions frozen in OMDA. It is, thus, essential that
a regular and well documented review of performance of MIAL at MOCA is in
place to safeguard the interests of Government and to get MIAL to deliver the
committed outputs.

(Para 3.5)


दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

Status of Mandatory Capital Projects

MIAL had to complete 32 Mandatory Capital Projects (MCPs) by March 2010.
Out of these 32 MCPs, 28 were to be completed by May 2008. One of the
MCPs (S-06) was not completed on time and was delayed by two years. SSA
provided for incentive to MIAL through a 10 per cent increase in airport base
charges provided MCPs were completed by May 2008. MOCA allowed the
incentive to MIAL though MIAL failed to complete the project in time. It needs
to be ensured that incentives such as increase in base airport charges are not
given when inordinate delays take place in completion of projects.

(Para 3.8)

Status of other capital projects

In addition to MCPs, Master Plan 2007 had listed a set of 45 other capital works
which included airside works, terminal works and city side development which
were necessary for overall execution of the project. Actual progress of work
was slow with only three works having been completed in Phase 1 (ending
2010) as against the targeted eight. The Independent Engineer had reported
progress in only thirteen works which indicated considerable scope for
improving the pace of work.

(Para 3.9

Increase in Project Costs estimates

The original transaction documents (OMDA, SSA) did not mention cos
estimate for the project. The initial estimate of the project cost was %5,826
crore (2006). These estimates were revised upward by MIAL progressively in
2008, 2010 and finally in 2011 to 712,380 crore. The project cost approved by
AERA for the period upto March 2014 is %11,647.46 crore. As significan
expenditures have been shifted to future control periods (beyond 2013-14) by
AERA, the project costs are set to increase further.

(Para 4.1

Gap in funding and Development Fee

As per Article 13.1(a) of OMDA, MIAL shall arrange for financing and / or
meeting all financing requirements through suitable debt and equity
contributions in order to comply with its obligations including development of
the Airport pursuant to the Master Plan and the Major Development Plan.
Further, OMDA provided that MIAL may, if its development funding
necessitated, procure the listing of shares of MIAL on the Mumbai and/ or the
National Stock Exchange(s) at any time. As per the initial financing plan, the
project cost of %5,826 crore was to be financed entirely through equity,
internal accruals and debt. As the project cost increased progressively, MIAL
sought and was allowed to levy Development Fee (DF) on passengers to


Report No. 15 of 2014 —— |

cover the funding gap. No efforts were made to secure sources of financing
for the project as envisaged in OMDA. With AERA's approval to levy of DF o
%3,400 crore in December 2012, DF accounted for 29.19 per cent of projec
funding while the equity stake of the private partners of MIAL at %888 crore
contributed a mere 7.6 per cent. The debt of MIAL had also not altered even
as the project cost nearly doubled thus indicating that the finance risk for the
project had not been appropriately transferred to the JV partner.

(Paras 4.3 and 4.4

Conflicts between OMDA and AERA Act in defining aeronautical
and non-aeronautical services

There were inconsistencies between provisions of OMDA and State Suppor
Agreement (SSA) signed for CSI Airport, Mumbai and the Airports Economic
Regulatory Authority (AERA) Act, 2008. These would have long term
repercussions on the regulator's role in tariff fixation for CSI Airport, Mumbai.
The definition of aeronautical and non-aeronautical services differs
substantially between OMDA and AERA Act. Ground handling and cargo
handling services have been designated as non-aeronautical services in
OMDA but are defined as aeronautical services under the AERA Act. The
‘Target Revenue’ for fixing airport charges takes into account only 30 per cent
of the revenue generated from non-aeronautical services. Thus, tariff payable
by the passengers will be cross subsidised only to the extent of 30 per cent by
revenues generated from cargo and ground handling services in case of CSI
Airport, Mumbai. As cargo and ground handling services constitute a major
source of revenue for the airport, this provided undue financial advantage to
MIAL at the expense of higher tariff imposed on the passengers. MOCA may
need to critically assess the financial impact of concessions granted by the
Government under OMDA and revenue ensured by the Government from
MIAL after ground handling and cargo services were categorised as
aeronautical services as recommended by PAC in its Report on
Implementation of PPP-IGI Airport, Delhi.

(Para 5.2)

Outsourcing domestic and international cargo activities

Cargo revenue comprises mainly domestic and international cargo
operations. MIAL had planned to outsource its cargo activities by September,
2012 and had estimated that the cargo revenue would, as a result, register a
fall of 40 per cent from the 2011-12 actuals in a span of two years (viz. 2012-13
and 2013-14) on account of the outsourcing. As the cargo revenue subsidises
tariff (30 per cent of cargo revenue is taken into account working out airport
charges), a fall in cargo revenues would lead to higher tariff and burden on
the passengers. Besides, the revenue share of AAI will also reduce
substantially with significant reduction estimated in cargo revenues.

(Para 5.4)



दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

Award of concession for operation of Hotel near Terminal 1C to a
Group Entity consortium

As per Article 8.3.7 of OMDA, all developments at the airport shall be as per
the existing Master Plan and no development that is not envisaged in the
Master Plan would be allowed to be undertaken. MIAL took up construction
of a hotel near Terminal 1C in June 2009 though it was not included in the
Master Plans in violation of the terms as above in OMDA. MIAL informed
(February 2010) AAI that it had carried out competitive bidding for operation
of a hotel in Terminal 1C and a Consortium of M/s. TAJ GVK Hotels & Resorts
and Greenridge Hotels & Resorts had emerged successful. The successful
bidder and MIAL were to have a revenue sharing arrangement of 4.65 per
cent of the gross revenue with a minimum guarantee clause which was
agreed to by AAI, though the arrangement would have significant adverse
impact on the revenue share of AAI. AAI will receive only 1.79 per cent of the
gross revenue earnings in the hotel project (38.7 per cent of the 4.65 per cent
revenue share due to MIAL from the hotel concession). As the hotel
concession has been awarded to a group entity of MIAL, the upside in
revenue may benefit the GVK group even as it is not shared with AAI.

(Para 5.5)

Delay in receipt of Retirement Compensation

As per OMDA, MIAL was liable to pay Retirement Compensation to AAI for
unabsorbed number of general employees. As per Article 1.1 of OMDA,
Retirement Compensation was to be based on AAI's latest available
Voluntary Retirement Scheme. AAI allowed MIAL to pay Retirement
Compensation as monthly instalments over ten years in violation of specific
directives from MOCA which stipulated that MIAL should pay the balance
amount immediately. This resulted in undue favour to MIAL and consequent
loss of interest (% 71.37 crore) to AAl. MOCA's attention is drawn to the
recommendation of PAC on a similar issue in Audit Report No. 5 of 2012-13
relating to the implementation of PPP arrangements in Indira Gandhi
International Airport, Delhi where PAC have concluded that MOCA had erred
in safeguarding the interests of employees of AAI and failed to enforce its
directives while also recommending that MOCA enforce contractual
obligations as per OMDA.

(Para 5.7)


Report No. 15 of 2014 —— |

Survey of airport land and maintenance of land records

Neither OMDA nor the lease deed signed between AAI and MIAL
demarcated and defined the specific details of leased land. Both documents
were to have a map of the ‘demised premises’ which was left blank. AA! did
not have up-to-date land records. As such, the area of CSI Airport, Mumbai
stated to be 1875 acres in the Request for Proposals increased to 2006 acres
on actual survey by MIAL. The very significant difference in areas quoted by
AAI and MIAL raises questions on the quality of land records and documents
maintained by AAI. MOCA’s attention is drawn to the recommendation of
PAC on a similar issue in Audit Report no. 5 of 2012-13 relating to the
implementation of PPP arrangements in Indira Gandhi International Airport,
Delhi that necessary survey of the land be undertaken and physical markings
erected to identify the demised land and carved out assets for future and
PAC apprised within six months.

(Para 6.1)

Carved out land transferred to MIAL on the basis of meagre
upfront fee

‘Carved out assets’ were primarily intended for the use of AAI as per OMDA
and could be transferred to MIAL, if required, for aeronautical purposes with
the condition that the parties (AAl and MIAL) should negotiate the terms and
conditions of such transfer. AAl agreed to transfer 48.15 acres out of carved
out assets to MIAL against a meagre consideration based on upfront fee paid
by MIAL without negotiation of terms and conditions as provided in OMDA.
MOCA maintained that upfront fee paid had no relation to the extent of land
and assets at airport, which, however, was the basis for transfer of part of
carved out assets to MIAL.

(Para 6.2)

Commercial exploitation of 190.1 acres

Article 2.2.4 of OMDA allows MIAL to utilise ten per cent of the demised
premises for provision of non-transfer assets. This is essentially the land
available to MIAL for commercial exploitation. Initially (as per RFP and OMDA),
the land area available for commercial utilisation was 179.8 acres. With the
execution of Supplementary Lease Deed in December 2011, the potential
non transfer asset land rose to 190.1 acres and transfer of carved out land
resulted in further increasing the eligibility of MIAL for commercial exploitation
to 196.67 acres. Though revenues from non-transfer assets would not form a
part of the ‘Target Revenue’ used for determining aeronautical charges in
terms of SSA, the same would be a revenue enhancing activity having the
potential for reduction of burden in the form of various levies on passengers.

-----जफफफफऊक3च्तर *)


दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

MOCA/AAI need to carefully work out the economics of commercial
exploitation of land.
(Para 6.3)

Encroachment

There were no firm estimates of the area under encroachment which kept on
increasing over time from 147 acres to 308.96 acres highlighting serious
deficiencies in land records management. MIAL executed a contract with
M/s. Housing Development and Infrastructure Limited (HDIL) to undertake
activities relating to rehabilitation of encroachers and restoration of the
Airport land under encroachment in lieu of the right to develop part of the
land vacated by encroachers. The encroachment was to be removed within
48 months of commencement date i.e. by October 2011 or with further six
months extension at MIAL’s discretion. The contract was subsequently
terminated by MIAL as the encroachment was not removed.

(Paras 6.7 and 6.8)

Unauthorised expenditure

SSA stipulated that airlines shall collect Passenger Service Fee (PSF) and
distribute the Security Component (SC) to AAI and the Facilitation
Component (FC) to MIAL directly. MIAL can revise FC under the provisions of
SSA while SC can be revised on the direction of Government. MOCA issued
instructions from time to time which mandated that the Airport
operators, (instead of AAI) would collect and utilise the SC component of PSF
for specified purposes. MIAL unilaterally procured computers, furniture, and
fixtures designating them essential to maintenance of security. This resulted in
an unwarranted favour amounting to %87.97 crore extended to MIAL during
2006-12.

(Paras 7 and 7.1)


1.1 Growth of Aviation Sector

Airports Authority of India (AAI) has been the sole air traffic service provider
for the air space in the country covering an area of 2.8 million square
nautical miles of land mass and the adjoining oceanic area as recognised by
International Civil Aviation Organisation. With the opening of Indian airspace
to private as well as international operators, air traffic in the country
registered a phenomenal growth. The existing airport infrastructure proved to
be inadequate to cope with the unprecedented increase in passenger and
cargo traffic. It led to congestion at many airports and in particular in
metropolitan cities. The country required new airports as also expansion and
modernisation of existing ones to efficiently handle passengers, cargo and
aircrafts. The Ministry of Civil Aviation (MOCA), in a Conference of Chief
Secretaries held on 20 May 2006 projected a requirement of an additional
%40,454 crore to augment and modernise existing infrastructure and to
construct Greenfield airports. The revenue surplus generated by AAI was
found to be grossly inadequate (%812 crore in 2005-06) to meet this
requirement and it was decided to adopt the Public Private Partnership (PPP)
mode of development.

1.2 Background of the decision of Joint Venture

The Cabinet while approving the restructuring of airports of AAI in January
2000 through long term lease route directed that detailed plans be prepared
for development and that each such case for lease should be separately
brought up for consideration of the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
(CCEA).

Action was accordingly initiated by MOCA to restructure and upgrade Delhi,
Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata airports through the long term leasing route.
Financial and Legal consultants were appointed and work regarding ‘due
diligence’ as well as desirable transaction structure was initiated. During this
exercise, MOCA felt that the Joint Venture (JV) route had certain
advantages over long term leasing route. The matter was again put up for
consideration of the Cabinet in December 2002 seeking approval to the
proposal of restructuring of Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata airports
through Joint Venture (JV) route by formation of separate Joint Venture
Company for each of these airports with the respective selected bidder, in
which AAI would have five per cent equity. The Cabinet directed MOCA to
discuss the proposal further with Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Company
Affairs and return to the Cabinet. In July 2003, the Ministry of Finance opined
that the proposal should be restricted to Delhi and Mumbai only. Finally in

न्ि3+े?


Report No. 15 of 2014 — |

September 2003, the Cabinet approved the proposal of MOCA that
restructuring of Delhi and Mumbai airports may be undertaken through JV
route by formation of two separate companies between AAI and selected
JV partners. The Cabinet also approved constitution of an Empowered
Group of Ministers (EGOM) comprising Minister of Finance, Minister of Law
and Justice, Minister of Disinvestment and Minister of State (Independent
Charge) of Civil Aviation to decide on the detailed modalities including the
design parameters, bid evaluation criteria etc. based on which the Joint
Venture partner was to be selected. Subsequent to the formation of the new
Government, the Government reconstituted (15 June 2004) the EGOM under
he Chairmanship of Defence Minister to take the transaction forward.

In February 2005, EGOM approved the key principles of Request for Proposal
RFP) document along with the draft transaction documents i.e. Operation,
Management and Development Agreement (OMDA), State Support
Agreement (SSA), Shareholders Agreement (SHA), Lease Deed Agreement,
Communication, Navigation and Surveillance/ Air Traffic Management (CNS/
ATM) Agreement and State Government Support Agreement (SGSA).
hereafter, AAI initiated the process of selecting Joint Venture partners for
executing the modernisation project at both the airports and undertook
competitive bidding. The EGOM after evaluation of the technical and
inancial bids recommended (31 January 2006) the Joint Venture partners.
he EGOM's recommendation was approved by the Cabinet on 1 February
2006.

Implementation of PPP in Indira Gandhi International Airport (IGIA), Delhi was
examined and a report was placed in Parliament in Audit Report No. 5 of
2012-13 in August 2012. The report was examined by Public Accounts
Committee (PAC) of Parliament and the final report of PAC was presented in
Parliament on 06 February 2014.

The present report on the implementation of PPP at Chhatrapati Shivaji
International (CSI) Airport, Mumbai, has been prepared taking into
account the findings in Audit Report No.5 of 2012-13 and the
recommendations of PAC thereon, mentioned above, in so far as they are
relevant and applicable.

1.3 Formation of Mumbai International Airport Private Limited
(MIAL)

M/s. GVK Consortium was selected as the JV partner for CS! Airport, Mumbai.
The Consortium comprised three private entities:

GVK Industries Limited;
Airports Company South Africa Limited; and
Bidvest Group Limited.

——————————|»


दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

On 02 March 2006, AAI incorporated a subsidiary Joint Venture Company
JVC) named Mumbai International Airport Private Limited (MIAL). Following
signing of the Operation, Management and Development Agreement
OMDA) and Shareholders Agreement (SHA) on 04 April 2006 between AAI
and the JV partners, AAI transferred 74 per cent of the equity shares in MIAL
0 JV partners in accordance with SHA. CSI Airport, Mumbai was handed
over to MIAL with effect from 03 May 2006.

IN terms of SHA, the issued share capital of MIAL was %200 crore which was
jointly held by AAI (26 per cent}, GVK Airport Holdings Private Limited (37 per
cent), Bid Services Division (Mauritius) Limited (27 per cent) and ACSA Global
Limited (10 per cent). Subsequently on 18 October 2011, 1,08,00,000 shares
out of 5,40,00,000 shares) of Bid Services Division (Mauritius) Limited were
acquired by GVK Airport Holdings Private Limited raising its stake in MIAL to
over 50 per cent. The paid up equity capital of MIAL as on 16 April 2012 was
%1,200 crore held by AAI (26 per cent), GVK Airport Holdings Private Limited
50.5 per cent), Bid Services Division (Mauritius) Limited (13.5 per cent) and
ACSA Global Limited (10 per cent).

1.4 Descriptions of the Transaction documents

Consequent upon the decision to hand over CS! Airport, Mumbai to MIAL
and before physically handing over the airport to the latter, a number of
agreements were signed among the concerned parties. These documents
individually and collectively determined the terms and conditions of the
handing over including economic benefits accruing to the parties. When
hese agreements were signed, the regulator, namely Airports Economic
Regulatory Authority (AERA) was not in existence. These documents contain
provisions relating to areas like tariff fixation for aeronautical services, which
later, with the establishment of AERA came under the regulator's domain of
decision making.

है1.4.1 Operation, Management and Development Agreement (OMDA)

ogether with the State Support Agreement (SSA), OMDA is the most
important document and forms the soul of PPP in CSI Airport, Mumbai.
Signed between AAI and MIAL, OMDA lays down obligations and
responsibilities of both the parties, the terms of revenue sharing, duration of
he concession, conditions of asset transfers (present and in future), terms and
conditions of land transfers, ete. OMDA was signed on 04 April 2006.

[11.4.2 State SupportAgreement (SSA)

Complementary to the OMDA, the State Support Agreement (SSA) was
signed between Government of India (Gol) represented by MOCA and MIAL
on 26 April 2006. It lays down the responsibilities and obligations of MOCA

|»


Report No. 15 of 2014 — |

and MIAL in their respective domain and to each other. It lays down in
Schedule 1, the principles of tariff fixation for aeronautical services.

[L1.4.3 State Government Support Agreement (SGSA)

State Government Support Agreement (SGSA) was signed on 27 April 2006
between the Government of Maharashtra and MIAL to provide support
services to the project. The agreement provided that the State Government
would provide support to MIAL in matters relating to removal of
encroachment, procurement of additional land for development of airport,
removal of obstruction outside the airport boundary to ensure safe and
efficient air traffic movement, improve the surface area access to the airport
and to provide alll utilities on payment basis to MIAL.

[4.4 leaseDeedAgreement  ———eeseseses—‘“‘“‘“‘i; 1.4.4 Lease Deed Agreement

The Lease Deed agreement was signed on 26 April 2006 between AAI and
MIAL to lease the demised premises on “as is where is basis” on an annual
lease rent of %100 initially for a period of 30 years extendable for another 30
years by virtue of extension of concession period. The demised premises
include all buildings, construction or immovable assets, if any on the premises
as described in the agreement with the liberty to MIAL to construct, erect,
renovate, alter or otherwise deal with the leased premises.

[5 corrector ce zenon and Surveliance (CNS) / Al Traffic Communication, Navigation and Surveillance (CNS) / Air Traffic
Management (ATM) Agreement

The agreement was signed on 26 April 2006 between AAI and MIAL
according to which the former was to provide air traffic services support at
the airport as AAI was authorised to provide necessary air traffic services
within the country's air-space and at all civil airports.

है1.4.6 Shareholders’ Agreement(SHA)

Signed on 04 April 2006 by AAI and MIAL and other participants, SHA records
the terms and conditions to govern the relationships in their mutual capacity
as shareholders of JVC.

[1.4.7 AirportOperator Agreement eeeeseseseses—‘“‘“‘its 1.4.7 Airport Operator Agreement

As per Schedule 8 of OMDA, MIAL is required to enter into an Airport Operator
Agreement with the Airport Operator (AO) who is a member of the
consortium (nominated if more than one AO are in the consortium). The
Agreement sets out the role, responsibilities, accountabilities and financial
arrangements between the AO and MIAL. Accordingly, an Agreement was
signed on 28 April 2006 between MIAL and ACSA Global Ltd. (Airport
Operator) to provide airport services.

नये?



दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

1.5 Financial and Operational Performance of MIAL

AAI handed over CS/ Airport, Mumbai to MIAL on 3 May 2006. MIAL continued
the mandatory capital projects initiated by AAI and started other capita
projects. Project cost increased from %5,826 crore as projected in 2006 to
211,647.46 crore in 2012 (as allowed by AERA). International terminal was
inaugurated on 10 January 2014. Domestic terminal is understood to be
poised to commence operations from August 2014. During the financial year
2012-13, MIAL earned 21478.58 crore, of which 38.7 per cent was to be shared
with AAI (%571.94 crore). MIAL, however, shared only *566.95 crore after
adjusting the bad debts of M/s. Kingfisher airlines.

The performance of MIAL from May 2006 to March 2013 is given below:

Ila) Projected Revenue as per original Business Plan and Actual Revenue __ Projected Revenue as per original Business Plan and Actual Revenue

The actual revenue earnings
were higher than the revenue
projections for the period
2006-07 to 2008-09 but from
2009-10 onwards the actual
revenues, though on an
increasing trend over previous
years, were lower than
projections.

[[b) Passenger movements at CS! Airport, Mumbai

Passenger traffic movement
has been consistently higher
than projections for all the
years from 2006-07 to 2011-
12. However, actual
passenger traffic decreased
in 2012-13.



Report No. 15 of 2014

[[c) Cargo movements at CSI Airport, Mumbai 6) Cargo movements at CSI Airport, Mumbai

The cargo carriage has
also been higher than
the projections for the
period 2006-07 to 2011-
12. However, actual
cargo carriage showed
slight declining trend
from 2010-11.

[Ld) Aircraft Traffic movements at CSI Airport Mumbai

Air traffic movements too
increased consistently
over the period covered
in audit (2006-12) with a
marginal decrease in
2008-09 and 2012-13.


दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

The Performance Audit of “Implementation of Public Private Partnership at
Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi’ had been conducted earlier and
the findings of the audit have been reported in CAG's Report No.5 of 2012-13
for Union Government, Ministry of Civil Aviation. The methodology and
procedure of re-development of Chhatrapati Shivaji International (CSI) Airport,
Mumbai were identical. The present report is a continuation of performance
audit efforts in respect of PPP arrangements in Indira Gandhi International
Airport, Delhi. This report also takes into account the recommendations of
PAC on the Audit Report No.5 of 2012-13 mentioned above, that are
contained in their final report presented to Parliament on 06 February 2014

MOCA has, infer alia, pointed out (November 2013) that the decision to
restructure and modernise Mumbai Airport was a policy decision of the
highest body i.e. Cabinet. The terms and conditions as well as the modalities
of modernisation/restructuring as mentioned in the transaction documents
were finalised and approved by EGOM and that there has been no change in
the finalised transaction documents. Several issues such as JV route, leasing
of land /assets, Concession Period, Right of First Refusal (ROFR) etc. were
policy decisions of the Cabinet based on expert inputs in formulation and
inter-ministerial consultation. Hence, these policy decisions should not be
brought into question at this stage through audit observations.

Audit acknowledges the prerogative of Government to adopt the JV route in
modernisation of Mumbai Airport and decide the terms of engagement. Audit
exercise is to review implementation of the agreements to assess whether
the interests of Government have been adequately protected and whether
the arrangement ensured maximum value to Government.



Audit Methodology

2.1 Audit Objectives

The performance audit was conducted with the following objectives:

e To assess whether the interests of Government (through MOCA and AAI)
have been adequately protected by the Public-Private Partnership (PPP)
arrangements entered with the private operator and whether the risks and
returns of the private operator were as envisaged in the arrangement;

e To study the actual operation of the PPP arrangements in CS! Airport,
Mumbai in the elapsed period (2006-12) and assess its impact on
Government (and its nominee AAI) and other stakeholders.

2.2 Audit criteria

The Performance Audit was carried out with reference to:

e The terms and conditions laid down in OMDA and the supporting
agreements relating to concession period, levy of Development Fee, tariff
determination, leasing of land, Master Plan, project cost etc.;

e¢ Guidelines/directions issued by MOCA, Airports Economic Regulatory
Authority (AERA) and AAI, the Agenda papers and Minutes of AAI Board
Meetings.

2.3 Scope of Audit and Methodology

Audit was conducted on the basis of documents available with AAI and
MOCA, records maintained at AAI's Airport Infrastructure Restructuring
Department, New Delhi, JV Co-ordination Cell, Mumbai, Independent
Engineer's Reports, Independent Auditor's Reports, Monthly Information
System returns, records and information maintained by AAI for calculation of
revenue share of AAI, and information/ data provided by MIAL through AAI.
Audit covered the period 2006 to 2012. Audit methodology and objectives
were discussed in the Entry Conference with the Member (Planning) AAI
(Headquarters), Regional Executive Director-Western Region AAI, and MIAL
representatives/ officials on 10 September 2012. A separate entry meeting
was also held with the Joint Secretary, MOCA on 15 January 2013. The draft
Audit Report was issued to AAI on 30 May 2013 and reply of AAI was received
on 30 July 2013. Reply of AAI was incorporated and draft report issued to
MOCA on 2 August 2013. Reply of MOCA was received on 18 November
2013. Audit findings were discussed during the Exit Conference on 18

१०)



दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

December 2013 in which Secretary, MOCA and other senior officers of
MOCA, AAI and MIAL were present.

2.4 Acknowledgement

Audit acknowledges the co-operation and assistance extended by the senior
officers and staff of MOCA, AERA, AAI at all levels during the Performance
Audit.


Chapter 3 | Project Management

3.1 CSI Airport -Mumbai

CSI Airport, Mumbai has two
intersecting operationa
runways designated 09/27 and
14/32 (No.'s 1 and 2 in picture.
which intersect at
approximately their mid points.
CSI Airport, Mumbai had
essentially been operated as a
‘Single Runway’ airport with
most operations handled
throughout the year on runway
09/27 with runway 27 end
being duty runway for 85 per
cent of the year due to

prevailing wind direction. Cross
runway operations were introduced at CSI Airport, Mumbai with effect from
01 January 2006 on trial basis and regularised from 27 March 2006. On
account of their cross design, simultaneous operation of both runways,
however, is not possible. This, in turn, places a design constraint on the
handling capacity of runways.

३.2 Design constraint to capacity

In the Initial Development Plan submitted by the GVK led consortium (JV
partner) at the time of bidding, an additional parallel runway (situated south
of runway 09/27) was envisaged to increase the runway capacity of the
airport. However, this involved large scale relocation of facilities and
acquisition of privately owned land which rendered such development and
its schedule uncertain. As a result, the Master Plan submitted by MIAL (03
October 2006) shelved the proposal for the additional parallel runway. Thus
the design constraint of the cross runway configuration in CSI Airport, Mumbai
remained, restricting the overall traffic handling capacity of the airport.

Given this constraint, MIAL estimated (Master Plan 2006) that the maximum
passenger traffic that could be handled at the airport was 40 million
passengers per annum (mppa). The demand forecast (based on Air Traffic
Forecasts Reports of M/s. NACO) for passenger travel through Mumbai was,
however, expected to reach close to 40 mppa by 2015 and exceed 80
mppa by 2026. Thus, even after modernisation and up-gradation, the airport



दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

would not be able to meet the growth of demand. This gap between
demand and capacity was expected to be visible from 2014 onwards as
indicated in the chart below.

runway

configuration
=
2
30 — Actual passenger
travelled
s 20
&
ढ़ 10
a 5 — Max. Passenger
& a handling capacity in
2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026 constrained
Year conditions

Source: MIAL's Master Plan 2006, actual passenger travelled as per traffic data in the Multi
Year Tariff Proposal submitted (October 2011) by MIAL fo AERA

AAI agreed (July 2013) that due to various constraints in developing new
acilities/ area, there is a limit to increasing passenger handling capacity of
he Airport.

While stating that the parallel runway option was cost-prohibitive and time
constrained, MOCA replied (November 2013) that after the initiatives taken
by MIAL, airside capacity had improved and it was expected that the
present airport could serve the capacity to some extent beyond 40 mppa.
Further, MOCA also stated that the Navi Mumbai airport and Juhu airport
which were at the planning stage, would address the congestion at CSI
Airport, Mumbai.

The response needs to be considered in light of the Master Plan 2011
prepared by MIAL which stated that even after significant improvement of
infrastructure in CSI Airport, Mumbai, the current airport site cannot match
the traffic volume forecast for the region, given the constraint of runway
capacity. In fact, the improved runway system using high intensity runway
operations would be approximately 3 lakh air traffic movements per year
which would translate into a traffic handling capacity of 40 mppa for the
airport. Besides, both the Navi Mumbai airport and Juhu airport are presently
at planning stage even as the traffic at CSI Airport, Mumbai is expected to
reach its maximum capacity of 40 mppa by 2015.

co ——“~


Report No. 15 of 2014 — |

३.३ Delayed second Airport at Navi Mumbai

In view of the limitation in
traffic handling capacity of
CSI Airport, Mumbai, a
second airport was
intended to be developed
at Navi Mumbai. The
Greenfield airport project
was proposed to be
developed in the Public- =
Private Partnership (PPP) ©
mode by setting up a
Special Purpose Company
(SPC) with equity Picture 2: Site for International Airport Navi Mumbai
participation from City and

Industrial Development Corporation of Maharashtra Limited (CIDCO), AAI,
Financial Institutions and an experienced private entrepreneur of repute as
equity holders. The SPC would plan, design, obtain development approvals,
arrange required resources, build and operate the airport, and finally transfer
the assets back after the concession period. The SPC would be entitled to
special benefits and incentives which were currently available to
infrastructure development projects.

The proposal for Navi Mumbai International Airport (NMIA) was mooted in
November 1997. Ten years later in July 2007, MOCA obtained an ‘in principle’
approval from the Cabinet for setting up the second airport. CIDCO was
appointed as the nodal agency for implementation in July 2008. Though the
Detailed Project Report and Business Plan for the project had been prepared
(February 2007), the project was yet (July 2013) to take off. NMIA was to be
developed in phases with the first phase intended to be put into operation by
2015 with a traffic handling capacity of 10 mppa. However, in view of its
present status, meeting this milestone seems unlikely. Considering that CSI
Airport, Mumbai is expected to reach saturation by 2015, this would imply
increased congestion at the airport in near future.

MOCA replied (November 2013) that the delay in construction of NMIA was
due to time taken for acquisition of required land and rehabilitation of 5000
people by the State Government.

३.4 Right of First Refusal for NMIA

The State Support Agreement for development of CSI Airport, Mumbai allows
the Right of First Refusal (ROFR) to MIAL for a second airport planned within a
150 km. radius of the former. For the ROFR to apply, MIAL has to participate in
the bidding process for the new airport. In the event of MIAL being

—————————»


EEE

unsuccessfu
competitive

Report No. 15 of 2014

in the bidding with its bid within a 10 per cent range of the most
bid, it would be allowed to match the first ranked bid

or the

second airport, provided that MIAL has performed satisfactorily without any

material defaul

under any project agreement at the time of exercising the

ROFR. This condition would be applicable for the first 30 years. Allowing such

ROFR in relation

Developers Limited, in 2007.

MOCA replied
6 mitigate the

he competing
does not thwar
performance ti

concessionaire in CS! Airpor
as against 29.19 per cent

unconditional extension of

NMIA. Thus, the ROFR condi
potential to restrict compe
second airport.

MOCA submitted before PAC wi
arrangement of ROFR in SSA relating to
Delhi with the concerned JVC, namely,
Limited (DIAL) mentioned in Audit Repor
had been provided to ensure transp
need to ensured in the case of MIAL

he concern of MOCA regarding significan
needs to be viewed vis-a-vis the actual equity capital

development fees (as elaborated at para 4.4
by MIAL is further mitigated by what would
erm upto 60 years
as discussed in a subsequent paragraph. Besid
report on Indira Gandhi International Airport, Del
under the regime of AERA and would not have the benefit of dual or hybrid
ill system which may further affect tl
ion limits
ition and

MIAL with an advantage on the second airport.
MIAL has incorporated a subsidiary company, M/s. Navi Mumbai Airport

of the inves

to second airport is likely to thwart competition and provide

It is pertinent to note that

November 2013) that ROFR was considered as an imperative
significant risks to which MIAL making subs
in CSI Airport, Mumbai, would be exposed in the event of
airport in close vicinity. MOCA also asserted that the provision
competition as the existing M
the time of the bid was satisfactory and in the event of the
bid being within 10 per cent of the highest bid offered

antial investments
traffic diversion to
AL ge

5 a chance only if their

for the second airport.

investments made by MIAL

invested by the

, Mumbai which amounts to a mere 7.6 per cent

ment
of the

being funded out of
report). The risk carried
appear to be rather an
that has been allowed in SSA

h_ regard

No.

00.

he competi
he risk to MIAL further, even as it has the
provides an advantage to MIAL on the

es, as PAC has remarked in its
hi, the new airport would be

iveness of a new bidder for

o similar provision in the

ndira Gandhi International Airport,
Delhi

nternational Airport Private
5 of 2012-13, that safeguards

arency and competitiveness. This would

MOCA also assured the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) that the second
airport in Mumbai may not be needed till the

point of 40 mppa. Adequate safeguards

traffic reaches the saturation

would need to be provided and

ensured so that interests of competitiveness and transparency are not

sacrificed especially as the traffic is expec

—————»

ed to reach 40 mppa in 2015 itself.


Report No. 15 of 2014 — |

3.5 Concession Period

Article 18.1(b) of OMDA gives MIAL the unilateral right to extend the
concession period for another 30 years ‘on the same terms and conditions’,
provided no event of default had taken place during the 20" to 24th year of
the first concession period. Absence of review clause, thus, virtually allows
MIAL the right to extend the term for another 30 years and the right to
operate the airport for a period of 60 years with the terms and conditions
frozen in OMDA.

MOCA stated (November 2013) that a financial consultant was appointed
and as per their advice, a period of 30 years was considered reasonable for
the investors to recoup their investment. MOCA confirmed that the Cabine
was informed (vide note dated 09 September 2003) that the lease period ०!
30 years could be extended by another 30 years subject to mutual
agreement and negotiation of terms. MOCA also stressed that the Inter
Ministerial Group (IMG) and EGOM which finalised the detailed terms of the
agreement had also intended the renewal of term to be subject to
satisfactory performance of the JV in the first term. MOCA stated in the Exi
Conference that non-inclusion of provision regarding extension of concession
period for 30 years beyond the initial term of 30 years subject to mutual
agreement and negotiation of terms was a conscious decision and it was no
intended to include such provisions in future too.

PAC in their report presented to Parliament on 06 February 2014 on the
Performance Audit of Implementation of PPP in Indira Gandhi Internationa
Airport, Delhi contained in Audit Report No. 5 of 2012-13, have, inter alia, on
the same issue, desired to be apprised how the Joint Venture (in Delhi airport
would pave the way for future airport development and modernisation in the
country. MOCA would need to devise an appropriate strategy to effectively
comply with the concern expressed in the above recommendation of PAC,
especially in view of the benefit conferred upon the Airport Operator (MIAL
which would translate into almost an automatic extension of the initial
concession period to another 30 years, without renegotiation of terms. A
regular and well documented review of the performance of MIAL by MOCA
would not only safeguard the interests of Government but also get MIAL to
deliver the committed outputs.



दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

3.6 Changes in Master Plans for CSI Airport, Mumbai

As per OMDA (Articles 8.3.5 and 8.4.2) for development of CSI! Airport,
Mumbai, Master Plan and Major Development Plan were to be submitted to
AAI for its information and MOCA for its review and comments before the
expiry of six months from the date of execution of OMDA. Specific schedule
for MOCA's suggestions and MIAL's action thereupon leading to firming up o
the plans is laid out in the SSA (Clauses 3.5.2, 3.5.3 and 3.5.4). Final Master
Plan would be binding on MIAL and would govern the operations,
management and development of the Airport. AERA would also accept this
Master Plan and Major Development Plan as the final document for tarif
fixation purposes (SSA Schedule 1).

MIAL submitted the initial Master Plan and Major Development Plan to AA
and MOCA on 03 October 2006. The Global Technical Advisor (GTA
appointed by AAI for implementing the restructuring of metro airports was to
offer comments on the plans of MIAL as per their terms of appointment.
However, GTA did not carry out this function. AAI has withheld 25 per cent o
GTA's fees, because of non-completion of technical review of Master Plans
by GTA. In the absence of GTA’s opinion, AAI! offered a set of interim
comments which were forwarded by MOCA to MIAL within the stipulated
period of 30 days. MIAL, however, submitted the revised Master Plan and
Major Development Plan late {in 2007), after seven and thirteen months
respectively as against the time limit of 15 days specified in SSA. There was no
evidence of any action being taken by MOCA against delay by MIAL from
he records made available to Audit. Subsequently in March 2011, MIAL
submitted a modified Master Plan. Details of project are in Table 1 in para 4.1.

hus, the Master Plan for the project remained flexible for over five years
October 2006 to March 2011). MOCA accepted changes in Master Plans
and did not comment about the delay in submission of the same. In the
Master Plan 2011, the constituent projects were restructured and re-
scheduled---a major change in completion schedule for the terminal building
from 2010 in the Master Plan of 2007 to 2013 (international) and 2014
domestic). The delay also added to the project cost.

AAI stated (July 2013) that OMDA did not contain any specific provision for
approval of Master Plan as well as its monitoring by AAI. MOCA added
November 2013) that depending upon the changed circumstances and
change in scope of work, the Master Plan was revised.

he reply needs to be viewed against the fact that the procedure for
finalisation of Master Plan including its schedule was laid down in OMDA and
SSA. That a final Master Plan was to be in place within a specific time period
which would be binding on MIAL, pointed to monitoring mechanism in
AAI/MOCA for arriving at applicable Master Plan in accordance with the
agreements and its timely implementation. The obligation of MIAL to develop

|»


Report No. 15 of 2014

the airport as per applicable Master

———

Plan prepared in accordance with the

time limits set out in the agreements stood diluted as the Master Plan was

delayed. Article 8.3.8 of OMDA also

mandated an ‘approved’ Master Plan

which implied the need for firming up of Master Plan with target dates for

individual facilities. The fact that ni
despite inordinate delays on the part
in SSA highlights deficiency in monitori

0 action had been taken by AAI/ MOCA

of MIAL beyond the schedule specified
ng.

३.7 Change in scope of work

nitial Master Plan of MIA
proposed a terminal build

L for CS
ing for al

in

For this, the existing international
reconstructed. MOCA (on t
user terminal for all pa
Accordingly, MIAL submit
passenger handling facili
erminal was reiterated in 1
Master Plan of March 20
Plan of May 2007 in re-loca
block, MET farm, cargo
certain land pockets
ownership.

ISSENGETIS,

becoming

Airport, Mumbai

domestic passengers at Sahar which was intended to
erminal was
he advice of AAI), sugge

03 October 2006) had
passengers and 60 per cent
be completed by 2010.
refurbished and partly
sted having a common
i¢ and_ international.

ternational

Oo be

both domes

ed a revised Master Plan in May 2007 centralizing
ties at Sahar. The same plan for a common user
he subsequent Mas
1 incorporated some chan
ion of some of the
erminal), as well as changes necessitated due to

jan of March 2011. The
ges vis-a-vis the Master
ies (e.g., ATC technical

er Pl

facili

un-available (e.g., land under P&T

and operational requirements. There was delay in implementation

of the individual projects which led to their re-scheduling in the Master Plan

2011 whic
report.

The change in scope of work for cons
on the advice of AAl and MOCA led
delay in project execution. Audit was

h has been separately commented at paras 3.8 and 3.9 of the

ruction of a ‘one roof’ terminal building
to increase in costs and contributed to
not provided dis aggregated details of

cost for examination. However, this did not alter the capacity constraint of

the airport as capacity remained a
scope thus remains uncertain even
over-run on this account.

40 mppa. Net benefit of the altered
as the project suffered cost and time

AAI stated (July 2013) that after reviewing the Master Plan submitted by MIAL,

MOCA/AAI considered developmen

of an ‘ultimate’ terminal under one-

roof at Sahar. AAI further stated that MIAL considered various advantages of

a common terminal such as:

a) It would provide far grea

er passenger convenience and a

significantly more operationally efficient cum flexible design as
compared to split operations in Sahar and Santacruz;

b)

Existing terminals were not harmonious and efficient.


दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

c) Feasibility study of existing terminals revealed that existing piles
required substantial structural modifications.

MOCA stated that though the ultimate capacity of the existing airport would
remain around 40 mppa, a second airport was in any case planned on its
saturation. MOCA also asserted that the change in scope advised was within
the OMDA framework.

AAI/MOCA's contention that the integrated design provided for greater
passenger convenience and efficiency needs to be viewed vis-a-vis the
present plan of retaining both the domestic terminals, 1.6. T 1A and T 1C
which is a departure from the integrated terminal plan. Further, investigations
by the consultant, appointed by MIAL at the time of preparation of the
Master plan, had revealed that the technical condition of the existing
terminal was sound and the structure could be adapted to the latest building
regulations to allow for large voids and addition of a new structure to create
a much better passenger experience and world class structure. This would
indicate that modifications to the existing structure had been found to be
feasible by MIAL. It has not been denied that the intermittent change in
scope had contributed to delay and cost over-run.

3.8 Status of Mandatory Capital Projects

In line with OMDA, the Master Plan 2006 prepared by MIAL conceptualised a
phased development of CSI Airport through MCPs and other capital projects
in the following manner:

न. Interim Measures: to be completed by 2008
. Phase 1: to be completed by 2010
. Phase 2: to be completed by 2015
. Phase 3: to be completed by 2020
. Phase 4: to be completed by 2026

(a) 32 Mandatory Capital Projects (MCPs) were included in Interim
Measures and Phase-1 to be completed by March 2010. Of these, MIAL was
required to complete 28 projects within two years from the effective date of
03 May 2006.

Clause 1 of Schedule 6 of SSA, allowed a nominal increase of ten (10) per
cent over the base airport charges for calculating aeronautical charges for
the third year after the effective date as an “Incentive”, provided MIAL duly
completed and commissioned MCPs required to be completed during
the first two years from the effective date. Thus, MIAL would be eligible for a
10 per cent increase in base airport charges if it had completed 28 MCPs by
May 2008.

ते


Report No. 15 of 2014 — |

MIAL did not complete one MCP (project code: S-06 for realigning the B-
taxiway) within the stipulated period of two years. MIAL had_ initially
requested (June 2007) for deferment of the work citing resultant operational
constraints for airlines. This was agreed to by MOCA (August 2007) and
completion date was re-scheduled to March 2010. MIAL again requested
May 2009) extension of the completion date and MOCA approved a further
extended schedule up to 31 December 2010 treating it as a onetime waiver.
he work was finally completed by December 2010.

MIAL was, thus, not eligible for the 10 per cent increase in base airport
charges as per the provisions of SSA. However, MOCA approved (12
December 2008) a 10 per cent increase in base airport charges w.e.f. 1
January 2009 as an incentive to MIAL though one of its MCPs remained
incomplete.

AAI /MOCA stated (July/November 2013) that increase in tariff in airport
charges had been approved considering justifications given by MIAL for the
delayed completion of capital works. The fact, however, remained that in
allowing rise in tariff despite non-completion of MCPs, SSA was violated.

(b) All 32 MCPs were to be completed by 31 March 2010. One of these
projects (project code: $ 09) is, however, yet to be completed. The project
envisaged refurbishment and reconstruction of existing international terminal
as per initial Master Plan. With change of plan in 2007, the scope of work of
this MCP was also revised to provide for amalgamation of Terminals 2B and
2C, expansion by adding gates, demolition of Terminal 2A and construction
of South West Pier. The schedule for completion of the project remained
unchanged as March 2010. MIAL was unable to complete even this reduced
scope of work under the project. An extension was allowed by MOCA for
completion of the project by March 2012 by which time, the project with its
reduced scope was completed.

However, the original scope of the project which intended to make the
international terminal ready for operations by March 2010 could only be
completed in January 2014 (terminal inaugurated on 10 January 2014) which
was 21 months beyond the date of its intended completion.

AAI stated (July 2013) that except these two works, other MCPs were
completed in time. AAI also stated that the reasons for delay were examined
through an Independent Engineer based on whose recommendations and
request of MIAL, competent authority found the delay justified.

In addition, MOCA replied (November 2013) that the delay in completion of
MCPs was attributable to circumstances and situations beyond the control of
MIAL as the works were being carried out with significant operational
constraints.


दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

The reply needs to be considered in the light of the inordinate delay of two
years in completion of the reduced scope of project S-09. Such delays raise
serious doubts on the achievement of efficiency advantages expected from
the PPP arrangement, especially as the terminal facilities for international
operations remained incomplete till January 2014 as against the original
intent of completion by March 2010.

MOCA/AAI may ensure that incentives such as increase in base airport
charges are not allowed as a matter of course, when inordinate delays take
place in completion of projects.

3.9 Status of other capital projects

In addition to MCPs, Master Plan 2007 listed a set of 45 other capital projects
which included airside works, terminal works and city side development
which were necessary for overall execution of the project. These works were
to be executed in three phases:

e Phase 1: upto 2010
e Phase 2: upto 2015
e ~=Phase 3: upto 2020

Targeted completion dates for these works were progressively pushed into
later phases in Master Plan 2011 in the following manner:

> 20 capital works were to be completed by Phase 1 as per Master Plan
2007. Of these, eleven were shifted to Phase 2, one was shifted to Phase 3
and one work was deleted in Master Plan 2011. One work was brought
forward from Phase 3 to Phase 1 leaving a total target of 8 works to be
completed by 2010.

> 14 capital works were to be executed in Phase 2 (2010-15) as per original
plan (2007). This increased to 25 with additions from left over works of
Phase 1.

> The works scheduled for Phase 3 continued to remain eleven.

Actual progress of work was even slower. It was noticed (from progress
reports of Independent Engineer) that only three works had actually been
completed in Phase 1 as against targeted eight as per Master Plan 2011. Two
projects of Phase 2 and one project of Phase 3 had since been completed.
Of the total of 44 capital works, progress had been reported in only 13 by the
Independent Engineer indicating tardy progress. Reasons for delay were not
brought out in the report. Audit did not have access to the original records of
MIAL in this regard.


Report No. 15 of 2014 — |

As per OMDA, target dates for construction of individual facilities as
incorporated in the Master Plan had to be fully met by MIAL. In the event of
delay in commencement or completion of projects, AAI had the right to levy
liquidated damages on MIAL (Article 8.3.8). However, no communication
from AAI to MIAL for levying of liquidated damages or urging that MIAL speed
up the work was on record. The progressive re-scheduling of capital works to
a later date contributed to an overall delay of the entire project even as
inaction on the part of AAl and MOCA point to a gap in monitoring and
oversight on the project.

AAI stated (July 2013) that OMDA did not contain any provision requiring AAI
to monitor other capital projects and that the provision under Article 8.3.8
applies only to Major MCPs.

MOCA replied (November 2013) that development of CSI Airport, being a
land constrained airport, heavily depended on timely availability of various
land pockets and relocation of existing facilities. Further in absence of any
linkage to traffic trigger, the imposition of Liquidated Damages under Article
8.3.8 was not applicable. MOCA also pointed out that Mumbai airport had a
large number of inherent problems which were specific to the airport which
caused delay and that MIAL could not be blamed for the same.

The reply needs to be viewed against the following:

As per Article 8.3.8 of OMDA ‘...to the extent not already covered
under article 8.2.2, in the event that a project set out in the approved
master plan is not commenced at the designated traffic trigger or such
other trigger and there is no explanation provided by the JVC to AAI
that is satisfactory to AAI, shall have the right to levy liquidated
damages on JVC equivalent to 0.5 per cent of the estimated capital
cost of the project for each week fhe project is delayed on the JVC.’
This meant an exercisable right by AAI to levy liquidated damages for
all capital projects (mandatory capital projects as well as other capital
projects) and had the responsibility of monitoring all such projects.

There is a need for MOCA and AAI 10 devise a time bound and regular
monitoring structure related to progress of work in any future PPP
arrangements. Similarly, there is a need to improve the assessment of
construction risk allocated to JVCs.


Chapter 4 | Project Fi icing

4.1 Increase in Project Costs estimates

The original transaction documents (OMDA/SSA) did not mention a cost
estimate for the project. The initial estimate (prepared in 2006) of the project
cost of %5,826 crore was revised upward by MIAL progressively in 2008, 2010
and finally in 2011 10 %12,380 crore. A summary of project cost estimate
prepared in October 2006, and its revision in July 2008, October 2010 and
October 2011 by MIAL is shown in the table below:

Table 1: Project cost estimates prepared in October 2006, July 2008, October
2010 and October 2011 by MIAL

Details of Project costs | le: ates | July October | | October
in October | 200: 2010 2011
2006
ee

Hard costs: Airside Projects, Terminal 1 & 2 4,417 7,487 7,982 9172
projects, Miscellaneous projects and
Technical Services & Consultancies
lation/ Contingencies, Landside
15, AAI works taken over

Other Costs/ Soft Costs: Capital
Expenditure for Operations, Capitalised
Interest/ Interest during Construction, Pre-
operative expenses, Upfront Fees to AAI
= = 651 651

ional Project: ATC Equipment &
Technical Block, Sahar Elevated

5,826 १,802 10,453 12,380

F's and Financial Audit:

Progressive cost escalations were largely, on account of the following:

*® 2008: The project cost increased by 68 per cent in comparison to 2006
estimate. The major contributor to the increase was revision of plan to
build a new integrated terminal complex at Sahar as against the initial
plan of modernising and expanding the existing facilities. This factor alone
accounted for a cost increase of %2,565 crore though it did not enhance
the capacity of the airport. In addition, estimates for support services,

नि


Report No. 15 of 2014 — |

consultants, contingency, escalation and interest during construction
(IDC) were enhanced based on longer project implementation schedule
consequent to the change in plans.

e 2010: The project cost estimates were again revised in October 2010 due
to loading the cost of Air Traffic Control Tower and Technical Block on the
project as well as including contribution to Mumbai Metropolitan Region
Development Authority (MMRDA) for Elevated Access Road, cost of
widening of Mithi River (as per directions of Government of Maharashtra)
and relocation of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj statue in the project cost.

e 2011: The project cost estimates were further revised by MIAL to %12,380
crore in October 2011. IDC expenses had significantly increased (an
increase of %546 crore) and additional provision for contingencies was
made by MIAL (%445 crore) along with a set of minor scope changes of
both airside and terminal projects.

Examination in audit revealed that:

e There was no provision in OMDA/SSA for MOCA to place a ceiling on
project costs. As a result, there were frequent revisions which contributed
to nearly doubling of estimates in 5 years.

e The Independent Engineer's duties (Schedule 21 of OMDA) did not
contain any provision for monitoring project costs on a regular basis,
except to review the ‘benchmarking’ exercise carried out by MIAL for the
project specifications and costs vis-d-vis national and international airport
projects of similar scope and nature.

e The major increase in cost estimates was for developing a new integrated
common user terminal as recommended by AAI and MOCA which also
extended the project schedule. This, however, did not alter the capacity
constraints of the airport though it led to significant time and cost over-run
in execution of the project.

e MIAL stated (October 2011) that the project had been delayed by
17 months for relocation of Shivaji Maharaj statue at the airport site
leading to a cost escalation of %1,250 crore (on IDC and pre-operative
cost, increase in costs of false ceiling and column cladding works for
check in hall, additional cost for PMC and other consultants and provision
for additional contingencies). The statue was located in the demised
premises of CS! Airport, Mumbai that was handed over to MIAL in May
2006. MIAL was, therefore, in possession of the site and ought to have
planned its relocation suitably in advance.

e The project cost estimates of 12,380 crore were later restricted by AERA to
11,647.46 crore for the period upto 2013-14 as part of the Authority's tariff

—————»


दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

determination exercise for CS! Airport, Mumbai for the said control period!
(under section 13(2) of the AERA Act,2008). As such, the approved
estimates are only for the period ending March 2014. Some significan
items of expenditure such as re-development of AAI-National Airports
Division colony and Air Traffic Control equipment with estimated cost o
%422.34 crore, were not included in this estimate. This would imply that the
project cost would continue to increase beyond 2014 and impact the
tariff adversely in future control periods too.

AAI stated (July 2013) that OMDA did not contain any provision for approval
of project cost by AAI/MOCA. Further, the scope of work of Independen
Engineers also did not contain any provision for monitoring the project cost.

MOCA stated that

i) delay in completion of the project was beyond the contro! o
MIAL because shifting of Shivaji statue was a complex issue and
took lot of time to resolve.

ii) a cap was possible for smaller projects but was difficult for larger
projects like CS! airport, Mumbai.

Though OMDA did not provide a cap on project cost or monitoring such
costs, such control nevertheless is a desirable good practice, particularly in
view of the very significant cost escalations in the project which were largely
being funded through additional levies on passengers.

4.2 Assessment of efficiency of capital expenditure

The airport charges are to be decided by the airport regulator, AERA.
Besides, as the project cost had increased significantly, MIAL had requested
approval to the levy of Development Fee (DF) in order to meet the financing
gap. AERA accordingly directed an audit of the process/ approach, cost
estimates and expenditure incurred for the period upto March 2014 under the
provisions of AERA Act, 2008. The Audit Reports of the Technical Auditor and
Financial Auditor so appointed are dealt with in AERA's consultation paper of
October 2012. The salient features include the following:

As part of AERA’s tariff determination exercise for CSI Airport, Mumbai for the
said period (under Section 13(2) of the AERA Act, 2008) the Technical Auditor

1 AERA considers a control period for tariff determination. Such a period is a five year
period as defined in the AERA Act. As per the Section 13(2) of the AERA Act, 2008, “The
tariff shall be determined once in five years and may, if so considered appropriate and in
public interest, amend, from fime to time during the said period of five years, the tariff so
determined." The tariff order issued by AERA in January 2013 considered the five year
control period upto 2013-14 for which the project cost was taken as 211,647.46 crore.

मजे


Report No. 15 of 2014 — |

(M/s. Engineers India Ltd.) and Financial Auditor (M/s. Ved Jain & Associates),
conducted the audits and submitted their reports in September 2012. In their
reports, the auditors recommended rationalisation / disallowance of some
specific items included in the project cost by MIAL. A significant observation
of the auditors was that certain items of work that had been included in
project estimates for the period upto March 2014 were unlikely to be
implemented in this period and ought to be considered in the subsequent
periods. AERA had taken on board these specific observations and
disallowed a cost of %310.20 crore and deferred cost of हैं 422.34 crore to
subsequent periods. This has restricted the project cost estimates to
311,647.46 crore for the period upto 2013-14.

The Technical and Financial Auditors have also highlighted a set of process
related concerns, the effects of which have not been quantified. The process
related concerns which could have a significant impact on the project costs,
as pointed out by the Technical and Financial Auditors are as below:

e The risk premium of all major contributors in the project implementation is
remarkably high which has been shared by MIAL in totality. It seems that
the main contractor, sub-contractors /vendors had worked out their rates
by considering a substantial risk premium.

* The Technical Auditor has also pointed out shortcomings in the sub-
contracting processes. It has been highlighted that tendering for all the
sub-contract work packages were done by M/s. L&T along with the MIAL
team. However, no estimation has been done either by MIAL or by M/s.
L&T. Negotiations have been done with all the techno commercially
successful bidders on random basis and MIAL did not have their own cost
estimates to compare the quotes given by sub-contractors.

e MIAL awarded the EPC contract for construction of the project to M/s. L&T.
The Financial Auditor has raised the following concerns regarding the
contracting process:

० During the contracting process, the two shortlisted bidders had
estimated the project cost differently and had quoted their fee
based on such estimated project cost (the fee had a variable
component which was a percentage of the total project cost).
MIAL had not computed any cost estimates for the EPC work
and considered a rough average of the cost estimates for
comparing the bids. Based on this average cost of %5,000 crore,
M/s. L&T emerged L1 bidder and was awarded the contract. The
auditor however observed that as the variable fee quoted
by M/s. L&T was higher than its competitor, the fees payable
to M/s. L&T would increase with increase in project cost. Beyond
an EPC cost of %6,180 crore, it would turn out to be the
more expensive alternative. The auditor also pointed out that the



दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

otal cost estimated for the EPC portion is 5,759 crore (as on
July 2011).

o The contract with M/s. L&T was a cost plus contract. It had been
intended to fix the contract sum within 14 months from the
contract date (i.e. by December 31, 2008). However, based on
he nature of the site, MIAL and L&T adopted the approach of
breaking down the whole project into small activities and
awarding separate contracts for each individual activity after
completion of the design for the respective package instead of
he program as a whole. The Financial Auditor commented that
his change in approach after the award of the contract led to
he contract cost being open ended, with its impact not possible
o be quantified.

० The site overheads recoverable by M/s. L&T were not finalised
which would mean that it was an open ended contract.

o The contract with M/s. L&T provided for a maximum cost for the
structure at %1,100 per sq. ft. The Financial Auditor had pointed
out that there was inadequate basis to decide on_ this
provisioning in the absence of any design and comparative
working at the time of the contract.

AERA considered these issues along with the submissions of MIAL and noted
that ‘MIAL is a Board- managed company with representations from AAI and
MoCA at sufficiently senior levels. It was also noted that the most of the
contracts in this project were already awarded and that the project was
under advance stage of implementation. Therefore, any corrections or
remedial measures did not appear to be feasible at this stage of the project.
In view of the inability of the auditors to further quantify or identify losses in
monetary term due to process issues, the authority had found itself unable to
take any further action in fhe matter.’

During our Audit, details of action taken by AAI on reports of the Technical
and Financial Auditors regarding non preparation of detailed cost estimates
by MIAL prior to contracting, and deviations from normal tendering processes
in selection of EPC contractor were sought for. In reply AAI stated that there
was no such provision in OMDA for AAI to call for information on selection of
contractors including preparation of cost estimates by MIAL.

As the financial effect of these process related concerns could not be
specified, its effect on the expenditure remains vague. The efficiency with
which capital expenditure is Undertaken is therefore not comprehensively
assessed. Besides, as evident from the response of AAI, no mechanism was
designed in the agreements to go into the appropriateness of the processes/
systems followed by MIAL. Audit did not have access to these records.

————————————»


Report No. 15 of 2014 — |

MOCA would need to review the issues highlighted above for necessary
action to derive an assurance that interests of Government and that of the
passengers are protected adequately.

4.3 Gap in funding and Development Fee

As per Article 13.1(a) of OMDA, MIAL should arrange for financing and / or
meeting all financing requirements through suitable debt and equity
contributions in order to comply with its obligations including development of
the airport pursuant to the Master Plan and the Major Development Plan.
Further, Article 2.5(d) of OMDA provided that MIAL may, if its development
funding necessitated, procure the listing its shares on the Mumbai and/ or the
National stock exchange(s) at any time. As per the initial financing plan, the
project cost of %5,826 crore was to be financed entirely through equity,
internal accruals and debt.

As the project cost increased to 9,802 crore, MIAL projected a funding gap
of 22,350 crore and requested (February 2009) levy of Development Fee (DF)
to meet the gap. MOCA allowed (order dated 27 February 2009) levy of DF
upto an amount of %1,543 crore on an ad-hoc basis for a period of 48 months
effective April 2009. With the creation of AERA in May 2009 the matter was
referred to them. Meanwhile, MIAL intimated (January 2011) that the project
cost had further increased to 10,453 crore (in October 2010) and to %12,380
crore (in October 2011) and requested for finalisation of DF citing the
increasing funding gap. Interestingly, the equity stake of the private
promoters increased merely from %463 crore to %888 crore and the debt
exposure of MIAL remained un-altered even as the project cost had more
than doubled.

Changes in the funding pattern with progressively increasing project costs are
shown in the chart below:


दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

© Security Deposits from Real

Estate

™ Debt

© Internal Accruals

February
2009

October
2010

October
2011

= Equity

Source: MIAL's correspondence with AAl/ MOCA, Technical Auditor and Financial Auditor Reports, AERA's Order
December 2012

As can be seen from the chart, MIAL, in October 2011, estimated a gap of
%3,485 crore and sought permission to levy DF on passengers to bridge the
same. MIAL had earlier requested (January 2011) for levy of DF at the rate of
%200 and %1,375 per departing domestic and international passenger
respectively for a three year period April 2011 to March 2014 to bridge this
gap.

AERA determined (December 2012) the project cost (upto March 2014) as
11,647.46 crore and funding gap of %4,219.05 crore. Of this, AERA allowed
funding of %3,400 crore through levy of DF and directed that MIAL would
arrange for additional financing to address the balance gap of %819.05 crore.
However, as MIAL would require the funds immediately and DF was
mandated for collection over the period January 2013 to April 2021, this
amount was to be securitised by MIAL, obtaining a loan with a
commensurate interest cost. Thus, the actual DF that would be levied on the
passengers would include the interest cost and be higher. Actual DF that
would be collected from the passengers would be %4,589.45 crore.

Examination in Audit revealed that:

« Levy of DF as a means of financing was not envisaged in OMDA. Article
13.1 of OMDA enjoins upon MIAL to find the entire funds necessary for the
project through equity and debt - “it is expressly understood that the JVC
shall arrange for financing and / or meeting all financing requirements
through suitable debt and equity contributions in order to comply with its
obligations hereunder including development of the airport pursuant to
the Master Plan and the Major Development Plans”. The financing risk for
the project had, thus, been transferred to MIAL through the PPP

Kr — —


Report No. 15 of 2014

arrangements formalised in the OMDA. |

gap for the escalated project cost, this fi

shares on the Mumbai and/ or the Natio
for funding the project, neither did MIAL
or AAI insist upon MIAL to explore this op

While fixing DF at %3,400 crore, AERA in i
stated that a justification for the DF was

———

n levying DF to meet the financing
inancing risk of MIAL was diluted.

Despite specific provision in OMDA {Article 2.5(d)} that MIAL could list its

nal Stock Exchange(s) at any time
explore this option nor did MOCA
ion for raising funds.

s order dated 21 December 2012
he comparable size of investment

by Delhi International Airport Private Limi
that DIAL was allowed a DF of 83,415 cro!
that the
the proje
remains i
inaugura

160 (DIAL) and MIAL and the fact
re. However, it cannot be denied
two projects are entirely disparate with DIAL having completed
ct on schedule while the CSI Airport has been delayed and
ncomplete, though the international terminal has since been
ed.

AAI stated
provisions 0
provided de

July 2013) that DF has been
AAI Act (clause 22A) and AE
tailed reasoning for approval ०

determined by AERA as per the
RA in its order for levying DF had
DF.

MOCA stated (November 2013) that GOI cannot assign the power to levy DF
through an agreement and that DF can only be levied through statutory
provisions which were known to all bidders upfront before issue of RFP. MOCA
also stated that the listing option was found not feasible, considering that it
would result in reduction of strategic interest of various stake holders.

While levy of DF may not
OMDA is unequivocal in

be violation of statute, it cannot be denied that
respect of finding funds for the project which was
specified as through equity and debt. Thus, levy of DF to enable MIAL meet
the funding gap amounted to burdening the passengers at the cost of more
effectively persuading the latter to follow through the equity/debt route as
provided for in the concluded contract. Besides, MOCA's contention that
listing was not feasible as it would reduce strategic interest of stake holders,
ignores the fact that dilution of ownership to raise funds was specifically
intended under Article 2.5(d) of OMDA, with conditions duly specified.

It is pertinent to note, in this connection, that PAC in their report presented to
Parliament on 06 February 2014, on the Audit Report No. 5 of 2012-13 that
dealt with Implementation of PPP in Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi,
on the same issue, commented that the action of MOCA enabled the
private partner to garner post contractual benefits in contravention of the
provisions of OMDA.



दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

4.4 Financing the project

The funding pattern for the project in the present control period (ending
March 2014) based on the summary of project cost that AERA considered is
presented in the chart below:

The contribution of the private partners of MIAL? through equity is a meagre
%888 crore’ or only 7.6 per cent of total cost (%11,647.46 crore).

AERA in its order (December 2012) on DF stated that shareholders of MIAL
had expressed their inability for any further infusion of equity share capital.
MIAL had also submitted (September 2012) the extract of its Board meeting of
26 July 2012 where inability to infuse more equity from the shareholders (ACSA
Global, Bid Services, GVK group and AAI) was noted.

It is, however, noticed that AAI in its letter of 26 October 2012, had informed
AERA their willingness to infuse additional equity in MIAL. Later in December
2012, AAI informed that AAI Board has approved infusion of equity
amounting to %293 crore in MIAL as and when cash call was made by MIAL.
AAI however, did not receive any cash calls from MIAL. In November, 2012
MIAL informed AERA that after detailed deliberations by the Board of
Directors of MIAL, it had been decided that there was no possibility of
bringing any additional equity.

2 Private partners of MIAL-GVK Airport Holdings Private Limited, Bid Services Division
(Mauritius) Limited, ACSA Global Limited.

3 Out of MIAL’s paid up equity of #1,200 crore, the private partners’ contribution amounts to
7888 crore (74 per cent).


Report No. 15 of 2014 — |

IN this regard, Clause 3.3.2 of Shareholders Agreement states that “the Private
Participants hereby undertake and agree to subscribe to such number of
Equity Shares as may be called upon to do so by JVC, proportionately in
accordance with their respective shareholding in the JVC or in such other
proportions as may be mutually agreed.” With reference to Clause 3.3.2 of
Shareholders Agreement, it appears that Government of India (acting
hrough AAI) was ready to infuse additional equity in the JV. As per
Shareholders’ Agreement, other private parties ought to have come forward
and contributed proportionately which would have reduced the burden of
DF on the passengers. This did not happen as the private parties did not take
he financing risk.

he financing arrangements in 2006 envisaged the entire project funding
hrough equity, internal accruals and debt. This reduced progressively in the
subsequent estimates of February 2009, October 2010 and October 2011 as
shown below:

Table 2: Source of Fund

Source of Fund
2006 February 2009 October 2010 October 2011

q' 100 76.00 71.30 71.90

funding to total funding (in per
centage)

Compared to the equity investment of the private promoter, the collection
through DF is much higher (the DF being nearly four times the equity stake of
the private promoter). At 3,400 crore, DF accounts for 29.19 per cent of the
total funding. This gives an impression that the project risks could have been
transferred to the private partner more effectively as the latter does not
appear to have any incentive to control costs, be efficient or complete the
project on time.

While agreeing that all the risks associated with MIAL had to be borne by the
private partner, MOCA stated (November 2013) that irrespective of various
1965, AAl would be earning revenue as per OMDA provisions. Besides, MOCA
pointed out that Audit had not considered the internal resource generation
of MIAL of 21,151 crore.

One of the objectives of developing the project on PPP basis was to find
private investment for the project. In the instant case, private partners of
MIAL had invested a mere % 888 crore which is only 7.6 per cent of the total
project cost and the burden has shifted to travelling passengers through levy
of DF. internal resource generation by MIAL is the surplus generated through
operations which is not an investment by the private partner and, hence, has
not been considered in the equity comparison.



दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

4.5 Assessment of funding gap

In response to the proposal of MIAL (October 2011) seeking approval to the

levy of
as %4,2
reason

DF, AERA had determined (December 2012) the actual funding gap
9.05 crore as against MIAL's own estimate of %3,485 crore. The major
or the difference in estimates was that internal accruals of MIAL were

assessed differently by MIAL and AERA. MIAL had assumed था internal
accrual of %2,464 crore, as their total estimated retained earnings in 2014

estima

estima

projec
estima

interna

164.29
had to

August 2014 being the targeted project completion date).

he Financial Auditor had estimated the same internal accrual at %4,021 crore
after adding depreciation and deferred tax liability to profit after tax

ed to be achieved in 2014. AERA pointed out that accruals estimated

by MIAL were based on their tariff expectations which were uncertain. AERA
also noted that assessment of gap in the means of finance has an inter-
inkage between determination of DF and _ tariff. AERA, accordingly,

ed an internal accrual of as %1,151.26 crore for the period upto March

2014, considering the actual cash balance (as on March 2012) and adding

ed depreciation (for two years, 2012-13 and 2013-14 alone). The lower
ion of internal accrual resulted in a higher funding gap which in turn

has led to levy of a larger DF on passengers.

In reply, MOCA pointed out that AERA has assessed the funding gap and
determined DF as per provisions of AERA Act, 2008. It also stated that higher

| accrual calculated by independent auditor was based upon

increased tariff sought by MIAL. As AERA has allowed much lower tariff

per cent as compared to 881.29 per cent sought), internal accruals
be reduced correspondingly.

The contention of MOCA needs to be viewed against the facts that

(i)

(ii

(ii)

Actual internal accruals were higher in 2011-12 and 2012-13 even at
the earlier lower rates of tariff.

Internal accruals as on March 2013 would be %1,408.49 crore which
is higher than the internal accrual projected at %1,151 crore upto
2013-14 by AERA.

Had a higher internal accrual been assumed by AERA, DF could
have been suitably rationalised. DF is a means of last resort as
acknowledged by AERA and minimising its quantum would have
reduced the burden on passengers.


Chapter §

The sole financial bidding criterion for selec
share of JV with AAI. The GVK led consor

offering 38.7 per cent of the revenue to AAI.

ion of JV partner was the revenue
tium emerged the highest bidder

OMDA defines revenue as all pre-tax gross revenue of JV, excluding (a)
payments made by JV, if any, for the activities undertaken by relevant

authorities or payments received by JV

or provision of electricity, water,

sewerage, or analogous utilities to the extent of amounts paid for such utilities

JV for and on behalf of any governmenta
e) any bad debts written off provided th
which annual fee has been paid to AAI.

Revenue includes revenue from aeronau

0 third party service providers; (b) insurance proceeds except insurance
indemnification for loss of revenue; (c) any amount that accrues to JV from
sale of any capital assets or items; (d) payments and/or monies collected by

authorities under applicable law;
ese pertain to past revenues on

ical as well as non aeronautical

sources. The services provided at the airport comprise two distinct categories;

- aeronautical services and services other tl

landing, housing or parking of an aircraft of

han aeronautical services (termed

as non-aeronautical services). Aeronautical services includes navigation,
surveillance and supportive communication to air traffic management for the

r any other ground facility offered

in connection with aircraft operations at the airport. Non-aeronautical
services include commercial activities like duty free shops, general retail,

hotels etc.

Revenue earned by MIAL from aeronautical and non-aeronautical services
as shared with AAI over 2006-07 to 2012-13 are shown in table 3 and chart
below. It may be noted here that cargo revenue is treated as non-

aeronautical revenue in MIAL.



दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

Table 3 -Aeronautical and Non-aeronautical revenue (% in crore)

| | Non-aeronautical revenue (including cargo)

Aeronautical revenue

| थक |
=
=

1,066.29 1,688.99

79.37 कह |

2006-07 2008-09 | 2009-10 | 2010-11 | 2011-12 | 2012-13
lim Total Revenue 586.97 856.82 970.59 996.63 1179.37 1314.35 1478.58
व Total Aeronautical Revenue 287.63 362.27 37147 383.16 © 406.15 424.21 520.39
== Total Cargo Revenue 12479 173.04 181.42 200... 292.12 338.57 258.20
=== Total Non Aeronautical Revenue 172.13 319.03 411.16 = 409.3. 477.27 «545.75 «696.00
—— Other income 2.42 2.48 6.54 3.27 3.83 5.82 3.99

Source: Independent Auditors’ Reports

Revenue earned by MIAL, in general, has shown an upward trend over the
years. Revenue from non aeronautical sources accounted for 64 per cent o
otal revenue of MIAL. Besides, non-aeronautical revenues (excluding cargo
revenue) registered 304 per cent growth in 2012-13 over 2006-07 revenues. In
contrast, the growth of aeronautical revenues has been modest, growing by
81 per cent over the same period.

As per OMDA, MIAL is allowed to carry out commercial activities employing
its assets utilising land area not exceeding ten per cent of the total land area
constituting demised premises. These assets which do not form a part of the
non-aeronautical assets are termed as ‘non-transfer assets’. Income from non
transfer assets in CSI Airport, Mumbai is yet to flow.

ca“


Report No. 15 of 2014 — |

5.1

Aeronautical tariff in ‘shared till’ arrangement

As per section 13 of AERA Act, 2008, AERA determines the tariff for
aeronautical services while charges for non-aeronautical services are not
regulated.

In order to determine the tariff for aeronautical services (airport charges),
three systems are in vogue - single till, dual till and shared till.

Single Till considers the entire airport as one system. Airport charges are
determined in a way to ensure that the sum of aeronautical and non-
aeronautical revenue provides a pre-determined rate of return to the
airport operator, over and above his operating costs, depreciation and
taxes.

Dual Till considers the entire airport as two independent systems -
aeronautical and non-aeronautical. Airport charges are determined in
a way to ensure that only the aeronautical revenues provide a pre-
determined rate of return to the airport operator, over and above his
aeronautical operating costs, depreciation and taxes.

Shared/Hybrid Till is a combination of Single Till and Dual till. Airport
charges are determined in a way to ensure that aeronautical revenues
provide a pre-determined rate of return to the airport operator, over
and above his operating costs, depreciation and taxes, cross-
subsidised by a certain fraction of the non-aeronautical revenues.

In case of Mumbai and Delhi airports, 30 per cent of the non-
aeronautical revenues subsidised aeronautical expenses. Airport
charges in CSI Airport, Mumbai are determined on a ‘shared till’ mode
as defined in schedule | of the State Support Agreement (SSA). This is in
contrast to other airports in the country (other than Delhi and Mumbai)
where AERA follows the ‘single till’ system for determining the airport
charges. In the shared till system, the costs associated with
aeronautical services (including the cost of infrastructure creation as
well as its maintenance and operation along with a reasonable return
on this investment) are set off against 30 per cent of non-aeronautical
revenue to arrive at the targeted aeronautical revenue leading to
determination of airport charges at CS! Airport, Mumbai.

Aeronautical assets constitute 90 per cent of the total assets in CSI Airport,
Mumbai. Besides, the cost of operation and maintenance of these
aeronautical assets is also over 80 per cent of the total operation and
maintenance expenditure. However, even as costs associated with non -
aeronautical services are 10 per cent of the total costs, the non-aeronautical
revenues (averaged over 2006-13) are 62 per cent of total revenues. Non-
aeronautical services, are thus, more profitable with low cost of creation and
operation of assets and high revenues.



दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

As non-aeronautical costs are minimal while non-aeronautical revenues are
large, the ‘shared till’ system is likely to lead to a higher airport charge vis-a-
vis the ‘single till’ system. These higher airport charges would be passed on by
the concerned airlines to passengers who would have to pay more for their
dirline ticket for flights through Mumbai while the return to MIAL for non-
aeronautical services would remain high.

MOCA replied (November 2013) that OMDA provisions regarding system o
permissible gross revenue generation from different sources, inclusion o
cargo and ground handling in non-aeronautical services, cross subsidisation
of 30 per cent of non aeronautical revenue towards tariff were laid down in
transparent manner upfront before bidding and also approved by EGOM.
Further MOCA stated that AERA Act also recognises that due consideration
be given to provisions of OMDA and as such AERA has followed lega
provisions.

While there is no issue regarding the bidding mechanism, it is a fact that in
following the ‘shared till’ system, only 30 per cent of non-aeronautica
revenue has been set off against the targeted revenue while determining
tariff. This has increased the burden of the airport charges borne by
passengers. The benefit of low-cost non-aeronautical revenues is largely
retained by MIAL, placing a heavier burden on travelling passengers in
Mumbai.

During the Exit Conference, MOCA stated that a comprehensive policy
regarding the appropriateness of the system of ‘till’ is being formulated.
Impact of such policy would be reviewed in subsequent audit.

It is pertinent to note that PAC in its report of February 2014 on Audit Repor
No. 5 of 2012-13 on Implementation of PPP in Indira Gandhi Internationa
Airport, Delhi, has urged the Government to consider the aspect that shared
till actually increased the burden on travelling passengers as aeronautica
tariffs were not subsidised by a significant part of non-aeronautical tariff
which are low capital intensive and high revenue services while awarding
airport contracts under PPP in future.

5.2 Conflicts between OMDA and AERA Act in defining
aeronautical and non-aeronautical services

As has been pointed out in Audit Report No.5 of 2012-13 which dealt with
Implementation of PPP in Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi, there are
conflicts between provisions in OMDA and SSA on one hand and the AERA
Act, 2008 on the other, which will have long term repercussions on the
regulator's role and in fixation of tariff for CS! Airport, Mumbai. Definitions of
aeronautical and non-aeronautical services differ substantially between
OMDA and the AERA Act.


Report No. 15 of 2014 — |

e Cargo Handling Service has been designated as a non-aeronautical
service in OMDA (Schedule 6) but is an aeronautical service as per AERA
Act (Section 2, v).

e Ground Handling Services have been included as non-aeronautical

services in OMDA (Schedule 6) but are aeronautical services as per the
AERA Act (Section 2, iv).

The Consultation Paper 22/2012-13 dated 11 October 2012 of AERA refers to
MOCA's letter dated 10 September 2012 which states " revenue from
Cargo and Ground Handling services accruing to the airport operator should
be categorised as non-aeronautical revenues as provided under the OMDA.
Section 13 (1)(a)(vi) of the AERA Act clearly states that concessions offered
by the Central Government in any Agreement or Memorandum of
Understanding or otherwise will have to be taken into consideration while
determining the tariff.”

Revenue generated from cargo and ground handling services are
considered as ‘non-aeronautical’ for CSI Airport, Mumbai during tariff
determination and only 30 per cent of such revenue is available for setting off
aeronautical costs while determining the airport charges. As cargo revenues
are very significant constituting 34 per cent of the total non-aeronautical
revenues (over 2006-07 to 2012-13), this affords a higher return to MIAL and
hence, the private partner of JV, while contributing to higher airport charges
at CSI Airport, Mumbai.

AAI stated (July 2013) that there is no conflict between AERA Act and SSA
and that these two provisions of OMDA and AERA Act have been
harmonised. Accordingly, the charges for Cargo and Ground Handling
services for Delhi/ Mumbai airports are being fixed / regulated by AERA
considering these as aeronautical services as per provisions of AERA Act. AAI,
however, agreed that the airport tariff is being determined as per the formula
provided in SSA in line with section 13(1)(a)(vi) of AERA act and schedule | of
SSA.

Though the charges for Cargo and Ground Handling services for Delhi/
Mumbai airports are being regulated by AERA, revenues from these services
are being treated as non-aeronautical revenue as per the provisions of
OMDA and SSA in determining the airport charges. As only 30 per cent of
gross non-aeronautical revenue is considered for fixation of airport charges
vis-a-vis 100 per cent of net aeronautical revenue, this difference in definition
of ‘aeronautical’ and ‘non-aeronautical’ revenue in OMDA and AERA
provisions allows a financial benefit to MIAL and, hence, the private partner
of JV, while loading the passenger with higher airport charges.

It is pertinent to note, in this connection, that PAC have recommended in
their report presented to Parliament on 06 February 2014, on the Audit Report


दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

No. 5 of 2012-13 that dealt with Implementation of PPP in Indira Gandhi
International Airport, Delhi, on the same issue, that MOCA may apprise PAC
of the financial impact of the concessions granted by Government under
OMDA and the revenue ensured by the Government from the JV after
Ground Handling services and Cargo Handling services were categorised as
aeronautical services.

5.3 Revenue accruing to AAI

The entire revenue earned (both aeronautical and non-aeronautical) by
MIAL is shared with AAI, the share of AAI being 38.7 per cent. The revenue
that accrued to AAI from 2006-07 to 2012-13 is shown in the following chart.

200.00 24.23, =©=AAl Share as per

OMDA (38.7% of

100.00 Actual Revenue)
0.00

00697 5907-08 4998-9 4999-4 9104 2000-37 209
Year

Source: Business Plan and Independent Auditors’ Reports

While AAI share has increased steadily over the years, with MIAL having
outsourced some of its activities, the percentage of additional revenue inflow
0 AAI is expected to diminish in future as has been brought out in the
subsequent paragraphs.

5.4 Outsourcing domestic and international cargo activities

Cargo revenue comprises mainly domestic and _ international cargo
operations. A review of MIAL's revenues particularly with regard to actua
cargo revenues of MIAL for the period 2006-07 to 2012-13 and the estimates
for 2013-14 revealed that the cargo revenue projections declined from
2012-13 onwards as indicated in the chart below:



Report No. 15 of 2014 — |

बह Cargo revenue

Source: Independent Auditors’ Report and MIAL's correspondence with AERA
Note: Figures for 2013-14 are estimates submitted by MIAL to AERA

The fall in estimated cargo revenues is on account of intended outsourcing of
both the domestic and international cargo operations. It had originally been
planned to operationalise the outsourcing arrangement for domestic as well
as international cargo by 01 September 2012. Domestic cargo was
outsourced (May 2013) to M/s. Container Corporation of India on Build Own
Operate Transfer basis (BOOT) and perishable cargo handling was outsourced
to M/s. Cargo Service Centre India Private Limited (16 May 2011).
International cargo had been concessioned to M/s. Concor Air Limited
(18 February 2014). Revenue share of MIAL from domestic cargo is
42 per cent (with a minimum annual guarantee of %7 crore) while that for
perishable goods is 15.11 per cent (with a specified minimum guarantee
based on estimates of cargo).

As seen from the chart, the cargo revenue is estimated to fall by %132.43
crore in a span of two years from (2011-12 to 2013-14) registering a 40 per
cent reduction. However, in 2012-13, cargo revenue decreased to हैं 258.20
crore. As 30 per cent of cargo revenue is taken into account in targe
revenue while arriving at the tariff rates, the fall in cargo revenues would lead
to higher tariff and corresponding higher burden on passengers. Besides,
significant reduction in cargo revenue would also reduce revenue share o
AAI substantially.

AA| /MOCA stated (July/November 2013) that OMDA gives the right to MIAL
to contract and / or sub-contract with third parties. AAI also pointed out tha
in the initial period, cargo operation had been handled by MIAL which
decided to develop these facilities on BOOT basis. AAl agreed that there
would be a drop in revenue in the initial period due to outsourcing bu



दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

pointed out that it would result in better infrastructure and increase in
handling capacity.

Reply of AAI substantiates the audit observation. MOCA would be wel
advised to monitor and review the extent and adequacy of promised
improvements in infrastructure and handling capacity compared to the
projected reduction in revenues.

5.5 Award of concession for operation of Hotel near Terminal 1C
to a Group Entity consortium

As per Article 8.3.3 and 8.3.7 of OMDA all developments (Aeronautical Assets,
Non Aeronautical Assets, Transfer Assets, Non-Transfer Assets) at the Airport
shall be as per the existing Master Plan and no development that is not
envisaged in the Master Plan shall be allowed to be undertaken. OMDA also
stipulates that MIAL shall clearly demarcate and distinguish, Transfer Assets
and Non-Transfer Assets in the Master Plan {Article 13.1 (b) (ii)}.

MIAL took up construction of a hotel near Terminal 1C in June 2009 though it
was not included in Master Plans (October 2006 and May 2007). In February
2010, MIAL informed AAI that it had carried out competitive bidding for
operation of a hotel in Terminal 1C of the airport and a Consortium of (i) M/s.
TAJ GVK Hotels & Resorts and (ii) Greenridge Hotels & Resorts had emerged
as a successful bidder. MIAL was to receive 3 per cent of the gross revenue
from the first year of commencement of operations of the hotel. A minimum
annual guarantee of %45 lakh from second year and %90 lakh from third year
onwards was also stipulated. AAI did not raise any objections though
construction of the hotel was in violation of the provisions of OMDA {Articles
8.3.3, 8.3.7 and 13.1(b)(ii)}. AAl being a shareholder in MIAL would have been
aware of the development, yet no action was initiated against the violation.
MIAL later included the proposal in the Master Plan of 2011.

Subsequently, MIAL proposed a set of amendments to the agreement with
the successful bidder which were also agreed by AAI with the suggestion that
MIAL comply with the provisions of OMDA. The amendments included:

« increase in number of rooms from 92 to 300;

« increase in concession period from 15 years to 30 years (i.e. upto 02 May
2036, the expiry date of 30 years of OMDA);

e revenue share of MIAL to be increased from 3 per cent to 4.65 per cent;

e change in the shareholding pattern among the Consortium partners
(M/s. TAJGVK - 49 per cent in place of 20 per cent and M/s. Greenridge -
51 per cent instead of 80 per cent).


Report No. 15 of 2014 — |

Examination in Audit revealed that:

MIAL had included the cost of construction of the hotel in the total project
cost. Later, AERA disallowed it and desired that MOCA/AAI decide
whether it is a ‘transfer asset'4 or 'non transfer asset's. If the hotel was
designated a transfer asset, it could be included in the project cost and
30 per cent revenue would also be available for tariff fixation. AAI
decided to consider it as a Non-transfer Asset.

The bidder consortium which emerged successful for operation of the
hotel comprised of M/s. TAJ GVK Hotels & Resorts (20 per cent stake) and
Greenridge Hotels & Resorts (80 per cent stake). It is seen that both entities
were GVK group companies. These entities formed a Joint Venture
company M/s. Green Woods Palaces and Resorts Private Limited. As
M/s. GVK Airport Holdings Private Limited which is a part of the GVK group
has management control of MIAL (with a 50.5 per cent equity
shareholding), the agreement entered into by MIAL with this consortium
could benefit the parent company. It was also noticed that the terms of
the agreement were subsequently altered in favour of the consortium
allowing an increase in number of hotel rooms from 92 to 300 and
extension of the concession period from 15 years to 25 years. The post bid
changes were a violation of the principles of contracting and was an
undue favor granted to the selected consortium which assumes further
significance in view of the shareholding pattern of the concerned
companies.

AAI is eligible to share 38.7 per cent of the revenue generated from this
asset. Since MIAL had agreed to receive only 4.65 per cent revenue from
the concessionaire, the actual revenue which would accrue to AAI on
account of the hotel project would be a miniscule fraction of the actual
revenues (38.7 per cent of 4.65 1.6. 1.79 per cent) generated by this
activity. However, as both the consortium members namely M/s. 16.) GVK
Hotels & Resorts and Greenridge Hotels & Resorts are GVK group entities,
the share of M/s. GVK from the hotel operations would be far higher.

MIAL had forwarded (February 2010) the draft License Agreement and
Concession Agreement to be executed with the successful bidder to AAI
for comments. AAI, however, did not object (February 2010) to the
arrangement though it would have significant adverse impact on its
revenues.

‘Transfer assets’ encompass assets used for both aeronautical and non-aeronautical
purposes which would be transferred back to AAI at the conclusion of the agreement.
‘Non-transfer assets’ imply land available for commercial exploitation by MIAL for which
AAI does not have the obligation (though it has the right) to acquire MIAL’s rights, titles
and interests at the conclusion of the agreement. Land available for ‘non-transfer asset’ is
limited to 10 percent of the demised premises according to OMDA.


दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

AAI stated (July 2013) that its comments were not required as both the Master
Plans of 2006 and 2007 did not envisage construction of the Hotel at Terminal
1C. AAI also asserted that the Hotel could not be designated as a ‘Transfer
Asset’ as in such a case it would have been included in the project cost and
had to be financed through DF which would also have increased the load on
the passenger. Besides, appropriate procedure for appointment of Probity
Auditor was done and its report was considered before permitting the
contract.

In addition, MOCA stated (November 2013) that modifications could have
been taken up by MIAL keeping AAI informed.

The reply needs to be viewed against the following:

a) AAI is represented on the Board of MIAL and ought to have been
aware of the initiation of construction of the Hotel in June 2009
without it being included in the Master Plan, 2007. The Independent
Engineer also failed in reporting the Hotel construction which was in
deviation to the then operational Master Plan.

b) Considering that the revenue of AAI vis-a-vis the promoter of MIAL
would be adversely affected through the concession agreement with
a group entity of the private promoter, a higher degree of vigilance
and due diligence was required.

c) MIAL included the Hotel project only in the Master Plan of 2011 and
proposed that it be developed as a Transfer Asset. AAI has stated
that the Hotel would not be developed as a Transfer Asset.

5.6 Undue benefit of 3.17 crore to MIAL

MIAL was liable (Article 5.1 of OMDA) to perform all obligations (including
payment obligations) of AAI under all contracts and agreements between
AAI and any third party with effect from the effective date (03 May 2006).
Further, MIAL was also liable {Article 5.2 (b) (ii)}, for completion of all work-in-
progress at CSI Airport, Mumbai and payments in respect of all capital work-
in-progress at CS! Airport, Mumbai from 30 August 2005. The payments were
to be made by MIAL to AAI within 15 days of the effective date on the basis
of separate detailed accounts maintained by AAI and furnished to MIAL on
the effective date.

In a meeting (14 June 2006) AAI agreed that all payments for the works in
progress after the effective date would continue to be discharged by AAI.
Bills for the work done would be raised by AAI on MIAL every fortnight which
MIAL would reimburse. AAI raised claims for reimbursement of capital work-in-
progress cost for the period 30 August 2005 to 02 May 2006 only on
15 September 2006. Besides, the claims for works-in-progress after the
effective date (03 May 2006) were also delayed upto 159 days against the



Report No. 15 of 2014

———

prescribed time of a fortnight. MIAL also defaulted in reimbursing the claims in
time and delayed reimbursement by upto 511 days resulting in loss of interest
of 83.17 crore to AAI.

AAI/MOCA | stated (July/November 2013) that raising of bills for
reimbursement of capital work-in-progress was delayed due to procedures
involved for preparation of bills. It was not possible to prepare bills on any
particular date. Being new, MIAL also took some time to understand and
reimburse the claims raised by AAI.

Reply ignores the fact that AAI was fully aware of the procedure involved in
the preparation of bills and, hence, it would have been possible for AAI to
have taken action to avoid delays. Further, as per the terms of OMDA, MIAL
had committed to timely reimbursement of claims.

5.7 Delay in receipt of Retirement Compensation

Article 6.1.1 of OMDA stipulated operation support by AAI with the help of
general employees to MIAL for a period of 3 years from 03 May 2006 to 02
May 2009. OMDA also stipulated (Article 6.1.4) that MIAL shall make an offer
of employment not later than 3 months prior to the expiry of Operation
Support Period, to a minimum of 60 per cent of employees. In the event o
MIAL being able to absorb less than 60 per cent of such employees, MIAL was
liable to pay Retirement Compensation to AAI for such unabsorbed number
of general employees. As per Article 1.1 of OMDA, Retiremen
Compensation was to be based on the latest available Voluntary Retiremen
Scheme of AAI.

During the operation support period, only 185 employees were absorbed by
MIAL and for the balance 1,245 unabsorbed employees, MIAL was liable to
pay Retirement Compensation as per the provisions of OMDA. AAI raised bil

on MIAL for %260.86 crore in March 2010. Of this,
released an amount of %154.23 crore in four instal
106.63 crore was outstanding (as of May 2010).

MOCA_ observed (November 2009) that

Compensation from MIAL became due immed
support period i.e. post 02 May 2009. However, a
the approval of Minister of State of Civil Aviation (
accordingly MOCA directed AAI to recover the

MIAL, till March 2010, had
ments and the balance o

payment of Retiremen
iately after the operation
lenient view was taken with
ndependent Charge), and
Retirement Compensation

without penal interest from MIAL by March 2010. MOCA also intimated (May

2010) that any payment due after 01 April 20

0 automatically attracted

penal interest on State Bank of India Prime Lending Rate plus 10 per cent.

In a meeting between AAI and MIAL (August 20
allow MIAL to pay the balance amount in instalm

0) a decision was taken to
ents. Consequent to the



दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

decision, AAI (October 2010) revised the balance due and recommended
for monthly instalment payable in 10 years from November 2010.

Thus, AAI allowed MIAL to pay Retirement Compensation as monthly
instalments over ten years in violation of the directives from MOCA._ This
resulted in undue favour to MIAL and consequent loss of interest to AAI
amounting to %71.37 crore, calculated at 10 per cent per annum.

Further, AAl had claimed (in March 2011 and April 2011) an additional
amount of %33.40 crore towards Retirement compensation due towards
revision of pay of non-executives. However, MIAL paid the same in
2 instalments (June 2011 and September 2011). Allowing MIAL to pay the
same in instalments was also an undue benefit conferred on MIAL by AAI.

AAI /MOCA stated (July/November 2013) that they had failed to raise the
final bill on MIAL in time (by 31 March 2010). When MIAL made a part
payment of % 154.23 crore on the provisional bill of = 260.86 crore, AAI did not
claim the balance as the procedure for payment of retirement benefit had
changed from a one-time to a monthly basis. Following deliberations of AAI
with MIAL, an agreement was reached according to which MIAL would
make full payment of ex-gratia amount in lump-sum and the balance would
be a monthly payment over the next ten years. AAI justified (July 2013) its
actions stating that as the claim of Retirement Compensation from MIAL was
as per the Voluntary Retirement Scheme of AAI, no loss had been incurred by
AAI.

Reply needs to be viewed against the facts tha

(i) MOCA stated in November 2009 that payment of retirement
compensation to AAI amounting to %260.86 crore became due
immediately after the end of Operational Support Period (i.e. 03
May 2009 as per OMDA).

(ii) AAI, however, allowed MIAL to pay 154.23 crore in four instalments
and to make balance payments in monthly instalments spread over
a period of 10 years against the directions of MOCA, which was an
undue favour to MIAL by AAI.

MOCA's attention is drawn to the recommendation of PAC on a similar issue
in Audit Report No. 5 of 2012-13 relating to the implementation of PPP
arrangements in Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi where PAC
concluded that MOCA had erred in safeguarding the interests of employees
of AAI and failed to enforce its directives while also recommending that
MOCA enforce the contractual obligations as per OMDA.



Pion

As per Article 2.6.1 of OMDA, AAI had agreed to lease out land in CS! Airport
other than the land under existing lease and ‘carved out assets’ to MIAL for
development of Airport. This was designated as 'demised premises’. The
lease deed agreement between MIAL and AAI provided (Article 2.1.2) that
on expiry or early termination of existing leases of AAI, the underlying land of
these leases would form an integral part of demised premises. The ‘carved
out assets’ were retained with AAI and did not form a part of the demised
premises. The carved out assets included the Air Traffic Control (ATC) tower,
AA\|-National Airports Division (NAD) staff colony, leased land to Hotel Leela,
retail fuel outlets outside airport operational boundary and the convention
centre. It was agreed (Article 2.6.3 of OMDA) that land underlying the
carved out assets could be leased to MIAL, if required for aeronautical
purposes.

Chart-11 Airport Land

Following the
agreement with MIAL
thus, the airport land
comprised ‘demised
premises’ leased to it
and ‘carved out
assets’ retained by

—_-_—_—, AAI. MIAL could use
Non transfer Transfer the ‘demised
10% 90% premises’ to create

‘transfer assets’ as
well as ‘non-transfer
No Aeronautical assets’. ‘Transfer
seronaut assets’ encompass
assets used for both
aeronautical and non-aeronautical purposes which would be transferred
back to AAI at the conclusion of the agreement. ‘Non-transfer assets’ imply
land available for commercial exploitation by MIAL for which AA! does not
have the obligation (though it has the right) to acquire MIAL’s rights, titles and
interests at the conclusion of the agreement. Land available for ‘non-transfer
asset’ is limited to 10 per cent of the demised premises according to OMDA.

6.1 Survey of airport land and maintenance of land records

OMDA (April 2006) under which ‘demised premises’ were handed over to
MIAL did not define the specific details of the leased land. Schedule 25 o



दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

OMDA was required to have a map of the ‘demised premises’ which was left
blank. Lease deed between AAI and MIAL (April 2006) also did not
demarcate the ‘demised premises’. Relevant schedule (Schedule 1) of the
lease deed was also left blank. OMDA (Schedule 27) only delineated
‘carved out assets’ as 3,08,747.15 sq.m.(76.3 acres‘). Thus, the actual area
and demarcation of leased premises were not firmly defined before handing
over the land to MIAL. Even the extent of ‘demised premises’ was not
mentioned in OMDA or the lease deed.

AAI had indicated in its RFP (2005) that the total area of Mumbai Airport was
1,875 acres. MIAL, in its Master Plan of 2007 attempted a property map of the
airport land. The total area of airport land as ascertained by MIAL was 2,001
acres, much higher compared to AAI’s figure of 1,875 acres. MIAL indicated
the ‘carved out assets’, existing and expired leases, land in possession of
other government agencies, land under dispute and encroached land in the
map, separately. Demised premises were indicated as 1,912.9 acres and
‘carved out assets’ as 88 acres. The very significant difference in the extent
of land quoted by AAI and MIAL raises questions on the quality of records
and documents maintained by AAI.

AAI had constituted a Committee (11 May 2011) to carry out proper
verification of land records for execution of Supplementary Lease Deed. As
per the Committee’s Report (05 July 2011) the total area, as per Property
Register Cards, was 2001.36 acres. It was however noticed that the
Supplementary Lease Deed signed by AAI and MIAL in December 2011
recorded the total land vested with AAI (lessor) at CSI Airport, Mumbai as
2006.73 acres. Thus, even after 4-5 years of signing of OMDA and handing
over of CSI Airport, Mumbai to MIAL, the total area of the airport land was not
firmed up.

The total area of the airport land as it altered progressively from 2006 to 2012
is shown below:

Table 4: Land holding at CSI Airport, Mumbai

LAND HOLDING AT CSI AIRPORT
Status as on 03 May 5 हे Status as per the Status as on December
। 777 conmiteetern | ue anes
1875 acres 2001 acres 2001.36 acres 2006.73 acres

6 One acre = 4,046.82 sq.metre.



Report No. 15 of 2014 — |

AAI stated (July 2013) that the area of the airport land could be determined
only after removal of encroachment.

MOCA replied (November 2013) that OMDA provided only map of the
‘demised premises’ and ‘carved out assets’ and that the land was handed
over on as-is-where-is basis. While agreeing that no proper land records were
available with AAl, MOCA stated that even after carrying out the survey, the
land in possession with MIAL might alter as the exchange of land with MIAL
was still in progress.

It is pertinent to mention in this regard that PAC in their report on Performance
Audit of Implementation of PPP- Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi
contained in Audit Report No. 5 of 2012-13, on a similar issue relating to Delhi
Airport, recommended that necessary survey of the land be undertaken and
physical markings erected to identify the demised land and carved out
assets for future and PAC apprised within six months. MOCA and MIAL would
be well advised to act on the above recommendation in respect of MIAL
and CSI Airport too.

6.2

‘Carved out land transferred to MIAL on the basis of meagre
upfront fee

‘Carved out assets’ were primarily in
and could be transferred to MIAL, if r

MIAL requested MOCA (in 2007) to transfer nearly the entire land under

‘Carved Out Assets’ for establishing

expansion/ development of CSI Airport, Mumbai. The matter was considered

by AAI [1090 Board Meeting/ 27 Apri
2008) and it was decided to lease
‘carved out assets’ (15 acres of Na
acres of Convention Centre and 2.98
It was also agreed that appropriate

be decided separately. Subsequent

ended for the use of AAI as per OMDA
equired, for aeronautical purposes only.

aeronautical services and carrying ou

2007 and 11% Board Meeting/ 07 Apri
out an additional 28.98 acres out ०
ional Airport Division (NAD) Colony, 11
acres of Air Traffic Contro!| Tower area).
payment for the additional lease would
ly, it was decided (16 April 2008) that 25

acres of NAD colony and 16 acres of Convention Centre would be leased to
MIAL. MIAL also agreed to identify in lieu of the above, a suitable area of 5
acres to be provided to AAI for its future requirements. AAl agreed to transfer
43.98 acres out of ‘carved out assets’ to MIAL which was approved by AAI
Board in its 1297 Board Meeting of 06 March 2009.

AAI Board decided (March 2009) that the additional carved out land of 43.98
acres would be transferred to MIAL against a consideration based on upfron
fee paid by MIAL. An amount of %3.52 crore was worked out as consideration
for this land on the basis of the upfront fee of %150 crore paid by MIAL

Gece C101 y 43.98 acres = %3.52 crore). The Supplementary Lease Deed for

the additional land was executed on 15 May 2009. Audit noticed that AAI
subsequently transferred an additional pocket of land measuring 4.17 acres



EEE

on MIAL's request basin:

Report No. 15 of 2014

g its valuation on the upfront fee of %150 crore. A

supplementary Lease Deed was executed on 15 April 2010 to lease out 4.17

acres of 'F' block in NAD
x 4.17 acres).

2150 Crore

Colony to MIAL on payment of %0.33 crore पक्के acres

MOCA stated (March 2012) that the upfront fee paid by MIAL to AAI had ‘no

relation to the extent of |
the OMDA fee’. Hence,
for calculating price of a

and and asset at an airport and it was only a part of
it would not be proper to use upfront fee as the base
ditional land provided by AAI to MIAL.

Article 2.6.3 of OMDA states that ‘with respect to land underlying the carved

out assets, the parties fur

ther agreed that if, at any time during the term, MIAL

requires the said land for providing any aeronautical services or developing
and/ or constructing any aeronautical assets, the parties shall come together
to negotiate in good faith, the terms and conditions on which AAI shall lease

to MIAL and MIAL shall

ake on lease from AAI, the said land’. Allowing

additional leased land to MIAL without negotiation, at the rates based on
upfront fee, was, thus, inappropriate.

AAI stated (July 2013) that additional land was leased out for

aeronautical use only
commercial rate could
stated (November 20

and not for commercial exploitation. Hence,
not be demanded from MIAL. In addition, MOCA
3) that income from these assets would offset

aeronautical charges benefitting general public.

The reply needs to be viewed against the following facts:

(i) OMDA enjoined that the terms and conditions for lease of

carved out |

land should be negotiated which was not done. That

the land was leased out for aeronautical purposes does not alter

this provision

(ii) Besides, with the increase in the extent of demised premises, the

quantum of

land available to MIAL for commercial exploitation

also increased which would be available for 30 years with an
assurance of continuation for another 30 years.

6.3 Commercial exploitation of 190.1 acres

Article 2.2.4 of OMDA allows MIAL to utilise ten per cent (or such different

percentage as set forth
authority of Mumbai, as

in the master plan norms of the competent loca
the same may change from time to time) of the

demised premises for provision of non transfer assets. This is essentially the land
available to MIAL for commercial exploitation.

RFP issued by AAI in 2005 indicated the total area of Mumbai Airport as 1875

acres. OMDA signed on

4 April 2006 did not indicate the total area of the


Report No. 15 0|

f 2014

———

airport but fixed the area of ‘carved out assets’ as 76.3 acres (schedule 27 of

OM
the
the
of

DA). Considering the total area as 1875 acres (as mentioned in the RFP),
balance land of 1798.7 acres would be ‘'demised premises’. Thus, as per
RFP and OMDA, MIAL would be eligible to utilise 179.8 acres (10 per cent
798.7 acres) for commercial exploitation. Subsequently, AAI signed a

supplementary lease deed with MIAL (December 2011) which placed the
area of demised premises (as on 26 April 2006) as 1901.03 acres. This
increased the area available to MIAL for commercial exploitation to 190.1
acres. Thus, MIAL would be benefitted through additional commercially

expl

Whi
as 187.5 ac
(November
exploitation,

res (10 per cent o
2013) that Mi
due to delay in vac

oitable land admeasuring 10.23 acres.

The reply needs to be viewed against the following:

(i)

RFP of 2005 had p

laced

(April 2006) had set aside 76.3 acres as carved out assets, with
1798.7 acres. The land available

bal

the to

MOCA that 187.5 acres 0

explo

(ii) AA

ance demised
commercial exploi

premises of

al area as pi

ation to MIAL is incorrect.

agreeing to an area of
2006. This increases the availabi
to 190.1 acres as per the

(iii) AAI had earlier (April 20
restricting the carved out assets
airport is 2006 acres (as indica
signed in December 2011), the

higher at 1966.76 acres,
commercial exploita

liv)

acres

commercial
encroachment of 204.99 acres was removed and that it was unlikely

cross |

During Exit Conference,
local authority (MMR

ion

DA) had ai
at present. M

exploi

ation

90 acres.

ity of land for commercia

provisions of OMDA.

to 39.95 acres. As the total
ed in the supplementary
demised premises would

urther increasing the land eligibili
© 196.67 acres.

ation is 10 per cent of demised premises and n
er OMDA (Article 2.2.4). Thus, the contention of
land were initially available for commerci

has signed a supplementary lease agreement (December 20
901.03 acres for demised premises as on A
exploitati:

0) signed another supplementary lease de:

| area of
lease de
actually
y of MIAL

he representative of MIAL informed that

lowed commercial exploi

increase as and

ation of

IAL subsequently informed that the quantum
might

when

e claiming the exact area of land available for commercial exploitation
original demised premises), MOCA stated
AL could not utilise even this land for commercial
ating the encroachment of land.

he total airport area as 1875 acres. OMDA

he
or
ot
he
ial

1)

pril

he
33
of
he
to

Thus, the quantum of land available for commercial exploitation remains un-
defined. It may not be prudent to overlook the earning potential of even
minimum of 133 acres. Benefit from the earning potential would accrue to
MIAL as revenue out of ‘non-transfer’ asset. Though the same would not be

he


दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

considered for determination of airport charges in terms of SSA, the same
would be a revenue enhancing activity having the potential for reduction of
burden in the form of various levies on passengers.

MOCA/AAI need 10 carefully work out fhe economics of commercial
exploitation of land.

6.4 Unwarranted benefit to MIAL on relocation of activities and
change in land use

As mentioned in para 6.2 above, the ‘carved out assets’ were retained by
AAI for its own usage and could be transferred to MIAL only if the latter
required it for aeronautical purposes. After the transfer of 48.15 acres of land
out of carved out assets on the request of MIAL, the remaining carved out
land (39.95 acres) comprised essentially of 8615 NAD staff residential colony.
MIAL proposed to relocate the Air India Cabin Catering and Chef-Air Flight
Kitchen located in the demised premises to AAI's balance carved out land.
AA|/ MOCA agreed to this proposal.

Relocation of these non-aeronautical facilities in carved out land amounts to
usage of additional carved out land for non-aeronautical purposes and was
a violation of the OMDA provisions which enjoined that ‘carved out land’
could be used by MIAL only for aeronautical purposes.

MIAL subsequently requested for change in end use of this vacated land for
non-aeronautical purpose which was agreed to by MOCA on the condition
that MIAL provide an alternate location of identical size for aeronautical
purpose. The alternate site was in an encroached area but was accepted
by AAI/MOCA.

While accepting that end use was altered for 3 acres, MOCA stated
(November 2013) that Air India had long discontinued use of the Air India
Cabin Catering and Chef-Air Flight Kitchen facility.

The reply has to be viewed against the facts th

fe]

(i) the intent had been to relocate non-aeronautical activities from the
demised premises into the balance portion of ‘carved out asset’
earmarked for the exclusive use of AAI.

(ii) there were no provisions in OMDA that allowed change in end use
of land. However, land use continued to be altered by AAI at the
request of MIAL.

(iii) The alternate site (3 acre) earmarked by MIAL at Agripada for

aeronautical purposes or for transfer to AAI was actually
encroached (as seen from the Master Plans of 2007 and 2011). AAI,


Report No. 15 of 2014 — |

however, did not raise any objections in this regard with MIAL. Thus,
effectively, the land under non-aeronautical use by MIAL increased
while relegating equivalent land for aeronautical functions to
encroached areas.

6.5 86515 Traffic Management Centre

MIAL had been directed to earmark 5 acres of land for 0615 Air Traffic
Management Centre while agreeing to lease additional 25 acres NAD land
and 16 acres Convention Centre out of carved out land as demised
premises. In the Master Plan 2011, MIAL marked the area of 5 acres in the
encroached region for AAI. Subsequently, it was decided in the 15th OIOC
meeting (14 September 2012) that AAI did not have an immediate
requirement of land and the same would be made available by MIAL as and
when required. The matter was treated as closed for the time being without
actual transfer of land to AAI.

The decision taken in the 15** OIOC meeting to treat the issue of transfer of
5 acres land to AAI as closed for the time being indicates that AAI was not
proactive about its requirement and that MIAL was able to prevail upon
OIOC for postponing the provision of land to AAI that would be contingent
upon availability post slum rehabilitation.

AAI stated (July 2013) that its Planning Department in coordination with Air
Navigation Services Department was in the process of identification of area
which MIAL would be asked to handover. MOCA replied that in 190 010८
meeting, AAI requested MIAL to hand over 5 acres immediately; however
MIAL stated that they would hand over land only after removal of
encroachment.

MIAL confirmed in the Exit Conference that it would provide suitable land to
AAI after discussion. MOCA would do well to monitor the developments
closely and ensure that the desired outcome is not delayed further.

6.6 Land in possession of other government agencies

Pockets of land in and around CS! Airport had been in the possession of other
government agencies. Master Plan 2007 prepared by MIAL lists nine such
plots. This includes land in possession of Posts & Telegraph (P&T) Department,
Air Force, Indian Navy, Central Public Works Department (CPWD), Yellow
Fever Hospital and Indian Meteorological Department (IMD). Some of these
plots were outside the boundary of the 'demised premises’, as in the case of
P&T colony. MIAL, in its Master Plan, pointed out that these plots of land may
be required for future use. The status of these plots as seen from the Master
Plan 2011 and study of minutes of OIOC was as below:


दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

Land ॥1 possession of P&T Department, Air Force, Navy: The land in
possession of Air Force and Navy has been permanently transferred to
hem as seen from Master Plan 2011. A major portion of the land in
possession of P&T Department is outside the demised premises. It was
indicated (Master Plan 2007) that this land would be required for
development of CSI Airport. However in the Master Plan 2011, it has been
deemed to be ‘presently not required’.

e IMD premises: It has been decided to relocate these buildings to ‘carved

out assets’. The cost of construction of the new office is to be borne by
MIAL.

Land _in_ possession of CPWD: Central Public Works Department (CPWD)

AAI

occupies 17.36 acres of land within the demised premises of the airport.
hough the title of the land is with AAI, it has been in the possession of
CPWD for historical reasons (CPWD being in charge of maintenance of
Mumbai Airport till 1972). As per the Master Plan (2007 and 2011), this land
was necessary for developing the air cargo facility at the airport. MIAL
entered into an agreement with CPWD (Memorandum of Understanding
signed in May 2009) according to which CPWD would vacate the said
land in lieu of MIAL constructing offices, residences and godowns for
CPWD at identified locations. The cost of construction in this case would
also be borne by MIAL .

/MOCA stated (July / November 2013) that any expenditure involved in

relocation of various facilities and consequent increase in project cost, if any,
has to be considered by AERA at the time of determination of tariff as per the

provisions of AERA Act.

The fact remains that land requirement for the airport and intended use of
such land has been altered over time as per successive Master Plans of MIAL.

AAI

॥ MOCA did not significantly comment on these plans and allowed such

changes to be made. Transfer of possession of identified land pockets (in
possession of IMD, CPWD) to MIAL involves significant expenditure which

WO
WO
ad

uld be loaded to the project cost in subsequent control periods and
uld, thus, lead to future increases in airport charges and _ possibly
ditional burden on passengers.

6.

7 Encroachment

While Schedule 2 of Lease Deed 2006 (signed on 26 April 2006) indicated the
area under encroachment as 147 acres, Schedule 2 of State Government
Support Agreement (SGSA) of 2006 (signed a day later on 27 April 2006) the
area under encroachment was depicted as 171 acres, approximately.
Mention of two different figures as area under encroachment in the two
documents signed by AAI on two successive days in 2006 indicated lack of

——————»


Report No. 15 of 2014 — |

clear understanding of AAI regarding the area that was actually under
encroachment. Incidentally, OMDA did not demarcate the area under
encroachment though a map of such area was to be included in Schedule
26 which was left blank. MIAL reported [209 OIOC meeting - 05 January 2007)
that the area under encroachments was about 276 acres. Subsequently, in
correspondence with the Collector, Mumbai Suburban District, (17 January
2011) AAI stated that the land under encroachment was 308.96 acres. AAI
stated (July 2013) that encroachment of land could be ascertained and
finalised only after proper removal of encroachment and survey thereafter.
While accepting the fact that AAI had no proper land records including
encroachment due to its legacy, MOCA stated that survey had been carried
out by MIAL and removal of encroachment is getting delayed due to
involvement of various complex issues.

This reinforces poor quality of land management at the Airport by AAI
already touched upon in paragraph 6.1 of this report.

6.8 Removal of encroachment

MIAL executed a contract with M/s. Housing Development and Infrastructure
Limited (HDIL), on 15 October 2007 to undertake activities relating to
rehabilitation of encroachers and restoration of airport land under
encroachment. HDIL was accordingly granted rights to develop part of the
land vacated by encroachers in a phased manner. The encroachment was
to be removed within 48 months of commencement date i.e. by October
2011 or with a further six months’ extension at MIAL's discretion. The contract
was subsequently terminated by MIAL as the encroachments were not
removed.

AAI stated (July 2013) that the contract with HDIL for removal of slums/
encroachment by MIAL was terminated due to failure of HDIL to execute the
work. MOCA also informed (November 2013) that HDIL and MIAL had
appointed an arbitrator and arbitration proceedings were in process.

With the termination of the contract and lack of progress in removal of
encroachment, development plans at the airport would continue to suffer.


Chapter 7 Passenger Service Fee

(Security Component) - Escrow Account

Licensee (MIAL) of an airport is entitled to collect fees known as Passenger

Service Fee (PSF) from the embarking passengers at such rate as the Cen

ral

Government may specify (Rule 88 of the Aircraft Rules 1937). The licensee is

also liable to pay for security component to any security agency designa

ed

by the Central Government for providing security service at the airport.
Article 12.4.1 of OMDA stipulates that PSF shall be collected and disbursed in

accordance with the provisions of SSA. Clause 3.1A.1 of SSA states that
chargeable at the airport shall be inclusive of security expenditure on

PSF
he

designated security agency. Security Component constitutes 65 per cent,

and the Facilitation Component 35 per cent of the total PSF charge,
embarking passenger.

per

Clause 3.1A.4 of SSA also states that respective airlines shall collect the entire

PSF and distribute the Security Component (SC) to AAI and the Facilita
Component (FC) to MIAL directly. FC payable to MIAL can be revised un

ion
der

the provisions of SSA while SC can be revised as and when directed by GOI.
MOCA issued instructions’? from time to time which allowed the airport

operators to collect the SC component of PSF and laid down cer

conditions for its utilisation. Broadly, these instructions were:

ain

i) PSF at airports would be collected by the respective Airport Operator,

which could be AAI, JVC or a private operator;

ii) For the SC of PSF, a separate Escrow account would be opened and

operated by the JVC or private operator;

iii) PSF (SC) of 130 (65 per cent), collected out of total %200
passenger to be deposited in the escrow account, for meeting
expenses relating to the Central Industrial Security Force (CISF).

per
the
The

collection must be utilised to meet security related expenses only; and

iv) Any balance amount remaining in PSF (SC) account would

be

transferred to AAI by the airport operator through a process of mutual
consultation for payment to CISF deployed for security purposes at

other airports.

7 May 2006, June 2007, April 2010 and July 2010 and Standard Operating Procedure in

January 2009.

—————————————»


Report No. 15 of 2014 — |

However, MOCA subsequently amended the provision regarding transfer of
balance funds to AAI and directed (June 2007) that PSF (SC) collected at an
airport operated by a JVC or private operator would be utilised at the
concerned airport only to meet the security related expenses of that airport.
In the Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) issued by MOCA on 19 January
2009 for Accounts and Audit of PSF (SC) by JVC/ Private Operators, MOCA
also mandated, inter-alia, that the Escrow account would be subject to audit
by C&AG.

Thus, MOCA progressively allowed MIAL to operate the PSF (SC) account
which was a deviation from the provisions of the SSA. MIAL incurred
expenditure out of these funds on ineligible items. A paragraph titled
‘Unauthorised withdrawal of %15.22 crore from the Escrow Account’ had
been reported (C&AG’s Report No. 3, (Commercial) of 2011-12). MOCA
informed (December 2011) the Committee on Public Undertakings (COPU)
that MIAL has been directed to remit the amount back in the escrow
account. MOCA confirmed to COPU (November 2013) that M/s. MIAL has
remitted the amount in the PSF (SC) Escrow Account on 19 August 2013.
MOCA however informed COPU that penal interest had not been recovered
as MIAL had filed a writ petition in Delhi High Court claiming expenses
incurred by them on deployment of private security guards which is presently
sub-judice. COPU expressed their strong disapproval of the inaction of the
Ministry and desired that needful be done at the earliest along with all out
efforts to expedite the legal process.

In addition, persistent irregularities have been noticed over the years like
incurring expenditure on items other than the permitted purchases from PSF
(SC) as listed below:

7.1 Unauthorised expenditure

(i) Clause 3.3.5 of SSA states that JVC shall be responsible for procuring and
maintaining at its own cost all security systems and equipment (except arms
and ammunitions) as required by the Government of India (GOl) or the
Bureau of Civil Aviation Security or its designated nominee(s)/
representative(s) from time to time. However, MOCA in its Order dated 16
April 2010 permitted that entire cost incurred on security equipment
deployed at the airports could be met from PSF (SC), over-riding the
provisions of SSA. It was noticed that MIAL unilaterally procured various
ineligible equipment including computers, furniture and fixtures and
designated them as being essential for maintenance of security. This has
resulted in extending unwarranted favour to MIAL amounting to & 87.97 crore
during 2006-12.

(ii) As per Article 8.5.6 (i) of OMDA, JVC shall, during the term, maintain at its
own cost the insurances set out in Schedule 11. However, MOCA specified


दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

(January 2009) in SOP that all fixed assets acquired through PSF (SC) shall be
adequately insured by Private Operator and insurance charges shall be paid
from PSF (SC). MIAL charged 22.55 lakh as insurance charges in the PSF (SC)
account for the period upto 2011-12.

Instructions of MOCA with respect to insurance charges to be charged to PSF
(SC) account were against the OMDA provisions which led to undue favour
to the tune of 2.55 lakh to the MIAL upto the year 2011-12.

MOCA replied (November 2013) that a need was felt by the Government to
upgrade the security equipment available at the airports to the level of the
best in the world.

Reply of MOCA is not acceptable as its letter dated 16.04.2010 stated that in
the case of new airports, the entire cost of the security equipment would be
borne by the airport operator. However in case of CSI Airport, Mumbai,
though MIAL was required to bear the cost of security equipment as per SSA,
MOCA permitted the same to be borne out of PSF(SC).

It is pertinent to note that PAC in their report presented to Parliament on 06
February 2014 regarding implementation of PPP in Indira Gandhi Internationa
Airport, Delhi while noting the assurance of MOCA in the matter, had
observed that such lapses should not recur.

7.2 Unjustified charge

As per Para No. ३(५) of MOCA's Order dated 08 January 2010, “The
permissible expenditure out of PSF (SC) shall not include the expenditure on
any other security staff (other than CISF) or other administrative set-up
created/engaged by the Airport Operators. The administrative cost,
consultant's cost etc. in respect of PSF (SC) handling shall not be chargeable
to PSF (SC) account.”

MIAL charged salary of %12.36 crore from PSF (SC) Escrow Account during the
year 2009-10 to 2011-12 in respect of security employees and other
miscellaneous services from private agencies deployed at Mumbai Airport,
which was not permissible out of PSF (SC) and is a violation of MOCA's order
of January 2010.

MOCA replied (November 2013) that in view of the frequent observations of
C&AG in respect of improper utilisation of PSF(SC) funds by the airport
operators, it has been decided to amend the modus operandi of PSF
handling by way of creating Aviation Security Fee by further amending Rule
88 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937.


Report No. 15 of 2014 — |

It is pertinent to note, in this connection, that PAC recommended (report
presented to Parliament on 06 February 2014) while considering
implementation of PPP in Indira Gandhi International Airport, Delhi that
MOCA look into the matter and fix responsibility on the part of officials
responsible for avoidable loss to Government.

Further action in this regard in MIAL would be watched in future audits.


Chapter 8 | Conclusion and Recommendations

Conclusion

PPP projects are designed to bring in private capital, enhance efficiency and
ensure professional management. One of the goals of a PPP arrangement is
to effectively allocate risks among the contracting parties. Examination in
audit indicated that risks had not been appropriately transferred to the
concessionaire in the development of CS! Airport, Mumbai. Though the
project cost more than doubled from %5,826 crore to 12,380 crore (restricted
to %11,647.46 crore for the period upto March 2014 by AERA), the
concessionaire did not appear to have faced financial vulnerability for the
same as the funding gap was being largely absorbed by the passengers
through levy of Development Fee (DF), though such levy was not in OMDA.
Further, the project has been delayed by four years (from 2010 to 2014) with
tardy progress noticed in mandatory capital projects as well as other
projects. This delay, however, did not affect the concessionaire adversely as
MIAL had not been penalised on this account and MOCA/AAI instead,
approved extensions and agreed to reschedule the projects across different
phases. As a result of the delay in project implementation, the terminal
building is expected to be fully ready operationally, only by the time the
airport would have reached its design capacity.

he agreement provides for a shared till system which, coupled with the
reatment of significant revenue generating activities like ground and cargo
handling as ‘non-aeronautical’, would lead to higher airport charges
payable by the passengers as compared to other airports in the country
except Delhi).

Rights of commercial exploitation of 179.8 acres of land were provided to the
concessionaire in the agreement. However, owing to poor maintenance of
land records by AAI, the commercially exploitable land potentially increased
6 190.1 acres. It may not be prudent to overlook the earning potential of
even the minimum of 133 acres as allowed by the local authority. Benefit
rom the earning potential would accrue to MIAL as revenue out of ‘non-
ransfer' asset. Though the same would not be considered for determination
of airport charges in terms of SSA, the same would be a revenue enhancing
activity having the potential for reduction of burden in the form of various
levies on passengers. MOCA/AAI need to carefully work out the economics
of commercial exploitation of land.

Besides, the provision of automatic extension of the contract period to 60
years with terms and conditions frozen in OMDA and the right of first refusal
or a second airport would appear to confer a benefit on the
concessionaire/private partners of MIAL.

मय


Report No. 15 of 2014 — |

AAI has received a gross revenue share of %2,857.33 crores over the period
2006-13. The revenue share of AAI is however set to decline with outsourcing
of activities as noticed in the case of domestic and international cargo
activities and the airport hotel project. The private partners have, on the
other hand, received gross revenues of %4,526 crore during the same period
on an investment of %888 crore without taking into account other potential
benefits that would accrue over time from commercial exploitation of land.

The conflict between OMDA and AERA Act in respect of cargo and ground
handling was resolved by MOCA's decision to categorise the revenues
thereof as non-aeronautical as provided under OMDA. Ministry invited
attention to AERA Act on determination of tariff duly considering the
concessions offered by Central Government in the agreement. However,
while levying development fee the express provisions of OMDA on financing
have not been accorded the same centrality and the funding gap was
bridged through levy of development fee on passengers.

There is a strong case for Government to critically review the outcomes from
the PPP arrangement in MIAL in line with the findings in this report and
recommendations of PAC in the report on Implementation of PPP in Indira
Gandhi International Airport, Delhi and protect the interests of Governmen
and passengers duly ensuring sanctity of various agreements entered into as
also benefits in the form of open ended project cost and dilution of financia
risk allocated to the private partner are not allowed in such arrangements in
future.

Recommendations

Absence of review clause and re-negotiation appears to virtually allow MIAL
the right to operate the airport for a period of 60 years with the terms and
conditions frozen in OMDA. It is essential that a regular and well documented
review of performance of MIAL by MOCA is in place to safeguard the interest
of Government and to get MIAL to deliver the committed outputs. This would
enable MOCA to address the concern expressed by PAC in a similar PPP

arrangement for Delhi airport.
9 P (Para 3.5)

There is a need for MOCA and AAI to devise time bound and regular
monitoring structure related to progress of work.
(Para 3.9)

MOCA may continuously and critically review the financing pattern of MIAL
and ensure that finance risk for the project as allocated in the agreement to
private partners is duly observed.

(Paras 4.3 and 4.4)
MOCA/AAI may ensure that necessary survey of land is undertaken and
physical markings erected to identify the demised land and carved out
assets clearly. MOCA/AAI need to carefully work out the economics of
commercial exploitation of land.

(Paras 6.1 and 6.3)


दि... Report No. 15 of 2014

MOCA may critically assess the financial impact of concessions granted
under OMDA and revenue ensured from MIAL after ground handling and
cargo services were categorised as aeronautical services. MOCA may
monitor and review the extent and adequacy of promised improvements in
infrastructure and handling capacity in CS! Airport, compared to the
projected reduction in revenues.

(Paras 5.2 and 5.4)

MOCA may note that PAC in its report of 06 February 2014 on Audit Report
No. 5 of 2012-13 on Implementation of PPP in Indira Gandhi International
Airport, Delhi, urged the Government to consider the aspect, while awarding
airport contracts in future, that ‘shared fill’ actually increased the burden on
travelling passengers as aeronautical tariffs were not subsidised by a
significant part of non-aeronautical tariff which are low capital intensive and
high revenue in nature.

(Para 5.1)
New Delhi (USHA SANKAR) _
Dated: 29 May 2014 Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General

and Chairperson, Audit Board

Countersigned

Ww

New Delhi (SHASHI KANT SHARMA)
Dated: 30 May 2014 Comptroller and Auditor General of India


दि... Report No, 15 of 2014
Glossary
[AAs Airports Authority of India

[AERA | Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India

[ANS | Air Navigation Services

९? कि Airport Operator

ATC Air Traffic Contro|

BOOT Build, Own, Operate and Transfer

८1020 City and Industrial Development Corporation of
Maharashtra Limited

CISF Central Industrial Security Force

CNS/ ATM Communication, Navigation and Surveillance/ Air
Traffic Management

COPU Committee on Public Undertakings

CPWD Central Public Works Department

CSI Airport, Mumbai | Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport, Mumbai

[DF wd Development Fee

}DIAL | Delhi International Airport Private Limited

|EGOM | Empowered Group of Ministers

[FA sd Financial Auditor

FC Facilitation Component (PSF)

७01 Government of India

GTA Global Technical Advisor

Ipc nterest during construction

}IMmD sid ndian Meteorological Department

IMG nter Ministerial Group

JV Joint Venture

Jvc Joint Venture Company

k.m. kilometre

MCP Mandatory Capital Projects

MIAL Mumbai International Airport Private Limited

MOCA Ministry of Civil Aviation

[mppa sid million passengers per annum

[NAD / National Airports Division (AAI)

[NMIA Navi Mumbai International Airport

010९८ OMDA Implementation Oversight Committee

joa Operation, Management and Development
Agreement

5a)



Report No. 15 of 2014 — |

[PPP tid Public-Private Partnership

[PSF sd Passenger Service Fee

[RFP sid Request for Proposal

|ROFR = sd Right of First Refusal

sc Security Component (PSF)

SGSA State Government Support Agreement

[SHA Shareholders’ Agreement

[SSA sd State Support Agreement

for Standard Operating Procedure for Accounts/Audit of
PSF(SC)

SPC Special Purpose Company

Isq.m /| m. square meter

[tA ssid Technical Auditor