28
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2007-08)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government  on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 18th Report of the Standing Committee on Defence
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘In-depth study and critical review
of Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL)]
TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2008/Phalguna, 1929 (Saka)

TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2007-08)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government  on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the 18th Report of the Standing Committee on Defence
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘In-depth study and critical review
of Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.3.2008
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha on 19.3.2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2008/Phalguna 1929 (Saka)


C.O.D. No. 94
Price : Rs. 75.00
© 2008 BY L OK SABHA  SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
 PAGES
COMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE  (2007-08) ............................................       (ii)
PREFACE ........................................................................................................ (iv)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government .........................     25
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies .....................................     49
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ......................................    52
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ...........................................................................  58
APPENDIX I Minutes of the Sitting ................................................    60
APPENDIX II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government
on the Recommendations contained in the
18th Report of the Standing Committee on
Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) .............................   67

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2007-08)
  Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
3. Shri S. Bangarappa
4. Shri Milind Murli Deora
5. Shri Santosh Gangwar
6. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa
7. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
8. Shri C. Kuppusami
9. Dr. K. S. Manoj
10. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
12. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
13. Shri Shrinivas Patil
14. Shri Raju Rana
15. Dr. H. T. Sangliana
16. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
17. Prof. Mahadeorao Shiwankar
18. Shri Manvendra Singh
19. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
20. Shri Rajesh Verma
21. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi
Rajya Sabha
22. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
23. Shri Jai Prakash Aggarwal
24. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
25. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
(ii)

26. Shri R. K. Dhawan
27. Smt. N. P. Durga
28. Shri S. P. M. Syed Khan
29. Shri K. B. Shanappa
30. Shri Arun Shourie
31. Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S. K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
4. Shri D. R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha — Under Secretary
6. Smt. Indu Kaushal — Executive Assistant
(iii)

(iv)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Defence (2007-08)
having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on
their behalf, present this Twenty-Eighth Report of the Committee on
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Eighteenth Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on‘In-depth Study and Critical Review of Bharat Electr onics Limited
(BEL)’.
2. The Eighteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in
Rajya Sabha on 7.5.2007 and it contained 21 recommendations/
observations. The Ministry of Defence have furnished their Action taken
Replies on all the recommendations/observations on 10.8.2007. The
Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence to have clarifications on certain issues arising out of the action
taken replies on 27.12.2007.
3. The Draft Action Taken Report was considered and adopted by
the Committee at their sitting held on 6.2.2008.
4. After adoption of draft Action Taken Report, the Committee
took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Heavy
Industries (Department of Public Enterprises) to have some more
clarifications on certain issues arising out of action taken replies on
3.3.2008. Minutes of the related sittings are given in Appendix-I to the
Report.
5. An analysis of action taken by the Government on
recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report of the
Standing Committee on Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in
Appendix-II.
  N EW D ELHI ; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
14 March, 2008 Chairman,
24 Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
The Report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Eighteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on In-
depth study and critical review of Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL)
which was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya
Sabha on 7 May, 2007.
2. The Committee’s Eighteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha),
contains 21 observations/recommendations on the following aspects :-
Sl.No. Para No. Subject
 1 2 3
 1. 2.8 Restructuring of the Board of Directors
 2. 2.9 Need for organizational restructure in all
the nine units of BEL
 3. 2.10 Need for conferring additional power to the
Board of Directors
 4. 3.3 Navratna status for BEL
 5. 4.42 Diversification
 6. 4.43 Infrastructure and their upgradation
 7. 4.44 Capacity utilization & order book position
 8. 4.45 Delivery schedule
 9. 4.46 Need for expanding export market
10. 4.47 Need to ensure competitiveness
11. 4.48 Appointment of Agents for export
12. 5.9 Indigenization
13. 6.32 Perspective Plan of BEL
14. 6.33 Need for close examination of
modernization/upgradation measures

2
1 2 3
15. 6.34 Status of major projects of BEL
16. 6.35 Need to retain R&D engineers and technical
staff
17. 7.20 Research & Development
18. 7.21 Need for extending financial help for
undertaking some of the strategic
technologies
19. 7.22 Delegation of systems/sub-systems
development and manufacture activities
powers of DRDO to BEL
20. 8.5 Urgent need for involvement of private
sector
21. 8.6 Concluding observations/recommendations
3. Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the
Report. These have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by Government
Recommendation Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15,
16, 17, 19 & 20
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies
Recommendation Nos. 2 & 21
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee
Recommendation Nos. 1 & 13
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of Government are still awaited
Recommendation No. 18
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given
to implementation of recommendations except those the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies. If it is not

3
possible for any reason to implement any of the recommendations
in letter and spirit, the matter should be reported to the Committee
with reasons for non-implementation. The Committee desire that
action taken notes on the recommendations/observations contained
in Chapter-I and final replies to the recommendations contained in
Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to the Committee within six
months of the presentation of the Report.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations contained in
Chapter-I of this report.
A. Restructuring of the Board of Directors
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No. 2.8)
6. The Committee had noted that the Board of Directors of BEL
comprises Chairman and Managing Director, six Directors incharge of
Finance, Research and Development, Personnel, Marketing, Other Units
and Bangalore Complex respectively. The Board of Directors also
included part time Government Directors  i.e. Joint Secretary (Shipyards)
of the Ministry of Defence and two representatives of Armed Forces.
In accordance with the SEBI guidelines, BEL had restructured its Board
of Directors and had included part time independent Directors and
had also included various technical and management experts from
leading business institutions and IITs. Two senior most Officers from
Air Force and Navy were the permanent special invitees to all the
Board meetings. The Committee felt that the restructuring of the Board
of Directors was positive step to manage the Company in a professional
manner. However, the Committee noted that Army have not been
represented in the Board of Directors of BEL and only making the
representatives of the Armed Forces as permanent special invitees
would not serve any meaningful purpose. Therefore, the Committee
desired that officers from Army, Navy and Air Force should be made
permanent Members on the Board of Directors instead of designating
them as permanent special invitees to all the Board meetings. This
would ensure active and effective participation of the users with the
projects from the conceptualization stage to production and use and
would help BEL to take decision in a more concerted way.
7. The Ministry in their, action taken reply, have stated:
“Presently, BEL Board of Directors is having Signal Officer-in-Chief,
Army Headquarters as a permanent member. However, Vice Chief
of Air Staff, Indian Air Force and COM of Indian Navy are the

4
permanent special invitees to all the meetings of the BEL Board of
Directors as per MoD directives in this regard.
As per the Government of India, Department of Public Enterprises
(DPE) guidelines, the number of Government Directors should in no
case exceed two. The DPE guidelines on structure and composition of
PSU Boards stipulate that:—
(a) The functional Directors on the Board should not exceed
50% of actual strength.
(b) The number of Government Directors should not exceed
two.
(c) The number of non-official Directors should be at least
one-third of the actual strength.
BEL Board of Directors was restructured by the Government in
March 2006 in accordance with the DPE/SEBI guideline/listing
agreement requirements.
Present composition of BEL Board of Directors, which fully complies
all the above requirements, is as follows:—
(a) Functional Director (including CMD) : 7
(b) Government Director : 2
(c) Non-official (independent) Directors : 9
   TOTAL 18
As per the above required stipulations of DPE and to comply with
the SEBI listing agreement conditions, Government could appoint 2
Government Directors only on the Board of BEL, one from the
Administrative Ministry i.e., Joint Secretary (SY), MoD and one from
Army, being the largest customer for BEL i.e., SO-in-C, Army.”
8. When asked whether the Ministry of Defence or Bharat
Electronics Limited (BEL) have ever proposed to the Department of
Public Enterprises to modify the guidelines to enable nomination of
one member each from the three user Services as a permanent member
on the Board of Directors, the Ministry of Defence in a written reply
stated:—
“BEL has earlier (in 2004) proposed to the Ministry of Defence to
consider the representatives of the three wings of the Armed Forces

5
as independent Directors on the Board. MoD had in turn referred
the matter to the DPE and DPE had not agreed to the proposal.
Hence representatives of Services have been incorporated as
permanent Special invitees so as to have the benefit of their
contribution in Board meetings.”
9. Clarifying the issue further the Secretary, Defence Production
during oral evidence has stated:
“The Ministry of Public Enterprises have taken the approval of
cabinet before issuing the order regarding the composition of Board
of Directors. After that when it came to us we had taken it up a
number of times with the Ministry, and we did not implement
this order for a long time but all these pleas were not
considered… … This was put up to the then Hon’ble Raksha Mantri,
and with his orders, it was decided to implement these decisions
in toto. So, independent Directors, who are very competent in this
field were selected and put in place, and only two Government
Directors were allowed to work in any public sector undertaking;
and that is what today, we have.
As far as officers of the Armed Forces are concerned, they are also
Members of some Boards. In some Boards they are the Members,
and in some Boards, Joint Secretaries in the Ministry are the
Members. But wherever one is not a Member, he has been made
a permanent invitee in that Board. That is how we have resolved
this matter. No Board has ever taken a decision where voting
takes place. It does not happen in our companies. Everything is
done by consensus. Everything is done by understanding each
other. One debates with the other person, tells him what his
viewpoints are; and when the consensus is there, then only a
decision is taken. So, Sir, there is no question of invitee having
less powers than the Director. He has full powers to give his
opinion, to give his decision, to contribute to that decision-making
process. That is what is being done in the Armed Forces. In some
place, the Financial Advisors are also doing that job.”
10. During oral evidence, of the Ministry of Heavy Industries
(Department of Public Enterprises) the representatives further clarified
the position regarding the strength of the Board of Directors of Bharat
Electronics Limited. The clarifications are as under:—
“There is a policy approved by the Government about the
composition of Board of Directors of Central Public Sector
Enterprises. The Policy laid down is that one-third of the Directors

6
would be non-official Directors and the strength of the functional
Directors shall not exceed 50 percent of the total strength of the
Board of Directors and the Government nominee Directors shall
not exceed two in any case. So, the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Industry which is concerned with our Ministry has
taken the subject of professionalisation of Board of Directors as a
special subject for study and this has been reviewed in that
Committee a number of times. The Department of Defence
Production under which these two companies come, had also
appeared before the Committee and the then secretary of the
Department of Defence Production had given an undertaking that
the Boards of these companies would be structured in terms of
that policy.
Thereafter, they have restructured the Boards of these Companies.
They have appointed Independent Directors. As regards the posts
of Functional Directors, as I already mentioned, the number of
Functional Directors should not exceed the fifty per cent of the
Board’s strength. With regard to Bharat Electronics Limited, in
November, 2005, the Department of Defence Production had made
a proposal for appointment of nine part time non-Functional
Directors on the Board. The Department of Defence Production
also agreed that the number of Government Directors should not
exceed two.”
11. Pertaining to a query on the Formation of Board of Directors,
after conferring Navratna status to BEL the representatives of the
Department of Public Enterprises, during oral evidence stated:—
“There is no change. The functional directors would be same and
not more than 50 per cent independent directors. If the company
is listed, then it will have to have 50 per cent non-functional
directors.”
12. Replying to a specific query of the Committee in regard to
professional and technical guidance in the composition of the Board to
give intellectual direction in terms of product designing, product
making, the representatives of the Department of Pubic Enterprises
during oral evidence stated:—
“The Board will have functional directors also who would have
specific technical know-how. It is because they will be experts in
their own discipline. Then the Ministry of Defence and the
company interact at various levels. In any case, the Department of
Defence Production can look into it. If they need any change in
the policy, the policy regarding composition of the Board is

7
approved by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA).
If the Department of Defence Production feel so, they will have to
approach the Competent Authority for relaxation. It is not within
the competence of our Department to make relaxations. If any one
feels that relaxation is required, then they have to make out a case
and go to the Competent Authority to seek that relaxation……N ow
the Defence sector is also opening up. The private sector is being
allowed to enter into many areas including the Defence sector.
This is a wider issue that can be debated and then the Government
can take a comprehensive view on this.”
13. Since Bharat Electronics Limited is a Defence Public Sector
Undertaking and Armed Forces are the main users for its products,
the Committee had recommended that an Officer each from the three
Services should be on the Board of Directors of BEL to ensure active
involvement of users in the process of taking the major decisions
impacting development and production of equipments for Armed
Forces. The Ministry of Defence have stated that since the guidelines
of the Department of Public Enterprises, have restricted the number
of Government directors in the Boards of PSUs to the maximum of
two an arrangement has been made whereby an officer of Army
Headquarters is a permanent member of BEL Board and a
representative each from Air Force and Indian Navy is a permanent
invitee to the Board meetings. The Committee hold that this
arrangement is not satisfactory to ensure active involvement of the
Armed Forces in the decision making body of BEL. The Committee
strongly feel that representative of the three Services can play
constructive role in providing necessary guidance and feedback about
functional requirement during product designing and manufacturing
of items ordered by Armed Forces. Their representation would also
enable sharing of relevant portion of Long Term Plan of the Armed
Forces. The Committee, therefore, expect the Ministry of Defence to
make out a case for relaxation of guidelines and take up the matter
with the appropriate authority for suitable amendment in the
guidelines in their application to Defence Public Sector Undertakings
which have paramount duty to cater to the strategic needs of the
Defence Forces.
B. Diversification
Recommendation No. 5 (Para No. 4.42)
14. The Committee had observed that in the last fifty years BEL
was doing good turnover and developing new products and technology.
The Committee noted that in its endeavour, BEL always gave priority

8
to Defence Sector and on an average, more than 80 per cent of its
turnover was from the Defence Services. Turnover of BEL from the
production for the civilian market was 15 to 20 per cent. More than
13 per cent of business comes from PSUs, like MTNL, VSNL, Airport
Authority etc. and less than 2-3 per cent turnover was from the other
civilian market. In this connection, the Committee desired that the
Ministry should give a re-look for more diversification and explore
new civil markets. The Committee wished to emphasise that BEL
should explore the civil market and see what were the areas where it
could help the Ministries of Shipping, Railways and other private
homes/ organizations in the field of communications to check, drug
trafficking and ensure effective safety and security of passengers and
goods.
The Committee wanted that BEL must emphasise upon more
diversification and thereby earning more profits from the civil market
and could fund its R&D programmes.
The Committee further desired that for effective and efficient
business management BEL should have two separate divisions of its
business, one devoted completely for commercialising the civil market
and the other solely meant for Defence purpose.
15. The Ministry in their, action taken reply, have stated:
“BEL’s turnover in defence is about 80% and remaining comes
from non-defence areas. During the year 2006-07, 76% of the
turnover has come from supplies to defence services and 24% from
non-defence market. The majority of the non-defence supplies are
made to MHA, PRASAR BHARTI, MTNL, and Election Commission
etc.
BEL has organized Units and SBUs in such way as to give clear
focus to non-defence business. In Bangalore, three SBUs viz.
Components, Export Manufacturing and Telecom & Broadcasting
Systems address the non-defence business. The Kotdwara Unit
addresses the telecom business for MTNL & BSNL.
In order to give thrust to non-defence business and diversify into
non-defence market, the company has been working in the
following diversified areas:—
— Container inspection systems
— Access control system
— Medical electronics

9
— e-passport
— Automotive electronics
— COTS Radar & Coastal Surveillance System
— Systems of System project
— Banks – IT, Communication and ATM needs”.
16. The Committee note that BEL’s turnover from non-defence
market has gone up to 24% during the year 2006-07 as compared to
20% earlier. The Ministry’s reply is, however, silent in regard to
efforts made to expand its civil market to the sectors like Shipping,
Railways and other Organisations in the field of communications.
The Committee hope that the Committee’s recommendation in this
regard has been taken note of for appropriate action and they may
be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
C. Capacity utilization & order book position
Recommendation No. 7 (Para No. 4.44)
17. The Committee had noted that Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL)
had 9 manufacturing units spread over different parts of the country.
The Committee further noted that in spite of the diversification,
adjustment and shifting of loads from one unit to the other, some of
the manufacturing units at Bangalore, Ghaziabad, Machilipatnam,
Panchkula and Kotdwara units were not fully loaded where 30-40 per
cent capacity was lying idle for want of orders of vital Defence
equipment viz. MK II, Upgraded Flycatcher Radar, Battle Field
Surveillance Radar (Short Range), Intelligent Message Terminal (IMT),
BSS (Sanjay), Night Vision Devices etc.
The Committee were distressed to note that order book position of
BEL was a matter of serious concern as the order book was not
proportionately increasing in comparison to the yearly dispatches. For
the year 2006-07, the dispatch plan was Rs. 4200 crore and order book
as on 1st April 2006 was Rs. 6633 crore, out of which executable order was
only Rs. 3541 crores. With these, there was a gap of about Rs. 700 crores
between the available executable orders and the dispatch targets. Some
of the units of BEL were not fully loaded and they were yet to get
additional orders. The Committee were further pained to note that the
amount of orders received from the Ministry of Defence had been
drastically reduced from Rs. 4548 crore in the year 2002-03 to Rs. 834 crore
upto 1st October 2006. The Committee felt that this drastic reduction

10
was a very serious matter. This indicate lack of faith of the Armed
Forces on the products produced by BEL. Therefore, the Committee
strongly felt that the Ministry of Defence should examine this matter
carefully and find out the equipment for which the units of BEL were
lacking orders from the Armed Forces and whether the same equipment
was being procured from other sources. Therefore, the Committee
desired that there was an urgent need to give a serious look to this
matter and produce quality high-end technologies by intensifying R&D
as per the present day’s requirements to face the ever changing security
challenges. In this way BEL would attract more customers and the
Government would minimize foreign dependence for procuring Defence
equipment and promote indigenization. This would also improve the
capacity utilization of all the units.
18. The Ministry in their, action taken reply, have stated:
“Order Book of the company as on 01.04.07 is Rs. 9130 crores.
During the year 2006-07, the amount of orders received from MoD
is around Rs. 6616 crores. The figure of Rs. 834 crores indicated
above is the values of orders received by BEL till September 2006.
But during the III & IV quarters the company received a balance
order of Rs. 5782 crores. This is the highest ever order received by
the company in any given year. It may be noted that majority of
the orders will be received only during III & IV quarters of the
year. This has been the phenomenon since the very beginning.
During the year, we got major orders of Naval project to the tune
of more than Rs. 2500 crores and from Army for around Rs. 3200
crores. During the year, BEL also got a highest ever single order
of Rs.1200 crores for one of the DRDO/BEL developed products
from Army.
Though the order book as on 01.04.2007 is at Rs. 9130 crores, most
of the orders get executed over the next 3-5 years. The executable
order available for the year 2007-08 is only Rs. 3695 crores against
the excellent MoU target of Rs. 4725 crores. During the year 2007-
08 as is the case in most years, the order get finalized mostly in
the III and IV quarter and therefore, we can expect more orders
during 2007-08 which could be executable partly during this current
year.
The decision on procurement is taken by the Armed Forces on the
basis of the Annual Acquisition Plan and other long term
perspective plans. Attempt is constantly made to use local
capabilities to the fullest extent”.

11
19. Taking note that the majority of the orders are received by the
BEL only during III & IV quarters of the year, the Committee enquired
whether the Ministry of Defence has prepared any advance planning
to place the orders in the beginning of the year, the Ministry of Defence
in a written reply have stated:
“The Defence Procurement Procedure 2006 provides for approving
the Annual Acquisition Plans in accordance with a prescribed time
frame for which advance planning is done much before the
beginning of the financial year. Since sanction can only be issued
after the Budget has been approved there is some unavoidable
administrative delay in placing order early in the financial year.
Every attempt is made to place orders as early as possible after
completing necessary formalities, including Trials etc.”
20. When asked to state about the equipments, for which the units
of BEL are lacking orders from the Armed Forces and whether the
same are being Procured from other sources, the Ministry in their
written reply stated:
“The policy of Government is to move towards true price discovery,
multi-vendor tendering and enhance competition in Defence
production by encouraging private sector participation for items
for which capabilities exist with Private and Public sector. In case
where capabilities doesn’t exist in BEL or any other Indian vendor,
the Armed Forces resort to Global tendering.
Capabilities of Bangalore, Hyderabad, Panchkula and Kotdwara
Units of BEL which manufacture equipments for Electronic Warfare
Systems, Command and Control Systems and Complex
Communication Systems are not fully utilized for supply to Armed
Forces”.
21. The Committee were concerned to note that there was under
utilisation of capacity to the extent of 30% to 40% in the
manufacturing units at Bangalore, Ghaziabad, Machilipatnam,
Panchkula and Kotdwara. The Committee regret to note that the
reply of the Ministry has not addressed the issue of capacity under-
utilisation in some of BEL’s units. The Committee desire that as
already recommended the technological competence of the above
units be reviewed to ensure full capacity utilization. The Committee
would like to know what specific efforts were made in this regard
by BEL to ensure full utilisation of its capacity and also by tapping
the domestic and export market particularly in European countries
and by steps of diversification.

12
D. Delivery schedule
Recommendation No. 8 (Para No. 4.45)
22. Pertaining to the delivery schedule of the various projects under
BEL, the Committee observed that in case of 20 equipments, the delay
was less than six months. The period varies from one to six months.
In case of 15 equipments, the delay was more than six months. The
period of delays varies from 7 to 25 months. The major reasons for
delay were sourcing problems, concurrent engineering, design related
issues obsolescence, delay related to trials and evaluation.
In view of the above problems, the Committee desired that the
Ministry of Defence and BEL should give a serious thought and take
corrective measures to minimize delays in completion and supply of
vital equipments and they must adhere to the prescribed time schedule
to avoid time and cost over run and deliver the same to the Armed
Forces and other customers at the earliest. Because for getting the best
value for the scarce resources being used for the nobel job the Ministry
should ensure to minimize delay. The Committee also desired that the
Ministry must strictly deal with the recovery of payments by BEL.
23. The Ministry in their, action taken reply, have stated:
“BEL has been taking necessary measures to ensure timely
deliveries. Some of the major reasons for delays are sourcing
problems, concurrent engineering, design related issues,
obsolescence, user trials & evaluation, bulk production clearance,
site readiness/handing over by customer etc.
Based on the analysis of major reasons for delays, BEL has
introduced various measures and set up processes to effectively
control the timely supplies. These measures are: close monitoring,
fixing quarterly targets, involvement of BEL engineers at early
design stages of projects of DRDO, multisourcing, indigenisation,
critical single vendor items etc. BEL has also taken up company
wide implementation of Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) in all
its Units and Offices. Bangalore Unit has already started using
ERP solutions for its operations. All the Units will be covered
with ERP by March 2008. This will enable to further enhance its
monitoring and control mechanism”.
BEL received orders on firm price basis and there is no cost
overrun/cost escalation to the customer in cases of delays in
supplies.

13
In many of the cases, the delays are beyond the control of BEL
and not attributable to BEL. In such cases, BEL takes up with
MoD with proper justification for waiver of LD. In case where
delay is attributable to BEL, LD is paid by BEL”.
24. When asked about the improvements made by the Ministry of
Defence and BEL in minimizing delay in completion and supply of
equipments to the Armed Forces and other customers, the Ministry of
Defence in a written reply have stated:
“The major reasons for delays in supply of equipments to the
Armed Forces has been analysed. Some of the important measures
taken to reduce delivery cycles are listed below:
a. Close Monitoring of the projects by fixing targets and
followed by periodic reviews and corrective actions, if any
b. Concurrent Engineering to reduce Cycle time from
development to supply of equipment
c. Indigenisation efforts for imported items
d. Identification of multiple sources for procurement to avoid
dependence on a particular vendor
e. Implementation of Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) in
all units to increase effectiveness of monitoring and
implementation
f. Advance manufacturing actions are taken for some of the
programmes in anticipation of orders.”
25. Regarding the reasons of delays which are beyond the control
of BEL, the Ministry of Defence in a written reply have stated:
“In some of the cases, the delays have taken place due to the
reasons where BEL does not have direct control and some of these
are; bulk production clearance by the customer, cycle time for user
trials and evaluation, cases where customer has to provide sites
after completion of certain agreed work before equipments can be
installed, equipments where obsolescence of certain items is
identified and development efforts are required to use alternate
items, changes in scope of work and specifications as a result of
trials and evaluation, unforeseen deviations in parameters observed
in cases of project with concurrent engineering etc.”.

14
26. The Committee had observed that there were as many as 15
cases in which there has been delay ranging from 7 to 25 months in
delivery of equipments by BEL. The Committee observe that most
of the reasons advanced by BEL for the delay in delivery are within
the control of the management which could have been taken care of
by an effective monitoring and control mechanism. The Committee
desire that BEL should make concerted efforts to eliminate delay in
production and delivery of equipments in order to obviate financial
and security implications.
E. Need for expanding export market
Recommendation No. 9 (Para No. 4.46)
27. The Committee were distressed to note that the export value
of BEL’s different products was very low and inconsistence. Further,
BEL had admitted their incompetence to export their products to
advanced countries. The export market was limited to South-East Asia,
SAARC countries and African Continent where state-of-the-art
technologies were not required. This indicate that BEL had to walk a
mile ahead in producing high-end technologies in order to compete
with the defence industries of other countries. The Committee further
observed that there was no specific collaboration with any foreign
country. Exports were effected based on the normal purchase contracts
and in some of the cases, supplies were made against Government of
India Line of Credit. Further, there was stiff competition in the world
defence market. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommended that
BEL must take concerted efforts to keep abreast with the emerging
security scenario and rapid technological changes around the world
and intensify its R&D by strengthening the in-house R&D and tie up
with DRDO and leading foreign partners and putting sufficient
investment in key technologies to produce high-end products to attract
foreign countries apart from South-East Asia, SAARC Countries and
African Continent and earn foreign exchange for India. The Committee
further had recommended that the Government should consider
evolving suitable arrangements in Indian Embassies abroad through
which a common outlet for sale of all the products of our Defence
PSUs could be found in order to maximize our export earnings and
also put to optimum use available surplus production capacities. Besides
the Defence attaches and other Officers posted in Indian Embassies
abroad must take concerted efforts to study the requirements of that
particular country and supply the inputs/feedbacks to BEL through
the Ministry of Defence in order to intensify their R&D efforts and

15
produce the products in order to attract the foreign countries and
expand its export market. The Committee also wish to stress that BEL
must explore the usages of available expertise for satellite based
navigation applications in view of the programme GAGAN of ISRO
and Airport Authority of India for advertisement and marketing of
the products.
28. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated:
“BEL started a separate Export Division in early 1990s to cater to
export business. BEL has taken up export as one of its thrust
areas. Over the years, export group has been strengthened to
address different countries. Though the export performance during
the last five years is around 13 US M$, the company is continuously
pursuing export business by identifying newer market segments.
BEL has also realized that in order to be lead player in export its
products need to be state-of-the-art. R&D is working in developing
such products for export market.
R&D projects have been taken up exclusively for export. e.g. A
30-88 MHz Handheld Radio has been developed and sent for trials/
demonstration in Zimbabwe. Further trials are planned in Indonesia
and Malaysia.
BEL is also seeking support from Indian Embassy in the target
countries in order to develop export business.
A core team has been created at BEL to study and address the
GAGAN programme of ISRO”.
29. In response to a written query, the Ministry of Defence have
further stated:
“In order to enhance the exports, BEL is in regular touch with the
Indian Missions abroad to get the inputs on the requirements and
plans for procurement. Further, BEL has appointed local
representatives in certain countries to promote BEL products and
provide necessary support to BEL. MOD organizes participation in
various exhibitions abroad and this gives opportunities for
promotion of BEL’s products. Further, during the visits of foreign
delegation to India, MOD is organizing visits to BEL where BEL
is able to present its capabilities and products of interest.”

16
30. The Ministry of Defence in a written reply have stated as
under :
“BEL has planned to export its products and services to many
countries of the world. The details of the countries are given below:
• SAARC Countries, specially Sri Lanka, Nepal
• South East Asian countries specially Indonesia, Mongolia,
Thailand, Philippines, Myanmar & Vietnam.
• African Countries, specially Botswana, Zimbabwe, Zambia,
Namibia, Mauritius, DR Congo, Sudan, Ghana, Nigeria,
Algeria, Egypt and Senegal.
• CIS Countries specially Russia and Kazakhstan
• European Countries specially France, Ireland, Italy, Israel,
Netherlands, Switzerland and Spain.”
31. It has been stated that in order to augment its export, BEL
is developing export oriented products and is also seeking support
from Indian Embassies in friendly/selected countries. However, the
results achieved by the Ministry of Defence in this regard are not
commensurate with the steps taken during the last five years. The
Committee, therefore, wish to reiterate their earlier recommendation
that R&D efforts of BEL be intensified to achieve state-of-the-art
technologies and an effective market oriented approach be evolved
to augment exports. The Committee desire to be apprised of the
outcome of these efforts and resultant growth in exports of BEL
during 2007-08.
F. Need to ensure competitiveness
Recommendation No. 10 (Para No. 4.47)
32. The Committee observed that the objectives of BEL was to
attain technological leadership in defence electronics to constantly
bench-mark company’s performance with best in class internationally
and to raise marketing availabilities to global standards. However, the
Committee were distressed to note that the same had not been reflected
in the export potential of BEL to different countries. BEL was finding
difficulties in exporting their products to the developed countries and
was only exporting to countries like South East Asian Countries,
SAARC Countries and African Continent where state-of-the-art
technologies were not required. The Committee did not agree with
this approach of BEL. Therefore, the Committee strongly desired that

17
to compete with international market which is full of challenges, the
BEL must make concerted efforts to update the technologies, which
had very high rate of obsolescence, and produce high-end technologies
to meet the changing requirements of the countries. The Committee
also desired that to ensure quality, BEL must adopt the process of
self-certification for all its products.
33. The Ministry in their, action taken reply, have stated:
“In order to be a lead player in export front, BEL is working on
futuristic technology like Frequency Hopping Radios, C I System,
Phased Array Radars, New Generation Sonars, MEMS etc. BEL is
also looking for Joint Ventures for developing technologies. The
contract manufacturing under offsets will enable BEL to acquire
new technologies.
BEL has elaborate inspection and quality checks in the
manufacturing line. The products are inspected at various stages
of manufacture, i.e., component level, module, sub-assembly,
assembly and at system level. The quality process established
ensures adequate quality checks during manufacture.
In the area of Quality Assurance, BEL has adopted the Total Quality
Management (TQM) approach. A Corporate Quality Group – Total
Organizational Quality Enhancement (TORQUE) has been set up
to oversee all activities relating to enhancement of quality in the
company. The company has adopted Six Sigma Concept – a concept
which has been successfully implemented by global giants like
Motorola, General Electric etc. for quality enhancement and total
quality management. This is being spread throughout the company.
The company has also adopted the Business Excellence Model as
laid down by the CII-EXIM Bank Excellence Award criteria, for
the past five years.
The products thus manufactured are also inspected by the customer
resident inspectors in case of defence product. For some of BEL
products, self-certification has been accorded. These products were
produced in large quantities. BEL has taken up self-certification
for some more products. For civilian and export products, the
internal quality teams inspect the products before despatch to
customers”.
34. When asked about the details of the products being exported,
their export value and the countries to which these are being exported
for the last five years, the Ministry of Defence in a written reply have

18
stated that BEL has exported products and services worth Rs. 25,522.33
lakhs (US $ 57.19 M) over the last 5 years (2002-03 to 2006-07) to
various countries. Some of the major products exported include
communication equipments, Radars & Spares, Night vision products,
etc.
35. The Committee are disappointed to note that the value of
BEL’s exports during the five year period from 2002-03 to 2006-07
was as little as Rs. 255 crore which works out to a paltry sum of
about Rs. 50 crore a year. For a company with the stature of BEL,
such a paltry sum signifies nothing. The Committee urge BEL to
initiate vigorous efforts to promote its exports and develop state-of-
the-art products for indigenous and export market.
G. Perspective Plan of BEL
Recommendation No. 13 (Para No. 6.32)
36. The Committee had noted that BEL followed various effective
steps in formulating long-term business plans. BEL followed the
guidelines of Department of Public Enterprise (DPE), which stipulates
that the targets fixed should be realistic and growth oriented. The
MoU target for Defence orders were negotiated on the basis of
projections of the customer as well as ability of the company to execute
the orders. The inputs regarding customer need were collected during
interactions in institutional meetings, progress reviews with customers,
interaction with DRDO business partners. However, the Committee
were pained to note that BEL did not have access to the long-term
perspective plan of the Armed Forces. The Committee further noted
that there was no direct user involvement in MoU target fixing.
The Committee were of the strong view that the perspective plan
of BEL was an unrealistic proposition by knowing the customer need
through institutional meetings and without access to long-term
perspective plan of the Armed Forces and without direct user
involvement in MoU target fixing. Therefore, the Committee strongly
recommended that the Ministry/Armed Forces should make available
the long-term perspective plan to BEL and involve the users directly
throughout the process so that the perspective plan of BEL would be
realistic and growth oriented. Besides, the Committee desired that the
perspective plan should also address the threat perception, both
conventional and non-conventional, rapid technological changes and
new innovations in defence technologies taking place world-wide and
intensify R&D activities through in-house R&D and tie up with R&D

19
institutions and foreign collaborations. The Committee further desired
that BEL should constantly evaluate their product lines and improve
its technologies and products in order to bring into the world standard
and make its product cost effective.
37. The Ministry in their action taken reply, have stated:
“The Armed Forces perspective plan, a secret document finalized
by HQIDS for Armed Forces is shared with Ministry of Defence
(Department of Defence Production). The details with reference to
the product profile of each PSU/OFB, are shared with them.
In addition to the above, the PSU conducts detailed discussions
with user directorates on their requirements.
The MoU between company and Govt. is facilitated by an action
task force constituted by DPE. The MoU contains various
performance parameters including customer satisfaction, quality,
financial performance etc. The users requirements and perception
are taken into account while drawing the MoU”.
38. On a specific query whether BEL has prepared any perspective
plan for its product profile and shared it with the armed forces before
its finalisation, the Ministry of Defence in a written reply have stated:
“BEL had prepared the perspective plan for the period, April 2004–
March 2009. This plan was based on the informal discussions with
user directorates and others. This plan was presented to the Board
of Directors of BEL where representatives of the Armed Forces
also participate.
BEL is now in the process of initiating the perspective plan for the
period April 2009 – March 2014. Based on the inputs gathered
BEL will prepare the perspective plan and it can then be finalized
in consultation with Armed Forces.”
39.  The Committee regret to note that what was stated in the
action taken reply and what was submitted in a subsequent written
reply are contradictory. The Ministry of Defence stated in the action
taken reply that details in the Armed Forces Perspective Plan with
reference to the product profile of each Public Sector Undertaking/
Ordnance Factory Board are shared with them. However, in a
subsequent written reply, the Ministry has stated that BEL had
prepared the Perspective Plan based on the informal discussions with
the user directorates and others. The Committee would like to know

20
why the details of Armed Forces Perspective Plan as relevant to the
Defence Public Sector Undertakings are not shared with them as
indicated in the action taken reply. The Committee hold that this is
a classic example of lack of coordination within the Ministry of
Defence. The Committee, therefore, urge that in order to ensure
timely supply of equipments by Defence Public Sector Undertakings
and to enable them to improve their performance, the Government
must share such details of Armed Forces Perspective Plan which are
relevant to the product profile of the Defence Public Sector
Undertakings.
H. Need to retain R&D engineers and technical staff
Recommendation No. 16 (Para No. 6.35)
40. The Committee noted that the number of engineers and
technical staff resigning in BEL since 1996-97 to 2005-06 were 1239
and 110 respectively due to opening up of economy and lucrative job
opportunities available outside BEL. The Committee were distressed
to note that majority of engineers who were leaving BEL were from
R&D area and they leave BEL after three-four years of joining as a
result major R&D projects were getting delayed. The Committee also
noted that the Ministry had taken a number of initiatives to retain the
executives. Besides, the BEL had sought some policy level intervention
to address these serious issues for retention of technocrats like attractive
compensation, increase terminal benefits, extension of pension, merger
of 50% Dearness Allowance etc. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommended that urgent attention of the Government must be drawn
towards the above policy level interventions and the pay structure of
its engineers must be adequately modified. The Committee desired
that the Ministry should take immediate steps to offer attractive job
package to R&D Engineers, which could be comparable to the best
package available to them in job Market. They should also be provided
on the job training to update their knowledge. These measures would
facilitate to retain them and minimize the delayed R&D projects which
cause a lot of concern to the nation and huge sufferings to the Armed
Forces. The Committee further desired that to minimize delay in the
R&D projects the Ministry must strictly adhere the policy of not
allowing the R&D engineers to leave their job till the completion of
the projects. The BEL must also make concerted efforts to document
the R&D achievement step by step as they make progress so that the
new incumbent who may take up the R&D project from where the
predecessor had left so that the projects were not delayed. The
Committee felt that the salary and other benefits of R&D engineers

21
should be performance based in order to attract young and talented
personnel. For retention of R&D engineers the Committee further
desired that the Government should resort to strong action against
those R&D engineers who were leaving BEL midway of the projects
assigned to them. They should be debarred to join any public sector
undertakings and Government Organizations. The Committee also
desired that the Ministry should frame a recruitment policy clearly
stipulating service conditions that the engineers joining the company
must sign a bond of compulsory service in the Company for at least
eight to ten years and in case of breach of the bond, the expenditure
incurred on their job specific training would be recovered from them.
The Committee were of the strong view that scientists and R&D
engineers were the actual brain of the projects. Therefore, the
Committee further wished to recommend that to attract the young
and experienced scientist, they could be appointed on contract basis
with a good remuneration on four to five years basis. While offering
incentives/promotional avenues and other facilities to the R&D
Engineers, the Government must took into account their individual
performance and contribution to the overall growth of the company.
In case of excellence performance they might be given acceleratory
promotions. The Committee further recommended that the Government
should extend royalty to the engineers for their original R&D work
done by them and any product developed thereon.
41. The Ministry in their action taken reply have stated:
“The pay revision for the employees of BEL is already due w.e.f.
01.01.2007. This issue of retention of qualified R&D engineers will
also be placed before the Committee examining pay-revision.
Issue of better compensation and perks was discussed by the Board
of the company and Board has constituted a sub-committee to
come out with a compensation package in view of the emerging
market forces. Allowances for conveyance and uniform maintenance
have already been enhanced.
BEL also grant variable increments to their R&D engineers in
Central Research Laboratories depending on their performance and
contribution in their developmental projects. BEL also recognizes
the contribution of R&D engineers by giving them R&D Awards.
BEL has also announced additional increments to all levels of
executives ranging from 10 increments at the lowest level to
3 increments at the highest level. The objective of this is to retain
and attract skilled executives in the company.

22
As regards to employing local persons, BEL is meeting the
manpower requirement in non-executive cadre by issuing
employment notification in the local employment exchanges and
other recruiting agencies/boards notified for this purpose. Whereas
the manpower requirement in Executive cadre is partially met
through conducting campus selections in reputed Engineering/
Professional colleges/Institutions situated in the vicinity of our
constituent units/ offices.”
42. To a specific question as to when the Sub-Committee was
constituted, the Ministry of Defence in a written reply have stated:
“A sub-committee was constituted by BEL’s Board under the
Chairmanship of JS (SY), MoD on 30th April 2007 to look into the
enhancement of compensation packages to the executives of the
company.
As per the sub-committee’s report, additional increments as an
interim measure pending 2nd pay commission’s (for PSU
executives) report, have been granted w.e.f. 01 December 2006.”
43. In a written reply, the Ministry of Defence have further clarified:
“BEL has various programs in place to impart on the job training
to update the knowledge of the engineers. The programs focus on
development of technical skills as well as managerial skills.
Engineers are deputed to attend class room courses, seminars,
exhibitions etc to enhance their knowledge. To develop managerial
skills, regular class room courses are in place for various levels of
engineers.
BEL takes several precautionary measures to minimise delay
in R&D projects including retaining of R&D engineers so as to see
that projects are not affected. Some of the measures taken are:
(a) Probationary engineers on induction have to execute a bond
for serving the company for a minimum period of 3 years
or else pay a penalty of Rs 50,000/-.
(b) Further, engineers execute a bond for the specified period,
whenever they are deputed abroad for training.
(c) Engineers have to give a notice of 3 months when they
submit their resignations.
Engineers on many occasions pay the bond amount and leave the
company in view of the pay package offered by the private
companies.

23
BEL is having an elaborate documentation system and during the
development phase also drawings and other documents are
prepared. These are kept in central records. D&E engineers are
maintaining a work diary where on daily basis they are recording
the activities done. Based on these, periodic reports are generated
and these are reviewed. This helps in capturing information
regarding the work done by an engineer. Also during the notice
period after resignation, by an engineer, another engineer gets
associated to take over information.
Performance based increments are in place for engineers working
in the Central Research Laboratories. Also the R&D award schemes
are in place where the project team is given monetary award based
on the selection of projects.
BEL is obtaining a bond for 3 years from all engineers. Further,
the applications of the engineers for job in other PSUs / Govt.
Organisations are not being forwarded during the bond period.
BEL has already provision for fast track promotions to engineers
who excel in their performance.
Extending royalty to Engineers employed by Government or PSU
for the original R&D work has commercial implication relating to
IPR and therefore BEL alternatively has devised schemes for
recognizing excellent R&D work done by the individuals and the
team like R&D Award, Fast Track Promotions, enhanced increments
and awards for patents.”
44. When asked about the measures taken by the Committee for
compensation package to executives of the Company, a representative
of Bharat Electronics Limited, during oral evidence, have stated:
“There are compensation package in the form of project-linked
schemes, performance-related and profit-related. We are giving
additional allowances i.e. conveyance allowance, housing allowance
etc. As far as these exceptional promotions are concerned, we have
started giving all our Scientists performance-based increments. It
is not one increment per year. Based on their performance, we are
giving the incentives. The attrition rate has very much come down
this year.”
45. During the oral evidence, a representative of Ministry of
Defence have stated:
“We are not independently deciding pay matters of the public
sector companies. As I have told you, we have given maximum

24
incentives we could have thought of. Whatever we could give
within our powers, if the companies could give, we have not come
in the way.”
46. The Committee note that the attrition rate in BEL has come
down this year with the grant of compensation package in the form
of Project-linked Scheme – performance related and profit-related.
Additional increments ranging from 3 to 10 increments to all levels
of executives have reportedly been announced. Extending royalty to
Engineers employed by Government or PSUs for the original R&D
work is stated to have commercial implication relating to IPR and,
therefore, BEL alternatively has devised schemes for recognizing
excellent R&D work done by the individuals and the team like
R&D Award, Fast Track Promotions, enhanced increments and awards
for patents. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Defence
should examine the feasibility of sharing of royalty received on
patents with the concerned team of scientists/engineers. The
Committee emphasize that incentives to scientists and engineers
should not be a one time affair but should be linked to their
achievement in R&D from time to time.
The Committee further desire that all requisite steps be taken to
keep the attrition rate to the minimum. The Committee would also
like to be informed as to what extent the attrition rate has come
down in 2007-08.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT
Need for conferring additional power to the Board of Directors
Recommendation No. 3
The Committee observe that being a mini Ratna Company, some
powers have been extended to the Board of Directors to take
Professional/business decisions, including powers to enter into joint
ventures/co-development and co-production agreements. BEL’s Board
of Directors was restructured on 7 March, 2006 to comply with the
SEBI requirements for listed companies. In accordance with the SEBI
stipulation for Navaratna Public Sector Enterprises (PSEs), BEL has
included one-third of the Members as a part time non-official Directors
and has included various technical and management experts and the
users.
In view of the recent restructuring, the Committee feel that
additional powers may be conferred on the Board to make the company
a truly professionally managed entity, to enable it to take independent
decisions on project sanction, joint ventures with private sector and
R&D etc.
Reply of the Government
BEL has been conferred with Navaratna status on 22nd June, 2007.
This status will enable the Board of the company to take independent
decisions regarding capital investments in projects, joint ventures with
private sector / foreign companies, proactive R&D projects, technology
tie-ups etc.
Navaratna status for BEL
Recommendation No. 4
The Committee observe that BEL has been rated as an “Excellent”
Public Sector Undertaking for the last 8 years by the Department of
Public Enterprises (DPE) and was conferred the status of Mini Ratna
by the DPE during the year 2001. All the above nine factories are
certified for ISO 9001:2000 ISO 14001:2004. The Committee also note
25

26
the benefits of conferring Navaratna status to BEL, as this status will
inter alia remove monetary ceiling for incurring capital expenditure on
purchase of new items or for replacement to establish financial joint
ventures/subsidiaries with a maximum permissible equity investment
of Rs. 1,000 crore in India and abroad, full power to the PSE to establish
Offices abroad without the concurrence of Administrative Ministry,
giving free hands to the PSE in creating and wind up of post i.e.
functional Directors and internal transfers and re-designation of posts
and delegation of power to raise debt from the domestic capital markets
and for borrowings from international market subject to the approval
of RBI/Department of Economic Affairs.
In view of the above benefits of Navaratna status and the
performance of BEL, the Committee strongly feel that BEL should be
elevated to Nava Ratna Status to make it truly professional body.
Reply of the Government
BEL has been conferred with Navaratana status on 22nd June 2007.
Diversification
Recommendation No. 5
The Committee observe that in the last fifty years BEL is doing
good turnover and developing new products and technology. The
Committee note that in its endeavour, BEL always gives priority to
Defence Sector and on an average, more than 80 percent of its turnover
is from the Defence Services. Turnover of BEL from the production for
the civilian market is 15 to 20 percent. More than 13 percent of business
comes from PSUs like MTNL, VSNL, Airports Authority etc and less
than 2-3 percent turnover is from the other civilian market. In this
connection, the Committee desire that the Ministry should give a re-
look for more diversification and explore new civil markets. The
Committee wish to emphasise that BEL should explore the civil market
and see what are the areas where it can help the Ministries of Shipping,
Railways and other private homes/organisations in the field of
communications to check drug trafficking and ensure effective safety
and security of passengers and goods.
The Committee wants that BEL must emphasise upon more
diversification and thereby earning more profits from the civil market
and can fund its R&D programmes.
The Committee further desire that for effective and efficient business
management, BEL should have two separate divisions of its business,

27
one devoted completely for commercializing the civil market and the
other solely meant for Defence purpose.
Reply of the Government
BEL’s turnover in defence is about 80% and remaining comes from
non defence areas. During the year 2006-07, 76% of the turnover has
come from supplies to defence services and 24% from non-defence
market. The majority of the non-defence supplies are made to MHA,
PRASAR BHARTI, MTNL, and Election Commission etc.
BEL has organized Units and SBUs in such way as to give clear
focus to non-defence business. In Bangalore, three SBUs viz.
Components, Export Manufacturing and Telecom & Broadcasting
Systems address the non-defence business. The Kotdwara Unit
addresses the telecom business for MTNL & BSNL.
In order to give thrust to non-defence business and diversify into
non-defence market, the company has been working in the following
diversified areas:-
- Container inspection systems
- Access control system
- Medical electronics
- e-passport
- Automotive electronics
- COTS Radar & Coastal Surveillance System
- Systems of System project
- Banks – IT, Communication and ATM needs.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 16 of Chapter-I)
Infrastructure and their upgradation
Recommendation No. 6
The Committee note that BEL has been proactively modernizing
and upgrading its infrastructure as per modernization and
diversification of the projects. Some of the new infrastructure are in
the process of establishment in various units of BEL. The facilities so

28
created will help in improving the process of manufacture and in turn
improve the efficiency of manufacturing and productivity. This will
also add versatility in units to handle different kinds of related jobs.
Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should expedite
the establishment of new infrastructure to ensure the above
improvements. The Committee further note that there is a stiff
competition in supplying electronic Defence equipment to the developed
countries and they are concentrating on South-East Asia, SAARC
countries and African Continent where state-of-the-art technologies and
more diversification both in Defence and civilian market BEL must
strive to continuously and vigorously upgrade and modernize its
infrastructure so as to meet the ever-changing and increasing
requirements of the civil, Defence markets and enhance export potential.
Reply of the Government
Infrastructure facilities are getting continuously upgraded in the
company. The company takes up upgradation/augmentation of
infrastructure based on Technology Gap Analysis, Technology Transfers,
Partnership, co-development and JV’s requirements.
Infrastructure facilities are augmented on a continuous basis to
meet the needs of the products being executed and the technology
being adopted for execution of the projects. There is no constraint to
invest in infrastructure to improve the productivity & efficiency of
manufacturing and to gain cost advantage.
During the last three years, BEL has spent on modernization of its
infrastructure and upgradation of its manufacturing facility more than
Rs. 110 crores annually as indicated below and it has plans of spending
nearly Rs 200 crores yearly in coming years as shown below:
Year Capital Expenditure (Rs. in Crore)
2003 – 04 117
2004 – 05 119
2005 – 06 105
2006 – 07 113
Plan Planned Expenditure (Rs. in Crore)
2007 – 08 209
2008 – 09 203

29
BEL on an average spends around Rs. 100-120 crores, annually, in
modernizing, upgrading its manufacturing facilities in order to suit
the newer technologies being inducted in the manufacture of new
products. Recently, BEL has set up Near Field test facility at
Ghaziabad, Upgraded Shelter manufacturing facility at
Navi Mumbai with the latest technology. Facility to produce SRE
Radar at Ghaziabad, rapid prototype manufacture facility in
Bangalore, implementation of SAP as ERP are some of the
examples”.
When asked whether the present plan of spending nearly
Rs. 20 crores in coming years will facilitate to develop the state-
of-the art technologies to compete with the developed countries
and enhance the export potential and diversification of civilian,
market as to the Ministries of Shipping, Railways and other Private
Organisations, the Ministry of Defence their written replies to the
list of points has stated:—
“BEL’s plan of spending nearly Rs. 200 crores annually for coming
years, is aimed to achieve the following objectives:—
a. Technology updation and new development to a level which
addresses the projected future requirements of the Indian
Defence Forces. Since, there is a global competition for defence
procurement, technology upgradation will also address the
competing technologies development.
b. The development of technology/updation will also result in
products suitable for export markets.
c. This will also result in improved processes and facilities leading
to enhancement of quality of products.”
Capacity utilization & order book position
Recommendation No.7
The Committee note that Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) has
9 manufacturing units spread over different parts of the country. The
Committee further note that in spite of the diversification, adjustment
and shifting of loads from one unit to the other, some of the
manufacturing units at Bangalore, Ghaziabad, Machilipatnam, Panchkula
and Kotdwara units are not fully loaded where 30-40 per cent capacity
is lying idle for want of orders of vital Defence equipment viz. Mk II,
Upgraded Flycatcher Radar, Battle Field Surveillance Radar (Short
Range), Intelligent Message Terminal (IMT), BSS (Sanjay), Night Vision
Devices etc.

30
The Committee are distressed to note that order book position of
BEL is a matter of serious concern as the order book is not
proportionately increasing in comparison to the yearly dispatches. For
the year 2006-07, the dispatch plan is Rs. 4200 crore and the order
book as on 1st April 2006 is Rs. 6633 crore, out of which executable
order is only Rs. 3541 crores. With these, there is a gap of about
Rs. 700 crores between the available executable orders and the dispatch
targets. Some of the units of BEL are not fully loaded and they are yet
to get additional orders. The Committee are further pained to note
that the amount of orders received from the Ministry of Defence has
been drastically reduced from Rs. 4548 crore in the year 2002-03 to
Rs. 834 crore upto 1st October 2006. The Committee feel that this
drastic reduction is a very serious matter. This indicates lack of faith
of the Armed Forces on the products produced by BEL. Therefore, the
Committee strongly feel that the Ministry of Defence should examine
this matter carefully and find out the equipment for which the units
of BEL are lacking orders from the Armed Forces and whether the
same equipment is being procured from other sources. Therefore, the
Committee desire that there is an urgent need to give a serious look
to this matter and produce high-end technologies by intensifying R&D
as per the present day’s requirements to face the ever changing security
challenges. In this way BEL will attract more customers and the
Government will minimize foreign dependence for procuring Defence
equipment and promote indigenisation. This in turn will also improve
the capacity utilization of all the units.
Reply of the Government
Order Book of the company as on 01.04.07 is Rs 9130 crores. During
the year 2006-07, the amount of orders received from MoD is around
Rs. 6616 crores. The figure of Rs. 834 crores indicated above is the
value of orders received by BEL till Sept 2006. But during the III &
IV quarters the company received a balance order of Rs. 5782 crores.
This is the highest ever order received by the company in any given
year. It may be noted that the majority of the orders will be received
only during III & IV quarters of the year. This has been the
phenomenon since the very beginning. During the year, we got major
orders of Naval project to the tune of more than Rs. 2500 crores and
from Army for around Rs. 3200 crores. During the year, BEL also got
a highest ever single order of Rs. 1200 crores for one of the DRDO/
BEL developed products from Army.
Though the order book as on 01.04.2007 is at Rs. 9130 crores, most
of the orders get executed over the next 3—5 years. The executable

31
order available for the year 2007-08 is only Rs. 3695 crores against the
excellent MoU target of Rs. 4725 crores. During the year 2007-08 as is
the case in most years, the order get finalized mostly in the III and
IV quarter and therefore, we can expect more orders during 2007-08,
which could be executable partly during this current year.
The decision on procurement is taken by the Armed Forces on the
basis of the Annual Acquisition Plan and other long term perspective
plans. Attempt is constantly made to use local capabilities to the fullest
extent.
Taking note that the majority of the orders are received by the
BEL only during III & IV quarters of the year, the Committee enquired
whether the Ministry of Defence has prepared any advance planning
to place the orders in the beginning of the year, the Ministry of Defence
in a written reply have stated:—
“The Defence Procurement Procedure 2006 provides for approving
the Annual Acquisition Plans in accordance with a prescribed time
frame for which advance planning is done much before the
beginning of the financial year. Since sanction can only be issued
after the Budget has been approved there is some unavoidable
administrative delay in placing order early in the financial year.
Every attempt is made to place orders as early as possible after
completing necessary formalities, including Trials etc.”
When asked to state about the equipments, for which the units of
BEL are lacking orders from the Armed Forces and whether the same
are being Procured from other sources, the Ministry in their written
reply stated:
“The policy of Government is to move towards true price discovery,
multi-vendor tendering and enhance competition in Defence
production by encouraging private sector participation for items
for which capabilities exist with Private and Public sector. In case
where capabilities doesn’t exist in BEL or any other Indian vendor,
the Armed Forces resort to Global tendering.
Capabilities of Bangalore, Hyderabad, Panchkula and Kotdwara
Units of BEL which manufacture equipments for Electronic Warfare
Systems, Command and Control Systems and Complex
Communication Systems are not fully utilized for supply to Armed
Forces”.

32
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 21 of Chapter-I)
Delivery Schedule
Recommendation No.8
Pertaining to the delivery schedule of the various projects under
BEL, the Committee observe that in case of 20 equipments, the delay
is less than six months. The period varies from one to six months. In
case of 15 equipments, the delay is more than six months. The period
of delay varies from 7 to 25 months. The major reasons for delay are
sourcing problems, concurrent engineering, design related issues,
obsolescence, delay related to trials and evaluation.
In view of the above problems, the Committee desire that the
Ministry of Defence and BEL should give a serious thought and take
corrective measures to minimize delays in completion and supply of
vital equipment and they must adhere to the prescribed time schedule
to avoid time and cost overrun and deliver the same to the Armed
Forces and other customers at the earliest. Because for getting the best
value for the scarce resources being used for the noble job the Ministry
should ensure to minimize delay. The Committee also desire that the
Ministry must strictly deal with the recovery of payments by BEL.
Reply of the Government
BEL has been taking necessary measures to ensure timely deliveries.
Some of the major reasons for delays are sourcing problems, concurrent
engineering, design related issues, obsolescence, user trials & evaluation,
bulk production clearance, site readiness/handing over by customer
etc.
Based on the analysis of major reasons for delays, BEL has
introduced various measures and set up processes to effectively control
the timely supplies. These measures are: close monitoring, fixing
quarterly targets, involvement of BEL engineers at early design stages
of projects of DRDO, multisourcing, indigenisation, critical single vendor
items etc. BEL has also taken up company wide implementation of
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) in all its Units and Offices.
Bangalore Unit has already started using ERP solutions for its
operations. All the Units will be covered with ERP by March 2008.
This will enable BEL to further enhance its monitoring and control
mechanism.

33
BEL received orders on firm price basis and there is no cost
overrun/cost escalation to the customer in cases of delays in supplies.
In many of the cases, the delays are beyond the control of BEL
and not attributable to BEL. In such cases, BEL takes up with MoD
with proper justification for waiver of LD. In case where delay is
attributable to BEL, LD is paid by BEL.
When asked about the improvements made by the Ministry of
Defence and BEL in minimizing delay in completion and supply of
equipments to the Armed Forces and other customers, the Ministry of
Defence in a written reply have stated:
“The major reasons for delays in supply of equipments to the
Armed Forces has been analysed. Some of the important measures
taken to reduce delivery cycles are listed below:
a. Close Monitoring of the projects by fixing targets and
followed by periodic reviews and corrective actions, if any.
b. Concurrent Engineering to reduce Cycle time from
development to supply of equipment.
c. Indigenisation efforts for imported items.
d. Identification of multiple sources for procurement to avoid
dependence on a particular vendor.
e. Implementation of Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) in
all units to increase effectiveness of monitoring and
implementation.
f. Advance manufacturing actions are taken for some of the
programmes in anticipation of orders.”
Regarding the reasons of delays which are beyond the control of
BEL, the Ministry of Defence in a written reply have stated:—
“In some of the cases, the delays have taken place due to the
reasons where BEL does not have direct control and some of these
are; bulk production clearance by the customer, cycle time for user
trials and evaluation, cases where customer has to provide sites
after completion of certain agreed work before equipments can be
installed, equipments where obsolescence of certain items is
identified and development efforts are required to use alternate
items, changes in scope of work and specifications as a result of
trials and evaluation, unforeseen deviations in parameters observed
in cases of project with concurrent engineering etc.”

34
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 26 of Chapter-I)
Need for expanding export market
Recommendation No. 9
The Committee are distressed to note that the export value of
BEL’s different products is very low and inconsistence. Further, BEL
has admitted their incompetence to export their products to advanced
countries. The export market is limited to South-East Asia, SAARC
countries and African Continent where state-of-the-art technologies are
not required. This indicates that BEL has to walk a mile ahead in
producing high-end technologies in order to compete with the defence
industries of other countries. The Committee further observe that there
is no specific collaboration with any foreign country. Exports are
effected based on the normal purchase contracts and in some of the
cases, supplies are made against Government of India Line of Credit.
Further, there is stiff competition in the world defence market.
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that BEL must take
concerted efforts to keep abreast with the emerging security scenario
and rapid technological changes around the world and intensify its
R&D by strengthening the in-house R&D and tie up with DRDO and
leading foreign partners and putting sufficient investment in key
technologies to produce high-end products to attract foreign countries
apart from South-East Asia, SAARC Countries and African Continent
and earn foreign exchange for India. The Committee further recommend
that the Government should consider evolving suitable arrangements
in Indian Embassies abroad through which a common outlet for sale
of all the products of our Defence PSUs can be found in order to
maximize our export earnings and also put to optimum use available
surplus production capacities. Besides the Defence attaches and other
Officers posted in Indian Embassies abroad must take concerted efforts
to study the requirements of that particular country and supply the
inputs/feedbacks to BEL through the Ministry of Defence in order to
intensify their R&D efforts and produce the products in order to attract
the foreign countries and expand its export market. The Committee
also wish to stress that BEL must explore the usages of available
expertise for satellite based navigation applications in view of the
programme GAGAN of ISRO and Airport Authority of India for
advertisement and marketing of the products.

35
Reply of the Government
BEL started a separate Export Division in early 1990s to cater to
export business. BEL has taken up export as one of its thrust areas.
Over the years, export group has been strengthened to address different
countries. Though the export performance during the last five years is
around 13 US M$, the company is continuously pursuing export
business by identifying newer market segments.
BEL has also realized that in order to be lead player in export its
products need to be state-of-the-art. R&D is working in developing
such products for export market. R&D projects have been taken up
exclusively for export. e.g. A 30-88 MHz Handheld Radio has been
developed and sent for trials/ demonstration in Zimbabwe. Further
trials are planned in Indonesia and Malaysia.
BEL is also seeking support from Indian Embassy in the target
countries in order to develop export business.
A core team has been created at BEL to study and address the
GAGAN programme of ISRO.
In response to a written query, the Ministry of Defence have further
stated:
“In order to enhance the exports, BEL is in regular touch with the
Indian Missions abroad to get the inputs on the requirements and
plans for procurement. Further, BEL has appointed local
representatives in certain countries to promote BEL products and
provide necessary support to BEL. MoD organizes participation in
various exhibitions abroad and this gives opportunities for
promotion of BEL’s products. Further, during the visits of foreign
delegation to India, MoD is organizing visits to BEL where BEL is
able to present its capabilities and products of interest.”
The Ministry of Defence in a written reply have stated as under:
“BEL has planned to export its products and services to many
countries of the world. The details of the countries are given below:
- SAARC Countries, specially Sri Lanka, Nepal
- South East Asian countries specially Indonesia, Mongolia,
Thailand, Philippines, Myanmar & Vietnam.
- African Countries, specially Botswana, Zimbabwe, Zambia,
Namibia, Mauritius, DR Congo, Sudan, Ghana, Nigeria,
Algeria, Egypt & Senegal.

36
- CIS Countries Specially Russia & Kazakhstan
- European Countries Specially France, Ireland, Italy, Israel,
Netherlands, Switzerland & Spain.”
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 31 of Chapter-I)
Need to ensure competitiveness
Recommendation No. 10
The Committee observe that the objectives of BEL is to attain
technological leadership in defence electronics to constantly benchmark
company’s performance with best in class internationally and raise
marketing availabilities to global standards. However, the Committee
are distressed to note that the same has not been reflected in the
export potential of BEL to different countries. BEL is finding difficulties
in exporting their products to the developed countries and is only
exporting to countries like South East Asian Countries, SAARC
Countries and African Continent where state-of-the-art technologies are
not required. The Committee does not agree with this approach of
BEL. Therefore, the Committee strongly desires that to compete with
international market, which is full of challenges, BEL must make
concerted efforts to update the technologies, which have very high
rate of obsolescence, and produce high-end technologies to meet the
changing requirements of the countries. The Committee also desires
that to ensure quality, BEL must adopt the process of self-certification
for all its products.
Reply of the Government
In order to be a lead player in export front, BEL is working on
futuristic technology like Frequency Hopping Radios, C4I System,
Phased Array Radars, New Generation Sonars, MEMS etc. BEL is also
looking for Joint Ventures for developing technologies. The contract
manufacturing under offsets will enable BEL to acquire new
technologies.
BEL has elaborate inspection & quality checks in the manufacturing
line. The products are inspected at various stages of manufacture, i.e.,
component level, module, sub-assembly, assembly and at system level.
The quality process established ensures adequate quality checks during
manufacture.

37
In the area of Quality Assurance, BEL has adopted the Total Quality
Management (TQM) approach. A Corporate Quality Group – Total
Organizational Quality Enhancement (TORQUE) has been set up to
oversee all activities relating to enhancement of quality in the company.
The company has adopted Six Sigma Concept – a concept which has
been successfully implemented by global giants like Motorola, General
Electric etc for quality enhancement and total quality management.
This is being spread throughout the company. The company has also
adopted the Business Excellence Model as laid down by the CII-EXIM
Bank Excellence Award criteria, for the past five years.
The products thus manufactured are also inspected by the customer
resident inspectors in case of defence products. For some of BEL
products, self certification has been accorded. These products were
produced in large quantities. BEL has taken up self certification for
some more products. For civilian and export products, the internal
quality teams inspect the products before dispatch to customers.
When asked about the details of the products being exported, their
export value and the countries to which these are being exported for
the last five years, the Ministry of Defence in a written reply
have stated that BEL has exported products and services worth
Rs. 25,522.33 lakhs (US $ 57.19 M) over the last 5 years (2002-03 to
2006-07) to various countries. Some of the major products exported
include communication equipments, Radars & Spares, Night vision
products, etc.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 35 of Chapter-I)
Appointment of Agents for export
Recommendation No. 11
The Committee note that BEL has appointed representatives in
selected foreign countries for export of its products. These
representatives provide support to BEL for various activities. The
compensation payable to the agent is mutually agreed upon case-to
case basis, subject to a maximum of ten per cent on FOB value of the
products supplied to the territory and is usually payable on full
realization of sale proceeds. The percentage compensation varies
depending on country, volume of business, nature of contract etc. The
Committee desire that for maintaining transparency and to ensure
accountability of the representatives, the Ministry should undertake a

38
thorough exercise and brought out a detailed guidelines regarding the
terms and conditions for appointing the agents, functions and procedure
for payment of compensation etc. The Committee may be apprised
about the progress made by the Ministry in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As far as BEL is concerned it has evolved a proves of selecting
and appointing agencies abroad. Since, the product line and scope for
export differs from PSU to  PSU, it may not be advisable to create a
common guidelines for appointment of agents. It also depends upon
the rules and laws of countries where these agents have to be
appointed. In view of this, the Ministry feels that each DPSU should
create its own guidelines depending upon their product profile and
the likely customers.
Indigenisation
Recommendation No. 12
The Committee observe that as part of indigenisation effort, BEL
has got some success in achieving indigenisation level in equipments
like USFM Radar, Flycatcher Radar, Reporter Radar, UHF Radio Relay
RL 432, Laser Range Finder LH-30, HHTI and PRC 6020. The
Committee also note that there has been consistent improvement of
the percentage of indigenous content to the total material of the
equipment produced by BEL since 2001-02. However, the overall
indigenisation level is not very satisfactory. The percentage of
indigenous content to the total material during 2005-06 is only 45.22%
is very dismal. The Committee are informed that out of the total
revenue earned by BEL, 70-75 per cent of revenue is coming from
products, manufactured based on indigenous design and development
and only about 30 per cent of the revenue is coming from products,
manufactured based on technology transfer and BEL is getting a
preference if they are meeting the customers’ requirement. Keeping in
view the above facts, the Committee strongly feel that BEL has to go
a long way in achieving sufficient indigenisation level. Therefore, the
Committee recommend that BEL must intensify its in-house R&D and
concerted efforts may be made to meet the customers requirements
and earn more revenue thereon. In case of transfer of technology BEL
must go beyond the position of system integration after importing the
parts. The Committee desire that BEL must produce the systems/sub-
system based on the technical know how it has received from the
foreign countries on the transfer of technology agreement.

39
Reply of the Government
Products supplied by BEL through indigenous route is either
designed at BEL or designed by DRDO and BEL is a Production
Agency. As most of the Defence products are designed for working in
extreme environmental conditions and in order to meet this
requirement, special MIL grade components are to be used. There are
very few manufacturer in India. Hence, these types of components
essentially need to be imported. BEL is outsourcing sub-systems,
modules through private Indian companies in areas where capabilities/
vendors are available.
In case of ToT with the foreign partner, BEL adopts the process of
absorbing technology in a phased manner leading to increase in the
indigenous content of the production in each phase, viz., Semi Knocked
Down (SKD), Completely Knocked Down (CKD) and In depth
Manufacturing (IM). In some of the ToTs, the proprietary items need
to be necessarily procured from the ToT partner only.
During the process of in-depth manufacturing, BEL has achieved
good results in achieving substantial indigenisation in some of the
ToT products like UHF Radio Relay RL 432, Flycatcher Radar, PRC
6020, HHTI etc. By adopting this process, the company not only reduces
the cost of manufacture, but also increases the indigenous content in
the ToT products.
During the year 2006-2007, the total turnover from the indigenously
designed and developed products, both from BEL & DRDO is 81%.
Need for close examination of modernization/upgradation measures
Recommendation No. 14
The Committee note that BEL has been continuously modernizing
its infrastructure to be in tune with the changing needs of the
technology. Some of the new infrastructure have been established or
are in the process of establishment in various units. The Committee
further observe that order book position in some of the units of BEL
is very grim. The orders from the Armed Forces has been drastically
reduced from the year 2001-02 to 2005-06. Some of the units of BEL
are lacking orders and 30 to 40 per cent of their capacity is lying idle.
The export potential of BEL since last five years is not satisfactory.
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry should
examine the available infrastructure, modernization/upgradation already
done and in view of the above problem areas the need for further

40
modernization/upgradation in all 9 units of BEL and should take
corrective measures and inform the Committee regarding the action
taken thereon within three months of the presentation of this report.
The Committee feel that although modernisation is a continuous
process, the Board should fix a time schedule for modernisation of
each of the infrastructural unit and that should be strictly adhered to
by BEL.
Reply of the Government
BEL as a Miniratna and now as a Navratna has extensive powers
to take up upgradation/Modernization in all Units of BE. During
various review meeting taken at the Ministry level, this is reviewed.
BEL has been advised by the Ministry to invest higher in R & D and
upgrade infrastructure wherever required. Accordingly, BEL has
established a mechanism for creating infrastructure, modernization/
upgradation of its plants & machinery through its capital budgeting
process. The capital projects are drawn by the Units to meet the
technological levels of the products being taken up for manufacture in
their Units in the coming three years. These budgets are annually
reviewed and updated to take care of the realistic situation and
necessary corrections are made, if required the modernization/
upgradation taken up in BEL is mostly in the areas of technology
upgradation and not in creating additional capacity.
The proposal for capital projects for modernization/upgradation is
put up to the Board for its approval before taking up the
implementation. The status of the Board approved capital projects is
reviewed by the Board on a half-yearly basis, both on time & cost
element.
Status of major projects of BEL
Recommendation No. 15
The Committee are happy to note that in the field of sonar the
country seems to be self-reliant. In the field of radar, BEL has the
infrastructure and capability to design and manufacture radars. The
Committee further note that BEL in close association with DRDO labs
is in the process of introducing new radars with the state-of-the-art
technology. In this connection, BEL has also tied up with reputed
foreign companies to develop high-end technologies. However, the
Committee during examination of Demands for Grants 2006-07 were
dismayed to note that some of the ships inducted in Navy are operating
without radar and most of the radars fitted on ships are imported.

41
Therefore, the Committee desire that the available infrastructure with
BEL must be properly utilized and in this connection reputed private
sector firms having relevant expertise must be involved in the designing
and manufacture of radars to attain indigenisation in the field of radars.
In regard to jammers, the Committee note that BEL is constantly
improving the technology of jammers to match technological
complexities of IEDs and BEL has already supplied the new version
of jammers to some of the users. The Committee is further informed
that on demand of users the existing jammers can be upgraded and
BEL is prepared to supply the new jammers soon after getting the
necessary orders. Therefore, the Committee recommends that BEL
should constantly upgrade the jammer devices as per the changing
requirements and supply the same to the users at the earliest.
The Committee observe that during the mid 80’s and 90’s BEL
had a proposal to upgrade the semi-conductor manufacturing facilities
to meet the country’s requirement. As the manufacture of semi-
conductor was not economically viable for BEL and non-availability of
Government funding, manufacture of semi-conductor did materialize.
However, BEL is using facilities already established to design and
manufacture semi-conductor devices. Therefore, the Committee
recommend that the Ministry of Defence must provide adequate
financial assistance to BEL in pursuing other new emerging technologies
like micro electronic mechanical systems, thermal imaging etc. so that
Armed Forces can avail benefits from it.
The Committee desire that BEL and Ministry of Defence should
have close monitoring on the ongoing projects to strictly adhered to
the time schedule for their completion and delivery to the Armed
Forces and they must closely watch the percentage of their achievement
against the targets fixed.
Reply of the Government
BEL has established strong capabilities and facilities to address the
requirements of radars for defence forces. Technology upgradation is
a continuous process at BEL. Apart from its in-house R&D, BEL is
partnering with educational institutions, private companies and various
Government laboratories to develop indigenous sub-systems and
systems. BEL is also getting associated with DRDO programmes for
concurrent engineering.
BEL is constantly reviewing the jammers devices in view of the
changing requirements of the users. Based on these, the R&D efforts
are initiated to develop the products and supply to users.

42
New emerging technologies like micro electro mechanical systems
(MEMS), thermal imaging and I.I. Tubes are being addressed by BEL
through in-house development and through collaboration arrangements.
Ministry of Defence is also providing BEL opportunity and resources
by placing orders on BEL for items involving higher quantity. For
example, MoD has placed a Letter of Intent for 30,000 Nos. of NVDs
on BEL. These NVDs require the I.I. Tubes of newer technology viz.,
Super Gen/III Gen or equivalent. BELOP, a BEL subsidiary is presently
manufacturing II Gen I.I. Tubes. The LoI of 30,000 Nos of NVDs will
enable BEL to negotiate with technology providers, a better deal for
acquiring technology and indigenous manufacture under ToT of this
newer technology I.I. Tubes at BELOP. BEL management has approved
Rs. 5 crore expenditure to establish Capital Manufacturing Facility
required for MEMS project. A majority of the capital items has been
received and are under installation.
MoD is regularly monitoring and reviewing the major projects
of BEL.
Need to retain R&D engineers and technical staff
Recommendation No. 16
The Committee note that the number of engineers and technical
staff resigning in BEL since 1996-97 to 2005-06 are 1239 and
110 respectively due to opening up of economy and lucrative job
opportunities available outside BEL. The Committee are distressed to
note that majority of the engineers who are leaving BEL are from
R&D area and they leave BEL after three-four years of joining, as a
result, major R&D projects are getting delayed. The Committee also
note that the Ministry has taken a number of initiatives to retain the
executives. Besides, BEL has sought some policy level intervention to
address these serious issues for retention of technocrats like attractive
compensation, increased terminal benefits, extension of pension, merger
of 50% Dearness Allowance etc.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that urgent attention
of the Government must be drawn towards the above policy level
interventions and the pay structure of its engineers must be adequately
modified. The Committee desire that the Ministry should take
immediate steps to offer attractive job package to R&D Engineers,
which can be comparable to the best package available to them in job
market. They should also be provided on the job training to update
their knowledge. These measures will facilitate to retain them and

43
minimize the delayed R&D projects, which cause a lot of concern to
the nation and huge sufferings to the Armed Forces.
The Committee further desire that to minimize delay in the R&D
projects the Ministry must strictly adhere to the policy of not allowing
the R&D engineers to leave their job till the completion of the projects.
BEL must also make concerted efforts to document the R&D
achievement step by step as they make progress so that the new
incumbent may take up the R&D project from where the predecessor
had left so that the projects are not delayed. The Committee feel that
the salary and other benefits of R&D engineers should be performance
based in order to attract young and talented personnel. For retention
of R&D engineers the Committee further desire that the Government
should resort to strong action against those R&D engineers who are
leaving BEL midway of the projects assigned to them. They should be
debarred to join any public sector undertakings and Government
Organisations. The Committee also desire that the Ministry should
frame a recruitment policy clearly stipulating service conditions that
the engineers joining the company must sign a bond of compulsory
service in the Company for at least eight to ten years and in case of
breach of the bond, the expenditure incurred on their job specific
training would be recovered from them.
The Committee are of the strong view that scientist and R&D
engineers are the actual brain of the projects. Therefore, the Committee
further wish to recommend that to attract the young and experienced
scientists, they can be appointed on contract basis with a good
remuneration on four to five years basis. While offering incentives/
promotional avenues and other facilities to R&D engineers, the
Government must take into account their individual performance and
contribution to the overall growth of the company. In case of excellence
performance they may be given acceleratory promotions. The
Committee further recommend that the Government should extend
royalty to the engineers for their original R&D work done by them
and any product developed thereon.
Reply of the Government
The pay revision for the employees of BEL is already due
w.e.f 01-01-2007. This issue of retention of qualified R&D engineers
will also be placed before the Committee examining pay-revision.
Issue of better compensation and perks was discussed by the Board
of the company and Board has constituted a sub-committee to come

44
out with a compensation package in view of the emerging market
forces. Allowances for conveyance and uniform maintenance have
already been enhanced.
BEL also grants variable increments to their R&D engineers in
Central Research Laboratories depending on their performance and
contribution in their developmental projects. BEL also recognizes the
contribution of R&D engineers by giving them R&D Awards.
BEL has also announced additional increments to all levels of
executives ranging from 10 increments at the lowest level to
3 increments at the highest level. The objective of this is to retain and
attract skilled executives in the company.
As regards to employing local persons, BEL is meeting the
manpower requirement in non-executive cadre by issuing employment
notification in the local employment exchanges and other recruiting
agencies/boards notified for this purpose. Whereas the manpower
requirement in Executive cadre is partially met through conducting
campus selections in reputed Engineering/Professional colleges/
Institutions situated in the vicinity of our constituent units/offices.
To  a specific question as to when the Sub-Committee was
constituted, the Ministry of Defence in a written reply have stated:
“A sub-committee was constituted by BEL’s Board under the
Chairmanship of JS (SY), MoD on 30th April 2007 to look into the
enhancement of compensation packages to the executives of the
company.
As per the sub-committee’s report, additional increments as an
interim measure pending 2nd pay commission’s (for PSU
executives) report, have been granted w.e.f. 01 December 2006.”
In a written reply, the Ministry of Defence have further clarified:
“BEL has various programs in place to impart on the job training
to update the knowledge of the engineers. The programs focus on
development of technical skills as well as managerial skills.
Engineers are deputed to attend class room courses, seminars,
exhibitions etc. to enhance their knowledge. To develop managerial
skills, regular class room courses are in place for various levels of
engineers.
BEL takes several precautionary measures to minimise delay
in R&D projects including retaining of R&D engineers so as to see

45
that projects are not affected. Some of the measures taken are:
(a) Probationary engineers on induction have to execute a bond
for serving the company for a minimum period of 3 years
or else pay a penalty of Rs 50,000/-.
(b) Further, engineers execute a bond for the specified period,
whenever they are deputed abroad for training.
(c) Engineers have to give a notice of 3 months when they
submit their resignations.
Engineers on many occasions pay the bond amount and leave the
company in view of the pay package offered by the private
companies.
BEL is having an elaborate documentation system and during the
development phase also drawings and other documents are
prepared. These are kept in central records. D&E engineers are
maintaining a work diary where on daily basis they are recording
the activities done. Based on these, periodic reports are generated
and these are reviewed. This helps in capturing information
regarding the work done by an engineer. Also during the notice
period after resignation, by an engineer, another engineer gets
associated to take over information.
Performance based increments are in place for engineers working
in the Central Research Laboratories. Also the R&D award schemes
are in place where the project team is given monetary award based
on the selection of projects.
BEL is obtaining a bond for 3 years from all engineers. Further,
the applications of the engineers for job in other PSUs/Govt.
Organisations are not being forwarded during the bond period.
BEL has already provision for fast track promotions to engineers
who excel in their performance.
Extending royalty to Engineers employed by Government or PSU
for the original R&D work has commercial implication relating to
IPR and therefore BEL alternatively has devised schemes for
recognizing excellent R&D work done by the individuals and the
team like R&D Award, Fast Track Promotions, enhanced increments
and awards for patents.”

46
When asked about the measures taken by the Committee for
compensation package to executives of the Company, a representative
of Bharat Electronics Limited, during oral evidence, have stated:
“There are compensation package in the form of project-linked
schemes, performance-related and profit-related. We are giving
additional allowances i.e. conveyance allowance, housing allowance
etc. As far as these exceptional promotions are concerned, we have
started giving all our Scientists performance-based increments. It
is not one increment per year. Based on their performance, we are
giving the incentives. The attrition rate has very much come down
this year”.
During the oral evidence, a representative of Ministry of Defence
have stated:
“We are not independently deciding pay matters of the public
sector companies. As I have told you, we have given maximum
incentives we could have thought of. Whatever we could give
within our powers, if the companies could give, we have not come
in the way.”
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para 46 of Chapter-I)
Research & Development
Recommendation No. 17
The Committee are happy to note that over the years, BEL has
grown and matured adequately to address the new technological areas.
BEL is spending 4-5 per cent of its turnover in R&D activities. All the
9 manufacturing units have their own unit development and
engineering groups to develop new products in their respective areas.
Two Central Research Laboratories at Bangalore and Ghaziabad are
set up for undertaking research in futuristic areas. Apart from in-
house Research & Development of new products, BEL is having strong
tie-up with DRDO laboratories. In addition to this, BEL has ToT tie-
ups with foreign vendors for some selected products. However, the
Committee are further informed that there is delay in completion of
some of the major ongoing R&D projects for the Defence services at
BEL. The delays are due to trials and evaluation, changes in scope of
the project due to feedback generated by users during the evaluation
and R&D engineers leaving BEL. In view of the above, the Committee

47
strongly recommend that BEL must take urgent step to stop the brain-
drain by taking corrective measures and provide attractive incentives
at par with the private sectors to the R&D engineers who are the
brain behind the progress of BEL. Further, the Committee desire that
the time period for evaluation at all levels should be reduced for the
timely completion of the project. The Committee further desire that
the Ministry should chalk out a well considered plan in order to
monitor the development of various projects being undertaken by BEL
and accountability for the delay in completion schedule must be fixed
on the engineers/officials, incharge of the project. The BEL should
make clear cut assignment of project related jobs to officials at the
start of the project. The Committee further desire that the option of
involving private sector in the various projects must be explored at
the beginning itself.
Reply of the Government
BEL has a well-established process for the R&D projects right from
start to finish. Before a project is taken up, a detailed project proposal
indicating detailed milestones, manpower requirements, tools and test
instruments requirements, estimated expenditure and completion period
is required to be approved by the management. This proposal also
includes the names of the project team with responsibilities. The
progress is periodically monitored at different levels. As regards to
participation of private sector, the project manager identifies the areas
of development or supplies from private vendors after the initial design
studies are completed.
Delegation of systems/sub-systems development and manufacture
activities powers of DRDO to BEL
Recommendation No. 19
The Committee observe that over the years, BEL has set up research
facilities required for manufacture of various products/equipment for
Defence. These facilities are being utilized by BEL for in-house R&D
activities and for DRDO development programmes where BEL is asked
to take up development of sub-systems. The Committee are informed
that as per BEL view points DRDO may consider giving more and
more systems/sub-systems development and manufacturing activities
to BEL. This will allow sharing of BEL’s facilities for DRDO’s
development work and also a faster realization of final products to
defence customers. In view of the above, the Committee wish to
recommend that the Ministry should examine this aspect very carefully

48
and may consider the delegation of systems/sub-systems development
and manufacturing activities of DRDO to BEL accordingly.
Reply of the Government
BEL is already engaged in developing some system/sub-system in
collaboration with DRDO. DRDO in general has been offloading
development of sub-systems to the industry as far as possible. In view
of this, there is no need for any specific delegation to be given, as
DRDO is already engaging BEL in development of several system/
sub-systems.
Urgent need for involvement of private sector
Recommendation No. 20
The Committee observe that BEL has been promoting small and
medium scale industries right from the beginning to meet its
manufacturing requirements of electronic sub-assemblies, sub-systems,
mechanical and electro-mechanical components and sub-systems, etc.
This will primarily augment the capacities, use design capabilities of
vendor for faster development and optimum use of infrastructure
available with private vendors to get the items and services at
competitive prices. The Committee, are, however distressed to note
that BEL is hesitant to outsource the items using critical and classified
technologies due to security reasons and commercial importance. The
Committee feel that non-involvement of private companies in
manufacturing of items of critical/classified technologies is an explicit
indication of its monopolistic attitude in Defence production which
will ultimately lead to weakening the existing R&D base in the country
and expose itself in times of emergencies/war situations. The
Committee are of the strong view that the private sectors should be
encouraged to come up a particular level in order to share responsibility
with the public sector undertakings as the same will strengthen the
domestic R&D base to ensure timely and sustained supply of
equipment to the Armed Forces.
Reply of the Government
BEL has been promoting small & medium scale industries right
from the beginning to meet its outsourcing requirements for its various
projects. Outsourcing is mainly done on the basis of availability of
technology, infrastructure at BEL and with vendors. BEL supports its
vendors fully during the process of outsourcing. Wherever excess
capacities are available at BEL, the same are utilized before resorting
to outsourcing.

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Need for organizational restructure in all the nine units of BEL
Recommendation No. 2
The Committee note that BEL has nine manufacturing units located
at Bangalore, Ghaziabad, Pune, Punchkula, Kotdwara, Hyderbad,
Machchilipatnam, Chennai and Navi Mumbai. The Committee observe
that BEL has restructured its biggest unit at Bangalore Complex into
six Strategic Business Units and is now in the process of restructuring
its second largest unit at Ghaziabad in order to achieve enhanced
business performance, increased customer satisfaction and faster
response. The Committee note that the BEL has not initiated any action
to restructure the other units in the line of Bangalore and Ghaziabad
units. Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry of Defence
should appoint a Committee to examine the restructuring of the other
units to enable them to meet the requirements of rapid technological
changes in the liberalized business environment.
Reply of the Government
Bangalore and Ghaziabad Units are two bigger Units of BEL Units
of BEL having wide range of products like Radars, Communication,
C I systems, SATCOM product etc. These two Units were restructured
based on the core areas of their business in order to provide better
business & customer focus. The balance 7 Units are engaged in very
specific defined areas like Electronic Warfare, Electro Optics, Tank
Electronics, Tactical Communication, Telecom business etc., and they
are able to address these businesses in a focused manner. Hence, at
present, the need for restructuring of these Units is not felt and it will
be done at an appropriate time.
Concluding Observations/Recommendations
Recommendation No. 21
The Committee have made an in-depth study of the functioning
of BEL from various standpoints viz. organizational structure,
49

50
performance, capacity utilization and supplying products to Defence
Forces, modernization, research and development, indigenization and
private sector participation and thus made well-considered
recommendations under various chapters for improvement. The
Committee feel that BEL plays a crucial and vital role for the national
security of the country and therefore its functioning should be organised
and re-structured to make it an independent and autonomous R&D
body on the line of ISRO and Brahmos. In this regard, the Committee
wish to stress upon that DRDO must facilitate the working of BEL in
various projects and it should refrain from being a controlling authority
of BEL projects and the Ministry must ensure to avoid bureaucratic
red tapism. The Committee desire that total leadership should be given
to BEL to work on the corporate lines so as to enable it to raise funds
from domestic as well as external markets. It should intensify its R&D
projects and diversify its production to meet the requirements of both
defence and civil markets as per the rapid scientific and technological
advancement. This will further facilitate BEL to produce high-end
technologies to attract the export market. In this regard, the Committee
wish to recommend that for a better functioning of BEL, its performance
must be reviewed by an independent body.
Reply of the Government
BEL is a listed company with the Government holding 75.86% of
the shares. Mutual funds & UTI, FIIS, Banks, Financial Institutions,
Insurance Companies, NRIs/OCBs, Private Corporate bodies and Indian
Public hold the remaining shares. The Company is a Navratna
Company and the present corporate structure of BEL gives enough
autonomy and independence to the company in its R&D activities and
no changes in the structure is at present warranted. The Company
spends 3-4% of its turnover on R&D. Several products have been jointly
developed by BEL & DRDO and several other projects are under
development. The relationship between the two organisations has been
a very fruitful one and has generated great synergies in meeting the
needs of the Armed Forces. BEL has a totally different R&D set up
and has no interference or control from DRDO on the nature of projects
initiated or taken up by BEL to address its business requirements. In
many recent projects BEL has contributed and provided major
development share and front ending such projects with the support/
part development by DRDO. This enables DRDO to concentrate on
their directly sanctioned projects. To sum up, the relationship of DRDO
with BEL is not in the nature of a controlling authority. Further BEL,
as a Navratna company has freedom to raise resources from domestic
and external markets subject to approval of RBI/Department of

51
Economic Affairs through the administrative Ministry. The Committee’s
recommendations on need to intensify R&D and diversify its production
to meet the civil and defence markets are very relevant for BEL’s
stature as a professional Electronics major and also to attract export
markets. However, there is no need for another independent body to
review the performance of BEL. In the present scheme there are enough
mechanisms to exercise oversight, review and monitor the performance
of BEL. Moreover, the company is a listed one, which is accountable
to shareholders. In addition to the Government, the shareholders
consists of the general public, various institutions and funds. The
success of the company is reflected in the share price of the company,
which varied between Rs.1395 and Rs. 1575 in BSE during March
2007. There are nine independent directors in the Board of Directors
who are eminent persons from various fields like, Management,
Finance, Academia and Industry. The Company also signs a MoU with
the Government with the assistance of DPE and its performance
parameters are laid down and monitored by Government. Further, the
company is subjected to the C&AG and CVC advices.

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Restructuring of the Board of Directors
Recommendation No. 1
The Committee note that the Board of Directors of BEL comprises
Chairman and Managing Director, six Directors incharge of Finance,
Research and Development, Personnel, Marketing, Other Units and
Bangalore Complex respectively. The Board of Directors also includes
part time Government Directors i.e. Joint Secretary (Shipyards) of the
Ministry of Defence and two representatives of Armed Forces. In
accordance with the SEBI guidelines, BEL has restructured its Board of
Directors and has included part time independent Directors and has
also included various technical and management experts from leading
business institutions and IITs. Two senior most Officers from Air Force
and Navy are the permanent special invitees to all the Board meetings.
The Committee feel that the restructuring of the Board of Directors is
a positive step to manage the Company in a professional manner.
However, the Committee to note that Army has not been represented
in the Board of Directors of BEL and only making the representatives
of the Armed Forces as permanent special invitees will not serve any
meaningful purpose. Therefore, the Committee desire that officers from
Army, Navy and Air Force should be made permanent Members on
the Board of Directors instead of designating them as permanent special
invitees to all the Board meetings. This will ensure active and effective
participation of the users with the projects from the conceptualization
stage to production and use and will help BEL to take decision in a
more concerted way.
Reply of the Government
Presently, BEL Board of Directors is having Signal Officer-in-Chief,
Army Headquarters as a permanent member. However, Vice Chief of
Air Staff, Indian Air Force and COM of Indian Navy are the permanent
special invitees to all the meetings of the BEL Board of Directors as
per MOD directives in this regard.
52

53
As per the Government of India, Department of Public Enterprises
(DPE) guidelines, the number of Government Directors should in no
case exceed two. The DPE guidelines on structure and composition of
PSU Boards stipulate that:
(a) The functional Directors on the Board should not exceed
50% of actual strength.
(b) The number of Government Directors should not exceed
two.
(c) The number of non-official Directors should be at least
one third of the actual strength.
BEL Board of Directors was restructured by the Government in
March 2006 in accordance with the DPE/SEBI guideline/listing
agreement requirements.
Present composition of BEL Board of Directors, which fully complies
all the above requirements, is as follows:
(a) Functional Director (including (CMD) : 7
(b) Government Director : 2
(c) Non-official (independent) Directors : 9
TOTAL 18
As per the above required stipulations of DPE and to comply with
the SEBI listing agreement conditions, Government could appoint
2 Government Directors only on the Board of BEL, one from the
Administrative Ministry i.e., Joint Secretary (SY), MoD and one from
Army, being the largest customer for BEL i.e., SO-in-C, Army.”
When asked whether the Ministry of Defence or Bharat Electronics
Limited (BEL) has ever proposed to the Department of Public
Enterprises to modify the guidelines in regard to nomination of one
member each from the three user Services as a permanent member on
the Board of Directors, the Ministry of Defence in their written replies
to the List of Points has stated:
“BEL has earlier (in 2004) proposed to the Ministry of Defence to
consider the representatives of the three wings of the Armed Forces
as independent Directors on the Board. MoD had in turn referred
the matter to the DPE and DPE had not agreed to the proposal.
Hence representatives of Services have been incorporated as

54
permanent Special invitees so as to have the benefit of their
contribution in Board meetings.”
Clarifying the issue further the Secretary, Defence Production during
oral evidence has stated:
“The Ministry of Public Enterprises have taken the approval of
cabinet before issuing the order regarding the composition of Board
of Directors. After that when it came to us we had taken it up a
number of times with the Ministry, and we did not implement
this order for a long time but all these pleas were not
considered… … This was put up to the then Hon’ble Raksha Mantri,
and with his orders, it was decided to implement these decisions
in toto. So, independent Directors, who are very competent in this
field were selected and put in place, and only two Government
Directors were allowed to work in any public sector undertaking;
and that is what today, we have.
As far as officers of the Armed Forces are concerned, they are also
Members of some Boards. In some Boards they are the Members,
and in some Boards, Joint Secretaries in the Ministry are the
Members. But wherever one is not a Member, he has been made
a permanent invitee in that Board. That is how we have resolved
this matter. No Board has ever taken a decision where voting
takes place. It does not happen in our companies. Everything is
done by consensus. Everything is done by understanding each
other. One debates with the other person, tells him what his
viewpoints are; and when the consensus is there, then only a
decision is taken. So, Sir, there is no question of invitee having
less powers than the Director. He has full powers to give his
opinion, to give his decision, to contribute to that decision-making
process. That is what is being done in the Armed Forces. In some
place, the Financial Advisors are also doing that job.”
During oral evidence, of the Ministry of Heavy Industries
(Department of Public Enterprises) the representatives further clarified
the position regarding the strength of the Board of Directors of Bharat
Electronics Limited. The clarifications are as under:—
“There is a policy approved by the Government abut the
composition of Board of Directors of Central Public Sector
Enterprises. The Policy laid down is that one-third of the Directors
would be non-official Directors and the strength of the functional
Directors shall not exceed 50 percent of the total strength of the

55
Board of Directors and the Government nominee Directors shall
not exceed two in any case. So, the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Industry which is concerned with our Ministry has
taken the subject of professionalisation of Board of Directors as a
special subject for study and this has been reviewed in that
Committee a number of times. The Department of Defence
Production under which these two companies come, had also
appeared before the Committee and the then secretary of the
Department of Defence Production had given an undertaking that
the Boards of these companies would be structured in terms of
that policy.
Thereafter, they have restructured the Boards of these Companies.
They have appointed Independent Directors. As regards the posts
of Functional Directors, as I already mentioned, the number of
Functional Directors should not exceed the fifty per cent of the
Board’s strength. With regard to Bharat Electronics Limited, in
November, 2005, the Department of Defence Production had made
a proposal for appointment of nine part time non-Functional
Directors on the Board. The Department of Defence Production
also agreed that the number of Government Directors should not
exceed two.”
Pertaining to a query on the Formation of Board of Directors, after
conferring Navratna status to BEL the representatives of the Department
of Public Enterprises, during oral evidence stated:
“There is no change. The functional directors would be same and
not more than 50 per cent independent directors. If the company
is listed, then it will have to have 50 per cent non-functional
directors.”
Replying to a specific query of the Committee in regard to
professional and technical guidance in the composition of the Board to
give intellectual direction in terms of product designing, product
making, the representatives of the Department of Pubic Enterprises
during oral evidence stated:
“The Board will have functional directors also who would have
specific technical know-how. It is because they will be experts in
their own discipline. Then the Ministry of Defence and the
company interact at various levels. In any case, the Department of
Defence Production can look into it. If they need any change in
the policy, the policy regarding composition of the Board is
approved by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA).

56
If the Department of Defence Production feel so, they will have to
approach the Competent Authority for relaxation. It is not within
the competence of our Department to make relaxations. If any one
feels that relaxation is required, then they have to make out a case
and go to the Competent Authority to seek that
relaxation……………… Now the Defence sector is also opening
up. The private sector is being allowed to enter into many areas
including the Defence sector. This is a wider issue that can be
debated and then the Government can take a comprehensive view
on this.”
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 13 of Chapter I)
Perspective Plan of BEL
Recommendation No. 13
The Committee note that BEL follows various effective steps in
formulating long-term business plans. BEL follows the guidelines of
Department of Public Enterprise (DPE), which stipulates that the targets
fixed should be realistic and growth oriented. The MoU target for
Defence orders are negotiated on the basis of projections of the
customer as well as ability of the company to execute the orders. The
inputs regarding customer need are collected during interactions in
institutional meetings, progress reviews with customers, interaction with
DRDO business partners. However, the Committee are pained to note
that BEL does not have access to the long-term perspective plan of the
Armed Forces. The Committee further note that there is no direct user
involvement in MoU target fixing. The Committee are of the strong
view that the perspective plan of BEL is an unrealistic proposition by
knowing the customer need through institutional meetings and without
access to long-term perspective plan of the Armed Forces and without
direct user involvement in MoU target fixing. Therefore, the Committee
strongly recommend that the Ministry/Armed Forces should make
available the long-term perspective plan to BEL and involve the users
directly through out the process so that the perspective plan of BEL
will be realistic and growth oriented. Besides, the Committee desire
that the perspective plan should also address the threat perception,
both conventional and non-conventional, rapid technological changes
and new innovations in defence technologies taking place world wide
and intensify R&D activities through in house R&D and tie up with
R&D institutions and foreign collaborations. The Committee further

57
desire that BEL should constantly evaluate their product lines and
improve its technologies and products in order to bring into the world
standard and make its product cost effective.
Reply of the Government
The Armed Forces perspective plan, a secret document finalized
by HQIDS for Armed Forces is shared with Ministry of Defence
(Department of Defence Production). The details with reference to the
product profile of each PSU/OFB, are shared with them.
In addition to the above, the PSU conducts detailed discussions
with user directorates on their requirements
The MoU between company and Government is facilitated by an
action task force constituted by DPE. The MoU contains various
performance parameters including customer satisfaction, quality,
financial performance etc. The users requirements and perceptions are
taken into account while drawing the MoU.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 39 of Chapter I)

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT
OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
ARE STILL AWAITED
Need for extending financial help for undertaking some of the
strategic technologies
Recommendation No. 18
The Committee are happy to note that BEL has played a significant
role in meeting the requirements of Armed Forces for electronic
communication and Radar equipment. The Company has developed
indigenously a number of products with active support of customers
and DRDO laboratories. The Company has also been making
continuous efforts towards technology upgradation and identifying new
technologies and new products jointly or in collaboration with Defence/
National Laboratories and Institutes. The Committee note that for
establishment of some of the strategic technologies inter-alia Infra-Red
Detectors & Detector Dewar Cooler Assembly, Micro Electro Mechanical
Systems (MEMS), Multi-junction Gallium Arsenide based Solar Cells
and Super Gen Image Intensifier Tubes & Micro Channel Plates, BEL
has sought financial assistance from the Government. The Standing
Committee in their Ninth Report, had also recommended for grant of
financial assistance to these projects. The Committee are constrained
to note that till now the same assistance has not been extended to
BEL, as a result, vital strategic projects will not be materialized and
the same cannot be extended to the Armed Forces. Besides the above
projects, BEL has also required Government assistance for MEMS and
Multi-junction Gallium Projects. Since limited resources are available
with the Company and huge funds are required for meeting the
expenditure on these strategic projects, the Committee strongly
recommend that the Government must consider extending help to BEL
for their timely completion and extend the benefits to the Armed Forces.
Reply of the Government
Development of some of these technologies are under examination
by the Ministry for initiating ‘make’ projects. Once, the project is
approved, required funds for design, development and production will
58

59
be made available. Alternatively, Ministry of Defence is placing indents
on BEL for procurement of items involving much cutting edge
technology with the objective of acquiring the know-how through
Transfer of Technology .
  N EW D ELHI ; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
14 March, 2008 Chairman,
24 Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2007-2008)
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 27th Decemebr 2007 from
1100 to 1215 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
3. Shri Santosh Gangwar
4. Shri C. Kuppusami
5. Dr. K.S. Manoj
6. Shri Raju Rana
Rajya Sabha
7. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
8. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
9. Smt. Shobhana Bhartia
10. Smt. N.P. Durga
11. Shri K.B. Shanappa
12. Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha — Under Secretary
60

61
WITNESSES
Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Vijay Singh — Defence Secretary
2. Shri K.P. Singh — Secretary (DP)
3. Shri M. Natarajan — SA to RM
4. Smt. Neelkamal Narang — FA (DS)
5. Shri P.K. Rastogi — AS (R)
6. Shri Ajoy Acharya — AS (DP)
7. Dr. D. Banerjee — CCR&D (AMS) & DS
8. Dr. Prahlada — CCR&D (SI)
9. Shri N. Sita Ram — CCR&D (ECS)
10. Shri S.N. Misra — JS (HAL)
11. Shri Gyanesh Kumar — JS (SY)
12. Shri P. Surendran — Director (SY)
13. Shri R.B. Singh — Director, (P&C)
HAL/BEL
1. Shri Ashok K. Baweja — Chairman, HAL
2. Shri V.V.R. Sastry — CMD (BEL)
3. Shri S.K. Mehta — Director (R&D), BEL
4. Shri Manoj Kr. Agarwal — Manager (IT) BEL
5. Col. J. Hota — PO (L)
Services HQS
1. Lt. Gen. H.S. Lidder — CISC
2. Lt. Gen. M.L. Naidu — VCOAS
3. V. Adml. Nirmal Verma — VCNS
4. Air Mshl. NAK Browne — DCAS
5. V. Adml. Anup Singh — DCNS
6. Air Mshl. K.M. Rama Sundara — AOM
7. AVM SB Bajpayee — ACAS (Sigs. & IT)
8. R. Adml. V. Karunanidhi — DG (EWSE)
9. Cmde. JJ Verma — PDA (Acq.)
10. Brig. Vivek Mehta — DDG WE (A)

62
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives
of the Ministry of Defence to the sitting of the Committee and drew
their attention to Direction 58 of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. The Committee then took evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Defence on Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry
of Defence on the recommendations contained in the **and 18th Reports
of the Committee on** and ‘In-depth Study and Critical Review of
Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL)’, respectively. The Committee sought
clarifications on several issues arising out of the Action Taken replies.
4. *** *** ***
5. As regards the Eighteenth Report on ‘In-depth Study and Critial
Review of Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL)’, the Committee sought
clarifications on guidelines issued by Department of Public Enterprises
in regard to nomination of one Member each from the three services
as a permanent Member on the Board of Directors, achievements of
Bharat Electronics Limited, sharing of perspective plan or long term
plan of the users with BEL, measures taken by Bharat Electronics
Limited or Minsitry of Defence for retention of R&D Engineers and
Scientists, delay in supply of items, steps taken to ensure self-reliance
and indigenisation and ensuring more private participation etc.
6.  The representatives of the Ministry of Defence then clarified
the issues one by one. As regards the points on which the
representatives could not readily respond, the Committee desired the
Ministry to furnish written information at the earliest.
7. At the end, Hon’ble Chairman wished to all the Members,
Officers of the Secretariat and Ministry of Defence a very Happy
New Year.
8. A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
**Not related to the subject.

MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2007-2008)
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 6th February 2008 from
1100 to 1200 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Milind Deora
3. Shri Santosh Gangwar
4. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa
5. Dr. K.S. Manoj
6. Shri Raju Rana
7. Dr. H.T. Sangliana
8. Shri Manvendra Singh
9. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
10. Shri Rajesh Verma
11. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi
Rajya Sabha
12. Dr. Farooq Abdullah
13. Shri Jai Parkash Aggarwal
14. Smt. N.P. Durga
15. Shri S.P.M. Syed Khan
16. Shri K.B. Shanappa
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
2. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha — Under Secretary
63

64
2. There were two items on the agenda of the Committee. These
were (i) oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Heavy
Industries (Department of Public Enterprises) in connection with
examination of the action taken replies furnished by the Ministry of
Defence to the recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report
of the Committee on “In-depth Study and Critical Review of Bharat
Electronics Limited (BEL)” and (ii) consideration and adoption of draft
action taken report on the recommendations/observations contained
in the Eighteenth Report of the Committee on “In-depth Study and
Critical Review of Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL)”.
3. The Chairman apprised the Members that due to inability of
the Secretary, Department of Public Enterprises to appear before the
Committee on that day, the oral evidence may be held at a later date.
4. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draft
action taken report on the recommendations/observations contained
in the Eighteenth report of the Committee on “In-depth Study and
Critical Review of Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL)” and adopted the
same subject to incorporation of the comments that may be made on
the basis of the oral evidence of the representatives of the Department
of Public Enterprises which may be held later.
5. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
report after oral evidence of Department of Public Enterprises and
present the same to the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2007-2008)
The Committee sat on Monday, the 3rd March, 2008 from 1500
to 1535 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
3. Shri S. Bangarappa
4. Shri Santosh Gangwar
5. Shri Ramesh C. Jigajinagi
6. Shri C. Kuppusami
7. Dr. K.S. Manoj
8. Shri Manavendra Singh
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri K.B. Shanappa
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Smt. J.M. Sinha — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Heavy Industries and
Public Enterprises (Department of Public Enterprises)
1. Shri K.D. Tripathi — Joint Secretary
2. Shri G. Ramachandran — Director
3. Shri P.J. Michael — Under Secretary
65

66
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the repesentatives of the
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises (Department of
Public Enterprises) to the sitting of the Committee for oral evidence in
connection with the Action Taken replies furnished of the Ministry of
Defence on the recommendations/observations fo the Committee
contained in their** and Eighteenth Report on ** and ‘In-depth Study
and Critical Review of Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL)’ respectively.
Then, the Chairman drew their attention to Direction 58 of Directions
by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
3. A representative of the Department of Public Enterprises briefed
the Committee regarding the guidelines Governing on the composition
of Board of Directors of** and Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL), matters
of Second Pay Revision Committee appointed by Department of Public
Enterprises to recommendation the pay scales for Public Enterprises.
4. With regard to composition of Board of Directors of Defence
Public Sector Undertakings, representative of department of Public
Enterprises stated that since the guidelines governing the structure of
Board of Directors had the approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic
Affairs (CCEA), any decision can be considered only if there is any
specific proposal in this regard from the Ministry of Defence.
5. The Committee were also informed that the issues regarding
acceleratory promotions and extending royalty to R&D scientist
engineers do not come under the purview of the Department of Public
Enterprises or the Second Pay Revision Committee.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
**Not related to the subject.

APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTEENTH REPORT OF
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (FOURTEENTH LOK
SABHA) ON THE SUBJECT ‘IN-DEPTH STUDY AND CRITICAL
REVIEW OF BHARAT ELECTRONICS LIMITED (BEL)’
Total  Percentage
 of Total
(i) Total number of recommendations 21  100%
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which 16  76.20%
have been accepted by Government
(vide Recommendation Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19
& 20).
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which  2  09.52%
the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of Government’s replies
(vide Recommendation Nos. 2 & 21).
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect 2  09.52%
of which Government’s replies have not
been accepted by the Committee
(vide Recommendation Nos. 1 & 13).
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect 1  04.76%
of which final replies of Government are
still awaited
(vide Recommendation No. 18)
67