26
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE
(2007-2008)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
16th Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2007-08]
TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2008/Phalguna, 1929 (Saka)

TWENTY-SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
16th Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands
for Grants of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2007-08]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 19.3.2008
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha on 19.3.2008
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 2008/Phalguna, 1929 (Saka)


C.O.D. No. 92
Price : Rs. 87.00
© 2008 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2007-2008) ........................................ (iii)
PREFACE ........................................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government ......................... 17
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies ..................................... 62
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ...................................... 70
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited ........................................................................... 74
APPENDIX I Minutes of the Sitting ................................................ 78
APPENDIX II Analysis Aocft ion Taken by Government on
the Recommendations contained in the 16th
Report of the Standing Committee on
Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) ............................. 80

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON DEFENCE (2007-2008)
  Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri iVjay Bahuguna
3. Shri S. Bangarappa
4. Shri Milind Murli Deora
5. Shri Santosh Gangwar
6. Shri Jigajinagi Ramesh Chandappa
7. Shri Suesrh Kalmadi
8. Shri C. Kuppusami
9. D. rK.S. Manoj
10. Ms. Ingrid Mcleod
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
12. ShrAi dhalrao Shivaji Patil
13. Shri Shriniwas Patil
14. Shri Raju Rana
15. D. rH.T. Sangliana
16. ShrAi rjun Charan Sethi
17. Porf. Mahadeorao Shiwankar
18. Shri Manavendra Singh
19. Shri Balashowry aVllabhaneni
20. Shri Rajesh eVrma
21. ShrAi nil Shukla Warsi
Rajya Sabha
22. D. rFarooq Abdullah
23. Shri Jai PrakashA ggarwal
24. Shri Abu AsimA zmi
25. Smt. Shobhana Bharatia
(iii)

26. Shri R.K. Dhawan
27. Smt. N.. PDurga
28. Shri S..MP . Syed Khan
29. Shri K.B. Shanappa
30. Shri Aurn Shourie
31. Smt. iVplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
4. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Smt. Jyochnamayi Sinha — Under Secretary
(iv)

(v)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Defence (2007-08)
having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on
their behalf, present this Twenty-Sixth Report of the Committee on
‘Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Sixteenth Report of the Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on
‘Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Defence.
2. The Sixteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 28.4.2007
and laid in Rajya Sabha on 3.5.2007 and it contained
76 recommendations/observations. The Ministry of Defence have
furnished their Action Taken Replies on all the recommendations/
observations on 22.8.2007.
3. The Draft Action Taken Report was considered and adopted by
the Committee at their sitting held on 11.3.2008.
4. An analysis of action taken by the Government on
recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the Standing
Committee on Defence (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) is given in Appendix-II.
  N EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
17 March, 2008 Chairman,
27 Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
The report of the Standing Committee on Defence deals with action
taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in their Sixteenth Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Demands for
Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Defence which was presented to
Lok Sabha on 28.4.2007 and laid in Rajya Sabha on 3.5.2007.
2. The Committee’s Sixteenth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
contains 76 observations/recommendations on the following aspects:—
Sl.No. Para No. ct Subje
 1 2 3
 1. 2r.17 G owth of Defence Expenditure vis-a-vis other
Economic Parameters
 2. 2&.2 32 .24 ojectiPonr  made by the three Services and
budgetary allocation during the year 2007-08
 3. 2.36 Ratio of Revenue to Capietal Expenditur
 4. 2.42, 2.43 & Capital Expeenditur
2.44
 5. 2.60, 2.61r & P oduction of funds in revised estimate stage—
2.62 need for expeditious colpeaorsaanlsce of pr
 6. 2.65 Delegation of financial power to service
headquarters
 7. 33..65 , & 3.7 Loenrgm  TIntegrated Perspective Planning
(LTIPP)
 8. 3.14 & 3.15 Utilisation of allocation during 10th Plan
 9. 3.18 1th SDtaetfuens coe f P1lan
10. 4.8, 4.9, 4.10 &Declining seh aorf Army in the Budget
4.11
11. 4.14 Non-intrinsic BAurdmgyet of the 

2
1 2 3
12. 44.1.189, , 4.20, Separate Pay Commission fAorr med Forces
4.21, 4.22, 4.23 &
4.24
13. 4.28, 4.29 & Sainik Schools
4.30
14. 44.3.334,  & Operation Sadbhavana and Operation Good
4.35 Samaritan
15. 4.45 aMnka i(nM BBaTt)t leA rTjun
16. 5.9, 5.10 &1 5.1 Brief on Revenue & Capital Expenditure
Budget 2007-2008
17. 5.15 Maritime surveillance capability of Indian
Navy
18. 5.19 & 5.20 Refitting Schedule of Admiral Gorshkov
(Vikramaditya) and Acquisition of Aircraft
carriers
19. 55.2.289, , 5.30 & Need to attract best Human Resoucres in
5.31 ces Armed For
20. 6.6 & 6.7 Modernisation oAf iIrn dFioarnc e
21. 6.9 & 6.10 Shortage of Manpower
22. 66.1.178, , 6.19 & Procurement and Upgradation Plans during
6.20 2007-08
23. 6.23 & 6.2c4rashA i&r  Training
24. 6.28 & 6.29 Attrition of Pilots
25. 7.6, 7.7 & 7.8 Defence Research & Development
Organisation
26. 8.7, 8.8, 8.9, 8.10, Special facilities for war disabled
8.11, 8.12 & 8.13 veterans
27. 9.5 , 9.6 & 9e.l7fWare of Ex-Servicemen
28. 10.9 & 10.10 Civil Estimates of the Ministry of Defence
29. 10.16, 10.17 &Defence Estateg aOnirsation
10.18

3
3. Actiona kTen Replies have been received from the Government
in respect of all the recommendations/observations contained in the
Report. These have been broadly categorized as follows :—
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted
by the Government:—
Para Nos. 2.23 & 2.24, 2.36, 2.42, 2.43 & 2.44, 2.60, 2.61 &
2.62, 2.65, 3.5, 3.6 & 3.7, 3.14, 3.15, 3.18, 4.8 & 4.9, 4.10, 4.11,
4.19, 4.28, 4.29, 4.30, 4.33, 4.34, 4.35, 4.45, 5.9, 5.10, 5.15,
5.20, 5.28, 5.29 & 5.30, 6.6, 6.7, 6.9, 6.10, 6.17, 6.19, 6.20,
6.23, 6.24, 6.28, 6.29, 7.6, 7.7, 7.8, 8.7, 8.8, 8.9, 8.12, 8.13,
10.9, 10.10 and 10.18
(57 Recommendations)
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government:—
Para Nos. 2.17, 4.14, 4.18, 4.20, 4.21, 4.22, 4.23 & 4.24, 5.31
and 10.17
(10 Recommendations)
(iii) Recommendations/observations ine srpect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration:—
Para Nos. 5.11, 5.19, 6.18 and 8.10
(4 Recommendations)
(iv) Recommendations/observations in esrpect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:—
Para Nos. 8.11, 9.5, 9.6, 9.7 and 10.16
(5 Recommendations)
4. On examination of the replies furnished by the Ministry of
Defence, the Committee note that most of the replies are not specific
to the points raised by the Committee and the Ministry have also
not given response to a number of points. The Ministry appear to
be reluctant to furnish direct response to some of the points. The
Committee caution the Ministry to exercise extreme care in furnishing
replies to the Committee.
The Committee trust that utmost importance will be given to
implementation of recommendations made by the Committee, except
those the Committee do not want to pursue in view of the

4
Government’s replies. In cases, where it is not possible for any reason
to implement the recommendations in letter and spirit, the matter
should be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-
implementation. The Committee desire that action taken notes on
the recommendations/observations contained in Chapter–I and final
replies to the recommendations contained in Chapter–V of the Report
be furnished to them within one month.
5. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations which need reiteration
or comments.
A. Study to identify areas of wasteful expenditure
Recommendation (Para No. 2.24)
6. The Committee had inter-alia desired that the Ministry of
Defence should make a study to find out area where wasteful
expenditure could be avoided and valuable resources could be saved
in order to utilize that amount for modernization of Armed Forces.
7. The Ministry of Defence in their, action taken reply, have stated
that Integrated Defence Services has been asked to study the aforesaid
recommendation and submit a report.
8. The Committee regret that even after lapse of a considerable
period, the Ministry of Defence have not studied the recommendation
made by the Committee and have not indicated how soon action
will be taken to implement the Committee’s recommendation
regarding curbing of wasteful expenditure. The Committee deplore
such indifference on the part of the Ministry and expect them to
take prompt action on Committee’s recommendations in future. The
Committee in this connection would like to point out that there
have been lot of wasteful expenditure due to lack of requisite
coordination among the services on many areas such as Missile
Testing, acquisition of lands, imports, operations etc. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard without
any further delay.
B. Advance planning to ensure optimum utilization of resources
Recommendation (Para No. 2.62)
9. The Committee noted the inability of the Ministry of Defence
to timely plan and process the cases so as to bring them to the

5
concluding stage during the first three quarters of the financial year
and to secure financing of projects provided in the budget. The large
scale surrender of funds at the end of the year had eroded their
credibility and ability to utilize the allocated funds which were badly
required for modernisation upgradation of defence forces. The
Committee therefore desired that the Ministry of Defence should set
up a committee consisting of the Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of
Finance & Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) represented not
below the rank of Additional Secretary in the acquisition process and
clear the proposals, timely. Further, they desired the Ministry to carry
out advance planning and process the cases so as to bring them to the
concluding stage before the month of December of every financial
year. This would facilitate optimum utilization of scarce resources
allocated for Defence and timely completion of schemes, projects
envisaged by the Ministry of Defence to ensure modernisation and to
maintain highest level of Defence preparedness. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the progress made by the Government in this
regard.
10. The Ministry of Defence in their, action taken reply, have stated:
“The utilization of capital acquisition funds vis-a-vis RE has ranged
from 95.90% to 101.01% during the period 2001-02 to 2005-06 and
the utilization percentage for the year 2006-07 against RE is
100.47%.
2. It may be noted that the RE provisions are based on the
assessment of the Service Headquarters on the likely expenditure
during the balance part of the year. Besides, if more funds can be
utilized subsequently, the additional funds beyond RE are also
made available through modified appropriation.
3. It may be noted that the rate of utilization of funds generally
catches up as the year advances in all procurement regimes.
However, efforts are already on to increase the pace of utilization
of the funds allocated.
Following steps have been taken to reduce the time frame of
Defence Acquisition:
(i) imT e frame for procurement activities has been stated at
Appendix-C of DPP-06 and major deviation would be
monitored at the highest level. The time frames as prescribed
in DPP-06 would lead to cutting down of internal lead time
for procurements as it brings in checks and balances to

6
avoid multi-layered examination on file and following a path
of collegiate functioning at all levels. All major decisions as
per the procedures in vogue are being taken at the initiation
of the case at the highest level in a time bound manner,
which is aimed to reduce the overall lead time for
procurement.
(ii) In odrer to reduce time taken at commercial negotiations
and also to ensure reasonable price for capital acquisitions,
it has been stated in DPP-06 that in multi vendor cases, on
opening of commercial offers, once L1 vendor is identified,
the contract should be concluded with him and normally
there would be no need for further price negotiations. It
has also been stated that before opening of commercial bids
CNC should establish a benchmark and reasonableness of
prices in an internal meeting. It has been stated that there
should be no need to carry out any further price negotiations
with the vendor if commercial offer is found within
benchmark. It has also been prescribed that the RFP in such
multi vendor case should clearly lay down that no
negotiation would be carried with L1 vendor once the
reasonability of the price quoted by him is established.
(iii) The financial powers of RM & FM have been enhanced
along with delegation of financial powers to SHQs (upto
Rs. 10 crores) which would speed up the acquisition process.
The time frame given in the DPP-06 is indicative and not
prescriptive.
(iv) All schemes/projects are being monitored and reviewed
regularly and efforts are being made to improve the pace
of expenditure while maintaining strict adherence with DPP-
2006 so as to ensure full utilization of the allotted funds.
(v) With the aforesaid measures having been taken, it is
expected that concern expressed by the Standing Committee
for early processing of the porposals would be addressed
and optimum utilization of scarce resources would be
achieved.”
11. Expressing their concern over large scale surrender of funds
at the end of the financial year, the Committee had recommended
that a Committee might be set up comprising the representatives of
Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Finance and CAG in order to clear
the acquisition proposals timely. However, the reply of the Ministry
of Defence is silent on this recommendation. The Committee had

7
also desired the Ministry to carry out advance planning and process
the case, so as to bring proposals to the concluding stage before the
month of December of every financial year. The Committee note
that the Ministry of Defence have taken a number of steps including
adherence to DPP 2006 to improve pace of expenditure to ensure
full utilisation of the allotted funds. The Committee however, feel
that these measures have not yet yielded the desired results and
there have been surrender of funds allocated for Defence
Modernisation. The Committee hope that the Ministry of Defence
will make concerted efforts to implement these steps in order to
reduce time frame in defence acquisition. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the progress made by the Ministry in this
regard.
C. Enhanced delegation of financial powers to service headquarters
Recommendation (Para No. 2.65)
12. The Committee observed that for the first time in 2006,
delegation of financial power upto Rs. 10 crore for capital procurement
has been made to three services. This delegation is expected to cover
approximately 33% of the procurement cases thus expediting the
procurements. However, the Committee felt that the Ministry of Defence
might examine to enhance the amount of financial delegation to the
three Services to Rs. 50 crore and to give appropriate financial
delegation of power to the Defence Secretary as recommended by the
Committee in their earlier report to further speed up and facilitate the
acquisition process.
13. The Ministry of Defence in their, action taken reply, have stated:
“The delegation of financial powers to three Services have been
made in the year 2006 with the due approval of the Raksha Mantri.
Since the delegation has been made only in the recent past, it is
considered that subsequent delegation can be assessed after due
passage of time with inputs from the Service HQrs. about the
outcome of delegation of financial powers carried out in the year
2006.”
14. The Committee are pained to note that the outcome of
delegation of financial powers carried out in the year 2006 is yet to
be assessed. The Committee see no reason why the assessment about
powers delegated in the year 2006 should take so much time. The
Committee would like to be informed of the assessment without
any further delay and also of the action taken on Committee’s
recommendations for enhanced delegation of financial powers to the
three Services.

8
D. Additional allocation at Revised Estimates 2007-2008
Recommendation (Para No. 5.11)
15. The Committee observed that the reduction of projected budget
allocation, forces the services to reprioritise and abandon their capital
schemes, which as a result deprive the Service to avail the intended
benefit of that schemes/projects envisaged by them which directly affect
the moral of the Armed Forces Personnel and security of the nation as
a whole. The Committee, therefore, urged the Government to increase
Naval share in the defence budget from current level of 17.5% to 30%
as proposed by the Finance Commission so that budgetary allocation
to Navy might grow in consonance with their long term plan for self
reliance in Naval defence. The Committee also hoped that Navy would
be provided additional Revenue Budget allocation at RE stage to
maintain operational readiness.
16. The Ministry of Defence in their, action taken reply, have stated:
“In order to take care of items of Capital nature there is single
Capital head for Defence Services. The allocation is given to Capital
head of Defence Services in a consolidated manner by Ministry of
Finance. The further sub allocation to various Services and
Departments are made by Ministry of Defence. Since allocation is
less than the Projection for the financial year 2007-08 the shortfall
has been shared by the Services and Departments.
However, as recommended by the Committee and based on
progress of expenditure, additional funds will be sought at RE
2007-08 stage, if required.”
17. The Committee had urged the Government to increase the
Navy’s share in the defence budget from current level of 17.5% to
30% as proposed by the Finance Commission so that budgetary
allocation to Navy might grow in consonance with their long term
plan for self-reliance in Naval Defence. The reply of the Ministry
does not mention anything about this issue. The Committee would
await the Ministry’s response in this regard.
The Ministry of Defence have stated that since allocation is less
than the projection for the financial year 2007-08, the shortfall has
been shared by the three Services and Departments. It is not clear
from the Ministry’s reply what criteria have been followed in

9
allocating funds to services in the wake of shortfall in overall
allocation. The Committee feel that shortfall should not be
mechanically apportioned among Services and Departments but
available funds in such an eventuality should be allotted to projects/
schemes on inter-se priority irrespective of the Service/Department.
E. Acquisition of Aircraft Carriers
Recommendation (Para No 5.19)
18. The Committee during the examination of Demands for Grants
of the Ministry of Defence for the year 2006-07 were given to
understand that there was a need of three aircraft carriers however as
of now country had only one Aircraft Carrier i.e. Virat. The Committee
noted that after refitting, Admiral Gorshkov was to be procured from
Russia by the end of 2008 and Air Defence Ship (Ship Carrier) is
under construction at Cochin Shipyard Ltd (CSL). Considering the fact
that refitting work of Admiral Gorshkov was already delayed in certain
areas, the Committee were concerned to note that the Ministry had
not drawn up any plan to meet the shortage of two carriers in the
intervening two years. The Committee, therefore, urged the Government
to pursue this vital and strategic important matter with the high level
delegation of Russia to expedite the procurement of Gorshkov
Vikramaditya and also make concerted efforts for providing necessary
infrastructure and make necessary budgetary allocations for speedy
completion of work of Air Defence Ship being constructed in CSL.
19. The Ministry of Defence in their, action taken reply, have stated:
“Both the ADS and Gorshkov projects are being closely monitored
by the Empowered Apex Committees and Steering Committees
constituted separately for both the projects. These measures have
been instituted to ensure that various issues pertaining to
construction of the ships are handled in a focused manner to avoid
time and cost overruns.
2. In addition, the issues relating to the Admiral Gorshkov have
been discussed at the highest level with the Russian authorities
for speeding up execution of this project. Further, a Warship
Overseeing Team (WOT) is situated in Russia for regular monitoring
and necessary certifications. Besides, a Project Review Team also
visits Russia at regular intervals for monitoring the progress of the
project.

10
3. The construction of the Air Defence Ship is progressing as per
the schedule in the contract signed with M/s Cochin Shipyard
Limited, Kochi with the 1st launching of the hull scheduled on
31 Oct., 2010. To this effect, necessary provisions have already
been made in the project for augmentation of infrastructure at the
yard. Besides, an Integrated Project Management Team has also
been regularly monitoring the execution of the project at CSL,
Kochi. Funds are being released as per the requirements of CSL.
Besides, sufficient budgetary allocations are being made for speedy
completion of the project and also for funds required for
infrastructure augmentation of the shipyard.”
20. The Committee are deeply concerned to note that launching
of hull of Air Defence Ship is expected after two and half years
from now and there is no indication whether Admiral Gorshkov
will be delivered by the end of the year 2008. It is a matter of
serious concern that with the expected de-commissioning of Virat in
the year 2008, the Indian Navy will have no Air Defence Ship for
surveillance of the coastal areas of the country. The Committee wish
to draw the attention of the Ministry of Defence to this serious
situation and call upon the Ministry to take urgent remedial measures
under intimation to the Committee. The Committee would also like
to be informed when exactly Admiral Gorshkov will be delivered to
Indian Navy. As already recommended, the Committee expect that
the matter be taken up at the highest level with the Russian
Authorities to ensure that Admiral Gorshkov is delivered by the
end of 2008.
F. Shortage of Manpower in Air Force
Recommendation (Para No. 6.9)
21. The Committee noted that in the Air Force there was a shortage
of 18,749 posts during the 10th Five Year Plan. However, in October
2006, the Government sanctioned 12,676 posts which include
1425 officers and 11,022 airmen, 197 non-commissioned officers and
32 civilian posts, thereby increasing the total Air Force cadre to
186,824 personnel which would meet the required minimum level of
personnel considering the force structure of the Air Force. The
Committee felt that by mere fulfilling the minimum requirement of
the Air Force structure, the Service should not feel content, rather
Government must strive to take immediate steps to increase the force
level and fill up the shortage in the Air Force in a time bound manner
so that the country’s security is not compromised in terms of shortage

11
of manpower in Air Force. The Committee desired that combat force
strength of IAF must be maintained at the authorized level for all
times. The Committee might be apprised about the progress made in
this regard.
22. The Ministry of Defence, in their action taken reply, have
stated:
“The requirement to sanction additional posts flows from the
increase in force structure and/or increase in operational
responsibilities. With sanction of additional 12,676 posts, the
minimum requirement of the IAF, as on June 2007 has been met.
Since induction of new weapon systems and aircraft is an ongoing
process, the requirements of additional posts arising in future will
be projected to the Government for further sanctions on case to
case basis and manpower as required to have the envisaged
capabilities will be provided. As regards already sanctioned 12,676
posts, the same are being filled in a phased manner.”
23. In the context of sanctioning of additional 12,676 posts for
Air Force in October 2006, the Committee had recommended that
the combat force strength of Indian Air Force must be maintained at
the authorized level at all times. The Ministry of Defence have stated
that the sanction of additional 12,676 posts are being filled up in a
phased manner and the same would result in meeting the minimum
requirement of Indian Air Force as in June 2007. The Committee
desire that continuous and sustainable efforts be made to fill up all
vacant posts including the shortfall in sanction of 6073 posts in Air
Force in a time bound manner.
G. Steps to augment manpower position in IAF
Recommendation (Para No. 6.10)
24. The Committee further noted that a porposal for ‘Retention
Bonus’ for pilots and engineers was also under consideration and if
the same was approved, it was likely to enhance induction as well as
motivate the officers to continue in service. The Committee desired
that this should be done at the earliest and their pay scales etc. should
be suitably revised so that they may not feel constraint to leave services.
The Committee might be informed of the action taken on the proposal
to revise the SSC scheme in flying branch to make both men and
women eligible for SSC in order to overcome the shortage.

12
25. The Ministry of Defence, in their action taken reply, have stated:
“The proposal for ‘Retention Bonus’ for Air Force pilots and
engineers is one of the proposals included in the joint
memorandum submitted by the three Services to the 6th Central
Pay Commission. The three Services Chiefs and officers in Ministry
of Defence also had a discussion with the 6th Pay Commission on
19th April, 2007 wherein all the issues in the memorandum were
presented before the Commission.
The SSC scheme for flying branch of IAF has been amended
making both the men and women eligible to join the flying branch
under SSC.”
26. Payment of ‘retention bonus’ to pilots and engineers is
evidently an administrative matter which ought to have been
expeditiously decided by the Ministry of Defence with a view to
stopping the exodus of pilots. The Committee feel that the Ministry
of Defence is skirting its responsibility and is causing inordinate
delay in arriving at a decision on payment of ‘retention bonus’ by
leaving the matter to be considered by the Sixth Pay Commission.
Delay in deciding such matters obviously act as disincentive and
defeat the very objective of the proposal. The Committee expect the
Ministry of Defence to reconsider the matter in the light of the
above and take urgent decision on the matter under intimation to
the Committee.
H. Processing of procurement proposals
Recommendation Para No. 6.18
27. The Committee noted that the Ministry was making efforts for
the procurement of Sukhoi – 30 MKI aircraft and also considering the
procurement of C-130J aircraft in order to boost up the capabilities of
Indian Air Force. In line with this, procurement and induction of
MMRCA, LCA, AWACS and Flight Refuelling Aircraft (FRA) were also
planned during the 11th and 12th Plan periods. The Ministry also
planned to undertake upgradation projects of Mirage—2000, Jaguar,
MiG-29, Mig-27, AN-32, Dornier and MI-17 and other weapon systems.
In order to bolster its air strike capabilities, the Ministry was also in
the process of acquiring 126 aircraft, the Request for Proposal (RFP)
was likely to be issued shortly. The Committee expressed their deep
concern on this stereotype reply being furnished by the Ministry for
the last 2-3 years and the same had not been turned into reality so
far, the Committee therefore, desired that the Ministry should strive

13
hard to expedite the completion of procedure and technicalities in
order to facilitate the acquisition of 126 proposed aircraft. The
Committee also noted that despite the repeated recommendation in
the past for the acquisition of low level radars, sufficient number of
low level radars have not yet been produced or procured resulting in
inadequate surveillance of the Indian Peninsula.
28. The Ministry of Defence, in their action taken reply, have stated:
“1. The RFP for MMRCA is under finalization.
2. The Ministry is also porcessing proposal for acquisition of
Low Level Transportable Radars and Low Level Light
Weight Radars to improve surveillance of airspace.”
29. During the examination of Demands for Grants of the
Ministry of Defence in March 2007, the Committee were informed
that the ‘Request for Proposal’ for 126 Medium Multi-role Combat
Aircraft was under process. The Committee are distressed to find
from the reply of the Ministry of Defence that the RFP for MMRCA
is still under finalization. The Committee wonder why finalizing
RFP should take such a long time. The Committee would like to
know the reasons for delay in this regard and the present status of
the proposal. The Ministry are also reportedly processing proposal
for acquition of Low Level Transportable Radars and Low Level
Light weight Radars to improve surveillance of airspace. The
Committee urge that processing of those proposals be completed
expeditiously and the procurement effected in a time bound manner
under intimation to this Committee.
I. vAiation Training Institute at Nasik
Recommendation (Para No. 6.29)
30. The Committee understood HAL, Nasik has all the facilities of
production, repair, overhauling of MiG series aircraft to train the pilots,
however, they did not have any training college. In this context, the
Committee were of the view that this infrastructure could be utilized
to open a new pilot training college so that number of trained pilots
could be increased. The Committee also desired that HAL Nasik may
explore possibilities to tie up with other reputed pilot training
institutions to make the training programme more effective.
31. The Ministry of Defence, in their action taken reply, have stated:
“The need for utilizing the infrastructure, capability and expertise
available at HAL, Nasik for training of new pilots, leading to

14
Licensing of Pilots has already been recognized and a proposal for
setting up an Aviation Institute at HAL, Nasik under an agreement
with an international institute of repute is under active
consideration.”
32. The Committee note that, as recommended by the Committee,
a proposal for setting up an Aviation Institute at HAL, Nasik utilizing
the existing capability and expertise is under active consideration.
The Committee would like to know how soon the Aviation Institute
at Nasik will be established.
J. Review of Management of Defence Research and Development
Organisation
Recommendation (Para No. 7.8)
33. The Committee weer given to understand that the Ministry of
Defence/DRDO were not inclined to accept the recommendation of
the committee in their earlier reports that R&D work of medical, life
and other allied sciences should be entrusted to the concerned
organization relating to these subjects and the DRDO should concentrate
on the fundamental and critical Defence research work. The Committee
therefore strongly reiterated their earlier recommendation and also
further desired the Ministry of Defence to consider the matter and
appoint an expert committee to go into the matter in detail. In this
regard, the Ministry may also see the practice being followed by the
developed countries of the world.
34. The Ministry of Defence, in their action taken reply have stated:
“Life sciences laboratories are not engaged in fundamental research
in the medical sciences but only carry out directed research in
defence-critical products and technologies like, NBC, Bio-terrorism,
problems related to high altitude stress, and augmentation of fresh/
nutrition food for sustaining troops in field areas as required by
the Indian defence forces.
The limited activities in the life science areas are of direct use to
the Services and is highly appreciated by them.
Nevertheless, the whole issue of management of DRDO and its
associate setup is being looked into by an independent Review
Committee chaired by Dr. P. Rama Rao.”

15
35. The Committee note that as recommended by the Committee,
an Independent Review Committee has been constituted to review
the organizational status of DRDO. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the Review Committee’s recommendations and the
time frame for implementation of those recommendations.
K. Special Facilities for War Disabled Veterans
Recommendation (Para No. 8.7)
36. The Committee weer unhappy to note that the Disabled War
Veterans had to literally fight for each and every measure which could
ameliorate their living conditions after being invalided out from the
Armed Forces. Often they were forced to go to the court to get justice.
Presently 3528 cases were pending in various High Courts relating to
their pension alone. The Committee felt that it was the duty of the
nation to look after welfare of the soldiers who had lost their limbs
for no fault of their own while protecting and serving the country.
Thus when admitted or visiting military hospitals for treatment, they
should be given the highest consideration of officers being admitted
in the senior officers/VIP wards and other ranks being admitted in
JCO wards. The need for a special identity card identifying the war
disabled was also necessary so that they could get preferential treatment
in various services like Railways, Roadways, Airlines etc. The
Committee desired that all out efforts should be made to make life
easy for the disabled veterans. The Committee also desired that a
special window should be opened in all the Military hospitals for War
Disabled Veterans and adequate representation in various boards/
organizations of the Ministry of Defence might also be given to them.
37. The Ministry of Defence, in their action taken reply have stated:
“Disabled soldiers when admitted or while visiting Military
Hospitals are given needed facilities and treated as per
requirements. Comprehensive medical care is provided to all
disabled soldiers as and when required.
They also get treatment at paraplegic homes at Kirkee
(Maharashtra) and Mohali (Punjab). They are provided artificial
limbs by Artificial Limb Centres. Blind soldiers are provided
psychological support to overcome the shock of blindness and
imparted vocational training by St. Dunstan’s After Care
Organisation, Dehradun.
As a special case, they have been exempted from payment of
contribution for becoming members of Ex-servicemen Contributory

16
Health Scheme (ECHS). They are provided full range of medical
treatment for all known diseases in ECHS empanelled service
hospitals. Permanent war disabled officers who have been
invalidated out of service and the dependent members of their
family are given 50% for air travel concession.
The matter regarding issue of special identity cards to the disabled
soldiers is under examination in consultation with Kendriya Sainik
Board (KSB). Regarding opening of a special window in the Military
Hospitals for them, necessary instructions for opening a special
window in all Military hospitals for issuing medicines to war-
disabled veterans and according them priority in admission and
treatment have been issued by Director General of Armed Forces
Medical Services (DGAFMS). As regards representations of war-
disabled in various boards/organizations, their due representations
will be considered in Rajya Sainik Boards (RSBs)/Zila Sainik Boards
(ZSBs).”
38. The Committee note that in pursuance of the Committees’
recommendation, necessary instructions for opening a special window
in the Military Hospitals for war-disabled veterans have been issued.
The Committee, however, regret to note that the question of issue of
special identity cards to the disabled soldiers is still under
examination of the Ministry even one year after presentation of the
Committee’s report. The Committee urge that the decision in this
regard be taken without any further delay and the Committee be
informed of the action taken. The Committee would also like to be
apprised of the action taken to give representation to the war-disabled
in various boards/organisations.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2.23)
The Committee note that projection of funds by the three Services
flow from the Services Acquisition plan, which are examined thoroughly
in the Ministry of Defence and are based on the requirements to meet
the changing security environment and threat perception. Based on
these requirements, the Defence Services and Departments had made
projection of Rs. 1,03,940 crore for the year 2007-08 (The provision for
Revenue expenditure is Rs. 58900 crore and capital expenditure is
Rs. 45040 crore). Against this the Ministry of Finance have made an
allocation of Rs. 96,000 crore (The provision for Revenue expenditure
is Rs. 54078 crore and capital expenditure is Rs. 41922 crore).
This allocation accounts for 7.87 percent increase over the Budget
estimate for the year 2006-07 and 11.63 percent increase over the
Revised estimate for the year 2006-07. However, there is a gap of
Rs. 7,940.00 crore between the projections made by the Ministry and
the allocation made in the Budget. This shortfall is reflected in both
the Revenue and Capital expenditures. The Shortfall in the Revenue
side is Rs. 4822 crore i.e. 8.19 percent. In the Capital side, the shortfall
is Rs. 3118 crore i.e. 6.92 percent.”
Reply of the Government
The recommendation notes lesser allocation to Defence Services to
the tune of Rs. 96000 crores as BE 2007-08 against a projection of
Rs. 103940 crores. Thus the gap of Rs. 7940.47 crores between the
projections made by the Ministry of Defence and the allocation given
by the Ministry of Finance has also been highlighted. Since the issue
is primarily of lesser allocation than the projection of MOD,
additionality of funds can be sought from Ministry of Finance at RE
2007-08 depending on progress of expenditure, if required. The Finance
Minster in his Budget Speech 2007-2008 has also mentioned that
additional requirement for the security of the nation shall be provided.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.24)
The Committee also note that the Ministry of Finance apply the
general rule for resource allocations to various sectors i.e. “the overall
17

18
resource position of the Government and also the various competiting
needs of different sectors”. The Committee however feel that the
defence sector needs a different treatment and strongly recommend
that the Government must allocate the amount as projected by the
Defence services, so that the defence acquisition programme and
modernization of Armed Forces may not face any resource crunch and
adversely affect the country’s defence preparedness in any manner.
The Committee also desire that the Ministry of Defence should
make a study to find out area where wasteful expenditure can be
avoided and valuable resources can be saved in order to utilize that
amount for modernization of Armed Forces.
Reply of the Government
IDS has been asked to study the aforesaid recommendation and
submit a report. Additionality of funds, if required, will be sought
from the Ministry of Finance at RE 2007-2008.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 8 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.36)
The Committee note that since 9th Defence Plan, the ratio of Capital
to Revenue expenditure has been increasing. This indicates the
determination of the services and the Ministry of Defence to provide
greater outlays for modernization and initiative to contain revenue
expenditure to the extend it is containable. However, it is pertinent to
mention here that revenue expenditure is meant to maintain weapon
platform and equipment as well as supply of ammunition and fuel
cost. Besides, the armed forces require some amount of revenue
expenditure to meet the disaster management. During evidence, the
representative of Ministry of Defence also admitted that beyond a
certain point, revenue expenditure can not be curtailed as that may
hamper defence preparedness and the allocation for revenue
expenditure for the year 2007-08 is inadequate. The Committee, while
stressing the need for reduction of revenue expenditure, also feel that
due precaution should be taken in the matter so as not to adversely
affect the defence preparedness of the country.
Reply of the Government
During the previous years expenditure ratio of Capital to Revenue
has been increasing. This has occurred due to consistent endeavour of

19
Ministry of Defence to prune the “running” or “operational’ costs
clubbed under Revenue allocation and allocate larger resources, in the
available budget to the Capital acquisition or modernization process
of the Defence Services. Notwithstanding the same, a fine balance of
the Defence budgetary allocation between the required “operational”
or “running” revenue expenditure and Capital acquisition or
modernization of Defence forces is maintained so that spearheading of
Capital acquisition do not hamper the operational cost under Revenue
expenditure.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.42)
The Committee note that there is an increasing trend in the Capital
expenditure of the three Services which reflects their intention to spend
more on the modernisation programme. However, the Committee are
pained to note that the allocation for the capital acquisition has been
drastically reduced from Rs. 29990.83 crore to Rs. 26774.39 crore at
RE stage during the year 2006-07. The Committee further note that
out of Rs. 32826.80 crore at BE allocated during the year 2007-08, for
capital acquisition, Rs. 19219.32 crore is for committed liabilities under
agreements signed for procurement of defence equipment leaving only
about Rs. 13612.48 crore for the new schemes/acquisitions. The
Committee are given to understand that the Ministry of Defence are
content with the amount left for new schemes/projects and additional
amount if required any, would be made available as agreed to by the
Ministry of Finance.
Reply of the Government
In accordance with the provisions of Defence Procurement
Procedure 2006 (DPP-06), the HQ Integrated Defence Staff worked out
the annual requirement of funds for the capital acquisitions to be taken
up during 2007-08 taking into account the schemes listed in the Services
Capital Acquisition Plan (SCAP) and those proposed for the year ahead,
carryovers, operational exigencies and proposed changes in priorities
recommended by the respective Service Headquarters (SHQs). The
details of these requirements were scrutinized and forwarded to Defence
(Finance) for budgetary allocations. Based on the budgetary projections
and allocations, the draft AAPs for the Armed Forces were formulated
by the respective SHQs and approval of Defence Procurement Board
(DPB) was obtained. Thus all the capital acquisition proposals of the
Armed Forces incorporated in their respective Annual Acquisition
Plans (AAPs) with the approval of DPB are under various stages of
progress.

20
2. It may be noted that the modernisation of the Armed Forces is
a continuous process. Further, for a scheme/contracted in a particular
year, the deliveries are made mostly in subsequent years which
accordingly generate committed liabilities. These cases are also
processed, monitored and reviewed for timely delivery and release of
stage payments linked to milestones achieved. The committed liabilities
are thus a part of capital acquisition funds and depend on the deliveries
in a particular year.
3. Similarly, cases relating to new schemes/projects are also
regularly reviewed and monitored at various higher levels to ensure
their fructification in a time bound manner and optimal utilization of
funds.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.43)
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of
Defence should complete all the procedural formalities for procurement
before the month of September, in order to avoid cut in the capital
acquisition budget allocation at RE stage. This will further facilitate
the Ministry of Defence to allocate more funds for the new schemes
instead of earmarking larger percentage of capital acquisition budget
for committed liabilities.
Reply of the Government
While all efforts are made to complete the procedural formalities
which consists of various stages at the earliest, it may not always be
possible to complete all such formalities by September in a year. It
may be appreciated that procurements for defence forces including
capital procurements are continuous process. Elaborate procedures have
been laid down therefor. As such even if some cases are finalized after
September, the cash outgo therefor may take place during the same
financial year or next. This ensures regular outflow of funds.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.44)
The Committee note with concern that since 2000-01 onwards the
Ministry of Defence have been spending huge amount on Capital
acquisition for procurement of equipment through import and only
40-45 percent of allocated funds for capital acquisition is being spent
for procurement of Capital items from indigenous sources. Therefore,
the Committee would like to reiterate their earlier recommendations,
given in various reports to boost fundamental R&D and encourage
the DPSUs, Ordnance Factories and Private Sector to increase

21
indigenization and reduce foreign dependence. The Committee also
recommend that the forces should undertake relevant R&D on the line
of Navy as per their requirement.
Reply of the Government
The ‘Make’ procedure in DPP-06 has addressed the issue for
indigenous research, design, development and production of systems.
The aim of the procedure is to undertake indigenous research, design,
development and production by Indian Defence Industries. Projects
under this procedure would involve design and development of high
technology complex systems and upgrades indigenously. These projects
are to be undertaken by Raksha Udyog Ratnas (RURs)/Indian
Industry/Defence Public Sector Undertakings (DPSUs)/Ordnance
Factory Board (OFB)/Consortia on a level playing field on shared
development cost. The sharing of cost of development would normally
be in the ratio of Ministry of Defence (80%) and the Industry (20%),
as laid down in the “Make” procedure (Para nos.6&30, Chapter-II–
Defence Procurement Procedure 2006).
2. It has also been opvrided in the procedure that there would
be a requirement of minimum order quantity to be placed on the
successful developer (Para 26 I, Chapter-II – Defence Procurement
Procedure 2006).
3. The “Make” procedure would enhance the indigenization
component in our acquisitions. Detailed provisions have been
incorporated in the “Make” procedure for monitoring of the projects,
to achieve all established milestones and the end product.
4. The Deicrtorate of Indigenization has been operational in the
Indian Air Force as well as in the Indian Navy. EME Directorate is
concerned with indigenization in the Indian Army.
5. Further, an offset clause would be applicable for all
procurement proposals where the indicative cost is above Rs. 300 crores
and the schemes are categorized as ‘Buy (Global)’ involving outright
purchase from foreign/Indian vendors and ‘Buy and Make with
Transfer of Technology’ i.e. purchase from foreign vendor followed by
licensed production. As per this provision, initially a uniform offset of
30% of the indicative cost of the acquisition in ‘Buy (Global)’ category
acquisitions and 30% of the foreign exchange component in ‘Buy and
Make’ category acquisitions would be the minimum required value of
the offset.

22
6. So far as private sector participation in the Defence sector is
concerned, industrial licenses have already been approved for 38 units
so far and several other units are under consideration.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.60)
The Committee note with serious concern that since 2002-03, the
amount provided in the BE has been reduced at RE stage except in
the year 2004-05. There is further shortfall from RE to actual
expenditure. The Committee are perturbed to note that during the
year 2006-07, allocation of Rs 89,000 crore was reduced to Rs. 86,000
crore in RE stage thereby showing a reduction of Rs. 3,000 core. The
Committee note with concern that reduction has been made in the
capital acquisition expenditure meant for modernisation programme,
even when there were enough projects with the Ministry in the
pipelines and certain projects were being simultaneously progressing.
The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry of Finance that the
principle of budgetary cap in the last quarter spending is not applicable
to the Ministry of Defence and they have full freedom to spend the
budget in any manner they like. The Committee are given to
understand by the Ministry of Finance that reduction at RE stage has
been made after due consultation with the Ministry of Defence taking
into account the actual trend of expenditure. The Committee note that
the Ministry of Defence upto Feb., 2007 has been able to make the
capital expenditure only upto 54% of the budgetary allocations for the
year 2006-07.
Reply of the Government
The utilization of capital acquisition funds vis-a-vis RE has ranged
from 95.90% to 101.01% during the period 2001-02 to 2005-06 and the
utilization percentage for the year 2006-07 against RE is 100.47%.
2. It may be noted that the RE opvrisions are based on the
assessment of the Service Headquarters on the likely expenditure during
the balance part of the year. Besides, if more funds can be utilized
subsequently, the additional funds beyond RE are also made available
through modified appropriation.
3. It may be noted that the rate of utilization of funds generally
catches up as the year advances in all procurement regimes. However,
efforts are already on to increase the pace of utilization of the funds
allocated.

23
Recommendation (Para No. 2.61)
The Committee note that inspite of the fact that the Ministry of
Defence has come out with DPP 2006, to bring transparency and
expeditious clearance of acquisition process, as well as the Ministry of
Finance has laid down standard parameters for submission of proposals
for approval of Ministry of Finance, the Department of Expenditure
ensure to examine the proposals received from Ministry of Defence
expeditiously and monitor them periodically, the Ministry of Defence
have not been able to increase the pace of expenditure to convince
that they will be in a position to fully utilize the allocated amount
during the year.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.62)
From the foregoing the Committee observe that this clearly shows
the inability of the Ministry of Defence to timely plan and process the
cases so as to bring them to the concluding stage during the first
three quarters of the financial year and to secure financing of projects
provided in the budget. The large scale surrender of funds at the end
of the year has eroded their credibility and ability to utilize the
allocated funds which were badly required for modernisation
upgradation of defence forces. The Committee therefore desire that the
Ministry of Defence should set up a committee consisting of the
Ministry of Defence, the Ministry of Finance & Comptroller and Auditor
General (C&AG) represented not below the rank of Additional Secretary
in the acquisition process and clear the proposals, timely. Further, they
desire the Ministry to carry out advance planning and process the
cases so as to bring them to the concluding stage before the month of
December of every financial year. This will facilitate optimum utilization
of scarce resources allocated for Defence and timely completion of
schemes, projects envisaged by the Ministry of Defence to ensure
modernisation and to maintain highest level of Defence preparedness.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made by
the Government in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Following steps have been taken to reduce the time frame of
Defence Acquisition:
(i) imT e frame for procurement activities has been stated at
Appendix-C of DPP-06 and major deviation would be
monitored at the highest level. The time frames as prescribed
in DPP-06 would lead to cutting down of internal lead time

24
for procurements as it brings in checks and balances to
avoid multi-layered examination on file and following a path
of collegiate functioning at all levels. All major decisions as
per the procedures in vogue are being taken at the initiation
of the case at the highest level in a time bound manner,
which is aimed to reduce the overall lead time for
procurement.
(ii) In odrer to reduce time taken at commercial negotiations
and also to ensure reasonable price for capital acquisitions,
it has been stated in DPP-06 that in multi vendor cases, on
opening of commercial offers, once L1 vendor is identified,
the contract should be concluded with him and normally
there would be no need for further price negotiations. It
has also been stated that before opening of commercial bids
CNC should establish a benchmark and reasonableness of
prices in an internal meeting. It has been stated that there
should be no need to carry out any further price negotiations
with the vendor if commercial offer is found within
benchmark. It has also been prescribed that the RFP in such
multi vendor case should clearly lay down that no
negotiation would be carried with L1 vendor once the
reasonability of the price quoted by him is established.
(iii) The financial powers of RM & FM have been enhanced
along with delegation of financial powers to SHQs (upto
Rs.10 crores) which would speed up the acquisition process.
The time frame given in the DPP-06 is indicative and not
prescriptive.
(iv) All schemes/projects are being monitored and reviewed
regularly and efforts are being made to improve the pace
of expenditure while maintaining strict adherence with DPP-
2006 so as to ensure full utilization of the allotted funds.
(v) With the aforesaid measures having been taken, it is
expected that concern expressed by the Standing Committee
for early processing of the proposals would be addressed
and optimum utilization of scarce resources would be
achieved.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 11 of Chapter-I)

25
Recommendation (Para No. 2.65)
The Committee observe that for the first time in 2006, delegation
of financial power upto Rs. 10 crore for capital procurement has been
made to three services. This however was done in consultation with
the Services. This delegation is expected to cover approximately 33%
of the procurement cases thus expediting the procurements. However,
the Committee feel that the Ministry of Defence may examine to
enhance the amount of financial delegation to the three Services to
Rs. 50 crore and to give appropriate financial delegation of power to
the Defence Secretary as recommended by the Committee in their
earlier report to further speed up and facilitate the acquisition process.
Reply of the Government
The delegation of financial powers to three Services have been
made in the year 2006 with the due approval of the Raksha Mantri.
Since the delegation has been made only in the recent past, it is
considered that subsequent delegation can be assessed after due passage
of time with inputs from the Service HQrs. about the outcome of
delegation of financial powers carried out in the year 2006.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 14 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.5)
The Committee are constrained to note that the period of Long
Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) 2002-17 has been revised to
2007-2009 keeping in view the likely availability of funds during the
Eleventh Plan and shift from equipment based approach to capacity
based approach. The process of revision has been completed by Navy.
The other two services are in the process of completing their exercises.
The Committee note that an integrated perspective plan covering the
three plan periods from 11th to 13th plan i.e. from 2007 to 2022 will
be approved by the Defence Acquisition Council by 31st October, 2009.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.6)
The Committee are dismayed to note the continuous delay in
preparing LTIPP and revised LTIPP which will be approved by the
DAC by 31st October, 2009. This clearly depicts the lackadaisical
approach and commitment of the Ministry of Defence in preparing &
finalizing the long term plan for defence Forces.

26
Recommendation (Para No. 3.7)
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of
Defence should take up this matter at the highest level to get its 11th
Plan cleared by the Ministry of Finance and finalise the LTIPP at the
earliest, not only to make a correct assessment of the threat perception,
changing security scenario and rapid scientific and technological
innovation but also to meet the requirement of forces of latest/high
tech machine/equipment and best human resource well in advance
with adequate allocation of funds and effective visionary plan.
The Committee are of the view that in the changing paradigm of
security scenario, threat perception and fast changing scientific and
technological field, the long-term plan need a regular and sustained
review of its content and thrust. Therefore, the Committee wish to
recommend that the long-term plan should be reviewed and updated
from time to time well in advance, in order to make it realistic and
the Committee may be apprised of the progress in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Long Term Integrated Perspective Plan (LTIPP) aims to provide
the capabilities required by defence forces based on aspirations, threat
perceptions and geo-political scenario over 15 years duration i.e., three
plan periods. The LTIPP is modified every five years based on the
changing requirements of defence forces in terms of technology
upgrades and latest trends in weapon systems.
2. The first LTIPP covers the period from 2002-2017. This LTIPP is
sub divided into 3 Five Year Plans. Each five-year plan is then sub
divided into Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP). The five years plan and
AAPs are made to achieve the capabilities required by the defence
forces in the medium term and short term respectively. The
procurements of the Services are carried out as per the projections in
these Five Year Plans and AAPs.
3. The exercise to review the LTIPP was initiated well before the
commencement of next 5 year plan i.e. , 11th Plan. It was observed that
in the LTIPP 2002-17, the thrust was more on equipment based
approach than capability building approach. A new approach for
formulation of LTIPP was therefore proposed which was approved by
the DAC in its meeting held on 19 June 2006. Since the new approach
required detailed deliberations and interaction between various
Government agencies, it was felt that work on various steps culminating
into preparation of LTIPP would require considerable time. The DAC

27
accordingly approved that a LTIPP covering to 2007-22 be prepared
and approved by the DAC by 31 Oct., 09. For the interim period till
Oct., 2009, capability building and procurement for the defence forces
has been covered by LTIPP 2002-2017 and 11th Five Year Plan covering
the period 2007-2012.
4. However, the recommendation of the Committee has been
noted and action has been initiated to review the LTIPP to make it
realistic and time bound.
5. The 11th Five Year Plan covering the period 2007-12 was
formulated and forwarded by Raksha Mantri to the Finance Minister
much before the start of the 11th Defence Plan period. The projections
were made by Ministry of Defence for the 11th Plan after due
consultations with the Services, DRDO and other departments of the
Ministry of Defence. However, after due examination within Ministry
of Finance, Finance Minister indicated a figure which is much below
the projected level. The matter for reconsideration has again been taken
up by Raksha Mantri with the PM and the FM.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.14)
The Committee are to note that the 10th plan was tentatively
approved in the last quarter of 10th plan i.e. in December, 2004 with
a lesser allocation by the Ministry of Finance than the projection made
by the Ministry of Defence. Every year there has been cut at RE stage
by the Ministry of Finance which affected both the revenue as well as
capital expenditure of the Ministry of Defence. The Committee note
that the Ministry of Finance made annual allocations depending upon
the resources available with the Government as also on utilization of
allocated funds by the Ministry of Defence. The Committee do not
agree with the logic put forth by the Ministry of Finance. The
Committee are of the strong view that had the 10th plan been approved
in time, the Ministry of Defence would have planned their projects as
per the changing requirements and utilized the allocated amount in a
better way. Budgetary allocations on a year to year basis for country’s
defence requirements and in the absence of Long Term Plan, has an
adverse impact and has led to the adhocism in decision making thereby
creating a stumbling block on the path of modernization and overall
Defence preparedness. The Committee feel that this may be the reasons
for delay in capital acquisition and will demoralize the Armed Forces.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.15)
Expressing their displeasure, the Committee strongly recommend
that the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Defence should not shift

28
the responsibility to each other, rather together they must approve the
11th plan at the earliest, so that it does not fact the same fate of
10th plan. This will further facilitate both the Ministry of Defence to
plan their finance, equipment acquisition and utilise the allocated
amount to the fullest extent in a time-bound manner.
The Committee observe that weightage is invariably given by the
Government to the Plan expenditure as compare to non-Plan
expenditure which one of the reasons for delay in approving the
allocation of Ministry of Defence which is non-plan expenditure.
Therefore, the Committee urge the Government to give due importance
to the non-plan expenditure as in the case of Plan expenditure.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry holds this Committee in highest esteem. The concerns
regarding non-approval of the Plans has been taken seriously by the
Ministry. It may, however, be added that the 11th Plan was prepared
by the Ministry of Defence well before the expiry of the 10th Plan.
The matter has also been followed up with Ministry of Finance at
highest level. The Ministry is however going ahead with the
modernization plan for the three Services based on Annual Acquisition
Plans which are based on the 11th Plan proposals.
The concerns expressed by Committee regarding importance of
non-plan expenditure were communicated to the Ministry of Finance
who have stated that the due attention is paid in allocation of funds
between Plan and Non-Plan expenditure of the Government. They have
further stated that each expenditure proposal, whether Plan or non-
Plan, is examined carefully and decided on merits keeping in mind
overall availability of resources and that, in fact, non-plan expenditure
cases are mostly obligatory expenditure of the Government, constituting
about 70% of the total expenditure, as compared to Plan expenditure
which constitutes 30% in BE 2007-08.
They have further stated that due consideration is given to the
proposals of Ministry of Defence keeping in view the aspects relating
to ‘national security’ and that there has been no delay in approving
the yearly allocation of Ministry of Defence which form part of the
Budget approved by Parliament.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.18)
The Committee note that the 11th Defence plan has been sent by
the Ministry of Defence to Ministry of Finance for approval and the

29
matter is under examination and consultation between the
two Ministries and till date, availability of funds as regards
Eleventh Defence plan has not been indicated by the Ministry of
Finance. The Committee strongly note that 11th Plan has not been
finalized, plan period has already began from April, 2007 and are
perturbed to note that there is a mismatch between the projection and
budgetary allocation during the first year of 11th plan i.e. 2007-08.
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the 11th Plan should
be approved at the earliest so that the Ministry of Defence should
implement all the proposals at the right earnest in the first year of
11th plan as per projection and seek additional allocation at the RE
stage so as to achieve the physical and financial target of 11th plan as
envisaged in its first year.
Reply of the Government
As mentioned in comments on Para 2.15, the matter of approval
of 11th Plan has been taken up at the highest level in Ministry of
Defence. The Ministry is, however, continuing with its modernization
plans based on Annual Acquisition Plans drawn up for the Services
which are based on 11th Plan proposals.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.8)
The Committee note with concern the declining trend in the share
of Army in Defence budget, which was 57 per cent in the year
2002-03 and now has come down to 47 per cent in the current year
(2007-2008).
Reply of the Government
The budgetary allocations to Defence Services are given under
two basic heads of Revenue and Capital by Ministry of Finance. The
subsequent allocations under Revenue and Capital heads to each
Service, R&D and Ordnance Factories are done primarily on the basis
of obligatory expenditure of each Service/Department followed by
allocation to Capital and Capital acquisition based on stage of
acquisition process. Under the Revenue head the share percentage of
Army to overall allocation has remained unchanged during the previous
year. Army being a personnel intensive organization greater care of its
requirement under “operational” cost (under Revenue head) is
undertaken. Since the other two Services are Capital intensive in nature,
their allocation under Capital head have been increasing during the
years. It is also a fact that during the previous years, the Capital to
Revenue ratio has been increasing resulting in growing allocation under

30
Capital head. Notwithstanding consistent allocation to Army under
Revenue head, growing allocations to other two Services under Capital
head has marginally reduced the overall share of allocation of Army.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.9)
The Committee note that with serious concern that during the
year 2007-08 out of Rs. 13,410.80 crore projected by the Army for
capital expenditure, Ministry of Finance allocated Rs. 11,388.52 crore
only, which has resulted in shortfall of Rs. 2022.28 crore and this
shortfall is likely to adversely affect the different constituents of Army
work like modernization, land, equipment (DGOF), Ex-Servicemen
Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS) and construction work. The
Committee further note that in the Revenue side also during the same
year, Rs. 37,007.20 crore was projected by the Army, the Ministry of
Finance allocated Rs. 34,369.16 crore only which has resulted in shortfall
of Rs. 2638.04 crore which is likely to affect Pay & Allowances,
Transportation, Military Farms, ECHS, Stores, Revenue works, Rashtriya
Rifles etc. The Committee take a serious note of the fact that there has
been a drastic reduction in funds allocated in Capital side particularly
in area of modernization of Army, which has direct ramification on
security of the country. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend
that the Government should look into the matter afresh to allocate the
projected funds for Capital expenditure at Revised Estimate stage, so
that modernization and other programmes, as envisaged by the Army,
may not suffer for want of funds.
Reply of the Government
For expenditure of capital nature the allocation given by the
Ministry of Finance to Ministry of Defence is a single Capital head.
The requirements of various Services/Departments come within the
same Capital head. Against the overall projection of Rs. 45040.12 crores
under Capital the allocation given by Ministry of Finance for financial
year 2007-08 has been Rs. 41992.00 crores. This reflects a shortfall of
Rs. 3118.12 crores or 7.44 per cent with respect to the projection. Since
there has been reduced allocation (against the Projection) the allocation
to Services/Departments were reduced proportionately and also with
respect to committed payment and stage of prospective procurement
under Capital head. Efforts are always made to take care of the Capital
requirements of Army. The recommendations of the Committee shall
be kept in view at the Revised Estimate stage.

31
Recommendation (Para No. 4.10)
The Committee also note that the revenue expenditure is taking
the major chunk in the allocated Defence budget of Army and there
is a huge gap between the revenue expenditure and the capital
expenditure of Army, due to different kind of requirement and work
performed by it. The Committee endorse the views of the Ministry of
Defence that revenue expenditure cannot be curtailed beyond a certain
point and desire that any reduction in the revenue expenditure should
not be at the expense of Army’s readiness/preparedness. This will
greatly boost the moral of the Army.
Reply of the Government
The observation of the Committee as regards non-curtailment of
Army’s Revenue expenditure beyond a certain point which could affect
the readiness/preparedness of the Army are also shared by Ministry
of Defence. The additional fund, if required, shall be projected to
Ministry of Finance.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.11)
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should
make a proper study in order to identify and rationalize Revenue and
Capital items and categorise them accordingly. The Committee are of
the view that any need of new item should be treated as capital
expenditure. Further for this purpose study should be made by the
Ministry on pattern being followed by other countries in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As per the provisions in Constitution of India the Annual Financial
Statement (Budget) has to be laid in the broad categories of Revenue
and Capital. Based on this the Revenue and Capital expenditure have
been classified in the General Financial Regulation. As per the
recommendation a study shall be made by the Ministry on pattern
being followed by other countries in this regard and findings submitted
to the Committee.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.19)
The Committee are given to understand that a large number of
discrepancies, brought to their notice by various non-official witnesses,
regarding Fifth Pay Commission’s recommendations; one of them being
that it gave a Brigadier more pension than a Major General. It also

32
removed the, “Running Pay Band” given by the Fourth Pay
Commission to compensate for very limited promotions in the armed
forces. The more disturbing the fact is that a Sepoy in the Army gets
less than half the pension of a peon in the Central Government.
Reply of the Government
An anomaly is alleged in fixation of pension of pre 01.01.1996
retiree Majors General and equivalents in the Armed Forces vis-a-vis
Brigadiers and equivalents. This is because the revised pay scale of
Brigadier (Rs 16700-450-18050) starts with Rs 16700/- along with
admissible Rank Pay of Rs 2400/- per month. Thus, the minimum
reckonable emolument for calculation of pension for a Brigadier is
Rs. 19100/- whereas for a Major General the minimum of pay scale is
Rs. 18400/-, there being no Rank Pay for the ranks of Major General
and above. Accordingly, the minimum pension of pre-01.01.1996 retiree
Brigadier (for 33 years of service) is fixed at Rs 9,550/- per month i.e.
50% of Rs 19100/-, whereas the minimum pension of a Major General
is fixed at Rs 9200/- i.e. 50% of Rs 18400. However, this discrepancy
has been removed as per existing provision in the order that the retiring
pension of an officer of the rank of a Major General shall not be less
than the pension which would have been admissible to him as a
Brigadier had he not been promoted to the higher rank. By virtue of
this provision, minimum pension of all Major Generals who retired
prior to 01.01.1996 has been stepped up to Rs 9550/- per month, which
is the minimum pension for the lower rank of Brigadier. Thus, no
officer of the rank of Major General is drawing/has drawn pension
less than an officer of the rank of Brigadier.
As regards pension in respect of Sepoy, Government have recently
improved the pension structure by increasing the weightage in the
qualifying service from 05 years to 10 years subject to maximum
30 years service. Further, in the case of pre-96 retirees, it has also
additionally been provided that the pension of Personnel Below Officer
Rank will be computed with reference to the maximum of the pay
scale introduced with effect from 01.01.1996.
A current retiree in the rank of Sepoy having 19 years qualifying
service with weightage of 10 years is entitled to a pension of
Rs. 3212/- per month, 2983/- per month and 2656/- per month for X,
Y and Z category respectively whereas a peon in the Central Govt.
having put in 33 years service is entitled to a pension of Rs. 2400/-
per month. Thus, the contention that a Sepoy in the Army gets less
than half the pension of peon in Central Government is factually not
correct.

33
In so far as the issue relating to running pay band given by the
IV CPC is concerned, the IV CPC had recommended integrated pay
scale for the rank of 2nd Lieutenant to Brigadier and pay scales for
higher ranks. The Fifth CPC however made their recommendation for
grant of regular pay scales.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.28)
The Committee are concerned to note the declining standard of
Sainik Schools in the country and the reasons furnished by the Ministry
in this regard. The Committee note that due to rising cost of education,
it has become very difficult for the Servicemen and Ex-Servicemen to
get their wards admitted in these Sainik Schools. The Committee note
that these Sainik Schools are being run on the grants given by the
Central/State Government which is perhaps not sufficient to meet all
expenses of the school children. The Committee, therefore, desire that
the Government should make a thorough review of the matter and
make these schools financially viable by using available surplus land
etc. so that these schools can become self reliant. The Central
Government should ponder in wider perspective in consultation with
the State Governments to provide them sufficient financial resources
on sharing basis.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.29)
The Committee also recommend that the Government should
explore the possibility of opening Sainik Schools in different districts
of the States which are traditional catchment areas of the country. The
Committee also desire that the Government should make earnest efforts
to increase the number of Sainik Schools run by Central/State
Governments.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.30)
The Committee, keeping in view the present situation of the Sainik
Schools, strongly recommend the Government to constitute a high level
Committee to study and analyse the causes of lowering the educational
standard of Sainik Schools and to suggest for overall improvement in
the working of these schools so that objectives for which they have
been created, may not be defeated. The steps should also be taken to
maintain All India character of these schools. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
There are 21 Sainik Schools being managed by the Sainik Schools
Society under the aegis of Ministry of Defence. So far as the academic

34
results are concerned, 100% and 97.29% pass percentage has been
achieved in CBSE 10th and 12th Board examinations respectively by
the cadets in these schools. On an average, about 30% strength of
even number courses at NDA has been from Sainik Schools. For the
118th NDA Course, a record 444 boys of Sainik Schools have cleared
the UPSC examination. 188 of these cadets have cleared the SSBs and
results in respect of 21 boys are still awaited. The performance of the
cadets from Sainik Schools in the academics and NDA is, therefore,
satisfactory. The NDA intake data for the last ten years and the
academic results for the last six years are as under:
YEARLY NDA INTAKE FROM SAINIK SCHOOLS—
LAST TEN YEARS
S.No. ear Y Coursoetal IinntTakNe DA auth o%f  Remarks
Nos. coursSeainik the
year engstthr School
in the year Boys
(two joined
courses) NDA
1. 1997 97-98231 8& 915 60109.6
2. 1998 99-10032 & 102134 60202.1
3. 1999 101-102 55 & 51005 60107.5
4. 2000 103-104 31 & 108139 60203.2
5. 2001 105-106 38 & 81523 60200.5
6. 2002 107-108 35 & 71409 60108.2
7. 2003 11009-1 31 & 71203 60107.2
8. 20110-41121 38 & 81725 60200.9
9. 201035-1114 181 4& 916 60019
10. 21050-61116 42 & 131173 60208.5
11. 2007 17-1118 es4u3l,t r 600 For 118 NDA
awaited Course record 444
boys of Sainik
Schools cleared
UPSC exam out
of which 188 have
already cleared
the SSBs and 21
boys are
undergoing SSBs.
Final NDA list is
awaited.

35
SUMMARY OF RESULTS
Class X Results of last six years
Year No.aNpop. PassAboveAbo%vaege of
passed %age 75% 6Is0t% Div
2002 1417445898.91 65556802.42
2003 15145813 97.7 68356800.29
2004 1 1515501 97.61 73659896.12
2005 1518586798.78 74266888.79
2006 1610567097.75 66568885.24
2007 16126121 10089050931.47
Class XII Results of last six years
2002 970980 8725550683.8
2003 98699373.14 25748787.36
2004 87978306.22 21353606.34
2005 97098847.44 16751701.55
2006 99929542.86 15049686.12
2007 99979517.29 24850807.10
2. Sainik Schools are primarily self sustaining institutions. These
depend mainly on fees payable by the parents. The State Governments
award scholarships on merit-cum-means basis. Ministry of Defence
awards scholarships towards of defence personnel including ex-
servicemen. The present scholarship amount is Rs.10,500/- for wards
of Other Ranks. In addition, Ministry of Defence provides a part of
scholarship as Central assistance to these students who are awarded
State Government scholarships. Besides, Ministry of Defence have
provided Rs.12.64 crore for subsidizing the tuition fee and dietary
charges of every cadet to the extent of about Rs.10,000/- per year. The
sharing of expenditure on fees/scholarships amongst Central
Government, State Governments and the parents is as decided by the
Board of Governors from time to time. The annual 10% hike in tuition
fees has been discontinued w.e.f. 2006-07 and it has been linked to the
inflation index. Training grants are also now being provided to the
Sainik Schools by the Ministry of Defence to provide financial assistance
for teachers’ training, specialized competition oriented training to cadets
and improvement of training infrastructure.

36
3. Thee rare 21 Sainik Schools already functioning in the country
and ‘In principle’ approval has also been given for opening of three
more Sainik Schools i.e. in the States of Karnataka, Sikkim and
Mizoram. A demand for opening a Sainik School in Chhattisgarh has
also been received. The schools have been designed for a strength of
525 cadets and on an average about 600 cadets are presently authorized.
It is not considered viable to increase the cadets strength further.
4. As per the Sainik Schools Society Rules & Regulations, the
entire capital expenditure on land , buildings, furniture and educational
equipments required by Sainik Schools and a major portion of the
running expenditure is borne by the concerned State Government who
are also responsible for maintenance of buildings, roads and installations
and for major replacements. They are also required to release grants-
in-aid sought for additional requirement of buildings and furniture,
transport, laboratory equipment, etc.
5. There is, however, a wide disparity in the support being
extended to the Sainik Schools by various States. A need was, therefore,
felt to solicit active cooperation of the State Governments. A joint
meeting of the State representatives and Principals of the Sainik Schools
was taken by RRM on 24.4.2006. A draft Memorandum of Agreement
(MoA) to be signed between the State Governments and the Sainik
Schools Society was also circulated. The MoA clearly defines the
responsibility of the either side towards these institutions. The
commitment by the State Governments to provide adequate financial
resources for creation and maintenance of infrastructure/ equipment
and for revision of the scholarship slabs are integral features of this
draft MoA. The matter regarding signing of the MoA is being pursued
with the State Governments.
Abbreviations used:—
CBSE  C: entrald B oofa rSecondary Education
NDA :National DeAfecnadcee my
UPSC : Union Public Service Commission
SSB S:ervice Selectiodn Boar
RRM :Raksha Rajya Mantri
Recommendation (Para No. 4.33)
The Committee note that Army has undertaken a large number of
civic action programmes aimed at winning the “Hearts and Minds” of
the people in Jammu and Kashmir as well as in the North East as
part of a strategy for conflicts prevention under these two operations
i.e., Sadbhavana and Good Samaritan.

37
Recommendation (Para No. 4.34)
The Committee during their visit to J&K, had taken note of the
efforts being made by the Army for spreading harmony and healthy
relations between Army and civilians. The Committee also noticed the
good work being done by the Army in the field of education and
upbringing the children of terrorists who died during Army operations.
Keeping in view the noble cause of these civic action programme of
Army, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry should
allocate more funds to Operation Sadbhavana. The Ministry of
Home Affairs should also make more allocation to Operation Samaritan
in order to fortify harmony and integration among the people. The
Committee feel that community development projects should be
undertaken in these areas by involving local people. The Committee
note that presently all Ministries of the Union Government are
allocating 10% of their budget every year for the development of
North East. The Committee desire that Army should be allocated funds
from the corpus for the development schemes of North East. The
Ministry of Defence should take up the matter with the appropriate
authority for facilitating such an allocation.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.35)
The Committee also desire that for this purpose funds should be
collected from different heads of the various Ministries like Health,
Human Resource Development, Rural Development, Road Transport,
etc. so that money may not be a constrain for this nodal cause and
Army should continue to be the nodal cause organization for effective
implementation of operation Sadbhavana and Good Samaritan.
Reply of the Government
The Government allots adequate funds to the Army for Operations
‘Sadbhavana’ and ‘Good Samaritan’ considering Army’s operational
commitments vis-a-vis commitments in development projects. The total
allotments under Operation Sadbhavana and Operation Samaritan
have increased from Rs. 16.00 crores in the year 2003-04 to over
Rs. 63.00 crores in the year 2007-08. Based on recommendations made
by the Committee, Defence Ministry has taken up the matter of
allotment of funds for Operations “Sadbhavana” and “Good Samaritan”
with the Ministries of Health & Family Welfare, Human Resource
Development, Rural Development, Road Transport and Development
of North Eastern Region.

38
Recommendation (Para No. 4.45)
The Committee are perturbed to note that Government of India
accorded clearance for the development of an indigenous Main Battle
Tank (MBT) Arjun in May 1974. Even after the lapse of more than
34 years, the nominated agency of DRDO could not execute the mission
so far. Inordinate delay has escalated the original cost of MBT project
from Rs.15.50 crore in 1974 to Rs. 306 crore in 2005. The Committee
are surprised to note that neither the execution agency of DRDO or
the certifying agency Director General Quality Assurance (DGQA) are
taking responsibility for the inordinate delay and quantity in production
of MBT Arjun. Out of 124 ordered for tanks for the users, only
15 tanks have been produced by the Heavy Vehicle Factory, Avadi.
Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry of Defence should
think seriously as to how to comply Arjun’s requirement in a time
bound manner.
Reply of the Government
The project for the design and development of Main Battle Tank
(MBT) Arjun was approved by CCPA in its meeting held on 26 March
1974, in order to give the required indigenous cutting edge to our
mechanized forces. Fifteen pre-production series of Arjun tanks
developed by DRDO are in service with one squadron of 43 Armoured
Regiment of Army.
Army HQ placed an indent for 124 MBT Arjun on Ordnance
Factory Board (OFB) in March 2000. The first 15 Nos. MBT Arjun are
being produced as Limited Series Production (LSP) tanks. Army has
planned to carry out extensive exploitation of these tanks through
Accelerated User Cum Reliability Trials (AUCRT) before Heavy Vehicle
Factory (HVF) is accorded clearance for the bulk production of the
remaining tanks.
Government sanction for creation of infrastructure for production
of MBT Arjun was accorded in May 2002 with a total outlay of
Rs. 100 crore (65 crore for Ordnance Factory, Medak and 35 crore for
HVF, Avadi). The infrastructure is in place with effect from June 2006
which includes the following :—
(i) Assembly line
(ii) oTols, fixture and material handling facilities
(iii) Pe-rfitment check facilities.

39
The production of MBT Arjun is regularly monitored through the
quarterly Working Group Meetings held under the Chairmanship of
Director General Mechanized Forces (DGMF) and the Steering
Committee Meetings held under the Co-chairmanship of Secretary (DP)
and SA to RM. Hon’ble RURM reviewed the production of MBT Arjun
in July 2006.
HVF Avadi has completed the assembly of 53 tanks. Out of these,
5 tanks have been handed over to the Army for user trials which
were successfully completed in June 2006. Defects noticed during the
trials have been rectified.
Nine tanks were tendered for Joint Receipt Inspection (JRI). Army
has completed the JRI of 5 tanks and the JRI of next 4 tanks is
underway. It has been decided that all the 9 tanks would be issued to
Army simultaneously and Army would undertake AUCRT on 2 tanks.
The production target for year 2007-08 is 32 tanks, thus the
cumulative total at end of year 2007-08 is likely to be 85 tanks.
Production of remaining 39 tanks is likely to be completed during
2008-09. Raksha Mantri is periodically reviewing the production
schedule of MBT Arjun.
Recommendation (Para No. 5.9)
The Committee note that during the year 2006-07 under Capital
expenditure at RE stage, reduction of Rs. 350 crore (296 crore under
modernization and 54 crore under land and works) was made by the
Government. Navy demanded Rs. 18387.80 crore for its Revenue and
Capital expenditure during the year 2007-08 against this Rs. 17529.44
crore were allocated. It shows shortage of overall amount of Rs. 858.36
crores against the projected demand of Navy. The Committee further
note that Naval Budget has grown from 13% of the Defence Budget
in 1990s to current level of 17.5% for the year 2007-08, however, increase
in the Revenue Budget is still 4% less than the present rate of inflation
and additional allocation would be sought by the Ministry at RE stage
to maintain operational readiness.
Reply of the Government
Against the overall projection of Rs. 103940.47 crores for BE
2007-08 the actual allocation given by Ministry of Finance  is
Rs. 96000 crores. This shows a shortfall of Rs. 7940.47 crores. The
lesser allocation has been absorbed within the Services.

40
Navy is basically a capital intensive organization. Therefore, greater
growth can be noted in the Capital head. Revenue requirements is not
as high as that of Army. Hence, the growth under Revenue is not as
high or commensurate with that of Capital. However, as recommended
by the Committee and based on progress of expenditure, additional
funds will be sought at RE 2007-08 stage, if required.
Recommendation (Para No. 5.10)
The Committee take a serious note that inspite of the fact that
Navy is a capital intensive Service, with projects having a long term
gestation period and as such sustained committed funding support is
critical for modernization of the Navy, the Ministry drastically reduced
the Capital expenditure budget by Rs. 350 crore under modernization
plan of Navy during the year 2006-07. The projected demand of Navy
during the year 2007-08 has also been reduced by Rs. 867.36 crore.
Reply of the Government
At the RE 2006-07 stage a cut of Rs. 3000.00 crores was imposed
under the Capital head of Defence services. Of the same, the portion
borne by Navy (under capital) was significantly less than that of Army
and Air Force.
Against the overall projection of Rs. 45040.12 crores under Capital
head for the financial year 2007-08, the actual allocation by Ministry
of Finance is Rs. 41922.00 crores. Thus, there has been an overall
shortage of Rs. 3118.12 crore. This shortage/shortfall has been shared
by the Services/Departments.
Recommendation (Para No. 5.15)
The Committee are happy to note that for strengthening of
Air Surveillance Capability, Navy have added 11 Dorniers in the last
plan period. The Committee, however, keeping in view the fact that
maritime responsibilities are increasing and will increase because of
the growth of our economy and EEZ, strongly recommend the Ministry
to make all out efforts to complete the ongoing work of ten fast attack
aircraft being built at GRAC and to meet shortage of both short range
as well as long range maritime surveillance aircraft in order to ensure
greater surveillance and to meet any other emergent requirement to
safeguard our maritime interest. The Committee desire that considering
the fact that we have far flung islands like Andamans and Lakshdweep,
the requirements of Air Surveillance should be reviewed on year to
year basis and necessary steps should be taken to strengthen the
surveillance for which necessary funds should be immediately provided
to Navy.

41
Reply of the Government
The Navy’s force structure planning is based on building
capabilities that would be required to secure our National interests in
the maritime areas of interests. These include the far flung island
territories, which are always factored whilst planning the naval force
structure in general and aviation assets in particular.
2. Review of tehart perception as well as capabilities required is
also undertaken periodically to ascertain that existing and planned
force structure are adequate to meet the operational tasks. Therefore,
presently the thrust is on augmenting the surveillance capability of
the Navy to cover all the areas of interests that include outlying island
territories for which adequate provision has been made in the
11th Plan.
Recommendation (Para No. 5.20)
The Committee also desire that the Ministry of Defence should
chalk out time bound process of acquiring MiG 29K for Vikramaditya
and to depute our pilots for Training to operate it. The Committee
may be apprised of the progress made by the Government in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
Contract has already been concluded in January, 2004 for acquisition
of MiG 29K/KUB aircraft from RAC MiG. The aircraft are being
acquired in a phased manner. The first aircraft is likely to be delivered
in Oct. 2007 and all the aircraft would be delivered by Nov. 2008.
2. As per the contract, Indian Navy pilots would be trained by
RAC MiG in two phases. The first phase of training is scheduled to
commence in October 2007. The second phase is linked with the
commissioning of INS Vikramaditya for deck landing training.
Recommendation (Para No. 5.28)
The Committee note that there has been a declining trend of youth
joining Armed Forces. The Committee observe that the service
conditions of the Armed Forces are not such as to attract best human.
As a result thereof, a substantial number of Pilots, Doctors, Technicians,
Scientists in Armed Forces and from other Defence Organizations are
leaving as they are in big demand outside the Services.

42
Reply of the Government
 Several steps have been taken by the three Services to make the
career in Armed Forces attractive and to fill up the vacant posts. All
officers including those from Short Service Commission (SSC) are now
eligible to hold substantive rank of Captain, Major and Lieutenant
Colonel after 2, 6 and 13 years of reckonable service respectively. The
tenure of SSC officers has also been extended to 14 years in the three
Services.
Besides, the Armed Forces have undertaken sustained image
projection and publicity campaign to create awareness among the youth
on the advantages of taking up a challenging and satisfying career.
Candidate-friendly recruitment procedures to attract more number of
candidates and a focused publicity drive in various institutions to
attract potential candidates have been undertaken. Awareness
campaigns, participation in career fairs and exhibitions, advertisements
in print and electronic media, motivational lectures in schools, college
are also some of the other measures in this direction.
The Government has set up the Sixth Central Pay Commission to
go into the question of pay, allowances and other facilities/benefits
etc. of Central Government Employees including Armed Forces
personnel. The three Services have submitted a joint memorandum to
the Sixth Central Pay Commission containing detailed proposals for
making a career in the Armed Forces attractive as well as to retain
trained, experienced and qualified personnel. The Ministry and the
Services also had an interaction with the Commission on the demands
made by the Services.
Recommendation (Para No. 5.29)
The Committee are of the view that in order to attract the talented
and best youth to the Armed Forces and to retain the existing strength,
there is an imperative need to approach the Sixth Central Pay
Commission to make the salary structure, facilities and working Service
conditions of the personnel of Armed Force Services more attractive
vis-à-vis private sector which pay them handsomely. The Committee
are also of the view that there is need to introduce pre-selection training
by the Ministry of Defence for the youth which may include lodging,
boarding and transport etc. The aim of the training should be to attract
youth to Defence services and equip them for final selection.

43
Reply of the Government
A joint memorandum has been submitted to the Commission by
the three Services proposing various measures to make the
Armed Forces attractive.
The Armed Forces are making a conscious effort through print
and electronic media to inspire the youth to choose the services as a
career option. In addition, the National Cadet Corps is doing a
yeoman’s service in attracting the youth towards the Armed Forces by
focusing on the high values of military traditions. Further, measures
like introduction of a technical entry scheme after 10+2 in the
Army and Navy, increasing the quota of Short Service Commission
officers and selection of competent Junior Commissioned and
Non-Commissioned officers to a commissioned rank and improvements
in promotional avenues and service conditions are expected to provide
a thrust to the efforts to attract more talented youth towards the
Armed Forces and retain the experienced personnel.
Rashtriya Indian Military College (RIMC), Dehradun and five
Military Schools are being run under the aegis of the Army HQrs. In
addition to these, there are 21 Sainik Schools located in various parts
of the country, which are being run in collaboration with the
State Governments. These institutions act as feeder institutions to the
National Defence Academy (NDA). The curricula of these institutions
are specifically designed to train the boys academically, mentally and
physically for entry into the NDA. It is stated that about 30% strength
of even number courses at NDA has been from Sainik Schools.
Recommendation (Para No. 5.30)
The Committee are of the firm view that in order to increase
quality of work and change mindset of the officers, it is an imperative
that Senior Officer from the Armed Forces must be allowed to go to
IITs and if necessary abroad frequently for higher study/research and
to get training in various science/technological working in the various
field of operations to be undertaken by the Services to improve the
entire capability of Defence.
Reply of the Government
The Army is sending its officers to various Indian Institutions of
Technology to pursue Post Graduate technical courses. During the last
five years, 282 Army officers have undergone these courses. Indian
Army officers are attending courses/seminars and joint exercises in

44
other countries on a regular basis. Presently, there are 28 officers
attending various courses abroad. The Navy is also regularly deputing
officers with approximately seven years of commissioned service for
various Post Graduate courses. The Air Force is sponsoring
28 Aeronautical Engineering Branch officers for courses in India
every year. Some Air Force officers are being deputed abroad for such
courses depending upon the availability of vacancies. Presently, four
Air Force officers are also deputed for Post Graduate Diploma in
Management (PGDM) at Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur;
Master of Business Administration (MBA) at National Institute of
Financial Management, Faridabad and Advanced Professional
Programme in Public Administration, at Indian Institute of Public
Administration, New Delhi.
Recommendation (Para No. 6.6)
The Committee note that the overall allocation to Air Force has
been enhanced during 2007-08 by approximately Rs. 4000 crore as
compared to the revised estimates 2006-07 out of which major part of
the additional allocation has gone to the Capital Head. The Committee
also note the utilisation pattern of the allocations under Capital Head
during the term of the Tenth Defence Plan (2002-07) and find that
during 2006-07 only Rs. 7034.76 crore have been spent (upto February
2007) out of Rs. 13006.50 crore (RE) allocated for the year. The
Committee observe that there has been a slow pace of utilisation of
the allocations made to Air Force for acquisition and other
modernization projects during the year 2006-07. The Committee are
seriously concerned about the gross under-utilisation of the available
funds and feel that this may lead to tendency of the Ministry towards
utilisation of funds in a hurry at the fag end of the financial year. The
Committee therefore strongly recommend that the Ministry should take
immediate steps in this direction and strive to utilize the entire funds
allocated to the Air Force under Capital Head within the stipulated
time period so that the ongoing modernization projects are completed
without any cost and time overrun. The Committee may be informed
about the action taken by the Ministry in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The allocation under Capital Budget of IAF at RE 2006-07 was
revised from Rs. 13006.50 crores to Rs. 14766.50 crores at MA 2006-07.
As against this revised MA an expenditure of Rs. 14624.50 crores i.e.
99.04% was achieved.

45
Recommendation (Para No. 6.7)
The Committee notes with concern, that in spite of several ongoing
projects for the upgradation of available aircraft, air crashes are taking
place due to technical defects, which put a question mark on
modernization and upgradation programme of the Air Force. The
Committee therefore, desires that Government should analyse technical
causes of the air crashes and take immediate corrective measures to
check the loss of precious lives and machines.
Reply of the Government
Modernisation & upgradation of IAF aircraft is undertaken with
the aim of improving weapon delivery capabilities and avionics.
Upgradation on IAF aircraft is a time consuming exercise. The system
is first tested on the ground, then in the air, before it is finally certified
as fit for operational use. Thereafter, all aircraft of the fleet are modified,
either at repair agency, or in-situ in the flying units. As on date, 206
aircraft have been upgraded and out of 206 upgraded aircraft only
4 aircraft have met with accidents, which proves that air crashes cannot
be attributed to the process of modernization & upgradation.
2. Accidents and incidents reported on IAF aircraft are attributable
to different reasons viz: Human Error (Aircrew), Human Error
(Servicing), Technical Defects, Bird Hits and Foreign Object Damage.
Of these, Technical Defects account for 40% of the accidents, whereas,
the Human Errors (Air Crew) account for 39% of the accidents followed
by Bird Hits which accounts for 9%. It means that Technical Defects
and Human Errors both put together accounts for nearly 80% of the
accidents.
3. It is highlighted thate cThnical Defects are not directly related
to negligence on the part of any person. Most of these Technical Defects
are caused by a multitude of factors such as ageing, wear due to
environmental degradation, malfunction of a particular sub-assembly,
degradation due to hot & humid conditions prevalent in most parts of
our country.
4. IAF has been taking a number ofe mr edial measures to ensure
that accidents caused by Technical Defects, are brought down to the
barest minimum. Almost all accidents occurring on IAF aircraft are
investigated by Courts of Inquiry (CoI)/Technical Investigations (TIs).
Recommendations of these COIs/TIs are implemented to prevent
recurrence of failures. By these measures, a number of technological
problems have been overcome on almost all fleets during the past five
years.

46
Recommendation (Para No. 6.9)
The Committee note that in the Air Force there was a shortage of
18,749 posts during the 10th Five Year Plan. However, in October
2006, the Government sanctioned 12,676 posts which includes
1425 officers and 11,022 airmen, 197 non-commissioned officers and
32 civilian posts, thereby increasing the total Air Force cadre to 186,824
personnel which will meet the required minimum level of personnel
considering the force structure of the Air Force. The Committee feel
that by mere fulfilling the minimum requirement of the Air Force
structure, the Service should not feel content, rather Government must
strive to take immediate steps to increase the force level and fill up
the shortage in the Air Force in a time bound manner so that the
country’s security is not compromised in terms of shortage of
manpower in Air Force. The Committee desire that combat force
strength of IAF must be maintained at the authorized level for all
times. The Committee may be apprised about the progress made in
this regard.
Reply of the Government
The requirement to sanction additional posts flows from the increase
in force structure and/or increase in operational responsibilities. With
sanction of additional 12,676 posts, the minimum requirement of the
IAF, as on June 2007 has been met. Since induction of new weapon
systems and aircraft is an ongoing process, the requirements of
additional posts arising in future will be projected to the government
for further sanctions on case to case basis and manpower as required
to have the envisaged capabilities will be provided. As regards
already sanctioned 12676 posts, the same are being filled in a phased
manner.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 23 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 6.10)
The Committee further note that a proposal for ‘Retention Bonus’
for pilots and engineers is also under consideration and if the same is
approved, it is likely to enhance induction as well as motivate the
officers to continue in service. The Committee shortly desire that this
should be done at the earliest and their pay scales etc. should be
suitably revised so that they may not feel constraint to leave services.
The Committee may also be informed of the action taken on the

47
proposal to revise the SSC scheme in flying branch to make both men
and women eligible for SSC in order to overcome the shortage.
Reply of the Government
The proposal for ‘Retention Bonus’ for Air Force pilots and
engineers is one of the proposals included in the joint memorandum
submitted by the three Services to the 6th Central Pay Commission.
The three Services Chiefs and Officers in Ministry of Defence also had
a discussion with the 6th Pay Commission on 19th April, 2007 wherein
all the issues in the memorandum were presented before the
Commission.
The SSC scheme for flying branch of IAF has been amended
making both men and women eligible to join the flying branch under
SSC.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 26 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 6.17)
The Committee note that against the Government authorized level
of 39.5 squadrons, the present strength stands at 33 squadrons. The
Committee are given to understand that the authorized level of
squadrons is planned to be achieved under 12th and 13th Plan periods.
The Committee feel that the induction plan of the Air Force under
12th and 13th Plan periods is ironical in view of the fact that despite
the lapse of the entire plan period, Tenth Defence Plan could not be
completed.
Reply of the Government
The Government has initiated a number of measures to improve
the combat strength of the IAF taking into account the number of
existing aircraft which are completing their total technical life and the
threat perceptions. These include induction of additional number of
some aircrafts which are going to be in service, new aircraft including
the medium multi-role combat aircraft and the light combat aircraft as
well as mid-life upgradation of existing aircraft.
Recommendation (Para No. 6.19)
The Committee feel that most of the aircraft in the inventory of
Air Force are quite old and therefore require immediate replacement.

48
The Committee also feel that the upgradation programme of the Air
Force which is a continuous process is proceeding at a very slow
pace. On the other hand, there has been under utilisation of the funds
allocated for the purpose during the last financial year 2006-07. In
view of this, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry
should take immediate steps for the ongoing acquisition and
upgradation programme by utilizing the entire funds allocated for the
current year. The Committee also desire that to address the needs of
adequate surveillance, procurement of various types of radars should
also be taken up on priority and the Committee should be kept
apprised of the procurement made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Procurement as per current Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP 2007-09)
is in process and plan is to utilize the entire funds allocated for the
current financial year. All schemes are being reviewed regularly by a
Joint Committee of MoD and Air HQ to ensure their fructification in
a time bound manner and effective utilisation of funds allotted. Schemes
being progressed include acquisition of combat aircraft and radars and
upgradation of combat aircraft.
Recommendation (Para No. 6.20)
The Committee note that the long-term perspective plan of the Air
Force (LTPP 2002-17) had been forwarded to the Ministry of Finance
for approval and the Indian Air Force is in process to prepare, the
LTPP 2007–22 which is planned to be put up for the approval of
Defence Acquisition Council by October 2009. The Committee are very
sad to note this progress of work on the preparation and finalization
of LTPP. The Committee are further constrained to note that the 11th
Plan document of the Air Force which has been forwarded to the
Ministry of Defence include several carried over schemes of the 10th
Plan and also includes the new schemes of the 11th Plan. The
Committee strongly feel that the present pace of finalization and
implementation of the schemes of the Air Force leave much to be
desired. Therefore, the Committee desire that serious efforts need to
be made to implement and realize the objectives set out in the plan
document in a time-bound manner. The Committee desire to be
apprised periodically about the progress made in regard to this
implementation and achieving the target of authorized level of squadron
strength.

49
Reply of the Government
1. Present LTIPP is for the period 2002–17. The LTIPP is planned
to be revised every five years commensurate with the nation’s five
year plans. This is done to update the existing plans as per the
achievements in the first five-year period as also to revise the plan
based on any change in the geopolitical situation and advancement in
technology. Therefore, LTIPP 2007–22 is in the process of preparation.
2. Procurement process as per current Annual Acquisition Plan
(AAP 2007–09) is underway and plan is to complete the procurement
process in the current financial year. All schemes are being reviewed
regularly by a Joint Committee of MoD and Air HQ to ensure their
fructification in a time bound manner and effective utilisation of funds
allotted.
Recommendation (Para No. 6.23)
The Committee note that during the last four years, 52 aircraft of
the Indian Air Force crashed, out of which 19 crashes are attributed
to technical defect, 20 to human error, 1 to bird hit and 1 to
miscellaneous reasons, 3 cases remained unresolved and 8 cases are
still under investigation. The causes of air crashes raise two significant
issues viz . upgradation programme of the Air Force for the ageing
fleet is not at the desired pace and secondly, training facilities available
to the Air Force Pilots are not well equipped. The Committee, therefore,
feel that Government should make all out efforts to keep the
upgradation programme of the Air Force on the track and at the faster
pace and put all efforts for the immediate replacement of the old
aircraft by making sufficient funds available for the purpose.
Reply of the Government
Procurement as per current Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP
2007-08) is in process. Schemes being progressed include acquisition of
Combat Aircraft, Radars and Upgradation of Combat Aircraft.
Recommendation (Para No. 6.24)
The Committee, at the same time, also feel that since a large
number of air accidents are also taking place due to human error, it
reflects that the training methodology needs immediate improvement,
correction and expansion. The Committee, therefore, earnestly desire
that the training module being imparted to the Air Force pilots should
be re-designed in such a manner that it matches the international

50
standards. The Committee feel that the induction of Advanced Jet
Trainer (Hawk) will go a long way in enhancing the training capabilities
of the Air Force and therefore desire that its induction should be
expedited in the right earnest. The Committee may be apprised of the
action taken by the Ministry in this regard.
The Committee further desire that training should be imparted to
the Air Force pilots in time to acclimatize them in different types of
Aircraft being inducted by the Air Force from time to time.
Reply of the Government
Induction of Hawk (AJT) Aircraft
A total of 66 Hawk Mk 132 AJT aircraft have been contracted. Out
of these 24 aircraft will be delivered by BAE Systems, United Kingdom
(UK) in flyaway condition and the rest would be licensed/manufactured
by Hindustan Aeronautics Limited. The delivery of Direct Supply
aircraft will commence from September, 2007 in batches of four aircraft
per month. The delivery of license build aircraft will commence from
March, 2008 in batches of 1-2 aircraft per month. The Main Operating
Base (MOB) for Hawk aircraft is being upgraded and readied for the
purpose with all requisite modern navigation aids, servicing facilities
and training systems. The induction is on schedule and the first batch
of trainee pilots on Indian Hawk aircraft are planned to commence
flying in July 2008.
Training of IAF Pilots on Hawk Mk 132 Aircraft
As per Direct Supply Contract, upto 75 IAF pilots are to be trained
at the U.K. in 13 batches of six to eight pilots each. All except one
batch would consist of ab-initio pilots, while one batch would have
Qualified Flying Instructors (QFI). Nine batches have completed their
training and three batches are undergoing training in UK. The 13th
batch is being prepared for departure to UK. In addition, 12 QFIs in
two batches of six each will undergo conversion training on Hawk
Mk 132 ac in UK. These QFIs along with those from Batch 12 will be
in initial team of Instructors, ready to impart training on Hawk Mk
132 aircraft in July 2008.
Training of IAF Pilots on Other Aircraft
The induction of Hawk Mk 132 aircraft will herald a new training
pattern in the IAF wherein, all trainees will now be exposed to ultra
modern state-of-the-art avionics and aircraft systems before they move

51
on to our modern fleet of fighter aircraft. A fair amount of commonality
in avionics and aircraft systems exists between Hawk Mk 132 and
fighter aircraft. This will pay rich dividends in terms of ease of settling
down in a new fighter cockpit, besides reducing the costly training
requirement on fighter aircraft.
Recommendation (Para No. 6.28)
The Committee note that alarming trend of attrition of pilots from
the Air Force who are joining the commercial aviation sector for the
sake of attractive perks and packages. The Committee are disturbed to
note that the increasing number of applications from the Air Force
pilots for premature retirement is directly proportional to the increasing
demand for trained pilots in civil/commercial aviation sector. The
Committee feel that this trend will disturb the operational requirements
of the Air Force and therefore immediate steps are required to be
taken to contain this trend. The Committee, therefore, strongly desire
that efforts must be made urgently in order to revise the pay structure
of the Air Force pilots so as to make up the existing vast difference
in the salary of an Air Force pilot and a commercial pilot and
differences likely to arise in future. In addition to this, strong measures
should also be taken to devise a mechanism by which Air Force pilots
may not leave the services after training and induction into the Air
Force. They should be made to sign an agreement before their induction
to serve for a minimum prescribed years in the Air Force.
Reply of the Government
As regards the trend of attrition of pilots, Premature Retirements
(PRs) are properly regulated and as such there is no shortage of pilots
in IAF. The request for acceptance of premature retirement/resignation
from the pilots are considered according to Government instructions.
The majority of the Pilots released from service have already completed
their useful tenure as Pilots. This release of Pilots does not affect the
operational status of the Indian Air Force.
The improvement in the job profile of the IAF Pilots is a continuous
process keeping in view the job specific requirements and operational
necessity. The vacancies in the Forces including those arising due to
premature retirement/resignation are filled up as per normal procedure.
To consider the issue of pay and allowances and other service
benefits/conditions etc. of the Government employees including Defence
personnel, Government have set up the 6th Central Pay Commission.

52
With a view to improve the pay structure and living conditions, and
to adequately compensate for the risks and hazards the armed forces
men, a joint memorandum on pay and allowances and other related
issues of Armed Forces has been submitted to the 6th Central Pay
Commission (CPC). Interaction has also taken place with the
6th CPC at the level of Service Chiefs and Defence Secretary.
Recommendation (Para No. 6.29)
The Committee understand HAL, Nasik has all the facilities of
production, repair, overhauling of MiG series aircraft to train the pilots,
however, they do not have any training college. In this context, the
Committee are of the view that this infrastructure could be utilized to
open a new pilot training college so that number of trained pilots can
be increased. The Committee also desire that HAL, Nasik may explore
possibilities to tie up with other reputed pilot training institutions to
make the training programme more effective.
Reply of the Government
The need for utilizing the infrastructure, capability and expertise
available at HAL, Nasik for training of new pilots, leading to Licensing
of Pilots has already been recognized and a proposal for setting up an
Aviation Institute at HAL, Nasik under an agreement with an
international institute of repute is under active consideration.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 32 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 7.6)
The Committee take a serious note of the fact that the percentage
expenditure on R&D which was 6.55 and 6.35 per cent of Defence
expenditure in 2005-06 and 2006-07 respectively has come down to
6.13 per cent in 2007-08. The Committee note that developed country
like USA is spending 14.4 per cent budget on its Defence R&D. Even
the neighbouring country like China is spending around 15 per cent
of its Defence budget. The Committee feel that in order to make the
country self-reliant in Defence production, it is absolutely necessary to
increase expenditure on Defence R&D at least to ten per cent of total
Defence expenditure.

53
Reply of the Government
The details of Defence R&D budget and Defence expenditure for
the years 2005-06 to 2007-08 are given below :
Year(s) Defence R&DDefence %of Defence
Expenditure ExpenediturR&D expendeitur
(Rs. in Cr.) (Rs. .)in .rC.tr. wto Defence
Expenditure
2005-06 5302.8502800.26 6.55%
2006-07 5456.8366000.00 6.35%
2007-08 5887.22 9(6B0E0)0.00(BE) 6.13%
It is observed that the Defence R&D budget in absolute terms has
increased progressively, though there is decline in terms of percentage
of Defence expenditure. However, Defence R&D expenditure is expected
to increase further due to induction of new programmes/schemes
during 11th plan period.
Ministry of Defence now can directly fund the development to
Industries, both Public and Private, under the “MAKE” procedure of
DPP-2006. This would substantially increase the Defence R&D
expenditure in future.
Recommendation (Para No. 7.7)
The Committee during the course of examination of subject DRDO
had observed that the proposals of various incentives/facilities to be
given to the scientist were still pending with the Government. The
Committee are of the firm view that scientists who are fully committed
to the research work assigned to them and show results, must be
encouraged by the Government by providing optimal, congenial and
healthy atmosphere. The Committee desire that the Government should
extend royalty to the scientists for the original R&D work done by
them and any product developed thereon. The Committee desire that
a board of permanent nature consisting of Distinguished Scientists
should be created to provide accelerated promotion to the scientist on
the basis of their performance and outcome in their respective field.
The Government may be the owner of that patent and the scientists
who have done the research work can be paid a major share in royalty
received on that patent. It has been brought to the notice of the
Committee that Departmental Promotion Committee (DPC) meeting
are not held on regular basis resulting in denial of promotion to a

54
large number of scientists. The Committee desire that DPCs meetings
should be held regularly every year and update the cadre by
promotional recruitment. This will work as an incentive to the scientists
and other relevant staff as the case may be. This will go a long way
in boosting the moral of scientists in DRDO. The Committee also desire
that Ministry should make all out efforts to fill up all vacancies in
Services, Defence PSUs, Ordinance Factories and particularly DRDO in
a time bound manner. The Committee hope that these positive steps,
if taken by the Government, will immensely help to encourage our
scientists to work with full devotion and commitment and show the
results. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
It is true that some scientists of DRDO are leaving organization
due to better opportunity available outside. To encourage, attract and
retain scientists, DRDO has proposed incentive schemes which is under
consideration by the Government. Another proposal has already been
submitted to 6th Central Pay Commission. These proposals also cover
incentives for in terms of royalty on patents filed by the scientists.
As far as the promotions of scientists are concerned, in DRDO,
these are based on Flexible Complementing Scheme (FCS) under which
scientists are promoted from one grade to the next higher grade, after
a prescribed period of Service. These promotions are based on the
basis of merit and ability irrespective of any vacancy in the higher
grade as per DRDS rules amended from time to time. DRDO ensures
the completion of the Assessment Board Proceedings (DPC) well in
time so as to declare the result of promotions by 30th June every year
to enable all the promoted scientists to join the next higher grade on
1st July. The Assessment Board is constituted as per rules keeping in
view the area of work of the respective scientists, his performance and
outcome, etc. The Assessment process is time bound and regular in
nature and is completed as per schedule without any delay.
Recruitments/ filling up of vacancies is an ongoing process and
all efforts are made to fill up the vacancies at the earliest. The
recruitment process in DRDO is one of the fastest process for recruiting
the scientist and it takes around 4-5 months to complete it from release
of vacancies to the recommendations made by Recruitment and
Assessment Centre (RAC). Presently, RAC is in the process of recruiting
500 scientist through Scientist Entry Test (SET) conducted on All India
basis followed by interviews.

55
Recommendation (Para No. 7.8)
The Committee are given to understand that the Ministry of
Defence/DRDO are not inclined to accept the recommendation of the
Committee in their earlier reports that R&D work of medical, life and
other allied sciences should be entrusted to the concerned organization
relating to these subjects and the DRDO should concentrate on the
fundamental and critical Defence research work. The Committee
therefore strongly reiterate their earlier recommendation and also further
desire the Ministry of Defence to consider the matter and appoint an
expert committee to go into the matter in detail. In this regard, the
Ministry may also see the practice being followed by the developed
countries of the world.
Reply of the Government
Life sciences laboratories are not engaged in fundamental research
in the medical sciences but only carry out directed research in defence-
critical products and technologies like, NBC, Bio-terrorism, problems
related to high altitude stress, and augmentation of fresh/nutrition
food for sustaining troops in field areas as required by the Indian
defence forces. The limited activities in the life science areas are of
direct use to the Services and is highly appreciated by them.
Nevertheless, the whole issue of management of DRDO and its
associate setup is being looked into by an independent Review
Committee chaired by Dr. P. Rama Rao.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 35 of Chapter-I)
Recommendation (Para No. 8.7)
The Committee are unhappy to note that the Disabled War Veterans
have to literally fight for each and every measure which can ameliorate
their living conditions after being invalided out from the Armed Forces.
Often they are forced to go to the court to get justice. Presently 3528
cases are pending in various High Courts relating to their pension
alone. The Committee feel that it is the duty of the nation to look
after welfare of the soldiers who have lost their limbs for no fault of
their own while protecting and serving the country. Thus when
admitted or visiting military hospitals for treatment, they should be
given the highest consideration of officers being admitted in the senior
officers/VIP wards and other ranks being admitted in JCO wards. The

56
need for a special identity card identifying the war disabled is also
necessary so that they can get preferential treatment in various services
like Railways, Roadways, Airlines etc. The Committee desire that all
out efforts should be made to make life easy for the disabled veterans.
The Committee also desire that a special window should be opened in
all the Military hospitals for War Disabled Veterans and adequate
representation in various boards/organizations of the Ministry of
Defence may also be given to them.
Reply of the Government
Disabled soldiers when admitted or while visiting Military
Hospitals are given needed facilities and treated as per requirements.
Comprehensive medical care is provided to all disabled soldiers as
and when required.
They also get treatment at paraplegic homes at Kirkee
(Maharashtra) and Mohali (Punjab). They are provided artificial limbs
by Artificial Limb Centres. Blind soldiers are provided psychological
support to overcome the shock of blindness and imparted vocational
training by St. Dunstan’s After Care Organisation, Dehradun.
As a special case, they have been exempted from payment of
contribution for becoming members of Ex-servicemen Contributory
Health Scheme (ECHS). They are provided full range of medical
treatment for all known diseases in ECHS empanelled service hospitals.
Permanent war disabled officers who have been invalidated out of
service and the dependent members of their family are given 50% for
air travel concession.
The matter regarding issue of special identity cards to the disabled
soldiers is under examination in consultation with Kendriya Sainik
Board (KSB). Regarding opening of a special window in the Military
Hospitals for them, necessary instructions for opening a special window
in all Military hospitals for issuing medicines to war-disabled veterans
and according to them priority in admission and treatment have been
issued by Director General of Armed Forces Medical Services
(DGAFMS). As regards representations of war-disabled in various
boards/organizations, their due representations will be considered in
Rajya Sainik Boards (RSBs)/Zila Sainik Boards (ZSBs).
Comments of the Committee
(Please see para 38 of Chapter-I)

57
Recommendation (Para No. 8.8)
The Committee note that Prosthesis are not a one time fitting.
These need to be replaced/ refitted as and when necessary, as each
and every part has a life. This involves, at an average, a refitting
every two to three years. Artificial Limb Centre (ALC), which provides
limbs to the disabled soldiers, is lagging far behind in its modernization
and research. The limbs provided by ALC, besides being extremely
heavy and obsolete, take considerably long time in making or refitting
them.
Reply of the Government
The Artificial Limb Centre (ALC), Pune is an ISO 9001 – 2000
certified unit established in 1944 and is a pioneer in the field of
manufacture of Prosthesis and Orthoses. The Centre manufactures over
4,000 artificial limbs in a year which include the conventional wooden
limb and the state of the art modern limb in equal measure and its
range of products meets international standards of quality. The Centre
as a policy issues two limbs to every patient, of which one is
conventional and the other state of the art limb with imported
components. Patients especially those from rural India/hilly regions
(serving and retired) prefer use of the conventional limb as the same
is more rugged and ‘soldier proof’ and requires little or no maintenance.
The use of the state of the art limb with imported components is
restricted as the state of the art limbs albeit very comfortable are
sophisticated and need deft handling. The limbs manufactured at the
ALC are in no way heavy and the techniques of manufacture are far
from being obsolete. The Centre has incorporated the carbon fibre rod
popularly called the Debel, a product of DRDO. The Centre is spending
approximately Rs. 25 lakhs every year to procure imported components
which are being used in all Above Knee limbs. These are being
procured from the best agencies in the world. The new limbs are
issued to a patient within 2-3 weeks of arrival in case of state of the
art modern limbs and within 3-4 weeks in case of conventional limbs,
as these require more manufacturing time. The time taken includes
that for trial gait training and organizing return journey reservation.
Recommendation (Para No. 8.9)
The Committee note that there are other manufactures of artificial
limb, who make water proof, light and cheap alternative to those
manufactured by ALC. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry should explore the possibility of technical collaboration of
ALC with other National or International Companies to manufacture

58
light and strong prosthesis or otherwise the Ministry may take initiative
to have public – private collaboration or may enter into contract with
the private manufacturers as the case may be to ease their problems.
Reply of the Government
The limbs manufactured at the Artificial Limb Centre (ALC) are
comparable to the best in the world. The Centre employs modern
equipment for manufacturing the limbs and they are in no way inferior
to the ones manufactured by civil agencies at very high costs. The
limbs fitted to patients at the ALC are the joint efforts of the
Orthopaedic Surgeon (Prescribing agency) and the Engineer
(Manufacturing agency). Most civil agencies pay scant regard for the
utility of the limb to the patient and are only concerned with furthering
their business interests. These centers only provide limbs whereas ALC,
provides comprehensive rehabilitation to all. The Centre is procuring
imported components from most renowned agencies and no
collaboration with any public/private agency is advocated. The Centre
needs no expertise related to manufacture as its work force is peerless
in skill and dedication. The Centre is on the threshold of acquiring a
Computer Aided Design and Manufacturing equipment which will give
further fillip to its modernization. There are not more than four or
five centers in the world using such advanced technique.
Recommendation (Para No. 8.12)
The Committee desire that the Ministry should create a separate
cell to deal with the grievances of the war disabled persons and chalk
out a policy to help the war disabled veterans and their dependent
family members in an efficacious way and implement it in a time
bound manner. In this regard, the Committee further desired that war
disabled soldiers and officers should be treated at par.
Reply of the Government
The grievances of the War disabled soldiers are already being
addressed. However, action to create a separate cell by designating
suitable officers to exclusively deal with their problems being taken
War disabled soldiers and officers are already treated at par for
employment.
Recommendation (Para No. 8.13)
The Committee note that a meagre sum of Rs. 8,000/- is given as
Marriage Grant for Daughter, Rs. 15000/- for medical Grant, Rs. 10,000

59
for House repairs, Rs. 300/- pm upto Std XII for three children and
Rs. 1000/- pm for two years to financially destitute ESM monthly. The
Committee feel that these grants do not serve any purpose, therefore,
the Committee strongly desire that keeping in view the rising cost of
living, these grants should be suitably enhanced and the Committee
may be informed of the progress made by the Ministry in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The financial assistance being granted to ex-servicemen/widows
for various purposes like marriage of daughter, house repair etc. has
been enhanced by 100%. A copy of the order issued in this regard is
enclosed.
Recently Prime Minister’s Scholarship Scheme has been launched.
Under this scheme wards of ex-servicemen/widows are also granted
scholarship for higher professional studies like engineering, medicine,
dental, veterinary, MBA, MCA etc. for a period of 2 to 5 years
@ Rs. 1250/- per month for boys and Rs. 1500/- per month for girls.
Recommendation (Para No. 10.9)
The Committee are concerned to note that there are serious
shortages in the force level of Coast Guard. Against the assessed
requirement of 154 ships, 93 boats and 105 aircraft, the present force
level is only 42 ships, 18 boats and 45 aircrafts. The Committee also
note that there is inadequate surveillance capabilities of Coast Guard
in various fields. Pertaining to the manpower of coast guard, the
Committee note that keeping in view the daunting task of coast guard
in peace and war situation to protect the huge coast line and exclusive
economic zone the present level of manpower i.e 6,016 service personnel
and 853 civilian, seems to be inadequate. The Committee are concerned
to note that there is huge reduction in the budgetary allocation from
BE to RE 2006-07. Therefore, the Committee earnestly recommend that
the surveillance capability and manpower of the Coast Guard should
be enhanced as per the assessment and the Committee desire the
Ministry to utilize the increased allocation in BE 2007-08 and if required
they may seek additional funds at the Revised Estimates stage.
Reply of the Government
It has been planned to achieve the target of 120 ships, 93 boats
and 105 aircrafts by 2022 by graduated procurement with proportionate
infrastructure development and augmentation of the trained manpower.
Manpower induction also has been accelerated and the training

60
requirement of increased manpower is being met by seeking additional
vacancies in the training establishments. The reduction in the budgetary
allocation from BE to RE 2006-07 was due to floods in the year 2006
in Gujarat. The ongoing scheme of construction of Pollution Control
Vessel (PCV) at M/s ABG, Surat, Gujarat received a setback due to
the said floods in the last financial year. Now the yard is making all
out efforts for ensuring completion of project in time. As a result, a
sum of Rs. 100 crore (approximately) could not be utilized during the
year 2006-07.
2. Furth,e wr ith an objective to streamline the capital acquisition
procedure of Coast Guard as per Defence Procurement Procedure (2005),
their Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP) has been brought under the
purview of Defence Procurement Board (DPB). The Annual Acquisition
Plan for the year 2006-07 of Coast Guard along with other three Defence
Services is coordinated by Headquarters Integrated Defence Staff (IDS)/
Ministry of Defence. As the new procedure, through HQ IDS took
some time to stabilise some of the schemes which were envisaged for
the year 2006-07, got delayed and are being programmed in the current
financial year.
Recommendation (Para No. 10.10)
The Committee also recommend that Navy should impart
institutional training to Coast Guard Personnel in order to increase
safety and aerial surveillance. This will also facilitate effective
coordination between the two organizations.
Reply of the Government
At present Coast Guard personnel are being imparted training by
Naval training institutes. Only certain courses which are specific to
Coast Guard are being conducted in Coast Guard Training Centre.
Recommendation (Para No. 10.18)
The Committee note with concern that a large number of cases are
pending in various courts regarding compensation paid to the persons
whose land was acquired by the Government for Defence purposes
and the aggrieved people are not getting compensation in time.
Therefore, the Committee strongly desire that the Ministry of Defence
should take initiative to settle the cases outside the court through
reconciliation/negotiation.

61
Reply of the Government
For settling court cases arising out of acquisition of land through
reconciliation/ negotiation, Ministry of Defence has considered some
cases through Lok Adalats. It is an ongoing process, which is taken
up on case to case basis, wherever feasible.

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW
OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2.17)
The issue of defence preparedness and our ability to meet the
threat perception is closely related to the quantum of funds made
available to our services. In this regard, the Committee are distressed
to note that five year Defence plans have lost their utility for resource
planning, as 10th Defence plan got tentatively approval at the end of
its specified period and 11th plan which begins from April, 2007 is yet
to get final clearance from the Ministry of Finance. The Committee
also observe that every year the annual budgetary allocation for the
armed forces particularly for capital acquisition is being reduced at RE
stage as a result of which a number of schemes do not fructify which
causes delay and cost overruns in the modernization of the Armed
Forces. The Budget outlay for the year 2007-2008 indicates that the
allocations have been increased to Rs. 96,000 crores i.e. an increase of
around 11 percent growth over the BE 2006-07. Given an inflation rate
of 5 to 6 percent, the increase is marginal. In this context, the
Committee are concerned to note that Defence outlay since 2004-05 as
a percentage of GDP has been continuously declining. Defence outlay
during 2006-07 was 2.10 percent of GDP has been further reduced to
2.07 percent. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the
Ministry of Defence should take up the matter with the Ministry of
Finance for providing a minimum 3% of GDP for Defence Services
every year in order to ensure a fixed amount to carry out their
modernization, Capital acquisition and R&D Programme and fulfil the
need based requirements of the Defence Forces.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation refers to inadequate budgetary allocation. The
allocation of funds in budget is made based on the demand projected
by the forces as per plans as also assessment of likelihood of
expenditure during the year and overall availability of funds. It may
be noted that during last 3 years a substantial increase has been made
in the defence budget particularly on capital side. Government is
committed to provide adequate funds to implement the planned
62

63
programmes for modernization of the Armed forces and if need arises,
additional fund by way of reappropriation may be provided. No
planned programme of forces will be allowed to suffer due to lack of
funds.
The issue regarding linking the Defence budget as a percentage of
GDP was taken up with the Ministry of Finance who have stated that
the Defence spending cannot have any logical connection with external
variables like GDP or total expenditure of the Government though it
can have a nexus with the overall threat perception to the security of
the nation. Higher GDP would no doubt make more resources available
for Defence but substantial resources are also required for developing
rural and urban infrastructure providing education and health services
and higher spending in the social sector to achieve a more inclusive
growth. However, this does not compromise the commitment of
Government towards ensuring defence preparedness and necessary
funds for this purpose will be provided for.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.14)
The Committee note that out of Rs. 45,764 crore of budget of
Army, Rs. 2,793 crore are proposed to be spent on non-intrinsic items/
activities of Army which includes National Cadet Corps (NCC),
Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS), Director General
Armed Forces Medical Services (DGAFMS), Commonwealth Games,
Republic Day and other miscellaneous activities. The Committee are
of the view that non-intrinsic budget should not be a sole responsibility
of Army as this expenditure is also concerned with the other Services
of the Army Forces. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry
should create a separate head under Civil budget of the Ministry of
Defence and Army can be entrusted with administrative authority to
facilitate them.
The Committee recommend that expenditure incurred by Director-
General Quality Assurance (DGQA) should be shared by all the three
Services proportionately.
Reply of the Government
For budgetary purposes National Cadet Corps (NCC),
Ex-Servicemen Contributory Health Scheme (ECHS), DGAFMS and
Director-General Quality Assurance (DGQA) are parts of Army Grant.
It is not that their budgetary requirements are carved out of Army’s
Grant. Instead, the assessment of budgetary requirements of said
organizations are done separately and included or added to Army’s

64
Grant for budgetary purposes only. The other Grants within Defence
budget also contain such clubbing for budgetary purposes. For instance,
the requirements of Jt. Staff/ HQ IDS though assessed separately remain
within Navy’s Grant for budgetary purposes. Creation of a separate
head under civil budget for the aforesaid Organizations shall be long
drawn and require approvals of statutory audit and Ministry of Finance.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.18)
Considering the fact that all difficult and hazardous tasks, such as
counter insurgency and counter terrorism, internal and external security,
rescue and relief operations during floods and all kind of disasters fall
in the lap of the Services and are undertaken by Armed Forces
personnel, the Committee in their 11th Report on Demands for Grants
2006-07 had recommended that the Government should seriously
consider the separate Pay Commission for the Armed Forces which
can appreciate the peculiar problems of the forces and suitably
compensate them for the difficult conditions in which they serve. This,
however, has not been accepted by the Government. The Committee
reiterate their earlier recommendation for setting up of separate Pay
Commission.
Reply of the Government
The recommendation has been considered in consultation with
Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Expenditure). Ministry of Finance have
stated that “the 6th Pay Commission covers all categories of Central
Government employees including those serving in the Armed Forces.
Its recommendations will take into account the relativities between
different categories and grades of employees thus giving a holistic
picture of Central Government pay scales. The Commission will also
be receiving representations from a number of organizations including
those representing the Armed Forces and these will be taken into
consideration while firming up its recommendations.” In this
background, it is felt that a separate Pay Commission for Armed Forces
is not feasible. It is also informed that the Services have been permitted
to have direct interaction with the Commission to present their views.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.19)
The Committee are given to understand that a large number of
discrepancies, brought to their notice by various non-official witnesses,
regarding Fifth Pay Commission’s recommendations; one of them being
that it gave a Brigadier more pension than a Major General. It also
removed the, “Running Pay Band” given by the Fourth Pay

65
Commission to compensate for very limited promotions in the armed
forces. The more disturbing the fact is that a Sepoy in the Army gets
less than half the pension of a peon in the Central Government.
Reply of the Government
An anomaly is alleged in fixation of pension of pre 01.01.1996
retiree Majors General and equivalents in the Armed Forces vis-a-vis
Brigadiers and equivalents. This is because the revised pay scale of
Brigadier (Rs. 16700-450-18050) starts with Rs 16700/- along with
admissible Rank Pay of Rs 2400/- per month. Thus, the minimum
reckonable emolument for calculation of pension for a Brigadier is
Rs. 19100/- whereas for a Major General the minimum of pay scale is
Rs. 18400/-, there being no Rank Pay for the ranks of Major General
and above. Accordingly, the minimum pension of pre 01.01.1996 retiree
Brigadier (for 33 years of service) is fixed at Rs 9,550/- per month i.e.
50% of Rs 19100/-, whereas the minimum pension of a Major General
is fixed at Rs 9200/- i.e. 50% of Rs 18400. However, this discrepancy
has been removed as per existing provision in the order that the retiring
pension of an officer of the rank of a Major General shall not be less
than the pension which would have been admissible to him as a
Brigadier had he not been promoted to the higher rank. By virtue of
this provision, minimum pension of all Major Generals who retired
prior to 01.01.1996 has been stepped up to Rs. 9550/- per month,
which is the minimum pension for the lower rank of Brigadier. Thus,
no officer of the rank of Major General is drawing/has drawn pension
less than an officer of the rank of Brigadier.
As regards pension in respect of Sepoy, Government have recently
improved the pension structure by increasing the weightage in the
qualifying service from 5 years to 10 years subject to maximum
30 years service. Further, in the case of pre-96 retirees, it has also
additionally been provided that the pension of Personnel Below Officer
Rank will be computed with reference to the maximum of the pay
scale introduced with effect from 01.01.1996.
A current retiree in the rank of Sepoy having 19 years qualifying
service with weightage of 10 years is entitled to a pension of
Rs. 3212/- per month, 2983/- per month and 2656/- per month for
X, Y and Z categories respectively whereas a peon in the Central
Govt. having put in 33 years service is entitled to a pension of
Rs. 2400/- per month. Thus, the contention that a Sepoy in the Army
gets less than half the pension of peon in Central Government is
factually not correct.

66
In so far as the issue relating to running pay band given by the
IV CPC is concerned, the IV CPC had recommended integrated pay
scale for the rank of 2nd Lieutenant to Brigadier and pay scales for
higher ranks. The Fifth CPC, however, made their recommendation
for grant of regular pay scales.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.20)
The Committee also feel that the Fifth Pay Commission completely
ignored the hardships of a career in the Armed Forces. It did not
consider the truncated careers, extremely limited promotions, long
separations from families, limited family accommodations in peace
stations, hard living service conditions in uncongenial and difficult
areas, risks to life and limb and other travails.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.21)
The Committee observe that successive Pay Commissions have
made service in the Armed Forces unattractive, which is one of the
reason of a large number of deficiency of officers in the Army. The
Committee are given to understand that between 2001 and 2004 more
than 2000 officers applied to leave the Army. These included
2 Lt.-Gens., 10 Maj-Gens. 84 Brigadiers and the remaining Colonels
and below. The situation in the IAF is even more distressing. Against
this a very few IAS, IPS and other Central Services officers have opted
to leave their services prematurely.
Reply of the Government
The Fifth Pay Commission vide para 145.13 of their Report
(Vol.-III) stated as under:
“We have studied and seen for ourselves the conditions under
which Servicemen operate, the complexity of weaponry they are
required to handle and the nature of duty and responsibilities
they have to carry out…” This indicates that the Commission took
into account the conditions under which the forces operate which
inter alia includes hardships faced by them.
The successive Pay Commissions have recommended enhancements
in the pay and allowances of the Government employees including
the Service Personnel keeping in view their working conditions as
also the overall resource position. The grounds on which service
officers prematurely leave the service inter alia include supersession,
compassionate reasons e.g. looking after old parents etc.

67
Recommendation (Para No. 4.22)
During the oral evidence of the representative of the Ministry of
Finance on the Demands for Grants and other related matters of the
Ministry of Defence, they could not furnish any plausible explanation
for even non-inclusion of a representative of Armed Forces on the
Sixth Pay Commission except that the Commission was an independent
body and had corresponded with the Ministry of Defence and it felt
no necessity for having a member of Armed Forces.
Reply of the Government
The issue was taken up with Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of
Expenditure) who observed:
“The 6th Pay Commission is of the view that it will not be
necessary to have a representative of the Armed Forces in the
Commission. It would however be open to receiving the views of
the Armed Forces through a suitable nodal officer to be appointed
by the Ministry of Defence. It was also felt that the Members of
the Pay Commission do not represent any particular service or
organization but would be working on various issues concerning
the overall service conditions of the Central Government
employees.”
The Commission have permitted the three Services for a direct
interaction with the Commission.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.23)
The Committee are given to understand that Armed Forces do not
have right to form union/association to represent their demand before
Pay Commission. Therefore, they strongly recommend that
representatives of the Ministry of Defence and Armed Forces while
representing the case of Armed Forces before Sixth Central Pay
Commission must pursue, and apprise the difficulties/risky working
conditions and problem of attrition of officers and Jawans from Armed
Forces. The Committee desire that the Sixth Pay Commission must
consider the anomalous conditions of the Fifth Pay Commission’s
recommendations and provide attractive salary structure and better
service conditions to Armed Force personnel so that they may feel
proud to serve the nation and live a dignified life.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.24)
The Committee are deeply concerned to note that the vacancies
and additional requirement of manpower in the Armed Forces are

68
increasing and the Ministry of Defence are facing difficulties in filling
up of the vacancies as talented youths are not coming forward to join
Armed Forces. Therefore, the Committee desire that the issue may be
adequately addressed in the Sixth Pay Commission in order to attract
best talented youth to join Armed Forces.
Reply of the Government
The Armed Forces have submitted Joint Memorandum to the
VI CPC containing detailed proposals for making a career in the Armed
Forces attractive as well as to retain trained and qualified manpower.
The three Service Chiefs and representatives of MoD also had a
discussion with the 6th CPC on 19th April 2007 wherein the issues
concerning the Services as reflected in the Committees recommendation
were also raised. The representatives of the Services and MoD are also
regularly interacting with the Commission on specific issues.
Recommendation (Para No. 5.31)
As regards recruitment of sailors, the Committee are of the
considered view that youth belonging to the coastal areas must be
imparted pre-selection training with adequate lodging, boarding etc.,
so as to exploit their maximum ability, sustainability, tolerance of
weather conditions which they possess inherently more than other non-
coastal candidates and encourage them to join Navy and Coast Guard
Services. The Committee also recommend that for the proposed training
should be imparted to the recruitees in regional languages in order to
make training purposeful and efficacious.
Reply of the Government
Recruitment in the Navy and the Coast Guard is done on All
India basis. Youth living in coastal areas can join Indian Navy and
Coast Guard, if selected. To provide opportunities to the youth of the
coastal areas, 12 recruitment centres of Indian Navy have been activated
in coastal areas, viz. at Dwarka, Jamnagar, Karwar, Goa, Kochi,
Tuticorin, Coimbatore, Chennai, Visakhapatnam, Chilka, Kolkata and
Port Blair. Special recruitment drives in the form of open rallies have
been carried out in all Southern Coastal States in March 2007. It is not
found feasible to accept the recommendations for imparting pre-
selection training.
Recommendation (Para No. 10.17)
The Committee observe that there is no separate budgetary
provision for paying compensation, rehabilitation and resettlement in

69
case of land acquisition. In this connection, the Committee desire that
the Ministry of Defence should make correct assessment of the land to
be acquired, the compensation to be paid and the pending cases, where
they have to pay compensation and project the amount for this purpose
under a separate budgetary head. This will facilitate early settlement
of rehabilitation cases and redress the grievances of the affected persons
at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
In so far as the observation concerning separate budgetary provision
for paying compensation, rehabilitation and resettlement in cases of
land acquisition is concerned, separate budgetary provision for payment
of land acquisition compensation already exists. Land acquisition cost,
including the cost of rehabilitation to be borne by the Ministry of
Defence, is catered for out of the budgetary provision made under
Major Head 4076—Capital Outlay on Defence Services with separate
sub-major heads and code heads allotted to different Services. Payment
of rehabilitation and resettlement compensation are all necessary parts
of the acquisition cost. These expenditures are all integral parts of the
project expenditure of the concerned service and hence, the same are
required to be projected against the particular project.

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 5.11)
The reduction of projected budget allocation, forces the services to
reprioritise and abandon their capital schemes, which as a result deprive
the Service to avail the intended benefit of that schemes/projects
envisaged by them which directly affect the moral of the Armed Forces
Personnel security of the nation as a whole. The Committee, therefore,
urge the Government to increase Naval share in the Defence budget
from current level of 17.5% to 30% as proposed by the Finance
Commission so that budgetary allocation to Navy may grow in
consonance with their long term plan for self reliance in Naval defence.
The Committee also hope that Navy would be provided additional
Revenue Budget allocation at RE stage to maintain operational
readiness.
Reply of the Government
In order to take care of items of Capital nature there is single
Capital head for Defence Services. The allocation is given to Capital
head of Defence Services in a consolidated manner by Ministry of
Finance. The further sub-allocation to various Services and Departments
are made by Ministry of Defence. Since allocation is less than the
Projection for the financial year 2007-08 the shortfall has been shared
by the Services and Departments.
However, as recommended by the Committee and based on
progress of expenditure, additional funds will be sought at RE
2007-08 stage, if required.
Recommendation (Para No. 5.19)
The Committee during the examination of Demands for Grants of
the Ministry of Defence for the year 2006-07 were given to understand
that there is a need of three aircraft carriers wherever as of now
country have only one Aircraft Carrier i.e. V irat. The Committee note
that after refitting, Admiral Gorshkov is to be procured from Russia
70

71
by the end of 2008 and Air Defence Ship (Ship Carrier) is under
construction at Cochin Shipyard Ltd. (CSL). Considering the fact that
refitting work of Admiral Gorshkov is already delayed in certain areas,
the Committee are concerned to note that the Ministry have not drawn
up any plan to meet the shortage of two carriers in the intervening
two years. The Committee, therefore, urge the Government to pursue
this vital and strategic important matter with the high level delegation
of Russia to expedite the procurement of Gorshkov Vikramaditya and
also make concerted efforts for providing necessary infrastructure and
make necessary budgetary allocations for speedy completion of work
of Air Defence Ship being constructed in CSL.
Reply of the Government
Both the ADS and Gorshkov projects are being closely monitored
by the Empowered Apex Committees and Steering Committees
constituted separately for both the projects. These measures have been
instituted to ensure that various issues pertaining to construction of
the ships are handled in a focused manner to avoid time and cost
overruns.
2. In addition, the issuese lrating to the Admiral Gorshkov have
been discussed at the highest level with the Russian authorities for
speeding up execution of this project. Further, a Warship Overseeing
Team (WOT) is situated in Russia for regular monitoring and necessary
certifications. Besides, a Project Review Team also visits Russia at
regular intervals for monitoring the progress of the project.
3. The consutcrtion of the Air Defence Ship is progressing as per
the schedule in the contract signed with M/s Cochin Shipyard Limited,
Kochi with the 1st launching of the hull scheduled on 31 Oct. 2010.
To this effect, necessary provisions have already been made in the
project for augmentation of infrastructure at the yard. Besides, an
Integrated Project Management Team has also been regularly monitoring
the execution of the project at CSL, Kochi. Funds are being released
as per the requirements of CSL. Besides, sufficient budgetary allocations
are being made for speedy completion of the project and also for
funds required for infrastructure augmentation of the shipyard.
Recommendation (Para No. 6.18)
The Committee note that the Ministry is making efforts for the
procurement of Sukhoi–30 MKI aircraft and also considering the
procurement of C-130J aircraft in order to boost up the capabilities of
Indian Air Force. In line with this, procurement and induction of

72
MMRCA, LCA, AWACS and Flight Refuelling Aircraft (FRA) are also
planned during the 11th and 12th Plan periods. The Ministry also
plans to undertake upgradation projects of Mirage – 2000, Jaguar,
MiG-29, Mig-27, AN-32, Dornier and MI-17 and other weapon systems.
In order to bolster its air strike capabilities, the Ministry is also in the
process of acquiring 126 aircraft, the Request for Proposal (RFP) is
likely to be issued shortly. The Committee express their deep concern
on this stereotype reply being furnished by the Ministry for the last
2-3 years and the same has not been turned into reality so far, the
Committee therefore, desire that the Ministry should strive hard to
expedite the completion of procedure and technicalities in order to
facilitate the acquisition of 126 proposed aircraft. The Committee also
note that despite the repeated recommendation in the past for the
acquisition of low level radars, sufficient number of low level radars
have not yet been produced or procured resulting in inadequate
surveillance of the Indian Peninsula.
Reply of the Government
1. The RFP for MMRCA is under finalization.
2. The Ministry is also opcressing proposal for acquisition of Low
Level Transportable Radars and Low Level Light Weight Radars to
improve surveillance of airspace.
Recommendation (Para No. 8.10)
The Committee recommend that Ministry should go into the details
to know the causes of increasing number of pension cases in the court
and find possible solution by relaxing the pensionary rules/interpreting
them flexibly to extend necessary pensionary benefits to these disabled
war veterans. The Ministry should also simplify procedure/rules in
extending pensionary, gratuity and other benefits to the war disabled.
The Committee desire that instead of taking average salary for
determining the pension, last pay drawn should be taken into
consideration while determining the amount of pension in case of War
Disabled Veterans and adequate representation in various boards/
organizations of the Ministry of Defence may also be given to them.
Reply of the Government
Various steps have been taken for improvement and simplification
of the procedure relating to grant of pensionary benefits of Armed
Forces personnel. This is an ongoing process. War Injury Pension on
invalidment is determined by counting service upto the date on which

73
he would have retired in that rank in normal course including
weightage as admissible and War Injury Element equal to reckonable
emoluments last drawn for 100% disablement. The details of pension
cases pending in various High Courts do not specifically indicate the
cases relating to the war disabled as Army is not maintaining any
data regarding different types of pension related cases. In the case of
invalidment on account of war injury, service element is granted equal
to retiring/service pension on the basis of his pay on the date of
invalidment. As regards their representations on various boards, the
same is being considered for Rajya Sainik Boards/Zila Sainik Boards.

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Para No. 8.11)
The Committee are surprised to note that Ministry of Defence
have not chalked out any scheme nor demanded funds in order to
extend financial and other help to the war disabled veterans. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry of Defence to
set up special fund under civil head in consultation with the Ministry
of Finance with an aim to provide infrastructures, liberal financial and
other required support to the war disabled veterans. The Committee
also desire that in each command there must be one office for Disabled
war veterans in order to ease and address their problems in right
direction. The Committee are of the considered view that this act of
the Government will facilitate the disabled war veterans to solve their
problems themselves and would have possible impact on the young
generation encouraging them to join the Armed Forces.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Standing Committee are under active
consideration in consultation with Service Hqrs.
Recommendation (Para No. 8.12)
The Committee desire that the Ministry should create a separate
cell to deal with the grievances of the war disabled persons and chalk
out a policy to help the war disabled veterans and their dependent
family members in an efficacious way and implement it in a time
bound manner. In this regard, the Committee further desired that war
disabled soldiers and officers should be treated at par.
Reply of the Government
The grievances of the war disabled soldiers are already being
addressed. However, action to create a separate cell by designating
suitable officers to exclusively deal with their problems being taken
war disabled soldiers and officers are already treated at par for
employment.
74

75
Recommendation (Para No. 8.13)
The Committee note that a meagre sum of Rs. 8,000/- is given as
Marriage Grant for Daughter, Rs. 15000/- for medical Grant, Rs. 10,000/-,
House repairs, Rs. 300/- pm upto Std. XII for three children and
Rs. 1000/- pm for two years to financially destitute ESM monthly. The
Committee feel that these grants do not serve any purpose, therefore,
the Committee strongly desire that keeping in view the rising cost of
living, these grants should be suitably enhanced and the Committee
may be informed of the progress made by the Ministry in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The financial assistance being granted to ex-servicemen/widows
for various purposes like marriage of daughter, house repair etc. has
been enhanced by 100%. A copy of the order issued in this regard is
enclosed.
Recently Prime Minister’s Scholarship Scheme has been launched.
Under this scheme wards of ex-servicemen/widows are also granted
scholarship for higher professional studies like engineering, medicine,
dental, veterinary, MBA, MCA etc. for a period of 2 to 5 years
@ Rs.1250/- per month for boys and Rs. 1500/- per month for girls.
Recommendation (Para No. 9.5)
The Committee are surprised to note that despite the
recommendation of the high level committee of Ex-Servicemen which
was set up in eighties, to provide one rank one pension to Ex-
servicemen and reiterating this recommendation again and again by
this Committee, long standing demand of Ex-Servicemen has not been
implemented by the Ministry so far. Therefore, the Committee
recommend once again to implement one rank one pension at the
earliest to attract the talented and best youths to join the Armed Forces.
The Committee, however, are happy to note that the Ministry have
initiated steps in providing job opportunities to Ex-servicemen in
private sector in coordination with Associated Chambers of Commerce
and Industry (ASSOCHAM), Federation of Indian Chambers of
Commerce and Industry (FICCI), Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)
and hope that the Ministry will keep their spirit up. The Committee
should be informed about the exact implementation status of jobs
provided in the private sector.
Reply of the Government
The issue regarding ‘One Rank One Pension’ has been referred by
the Service Hqrs. to the 6th Central Pay Commission for their

76
consideration. Further action in this regard will be taken based on
their recommendations.
So far, 17,000 ex-servicemen have been re-employed in non-
Government sector this year from January to June, 2007, through DGR.
It does not include those who got re-employment directly.
Recommendation (Para No. 9.6)
The Committee note that the issue of removal of 33 years of
condition and/or enhancement of weightage to the extent of making
Armed Forces personnel eligible for full pension admissible for 33
years qualifying service has been considered by the Government.
However, the Committee do not agree with the view of the Ministry
that it was not found feasible to grant benefit for 33 years qualifying
service to the Personnel Below Officer’s Rank (PBOR). The Committee
again reiterate their earlier recommendation to provide full pensionary
benefits to the Armed Forces personnel without insisting on 33 years
qualifying service conditionality, keeping in view the fact that they are
forced to go out of service to keep the fighting forces young.
Reply of the Government
The issue of removal of conditionality of 33 years qualifying service
to the Armed Forces personnel for computing pension has been referred
to the 6th Central Pay Commission by the Service Hqrs.
Recommendation (Para No. 9.7)
The Committee also desire that in the cases where Armed Forces
personnel died in young age while in service or injured and invalidated
out from the service, should also be suitable compensated by giving
relaxation in years of service rendered by them.
Reply of the Government
Ex-servicemen are allowed to deduct the length of military service
plus 3 years from their actual age for determining the upper age limit
for appointment to Central Government jobs filled by direct recruitment,
otherwise than on the results of an open All India Competitive
Examinations held by UPSC, SSC etc. This concession is available for
all vacancies whether reserved or unreserved in Groups ‘A’ to
Group ‘D’.
The recommendations made by the Committee that in the cases
where Armed Forces personnel died in young age while in service or

77
injured and invalidated out from the service, should also be suitable
compensated by giving relaxation in years of service rendered by them,
is under examination.
Recommendation (Para No. 10.16)
The Committee note that the restructuring of Department of
Defence Estate Organization has been approved by the Ministry of
Defence and the approval of the Ministry of Finance and Cabinet is
yet to be obtained. Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry
should take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance and resolve
the queries at the earliest, so as to get the approval of the Ministry of
Finance, without further loss of time.
Reply of the Government
The proposal for restructuring of Defence Estates Organization has
been approved by the Ministry of Defence and sent to the Department
of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for approval, who have stated
that the comments of Department of Personnel and Training have to
be obtained before they can give their views in the matter. Accordingly,
the proposal has been referred to Department of Personnel & Training
for their comments.
  N EW D ELHI; BALASAHEB VIKHE PATIL,
17 March, 2008 Chairman,
27 Phalguna, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Defence.

78
APPENDIX I
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE (2007-2008)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11th March, 2008 from
1500 hrs. to 1545 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’, Parliament House
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Balasaheb Vikhe Patil — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Milind Murli Deora
3. Shri Santosh Gangwar
4. Shri Suersh Kalmadi
5. Shri C. Kuppusami
6. D.r K.S. Manoj
7. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi
8. Shri Shrinivas Patil
9. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
10. Shri Balashowry Vallabhaneni
11. Shri Anil Shukla Warsi
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Abu Asim Azmi
13. Smt. N.P. Durga
14. Shri K.B. Shanappa
15. Smt. Viplove Thakur
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Louis Martin — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
3. Shri D.R. Shekhar — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Smt. J.M. Sinha — Under Secretary

79
2. The Committee considered the draft report on action taken by
the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in
the Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry
of Defence and adopted the same with some additions/modifications
as suggested by the Members.
3. The Committee then authorised the Chairman to finalise the
report and present the same to the Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX II
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
16TH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-08) OF THE MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
Percentage
of Total
(i) otalT number of recommendations 76
(ii) Recommendations/observations which have 5775%
been accepted by the Government:
(Para Nos. 2.23 & 2.24, 2.36, 2.42, 2.43 & 2.44,
2.60, 2.61 & 2.62, 2.65, 3.5, 3.6 & 3.7, 3.14,
3.15, 3.18, 4.8 & 4.9, 4.10, 4.11, 4.19, 4.28,
4.29, 4.30, 4.33, 4.34, 4.35, 4.45, 5.9, 5.10, 5.15,
5.20, 5.28, 5.29 & 5.30, 6.6, 6.7, 6.9, 6.10, 6.17,
6.19, 6.20, 6.23, 6.24, 6.28, 6.29, 7.6, 7.7, 7.8,
8.7, 8.8, 8.9, 8.12, 8.13, 10.9, 10.10 and 10.18)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the 1103%
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the replies of the Government:
(Para Nos. 2.17, 4.14, 4.18, 4.20, 4.21, 4.22,
4.23 & 4.24, 5.31 and 10.17)
(iv) Recommendations/observations ines prect % 54
of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee and
which require reiteration
(Para Nos. 5.11, 5.19, 6.18 and 8.10)
(v) Recommendations/Observations iens prect % 75
of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited.
(Para Nos. 8.11, 9.5, 9.6, 9.7 and 10.16)
80